ASIA 


!:.fK'X<^?:M':.utii 


•J3?;;?ai-iisiy?.?j.^t»i«'<-f^»j 


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


Cornell  University  Library 
DS  485.B81S421 


The  Burman,  his  life  and  notions  / 


3   1924  023  243  938 


The  original  of  tliis  book  is  in 
tlie  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924023243938 


THE   BURMAN 
HIS    LIFE   AND   NOTIONS 


MACMILLAN   AND   CO.,  Limited 

LONDON  •  BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA 

MELBOUENE 

THE    MACMILLAN    COMPANY 

NEW   YORK  •  BOSTON  -  CHICAGO 
ATLANTA  •  SAN    FRANCISCO 

THE   MACMILLAN   CO.   OF   CANADA,  Ltd. 

TORONTO 


THE    BURMAN 

HIS    LIFE    AND    NOTIONS 


BY 

SHWAY   YOE 

SUBJECT  OF  THE  GREAT  QUEEN 


MACMILLAN   AND  CO.,  LIMITED 

ST.  MARTIN'S   STREET,  LONDON 

I  910 


First  Edition  (2  vols.  Crown  Zvo)  i88z 
Second  Edition  (i  vol.  Demy  %vo)  i8g6 
Third  Edition  (i  vol.  Demy  Zvo)  1910 


When  anything  surprises  or  pleases  a  Burman  he  never 
fails  to  cry  out.  Ami — mother.  Following  the  national 
example,  to  ivhom  can  I  better  dedicate  this  book  than  to  you, 
my  dear  Mother?  Who  else  will  be  so  eager  to  praise j  so 
tender  to  chide;  so  soft  to  soothe  and  console;  so  prompt  to 
shield  and  defend?  To  you,  therefore,  I  dedicate  it;  and 
if  this  tribute  of  reverence  and  gratitude  gives  you  a  days 
pleasure,  it  will  have  been  a  kaung-hmu — a  work  of  merit. 


PREFACE 

Phoneticism  is  said  to  be  "  the  murderer  of  history,"  and 
there  has  been  a  craze  of  late  years  to  prevent  this  felony  by 
the  adoption  of  "  scientific  methods  "  of  rendering  Burmese 
in  English  characters.  I  have  no  doubt  that  whatever  other 
faults  I  may  be  accused  of,  I  shall  be  greatly  blamed  for 
endeavouring  to  reproduce  the  pronunciation  rather  than 
the  orthography  of  Burmese  words.  But  I  may  be  allowed 
to  contend  that  the  catch  phrase  ascribing  bloodguiltiness 
to  phoneticism,  however  just  it  may  be  in  a  country  where 
fonetic  nuz  puzzle  a  long-suffering  generation,  is  most  mis- 
leading and  calumnious  where  it  is  applied  to  a  foreign 
language,  and  especially  to  such  a  language  as  Burmese. 
No  one  who  is  concerned  about  the  etymology  of  a  language 
is  likely  to  study  it  except  in  the  national  character ;  if  he 
trusts  to  transliterations,  scientific  or  otherwise,  he  will  most 
assuredly  be  little  worth  listening  to.  When  an  author 
writes  in  English  about  a  little-known  people  he  presumably 
writes  for  a  majority  of  readers  who  know  nothing  whatever 
of  the  language,  and  cannot  be  reasonably  expected  to  have 
any  very  great  concern  in  its  etymology  as  long  as  they  get 
a  more  or  less  correct  notion  of  how  the  words  should  be 
pronounced.  This  is  most  especially  the  case  in  Burmese, 
where,  in  very  many  cases,  the  orthography  of  a  word 
supplies  but  the  remotest  possible  hint  of  its  pronunciation. 


viii  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS 

The  scientific  men  write  bhoora  (lord),  the  Burman  pro- 
nounces the  word  payah ;  tsit-tshay  (ghost)  is  a  formidable 
way  of  reproducing  the  spoken  tasay  ;  pa-nya  (learning)  but 
inadequately  represents  the  sound  of  pyinya  ;  khwon  (taxes) 
is  a  startling,  not  to  say  puzzling,  way  of  suggesting  the 
sound  kohn.  The  matter  is  made  none  the  easier  by  the 
difficulty  of  finding  an  English  equivalent  at  all  for  some 
Burmese  sounds.  In  the  words  nyaung,  pyouk,  gyi,  and 
the  like,  the  y  belongs  to  the  preceding  letter,  and  has  always 
the  consonantal  and  never  the  vowel  sound.  Such  words 
are  therefore  invariably  monosyllables.  Again,  the  nou'pyit 
sound,  which  I  have  written  e  on  the  analogy  of  the  French 
mere,  has  as  a  final  vocable  no  equivalent  in  English. 
Errant  gives  the  force  as  an  initial  letter.  The  scientific 
form  of  eh  is  certainly  misleading.  The  initial  ^  is  a  great 
crux  to  beginners  in  Burmese.  It  requires  a  fine  ear  to 
catch  the  precise  sound.  An  English  officer  will  call  for 
his  clerk,  Maung  Poh  Ch^,  and  the  punkah-boy  will  pass 
on  the  word  for  Maung  Poh  Ky^ — tye  it  might  almost  be 
written.  But  it  is  little  use  multiplying  instances.  Suffice 
it  to  add  that  a  final  consonant  is  always  silent— strangled 
is  almost  a  literal  translation  of  the  Burmese  word. 

Of  published  works  on  Burma  I  have  found  those  of 
Colonel  Yule,  Captain  Forbes,  and  Dr.  Bastian  most  valuable 
in  supplying  hints  as  to  those  of  the  national  customs  most 
likely  to  be  interesting  to  foreigners.  Had  Captain  Forbes's 
life  been  prolonged  this  book  would  probably  have  had  no 
raison  cHitre. 

In  conclusion,  I  have  only  to  record  my  indebtedness  to 
the  Rev.  Dr.  Marks,  the  head  of  the  S.P.G.  in  Burma.  For 
over  twenty  years  he  has  laboured  in  Burma  both  as  a 
teacher  and  a  missionary,  and  there  is  no  Burman  in  the 


PREFACE  ix 

country  to  whom  his  name  is  not  known,  and  with  whom  it 
is  not  held  in  reverence.  Had  it  not  been  for  him  this  work 
would  never  have  appeared. 

The  chapters  xviii.  to  xx.,  and  xxiii.  to  xxvii.  in  the 
first  volume,  and  chapters  v.,  viii.,  x.  to  xiv.,  xvii.,  xxiii.,  and 
xxiv.  in  the  second,  have  already  appeared,  mostly  in  a 
shorter  form,  in  the  columns  of  the  St.  Jameses  Gazette. 

June  1882. 


With  the  exception  of  a  few  verbal  alterations,  rendered 
necessary  by  the  annexation  of  Upper  Burma,  this  second 
edition  in  no  way  differs  from  that  which  preceded  it. 

November  1S95. 


This  third  edition  has  been  more  thoroughly  revised, 
in  view  of  the  changes  during  the  twenty-seven  years  since 
it  was  written.  The  system  of  transliteration  adopted  by 
the  Royal  Geographical  Society  has  been  substituted  for 
phoneticism. 

Camp  Wankan, 

Southern  Shan  States, 
April  26,  1909. 


CONTENTS 


CHAP. 

1.  First  Years    .  .  ■      . 

2.  School  Days   .... 
'3.  Buddhist  Baptism     . 

.  Life  in  the  Monastery 

,  Tattooing 

,  Ear-Boring     « 

7.  Marriage 

8.  Domestic  Life 

9.  The  House  and  its  Belongings 
'lo.  The  Earth  and  its  Beginning 
III.  The  Ladder  of  Existence  . 

12.  The  Noble  Order  of  the  Yellow  Robe 
113.  The  Monasteries 

14.  Schismatics     . 

15.  Pagodas 

16.  The  Legend  of  the  Rangoon  Pagoda 

17.  Images  . 
I    18.  Bells    . 

I    19.  A  Pagoda  Feast 

i    20.  Duty  Days 

i 

1    21.  The  End  of  Lent     . 

aB^<»4jATS  AND  Spirit-Worship    . 

23.  Rice  Cultivation 

24.  A  Gracious  Ploughing 

25.  A  Harvest  Feast 

26.  Silk-Growing 

27.  Lacquer  Ware 

.     28.  Ngapi    . 

*  ^  29.  Plays    . 

xi 


PAGB 
I 

21 
30 
39 
48 

52 
65 
75 
88 

97 
107 
124 
143 
153 
179 
184 
202 
211 
217 
223 
231 

243 
257 
263 
269 
274 
280 
286 


Xll 


THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS 


White 


CHAP. 

30.  Dancing 

31.  Music  and  Songs 
^32.  The  Tawadeintha  Feast    . 

33.  A  S6NDAWGY1  Feast  . 

34.  A  Work  of  Merit    . 

35.  The  New  Year's  Feast 

36.  A  Boat-Race  . 

37.  Chess    . 

38.  Games 
/39.  Lucky  and  Unlucky  Days  . 
\  40.  The  Butterfly  Spirit 

J  41.  Cholera  Specifics     . 

I   42.  Making  Gold 

/    43.  Sumptuary  Laws  and  Etiquette  . 
\^p  Wizards,  Doctors,  and  Wise  Men 

/45.  Slaves  and  Outcasts 

46.  Forming  the  National  Character 

47.  The  Lord  of  the  Celestial  Elephant  and  of  many 

Elephants  .... 

48.  King  Thibaw — I.  A  Private  Interview 

49.  King  Thibaw— II.  The  Many-Titled 

50.  King  Thibaw — III.  A  Kadaw  Day 

51.  The  Palace    .... 

52.  The  Lord  White  Elephant 

53.  Ministers  of  State  . 

54.  The  Burmese  Army  . 

55.  Judicial  Administration 

56.  Revenue  System 

57.  Land  Tenure  . 
\58.  Mandalay  and  Rangoon 

59.  Eras,  Computation  of  Time,  Weight,  etc, 

60.  The  Language 

61.  Selections  from  the  Literature  . 

62.  Stray  Notes    . 

63.  A  P6ngyi  Byan 

64.  Death  and  Burial  . 

INDEX 


310 

316 
328 

334 

341 

347 

356 

367 

373 

383 

390 

396 

401 

406 

413 

427 

435 

446 

459 
466 

471 
477 
485 
490 

497 
509 

523 
531 
539 
549 
560 
566 
577 
583 
589 

603 


CHAPTER    I 

FIRST   YEARS 

It  is  fortunate  for  the  young  Burman  that  on  his  first 
appearance  in  the  world  all  attention  is  directed  to  the 
mother,  and  the  "  little  stranger "  is  left  very  much  to 
himself  till  he  has  attained  a  stronger  vitality.  Were  it  not 
so,  the  rival  parties  of  the  Dietists  and  Druggists  might 
quarrel  over  the  relative  quantities  of  the  four  elements,  fire, 
air,  earth,  and  water,  composing  the  new  arrival,  and  diet 
and  dose  him  out  of  existence  immediately,  in  a  heroic 
attempt  to  attain  an  equilibrium  of  forces.  The  mother 
indeed  is  the  major  point  of  interest  in  all  countries,  but 
childbirth  nowhere  entails  such  penalties  as  in  Burma. 
Directly  the  child  is  born,  the  mother  is  rubbed  all  over 
with  na-nwin  (turmeric),  and  a  big  fire  is  lighted  as  near  as 
the  construction  of  the  wooden  or  bamboo  house  permits, 
while  rugs  and  blankets  are  heaped  over  her  to  the  extent 
of  the  possessions  of  the  family.  As  speedily  as  possible 
the  midwife  prepares  a  draught  called  se  sein  (green  medi- 
cine), the  composition  of  which  is  a  tradition  with  the 
Wun-swes,  and  is  kept  a  secret  from  inquisitive  males. 
This  the  victim  in  bed  has  to  drink  perpetually  during  seven 
days,  and  for  the  same  period,  irrespective  of  the  blankets  and 
the  time  of  year,  is  heated  up  with  6k  pu.  These  are  big 
circular  or  lozenge-shaped  bricks.  They  are  heated  blazing 
hot  in  the  wood  fire,  dropped  for  a  few  seconds  into  a  pot 
full  of  water,  and  then  wrapped  up  in  cloths  and  applied  to 
the  body  of  the  mother.  In  addition  to  this,  doses  of 
turmeric  are  regularly  administered,  and  every  now  and  then 

I  B 


2  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

she  is  made  to  smell  sam6n-net,  a  plant  (the  Nigella  sativd), 
which  is  put  in  an  earthen  pot,  strongly  heated,  and  then 
triturated  into  the  shape  of  a  ball.  The  odour  is  not  exactly 
such  as  one  would  recognise  as  calculated  to  exhilarate  any 
one,  but  probably  after  the  hot  bricks  and  the  se  sein  every- 
thing else  comes  as  a  matter  of  detail.  All  this  is  done  to 
drive  out  the  noxious  humours  which  are  supposed  to  be 
generated  by  the  birth  of  a  child.  On  the  seventh  day  the 
woman  takes  an  elementary  kind  of  Turkish  bath.  She  sits 
over  a  large  jar  of  boiling  water,  medicated  with  tamarind 
twigs  and  a  few  other  kinds  of  leaves  and  grasses,  with  a 
blanket  over  her.  After  about  an  hour  of  this  she  has  a 
cold  bath,  and  is  then  free  to  do  as  she  pleases.  She  usually 
goes  to  bed. 

It  might  be  supposed  that  under  this  treatment  death 
in  child-bearing  would  be  very  frequent,  but  as  far  as 
imperfect  statistics  can  show  the  percentage  is  not  much 
higher  than  in  other  countries.  The  result,  however,  appears 
in  another  way.  A  woman  ages  up  ten  or  fifteen  years  for 
every  child  she  has.  It  is  satisfactory  to  notice  that  in  all 
the  larger  towns  in  Lower  Burma  the  more  unpleasant 
features  are  fading  away  before  the  example  and  influence 
of  women  of  other  nationalities.  In  the  jungle  and  in 
Upper  Burma,  however,  ancient  use  and  wont  still  prevail, 
and  the  young  mother  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  is  shrivelled 
into  thirty  with  her  first  baby. 

If  a  woman  gives  birth  to  a  still-born  child,  a  piece  of 
iron  is  placed  in  the  cloth  in  which  the  body  is  wrapped,  or 
in  the  coffin  if  there  is  one,  and  at  the  burial  some  member 
of  the  family  says  some  such  formula  as  "  Never  more  return 
into  thy  mother's  womb  till  this  metal  becomes  soft  as  down." 

If  a  married  woman  dies  before  bearing  a  child  (al6n 
hnin  the-thi),  a  Caesarean  operation  is  performed,  and  the 
alon  is  buried  in  some  secret  place.  The  reason  alleged  for 
this  is,  that  were  it  not  done,  the  husband  in  future  exist- 
ences would  marry  this  woman  again,  and  she  would  die  in 
the  same  way.  Were  the  embryo  not  secretly  buried  it 
would  be  disinterred  by  hmaw-sayas,  necromancers,  and 
wizards,  who  would  make  evil  uses  of  it.  Children's  cauls 
are  as  highly  thought  of  by  Burmans  as  they  are  by  English 


FIRST  YEARS 


sailors  ;  only  where  the  tar  thinks  he  will  be  saved  from 
drowning,  the  Turanian  expects  to  gain  the  patronage  of  any 
great  person  he  may  address. 

The  infant  having  survived  and  the  mother  recovered 
from  her  roasting,  the  next  thing  to  be  done  is  to  name  the 
child.  This  usually  happens  about  a  fortnight  after  the  birth. 
A  fortunate  day  and  hour  is  sought  out  by  some  Brahmin 
astrologer,  or  a  saya  of  lesser  note,  if  there  is  no  such 
dignitary  in  the  neighbourhood.  A  great  feast,  as  elaborate 
as  the  wealth  or  the  ambition  and  borrowing  capacities  of 
the  parents  admit,  is  prepared,  and  all  the  friends  of  the 
family  and  the  neighbours  are  invited  to  come.  The  child's 
head  is  usually  washed  for  the  first  time  on  this  day.  The 
ceremony  is  therefore  called  kin-b6n  tat  thi.  A  decoction  of 
the  pods  and  bark  of  the  soap  acacia  {Acacia  rugata)  or 
kin-b6n  is  prepared,  and  with  this  the  midwife  washes  the 
infant's  head  and  the  guests  wash  their  hands.  Most  of 
them  bring  friendly  contributions  towards  the  feast,  or 
perhaps  a  little  money.  The  mother  sits  down  in  the 
centre  of  the  circle  with  the  infant  in  her  arms,  and  near 
her  is  the  father.  The  company  sit  gravely  smoking  and 
chewing  betel  for  a  time,  and  then  some  elder,  or  a  near 
relation  of  the  parents,  seems  struck  with  a  name,  and 
suggests  it  aloud.  Everybody  accepts  it  on  the  spot,  and 
falls  to  discussing  the  aptness  of  the  name  and  the  ac- 
complishments and  virtues  of  people  they  have  known  with 
that  appellation.  This  is,  however,  all  a  pre-arranged  thing. 
The  father  and  mother  have  settled  beforehand  what  the 
child  is  to  be  called,  and  have  apprised  the  lu-gyi  selected 
what  is  to  be  the  result  of  his  cogitations.  The  midwife 
then  gets  a  present  according  to  the  means  of  the  family, 
having  previously,  after  the  seven  days'  roasting,  received 
the  regulation  fee  of  one  pyi,  the  sixteenth  of  a  basket  of 
husked  rice,  one  mat,  and  a  four  anna  bit.  Then  everybody 
adjourns  to  the  feast,  which,  with  the  dessert  of  le'-pet,  salted 
ginger  cut  into  small  strips,  ground  nuts,  fried  garlic,  the 
invariable  betel  apparatus,  cheroots,  and  what  not,  pass  the 
time  till  nightfall,  when,  except  in  the  case  of  poor  people, 
there  is  always  a  pwe  which  carries  on  proceedings  till  the 
next  morning. 


4  THE  BVRMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

The  name  given  thus  appears  to  be  entirely  a  matter  of 
choice  ;  but  this  is  not  so.  The  consonants  of  the  language 
are  divided  into  groups  which  are  assigned  to  the  days  of 
the  week,  Sunday  having  all  the  vowels  to  itself.  With  all 
respectable  families  it  is  an  invariable  rule  that  the  child's 
name  must  begin  with  one  of  the  letters  belonging  to  the 
day  on  which  it  was  born,  but  within  these  limits  any  name 
may  be  chosen.  As  an  immediate  consequence  it  follows 
that  a  Burman  has  a  birthday  every  week,  a  frequency  of 
recurrence  which  renders  the  event  monotonous,  and  pre- 
cludes the  friendly  amenities  of  western  nations  on  such 
occasions. 

The  letters  of  the  alphabet  are  apportioned  to  the  days 
of  the  week  in  the  following  rough  rhyme,  which  every 
Burman  child  can  repeat  with  as  much  certainty  as  the 
English  one  will  display  in  the  recitation  of  Little  Jack 
Horner : — 

Ka,  kha,  ga,  gha,  nga,  Taninla. 

Sa,  hsa,  za,  zha,  nya,  Ainga. 

Ta,  hta,  da,  dha,  na,  Sane. 

Pa,  hpa,  ba,  bha,  ma,  Kya-thabade. 

La,  wa,  Boddahu. 

Ya,  ya  (the  Pali  and  Arakanese  ra),  Yahu. 

Tha,  ha,  Thauk-kya. 

A,  Taninganwe. 

That  is  to  say,  children  born  on  Monday  have  for  the 
initial  letter  of  their  names,  K,  Kh,  G,  Gh,  or  Ng ;  for 
example — Maung,  Ngwe  Khaing,  Mr.  Silver  Sprig  ;  Maung 
Gauk,  Mr.  Crooked ;  Ma  Kwe  Yo,  Miss  or  Mrs.  Dog's 
Bone ;  Ma  Khin,  Miss  or  Mrs.  Lovable.  It  will  be  noticed 
that  in  Miss  Dog's  Bone's  names  the  initial  letters  of  the  two 
words  do  not  agree  as  to  the  day.  This  often  occurs,  and 
the  first  name  (Maung  and  Ma  being  merely  honorary 
additions)  always  denotes  the  birthday.  The  better  class 
families  avoid  such  a  mixing,  however,  as  far  as  possible. 

Tuesday's  children  have  the  choice  of  S  or  S  aspirated 
(practically  the  same),  Z,  Zh,  and  Ny.  For  example : — 
Maung  San  Nyun,  Mr.  Beyond  Comparison ;  Maung  Po 
Sin,  Mr.  Grandfather  Elephant ;  Ma  So,  Miss  or  Mrs. 
Naughty. 


FIRST  YEARS  5 


Those  born  on  Saturday  have  T,  Ht,  D,  Dh,  and  N. 
The  aspirated  and  unaspirated  letters  have  to  most  English- 
men precisely  the  same  sound,  though  a  practised  ear  detects 
the  difference  immediately.  Examples  are : — Maung  Ba 
Tu,  Mr.  Like  His  Father;  Ma  Ne  Htun,  Miss  or  Mrs. 
Sunshine ;  Maung  Du  Wun,  Mr.  Pole  Star  ;  Mi  Nu,  Miss 
Tender. 

Those  born  on  Thursday  select  from  P,  Hp,  B,  Hb,  and 
M.  For  example  : — U  Po  Mya,  Old  Grandfather  Emerald  ; 
Maung  Bo  Gale,  Mr.  Little  Officer ;  Ma  Hmwe,  Miss  or  Mrs. 
Fragrant ;  Mi  Meit,  Miss  Affection. 

Wednesday  has  L  and  W.  Examples : — Maung  Ho, 
Mr.  Yonder;  Ma  Waing  Hla,  Miss  or  Mrs.  All -Round 
Pretty ;  Ma  Hein,  Miss  or  Mrs.  Growler. 

From  noon  till  midnight  on  Wednesday  is  represented 
as  a  special  day,  or,  at  any  rate,  under  a  special  constellation 
called  Yahu,  and  those  born  between  those  hours  have  the 
alternative  of  the  two  Y's,  one  of  which  is  sounded  R  in 
Pali  and  by  the  Arakanese.  Examples  are : — Maung  Yo, 
Mr.  Honesty ;  Ma  Yon,  Miss  or  Mrs.  Rabbit,  U  Yauk,  Old 
Individual. 

Friday  has  Th  and  H.  Examples  : — Maung  Than,  Mr. 
Million  ;  Maung  Thet  She,  Mr.  Long  Life  ;  Ma  Thin,  Miss 
or  Mrs.  Learned ;  M^  Thaw,  (old)  Mrs.  Noisy. 

A  is  the  only  letter  assigned  to  Sunday,  but  the  com- 
bination with  it  of  the  symbol  of  any  other  vowel  changes  it 
to  the  sound  of  that  vowel.  For  example  : — Maung  On,  Mr. 
Cocoa-nut ;  Maung  At  Ni,  Mr.  Red  Needle ;  Ma  E,  Miss 
Cold ;  Ma  Eing  Saung,  Mrs.  Housekeeper ;  U  O,  Old  Pot. 

A  common  popular  belief  is,  that,  according  to  the  day 
of  the  week  (or  rather  the  constellation  representing  that 
day)  on  which  a  man  is  born,  so  will  his  character  be.  Thus 
a  man's  name  discloses  his  probable  characteristics  to  the 
superstitious. 

A  man  born  on  Monday  will  be  jealous  ;  on  Tuesday, 
honest ;  on  Wednesday,  short  -  tempered,  but  soon  calm 
again,  the  characteristic  being  intensified  under  Yahu ;  on 
Thursday,  mild;  on  Friday,  talkative;  on  Saturday,  hot- 
tempered  and  quarrelsome  ;  on  Sunday,  parsimonious. 

Not  only  has  every  day  its  special  character  and  its  fixed 


6  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

letters,  but  there  is  also  a  particular  animal  assigned  to 
symbolise  it,  and  red  or  yellow  wax  candles  are  made  in 
the  forms  of  these  animals  to  be  offered  at  the  Pagoda  by  the 
pious.  Each  worshipper  offers  the  creature-candle  represent- 
ing his  birthday,  or  that  of  any  particular  friend  or  relation 
whom  he  wishes  well.  In  this  way  Monday  is  represented  by 
a  tiger ;  Tuesday,  by  a  lion  ;  Wednesday,  by  an  elephant 
with  tusks  ;  Yahu,  by  an  elephant  without  tusks  ;  Thursday, 
by  a  rat ;  Friday,  by  a  guinea-pig ;  Saturday,  by  a  naga  or 
dragon  ;  Sunday,  by  a  kaldn,  the  fabulous  half-beast,  half- 
bird,  which  guards  one  of  the  terraces  of  Mount  Myinmo 
(Meru),  the  centre  of  the  universe. 

Little  candles  of  this  kind  are  to  be  had  at  any  of  the 
stalls  which  cluster  about  the  steps  and  the  base  of  every 
pagoda  in  the  country,  and  they  are  as  freely  offered  as 
flowers,  and  fruits,  and  gold-leaf. 

It  will  be  seen  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  surname 
among  the  Burmese.  A  man  may  have  a  dozen  sons  not 
one  of  whom  has  the  same  name  as  his  father.  Maung, 
literally  "  brother,"  has  come  to  stand  practically  for  "  Mister." 
Po  and  Shwe  and  Ba  may  be  applied  to  any  one  without 
regard  to  his  birthday,  Shwe  implying  usually  politeness 
or  affection.  Nga,  used  in  the  English  law-courts  and  by 
pompous  native  officials  generally,  implies  superiority  claimed 
by  the  speaker  or  writer.  Ko  denotes  friendship,  or  superior 
age  and  dignity  in  the  person  addressed.  Maung  Shwe 
Than  might  call  himself  indifferently — Maung  Than,  Po 
Than,  Ba  Than,  Ko  Than,  Nga  Than,  or  Shwe  Than, 
and  might  add  Maung  to  any  one  of  these.  As  a  matter  of 
fact  most  Burmans  chop  about  their  name  a  good  deal  during 
their  lives.  He  may  begin  by  being  called  Lugale  Ngfe, 
"  Little  Wee  Man."  When  he  grows  up  a  little  the  family 
probably  get  to  call  him  Lugale  Gyi,  "  Big  Little  Man." 
Later,  when  he  begins  to  think  of  his  appearance  and  look 
after  the  girls — and  they  begin  that  sort  of  thing  very  early 
in  Burma  —  he  probably  calls  himself  Maung  Lugale  or 
Shwe  Lugale,  "  Mr.  Littleman,"  or  "  Mr.  Boy,"  or  "  Golden 
Boy."  There  are  a  variety  of  other  changes  possible  and 
likely.  Finally,  when  he  reaches  the  age  of  thirty-five  or 
forty  he  either  readopts  the  original   Ng6  and  calls  himself 


FIRST  YEARS 


U  Ng^,  "  Old  Small  "  or  "  Old  Wee  "  ;  or  takes  U  Lugale 
instead,  "  Old  Boy."  To  this  additions  may  be  made 
according  to  fancy.  Indeed  the  possible  forms  of  any  given 
Burmese  name  would  supply  a  very  fair  sum  in  permutations 
and  combinations. 

There  is  a  similar  freedom  with  the  women's  names. 
Every  woman  married  or  unmarried  may  be  called  Ma. 
When  she  becomes  elderly  M^  is  very  often  used.  Mi 
implies  youth  in  the  person  addressed,  or  affection  on  the 
part  of  the  speaker.  A  young  husband  or  lover  usually 
calls  his  lady  love  Mi  Mi.  She  addresses  him  as  Maung, 
"brother,"  or  familiarly  as  Taw,  or  Shin.  Ba  in  Lower 
Burma  is  a  polite  form.  In  Upper  Burma,  especially  in  the 
Palace,  Maung  Maung,  or  Tin  Tin,  or  Teit  Tin  (prostrating 
the  forehead,  Kowtowing)  are  used  in  a  courteous  way.  It  is 
considered  hardly  civil  in  any  case  to  use  the  bare  name ; 
the  office  held,  or  some  particular  alms  given  by  the  person 
addressed,  supplies  the  easiest  equivalent ;  otherwise  some 
friendly  form  is  employed  in  speaking.  Kin-le  is  used 
similarly  in  familiar  fashion  or  in  a  friendly  way  to  those  of 
lesser  rank.  Thus  a  prince  would  use  it  in  addressing  an 
A-pyo-daw,  a  maid  of  honour. 

Sometimes  when  a  boy  grows  up  he  does  not  like  the 
name  his  parents  gave  him.  He  can  then  change  it  by  a 
very  simple  process.  He  makes  up  a  number  of  packets  of 
le'-pet  and  sends  round  a  friend  to  deliver  them  to  all  his 
acquaintances  and  relations.  The  messenger  goes  to  the 
head  of  the  house  and  says  :  "  I  have  come  from  Maung 
Shwe  Pyin  (Mr.  Golden  Stupid).  He  is  not  to  be  called 
by  that  name  any  more.  When  you  invite  him  call  him 
Maung  Hkyaw  Hpe  (Mr.  Celebrated  Father).  Be  good 
enough  to  eat  this  pickled  tea,"  and  then  he  goes  on  to  the 
next  house.  It  is  not  imperative  that  the  letters  of  the 
birthday  should  be  adhered  to,  but  it  is  usually  done.  Women 
very  seldom  change  names.  It  looks  too  much  like  a  broad 
hint  that  they  are  growing  up  and  have  some  notion  of  them- 
selves, or  that  they  have  a  mind  of  their  own,  which  might 
prove  irksome  to  possible  husbands. 

A  careful  note  is  made  of  the  exact  hour  of  birth  with 
the  object  of  drawing  up  the   sada  or  certificate  of  birth 


8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

which  every  Burman  has,  and  carefully  consults,  with  the 
help  of  an  astrologer,  for  the  fixing  of  fortunate  days  and 
hours  throughout  his  life.  Sometimes  the  sada  is  drawn 
up  very  shortly  after  birth,  but  ordinarily  not  till  the  child  is 
five  or  six  years  old.  Then  an  old  P6nna,  a  Brahmin,  or 
any  ordinary  astrologer  is  called  in.  He  records  on  a  doubled 
up  strip  of  palm  leaf  the  year,  the  month,  the  day  and  hour 
at  which  the  child  was  born  ;  the  name  given  to  it ;  the 
planet  in  the  ascendant  at  the  moment  of  birth  and  the 
house  in  which  it  was  at  the  time.  This  is  scratched  neatly 
on  the  palm  leaf  in  the  usual  way  with  a  metal  style.  On 
the  other  side  are  a  number  of  cabalistic  squares  and  numbers 
from  which  the  future  calculations  may  be  made.  There  are 
said  to  be  eight  gyo,  or  planets,  and  from  these  the  days  of 
the  week  are  named,  Wednesday  having  a  second,  Yahu, 
which  rules  from  mid-day  to  midnight.  Each  of  the  planets 
has  its  own  point  of  the  compass  as  follows  : — 

N. 


W. 


Yahu.         12 

Thauk-kya.    2 1 

Taninganwe.     6 

Symbol — Tuskless 

Symbol — Guinea- 

Symbol — Kalohn. 

Elephant. 

Pig- 

Sunday. 

Wednesday,  12  P.M. 

Friday. 

The  Sun. 

to  12  A.M. 

Venus. 

Unnamed. 

Kyathabade.    19 

Taninla.       1 5 

Symbol — Rat. 

Symbol — Tiger. 

Thursday. 

Monday. 

Jupiter. 

The  Moon. 

Sane.         10 

Boddahu.      17 

Ainga.        0 

Symbol — Nagah. 

Symbol— Tusked 

Symbol — Lion. 

Saturday. 

Elephant. 

Tuesday. 

Saturn. 

Wednesday,  12  a.m. 

to  12  P.M. 

Mercury. 

Mars. 

S. 


The  stations,  numbers,  and  symbols  of  the  planets  are 
recorded  in  a  jingling  rhyme,  which  is  one  of  the  first  things 
boys  learn  in  the  monastic  schools,  e.g. — 


FIRST  YEARS 


Taninla  kya 
Ta-se  nga 
Ne  nya 
She  yat  ga. 

Monday's  number,  I  ween, 
Is  always  fifteen  ; 
The  tiger's  the  beast. 
And  its  place  is  the  East. 

There  are  various  ways  of  calculating  the  horoscope, 
most  of  them  not  to  be  understanded  of  the  people,  but  the 
most  popular,  because  the  preliminaries  are  evident  to  every- 
body, is  from  the  numbers  given  above.  A  person  born  on 
Monday  remains  under  the  influence  of  the  moon  for  fifteen 
years.  Then  he  passes  into  the  house  of  Mars  and  sojourns 
there  for  eight  years.  At  the  age  of  twenty-three,  Mercury 
presides  over  him  and  continues  to  do  so  for  the  next  seven- 
teen years,  and  so  on  to  the  end,  which  mounts  up  to  io8 
years.  Should  he  outlive  that  he  would  begin  the  circle  over 
again.  Another  way  is  to  divide  the  inquirer's  age  by  eight. 
If  there  is  no  remainder,  the  horoscope  is  made  up  from 
the  gyo  under  which  he  was  born.  If  there  is  a  remainder, 
the  Bedin  Saya  counts  it  out  round  the  figure,  in  the 
direction  of  the  hands  of  a  watch,  commencing  with  the 
birth  planet.  Thus  a  man  born  on  Thursday,  now  twenty- 
nine  years  of  age,  would  be  under  the  influence  of  the  moon. 
The  gyo  at  the  four  cardinal  points,  east,  south,  west,  and 
north  are  happy  in  their  influences,  those  on  the  diagonal 
rhumbs  not  so  good.  Yahu,  and  especially  Saturday,  have 
a  particularly  sinister  influence.  A  man  does  most  of  the 
stupid  and  vicious  things  in  his  life  while  he  is  in  Saturn's 
house.  A  young  man  born  on  Wednesday  will  need  a  lot 
of  ballast  to  tide  him  through  the  ten  years  of  Saturn,  seeing 
that  he  enters  on  the  danger  at  the  age  of  seventeen. 

Little  gilded  and  red  painted  signboards  are  put  up  at 
all  the  pagodas,  displaying  the  nan,  the  .symbol,  and  the 
relative  position  of  all  the  planets.  Sometimes  people 
worshipping  at  the  pagoda  go  to  the  point  of  the  gyo,  in 
whose  house  they  were  born,  and  offer  up  their  lauds  and 
candles  there.  But  this  is  a  mere  matter  of  individual  fancy, 
and  is  hardly  open  to  those  born  in  the  diagonally  situated 


10  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


houses,  for  the  niche  shrines,  if  there  are  more  than  one  at 
the  pagoda,  are  always  at  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  if  there 
is  only  one,  as  is  usual  at  small  pagodas,  it  is  to  the  East. 

The  sada  is  carefully  kept  by  the  parents  until  the  child 
is  old  enough  to  take  care  of  it  himself,  and  thenceforward  it 
is  guarded  as  the  most  valuable  possession  the  person  has. 
No  matter  how  often  the  name  is  changed  the  new  one  is 
never  put  in  the  sada,  so  that  this  certificate  cannot  be 
trusted  to  implicitly  for  a  man's  name.  Some  of  them  are 
very  beautifully  engraved  and  ornamented,  but  they  are 
naturally  not  often  to  be  seen.  I  only  know  of  two  in 
England  at  the  present  time  (1881),  one  of  which  is  my  own 
and  the  other  belonging  to  a  travelling  Burman.  When  a  man 
dies,  the  sada  is  either  destroyed  or  preserved  as  a  memento 
by  the  family.  A  great  many  sadas  were  found  and  carried 
off  as  curiosities  during  the  Third  Burmese  War.  There  is 
one  at  Abbotsford. 

A  curious  instance  of  the  firm  belief  of  the  nation  in  the 
reasonableness  of  the  conviction  that  the  planet  under  which 
one  is  born  influences  the  fates  and  actions  of  one's  life,  is 
the  fact  that  royalty  ordained  that  the  coins  and  measures 
used  by  traders  should  bear  the  emblem  of  the  monarch's 
birthday.  Thus  for  example  all  the  gold  coins  used  in  Upper 
Burma  bazaars  during  the  penultimate  reign  had  the  figure  of 
a  lion  on  them,  Minddn  Min  having  been  born  on  a  Tuesday. 
The  few  remaining  from  previous  reigns  bearing  other  sym- 
bols were  rigidly  kept  out  of  the  sight  of  Burmese  officials. 
The  Convenor  of  the  Fifth  Great  Synod,  though  probably 
the  mildest  and  best  sovereign  Burma  ever  had,  would 
certainly  have  stood  no  trifling  in  matters  of  this  kind,  which, 
if  not  amounting  actually  to  a  part  of  the  religion,  were  at 
any  rate  very  intimately  connected  with  it.  His  son  Thibaw 
Min,  however,  notoriously  indifferent  to  religion,  if  a  stronger 
word  might  not  even  be  admissible,  let  the  old  weights  remain 
in  use,  and  probably  called  it  the  march  of  civilisation. 

The  naming  and  the  construction  of  the  sada  being 
finished,  the  principal  events  in  the  youthful  Burman's  life 
are  over,  and  the  children  run  about  in  as  happy  a  state  of 
nudity  as  the  respectability  of  the  family  permits  ;  and  boys 
and  girls   steal   grandmamma's    cheroot,  and    potter    about 


FIRST  YEARS 


making  mud  pies  according  to  cosmopolitan  infantile  habit, 
and  not  seldom  getting  up  decorous  and  serious  representa- 
tions of  the  choral  dances  and  dramatic  performances  they 
have  seen.  The  spectacle  of  a  little  girl  vigorously  puffing 
a  big  green  cheroot  while  she  moulds  a  heap  of  mud  into 
shapely  form  is  only  a  little  more  startling  to  the  white-faced 
foreigner  than  the  declamatory  passion  of  a  five-year-old 
princeling.  So  it  goes  on  till  the  eighth  year  is  reached  ; 
then  it  is  time  to  go  to  the  monastic  school. 

On  the  following  page  is  a  copy  of  the  sada  of  Shin 
Thuza.  The  young  lady,  I  regret  to  say,  is  dead.  The 
publication  of  her  horoscope  cannot  therefore  enable  mali- 
cious persons  to  work  her  any  harm  by  means  of  spells.  The 
side  represented  is  the  obverse.  I  have  submitted  the  figures 
to  two  very  distinguished  wranglers,  but  they  have  been 
unable  to  detect  any  system  in  them. 

On  the  reverse,  surrounded  by  an  ornamental  border  of 
numbers  written  in  accordance  with  a  rhyme,  are  recorded 
in  mystic  language  the  details.  The  young  lady  was  born 
in  the  year  1220  B.E.  (twenty -three  years  ago),  in  ,the  astro- 
logical cycle  422,  in  the  month  of  Ta-bodwfe,  on  the  ninth 
of  the  waxing  moon,  and  the  seventh  day  (Friday)  of  the 
week,  in  the  evening,  at  th6n  chetti  gyaw,  a  little  past  the 
third  hour,  or  more  exactly,  three  nayi,  two  pads,  and  ten 
bizana.  Then  the  precise  position  of  the  constellation  in 
the  heavens  is  noted.  It  is  thirteen  bawa  (feet),  five  finger 
breadths,  three  mayaw  (grains'  length),  one  sessamum  seed 
(nan),  and  eight  hairs'  breadths  from  the  planet.  Then  it 
winds  up  to  the  effect  that  this  is  the  horoscope  of  the 
maiden,  whom,  that  she  may  be  known  by  a  pleasant  name, 
her  parents  have  called  Shin  Thuza.  "  May  she  live  to  be 
a  hundred  and  twenty  !  "     Alas  !  she  did  not. 

At  either  side  of  these  details  are  two  identical  magic 
squares,  formed  in  accordance  with  the  well- 
known  Hindoo  Law.  Over  one  is  written 
"  The  Buddha  "  ;  over  the  other  "  The  Law  "  ; 
beneath  the  former  "  Rangoon,"  and  the  latter 
"  650."  The  two  palm-leaves  are  tightly  sewn 
together,  and  the  writings  and  figures,  done 
with  a  metal  style  on  the  dry  leaf,  are  very  neatly  executed. 


294 

7        5        3 
6       I        8 


<a 

* 

T[ 

„ 

o 

0] 

n 

=__ 

« 

T 

(P 

to 

=n^ 

"t 

o 

- 

o  1  - 

- 

^ 

« 

o 

^ 

o 

" 

« 

J!_ 

o 

_!1 

_1 

o 

J_ 

-!!_ 

- 

-  1  o 

^ 

^  »  o  o  * 

3 

"=SS  2 

^                .._< 

f 

«-  =  -s 

CO 

ss;?  = 

"""**"  5 

u> 

t^ 

"  s  s  «  s 

«    O    N    ^    « 

Joe 

a. 

.O»o; 

m 

ID     S>    T-     <S     1- 
"     ^    0»    CO     T- 

0  09   u>   a  n 

*X 

"           '^            00 

10 

''  S  5  "  5 

BO   0    M    01    M 

2 

K 

X  uj 

o^»c» 

1* 

^c,^,» 

o 
o 

r 

3 

:=-*"? 

ra 

^                    > 

E 

X 

ct 

J  "  "  '"  *  . 

E 

X 

«  o  ^:  «  « 

- 

o  o   w  «  o 

""  ■*      •-  '^ 

i^ 

(0       o 

C4 

ID 

c< 

n 

rj-     o 

(0 

A 

t 

C4 

O  1 

>0 

<» 

« 

T 

10 

- 

«  « 

o 

W 

o 

- 

«      « 

o 

- 

« 

- 

«. 

- 

- 

- 

" 

- 

" 

3 

n     o 

_r= 

1! 

_ 

"                            .^„          --5, 

1\ 

S<»«io~ 

'      ' 

-,E          -Jl 

Y= 

_ 

f          I 

h 

- 

- 

r- 

_JU       •i.jiii        ~   1 

" 

! 

^J 

"-^ 

n 

1__ 

. 

- 

. 

« 

c 

to 

a, 

tn 

•t 

CO 

in 

03 

^ 

(0       -      w      o      a 

« 

» 

" 

- 

• 

™ 

o 

- 

" 

M 

O 

W 

o 

-       W      e*      e«     (D 

o 

n 

n 

o 

io|„|=|- 

« 

<D 

- 

1=        -1- 

<D 

O 

1 

■* 

i 

o     c 

o 

- 

m 

N     a 

c« 

m 

-      . 

o 

o 

o      « 

w 

(D 

«     a 

KI 

« 

-         X 

o 

- 

ffi 

. 

c; 

o)  n  1  ^- 

n 

«) 

O        0 

< 

o 

« 

't 

^ 

M       . 

- 

- 

- 

~ 

- 

lO 

o 

o 

cc 

cs 

■* 

(0 

n 

« 

^^<^ 

- 

^^'^^ 

o     e 

» 

- 

- 

-I»l 

<D 

o 

CI 

« 

n      e.     o 

« 

* 

» 

- 

" 

^ 

<D 

- 

" 

(D 

CO 

.o 

- 

10      -      « 

0 

»- 

« 

^ 

° 

JL 

o 

- 

" 

o 

» 

- 

o 

- 

- 

-      ■*     o 

FIRST  YEARS  13 


The  general  construction  of  all  sadas  is  the  same,  but 
there  are  very  considerable  divergences  in  the  number  of 
figures.  In  another — I  do  not  say  whose  it  is — there  are 
two  circles  only  in  the  left  portion,  and  only  eight  divisions 
in  the  right  half,  while  several  of  the  headings  to  the  columns 
are  different.  The  ti-padi-taing,  the  "  highest  post,"  between 
the  two,  also  varies.  I  may  mention  that,  beginning  with 
the  second  stage  on  the  left,  descending  and  going  up  the 
other  side,  the  numbers  increase  by  three  :  e.g.  2,  5,  8,  1 1, 
etc.  This  is  the  case  in  all  sadas,  but  they  do  not  neces- 
sarily begin  with  the  same  number. 


CHAPTER     II 

SCHOOL    DAYS 

I  SUPPOSE  Englishmen  will  never  get  rid  of  the  notion  that 
monastic  schools  must  needs  be  dull  and  dismal,  that  hours 
of  study  only  alternate  with  seasons  of  austerity  and  rough 
punishments.  The  uninhabited,  almost  deserted,  appearance 
of  the  Burmese  kyoung ;  its  isolated  position ;  the  solemn, 
restful  front  which  it  always  preserves,  no  matter  how 
lightened  up  by  profuse  gilding  and  the  carved  magnificence 
of  its  panels  and  eaves'  boards,  or  how  embowered  in  rich 
^nd  waving  foliage  ;  the  austere  aspect  and  slow-paced  gait 
-of  the  mendicants  in  their  sad  yellow  robes — all  these  things 
inevitably  encourage  the  foreigner  in  the  belief  that  the 
monotony  and  the  discipline  must  crush  all  life  and  light- 
heartedness  out  of  the  young  scholars. 

Nothing,  however,  can  be  farther  from  the  actual  fact. 
No  Etonian,  no  old  Rugbeian,  can  look  back  with  greater 
delight  on  triumphs  on  the  river  or  in  the  football  field, 
than  the  grown-up  Burman  does  on  his  early  days  at  the 
P6ngyi  Kyaung.  There  are  no  rough  games  to  remember, 
it  is  true,  no  strivings  of  any  kind  with  members  of  another 
institution.  Those  things  do  well  enough  for  a  cold-country 
people.  The  Burman's  reminiscences  are  of  a  quieter  kind. 
There  was  the  emulation  with  the  chin  16n,  the  wicker  foot- 
ball, to  see  who  could  keep  it  longest  in  the  air  by  dexterous 
use  of  knee,  foot,  shoulder,  thigh,  and  cheek.  How  it  re- 
lieved the  body  and  freshened  the  mind  after  hours  of  poring 
over  little  hand -blackboards,  covered  with  cramped  words 
and  letters,  in  the  quiet  rooms  inside.  Then  there  were  the 
games  at  gdnnyinhto,  an  elementary  combination  of  skittles 

14 


CHAP,  n  SCHOOLDAYS  ij 

and  ninepins,  played  with  the  big  flat  seeds  of  a  jungle 
creeper.  Pleasant  they  were  under  the  shade  of  the  great 
mango  and  pipul  trees  and  the  lofty  cocoa-nut  and  palmyra 
palms,  and  exciting  were  the  games,  so  that  the  customary 
stillness  of  the  place  was  rudely  broken  upon  by  disputing 
voices,  till  a  monk  would  come  out  and  bring  all  back  to 
work  again  as  a  penance.  Then  during  the  work  there  was 
the  fun  of  the  writing  hour,  when  everybody  had  to  write 
out  maxims  and  prayers  on  his  little  parabaik  with  a  clumsy 
pointed  steatite  pencil.  There  were  always  some  stiff- 
fingered  big  pupils  who  could  not  manage  to  write  their 
copy  neatly  or  correctly,  and  as  punishment  had  to  take 
the  good  writers  on  their  backs  and  march  ruefully  up  and 
down  the  long  schoolroom  during  pleasure.  Sometimes 
they  were  thrashed,  but  the  other  punishment  was  the  more 
dreaded.  Then  there  was  the  schoolmaster  monk,  who 
would  tell  fairy  stories  of  the  other  three  great  islands  which 
lie  in  the  sea  p6und  about  Myinmo  mountain  ;  of  the  half- 
moon-faced  western  islanders,  and  the  wondrous  tree  that 
bore  everything  eatable  one  could  wish  for  and  delivered  it 
ready  cooked  ;  the  joys  of  the  six  heavens  of  the  Nats  and 
the  grisly  horrors  of  Nga-yfe,  with  its  fearful  ages  of  fan- 
tastic punishments.  Every  now  and  again  travelling  necro- 
mancers and  hmaw  sayas  would  spend  a  night  or  two  at 
the  monastery,  and  in  recompense  for  the  little  delicacies 
and  odds  and  ends  of  food  which  good-natured  neophytes 
would  get  for  them,  used  to  tell  stories  of  witchery  and 
marvel.  Sometimes  there  would  be  a  sa-haw  saya,  a  kind 
of  cyclic  poet,  who  knew  half  the  zats  in  the  language  by 
heart,  and  would  recite  a  little  just  for  practice.  Or  a 
tattooing  saya  would  come  round  and  mark  some  particu- 
larly favoured  youth  with  a  quaint  figure.  Discussion  as  to 
its  meaning  and  probable  virtues  would  be  carried  on  in  the 
shadowy  evenings  for  months  afterwards.  Varieties  of  this 
kind  recur  to  the  old  Burman  as  he  thinks  of  the  school 
days  long  ago,  and  he  sighs  with  as  much  conviction  as 
any  European  that  there  are  no  days  so  happy  as  the 
school  days. 

English  rule  has  disturbed  old  customs  a  good  deal  in 
the  province,  but  even  now  we  may  say  that,  as  an  invari- 


i6  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

able  rule,  when  a  boy  has  reached  the  age  of  eight  or  nine 
years  he  goes  as  a  matter  of  course  to  the  Pdngyi  Kyaung. 
It  is  open  to  all  alike — to  the  poor  fisherman's  son  as  well 
as  to  the  scion  of  princely  blood — for  no  one  pays  anything, 
and  it  is  not  carefully  considered  who  it  is  that  fills  the 
monkish  begging  pots  in  the  daily  round.  Thus  every 
Buddhist  boy  in  the  country  is  taught  to  read  and  write, 
and  in  this  respect  at  least  there  are  but  very  few  illiterate 
Burmans.  This  primary  education  must  by  no  means  be 
confounded  with  entry  into  the  monastery  as  a  koyin-gale, 
or  novice.  Strictly  speaking,  this  ceremony  ought  not  to 
take  place  before  the  age  of  fifteen,  and  the  earlier  sojourn 
is  only  a  preparation  for  it.  The  younger  pupils  may  be- 
come boarders  in  the  monastic  building  if  they  choose,  but 
they  do  not  assume  the  yellow  robe,  which  marks  them,  for 
however  short  a  time  it  may  be  worn,  as  members  of  the 
Assembly  of  the  Perfect.  They  wear  their  ordinary  clothes 
and  retain  their  secular  name. 

As  soon  as  the  boy  enters  the  monastery  he  is  set  down 
in  the  big  schoolroom  beside  all  the  other  boys,  and  receives 
a  roughly-made  black  wooden  slate.  On  this  are  written  a 
few  of  the  letters,  perhaps  the  whole  of  the  alphabet.  A 
little  explanation  starts  him  off,  and  for  the  next  few  days 
he  is  engaged  in  shouting  out  their  sounds  at  the  top  of  his 
voice.  Nobody  minds  him,  for  all  the  other  scholars  are 
similarly  engaged  in  hallooing,  and  the  monks  derive  a  sense 
of  comfort  and  a  virtuous  consciousness  of  doing  good  from 
the  noise.  It  is  as  soothing  as  the  sound  of  his  mill-wheels 
to  the  miller,  or  the  roar  of  traffic  to  the  cockney.  If  a  boy 
stops  shouting,  it  is  a  sign  that  he  has  stopped  working — 
and  if  he  is  not  meditating  mischief,  it  is  probable  that  he  is 
about  to  go  to  sleep,  and  he  is  corrected  accordingly.  The 
method  is  an  admirable  one  for  keeping  the  boys  occupied 
— much  more  so  than  civilised  Western  methods — though  I 
fear  a  council  of  English  head-masters  would  scout  the  idea. 
The  casual  foreign  observer  who  goes  about  taking  notes, 
like  Grose  or  the  "  Rampant  M.P.,"  passes  the  ecclesiastical 
school,  and  in  amazement  at  the  seeming  uproar  within, 
declares  that  monastery  schools  are  hopelessly  badly  con- 
ducted,  and  without  the  semblance   of   discipline.       As  a 


SCHOOL  DAYS  i; 


matter  of  fact,  the   more  noise  there  is  going  on,  the  more 
work  there  is  being  got  through. 

Doubtless  it  is  a  primitive  method — doubtless  there  are 
thick-headed  boys  with  tough  lungs  who  shout  out  the  ka 
gyi,  ka  gwe  (the  A,  B,  C)  with  but  the  slightest  portion 
of  it  remaining  in  their  brains.  There  must  be,  because 
sometimes  a  boy  takes  a  year  to  get  through  the  alphabet 
(called  the  thin-bon-gyi,  the  "  great  basket  of  learning "), 
the  combination  of  vowel  symbols,  and  the  alterations  of 
sound  effected  by  the  union  of  consonants,  all  of  which  are 
mere  materials,  and  only  a  very  small  portion  of  the  com- 
plicated system  of  the  language.  Nevertheless  everybody 
learns  in  the  end,  and  then  they  are  set  to  read  in  the  same 
way,  and  gradually  advance  in  the  immemorial  regulation 
subjects.  The  first  books — all  the  books,  in  fact,  put  in  the 
boys'  hands — are  religious.  They  learn  the  five  universal 
commandments,  the  five  subsidiary  rules,  the  Pali  formulae 
to  be  employed  at  the  pagoda — pattering  them  over  till  they 
pour  out  of  the  lips  with  the  fluency  and  precision  of  water 
out  of  a  pump.  When  there  are  a  number  at  the  same 
stage  in  their  studies,  they  repeat  their  lesson  word  for  word 
after  the  teacher,  sitting  in  wide  rows  before  him,  and  all 
chanting  with  the  same  emphasis  and  apparently  in  the  same 
key.  The  effect  is  very  singular  when  a  string  of  sonorous 
Pali  versicles  is  being  mouthed  over  in  the  striking  intoned 
recitative  peculiar  to  these  formulae.  The  twenty  or  thirty 
boys  crouching  down  on  their  knees,  their  little  heads  every 
now  and  then  bowing  down  to  the  ground  over  their  hands 
joined  in  supplication,  the  yellow-robed  monk  sitting  cross- 
legged  on  the  dais  before  them,  repeating  in  abrupt,  jerky 
fashion  the  clauses  of  the  form  of  worship,  which  the  childish 
voices  instantly  catch  up,  forms  a  scene  which  never  loses 
its  novelty  and  attractiveness. 

The  little  schoolboy  slowly  learns  all  these  formulae. 
Even  near  to  and  in  the  larger  towns  of  Lower  Burma  the 
amount  of  secular  learning,  arithmetic,  and  so  on  that  is 
learnt,  is  of  the  most  meagre  possible  description.  All  relates 
to  the  tenets  of  religion — to  the  existences  and  teachings  of 
the  Lord  Buddha.  The  things  thus  impressed  on  the  youth- 
ful mind  sink  deep  into  the  memory,  and  leave  their  mark 

C 


i8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

on  the  whole  future  life  of  the  young  scholars.  As  long  as 
these  monastic  schools  are  attended,  all  attacks  on  the 
Buddhist  faith  must  be  fruitless. 

Besides  the  commandments,  the  paya-shekho,  and  the 
pareit-yop-thi,  the  lauds  of  the  Lord  Buddha,  and  the 
aspirations  to  be  repeated  at  the  holy  shrines,  the  formulae 
to  be  told  over  on  the  beads  ;  besides  these  first  principles, 
the  young  Burman  is  taught  the  thin-ki-ya,  the  rules  which 
are  to  prepare  him  for  assuming  the  yellow  robe,  and  to 
guide  him  during  his  longer  or  shorter  withdrawal  from  the 
sinful  world  to  the  calm  tranquillity  of  the  monastery.  He 
must  learn  that  the  young  novice  carefully  imitates  the 
decorous  pace  of  the  yahan  ;  does  not  walk  fast ;  avoids 
swinging  his  hands  ;  does  not  smile  or  laugh  in  passing 
through  a  village,  and  keeps  far  away  from  all  secular  amuse- 
ments. The  yellow  robe,  distinctive  of  the  order,  is  to  be 
regarded  not  as  a  garment  to  cherish  and  comfort  the  wearer, 
not  as  a  robe  to  adorn  the  outward  man  and  make  it  look 
stately  or  pious,  but  merely  as  a  concession  to  modesty, 
born  of  the  weaknesses  of  poor  human  flesh — and  further, 
as  a  means  of  enabling  the  worthless  frame  to  endure  the 
extremes  of  heat  and  cold.  In  the  same  way  food  is  to  be 
eaten  only  to  support  life.  The  member  of  the  sacred  order 
must  not  think  of  meal  times  as  an  occasion  for  gratify- 
ing his  senses  ;  he  must  avoid  dwelling  on  the  tastiness  of 
the  food  and  the  gratification  to  his  palate  which  the  pious 
zeal  of  a  supporter  may  afford  in  presenting  an  unusually 
dainty  meal.  Especially  must  he  refrain  from  eating  food 
to  make  himself  strong  and  lusty.  He  must  always  remember 
the  transitoriness,  the  misery  and  unreality  of  the  world,  and 
find  relief  in  the  Triple  Consolation,  the  trust  in  the  Lord, 
the  Law,  and  the  Assembly. 

All  these  things  are  impressed  on  the  young  pupil  as 
soon  as  he  is  able  to  read  at  all,  every  one  of  them  assuming 
the  fact  that  as  soon  as  he  is  old  enough,  or  as  soon  as  he 
has  gone  through  the  necessary  preparation,  he  will  assume 
the  yellow  robe  of  the  devout,  to  wear  it  perhaps  for  life, 
perhaps  only  for  a  day  or  two,  but  certainly  to  put  it  on,  for 
without  this  he  cannot  attain  to  the  full  privileges  of  a  man. 
His  kan  (luck)  will  be  altogether  one-sided.     All  the  ill  deeds 


SCHOOL  DAYS  19 


he  does  will  swell  the  sum  of  his  demerits,  but  not  a  single 
good  action,  no  uttermost  act  of  charity  or  devotion,  will  be 
recorded  to  his  advantage  for  another  existence.  Without 
admission  to  the  order,  without  "  Buddhist  baptism,"  no  man" 
can  count  his  present  existence  as  other  than  an  animal's. 
The  great  gift  of  having  appeared  in  the  likeness  of  a  human 
being ;  the  happy  balancing  of  merits  and  demerits  which 
has  resulted  in  so  glorious  an  opportunity  of  advancing 
towards  Ne'-ban  ;  the  still  greater  fortune  of  existence  in  a 
country  where  the  tenets  of  Buddhism  offer  supreme  chances 
to  the  weary  seeker  after  rest  from  the  moil  of  a  work-a-day 
world  ;  all  will  have  been  recklessly  thrown  away.  It  is 
written  that  more  hardly  will  a  needle  cast  from  the  summit 
of  Mount  Myinmo  across  the  wide  Thamoddaya  Sea,  more 
hardly  will  it  touch  with  its  point  as  it  falls  another  needle 
standing  point  upwards  in  the  great  Southern  Island,  than 
will  any  given  creature  become  a  human  being.  How  are 
the  Western  foreigners,  black  and  white,  to  be  pitied,  who 
have  indeed  by  earnest  strivings  attained  the  seat  of  man, 
but,  arrived  there,  find  it  all  naught  because  they  do  not 
hear  the  teachings  of  the  Buddha !  How  much  worse  the 
Burman,  to  whom  all  his  life  long  the  monastery  door  stands 
open,  to  whom  a  week's,  a  day's,  an  hour's  sojourn  would 
offer  boundless  possibilities,  and  yet  who  enters  not  in. 
If  this  be  so,  what  then  can  be  the  prospect  for  the  boy  who 
having  put  his  hand  to  the  plough  turns  back,  who  entering 
the  monastery  as  a  child,  imbibes  the  religious  thoughts  and 
becomes  acquainted  with  the  religious  creed,  and  yet  fails  to 
seek  the  "  humanity  "  so  easily  to  be  gained  ?  Better  have 
been  born  an  animal  or  an  Englishman,  and  scoffed  at  what 
he  did  not  understand. 

Consequently  it  may  be  invariably  assumed  that  the 
little  scholar,  as  soon  as  age  and  acquirements  admit,  puts 
on  the  yellow  garb  as  a  finish  to  his  education.  This  used 
to  include  every  one.  Till  the  English  came  and  took  the 
country,  everybody  went  to  the  Pon-gyi-Kyaung.  But  now 
there  are  English  government  schools ;  there  are  Burmese 
laymen's  schools,  which  neglect  religious  education  alto- 
gether, and  look  to  competitive  examinations  as  the  end 
and  aim  of  juvenile  existence,  as  the  ne'-ban  of  school  life. 


20  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    chap,  ii 

There  is  a  percentage  of  thirty-five  in  the  "  middle  standard  " 
(Government  Education  Department).  What  matters  if  the 
successful  halt  and  stumble  in  the  pareit-gyi  ?  There  are 
two  boys  who  have  a  chance  in  the  Calcutta  University 
Matriculation  Examinations.  It  is  a  matter  of  indifference 
that  the  thingyo  is  as  unknown  to  them  as  it  is  to  any  poor 
foreigner.  Nevertheless,  notwithstanding  their  shortcomings 
in  this  respect,  there  are  but  few  even  of  these  young  Bur- 
mans  who  have  not  become  members  of  the  society,  if  only 
for  long  enough  to  get  their  heads  shaved  and  be  invested 
with  the  yellow  diess.  Still  in  these  latter  years  there  are  a 
few  who  have  never  gone  through  even  this  slight  ceremony, 
and  the  number  may  be  expected  annually  to  increase  as 
Western  habits  spread  more  widely  over  the  country.  Not 
till  the  monastic  schools  begin  to  be  deserted  will  the 
Christian  missionary  find  that  his  labours  have  had  any 
effect  on  the  vital  energies  of  the  ancient  faith  of  the  Buddha. 
That  day  is  still  far  off.  As  yet  the  government  and  verna- 
cular lay  schools  have  had  very  little  effect  in  reducing  the 
number  of  scholars  who  go  daily  to  study  in  the  dim-lighted 
schoolrooms  of  the  monastery.  Not  even  in  Rangoon  have 
the  monks  to  call  for  scholars  ;  they  flock  there  abundantly 
of  their  own  accord. 


CHAPTER    III 

BUDDHIST   BAPTISM 

The  term  baptism  as  applied  to  a  youth  who  enters  a  monas- 
tery in  the  state  of  probation  (called  shin)  is  not,  as  many 
people  think,  a  mere  idle  analogy  borrowed  from  the 
Christian  faith.  The  novice  actually  and  formally  receives 
a  new  name  to  mark  his  accession  to  the  full  dignity  of 
humanity.  The  great  majority  of  shins,  or  ko-yins,  are  little 
boys  of  twelve  or  a  little  older,  but  occasionally  a  man 
secludes  himself  from  the  world  at  an  advanced  age.  Till  a 
Buddhist  has  entered  the  fraternity  he  cannot  claim  to  be 
more  than  a  mere  animal.  He  has  a  lu  nam6,  it  is  true, 
a  worldly  name,  but  so  might  any  ox,  or  horse,  or  elephant. 
It  is  not  till  he  has  subjected  himself  to  the  discipline  of  the 
kyaung  that  he  can  reap  the  fruits  of  a  holy  past  and  look 
forward  to  a  more  glorious  future. 

The  devils  in  the  underworlds  wear  out 
Deeds  that  were  wicked  in  an  age  gone  by. 

Man  has  less  innocence  than  the  animals,  and  cannot,  like 
them,  progress  by  merely  omitting  to  sin.  He  may  make 
golden  stairways  of  his  weaknesses  indeed,  but  before  he  can 
do  so  he  must  abandon  the  world,  if  it  is  only  for  twenty- 
four  hours.  Then  he  becomes  an  upathaka,  a  believer,  and 
towards  another  life  will  hold  the  gain  as  well  as  answer 
for  the  loss  in  the  present  one,  death  casting  up  the  debit 
or  credit. 

Higher  than  Indra's  ye  may  lift  your  lot. 
And  sink  it  lower  than  the  worm  or  gnat. 

In  recognition  of  this  new-gained  power  the  novice  drops 


22  THE  BVRMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

his  secular  name  and  receives  a  hvfh,  an  honorific  title,  to 
mark  that  it  is  now  open  to  him  to  escape  from  suffering. 
The  name  lapses  when  he  returns  to  the  world  again,  but  it 
is  sufificient  that  he  has  once  borne  it.  He  may  now  add  to 
his  kan,  merit,  and  gain  for  himself  a  glorious  new  life  by- 
good  works. 

This  is  what  is  meant  by  calling  the  ceremony  a  baptism. 
The  bwe  are  almost  invariably  Pali,  or  Burmanised  Pali 
names,  and  follow  the  same  rules  with  regard  to  initial 
letters  a|  the  lu  namd.  Thus  a  Maung  Po  Myat,  born  on 
Thursday,  might  take  the  name  of  Pyinya-Zawta,  while 
the  bw^  of  a  Sunday  child,  Maung  An,  would  be  Adesa. 
This  religious  or  Buddhist  (on  the  analogy  of  Christian) 
name  is,  of  course,  retained  by  the  regular  members  of  the 
monastery,  and  a  monk  is  never  addressed  by  any  other 
when  a  name  is  used  at  all.  When  he  becomes  old  a  U 
is  added,  as  U  Adesa,  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that 
the  use  of  a  person's  name  in  addressing  him  is  considered 
very  far  from  being  polite  in  Burma,  especially  to  one  of 
rank  and  dignity  such  as  a  mendicant.  On  the  other  hand, 
one  who  has  returned  to  the  world  never  uses  the  bwe,  not 
even  when  he  accomplishes  some  great  religious  work  such 
as  the  foundation  of  a  pagoda,  which  according  to  a  com- 
forting belief  ensures  passage  to  Ne'ban  after  death. 

The  entry  into  the  monastic  order  is  therefore  certainly 
the  most  important  event  in  the  life  of  a  Burman,  since  only 
under  the  robe  of  the  recluse  and  in  the  abandonment  of  the 
world  can  he  completely  fulfil  the  law  and  hope  to  find  the 
way  to  eventual  deliverance  from  the  misery  of  ever-recur- 
ring existences.  The  popular  time  for  the  ceremony  is  just 
at  the  beginning  of  Wa,  the  Buddhist  Lent,  which  lasts 
from  July  to  October,  roughly  speaking.  Strict  Buddhists 
make  their  sons  stay  throughout  the  whole  Wa.  During 
that  season  feasts,  though  they  do  occur,  are  very  much  dis- 
countenanced, and  dramatic  performances  are  energetically 
denounced  by  the  religious. 

According  to  the  letter  of  the  law  the  intending  proba- 
tioners should  have  reached  the  age  of  fifteen,  but  this 
regulation  has  almost  entirely  lapsed  in  Lower  Burma, 
among  other  reasons  chiefly  because  that  is  just  the  most 


Ill  BUDDHIST  BAPTISM  23 

important  age  for  the  boy  to  be  learning  English  and  arith- 
metic, with  a  view  to  getting  situations  under  Government  or 
in  English  merchants'  offices.  Therefore  in  the  vast  majority 
of  cases  shin-pyu  thi  takes  place  at  the  age  of  twelve,  or 
perhaps  even  a  year  earlier. 

If  the  boy  has  been  a  scholar  in  the  monastery  before- 
hand, he  is  sure  to  be  already  prepared  in  all  that  is  required 
of  him.  If  not,  he  gets  a  few  hasty  lessons  in  the  duties 
that  will  be  incumbent  on  him.  He  must  address  a  full 
member  of  the  order  in  such  and  such  language ;  he 
must  walk  decorously  through  the  streets,  keeping  his 
eyes  fixed  on  the  ground  six  feet  before  him,  and  on  no 
account  gaze  round  him,  no  matter  what  exciting  events  may 
be  going  on  ;  he  must  wear  his  thingan  and  du-gut  in  the 
prescribed  fashion  ;  he  must  eat  with  dignity  and  circum- 
spection, and  so  on.  All  these  details  are  set  forth  in  most 
minute  fashion  in  a  code.  When  he  has  mastered  the  most 
essential  portions,  and  has  also  given  proof  of  an  acquaint- 
ance with  the  ordinary  forms  of  worship,  all  is  ready.  His 
horoscope  now  comes  into  requisition,  and  a  bedinsaya 
or  Ponna  is  called  in  to  determine  a  lucky  day  and  hour 
from  the  sada.  When  this  has  been  settled,  three  or  four 
girls,  the  intending  koyin -gale's  sisters,  or  friends  of  the 
family,  dress  themselves  up  in  their  finest  silks  and  jewels — 
often  borrowing  a  large  quantity  of  the  latter — and  go  round 
the  town,  announcing  to  all  relatives,  friends,  and  neighbours 
when  the  induction  will  take  place,  and  inviting  them  to  the 
feast,  presenting  the  little  packet  of  le'-pet  usual  on  such 
occasions.  Almost  all  of  these  send  some  little  present, 
either  of  money  or  victuals,  to  aid  in  the  feast  and  make  it 
as  grand  as  possible.  Not  unseldom,  if  somebody  else's  son 
is  also  going  to  enter  the  kyaung  and  the  town  is  not  very 
large,  the  two  join  forces,  while  occasionally  as  many  as  half 
a  dozen  unite,  especially  if  the  families  are  not  well  off. 

On  the  appointed  day  the  young  neophyte  dresses  in 
his  finest  clothes,  and  loads  himself  with  all  the  family  gold 
chains  and  jewellery,  and  as  much  more  as  he  can  borrow  for 
the  occasion.  He  then  mounts  a  pony  or  gets  into  a  richly 
decorated  car.  Shaded  by  gold  umbrellas,  allowed  formerly 
on  this  occasion  only  in  Upper  Burma,  except  to  those  who 


24  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

had  got  a  special  patent  for  them  from  the  sovereign,  he 
passes  at  a  foot-pace  through  the  village.  A  band  of 
music  goes  before ;  all  his  friends  and  relatives  crowd  round 
him  decked  in  their  gayest ;  the  young  men  dancing  and 
singing  vigorously ;  the  girls  laughing  and  smiling,  with 
powdered  faces  and  brilliant  dresses.  Thus  he  goes  in 
succession  to  the  houses  of  his  relations  and  of  all  the  local 
officials,  to  do  them  the  obeisance  due  from  a  younger 
member  of  the  family,  and  to  bid  them  farewell.  They  in 
turn  contribute  money  towards  the  expense  of  the  band, 
and  the  solace  of  the  supernumeraries.  This  triumphant 
march  is  meant  to  symbolise  the  maung-shin's  abandonment 
of  the  follies  of  this  world,  and  to  recall  Prince  Theidat's 
last  splendid  appearance  in  Kapilawut,  amidst  a  crowd  of 
rejoicing  clansmen  and  subjects,  just  previous  to  his  abandon- 
ment of  family  and  kingdom  to  become  a  homeless  mendi- 
cant ascetic,  and  to  obtain  the  Buddhaship  under  the  bawdi 
tree.  When  the  round  of  visits  has  been  duly  carried  out, 
the  procession  turns  back  to  the  parents'  house,  where  in  the 
meantime  the  final  preparations  for  the  induction  and  sub- 
sequent feast  have  been  concluded.  The  head  of  the  kyaung 
to  which  the  young  postulants  are  to  be  admitted,  together 
with  several  of  his  brother  monks,  are  seated  at  the  back  of 
the  room  on  a  raised  dais,  in  front  of  which  are  ranged  the 
presents  intended  for  the  mendicants — heaps  of  fruit,  cooked 
food,  mats,  yellow  cloth,  and  so  on.  The  "  Talapoins " 
seated  in  a  row  carefully  hold  up  the  large  lotus-leaf-shaped 
fans  before  their  faces  to  shut  out  from  view  the  female 
portion  of  the  assemblage.  Never  is  the  command  to  the 
holy  community  not  to  look  on  woman  more  necessary  and 
more  arduous  to  observe  than  at  a  shin-pyu  pw^.  Burma's 
fairest  daughters  are  assembled,  bright  in  rainbow  skirts 
and  neckerchiefs,  drowsy-scented  flowers  in  the  jetty  tresses, 
jewellery  flashing  on  the  bosom,  the  fingers,  and  ears,  the 
fragrance  of  thana'ka  lingering  over  the  smiling  faces. 
Terrible  trial  it  is  for  the  young  monk,  if  any  such  there 
be  in  the  gaing  6k's  following,  and  more  imperative  the 
concentration  of  the  mind  on  the  Payeit  Gyi  and  other 
portions  of  the  sacred  writ  which  are  loudly  chanted  as  the 
postulants  return,  and   the  assembly  shikhoes  to  the  pon- 


in  BUDDHIST  BAPTISM  25 

gyis,  and  settles  down  to  observe  the  proceedings.  The 
boy  throws  off  all  his  fine  clothes  and  jewellery,  and  binds  a 
piece  of  white  cloth  round  his  loins.  Then  his  long  hair  is 
cut  off  close  to  the  head.  Often  the  locks  are  as  much  as 
three  or  four  feet  long,  and  are  carefully  preserved  by  the 
mother  or  sister,  the  latter  often  making  them  up  into  ta-su, 
the  tails  of  hair  twisted  in  with  her  own  to  increase  the  size 
of  her  sa-d6n — the  knot  of  hair  she  wears  at  the  back  of 
her  head.  When  the  hair  has  been  cut,  the  head  is  care- 
fully shaved,  the  boy  holding  it  over  a  cloth  held  by  some 
of  his  relations.  After  this  the  head  is  washed  in  the  usual 
way  with  a  decoction  of  the  seeds  and  bark  of  the  kin-b6n 
thi,  and  rubbed  well  with  saffron.  A  bath  is  then  taken, 
and  once  more  he  puts  on  the  bright  paso,  and  repairs  to 
the  presence  of  the  monks.  Near  at  hand  the  parents  have 
set  ready  the  thingan,  belt,  ko-wut,  and  other  yellow  robes, 
the  begging-pot  and  other  requisites  of  the  shin.  The  boy 
comes  forward,  prostrates  himself  three  times,  raises  his 
hands  joined  in  reverence,  and  begs,  in  a  Pali  formula  got 
up  by  heart,  to  be  admitted  to  the  Holy  Assembly  as  a 
neophyte,  that  he  may  walk  steadily  in  the  path  of  perfection, 
enjoy  the  advantages  which  result  therefrom,  and  finally 
attain  to  the  blessed  state  of  Ne'ban.  The  kyaung  po-go 
with  his  own  hands  gives  him  the  garments ;  he  is  duly 
robed ;  the  thabeit  is  hung  round  his  neck  by  the  strap, 
and  then  it  is  announced  formally  that  he  is  a  member  of 
the  monastery.  He  falls  in  among  the  other  novices  who 
have  come  with  the  mendicants.  The  abbot  perhaps  exhorts 
the  assemblage  for  a  short  time,  and  then  rising  while  all 
the  people  do  obeisance,  walks  off  slowly  to  the  monastery, 
whither  the  newly-appointed  ko-yins  follow  him,  not  unlikely 
helping  to  carry  the  presents  which  have  been  given  at  their 
induction. 

The  feast  at  the  parents'  house  begins  immediately,  and 
of  course  ends  in  a  pwe,  which  lasts  till  dawn.  Sometimes, 
though  this  is  very  seldom  the  case  even  in  Rangoon, 
the  young  probationer  comes  back  again  the  same  night 
and  assumes  the  lay  dress.  This  pro  forma  observance  of 
the  ceremony  of  baptism  is,  however,  vehemently  opposed 
by  all  the  monks  who  are  worth  anything.      A  few  boys 


26  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


remain  only  twenty -four  hours  in  the  yellow  dress,  long 
enough  to  enable  them  to  go  once  at  least  round  the  village 
begging  from  door  to  door  in  the  train  of  the  yahans.  This, 
naturally,  is  very  little  better  than  leaving  the  kyaung 
immediately.  It  is  considered  hardly  decent  for  the  shin 
to  leave  under  seven  days  of  professed  membership  of  the 
community.  Some  stay  longer — a  fortnight,  a  month,  or 
two  months ;  but  all  the  more  earnest  believers  insist  that 
their  sons  shall  remain  at  least  one  Wa,  throughout  the 
four  months  of  Lent,  in  the  rainy  season.  The  best  course 
for  a  fervent  Buddhist,  who  nevertheless  does  not  feel  him- 
self, adapted  for  a  monkish  life,  is  to  stay  over  three  Was, 
one  Lent  for  his  father,  one  for  his  mother,  and  one  for 
himself  It  is  on  account  of  the  importance  of  the  Wa  to 
the  shin-pyu  that  most  inductions  take  place  at  the  begin- 
ning of  that  season.  Yahans  count  their  seniority  by  the 
number  of  Lents  they  have  spent  in  the  kyaung.  A  mendi- 
cant of  twenty  Was  must  shekho  to  one  of  twenty-five,  and 
so  on.  An  individual  who  has  left  the  holy  community  to 
re-enter  the  world  is  called  a  lu-twet,  a  runaway.  On  the 
other  hand,  a  man  who  has  been  married,  and  has  after- 
wards entered  the  monastery,  goes  by  the  name  of  taw-twet, 
one  who  has  fled  from  the  jungle  of  the  world.  The  most 
revered  yahans  are  those  who  have  held  steadfastly  by  the 
blameless,  austere  life  of  the  fraternity  since  the  time  when 
they  were  first  admitted  as  koyin-gale.  Such  are  called 
ng^-byu,  white,  or  stainless  from  youth,  and  if  they  attain 
to  advanced  age  are  always  sure  of  a  most  splendid  cere- 
monial funeral,  whether  they  have  been  celebrated  for  piety 
and  learning  or  not. 

If  the  shin-pyu  stays  on  in  the  kyaung,  he  continues 
the  same  course  of  studies  as  he  began  as  a  scholar.  If  he 
has  not  already  learnt  the  Payeit  Gyi  and  the  Paya  Shikho, 
Pali  sermons  and  forms  of  worship,  or  the  Mingala  Thut, 
the  "  Buddhist  Beatitudes,"  he  applies  himself  to  them  now. 
The  most  advanced  pore  over  the  metaphysical  mysteries 
of  the  Abidhamma  Konit-gyan,  the  seven  books  of  the  most 
difficult  part  of  the  Bitaghat.  These,  with  the  Thingyo  and 
Thadda,  afford  ample  room  for  consideration  to  the  longest 
life.     The    modern    system    of    shortened    sojourn    in    the 


Ill  BUDDHIST  BAPTISM  27 

kyaungs  has  led  to  very  imperfect  and  limited  knowledge 
of  these  treasuries  of  sacred  knowledge.  Formerly  it  used 
to  be  said  that  the  man  who  did  not  know  the  Thadda, 
the  Pali  "  grammar,"  knew  nothing.  If  this  position  were 
insisted  on  now,  the  number  of  ignorant  people  in  Lower 
Burma  would  be  somewhat  startling. 

But  there  are  many  difficulties  before  you  get  to  the 
Abidhamma  and  its  cognate  subjects.  Even  in  the  Payeit 
Gyi  there  is  a  section  called  Ta-zet,  or  Ta-zet-thut,  which 
has  the  credit  of  sending  many  a  probationer  back  to  the 
noisy,  sinful  world.      According  to  the  couplet — 

Shin  pyet  ta-zet, 
Loo  pyet  a-yet. 

Brandy  sends  a  man  to  hell ; 
Ta-zet  spoils  the  saint  as  well. 

It  is  a  sort  of  religious  Pons  Asinorum. 

Besides  prosecuting  his  religious  studies,  the  shin  is 
required  also  to  attend  on  the  pon-gyis  and  minister  to 
their  wants.  He  must  lay  before  them  at  fixed  times  their 
daily  food,  the  proper  supply  of  water,  the  well-used  betel- 
box,  and  whatever  else  the  monk  may  require.  He  must  of 
course  go  round  every  morning  with  the  other  members  of 
the  monastery,  the  begging-bowl  strapped  round  his  neck, 
accepting  meekly,  without  word  of  thanks,  or  glance  thrown 
to  the  right  or  left,  even  when  he  passes  his  father's  house, 
the  food  poured  in  by  the  pious.  When  a  pon-gyi  goes 
abroad  the  neophyte  may  be  required  to  follow,  carrying  his 
fan  or  umbrella,  or  perhaps  an  arm-load  of  palm-leaf  books, 
if  a  function  is  to  be  performed  anywhere.  According  to  the 
strict  letter  of  the  law  the  ko-yin  ought  to  eat  only  of  the 
food  presented  in  the  morning,  but  a  very  great  laxity  has 
crept  in  in  this  respect,  not  only  with  the  neophytes,  but 
even  among  the  professed  members  of  the  order.  It  is  no 
uncommon  thing  for  the  parents  of  the  youth  to  send  in 
daily  a  special  meal  for  him,  or  even,  in  the  case  of  wealthy 
families,  actually  to  keep  a  cook  on  the  monastic  premises 
to  prepare  his  food.  Such  sybaritism  is  not  by  any  means 
uncommon  in  Lower  Burma,  though  even  there  hardly 
approved  of.      In  any  good  monastery  in  Upper  Burma,  or 


28  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


indeed  in  any  monastery  at  all,  even  in  Mandalay,  it  would 
be  promptly  put  a  stop  to.  But  where  the  monks  them- 
selves show  the  example  of  carnal  weakness,  the  probationers 
cannot  be  expected  to  maintain  the  old  austerity. 

The  shin  is  subject  in  every  way  to  the  discipline  of  the 
monastery,  but  there  are  very  few  additional  rules  really 
incumbent  on  him.  He  has  to  observe  always  the  S^-ba 
Thila,  the  ten  commandments.  Five  of  these  are  obligatory 
on  all  Buddhists  at  all  times :  the  other  five  are  supposed  to 
be  incumbent  upon  laymen  only  on  sacred  days  and  during 
Lent.     The  five  universal  commandments  are  : — 

1.  Thou  shalt  not  take  any  life  at  all. 

2.  Thou  shalt  not  steal. 

3.  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery. 

4.  Thou  shalt  not  lie. 

5.  Thou  shalt  not  drink  intoxicating  liquor. 

The  additional  five  are  : 

6.  Thou  shalt  not  eat  after  mid-day. 

7.  Thou  shalt  not  sing,  dance,  or  play  on  any  musical 
instrument. 

8.  Thou  shalt  not  use  cosmetics,  or  colour  the  face. 

9.  Thou  shalt  not  sit,  stand,  or  sleep  on  platforms  or 
elevated  places  not  proper  for  thee. 

10.  Thou  shalt  not  touch  gold  or  silver. 

These  latter  five  are,  it  has  been  said,  imposed  upon 
laymen  on  sacred  days,  but  the  burden  is  very  light,  the 
people  observing  them  or  not,  accordingly  as  they  are  observ- 
ing the  "  duty-day."  If  they  are  not  "  keeping  the  feast," 
they  conduct  themselves  precisely  as  they  would  on  any 
other  day,  and  buy  and  sell  and  attend  pwes  in  their  ordinary 
fashion. 

This  laxity  is,  of  course,  not  open  to  the  shins,  but  it 
cannot  be  said  that  the  regulations,  except  perhaps  as  to 
eating,  are  very  irksome.  The  seventh  and  eighth  com- 
mandments seem  by  themselves  peculiar,  but  they  refer  to 
filthy  habits  more  explicitly  set  forth  in  the  Patimauk,  or 
book  of  the  enfranchisement,  containing  the  227  sins  which 


Ill  BUDDHIST  BAPTISM  29 

a  monk  is  liable  to  commit.  The  ninth  refers  to  the 
common  Oriental  dislike  to  any  person  of  insufficient 
dignity  occupying  an  elevated  place  physically  above 
worthier  people. 

So  far,  then,  the  shin  is  not  very  grievously  burdened 
in  the  monastery.  But  the  discipline  maintained  is  very 
strict.  None  of  the  ko-yins  or  of  the  boarder-pupils  must 
be  out  of  the  monastic  limits  after  the  bell  has  rung.  A 
lay  scholar  may  get,  permission  from  the  kyaung  po-go 
to  sleep  at  home  now  and  again,  but  this  indulgence  is 
naturally  impossible  to  the  neophyte ;  he  must  always 
stay  in  the  monastery.  Again,  the  boarders  may  run  home 
in  the  afternoon  to  get  some  dinner  at  their  parents'  houses, 
but  this  the  shin  cannot  do.  Breaches  of  the  rules  are  very 
severely  punished.  The  culprit's  hands  are  tied  high  above 
his  head  to  a  post,  and  the  castigator  lays  on  vigorously 
on  the  naked  back  with  a  stout  bamboo.  Cases  of  deliberate 
cruelty  of  course  occasionally  happen,  for  human  nature  is 
the  same  everywhere,  and  a  Dotheboys  Hall  is  not  an 
entire  figment ;  but  they  are  rare,  and  on  the  whole  the 
shin  is  happy  in  the  monastery,  and  occasionally  in  later 
life  looks  back  with  regret  to  the  old,  quiet,  unruffled,  care- 
less life  of  the  pon-gyi  kyaung. 

In  Upper  Burma  it  has  actually  been  his  school,  for  but 
very  few  adopt  the  system  of  having  private  teachers  to 
instruct  their  children  ;  and  in  Lower  Burma  it  probably 
contrasts  favourably  with  the  uncomfortable  hard  benches 
and  desks  of  the  English  institution,  and  the  still  more  irk- 
some quietness  demanded,  and  steady,  prolonged  application 
exacted  by  the  English  teacher.  Those  who  have  been  to 
both  remember  most  fondly  the  long  dusky  monastery  school- 
room, where  they  sat  on  the  floor  and  shouted  out  their 
lessons,  and  now  and  again  slipped  out  into  the  air  to  take 
the  stiffness  out  of  their  limbs  with  a  quarter  of  an  hour  at 
chin  16n,  Burmese  football.  In  the  English  school  you 
learned  to  make  money ;  in  the  Burmese  school  you  learned 
to  be  happy  and  contented. 


CHAPTER   IV 

LIFE   IN    THE   MONASTERY 

A  LITTLE  before  daylight,  "  when  there  is  light  enough  to 
see  the  veins  in  the  hand,"  that  is  to  say,  in  Burma,  at  half- 
past  five  in  the  morning,  in  accordance  with  the  dina  chariya, 
the  whole  monastic  community  rises,  awakened  by  the  sound 
of  the  kaladet.  This  is  a  big,  oblong,  trough-shaped  bell, 
made  of  a  piece  of  wood  hollowed  out,  with  little  chiselled 
holes  on  the  side.  It  is  beaten  with  a  wooden  mallet, 
and  makes  noise  enough  to  rouse  the  heaviest  sleeper. 
The  yahan  then  rinses  out  his  mouth,  washes  his  hands  and 
face,  arranges  his  dress,  the  same  in  which  he  has  slept  all 
night,  and  recites  a  few  pious  precepts,  chief  among  which  is 
the  morning  prayer :  "  How  great  a  favour  has  the  Lord 
Buddha  bestowed  upon  me  in  manifesting  to  me  his  law, 
through  the  observance  of  which  I  may  escape  hell  and 
secure  my  salvation." 

There  are  always  a  few  sleepy  boarders,  or  shins,  who 
have  been  indulging  in  the  dissipation  of  whispered  con- 
versations till  far  into  the  night,  whom  nothing  but  a  personal 
attack  will  awaken,  but  they  are  soon  shaken  up,  and  then 
the  entire  community  arranges  itself  before  the  image  of  the 
Buddha,  the  abbot  at  the  head,  the  rest  of  the  brotherhood, 
pyin-sins,  novices,  and  scholars,  according  to  their  order,  and 
all  together  intone  the  morning  service.  This  done,  they 
each  in  their  ranks  present  themselves  before  the  kyaung 
po-go,  and  pledge  themselves  to  observe  during  the  day 
the  vows  and  precepts  incumbent  upon  them.  They  then 
separate  for  a  short  time,  the  pupils  and  shins  to  sweep  the 
floor  of  the  kyaung,  and  bring  a  supply  of  drinking  water 

3° 


CHAP.  IV  LIFE  IN  THE  MONASTERY 


31 


for  the  day,  filter  it,  and  place  it  ready  for  use ;  the  more 
advanced  novices  and  others  of  full  rank  to  sweep  round  the 
sacred  trees  and  water  them  ;  the  elders  to  meditate  in 
solitude  on  the  regulations  of  the  order.  Meditation  is  be- 
yond all  other  actions  meritorious.  The  first  meditation  of 
the  day  should  be  on  the  miseries  of  life  and  the  conviction 
that  we  cannot  free  ourselves  from  them  ;  such  thoughts  are 
honourable  beyond  the  founding  of  a  pagoda,  or  praying  for 
the  salvation  of  all  living  creatures.  Some  gather  flowers 
and  offer  them  before  the  pagoda,  to  impress  upon  the  mind 
the  virtues  of  the  great  teacher  and  the  weaknesses  and 
shortcomings  of  human  nature. 

Then  comes  the  first  meal  of  the  day,  a  light  refection 
usually  preceded  by  a  homily  or  grace,  to  the  effect  that  the 
rice  is  eaten  not  to  please  the  appetite,  but  to  satisfy  the 
wants  of  the  body ;  that  the  yellow  habit  is  worn  not  for 
vanity,  but  to  cover  nakedness  ;  that  they  dwell  in  this  house 
not  for  vainglory,  but  to  be  protected  from  the  inclemency 
of  the  weather ;  that  medicine  is  taken  merely  to  recover 
health,  and  that  health  is  desirable  only  that  they  may  attend 
with  greater  diligence  to  prayer  and  meditation.  After  the 
meal  all  proceed  to  study  for  an  hour.  The  ko-yins  repeat 
what  lessons  they  have  learnt  and  apply  themselves  to  new 
tasks.  The  early  morning  is  considered  especially  favour- 
able for  committing  to  memory. 

It  is  now  close  on  eight  o'clock,  and,  arranging  them- 
selves in  Indian  file,  they  set  forth  in  orderly  procession, 
with  the  abbot  at  their  head,  to  beg  their  food.  Slowly 
they  wend  their  way  through  the  chief  street  of  the  town  or 
village,  halting  when  any  one  comes  out  to  pour  his  con- 
tribution of  rice,  or  fruit,  or  vegetables,  into  the  alms-bowl, 
but  never  saying  a  word,  or  even  raising  the  eyes  from  the 
ground.  It  is  they  who  confer  the  favour,  not  the  givers. 
Were  it  not  for  the  passing  of  the  mendicants,  the  charitable 
would  not  have  the  opportunity  of  gaining  for  themselves 
merit.  Not  even  a  glance  rewards  the  most  bounteous 
donation.  With  eyes  fixed  unwaveringly  on  the  ground  six 
feet  before  them,  and  hands  clasped  beneath  the  begging- 
bowl,  they  pass  on,  solemnly  meditating  on  their  own  un- 
worthiness  and  the  vileness  of  all  human  things.     There  are 


32  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

naturally  certain  places  where  they  receive  a  daily  dole  ;  but 
should  the  open-handed  good  wife  have  been  delayed  at  the 
bazaar,  chatting  with  her  gossips,  or  the  pious  old  head  of 
the  house  be  away  on  a  journey,  the  recluses  would  rather 
go  without  breakfast  than  halt  for  a  second,  as  if  implying 
that  they  remembered  the  house  as  an  ordinary  place  of  call. 
It  is  a  furlong  on  the  noble  path  lost  to  the  absentees,  and 
the  double  ration  of  the  following  day  is  noted  without  a 
phantom  of  acknowledgment.  So  they  pass  round,  circling 
back  to  the  monastery  after  a  perambulation  lasting  perhaps 
an  hour  or  an  hour  and  a  half.  Some  mendicants,  especially 
the  more  austere,  return  as  soon  as  their  thabeits  are  well 
filled  ;  others  apparently  walk  for  a  certain  fixed  time,  and 
if  the  bowl  is  filled  before  this  time  is  over,  they  empty  it 
carefully  on  the  side  of  the  road.  This  is  not  wastry  ;  the 
food  is  eaten  by  the  dogs  and  birds  of  the  air,  and  the  merit 
to  the  givers  is  the  same. 

On  their  arrival  at  the  monastery,  a  portion  of  all  the 
alms  they  have  received  on  the  tour  is  solemnly  offered  to 
the  Buddha,  and  then  all  proceed  to  breakfast.  In  former 
times,  and  according  to  the  strict  letter  of  the  law,  this  ought 
to  consist  solely  of  what  has  been  received  during  the  morn- 
ing ;  but  a  very  great  number  of  monasteries  have,  sad  to 
say,  fallen  away  from  the  strictness  of  the  old  rule.  Only 
the  more  austere  abbots  enforce  the  observance  of  the  earlier 
asceticism.  Certainly  in  the  great  majority  of  the  kyaungs 
of  Lower  Burma  there  is  a  man,  not  a  monk,  called  kappi- 
yadayaka,  or  supporter,  who  provides  for  them  a  much  more 
delicate  and  better  dressed  meal  than  they  would  have  if 
they  ate  of  the  miscellaneous  conglomerate  turned  out  of  the 
alms-bowl.  That  indiscriminate  mixture  of  rice,  cooked  and 
raw  ;  peas,  boiled  and  parched  ;  fish,  flesh,  and  fowl,  curried 
and  plain,  usually  wrapped  separately  in  plantain  leaves ; 
cocoa-nut  cakes  and  cucumbers  ;  mangoes  and  meat ;  is  very 
seldom  consumed,  in  the  larger  towns  at  any  rate,  by  any 
but  the  most  rigidly  austere.  It  is  handed  over  to  the  little 
boys,  the  scholars  of  the  community,  or  to  any  wanderers 
who  may  be  sojourning  in  the  kyaung,  who  eat  as  much  of 
it  as  they  can,  and  give  the  rest  to  the  crows  and  pariah 
dogs.       The   abbot   and  the   pyin-sin    find   a   smoking   hot 


IV  LIFE  IN  THE  MONASTERY  33 

breakfast  ready  prepared  for  them  when  they  return  from 
their  morning's  walk,  and  are  ready  to  set  to  with  healthy 
appetites.  This  question  of  Sybaritism  is  a  chief  source 
of  dispute  between  the  rival  sects  of  Maha  and  Sula- 
gandi. 

Breakfast  done,  they  wash  out  the  begging-bowls,  and 
chant  a  few  lauds  before  the  image  of  the  Buddha,  medi- 
tating for  a  short  time  on  kindness  and  affection.  During 
the  succeeding  hour  the  scholars  are  allowed  to  play  about, 
but  must  not  make  a  noise,  or  indulge  in  quarrelsome  games  ; 
the  religious  pass  the  time  in  leisurely  conversation,  or  in  any 
other  way  they  please ;  the  kyaung  po-go  usually  has  visits 
from  old  people,  who  come  to  pay  their  respects,  or  perhaps 
the  kyaung-taga,  the  founder  of  the  monastery,  the  patron  of 
his  benefice,  comes  to  consult  with  him  on  various  matters, 
or  to  converse  about  religion  and  good  works.  The  etiquette 
observed  on  these  occasions  is  always  very  stately  and  cere- 
monious. Whoever  approaches,  whether  it  be  the  poorest 
villager,  the  founder  of  the  monastery,  or  the  governor  of  the 
district,  all  alike  must  prostrate  themselves  three  times  be- 
fore the  yahan,  and,  with  uplifted  hands,  say,  "  In  order  that 
all  the  sins  I  have  committed,  in  thought,  in  word,  or  in 
deed,  may  be  pardoned  to  me,  I  prostrate  myself  three  times, 
once  in  honour  of  the  Buddha,  again  in  honour  of  the  Law, 
and  thirdly  in  honour  of  the  Assembly,  the  three  precious 
things.  By  so  doing,  I  hope  to  be  preserved  from  the  three 
calamities,  from  the  four  states  of  PUjaiatuaSfltj  and  from  the 
five  enemies,  fire,  water,  thieves,  governorspiterally  trans- 
lated burdens),  and  malevolent  peoptej"~"-The  saya  replies  : 
"  As  a  reward  for  his  merit  and  his  obeisances,  may  the 
supporter  (taga)  be  freed  from  the  three  calamities,  the  four 
states  of  punishment,  the  five  enemies,  and  from  harm  of 
what  kind  soever.  May  all  his  aims  be  good  and  end  well ; 
may  he  advance  firmly  in  the  noble  path,  perfect  himself  in 
wisdom,  and  finally  obtain  rest  in  ne'ban."  Whenever  the 
Visitor  addresses  the  yahan  he  joins  his  hands  together,  and 
sitting  as  he  does  on  a  mat,  slightly  bends  the  body  forward, 
applying  the  title  of  paya,  or  lord,  and  making  use  of  the 
honorific  forms  of  speech  specially  reserved  for  the  religious. 
The  mendicant  on  his  part  calls  the  layman,  of  whatever 

D 


34  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

rank,  taga,  supporter,  or,  if  the  visitor  be  a  woman,  tagama. 
Somehow  or  other  these  conversations,  like  the  addresses  of 
the  religious  to  the  people  in  the  rest-houses,  always  seem 
to  come  round  to  the  subject  of  the  merit  of  almsgiving. 
The  recluse  will  say  that  whatever  is  presented,  silk  robe, 
mattress,  pillow,  betel-box,  is  purified  by  the  merit  of  the 
alms  deed.  The  poor  could  fill  the  Lord  Buddha's  begging- 
bowl  with  a  handful  of  flowers ;  the  rich  could  not  do  so 
with  a  hundred,  a  thousand,  ten  thousand  measures  of  grain. 
The  path  in  the  noontide  heat  is  hard  to  one  who  has  no 
sandals,  and  no  water-gourd.  What,  then,  will  be  the  path 
after  death  to  one  who  has  not  charity  and  regard  for  the 
ten  precepts !  Alms  deeds  can  defend  a  man  and  protect 
him  against  the  influence  and  the  sources  of  demerits  which 
are  man's  true  enemies.  Liberality  is  chief  among  the  ten 
great  virtues ;  it  is  the  second  of  the  three  works  of  per- 
fection ;  it  is  the  absolute  soul  of  the  five  renouncements. 
With  all  these  a  man  becomes  a  Buddha,  without  them 
he  sinks  to  be  an  animal,  or  worse  still,  to  the  fiery  chambers 
of  hell. 

When  the  conversation  is  over  the  layman  bows  down 
three  times  again,  saying,  "  My  Lord's  disciple  does  obeis- 
ance " ;  or  U  tin  ba  thi  "  places  his  forehead  on  the 
ground,"  rises,  backs  five  or  ten  paces,  and  then  turning  on 
the  right,  as  he  would  at  the  pagoda,  departs.  There  may 
be  quite  a  long  succession  of  these  visitors,  and  their  respects 
are  paid  all  through  the  afternoon,  if  the  weather  be  not 
too  hot. 

At  half-  past  eleven,  however,  there  is  another  meal, 
usually  a  light  refection  of  fruits,  and  this  is  the  last  of  the 
day.  The  pyin  -  sin  are  expressly  forbidden  to  eat  after 
noon.  Solid  food  taken  after  the  shadows  slope  to  the  east 
endangers  purity.  The  blood  becomes  heated,  and,  more- 
over, when  the  stomach  is  loaded  the  mind  becomes  over- 
clouded and  unfitted  for  meditation.  It  is  worthy  of  remark 
that  the  religious  must  eat,  as  they  walk,  slowly  and  with 
gravity,  only  putting  moderate-sized  morsels  into  the  mouth, 
and  constantly  bearing  in  mind  that  food  is  not  intended 
for  the  gratification  of  the  flesh,  but  for  the  nourishment  of 
the  body.     The  ceremony  called  a-kat  must  also  be  care- 


IV  LIFE  IN  THE  MONASTERY  35 

fully  observed,  in  accordance  with  the  precise  instructions 
laid  down  in  the  Wini.  When  a  monk  wants  anything  he 
must  not  go  and  get  it  for  himself,  nor  direct  any  one  in  as 
many  words  to  bring  it  to  him.  He  must  say  to  an  attend- 
ant shin,  or  scholar,  "  Do  what  is  lawful,"  whereupon  the  food 
is  brought  him,  and  the  shin  kneels  down  at  a  distance  of  a 
couple  of  feet,  and,  making  the  customary  salutation,  says, 
"  This  is  lawful."  The  yahan  then  either  takes  it  from  his 
hand  or  directs  him  to  place  it  within  reach.  The  same 
ceremony  is  observed  in  everything,  whether  the  religious 
wants  water  to  wash  his  face  or  hands  or  to  rinse  out  his 
mouth,  or  his  sandals  and  fan  when  he  goes  out,  or  when 
offerings  are  made  to  him  by  the  pious.  The  desire  is  of 
course  to  impart  dignity  to  all  the  monk  does,  and  to  repress 
covetousness  and  inordinate  carnal  desires,  and  the  custom 
dates  from  the  very  foundation  of  the  order. 

After  the  noontide  meal  all  return  to  work  again.  A 
certain  number  undertake  the  teaching  of  the  boys,  who  are 
at  all  stages  of  learning,  from  the  children  at  the  Thin-b6n- 
gyi,  the  spelling-book,  up  to  the  Ko-yins,  who,  in  accordance 
with  the  law,  are  learning  the  Wini,  the  Whole  Duty  of  the 
Monk,  by  heart,  with  a  view  to  abandoning  the  world  and 
adopting  the  religious  life.  Others  set  to  work  to  read  old 
texts  and  the  commentaries  on  them,  or  go  to  superintend 
the  professional  writers  who  are  copying  out  manuscripts, 
carefully  scratching  on  the  palm  -  leaves  with  sharp  steel 
style.  The  pyin-sin  themselves  never  do  anything  of  the 
kind.  The  writers  are  all  professionals,  laymen,  and  almost 
without  exception  from  Upper  Burma.  The  sadaik,  the 
carved  and  gilded  box  containing  the  palm  -  leaf  books, 
stands  in  the  central  room  near  the  images,  and  often 
shaded  by  a  sacred  umbrella.  When  a  learned  sadaw 
makes  notes,  or  writes  a  commentary  of  his  own,  he  dic- 
tates it  all  to  these  copyists,  who  afterwards  engross  it. 
Most  of  the  older  members  of  the  kyaung  do,  however,  what 
an  Englishman  would  call  nothing,  all  the  afternoon.  They 
talk  with  whatever  idlers — and  there  are  always  an  abund- 
ance of  them — come  about  the  place,  and  then  sink  into 
meditation  and  many  of  the  weaker  of  them  into  sleep. 
Meditation  is  the  only  path  to  the  higher  seats  whereby  a 


36  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

man  becomes  a  yahanda,  fit  for  Ne'ban,  possessed  of  the  six 
kinds  of  wisdom  : — 

1.  The  faculty  of  seeing  like  a  nat  or  dewa. 

2.  The  faculty  of  hearing  like  a  nat. 

3.  Creative  power. 

4.  Knowledge  of  the  thoughts  of  others. 

5.  Freedom  from  passion. 

6.  Knowledge  of  one's  own  past  existences. 

They  sit  therefore  for  long  hours  fingering  their  rosaries,  the 
beads  made  of  the  seeds  of  the  Canna  indica,  "  Indian  shot," 
which  sprang  from  Shin  Gautama's  blood,  and  repeating 
many  times  the  prescribed  formulae,  most  often  the  Thama- 
tawi  Patthana — All  is  changeful,  all  is  sad,  all  is  unreal ; 
followed  by  the  Tharana  G6n,  the  invocation  of  the  Three 
Precious  Gems,  the  Lord,  the  Law,  and  the  Assembly.  So 
by  abstraction  of  the  mind  they  hope  to  acquire  the  four 
laws  of  Edepat  : — 

1.  Absolute  power  over  the  will. 

2.  Absolute  power  over  the  mind. 

3.  Absolute  power  of  execution. 

4.  Absolute  power  over  the  means  to  the  object. 

The  discipline  is  terrible  to  all  but  a  slow-minded  man,  and 
we  can  well  imagine  one  who  thus  presents  himself  to  the 
people  as  a  living  memento  of  all  that  is  sacred  and  perfect 
in  the  religion,  longing  for  the  extinction  of  Ne'ban,  where 
he  may  escape  from  the  misery  of  recurring  lives. 

Ask  of  the  sick,  the  mourners,  ask  of  him 
Who  tottereth  on  his  staff,  lone  and  forlorn, 

Liketh  thee  life?     These  say,  The  babe  is  wise 
That  weepeth  being  born. 

So  each  one  in  the  brotherhood  passes  the  time  each  after- 
noon :  some  asleep,  some  racking  the  brain  with  mystical 
musings,  some  learning,  some  teaching,  while  throughout 
all  sounds  the  din  of  the  schoolroom,  where  the  pupils  are 
shouting  out  their  tasks  at  the  top  of  their  voices. 

Between  three  and  four  the  lessons  are  finished,  and  the 
shins  and  scholars  perform  any  domestic  duties  that  may  be 


IV  LIFE  IN  THE  MONASTERY  37 

required  about  the  monastery.  This  done,  the  day-scholars 
go  home  and  have  their  dinner,  a  few  of  the  boarders  perhaps 
gaining  permission  to  do  the  same.  The  ko  -  yins,  being 
under  monastic  discipline,  are  obliged  to  fast  like  their 
superiors.  Most  of  them,  and  some  few  of  the  pon-gyis, 
go  out  for  a  staid  and  solemn  walk  round  the  village  and 
out  to  the  pagoda.  Then,  at  sunset,  the  unmelodious,  far- 
reaching  notes  of  the  kaladet  summon  all  back  to  the  kyaung. 
The  strollers  return  immediately.  None  wearing  the  yellow 
robe  may  be  without  the  monastery  limits  after  the  sun  goes 
down,  which  occurs  throughout  the  whole  year  close  upon 
six  o'clock.  A  short  time  afterwards  the  scholars  are  sum- 
moned before  the  abbot  or  some  of  the  pon-gyis  and  recite 
steadily  all  that  they  have  learned,  from  the  Thin-b6n-gyi 
up  to  the  book  they  have  last  committed  to  memory.  If  the 
kyaung  is  large  and  there  are  a  number  of  students,  this 
thorough  process  is,  however,  modified,  and  only  the  work  at 
the  moment  being  learned  is  required  of  the  pupils.  The 
Pali  rituals  are  chanted  with  spasmodic  energy,  abundance 
of  sound  in  most  cases  doing  duty  for  a  just  comprehension 
of  the  matter.  Very  few  of  the  religious  could  string  a 
sentence  together  in  Pali,  far  less  speak  the  language,  yet 
most  of  them  can  pour  forth  homilies  and  dogmata  for  hours 
on  end,  so  that  the  poor  ko-yins  are  not  to  be  scoffed  at  for 
their  parrot-like  volubility.  When  this  examination  is  over, 
if  the  saya  is  an  enthusiast,  or  if  there  is  time,  that  dignitary 
himself  delivers  a  sermon,  or  gives  an  exposition  of  some 
knotty  passage,  or  perhaps  there  is  a  general  conversation  on 
some  question  of  doctrine,  or  other  subject  of  ecclesiastical 
interest  at  the  moment. 

Thus  the  time  passes  away  till  half-past  eight  or  nine, 
when  the  evening  is.  closed  with  devotions  in  the  presence  of 
the  image  of  the  Buddha.  All  assemble  according  to  their 
rank  as  in  the  morning,  and  together  intone  the  vesper  lauds. 
When  the  last  sounds  of  the  mournful  chant  have  died  away 
in  the  dimly-lighted  chamber,  one  of  the  novices,  or  a  clever 
scholar,  stands  up,  and  with  a  loud  voice  proclaims  the  hour, 
the  day  of  the  week,  the  day  of  the  month,  and  the  number 
of  the  year.  Then  all  shikho  before  the  Buddha  thrice, 
and  thrice  before  the  abbot,  and   retire  to  rest.      None  who 


38  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    chap,  iv 

have  experienced  the  impressiveness  of  this  ceremonial,  called 
the  Tha-thana-hlyauk,  will  readily  forget  the  powerful  effect 
it  has  on  the  feelings.  It  is  the  fit  ending  of  a  day  full  of 
great  possibilities  for  all.  If  the  same  routine  gone  through 
day  after  day  becomes  monotonous   and  loses  some   of  its 

~  power  for  good,  yet  the  effect  of  such  a  school,  presided 
over  b/,an  abbot  of  intelligence  and  earnestness,  must 
infallibly  Work  for  the  good  of  all  connected  with  it,  and 
especially  So  in  the  case  of  an  impulsive,  impressionable 
people  like  the  Burmese.  As  long  as  all  the  men  of  the 
country  pass  through  the  kyaungs,  the  teachings  of  Western 
missionaries  can  have  but  little  power  to  shake  the  power  of 
Buddhism  over  the  people.  The  moral  truths  of  both 
religions,  Christianity  and  Buddhism,  are  practically  the  same, 
and  who  can  give  proof  of  aught  else  without  calling  in  the 

\  aid  of  faith  ?  The  Burman  is  convinced  that  no  other  creed 
will  suit  him  so  well,  and  the  number  of  monasteries  in  all 
parts  of  the  country  renders  it  easy  for  every  one  to  obtain 
entrance  for  his  children.  The  king  sent  his  sons  to  the 
kyaung,  and  the  poorest  and  most  sinful  wretch  need  not  fear 
that  his  child  will  be  turned  away  from  the  gates.  Teaching 
is  really  all  the  pyin-sin  do  for  the  people  ;  but  it  is  precisely 
this  moderate  amount  of  teaching,  revealing  as  it  does  to  all 
the  stern  simplicity  of  the  monastic  life,  that  keeps  the  faith 
active  in  the  country.  Many  monks  are  supremely  lazy,  but 
so  are  many  of  their  fellow-countrymen,  and  if  you  are 
bidden  by  the  Law  to  meditate  deeply  on  the  nature  of 
mind  and  matter,  of  Nam  and  Rupa,  of  Seit  and  Sedathit, 
of  Thissa  and  Zan,  it  is  certain  that  you  cannot  be  actively 
employed  on  other  less  important  matters. 

Of  late  years  the  rudiments  of  Western  knowledge,  arith- 
metic, elementary  geography,  and  history  are  more  and  more 
taught  in  the  monasteries  all  over  the  country,  and  Govern- 
ment gives  grants  to  the  monasteries  for  the  pupils  who  pass 
the  prescribed  examinations. 


CHAPTER    V 

TATTOOING 

Whatever  his  parents  may  think,  the  Burman  youth  con- 
siders the  tattooing  of  his  thighs  quite  as  important  a  matter 
as  his  entry  into  a  monastery.  If  he  attains  to  the  full 
dignity  of  humanity  by  becoming  a  shin,  it  is  no  less  settled 
in  his  own  mind  that  till  he  is  tattooed  in  proper  fashion  [i 
there  may  be  doubts  as  to  his  thorough  manhood.  Accord-  \ 
ingly,  very  often  at  a  tender  age,  varying  with  the  spiritedness  \ 
of  his  character,  he  begins  to  get  figures  tattooed  on  various  \ 
parts  of  his  thighs.  When  the  operation  is  finished,  the 
whole  body  from  the  waist,  in  a  line  with  the  navel,  down- 
wards to  just  beyond  the  knee-cap,  is  completely  covered, 
the  effect  to  the  eye  being  not  so  much  of  a  marking  of  the 
cuticle  as  of  a  skin-tight  pair  of  caleqons,  fitting  better  than 
the  best  glove  ever  made.  The  origin  of  the  custom  may  or 
may  not  be  the  shameful  reason  assigned  by  foreign  writers. 
No  true  Burman  believes  it.  But  in  any  case  the  tattooing 
looks  very  well  on  the  olive  skin,  and  I  have  heard  English 
ladies  admire  it.  The  custom  will  probably  never  die  out. 
There  are,  it  is  true,  not  a  few  puny  Rangoonites,  spiritless 
sons  of  the  town,  who  do  not  get  tattooed,  but  they  are 
ashamed  of  it  and  take  every  opportunity  of  concealing  their 
weakness.  But  there  is  not  a  single  up-country  man,  not  a 
solitary  taw-tha,  the  sturdy  inhabitants  of  the  small  towns 
and  villages,  who  is  not  decorated  with  the  dark  blue  tracery. 
They  would  as  soon  think  of  wearing  a  woman's  skirt  as  of 
omitting  to  be  tattooed,  and  they  are  strengthened  in  the 
feeling  by  the  opinion  of  the  girls  themselves. 

The  operation  is  not  by  any  means  pleasant.      In  fact  in 
*  39 


40  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

places  such  as  the  tender  inside  parts  of  the  thigh  and  at 
the  joints  of  the  knee,  it  needs  more  stoicism  than  most 
youths  can  command,  to  endure  it  without  relieving  the 
mind  in  speech.  Therefore  it  is  common  to  put  the  boy 
under  the  influence  of  opium  while  it  is  being  done,  though 
some  parents  will  not  allow  this,  for  cases  have  occurred 
where  the  youth  has  died  of  an  over-dose.  For  the  same 
reason  it  is  very  seldom  that  more  than  three  or  four  figures 
are  done  at  a  time.  The  part  swells  up  a  good  deal,  and 
there  is  danger  of  fever ;  besides  that  a  few  days  afterwards 
the  itchiness  which  supervenes  is  almost  as  intolerable  as  the 
first  tattooing,  while  if  the  skin  is  broken  by  scratching  there 
is  not  only  a  nasty  sore,  but  the  figure  is  spoilt.  You  not 
uncommonly  hear  of  cases  where  the  whole  surface  was 
finished  at  one  sitting,  but  you  only  hear  of  them  because  it 
is  unusual,  and  because  the  youth  is  proud  of  it. 

The  instrument  used  is  a  pricker  about  two  feet  long, 
weighted  at  the  top  with  a  brass  figure,  sometimes  plain, 
but  in  the  case  of  good  sayas,  always  carved  more  or  less 
elaborately  in  the  figure  of  a  bird,  a  nat,  or  a  bilu.  The 
yat,  or  style  part,  is  solid,  with  a  round,  sharp  point,  split 
up  into  four  by  long  slits  at  right  angles  to  each  other, 
which  serve  to  hold  the  colouring  matter.  This  style  is  about 
four  inches  long  and  fits  into  a  hollow  pipe,  which  again 
joins  it  to  the  weighted  end.  Thus  the  length  required  for 
free  work  is  gained  without  too  great  weight,  except  where 
it  is  wanted.  The  tattooer  catches  the  pricker  with  his 
right  hand,  and  guides  the  point  with  a  rest  formed  by  the 
forefinger  and  thumb  of  his  left,  the  hand  resting  firmly  on  the 
person's  body.  The  dye  used  is  lampblack,  the  best  being 
that  obtained  by  the  burning  of  sessamum  oil,  and  this  is 
mixed  with  water  as  it  is  wanted.  Good  sayas  always 
sketch  the  outline  of  the  figure  roughly  on  the  skin  with  an 
ordinary  camel's-hair  brush,  and  then  the  pattern  is  executed 
with  a  series  of  punctures  close  together,  forming  what  after- 
wards fades  into  a  rough  line.  Skilful  men  are  very  quick 
at  it.  I  have  had  fifteen  figures  done  in  little  over  half  an 
hour.     But  then  Saya  Chein  is  a  celebrated  man. 

The  figures  tattooed  are  those  of  all  kinds  of  animals, 
tigers,  cats,  monkeys,  and  elephants   being  the  commonest. 


TATTOOING  41 


while  nats,  bilus,  and  compound  animals  called  tiger-bilus 
are  also  frequent.  Each  representation  is  surrounded  by  a 
roughly  oval  tracery  of  a  variety  of  letters  of  the  alphabet, 
which  form  a  curious  and  remarkably  effective  frame.  Thus 
each  animal  has  a  setting  of  its  own.  Vacant  spaces  are 
filled  up  in  a  similar  way,  and  the  top  and  bottom  are 
finished  off  with  a  scolloped  line.  Sometimes  these  letters 
are  asserted  to  have  a  cabalistic  meaning,  but  ordinarily  no 
greater  virtue  is  claimed  for  them  than  that  of  beauty. 
Mystic  squares  and  ladder-step  triangles  of  serious  import 
are  often  added  in  vacant  spaces,  but  all  the  more  important 
and  valid  charms  are  reserved  for  other  parts  of  the  body 
and  for  special  execution,  usually  too  in  vermilion.  The  old 
style,  and  that  which  prevails  still  in  jungle  districts,  was  to 
cover  every  available  piece  of  skin  with  tracery,  so  that  the 
figures  became  blurred  and  indistinct,  and  on  a  dark  skin 
grown  old  were  practically  not  visible  without  careful 
examination,  which,  considering  the  portion  of  the  body, 
was  embarrassing  to  both  parties.  The  newer  style,  and 
that  specially  affected  by  those  with  a  white  skin,  is  to 
sacrifice  mass  of  colour  to  distinctness  of  outline.  The  best 
sayas  carry  about  sample-books  with  them  containing  clever 
drawings,  from  which  the  aspirant  may  select  the  patterns 
he  likes  best,  and  mark  their  relative  positions  before  he 
takes  the  opium.  But  tigers,  cats,  monkeys,  and  bilus 
always  predominate.  To  fill  up  space,  and  for  greater 
certainty,  the  name  of  the  animal  is  often  added  in  the 
figure,  after  the  style  of  juvenile  art  on  slates,  or  with  a 
piece  of  chalk  on  blank  hoardings. 

The  Shans  tattoo  even  more  extensively  than  the  Bur- 
mans.  The  figures  are  carried  down  well  over  the  calf  of 
the  leg  and  above  the  navel,  while  from  the  upper  line 
tattooed  rays  run  up  to  the  chest  and  at  the  back,  after  the 
fashion  of  a  rising  sun,  almost  to  the  nape  of  the  neck. 
Sometimes  the  retainers  of  the  Sawbwas,  or  Shan  chiefs, 
had  every  part  of  the  body  except  the  palms  of  the  hands 
and  the  soles  of  the  feet  tattooed.  Even  the  face  was 
covered  with  the  dark-blue  markings.  Mostly  all  the  men 
who  tattoo  charms  and  cabalistic  figures  are  Shans.  They 
claim  and  are  allowed  a  special  skill  in  such  matters,  and  as 


42  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

they  mutter  spells  and  incomprehensible  incantations  over 
the  "  medicine,"  are  looked  up  to  with  profound  belief  and  a 
very  considerable  deal  of  awe. 

The  tattooing  on  the  loins  and  legs  is  universal  with  all 
Burmans,  and  nothing  more  is  ordinarily  required  ;  but  there 
are  very  few  who  have  not  charms  of  some  kind  tattooed  on 
the  arms,  back,  chest,  or  even  on  the  top  of  the  head,  which 
is  shaved  for  the  purpose.  These  figures  are  of  all  kinds — 
lizards,  birds,  mystic  words  and  squares,  rings,  images  of  the 
Buddha,  and  sometimes  merely  a  few  scattered  dots,  the 
latter  especially  on  the  face,  between  the  eyes,  over  the  ears, 
or  on  the  chin.  The  colouring  matter  is  almost  always  ver- 
milion, with  drugs  and  solutions,  according  to  requirement, 
mingled  with  it.  The  blue  dye  from  the  lampblack  never 
disappears,  but  the  red  colour  of  the  vermilion  gradually 
fades  away  and  vanishes.  Nevertheless  figures  of  this  kind, 
more  or  less  distinct,  are  to  be  found  on  Burmans  of  all 
ages,  so  great  is  the  national  superstition.  Even  the  town 
youths,  whose  limbs  are  smooth  and  "  unbreeched "  as  a 
girl's,  are  never  without  some  charms  of  this  kind,  if  it  is 
only  the  a-nu  se,  which  enables  a  man  to  gain  the  woman  he 
loves.  This  "  drug  of  tenderness  "  is  composed  of  vermilion 
mixed  with  a  variety  of  herbs  and  curious  things,  prominent 
among  which  is  the  bruised,  dry  skin  of  the  taukte,  the 
trout-spotted  gekko,  whose  sonorous  cry  and  fidelity  to  the 
house  where  he  establishes  himself  and  brings  luck,  are  well 
known  to  all  who  have  visited  Burma  or  Siam.  It  is  very 
sparingly  used,  a  few  round  spots  arranged  in  the  shape  of  a 
triangle  being  of  sufficient  virtue  to  ensure  the  object  aimed 
at.  The  commonest  place  for  them  is  between  the  eyes, 
but  occasionally  the  se  saya  recommends  the  lips,  or  even 
the  tongue,  and  his  advice  is  always  followed.  This  is  the 
only  tattooing  which  women  ever  have  executed  on  them, 
and  there  are  not  many  of  them  who  have  it  done.  The 
patient  is  usually  a  love-sick  maiden  who  is  afraid  the  object 
of  her  affection  will  escape  from  her,  or  a  girl  whom  rolling 
years  warn  that  she  must  be  quick  if  she  would  not  be 
condemned  to  remain  an  a-pyo  being,  an  old  maid.  Except 
in  very  desperate  cases,  however,  they  always  manage  to 
persuade  the  operator  to  place  the  charm  on  some  part  of  the 


TA  TTOOING  43 


body  where  it  will  not  be  visible.  If  it  is  not  effectual,  there 
is  always  open  to  them  the  signal  afforded  by  kindly  national 
custom  to  maidens  longing  for  a  mate.  They  cut  off  the 
lappets  of  hair,  the  bya-bazan,  hanging  over  the  ears,  and  the 
significance  is  the  same  as  the  white  heather  of  the  language 
of  flowers,  "  heart  for  sale."  In  Rangoon  the  tattooing  of  a 
woman  has  a  special  signification,  not  recognised  elsewhere. 
It  means  that  she  wants  an  Englishman  for  a  husband. 
Poor  thing  ! 

Another  very  universal  kind  of  tattooing  is  that  with 
a-hpi  se.  Almost  every  schoolboy  in  the  country  has  a 
specimen  of  this  on  him,  for  does  it  not  prevent  him  from 
feeling  the  pain  when  he  is  caned  ?  No  amount  of  falsified 
hopes  in  the  experience  of  friends  will  persuade  him  that 
it  may  not  be  effectual  in  his  case,  and  a  flogging  is  often 
courted  as  an  immediate  test  of  its  eflScacy.  Pride  repels 
the  inquiries  of  chums  as  to  the  results,  but  the  experimenter 
is  usually  very  well  behaved  for  some  time.  In  the  case 
of  older  men  the  a-hpi  se  acts  as  a  talisman  against  bullets, 
sword  cuts,  and  ills  of  that  kind.  Allied  to  this  are  the 
thenat  hpi,  which  soldiers  and  dacoits  carry  about  with  them. 
These  are  the  horns  of  buffaloes  and  other  animals,  which 
may  be  plain,  but  are  usually  elaborately  carved  with  figures 
according  to  fancy.  They  must  be  quite  solid  down  to  the 
root.  A  hollow  or  flaw  of  any  kind  deprives  them  of  their 
virtue.  While  the  man  has  such  a  talisman  in  his  hands 
he  cannot  be  killed.  A  monkey  is  a  very  favourite  image 
to  have  carved  in  this  way  on  a  sword  or  dagger  hilt,  the 
reference  being  to  the  tale  of  the  Ramayana.  Of  a  similar 
nature  are  talismans  which  are  especially  used  by  soldiers 
and  dacoits.  These  hkaung-beit-set  are  charmed  or  conse- 
crated objects  let  into  the  flesh  under  the  skin.  They  are  of 
various  kinds.  Some  are  gold,  silver,  or  lead  ;  others  curious 
pebbles,  pieces  of  tortoise-shell,  or  bits  of  horn,  all  of  them 
with  incantations  of  mystic  character  written  on  them. 
Many  famed  dacoits  have  long  rows  and  curves  of  them  over 
the  chest,  showing  in  little  knobs  through  the  skin.  When 
they  get  into  English  prisons,  an  energetic  jailer  has  been 
known  to  cut  them  out,  lest  they  should  be  pieces  of  gold  or 
silver,  or  perhaps  precious  stones,  with  which  the  turnkeys 


44  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

might  be  bribed.  The  usual  result  is  to  break  the  robber's 
spirit.  Once  the  continuity  is  interrupted  the  consecration 
is  gone.  More  peaceable  people  wear  necklaces  or  bracelets 
of  such  talismans  in  the  belief  that  they  are  thus  proof 
against  malignant  witches  and  necromancers.  Most  English- 
men in  Burma,  who  are  on  friendly  terms  with  the  people, 
have  been  asked  to  test  the  virtue  of  such  a  charm,  by  firing 
at  it  tied  up  in  a  handkerchief  If  the  incantation  is  valid 
the  handkerchief  will  be  unharmed,  though  the  muzzle 
of  the  pistol  be  held  up  to  it.  In  such  a  case  the  pistol 
will  burst. 

Another  kind  of  tattooing  is  the  mwe  se,  which  guards 
against  danger  from  snake  bite.  Similarly  the  a-kwe  a-ka, 
the  shielding,  or  defending  drug,  renders  harmless  the  spells 
of  wizards  and  geomancers,  and  keeps  far  away  evil  spirits  of 
every  kind.  But  the  most  hideous  and  weird  of  the  super- 
stitions about  tattooing  is  that  connected  with  the  a-kyan  se. 
There  are  but  very  few  sayas  who  are  acquainted  with  the 
necessary  drugs  and  incantations,  and  fewer  people  still  who 
have  the  courage  to  submit  to  the  operation,  for  many  men 
are  pointed  out  whose  minds  have  given  way  under  the  grue- 
some process,  and  who  wander  about  graveyards,  gnashing 
their  teeth  and  fumbling  about  for  human  bones  to  gnaw 
and  mouth.  And  no  wonder,  for  some  tattooers  make  them 
chew  the  raw  flesh  of  a  man  who  has  been  hanged,  while  the 
figure  is  being  tattooed  on  the  breast.  Those  who  go  through 
the  operation  are  called  Baw-di-tha-da.  Some  become  Baw- 
di-tha-da  without  knowing  it,  and  without  the  sickening 
necessity  of  mumbling  human  flesh  like  a  ghoul.  I  knew  an 
instance  in  a  monastery.  The  patient  was  a  boarder  about 
fourteen  years  of  age.  A  Shan  tattooer  wandering  about  the 
country  spent  a  couple  of  nights  in  the  kyaung,  and  the  boy, 
attracted  by  the  fellow's  eerie  tales,  managed  to  save  up  a  good 
many  titbits  for  him  from  the  food  going  in  the  monastery. 
Out  of  gratitude,  and  having  nothing  better  to  give  him,  for  he 
was  very  poor  and  homeless,  the  saya  tattooed  on  the  lad  a 
figure  with  singular  drugs,  muttering  queer  phrases  the  while. 
Then  he  went  away  saying  no  more  than  that  it  would  make 
the  boy  very  strong.  In  about  a  month's  time  the  boarder 
displayed  unmistakable  signs  of  being  a  Baw-di-tha-da.     He 


TA  TTOOING  45 


leapt  enormous  heights  in  the  air,  jumped  about  and  ran  at 
random,  carried  with  the  utmost  ease  things  which  no  one 
else  could  move.  The  abbot  locked  him  up  in  a  sadaik,  the 
box  in  which  the  palm-leaf  manuscripts  were  kept ;  he  got 
out  without  injuring  the  lock  in  any  way,  sprang  on  to 
the  roof  of  the  monastery,  forty  feet  high,  and  turned  a 
somersault  to  the  ground  without  hurting  himself  in  the 
least.  He  had  been  a  boy  of  very  soft,  easy  temper,  and 
now  he  became  fiery  and  uncertain,  and  with  his  vast 
strength,  very  dangerous.  He  only  calmed  down  when  a 
monk  preached  the  law  to  him.  He  was  constantly  doing 
marvellous  things ;  one  day  he  walked  across  the  river  in 
front  of  the  monastery,  holding  a  monk's  6k,  or  food  vessel, 
in  his  hands.  The  depth  of  the  water  was  over  six  fathoms, 
but  it  did  not  reach  higher  than  his  waist.  On  another 
occasion  a  tree  which  was  being  cut  down  fell  on  him.  He 
sank  into  the  ground  and  came  forth  quite  uninjured. 
After  some  years  his  parents  took  him  to  Magwe  in  Upper 
Burma.  There  he  fell  into  bad  courses  and  became  a 
dacoit.  This  was  terrible  for  his  family  in  a  special  way, 
because  in  native  territory  if  they  cannot  catch  the  dacoit 
they  seize  all  his  friends  and  relations  and  put  them  in  jail 
till  they  can  get  hold  of  the  real  culprit,  and  no  one  can  lay 
hands  on  a  Baw-di-tha-da.  At  last,  however,  he  was  restored 
to  his  right  mind.  A  holy  ascetic  came  across  him,  soothed 
him  with  the  payeit  gyi,  and  then  with  a  rusty  nail  and 
sacred  medicines,  tattooed  out  the  figure  put  on  with  such 
lamentable  results  by  the  Shan  saya.  The  quondam  Baw- 
di-tha-da  is  now  a  staid  and  respected  broker  in  the  employ 
of  one  of  the  best -known  English  rice  firms  in  Rangoon. 
He  was  fortunate  ;  most  Baw-di-tha-das  have  to  be  killed 

in  their  sleep. 

But  though  Baw-di-tha-das  are  very  rare,  charmed  tattoo- 
ing is  not,  and  there  are  some  fast  young  men  who  seem 
almost  to  make  picture  galleries  of  themselves  with  emblems 
and  patterns  all  over  their  chests,  arms,  backs,  and  the 
calves  of  their  legs.  The  colour  gradually  dies  away  until 
at  last  nothing  remains  but  the  blue  breeches.  These  really 
look  well,  and  they  last  a  man  to  his  dying  day. 

The    following    recipes    and    formulae    to    be    repeated 


46  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap 

during  tattooing  are  taken  from  a  Mandalay  tattooer's 
book  : — 

For  an  a-nu  se :  "I  was  Kutha  Min,  I.  At  the 
time  when  Papawadi  was  my  queen,  when  I  routed  the  kings 
of  all  the  seven  countries  who  came  suing  for  her  hand. 
Right  beautiful  ^was  she,  fair  as  the  malla  flower  when  it 
perfumes  the  forest  with  its  odours.  I  the  great  Kutha 
Yaza." 

This  is  to  be  repeated  seven  times  at  various  stages  in 
the  operation.  Kutha  Yaza  is  the  hero  of  one  of  the  510 
Zats,  detailing  the  previous  births  of  the  Lord  Buddha. 

For  an  a-hpi  se :  "  Steal  gold  from  the  pagodas,  fine, 
bright  gold.  Refine  it  in  the  fire  and  repeat  the  magic 
words  in  the  house,  on  the  lonely  path,  before  the  lucky 
star,  at  the  pagoda  ;  repeat  them  a  thousand  times  save  one. 
Consecrate  the  water,  draw  the  circle  of  the  flying  gal6n. 
Put  it  under  the  left  arm,  under  the  right  arm.  No  harm 
will  befall  thee,  safe  and  invulnerable." 

"  A  parrot  tattooed  on  the  arm  will  give  great  favour 
with  princes." 

"  Take  a  length  of  bamboo  or  of  rattan  the  size  of  a  joint 
of  the  merchant's  finger,  and  repeat,  pressing  your  foot 
against  the  tha-bye  tree,  Nat-tha  wa-pa,  wa-pa  nat-tha  na. 
Repeat  this  seven  times  and  put  the  joint  in  your  mouth 
when  you  are  in  danger.     There  is  no  better  the-nat  hpi." 

The  merchant's  finger  (let  thugyw^)  is  the  third — that 
on  which  rings  are  worn.  The  forefinger  is  called  let-hno. 
Hno  means  to  hate,  but  whether  this  is  the  meaning  or  not 
— as  it  were  "  the  finger  of  scorn  " — I  do  not  know. 

"  Repeat  sa  ba  pa  wa  wa  ba  pa  wa  with  the  tooth  of  the 
wild  boar  in  your  palm,  with  the  wild  boar's  ear  as  you 
know.  Draw  the  circle  with  pure  red  gold.  Draw  in  it  a 
naga  ;  then  draw  sideways  the  figure  of  a  flying  lion.  Write 
round  it  6m  gyu-lu  gyu-lu  thwa  ha  ya.  Then  carry  rice, 
fresh  water,  betel,  tobacco,  and  le'pet  to  the  pagoda  and  heap 
them  together.  When  you  have  repeated  a  thousand  times 
the  words  of  the  encircling  gata  (spell)  put  it  below  the  skin. 
But  be  careful  not  to  give  it  to  the  first  man  who  asks  for 
it.      It  is  very  powerful."     This  is  another  a-hpi  se. 

Certain  stones  called  amad^,  said  to  be  found  in   the 


TA  TTOOING  47 


heads  of  birds,  in  trees,  and  in  animals,  are  highly  prized 
as  amulets.  They  will  guard  from  musket  shots,  or  sword 
thrusts,  from  painful  blows,  or  evil  spirits.  Hmaw  sayas 
always  have  them.  When  they  are  placed  on  a  child's  face, 
or  introduced  into  any  one's  blood,  nat  thwin  thi,  they  intro- 
duce a  spirit.  The  person  so  possessed  falls  into  a  trance, 
and  may  be  questioned  as  to  the  doings  of  any  other  evil 
spirits  in  the  neighbourhood. 

Letters,  placed  in  the  magic  squares  and  triangular  "  in  " 
are  la-gyi,  na-gyi,  ka-gyi,  ga-gyi  (great  /,  great  n,  great  k, 
and  great  g).  Other  very  powerful  s'ma,  as  these  tattooed 
letters  are  called,  are  "  round "  sa,  wa,  la,  and  "  bottom- 
indented  "  da.     The  arm  is  a  favourite  place  for  them. 

The  belief  of  every  Burman  in  the  efficacy  of  these 
tattooed  charms  is  practically  ineradicable.  In  1881,  in 
Rangoon,  a  young  man  had  the  figure  of  the  great  Peguan 
byaing,  the  "  paddy-bird,"  a  species  of  egret,  tattooed  upon 
him.  This  was  to  be  as  efficacious  in  preserving  him  from 
drowning  as  a  child's  caul  used  to  be  considered  by  British 
sailors.  When  it  was  finished,  he  suggested  that  an  imme- 
diate experiment  should  be  made.  Accordingly  his  hands 
and  feet  were  tied,  and  he  was  tossed  over  the  side  of  a 
boat  into  the  river.  The  under-currents  in  the  Rangoon 
river  are  very  dangerous,  and  the  poor  fellow  was  never  seen 
again.  The  tattooers,  master  and  assistant,  were  brought  up 
on  a  charge  of  murder,  and  convicted  of  manslaughter,  but 
the  great  mass  of  the  Burman  population  thought  they  were 
very  hardly  treated,  and  that  the  fact  of  an  unlucky  side- 
wind, some  mischance  in  the  calculation  from  the  horoscope, 
the  machinations  of  an  evil-disposed  person  against  the 
deceased,  or  something  of  that  kind,  which  had  caused  the 
lamentable  issue,  ought  never  to  have  led  to  the  conviction 
of  the  skilled  sayas.  That  they  were  charlatans  was  never 
once  hinted. 


CHAPTER    IV 

EAR-BORING 

The  first  great  event  in  a  Burmese  girl's  life  is  the  na-twin 
mingala,  the  boring  of  her  ears.  She  is  not  out  of  the  doll 
stage  till  that  happens.  She  may  have  toddled  after  her 
mother  to  the  market  with  a  basket  of  fruit  on  her  head, 
long  before  the  ear-boring,  but  that  ceremony  is  as  much  an 
epoch  to  her  as  putting  on  the  yellow  robe,  or  getting  his 
legs  tattooed,  is  to  her  brother.  Ever  afterwards  she  will 
look  upon  every  male  as  a  possible  lover.  No  more  taking 
alternate  whiffs  at  a  big  green  cheroot  with  little  Maung 
Po ;  no  more  teasing  Po  Shan  to  let  her  have  a  taste  of 
those  fine  nette  mangoes  his  father  has  got  down  from 
Mandalay  ;  no  more  dawdling  about  the  streets  by  herself, 
watching  the  small  boys  playing  with  the  round  g6n  nyin 
seeds,  or  having  a  hurried  glimpse  of  the  puppet  play,  while 
she  is  supposed  to  be  at  home  looking  after  the  house  with 
her  little  brother.  When  she  walks  out  now  it  will  be  with 
her  mother,  or  an  aunt,  or  married  sister,  as  a  chaperone ; 
and  if  she  goes  to  the  play  it  will  be  in  formal  procession, 
and  with  all  her  finest  clothes  on.  Nothing  like  getting  the 
ears  bored  to  set  a  girl  thinking  about  the  wave  of  the  hair 
that  falls  down  in  lappets  by  her  ears,  or  the  best  recipe  for 
the  fragrant  straw-coloured  thanaka,  with  which  she  tints 
her  face  and  charms  half  the  senses  of  the  gallants.  It  even 
alters  her  walk.  She  sets  about  practising  the  coquettish  sway 
of  the  body  in  walking,  which  is  considered  so  attractive,  and 
which  a  philosophical  matter-of-fact  Darwinian  would  prob- 
ably declare  was  first  of  all  due  to  an  involuntary  throwing 
out  of  the  heel  with  each  step  to  keep  the  folds  of  the  dress 


CHAP.  VI  EAR-BORING  49 

modestly  closed  in  front,  and  to  prevent  the  dainty  slipper, 
just  covering  her  toes  and  no  more,  from  slipping  off  the 
foot.  However  that  may  be,  it  is  an  accomplishment  indis- 
pensable to  a  Burmese  belle.  She  takes  as  much  pains  over 
it  as  she  does  with  her  jetty  tresses.  In  a  word,  the  na-twin 
mingala  transforms  the  girl  into  a  woman,  just  as  much  as 
admission  to  a  monastery  makes  the  boy  a  man.  It  is  her 
baptism,  and  is  the  distinctive  mark  of  her  race.  Most  of 
the  men  get  their  ears  bored  too,  but  the  ceremony  is  not  so 
solemn  with  them,  and  latterly  is  not  so  universal,  at  any 
rate  not  in  the  towns  on  the  coast. 

The  ceremony  takes  place  at  the  age  of  twelve  or 
thirteen,  just  when  the  girl  has  attained  puberty  in  fact. 
Her  sada  is  submitted  to  a  soothsayer,  that  a  fortunate  day 
and  hour  may  be  chosen,  and  that  being  fixed,  a  great  feast 
is  prepared,  and  all  the  friends  of  the  family  and  the  rela- 
tions are  invited.  An  invitation  to  an  ear-boring  feast  is  a 
very  urgent  matter.  No  one  can  refuse  without  a  very  good 
excuse,  and  serious  business  is  often  postponed  to  the 
demands  of  such  a  ceremony.  Everybody  comes  early,  and 
sits  down  in  any  place  he  can  find  round  about  the  front 
part  and  sides  of  the  room,  the  girl,  with  all  her  female 
relatives  about  her,  reclining  on  a  mat  at  the  back.  The 
bedin  saya  stalks  about  gazing  at  a  mysterious  strip  of 
palm-leaf,  or  apparently  wrapped  in  deep  thought.  Beside 
him  is  the  professional  ear-borer.  He  carries  the  needles, 
which  are  almost  always  pure  gold,  and  even  in  the  case  of 
the  poorest,  never  of  any  baser  metal  than  silver.  Rich 
people  very  often  have  them  set  at  the  ends  with  precious 
stones.  At  last  the  soothsayer  gives  the  sign  that  the 
favourable  moment  has  arrived.  The  ear-borer  moves  up 
immediately  and  passes  the  needles  through  the  lobe  of  the 
ear,  sometimes  using  a  cork  as  they  do  in  England,  but 
more  often  letting  them  pass  between  two  of  his  fingers. 
The  girl,  who  has  been  worked  up  into  a  high  state  of 
excitement  and  terror  by  all  the  preparations,  usually 
struggles  and  shrieks  as  hard  as  she  can,  but  the  women 
round  about  hold  her  down,  and  the  band  of  music  in  the 
street  outside  strikes  up  a  rapid  movement  and  drowns  her 
lamentations,  while  all  the  visitors  burst  into  a  flood  of  talk 

E 


so  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

and  reminiscences  of  other  ceremonies  of  the  kind  that  they 
have  witnessed.  Usually  the  gold  needle  is  bent  round  and 
left  in  the  wound,  but  poor  people  sometimes  pass  a  piece  of 
string  through  and  tie  it.  This  is  turned  round  and  passed 
backwards  and  forwards  daily  till  the  sides  heal,  and  then 
begins  the  process  of  enlarging  the  hole  to  receive  the  na- 
daung,  a  big  tube  an  inch  long  and  from  half  an  inch  to 
three-quarters  in  diameter.  This  takes  a  very  long  time, 
and  is  less  pleasant  even  than  the  first  boring.  Some  do  it 
with  a  gold  or  thickly  gilt  metal  plate,  which  is  rolled  up 
and  passed  through  the  hole.  The  elasticity  of  the  metal 
makes  it  constantly  tend  to  expand,  and  so  the  hole  is 
gradually  enlarged.  A  commoner  method,  however,  is  by 
introducing  stems  of  the  kaing,  or  elephant  grass.  As  many 
of  the  little  stems  of  the  inner  blade  as  will  go  through 
are  passed  in,  and  daily  their  number  is  added  to  until  a 
considerable  width  is  attained.  When  kaing  grass  is  not 
available,  little  splints  of  the  thekke  kyaung  are  made  use 
of  This  is  the  ordinary  thatch  of  the  poorer  sort  of  houses, 
and  almost  universal  in  the  country  districts,  but  forbidden 
in  the  large  towns  on  account  of  its  inflammable  character. 
Then,  after  a  time,  the  na-kat  is  brought  into  use.  This  is 
a  curious  ear-plug,  big  at  both  ends,  and  smaller  in  the 
middle,  where  the  two  parts  screw  into  one  another.  The 
screw  is  passed  through  the  lobe  of  the  ear,  and  the  other 
portion  is  then  twisted  on.  These  na-kat  are  gradually 
increased  in  size,  until  at  last  the  orifices  are  large  enough 
to  receive  the  na-daung,  the  regular  ear-cylinders.  These 
are  of  various  make  and  material,  the  latter  being  formerly 
regulated  by  the  sumptuary  laws  in  independent  territory. 
The  royal  family,  both  males  and  females,  had  them  of  gold, 
richly  set  with  jewels,  often  a  single  large  brilliant  in  front, 
or  a  diamond  surrounded  by  a  ring  of  emeralds,  while  the 
back  was  a  cluster  of  rubies.  The  right  to  wear  these  was 
also  extended  to  the  higher  ministers  and  their  families. 
Others  wear  gold,  plain  hollow  tubes,  or  with  the  ends  filled 
up  with  delicate  repousse  work.  Those  who  cannot  afford 
this  content  themselves  with  solid  amber  plugs,  which,  when 
they  are  without  a  flaw,  are  worth  three  or  four  pounds 
sterling  apiece.      Finally,  the  poor  content  themselves. with 


EAR-BORING  51 


hollow  pipes  of  glass,  coloured  in  a  variety  of  tints.  The 
shape  is  somewhat  peculiar,  a  slight  irregular  concave,  if  I 
may  be  allowed  the  expression,  the  front  being  a  little  larger 
in  diameter  than  the  back.  Some  of  the  princesses  wore 
very  costly  na-daung,  the  diamonds,  and  especially  the  rubies, 
for  which  Burma  is  celebrated,  being  exceedingly  fine.  The 
men,  except  those  of  high  rank,  very  seldom  wear  them, 
unless  on  exceptional  feast  days.  Women  ordinarily  put 
them  on  whenever  they  go  out.  Poor  people  keep  the  holes 
open  with  a  roll  of  paper  or  cloth.  A  chic  damsel  very  often 
courts  attention  by  carrying  spare  cheroots  dangling  from 
her  lobes.  Elder  women  who  subordinate  personal  appear- 
ance to  bodily  comforts  usually  do  the  same  thing  on  a 
journey.  It  secures  them  a  smoke  whenever  they  may  want 
it,  and  the  huge  green  cheroots  are  not  easily  carried  in  the 
penetralia  of  the  Burmese  female  dress,  while  if  they  were  in 
the  travelling  box,  they  might  be  abstracted  by  unscrupulous 
youngsters. 

It  is  curious  to  notice  how  much  the  custom  is  falling 
into  disuse  in  the  larger  towns  with  the  men.  Even  among 
the  wealthier  classes  you  seldom  see  a  man  wearing  a  na- 
daung  of  the  largest  size.  Those  of  the  thickness  of  a  pencil 
or  a  little  less  are  still  common,  but  they  too  probably  will 
pass  out  of  use  shortly.  Yet  this  used  to  be  looked  upon 
as  the  distinctive  mark  of  Burmese  nationality.  Probably, 
nowadays,  the  tattooing  is  considered  sufficient ;  while  the 
ear-plugs  were  certainly  inconvenient  things,  and  afforded 
obvious  attractions  to  robbers.  But  with  the  women  ear- 
boring  is  still  universal,  and  probably  will  continue  so  as  long 
as  the  men  go  on  tattooing,  notwithstanding  the  pain  of  the 
process.  The  na-daung  are  as  characteristic  of  the  Burmese 
women  as  the  flapping  tamein. 


CHAPTER    VII 

MARRIAGE 

In  the  Lawkanidi,  the  book  of  proverbs  relating  to 
ordinary  life,  it  is  said  that  monks  and  hermits  are  beautiful 
when  they  are  lean  ;  four-footed  animals  when  they  are  fat ; 
men  when  they  are  learned ;  and  women  when  they  are 
married.  This  recommendation  to  the  married  state  is  no 
more  needed  by  Burmese  maidens  than  it  is  by  their  sisters 
in  other  parts  of  the  world,  and  they  have  the  further  induce- 
ment that  they  enjoy  a  much  freer  and  happier  position 
than  in  any  other  Eastern  country,  and  in  some  respects 
are  better  off  even  than  women  in  England.  All  the  money 
and  possessions  which  a  girl  brings  with  her  on  marriage  are 
kept  carefully  separate  for  the  benefit  of  her  children  or 
heirs,  and  she  carries  her  property  away  with  her  if  she  is 
divorced,  besides  anything  she  may  have  added  to  it  in  the 
interim  by  her  own  trading  or  by  inheritance.  Thus  a 
married  Burmese  woman  is  much  more  independent  than 
any  European  even  in  the  most  advanced  states.  In  the 
eyes  of  the  Dammathat  the  old  idea  of  the  patria  potestas 
prevails  indeed,  and  woman  is  regarded  as  a  simple  chattel, 
belonging  entirely  to  her  parents,  and  to  be  disposed  of  by 
them  without  any  reference  to  her  personal  inclinations ; 
but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  she  may  do  pretty  well  as  she 
pleases,  may  marry  the  youth  on  whom  she  has  fixed  her 
affections,  and  may  separate  herself  from  the  husband  who 
has  offended  her,  by  going  before  the  village  elders  and 
stating  her  case ;  and  if  the  complaint  is  just,  her  request 
is  never  refused. 

As  yet  they  have  not  begun  to  demand  an  equal  share 

52 


MARRIAGE  53 


of  education  with  the  boys,  and  the  only  accomplishments 
most  Burmese  girls  know  are  how  to  dress  neatly,  do  up 
their  hair,  and  powder  their  faces.  This  is  the  single  open 
implication  of  their  inferiority — except  in  worship  at  the 
pagoda,  when  every  woman  will  pray  that  in  another  exist- 
ence she  may  be  a  man — and  it  is  not  likely  that  female 
education  will  make  much  progress  for  another  generation, 
the  popular  idea  in  Burma  being  that  learning  is  no  use  to  a 
girl  when  she  has  it,  and  she  may,  consequently,  as  well 
devote  all  her  spare  time  to  making  herself  look  as  pretty  as 
possible.  Here  and  there  are  a  few  who  are  deeply  learned 
in  Burmese  literature.  The  young  wife  of  one  of  the  most 
prominent  living  Burman  pleaders  in  Rangoon  has  as  good 
a  knowledge  of  the  sacred  books  and  as  great  a  fluency  in 
repeating  Pali  rituals  as  any  p6ngyi  in  the  country.  But 
the  great  majority  of  girls  only  know  what  they  pick  up 
from  the  conversation  of  their  brothers  and  the  men  who 
come  about  the  house.  It  is  therefore  greatly  to  their  credit 
that  they  manage  not  only  house  affairs,  but  their  husband's 
business  into  the  bargain.  A  farmer's  wife  will  carry  out  the 
sale  of  the  whole  rice  crop  to  the  agent  of  an  English  rice 
firm  in  her  husband's  absence,  and  generally  strikes  a  better 
bargain  than  he  would  have  made  himself  If  the  village 
head  constable  is  away,  the  wife  will  get  together  the  police- 
men, stop  a  fight,  arrest  the  offenders,  and  send  them  off  to 
the  lock-up  all  on  her  own  responsibility.  The  wife  sits  by, 
no  matter  what  public  business  is  being  transacted,  and  very 
often  puts  in  her  own  opinion  quite  as  a  matter  of  course ; 
in  fact,  she  is  virtual  master  of  the  house,  and  henpecked 
husbands  are  not  by  any  means  uncommon.  The  last  king 
of  Burma,  Thibaw  Min,  was  a  notable  instance.  There 
never  was  a  king  of  Burma  before  who  remained  for  three 
years  the  husband  of  one  wife.  It  was  not  inclination  in 
his  case.  He  had  quite  a  number  of  amourettes ;  but  the 
sturdy  Supaya  Lat  and  her  formidable  mother  soon  got  the 
offending  damsels  out  of  the  way.  There  is  also  little 
doubt  that  it  was  Supaya  Lat  and  her  mother  who  sug- 
gested the  massacre  of  the  Princes  and  prompted  the  defiance 
of  the  British  Government,  which  brought  about  the  ending 
of  the  Burmese  monarchy. 


54  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

According  to  the  laws  of  Menu  there  are  three  ways  in 
which  a  marriage  can  be  brought  about : — 

1.  When  the  parents  of  the  couple  give  them  to  one 
another. 

2.  When  they  come  together  through  the  good  offices  of 
a  go-between,  called  an  aungthwe. 

3.  When  they  arrange  the  matter  between  themselves. 

It  is  understood,  of  course,  that  the  two  latter  forms 
require  at  least  the  passive  consent  of  the  father,  or,  if  he  is 
dead,  of  the  guardian,  mother,  brother,  sister,  uncle,  or  who- 
ever it  may  be  ;  every  woman — every  young  woman  at  any 
rate — being  necessarily  under  the  protection  of  somebody. 
The  Dammathat  says :  "  Let  the  man  to  whom  she  is  given 
by  her  nearest  relation  be  her  husband.  If  the  parents  or 
the  relations  of  the  girl  do  not  give  her  away,  and  she  is 
carried  off  against  their  will,  even  if  she  has  had  ten  children, 
they  have  power  to  cause  her  to  separate  from  the  man  and 
give  her  to  another ;  the  man  has  no  right  to  say  that  she  is 
his  wife.  Why  is  this  ?  Because  a  daughter  belongs  to  her 
parents  ? "  But,  on  the  other  hand,  "  If  a  young  woman  runs 
off  with  a  young  man  not  approved  by  her  parents,  and, 
having  concealed  herself  for  some  time,  shall  return  to  the 
village  or  neighbourhood  in  which  her  parents  live,  and  have 
two  or  three  children,  or  live  there  five  or  ten  years  with  the 
man  after  her  parents  have  seen  and  known  of  her  being 
there,  they  shall  not  have  power  to  cause  her  to  separate 
from  her  husband." 

According  to  the  old  system,  the  young  man  was  not 
considered  of  age  to  marry  till  he  was  twenty-four  or  twenty- 
five.  The  age  of  the  girl  was  always  a  matter  of  no  con- 
sequence as  long  as  she  had  attained  to  puberty.  When  a 
youth  wanted  to  marry  he  told  his  parents,  and  they  went 
to  the  father  and  mother  of  the  young  woman  of  his  choice. 
If  these  had  no  objections,  then  the  young  man  kept  com- 
pany with  the  girl,  had  the  run  of  the  house  for  two  or  three 
years,  so  that  they  might  get  to  know  one  another  well,  and 
then,  if  they  were  still  of  one  mind,  the  question  of  dowry 
was  settled,  a  fortunate  day  and  hour  fixed  upon,  and  the 
marriage  carried  out.      Nowadays  such  formalities  are  almost 


VII  MARRIAGE  55 

entirely  dispensed  with.  If  the  parents  of  both  houses  are 
agreeable,  the  contracting  parties  get  married  with  most 
ardent  lover-like  rapidity.  The  age,  too,  has  become  very 
much  younger.  Most  lads  get  married  when  they  are 
eighteen  or  nineteen  ;  thirteen  or  fourteen  is  a  common  age 
for  the  girls.  Runaway  marriages  are  common  enough,  and 
though  the  parents  may  be  angry,  they  are  usually  too  easy- 
going and  indolent  to  take  any  energetic  action  in  the 
matter,  and  let  the  couple  find  out  their  mistake  and  come 
and  ask  for  pardon  and  a  house  to  live  in,  which  is  seldom 
refused.  Occasionally  in  Lower  Burma  a  stern  father 
demands  that  they  shall  be  separated  until  the  lad  has  got  a 
situation  for  himself,  but  this  is  ordinarily  little  more  than 
a  mere  form  of  speech.  In  Upper  Burma,  where  food  is 
scarce  and  working  hands  more  valuable,  the  husband  is 
brought  to  the  girl's  parents'  house  and  made  to  do  his  share 
towards  supporting  the  household. 

The  preliminary  courting  is  naturally  conducted  in  the 
old  fashion,  best  known  to  those  who  have  had  experience 
of  their  own  in  such  matters.     The  parties  meet  at  pw^s, 
the  girl  perhaps  selling  cheroots,  fried  garlic,  le'pet,  and  what 
not,  and   therefore   being   readily   accessible   to  any  swain. 
It  must  not  be  supposed  that  keeping  a  stall  is  regarded 
as  anything  derogatory.      Numbers  of  perfectly  well-to-do 
women  set  them  up  regularly ;  some  even  have  daily  work 
in  the   bazaars,   and  very  often  a  girl  commences  occupa- 
tions of  the  kind  with  the  view  of  attracting   the   young 
men  and  securing  a  husband.     Then  there  are  meetings  at 
pagoda  feasts,  in  the  zayats  and  at  friends'  houses,  so  that 
there  are  plenty  of  chances  of  introduction  to  eligible  swains, 
even  without    calling    in    the    assistance  of   the  aungthwfe. 
This  functionary  makes  it  a  regular  occupation  to  know  all 
the  attractions,  physical  and  sordid,  of  all  the  young  women 
in  the  place,  and  for  a  small  consideration,  or  sometimes 
merely  for  love  of  his  trade,  brings  young  couples  together 
and  arranges  places  of  meeting  for  them.      He  is,  of  course, 
most   useful   where   an    impecunious   youth   aspires   to    the 
hand  of  a  rich  merchant's  or  high  official's  daughter.      He 
manages   an    introduction    in    a   roundabout   way   to   avoid 
rousing     suspicions,    praises    his     client's     appearance     and 


56  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


abilities,  contrives  a  series  of  unexpected  meetings,  and  does 
everything,  in  fact,  to  further  the  project.  There  are 
regular  practitioners  in  the  business,  and  others  who  dabble 
in  it  for  want  of  something  to  do  and  from  sheer  love  of 
scheming. 

Courting,  whether  authorised  by  the  parents  or  not,  is 
very  seldom  carried  on  in  daylight.  So  much  is  this  the 
case  that  the  phrase  Lu-byo  hl^  thi  achein, "  Courting  time," 
is  commonly  used  in  ordinary  conversation  to  designate 
nine  o'clock  at  night,  or  a  little  before  or  after.  The  time 
may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  occupation,  or  the  heat,  prevent 
it  during  the  day,  but  there  is  an  old  saw  which  may  account 
for  it,  to  the  effect  that  in  the  morning  women  are  cross 
and  peevish ;  in  the  middle  of  the  day  they  are  testy  and 
quarrelsome ;  but  at  night  they  are  sweet  and  amiable. 
Authorised  courtship,  if  the  term  is  not  too  unromantic,  is 
always  carried  on  at  this  time,  and  preparations  for  it  are 
duly  made  by  the  girls.  A  couple  of  hours  after  nightfall 
the  lover,  with  a  friend  or  two,  makes  his  appearance  near 
the  house  and  dawdles  up  and  down  till  he  finds  the  old 
people  have  gone  to  bed,  or  retired  from  the  scene.  Then 
he  goes  up  the  steps  along  with  his  supporters  and  finds  the 
girl  alone,  or  with  a  companion  or  two,  dressed  in  her  best, 
with  flowers  in  her  hair,  powder  on  her  cheeks  and  neck,  and 
generally  prepared  for  conquest.  The  old  people  are  never 
present,  though  they  can  hear  everything,  and  the  mother, 
as  I  am  credibly  informed,  pauk-kyi  thi,  has  a  convenient 
chink  in  the  bamboo  walls  through  which  she  can  survey 
operations  and  prevent  too  ardent  love-making.  Interviews 
vary  in  length,  and  the  nature  of  the  conversation  may  be 
best  left  to  the  imagination.  If  one  of  the  accompanying 
young  men  has  also  an  appointment  that  evening  he 
naturally  endeavours  to  curtail  his  friend's  philandering  as 
much  as  possible,  in  order  that  he  himself  may  have  the 
more  time  in  another  place  to  press  his  suit.  Even  in 
clandestine  flirtations  the  courting  is  always  effected  in  a 
formal  way  like  this.  Meetings  in  lover's  loans,  or  a  quatre 
yeux,  would  ruin  a  girl's  character  immediately.  Her  own 
mother  would  be  the  first  to  put  the  worst  construction  on 
such  doings. 


VII  MARRIAGE  57 

Little  presents  are  exchanged.  The  soupirant  brings  a 
gay  kerchief  with  some  love-verses  written  on  it,  perhaps  his 
own  composition,  more  probably  the  erotic  sighings  of  the 
prince  in  the  last  play  he  heard,  or  cribbed  bodily  from  a 
song-book  for  Kalathas  (Corinthians,  lads  of  mettle).  The 
girl  gives  him  some  green  cheroots,  rolled  by  her  fair  hands, 
or  a  brilliant  woollen  muffler  which  she  has  knitted  ;  but 
there  is  never  any  of  the  kissing  and  caressing  indulged  in 
by  more  urgent  foreign  lovers.  The  girl  would  look  upon 
any  attempts  of  such  a  nature  as  highly  indecorous,  and  no 
doubt  it  is  quite  unsuited  to  her  clothing. 

When  at  last  everything  has  been  settled  —  parents' 
consent  obtained,  dowry  fixed,  and  a  fortunate  day  and  hour 
pitched  upon  —  the  marriage  ceremony  comes  off  in  the 
house  of  the  bride's  parents.  The  ritual  is  very  simple  and 
has  nothing  whatever  of  a  religious  character  about  it ;  in 
fact  the  celibate  pdngyis  would  be  grossly  scandalised  if 
they  were  asked  to  take  any  part  in  it.  A  great  feast  is 
prepared  at  the  expense  of  the  bridegroom  or  his  parents. 
All  the  relations,  friends,  and  neighbours  are  invited,  and  it 
is  the  publicity  of  the  thing  that  is  really  the  main  feature 
of  the  ceremony.  The  old  custom  that  the  bride  and  bride- 
groom should  join  their  right  hands  together,  palm  to  palm, 
in  the  presence  of  all  the  assembled  guests,  and  then  should 
eat  rice  out  of  the  same  dish  and  feed  each  other  with  one 
or  two  morsels  in  turtle-dove  fashion,  has  in  many  cases 
died  out,  and  the  eating  and  drinking,  the  talk  of  the  men 
in  the  main  room  of  the  house  and  of  the  women  in  the 
inner  apartment,  is  quite  enough  to  solemnise  the  union. 
When  the  newly  -  married  couple  retire  into  the  bridal 
chamber  it  is  sometimes  in  the  larger  towns  the  custom 
to  shower  saffron  -  coloured  rice  on  them,  but  this,  like 
the  entire  seclusion  in  which  the  happy  pair  are  supposed 
to  pass  the  next  seven  days,  is  very  seldom  actually 
carried  out. 

In  the  country  villages,  however,  two  ancient  customs 
are  still  very  generally  prevalent.  The  one  is  to  tie  a  string 
across  the  road  along  which  the  bridegroom  must  pass  to 
the  house  of  his  intended.  He  comes  in  procession  with  all 
his  friends,  carrying  the  greater  portion  of  the  belongings 


58  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

with  which  he  intends  to  set  up  house :  a  bundle  of  mats, 
a  long  arm  -  chair,  a  teak  box,  mattresses,  pillows,  besides 
materials  for  the  feast  and  presents  for  the  bride.  The 
people  who  have  put  up  the  string  —  called  the  gold  or 
silver  cord — usually  young  men  intent  on  a  jollification  of 
their  own,  stop  the  happy  man,  and  threaten  to  break  the 
string  with  a  curse  on  the  married  couple  unless  some 
money  is  given  them.  It  is  simple  extortion,  and  English 
district  officers  sometimes  forbid  it.  Nevertheless  the  specu- 
lation is  usually  successful.  I  suppose  no  one  feels  very 
niggardly  on  his  marriage  day. 

The  other  custom  is  much  more  singular,  more  ancient, 
and  infinitely  more  disagreeable.  On  the  night  of  the 
marriage  a  band  of  the  young  bachelors  of  the  place  'come 
and  shower  stones  and  sticks  on  the  roof  of  the  house  where 
the  happy  couple  are,  keeping  up  sometimes  such  a  sus- 
tained battery  that  the  thatch  or  wooden  shingles  suffer 
materially,  while  the  furniture  and  even  the  newly-wedded 
couple  occasionally  do  not  escape  injury.  In  Lower  Burma 
the  lads  are  usually  bought  off  with  a  sum  of  money,  and 
where  the  officials  do  not  interfere  to  prevent  it,  the  custom 
has  degenerated  into  a  system  of  extortion.  Not  a  few  law- 
suits have  sprung  out  of  such  sieges.  The  money  paid  in 
toll  to  this  horseplay  goes  by  the  name  of  kd-bo,  and  is 
supposed  to  be  devoted  by  the  receivers  to  making  offerings 
at  the  pagoda,  but  the  young  men  nowadays  use  it  shame- 
lessly for  their  own  entertainment.  In  Upper  Burma  the 
blackmail  is  never  demanded,  and  consequently  Father  San 
Germano  was  puzzled  to  conceive  any  reason  for  the  extra- 
ordinary practice.  Captain  Forbes  seeing  the  payment  to 
procure  relief,  believed  that  extortion  was  the  sole  origin  as 
well  as  object  of  the  performance.  But  the  learned  in  Bur- 
mese folk-lore  assign  it  a  much  higher  and  more  estimable 
beginning.  When,  after  the  world  was  formed,  it  was  first 
peopled  from  the  superior  heavens  of  the  Byammas,  of  the 
nine  that  remained  behind,  weighed  down  by  the  gross 
earthly  food  they  had  eaten,  five  gradually  became  men  and 
four  women.  When  these  Byamma-gyi  ko-yauk,  these  nine 
great  ancestors  of  the  Burmese  and  of  all  mankind,  had 
gradually   degenerated,   through   the   substitution    of   Pada- 


VII  MARRIAGE  59 

lata  for  the  original  flavoured  earth,  and  of  Thale  rice  for 
the  leguminous  creeper,  desire  arose  among  them,  and  four 
of  the  men  took  the  four  women  to  wife.  The  fifth  man 
naturally  resented  being  left  compulsorily  single,  and  pelted 
the  happy  couples  with  stones  on  their  marriage  night. 
Sympathy  with  the  feelings  of  this  archetypal  bachelor  has 
perpetuated  the  stone-throwing  by  the  lu-byos  down  to  the 
present  day,  and  if  there  is  no  dearth  of  eligible  spinsters  in 
our  times,  the  lonely  bachelor  may  be  allowed  to  express  his 
envy  of  his  friend's  bliss  without  being  accused  of  anything 
but  gross  cupidity. 

After  marriage  the  couple  almost  always  live  for  two  or 
three  years  in  the  house  of  the  bride's  parents,  the  son-in- 
law  becoming  one  of  the  family  and  contributing  to  its  sup- 
port. Setting  up  a  separate  establishment,  even  in  Rangoon, 
where  the  young  husband  is  a  clerk  in  an  English  office,  is 
looked  upon  with  disfavour  as  a  piece  of  pride  and  ostenta- 
tion. If  the  girl  is  an  only  daughter,  she  and  her  husband 
stay  on  till  the  old  people  die. 

Polygamy  is  recognised  and  permitted,  but  practically 
does  not  exist  now  in  British  territory.  A  man  with  more 
than  one  wife  becomes  a  subject  of  common  talk,  and  a 
native  official  now  living  is  well  known  all  through  the  delta 
as  the  myo-ok  with  twenty  wives.  In  native  territory  the 
right  to  have  several  wives  was  equally  little  used  in  prac- 
tice. Many  of  the  high  officials  who  travelled  about  over 
large  districts  had  wives  in  almost  all  the  towns  they  visited 
— a  custom  in  great  measure  induced  by  the  rule  which  pro- 
vided that  the  maya-gyi,  the  chief  wife,  had  to  be  left  in 
Mandalay  as  a  hostage  for  the  fidelity  of  the  official.  But 
the  great  bulk  of  the  people  are,  and  always  have  been, 
monogamous.  King  Minddn  had  fifty -three  recognised 
wives,  of  whom  thirty  -  seven  survived  him.  His  children 
numbered  one  hundred  and  ten,  of  whom  upwards  of  fifty 
survived  him.  Besides  the  wives,  like  Solomon,  he  had 
numerous  concubines.     So,  indeed,  have  many  lesser  people. 

The  forbidden  degrees  are  few.  Marriages  with  mother, 
daughter,  sister,  and  half-sister,  aunt,  grandmother,  and 
granddaughter,  are  forbidden,  but  none  else.  A  son  may 
marry   his   stepmother  ;    it   is   expressly  mentioned   in    the 


6o  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Dammathat  The  sovereign  always  married  at  least  one 
half-sister  to  ensure  the  purity  of  the  royal  blood,  but,  rather 
illogically,  the  issue  of  this  union  was  not  by  any  means 
necessarily  heir  to  the  throne.  The  son  whom  the  king, 
or  his  ministers  after  his  death,  named,  succeeded,  or  more 
commonly  still,  the  son  who  could  best  maintain  his  position 
by  force. 

The  liberty  of  divorce  is  practically  unrestricted,  except 
by  the  elaborate  laws  respecting  the  division  of  property. 
According  to  the  Laws  of  Menu  a  woman  may  obtain  a 
divorce  among  other  reasons  for  the  following :  When  her 
husband  is  poor  and  unable  to  support  her ;  when  he  is 
always  ailing ;  when  he  does  not  work  and  leads  an  idle 
life ;  when  he  is  incapacitated  by  reason  of  old  age ;  when 
he  becomes  a  cripple  after  marriage. 

And  a  man  may  obtain  a  divorce  if  his  wife  has  no 
male  children,  if  she  has  no  love  for  her  husband,  or  if  she 
persists  in  going  to  a  house  where  he  tells  her  she  must  not 
visit,  and  so  on. 

The  lawgiver  seems  in  fact  to  have  laid  down  that 
marriage  is  a  civil  contract  which  either  party  can  dissolve ; 
but,  unless  with  good  reason,  the  one  that  wishes  to  separate 
must  suffer  in  property,  more  or  less  severely,  according  as 
the  plea  is  good  or  bad. 

Property,  for  this  purpose,  is  said  to  be  of  three  kinds. 
Pa-yin,  property  acquired  by,  or  in  possession  of,  persons 
before  marriage.  Let-htet-pwa,  property  acquired  by  hus- 
band or  wife  after  marriage.  Tin-thi,  property  inherited 
or  obtained  by  gift.  Pa-yin  after  marriage  becomes  hnit- 
pa-s6n,  that  is,  the  joint  property  of  husband  and  wife, 
but  only  when  it  is  agreed  between  them  either  before  or 
after  marriage  that  the  property  shall  be  put  together  for 
the  mutual  benefit. 

In  the  event  of  a  divorce  both  parties  take  away  what- 
ever pa-yin  they  may  have  had  on  marriage,  and  the 
let-htet-pwa  is  divided  either  by  mutual  agreement,  or  by 
the  decision  of  the  village  elders  who  sanction  the  separation. 

But  divorces  are  far  from  being  so  common  as  most 
writers  would  have  us  believe.  The  warmth  of  family  aiifec- 
tion    is   one   of  the  strongest   traits   of   the  race,  and    the 


MARRIAGE  6i 


Burman  is  always  very  kind  to  his  wife,  while  every  girl  is 
taught  from  her  earliest  years  to  look  with  the  highest 
respect  upon  man  as  man,  and  to  defer  in  all  things  to  his 
judgment,  though  she  is  far  more  free  than  the  Indian  wife. 
The  Burman  consults  with  his  partner  in  all  his  affairs,  public 
and  private,  and  often  is  entirely  guided  by  her.  She  keeps 
the  shop  that  is  to  be  found  in  almost  every  house  in  the 
country  towns,  and  usually  makes  far  more  money  than  the 
goodman  himself.  It  is  a  simple  matter  to  blame  the 
Burmese  for  easy  marriage  customs,  but  the  system  speedily 
puts  an  end  to  unhappy  and  ill-assorted  unions,  and  ille- 
gitimate children  are  exceedingly  rare.  Finally,  unless  there 
is  good  known  cause  for  a  separation  the  divorced  parties  are 
not  by  any  means  looked  upon  with  a  favourable  eye.  The 
man  who  enters  a  monastery  to  get  rid  of  a  wife  goes  by  the 
contemptuous  name  of  taw-twet  "jungle  runaway,"  for  the 
rest  of  his  life,  while  the  ta-ku-lat,  the  divorcee,  is  a  perennial 
subject  of  joke  to  the  jester  in  the  play  : — 

She  that's  neither  maid,  married,  nor  widow, 
Fits  all  men  as  a  pot  does  it's  lid,  O. 

That  is  to  say,  a  divorced  woman  needs  small  wooing. 
Such  a  woman  will  not  hesitate  to  cut  off  the  bya-bazan, 
the  lappets  of  hair  that  fall  down  over  the  ears,  the  last 
resource  of  the  despairing  and  unwilling  celibate. 

The  literature  of  marriage  is  not  inconsiderable.  The 
tattooing  ceremonies,  a  -  nu  se,  love  -  philtres,  charms,  and 
what  not,  are  referred  to  elsewhere.  There  remain  a  number 
of  singular  matters  to  be  taken  note  of  by  those  who  would 
be  happy  in  married  life.  Thus  the  girls  are  told  how  they 
may  ascertain  a  man's  character  by  the  colour  of  his  heart's 

blood though  how  they  are  to  ascertain  this  colour  without 

injury  to  the  subject  of  inquiry  is  not  mentioned.  A  lustful 
man's  blood  is  dark  red  ;  a  cross,  quarrelsome  man's  is  so 
dark  as  almost  to  be  black  ;  a  lazy  man's  like  elephant's 
water ;  a  rough-speaking  man's  like  boiled  peas  :  a  charit- 
able man's  like  the  flower  of  the  maha  hlega,  a  species  of 
bauhinia ;  while  a  learned  man's  heart's  blood  is  beautiful  as 

the  ruby. 

Similarly  useless   knowledge   is   the   statement   that  an 


62  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

ignorant  man's  heart  is  all  in  one  mass,  while  that  of  the 
well-instructed  divides  itself  into  three  small  parts. 

As  models  of  married  women  are  held  up  the  Taw  le- 
wa,  the  most  faithful  and  beautiful  of  wives,  the  consorts  of 
four  of  the  chief  princes  in  the  ten  great  Jatakas,  treating  of 
the  last  births  of  the  Lord  Buddha.  To  say  that  a  girl  is 
Taw  le-wa  win  lauk,  calculated  to  become  like  one  of  these 
four  great  queens,  Amaya  the  wife  of  Mahawthata,  the 
Solomon  of  Buddhist  kings  ;  Madi,  the  wife  of  Wethan- 
daya,  world-famed  for  his  charity ;  Keinnayi  or  Thanbula, 
the  partners  of  princes  hardly  less  celebrated,  is  to  pay  the 
highest  possible  compliment  to  any  woman.  But  these  are 
somewhat  vague  and  intangible  matters.  There  are  other 
recommendations  which  appeal  much  more  directly  to  those 
intending  to  get  married  ;  to  the  man  that  seeks  a  wife,  san- 
shwe,  pure  as  "  test  gold  "  ;  or  the  girl  who  would  avoid  a 
linkwe,  a  "  cur  of  a  husband." 

Prominent  among  these  is  the  rhyme  of  "  the  hostile 
pairs,"  the  yan-hpet,  who,  if  they  marry,  will  certainly  have 
a  short  life. 

Some  violence  is  done  to  the  niceties  of  language  in  the 
linga,  so  that  I  may  be  allowed  the  same  in  the  translation 
of  a  portion  of  it. 

Friday's  daughter 

Didn't  oughter 
Marry  with  a  Monday's  son  ; 

Should  she  do  it 

Both  will  rue  it, 
Life's  last  lap  will  soon  be  run. 

The  same  lamentable  result  would  follow  if  the  man  were 
born  on  Friday  and  the  woman  on  Monday.     Again  : 

Saturdays  and  Thursdays,  . 

The  serpent  and  the  rat. 

You  cannot  find  out  worse  days, 

Life's  short  enough  at  that. 

The  serpent  and  the  rat  preside  over  Saturday  and 
Thursday  respectively.  Similar  curtailment  of  life  would 
follow  if  the  union  was  between  Sunday  and  Wednesday,  or 
between  Tuesday  and  the  eighth  half-day  Yahu.      One  or 


MARRIAGE 


63 


both  contracting  parties  would  soon  die  if  children  of  these 
hostile  days  married. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  an  elaborate  figure  showing 
what  unions  according  to  birthdays  will  be  lucky. 

The  numbers  represent  the  days  of  the  week  according 
to  the  order.  i,  Sunday;  2,  Monday;  3,  Tuesday;  4, 
Wednesday  ;  5,  Thursday  ;  6,  Friday  ;  7,  Saturday  ;  8,  Yahu 
(half  Wednesday).  The  inner  numbers  represent  the  man's 
birthday  ;  the  outer  the  woman's.  Those  who  choose  their 
wives  in  accordance  with  this  figure  will  be  happy  and 
well-to-do. 


^A 

3 

1 

^ 

2     5 

\ 

3                     7 

7 
4 

-"■^    3            \ 

The  outer  ring  the  maiden's, 
The  inner  ring  the  man's. 
All  ye  who  would  live  easeful 
On  this  scheme  form  your  plans. 

All  these  rhymes  are  learned  by  the  little  boys  at 
school,  sometimes  formally  taught  them  by  the  preceptor  as 
an  excerpt  from  the  Bedin,  sometimes,  when  the  yahan 
refuses  to  recognise  the  validity  of  these  books,  studied 
surreptitiously  along  with  the  secular  plays  and  song-books. 
Whatever  else  a  girl  may  know,  you  may  be  sure  she  can 
give  you  the  marriage  rhymes. 

After  the  marriage  has  been  settled  upon,  lucky  combina- 
tion of  birthdays,  parents'  consent,  settlement  of  dower  and 


64  THE  BURM AN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    chap,  vii 

so  on,  all  satisfactorily  arranged,  the  formalities  are  not  yet 
over.      A  lucky  day  has  to  be  sought  from  the  horoscopes  of 
the  two  chief  parties,  but  beyond  this  there  are  a  number 
of  obstacles  which  must  on  no  account  be  overlooked.      In 
the  first  place,  with  the  pious  the  same  rule  prevails  as  in 
England,   that    no    marriages    should    take   place    in    Lent. 
This  cuts  upwards  of  three  months  out  of  the  year  imme- 
diately.     Unfortunately  a  number  of  persons  are  so  completely 
in  the  world  of  kama,  the  seat  of  the  passions,  that  they 
care  very  little  whether  it  is  the  season  of  the  Wa  or  not. 
But  almost  every  one,  whether  pious  or  not,  considers  well 
the  character  of  the  months  as  given  in  the  marriage  linga. 
The  year  begins  with  Tagu,  commencing  about  the  middle 
of  April.       In    this    month   and    Kas6n    the   next,   couples 
marrying  will  be  very  rich.      In   Nay6n  they  will  love  one 
another.     Those   marrying   in    Waso   and   Wagaung,   when 
Lent  begins,  will  die  or  be  grievously  sick.      If  the  young 
pair  are  so  mad  as  to  brave  the  danger,  their  parents  should 
stop  the  marriage.      In  Tawthalin,  Na'daw,  and  Pyatho,  if  you 
marry,  you  will  lose  goods  and  money.      In  Thadingyut  you 
will  have  slaves,  children,  and  money  as  much  as  you  want, 
In   Tasaungmdn   slaves,   buffaloes,  cattle,   and    furniture   in 
abundance,  will  flow  in  upon  the  married  couple.     Tabodw^ 
and  Tabaung  are  very  unlucky  for  those  who  tempt  Hymen. 
There  will  be  no  children,  or  only  girls,  and  misfortunes  will 
be  frequent.      Nevertheless  though  there  is  all  this  trouble 
in  getting  a  wife  to  your  mind,  as  well  as  lucky  in  time  of 
birth,  worldly  goods,  and  season  of  marriage,  there  are  very 
few  Burmans,  not  in  the  sacred  order,  who  are  not  married 
before  they  are  twenty,  and  happily  married  too.      As  the 
popular  saying  puts  it — 

Ye  hnin  nga, 
Lin  hnin  maya. 

Fish  to  the  water, 
Man  to  Eve's  daughter. 


CHAPTER    VIII 

DOMESTIC    LIFE 

The  Burman  is  the  most  calm_and  contented  of  mortal.';. 
He  does  not  want  to  growrich.  When  he  does  make  a 
large  sumof  fflOrifey,  he~spends  it  all  on  some  pious  work, 
and  rejoices  in  the  thought  that  this  will  meet  with  its 
reward  in  his  next  existence.  If  he  never  amasses  enough 
to  build  any  great  public  work,  at  any  rate  he  subscribes 
what  he  can,  and  is  generous  in  almsgiving.  A  bountiful 
soil  will  not  let  its  children  starve  ;  and  so  the  Burman  jogs 
on  through  a  cheerful  existence,  troubled  by  no  anxious 
cares,  and  free  from  all  the  temptations  of  ambition.  His 
daily  round  is  simple  enough.  In  the  morning,  after  his 
bath,  he  loiters  about,  talking  to  the  neighbours  till  break- 
fast time,  or  perhaps  strolls  out  to  the  corner  of  his  paddy 
field,  and  indulges  in  a  contemplative  smoke.  After  break- 
fast he  probably  dozes  through  the  heat  of  the  day,  and 
when  the  shadows  begin  to  get  long,  saunters  about  again. 
A  semblance  of  regular  labour  appears  when  the  paddy  is 
being  sown  or  the  grain  reaped,  but  even  then  no  one  is  in 
the  least  inclined  to  disturb  himself  for  the  sake  of  rapid 
work.  It  is  sufficient  that  you  are  always  certain  in  Burma 
what  kind  of  weather  you  are  going  to  have.  "  Another  hot 
day,"  or  "  another  wet  day,"  is  quite  as  much  a  matter  of 
course  as  the  rising  of  the  sun  itself,  and  there  is  therefore 
no  need  to  hurry  operations  in  case  of  •  a  change.  The 
evenings  are  spent  ordinarily  at  a  pwe  during  the  fine  season, 
or  in  amicable  converse  over  a  cheroot  at  a  friend's  house  in 
the  rains.  Variety  comes  occasionally  in  the  shape  of  a 
jolting,  hilarious  journey  to  a  distant  pagoda  feast,  or  a  trip 

65  F 


66  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

down  the  river  in  the  big  rice-boat  to  one  of  the  great  milling 
towns.  And  so  an  uneventful  life  passes  away  :  the  greatest 
ambition  to  see  the  village  boat  successful  at  the  Thadingyut 
races,  and  the  village  champion  cock  or  buffalo  triumphant 
over  all  others  ;  the  greatest  desire  to  live  peaceably  with 
all  men  and  observe  the  Ten  Precepts ;  the  greatest  excite- 
ment the  occasional  visit  of  the  English  district  officer,  or  the 
suspicion  of  a  witch  in  that  lonely  house  down  by  the  spirit's 
pool  on  the  creek.  In  Upper  Burma  formerly  this  quiet 
was  more  apt  to  be  disturbed  by  the  summoning  of  levies 
to  serve  in  some  special  raid  against  audacious  dacoits,  or  to 
make  a  demonstration  against  reiving  mountaineers.  If  the 
myo-wun  was  a  pious  man,  calls  for  enforced  labour  at 
digging  tanks,  building  pagodas  and  monasteries,  rest-houses 
and  tazaungs,  were  likely  to  keep  the  villager  a  great  deal 
more  occupied  than  he  cared  for.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
in  any  patriotic  Burman's  mind  that  the  state  of  the  people, 
regularly  taxed  though  they  be,  under  British  rule,  is 
infinitely  happier  than  it  was  under  their  king,  and  all  but 
the  officials  and  their  hangers-on  longed  for  the  day  when 
the  English  flag  was  to  float  over  all  the  land  as  far  as 
Mogaung.  There  could  be  no  hope  for  the  country,  where, 
even  under  a  kindly  king  like  Minddn,  ill-conditioned 
governors  oppressed  the  populace  with  absolute  impunity. 
Complaints  were  made,  but  his  majesty  could  not  venture 
to  leave  his  palace  for  any  great  distance  to  inquire  for  him- 
self, and  gold  easily  dulled  the  senses  of  the  highest  minister 
round  the  golden  throne.  It  is  little  wonder  then  that  the 
people,  kept  perpetually  in  the  lowest  depths  of  poverty, 
were,  if  not  actually  dying  out,  certainly  not  increasing  in 
numbers.  There  was  nothing  which  so  much  indicated  the 
popular  feeling,  and  at  the  same  time  so  irritated  the  Burmese 
Government,  as  the  unceasing  stream  of  emigrants  to  Lower 
Burma. 

Nevertheless,  even  in  Independent  territory  the  Burman 
preserved  his  light  heart  and  buoyant  disposition.  No 
calamity  is  so  overwhelming  as  to  make  him  despond.  Some 
years  ago  a  large  fire  occurred  in  Mandalay,  and  spread 
with  such  terrible  rapidity  that  the  inhabitants  of  a  whole 
quarter  were  unable  to  save  anything  but  the  clothes  they 


DOMESTIC  LIFE  67 


wore.  Some  of  them  went  the  next  day  to  the  English 
missionary  chaplain,  and  told  him  of  the  misfortune  that 
had  befallen  them,  and  how  so  completely  were  they  rendered 
destitute  that  they  had  been  indebted  to  the  charity  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  monastery  for  a  breakfast  that  morning. 
The  clergyman  promised  to  do  what  he  could  for  them,  and 
the  same  evening  went  along  to  view  the  site  of  the  fire. 
What  was  his  astonishment  to  find  that  the  burnt-out  victims 
had  rigged  up  a  rude  stage  among  the  charred  stumps  of 
their  house-posts,  and  in  default  of  a  house  to  sleep  in,  were 
prepared  to  spend  the  night  listening  to  the  love-making  of 
the  princes  and  princesses,  and  laughing  at  the  caustic  witti- 
cisms of  the  clown,  not  a  few  of  the  jokes  being  inspired  by 
the  blackened  surroundings.  Such  defiance  of  all  the  ills  of 
fate  is  very  characteristic,  and  would  seem  to  a  Burman 
mind  the  most  natural  thing  to  do  under  the  circumstances, 
since  it  afforded  both  distraction  and  amusement. 

If  any  one  has  escaped  the  curse  of  Adam  it  is  the 
Burman.  He  does  not  need  to  earn  his  bread  with  the 
sweat  of  his  brow,  and  riches  having  no  attraction  for  him, 
when  his  patch  of  paddy  land  has  been  reaped,  his  only 
concern  is  how  to  pass  the  time,  and  that  is  no  very  difficult 
matter,  where  he  has  plenty  of  cheroots  and  betel-nut.  He 
can  stroll  along  to  neighbour  Maung  Gyi's,  whose  son  has 
a  knack  for  wood-carving,  and  watch  him  as  he  deftly  cuts 
out  a  piece  of  elaborate  scroll-work  for  the  roof  of  a  neigh- 
bouring monastery,  or  finishes  off  the  grim  features  of  a  bilu 
for  the  English  Inspector  of  Police.  Next  door  the  saya 
is  engaged  on  a  painting,  the  representation  of  some  palace 
scene,  or  of  some  well-known  event  in  the  life  of  the  Lord 
Buddha.  Burmese  artists  do  not,  as  a  rule,  paint  likenesses, 
though  they  are  by  no  means  unsuccessful  when  they  make 
the  attempt.  Any  one  but  a  high  official  would  probably 
consider  it  a  mark  of  great  presumption  and  conceit  to  hang 
up  a  picture  of  himself  in  his  house.  There  is,  however, 
none  of  the  objection  to  portrait  painting  which  is  so  common 
with  some  other  nations.  For  example,  the  Mohammedans 
will  not  suffer  likenesses  to  be  drawn  for  fear  they  should 
demand  a  soul  on  the  Day  of  Judgment,  and  so  some  actual 
human  being  might  come  to  be  left  out  in  the  cold.     Catlin 


68  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

tells  us  that  the  American  Indian  chief  was  in  a  state  of 
great  alarm  lest  his  soul  might  be  carried  off  with  his 
picture.  A  notion  of  the  same  kind  appears  in  the  Chinese 
custom  of  getting  a  priest  to  put  in  the  pupil  of  the  eye,  a 
method  which  often  has  rather  a  ghastly  effect  when  the 
reverend  gentleman  is  not  skilful.  Similarly,  every  Chinese- 
owned  craft,  from  the  sampan  to  the  English-built  iron  screw 
steamer,  has  a  couple  of  eyes  painted  on  its  bows,  in  order 
that  it  may  see  the  way.  Down  in  the  Straits,  and  in  all 
places  where  there  are  many  Chinese,  the  local  steamers, 
whoever  their  owners  may  be,  are  all  endowed  with  eyes. 
Were  they  not  so  favoured,  no  Chinaman  would  travel  with 
them  as  a  passenger,  or  send  any  of  his  goods  aboard  of 
them.  The  Burman  is  not  troubled  with  any  such  fantastic 
notions,  and  has  no  objection  whatever  to  sitting  for  his 
portrait,  only,  as  King  Minddn  said  to  Yule,  they  prefer 
a  flattering  likeness  to  an  exact  one.  It  is  seldom,  however, 
that  a  Burman  has  a  picture  gallery  in  his  house,  and  the 
village  artist  usually  confines  himself  to  vivid  -  coloured 
sketches  for  the  funeral  of  a  pdngyi,  or  to  be  hung  round 
the  mandut,  where  the  great  people  sit  to  look  on  at  a 
play.  The  drawing  and  the  perspective  are  naturally  a  little 
faulty,  but  the  details  are  usually  worked  out  with  very 
creditable  skill. 

Thus  wandering  about,  seeing  what  his  neighbours  are 
doing,  with  an  occasional  visit  to  the  monastery  to  have 
some  edifying  talk  with  the  religious,  the  villager  may 
spend  the  time  very  comfortably.  Oftenest  however,  he 
stays  at  home,  and  waits  for  visitors  to  drop  in  and  have  a 
little  gossip.  The  goodwife  always  has  a  little  shop  in  the 
lower  part  of  the  building.  There  is  hardly  a  single  house 
in  the  whole  village  where  something  is  not  offered  for 
sale :  a  few  dried  fish,  betel-nut,  with  the  fresh  green  leaves, 
lime,  cardamoms,  and  cutch,  all  ready  for  making  up,  half  a 
dozen  cocoa-nuts,  or  perhaps  some  twopenny-ha'penny  knives, 
looking-glasses,  coloured  tumblers,  and  paltry  Manchester 
goods,  or  where  there  are  many  girls  about  the  house,  a  few 
home-made  lungyis  and  pasos,  waist-cloths,  woven  at  odd 
times  in  the  loom  which  stands  in  the  yard  or  in  a  corner 
of   the   verandah   of   every   house.     The  stock-in-trade   is 


DOMESTIC  LIFE  69 


intended  more  as  an  excuse  for  people  to  enter  the  house  and 
have  a  talk  than  with  any  idea  of  making  a  profit.  What- 
ever money  is  drawn  is  regarded  as  a  kind  of  pin-money  for 
the  mistress  of  the  establishment.  When  the  ladies  of  the 
household  are  in  earnest  about  trading,  they  start  a  stall  in 
the  bazaar,  and  very  good  hands  they  are  at  driving  a  bargain. 
A  more  regrettable  trait  is  the  forcible  character  of  their 
language  when  they  are  annoyed.  But  this,  unhappily,  is  a 
characteristic  of  the  fair  sex  all  the  world  over,  whether  in 
trade  or  out  of  it.  Certain  it  is  that  the  dames  de  la  halle 
and  the  Billingsgate  fishwives  would  require  all  their  powers 
of  voice  and  vituperation  to  silence  a  bazaar  maiden  when 
she  sets  her  mind  to  it. 

There  are  as  a  general  thing  two  meals  only  in  the  day : 
breakfast  at  about  eight  in  the  morning,  and  dinner  at  five 
in  the  afternoon.  There  is  no  difference  in  the  menu  of  the 
two  meals.  The  staple  article  of  food  is  plain  boiled  rice, 
which  is  piled  up  in  a  heap  on  a  huge  platter,  round  about 
which  the  household  arrange  themselves,  sitting,  like  pit-men, 
on  their  heels.  The  curry  which  is  taken  with  it  is  placed 
in  little  bowls,  and  each  one  of  the  party  has  his  own  plate, 
and  helps  himself.  Knives  are  unnecessary ;  spoons  and 
forks  and  celestial  chopsticks  are  unknown,  except  in  the 
houses  of  a  few  Government  officials  and  traders  in  Rangoon, 
who  have  had  some  experience  of  English  society.  Very 
few  are  able  to  afford  curries  of  meat  or  fish,  besides  that 
there  are  not  always  unscrupulous  people  ready  to  disregard 
the  law  against  taking  life,  and  the  material  is  therefore  not 
always  available.  Ordinarily  the  curry  consists  of  a  soup, 
or  thin  concoction  of  vegetables,  in  which  chillies  and  onions 
figure  largely.  The  other  ingredients  are  very  various. 
Young  shoots  of  bamboo  are  very  delicate  in  their  flavour, 
if  not  overpowered  by  too  much  garlic.  Wild  asparagus, 
the  succulent  stems  of  a  number  of  aquatic  plants  and  fleshy 
arums  are  constantly  used,  and  may  be  seen  exposed  for  sale 
in  every  bazaar.  Tamarind  leaves  and  those  of  the  mango- 
tree  are  used  by  the  very  poor.  The  former  have  a  some- 
what acrid  taste,  the  latter  are  curiously  aromatic.  Along 
with  the  curry,  which  has  always  a  large  amount  of  oil  and 
salt   in   it,  there   are  a  variety  of  condiments,  notably  the 


70  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

strongly-flavoured  nga-pi,  without  which  no   Burman  would 
consider   his    meal   complete.      Sometimes   the   big,   fierce- 
stinging  ka-gyin,  a  species  of  red  ant,  is  used  along  with 
this  fish  paste,  sometimes  it  is  fried  in  oil  by  itself      As  may 
be   imagined,   they   have   an    acid    and    decidedly   pungent 
flavour    about    them.      Roasted    turtle's   and    iguana's   eggs, 
dried  fish,  and  fried  ginger  are  gourmand's  adjuncts.     There 
is  a  particular  objection  to  the  smell  of  cookery,  and  when 
anything  is  fried  in  oil,  or  prepared  so  as  to  produce  a  strong 
savour,  it  is  always  done  to  leeward  of  the  house,  and  where 
the  fumes  may  not  reach  any  other  dwelling.      Such  smells 
are  believed  to  be  very  productive  of  fever.      Nothing  is  ever 
drunk  at  meals,  but  each  one,  when  he  has  finished,  goes  to 
the  earthenware  jar  full  of  water  which  stands  in  a  corner  of 
the  verandah,  and  rinses  out  his  mouth.      It  is  a  lamentable 
fact  that  many  Burmans  in  the  low  country  now  drink  beer 
and  spirits,  but  this  is  never  done  at  meals  nor  in  the  house, 
where,  indeed,  the  wife  would  not  allow  it.      It  is  deplorable, 
because  it  is  drinking  for  the  sake  of  drinking,  and  is  never 
done   in    moderation.      The   tippling   Burman   goes   to   the 
"  toddy-shop  "  for  his  liquor,  and  he  does  not  know  when  to 
stop.     Brandy  of  the  fiery  description  known  to  the  British 
soldier  as  "  fixed  bayonets,"  or  "  chain-shot,"  is  often  drunk, 
but  the  usual  tipple  is  "  Old  Tom."     A  particularly  heady 
mixture  of  this  with  cheap  beer  is  affected  by  confirmed 
topers.      It  is  contrary  to  the  national  religion,  and  it  does 
not  suit  the  national  temperament. 

After  meals  every  one  smokes — men,  women,  and  chil- 
dren. Facetious  people  have  declared  that  Burman  babies 
blow  a  cloud  while  they  are  still  at  the  breast.  This  is  in- 
accurate. They  never  indulge  till  they  are  able  to  walk 
without  needing  the  assistance  of  their  hands,  but  their 
mothers  give  them  whiffs  long  before  that.  The  ordinary 
Burman  cheroot  is  very  mild  and  has  really  very  little 
tobacco  in  it.  The  full-flavoured  article  to  be  seen  occa- 
sionally in  London  shops  is  manufactured  entirely  for 
English  residents.  The  se  paw-leip,  the  cigar  for  home  con- 
sumption, commonly  known  as  the  green  cheroot,  is  very 
large,  from  six  to  eight  inches  long  and  about  an  inch  in 
diameter  at  one  end,  tapering  to  slightly  less  at  the  other. 


DOMESTIC  LIFE  71 


It  rounds  a  girl's  mouth  a  good  deal  when  she  puts  it  in. 
In  the  manufacture  of  it  chopped  tobacco  leaves  and  pieces 
of  the  stem  of  the  tobacco  plant  and  the  pith  of  the  oh'ne, 
a  species  of  Euphorbia,  .are  the  chief  ingredients.  Very 
often  these  are  boiled  with  palm-sugar  and  allowed  to  dry 
before  making  up.  The  cover  is  made  of  the  leaf  of  the 
teak-tree,  or  of  a  tree  called  the  thanat,  the  ends  being 
tucked  in  at  the  point.  A  piece  of  red  raw  silk  fastens  it 
at  the  end  put  in  the  mouth,  and  some  broader  pieces  of 
pith  are  put  there  to  give  it  stiffness  to  the  lips.  The  finer 
kinds,  such  as  were  only  used  in  Upper  Burma  in  the  palace, 
are  rolled  up  in  the  thin  white  inner  coating  of  the  bark  of 
the  betel-tree.  The  cheroot  has  an  ash  like  a  cinder,  and 
usually  burns  holes  in  the  clothes  of  an  Englishman  the  first 
time  he  tries  it.  Laid  down  thoughtlessly  on  an  oily  mat,  it 
is  a  fruitful  cause  of  fires.  All  Burman  ladies  are  adepts  at 
rolling  cheroots,  and  a  dozen  or  two  of  them  form  a  common 
present  to  favoured  swains. 

Chewing  betel  is  sometimes  carried  on  simultaneously 
with  smoking,  but  most  people  prefer  to  economise  enjoy- 
ment, and  only  chew  in  the  interval  between  smokes. 
Chewing  is  hardly  an  exact  expression,  and  the  use  of  it 
frequently  leads  the  experimenting  Briton  into  the  un- 
pleasant predicament  of  having  all  the  interstices  between 
his  teeth  choked  up  with  little  fragments  of  the  nut,  which, 
with  their  indescribable  aromatic  flavour,  stimulate  the  flow 
of  saliva  for  hours  afterwards.  The  Burman  splits  his  nut  in 
half,  smears  a  little  slaked  lime,  usually  white,  but  sometimes 
tinted  pink  or  salmon  coloured,  on  the  betel  vine  leaf,  puts 
in  a  little  morsel  of  cutch  and  tobacco,  and  then  rolls  it  up 
and  stows  away  the  quid  in  the  side  of  his  mouth,  occasion- 
ally squeezing  it  a  little  between  his  teeth.  It  is  as  well  to 
be  very  cautious  with  the  lime  and  cutch  (the  juice  of  the 
Acacia  catechu)  the  first  time  you  make  a  trial.  The  latter 
especially  is  very  astringent.  One  variety  of  the  nut,  called 
the  Taunggu  betel,  has  effects  very  much  resembling  intoxi- 
cation. Chewing  kon-thi  is  an  unlovely  practice.  The 
Burman  has  none  of  the  delicacy  with  regard  to  a  spittoon 
which  characterises  the  American,  and  these  articles  require 
to  be  of  a  very  considerable  size.     The  monks  are  perhaps 


7s.  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  most  persistent  chewers  of  the  good  betel.  Smoking  is 
prohibited,  but  nothing  is  said  against  betel,  and  it  is  con- 
sidered a  great  stimulator  of  the  meditative  faculties.  The 
lime  used  very  speedily  corrodes  and  destroys  the  teeth,  and 
then  the  old  p6ngyi  has  to  make  the  scholars  crush  up  the 
nuts  so  that  they  may  not  hurt  his  toothless  gums.  It  is  a 
common  belief  that  no  one  can  speak  Burmese  well  till  he 
chews  betel.  Demosthenes  is  said  to  have  put  pebbles  in 
his  mouth  when  he  was  practising  oratory. 

Alternate  smoking,  chewing,  and  conversation  serve  to 
pass  the  day,  and  after  dinner,  when  the  sun  goes  down,  our 
villager  has  a  bath  down  by  the  well  to  freshen  him  up^ 
The  water  is  drawn  up  in  a  bucket  and  simply  poured  over 
the  body.  Soap  is  never  used,  and  particular  care  is  taken 
not  to  wet  the  hair.  The  head  washing  Is  a  special  ceremony, 
to  be  gone  through  only  occasionally,  and  then  with  cir- 
cumspection. Dandies,  as  a  rule,  put  a  solution  of  rice 
and  water  on  their  hair  every  day  to  make  it  grow  long,  and 
cocoanut  oil  is  also  very  generally  used.  Both  sexes  are 
proud  of  the  length  of  their  hair,  and  it  is  not  uncommon  to 
see  it  reaching  below  the  knee  and  down  to  the  ankles. 
The  men  wear  it  in  a  yaung  or  knot  on  the  top  of  the  head, 
while  the  saddn  of  the  women  is  at  the  back  of  the  head. 
Both  men  and  women  are  in  the  habit  of  adding  to  its  size 
by  interweaving  false  tresses,  which  are  easily  got,  seeing 
that  everybody  has  black  hair,  and  that  some  young  member 
of  the  family  is  constantly  getting  his  locks  cut  off  on  his 
entry  into  the  monastery.  There  is  no  more  sense  of  shame 
in  using  false  hair  than  there  is  in  improving  the  appearance 
by  wearing  fine  clothes.  At  his  bath  it  is  usual  for  a  pious 
person  to  repeat  a  Pali  charm  over  the  first  bucket  of  water, 
which  is  then  slowly  poured  over  the  body.  The  object  of 
this  is  to  guard  against  sickness. 

After  bathing,  the  Burman,  if  he  is  young,  usually  puts 
on  his  fine  clothes,  for  except  in  the  rainy  season  there  is 
sure  to  be  a  dramatic  performance,  or  a  yein  dance  by  the 
village  lads  and  lasses,  or  an  entertainment  of  some  kind 
going  on  at  some  house  in  the  village.  The  dress  is  very 
simple  and  picturesque.  The  paso  is  a  long  silk  cloth, 
fifteen  cubits  long  and  about  two  and  a  half  wide.      It  is 


DOMESTIC  LIFE  73 


wound  round  the  body,  kilt  fashion,  tucked  in  with  a  twist 
in  front,  and  the  portion  which  remains,  gathered  up  and 
allowed  to  hang  in  folds  from  the  waist,  or  thrown  jauntily 
over  the  shoulder.  The  body  is  covered  with  a  short  white 
cotton  jacket,  over  which  another  of  dark  or  coloured  cloth 
is  often  worn.  Elderly  people,  and  the  wealthy  of  all  ages, 
when  they  are  paying  a  visit  of  ceremony  or  going  to  worship 
at  the  pagoda,  wear  a  taing-mathein,  a  long  white  coat,  open 
in  front  except  at  the  throat,  where  it  is  tied,  and  reaching 
almost  to  the  knees.  Round  the  head  a  flowered  silk  hand- 
kerchief is  loosely  wound  as  a  turban.  The  old  wear  a 
simple  narrow  fillet  of  white  book-muslin  round  the  temples 
and  showing  the  hair.     This  is  called  a  pawl6n. 

The  woman's  tamein  is  a  simple  piece  of  cotton  or  silk, 
almost  square,  four  feet  and  a  half  long  by  about  five  broad, 
and  woven  in  two  pieces  of  different  patterns.  This  is 
wound  tightly  over  the  bosom,  and  fastened  with  a  simple 
twist  of  the  ends.  The  opening  being  in  front,  the  symme- 
try of  the  thigh  is  displayed  in  walking,  but  a  peculiar 
outward  jerk  of  the  heels  which  the  girls  acquire  prevents 
any  suggestion  of  immodesty.  The  loose  cotton  jacket  is 
unhappily  not  so  well  contrived  to  display  their  charms. 
Over  the  shoulders  is  thrown  a  bright  silk  handkerchief,  the 
same  as  that  used  by  the  men  for  turbans.  Nothing  is  worn 
on  the  head  except  flowers  twisted  into  the  hair.  Dressed 
in  their  best,  the  family  sally  forth  in  search  of  amusement. 
If  it  is  a  pwe,  they  will  not  get  home  till  very  late,  possibly 
not  till  daybreak,  when  the  yellow  line  of  monks  issuing 
forth  on  their  matutinal  tour  may  meet  them  at  the  monas- 
tery gate.  A  country  dance  naturally  does  not  last  nearly 
so  long,  though  it  is  kept  up  much  longer  than  most  people 
would  care  to  dance  a  hornpipe  or  even  a  minuet.  But  a 
still  more  favourite  form  of  amusement  is  the  entertainment 
of  a  sa-haw  saya,  a  kind  of  reciter  or  improvisatore.  He 
is  paid  to  come  to  a  house,  and  the  company  invited  are 
asked  to  choose  a  subject  for  him,  some  of  the  favourite 
zats,  or  an  incident  in  history,  sacred  or  secular.  Many  of 
them,  like  the  cyclic  poets,  repeat  from  memory,  but  there 
are  others  who  invent  their  smooth  verses  as  they  go  on 
chanting.      They  may  perform  in  a  house,  or  in  a  mandut 


74  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS  chap,  vm 

specially  run  up  for  the  occasion,  or  even  in  the  open  street. 
When  a  well-known  sa-haw  saya  is  going  to  recite  the 
Wethandaya  or  the  Zanekka  Zats,  or  when  he  tells  how 
the  Lord  Buddha  left  his  father's  palace  to  wear  the  yellow 
robe,  or  how  he  ascended  to  Tawadeintha,  a  dramatic  per- 
formance is  often  completely  deserted,  and  the  actors  have 
no  option  but  to  follow  the  populace  and  listen  to  the 
improvisatore  themselves.  One  of  the  best  of  the  Burmese 
dramatic  writers,  U  Po  Mya,  was  also  particularly  celebrated 
as  a  sa-haw  saya.  He  could  repeat  his  own  drama,  the 
Wizaya  Zat,  from  end  to  end,  but  had  also  a  particular 
facility  in  improvising. 

His  night's  amusement  over,  the  Burman  goes  home  to 
sound  sleep  on  his  Danubyu  mat  or  a  coarser  one  if  he  has 
not  got  that,  and  rises  to  spend  another  day  of  the  same 
kind.  He  cares  nothing  for  the  assertion  that  he  leads  an 
aimless,  lazy  life.  He  has  enough  to  live  upon,  and  the 
writings  of  all  the  philosophers  say  that  wealth  only  brings 
new  cares. 


CHAPTER    IX 

THE    HOUSE    AND    ITS    BELONGINGS 

It  is  singular  that  in  a  country  where  the  pagodas  and 
temples  will  compare  in  stately  grandeur  and  symmetry  of 
form  with  the  sacred  edifices  of  any  part  of  the  world,  and 
where  the  monastic  buildings,  though  only  constructed  of 
wood,  strike  the  most  casual  observer  with  their  shapely 
beauty  and  wealth  of  decoration  ;  it  is  singular  where  there 
is  a  taste  for  such  edifices  and  abundance  of  the  architectural 
skill  necessary  to  erect  them,  that  the  Burman  should  in  the 
vast  majority  of  cases  live  in  the  flimsiest  of  bamboo  huts. 
The  original  cause  may  be  found  perhaps  in  the  stringent 
regulations  of  the  Yazagaing.  In  native  Burma  the  shape 
of  a  man's  house  was  fixed  for  him  by  law  according  to  his 
station  in  life.  All  were  one-storeyed,  save  where  exceptional 
royal  favour  had  granted  the  spire-like  roof  to  a  distinguished 
noble  or  a  feudatory  chief.  Brick  houses  were  forbidden, 
from  the  apprehension  that  the  inhabitants  might  take  it 
into  their  heads  to  turn  them  into  fortifications.  Gilding 
was  forbidden  to  all  subjects,  and  permission  to  lacquer  and 
paint  the  pillars  of  their  houses  granted  to  but  a  very  few, 
and  it  was  expressly  laid  down  that  no  one  should  have  an 
arch  over  his  door.  This  may  account  for  the  paltry  and 
even  wretched  appearance  of  most  villages,  but  it  is  undeni- 
able that  though  nowadays,  they  are  very  considerably  more 
substantial,  yet  a  rich  man  never  by  any  chance  thinks  of 
building  himself  a  grand  house,  and  remains  firmly  by  the 
unpretentious  model  of  his  ancestors.  This  is  the  more 
curious,  because  they  will  spare  no  expense  to  buy  gay 
turbans  and  bright-coloured  pasos  for  themselves,  and  costly 

75 


76  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


silks  for  their  wives.  The  ordinary  explanation  is  that  every 
one  can  see  what  clothes  you  wear,  while  few  people  care  to 
come  and  spy  out  what  kind  of  a  house  you  live  in,  and  how 
you  fare.  But  there  can  be  very  little  doubt  that  the  real 
reason  is  a  survival  of  the  idea  'of  the  old  Yazagaing,  as 
well  as  the  fact  that  long  years  of  custom  have  impressed 
upon  everybody  the  opinion  that  there  are  only  two  forms 
of  architecture,  the  secular  and  the  ecclesiastical,  and  no  one, 
no  matter  how  sure  he  might  be  that  the  Government  would 
take  no  notice  of  his  ambition,  would  brave  the  denuncia- 
tions of  the  religious  by  adding  a  spire  to  his  house,  or  even 
adorning  the  gable  ends  with  carved  pinnacles  and  flam- 
boyant finials  of  the  monasteries.  Consequently  the  one 
regular  form  prevails  everywhere. 

The  Burman's  dwelling,  then,  is  always  shaped  more  or 
less  like  a  marquee  tent,  and  never  more  than  one  storey 
high,  to  avoid  the  humiliating  possibility  of  the  feet  of  some 
one  being  over  your  head.  But  the  whole  house  stands  on 
posts,  so  that  the  floor  is  seven  or  eight  feet  from  the  ground. 
It  consists  often  of  only  one  room,  usually,  however,  of  two 
or  more,  and  to  the  front  of  the  house  there  is  always  a 
verandah,  three  or  four  feet  lower  than  the  general  level  of 
the  house,  and  as  often  as  not  quite  open  to  the  street,  or  the 
garden,  or  whatever  may  be  in  front  and  always  to  the  sky. 
The  posts  which  form  the  main  or  central  part  of  the  house 
are  usually  six  in  number,  and  all  have  their  names,  such  as 
Uyu,  Kya-hngan,  Nyaung-yan.  The  south  post,  in  the 
main  part  of  the  house,  the  Thabye-taing,  is  the  best  known, 
as  being  always  adorned  with  leaves  and  particularly  marked 
as  that  in  the  top  of  which  most  probably  lives  the  nat-spirit 
of  the  house.  A  dead  body,  after  being  swathed,  and  while 
waiting  for  the  coffin,  is  always  placed  by  it. 

A  house  ought  never  to  be  built  till  the  foundations  have 
been  thoroughly  dug  up  and  shown  to  a  soothsayer.  He 
will  determine,  from  the  substances  found,  whether  it  is  a 
lucky  place  to  build  a  house  in  or  not.  It  stands  to  reason 
that  the  building  cannot  be  commenced  till  a  lucky  day  and 
hour  have  been  sought  out.  There  is  considerable  care  to  be 
observed  in  the  selection  of  the  timber.  Posts  are  masculine, 
feminine,  and  neuter.      Male  posts  are  of  equal  size  at  both 


IX  THE  HOUSE  AND  ITS  BELONGINGS  77 

ends  ;  females  are  larger  at  the  base  ;  those  which  swell 
out  in  the  middle  are  a-thet  ma-shi — without  life  ;  taing 
bilu,  ogre's  posts  are  largest  at  the  top.  As  a  general  rule 
it  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  if  a  house  is  built  with 
neuter  posts,  its  inmates  will  always  be  miserable  and  un- 
lucky ;  if  the  posts  are  ogres,  death  and  disaster  will  attend  ; 
male  posts  are  easy-going  and  harmless  ;  females,  on  the 
contrary,  are  fortunate  and  leading  to  honour.  But  it  may 
happen  that  the  character  of  the  piece  of  ground  on  which 
the  house  is  built  upsets  all  these  generalisations,  so  that  it 
is  necessary  to  get  a  wise  man's  opinion  before  you  get  your 
posts.  The  Deitton  gives  many  instructions  on  the  subject, 
and  among  other  things  mentions  how  a  man's  fortune  may 
be  calculated  from  the  Hle-ga-tit,  the  side  pieces  of  the  steps 
which  lead  up  to  the  verandah.  The  presence  or  absence 
of  knots,  and  if  the  former,  their  position,  determines  the 
luck  of  the  householder. 

Poor   people   use   bamboo   instead    of  wood,  and  make 
their  walls  of  mats,  woven  of  the  same  substance,  split  up. 
Occasionally,  however,  they  rise  to  the  dignity  of  common 
jungle  timber.      Richer  people  make  use  of  the  invaluable 
teak,  or  of  pyinkado  {Xylia  dolabriformis),  a  wood  almost  as 
durable,  and    equally  expensive.       White    ants   will   attack 
neither  of  these.       The  walls   of  such  houses   are  planked: 
The   roof  is   sometimes   composed    of   small    flat    tiles,   but 
more   commonly  of  thatch.     This  consists   in   most  places 
in  the  Delta  of  dani,  the  leaves  of  the  toddy  palm,  which  are 
first  soaked  in  salt  water,  a  precaution  which  prevents  insects 
from  destroying  them.     Up  country  a  species  of  grass  called 
thekke  is  universally  used.      This  style  of  roofing  is  very 
satisfactory  in  every  respect  but  one.     It  is  cheap,  easily  put 
on,  reasonably  water-tight,  but  very  inflammable,  and  conse- 
quently is   not  allowed   in  any  of  the  larger  towns  in  the 
Province.      In  the  smaller  stations,  however,  it  is  almost  uni- 
versal, and  the  consequence  is  that  when  one  house   takes 
fire,  the  sparks  from  it  kindle  all  the  others,  as  a  matter  of 
course.     Consequently,  as  an  imperative  measure  of  protec- 
tion, every  house  is   provided  with  a  long  hooked  bamboo, 
called  a  mi-cheit,  by  means  of  which  to  pull  off  all  the  thatch 
as  soon  as  a  fire  breaks  out  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  in 


78  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

addition  to  this  a  mi-kat  stands  beside  it.  This  is  a  broad 
griddle,  or  flapper  kind  of  thing,  and  its  object  is  to  beat  out 
the  flame  which  may  be  caused  by  a  spark  lighting  on  the 
roof.  In  addition  to  this,  in  many  parts  of  the  country, 
pots  full  of  water  are  always  kept  in  readiness  on  the  tops  of 
the  houses,  so  that  when  the  hour  of  danger  comes,  the 
householder  may  douse  his  roof,  and  so  do  the  best  for  him- 
self. In  Mandalay,  under  native  rule,  some  of  the  pa-gwets, 
and  other  outcasts,  patrolled  the  streets  all  night,  to  watch 
for  and  prevent  fires  as  much  as  possible. 

Another  kind  of  roofing  is  wa-kat,  a  sort  of  flat  tile-like 
construction,  six  feet  long  by  two  feet  broad,  made  of  coarse 
bamboo  matting.  Bamboos  split  in  half  down  the  centre, 
and  with  the  knots  smoothed  away,  are  also  used.  They 
are  placed  close  together,  with  the  hollow  side  upwards, 
extending  all  the  way  down  from  the  ridge  to  the  eaves,  and 
over  these  again  are  placed  others  with  the  rounded  side  up, 
the  whole  presenting  rather  a  curious  appearance,  but  making 
a  very  serviceable  roof  and  not  nearly  so  dangerous  as  the 
leaf  or  grass  thatching.  The  leaves  of  other  trees  are  also 
occasionally  used,  but  the  simplicity  and  cheapness  of  the 
dani  roof  make  it  by  far  the  most  prevalent  in  the  delta,  as 
grass  is  elsewhere,  notwithstanding  its  danger.  In  Rangoon 
and  Maulmein,  shingles,  that  is,  small  wooden  slabs  like 
slates,  are  being  very  generally  introduced. 

In  the  better  class  of  houses  the  floors  are  made  of 
planking,  but  poorer  people  have  nothing  better  than  a  series 
of  whole  or  split  bamboos  laid  side  by  side  on  the  cross- 
beams and  tied  down  with  rattans.  This  is  not  very 
pleasant  to  walk  on,  and  has  the  further  disadvantage  of 
being  anything  but  cleanly,  for  the  spaces  between  the  bam- 
boos offer  an  irresistible  temptation  to  drop  all  litter  and 
garbage  on  to  the  ground  immediately  underneath  the 
house,  and  were  it  not  for  the  pariah  dogs  the  sanitary 
condition  of  the  place  would  soon  be  very  bad. 

The  house  is  thus  simple  enough  in  its  character,  but 
the  furniture  is  still  more  so.  Intercourse  with  the  English 
has  indeed  brought  many  Burmans  to  indulge  in  English 
luxuries,  and  in  many  houses  in  Rangoon  and  the  larger 
district    towns,    chandeliers,   bookcases,    pictures,    and    even 


THE  HOUSE  AND  ITS  BELONGINGS  79 


statuary  are  to  be  seen,  besides  abundance  of  chairs  and 
tables,  and  occasionally  bedsteads,  while  clocks,  kerosine 
lamps,  looking-glasses,  and  lounge  chairs  are  universal.  But 
it  is  very  different  in  the  village  houses.  There  is  prac- 
tically no  furniture  at  all  there,  for  a  chair  is  of  no  use  to 
a  jungle  Burman,  and  without  chairs  tables  are  equally  use- 
less. Consequently  all  that  is  to  be  seen  in  a  village  house 
is  the  goodman's  box,  and  a  few  woven  mats  and  hard 
bamboo  pillows  to  sleep  on.  Cots  are  not  used,  for  one  of 
the  Ten  Precepts,  to  be  kept  on  duty-days,  is  that  one  must 
not  sleep  on  a  high  place.  The  only  furnishings  visible  are 
the  mats  rolled  up  during  the  day  with  the  rugs  or  blankets 
which  serve  for  bedding.  The  mats  themselves  are  probably 
home-made,  manufactured  from  fine  strips  of  bamboo,  the  best 
being  those  with  the  polished  silicious  surface  outside,  which 
stand  any  amount  of  work.  Softer,  finer  articles  are  made 
from  the  skin  of  the  theng,  a  species  of  rush,  which  takes  a 
black  dye,  and  is  often  worked  into  patterns,  but  no  one  has 
anything  more  elaborate,  and  indeed  nothing  better  could  be 
wished  for.  A  cooler  bed  could  not  easily  be  found.  In 
the  country,  also,  the  cooking  place  during  the  rains  is  in 
the  house.  During  the  fine  weather  culinary  operations  are 
carried  on  in  the  open  air,  behind  the  premises.  The  cook- 
ing range  is  nothing  more  than  a  box,  two  or  three  feet 
square,  and  six  inches  deep,  filled  up  with  earth  or  ashes, 
and  on  the  top  of  this  the  wood  used  as  fuel  is  piled.  The 
cooking  utensils  and  the  dining  service  are  equally  simple. 
The  former  consists  of  nothing  further  than  two  or  three 
earthen  pots  with  lids  to  them,  and  a  wooden  spurtle  to  stir 
the  contents  with.  Close  at  hand  is  a  jar  full  of  water,  with 
a  ladle — half  a  cocoa-nut  with  a  handle  through  it.  These 
are  all  the  kitchen  appliances.  In  place  of  table  there  is  a 
huge  round  dish  of  lacquered  wood,  called  a  byat.  These 
byats  are  sometimes  as  much  as  three  feet  and  more  in 
diameter,  and  on  them  is  heaped  up  in  a  gigantic  pile  the 
rice,  while  the  curry  is  served  in  little  bowls  disposed  round 
about.  A  young  couple  have,  therefore,  no  ruinous  ex- 
penses when  they  set  up  house.  The  inventory  of  effects 
necessarily  is  soon  made. 

Outside  the  house  there  is  not   much   more   to  notice. 


So  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

The  abundance  of  land  allows  every  one  to  have  a  court- 
yard of  his  own.       In  this  the  farmer  keeps  his  cart  and 
plough,  the  fisherman  his  boat.      The  buffaloes  and  oxen  of 
the  whole  village  are  usually  all  together  on  a  pasture-ground 
kept  by  some  speculative  individual,  who  charges  a  couple  of 
rupees  or  so  for  feeding  and  looking  after  them.      The  care 
exercised  is  not  very  great.      Heat  and  rain   kill  many  of 
them,  where,  as  is  too  frequently  the  case,  no  shelter  is  avail- 
able ;  foot-and-mouth  disease,  and  other  epidemics,  carry  off 
great  numbers,  and  finally,  they  are    not  at  all   averse    to 
killing   one   another.       Consequently    the   vultures   are   fre- 
quently to  be  seen   on  the  trees  round  the  village  pasture- 
land.     Besides  his  implements  the  house-owner  has  always 
in  his  yard  a  hand  rice-mill.      Husking  paddy  has  become, 
near  the  big  towns,  quite  a  separate  trade,  and  abundance  of 
cleaned  rice  may  be  bought  in  the  bazaars,  but  in  the  village 
every  family  husks  its  own  rice,  the  grain  being  kept  stored 
in  a  small  granary  in  the  yard.     The  milling  is  done  by  the 
women,  and  there  are  two  processes  in  the  operation.     The 
mill  consists  of  two  wooden  cylinders  about  two  feet  thick, 
the  inner  surfaces  of  both  roughened  in  a  simple  way  by  the 
cutting  of  radii  from  their  centres,  the  lines  being  about  a 
quarter  of  an  inch  deep.     The  upper  cylinder  has  a  funnel- 
shaped  hole  cut  through  it,  to  let  the  grain  down,  and  is 
worked   backwards   and   forwards    by  a    long    pole    loosely 
fastened  in,  the  rice  coming  out  between  the  two  cylinders, 
and  falling  on  mats  down  below.      It  is  winnowed  either  in 
the  primitive  way  of  throwing  it  into  the  air,  so  that  the 
light  husk  may  be  blown  away,  or,  often  nowadays  in  Lower 
Burma,  by  a  hand-worked  pair  of  fanners,  introduced  since 
the  English  occupation. 

The  rice  is  not  yet,  however,  ready  for  cooking.  The 
inner  pellicle  has  still  to  be  removed,  and  this  is  done  in  a 
big  wooden  mortar.  Two  varieties  are  in  use,  worked  either 
by  hand,  as  an  apothecary  pounds  his  drugs,  the  pestle  being 
very  long  and  heavy  ;  or  by  foot,  when  the  wooden  mortar  is 
sunk  in  the  ground.  The  pestle  in  this  latter  case  consists 
of  a  short,  stumpy  piece  of  wood,  let  into  a  long  lever  near 
the  end.  This  lever  is  supported  on  two  uprights  at  some 
distance  from  the  mortar,  and  the  machine  is  worked  by  the 


IX  THE  HOUSE  AND  ITS  BELONGINGS  8i 

housewife  or  her  daughter  stepping  on  and  off  the  bar,  so  as 
to  raise  the  pestle  and  let  it  fall  on  the  rice  in  the  mortar. 
The  rice  is  very  thoroughly  cleaned  in  this  way,  and  Bur- 
mans  prefer  it  to  that  which  has  passed  between  the 
mill-stones  of  the  European  factory.  The  Derbyshire,  or 
composition  stones,  do  their  work  only  too  thoroughly,  and 
remove  so  much  of  the  pellicle  as  to  take  away  all  the 
flavour,  besides  that  the  great  heat  caused  by  the  steady 
grinding  tends  to  the  same  result.  Consequently  the 
pleasant  refrain  of  the  girls  chanting  at  their  work  may  be 
heard  all  over  the  village  after  dark,  and  when  a  large  quan- 
tity has  to  be  prepared  for  some  offering  to  the  Sacred 
Order  on  a  feast-day,  the  chanted  chorus  rises  and  falls 
round  about  the  homestead  often  till  long  past  "  midnight 
cock-crow,"  till  the  rising  of  the  "  red  star "  warns  them  to 
retire  to  rest,  tired,  but  happy,  for  such  a  good  work  earns 
great  merit.  A  sesamum  oil-press  is  also  frequently  found 
in  at  least  one  house  in  every  village.  This  is  equally 
simple  in  its  construction.  It  consists  of  a  deep  wooden 
trough,  in  which  the  seeds  are  pressed  by  a  heavy  upright 
timber  fixed  in  a  frame.  The  weight  is  increased  by  a  long 
lever,  on  the  end  of  which  a  man  sits  and  guides  a  bullock 
which  goes  round  in  a  circle,  thus  crushing  and  turning  the 
seed  at  the  same  time. 

The  carts  are  very  strongly  built,  and  are  remarkable  for 
the  way  in  which  the  floor  curves  upwards  towards  the  back 
in  the  same  way  as  the  boats  do.  In  Upper  Burma  formerly 
the  wheels  were  mostly  composed  of  one  solid,  roughly- 
rounded  slab  of  wood,  or  in  some  cases  of  two  semicircular 
slabs  joined  together,  and  these  are  still  found,  but  more  and 
more  rarely,  in  out-of-the-way  places  in  the  upper  province, 
though  wheels  constructed  in  European  fashion  with  spokes 
are  mostly  in  use,  and  Government  now  prescribes  a  three- 
inch  tyre  on  all  district  roads.  Occasionally  in  the  old 
days  to  save  trouble  the  carter  started  with  a  square 
wheel,  and  trusted  to  time  to  round  it  for  him.  Padauk 
{Pterocarpus  indicus)  is  the  wood  most  valued  for  this 
purpose,  but  it  is  too  expensive  for  most  people.  The 
wheels  are  never  greased,  and  make  hideous  shrieking  noises 
as  they  revolve.     This  serves  to  keep  away  tigers  and  wild 

G 


82  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

animals  generally  when  a  journey  is  being  made  for  any 
distance.  At  night  the  carts  are  arranged  in  a  laager  with 
the  high  backs  outwards,  and  all  inside,  including  even  the 
pariah  dogs,  are  safe  from  wild  animals.  The  waggoners 
used  to  glory  in  the  strident  sound  of  their  wheels,  which 
often  can  be  heard  miles  off  in  the  forest.  A  wheel  with  a 
creak  of  particular  volume  and  power  of  penetration  is 
highly  prized,  and  an  experienced  driver  can  tell  whom  he 
is  going  to  meet  or  overtake  by  the  groanings  of  the  axles 
and  the  key  in  which  they  are  pitched.  Every  bullock  in 
addition  carries  a  square  metal  bell  tied  under  his  throat. 

In  the  yard  round  about  the  house  there  is  very  often  a 
little  garden  fenced  off  in  a  rough  kind  of  way,  but  no  par- 
ticular care  is  taken  to  keep  it  neat  and  free  from  weeds — 
no  easy  matter  even  for  an  active  gardener  in  Burma.  The 
favourite  plant  is  always  the  B6ddha  Tharanat  {Carina  Indica, 
or  Indian  shot),  so  named  from  its  seeds,  which  are  used  for 
the  beads  of  the  rosary.  The  flowers  are  red,  or  sometimes 
white.  The  fable  relates  that  it  sprang  from  the  Buddha's 
blood.  His  impious  and  evil-minded  brother-in-law  and 
cousin  Dewadat,  enraged  that  he  was  not  allowed  to  have  a 
separate  assembly  of  his  own,  went  to  the  top  of  a  hill  and 
rolled  down  a  huge  stone,  intending  to  destroy  the  most 
excellent  paya.  But  the  boulder  burst  into  a  thousand 
pieces,  and  only  one  little  bit  bruised  Shin  Gautama's  toe, 
and  drew  a  few  drops  of  blood,  whence  sprang  the  sacred 
flower.  The  renowned  physician  Zewaka  healed  the  great 
teacher's  wound  in  a  single  day,  and  almost  immediately 
afterwards  the  earth  opened  and  swallowed  up  the  sacrilegious 
Dewadat.  The  plants  and  flowers  usually  stand  demurely 
in  a  single  row,  or  perhaps  in  three  or  four,  like  a  patch  of 
peas.  The  Datura  tatula  is  almost  always  found,  and  among 
the  other  mingled  vegetables  and  medicinal  plants  the  Celosia 
cristata,  in  both  its  yellow  and  purple  varieties,  is  a  special 
favourite.  But  the  Burman  can  scarcely  vaunt  his  success 
as  a  flower  gardener. 

There  are  always  a  few  domestic  animals  and  pets  about 
the  premises.  Every  family  has  its  dog,  which  trots  about 
the  establishment  and  makes  a  terrible  to-do  whenever  a 
white   man   appears.     The  pariahs   are   magnificent  watch- 


IX  THE  HOUSE  AND  ITS  BELONGINGS  83 

dogs  with  their  uninflectional,  agglutinative  barking.  They 
sleep  most  of  the  day,  and  at  night  gather  together  in  bands 
and  do  their  best  to  make  up  for  the  want  of  jackals  in 
Burma.  There  is  always  a  huge  band  of  unattached  dogs 
about  the  village,  for  Buddhism  does  not  permit  of  the 
drowning  of  superfluous  puppies,  and  these  manage  to  lead  a 
fairly  well-fed  life  betvveen  stealing  and  devouring  the  offer- 
ings at  the  pagoda,  and  the  superabundant  charity  received 
by  the  monks  in  their  morning  begging  rounds.  It  is  a 
mystery  how  they  managed  formerly  to  exist  in  Mandalay 
and  Upper  Burma  generally ;  there  were  such  constantly 
increasing  hordes  of  them.  Nowadays  the  Assistant  Com- 
missioner periodically  issues  an  edict,  and  poisoned  meat  and 
the  policemen's  truncheons  thin  out  their  numbers  very 
thoroughly  for  a  month  or  two.  The  house  -  dog  often 
perishes  with  his  Bohemian  acquaintances,  and  there  is  much 
lamentation  among  the  younger  members  of  the  household, 
but  there  is  no  difficulty  in  getting  a  successor,  grown  up  or 
otherwise.  The  ordinary  pariah  has  a  greater  turn  for  agility 
than  pluck,  and  the  young  civilian's  English  bull-dog  would 
probably  kill  more  of  them,  when  he  is  on  a  tour  to  the  out- 
lying villages  with  his  master,  than  he  actually  does,  if  he 
was  as  smart  on  his  legs  as  he  is  with  his  jaws.  The  pariah 
is  almost  as  noisy  and  quarrelsome  as  a  Madrasi,  but  any 
fights  there  are  result  as  harmlessly  as  a  French  duel. 
Nevertheless  some  of  the  Karen  trained  hunting  dogs  will 
fasten  on  to  a  tiger,  or  a  leopard,  or  the  even  more  dangerous 
wild  boar,  with  the  greatest  determination.  So  esteemed 
are  they  that  the  sporting  owner  usually  receives  an  official 
message  to  keep  his  dogs  in  safety  when  the  half-yearly 
poisoners  are  about.  Still  though  buffalo  fights  and  mains 
of  cocks  have  been  common  in  Burma  time  out  of  mind,  the 
pariah  has  never  been  called  upon  to  develop  pugnacious 
instincts. 

The  harmless,  necessary  cat  is  not  so  abundant.  There 
are,  however,  few  villages  without  one  or  two  of  them.  What 
^becomes  of  the  kittens  is  a  mystery.  Perhaps  they  go  wild 
and  take  to  the  woods.  Perhaps  the  pariah  eats  them  when 
their  mother  is  out  foraging.  At  any  rate  the  fact  remains 
Ihat  they  increase  but  very  slowly.      The  Burman   cat  is 


84  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

more  fortunate  than  his  Malay  congener  in  possessing  a 
tail,  but  asserts  relationship  with  that  animal  in  the  posses- 
sion of  a  horny  hook,  with  this  difference,  that  the  hard 
excrescence  is  at  the  end  of  a  tail  of  fair  dimensions  instead 
of  being  humbly  situated  on  the  rump,  as  is  the  case  with 
the  Straits  tabby. 

There  are  always  some  tame  villatic  fowl  about  the 
house.  If  the  householder  does  not  aspire  to  the  ownership 
of  a  taik-kyet,  a  regular  game  cock,  bred  for  the  purpose,  he 
has  at  least  a  kyet-hpa,  an  ordinary  cock  of  combative  in- 
stincts, and  backs  him  against  his  neighbour's  when  occasion 
offers,  through  the  absence  of  the  constable,  by  chance,  or 
by  the  influence  of  pecuniary  profit  acting  on  a  sporting 
disposition.  A  cock  that  declines  to  fight  under  any  circum- 
stances is  called  a  kyet  nyaung-gan,  and  stands  in  great 
danger  of  dying  suddenly  and  being  converted  into  curry. 
Hens  are  regarded  with  indifference  except  in  view  of  similar 
possibilities,  for  their  eggs  are  of  no  use.  A  fowl  may  be 
killed  by  accident  by  a  stick  thrown  at  random,  but  the  germ 
of  life  in  an  egg  cannot  die  unless  it  is  boiled  or  goes  rotten. 
In  the  former  case  the  boiler  incurs  mortal  danger  from 
breaking  one  of  the  Five  Precepts  ;  in  the  latter  the  egg 
is  undesirable.  In  small  villages  almost  every  one  keeps  a 
te-gyet,  a  decoy  cock,  for  luring  the  wild  jungle-fowl.  The 
fore-doomed  hunter  kills  the  game,  and  the  pious  owner  of 
the  decoy  bird  gets  a  good  dinner.  Similarly  te-gyo,  pigeons, 
are  bred  specially  as  lures,  and  so  are  partridges.  Ordinary 
pigeons,  occasionally  used  for  the  same  purpose,  go  by  the 
name  of  gyo  ta-nyin.  Caged  birds  are  not  very  common  as 
pets,  though  every  here  and  there  one  comes  across  a  hill 
Mina,  who  has  acquired  a  fair  knowledge  of  the  vernacular, 
and  astonishes  passers-by  with  the  unceremonious  way  in 
which  he  hails  them.  But  the  Buddhist  religion  condemns 
keeping  animals  in  confinement.  So  much  is  this  the  case 
that  in  Mandalay,  and  here  and  there  in  other  places,  there 
are  men  who  make  a  regular  living  by  catching  birds  and 
selling  them  to  the  pious,  that  they  may  gain  merit  by  setting 
them  free.  Crafty  birdcatchers  are  able  so  far  to  disable  the 
bird,  without  doing  it  any  material  or  visible  harm,  that  they 
can  catch  it  again  immediately  after   their   tender  -  hearted 


IX  THE  HOUSE  AND  ITS  BELONGINGS  8; 

customer  has  gone  his  way.  It  used  to  be  a  common  thing 
in  the  palace,  during  the  late  king's  reign,  to  let  loose  a 
number  of  birds  for  the  delectation  of  foreign  worshippers  at 
the  golden  feet,  and  the  expansion  of  the  royal  merit.  Ill- 
natured  people  said  all  the  birds  were  recaptured  in  the  next 
room,  and  appeared  again  for  the  next  display  of  charity  ; 
but  of  that  I  can  say  nothing. 

Each  house,  with  its  ground,  is  surrounded  by  a  rude 
fence  more  or  less  substantial  according  to  the  character  of 
the  district.  Where  there  are  many  tigers  or  ill-doers,  and 
especially  north  of  Mandalay,  where  formerly  the  Kachins 
might  swoop  down  any  night,  this  is  made  very  high  and 
strong,  and  is  further  rendered  effective  by  a  formidable  array 
of  sharpened  bamboos.  Except  where  the  British  have 
taken  the  matter  in  hand,  the  village  roads  are  simply  places 
where  the  jungle  is  kept  from  growing.  There  is  no  attempt 
at  metalling ;  in  fact  there  is  no  material  for  the  purpose. 
In  some  pretentious  villages  indeed  there  is  a  raised  path 
formed  of  bricks  set  on  edge,  and  about  three  feet  broad. 
This  is  regarded  as  a  public  work  of  great  value,  and  a 
distinction  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  place.  It  usually  leads 
to  the  monastery.  In  many  villages,  however,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  move  about  during  the  rains  without  some 
such  contrivance.  The  mud  would  be  too  deep,  and  logs 
are  slippery  even  to  bare  feet. 

Swinging  by  a  couple  of  ropes  from  the  roof  hangs  in  the 
centre  of  the  house  a  rude  basket,  made  snug  with  a  blanket 
or  some  old  clothes.  This  is  the  baby's  cradle,  and  the 
mother  may  often  be  seen  sitting  by  it  crooning  and  gently 
swaying  it  backwards  and  forwards.  Some  of  the  lullabies 
are  very  clever.  I  have  tried  to  give  a  version  of  one  of  the 
most  popular,  with  as  near  an  approach  to  the  metre  as 
practicable.      It  is  sung  to  the  favourite  te-dat  air. 

SEIN-NI  LA-YAUNG 

Clouds  in  Heaven, 
Bright  as  levin, 
Dyed  with  rosy  diamond's  light. 
Did  the  Nine  Gems 
Stud  your  white  hems, 


86  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Silver  moonbeams 

Cast  their  chill  gleams, 
But  to  make  black  darkness  vanish, 
Sweet  sleep  from  my  babe's  eyes  banish  ? 

Fairies  wiled  him, 

Dreams  beguiled  him, 
In  his  cradle  wrapped  so  snugly. 
Cradle  carved  with  nayas  ^  ugly, 
Carved  with  Nats  and  Kings  and  Princes, 
Every  splendour  that  evinces 
Royal  state  and  princely  usance. 
There  he  slept,  when  what  a  nuisance  ! 

Comes  the  light 

To  affright 
And  scare  him  back  to  home  from  elfin  land. 

Sweet,  my  babe,  your  father's  coming, 
Rest  and  hear  the  songs  I'm  humming ; 
He  will  come  and  gently  tend  you, 
Rock  your  cot  and  safe  defend  you  ; 
Mother's  setting  out  his  dinner — 
Oh,  you  naughty  little  sinner  ! 
What  a  yell  from  such  a  wee  thing, 
Couldn't  be  worse  if  you  were  teething. 
My  sweet  round  mass  of  gold, 
Now  please  do  what  you're  told. 

Be  quiet  and  good. 

As  nice  boys  should. 
Oh,  you  plaguy,  nasty  brat ! 
I  must  call  the  great  big  cat, 
He  will  come  and  squeeze  and  bite, 
Scratch  and  eat  you  up  outright. 
Puss,  puss,  puss,  you  great  big  pussy  ! 
Here's  a  boy  so  nice  and  juicy. 
Let  the  mice  have  one  night's  pleasure. 
You  shall  eat  him  at  your  leisure. 

Nasty,  naughty,  noisy  baby, 

If  the  cat  won't,  Nats  will  maybe 

Come  and  pinch  and  punch  and  rend  you. 

If  they  do  I  won't  defend  you. 

Oh,  now  please. 

Do  not  tease. 

Do  be  good. 

As  babies  should, 
Just  one  tiny  little  while  ; 
Try  to  sleep,  or  try  to  smile. 

'  A  naya  is  a  dragon  with  four  legs.  The  word  used  here,  myat  e  yin-w^,  is 
specially  reserved  for  royal  cradles.  The  plebeian  article  is  called  pa-hket. 
Throughout,  the  language  is  of  the  most  honorific  character. 


THE  HOUSE  AND  ITS  BELONGINGS  87 


My  prince,  my  sweet  gold  blood,  my  son, 
Ordained  a  regal  race  to  run. 
Listen  to  your  mother's  coaxing. 
Listen  to  the  song  good  folks  sing. 

When  little  boys 

Make  such  a  noise. 

Comes  the  brownie 

On  wings  downy. 

Comes  the  wood  sprite 

In  the  dark  night, 

Witch  and  warlock. 

Mere  and  tor-folk, 

Kelpie,  nikker, 

Quick  and  quicker. 
Gobble  all  bad  babies  up. 

Mercy,  what  an  awful  squall ! 
Don't  you  love  mamma  at  all  ? 
Where's  your  father  ?     Fie,  for  shame  ! 
He  could  quiet  you  if  he  came. 
But  he  won't;  he  lolls  and  smokes. 
With  the  neighbours  cracks  his  jokes. 
He's  just  as  bad  as  you,  ta-te,i 
Plagues  poor  mamma  and  stays  away. 

Now  I  tell  you 

This  to  quell  you. 

Both  shall  rue  it. 

Thus  I'll  do  it. 
Neither  shall  have  any  dinner  ; 

You  no  sweet  milk, 

He  no  meat  ilk, 
You'll  be  good  when  you  are  thinner. 

The  King  alone  you  dread  on  earth, 
The  wise  man  said  it  at  your  birth. 
Said  that  all  the  stars  would  love  you, 
None  on  earth  should  be  above  you  ; 
But  I'm  sure  that  in  the  palace 
Princes  never  shriek  for  malice. 
Now  I'll  sing  the  eighty  ditties,^ 
Known  in  all  the  royal  cities. 
Lullabies  so  soft  and  drowsy 
E'en  the  Nat-so  could  not  rouse  ye. 
Hush,  my  babe,  my  prince,  my  treasure, 
List  the  poppy's  slumbrous  measure. 

'  Ta-t,  according  to  the  consent  of  the  Burmese  nursery  literature,  is  the 
typical  ba'  boy. 

^  "  Th  eighty  ditties,"  a  very  old  and  well-known  palace  lullaby. 


CHAPTER    X 

THE    EARTH    AND    ITS    BEGINNING 

The  Lord  Buddha  cared  very  little  for  speculations,  or 
theories  as  to  the  construction  and  extent  of  the  terrestrial 
globe,  or  as  to  the  size  and  motions  of  the  sun,  the  moon,  anc 
the  stars.  Shin  Gautama  was  entirely  a  moral  philosophe/, 
concerned  with  the  workings  of  the  mind,  whose  highest  aim 
was  to  despise  matter  and  free  itself  from  such  tramm^s 
in  the  progress  towards  Ne'ban.  The  consideration  jDf 
natural  phenomena  was  therefore  entirely  outside  fhe 
province  of  the  true  sage.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  (he 
transmogrified  Hindu  system  which  does  duty  for  Burmese 
cosmography  was  elaborated  rather  by  the  Buddha's  disciiles 
than  by  himself  It  has  been  altered  only  to  suit  Buddhstic 
religious  views,  with  here  and  there  the  fancies  of  a  lively 
imagination  thrown  in,  but  the  outline  of  it  existed  bnbre 
Prince  Theidat  came.  / 

The  Burmese  are  therefore  certainly  not  responsibc  for 
it,  but  as  some  knowledge  of  the  system  is  necessary  f<r  the 
comprehension  of  various  superstitions,  phrases,  and  fops  of 
speech,  it  may  be  desirable  to  give  a  slight  sketch  ofj  these 
astronomical  and  cosmical  theories.  / 

The  word  lawka  means  a  whole  revolution  of  iature. 
The  world  is  being  constantly  destroyed  and  reprpuced, 
but  each  lawka  lasts  an  incalculable  length  of  years.  It  is 
divided  into  four  periods,  and  it  is  not  till  the  arrival  of  the 
fourth  period  that  man  appears  upon  earth.  Duriig  that 
last  period,  divided  into  sixty-four  Andrakaps,  the!  life  of 
man  must,  in  each  Andrakap,  wax  from  ten  year)  to  an 
Athinkaya  (a  time  represented  by  a  unit  and  a  hunaed  and 

88 


CHAP.  X  THE  EARTH  AND  ITS  BEGINNING  89 

sixty-four  ciphers,  one  and  a  half  quintillion  years),  and  then 
gradually  wane  to  ten  years  again,  on  account  respectively 
of  the  merit  and  demerit  in  the  world.  We  are  now  in  the 
waning  term  of  the  eleventh  Andrakap.  The  Buddhas  only 
appear  upon  earth  during  the  waning  season  of  man's  life, 
chiefly,  of  course,  to  stay  the  increasing  influence  of  evil  by 
preaching  the  law,  and  also  because  when  man's  life  is  slowly 
lengthening  to  an  Athinkaya  he  is  not  so  disposed  to  listen 
to  their  teaching.  100,000  years  before  the  destruction  of 
the  world  the  D^was  come  down  from  their  six  blissful 
seats  and  wander  about  the  earth  with  dishevelled  hair  and 
mournful  garb,  proclaiming  the  sad  tidings  of  the  impending 
destruction  of  the  world.  Once  again  a  hundred  years  before 
the  cataclysm  they  come,  and  all  mankind  strives  to  raise 
itself  beyond  the  influence  of  the  destroying  element.  The 
world  must  be  destroyed  in  any  case,  but  there  are  three 
great  principles  of  demerit  which  determine  by  what  means 
the  catastrophe  will  be  effected.  Concupiscence  is  the  most 
common  and  the  least  heinous  of  these  principles,  and  the 
world  of  the  lustful  will  be  destroyed  by  fire.  Next  comes 
anger,  a  more  grievous  sin  than  concupiscence,  and  the  world 
ruined  by  the  principle  of  anger  will  be  destroyed  by  water. 
Worst  of  all  is  the  sin  of  ignorance.  The  world  of  the 
ignorant  will  be  scattered  about  the  bounds  of  space  by  a 
mighty  rushing  wind,  which  beginning  so  gently  as  barely 
to  sway  the  leaves  and  flowers,  ends  by  breaking  up  with  its 
irresistible  force  the  vast  bulk  of  Mount  Myinmo  and  the 
Sekyawala  circle  of  hills.  Of  sixty-four  worlds,  fifty-six 
are  destroyed  by  fire,  seven  by  water,  and  one  by  wind. 
Fire  reaches  to  the  fifth  seat  of  the  Rupa,  the  beings  called 
Perfect.  Water  mounts  higher  by  three  seats  to  the  eighth 
of  the  Byammas,  and  wind  one  seat  beyond  this.  Out  of 
the  thirty-one  seats  of  the  world  there  remain  therefore  only 
eleven  undestroyed.  The  Four  States  of  Punishment,  the 
abode  of  man,  the  six  blissful  seats  of  Nats  ;  and  five,  eight 
or  nine  of  the  lofty  dwellings  of  the  Rupa,  according  to  the 
destroying  agent,  are  altogether  overwhelmed  and  dispersed 
throughout  space.  The  seven  highest  seats  of  the  Byammas 
and  the  four  of  Arupa,  where  dwell  the  Immaterial,  who 
having   broken    all   ties   with   the  material  world,  are   ripe 


90  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

for  Ne'ban,  these  eleven  seats  only  remain  constantly 
undisturbed. 

Then  there  is  chaos  for  an  athinkaya.  When  that 
mighty  season  has  passed,  rain  begins  to  fall  again  through- 
out infinity.  Fire,  water,  or  wind  may  destroy  the  world, 
but  water  alone  can  reproduce  it,  though  both  the  sun  and 
the  wind  have  minor  parts  to  play.  The  drops  gradually 
increase  in  size  till  they  reach  the  volume  of  five,  ten,  a 
hundred,  even  a  thousand  yuzanas  (a  yuzana  being  about 
twelve  miles  English).  The  wind  blows  the  water  together 
in  the  spot  occupied  by  the  last  world.  A  greasy  scum 
gathers  on  the  surface.  The  action  of  the  sun  gradually 
hardens  this  into  a  crust,  which  eventually  assumes  the  exact 
appearance  and  shape  of  the  last  world.  The  Lord  Buddha 
himself,  it  is  written,  did  not  know  which  was  the  first  world 
and  which  would  be  the  last.  Many  learned  writers  say  that 
there  is  neither  a  beginning  nor  an  end  to  the  production 
and  destruction  of  worlds.  It  will  go  on  for  ever  like  a 
great  wheel,  even  as  the  great  wheel  of  the  Law  itself. 
Since  sorrow  then  is  shadow  to  life,  how  should  all  beings 
strive  to  escape  from  the  vortex  of  existences  ?  In  the 
Abhidhamma  we  read  that  there  are  two  descriptions  of 
worlds,  called  Th6n-nya  Kaba  and  A-th6n-nya  Kaba,  that 
is  to  say,  worlds  to  which  the  Buddhas  came,  and  those  to 
which  they  did  not  come.  Some  think  that  the  latter  kind 
of  worlds  must  have  been  uninhabited.  However  that  may 
be,  it  is  certain  that  the  law  has  always  existed.  It  existed 
Kalpas  and  Mahakalpas  before  the  first  Budh  came  to  this 
earth.  The  Buddhas  only  revive  the  knowledge  of  it  among 
creatures  upon  the  painful  ladder  of  existence.  Our  present 
world,  called  Badda,  has  been  particularly  favoured.  Already 
four  Buddhas  have  appeared,  and  when  the  dispensation  of 
Shin  Gautama  shall  have  passed  away,  two  thousand  five 
hundred  years  hence,  there  will  come  another,  Arimad^ya, 
whose  stature  will  exceed  the  highest  mountains  in  all  the 
Southern  Island. 

The  system  of  the  world  as  explained  by  the  Buddhist 
Yahandas  is  somewhat  different  from  that  adopted  by 
western  men  of  science.  In  the  centre  is  the  Myinmo 
Taung,  Mount  Meru,  the  highest  peak  of  all  the  world.     Its 


X  THE  EARTH  AND  ITS  BEGINNING  91 

shape  is  somewhat  peculiar,  like  a  cask  floating  end  upwards 
in  water.  A  height  of  84,000  yuzanas  above  the  sea  is 
counterbalanced  by  as  many  of  depth  below  the  surface.  It 
is  supported  on  three  feet,  each  a  huge  ruby  or  carbuncle. 
In  the  space  between  these  feet  dwell  the  Athura,  the  Nats 
who  were  tempted  to  drink  by  new  arrivals  in  the  seat  of 
Toktheeta,  and  when  overcome  by  the  liquor  were  hurled 
into  the  sea  by  their  crafty  rivals.  At  various  heights  on 
the  central  mountain  are  ranged  the  six  blissful  seats  of  the 
Dewas,  but  many  of  them  dwell  elsewhere.  Thus,  for 
example,  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  most  of  the  stars  and 
planets  are  simply  gorgeous  dwellings  of  Nats.  Away  in  the 
empyrean,  rising  perpendicularly  one  above  the  other,  are 
the  sixteen  seats  of  Rupa,  where  the  Byammas,  the  Perfect, 
dwell.  These  have  got  rid  of  almost  all  the  passions,  but 
especially  of  concupiscence.  It  is  not  till  they  have  freed 
themselves  from  all  affection  for  matter  and  material  things 
that  they  can  pass  beyond  to  the  incalculable  heights  of  the 
four  seats  of  Arupa,  where  the  Immaterial  dwell  in  a  state 
of  sublimest  contemplation  waiting  only  for  the  moment  when 
they  shall  pass  beyond  into  Ne'ban.  Down  below  the  earth, 
in  a  mass  of  hard  rock,  are  the  eight  great  Hells  and  the 
numberless  smaller  ones.  Surrounding  the  Myinmo  Taung 
and  girdling  round  the  earth  are  the  seven  ranges  of  the 
Sekyawala  mountains,  with  seven  seas  interposed.  In  the 
sea  round  about  Mount  Myinmo,  the  great  Tham6ddaya 
Ocean,  are  the  four  great  islands — Ottayakuru  to  the  north, 
Py6ppawideha  to  the  east,  Aparagawyan  to  the  west,  and 
Zampudipa  to  the  south.  In  the  Southern  Island  dwells 
the  race  of  man.  Each  of  the  great  islands  has  five  hundred 
smaller  ones  round  about  it,  and  in  these  islands  dwell  the 
English  and  other  nations  other  than  the  Buddhists  and 
the  Indian  heretics. 

The  Tham6ddaya  sea  is  too  stormy  to  allow  of  any 
one  passing  from  one  of  the  great  islands  to  any  other.  The 
Southern  Island  is  the  largest,  and  is  shaped  like  a  trapezium. 
The  Western  Island  is  like  the  full  moon,  the  Northern  is 
square,  and  Py6ppawideha  is  shaped  like  the  moon  in  her 
quarters.  The  shape  of  the  head  of  the  different  inhabit- 
ants follows  the  shape  of  the  island,  and  the  different  sides 


92  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

of  Mount  Meru  give  their  different  colours  to  each  island. 
Thus  the  Eastern  Island  is  all  white  from  being  opposite  to 
the  silver  face  of  the  mountain ;  the  Western  is  green, 
because  on  that  side  Myinmo  is  of  glass ;  the  Northern 
Island  glitters  like  gold,  and  the  Southern  is  a  pale-coloured 
brown-like  carbuncle.  Each  island  is  named  from  the  great 
tree  which  grows  upon  it  and  forms  the  sacred  insignia  of 
the  island.  Thus  the  Southern  Island  is  named  from  the 
Zampu  tree,  the  great  Eugenia. 

The  Eastern,  Western,  and  Northern  Islands  are  very 
pleasant  to  dwell  in,  but  especially  the  Northern.  There  the 
people  live  to  the  age  of  a  thousand  years,  and  always 
appear  to  be  no  more  than  eighteen.  In  the  other  islands 
they  only  live  to  be  five  hundred.  In  other  respects  the 
Northern  Island  is  a  regular  land  of  Cockayne.  The  fabled 
Padetha  Bin,  elsewhere  only  found  in  the  happy  countries 
of  the  Nats,  grows  there.  From  its  bounteous  branches 
hang  the  most  gorgeous  dresses  of  every  variety  of  colour, 
and  the  happy  islanders  have  only  to  take  them  off.  Nor 
are  they  at  any  necessity  to  till  the  ground  to  procure  them- 
selves food.  From  this  tree  they  obtain  also  an  abundant 
supply  of  a  most  excellent  kind  of  rice,  already  husked  to 
their  hands.  All  that  they  have  to  do  is  to  place  it  on  a 
certain  large  stone,  and  it  is  forthwith  cooked,  and  upon  the 
branches  of  the  trees  round  about  appear  the  most  dainty 
meats.  Truly  the  Northern  islanders  have  a  most  enviable 
existence.  But  in  one  respect,  like  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Eastern  and  Western  isles,  they  are  unhappy.  They  are 
always  born  back  to  the  same  island.  They  cannot  raise 
themselves  in  the  scale  of  being,  like  the  otherwise  sorrowful 
Southern  islanders.  Only  in  Zampudipa  do  the  Buddhas 
appear  to  teach  the  law  and  free  the  people  from  constant 
deaths  and  reappearances.  FromTahingaya,  the  first  Buddha, 
to  Shin  Gautama,  under  whose  dispensation  we  now  live, 
there  have  been  twenty-eight  Buddhas,  and  all  of  them  have 
come  to  the  great  Southern  Island.  To  Byammas,  to  Nats, 
even  to  animals  and  the  agonised  dwellers  in  the  lowest 
hells,  the  blessed  words  have  come,  but  never  to  those  other 
dwellers  in  the  islands  of  the  great  sea  Thamdddaya,  Th  us 
are  men   enabled   to   attain   to  the  state  of  Nats,  to  pa(iss 


X  THE  EARTH  AND  ITS  BEGINNING  93 

through  the  seats  of  Rupa  and  Arupa,  until  finally,  freed 
from  passion  and  sorrow  and  the  trammels  of  matter,  they 
sink  into  the  bliss  of  Ne'ban.  Therefore  have  pious  writers 
of  old  called  the  Southern  Island  Ne'ban's  ferry. 

Down  below  the  earth,  in  the  deepest  recesses  of  the 
Southern  Island,  are  the  eight  great  Hells,  surrounded  by 
40,040  smaller  ones.  Four  of  the  great  Hells  are  called 
Awidzi,  and  in  addition  to  other  tortures,  terrible  flames 
leap  from  wall  to  wall  across  the  monstrous  space,  and 
extend  on  all  sides  beyond  for  a  thousand  yuzanas.  The 
other  four  are  called  Lawkanty^,  and  there,  instead  of 
flames,  we  find  hideous  cold.  A  day  in  any  of  these 
places  of  torment  is  as  long  as  thousands  of  mundane 
years. 

The  world  having  been  created  is  as  yet  uninhabited. 
Our  present  earth,  Badda,  was  peopled  in  the  following  way, 
From  the  seats  of  Zan,  to  which  the  destructive  element 
had  not  reached,  came  down  certain  Byammas,  some  say 
three,  some  as  many  as  nine.  Holy  people  as  they  were  and 
freed  from  all  passions,  they  existed  at  firsts  like  Adam  and 
Eve,  in  a  state  of  perfect  bliss  and  innocence.  They  were 
not  as  the  Kama,  the  generating  beings  of  the  Four  States 
of  Punishment  and  the  Seven  States  of  Happiness — that  of 
man  and  the  six  seats  of  Nats.  But,  like  Adam  and  Eve, 
they  fell  into  sin  and  thence  into  misery.  First  we  read  that 
they  prayed  for  light.  We  may  imagine  that  already  the 
spiritual  light  had  forsaken  them,  for  in  answer  to  their 
prayers  appeared  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars.  The 
holy  people  had  hitherto  lived  on  a  flavoured  earth,  which, 
however,  driven  away  by  their  growing  desire  for  matter, 
vanished  and  gave  place  to  another  species  of  food,  a  sweet 
creeping  plant  called  Padalata.  This  was  perfect  in 
odour  and  flavour,  but  still  the  appetites  of  the  people  grew, 
and  the  Padalata  was  taken  away  and  in  its  place  appeared 
the  Thald  san,  a  peculiarly  fine  kind  of  rice,  which  grew 
ready  husked,  and  had  only  to  be  put  in  a  pot,  when  it 
would  cook  itself.  But  by  eating  the  Thald  rice,  the 
Byammas  became  more  and  more  gross,  until,  like  Adam 
and  Eve  after  eating  the  apple,  they  attained  a  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil,  and  marriage  was  instituted.      After  this  the 


94  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Thale  san  became  more  and  more  scarce.  At  first,  no 
matter  how  much  was  eaten,  at  night  the  portion  which  had 
been  cut  during  the  day  reappeared  ;  but  when  the  first 
people  fell  into  the  sin  of  lust  the  rice  gradually  vanished. 
Where  the  rice  was  cut  in  the  morning,  there  remained  a 
bare  patch  at  night.  Since  then  man  has  had  to  labour,  and 
earn  his  bread  with  the  sweat  of  his  brow. 

Owing  to  the  scarcity,  crime  first  appeared  in  the  world. 
One  man,  fearing  that  his  stock  would  not  last  him,  went  and 
stole  from  his  neighbours'  barns.  Thus  theft  was  the  first 
crime  committed  in  the  world.  The  man  whose  rice  was 
stolen  at  first  only  scolded  the  thief,  and  let  him  go.  The 
robber,  however,  did  not  care  for  this,  and  came  back  a  second 
and  a  third  time.  The  third  time  he  was  seized  and  beaten. 
Thus  out  of  the  original  crime  of  thievery  arose  abuse, 
reviling,  assault,  falsehood,  and  then  punishments.  In  this 
way  did  crime  and  consequently  law  and  justice  take  their 
origin,  and  have  lasted  since  the  very  beginning  of  the  world. 
Hitherto  on  account  of  the  happy  state  in  which  the  people 
had  lived,  without  crime  and  without  punishments,  every  one 
had  been  equal,  and  there  had  been  no  necessity  for  marking 
different  grades.  As,  however,  crime  increased,  and  with  it 
revenge,  more  or  less  sweeping  according  to  temperament, 
the  people  took  counsel  together  and  resolved  to  appoint  a 
man  to  be  ruler  over  them,  who  should  regulate  their  affairs 
and  punish  Iwrongdoers.  Thus  a  king  was  first  appointed, 
and  his  revenue  was  derived  from  tithes  given  by  the  people. 
Each  man  set  apart  a  tenth  of  his  Thal^  san  for  the  support 
of  the  king.  The  tithe  system  was  kept  up  among  the 
Burmese,  the  most  direct  in  descent  from  the  original  people, 
until  a  few  years  ago.  The  kings  extended  the  system. 
The  rulers  and  governors  of  provinces  received  in  place  of 
salary  the  tithes  of  the  districts  which  were  under  their 
charge.  But  King  Mind6n  Min,  finding  that  with  un- 
scrupulous men  the  method  was  liable  to  abuse,  abolished 
the  system  of  tithes,  and  introduced  the  English  method  of 
paying  a  regular  salary.  It  did  not,  however,  work  well. 
Many  of  the  myo-sas,  finding  that  they  did  not  receive  their 
money  regularly  from  the  State,  continued  to  exact  tithes  as 
before,  only  secretly  and  with  many  cunning  devices  to  hide 


X  THE  EARTH  AND  ITS  BEGINNING  95 

what  they  were  doing.      It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  the 
custom  of  the  ancients  would  have  been  reintroduced. 

The  appointment  of  a  ruler  to  punish  crime  was  therefore 
the  second  source  of  the  law,  and  the  first  source  of  the 
administration  of  justice.  The  first  king  chosen  was  a 
Payalaung,  a  person  destined  in  future  ages  to  be  a  Buddha, 
and  therefore  of  great  sanctity  and  wisdom,  and  one  who 
strictly  conformed  to  the  five  natural  and  religious  laws 
incumbent  on  all  men,  namely,  not  to  murder,  steal,  commit 
adultery,  drink  fermented  liquors,  or  speak  falsely.  From 
these  immediately  sprang  the  four  thingahas  or  kingly  laws, 
and  the  first  laws  laid  down  by  the  Payalaung  were  with 
regard  to  the  twenty-five  descriptions  of  theft,  the  ten  kinds 
of  assault,  and  the  twenty-seven  kinds  of  abusive  language. 

Notwithstanding  the  institution  of  a  source  of  adminis- 
trative justice,  crime  continued  to  increase,  and  those  who 
wished  to  escape  from  its  evil  influences  retired  to  the  jungles 
and  there  built  small  houses  for  themselves,  or  gained  a 
living  by  begging  from  village  to  village.  Thus  rose  the 
caste  of  the  Brahmins.  Those  who  built  themselves  houses 
and  acquired  wealth  by  agriculture  and  trade,  were  called 
that6  thu-gyw^,  rich  men,  while  those  who  were  unfortunate 
and  oppressed  sank  into  the  state  of  poverty  and  were  called 
thu  sinye.  Thus  arose  the  legal  classification  of  the  people. 
The  first  king,  Mahathamada  as  he  was  called,  probably 
had  a  written  code,  but  it  has  been  superseded  or  lost.  The 
laws  which  now  guide  us'were  drawn  up  by  Menu,  originally 
a  cowherd,  but  afterwards  a  minister.  To  these  laws  all 
others  owe  their  existence,  for  we  read  that  in  Greece,  the 
earliest  civilised  country  in  Europe,  Menu  was  styled  Minos 
in  Crete,  and  first  gave  them  laws.  In  this  way  polity  was 
established  in  the  Southern  Island.  The  original  people 
soon  greatly  increased,  and  multiplied,  and  dispersed  them- 
selves not  only  all  over  the  mainland,  but  some  even  went 
to  the  smaller  islands  round  about,  as  did  the  English  to 
the  Pyi  Gyi.  Just  as  the  children  of  one  father  take 
different  names,  so  the  different  peoples  took  to  themselves 
different  titles,  according  to  the  part  of  the  earth  they 
settled  in.  Just  also  as  some  children  in  a  family  are  good 
and  some  bad,  so  a  few  races  preserved  the  sacred  law  of 


96  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS     chap,  x 

the   Lord    Buddha,  and    some    fell    away    into    lamentable 
heresies.       Many  of  them  still  retain  reminiscences  of  the 
teachings   of  the  Great   Master.      Thus    the   Bible   of  the 
Christian    contains    moral    precepts    in    a    great    measure 
identical  with  the  sentiments  conveyed  in  the  thoughts  or 
sermons  of  the  Lord  Buddha.     There  is  even  confirmation 
in  the  mention  of  the  ages  of  Methuselah  and  other  men  of 
old,  of   the  doctrine   of  the   waxing   and   waning   term  of 
human  life.      Some  learned  Sadaws  have  held  that  the  Lord 
Jesus   is  Dewadat,  the  cousin  of  Shin  Gautama,  who  was 
always  trying  to  overthrow  the  good  works  of  the  Buddha ; 
and  it  is  well   known  that  the   Siamese  speak  of  the  evil 
Dewadat  as  the  God  of  Europe,  and   the  causer  of  all  the 
evil  in  the  world.     This  opinion  is  not,  however,  generally 
held,  and   the  best  thing  a   Burman   can   wish  for  a  good 
Englishman  is  that  in  some  future  existence,  as  a  reward  of 
good  works,  he  may  be  born  a  Buddhist  and  if  possible  a 
Burman.     For  that  the  Burmese  are  most  nearly  descended 
from    the    original    holy   people,   their    name    Byamma    or 
Bama  evidently  shows,  while  no  other  nation  preserves  the 
sacred  law  more  carefully  and  more  exactly  in  its  form  as  it 
came  from  the  lips  of  the  Lord  Buddha  himself.     Moreover, 
the  Burmese  monarchs  retained  the  titles  given  to  Mahatha- 
mada,   the   first    king,  and    his    immediate   successors,   and 
therefore  they  ranked  above  all  others. 


CHAPTER    XI 

THE   LADDER    OF    EXISTENCE 

Notwithstanding  the  change,  the  pain,  and  the  vanity 
of  everything  upon  earth,  yet  the  Lu-pyi,  the  Man6t-tha- 
b6ng,  the  state  of  man,  is  desirable  beyond  all  others. 
Transience,  misery,  unreality  prevail  in  all  the  thirty-one 
seats  of  the  world,  even  in  the  twenty  superior  heavens, 
where  those  acted  on  by  Kama,  generating  beings,  find  no 
entrance.  The  Ddwas  come  down  to  our  earth  from  their 
six  seats  of  bliss ;  the  Byammas,  even  to  the  fourth  state 
of  Zan,  are  occasionally  found  in  earthly  guise  in  the 
precincts  of  holy  monasteries ;  even  Yahandas,  who  have 
entered  into  Thodda,  the  current  of  perfection,  and  after 
death  attain  the  dreamful  joy  of  Ne'ban,  the  cessation  from 
existence,  even  these  immaterial  beings  diifuse  a  saintly 
presence  over  the  Southern  Island.  The  great  Lord 
Gautama  appeared  in.  the  seat  of  man  and  preached  the 
sacred  law,  and  he  preached  it  there  because  all  the  twenty- 
seven  Buddhas  before  him  had  done  the  same,  and  when  he 
preached  it  on  that  soft  Indian  eve, 

I  know  it  writ  that  they  who  heard 

Were  more — lakhs  more— crores  more — than  could  be  seen, 

For  all  the  Devas  and  the  Dead  thronged  there, 

Till  Heaven  was  emptied  to  the  seventh  zone, 

And  uttermost  dark  Hells  opened  their  bars  ; 

Also  the  daylight  lingered  past  its  time 

In  rose-leaf  radiance  on  the  watching  peaks. 

So  that  it  seemed  Night  listened  in  the  glens 

And  Noon  upon  the  mountains  ;  yea  !  they  write, 

The  Evening  stood  between  them  like  some  maid. 

Celestial,  love-struck,  rapt ;  the  smooth-rolled  clouds 

Her  braided  hair  ;  the  studded  stars  the  pearls 

97  H 


98  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

And  diamonds  of  her  coronal  ;  the  moon 

Her  forehead  jewel,  and  the  deepening  dark 

Her  woven  garments.     'Twas  her  close-held  breath 

Which  came  in  scented  sighs  across  the  lawns 

While  our  Lord  taught,  and,  while  he  taught,  who  heard — 

Though  he  were  stranger  in  the  land,  or  slave. 

High  caste  or  low,  come  of  the  Aryan  blood, 

Or  Mlech  or  Jungle-dweller,  seemed  to  hear 

What  tongue  his  fellows  talked.      Nay,  outside  those 

Who  crowded  by  the  river,  great  and  small. 

The  birds  and  beasts  and  creeping  things — 'tis  writ — 

Had  sense  of  Buddha's  vast  embracing  love 

And  took  the  promise  of  his  piteous  speech  ; 

So  that  their  lives — prisoned  in  shape  of  ape, 

Tiger,  or  deer,  shagged  bear,  jackal,  or  wolf. 

Foul-feeding  kite,  pearled  dove,  or  peacock  gemmed. 

Squat  toad,  or  speckled  serpent,  lizard,  bat  ; 

Yea,  or  of  fish  fanning  the  river-waves — 

Touched  meekly  at  the  skirts  of  brotherhood 

With  man  who  hath  less  innocence  than  these  ; 

And  in  mute  gladness  knew  their  bondage  broke 

Whilst  Buddha  spake  these  things  before  the  King. 

The  Light  of  Asia. 

And  since  that  time  some  few  have  passed  from  our 
earth  to  Ne'ban,  where  the  silence  lives  ;  "  seeking  nothing, 
they  gained  all."  But  far  the  most  have  failed  ;  some  have 
sunk  to  the  Four  States  of  Punishment ;  some  have  risen  to 
the  blissful  seats  of  Nats  ;  fewer  have  passed  beyond  to  the 
meditative  realms  of  Zan. 

It  is  written  that  the  life  of  man  waxes  from  ten  years 
to  the  huge  period  of  an  Athinkaya,  and  then  wanes  to  ten 
years  again.  How  is  it,  then,  that  some  men  live  beyond  a 
hundred  years,  and  others  die  almost  ere  they  have  drawn 
breath  ?  The  reason  is  that  some  have  taken  no  life  at  all 
in  previous  existences,  and  that  others  have,  unwittingly 
perhaps,  destroyed  many  creatures,  and  their  own  existence 
is  correspondingly  graduated.  To  maintain  his  dignity  of 
man  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  a  human  being  must 
observe,  as  far  as  his  powers  admit,  the  Five  great  Precepts. 
Failure  to  observe  these  will  infallibly  result  in  a  fall  in  the 
next  existence  into  the  States  of  Punishment. 

It  will  be  well  to  begin  the  ladder  of  existence  at  the 
lowest  rung,  at  the  worst  of  these  four  states.  This  is 
Nga-ye,  hell — the  most  hideous   of  all.     Even  in  Nga-yfe 


XI  THE  LADDER  OF  EXISTENCE  99 

there  are  gradations  :  the  one  mighty  seat  is  divided  into 
eight  great  holds,  arranged  one  below  the  other,  all  with 
punishments  so  terrible  that  none  can  be  said  to  exceed 
any  other  in  hideousness.  The  names  of  all  the  eight 
great  chambers,  from  Theinzo  above  to  Awizi  the  nether- 
most hell,  are  given,  but  a  detailed  catalogue  is  unnecessary. 
Each  great  hell  is  surrounded  by  sixteen  inferior  places  of 
torture  called  Otthad-daret.  From  west  to  east  the  flames 
stream  through  all  the  mighty  space  and  pass  through  on 
the  other  side  to  a  distance  of  a  thousand  yuzanas,  and 
from  east  to  west  the  same.  From  north  to  south,  from 
Nadir  to  Pole,  and  Pole  to  Nadir,  it  is  the  same,  and  yet  the 
torments  of  this  heat  are  but  a  tithe  of  the  gruesome  tortures 
the  sinner  must  suffer.  The  life  of  the  Dewas  in  Tawa- 
deintha  is  reckoned  at  sixteen  million  human  years.  That 
period  is  but  as  a  day  and  night  in  Kalathot,  the  second 
hell.  Thirty  such  days  and  nights  make  a  month,  twelve 
months  one  year ;  and  the  wicked  in  the  Kalathot  hell 
must  pass  one  thousand  such  horrible  years.  The  Nats  in 
T6t-thita  live  five  hundred  and  seventy-six  million  years, 
which  is  but  as  one  revolving  sun  and  moon  to  the  tenants 
of  Yawruwa.  Of  such  appalling  days  they  must  make  up 
a  tale  of  four  thousand  agonising  years.  The  miserable 
wretches  in  Awizi  work  out  the  evil  of  their  sins  only  in 
the  space  of  an  Andrakap,  a  period  so  vast  that  the  mind 
cannot  grasp  it.  As  if  these  punishments  were  not  sufficient 
to  scare  the  weak  and  ignorant  from  sin,  it  has  been  revealed 
what  other  tortures  await  the  damned.  In  one  of  the  Ten 
Great  Sacred  Mystery  Plays  it  is  related  how  a  pious  prince 
was  shown  the  horrors  of  hell.  The  terrible  pictures  of  the 
sixth  book  of  the  ^neidjCs\Q  awful  imaginings  of  Dante's  poem, 
are  outdone  by  the  flesh-creeping  minuteness  of  the  Nemi 
Zat.  The  prince  saw  men  devoured  by  five-headed  dogs, 
by  famished  vultures,  by  loathsome  crows,  the  flesh  being 
renewed  as  fast  as  the  foul  creatures  tore  it  away  ;  he  saw 
others  crushed  beneath  the  weight  of  vast  white-hot  moun- 
tains, stretched  on  fiery  bars  and  cut  up  with  burning  knives 
and  flaming  saws,  their  hearts  slowly  scratched  and  pierced 
with  fiery  needles,  flame  entering  at  the  mouth  and  licking 
up   the  vitals,  fiends   all   about,  hacking,  hewing,  stabbing. 


loo  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

lacerating  the  body  with    all    that    the    human   mind   has 
imagined  hideous,  and  all  this,  and  ten  times  more,  which  it 
were  only  disgusting  to  write  down,  continued  with  never- 
abated  torture  to  the  wretched  victims.     The  lesser  hells  are 
no  less  horrible  ;  that  of  ordure,  where  huge  stinging  serpents 
and  gnawing  worms  fasten   on    the   sinners  who   are   there 
immersed  ;  those  of  burning  coals,  swords  and  knives,  molten 
lead,  fiery  hammers  which  crush  the  bones  at  every  stroke ; 
that  where  the  heart,  lungs,  and  liver  are  torn  out  with  hooks 
and    slowly    sliced    and    ever    renewed.       Occasionally    the 
damned  are  transferred  to  the  Lawkanty^  hells,  situated  in 
the  intermediate  spaces   between   the   Sekya   worlds,  where 
the  tortures  are  those  of  frightful  cold.     Enough,  however, 
has  been  said  about  the  horrors  of  hell.     The  crimes  which 
condemn  a  man,  and   the  hell  to  which  he  is  sent,  are  all 
duly  recorded  ;  but  as  one  hell   is  as  bad   as  another,  it  is 
unnecessary  to  recount  these  particulars.     Suffice  it  to  say 
that  the  man  who  scoffs    at   the   Buddha   and   derides  the 
law,  will  remain,  throughout  a  whole  revolution   of  nature, 
an  entire  Lawka,  transfixed  head  downwards  on  a  red-hot 
spit,    in    the     lowest    hell,    hacked,    gnawed,    crushed,    and 
beaten  by  all  that   is   most    awesome    in    all    the  flaming 
realms.      There  are  twenty-one  kinds  of  people  who  will  fall 
into   the   lowest   hell.      Nineteen,  however,  if  they  see   the 
error  of  their  ways,  and  attend   the   pagodas  with   goodly 
offerings,  may  be  redeemed ;  but   the  hunter  and  the  fisher- 
man  cannot  be  saved.     The  impious  Dewadat,  cousin  and 
brother-in-law  of  the  Buddha,  who  tried  to  kill  him,  suffers 
terrible  punishment.     His  feet  are  sunk  ankle-deep  in  burn- 
ing marl.      His  head  is  incased   in  a  red-hot  pan  that  caps  it 
down  to  the  lobe  of  the  ears.     Two  large  red-hot  bars  transfix 
him  from  back  to  front,  two  horizontally  from  right  to  left,  and 
one  impales  him  from  head  to  foot.     But  since  he  repented 
when  he  sank  into  the  earth  to  his  doom,  he  will  become  a 
Pyitsega  Buddha,  under  the  name  of  Ahisara,  in  coming  ages. 
The   State   of  Punishment   above   that   of  hell   is   that 
of  the   Thurake.     Their    miseries    are   various.      Some  are 
keepers  of  hell    by  day  or    by  night,  themselves  suffering 
all  the  horror   of  the   terrible   heat,  assuming  the  form  of 
man  at  other  times.     Others  feed  on  their  own  flesh  and 


THE  LADDER  OF  EXISTENCE 


blood,  and  tear  themselves  with  great  hooks.  Some  are 
six  miles  high,  with  projecting  crab's  eyes,  short  lids,  and 
a  mouth  the  size  of  an  ordinary  mortal's,  so  that  they  are 
incessantly  tormented  by  hunger.  Above  them  are  the 
Pyeitta,  who  in  many  respects  resemble  them  in  their 
sufferings.  They  wander  on  desert  sea-shores  and  moun- 
tains, and  in  dismal  forests,  far  from  the  abodes  of  man, 
naked  and  continually  lamenting.  Some  have  huge  bodies 
with  a  mouth  no  larger  than  the  eye  of  a  needle,  so  that 
they  can  never  satiate  their  craving  for  food.  Others  have 
huge,  gluttonous  mouths,  always  seeking  to  devour,  but  with 
no  stomach  in  which  the  food  can  be  received.  Maggots, 
earth-worms,  ants,  and  the  like  are  often  called  Pyeitta, 
because  they  live  on  excrements  and  all  manner  of  filth.  This 
state  is  the  one  specially  assigned  to  misers  and  niggardly, 
uncharitable  people. 

The  highest  of  the  Four  States  of  Punishment  is  that 
of  Tareiksan,  or  animals.  Those  who  do  not  keep  a  guard 
over  their  passions,  who  are  abusive,  and  who  refrain  from 
giving  alms,  will  fall  into  the  B6ng  of  animals.  Just  as 
one  man  by  reason  of  previous  merits  is  born  a  prince, 
while  another  barely  scrapes  into  human  existence  as  an 
outcast  pagoda  slave,  a  grave-digger,  a  leper,  or  a  heretic, 
so  there  are  grades  in  the  state  of  animals.  To  be  an 
elephant  is  of  course  nearly  as  good  as  being  a  man  ;  to 
be  a  white  elephant  is  usually  very  much  better.  Any 
herbivorous  animal  is  in  a  better  state  than  a  creature 
which  eats  flesh.  Lions,  tigers,  and  all  life -destroying 
creatures  are  particularly  undesirable  transincorporations. 
The  vulture  is  highly  honoured  because  it  never  takes 
life,  but  lives  entirely  on  carrion.  Some  animals  are  par- 
ticularly esteemed  as  having  been  incarnations  of  the  Lord 
Buddha.  Such  are  the  white  elephant,  the  hare,  the  pigeon. 
Shin  Gautama's  first  existence  was  in  the  form  of  a  little 
bird,  and  all  the  stages  he  passed  through  in  after  existences 
are  recorded  in  the  Ten  Great  Zats  and  the  five  hundred 
and  ten  minor  tales.  He  who  would  cross  the  ferry  to 
Ne'ban  may  learn  from  them  how  he  may  do  so,  and  how 
miserable  the  toil  is.  Who  would  not  seek  the  higher  paths 
when  he  sees  what  the  alternative  is  ? 


I02  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Raised  from  the  Four  States  of  Punishment  to  the 
Man6t-tha  B6ng,  where  as  man  the  law  is  open  to  his 
study,  the  creature  on  his  upward  path  should  not  be  lightly- 
stayed.  To  rise  from  the  seat  of  man  to  that  of  Nats  seems 
simple.  Observe  but  the  Five  Precepts,  give  alms,  live 
peaceably  with  all  men,  attend  regularly  at  the  pagodas  on 
the  appointed  days  that  the  image  and  model  there  presented 
to  you  may  strengthen  your  resolution,  do  but  live  a  respect- 
able life,  and  the  end  is  gained  ;  you  pass  to  the  dwellings  of 
the  Ddwas,  there  to  spend  long  years  of  bliss.  Good  works 
will  do  much,  but  it  is  especially  necessary  to  observe  the 
Five  Precepts.  You  must  keep  them  in  your  mind  every 
day,  as  you  put  your  clothes  on  your  body.  The  Ten 
Precepts  must  be  kept  on  holy  days,  four  times  in  every 
lunar  month  and  throughout  all  Lent ;  these,  and  the  daily 
giving  of  alms  to  the  mendicants,  will  save  you  ;  your  next 
existence  will  be  in  the  Heavens  of  the  Nats. 

The  Nat-pyi  Chauk-tap,  the  six  blissful  seats,  the  highest 
of  the  Kama  B6ng,  the  worlds  of  passion,  are  ranged  on 
and  around  Mount  Myinmo.  Like  the  eight  Hells  they 
all  have  names,  beginning  with  Zatu-ma-harit  and  ending 
with  Para-neimmita  Wot-thawati.  The  second  and  the 
fourth  Heavens  are  the  best  known  ;  for  to  Tawadeintha 
the  Lord  Buddha  ascended  in  three  steps  to  preach  the  law 
to  his  mother,  the  sainted  Queen  Maya,  and  countless 
Byammas  and  Immaterial  from  the  far  realms  of  Rupa 
and  Arupa  came  to  hear ;  and  from  T6t-thita  the  embryo 
Budh  descended  to  take  flesh  as  Prince  Theidat.  The 
length  of  life  in  Tawadeintha  is  a  thousand  D^wa's  years, 
that  is,  in  earthly  reckoning,  nine  millions.  Similarly  the 
four  thousand  of  T6t-thita  are  in  human  calendars  five 
hundred  and  seventy-six  million  years. 

Take  up  any  book  of  fairy  tales  you  have ;  revive  your 
recollection  of  the  Arabian  Nights ;  recall  any  dream  when 
you  thought  you  had  made  your  fortune,  and  you  have  a 
picture  of  the  six  blissful  seats.  A  vision  of  song  and 
dancing,  beautiful  and  fragrant  flowers,  delicious  fruits,  palm- 
trees  bearing,  in  place  of  leaves,  rich  garments  and  priceless 
ornaments  and  dainty  cates,  great  gorgeous  palaces  with 
crystal  pavements,  golden  columns,  and  jewelled  walls ;   a 


XI  THE  LADDER  OF  EXISTENCE  103 

tinkling  of  gold  and  silver  bells,  intoxicating  music — every- 
thing the  most  fervid  imagination  can  picture,  all  are  found 
in  these  happy  realms.  Prince  Nemi  was  granted  a  sight 
of  them  as  well  as  of  the  horrors  of  hell. 

Passion  still  prevails,  but  it  becomes  less  and  less  sensual 
the  higher  we  rise.  In  Tot-thita  a  touch  of  the  hand 
satisfies  love  ;  in  the  fifth  seat,  lovers  simply  gaze  on  each 
other  ;  and  in  the  sixth,  existence  in  the  same  place  is  enough. 
The  Nat  of  the  highest  Bong  is  not  far  from  the  twenty 
superior  heavens. 

Passage  to  the  D6wa  seats  is  obtained  by  the  strict 
observance  of  the  precepts  and  the  regular  performance  of 
good  works  ;  the  step  beyond  can  only  be  accomplished  by  the 
aid  of  the  intellect.  Ignorance  is  always  the  chief  hindrance 
to  rise  in  the  scale  of  worlds ;  it  is  especially  so  in  the  case 
of  the  superior  heavens.  The  twenty  higher  seats  can  only 
be  reached  by  concentrated  meditation  ;  by  the  performance 
of  good  works,  not  outwardly  by  the  body,  but  inwardly 
by  the  soul.  The  three  fundamental  principles  of  Aneiksa, 
Dokka,  Anatta — transience,  pain,  vanity — must  first  be 
intently  examined.  Then  we  must  pass  on  through  the  five 
kinds  of  meditation,  the  highest  of  which  is  Upekka,  which 
brings  perfect  fixity,  whence  originates  callousness  to  pleasure 
or  pain,  scorn  or  affection.  Thus  we  pass  through  the 
successive  stages  of  contemplation  which  lead  us  through  the 
sixteen  seats  of  Rupa,  each  of  which  constitute  the  first, 
second,  and  third  Zans — Thawtapan,  Thakadagam,  Anagam  ; 
the  tenth  and  eleventh  seats  form  the  fourth  Zan,  and  in 
the  five  highest,  the  Yahandas  have  entered  on  Thodda,  on 
the  current  of  perfection. 

Thus  we  reach  to  the  verge  of  the  four  immaterial 
superior  heavens.  To  enter  these  we  must  get  rid  of  all 
affection  for  matter.  The  thirty-two  parts  of  the  body  are 
often  mentioned  in  prayer  by  pious  Buddhists,  each  part  with 
its  forty-four  subdivisions.  On  these  we  must  ponder  till  we 
understand  and  see  the  worthlessness  of  them.  Then  we 
must  repeat  ten  thousand  times  "  the  firmament,  or  the  aether, 
is  immeasurable,"  till  at  length  we  reach  the  first  Seit  or  idea 
of  Arupa. 

Thence  we  progress  in  contempt  for  matter  till  at  last 


104  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

we  are  delivered  from  the  three  Thangya,  or  false  persuasions, 
and  reaching  the    topmost  seat  of  Arupa,   Newa-thangya- 
nathangya-yatana,  tremble  on  the  verge  of  Ne'ban. 
What  is  Ne'ban  ? 

If  any  teach  Nirvana  is  to  cease, 

Say  unto  such  they  lie  ; 
If  any  teach  Nirvana  is  to  live, 

Say  unto  such  they  err. 

The  common  illustration  of  the  schools  will  not  suffice 
for  matter-of-fact  Western  heretics.  You  tell  them  life  is 
like  a  lamp,  with  its  wick  and  its  little  lake  of  oil.  It  may 
be  kindled  and  extinguished  many  times,  fresh  oil  may  be 
added,  other  lamps  kindled  from  it,  but  at  length  the  oil  is 
exhausted,  the  flame  flickers  and  dies  away  for  ever.  That 
is  annihilation,  you  say.  It  is  not.  When  a  man  dies  and 
goes  to  Ne'ban  he  ceases  to  be  individualised  ;  he  is  no  more 
agitated  by  existence,  wretched  in  itself,  still  more  wretched 
from  the  woes  it  reveals  in  others  ;  he  falls  into  a  calm  and 
never-ending  cessation  of  existence ;  he  knows  nothing  of 
others,  or  of  the  world,  and  so  is  a  stranger  to  all  feelings  of 
joy  or  sorrow ;  he  contemplates  fixedly  the  abstract  truth, 
which  even  the  highest  Immaterial  cannot,  perpetually  ;  but 
he  is  not  annihilated  as  the  heretics  assert ;  nor  does  he  slip, 
like  the  dew-drop,  into  the  shining  sea ;  he  is  not  absorbed 
into  the  supreme  Buddha,  as  the  Brahmins  loosely  say ;  he 
remains  perpetually  in  a  sacred  calm,  unmoved  by  any  feeling 
whatever,  in  lifeless,  timeless  bliss. 

The  teachers  strive  to  give  a  detailed  explanation,  but 
who  can  know  ?  who  can  tell  for  certain  the  composition  and 
economy  of  even  the  nearest  star?  They  tell  us  this  ; 
Ne'ban  is  the  extinction  of  Kan,  the  soul  of  recurring  exist- 
ences, the  influence  of  merits  and  demerits,  exemption  from 
which  means  utter  cessation  from  existences  ;  Ne'ban  is  the 
stifling  of  Seit,  the  fire  of  passions,  the  entire  hundred  and 
twenty  volitions  and  desires ;  Ne'ban  is  the  cessation  of 
Utu,  exemption  from  revolving  years,  from  the  changes  of 
seasons,  from  the  variations  of  heat  and  cold,  darkness  and 
light ;  Ne'ban  is  the  death  of  Ahaya,  taste,  typifying  all  the 
senses  ;  Ne'ban  is,  in  fact,  the  going  out  of  all  that  we  know 
as  making  up  a  living  being ;  there  remains  behind  what  no 


XI  THE  LADDER  OF  EXISTENCE  105 

one  can  name  and  few  even  picture  to  themselves,  and  those 
who  attempt  it  do  so  according  to  their  individual  fancies. 
When  a  person  recovers  from  a  grievous  illness  we  can  only 
say  that  to  be  free  from  infirmities  is  to  recover  one's  health. 
So  we  say  that  a  man  has  attained  to  Ne'ban  when  he  is 
freed  from  the  sorrows  of  existences. 

In  regard  to  the  Lord  Buddha  himself,  we  are  told  that 
there  are  in  reality  three  stages  in  Ne'ban.  The  first  was 
the  Ne'ban  of  Kiletha,  of  the  earthly  passions,  when  under 
the  Baw-di  Bin,  the  sacred  banyan-tree,  he  renounced  all 
and  became  a  Buddha.  The  second  was  the  Ne'ban  of 
Khanda,  when  near  K6kthenay6n,  he  expired  in  the  grove  of 
sal-trees,  when  the  five  supports  of  existence  gave  way  and 
he  finally  departed  from  the  thirty-one  seats  of  the  world. 
The  third  and  last,  the  Ne'ban  of  Dat,  will  not  be  for  nearly 
two  thousand  five  hundred  years,  five  thousand  from  the  day 
of  his  death.  Then  the  duration  of  the  Great  Master's 
teachings  will  have  ceased,  his  cycle  will  have  lapsed,  and 
all  his  relics  from  all  parts  of  the  world  will  be  miraculously 
gathered  together  into  the  place  where  the  original  Baw-di 
Bin  stood ;  there  will  be  many  wondrous  signs,  and  then  all 
but  the  memory  of  him  will  be  gone,  the  complete  Ne'ban 
will  have  been  attained. 

The  definition  may  be  vague,  and  the  monks  of  Burma, 
Siam,  Japan,  Ceylon,  Thibet,  and  China  may  each  have  their 
own  definition,  but  there  is  the  same  difficulty  to  be  found 
in  all  religions  with  regard  to  the  last  mystery.  Who  can 
find  agreement  in  the  variety  of  Christian  descriptions  of  the 
future  life,  where  one  places  happiness  in  the  eternal  singing 
of  songs  and  in  feastings,  another  in  gazing  on  the  Deity,  a 
third,  with  greater  modesty,  hopes  to  creep  in  by  the  door 
of  which  St.  Peter  holds  the  keys  ?  Buddhists  have  in  their 
six  heavens  and  twenty  superior  seats  a  choice  of  every  kind 
of  bliss,  suited  to  every  liking.  They  have  the  Islamite 
delights  of  sense  in  the  heavens  of  Ddwas  with  the  houri 
nat-daughters.  Then  for  the  various  kinds  of  meditation 
and  mysticism  they  have  the  contemplative  Byamma  seats, 
while  the  four  seats  of  Arupa  afford  room  for  the  most 
transcendental  speculation. 

Yet  all  these  ideal  realms  of  phantasy — the  dreams  of 


io6  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    chap,  xi 

sense,  of  contemplation  and  mystic  trance — iiave  nothing  to 
do  with  the  state  of  Ne'ban.  It  is  not  a  "  nothing "  A 
"  nothing "  that  can  be  imagined  is  an  all,  for  according  to 
the  laws  of  thought,  non-existence  can  only  be  understood 
in  a  relative  sense.  The  Buddhist  system  is  much  too  logical 
to  trouble  itself  with  such  incomprehensible  problems,  and  in 
order  to  create  no  false  impressions,  the  teachers  surround 
the  last  state  with  the  utmost  possible  uncertainty  of  ex- 
pression. The  Buddhist  yearns  to  return  from  the  endless 
whirl  and  turmoil  of  existences  to  the  calm  of  the  first 
beginning. 


CHAPTER  XII 

THE  NOBLE  ORDER  OF  THE  YELLOW  ROBE 

That  noble  order  of  the  yellow  robe 

Which  to  this  day  standeth  to  help  the  world. 

All  living  creatures  are  plodding  on 

the  noble  Eightfold  Path  which  brings  to  peace  ; 
By  lower  or  by  upper  heights  it  goes, 
The  firm  soul  hastes,  the  feeble  tarries.     All 
Will  reach  the  sun-lit  snows. 

The  monks  in  Lower  Burma  are  fond  of  the  comparison 
which  steam  lends  them  now.  The  holy  fraternity  are 
pushing  on  by  mail  train  to  the  emancipation  from  constant 
successions  of  new  btfths,  while  the  weary  layman  toils 
along  the  dusty  road  on  foot,  or  at  best  in  a  jolting  bullock- 
cart  ;  the  mendicant  pushes  up  the  stream  of  life  in  a  huge 
throbbing  paddle  steamer  ;  ftie  man  yet  in  the  world  struggles 
along  painfully  against  the  current,  and  whirled  about  by 
eddies  in  a  rude  canoe.  Why,  then,  cannot  all  set  forth  on 
the  path  alike  ?  Partly  because  of  ignorance  and  its  con- 
sequences ;  partly  because  of  the  kan  which  forms  each  man's 

life: 

The  books  say  well,  my  Brothers  !  each  man's  life 

The  outcome  of  his  former  living  is,        <^ 
The  bygone, wrongs  bring  forth  sorrows  and  woes, 

The  bygone  right  breeds  bliss. 

A  man's  kan  may  be 'efficient  to  gain  him  existence  as  a 
human  being,  but .  not  enough  to  suStain  him  in  the  noble 
life  of  the  monk.  He  may  enter  the  noble  order,  he  must, 
indeed,  if  he  would  be  other  than  a  brute  beast ;  but  his 
kan,  the  sum  of  actions  that  make  up  his  life,  the  soul  of 

107 


io8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


transmigrations,  forces  him  to  leave  and  enter  the  forest  of 
the  world,  some  from  want  of  the  gift  of  continence,  some 
from  ambition  and  desire  for  worldly  power,  some  from  a 
seeking  after  wealth,  all  from  the  predominance  of  some  one 
of  the  hundred  and  twenty  seit  that  incapacitate  a  man  for 
the  calm  meditative  life  of  the  pyin-sin. 

In  the  Lord  Buddha's  time,  when  a  man  adopted  the 
faith,  the  requisites  were  belief  in  his  teaching,  a  willingness 
to  live  in  poverty  and  chastity,  and  under  strict  rules.  All 
the  applicant  had  to  do  was  to  renounce  the  ordinary  pursuits 
of  life,  give  up  all  his  goods,  take  the  vows,  and  he  was  forth- 
with a  member  of  the  Thenga.  From  that  time  forward  he 
lived  in  poverty,  was  dependent  upon  alms  for  his  food,  and 
upon  charity  for  a  shelter  for  his  head  ;  he  was  a  beikku, 
a  mendicant,  and  only  those  who  were  such  were  Buddhists. 
But  as  the  believers  increased,  it  was  evident  that  all  could 
not  wholly  adopt  the  religious  life.  Many  had  faith,  but 
not  faith  enough  to  support  them  in  the  strict  rule  of  the 
society,  and  soon  Buddhists  became  divided  into  the  two 
classes  of  laymen  who  adopted  and  believed  in  the  religious 
tenets,  and  the  religious  who  abandoned  the  world  entirely, 
and  strove  only  to  lead  the  higher  life.  Hence  also  arose 
the  hierarchy  of  the  order,  which  exists  to  a  certain  extent 
in  Burma,  though  very  far  from  approaching  the  complete- 
ness of  the  system  of  Thibet,  where  there  is  a  pontifical  court, 
an  elective  sacerdotal  chief,  and  a  college  of  superior  Lamas. 
In  this  respect,  however,  Burman  Buddhism  is  as  much  closer 
to  the  primitive  order  in  polity  as  it  is  in  exact  observance 
of  the  ordinations  of  the  Wini.  Theoretically,  in  the  sacred 
assembly  there  are  but  three  classes : 

The  shin,  the  novice,  who  has  put  on  the  yellow  robe 
without  becoming  ^  professed  member  of  the  order,  and 
probably  with  no  other  desire  than  that  of  obtaining  his 
"  humanity."  These  are  called  ko-yins,  maung-shins,  and  a 
variety  of  other  names. 

The  u-pyin-sin,  those  who,  having  lived  a  certain  time  in 
the  monastery,  have  been  formally  admitted  to  the  assembly 
with  a  prescribed  ceremony,  whereby  the  title  of  yahan  is 
solemnly  conferred.     These  are  the  pyit-shin,  or  religious. 

Finally,  there  is  the  p6ngyi,  the  "  Great  Glory,"  who  by 


xii         THE  NOBLE  ORDER  OF  THE  YELLOW  ROBE        109 


virtue  of  prolonged  stay — ten  years  is  the  minimum — has 
proved  his  steadfastness  and  unflinching  self-denial. 

This  division  of  the  fraternity  is  not  far  removed  from 
the  classification  of  Shin  Gautama's  own  time,  when  all 
people  were  regarded  and  addressed  as  dayaka,  laymen, 
who  hear  the  preaching  of  the  law,  but  are  not  yet  con- 
verted to  a  firm  acceptance  of  it ;  or  upathaka,  not  merely 
hearers  of  the  law,  but  steadfast  believers  and  practisers  of 
its  precepts.  Nowadays  the  term  dayaka  is  applicable  to 
all  mankind,  for  it  is  open  to  all  to  seek  for  refuge  in  the 
Law  of  Good. 

Practically,  however,  there  is  a  slightly  extended  distinc- 
tion of  rank. 

1.  The  Shin,  the  postulant. 

2.  The  Pyit-shin,  the  religious,  the  full  member  of  the 
order. 

3.  The  Saya,  always  a  pdngyi,  the  head  of  each 
kyaung,  or  religious  house,  who  controls  all  the  inmates. 

4.  The  Gaing-6k,  the  provincial,  who  has  a  jurisdiction 
extending  over  all  the  monasteries  of  a  cluster  of  villages  or 
over  a  whole  district,  giving  advice  in  all  the  affairs  of  these 
communities,  enforcing  the  rules  against  malcontents,  and 
correcting  any  abuses. 

5.  The  Sadaw,  a  royal  teacher,  or  vicar-general  of  the 
order,  who  manages  the  entire  affairs  of  the  whole  country, 
both  Burma  and  the  Shan  States,  in  religious  matters. 
These  live  in  or  near  Mandalay,  and  are  summoned 
thither  on  their  appointment.  There  are  ordinarily  eight 
of  them,  all  honoured  with  the  title  of  Tha-thana-paing, 
i.e.  supreme  in  matters  appertaining  to  religion.  It  is  a 
mistake  to  speak  of  the  Tha-thana-paing  as  a  sort  of  Bur- 
mese Buddhist  pope.  There  is  no  such  approximation  to 
the  heterodox  Buddhism  of  Thibet,  unless  indeed  the  other 
sadaw-gyis  have  died,  and  there  is  but  one  remaining.  Since 
the  annexation  of  Upper  Burma,  the  British  Government 
has  allowed  the  election  of  a  single  Tha-thana-paing  and 
given  letters  patent  to  the  monk  chosen. 

In  the  time  of  native  rule  the  teacher  of  the  reigning 
king  was  always  created  a  Sadaw,  if  indeed  he  had  not  been 
one  before  he  was  called  upon  to  take  a  royal  pupil.     The 


no  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS         chap. 

respect  paid  to  him  by  the  king  was  paid,  not  as  to  the  head 
of  the  religion,  but  as  to  the  personal  teacher.  The  Burman 
in  his  prayers,  or  rather  his  meditations  for  the  good  of  others, 
prays  for  his  teacher  before  his  parents.  The  five  pleasant 
things  in  the  world  are :  the  shade  of  trees,  the  shade  of 
parents,  the  shade  of  teachers,  the  shade  of  princes,  the 
shade  of  the  Buddha. 

It  is  this  republican  tendency  of  Buddhism  that  gives  it 
such  a  wonderful  hold  on  the  people.  Rank  does  not  confer 
on  the  mendicant  greater  honour,  or  release  him  from  any  of 
his  obligations.  The  most  learned  and  famous  Sadaw  must 
go  forth  every  morning  to  beg  his  daily  food.  If  he  is  very 
aged  and  decrepit  he  may  be  excused  to  some  extent,  but 
every  now  and  again  he  must  totter  forth  to  preserve  the 
letter  of  the  law  and  show  a  proper  example  of  humility. 
His  dress  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  most  recently  admitted 
ko-yin,  and  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  he  holds  honour,  not 
because  he  controls  the  affairs  of  the  assembly,  but  because 
he  is_sp  close  to  the  verge  of  Ne'ban.  This  feeling  extends 
beyond  the  order  into  ordinary  iite.~  The  religion  brings  all 
men  down  to  the  same  level.  The  poor  man  may  be  a  king 
of  nats  in  the  next  life  ;  the  wealthy  sinner  may  frizzle  in  the 
awful  pains  of  hell.  There  is  no  difference  between  man  and 
man  but  that  which  is  established  by  superiority  in  virtue ; 
and  hence  it  is  that  the  state  of  women  among  Buddhists  is 
so  very  much  higher  than  it  is  among  Oriental  peoples,  who 
do  not  hold  by  that  faith.  The  Burmese  woman  enjoys 
many  rights  which  her  European  sister  is  even  now 
clamouring  for. 

We  have  seen  that  the  whole  male  population  of  Burma 
enters  the  monastery,  and  that  the  great  majority  leave  after 
a  very  short  stay.  Some,  however,  grow  fond  of  the  monastic 
ways,  and  remain  to  study  and  qualiiy  themselves  to  be 
mendicants.  In  becoming  pyin-sin  they  do  not  acquire  any 
new  spiritual  power,  nor  do  they  constitute  themselves 
directly  teachers  of  the  people.  In  a  religious  system, 
which  acknowledges  no  supreme  Deity,  it  is  impossible  for 
any  one  to  intercede  with  a  Creator  whose  existence  is 
denied,  in  behalf  of  a  man  who  can  only  attain  to  a  higher 
state   by  his  own  pious  life  and  earnest  self-denial.      The 


xn         THE  NOBLE  ORDER  OF  THE  YELLOW  ROBE       in 

religious  are  merely  initiated  into  a  higher  stage,  and  be- 
come members  of  an  order  in  which  every  individual  is 
aiming  at  a  greater  degree  of  sanctity.  The  doors  of  the 
kyaung  are  always  open  as  well  to  those  who  wish  to  enter 
as  to  those  who  wish  to  leave  it.  The  longest  stayer  has 
the  greatest  honour.  A  visitor  monk,  who  has  the  greater 
number  of  was,  who  has  passed  many  lenten  seasons  in  his 
yellow  robe,  will  be  shikho'd  to,  will  receive  the  homage  of 
the  head  of  the  monastery,  even  if  he  be  a  gaing-6k,  and 
the  stranger  but  a  simple  pongyi. 

In  his  ordination,  therefore,  the  pyin-sin  takes  upon  him.- 
self  no  burden  in  the  shape  of  a  cure  of  souls.  He  is  not  a 
priest  like  the  Christian  minister,  who  undertakes  to  guide 
others  to  salvation.  He  has  no  trouble  for  his  food  ;  a  pious 
and  kindly  population  supplies  him  far  beyond  his  require- 
ments, and  expects  no  service  in  return  for  this  support. 
He  has  no  sermons  to  prepare ;  it  is  not  expected  that  he 
will  preach  the  law,  and  when  of  his  own  accord  he  occasion- 
ally does  give  an  exposition,  it  is  not  any  feeble  excogitation 
of  his  own,  but  the  thoughts  and  words  of  the  Great  Master 
himself,  or  of  the  highest  and  noblest  of  the  men  of  old,  that 
he  delivers.  His  natural  rest  is  never  broken  in  upon  by 
calls  to  administer  consolation  and  comfort  to  the  sick  and 
the  dying.  Even  his  leisure  is  seldom  interrupted  to  be 
present  at  the  last  rites  for  the  dead.  He  is  not  a  minister 
of  religion,  and  all  he  has  to  do  is  to  seek  his  own  deliver- 
ance and  salvation.  All  that  is  compulsory  on  him  is  the 
observance  of  continence,  poverty,  and  humility,  with  tender- 
ness to  all  living  things,  abstraction  from  the  world,  and  a 
strict  observance  of  a  number  of  moral  precepts,  all  tending 
to  inculcate  these  things.  It  is  curious  perhaps,  therefore, 
that  greater  numbers  do  not  don  the  yellow  robe.  As  it  is, 
however,  there  is  no  lack  of  them. 

Previous  to  admission  the  postulant  must  have  reached 
the  age  of  twenty  years  and  have  obtained  his  parents'  per- 
mission. The  origin  of  this  stipulation  dates  from  the 
earliest  times.  When  Gautama  attained  the  Buddhaship 
his  half-brother  Nanda  was  next  heir,  and  was  about  to  be 
proclaimed  Crown  Prince  when  he  was  persuaded  to  become 
yahan.       Thereupon   Thudaw  -  dana,  the    king,  obtained    a 


112  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

promise  from  the  Buddha  that  ever  after  none  should  put 
on  the  celibate  robe  without  his  parents'  consent.  The  can- 
didate must  also  give  proof  of  a  sufficient  knowledge  of  the 
Pareit-gyi,  the  Padiseit,  the  three  Bitaghats,  and  the  like. 
When  it  is  understood  that  he  has  given  satisfaction  in 
these  subjects,  his  friends  provide  for  him  the  complete 
equipment  of  a  mendicant,  the  sacred  eight  utensils  which 
a  pyin-sin  cannot  do  without.      These  are : — 

1.  The  dug6t,  a  piece  of  yellow  cloth  of  rectangular 
shape,  folded  many  times  and  worn  over  the  left  shoulder, 
with  the  ends  hanging  down  behind  and  before. 

2.  The  kowut,  a  piece  of  cloth  worn  round  the  loins 
and  reaching  to  the  ankles. 

3.  The  thinbaing,  a  square-shaped  cloth,  yellow  like  the 
others,  thrown  cloak-fashion  over  the  chest  and  shoulders, 
and  coming  down  as  far  as  the  knees. 

4.  The  thabeit,  or  begging-pot,  worn  suspended  round 
the  neck  by  a  cord.  It  is  shaped  like  a  large  circular  soup- 
tureen  with  a  rounded  bottom,  and  has  no  lid.  This  must 
be  carried  round  every  morning  to  receive  the  alms  of  the 
pious. 

5.  The  kaban,  a  leathern  girdle  used  for  binding  on  the 
kowut. 

6.  The  pekot,  a  short  -  handled  axe  used  for  splitting 
firewood  and  the  like. 

7.  An  at,  or  needle. 

8.  A  yesit,  a  strainer,  or  water  dipper,  an  apparatus  for 
filtering  the  water  which  he  drinks,  so  that  he  may  not,  even 
unwittingly,  take  animal  life. 

To  these  pareik-kaya  shit-ba,  these  sacred  eight  utensils, 
is  usually  added  an  awana  or  yap,  a  lotus-leaf-shaped  fan, 
made  from  a  single  palm  frond,  with  an  edging  of  bamboo 
or  light  wood,  and  furnished  with  a  handle  fashioned  like 
the  letter  S.  The  leaf  used  is  that  of  the  Talapat  palm, 
hence  the  name  of  Talapoins  given  to  the  members  of  the 
brotherhood  by  the  early  Portuguese  adventurers  in  Burma. 
Every  mendicant  must  have  this  fan  with  him  when  he  goes 
to  an  assemblage  where  there  are  likely  to  be  women  present, 
in  order  that  he  may  be  thus  able  to  shut  himself  off  from 
any  temptation  to  carnal   thoughts.      The   sight   of  half  a 


XII         THE  NOBLE  ORDER  OF  THE  YELLOW  ROBE        113 

dozen  or  more  solemn-visaged  monks  sitting  on  their  mats 
and  coyly  hiding  their  faces  behind  these  big  fans  is  apt  to 
raise  a  smile  on  the  face  of  a  foreigner.  But  there  is  no 
doubt  that  the  regulation  is  well  advised.  Women  are 
disturbers  of  tranquil  meditation. 

When  these  necessaries  have  been  provided,  the  candidate 
proceeds  to  the  appointed  building.  This  is  always  a  thein, 
a  consecrated  hall,  built  of  teak,  with  open  sides  and  the 
sacred  three,  five,  or  seven  overlapping  and  diminishing  roofs, 
not  unlike  the  Albert  Memorial  in  appearance,  but  much 
larger  at  the  base.  Here  the  examining  body  is  assembled 
to  the  number  of  ten  or  twelve,  ordinarily,  but  a  minimum 
of  four  will  suffice  if  the  ceremony  is  conducted  in  the 
jungle.  The  senior  is  appointed  upyitsi,  or  president,  and 
a  secretary  is  nominated,  whose  duty  it  is  to  bring  forward 
the  candidate  and  to  read  the  Kammawasa,  the  ritual  of 
ordination.  This  is  the  most  gorgeously  ornamented  of  all 
the  Burmese  books.  It  is  written,  not  in  the  ordinary  round 
character,  but  in  square  letters  painted  on  with  a  thick  black 
resinous  gum,  and  requires  a  special  education  to  read  it. 
The  leaves  are  formed  either  of  the  ordinary  palm-leaf,  thickly 
covered  with  red  lacquer,  and  profusely  ornamented  round 
the  border  and  between  the  lines  with  gilded  figures  of  nats 
and  elaborate  scroll-work,  or  in  the  case  of  the  more  sacred 
monasteries,  of  the  discarded  waistcloths  of  kings.  None 
might  wear  these  pasos  after  the  Great  King  of  Righteous- 
ness had  tired  of  them,  and  many  were  therefore  made  use 
of  for  this  purpose.  Portions  of  them  are  taken,  doubled 
over,  and  then  covered  with  numerous  coatings  of  wood-oil 
and  a  paste  composed  of  this  same  thitsi,  with  finely  sifted 
burnt  rice-husks,  sawdust,  and  rice-water,  until  at  last  they 
become  firm  as  a  piece  of  cardboard,  but  vastly  more  pliant. 
Then  the  sheets  are  emblazoned,  and  the  text  painted  on, 
the  whole  being  enclosed  between  richly  ornamented  teak 
boards.  Few  more  splendid-looking  manuscripts  can  be 
seen  anywhere.  Occasionally  copies  are  found  engrossed  on 
thin  sheets  of  ivory  or  copper,  but  those  on  the  royal  pasos, 
called  Wut-1^  Kammawasas,  are  most  highly  esteemed.  The 
text  is  always  read  in  a  peculiar  way,  in  a  high-pitched,  jerky 
recitative,  which  is  not  without  a  certain  impressive  effect. 

I 


114  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

The  following  detailed  account  of  the  ceremony  of  initia- 
tion is  taken  from  the  second  volume  of  Bishop  Bigandet's 
Life  of  Gautama,  the  bulk  of  it  being  a  translation  of  the 
Kammawasa : — 

As  soon  as  the  pyin-sin  have  taken  their  places,  the 
Kammawa-saya  (the  secretary)  introduces  the  novitiant  duly 
clothed  and  bearing  the  necessary  utensils.  The  candidate 
kneels  down,  and,  with  his  hands  raised  to  his  forehead  and 
his  body  bent,  repeats  three  times : 

"  Venerable  president,  I  acknowledge  you  to  be  my 
upyitsi." 

The  assistant,  addressing  himself  to  the  candidate,  says : 

"  Dost  thou  acknowledge  this  to  be  thy  father,  and  these 
thy  sacred  vestments  ?  " 

The  candidate  audibly  answers  "  Yes,"  and  then  with- 
draws to  a  distance  of  twelve  cubits  from  the  assembled 
fathers,  whom  the  Kammawa-saya  addresses  as  follows : 

"  Venerable  upyitsi,  and  you,  brethren,  here  assembled, 
listen  to  my  words.  The  candidate  who  now  stands  in  a 
humble  posture  before  you  solicits  from  the  upyitsi  the 
favour  of  being  honoured  with  the  dignity  of  pyin-sin.  If  it 
appears  to  you  that  everything  is  properly  arranged  and 
disposed  for  this  purpose,  I  will  duly  admonish  him." 

Then  turning  to  the  candidate  he  says  : 

"  O  candidate,  be  attentive  to  my  words,  and  beware 
lest  on  this  solemn  occasion  thou  utterest  an  untruth,  or 
concealest  aught  from  our  knowledge.  Learn  that  there  are 
certain  incapacities  and  defects  which  render  a  person  unfit 
for  admission  into  our  order.  Moreover,  when  before  the 
assembly  thou  art  interrogated  respecting  such  defects,  thou 
art  to  answer  truly  and  declare  what  incapacities  thou 
mayest  labour  under.  Now  this  is  not  the  time  to  remain 
silent  and  decline  thy  head  ;  every  member  of  the  assembly 
has  a  right  to  interrogate  thee  at  his  pleasure,  and  it  is  thy 
bounden  duty  to  return  an  answer  to  all  his  questions. 

"  Candidate !  Art  thou  affected  with  leprosy  or  any  such 
odious  malady?  Hast  thou  scrofula  or  any  similar 
complaint  ?  Dost  thou  suffer  from  asthma  or  cough  ?  Art 
thou   affected  with    those   complaints    which    arise    from   a 


XII         THE  NOBLE  ORDER  OF  THE   YELLOW  ROBE       115 

corrupted  blood  ?  Art  thou  afflicted  by  madness  or  other 
ills  caused  by  giants,  witches,  or  the  evil  spirits  of  the  forests 
or  mountains  ? " 

To  each  question  the  candidate  answers — 

"  From  such  complaints  and  bodily  disorders  I  am  free." 

The  examination  continues  : 

"  Art  thou  a  man  ?  " 

"  I  am.- 

"  Art  thou  a  true  and  legitimate  son  ?  " 

"  I  am." 

"  Art  thou  involved  in  debts  ?  " 

"  I  am  not." 

"  Art  thou  the  bondman  and  underling  of  some  great 
man  ?  " 

"  I  am  not." 

"  Have  thy  parents  given  their  consent  to  thy  ordination  ?  " 

"  They  have." 

"  Hast  thou  reached  the  age  of  twenty  years  ? " 

"  I  have." 

"  Are  thy  vestments  and  sacred  begging-bowl  prepared  ?  " 

«  They  are." 

"  Candidate,  what  is  thy  name  ?  " 

"  Wago  (a  vile  and  unworthy  being)." 

"  What  is  the  name  of  thy  master  ?  " 

"  His  name  is  upyitsi." 

The  assistant  then  turns  to  the  assembled  yahans  and  says : 

"  Venerable  upyitsi,  and  ye  assembled  brethren,  be  pleased 
to  listen  to  my  words.  I  have  duly  admonished  this  candidate 
who  seeks  from  you  admission  to  our  order.  Does  the 
present  moment  appear  to  you  a  meet  and  a  fit  one  for  his 
admission  ?      If  so,  I  will  order  him  to  approach." 

The  fathers  remaining  silent,  the  assistant  instructs  the 
postulant  to  go  close  to  the  assembly  and  to  ask  that  he  may 
be  received.  The  candidate  approaches  the  assembly,  and 
sitting  before  them  in  a  respectful  attitude,  resting  on  his 
heels,  raises  his  joined  hands  and  says  three  times,  "  I  beg, 
O  fathers  of  this  assembly,  to  be  admitted  as  yahan.  Have 
pity  on  me,  take  me  from  my  present  state  of  a  layman, 
which  is  one  of  sin  and  imperfection,  advance  me  to  that  of 
yahan,  which  is  one  of  virtue  and  perfection."  !" 


Ii6  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

The  assistant  then  addresses  the  council  and  says : 

"  O  ye  fathers  here  assembled,  hear  my  words.  This 
candidate,  humbly  prostrated  before  you,  begs  of  the  upyitsi 
to  be  admitted  among  us ;  he  is  free  from  all  defects, 
corporeal  infirmities,  and  mental  incapacities  that  would 
otherwise  debar  him  from  entering  our  holy  state ;  he  is 
provided  with  the  patta  and  holy  vestments,  and  he  has  duly 
asked  the  assembly  in  the  name  of  the  upyitsi  for  per- 
mission to  be  admitted.  Now,  therefore,  let  the  assembled 
fathers  complete  his  ordination.  To  whomsoever  this  seems 
good  let  him  keep  silence ;  whosoever  thinks  otherwise,  let 
him  declare  that  the  candidate  is  unworthy  of  admission." 

This  he  repeats  thrice,  and  then  continues  : 

"  Since  then  none  of  the  fathers  object,  but  all  are  silent, 
which  is  a  sign  that  all  have  consented,  so  therefore  let  it  be 
done.  Let  this  candidate  pass  out  of  the  state  of  sin  and 
imperfection  into  the  perfect  state  of  a  yahan,  and  thus,  by 
the  consent  of  the  upyitsi  and  all  the  fathers,  let  him  be 
received." 

The  fathers  must  note  down  under  what  shade,  on  what 
day,  at  what  hour,  and  in  what  season  the  candidate  has 
been  received. 

The  reader  of  the  Kammawa,  addressing  the  candidate, 
continues : 

"  Let  the  candidate  attend  to  the  following  account  of 
the  duties  which  are  incumbent  upon  him,  and  to  the  faults 
which  he  must  carefully  avoid  : — 

"It  is  the  duty  of  each  member  of  our  brotherhood  to 
beg  for  his  food  with  labour  and  with  the  exertion  of  the 
muscles  of  his  feet,  and  through  the  whole  course  of  his  life 
he  must  gain  his  subsistence  by  the  labour  of  his  feet  (he 
must  not  work  with  his  hands,  nor  beg  with  his  tongue). 
He  is  allowed  to  make  use  of  all  things  that  are  offered  to 
him  in  particular,  or  to  the  society  in  general,  that  are  usually 
presented  in  banquets,  that  are  sent  by  letter,  and  that  are 
given  on  the  new  and  full  moon  and  at  festivals.  O 
candidate,  all  these  things  you  may  use  for  your  food." 

Candidate.  "  Sir,  I  understand  what  you  tell  me." 

"  It  is  a  part  of  the  duty  of  a  member  of  our  society  to 
wear,  through  humility,  yellow  clothes  made  of  rags  thrown 


xii         THE  NOBLE  ORDER  OF  THE   YELLOW  ROBE       117 

about  in  the  streets  or  among  the  tombs.  If,  however,  by  his 
talent  and  virtue,  one  procures  for  himself  many  benefactors, 
he  may  receive  from  them  for  his  habit  the  following  articles, 
namely,  cotton  and  silk,  or  cloth  of  red  (of  a  Thibetan  origin) 
or  yellow  wool." 

Candidate.  "  As  I  am  instructed  so  will  I  perform." 
"  Every  member  of  the  society  must  dwell  in  a  house 
built  under  the  shade  of  lofty  trees.  But  if,  owing  to  your 
zeal  and  virtue,  you  procure  for  yourself  many  benefactors 
who  are  willing  to  build  for  you  a  better  habitation,  you  may 
dwell  in  it.  The  dwelling  may  be  made  of  bamboo,  wood, 
or  bricks,  with  roofs  adorned  with  spires  of  pyramidal  or 
triangular  form." 

Candidate.  "  I  will  duly  attend  to  these  instructions." 
"  It  is  incumbent  upon  an  elect  to  use  as  medicine  the 
urine  of  a  cow  or  of  a  black  bullock,  whereon  lime  and  the 
juice  of  a  lemon  or  other  sour  fruit  has  been  poured.  He 
may  also  use  as  medicines  articles  thrown  out  of  markets,  or 
picked  up  at  the  corners  of  streets.  He  may  accept  for 
medicinal  purposes  nutmegs  or  cloves.  The  following 
articles  also  may  be  used  medicinally— butter,  cream,  and 
honey." 

Candidate.  "  As  I  am  instructed  so  will  I  perform." 
The  newly  initiated  yahan   is  now  warned  against  the 
four  sins,  the  commission  of  any  one  of  which  would  entail 
the  loss  of  the  dignity  he  has  just  attained. 

The  Kammawa  -  saya  goes  on :  "  Elect,  being  now 
admitted  into  our  society,  it  is  no  longer  lawful  for  you  to 
indulge  in  carnal  pleasures,  whether  with  yourself  or  with 
animals.  He  who  is  guilty  of  such  a  sin  can  no  longer  be 
numbered  among  the  perfect.  Sooner  shall  the  severed 
head  be  joined  again  to  the  neck,  and  life  restored  to  the 
breathless  body,  than  a  pyin-sin  who  has  committed  fornica- 
tion recover  his  lost  sanctity.  Beware  therefore  lest  you 
pollute  yourself  with  such  a  crime." 

Candidate.  "  As  I  am  instructed  so  will  I  perform." 

"  Again,  it  is  unlawful  and  forbidden  for  an  elect  to  take 

things  that  belong  to  another,  or  even  to  covet  them,  although 

their  value  should  not  exceed  a  quarter  of  a  tical  (about  six 

annas).      Whoever  sins  even  to  that  small  amount  is  thereby 


ii8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

deprived  of  his  sacred  character,  and  can  no  more  be  restored 
to  his  pristine  state  than  the  branch  cut  from  the  tree  can 
retain  its  luxuriant  foliage  and  put  forth  buds.  Beware  of 
theft  during  the  whole  of  your  mortal  journey." 

Candidate.  "  As  I  am  instructed  so  will  I  perform." 
"  Again,  an  elect  can  never  knowingly  deprive  any  living 
being  of  life,  or  wish  the  death  of  any  one,  however  trouble- 
some he  may  prove.  Sooner  shall  the  cleft  rock  reunite  so  as 
to  make  a  whole,  than  he  who  kills  any  being  be  readmitted 
into  the  society.  Cautiously  avoid  so  heinous  a  crime." 
Candidate.  "  As  I  am  instructed  so  will  I  perform." 
"  Again,  no  member  of  our  brotherhood  can  ever  arrogate 
to  himself  extraordinary  gifts  or  supernatural  perfections,  or 
through  vainglory  give  himself  out  as  a  holy  man  ;  such,  for 
instance,  as  to  withdraw  into  solitary  places,  or  on  pretence 
of  enjoying  ecstasies  like  the  ariya,  afterwards  presume  to 
teach  others  the  way  to  uncommon  spiritual  attainments. 
Sooner  the  lofty  palm-tree  that  has  been  cut  down  can  be- 
come green  again,  than  an  elect  guilty  of  such  pride  be 
restored  to  his  holy  station.  Take  care  that  you  do  not 
give  way  to  such  an  excess." 

Candidate.  "  As  I  am  instructed  so  will  I  perform." 
(The  pyin-sin  who  commits  any  one  of  these  last  four 
sins  is  ipso  facto  excluded  from  the  society.  Nothing  can 
palliate  them.  Other  sins  may  be  atoned  for  by  penance 
and  repentance,  but  one  who  has  committed  any  one  of  these 
crimes  may  indeed,  if  undetected,  remain  a  member  of  the 
order,  but  inwardly  he  no  longer  belongs  to  it.  He  has 
become  a  living  lie.) 

These  denunciations  end  the  ceremony.  The  newly 
made  yahan  falls  in  with  the  rest,  and  on  the  rising  of  the 
council  proceeds,  in  company  with  them,  to  his  own  monas- 
tery. It  is  thus  clearly  seen  that  the  mendicant  receives  no 
spiritual  powers  whatever.  He  simply  becomes  a  member 
of  a  holy  society  that  he  himself  may  observe  the  laws  of 
the  Master  more  perfectly.  He  has  nothing  to  do  with 
guiding  his  fellow-monks  or  the  laity.  The  latter  indeed 
may  gain  for  themselves  easy  merit  by  pressing  alms  upon 
him,  but  that  can  hardly  be  said  to  be  a  merit  in  the  pyin-sin. 


XII         THE  NOBLE  ORDER  OF  THE  YELLOW  ROBE       119 

They  may  also  go  and  consult  him,  and  he  will  read 
portions  of  the  Law,  and  explain  them  as  far  as  his  learning 
permits.  He  occasionally  reads  the  Law  aloud  in  a  rest- 
house  near  the  pagoda  on  a  feast  day  ;  goes  to  a  funeral,  that 
the  pious  may  have  an  opportunity  of  giving  him  presents, 
and  so  laying  up  a  good  store  towards  the  kan  of  a  future 
existence.  But  it  is  the  teaching  of  the  youth  of  the 
country  that  is  his  chief  credit,  and  it  is  this  that  binds  the 
country  to  the  support  of  the  monastic  system. 

Sometimes  after  the  ritual  of  the  Kammawa  has  been 
gone  through,  the  sponsor  of  the  elected  pyin-sin  stands  up 
and  reads  a  selection  from  the  full  rule  of  the  order,  which 
contains  227  precepts.  This  is  called  the  Patimauk,  or 
Book  of  the  Enfranchisement,  and  its  composition  is  attri- 
buted to  the  Lord  Buddha  himself;  but  it  is  much  more 
probably,  indeed  certainly,  like  the  Kammawasa,  the  slow 
growth  and  production  of  a  long  series  of  observant  apostles. 
Every  possible  action  of  the  pyin-sin  during  the  day  is 
anticipated,  and  the  precise  way  in  which  it  should  be 
performed  carefully  set  forth.  The  sins  he  may  commit 
are  divided  under  seven  main  heads,  of  which  the  first,  called 
Parazikan,  comprises  the  four  cardinal  sins  mentioned  above. 
The  others  may  be  atoned  for  by  confession  to  the  kyaung- 
pogo  or  saya,  who  appoints  a  penance  or  not  as  he  thinks 
fit.  The  punishments  are  not  severe  in  character,  and  are 
usually  to  water  the  sacred  trees,  to  sweep  out  the  rooms, 
to  walk  for  a  stated  time  in  the  heat  of  the  sun,  to  carry  a 
number  of  baskets  of  earth  from  one  place  to  another,  to 
sleep  without  a  pillow,  or  to  keep  a  vigil  by  night  in  a 
churchyard.  But  a  series  of  infractions  of  the  law  would 
meet  with  very  severe  treatment,  if  not  from  the  heads  of  the 
monastery,  then  from  the  mass  of  the  people  outside.  If  a 
pyin-sin  committed  any  one  of  the  four  cardinal  sins,  he 
would  most  assuredly  be  unfrocked  and  turned  out  of  the 
monastery  doors  to  the  mercy  of  the  people,  and  they  would 
certainly  stone  him,  and  perhaps  even  put  him  to  death. 
Such  lapses,  and  even  the  commission  of  more  venial  offences, 
are  very  rare,  for  the  weak-minded  yahan  is  always  free  to 
turn  layman  whenever  he  chooses,  without  consulting  any 
one  but  himself  and  his  frailties. 


120  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

The  ceremony  of  excommunication,  thabeit  hmauk 
(literally,  inverting  the  alms-bowl),  is  sufficiently  solemn. 
The  monks  gather  in  a  circle  round  the  culprit,  and  the 
latter  part  of  the  Kammawa,  that  which  is  read  to  drive 
sickness  and  evil  spirits  out  of  a  town,  is  gravely  recited  by 
the  abbot,  the  surrounding  brethren  responding  at  the  end 
of  each  sentence.  When  it  is  finished,  his  yellow  robes  are 
taken  off  him,  his  alms-bowl  is  turned  mouth  downwards,  and 
he  is  hurried  out  of  the  monastery  limits.  His  condition  is 
pitiable.  No  one  may  speak  to  him  ;  no  monk  will  take 
alms  from  him ;  he  can  neither  buy  nor  sell  ;  he  is  not 
allowed  even  to  draw  water  from  a  well,  or  drink  from  the 
jars  at  a  wayside  zayat.  He  is  as  much  an  outcast  as  any 
pagoda  slave,  and  grievous  is  the  penance  he  must  go 
through  before  he  is  once  more  received  into  the  society 
even  of  laymen.  It  occasionally  happens  when  there  is  much 
evil  living  in  a  district,  or  if  the  people  are  lax  in  their 
religious  observances,  that  the  brethren  of  the  kyaung  put 
the  neighbourhood  under  a  ban  by  inverting  their  alms- 
bowls,  and  refusing  to  go  out  begging.  There  is  no  greater 
proof  of  the  power  of  the  assembly  than  the  rapidity  with 
which  this  effects  its  purpose.  The  most  careless  are  brought 
to  a  sense  of  their  sinfulness  in  a  few  days.  Such  excom- 
munication is,  however,  more  and  more  rare. 

Before  the  death  of  the  Lord  Buddha,  the  yahans  all 
addressed  one  another  as  awutthaw ;  but  after  he  had 
attained  the  ne'ban  of  khan -das  under  the  eng-gyin-bin 
{Shorea  robusta),  a  recognition  of  relative  rank  was  instituted. 
The  inferiors,  we  are  told,  called  the  more  advanced  in  the 
order,  bante,  while  the  juniors  were  addressed  in  their  turn, 
by  their  proper  name,  or  that  of  their  family.  In  Burma, 
however,  this  regulation  prevails  only  to  a  very  slight  extent. 
With  the  mendicants,  as  with  the  royalty,  and  indeed  with 
the  populace  at  large,  it  is  considered  uncivil  to  mention  a 
person's  name  in  conversation,  and  his  rank,  or  the  kyaung 
he  belongs  to,  is  used  instead,  or  perhaps  only  the  designa- 
tion of  his  sacred  profession.  The  laity  indiscriminately 
address  all  wearers  of  the  yellow  robe  as  paya  (lord). 

Similarly  the  "  punishment  of  Brahma,"  recommended  by 
the  great  master  to  be  employed  against  weaker  brethren,  is 


xn         THE  NOBLE  ORDER  OF  THE  YELLOW  ROBE       121 

little  used.  This  punishment  was  calculated  to  isolate  the 
offending  brother.  The  other  yahans  were  to  avoid  speak- 
ing to  him,  to  the  extent  of  not  even  uttering  a  rebuke,  if  he 
indulged  in  indiscreet  talk.  Nowadays,  when  one  pyin-sin 
is  irritated  with  another,  he  does  not  indeed  talk  to  him,  or 
go  and  abuse  him,  but  he  advises  the  people  to  have  nothing 
to  do  with  him,  and  give  him  no  alms. 

Indeed  many  laxities  have  crept  in.  Some  casuists 
evade  the  rule  against  touching  gold  and  silver.  It  is  be- 
coming lamentably  common  for  monks,  otherwise  eminently 
pious  and  worthy  of  respect,  not  only  not  to  refuse  money, 
but  actually  to  receive  it  with  their  own  hands — covered 
with  a  handkerchief.  Such  unprincipled  playing  with  the 
letter  of  the  law  is  vehemently  denounced  by  the  Sulagandi, 
and  disliked  by  the  more  earnest  laymen,  even  when  the 
pyin-sin  does  not  personally  shave  so  close  to  the  wind,  but 
bids  one  of  his  schoolboys  take  the  coin  and  put  it  in  the 
box.  Of  a  piece  with  this  is  the  roundabout  way  of  getting 
anything  the  monk  may  especially  desire.  He  may  not 
directly  ask  for  anything,  if  it  were  even  food  to  save  him 
from  starvation,  far  less  must  he  bargain  for  the  object  he 
wishes.  Therefore  an  elaborate  method  of  exchange  has 
been  invented  by  a  yahan  in  whom  the  passion  of  covetous- 
ness  was  far  from  being  extinguished.  He  says,  such  and 
such  a  thing  "  is  useless  to  me  ;  but  what  is  the  value  of 
that?  I  have  begging- bowls,  iron,  clay,  and  lacquer  in 
abundance,  but  my  robe  is  sadly  worn  and  discoloured. 
That  thengan  is  seemly  and  suitable  for  a  holy  man.  Thrice 
blessed  is  he  that  giveth  alms,  his  merit  will  wax  great." 
Very  often  he  thus  gets  the  thing  he  wants  without  having 
to  part  with  previous  alms-gifts.  Others,  perhaps,  a  little 
more  scrupulous,  mention  to  the  kappiyadayaka,  the  manciple 
of  the  kyaung,  that  they  would  be  glad  to  have  such  and 
such  a  thing,  and  he  provides  it  out  of  the  monastic  funds. 
All  this  trifling  with  the  spirit  of  the  patimauk  is,  however, 
strenuously  denounced  by  the  Sulagandi,  who  in  Lower 
Burma  have  gathered  a  large  proportion  of  the  more  right- 
thinking  of  the  laity  to  their  side. 

Some  of  the  regulations  of  the  Book  of  the  Enfranchise- 
ment are  very  singular,  but  all  may  be  traced  to  some  one 


122  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

of  the  fundamental  precepts,  and  are  not  so  ludicrous  as  some 
unbelievers  would  make  out,  except  for  the  fact  that  they 
are  set  down  so  precisely  when  they  might  have  been  left  to 
the  imagination. 

A  monk  must  not  build  a  monastery  for  himself  without 
the  aid  of  a  benefactor.  If  his  piety  and  talents  are  not 
such  as  to  induce  a  layman  to  build  a  kyaung  for  him,  let 
him  patiently  remain  in  the  house  into  which  he  was 
ordained.  He  must  see  that  the  foundations  of  a  monastery 
are  not  laid  in  a  place  where  there  are  many  insects  or 
worms,  which  would  thus  be  killed. 

For  a  similar  reason  he  must  not  dig  himself,  except  in 
a  sandy  place,  where  there  can  be  no  animal  life.  Neither 
must  he  spit,  nor  do  anything  of  that  kind  on  green  grass, 
nor  in  fresh  water,  nor  is  he  allowed  to  climb  trees.  There 
was  a  discussion  in  the  Lord  Buddha's  time  as  to  whether 
vegetation  could  be  regarded  as  anyv/here  in  the  ladder  of 
existence.  Shin  Gautama,  on  being  asked,  said  it  could  not. 
Still  trees  and  grass  must  not  be  destroyed,  for  they  support 
life  in  other  creatures.  A  yahan  may  not  drive  in  a  carriage 
or  ride  a  pony.  He  must  not  travel  in  the  same  boat  or 
remain  under  the  same  roof  with  a  woman,  or  even  with  a 
female  animal.  When  he  walks  abroad  he  must  neither 
walk  fast  nor  dawdle  and  lounge  about  the  streets.  He  must 
allow  no  woman  to  wash  or  clean  his  robes,  nor  eat  food 
cooked  by  female  hands,  if  he  can  get  any  other  ;  if  a  woman 
offers  rice  in  her  hand,  he  may  take  but  not  eat  it.  He  must 
not  look  into  a  brother's  thabeit,  as  suggesting  that  he  does 
not  receive  much  alms.  He  must  not  eat  his  food  to  the 
last  mouthful,  and  must  avoid  highly -seasoned  dishes  as 
tending  to  heat  the  blood. 

In  return  for  their  self-denial  the  pyin-sin  are  bountifully 
honoured  by  the  people,  from  the  sovereign  on  the  throne, 
who  vacates  his  seat  for  the  tha-thana-baing,  to  the  beggar 
in  the  street  who  prostrates  himself  in  the  dust  when  the 
yahan  passes  by.  In  the  country  villages  all  make  obeisance 
when  the  mendicant  passes,  and  the  women  kneel  down  on 
each  side  of  the  road.  Such  outward  marks  of  respect  are 
not  usual  in  the  larger  towns,  but  there  is  no  lack  of  venera- 
tion, and  all  make  way  for  the  monk  when  he  walks  abroad. 


XII         THE  NOBLE  ORDER  OF  THE  YELLOW  ROBE        123 

The  oldest  layman  assumes  the  title  of  disciple  to  the  last 
inducted  pyin-sin,  and,  with  clasped  hands,  addresses  him  as 
paya,  the  highest  title  the  language  affords.  The  monk's 
commonest  actions,  walking,  eating,  sleeping,  are  referred  to 
in  honorific  language,  different  from  that  which  would  be 
used  of  a  layman,  or  even  of  the  king,  performing  the  same 
thing.  The  highest  officials  bow  down  before  them,  and 
impose  upon  themselves  the  greatest  sacrifices,  both  of  time 
and  money,  to  build  splendid  kyaungs  for  them,  and  minister 
to  their  wants.  Finally,  the  monk's  person  is  sacred  and 
inviolable.  Nothing  he  does  can  subject  him  to  the  civil 
law.  He  bears  the  title  of  Thagiwin  Mintha,  Thagiwin 
Prince,  as  the  heir  of  the  scion  of  Kapilawut,  and  receiver  of 
his  inheritance. 


CHAPTER    XIII 

THE    MONASTERIES 

Outside  every  village  in  Burma,  no  matter  how  small,  there 
stands  a  pdngyi  kyaung.  There  may  have  been  no  one 
wealthy  enough,  or  zealous  enough,  to  build  a  pagoda,  or 
the  proximity  of  some  ancient  and  eminently  famous  shrine 
may  have  rendered  unnecessary  a  general  subscription  for 
such  a  purpose,  but  there  is  always  a  building  for  the  mendi- 
cants. Away  from  the  noise  of  the  people — for  the  monastery 
must  not  have  secular  houses  near  it — surrounded  by  great, 
well-foliaged  trees,  tamarinds,  mangoes,  jacks,  cocoa-nut,  and 
areca,  and  palmyra  palms,  s^l  trees,  and  the  tha-bye-bin,  to 
shield  them  from  the  heat  and  supply  them  with  fruit,  the 
monks'  position  is  well  calculated  to  attract  those  who  are 
tired  of  the  tumult  and  bickerings  and  sorrows  of  the  world. 
There  the  pyin-sin  pass  their  time  without  a  care  to  ruffle 
the  tranquil  current  of  their  lives  ;  without  trouble  as  to  their 
food,  for  a  pious  and  kindly  population  supplies  them  far 
beyond  their  wants  ;  with  no  irksome  duties,  for  nothing  is 
required  of  them  in  return  ;  with  no  care  but  how  to  get 
through  the  day  with  as  little  trouble  and  ennui  as  possible ; 
seeking  nothing  but  the  fulfilment  of  the  Law,  and  the  path 
to  eventual  deliverance  from  the  misery  of  ever -recurring 
existences ;  no  wonder  many  novices  come  to  like  the  ways 
of  the  religious  house  and  yearly  swell  the  ranks  of  the 
order,  so  that  there  are  no  signs,  two  thousand  five  hundred 
years  after  the  founding  of  the  religion,  of  any  weakening  of 
its  strength. 

The  first  beikkus  dwelt  under  the  shade  of  the  forest 
trees,  or  perhaps  in  small  huts  erected  there  to  shelter  them 

124 


CHAP,  xin  THE  MONASTERIES  125 

from  the  pitiless  sun  and  the  raging  of  the  storms.     This  is 
the    explanation   of  the   circumstance   that  every   Budh   is 
specially  connected  with  some  tree,  as  Shin  Gautama  with 
the  bawdi-bin,  the  banyan,  under  which  he  attained  his  full 
dignity,   and   the   eng-gyin-bin,   the    Shorea   robusta,   under 
which  he  was  born  and  died,  and,  as  we  are  told,  the  last 
Budh  of  this  world  cycle,  Arimadeya,  will  receive  his  Buddha- 
ship  under  the  Mesua  ferrea.      Hence  the  regard  for  trees 
which    the    Burmans    share  with    so   many   other    nations, 
ancient  and  modern,  and  the  fact  that  a  clump  of  palmyras 
and   tamarinds   seen   in  the   distance    infallibly  suggests   a 
monastery.      It  is  not  to  be  supposed,  however,  that  it  was 
the  intention   of  the   Lord   Buddha  that   the  sacred   order 
should  remain  far  away  from  mankind  in  lonesome  huts  in 
the  depths  of  the  forest.     Very  early  in  his  teaching,  kings, 
nobles,  and  wealthy  men  vied  with  one  another  in  erecting 
spacious  and  magnificent  dwellings  for  the  Budh  himself  and 
his  disciples.      Most  noted  among  these  were  the  Zetawun 
Monastery,  built  by  the  rich  man  Anatabein,  within  which 
the  celebrated  Mingala  Thot  sermon  was  preached  by  the 
Buddha  to  a  pious-minded   d^wa ;   the  P6ppay6n  Kyaiung 
and  that  of  Weluwun  built  by  the  wealthy  dame  Withaka 
and  King  Bimbathara  of  Razagyo,  to  both  of  which  Shin 
Gautama  frequently  retired   to  spend   the  rainy  season  of 
Lent.      These  were   all   magnificently  adorned ;    and   it  is 
expressly  mentioned  that  the  pious  need  spare  themselves 
no   expense   in    constructing   and    adorning    such    religious 
buildings,  though  the  inhabitant  of  the   most  gorgeous  of 
them    dresses    in    no    way    differently    from    the    humblest 
anchorite,  and  has  no  more  costly  utensils. 

Ordinarily  the  monastery  is  built  of  teak,  though  in 
many  places,  both  in  Mandalay  and  Lower  Burma,  brick 
buildings  are  being  erected,  notwithstanding  the  prejudice 
that  exists  against  them  from  their  greater  liability  to 
damage  in  the  case  of  earthquakes.  The  shape  is  always 
oblong,  and  the  inhabited  portion  is  raised  on  posts  or  pillars, 
some  eight  or  ten  feet  above  the  ground.  They  are,  like  all 
the  other  houses  in  the  country,  never  more  than  one  story 
high  ;  for  if  it  is  an  indignity  to  a  layman  to  have  any  one 
over  his  head,  it   is   much   more   so  to  a  member   of   the 


126  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

brotherhood.  The  space  between  the  ground  and  the  floor 
of  the  kyaung  is  always  kept  open  and  is  never  used  except 
by  the  school-boys,  who  have  not  arrived  at  notions  of 
personal  dignity,  and  find  the  locality  retired  and  convenient 
for  games  at  g6n-nyin-to,  and  the  discussion  of  forbidden 
eatables,  or  subjects  of  conversation.  There  are  always  a 
few  pariah  dogs  there  too,  dozing  off  the  surfeit  of  food  they 
have  had  from  the  morning  begging-pots,  or  the  offerings  at 
the  pagoda.  A  flight  of  steps  of  stone  or  wood  leads  up  to 
the  verandah,  which  extends  all  along  the  north  and  south 
sides,  and  frequently  all  round  the  building.  If  the  steps 
are  of  stone,  or  rather  brickwork  covered  with  plaster,  they 
are  usually  adorned  at  the  foot  by  propylsea  in  the  shape  of 
two  bilus,  or  a  couple  of  mandt-thiha — curious  creatures, 
half  man  half  lion — usually  bold  enough  in  conception,  if 
somewhat  rough  in  execution.  Tiers  of  trefoil  heads  usually 
characterise  the  parapets  when  they  are  of  mason -work. 
When  the  ladder  is  of  wood  it  is  covered  with  spirited  carving 
in  deep  relief,  representing  nats  and  ogres,  dancing  figures 
and  grim  warriors,  with  abundant  scroll-work  as  everywhere 
else  throughout  the  building. 

From  the  raised  floor  thus  reached,  rises  the  building, 
with  tier  upon  tier  of  dark  massive  roofs,  giving  the  appear- 
ance of  many  stories  when  there  is  actually  but  one,  for  the 
reason  already  mentioned.  This  style  of  roofing  was  allowed 
only  for  religious  buildings,  for  the  royal  palaces,  and  for  the 
houses  of  a  few  high  officials  who  acquired  the  honour  by 
special  patent,  and  with  whom  the  form  and  number  of  roofs 
was  a  matter  of  regulation  settled  by  the  sumptuary  laws. 
Under  British  rule  it  is  practically  confined  to  monastic 
buildings  and  the  houses  of  feudatory  chiefs.  This  spire- 
like style  of  roof  is  called  pyathat,  and  properly  there  are 
but  three  kinds :  with  three  super-imposed  roofs  called 
yama,  with  five  roofs  called  thuba,  and  with  seven,  as  the 
royal  palace  and  the  most  sacred  kyaungs,  called  thuyama. 
The  ends  of  the  gables  are  adorned  with  pinnacles  or  finials, 
each  with  a  curious  wooden  flag  at  the  top  and  crowned 
with  a  hti,  gilt  and  furnished  with  bells,  copper,  silver,  or 
gold,  the  whole  being  elaborately  carved.  The  triple,  quin- 
tuple, and  septuple  roofs  of  the  monastic  hcwses,  with  their 


xiii  THE  MONASTERIES  127 

elaborate  adornments,  there  is  little  doubt  found  their  origin 
in  the  opportunity  which  wood  gave  for  the  development  of 
ornament  in  the  way  of  carving.  If  the  wooden  monasteries 
are  compared  with  the  strikingly  similar  wooden  churches  in 
Norway — at  Hitterdal,  for  example,  or  Borgund — we  have  a 
proof  that  nature,  under  like  circumstances,  always  produces 
like  results  from  human  ingenuity.  It  may  be  added  that 
the  simple  tumulus,  which  was  the  original  idea  of  the  bell- 
pagoda,  is  also  found  in  the  Scandinavian  haug. 

The  kyaung  accommodation  is  very  simple.  It  consists 
in  the  main  of  a  great  central  hall  divided  into  two  portions, 
one  level  with  the  verandah  where  the  scholars  are  taught, 
and  most  of  the  duties  of  the  monastery  carried  on,  and  the 
other  a  raised  dais,  two  feet  or  so  above  the  level  of  the  rest 
of  the  building.  Seated  upon  this  the  yahans  are  accustomed 
to  receive  visitors,  and  at  the  back,  against  the  wall,  are 
arranged  the  images  of  Buddha,  a  large  one  usually  standing 
in  the  centre  on  a  kind  of  altar  with  candles,  flowers,  pray- 
ing flags,  and  other  offerings  placed  before  it,  and  on  shelves 
alongside  a  number  of  smaller  figures  of  gold,  silver, 
alabaster,  clay  or  wood,  according  to  the  popularity  of  the 
kyaung  and  the  faith  of  the  neighbourhood.  Close  by  are 
placed  also  the  manuscript  chests,  sadaiks,  small  shrines, 
models  in  wood  of  monasteries  and  pagodas,  the  fans  and 
other  religious  implements  of  the  pyin-sin  and  the  gifts  of 
the  pious,  heaped  together  ordinarily  in  very  careless  fashion. 
The  central  image  is  almost  invariably  placed  on  the  eastern 
side  of  the  building.  There  are  occasionally  dormitories  for 
the  monks,  but  as  a  rule  they  sleep  in  the  central  hall, 
where  the  mats  which  form  their  beds  may  be  seen  rolled  up 
round  the  pillow  against  the  wall.  In  many  monasteries 
there  is  a  special  room  for  the  palm-leaf  scribes,  often 
detached  from  the  main  building,  as  are  the  cook-room  and 
the  bathing-houses. 

The  whole  area  of  the  extensive  compound  in  which  the 
monastery  stands  is  enclosed  by  a  heavy  teak  fence  with 
massive  squared  posts  and  rails,  seven  or  eight  feet  high. 
All  within  this  parawun  is  sacred  ground,  and  the  laity,  when 
they  enter,  take  off  their  shoes  and  carry  them  in  their  hands. 
This  rule  applies  to  the  highest  in   the  land,  and  when  a 


128  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap, 

Shan  prince  or  a  high  official  arrives  on  his  elephant,  he 
must  dismount  at  the  monastery  gate,  and  come  in  reverently 
barefooted.  Within  the  one  encircling  fence  there  may  be, 
and  usually  are,  quite  a  number  of  separate  buildings  like 
that  described,  with  their  ecclesiastical  roofs  towering  up, 
dark,  or  glittering  with  gold-leaf  among  the  bright  green 
foliage  of  the  pipul  and  tamarind  trees.  Each  house  has  a 
prior  or  superior,  with  his  two  or  three  brethren,  and  a  certain 
number  of  probationers  and  scholars,  and  in  the  central 
building  dwells  the  gaing-6k,  or  sadaw.  In  a  corner  of  the 
compound,  or  just  outside,  there  is  almost  always  a  thein,  a 
building  for  the  performance  of  various  rites  and  ceremonies,, 
more  particularly  for  the  examination  and  ordination  of 
yahans.  The  ground  on  which  these  stand  is  not  only  holy 
now,  but  has  always  been  so  since  the  Lord  Buddha  first 
preached  the  Law.  When  a  new  thein  is  to  be  built  it  is 
usually  found  possible  to  exhume  the  remains  of  an  old  build- 
ing of  the  same  kind,  thus  proving  the  immemorial  sanctity 
of  the  site.  Otherwise  the  ground  is  dedicated  to  religion 
in  perpetuity.  The  consecration  of  the  ground  is,  however, 
rare  in  these  latter  times,  though  several  times  the  British 
Government  has  been  asked  to  make  a  formal  grant  of  land, 
to  be  used  for  religious  purposes.  Not  far  from  Rangoon, 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Kyaik-ka-san  pagoda,  there  is 
a  thein-gyi,  regarded  as  particularly  holy,  from  the  tradition 
that  it  is  built  over  the  remains  of  one  of  the  yahanda, 
who  brought  the  remains  of  Shin  Gautama  to  Rangoon. 

Within  the  monastery  precincts  are  usually,  also,  one  or 
two  tasaungs,  highly  ornamented  tectums,  erected  over  an 
image  of  the  Buddha.  Very  many  zealous  priors  put  up 
marble  stones,  or  finger-posts,  at  certain  points  beyond  the 
Parawun,  with  inscriptions  on  them  to  the  effect  that  U 
Adeisa's  or  Pyinyazawta's  monastery  is  to  the  westward,  or 
southward,  and  you  must  not  kill  animals  or  conduct  your- 
self in  an  unseemly  manner  near  it.  It  is  the  ignoring  or 
the  ignorance  of  this  injunction  which  has  brought  many 
sporting  Englishmen  into  trouble,  and  led  them  to  believe 
that  the  yahans  condemn  shooting  altogether,  and  lay  them- 
selves out  to  thwart  it ;  whereas  the  intention  is  only  to 
avoid  witnessing,  if  possible,  what  they  regard  as  a  flagrant 


XIII  THE  MONASTERIES  129 

sin,  and  especially  to  protect  the  pigeons,  which  usually 
flock  about  the  monastic  trees.  Not  many  people  in 
England  would  think  of  going  to  shoot  in  a  churchyard. 

The  majority  of  kyaungs  in  the  jungle  and  in  the  smaller 
towns  are  plain  teak  wood,  or  brick  and  lime  structures, 
with  more  or  less  ornate  carving  and  moulding,  and  interior 
decorations ;  but  to  see  the  really  gorgeous  ecclesiastical 
buildings  one  must  journey  to  Mandalay.  There  the 
Kyaung-daw-gyi,  the  Royal  Monastery,  is  the  most  striking 
collection  of  edifices  of  their  kind  to  be  seen  in  the  world. 
At  the  foot  of  Mandalay  Hill,  just  outside  the  eastern  gate 
of  the  city,  it  extends  over  an  area  of  a  good  many  acres. 
Every  building  in  it  is  magnificent ;  every  inch  carved  with 
the  ingenuity  of  a  Chinese  toy  ;  the  whole  ablaze  with  gold- 
leaf  and  a  mosaic  of  fragments  of  looking-glass,  embedded 
in  a  resinous  gum,  while  the  zinc  roofs  glisten  like  silver  in 
the  sun,  and  the  golden  bells  on  the  gable  spires  tinkle 
melodiously  with  every  breeze.  The  huge  posts  are  gilt  all 
over,  or  covered  with  a  red  lacquer  ;  the  eaves  and  gables 
represent  all  kinds  of  fantastic  and  grotesque  figures.  The 
interior  is  no  less  elaborate,  the  panels  of  wall  and  ceiling 
are  some  carved,  some  diapered  with  the  mosaic  mirror  work, 
glistening  like  polished  metal  with  a  rough  gold  mesh  net 
thrown  over  it.  The  wood-carving  is  particularly  fine  ;  the 
effect  in  some  places,  where  the  birds,  pecking,  taking  wing, 
alighting,  and  in  every  other  variety  of  attitude,  are  so  cut 
as  to  appear  to  underlie  the  profuse  flower  tracery, 
being  especially  clever.  The  amount  of  gilding,  spread 
thickly  over  every  part  of  the  kyaung,  alone  represents 
many  hundred  pounds.  Singular  from  its  plain  unadorned 
appearance  is  the  high,  brown  teak -wood  tower  in  one  corner, 
to  which  the  Sadaw-gyi  and  his  monks  occasionally  with- 
draw, to  devote  themselves  to  contemplation  and  the  task  of 
learning  to  know  themselves  and  the  khandas,  as  well  as  the 
Seit  and  the  Seikdathit.  For  this  withdrawal  from  their 
gorgeous  surroundings,  to  indulge  in  abstract  thought,  they 
have  the  example  and  precept  of  the  Lord  Buddha  himself, 
who,  even  when  he  reposed  as  a  babe  on  the  bosom  of  his 
aunt  Gautami,  gave  himself  over  to  contemplation. 

The  whole  of  the  flat  land  between  Mandalay  Hill  and 

K 


I30  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


the  city  walls  was  formerly  covered  with  monasteries,  each 
of  them  standing  separate  and  enclosed  within  its  own 
parawun,  and  almost  all  presided  over  by  a  sadaw,  a  monk 
of  the  highest  rank.  They  were  thus  entirely  independent 
of  each  other.  One  of  the  most  interesting  for  English- 
men is  the  Thiho  Talk,  the  "  Ceylon  Monastery,"  presided 
over  by  Lingayama,  a  sadaw  who  was  in  great  favour  with 
Minddn  Min,  the  last  king  but  one.  The  term  talk  is 
always  applied  to  a  "  bishop's  monastery,"  as  implying  that 
his  is  the  chief  of  a  number  of  kyaungs,  all  under  his  care, 
and  in  which  he  makes  occasional  sojourns.  The  Thiho 
Talk  is  peculiar  for  its  trim  appearance.  It  is  very  new ; 
the  under  part  of  all  the  buildings  is  of  brick  ;  the  com- 
pound is  kept  scrupulously  clean  ;  there  is  not  a  single  large 
tree  in  it,  and  the  parawun  is  a  neat  sawn -wood  fence, 
instead  of  being,  as  is  the  case  almost  everywhere  else,  com- 
posed simply  of  huge  stems  of  trees  placed  side  by  side  in 
the  ground.  The  sadaw  himself  is  a  very  enlightened  man. 
He  has  been  several  times  to  Rangoon  to  worship  at  the 
Great  Pagoda,  and  to  decide  on  questions  in  dispute.  He 
has,  in  his  library,  copies  of  the  English  Scriptures  in  the 
Burmese  version  of  Judson,  and  has  read  them  through. 
Numbers  of  American  Baptists'  tracts,  and  the  sacred  books 
of  other  religions,  have  also  a  place  in  his  manuscript  chests. 
These  are  all  deposited  in  a  separate  building  standing  in 
the  middle  of  the  enclosure,  and  used  for  no  other  purpose, 
except  that  the  scribes  sit  here  making  copies  of  borrowed 
MSS.,  or  setting  down  notes  of  the  learned  bishop  himself. 
The  palm-leaf  book  is  still  universal,  and  the  work  of  making 
up  a  volume  is  therefore  very  laborious  ;  for  the  most  practised 
manipulator  cannot,  with  his  agate  style  and  light  strip  of 
palmyra-leaf,  exceed  the  speed  of  an  English  boy  who  has 
just  got  over  the  preliminary  difficulties  of  pot-hooks  and 
hangers.  The  letters  scratched  on  the  leaf  are  made  more 
distinct  by  the  application  of  crude  earth-oil.  This  serves 
to  darken  the  writing,  as  well  as  to  preserve  the  book.  The 
regular  scribes  are  always  laymen,  and  it  is  a  matter  of 
very  considerable  unpleasantness  to  the  cenobites,  that  the 
cleverest  of  them  are  very  often  uncommonly  bad  livers, 
spending  all  their  gains  in  libations  of  "  Old  Tom,"  or  little 


XIII  THE  MONASTERIES  131 

balls  of  opium.  These  vagaries  are,  however,  frequently 
winked  at,  for  a  copyist  who  can  write  neatly  and  with 
accuracy  is  far  from  being  common. 

The  Thiho  Taik  library  is  a  model  in  its  way.  It  is 
nearly  the  best  monastic  collection  in  Mandalay,  and  is 
certainly  far  better  arranged  than  any  other.  The  sadaiks, 
or  manuscript  boxes,  are  arranged  in  three  rows,  one  over 
the  other  ;  the  thdts  and  zats — the  sermons  and  birth-stories 
— of  the  Lord  Buddha  below ;  above  them  the  Cinghalese 
commentaries  and  exegeses ;  and  on  the  top  shelf  Burmese 
translations  and  the  explanations  of  various  learned  sadaws. 
Each  chest  contains  a  large  number  of  different  books,  every 
separate  collection  of  leaves  being  enclosed  between  wooden 
boards,  some  plain,  some  carved  in  high  relief,  with  figures 
of  d^was  and  demons.  Round  this  is  wrapped  a  kabalw^, 
a  square  piece  of  cloth  with  inwoven  scenes  from  the  sacred 
books,  or  portions  of  the  Law,  and  the  formulae  used  at  the 
pagoda.  Most  of  these  are  of  silk,  very  often  with  narrow 
slips  of  bamboo  worked  in  so  as  to  give  stiffness  to  the 
whole.  Instead  of  this,  or  sometimes  in  addition,  is  used 
the  sa  -  si  -  gyo,  a  riband,  about  two  fingers'  breadth,  and 
upwards  of  a  yard  in  length.  This  is  knitted  or  crocheted 
in  a  peculiarly  close  fashion,  which  puzzles  English  ladies. 
On  it  is  worked  the  name  of  the  owner,  his  titles  and  dis- 
tinctions, and  whatever  other  aspirations  he  chooses  to  add. 
They  are  very  neat,  and  quite  easy  to  read,  an  advantage 
which  does  not  always  characterise  Berlin  wool  work.  The 
king's  grants  of  forest  land,  monopolies,  and  the  like,  were 
usually  executed  in  this  way. 

All  the  boxes  are  kept  carefully  locked,  and  the  door  is 
barred  at  night,  for  such  a  library  represents  years  of  labour, 
and  could  only  with  the  greatest  difficulty  be  replaced.  It 
is  only  in  Mandalay  that  libraries  of  any  value  are  to  be 
found.  In  Lower  Burma  the  majority  of  the  kyaungs  do 
not  even  possess  a  complete  copy  of  the  three  parts  of  the 
Bitaghat,  the  Buddhist  Bible,  and  some  few  have  nothing 
beyond  a  copy  of  the  Kammawasa,  and  perhaps  a  Malla 
Lingaya  Wuttu,  a  life  of  the  Lord  Buddha,  or  something  of 
the  kind.  Many  others  have,  no  doubt,  valuable  collections, 
but  the  monks  are  ignorant,  they  cannot  read  the   books 


132  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

themselves,  and  they  do  not  care  to  exhibit  them  to  those 
who  can.  Consequently,  they  moulder  away  in  the  bottom 
of  the  sadaik,  crushed  away  into  the  darkest  corner  of  the 
main  room  of  the  monastery.  It  is,  perhaps,  not  surprising 
that  the  most  learned  monks  do  not  belong  to  the  large 
towns,  but  come  from  remote  kyaungs  in  the  depths  of  the 
jungle.  This  is  true  also  of  Upper  Burma,  for  though  the 
sadaws  in  Mandalay  are  the  most  learned  in  the  country, 
they  have  acquired  their  reputation  in  jungle  monasteries, 
and  have  only  been  summoned  to  the  royal  city  when  their 
fame  has  spread  over  the  land,  and  the  title  of  royal  teacher 
has  been  conferred  on  them. 

The  main  room  of  Lingayama's  Monastery  contains 
a  great  number  of  curiosities  collected  by  the  Burmese 
Embassies  on  their  travels  through  Europe.  Most  of  these 
were  presented  by  the  Kin  Wun-gyi,  the  head  of  the  mission, 
and  are  in  many  ways  most  interesting.  Prominent  is  a 
large  photograph  album,  emblazoned  with  the  Italian  royal 
arms  and  containing  a  fine  collection  of  views.  Another 
album  is  filled  with  cartes  of  members  of  the  Embassy, 
notably  of  the  lamented  Naingan-gyaw  Wun-dauk,  the 
portly  and  good-natured  "  Pio  Nono ''  of  the  Daily  News,  who 
seems  never  to  have  missed  being  photographed  wherever 
he  went,  and  figured  in  every  style,  from  the  penny  smudge, 
apparently  taken  on  a  country  race  -  course  or  outside 
Battersea  Park,  to  the  coloured  and  gilt  grandeur  of 
a  Neapolitan  cabinet.  The  author  of  the  Encyclopedia  of 
Burmese  Literature  had  no  notion  of  changing  the  expres- 
sion of  his  face,  however.  He  looks  stolidly  like  just  having 
had  his  dinner  in  every  impression,  and  the  multiplication 
of  photographs  serves  principally  as  a  means  of  comparing 
different  styles  of  art,  and  exhibiting  the  great  stock  of 
clothing  which  the  worthy  Wun-dauk  carried  about  with  him. 
In  addition  to  the  photographs,  there  is  a  great  collection 
of  engravings,  some  of  them  very  valuable ;  and  mixed  up 
with  these  are  to  be  found  some  very  queer  items — old  hotel 
bills,  advertisements  of  gigantic  hosiery  establishments,  with 
pictures  of  the  same  at  the  top,  circus  play-bills,  shilling 
view  guides,  some  sheets  of  the  Graphic,  the  front  page  of 
the  wrapper  of  Punch,  and  a  few  railway  tickets.     These  are 


xin  THE  MONASTERIES  133 

all  carefully  preserved,  along  with  many  other  gifts  of  the 
home-keeping  pious ;  rolls  of  yellow  cloth,  Dutch  clocks, 
betel-nut  boxes,  spare  spittoons,  and  begging-pots,  rugs,  and 
pots  of  honey.  The  Images  of  the  kyaung,  contrary  to  the 
usual  custom,  are  placed  in  a  glass  case  in  the  centre  of  the 
room,  instead  of  at  the  east  end.  This  situation  is  due  to 
their  value,  most  of  them  being  of  silver  or  gold,  and  one  or 
two  studded  with  precious  stones. 

The  Thiho  Talk  was  certainly  one  of  the  neatest  and 
most  methodically  arranged  monasteries  to  be  seen  any- 
where. Unfortunately  it  was  burnt  with  many  others  in 
the  year  of  the  Annexation.  There  were  many  more 
gorgeously  decorated,  and  still  more  that  were  larger.  The 
biggest  in  Burma  was  probably  the  Maha  Yatana  Paung- 
daw,  which  stood  near  the  great  Arakan  Pagoda  in  the 
suburbs  of  Mandalay,  and  was  in  great  part  burnt 
down  in  1879.  The  building,  with  its  encircling  platform, 
measured  440  feet  by  200,  and  was  supported  by  404 
massive  teak  trees,  none  less  than  two  feet  in  diameter,  and 
the  central  posts,  which  upheld  the  topmost  tier  of  roof, 
must  have  been  quite  eighty  feet  in  height.  Near  Maul- 
mein,  in  Lower  Burma,  there  is  another  kyaung  remarkable 
for  the  huge  girth  of  its  posts. 

The  brick  monasteries  are  commonest  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Mandalay  and  other  old  capitals.  They  are  covered 
with  chunam,  and  in  place  of  having  a  spire,  are  themselves 
built  in  the  form  of  a  pya-that,  rising  in  the  shape  of 
rectangular  terraces  to  a  considerable  height.  Round  the 
central  hall,  which  is  often  divided  by  a  gilt  railing  across 
the  centre,  are  a  number  of  cloisters  and  corridors,  which 
ensure  a  perpetual  cool  breeze.  Many  of  these  monasteries 
are  adorned  with  fresco  paintings  in  the  hall  and  in  the 
honeycomb  of  corridors,  representing  usually  scenes  from  the 
Zats,  passages  in  the  life  of  Shin  Gautama,  an  especially 
favourite  one  being  the  Jataka  of  Nemi,  where  the  pious 
prince  is  represented  as  a  white  ghostly  figure  in  a  chariot, 
passing,  like  the  pius  JEneas,  through  the  dismal  abodes  of 
hell  and  the  six  heavens  of  the  nats.  Some  other  represen- 
tations portray  the  occupations  of  daily  life,  such  as  feasting, 
hunting,  weaving,  and  the  different  nationalities  to  be  seen 


134  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

in  the  country.  A  very  common  scene  shows  the  punish- 
ment which  awaits  fishermen  in  the  next  existence.  The 
miserable  destroyer  of  animal  life  is  represented  as  dangling 
by  the  tongue  on  a  fish-hook,  while  demons  jerk  him  into 
the  air,  and  drop  him  back  into  a  lake  of  burning  pitch. 
Many  of  them  have  inscriptions  below  to  explain  the  subject 
of  the  picture.     Thus  in  Pag^n  : — 

"  When  King  Ne-bin  Min-gyi  reigned  in  Methila  over 
the  ten  governors,  according  to  the  old  books,  the  Thagya 
Min  came  from  the  nat  heavens  to  help  him." 

"  In  the  Monastery  Yatana  Shwe  -  daing,  our  Lord 
preached  the  Paten6n  Tagayo,  and  remained  several  days." 

"  Shin  Thumeda  (Gautama),  in  the  land  of  Thudawdana, 
received  the  Buddhaship  under  the  banyan  tree." 

"  Paya  Alaung  Theidat  (the  embryo  Budh,  Prince  Sid- 
dartha),  the  King's  son,  married  4000  charming  Yathe-mya." 

"  Our  Lord  rides  on  the  elephant  Nalagiri." 

And  so  on  in  great  variety.  One  also  often  finds  such 
a  notice  as  this  scrawled  on  the  wall :  "  In  order  to  be  pre- 
pared and  to  gain  happiness  in  the  seats  of  men,  of  nats, 
and  of  ne'ban,  the  rice-pots  are  set  in  order,  the  images  are 
erected,  and  the  paintings  on  the  walls  painted." 

The  monasteries  are  built,  supported,  and  furnished  by 
the  pious,  but  there  are  not  a  few  of  them  that  have  con- 
siderable sums  of  money  laid  away,  usually  under  the  control 
of  the  kappiya-dayaka,  the  layman  who  lives  in  the  kyaung, 
and  provides  for  the  wants  of  its  inmates.  A  number  of 
the  royal  fields  round  about  Aungbinle,  where  the  Burmese 
army  assembled  to  seek  victory  before  entering  on  a  cam- 
paign, were  set  apart  for  the  use  of  the  Royal  monastery  at 
Paya  Gyi,  and  the  revenues  were  kept  in  a  huge  money- 
chest,  which  was  always  under  the  care  of  a  guard  of 
soldiers.  Much  of  the  money  was  devoted  to  the  adorn- 
ment of  the  adjacent  pagoda.  None  can  be  spent  on 
embellishing  the  monastery  itself  That  would  be  as  great 
a  sin  as  if  a  monk  should  build  one  for  himself,  besides  that 
it  would  be  depriving  the  populace  of  much  opportunity  for 
gaining  merit. 

There  are  a  few  monasteries  of  the  P6nnas  here  and 
there  in  the  large  towns  throughout   the  country.     These 


xni  THE  MONASTERIES  135 

Brahmin  priests  were  originally  brought  captives  from 
Manipur,  and  have  been  employed  as  astrologers  ever  since, 
their  ranks  being  occasionally  recruited  by  new  arrivals. 
One  of  the  requests  preferred  to  Colonel  Symes  on  his 
embassy  to  Ava  in  1796  was  that  he  would  persuade  the 
Governor-General  to  send  a  learned  Brahmin  and  his  wife 
to  the  capital.  The  race  has  been  maintained  tolerably 
pure,  and  the  P6nna  is  readily  distinguishable  in  the  streets 
from  the  p6ngyi.  The  astrologers  muster  naturally  in 
greatest  force  in  Mandalay,  and  their  monastery  there  is 
situated  in  a  magnificent  grove  of  trees  south  of  the  town, 
and  close  to  the  cemeteries.  Unlike  the  native  religious, 
they  do  not  raise  their  houses  on  posts  above  the  ground, 
but  follow  the  Indian  custom  of  having  the  mat-covered 
earth  for  their  floor.  Foreigners  are  not  admitted  into  their 
temples,  but  there  is  no  objection  to  the  images  being 
brought  out  by  a  P6nna  for  exhibition  to  his  friends.  They 
worship  Krishna  and  twenty-five  other  deities,  but  have  all 
but  no  congregation,  few  of  their  faith  coming  to  Mandalay, 
and  those  laymen  who  were  carried  away  at  the  same  time  as 
themselves  into  captivity  having  turned  to  the  Buddhist  faith. 

No  yahan  is  allowed  to  have  a  separate  monastery  built 
for  him  until  he  has  spent  five  full  Wa  under  the  discipline 
of  a  prior.  These  Lents  must  also  be  consecutive.  Accord- 
ing to  their  seniority  in  this  respect  the  monks  obtain  names. 
Thus  a  pyin-sin  who  has  spent  five  years — which  of  course 
is  implied  by  the  Wa — is  called  Anuti,  and  is  a  fit  object 
for  the  pious  to  honour  by  erecting  a  special  kyaung  for  him. 
When  he  has  been  ten  years  in  the  order  he  is  addressed  as 
Myizza-ti,  and  those  who  have  remained  steadfastly  for 
twenty  years,  attain  to  the  full  honour  of  Maha-ti.  Such  a 
self-denying  man  is  always  sure  of  a  magnificent  funeral 
when  he  dies. 

It  is  a  very  good  point  about  the  life  in  the  monastery 
that  the  great  austerities  and  absurd  mortifications  of  the 
flesh  indulged  in  by  the  Brahminical  houses  find  no  place 
with  the  Buddhists,  who  reject  them  as  unnecessary  and  un- 
profitable. The  life  of  the  initiated  is  one  of  constant  self- 
denial  ;  all  superfluities  and  luxuries  are  renounced  ;  all  that 
is  calculated  to  excite  the  passions  is  forbidden  ;  but  there 


136  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

are  no  revolting  self-inflicted  penances  such  as  are  regarded 
as  meritorious  in  themselves  by  the  followers  of  the  Hindu 
creed.  Fasts  and  penitential  deeds  are  indeed  recommended 
to  those  living  in  the  world,  but  that  is  because  such  methods 
are  the  best  means  for  weakening  the  passions,  and  increasing 
the  power  of  the  spirit  as  against  the  flesh.  They  are  not  a 
part  of  perfection.  They  are  not  even  on  the  direct  way  to 
the  attainment  of  perfection.  That  is  only  to  be  achieved 
by  meditation,  by  pondering  on  the  various  aspects  of  the 
substances  and  truths  in  the  world.  Therefore  the  pyin-sin 
do  not  make  any  difference,  except  in  the  case  of  the  very 
austere,  in  the  observance  of  the  appointed  duty  days,  during 
which  it  is  incumbent  on  the  laity  to  abstain  from  food  up 
till  mid-day.  After  noontide  the  yahan  never  eats.  Con- 
siderable scandal  is  sometimes  caused  by  the  tricks  of  sundry 
of  the  weaker  vessels.  They  sit  all  day  with  their  back  to 
the  sun,  and  if  in  the  afternoon  they  feel  hungry,  they  ask  a 
scholar  if  it  is  yet  noon.  The  wily  kyaung-tha,  thinking  to 
escape  a  thrashing  on  the  morrow,  promptly  answers  that  it 
is  a  good  way  off  twelve  o'clock  yet,  and  brings  wherewithal 
to  solace  the  hungry  religious.  The  falsehood,  or  suppressio 
veri,  on  the  part  of  the  scholar  is  a  venial  offence  at  his  age, 
and  the  yahan  escapes  sin,  for  if  he  breaks  the  law  it  is 
because  he  was  deceived.  Again,  Englishmen  are  often 
puzzled  to  know,  in  a  country  where,  even  now,  clocks  are  by 
no  means  common,  and  where  they  are  found,  usually  show 
the  wrong  time,  how  it  is  that  the  people  know  what  o'clock 
it  is.  The  matter  is  simple  enough  when  the  sun  is  to  be 
seen,  for  its  course  is  pretty  nearly  the  same  all  the  year 
round,  and  the  Burman  is  tolerably  skilled  in  guessing  the 
time  from  its  height  or  from  the  length  of  the  shadows  thrown. 
But  it  is  different  during  the  rainy  season,  when  the  sun  is 
often  not  to  be  seen  for  weeks  at  a  time.  Here,  however,  so 
say  the  yahans,  whom  it  most  seriously  concerns,  a  singular 
dispensation  of  nature  steps  in  to  their  aid.  The  cocks  and 
hens  of  Buddhist  countries  are  not  as  the  tame  villatic  fowl 
of  Western  lands.  I  do  not  refer  to  their  powers  of  flying, 
which  are  sufficiently  irritating  to  hungry  life-taking  voyagers, 
but  to  the  fact  that  the  cocks  crow  at  stated  hours,  four 
times   a   day — at   sunrise,   noon,   sundown,   and    midnight. 


xin  THE  MONASTERIES  137 

They  thus  inform  the  inmates  of  the  kyaung  when  they  must 
cease  eating  for  the  day,  and  enable  them  to  obey  the  pro- 
visions of  the  Patimauk.  This  useful  acquirement  of  the 
Buddhist  chanticleer  was  acquired  in  a  singular  way.  Sundry 
books  of  the  Bedin  were  burnt  as  containing  unlawful 
cabalistic  teachings.  Among  these  was  the  A-tappana  Bedin. 
When  the  fire  had  died  out  the  barn-door  flock  came  and 
pecked  at  the  ashes,  and  so  assimilated  the  astronomic  lore 
contained  in  the  book.  I  never  had  the  opportunity  of 
watching  any  particular  cock  to  see  if  he  actually  crowed 
four  times  a  day,  at  the  times  reported.  They  fly  about  so, 
that  for  purposes  of  observation  they  might  just  as  well  be 
jungle  fowl. 

Thus  even  the  powers  of  nature  conspire  for  the  well- 
being  of  the  monks.  It  has  been  shown  how  the  laity 
provide  them  with  food  and  splendid  dwellings.  It  may  be 
unhesitatingly  asserted  that  the  most  luscious  fruits  and  the 
most  delicate  viands  all  find  their  way  to  the  monasteries. 
A  single  instance  will  show  to  what  an  extent  this  is  carried. 
In  jungle  places,  where  in  jthe  dry  season  there  is  often  a 
great  dearth  of  water,  one  spring  is  always  set  apart  for  the 
kyaung,  because  it  would  be  a  great  sin,  as  well  as  being 
unpleasant  for  the  yahan,  to  drink  water  which  had  been 
stirred  up,  and  for  that  reason  would  be  more  likely  to  con- 
tain animal  life.  This  reservation  often  compels  the  entire 
village  to  walk  a  mile  or  more  for  a  supply  of  water,  a  very 
serious  inconvenience  to  the  easy-going  Burman.  In  order 
that  strangers  and  passers-by  may  have  no  excuse  for  drink- 
ing from  the  monastic  well,  a  yellow  cloth  is  hung  over  it 
from  a  bush  or  a  post  erected  for  the  purpose.  Here  again 
a  stumbling-block  and  stone  of  offence  is  set  up  in  the  way 
of  the  ignorant  or  unreflecting  foreigner. 

Everything  near  the  monastery  is  rendered  sacred,  not 
merely  when  it  is  enclosed  in  the  parawun,  but  as  far  as  the 
prior  may  choose  to  proclaim  it.  This  is  especially  common 
in  the  case  of  the  large  tanks  or  bricked  reservoirs  which  the 
pious  dig  in  many  parts  of  the  country.  These  are  frequently 
well  stocked  with  fish  and  turtle,  and  when  the  monks 
declare  them  sacred,  the  fish  often  become  wonderfully  tame 
from  the  abundant  food   that  is  brought  them  by  yahans 


138  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

solicitous  as  to  their  welfare.  A  regular  thing  after  worship 
in  the  Arakan  Pagoda  at  Mandalay  is  to  go  and  feed  the 
great  turtle  in  the  tank  at  the  back  of  the  cloisters.  There 
are  rows  of  women  selling  balls  of  cooked  rice,  cakes,  and 
other  delicacies  which  the  pious  buy  for  the  consumption  of 
the  sacred  reptiles.  There  was  great  consternation  when,  in 
March  1879,  the  tank  dried  up  and  many  of  the  huge 
creatures  died  before  the  people  could  get  water  enough 
from  the  river,  brought  in  chatties  and  household  utensils,  to 
save  them  from  such  a  sad  fate.  The  circumstance  was 
supposed  to  be  a  sign  from  the  nat  guardians  of  the  place 
of  their  abhorrence  and  anger  at  the  shedding  of  the  royal 
blood  by  King  Theebaw  in  his  holocaust  of  February.  But 
taking  further  and  totally  innocent  life  seemed  a  rather 
singular  fashion  of  expressing  disapprobation. 

The  dog-fish  of  the  Thihadaw  Monastery,  situated  on  a 
small  island  in  the  middle  of  the  third  and  lowest  defile  of 
the  Irrawaddy,  are  particularly  celebrated,  and  having  been 
referred  to  by  every  traveller  in  Burma,  the  little  kyaung 
with  its  stone  pagoda  (one  of  the  few  of  that  material  in  the 
country)  has  become  a  regular  show-place  for  all  passengers 
to  Bhamaw.  The  great  five  -  feet  -  long,  gape  -  mouthed 
creatures  seem  to  know  their  bounds,  and  do  not  wander 
farther  than  half  a  mile  or  so  from  their  sanctuary. 

But  this  is  far  from  being  such  a  remarkable  case  as 
previous  writers  have  seemed  to  imply.  There  is  a  tank 
with  tame  fish  at  the  Maze  Monastery  near  the  Shwe  Dag6n 
pagoda  in  Rangoon.  All  monastic  tanks  have  fish  more 
or  less  tame,  according  to  the  good  nature  and  sympathies 
of  the  cenobites,  and  there  is,  or  was,  at  least  one  other 
place  on  the  Irrawaddy  where  the  fish  were  as  domestic  as 
the  dog-fish  of  Thihadaw.  This  was  near  the  Kyaik-Iat 
pagoda  and  monastery,  on  one  of  the  numerous  mouths  of 
the  great  river.  I  knew  the  place  well  years  ago,  and  then 
there  used  to  be  great  conflicts  between  the  ill-conditioned, 
impious  fishermen  and  the  monks.  The  fish  were  of  the 
species  called  nga-dan,  well  known  on  English  breakfast- 
tables  under  the  name  of  "  butter-fish,"  and  to  provide  for 
the  unscrupulous  appetites  of  the  foreigner,  people  used 
to  come  at  night  to  catch  the  unsuspecting  nga-dan.     The 


XIII  THE  MONASTERIES  139 

yahans  had  taught  the  fish  to  come  and  be  fed  when  they 
beat  on  the  bank  and  cried  Tit,  tit,  tit ;  and  it  was  easy  to 
bring  them  up  at  any  time  by  following  this  method.  The 
fishermen  came  about  midnight,  and  stamped  on  the  bank, 
and  when  the  nga-dan  came,  promptly  whisked  them  out 
with  a  landing  net.  The  scholars  and  novitiants  had  to 
take  turn  at  watching  for  these  marauders,  and  if  any  were 
discovered,  the  abbot  with  his  entire  posse  comitatus  sallied 
out  to  the  rescue  of  his  domesticated  fish.  If  the  impious 
life-taker  was  alone,  or  if  the  abbot's  was  the  stronger  party, 
the  offenders  were  incontinently  thrashed,  and  the  young 
ko-yins  wielded  their  cudgels  with  an  energy  and  knowledge 
of  tender  spots  which  ordinarily  made  the  victim  give  up 
his  vile  practices  for  the  future.  If,  however,  the  law-breakers 
were  in  force,  then  the  abbot  adopted  less  violent  tactics — 
though  it  would  have  gone  hard  with  any  hardened  sinner 
who  might  have  ventured  to  strike  a  pyin-sin.  He  simply 
sat  down  and  preached  the  Law  to  them,  recited  the  Ten 
Precepts,  enumerated  the  horrors  of  hell,  and  thus  soon 
choked  them  off  for  that  occasion  at  any  rate.  But  the 
presence  and  example  of  the  English,  and  more  especially 
their  money,  has  a  very  bad  effect  on  weak-minded,  un- 
principled men.  In  Upper  Burma  such  a  contest  between 
wrong- doers  and  the  upholders  of  the  first  of  the  Five 
Precepts  could  never  have  been  prolonged — Thihadaw, 
where  such  scandals  never  occur,  is  indeed  an  instance  of  it ; 
and  since  the  country-side  would  not  rise  to  the  aid  of  the 
pyin-sin,  they  had  to  adopt  other  measures  to  save  their 
friends  and  enjoy  peaceful  nights.  They  persuaded  a  pious 
supporter  to  dig  a  large  tank  near  the  river-bank  and  to 
connect  it  by  a  narrow  ditch  with  the  river.  Then  they 
devoted  the  results  of  a  whole  morning's  begging  to  enticing 
the  nga-dan  into  the  tank,  beating  first  at  the  mouth  of  their 
canal  and  then  all  along  the  banks  of  it,  till  they  had  got  all 
safe  in  the  tank,  which  abutted  on  the  enclosure  of  the 
kyaung.  But  alas  !  this  was  done  in  the  rainy  season,  and 
when  the  hot  weather  came  round  the  water  got  shallow  and 
warm,  and  the  fish  sickened  and  died ;  and  in  order  to  pre- 
serve at  least  some  of  them,  the  survivors  had  to  be  taken 
back  to  the  river  again.     When  I  last  was  at  Kyaik-lat,  there 


140  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

were  still  a  good  number  of  the  tame  fish,  tame  enough  to 
allow  you  to  stroke  them  and  put  gold-leaf  on  their  heads, 
but  there  were  far  from  being  as  many  as  there  should  have 
been  had  the  villagers  duly  observed  the  teachings  of  the 
Buddha.  The  primeval  simplicity  of  the  people  is  fast  fading 
away  throughout  the  province.  The  travelling  Englishman 
finds  no  difficulty  in  either  getting  people  to  sell  fowls,  or 
others  still  less  hampered  by  doubts,  to  wring  their  necks  and 
cook  them. 

The  monastery  sometimes  has  a  name  of  its  own  ;  more 
frequently  it  is  called  by  the  Pali  name  of  the  town  or 
pagoda  near  which  it  lies,  or  by  that  of  its  prior.  The 
Thayet-daw  Kyaung  in  Rangoon  is  so  called  from  the 
magnificent  mango-trees  that  grow  within  it.  Well  known 
in  Upper  Burma  is  the  monastery  of  U  Sandima,  or  the 
Mingala-san  Talk,  where  King  Minddn  received  his  instruc- 
tion in  the  religious  texts  which  he  knew  so  well.  The 
name  is  usually  given  by  the  founder  after  consultation  with 
the  proposed  head  of  the  community,  and  it  cannot  be  said 
that  the  consultation  results  in  much  originality. 

Here  and  there  throughout  the  country  there  are  a  few 
yatheit,  hermits  who  withdraw  into  solitude  in  forests  and 
desert  places,  and,  like  the  old  rathi  (from  which  word  of 
course  the  Burman  term  is  derived),  they  live  on  wild  fruits 
and  roots  and  the  chance  alms  of  passers-by.  But  as  the  rathi 
were  closely  connected  with  the  Brahmins,  and  as  the  custom 
is  not  recommended  by  the  Buddha,  nor  looked  upon  with 
favour  by  the  people,  it  is  not  of  frequent  occurrence. 
Occasionally  a  very  austere  monk  buries  himself  in  the 
solitude  of  the  jungle  during  the  season  of  Lent,  in  order  the 
better  to  devote  himself  to  meditation,  but  even  this  is  not 
common.  Nevertheless  in  the  rocks  above  Nyaung-u,  near 
Pagan,  there  are  a  few  cells  dug  out  high  up  in  the  cliffs 
which  are  always  occupied,  as  any  one  who  has  gone  out  to 
shoot  the  rock  pigeons  which  abound  there  will  very  speedily 
find.  The  yatheit  comes  down,  confiscates  the  bag,  and 
drives  away  the  sportsman  with  terrible  threats  of  future 
punishment.  Such  caves  and  holes  in  the  rocks  are  not  un- 
common on  other  parts  of  the  Irrawaddy,  wherever  the  ascetic 
is  able  to  climb  up  and  finds  the  stratum  soft  enough  to  hack 


XIII  THE  MONASTERIES  141 

out  with  his  axe  and  hollow  with  his  finger-nails.  There  were 
a  few  such  cells  cut  in  the  rocks  at  the  back  of  Mandalay 
Hill,  and  visitors  to  the  sacred  spot  occasionally  came  across 
one  of  the  hermits  striding  along,  wrapped  in  thought,  grasp- 
ing an  iron  staff  hung  with  rings,  the  rattle  of  which  warns 
the  people  to  get  out  of  the  way  and  not  disturb  the  holy 
man's  meditations.  A  few  go  away  from  human  society 
altogether,  just  as  St.  Simeon  Stylites  isolated  himself  on  a 
pillar,  and  the  old  Culdee  monks  from  the  north  of  England 
and  Scotland  wandered  off  to  the  snowy  wastes  of  Iceland, 
there  to  seek  repose  and  relief  from  the  turmoil  of  the  world. 
It  is  said  that  the  Thadda,  the  grammar,  was  added  to  the 
Bitaghat,  that  the  hermits  who  had  withdrawn  to  the  jungle 
might  not  destroy  the  power  of  the  sermons  and  lauds  by 
mispronunciation. 

Mandalay  Hill  is  always  occupied,  for  the  spot  is  par- 
ticularly sacred.  King  Minddn  used  to  send  thither  daily 
a  hundred  fowls  which  had  been  bought  and  saved  from 
death,  and  the  pious  gave  them  plenty  to  eat.  Similar 
proceedings  caused  the  sneer  of  Purchas,  "  For  men  they 
hadde  not  an  hospitall  that  were  thus  hospitall  to  fowles  " ; 
but  this  is  hardly  deserved,  at  any  rate  in  Burma.  There 
in  every  monastery  the  Kappiya-dayaka  has  a  stock  of 
money,  raised  by  selling  the  presents  given  to  the  monks, 
which  he  devotes  in  charity  to  the  well-deserving  sick  and 
to  poor  travellers,  while  any  one  is  welcome  at  all  times  to 
shelter  and  food  in  the  kyaung  as  long  as  he  conducts  him- 
self properly.  The  yatheit  may  be  looked  upon  with  pious 
awe  for  his  austerities  and  mortifications  of  the  flesh,  but  the 
ordinary  pyin-sin  is  more  favourably  regarded.  The  build- 
ing of  monasteries  and  the  giving  of  presents  to  their 
inmates  is  a  constant  strain  on  the  generosity  of  the  people. 
It  is  far  more  difficult  to  keep  the  balance  of  merit  on  the 
right  side  in  Burma  than  in  other  countries.  Almsgiving  is 
a  constant  and  imperative  expense,  in  addition  to  regular 
and  personal  worship  at  the  pagoda.  In  Thibet  wind  or 
water  drives  the  prayer-machines  for  extinguishing  sin,  and 
the  goodman  acquires  merit  while  he  is  snoring  at  night 
with  his  wife  at  his  back.  In  some  parts  practical  house- 
holders are  able  to  calculate  exactly  what  is  set  down  to 


142         THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    chap,  xiii 


their  credit,  by  the  expedient  of  having  the  prayer-wheels 
turned  when  necessary  by  oxen.  But  nothing  of  this  kind 
is  practicable  in  Burma.  You  must  pay  your  devotions  in 
person,  and  unless  you  supplement  these  by  almsgiving,  your 
prospects  towards  a  next  existence  are  not  such  as  your 
friends  can  regard  otherwise  than  with  concern.  P'ortunately 
the  more  holy  the  receiver  the  greater  the  merit  of  the  alms. 
To  support  one  hundred  ordinary  men  is  not  so  much  as  to 
feed  one  yahan,  and  so  on  in  increasing  ratio.  The  merit  of 
giving  one  single  meal  to  a  Buddha  outweighs  that  of  supply- 
ing ten  million  Pyitzega  Buddhas  with  food.  Thus  the 
kyaungs  are  always  well  furnished,  and  their  advantage  in 
affording  education  to  the  children  further  gives  them  a  hold 
over  the  country.  It  will  be  long  before  the  number  of 
monasteries  decreases  in  Burma. 


CHAPTER    XIV 

SCHISMATICS 

The  Buddhist  religion  is  to  its  adherents  the  full  and  entire 
truth,  and  has  remained  almost  entirely  free  from  the  schisms 
and  dissensions  which  have  sprung  up  in  most  other  religions, 
especially  in  those  of  Europe,  where  the  progress  of  science 
has  caused  the  rise  of  multitudes  of  sects.  Fully  bound  by 
their  religion,  in  the  complete  sense  of  the  word,  are  only  the 
worshipper  of  the  fetish  whose  object  of  adoration  hangs  up 
in  his  house,  or  dangles  about  his  neck,  and  the  Buddhist, 
whose  teachers  and  models  of  faith  rise  and  fall  in  flesh  and 
blood  before  his  eyes,  vanishing  to  Ne'ban,  there  to  be  freed 
from  all  earthly  concern,  but  leaving  behind  them  as  a  guide 
to  the  same  last  resting-place  the  sacred  World- Law,  and  at 
the  same  time  the  Assembly  of  the  Perfect,  who  appear 
as  an  incarnation  of  that  Law  for  the  building  up  of  piety 
among  the  laity.  The  yahans  have  already  beaten  down 
the  adversaries  within  them,  and,  clothed  with  the  yellow 
robe  of  transfiguration,  exhibit  in  their  persons  the  glorious 
results  of  adherence  to  the  Law.  Thus  the  reverence  paid 
to  the  monks  is  a  kind  of  spiritual  hero-worship  in  the  sense 
in  which  Carlyle  speaks  of  it. 

The  man  yet  a  slave  in  the  bondage  of  his  lusts  and 
passions  gazes  in  admiration  on  these  models,  to  whom  the 
recognition  of  earthly  vanity  gives  strength  enough  to  reject 
all  the  allurements  of  the  world  and  to  live  only  for  the  future. 
The  spirits  are  always  present  to  the  fetish-worshipper,  for 
hideous  devils  scare  him  away  from  every  natural  object. 
So  the  great  secret  of  the  existence  of  the  world  is  ever 
present  to  the  Buddhist,  and  while  in  the  political  and  social 

143 


144  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

life  of  the  European  nations  the  manifold  character  of  the 
questions   of  the  day  attract   and   occupy  the  minds   and 
influence  the  religious  beliefs  of  the  people,  the  eyes  of  the 
Burman    Buddhist   are   uninterruptedly  fixed   on   the   dark 
mysteries  which  surround  his  beginning,  his  end,  and  every 
moment  of  his  existence.      His   religion    enters   into  every 
action  of  his  life,  and  its  admirable  system  of  morality  need 
fear  comparison  with  none  other  on  earth ;  while  everything 
else  appears  but  as  a  matter  of  detail,  or  a  different  method 
of  viewing  the  same  things.      He  is  not  at  all  unwilling  to 
enter  into  discussion  as  to  what  is  the  true  religion  :  whether 
only  one  is  the  right,  whether  all  have  sprung  from  the  same 
root  and  have  only  now  assumed  different  forms,  or  whether, 
as  the  Deity  gave  to  the  hand  different  fingers,  so  He  has 
given  to  mankind  different  paths.     But  the  arguments  of  the 
proselytiser  have  but  very  little  success,  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  there  is  nowadays  practically  no  attempt  to  gain  con- 
verts  to   their  own   national   faith.      This   is  no  doubt  in 
great  part  due  to  the  absence  of  all  ministerial  duties  in  the 
brethren  of  the  yellow  robe,  but  also  to  a  belief  that  true 
faith  can  only  grow  up  gradually,  and  cannot  be  forced  on 
the  mind.      At  the  same  time  there  is  not  a  hint  of  bigotry. 
In  Mandalay  all  forms  of  religion  were  allowed  to  be  carried 
on  without  the  least  semblance  of  opposition.      The  solemn 
call  of  the  muezzin  ;  the  tinkling  of  the  convent-bell,  under 
the  cross  of  Rome ;  the  noisy  rites  of  devil  and  fire-wor- 
shippers ;  even  the  ceremonies  of  the  former  fierce  enemies 
of  Buddhism,  the    Brahmins — all   of  these  were  exercised 
without  the  least  hindrance,  and  the  processions  of  the  various 
forms   of  faith   passed  one  another  in  the  street  with  the 
most  complete  amicability.     Even  a  convert  is  left  unharmed. 
There  may  be  a  sense  of  wonder  and  contempt  for  the  man 
who  voluntarily  resigns  his  high  hopes  as  a  Buddhist  for  the 
probable  fallacies  of  another  cult,  but  there  is  never  any  real 
attempt  at  oppression. 

Heresies,  therefore,  never  originate  with  the  people ;  any 
there  are  come  from  the  monasteries,  but  even  these  relate 
more  to  matters  of  discipline  and  internal  regulation  than  to 
real  points  of  faith.  The  yahans  are  very  clever  in  dispute, 
and  are  far  from  being  averse  to  it.     The  better  educated  of 


SCHISMATICS  145 


them  know  their  ground  perfectly  well,  and  are  quite  able  to 
take  full  advantage  of  the  strong  points  of  their  position. 
They  rely  entirely  on  the  holy  books,  and  these  they  have 
at  their  fingers'  ends.  It  is  granted  by  all  that  they  are, 
almost  without  exception,  entirely  free  from  intolerance,  and 
are  quite  unable  to  comprehend  the  zeal  for  conversion.  A 
venerable  Sadaw  in  Bhamo  came  and  listened  attentively  to 
a  Burmese  sermon  of  Dr.  Mason,  the  celebrated  American 
missionary.  When  it  was  over  he  came  and  complimented 
him  on  its  depth  and  grasp,  and  then  suggested  that  the 
reverend  doctor  should  go  with  him  to  offer  up  worship 
before  the  image  of  Buddha  !  The  monks  do  not  think, 
with  cynical  mockery,  that  every  one  should  be  allowed  to 
go  his  own  way  and  be  blessed  after  his  own  fashion  ;  on 
the  contrary,  they  seek  zealously  for  new  truths  and  explana- 
tions of  mysteries ;  but  they  hold  it  presumptuous  and  un- 
warrantable, in  view  of  the  dark  secrets  which  envelop  the 
life  of  man  from  its  dawning  to  its  close,  to  set  up  each  his 
individual  opinion  with  dogmatic  certainty  as  the  only  true 
form  and  the  only  one  that  can  save.  They  take  their 
standpoint  on  the  actual  state  of  things,  on  the  misery  and 
sorrow  which  is  externally  bound  up  with  the  nature  of  the 
human  body  as  it  exists.  They  devote  themselves  entirely 
to  preparing  the  spirit  for  its  delivery,  when  it  will  finally 
rest,  raised  above  every  fear  of  new  change,  in  the  harmonious 
equipoise  of  Ne'ban.  For  this  last  and  highest  aim  no 
hypotheses  have  to  be  assumed.  They  require  no  personal 
deity  who  would  demand  a  special  place  in  the  system  of 
the  world,  and  in  a  possible  danger  to  the  cosmic  system 
might  incur  the  same  risk  of  destruction.  They  remain 
entirely  within  the  clearly  defined  horizon  of  their  limit  of 
vision,  and  are  therefore  very  difficult  to  attack  in  argument. 
Nevertheless  schisms  have  arisen  from  time  to  time,  and 
exist  at  the  present  day,  but  they  have  sprung  more  from 
revolt  against  excessive  austerity,  or  corresponding  laxity, 
than  from  any  real  difference  on  doctrinal  points.  The  Lord 
Buddha  had  hardly  died  before  one  of  the  most  aged  of  the 
disciples,  Subhadra,  thus  addressed  the  assembled  brethren  : 
"  Revered  ones,  cease  to  mourn.  We  are  now  happily  re- 
leased  from   the  rule  of  the   great   Sramana  ;  we  shall  no 

L 


146  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap, 

more  be  tormented  with  '  this  is  allowable '  and  '  that  is  not 
allowable ' ;  we  can  now  do  what  we  wish,  and  leave  undone 
what  we  do  not  care  for."  To  put  an  end  to  this  scandal  to 
religion,  and  to  fix  definitely  the  bonds  of  morality,  the  great 
disciple,  Kathapa,  called  together,  forty-five  years  after  the 
Buddha's  death,  in  the  year  543  B.C.,  the  first  great  Council, 
at  Rajagriha,  in  the  country  of  Magadha.  Kathapa  himself 
was  president.  The  Wini  was  read  by  Upali,  whom  Shin 
Gautama  himself  had  pointed  out  as  the  most  learned  of  his 
followers,  and  the  Dharma  by  Ananda,  the  personal  attendant 
and  favourite  disciple  of  the  Budh.  During  seven  months 
the  various  points  in  dispute  were  considered  from  all  points, 
and  after  rulings  had  been  publicly  and  authoritatively  given, 
the  Council  broke  up.  Thus  were  the  three  "  baskets  of  the 
Law  "  first  settled. 

But  the  backsliders  were  not  corrected,  and  they  gradually 
increased  in  number,  until,  one  hundred  years  later,  it  was 
found  necessary  to  call  together  another  synod.  There  was 
now  a  considerable  body  of  schismatics,  and  they  formulated 
a  demand  for  definite  relaxations  from  the  severity  of 
the  laws.  The  Council  was  again  held  in  the  country  of 
Magadha  (the  modern  Oudh),  this  time  in  the  town  of 
Wethali.  The  king,  Kalathawka,  built  a  splendid  hall,  and 
when  all  was  ready,  himself  placed  the  ivory  fan  on  the  ledge 
of  the  pulpit,  and  sent  a  message  to  the  members  of  the 
Thenga  who  had  assembled  for  the  conference,  saying, 
"Lords,  my  task  is  finished."  The  relaxations  demanded 
were  then  discussed  The  most  important  were  as  follows  : — 
Food  might  be  taken  until  the  shade  of  the  sun  was  two 
inches  in  length ;  whereas  Shin  Gautama  had  directed  that 
for  the  curbing  of  the  flesh  none  should  be  eaten  after 
noontide. 

Whey  might  be  drunk  after  mid-day  ;  forbidden  as  being  a 
component  part  of  milk,  and  therefore  approaching  animal  food. 

Tari,  or  palm  toddy,  might  be  taken,  because  it  looks 
like  water.  This  was  a  particularly  bold  demand,  seeing 
that  all  fermented  liquors  are  forbidden,  and  that  in  modern 
days  the  same  plea  might  be  urged  on  behalf  of  gin. 

Gold  and  silver  might  be  accepted  as  alms  ;  the  use  of 
them  being  strictly  prohibited. 


XIV  SCHISMATICS  147 

A  junior  might  lawfully  copy  a  senior  even  in  what  is 
wrong ;  whereas  no  example  could  be  any  valid  excuse  for 
a  wrong  act. 

Subsequent  permission  might  cover  an  act ;  whereas  the 
Wini  required  prior  permission. 

The  restrictions  against  indulgences  were  to  be  in  force 
only  in  the  monasteries  ;  and  not  for  those  who  might  be 
sojourning  in  villages. 

These  points,  after  lengthy  discussion,  were  all  given 
against  the  dissenters,  and  degradation  was  awarded  them  as 
a  punishment. 

Still  matters  got  worse,  and  in  241  B.C.  the  great  king 
Athawka,  of  Pataliputra,  brought  about  the  third  and  last 
great  Council  to  cleanse  the  Church.  After  nine  months' 
public  reading  of  the  Book  of  Rules  and  of  the  most  excellent 
Law,  60,000  heretics  were  expelled  from  the  Church,  and  it 
was  resolved  to  propagate  the  religion  far  and  wide.  This 
last  decision  was  fraught  with  the  most  momentous  conse- 
quences to  Burma,  for  among  the  missionaries  sent  north, 
south,  east,  and  west  from  Behar  were  the  two,  Thawna  and 
6ttara,  who  proceeded  to  the  country  of  Suvarna  Bhumi, 
the  "  Golden  Land,"  and  landing  at  Thatdn,  now  north  of 
Maulmein,  but  then  on  the  sea -coast,  proceeded  to  dis- 
seminate the  Buddhist  doctrines  amongst  the  tribes  in  the 
great  river-valleys  of  the  country.  It  is  important  to  notice 
that  the  doctrines  they  brought  with  them  had  just  been 
revised  and  confirmed  by  a  great  Council  of  the  Church. 
Since  then,  throughout  all  Burma,  the  old  geniolatry  has 
been  displaced  by  the  teachings  of  the  Buddha.  The  regula- 
tions, introduced  then  in  their  first  purity,  have  been  retained 
ever  since  practically  unchanged,  so  that  at  the  present  time 
Buddhism  exists  in  Burma  in  a  form  much  nearer  to  that 
which  Shin  Gautama  taught  than  is  found  in  any  country 
where  the  Three  Precious  Things  are  held  in  reverence. 

The  only  sect  which  has  at  any  time  started  any  doctrinal 
heresy  is  that  of  the  Paramats.  They  reject  the  worship 
before  pagodas  and  images,  and  pray  only  to  the  Nyan-daw, 
the  godlike  wisdom,  which  abides  like  a  mountain  of  fire  in 
the  heavens,  invisible  to  mortal  eyes,  and  taking  no  interest 
and   exercising  no  influence  over   mundane  things.     These 


148  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

dissenters  pay  reverence  to  the  ordinary  brethren  of  the 
yellow  robe,  keep  the  Ten  Precepts,  repeat  the  Bawana 
(Paya,  Taya,  Thenga,  etc.)  and  the  Ittipi-thaw,  but  they 
never  go  near  the  shrines,  and  recite  their  prayers  and 
invocations  in  the  jungle  or  in  open  fields.  It  is  a  kind 
of  reminiscence  of  fire-worship,  an  ancestral  adoration  of  the 
heavens  in  the  sun,  caused  possibly  by  a  shrinking  from  the 
suspicion  of  idolatry.  A  cardinal  fault  in  them  is  that  they 
give  no  alms,  for  most  religions  are  at  one  on  the  question 
that  charity  covers  a  multitude  of  sins.  The  sect  was  founded 
at  the  beginning  of  this  century  by  a  p6ngyi,  called  by 
his  followers  Shin  Tabaung.  He  lived  at  Sinbyugyun, 
"  White  Elephant  Island,"  a  place  half-way  between  Man- 
dalay  and  the  British  frontier,  and  the  dissent  would  probably 
never  have  spread  beyond  that  district,  or  outlived  the 
life  of  its  originator,  had  it  not  been  for  the  king  Bodaw 
Paya.  When  the  Thenga  refused  to  recognise  his  claim  to 
be  the  fifth  Buddha  of  this  world  cycle,  he  espoused  the 
cause  of  the  Paramats,  imposed  penalties  on  all  monks  who 
would  not  accept  their  tenets,  and  went  so  far  as  to  force 
a  Thathanabaing,  one  of  the  heads  of  the  Order,  to  marry, 
marriage  being  permissible  under  the  doctrines  of  the 
dissenters.  This  gave  the  schism  a  prominence  which  it 
could  not  otherwise  have  attained,  and  enabled  it  to  last 
down  to  the  present  time,  though  its  numbers,  never  very 
great,  have  steadily  dwindled  away.  There  are  perhaps  more 
Paramats  in  Prome  than  in  any  other  town  of  Burma,  Lower 
or  Upper.  Their  most  prominent  doctrine  is  that  the  Shwe 
Nyan-daw  existed  before  the  world  began,  and  will  exist 
for  all  eternity.  Ideas  may  arise  from  the  influence  of 
exterior  objects,  but  when  they  have  been  freed  from  their 
connection  with  bodily  creations,  they  have  an  independent 
existence,  and  when  once  they  have  come  into  being  con- 
tinue to  live,  This  is  explained  by  the  assertion  that  the 
quasi-deity  of  the  Buddha  is  founded  only  on  his  supreme 
wisdom.  Buddha  means,  etymologically,  "the  wise,"  and 
Shin  Gautama  was  simply  an  incarnation  of  the  pure 
Wisdom.  Men  believed  they  actually  saw  him  when  he  was 
already  really  a  deity — nothing  else  than  the  inspiring 
Nyan-daw,  which  made  the  five  Khandas  appear  to  have  an 


SCHISMATICS  149 


actual  earthly  existence.  Occasionally  an  energetic  Sadaw 
excommunicates  all  the  Paramats  under  his  jurisdiction,  and 
forbids  all  the  laity  to  sell  to  them,  or  have  any  communica- 
tion whatever  w^ith  them,  but  as  a  rule  they  are  let  alone. 
The  movement  is  too  feeble  to  threaten  any  real  danger  to 
religion,  and  has  never  gained  many  adherents  among  the 
laity. 

It  is  a  different  matter  with  the  rival  parties  of  the 
Mahagandi  and  the  Sulagandi.  Here  there  are  no  heretical 
doctrines  in  dispute ;  it  is  simply  a  question  of  greater 
adherence  to  the  strict  rule  of  the  Order.  Instead  of,  as  in 
the  early  days  of  the  Assembly,  one  party  crying  out  against 
the  too  great  austerity  of  the  majority,  it  is  a  sturdy  protest 
of  a  minority  within  the  Church  against  the  lamentable 
weakness  and  laxity  of  the  great  body  of  the  Order  in  the 
observance  of  the  precepts  of  the  Book  of  the  Enfranchise- 
ment. The  quarrel  is  at  present  limited  to  Lower  Burma, 
where  the  greater  wealth  of  the  country  and  the  introduction 
of  foreign  luxuries  among  the  laity  have  led  to  correspond- 
ing indulgences  in  many  of  the  monasteries,  against  which 
the  Sulagandis  protest  and  preach  with  feverish  energy. 
The  austere  party  is  strongest  in  Maulmein,  Henzada,  and 
Pegu,  and  faction  feeling  runs  so  high  that  street  fights 
between  the  scholars  of  the  two  sects  are  very  common,  and 
often  so  embittered  that  the  English  authorities  have  to 
interfere  to  restore  peace  in  the  town,  for  the  laity  take  sides 
with  equally  bitter  animosity. 

The  questions  in  dispute  are  entirely  matters  of  disci- 
pline. The  Puritan  party,  as  the  Sulagandi  may  very  well 
be  called,  denounce  the  habit,  which  is  becoming  very 
frequent,  of  wearing  silk  robes.  The  Kammawa  sets  forth 
that  the  thengan  should  be  stitched  together  of  rags  picked 
up  in  the  streets  or  in  the  graveyards,  and  such  panthagu 
thengans  the  Sulagandis  wear  and  glory  in.  The  Maha- 
gandis,  on  the  other  hand,  have  been  gradually  becoming 
more  and  more  luxurious.  At  first  new  cloth  was  torn  into 
irregular  pieces,  and  then  sewn  together.  Latterly  it  has 
been  considered  sufficient  to  tear  a  corner  and  stitch  it  up 
again,  or  perhaps  only  to  rip  a  portion  of  a  seam,  and  from 
this  to  the  wearing  of  silk  garments  was  no  very  great  step. 


150  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

The  Puritan  party  declare  that  this  is  simply  a  scandalous 
playing  with  the  letter  of  the  law.  Again,  the  Sulagandis 
eat  out  of  the  alms-bowl  as  it  comes  in  from  the  morning 
round,  whereas  the  Mahagandis  empty  out  the  thabeit  into 
plates  and  make  as  palatable  a  meal  as  possible  from  their 
collections,  which,  on  the  face  of  it,  is  a  pandering  to  fleshly 
weakness.  Others,  much  more  bold  in  their  backsliding, 
do  not  hesitate  to  have  a  special  meal  cooked  for  them 
every  morning  by  the  Kyaung-tha-gyi,  and  sit  down  to 
it  smoking  hot,  after  their  morning's  perambulation,  while 
the  begging-bowl  is  handed  over  to  poor  people  staying  in 
the  monastery,  or  emptied  out  for  the  benefit  of  the  dogs 
and  crows.  No  sophistry,  one  would  think,  could  explain 
away  this  Sybaritism,  but  the  Mahagandis  have  the  assur- 
ance to  try  to  make  a  merit  of  it,  saying  that  the  money 
expended  by  the  Kappiya-dayaka  on  the  materials  for  the 
breakfast  is  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  previous  offerings  of 
the  pious — rugs,  blankets,  lamps,  and  so  on — and  by  thus 
making  use  of  it,  not  only  do  the  people  gain  merit  for 
their  gifts  of  food,  but  the  monks  themselves  are  enabled 
to  extend  their  charity  to  the  poor  or  the  birds  of  the  air. 
That  is  a  severe  straining  of  the  command  that  the  Ariya 
should  live  by  alms. 

Similarly  when  the  Mahagandi  goes  abroad  he  wears 
sandals  on  his  feet,  and  protects  his  shaven  crown  from  the 
rays  of  the  sun  with  an  umbrella.  The  austere  brother 
walks  the  streets  barefooted  and  bareheaded,  even  though 
his  head  may  ache  and  his  feet  be  blistered  with  the  shim- 
mering heat  of  high  noon.  Only  when  he  is  on  a  long 
journey  does  the  Sulagandi  allow  himself  such  superfluities 
as  sandals  or  umbrella.  The  Mahagandi  will  receive  coin 
in  his  own  hands,  covered  by  a  handkerchief;  the  Sulagandi 
will  not  take  it  even  through  the  instrumentality  of  a  pupil, 
or  off  a  ngwe-pa-detha,  a  rupee-hung  tree,  at  Tawadeintha 
feast  time.  Pwes  on  feast  days,  or  even  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  pagodas,  are  denounced  by  the  reforming  party  ; 
so  are  balloons  with  fireworks  in  them  ;  the  habit  many 
monks  have  fallen  into  of  going  to  visit  Englishmen,  with 
no  other  object  than  curiosity ;  and  above  all  the  noisy 
saturnalia    in   the   monasteries    at   the   end  of  Lent  which 


SCHISMATICS  151 


have  become  so  common  in  Rangoon.  It  will  thus  be  seen 
that  the  great  point  at  issue  is  the  maintenance  of  the 
original  humble  character  of  the  brotherhood.  The  different 
vernacular  presses  of  Rangoon  flood  the  country  with  con- 
troversial tracts  written  by  both  parties,  and  the  laity  adopt 
sides  and  carry  polemical  discussions  into  private  life.  So 
fierce  had  the  quarrel  become,  that  in  1880  one  of  the  most 
learned  and  venerated  of  the  Mandalay  heads  of  the  Church, 
the  Thinkaza  Sadaw,  came  down  to  settle  the  question. 
He  was  received  everywhere  with  extraordinary  honours. 
At  Danubyu  the  whole  of  the  populace  lined  the  path  up 
to  the  monastery  prepared  for  him,  and  kneeling  down,  threw 
their  hair  across  the  way,  so  that  from  the  river -bank  to 
the  steps  of  the  kyaung  he  walked  all  the  way  on  a  carpet 
of  human  tresses.  But  he  did  not  settle  which  party  was 
in  the  right.  After  making  abundant  inquiries  and  hearing 
the  most  prominent  advocates  on  either  side,  he  halted  at 
Henzada  and  announced  that  he  was  about  to  give  his 
decision.  Unfortunately  it  came  to  his  ears  that  in  that 
town,  as  well  as  in  several  others,  the  Ariya  had  been  betting 
freely  as  to  which  way  he  would  give  his  judgment.  There- 
upon the  Sadaw  grew  furious,  denounced  both  parties  alike, 
and  refused  to  say  anything  which  would  countenance  the 
claims  of  either  sect.  He  remained  for  a  considerable  time 
in  the  low  country,  giving  numerous  addresses  for  the  build- 
ing up  of  religion,  but  never  on  any  occasion  throwing  out 
a  hint  as  to  which  way  he  leaned,  further  than  that  both 
parties  should  give  way  a  little  and  refrain  from  exhibiting 
such  scandalous  dissensions  before  the  heretics.  The  war- 
fare was  calmed  for  a  space,  but  the  old  fierce  denunciations 
have  broken  out  again.  The  opposing  abbots  bid  their  lay 
supporters  refrain  from  giving  alms  to  the  rival  sect.  They 
recommend  all  the  penalties  of  excommunication  without 
having  the  power  to  go  through  the  formal  ceremony.  But 
though  the  Mahagandis  have  the  greater  number  of  followers, 
the  self-denying  Sulagandis  have  all  the  more  earnest  and 
rightly-thinking  men  on  their  side  and  will  probably  prevail 
in  the  end,  though  a  new  great  synod  may  have  to  be  held 
before  that  is  effected.  The  head  of  the  reforming  party  is 
U  6kgansa,  a  learned  Sadaw,  whose  monastery  is  at  Okpo 


152         THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    chap,  xiv 

in  the  Tharrawadi  district.  He  was  at  one  time  invited  to 
go  up  to  Mandalay  to  assume  the  control  of  a  Kyaung  and 
spend  the  rest  of  his  days  there.  The  Burmese  Government 
offered  to  send  down  a  royal  steamer  with  high  dignitaries 
to  escort  him  to  the  capital,  but  the  sturdy  old  "  Bishop " 
refused  to  forsake  his  party  until  he  should  be  persuaded 
that  its  principles  would  gain  the  victory  in  the  end.  And 
so  no  doubt  they  will,  for  not  even  the  most  casual  observer 
can  fail  to  see  that  they,  in  their  bare  ascetic  monasteries, 
are  far  nearer  to  the  ideal  of  the  founder  than  the  Maha- 
pfandis  with  all  the  appliances  of  their  richly- stocked 
abiding-places. 


CHAPTER    XV 

PAGODAS 

Some  one  with  a  greater  regard  for  alliteration  than  the 
truth  once  said  that  the  principal  productions  of  Burma 
were  pagodas,  pongyis,  and  pariah  dogs.  As  a  superficial 
impression  this  is  neat,  and  therefore  it  will  continue  to  be 
quoted  by  forcible  feebles  to  the  end  of  their  days,  in  Bays- 
water  or  Ealing.  It  certainly  is  marvellous  how  many 
pagodas  there  are  in  the  country,  far  exceeding  the  number 
of  those  raised  in  the-  sacred  island  of  Ceylon,  or  by  the 
Thibetans  and  Chinese,  pious  Buddhists,  though  they  have 
fallen  into  sad  doctrinal  heresies.  A  Burman  does  not 
notice  the  multitude  of  the  religious  edifices  in  his  country 
till  he  leaves  it  and  finds  how  far  more  sparing  other  nations 
are  in  their  places  of  worship.  The  poorest  village  has  its 
neatly  kept  shrine,  with  the  remains  of  others  mouldering 
away  round  about  it.  No  hill  is  so  steep  and  rocky,  or  so 
covered  with  jungle,  as  to  prevent  the  glittering  gold  or 
snow-white  spire  rising  up  to  guard  the  place  from  ghouls 
and  sprites,  and  remind  the  surrounding  people  of  the 
Saviour  Lord,  the  teacher  of  Nirvana  and  the  Law.  There 
is  good  reason  for  this  multiplication  of  fanes.  No  work  of 
merit  is  so  richly  paid  as  the  building  of  a  pagoda.  The 
Paya-taga  is  regarded  as  a  saint  on  earth,  and  when  he  dies 
he  obtains  the  last  release ;  for  him  there  are  no  more 
deaths.  The  man  who  sets  up  a  row  of  water-pots  on  a 
dusty  road  does  well ;  he  who  raises  a  ta-g6n-daing,  or 
sacred  post,  who  builds  a  rest-house,  presents  an  image  or  a 
bell,  or  founds  a  monastery,  gains  much  kutho  and  ensures 
a  happy  transincorporation  when  he  passes  away  ;  but  the 

IS3 


154  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap, 

Paya-taga  is  finally  freed  from  the  three  calamities,  his  kan 
is  complete,  the  merits  outweigh  the  demerits,  and  he  attains 
the  holy  rest.  That,  at  any  rate,  is  the  comforting  belief, 
cherished  by  the  most  reprobate.  Little  wonder  then  that,, 
with  such  a  glorious  reward  in  store  for  him,  the  pious  man 
hoards  his  wealth  for  such  an  object,  and  that  pagodas  are  so 
plentiful  in  the  land.  It  avails  little  to  repair  a  previous 
dedication,  unless  it  be  one  of  the  great  world  shrines  at 
Rangoon,  Pegu,  Prome,  or  Mandalay.  In  the  case  of 
ordinary  pagodas  the  merit  of  the  repair  goes  practically 
entirely  to  the  original  founder.  Hence  that  puzzle  to 
Europeans,  the  building  of  a  bright  new  place  of  worship 
close  to  one  which  a  very  little  care  would  save  from 
crumbling  away  into  a  simple  tumulus. 

The  word  pagoda  is  seemingly  a  kind  of  verbal  hysteron 
proteron,  a  metathesis  of  the  Cinghalese  dhagoba,  derived 
from  the  Sanskrit  dhatu  garba,  a  relic  shrine,  and  is  properly 
applied  only  to  a  monument  raised  over  some  of  the  remains 
of  the  Lord  Buddha.  Such  are  dat-daw,  pieces  of  Shin 
Gautama's  flesh  ;  an-daw,  his  teeth  ;  san-daw,  his  hair  ;  thin- 
gyat-daw,  the  frontal  bone ;  hnyat-yo-daw,  the  jaw-bone, 
besides  others.  In  addition  to  these  there  are  the  sacred 
utensils  and  other  articles  used  by  the  teacher  of  the  Law, 
such  as  the  thengan,  the  yellow  robe  ;  the  thabeit,  or  alms- 
bowl  ;  the  taung-we-daw,  his  staff ;  the  padi,  or  rosary,  and 
other  things  of  the  same  kind.  These  holy  relics,  however, 
could  not  go  far,  even  if  they  had  been  equitably  divided 
between  the  great  countries  professing  Buddhism,  which 
they  certainly  were  not.  Burma  alone  claims  more  personal 
remains  than  could  possibly  have  existed.  The  same  thing 
is,  I  believe,  true  of  Popish  relics  in  Europe,  where  pieces  of 
the  true  cross  are  as  abundant  as  portions  of  the  dress  of 
the  founder  of  Buddhism  are  in  Burma.  It  is  useless 
attempting  to  prove  or  disprove  the  authenticity  of  parti- 
cular relics.  To  admit  of  the  multiplication  of  shrines, 
models  of  the  sacred  things  are  permitted,  and  these  only, 
in  metal,  precious  stones,  or  clay,  are  deposited  under  the 
vast  majority  of  pagodas.  But  images  and  sacred  books 
are  also  so  enshrined,  and  thus  arises  the  classification  of 
the  four  kinds  of  shrines,  the  Zedi  le-ba. 


PAGODAS  155. 


1.  Datu  zedi,  erected  over  relics  of  the  Buddha,  or 
models  of  these. 

2.  Paribawga  zedi,  over  the  sacred  eight  utensils,  or  their 
imitations. 

3.  Oddeitha  zedi,  enclosing  images. 

4.  Damma  zedi,  enclosing  the  sacred  books,  such  as  the 
Bitaghat  thdn-bdn,  the  three  baskets  of  the  Law,  and  other 
sacred  volumes,  like  the  Bagawa,  appointed  to  be  read 
during  Lent. 

It  may  be  well  to  remark  that  the  word  "  pagoda  "  is  not 
known  at  all  in  Burmese,  either  in  its  English  or  Cinghalese 
form,  any  more  than  the  word  Mandarin  is  known  in  China. 
Such  a  building  is  called  a  Zedi,  from  the  Pali  chaitya, 
meaning  the  offering-place,  or  place  of  prayer,  but  the  ex- 
pression Paya,  applicable  as  well  to  the  image  as  to  the 
shrine,  is  most  frequently  used  in  reference  to  the  more 
famous  centres  of  worship. 

The  greatest  of  the  payas,  such  as  the  Shwe  Dagdn 
in  Rangoon,  the  most  famous  of  all ;  the  Shwe  Maw-daw, 
the  lotus-shrine  of  Pegu  ;  the  Shwe  San-daw,  the  depository 
of  the  sacred  hair  at  Prome  ;  and  the  Maha  Myat  Muni, 
the  temple  of  the  most  exalted  saint  in  Mandalay  ;  all  these 
were  founded  by  single  individuals,  or  brothers  to  whom  the 
most  excellent  Master  had  given  hairs  from  his  head  to 
deposit  in  the  specified  place.  How  the  exact  spot  was 
found,  and  how  successive  kings  increased  the  size  of  the 
first  erection,  and  donations  flowed  in  from  the  pious  in  all 
parts  of  the  world  to  beautify  and  preserve  the  building,  all 
these  particulars  are  recorded  in  the  palm-leaf  records  of  the 
various  temples.  Many  later  Zedi,  however,  have  been 
erected  by  villages,  or  by  public  subscription  in  whole  dis- 
tricts, as  pious  memorials,  or  to  commemorate  some  particular 
event,  as  well  as  for  the  obvious  purposes  of  public  convenience 
on  the  duty  days  of  the  month.  Very  many,  and  among 
them  some  of  the  most  beautiful,  are,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
outcome  of  purely  individual  desire  for  merit.  Some,  such 
as  the  chaste,  white  Sibyo  shrine  at  Meng6n,  near  Man- 
dalay, are  built  in  remembrance  of  individuals ;  the  graceful 
pagoda  mentioned  being  erected  by  a  recent  monarch  in 
memory  of  a  favourite  queen.      Under  all,  however,  to  render 


156  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

them  sacred,  are  buried  some  of  the  holy  things.  Without 
these,  no  hti,  or  umbrella,  could  be  placed  on  the  summit  of 
the  spire. 

These  objects  are  deposited  in  the  tapana  talk,  a  square 
chamber,  built  in  the  basement  of  every  paya,  and  always 
the  first  thing  finished.  Not  only  one,  but  many  things  are 
thus  enclosed.  Captain  Cox,  who  saw  the  first  beginnings 
of  the  huge  Mengdn  pagoda,  describes  the  tapana  taik  of 
that  vast  amount  of  brickwork.  It  measured  sixty-one 
and  a  half  feet  square,  and  was  eleven  feet  deep.  The  interior 
was  plastered  white  and  gaily  painted,  and  was  divided  into 
a  number  of  compartments  of  various  sizes  to  receive  the 
offerings  of  the  king  and  the  courtiers,  the  innermost  natur- 
ally containing  the  most  sacred.  The  dedicated  treasures 
themselves  were  very  numerous,  including  a  great  variety  of 
miniature  pagodas  and  monasteries  in  silver  and  gold  of 
varying  degrees  of  purity  ;  images  of  the  same  materials  and 
of  polished  alabaster,  some  of  them  four  feet  high  ;  a  number 
of  gold  caskets,  probably  containing  models  of  the  sacred 
teeth  and  bones  ;  besides  these,  there  was  a  miscellaneous 
collection  of  other  things — slabs  of  coloured  glass,  precious 
stones,  white  jars,  such  as  are  used  by  the  royal  family,  and 
finally  a  soda-water  machine,  then  almost  as  much  a  novelty 
in  England  as  in  Burma.  The  offerings  did  not  strike  Captain 
Cox  as  being  very  valuable,  but  the  then  king,  Bodaw  Paya, 
cared  a  good  deal  more  for  his  own  special  glory  than  for 
the  raising  of  religion.  Not  long  afterwards  he  claimed  to 
be  a  new  Buddha,  and  because  the  Sacred  Order  would  not 
recognise  his  right  to  the  title,  turned  heretic,  and  victimised 
the  monks  with  renegade  zeal. 

The  relic  chamber  at  the  great  Shwe  Maw-daw  offers  a 
very  decided  contrast.  The  Buddha  gave  two  hairs  of  his 
head  to  two  brothers,  with  instructions  to  enshrine  them  on 
the  Thu-da-thana  hill.  An  earthquake  revealed  the  exact 
spot  to  them,  and  a  host  of  byammas  and  nat-ddwas  came 
down  to  take  part  in  the  depositing  of  the  relics.  A  chamber, 
ten  cubits  square,  was  prepared,  and  at  the  bottom  was  laid 
a  slab  of  pearly  white  marble,  set  with  diamonds.  A  similar 
slab,  studded  with  emeralds,  formed  the  lid.  The  Tha-gya 
king  placed  a  golden  cradle  in  the  centre  of  the  bottom 


XV  PAGODAS  157 

slab,  and  round  this  were  arranged  images  of  the  chief  dis- 
ciples of  Shin  Gautama,  each  holding  a  golden  bouquet.  The 
jewelled  casket  containing  the  hairs  was  placed  on  the  cradle, 
and  high  festival  was  held  for  many  days.  Numbers  of  other 
images  of  the  Buddha  himself,  and  of  many  eminent  dis- 
ciples, were  placed  round  the  sides  of  the  tapana  talk,  and 
countless  offerings  were  made,  the  Tha-gya  king  giving 
ten  billions  of  gold,  each  of  his  queens  forty  thousand  of 
silver  ;  the  father  of  the  two  brethren  one  thousand  of  gold, 
and  many  others  equally  great  sums.  But  this  was  in  the 
brave  days  of  old,  when  imagination  was  vivid  and  evidence 
cursory. 

Still  even  nowadays  very  costly  offerings  are  often 
deposited  in  the  relic  chamber.  An  almost  invariable  gift 
is  a  representation  in  gold  of  the  Lord  Buddha,  with  the 
hooded  snake  raising  itself  over  him,  as  in  the  images  of 
Vishnu  in  India,  or  a  great  model  of  the  Great  Master 
as  he  received  the  supreme  wisdom  under  the  bawdi-bin. 
Examples  of  the  last  may  be  seen  in  the  South  Kensington 
Museum,  as  also  of  the  Sabupati  paya,  representing  him 
with  the  tower-like  royal  crown,  the  wings  on  legs  and  arms, 
and  other  emblems  recalling  the  king's  son  who  went  out 
to  dedicate  himself  as  the  Buddha  and  the  conqueror  of 
Man-nat.  Open-handed  piety  is  twice  as  frequent  as  of 
yore,  only  the  chroniclers  of  modern  days  have  not  the  florid 
imaginations  of  their  predecessors. 

The  dedication  of  a  paya  is  a  high  festival,  but  there 
is  no  prescribed  ritual  in  the  sacred  books,  and  each  indi- 
vidual pdngyi,  after  reciting  the  precepts  and  the  Itti 
pithaw,  has  a  form  of  his  own,  embracing  portions  of  the 
law  and  the  sacred  discourses.  A  prominent  function  in  the 
service,  as  indeed  always  in  giving  alms,  is  the  yeset-cha, 
the  pouring  out  of  water  drop  by  drop  on  the  ground.  The 
great  king  Bimbathara  did  it  himself  from  a  gold  cup  when 
he  presented  the  Weluwun  or  Bamboo -grove  monastery, 
and  so  likewise  it  is  recorded  of  the  rich  man  Anatabein. 
The  idea  is  to  share  the  merit  of  the  action  with  all  creatures, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  call  to  witness,  besides  the  math6n- 
daye  nats,  all  gods  and  men,  that  the  donor  may  have 
due  reward  for  his   piety.     The   same   thing   is  frequently 


158  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


done  in  order  to  legally  hand  over  a  gift.  As  the  water 
falls  drop  by  drop  on  the  ground,  the  pdngyis  read  out 
the  formulae,  the  substance  of  which  is  as  follows  :  "  Firm  in 
my  belief  in  the  three  precious  things,  the  Lord,  the  Law, 
and  the  Assembly,  I  make  this  offering  that  I  may  be  freed 
from  all  present  and  future  miseries.  May  all  creatures 
suffering  torment  in  the  four  states  of  punishment  reach  the 
happy  seats  of  nat-ddwas.  May  all  my  relatives,  friends, 
.and  all  men  inhabiting  this  earth  and  the  ten  thousand 
worlds,  share  in  the  benefits  of  this  meritorious  work.  0 
^arth,  and  ye  spirits,  guardians  of  this  place,  bear  me  witness 
to  the  piety  of  this  gift." 

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  it  is  explicitly  stated  that  the 
inward  dispositions  of  the  giver  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
merit  resulting  from  a  good  work.  The  merits  are  strictly 
proportioned  to  the  degree  of  sanctity  or  perfection  of  him 
who  receives  the  alms.  Hence  the  glorious  release  which 
awaits  an  otherwise  bad  man  who  erects  a  pagoda. 

Zedis  are  of  many  shapes  and  degrees  of  elaboration, 
but  one  common  idea  may  be  traced  through  them  all.  II 
you  ask  a  Burman  monk  the  cause  of  the  variations  in  the 
form  of  the  paya,  he  will  tell  you  that  the  Buddha  left  no 
instructions  regarding  them  in  the  holy  books,  but  had  only 
jsaid  that  a  small  mound  should  be  raised  over  his  bones  in 
the  form  of  a  heap  of  rice.  Apart  from  the  relation  in 
which  the  paya  stands  to  the  Buddha  himself  as  the 
representation  of  the  holy  one  sunk  in  meditation,  the 
ostensible  object  is  the  preservation  of  relics,  and  these 
are  to  be  laid  in  a  shrine,  like  the  lotus-bud  of  which 
the  zedi  is  typical,  and  later  by  an  extending  of  the  lines 
this  got  the  form  of  a  bell  or  spire.  In  the  Malla  Lingaya 
Wuttu  we  are  told  that  the  infant  Buddha  in  the  womb 
of  Queen  Maia  resembled  a  lotus-bud,  or  a  beautiful  pagoda, 
and  the  conjunction  of  this  idea  with  the  simple  original 
tumulus  has  undoubtedly  led  to  the  typical  form  as  now 
seen  in  Burma.  The  names  for  various  parts  of  the 
building  all  recall  the  idea  of  the  flower -bud,  with  its 
young  leaves  folded  in  adoration.  Thus  the  rounded 
swelling  just  below  the  slender  spire  is  called  the  hnget- 
pyaw-bu,  the  banana  palm-bud,  and  on  the  extreme  summit 


XV  PAGODAS  159 

at  the  top  of  the  hti  is  the  seinbu,  the  diamond- bud, 
which  in  not  a  few  poor  districts  is  represented  by  a  soda- 
water  bottle,  which  combines  the  resemblance  to  a  flower-bud 
with  the  good  offices  of  a  lightning  conductor.  The  hnget- 
pyaw-bu  is  usually  surrounded  with  lavish  adornment  of 
the  sacred  lotus.  The  payas  that  rise  up  into  a  plain  cone 
or  spire  are  therefore  the  nearest  to  the  original  tumulus, 
the  top  being  simply  drawn  out  into  a  conical  point.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  bell -like  pagodas  are  only  a  direct 
imitation  of  the  lotus-bud,  and  this  has  led  to  the  more 
rounded  dome-like  forms,  sometimes  called  thabeit  hmauk, 
the  inverted  begging-pot.  This  term,  however,  is  applied 
to  the  swelling -out  round  part  on  every  pagoda,  and 
has  thence  been  borrowed  to  designate  special  shrines.  It 
has  nothing  to  do  with  phallic  worship  as  some  have 
imagined,  nor  is  there  any  idea  of  the  resemblance  to  a 
human  skull.  Such  grim  reminders  of  mortality  common 
in  Thibetan  Buddhism  do  not  commend  themselves  to  the 
Burman. 

The  buildings  are  all  made  of  crumbling,  sun-dried 
brick,  for  it  is  enough  to  gratify  the  pious  feeling  of 
the  moment,  and  even  the  long  years  that  the  most 
solidly  built  stone  edifices  might  last  would  only  be  as 
an  evanescent  drop  in  the  stream  of  eternity.  Thus  the 
Burman  sees  no  harm  in  building  pagodas  of  sand,  or 
even  cloth  and  pasteboard,  and  in  the  national  annals 
the  victory  which  false  shrines  won  over  more  substantial 
erections  is  a  favourite  theme.  In  Lower  Burma,  the 
payas  are  mostly  of  the  simplest  pattern,  derived  from  the 
archetypal  rice -heap  and  the  lotus -bud.  They  are  solid 
pyramidal  cones,  rising  with  a  gradually  diminishing  rounded 
outline,  and  surmounted  by  a  hti,  or  "  umbrella "  spire,  a 
construction  resembling  the  musical  instrument  called  a 
£hapeau  chinois,  formed  of  concentric  rings,  lessening  to  a  rod 
with  a  small  vane  called  hnget-ma-na  on  the  top.  They  are 
almost  without  exception  erected  on  more  or  less  elevated 
platforms.  Burma  is  quite  different  from  other  Buddhist 
countries,  where  the  relics  are  exhibited  on  great  feast  days. 
The  paya  is  perfectly  solid  with  the  exception  of  the  tapana 
talk,   situated   directly  under    the    spire    and    the  hti,    and 


i6o  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

there   is   no   means   of    entering    this    to   view   the   sacred 
reiics.     The  addition  of  spires  and  the  elaboration  of  the 
central  pyramid  are  later  thoughts,  and  give  hints  of  the 
great  architectural   efforts    to    be    seen   in    Upper   Burma. 
The  peaks  of  Mount  Myinmo  are  said  to  have  furnished 
the  first  notion.      In  some  cases,  as  at  the  Shwe  San-daw 
of  Prome,  the  central  spire  is  surrounded  at  its  base  by  a 
circle  of  small  gilded  temples  or  zediyan,   forming  a  con- 
tinuous wall  round  the  pagoda,  each  containing  an  image 
of  the  Buddha,  and  suggesting  the  idea  of  the  Setyawala 
hills  round  the  world-girding  Tham6ddaya  sea.      In  almost 
all  the  larger  payas  there  are  arched  wings  on  each  face  of 
the  lower  platform,  serving,  as  it  were,  as  ante-chapels,  and 
each  containing  a  large  Gautama.      It  is  obvious  how  easily 
the  introduction  of  these  niche  chapels  led  to  the  halls  and 
aisles  of  the  Pagan  temples.      Still  this  elaboration  remains 
only   a   sign   of   architectural    genius,   and    not   of  greater 
sanctity,  for  in  every  case  the  building  itself  serves  only  as 
a  meet  place  for  meditation  and  praise  in  thought  or  words. 
The  great  temples  of  Pagan,  with  their  galleries,  transepts, 
and  corridors,  have  more  of  the  character  of  churches  in  the 
ordinary  acceptation  of  the  word,  and    the  Ananda  above 
all,  with  its  echoing  vaults  and  dim  religious  light,  reminds 
one  especially  of  some  great  cathedral  of  the  Middle  Ages. 
But  the  outward  magnificence  of  the  Pagan  temples  does 
not  win  for  them  the  reverence  which  is  shown  to  vastly 
plainer  bell  pagodas. 

Of  all  the  shrines,  the  Shwe  Dagon  Paya,  the  great 
pagoda  of  Rangoon  and  the  most  venerable  place  of  worship 
in  all  the  Indo-Chinese  countries,  is  the  finest  and  the  most 
universally  visited.  Its  peculiar  sanctity  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  it  is  the  only  paya,  known  to  Buddhists,  which  contains 
actual  relics,  not  only  of  Shin  Gautama,  but  of  the  three 
Budhs  who  preceded  him  in  this  world.  In  the  tapana 
talk  of  the  pagoda,  along  with  eight  hairs  from  the  head 
of  the  Buddha,  in  the  eleventh  andrakap  of  whose  cycle  we 
are  now  living,  there  exist  the  ye-thauk-pala,  the  drinking- 
cup  of  Kaukkathan  ;  the  thengan  or  robe  of  Gawnag6ng ; 
and  the  taungwe  or  staff  of  Kathapa.  Little  wonder 
then  that  the  glittering  gold  spire  on  the  last  spur  of  the 


PAGODAS  i6i 


Pegu  hills  attracts  at  the  time  of  the  annual  festival  in 
March,  pilgrims,  not  only  from  the  farthest  parts  of  Burma, 
but  from  Cambodia,  Siam,  and  Corea.  The  stately  pile 
stands  upon  a  mound  partly  natural,  partly  artificial,  which  has 
been  cut  into  two  rectangular  terraces,  one  above  the  other, 
each  side,  as  is  the  case  with  all  pagodas,  facing  one  of  the 
cardinal  points  of  the  compass.  The  upper  terrace,  which  has 
been  carefully  levelled  and  paved  and  repaved  by  the  pious, 
rises  i66  feet  from  the  level  of  the  ground,  and  is  900  feet 
long  by  685  wide  according  to  English  measurement.  The 
ascent  was  by  four  flights  of  brick  steps,  one  opposite  the 
centre  of  each  face,  but  the  western  approach  has  been 
closed  by  the  fortifications  built  by  the  English  conqueror 
to  dominate  the  town  and  secure  the  pagoda,  where  there 
was  so  much  desperate  fighting  in  the  Burmese  wars. 
Ordinarily  with  other  pagodas,  the  eastern  flight  is  the  most 
holy  and  therefore  the  most  cared  for ;  but  the  town  of 
Rangoon  lies  to  the  south,  and  consequently  this  ascent  is 
the  grandest. 

At  the  foot  are  two  gigantic  leogryphs,  built  of  brick, 
covered  with  plaster  and  gaudily  painted.  From  them  up 
to  the  platform,  the  saung-dan,  the  long  stairs,  are  covered 
by  a  rising  series  of  handsomely-carved  teak  roofs,  supported 
on  huge  wood  and  masonry  pillars.  The  heavy  crossbeams 
and  the  panelling  are  in  many  places  embellished  with 
frescoes,  representing  scenes  in  the  life  of  the  Great  Master 
and  his  disciples,  and  with  hideously  curious  representations 
of  the  tortures  of  the  wicked  in  the  fiery  chambers  of 
hell.  The  steps  themselves  are  exceedingly  primitive  and 
dilapidated.  They  have  been  manufactured  piece  by  piece, 
apparently  by  ardent  seekers  after  merit.  Here  and  there 
they  are  made  of  broad  stone  flags  from  Penang  and  Bombay, 
but  for  great  part  of  the  distance  they  consist  of  simple 
sun-dried  bricks,  worn  almost  into  a  slope  by  the  pious  feet 
of  myriads  of  worshippers — bare  feet  too,  for  none  but 
Europeans  are  allowed  to  mount  the  steps  with  boots  on. 
The  stairs  are  wonderfully  uncomfortable,  not  merely  because 
they  are  so  dilapidated,  but  because  they  are  seemingly 
constructed  with  the  object  of  preventing  any  one  from 
ascending  or  descending  with  unseemly  haste.      They  are 

M 


i62  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

too  broad  to  mount  two  at  a  time,  and  too  low  to  suit 
occidental  tastes  taken  singly.  This  method  of  enforcing 
respect  is  characteristic  of  the  Burmese  nation,  and  reminds 
one  of  the  nails  which  projected  through  the  floors  in  the 
Royal  Palace  at  Mandalay. 

The  stairs  debouch  on  a  broad,  open,  flagged  space, 
which  runs  all  round  the  pagoda,  and  is  left  free  for  wor- 
shippers. From  the  centre  of  this  springs  from  an  octagonal 
bi-nat-daw,  or  plinth,  the  profusely  gilt,  solid  brick  paya. 
It  has  a  perimeter  of  1355  feet,  and  rises  to  a  height  of 
about  370,  or  a  little  higher  than  St.  Paul's  Cathedral.  On 
the  summit  is  the  hti,  the  gilt  iron-work  "  umbrella,"  on 
each  of  whose  many  rings  hang  multitudes  of  gold  and 
silver  jewelled  bells,  which  tinkle  melodiously  with  every 
breath  of  air.  This  hti  was  made  and  presented  by  Minddn 
Min,  the  second  last  King  of  Burma,  and  was  placed  on  the 
summit  at  a  cost  of  not  much  less  than  ;^5  0,000.  It  was 
constructed  by  voluntary  labour  ;  and  subscriptions  in  money 
and  jewels,  with  which  the  vane  and  the  uppermost  band  are 
richly  studded,  flowed  in  from  all  parts  of  Burma.  The  old 
king,  "  the  convener  of  the  fifth  great  synod,"  strove  hard  to 
have  it  placed  on  the  pagoda  entirely  at  his  own  cost  and 
by  his  own  men  ;  but  the  British  Government  rightly  and 
firmly  refused,  for  had  this  been  done  it  would  have  been 
regarded  by  British  Burmans  as  an  acknowledgment  of  his 
suzerainty.  After  considerable  correspondence  it  was  handed 
over  at  the  frontier  to  native  officials  and  a  body  of  Buddhist 
elders,  by  whom  it  was  conveyed  to  the  holy  Theinguttara 
Mount,  and  there  successfully  placed  in  position.  The  old 
hti  was  lowered  intact,  and  now  stands  on  the  platform, 
filled  in  and  gaily  painted  like  a  small  pagoda  or  a  florid 
marriage  cake,  beside  a  still  earlier  decoration  which  it  had 
supplanted. 

At  the  corners  of  the  basement  are  somewhat  Assyrian- 
like figures  of  Mandt-thiha,  creatures  with  two  bodies  and 
one  head,  half  lion,  half  man,  with  huge  ears  and  ruffled 
crest,  and  all  round  about  are  stone  figures  of  lions  display- 
ing an  ample  show  of  teeth  between  their  grinning  lips.  The 
tale  is  that  long  ages  ago  a  king's  son  who  had  been  aban- 
doned in  the  forest  was  found  by  a  lioness  and  suckled  by 


PAGODAS  163 


her.  When  the  prince  grew  to  man's  estate,  he  left  his 
foster-mother  and  swam  a  broad  river  to  escape  from  her. 
The  tender  mother's  heart  burst  when  he  reached  the  other 
side,  and  she  died  ;  and  in  remembrance  of  her  love,  lions' 
figures  are  placed  at  the  foot  of  all  pagoda  steps,  and  round 
the  building  itself. 

The  four  chapels  at  the  foot  of  the  pagoda  are  adorned 
at  the  sides  by  colossal  figures  of  the  sitting  Buddha,  and 
in  the  farthest  recess,  in  a  niche  of  its  own,  is  a  still  more 
goodly  figure,  the  thick  gilding  darkened  in  many  places 
by  the  fumes  of  thousands  of  burning  tapers  and  candles. 
Hundreds  of  Gautamas,  large  and  small,  sitting,  standing, 
and  reclining,  white  and  black,  of  alabaster,  sun-dried  clay, 
or  the  wood  of  the  Pein-n^,  the  jack  tree  {Artocarpus  integri- 
folid),  gilded  or  plain,  surround  and  are  propped  up  on  the 
larger  images.  Even  the  figures  in  the  niches  are  elaborate 
carved  woodwork,  representing  figures  dancing  or  fighting, 
and  others  flying  through  the  air,  or,  with  head  on  hand, 
sunk  in  meditation  ;  monsters  of  the  woods  and  hills  and 
streams.  High  stone  altars  for  the  offering  of  rice  and 
flowers  stand  before  the  lions,  the  offering  being  made  to  the 
whole  pagoda  and  not  to  them.  Under  the  Mandt-thihas 
at  the  corners  are  niche  altars  for  burnt  offerings.  On  the 
outer  edge  of  the  platform  are  a  host  of  small  zedi-yan, 
each  with  its  hti ;  tasaungs,  image  houses,  overflowing  with 
the  gifts  of  generations  of  pilgrims  ;  figures  of  the  Budh  in 
single,  low  stone  chapels ;  tagdn-daing,  tall  posts,  flaunting 
from  which  are  long  cylindrical  streamers,  of  bamboo  frame- 
work, pasted  over  with  paper,  depicting  scenes  in  sacred 
history,  and  often  inscribed  with  pious  invocations  from  the 
offerer  ;  others  are  surrounded  by  the  sacred  hentha,  the 
Brahminy  Goose  {Phcenicopterus  rubra),  the  emblem  of  the 
Talaings,  or  the  kalawaik,  the  crane  of  the  Burmese.  Inter- 
spersed among  these  on  the  outer  edge  of  the  open  platform 
are  multitudes  of  bells  of  all  sizes.  Beside  each  bell,  all  of 
which  are  hung  on  stout  crossbeams  supported  by  two  side 
posts,  lie  deer's  antlers,  and  pieces  of  wood  with  which  the 
worshipper  strikes  them  as  he  passes.  He  strikes  the  bell 
and  then  the  ground,  to  call  the  sky  and  the  earth  as 
witnesses  to  his  prayers.      On  the  eastern  side,  covered  by  a 


i64  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

great  wooden  shed,  hangs  one  of  enormous  size,  inside 
which  five  or  six  men  can  stand  with  ease.  It  was  pre- 
sented by  King  Tharrawaddy  in  1840,  on  the  occasion  of  a 
state  visit  to  Rangoon  and  the  paya.  It  measures  seven 
feet  seven  and  a  half  inches  across  the  mouth,  fifteen  inches 
in  thickness,  fourteen  feet  high,  and  weighs  94,682  lbs.  With 
a  proper  hammer  it  ought  to  give  forth  a  splendid  sound, 
but  the  ordinary  antlers  and  posts  of  wood  used  fail  to  do 
it  justice.  It  is  second  in  size  in  Burma  to  the  great  bell  at 
Mengdn,  which,  apart  from  the  monster  at  Moscow,  is  the 
largest  in  the  world.  There  is  a  long  inscription  on  the 
Maha  Ganda  (the  great,  sweet  voice)  at  Rangoon,  recount- 
ing the  merits  gained  by  the  monarch  who  presented  it  and 
the  praises  of  him  chanted  by  the  Nats,  the  guardians  of  the 
empire.  The  bell  has  a  curious  history.  After  the  second 
Burmese  war,  the  English  made  an  attempt  to  carry  it  off 
to  Calcutta  as  a  trophy,  but  by  some  mishap  the  Maha 
Ganda  toppled  over,  and  sank  to  the  bottom  of  the  Rangoon 
river.  English  engineers  made  several  attempts,  but  failed 
to  raise  it.  The  Burmans,  after  some  years,  begged  that 
the  sacred  bell  might  be  restored  to  them,  if  they  could 
recover  it.  The  petition  was  granted  with  a  sneer,  but  they 
set  to  work,  got  it  out,  and  carried  it  in  triumph  to  the  place 
where  it  now  hangs.  This  success  was  ascribed  by  the 
thoughtful  to  supernatural  aid,  but  the  common  people 
chuckled  in  a  carnal  and  exultant  manner  over  the  victory, 
and  not  without  very  fair  reason,  for  their  appliances  were 
of  the  most  primitive  kind. 

Buddhists  fix  the  date  of  the  erection  of  the  Shwe 
Dagon  Paya  in  588  B.C.,  but  the  site  must  have  been 
sacred  for  cycles  before,  since  the  relics  of  the  three  pre- 
ceding Buddhas  were  found  interred,  when  the  two  Taking 
brothers.  Poo  (dove)  and  Tapaw  (plenty),  came  with  their 
precious  eight  hairs  to  the  Theinguttara  hill.  The  original 
paya  is  said  in  the  palm-leaf  history  to  have  been  only 
twenty-seven  feet  high,  and  it  has  attained  its  present  height 
by  being  repeatedly  cased  with  an  outer  covering  of  bricks 
several  feet  in  thickness.  Every  now  and  again  it  has  been 
completely  regilt.  Sinbyu  Shin,  king  of  Burma,  towards 
the  end  of  the  last  century,  used  his  own  weight  in  gold  in 


XV  PAGODAS  i6s 

the  process.  He  scaled  twelve  stone  three,  a  remarkably 
good  weight  for  a  Burman,  and  the  gold  used  cost  over 
;^9000.  The  last  occasion  when  the  whole  vast  bulk  was 
gilt  was  in  1871,  when  King  Minddn  sent  down  his  hti. 
On  every  feast-day  and  ubond,  however,  numbers  of  the 
pious  clamber  up  wherever  they  can  and  fix  on  little  squares 
of  gold-leaf,  packets  of  which  can  be  bought  at  the  stalls 
below  for  a  few  rupees.  The  consequence  is  that  every  now 
and  again  the  spire  breaks  out  in  a  rash  of  bright  patches, 
which  give  it  a  mysterious,  rough,  uneven  appearance  on 
clear  moonlight  nights.  Of  late  years  a  great  part  of  the 
lower  portion  has  been  covered  with  thin  plates  of  gold 
brought  by  the  pious  from  all  parts  of  the  Buddhist  world. 

It  is  difficult  to  say  what  the  real  age  of  the  building  is, 
if,  as  sceptical  Englishmen  tell  us,  we  are  not  to  place 
implicit  faith  in  the  palm-leaf  record.  Trustworthy  docu- 
ments reach  no  further  back  than  the  time  of  the  Peguan 
Queen  Shin-saw-bu,  who  reigned  in  the  early  part  of  the 
sixteenth  century  ;  but  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that 
a  pagoda  existed  there  long  before  her  time.  The  shrine 
has  remained  unaltered  in  size  or  shape  since  1 5  64,  and 
probably  will  never  be  altered  again.  At  all  times  and  at 
all  distances  it  looks  imposing  and  sublime,  like  the  religion 
whose  followers  have  built  it. 

At  the  base  of  the  pagoda  hill  are  many  monasteries 
embowered  in  their  groves  of  palmyra  palms  and  shady 
trees ;  and  to  the  south  is  a  small  convent  of  nuns,  not  far 
from  the  zayat  which  the  king  of  Siam  had  built  for 
pilgrims  from  his  dominions.  Similar  rest-houses  line  the 
Saung-dan  all  the  way  up  to  the  pagoda,  and  they  always 
have  occupants ;  while  at  the  season  of  the  feast  in 
Tabaung  they  are  crowded  to  overflowing.  Lepers,  and 
cripples,  and  nuns  in  their  white  robes,  line  the  steps,  and 
cry  out  in  piteous  tones  for  alms  from  the  passers  -  by. 
Nearer  the  top  and  round  the  platform  itself  are  sellers  of 
candles  and  coloured  tapers,  Chinese  incense  -  sticks,  and 
prayer-flags,  along  with  abundance  of  gold-leaf.  Numbers 
of  young  girls  sit  about  with  flowers,  especially  of  the 
lotus,  and  meats  of  different  kinds  for  offerings.  Others 
— these   always  enfranchised  pagoda   slaves — sell  toys  and 


i66  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

articles  for  household  use.  The  platform  is  never  deserted. 
Even  long  after  midnight  the  voice  of  the  worshipper  may- 
be heard  in  the  night  air,  chanting  in  solemn  monotone 
his  pious  aspirations,  while  on  a  duty  -  day,  and  especially 
on  a  feast-day,  the  laughing,  joyous  crowd  of  men  and 
maidens,  in  their  gay  national  dress,  makes  the  platform  of 
the  Shwe  Dag6n  one  of  the  finest  sights  in  the  world. 

The  Shwe  Dagdn  Paya  is  by  far  the  most  widely  cele- 
brated of  the  great  Buddhist  shrines,  but  there  are  others 
which,  if  not  so  venerated  in  other  lands,  still  enjoy  an  even 
greater  local  reputation  for  sanctity,  and  attract  pilgrims 
from  all  parts  of  Burma  and  the  dependent  hills,  with  now 
and  again  a  band  of  pious  worshippers  from  distant  countries. 
Chief  among  these  is  the  Shwe  Hmaw-daw  at  Pegu,  which 
commands  Taking  worship  before  even  the  shrine  of  "  the 
slanted  beam "  on  the  Theinguttara  hill.  The  pond  close 
by  it  was  covered  with  lotus  blossoms  immediately  on  the 
construction  of  the  shapely  spire  and  the  great  Tha-gya 
Min,  and  countless  Byammas  and  Nat-d^was  assisted  at  the 
enshrinement  of  the  relics.  As  with  many  other  fanes,  the 
king  granted  to  the  pagoda,  and  set  apart  from  secular  uses 
for  ever,  the  whole  space  round  it  on  which  the  shadow  of 
the  original  pile  fell  between  sunset  and  sunrise.  Several 
hundred  families  were  dedicated  to  its  service,  and  in  1881 
large  sums  were  raised  throughout  all  the  low  country  for 
the  manufacture  of  a  new  hti  and  the  gilding  of  the  whole 
surface,  while  many  wondrous  signs  in  the  neighbourhood 
attested  the  sacred  character  of  the  undertaking.  Similarly 
the  Shwe  San-daw  at  Prome,  with  its  multitude  of  bells  on 
the  cramped  hill-top,  enjoys  a  special  reputation  on  account 
of  the  prophecy  there  spoken  by  Shin  Gautama  himself,  and 
the  connection  of  the  paya  with  the  national  hero  -  king, 
Dwut-tabaung,  as  recorded  in  the  sacred  books.  In  proof 
of  this  there  exists  to  the  present  day,  and  may  be  seen  at 
the  foot  of  the  hill,  a  huge  stone  with  an  inscription  which 
none  but  the  pure-minded  can  read,  and  few  even  of  them 
understand.  In  other  places  examples  of  this  duganan  kye- 
ganan,  a  kind  of  cypher-writing,  or  cryptograph,  as  it  appears 
to  the  unenfranchised,  exists,  and  usually  records  in  mystic 
phraseology  and  inverted  orthography  the  alms  presented  to 


XV  PAGODAS  167 

the  pagoda.  Many  of  the  lists  of  donations  are,  however, 
graven  in  a  less  cramped  kyauk-sa,  or  "  stone  writing,"  the 
givers  having  probably  had  a  weak  hankering  after  earthly 
fame.  Thus  a  goodly  marble  slab  with  a  long  list  of  names 
may  be  seen  at  the  Shwe  Hmaw  -  daw,  and  a  tablet  near 
the  Mya  Thal6n,  the  Temple  of  the  Emerald  Bed  (of  the 
Buddha),  at  Ma-gwe  in  Upper  Burma  records  how  Min  Din 
and  Min  La -go  had  in  the  year  2399  of  religion  covered 
the-  whole  paya  with  yellow  cloth,  repaired  it  thoroughly, 
and  had  it  painted  red  and  gold.  An  exact  account  is 
given  of  the  amount  of  materials  used  and  the  money 
paid  to  workmen,  and  the  inscription  ends  up  with  a  prayer 
that  the  family  of  the  donors  might  be  gratified  with  the 
birth  of  a  son.  Near  it  is  a  magic  stone  with  the  figure 
of  a  hare,  surrounded  by  stars,  deeply  graven  in  it  to 
represent  the  moon,  and  a  peacock  to  represent  the  sun. 

A  frequent  adjunct  of  many  pagodas  is  the  Shwe  Zet- 
daw,  the  imprint  of  the  Lord  Buddha's  foot.  It  is  too  nearly 
square  to  command  a  painter's  or  sculptor's  praise,  and  the 
toes  are  all  of  the  same  length,  as  may  be  seen  in  the 
example  carried  off  by  Captain  Marryat,  the  novelist,  in  the 
first  Burmese  war,  and  now  preserved  in  the  British  Museum. 
The  sole  is  divided  into  a  hundred  and  eight  squares  (taya 
shi'  kwet),  and  on  them  are  many  lekkhana,  representations 
of  monasteries,  pyathats,  tigers,  kalawaiks,  henthas,  parrots, 
seipputi  fish,  and  the  like,  to  signify  that  all  things  were 
under  the  feet  of  the  Great  Master.  The  number  of  beads 
on  the  rosary  corresponds  with  the  number  of  squares  on  the 
Shwe  Zet-daw.  The  most  famous  example  is  at  the  pagoda 
of  that  name  east  of  Mandalay,  the  great  resort  of  the 
Shans,  and  another  well  -  known  one  is  opposite  Magwe, 
inland  from  Minbu,  where  the  mud  volcanoes  are,  "  the  boil- 
ing vats  of  the  nagas."  But  there  are  many  specimens  all 
over  the  country,  not  a  few  with  the  figure  of  a  naga,  or 
sea  monster,  reared  over  them. 

Most  famous  among  the  small  pagodas  is  the  Kyaik-hti- 
yo,  insignificant  in  size,  but  unique  from  its  position.  The 
hill  on  which  it  stands  takes  its  name  from  the  paya,  and 
is  over  three  thousand  five  hundred  feet  in  height.  On  its 
summit  are  numbers  of  granitoid  boulders,  many  of  them 


i68  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

balanced  in  a  most  extraordinary  way,  and  all  the  more 
striking  surmounted  by  little  shrines.  The  Kyaik  -  hti  -  yo 
stands  on  a  huge  boulder,  which  itself  rests  on  a  projecting 
rock,  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  hill  by  a  chasm,  fathom- 
less to  the  eye,  and  reaching,  so  say  the  villagers,  far  below 
the  depth  of  the  hill.  The  boulder  stands  on  the  extreme 
verge  of  the  bare  rock,  and  hangs  over  it  as  if  a  gust  of  wind 
or  a  few  extra  pounds  added  would  make  it  topple  over  and 
crash  down  the  dizzy  height  far  away  into  the  green  valley 
below.  To  this  shrine  people  from  all  parts  of  the  country, 
but  more  especially  the  Talaings,  come  in  the  month  of 
February,  and  cast  jewellery  and  precious  stones  into  the 
yawning  rift,  and,  clambering  up  the  rock  by  the  aid  of  a 
bamboo  ladder,  cover  the  paya  with  flowers  and  small 
lighted  candles,  making  it  look  like  a  new  nebulous  con- 
stellation from  the  far-off  plains.  Inquirers  are  told  with 
the  utmost  confidence  that  the  pagoda  is  five  thousand 
years  old.  It  certainly  has  been  there  time  out  of  mind, 
and  the  boulder  has  solely  been  kept  in  its  place  by  the 
hair  buried  under  the  shrine,  and  given  to  a  hermit  by  the 
great  Budh  himself  when  he  returned  from  Tawa-deintha, 
the  second  heaven  of  the  Nat-ddwas,  on  the  occasion  of  his 
preaching  the  Law  to  his  mother.  Near  it  is  a  spring  which 
always  flows  freely  with  crystalline  water,  unless  there  is  evil 
talk  among  the  assembled  people  or  if  the  sexes  are  not 
separated.  A  complete  Thin  -  b6ng  -  gyi,  the  alphabet,  is 
graven  on  the  rock.  The  view  from  the  pagoda  is  superb ; 
bounded  on  the  east  by  the  blue  Martaban  hills,  fading 
away  into  the  dim  peaks  of  Siam,  and  extending  south- 
wards over  tangled  jungle  and  yellow  paddy  lands  to  the 
bright  waves  of  the  Gulf  of  Martaban,  while  to  the  west 
the  jewelled  speck  of  the  pagoda  at  Pegu  almost  leads 
one  to  imagine  the  stately  bulk  of  the  sacred  Shwe  Dagdn 
beyond. 

There  are  many  such  shrines  on  the  abrupt  limestone 
hills  in  the  Maulmein  district,  where  the  devotee  has  to 
clamber  up  bare  rock  faces,  and  scramble  through  treacherous 
ddbris,  occasionally  swinging  over  perilous  deeps  on  the  pre- 
carious footing  of  a  rough  bamboo  ladder  ;  his  offerings  tied 
to   his   back,  and  his  heart  between  his  teeth.       And  yet 


PAGODAS  169 


women  are  found  to  make  the  ascent,  especially  at  the  Zw^- 
kabin,  the  precipitous  "  Duke  of  York's  nose,"  some  forty 
miles  up  the  Sittang  river  from  Maulmein,  where  the 
Englishman  is  lost  in  amazement  as  to  how  they  ever  got 
the  bricks  and  ironwork  up  the  rocks  to  construct  the 
pagoda  and  the  hti.  Yet  thousands  of  people  scramble  up 
at  the  time  of  the  annual  feast,  and  the  pagoda  is  as  well 
adorned  with  offerings  as  any  in  the  flat  lands  down  by  the 
sea,  where  a  rise  of  a  few  feet  in  the  ocean  would  put 
hundreds  of  square  miles  under  water. 

Every  district  pagoda  has  its  special  feast  and  all  are 
well  attended,  for  even  though  the  locality  may  be  thinly 
populated  there  are  always  to  be  found  visitors  from  other 
places  round  about ;  partly  as  a  kind  of  neighbourly  cour- 
tesy, partly  because  there  is  always  some  fun  in  the  shape 
of  a  travelling  troupe,  or  a  marionette  play,  at  a  pagoda 
feast,  and  chiefly,  there  can  be  no  denying,  from  a  feeling  of 
genuine  piety  and  a  real  desire  to  acquire  merit.  Pagoda 
feasts  enable  a  Burman  to  see  the  world,  as  far  as  it  can  be 
seen  in  his  native  land.  Without  the  periodical  festivals  he 
would  only  stop  chewing  betel  in  the  wattled  bothy  where 
he  was  born  to  go  out  and  smoke  a  cheroot  round  his  patch 
of  paddy  land,  and  speculate  on  the  time  when  the  Rangoon 
or  Bassein  broker  would  come  up  to  buy  his  crop  from  him. 
Most  of  the  district  Burmans  would  never  see  the  Englishman 
and  his  doings  were  it  not  for  the  annual  pilgrimage  to 
Rangoon  to  worship  at  the  Shwe  Dag6n.  During  the  rest 
of  the  year,  unless  he  lives  in  the  headquarters  of  an 
assistant  commissionership,  all  he  sees  of  the  British  occupa- 
tion is  a  stray  visit  from  a  young  official  out  shooting,  or 
the  chance  appearance  of  an  inspector  of  police  in  search 
of  a  criminal. 

Similarly  very  few  Burmans,  except  those  attracted  by 
business  to  the  capital,  would  ever  visit  Mandalay  were  it 
not  for  the  great  "  Arakan  pagoda."  The  Maha  Myat  Muni 
Paya  is  rendered  especially  sacred  by  the  sitting  image  of 
Shin  Gautama  there  preserved,  and  is  on  this  account 
regarded  by  Upper  Burmans  as  not  inferior  in  sanctity  to 
the  Shwe  Dagdn  itself  The  huge  brass  image,  twelve  feet 
in  height,  was  brought  over  the  hills  from  Akyab  in  the  year 


I70  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


1784  (1146  B.E.).  According  to  the  inscription,  the  king 
drew  this  Arakan  Gautama  to  the  shrine  by  the  charm  of 
his  piety,  but  the  historical  books  speak  only  of  rough  force 
of  arms.  However  that  may  be,  it  is  a  mystery  how  the 
huge  masses  of  metal — the  figure  was  cast  in  three  sections 
— were  brought  over  the  steep,  pathless  mountain  sides. 
The  inscription  flatters  the  king,  and  the  monks  ascribe  the 
feat  to  supernatural  help,  as  they  do  the  faultless  joining 
together  of  the  pieces.  The  image  was  set  up,  so  says  the 
legend,  during  the  lifetime  of  the  Great  Master.  The  utmost 
skill  and  most  persistent  energy  had  failed  in  fitting  the  parts 
together,  and  the  feelings  of  the  pious  were  fearfully  lacerated 
by  the  cracking  of  the  head  in  their  futile  struggles.  But 
the  Buddha,  perceiving  from  afar  what  was  going  on,  and 
ever  full  of  pity,  came  himself  to  the  spot,  and,  embracing 
the  image  seven  times,  so  joined  together  the  fragments  that 
the  most  sceptical  eye  cannot  detect  the  points  of  junction, 
while  the  head  was  restored  to  its  pristine  smoothness.  So 
like  was  the  image,  and  so  sublime  the  effulgence  which 
shone  around  during  the  manifestation,  that  the  reverently 
gazing  crowd  could  not  determine  which  was  the  model  and 
which  the  Master.  The  resemblance  has  no  doubt  faded 
away  with  the  wickedness  of  later  times,  for  unlike  most 
Burmese  images,  the  Paya  Gyi  has  most  gross  and  repulsive 
features.  Inspired  by  the  divine  embrace  the  figure  spoke, 
but  afterwards  received  the  Teacher's  command  never  again 
to  open  its  lips  till  Arimaddya  should  come  to  reveal  the  new 
Law.  The  shrine  in  which  it  stands  is  one  of  the  most 
splendid  in  the  country.  The  image  itself  is  covered  by  a 
great  seven-roofed  pya-that  with  goodly  pillars,  the  ceiling 
gorgeous  with  mosaics.  Long  colonnades,  supported  on  2  5  2 
massive  pillars,  all  richly  gilt  and  carved,  with  frescoed  roofs 
and  sides,  lead  up  to  it,  and  daily  from  the  royal  palace  used 
to  come  sumptuous  offerings  in  stately  procession,  marshalled 
by  one  of  the  ministers  and  shaded  by  the  white  umbrella, 
the  emblem  of  sovereignty  and  the  prerogative  of  the  Arbiter 
of  Existence.  On  its  first  arrival  a  hundred  and  twenty 
families  of  Arakanese  were  assigned  as  slaves  of  the  paya, 
and  the  number  was  frequently  afterwards  added  to.  In  a 
long  gallery   there   is  an  enormous  number  of  inscriptions. 


XV  PAGODAS  171 

gathered  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  many  on  gilt  slabs  of 
marble,  a  still  greater  number  on  sandstone.  All  day  long 
circles  of  constantly  renewed  worshippers  chant  aloud  the 
praises  of  the  Buddha,  and  the  air  is  heavy  with  the  effluvia 
of  candles  and  the  odours  from  thousands  of  smouldering 
incense-sticks.  Within  the  precincts  of  the  pagoda  is  a  large 
tank,  tenanted  by  sacred  turtle,  who  wax  huge  on  the  rice 
and  cakes  thrown  them  by  the  multitudes  of  pilgrims. 
Probably  not  even  at  the  Shwe  Dag6n  Paya  is  more  enthusi- 
astic devotion  shown  than  at  the  Paya  Gyi  in  Mandalay.  It 
is  regarded  with  special  reverence  by  the  Shans. 

Near  the  royal  city,  about  nine  miles  up  the  river,  on 
the  right  bank,  is  a  huge  monster  of  a  pagoda,  built  on  a 
low  green  bluff,  running  out  from  the  barren,  pagoda-sprinkled 
Sagaing  hills.  The  groundwork  of  the  great  misshapen 
Mengdn  Paya  covers  a  square  of  450  feet  and  its  height  is 
165  feet,  about  one-third  of  the  elevation  intended  for  it 
when  completed ;  but  Mintaya  Gyee,  the  crack  -  brained 
monarch  who  founded  it,  ran  short  of  funds,  and  the  building 
was  stopped.  Nature  was  jealous  of  the  miniature  mountain 
— the  largest  mass  of  brickwork  in  the  world — and  an 
earthquake  in  1838  rent  the  gigantic  cube  with  fantastic 
fissures  from  top  to  bottom,  and  cast  down  great  masses  of 
masonry,  tons  upon  tons  in  weight,  and  yet  not  sufficient  to 
destroy  the  main  structure,  massive  and  imperishable  as 
Time  itself.  There  it  stands,  unharmed  alike  by  rain-floods 
and  blistering  suns,  and  laughing  even  at  earthquakes. 
According  to  Burmese  custom,  Bodaw  Paya  built  a  model 
for  the  guidance  of  the  workmen.  This  is  called  the  P6n- 
daw  Paya,  and  is  fifteen  feet  high.  This  consists  of  a  bell- 
shaped  dome  surmounted  by  a  sikkhdra,  a  pointed  spire,  and 
resting  on  a  square  plinth  of  solid  brickwork.  It  is  a  hybrid 
between  the  Shwezig6n  and  Ananda  pagodas  of  Pagan,  and 
has  all  the  requirements  of  a  place  of  worship,  circuit  walls, 
staircases,  ornamented  arches,  and  leogryphs. 

Perhaps  it  was  this  proud  stability  which  induced  King 
Mind6n  Min  to  attempt  an  even  greater  work.  He  planned 
a  huge  shrine  to  be  raised  east  of  Mandalay,  under  the 
shadow  of  the  Shan  hills.  The  Yankin-taung  Paya  was  to 
be  larger  than  the  Mengdn  monster,  and  it  was  to  be  built 


172  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

of  stone.  A  fair-sized  hill  was  hewn  into  blocks  to  furnish 
material.  Canals  several  miles  long  were  dug  to  convey  the 
stones,  and  huge  lighters  were  built  upon  them.  The  whole 
kingdom  was  called  upon  to  furnish  men  to  labour  a  few 
months  at  a  time  on  the  pious  work.  Architects,  monks, 
foreigners,  were  called  upon  to  offer  suggestions  and  make 
plans.  A  French  engineer,  who  declared  that,  with  5000 
men  working  every  day,  it  would  require  eighty-four  years 
to  complete  the  original  design,  came  near  being  crucified  on 
the  spot.  After  four  years'  labour  the  basement,  some  four 
feet  high,  was  completed,  and  then  the  Convener  of  the  Fifth 
Great  Synod  returned  to  the  village  of  Nats.  Theebaw  Min, 
who  succeeded  him,  was  the  last  man  likely  to  finish  the 
work,  and  there  lie  the  mountains  of  squared  stones  and  the 
heaps  of  rubble  for  the  centre.  The  canals  have  silted  up 
and  the  lighters  foundered  with  their  unloaded  cargoes,  and 
instead  of  a  monument.  King  Minddn  has  simply  left  a 
ghastly  chaos.  What  kan  King  Mintaya  Gyee  must  have 
had  to  get  so  far  as  he  did  ! 

The  whole  neighbourhood  of  Mandalay,  Amarapoora,  and 
Ava  is  rich  with  splendid  fanes  ;  but  a  detailed  account  of 
them  would  only  weary  the  reader,  as  the  visiting  of  them 
tires  out  the  non -religious  observer.  Nevertheless  some 
must  at  least  be  adverted  to.  There  is  the  Ku-thu-daw,  the 
"  Royal  Merit  House,"  the  richly-gilt  shrine  built  by  King 
Theebaw's  uncle,  the  "  War  Prince,"  one  of  the  most  compact 
and  tastefully  adorned  of  pagodas,  with  beautifully  carved 
gilt  gates,  the  main  spire  being  surrounded  by  a  triple  square 
of  shrines,  each  shrine  containing  a  marble  slab  engraved 
with  a  chapter  of  the  Bitaghat  on  the  back  and  front.  The 
text  of  the  three  volumes  of  the  Buddhist  Scripture  was 
carefully  collated  by  the  most  learned  Sadaws  in  the  royal 
city,  and  is  considered  the  best  extant. 

Especially  interesting  also  is  the  Atumashi,  the  incom- 
parable paya,the  great,  oblong,  lofty-terraced  chapel  monastery 
of  Minddn  Min,  outwardly  plain  white,  but  within  splendid 
with  a  gorgeously  decorated  shrine,  purple  and  scarlet,  and 
gold  hangings,  and  velvet  carpets.  Here  were  preserved  the 
gold  spittoon,  betel-box,  kalawaik,  and  other  paraphernalia 
of  its  founder.      Unhappily  it  was  burnt  in  1892. 


PAGODAS  173 


Down  the  river  there  are  hundreds  of  others  of  every 
variety  and  degree  of  decoration.  There  is  the  Naga  Yon 
Paya,  the  whole  building  wrought  into  the  form  of  a  dragon  ; 
the  huge  round -domed  Kaung-hmu-daw,  and  the  "king's 
victory  pagoda "  at  Sagaing,  the  "  golden  cock-scratching," 
on  the  other  side,  commemorating  a  favourite  legend  of  the 
boundless  charity  of  the  Budh.  There  are  glistening  white 
pinnacles,  or  flashing  gold  spires,  far  up  the  Sagaing  hills, 
with  thousands  of  steps  wending  wearily  up  over  the  steep, 
rough  hill-side,  and  gazing  up  to  them  from  the  Amarapoora 
side  are  great  massy  temples,  frowning  over  the  river  with 
all  the  stern  solidity  of  a  knightly  hold.  Each  has  its 
legend,  some  tale  of  bloodshed  or  piety,  some  event  in 
Burmese  history,  or  birth-story  of  the  Buddha. 

Most  renowned,  however,  for  its  pagodas  is  Pagan,  in 
many  respects  the  most  remarkable  religious  city  in  the 
world.  Jerusalem,  Rome,  KiefF,  Benares,  none  of  them  can 
boast  the  multitude  of  temples,  and  the  lavishness  of  design 
and  ornament  that  make  marvellous  the  deserted  capital  on 
the  Irrawaddy.  Deserted  it  practically  is,  for  the  few  flimsy 
huts  that  stand  by  the  river  are  inhabited  only  by  pagoda 
slaves  and  men  condemned  to  perpetual  beggary.  For  eight 
miles  along  the  river-bank  and  extending  to  a  depth  of  two 
miles  inland,  the  whole  space  is  thickly  studded  with  pagodas 
of  all  sizes  and  shapes,  and  the  very  ground  is  so  thickly 
covered  with  crumbling  remnants  of  vanished  shrines,  that 
according  to  the  popular  saying  you  cannot  move  foot  or 
hand  without  touching  a  sacred  thing.  Some  of  the  zedis 
are  all  but  perfect.  Restored  by  the  pious,  they  stand  out 
glistening  snow-white,  only  to  render  more  striking  the 
hoary,  weather-beaten  ruins  of  their  less-cared-for  neighbours. 
Here  the  bell -shaped,  solid  pyramid  of  Lower  Burma  is 
rarely  seen.  The  religious  structures  fully  merit  the  word 
temple  as  understood  in  ordinary  language.  To  quote  Yule, 
who  gives  a  detailed  account  of  the  principal  shrines  in  his 
Mission  to  Ava,  there  are  all  kinds:  "The  bell -shaped 
pyramid  of  dead  brickwork  in  all  its  varieties  ;  the  same 
raised  over  a  square  or  octagonal  cell,  containing  an  image 
of  the  Buddha;  the  bluff",  knob-like  dome  of  the  Ceylon  Dago- 
bats,  with  the  square  cap  which  seems  to  have  characterised 


174  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  most  ancient  Buddhist  chaityas,  as  represented  in  the 
sculptures  at  Sanchi,  and  in  the  ancient  model  pagodas  found 
near  Buddhist  remains  in  India;  the  fantastic  bu-paya,  or 
pumpkin  pagoda,  which  seemed  rather  like  a  fragment  of 
what  we  might  conceive  the  architecture  of  the  moon  than 
anything  terrestrial,  and  many  variations  on  these  types. 
But  the  predominant  and  characteristic  form  is  that  of  the 
cruciform  vaulted  temple." 

The  Irrawaddy  just  below  Pagan  widens  out  like  a 
gigantic  lake  to  over  two  miles  in  breadth,  and  the  view  of 
the  sacred  city  from  far  down  the  river  is  particularly  iine. 
Towering  above  the  others  rise  the  great  temples  of  Ananda, 
Ta-pyi-nyu,  and  Gawdapalin,  like  visions  of  old-world 
cathedrals  strayed  into  the  desert.  Round  about  them 
gradually  rise  into  view  hoary  round  towers,  like  a  border 
"  peel " ;  airy  minarets  as  of  an  underground  mosque ; 
apparitions  like  the  pyramids,  chiselled  into  fairy  terraced 
fretwork  ;  huge  bulbous  mushrooms  with  slim  lanterns  on 
their  backs,  like  the  wide  studio  of  a  mad  architect.  There 
is  a  memorial  line  which,  placing  letters  for  numbers,  declares 
the  sum  total  of  the  pagodas  to  be  9999. 

Hlfe  win-yo  than  ta-nyan  nyan 
Pagan  paya  paung. 

The  cartwheel's  creaking  strains 
Pass  Pagahn's  storied  fanes. 

Probably,  however,  there  are  not  nearly  so  many  in 
anything  like  a  complete  state.  Pagan  ceased  to  be  capital 
in  1284  A.D.  The  Emperor  of  China  had  sent  a  vast  army 
to  avenge  the  murder  of  an  ambassador.  The  Burmese  king 
pulled  down  a  thousand  arched  temples,  a  thousand  smaller 
ones,  and  four  thousand  square  temples  to  strengthen  the 
fortifications.  But  a  prophecy  found  under  one  of  the  dese- 
crated shrines  robbed  him  of  his  courage,  and  he  fled  to  the 
south  ;  and  ever  since  Pagan  has  remained  in  its  present  prac- 
tically deserted  state.  The  whole  ground  within  the  old  walls 
is  strewn  with  bricks  and  mortar.  Some  of  the  zedis  are 
strangled  with  jungle  growth,  huge  bushes  spring  from  their 
summits  and  sides  and  tear  the  masonry  asunder,  and  with 
the  vast  majority  no  attempt  is  made  to  arrest  the  ravages 


PAGODAS  175 


of  time,  but  Mr.  Taw  Sein  Ko  says  in  his  report  of  1 908  : 
"  Numerous  terra-cotta  tiles  have  been  found  in  the  basements 
and  corridors  of  several  of  the  pagodas.  They  illustrate 
scenes  in  the  jdtakas  and  in  the  life  of  the  Buddha  Gautama. 
They  are  of  two  types.  In  the  Ananda  and  Shwezigdn  the 
tiles  are  enamelled  green  and  show  Chinese  influence.  In 
the  Petleik  pagoda  they  are  of  red  baked  clay  and  have 
South-Indian  resemblances.  All  three  shrines  belong  to  the 
eleventh  century  A.D.  The  stone  sculptures  in  the  Ananda 
are  fine,  and  the  pose,  drapery,  and  contour  are  distinctly 
Indian.  In  the  Sein  nyet  pagoda,  halfway  between  Myinpagan 
and  Thiyipyitsaya,  of  the  eleventh  century,  the  Chinese 
influence  preponderates.  The  twin  Petleik  pagodas  are  at 
Thiyipyitsaya." 

Few,  if  any,  contain  actual  relics.  The  cloistered  and 
terraced  temples  are  simply  receptacles  for  huge  images  of 
the  Buddha  and  others.  The  corridors  of  the  Ananda  and 
Gawdapalin  are  filled  with  sculptured  groups  representing 
events  in  the  life  of  the  Great  Master,  and  figures  of  eminent 
disciples  and  yahanda.  In  the  central  recesses,  where  are 
the  colossal  figures  of  the  Buddhas,  the  light  is  cunningly 
admitted  from  above  so  as  to  fall  on  the  calm  gilded  face, 
producing  a  most  weird  and  striking  effect.  But  Pagan 
would  require  a  monograph  itself,  and  with  it  should  be 
compared  Shwegu,  between  Mandalay  and  Bhamaw.  That 
sacred  island  is  a  perfect  forest  of  pagodas,  and  only  fails  to 
obtain  wider  fame  because  of  the  existence  of  Pagan.  There 
are  999  shrines  within  its  limits,  and  a  much  larger  propor- 
tion of  these  exist  intact  than  is  the  case  with  Pagan,  though 
none  of  them  can  compare  with  the  magnificence  of  the 
Ananda. 

The  question  of  the  architecture  of  the  Pagan  temples, 
which  is  so  different  in  style  from  that  found  in  other  parts 
of  Burma,  has  been  fully  discussed  in  Yule's  admirable 
Mission  to  Ava.  He  omits,  however,  to  notice  the  fact 
that  Anawrata-saw  Min,  when  he  established  Buddhism  in 
Pagan,  built  all  the  pagodas  and  temples  after  the  exact 
model  of  those  then  existing  in  Thatdn,  in  the  same  order 
and  of  the  same  size.  The  town  of  That6n,  above  Maul- 
mein,  was  the  first  settlement  of  Thawna  and  Ottara,  the 


176  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

missionaries  from  Central  India  who  introduced  the  teachings 
of  the  Lord  Buddha  into  Burma.  There  was  certainly  an 
ancient  Hindu  colony  there,  and  its  inhabitants  may  have 
brought  some  notions  of  their  architecture  with  them.  But 
whether  this  be  so  or  not,  Burmans  find  source  for  pride  in 
the  admitted  fact  that  "  there  is  nothing  in  India  to  compare 
with  the  classical  beauty  of  some  of  the  smaller  temples,  or 
the  stupendous  architectural  majesty  of  the  Ananda,  or  the 
Ta-pyi-nyu." 

The  following  song  is  taken  from  a  very  favourite  play, 
Sawp^  Sawtne,  written  by  a  Pegu  dramatist  and  published 
in  1880,  and  gives  an  idea  of  the  canticles  sung  at  the 
dedication  of  pagodas  and  similar  ceremonies.  It  is  set 
to  a  very  popular  air,  the  Yoddaya  Nan-thein  Than,  "the 
Siamese  Palace  Tune,"  but  I  have  not  ventured  to  try  to 
reproduce  the  original  complicated  metre.  The  sikke  or 
magistrate  in  question  was  U  Maung  Gal6,  a  younger 
brother  of  the  late  U  On,  long  the  only  Burmese  CLE., 
and  once  second  judge  of  the  Small  Cause  Court  in 
Rangoon. 

THE  GILDING  OF  THE  SHWE   MAW-DAW 

Far-famed  and  bright,  the  Shwe  Maw-daw 

Is  known  where'er  the  Sacred  Law 

To  toiling  milhons  brings  the  peace. 

Bids  grief  be  still  and  turmoil  cease. 

Fair  glory  of  Peguan  land 

Revered  on  earth's  most  distant  strand, 

Not  more  Dagon's  great  golden  pile 

Hath  honour  in  the  Southern  Isle, 

Where'er  beneath  the  zampu  tree 

The  pious  bend  the  suppliant  knee, 

Than  thou  the  glorious  lotus  shrine 

High  temple  of  the  hairs  divine. 

As  leaps  on  high  the  funeral  flame 

Of  some  yahan  of  sainted  name, 

A  beacon  light  to  Neh'ban's  rest 

And  haven  sure  to  men  distressed, 

So  skywards  reared,  thy  shapely  spire 

Upsprings  a  pyramid  of  fire. 

The  hoar  seer's  words  are  now  proved  true. 
Spoke  ages  since  while  yet  all  new 


PAGODAS  177 


The  callow  world  in  earnest  youth 
Revered  the  Buddha's  law  of  truth, 
Ere  yet  the  wiles  of  lust  and  wrath 
Beguiled  men  from  the  Noble  Path, 
And  ignorance  of  sins,  the  worst 
With  which  the  race  of  man  is  cursed  : 

When  white  men  reign 

Thy  glories  wane. 

Yet  blaze  again 

While  yet  they  reign. 

High  honour  to  our  Sikke  Min, 
Who  purged  away  the  stain  of  sin. 
Now  radiant  as  a  mass  of  gold, 
The  temple  glitters  as  of  old  ; 
Ten  thousand  districts  chant  his  name. 
The  Sekya  systems  vaunt  his  fame, 
High  winner  of  the  holy  rest. 
Thrice  is  the  benefactor  blessed. 
For  him  the  last  of  lives  is  run 
The  ferry  past  and  Ne'ban  won. 
Great  guerdon  gains  such  gift  as  this, 
A  sainted  name,  eternal  bliss. 
On  earth  renown  will  live  for  aye. 
Beyond  ne'er  more  to  breathe  a  sigh. 
Whenas  the  sacred  work  was  wrought 
The  Tha-gya  Min  came  down  unsought. 
Sweet  music  breathed  from  angel  bands 
And  Ddwas  sped  the  workers'  hands, 
A  nimbus  shone  around  the  spire 
And  gleamed  each  gem  with  holy  fire, 
As  though  on  high  in  lucent  coil 
The  sacred  hair  did  grace  the  toil. 
And  once  again  in  hermit  guise 
The  Buddha  Prince  blessed  the  emprise. 

Hast  seen  the  lotus-bud  in  prayer 
Fold  fervent  leaves  ;  with  odours  rare 
Invoke  the  Buddha's  gracious  power 
To  save  mankind  in  danger's  hour  ? 
Hast  seen  the  pongyi's  garb  of  peace. 
The  golden  robe,  strong  to  release 
The  suppliant  from  endless  strife. 
Unceasing  change,  the  pains  of  life  ? 
So  prayerful  stands  the  holy  fane. 
So  new-born  gleams  in  golden  grain  ; 
And  calmly  sleep  the  hairs  divine, 
Meet  relic  for  so  fair  a  shrine  ; 
And  hither  on  the  holy  day 
From  far  and  near  men  wend  their  way 


N 


178  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    chap,  xv 

And  kneeling  pray  that  they  may  gain 
Release  from  fitful  change  and  pain. 
Ah,  Saviour  Buddha,  hear  them  call 
And  grant  the  long,  last  life  to  all. 

High  striving  to  the  upper  air, 

Great  convent  of  the  Sacred  Hair, 

Thou'st  stood  upon  the  foreland's  brow 

From  misty  ages  e'en  till  now. 

The  Budh  himself,  with  his  own  mouth, 

Stood  on  this  hill,  and,  looking  south. 

Foretold  that  on  this  spot  should  stand 

A  fane  far-famed  in  farthest  land  ; 

And  hither  came  the  brethren  twain 

And  reared  with  stone  of  precious  vein 

A  lordly  pile  and  gilt  it  o'er 

And  many  a  monarch  added  store. 

Till  last  of  all  our  Sikkfe  came 

And  joined  to  theirs  a  pious  name. 

From  youngest  years  till  hoarest  hours, 

Peguans  all,  great  fame  is  ours  ; 

Two  Henthas  dwelt  here,  male  and  mate, 

Ten  thousand  kings  kept  regal  state. 

And  ever  till  the  kalpas  end 

Will  pious  pilgrims  hither  wend. 

Ah,  Sikkfe,  great  reward  is  thine, 

Thy  fame  doth  last  while  lasts  the  shrine 

And  ere  the  shrine  falls,  falls  the  world. 

Pegu  was  the  capital  of  the  Taking  kingdom  ot 
Hanthawadi.  Shin  Gautama  foretold  that  it  would  be 
founded  in  the  1 1 1 6th  year  of  his  religion,  and  gave  two  of 
his  hairs  to  two  brothers,  Maha  Thala  and  Sula  Thala,  to 
enshrine  on  the  Thudathana  Myinthila  Hill.  A  pagoda 
fifty  cubits  high  was  erected  over  them,  and  this  was  the 
original  of  the  Shwe  Maw  (or  Hmaw)  -daw  Paya. 


CHAPTER    XVI 

THE   LEGEND   OF   THE   RANGOON    PAGODA 

At  the  end  of  the  last  world-period  five  lotus-buds  sprang 
up  on  the  Theinguttara  Hill,  where  now  the  Shwe  Dag6n 
pagoda  stands.  They  opened  their  leaves  and  disclosed 
each  of  them  within  its  chalice  a  thengan,  the  holy  yellow 
robe  of  the  monastic  brethren.  Then  a  huge  bird  settled  on 
the  top  of  the  hill  and  laid  an  egg,  and  from  this  was 
presently  hatched  the  kalawaik,  the  carrying  bird  of  Vishnu, 
which  seized  the  sacred  garments  and  flew  up  to  the  heavens. 
This  was  an  omen  foretelling  the  appearance  of  five  Buddhas 
in  the  present  world  cycle,  and  accordingly  the  universe 
which  had  existed  in  the  preceding  kalpa  was  shortly  after- 
wards destroyed,  with  Mount  Meru,  the  enclosing  Set-ya- 
wala  hills,  the  six  heavens  of  the  nat-d6was,  and  many  of  the 
lower  seats  of  Byammas.  Then  followed  myriads  of  years 
of  chaos  ;  then  myriads  more  while  the  present  world  called 
Badda  was  being  constructed  atom  by  atom,  and  at  last  the 
earth  was  ready  and  prepared  to  receive  the  first  Buddha, 
Kaukkathan.  He  left  his  staff  on  the  Theinguttara  Hill ; 
his  successor  Gawnag6ng  deposited  his  water-filter  beside  it, 
and  the  third  Buddha,  Kathapa,  added  a  portion  of  his  robe. 
In  the  time  of  the  fourth  Buddha,  Gautama,  there  lived 
on  the  Theinguttara  Hill  a  gigantic  scorpion,  so  huge  that 
it  devoured  every  day  an  elephant,  and  the  tusks  of  its  many 
victims  were  set  up  in  a  great  ring  fence  round  about  its  den. 
One  day  seven  foreign  ships  passed  along  the  coast.  The 
sailors  saw  the  white  glimmer  of  the  ivory  from  far  out  at  sea, 
and  landed  to  ascertain  what  it  was.  They  began  loading 
their  ships  with  the   precious   treasure  ;  and  were  working 

179 


i8o  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

their  hardest,  when  suddenly  they  saw  the  giant  scorpion 
coming  straight  at  them.  They  rushed  on  board,  cut  their 
cables,  and  stood  out  to  sea.  But  here  a  new  danger  awaited 
them.  A  monster  crab  reared  two  gigantic  claws  out  of  the 
waters  and  threatened  to  crush  anything  that  passed  between. 
But  there  was  no  retreat,  and,  overwhelmed  with  terror,  they 
drove  before  the  wind.  The  vessels  just  managed  to  pass 
through  without  touching  the  claws  with  their  yards  or  masts  ; 
but  the  scorpion,  following  in  hot  pursuit,  rushed  up  against 
both  pincers  with  its  bulky  body,  and  they  closed  in  an 
instant,  crushing  and  rending  the  monstrous  prey.  The  crab 
itself  died  of  the  poisonous  food,  and  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  holy  hill  was  thus  freed  from  its  terrors. 

Not  long  afterwards  another  ship  sailed  in  these  waters. 
Near  Twantd,  a  town  about  twenty  miles  from  Rangoon, 
lived  a  pious  Talaing  merchant,  who  had  two  sons  named 
Pu,  or  dove,  and  Tapaw,  or  plenty.  These  young  men 
heard  that  there  was  a  famine  in  the  western  lands,  and  set 
sail  thither  with  a  shipload  of  rice.  They  landed  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Ganges,  and  having  procured  five  hundred 
waggons,  loaded  them  with  their  grain  and  travelled  into 
the  Wethali  country.  There  one  day  their  waggons  were 
suddenly  arrested,  and  as  it  were  chained  to  the  earth. 
While  they  were  seeking  for  the  cause,  a  nat,  who  in  a 
previous  existence  had  been  their  mother,  appeared  to  them 
and  asked  :  "  Desire  ye  store  of  gold  and  precious  things, 
or  rather  desire  ye  heavenly  treasure  ? "  They  answered, 
"  Heavenly  treasure."  Thereupon  the  nat  bade  them  go 
to  where  Shin  Gautama,  the  embryo  Buddha,  was  sitting 
beneath  the  yaza-yatana  tree  in  the  seventh  period  of  seven 
days'  meditation,  which  immediately  preceded  his  becoming 
perfect.  They  laid  a  sack  of  rice  reverently  at  his  feet,  and 
in  return  received  four  hairs  each.  The  Buddha  renamed 
them  Tap6t-tha  and  Palika,  and  enjoined  them  to  deposit 
the  hairs  on  the  Theinguttara  Hill,  beside  the  relics  of  the 
three  preceding  Budhs.  The  place  was  to  be  determined  by 
the  "  takun,"  a  felled  wood-oil  tree  "  lying  athwart,"  so  that 
neither  the  top  nor  the  roots  touched  the  ground. 

The  brothers,  happy  in  the  possession  of  such  inestim- 
able relics,  enclosed  them  in  a  golden  casket,  hastened  back 


XVI  THE  LEGEND  OF  THE  RANGOON  PAGODA  i8i 

to  their  ship  and  set  sail.  But  they  visited  many  a  distant 
shore  without  gaining  any  tidings  of  the  whereabouts  of  the 
Theinguttara  mount.  In  vain  they  besought  the  nats,  the 
bilus,  and  yekkathas,  good  genii,  ogres,  and  demons,  of 
whom  there  were  many  upon  earth  in  those  days.  The 
spirits  knew  no  more  than  the  men.  At  last  the  king  of  the 
Tha-gyas  took  pity  upon  them,  came  down  from  the  heavens, 
and  appearing  before  the  seekers  in  the  guise  of  a  nat,  told 
them  to  return  to  their  own  native  land.  There,  not  far 
from  their  birthplace,  Twante,  was  the  hill  they  sought  for, 
and  the  only  being  who  could  point  it  out  to  them  was  the 
guardian  spirit  of  the  hill,  the  aged  Sule  nat.  But  this 
guardian  nat  had  lived  so  long  upon  earth  that  his  eyelids 
had  become  weak  and  heavy  and  had  fallen  together,  so  that 
he  was  stone  blind.  Before  he  could  help  them  at  all  it 
would  be  necessary  to  restore  to  him  his  eyesight,  and  this 
could  only  be  done  by  hoisting  up  his  eyelids  with  two  great 
wooden  props.  The  SuM  nat  was  of  gigantic  stature,  and 
the  two  brothers  sought  about  in  the  forest  for  the  tallest 
oil-palms  they  could  find,  cut  them  down,  lopped  them  into 
shape,  and  then  went  out  in  quest  of  the  aged  guardian 
spirit.  At  length  they  found  him  so  thickly  covered  with 
ancient  moss  and  lichens  that  it  was  difficult  to  recognise  a 
living  creature  in  him.  When  he  was  asked  where  the 
Theinguttara  Hill  lay  he  became  suspicious,  and  brought 
forward  his  blindness  as  an  excuse  for  not  being  able  to 
indicate  its  situation.  But  the  two  brothers  were  prepared 
with  their  remedy.  They  got  their  two  great  beams  into 
position,  and  after  much  trouble  managed  to  hoist  up  his 
heavy  lids  so  far  that  the  light  fell  in  a  narrow  streak  on 
his  pupils.  Suld  then  indicated  with  a  wave  of  his  hand 
in  what  direction  they  were  to  go,  and  Tap6t-tha  and  Palika 
set  ofif  again  on  their  search.  But  here  they  encountered  a 
new  difificulty.  Instead  of  one  hill  they  found  three,  with  a 
lake  in  the  middle  of  them,  and  there  was  nothing  to  show 
where  the  staff,  the  filter,  and  the  bathing  robe  of  the  previous 
three  Budhs  lay  buried.  They  were  in  despair,  but  the  king 
of  the  Tha-gyas  again  came  to  their  aid.  He  descended 
with  his  subject  d^was  during  the  night  and  united  the 
three  peaks  into  one.      The  next  day  the  brothers  felled  the 


182  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

tree  on  the  summit  and  it  fulfilled  the  required  conditions. 
"  It  remained  poised  on  its  centre  on  the  peak.  Its  top 
touched  not  the  ground,  and  its  root  touched  not  the  ground. 
Therefore  the  place  was  called  in  the  M6n  language,  Takun." 
A  pagoda  was  built  twenty-seven  feet  high,  and  all  the  land 
round  about  on  which  its  shadow  fell  between  sunrise  and 
sunset  was  consecrated  to  it  for  ever.  The  ddwa  king  pre- 
pared a  golden  boat  to  hold  the  casket  containing  the  hairs, 
and  this  vessel  circled  about  perpetually  on  the  lake,  and 
was  protected  by  water-wheels,  whose  spokes  were  prolonged 
into  great  swords  and  knives  that  struck  out  in  all  directions 
and  turned  without  ceasing,  except  for  a  moment  at  mid- 
day, when  they  halted  for  the  space  of  time  during  which  a 
woman  might  draw  out  a  thread  from  her  spinning-loom. 

Long  after,  the  royal  elder  brother  of  China,  King 
Udibwa,  during  his  wars  with  the  Burmans,  was  exceedingly 
anxious  to  carry  off  the  sacred  relics  which  are  deposited  in 
the  Rangoon  shrine.  He  prepared  a  magic  figure  in  human 
form  and  despatched  it  to  steal  the  Budhs'  remains.  The 
creature  crawled  all  the  way  down  the  Irrawaddy  on  its 
stomach  until  it  arrived  at  the  suburb  of  Rangoon  called 
Kemindine  ("  the  looking-post  ")•  There  it  raised  its  head 
to  look  for  a  moment,  and  was  so  overcome  by  the  splendour 
of  the  shrine  that  it  delayed  too  long,  and  when  at  length  it 
stretched  out  its  hands  to  steal  the  relics,  the  favourable 
moment  at  noon  was  passed,  and  the  whirling  swords  cut  it 
in  pieces.  Since  then  the  whole  of  the  treasures  have  been 
walled  up  in  the  relic -chamber,  whence  nothing  but  the 
entire  destruction  of  the  paya  could  remove  them.  The 
marvellous  wealth  of  the  shrine  has  been  a  fruitful  source  of 
wonder  and  speculation  to  many.  Nevertheless  the  state- 
ment of  Sonnerat  that  the  spire,  which  has  now  risen  to  a 
height  of  nearly  370  feet,  has  a  narrow  funnel  descending 
from  the  top  down  to  the  basement,  and  that  down  this 
shaft  princes,  rich  men,  and  the  religious  of  all  nations  cast 
gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones,  has  a  foundation  only 
in  the  imagination  of  the  Gallic  writer.  The  crown  or 
"  umbrella  "  at  the  top  is  known  to  be  crusted  thick  on  the 
upper  ring  with  precious  stones,  and  from  it  hang  scores  of 
jewelled  gold  bells,  placed  there  in  recent  times,  but  to  the 


XVI  THE  LEGEND  OF  THE  RANGOON  PAGODA  183 

mysterious  relic-chamber  no  one  has  penetrated  for  hundreds 
of  years,  nor  probably  ever  will.  Neither  the  shrine  itself, 
nor  the  relics,  nor  the  images,  are  the  objects  of  the  adora- 
tion of  the  pious.  The  Burman,  it  cannot  be  too  much 
urged,  is  not  an  idolater.  He  worships  neither  relic  nor 
image.  The  pagoda  and  the  figure  only  supply  him  with  a 
seemly  place  to  utter  the  praises  of  the  great  Buddha,  and 
to  form  resolutions  to  imitate,  as  far  as  he  can,  the  charity 
and  the  sinless  life  of  the  great  model. 


CHAPTER    XVII 

IMAGES 

There  are  few  things  which  more  irritate  an  educated  Burman 
than  to  assert,  or  as  most  English  do,  calmly  assume,  that 
the  Burmese  are  idolaters.  The  national  idea  is  that  idol- 
worship  is  especially  the  characteristic  of  the  lowest  savage 
tribes,  and  even  fetichism  is  considered  a  superior  faith. 
Therefore  the  accusation  of  bowing  down  to  stocks  and 
stones  is  intolerable,  and  the  implication  is  combated  with 
feverish  energy.  Where  there  are  no  prayers,  in  the  technical 
sense  of  the  word,  there  can  be  no  idolatry.  No  one,  not 
even  Shin  Gautama  himself,  can  help  a  man  in  his  strivings 
to  lead  a  holy  life.  None  but  the  individual  in  his  own 
person  can  work  out  his  special  salvation,  and  he  tries  to  do 
so  by  setting  a  splendid  ideal  before  his  mind.  The  words 
uttered  before  the  impassive  features  of  the  Budh  are  not  a 
supplication  for  mercy  or  aid,  but  the  praises  of  the  great 
Lord  himself,  through  the  contemplation  of  whose  triumphant 
victory  over  passions  and  ignorance  the  most  sinful  may  be 
led  to  a  better  state. 

There  is  no  Supreme  Being  ;  the  Buddha  himself,  who 
even  while  he  was  on  earth  was  no  more  than  a  perfect, 
sinless  man,  no  longer  exists  to  make  intercession,  were  there 
any  such  power  to  which  one  might  appeal.  The  only  thing 
to  be  done  is  to  praise,  and  in  praising  to  strive  to  imitate, 
and  through  imitation  to  attain  to  the  perfect  knowledge, 
and  so  to  the  final  deliverance,  the  exemption  from  the  four 
burdens  of  heaviness,  age,  sickness,  and  death,  which  is  the 
restful  absorption  of  Ne'ban. 

The  worshippers  of  all  creeds  have  always  sought  for  a 

184 


CHAP.  XVII  IMAGES  185 

special  place  wherein  to  pay  their  devotions.  The  Burman 
erects  a  pagoda  over  sacred  relics,  and  puts  up  an  image 
of  the  great  Lord  of  Truth  there,  not  to  w^orship,  but  to 
afford  a  means  to  the  pious  of  localising  their  feelings  and 
concentrating  their  thoughts  on  the  supreme  model.  The 
candles  and  smoky  oil  lamps,  the  fruits  and  flowers  offered 
on  the  shrine,  are  no  more  signs  of  idolatry  than  the  offertory 
bag  placed  on  the  altar  by  the  Christian  priest.  The  Yatana 
Kalapa  is  perfectly  distinct  on  this  point.  Under  the  heading 
U'bhato  Kotito  Panha  we  find  it  written  :  "  It  is  bootless  to 
worship  the  Buddha  ;  nothing  is  necessary  but  to  revere  him 
and  the  memory  of  him.  Statues  are  only  useful  in  so  far 
as  they  refresh  the  memory ;  for  as  the  farmer  sows  the  seed 
and  gathers  in  the  grain  in  due  season,  so  will  the  man  who 
trusts  in  the  Buddha  and  holds  fast  by  his  sacred  Law  obtain 
the  deliverance  and  pass  into  Ne'ban.  The  earth  and  the 
Buddha  are  alike  in  themselves  inert." 

There  is  thus  no  doubt  left  as  to  what  the  great  master 
and  his  interpreters  intended.  The  worship  of  the  paya  is 
nothing  m.ore,than  a  simulation  of  the  devotion  which  would 
be  paid  to  Shin  Gautama  were  he  still  upon  earth.  The 
Buddha  is  admired,  he  is  lauded,  he  is  tenderly  loved  ;  and 
this  devotion  is  extended  to  the  figures  which  are  erected  in 
remembrance  of  him,  in  recognition  of  his  blameless  life,  the 
supreme  wisdom  which  enabled  him  to  teach  the  Law,  and 
the  great  compassion  and  benevolence  with  which  he  regarded 
all  living  things.  The  characteristics  of  a  Budh  are  the 
exercise  of  the  Three  Great  Works  of  Perfection,  the  con- 
stant practising  of  the  Ten  Great  Virtues,  and  the  Five 
Renouncings ;  and  to  attain  the  deliverance,  all  must  dili- 
gently strive  to  observe  these.  The  Three  Great  Works  of 
Perfection  are  : — 

1.  Assistance  afforded  to  parents  and  relations. 

2.  Great  offerings  made  in  this  and  previous  existences, 
coupled  with  strict  observance  of  the  enactments  of  the 
Law. 

3.  Benevolent  dispositions  towards  all  sentient  beings 
indiscriminately. 

The  Ten  Great  Virtues  are  : — liberality  ;  observance  of 
the  precepts  of  the  Law  ;  retreat  into  lonely  places  ;  diligence  ; 


i86  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

patience  ;  fortitude  ;  wisdom  ;  benevolence  ;  truthfulness  ; 
indifference. 

The  Five  Renouncings  are  the  giving  up,  for  holiness' 
sake,  of — children  ;  wife  ;  goods  ;  life  ;  one's  self. 

This  cannot  all  be  effected  in  one  existence,  unless  piety 
has  been  exhibited  in  many  previous  lives.  Much  depends 
on  one's  kan,  the  accumulation  of  merits  from  past  time. 
Just  as  the  fruits  on  a  tree  are  some  of  them  good,  some 
bad,  but  have  little  or  nothing  in  common  with  each  other, 
or  with  those  that  went  before,  or  may  come  after,  so  it  is 
with  a  man's  kan.  But  the  diligent  observance  of  the  holy 
precepts,  and  especially  the  exercise  of  open-handed  charity, 
will  always  tend  to  reduce  the  number  of  lives  to  be  endured 
before  the  deliverance  comes. 

Prayer  there  is  none  in  the  technical  sense  of  the  word, 
and  the  doxologies  repeated  at  the  shrines  are  mostly  those 
learnt  in  childhood  at  the  monastery  school,  or  special  com- 
positions of  each  individual  for  himself.  There  is  nothing 
laid  down  in  any  of  the  Buddhist  religious  books  concern- 
ing the  formulse  of  prayer.  Whatever  there  is,  is  taken 
from  the  Apyin  Aung-gyin,  the  record  of  the  triumph  of 
Shin  Gautama  over  the  outer  foes,  Man-nat,  the  spirit  of 
evil,  and  his  daughters,  and  the  Atwin  Aung-gyin,  the 
triumph  over  the  inward  foes,  the  kiletha,  the  passions  of 
mankind.  Many,  however,  repeat  little  more  than  the 
tharana-g5ng,  the  form  with  which  the  p6ngyis  almost  inr 
variably  commence  worship :  "  I  worship  the  Buddha ;  I 
worship  the  Law  ;  I  worship  the  Assembly."  This,  with  the 
aneiksa,  ddkha,  anatta,  "change,  pain,  illusion,"  forms  the 
sentence  to  be  repeated  on  the  rosary.  A  very  usual  form 
of  doxology  commonly  taught  to  the  scholars  of  the  kyaungs, 
and  therefore  retained  through  life,  is  the  following : — 
"  Awgatha,  Awgatha,  I  worship  with  the  body,  with  the 
mouth,  and  with  the  mind,  with  these  three  kans.  The  first, 
the  second,  the  third  ;  once,  twice,  until  three  times.  The 
Lord,  the  precious  one ;  the  Law,  the  precious  one ;  the 
Assembly,  the  precious  one ;  these  three  precious  things. 
I,  the  worshipper,  most  humbly,  with  fervid  zeal,  with  clasped 
hands,  pay  reverence,  give  offerings,  and  with  pious  gaze 
bow  me  down.      Thus  by  this  worshipping  I  gain  merit  and 


IMAGES  187 


increase  in  earnestness  and  purity  of  heart,  and  am  freed 
from  the  Four  States  of  Punishment ;  from  the  Three  Evil 
Things,  starvation,  plague,  and  warfare ;  from  the  Eight 
Chambers  of  Hell ;  and  from  the  Five  Enemies.  And  at 
the  end,  when  the  last  existence  has  come  for  me,  may  I 
pass  into  Ne'ban." 

Such  "  prayers  "  are  addressed  not  merely  to  the  image,  \l 
but  to  the  whole  pagoda,  and  not  even  on  the  platform  of  1  \ 
the  latter.  It  is  common  for  the  pious  at  any  period  of  the 
day  to  repeat  their  devotions  simply  in  the  direction  of  the 
pagoda,  and  often  from  a  spot  where  hardly  even  the  summit 
of  it  can  be  seen.  The  pilgrims  to  the  Shwe  Dag6n  Paya 
in  Rangoon  prostrate  themselves  at  intervals  from  the 
moment  they  catch  sight  of  its  glittering  spire ;  but  they 
repeat  nothing  further  than  the  above,  or  some  more  fanciful 
formula,  such  as  this :  "  Awgatha,  Awgatha,  Awgatha,  I 
worship  the  footsteps  of  the  great,  the  brilliant  Buddha,  to 
whom  even  the  savage  hunters  turn,  and  the  fierce  dragons 
on  the  mountain  tops  and  in  the  abysses  of  the  hills.  In 
the  far  land  of  Thiho  (Ceylon)  there,  where,  in  the  wilder- 
ness of  woods,  far  from  human  dwellings,  temples  and 
pagodas  rise  up  84,000  in  number,  in  the  caves  and  the 
deeps  ;  there  I  worship,  there  I  bow  me  in  devotion."  By 
far  the  greater  number,  however,  repeat  simple  Pali  sentences, 
of  which  they  have  long  forgotten  the  meaning,  if  indeed 
they  ever  knew  it.  Many  of  the  pyin-sin  can  repeat  whole 
books  and  chapters  in  the  sacred  tongue,  without  having 
any  but  a  very  confused  notion  of  the  meaning  of  what  they 
utter.  Yet  even  this  parrot-like  performance  has  its  merit, 
for  it  brings  the  mind  into  a  fit  state  to  contemplate  the 
great  ideal.  A  conclusive  proof  of  this  is  recorded  in  the 
Malla  Lingaya  Wuttu,  the  life  of  Shin  Gautama.  There 
were  many  bats  who  lived  in  a  cave  in  the  time  of  the  last 
Buddha,  Kathapa,  and  great  numbers  of  yahans  were  in  the 
habit  of  resorting  to  this  cave  to  meditate  and  give  them- 
selves up  to  devotion.  These  bats  learned  to  repeat  some 
of  the  phrases  which  they  heard,  but  could  not  understand, 
and  this  pious  exercise  resulted  in  such  benefit  to  their  kan, 
that  on  their  death  they  migrated  to  the  seats  of  nat-d^was. 
Afterwards,  when  Shin  Gautama  was  preaching  upon  earth, 


i88  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

they  again  appeared  upon  the  seat  of  man  as  yahans,  and, 
attending  diligently  to  the  precepts  of  the  Law,  were  the 
first,  as  disciples  of  Thariputra,  one  of  the  chief  followers 
of  the  Buddha,  to  comprehend  the  sublime  law  of  the 
Abhidamma.  If  dumb  creatures  then  can  win  such  rewards 
for  piety,  how  much  more  a  man  who  repeats  his  sentences 
with  at  least  a  consciousness  of  what  their  import  is. 

Similar  to  this  feeling  with  regard  to  the  Pali  jargon,  of 
which  every  Burman  knows  more  or  less,  according  to  the 
length  of  his  stay  in  the  monastery  or  the  depth  of  his 
religious  sentiments,  and  prompted  by  a  like  idea,  is  the 
offering  of  little  nan-tag6n.  These  prayer-flags — kyet-sha- 
taing,  as  they  are  sometimes  called — are  made  of  paper,  cut 
fancifully  into  figures  of  dragons,  lizards,  and  the  like,  with 
embroidery-work  round  their  edges.  In  the  centre  is  written 
some  pious  reflection  or  aspiration,  and  the  offerer  places  it 
on  the  shrine.  Most  of  those  sold  ready  composed  for  the 
worshipper  are  in  Pali,  those  which  he  writes  for  himself,  in 
Burmese.      Samples  of  these  inscriptions  are  : — 

"  By  means  of  this  paper  the  offerer  will  become  very 
strong." 

"  By  the  merit  of  this  paper  Wednesday's  children  will 
be  blessed  by  spirits  and  men." 

"  May  the  man  born  on  Friday  gain  reward  for  his  pious 
offering." 

"  This  paper  is  an  offering  for  people  born  on  any  day 
of  the  week  from  Sunday  to  Saturday." 

"  May  the  man  born  on  Monday  be  freed  from  sickness 
and  from  the  Three  Calamities." 

Very  often  nothing  but  the  names  of  certain  days  of  the 
week  are  written  on  the  nan-tag6n  ;  but  sometimes  a  friend 
of  humanity,  or  a  man  with  a  particularly  large  family, 
covering  with  their  birthdays  the  whole  week,  simply  writes 
down  the  names  of  the  days  in  any  order  he  pleases.  The 
commonest  form  at  the  stalls  round  about  the  Shwe  Dagdn 
is  this  simple,  bald  list,  and  indeed  Rangoon  is  particularly 
badly  supplied  in  this  way.  There  are  other  small  flags 
or  streamers  made  of  coloured  cloth,  some  of  them, 
especially  those  presented  by  the  Shans,  stitched  with  many 


IMAGES  189 


plies  until  they  stand  out  quite  stiff.  Others  again  are 
made  of  varnished  strips  of  zinc.  These  have  nothing 
written  on  them,  and  stand  simply  for  the  advancement  in 
piety  of  their  offerers,  as  do  the  candles  representing  the 
various  nan,  the  animals  which  stand  for  the  days  of  the 
week.  Other  offerings  are  flowers,  single  or  arranged  in 
bouquets,  and  almost  invariably  distinguished  by  the  heavy 
sweetness  of  their  odour.  Candles  and  tapers,  of  all  sizes 
and  styles  of  manufacture,  abound  ;  some  a  couple  of  feet 
high,  or  occasionally  much  more,  made  of  long,  narrow 
coloured  tapers,  plaited  together  over  an  ordinary  solid  one, 
some  plain  white,  others  coloured  all  the  hues  of  the  rain- 
bow, European  manufactured  sperm  or  paraffin  articles,  and 
home-made  tapers  of  the  crudest  style  of  dip.  Side  by  side 
with  these  are  placed  smoky  oil-lamps,  consisting  of  a  little 
flat  saucer  full  of  oil,  with  a  wick  composed  of  a  bit  of  cloth 
or  a  few  threads  of  cotton  roughly  twisted  together.  The 
candles  are  simply  softened  with  a  match  at  the  bottom  and 
made  to  stick  on  the  ledges  in  front  of  or  round  about  the 
figures  of  the  Buddha.  Incense  sticks  and  scented  wood  are 
often  burnt  on  stone  altars  erected  specially  for  such  fire 
offerings. 

The  worshippers,  if  they  are  men,  squat  down,  neither 
kneeling  nor  sitting  down,  but  resting  the  body  on  their 
heels  as  miners  who  are  accustomed  to  low  workings  do. 
The  body  is  bent  a  little  forward,  and  the  hands  are  joined 
together  and  raised  to  the  forehead.  The  women  kneel 
down  altogether,  and  for  this  reason  take  especial  care  to 
cover  up  their  feet,  sometimes  getting  a  friend  to  tuck  their 
skirts  over  them.  All  are  of  course  barefooted.  The 
sandals  are  removed  always  at  the  foot  of  the  pagoda  steps, 
though  these  may  begin  in  some  places  many  hundred  yards 
away  from  the  shrine.  Before  commencing  the  repetition  of 
the  formulae,  three  prostrations  are  made  with  the  forehead 
to  the  ground,  and  the  same  is  repeated  at  the  close,  and  on 
rising  to  depart  you  must  turn  to  the  right.  It  is  usual  to 
hold  some  offering  between  the  hands  during  worship — a 
prayer-flag,  a  flower,  or  something  of  the  kind — and  this  is 
afterwards  reverently  deposited  on  the  altar.  A  favourite 
offering,  instead  of  real  flowers,  is  pauk-pauk.     This  is  the 


I90  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

variety  of  rice  known  as  kauk  hnyin,  fired  dry  on  a  pan. 
It  swells  up  and  cracks  open,  and  the  grains  are  then  dyed 
red,  green,  or  yellow,  while  some  are  left  plain  white.  The 
resemblance  to  flowers  or  flower -ileaves  at  a  distance  is 
sufficiently  striking.  It  is  a  work  of  merit  to  go  about 
lighting  tapers  and  candles  which  have  blown  out,  or  lamps 
which  have  got  choked  up,  watering  flowers,  and  so  on. 

The  statues  of  Shin  Gautama,  then,  are  only  his  visible 
representatives  to  keep  alive  in  the  hearts  of  his  flock  feelings 
of  love  and  adoration,  and  gratitude  to  the  Great  Master  who 
strove  so  long  to  teach  the  Law,  and  was  ever  so  pitiful 
towards  earthly  suffering.  Like  the  Egyptians,  Buddhists 
have  large  images,  but  stand  diametrically  opposed  to  them 
in  the  way  in  which  they  regard  them.  All  the  Egyptian's 
energies  were  directed  to  conquering  the  hostile  powers  of 
nature.  He  sought  with  anxious  care  to  preserve  the 
mummy  in  the  recesses  of  huge  mountains  of  stone,  in  order 
that  the  soul  returning  after  the  period  of  5000  years  might 
enter  again  its  old  home.  He  built  for  eternity,  and  hoped 
to  defy  decay  and  outlast  the  world.  The  Buddhist  laughs 
at  this  notion,  seeing  that  for  him  the  stream  of  time  levels 
and  carries  off  every  existence  with  it.  The  rising  again  of 
spirits  has  for  him  nothing  but  a  suggestion  of  devilish  arts. 
The  idea  raises  in  his  mind  a  threatening  of  evil,  as  well  to 
the  living  as  to  the  disembodied  spirit.  Instead  therefore  of 
devising  any  such  uncanny  measures  for  the  preservation  of 
the  corpse,  he  strives  rather  to  destroy  it  as  soon  as  may  be 
on  the  funeral  pyre,  or  even  to  blow  it  into  small  atoms  with 
fireworks  and  bombs.  Similarly,  his  images  are  made  of 
mouldering  brick.  Where  is  the  use  of  laboriously  carving 
figures  in  the  hardest  stone;  when  the  most  indestructible  of 
them  could  only  last  for  a  time,  which  is  but  as  a  ripple  in 
the  stream  of  eternity  ?  Therefore  the  marble  and  brass 
Gautamas  are  but  few  compared  with  those  of  brick  and 
mortar,  or  wood,  and  the  crumbling  away  and  rotting  of 
these  is  viewed  with  the  utmost  equanimity.  There  will 
always  be  piety  enough  to  keep  the  tazaung  full  until  the 
cycles  end. 

The  popular  division  of  the  Gautamas  is  into  the  classes 
of  standing,  sitting,  and  lying.     This  is  somewhat  crude,  but 


IMAGES  191 


it  is  perpetuated  by  a  curious  notion  that  though  a  man  may- 
present  all  three  kinds  of  images,  he  must  do  so  in  a  special 
order :  the  standing  first,  then  the  sitting,  and  last  the  lying 
down.  As  many  as  one  pleases  of  one  style  may  be  pre- 
sented, but  you  must  not  reverse  the  order :  one  dare  not  go 
backwards.  The  vast  majority  of  images  represent  the 
master  in  a  cross-legged  attitude,  in  which  he  attained  the 
Buddhaship,  seated  under  the  bawdi  tree.  This  sitting 
figure  is  called  Tinmyinkw6.  The  left  hand  lies  palm  up- 
wards in  the  lap  ;  the  right  hangs  over  the  knee.  The  ears 
reach  to  the  shoulder,  and  the  face  is  calm  and  passionless. 
On  the  top  of  the  head  is  a  little  knob  or  point.  This  is 
called  the  mani-daw,  and  represents  the  hair  which  Prince 
Theiddat  cut  off  with  his  sword  w^hen  he  first  put  on  the 
yellow  robe.  It  was  left  a  quarter  of  an  inch  long,  and 
never  grew  again.  In  attaining  to  the  supreme  wisdom,  the 
Prince  attained  to  the  Ne'ban,  or  annihilation  of  the  passions. 

Less  common  are  the  Shinbinthalyaung,  the  recumbent 
figures  representing  the  Budh  as  he  died  and  attained  to  the 
Ne'ban  of  earthly  existence,  reclining  between  the  two  sal- 
trees.  He  lies  on  his  right  side,  and  is  often  represented 
with  numbers  of  his  lamenting  disciples  ranged  around  the 
couch.  To  these  are  not  uncommonly  added  circles  of  the 
kings  of  the  earth  and  the  heavens,  bilus,  galdns,  nats,  yek- 
kathas,  and  a  variety  of  other  creatures.  The  figures  of  the 
latter  often  display  some  artistic  skill  in  the  modelling  and 
the  expression  of  the  features,  which  it  is  impossible  to  show 
in  the  placid  countenance  of  the  teacher  himself.  The  Shin- 
binthalyaung very  often  have  the  emblems  of  the  Shwe-zet- 
daw  carved  on  the  soles  of  the  feet. 

Finally  there  is  the  Mat-tat-kodaw,  or  erect  image,  also 
called  Mat-yat-daw,  where  the  master  is  represented  in  the 
attitude  of  preaching,  the  right  hand  elevated,  but  still  with 
the  same  calm,  unmoved  visage.  These  Mat-yat-daw  are 
usually  very  large,  and  are  far  more  common  in  the  temples 
of  Upper  Burma  than  in  the  bell-pagodas  of  the  low  country. 
They  are  often  Sapupati  Paya,  representing  the  Budh  as  a 
king  with  crown  on  head  and  the  royal  wings  on  arms  and 
thighs.  They  are  usually  very  large,  like  the  recumbent 
figure.      The  standing  -figures  in  the  Ananda  at  Pagan  must 


192  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

be  over  forty  feet    in  height,  and   form  a   very  impressive 
sight.     Light  sufficient  to  illuminate  the  whole  figure  cannot 
be  admitted  at  the  comparatively  low  gateways  of  the  shrine. 
Cunning  architects  have  therefore   cut   slits   far  up   in   the 
chapel  roof,  and  a  narrow  stream  of  light  falls  full  on  the 
gilded  face  of  the  Buddha.     The  effect  is  most  solemn  and 
awe-inspiring.       The    devotee     passes    through     long    dim 
corridors,  where  his  foot  falls  soft  on  the  mouldy  pavement, 
and  the  smell  is  as  of  a  charnel-house,  and  there  is  silence 
throughout  the  whole  vast  temple,  broken  fitfully  by  the  eerie 
chant  of  a  fellow-worshipper  far  away  through  the  passages, 
and  suddenly  he  comes  on  the  chapel  and  sees  before  him 
the  sad  tranquil  face,  with  a  glory  shed  over  it,  and  the  hand 
stretched  out  as  if  in  warning  or  benediction.     One  can  then 
understand  how  it  is  that  many  of  the  ignorant  and  unin- 
structed  do  actually  worship  the  Gautama  as  if  it  were  an 
idol,  and  the  Englishman  involuntarily  takes  off  his  hat  as 
he  enters  the  sanctuary. 

The  statues  in  the  great  lonely  fanes  at  Pagan  are  cer- 
tainly far  more  impressive  than  those  in  the  smaller  but 
more  gaily-decked-out  niche-shrines  of  the  solid  pyramidal 
pagodas  of  Lower  Burma.  The  four  great  Mat-yat-daw  in 
the  Ananda  Paya  represent  the  four  great  Buddhas  of  this 
world-cycle.  Kauk-kathan,  as  the  first  law-giver,  is  placed 
in  the  east ;  Gawnag6ng  in  the  southern  image  chamber ; 
Kathapa  to  the  west,  and  the  Buddha  of  the  present  religious 
period  in  the  northern  shrine.  Kauk-kathan  is  made  of  the 
sweet-scented  dantagu  tree  ;  Gawnag6ng  of  jasmine  wood  ; 
Kathapa  of  brass,  and  Gautama  of  fir ;  but  they  have  all 
been  covered  with  plaster  and  gilt,  and  the  material  of  which 
they  are  made  is  only  known  by  tradition.  An  especially 
favourite  figure  to  represent  standing  is  Dibinkaya  Paya, 
the  fourth  of  the  twenty-eight  Buddhas  whose  names  are 
recorded  as  appearing  in  successively  destroyed  worlds.  It 
was  this  Buddha,  the  "  Light-bringer,"  who  first  announced 
to  Shin  Gautama  that  he,  then  a  fervent  yahan,  would  here- 
after, after  many  worlds,  attain  the  supreme  wisdom. 

The  temples  of  Pagan  and  other  places  in  the  upper 
territory  are  built  specially  for  the  reception  of  great  images, 
and  as  the  public  zeal  is  concentrated  on  these,  there  are 


IMAGES 


193 


comparatively  few  surplus  figures,  and  these  mostly  scattered 
along  the  sides  of  the  dim  corridors.  In  Lower  Burma, 
however,  where  the  sacred  buildings  are  more  particularly 
relic  shrines,  the  images  are  more  of  an  adjunct  to  the  paya, 
and  there  is  a  most  extraordinary  multiplication  of  them. 
In  each  of  the  four  image  chambers  round  the  base  of  the 
pagoda,  besides  the  chief  figure  there  are  numbers  of  other 
Buddhas  of  all  sizes,  and  these  overflow  into  dozens  of 
tazaungs,  or  image  houses,  all  round  about  the  central 
paya.  This  reserve  stock  is  due  to  the  unceasing  desire 
for  kutho.  If  a  man  cannot  build  a  pagoda,  or  has  not 
money  enough  to  erect  a  monastery  or  a  rest-house,  there  is 
at  any  rate  no  one  so  poor  but  he  can  gain  merit  by  dedi- 
cating a  Gautama  ;  and  so  images  of  brass  and  marble, 
plaster  and  wood,  and  sun-dried  clay,  flow  in  a  never-ending 
stream  to  the  great  district  shrines.  There  has  long  ceased 
to  be  any  room  for  them  except  in  the  image-houses,  and 
there  they  remain,  seldom  visited  by  any  but  the  very 
religious,  and  gradually  becoming  grimed  and  mouldy  with 
age,  notwithstanding  the  Ydthonpwe,  at  the  new  year,  when 
the  women  come  and  wash  them  down.  It  is  a  maxim 
that  devotions  may  and  ought  to  be  repeated  before  every 
image,  but  it  is  not  often  that  a  worshipper  is  seen  in  the 
tazaungs,  and  the  offerings  of  candles  and  incense  sticks, 
flowers  and  pauk-pauk  san-pan  (pop-corn),  are  few  and  far 
between.  Nevertheless  the  houses  are  crammed  with  figures 
of  all  sizes,  from  huge  ten  feet  high  Sagaing  marbles  down 
to  little  clay  painted  and  gilt  specimens  that  you  can  put 
in  your  pocket,  and  that  idolatry-detesting  Britishers  often 
do  so  serve  and  afterwards  exhibit  as  having  actually  "  been 
worshipped."  Big  and  small,  they  are  crowded  together  as 
close  as  they  can  be,  the  small  ones  reposing  in  the  hand  or 
the  lap,  or  round  about  the  sides  of  their  bigger  facsimiles. 
Sometimes,  as  is  the  case  in  a  great  long  building  at  the 
Kyaik-than-lan  Paya  at  Maulmein,  the  centre  is  occupied  by 
a  gigantic  recumbent  figure,  the  tinmyinkwe  being  placed  in 
orderly  array  all  round  the  sides  facing  the  central  dying 
Budh.  Sometimes  the  figures  stand  side  by  side  on  steps 
rising  one  above  the  other  with  a  small  open  space  in  the 
middle.     The  halls  are  always  quite  full,  the  most  recently 

O 


194  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

erected  being  apparently  just  spacious  enough  to  hold  all  the 
images  ready  to  put  into  it. 

Few  statues  stand  unprotected  in  the  open.  At  Kyauk- 
taran,  on  the  Irrawaddy  a  few  miles  below  Prome,  there  are 
a  number  of  Gautamas  cut  out  of  the  rocky  face  of  a  bluff 
overhanging  the  river.  The  ridge  is  about  eighty  feet  high 
altogether,  and  the  figures  are  thirty  feet  above  the  level  of 
the  water.  They  are  all  honestly  cut  out  of  the  rock,  and 
not,  as  some  people  think,  simply  brick  and  plaster  erections 
— an  idea  induced  by  the  habit  of  painting  them  white,  or 
covering  them  with  gold-leaf,  occasionally  indulged  in  by 
people  anxious  of  bettering  their  chance  towards  a  new 
existence.  There  are  about  fifty  of  them  altogether,  varying 
very  considerably  in  size,  some  being  very  large.  A  similar 
work  may  be  seen  on  the  hill-side  above  Sagaing,  opposite 
Ava.  There  the  Buddhas,  each  in  his  separate  niche,  are 
carved  at  regular  intervals,  and  the  rock  face  sweeps  round 
in  a  segment  of  a  circle,  the  platform  in  front  being  strongly 
built  up  with  a  masonry  revetment. 

On  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  near  the  village  of 
Sagyinwa,  formerly  a  suburb  of  the  old  capital,  Amara- 
poora,  is  a  gigantic  sedent  figure  built  perfectly  open  and 
uncovered.  It  is  situated  close  to  a  half-mile-long  wooden 
bridge  which  once  crossed  the  lagoon  there,  and  the  Budh 
gazes  across  the  waters  with  eternal  meditative  smile. 
Round  about  are  ranged  double  and  treble  circles  of  pigmy 
Zedi-yan,  over  which  it  towers  to  a  height  of  ninety  feet  or 
more.  The  neighbourhood  is  practically  deserted  now  that 
Mandalay  has  become  the  capital.  There  are  almost  no 
worshippers  of  the  giant  Buddha  except  the  small  colony 
of  monks  from  the  kyaung  hard  by.  The  birds  will  drop 
seeds  between  the  crevices  of  the  bricks  and  plaster,  and 
another  decade  will  probably  see  the  great  image  torn  out 
of  all  possibility  of  recognition. 

Such  a  phenomenon  actually  does  exist  near  the  ancient 
Pegu  town  of  Zaingganaing,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
river  from  the  capital  of  the  old  Peguan  kings.  One  of  the 
singular  pyramidal  limestone  rocks,  common  in  the  Tenas- 
serim  Province,  has  been  built  with  the  aid  of  bricks  into 
the   form   of  an    enormous   Gautama.      On   the  top  of  the 


XVII  IMAGES  195 

head,  glinting  white  through  the  trees,  appears  the  slender 
spire  of  a  small  pagoda.  The  jungle  growth  has  spread  all 
over  the  hill,  or  image,  and  the  outline  and  features  of  the 
Budh  struggle  to  be  seen  through  a  heavy  fog  of  varied 
green.  Such  monster  images  exist  here  and  there  all  over 
the  Eastern  districts.  They  are  all  exceedingly  ancient, 
and  are  regarded  more  as  glorifications  of  the  Great  Master 
than  as  recognised  places  for  devotion.  The  pious  deposit 
offerings  and  chant  their  sentences  before  them  as  they  do 
everywhere  before  the  features  of  the  Buddha,  but  otherwise 
the  people  regard  them  more  with  the  curiosity  of  the 
foreigner  than  with  the  adoration  of  the  devotee. 

Among  the  more  ignorant  and  superstitious  classes  it  is 
not  at  all  uncommon  to  find  particular  images  regarded  with 
especial  awe  and  reverence,  on  account  of  the  tale  of  some 
prodigy  displayed.  The  sacred  order  and  all  true  Buddhists, 
however,  strenuously  discountenance  the  idea  of  any  miracles 
being  wrought  either  by  particular  images  or  by  holy  relics. 
It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  latter  are  in  Burma  all  walled 
up  and  not  brought  out  for  the  inspection  of  worshippers  as 
in  other  Buddhist  countries.  The  Kammawasa  in  its  de- 
nunciation of  the  claiming  of  magic  powers  is  also  considered 
to  forbid  the  assertion  that  any  particular  statue  displays 
more  than  usual  power — a  power  which  could  not  fail  to 
lead  directly  to  idolatry.  The  passage  runs  as  follows : 
"  No  brother  must  arrogate  to  himself  what  goes  beyond  the 
power  of  human  nature,  and  he  must  not  boast  of  excep- 
tional abilities.  Whoso  gives  out  with  evil  intentions  that 
he  possesses  supernatural  powers,  saying  that  he  has 
attained  zan,  or  'ne'ban,  or  command  of  religion,  or  un- 
disturbed repose  on  the  path  that  leads  to  the  deliverance ; 
he  is  no  Sramana  ;  he  is  no  son  of  Sakya.  As  a  broken 
palm-tree  cannot  be  again  united,  as  a  twig  broken  from  the 
stem  cannot  be  joined  on  again,  so  is  that  religious  man, 
who  falsely  declares  that  he  has  attained  the  superhuman, 
fallen  away  from  the  true  Sramanas,  separated  from  the  sons 
of  Sakya.      So  long  as  life  lasts  must  this  be  avoided." 

Nevertheless  unprincipled  yahans,  fearing  that  the  piety 
of  their  district  is  growing  slack,  or  wishing  to  attract 
benevolent    pilgrims   to    their    neighbourhood,    undoubtedly 


196  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

do  occasionally  originate,  or  at  any  rate  stimulate,  the  belief 
in  prodigies.  A  common  wonder  is  that  of  the  Tat-daw  pwa, 
growing  images.  I  am  not  aware  that  they  are  made  of 
meteoric  stones  or  any  such  substance.  The  carnal  and 
unregenerate  are  wont  to  asssert  that  these  images  only 
grow  at  night  and  then  in  sudden  jumps.  In  any  case, 
they  never  grow  very  big. 

A  more  unusual  miraculous  discovery  actually  resulted 
in  the  growth  of  a  small  fishing  village  into  a  prosperous 
town,  and,  owing  to  this  latter  circumstance,  into  the  head 
of  one  of  the  subdivisions  under  the  British  Government. 
This  is  the  station  of  Myan-aung  on  the  Irawaddy.  A 
Gautama  rose  out  of  the  ground  there.  That  was,  however, 
not  the  wonder.  It  perspired  !  It  perspired  a  thick,  sticky 
exudation  which  precluded  the  necessity  of  using  the  milky 
juice  of  the  thapan  thi  {Ficus  racemosa),  the  gum  usually 
employed  in  fixing  gold-leaf  on  the  images  or  pagodas. 
The  tidings  soon  spread  far  and  wide,  and  people  journeyed 
from  distant  towns  to  see  the  wonder  and  to  plaster  on 
fabulous  quantities  of  gold-leaf.  The  hamlet  rapidly  grew 
into  a  town.  The  surrounding  country  was  taken  up  and 
cultivated,  and  Myan-aung  is  now  as  pretty  a  little  station 
as  any  you  will  see  on  the  great  Irrawaddy,  and  is  one  of  the 
principal  centres  of  the  great  Henzada  district. 

Another  little  fishing  village,  farther  down  the  river, 
below  Maubin,  possessed  in  1879  ^  singular  image.  This 
Buddha  in  most  unusual  fashion  suddenly  began  to  develop 
a  moustache.  It  was  not  much  to  speak  of,  and  was  cer- 
tainly not  pretty,  but  there  was  undoubtedly  a  growth  of 
some  kind  on  the  upper  lip.  The  phenomenon,  however, 
never  had  more  than  an  exceedingly  local  interest.  A 
moustache  is  not  an  appendage  that  appeals  to  a  Burman's 
finer  feelings  to  any  great  extent,  and  if  Shin  Gautama  had 
one  in  life  he  would  certainly  have  shaved  it  off.  Therefore 
the  swampy,  mosquito-haunted  district  failed  to  better  its 
fortunes.  A  good  many  people  came  and  gazed  on  the 
ugly  bristles  and  made  offerings,  but  they  went  away  again, 
and  the  enthusiasm  was  strangled  before  it  was  well  born. 
The  military  assistant  commissioner  of  the  district  declared 
in  an  off-hand  way  that  it  was  a  fungus  of  a  new  kind,  or 


XVII  IMAGES  197 

some  hitherto  undiscovered  lichen,  and  had  thoughts  of 
chipping  a  bit  of  the  lip  off  and  sending  it  to  the  British 
Museum.  But  he  refrained,  and  the  villagers  missed  even 
this  poor  chance  of  notoriety. 

There  are  a  few  images  specially  noteworthy  with  less 
questionable  reason.  One  of  these  stands  half-way  up 
Mandalay  Hill  under  a  lofty  teak  tectum.  It  is  a  gigantic 
standing  image  profusely  gilt  all  over,  and  pointing  with 
steadfast  finger  full  at  the  glittering  central  spire  of  the 
palace  rising  gracefully  over  the  throne  of  the  Ruler  of 
Existence.  As  a  half-way  house  on  the  toilsome  ascent  of 
the  hill  it  is  always  frequented,  but  the  superstitious  way- 
farers gaze  through  the  gilt  railings  more  with  the  awe  due 
to  the  guardian  spirit  of  the  capital  than  with  the  fervency 
of  the  worshipper.      It  has  been  burnt  since  the  annexation. 

In  the  chapel  on  the  summit  of  the  hill,  looking  over  the 
wide,  fertile  plain  towards  the  black,  jagged  Nat's  Peak, 
haunted  by  goblins  and  wraiths,  the  silver  windings  of  the 
mighty  Irrawaddy  and  the  barren  pagoda-sprinkled  Sagaing 
hills  beyond,  there  is  a  singular  statue.  A  notice  begs  the 
religious  to  put  their  gold-leaf,  not  indiscriminately  all  over 
the  figure,  but  only  on  the  eyeballs.  The  zeal  of  many 
years  causes  the  pupils  to  start  from  their  sockets  as  if  the 
Buddha  were  horrified  by  some  gruesome  deed  of  sin  per- 
petrated in  the  golden  city  below.  The  last  time  I  was 
there  I  heard  a  matter-of-fact  Briton  marvelling  how  it  was 
that  the  goodly  nuggets  had  not  long  since  been  removed 
by  a  sacrilegious  hand.  It  seems  to  be  always  Englishmen 
who  think  of  these  things  first. 

A  hundred  yards  from  the  foot  of  the  sacred  hill  in  a 
tall  brick  building  is  a  great  marble  Buddha,  probably  the 
biggest  monolith  in  the  world.  The  sitting  figure  must  be 
quite  twenty-five  feet  high,  and  scores  of  tons  weight.  It 
does  the  Mandalay  workmen  great  credit  that  with  their 
primitive  appliances  they  should  have  been  able  to  mount 
so  ponderous  a  figure  on  its  pedestal.  In  a  wide  square 
round  about  are  arranged  little  six-foot  shrines,  each  contain- 
ing a  gilt  image  and  all  looking  towards  the  central  Buddha. 
It  is  not  the  least  wonderful  of  the  many  wonderful  things 
to  be  seen  round  the  foot  of  Mandalay  Hill. 


198  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


The  casting  of  a  brass  image  is  a  public  festival,  and  the 
scene  of  general  rejoicing.  The  people  gather  from  miles 
round  about,  and  there  are  plays  and  feastings  for  several 
nights,  whether  the  Buddha  is  presented  by  an  individual  or 
by  public  subscription.  The  whole  assemblage  takes  an 
interest  in  the  proceedings,  and  rejoices  in  proportion  to  the 
success  of  the  casting,  which  is  effected  in  the  same  way  as 
with  bells.  When  the  image  is  finished  and  ready  to  be 
dedicated,  a  great  procession  is  formed  ;  a  band  of  music 
and  dancers  go  at  the  head  ;  the  most  wealthy  men  deem  it 
an  honour  to  be  allowed  to  bear  a  hand  in  carrying  the 
statue  ;  men,  women,  and  children  from  all  the  surrounding 
country,  dressed  in  their  gayest  clothes,  follow  on  foot  or  in 
brightly  decorated  bullock-carts  to  the  bottom  of  the  pagoda 
steps.  Then  the  Buddha  is  carried  up  and  solemnly 
deposited  in  the  allotted  place,  myatta-thappe,  in  religious 
phraseology,  a  term  not  to  be  rendered  without  many  words 
in  English.  It  includes  all  the  meanings  of  seemliness, 
dignity,  beauty,  splendour,  and  awe -compelling  majesty. 
The  ritual  of  the  monks  at  the  consecration  of  an  image  is, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  dedication  of  a  pagoda,  vague,  and 
decided  by  individual  opinion.  Such  a  formal  presentation 
service  is  called  Nekaza,  and  is  declared  by  the  Sulagandi 
sect  to  be  superfluous.  The  lineaments  of  the  Budh  are 
worthy  of  honour  wherever  seen,  at  the  pagoda  or  in  the 
workman's  shop. 

The  figures  of  Shin  Gautama  are  not  in  themselves  by 
any  means  handsome  as  works  of  art.  The  national  skill 
in  wood-carving  is  well  known,  and  the  little  wooden  lay 
figures  made  at  Henzada  and  other  places  are  remarkably 
clever  in  their  variety  of  expression.  None  of  this  skill 
appears  in  the  religious  images.  The  modeller  or  sculptor 
is  held  fast  by  ancient  custom.  He  must  make  his  image 
of  a  particular  pattern  and  with  the  recognised  expression. 
The  object  is  to  portray  the  death  of  all  human  passions 
and  earthly  feelings.  The  calm,  eternal  sleep-like  smile 
symbolises  the  attainment  of  ne'ban,  the  cessation  of  being, 
the  end  of  the  cycles  of  transincorporation  of  souls.  This 
is  all  that  is  intended  to  be  represented,  and  it  is  held  out 
as  a  hope  to  the  struggling  sinner  among  earthly  miseries. 


IMAGES  199 


The  model  to  be  followed  would  be  worthless  did  the  face 
express  the  hopes  and  fears  and  pleasures  of  wretched 
mortality. 

The  following  triumphal  song  is  taken  from  the  same 
play  of  Sawpd  Sawmd  as  the  chant  in  celebration  of  the 
gilding  of  the  Pegu  pagoda,  and  is  set  to  the  same  Yoddaya 
nan-thein  than.  The  Maha  Myat  Muni  is  the  "  Arakan 
Pagoda  "  in  Mandalay. 

ON   THE   IMAGE  PRESENTED   BY  THE  PEGU   INSPECTOR 
TO  THE   MAHA  MYAT-MUNI 

Fair  springs  the  sun  at  dawning 

From  out  the  forest's  green, 
The  nine  gems  on  his  nat-front 

Shine  gloriously  at  e'en. 

The  rainbow  weaves  nat-raiment, 

Sweet  is  the  lily's  breath, 
The  malla  flower  is  winsome, 

That  weeps  the  Saddan's  i  death. 

But  fairer  is  the  image 

That  Hanthawadi  sends, 
Amid  its  gold  and  silver 

The  pearl  with  ruby  blends. 

The  maiden  from  her  finger 

Drew  off  her  jewelled  rings, 
The  men  brought  costly  diamonds 

And  wealth  of  precious  things, 

And  as  'mid  shouts  and  clangour 

The  flames  leapt  red  as  gold 
All  joyous  cast  their  treasures 

Into  the  hissing  mould. 

So  high  hath  Buddha  honour 

In  Hanthawadi's  soil, 
So  gladly  seek  believers 

Release  from  earthly  toil. 


>  The  Saddan  is  the  White  Elephant,  the  last  incarnation  of  Shin  Gautama 
before  he  was  conceived  in  Queen  Maia's  womb. 


THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


First  great  Sandathuriya  i 

The  Master's  features  wrought, 

He  sought  the  Budh's  permisson, 
Nor  failed  in  what  he  sought. 

.^nd  I,  the  poor  Inspector, 

Fired  by  as  holy  zeal, 
Present  a  copied  image 

And  trust  for  equal  weal. 

That  'tis  a  precious  alms-gift 

Great  prodigies  attest, 
The  Buddha's  six-fold  glory 

Gleams  nightly  on  its  crest. 

And  whenas  it  was  casting 

Byammas  and  nats  untold 
Came  down  and  cast  rich  oflferings 

Into  the  holy  mould. 

Yea,  myriads  of  all  creatures 

From  every  earthly  seat 
Rejoicing  cast  their  alms-gifts 

Before  the  Buddha's  feet. 

With  close-clasped  hands  men  bowed  them, 
With  fervent  minds  they  prayed, 

That  Buddha  some  great  token 
Might  grant  them  for  their  aid. 

Then  from  the  lordly  image. 

Aglow  with  brilliant  light, 
There  streamed  both  fire  and  water 

Upon  their  dazzled  sight. 

And  diamond  rays  and  ruby, 

The  Six  great  Glories  blaze. 
The  Buddha's  Nine  great  Splendours 

Blind  their  adoring  gaze. 


1  The  King  Sandathuriya,  while  the  Buddha  was  yet  alive,  obtained  his 
permission  to  make  a  statue  of  him.  This  image  is  the  great  twelve-foot  high 
brass  Tlnmyinkwe,  now  the  chief  centre  of  worship  in  the  Maha  Myat-muni 
shrine. 


IMAGES 


There's  many  a  goodly  image 

In  Maha  Myat-muni, 
But  Mamyay  ^  shall  be  aged 

Ere  it  a  fairer  see. 

And  I,  the  poor  Inspector, 

May  lay  me  down  in  peace, 
For  when  this  life  is  ended 

Existences  shall  cease. 

It  is  a  very  usual  practice  at  the  casting  of  bells  and 
images  for  the  onlookers  to  throw  gold  and  silver  articles 
of  jewellery  into  the  ladles  of  melted  ore. 

^  Mamyay  is  a  common   poetical   contraction   for  Mandalay.      Man  is  also 
frequently  used. 


CHAPTER    XVIII 

BELLS 

"  This  Bell  is  made  by  Koo-na-lin-gala,  the  priest — and 
weight  600  viss.  No  one  body  design  to  destroy  this  Bell. 
Maulmein,  March  30th,  1855.  He  who  destroyed  to  this 
Bell,  they  must  be  in  the  great  Heell,  and  unable  to  coming 
out." 

This  inscription  runs  round  the  rim  of  the  great  bell  at 
the  Kyaik-than-lan  pagoda  at  Maulmein.  It  is  hardly  a 
fiftieth  part  of  the  Maha  Ganda  at  Rangoon,  which,  in  turn, 
is  a  great  deal  smaller  than  the  huge  monster  at  Meng6n, 
near  Mandalay ;  but  it  is  noticeable  as  being  the  only  bell 
in  Burma,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  which  has  an  English 
inscription  on  it.  The  circumstance  is  scarcely  to  be  con- 
sidered in  the  light  of  a  compliment,  for  the  bell  has  not  the 
character  of  exceptional  sanctity,  and  there  is  a  lengthy  Pali 
inscription  on  the  upper  part  giving  further  particulars,  and 
commending  the  pious  donors  to  the  safe  keeping  of  the 
5000  nats  who  guard  the  faith,  the  tutelary  nats  of  the 
universe,  the  nats  of  the  earth,  the  air,  the  forest,  and  the 
city  ;  but  there  is  nothing  whatever  in  the  shape  of  menaces 
to  such  as  may  have  evil  designs  on  the  bell.  Koo-na-lin- 
gala,  the  priest,  however,  no  doubt  thought  this  English 
addition  very  necessary  and  by  no  means  unwarranted  ;  for 
only  two  years  before,  after  the  conclusion  of  the  second 
Burmese  war,  in  1853,  the  British  troops  had  tried  to  carry 
off  the  sacred  Shwe  Dag6n  bell,  and  had  gone  the  length 
of  getting  it  on  board  of  a  ship.  Unfortunately  the  vessel 
turned  over,  and  Maha  Ganda,  the  "  great  sweet  voice,*'  was 
capsized  into  the  mud  at  the  bottom  of  the  Rangoon  river. 


CHAP,  xviii  BELLS  203 

The  good  mendicant,  therefore,  who  superintended  the  cast- 
ing of  the  bell  for  the  Maulmein  paya  doubtless  thought 
that  none  but  the  utmost  terrors  would  serve  to  scare  off  the 
sacrilegious  Briton,  and  therefore  it  is  with  punishment  in 
awidzi,  the  lowest  of  the  eight  chambers  of  hell,  ordinarily- 
reserved  for  parricides,  assaulters  of  an  ascetic,  and  railers  at 
the  Buddha,  that  all  who  meditate  harm  to  the  Kyaik-than- 
lan  bell  are  threatened.  The  fiery  monk  may  rest  happy. 
The  bell  has  hung  unmolested  from  the  big  crossbar,  rest- 
ing on  its  two  huge  teak  uprights,  and  will  doubtless  long 
remain  safe  on  the  somewhat  cramped  platform  at  the  end 
of  the  Taungnyo  range. 

The  love  of  bells  in  Burma  is  somewhat  remarkable. 
Every  large  pagoda  has  some  dozens  of  them,  of  all  sizes, 
hanging  round  the  skirts  of  the  zedi,  the  image-houses,  and 
sacred  posts.  One  or  two  were  put  up  with  the  central 
shrine  itself;  others  have  been  added  at  various  times  by 
the  religious.  Most  of  them  have  long  Pali  inscriptions  on 
them  recording  the  praises  of  the  Lord  and  the  aspirations  of 
the  giver.  Here  and  there  are  a  few  with  Burmese  dedica- 
tions, presented  by  poor,  simple  jungle  people,  the  monks  in 
whose  district  did  not  know  Pali,  or  had  the  grace  to  say 
they  were  not  learned  enough  to  write  an  original  composition 
in  that  language.  Every  Burman  has  learned  a  certain 
number  of  Pali  formulae  to  enable  him  to  worship  at  the 
pagoda,  but  few  even  of  the  most  renowned  sadaws  have 
anything  like  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  sacred  language. 
Hence,  when  there  is  a  modest  monk  in  the  kyaung,  the 
simple  cultivators  have  to  fall  back  on  their  own  vernacular, 
and  produce  plaintive  appeals  like  the  following : — 

"  This  bell  was  moulded  with  great  care  and  much 
expense,  and  is  humbly  offered  by  Maung  San  Ya,  of  the 
hamlet  of  Nga-pe-u,  in  the  township  of  Maubin,  and  Mama 
Gyi,  his  wife,  who  seek  refuge  in  the  boundless  mercy  of  the 
pitiful  Buddha,  in  the  majesty  of  the  eternal  Law,  and  in 
the  example  of  the  venerable  Assembly  of  the  Perfect,  the 
three  gems.  They  visit  the  precious  things  faithfully  on  the 
appointed  days.  Applaud,  ye  pious  !  They  humbly  strive 
to  gain  for  themselves  merit.  May  the  good  nats  who 
guard  the  forest  and  the  field  look  smilingly  on  them  and 


204  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

protect  the  poor  man's  crops.  May  the  nats  who  dwell  in 
the  air  and  the  earth  defend  from  evil  creatures  the  two  fat 
bullocks  which  plough  the  fields.  May  the  guardian  nats 
of  the  house  and  the  city  keep  from  harm  Chit  U,  their  son, 
and  little  Ma  Mi,  their  darling  daughter.  And  may  the 
merit  of  this  offering  be  shared  with  their  children  and  with 
all  living  beings.  May  the  excellent  Lord  pity  them,  the 
good  spirits  smile  on  them,  the  holy  assembly  receive  them. 
So  shall  Maung  San  Ya  and  Mama  Gyi  gain  much  merit 
and  rejoice  in  presenting  this  bell.  Weight,  seventy-five 
viss.'' 

Such  dedications  are  found  here  and  there,  but  they  are 
not  common,  for  half  the  honour  of  presenting  the  bell  is  lost 
if  the  common  crowd  can  read  what  is  written  on  it ;  and 
doubtless  Maung  Chit  U,  when  he  has  been  to  an  English 
school,  and  has  got  a  place  under  Government,  or  in  an 
English  merchant's  ofifice,  will  be  rather  ashamed  of  the 
quaint  humility  of  his  father's  offering. 

The  bells  are  not  intended  to  summon  worshippers  to  their 
devotions.  There  is  no  necessity  for  such  a  call  where  there 
is  no  formal  service.  Every  man  is  responsible  to  himself 
only  for  his  religious  state  ;  no  one  else  has  anything  directly 
to  do  with  him,  or  can  give  him  help.  The  monks  them- 
selves display  but  little  concern  in  the  spiritual  state  of  the 
laity.  If  a  man  is  to  attain  a  favourable  change  in  a  suc- 
ceeding existence,  it  must  be  by  his  own  exertions.  He 
knows  the  regular  duty-days,  and  on  these  and  on  the  special 
feast-days  he  goes  to  gain  kutho  for  himself  and  better  his 
chance  towards  a  new  transincorporation.  If  he  is  a  fond 
man,  he  parcels  out  the  merit  acquired  by  his  devotions 
among  those  members  of  his  family  or  friends  who  have  not 
been  to  the  pagoda.  The  use  of  the  bells  is  to  direct  atten- 
tion to  the  fact  of  the  lauds  of  the  Buddha  having  been 
recited.  The  worshipper,  when  he  has  finished,  goes  to  one 
of  the  bells  and  strikes  it  three  times,  to  bring  to  the  notice 
of  the  guardian  spirits  and  the  four  worlds  what  he  has  been 
doing.  There  are  always  a  number  of  deer's  antlers  and 
billets  of  wood  lying  near  the  bell  for  this  purpose.  None 
of  them  have  clappers,  and  metal  is  not  used  to  strike  them. 
There  is  no  objection  whatever  to  a  non-Buddhist  striking 


XVIII  BELLS  205 

the  bell ;  it  is  indeed  rather  a  kindly  action,  for  the  more 
clangour  there  is  the  more  likely  the  nats  are  to  observe  the 
devotions  going  on.  After  the  bell  itself  has  been  struck  it 
is  proper  to  strike  the  ground,  so  that  the  spirits  of  the  earth 
may  know  as  well  as  the  guardians  of  the  air.  Most  of  the 
bells  have  a  fine  tone,  and  a  flick  with  the  finger  is  sufficient 
to  cause  a  vibration  through  the  whole  twenty- five  tons  of 
metal  in  Maha  Ganda.  What  sound  the  Mengdn  bell, 
second  only  in  size  to  that  presented  by  the  Empress 
Catherine  to  Moscow,  is  capable  of  producing,  will  never, 
probably,  be  known,  for  the  supports  have  given  way, 
and  half  of  the  rim  rests  on  the  ground.  But,  as 
Colonel  Yule  says,  it  would  have  at  any  time  required  a 
battering-ram  to  bring  out  its  music.  It  has,  since  the 
annexation,  been  hung  by  the  enterprise  of  the  Irrawaddy 
Flotilla  Company. 

Besides  those  suspended  round  the  precincts  of  the  paya,. 
the  hti,  or  umbrella,  on  the  top  of  the  edifice,  is  always 
hung  with  a  multitude  of  bells.  Those  on  the  more  sacred 
shrines  are  very  often  entirely  gold  or  silver.  Several  on 
the  Shwe  Dag6n  are  of  gold,  studded  with  precious  stones, 
and  are  worth  many  hundred  pounds  sterling  apiece.  These,, 
of  course,  are  furnished  with  tongues,  and  the  slightest 
breeze  causes  a  constant  harmonious  tinkling,  dear  to  the 
worshipper's  heart.  The  object  of  these  bells  is  identical 
with  that  of  those  below  on  the  platform — to  attract  the 
attention  of  the  good  spirits  in  Tawa-deintha,  and  other 
abodes  of  the  nat-d6was  on  Mount  Myinmo. 

Though  the  bells  are  very  well  moulded,  the  mode  of 
casting  them  is  of  the  most  primitive  possible  character.  A 
mould  of  clay  is  formed  to  represent  the  inside.  This  is 
covered  with  bees'-wax  to  the  proposed  thickness  of  the 
metal,  and  over  this  again  is  placed  a  heavy  layer  of  clay, 
mixed  with  chopped  paddy  straw.  Through  this  outer 
covering  there  are  a  number  of  funnel  holes  in  parallel  rings 
at  distances  of  six  or  nine  inches,  and  through  these  the 
molten  metal  is  poured  in,  melting  and  taking  the  place  of 
the  bees'-wax,  which  flows  out  at  the  bottom.  Straws  inserted 
through  the  clay  let  out  the  air  and  steam.  Thus  the  bell 
is  formed  in  a  series  of  rings  one  above  the  other.     The 


2o6  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

copper  and  tin  are  melted  together  in  small  open-air  furnaces 
round  about,  and  the  crucibles  are  carried  in  little  wicker 
baskets.  Large  bells  usually  are  made  in  a  pit  dug  in  the 
ground.  The  metal  images  of  the  Buddha  for  the  pagodas 
are  cast  in  a  similar  way.  When  the  mass  has  cooled,  the 
outside  is  polished,  and  any  flaws  there  may  be  are  patched 
up.  Then  the  inscription  is  chiselled  on,  and  the  bell  is 
solemnly  dedicated. 

The  casting  is  made  quite  as  much  a  ceremony  as  it  used 
to  be  in  the  Middle  Ages  in  Europe.  The  whole  district 
gathers  to  see  the  operation.  Songs  are  sung,  and  bands 
clash  and  play  while  the  actual  casting  is  going  on,  and 
sometimes  the  vast  multitude  is  wrought  up  to  such  a  state 
of  enthusiasm  that  women  and  children  throw  in  their  neck- 
laces, and  gold  and  silver  rings  and  bangles.  Traces  of 
these  are  to  be  seen  in  the  inside  of  many  bells,  in  the  shape 
of  whitish  or  yellowish  streaks.  The  workmen  sometimes, 
in  the  case  of  large  bells,  try  to  strengthen  them  by  twisting 
iron  chains  round  the  inner  mould  in  the  midst  of  the  bees'- 
wax.  Such  a  chain  cable  is  distinctly  to  be  seen  in  the 
great  ninety -ton  Mengdn  bell.  Since  the  "  Great  Monarch  " 
of  Moscow  became  a  chapel,  this  is  actually  the  biggest  bell 
in  the  world. 

The  shape  of  Burmese  bells  is  not  handsome.  They 
come  straight  down  to  the  mouth  like  a  barrel — not  expand- 
ing at  the  rim,  like  those  of  European  make,  but  their  tone 
is  very  sweet.  In  Burma  bells  are  entirely  reserved  for 
pagodas.  A  Burman  never  has  a  bell  in  his  house ;  and  it 
would,  in  fact,  be  no  use  to  him  there  if  he  had  it.  English- 
men do  not  use  them  either,  so  that  throughout  the  whole 
country  the  bell  is  only  used  for  sacred  purposes. 

The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  inscription  on  the 
bell  numbered  152 19  in  the  Indian  section  of  the  South 
Kensington  Museum  : — - 

"The  Victor,  the  All-gracious"  [referring  to  Gautama, 
the  Lord  Buddha]. 

"  The  gist  of  the  discourse  on  worship,  as  it  appears  in 
the  beginning  of  the  Dhamma-set,  is  as  follows  : — One  must 
give  goods  in  alms  ;  one  must  preach  the  Law  :  these  two 
things  are  good  deeds  both  for  this  world  and  for  the  next ; 


XVIII  BELLS  T.on 

they  lead  into  the  four  meggas  and  the  four  palin-sas,  the 
paths  by  which  a  man  may  pass  to  ne'ban.  Without 
charity  you  cannot  attain  to  ne'ban  ;  so  it  is  written  in  the 
Pali,  in  the  texts,  the  Tagata  and  the  Tiga,  and  the  com- 
mentaries on  these  sacred  books. 

"  A  seemly  place  is  this,  a  goodly  and  far-famed  place 
[the  shrine  where  the  bell  was  set  up],  renowned  throughout 
the  four  systems  of  ten  thousand  worlds,  among  the  Nat- 
ddwas,  the  Athuras,  the  Byammas,  the  Thagyas,  the 
Nagas,  the  G6n  ba  Yekkhas  [the  guardians  of  the  Thagya 
realms],  and  all  such  beings  to  whom  reverence  may  be 
paid. 

"  The  Pagan  Min  [who  was  deposed  during  the  second 
Burmese  war  in  1852,  and  died  of  smallpox  in  1880],  who 
has  received  the  divine  authority,  the  king  of  this  country, 
gave  to  me,  as  to  one  of  his  pages  to  whom  he  gives  com- 
mands, the  title  of  Maha  Min-gaung  Kyaw  Din,  because  I 
was  an  old  and  true  servant  of  his,  listening  reverently  to  all 
his  commands ;  this  title  he  gave  me  with  power  over  three 
districts,  with  mercy  abundant,  like  the  earth  and  all  the 
precious  things. 

"  I,  the  giver  of  the  bell,  the  famous  man,  the  Yewun 
Min,  was  staying  in  the  sweet-smelling  town  of  Ma-u,  of 
which  I  collect  the  revenue  for  the  king,  and  with  me  was 
my  wife,  my  life's  breath,  M^h  Shwe  G6n,  like  to  the 
pollen  of  a  lily,  from  whom  I  will  not  be  separated  in  all  the 
existences  to  come,  out  of  which  we  hope  soon  to  escape, 
and  therefore  we  give  praises  now  in  order  to  advance  in  the 
Meggas  and  the  Po  [the  four  great  attainments] ;  we  adore 
before  the  Lord  Buddha  that  we  may  embark  on  the  golden 
raft  of  the  noble  path  which  will  conduct  us  to  the  final 
plunge  into  ne'ban  ;  we  two,  brother  and  sister  [commonly 
used  for  husband  and  wife],  have  given  this  bell  as  an  offer- 
ing to  the  seven  precious  things. 

"  The  -exact  weight  of  the  bell  in  current  reckoning  is 
2500  kyats  weight.  In  this  attempt  to  merit  ne'ban  our 
method  was  as  follows  : — We  took  our  own  weight  in  gold 
and  in  silver  and  bought  copper  and  other  metal  [lawha, 
the  Pali  word  used,  implies  five  metals — gold,  silver,  copper, 
iron,  and  lead],  and  mixed  them  well  together. 


2o8  THE  nURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


"In  the  year  1209  [1847  A.D.j,  in  the  hot  season,  at  a 
fortunate  hour,  I  had  it  moulded,  setting  my  heart  on  giving 
it  in  alms.  As  I  wrote  this  inscription  I  offered  up  abundant 
prayer  that  no  enemies  or  troubles  might  come  nigh  me,  and 
that  I  might  obtain  ne'ban.     Then  I  dedicated  it. 

"  Now  will  I  record  all  the  alms  which  I  gave  and 
erected  within  the  sacred  enclosure  of  the  pagoda,  round  the 
slender  spire.  I  gave  a  tagdn-daing,  the  price  of  which, 
with  all  incidental  expenses  in  putting  up  and  everything, 
was  five  hundred  rupees  ;  that  was  the  alms  exactly.  At 
the  foot  of  the  tag6n-daing  I  built  four  small  pagodas, 
making  bold  to  offer  them  in  alms.  In  addition  to  these  I 
built,  outside  the  pagoda  enclosure,  a  monastery  and  a  rest- 
house.  I,  the  Yewun  Min,  wished  earnestly  to  give  the 
greatest  alms  of  any  in  fragrant  Ma-u-myo,  of  which  I 
collected  the  taxes.  I,  the  Yewun  Min,  and  my  wife,  my 
sons  and  my  daughters,  the  four  chief  parties,  together  with 
my  servants  and  slaves  [presented  these  things].  I  persuaded 
them  all  to  give  alms  that  they  might  attain  to  ne'ban,  the 
deliverance  ;  that  they  might  prepare  for  themselves  the  way, 
difficult  and  full  of  swirling  eddies.  Let  the  four  congrega- 
tions—  let  men,  nat-ddwas,  and  all  creatures,  unite  in 
praise. 

"  Such  are  all  my  offerings  ;  these  alms  dedicated  all 
together,  in  order  to  gain  merit,  to  rise  and  progress  to 
ne'ban — to  the  world  just  before  it  [the  last  of  corporeal 
lives].  May  I  be  freed  from  the  four  states  of  punishment ; 
the  three  great  kaps  [fighting,  famine,  and  plague] ;  the  eight 
evil  places,  from  which  a  man  is  born  blind,  dumb,  and  other- 
wise crippled ;  from  the  five  enemies ;  from  unfortunate 
times  and  seasons ;  from  bad-intentioned  people ;  may  I 
escape  all  these  when  I  die.  When  new  glories  wake  up,  I 
will  give  praise  ;  in  the  king's  palace,  the  golden  dwelling 
where  the  king  lives  ;  I  will  ponder  well  and  chant  aloud 
the  praise  of  faith.  Very  high,  even  to  the  skies,  rises  the 
pagoda  given  in  alms  by  the  Ma-u  revenue  collector,  the 
Yewun  Min  paya,  the  pious  founder.  All  men  and  nat- 
d^was,  when  they  behold  it,  will  cry  out  eagerly  in  praise, 
they  will  shout  Thadu  [well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful 
servant],  with  united,  limitless  clamour. 


XVIII  BELLS  209 

"  The  good  that  I  have  done  in  this  world  ;  all  the  alms 
that  I  have  given  [may  they  be  for  the  benefit  of]  my 
parents,  teachers,  cousins,  and  all  my  relations ;  all  virho  in 
Zampu-dipa  are  kings  of  the  earth,  all  queens,  their  sons 
and  daughters ;  nobles  and  all  men  of  rank,  officers,  and  all 
people  of  the  earth  in  the  thirty-one  seats  of  the  world.  All 
the  merits  I  have  gained,  may  they  be  shared  with  these. 
I  give  them  and  share  them  freely.  The  alms  are  manifest. 
I  have  given  them.  This  good  work,  when  I  forget  it  \i.e. 
in  my  next  life],  may  it  be  counted  to  me  in  the  time  of  the 
Buddha  Arimadeya,  when  he  is  revealed.  The  friendly 
witnessing  nats  will  bear  testimony,  as  they  wring  the  water 
from  their  streaming  hair." 

The  allusion  to  the  witnessing  spirits  refers  to  the 
Math6ndaye  nats  who  testified  that  Shin  Gautama  was  the 
true  Buddha.  Man  Nat,  the  spirit  of  evil,  came  and  claimed 
the  throne  under  the  Bawdi-bin  as  his,  and  appealed  to  all 
his  countless  retinue  as  witnesses  that  he  was  the  true  Buddha, 
and  the  rightful  possessor  of  the  throne.  They  replied  with 
a  great  shout.  The  Lord  Buddha  had  no  one  to  call  in 
evidence  but  the  earth,  and  to  it  he  addressed  himself.  The 
earth  replied  with  a  violent  quaking  and  a  roar  that  scared 
away  all  Man  Nat's  noisy  host.  The  Mathdndaye  nats 
stand  as  representatives  of  the  earth,  and  it  is  to  gain  their 
testimony  that  a  cup  of  water  is  always  poured  out  when- 
ever an  offering  is  made.  Hence  their  wet  hair.  At  the 
Shwe  Zig6n  pagoda  between  Nyaung-u  and  Pagan,  the 
Mathdndaye  nats  are  represented  under  umbrellas  and  with 
books.  Their  images  almost  always  display  them  wringing 
the  water  out  of  their  long  tresses.  It  is  to  draw  the  atten- 
tion of  these  nats  that  the  worshipper,  after  striking  the 
pagoda  bell,  strikes  the  earth. 

The  small  bell  in  the  South  Kensington  Museum,  in  the 
case  close  by  the  larger  one,  bears  the  following  inscription  : 
— "  In  the  month  of  Tabodwe  [February],  on  the  fifth  of  the 
waning  moon,  in  the  year  1204  [1842  A.D.],  on  a  Sunday  at 
about  four  in  the  afternoon,  this  bell  was  cast  and  moulded 
of  pure  copper.  Its  weight  is  594,049  kyats  [this  is  an 
absurd  misstatement,  or  a  gross  piece  of  flattery  to  the  king]. 
There  are  four  lions  on  the  hanging  apparatus.      Its  height 

P 


2IO  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    ch.  xviii 

is  nine  fingers'  breadths ;  the  diameter  five  inches ;  the 
circumference  fifteen  ;  the  thickness  twenty-four  (lines  ?).  It 
is  called  the  Mahati  Thadda  Ganda  (the  great,  sweet  sound). 
The  man  who  had  this  royal  bell  moulded  was  the  Burman 
king  Tharrawaddy,  K6nbaung  Min." 


CHAPTER    XIX 

A   PAGODA   FEAST 

A  PAGODA  feast  in  Burma  is  one  of  the  most  frequent,  as 
well  as  one  of  the  most  picturesque  sights  in  the  country. 
Each  shrine  has  its  own  special  sacred  day ;  and  the  annual 
celebration  of  it  is  made  the  occasion  of  a  general  picnic,  the 
congregation  of  people,  from  all  parts  of  the  surrounding 
districts,  being  bent  no  less  on  pleasure  than  on  pious 
observances.  Reverence  for  the  shrines  of  various  saints  in 
different  parts  of  Europe  gave  rise  to  the  great  fairs  which 
were  general  until  the  end  of  last  century,  and  survive  even 
now  in  out-of-the-way  places.  Doubtless,  if  the  Burmese 
were  a  commercial  people,  and  cared  for  the  putting  together 
of  pieces  of  silver,  these  gatherings  might  degenerate  into 
occasions  of  barter  and  bickerings  of  trade — ^just  as,  if  they 
were  a  practical  people,  their  zat-pwe  might  blossom  into 
something  of  a  more  real  character,  as  the  old  mystery  and 
morality  plays  gave  birth  to  the  modern  drama  of  Europe. 
But  the  Burmese  do  not  care  for  any  of  these  things ;  and 
the  pagoda  festivals  retain  therefore  the  character  they  have 
always  had,  of  ostensible  religious  assemblies.  Still  their 
most  obvious  characteristic  to  the  ordinary  p,ublic  mind  is 
very  different.  Youths  and  girls  look  forward  to  them  as 
seasons  of  mirth  and  flirtation  :  long  nights  at  the  open-air 
theatre,  feastings  and  perpetual  amusements,  the  pleasanter 
because  lasting  no  more  than  a  couple  of  days.  Elderly 
people  have  no  less  liking  for  them.  They  meet  their  old 
friends,  and  receive  and  recount  the  gossip  of  half  a  dozen 
districts ;  and  there  is  always  a  succession  of  new  acquaint- 
ances.     It  is  a  joyous  holiday ;  and  it  is  sanctified  by  the 


212  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

thought  that  the  few  hours  spent  at  the  paya  gather  up 
stores  of  kutho,  not  less  certainly  profitable  than  the  social 
delights  of  the  "  duty  day  "  are  pleasurable. 

The  greatest  of  all  the  pagoda  feasts  is,  of  course,  that 
of  the  Shwe  Dag6n  in  Rangoon,  with  its  pilgrims,  not  only 
from  the  farthest  parts  of  Burma  and  far-away  Shan  hills, 
but  also  from  over  the  seas,  from  Siam  and  Cambodia  and 
the  Corea.  But  the  vastness  of  the  gathering  and  the 
proximity  of  the  great  town  spoil  the  national  character  of 
the  festival,  and  introduce  too  many  elements  of  nineteenth- 
century  civilisation  in  the  shape  of  merry-go-rounds  and 
hack  carriages.  A  "  jungle  "  feast  is  not  only  more  char- 
acteristic, but  more  appreciated  in  its  way  by  both  town  and 
country  folk. 

There  are  three  old  Talaing  pagodas  near  Rangoon, 
Kyaik-ka-san,  Kyaik-ka-lo,  and  Kyaik-waing,  whose  annual 
duty  days  are  looked  forward  to  with  pleasure  by  all  the 
people  round  about.  The  feasts  all  occur  in  the  month  of 
Tabodwe,  corresponding  to  our  February  or  March.  I 
have  a  suspicion  that,  were  the  proper  date  adhered  to,  all 
three  would  have  the  same  ubond ;  but  such  a  lavish 
squandering  of  the  good  a  popular  religion  provides  for  us 
would  hardly  meet  with  lay  approval,  even  if  advocated  by 
the  most  holy  of  hermits.  Accordingly  the  three  pagoda 
days  occur  at  intervals  of  a  week,  without  reference  to  the 
crescent  or  waning  moon ;  and  latterly,  with  singular  con- 
venience for  Burmans  occupied  in  business  in  Rangoon, 
have  usually  been  fixed  for  Sunday;  so  that  English 
merchants  are  not  troubled  with  the  sudden  ailments  of 
their  clerks  at  this  season  so  much  as  used  formerly  to  be 
the  case.  The  Kyaik-ka-san  is  probably  the  most  sacred 
of  the  three ;  containing  as  it  does  a  tooth  and  bone  of 
the  forehead  of  Shin  Gautama,  brought  to  Rangoon  by 
a  yahanda,  a  blameless  mendicant,  over  whose  remains  in 
Rangoon  a  huge  thein-gyi,  or  ceremonial  building,  has  been 
erected.  Kyaik-ka-lo  is,  however,  seemingly  the  more 
popular.  It  stands  on  the  summit  of  a  little  hill  about 
fourteen  miles  north  of  Rangoon,  and  is  built  of  laterite 
blocks,  now  faced  with  bricks  covered  with  plaster.  The 
shrine   was  built   in  the  second  century  before   Christ,  and, 


XIX  A  PAGODA  FEAST  213 

ninety  feet  high  itself,  is  surrounded  by  twenty-four  smaller 
zediyan  of  a  much  later  date. 

Great  crowds  of  people  go  out  every  year  from  Rangoon, 
starting  early  in  the  morning,  so  as  to  avoid  the  heat,  though 
in  February  the  bracing  winds  of  the  cold  weather  have  not 
altogether  gone.  Most  of  the  travelling  is  done  in  bullock- 
carts.  These  conveyances  are  not  nearly  so  fine  as  the 
Mandalay  vehicles,  but  they  are  neat  enough ;  the  pole  is 
elaborately  carved  at  the  end,  and  above  all  they  are  roomy, 
and  allow  "  Jack  Burma "  and  his  family  to  loll  about  as 
they  please.  Bamboos  are  bent  over  to  form  a  hood,  and 
over  this  is  thrown  a  kullaga,  a  piece  of  tapestry-work 
formed  of  pieces,  of  many-coloured  cloth  sewn  on  to  a  red 
blanket  so  as  to  represent  figures  ;  the  scenes  being  usually 
taken  from  some  well-known  play  or  from  the  court.  They 
are  eight  or  ten  feet  long,  and  four  or  five  broad,  affording 
a  capital  shelter  from  the  sun,  and  combining  the  advantage 
of  being  easily  moved  when  there  is  a  breeze,  with  the  still 
greater  merit  of  looking  very  gay  and  bright.  The  party 
starts  off  before  daylight,  young  master  Lugal^  being  left 
behind  to  guard  the  house  till  the  rest  come  back,  and  testi- 
fying his  disapproval  of  the  responsibility  of  this  duty  by 
strenuous  howls.  The  Madrasi  sepoy  lines  are  soon  passed, 
and  we  get  out  into  the  undulating  country  beyond,  and 
pass  through  the  gardens  and  orchards  which  abound  along 
the  jProme  road.  The  ground  here  is  not  suited  for  rice, 
and  there  are  large  areas  covered  with  mango,  jack,  ma-yan, 
a  kind  of  acid  plum  (which  the  perverse  Englishman  persists 
in  calling  Mary- Anne),  and  other  fruit-trees,  with  pine-apples 
in  long  rows  beneath  their  shade.  The  Chinese  have  great 
market -gardens  here,  miracles  of  neatness,  but  far  from 
savoury  in  their  odours.  They  never  miss  a  chance  of 
making  money,  and  accordingly  this  morning  turn  over  a 
few  pice  by  selling  sugar-cane  to  the  girls,  and  bamboo  pipes 
of  palm-toddy  to  the  men.  The  Shans,  also  born  gardeners, 
to  whom  the  fruit-trees  mostly  belong,  are  very  pious,  and 
join  in  the  pilgrimage  with  their  quaint  offering-flags  made 
of  slim  frameworks  of  bamboo,  woven  across  in  diverse 
patterns  with  vari-coloured  cotton  threads.  A  little  farther 
on  we  get   beyond   the   region  of  the   market -gardens,  and 


214  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

pass  between  monotonous  stretches  of  secondary  jungle  with 
no  houses  to  be  seen,  though  behind  the  strip  of  tangled 
bush  there  are  wide  expanses  of  rice-land  with  little  bamboo 
huts  dotted  here  and  there  in  clusters.  But  the  sun  is 
getting  thigh,  and  about  half-way  on  the  journey  old  Maung 
Gyi  declares  he  is  hungry,  and  draws  up  the  cart  under  a 
bank  in  a  shady  hollow.  The  bullocks  are  turned  loose,  and 
preparations  made  for  breakfast.  The  entire  house  service 
has  been  brought  with  us.  It  is  not  very  extensive,  certainly. 
A  couple  of  earthen  pots  with  covers,  and  a  flat  wooden 
spoon  to  stir  up  the  rice  or  curry ;  a  ladle  made  of  half  a 
cocoa-nut,  with  a  handle  in  it ;  a  big  round  flat  dish  of  plain 
lacquered  wood  to  place  the  entire  feast  on  when  it  is  ready  ; 
and  a  few  bamboo,  lacquered  cups,  without  handles,  with 
perhaps  a  plate  or  two,  complete  the  list.  The  provender 
is  equally  simple.  A  heap  of  plain  boiled  rice,  dried  fish, 
chillies,  onions,  nga-pi,  some  salt  and  oil— that  is  the  sum 
total.  But  it  is  eaten  with  zest  and  good  appetite,  and  the 
little  stream  furnishes  wherewith  to  wash  it  down.  Then 
the  ladies  produce  cheroots  for  the  party  from  the  recesses 
of  their  bamboo  plaited  pahs,  and  light  up  for  everybody  if 
they  are  good-natured. 

Numbers  of  other  carts  have  come  up  and  stopped  or 
passed  on  in  the  meantime,  and,  hilarious  with  his  breakfast, 
Maung  Gyi  challenges  neighbour  U  Hpe  to  a  race ;  and 
forthwith  the  bullocks  are  brought  into  a  shambling  trot, 
and  amidst  much  prodding  with  sticks  and  cries  of  "  H6 
noa "  and  "  Tun-n-ng,"  and  other  sounds  understanded  of 
cattle,  a  fairly  level  race  is  kept  up  for  half  a  mile  or  so. 
Then  the  carts  are  pulled  up,  and  their  inmates  burst  into 
loud  talk,  having  been  hitherto  precluded  from  expressing 
their  triumph  or  chagrin  from  a  fear  of  biting  their  tongues 
off  in  the  jolting,  or  of  being  choked  with  the  dust.  Notes 
are  compared  as  to  who  is  coming  and  who  has  stayed  away, 
and  then  fresh  acquaintances  are  sighted  in  the  passing 
throng ;  and  so  with  much  good  humour  and  pleasant 
meetings  the  fourteen  -  mile  journey  is  safely  got  over. 
Arrived  at  the  zayat,  the  rest-house,  which  marks  the  point 
whence  the  path  to  the  shrine  strikes  off"  from  the  highway, 
the  cart  is  turned  aside  among  the  low  bushes  ;  the  oxen 


XIX  A  PAGODA  FEAST  215 

are  cast  off  and  tethered  up,  the  mats  and  bedding  spread 
out  below  the  cart  in  readiness  against  bed-time.  Then  our 
party  breaks  up  to  seek  friends  in  the  crowd ;  the  girls 
taking  off  their  travelling-dress  and  putting  on  their  finest 
tameins,  an  operation  which  it  would  puzzle  English  women 
to  do  in  public  with  equally  scanty  raiment  and  equal 
modesty.  But  they  do  it  deftly  ;  and,  after  touching  up 
their  complexion  with  a  little  fragrant  thana'kha,  are  off, 
followed  shortly  by  their  brothers,  who,  in  the  absence  of  a 
looking-glass,  have  some  difficulty  in  winding  on  their  turbans 
to  their  liking.  However,  that  is  eventually  done,  and  the 
remaining  hours  of  daylight  are  spent  in  pleasant  talk  with 
friends,  and  wanderings  through  the  shrub-growth  and  tall 
grass  which  cover  the  spur,  at  the  end  of  which  is  the  pagoda. 
The  little  tank,  a  brick-built  pond,  which  lies  at  the  foot  of 
the  hollow,  falling  away  from  the  monastery,  is  a  great 
rendezvous,  and  many  of  the  older  people  climb  the  slope 
to  have  some  talk  with  the  abbot. 

At  nightfall  there  is  a  general  gathering  in  the  cleared 
space  where  the  stage  for  the  puppet-play  is  erected.  The 
monks  of  the  kyaung  are  not  Sulagandis,  and  do  not  pro- 
hibit the  acting  of  a  play  so  near  to  the  sacred  precincts. 
Besides,  it  is  the  Wethandaya  Wuttu,  one  of  the  ten  greatest 
birth-stories  ;  and  there  is  a  troupe  of  famous  manipulators 
from  Rangoon.  The  marionette  play  is  more  esteemed  by 
the  people  than  the  legitimate  drama,  and  it  is  more  suited 
to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  relic-shrine.  Nevertheless,  a 
zat-pw^,  got  up  by  the  amateur  actors  and  actresses  of  the 
village  of  San-gyi-wa,  a  mile  back  on  the  road,  is  also  well 
patronised,  so  that  all  tastes  are  consulted. 

The  people  sit  round  about  in  a  dense  crowd,  smoking 
and  chewing  betel,  many  of  the  young  men  strolling  about 
and  flirting  in  the  impromptu  bazaar  which  some  business- 
like girls  have  started.  This  goes  on  till  daylight,  the 
audience  alternately  sleeping  and  looking  on  and  applaud- 
ing. At  early  dawn,  the  offerings  are  made  to  the  yahans, 
and  all  crowd  to  the  shrine  to  recite  their  sentences  in 
praise  of  the  Lord  Buddha.  After  breakfast  there  is  more 
gossip  and  conversation  with  friends.  A  few  of  the  old 
people  listen  to  the  reading  and  expounding  of  the  Law  by 


2i6  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    chap,  xix 

the  superior  of  the  monastery,  but  the  young  continue  the 
amusements  of  the  day  before.  The  cool  of  the  evening,  or 
the  following  morning  at  latest,  sees  all  on  their  way  home 
again,  the  fun  being  kept  up  with,  if  anything,  increased 
zest.  Every  one  is  in  high  spirits.  There  has  been  much 
merit  gained  by  the  pilgrimage,  and  the  personal  enjoyment 
of  the  trip  has  been  no  less  satisfactory.  Gay  turbans  are 
hung  up  as  flags  from  the  carts,  and  songs  and  choruses  are 
frequent  and  jovial.  Many  a  marriage  is  settled  at  these 
pious  picnics.  There  is  such  abundant  opportunity  for  love- 
making  at  the  open-air  encampment,  where  the  old  people 
are  so  engaged  in  talking  with  relations  and  friends  whom 
they  have  not  seen  for  the  last  twelve  months,  that  they 
forget  how  craftily  they  utilised  similar  opportunities  when 
they  were  young  themselves.  Besides,  at  the  end  of  February, 
Lent  is  beginning  to  loom  up,  and  in  Lent  nobody  can  be 
married,  and  those  girls  who  do  not  care  for  the  watery 
courtship  of  the  New  Year's  Feast  in  April  are  often  induced 
to  be  complaisant  at  the  country  pagoda  feasts.  Many  a 
young  couple  have  special  cause  to  remember  the  happy 
ride  back.  The  Buddhist  faith  may  be  as  dreary,  without 
hope,  without  belief  in  the  world,  as  many  say  it  is,  but  no 
one  would  imagine  it  so  who  looks  on  the  gaily-dressed 
laughing  crowd  of  men  and  maidens  who  throng  to  the 
country  pagoda  feasts. 


CHAPTER    XX 

DUTY    DAYS 

There  are  four  ubone,  or  duty  days,  in  every  lunar  month, 
on  which  all  good  Burmans  are  expected  to  go  and  worship 
at  the  pagodas.  These  are  the  eighth  of  the  crescent,  the 
full  moon,  the  eighth  of  the  waning,  and  the  change,  of 
which  the  second  and  the  fourth  are  the  more  sacred.  As 
the  monks  have  nothing  to  do  with  looking  after  the  spiritual 
state  of  the  people,  it  is  entirely  a  matter  to  be  settled  by 
one's  self  whether  any  particular  worship  day  is  to  be 
observed  or  not.  If  you  conclude  that  strict  religious  observ- 
ances are  only  necessary  for  your  spiritual  well-being  on 
the  day  of  the  full  moon,  or  at  any  rate  that  you  may  leave 
out  the  eighth  of  the  crescent  and  waning  moon,  then  the 
ubon6  does  not  concern  you  at  all,  and  you  may  proceed 
about  your  ordinary  business  without  being  considered  a 
reprobate.  The  very  devout  may  go  to  the  pagoda  on  all 
the  four  sacred  days  of  the  month ;  but  if  you  choose  to 
omit  one  or  several,  or  substitute  an  ordinary  day  for  that 
provided  by  religious  custom,  there  is  no  one  to  take  you  to 
task  for  it.  Were  a  Burman  never  to  go  to  the  pagoda  at 
all,  or  fail  to  do  so  for  any  considerable  time,  he  would 
indeed  soon  get  a  very  bad  character  among  his  neighbours, 
and  might  even  be  formally  excommunicated  by  the  yahans. 
There  is,  however,  practically  no  constraint  save  the  force 
of  public  opinion.  But  the  duties  of  worship  are  so  light, 
and  so  dependent  in  their  details  upon  yourself,  and  there 
is  so  much  amusement  to  be  got  out  of  a  visit  to  the  pagoda 
on  an  ubond,  that  few,  even  of  the  most  worldly-minded, 
miss  any  great  number  of  the  appointed  days,  and  a  special 
festival  is  always  carefully  observed. 

217 


2i8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

With  the  really  devout,  a  worship  day  always  commences 
on  the  previous  evening,  that  of  the  apeitnd,  or  day  of  pre- 
paration. In  most  country  villages,  and  occasionally  even  in 
the  larger  district  towns,  where  there  is  more  dissipation 
than  devoutness,  a  few  old  men,  as  a  voluntary  work  of  merit, 
go  round  about  the  place  beating  the  kyizi,  the  triangular 
gong,  used  only  for  this  and  similar  religious  purposes. 
The  instrument  is  suspended  by  a  string  to  a  stick  carried 
over  the  shoulder,  and  as  the  sounds  vibrate,  rise  and  fall, 
quicken  and  die  away  with  the  winding  and  unwinding 
of  the  cord,  those  who  intend  to  keep  the  duty  day  well 
make  ready  for  a  start  to  the  pagoda.  Mats,  sleeping-rugs, 
blankets,  and  eatables  are  gathered  together  ;  and  the  whole 
family,  with  the  exception  of  a  couple  of  the  children  and 
an  old  woman  or  so  perhaps,  left  behind  to  look  after  the 
house,  set  off  in  a  body,  preceded  in  some  cases  by  a  kyizi 
of  their  own,  struck  at  intervals  by  the  head  of  the  family, 
who  slings  it  on  a  bamboo,  to  the  other  end  of  which,  as  a 
kind  of  equipoise,  is  fastened  a  lamp.  The  purpose  of  this 
ceremony  of  striking  the  gong  is  to  announce  to  the  four 
worlds  the  good  work  on  which  the  party  is  engaged. 
They  make  their  way  to  one  of  the  numerous  zayats,  erected 
round  the  pagoda  for  the  accommodation  of  pious  people. 
If  the  family  be  a  wealthy  one  they  have  probably  such  an 
open-sided,  floored  shed  of  their  own,  erected  for  the  general 
use,  but  virtually  reserved  for  themselves  when  required.  If 
they  have  not,  or  if  the  shrine  is  small  and  the  rest-houses 
few,  they  put  up  in  one  of  the  general  zayats,  where  they 
can  always  find  a  quiet  corner  to  settle  in.  There  they 
sleep,  or,  what  is  better,  tell  their  beads  and  meditate. 

Some  time  before  daylight  the  food  intended  for  the 
yahans  is  cooked,  and  when  the  sun  rises  a  message  is  sent 
to  the  monastery  that  everything  is  ready.  The  alms  have 
been  put  together  in  a  heap  in  the  middle  of  the  zayat,  in 
front  of  the  permanent  platform  on  which  the  mendicants 
take  their  station  after  they  have  arrived  in  a  long  procession 
of  Indian  file.  In  the  meantime  numbers  of  other  more 
comfort -seeking  laymen,  who  have  slept  at  home,  come 
trooping  in  from  the  town,  also  bringing  offerings  for  the 
pagoda,  and  food  for  themselves  and  the  pyinsin.     When  a 


DUTY  DAYS  319 


congregation  has  been  made  up,  or  when  the  family  party 
is  complete,  the  senior  monk  recites  the  Ten  Precepts  in- 
cumbent on  all  upathaka  on  duty  days,  and  adds  some 
portion  of  the  sermons  of  Shin  Gautama,  the  other  pyinsin, 
sitting  behind  their  big  fans  to  hide  the  women  from  their 
sight,  occasionally  making  the  responses.  Finally  the 
Payeit-gyi,  or  some  similar  litany  of  praise,  is  intoned  ; 
all  the  congregation  joining  in  the  chant,  with  upraised 
hands  clasping  a  flower  or  some  other  symbol  of  offering. 
With  this  the  service  ends.  The  yahans  rise  from  behind 
their  fans  and  file  back  to  the  monastery  again,  the  food 
being  carried  after  them  by  the  pupils  or  the  donors.  When 
this  is  done  the  worshippers  set  about  preparing  their  own 
breakfast — unless,  indeed,  as  is  probable,  it  was  cooked  at 
the  same  time  as  the  food  for  the  yahans.  Each  family  eats 
separately,  arranged  in  a  circle  round  the  great  byat,  or 
platter  of  rice.  If,  however,  any  one  has  some  particular 
delicacy — the  celebrated  nga-pi  gaung  fish  paste  from  Paya 
Gyi,  in  the  An-gyi  township,  iguana's  eggs  from  Shwe 
Gyin  side,  or  pickled  tea  fresh  from  the  Shan  hills — he 
gives  of  his  abundance  to  those  round  about ;  and  any 
solitary  stranger  from  a  distance  is  always  sure  of  an  invita- 
tion to  join  some  breakfast  party.  When  all  have  finished 
eating,  the  fragments  that  remain  are  thrown  out  for  the 
pariah  dogs  and  the  crows.  Additional  merit  is  of  course 
gained  by  this  act  of  charity.  For  the  rest  of  the  day,  with 
the  exception  of  the  time  that  may  be  spent  in  repeating 
doxologies  before  the  image  of  the  Buddha  at  the  pagoda, 
nothing  is  done.  Every  one  is  dressed  in  his  best  and  goes 
about  meeting  his  friends,  or  lolling  comfortably  with  a 
cheroot  in  the  zayat  waiting  for  them  to  come  to  him.  Vast 
quantities  of  betel-nut  and  pickled  tea  and  local  gossip  are 
discussed.  The  racing-boat  the  Bassein  men  are  getting 
ready  to  send  for  the  October  contests  in  Mandalay ;  the 
brass  image  Maung  Walk,  the  extra  assistant  commissioner, 
is  going  to  dedicate  next  month  ;  the  old  witch  down  at 
Ywa  Thit  Gyi,  who  has  caused  the  murrain  among  the 
Thu-gyi's  buffaloes,  and  the  nuisance  it  is  that  the  English 
ayebaing  will  not  allow  her  to  be  tied  to  a  bamboo  and 
pitched  into  the  river  in  the  good  old  fashion,  to  prove  that 


220  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


she  really  does  trade  in  the  black  art ;  the  new  style  in 
Manchester -flowered  turbans  that  Ah  L6k,  the  Chinese 
pedlar,  has  brought  in  his  boat  from  Rangoon — all  these, 
and  a  great  variety  of  kindred  topics,  are  considered  under 
all  their  aspects. 

It  must  not,  however,  be  supposed  that  all  the  people 
take  this  easy-going  and  frivolous  view  of  duty  days. 
Diligent  seekers  after  kutho  behave  very  differently.  They 
do  not  merely  limit  themselves  to  the  customary  forms  of 
worship  and  offerings.  They  sleep  little,  or  not  at  all, 
the  night  before  ;  telling  their  beads  instead,  and  reading 
good  books,  some  of  the  discourses  of  the  Buddha,  or 
portions  of  the  greater  zats.  All  necessary  business  is 
transacted  the  day  previous  to  the  ubon^,  and  neighbours 
are  exhorted  to  observe  the  festival  properly.  After  one 
simple  dish  in  the  morning,  they  eat  nothing  for  the  rest 
of  the  day ;  or  perhaps  on  certain  occasions  do  not  break 
their  fast  till  after  mid-day,  a  custom  very  general  on  the 
first  day  of  Lent.  Instead  of  staying  in  the  noisy  zayat, 
where  the  assembled  people  are  talking  of  light  matters, 
laughing  and  diverting  themselves,  they  retire  to  a  tazaung 
on  the  pagoda  platform,  or  to  some  place  shaded  by  trees, 
where  they  finger  the  hundred  and  eight  beads  of  their 
rosary,  muttering,  "  All  is  transient,  sorrowful,  and  vain  ;  the 
Lord,  the  Law,  the  Assembly ;  the  three  precious  things  "  ; 
and  meditate  on  the  example  of  the  Lord  Buddha  and  the 
excellence  of  his  Law.  To  vary  the  monotony  of  this 
performance,  they  go  for  an  hour  or  two  to  one  of  the 
monasteries  to  talk  with  the  prior  or  some  learned  brother, 
or  perhaps  to  hear  him  read  and  expound  one  of  the  jatakas, 
or  birth-stories. 

So  the  duty  day  passes.  By  sunset  most  of  the  wor- 
shippers are  making  their  way  back  to  their  homes ;  but  a 
few  zealous  spirits  remain  all  night  in  the  zayat,  and  only 
return  with  daylight  on  the  following  morning.  This  simple 
round  of  celebration  is  repeated  four  times  in  every  lunar 
month,  with  here  and  there  a  feast-day  of  some  particular 
shrifte  thrown  in,  when  the  only  difference  is  that  there  is 
greater  ceremony  and  a  more  or  less  large  influx  of  strangers, 
according  to  the  sanctity  of  the  pagoda. 


DUTY  DA  YS  221 


The  sole  distinction  between  Lent — lasting  from  the 
day  after  the  full  moon  of  July  to  the  full  moon  of  October 
— and  the  rest  of  the  year,  is  that  all  laymen  are  expected 
to  be  much  more  regular  in  their  observance  of  the  weekly 
religious  days.  It  is  not  a  season  of  fasting,  but  simply  of 
stricter  execution  of  religious  duties.  No  marriages,  feasts, 
or  public  amusements  are  held,  or  only  by  the  graceless  ;  and 
some  of  the  yahans  retire  into  the  depths  of  the  jungle,  where 
they  can  devote  themselves  to  meditation  with  greater  security 
from  interruption.  The  custom  of  regarding  these  three 
months  as  peculiarly  sacred  undoubtedly  rose  from  the  habit 
of  the  monks,  in  the  first  days  after  the  Buddha's  teaching, 
remaining  steadfastly  in  their  monasteries  in  Magadha  during 
the  period  of  the  annual  rains,  devoting  all  their  time  to 
pondering  over  the  Sacred  Law,  and  expounding  it  to  any 
laymen  dayakas,  or  upathakas,  inquirers,  or  believers  and 
searchers  after  the  truth,  who  came  to  consult  with  them  in 
their  dwellings ;  seeking  to  enter  the  current  of  perfection, 
and,  attaining  the  state  of  arahan,  to  float  into  Ne'ban,  the 
state  of  joyless,  painless  calm.  Nowadays  all  are  expected  to 
study  the  Law  for  themselves  ;  but  in  order  to  prepare  them- 
selves worthily  for  the  Wa,  the  wealthier  people  often  call 
in  the  more  learned  yahans  to  deliver  exhortations  in  their 
houses.  Numbers  of  relations  and  friends  are  invited,  who 
bring  presents  for  the  holy  man,  in  the  hope  of  sharing  the 
merit  of  the  transaction.  Portions  of  the  holy  books  usually 
are  read  on  these  occasions,  especially  the  much-admired 
Wethandaya  Wuttu.  The  doctrine  inculcated  by  this  zat 
is  charity  ;  and  malicious  people  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that 
the  giving  of  alms  is  the  invariable  theme  of  the  pyinsin. 
But  I  have  at  least  as  often  heard  the  praises  of  wisdom 
from  the  Lawkanidi  recited  at  such  Lenten  lectures,  and 
a  portion  may  be  quoted  here :  "  The  ignorant  bow  down 
before  the  wise  man.  The  riches  of  the  wise  man  are  like 
a  bubbling  spring,  a  fountain  that  never  runs  dry,  and  that, 
however  constantly  you  may  draw  from  it,  is  ever  filled 
anew.  The  beauty  of  women  and  the  sweetness  of  the 
sugar-cane  bring  satiety,  but  the  words  of  wisdom  never  pall. 
The  lazy  man  will  never  get  learning.  Any  man  may  be 
endowed    with    riches,    beauty,   rank,   youth ;     but    without 


222  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    chap,  xx 

knowledge  he  is  but  as  a  beautiful  flower  that  hath  no  per- 
fume. The  fragrance  of  flowers  is  refreshing ;  more  so  is  the 
light  of  the  cool  moon's  rays  ;  but  the  greatest  delight  comes 
from  the  words  of  wisdom.  The  sun  may  rise  in  the  west ; 
the  summit  of  Mount  Meru  may  be  bent  like  a  bow ;  the 
fires  of  hell  may  languish  and  die  out ;  the  lotus  may  spring 
on  the  tops  of  the  mountains  ;  but  the  words  of  truth  and 
wisdom  are  always  the  same.'' 

Similarly  the  riches  of  man  are  said  to  consist  in  his 
learning,  his  family,  and  his  good  name  ;  of  a  woman  in  her 
beauty  ;  of  a  great  man  in  his  rank,  influence,  position,  and 
the  number  of  his  slaves  ;  of  a  monk  in  his  austerity ;  of  a 
serpent  in  its  poison  ;  and  of  a  p6nna  in  his  oaths  and  his 
prophecies. 

Thirteen  kinds  of  pride  are  enumerated.  To  lie  in  the 
cool  shade,  with  the  power  of  the  heavens  at  his  command, 
and  to  be  victorious  over  his  enemies,  is  the  pride  of  the 
tha-gya  king.  The  gal6n  delights  in  flying  throughout  the 
skies  above  or  below.  The  naga  prides  himself  in  his 
wondrous  works,  bright  and  glorious.  The  lion's  pride  is 
to  overcome  his  enemies  and  destroy  all  opposition.  The 
merchant's  pride  is  to  have  obedient  slaves  and  abundance 
of  gold  and  silver.  The  soldier's  to  enter  a  town  with  the 
clash  of  the  cymbal  and  the  pomp  of  military  music.  The 
peasant's  to  finish  his  toil  honestly  and  well.  The  yahanda 
finds  his  pride  in  the  power  of  wisdom  and  in  books.  The 
prince  in  triumphing  over  routed  enemies  and  enriching 
himself  with  their  spoil.  A  woman's  pride  is  to  talk  in  a 
pleasant  and  amusing  way.  A  man's  to  be  celebrated  and 
feared  for  his  strength  of  mind  and  body.  A  doctor's  to 
effect  successful  cures  with  his  own  medicines,  and  a  pdnna's 
pride  is  in  his  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  the  Bedin. 

The  significance  of  all  this  and  a  deal  more  similar 
useless  information  is  that  during  the  Wa  the  sacred  books 
should  be  studied,  while  all  youths  should  receive  their 
Buddhist  baptism  by  putting  on  the  wa,  the  yellow  robe  of 
the  cloister — a  Burmese  play  upon  words  which  has  a  further 
significance  to  the  young  neophytes,  in  the  reflection  that 
"wa"  also  means  a  bamboo,  which  yahans  do  not  spare. 
Lent  or  no  Lent. 


CHAPTER    XXI 

THE    END   OF    LENT 

The  end  of  the  Wa,  or  the  full  moon  of  Thadin-gyut,  is 
always  the  occasion  of  a  regular  carnival  of  enjoyment, 
which  in  Rangoon  has  latterly  shown  a  tendency  to  de- 
generate into  uproarious  saturnalia.  The  dismal  season  of 
the  rains  and  of  Lent,  when  there  were  no  pwes  anywhere, 
no  feasts,  no  courting  to  be  done  wherever  the  parents  were 
at  all  strict,  no  amusement  of  any  kind  to  be  had,  except 
the  somewhat  tame  diversion  of  a  gossip  with  kindred  spirits 
at  the  pagoda  on  the  duty  days — all  this  has  passed  away. 
Plays,  ahlu  pw^  and  kyi-gyin  pwe,  are  to  be  seen  in  every 
quarter  ;  young  brothers  who  have  just  finished  their  three 
months  as  novitiants  in  the  monastery  and  have  come  out 
into  the  world  again  are  wild  with  excitement  at  their  re- 
gained freedom,  and  infect  their  sisters  with  enthusiasm  for 
gaiety  of  all  sorts  ;  the  town  is  illuminated,  feasting  goes  on 
everywhere,  and  the  street  plays  are  so  crowded  that  you 
cannot  secure  a  decent  place  unless  you  come  down  early  in 
the  afternoon,  or  at  any  rate  before  nightfall. 

But  all  public  festivals  in  Burma  are  religious  in  their 
character,  and  the  rejoicings  at  wa-gyut  are  not  less  so  than 
those  at  wa-win,  when  every  one  was  preparing  for  the 
austerities  of  Lent,  instead  of  the  relaxations  of  the  coming 
cold  months.  Accordingly  the  merry  season  is  ushered  in 
with  a  great  feasting  of  the  monks.  This  s6n-daw-gyi  pwe 
is  not  so  extensive,  properly  speaking,  as  the  legitimate 
festival  of  that  name  a  month  later  at  the  time  of  the 
Tawadeintha  feast,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  is  much  more 
modest   in    its   character  in  the   small    towns   and  villages. 

223 


224  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

But  in  Rangoon  it  has  assumed  in  recent  years  a  form  which 
gives  a  great  deal  of  offence  to  all  the  more  serious  people, 
and  is  especially  condemned  by  the  austere  Sulagandis. 
Instead  of  having  the  offerings  displayed  in  their  houses 
and  giving  them  to  the  yahans  when  they  come  round  in 
the  grey  of  the  morning,  the  new  fashion  with  the  inhabitants 
of  Rangoon  is  to  carry  all  the  alms  to  the  monastery  over- 
night, set  them  up  in  goodly  array,  there  and  then  hold 
receptions,  sing  songs,  dance,  play  musical  instruments,  and 
generally  turn  the  quiet  monastery  into  the  semblance  of  an 
uproarious  "  penny  gaff."  This  objectionable  innovation  has 
gradually  arisen  out  of  the  practice  of  a  few  of  the  more 
pious  old  people  who  at  the  end  of  Lent  used  to  go  in  the 
evenings  with  ahlu  for  the  pyinsin,  listen  to  some  pious 
discourses,  or  the  recitation  of  some  sacred  zat,  ■  and  then 
return  betimes  to  bed.  But  now  the  frivolous  find  monks 
not  less  carnal- minded  than  themselves.  Subscriptions  are 
raised  for  weeks  beforehand  to  make  a  grand  display.  One 
of  the  yahans  is  asked  to  grant  the  zayat  near  hisjiouse  for 
the  occasion.  Some  of  the  monks  of  the  Thayet-daw  kyaung 
in  Godwin  Road,  which  is  the  chief  sinner  in  this  respect, 
are  even  so  shameless  as  actually  to  go  touting  about  for 
people  to  take  their  zayats,  or  at  times  even  part  of  the 
monastery  itself 

Then  at  nightfall,  on  the  full  moon,  the  people  begin  to 
troop  in.  Those  who  have  taken  the  management  of  the 
almsgiving  are  there  before.  We  enter  by  one  of  the  little 
wooden  bridges,  and  come  across  a  pya-that,  a  presentation 
spire,  immediately,  glittering  bright  in  the  moonlight  and 
the  glaring  torches  which  are  gathered  thick  farther  on 
among  the  pdngyis'  dwelling-places  and  the  mango-trees 
from  which  the  monastery  takes  its  name.  The  spire  has 
just  been  deposited,  and  the  band  has  barely  stopped  the 
music  which  sounds  so  strange  within  the  sacred  parawun. 
But  there  is  more  coming  that  will  be  a  far  greater  shock 
to  up-country  notions  of  religious  propriety.  The  first  place 
we  come  to  is  a  zayat,  and  Maung  Maung,  the  dispenser  of 
hospitality,  recognises  us  and  calls  us  up.  All  his  female 
friends  are  arranged  in  a  row  at  the  back,  dressed  in  their 
finest,  and  before  them,  just  as  at  the  Tasaungmdn  alms- 


XXI  THE  END  OF  LENT  225 

feast,  are  heaped  up  piles  of  fruits,  savoury  curries,  cakes, 
biscuits,  and  sweetmeats  of  all  kinds,  intended  for  the  monks  ; 
while  scattered  about  are  great  repoussi  silver  bowls  full  of 
sherbet,  gold  and  silver  cups,  lamps,  mirrors,  and  all  the 
familiar  adornments,  fit  enough  for  a  private  house,  but 
singularly  out  of  place  where  a  gay  piece  of  tapestry  hung 
up  barely  conceals  the  image  at  the  eastern  side  of  the  rest- 
house.  Maung  Maung  offers  us  some  lemonade,  and  we 
light  cheroots,  exchange  a  few  compliments  with  the  ladies,  and 
pass  on,  just  as  a  noisy  half-dozen  of  young  Englishmen  from 
one  of  the  mercantile  houses  come  scrambling  up  the  ladder- 
like steps.  It  would  be  well  if  these  gentlemen  would  re- 
member that  each  of  the  houses  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes 
a  private  assembly  for  the  night,  and  that,  though  the  host 
always  welcomes  them,  he  understands  English,  and  does 
not  by  any  means  relish  the  mocking  comments  which  are 
lavished  on  everything,  and  still  less  is  inclined  to  approve 
of  the  criticisms  passed  on  the  ladies.  But  then  there  are 
so  few  Englishmen  in  Burma  who  understand  the  very 
shortest  sentence  in  the  language  that  they  may  be  pardoned 
if  they  mistake  for  a  promiscuous  saturnalia  what  is  nominally 
a  religious  ceremony.  We  leave  them  joking  with  Maung 
Maung  and  the  hostess,  as  she  offers  them  some  beer — beer 
in  a  monastery !  But  then  it  is  known  that  Englishmen 
will  be  there,  and  the  Burman's  notion  is  that  an  English- 
man only  leaves  off  drinking  beer  when  he  drinks  brandy, 
so  this  last  indignity  is  not  objected  to  by  the  yahans. 

Farther  on  we  come  to  the  place  we  are  specially  in 
search  of  The  master  of  ceremonies  here  is  our  friend 
Maung  Po  Si,  a  Patama  Byan,  a  certificated  theologian 
and  long  resident  in  Mandalay,  qualified,  therefore,  to  be  a 
yahan  himself,  and  from  his  previous  experiences,  one  would 
think,  not  at  all  likely  to  countenance  such  open  contempt 
of  the  provisions  of  the  Wini,  which  treatise  his  success  in 
the  above-mentioned  "theological  tripos"  implies  that  he 
knows  by  heart.  But  "  Mr.  Grandfather  Oil "  is  very  em- 
phatically in  the  world  of  kama  ;  he  is  far  from  having 
beaten  down  the  passions,  and  his  place  is  the  most  start- 
lingly  secular  of  them  all.  He  has  got  the  kyaung  of  a  myizzi 
mati,  a  p6ngyi  who  has  been  ten  Lents  in  the  Order,  and 

Q 


226  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

ought  therefore  to  scorn  such  desecration  for  any  purpose 
whatever,  and  certainly  should  not  be  tempted  by  the  offer 
of  a  feast  for  his  palate.  But  the  fact  remains  that  not  only 
has  he  given  up  the  front  part  of  his  kyaung,  all  but  the 
elevated  dais  on  the  eastern  side,  where  the  images  stand 
and  visitors  are  received,  but  there  is  actually  a  play 
going  on,  trumpets  braying,  drums  beating,  and  the  bamboo 
clappers  sounding  high  over  all.  It  is  a  zat,  a  birth-story 
certainly,  but  that  does  not  make  it  any  less  a  sin  for  the 
p6ngyi  to  be  so  near,  and  with  all  those  thirty  pretty 
girls  looking  on  too.  The  monk  is  behind  the  curtain  which 
shuts  off  the  undesecrated  part  of  the  building,  it  is  true,  but 
he  can  hardly  be  asleep  with  all  that  music,  surely,  and  it  is 
a  crime  for  a  member  of  the  Order  to  listen  to  music.  Yet 
who  is  to  condemn  him  to  penance  when  the  prior's  house 
is  very  little  better  ?  In  some  of  the  kyaungs,  indeed,  the 
younger  yahans  take  very  little  trouble  to  conceal  the  fact 
that  they  are  looking  through  the  chinks  of  the  slight 
hangings  which  cut  off  their  sleeping-places  from  the  noisy 
throng  on  the  other  side.  The  Englishmen,  when  they  come 
round,  push  aside  the  kalagas  to  see  what  is  behind,  stumble 
over  the  peeping  postulants,  and  scare  the  conscience-stricken 
"  ascetics "  almost  out  of  their  senses,  under  the  impression 
that  it  is  a  bilu  who  has  been  enabled  to  gain  access,  and 
is  going  to  devour  them  incontinently.  Nevertheless  there 
is  no  check  in  the  revelry.  It  goes  on  until  far  into  the 
night,  and  increases  in  noise  the  later  it  gets.  The  liquor 
which  has  been  brought  for  expected  visiting  foreigners 
cannot  be  left  behind  in  the  kyaungs ;  they  are  not  low 
enough  for  that  yet.  Consequently,  the  laymen  must  drink 
it.  The  result  is  that  as  time  goes  on  there  are  quarrels  and 
fights ;  and  in  this  very  Thayet-daw  kyaung  in  the  Thadin- 
gyut  of  1879  a  man  was  stabbed  and  died  within  the  limits 
of  the  parawun.  Little  wonder  that  the  strict  Sulagandis 
are  gaining  over  many  of  the  more  respectable  inhabitants 
of  Rangoon,  for  even  this  horror  has  not  diminished  the 
popularity  of  the  wagyut  alms-feast. 

The  noise  and  hubbub  go  on  till  far  into  the  morning, 
and  when  at  last  the  people  go,  the  monks  may  be  supposed 
to  have  a  little  rest,  for  they  can  hardly  have  slept  much 


XXI  THE  END  OF  LENT  227 

before,  however  steadily  they  lay  on  their  mats.  The  offerings 
are  eaten  next  morning,  and  it  is  greatly  to  be  feared  that 
there  are  many  abstentions  from  the  morning's  round  of 
alms-begging.  Such  dissipation  must  scatter  to  the  winds 
any  merit  acquired  by  diligent  piety  and  meditation  in  the 
long  weeks  of  Lent.  It  is  only  to  be  seen  in  Rangoon  and 
a  few  other  places  where  many  foreigners  congregate.  The 
description  is  from  the  "  country  mouse  "  point  of  view. 

In  country  towns,  revels  of  this  kind  are  never  seen,  and 
even  in  Mandalay,  though  there  are  festivities  in  abundance, 
the  monasteries  are  never  invaded  in  this  scandalous  way. 
The  difference  is  that  between  the  primitive  Buddhist  and 
the  highly  sophisticated  latitudinarian.  A  more  harmless 
and  decidedly  prettier  custom  is  the  illumination,  called 
taungpyi  pwe,  of  the  pagodas  and  the  town.  In  Rangoon 
a  very  fine  effect  is  produced  by  hanging  the  Sule  Pagoda, 
in  Fytche  Square,  all  round  with  Chinese  lanterns,  from  the 
base  up  to  the  top  of  the  thabeit-hmauk,  where  the  body  of 
the  shrine  begins  to  narrow  into  the  spire.  The  rings  of 
coloured  light  narrowing  upwards  in  a  veritable  pyramid  of 
fire,  produce  one  of  the  finest  sights  of  the  kind  to  be  seen 
in  the  country.  The  street  lamps,  however,  somewhat 
handicap  the  simple  means  of  illumination  open  to  the 
inhabitants,  and  to  see  the  illumination  of  a  town  at  its  best 
one  must  go  to  a  place  where  there  are  no  street  lamps. 
There  all  the  pagodas  and  many  of  the  private  houses  are 
lighted  up,  and  the  contrast  to  the  ordinary  gloom  is  start- 
ling. Candles  are  placed  on  posts  at  intervals  of  ten  paces 
in  every  street,  and  the  se-eing  gaungs  have  very  plain-worded 
instructions  as  to  what  will  happen  to  them  if  any  of  the 
lights  in  front  of  the  ten  houses  of  which  they  have  charge 
go  out.  Mandalay  Hill  at  such  a  time  was  a  fine  sight  and 
still  is,  though  it  is  no  more  a  royal  town.  The  two  covered 
ways  which  lead  up  the  steep  uneven  sides  to  the  pagoda 
and  the  richly  gilt  Gautama  on  the  top,  look  like  streams  of 
flame,  or  fiery  serpents  from  the  haunted  nat-taung,  under 
the  shade  of  the  Shan  hills.  But  the  monasteries  which 
cluster  close  in  to  the  foot  of  the  sacred  hill  are  all  as  dark 
and  still  as  on  any  night  in  the  middle  of  the  Wa.  No 
unseemly  orgies  are  permitted  there.     In  the  town,  on  the 


228  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

other  hand,  all  is  noise  and  merriment.  Bands  of  music 
and  dances  figure  at  the  corners  of  all  the  chief  streets, 
provided  by  the  chief  burghers,  who  take  the  place  formerly 
occupied  by  the  king  himself,  or  by  the  ministers  under  his 
orders.  The  capital  used  to  be  crowded  with  umbrella- 
bearing  chiefs  and  officials,  Shan  sawbaws,  and  chieftains  of 
the  mountain  tribes  all  come  down  with  their  bands  of  wild 
followers  to  do  homage  to  the  Lord  of  the  Rising  Sun,  for 
the  greatest  of  the  kadaw-n^,  the  beg-pardon  days,  was 
always  immediately  after  Lent.  Having  brought  their  minds 
into  a  sedate  and  tranquil  state  by  the  observances  of  the 
Wa,  it  was  fitting  that  men  should  come  and  make  submission 
and  do  obeisance  at  the  golden  feet.  Mandalay  is  a  very 
different  town  now  from  what  it  was  in  royal  times,  but  the 
old  traditions  still  linger. 

At  the  same  season  there  is  an  illumination  on  the  river. 
As  soon  as  it  is  dark  the  villagers  row  out  into  the  middle 
of  the  stream  and  set  adrift  a  multitude  of  little  oil-lamps, 
each  fastened  to  a  little  float  of  bamboo  or  plantain  stems. 
The  lamps  are  simply  little  earthenware  cups  filled  with  oil, 
and  each  supplied  with  a  small  piece  of  cotton  for  a  wick. 
Thousands  of  them  are  sent  out  by  a  single  village,  and  the 
sight  from  a  steamer  suddenly  rounding  a  bend  and  coming 
upon  a  bank  of  these  little  stars  of  light  afloat  on  the  river 
is  very  singular.  In  the  distance  it  looks  like  a  regular  sea 
of  flame,  and  as  there  is  plenty  of  oil,  on  the  night  of  the 
full  moon  there  is  a  constant  succession  of  these  shoals  of 
twinkling  lights  .floating  down  the  whole  length  of  the 
Irrawaddy  from  above  Bhamaw  to  China  Buckeer,  every 
village  sending  its  contingent. 

This  ceremony,  called  ye-hpaung  hmyaw  thi,  or  mi- 
hpaung  hmyaw  thi,  launching  water  or  fire  rafts,  is  in  re- 
membrance of  a  universally  honoured  paya-nge,  a  lesser 
divinity  called  Shin  Upago,  who  lives  down  at  the  bottom 
of  the  river  in  a  kyi-pya-that,  a  brazen  spire,  where  he 
zealously  keeps  the  sacred  days.  In  a  former  existence  he 
carried  ofif  the  clothes  of  a  bather,  and  for  this  mischievous 
pleasantry  is  condemned  to  remain  in  his  present  quarters 
till  Arimadeya,  the  next  Buddha,  shall  come.  Then  he 
will    be   set   free,  and   entering   the   thenga  will    become   a 


XXI  THE  END  OF  LENT  229 

yahanda,  and  attain  Ne'ban.  He  is  a  favourite  subject  for 
pictures,  which  represent  him  sitting  under  his  brazen  roof, 
or  on  the  stump  of  a  tree,  eating  out  of  an  alms-bowl,  which 
he  carries  in  his  arms.  Sometimes  he  is  depicted  gazing 
sideways  up  to  the  skies,  where  he  seeks  a  place  that  is  not 
polluted  by  corpses.  Such  a  spot  is  not  to  be  found  on 
earth,  where  every  stock  and  stone  is  but  the  receptacle  of  a 
departed  spirit.  The  notion  is  like  that  of  the  Tibetan 
monks,  who  look  upon  the  earth  as  simply  a  vast  graveyard. 
They  carry  human  finger-joints  strung  together  for  a  rosary, 
eat  their  food  out  of  a  human  skull,  and  instead  of  horns  for 
trumpets  use  the  bones  of  a  man's  forearm.  "  We  are  dead," 
they  say,  "  and  dead  men  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  things 
of  the  living." 

Of  a  similar  character  to  this  illuminating  of  the  pagodas, 
the  town,  and  the  river,  is  the  letting  loose  of  fire-balloons, 
from  the  end  of  Lent  to  the  Tawadeintha  festival  in 
Tasaungm6n.  The  balloons  are  sometimes  very  big,  but 
they  are  simple  enough  structures.  A  bamboo  framework 
is  covered  over  with  the  thick,  coarse,  home-made  paper 
manufactured  from  the  bark  of  the  mahlaingbin  {Brousso- 
netia  papyri/era),  which  also  supplies  the  material  for  the 
black  parabaik  note-books.  At  the  bottom,  across  the  open 
mouth  of  the  balloon,  is  a  little  platform,  on  which  pitch 
is  heaped,  and  with  torches  attached  to  it.  The  balloon 
is  then  tethered  to  the  ground.  The  torches  and  resinous 
matter  are  lighted,  and  when  the  strain  on  the  stays  is 
considered  sufficient,  they  are  cut,  and  the  balloon  goes  off. 
They  are  dangerous  in  large  towns,  and  are  forbidden  there, 
but  the  Burman  considers  that  the  law  applies  only  to  the 
ground  round  the  town,  and  dozens  are  let  off  every  year 
from  spots  only  a  hundred  yards  or  so  outside  of  municipal 
limits.  Not  unseldom  d6n,  rockets,  and  other  kinds  of  fire- 
works are  attached  to  them,  not  by  any  means  tending  to 
make  them  safer  for  the  houses  below.  This  mi-eing*byan, 
as  it  is  called,  is  in  honour  of  the  Sula-mani  paya,  a  pagoda 
erected  in  Tawadeintha,  over  Mount  Myinmo,  by  the  Tha- 
gya,  king  of  the  Nat-ddwas.  When  Prince  Theidat  left  his 
palace,  his  wife,  and  forsook  all  to  become  a  Buddha,  he  rode 
as  far  as  the  river  Anawma  and  leaped  over  it  on  his  famous 


230  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  xxi 

steed  Kantika.  Then  he  drew  his  sword,  cut  off  his  long 
hair  and  threw  it  into  the  air,  where  it  remained  suspended, 
till  the  Tha-gya-min  carried  it  off  in  a  basket  and  had  his 
Sula-mani  shrine  built  over  it.  Hence  the  offering  of  fire- 
balloons. 

Thus  offerings  are  made  on  earth,  water,  and  in  the  air. , 
The  whole  month,  from  the  full  moon  which  ends  Lent  till 
the  feast  commemorative  of  the  nogana  alms  of  Thuzata, 
is  distinguished  by  specially  abundant  ahlu  to  the  pagodas 
and  to  the  beikku.  A  peculiarly  pretty  offering  is  that 
called  a  pan-taing,  a  pyramid  somewhat  like  a  pya-that, 
entirely  composed  of  flowers  in  wreaths  and  nosegays,  which 
is  conducted  with  much  dancing  and  sounds  of  music,  to 
be  laid  before  the  great  image.  Fantastic  tin  shrines  and 
lanterns  made  to  hold  big,  two -inch  thick  candles,  often 
plaited  of  long  tapers  made  of  different  coloured  wax,  are 
presented,  and  along  with  these,  huge  monkish  fans,  each 
adorned  round  the  edge  with  tags  of  gold-leaf  and  little 
pictures ;  big  muslin  dragons  distended  on  hoops  and  long 
streamers  to  be  hung  from  the  poles  surmounted  with  the 
sacred  hentha,  or  the  kalawaik,  are  also  frequent.  It  is  also 
customary  at  this  season  to  make  the  monks  large  offerings 
of  honey — pya-ye  hlu-thi.  This  can  hardly  be  called  a 
separate  festival,  but  as  the  honey  is  only  given  in  these 
months,  it  affords  sufficient  cause  for  the  exhibition  of  plays 
and  energetic  dancing  on  the  way  to  the  monastery. 

All  these  religious  observances,  sufficiently  mixed  up 
with  secular  enjoyment,  are  accompanied  by  other  occupa- 
tions which  cannot  be  said  to  have  anything  directly  to  do 
with  religion.  Such  is  the  preparation  of  the  boats,  and  the 
practice  for  the  races,  which  always  take  place  in  Thadin- 
gyut.  They  must  wait,  however,  till  Lent  is  over  ;  and  the 
racing  boats  are  almost  always  kept  under  the  abodes  of  the 
yahans,  so  that  even  here  there  is  ground  for  the  assertion 
that  all  great  public  feasts  in  Burma  are  connected  with 
religion.  But  the  Burmans  are  very  far  from  being  sad 
worshippers,  and  any  one  who  has  been  in  the  country  in  the 
months  of  October  and  November  would  be  inclined  to 
assert  that  the  whole  round  of  existence  in  Burma  is  made 
up  of  junketings  and  pleasure-parties. 


CHAPTER    XXII 

NATS   AND    SPIRIT-WORSHIP 

Notwithstanding  that  Buddhism  has  been  the  established 
religion  in  Burma  since  shortly  after  the  third  great  council 
at  Patalipootra  in  241  B.C.  (283  of  the  sacred  era),  and  that 
the  purest  form  of  the  faith  exists,  and  is  firmly  believed 
in,  yet,  throughout  the  whole  Ashe  Pyi  (the  Eastern  country), 
both  in  Upper  and  T.nwer  Burpia,  the  old  geniolatry  still  re- 
tains a  firm  hold  on  the  minds  of  the  people.  Missionaries 
say  that  it  is  a  natural  rgvolting  of  the  human  mindagainst 
the  denial  of  the  existence  ofa^upreinS  Beifig.  siJp^rinr  to. 
nian,  and  controTling  his  destiny,  tjovernment  officers  assert 
fEat  the  retention^^the  prior  religion  (for  it  is  undoubtedly 
a  kind  of  second  religion)  is  due  to  the  fact  that  surround- 
ing, and  scattered  about  amongst  the  Buddhist  Burmans,  are 
numerous  tribes — Karens,  Kachins,  and  others — who  have 
no  form  of  belief  but  nat  -  worship,  the  reverencing  of  the 
spirits  of  nature.  As  a  simple  matter  of  fact,  it  is  undeni- 
able that  the  propitiating  of  the  nats  is  a  question  of  daily 
concern  to  the  lower  class  Burman,  while  the  worship  at 
the  pagoda  is  only  thought  of  once  a  week.  For  the  nat 
may  prove  destructive  and  hostile  at  any  time,  whereas  the 
acquisition  of  kutho  at  the  pagoda  is  a  thing  which  may  be 
set  about  in  a  business  -  like  way,  and  at  proper  and  con- 
venient seasons.  It  is  just  the  difference  between  avoiding 
a  motor  car  and  avoiding  the  circular  saw  in  a  timber  mill. 

Before  proceeding  further,  it  will  be  well  to  discuss  the 
word  "nat"  itself.  General  Phayre  and  Bishop  Bigandet 
did  not  finally  settle  whether  Nat  is  derived  from  the  Sanskrit 
term  nath,  meaning  "  master,  husband,  lord,"  or  not.       The 

231 


232  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

question  may  be  philologically  interesting,  but  is  not  likely 
to  be  definitely  settled  till  the  languages  of  "  Farther  India  " 
are  better  known.  What  concerns  us  is  the  fact  that  "nat " 
means  in  Burmese  two  distinct  kinds  of  individuals.  It  may 
be~applied  torjtfae  inhabitants~of~the~six  interior  heavens, 
properly  calleq_>dewas,  who  figure  in  Hindu  mythology,  and 
have  thence  been  transferred  to  the  Buddhist  world  system. 
Kings  and  virtuous  people  are  rewarded  with  happiness  in 
these  six  seats  after  a  good  life  upon  earth.  The  Tha-gya 
min,  thejdng  of  the  nats,^^rd^was,  comes  down  to  earth  at 
the_^egjnni^_fiL_tla^_Burman  year,  and  remains  here  for 
three  days,  and  his  subjects  generally  display  great  solicitude 
for  the  pious  state  and  welfare  of  mankind,  but  otherwise 
they  are  matters  of  npr^oncern  to  dwellers  in  the  lupyi  unless 
as  objects  of  envyjC^f;yerfectly  distinct  from  these  are  the 
natsof^he  house,  the  airj_the_  water,  the  forest, — the_spirits 
of  nature^fajrievelygs,_gnornes,  kelpies,  knholdsjixies,  what- 
ever otTieF^names  they  have  _received  in  other  countries. 
Burmans  never  have  any  confusion  in  their  mind  on  the 
subject,  such  as  may  occasionally  occur  to  a  foreigner.  The 
genii  and  peris  of  Eastern  story,  though  doubtless  springing 
from  the  Hindu  ddwas,  have  no  real  analogy  in  Burmese 
literature,  any  more  than  the  idea  of  the  devil — etymologic- 
ally  connected  with  the  word  d^v-a  or  d^wa — has  anything 
to  do  with  the  joys  of  Tawadeintha  and  T6tthita,  the  best- 
kjao^n  heavens  of  nats  of  the  superior  order, 
f  ;^4!bg-wofBhiaiaLjiaLL.,  of  Lliu  L|jliiL5r-th£ri.  has  nothing-' to 
do^ith  BuddhisnL_and  is  denounced  bv  all  the  more  parnpgt 
oLJhfl  pyin- sin. -as-.. being"  '^^tiVal  nnd  nntngnnintin  fn  fhr 
teachings  of  the  Lord  Buddha.  ...Kinpr  Minddn,  who  was  a 
true  defender  of  the  faith,  and  possessed  of  a  deeper  know- 
ledge of  the  Pali  texts  than  many  of  the  members  of  the 
Assembly  of  the  Perfect,  fulminated  an  edict  against  the 
reverence  paid  to  the  nats,  and  ordered  its  discontinuance 
under  severe  penalties,  but  the  worship  was  never  really 
stopped,  and  can  no  more  be  stopped  than  refusing  to  dine 
thirteen  at  table,  to  walk  under  ladders,  to  cross  knives,  or  to 
refrain  from  throwing  spilt  salt  on  other  people's  carpets. 

The  term  s^int-worship  hardly  conveys  a  proper  notion. 
Even  the  Karens  and  Kachins,  who  have  no  other  form  of 


XXII  NATS  AND  SPIRIT-WORSHIP  233 

belief,  do  not  regard  them  otherwise  than  as  malevolent 
beings  who  must  be  looked  up  to  with  fear,  and  propitiated 
by  regular  offerings.  They  do  not  want  to  have  anything 
to  do  with  the  nats ;  all  they  seek  is  to  be  let  alone.  The 
bamboo  pipes  of  spirit,  the  bones  of  sacrificial  animals,  the 
hatchets,  swords,  spears,  bows  and  arrows  that  line  the  way 
to  a  Kachin  village,  are  placed  there  not  with  the  idea  of 
attracting  the  spirits,  but  of  preventing  them  from  coming 
right  among  the  houses  in  search  of  their  requirements.  If 
they  want  to  drink,  the  rice  spirit  has  been  poured  out,  and 
the  bamboo  stoup  is  there  in  evidence  of  the  libation  ;  the 
blood-stained  skulls  of  oxen,  pigs,  and  the  feathers  of  fowls 
show  that  there  has  been  no  stint  of  meat-offerings ;  should 
the  nats  wax  quarrelsome,  and  wish  to  fight,  there  are  the 
axes  and  dahs  with  which  to  commence  the  fray.  Only  let 
them  be  grateful,  and  leave  their  trembling  worshippers  in 
peace  and  quietness.  For  the  Karen  all  nature  is  filled  with 
nats^^ver3LJtr£e_jarui_stone_and  pool  and  breathjofjair  hasj^s 
spirit-  The  dead  are  only  separated  from  the  living  by  a 
thin  white  veil,  through  which,  however,  none  but  the  gifted 
can  see  and  venture  to  speak  to  them  in  words.  So  the 
Caffres  leave  an  open  space  in  their  line  of  battle  that  there 
may  be  room  for  the  spirits  of  dead  heroes  to  join  in  the 
conflict  and  fight  on  their  behalf 

The  Burmans  are  naturally  not  so  wholesale  nor  so 
demonstrative  in  their  recognition  of  the  existence  of  spirits. 
The  yahans  would  not  endure  it,  and  Buddhism  has  at  any 
rate  a  somewhat  softening  and  reassuring  power.  Neverthe- 
less evidences  of  the  fact  of  the  belief  are  universal  and  not 
to  be  mistaken,  in  all  parts  of  the  country,  whether  among 
the  Government  school  educated  youth,  or  among  the 
bumpkins,  who  follow  the  plough,  and  crush  the  clods,  and 
know  the  jungle  better  than  anything  else  upon  earth.  At 
the  extremity  of  every  village,  the  Ywas6n,  there  is  a  nat- 
sin,  a  shrine  for  the  nat  or  nats  of  the  neighbourhood.  This 
varies  very  much  in  size  and  character.  Sometimes  it  is 
a  mere  bamboo  cage,  hung  in  a  pipul  or  other  tree,  or 
slung  on  a  post,  a  bird-cage  kind  of  construction,  with  an 
image  inside,  and  a  little  hole  through  which  the  supersti- 
tious can  introduce  their  offerings,  tiny  water-pots,  oil-lamps, 


234  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

and  little  morsels  of  food.  Often,  if  the  village  is  larger,  the 
shrine  is  much  more  pretentious,  assuming  almost  the  size 
and  appearance  of  a  zayat,  a  large  tectum  or  roof,  gabled 
and  supported  with  red  posts,  the  platform  ornamented,  and 
with  a  dais  at  one  end,  on  which  a  representation  of  the  nat 
is  placed  at  the  feast  time,  which,  in  imitation  of  the  pagoda 
festivals,  occurs  at  a  regular  fixed  season.  At  other  times 
these  images  are  kept  stowed  away  in  an  adjoining  chamber, 
built  for  the  purpose.  It  is  particularly  irritating  to  an 
educated  Burman  to  see  these  absurd  figures,  which  remind 
one  of  nothing  so  much  as  the  fetiches  of  the  prognathous 
African.  Two  gaudily  dressed  puppets,  masquerading  with 
spire-like  crown,  and  royal,  sharp-pointed  swords,  represent 
the  much -feared  nats,  Shwe  Pyin-gyi  and  Shwe  Pyin-ngfe, 
the  Nyi-daw,  Naung-daw,  the  Royal  Younger  Brother  and 
the  Royal  Elder  Brother,  who  command  much  respect  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Mandalay  and  in  Upper  Burma  gener- 
ally. A  still  more  dreaded  spirit  is  one  whose  representation 
figures  in  a  shrine  at  Tagaung,  one  of  the  ancient  capitals  of 
the  country,  half-way  between  Mandalay  and  Bhamaw.  He 
appears  simply  as  a  head  on  a  post,  four  feet  high  or  there- 
abouts. A  spire -like  crown  rests  on  his  head,  his  eyes 
protrude  and  goggle  in  semi  -  globular  wrath,  asinine  ears 
and  a  Punch-like  nose  complete  the  likeness,  for  he  has  no 
mouth,  and  his  body  is  that  of  a  dragon.  Every  one  avoids 
his  temple  as  much  as  possible,  but  the  inhabitants  of  the 
village  bow  in  that  direction  before  they  venture  to  do  any- 
thing, and  passing  boatmen  kindle  lamps  and  offer  flowers, 
of  which  he  is  said  to  be  particularly  fond,  and  fruit,  for  the 
nat  has  an  incorrigible  habit  of  giving  people  the  stomach- 
ache when  he  is  offended,  and  death  punishes  the  recalcitrant. 
"  Tagaung  colic  "  is  a  recognised  ailment  with  the  Burmese 
faculty.  The  demon  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  ancient 
kings  of  the  place,  who  acquired  his  power  from  magical  arts 
which  he  learned  in  Northern  India.  Three  famous  pagodas 
in  the  defile  take  their  names  from  episodes  in  his  life  ;  and 
his  two  sons  founded  the  dynasty  of  Prome.  Oftenest  of 
all,  however,  the  nat-shrinfe  contains  no  figure.  It  is  occupied 
only  by  the  viewless  spirits  of  the  air. 

First  in  the  list  of  personal  spirits  may  be  considered  the 


XXII  NA  TS  AND  SPIRIT-  WORSHIP  235 

kosaung  nats,  a  kind  of  confusion  of  ideas  between  the  proper 
spirit  and  the  butterfly  spirit,  and  representing  as  it  were  the 
genius  of  each  individual,  a  kind  of  materialised  conscience. 
They  are  twelve  in  number,  six  good  and  six  bad,  six  male 
and  six  female,  and  regulate  the  life  and  doings  of  their 
prot^g^  accordingly  as  the  benevolent  or  the  malevolent  gain 
the  upper  hand. 

Next  to  these  comes  the  eing  saung  nat,  very  often 
called  Min-magayi,  the  guardian  nat  of  the  house.  For 
his  comfort  the  tops  of  all  the  posts  in  the  house  are  covered 
with  a  hood  of  white  cotton  cloth,  for  it  is  in  this  situation 
that  he  usually  takes  up  his  abode.  In  almost  every  house, 
at  the  end  of  the  verandah  in  front,  you  will  find  a  water- 
pot  full  of  pareity^,  water  over  which  certain  gathas,  magic 
spells,  or  religious  formulae  have  been  uttered  by  the  astrologer, 
or  the  prior  of  the  district.  This  water,  which  is  replenished 
once  a  month,  or  oftener  in  cases  of  danger  from  disease,  or 
when  a  member  of  the  family  is  absent  on  a  journey,  is  every 
now  and  then  sprinkled  about  the  house  as  a  protection 
against  bilus  and  spectres,  ogres  and  tas^s.  When  the 
water  is  consecrated  in  this  nyaungye-o,  which  is  of  a  special 
shape,  something  like  an  overgrown  Indian  spittoon,  there 
are  always  a  few  twigs  and  leaves  of  the  thaby^  tree  float- 
ing on  the  top.  These  are  mostly  taken  out  and  hung  round 
about  the  eaves,  but  occasionally  left  in  the  water.  The 
inordinately  superstitious  sometimes  keep  a  small  thabye 
bin  (the  sacred  eugenia)  growing  in  a  pot  in  the  house,  so 
that  its  benign  influence  may  keep  harm  away.  Talaing 
houses  may  usually  be  known  by  the  cocoa-nut  hanging  up 
at  the  south  side  of  the  building.  This  is  covered  with  strips 
and  tags  of  yellow  or  red  cloth,  and  is  offered  to  Min-magayi, 
whom  they  call  the  king  of  the  nats.  Of  these  spirits  (called 
kaluk  in  their  language)  they  say  there  are  thirty-seven  dis- 
tinct varieties,  but  Min-magayi  rules  them  all.  These  are 
the  "thirty-seven  nats  of  Burma,"  but  whether  they  were 
borrowed  by  the  Burmese  from  the  Takings  or  not  seems 
at  any  rate  doubtful.  At  the  beginning  of  the  wet  season 
they  always  wrap  up  the  cocoa-nut  afresh,  and  when  the 
rains  are  over  make  new  offerings  of  money,  glutinous  rice, 
eggs,  jaggari,  and  fruit,  in  order  that  the  eing  saung  nat  may 


236  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

keep  away  fever  from  the  household.  It  must  not  be  sup- 
posed that  the  nat  guardian  of  the  house  has  necessarily 
any  affection  for  those  who  have  built  the  place  where  he 
has  taken  up  his  abode.  He  probably  regards  them  only 
with  cold  indifference,  however  generous  they  may  be  in 
their  offerings,  and  were  he  not  propitiated  by  these  gifts  he 
would  almost  certainly  display  his  anger  by  doing  the 
inhabitants  some  grievous  injury.  But  then  he  dislikes  his 
haunts  being  intruded  upon,  and  if  a  stranger  comes  at  an  un- 
wonted time — a  burglar  at  midnight,  for  example — it  is  quite 
likely  that  the  eing  saung  nat  will  attack  him  violently, 
scare  him  out  of  his  wits,  or  give  him  the  colic.  Thus  with- 
out any  really  estimable  purpose  in  his  mind,  Min-magayi 
may  be  a  considerable  protection  to  his  worshippers,  just  as 
an  "  awful  example  "  is  useful  to  teetotallers. 

Beyo»4-tfe«-gOM4ian,  or  dnrnnn  of  the  hnuse,  there  is 
the'g4«tcdian^nat  of  tVip  villa |yp^"Tihpvwa  ■rpiinpr  na<^,  of  whose 
shrine  at  the  eM-eiLthfiJ^owirniave  already  made  mention. 
None  of  the  lower-class  Talaings  would  ever  think  of  eating 
a  morsel  without  first  holding  up  his  platter  in  the  air,  and 
breathing  a  prayer  to  the  village  nat.  They  are  particularly 
fond  of  putting  up  shrines  to  the  nats  under  the  le'pan  tree, 
from  the  wood  of  which  coffins  are  frequently  made.  A 
feast  must  be  held  every  three  or  four  years  in  honour  of 
this  nat,  at  which  the  natkadaw,  a  woman  called  the  nat's 
wife,  dances.  This  is  done  in  order  that  sickness  may  be 
kept  away.  Should  an  epidemic  actually  break  out,  a  very 
elaborate  ceremony  is  gone  through.  Probably  first  of  all 
the  figure  of  a  spectre,  or  of  a  bilu,  is  painted  on  an  ordinary 
earthenware  water- pot,  and  this  is  solemnly  smashed  to 
pieces  about  sundown,  with  a  heavy  stick  or  a  dah.  As 
soon  as  it  gets  dark,  the  entire  populace  break  out  into 
yells,  and  make  as  much  noise  generally  as  they  can  com- 
pass, with  the  view  of  scaring  away  the  evil  spirit  who  has 
brought  the  disease.  This  is  repeated  on  three  several 
nights,  and  if  it  is  not  then  effective  the  yahans  are  called 
in  to  give  their  assistance.  The  prior,  with  his  following, 
repeat  the  Ten  Precepts,  chant  the  Payeit-gyi,  and  then  one 
of  the  sermons  of  the  Lord  Buddha  is  declaimed,  the  same 
by  the  preaching  of  which  he  drove  away  the  pestilence 


xxii  NATS  AND  SPIRIT-WORSHIP  237 

which  was  devastating  the  country  of  Wethali.  If  this  last 
ceremony  is  not  effectual  the  village  is  abandoned.  The 
inhabitants  leave  the  sick  and  the  dying  to  their  fate,  and 
go  oiT  to  the  jungle,  where  each  household  camps  out  by 
itself  for  a  time.  Before  they  return  again,  the  yellow-robed 
monks,  in  recognition  of  much  alms,  read  the  Law  up  and 
down  the  street  between  the  houses.  When  they  have  gone 
back  to  the  monastery,  the  nat's  shrine  is  repaired,  and 
abundant  offerings  deposited.  Having  thus  made  their 
peace  with  the  representatives  of  both  religions,  the  people 
return  to  their  houses,  light  fires,  cook  rice  for  new  offerings^ 
and  then  enter  upon  their  ordinary  pursuits  as  if  no  inter- 
ruption whatever  had  occurred. 

This  is  what  would  take  place  in  any  ordinary  Burman 
village.  But  among  the  Talaings,  and  in  the  more  retired 
places  in  the  jungle,  occupied  by  ignorant  uncultivated 
Burmans,  the  function  called  ywakyathi  would  be  carried 
out,  which  is  much  more  purely  geniolatric  in  its  character.. 
This  is  sometimes  done  when  a  prominent  man  in  the 
hamlet  is  sick,  more  often  when  there  is  danger  of  a  con- 
tagious disease.  A  great  feast  of  cooked  rice  and  meat,, 
roasted  fowls  and  ducks  forming  a  prominent  part  of  it,  is 
heaped  up  on  a  platform  specially  erected  for  the  purpose 
some  distance  outside  the  village.  Everybody  in  the  village- 
is  required  to  have  some  part  in  the  ceremony.  A  few  are 
sent  out  beforehand,  who  dress  themselves  up  in  a  fantastic 
way,  and  pretend  to  be  bilus,  evil  nats,  and  witches.  With 
them  are  others  who  feign  to  be  dogs,  and  rush  about  on 
all  fours,  barking  and  howling ;  others  represent  pigs,  and 
grunt  and  nuzzle  about  with  their  noses  in  the  ground.. 
After  this  performance  has  been  carried  on  for  some  time, 
the  remainder  of  the  villagers  come  out  in  a  band,  and, 
through  one  or  more  spokesmen,  demand  of  the  possessed 
whether  those  lying  sick  at  home  will  recover,  and  whether 
the  bad  spirits  are  satisfied  with  the  offerings.  It  is  specially 
ordained  at  these  exhibitions  that  no  one  shall  be  called  by 
his  real  name ;  such  mention,  if  made  inadvertently,  would 
expose  the  person  addressed  to  considerable  danger,  even  if 
he  should  make  no  sign  betraying  himself,  for  he  certainly 
would  not  answer.     The  quasi  tas6s  always  reply  that  the 


238  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

sick  will  recover  and  the  plague  leave  the  locality.  There- 
upon the  villagers  rush  off  like  madmen  into  the  surround- 
ing forest,  and  run  about  hither  and  thither  in  a  reckless 
way  with  an  open  cloth,  or  the  end  of  their  waistcloth,  in 
their  hands.  Some  of  them  suddenly  make  a  plunge  with 
their  cloth  over  a  bush  or  a  tussock  of  grass,  and  then  closing 
it  up  carefully,  hurry  breathless  back  to  the  village.  The 
leip-bya  or  "  butterflies "  of  the  sick  man  are  supposed  to 
have  been  captured.  The  paso,  or  cloth,  is  carefully  opened 
and  shaken  over  the  patient's  head,  and  the  leip-bya  is 
supposed  to  return  to  its  proper  habitation.  This  operation 
is  repeated  several  times,  in  case  a  wrong  "  butterfly  "  might 
have  been  captured,  or  lest  the  actual  one  should  have 
escaped  on  the  way.  Then  everybody  returns.  The  function 
is  not  without  its  danger,  for  it  has  happened  that  the 
temporary  mimes  have  become  permanently  possessed  of 
evil  spirits,  and  as  witches  and  wizards  have  proved  as  great 
curses  to  the  neighbourhood  as  any  pestilence  could  have 
been.  Which  things  are  an  allegory.  The  whole  ceremony 
is  beginning  to  get  into  very  bad  odour  in  the  more  settled 
parts  of  the  province,  and  respectable  people  avoid  having 
anything  to  do  with  it,  while  those  who  have  taken  a  part 
are  ashamed  to  own  it. 

All  these  nats  are  directly  connected  with  a  particular 
locality,  and  therefore  well  known  to,  and  regularly  pro- 
pitiated by,  the  inhabitants  of  that  place.  But  there  are 
abundance  of  nats  to  be  found  elsewhere,  away  from  villages 
and  houses,  and  all  of  them  equally  ready  to  resent  any 
injury  which  the  passer-by  may  unwittingly  do  them. 
When  a  Burman  starts  on  a  journey  he  hangs  a  bunch  of 
plantains,  or  a  twig  of  the  tha-bye  tree,  on  the  pole  of  the 
buffalo  cart  or  the  stern  of  the  boat,  to  conciliate  any  spirit 
whose  beat  he  may  intrude  upon.  The  fisherman  makes 
offerings  in  his  nat-sin  every  time  he  launches  his  dug-out ; 
the  lonely  hunter  in  the  forest  deposits  some  rice  and  ties 
together  a  few  leaves  whenever  he  comes  across  some  parti- 
cularly large  and  imposing  tree,  lest  there  might  be  a  thi'pin- 
saung  nat  dwelling  there.  Should  there  be  none,  the 
tied-back  twigs  will  at  any  rate  stand  in  evidence  to  the 
taw-saung  nat,  the  demon  who  presides  over  all  the  forest. 


xxn  NATS  AND  SPIRIT-WORSHIP  239 

When  there  is  a  boat-race,  the  opposing  crews  have  a  pre- 
liminary row  over  the  course  with  offerings  placed  on  the 
prow  for  the  nat  who  guards  that  stretch  of  the  river.  And 
so  on  through  numberless  examples.  Some  nats  achieve 
fame,  and  are  known  far  and  wide  by  special  appellations. 
Such  is  Maung  In  Gyi,  a  spirit  who  is  feared  in  all  the 
district  round  Rangoon,  and  away  eastward  and  northward 
as  far  as  Pegu.  He  lives  in  the  water,  and  causes  death. 
A  special  festival  is  celebrated  in  his  honour,  or  rather  in 
deprecation,  in  the  month  of  Waso,  the  same  in  which  Lent 
begins.  Others  more  especially  known  in  Upper  Burma 
are  Byinddn,  Shwe  Pyin-Gyi  and  his  brother,  and  a  drunkard 
nat  called  Maung  Min  Gyaw,  to  whom  great  quantities  of 
rice  spirit  are  offered.  Uyingyi  is  a  spirit  universally  known 
among  the  Talaings.  The  chief  spirit  of  a  district  usually 
goes  by  the  name  of  A-shin  Gyi,  the  great  lord,  or,  among 
the  Talaings,  Okkaya.  Then  there  are  generic  names ; 
there  is  the  Hmin  nat  who  lives  in  woods,  and  shakes  those 
he  meets  so  that  they  go  mad.  There  is  the  Upaka,  who 
flies  about  in  the  clouds  to  spy  out  men  whom  he  may  snap 
up.  There  is  the  Akakaso  who  lives  in  the  tops  of  trees, 
Shekkaso  who  lives  in  the  trunk,  and  Bumaso  who  is 
content  with  a  dwelling  in  the  roots.  The  presence  of 
spirits  or  witches  in  trees  may  always  be  ascertained  by 
the  quivering  and  trembling  of  the  leaves  when  all  around 
are  still. 

The  Talaings,  and  many  of  the  Burmans  in  the  Irra- 
waddy  delta,  have  a  regular  nat-feast  just  before  harvesting 
begins.  The  figure  of  a  woman  is  fashioned  out  of  straw, 
and  a  tamein,  kerchief,  and  other  portions  of  female  dress 
placed  along  with  it  in  a  bullock  cart.  Great  quantities  of 
kauk-hnyin,  "  sticky  rice,"  are  heaped  up,  and  the  whole 
driven  in  procession  round  the  ripe  paddy  fields.  The 
figure  is  then  set  up  in  the  place  where  the  paddy  is  to  be 
stored,  and  the  offerings  are  usually  swept  away  by  the 
boys  of  the  place,  whose  appetites  overcome  their  fear  of 
the  nats,  Bumadi,  the  guardian  of  the  earth,  and  Nagyi,  the 
guardian  of  the  grain,  to  propitiate  whom  the  feast  is  held. 

There  is  a  theory  that  persons  who  are  executed  or  meet 
a  violent  death  become  nats  and  haunt  the  place  where  they 


240  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chai 

were  killed.  They  are  called  nat-sein.  Advantage  is  takei 
of  this  to  guard  the  capital.  When  a  town  is  founded,  a 
each  of  the  four  corners  of  the  city  walls  and  under  th( 
gate-posts  people  are  buried  alive.  Their  spirits  thereafte 
hover  about  the  place  and  bring  disaster  on  strangers  wh( 
come  there  with  evil  intentions.  Monks  and  nuns  who  leac 
bad  lives  and  break  their  vows  are  also  believed  to  pas; 
into  demons  when  they  die.  There  is  therefore  a  constani 
and  lamentable  recruiting  of  the  forces  of  the  nats  and 
tas^s. 

In  some  places  certain  nats  have  qualities  ascribed  tc 
them  which  are  not  entirely  obstructive  and  obnoxious 
For  example,  in  a  nat's  house  at  Nyaung-u,  before  the 
figure  of  a  spirit  called  Ap^  Shwemyosin,  lies  a  twisted, 
curious-shaped  stone,  which  has  magic  powers  ascribed  tc 
it.  The  sick  come  and  try  to  lift  it  up.  If  they  are  success- 
ful they  will  soon  recover  health ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  its 
weight  is  too  much  for  them,  the  inquirers  will  die.  Similarly, 
on  the  ascent  to  Mandalay  Hill  there  is  a  little  chapel  in 
which,  besides  three  figures  of  the  hentha,  the  Brahminy 
goose,  each  said  to  contain  a  sacred  tooth  brought  from 
Ceylon,  there  is  a  flat,  oval  stone,  with  mystic  characters 
inscribed  on  it.  Many  resort  there  to  ascertain  the  probable 
issue  of  an  intended  journey  or  enterprise.  If  the  stone 
proves  heavy,  the  sign  is  bad. 

The  belief  in  spirits  naturally  induces  a  corresponding 
faith  in  omens.  The  Deitton,  an  astrological  book  con- 
stantly in  the  hands  of  Bedin  Sayas,  but  carefully  excluded 
from  all  monasteries,  gives  a  great  variety  of  them  ;  auguries 
from  the  flight  and  number  of  birds  seen,  omens  from  the 
barking  of  dogs,  the  movements  of  bees,  and  the  laying  of 
eggs  by  fowls.  Rules  are  given  for  choosing  the  site  on 
which  a  house  is  to  be  built,  and  omens  drawn  from  the  sub- 
stances found  in  digging  the  foundations.  Posts  are  called 
male,  female,  or  a-thet  ma  shi,  neuter,  according  as  they  are 
of  the  same  girth  throughout,  larger  at  the  bottom  or  in  the 
middle.  Under  ordinary  circumstances,  houses  with  female 
taing  are  fortunate,  with  neuter  disastrous.  Posts  which  are 
largest  at  the  top  are  called  taing  bilu,  "  demon  beams,"  and 
are  especially  unhappy. 


NA  TS  AND  SPIRIT-  WORSHIP  24 1 


If  a  hen  lays  an  egg  upon  a  cloth,  its  owner  will  lose 
money.  To  come  across  mushrooms  at  the  beginning  of  a 
journey  is  a  most  fortunate  sign.  A  snake  crossing  the  path 
always  denotes  delay,  whether  in  a  lawsuit,  a  journey,  or  a 
warlike  expedition.  If  a  dog  carries  an  unclean  thing  up 
into  his  master's  house,  he  may  get  thrashed  for  it,  but  the 
man  will  become  rich  ;  and  so  on  in  infinite  variety. 

All  this  belief  in  supernatural  powers  tends  to  produce 
abundance  of  experts  who  profess  to  be  able  to  explain  signs 
and  to  control  the  evil  spirits.  Every  district  possesses  its 
nat  thunge,  or  nat  meimma,  a  spirit  woman  who  dances 
at  the  nat  feasts,  and  at  ordinary  times  is  consulted  by  the 
superstitious  on  all  kinds  of  subjects  connected  with  her 
trade.  She  is  asked  where  so-and-so,  lately  deceased,  is, 
to  what  seat  of  the  world  he  has  migrated  ;  where  absent 
persons  are,  and  what  they  are  doing ;  what  facilities 
there  are  for  special  undertakings,  and  when  they  should 
be  begun. 

The  Bedin  Sayas  claim  similar  knowledge,  and  are 
equally  abundant.  Numbers  of  them  may  be  seen  at  any 
time  of  the  day  sitting  under  the  trees  on  the  way  up  to 
the  Shwe  Dagdn  pagoda,  writing  and  rubbing  out  figures 
and  letters  on  their  black  note-books,  and  drawing  a  comfort- 
able income  from  an  unfailing  succession  of  inquirers.  Some- 
times such  a  magic-worker,  wishing  to  establish  a  reputation, 
or  having  a  spite  against  somebody,  performs  the  ceremony 
called  p6nnaga  taikgyin.  He  carries  off  some  cinders  from 
the  funeral  pyres  of  people  who  have  been  burnt,  and  collect- 
ing a  large  assortment  of  such  charred  pieces  of  wood,  puts 
them  secretly  in  the  house  of  the  person  whose  feelings  he 
wishes  to  work  on.  At  night  the  spirits  come  and  keep  up 
a  battery  of  stones  on  the  unfortunate  man's  roof,  all  attempts 
to  find  out  where  the  stones  come  from  being  as  unavailing 
as  they  were  in  a  similar  instance  in  the  suburbs  of  London 
not  very  long  ago. 

It  is  consolatory,  however,  to  know  that  piety  will  protect 
any  one  from  the  attacks  of  malevolent  spirits.  Numerous 
stories  told  by  the  yahans  prove  the  virtue  of  the  gatas  to 
guard  against  evil.  If  the  victim  has  only  knowledge  and 
strength  of  mind  sufficient  to  recite  these  religious  formulae, 

R 


242  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  xxh 

the  wiles  of  the  nats  are  harmless.  In  case  of  the  utmost 
need,  even  the  ordinary  tharana-g6n,  the  paya,  taya,  thenga, 
is  of  much  avail,  if  only  uttered  with  faith.  It  is  with  the 
idea  of  keeping  away  bilus,  tas^s,  and  demons  that  the 
members  of  the  yellow  robe  are  often  summoned  to  death- 
beds. There  is  no  thought  of  the  monk  administering 
spiritual  consolation  to  the  dying  man.  The  good  influence 
of  his  pious  presence  keeps  away  evil  spirits,  and  nothing 
more.  No  exhortations  of  the  yahan  can  alter  the  balance 
of  merit  and  demerit  which  is  already  cast  up  for  the  dying 
man.  On  the  other  hand,  in  out-of-the-way  parts  of  the 
country,  and  especially  in  the  hills,  spirit  shrines  are  not 
unseldom  found  actually  inside  a  monastery  compound. 


CHAPTER   XXIII 

RICE   CULTIVATION 

A  GROWING  number  of  millions  of  acres  are  under  cultiva- 
tion in  Lower  Burma,  and  of  this  total  all  but  some  three 
hundred  thousand  acres  are  devoted  to  the  planting  of  rice. 
Tobacco,  sugar-cane,  cotton,  and  oil-seeds  of  different  kinds, 
as  well  as  fruit-trees,  form  the  other  crops.  Upper  Burma 
has  a  greater  number  of  crops,  and  the  proportion  of  rice  is 
far  from  being  so  overwhelming,  though  almost  everywhere 
it  is  the  chief  crop.  The  alluvial  lands  of  the  Irrawaddy 
delta  produce  by  far  the  greatest  quantity  of  rice.  It  is 
certain  that  the  best  quality  grain  comes  at  present  from 
this  part  of  the  country,  but  this  may  be  due  to  more 
practised  agricultural  skill  or  long-continued  tilling  of  the 
land.  Hardly  any  possible  number  of  crops  in  a  season 
could  apparently  exhaust  the  fertility  of  the  soil.  Any  part 
of  the  country,  however,  may  be  used  for  the  cultivation  of 
rice.  The  laziest  farm  is  a  swamp-land,  where  the  ordinary 
rainfall  is  sufficient  to  produce  the  sodden  ground  requisite 
for  a  rice  crop.  Such  low-lying  plains  and  the  riparian 
lands,  annually  flooded  by  the  overflow  of  the  river,  are 
naturally  best  suited  to  Burmese  indolence  and  are  earliest 
taken  up.  Farther  up  the  country,  where  the  rain  runs  off 
the  surface  quickly  and  the  land  is  too  high  for  the  south- 
west monsoon  floods,  it  is  necessary  to  resort  to  irrigation; 
either  by  the  obvious  method  of  dams  or  by  ingenious 
water-wheels.  Finally,  there  is  the  laborious  taung-ya  culti- 
vation, where  whole  hillsides  are  cleared  of  trees  to  produce 
a  crop.  This  hard  work  is  left  to  mild  aboriginal  or  other 
tribes,  whom  the  Burman  has  long  ago  bullied  out  of  the 
fat  lowlands. 

243 


244  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Malicious  people  have  declared  that  the  only  things  a 
Burman  does  well  are  steering  a  boat  and  driving  a  bullock- 
cart  This  is  a  libel ;  he  can  cultivate  rice  remarkably  well. 
Unfortunately,  however,  as  far  as  a  vindication  of  his 
character  as  a  worker  is  concerned,  this  does  not  imply  any 
severe  labour.  Here  the  Burman  is  a  victim  of  circum- 
stances. So  rich  is  the  soil  of  his  native  land  that  it  has 
only  to  be  scratched  to  burst  with  plenty ;  the  ploughing  of 
the  land  cannot  be  described  in  any  other  way.  The  south- 
west monsoon  rains,  commencing  early  in  June,  soon  reduce 
the  ground  to  a  soft  sea  of  mud.  When  this  has  come 
about,  the  Burman  proceeds  to  plough  it.  His  plough  is  a 
single-barred  harrow,  or  rake,  with  three  long  teeth  of  tough 
acacia-wood  ;  a  high  bow  or  loop  of  bent  wood  rises  from 
the  cross-bar,  and  standing  on  this,  the  farmer  is  dragged 
backwards  and  forwards  till  the  ground  is  reduced  to  a 
smooth  surface — no  very  difficult  matter.  Oxen  are  frequently 
used,  but  more  commonly  the  mud -loving  buifalo,  partly 
because  he  regards  the  toil  as  a  pleasure  on  account  of  the 
mud,  and  partly  because  of  his  greater  strength.  Lazier 
farmers  still  adopt  the  primitive  method  of  making  the 
children  drive  the  buffaloes  and  plough-oxen  up  and  down 
in  the  mud  and  water  so  as  to  poach  it  up  well ;  and  then 
a  log  of  wood  is  drawn  over  it  to  smooth  it  down.  None  of 
the  farms  are  large,  the  average  being  somewhere  between 
ten  and  twenty  acres ;  so  that  this  work  is  soon  over. 
Nurseries  are  prepared  at  the  same  time  on  somewhat  higher 
ground,  where  the  seed  will  not  rot  with  excessive  moisture, 
and  here  the  grain  is  sown  broadcast. 

Agricultural  operations  are  now  suspended  for  a  month 
or  six  weeks.  By  about  the  beginning  of  August  the 
ploughed  fields  have  become  somewhat  less  fluid,  and  the 
plants  in  the  nursery,  called  pyokyele,  have  grown  to  a 
fair  size.  These  are  then  pulled  up  and  carried  off  to  the 
prepared  lands.  A  kaukseiktan,  or  knobbed  stick,  is  used 
to  make  holes  in  the  ground  at  intervals  of  a  few  inches, 
and  into  each  of  these  holes  a  couple  of  plants  are  inserted. 
This  work  is  left  to  the  women  and  children,  many  of  whom 
prefer  their  hands  to  the  stick.  The  farmer  squats  on  one 
of  the  solid  ridges,  which  intersect  the  ground  and  serve  as 


RICE  CULTIVATION  245 


footpaths,  and  with  a  huge  green  cheroot  in  his  mouth, 
leisurely  contemplates  the  operation.  Everything  is  now  in 
the  hands  of  nature,  and  the  agriculturist  may  lounge  round 
his  farm  in  peace  till  November ;  unless,  indeed,  excessive 
rain  floods  the  ground  and  rots  the  crop,  when  a  new  plant- 
ing out  has  to  be  gone  through.  The  harvesting  near 
Rangoon  is  entirely  done  by  men  from  Upper  Burma,  or 
even  by  Indian  coolies.  They  work  for  very  little,  and  it 
saves  the  farmer  a  good  deal  of  time  and  dignity  to  get  all 
the  cutting  done  for  him.  Accordingly,  from  October  till 
December  the  steamers  down  the  Irrawaddy  used  to  be 
crowded  with  King  Thibaw's  subjects,  all  of  whom  had  to 
leave  behind  them  with  their  Myo-sa,  or  his  delegate  the 
Myo-wun,  who  vicariously  "  ate ''  the  township  between 
them,  a  pledge  either  of  property  or  of  some  member  of 
their  family,  that  they  would  return  to  their  country  again. 
When  they  got  back,  very  little  of  their  hard-earned  gains 
escaped  the  voracity  of  the  royal  officials.  Now  they  come 
down  by  train,  and  after  a  trip  or  two  learn  enough  to  keep 
their  money  from  enterprising  fellow-countrymen.  These 
anyathas,  as  they  are  called,  behave  remarkably  well  in 
British  territory,  notwithstanding  the  assertions  of  the  rural 
police,  who,  being  unable  to  detect  dacoits,  declare  that 
these  are  all  Upper  Burmans  who  have  come  down  for  the 
harvest.  They  are  really,  however,  mostly  simple,  quiet 
people,  who  are  kept  very  much  in  awe  by  the  bluster  and 
town -knowledge  of  the  down -country  farmers,  and  work 
away  zealously  with  their  queer  sickles,  looking  like  the 
ordinary  English  article  worn  to  half  its  original  size  by 
long  use.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  the  grain  is  not  mown 
close  to  the  ground  as  in  Europe.  Except  where  there  is  a 
market  for  straw,  very  little  more  than  the  ears  are  cut  off, 
and  the  straw  burnt  in  the  hot  weather  of  March  and  April 
supplies  a  scarcely -needed  fertilising  to  the  soil.  The 
reapers  usually  receive  their  payment  from  the  farmer  in 
grain,  but  they  naturally  convert  this  into  money,  or  more 
portable  goods,  before  they  start  off  home  again. 

It  does  not  take  long  to  cut  the  crop,  and  then  the  corn 
is  brought  in  to  the  homestead,  commonly  on  rude  sledges, 
more   seldom  in  carts.     The  threshing-floor  does  not  take 


246  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

much  preparing.      It  is  simply  a  portion  of  the  field  swept 
clean.     It  is  sufficiently  hard  from  the  broiling  sun,  and  a 
stake  is  driven  into  the  centre  of  the  circle.     Two  lines  of 
sheaves  are  arranged  round  this,  head  to  head,  and  the  grain 
is  trodden  out  by  slow-moving  bullocks   in  good  old  lazy 
fashion.     The  Christian  Biblical  precept,  not  to  muzzle  the 
ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn,  does  not  fail  of  observance 
with   the   Buddhist  farmer.      Then  the  paddy,  that  is,  the 
unhusked  grain,  is  winnowed.      In  some  places  hand-winnow- 
ing machines  of  a  simple  pattern  are  used  ;  but  ordinarily  a 
far  more  primitive  and  easy  method,  corresponding  to  the 
substitution  of  oxen  for  threshing-flails,  is  in  use.     A  man 
stands   on   an   elevated   platform    and    capsizes    baskets   of 
paddy  brought  from  the  threshing-floor ;  the  rice  falls  on  a 
sloping  bamboo  mat  and  so  to  the  ground,  the  wind  blowing 
away   a   great  part  of  the  bits  of  broken  straw,  chaff,  and 
light  grain.     The  system  may  not  be  very  thorough,  but  it 
saves  an  immense  amount  of  trouble,  which  is  the  chief  con- 
sideration.    All  that  now  remains  to  be  done  is  to  carry  the 
grain  off  to  the  big  rice-boat  lying  in  the  creek.      There  it  is 
stowed  in  bulk ;  and  after  a  day  or  two,  the  farmer  makes 
a  start,  dropping  leisurely  down    through    the   network   of 
creeks  into  one  of  the  main  streams,  and  so  making  his  way 
to  Rangoon,  or  Bassein,  whence  he  will  return  in  a  few  weeks 
with  fine  Chinese  neckerchiefs  for  his  daughters  and  perhaps 
a  gay  Manchester  paso  or  two  for  himself  and  his  sons — 
unless,  indeed,  the  Madras  money-lender  has  snapped  up  all 
his  receipts  down  in  town,  or  some  of  the  robber-boats  that 
infest   the   creeks   at   this   time   of  the   year  have  pounced 
upon  him  and  carried  off  everything  but  the  boat  and  the 
paddles. 

Rice-farming  would  be  profitable  as  well  as  easy  work 
were  it  not  for  the  reckless  squandering  of  almost  all  the 
cultivators.  The  average  rent  per  acre  is  under  three 
shillings ;  the  average  produce  of  the  land  per  acre  is  from 
eighty  to  a  hundred  bushels  in  the  more  fertile  parts,  while 
elsewhere  the  yield  is  from  forty  to  fifty.  The  selling  price 
of  rice  per  maund  (80  lbs.)  in  Rangoon  is  between  4s.  6d. 
and  ss.  Agriculturists,  therefore,  ought  to  grow  rich.  But 
they  are  too  fond  of  gambling  and  building  works  of  merit 


XXIII  RICE  CULTIVATION  247 

to  accumulate  money,  and  their  carelessness  results  in  the 
constant  death  of  their  plough-beasts,  so  that  matters  usually 
remain  exactly  at  the  same  level  if  the  farmer  does  not 
actually  get  into  permanent  debt.  The  Scottish  Highlanders 
have  a  pious  wish,  "  May  the  free  hand  always  be  full ! " 
If  it  is  not  always  full  in  Burma  it  is  consoling  to  think  that 
it  is  seldom  absolutely  empty.  Still,  when  the  grandson 
succeeds  he  ordinarily  finds  that  there  is  as  little  actual 
money  hoarded  up  about  the  place  as  there  was  when  the 
grandfather  Po  Gyi  spent  so  many  borrowed  rupees  at  his 
uncle's  funeral. 

If  rice  cultivation  is  easy  work  in  the  low  country,  it  is 
very  different  with  the  taung-ya,  or  hill  clearings.  Here  the 
dense  underwood  and  forest  growth  has  to  be  cut  down ; 
and  the  more  there  is  to  cut  the  better  the  crop,  for  the  soil 
needs  fertilising  badly,  and  all  that  is  cut  down  is  burned. 
Work  is  begun  about  January ;  everything  is  felled,  bushes 
and  all ;  and  after  the  fallen  logs  have  dried  some  time  in  the 
sun,  the  brushwood  is  heaped  up  round  about  them  and  the 
whole  is  set  on  fire.  Some  of  the  logs  smoulder  for  weeks 
— perhaps  till  the  first  rains  come.  Then  the  ground  is 
rudely  dug  up  with  hoes,  and  the  ashes  turned  in.  Cotton- 
seed is  ordinarily  mixed  with  the  rice,  which  is  of  a  quite 
different  variety  from  that  produced  in  the  plains.  It  is 
sown  broadcast,  and  the  farmer  has  thereafter  only  to  keep 
down  the  weeds,  but  this  is  not  by  any  means  a  light  task. 
The  crop  is  ready  by  October,  and  furnishes  little  more  than 
enough  to  support  the  family  or  community.  The  scanty 
manure  provided  by  the  wood-ashes  is  not  sufficient  to  last 
more  than  two  or  three  years ;  and  when  the  crop  is  secured 
the  party  proceeds  on  to  a  new  settlement,  there  to  repeat 
the  same  laborious  process.  A  very  ingenious  device  for 
lightening  the  toil  is  resorted  to  where  there  is  much  heavy 
timber.  Beginning  at  the  bottom,  they  slightly  cut  the 
lowest  trees  on  the  upper  side  only,  gradually  increasing  the 
depth  of  the  notch  as  they  advance  up  the  hill,  until  at  the 
top  of  the  clearing  they  cut  the  trees  completely  through. 
These  fall  on  the  row  immediately  below  them,  and  by  their 
weight  knock  it  down ;  and  so  the  felling  process  is  con- 
tinued down  to  the  bottom.     Occasionally  a  tangle  occurs 


248  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

where  some  sturdy  tree  refuses  to  fall,  and  the  clearing  it 
away  becomes  a  matter  of  very  considerable  danger.  This 
taung-ya  system  is  very  wasteful  as  well  as  laborious,  and 
annually  draws  down  upon  itself  the  denunciations  of  the 
English  forest  officers.  But  the  hill-tribes  who  adopt  it  are 
too  few  to  support  themselves  in  any  other  way.  They 
were  long  ago  driven  out  of  the  plains  by  the  Burmans,  and 
now  cling  to  their  old  nomadic  life  with  a  degree  of 
obstinacy  which  Government  officials,  in  a  variety  of  ways, 
have  found  is  not  to  be  tempted  by  any  tale  of  the  present 
security  and  plenty  of  the  low  country,  or  even  of  the 
valleys  among  the  hills.  Rice,  therefore,  continues  to  be 
produced  with  the  minimum  and  the  maximum  of  labour ; 
but  none  of  the  hill  rice  ever  finds  its  way  out  of  the 
country,  and  seldom  even  down  to  the  plains. 

The  rice  season,  as  far  as  the  English  merchant  is  con- 
cerned, commences  in  January  and  ends  about  May ;  but 
though  this  is  pre-eminently  the  "  busy  season,"  there  are 
purchases  made  in  greater  or  less  quantities  all  the  year 
round.  The  relations  between  the  great  English  rice  firms 
and  the  simple  jungle  cultivators  have  not  always  been  of  a 
very  elevating  character,  and  it  can  hardly  be  denied  that 
the  fault  lies  wholly  at  the  door  of  the  foreigner.  Missionaries 
in  Burma  are  wont  to  mourn  that  their  teachings  are  often 
rendered  wholly  nugatory  by  the  want  of  scruple,  and  it 
might  almost  be  said  of  honour,  displayed  by  the  great 
Rangoon  rice  firms.  The  good  padres  teach  their  proselytes 
that  Christians  are  all  honest  and  truthful.  The  ingenuous 
lads  enter  as  clerks  in  a  rice-mill  and  discover  that  English- 
men scarcely  differ  from  the  "  poor  heathen,"  except  in  being 
more  lordly  in  the  way  of  doing  the  thing. 

Years  ago,  when  there  were  not  nearly  so  many  mills  as 
there  are  now,  and  not  a  quarter  so  many  ships  in  the  harbour 
during  the  rice  season,  things  went  on  pretty  equably.  One 
day  one  firm  would  give  a  rupee  or  so  more  per  hundred 
baskets,  and  the  next  day  it  would  be  another.  But  soon 
the  mills  began  to  increase  in  number  and  more  ships  came, 
and  it  was  harder  to  get  paddy.  Then  rival  firms  began  to 
bid  against  each  other.  There  was  demurrage  before  their 
eyes,  and  it  was  terribly  expensive  work  keeping  the  mill 


XXIII  RICE  CULTIVATION  249 

establishment  up  to  its  full  strength.  And  so  prices  rose 
and  rose  until  they  became  absurdly  high,  and  no  one 
profited  but  the  hawks  that  preyed  on  the  simple  Burmese 
cultivators.  Then  the  English  merchants  held  a  meeting, 
and  all  pledged  themselves  not  to  give  more  than  the 
current  market  rate  for  paddy.  This  seemed  a  fair  enough 
agreement ;  but  after  a  wfhile  it  was  found  that  the  boats  all 
gravitated  towards  one  or  two  firms.  A  little  investigation 
showed  that  this  was  due  to  the  fact  that  though  they  paid 
the  ordinary  rate,  according  to  the  compact,  they  had  a 
smaller  measuring  basket  than  their  neighbours.  Accord- 
ingly every  one  went  on  reducing  the  size  of  his  basket 
until  the  system  became  as  ruinously  absurd  as  ever  it  had 
been  before.  Then  there  was  another  meeting,  at  which  it 
was  unanimously  agreed  that  this  state  of  affairs  would 
never  do,  and  that  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  come  to 
some  definite  understanding.  A  committee  was  appointed 
which,  after  some  deliberation,  concluded  that,  if,  in  addition 
to  abiding  by  the  market  rate,  every  one  were  bound  to  use 
a  basket  of  a  certain  fixed  size,  there  would  be  no  chance 
for  unfair  speculations.  A  standard  basket  was  therefore 
fixed  upon  ;  and  the  competitors  were  supposed  to  start  fair 
again.  But  in  no  very  long  time,  one  firm  put  a  false 
bottom  in  the  basket,  another  wedged  in  a  board  ;  and  so 
on,  till  matters  got  back  to  the  old  way.  This  state  of  affairs 
is  hardly  creditable  to  mercantile  honour,  and  it  certainly  is 
by  no  means  profitable. 

Independently  of  this,  paddy  has  gone  up  in  price  at  an 
alarming  rate  of  late  years.  The  first  heavy  rise  was  in 
1877,  at  the  time  of  the  Madras  famine.  That  was  also 
the  time  of  the  resolution  to  have  a  standard  basket. 
Rice  was  wanted  in  any  quantity  for  the  famine  districts, 
and  millers  gave  an  altogether  fabulous  price  for  grain. 
The  game  went  on  merrily,  introduced  the  scandalous 
"  paddy  morality,"  and  lasted  long  enough  to  make  the 
cultivators  think  the  new  prices  had  come  in  for  good. 
Far  too  many  Burmese  farmers  are  heavily  in  debt  to 
the  "  chetties,"  the  money-lending  caste  of  the  Madras 
coast.  The  agriculturists  have  borrowed  money  to  build 
a  pagoda  or  a  monastery  ;    to  give  a  grand    feast  on  the 


250  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

occasion  of  their  marriage,  or  their  father's  death ;  to  buy 
a  new  yoke  of  oxen  in  the  place  of  those  that  have  been 
carried  off  by  disease ;  to  get  seed -grain  to  sow  their 
tracts  of  paddy  land,  the  last  season's  gains  having  been 
lost  in  some  gambling  transaction  when  they  were  down 
in  Rangoon.  They  have  got  into  the  chetty's  books  in 
some  way  at  any  rate ;  and  hapless  is  the  man,  Burman  or 
Englishman,  who  has  dealings  with  the  fat,  shaven -headed 
Madras  money-lender.  He  will  be  charged  eight,  ten, 
twelve  per  cent  a  month,  or  even  more,  before  there  is  an 
end  of  the  transaction.  The  chetties,  therefore,  took  a  par- 
ticular interest  in  the  rise  of  the  price  of  paddy.  High 
prices  ensured  their  being  paid  ;  moreover,  handling  such 
unwonted  sums  of  money  made  the  ever -careless  Burman 
reckless.  He  gambled,  he  gave  great  feasts,  he  got  deeper 
and  deeper  into  debt  with  the  money-lenders.  Consequently 
it  was  desirable  that  the  prices  should  not  go  down  ;  and  as 
men  of  business  the  chetties  understood  how  that  was  to  be 
done ;  they  made  the  Burman  farmers  hold  back  their  grain. 
The  Rangoon  firms  were  in  desperation  to  meet  their  con- 
tracts, the  ships  could  not  be  kept  waiting ;  and  so  prices 
were  maintained  at  nearly  famine  rates.  This  more  than 
anything  else  brought  about  the  unlucky  legerdemain  with 
standard  baskets.  The  appearance  of  the  chetty  element 
in  the  trade  upset  everything.  They  are  charming  men 
of  business,  and  know  all  about  bulling  and  bearing,  and 
all  the  other  civilised  expedients  of  trade.  Poor  "  Jack 
Burma,"  listless  and  good-natured  as  he  is,  would  never 
have  thought  of  such  things  of  himself;  but  he  is  in  the 
hands  of  his  master.  Not  a  single  village  in  the  jungle, 
however  remote,  is  to  be  found  without  its  bare-backed 
money-lender.  He  hovers  round  the  paddy  nursery  ;  he 
watches  the  men  planting  out  the  handfuls  of  half-grown 
rice  ;  he  makes  the  farmer  hold  back  the  threshed-out  grain 
till  he  gives  the  word  :  then  he  fixes  the  rate  and  all  but 
takes  the  money  himself 

The  English  merchants  have  struggled  against  the 
system,  but  with  small  success.  They  have  laid  out  heavy 
sums  in  advances.  The  farmer  is  paid  for  the  next  year's 
crop  before  ever  it  is  sown.      This  is  generally  only  practi- 


xxiii  RICE  CULTIVATION  251 

cable  with  men  who  have  not  yet  fallen  into  the  clutches  of 
the  chetties,  and  the  result  has  been  almost  invariably  to 
drive  them  into  the  money-lender's  arms.  The  Burmese,  it 
it  is  to  be  feared,  have  not  sufficient  stability  of  character. 
U  Myaing  or  Maung  Po  never  had  so  much  money  before  in 
their  lives  as  the  advances  figure  to.  They  do  not  know  the 
value  of  it,  and  proceed  to  squander  the  rupees  forthwith ; 
and  so,  long  before  the  paddy  is  delivered  they  are  heavily 
in  the  usurer's  books,  and  then  Maung  Po  and  U  Myaing 
have  to  do  as  they  are  bidden.  Moreover,  the  system  in 
any  case  could  hardly  be  a  safe  one.  The  cultivator  might 
die ;  there  might  be  a  flood  or  a  jungle  fire  ;  many  things 
might  happen,  in  fact,  to  prevent  the  advance  boats  from 
ever  reaching  the  Puzundaung  creek.  Consequently  many 
English  firms  have  given  up  the  practice,  and  instead  send 
agents  away  up  the  creeks,  far  into  the  jungle,  to  negotiate 
with  the  farmers  on  the  spot  and  try  to  secure  paddy  before 
rivalry  has  had  time  to  raise  the  price.  But  even  this  ex- 
pedient does  not  answer  well.  The  chetties  do  their  best  to 
throw  obstacles  in  the  way.  It  is  not  without  expense,  and 
it  impresses  the  cultivators  with  a  notion  of  the  great  demand 
there  is  for  paddy. 

The  telegraph,  they  say,  ruins  business.  The  paddy 
season  opens  in  February  with  a  price  of,  say  between 
seventy  and  eighty  rupees  a  hundred  baskets.  The  mer- 
chants declare  they  will  not  be  forced  into  materially  increas- 
ing this  rate,  and  the  home  firms  charter  a  number  of  ships. 
Meanwhile  the  price  of  paddy  steadily  rises,  while  rice  in 
England  steadily  goes  down  ;  and  by  the  time  the  vessels 
discharge  their  cargo  in  Liverpool  or  London,  milled  rice  is 
not  very  much  dearer  in  wholesale  shops  than  the  raw  paddy 
in  the  Burmese  boats.  New  mills  are  constantly  being 
started — which  would  seem  contradictory,  were  it  not  that 
all  the  firms  starting  them  have  business  of  another  kind  ; 
teak  sawmills,  cotton  or  piece-goods  trade,  silks  for  Burmese 
men  and  maidens,  or  jute  and  grey  shirtings  for  Upper 
Burma  and  the  hill  tribes.  Rice  will  certainly  always  be 
wanted,  and  there  is  any  quantity  of  it  to  be  had  in  Burma. 
A  little  more  of  the  sterling  probity  which  used  to  be 
associated  with  the  name  of  the   English  merchant  would 


252  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

do  no  harm  in  Rangoon  rice  dealings,  and  would  win  that 
respect  from  the  farmer  which  heavy  payments  and  cunning 
never  will. 

Rangoon  still  continues  to  be  the  largest  rice  port  in 
the  world.  From  January  to  May  the  river  is  crowded 
with  shipping — huge  iron  and  steel  sailing  craft  that  have 
been  chartered  beforehand,  and  carry  off  thousands  of  bags 
in  their  capacious  holds  ;  and  a  constant  succession  of 
"ditchers,"  as  the  steamers  passing  through  the  Suez 
Canal  are  called,  which  come  "  seeking,"  and  seldom  have 
to  go  away  without  their  full  complement  of  "  five  parts 
cargo  rice,"  or  "  Europe  milled."  The  steamers  are  dis- 
placing the  sailing  ships,  and  the  shorter  passage  now  makes 
it  possible  to  carry  fully  husked  rice  home  without  the 
danger  of  heating,  which  was  supposed  to  be  avoided  by 
the  partly  husked  "  five  parts  cargo  rice."  Harbour-masters 
and  river-pilots  have  a  busy  time,  and  gather  together  many 
pieces  of  silver  against  the  later  months  of  the  year,  when 
they  will  have  abundant  leisure  to  spend  them.  Coringi 
coolies  swarm  in  the  town,  and  their  monotonous  chant, 
"  Eh-ya-mah-la  Tah-ma-lay,  Madras  Ag-boat  Tah-ma-lay," 
may  be  heard  at  any  hour  of  the  night  or  the  morning, 
floating  over  the  river.  The  British  sailor  overflows  into  the 
town  and  sings  noisy  old  salt  sea-songs  round  about  the 
Sule  pagoda,  gets  mad  drunk  on  arrack,  and  not  unseldom 
clears  Dalhousie  Street  with  a  linked-arm  rush,  heedless  of 
the  red-turbaned  guardian  of  the  peace,  who  keeps  out  of  the 
way  in  the  meantime,  but  will  break  poor  drunken  Jack's 
head  with  his  truncheon  if  he  finds  him  helpless  and  strayed 
from  his  fellow-roysterers. 

The  Puzundaung  Creek,  where  all  the  mills  are,  is  as 
busy  as  an  ant-hill  all  day  long,  and  all  night  too,  when 
some  of  the  mills  are  lighted  up  with  Jablochkoffs  or  later 
forms  of  electric  light,  and  the  silvery  rays  shine  ghastly  on 
the  black  and  bronzed  mill -workers.  Here  we  have  the 
Madrasi  coolies  again,  making  noises,  according  to  their 
nature,  as  a  kind  of  assertion  that  they  are  doing  hard  work. 
The  lank  Chittagonian  firemen,  with  their  aquiline  noses,  are 
coated  with  coal-dust,  and  divide  their  time  between  firing 
up  and   having  a  whiff  at  the  hubble-bubble  when   Sandy, 


xxin  RICE  CULTIVATION  253 

the  Scotch  engineer,  is  not  looking.  There  is  a  cluster  of 
Chinese  carpenters,  chipping  away  with  their  queer  thick- 
headed axes  and  planes,  which,  with  characteristic  perversity, 
they  pull  towards  them,  instead  of  pushing  away  as  other 

workmen  do.      Here  is  M ,  the  English  "  assistant  "  at 

the  mill,  his  hat  and  coat  all  covered  with  rice-dust,  which 
hangs  in  queer  fashion  on  his  eyebrows  and  moustache.  He 
is  in  high  spirits.  "  We've  got  twenty-four  pair  of  stones 
going  to-day,  more  than  anybody  else  in  the  creek  ; "  and 
he  goes  off  to  see  how  the  Burmese  girls  are  stitching  up  the 
rice-bags,  a  duty  of  which  he  is  particularly  fond,  and  over 
which  he  spends  a  quite  unnecessary  amount  of  time.     There 

is  R 's  voice  on  the   other   side  of  the  creek.      He  is 

storming  at  some  men  in  the  cargo -boat,  who  have  done 
something  wrong — anchored  in  the  wrong  place,  or  not 
started  for  the  upper  mill  at  Kemendine  last  night  as  they 

ought  to  have  done.      R has  a  voice  which  is  the  terror 

of  every  loitering  coolie  and  dawdling  boat -wallah  in  his 
employ ;  and  he  will  be  as  hoarse  as  a  North  Sea  pilot  by 
nightfall,  and  will  want  a  "double-barrelled"  whisky  and 
soda  to  moisten  him  before  dinner.  He  wants  company 
down  to  "  the  Point,"  and  presently  comes  skimming  across 
in  his  gig,  manned  by  Chittagonian  Kalassies,  and  we  drop 
down  the  creek — they  call  small  rivers  creeks  in  the  East — 
to  where  it  joins  with  the  main  Rangoon  stream.  The 
Pegu  river,  tapping  the  country  north-east  and  north  of 
Rangoon,  comes  in  at  the  same  place  ;  and  there  is  a  great 
crowd  of  paddy-boats  here  in  the  early  morning.  Each  firm 
has  its  brokers,  middlemen  who  make  the  purchases  from 
the  farmers  that  come  down  with  their  grain.  They  have 
been  here  since  daylight,  and  fly  about  in  their  little  dug- 
outs from  one  seller  to  another.  The  great  point  in  a  broker 
seems  to  be  power  of  lungs  and  fluency  in  abuse.  The 
amount  of  yelling  that  goes  on  at  "  Monkey  Point "  would 
silence  the  bookmakers'  ring  at  Epsom  on  a  Derby  day. 

R has  not   come  down  to  this  pandemonium  for 

nothing.  There  are  a  couple  of  big  ships  in,  which  must  be 
filled,  or  there  will  be  demurrage  to  pay,  and  a  "  canal- 
wallah"  is  expected  this  afternoon  or  to-morrow  morning; 
so    that    the    wheels    must    be    kept    going    their    hardest. 


254  THE  BVRMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Accordingly,  we  paddle  about  here  and  there,  and  whenever 
we  come  across  the  little  canoe  flying  the  flag  that  marks 

R 's  brokers,  sundry  signs  pass,  which  result  in   three 

great  paddy-boats  mounting  the  red  flag  too.     They  presently 

weigh  anchor,  and  drop  up  to  the  mill.      R is  a  smart 

man  of  business,  and  is  very  scornful  about  the  representa- 
tives of  several  other  firms,  who  lounge  on  the  bank,  smoking 
cheroots,  and  throwing  sticks  into  the  water  for  their  dogs  to 
fetch  out.  It  is  not  directly  a  matter  of  money  that  is  in 
question.  The  cultivators  know  pretty  well  what  they  are 
about,  though  you  might  not  think  it  when  you  hear  a  man 
refuse  ninety-two  rupees  a  hundred  baskets,  and  afterwards 
settle  with  a  broker  for  eighty-eight.  Those  passes  with  the 
finger  on  the  nose  meant  a  good  deal  more  than  appeared. 
Another  brick  in  the  bottom  of  the  basket,  a  three-inch 
batten  wedged  in  somewhere,  was  the  significance  of  that 
wink  which  sent  the  broker  off  in  such  a  hurry. 

At  last  it  is  over.  There  are  no  more  boats  to  be  had ; 
and  we  are  not  sorry  to  turn  back,  for  the  sun  throws  its 
beams  fiercely  back  from  the  water  in  a  way  that  gets  below 

the  broadest  solah  hat.     R is  in  great  glee  :  "  Thirteen 

boats,  by  George  !  Next  best  to  the  Imperial  Firm  ;  and 
then  there's  the  launch  to  come  back."  The  Imperial  Firm 
is  the  biggest  concern  in  Rangoon,  and  has  sometimes  as 
much  as  a  lakh  out  for  "  advance  boats,''  i.e.  money  paid  to 
cultivators  before  the  rice  has  been  planted  out  from  the 
nurseries,  or  perhaps  even  before  it  has  been   sown  at  all. 

The  launch  about  which  R is  so  solicitous  went  away 

last  night  far  up  the  Pegu  River  to  intercept  boats  coming 
down  with  paddy  for  sale.  There  are  sometimes  great 
bargains  to  be  made  in  this  way.  The  boatmen  have  come 
a  long  distance,  and  are  tired  with  paddling.  The  tide  is 
making  strong  when  the  steam-launch  comes  up.  There  is 
the  welcome  prospect  of  an  end  to  their  labours,  and  above 
all  there  are  no  outbidding  rivals  to  interfere.  R insti- 
tuted the  system,  and  for  a  day  or  two  had  the  game  all  to 
himself;  but  now  the  other  firms  have  got  wind  of  it,  and 
there  are  sometimes  famous  races  for  a  big  boat,  which  must 
somewhat  astonish  the  simple  jungle  wallahs,  and  certainly 
do  not  reduce  the  demands  of  the  hleshin,  the  owner  of  the 


xxiii  RICE  CULTIVATION  255 

boat.      R is   in  luck  this  morning.     We  have  hardly 

gone  a  hundred  yards  when  the  "  Mah  Hlah  "  comes  puffing 
round  the  point  behind  us,  with  a  boat  on  either  side,  and 
three  towing  astern. 

And  now  we  have  got  back  to  the  mill.  The  Burmans 
are  discharging  their  paddy,  which  is  stowed  in  bulk,  into  a 
big  cargo  boat.  The  regulation  basket  is  in  use,  and  we  do 
not  peer  too  inquisitively  into  the  bottom  of  it.  The  owner 
of  the  boat  is  perched  on  the  lofty  carved  stern  of  his  craft, 
and  placidly  smokes  a  great  cheroot.  Presently  he  will  come 
down  and  make  his  way  to  the  office,  where  he  will  get  a 
great  pile  of  rupees  to  carry  off,  tied  in  the  end  of  his  paso. 
The  greater  number  of  them  will  probably  find  their  way 
into  the  hands  of  the  oily  chetty,  who  is  squatting  on  the 
bank  there.  The  rest  our  hleshin  will  most  likely  gamble 
away. 

Meanwhile,  a  long  string  of  coolies  is  carrying  the  paddy 
from  the  lighter  into  the  godown,  a  gigantic  shed,  where 
there  is  already  a  mountain  of  grain.  We  skirt  round  it, 
and  go  to  the  other  side.  There  a  few  hundred  more  coolies 
are  running  off  with  more  baskets  to  the  mill.  The  paddy 
is  thrown  into  huge  receptacles  on  the  basement,  winnowed, 
carried  up  in  lifts  to  the  top  of  the  house,  three  stories  high, 
where  it  is  first  of  all  passed  over  a  long  sieve.  Here  the 
stalks,  leaves,  stones,  and  stumps  of  cheroots  are  separated 
from  the  grain,  which  is  then  passed  between  two  revolving 
stones,  just  sufficiently  wide  apart  to  grind  off  the  outer 
husk  without  breaking  the  seed.  Then  it  is  rewinnowed  in 
fanners,  and  passed  over  finer  sieves,  where  the  broken  grains 
fall  through,  while  the  part-cleaned  rice  goes  on  to  fresh 
stones.  It  is  found  that  perfectly  clean  rice  will  not  stand 
the  long  sea  voyage,  and  the  grain  as  it  is  sent  in  the  sailing 
ship  has  still  the  inner  pellicle,  and  is  mixed  with  about 
twenty  per  cent  of  unhusked  rice.  This  is  what  is  technically 
known  as  "  five  parts  cargo  rice,"  or  simply  "  cargo  rice." 
Since  so  many  steamers  have  begun  to  go  through  the  Suez 
Canal,  the  amount  of  "  white  rice "  milled  in  the  province 
has  been  steadily  increasing.  Rice  of  a  specially  fine  quality, 
with  a  glaze  on  the  surface,  is  manufactured  for  Italy. 
Clouds  of  rice-dust  float  all  over  the  mill,  and  settle  every- 


256         THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  xxni 

where,  making  queer  spectacles  of  the  dark-skinned  Madrasis. 
The  dust  is  carefully  swept  up  and  sold  to  Chinamen,  who 
fatten  their  pigs  upon  it.  The  milled  grain  descends  to  the 
ground-floor  again,  and  pours  in  a  stream  through  shoots 
into  bags  standing  ready  on  weighing  machines.  There  is  a 
crowd  of  Burmese  girls  ready  to  sew  them  up  as  they  are 
filled,  and  another  band  of  coolies  to  carry  them  off  in  the 
cargo  boats  ready  to  convey  them  to  the  ships  away  up  in 
the  Rangoon  harbour.  Paddy  that  came  in  a  Burmese  boat 
in  the  morning  may  by  night  be  safe  stowed  in  the  shape  of 
milled  rice  deep  down  in  the  hold  of  a  ship  bound  "  to  the 
Channel  for  orders."  Everything  is  used  but  the  paddy 
husk.  That  is  passed  out  from  the  fanners,  and  pours  in  a 
great  stream  from  wooden  shoots  into  the  creek.  There  it 
floats  backwards  and  forwards  with  the  tide,  and  creates 
miasma  and  narrows  the  river  ;  still  no  other  feasible  means 
of  getting  rid  of  it  has  yet  been  devised.  Several  engineers 
and  others  in  Rangoon  have  tried  special  furnaces  for  con- 
suming the  husk,  but  with  no  very  great  measure  of  success. 
Mr.  Cowie's  system  is  probably  the  best ;  but  it  requires  a 
special  kind  of  boiler  and  furnace,  and  has  not  as  yet  been 
generally  adopted.  The  economy  in  fuel  as  well  as  the 
advantage  to  the  river  would  be  immense  if  the  scheme  were 
perfected. 

And  so  we  have  seen  the  paddy  sown  out  and  mown, 
and  passing  from  the  hands  of  the  cultivators,  through  the 
mills,  into  the  great  ships  that  carry  the  rice  away  to  all 
parts  of  the  world. 


CHAPTER   XXIV 

A   GRACIOUS   PLOUGHING 

Like  the  "  royal  elder  brother  "  of  China,  the  king  of  Burma 
ought  to  go  out  once  a  year  to  plough  the  fields.  Thibaw 
Min  did  not  do  it  during  the  first  two  years  of  his  reign, 
and,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  was  equally  heedless  throughout 
the  later  years  also.  The  consequences  ought  to  have  been 
disastrous.  According  to  tradition,  the  failure  of  the  L^twin 
mingala  to  come  off  should  have  caused  a  drought  all  over 
the  country.  But  the  Mo  hkaung  did  not  ensue ;  on  the 
contrary,  there  was  Mo  kaung :  an  aspirate  makes  all  the 
difference  between  a  water-famine  and  seasonable  showers. 
King  Thibaw  went  very  little  indeed  out  of  his  palace. 
The  annals  of  the  country  supply  too  many  instances  of 
kings,  who,  having  gone  abroad,  found  on  their  return  to 
the  palace  gates  that  a  usurper  had  taken  possession  of  the 
throne  in  the  meantime,  and  had  no  better,  greeting  for  his 
predecessor  than  a  short  shrift  and  a  red  velvet  sack  in 
which  to  plunge  his  body  into  the  Irrawaddy.  This  un- 
lovable custom  had  great  weight  with  King  Thibaw ;  but  it 
was  unwise  of  him  to  entirely  abandon  so  venerable  a 
tradition  as  the  Letwin  mingala.  It  was  at  this  ceremonial 
that  one  of  the  earliest  marvels  in  the  life  of  the  Buddha 
Gautama  happened.  The  king  Thudawdana,  with  eight 
hundred  noblemen  save  one,  was  ploughing  the  fields  at  the 
annual  festival.  Many  country  people  came  to  see  the  great 
sight,  and  the  city  emptied  itself.  The  maids  who  had 
charge  of  the  little  Prince  Theidat  laid  him  down  under 
the  shade  of  a  tree  and  went  to  look  on.  The  infant 
Buddha  rose    up   as  soon    as  they  were  gone,  and  sitting 

2S7  S 


258  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

cross-legged  in  the  fashion  in  which  he  is  ordinarily  repre- 
sented in  the  images,  became  sunk  in  meditation.  The 
careless  maids  all  through  the  hot  afternoon  forgot  about 
their  princely  charge,  until  the  returning  crowds  and  the 
setting  sun  reminded  them  of  their  neglect.  Then  they 
hurried  to  the  tree  and  found  that  the  Zampu  tha-bye  had 
maintained  its  shadow  in  the  exact  same  position  all  day 
as  it  was  in  when  Prince  Theidat  was  first  laid  down. 
Notwithstanding  the  arc  the  sun  had  described,  the  shade 
had  all  along  hung  over  the  head  of  the  meditating  Paya 
Alaung. 

The  festival  has  therefore  special  reason  to  be  celebrated 
by  the  descendants  of  the  solar  kings.  It  was  also  in  every 
way  a  most  picturesque  fete,  pleased  the  people,  and  offered 
a  valuable  opportunity  for  squeezing  money  out  of  them. 
King  Minddn  never  omitted  it,  even  when  he  was  grown 
old  and  portly,  and  little  able  to  follow  the  slow-stepping 
bullocks.  The  ceremony  took  place  in  the  beginning  of 
June,  about  the  time  when  the  south-west  monsoon  usually 
breaks  in  Mandalay.  The  order  went  forth  that  the  king 
would  come  out  on  such  and  such  a  day,  and  the  people 
were  enjoined  to  get  ready.  Not  to  see  him — far  from  it. 
The  right  of  a  cat  to  look  at  a  king  in  Mandalay  was  not 
well  established.  The  Amein-daw  was  issued  in  order  that 
the  heads  over  ten  houses,  the  Se-eing  gaungs,  might  see 
that  the  road  in  their  district  was  in  proper  repair,  and  that 
the  yazamat  had  not  got  out  of  order.  The  yazamat,  or 
king's  fence,  was  a  kind  of  lattice-paling  put  up  in  every 
street  in  the  walled  town,  and  in  any  of  those  in  the  suburbs 
through  which  the  king  was  likely  at  any  time  to  pass. 
It  was  formed  of  thick  diagonal  spars  made  into  hurdles, 
which  were  lashed  to  heavy  posts  sunk  in  the  ground  at 
regular  intervals.  The  whole  was  whitewashed,  and  often 
flower-pots  stood  on  the  top  of  the  posts  to  enliven  the 
structure  a  little ;  and  it  certainly  wanted  enlivening  a  good 
deal.  The  lattice-fence  undoubtedly  looked  very  neat  and 
tidy,  as  a  long  straight  road  lined  with  Lombardy  poplars 
does  ;  but  it  became  terribly  tiresome,  when  you  found  all 
the  streets  looking  exactly  the  same,  with  this  six-foot-high 
heavy  wood  fence  standing  within  a  couple  of  feet  or  so  of 


XXIV  A  GRACIOUS  PLOUGHING  259 

the  walls  of  the  houses,  and  shutting  out  all  view  of  these 
wooden  structures.  It  had,  however,  to  be  kept  in  constant 
repair,  and  the  house-reeve  has  to  go  round  carefully  to  see 
that  none  of  the  whitewash  had  been  rubbed  off,  nor  any  of 
the  transverse  bars  sprung  with  the  sun.  Behind  these  the 
entire  populace  had  to  stay  when  the  king,  or  any  one  ol 
the  queens,  went  out.  Woe  betide  the  wretch  who  was 
caught  outside  them  when  the  procession  had  started.  He 
might  consider  himself  lucky  if  he  escaped  with  only  a 
belabouring  from  the  fasces  of  the  shrieking  lictors.  No 
one  was  supposed  even  to  look  through  the  little  diamond- 
shaped  holes.  As  a  matter  of  fact  they  did  ;  but  by  way  of 
condoning  for  the  offence,  they  rendered  it  more  difficult  by 
planting  flowering  shrubs  between  the  bamboo  houses  and 
the  lattice-work. 

The  procession  on  the  route  out  to  the  Leya,  the  royal 
acre,  to  be  ploughed,  was  magnificent.  The  king  was  clad  in 
all  his  robes  of  state :  the  paso  with  the  daungydp,  the  pea- 
cock sacred  to  royalty ;  the  long  silk  surcoat,  or  tunic,  so 
thickly  crusted  with  jewels  that  its  colour  could  not  be  seen  ; 
the  tharapu,  the  spire-like  crown,  also  a  mass  of  precious 
stones  ;  the  twenty-four  strings  of  the  Order  of  the  Salwfe 
across  his  breast ;  and  over  his  forehead  the  gold  plate,  or 
frontlet.  The  great  gates  in  front  of  the  stairs  from  the 
Hall  of  Audience  were  opened  for  him.  Except  the  King  of 
the  Golden  Throne  no  one  might  pass  through  them  ;  there 
was  the  low  red  postern  at  the  side  for  meaner  beings — a 
shrewd  device  to  make  every  one  bow  his  head  to  the 
palace,  whether  he  liked  it  or  not.  His  majesty  mounted 
the  white  elephant,  which  none  save  he  might  ride — for  is 
not  the  noble  creature  a  king  himself? 

The  king  mounted  the  Lord  White  Elephant  at  the 
palace  of  the  latter,  to  the  right  of  the  Hall  of  Audience  ; 
but  the  princes  and  ministers,  all  of  whom  came  to  attend 
the  great  function  in  their  robes  of  state,  might  not  enter 
their  howdahs  till  the  stockade  of  the  nandaw  had  been 
passed.  Then  they  fell  into  line  in  order  of  precedence,  the 
wuns  and  wundauks  wearing  their  official  mitres — tall  red 
velvet  hats,  with  the  top  curled  back  like  a  nautilus,  and  the 
base  surrounded  with  a  row  of  gilt  spear-heads.     The  long 


26o  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

crimson  velvet  cassocks  edged  with  rich  brocade  were  also 
worn,  and  every  one  paraded  all  the  umbrellas,  gold,  or 
vermilion,  or  green,  that  he  was  entitled  to. 

Thus  they  pass  through  the  official  town  into  the  suburbs. 
The  road  taken  is  that  by  the  east  gate,  whence,  in  a  line 
with  the  steps  of  the  Hall  of  Audience,  a  broad  way  runs 
straight  away  to  the  blue  Shan  hills  ;  or  at  least  to  where, 
in  Mind6n's  reign,  the  great  Yankin-taung  pagoda  was  being 
built,  a  few  miles  from  where  the  hills  rise,  steep  as  out  of  a 
lake,  from  the  flat  rice  lands.  A  death-like  stillness  prevails 
after  the  procession  has  passed  the  two  timber  guard-houses, 
between  the  tall  columns  of  the  eastern  gate,  surmounted  by 
fantastic,  triple-roofed  teak  pavilions,  looking  like  Chinese 
joss-houses  with  their  flamboyant  carvings.  The  people 
are  no  doubt  all  there — we  speak  as  those  who  know — 
crouching  on  their  stomachs  and  peeping  as  best  they  can 
through  yazamat  and  leaves  of  the  bushes  and  legs  of  the 
soldiers  that  line  the  royal  path  all  the  way,  striving  their 
utmost  to  get  a  glimpse  of  the  king  and  the  splendour  of  his 
retinue  ;  but  they  are  not  to  be  seen,  and  no  one  so  much  as 
sneezes.  Thus  the  richly  carved  and  gilt  royal  monastery 
is  passed  on  the  left ;  and  immediately  afterwards  compara- 
tively open  ground  is  reached,  stretching  out  on  either  side 
of  the  high,  raised  road.  A  little  farther  on,  half  a  mile 
or  so  from  the  eastern  gate,  a  halt  is  made  at  the  selected 
portion  of  the  ledawgyi.  Ploughs  stand  ready  in  a  long 
row,  extending  away  as  far  as  one  can  see  ;  for  all  the  princes 
and  ministers  must  plough  as  well  as  the  king.  The  royal 
plough  is  thickly  covered  with  gold-leaf;  the  part  on  which 
his  majesty  stands — for  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the 
Burmese  plough  is  something  like  a  giant  rake,  and  is  not 
really  a  plough  to  English  ideas  at  all — is  gold,  roughened 
with  pearls  and  emeralds.  The  milk-white  oxen  that  draw 
it  rival  the  Lord  White  Elephant  in  the  splendour  of  their 
harness.  Crimson  and  gold  bands  hook  them  on  ;  the  reins 
are  stiff  with  rubies  and  diamonds  ;  heavy  gold  tassels  hang 
from  gilded  horns.  The  gold-tipped  ox-goad  his  majesty 
wields  is  covered  with  jewels  and  flashes  like  a  rod  of  fire  in 
the  sun. 

The  king  ploughs  a  couple  of  furrows — or,  rather,  passes 


XXIV  A  GRACIOUS  PLOUGHING  261 

the  big  rake  once  up  and  down  the  rain-sodden  field — and 
then  stops  ;  for  he  is  portly,  and  short  of  breath  now.  The 
ministers,  no  matter  how  fat  they  are,  have  to  go  on  plough- 
ing as  long  as  the  Arbiter  of  Existence  chooses  to  look  on. 
At  last  he  declares  that  enough  has  been  done,  and  prepara- 
tions are  made  to  go  back  again.  He  doffs  his  royal  robes, 
for  the  tharapu,  with  its  spire  and  jewelled  ear-flappets,  is 
burdensome,  and  the  long  surcoat,  with  its  thousands  of 
precious  stones,  is  said  to  weigh  about  a  hundred  pounds. 
The  Lord  White  Elephant  is  relieved  too.  He  stalks  back 
unencumbered,  with  his  household  of  thirty  retainers  fussing 
about  him  with  fans  and  swaying  umbrellas. 

The  king  gets  into  an  open  car,  something  like  what 
Roman  racing  chariots  are  represented  to  have  been.  It  is 
of  course  adorned  as  richly  as  everything  else,  and  is  drawn 
not  by  ponies  or  bullocks,  but  by  men,  eight  of  them  pulling 
at  each  of  the  flexible  shafts.  The  object  is  to  prevent  any 
one,  the  driver  for  example,  sitting  higher  than  the  king. 
The  English  carriages  presented  at  various  times  to  different 
Burmese  monarchs  met  with  little  approval.  At  first  it  was 
thought  that  the  king  was  to  sit  on  the  box  ;  but  then  it 
was  found  that  with  this  arrangement  there  was  nothing  for 
it  but  that  the  driver  should  run  by  the  side  and  therefore 
maintain  a  constant  erect  attitude  in  the  presence  of  royalty. 
When  it  was  found  that  the  king  was  supposed  to  sit  inside, 
with  the  driver  two  or  three  feet  above  him,  a  burst  of 
indignation  suggested  that  it  was  an  insidious  plot  to  put  an 
insult  on  the  majesty  of  the  lord  of  the  umbrella-bearing 
chiefs.  For  a  time  the  vehicles  were  put  away  as  lumber  ; 
but  an  ingenious  handicraftsman  adorned  them  with  pya- 
thats — five-roofed  ecclesiastical  or  royal  spires.  They  were 
now,  when  drawn  by  men,  suitable  for  royal  occupation  ;  but 
unfortunately  the  solid  teak -wood  spires  made  them  top- 
heavy,  and  especially  unstable  on  rough  Mandalay  roads. 
They  therefore  degenerated  into  paraphernalia  for  exhibition 
on  a  kadaw  day,  or  gauds  for  a  procession  at  Tawadeintha 
feast  time. 

The  king  consequently  returns  on  his  low,  gilt,  native- 
made  carriage,  reclining  on  a  mattress  placed  on  the  floor. 
He  is  now  dressed  in  the  ordinary  national  way,  with  a  light 


262  THE  BVRMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  xxiv 

linen  jacket  and  a  slender  pawldn  (a  fillet  of  book-muslin 
wound  round  the  head),  showing  the  thin  white  hair  tied  up 
in  a  little  knot  on  the  top  of  the  head.  The  chief  ministers 
are  round  about,  fanning  him  assiduously ;  and  he  is  in 
extreme  good-humour,  chaffing  the  Kin  Wungyi,  the  astute 
prime  minister,  on  the  way  he  let  his  bullocks  straggle  away 
at  random  and  the  difficulties  he  got  into  in  trying  to  turn 
them  at  the  end  of  the  field  ;  while  the  stout  old  Naingan- 
gya  Wun-dauk  is  rallied  about  the  absurd  state  of  heat  he 
was  brought  into  by  his  exertions.  Possibly,  if  a  venture- 
some and  inquisitive  subject  were  to  be  seen  now,  the  king 
might  pardon  him  for  his  rude  gaping.  But  nobody  knows 
in  what  temper  the  king  is,  and  the  silence  is  as  death-like 
as  when  the  party  moved  out.  As  soon,  however,  as  the 
great  procession  has  passed  and  has  wound  its  way  into 
the  palace,  the  hitherto  deserted  streets  are  crowded  again. 
Pwes  begin  with  startling  suddenness  at  every  corner.  Bands 
strike  up ;  long  lines  of  candles  illuminate  the  streets  at 
nightfall ;  rockets  are  let  off,  fire-balloons  ascend,  and  every- 
thing is  given  up  to  rejoicing ;  for  the  l^dawgyi  has  been 
graciously  ploughed,  and  the  Letwin  mingala  is  a  presage  of 
abundant  crops. 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  persons  mentioned  are 
now  all  dead  and  that  the  British  Government  does  not 
maintain  the  Letwin  mingala.  The  spectacle  of  the  Lieu- 
tenant-Governor balancing  himself  on  a  harrow  with  the 
Commissioner  of  the  Northern  Division  and  the  Judicial 
Commissioner  for  Upper  Burma  as  acolytes,  or  rivals,  would 
not  be  impressive.  A  striking  spectacle  has  gone  and  cannot 
be  revived. 


CHAPTER    XXV 

A   HARVEST   FEAST 

One  of  the  pleasantest  and  most  social  of  Burmese  country 
festivals  is  the  ceremony  which  goes  by  the  name  of  Tamane 
Hto-thi.  It  occurs  in  the  month  of  Ta'saungm6n,  or  of 
Na'daw,  when  the  harvest  is  over  and  the  first  of  the  new 
rice  piled  up  in  a  heap  near  the  farmer's  house,  or  perhaps 
stowed  away  in  the  capacious  bottom  of  the  hnaw,  the  big 
rice-boat,  with  its  stern  rising  ten  or  fifteen  feet  above  the 
surface  of  the  water,  and  ready  to  start  for  Rangoon  when- 
ever its  owner  shall  have  hit  upon  a  lucky  day  for  commen- 
cing the  voyage.  In  order  to  acquire  a  store  of  merit  as  well 
towards  the  next  existence  as  towards  the  journey  immedi- 
ately in  view  ;  to  back  up  the  verdict  of  the  astrologer  from 
the  horoscope  with  the  good  wishes  of  the  holy  men  of  the 
monastery ;  and,  above  all,  to  have  a  feast  such  as  generally 
comes  in  somewhere  in  all  Burmese  religious  proceedings,  the 
cultivator  resolves  to  give  away  twenty  baskets  or  so  of  rice 
in  alms  and  presents  to  the  yellow-robed  monks  and  his 
neighbours.  A  special  kind  of  rice  is  always  used  on  these 
occasions.  Englishmen  generally  are  unaware  probably  that 
there  are  a  great  number  of  varieties  of  rice,  and  that  they 
differ  very  much  in  their  flavour.  Most  people  imagine  that 
all  rice  has  the  same  taste  (no  taste,  they  would  probably 
say)  ;  and  distinguish  in  a  rough  material  way  between  Patna 
rice,  which  is  very  small,  and  Rangoon  rice,  which  is  con- 
siderably larger  in  the  grain,  and  finally  Carolina  rice,  which 
is  bigger  than  any  of  them.  A  Rangoon  merchant  would 
go  a  little  farther,  and  say  that  there  are  two  varieties — the 
nga-sein,  which  he  likes  best  and  gets  most  oi,  and  the  nga- 
kyauk,  which  comes  in  more  sparingly.     But  beyond  these — 

263 


264  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

and  they  are  not  the  varieties  most  in  favour  with  the  Burmese 
for  their  own  consumption — there  are  at  least  thirty  different 
kinds.  There  is  the  byat  saba,  the  "tray"  rice,  which  is 
considered  the  best,  but,  like  most  of  the  other  sorts,  will  not 
stand  the  rough  treatment  of  the  steam  mill -stones,  and 
breaks  in  pieces.  Then  there  is  the  myi-she,  which  has  a 
long  awn,  and  the  myi-t6n,  which  has  no  awn  at  all ;  the 
taung-pyan,  "winged  rice,"  and  the  nga-chywe,  "buffalo 
grain "  ;  and  so  on  through  a  long  list,  ending  up  with 
"  black  rice,"  which  is  not  by  any  means  bad  eating.  But  of 
all  the  kinds,  kauk-hnyin,  "  sticky  rice,"  is  the  variety  always 
used  at  the  harvest  feast.  It  is  mixed  with  thin  sliced  cocoa- 
nut,  sesamum  seeds,  ginger,  onions,  and  pepper,  all  stirred 
together  and  well  boiled  ;  and  the  resulting  mess  is  called 
tamane.  The  rice  is  well  named.  It  is  very  emphatically 
sticky,  and  even  when  taken  alone  is  not  very  easily  digested  ; 
but  when  it  comes  in  the  form  of  taman^,  the  result  is  usually 
a  widespread  attack  of  colic  throughout  the  village.  This, 
however,  comes  after  the  festival,  when  the  fun  is  all  over, 
and  does  not  concern  us  in  any  way. 

When  the  farmer  has  made  up  his  mind  as  to  the  day 
on  which  he  is  going  to  have  the  feast — a  date  which,  of 
course,  cannot  be  settled  without  consulting  the  wise  men  of 
the  village  and  much  pondering  over  the  palm-leaf  horoscope 
— he  sends  out  a  few  boys  with  a  number  of  packets  of 
"  pickled  tea  "  to  all  the  young  men  in  the  place,  requesting 
them  to  be  good  enough  to  eat  it  and  to  come  without  fail 
that  night  to  his  homestead  in  order  to  help  him  to  husk  his 
rice  for  the  tamanfe  hto-thi.  A  few  girls  are  also  asked  to 
come  ;  and  they  bring  their  friends  for  the  sake  of  company, 
and  the  mothers  follow  for  the  sake  of  propriety.  Thus  there 
is  quite  a  large  assemblage  at  the  farmer's  when  night  falls 
and  the  business  is  to  commence.  There  is  a  good  deal  of 
preliminary  tea-drinking  and  smoking  of  cheroots  and  chew- 
ing of  betel  and  le'hpet,  and  a  great  deal  of  laughing  and 
talking.  The  girls  profess  to  be  astonished  to  find  so  many 
young  men  there ;  they  had  not  imagined  their  host  was 
meditating  such  extensive  preparations,  and  thought  there 
would  be  nobody  there  but  his  own  and  his  wife's  younger 
brothers.      That  is  exactly  what  they  will  say  next  week 


XXV  A  HARVEST  FEAST  365 

when  they  attend  a  similar  assemblage  at  Htun  Aung's 
house  at  the  other  end  of  the  village. 

But  after  an  hour  or  so  they  settle  down  to  do  a  little 
work.  The  young  men — kalathas,  they  call  themselves — 
"  Corinthians,  lads  of  mettle " — have  brought  with  them  a 
number  of  wooden  mortars,  with  a  heavy  pestle  working  on 
a  lever ;  and  these  they  set  up  and  commence  to  husk  the 
rice.  The  process  is  very  simple.  A  few  handfuls  of  the 
paddy  are  thrown  into  the  mortar,  the  workers  step  off  and 
on  the  lever  which  raises  and  lets  fall  the  solid  wooden 
pestle,  and  the  husk  is  every  now  and  then  blown  out  and 
the  grain  stirred  up  a  little.  The  Burmans  infinitely  prefer 
rice  husked  in  the  national  way  to  that  which  is  sent  out 
from  the  European  steam -mills.  The  big  Derbyshire  or 
composite  stones  do  their  work  only  too  effectually ;  they 
take  off  not  only  the  hard  shell,  but  also  the  inner  cuticle  of 
the  grain,  which  contains  the  chief  flavour ;  and,  moreover, 
the  heat  which  the  steady  grinding  induces,  scorches  out  a 
great  deal  of  what  taste  remains.  Therefore  at  every  house 
there  is  to  be  found  the  primitive  national  apparatus  in 
which  the  girls  of  the  household  every  morning  or  evening 
prepare  the  rice  for  the  day's  consumption.  But  to-night 
they  are  relieved  from  such  hard  work.  The  village  youths 
for  once  in  a  way  exert  themselves ;  and  all  the  girls  have 
to  do  is  to  wash  out  a  few  dishes  and  prepare  the  bamboo- 
lacquered  platters,  the  pyramidal  6k,  in  which  the  tamane  is 
to  be  carried  to  the  yahans  and  the  pagoda  to-morrow,  and 
get  ready  the  palm-leaves  in  which  less  exalted  people  will 
receive  their  modicum  of  the  stew.  The  whole  actual  work 
might  be  finished  in  little  over  an  hour,  but  that  is  the 
intention  neither  of  the  giver  of  alms  nor  of  the  assembled 
young  men  and  maidens.  They  have  come  much  more  for 
merriment  than  for  merit.  Else  why  that  great  pile  of 
le'hpet  ?  For  the  condiment  is  an  anti-soporific,  and  if  you 
take  enough  of  it,  you  will  be  able  to  see  all  through  a  forty- 
eight  hours'  play,  and  give  your  friends  an  outline  of  the  plot 
before  you  lapse  into  a  slumber  lasting  twice  round  the  clock. 

Accordingly,  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  work,  the 
"  prince  "  of  the  local  amateur  dramatic  company  jumps  off 
his  perch,  and  commences  the  "  White  Dove  "  song  from  the 


266  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Zawtagdmma  melodrama,  which  the  old  saya  at  Pegu  has 
just  brought  out,  and  which  is  having  a  tremendous  run  all 
through  the  low  country.     The  song  is  about  the  Saddan 
mere,  the  lake  of  the  Lord  White  Elephant,  where  golden 
lotuses  flower  perpetually,  where  the  gorgeous  yin-dwin  bird 
sails  on  the  silvery  waters,  great  butterflies  flap  about  with 
painted  wings  and  sip  the  nectar  of  the  fabled  Jasmine,  and 
peacocks  stalk  proudly  on  the  jewelled  margin,  while  around 
roam  elephants  white,  red,  and  black  in  happy  security.     The 
singer  has  hardly  finished  when  the  lu-byet,  the  village  jester, 
breaks  in  with  a  travesty  of  the  whole  thing,  mocking  at  the 
tremolos  and  the  lofty  style,  and  taking  off  the  peculiarities 
of  the  singer.      He  went  out  to  a  lake  too,  and  launched  a 
canoe  on  it,  but  he  was  capsized  by  a  huge  creature  that 
came  up  from  below ;  and  then  he  found  that  he  had  got 
into  a  slimy  buffalo  wallow,  out  of  which  he  only  escaped 
after  great  peril  from  the  horns  of  its  three  outraged  owners, 
who  butted  him  under  the  surface  many  times ;  and  at  last, 
when  he  crawled  out,  he  was  so  brown  and  dirty  that  some 
passers-by  took  him  for  a  hermit,  and  gave  him  some  rotten 
plantains  in  alms.     Before  the  "  prince "  has  time  to  show 
any  bad  temper,  a  girl  commences  a  coquettish  ditty,  some- 
what  after  the   fashion   of  the   English  "  Paddle   my  own 
canoe,"  about  a  poor  wife  whose  husband  comes  home  and 
storms  and  growls  and  abuses  because  there  is  no  rice  ready 
cooked,  softens  down  when  he  has  crammed  himself  with 
curry  and  rice,  but  breaks  out  into  grumbling  again  at  night 
because  his  wife  cries  and  will  not  go  to  sleep.    Such  tyranny 
the  young  lady  declares  she  will  never  expose  herself  to,  or 
at  any  rate  "  she'll  be  no  submissive  wife.''     Then  there  are  a 
few  love-songs,  wherein  the  girls  are  compared  with  the  maids 
of  the  palace  in  Mandalay,  and  the  Mandalay  girls  generally 
(who  are  ex  officio  pretty)  with  the  daughters  of  nats,  with 
Madi,  the  model  wife  of  Wethandaya  (the  prince  who  in  his 
next  existence  became  the  Lord  Buddha),  with  flowers  and 
stars  and  gems,  and  whatever  similes  lovers  all  the  world 
over  are  in  the  habit  of  making.     The  swaying  of  the  body 
as   they  walk,  the  turning  in  of  the  elbows,  the  fragrant 
powder  on  their  cheeks  and  necks,  and  a  few  other  items 
which  would  not  commend  themselves  to  a  Western  admirer, 


XXV  A  HARVEST  FEAST  267 

are  recorded  with  enthusiasm  and  delighted  precision  of 
detail ;  and  when  an  hour  or  so  has  been  passed  in  this  way, 
a  little  more  rice-husking  is  done,  and  the  girls  set  to  work 
getting  ready  the  onions  and  sesamum  seed,  and  slicing  up 
the  cocoa-nut  kernels.  This  sort  of  thing  goes  on  all  the 
night  through.  There  is  half  an  hour's  work,  and  then  an 
hour  of  singing  and  story- telling  and  gossip;  about  the 
great  Shinbinthalyaung,  the  gigantic  recumbent  image  of 
Shin  Gautama  dug  up  lately  near  Pegu  ;  of  the  two  min- 
laungs,  the  embryo  kings,  who  have  been  revealed  there,  and 
the  third  one,  who  is  foretold  by  the  old  theit-sa,  the 
prophecy  which  declares  that  he  will  restore  the  ancient 
Talaing  kings  and  revive  religion ;  of  the  new  hti  which  is 
being  set  up  on  the  pagoda  of  the  lotus  tank,  and  its  exceed* 
ing  splendour,  each  single  one  of  the  concentric  rings  having 
been  assigned  as  a  particular  favour  to  one  out  of  many 
competing  districts.  Then  there  is  a  discussion  as  to  the 
new  fashion  of  turbans,  the  one  plain  colour  with  worked 
flowers  on  it,  which  has  supplemented  the  old  thinner  style 
with  more  braid-like  patterns ;  and  the  present  rage  for 
waist-cloths  with  many-coloured  stripes  in  place  of  the  old 
wavy  and  dog's-tooth  fashion.  Then  the  girls  are  rallied 
about  the  method  in  which  they  dress  their  hair — all  of 
them  in  the  style  just  declared  treasonable  in  the  upper 
country.  Queen  Supayalat  has  hit  upon  some  particular 
set,  or  plaiting  of  her  tresses,  which  she  thinks  becomes  her 
very  well,  and  a  royal  order  has  come  out  making  it  penal 
for  any  meaner  damsels  to  adopt  the  same  method.  Conse- 
quently all  the  maidens  from  Taungoo  to  Kyauk-Hpyu  and 
the  A-eng  Pass  to  Malawun  have  made  up  after  the  queenly 
model  and  flatter  themselves  that  it  is  chic.  There  are 
always  ghost  stories  at  these  gatherings,  tales  about  the 
three  farmer  brothers  that  were  killed  just  after  harvest  time 
three  years  ago,  and  now  haunt  the  dense  patch  of  swampy 
jungle  down  by  the  creek  as  nat  seins,  and  sometimes  scare 
the  fishermen  out  of  a  night's  work  by  the  violent  agitation 
of  the  tree-tops  on  a  still  night ;  and  then  there  is  that  old 
hag  in  the  lone  house  at  the  far  end  of  the  village,  who  is 
certainly  a  witch ;  it  must  have  been  she  who  gave  the  old 
sikke  the  tet,  poor  old  man,  and  he  a  paya-taga  too,  founder 


268  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  xxv 

of  the  pagoda  on  the  slope  of  the  "  Brother  and  Sister  Hill  " ; 
and  there  is  little  Ma  Mi ;  the  old  beldam  looked  at  her  over 
the  fence  on  the  fifth  of  last  waning,  and  the  poor  thing  lost 
her  sweetheart  before  the  change  of  the  moon,  and  had  all 
her  fine  false  hair  stolen  only  three  days  ago :  proof  enough 
that  of  the  jettatura. 

It  is  long  past  midnight,  when  all  the  cocks  of  the 
village  crow  together,  deriving  their  knowledge  of  the  exact 
time  from  the  diet  of  burnt  astrological  books,  pecked  at  by 
their  ancestors  long  ago,  when  the  objection  to  cabalistic 
works  was  much  more  violent  than  it  is  nowadays;  and 
sometimes  daylight  is  coming  in,  and  the  sound  of  the 
morning  chant  steals  over  from  the  monastery,  when  the 
party  breaks  up  and  all  go  home.  The  kauk  hnyin  has 
been  all  husked,  and,  mixed  up  with  the  other  ingredients, 
is  simmering  away  over  the  fire.  Every  one  has  a  virtuous 
consciousness  of  having  gained  considerable  kutho  in 
addition  to  having  spent  a  very  agreeable  time.  Few  go 
to  sleep.  They  have  eaten  too  much  le'hpet  for  that,  and 
in  an  hour  or  two  some  of  them  will  be  wanted  again  to 
take  the  tamane  round.  That  is  done  about  eight  o'clock 
in  the  case  of  the  monks.  The  farmer  himself  and  his 
family  carry  it  to  the  monastery  in  the  spire-shaped  lacquer- 
box,  and  having  paid  the  usual  reverence,  deposit  it  before 
the  superior,  who  looks  on  calmly  without  a  word  of  thanks, 
or  even  the  semblance  of  a  recognition,  but  says  before  they 
go,  that  if  they  keep  the  Ten  Precepts  and  live  virtuously, 
they  will  escape  the  Four  States  of  Punishment  and  be 
delivered  from  the  Five  Enemies.  Then  the  "  supporters  " 
wheel  on  the  right,  and  depart  home  to  make  up  the  portions 
for  all  their  friends  and  neighbours.  These  are  usually  taken 
round  by  the  girls,  who  go  in  bevies  of  three  or  four,  dressed 
in  their  finest  clothes  and  with  flowers  in  their  hair,  and 
deliver  the  dainty  with  compliments,  and  injunctions  to  eat 
it  immediately.  By  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  the 
sonorous  wooden  bell  of  the  monastery  is  summoning  in  all 
the  scholars,  the  entire  village  is  asleep  ;  and  they  do  not  get 
up  very  early  next  morning.  Nobody  in  the  whole  place  has 
been  drunk  ;  and  if  there  is  an  opium-eater  in  the  village,  he 
was  not  asked  to  the  feast  and  had  none  of  the  taman^. 


CHAPTER    XXVI 

SILK -GROWING 

Rearing  silkworms,  though  a  very  profitable  occupation,  is 
not  looked  upon  with  any  favour  in  Burma.  To  get  the  silk 
the  pupa  must  be  killed ;  and  the  taking  of  life  in  any  form 
is  an  impiety  always  looked  upon  with  great  horror  by  all 
good  Buddhists.  Silk-growers  are  classed  together  with 
professional  hunters  and  fishermen.  The  Four  States  of 
Punishment  yawn  for  them,  and  their  portion  will  be  in  the 
lowest  abyss  of  the  lowest  hell.  Still  there  are  colonies  of 
silk-growers  in  various  parts  of  the  country ;  but  they  live 
apart  from  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants  as  a  rule,  and  often 
have  entire  villages  to  themselves.  Colonel  Horace  Browne 
who,  more  than  any  other  Englishman  took  an  interest  in 
the  ways  and  occupations  of  the  districts  under  his  charge, 
states  that  the  cultivators  near  Prome,  where  more  silk  is 
produced  than  in  any  part  of  Burma,  are  nearly  all  Yabeins 
- — a  race  of  the  same  stock  as  the  Burmese,  but  despised  by 
them  independently  of  their  crime  in  the  way  of  habitually 
taking  animal  life.  So  much  has  the  cultivation  of  silk 
become  identified  with  them,  that  to  Burman  ears  the  term 
Yabein  is  virtually  synonymous  with  that  of  silk-grower. 
They  usually  live  on  the  hillsides,  occupying  themselves  like 
the  poorer  Burmans  and  Karens,  with  taung-ya  cultivation ; 
burning  the  forests  on  the  slopes  and  sowing  the  ground  thus 
enriched  with  the  wood  ashes,  with  rice,  cotton,  or  oil-seed. 
The  system  is  viewed  with  very  little  approval  by  the  govern- 
ment officials,  for  the  taung-ya  soil,  hardly  exhausted  by  the 
single  crop  raised  off  it,  immediately  produces  a  dense  shrub- 
growth  of  no  use  to  anybody,  certainly  not  to  the  foresters. 

269 


^^o  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Silk-raising  is  therefore  encouraged  as  a  means  of  stopping 
the  ruination  of  the  timber.  It  is  a  very  simple  matter,  in- 
volving the  least  possible  amount  of  toil,  and  at  the  same 
time  being  on  the  whole  very  profitable.  Moreover,  the 
Burmese  mulberry-bush,  which  is  quite  distinct  from  the 
ordinary  Morus  Indica,  does  not  grow  well  on  the  alluvial 
soil  of  the  low  lands,  while  it  flourishes  on  the  hillsides, 
where  the  Yabeins  mostly  live.  The  silk  obtained  from  the 
caterpillars  fed  on  the  leaves  of  the  hill-shrubs  is  very  much 
better  than  that  obtained  from  the  mulberry-bushes  of  the 
plains.  Thus  it  happens  that  all  parties  are  likely  to  be 
pleased.  The  English  Government  foresters  will  gradually 
find  means  of  putting  an  end  to  the  timber-burning,  which 
they  detest ;  the  richer  Burmans  down  in  the  lowlands  will 
neither  have  the  temptation  to  increase  their  income  at  the 
expense  of  their  piety,  nor  will  they  have  that  piety  shocked 
by  an  organised  system  of  taking  life  ;  while  the  Yabeins  in 
their  own  hill-villages  will  be  allowed  to  do  as  they  please, 
and  will  accumulate  tidy  sums  of  money  into  the  bargain. 

It  is  certain  that  neither  the  silkworm  nor  the  mulberry- 
bush  is  indigenous  in  Burma.  It  is  said  that  the  first 
cocoons  were  brought  from  China  in  the  reign  of  King 
Anawrata  Saw.  Others  again  maintain  that  the  Chinese 
taught  the  Shans,  the  Shans  the  Karens,  and  these  the 
Burmese.  In  some  places  among  the  more  superstitious 
hill-tribes  the  mulberry-tree  receives  a  kind  of  worship.  In 
any  case  it  is  more  probable  that  both  the  silkworm  and  the 
tree  were  introduced  from  Western  China,  down  the  valley 
of  the  Irrawaddy  or  the  Salween,  than  that  they  came  over 
the  hills,  through  turbulent  mountaineers,  from  India.  The 
shrub  does  not  grow  much  more  than  ten  feet  high,  and 
seldom  produces  good  succulent  leaves  for  a  longer  period 
than  three  years.  After  that  the  plants  are  apt  to  get  coarse 
and  stringy,  and  the  cultivators  ordinarily  abandon  the  plant- 
ation, or  root  out  the  bushes  and  plant  new  ones.  As  the 
shrub  will  not  flower  it  is  propagated  by  cuttings,  and  new 
shoots  are  constantly  being  planted  so  that  there  may  be  an 
unfailing  supply  of  young  and  fresh  leaves.  The  Burmans 
call  it  the  posabin,  "the  tree  the  silkworms  eat."  There  is 
another  tree — that  from  the  bark  of  which  the  coarse  paper 


SILK-GROWING  271 


used  for  the  para-baik,  or  note-books,  is  got — the  leaves  of 
which  the  caterpillars  will  eat ;  but  the  silk  thus  obtained  is 
much  coarser,  and  recourse  is  had  therefore  to  the  mahlaing- 
bin  only  when  the  mulberry-bushes  give  out.  In  any  case, 
however,  it  is  undeniable  that,  as  yet,  the  silk  produced  in 
Burma  is  of  a  very  inferior  kind.  It  is  rough  and  coarse ; 
but  it  is  all  the  better  suited  for  the  strong  lungyis  and 
pasos  in  use  for  ordinary  every-day  wear  among  the  people, 
the  finer  fabrics  all  coming  from  China  or  Manchester. 

The  whole  process  of  growing  the  silk  is  of  the  simplest 
possible  character,  and  is  exactly  suited  to  indolent  people  who 
have  no  conscientious  objections  to  the  killing  of  the  pupae. 
Silk  can,  indeed,  be  spun  from  the  cocoons,  out  of  which 
the  moths  have  escaped  ;  but  it  is  very  much  coarser  even 
than  the  ordinary  silk,  and  commands  somewhat  less  than 
half  the  price.  Except  the  occasional  trouble  of  strolling 
out  for  a  few  leaves,  there  is  almost  nothing  to  be  done  ; 
and  the  whole  operations  are  carried  on  in  the  rickety  bamboo 
hut  of  the  cultivator,  within  a  yard  or  two  of  the  place  where 
his  food  is  cooked.  The  caterpillars  do  not  seem  to  care 
a  bit  for  the  smoke  or  the  dirt ;  and  the  pupae  are  equally 
callous  to  the  fumes  of  tobacco  which  circle  about  them  con- 
stantly during  the  few  days  that  remain  to  them  before  they 
are  stewed.  The  female  moths  are  placed  upon  pieces  of 
coarse  cloth,  with  palm-leaf  lids  put  over  them.  The  eggs 
stick  to  the  cloth,  and  form  a  compact  little  circle.  A  day 
or  two  over  a  week  suffices  to  produce  the  larvae,  and  these 
are  then  thrown  upon  flat  trays,  made  of  strips  of  bamboo 
plaited  closely  together,  and  guarded  by  a  slightly  raised 
edge.  For  four  or  five  days  the  little  caterpillars  are  fed  on 
finely-chopped  mulberry-leaves,  the  tenderest  that  can  be 
found.  After  that  they  change  their  skins,  and,  beyond 
getting  plenty  of  leaves,  do  not  receive  much  attention. 
They  are  sturdy  creatures,  and  they  would  need  to  be,  for 
they  are  often  very  roughly  treated.  The  trays  are  scarcely 
ever  cleaned,  and  if  the  larvae  are  to  be  shifted  from  one 
tray  to  another,  they  are  scraped  up  in  handfuls  and  thrown 
down  as  if  they  were  so  many  chips  of  wood.  Gauze  or 
mosquito  netting  is  usually  thrown  over  the  trays  to  keep 
away  the  ichneumon  flies,  which  otherwise  would   deposit 


272  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

their  eggs  in  the  silkworm's  back  and  kill  him.  In  about  a 
month's  time  the  caterpillar  is  full  grown.  He  is  then 
bundled  into  a  fresh  tray,  in  which  there  lies,  wound  about 
in  the  form  of  a  spiral,  a  narrow-plaited  bamboo  strip.  The 
ripe  larvae  are  thrown  into  this  with  as  little  ceremony  as  if 
they  were  pebbles.  In  about  a  day's  time  they  have  spun 
their  cocoons,  fastening  them  to  the  strips  of  bamboo.  These 
are  torn  off  and  kept  in  baskets  for  a  day  or  two,  when  a 
pot  with  water  in  it  is  filled  with  the  pupae,  and  then  set  to 
simmer  over  a  slow  wood  fire. 

From  a  triangle  over  the  pot  is  suspended  a  small  bamboo 
reel,  and  down  below,  near  the  pot,  is  a  wooden  cylinder. 
The  reeler  is  usually  a  girl.  She  fishes  about  for  a  time  in 
the  simmering  vessel,  and,  catching  a  few  threads  of  silk, 
passes  them  over  the  reel  and  down  to  the  cylinder,  to  which 
they  are  fastened.  She  then  turns  the  handle  of  the  cylinder, 
winding  on  the  silk,  and  at  the  same  time  constantly  fishing 
up  and  fastening  on  new  filaments,  which  she  does  by  means 
of  a  light  bamboo  double-pronged  fork.  Not  the  least 
trouble  is  taken  to  keep  the  silk  clean.  Any  rubbish  that 
may  be  floating  on  the  surface  of  the  water  is  wound  on  to 
the  cylinder  without  an  attempt  being  made  to  disengage  it. 
When  all  the  silk  has  been  got  off  the  cocoons,  and  wound 
on  to  the  cylinder,  the  pupse  are  taken  out  of  the  water  and 
fried  in  oil  to  furnish  a  dish  for  the  family  dinner.  They 
are  not  by  any  means  unpleasant,  tasting,  barring  the  oil, 
very  much  like  roasted  chestnuts  ;  and  indeed  the  dish  is 
considered  a  great  dainty. 

The  silk-growers  mostly  sell  their  silk.  A  loom  is  to  be 
found  in  almost  every  Burman's  house  in  the  country ;  and 
in  Prome  and  Shwe-daung,  as  being  close  to  the  place  where 
the  silk  is  produced,  great  quantities  of  articles  of  dress  are 
made  for  sale.  The  native-grown  silk  is  only  used  for  every- 
day clothes  of  simple  patterns,  the  more  elaborate  being  all 
worked  from  imported  Chinese  silk.  The  silk  is  bought 
raw,  the  separate  filaments  twisted  into  a  thread  by  means 
of  a  wheel,  and  then  made  up  into  hanks  ;  these  are  boiled 
in  soap  and  water,  and  are  then  ready  for  the  dye.  The 
commonest  colours  are  green,  yellow,  orange,  different  shades 
of  red   and  light  blue  ;    black   and  dark   blue  are  only  in 


SILK-GROWING  273 


favour  with  the  Shans.  The  dyes  are  obtained  from  various 
jungle  seeds,  roots,  flowers,  leaves,  and  barks ;  the  yellow 
dye  obtained  from  the  wood  of  the  Jack-tree  [Artocarpus 
integrifolid)  being  reserved  for  the  monkish  robes.  After 
being  dyed,  the  thread  is  unwound  again.  The  weaving 
machine  is  very  much  like  the  old  hand-loom  still  occa- 
sionally seen  in  out-of-the-way  parts  of  England.  The 
operators  are  almost  always  young  women,  and  they  are 
very  clever  at  working  the  treadle  and  shooting  through  the 
shuttle,  while  talking  all  the  time  to  village  gossips  or  admir- 
ing swains.  Some  of  the  tameins,  made  for  the  richer 
women,  are  extremely  intricate  in  pattern  and  require 
between  twenty  and  thirty  shuttles.  The  treadle  raises 
and  lowers  the  alternate  threads  of  the  warp.  Except  the 
rough  dresses  and  the  most  complicated  in  pattern,  how- 
ever, not  many  native-made  clothes  are  worn  now.  The 
townspeople  prefer  the  showy  and  cheaper  imported  articles, 
and,  though  the  Manchester  goods  are  too  frequently 
"  doctored  "  and  do  not  last  long,  yet  this  does  not  trouble 
the  Burman  much,  for  he  is  fond  of  a  change  of  dress,  and, 
unless  he  is  very  poor,  will  never  wear  a  paso,  except  about 
the  house,  after  it  has  been  washed.  All  the  more  elaborate 
designs  are,  however,  native  made.  The  "  dog's  tooth " 
pattern  is  almost  confined  to  Amarapura  or  Sagaing  court 
looms,  and  since  the  fall  of  the  monarchy  is  hardly  seen  at 
all.  The  acheit  paso  or  tamein,  of  a  complicated,  wavy, 
sprigged  design,  which  middle-aged  Burmans  remember  as 
being  the  cherished  object  of  desire  of  their  young  days,  is 
now  considered  rustic.  Young  Rangoon  will  tell  you  that 
you  may  always  know  a  taw-tha  (a  jungle  wallah)  at  the 
pagoda  feast  by  his  wearing  an  acheit  paso  and  nothing 
else  except  his  turban  ;  and  although  the  waist-cloth  may 
cost  from  1 5  o  to  400  rupees,  that  does  not  redeem  it  in  the 
town-bred  youth's  eyes. 


CHAPTER   XXVII 

LACQUER   WARE 

For  a  long  time  it  was  assumed  that  Japanese  and  Chinese 
lacquered  goods  were  simply  papier -mach6.  A  popular 
fancy  for  the  ware  has  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  all  who 
care  for  the  information  that  it  is  really  wood  of  different 
kinds  painted  over  with  the  juice  of  the  urushi  tree.  Should 
fashion  ever  inspire  a  similar  enthusiasm  for  Burmese  pro- 
ductions of  the  same  kind,  it  is  probable  that  it  may  be 
supposed'  that  these  also  are  composed  of  solid  wood,  and 
people  will  wonder  at  the  extreme  thinness  and  flexibility 
of  the  finer  specimens.  But  it  is  only  the  coarsest  ware 
which  is  thus  produced.  All  the  better  boxes  and  cups  are 
made  of  a  woven  basket-work  of  strips  of  bamboo ;  the 
varnish  used  on  them  is,  like  the  Japanese  lacquer,  the  sap 
obtained  from  the  stem  of  a  tree,  and  has  nothing  what- 
ever to  do  with  the  insect -produced  lac,  such  as  English 
varnishers  employ  in  solution  with  alcohol.  I  am  not 
botanist  enough  to  know  whether  the  urushi  {Rhus  vernici- 
ferd),  the  Japanese  tree,  is  identical  with  the  Burman  thi'si 
{Melanorrhcea  usitatissimd),  or  even  whether  it  is  of  the 
same  genus  or  order.  Thi'si  (literally  wood-oil)  is  dark  in 
colour  from  the  moment  it  is  gathered,  whereas  the  urushi 
sap  is  described  as  being  light  yellow  when  first  extracted, 
and  only  turning  black  after  considerable  exposure  to  the 
air.  The  urushi  has  been  cultivated  by  royal  order  for 
hundreds  of  years  in  Japan  ;  but  in  Burma,  though  the  Forest 
Department  declares  the  thi'si  a  reserved  tree,  there  is  no 
attempt  at  organised  cultivation,  and  the  thi'si-bin  grows 
wild  in  the  jungle.      Not  even  near  Nyaung-u,  where  nearly 

274 


CHAP.  XXVII  LACQUER   WARE  275 

every  household  in  the  town  is  occupied  in  the  trade,  is 
there  any  attempt  at  regular  planting  of  nurseries.  Never- 
theless it  is  plentiful  enough,  and  affords  a  magnificent 
spectacle  when  it  is  in  flower — a  huge  forest  tree  covered  so 
thickly  with  creamy-white  blossoms  that  the  leaves  cannot 
be  seen.  The  flowers  have  a  fragrant  scent  not  unlike  that 
of  apples,  and  the  needy  and  practical  Burman  often  makes 
a  very  acceptable  curry  of  the  buds.  In  full-grown  trees 
the  average  height  to  the  first  branch  is  thirty  feet,  and 
the  ordinary  girth  six  feet  from  the  ground  is  nine  feet. 
Charcoal-burners  have  a  predilection  for  the  wood,  which 
would  not  meet  with  approval  in  Japan  ;  and  it  is  much 
used  for  anchors  and  tool-helves,  being  very  close  and  fine- 
grained. It  is  too  heavy  to  float  when  green,  but  dried  it 
is  not  particularly  weighty.  The  sap  may  be  collected  at 
all  times,  except  when  the  fruit  is  on  the  trees,  from  Pyatho 
to  Tabaung — the  first  three  months  of  the  English  year. 
Then  it  is  thin  and  does  not  produce  such  a  brilliant  polish. 
The  mode  of  collection  is  simple  enough.  Incisions  are 
made  in  the  stem,  and  the  sap  trickles  into  bamboos  placed 
to  catch  it.  When  it  is  to  be  kept  any  time  there  must  be 
a  depth  of  two  or  three  inches  of  water  on  the  top,  other- 
wise it  would  dry  up  and  become  solid.  The  water,  how- 
ever, does  not  improve  it.  The  best  varnish,  called  thi'si 
ayaungtin,  is  that  which  has  been  just  drawn  from  the  tree ; 
the  second  quality  contains  twenty-five  per  cent  of  water, 
the  inferior  as  much  as  fifty. 

The  articles  lacquered  are  chiefly  drinking- cups  and 
betel-boxes,  the  latter  consisting  of  a  cylindrical  inner  case, 
in  which  are  fitted  two  or  three  trays  for  holding  the  lime, 
betel-vine  leaves,  cutch,  nuts,  and  other  ingredients  for  betel- 
chewing,  the  whole  covered  by  an  outer  lid  reaching  to  the 
bottom  of  the  inner  case.  Ordinary  k6n-it,  betel-boxes,  are 
three  or  four  inches  high  and  two  and  a  half  to  three  in 
diameter.  Articles  of  the  same  shape  are  made  of  all  sizes 
up  to  a  couple  of  feet  or  more  in  height,  these  last  being 
used  for  holding  clothes  and  women's  working  materials. 
The  bi-it,  ladies'  toilet-boxes,  are  often  the  most  delicate 
and  carefully  worked.  The  actresses  always  carry  splendid 
specimens  about  with  them  to  contain  their  combs,  oil,  scent. 


276  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  white  lead  and  thana'kha  for  the  complexion,  and  a  few 
tresses  of  false  hair.  Other  articles  are  the  pyramidal  tamin- 
sa-6k,  used  for  carrying  food  to  the  monasteries  and  the 
pagodas,  fashioned  somewhat  in  the  style  of  the  sacred 
spires,  of  five  or  seven  roofs,  and  of  all  sizes  from  eighteen 
inches  to  the  huge  things,  the  height  of  a  man,  which  the 
king  sent  under  the  royal  umbrellas  to  the  Arakan  pagoda 
in  Mandalay.  Byat,  platters  of  all  sizes,  up  to  the  gigantic 
circular  tray  as  big  as  a  small  table,  used  for  dishing  up 
the  family  dinner,  are  always  made  of  wood,  like  the  Japan 
ware.  The  people  do  not  think  much  of  them,  and  they 
are  therefore  almost  always  quite  plain,  either  black  or 
red.  There  is  no  inferiority  to  the  Japanese  in  capacity 
for  sketching  fantastic  designs.  The  future  may  see  great 
developments  in  this  branch  of  the  art,  but  at  present  it  is 
practically  untouched.  It  is  unfortunate  that  enterprise  so 
far  has  taken  the  form  of  making  "  peg  "  tumblers  and  cigar- 
cases  instead  of  developing  national  forms. 

The  process  of  manufacture  is  as  follows  :  Little  basket- 
like boxes  of  the  required  shape  and  size  are  woven  of  fine 
bamboo  wicker-work,  upon  round  chucks  of  wood  prepared 
and  firmly  fixed  for  the  purpose.  The  bamboos  used,  which 
are  usually  split  and  cleaned  by  the  women  and  children, 
are  of  different  kinds,  that  called  myinwa  being  the  most 
highly  esteemed.  Similarly,  the  yet,  or  woven  basket-work, 
is  of  different  degrees  of  excellence,  the  kyaungleinyet 
being  the  finest.  Some  of  the  Shans  and  better  workmen 
at  Nyaung-u  are  celebrated  for  the  delicacy  of  their  work. 
On  this  is  then  evenly  applied  with  the  hand  (so  that  the 
slightest  particle  of  sand  or  dirt  may  be  at  once  detected)  a 
coat  of  the  pure  wood-oil.  This  is  then  put  away  to  dry — 
not  in  the  sun,  which  is  apt  to  pucker  and  blister  it,  but  in 
a  cool  airy  place.  Some  careful  workmen  have  often  an 
underground  room  prepared  specially  for  the  purpose.  After 
three  days  it  is  quite  dry  and  hard,  and  is  then  liberally  and 
evenly  covered  over  with  a  paste  called  thayo.  This  is 
made  in  a  variety  of  ways,  the  commonest  being  a  mixture 
of  finely-sifted  teak  sawdust,  thi'si,  and  rice-water.  But 
instead  of  the  sawdust,  or  often  mixed  with  it,  finely-ground 
bone-ash,  or  paddy-husk  burnt  and  strained  through  a  cloth, 


xxvn  LACQUER  WARE  277 

is  kneaded  in.  In  the  coarse,  common  articles  for  every- 
day use,  tempered  clay  and  some  other  materials  are  often 
used ;  but  this  being  thicker  and  less  putty-like,  is  apt  to 
scale  and  come  off  in  flakes,  especially  if  at  all  roughly 
used.  This  thayo  is  allowed  to  dry  quite  hard,  and  the  box 
is  then  fastened  to  a  rude  lathe,  which  is  turned  with  one 
hand,  while  the  other  is  employed  in  polishing  the  box. 
This  smoothing-down  is  effected  with  sifted  ashes,  or  some- 
times with  a  piece  of  silicious  bamboo,  which  is  as  good  as 
fine  sand-paper.  When  this  is  done  the  box  is  ready  for  a 
fresh  coat,  which  almost  invariably  consists  of  a  mixture  of 
finely-powdered  bone-ashes  and  thi'si.  This,  after  drying, 
is  polished  in  the  same  way  as  before.  We  have  now  a 
box  of  a  brilliant  glossy  black,  in  itself  very  pretty  and  fit 
for  use  anywhere.  But  this  is  only  the  end  of  the  first 
stage ;  none  but  the  byat  and  common  wooden  platters  are 
left  in  this  state. 

The  ground  colour  of  the  great  majority  of  the  boxes 
and  cups  is  red ;  but  some  of  the  black  wood-oil  is  required 
to  rise  through  it  and  define  the  pattern.  This  is  effected 
in  a  most  ingenious  way.  The  black  box  is  put  on  the 
lathe  again  and  turned  round,  while  the  lines  and  spots,  and 
the  form  of  the  black  pattern  generally,  is  sketched  on  with 
a  sut,  or  split  stile,  charged  with  thi'si.  The  drawer  has  no 
guide  but  his  eye.  There  is  no  preliminary  mapping  out, 
yet  a  practised  hand  will  never  make  a  mistake  and  spoil 
a  box.  The  fresh  thi'si  thus  put  on  stands  up  above  the 
general  level  of  the  surface.  The  whole  box  is  now  covered 
with  red  paint ;  and  when  this  is  dry  the  box  is  put  on 
the  lathe  again,  and  the  operator  turns  it  round  and  rubs 
it  steadily  with  ashes.  By  this  means  the  red  paint  is 
removed  where  the  lines  of  thi'si  rise  above  the  general 
surface,  and  the  black  pattern  stands  out  clearly  on  the  red 
ground.  A  quaint  chequer-work  is  also  always  produced, 
where  the  slightly  projecting  edges  of  the  bamboo  wicker- 
work  raise  the  black  wood-oil  through  the  vermilion  layer. 
Still,  however,  it  is  not  finished.  No  box  is  complete  with- 
out three  colours ;  and  this  last  shade  is  applied  in  an 
equally  simple  and  effective  way.  The  desired  pattern  is 
incised  with  a   graving-tool   called  a   kauk — often  nothing 


278  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

more  elaborate  than  a  pin  firmly  tied  to  a  piece  of  stick. 
Then  the  whole  box  is  coated  over  with  the  new  colour, 
and  this  is  in  its  turn  polished  off  on  the  lathe  till  nothing 
remains  but  the  lines  of  the  engraved  pattern.  If  another 
colour  is  required,  a  similar  process  is  gone  through. 

When  the  design  is  complete,  a  clear  varnish  of  another 
vegetable  oil,  called  shansi,  with  a  dash  of  thi'si  in  it,  is 
applied  all  over  as  a  last  touch,  unless  indeed  a  very  high 
polish  is  required.  This  is  effected  by  rubbing  gently  with 
the  powdered  petrified  wood  found  so  useful  in  imparting 
a  gloss  to  the  alabaster  images.  The  patterns  are  none  of 
them  very  intricate,  and  are  handed  down  as  heirlooms 
from  father  to  son,  so  that  the  same  family  will  have  all  its 
ware  made  on  a  few  clearly-defined  models,  and  there  is  no 
fear  of  "  spoiling  a  set."  The  invention  does  not  as  yet  soar 
beyond  scroll-work  and  line-figures  of  infinite  variety ;  but 
should  a  foreign  demand  spring  up  there  would  be  no  lack 
of  skill  to  meet  it ;  just  as  the  Rangoon  tattooers  have 
taken  to  copying  pictures  out  of  the  Graphic  on  English 
sailors'  breasts. 

The  supreme  test  of  excellence  in  the  manufacture  is 
when  the  sides  will  bend  in  till  they  touch  without  cracking 
the  varnish  or  breaking  the  wicker-work.  Connoisseurs  can 
discriminate  between  Shan,  Nyaung-u,  and  the  ware  of 
other  places,  by  the  shadow  thrown  on  the  inside  (which  is 
varnished  plain  red  or  black),  when  the  cup  or  circular  box 
is  held  at  an  angle  of  forty-five.  Three  colours  only  are 
used  besides  the  black  groundwork ;  but  variety  is  pro- 
duced by  graduating  their  intensity  of  shade.  They  are  red, 
green,  and  yellow.  Red  is  prepared  from  finely-ground 
vermilion  mixed  with  shansi.  The  Nyaung-u  people  prefer 
a  vermilion  called  hinthapadi  ywfe,  prepared  by  themselves, 
to  that  procured  from  China  and  used  elsewhere.  The 
home-made  stuff  seems  to  be  much  brighter  in  tint.  Myeni, 
red  ochre,  is  used  only  with  the  coarsest  work.  For  yellow, 
yellow  orpiment  is  ground  down  and  washed  several  times 
until  a  pure,  impalpable  powder  remains.  This  is  mixed 
with  a  pellucid  gum,  and  when  required  for  use,  worked  up 
with  shansi.  Green  is  obtained  by  adding  finely- ground 
indigo   to   the  yellow  orpiment   until   the   required   tint   is 


LACQUER  WARE  279 


obtained.      Red   and  yellow  are,  however,   always  the  pre- 
dominating colours. 

The  thi'si  is  turned  to  a  variety  of  other  uses  besides 
the  manufacture  of  lacquer-work  ;  applied  to  wood,  or  to 
marble  and  clay  images,  it  enables  them  readily  to  take 
on  gilding.  It  is  used  as  a  waterproof  varnish  to  all  the 
umbrellas  in  the  country,  and  makes  them  as  impervious  to 
rain  as  if  they  were  made  of  wood,  while  it  protects  the 
palm-leaf  against  the  rays  of  the  sun,  which  otherwise  would 
burn  it  as  brittle  as  an  egg-shell.  All  the  racing  and  war- 
boats  in  Burma  are  painted  with  it,  and  the  best  caulking 
in  the  world  could  not  make  them  more  water-tight. 
Finally,  boiled  down  thick  it  furnishes  the  material  for 
delineating  the  square  heavy  characters  of  the  sacred 
kammawa-sa,  the  ritual  for  the  admission  of  brethren  to 
the  sacred  order. 

The  oil  is  usually  put  in  the  sun  for  a  short  time  before 
being  used,  and  it  is  at  first  of  a  light  brown  colour,  soon 
darkening  into  a  brilliant  black.  It  seems  to  be  of  a  par- 
ticularly mordant  character,  and  raises  huge  blisters  on  the 
hands  of  some  people,  leaving  marks  of  the  ashy  -  white 
colour  suggestive  of  leprosy.  Hence  strangers  suspected  of 
being  afflicted  with  the  terrible  malady  always  declare  they 
are  thi'si  workers ;  and  many  people  avoid  these  latter,  in 
case  they  might  find  they  had  been  holding  communication 
with  an  outcast.  A  lotion  composed  of  fine  teak-wood  saw- 
dust, mixed  with  a  little  water,  is  used  as  a  cure  for  blains. 
Many  of  the  workmen  periodically  swallow  small  doses  of 
the  wood-oil,  under  the  impression  that  it  acts  as  a  preven- 
tive. The  capriciousness  with  which  the  varnish  acts, 
leaving  some  men  quite  unharmed  and  punishing  others 
severely,  has  given  rise  to  a  proverb  in  Nyaung-u  : — 


Thi'si  is  a  witness 

To  a  burgher's  fitness  ; 

If  bad,  he's  marked  an  outcast ; 

If  good,  not  long  can  doubt  last. 


CHAPTER    XXVIII 

NGAPI 

There  are  few  articles  of  food  which  meet  with  more 
energetic  denunciation  than  the  favourite  Burman  condi- 
ment, ngapi,  which  means  literally  pressed  fish.  The  frogs 
of  France,  the  rats  and  puppy  dogs  of  China,  the  diseased 
liver  of  the  Strasburg  pdtes,  the  "  ripe "  cheeses  of  most 
European  countries,  and  the  peculiar  character  of  game  in 
England,  with  its  occasional  garniture  of  "  rice,"  all  meet 
with  condemnation  from  those  who  dislike  such  dainties. 
The  smell  of  ngapi  is  certainly  not  charming  to  an  unedu- 
cated nose,  but  the  Backsteiner  or  Limburger  cheese  of 
Southern  Germany  is  equally  ill-calculated  to  evoke  appro- 
bation on  a  first  experience.  An  old  herring  barrel  smells 
strong,  but  there  is  nothing  in  nature  that  more  than  ngapi 
hath  an  ancient  and  a  fish -like  smell.  Travellers  on  the 
steamers  of  the  Irrawaddy  Flotilla  Company  are  wont  to  rail 
in  no  measured  terms  at  the  fish -paste  which  forms  an 
invariable  and  obtrusively  evident  part  of  the  cargo,  yet  no 
Burman  would  think  a  dinner  complete  without  his  modicum 
of  ngapi,  and  it  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  one  form  of  the 
condiment  is  of  frequent  appearance  on  English  dinner- 
tables  in  the  East,  under  the  name  of  balachong,  a  term 
borrowed  from  the  Straits  Settlements,  but  which  designates 
nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  specially  prepared  variety  of 
ngapi.  In  the  same  way  there  are  equally  various  opinions 
with  regard  to  the  celebrated  Durian,  a  fruit  found  as 
abundantly  in  the  Tenasserim  province  as  in  the  islands  of 
the  East  Indian  Archipelago,  and  equally  highly  prized  by 
Burmans.      Some  Englishmen  will  tell  you  that  \he.  flavour 

280 


CHAP,  xxviii  NGAPI  281 


and  the  odour  of  the  fruit  may  be  realised  by  eating  a 
"  garlic  custard "  over  a  London  sewer ;  others  will  be  no 
less  positive  in  their  perception  of  blendings  of  sherry,  noyau, 
delicious  custards,  and  the  nectar  of  the  gods,  while  a  some- 
what objectionable  smell  is  regarded  as  doing  no  more  than 
suggest,  or  recall,  a  delightful  sensation.  I  am  not  aware 
that  any  Englishman  has  been  equally  enthusiastic  with 
regard  to  balachong,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  ngapi  seinsa 
["  raw-eaten  fish-paste,"  so  called  because  it  is  fit  for  con- 
sumption without  being  cooked]  is  identical  with  this  much- 
used  substitute  for  anchovy  sauce,  and  is  often  brought 
direct  from  the  Burman  bazaar  by  Madrasi  butlers,  who 
declare  it  has  come  all  the  way  from  Penang,  and  charge 
correspondingly. 

Of  ngapi  there  are  three  main  kinds  —  ngapi  gaung, 
taung-tha  ngapi,  and  ngapi  seinsa.  Each  of  these  has 
its  special  varieties,  getting  their  names  from  the  township 
where  they  are  prepared,  or  from  the  species  of  fish  used 
in  their  manufacture. 

Ngapi  gaung,  or  whole  ngapi,  is  the  most  prized  and 
the  highest  in  price.  That  made  at  the  village  of  Payagyi, 
in  the  Angyi  circle,  not  far  from  Rangoon,  is  celebrated 
from  the  rocky  promontory  of  Modain,  with  its  golden 
pagoda,  to  the  barren  solitudes  of  Mogaung,  the  Burmese 
Siberia.  It  may  be  made  from  any  kind  of  fish,  but  the 
varieties  preferred  are  the  nga-ku,  an  amphibious,  slimy  fish, 
found  in  ponds  and  ditches  wherever  there  is  plenty  of  mud, 
and  something  under  a  foot  and  a  half  in  length ;  and  the 
nga-gyi,  a  fish  very  similar  in  general  appearance  and  size, 
but  called  by  the  English  the  scorpion-fish,  and  very  much 
dreaded  for  the  wounds  it  causes  with  the  pectoral  spines. 
The  great  object  in  the  preparation  is  to  keep  the  fish  quite 
whole,  not  so  easy  a  matter  as  would  at  first  appear.  The 
process  is  as  follows  :  A  great  mass  of  the  fish,  some  of  them 
only  half  dead,  are  thrown  together  into  a  big  wooden 
mortar,  and  a  man  stands  over  them  and  works  about  with 
a  curious  cleaner  made  of  a  bamboo,  the  end  of  which  has 
been  slit  and  frayed  into  a  kind  of  stiff  brush.  By  this 
means  it  is  surprising  how  soon  the  fish  are  scaled,  and  how 
effectively  it  is  done.      The  larger  specimens  are,  however, 


282  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

almost  always  cleaned  by  hand,  the  shoulder  fins  and  the 
tail  being  also  removed.  They  are  then  thoroughly  rubbed 
with  salt  and  tightly  packed  in  bamboo  baskets,  each  of 
which  is  well  weighted  down.  They  are  thus  left  for  from 
twelve  to  twenty- four  hours,  the  superfluous  juices  of  the 
fish  straining  out  at  the  bottom.  Then  they  are  cautiously 
taken  out  one  by  one,  well  rubbed  with  salt  again,  and  laid 
out  on  a  mat  in  the  sun  to  dry.  On  the  second  day  they 
are  equally  carefully  packed  away  in  huge  earthenware  jars 
with  abundance  of  salt  between  the  layers  of  fish.  These 
jars  are  then  put  away — no  easy  matter  with  some  of  them, 
which  might  have  served  to  conceal  the  forty  thieves  of  the 
Arabian  Nights — in  as  shady  and  cool  a  place  as  can  be 
found.  Gradually  the  liquid  rises  to  the  surface  and  eva- 
porates by  degrees,  leaving  a  layer  of  solid  salt  on  the  top. 
Sometimes  this  fish-brine  becomes  alive  with  maggots,  when 
the  fish  have  not  been  sufficiently  pressed,  or  have  not  had 
enough  sun.  When  this  occurs  the  liquid  is  drawn  off  the 
top  and  more  salt  is  added,  but  in  no  case  are  any  of  the 
fish  rejected.  Usually  the  fish  are-  ready  for  the  market  in 
a  month's  time,  and  will  keep  as  long  as  may  be  wanted. 
They  are  eaten  roasted,  or  fried  somewhat  in  the  same  way 
as  the  "  Bombay  ducks,"  well  known  to  the  Anglo-Indian 
gourmand  ;  sometimes  also  they  are  made  into  curries,  the 
cook  taking  as  great  care  as  the  manufacturer  to  keep  them 
quite  whole.  The  salt  used  is  in  many  places,  such,  for 
example,  as  the  Angyi  township,  made  on  the  spot.  The 
soil  there  is  strongly  impregnated  with  salt.  Water  is  run 
through  it  after  the  ground  has  been  ploughed.  The  water 
is  then  collected  in  a  tank,  whence  it  is  taken  to  pots,  placed 
over  furnaces,  and  evaporated  to  dryness,  and  the  salt  ob- 
tained is  piled  on  sloping  boards  so  that  the  bittern  may 
run  off. 

A  specially  esteemed  variety  of  the  ngapi  gaung  is  that 
called  the  nga-tha-lauk,  after  the  fish  of  the  same  name,  the 
hilsa,  or  "  Indian  salmon,"  which  would  be  perfect,  were  it 
not  supplied  with  bones  all  through  its  body,  seemingly 
utterly  irresponsible  and  unconnected  with  the  spine.  This 
handsome  fish,  silvery,  shot  with  purple  and  gold,  is  not 
scaled,  nor  are  the  head,  tail,  or  any  of  the  fins    removed. 


NGAPI  283 


Each  fish  is  cleaned  and  rubbed  with  salt  in  the  usual  way 
and  exposed  to  the  sun.  Then  they  are  spread  out  on  the 
floor  of  a  shed  on  mats,  and  mats  are  also  put  over  them, 
and  on  these  are  placed  weights  of  some  size.  This  is  all 
that  is  required.  In  four  days  at  the  outside  they  are  ready 
for  sale,  and  are  then  handled  with  most  reverential  care  by 
both  buyer  and  seller,  for  the  hilsa  is  a  fish  that  the  foreigner 
loves,  and  therefore  always  commands  a  good  price. 

The  second  kind  is  that  called  taungtha  ngapi,  that  is, 
pounded  fish,  or  fish-paste.  It  also  frequently  goes  by  the 
name  of  damin  ngapi,  from  the  bamboo  trap  in  which  the 
fish  are  usually  caught.  This  is  the  form  of  ngapi  which 
has  earned  the  bad  name  for  the  whole  preparation.  It  is 
made  almost  exclusively  from  shrimps  and  the  smaller  kinds 
of  fish.  These  are  spread  out  as  they  are  caught,  without 
the  addition  of  salt  or  any  cleaning  whatever,  on  mats  in 
the  sun.  There  they  remain  for  two,  or  perhaps  three,  days 
— by  which  time  their  condition  is  better  imagined  than 
closely  investigated.  They  are  then  thrown  into  a  huge 
wooden  mortar  and  pounded  together,  with  a  liberal  addi- 
tion of  salt.  It  does  not  take  any  very  heavy  work  or 
length  of  time  to  reduce  them  to  a  state  of  mash,  in 
which  one  fish  is  not  to  be  distinguished  from  another. 
The  whole  is  then  heaped  up  in  a  great  mound  under  a 
shed  near  the  house,  and  several  hollow  bamboos,  with  little 
holes  here  and  there  in  their  sides,  are  thrust  into  it.  Out 
of  these  a  liquor,  called  nganpya  ye,  runs,  and  is  carefully 
collected  in  jars  set  there  for  the  purpose.  This  as  well  as 
some  other  fishy  oils  are  greatly  esteemed  for  culinary  pur- 
poses, and  fetch  a  good  price.  When  these  juices  cease  to 
run  freely,  the  fish-paste  is  ready  for  sale,  and  is  dug  and 
shovelled  out  in  an  unceremonious  way,  contrasting  very 
markedly  with  the  loving  care  taken  of  the  "  whole  fish 
ngapi."  In  the  country  boats  it  is  usually  carried  in  bulk, 
piled  up  as  corn,  or  salt,  or  commodities  of  a  like  nature 
might  be  loaded  ;  and  therefore  a  boat  which  has  once  been 
used  for  this  purpose  is  easily  known  again.  In  English 
steamers  it  is,  of  course,  packed  in  jars,  but  the  odours  are 
none  the  less  fragrant  on  that  account.  This  is  the  true 
and  only    mode   of  preparation,  and   the   marvellous   tales 


284  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

related  by  some  foreigners  of  the  burial  of  the  fish  in  the 
earth  for  periods  varying  from  a  week  to  a  year  (!)  are  due 
either  to  a  guileless  nature  or  a  too  powerful  imagination. 
The  soil  of  Burma  needs  no  manure. 

The  fish  most  sought  after  for  damin  ngapi  are  those 
belonging  to  the  family  of  cat-  and  dog-fish,  from  the  cir- 
cumstance that  they  have  no  scales,  and  therefore  make  a 
smoother  compound.  Some  of  these  attain  a  huge  size,  the 
tame  dog-fish  at  Thihadaw,  above  Mandalay,  being  quite 
five  feet  long,  and  blessed  with  mouths  that  would  take  in 
a  leg  of  mutton.  Many  of  them  also  have  the  peculiarity 
of  breathing  air,  rising  to  the  surface  of  the  water  and  open- 
ing their  mouths  for  the  purpose ;  while,  when  the  inland 
pools  dry  up  after  the  rains  are  past,  they  are  capable  of 
making  long  journeys  overland. 

Seinsa  ngapi  is  made  entirely  from  prawns,  and  comes 
chiefly  from  the  Tenasserim  coast,  Beit  (the  English  Mergui) 
and  Tavoy  being  the  centres  of  its  manufacture.  The  prawns 
are  spread  out  on  mats  in  the  sun  as  soon  as  caught  and  left 
there  till  they  are  fairly  well  dried.  Then  they  are  mashed 
up  by  hand,  abundance  of  salt  being  added,  and  are  stirred 
up  several  times  a  day  regularly  for  three  days,  lying  out  in 
the  sun  all  the  time.  After  that,  the  paste  is  ready  for  use, 
and  is  packed  in  small  jars.  Properly,  seinsa  is  that  made 
from  the  prawns  exposed  immediately  after  being  caught. 
When  some  hours  elapse  before  they  are  spread  out  to  dry, 
the  resulting  ngapi  is  called  yetpyan  ;  and  if  a  whole  day 
elapses  before  the  exposure,  yet-6k.  The  greater  the  delay, 
the  more  powerful  the  smell  and  the  more  piquant  the 
flavour — a  fact  for  Englishmen  to  remember  when  they  take 
balachong.  Ket  ngapi  is  simply  a  variety  made  of  large 
prawns,  which  are  heavily  pressed  in  baskets  called  ket, 
before  they  are  put  out  in  the  sun  to  dry.  They  are  then 
pounded  with  salt  and  pressed  again,  after  which  they  are 
ready  for  consumption,  either  as  they  are  or  after  frying. 

Notwithstanding  the  open  disfavour  with  which  the 
English  regard  ngapi,  the  Burmese  hold  by  it  as  the  most 
savoury  and  necessary  portion  of  their  dinner,  and  vast 
quantities  are  exported  to  Upper  Burma,  where  the  manu- 
facture, owing  to  the  smaller  fisheries,  is  not  equal  to  the 


xxvm  NGAPI  285 

demand.  The  indignation  which  a  crusade  against  the 
condiment  by  a  young  civil  officer  with  more  zeal  than 
discretion  caused  in  1880,  will  not  soon  be  forgotten. 
Cholera  was  rather  bad  in  Yandun,  one  of  the  great  places 
for  ngapi,  and  the  Assistant  Commissioner,  convinced  that 
the  heavy  smells  must  be  the  cause  of  it,  issued  an  order 
forbidding  the  manufacture  of  the  fish-paste,  or  its  sale  in 
the  public  markets,  as  well  as  that  other  cherished  but 
strong-smelling  dainty,  prawn-head  oil.  The  result  was  an 
avalanche  of  petitions  to  the  Chief  Commissioner,  and  some- 
thing very  like  open  riot  in  the  town.  Equanimity  was  not 
restored  till  the  too  energetic  official  was  removed  to  another 
station,  and  the  lugyis  pointed  exultantly  to  the  fact  that  as 
soon  as  they  began  to  make  up  arrears  in  the  way  of  ngapi 
consumption,  cholera  left  the  place.  Nevertheless,  Yandun  is 
not  a  charming  place  of  residence  to  a  man  with  a  sensitive 
nose. 

Fishermen  are  promised  terrible  punishments  in  a  future 
life  for  the  number  of  lives  they  take,  but  popular  sympathy 
finds  a  loophole  of  escape  for  them.  They  do  not  actually 
kill  the  fish.  These  are  merely  put  out  on  the  bank  to  dry, 
after  their  long  soaking  in  the  river,  and  if  they  are  foolish 
and  ill-judged  enough  to  die  while  undergoing  the  process, 
it  is  their  own  fault.  Nevertheless,  some  strict  people  hold 
by  the  doctrine  of  the  Manichaeans,  who  asserted  that  the 
soul  of  the  farmer  migrated  into  herbs  so  that  it  might  be 
cut  down  and  thrashed  out.  The  baker  becomes  bread  and 
is  eaten.  The  killer  of  a  deer  becomes  a  deer ;  of  a  fish,  a 
fish ;  and  so  on.  But  nevertheless,  if  all  the  fishermen 
became  monks  one  day,  the  next  would  see  some  of  the 
pious  trying  their  hands  with  the  cast-net. 


CHAPTER    XXIX 

PLAYS 

There  is  no  nation  on  the  face  of  the  earth  so  fond  of 
theatrical  representations  as  the  Burmese.  Probably  there 
is  not  a  man,  otherwise  than  a  cripple,  in  the  country  who 
has  not  at  some  period  of  his  life  been  himself  an  actor, 
either  in  the  drama  or  in  a  marionette  show  ;  if  not  in  either 
of  these,  certainly  in  a  chorus  dance.  It  would  be  wrong  to 
say  that  there  is  no  other  amusement  in  the  country,  but  it 
is  indisputable  that  every  other  amusement  ends  up  with  a 
dramatic  performance.  When  a  Burman  is  born  there  is 
a  pwe  ;  when  he  is  named  there  is  a  pw^  ;  when  a  girl's  ears 
are  bored  ;  when  the  youth  enters  the  monastery ;  when  he 
comes  out  again  ;  when  he  marries ;  when  he  divorces ; 
when  he  makes  a  lucky  speculation ;  when  he  sets  up  a 
water-pot ;  builds  a  bridge ;  digs  a  tank ;  establishes  a 
monastery  ;  dedicates  a  pagoda,  or  accomplishes  any  other 
work  of  merit ;  when  there  is  a  boat  or  horse  race ;  a 
buffalo  or  cock  fight ;  a  boxing  match,  or  the  letting  loose 
of  a  fire-balloon  ;  a  great  haul  of  fish,  or  the  building  of  a 
new  house ;  when  the  nurseries  are  sown  down,  or  the  rice 
garnered  in  ;  whenever  in  fact  anything  at  all  is  done,  there 
is  a  theatrical  representation.  Finally,  there  is  a  pw^,  as 
grand  as  his  friends  can  make  it,  when  the  Burman  dies. 

The  plays  are  always  given  in  the  open  air,  and  any  one 
that  pleases  may  come  and  look  at  them,  and  stay  as  long 
as  he  likes  without  paying,  or  being  expected  to  pay,  a 
single  pice  towards  the  expense  of  the  performance.  A 
large  shed  has  indeed  been  erected  in  Rangoon,  nightly 
performances  take   place,  regular   troupes   are   engaged    for 

286 


CHAP.  XXIX  PLA  YS  287 

a  definite  period,  and  money  is  charged  for  admission  ;   but 
the  idea  is  an  English  one,  and  opposed  as  it  is  to  ancient 
custom  and  the  old  free   attractions  elsewhere,  meets  with 
barely  enough  support  to  keep  it  going.     The  giver  of  the 
pwe  simply  constructs  a  small  roofed  enclosure  for  himself, 
if  the  pw^  is  held  on  open  ground,  and  fits  it  up  with  a 
bedstead  covered  with  mats  as  a  kind  of  private  box,  with 
a  few  chairs  and  plentiful   mats  round  about  it.      To  this 
reserved  space  he  invites  a  few  of  his  most  intimate  friends, 
sending  them  the  ordinary  little  palm-leaf  packet  of  pickled 
tea   by   the   hands   of  his  daughters   or   sisters.     All  other 
places  in  the  circle  are  open  to  the  first  comer,  and  when  a 
pwe  is  announced,  women  may  be  seen  early  in  the  after- 
noon  strolling   down,   with   rolls   of   mats   on    their    heads, 
to   secure   good   places.       Abundance   of  refreshments    and 
materials  for  smoking  are  taken,  for  it  will  be  sunrise  before 
the  play  is  over.     The  commonest  place  for  a  pwe,  however, 
is  in  the  street  opposite  to  the  giver's  house.     All  traffic  is 
unceremoniously  stopped.     There  is  nothing  to  be  done  but 
to  hoist  up  the  hinged  front  wall  of  your  house,  or  throw 
open  the  windows  and  go  out  on  the  verandah,  if  the  con- 
struction of  the  building  is  more  solid,  and  there  you  are 
with  the  theatre  come  to  your  doors.     There  is  no  trouble 
with  the  stage.     A  circular  space  is  covered  with  mats  and 
it  is  all  ready.     This  is  called  the  pwe-waing.      In  the  centre 
is  a  branch  of  a  tree,  or  the  stem  of  a  plantain  palm  stuck 
in   the    ground,   which   goes  by  the  name   of  the   pan-bin. 
Yule   and    others  have  endeavoured  to   discover  some   for- 
gotten meaning  for  this  centre  of  action,  comparing  it  with 
the  altar  of  the  old  Greek  stage,  but  probably  it  never  had 
any  greater  significance  than   to   mark   the   centre    of    the 
arena  and  prevent  the  audience  from  crowding  in  too  much 
so   as   to   curtail  the  space.       The  actors  when  questioned 
about  it  always  say  that  it   is  there   to   represent  a   forest, 
such  as   forms  part  of  the  scene  of  action   in   every  play. 
This  of  course  is  merely  an  answer,  and  not  an  explanation. 
Europeans  of  an  inquiring  turn  are  apt  to  complain  of  this 
Burmese   (and    Scotch)   method    of    supplying    information. 
Why  such    a    phantom    attempt    at    representing    a    forest 
should    be  made,  when  no    effort  aims    at    portraying    the 


288  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap, 

palace  which  is  of  equally  regular  appearance  in  all  zats, 
is  not  by  any  means  evident.  The  property  box  of  the 
company  indeed  serves  as  a  throne,  but  this  is  an  accident, 
and  if  there  is  no  property  box,  there  is  no  throne.  The 
people  take  up  positions  long  before  the  performance  com- 
mences, and  no  doubt  the  pan-bin  serves  no  deeper  purpose 
than  to  indicate  to  intending  spectators  where  the  action 
will  take  place,  and  where  therefore  they  may  deposit  their 
mats  without  being  turned  out  later  for  being  in  the  way. 
Further  than  the  central  tree  and  the  mats  nothing  is 
required  till  the  play  begins.  Then  round  about  the  pan- 
bin  are  arranged,  as  footlights,  a  number  of  small  earthen- 
pots  iiUed  with  petroleum,  usually  the  thick  black  crude  oil 
brought  from  the  wells  at  Yenangyaung.  Bits  of  rag  or 
cotton  seed  are  used  for  wicks,  and  the  cups  are  replenished 
by  the  actors  as  occasion  may  require  during  the  progress 
of  the  play.  They  are  freely  used  throughout  by  both 
performers  and  audience  as  a  means  of  obtaining  lights  for 
their  cheroots.  It  is  somewhat  trying  to  the  dramatic  sense 
when  the  princess  of  the  piece  after  a  prolonged  ngo-gyin, 
a  doldrous  wailing  for  her  sad  fortunes,  driven  from  her 
love  and  strayed  far  in  the  jungle  through  devious  paths  to 
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  bilus,  ogres,  ghouls,  and 
horrid  creeping  things,  when  thus  forsaken  and  finishing  off 
with  the  sense  of  an  impending  danger,  she  proceeds  to 
light  a  great  green  cheroot  and  placidly  blow  great  clouds 
till  her  turn  comes  again.  No  less  startling  is  it,  when  in 
the  middle  of  a  sonorous  declamation  from  the  king  a  half- 
naked  youngster  scuttles  across  the  stage  to  get  a  light  and 
scrambles  back  again.  Englishmen,  not  understanding  the 
progress  of  the  play,  notice  these  things  more  than  anything 
else,  and  get  an  impression  that  the  whole  thing  is  ludicrous 
and  unreal.  This  is  very  far  from  being  the  case.  When 
the  Yindaw  Ma  Le,  the  Mandalay  prima  donna,  sang,  or  when 
the  famous  puppet  player,  Maung  Tha  Byaw,  is  performing, 
there  is  not  a  sound,  the  whole  great  crowd — and  it  must  not 
be  forgotten  that  the  performance  is  in  the  open  air — is 
hushed  to  its  farthest  limits,  and  not  till  the  passage  is 
finished  does  the  usual  buzz  and  chatter  begin  again.  Those 
who  have  heard  it  will  acknowledge  that  this  spontaneous 


XXIX  PLA  YS  289 

tribute  must  be  as  gratifying  as  the  loudest  stamping  of  feet 
and  whistling  on  fingers  of  a  London  theatre.  In  fact  a 
Burman  might  perhaps  be  justified  in  doubting  the  enthu- 
siasm and  admiration  which  finds  vent  in  whistling. 

The  acting  as  a  whole  cannot  be  said  to  be  satisfactory. 
The  circumstances  are  against  it.  Who  could  "  lose  himself 
in  his  part "  in  the  centre  of  a  crowd  of  people  all  smoking 
and  often  talking  ?  Moreover  the  subjects  treated  are  so 
romantic  and  remote  from  ordinary  worldly  events  that  no 
one  can  be  expected  to  realise  them.  Finally,  who  could 
keep  it  up  for  ten  hours  at  a  stretch?  Nevertheless, 
individual  passages  are  occasionally  wonderfully  well  done. 
The  piteous  wailings  and  desolation  of  the  princess  ;  the 
majesty  of  the  king ;  the  grim  savagery  of  the  demon,  are 
often  very  effectively  delineated,  while  the  clowns  are  almost 
invariably  exceedingly  clever.  They  are  chosen  for  their 
ready  wit,  many  of  the  jokes  being  extempore,  as  well  as  for 
their  power  of  facial  contortion.  Caricatures  of  the  per- 
formances of  the  other  actors  and  comic  songs  form  their 
chief  stock-in-trade,  and  the  text  of  the  play  is  very  far 
from  being  adhered  to.  It  is  an  undoubted  fact,  if  scarcely 
complimentary,  that  the  clown  has  much  more  to  do  in  the 
play  and  is  very  much  broader  in  his  jokes  when  Englishmen 
are  present  than  when  there  is  a  purely  national  audience. 
The  prolongation  of  the  comic  parts  is  due  to  a  courteous 
desire  to  please  the  visitors,  buffooneries  being  much  more 
readily  understood  than  high  dramatic  art,  while  the  coarse- 
ness is  unfortunately  due  to  the  same  impression  which 
makes  a  Burman  always  produce  brandy  and  beer  for  the 
refreshment  of  a  white  man,  the  idea  namely  that  that  is 
what  he  likes  best.  None  of  the  higher  class  troupes,  more 
especially  those  from  Upper  Burma,  will,  however,  con- 
descend to  this  sort  of  thing. 

The  company  formerly  was  always  made  up  in  Man- 
dalay,  or  said  it  was.  There  are  other  troupes,  but  it  is 
usually  taken  for  granted  that  they  cannot  be  better  than 
second-rate.  The  delta  Burman  is  firmly  persuaded  that 
"  far  birds  have  fair  feathers."  In  their  humble  phraseology 
they  say,  "  In  the  Low  Country  we  are  not  up  in  the 
humanities."     This  is  not  exactly  complimentary  to  longer 

u 


290  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

English  rule  and  civilisation,  but  in  one  sense  it  is  true.  In 
Upper  Burma  every  one  is  taught  in  the  monasteries,  and 
having  no  other  relief  from  Pali  doxologies,  becomes  satu- 
rated with  the  phraseology  and  ideas  of  the  zats.  Thus, 
from  the  theatrical  point  of  view,  the  Mandalay  youth  starts 
with  a  distinct  advantage  over  the  Lower  Burman  who 
potters  away  in  lay  and  elementary  Government  schools 
over  addition  and  multiplication  and  the  sterilities  of  the 
First  Reader.  To  qualify  for  the  first  ranks,  therefore,  the 
ambitious  Peguer  starts  for  the  Royal  City  of  Gems,  practises 
as  much  as  he  can  there,  and  watches  the  most  celebrated 
players.  Then,  after  a  time,  he  obtains  an  engagement,  and 
turns  up  in  Rangoon  as  a  quasi  anya  tha.  The  stage 
managers,  usually  old  actors  who  have  made  some  money 
and  are  inclined  to  take  their  ease,  go  up  to  Mandalay 
during  the  rains,  when  comparatively  little  is  doing,  the  wet, 
combined  with  the  four  months  of  Lent,  making  pw^s  few 
and  far  between.  There  they  cast  about  and  get  together 
a  company,  entering  into  a  written  engagement  with  the 
actors,  male  and  female,  for  the  season,  which  lasts  about 
seven  months,  from  Ta'saungmdn  to  Nay6n  (roughly, 
November  to  May).  The  manager  makes  all  arrangements, 
and  usually  takes  up  his  headquarters  in  some  town  or  large 
village  whence  he  can  easily  move  to  the  surrounding  places 
where  the  company  may  be  wanted.  The  salaries  paid  are 
very  good.  A  first-class  prince  or  princess  commands  from 
800  to  1000  rupees  for  the  season.  A  good  lubyet,  or 
jester,  will  get  five  or  six  hundred.  After  these  come  the 
actors  who  take  such  parts  as  the  king  or  the  maids  of 
honour.  The  dancers,  that  is  to  say,  those  who  simply 
dance  and  do  no  more,  get  about  sixty  rupees  ;  the  saingthama, 
the  musicians,  receive  forty.  The  company  have  not  more 
than  two  or  three  rehearsals  together  before  they  commence 
their  tour,  but  this  does  not  matter  much,  because  every  one 
knows  his  part  well,  and  the  cue  is  not  a  matter  of  supreme 
importance.  The  zat-6k  (the  manager)  draws  all  the  money 
from  the  performances.  As  much  as  450  rupees  have  been 
paid  for  a  two-night  performance.  This,  however,  was  ex- 
ceptional, and  it  was  a  marionette  play  with  the  great 
Maung  Tha  Byaw  in  the  prince's  part.     Very  few  people 


XXIX  PL  A  YS  291 

could  afford  so  much  as  this.  The  best  engagements  are 
those  known  as  ahlu  pwe,  given  by  a  rich  man  in  celebration 
of  some  religious  festival,  or  to  commemorate  some  event 
in  his  family,  such  as  the  donning  by  his  son  of  the  yellow 
robes  of  the  monastery.  The  elders  of  the  village,  or  the 
custodians  of  the  pagoda,  often  collect  money  for  the  per- 
formance of  some  of  the  religious  zats,  depicting  avatars  of 
the  Lord  Buddha.  Then  there  are  subscription  pw^s,  where 
some  energetic  lover  of  the  drama  suggests  the  propriety  of 
a  play  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  village,  or  of  a  street  in  the 
town.  He  goes  round  gathering  subscriptions,  and  then 
negotiates  with  the  zat-6k  for  as  many  nights  as  the 
manager  is  inclined  to  give  for  the  money.  This  system  has 
unfortunately  led  to  abuses.  Sharp  individuals  have  dis- 
covered the  possibility  of  collecting  three  or  four  hundred 
rupees  among  the  people,  paying  the  manager  two  hundred 
out  of  this,  and  keeping  the  rest  for  themselves.  The  dodge 
has  been  too  often  tried  in  Rangoon,  but  in  the  smaller 
towns  it  is  still  practicable,  and  is  far  too  often  carried  out. 
Besides  these  performances  by  accredited  companies,  there 
are  others  called  kyigyin  pwfe,  given  by  professionals  anxious 
to  make  a  name  for  themselves,  and  for  this  purpose  giving 
gratuitous  exhibitions.  These  are  naturally  very  uneven 
from  the  difficulty  of  getting  a  complete  company  together. 
But  in  all  cases  the  vast  majority  of  the  spectators  pay 
nothing  at  all.  The  guests  invited  by  packets  of  le'hpet 
usually  contribute  a  rupee  or  two  towards  the  expenses  of 
their  host,  but  otherwise  the  entire  cost  is  defrayed  by  him. 

The  pwe  is  begun  by  the  arrival  of  the  band,  which,  with 
characteristic  Burmese  disregard  of  the  value  of  time,  ordin- 
arily comes  upon  the  scene  several  hours  before  the  actual 
commencement  of  operations.  They  occupy  one  side  of  the 
stage,  and  tune  up  their  saing  and  play  away  vigorously 
while  the  people  gather.  The  zatthama  and  zatthama,  the 
male  and  female  artistes,  drop  in  casually  along  with  the 
spectators.  Each  is  ordinarily  accompanied  by  a  servant  to 
carry  their  dresses  and  help  them  in  robing.  All  of  them, 
women  as  well  as  men,  make  their  preparations  in  full  view 
of  everybody.  Each  lady  has  a  toilette-box  with  all  the 
necessaries  for  making  up.     Many  are  the  hints  the  village 


292  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

maidens  receive  in  the  way  of  touching  up  eyebrows,  artfully 
swelling  out  the  sad6n  with  false  locks  of  hair,  intertwining 
the  raven  tresses  with  red  and  white  fragrant  flowers,  toning 
the  complexion  with  thana'ka,  and  so  on.  The  young  men 
look  on  critically  while  the  princess  scans  herself  in  the  little 
hand-mirror  and  tranquilly  completes  the  touching-up  and 
other  feminine  mysteries  so  little  dreamed  of  by  ordinary 
European  swains.  No  one  has  the  slightest  appearance  of 
recognising  the  ludicrousness  of  the  thing,  or  of  deprecating 
the  exposure  of  little  female  wiles  and  vanities.  The  zat- 
thama  wears  her  acting  skirt  indeed  when  she  arrives,  but 
everything  else — the  tight-fitting  lace  jacket,  the  stiff  brocaded 
wings,  the  jewellery,  the  pagoda-like  crown — is  put  on  by 
the  side  of  the  stage  at  the  bamboo  rack  which  supports  the 
masks  and  necessary  changes  of  dress.  The  audience  either 
looks  on  with  stolid  earnestness,  or  takes  no  notice  whatever. 

Finally,  having  smoked  all  through  the  toilette,  the 
princess  and  the  maids  of  honour  quietly  seat  themselves — 
squat  would  be  more  accurate,  but  does  not  sound  nice — at 
the  edge  of  the  pwe-waing,  and  continue  to  smoke  till  every- 
thing is  ready  and  their  call  comes.  Then  they  simply  stand 
up  and  are  on  the  stage  immediately.  They  do  not  cease 
smoking  then,  except  during  a  long  song.  The  men  are 
equally  calm.  The  king  chews  betel  and  salivates  copiously 
between  observations  or  speeches,  but  in  so  doing  he  can 
only  be  said  to  be  the  more  realistic.  Incidental  ballets  are 
introduced  to  relieve  the  monotony  of  the  dialogue,  and  the 
maids  of  honour  and  the  clowns  perform  wonderful  feats  of 
winding  themselves  about  as  if  they  had  no  bones,  picking 
up  coins  with  the  mouth  bent  back  to  the  ground,  doubling 
themselves  up  so  that  the  toes  touch  the  forehead,  and  so  on. 

Sometimes  there  are  great  fights  at  these  pwes.  A 
young  man  has  got  surly  because  there  is  such  a  crowd  that 
he  can  see  nothing  of  what  is  going  on,  and  runs  up  against 
another  equally  inclined  to  quarrel  for  the  same  reason.  Or 
perhaps  he  is  angry  because  some  one  has  supplanted  him 
in  a  flirtation  with  one  of  the  girls  who  have  established  a 
temporary  bazaar  in  the  outskirts  of  the  crowd.  Or  there 
may  be  a  dispute  as  to  the  ownership  of  a  mat.  There  are 
a  few  loud  words  ;  a  woman's  voice  joins  in.      Next  minute 


XXIX  PLA  YS  293 

the  two  are  smashing  away  at  one  another  with  their  long 
hair  streaming  over  their  faces  and  down  their  shoulders. 
Friends  join  in,  and  almost  before  you  can  realise  what  has 
happened,  the  actors  disappear,  the  women  and  children  run 
off  home,  and  the  street  is  filled  with  an  excited  crowd  of 
men  swaying  backwards  and  forwards,  and  fighting  promiscu- 
ously. For  this  reason  pw^s  are  now  never  allowed  in  towns 
without  permission  from  the  civil  authority,  and  numbers  of 
policemen  are  always  at  hand  to  nip  any  riot  in  the  bud. 
With  the  same  object  performances  are  only  allowed  in 
large  towns  about  the  time  of  the  full  moon,  when  there  is 
abundance  of  light,  in  case  the  street  lamps  should  be  put 
out.  The  worst  row  of  the  kind  I  ever  saw,  however,  was 
started  by  two  of  the  Burman  policemen  themselves.  They 
quarrelled  about  the  merits  of  two  apyodaws,  talented  dan- 
seuses,  and  the  crowd,  relishing  the  absurdity  of  the  thing, 
backed  up  the  quarrel  with  such  energy  that  broken  heads 
were  plentiful  and  a  ward  in  the  infirmary  was  filled. 

Foreigners  very  often  make  the  mistake  of  taking  the 
performances  of  children's  companies  to  be  actual  zat  plays. 
Even  Captain  Forbes,  usually  so  accurate,  falls  into  this 
error  in  speaking  of  a  representation  of  the  Wethandaya  zat. 
This  must  simply  have  been  a  yein,  an  adaptation  of  the 
great  drama  for  performance  by  the  little  choral  dancers. 
For  people  who  do  not  understand  Burmese  well — among 
whom,  of  course,  the  late  Captain  Forbes  was  certainly  not 
to  be  included — the  mistake  is  very  easy.  They  are  far 
prettier  to  look  at,  and  much  preferable  in  every  way  to 
the  actual  text  of  the  birth-story,  mainly  because  they  are 
not  so  dismally  drawn  out,  and  can  ordinarily  be  got 
through  in  an  evening. 

The  dramas  are  all  founded  on  the  tales  which  Shin 
Gautama  told  of  five  hundred  and  ten  of  his  previous 
existences,  or  on  events  in  the  lives  of  kings  and  heroes 
in  India.  None  of  them  are  original.  The  story  in  every 
instance  is  taken  from  the  Hindoo,  the  adapter  in  most 
cases  not  even  taking  the  trouble  to  nationalise  the  names 
of  places  and  characters.  It  is  only  in  the  extemporising 
of  the  clown  that  anything  really  characteristic  comes  out. 
The    Hindoo    sense    of  humour    is   vastly    inferior   to    the 


294  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Burmese.  The  term  zat  or,  still  more  so,  wuttu  {i.e.  a  real 
story)  is  properly  applied  only  to  the  religious  plays,  the 
five  hundred  and  ten  Jatakas.  The  work  of  fiction  not 
necessarily  religious  is  called  a  Pyazat,  an  acting  play. 
Thus  you  speak  of  the  Utena  Wuttu  (given  in  part  by  Yule), 
but  of  the  Zawta  G6mma  Pyazat. 

Ten  of  the  religious  dramas  stand  out  prominently  from 
the  others.  These  are  called  the  Zatgyi  S^bw^,  and  are 
designed  to  show  how  the  Lord  Buddha  in  turn  overcame 
all  the  deadly  sins.  They  are  named:  (i)  Temi,  (2) 
Zanecka,  (3)  Thuwunnashan,  (4)  Nemi,  (5)  Mahawthata, 
(6)  Buyidat,  (7)  Sanda  Gdmma,  (8)  Nayidda,  (9)  Widuya, 
and  ( I  o)  Wethandaya.  Several  of  them  are  very  interesting. 
The  Wethandaya  is  probably  best  known  on  account  of  the 
real  pathos  of  the  story  and  the  beauty  of  the  composi- 
tion. It  illustrates  the  boundless  pity  of  a  Budh.  The 
prince — Gautama's  last  incarnation  on  earth  previous  to  his 
appearance  as  Prince  Siddartha  or  Theidat — gives  away 
everything  he  possesses,  even  to  his  wife  and  children.  The 
Nemi  and  Buyida  zats,  or  wuttus  as  they  are  called  indif- 
ferently, are  also  very  popular  on  account  of  the  particulars 
they  give  of  the  nga-ye,  the  great  hell,  and  the  country  of 
the  nagas,  fabulous  creatures,  like  the  kraken,  that  sleep 
deep  down  below,  far  beyond  the  ken  of  mortal  man.  The 
similarities  between  Norse  mythology  and  Buddhist  cosmo- 
gonies have  often  been  noticed,  and  the  legend  of  the  kraken 
or  naga  is  not  the  least  singular. 

Of  the  other  more  secular  plays,  U  Hpo  Nya  is  the  most 
celebrated  recent  author.  He  was  killed  in  King  Mind6n's 
reign  by  the  Tab^  Mintha,  one  of  the  most  brutal  of  the 
royal  princes,  and  for  whose  son's  head  King  Thibaw  twice 
paid  a  thousand  rupees.  The  young  man,  however,  lived 
long  after  King  Thibaw  himself  had  gone.  His  father's 
victim,  U  Hpo  Nya,  was  particularly  celebrated  for  the 
sweetness  and  melody  of  the  songs  introduced  in  his  pieces, 
these  songs,  of  course,  being  practically  original.  No  one 
before  or  since  is  equal  to  him  in  this  respect.  The  Wizaya 
Zat  is  probably  his  masterpiece,  and  forms  one  of  the  stock- 
in-trade  of  every  company  in  the  country.  Maung  Hpe,  the 
son  of  a  former  wungyi,  or  minister  of  state  in  Mandalay,  is 


XXIX  PLA  YS  295 

another  popular  and  voluminous  writer.  An  ever  favourite 
play  is  the  Ramazat,  the  fight  of  the  monkeys  and  the  men 
in  Ceylon.  It  was  performed  by  a  palace  troupe  specially 
sent  down  to  Rangoon  by  King  Minddn  on  the  occasion  of 
the  proclamation  of  Queen  Victoria  as  Empress  in  India. 
Everything  was  of  the  best  possible  kind ;  the  royal  drum 
and  cymbal  harmonicons,  the  trumpets,  the  flutes,  even  the 
bamboo  clappers,  were  of  an  excellence  never  before  known 
in  Rangoon.  The  players  were  famous  wherever  Burmese 
was  spoken,  and  the  play  lasted  five  nights.  The  general 
opinion  was  that  it  called  forth  more  admiration  of  King 
Minddn  than  loyalty  for  the  Empress  among  the  delta 
people. 

Ail  that  has  been  said  of  the  zat  pwfes,  those  in  which 
men  and  women  act,  applies  with  equal  force  to  the  ydkthe, 
or  marionette  pw^s.  It  is  well  known  that  the  Burmese 
esteem  these  more  highly  than  what  Englishmen  would  call 
the  legitimate  drama.  The  action  in  the  puppet-shows  is 
much  more  complicated  than  on  the  plain  mat  stage,  the 
dialogue  is  very  much  more  refined,  and  there  are  none  of 
the  Idches  perpetrated  by  individual  zatthama  striving  for 
effect.  Especially  there  is  never,  even  with  the  provocation 
of  a  number  of  Englishmen  present,  the  least  semblance  of 
coarseness.  Further,  supernatural  beings,  nats  and  bilus, 
elephants,  dragons,  ships,  thrones,  and  properties  of  all  sorts 
can  be  introduced  which  are  impracticable  on  the  limited 
arena  of  the  mat  platform.  The  elocutionary  powers  of  the 
performers  behind  the  curtain,  the  verve  and  passion  of  the 
songs,  the  accuracy  and  melody  of  the  recitative,  to  command 
success  must  be  at  least  as  good,  if  not  better,  than  the  best 
of  what  is  met  with  in  the  pwe-waing.  Added  to  this  there 
is  the  manual  skill  implied  in  moving  the  strings  attached 
to  the  heads,  limbs,  and  joints  of  the  puppets,  which  are 
often  exceedingly  cleverly  manipulated.  The  national  pre- 
ference for  the  marionette  play  is  therefore  not  entirely 
without  justification. 

The  action  takes  place  on  a  raised  bamboo  platform 
some  thirty  feet  long,  the  puppets  performing  on  the  stage 
in  front  of  a  curtain  which  screens  the  manipulators  down 
the  whole  length  of  the  erection.     One  end  of  the  stage  is 


296  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

devoted  to  scenes  at  court,  and  is  adorned  with  a  throne, 
golden  umbrellas,  and  other  royal  insignia.  The  other 
extremity  represents,  with  artfully-arranged  twigs  and  tufts 
of  grass,  the  jungle  and  forests  to  which,  during  some  part  of 
every  play,  the  prince  and  princess  are  sure  to  have  to  fly. 
The  puppets,  which  are  frequently  as  much  as  two  or  three 
feet  high,  are  always  gorgeously  and  expensively  dressed. 
The  larger  ones  are  all  cut  in  wood,  and  the  carver's  skill 
often  turns  out  very  clever  presentments  of  rugged-faced  old 
men  and  exuberantly  jovial  lubyets.  Most  of  the  zats, 
which  deal  greatly  with  the  supernatural  and  fabulous,  are 
only  represented  as  yokthe  pwes.  No  amount  of  technical 
skill  could  represent  in  the  public  streets  an  athurein,  a 
creature  (destined  incalculable  ages  hence  to  be  a  Budh) 
whose  height  is  a  few  thousand  miles,  and  who  produces 
eclipses  in  his  play  by  taking  the  sun  or  moon  in  his  fingers 
or  between  his  toes. 

Curious  as  it  may  seem,  the  puppet  players  often  acquire 
a  far  more  really  personal  reputation  than  the  legitimate 
actors.  The  zatthama  mostly  get  a  name  for  dancing  as 
much  as  for  anything  else.  The  Yindaw  Ma  Le,  who  came 
from  a  village  near  Meiktila  in  Upper  Burma,  indeed,  was 
equally  celebrated  for  her  voice  and  her  graceful  movements, 
but  the  yokthethama  become  renowned  for  dramatic  fervour, 
for  tender  passion,  for  dry  wit,  just  as  thoroughly  and  per- 
sonally as  if  they  actually  appeared  before  the  audience. 
Except  the  prima  donna  just  alluded  to  (now  dead)  there  are 
few  professionals  celebrated  on  the  stage  who  are  not  far 
better  known  as  first-class  marionette  players.  These  per- 
formers are  all  men  and  boys.  None  of  the  female  parts 
are  ever  taken  by  women.  Maung  Tha  Byaw  was  unequalled 
in  "  prince's  "  parts.  He  was  recognised  as  Thabinwun  ; 
every  stage-manager,  every  zat-6k  in  the  country  received  his 
word  as  law.  No  tenor  with  a  voce  fenomenale,  no  bird- 
voiced  Patti,  was  more  sought  after  nor  received  with  greater 
honours.  His  name  became  a  proverb  in  the  mouths  of 
people  who  never  heard  him.  "  Tha  Byaw  Hd,"  a  Mergui 
man  will  say  when  he  makes  a  marvellous  haul  of  fish  or 
gets  a  super-excellent  cheroot.  A  journey  of  his  to  Rangoon 
produced  a  popular  saw,  corresponding  to  the  English  "  kill- 


XXIX  PLA  YS  297 

ing  two  birds  with  one  stone."  Maung  Tha  Byaw  said  he 
was  going  to  worship  at  the  Shwe  Dag6n  pagoda.  He  gave 
a  performance  or  two,  and  made  several  (Burmese)  fortunes. 
Hence  the  saying — 

Paya  Ife  pu  yin 
Leip  u  \h.  tu  yin. 

You  go  and  worship  and  dig  turtles'  eggs. 

Turtles'  eggs  for  prayer 
Reward  the  pious  player. 

Maung  Tha  Byaw^  was  not  only  a  good  singer,  but  himself 
wrote  very  good  songs,  and  was  particularly  clever  at  coining 
in  phrases  the  wisdom  of  many  with  the  wit  of  one.  No 
other  "  prince  "  has  ever  attained  to  his  fame.  Best  known 
among  the  clowns  was  Shwe  L6t  Gyi,  who  had  the  knack  of 
making  local  jokes  wherever  he  happened  to  be,  and  took 
the  fullest  advantage  of  the  scope  which  the  language 
afforded  him  in  the  way  of  punning.  Just  after  the  railway 
from  Rangoon  to  Prome  was  opened,  Shwe  L6t  Gyi  was 
performing  in  a  piece  where  the  prince  and  his  servant,  the 
clown,  wander  away  into  the  forest  and  fall  into  a  state  of 
great  destitution.  The  prince  bewails  his  sad  fate  in  a 
dolorous  tedat  (a  tune  appropriate  to  such  lamentations),  and 
finishes  by  asking  what  they  are  to  do.  The  lubyet  replied, 
"  The  English  have  just  opened  a  railway  here.  You  go  and 
trespass  on  it,  and  I'll  lay  information  against  you  and  get 
the  reward."  The  idea  showed  considerable  acuteness  in  a 
man  who  had  never  seen  a  railway  before. 

Among  the  "  princesses  "  many  youths  have  been  noted 
for  the  sweetness  of  their  voice.  The  two  best  were  Maung 
Tha  Zan  and,  running  him  very  close,  Maung  Mu,  both  of 
them,  like  Tha  Byaw  and  the  clown,  Mandalay  men.  The 
accuracy  with  which  they  imitated  the  female  voice  was 
wonderful,  the  more  so  as  every  song  abounds  with  trills  and 
turns  which  would  expose  the  least  roughness.  Neither  in 
the  recitative,  the  tremulous  erotics,  nor  the  doleful  wailings 
of  the  maiden  for  her  absent  lover,  would  the  stranger  ever 
suspect  the  performer's  sex. 

The  plays  are  performed  during  the  day  only  in  a  few 
and  exceptional   cases,  such  as  the  arrival  of  a   great  man. 


298  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


who  cannot  stay  over  the  night,  or  when  a  local  feast, 
limited  in  its  time,  occurs.  The  great  and  legitimate  season 
is  the  night,  and  frequently  a  play,  especially  a  puppet  play, 
extends  over  six  or  seven  successive  nights.  The  majority 
of  the  audience  stay  the  whole  time,  from  seven  or  eight 
o'clock  at  night  till  sunrise.  It  is  not,  however,  to  be  sup- 
posed that  they  hear  it  all  through.  Abundance  of  mats 
and  rugs  are  brought,  and  not  a  few,  after  listening  till 
midnight  or  thereabouts,  calmly  curl  themselves  up  to  sleep, 
and  slumber  away  for  two  or  three  hours,  heedless  of  the 
braying  of  the  horns  and  the  crash  of  the  cymbals  only  a 
few  yards  off.  Then  they  wake  up  and  fall  in  with  the 
progress  of  the  piece  with  as  keen  interest  as  if  they  had 
heard  every  word  of  it.  Most  of  the  young  people,  however, 
prime  themselves  with  the  anti-soporific  le'hpet,  "  pickled 
tea,"  as  the  English  call  it,  and  bid  defiance  to  drowsiness. 
This  condiment  is  as  regular  a  crown  to  a  Burmese  dinner 
as  cheese  is  to  an  English  one,  and  with  the  same  idea, 
possibly  erroneous  in  both  cases,  that  it  promotes  digestion. 
It  is  almost  exclusively  produced  in  Taungbaing,  in  the 
Shan  country,  by  a  hill  tribe  called  Rumai,  better  known  by 
the  Burmese  name  of  Palaungs.  The  Burmese  mix  with  it 
salt,  garlic,  and  assafcEtida,  douse  it  in  oil,  and  add  a  few 
grains  of  millet  seed.  The  leaves  forming  the  basis  are  the 
leaves  of  an  actual  tree  as  distinguished  from  the  bushes  of 
China  and  Assam.  Hooker  called  it  Elceodendron  orientate, 
while  Anderson  asserted  that  it  was  really  E.  persicum.  Of 
late  years  Assam  planters  have  bought  Taungbaing  seed 
for  their  gardens.  One  of  the  grievances  which  Englishmen 
have  when  they  attend  a  pwe  is  that  they  are  always  induced 
by  their  host  to  take  pickled  tea,  and  perceive  in  it  nothing 
but  the  overpowering  horrors  of  the  assafoetida.  Pwes  and 
assafcetida  are  therefore  associated  with  one  another  to  the 
detriment  of  both. 

Few  foreigners  can  detect  one  tune  from  another,  or  the 
recitative  from  any  one  of  them.  Consequently  most  declare 
there  is  only  one  tune,  or  no  tune  at  all,  according  to  the 
capacity  of  generosity  in  them.  The  same  thing  has  been 
said  by  an  inappreciative  Burman  of  the  "  vipers "  of  the 
Royal  Scots  Fusiliers.      He   admired   the  conscientiousness 


XXIX  PLA  YS  299 

and  pertinacity  with  which  they  defied  the  mosquitoes  under 
the  shade  of  the  trees,  and  droned  away  on  their  pipes  all 
through  a  tight-tunicked  and  perspiring  Rangoon  afternoon 
garden  party,  as  the  observant  Burman  imagined,  at  one 
endless  tune.  The  national  music  is  not  written  down,  and 
each  actor  has  a  variation  of  his  own,  but  the  smallest  girl 
in  the  audience  w^ould  detect  a  kayathan  from  a  dobatthan 
with  as  much  readiness  as  any  English  boy  would  dis- 
tinguish "Drops  o'  Brandy"  from  the  "Old  Hundred"! 
But  there  are  some  people  who  do  not  like  the  Italian  opera, 
and  even  say  so. 

The  following  short  outline  of  the  Zawtagdmma  pyazat 
will  give  an  idea  of  the  style  of  the  more  popular  drama,  as 
distinguished  from  the  purely  religious  birth -story.  The 
writer  was  an  old  player  himself.  He  lived  at  Pegu,  and  the 
Zawtagdmma  was  perhaps  his  most  successful  effort.  The 
text  has  been  published  at  one  of  the  vernacular  presses  in 
Rangoon,  and  the  sketch  given  is  a  translation  of  the  Zat- 
lan,  the  "  path  of  the  play,"  prefixed  by  the  editor.  "  In  the 
country  of  Pyinyawwada,  of  which  Yaz6tta  was  the  sovereign, 
the  name  of  the  Southern  Queen  was  Thunemadewi,  and 
that  of  the  Northern  Queen  Thukethidewi.  The  Queen  of 
the  Southern  Palace  was  about  to  bear  a  child,  and  the 
king  issued  an  order  that  her  majesty  of  the  North  should 
attend  on  her.  This  was  very  irritating  to  the  Northern 
Queen,  and  she  resolved  to  ruin  Thunemadewi,  and  for  that 
~  purpose  conspired  with  Shin  Gwe  Ni,  the  midwife.  As  soon 
as  the  child  was  born  it  was  to  be  killed,  and  set  afloat  on 
the  river  in  an  earthen  pot,  and  the  accoucheuse  was  to  say 
the  Head  Queen  had  been  delivered  of  a  still-born  baby. 
A  twin  son  and  daughter  were  born,  and  Shin  Gwe  Ni  put 
each  of  them  in  a  jar  and  launched  them  on  the  river,  and 
went  and  told  the  king  that  they  were  still-born.  Yaz6tta, 
the  king,  was  very  angry,  and  punished  his  consort  by  setting 
her  to  dig  the  ground  and  carry  water  for  the  palace.  The 
Queen  of  the  North  was  promoted  to  be  Head  Queen,  and 
her  daughter,  Pyinsarupa,  was  made  tabin-daing  {i.e.  she 
was  set  apart  as  wife  for  the  next  king,  and  not  allowed  to 
marry). 

"  With  regard  to  the  bodies  of  the  prince  and  princess. 


300  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  prince  was  carried  down  the  Yamuna  river  and  the 
Thuwuna  naga  swallowed  the  body,  and  the  spirit  of  the 
prince  entered  into  the  ruby  that  hung  in  the  necklace  of 
the  dragon.  Not  long  after  the  naga  became  nervous  and 
uncomfortable  in  his  mind,  and  proceeded  to  the  monastery 
of  the  recluse  Bedaseinda,  in  the  Thiriwunna  forest.  There 
he  went  to  keep  the  ten  holy  precepts.  As  soon  as  the 
ya-theit  saw  the  necklace  with  the  ruby  in  it,  he  knew  by 
his  bedin  that  the  spirit  of  a  young  prince  was  enclosed 
there.  He  therefore  represented  to  the  dragon  that  it  was 
unseemly  to  wear  precious  things  when  he  was  observing 
the  injunctions  of  the  law.  The  naga  therefore  gave  him 
the  necklace  in  alms,  and  having  kept  the  ten  precepts  the 
prescribed  number  of  days,  returned  to  his  own  place.  When 
the  prince  was  born  anew  from  the  ruby,  the  ya-theit  gave 
him  the  name  of  Zawtagdmma,  and  explained  to  him  all 
that  had  happened  in  the  prince's  last  existence. 

"  The  princess's  body  was  carried  away  into  the  Southern 
Ocean,  and  there  the  fish  kegga-thitha,  whose  head  is  shaped 
like  a  sceptre,  ate  her  up.  The  spirit  of  the  princess  entered 
a  pearl  in  the  fish's  head  and  dwelt  there.  A  violent  hurri- 
cane came  on,  and  the  fish  was  carried  up  into  the  sky  and 
fell  down  inside  the  enclosure  of  the  recluse  Bedaseinda, 
When  the  ya-theit  cast  eyes  on  the  pearl,  he  knew  that  a 
princess  was  in  it,  and  he  gave  this  pearl,  called  the  myissa, 
to  the  Zawtag6mma  prince.  From  the  precious  stone  was 
born  in  seven  days  the  princess,  and  she  got  the  name  of 
Pal^thwe.  The  ya-theit  knew  from  his  mystic  books  that 
in  the  former  existence  they  had  been  brother  and  sister,  and 
told  them  all  about  it. 

"  When  they  grew  up  he  told  them  they  were  to  go  back 
to  the  old  king  and  queen's  capital  in  the  Pyinyawwada 
country,  and  on  their  way  they  were  to  make  offerings  and 
give  the  pearl  to  the  Gyo  nat.  But  the  prince  forgot  all 
about  the  Meittu  Gyo,  and  the  spirit  therefore  became  very 
angry  with  him.  While  they  were  travelling  on,  the  nat 
separated  them  by  means  of  magnets,  which  attracted  the 
iron  in  their  bones,  and  drew  them  away  to  the  devils  on 
either  side,  to  right  and  to  left,  who  held  the  magnets. 

"  Meanwhile,  in  the  Pyinyawwada  country,  Zawtagdmma's 


XXIX  PLA  YS  301 

father  and  mother,  and  his  stepmother,  the  former  Northern 
Queen,  had  all  of  them  gone  to  the  country  of  nat-d^was 
{i.e.  died),  and  there  was  no  king  to  rule  over  the  land. 
The  Pyinsarupa  princess,  therefore  (who  had  been  kept 
single  to  marry  the  new  king),  according  to  ancient  custom, 
sent  out  the  pdtthwin  yatta  (a  chariot  which  has  no  driver, 
and  stops  where  the  horses  will),  and  it  hurried  away  from 
the  palace  and  came  and  stopped  beside  the  sleeping  Zawta- 
gomma.  When  he  woke  he  entered  the  chariot,  and  the 
horses  returned  straight  to  the  capital.  The  prince  then 
ascended  the  throne  and  married  Pyinsarupa. 

"  In  the  meantime,  the  princess  who  was  born  from  the 
pearl  came  to  the  house  of  a  p6nna  and  his  wife,  and  was 
delivered  of  a  child  there.  One  day  she  covered  the  baby 
with  an  emerald  green  neckerchief,  and  laid  it  on  the  bank 
of  a  lake  while  she  went  into  the  water  to  bathe.  But  a 
bird,  called  kemayekka,  swooped  down  from  the  skies  and 
carried  off  the  green  scarf,  baby  and  all.  Then  it  flew  to 
the  palace  of  Zawtag6mma  and  circled  round  in  the  air 
above  it.  The  prince  shot  at  it  with  a  bow,  and  it  fell  down 
and  died,  and  vomited  up  the  green  scarf,  and  the  baby, 
still  alive.  As  soon  as  Zawtagdmma  saw  the  infant  and  the 
neckerchief,  he  knew  that  they  were  Pal^thw^'s,  and  clasp- 
ing the  child  in  his  arms,  he  set  out  to  find  the  princess,  and 
wandered  far  and  wide. 

"  Pal^thwe  herself,  as  soon  as  she  had  obtained  per- 
mission from  the  ponna,  set  off  in  search  of  the  prince  and 
her  child.  The  Brahmin  priest,  with  the  aid  of  his  mantras, 
made  her  assume  the  appearance  of  a  man,  and  despatched 
her  to  seek  Zawtagdmma  in  the  disguise  of  a  harp-player. 
He  also  instructed  her  that  she  would  meet  the  prince  on 
the  way,  but  she  was  not  to  reveal  herself  to  him  :  she  was 
to  explain  how  it  was  that  the  two  had  been  separated  by 
the  Meittu  Gyo  nat,  and  say  that  she  had  met  Palethwe, 
and  that  the  princess  had  gone  to  Pyinyawwada ;  Zawta- 
gdmma  himself  was  to  take  the  counsel  of  the  Bedin  wise 
men,  and  return  to  his  own  country,  where  he  must  offer 
sacrifices  to  the  ten  gyo  nats,  whereupon  he  would  meet  the 
princess  Palfethwe,  the  wife  he  so  tenderly  loved.  All  these 
instructions  the  pdnna  gave  to  the  princess,  and  then   let 


302  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

her  go.  Everything  happened  as  he  had  foretold.  She  met 
the  prince  and  he  followed  her  advice.  They  returned  to 
the  Pyinyawwada  country,  and  all  was  happy." 

The  above  is  the  merest  outline  of  the  story.  The  piece 
is  very  long,  and  there  is  abundance  of  incident.  The 
prince's  servant,  and  usually  also  the  two  holy  men,  do  the 
comic  part  of  the  business,  but  this  is  always  so  purely 
personal  a  matter  that  the  printed  text  can  give  no  real 
notion  of  what  actually  is  said.  It  serves  merely  to  point 
out  the  lines  which  the  lubyet  must  follow  in  his  impersona- 
tion. The  stage  books,  written  on  palm-leaf,  contain  but 
very  few  detailed  speeches,  and  merely  indicate  the  story, 
and  throw  out  hints  to  the  actors.  The  following  is  one  of 
the  songs  sung  by  the  prince  in  his  wanderings  through  the 
forest  in  quest  of  Palethwe.  i  It  is  written  to  the  tune  of  the 
■"  Chase  in  the  Tawmawydn  Forest,"  that  in  which  the  king 
goes  to  hunt  in  the  epic  of  the  Ramayana.  The  wut  or 
wutdaw  referred  to  is  the  penalty  of  suffering  the  same 
punishment,  or  death,  which  has  in  a  former  existence  been 
wrongfully  or  needlessly  inflicted  on  others.  Thus  the  great 
minister,  Widuya,  spoken  of,  who  was  an  avatar  of  the  Lord 
Buddha,  had  in  a  previous  life  dragged  a  frog  by  the  leg 
so  that  it  died.  Hence  he  is  dragged  at  the  tail  of  the 
fierce  Nat's  horse  until  he  dies  himself.  The  prince  fears 
that  some  such  evil  destiny  is  working  itself  out  on  him. 
The  jingle  of  the  rhythm  is  intended.  The  whole  play  is 
of  the  "  raging  rocks  and  shivering  shocks  "  pattern. 

FATE 

The  wind  breathes  chill 

Across  the  rill 
That  cuts  the  forest  track  ; 

The  haze  to  mist 

Whitens,  I  wist, 
And  I  am  lost,  alack. 

The  branches  spread 

Dull  green  and  red 
Flat  o'er  the  sullen  stream  ; 

Comes  through  the  gloom 

The  gibbon's  boom, 
And  shrill  the  parrot's  scream. 


PLAYS 

Ah,  sad  the  scene  ; 

But  yet,  I  ween, 
A  sadder  wight  am  I  ; 

The  thuyaung  seed  i 

Gives  lovers  rede, 
But  sears  my  tortured  eye. 

Ah,  cruel  spite, 

Ah,  cursed  night, 
That  tore  my  Queen  away  ; 

More  comfort  here. 

In  jungle  drear. 
Than  in  the  golden  day. 

The  fog's  death-cloud 

Hangs  like  a  shroud 
Upon  the  shagg'd  hillside  ; 

The  tall  trees  mope. 

The  wild  beasts  grope, 
Nor  know  what  may  betide. 

Yet  the  great  sun 

Needs  cast  but  one 
Fierce  eye  upon  the  gloom  ; 

The  mists  all  rise, 

Mix  with  the  skies. 
And  rainbows  deck  his  loom. 

Ah,  wretched  wight. 

Such  omen  bright 
Gleams  not  upon  my  fate  ; 

Nor  faint,  nor  bright, 

Hope's  golden  light 
Lends  me  no  heart  to  wait. 

The  story  old 

Of  Nat  so  bold 
Creeps  o'er  my  harassed  thought ; 

Haply  this  hill 

He  treadeth  still, 
And  here  that  horror  wrought. 

In  warlike  guise, 
With  wings  on  thighs, 
He  scales  where  eagles  flag  ; 


303 


1  The  fruit  of  the  thuyaung  bin,  a  kind  of  half  shrub,  half  tree,  has  a  curious 
resemblance  to  the  figure  of  a  woman,  and  soupirants  are  wont  to  detect  fancied 
likenesses  to  the  object  of  their  affections,  and  deduce  favourable  omens  from  the 
discovery. 


304  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

His  magic  steed 
Hath  such  great  speed 
The  lightnings  seem  to  lag. 

Ah,  fateful  law, 

Ruthless  Wutdaw, 
Widuya,  art  thou  feared  ? 

From  life  long  past, 

Thy  sin  at  last 
Eftsoons  must  dree  its  weird. 

Nor  soon,  nor  late 

With  calm,  cold  gait 
The  Wut  relentless  tracks  ; 

Nor  prayer,  nor  fees 

Will  bring  release, 
'Tis  blood  for  blood  it  lacks. 

Thy  limbs  fast  tied 

The  Nat  doth  ride 
O'er  gorge  and  cliff  and  plain  ; 

At  his  horse  heels 

Dragged,  no  faint  steals 
O'er  thee  to  spare  one  pain. 

Though  blood  forth  gushed 

And  brain  was  crushed. 
Thy  heart  was  panting  still ; 

Lingered  thy  breath. 

Nor  came  glad  death 
Till  ye  twain  reached  this  hill. 

The  fiend  sprang  down. 

And  from  its  crown 
He  hurled  thee  many  a  rod. 

With  eldritch  glee 

He  hurled  e'en  thee 
The  great  embryo  god. 

So  the  old  Wut 

With  stealthy  foot 
Nor  pity  e'er  evinces  : 

So  must  some  crime 

From  ancient  time 
Have  robbed  me  of  my  princess. 

Methinks  'twas  here, 

This  place  so  drear. 

That  great  Widuya  died  ; 


PLA  YS  305 


Here  or  elsewhere, 
With  praise  and  prayer 
I  seek  him  for  my  guide. 

Ah,  still  the  Wut 

Its  baleful  fruit 
Doth  bring  before  mine  eyes. 

See,  bright  and  clear. 

The  Saddan  mere 
And  round  the  mountains  rise. 

Like  jangled  chime, 

Or  tangled  rhyme. 
The  piteous  tale  is  told  ; 

The  Saddan  Min  1 

By  death  solves  sin 
Committed  once  of  old. 

Thrice  wretched  she, 

By  destiny 
Marked  out  the  blow  to  guide  ; 

She,  then  as  Queen 

Thubadda  seen 
Had  erewhile  been  his  bride. 

But  beauty's  curse 

Hath  made  her  nurse 
Greed  most  akin  to  hate  ; 

The  milk-white  tusk 

She  sought  to  busk 
With  glories  six  her  state. 

Then  her  behest 

She  hath  addressed 
To  Thawnotto,  the  hind  ; 

Fell  hunter  that. 

As  Dewadat 
Hath  felon  deeds  designed. 


'  The  Saddan  Min  is  the  Celestial  White  Elephant,  an  avatar  of  the  Buddha 
Gautama.  Hence  it  is  that  white  elephants  are  so  revered  and  regarded  as  the 
symbol  of  universal  sovereignty.  Thubadda  had  been  the  Saddan's  queen  in  a 
previous  existence.  She  repents,  dies  of  sorrow,  when  she  hears  of  the  Lord 
White  Elephant's  end,  and  afterwards,  in  consequence,  becomes  a  Yahanda  in 
the  time  of  the  revealing  of  the  Buddha.  Mfebadda  is  the  actual  consort  of  the 
Saddan.  She  became,  in  after  existence,  Yathawdaya,  the  wife  of  Prince  Theidat, 
before  he  left  the  palace  and  devoted  himself  to  acquiring  the  Supreme  Wisdom. 
Thawnotto,  the  hunter,  became  the  wicked  Dewadat,  cousin  and  brother-in-law 
of  the  Lord  Buddha,  and  now  languishes  in  Awidzi,  suffering  punishment  for  his 
attempt  on  the  life  of  Shin  Gautama. 

X 


3o6  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Then  he  with  guile 

His  purpose  vile 
With  yellow  robe  conceals  ; 

The  Monkish  garb 

Hides  the  sharp  barb, 
Nor  aught  of  sin  reveals. 

And  when  he  nears 

The  silver  mere's 
Fair  jewel-studded  edge ; 

Then  like  a  snake, 

Through  baleful  brake, 
He  parts  the  golden  sedge. 

His  arrows'  tip 

With  poison  drip, 
He  rears  his  cobra  head  ; 

The  bowstring  twanged, 

The  dart  deep-fanged 
Its  course  too  well  had  sped. 

Thy  heart  is  cleft. 

Thy  life  is  reft, 
Now,  reel'st  thou,  milk-white  King  ; 

The  woodland  hushed, 

And  darkness  brushed 
O'er  earth  its  sooty  wing. 

The  silent  moon 

Doth  fright  the  noon, 
And  Death  e'en  breath  restrains  ; 

Save  one  wild  scream 

Might  check  the  stream 
Of  blood  in  murder's  veins. 

Mebadda,  Queen, 

The  deed  had  seen. 
She  caught  him  e'er  he  fell ; 

Would  staunch  the  flood 
.     Of  red  heart's  blood 
That  fiercely  forth  doth  well. 

Ah  me,  'tis  vain. 

Wild  with  heart-pain 
Forth  flies  the  frenzied  wife 

To  seek  for  foes. 

Or  mayhap  those 
Might  save  the  Saddan's  life. 

Ye  who  doubt  truth. 

The  boundless  ruth 

Of  the  all-pitying  Budh  ; 


XXIX  PLA  YS  307 

Now  list  ye  well 
What  then  befell, 
And  quit  your  scoffing  mood. 

Straight  to  the  cave, 

Where  crouched  the  knave. 
He  walks  with  gentle  mien  ; 

Himself  bestows 

The  tusks'  white  snows 
For  Thubadda,  the  Queen. 

Ah,  cruel  Wut, 

Why  strayed  my  foot 
Unto  this  hateful  spot  ? 

See  low  I  bow 

To  earth  my  brow  ; 
Be  mine  less  awesome  lot. 

Here  erewhile  trod 

The  embryo  god. 
Now  all  is  dull  and  blear  ; 

O'er  land  and  sea 

I  seek  for  thee, 
My  Princess,  even  here. 

By  lonesome  lake. 

Through  forest  brake, 
I'll  track  each  rumour's  breath  ; 

Where  roams  the  bear, 

By  fierce  beast's  lair, 
I'll  seek  thee  e'en  pasf  death. 

But,  'gainst  the  Wut's 
Fierce  power  what  boots 
To  strive  with  eager  zeal  ? 

Peace,  doubting  heart, 
No  fate  can  part 
True  lovers  fond  and  leal. 

As  an  illustration  of  a  purely  religious  play  may  be 
given  the  Nemi  Zat,  one  of  the  Ten  Great  Birth  Stories. 
It  is  occasionally  represented  as  a  ydkthe,  or  marionette 
play,  but  it  is  rather  expensive  to  put  it  on  the  stage  well. 
It  was  "  preached  "  in  the  monastery  of  Meggadawun,  during 
the  stay  of  Shin  Gautama  in  M^thila,  of  which  country  he 
remembered  to  have  been  king  in  a  previous  existence.  The 
following  is  the  story  in  brief : — 


3o8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

In  old  times  the  King  Mingadeva  ruled  over  the  country, 
and  for  many  years  was  entirely  given  up  to  pleasure  and 
worldly  passions,  till  one  day  his  barber  showed  him  a  grey 
hair — "  a  flag  of  the  king  of  death,"  as  it  is  commonly  called 
in  Burmese — which  he  had  found  on  the  royal  head.  The 
king  was  struck  with  this  memento  mori,  and  immediately 
saw  yawning  before  his  eyes  the  abyss  of  mortality.  The 
vision  scared  him,  and  he  gave  up  the  gay  raiment  and  idle 
pleasures  of  earthly  glory  and  wandered  into  the  desert  to 
end  his  life  as  a  hermit.  His  self-denying  piety  gained  for 
him  on  his  death  elevation  to  the  seats  of  the  Byammas,  and 
all  the  82,000  princes  who  succeeded  him  on  the  throne  of 
Methila  followed  the  example  of  their  ancestor  and  retired 
into  hermits'  cells  when  they  felt  their  end  approaching. 
Mingadeva,  from  his  blissful  superior  seat,  followed  with 
earnest  solicitude  the  fortunes  of  his  dynasty,  and  when  at 
length  he  saw  that  it  was  drawing  near  its  close,  he  returned 
once  more  to  earth.  He  was  conceived  in  the  womb  of  the 
then  Queen  of  Methila,  and  was  born  of  her,  and  received 
the  name  of  Prince  Nemi.  From  his  earliest  years,  as  the 
p6nnas  discerned  from  his  horoscope,  his  mind  was  firmly 
and  unwaveringly  directed  to  the  prescriptions  of  religion 
and  to  pious  observances.  Once  when  he  felt  a  doubt  in 
his  mind  as  to  whether  the  outward  giving  of  alms  or  inward 
self-contemplation  was  the  more  meritorious,  the  Tha-gya 
King  himself  came  down  and  instructed  him  that  abundant 
charity  would  indeed  secure  him  a  new  birth  in  the  heavens 
of  Nat-d6was,  but  that  only  the  cultivation  of  the  mind 
could  ensure  a  rise  to  the  blessed  regions  of  the  Byammas. 
The  Ddwa  King  was  so  attracted  by  the  religious  spirit  and 
piety  of  the  young  prince  that  on  his  return  he  spoke  of  it 
with  admiring  delight  to  his  subject  Nats.  Their  curiosity 
was  excited  by  the  account  of  such  distinguished  qualities 
in  a  man,  and  they  begged  the  Tha-gya  Min  to  procure  for 
them  the  acquaintance  of  so  holy  a  personage.  Accordingly 
the  king  gave  orders  to  a  young  D6wa  named  Matali  to 
descend  to  the  earth  and  invite  the  young  prince  to  a  visit 
to  the  nat-heavens. 

It  was  the  day  of  the  full  moon,  and  all  the  inhabitants 
of  Methila  were  assembled  in  the  streets  and  on  the  pagoda 


XXIX  PLA  YS  309 

platforms  to  observe  the  ceremonies  of  the  holy  day,  when  a 
great  wonder  happened.  While  the  full  moon  shone  high 
and  clear  in  the  heavens,  there  appeared  through  the  clouds 
a  glowing  light  in  the  east,  so  that  all  the  people  cried  aloud 
in  astonishment  that  two  moons  had  arisen  in  the  sky  at  the 
same  time.  But  as  the  light  gradually  neared  and  neared, 
it  became  evident  that  it  was  a  nat-chariot  with  the  young 
D6wa  inside.  Matali  advanced  to  the  prince  and  invited 
him  to  enter  the  car  and  proceed  to  the  realms  of  the 
blessed.  Nemi  stepped  in  without  fear,  and  when  he  was 
told  by  the  charioteer  that  there  were  two  ways  open  to 
him,  of  which  one  led  through  the  horrors  of  Nga-ye,  and 
the  other  through  the  Elysian  fields,  he  at  once  desired  to 
visit  both.  First  they  went  down  to  the  eight  vast  burning 
chambers,  and  saw  the  pains  of  the  damned  in  the  fiery 
gloom  of  hell,  and  then  they  ascended  and  viewed  the  pure 
delights  of  bright  paradise.  After  Nemi  had  met  in  audience 
the  highest  king  of  Nats,  he  returned  to  earth  to  give  to  his 
subjects  a  true  account  of  what  fate  would  befall  them  after 
death,  according  as  they  followed  the  path  of  virtue  or  of 
vice. 

After  many  peaceful  and  honoured  years,  when  Nemi 
at  last  saw  his  hair  begin  to  grow  grey,  he,  like  his  prede- 
cessors, entered  the  state  of  Yahanda  and  abdicated  the 
royal  power.  The  same  venerable  custom  was  followed  by 
his  son  Thalarazana,  the  last  of  the  roll  of  kings,  who,  when 
old  age  began  to  snow  upon  them,  devoted  themselves  to  the 
holy  order  in  the  town  of  Yathemyo  (Kappilavastu). 

It  is  evident  that  such  a  play  as  this,  though  it  offers 
plenty  of  incident,  is  for  this  very  reason  the  more  difficult 
to  put  on  the  stage,  and  can  hardly  be  satisfactorily  pro- 
duced at  all  except  as  a  marionette  play.  No  zat  furnishes 
more  subjects  to  the  Burman  artist  than  that  of  Nemi,  and 
pagoda  corridors  all  over  the  country  are  decorated  with  the 
scenes  in  hell,  which  are  much  more  easily  pictured  to  the 
mind  and  the  eye  than  the  pure  joys  of  heaven. 


CHAPTER    XXX 

DANCING 

Dancing,  though  an  accomplishment  in  which  every  Burmese 
man  or  woman  is  more  or  less  proficient,  is,  as  elsewhere  in 
the  East,  never  carried  on  simply  for  personal  amusement. 
That  custom,  together  with  the  elaboration  of  the  two  sexes 
dancing  in  couples,  is  entirely  a  Western  invention.  If  a 
great  man  wants  dancing  he  hires  people  to  do  it  for  him. 
If  indeed  he  becomes  greatly  excited  at  a  boat-race,  a  buffalo 
fight,  br  a  religious  procession  on  its  way  through  the  town 
to  the  pagoda,  he  may  tuck  up  his  paso  tightly  round  his 
thighs  and  caper  away  till  his  bare  legs  tire,  but  he  does  so 
ordinarily  with  a  ludicrously  solemn  aspect,  as  if  the  perform- 
ance were  a  part  of  his  official  duties,  and  to  be  got  through 
with  as  much  stately  dignity  as  the  dispensing  of  justice 
from  the  magisterial  bench.  It  is  a  concession  to  the  ex- 
citability of  his  nature,  and  he  would  be  very  much  offended 
if  next  day,  when  he  had  calmed  down  to  his  ordinary  com- 
posed demeanour,  an  Englishman  were  to  compliment  him 
on  the  agility  he  displayed,  or  the  complexity  of  his  evolutions 
on  the  previous  day. 

With  the  young  people  it  is  different,  but  only  to  a 
certain  extent.  Most  of  them,  if  they  have  any  aptitude 
that  way,  practise  dancing  for  the  sake  of  the  applause  and 
admiration  it  may  get  for  them  when  they  perform  in  a 
village  procession,  at  the  initiation  of  a  young  friend  into 
a  monastery,  or  at  one  of  the  great  religious  feasts,  such  as 
Tawadein-tha,  or  even  at  a  funeral.  But  as  a  general  rule 
no  lessons  are  taken  other  than  watching  noted  performers. 
The  ambitious  usually  confine  themselves  to  practise  in  out- 

310 


CHAP.  XXX  DANCING  311 

of-the-way  places  by  themselves,  trusting  to  natural  ability 
and  good  ear  to  help  them  in  the  harmonious  movement  of 
head,  limbs,  and  body,  to  the  sound  of  the  music.  The 
women  who  dance  as  professionals  in  the  plays  have  to  go 
through  a  very  rigorous  course,  not  that  there  are  any  com- 
plicated steps  to  be  learnt,  but  that  they  may  acquire  the 
pliancy  of  body  necessary  for  the  indiarubber  contortions 
into  which  they  have  to  writhe  their  bodies. 

There  are  therefore  no  distinctions  of  dances,  according 
to  regular  varieties  of  movements.  These  are  pretty  well 
regulated  both  by  professionals  and  amateurs  according  to 
individual  fancy.  If  such  a  thing  as  an  "  encore  "  existed  in 
Burma,  it  would  probably  puzzle  the  dancer  to  repeat  the 
step  exactly  as  it  has  been  gone  through  before.  This  of 
course  refers  to  individual  dancing,  and  does  not  by  any 
means  apply  to  the  yein  pw^s,  where  a  carefully-trained 
troupe  goes  through  pre-arranged  movements  with  well- 
drilled  precision.  There  may  be  said  to  be  really  only  two 
kinds  of  dancing :  individual,  or  it  might  almost  be  called 
irresponsible  dancing,  such  as  is  seen  in  the  plays  and  at 
various  religious  or  social  ceremonies  ;  and  the  yein  pwes, 
the  figure,  or  "country"  dances,  where  much  practice  and 
working  together  is  imperatively  necessary.  A  zat6k,  or 
theatre  manager,  will  tell  you  that  there  are  four  or  perhaps 
five  kinds  ;  the  dancing  of  the  zat  pwe,  the  regular  drama ; 
that  of  the  yama  zat  (the  Ramayana),  which  is  of  a  much 
wilder  and  more  energetic  character ;  the  dancing  of  the 
anyeinthama,  the  trained  companies  of  ballet-dancers,  who 
perform  in  the  palace  before  the  king  and  princes  to  the 
sound  of  the  pattala,  the  harp,  or  the  flute.  These  are  simply 
glorified  yeins,  and  the  danseuses  are  often  most  gorgeously 
dressed  with  gilded  pyramidal  crowns,  and  wings  on  their 
legs.  Fourthly,  there  is  the  bdnshe  pwe,  a  performance  of 
much  the  same  kind,  except  that  it  is  gone  through  to  the 
music  of  the  instrument  of  that  name,  a  long  kettle-drum-like 
thing,  much  the  same  as  the  tom-tom  of  India.  This  latter 
variety  is  considered  old-fashioned,  and  is  not  often  seen 
now,  notwithstanding  that  it  is  called  Byaw,  after  the  great 
Thabinwun,  who  was  particularly  fond  of  it.  The  fifth  style 
of  dancing,  according  to  the  player's  idea,  is  the  performance 


312  THE  BVRMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

of  the  ordinary  domestic  youth  on  festive  occasions,  when  he 
prances  about  like  an  extremely  self-conscious  turkey-cock 
in  the  style  that  suits  his  capabilities  best. 

There  are  a  great  variety  of  names  for  special  dances, 
but  in  all  there  is  the  same  waving  of  hands  and  weaving  of 
paces.  The  hands,  fingers,  elbows,  and  shoulders  are  twisted 
about  as  if  they  were  circular-jointed  ;  the  legs  are  doubled 
up  and  extended  in  the  same  fantastic  and  tentacular  fashion, 
while  the  body  seems  to  wind  and  bend  in  any  direction 
with  equal  facility.  Europeans  as  a  rule  find  nothing  to 
admire  in  the  dancing  except  the  marvellous  sensitiveness  to 
time,  and  the  extreme  tension  in  which  every  muscle  of  the 
body  is  constantly  kept.  The  solemnity  of  face  is  paralleled 
by  the  expression  of  the  waltzer  who  is  convinced  that  he  is 
becoming  giddy. 

Little  though  the  dancing  of  the  men  resembles  European 
saltation,  that  of  the  girls  is  still  farther  from  active  motion 
and  definitive  figures.  This  is  no  doubt  in  great  part  due 
to  the  Burmese  female  dress.  The  tamein  is  simply  a  square 
cloth  folded  round  the  body  and  tucked  in  so  that  the  open- 
ing is  down  the  front  This  necessitates  some  adroitness 
even  in  walking,  and  renders  all  active  motions  incompatible 
with  modesty.  When  they  dance  the  skirt  is  sewn  or  pinned 
down  the  front,  so  that  the  girl  is,  as  it  were,  in  a  narrow 
bag,  reaching  down  to  her  feet  and  trailing  about  on  the 
ground  in  an  eighteen-inch  or  two-foot  train.  Even  thus 
hampered  their  dances  are  much  more  animated  than  those 
of  the  Indian  nautch  girls,  but  still  do  not  go  greatly  beyond 
posturing.  Nevertheless,  the  natural  and  graceful  attitudes 
into  which  they  throw  the  body,  and  the  cleverness  with 
which  they  manoeuvre  their  hands  and  arms,  so  different 
from  European  awkwardness  with  these  members,  is  not 
without  a  charm.  It  is  quite  a  common  thing  to  see  a  girl 
bend  over  backwards  till  her  lips  touch  the  mat  upon  which 
she  stands,  and  pick  up  from  the  ground  rupees  thrown  there 
by  the  spectators.  In  Mandalay  I  have  seen  a  performer 
double  up  all  her  members,  head  and  all,  into  a  space  repre- 
sented by  the  length  of  her  trunk,  and  compact  enough  to  be 
put  into  an  ordinary-sized  portmanteau. 

The  zatthama,  the  professional  actresses,  usually  dance 


DANCING  313 


to  their  own  singing  and  often  improvise  with  wonderful 
cleverness,  when  performing  before  a  celebrity,  or  any  one 
whom  it  is  especially  desired  to  honour.  Many  of  them 
acquire  a  reputation  that  extends  all  over  the  country,  and 
are  often  sought  for  in  vain  by  the  wealthiest  play-goers. 
Chief  among  them  was  the  Yindaw  Ma  Le,  the  "  Mandalay 
Diva,"  who  was  known  to  every  English  official  or  man  of 
importance  who  visited  Mandalay  during  the  twenty  years 
before  the  annexation.  Unlike  most  Eastern  women,  she 
kept  remarkably  well,  and  though  her  voice  failed  latterly, 
she  made  up  as  well  as  she  did  nearly  twenty  years  before, 
when  she  sang  in  Amarapoora,  the  City  of  the  Immortals. 
There  were  few  Englishmen  who  saw  her  perform  before 
Lord  Mayo  in  Rangoon — she  was  sent  down  specially  from 
Mandalay  by  King  Minddn  for  that  purpose — who  could 
have  believed  that  she  was  then  close  on  forty.  The  want 
of  a  national  court  no  doubt  prevents  any  other  dancer  from 
taking  the  place  which  she  has  left  for  ever. 

An  accomplishment  greatly  affected  by  the  coryphdes  is 
the  extraordinary  faculty  of  moving  local  muscles,  the  re- 
mainder of  the  body  being  perfectly  quiet.  Many  of  the 
men,  especially  the  clowns  of  the  piece,  can  do  the  same 
thing,  but  it  is  usually  brought  in  by  them  only  as  a  mockery 
of  the  lady.  She  will  extend  the  arms  alternately  and  cause 
the  muscles  to  rise  and  fall  and  twitch  so  vigorously  that  it 
may  be  seen  yards  off.  Similarly  the  bosom  heaves  as  if 
violently  agitated  by  passion  or  exertion,  while  the  face 
remains  perfectly  impassive. 

These  displays  are  all,  however,  comparatively  uninter- 
esting to  foreigners.  The  posturing  and  waving  of  hands, 
however  graceful  and  supple,  become  tiresome,  and  the  more 
so  the  oftener  they  are  seen.  But  it  is  different  with  the 
yein  pwe,  the  choral  dances,  which  are  very  often  executed 
by  amateurs,  and  imply  considerable  skill  and  long  practice 
under  competent  instructors.  The  coup  dail  is  very  attrac- 
tive, and  the  effect  of  the  different  groupings  quite  as  good  as 
anything  to  be  seen  in  the  incidental  ballet  of  the  European 
stage,  while  the  brilliance  of  the  dresses  and  the  ebbing  and 
flowing  chorus  of  the  dancers  add  to  the  picturesqueness  of 
the  whole.     The  yein  flourishes  most  in  small  villages,  where 


314  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  most  promising  of  the  youth  of  both  sexes  are  taken  in 
charge  by  a  skilled  saya,  who  trains  them  assiduously 
together  until  they  have  attained  perfection.  Even  in  these 
dances  the  sexes  do  not  mingle.  There  are  meimma  yein 
and  yaukya  yein,  the  former  usually  eschewing  complex 
movements,  and  sitting  in  rows  on  the  ground,  richly  decked 
with  bracelets,  and  dalizan  necklaces  falling  over  their 
silken  vests  or  tight-fitting  lace  bodices.  The  dancing  con- 
sists of  the  usual  pirouetting,  or  perhaps  it  ought  to  be  called 
winding,  on  both  feet,  with  much  serpentine  movements  of 
the  arms  and  the  head.  The  loosening  of  the  elbow-joint  is 
greatly  practised  by  Burmese  girls  with  a  view  to  these 
performances,  and  also  under  the  impression  that  it  is  elegant 
in  itself.  From  early  years  the  arm  is  so  manipulated  that 
the  forearm  can  be  bent  back  so  as  to  form  a  curve  outwards, 
and  this  accomplishment  is  steadily  exhibited  on  all  occasions 
in  public  by  a  belle  who  has  acquired  it.  Very  often  the 
meimma  yein  is  performed  by  a  body  of  girls,  who  succeed 
one  another  in  successive  groups.  All  are  seated  at  first. 
The  chorus  is  led  by  a  woman,  who  herself  does  not  dance, 
and  is  usually  the  instructress  of  the  troupe.  She  begins  in 
a  low  recitative  gradually  swelling  until  at  last  the  first  group 
rise  and  go  through  a  stately  performance.  They  are  suc- 
ceeded by  the  next  row,  who  are  more  lively  in  their  move- 
ments, and  so  on  to  the  last,  who  are  usually  young  girls, 
and  are  much  more  rapid  and  varied  in  their  figures  than 
their  elder  predecessors.  Finally,  all  join  in  some  compli- 
cated evolutions,  and  finish  up  seated  in  some  pre-arranged 
figure.  But  as  a  rule  the  meimma  yeins,  though  pretty 
enough  as  a  mere  spectacle,  have  not  sufficient  action  to 
redeem  them  from  the  accusation  of  tiresome  sameness 
brought  against  individual  dancing,  and  they  are  always  so 
discreet  that  they  might  be  performed  by  Sunday-school 
teachers. 

In  the  men's  dances  it  is  different.  At  the  commence- 
ment all  are  seated,  four  or  five  in  the  front  row,  and  forming 
a  column  of  perhaps  ten  or  more  rows.  The  conductor 
gives  the  sign  and  all  bow  down  with  closed  hands  raised 
to  the  forehead  in  salutation  to  the  great  man  in  whose 
honour   the   dance  is  given.      Then  they  begin  singing   in 


XXX  DANCING  315 

chorus  in  the  usual  way.  The  song  treats  in  a  rambling 
way  of  the  past  history  of  the  \illage,  its  ancient  glories  and 
heroes  ;  its  victories  in  boat-races,  boxing  matches,  or  mains 
of  cocks.  Interpolated  are  catch  phrases  for  the  guidance  of 
the  dancers.  At  a  certain  word  all  spring  to  their  feet ;  they 
sway  to  the  right,  to  the  left ;  white  handkerchiefs  are  drawn 
from  the  belt  and  waved  to  the  measure  of  the  refrain,  peeled 
white  wands  replace  them  ;  they  pirouette  simultaneously, 
they  troop  round  in  procession  in  movements  resembling 
figures  in  the  Lancers  or  the  Haymakers,  the  time  varying 
with  the  measure  of  the  song,  dying  away  in  plaintive  sounds 
almost  to  quiescence,  and  then  suddenly  rising  to  excited 
movement  of  every  limb  as  the  words  tell  of  a  let-pwe,  in 
which  some  local  hero  of  the  fancy  did  glorious  deeds,  or  a 
fight  long  years  ago  when  the  village  spearmen  carried  the 
day.  Then  the  measure  changes  again,  the  alterations  in 
time  being  always  heralded  by  some  such  refrain  as  to  yein 
daw  tha,  le  maung  yo  wa,  a  kind  of  warning  hung  out 
after  the  manner  of  the  first  word  of  a  military  command. 
Occasionally,  a  yein  troupe  which  has  acquired  particular 
skill  and  renown  travels  about  the  country  on  special  invita- 
tion. Rangoon  is  often  supplied  with  its  "  country  dances  " 
in  this  way,  the  townspeople  not  having  the  time,  or  being 
too  numerous  to  form  a  good  company  for  themselves.  But 
they  very  rarely  become  regular  professionals  in  the  same 
way  as  the  play  actors  do  ;  they  never  perform  ostensibly  to 
gain  a  living,  and  the  dances  always  occur  on  some  f^te  day, 
whether  in  their  own  place  or  in  the  village  to  which  they 
have  been  invited.  Their  instructor  always  receives  a  sum 
of  money  to  recompense  him  for  his  trouble  and  to  pay  for 
the  expenses  of  his  troupe.  Yein  pwes  are  performed  ordin- 
arily in  private  houses  or  on  a  public  platform,  when  it  is 
a  religious  or  special  festival.  A  yein  is  a  favourite  way  of 
greeting  a  great  man,  or  an  English  official  on  his  arrival 
in  a  village.  It  is  not  so  expensive  as  a  zat  pw6,  is  more 
quickly  arranged,  allows  the  sons  and  daughters  of  the  chief 
people  to  distinguish  themselves,  and  lasts  just  as  long  as  the 
person  it  is  intended  to  honour  pleases. 


CHAPTER    XXXI 

MUSIC   AND    SONGS 

There  are  no  teachers  of  music  or  singing  in  Burma,  and 
there  are  no  written  scores.  A  musician  commences  his 
career  by  diligently  listening  to  the  performance  of  a  good 
band.  By  and  by  he  enters  the  village  orchestra  as  a 
clapper  player,  and  so  learns  the  time  and  the  peculiarities 
of  various  tunes,  just  as  actors  rise  from  the  posturing  and 
choruses  of  the  children's  and  country  yein  pw^s  to  the  full 
dignity  of  dramatic  performers.  As  a  natural  consequence 
there  are  occasionally  variations,  and  indeed  every  pulw^,  or 
flute-player,  has  his  own  particular  mannerisms,  but  these 
are  never  so  great  as  to  materially  alter  the  character  of  the 
air,  and  such  tunes  as  the  tedat,  apudaik,  Idngyin,  and  so 
forth,  which  occur  in  every  zat,  are  as  familiar  to  everybody 
as  "God  save  the  King"  and  "Auld  Lang  Syne"  are  to  an 
Englishman.  Nevertheless  it  is  very  difficult  for  a  foreigner 
to  catch  the  air,  and  I  have  not  been  able  to  get  an  English 
score  of  any  of  the  really  old  national  tunes.  The  melody 
given  later  on  was  taken  down  from  the  playing  of  a  well- 
known  pw^  leader  in  Maulmein,  and  has  been  harmonised 
for  the  town  brass  band  by  Mr.  W.  G.  St.  Clair,  formerly  ol 
that  place,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  the  score.  So  true 
is  it  to  the  air  that  many  wealthy  Burmans  have  the  band 
to  play  at  domestic  festivals,  funerals,  and  the  like,  and  are 
satisfied  to  have  the  one  tune  played  over  and  over  again  a 
score  of  times.  But  the  kayathan  is  of  modern  origin,  and, 
as  Burmans  always  say,  in  the  English  style,  though  English- 
men will  persist  in  saying  that  there  is  nothing  English 
about  it.      It  has  somewhat  absurdly  been  adopted  by  the 

316 


CHAP.  XXXI  MUSIC  AND  SONGS  317 

British  army  as  "  The  Burmese  National  Anthem."  It 
makes  not  at  all  a  bad  quick  march,  but  it  is  about  as 
appropriate  for  a  national  anthem  as  "  Champagne  Charlie 
is  my  name."  In  the  acknowledged  national  airs  it  is  very 
difficult  to  get  a  definite  rhythm,  the  music  being  appar- 
ently, at  any  rate  to  all  but  experts,  a  mere  succession  of 
recitative,  more  or  less  Wagnerian  in  its  style. 

The  instruments  of  a  full  Burmese  band  always  include 
the  following,  whether  the  occasion  is  the  orchestra  for  a 
play,  the  music  for  a  dance,  for  a  wedding,  an  ear-boring 
ceremony,  or  a  funeral.  A  saing-waing,  an  elaborately  carved, 
circular,  wooden  frame,  painted  in  parts,  standing  between 
two  and  three  feet  high,  and  five  feet  or  more  in  diameter. 
Round  the  inside  of  this  are  hung  drums  of  graduated  sizes, 
which  are  struck  with  the  hands  of  the  performer,  who  sits 
in  the  middle.  The  alternate  dry  and  saturated  state  of  the 
atmosphere  renders  constant  tuning  necessary,  and  this  is 
effected  by  tightening  the  drum-heads,  and  also  by  smearing 
on  with  the  fingers  a  paste  made  of  burnt  rice  husk.  The 
music  produced  is  rather  thin  in  itself,  but  by  no  means 
unpleasing.  Similar  to  it  in  construction,  but  not  standing 
so  high,  is  the  kyi-waing,  the  only  difference  being  that 
graduated  gongs  take  the  place  of  the  drums.  The  gongs 
are  of  course  beaten  with  a  knobbed  stick,  and  not  with  the 
hand.  These  ponderous  instruments  can  only  be  carried 
about  in  a  cart,  and  their  owner  keeps  perpetual  guard  over 
them,  sitting  in  the  centre,  cheroot  in  mouth,  for  they  cost  a 
very  considerable  sum  of  money.  Fair  specimens  of  both 
the  drum  and  the  gong-harmonicon  may  be  seen  in  the  South 
Kensington  Museum.  In  addition  to  these,  there  are  in 
every  band  two  or  three  hne,  trumpets  or  clarionets,  with  a 
broad  bell-shaped  mouth,  which  is  movable  and  ordinarily 
but  loosely  attached.  The  noise  of  these  is  always  very 
prominent,  and  is  not  relished  by  people  who  do  not  care  for 
the  bagpipes.  There  is  also  a  similar  number  of  pulwe,  or 
pyue,  a  rude  kind  of  flute.  The  best  pulw^-player  is  always 
the  leader  of  the  band.  Then  there  are  ya-gwin,  big  cymbals, 
and  than-lwin,  little  cymbals,  and  the  patma,  a  long  drum 
like  the  tom-tom  of  India  and  beaten  with  the  hand  in  the 
same  way.      Finally  there  are  the  wa  le'kdt,  each  formed  of 


3i8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

a  length  of  bamboo,  extending  to'  five  feet  occasionally,  and 
split  down  the  centre.  These  castanets  are  always  in  the 
hands  of  the  most  recently  joined,  and  therefore  most  zealous, 
members  of  the  band,  and  are  clapped  together  with  an 
energy  which  usually  makes  them  unduly  prominent.  The 
above  instruments  serve  to  constitute  a  full  band. 

Besides  these,  however,  there  are  several  other  musical 
instruments  used  by  themselves,  and  learners — even  those 
who  are  members  of  an  orchestral  band — usually  avail  them- 
selves of  the  aid  of  a  teacher  to  acquire  accuracy  and 
delicacy  of  touch,  especially  in  the  case  of  the  harp.  The 
saung  consists  of  thirteen  silken  strings  stretched  on  a  boat- 
shaped  wooden  case,  with  a  long,  curved  handle.  The 
Burman  boat,  low  at  the  bows,  rises  to  a  very  considerable 
height  at  the  stern,  and  is  so  like  a  harp  frame  that  there  is 
a  stock  story  of  a  country  peasant,  for  the  first  time  in  Man- 
dalay,  believing  that  the  gilded  royal  boats  in  the  moat 
were  gigantic  harps  being  seasoned  for  use  in  the  palace. 
The  sounding-board  is  formed  of  thick  buffalo-hide,  and  the 
instrument  is  tuned  by  pushing  the  strings  up  or  down  the 
curved  handle,  and  so  tightening  or  loosening  them.  Only 
the  young  men  play,  and  the  accomplishment  is  not  very 
common.  The  handle  rests  on  the  left  arm  and  the  right 
hand  touches  the  strings,  while  the  singer  plays  his  own 
accompaniment.  A  similar  instrument  is  the  migyaung,  the 
crocodile,  a  sort  of  guitar  with  three  strings,  stretched  over  a 
hollow  sounding-board,  shaped  like  that  uninviting  saurian. 
It  is  somewhat  too  primitive,  however,  to  be  popular,  except 
with  sentimental  people.  Finally  there  is  the  pattala,  or 
bamboo  harmonicon,  as  some  call  it.  This  instrument  has 
always  evoked  approval  from  even  the  most  fastidious  of 
foreigners,  as  a  singular  instance  of  sweetness  of  sound  pro- 
duced from  most  unpromising  materials.  It  consists  of  a 
carved  and  painted  box,  long  and  narrow  and  with  high 
rising  ends.  From  each  of  the  corners  of  these  sides  are 
suspended  strings,  which  hang  down  in  a  parabolic  curve 
over  the  low  centre  of  the  box,  and  to  these  strings  are 
attached  flat  strips  of  bamboo,  placed  at  close  intervals. 
Their  tone  is  regulated  by  the  more  or  less  complete 
thinning  out  of  the  centre  of  the  under  side,  and  little  sticks 


XXXI  MUSIC  AND  SONGS  319 

are   used   to   strike  them  with.      The   notes   produced    are 
surprisingly  clear  and  melodious. 

Fiddles  may  often  be  heard  played  with  greater  or  less 
skill,  especially  on  the  pagoda  steps  by  blind  and  deformed 
beggars,  but  the  instrument  is  not  national,  and  is  never,  or 
but  rarely,  found  where  Europeans  have  not  penetrated. 
The  same  may  be  said  of  the  young  Burmans  who  play  in 
Rangoon  on  the  concertina  and  the  English  fife  and  piccolo. 
It  is  flattering  to  national  pride  to  notice  with  what  accuracy 
and  rapidity  they  pick  up  English  airs. 

But  except  at  funerals  and  other  solemn  occasions  in- 
strumental music  is  looked  upon  not  so  much  as  a  means 
of  enjoyment  in  itself  as  an  accompaniment  to  the  human 
voice,  and  mere  orchestral  concerts  would  never  draw  the 
crowds  which  a  single  good  singer  can  always  command. 
The  recitative  character  of  the  music  is  always  more  evident 
in  the  singing  than  in  the  instruments,  and  each  "  prince  " 
or  "  princess  "  has  individual  peculiarities  in  the  way  of  trills 
and  staccatos  introduced  into  the  legitimate  air.  As  the 
young  musician  learns  by  hanging  about  the  band,  so  a 
vocalist  follows  an  acknowledged  great  singer  about  and 
imitates  his  style,  or  at  any  rate  learns  the  tunes  and  the 
words.  The  latter  are,  however,  very  immaterial,  for  the 
language  itself  is  so  pliant  that  it  is  easy  to  express  the 
ideas  in  rhythm  as  you  go  on.  Maung  Tha  Byaw,  the 
great  singer  of  his  day,  always  made  his  songs  as  he 
sung  them,  and  this  was  so  well  known  that  whenever  he 
appeared,  whether  in  a  regular  play  or  only  to  sing  a  few 
airs,  there  were  always  thirty  or  forty  reporters  sitting  round 
to  take  down  his  words  in  their  parabaik.  This  peculiarity 
of  the  Thabinwun  occasionally  got  him  into  trouble.  A 
somewhat  incomprehensible  piece  of  palace  etiquette  rendered 
it  treasonable  to  sing  a  thanzan,  a  new  song,  before  the 
king.  Maung  Tha  Byaw  several  times,  whether  through 
too  great  laziness  to  learn  the  words,  or  from  the  force  of 
habit,  transgressed  this  rule,  and  was  several  times  ordered 
out  to  execution.  But  he  sang  to  the  taunghmu  and  the 
pagwet,  and  these  grim  customers,  the  gaoler  and  the 
executioner,  unable  to  resist  the  melody  of  this  latter-day 
Orpheus,  hid  him  away  and  exhibited   some  less  talented 


320  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

person's  body  in  evidence  of  having  carried  out  their  orders. 
Then  when  the  next  palace  concert  came  on,  the  king — his 
late  majesty — would  grow  tired  of  the  ordinary  vocalists  and 
regret  that  the  great  improvisatore  was  gone.  Whereupon 
Maung  Tha  Byaw  would  promptly  come  forth  and,;  sing  his 
sweetest.  He  was  killed  in  this  way  several  times,  but  in 
the  end  died  a  natural  death,  about  the  same  time  as  his 
contemporary  Yindaw  Ma  Le. 

The  honours  he  received  were  quite  on  a  par  with 
European  estimation  of  musical  talent.  He  had  a  patent 
to  carry  a  golden  umbrella,  and,  as  Thabinwun,  had 
magisterial  powers  to  punish  those  who  offended  him  or 
refused  to  obey  his  edicts.  Two  lictors  went  before  him  to 
clear  the  way,  a  white  cloth  being  tied  round  their  fasces 
as  a  distinctive  mark.  When  he  performed  in  a  play  a  low 
yaza  mat,  or  royal  fence,  extended  across  the  front  of  the 
stage,  and  at  the  ends  were  planted  his  golden  hti  and  a 
banana -tree.  The  latter  distinction  was  also  granted  to 
Maung  Tha  Zan  and  Maung  Mu,  singers  only  inferior  to 
the  Thabinwun  himself. 

If  the  tunes  are  not  easily  reduced  to  regular  rules,  the 
difficulty  with  the  metres  is  not  less.  There  exist,  indeed, 
written  laws  ordaining  the  number  of  feet  to  the  verse,  but 
they  are  as  lightly  regarded  as  is  consistent  with  their 
recognition  at  all.  Much  more  precision  is  indeed  expected 
in  the  old  tunes  than  in  those  of  modern  date,  but  even  with 
them  song- writers  of  the  present  time  allow  themselves 
considerable  freedom.  The  original  linga  are  all  very  short. 
Thus  the  pyo  has  but  four  syllables ;  kabya,  four ;  yatu, 
six  and  four ;  luta,  four ;  yagan,  six  and  four ;  ^gyin,  four, 
five,  and  six  ;  hmawl6n,  four  and  six  ;  paikzdn,  four ;  legyo, 
four ;  sagyin,  four,  five,  and  six ;  and  so  forth.  In  the 
thanzan,  or  new  tunes,  however,  the  compass  of  the  lines 
often  approaches  the  portentous  length  of  some  of  Walt 
Whitman's  Leaves  of  Grass.  Such  modern  tunes  are  the 
kayathan  (so-called  English),  dobatthan,  nabethan,  nanthein 
yodaya  (Siamese),  and  pyigyithan  (Chinese).  Such  composi- 
tions as  the  Idngyin  and  ngogyin  cannot  be  designated 
otherwise  than  as  musical  prose,  with  occasional  fits  ol 
metre,  prompted  by  their  dolorous  character.     They  are  the 


XXXI  MUSIC  AND  SONGS  321 

threnodies  and  the  laments  of  divorcees,  unhappily  all  too 
common  (in  plays  and  song -books).  Such,  too,  are  the 
saungbasa,  the  ardent  epistles  of  separated  sweethearts. 

The  question  of  rhyme  is  even  more  puzzling.  Some 
compositions  not  intended  to  be  sung,  such  as  notably  the 
sehnityathi  bwe,  songs  about  the  twelve  months  of  the  year, 
giving  an  account  of  their  characteristics,  the  pw^s  that 
take  place  in  them,  and  so  on,  are  written  with  regular  final 
rhymes,  while  the  other  laws  of  prosody,  shi'-16n  tabaik, 
kol6n  tabaik,  and  so  forth,  are  fairly  strictly  observed.  But 
in  the  songs  of  the  plays  and  such-like  productions,  rhyme 
runs  absolute  riot,  so  that  it  is  quite  common  for  every 
word  in  a  line  to  rhyme  with  the  corresponding  word  in  the 
second  verse  of  the  couplet. 

Thus  in  the  kayathan,  translated  below,  there  are 
abundance  of  lines  like  the  following  : — 


Or— 


Or  in  the  Tedat — 


Thuza  lo  lo 
Muya  po  po. 

Ma  yo  le  hnan  kyauk 
A-po  le  tan  lauk. 


Ta  ko  de  pa 
Ma  so  hh  hma 
A  ngo  \hh  hla. 


Such  rhymes  occur  in  an  abundance  that  makes  them  the 
most  prominent  characteristic  of  the  verse,  but  it  is  im- 
possible to  reproduce  them  except  in  another  monosyllabic 
language.  English,  of  all  others,  offers  the  greatest  diffi- 
culties to  the  translator. 

I  have  done  what  is  possible  to  reproduce  the  following 
kayathan,  "  The  Sound  of  the  Trumpet,"  as  nearly  as  possible 
in  the  varying  metre  of  the  original.  Those  who  are  best 
able  to  judge  of  the  success  of  the  attempt  will  be  the  most 
lenient  in  their  criticism.  I  may  mention  that  the  tune  was 
originally  composed  to  the  words  of  a  song  in  honour  of 
the  accession  of  King  Thibaw,  but  words  on  all  manner  of 
subjects  have  been  written  to  it  since. 


322  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


RANGOON  MAIDENS 

O,  the  girls  of  Rangoon  town, 
They  are  fairies  who've  come  down 
From  seats  of  nats,  beyond  the  skies,  sure  here  their  hkes  are  none. 
And  the  fragrance  on  their  cheek, 
Gad,  it  makes  a  man  feel  weak. 
And  their  hair  so  black  and  glossy  with  jet  wavelets  in  the  sun. 
Ye  maidens  fair, 
With  graces  rare, 
Your  faces  and  your  ways  they  are  a  pair ; 
Nat-maidens  are  renowned. 
But  to  say  this  I  am  bound — 
If  you  were  mixed 
We  should  be  fixed, 
For  who  could  tell  the  fairy  from  the  fair  ? 
You're  so  slender 
And  so  tender. 

You  are  like  Wethandaya's  queen. 
And  when  Barani  is  seen. 
Who  goddess  is  of  flowers  on  the  green, 
Men  say, 
'Am&! 
Such  a  likeness,  I  am  sure,  ne'er  was  seen.' 
Ah,  when  we  meet  by  chance. 
My  heart's  all  in  a  dance. 
You're  so  dangerously,  murderously  fair. 
The  diamond  ear-ring's  light 
Like  a  meteor  glows  at  night. 
With  the  lightning  of  the  hair-pin  in  the  midnight  gloom  of  hair. 

The  Southern  Queen, 

The  right-hand  Queen, 
She  who  sits  supreme,  alone 
By  the  monarch  on  the  throne. 

She  the  greatest  of  the  Four ; 
List,  sweet  maids  whom  I  adore. 

Dark-skinned  or  fair. 

Slim,  dibonnaire. 
She  has  robes,  a  kingdom's  joy, 
That  two  hundred  looms  employ  ; 
But  the  silken  flowers  you  wear, 
You  may  dare  with  her  compare, 

Rangoon  maids. 
With  gay  kerchief  o'er  the  bosom, 
With  sweet  swaying  of  the  shoulder. 

Without  art 
Ye  inflict  on  one  or  two  some 
Wounds  that  love  will  hardly  solder 

In  the  heart. 


XXXI  MUSIC  AND  SONGS 


323 


O  that  curve  in  the  round  arm ! 
It  has  wrought  men  grievous  harm. 
Like  the  sylphs  when  they're  at  play, 
Like  the  maids  of  Mandalay, 

Without  display 

In  everyday 

Quiet  dresses  they 

Are  busked  and  gay 
As  the  daughters  of  the  palace,  as  the  maidens  of  the  skies 
In  their  natural,  their  usual  array. 

O !  could  I  but  sing  what  I  think. 
My  heart  would  no  more  on  the  brink 
Of  despairing  love  struggle  and  sink, 
Ye  maidens  to  heavens  the  link ; 

Each  passer-by 

Who  casts  his  eye 
Upon  the  buxom  Hanthawaddy  girls. 

Though  he  be  sage, 

His  feelings  wage 
Fierce  war  within  his  brain-pan  till  it  whirls. 

Dewa  daughters,  fair,  fair. 
Rosebud  fairies,  ware,  ware, 
Bom  men's  hearts  to  snare,  snare, 
Can  I  paint  your  ways, 
Better  sound  your  praise. 
In  verse 
That's  terse 
Than  thus  :  You're  fair  as  any  maid  in  Mandalay. 

Barani  is  a  daughter  of  nats,  corresponding  very  much 
to  the  classical  Flora. 

Madi,  the  spouse  of  Prince  Wethandaya,  is  always 
regarded  as  the  model  wife. 

Ame  !  "  mother  ! "  is  the  invariable  exclamation  of  all 
Burmans  on  all  possible  occasions  of  astonishment,  anger, 
doubt,  or  delight. 

The  name  Hanthawaddy,  properly  applied  to  the  whole 
province,  is,  in  songs,  usually  employed  to  designate  Rangoon, 
for  rhythmical  more  than  any  other  reason,  just  as  Mamye, 
or  Mye,  or  Man  stands  for  Mandalay. 

"  Rosebud  fairies,"  called  bdngyo,  are  daughters  of  nats, 
who  having  stayed  in  the  country  of  the  d^was  for  a  thousand 
years,  are  obliged  to  come  down  to  the  seat  of  man  again. 


324  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


They  are  born  from  roses.     Such  charming  houris  apparently 
particularly  affect  Rangoon. 

The  following  is  the  score  as  written  down  by  Mr.  St. 
Clair,  now  and  for  many  years,  editor  of  the  Singapore  Free 
Press  :— 

KAYA-THAN 


^^^^^j^i^^^a 


MUSIC  AND  SONGS 


325 


Next  to  the  "  Sound  of  the  Trumpet "  the  Dobatthan  is 
probably  the  most  popular  air,  and  is  certainly  the  next 
most  familiar  to  the  English  ear.  It  may  be  called  the 
refrain-song,  and  is  remarkable  for  the  long  dwelling  and 
trilling  on  the  last  note  of  each  stanza.  The  do  is  the  seed 
with  which  aim  is  taken  in  the  game  of  gonnyinhto,  and  pat, 
or  bat,  is  to  twist  or  spin.  The  metre  here  is  not  so  compli- 
cated : — 

SERENADE 

Love  united, 
Troth  so  fondly  plighted. 
Love's  light  with  life  first  lighted. 
Sigh,  my  dear, 
In  me  here, 
Long  with  fear. 
Now  thou'rt  near ; 
Long  and  sigh,  my  dear. 

Flew  the  storm-cloud,  " 

Rose  and  shrieked  the  winds  loud 
Came  I  yet  and  lowly  bowed. 
Cold  as  lead 
Here  I  sped. 
For  love  dead 
Bent  my  head. 
Lonesome  for  love  dead. 


The  thein-nats  play. 
See  through  wild  rain  I  stray. 
Drenched,  but  sad  from  thee  away : 
Sad  and  lone. 
Sweet,  my  own, 
Be  not  stone. 
Hear  me  moan, 
Sweet  love,  hear  my  moan. 


326  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 


Love,  the  cloud-rack, 
Flashed  blue  gleams  of  hope  back. 
Broke  and  furled  its  fringes  black  ; 
Here  I  wait 
At  thy  gate ; 
Open  straight, 
Be  not  late. 
Hot  with  hope  I  wait. 

My  pet  is  fair 
With  flowers  twined  in  her  hair, 
Kerchief  gold-meshed  like  a  snare. 
Like  a  net 
Fairly  set 
Hearts  to  get, 
Sweet  my  pet. 
Mine  lies  in  that  net. 

Courtly  story 
Tells  of  queenly  glory  ; 
My  queen's  as  fair  and  more,  aye. 
Eyebrow  tint, 
Just  a  glint. 
Slightest  hint 
Of  art  in  't. 
Eyebrow's  pencilled  tint. 

Painted  cheeks  sweet. 
Nosegay  where  all  scents  meet. 
See,  I  throw  me  at  thy  feet. 
There  is  none 
To  be  won, 
No  not  one 
'Neath  the  sun, 
Like  my  love  there's  none. 

The  thein-nats  are  certain  spirits,  or  superior  beings,  who 
preside  over  the  showers.  It  rains  whenever  they  come  out 
of  their  houses  (the  stars),  to  sport  about  and  have  mimic 
fights  in  the  air.  The  thunder  and  the  lightning  are  the 
clashing  and  shining  of  the  celestial  arms.  When  the  sun  is 
in  the  house  of  the  goat  it  is  very  hot,  and  the  thein-nats  do 
not  come  out.  To  arouse  them  from  their  lethargy,  if  the 
rains  are  long  of  coming,  it  is  a  common  custom  in  country 
places  to  have  a  16nsw6thi,  a  tug-of-war.  A  chain  or  a 
stout  cable  is  got,  and  the  villagers  divide  themselves  into 
two  parties,  and  pull  and  shout  and  get  up  as  much  excite- 


XXXI  MUSIC  AND  SONGS  327 

ment  as  possible,  to  stimulate  the  thein-nats  to  exert  them- 
selves also.  A  Idnsw^thi  sometimes  continues  for  nearly  an 
hour  without  definite  result. 

The  "  painted  cheeks,"  or  "  fragrant  cheeks,"  so  frequently 
mentioned  in  all  these  love-songs,  refers  to  the  thana'kha,  a 
sweet-scented,  straw-coloured  powder  made  from  the  bark 
and  roots  of  the  Murraya  paniculata,  a  flowering  shrub  of 
the  citron  species.  Some  girls,  and  especially  some  actresses, 
have  particular  recipes  for  making  up  the  cosmetic  into  a 
moist  paste.  It  is  applied  with  the  finger,  and  a  good  deal 
of  skill  is  exhibited  in  putting  on  the  requisite  amount. 
Unpractised  hands  usually  smear  on  far  too  much,  and  it  is 
as  unsightly  as  a  badly  whitewashed  outhouse.  On  others  it 
is  barely  visible.    All  girls  use  it,  and  not  a  few  town  dandies. 

The  following  may  be  regarded  as  somewhat  of  an 
approach  to  the  European  vers  de  sociH^.  I  have  not 
attenipted  to  imitate  the  original  metre : — 

THE  CIGAR-MAIDEN   OF  MADEYA,   NEAR  MANDALAY 

Thy  cheroots,  so  deftly  fingered. 

Famous  are  in  Burma's  land. 
Many  a  chief  has  fondly  lingered, 

Watched  the  maiden's  nimble  hand. 

Madeya,  I'd  spare  to  sing  thee 

For  cheroots  and  dainty  maids. 
For  their  crispness  doth  but  bring  thee 

Sorrow  from  the  palace  blades. 

By  the  throne's  great  gilded  grandeur 

Sits  the  prince,  cheroot  in  hand, 
And  behind  him  little  Ma  Nyo, 

Pearl  of  all  the  village  band. 

Burnt  up  all  my  love  and  sighing. 

Like  the  ash  of  his  cigar  ; 
Hopes  dispelled  and  idly  flying. 

Like  the  smoke  he  puffs  afar. 

Thy  cheroots  so  deftly  fingered, 

Madeya  are  silver- white. 
But  the  prince  that  came  and  lingered, 

Stole  away  the  hamlet's  light. 


CHAPTER  XXXII 

THE    TAWADEINTHA    FEAST 

Next  to  the  uproarious  merriment  of  the  New  Year's  feast 
in  the  spring,  the  festival  of  Tawadeintha  is  probably  the 
most  joyous  and  striking  of  the  Burmese  religious  ceremonies. 
It  is  not  of  universal  observance.  Some  districts  keep  it  up 
w'th  much  more  pomp  than  others,  but  are  not  always 
equally  enthusiastic  every  year  in  the  way  in  which  they 
celebrate  it  In  Rangoon  and  Mandalay,  however,  it  is 
carried  out  regularly  with  greater  or  less  magnificence,  and 
preparations  for  the  procession  and  the  performance  of  the 
mystery  play  often  go  on  for  many  months  beforehand. 

The  feast  commences  on  the  first  of  the  waning  moon  of 
Ta'saungmdn,  about  the  beginning  of  November,  and  lasts 
over  three  days.  It  is  commemorative  of  the  Lord  Buddha's 
ascent  from  the  earth  to  preach  the  Sacred  Law  to  his 
mother,  Maya,  then  a  Queen  of  d^was  in  Tawadeintha,  the 
second  nat-heaven.  He  was  staying  at  the  time  in  the 
country  of  Thawatti  (probably  the  place  now  called  Fyzabad), 
in  the  Zetawun  monastery,  and  thence  in  three  steps  compassed 
the  distance  to  the  nat-heaven,  situated  above  the  Myinmo 
Taung,  the  centre  of  the  universe.  He  had  just  finished  a 
display  of  miracles  on  an  immense  road,  constructed  by  him 
from  one  side  of  the  world  to  the  other,  before  a  crowd 
covering  an  area  of  thirty-six  yuzanas.  The  leader  of  the 
heretics  who  challenged  the  display  of  wonders,  a  man 
named  Purana,  was  so  overcome  with  chagrin  that  he  tied 
himself  to  a  weighted  jar  and  was  drowned.  Arrived  in  the 
nat-seat,  the  Buddha  preached  a  sermon  on  the  duties  of 
filial   gratitude,  to   a   vast  congregation   of  byammas,   nat- 

328 


CHAP.  XXXII  THE  TAWADEINTHA  FEAST  329 

d^was,  and  arahats,  and  having  expounded  the  Law  which 
was  to  lead  them  into  the  noble  path  of  deliverance,  descended 
again  by  a  magnificent  ladder  composed  in  separate  strips 
of  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones,  to  the  ne'ban  kyaung, 
where  he  received  the  usual  pious  offerings  of  the  people  on 
his  arrival,  on  the  day  of  the  full  moon  of  Thadingyut. 

To  recall  this  event  in  the  Buddha's  life  is  the  object  of 
the  feast,  and  the  preparation  of  the  stage  often  takes  con- 
siderably over  a  week,  notwithstanding  the  facility  with 
which  bamboo  buildings  are  run  up  in  Burma.  A  plat- 
form is  prepared,  from  twenty  to  fifty  or  sixty  feet  in  height, 
according  to  the  subscriptions  and  the  scale  on  which  it  is 
intended  to  carry  out  the  performance.  Over  this  is  raised 
a  gaily-decorated  pya-that,  the  tower-like  spire  with  seven 
diminishing  roofs,  characteristic  of  sacred  buildings,  and  lead- 
ing up  to  it  is  a  sloping  way,  representing  the  Saungdan,  the 
path  by  which  Shin  Gautama  ascended.  Sometimes  there 
is  a  similar  sloping  descent  on  the  other  side,  figuring  the 
ladder  which  led  down  to  the  monastery  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Sampa  Thanago,  but  more  often  the  ascent  and 
descent  are  compassed  on  the  same  slope,  which  comes  to 
an  abrupt  end  six  or  eight  feet  from  the  ground,  on  a  level 
platform,  covered  by  an  ordinary  roof,  if  it  represents  merely 
the  earth,  or  the  sacred  pya-that  if  it  does  duty  also  for  the 
ne'ban  kyaung.  Half-way  up  there  is  sometimes  a  covered 
stage,  representing  the  Ugandaw  hill,  on  which  the  Lord 
Buddha  found  purchase  for  his  final  step  to  the  nat-ddwa 
country.  On  the  first  day  of  the  feast,  usually  about  eight 
o'clock  at  night,  the  whole  scene  being  lighted  up  by  the 
brilliant  moon,  occasionally  rather  spoilt  by  smoky  torches 
and  the  evil-smelling  fumes  of  open  crude-oil  lamps,  the  pro- 
cession begins.  The  image  of  the  Teacher  of  the  Law, 
always  represented  sitting  cross-legged,  is  mounted  on  a 
little  carriage,  fitted  to  run  on  a  tramway  reaching  right  up 
to  the  top,  and  is  dragged  up  by  means  of  a  rope  and  a 
windlass.  This  is  done  slowly  and  in  a  rather  jerky  fashion, 
partly  because  the  apparatus  does  not  admit  of  greater  expe- 
dition, but  principally  to  prolong  the  function  as  much  as 
possible,  so  that  all  the  people  may  see  it  and  greater  merit 
may  be  gained.      Surrounding  the  Buddha  is  a  great  company 


330  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

of  worshippers  from  all  the  higher  seats  of  the  universe, 
earthly  kings  in  royal  dress,  the  white  umbrella  borne  over 
their  heads,  and  ministers  and  pages  at  hand  with  trailing 
robes  and  gorgeous  peacock  fans;  nat-d6was  and  their  rulers 
in  rainbow  hues,  with  wings  on  arm  and  thigh  ;  byammas 
from  the  thoughtful  realms  of  the  upper  sky ;  a  glittering 
throng,  all  uniting  in  praise  to  the  Saviour  of  the  World,  the 
chant  rising  and  falling  on  the  night  air  as  they  slowly  ascend. 
As  a  general  thing  it  takes  quite  an  hour  to  get  up.  There 
are  many  doxologies  to  be  sung,  and  the  performers,  all 
laymen  from  the  town,  have  paid  many  rupees  for  their 
dresses  and  want  as  many  people  to  see  their  grandeur  as 
possible.  Technically,  on  the  first  night  the  image  should 
go  no  farther  than  the  Ugandaw  hill,  but,  as  already  said, 
this  half-way  house  very  often  does  not  exist  at  all,  and  even 
when  it  does  there  is  usually  no  more  than  half  an  hour's 
halt,  and  then  the  procession  goes  on  to  Tawadeintha,  the 
spire-covered  platform  on  the  summit.  There  the  gay  throng 
gather  round  the  image  in  the  attitude  of  adoration,  and  a 
man  with  a  powerful  voice  stands  behind  it  and  declaims  the 
sermon  written  down  in  the  sacred  books  as  having  been 
preached  on  the  occasion.  The  subject  is  filial  piety.  "  I, 
the  great  Sramana,  the  mightiest  of  all  beings,  the  teacher  of 
ne'ban  and  the  Law  ;  I,  the  all-powerful,  who  by  my  preach- 
ing can  lead  my  mother  into  the  path  of  salvation  and  the 
final  deliverance  ;  I,  who  know  all  things  and  have  beat  down 
the  passions  under  my  feet ;  even  I,  with  all  this  can  but 
repay  the  debt  due  to  one  of  the  breasts  that  suckled  me. 
What  then  can  man  offer  in  love  and  gratitude  to  the  mother 
who  nourished  him  at  her  breast  ? " 

The  sermon  takes  very  much  less  time  than  the  ascent. 
There  is  a  Burmese  proverb — 

Sa  nahtaung  thaw 
Taye  pyaw. 

When  the  p6ngyi  preaches 
No  harm  the  sleeper  reaches  ; 

that  is  to  say,  no  great  evil  can  befall  you  when  you  are 
assisting,  in  presence  of  body,  if  in  no  other  way,  at  the 


XXXII  THE  TAWADEINTHA  FEAST  331 

exercise  of  so  meritorious  a  ceremony  as  the  expounding  of 
the  Law.  Accordingly  the  great  crowd,  who  have  been 
looking  on  with  much  interest  at  the  progress  up  the  taper- 
lit  saungdan,  commence  generally  to  prepare  for  sleep  in  the 
zayats  which  surround  the  place  where  the  stage  is,  or  failing 
accommodation  there,  curl  themselves  up  as  comfortably  as 
may  be  under  the  bullock-carts  which  brought  them  thither. 
A  still  greater  proportion,  however,  gather  together  in  circles 
to  have  a  gossip,  and  this  talk,  accompanied  by  much  smoking 
and  chewing  of  pickled  tea  and  betel,  goes  on  till  far  into  the 
night.  An  excuse  for  the  scant  reverence  paid  to  the  sermon, 
to  which  none  but  a  few  white-haired  men  and  women  listen, 
is,  that  what  part  of  it  is  not  in  Pali  is  in  such  suggagyi,  such  a 
lofty  and  stilted  style  of  Burmese,  that  no  one  can  follow  it. 
Accordingly  the  discourse  is  hurried  through  and  the  per- 
formers come  down,  and  after  putting  off  their  fine  clothes 
receive  the  congratulations  of  their  friends.  The  image 
remains  all  night  in  "  Tawadeintha,"  and  the  following  even- 
ing the  descent  is  made  with  similar  ceremonial,  and  so  the 
dramatic  part  of  the  festival  is  concluded. 

But  this  is  very  far  from  being  the  whole  of  the  proceed- 
ings. On  both  days  numerous  presents  are  made  to  the 
yahans  and  offerings  to  the  pagodas,  and  these  are  carried 
round  about  the  town  and  by  circuitous  routes  to  the  monas- 
teries, so  that  the  greatest  amount  of  pleasure  and  publicity 
may  accrue  to  the  donors. 

Chief  among  these  offerings  are  always  huge  spires,  some 
of  them  fifty  feet  high,  representing  Tawadeintha,  and  similar 
to  that  on  the  summit  of  the  stage  platform.  They  are 
made  of  bamboo  covered  with  pasteboard,  glittering  with 
gold  and  silver  paper  and  painted  in  many  colours,  and 
are  carried  by  ten  or  twenty  men,  on  long  bamboo  poles. 
Round  about  them  dance  all  the  youth  of  the  quarter  or 
village  they  are  presented  by,  young  men  and  girls,  all  in 
their  brightest  clothes.  In  Rangoon  scores  of  these  offerings 
wend  their  way  to  the  monasteries  under  the  shadow  of  the 
great  Shwe  Dag6n. 

Mingled  up  in  the  procession  come  white  umbrellas,  gold 
umbrellas,  lofty  bamboo  poles  with  gilt  balls  quivering  and 
swaying  at  the  top,  big  pasteboard  images  of  nat-d^was. 


332  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

bilus,  princes,  and  animals,  from  the  crawling  turtle  to  the 
familiar  two-legged  (or  six-legged,  which  you  please)  horse, 
all  of  them  surrounded  by  their  group  of  vigorous  dancers. 
Most  characteristic  of  the  day  are  the  padetha-bins,  a  sort  of 
Turanian  Christmas-tree,  representing  the  fabled  wishing-tree 
of  the  Northern  Island  and  the  heavens  of  the  nats.  In 
those  regions  the  fairy  branches  bear  whatever  is  wanted, 
from  a  savoury  ragout  to  a  complete  suit  of  clothes.  Upon 
earth  the  quivering  bamboo  twigs  carry,  dangling  by  strings, 
whatever  the  bazaar  shops  will  supply,  packets  of  scented 
soap,  matchboxes,  razors,  clasp-knives,  little  looking-glasses, 
coloured-glass  tumblers,  candles,  and  dolls  ;  and  piled  round 
the  roots  are  heavier  and  more  useful  articles  —  blankets, 
mats,  bales  of  yellow  cloth,  and  earthenware  or  lacquer 
begging-bowls.  These  trees,  each  with  its  attendant  band 
of  dancers,  are  carried  round  and  finally  deposited  before  the 
house  of  the  head  of  the  monastery.  Occasionally  a  ngwe 
padetha  is  offered,  if  the  inhabitants  of  the  wealthy  districts 
of  the  town  are  particularly  pious.  This  silver  padetha  is  a 
tree  similar  to  the  rest,  except  that  from  its  branches  hang 
exclusively  rupees  and  smaller  silver  coins,  each  wrapped  up 
in  a  piece  of  tinsel  or  coloured  paper.  These  silver  trees, 
some  of  which  are  worth  from  500  to  1000  rupees,  are  more 
frequently  presented  to  the  pagodas  than  to  the  monasteries. 
In  the  former  case  the  custodians  of  the  shrine  take  charge 
of  the  money  for  the  purposes  of  repair  and  the  payment  of 
watchmen ;  in  the  latter,  the  kyaungthagyi,  the  kappiya  da- 
yaka,  or  lay  steward  of  the  monastery,  receives  the  money, 
as  indeed  he  takes  the  miscellaneous  collection  from  the 
other  wishing-trees,  and  dispenses  all  for  the  benefit  of  the 
kyaung  and  the  giving  of  alms  to  poor  travellers.  It  is 
noticeable,  however,  that  the  ascetic  Sulagandi  monks  would 
altogether  refuse  to  accept  such  a  temptation  to  break  their 
vows  as  a  silver  rupee  tree. 

Spires  and  umbrellas,  padetha-bins  and  hobby-horses, 
hover  about  the  streets  on  the  way  to  the  monasteries  all 
day  long  throughout  the  duration  of  the  festival,  and  at 
night,  after  the  mystery  play  is  over,  the  bands  which  have 
been  performing  sedulously  all  day  crash  out  again  on  the 
night  air,  and  fragments  of  plays  and  songs  are  to  be  heard 


XXXII  THE  TAWADEINTHA  FEAST  333 

everywhere.  Chief  among  the  night  amusements  too  is  the 
presentation  of  the  naga,  the  huge  serpent- Hke  dragon,  a 
great  monster  often  considerably  over  a  hundred  feet  long, 
formed  of  thin  paper,  distended  on  bamboo  hoops.  Each  of 
these  has  a  handle  attached  to  it  and  a  lighted  taper  fastened 
inside,  and  is  carried  by  a  man.  The  body  is  white,  shading 
off  into  a  blood -red  head  and  jaws,  and  as  the  creature 
writhes  its  long  folds  and  twists  and  darts  from  side  to  side 
of  the  road,  the  effect  from  a  distance  is  very  fine  and 
startling  on  a  first  view.  He  plunges  and  coils  about  till 
the  candles  are  nearly  burnt  out,  and  then  is  deposited  with 
other  offerings  on  the  pagoda.  All  through  the  day  and 
night  there  are  generous  people  about,  ready  to  give  meat 
and  drink,  cheroots  and  betel,  to  any  passer-by  who  chooses 
to  afford  them  an  opportunity  of  acquiring  merit,  for  any 
act  of  charity  accumulates  kutho,  even  though  the  object 
aided  be  base. 

The  offerings  to  the  monks  are  also  not  confined  to  the 
fruit  of  the  padetha-bins.  On  the  third  day  of  the  feast  the 
image  of  Shin  Gautama  is  carried  away  from  the  bamboo 
erection  and  dragged  through  the  town  in  the  early  morning, 
the  monks  following  with  their  begging-pots  and  receiving 
the  abundant  alms  prepared  for  them  at  the  S6ndawgyi 
feast,  which  is  intimately  connected  with  that  of  Tawa- 
deintha,  and  commemorates  as  much  the  Lord  Buddha's 
issuing  from  the  ne'ban  kyaung  at  Sampa  Thanago  to  beg 
for  his  food  on  his  return  from  the  second  heaven,  as  the 
pious  gift  of  nogana,  made  after  the  long  fast,  by  Thuzata. 


CHAPTER    XXXIII 

A   SONDAWGYI   FEAST 

It  is  written  that  in  the  solitude  of  Uruwela  a  woman  named 
Thuzata  vowed  an  offering  to  the  spirit  of  the  place  if  she 
should  have  a  male  child.  The  prayer  was  granted,  and 
the  offering  prepared.  A  thousand  cows,  new-calved,  were 
milked ;  five  hundred  more  were  fed  with  this  milk,  and 
then  with  theirs  two  hundred  and  fifty  more,  and  so  on 
until  the  six  noblest  and  best  of  all  her  herds  produced  a 
milk  of  surprising  flavour  and  richness.  This  was  boiled 
with  sandal  and  fine  spice  in  silver  vessels,  and  fine  ground 
rice,  from  chosen  seed,  set  in  new-broken  ground,  was  added. 
Wonderful  signs  attended  the  preparation  of  the  offering. 
A  tha-gya  brought  fuel  to  the  fire  ;  the  great  Brahma  held 
an  umbrella  over  the  silver  lota ;  four  kings  of  nats  sat  by 
and  watched  ;  while  subject  spirits  infused  rich  honey  into 
the  nogana.  When  it  was  ready  Thuzata  sent  a  servant  to 
clear  a  place  under  a  tree  in  the  grove  that  she  might  make 
her  offering  to  the  wood-spirit.  Sunama,  the  servant,  found 
Shin  Gautama  sitting  under  the  bawdi-tree.  It  was  the  day 
on  which  he  attained  the  ne'ban  of  the  passions,  on  which 
he  became  the  Lord  Buddha,  and  his  face  shone  with  a 
splendour  beyond  that  of  nats.  Sunama  returned  and  told 
her  mistress  that  the  spirit  of  the  grove  had  appeared  in 
person  to  receive  the  offering.  Thuzata  poured  the  nogana 
into  a  golden  cup,  worth  a  hundred  thousand  pieces  of  silver, 
such  a  cup  as  is  always  presented  to  the  payalaung  on  the 
day  wherein  he  becomes  Buddha.  Then  she  went  to  the 
grove,  and  prostrating  herself  humbly,  made  her  offering, 
turned  on  the  right,  and  retired.     The  Lord  Buddha  bathed 

334 


CHAP.  XXXIII  A  SONDAIVGYI  FEAST  335 

in  the  river  Neritzara,  at  a  place  where  more  than  100,000 
Buddhas  had  bathed,  before  obtaining  the  supreme  intelli- 
gence. Then  he  divided  the  nogana  into  forty-nine  mouth- 
fuls,  ate  it,  and  mounted  the  throne,  whereon  he  sat  for 
forty-nine  days  tasting  no  food,  and  combating  Man  Nat, 
the  spirit  of  death  and  sin.  But  ere  he  lapsed  into  medita- 
tion he  threw  his  golden  bowl  into  the  river.  It  ascended 
the  stream  swiftly,  floated  steadily  for  a  short  time,  and  then 
sank  in  a  whirlpool  far  down,  leagues  beyond  the  earth  into 
the  country  of  the  nagas,  where  it  fell  against  the  golden 
bowls  of  the  three  previous  Budhs  with  a  clang  that  re- 
sounded throughout  the  four  worlds,  and  all  things  wor- 
shipped the  present  Lord  : 

King  and  high  Conqueror  !  thine  hour  is  come. 
This  is  the  night  the  ages  waited  for. 

This  event  in  the  life  of  Shin  Gautama  is  commemorated 
in  the  S6ndawgyi  pwe.  Sonthi  is  a  sacred  word  set  apart 
to  denote  the  eating  of  members  of  the  Holy  Assembly,  and, 
in  remembrance  of  Thuzata's  historic  offering,  the  mendi- 
cants are  feasted  annually  by  the  pious,  with  a  splendour 
and  profusion  far  exceeding  the  ordinary  alms  poured  daily 
with  unstinting  hand  into  the  begging-bowl.  The  date  of 
the  feast  does  not  exactly  correspond  with  the  original  event. 
According  to  the  chronicle,  the  Lord  Buddha  attained  the 
first  state  of  ne'ban  in  the  month  of  Kason,  about  April, 
whereas  the  feast  of  Tawadeintha,  with  which  the  Sdndaw- 
gyi  is  always  immediately  connected,  is  celebrated  after 
Lent,  at  the  full  moon  of  Ta'saung-m6n  in  November.  The 
festival  is  essentially  one  of  the  town  rather  than  of  the 
country.  Except  the  New  Year's  Feast,  none  of  the 
religious  celebrations  can  be  really  called  universal,  and  the 
S6ndawgyi  perhaps  least  of  all.  Villages  and  small  country 
towns  cannot  get  together  the  splendour  necessary  to  dis- 
tinguish the  occasion  from  the  ordinary  domestic  feasts,  or 
even  from  the  daily  almsgiving  to  the  mendicants.  It  is 
therefore  in  a  large  town  like  Rangoon,  where  there  is  a 
certain  amount  of  money,  and  a  facility  for  acquiring  or 
borrowing  ornaments  and  frippery,  that  the  festivities  are 
best  seen.     There  the  fite — the  word  is  more  appropriate 


336  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

than  any  implying  more  of  a  religious  character — assumes 
the  appearance  of  a  gigantic  reception,  or  conversazione. 
Streets  and  quarters  of  the  town  make  up  a  common  purse 
for  general  decorations  and  the  erection  of  stages  for  hired 
troupes  of  actors,  in  addition  to  individual  effort.  The  dates 
are  arranged  beforehand  so  that  no  two  streets  shall  make 
their  effort  on  the  same  night,  and  so  lessen  the  enjoyment 
of  the  public,  or  draw  away  from  the  expected  number  of 
spectators.  A  committee  is  elected,  or  appoints  itself,  and 
having  got  as  much  money  as  possible,  hires  the  best  avail- 
able dancers  and  actors  for  the  zat  pwe,  if  possible  a  puppet 
troupe  also,  and  in  addition,  as  many  unattached  mummers 
and  clowns  as  can  be  got,  whose  business  it  is  to  dance  up 
and  down  the  street  in  the  guise  of  dragons,  snakes,  nagas, 
and  demons  of  all  sorts,  and  amuse  such  of  the  visitors  as 
cannot  get  near  enough  to  see  the  set  play,  or  prefer  walking 
about  talking  to  their  acquaintances.  Bands  are  engaged 
in  profusion,  flower-garlanded  arches  erected  at  the  ends  of 
the  street  and  at  intervals  along  its  length,  and  gay  Chinese 
lanterns  hung  up  everywhere.  Complimentary  packets  of 
le'hpet,  pickled  tea,  serving  as  invitations,  are  sent  out  in 
profusion,  but  the  non- receipt  of  one  of  these  does  not 
deter  anybody,  and  all  comers  of  whatever  nationality  are 
welcome. 

Nowadays  the  monks  are  wont  to  complain  that  the 
presents  customarily  made  them  at  the  Tawadeintha  feast 
are  not  nearly  so  valuable,  or  even  so  satisfactory,  as  they 
used  to  be.  But  it  is  different  with  the  Sdndawgyi  fite. 
There  the  emblems  of  the  archetypal  nogana  are  all  edible 
and  of  the  most  sumptuous  kind.  In  every  house  the  offer- 
ings for  the  ascetics  are  set  out  for  display  all  night  long 
and  make  a  goodly  show,  if  the  process  can  hardly  be  sup- 
posed to  improve  them  for  consumption.  Mountains  of 
cooked  rice  send  out  spurs  of  beef  and  pork,  with  flat  lands 
of  dried  fish  and  outlying  peaks  of  roasted  ducks  and  fowls, 
the  legs  with  their  claws  and  the  neck  with  the  head  and 
beak  being  extended  as  if  they  had  been  drawn  out  tight  to 
exhibit  their  greatest  length.  Ngapi,  fish  paste,  in  all  its 
malodorous  varieties  of  ngapigaung,  seinsa,  dhamin,  nga-tha- 
lauk,  abounds,  and  loads  the  air  with  suggestions  of  a  fish- 


xxxiii  A  sdNDAWGYI  FEAST  337 

curing  village,  or  an  unclean  fishmonger's  in  the  dog  days. 
Chinese  patties  of  sugar  and  fat  pork,  plates  full  of  fried 
silkworms,  maggots  from  the  top  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree,  salt- 
pickled  ginger  and  fried  garlic,  and  a  variety  of  other  dishes 
beyond  the  ken  of  occidental  cookery,  abound  all  down  the 
long  tables.  Alternating  with  these,  and  perhaps  more 
pleasant  to  look  at,  are  heaps  of  fruit,  oranges,  citrons, 
shaddocks,  plantains,  with  here  and  there  a  late  durian  or 
two,  rivalling  the  ngapi  in  its  odour,  and  the  brick-red  or 
purple  rind  that  conceals  the  luscious  "  snows "  of  the  deli- 
cious mangosteen.  Plentiful  tins  of  sardines  and  Reading 
biscuits,  with  somewhat  muddy-looking  Bengali-made  lemon- 
ade, give  evidence  of  the  progress  of  "  civilisation "  ;  and 
plates  of  betel  with  the  fresh  green  leaves  of  the  betel- 
vine  suggest  how  the  morrow's  afternoon  will  be  passed  in 
well-filled  meditations  by  the  pdngyis  of  the  neighbouring 
monastery. 

The  house  itself  is  decked  out  on  a  corresponding  scale 
of  magnificence.  To  the  uninitiated  foreigner  an  ordinary 
Burmese  hut  presents  about  as  unfavourable  raw  material 
for  decoration  as  can  well  be  imagined.  Built  of  rough  teak 
planking,  or  of  split  bamboo  mats,  and  raised  a  few  feet  off 
the  ground  on  posts,  it  resembles  a  marquee  tent  in  shape 
and  in  size  (according  to  the  principle  of  the  old  Joe  Miller 
story  about  the  stone  which  was  as  big  as  a  lump  of  chalk). 
On  all  ordinary  occasions  there  is  not  a  vestige  of  furniture 
in  it.  A  row  of  earthenware  pots  with  water,  a  couple  of 
wooden  boxes,  and  the  rolled-up  mats  and  blankets  whereon 
the  household  sleep,  are  the  only  things  to  be  seen.  The 
sides  and  ceiling  are  grimed  with  the  smoke  of  the  fire  that 
cooks  the  daily  meals  ;  the  floor  stained  with  smudges  of 
oil  and  red  blotches  of  betel.  Yet  this  unpromising  shanty 
the  Burman  transforms  into  a  palace  chamber,  or  stage-like 
fairy  bower.  The  sides  of  the  house  are  thrown  up  towards 
the  street,  so  that  the  room  assumes  the  appearance  of  a 
verandah.  The  floor  is  covered  with  thick  bamboo  matting 
finely  woven,  over  which  bright -flowered  rugs  are  spread. 
The  dingy  sides  of  the  house  are  draped  with  flags  and 
kullagas,  elaborate  stitched  pieces  of  tapestry,  ten  or  twelve 
feet   long,  and   reaching   down  to  the  ground.     White,  or 

z 


338  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

brilliant-coloured  chintz,  or  paper,  forms  a  roof  studded  with 
red,  blue,  or  green  stars  and  rosettes  of  tinsel  paper.  Great 
mirrors,  swinging  and  other  lamps,  statuettes  of  wood  or 
stucco,  candlesticks  with  glass  shades,  clocks,  German  half- 
crown  engravings,  and  gay  Chinese  lanterns  hang  or  stand 
about.  The  floor  is  literally  covered  with  silver  and  gold 
cups  and  betel-boxes,  of  all  sizes,  from  that  of  a  soup-tureen 
down  to  a  breakfast  cup.  Some  are  plain ;  some  of  that 
repoussi  work  at  which  the  Burmese  silversmiths  are  so 
clever.  The  great  majority  of  these  are  of  course  borrowed 
from  friends  (of  another  street  or  quarter)  or  hired  for  the 
night  from  the  chetty  pawnbrokers.  A  few  chairs  and  tables 
stand  about  for  any  European  visitors  who  may  come,  and 
they  are  sure  of  a  friendly  welcome.  At  the  back  of  the 
room  in  a  long  line,  behind  the  mirrors  and  statuettes,  sit 
the  girls,  decked  out  in  their  most  expensively  embroidered 
skirts  and  gayest  silk  neckerchiefs.  They  are  literally 
loaded  with  jewellery.  Round  their  necks  and  over  the 
bosom  hangs  the  broad  network  of  the  dalizan,  formed  of 
silver  or  gold  fishes  and  flowers  linked  together.  The 
nadaung,  the  huge  gold  plugs  or  circlets  in  their  ears, 
sparkle  with  rubies  and  emeralds.  So  do  the  bracelets  on 
their  arms  and  the  rings  on  their  fingers.  Each  girl  as  she 
sits  is  worth  many  hundred  rupees.  It  is  probably  for  this 
reason  that  they  are  made  so  inaccessible,  seated  behind  the 
lamps  and  lights.  If  admiring  swains  could  get  at  them,  so 
could  other  individuals,  whose  regard  for  the  jewellery  might 
exceed  that  for  the  commandments.  The  young  women 
may  therefore  be  supposed  not  to  care  so  much  for  the 
Sdndawgyi ///^  as  their  brothers.  Most  of  the  girls  are  of 
course  daughters  of  the  house.  If,  however,  the  householder 
has  not  womankind  enough,  he  simply  goes  into  the  bazaar 
and  hires  as  many  personable-looking  damsels  as  he  may 
find  necessary.  They  are  as  much  a  part  of  -the  display  as 
the  silver  cups  and  the  looking-glasses.  A  band  at  one  end 
of  the  room  discourses  music  fitfully.  Occasionally  a  girl, 
too  young  to  have  attained  to  the  dignity  of  jewellery,  gets 
up  and  dances  and  sings  for  a  while.  Musical  instruments 
of  different  kinds,  pattala,  hn^,  and  migyaung,  harmonicons, 
trumpets,  and  alligator  guitars,  lie  scattered  about  here  and 


XXXIII  A  SONDAWGYI  FEAST  339 

there   for   the   amusement  of  skilled  visitors,  and  there   is 
always  somebody  thrumming  or  tootling  away  on  them. 

The  whole  scene  is  an  unceasing  round  of  laughter  and 
gaiety.  The  host  and  hostess  and  a  few  old  women  bustle 
about  and  receive  the  visitors,  point  out  the  most  noteworthy 
parts  of  the  display,  have  a  few  words  of  conversation,  and 
offer  refreshments.  The  guest  drinks  a  cup  of  singularly 
washy  and  saccharine  tea  or  lemonade,  smokes  a  big  green 
cheroot,  or  chews  a  fid  of  betel,  compliments  the  owner  of 
the  house,  declares  he  never  saw  so  much  magnificence  in 
his  life,  and  departs  to  go  through  the  same  performance  in 
the  next  house.  Englishmen  are  always  welcome.  Seats 
are  brought  for  them  ;  the  master  of  the  house  sits  by  while 
they  are  under  his  roof,  explains  everything  to  the  best  of  his 
ability,  and  produces  the  inevitable  bottle  of  brandy  or  beer, 
without  which  no  European  is  supposed  to  be  able  to  endure 
existence.  The  reception  begins  at  eight,  or  half-past,  and 
lasts  for  an  hour  and  a  half  or  so.  Then  every  one  who  is 
coming  has  arrived,  and  has  gone  the  round  of  his  friends,  so 
that  the  domestic  display  is  pretty  well  over.  The  gorgeously- 
arrayed  females  gather  up  their  skirts,  and  go  off  home  under 
a  guard  of  their  male  relatives,  and  having  put  off  the  greater 
part  of  their  jewellery,  come  back,  each  with  a  huge  green 
cheroot  in  her  mouth,  to  see  the  play  and  join  in  the  fun.  A 
few  of  the  older  people  remain  indoors,  steadily  chewing 
betel,  comparing  notes  as  to  past  displays,  and  speculating 
as  to  whether  any  other  street  in  the  town  will  be  able  to 
surpass  the  display  of  Eighteenth  Street.  Not  a  few  placidly 
go  to  sleep,  notwithstanding  the  din  without,  the  strident 
sounds  of  the  band,  the  shouts  at  the  buffoonery  of  the 
clown,  and  the  confused  chatter  of  thousands  of  voices.  Out- 
side there  is  no  slackening  in  the  jollity.  From  the  lofty 
stage  representing  the  second  heaven  of  the  nats,  portions  of 
the  Law  are  declaimed  ;  the  celestial  beings  deliver  them- 
selves of  suggagyi,  lordly  sentiments,  revellings  in  exuberant 
verbosity,  all  night  long,  and  the  constantly-shifting  audience 
never  thins  away.  Farther  up  the  street  a  huge  pasteboard 
demon  is  gambolling  unwieldily,  half-a-dozen  dancers  twirling 
and  twisting  vigorously  within  a  foot  or  two  of  its  great 
tusked  jaws.     At  intervals  some  of  the  youths  of  the  street. 


340       THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  xxxui 

or  some  of  the  visitors,  worked  into  a  state  of  excitement  by 
the  music,  dance  enthusiastically  in  an  unattached  kind  of 
fashion  for  a  few  minutes,  and  then  suddenly  break  off  with 
a  laugh.  Some  of  the  young  men  spend  most  of  the  time 
flitting  about  the  extemporised  stalls,  tasting  at  one  place 
fish  jelly,  at  another  queer  salads,  having  a  violent  flavour  of 
garlic ;  here  smoking  a  cheroot,  there  chewing  a  packet  of 
pickled  tea,  and  flirting  in  turn  with  all  the  girl  vendors, 
who  look  very  coquettish  with  the  red  or  white  flowers  in 
their  glossy  black  hair,  and  the-  fragrant,  yellow  thanaka 
toning  down  their  complexion.  Not  in  the  least  shy  they 
are,  and  quite  ready  to  bandy  Oriental  compliments  with 
new  acquaintances.  It  is  with  many  of  the  younger  folks 
the  pleasantest  part  of  the  feast — and  is  not  the  old  duenna 
sitting  behind — what  matter  though  she  is  asleep — to  play 
propriety?  And  so  the  merriment  goes  on  all  night,  fit 
occupation  provided  for  all :  sleep  or  high  moral  declaim- 
ings,  combined  with  the  clown's  comedy,  for  the  elderly ; 
abundance  to  eat,  and  a  surfeit  of  gossip  for  the  lazy  and 
middle-aged;  and  indiscriminate  love-making  and  dancing 
and  noise  for  the  young.  At  length,  with  dawn  of  day, 
which  in  those  low  latitudes  corresponds  with  the  rising  of 
the  sun,  the  ascetics  come  round  in  grave  yellow  procession, 
their  hands  clasped  round  the  thabeit,  their  eyes  downcast. 
The  bowls  are  filled,  the  rest  of  the  feast  is  carried  humbly 
to  the  monastery  by  the  donors,  and  the  Eighteenth  Street 
S6ndawgyi  pw6  is  over.  The  celebrators  sleep  all  day ;  the 
state  of  digestion  of  the  monks  is  not  a  matter  for  discussion  ; 
and  those  visitors  who  have  got  new  ideas  from  what  they 
saw  last  night,  lose  no  time  in  making  use  of  them  for  the 
better  glorification  of  their  own  file,  which  comes  off  a  few 
days  later. 


CHAPTER    XXXIV 

A    WORK    OF    MERIT 

"  The  wisdom  that  made  Asia  mild  "  laid  down  no  command 
which  is  better  observed  in  Burma  than  the  first  of  the  Five 
Rules :  Thu  a-thet  go  ma  that  hnit  (Thou  shalt  not  take 
any  life  at  all).  Hardened  convicts  will  not  harm  the 
vermin  that  infest  their  mattresses.  A  story  is  told  of  a 
man  who  allowed  the  snake  that  had  kiJled  his  father  to 
wriggle  away  unmolested  through  the  tall  elephant  grass. 
I  myself  have  seen  a  Burmese  mother  take  up  between  two 
bits  of  bamboo  the  scorpion  that  had  stung  her  little  son, 
and  simply  throw  the  hideous  creature  out  of  the  house.  So 
far  does  the  command  to  beware  how  they  harm  any  meanest 
thing  in  its  upward  path  lead  earnest  Buddhists.  Mr.  Edwin 
Arnold  tells  how,  in  a  distant  age,  the  great  Lord  Buddha 
offered  up  himself  to  preserve  "  this  breath  of  fleeting  life " 
in  an  animal : 

Drought  withered  all  the  land  ;  the  young  rice  died 
Ere  it  could  hide  a  quail. 

When  between  the  hot  walls  of  a  nullah,  our  Lord  spied,  as 
he  passed,  a  starving  tigress,  with  two  little  cubs  whining  for 
the  nourishment  her  shrunken  frame  could  not  give  them. 
Then,  heeding  nought  but  the  immense  compassion  of  a 
Budh,  the  great  yahan  bethought  himself: 

"  Lo  !  if  I  feed  her,  who  shall  lose  but  I  ? "  and,  throwing 
off  his  priestly  robes,  came  forth  with  a  "  Ho  !  mother,  here 
is  meat  for  thee  !  "  and  died. 

"  So  large  the  Master's  heart  was  long  ago,"  before  he 
came  upon  earth  for  the  last  time  to  teach  the  Law  and  give 

341 


342  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  millions  peace ;  not  only  when  he  came  down  from  the 
hills,  where  in  austere  fastings  he  had  been  pondering  to  win 
the  secret  of  "  that  curse  which  makes  sweet  love  our  anguish," 
and  appeared  before  King  Bimbasara  to  plead  for  the  flocks 
that  the  white-robed  Brahmin  priests  destined  for  sacrifice  on 
the  altar.  The  idea  has  always  been  a  favourite  one  with 
Buddhists.  A  favourite  myth  is  that  of  the  hare.  Kalpas 
since  the  Lord  of  ruth  appeared  on  earth  in  the  form  of  that 
animal.  All  creatures  were  making  offerings  to  the  Buddha 
who  was  then  engaged  in  preaching  the  sacred  Law.  The 
hare  bethought  himself  that  he  too  must  give  some  alms. 
But  what  had  he  to  give  ?  Man  might  bring  costly  gifts  ;  the 
lion  found  it  easy  to  offer  the  tender  flesh  of  the  fawn  ;  birds 
of  prey  brought  dainty  morsels ;  fish  could  produce  no  less 
tasty  signs  of  devotion  ;  even  the  ant  was  able  to  drag  along 
grains  of  sugar  and  aromatic  leaves  ;  but  the  hare,  what  had 
he  ?  He  might  gather  the  most  tender  succulent  shoots 
from  the  sunny  forest  glades,  but  they  were  useless  even  to 
form  a  couch  for  the  teacher.  There  was  nothing  but  his 
own  body,  and  that  he  freely  offered.  The  Supreme  Lord 
declined  the  sacrifice,  but  in  remembrance  of  the  pious  inten- 
tion, placed  the  figure  of  the  hare  in  the  moon,  and  there  it 
remains  as  a  symbol  of  the  queen  of  night  to  the  present 
day. 

Similarly  just  a  little  below  Mandalay  on  the  river,  near 
the  Ava  road,  there  is  a  huge,  castellated  pagoda,  the  Shwe 
Gyet-yet,  raised  in  commemoration  of  another  performance 
of  the  Budh,  in  an  avatar  countless  ages  ago.  The  tale  is 
that  in  a  season  of  grievous  dearth,  when  all  flesh  was  dying 
of  famine,  the  great  Master,  then  in  the  shape  of  a  jungle- 
fowl,  spied  a  holy  pilgrim  in  the  last  extremity  of  want. 
There  was  none  to  pity  him,  none  to  save  him  from  death, 
and  the  Budh,  conquering,  even  in  that  distant  time,  one  of 
the  latest  lost  of  the  ten  deadly  sins — the  love  of  life — 
surrendered  himself  to  save  another.  Hence  the  pagoda 
standing  out  boldly  on  a  great  rock  over  the  river.  To  the 
east  is  a  representation  of  a  fowl  in  stone,  recalling  the 
event ;  and  before  this,  daily  by  the  pagoda  slaves  and  others, 
and  on  feast-days  by  hundreds  of  worshippers,  plentiful  heaps 
of  gilded  grains  are  strewn. 


XXXIV  A    WORK  OF  MERIT  343 

These  personal  examples  furnished  by  the  teacher  of 
neh'ban  and  the  Law  himself  have  only  served  to  emphasise 
what  is  seen  on  the  admission  of  every  new  member  to  the 
holy  assembly.  One  of  the  articles  with  which,  in  addition 
to  his  dress  and  begging-bowl,  every  postulant  must  provide 
himself,  is  a  strainer,  without  using  which  he  must  drink  no 
water.  The  object  is,  of  course,  to  prevent  him  from  destroy- 
ing life  in  the  shape  of  the  small  animalcula  to  be  found  in 
water.  Some  zealous  and  scientific  proselytiser  endeavoured, 
by  the  use  of  microscopes,  to  persuade  the  people  that  this 
was  of  no  avail,  seeing  that  even  in  the  strained  water  there 
was  abundance  of  animal  life ;  but  a  council  decided  that, 
provided  the  water  had  been  filtered,  if  the  ascetic  could 
detect  nothing  living  with  his  unaided  eyes  he  was  at  liberty 
to  drink  the  water  without  incurring  blood-guiltiness.  The 
attacks  of  science  on  Buddhism  failed  as  completely  as  the 
efforts  of  most  missionaries. 

The  mingled  pity  and  dislike  with  which  professional 
hunters  and  fishermen,  whose  occupation  implies  the  regular 
taking  of  life,  are  viewed  by  Buddhists,  is  well  known,  and 
makes  itself  evident  in  the  fact  that  the  villains  in  most 
plays  are  hunters.  Fishermen  are  perhaps  not  so  much 
decried — possibly  on  account  of  the  plea  brought  forward 
on  their  behalf,  that  the  fish  die  of  themselves,  being  taken 
out  of  the  water,  and  not  through  any  direct  action  of  their 
captors.  It  is  in  connection  with  fish,  however,  that  one  of 
the  most  curious  national  works  of  merit  takes  place  annually 
— furnishing,  like  all  Burmese  festivals,  occasion  for  much 
fun  and  frolic. 

The  violence  of  the  rain  during  the  five  or  six  months 
of  the  south-west  monsoon  floods  the  country.  Not  only  do 
the  rivers,  which  in  many  places  rise  regularly  as  much  as 
thirty  or  forty  feet  above  their  hot-weather  level — not  only 
do  they  overflow  their  banks,  and  make  wide  seas  of  the 
neighbouring  flat  lands,  but  great  lakes  spring  up  everywhere. 
These  are  gradually  stocked  with  fish  of  all  kinds,  most  of 
which,  by  the  sudden  fall  of  the  water,  are  cut  off  from  all 
chance  of  retreat  to  the  large  rivers,  where  alone  there  is 
safety.  Steadily  the  water  goes  down,  the  hot  sun  sucks  up 
the  pools,  till  at  last  the  end  seems  to  be  come.     The  river 


344  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

is  far  away,  and  there  will  be  no  rain  for  months.  Another 
day  or  two  will  suffice  to  bake  and  split  into  long  fissures 
the  bottom  of  the  puddle,  wherein  are  yet  hundreds  of 
animate  things,  from  the  whiskered  mud-fish  to  the  lordly 
hilsa,  the  salmon  of  India.  Then  the  seekers  after  merit 
come  out,  bearing  with  them  big  chatties,  huge  earthenware 
jars,  the  size  of  some  of  which  makes  the  story  of  AH  Baba 
and  the  Forty  Thieves  seem  very  much  more  credible.  Girls 
and  boys,  old  men  and  old  women,  go  tramping  about  in 
the  soft  slush,  capturing  the  fish  and  dropping  them  into  the 
jars  of  water.  Great  laughter  there  is  over  the  wild  plunges 
and  flounderings  of  the  boys,  the  little  screams  and  "  a-m^ 
lele,  a-me  le-taw  "  of  the  girls  as  they  step  upon  a  fish,  which 
whizzes  away  with  a  suddenness  that  is  apt  to  disturb  the 
equilibrium,  or  slip  with  one  leg  slowly  but  irremediably 
into  a  hole — perhaps  a  last  year's  buffalo-wallow — out  of 
which  they  are  only  extricated  after  much  teasing  and 
tickling  by  the  boys.  Then  there  is  the  stalking  and  driving 
of  a  great  nga-gyi  into  a  corner,  whence  with  a  flop  and  a 
muddy  dash  he  escapes  into  the  middle  again,  amidst  a 
chorus  of  the  inevitable  ame  1  ("  mother  ")  which  springs  to  a 
Burman's  lips  on  all  possible  and  unexpected  occasions. 
There  is  the  caution  to  be  observed  in  seizing  the  stinging 
mud-fish,  the  gingerliness  with  which,  when  he  is  caught,  the 
waving  whiskers  are  avoided ;  especially  the  control  over 
yourself  to  be  maintained  if  he  does  sting  you,  lest  you 
should  spoil  all  your  chance  of  merit  in  a  moment  of  irrita- 
tion, by  doing  him  an  injury.  Sometimes  the  fish  are  caught 
in  nets ;  but  this  reckless  wastefulness  in  the  matter  of  com- 
bining merit  with  merriment  is  not  very  favourably  viewed 
by  the  neighbourhood. 

At  last  the  fish  are  all  caught  and  crowded  together  in 
the  sin-o — the  water-jars.  There  is,  perhaps,  a  considerable 
pause  before  they  are  liberated.  The  nga-hlut  pw^  usually 
occurs  a  little  after  the  carnival  of  the  water  feast,  when 
everybody  is  doused  with  water ;  and  if  the  fish  have  been 
rescued  from  their  danger  some  time  before  that,  they  have 
to  wait  in  their  uncomfortable  quarters  all  the  longer.  The 
fite  seems  to  be  celebrated  with  more  enthusiasm  in 
Maulmein  than  in  any  other  large  town  in  Lower  Burma. 


XXXIV  A    WORK  OF  MERIT  345 

In  Rangoon  the  spruce  merchants'  clerks  are  apt  to  sneer 
at  it  as  a  "jungle  feast,"  and  rather  laugh  at  the  gatherings 
on  the  banks  of  the  "  Great  Royal  Lake."  But  in  Maulmein 
it  is  different.  There  everybody  enters  into  the  spirit  of  the 
thing  with  religious  fervour.  A  great  procession  is  formed, 
and  winds  its  way  along  the  long  snake-like  up-and-down 
street  that  constitutes  the  great  part  of  the  town.  At  the 
head  comes  a  band  of  young  men  dancing — some  with  their 
faces  whitened  with  chalk,  others  grimed  with  soot ;  some 
extravagantly  dressed  as  princes  and  ogres,  others  scantily 
arrayed  in  a  tucked-up  waist-cloth — capering  and  prancing 
along  with  the  waving  of  hands  and  fantastic  pacings 
characteristic  of  the  national  dancing.  Behind  them,  in  a 
bullock  cart,  is  the  band,  the  huge  saing-waing,  the  circular 
frame  with  its  octaves  of  drums,  on  which  the  performer, 
smoking  a  big  green  cheroot  all  the  while,  thumps  away 
with  great  vigour  and  in  excellent  time,  accompanied  by 
some  trumpets,  a  flute  or  two,  and  a  young  fellow  with  a 
noisy  bamboo  clapper.  Then  there  is  an  indiscriminate 
crowd  of  well-dressed,  excited  people,  carrying  huge 
umbrellas,  white  and  gold  ;  big  spires  ;  young  fellows  on 
hobby-horses ;  men  with  long  bamboos,  gilt  from  butt  to 
tip,  looking  like  fishing-rods,  with  which  one  might  bob  for 
whales.  Mingled  with  these  are  the  carts  carrying  the  jars 
of  fish.  In  the  middle  is  a  great  long  platform  on  wheels, 
supporting  a  pasteboard  and  bamboo  and  painted  mat 
model  of  a  steamboat.  The  captain,  in  a  gold-bordered  cap, 
occupies  the  greater  part  of  the  ship  forward,  and  yells 
orders  to  the  man  at  the  helm,  who  ports  and  starboards 
with  surprising  rapidity  and  impartiality.  The  chief  engineer 
divides  his  time  between  stoking  up  the  smouldering  cigar- 
stump  and  the  cotton  which  supplies  the  smoke  from  the 
funnel,  and  whistling  violently  on  his  fingers.  A  man  stands 
at  the  side,  heaving  the  lead  (a  joint  of  bamboo  stuffed 
with  cotton).  It  seems  to  be  "And  a  half,  nine,"  when 
some  one  is  hit  on  the  head,  and  "  tin  bam  milla  ne  " — three 
fathoms  and  no  bottom — when  the  lead  fails  to  touch  any- 
body. A  lady  in  English  dress,  with  her  face  brought  to 
the  proper  colour  with  chalk,  represents  the  passengers. 
This  performer  is  of  course  a  boy,  and  usually  affords  most 


346        THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  xxxiv 

amusement  to  both  native  and  English  spectators.  The 
fun  goes  on  all  the  way  with  jokes  at  the  expense  both  of 
the  performers  and  the  lookers-on,  and  shouts  and  roars  of 
laughter  at  every  new  buffoonery.  At  last  they  reach  the 
spot  on  the  river-bank  selected  for  freeing  the  fish,  and  after 
a  few  pious  formulae  have  been  recited,  the  contents  of  the 
jars  are  capsized  into  the  water.  Many  of  the  fish  are  already 
dead,  and  not  a  few  are  so  sickly  that  there  is  little  chance 
of  their  escaping  being  eaten  by  cannibal  brethren ;  but  this 
does  not  disturb  the  equanimity  of  any  one.  A  great 
kaunghmu  has  been  done,  much  merit  has  been  gained,  and 
there  has  been  great  fun  over  it.  The  motley  procession 
wends  its  way  back  again,  and  everybody  goes  at  nightfall 
to  see  the  great  kyi-gyin  pw^  given  by  some  public-spirited 
and  drama-loving  quarter  or  street  in  the  town. 


CHAPTER   XXXV 

THE    NEW   year's    FEAST 

Although  religious  festivals  and  fetes  are  so  abundant  in 
Burma,  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  none  of  them  are  univer- 
sally observed  in  all  parts  of  the  country,  except  the  New 
Year's  Feast.  In  localities  where  the  people  are  exception- 
ally pious,  the  end  of  Lent  may  be  more  carefully  observed 
than  elsew^here,  some  devoting  themselves  especially  to  pious 
observances,  others  to  the  more  worldly  ceremonies  of  the 
sdndawgyi  feast.  The  Tawadeintha  festival  is  an  annual 
observance  in  some  districts,  in  others  it  practically  passes 
over  unnoticed.  Similarly  with  all  the  minor  fetes.  But  it 
is  not  so  with  the  thi'gyan  pwe.  All  over  Burma,  from  the 
smallest  jungle  hamlet  to  the  crowded  streets  of  Rangoon 
and  the  straggling  suburbs  of  Mandalay,  the  New  Year  is 
ushered  in  with  the  old  formalities,  and  with  perennial 
enthusiasm.  Not  an  hour  is  cut  off  from  the  allotted  number 
of  days,  and  every  item  of  the  old  practice  is  carried  out 
with  the  same  vigour. 

For  this  reason  the  "  Water  Feast,"  as  it  is  called  by 
Englishmen,  has  forced  itself  on  the  attention  of  the  most 
careless  observer,  and  every  one  who  has  written  about 
Burma  devotes  a  greater  or  less  amount  of  space  to  a 
description  of  the  good-humoured  merriment  with  which 
the  New  Year  is  introduced.  I  do  not  propose,  therefore, 
to  do  more  than  allude  to  the  lesser  known  formalities 
observed  on  the  occasion. 

The  month  Tagoo,  the  first  of  the  Burman  year,  occurs 
in  the  spring,  and  New  Year's  Day  is  in  the  earlier  half  of 
April.      But  it  does  not  fall  annually  on  the  same  day.      It 

347 


348  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap 

is  a  movable  feast,  and  the  date  of  the  commencement 
of  the  year  was  regularly  fixed  by  the  royal  astrologers  in 
Mandalay,  who  made  a  variety  of  intricate  calculations,  based 
on  the  position  of  various  constellations.  Since  the  annexa- 
tion the  duty  of  fixing  the  date  of  the  new  year  has  fallen 
on  the  Chief  Secretary  to  the  Local  Government.  The 
object  is  to  determine  at  what  time  the  king  of  the  tha- 
gyas  will  descend  upon  earth,  for  it  is  his  arrival  which 
will  inaugurate  the  year.  The  Ddwa  king  is  fairly  punctual, 
and  the  descent  occurs  always  between  the  9th  and  12th 
of  April.  For  some  few  years  he  has  appeared  on  the  1 1  th, 
and  scoffers  in  Rangoon  declare  that  he  will  probably  con- 
tinue to  do  so  to  save  the  pdnnas  trouble.  These  gentlemen 
annually  draw  up  a  thi'gyan  sah,  a  kind  of  prophetic 
almanac  for  the  year,  relating  what  is  likely  to  happen,  and 
whether  it  will  be  prosperous  or  not.  These  vaticinations 
depend  upon  a  variety  of  circumstances.  The  tha-gya 
min  may  come  down  wielding  a  spear,  when  there  will  be 
disturbances  in  the  land  ;  a  water-jar,  when  the  rains  will  be 
abundant  and  the  crops  good,  a  torch  or  a  simple  staff. 

It  is  from  those  objects  that  he  bears  with  him,  all  of 
which  are  ascertained  by  previous  inspection  of  the  heavens 
and  comparison  with  ancient  precedents,  that  the  astrologers 
are  able  to  determine  the  exact  time  when  the  descent  will 
be  made.  Other  particulars  are  learned  from  the  animals 
on  which  the  nat-king  rides.  Sometimes  he  has  a  cow  or 
a  buffalo  for  a  mount ;  at  other  times  he  bestrides  a  naga, 
when  there  are  sure  to  be  very  heavy  rains  ;  a  gal6n,  on  the 
other  hand,  presages  violent  squalls  and  atmospheric  dis- 
turbances. When  the  tha-gya  min  goes  on  foot  with  a 
lantern  in  his  hand  and  shoes  on  his  feet,  it  is  a  sign  that 
the  heat  will  be  very  great  and  prolonged.  Besides  this  the 
king  of  the  superior  heavens,  the  Bumazonat,  the  spirit 
guardian  of  the  earth,  exercises  also  a  considerable  influence 
on  the  coming  year,  though  he  has  nothing  to  do  with  its 
commencement.  The  p6nnas,  therefore,  are  at  great  pains 
to  find  out  his  exact  position  at  the  beginning  of  the  month 
Tagu — whether  in  the  trees,  the  flowers,  or  the  paddy 
stubble.  Each  of  these  temporary  habitations  has  its  special 
signification,  and  the  discovery  of  them  is  not  only  valuable 


XXXV  THE  NEW  YEARS  FEAST  349 

in  itself,  but  serves  as  a  most  satisfactory  corroboration  of 
the  truth  of  the  events  prognosticated  by  the  movements 
and  surroundings  of  the  tha-gya  king.  The  conclusions  are 
all  carefully  noted  down  in  the  thi'gyan  sa,  and  great  piles 
of  these  are  carefully  preserved  in  the  archives  of  the 
monkish  library,  seldom  to  be  looked  at  again. 

Besides  the  events  which  are  to  happen  in  the  coming 
year  the  astrologers  are  also  able  to  determine  whether  the 
tha-gya  min  will  remain  three  days  or  four  days  upon  earth. 
If  he  stays  three  days  it  is  called  a  matule  year,  if  four, 
tawtule,  and  the  water-throwing  is  carried  on  a  correspond- 
ing time. 

All  these  points  are  settled  some  time  beforehand,  so 
that  every  one  in  the  remotest  part  of  the  country  may 
have  due  notice,  and  then  information  is  sent  to  the  heads 
of  monasteries,  and  the  chief  districts,  and  all  is  made  ready 
to  receive  his  nat-majesty  with  proper  honours.  When  at 
last  the  day  comes  round,  all  are  on  the  watch,  and  when 
the  wise  men  give  the  signal,  tha-gya  min  kyabyi,  the  king 
has  come  down,  a  cannon  is  fired  off,  and  forthwith  all  the 
people  come  out  of  doors  with  pots  full  of  water,  the  mouths 
of  the  jars  filled  up  with  fresh  green  leaves  and  twigs  of  the 
sacred  tha-bye  tree.  A  formal  prayer  is  said,  and  the  water 
is  poured  out  on  the  ground,  and  all  are  happy.  Many 
years  ago  an  event  happened  which  singularly  impressed 
true  believers  in  the  royal  city.  Just  when  expectation  was 
at  its  highest  and  all  ears  were  strained  in  expectation  of 
the  roar  of  the  cannon,  there  was  a  terrific  thunderclap,  which 
made  all  the  town  quiver,  and  demonstrated  the  accuracy  of 
the  p6nnas'  calculations.  There  was  no  more  thunder  that 
night,  and  the  ranks  of  the  pious  received  great  increase 
during  the  ensuing  week.  In  country  towns  and  villages 
every  one  who  has  a  gun  rushes  out  into  the  street  at  the 
appointed  hour  and  fires  it  off.  Most  wonderful  blunder- 
busses and  old  flintlocks  and  ancient  rusty  horse -pistols 
make  their  appearance,  warranted  to  make  a  noise,  but 
capable  of  little  more.  After  this  ceremony  is  over  a  few 
go  to  bed, — for  the  descent  is  usually  made  at  midnight, — 
but  the  majority  sit  up  and  talk. 

With  the  earliest  glimmer  of  light  all  rise,  and  taking 


350  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

pots  full  of  fresh  clean  water,  carry  them  off  to  the  monastery 
to  present  them  to  the  monks — not  to  throw  over  them,  such 
liberties  are  never  taken  with  the  brethren.  After  having 
made  their  kadaw,  "  begged  pardon  with  water,"  to  the 
sacred  order,  they  set  off  to  the  pagoda  and  there  com- 
mence the  yethdn  pw^,  the  washing  of  the  images.  It  is 
not  to  be  supposed  that  these  really  require  cleansing  any 
more  than  the  recluses  do,  but  it  renders  them  myatta-thappfe, 
an  expression  not  to  be  rendered  by  many  words  in  English. 
It  combines  all  the  meanings  of  cleanliness,  beauty,  stateli- 
ness,  proper  position,  majesty,  and  repose ;  and  the  laving 
with  water  is  merely  a  recognition  of  this  fact.  The  work 
is  usually  done  by  women,  and  they  reverently  clamber  up 
and  capsize  their  silver  and  earthenware  goblets  of  water 
over  the  placid  features.  There  are  scores  of  them  at  work, 
and  the  ceremony  is  soon  finished.  Then  all  set  off  home 
again,  and  the  jovial  part  of  the  festivities  begin.  All  along 
the  road  are  urchins  with  squirts  and  syringes,  made  of  tin 
and  bamboo,  with  which  they  have  been  furtively  practising 
for  the  last  few  days,  and  their  experience  develops  itself  in 
extreme  accuracy  in  catching  you  with  a  stream  of  water  in 
the  ear.  Young  men  and  girls  salute  one  another  mostly 
with  cups  and  goblets  of  water,  and  stifled  screams  and 
shouts  of  merriment  rise  everywhere.  Before  breakfast  every 
one  is  soaked,  but  no  one  changes,  for  it  is  fine  warm  weather, 
and  there  is  lots  more  water  to  come. 

During  the  day  there  is  a  regular  going  round  to  pay 
the  compliments  of  the  season.  It  was  a  great  kadaw  day 
in  the  palace  at  Mandalay,  and  all  the  nobles  and  officials 
went  to  "  beg-pardon,"  and  worship  at  the  golden  feet — not 
with  water,  however.  Similarly  inferiors  pay  their  respects 
to  their  superiors  and  masters,  children  to  their  parents, 
scholars  to  their  teachers,  and  juniors  generally  to  seniors 
There  is  water  everywhere,  more  especially  on  those  parts  of 
your  dress  which  cling  most  uncomfortably  to  you.  The 
girls  are  the  most  enthusiastic  in  the  matter,  and  as  they 
generally  go  in  bands  and  have  a  copious  reservoir  in  the 
shape  of  big  jars  along  with  them,  the  unprotected  male  is 
routed  in  no  time.  Some  zealous  people  go  down  to  the 
river  or  creek,  wade  into  the  water  knee -deep,  and  splash 


XXXV  THE  NEW  YEAR'S  FEAST  351 

water  at  one  another  till  they  are  tired  and  the  thing  begins 
to  seem  monotonous.  No  one  escapes  ;  in  fact  no  one  would 
care  to  get  through  the  three  days  with  dry  clothes,  for  the 
wetting  is  considered  a  compliment.  A  clerk  comes  up  to 
his  master,  shikhos  to  him,  and  gravely  pours  the  contents 
of  a  silver  cup  down  the  back  of  his  neck,  saying  ye-kadaw 
mi,  "  I  will  do  homage  to  you  with  water."  A  polite  but 
less  humble  form  of  speech  is  ye-laung-thi,  to  "  pour  "  water 
over  ;  while  equals,  and  the  young  people  generally,  yepetthi, 
"  splash  "  one  another  with  the  utmost  vigour.  It  is  to  be 
observed  that  dirty  water  is  never  used.  The  barbaric 
innovation  of  squirts  is  a  sign  of  decadence. 

Foreigners  do  not  object  to  the  custom,  except  perhaps 
some  of  the  more  pompous  and  stolid  natives  of  India,  whose 
minds  are  incapable  of  appreciating  a  joke  in  any  form 
whatever.  The  rollicking  Chinaman  takes  it  up  with  the 
utmost  zeal,  and  sets  about  the  thing  in  the  most  business- 
like way.  The  last  time  I  was  in  Maulmein  one  of  the 
storekeepers  in  the  main  street  had  rigged  up  a  garden 
hydrant  in  front  of  his  house  and  connected  it  with  the 
well.  A  coolie  was  engaged  to  work  it  all  day,  and  a 
continuous  jet  of  water,  sufficient  to  put  out  a  small  con- 
flagration, streamed  from  the  nozzle  the  entire  duration  of 
the  feast.  Not  only  was  Boon  Tek  enabled  to  drench 
everybody,  but  he  advertised  his  machines  and  made  a  good 
thing  of  it. 

But  the  Chinaman  was  exceeded  in  zeal  by  a  young 
Englishman  in  Prome,  not  many  years  ago.  He  was  a 
Government  official,  and  there  were  two  friends  dining  with 
him.  A  note  came  round  to  him  from  a  neighbour  in  the 
next  street  saying  that  the  yepetthi  girls  were  out  and  would 
be  round  his  way  shortly.  So  he  forthwith  made  prepara- 
tions. The  Madrasi  "  boys  "  got  a  huge  bath  tub  on  to  the 
verandah,  and  tin  pannikins  were  placed  handy,  and  the 
dinner  proceeded.  But  unfortunately  there  was  no  one  put 
to  watch  for  the  arrival  of  the  girls,  and  the  first  notice  of 
their  appearance  was  a  well-directed  stream  of  water  in  the 
nearest  man's  shirt-front.  To  sally  forth  was  the  work  of  an 
instant,  but  it  was  found  that  the  tub  was  in  the  possession 
of  the   enemy,  and  only   served  to   eke   out  the  abundant 


352  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

supply  they  had  brought  with  them  in  big  silver  bowls. 
The  three  Englishmen  were  soaked  through  at  the  first  dis- 
charge. But  the  Assistant  Commissioner  was  not  to  be 
discomfited  so  easily.  He  rushed  through  a  perfect  cascade, 
and  seizing  the  first  damsel  he  came  across,  incontinently 
plunged  her  in  the  bathing-tub  and  soused  her  under.  This 
filled  the  rest  with  dismay,  and  they  forthwith  took  to  their 
heels  and  ran,  followed  as  speedily  as  her  clinging  garments 
would  permit  by  the  offended  beauty  who  had  been  so 
unceremoniously  treated.  The  occurrence  was  rather  un- 
fortunate, for  the  girls  were  all  daughters  of  some  of  the 
principal  Burmans  in  the  town,  and  it  is  a  very  grave  im- 
propriety for  a  man  to  lay  hands  on  a  woman  even  in  joke  ; 
how  much  more  to  duck  her  in  a  wash-tub  and  wet  all  her 
hair !  That  young  official  had  no  more  compliments  paid 
him  at  New  Year's  time,  to  his  own  loudly  expressed  regret. 
The  most  ludicrous  story  I  have  heard  on  the  subject  of 
the  water-feast  may  serve  as  a  warning  to  Englishmen  who 
arrive  in  Burma  in  April.  The  victim  reached  Rangoon  on 
the  second  day  of  the  water-feast,  and  having  no  Indian 
outfit  got  himself  up  in  a  tall  hat,  frock-coat,  and  the  rest, 
to  go  and  present  a  letter  of  introduction.  After  much 
trouble  and  irritation,  caused  by  the  meanderings  of  his 
ghari-wallah,  not  by  any  means  alleviated  by  the  heat — ^for 
the  sun  is  usually  at  its  hottest  in  April — he  arrived  at  the 
desired  house,  and  proceeded  upstairs.  On  the  verandah 
he  found  three  or  four  Burmese  girls,  who  forthwith  asked 
permission  to  throw  water  on  him.  He  naturally  supposed 
they  were  asking  whether  he  wanted  to  see  the  master  of 
the  house,  and  nodded  violently.  Whereupon  they  capsized 
their  bowls  of  water  over  him,  including  the  hat  in  the 
libation.  The  astonished  man  took  it  to  be  a  custom  of  the 
country  to  cool  down  over-heated  foreigners,  but  thought  the 
inclusion  of  his  hat  an  unnecessary  detail.  Just  then  the 
owner  of  the  house  appeared,  having  retired  previously  to 
get  some  money  to  buy  himself  off  a  ducking,  and  having 
been  informed  of  the  state  of  affairs,  burst  into  a  fit  of  such 
violent  laughter  at  the  griff's  notion  of  the  ceremony  as 
roused  in  the  latter  a  wrath  so  fiery  that  it  almost  dried  him 
again. 


XXXV  THE  NEW  YEAR'S  FEAST  353 

A  special  feature  of  the  New  Year's  Feast  was  the  formal 
washing  of  the  king's  head,  called  thi'gyan  daw  gyi.  It  is 
not  to  be  supposed  that  his  majesty  washed  his  head  only 
once  a  year,  or  that  it  is  at  any  time  an  operation  to  be 
lightly  undertaken,  any  more  than  it  is  by  the  humblest  of 
his  subjects.  But  at  other  times  the  ceremony  was  called 
hkaung-se  mingala  or  thi'gyan  daw  hkaw,  and  was  not 
attended  with  so  great  solemnity  as  characterised  the  func- 
tion at  the  opening  of  a  new  year.  Formerly  the  water  for 
the  purpose  was  annually  brought  up  from  Hkaung-se 
Gyun  (Head-washing  Island),  a  little  rocky  islet  situated  on 
the  river  opposite  Maulmein.  Hkaung-se  Gyun  is  fabled 
to  hang,  with  its  little  cluster  of  pagodas  and  monasteries, 
by  an  invisible  cord  from  the  heavens,  and  has  therefore 
long  enjoyed  a  special  sanctity,  not  by  any  means  reduced 
by  the  springs  of  clear  bubbling  water  found  on  its  limited 
surface.  Therefore  for  long  it  supplied  all  the  water  for  the 
royal  head-washing.  Latterly,  however,  it  was  abandoned, 
and  with  this  there  is  a  curious  history  connected.  After 
the  war  of  1826,  it  was  settled  in  a  general  way  between 
the  commissioners  that  the  river  Salween  should  form  the 
boundary  between  Burma  and  the  newly-acquired  British 
province  of  Tenasserim.  But  later  a  question  arose  as  to 
the  ownership  of  the  islands,  and  especially  of  the  rich  rice- 
growing  Bilu-gyun,  north  and  south  of  which  the  three  rivers 
flow  into  the  sea.  After  much  fruitless  palavering  it  was 
determined  to  leave  the  decision  to  chance.  A  couple  of 
cocoa-nuts  were  tied  together  and  taken  some  distance  up 
the  Salween  and  thrown  into  the  water  in  the  middle  of  the 
river.  They  went  down  bobbing  gaily  till  they  came  to  the 
place  where  the  conflicting  currents  of  the  Gyaing  and  the 
Attaran  come  in,  and  there  they  twirled  and  twisted  about 
in  an  aggravating  way  until  at  last  an  eddy  caught  them, 
and,  carrying  them  past  the  old  town  of  Martaban,  decided 
for  the  Daye  outlet,  through  which  they  were  swept  away  to 
sea.  Thus  the  "  Ogre's  Isle  "  became  British  territory,  and 
with  it  the  little  Hkaung-se  Gyun.  Nevertheless  for  many 
years  water  was  still  carried  up  to  Mandalay  for  the  thi'gyan 
daw  gyi,  till  at  last  Pegu  was  annexed  to  the  British  crown. 
Then  it  seemed  undignified  to  carry  the  sacred  water,  not 

2  A 


354  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

only  from  the  stranger's  land,  but  so  many  miles  through 
alien  waters,  and  so  it  was  necessary  to  seek  for  another 
place.  Where  could  a  better  be  found  than  the  mighty 
Irrawaddy  itself?  Accordingly  from  then  on  till  there  ceased 
to  be  a  king  of  Burma,  the  necessary  amount  was  drawn 
from  the  centre  of  the  river  by  the  Ye-kyi-wun,  a  minister 
specially  appointed  for  that  purpose. 

As  in  so  many  other  cases  the  amenities  of  the  thi'gyan 
pw^  have  led  to  the  extorting  of  money.  In  the  good  old 
days,  and  in  the  country  districts  still,  it  was  the  practice  for 
benevolent  people  to  keep  open  house,  and  give  food  and 
dainties  to  all  passers-by,  with  tea  and  flavoured  drinks, 
cheroots  and  betel  for  those  that  preferred  them.  To  lighten 
the  expense,  contributions,  called  k^bo,  were  invited  from 
friends  and  neighbours,  and  out  of  this  has  sprung  the  system 
of  blackmail  prevalent  in  Rangoon.  A  bevy  of  girls  go  into 
an  Englishman's  house  and  sprinkle  him  with  lavender-water, 
or  the  moss-rose  bouquet,  so  much  in  favour  with  Burmese 
belles.  After  a  little  badinage,  they  produce  plain  water,  and 
threaten  further  operations  unless  something  is  given  them. 
This  they  usually  get,  and  if  Englishmen  complain  of  shame- 
less extortion  it  is  their  own  fault.  The  fair  speculators  are  not 
such  as  any  respectable  girl  would  care  to  be  seen  with,  and 
the  prettinesses  with  scents  are  no  more  national  than  the 
scents  are  themselves.  A  provincial  beauty  would  infinitely 
prefer  a  good  honest  ducking  with  vulgar  water  to  the 
mawkish  sentimentality  of  eau  de  Cologne.  Some  of  the 
results  of  superior  civilisation  are  very  undesirable. 

On  the  final  day  of  the  feast  a  gun  is  fired  at  noon  to 
signalise  the  ascent  of  the  thi'gya  min  to  his  happy  realms 
again,  and  then  all  is  over.  The  squirts  are  laid  by  for 
another  year ;  clothes  are  hung  up  to  dry,  and  nothing 
remains  but  to  wait  and  see  whether  the  pdnnas  are  more 
successful  than  usual  in  their  prognostications  for  the  year. 

The  origin  of  the  custom  is  no  doubt  the  rain-making, 
described  by  Professor  J.  G.  Frazer  in  The  Golden  Bough,  but 
the  Burmese  explain  it  by  a  legend.  The  thi'gya  min  had  a 
bet  with  a  rival  and  the  loser  lost  his  head.  This  could  not 
be  allowed  to  be  defiled  by  touching  the  ground,  so  it  was 
caught  by  a  daughter  of  Natdewas.     Seven  of  them  take  it 


XXXV  THE  NEW  YEARS  FEAST  355 

in  turn  to  hold  the  head,  and  when  the  head  passes  from 
one  goddess  to  another  the  New  Year  begins.  The  head  is 
burning  hot,  and  has  to  be  cooled  with  pouring  on  of  water. 
This  is  recalled  by  the  splashing  of  one's  neighbour  w^ith 
water  at  the  New  Year  time. 


CHAPTER    XXXVI 

A    BOAT-RACE 

It  is  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  the  sun  is  still  beat- 
ing down  fiercely  on  the  mile  and  a  half  broad  stretch  of 
water  which  extends  far  above  and  below  Myanaung.  But 
the  whole  population  of  the  town,  and  excited  family  parties 
from  a  score  of  villages  round  about,  are  gathered  on  the 
banks  of  the  Irrawaddy,  and  bustle  about  regardless  of  the 
heat.  Girls  with  flowers  in  their  hair,  and  the  brightest  of 
dainty  silk  handkerchiefs  floating  over  their  dazzling  white 
jackets ;  their  costly  skirts  trailing  on  the  half-muddy,  half- 
dusty  grass,  and  the  long  loops  of  their  dalizan  necklaces 
swinging  about  on  their  bosoms,  hurry  hither  and  thither 
with  unwonted  activity,  regardless  of  the  detriment  to  the 
fragrant  yellow  cosmetic  on  their  cheeks  and  necks,  and 
heedless  of  the  occasional  remonstrances  of  the  guardian 
duennas,  hardly  less  excited  than  themselves.  Young  men, 
ordinarily  scrupulous  as  to  the  jaunty  set  of  their  flowered 
turbans,  and  the  carefully-arranged  folds  of  their  hundred 
or  two-hundred  rupee  waistcloths,  now  rush  backwards  and 
forwards,  apparently  aimlessly,  their  gaung-baungs  twisted 
on  anyhow,  or  hanging  loose  round  their  necks,  and  the 
cherished  paso  girded  up  tightly  round  their  loins,  reckless 
of  creases  ;  while  they  have  not  a  word  to  say,  or  even  a 
glance  to  throw,  at  the  fairest  of  the  country's  daughters. 
Staid  old  men  are  gathered  together  in  knots,  all  talking 
together  at  the  pitch  of  their  voices,  and  jingling  bags  of 
rupees  in  one  another's  faces  ;  every  now  and  then  one  group 
rushing  off  to  another  and  swelling  loud  talk  into  shouting, 
in   a   fashion   of  which  you  would   not   have   believed   the 

356 


CHAP.  XXXVI  A  BOAT-RACE  357 

phlegmatic  old  gentlemen  capable,  if  you  had  seen  them 
three  days  ago.  Everywhere  is  bustle  and  excitement  and 
anticipation.  Even  the  township  policemen  have  lost  their 
ordinary  official  swagger,  and  are  engaged  in  eager  converse 
with  individuals  who,  in  ordinary  times,  command  their 
attention  in  quite  a  different  way. 

There  is  very  good  reason  for  it.  The  full  moon  of 
Thadingyut  is  past ;  it  is  well  on  in  October,  and  it  is  the 
time  of  the  boat-races.  For  weeks  past  the  Myanaung  boat 
has  been  spurting  up  and  down  the  long  straight  reach,  or 
having  a  heavy  training  paddle  to  Akauktaung  and  back 
again,  and  now  at  last  the  great  day  has  come.  Myanaung 
has  challenged  Thonkwa,  hitherto  the  unconquered  champions 
of  all  the  low  country,  and  the  race,  in  best-and-best  boats, 
is  to  come  off  this  afternoon.  The  down-river  men  with 
their  boat,  and  pretty  nearly  the  entire  body  of  their  fellow- 
villagers,  arrived  last  night,  and  none  except  the  privileged 
have  seen  anything  of  them  yet,  to  enable  them  to  judge 
whether  they  are  in  as  fine  form  as  they  were  last  year 
when  they  rowed  the  Bassein  boat  to  a  standstill.  No 
wonder  there  is  excitement,  for  Myanaung  is  but  a  young 
subdivision,  sprung  up  since  the  English  occupation,  with 
no  speciality  for  paddlers,  and  Th6nkwa  cherishes  a  name 
for  prowess  on  the  river  from  far  back  in  the  old  Burmese 
days. 

But  suddenly  there  is  a  lull  in  the  buzz  of  talk,  and  every 
eye  is  directed  up  the  river.  The  boats  have  started  for  the 
preliminary  row  over  the  course.  It  is  necessary  to  pro- 
pitiate the  guardian  spirits  of  the  river,  and  the  votive  offer- 
ings are  therefore  to  be  made.  At  the  stem  of  each  boat 
crouches  a  man  holding  with  outstretched  arms  a  bunch  of 
plantains,  some  cooked  rice,  flowers,  and  betel,  for  the  sooth- 
ing of  the  water-kelpie.  This  precaution  must  on  no  account 
be  omitted.  Who  knows  what  disaster  might  not  otherwise 
happen  ?  The  flouted  nat  might  upset  the  craft  with  a  flip 
of  his  finger,  or  cling  to  the  keelson  of  the  boat  and  tire  to 
nothing  the  sinews  of  the  brawniest  arms.  Therefore  goodly 
alms  are  given,  so  that  all  may  rest  with  the  prowess  of  the 
rival  crews.  This  breather  serves  also  another  purpose.  It 
enables  the  spectators  to  have  a  final  view  of  the  antagonists. 


3S8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

and  to  lay  their  last  rupee  or  not  on  their  champions  according 
as  their  judgment  or  loyalty  bids  them.  Not  a  man  of  them 
will  back  the  enemy's  boat.  If  they  have  not  supreme  con- 
fidence in  the  superiority  of  their  representatives,  they  simply 
refrain  from  staking  all  they  possess.  But  in  all  the  vast 
crowd  there  is  not  a  man  who  has  not  a  money  interest 
of  some  kind  in  the  race.  There  is  U  On,  the  district 
magistrate,  in  the  "  grand  stand  " — a  primitive  erection  run 
up  in  half  an  hour  with  some  sticks  and  bamboo  matting ; 
he  is  a  Thdnkwa  man  by  birth  himself,  but  nothing  will 
persuade  him  to  back  the  fishing  village  against  the  sub- 
division over  which  he  now  rules.  Why,  he  has  practically 
built  and  furnished  all  the  money  for  the  Daungsatpyan 
himself.  The  water-craft  which  he  learnt  in  his  native  place 
has  only  prompted  him  to  hang  with  greater  loving  care 
over  the  lines  of  the  boat  when  it  was  building,  and  Ba  Tu, 
his  eldest  son,  wields  the  steering  paddle  in  the  Peacock, 
the  pride  of  Myanaung.  Now  the  old  gentleman — he  pulled 
a  good  oar  himself  twenty  years  ago  for  the  very  town  he 
now  longs  to  beat — moves  about  uneasily,  gets  up  and  sits 
down,  winds  and  unwinds  his  white  pawldn,  and  can  hardly 
refrain  from  shouting  out,  for  the  Peacock  is  just  passing, 
and  Ba  Tu  gives  a  yell  and  flourishes  his  paddle,  and  there  is 
a  great  shout  of"  Yauk-kya  !  "  from  the  Myanaung  partisans. 
Yauk-kya,  or  yauk-kya  ba-tha,  means  simply  "  man "  or 
"  man,  the  son  of  his  father,"  but  it  is  a  defiant  challenge, 
or  an  inspiriting  cheer  to  the  Burmese.  They  are  a  fine, 
strong-looking  lot,  the  Myanaung  crew,  perhaps  a  little  too 
fleshy,  and  therefore  possibly  deficient  in  staying  power, 
but  all  young,  and  worked  up  to  a  state  of  nearly  frantic 
enthusiasm  by  the  presence  of  their  sweethearts  and  the 
momentous  duty  that  rests  upon  them.  Their  weather- 
beaten  old  trainer  paddles  alongside  of  them  in  a  little  canoe, 
and  begs  them  to  be  calm  at  the  beginning  and  not  rush 
themselves  out  at  the  start.  The  boat  is  a  beauty,  and  does 
credit  to  the  old  magistrate  in  the  sweeping  curves  of  its 
lines.  Low  and  as  light  as  skilled  hands  can  make  it,  it 
draws  only  a  few  inches  of  water,  and  does  not  rise  much 
more  than  a  foot  above  the  surface.  So  thin  are  the  sides 
that  the  boat   is   tourniquetted   together  with    twisted  wire 


A  BOAT-RACE  359 


and  bamboo,  and  the  seats  themselves  serve  more  to  stiffen 
it  and  prevent  a  wrench  from  doing  any  harm,  than  as 
conveniences  for  the  paddlers.  There  are  twenty-four  of  a 
crew  all  told,  and  the  boat  is  fifty  feet  long.  It  is  painted 
all  black,  save  at  the  bow,  where  there  is  a  brilliant  representa- 
tion of  the  peacock,  from  which  it  takes  its  name.  At  the 
end  they  come  with  a  great  spurt,  shouting  and  bending  to 
each  stroke,  and  another  great  yell  rises  from  the  bank  to 
assure  them  of  the  approval  of  their  townsmen. 

A  length  or  two  behind  them  comes  the  Thdnkwa  boat, 
paddling  along  composedly  to  the  time  of  their  celebrated 
rowing  song,  a  mysterious,  gusty  air  that  has  suggestions  of 
the  swirl  of  the  river  eddies  and  the  rustle  of  the  wind  in  the 
tall  kaing-grass  that  lines  their  native  creeks,  in  its  varying 
measure.  It  comes  over  the  water  gently  enough  now,  but 
many  is  the  time  it  has  swelled  like  a  hurricane-blast  and 
left  the  opposing  boat  foolishly  as  if  it  were  at  anchor.  The 
Thdnkwa  crew  are  as  different  as  possible  in  appearance 
from  their  robust  young  rivals.  There  is  probably  not  a 
man  under  thirty  among  them,  but  there  is  not  a  superfluous 
ounce  in  all  the  wiry  twenty-four.  Every  thew  is  tough  as 
whip-cord,  with  long  struggles  against  the  rush  of  the  current 
in  the  flooded  creeks ;  every  face  and  arm  and  shoulder  is 
deep  brown  with  exposure  to  the  wind  and  the  sun,  for  not 
a  man  among  them  but  is  a  fisherman,  and  thinks  nothing 
of  the  wild  squalls  that  sweep  over  the  delta  and  rufifle  the 
swift  current  into  a  dangerous  surge.  No  wonder  they  have 
an  unbeaten  record ;  and  U  On  fidgets  about  uneasily 
when  the  famous  pe-nin  of  the  Thdnkwa  boat  salutes  him 
obsequiously  as  the  boat  sweeps  up. 

No  one  knows  how  old  Ko  Kya-gyi  is.  His  withered 
face  and  shrunken  body  suggest  that  it  is  time  he  was  giving 
up  fishing  and  endeavouring  by  assiduous  piety  to  get  his 
balance  of  kan  somewhat  more  on  the  right  side  towards 
another  existence,  but  he  is  tough  as  buffalo  hide  still,  and 
no  man  in  all  Burma  has  a  greater  name  than  the  ever- 
victorious  Thdnkwa  steersman.  None  like  him  to  keep  a 
boat  straight  in  the  conflicting  eddies  that  have  thrown  out 
many  an  apparently  conquering  boat ;  none  like  him  to 
gauge  the  strength  of  his  crew  and  spurt  just  at  the  right 


36o  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

moment !  From  start  to  finish  he  has  all  his  wits  about  him, 
and  the  stem  of  the  boat  is  full  on  the  winning-post  all  the 
time.  Four  years  ago,  when  the  Hlaing  men  seemed  to  be 
carrying  all  before  them,  it  was  Kya-gyi's  generalship  that 
won  the  day.  Therefore  the  Myanaung  magistrate  is  a 
little  disconcerted  at  the  homage  paid  him  by  his  old  rowing 
mentor,  but  none  the  less  he  puts  on  another  hundred  rupees 
with  a  Thdnkwa  lugyi  who  comes  up  at  the  moment. 
The  Th6nkwa  men  come  with  a  bit  of  pace  just  at  the 
finish  too,  and  with  a  he-la,  lu-la,  yauk-kya,  ba-tha,  h^, 
dash  past  the  winning-post. 

This  winning-post  is  not  such  as  is  used  in  English  boat- 
racing.  A  boat  is  moored  right  out  in  the  current  with  its 
head  to  the  stream.  At  right  angles  to  its  length  a  long 
hollow  bamboo  stretches  across  the  bows,  and  through  this  is 
passed  a  rattan,  the  end  projecting  an  inch  or  two  beyond 
the  mouth  of  the  tube  at  both  sides.  The  contesting  boats 
have  each  their  own  side  and  keep  their  own  water,  and  the 
bow-paddler  rises  and  snatches  at  this  pan  as  the  boat  whisks 
past.  It  thus  becomes  a  sign  and  proof  of  victory  and  is 
planted  in  the  bows  of  the  winner.  Not  a  little  skill  is 
wanted  on  the  part  of  both  the  man  at  the  bow  and  the 
man  at  the  stern.  The  former  has  to  be  sure  in  the  eye 
and  quick  of  hand,  and  the  ktter  must  take  especial  care 
to  bring  the  boat  past  at  the  proper  distance.  It  is  not 
so  very  simple  a  matter  to  pull  out  the  long  cane  at  the 
terrific  pace  with  which  the  boats  come  up,  and  the  pan 
must  be  carried  off  to  ensure  the  verdict.  Sometimes  both 
men  seize  it  at  once,  and  then  they  are  almost  certainly 
swept  out  of  the  boat,  and  as  a  rule  both  lose  the  rattan. 
Then  it  is  a  thaye  pw6,  a  dead  heat.  But  if  one  has  the 
pluck  and  presence  of  mind  to  stick  to  it,  then  his  boat 
has  won. 

Now  the  ofiferings  have  been  made  and  the  boats  turned 
round,  no  very  easy  matter  in  the  swift  current  with  their 
great  length.  But  it  is  effected  dexterously  enough.-  The 
Myanaung  boat  paddles  up  to  the  winning-post  and  young 
Aung  Zan  tries  the  pan  to  see  that  it  runs  smoothly  in  the 
bamboo,  and  Ko  Kya-gyi  swings  in  the  stern  of  the 
Thdnpanhla — the    Three    Fair    Flowers,    as    the    Thdnkwa 


^  \ 


A  BOAT-RACE  361 


boat  is  called — to  make  sure  that  his  man  will  have  his 
proper  amount  of  cane  to  grasp  at.  Then  both  boats  get 
under  the  bank  to  avoid  the  force  of  the  current,  and  paddle 
leisurely  up  to  the  starting-point,  a  mile  or  a  mile  and  a  half 
up  the  river. 

The  din  and  bustle  on  the  bank  now  become  greater 
than  ever.  Every  one  is  talking  and  stating  his  views  as 
to  the  result  of  the  race,  and  nobody  is  listening  to  him. 
Betting  goes  on  freely,  and  the  chink  of  rupees  is  heard  per- 
petually. It  is  announced  that  the  sporting  English  extra 
assistant-commissioner  from  the  divisional  town  has  given  as 
his  opinion  that  "the  fishermen"  will  win  ;  they  are  in  better 
condition  and  cooler-headed  than  their  opponents,  and  will 
win  at  the  finish.  There  is  a  minute's  dejection  at  this,  and 
then  it  is  all  effaced  by  the  discovery  that  the  Chinese  store- 
keepers have  put  their  "bottom  dollars"  on  the  home  boat. 
That  is  good  news,  for  the  Tay6k  is  a  good  judge  of  any- 
thing that  can  be  betted  about,  and  it  is  very  seldom  that  he 
drops  money.  So  the  talk  goes  on  till  the  last  coin  is  staked. 
Welshers  have  not  yet  been  introduced  into  Burma,  and 
there  is  now  nothing  to  be  done  but  relieve  one's  feelings  in 
talk,  and  puff  furiously  at  big  cheroots,  with  an  occasional 
rush  into  the  water  to  see  how  far  the  boats  have  got  up. 
Old  U  On  tries  to  talk  to  the  young  Englishman,  but  it  is 
no  use,  he  can't  keep  either  his  mind  or  his  eyes  off  the  boat, 
and  the  Ayebaing  improves  the  occasion  by  attempting  a 
flirtation  with  the  daughter  of  the  house.  But  he  might 
as  well  talk  to  the  winds.  She  is  far  more  excited  than  her 
father,  and  would  be  dancing  about  if  it  were  not  for  the 
restraint  of  her  old  nurse,  who  is  too  blear-eyed  and  rheu- 
matic to  be  anything  but  ill-natured. 

But  at  last  there  is  a  hush  and  every  eye  is  turned  up 
the  river.  The  boats  are  turning,  and  come  drifting  down 
to  the  starting-place.  There  is  a  minute  or  two  of  backing 
and  fussing  about  so  as  to  get  the  boats  straight  and  the 
bows  level,  and  then,  with  a  loud  shout,  they  are  off  to  a 
start  by  mutual  consent.  A  roar  of  pent-up  excitement 
comes  from  the  crowd  all  the  way  down  the  banks  to  the 
grand  stand  and  then  swings  back  again  like  a  wave  on  the 
flat  sea-sand.     Served  by  their  magnificent  boat  and  their 


362  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS         chap. 

younger  strength,  the  Myanaung  crew  jump  off  with  the 
lead  and  continue  to  draw  away  until  half-way  down  the 
course,  where  they  are  clear  and  have  a  bit  of  daylight  to 
spare.  The  backers  of  the  Peacock  are  wild  with  triumph, 
and  already  see  victory  before  them,  but  the  Th6nkwa 
party  are  perfectly  composed  and  declare  that  things  could 
not  be  going  better.  Quarter  of  a  mile  from  home  old  Ko 
Kya-gyi  lets  out  a  yell,  and  though  there  is  no  apparent 
quickening  of  the  stroke,  the  gap,  which  for  the  last  few 
hundred  yards  has  remained  unaltered,  suddenly  disappears, 
and  the  Thdnpanhla  creeps  steadily  up  the  Peacock's 
thwart,  and  at  last  Aung  Zan,  the  Myanaung  bow,  sees  the 
enemy's  boat  for  the  first  time  since  the  start,  and  a  few 
seconds  later  the  rival  bow  is  level  with  him,  and  the  nose 
of  the  Three  Fair  Flowers  shows  in  front  to  the  length  of  its 
figure-head.  The  noise  on  the  bank  is  simply  deafening. 
Incoherent  shouts  of  despair  and  encouragement  and  delight 
burst  from  every  throat ;  old  women  tear  down  their  scanty 
hair  and  work  with  their  arms  as  if  they  themselves  were  in 
the  race ;  girls  rush  to  the  water's  edge  heedless  of  the  mud 
and  splashing  that  will  ruin  their  silken  skirts  for  ever ; 
young  men  and  boys  rush  up  to  their  necks  in  the  water 
and  yell  with  frenzied  eagerness,  for  it  is  only  a  boat's  length 
to  the  winning-post,  and  Thdnkwa  leads  by  a  foot.  Old 
U  On  can  stand  it  no  longer,  for  the  last  minute  he  has 
been  shaking  all  over  as  if  he  were  in  a  palsy,  and  his  tongue 
and  throat  are  as  parched  as  if  they  were  choked  with  slack- 
lime.  He  rushes  forward  with  his  hands  in  the  air  and 
shrieks  Yauk-kya  in  a  key  that  cuts  through  the  din  like 
a  steam  whistle.  Yauk-kya — the  cry  is  taken  up ;  Yauk- 
kya,  ba-tha — every  mother's  son  of  you — the  Daung,  the 
Flower,  swe  le  le ;  row  for  your  lives  ;  row  for  your  un- 
vanquished  name  ;  and  the  two  bows  fling  their  paddles  from 
them  and  rise  for  the  struggle.  The  wink  of  an  eye  too 
soon  and  he  will  miss  his  grasp,  the  flick  of  a  finger  too  late 
and  there  will  be  nothing  to  seize.  A  great  hush  falls  on 
the  vast  crowd  as  if  they  were  all  stricken  dead,  and  then 
both  men  disappear  in  the  water,  clutching  apparently  simul- 
taneously at  the  rattan.  An  agonising  five  seconds,  and 
then  Aung  Zan  comes  to  the  surface  brandishing  on  high 


A  BOAT-RACE  363 


the  pan  ;  the  Thdnkwa  bow  felt  the  scratch  of  it  on  his 
palm  as  it  disappeared  through  the  tube. 

The  scene  that  follows  is  beyond  description.  The  vic- 
torious crew  spring  up  to  dance,  but  the  relief  is  inadequate. 
They  can  only  escape  frenzy  by  plunging  into  the  river. 
U  On  tucks  up  his  waistcloth  and  dances  round  in  mad 
delight  till  his  stiff  old  legs  will  bear  him  no  longer.  Pompous 
old  lugyis  caper  and  plunge  and  shout ;  younger  men  can 
only  relieve  their  feelings  by  flinging  themselves  in  the 
pools  on  the  bank  and  rolling  about  wildly  in  the  mud  ; 
girls,  who  at  ordinary  times  would  hardly  dare  to  raise  their 
eyes  to  look  about  them,  dance  and  shout  in  ecstasy,  and 
their  married  guardians  join  in  the  rout.  Bands  from  a 
dozen  villages  round  about  strike  up,  but  the  professional 
dancers  who  came  to  perform  in  honour  of  the  victors  are 
fain  to  look  on  while  their  intended  audience  go  through 
unpremeditated  figures.  It  always  seems  marvellous  how 
the  people  ever  get  gravity  of  demeanour  again  after  a  great 
boat-race. 

The  contest  is  technically  not  over  yet.  It  is  a  hle- 
pyaung  lu-pyaung,  that  is  to  say,  the  crews  have  now  to 
change  boats.  The  Thonkwa  men  take  the  Daungsatpyan, 
and  the  home  crew  man  the  Three  Fair  Flowers.  But  to 
all  intents  and  purposes  the  victory  has  been  won,  and  the 
home  representatives  are  the  conquerors.  The  two  boats 
paddle  up  again,  and  the  fishermen  go  right  away  and  win 
with  the  most  consummate  ease.  This  sets  money  matters 
on  a  more  comfortable  footing,  but  the  Myanaung  people 
are  not  a  whit  disconcerted.  They  won  the  real  race,  that 
in  which  each  crew  rowed  in  its  own  boat,  and  they  receive 
the  arguments  of  the  Thdnkwa  contingent  with  the  most 
self-satisfied  composure.  The  record  of  the  champions  has 
been  broken,  and  the  veteran  Ko  Kya-gyi  has  at  last  sat 
in  a  losing  boat. 

A  general  adjournment  is  made  back  to  the  town.  The 
country  people  have  all  come  in  their  bullock  waggons,  and 
these  are  drawn  up  in  comfortable  places  under  the  trees. 
The  victorious  crew  go  in  procession  up  and  down  the  main 
street,  preceded  by  bands  and  every  one  in  the  place  who 
can  dance.     Feasting  is  general,  and  then  all  move  off  to 


364  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  plays,  of  which  there  are  three  or  four,  while  some  un- 
wearied spirits  can  only  find  relief  for  their  exultant  triumph 
in  yein  dances  and  irresponsible  performances  of  their  own. 
Till  dawn  of  day  the  revelry  goes  on,  but  there  is  nothing 
like  drunkenness.  It  is  exceedingly  seldom  that  you  see  a 
drunken  Burman  out  of  Rangoon,  where  they  claim  to  be 
Europeanised.  For  a  couple  of  days  the  excitement  lasts, 
and  then  the  strangers  wend  their  way  homewards,  and  the 
township  calms  down  to  its  usual  quiet.  But  for  years  the 
great  event  will  be  talked  of  at  the  local  feasts,  and  the  Yein 
choruses  of  three  or  four  generations  will  tell  of  the  gallant 
struggle  when  the  Daungsatpyan  beat  the  Th6npanhla  and 
broke  the  long  supremacy  of  the  Thdnkwa  rowers. 

It  is  a  great  pity  that  these  old  contests  are  not  kept  up 
with  the  spirit  that  used  to  characterise  them.  In  1877  the 
then  Chief  Commissioner  of  British  Burma,  Mr.  Rivers 
Thompson,  believing  that  they  led  to  unrestrained  and 
dangerous  gambling,  issued  an  order  forbidding  all  govern- 
ment officials  to  have  anything  to  do  with  them,  and  advising 
that  great  races  should  be  discouraged  as  much  as  possible. 
This  policy  was  continued  by  Mr.  Aitchison  (late  Sir 
Charles),  and  there  seemed  some  danger  that  the  art  of 
making  fine  racing-boats  would  be  lost,  while  all  the  fun  and 
jollity  of  the  old  ye-pwe,  kdn-pwfe,  land  and  water  sports, 
were  put  an  end  to,  without  any  decrease  in  the  amount  of 
gambling.  The  habit  is  as  engrained  with  the  Burman  as 
with  the  Chinaman,  and  if  there  are  no  boat-races  to  bet  on 
there  are  lots  of  other  things,  from  pony  matches  to  gdn- 
nyin-to,  on  which  sporting  votaries  might  stake  their  money. 
There  were  still  local  matches  between  adjacent  villages  held, 
but  they  were  but  a  sorry  imitation  of  the  old  festivals,  and 
have  unfortunately  led  to  the  unpleasant  speculations  of  the 
West  being  introduced.  "  Barneyings,"  in-and-out  rowing, 
and  all  the  unlovely  customs  of  Western  professionalism 
have  sprung  up  as  a  consequence  of  the  degradation  of 
the  old  manly  sport.  Sir  Charles  Bernard,  who  was  an 
ardent  athlete  himself,  did  a  good  deal  towards  reviving 
boat-racing.  Sports  have  been  held  on  the  Great  Royal 
Lake  at  Rangoon,  it  may  be  hoped  only  as  a  prelim- 
inary measure  to  the  encouragement  of  longer  contests  on 


XXXVI  A  BOAT-RACE  365 

the  great  rivers  again.  The  surest  way  of  putting  an  end 
to  "  roping  "  and  false  rowing  with  the  object  of  mere  money 
gain,  is  to  reintroduce  the  old  honest,  enthusiastic  rivalry. 
Where  every  rower  feels  that  the  name  of  his  village  depends 
upon  the  prowess  of  his  arm,  there  will  be  no  "  sugaring " 
and  ignobly  waiting,  in  Sheffield  handicap  fashion,  to  "  have 
their  heads  loose." 

All  the  races  in  the  low  country  are  rowed  in  hlaw  hie, 
or  hlaw  laung,  that  is  to  say,  in  paddle-boats.  Up  country 
there  are  frequently  contests  in  hkap  hie,  "  pull-away  boats," 
rowed  with  oars,  but  even  there  the  national  paddle  pre- 
dominates. It  may  be  mentioned  that  the  coast  men  are 
by  far  the  better  rowers.  In  the  Mandalay  October  races 
in  1 8  8 1 ,  a  scratch  Bassein  boat  challenged  all  comers,  and 
was  victorious  in  every  match. 

There  are  a  variety  of  boats,  mostly,  however,  made  on 
the  same  model,  of  which  the  launggo  is  the  type.  This  is 
simply  a  canoe  hollowed  out  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  the 
sides  of  which  are  drawn  out  by  charring  and  inserting 
wedges ;  then  the  boat-builder  chips  out  the  centre.  The 
laungsat  is  only  a  little  larger  and  more  commodious,  plank 
sides  being  added  to  the  solid  keel,  if  it  may  be  so  called. 
The  huge  hnaw,  or  rice-boats,  are  made  in  the  same  fashion. 

Of  a  different  style  are  the  pein-gaw,  huge,  ungainly, 
barge-like  things,  used  principally  at  Yenangyaung  for 
carrying  oil.  Along  the  sides,  projecting  over  the  beams  of 
the  boat,  and  reaching  aft  to  the  house  raised  on  the  quarter- 
deck, are  tagin,  a  sort  of  platform  for  the  polers  to  walk 
backwards  and  forwards  on.  Pihn-gaw  keep  mostly  in 
shallow  water,  so  that  their  ungainly  weight  may  be  moved 
along  by  poles,  which  is  much  quicker  and  less  laborious 
work  than  rowing. 

Barring  exceptionally  fine  racing-boats,  the  hlawkadaw, 
or  hiawga,  the  king's  despatch  boats,  were  the  finest  speci- 
mens of  boat-building.  They  were  gilt  all  over,  even  to  the 
kat-tat,  or  paddles,  and  the  stern  rose  high  up  in  the  air  for 
the  accommodation  of  the  steerer.  The  express  boats,  or 
hpaungpaw,  had  usually  a  representation  of  the  kalawaik, 
the  carrying  bird  of  Vishnu  and  national  emblem  of  the 
Burmese,  on    the   bows,  and   had   often   as   many  as   sixty 


366  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    ch.  xxxvi 

paddlers.  Down  stream  they  went  faster  than  a  steamer  ; 
but  they  are  never  seen  nowadays. 

In  the  Rangoon  Boat  Club  regattas  on  the  Royal  Lakes, 
a  British  four  usually  rows  a  Burmese  ten  to  fourteen  paddle- 
boat.  Honours  are  fairly  easy  with  perhaps  a  balance  in 
favour  of  the  paddlers,  who  always  get  off  at  practically 
top  speed. 

The  Intha  leg  rowers  of  the  Yawnghwe  Lake  in  the 
Southern  Shan  States,  when  they  row  in  their  own  boats, 
seem  likely  always  to  beat  even  the  best  picked  Burman 
crews. 


CHAPTER    XXXVII 

CHESS 

I  DO  not  say  that  the  Burmese  invented  chess,  either  for  the 
world  or  themselves.  As  latter-day  English  dramatists 
"  adapt "  from  the  French,  so  Burmese  play-writers  steal  from 
the  Hindoos,  and  possibly  the  game  of  chess  was  got  in  the 
same  way.  But  there  is  a  considerable  diversity  in  one 
respect.  The  plays  are  rendered  into  Burmese  with  a  stupid 
fidelity.  The  sayas  do  not  even  take  the  trouble  of  altering 
the  names  of  men  and  places,  and  the  only  difference  in  the 
pieces  is  that  the  lubyets,  and  occasionally  even  the  actors  of 
higher  parts,  introduce  "  gag  "  of  a  comic  and  local  description 
to  satisfy  the  national  demand  for  fun  and  frolic,  and  to  carry 
down  the  prosiness  of  the  staid  Hindoo.  Chess  may  have 
been  taken  over  in  a  similar  way,  and  altered  after  the  same 
fashion.  I  remember  once,  indeed,  hearing  an  enthusiastic 
player  in  Rangoon  claim  the  invention  of  the  game  for  an 
ancient  Talaing  queen.  She  was  passionately  fond  of  her 
lord ;  he  was  equally  fond  of  fighting ;  and  to  keep  him  by 
her,  and  at  the  same  time  out  of  the  dangers  of  the  wars,  she 
invented  the  game  of  chess.  The  story  has  a  certain  pathos 
about  it,  and  it  would  be  pleasant  to  believe  it  true ;  but  I 
never  came  across  any  other  Burman  who  had  ever  heard 
the  story,  and  am  afraid  the  old  sitduyin  player  was 
romancing.  But  if  the  Burmans  did  take  the  first  notion 
from  India,  they  have  greatly  altered  the  game,  and  not  less 
improved  than  altered  it. 

It  is  generally  believed  that  it  is  to  the  Hindoos  that 
the  world  owes  this  most  purely  intellectual  of  games.  Sir 
William  Jones  was  quite  positive  on  the  point,  and  quotes 

367 


368  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

from  the  Bhawishya  Puran.  This  seems  all  the  more 
mysterious  when  he  proceeds  :  "  The  beautiful  simplicity  and 
extreme  perfection  of  the  game,  as  it  is  commonly  played  in 
Europe  and  Asia,  convinces  me  that  it  was  invented  by  one 
effort  of  some  great  genius ;  not  completed  by  gradual 
improvements,  but  formed,  to  use  the  phrase  of  Italian 
writers,  by  the  first  intention."  But  the  European  game  is 
as  different  from  the  old  Hindoo  as  the  Burmese  is  from 
either.  The  Sanskrit  name  was  cha-tur-anga — literally,  the 
four  members  of  an  army :  elephants,  horses,  chariots,  and 
foot-soldiers.  But  the  Hindoo  game  had  four  armies  on  the 
board  ;  yellow  and  black  against  green  and  red.  Each  army 
had  a  corner  of  the  board  to  itself,  and  there  were)  usually 
four  players.  One  of  the  allied  armies  on  either  side  attacked 
the  immediately  opposed  force  in  flank,  and  therefore  had  an 
immense  advantage  at  the  start.  Moreover,  the  allies  were 
never  sure  of  one  another.  It  was  allowed,  and  even  recom- 
mended, to  indulge  in  treachery.  The  black  king  might, 
in  the  heat  of  battle,  attack  and  depose  his  yellow  friend, 
uniting  the  two  armies  under  himself  against  the  green 
and  red  foe.  However  consonant  this  might  be  with  the 
national  character,  it  can  hardly  be  claimed  as  a  special 
beauty  in  the  game.  A  ship,  or  boat,  also  figured  somewhat 
mysteriously  in  the  warfare.  Moreover,  the  rule  that  the 
piece  to  be  moved  was  determined  by  a  throw  of  the  dice,  by 
still  further  complicating  the  game,  virtually  ruined  all 
scientific  play,  and  robbed  it  of  more  than  half  of  its  interest 
as  an  exercise  of  purely  intellectual  skill.  When  a  cinque 
was  thrown,  the  king  or  a  pawn  had  to  be  moved ;  when  a 
quarte,  the  elephant ;  a  trois,  the  horse ;  a  deux,  the  boat. 
With  such  a  method  it  was  impossible  to  forecast  the  game 
— or,  in  fact,  to  work  on  any  leading  idea  at  all.  Neverthe- 
less, the  Hindoo  game  is  undoubtedly  very  ancient,  and  has 
certainly  the  oldest  history  of  any  known  form  of  chess.  It 
is  alluded  to  in  the  most  ancient  law-books.  The  wife  of 
Ravan,  King  of  Lunka  (Ceylon),  is  said  to  have  invented  it 
to  amuse  her  spouse  with  the  image  of  field  war  while  his 
capital  was  besieged,  5000  years  ago,  by  Rama,  with  his 
wild  hordes  of  barbarian  mountaineers,  derisively  called 
monkeys,  or  satyrs,  in  the  great  Indian  epic.     The  Hindoo 


CHESS 


369 


game,  then,  if  it  really  be  the  first  idea,  has  been  no  less 
altered  by  us  than  by  the  Burmans,  as  well  as  by  the 
Persians. 

The  Burmese  arrangement  of  the  pieces  differs  entirely 
from  the  Hindoo,  though  we  may,  perhaps,  imagine  a 
reminiscence  of  the  four  armies  in  the  arrangement  of  the 
pawns.     The  pieces  are  as  follows  : — 


1.  Min=one  king. 

2.  Sikke  =  one  lieutenant- 

general. 

3.  Yitta=two  war-chariots. 

4.  Sin  =  two  elephants. 

5.  Myin  =  two  horsemen. 

6.  Ne= eight  pawns,  or  foot- 

soldiers. 


The  king  has  the  same  moves  as  in  the  English  game, 
but  cannot  ''  castle."  Sikke  can  move  diagonally  in  advance, 
or  retrograde  one  square  at  a  time.  The  yittas  have  the 
same  power  as  the  English  castle  or  rook.  The  sins  have 
five  moves,  one  square  at  a  time — one  direct  forward,  two 
diagonally  forward,  and  two  diagonally  backwards.  An 
elephant  cannot  walk  straight  backwards,  nor  can  he  go  side- 
ways. The  myins  have  precisely  the  same  power  as  the 
English  knight.  The  pawns  act  in  the  same  way  as  in  the 
English  game,  except  that  in  the  initial  move  they  can  only 
advance  one  square.  They  may  become  sikk^,  in  the  event 
of  that  piece  being  taken,  by  advancing  to  the  diagonal  line 
which  stretches  across  the  board.  When,  however,  the  pawn 
replaces  the  dead  leader,  he  is  not  allowed  to  remain  on  the 
square  where  he  gained  the  distinction.  He  must  be  placed 
as  one  of  the  eight  surrounding  checks,  at  the  player's 
option,  and  therefore  often  falls  a  victim  to  his  new-gained 
eminence. 

2  B 


\ 

/ 

\ 

4 

5 

5 

/ 

4 

\ 

6 

y 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

\ 

/ 

/ 

\ 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

/ 

6 

\ 

4 

/ 

6 

5 

4 

\ 

/ 

\ 

370  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

From  the  Q.'s  pawn  to  the  Q.'s  R.'s  pawn,  the  nfe  are 
placed  on  the  third  square.  From  the  K.'s  pawn  to  the  K.'s 
R.'s  pawn,  they  are  placed  on  the  fourth  square  in  direct 
ichelon.  The  first  move,  therefore,  takes  a  pawn.  The 
pieces  may  be  arranged  behind  the  pawns  according  to  fancy 
or  judgment.  The  formation  represented  in  the  figure  is 
considered  the  best  among  Rangoon  players. 

Either  player,  however,  may  adopt  another  line  of  battle. 
He  may  strengthen  either  wing,  or  expose  the  king,  according 
as  he  estimates  his  opponent's  abilities,  or  the  peculiarities  of 
his  play.  In  some  respects  this  may  be  done  in  such  a  way 
as  to  be  tantamount  to  giving  a  piece  to  an  inferior  player. 
The  pawns,  however,  never  vary  in  position.  The  board  is 
a  huge  thing  like  an  enlarged  foot-stool,  or  a  tea-table  with 
rudimentary  legs,  the  players  squatting  on  mats.  There  is 
always  heavy  betting  on  the  games ;  and  when  a  famous 
player  comes  in  from  the  district  or  over  from  Maulmein  to 
measure  strength  with  the  Rangoon  cracks,  the  excitement  is 
wonderful,  and  often  furnishes  occasion  for  free  fights,  such 
as  the  Burmese,  in  their  sturdy,  hot-blooded  way,  delight  in 
as  much  as  any  schoolboy  or  devotee  of  town-and-gown 
rows. 

The  Burmese  game,  as  well  in  the  names  and  powers 
of  the  pieces  as  in  the  liberty  of  individual  arrangement,  is 
thus,  it  will  be  allowed,  much  more  like  a  real  battle  than 
any  other  recognised  form.  The  elephant  is  particularly 
well  calculated  for  defending  the  king  where  he  is  most 
vulnerable. 

War-chariots  are  decidedly  more  appropriate  to  active 
warfare  than  castles.  Indeed  the  Briton  must  acknowledge 
that  the  English  nomenclature  is  bad.  There  was  a  time 
certainly  when  bishops  used  to  buckle  on  their  armour,  and 
charge  across  the  field  of  fight ;  but  their  disestablishment 
in  that  way  came  about  long  before  the  day  of  Mr.  Miall. 
Boadiceas  and  Shan  amazon  leaders  are  too  rare  nowadays 
to  have  queens  careering  about  the  board  as  a  regular  thing, 
dealing  slaughter  for  their  less  nimble  spouses.  The  Burmese 
general  has  powers  sufficient  to  elevate  him  above  his  men, 
and  is  yet  not  so  loftily  supreme  as  the  mail-clad  knights  of 
romance  ;  while  if  he  is  laid  low,  it  is  not  too  violent  a  change 


xxxvii  CHESS  371 

for  the  gallant  foot-soldier  who  may  win  the  marshal's  baton. 
On  the  whole,  the  Burmese  game  is  undeniably  a  good  one  ; 
far  superior  to  the  Hindoo,  or  the  Persian,  though  possibly 
not  requiring  the  skill  and  calculation  of  the  European  form. 

It  may  perhaps  be  said  that  the  Burmese  would  be 
more  likely  to  get  their  game  from  their  Mongolian  relations 
than  from  the  Hindoos.  This  is  historically  improbable,  and 
a  comparison  of  the  games  bears  out  the  belief.  The  Chinese, 
as  usual,  claim  for  themselves  priority  in  the  discovery  of 
the  game.  Unfortunately,  however,  they  fix  a  date  when 
it  was  invented,  and  this  is  long  after  the  time  when  the 
Aryan  game  is  first  spoken  of  Three  hundred  and  seventy 
years  after  Confucius  (B.C.  174),  Hung  Ko-chi  sent  a  warlike 
expedition  into  the  Shensi  country,  under  a  mandarin  called 
Hem  Sing.  After  one  successful  campaign,  the  troops  went 
into  winter  quarters.  Shensi  lies  in  the  north-west,  and  the 
weather  was  very  cold ;  and  the  soldiers  thought  of  their 
families,  and  wanted  to  go  home.  Hem  Sing,  who  was  a  great 
military  genius,  invented  the  game  of  chess  to  occupy  their 
minds  and  foster  their  military  ardour.  The  soldiers  were 
so  delighted  with  it  that  they  forgot  the  inclemency  of  the 
weather,  and  their  wives  and  children  at  home,  in  the  excite- 
ment of  the  new  game.  So  the  winter  passed  away,  and  in 
the  spring-time  Hem  Sing  took  the  field  again  and  conquered 
the  entire  province,  in  consequence  of  which  Hung  Ko-chi 
assumed  the  title  of  Emperor,  and  chess  was  held  in  the 
greatest  reverence  ever  after.  So  says  the  book  of  Chinese 
Annals. 

The  Chinese  game  is  a  very  odd  one.  The  pieces  are 
played,  not  on  the  squares,  but  on  the  lines.  I  should  have 
mentioned  before  that  in  none  of  the  Eastern  games  are  the 
squares  differently  coloured.  Midway  between  the  opposed 
forces  flows  a  river.  The  king  on  either  side  is  shut  up 
inside  a  fortress,  out  of  which  he  cannot  move,  but  can  shift 
about  from  one  side  to  the  other  as  much  as  he  pleases.  On 
either  side  of  the  fortress  are  two  princes,  his  sons,  who  are 
equally  bound  to  stick  to  the  side  assigned  to  them.  There 
are  a  couple  of  (elephants  in  either  army,  which,  however, 
being  very  heavy,  cannot  cross  the  slender  plank-bridge 
thrown  over  the  stream  for  the  passage  of  the  other  troops. 


372        THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    ch.  xxxvii 

They  therefore  remain  on  the  defensive.  There  are  also 
pieces  called  pau — bombardiers  or  rocket-men — with  curious 
powers.  They  can  move  the  whole  length  of  the  board,  in 
the  fashion  of  the  castle.  If  an  adversary's  piece  intervenes, 
they  can  take  the  pawn  or  piece  immediately  behind  it,  but 
cannot  kill  direct.  Students  of  the  Persian  game  will  be 
reminded  of  the  power  of  their  elephant.  It  will  be  seen 
from  this  cursory  description  that  the  Burmans  can  hardly 
owe  their  game  to  the  Chinese.  Shin  Gautama  sent  us 
Buddhism  from  "  the  Middle  Country  "  ;  ^  it  is  possible  that 
tlie  game  of  chess  came  from  India  also.  But  if  so,  while 
/Burmese-Buddhism  has  hardly  changed  at  all,  and  remains 
much  more  like  the  original  teachings  of  the  Master  than 
the  faiths  of  Ceylon,  Nepaul,  and  Thibet,  the  game  of  chess 
has  been  greatly  altered,  and  I  think  I  may  venture  to  say 
vastly  improved. 

'  Myirimadetha,  not  the  "  Middle  Kingdom"  of  the  Chinese. 


CHAPTER    XXXVIII 

GAMES 

A  VERY  favourite  game  with  Burmans  of  all  ages  is  the 
gdnnyinto  pwe.  The  name  is  very  suggestive.  G6n  or 
hkon  means  to  jump,  and  nyin  is  to  deny  or  bluster,  and 
there  is  no  doubt  of  the  fitness  of  the  implication.  A  more 
noisy  and  contentious  game,  not  even  omitting  the  uproari- 
ousness  of  the  English  enormities  known  as  grab  or  pit,  it 
would  be  difficult  to  find.  Most  writers  on  Burma  have 
passed  over  gdnnyinwaing  lightly,  as  a  simple,  harmless, 
children's  game.  It  would  be  well  if  it  were  only  that, 
though  the  monks  at  the  p6ngyi  kyaung  often  sally  forth 
in  great  wrath  (most  dangerous  for  their  future  state),  and 
armed  with  a  stout  bamboo,  to  put  a  stop  to  the  clamorous 
disputes  of  the  schoolboys  over  their  seeds.  But  the  police 
officers  would  tell  a  very  different  tale.  Grown-up  men  play 
also,  the  quarrels  sometimes  end  in  assault  and  murder,  and 
always  in  reckless  gambling.  Beinshu,  opium-eaters,  who 
with  all  respectable  Burmans  stand  for  types  of  iniquity, 
a  kind  of  epitome  of  vice,  often  have  as  much  as  two  or 
three  hundred  rupees  on  a  single  game,  and  the  results  of 
unrestrained  gambling  are  best  known  to  civilised  people 
who  frequent  Monte  Carlo.  Consequently  the  police  keep 
a  sharp  eye  on  grown-up  g6nnyinto  players,  and  if  a  party 
is  caught,  they  are  all  punished  heavily  for  gambling,  the 
daing,  or  keeper  of  the  ground,  being  fined  heaviest  of  all. 
For  there  are  regular  alleys  kept  for  the  purpose,  the  daing, 
or  proprietor,  carefully  smoothing  the  ground,  moistening 
it  delicately  in  the  hot  weather,  and  keeping  it  from  getting 
sodden  during  the  monsoon.  He  charges  his  customers  a 
small  fee  for  the  right  to  play,  usually  an  anna  in  the  rupee, 

373 


374  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

keeps  a  supply  of  seeds  ready,  and  acts  as  umpire  in  cases 
of  doubt,  or  when  a  tie  has  to  be  played  off. 

The  game  is  played  with  the  seeds  of  a  huge  creeper, 
the  Entada  Purscztha,  whose  pods  are  five  feet  long  and 
six  inches  broad,  and  the  beans  are  large  flat  things,  about 
an  inch  in  diameter,  and  shaped  like  a  lily  or  lotus  leaf,  or 
the  flattened-out  gizzard  of  a  fowl.  They  are  made  to  stand 
on  the  stalk  side,  flat  face  foremost,  a  little  more  than  a 
diameter  apart  in  a  long  row,  and  the  object  of  the  player 
is,  as  in  bowls  and  ninepins,  to  knock  down  as  many  as 
possible.  The  players  use  seeds  called  do,  exactly  similar 
to  those  they  aim  at,  or  occasionally  iron  rings,  and  the  dis- 
tance from  which  they  do  so  is  agreed  upon  beforehand,  but 
is  never  less  than  five  or  six  yards.  The  do  is  spun  away  in 
crossbow  fashion  from  the  forefinger  of  the  left  hand,  drawn 
back  by  the  thumb  and  finger  of  the  right.  As  the  seeds 
aimed  at  are  all  in  a  line,  there  is  plenty  of  room  for  skill  in 
the  way  of  putting  a  heavy  bias  on,  as  well  as  in  the  by  no 
means  easy  matter  of  preventing  the  bean  from  jumping  up 
and  missing  altogether.  Some  old  players  have  a  wonderful 
knack  of  getting  a  strong  parabolic  curve  on,  which  succeeds 
in  levelling  a  great  part  of  the  line.  The  difficulty  of  the 
thing  cannot  be  realised  till  one  has  made  an  attempt  one's 
self,  and  the  result  of  a  few  experiments  is  usually  greatly  to 
raise  the  estimation  of  gdnnyinto  as  a  game  of  skill. 

There  are  a  great  many  ways  of  playing  it.  First,  it 
may  be  premised  that  the  ordinary  value  of  a  seed  is  two 
annas,  about  threepence — that  at  any  rate  is  the  price  usually 
charged  by  the  daing,  who  always  has  a  great  supply  of  them. 
Having  got  his  seeds,  the  player  puts  down  as  many  as  he 
pleases  in  the  row,  five  perhaps  or  ten.  There  is  usually  a 
preliminary  dispute  about  some  one  who  has  not  put  down 
so  many  as  the  others,  yet  claims  an  equal  chance  of  winning 
in  the  game.  These  quarrels,  after  having  been  noisily  fought 
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  so,  are  referred  to  the  decision  of 
the  ground  keeper,  who  settles  the  matter  off-hand,  seldom 
knocking  a  man  out  as  long  as  he  is  sure  that  he  has  no 
more  seeds  to  stake.  Then  it  has  to  be  settled  who  is  to 
have  first  shot,  naturally  among  good  players  a  very  con- 
siderable   advantage.     This    is    settled    by   a    preliminary 


XXXVIII  GAMES  375 

tournament  for  the  best  of  one  or  three  shots,  the  players 
following  one  another  in  the  order  of  their  success  in  the 
trial.  Then  it  is  settled  how  the  game  is  to  be  played. 
Sometimes  it  is  the  obvious,  elementary  way  of  each  man 
taking  the  seeds  he  knocks  down,  sometimes  it  resolves  itself 
into  a  contest  for  everything  staked,  the  man  who  knocks 
down  most  taking  all  the  seeds.  There  are  of  course  numer- 
ous bets,  but  they  are  more  frequently  disposed  in  backing 
one  player  against  another  than  in  selecting  a  single  in- 
dividual as  the  probable  eventual  winner. 

This  method,  however,  of  endeavouring  to  knock  down 
the  greatest  number  of  seeds,  which  is  of  course  the  com- 
monest with  children,  is  not  so  much  affected  by  grown-up 
gamblers  as  other  elaborations  of  the  game.  A  favourite 
form  is  that  called  ngalet  ngaldn,  where  the  object  is,  in 
five  shots  to  knock  down  five  seeds,  neither  more  nor  less. 
This  is  not  so  easy  as  it  might  seem,  for  the  seeds  are  not 
like  marbles,  and  it  is  hardly  less  difficult  to  make  them  go 
perfectly  straight  than  it  is  to  put  on  the  proper  "  side.'' 
Most  men  try  to  knock  down  all  five  at  their  first  attempt, 
and  then  let  their  remaining  seeds  go  anyhow.  Veterans, 
however,  declare  that  the  safest  way  is  to  knock  down  the 
fifth  from  the  end  of  the  line  with  your  first  shot.  It  then 
lies  as  a  kind  of  barrier  to  prevent  the  other  four,  when 
knocked  down,  from  rolling  about  and  upsetting  more  than 
the  proper  number.  The  seeds  when  hit  hard  certainly  have 
very  eccentric  methods  of  spinning  and  wobbling  about.  If 
there  are  ties,  the  men  of  course  play  off,  and  the  winner 
takes  the  whole  pool,  if  the  collection  of  seeds  may  be  so 
called.  The  best  play  is  almost  always  seen  in  these  ngalet 
ngal6n  contests.  The  children's  form,  that  of  knocking  down 
the  greatest  number  in  one  or  three  shots,  is  called  pwet-tha, 
and  is  certainly  the  commonest,  except  with  the  avowed 
gamblers.  There  are  besides  these  two  main  forms  many 
other  variations  occasionally  introduced,  the  commonest  being 
daungpyit  and  pedan.  In  the  former  the  seeds  are  placed 
in  the  usual  line,  but  all  except  the  centre  are  lying  on  their 
sides.  The  players  stand  much  farther  away,  and  the  object 
is  to  hit  the  seed  standing  up.  Any  one  who  does  so  carries 
off  all.      If  one  of  those  lying  down  is  hit,  the  seeds  from  it 


376  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

to  the  extremity  of  the  line  are  taken.  In  pedan  the  seeds 
are  placed  in  a  big  circle.  Some  one  seed,  either  at  one  of 
the  sides  or  at  the  back,  is  fixed  upon  to  be  hit.  Any  one 
who  does  so  takes  all,  but  if  any  other  seed  is  knocked  over 
you  have  to  pay  forfeit,  and  add  one  to  the  circle.  This  is, 
perhaps,  the  most  outrageously  noisy  form  of  all,  and,  like 
the  daungpyit,  is  very  seldom  played  by  any  but  children. 

The  daing  or  ground  keeper's  services  are  constantly 
being  called  for.  A  long-armed  man  is  accused  of  deliver- 
ing too  far  forward  ;  some  one  'has  got  an  exceptionally  big 
do  to  aim  with ;  one  of  the  seeds  knocked  over  does  not 
fall  down  flat,  but  leans  up  against  another ;  somebody  hits 
a  seed  already  knocked  down  by  somebody  else,  and  by 
means  of  it  manages  to  level  some  of  those  left  standing, 
though  his  own  seed  never  touches  them  ;  cases  of  this  kind 
are  always  cropping  up  and  being  referred  to  the  umpire 
amidst  boisterous  statements  and  precedents  referred  to  by 
everybody  present,  for  the  betting  spectators  are  often  more 
deeply  interested  in  the  matter  than  the  actual  players. 
Then  the  police  burst  in  and  carry  them  all  off  to  the 
lock-up,  and  they  are  duly  fined  for  gambling,  and  English 
residents  who  look  upon  g6nnyinto  as  only  an  elementary 
kind  of  marbles  are  astonished  that  people  should  get 
themselves  into  trouble  for  such  a  trifle.  But  for  all  that, 
g6nnyinto,  in  its  way,  requires  quite  as  much  skill  as  either 
bowls  or  curling,  and  judgment  and  delicacy  of  touch  are 
quite  as  essential  as  in  billiards. 

Curiously  enough,  taking  gdnnyinto  for  mere  childishness, 
most  foreigners  look  upon  "  Burmese  football "  as  a  game. 
This  is  certainly  not  the  case  in  so  far  as  a  "  game "  is  a 
striving  between  one  or  more  competitors  for  supremacy. 
There  are  of  course  different  degrees  of  proficiency,  but  one 
man  cannot  be  pitted  directly  against  another  to  see  who  is 
the  better  player,  as  you  do  with  two  lawn  tennis  or  racket 
players.  Primarily  chinl6n,  as  it  is  called,  is  simply  designed 
to  exercise  the  body,  to  restore  elasticity  to  the  back  and 
limbs  cramped  by  sitting,  reading,  or  writing,  or  even  by 
playing  chess  or  gdnnyinto.  The  ball  is  composed  of 
wicker-work,  strips  of  rattan  interwoven  in  bands  so  as 
to  leave  a  number  of  pentagonal  holes,  and  is  about  four 


XXXVIII  GAMES  ZTJ 

inches,  or  a  little  less,  in  diameter.  It  is  extremely  light, 
and  the  object  is  to  keep  the  ball  as  long  as  possible  in  the 
air  without  touching  it  with  the  hands.  Thus  a  single 
individual  may  play  it  all  by  himself,  or  there  may  be  a 
circle  of  players  who  catch  the  ball  as  it  comes  round  their 
way,  keep  it  up  as  long  as  they  can,  until  an  ill-judged 
stroke  sends  it  away  from  them  to  somebody  else,  who 
proceeds  in  a  similar  manner.  To  play  it  of  course  the 
feet  must  be  without  shoes  and  the  waistcloth  is  tucked  up 
close  round  the  middle,  so  that  the  legs  may  be  quite  free. 
It  is  worth  while  watching  a  good  player.  He  starts  the 
ball  on  his  knee,  knocking  it  up,  and  standing  on  one  leg 
all  the  time,  or  perhaps  rapidly  changing  the  knee.  Suddenly 
he  sends  it  up  high,  catches  it  with  a  back  stroke  with  the 
heel,  repeated  perhaps  several  times.  Then  he  receives  it 
on  the  knee  again,  gradually  and  gently  reduces  the  force 
with  which  he  strikes  it,  lets  it  slip  down  to  the  instep,  and 
jerks  it  back  and  forwards  between  the  top  of  the  foot  and 
the  knee  for  a  time.  Then  from  the  knee  he  sends  it  into 
the  air  again,  clips  it  between  his  cheek  and  his  shoulder ; 
then  lets  it  run  down  the  side  to  be  caught  up  with  a  side 
stroke  of  the  foot,  or  behind  to  be  sent  up  by  the  heel,  or 
forwards  to  be  caught  again  by  the  knee.  The  last  is  the 
most  difficult,  because  if  hit  too  soon  with  the  top  of  the 
thigh,  the  ball  simply  flies  outwards,  and  cannot  be  saved 
from  falling  to  the  ground,  while  even  in',  catching  it  with 
the  knee,  care  must  be  taken  to  hit  it  gently.  Another 
very  difficult  manoeuvre  is  to  jump  into  the  air,  catch  the 
ball  between  the  feet  and  jerk  it  up  again  before  reaching 
the  ground.  Nasty  tumbles  are  the  usual  result  of  first 
attempts.  A  good  player  will  keep  the  ball  up  until  his 
strength  gives  way,  and  most  Burmans,  if  they  are  not 
ambitious  to  attempt  difficult  strokes,  can  keep  the  chin- 
16n  up  a  very  fair  time.  But  it  is  not  easy  all  the  same. 
No  part  of  the  arm  must  be  used,  and  using  the  toes  is  also 
barred,  though  in  any  case,  with  them  a  stroke  would  almost 
inevitably  prove  a  failure.  Still  though  spectators  may  stand 
and  look  on,  and  the  players  may  try  to  give  one  another 
difficult  strokes,  the  skill  displayed  in  negotiating  which  is 
always   applauded,   yet   chinldn    cannot   be   called   a   game. 


378  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

any  more  than  dancing  the  Highland  Fling  can,  for  judg- 
ment as  to  superiority  in  either  case  must  be  a  mere  matter 
of  personal  opinion,  and  cannot  be  governed  by  hard  and 
fast  rules. 

These  are  practically  the  only  outdoor  national  games. 
Boxing  is  a  very  common  institution,  but  there  is  no  ordinary 
practice  in  the  evenings,  and  when  a  let-pw^  comes  off  it  is 
a  regular  ceremony  more  resembling  what  would  be  called  in 
Europe  a  match,  or  a  tournament,  than  a  game.  A  good 
deal  of  agility  and  skill  is  shown,  leaps  into  the  air,  and 
kicks  with  the  bare  feet,  and  violent  upward  knocks  with 
the  knee  finding  a  place  which  would  not  be  allowed  by 
the  "  fancy."  The  first  drawing  of  blood  decides  a  contest, 
however  slight  the  injury  may  be.  But  boxing  is  not  common 
now.  Among  the  Karens  near  Maulmein  it  is  still  regularly 
kept  up,  and  no  young  man  would  be  successful  in  his  court- 
ing unless  he  had  taken  part  on  some  occasion  or  other  at  a 
let-pwe.  In  Rangoon  nowadays  contests  are  of  regular 
occurrence  at  feast  times,  but  the  displays  are  in  sheds  and 
entry  money  is  charged.  Elsewhere  they  are  not  often  seen, 
and  the  Vule  that  no  women  shall  be  present  is  always  rigor- 
ously kept. 

What  may  be  called  indoor  games  are  numerous  and 
various.  There  is  a  game  very  much  like  the  English  one 
known  as  Fox  and  Geese.  There  are  three  big  tigers,  and 
eleven  or  sometimes  twelve  little  ones.  It  is  called  legwet 
kya,  and  the  object  is  for  the  big  tigers  to  hunt  down  on  a 
draught  board  and  eat  the  little  ones.  If,  however,  the  cubs 
can  corner  the  big  ones,  and  prevent  them  from  taking  a 
leap,  the  latter  have  to  succumb — starve  to  death  in  fact. 
Another  game  called  pasit,  or  chwe  pyitthi,  or  ansa  pyit- 
thi  is  a  steeplechase  kind  of  arrangement,  and  is  a  favourite 
with  children  and  simple  country  people.  It  is  played  on 
a  board  shaped  and  divided  like  that  in  the  figure. 

Cowries  are  used  instead  of  dice,  and  the  object  is  to 
complete  the  tour  of  the  board  as  fast  as  possible,  and  to 
take  as  many  opponents  as  you  can  on  the  way.  Thus  if 
there  were  two  playing,  the  first  thrower  would  enter  at  a, 
and  having  reached  b,  would  continue  from  a  to  c,  from  c  to 
d,  and  so  on.     The  second  would  commence  at  a  also,  but 


GAMES 


379 


proceed  first  to  c,  thence  to  d,  and  so  on.      A  third  would 
start  from  e  towards  /,  and  a  fourth  in  the  remaining  arm. 

The  method  is  as  follows.  Six  cowries  (chwe)  are  taken 
in  the  hand  and  thrown  into  a  plate  or  cup ;  if  one  falls 
upside  down  it  is  called  se,  and  counts  ten  ;  two,  called  pa, 
scores  two  ;  three,  thdn,  is  the  same  in  value  ;  four,  le,  equals 
four;  five  upside  down,  called  taseit,  scores  twenty-five.    When 


all  are  on  their  backs,  it  is  called  baya,  and  counts  twelve. 
When  all  six  fall  on  their  faces,  chauk,  and  the  value  six. 

You  have  three  throws  to  start  with,  and  can  only  enter 
with  a  ten  or  a  twenty-five ;  after  entering  you  can  have 
only  one  throw  at  a  time.  If  you  are  lucky  enough,  you 
may  enter  two  or  even  three  racers,  but  if  you  throw  three 
tens  running,  or  three  twenty-fives  consecutively,  the  hand 
is  lost  to  you,  you  cannot  enter  even  one.  If  you  overtake 
an  opponent  and  come  on  to  the  same  square  with  him, 
you  kill  him  and  he  has  to  go  back  to  the  starting-post,  but 
only  if  you  fall  on  the  same  square,  and  not  if  he  is  on  one 
of  the  shaded  squares,  called  poh  or  kyah,  which  are  coloured 


38o  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

red  or  green  on  the  board.  In  this  latter  case  you  lose  your 
throw.  The  game  is  won  by  returning  home  first.  Thus 
the  first  player  having  rounded  g,  comes  down  the  middle 
course  and  finishes  at  h  ;  the  second  player  at  i ;  the  third  at 
j,  and  so  on.  Any  number  can  play,  and  if  there  are  four, 
or  more,  and  even  numbers,  partnerships  are  formed.  When 
three  or  more  play,  it  is  called  methida. 

The  game  is  simple  and  harmless  enough,  and  as  there 
is  little  chance  of  gambling  over  it,  pasit  is  but  little  in  favour 
with  people  in  the  big  towns.  T6nbu  lein,  cheating  with 
the  weight  of  the  lime  used  in  betel-nut  chewing,  is  much 
more  to  their  taste.  This  lime,  a  little  of  which  is  smeared 
on  the  leaf  of  the  betel-vine  that  wraps  round  the  nut,  is, 
if  of  fine  quality,  often  sold  by  its  weight  in  rupees.  Two 
confederates  arrange  a  speculation  together.  One  of  them 
picks  out  an  eligible-looking  bumpkin  in  the  street,  some 
rice-farmer,  who  has  come  in  with  his  boat-load  of  paddy ; 
or  a  raftsman,  who  has  brought  down  a  lot  of  teak  logs ;  or 
a  pious  man  come  to  worship  at  the  pagoda.  He  gets  into 
conversation  with  the  intended  victim — asks  him  for  a  light 
for  his  cheroot,  perhaps,  and  brings  round  the  talk  to  tdnbu. 
Then  he  says  he  has  got  a  fine  sample  of  it,  and  draws  a 
packet  out  of  his  pocket.  The  unsuspecting  taw-tha  admires 
it  and  is  asked  how  much  he  thinks  there  is.  He  guesses 
three  rupees  weight.  The  speculator  happens,  singularly 
enough,  to  have  a  little  pair  of  scales  in  the  folds  of  his 
waistcloth.  The  lime  is  duly  weighed,  and  the  countryman 
proves  to  be  right — Burmans  have  a  natural  faculty  for 
estimating  by  the  eye.  The  scales  and  the  lime  are  put 
away,  when  up  comes  the  confederate,  who  has  been  loiter- 
ing about  at  a  distance.  He  pretends  to  recognise  a  friend 
in  our  farmer,  with  his  old-fashioned  zig-zag  paso  and  red- 
tanned  face.  After  explanations  he  asks  who  his  friend — 
the  man  with  the  tdnbu — is.  The  latter  immediately  intro- 
duces himself,  produces  his  lime  again,  and  asks  the  new- 
comer how  much  he  thinks  there  is.  He  says  right  off,  "  Two 
rupees  weight "  ;  our  taw-tha  breaks  in,  "  No  there  isn't." 
"  Bet  you  a-seit  (a  quarter  century,  twenty-five  rupees)  there 
is."  All  Burmans  love  gambling,  and  the  farmer  straightway 
tables  his  pieces,  thinking  he  has  got  rather  a  "  soft "  thing. 


GAMES  381 


The  scales  come  into  use  again,  and  the  lime  weighs  two 
rupees — it  is  another  packet.  That  night  the  two  rascals 
are  drunk  together,  and  the  farmer  makes  an  offering  to  the 
nats,  persuaded  that  there  is  something  supernatural  in  the 
matter. 

Pitch  and  toss  is  common  enough  in  Rangoon  now,  as 
is  also  the  three-card  trick,  introductions  of  Western  industry. 
Pitch  and  toss  is  called  myauk  pan — myauk  is  the  lion  and 
unicorn  on  the  old  "  Jan  Kumpani's  "  coin,  while  the  pan, 
the  "  flower,"  is  the  laurel  wreath  on  the  other  side.  Two 
rupees  or  pice  are  spun,  and  the  bystanders  call.  One  says 
two  tails,  and  if  they  turn  up,  he  wins  double  his  stake  ; 
similarly  if  he  is  equally  fortunate  as  to  his  guess  of  two 
heads.  If  he  hedges  with  a  head  and  tail,  he  only  wins 
what  he  laid.  The  "  tossing  shilling,"  and  the  "  lucky 
penny,"  of  Box  and  Cox,  one  of  which  had  no  head  and 
the  other  two,  are  not  by  any  means  novelties  in  the  Pabe- 
dan  and  other  disreputable  streets  in  Rangoon. 

Another  sleight-of-hand  trick  at  which  the  town  loafers 
are  very  skilful  and  are  constantly  deluding  the  unwary,  is 
a  performance  called  kyotothi,  tilting  at  the  string.  A  narrow 
strip  of  hide  is  doubled  across,  and  the  doubled  end  being  in 
the  centre,  it  is  wound  round  and  round  in  a  complicated 
way.  Then  one  of  the  bystanders  is  asked  to  place  either 
his  finger  or  a  stick  into  the  centre.  The  thong  is  then  un- 
wound, and  if  the  man  has  his  finger  in  the  doubled-up  end 
he  wins,  otherwise  the  manipulator  gathers  up  the  money. 
It  is  obvious  that  manual  dexterity  may  do  a  great  deal  in 
a  venture  of  this  kind,  and  the  operator  usually  makes  a 
good  thing  of  it. 

Cock-fighting  is  also  a  favourite  pastime,  and  though 
forbidden  by  the  authorities,  is  still  carried  on  more  or  less 
openly  in  country  villages  and  quiet  streets  in  the  towns. 
Thibaw's  uncle,  the  deposed  Pagan  Min,  who  died  of  small- 
pox in  1880,  was  so  fond  of  the  practice  that  he  went  by 
the  name  of  the  cock-fighting  king.  In  sporting  villages 
pretty  nearly  every  house  has  its  kyet-hpa,  or  its  taik-kyet, 
the  latter,  splendid-looking  birds,  being  bred  specially  for 
their  pluck  in  fighting. 

Buffalo  fights,  which  used  to  be  great  festivals  in  the 


382        THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS  ch.  xxxvm 

Tenasserim  province,  especially  round  about  Amherst  and 
Tavoy,  have,  under  the  influence  of  the  British  Government, 
almost  totally  died  out.  Each  village  used  to  have  its 
champion,  songs  were  composed  in  its  honour,  and  special 
guards  appointed  to  look  after  it,  and  the  conqueror  brought 
as  much  honour  to  the  village  as  a  personal  victory  of  the 
inhabitants  would  have  done.  But  they  were  nearly  as 
brutal  exhibitions  as  Spanish  bull-fights,  and  only  a  little 
less  dangerous. 

Field  sports  are  barred  to  all  but  professional  hunters 
by  the  religious  objection  to  taking  animal  life,  though 
when  a  Burman  does  enter  upon  the  pursuit,  he  is  always 
an  enthusiastic  and  skilful  sportsman  and  generally  a  clever 
shot. 


CHAPTER    XXXIX 

LUCKY  AND  UNLUCKY  DAYS 

It  has  come  to  be  considered  an  axiom  that  the  Burmese 
are  irredeemably  lazy.  Some  authors  who  have  written 
about  the  country  ascribe  a  very  great  number  of  additional 
bad  qualities  to  them  ;  others  are  more  favourable ;  but  all 
are  unanimous  in  the  declaration  that  they  are  lazy.  The 
reverend  missioner,  Father  San  Germano,  who  was  almost 
the  first  European  to  write  a  definite  account  of  Burma,  is 
the  most  unkind  critic  of  all.  He  gathered  together  a 
great  deal  of  information  about  the  country  during  his  long 
residence,  but  the  opinion  he  formed  of  the  people  would 
be  crushing  were  it  not  so  strongly  at  variance  with  that 
expressed  by  a  Christian  priest  who  has  been  still  longer  in 
Burma,  and  whose  knowledge  of  everything  connected  with 
it  yields  to  none,  the  late  Bishop  Bigandet.  But  it  is  as 
well  to  see  ourselves  as  others  see  us.  The  good  father 
says :  "  The  Burmese  are  distinguished  for  that  timidity 
and  servility  which  is  the  characteristic  of  slaves.  .  .  .  There 
is  no  contempt,  oppression,  or  injustice  they  will  not  exercise 
towards  their  fellow-men  when  they  can  assure  themselves 
of  the  protection  of  government.  They  are  thus  vile  and 
abject  in  adversity,  but  arrogant  and  presumptuous  in  pros- 
perity. There  is  no  one  amongst  them,  however  mean,  who 
does  not  aim  at  the  dignity  of  mandarin  (minister)."  But 
the  chief  characteristic  of  the  Burmese  "is  an  incorrigible 
idleness.  Instead  of  employing  their  time  in  improving  their 
possessions,  they  prefer  to  give  themselves  up  to  an  indolent 
repose  ;  to  spend  the  day  in  talking,  smoking,  and  chewing 
betel,  or   else   to   become    the    satellites  of   some    powerful 

383 


384  THE  BURMAN,:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

mandarin.  The  same  hatred  of  labour  leads  to  an  excessive 
love  of  cunning,  and  also  to  thieving,  to  which  they  are  much 
addicted.  ...  It  would  seem  that  it  is  impossible  for  this 
people  to  tell  the  truth ;  nay,  a  person  who  ventures  to  do 
it  is  called  a  fool,  a  good  kind  of  man,  but  not  fitted  for 
managing  his  affairs."  Still  the  padre  has  a  little  good  to 
say  of  them :  "  Besides  giving  daily  alms  to  their  talapoins, 
they  all  lay  by  something  to  be  applied  to  some  sort  of  public 
benefit.  They  are  very  fond  of  thus  signalising  their  gener- 
osity, and  will  often  deprive  themselves  of  comforts  to  have 
the  pleasure  of  being  benefactors  to  the  public."  This  is  an 
unlovely  picture.  But  the  good  father  was  apparently  very 
unfortunate  in  his  acquaintances. 

It  is  pleasant  after  this  to  turn  to  a  soldier's  opinion. 
Major  Grant  Allen  says  :  "  Unlike  the  generality  of  Asiatics, 
the  Burmese  are  not  a  fawning  race.  They  are  cheerful,  and 
singularly  alive  to  the  ridiculous ;  buoyant,  elastic,  soon  re- 
covering from  personal  or  domestic  disaster.  Free  from  the 
prejudices  of  caste  or  creed,  they  readily  fraternise  with 
strangers,  and  at  all  times  frankly  yield  to  the  superiority  of 
the  European.  .  .  .  Indifferent  to  the  shedding  of  blood  on 
the  part  of  their  rulers,  yet  not  individually  cruel ;  temperate, 
abstemious,  and  hardy,  but  idle,  with  neither  fixedness  of 
purpose  nor  perseverance.  Discipline,  or  any  continued  em- 
ployment, becomes  most  irksome  to  them,  yet  they  are  not 
devoid  of  a  certain  degree  of  enterprise." 

This  is  a  much  better  certificate,  but  still  we  are  accused 
of  laziness.  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  last  and  the  best 
authority  on  the  subject  (from  an  English  point  of  view), 
Colonel  Horace  Browne,  at  one  time  Commissioner  of  Pegu, 
and  always  very  popular  with  the  Burmese.  The  Burman, 
he  says,  "  displays  much  spasmodic  energy  and  general 
laziness,  much  love  of  feasts  and  shows,  much  disregard  of 
the  sacredness  of  human  life,  and  much  tenderness  for  the 
lives  of  inferior  members  of  the  animal  kingdom,  much  arro- 
gance and  inconsiderateness  when  placed  in  high  position, 
and  last,  though  not  least,  much  general  truthfulness,  and, 
amongst  unsophisticated  villagers,  the  very  unoriental  trait 
of  being  unable'  to  tell  a  specious  falsehood." 

The  hauteur  complained  of  towards  strangers  is  princi- 


XXXIX  LUCKY  AND  UNLUCKY  DAYS  385 

pally  due  to  the  fact  that  the  stranger  is  not  a  Buddhist,  and 
has  not  as  a  boy  been  admitted  into  a  monastery.  To  a 
Burman  such  a  man  is  no  better  than  a  buffalo  or  a  dog. 
In  those  of  low  degree  this  feeling  shows  itself  in  pitying 
kindness,  in  those  in  high  positions  in  arrogance  and  insult- 
ing rudeness. 

The  unpleasant  allegations  of  Father  San  Germano  may 
be  considered  cancelled  by  the  advocacy  of  the  two  military 
gentlemen,  but  there  remains  the  united  charge  of  unwarrant- 
able laziness.  Let  us  see  what  can  be  said  for  the  defence 
on  this  point. 

It  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  the  whole  human  race 
is  more  or  less  hampered  by  a  dislike  for  work  when  there 
is  no  necessity  for  doing  it.  In  addition  to  sharing  this  weak- 
ness, the  Burman  is  fettered  by  a  multiplicity  of  fortunate 
and  unfortunate  days.  When  he  is  born,  his  sada,  or 
horoscope,  is  cast,  detailing  minutely  the  moment  at  which 
he  appeared,  and  the  influence  the  presiding  constellation 
has  over  him  personally ;  and  this  sada  must  be  carefully 
examined  before  anything  can  be  done.  But  beyond  this 
there  are  a  great  variety  of  unlucky  days  which  more  or  less 
concern  everybody,  and  have  to  be  avoided  if  a  man  is  to 
hope  for  success  in  his  enterprise  or  his  journey.  To  enlist 
the  sympathy  of  maritime  England,  I  will  begin  with  the 
superstition  about  Friday : 

Thaukkya  ye  gyaung 
Ma  thwa  kaung. 

On  Friday  boats  sailing 
Cause  weeping  and  wailing. 

On  the  contrary,  if  you  begin  the  study  of  a  subject  on 
Friday  you  will  become  an  authority  on  it.  Thursday  is 
also  a  good  day;  but  if  you  commence  on  Tuesday  or 
Saturday  you  will  soon  die.  Saturday  is  a  bad  day  for 
everything,  especially  for  fires — a  fact  which  the  Fire  Brigade 
would  probably  corroborate.  But  doubtless  it  is  somewhat 
irritating  for  an  Englishman  when  he  wants  to  commence  a 
journey,  and  has  everything  ready  except  the  bullocks  for 
the  cart,  to  find  that  he  cannot  persuade  his  servants  to  buy 
or  engage  them  till  Sunday,  because  such  a  proceeding  would 

2  c 


386  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

bring  disaster  on  everybody  connected  with  it.  He  declares 
it  is  dilatoriness,  or  the  desire  to  stay  and  see  some  feast ; 
whereas  it  is  a  matter  of  conscience,  and  was  taught  to  the 
Burman  in  a  rhyme  when  he  was  a  little  boy  at  school. 
Similarly  there  are  regulations  as  to  the  days  proper  for 
washing  one's  head.  This  is  a  regular  ceremony,  performed 
only  once  a  month  or  so,  partly  because  it  takes  a  long  time 
with  the  Burman's  luxuriant  hair ;  partly  because  many 
people,  especially  in  the  small  Talaing  villages  in  Pegu, 
believe  that  too  frequent  washings  would  disturb  and  irritate 
the  genius  who  dwells  in  the  head  and  protects  the  man. 
Therefore  when  you  collect  the  bark  and  saponaceous  seeds 
and  other  material  for  the  operation,  you  must  remember 
that  it  is  unlucky  to  wash  your  head  on  Monday,  Friday,  and 
Saturday.  In  the  same  way,  parents  sending  their  boy  into 
the  monastery  must  remember  not  to  cut  his  hair  on  a 
Monday,  a  Friday,  or  on  his  birthday.  A  Burman's  birth- 
day, it  must  not  be  forgotten,  occurs  once  a  week,  and  his 
name  recalls  the  day. 

This  circumstance  gives  rise  to  a  number  of  barriers  to 
the  proceedings  of  the  children  of  particular  days,  all  of 
which  are  taught  in  the  linga,  the  doggerel  rhymes  of  the 
monastic  and  lay  schools.  Pyatthada  ne  (unlucky  days)  are 
as  follows  :  Thursday  and  Saturday  in  the  months  -of  Tagu 
(April),  Wagaung  (August),  and  Na'daw  (December).  The 
months  do  not  exactly  correspond.  Tagu,  the  first  month  of 
the  Burman  year,  is  really  half  April  and  half  May  ;  Na'daw, 
half  December  and  half  January,  and  so  on  ;  which  must  be 
remembered  in  the  months  mentioned  below.  Thursday  and 
Saturday  mean  that  the  people  born  on  those  days  are  invari- 
ably unlucky  in  the  specified  three  months,  and  had  con- 
sequently much  better  remain  at  home,  talking,  smoking, 
and  chewing  betel,  even  though  it  irritate  good  missionaries, 
like  San  Germano,  than  endeavour  to  do  work  of  any  kind 
which  could  only  result  unfortunately.  The  monastery  rhyme 
may  be  rendered  as  follows  : — 

Tagu  the  hot,  Wagaung  the  wet, 

Na'daw  the  dull  and  chilly. 
Scowl  on  the  serpent  and  the  rat, 

So  rest  ye,  willy  nilly, — 


XXXIX  LUCKY  AND  UNLUCKY  DAYS  387 

the  serpent  being  the  sign  of  Saturday,  and  the  rat  of 
Thursday.  Similarly  the  sons  of  Wednesday  and  Friday 
are  debarred  from  work  in  Kason  (May),  Tawthalin  (Sep- 
tember), and  Pyatho  (January) : 

Kas6n,  Pyatho,  and  Tawthalin, 
These  months  are  right  unlucky. 
For  Friday  and  for  Wednesday 
At  home  or  in  Kentucky. 

Sunday  and  Monday  are  bad  days  in  the  months  of  Nayon 
(June),  Thadingyut  (October),  and  Tabodwe  (February) : 

The  tiger  and  the  gusty  roc 

Must  shun  Nayon  and  Thadingyut, 

Eke  Tabodwfe  with  dripping  lock, 
Whate'er  they  do  'twill  bear  no  fruit. 

The  tiger  is  the  symbol  for  Monday ;  the  Galon,  or  roc, 
for  Sunday.     Tabodwe  is  the  foggiest  month  of  the  year. 

The  Waso  (July),  Ta'saungmdn  (November),  and  Tabaung 
(March),  those  under  the  sign  of  the  lion  (Tuesday),  and 
the  tuskless  elephant,  Haing — which  represents  the  dark 
planet  Yahu,  and  makes  an  eighth  day  of  Wednesday  after 
noontide — are  shut  out  from  active  labour : 

In  month  Tabaung,  'twixt  hot  and  cold, 

Ta'saungm6n,  Waso  breezy, 
Yahu  and  Tuesday's  human  fold 

Must  take  it  precious  easy. 

On  the  other  hand  there  are  Yet  Yaza,  "  kingly  days," 
during  which  the  Burman  will  display  "  much  spasmodic 
energy."  Such  are  Friday  and  Monday  in  April ;  Saturday 
and  Thursday  in  May ;  Tuesday  in  June ;  Sunday  and 
Wednesday  in  July ;  Friday  and  Wednesday  in  August ; 
Thursday  and  Saturday  in  September  ;  Tuesday  in  October  ; 
Tuesday  and  Yahu  (noon  to  midnight  on  Wednesday)  in 
November  ;  Friday  and  Wednesday  in  December  ;  Thursday 
and  Saturday  in  January ;  Thursday  and  Tuesday  in  February; 
Saturday  and  Wednesday  in  March. 

Cease  to  weary. 

Whose  lot's  dreary, 

On  these  kings  of  kingly  days. 


388  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

It  must,  of  course,  be  borne  in  mind  that  these  days  are 
only  lucky  for  those  who  were  born  on  them,  and  not  for 
everybody. 

With  all  this  the  Burman  is  in  a  very  considerable  diffi- 
culty between  lucky  and  unlucky  days.  If  he  declines  a 
piece  of  work  because  it  is  his  unlucky  season,  or  under- 
takes it,  but  delays  commencing  till  his  fortunate  time  shall 
come  round,  the  foreigner  accuses  him  of  laziness  in  the  one 
case  and  dawdling  in  the  other.  Yet  many  Englishmen 
would  not  sit  down  as  one  of  thirteen  to  dinner. 

It  would  be  bad  enough  if  this  were  all ;  but  there  afe 
other  matters  calling  for  the  observance  of  the  Burman  if 
he  would  consult  his  well-being.  It  is  ordained  for  him  by 
paternally  solicitous  astrologers  in  what  directions  he  must 
not  travel  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year.  This  is  regulated 
by  the  naga  hie.  The  Naga  is  a  huge  creature,  half  dragpn, 
half  serpent,  coiled  round  the  world,  and  gradually  and 
steadily  crawling  in  a  constantly  repeated  circle  ;  so  that  his 
head  is  now  in  one  place,  now  in  another ;  the  circuit  being 
completed  in  a  year,  and  following  the  direction  of  the 
hands  of  a  watch.  You  can  journey  from  the  tail  towards 
the  head  with  safety,  but  not  from  the  direction  of  the  head 
towards  the  tail,  for  then  you  would  go  straight  into  the 
monster's  jaws.  It  is  safe  to  go  across  in  any  direction. 
As  long  as  you  know  the  position  of  the  head,  therefore, 
you  are  safe  ;  and  this  is  recorded  for  you  in  the  usual  linga ; 

From  March  to  May,  all  April  through, 
The  huge  Naga  towards  Mount  Meru 
His  belly  turns,  his  back  to  south  ; 
The  west  he  frights  with  open  mouth  ; 
His  tail  curled  up  holds  all  the  east. 
Mark  well  how  lies  the  grisly  beast. 

From  June  to  August,  therefore,  the  head  is  to  the  north, 
and  you  must  not  go  southwards  ;  from  September  to  Novem- 
ber the  west  is  barred  to  you,  and  from  then  on  till  March 
it  is  dangerous  to  go  north. 

The  difficulty  an  Englishman  occasionally  finds  in  get- 
ting boatmen  to  go  in  a  particular  direction,  or  porters  to 
carry  his  baggage  across  country,  is  therefore  easily  accounted 
for  without  any  necessity  for  stigmatising  the  Burmese  as 


XXXIX  LUCKY  AND  UNLUCKY  DAYS  389 

hopelessly  lazy  and  averse  to  steady  labour.  The  fact  that 
men  are  always  to  be  got  eventually  is  no  argument  against 
the  general  belief  in  the  theory,  for  the  English  persuade 
people  to  all  manner  of  iniquity.  Staunch  members  of  the 
Order  of  the  Yellow  Robe  will  tell  you  that  the  brandy- 
drinkers  and  the  opium-eaters  (whom  the  English  Thathana- 
baing,  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  other  good  people 
believe  to  be  so  very  numerous  in  Burma)  are  very  frequently 
proselytes,  and,  at  any  rate,  have  been  much  influenced  by 
the  white  foreigners.  And  probably  every  officer  in  the  Com- 
mission who  has  at  length  got  together  a  band  of  men  to 
journey  towards  the  naga's  jaws  will  bear  out  the  assertion 
that  they  must  have  been  a  bad  lot,  and  drank  raw  spirits 
and  chewed  opium  enough  to  gladden  the  heart  of  an  anti- 
opium  society  man  in  search  of  a  frightful  example. 

It  may  be  asserted  that  the  unlucky  days  were  invented 
as  an  excuse  for  laziness  ;  but  the  prevalence  of  the  system 
with  regard  to  other  matters  disproves  this.  For  example, 
the  blind  god  is  supposed  to  laugh  at  barriers  of  rank  and 
time  and  space  ;  but  most  Burmans  have  a  profound  belief 
in  the  yan-pet  linga — the  rhyme  of  hostile  pairs,  referred  to 
in  the  chapter  on  marriage.  Again,  in  forming  a  partner- 
ship for  purposes  of  trade,  or  the  like,  a  due  regard  must  be 
paid  to  birthdays.  Lucky  combinations  are  as  follows : — 
Sunday  and  Friday,  Tuesday  and  Thursday,  Saturday  and 
Wednesday,  Monday  and  Yahu. 

When  you  get  a  Burman  on  his  lucky  day,  he  will  dis- 
play an  amount  of  "  spasmodic  energy  "  which  has  surprised 
many  travellers  into  calling  him  hard-working.  The  boat- 
men on  the  Irrawaddy  and  the  Sittang  often  row  six,  eight, 
and  even  ten  hours  at  a  stretch,  on  no  more  solid  food  than 
cold  boiled  rice,  with  a  fragment  or  two  of  salt  fish  or  curried 
vegetables.  But  that  is  when  it  is  their  "  kingly  day."  Try 
them  on  a  pyatthada  day,  and  they  will  not  even  drift  with 
the  stream. 


CHAPTER    XL 

THE   BUTTERFLY   SPIRIT 

It  is  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  that  Buddhists  deny 
the  existence  of  a  soul  or  spiritual  principle  in  man.  Each 
new  being,  spiritual  nature  as  well  as  bodily  substance,  is 
the  product  of  what  has  gone  before,  and  differs  entirely 
from  the  previous  being.  That  faculty  which  performs  all 
the  actions  referred  by  other  religions  to  the  soul  is  by  the 
Buddhist  system  placed  in  a  sixth  sense  called  manaw,  the 
heart,  or  faculty  of  knowing.  This  sense  is  as  material  in 
its  action  as  any  of  the  others  which  are  denominated  seeing, 
hearing,  tasting,  and  so  on.  The  manaw  is,  it  is  true,  the 
most  important  of  all  the  senses.  The  eyes,  the  ears,  all 
the  others,  are  merely  channels  to  communicate  impressions 
to  the  purely  intellectual  faculty  of  knowing ;  but  it  is  not 
a  separate  something,  distinct  in  composition  and  existence 
from  the  material  body.  The  quality  and  keenness  of  per- 
ception of  the  manaw  is  a  matter  of  serious  importance  to 
its  owner  ;  for  it  is  only  by  meditation  that  a  man  can  attain 
to  the  higher  heavens,  and  the  act  of  meditating  can  only  be 
conducted  by  the  sixth  sense.  The  observance  of  the 
precepts  and  the  performance  of  good  actions  meet  with 
abundant  reward  in  happy  births  on  earth  or  in  the  six 
heavens  of  the  nat-dewas ;  but  the  inward  good  deeds  of 
the  soul  are  incomparably  more  meritorious,  and  therefore 
the  pondering  on  the  lawki  seit,  the  ideas  of  creatures  yet 
under  the  influence  of  the  passions,  and  on  the  lawkotara 
seit,  which  are  the  ideas  of  those  happy  beings  who  have 
entered  into  the  current  of  perfection  and  move  about  in  the 
regions  of  pure  spiritualism — the  consideration  of  these  and 

39° 


CHAP.  XL  THE  BUTTERFLY  SPIRIT  391 

of  the  seitathit,  or  results  immediately  connected  with  ideas, 
throughout  all  the  five  stages  of  meditation  up  to  upekka, 
lead  to  rewards  in  the  twenty  superior  heavens,  where  the 
contemplative  gradually  frees  himself  from  the  thanya,  or 
false  persuasions,  and  acquires  a  contempt  for  matter. 

All  this  action  has  its  place  in  the  manaw,  or  the  seat 
of  knowledge,  and  is  duly  explained  to  the  Burman  when 
he  is  in  the  monastery  school,  and  afterwards,  perhaps,  in 
discourses  of  the  Yahans  in  the  rest-houses  on  feast-days, 
or  other  suitable  occasions.  Unfortunately,  however,  the 
matter  is,  to  say  the  least,  a  little  obscure,  and  not  by  any 
means  easily  to  be  grasped.  Accordingly,  the  superstitious 
Burman  having  got  a  confused  lot  of  big  words  into  his 
head,  after  letting  them  simmer  there  for  a  while,  evolved 
from  his  internal  consciousness  the  notion  of  the  leip-bya, 
or  butterfly  spirit. 

This  personation  of  the  soul  in  a  fairy-like  form  had 
natural  elements  of  attractiveness  in  it ;  and  the  consequence 
is  that  the  error  of  the  unphilosophical  Burman  long  ago  has 
grown  into  a  present  national  belief,  and  it  is  universally 
accepted  that  the  life  of  man  resides  in  the  leip-bya  and  dies 
when  it  disappears.  The  man  at  the  point  of  death  opens 
his  mouth  and  the  butterfly  escapes  from  the  body,  but  only 
to  die  at  the  same  time.  Many  strange  things  are  explained 
by  this  doctrine.  For  example,  the  leip-bya  is  the  cause  of 
dreams.  It  is  not  absolutely  necessary  that  the  butterfly 
should  remain  constantly  in  the  body ;  death  will  not 
necessarily  ensue  from  the  separation.  When  the  man  is 
asleep,  therefore,  it  leaves  the  body  and  roams  about  far  and 
wide.  But  in  these  wanderings  it  can  only  go  to  such  places 
as  a  person  to  whom  it  belongs  has  previously  been  in.  A 
straying  from  known  paths  would  cause  extreme  danger  to 
the  sleeping  body,  for  it  might  happen  that  the  butterfly 
would  lose  its  way  and  never  return,  and  then  both  would 
die — the  body  because  the  animating  principle  was  gone, 
the  leip-bya  because  it  had  no  earthly  tenement  to  live  in. 
The  butterfly  is  enabled  to  perform  these  journeys  through 
its  existence  as  thwe  seit,  or  soul  of  the  blood  ;  and  it  is 
the  state  of  this  blood  which  makes  the  leip-bya  more  or 
less  inclined  to  roam,  and  directs  its  movements.     If  the 


392  THE  BURMAN :  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        cyim;. 

blood  is  feverish  or  excited  in  any  way,  the  butterfly  necessarily 
beconaes  restless,  and  wanders  about  more  or  less  rapidly  and 
into  more  or  less  strange  places,  according  to  the  degree  of 
perturbation.  Therefore  it  happens  that  the  soul  thus  exist-' 
ing  in  itself,  and  straying  or  flying  at  random,  sees  extremely 
strange  and  fantastic  visions  on  these  voyages.  An  elabora- 
tion of  this  notion  divides  dreams  into  three  special  varieties  ; 
those  which  occur  at  the  beginning  of  sleep,  those  about 
midnight,  and  those  in  the  early  morning ;  or  the  false,  the 
mixed,  and  the  true.  Bedin-say5s  and  wise  women  are  for 
this  reason  always  very  particular  in  their  inquiries  as  to 
the  precise  time  at  which  the  dream  occurred.  If  they 
foretell  wrongly  it  is,  of  course,  because  the  questionist  made 
a  mistake  as  to  the  time  when  his  vision  appeared  to  him. 

These  night  wanderings  of  the  butterfly  spirit  are  not 
without  their  dangers.  In  addition  to  other  hobgoblins  and 
spectres,  Burma  is  especially  plagued  by  evil  spirits  called 
bilus — creatures  in  human  guise  who  devour  men.  If  they 
will  eat  the  corporate  man,  there  is  small  doubt  what  will 
happen  to  the  fragile  butterfly  spirit  should  it  come  across 
such  an  ogre.  Cases  do  happen  when  the  leip-bya  is  gulped 
down,  and  then  the  man  has  slept  his  last  sleep.  More  often, 
however,  it  is  only  a  case  of  leip-bya  Ian  ;  the  soul  is  scared, 
and  in  its  terror  sometimes  runs  into  unknown  regions,  from 
which  it  is  unable  to  retrace  its  steps,  when  of  course  it  dies 
and  with  it  the  owner ;  or  it  rushes  home  to  its  bodily  dwell- 
ing-place with  such  precipitation  that  the  whole  system  is 
disorganised  and  sickness  follows.  This  butterfly  theory, 
therefore,  offers  a  grand  field  for  quack  doctors,  of  whom 
there  are  unfortunately  a  very  large  number  in  Burma. 
When  a  man  falls  ill  they  dose  him  with  all  the  drugs  and 
simples  they  have  in  their  little  bamboo  phials.  If  he  does 
not  get  better  after  taking  even  the  fungus  from  the  roots 
of  the  bamboo,  culled  in  the  eclipse,  or  vegetable  soot  pre- 
pared at  the  change  of  the  moon,  then  there  can  be  only 
one  opinion ;  the  leip-bya  has  had  its  system  shaken  by 
some  ghoulish  sight ;  or  perhaps  it  is  being  kept  in  durance 
vile  by  some  tas6,  some  demon  (in  the  sense  of  the  Greek 
Bai/Mtov),  or  by  a  s6n,  a  wizard.  In  this  case  no  bodily 
medicine  can  be  of  any  use,  were  it  even  that  celebrated 


XL  THE  BUTTERFLY  SPIRIT  393 

nostrum,  the  green  powder,  which  contains  160  different 
ingredients.  A  witch  doctor  must  be  called  in,  and  he 
resorts  to  the  leip-bya  hkaw.  This  ceremony  is  very  much 
like  that  made  use  of  in  ordinary  cases  of  oppression  by  evil 
genii,  nat-sos,  and  witches.  Offerings  are  laid  outside  the 
house,  or  perhaps  outside  the  village,  at  night — heaps  of 
cooked  rice,  bananas,  salt  fish,  and  other  eatables ;  and  the 
malevolent  being,  whether  ghostly  tas6  or  material  witch, 
is  begged  to  eat  this  rice  instead  of  the  butterfly  spirit,  and 
to  let  the  prisoner  free.  Few  are  hardy  enough  to  watch 
and  see  what  happens  ;  but  the  few  who  have  done  so  agree 
in  the  discovery  that  the  demon  appears  in  the  shape  of  a 
pariah  dog,  which  does  not  differ  from  other  pariah  dogs  in 
spirit,  inasmuch  as  it  will  run  away  if  you  throw  stones  at  it. 
The  offerings  are  repeated  till  a  change  takes  place.  Perhaps 
the  tas6  is  greedy,  eats  offerings,  leip-bya,  and  all,  and  kills 
the  man.  Perhaps  it  is  appeased.  Then  the  butterfly  spirit 
returns  safe  to  its  owner  again,  and  convalescence  sets  in. 
This  is  called  leip-bya  win.  Bilus  are  never  successfully 
negotiated  with  in  this  way ;  they  are  too  voracious.  They 
occasionally  appear  in  broad  daylight  upon  earth ;  but  may 
always  be  recognised,  since  they  have  red  eyes  and  cast  no 
shadow. 

A  particularly  difficult  operation  is  to  separate  two  leip- 
byas  that  were  intimately  united  in  life.  This  is  especially 
the  case  when  a  mother  has  died  leaving  a  little  infant.  If  the 
leip-bya  kwe  is  not  resorted  to,  the  butterfly  of  the  little  one 
will  follow  the  mother,  and  the  child  will  die.  A  wise  woman 
is  therefore  called  in.  She  murmurs  some  mantras,  and  then 
places  a  looking-glass  on  the  floor  near  the  corpse.  Still 
muttering,  but  with  more  and  more  rapid  gesticulation,  she 
drops  a  filmy  shred  of  cotton  down  on  the  face  of  the  mirror, 
and  with  frenzied  words  entreats  the  dead  mother  not  to  retain 
the  infant  soul,  but  let  it  come  back  to  its  earthly  tenement. 
The  fleecy  down  slowly  slips  down  the  mirror  face  and  falls 
off  into  the  handkerchief  she  holds  below,  and  is  then  gently 
placed  on  the  breast  of  the  child.  A  similar  ceremony  is 
occasionally  gone  through  when  a  husband  or  wife  is  more 
than  usually  overcome  by  the  death  of  the  yoke-fellow. 

The  whole  notion  is  of  course  foreign  to  Buddhism,  and 


394  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

is  viewed  with  great  disfavour  by  the  members  of  the  sacred 
assembly,  but  they  are  no  more  able  to  put  a  stop  to  it  than 
they  are  Ito  suppress  nat-worship  in  the  subsidiary  form  in 
which  it  still  exists.  It  is  somewhat  discouraging  to  those 
who  have  the  welfare  of  the  people  at  heart ;  yet  still  when 
one  comes  to  highly  civilised  countries  such  as  are  found  in 
Europe  and  finds  ghosts  only  a  little  less  demonstratively 
believed  in,  a  load  is  removed.  The  world  is  very  small 
after  all. 

The  leip-bya  idea,  like  a  good  many  other  peculiarities 
of  the  Burmese,  occasionally  gets  them  into  trouble  with 
foreigners.  It  is  the  cause  of  the  great  unwillingness  all 
Burmans  have  to  wake  a  sleeping  man.  It  is  obvious  from 
the  above  explanation  of  the  character  of  the  leip-bya,  that 
it  would  be  highly  injurious  to  rouse  a  man  suddenly  from 
his  slumbers.  His  butterfly  might  be  wandering  far  from 
the  body,  and  probably  would  not  have  time  to  hurry  back 
to  its  tenement;  Then  the  man  would  certainly  fall  sick,  or 
at  any  rate  would  be  indisposed  for  a  time.  Consequently,  it 
is  useless  to  tell  a  Burman  servant  to  wake  you  at  a  certain 
hour.  He  will  come  in  at  the  appointed  time  and  look  wist- 
fully at  you,  and  wish  something  would  fall  dov/n  and  make 
a  noise ;  but  he  himself  will  tread  as  softly  as  a  housebreaker, 
and  will  not  even  have  the  heart  to  instigate  somebody  out- 
side to  make  a  disturbance.  The  Englishman  has  not  got 
"  humanity,"  it  is  true  ;  he  has  not  been  in  a  monastery,  and 
is  therefore  not  really  a  "  man " ;  but  there  is  no  knowing 
but  what  he  might  have  a  leip-bya  for  all  that.  Conse- 
quently the  master  is  not  wakened,  and  gets  up  an  hour  and 
a  half  after  he  wanted  to,  and  storms  at  the  poor  Burman 
for  a  lazy  scoundrel  who  snores  away  till  the  sun  is  as  high 
in  the  sky  as  the  pagoda  spire,  let  alone  a  tari  palm. 

The  same  thing  occurs  out  in  the  country  villages.  An 
English  assistant  commissioner  rides  unexpectedly  into  a 
small  townlet  in  his  subdivision  and  calls  for  the  headman. 
That  worthy  is  having  his  afternoon  siesta,  and  the  good 
wife  announces  this  with  a  composure  which  almost  sur- 
prises the  young  sub-janta  wallah  into  swearing.  He  says, 
"  Well,  then,  wake  him,  and  tell  him  to  bring  his  accounts 
along  to  the  traveller's  bungalow.''     Old  Ma  Gyi  shudders 


XL  THE  BUTTERFLY  SPIRIT  395 

at  the  very  thought,  and  flatly  refuses.  The  Englishman 
gallops  off  in  a  fury  at  the  d — readful  impertinence  of  the 
people,  and  Ma  Gyi  calls  together  all  her  gossips  to  hear 
of  the  brutality  of  the  young  wundauk,  who  actually  wanted 
her  to  imperil  her  goodman's  life.  It  needs  something  more 
than  passing  examinations  and  being  a  smart  report-writer 
to  govern  the  people  well. 


CHAPTER    XLI 

CHOLERA   SPECIFICS 

Occasionally  a  whole  Burmese  village  or  a  quarter  of  the 
town  seems  to  be  seized  with  sudden  madness.  Without  a 
moment's  warning,  apparently,  and  moved  by  one  common 
impulse,  the  able-bodied  scramble  on  to  the  tops  of  their 
houses  and  fall  to  work  to  beat  the  wooden  or  mat  roofs 
with  bamboos  and  billets  of  wood.  The  old  and  feeble 
stand  down  below  and  thump  unmelodious  drums,  or  bray 
their  loudest  on  raucous  trumpets,  while  the  women  and 
children  dance  round  about  and  open  their  mouths  and  yell. 
No  one  has  any  right  to  talk  about  pandemonium  till  he  has 
been  scared  by  the  sudden  bursting  on  the  night  air  of  this 
diabolical  uproar.  New-comers  in  Rangoon,  mindful  of  the 
scares  which  have  been  frequent  of  late  years,  on  hearing 
the  outburst  for  the  first  time,  are  apt  to  believe  that  the 
long-prophesied  rising  of  the  "  budmash  "  population  has  at 
length  commenced,  and  that  the  ferocious  Burman  has 
started  on  the  war-path.  They  are  the  more  inclined  to 
believe  it  because  the  outbreak  always  takes  place  at  night, 
and,  at  a  distance,  suggests  nothing  so  much  as  a  general 
free  fight.  But  it  is  nothing  of  the  kind  ;  nothing  could  be 
farther  from  it.  It  is,  in  point  of  fact,  the  regular  sequel  to 
a  religious  ceremony.  Cholera  has  appeared  in  the  district. 
There  have  been  a  number  of  deaths,  and  the  population  is 
aroused  to  a  sense  of  the  danger.  The  terrible  epidemic  is 
of  annual  occurrence,  notwithstanding  all  sanitary  precau- 
tions, at  the  beginning  of  the  south-west  monsoon  in  May. 
The  first  heavy  bursts  of  the  rainy  season  wash  all  manner 
of  surface  impurities,  animal  and  vegetable,  into  the  wells 

396 


CHAP.  xLi  CHOLERA  SPECIFICS  397 

and  tanks,  and  cases  of  sporadic  cholera  are  the  conse- 
quence. So  says  the  civil  surgeon  ;  but  the  Burmans  do 
not  believe  him.  They  are  convinced  that  a  nat-so,  some 
evil  spirit,  has  taken  up  his  abode  in  the  place,  and  is  exact- 
ing revenge  for  some  real  or  fancied  insult.  They  accord- 
ingly take  this  means  of  forcing  him  to  quit ;  and  if  the 
malignant  nat  can  be  supposed  to  have  any  nerves  whatever, 
it  certainly  ought  to  be  effective. 

The  brethren  of  the  monastery  discountenance  the  prac- 
tice as  far  as  they  can — as  indeed  every  one  not  afflicted 
with  a  dulness  of  hearing  might  be  expected  to  do.  It  is  a 
remnant  of  the  old  geniolatry,  and,  having  nothing  to  do 
with  pure  Buddhism,  confounds  the  dewas  of  the  six  heavens 
with  the  heathenish  spirits  of  the  old  wild  tribes.  But  cholera 
is  a  pestilence  that  regards  not  the  yellow  robe  of  the  mendi- 
cant any  more  than  the  gay  paso  of  the  frivolous ;  and  so 
the  p6ngyis  hold  the  ceremony  which  immediately  precedes 
the  wild  riot  called  thay^  t6pthi,  and  display  their  opposition 
no  more  violently  than  by  getting  out  of  the  way  as  fast  as 
the  dignified  walk  prescribed  to  the  Assembly  of  the  Perfect 
permits. 

It  is  related  that  long  ago,  at  the  time  of  the  beginning 
of  religion,  the  terrible  pestilence  swept  over  Kapilawut,  the 
city  of  Thudawdana,  the  father  of  the  Lord  Buddha.  Only 
at  the  intercession  and  by  the  merits  of  the  prayers  and 
good  works  of  the  saviour  of  the  world  and  his  assembly, 
was  the  plague  stayed,  and  the  city  saved  from  desolation — 
hence  the  function  called  pareit  ydtthi.  Cholera  has  broken 
out  in  the  village.  Several  deaths  have  occurred  in  succes- 
sion with  the  terrible  suddenness  which  is  characteristic  of 
the  disease.  The  dirges  played  by  the  bands  for  the  dead 
fade  into  one  another  and  break  out  all  down  the  street. 
Then  one  of  the  chief  men  of  the  place  makes  preparations 
and  begs  the  irionks  to  come  down  from  the  monastery.  A 
raised  dais  is  put  up  at  the  back  of  the  room  for  the  accom- 
modation of  the  yahans,  and  covered  with  mats.  Offerings 
to  the  holy  men  are  arranged  in  a  long  row  before  the  plat- 
form— rice,  fruit,  flowers,  betel-boxes,  pillows,  cups  and  bowls. 
Alongside  of  these  are  placed  the  vessels  which  the  monastic 
superior  is  to  consecrate — nyaung  ye-o,  sacred  to  the  use  of 


398  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  religious,  and  pareit-o,  so  called  from  the  ceremony. 
These  are  partially  filled  with  water,  leaves  of  the  thabye 
bin,  a  species  of  Eugenia,  are  put  in,  and  along  with  them 
coarse  yellow  string  wound  round  a  small  stick.  When  all 
is  ready  the  monks  come  down  in  the  grey  of  the  evening, 
moving,  as  always,  in  slow  procession  of  Indian  file  from 
the  kyaung,  followed  by  their  disciples  carrying  the  large 
monastic  fan,  or  perhaps  an  arm-load  of  palm-leaf  manu- 
script books.  Meanwhile,  and  all  through  the  ceremony, 
the  people  from  all  parts  of  the  village  come  in,  each  person 
bearing  his  pareit-o,  with  its  supply  of  thabye  bin  leaves  and 
modicum  of  yellow  string.  The  pdngyis,  their  eyes  fixed 
humbly  on  the  ground,  take  their  allotted  seats  without  a 
word  to  any  one,  not  even  to  the  master  of  the  house.  All 
the  people  kneel  as  they  come  in,  and  remain  in  the  half- 
kneeling,  half-prostrate  position  customary  before  members 
of  the  thenga. 

The  abbot  of  the  kyaung  then  begins  the  service,  longer 
or  shorter  according  to  the  capability  or  inclination  of  the 
officiator.  Certain  formulae  reciting  the  praises  of  the  Lord 
Buddha  are  always  chanted  ;  the  Seba  Thila,  the  Ten  Com- 
mandments incumbent  on  all  believers  on  worship  days  and 
on  the  earnest  always,  are  usually  declaimed.  Sometimes  it 
ends  with  this  ;  sometimes,  if  the  abbot  is  an  enthusiast,  the 
law  is  preached.  Then  he  extends  his  hands  over  the 
collected  vessels  and  consecrates  them,  and  the  religious 
ceremony  is  over.  The  yahans  rise  and  file  back  to  their 
kyaung  as  solemnly  as  they  came.  The  presents  made  to 
them  are  carried  off  at  the  same  time,  some  by  the  boy 
pupils,  some  by  the  donors.  The  people  then  take  away 
their  pots  to  their  houses,  and  shortly  afterwards,  at  a  given 
signal,  the  wild  clattering  on  the  roofs  begins.  This  lasts 
till  the  performers  are  exhausted.  Fortunately  that  usually 
occurs  within  half  an  hour.  If  the  malignant  demon  can 
hold  out  so  long,  it  is  much  more  than  most  Europeans  can, 
and  their  futile  remonstrances  and  threats  sometimes  add  to 
the  general  din,  especially  if,  as  not  unfrequently  happens, 
the  disturbance  is  repeated  for  several  nights. 

There  is  this  much,  however,  to  be  said  in  favour  of  the 
custom,  that  it  often  actually  does  stay  the  spread  of  cholera 


XLi  CHOLERA  SPECIFICS  399 

— no  doubt  owing  to  the  diversion  of  mind  produced  by 
banging  away  on  the  top  of  your  roof,  and  the  confidence 
and  hope  which  the  operation  induces.  Moreover,  so  much 
damage  is  done  to  the  house  itself  that  repairs  take  some 
time,  which  also  serves  to  keep  the  mind  occupied. 

When  the  thayfe  tdpthi  is  over,  the  people  return  to 
their  houses,  where  the  pots  with  their  consecrated  contents 
are.  The  yellow  string  is  unwound  from  the  sticks  and 
divided  into  lengths.  Some  people  hang  it  all  round  the 
eaves  of  the  house  in  little  bags,  others  tie  pieces  of  it  round 
the  left  wrist,  more  especially  those  who  go  about  much.  At 
a  time  when  there  is  cholera  about,  most  of  the  young  men 
may  be  seen  with  these  wristlets.  A  Rangoon  clerk  detected 
wearing  one  colours  with  annoyance,  and  says  his  parents 
made  him  put  it  on.  He  very  probably  throws  it  away,  but 
the  same  night  he  will  have  a  fresh  piece  on.  The  thread  is 
coloured  with  dye  obtained  from  the  wood  of  the  jack-tree, 
the  same  which  supplies  the  colouring  matter  for  the  monkish 
garments.  The  thabye  bin  leaves  are  kept  in  the  pot,  or 
scattered  about  the  house.  The  tree  is  particularly  highly 
esteemed  by  the  Burmese.  A  species  of  it,  the  thabu  thabye 
bin  (the  Malay  apple,  Eugenia  malaccensis),  is  celebrated  as 
the  largest  tree  in  the  island  which  lies  to  the  south  of 
Mount  Myinmo.  Sprigs  and  leaves  of  the  thabye  bin  are 
cut,  prayers  and  supplications  for  absent  friends  and  relatives 
offered  up  before  them,  and  then  the  twig  is  thrown  into  a 
pot  of  water.  A  song  has  been  composed  about  the  tree 
itself,  and  is  one  of  the  most  popular  of  those  that  do  not 
belong  to  the  category  of  love-songs.  The  jester  in  a  play 
has  always  an  unfailing  draw  when,  wishing  to  testify  his 
regard  for  some  one,  he  declares  he  has  cut  down  an  entire 
thabye  bin  and  thrown  it  into  the  river  that  his  friend  may 
enjoy  good  health.  The  joke  lies  in  the  contrast  between 
this  and  the  couple  of  leaves  in  a  small  pot  used  by  people 
ordinarily. 

It  might  have  been  expected  that  contact  with  English 
civilisation  and  doctors  would  have  put  an  end  to  the  riotous 
absurdity  of  the  thayfe  t6pthi ;  but  it  has  not  by  any  means. 
In  fact  the  house-beating  goes  on  more  vigorously  in  Ran- 
goon and  the  larger  district  towns  than  elsewhere.     This  is 


400  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    chap,  xli 

partly  because  cholera  is  more  frequent  there  on  account  of 
the  crowding  together  of  the  people,  and  the  greater  chances 
of  the  water  being  polluted ;  and  partly  because  in  small 
villages  the  people  very  often  simply  abandon  the  place,  if 
there  seems  any  danger  of  the  malady  getting  a  firm  hold. 
Cholera  is  almost  certainly  fatal  to  any  Burman  attacked. 
The  usual  remedy  adopted  is  a  very  astringent  decoction  of 
the  rind  of  the  mangosteen  fruit,  but  it  is  seldom  given 
soon  enough  to  be  of  any  use  ;  and  the  Burman  habit  of 
trying  to  keep  air  away  from  the  patient  as  much  as  pos- 
sible, pretty  nearly  renders  useless  any  effect  the  remedy 
might  have  had.  All  the  windows  and  doors  of  the  house 
are  covered  up,  and  a  cloth  is  usually  thrown  over  the  sick 
man's  head,  so  that  he  can  hardly  draw  breath.  Under 
these  circumstances  the  man  smitten  with  cholera  invariably 
justifies  the  national  belief  that  he  is  doomed.  Any  means, 
therefore,  of  keeping  away  the  epidemic  is  eagerly  seized 
upon,  if  it  is  only  the  embarkation  of  the  whole  population 
in  unlimited  gdnnyinto  playing,  as  was  recently  recom- 
mended as  a  favourable  diversion  to  the  public  mind  in 
Prome.  No  amount  of  reasoning  or  remonstrance  is  likely 
to  put  an  end  to  the  infliction  of  the  thay^  tdpthi.  The 
Government  officials  are  helpless  against  the  superstition, 
and  English  police- inspectors  have  simply  to  stand  by 
foolishly  with  their  hands  to  their  ears  till  the  clatter  and 
clamour  dies  down. 


CHAPTER    XLII 

MAKING   GOLD 

The  Burmese  have  no  more  escaped  from  the  craze  for  the 
discovery  of  the  philosopher's  stone  than  other  civilised 
peoples.  Even  at  the  present  day  there  are  numbers  of 
goldsmiths  and  other  handicraftsmen  in  the  principal  towns 
of  Low^er  Burma  who  might  be  prosperous  and  happy,  did 
not  the  craving  for  the  discovery  of  a  means  of  making  gold 
perpetually  disturb  their  minds,  and  impel  them  to  waste 
their  earnings  in  dabblings  with  mercury  and  strange-looking 
mineral  and  vegetable  products.  Mercury  is  what  the  ex- 
perimenter always  starts  with.  Every  would-be  discoverer 
commences  his  researches  with  mercury ;  and  it  is  on  this 
account  a  matter  for  congratulation  that  it  is  so  expensive  ; 
otherwise,  we  might  have  far  more  people  doing  damage 
to  themselves  and  others  than  is  even  now  the  case.  A 
very  great  fire  in  Rangoon  was  caused  by  a  searcher  after 
secrets  capsizing  his  crucible  while  suddenly  pouring  in 
mercury.  For  greater  secrecy,  and  because  his  horoscope 
said  it  was  a  favourable  time,  he  was  working  at  three  in 
the  morning.  His  house  took  fire ;  and  when  day  dawned 
the  whole  of  Edward  Street — one  of  the  wealthiest  inhabited 
by  Burmans — was  a  heap  of  smouldering  ashes.  The  origin- 
ator of  the  fire,  instead  of  being  abused  for  his  carelessness,, 
was  condoled  with,  because  he  was  able  to  assert  that  the 
accident  happened  at  the  supreme  moment,  when  he  was 
trembling  on  the  verge  of  the  great  discovery  that  would 
have  made  his  own  and  all  the  neighbouring  goldsmiths' 
fortunes.  But  accidents  of  this  kind  are  not  of  frequent 
occurrence.      The  damage  is  usually  limited  to  burnt  fingers,, 

401  2  D 


402  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

and  constitutions  shattered  with  the  red  fumes  of  the  heated 
mercury.  Sometimes,  however,  men  who  have  lost  their 
possessions  in  attempting  to  make  gold,  fall  upon  the  notion 
of  repairing  their  fortunes  by  making  money — coining  as  it 
is  called  in  ordinary  parlance.  Luckily,  few  have  the  skill 
requisite  for  this  smashing  business  ;  and  the  counterfeit  coin 
put  about  is  such  as  should  hardly  deceive  any  man  who  has 
ever  seen  a  genuine  piece  of  money  before. 

Naturally  with  so  many  people  experimenting,  there  are 
always  rumours  of  the  discovery  having  been  made.  In- 
deed, methods  are  known  by  which  the  great  object  can  be 
attained — with  proper  care  and  the  selection  of  a  favourable 
hour.  One  of  these  is  quite  infallible,  and  is  so  regarded 
even  by  those  who  have  tried  it  many  times  without  success. 
If  there  has  been  any  failure  it  is  because  of  some  miscal- 
culation in  selecting  a  lucky  moment  from  the  sada,  the 
horoscope  which  every  one  possesses  ;  or  because  some  un- 
avoidable hitch  in  the  operations  allowed  the  propitious  hour 
to  pass.  That  there  is  any  doubt  about  the  feasibility  of 
the  process  no  one  dreams  of  hinting.  Have  not  skilled 
sayas  exhibited  the  metal — undoubted  gold — which  they 
have  made? 

This  method  is  as  follows.  On  the  slopes  of  Kyaik- 
htiyo,  the  hill  on  which,  perched  on  a  gigantic  boulder,  stands 
the  famed  pagoda  of  that  name,  grows  a  peculiar  kind  of 
tree,  the  stem  of  which  is  flattened  out  in  a  singular  way,  so 
that  it  gets  the  name  of  se  nga-pe,  from  a  flat  flounder- 
like fish  called  nga-pe.  This  tree  is  cut  down,  and  the 
trunk  is  chopped  into  little  pieces,  which  are  then  squeezed 
in  as  effectual  a  way  as  the  limited  machineries  in  a  Bur- 
man's  household  can  do  it.  The  chips  are  pressed  between 
two  stones  ;  or  the  bullock -cart  is  passed  over  them  ;  or 
the  good  man  of  the  house  puts  his  teak  box  on  the  top 
of  them,  and  summons  the  family  to  sit  upon  it.  Any 
way,  the  chips  must  be  well  squeezed  ;  many  failures  are 
due  to  remissness  in  this  respect.  The  chips  are  next 
thrown  into  a  long  crucible,  half  filled  with  mercury,  and 
the  mixture  is  subjected  to  the  heat  of  a  roaring  wood  fire. 
By  this  simple  process,  the  sayas  have  obtained  pure  gold 
— a  little  mixed  with  ashes,  if  there  has  been  too  much  of 


MAKING  GOLD  403 


the  se  nga-pfe,  but  otherwise  pure  enough  to  content  the 
most  fastidious  assayist.  The  only  time  I  ever  witnessed 
the  operation,  we  were  prematurely  choked  off  by  the  wood 
smoke  and  the  red  fumes  of  the  mercury ;  and  when  we 
went  back  again  towards  sunrise,  w^e  got  nothing  but  a 
quantity  of  very  malodorous  charred  wood.  There  was  a 
mistake  somewhere  in  conducting  the  experiment. 

There  is  another  method  well  vouched  for,  and  it  is  much 
less  trying  to  the  temper  and  constitution  than  the  other, 
though  perhaps  a  little  more  difficult  of  execution ;  seeing 
that  a  good  deal  depends  upon  extraneous  help,  which  is  not 
always  available,  and  then  only  in  special  localities.  You 
get  a  small  piece  of  palad6tta,  copperas,  or  green  vitriol, 
and  persuade  a  fish  to  swallow  it.  Any  kind  of  fish  will 
not  do.  You  must  seek  out  the  nga  hkdnma,  a  silvery  fish, 
which  grows  to  the  length  of  about  a  foot,  and  is,  I  believe, 
known  to  science  as  Barbus  sarana.  It  is  most  certain  if 
you  introduce  the  copperas  into  the  living  fish,  let  the  creature 
loose,  and  catch  it  again.  If  you  are  in  a  hurry,  however, 
it  is  sufficient  to  put  the  copperas  into  the  dead  creature's 
stomach.  When  it  is  taken  out  again  it  is  quite  changed  in 
appearance.  I  have  never  been  fortunate  enough  to  see  the 
thing  done,  but  sayas  say  the  change  is  quite  remarkable. 
This  new  substance  is  put  into  a  mass  of  copper,  and  either 
allowed  to  remain  there  till  the  change  comes  about,  or 
heated  in  a  crucible  to  accelerate  the  process.  In  a  suc- 
cessful experiment  half  the  metal  should  become  pure  silver, 
and  the  other  half  remain  copper,  the  two  being  on  separate 
sides  of  the  vessel  and  not  mixed  up  together.  This  method, 
competent  alchemists  say,  is  infallible ;  but  somehow  it  does 
not  seem  to  enrich  them.  Perhaps  they  spend  their  gains 
in  searching  after  more  lucrative  processes.  When  you 
can  make  silver,  the  desire  to  make  gold  is  doubtless  only 
intensified. 

I  will  mention  only  one  more  method,  which  was  more 
satisfactory  than  any  while  it  lasted,  but  was  brought  to  an 
abrupt  end  by  the  exhaustion  of  the  raw  material.  A  ship 
was  driven  on  shore  near  Negrais,  the  promontory  on  the 
south-west  coast  of  Burma,  and  was  broken  up  in  a  violent 
storm.     Among  the  wreckage  was  discovered  a  small  quantity 


404  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

of  some  substance,  which  those  who  found  it  called  a-yet  hke 
(congealed  or  solidified  spirit),  on  the  analogy  of  yh  hkfe 
(ice).  How  they  came  to  try  it  I  do  not  know  ;  but  after  a 
while  it  was  found  out  that  this  was  the  grand  secret.  A 
•small  fragment  of  this  stuff  proved  thoroughly  effectual  in 
converting  the  baser  metals  into  gold.  No  matter  what  it 
was  tried  on — tin,  copper,  lead,  iron — the  result  was  always 
satisfactory,  and  the  discoverers  travelled  about  the  country 
for  a  time  turning  other  people's  scraps  of  metal  into  gold. 
Then  the  supply  of  the  a-yet  hkfe  ran  out ;  and  the  great 
question  is  now  where  to  get  more  of  it.  The  invention  of 
compressed  beer  created  hope  ;  but  the  acquisition  of  that 
article  was  disillusionising.  It  had  not  the  magical  pro- 
perties of  the  a-yet  kh^,  and  it  was  not  good  to  drink. 
There  is  here,  perhaps,  a  promising  field  for  sympathetic 
Western  industry.  It  may  be  hoped  that  the  wrecking  of 
the  ship  had  nothing  to  do  with  communicating  its  special 
virtue  to  the  compressed  spirit ;  otherwise  we  might  have 
an  alarming  series  of  maritime  disasters  all  round  the  Gulf 
of  Martaban.  Burning  houses  to  get  roast  pig  would  be  a 
trifle  to  this. 

These  are  a  few  of  the  methods  adopted,  and  they  may 
be  taken  as  samples  of  them  all.  None  of  them  are  more 
scientific,  and  the  three  I  have  described  enjoy  the  reputation 
of  being  entirely  successful  in  the  right  hands.  But  the 
practice  is  much  discountenanced  by  the  pious.  Alchemy 
is  specially  denounced  by  the  Lord  Buddha.  It  tends  to 
induce  covetousness  ;  and  the  striving  is  in  itself  the  best 
evidence  of  a  love  for  the  things  of  this  world,  which  in- 
capacitate a  man  for  the  contemplative  states  of  zan  and  arupa 
— how  much  more,  then,  for  ne'ban.  The  monks,  the  As- 
sembly of  the  Perfect,  of  course  denounce  it ;  for,  in  addition 
to  the  consulting  of  horoscopes — itself,  though  universal  (the 
pdngyi  himself  had  one  drawn  up  when  he  was  a  week  old), 
a  Brahminical  practice,  and  remote  from  true  Buddhism — 
there  are  numerous  other  observances  connected  with  alchemy 
which  are  still  more  heretical.  In  addition  to  consulting  his 
sada  for  a  lucky  hour,  the  alchemist  frequently  also  obtains 
omens  through  the  augurs  from  the  bones  of  a  sacrificial 
fowl.      It  is  arranged  that  the  thigh  bones  of  a  chicken  shall 


MAKING  GOLD  405 


be  examined.  A  condition  is  imposed  that  the  bones  shall 
exactly  correspond,  or  that  there  shall  be  certain  defined 
differences.  The  hollows  of  the  tendons,  for  example,  shall 
be  like  or  unlike,  the  bones  shall  be  even  or  uneven,  and  so 
on.  This  being  accurately  settled,  the  bones  are,  after  the 
chanting  of  bedin,  and  cabalistic  spells,  held  up  side  by 
side,  and  critically  examined.  An  experienced  eye  is  neces- 
sary to  read  the  result  properly,  and  interpret  the  full  signi- 
fication of  the  omens.  Fortunately,  or  unfortunately,  as  you 
like  to  take  it,  if  there  are  two  augurs  present,  they  almost 
always  differ,  and  the  intending  experimenter  is  left  free  to 
follow  the  opinion  that  he  approves  of,  or  which  fits  in  best 
with  his  plans.  This  superstition,  besides  being  abhorrent 
in  itself,  on  account  of  the  taking  of  life,  is  particularly  objec- 
tionable to  the  mendicants,  as  implying  that  there  are  others 
besides  themselves  commanding  respect  and  receiving  rever- 
ence. The  openly  avowed  alchemists  are  therefore  a  much 
abused  body.  But  they  have  the  consolation  of  knowing 
that  almost  every  Burman  has  tried  his  hand  at  eggayat 
htothi  and  failed.  There  are  very  many  monasteries  where 
experiments  have  been  made  notwithstanding  theoretical 
denunciations. 


CHAPTER    XLIII 

SUMPTUARY   LAWS   AND    ETIQUETTE' 

Under  native  rule  the  sumptuary  laws  in  Mandalay  were 
exceedingly  strict  and  most  elaborate  in  their  character. 
Out  of  the  capital  the  regulations  were  equally  in  force,  but 
never,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  came  into  action,  because  the 
country  governors  took  very  good  care  to  replenish  their 
coffers  out  of  the  money-bags  of  every  one  who  chanced 
to  be  fortunate  in  his  speculations.  Speaking  generally, 
officials  were  the  only  rich  people  ;  but  in  no  country  in  the 
world  was  the  official  rank  more  open  to  competition,  or 
more  subject  to  the  caprice  of  the  king.  The  last  mayor  of 
Mandalay,  who  was  also  Governor  of  the  Rafts — that  is  to 
say.  Lord  High  Admiral — was  not  many  years  before  little 
better  than  a  slave,  and  owed  his  first  start  in  life  to  a  lucky 
accident.  Several  others  of  King  Thibaw's  most  prominent 
advisers  were  among  his  personal  attendants  before  he 
ascended  the  throne.  There  is,  therefore,  nothing  of  the 
caste  prejudice  of  the  Hindoos  to  be  found  in  Burma. 
Burmans  will  often  declare  there  is  caste,  but  what  is 
called  by  that  name  is  nothing  more  than  the  arbitrary 
settlement  by  the  sumptuary  laws  of  what  a  man  might 
wear  and  what  was  forbidden  ;  what  language  he  may  use 
and  what  must  be  used  to  him.  Captain  Forbes,  in  his 
book  on  Burma,  said  that  these  prohibitions  extended  in 
native  territory  to  the  names  which  might  be  given  to  a 
man.  The  term  Shwe,  meaning  gold,  was,  he  said,  restricted 
as  a  name  to  people  of  rank.     This  is  certainly  a  misappre- 

1  Since  the  annexation  of  Upper  Burma  these  sumptuary  rules  are  no  longer 
law,  but  they  are  observed  by  very  many  good  citizens  even  under  British  rule. 

406 


CH.  XLiii      SUMPTUARY  LAWS  AND  ETIQUETTE  407 

hension.  It  may  have  been  an  ancient  law,  but  it  was  not 
enforced  in  the  last  years  of  the  Burmese  empire,  and  it 
does  not  seem  to  have  been  enforced  even  in  the  times  of 
the  haughtiest  and  most  unreasonable  monarchs,  such  as 
Tharrawaddy  and  Mintaya  Gyi.  The  appellative  was  per- 
haps not  so  common  as  in  British  territory ;  but  as  far  as 
the  law  was  concerned,  the  poor  man  might  call  himself  and 
his  children  Shwe  as  much  as  he  pleased  ;  only  he  had  to 
be  very  careful  how  he  used  any  of  the  gold  he  might 
possess  in  decorating  his  person  or  in  adorning  his  house. 

If  the  regulations  did  not  apply  to  the  name  a  man 
might  have,  they  certainly  did  to  the  language  he  might 
make  use  of  Oriental  forms  of  speech  in  self-depreciation 
are  familiar  enough.  They  are  universal  with  all  the  nations 
of  the  East,  and  even  turn  up  in  the  democratic  West  in  the 
petitions  of  "  your  humble,  obedient  servant."  The  magni- 
loquent and  supreme  nga,  as  applied  to  one's  self,  is  not 
peculiar  to  Burma  ;  while  hnin,  addressed  to  an  inferior,  is 
only  a  little  more  contemptuous  than  the  Er  of  the  small 
German  courts.  The  difference  between  the  various  ranks  is 
far  more  distinctly  marked  than  this  in  the  employment  of 
different  forms  of  speech  ;  an  entirely  special  language  as 
applied  to  the  royal  blood,  and  in  a  scarcely  less  adulatory 
way  to  the  members  of  the  Assembly  of  the  Perfect.  A 
man  "  dies "  ;  a  monk  "  goes  back ''  to  the  blissful  seats 
whence  he  came,  or  to  ne'ban ;  a  king  "  ascends  to  the 
village  of  Nats  "  ;  one  of  the  six  heavens  of  happiness,  where 
the  passions  still  reign,  and  in  the  contemplation  of  which 
Buddhists  find  consolation  for  the  otherwise  dismal  fore- 
bodings of  their  faith.  The  Buddhist  religion  is  thoroughly 
democratic.  A  man  only  is  what  he  is  through  his  actions 
in  past  existences.  The  accumulation  of  merits  must  there- 
fore vastly  outweigh  the  demerits  in  the  kan  of  a  king. 
However  badly  he  may  act  in  his  regal  existence,  he  cannot 
fall  below  the  lowest  seat  of  the  dewas — at  least,  so  official 
language  declares.  Similarly,  an  ordinary  man  "walks"  ;  a 
mendicant  "stalks,"  or  "strides,"  or  "paces  with  dignified 
gait,"  or  whatever  may  be  the  English  honorific  equivalent 
of  the  Burmese  chwa  ;  while  a  king  "  makes  a  royal  pro- 
gress."    The  latter  expression  was  emphatically  correct  as 


4o8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

far  as  personages  of  the  Burmese  royal  blood  were  con- 
cerned. The  descendants  of  Maha  Thamada  never  went  on 
their  own  legs  in  the  open  air.  If  they  did  not'  mount  an 
elephant,  some  official  was  honoured  with  the  weight  of 
majesty  on  his  back.  In  the  same  way,  while  a  humble  sub- 
ject "  eats,"  a  p6ngyi  s6np6npethi "  assimilates,"  or  "  nourishes 
his  body  with  the  alms  of  the  pious  "  ;  and  a  king  demeans 
himself  to  nothing  less  than  "  ascending  to  the  lordly  board." 
You  may  "  call "  or  "  invite  "  an  ordinary  man  ;  to  an  ascetic 
you  may  "  suggest  an  interview "  ;  you  would  be  a  reckless 
man  indeed  if  you  sought  a  formula  which  in  the  faintest 
imaginable  way  would  suggest  to  a  king  that  you  wanted 
him  to  come  to  you.  When  your  visitor  departs,  if  he  is  on 
familiar  terms,  he  says,  Thwa-mi  no, "  I  say,  I'm  going,"  and 
you  politely  respond,  Thwa-ba,  "  By  all  means,  go  away "  ; 
if  he  stands  a  little  in  awe  of  you,  he  says,  Thwa-daw-mi, 
"  Honoured  sir,  I  take  my  leave  "  ;  on  the  other  hand,  when, 
after  a  conference  with  a  holy  brother,  you  take  your  depart- 
ure, you  say,  "  My  lord's  servant  does  obeisance "  (literally, 
"  kowtows  with  his  forehead  ").  When  there  was  a  king  he  did 
not  give  you  the  chance  to  say  anything ;  he  flung  out  of  the 
throne  and  disappeared  behind  a  blue  curtain,  while  your 
eyes  were  fixed  on  the  ground  a  couple  of  feet  before  you. 

And  so  it  goes  on  through  a  triple  language,  which 
makes  Burmese  of  the  palace  an  unknown  tongue  to  the  best 
foreign  scholar.  Tales  are  told  of  the  ludicrous  mistakes  of 
men,  who  to  ordinary  people  could  speak  Burmese,  and 
therefore  imagined  they  might  venture  on  it  with  the  king. 
Thus  it  was  with  a  bluff  English  manager  of  one  of  the 
numerous  mills  which  King  Mind6n  built  and  kept  going 
till  he  got  tired  of  them.  This  gentleman,  in  replying  in 
the  affirmative  to  some  remark  of  the  Lord  of  the  Golden 
Palace,  horrified  the  court  by  saying  h6kde  instead  of  the 
prescribed  tin-ba  payah,  "  I  think  with  your  majesty."  The 
expression  to  palace  ears  was  much  the  same  as  if  some  one 
were  to  say  to  His  Majesty  the  King  of  England,  "  Right 
you  are,  old  cockie."  The  court  language  is  still  kept  up  by 
all  Burmese  in  their  intercourse  with  superior  officials. 

If  the  proprieties  of  language  were  carefully  observed, 
the  regulations  as  to  wearing  apparel  and  ornaments  were 


xLiii  SUMPTUARY  LAWS  AND  ETIQUETTE  409 

far  more  minute,  and  guarded  with  the  most  jealous  care. 
The  almost  wretched  character  of  the  houses  of  Upper 
Burma,  as  compared  with  those  in  the  lower  territory,  was 
very  apparent ;  but  what  struck  a  stranger  even  more  was  the 
absence  of  the  gay  dress  which  is  so  pleasant  and  pic- 
turesque in  Pegu  and  the  seaboard  provinces.  There  was 
indeed  no  law  against  any  one  wearing  the  most  brilliant 
paso  he  could  get ;  but  the  money  was  wanting  to  support 
the  character.  A  man  with  a  fine  waistcloth  would  be  con- 
sidered to  have  the  money  at  the  back  of  it,  and  might  have 
to  sell  his  dress  to  meet  the  contributions  demanded  accord- 
ingly by  the  local  official.  In  Lower  Burma,  every  one  has 
a  feast-day  dress,  however  poor  he  may  be.  He  gets  the 
money  for  it  by  a  week's  work,  perhaps  backed  up  by  a 
lucky  bit  of  gambling.  Then  he  is  at  liberty  to  strut  about 
and  do  nothing  till  the  clothes  get  shabby,  when  he  has  to 
bestir  himself  again.  In  British  territory,  too,  he  might 
decorate  his  kilt  with  any  number  of  representations  of  the 
peacock.  An  Upper  Burman  would  have  been  promptly 
put  in  gaol — he  would  even  have  run  some  risk  of  being 
killed  outright — if  he  ventured  upon  one.  Peacocks  were 
for  personages  of  the  blood-royal.  Most  people  in  inde- 
pendent territory  wore  no  coats  at  all ;  but  if  they  did  wear 
coats,  they  had  to  be  of  the  simplest  possible  "  Chinese 
cut."  Long-tailed  taingmatheins,  surcoats  and  the  like,  were 
reserved  for  officials,  with  regulations  as  to  buttons,  gold  or 
otherwise,  and  other  minutiae  which  must  have  severely 
taxed  the  memory  of  informers  and  chamberlains. 

As  we  ascend  in  the  social,  or  rather  the  official  scale, — 
for  all  dignity  came  from  office,  or  from  a  special  patent  from 
the  king — distinctions  thickened.  Naturally  in  the  land  of 
the  umbrella-bearing  chiefs,  the  huge  htis  afforded  a  promi- 
nent and  obvious  mode  of  marking  rank.  The  umbrella  is 
twelve  or  fifteen  high,  with  an  expanse  of  six  feet  or  more 
across.  A  poor  man  had  nothing  to  do  with  these  big 
umbrellas  whatever,  unless  he  were  employed  to  carry  one 
over  his  master's  head.  If  he  owned  an  umbrella  at  all,  it 
had  to  be  short  in  the  handle  and  otherwise  of  Western 
dimensions.  Royal  officials  about  the  palace  had  their 
umbrellas  painted  black  inside ;  country  people,  and  those 


4IO  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

not  directly  connected  with  the  royal  abode,  had  the  palm-leaf 
as  near  the  original  colour  as  the  varnishing  with  wood-oil 
permitted.  Some  had  permission  to  cover  the  wide  surface 
with  pink  or  green  satin ;  others,  more  honoured,  might  add 
a  fringe,  either  plain  or  embroidered.  A  golden  umbrella 
was  given  by  special  grace  to  the  highest  wuns  and  the 
royal  princes.  A  white  umbrella  belonged  to  the  king 
alone  and  to  religion,  and  not  even  the  Eingshemin,  the 
heir-apparent,  when  such  a  person  existed,  was  allowed  to 
use  it.  Matters  were  still  further  complicated  by  the  number 
of  umbrellas.  Nine  white  ones  marked  the  king ;  the  Eing- 
shemin had  eight  golden  ones  ;  and  the  rest  of  the  royal 
personages  numbers  corresponding  to  their  achievements,  or 
the  regard  the  king  had  for  them.  If  they  achieved  too 
much,  however,  and  became  popular,  they  died.  Distin- 
guished statesmen  and  generals  might  have  several  gold 
htis,  which  were  duly  displayed  on  all  public  occasions, 
and  were  put  up  in  the  house  in  prominent  places.  The 
king's  "  agent "  in  Rangoon  had  only  one,  which  very  fairly 
represented  the  consideration  in  which  Great  Britain  was 
held,  and  the  official  rank  thought  good  enough  to  com- 
municate with  the  Chief  Commissioner.  A  favourite  trick 
of  the  king,  Naungdaw  Gyi,  was  to  issue  perpetually  new 
edicts  as  to  the  length  of  umbrella  handles  and  the  proper 
measurement  of  the  paso.  District  officials  used  to  make 
large  sums  of  money  in  the  way  of  fines  in  those  days,  and . 
occasionally  themselves  fell  victims.  There  was  nothing  of 
the  kind  latterly,  unless  we  may  consider  the  queen  Supaya- 
lat's  announcement  as  to  the  way  in  which  her  hair  was 
dressed,  being  patented  as  her  sole  prerogative,  an  instance 
of  the  same  nature.  Nevertheless,  the  general  distinctions 
were  very  tenaciously  held  by.  Innocent,  unwitting  English- 
men got  themselves  into  serious  trouble  in  Mandalay  by 
going  about  carrying  silk  umbrellas  with  white  covers.  The 
offence  was  high  treason  and  merited  death.  None  actually 
underwent  the  supreme  penalty,  but  there  were  a  few  who 
had  vivid  denunciations  for  the  stocks. 

The  metal,  size,  and  construction  of  spittoons,  betel- 
boxes,  cups,  and  the  like  household  furniture  for  different 
grades    were    rigidly    demarcated,    and    afforded    the    most 


xLiii  SUMPTUARY  LAWS  AND  ETIQUETTE  411 

minute  evidences  of  the  owner's  rank  and  his  precedence 
in  that  rank.  Anklets  of  gold  (kyegyin)  were  forbidden  to 
all  children  but  those  of  the  royal  family  on  pain  of  death. 
Silk  cloth,  brocaded  with  gold  or  silver  flowers  and  figures 
of  animals,  might  be  worn  by  none  but  the  royal  blood  and 
such  of  the  wunkadaws,  the  minister's  wives,  as  received  a 
special  grace  enabling  them  to  use  it.  Similarly  the  usage 
as  to  jewels  and  precious  stones  was  very  carefully  laid 
down.  Very  few  besides  the  king  and  his  kinsfolk  might 
wear  diamonds.  The  display  of  emeralds  and  rubies  was 
restricted  in  like  manner,  and  so  on  with  other  precious 
stones  less  esteemed  by  Burmans.  All  rubies  above  a  cer- 
tain size  found  in  the  country  were  the  property  of  the  king, 
and  the  hapless  digger  as  a  rule  got  nothing  in  return.  His 
head  paid  the  penalty  if  he  listened  to  the  temptings  of 
black  merchants  from  India,  and  chipped  it  so  as  to  bring  it 
under  the  royalty  size.  Kadipa  panat,  velvet  sandals,  were 
allowed  to  none  but  persons  of  royal  blood.  The  use  of 
hinthapada,  a  vermilion  dye  obtained  from  cinnabar,  was  very 
jealously  guarded.  The  kamauk,  a  great  wide-brimmed  hat, 
was  an  honour  eagerly  sought  after  by  the  lower  rank  of 
oificials.  The  institution  was  not  very  ancient,  and  was 
primarily  due  to  a  prophecy  that  Burma  would  come  to  be 
ruled  by  a  hat-wearing  people.  To  cut  out  the  Englishmen, 
therefore,  the  kamauk  was  invented,  and  was  looked  upon  as 
a  great  distinction.  Hundreds  more  instances  might  be 
given  of  the  yazagaing,  the  sumptuary  rules ;  but  the  above 
will  probably  suffice  to  exhibit  their  scope  and  character. 

Our  present  Burmese  subjects  delight  in  nothing  so 
much  as  in  their  immunity  from  these  enactments ;  and 
perhaps  the  permission  to  bury  their  dead  in  any  way  they 
please  is  the  most  popular  privilege.  In  Mandalay,  exclusive 
of  the  ceremonial  at  the  cremation  of  a  monk,  which  is  iden- 
tical all  over  the  country,  five  kinds  of  funeral  were  ordained 
by  the  yazagaing.  First,  that  of  the  king;  then  of  any 
member  of  the  royal  family.  Even  if  one  of  them  were 
executed,  he  was  put  in  a  red  velvet  bag  and  committed 
to  the  waters  of  the  Irrawaddy.  Third  in  order  were  the 
funerals  of  those  who  died  in  the  enjoyment  of  ministerial 
office — not  always  a  certain  thing,  if  the  recipient  did  not 


412  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    ch.  xlih 

die  shortly  after  his  promotion.  Then  came  the  obsequies 
of  thut^s,  '•  rich  men,"  people  who  had  royal  edicts  conferring 
that  title  on  them  ;  and  finally  the  rites  of  poor  people,  which 
were  practically  no  rites  at  all.  They  probably  would  not 
even  have  been  buried  were  it  not  for  sanitary  reasons.  But 
now  in  all  Burma  the  poorest  man,  if  he  can  borrow  the 
money,  may  have  any  honours  he  pleases  for  his  dead.  He 
may  shade  the  catafalque  with  golden  umbrellas,  or  white 
ones  for  the  matter  of  that ;  he  may  hire  elephants ;  he  may 
fire  guns,  as  long  as  he  does  not  do  it  in  the  public  thorough- 
fares ;  he  may  have  any  number  of  bands  of  music ;  he  may 
erect  a  pagoda  over  the  ashes  of  the  deceased ;  he  may  revel 
in  all  the  honours  restricted  by  the  yazagaing  to  the  most 
privileged  dead ;  and,  in  consequence,  he  may  suffer  in  pocket 
as  much  as  he  dares.  Further,  he  may  heap  up  honorifics 
in  his  conversation  and  correspondence  to  the  utmost  of  his 
desire  and  capability ;  finding  infinite  gratification  in  the  fact 
that  in  former  days  the  use  of  a  single  one  of  them  would 
most  assuredly  have  resulted  in  his  being  lodged  in  gaol, 
there  to  be  treated  according  to  the  way  in  which  he  was 
able  to  satisfy  the  rapacity  of  his  guardians.  If  yazagaing 
was  unpleasant  when  it  was  in  operation,  the  contemplation 
of  it  certainly  affords  an  unfailing  pleasure  to  those  who  are 
exempt  from  its  provisions. 


CHAPTER    XLIV 

WIZARDS,   DOCTORS,   AND   WISE    MEN 

Wizards  and  witches  are  very  common  in  Burma.  The 
thing  runs  in  families,  and  on  the  Chindwin  river  in  Upper 
Burma  there  is  a  village  called  Kale  Thaungthut,  "  the 
small  town  at  the  top  of  the  sandbank,"  where  the  entire 
population  is  credited  with  supernatural  power  of  this  kind. 
They  have  a  king  there,  and  if  a  person  who  has  been 
bewitched  goes  to  him  and  represents  that  he  has  been 
malignantly  and  unjustifiably  laid  under  a  spell  by  some 
unknown  person,  the  wizard  king  goes  through  some  in- 
verted prayers  and  ceremonies,  and  utters  an  incantation, 
which  forces  the  bewitcher  to  his  presence.  An  explanation 
is  then  demanded,  and  if  no  just  cause  can  be  shown,  the  witch 
is  punished  and  the  afflicted  person  is  freed  from  his  ailment. 
Many  bewitched  people  who  have  gone  there  to  be  cured 
have,  however,  never  come  back  again,  and  pilgrimages 
thither  are  therefore  not  so  common  as  they  might  be 
otherwise,  and  of  course  no  one,  not  afflicted,  would  be 
reckless  enough  to  go,  as  it  were,  into  the  lion's  den. 

But  there  are  good  witches  and  bad.  There  are  the 
s6ns,  who  delight  in  nothing  so  much  as  in  killing  people, 
afflicting  them  with  epilepsy,  fits,  and  divers  other  ailments ; 
and  there  are  the  w^zas,  who  are  good  people,  and  strive 
to  overthrow  the  machinations  of  the  s6ns  against  the  welfare 
of  mankind,  while  themselves  learned  in  all  the  knowledge 
of  the  mystic  art.  W^za  simply  means  wisdom  or  know- 
ledge, and  the  sorcery  studied  by  both  classes  is  the  same. 
Both  kinds  of  wise  men  are  divided  into  four  orders,  according 

413 


414  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

to  the  branch  of  learning  to  which  they  have  applied  them- 
selves more  particularly.     Thus  there  are — 

1.  The  Pyada  w6za,  the  mercury  wise  man. 

2.  The  Than  w^za,  the  iron  wise  man. 

3.  The  Se  weza,  the  medicine  wise  man. 

4.  The  In  w^za,  the  wise  man  learned  in  cabalistic  signs 

and  squares. 

The  than  and  in  sorcerers  are  the  most  powerful  and 
efficacious  in  their  workings,  whether  for  good  or  evil,  and 
the  others  are  looked  upon  more  as  experimenters  and  can- 
didates for  the  higher  ranks  than  as  legitimate  wizards.  To 
the  class  of  mercury  wizards  belong  all  those  who  make  a 
regular  practice  of  the  study  of  alchemy  with  a  view  to  the 
production  of  gold  and  silver,  and  on  this  subject  almost 
every  Burman  has  some  pet  notion.  The  medicine  wizards 
are  those  who  set  up  as  professional  doctors  on  the  score 
of  a  particular  knowledge  of  herbs  and  simples.  It  is  a 
very  simple  matter  starting  as  a  doctor  in  Burma.  All  you 
have  to  do  is  to  assert  that  you  have  acquired  a  special 
knowledge,  and  set  to  work  prescribing  the  most  villainous- 
tasted  and  drastic  medicines  you  can  concoct.  As  long  as 
an  undeniable  result  one  way  or  the  other  is  produced  you 
are  sure  of  getting  a  certain  amount  of  reputation. 

The  than  and  in  practitioners  have  a  more  legitimate 
title  to  the  name  of  conjurers  or  workers  in  magic.  The 
title  of  iron  wizard  is  merely  typical,  and  implies  that  the 
man  has  a  knowledge  of  the  properties  of  all  natural  objects, 
and  is  as  capable,  or  more  so,  of  acting  the  rdle  of  a  medical 
adviser  as  the  professed  doctors.  The  discovery  and  pre- 
paration of  the  pieces  of  metal,  stones,  and  what  not,  that 
are  let  under  the  skin  of  soldiers  and  dacoits  is  carried  on 
by  them,  and  this  vending  of  charms  is  a  regular  source  of 
income  to  them.  An  occasional  marvel  worked  now  and 
then  acts  as  a  recommendation  and  advertisement  of  their 
powers.  Thus  I  have  seen  a  hmaw  saya,  a  kind  of  generic 
term  applied  to  all  wonder-workers,  roll  up  pieces  of  gold 
and  silver  leaf  and  thin  sheets  of  copper,  and  throw  them 
into  a  bowl  of  water.  They  of  course  sank  immediately  to 
the  bottom,  and  then  the  saya  would  make  passes  with  his 


xi.iv  WIZARDS,  DOCTORS,  AND  WISE  MEN  415 

hands  and  mutter  an  incantation,  when  the  metal  would 
slowly  rise  to  the  top  and  float  there.  When  sceptics  were 
present,  this  man  would  suddenly  stop  the  charm  he  was 
uttering,  and  the  bits  of  metal  would  either  remain  floating 
in  the  middle  of  the  bowl  of  water  or  sink  down  again, 
according  to  the  part  of  the  spell  to  which  he  had  reached. 
How  it  was  done  is  only  known  to  wizards  of  his  class  and 
sleight-of-hand  people  perhaps,  but  to  the  actual  fact  of  this 
khdntet  letpwe,  as  it  is  called,  numbers  of  people,  Europeans 
as  well  as  Burmans,  can  testify.  The  conjurer  is  a  well- 
known  man  near  the  village  of  Pantanaw,  fifty  miles  or  so 
west  of  Rangoon. 

But  however  many  miracles  the  than  w^za  may  work, 
he  is  always  exceeded  in  reputation  by  the  constructor  of 
cabalistic  squares  and  symbols.  These  are  in  constant  use 
by  every  Burman,  or  rather  he  gets  them  made  and  interpreted 
for  him  by  a  proficient.  The  horoscope  which  every  one  has 
drawn  up  at  his  birth  has  numbers  of  these  mystical  numbers 
on  it,  from  which  lucky  days  and  dangerous  combinations 
may  be  learnt.  To  calculate  the  more  harmful  spells  the 
in  saya  should  have  these  data,  or  at  any  rate  should  know 
the  date  and  hour  of  the  victim's  birth.  Therefore  it  is  a 
safe  rule  never  to  let  a  wizard  or  conjurer  see  your  sada,  or 
to  mention  the  hour  of  your  birth  to  any  one  whom  you 
may  suspect  of  having  an  ill-will  against  you,  for  he  might 
from  even  that  one  fact  have  a  most  potent  charm  thrown 
over  you.  These  mystic  squares  and  numbers  have  most 
extraordinary  virtue.  By  holding  up  one  of  a  particular 
kind  for  a  short  time  you  can  set  a  house  on  fire.  Another 
in  engraved  on  a  stone  will  make  it  float,  and  such  a  stone, 
buried  in  the  skin  of  a  man's  body,  would  prevent  him  from 
drowning,  unless  some  other  magician  destroyed  its  influence 
by  a  more  potent  spell.  If  you  scratch  an  in  on  a  tree  or 
a  house,  you  can  make  lightning  strike  it ;  another  arrange- 
ment of  the  cabalistic  words  or  numbers  will  preserve  it  from 
such  a  calamity.  There  is  probably  not  a  single  Burman, 
tattooed  at  all,  who  has  not  several  ins  on  different  parts  ot 
his  body.  Some  of  them  protect  from  special  ailments ;  the 
most  common  are  those  which  avert  dangers  from  bullet  or 
sword-cut. 


4i6  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

The  doings  of  the  wizards  therefore  enter  largely  into 
Burmese  domestic  life.  There  is  a  s6n  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, and  all  the  mischief  which  happens  there  is  ascribed 
to  him,  while  the  aid  of  the  in  sayas  and  others  is  called  in 
to  frustrate  his  knavish  tricks.  The  s6n  is  of  course  un- 
known, or  the  people  would  soon  make  short  work  of  him. 
In  remote  country  places,  among  other  remnants  of  trial  by 
ordeal,  they  still  occasionally  put  a  suspected  person  to  the 
old  test.  A  woman  is  suspected  of  being  a  sdnma.  Her 
hands  and  feet  are  tied,  and  she  is  placed  between  two  boats 
moored  out  in  the  river.  A  quantity  of  filth  is  heaped  upon 
her,  and  the  boats  are  then  drawn  away  so  that  she  falls  into 
the  water.  If  she  swims  she  is  a  witch,  and  is  put  to  death. 
If,  on  the  contrary,  she  sinks,  it  is  a  proof  of  her  innocence, 
and  the  accusers  are  punished.  To  prevent  her  from  being 
drowned,  a  rope  made  of  green  bark  is  tied  round  her  waist, 
so  that  she  may  be  pulled  on  shore  again.  The  great  danger 
from  the  witches  is  that,  like  the  wehrwolf,  they  can  assume 
the  appearance  of  animals,  or  living  people,  even  of  one's 
own  relations.  If,  however,  the  apparition  is  wounded,  the 
same  injury  will  be  found  on  the  person  of  the  actual  witch. 
Few  people,  however,  have  the  courage  to  attack  a  nocturnal 
visitant  whom  they  believe  to  be  a  s6n,  and  prefer  propitia- 
tion in  the  shape  of  refections  laid  outside  the  house.  In  all 
these  points  the  beliefs  and  fears  coincide  with  those  of  other 
countries,  and  it  is  therefore  unnecessary  to  do  more  than 
allude  to  them. 

The  rudiments  of  the  science  are  contained  in  the  volumes 
of  the  Bedin  and  a  book  on  astrology  and  cabalistic  science 
called  the  Deitt6n.  These  are  very  imperfect,  and  individual 
magic-workers  advance  far  beyond  the  matter  to  be  found  in 
them.  It  is  said  that  these  books  were  complete,  but  that 
in  the  time  of  the  Lord  Buddha  the  people,  worked  on  by 
his  vivid  preaching,  seized  on  all  the  magic  volumes,  together 
with  all  weapons  and  objects  for  destroying  life,  and  heap- 
ing them  together,  set  fire  to  them.  But  Dewadat,  cousin 
of  Shin  Gautama,  and  always  plotting  harm  against  him, 
snatched  several  of  the  sections  from  the  flames,  and  so  a 
portion  of  the  old  science  was  preserved  in  the  world.  This 
tradition  of  course  shows  the  attitude  of  the  monks  and  the 


XLiv  WIZARDS,  DOCTORS,  AND   WISE  MEN  417 

religious  towards  the  students  of  this  sort  of  learning.  Never- 
theless, just  as  every  Burman  at  some  time  in  his  life  dabbles 
a  little  in  alchemy,  so  the  bedin  sayas  and  hmaw  sayas,  and 
the  magicians,  good  and  evil,  obtain  believers  and  clients. 

As  the  s6ns  are  supposed  to  afflict  people  with  strange 
illnesses,  the  province  of  the  wdzas  becomes  very  much  mixed 
up  with  that  of  the  professional  doctors.  The  latter  cannot 
complain,  and  the  general  public  can  see  no  reason  why  the 
one  should  not  be  as  good  a  physician  as  the  other,  for  doc- 
tors in  Burma  take  no  diploma,  and  are  not  required  to  give 
proofs  of  skill  in  the  healing  art  to  any  one  but  themselves. 
Many  of  them  therefore  are  the  most  arrant  charlatans,  giving 
medicines  according  to  fancy  and  in  unlimited  quantities.  On 
the  principle  of  like  to  like,  prescriptions  mainly  composed  of 
cayenne,  cloves,  ginger,  and  the  like,  are  made  up  for  fever 
patients,  while  purgatives  are  rigidly  withheld.  If  a  patient 
says  he  is  no  better  five  minutes  after  he  has  swallowed  a 
dose,  something  else  is  tried,  and  so  on,  till  the  wretched 
victim  has  a  stomach  loaded  with  drugs  to  the  limit  of  the 
prescriber's  pharmacopoeia.  These  quacks  are  too  often  taken 
as  the  only  representatives  of  Burmese  medical  skill,  and  it 
is  denied  that  any  one  in  the  country  has  a  right  to  the  title 
of  doctor  at  all.  But  it  is  certain  that  some  have  really  useful 
and  efficacious  remedies  for  ordinary  ailments,  such  as  jungle 
fever,  dysentery,  and  other  frequently-met-with  diseases,  while 
it  is  admitted  that  they  are  particularly  successful  in  the 
treatment  of  sores  and  ulcers.  I  knew  of  a  case  in  Rangoon 
where  varicose  ulcers,  which  had  resisted  the  efforts  of  the 
best  English  doctors  in  Rangoon  and  Calcutta,  yielded  to 
the  simples  of  a  Burmese  sethama.  He  used  earth-oil  with 
an  infusion  of  some  seed  or  bark,  and  speedily  effected  a 
cure.  The  Burmese  materia  medica  consists  of  barks,  leaves, 
flowers,  seeds,  roots,  and  a  few  simple  minerals,  of  which 
they  have  an  empirical  knowledge.  They  especially  deal  in 
pills  and  powders,  which  they  carry  about  with  them  in  little 
phials  of  bamboo.  These  little  cylinders  are  usually  gilt  and 
painted  bright  red,  and  are  always  strongly  perfumed.  It 
does  not  so  much  matter  about  the  materials  as  at  what  time 
of  the  moon  and  under  what  constellations  the  ingredients 
are  gathered.     Whoever  reaches  a  place  within  three  days 

2  E 


4i8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

of  the  falling  of  a  thunderbolt  and  finds  meteoric  stones,  has 
sufficient  to  set  him  up  as  a  doctor  at  once.  The  scrapings 
of  the  stone,  among  other  things,  are  the  best  possible 
ophthalmic  medicine.  Liquids  are  very  seldom  used.  There 
are,  however,  two  schools — the  datsayas,  or  dietists,  who 
trust  solely  to  regulating  the  patient's  food  according  to  the 
derangement  of  the  elements,  which  is  supposed  to  cause  his 
disease,  and  eschew  drugs ;  and  the  beindawsayas,  who  rely 
upon  the  exhibition  of  medicines.  These  last,  the  druggists, 
are  far  more  numerous  than  the  dietists.  It  is  a  great  deal 
more  easy  to  get  a  reputation  with  potent  drugs  than  with 
a  simple  regulation  of  the  diet,  and  accordingly  an  upstart 
doctor  is  always  a  druggist.  The  best  advisers  are  those 
who  combine  the  two  systems,  but  such  sensible  practitioners 
are  unfortunately  few  and  far  between. 

Both  assert  that  the  human  body  is  composed  of  four 
dat,  or  elements.  These  are — patawi  daht,  earth  ;  apaw 
dat,  water ;  tezaw  dat,  fire ;  wayaw  dat,  air.  Akatha,  or 
ether,  is  sometimes  added  to  these,  but  the  doctors  mostly 
disregard  it.  Earth  constitutes  the  flesh,  bones,  hair,  intes- 
tines, and  the  like  members  of  a  man.  Water  constitutes 
the  fat,  blood,  bile,  spittle,  mucus,  etc.  Eating,  drinking, 
chewing,  and  licking  come  from  the  fire  element.  Air  pro- 
duces the  six  kinds  of  winds.  Any  derangement  of  the 
equilibrium  of  these  elements  makes  a  man  ill,  and  it  is 
important  to  know  the  precise  time  of  a  man's  birth  in  order 
to  know  in  what  proportion  the  dat  should  be  present. 
Therefore  in  the  case  of  illness  an  experienced  doctor  almost 
always  examines  a  man's  birth  certificate  before  he  looks  at 
the  sick  man  himself  Besides  the  derangement  of  the  ele- 
ments, diseases  may  be  caused  by  kan,  the  influence  of  the 
sum  of  good  and  bad  actions  a  man  has  done  in  past  exist- 
ences. If  a  man  is  ill  of  kan,  nothing  will  cure  him  but 
the  preponderance  of  good  in  his  past  lives.  Again,  a  man 
may  fall  sick  through  derangement  of  his  seit,  or  mind; 
through  the  influence  of  the  seasons,  utu ;  or,  lastly,  through 
food,  ahaya.  These  causes,  being  laid  down  as  the  basis  of 
the  diagnosis,  naturally  do  not  always  lead  to  the  best  results 
in  the  case  of  affections  which  are  in  any  way  out  of  the 
common  run.     Even  in  perfectly  evident  illnesses,  however, 


XLiv  WIZARDS,  DOCTORS,  AND  WISE  MEN  419 

such  as  low  fever,  two  persons  in  the  same  house  afflicted  in 
the  same  degree  with  the  same  ailment,  are  treated  dif- 
ferently, simply  because  they  were  born  under  the  influence 
of  different  planets,  which  have  a  special  control  over  the 
effects  of  utu  and  ahaya,  or  over  the  respective  relations  of 
fire  and  water. 

The  dietists  are  often  particularly  absurd  in  their  regula- 
tion of  the  diet  from  the  horoscope.  Having  ascertained 
the  day  on  which  the  patient  was  born,  they  will  forbid  him 
to  eat  articles  of  food  whose  names  commence  with  any  of 
the  letters  assigned  to  that  particular  day,  most  especially 
those  which  have  the  same  initial  letter  as  the  sick  man  has 
himself  Thus  a  man  born  on  Sunday  will  have  to  eschew 
eggs  (u),  cocoanuts  (6nthi),  and  other  edibles  whose  name 
commences  with  a  vowel.  One  whose  birthday  is  Thursday 
must  give  up  pumpkins  (pay6nthi),  mangosteens,  and  gourds 
(buthi),  while  a  Monday's  child  must  refrain  from  seasoning 
his  curry  with  ginger  (kyinsein)  or  garlic  (kyetth6nbyu),  and 
so  on  through  all  the  other  days.  It  is  worthy  of  note,  how- 
ever, that  those  born  on  a  Saturday  are  never  forbidden  to 
eat  their  rice  (tamin),  nor  those  on  Friday  their  curry  (hin). 
An  attempt  to  ostracise  the  staff  of  life,  as  curry  and  rice  is 
to  all  Orientals,  would  only  result  in  bad  treatment  to  the 
too  pedantic  and  precisely  logical  practitioner.  Such  affec- 
tions are  called  "  Monday's  sickness,"  "  Tuesday's  sickness," 
and  so  on.     (Taninla,  Inga  kan  kaitthi.) 

These  vagaries  of  the  dietists  are,  however,  far  from 
universal,  and  emanate  mostly  from  the  manifest  quacks  of 
the  profession,  just  as  newly-set-up  druggists  will  imagine 
specially  curative  properties  in  every  strange  and  new  leaf, 
or  seed,  or  mineral  they  come  across,  and  manufacture  such 
extraordinary  compounds  as  the  green  powder  nostrum, 
which  was  exhibited  to  an  astonished  English  M.D.  with 
the  information  that  it  contained  one  hundred  and  sixty 
different  ingredients  and  was  infallible  in  its  results.  No 
doubt  it  was. 

There  is  no  denying  that  the  excitability  and  impatience 
of  the  people  react  on  the  proceedings  of  the  Burmese 
doctors.  Whenever  a  man  falls  sick  he  gets  into  a  feverish 
state   of  alarm    about   himself,  and   probably  sends  off  for 


420  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

several  doctors  at  once.  The  first  one  that  comes  prescribes, 
say  for  the  liver.  If  the  sick  man  does  not  feel  better  within 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  at  the  outside,  the  physician  is  paid  his 
fee  of  a  few  annas,  sixpence  say,  and  dismissed,  and  another 
is  called  in.  Possibly  he  decides  that  the  constituent  of  the 
disturbing  element  is  the  blood — the  element  of  water,  and 
not  that  of  earth — and  gives  a  dose  accordingly.  Should 
this  not  be  speedily  effective,  he  too  gets  his  sixpence  and 
his  congL  And  so  on,  as  long  as  the  means  of  the  patient 
or  the  supply  of  doctors  holds  out.  One  consequence  of  this 
system  is,  that  the  richer  a  man  is,  and  the  more  doctors 
there  are  in  the  neighbourhood,  the  greater  is  the  probability 
that  he  will  die ;  another  equally  unsatisfactory  result  is  that 
the  doctors,  to  maintain  a  reputation  and  ensure  clients,  are 
obliged  to  make  their  medicines  as  griping  in  character,  as 
unpleasant  in  smell,  and  as  nasty  to  taste  as  possible.  In 
the  larger  towns  many  of  the  better-class  Burmans  resort 
now  to  English  doctors  or  apothecaries.  In  many  villages 
still,  however,  and  in  old-fashioned  families,  the  patient  is 
usually  killed  off  by  the  variety  of  drugs  given  him  by 
different  doctors. 

But  in  small  towns  and  country  villages  the  physicians 
areTew.  and  whegthe^se  saya  cannot,  cure  the  sick  man,  he 
Beclares  that  heis_^ssesse3  b)''  r*"  '*'"'  "pirJI:."''  unde^a 
s5TT^  spell,  an3[_.calls__in  the  assistance  of  a  witch  doctor,  a 
'wHza~orany  one  of  the  different  clas^s7"By"'preference,  of 
course,  an  in  w6za.  Then  there  is  a  fresh  consultation  over 
the  birth  horoscope,  an  examination  of  the  charms  there 
may  be  on  the  sick  man's  body,  a  muttering  of  prayers  and 
incantations,  and  finally  the  bedin  saya  agrees  that  the  man 
is  bewitched.  Thereupon  he  ties  a  rope  round  the  patient's 
neck,  and  afte*  chanting  a  formula  with  occasional  jerks  on 
the  line,  asks  the  demon  in  the  victim  what  he  has  come  for. 
If  any  answer  is  given  and  an  object  mentioned,  this  is  taken 
to  be  the  thing  required,  and  it  is  placed  outside  the  house 
in  the  road  and  left  there  all  night.  It  will  be  gone  by  that 
time  if  it  is  worth  taking  (by  men  or  nats).  If  the  evil 
spirit  does  not  then  go  out  of  the  man,  or  if  the  tugging  at 
the  rope  brings  forth  no  answer,  stronger  measures  are  re- 
sorted to.      He  is  soundly  beaten  with  a  stout  bamboo,  pins 


XLiv  WIZARDS,  DOCTORS,  AND  WISE  MEN  421 

are  stuck  into  him,  red  pepper  is  forced  into  his  eyes,  and 
the  louder  he  shrieks  and  groans  the  better  pleased  are  his 
friends  and  relations,  for  it  is  the  witch,  or  the  natso,  that  is 
suffering,  and  not  the  sick  man  at  all.  If  this  treatment 
does  not  kill  or  cure  him,  a  final  effort  is  made.  A  middle- 
aged  woman,  sometimes  a  member  of  the  family,  dresses 
herself  up  in  a  fantastic  way,  and  assumes  the  name  of 
"  wife  of  the  evil  spirit."  A  shed  is  erected  for  the  occasion 
just  outside  the  house.  Music  is  brought,  and  the  woman 
begins  to  dance,  slowly  at  first,  and  then  gradually  more 
and  more  furiously,  until  at  length  she  works  herself  into  a 
regular  frenzy  or  ecstasy.  Then  it  is  supposed  that  the 
demon  has  passed  out  of  the  sick  man  into  her,  and  that 
whatever  answers  she  now  gives  to  questions  are  the  utter- 
ances of  the  demon.  Consequently,  whatever  she  directs 
is  implicitly  carried  out.  The  instructions  usually  resolve 
themselves  into  offerings  to  be  placed  outside  for  the  evil 
spirit  at  nightfall.  If  this  fails,  then  the  witch  doctors  and 
medicine  doctors  unite  in  declaring  that  the  nat  is  too 
strong  for  them,  and  abandon  their  patient.  Occasionally, 
if  he  is  of  a  very  strong  constitution,  he  revives  after  that. 
Such  performances  are  limited  to  remote  jungle  places  nowa- 
days. Thus,  however,  the  provinces  of  the  physician  and 
the  necromancer  run  into  one  another,  and  it  is  difficult  to 
say  where  science  ends  and  magic  begins. 

Shampooing  is  almost  always  employed  in  every  disease, 
in  addition  to  the  prescriptions  of  the  doctor  ;  and  here,  at 
any  rate,  we  have  real  skill.  The  shampooers  are  almost 
always  women,  though  most  men  know  a  little  about  it  too. 
A  professional  has  a  most  wonderful  knowledge  of  all  the 
tendons  and  muscles  in  the  human  body,  and  follows  them  up 
with  a  light  pressure  of  the  fingers  that  affords  a  relief  in  the 
case  of  rheumatism  and  stiffness  from  exhaustion,  which  is 
simply  incredible  to  all  but  those  who  have  experienced  it. 

In  addition  to  their  other  work,  the  hmaw  sayas  are 
very  much  resorted  to  for  love  philtres  and  potions  by  both 
sexes.  They  have  always  an  answer  pat  if  the  prescription 
fails :  it  is  due  to  the  opposition  of  the  eingsaung  nat,  the 
guardian  spirit  of  the  house  ;  or  the  applicant  has  made  a 
mistake  as  to  the  date  of  birth  of  the  object  of  his  affection 


422  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Knowledge  of  this  latter  particular  is  imperative,  and  an 
error  of  an  hour  or  two  makes  all  the  difference  in  the 
composition  of  the  potion. 

It  ought  to  be  unsatisfactory  to  an  intelligent  Burman's 
feelings  to  think  that  the  man  who  pi'escribes  for  him  in  a 
dangerous  illness  is  possibly  at  the  same  time  mixing  cunning 
draughts  for  a  love -sick  maid,  or  is  manufacturing  an 
image  of  a  girl  with  magical  charms  and  drugs  which  shall 
drive  the  original  mad  and  soothe  the  vengeful  wrath  of 
the  rejected  suitor.  Perhaps  it  is  on  this  account  that  a 
Rangoon  Burman,  if  he  falls  ill  out  in  the  district  anywhere, 
hurries  back  to  town  as  fast  as  he  can.  If  he  cannot  do 
that,  the  best  thing  is  to  call  in  a  weza  in  pi'eference  to  an 
unknown  doctor  ;  for  while  the  former  will  probably  confine 
himself  to  incantations  at  first,  the  dietist  will  irritate  all 
the  gastric  juices  in  your  body  by  prescribing  some  new 
variety  of  food,  and  banning  everything  you  have  been 
accustomed  to ;  while  the  druggist  will  cram  you  to  the 
throat  with  cathartics  and  anthelmintics,  with  arsenic,  fungi 
from  bamboo  roots,  green  vitriol,  decoctions  of  lemon  grass, 
borax,  croton  seeds,  and  vegetable  soot. 

The  father  of  Burmese  medical  science  was  the  celebrated 
physician  Zewaka,  who  once  cured  a  colic  which  afflicted  the 
Lord  Buddha  Gautama,  by  simply  giving  him  three  flowers 
to  smell.  Upon  the  petals  were  strewn  some  potent  powders 
which  restored  perfect  health  in  a  few  hours.  To  this  good 
medico  is  to  be  ascribed  the  assertion  that  the  diseases  which 
afflict  mankind  are  ninety-six  in  number.  These  may  vary 
in  their  symptoms  according  to  the  thirty-five  tempera- 
ments, the  forty-five  accidents,  the  sixteen  dangers,  and  the 
four  elements,  but  there  are  no  more  than  ninety-six  wedana 
for  all  that.  Accordingly,  a  very  common  beginning  to  a 
formal  Burmese  letter  is  to  say  that  by  his  correspondent's 
good  wishes  the  writer  has  been  preserved  from  the  ninety- 
six  andaye  ;  the  thirty-two  kan-chamma,  or  pieces  of  bad 
luck ;  the  twenty -five  baya,  dangers  from  assassins,  wild 
beasts,  and  the  like  ;  and  finally  from  aneitta  bala,  evils  of 
all  kinds,  envy,  hatred,  malice,  and  all  uncharitableness :  his 
friend's  regard  has  kept  all  these  things  far  from  him,  may 
the  writer's  good  will  be  not  less  efficacious.      Therefore  it  is 


xLiv  WIZARDS,  DOCTORS,  AND  WLSE  MEN  423 

very  essential  that  even  the  most  empirical  doctor  should 
know  at  least  the  names  of  these  diseases.  The  mere 
sound  of  them  is  as  good  as  medicine  to  a  man  with  a 
stomach-ache. 

Bewitchings,  of  course,  do  not  count  as  diseases.  Very 
often  when  a  man  has  very  strong  griping  pains  which  no 
amount  of  drugs  will  serve  to  alleviate,  the  doctor  declares 
that  there  is  an  a-pin  in  him.  Some  wizard  has  introduced 
a  piece  of  raw  flesh  into  his  stomach  by  means  of  a  spell, 
and  this  goes  on  drawing  everything  to  it  till  it  kills  the  man. 
When  a  sick  man  is  unable  to  pronounce  certain  letters  the 
doctors  are  able  to  calculate  in  how  many  days  or  hours  he 
will  die.  It  is  not  wise  to  dispute  this.  The  fulfilment  of 
their  prophecies  lies  very  completely  in  their  hands. 

Very  often  images  of  pagodas  and  Buddhas  may  be  seen 
outside  a  house  in  the  country  villages.  There  is  some  one 
sick  within,  and  the  pious  resort  to  this  expedient  to  get  rid 
of  the  malady.  This  method  is  called  paya  taya,  and  does 
not  exclude  medical  advice.  The  figures  are  small,  and  are 
usually  made  of  pasteboard  or  clay.  A  man  afflicted  with  a 
headache  will  often  hang  up  pictures  of  peacocks  and  hares 
under  his  eaves,  along  with  small  fans.  The  peacock  repre- 
sents the  sun  and  the  hare  the  moon,  and  the  indisposition 
is  supposed  to  result  from  sun  or  moonstroke.  Sometimes  a 
saya,  when  he  is  called  in,  will  recommend  that  the  patient 
be  moved  a  little  to  the  eastward  or  the  westward,  if  his 
illness  arises  from  kan.  Similar  to  this  is  the  ceremony 
called  yedaya  yayi  or  yedaya  sin.  A  small  coffin  with  a  tiny 
corpse  inside  it  is  manufactured  and  carried  a  small  distance 
to  the  east  or  the  west  and  there  buried.  When  the  ay6p, 
the  effigy  of  the  patient,  has  been  thus  disposed  of,  he  ought 
to  get  well.  These  matters  are  decided  from  the  sick  man's 
horoscope,  which  shows  from  what  constellations  he  is  par- 
ticularly likely  to  suffer  harm. 

The  witch  doctor  usually  has  an  elaborate  rod  called 
ywatan,  marked  all  over  with  cabalistic  figures,  and  often 
with  medicines  let  into  it.  The  saya  stands  before  the  pos- 
sessed person  and  threatens  a  blow.  The  witch  or  spirit  in 
the  victim  then  becomes  anxious  and  pays  reverence  with 
clasped  hands.      It  is  then  forced  to  relate  exactly  its  name 


424  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

place  of  abode,  friends  and  relations,  and  so  on.  The  pos- 
sessing demon  is  usually  a  witch,  and  she  acknowledges  that 
she  has  entered  the  patient  from  motives  of  hatred  or  revenge, 
The  wise  man  could  now  kill  the  witch  with  his  bedin  if  he 
pleased,  but  is  usually  persuaded  by  the  relatives  of  the  sick 
man  not  to  do  so.  A  desire  not  to  spoil  his  own  trade  is 
also  not  without  its  argument.  So  he  accepts  a  number  of 
presents  from  the  patient's  family,  and  is  then  won  over, 
contenting  himself  with  giving  the  possessed  person  a  sound 
thrashing  as  a  remembrance  of  him  and  a  return  for  the  fees. 
Then  he  commands  the  witch  to  depart  and  not  come  back 
again.  As  a  conclusion  the  victim  and  his  relations  are 
enjoined  not  to  pursue  the  witch  any  farther.  Sometimes, 
however,  they  are  obstinate,  and  refuse  to  rest  here.  Then, 
if  the  affair  has  happened  in  native  territory,  the  case  is 
brought  before  the  magistrate,  who  has  the  accused  tied  to  a 
bamboo  and  thrown  into  the  river  along  with  the  accuser, 
who  is  served  in  the  same  fashion.  The  one  that  sinks  wins 
the  case,  and  the  loser  pays  all  costs.  In  English  territory 
the  magistrate  has  the  complainants  bundled  out  of  court. 

If  any  one  doubts  the  power  of  the  hmaw  saya,  he  works 
a  miracle  to  cure  them  of  their  scepticism,  and  prove  that  he 
governs  all  creatures.  He  gets  an  empty  earthenware  jar, 
covers  it  with  a  cloth,  and  repeats  his  spells  over  it.  When 
the  cloth  is  removed,  there  is  smoking-hot  rice  and  roasted 
fowl  in  the  jar,  and  those  present  are  allowed  to  eat  as  much 
as  they  like.  If  they  eat  with  perfect  belief,  they  will  never 
be  hungry  again  ;  but  perfect  belief  is  practically  never  found. 
Sometimes,  however,  a  demon  gets  angry  at  the  display  of 
power,  and  interferes  in  an  officious  way.  He  steals  some 
of  the  cooked  meat  out  of  the  jar,  and  does  his  best  to  work 
a  counter-miracle.  He  never  quite  manages  to  do  it,  but 
the  ceremony  is  disturbed  by  his  interference  and  has  to  be 
gone  through  again.  Sometimes  the  saya  himself  indulges 
in  a  little  pleasantry.  The  spectators  see  a  beautiful  melon 
so  juicy  and  ripe  that  their  mouths  water  at  the  very  sight 
of  it ;  but  when  they  seize  a  piece  and  already  feel  it  between 
their  lips,  it  vanishes  away  and  they  bite  their  own  fingers. 
Unless  they  are  hopelessly  stupid  they  do  not  laugh  at 
hmaw  sayas  after  that. 


XLiv  WIZARDS,  DOCTORS,  AND   WISE  MEN  425 

The  following  are  a  few  prescriptions  for  whitlow  and 
bad  sores  from  a  Maulmein  doctor's  books : — 

1 .  The  "  hand  "  of  a  tauk-t^,  the  big  trout-spotted  gekko, 
that  haunts  old  trees  and  the  thatch  of  houses  ;  or,  more  prob- 
ably, a  bit  of  the  stem  of  an  epiphyte  called  the  tauk-tfe's  hand. 

2.  Sulphur. 

3.  The  bulb  of  a  white  lily. 

4.  A  chilli  roasted. 

5.  Cock's  dung. 

Mix  in  equal  parts,  and  stir  while  heating  it,  and  finally 
add  some  earth  oil. 

Again  :  Take  a  sufficient  quantity  of  cock's  dung,  add  to 
it  a  small  quantity  of  copperas,  pound  them  well  together, 
and  then  mix  with  earth  oil  and  some  sesamum  oil. 

Seven  or  eight  dry  seeds  of  dankw^  {Cassia  faetida),  well 
bruised,  and  then  intimately  mixed  with  a  little  congee  (rice 
water),  with  "  sufficient "  earth  oil  added,  also  proves  a  very 
effective  remedy. 

The  bedin  saya's  books  are  partly  written,  partly  filled, 
with  magic  figures  and  pictures.  The  squares  are  all  formed 
in  accordance  with  the  ordinary  Hindoo  law.  When  the 
wise  man  is  asked  questions,  he  keeps  writing  down  numbers 
and  characters  on  his  parabaik  tablets  and  rubbing  them  out, 
chanting  to  himself  all  the  time.  Sometimes  he  shakes 
cowries  and  seeds  together,  and  when  they  fall  out,  decides 
from  their  position  which  of  the  pictures  or  rhymes  in  his 
book  is  to  be  consulted.  Each  of  these  gives  its  own  answer, 
but  they  are  not  always  as  definite  in  their  character  as  is 
desirable.  The  saya  always  speaks  in  the  declamatory 
monotone  of  the  linga. 

The  following  are  the  names  of  some  of  the  familiar 
spirits  and  their  likenesses  : — 

Upadana  Pyuda,  a  spirit  who  lives  under  the  earth  and 
protects  the  husbandman.  When  he  comes  above  ground 
he  rides  on  a  serpent.  The  inquiring  farmer  whose  cowrie 
refers  to  this  picture  is  most  fortunate. 

Sadi  Wazadat,  a  wild  figure  galloping  on  a  horse.  This 
means  failure  of  the  attempt. 

Saka  Bada,  a  monkey  mounted  on  a  goat.  Denotes 
fertility  of  mind. 


426  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  xliv 

In  another  picture  a  crow  is  represented  breaking  a  vessel 
full  of  money  with  its  beak.  Close  at  hand  are  a  man  and 
woman  embracing  one  another.     This  denotes  loss. 

A  man  and  his  wife  represented  dancing  together  signify 
great  gifts  to  the  pagoda. 

Another  picture,  which  represents  a  husband  and  wife 
standing  together  in  front  of  a  house,  with  a  horse  and  cow 
near  it,  denotes  that  the  child  to  whom  this  picture  may 
refer  will  be  a  farmer. 

Near  the  picture  of  a  dog,  which  one  man  holds  by  the 
tail  while  another  hits  it  on  the  head,  is  written :  "  When 
the  lot  falls  here,  be  not  boastful,  but  humble  ;  avoid  pride 
and  assumption,  for  that  will  only  raise  up  enemies  for  you." 

The  following  are  some  spells  : — 

Take  this  amulet  (a  piece  of  bone  carved  rudely  square, 
and  with  mystic  figures  on  it),  put  your  foot  up  against  a 
thabye  tree,  and  repeat  the  Ittipithaw  (a  form  of  worship 
in  learning  which  one  spends  four  or  five  months  in  the 
monasteries)  thirty-seven  times.  Then  you  will  be  able  to 
turn  any  given  man  into  a  ghost  and  make  him  do  as  you 
please. 

Take  the  stalk  of  a  betel  leaf  in  your  hand.  Repeat 
"  Om  padan  rupa  wari  thwa  ha "  seven  times,  and  then 
throw  the  stalk  at  the  person.  He  or  she  is  sure  then  to 
listen  to  what  you  say. 

The  following  is  a  charm  to  cause  a  dream  about  your 
lady-love : — Get  an  exact  likeness  of  her  made.  Find  out 
the  hour  and  day  on  which  she  was  born,  her  name  and  exact 
age.  Then  having  begged  permission  from  the  guardian 
spirit  of  both  the  houses  (your  own  and  hers),  chant  as 
follows  :  "  O  Thurathadi,  fairest  goddess  of  flowers,  daughter 
of  nats  most  high,  grant  most  graciously  all  that  I  desire  of 
thee :  tasa  machan :  without  keeping  back  the  least  re- 
mainder ;  without  withdrawing  a  single  joy :  prithee  do  this 
without  fail,  sweet  goddess  of  woodland  love."  Repeat  this 
seven  times  before  the  figure.     Then  go  to  sleep. 


CHAPTER    XLV 

SLAVES   AND   OUTCASTS 

It  is  a  work  of  the  greatest  possible  merit  to  build  a  pagoda, 
and  the  founder,  prefixing  Payataga  to  his  signature,  for  the 
rest  of  his  life  is  looked  upon  as  certain  to  pass  into  ne'ban 
on  the  completion  of  this  his  present  existence.  Similarly 
a  man  acquires  great  kutho  by  repairing  portions  of  one  of 
the  old  national  shrines,  putting  up  a  new  umbrella  on  the 
summit,  setting  the  steps  that  lead  up  to  the  platform  in 
order,  or  even  by  simply  gilding  afresh  a  few  square  feet 
on  a  feast  day.  By  doing  any  one  of  these  things  a  man 
sets  his  balance  of  kan  on  the  right  side  and  gains  the  good 
opinion  of  his  neighbours.  It  is,  therefore,  not  unnatural 
that  all  foreigners  should  be  struck  with  the  fact  that  the 
regular  servitors  of  the  places  of  worship,  those  who  sweep 
the  platform,  carry  off  dead  leaves,  broken  branches,  and 
litter  generally,  and  keep  the  place  in  order,  are  not  only 
slaves,  but  are  regarded  as  outcasts  with  whom  the  rest  of 
the  community  will  have  no  dealings  and  whose  society  is 
contaminating.  Not  only  is  the  original  parakyun  a  slave 
for  life,  for  no  one,  not  even  a  king,  can  liberate  him  or  pro- 
vide a  substitute  in  his  place,  but  his  descendants,  till  the 
cycle  of  Shin  Gautama's  religion  shall  have  come  to  an  end 
and  all  the  relics  shall  vanish  from  the  earth,  all  his  children 
throughout  the  thousands  of  years  that  have  to  elapse,  are 
fixed  and  settled  slaves  of  the  pagoda  from  their  birth,  and 
any  one  marrying  a  pagoda  slave,  even  unwittingly,  becomes 
himself,  with  all  the  children  he  may  have  had  by  a  previous 
wife,  irremediably  a  parakyun.  The  reason  no  doubt  lies  in 
the  conviction  of  the  existence  of  original  sin.     It  is  desirable 

*27 


428  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

to  have  the  pagoda  attended  to.  A  very  small  acquaintance 
with  human  nature  induces  the  belief  that  this  will  not  be 
done  if  individual  effort  is  trusted  to  do  the  work.  There- 
fore prisoners  of  war  and  others  whom  it  is  not  convenient 
to  put  to  death  are  dedicated  to  the  service.  So  strict  is  the 
dedication  that  any  one  who  attempts  or  connives  at  setting 
free  a  pagoda  slave  is  condemned  to  misery  in  the  lowest 
hell,  awizi.  The  servitor  of  the  shrine  can  be  employed  in 
no  other  duty  than  keeping  it  in  order,  and  kings  and  great 
men  are  threatened  with  loss  of  power  and  dire  destruction 
if  they  venture  to  employ  such  outcasts  as  servants,  even  in 
the  meanest  capacity. 

Slavery  of  the  familiar  form  known  in  semi -civilised 
countries  formerly  existed  in  Upper  Burma,  but  the  pagoda 
slaves  are  a  perfectly  distinct  body.  A  person  who  sells 
himself,  or  is  sold,  by  his  relation  for  debt  is  in  a  very 
inferior  position  doubtless  and  cannot  enjoy  any  very  great 
privileges.  But  he  can  always  work  his  release,  and  is  not 
thereafter  considered  as  lying  under  any  particular  stigma. 
But  the  parakyun  are  neither  more  nor  less  than  outcasts. 
They  are  looked  upon  as  unclean,  and  the  rest  of  the  com- 
munity will  have  no  intercourse  whatever  with  them.  So  much 
is  this  the  case  that  under  British  rule,  which  has  of  course 
freed  them  from  their  compulsory  servitude,  they  are  still 
looked  upon  with  no  less  aversion  than  they  were  when  the 
country  was  independent,  and  though  nominally  free  to  do 
as  they  please,  have  to  travel  into  districts  where  they  are 
unknown  before  they  can  find  employment  even  of  the  most 
menial  kind. 

It  is  no  explanation  of  the  taint  that  the  original  ser- 
vitors were  prisoners  taken  in  war,  condemned  convicts,  or 
people  expressly  sentenced  to  this  office  on  account  of  hideous 
crimes.  The  reverence  for  the  pagoda  cannot  be  exceeded, 
why  then  should  the  care  of  it  and  the  surrounding  buildings 
be  considered  to  make  its  compulsory  guardians  vile  and 
degraded  people  ?  In  the  old  autocratic  days  it  was  a 
common  thing  for  a  pious  sovereign  to  set  apart  certain 
villages,  or  a  stated  number  of  houses  in  those  villages,  for 
the  service  of  the  pagoda,  and  the  victims  were  selected, 
quite  regardless  of  personal  character,  by  the  village  head- 


XLV  SLAVES  AND  OUTCASTS  429 

man  from  those  who  were  unable  to  buy  themselves  off. 
The  cloud,  therefore,  which  hangs  over  such  people  is  all 
the  more  singular.  The  feeling  came  out  very  strongly  in 
the  case  of  a  man  with  slave  blood  in  him,  who  was 
appointed  by  the  local  government  to  be  a  magistrate. 
Subordinates  declined  to  act  under  him,  and  resisted  all  he  did  ; 
the  people  were  still  more  demonstrative,  and  petitions  flowed 
in  begging  that  the  disgrace  might  be  removed  from  their 
district.  It  was  to  English  minds  quite  impossible  that  this 
should  be  done,  and  equally  so  that  he  should  not  receive 
support  in  the  execution  of  his  duties.  The  matter  was  far 
from  being  simplified  by  the  natural  feelings  of  resentment, 
showing  itself  in  undue  severity  when  occasion  offered,  which 
filled  the  victim  of  the  popular  clamour,  and  it  was  only  by 
the  exercise  of  great  tact  and  patience  that  the  English 
Deputy  Commissioner  was  able  to  quiet  the  people,  and 
after  long  persuasion  gradually  to  set  matters  right.  But 
the  majority  of  parakyuns  are  far  from  being  so  fortunate. 
Here  and  there  in  Rangoon  and  Maulmein  are  a  few  men 
who  have  got  into  business,  but  it  is  only  by  carefully  con- 
cealing their  antecedents,  and  they  live  in  constant  terror 
that  the  few  who  know  them  will  betray  their  secret  and 
reduce  them  to  ruin.  The  great  bulk  of  the  liberated,  how- 
ever— if  they  can  be  called  liberated  when  they  never  had 
any  direct  master — find  that  the  force  of  public  opinion  is 
too  much  for  them  and  are  driven  to  staying  about  the  old 
source  of  their  shame  to  obtain  a  living ;  they  haunt  the 
pagoda  steps  and  sell  offerings  to  the  pious  on  their  way  to 
worship,  candles  and  prayer-flags,  incense-sticks,  flowers,  and 
fruit.  Few  of  them  now  resort  to  their  old  source  of  food, 
the  altars,  where  they  used  to  dispute  the  ownership  of  the 
cold  rice  and  victuals  with  the  crows  and  the  pariah  dogs. 
In  Upper  Burma  the  sellers  of  gold-leaf  and  tag6nl6n  are 
often  respectable,  that  is  to  say,  free  men,  but  in  the  low 
country  so  great  is  the  fear  of  being  mistaken  for  a  para- 
kyun  that  but  very  few  but  the  destitute  will  sell  their  wares 
on  the  saung-dan.  At  the  Shwe  Dag6n,  in  Rangoon,  the 
vendors  are  almost  without  exception  of  the  unclean  class. 

Pagoda  slaves  are  still  universal  at  all  the  greater  shrines. 
As  might  have  been  expected,  many-pagoda'd  Pagan  is  their 


430  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS         chap. 

greatest  place.  Here  there  is  even  a  king  of  the  parakyuns, 
and  he  enjoys  a  sorry  mockery  of  state  in  the  use  of  gold- 
embroidered  sandals,  permission  to  wear  jewellery,  and  the 
shade  of  a  gold  unibrella  when  he  walks  abroad.  But  a  free 
man  meeting  him  in  his  grandeur  would  make  no  obeisance 
arid  would  pass  him  by  with  a  grin  and  a  gibe.  The  origin 
of  his  sovereignty  is  told  in  an  old  tale  which  proves  the 
antiquity  of  the  custom  and  the  tenacity  with  which  the 
dedication  is  held  to.  A  king  of  Pagan — •  which  has  not 
been  a  capital  since  the  fourteenth  century — had  suspicions 
of  the  loyalty  of  a  tributary  sovereign,  and  invited  him  to 
the  great  and  noble  city  with  its  towers  of  gold  and  silver  of 
which  Ser  Marco  Polo  writes.  This  monarch  seems  to  have 
had  no  fears,  and  came  with  but  a  small  retinue.  Then  the 
Lord  of  the  Golden  Palace  decreed  a  great  feast,  and  when 
all  were  assembled  at  the  Shwezigdn  pagoda,  seized  his  un- 
fortunate vassal  by  the  hair,  and  holding  aloft  his  sword, 
dedicated  the  helpless  man  with  all  his  followers  and  their 
descendants  for  ever  to  the  service  of  the  great  shrine,  where 
lies  a  cast  of  the  Lord  Buddha's  jawbone.  Hence  the  petty 
state  of  the  slave -king  and  the  great  crowding  of  pagoda 
slaves  to  his  dominions  to  share  his  privileges.  It  is 
difficult  to  say  whether  the  class  will  die  out,  and  it  seems 
certain  that  there  will  be  no  new  dedications.  It  is  per- 
haps more  probable  that  the  Pagan  temple  slaves  are  the 
descendants  of  the  Taking  King  Manuha,  who  was  brought 
here  a  prisoner  with  all  his  people  and  the  sacred  books,  by 
King  Anawrata  from  That6n.  As  it  is  they  marry  and 
increase.  Besides  the  parakyun,  equally  among  the  out- 
casts were  the  executioners,  jailers,  and  lictors  in  Mandalay  ; 
lepers  and  incurables  of  all  kinds,  coffin-makers,  and  those 
occupied  with  dead  bodies  and  the  graveyards ;  all  deformed 
and  mutilated  persons  and  the  lamaing,  or  government  slaves, 
tillers  of  the  royal  lands.  The  tadaungsa  are  the  nearest  in 
character  to  the  pagoda  slaves,  and  were  probably  originally 
intended  as  a  kind  of  reserve  to  draw  from  for  a  supply  of 
servitors  to  the  temples.  They  may  not  engage  in  any  fixed 
occupation  for  their  support,  and  are  condemned  to  make 
their  living  by  begging  alone,  but  a  few  of  them  become 
very  rich,  for  they  wander  all   over  the  country  and  occa- 


XLV  SLAVES  AND  OUTCASTS  431 

sionally  chance  upon  windfalls,  but  their  wealth  is  of  no  use 
to  them,  for  they  can  never  retire,  even  in  the  extremest  age. 
Like  the  pagoda  slaves  they  have  their  headquarters  in 
Pagan,  and  some  of  them  are  vehemently  suspected  of 
being  runaway  parakyuns  from  other  parts  of  the  country. 
But  the  advance  in  public  estimation  is  of  the  slightest  pos- 
sible character.  Among  the  sellers  of  nantagdn  and  other 
pagoda  essentials,  at  the  shrines  of  Rangoon,  Prome,  and 
Pegu,  are  here  and  there  a  few  tadaungsa,  tired  of  their 
wandering  life;  yet,  notwithstanding  the  ill-favour  with 
which  they  are  regarded,  they  are  never  stinted  for  food. 

Lepers  and  others  afflicted  with  loathsome  diseases, 
deformed  and  mutilated  persons,  are  regarded  more  with 
pity  than  with  aversion,  but  they  are  not  the  less  outcasts, 
and  must  live  in  villages  by  themselves,  or  with  the  ta- 
daungsa and  parakyun  if  indeed  they  do  not  scorn  to  do 
so.  They  usually  line  the  pagoda  steps  on  a  duty  or  feast 
day,  and  receive  abundant  alms,  every  third  or  fourth  wor- 
shipper dropping  a  handful  of  rice  or  a  copper  coin  into  the 
basket  or  platter  laid  before  them.  The  dislike  to  maimed 
people  is  very  singular,  and  led  to  curious  incidents  in  the 
first  and  second  Burmese  wars.  The  wounded  men  brought 
into  the  field  hospitals  refused  to  have  arms  or  legs  ampu- 
tated to  save  their  lives,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  not  unfrequent 
occurrence  even  now,  in  the  hospitals,  for  a  man  to  tear  off 
the  bandages  wrapped  round  the  stump,  that  he  may  not 
survive  his  misfortune  and  become  a  shame  to  his  family. 
In  some  parts  of  the  province  the  taint,  or  even  the  sus- 
picion of  leprosy  in  a  family,  becomes  a  fertile  source  of 
villainy.  If  the  suspected  person  or  the  head  of  the  house 
be  at  all  well-to-do,  heavy  sums  are  extorted  by  the  headman 
of  the  place  in  return  for  permission  to  stay  on  in  the 
village,  and  sometimes  informers  make  a  good  thing  in 
demanding  hush-money.  But  no  amount  of  payments 
could  save  a  man  badly  affected  with  the  disease  from 
being  driven  out  of  the  town.  Even  in  large  towns  the 
aversion  is  equally  strong,  and  unless  the  leper  is  a  rich 
man  he  has  to  live  in  prescribed  quarters  among  the  out- 
casts already  mentioned.  Equally  despised  are  all  those 
who  have  anything  to  do  with  funerals,  either  in  making  the 


432  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

coffin  or  digging  the  grave.  This  occupation  has  therefore 
fallen  almost  exclusively  into  the  hands  of  the  old  para- 
kyun,  and  helps  to  keep  alive  the  ancient  feeling.  It  must 
be  allowed  that  the  ways  of  the  sandalas  do  not  in  any  way 
tend  to  conciliate  the  multitude. 

Finally  there  were  the  pagwet,  the  letyataung,  or  thaing- 
gyaing,  the  constables,  jailers,  executioners,  lictors,  mostly 
confined  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  native  kingdom  Man- 
dalay.  These  merited  all  the  obloquy  that  could  be  cast  on 
them,  but  their  position  of  quasi-authority  made  them  more 
secretly  hated  than  openly  flouted.  They  were  never  allowed 
to  enter  a  free  man's  house,  even  in  the  exercise  of  their 
office ;  nor  could  they  go  within  the  walls  of  the  palace 
stockade,  but  many  a  citizen  smarted  under  the  blows  of  the 
lictor's  thaing,  when  a  great  man  came  round  a  corner  sud- 
denly, and  the  letyataung  saw  a  chance  for  a  back-hander 
with  his  fasces ;  and  it  was  far  too  easy  a  matter  for  a  man 
to  get  into  jail  in  Mandalay  to  make  it  a  wise  proceeding  to 
rail  at  the  pagwet.  It  was  an  unlovely  custom  in  Upper 
Burma  which  made  the  executioner  both  constable  and 
jailer,  and  condemned  him  to  live  on  his  wits.  The  natural 
result  was  that  he  lived  on  the  prisoners,  and  extorted  the 
last  pice  out  of  his  victim  with  threats  of  violence,  or  actual 
torture.  Pagwet  means  a  circle  on  the  cheek,  and  this  ring 
on  the  face  implied  that  its  bearer  had  been  condemned  for 
a  capital  crime,  and  was  respited  to  become  executioner. 
Others  had  devices  descriptive  of  their  offence  tattooed  on  the 
chest,  as  luthat  (murderer),  thukho  (thief),  damya  (dacoit  or 
highway  robber).  An  execution  in  Mandalay  was  a  horrid 
sight.  The  "  spotted  man  "  danced  round  his  victim,  made 
feints  with  his  sword  and  burst  into  fits  of  wild  laughter 
or  yells,  to  shake  the  doomed  man's  nerves.  It  must  be 
admitted  that  the  spectators  were  very  little  better.  A 
skilful  blow  which  just  slit  the  skin  and  drew  blood  met 
with  an  approving  shout.  The  pagwet,  like  other  outcasts, 
was  buried  like  carrion  when  he  died,  or  perhaps  was  simply 
thrown  out  with  the  town  offal. 

How  does  all  this  agree  with  the  theory  of  Buddhism, 
that  there  is  equality  for  all,  and  that  the  poorest  man  can 
raise  himself  to  sublimest  heights  after  death?     The  king 


XLV  SLAVES  AND  OUTCASTS  433 

had  and  exercised  the  power  of  life  and  death  over  all  his 
people.  He  ruled  in  the  truest  sense  by  divine  right,  and 
his  subjects  were  all  his  slaves.  The  answer  is — it  is  kan, 
it  is  the  accumulation  of  merits  or  demerits  in  past  exist- 
ences. A  man  is  rich,  powerful,  and  great,  because  aforetime 
he  was  pious  and  good.  Therefore  now  he  has  a  right  to 
govern  and  look  down  with  contempt  on  the  poor.  The 
poor  man  must  have  been  a  bad  man  before  he  entered  on 
this  existence.  He  deserves  to  be  miserable  ;  he  knows  it 
himself,  and  submits  fatuously.  It  is  true  the  tyrant  does 
not  do  well  if  he  oppresses  him,  and  perhaps  may  be 
punished  for  it  in  a  later  existence,  and  become  the  slave 
of  him  who,  now  a  slave,  may  hereafter  by  good  works  attain 
the  rank  of  king.  But  in  his  present  existence  the  great  man 
has  the  fullest  right  to  oppress  and  grind  down  the  poor 
as  much  as  he  chooses.  He  enjoys  the  fruits  of  previous 
virtues,  and  since  he  has  perhaps  in  many  existences  mortified 
the  flesh  and  done  grievous  penance,  he  has  now  a  right  to 
enjoy  himself  to  the  limit  of  his  desires.  Moreover,  as  he 
has  great  power  and  riches,  it  is  always  easy  for  him  by 
much  almsgiving  and  good  works  to  add  so  much  merit  to 
his  kan  as  to  outweigh  all  his  sins,  and  in  the  end  preserve 
the  balance  still  in  his  favour.  This  is,  however,  very  hard 
for  the  poor  man.  His  station  exposes  him  to  many  tempta- 
tions to  sin.  He  has  but  very  little  to  give  to  the  beikku 
and  to  the  pagodas.  He  has  perhaps  even,  in  order  to  save 
himself  from  stai-vation,  to  shoot  deer  and  game,  and  catch 
fish,  a  mode  of  living  which  infallibly  dooms  him  to  a  few 
millions  of  years  in  hell,  whence  again  he  has  to  work  up 
through  the  upper  three  states  of  punishment  before  he 
can  enter  anew  upon  existence  on  earth,  there  to  strive  to 
accumulate  hard-earned  merit,  that  he  may  not  incontinently 
topple  back  again  to  nga-ye.  In  any  case  the  poor  man's 
hope  can  only  be  directed  to  the  future.  From  the  seeds 
sown  in  past  worlds,  tares  have  sprung  up  in  the  soil  of  his 
present  existence,  and  tares  they  will  remain.  The  germ  of 
a  higher  life  may  be  sown,  but  it  will  only  grow  up  in  a  new 
existence.  There  is  happily  one  refuge  for  the  man  born  to 
poverty  and  misery.  It  is  always  open  to  him  to  put  on  the 
yellow  robe  of  the  Assembly  of  the  Perfect,  but  to  do  that 

2  F 


434  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS     ch.  xlv 

he  must  feel  himself  strong  enough  to  beat  down  the  fire  of 
passions  and  remain  steadfast  to  the  end,  for  a  lutwet,  a  man 
who  has  put  his  hand  to  the  plough  and  turns  back  again, 
exposes  himself  to  infinitely  greater  danger  towards  his  next 
existence  than  he  who  has  remained  throughout  in  the 
world.  The  monastery  is  a  house  of  refuge  not  to  be 
lightly  sought,  and,  sad  to  say,  even  it  is  not  open  to  the 
outcast 

This  doctrine  of  kan  also  accounts  for  the  equanimity 
and  callousness  with  which  Buddhists  view  human  misery 
and  the  taking  of  human  life,  notwithstanding  the  law  which 
forbids  the  killing  of  even  the  smallest  insect.  They  recog- 
nise apathetically  the  working  out  of  inexorable  destiny, 
and  watch  a  man  drowning  in  the  river  with  undisturbed 
tranquillity,  for  they  are  not  called  upon  or  even  justified  in 
stirring  a  hand  to  prevent  it.  You  cannot  combat  manifest 
fate. 

But  the  outcast  may  not  in  any  case  enter  the  monastery, 
not  even  as  a  scholar.  Even  that  last  chance  is  withheld 
from  him.  He  is  the  connecting  link  with  the  state  ot 
animals,  the  highest  state  of  punishment.  He  is  considered 
no  better  than  an  animal  in  thought ;  he  meets  with  less 
toleration  in  actual  life.  Were  he  bedizened  to  the  eyes 
with  costly  silks  and  priceless  jewellery  no  girl  would  look 
at  him.  His  wealth  is  of  no  use.  He  is  not  allowed  to 
build  a  pagoda,  or  even  to  supply  fresh -water  pots  on  a 
wayside  stand.  The  monk  would  refuse  his  alms ;  the 
starving  free -man  beggar  would  scorn  his  bounty.  They 
will  no  doubt  gradually  disappear  under  British  rule,  but 
there  will  be  those  who  will  regret  it.  They  may  have  to 
work  hard  for  their  living. 


CHAPTER     XLVI 

FORMING   THE    NATIONAL   CHARACTER 

If  the  nation  which  has  no  history  is  happy,  it  is  difficult  to 
know  what  is  to  be  said  of  the  nation  which  has  a  very 
voluminous  history,  almost  all  of  which  is,  however,  pure 
romance.  The  effect  on  the  Burmese  of  the  fond  imaginings 
of  the  Maha  Yazawin,  the  great  Chronicle  of  Kings,  is  most 
undesirable.  No  defeats  are  recorded  in  those  courtly  pages ; 
reverses  are  charmed  into  acts  of  clemency ;  armies  vast  as 
those  that  people  dreamland  march  through  its  chapters ; 
its  heroes  are  of  the  old  ballad  type ;  its  treasures  such  as 
might  have  been  the  produce  of  Aladdin's  lamp.  The  result 
has  been  a  permanent  influence  on  the  national  character. 
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth's  "  Chronicle  of  British  Kings "  has 
left  only  a  faint  mark  on  the  national  literature,  but  had  the 
English  lived  forty  degrees  nearer  the  line,  they  might  still 
be  believing  in  Brut,  great-grandson  of  .^neas,  and  the  un- 
broken line  of  kings  of  whom  King  Arthur  was  chief  As 
it  is,  the  British  Maha  Yazawin  only  supplied  a  spring  for 
the  poets  of  all  the  after  time.  The  Burman  Chronicle,  on 
the  other  hand,  has  laid  the  foundation  of  the  national 
character.  Like  all  hardy,  strong-limbed  races,  the  Burmans 
are  naturally  proud  ;  but  this  innate  pride  has  been  tenfold 
increased  by  the  wonderful  tales  of  the  national  annals. 
What  is  a  Burman  to  think  when  he  reads  in  the  history 
of  his  country — there  is  but  the  one  means  of  learning  the 
past — that  the  English  have  only  foothold  in  Burma  through 
the  clemency  of  a  gracious  king  ?  They  might  have  been 
crushed  as  effectually  as  the  first  settlers  of  Negrafs  Island ; 
they  might  have  been  driven  forth  as  easily  as  their  seven- 

435 


436  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

teenth-century  ancestors  from  the  factory  at  Bhamaw,  far  up 
the  Irrawaddy  on  the  confines  of  China ;  but  Bagyidaw,  the 
king,  said,  like  the  Lord  Buddha,  "  All  can  take  life,  but  who 
can  give  it  back  ? "  The  Burmese  annalist  relates :  "  The 
kalabyu,  the  white  strangers  from  the  west,  fastened  a  quarrel 
upon  the  Lord  of  the  Golden  Palace.  They  landed  at 
Rangoon,  took  that  place,  and  Prome,  and  were  permitted 
to  advance  as  far  as  Yandabo  ;  for  the  king,  from  motives  of 
piety  and  regard  to  life,  made  no  effort  whatever  to  oppose 
them.  The  strangers  had  spent  vast  sums  of  money  on 
the  enterprise  ;  and  by  the  time  they  reached  Yandabo  their 
resources  were  exhausted ;  and  they  were  in  great  distress. 
They  petitioned  the  king,  who,  of  his  clemency  and  gener- 
osity, sent  them  large  sums  of  money  to  pay  their  expenses 
back,  and  ordered  them  out  of  the  country." 

By  the  Treaty  of  Yandabo,  extorted  by  the  fear  that  the 
capital  would  fall  into  the  hands  of  Sir  Archibald  Campbell, 
then  thundering  at  the  gates  of  Ava,  the  English  acquired 
the  provinces  of  Tenasserim  and  Arakan,  and  deprived  the 
sovereign  of  two-thirds  of  his  sea-board.  The  Province  of 
Pegu,  which  was  annexed  after  the  second  Burmese  war  in 
1852-53,  has  never  been  formally  ceded  by  any  treaty. 
King  Mind6n  said,  "Let  them  stay  there;  I  cannot  turn 
them  out,  but  I  will  not  be  written  down  as  the  king  that 
gave  up  Rangoon."  Lord  Dalhousie  said,  "  A  treaty  with 
a  man  like  that  is  useless  " ;  and  he  straightway  fixed  upon 
a  parallel  of  latitude  as  the  northern  boundary  of  British 
Burma,  and  put  up  a  line  of  frontier  pillars  along  it  without 
reference  to  the  Burmese  Government  at  all.  The  Maha 
Yazawin  said,  in  effect,  "  The  foreigner  was  starving  in  his 
own  land,  and  the  king  bounteously  granted  him  a  resting- 
place  in  the  dismal  swamps  by  the  sea."  Until  the  Burmese 
kingdom  finally  disappeared  the  only  approach  to  a  recogni- 
tion of  the  British  possession  of  Pegu  was  an  announcement 
from  Mind6n  Min  that  "  orders  had  been  issued  to  the 
governors  of  districts  not  to  allow  the  Burmese  troops  to 
attack  the  territories  of  Myed^  and  Taung-ngu,  in  which  the 
British  Government  had  placed  its  garrisons."  Well  may  it 
be  said  that  Burmese  kings  submitted  to  accomplished  facts, 
but  did  not  sanction  them.     Shortly  before  the  storming  of 


XLVi  FORMING  THE  NATIONAL  CHARACTER  437 

Malun,  the  King  Mintayagyi  sent  a  note  to  Sir  Archibald 
Campbell  representing  that  "  it  was  contrary  to  his  religious 
principles  and  the  constitution  of  the  Empire,  to  make 
any  cession  of  territory,  and  he  was  bound  to  preserve  its 
integrity," 

Naturally,  therefore,  the  up-country  Burman  thinks  that 
his  race  is  the  bravest  in  all  the  realms  of  Zampudipa,  the 
island  in  the  south,  with  all  its  five  hundred  surrounding 
islets.  The  idea  has  been  little  checked  by  English  com- 
munications and  relations  with  the  Lord  of  the  Golden 
Palace.  Such  documents  as  the  following  are  duly  inserted 
in  the  Maha  Yazawin,  and  lose  nothing  in  the  translating. 
This  was  sent,  in  1695,  by  Nathaniel  Higginson,  Governor 
of  Madras,  to  the  King  of  Ava.  "  To  his  Imperial  Majesty 
who  blesseth  the  noble  city  of  Ava  with  his  presence, 
Emperour  of  Emperours,  and  excelling  the  Kings  of  the  East 
and  the  West  in  glory  and  honour,  the  clear  firmament  of 
Virtue,  the  fountain  of  Justice,  the  perfection  of  Wisdom, 
the  lord  of  Charity  and  Protector  of  the  Distressed,  the  first 
mover  in  the  Sphere  of  Greatness,  president  in  council, 
victorious  in  war ;  who  feareth  none  and  is  feared  by  all ; 
centre  of  the  treasures  of  the  Earth,  and  of  the  Sea ;  Lord 
Proprietor  of  Gold  and  Silver,  Rubies,  Amber,  and  all 
precious  Jewels ;  favoured  by  Heaven  and  honoured  by  all 
men ;  whose  brightness  shines  through  the  World  as  the 
light  of  the  Sun,  and  whose  great  name  will  be  preserved  in 
perpetual  memory." 

After  this  promising  exordium  the  letter  goes  on  :  "  The 
fame  of  so  glorious  an  Emperour,  the  Lord  of  power  and 
riches,  being  spread  throughout  the  whole  earth,  all  nations 
resort  to  view  the  splendour  of  your  greatness,  and,  with 
your  majesty's  subjects,  to  partake  of  the  blessings  which 
God  Almighty  hath  bestowed  upon  your  kingdom  above  all 
others.  Your  majesty  has  been  pleased  to  grant  your 
especial  favours  to  the  Honourable  English  Company,  whose 
servant  I  am  ;  and  now  send  to  present  before  the  footstool 
of  your  throne  a  few  toys,  as  an  acknowledgment  of  your 
majesty's  goodness,  which  I  beg  your  majesty  to  accept,  and 
to  vouchsafe  an  audience  to  my  servants  and  a  gracious 
answer  to  my  petition." 


438  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

He  finishes  by  asking  leave  to  send  a  factor  next  mon- 
soon to  reside  at  Syriam,  opposite  Rangoon,  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Pegu  river.  Edward  Fleetwood  was  the  envoy. 
He  had  to  wait  a  long  time  before  the  gate  of  the  palace 
stockade  was  opened ;  when  ■  that  was  done  he  had  to  bow 
three  times  to  the  building ;  half  way  across  the  esplanade 
he  had  to  bow  humbly  three  times  again ;  then  at  fifteen 
yards'  distance,  and  finally  had  to  make  the  same  obeisance 
to  the  king. 

The  answer  to  the  governor,  in  the  name  of  the  ministers, 
ran  as  follows  :  "  In  the  East,  where  the  sun  rises,  and  in 
that  Oriental  part  of  it  which  is  called  Chapudu ;  the  Lord 
of  water  and  earth,  the  Emperor  of  Emperors,  against  whose 
imperial  majesty  if  any  shall  be  so  foolish  as  to  imagine  any- 
thing, it  shall  be  happy  for  them  to  die  and  be  consumed ; 
the  lord  of  great  charity  and  help  of  all  nations,  the  great 
Lord  esteemed  for  happiness ;  the  Lord  of  all  riches,  of 
elephants  and  horses  and  all  good  blessings ;  the  Lord  ol 
high -built  palaces  of  gold;  the  great  and  most  powerful 
Emperor  in  this  life,  the  soles  of  whose  feet  are  gilt  and  set 
upon  the  heads  of  all  people ;  we  his  great  governor  and 
president  here,  called  Maha  Eggena  Tibodis,  do  make  known 
to  the  governor,  Nathaniel  Higginson,"  and  so  it  goes  on  in 
the  same  strain,  concluding  with  a  notification  of  the  presents 
sent — 1500  viss  of  lac,  2500  viss  of  tin,  300  viss  of  ivory, 
6  earthen  dishes,  and  8  lacquered  boxes.  This  was,  how- 
ever, more  satisfactory  than  that  which  fell  to  the  lot  of 
Ensign  Lester  in  1757,  when  he  got  a  concession  of 
Negraits  Island  and  a  commercial  treaty  from  the  conqueror, 
Alaungpaya.  The  gallant  envoy  received  a  present  of 
eighteen  oranges,  two  dozen  heads  of  Indian  corn,  and  five 
cucumbers.  Two  years  later  the  garrison  on  the  ceded 
island  was  massacred.  The  national  annalist  gloats  over 
these  things. 

Here  is  another  petition  from  the  white  foreigners : 
"  Placing  above  our  heads  the  golden  majesty  of  the  mighty 
lord,  the  possessor  of  the  mines  of  rubies,  amber,  gold,  silver, 
and  all  kinds  of  metals ;  of  the  lord  under  whose  command 
are  innumerable  soldiers,  generals,  and  captains ;  of  the  lord 
who  is  king  of  many  countries  and  provinces,  and  emperor 


XLVi  FORMING  THE  NATIONAL  CHARACTER  439 

over  many  rulers  and  princes,  who  wait  round  his  throne 
with  the  badges  of  his  authority ;  of  the  lord  who  is  adorned 
with  the  greatest  power,  wisdom,  knowledge,  prudence,  fore- 
sight, etc.  ;  of  the  lord  who  is  rich  in  the  possession  of 
elephants  and  horses,  and  in  particular  is  the  lord  of  many 
white  elephants  ;  of  the  lord  who  is  the  greatest  of  kings, 
the  most  just  and  the  most  religious  ;  the  master  of  life  and 
death  ;  we  his  slaves,  the  governor  of  Bengal,  the  officers 
and  administrators  of  the  Company,  bowing  and  lowering 
our  heads  under  the  sole  of  his  royal  golden  feet,  do  pre- 
sent to  him,  with  the  greatest  veneration,  this  our  humble 
petition." 

Such  documents  might  have  flowed  from  the  chronicler's 
own  pen,  and  the  Burmese  historical  student,  in  reading  this 
unbought  praise  of  nations,  naturally  takes  it  as  honest 
homage  due  to  the  race,  since  there  is  now  no  king.  So 
exalted  an  idea  had  the  Court  of  the  military  power  of 
the  country  that  in  18 10  a  minister  at  Ava  told  Captain 
Canning  that  if  proper  application  had  been  made  to  the 
king,  he  would  have  sent  an  army  to  Europe  and  put 
England  in  possession  of  France,  and  so  ended  all  the 
troubles  of  the  beginning  of  the  century. 

Most  envoys  sent  to  the  Arbiter  of  Existence  were 
treated  very  cavalierly  in  the  way  of  interviews  ;  not  a  few 
in  the  old  days  waited  long  months  without  ever  seeing  the 
king  at  all.  All,  down  to  Sir  Douglas  Forsyth,  in  1874, 
had  to  go  in  shoeless,  and  sit  cross-legged  on  the  floor,  an 
unaccustomed  attitude  which  did  not  tend  to  render  the 
position  less  ridiculous.  In  other  ways  they  were  treated 
with  every  indignity.  When  King  Mintayagyi  heard  that 
Colonel  Symes  was  coming,  he  went  away  to  Mingdn,  to 
contemplate  his  gigantic  failure  at  a  pagoda  there.  Thither 
the  colonel  had  to  follow  him,  congratulating  himself  on  the 
circumstance  that  as  the  king  was  away  from  the  palace, 
there  would  be  the  less  trouble  in  seeing  him.  But  he  found 
himself  vastly  mistaken.  On  arriving  at  Mingdn  he  was 
told  to  take  up  his  quarters  on  an  island  in  the  middle  of 
the  river.  On  this  barren  place,  shunned  by  all  Burmese 
as  a  polluted  spot,  where  bodies  were  burnt  and  criminals 
executed,  he  had  to  remain  forty  days,  and  during  all  that 


440  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

time  not  the  slightest  notice  of  him  was  taken  by  the  court. 
Finally  he  was  admitted  on  a  kadaw,  or  "  Beg-Pardon  Day," 
one  of  those  set  apart  for  all  inferiors  and  vassals  to  come 
and  do  homage  and  worship  at  the  Golden  Feet.  For  long 
it  was  the  invariable  custom  to  receive  representatives  of 
foreign  states  on  these  days.  Colonel  Burney  was  the  first 
to  refuse  to  be  so  treated,  and  he  carried  his  point,  though 
the  wungyis  told  the  king  the  reason  why  he  did  not  come 
on  the  appointed  kadaw  day  was  because  he  was  sick.  The 
utmost  protestations  of  Symes  and  Crawford  failed  to  save 
them  from  the  humiliation.  Another  favourite  method  of 
showing  contempt  for  foreigners  and  exalting  the  national 
dignity  was  rather  curious  in  its  elaborate  ingenuity.  Foreign 
missions  were  provided  for  by  a  tax  levied  on  outcasts.  The 
money  was  only  collected  when  an  embassy  was  expected, 
and  was  applied  to  no  other  purpose  than  providing  accom- 
modation and  food  for  the  members  of  the  mission.  The 
coin  was  considered  too  vile  to  be  put  to  any  other  use. 
Delaying  the  envoy  at  the  gates  was  an  invariable  device. 
Just  as  he  came  up  to  the  entrance  a  band  of  princes,  with 
their  followers,  would  turn  in  from  a  side  street,  and  the 
luckless  representative  of  England  would  have  to  stop  and 
bite  his  nails  till  they  had  all  passed  in.  Colonel  Burney 
was  delayed  two  hours  in  this  way,  and  even  Colonel  Phayre, 
the  first  Commissioner  of  the  three  coast  provinces,  in  1856, 
had  to  wait  on  his  elephant  till  the  Eingshemin  and  his  train 
filed  in  before  him.  Arrived  at  the  palace,  all  the  earlier 
envoys  were  made  to  fall  on  their  knees,  and  shikho  to  the 
central  spire  of  the  royal  residence.  The  members  of  the 
embassy  of  1856  were  nearly  bullied  into  taking  off  their 
hats  to  the  pyathat.  The  object  was  to  show  them  as  sup- 
pliants at  the  Golden  Feet,  honoured  by  being  allowed  to 
view  his  dwelling,  and  elevated  to  the  summit  of  earthly 
ambition  by  being  admitted  to  an  interview.  Symes  and 
Cox  paid  for  their  admission  in  this  way.  Besides  this 
official  bad  treatment  the  plenipotentiaries  were  victimised 
with  numberless  personal  insults.  Even  the  Supreme  Court 
on  at  least  one  occasion  refused  to  see  Cox.  He  was 
knocked  up  long  after  midnight  one  night  by  a  clerk  who 
wanted  to  get  a  nutmeg-grater  to  show  to  the  king.     The 


xLVi  FORMING  THE  NATIONAL  CHARACTER  441 

Myowun  wrote  to  him  to  say  that  as  the  envoy  would  not 
take  his  advice  he  must  break  off  all  intercourse,  and  the 
English  thanthaman  would  be  good  enough  not  to  come 
near  his  house  for  the  future.  Captain  Cox  had  had  a  fence 
put  up  round  his  house  to  keep  away  the  inquisitive  rabble, 
at  a  cost  of  twenty  rupees.  One  morning. when  he  woke  up  he 
found  this  had  been  unceremoniously  carried  away,  and  that 
it  had  been  used  to  enclose  a  place  near  the  river  where  the 
heir-apparent's  head  might  be  washed.  Finally  great  pres- 
sure was  put  upon  him  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the 
king ;  he  was  to  drink  the  water  in  which  the  muskets  and 
lances  of  the  guard  had  been  dipped,  and  it  was  expressly 
stipulated  that  he  should  pay  for  his  oath  just  as  any  Burman 
would  have  to  do.  Scores  of  like  details  might  be  men- 
tioned with  regard  to  all  the  other  ambassadors  and  residents. 
It  will  be  sufficient,  however,  to  mention  that,  in  later  years, 
one  resident  had  a  cane  flourished  over  his  head  by  a  convict 
lictor,  and  that  the  last  charge  daffaires  of  all  was  chased  by 
a  howling  rabble  from  the  Mandalay  bazaar  to  the  Residency 
gates,  which  were  broken  in — no  great  exertion  of  strength 
was  necessary  certainly — all  because  he  had  killed  a  pariah 
dog  that  was  snapping  at  his  heels. 

If  the  various  Government  representatives  were  treated 
in  this  way,  non-official  Englishmen  could  not  expect  great 
reverence  to  be  paid  to  them,  and  it  is  hardly  worth 
mentioning  that  in  1881  a  Rangoon  merchant,  yelled  at 
by  convict  lictors,  went  down  on  his  knees  while  one  of  the 
leading  spirits  of  the  massacres,  the  Hpaung  Wun,  went  by 
on  his  elephant.  Little  wonder  then  that  the  patriotic  fictions 
of  the  Maha  Yazawin  were  believed,  and  that  the  perusal  of 
them  was  all  the  more  greedily  indulged  in.  The  wearing  of 
shoes  in  the  Palace  was  never  settled  till  there  had  ceased  to 
be  a  Lord  of  it. 

But  it  is  not  so  much  the  English  that  suffered — though 
occasionally  a  few  of  them  did  get  stoned— as  the  smaller 
nations  and  tribes  who  live  around  and  among  the  Burmese. 
It  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  Burman  is  a  sad  bully  ; 
but  the  white  strangers  could  reduce  him  to  civility,  if  to 
nothing  else,  very  speedily.  It  is  different  with  other  races 
— some  perhaps  aboriginal,  some  invaders  of  Burma  as  much 


442  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

as  the  Burmese  themselves.  The  Chins,  the  Karens,  and, 
in  some  degree,  even  the  stalwart  if  simple  Shans,  have 
all  suffered  in  common  with  weaker  nationalities  from  the 
cunning  and  braggadocio  of  the  Burman.  The  Maha  Yaza- 
win  delights  no  less  in  recounting  tales  of  barbaric  diplomacy 
than  in  heroics  about  gallant  generals  who  hold  quicksilver 
in  their  mouths  and  advance  on  the  quailing  foe,  leaping 
eighteen  or  twenty  cubits  in  the  air.  For  example,  the 
chronicles  of  Prome  relate  the  well-known  world-story  of 
the  bullock's  hide  of  ground.  A  tribe  came  from  the  East 
under  the  command  of  an  Amazon.  She  obtained  from  the 
aborigines — probably  now  some  of  the  hill-tribes  in  Arakan 
— a  grant  of  as  much  land  as  could  be  enclosed  within  an 
ox-hide,  and,  following  the  example  of  Dido,  cut  the  hide 
into  strips.  She  got  into  difficulties,  however,  and  would 
probably  have  been  driven  out  had  she  not  married  a 
neighbouring  king.  A  stepson  of  hers  founded  the  ancient 
town  of  Tharekettara  (Prome),  an  event  said  to  have  been 
prophesied  by  the  Buddha  Gautama  himself,  in  proof  whereof 
the  Shwesandaw  pagoda  exists  to  the  present  day. 

A  story  of  a  similar  character  is  told  with  regard  to  the 
Shans.  The  Burmans  had  a  quarrel  with  some  of  these  big- 
boned  highlandmen  as  to  the  ownership  of  a  tract  of  fine 
paddy-land.  The  Shans  were  in  force,  and  perfectly  pre- 
pared to  fight  about  the  matter.  The  Burmese  therefore 
resorted  to  craft.  An  old  hermit  was  referred  to  on  the 
subject.  He  said  that  the  party  which  first  finished  building 
a  pagoda  of  a  certain  fixed  size  should  have  the  disputed 
territory.  So  both  sides  set  to  work.  The  Burmese  soon 
found  that  the  sturdy  hillmen  were  distancing  them.  At 
night,  therefore,  the  chief  had  recourse  to  stratagem.  He 
made  a  framework  of  bamboos  of  the  required  height,  had  it 
covered  with  cloth,  and  daubed  the  cloth  with  white  plaster. 
When  daylight  came,  and  the  Shans  saw  the  Burmese  shrine 
complete  and  perfect,  even  to  the  extent  of  offerings  of  fruit 
and  candles,  their  astonishment  and  dismay  were  such  that 
they  marched  off  straightway  to  the  hills — ascribing  the 
rapid  erection  to  supernatural  assistance,  and  never  dreaming 
of  examining  the  precocious  paya  ;  whereat  the  Burmese 
chronicler  chuckles  with  patriotic  delight,  and   glorifies  the 


XLVi  FORMING  THE  NATIONAL  CHARACTER  443 

shrewdness  of  his  countrymen.  The  same  story  is  told  of 
the  foundation  of  the  Arakan  empire  by  the  younger  of  two 
brothers  who  came  from  India. 

But  it  is  in  the  relations  with  the  milder-natured  tribes, 
such  as  the  Karens  and  Chins,  or  the  small  if  warlike  septs 
such  as  the  Kachins,  that  the  Burman  most  comes  up  to 
the  truculence  of  the  Maha  Yazawin.  Out  of  the  northern 
Kachins — bold  robber  bands,  armed  with  queer,  home-made, 
stockless  guns — little  was  to  be  gained.  They  lived  on  the 
hills,  and  owned  nothing  but  pigs ;  but  they  raided  on  low- 
land villages,  and  the  Burmans  retaliated,  and  there  were 
periodic  seasons  of  mutual  crucifixion.  Long  ago  these 
clans  had  the  reputation  of  kindly  hospitality,  but  Burmese 
tyranny  made  most  of  them  dangerous  savages.  It  is  dif- 
ferent with  the  Karens  and  Chins.  The  former,  a  heavy, 
plethoric  people,  endure  their  wrongs  with  dull  indifference, 
all  but  the  fierce  Red  Karens,  who  kept  up  a  perpetual  guerilla 
warfare,  after  the  manner  of  the  Kachins.  The  Karens 
account  for  their  wrongs  in  the  following  way.  When 
Yuwa  created  the  world  he  took  three  handfuls  of  earth 
and  threw  them  round  about  him.  From  one  sprang  the 
Burmans,  from  another  the  Karens,  and  from  the  third  the 
Kalas,  the  foreigners.  The  Karens  were  very  talkative  and 
made  more  noise  than  all  the  others,  and  so  the  Creator 
believed  that  there  were  too  many  of  them,  and  he  threw 
another  half  handful  to  the  Burmans,  who  thus  gained  such 
a  supremacy  that  they  soon  overcame  the  Karens,  and  have 
oppressed  them  ever  since. 

The  Chins  were  subjected  to  such  long-continued  and 
systematic  ill-treatment  on  the  part  of  the  Burmese,  that 
traditions  accounting  for  this  oppression  actually  form  a 
part  of  the  national  religion.  All  mankind,  they  say,  is 
descended  from  a  woman  called  Hlinyu,  who  laid  loi  eggs, 
from  the  last  laid  of  which  sprang  the  Chins.  Hlinyu  loved 
the  youngest  best ;  but  he  had  gone  away,  and  before  she 
found  him  again  the  whole  world  except  bleak  mountain- 
ranges  had  been  partitioned  out  among  her  other  children. 
So  the  Chin  first  man  got  the  hills,  and  as  compensation 
was  given  elephants,  horses,  cattle,  goats,  pigs,  and  fowls. 
Unfortunately,  Hlinyu    appointed   the   Burman   brother   to 


444  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

look  after  him.  The  Burman  turned  out  a  most  wicked 
and  unscrupulous  guardian.  He  pretended  to  teach  him, 
but  only  showed  the  blank  side  of  the  slate,  so  that  the 
poor  Chin  never  learned  a  single  letter.  He  rubbed  the 
elephant's  back  with  cowhage,  so  that  the  Chin's  bare  legs 
were  so  tickled  that  he  refused  to  have  such  an  unpleasant 
animal,  and  gave  all  the  elephants  to  the  Burman.  By 
similar  tricks  the  buffaloes,  the  horses,  and  the  cattle  were 
obtained.  When  the  Chin  mounted  to  ride  on  the  horse, 
the  Burman's  wife  got  in  the  way,  and  was  knocked  down  ; 
and  as  compensation  for  the  injuries  she  sustained,  and  to 
quiet  her  clamour,  the  horse  had  to  be  handed  over.  Then 
at  the  Burman's  instigation  the  Chin  went  to  view  his 
buffaloes,  clad  in  fiery-red  garments.  The  buffalo  naturally 
chased  him  up  a  tree,  and  before  he  could  gain  the  earth 
again  the  buffaloes  had  gone  the  way  of  the  elephants  and 
horses.  Ultimately  nothing  remained  but  goats,  pigs,  and 
fowls.  Even  the  barren  mountains  were  not  left  in  his  un- 
disturbed possession.  When  the  boundaries  of  the  different 
countries  were  marked  out,  the  Burman  took  very  good  care 
to  mark  his  with  stones  and  pillars,  but  he  persuaded  the 
Chin  that  tufts  of  grass  were  good  enough  for  him.  These 
were  all  burned  away  by  the  jungle -fires,  and  then  the 
despoiled  Chin  had  to  live  wherever  the  Burman  told  him. 
Thus  the  race  has  never  had  a  country  or  town  of  its  own, 
but  wanders  about  in  a  nomadic  way  over  the  hills  on  the 
fringe  of  Burma.  The  well-known  custom  some  of  the 
frontier  Chin  women  have  of  tattooing  their  faces  is  an 
existing  proof  of  this  tyranny.  They  are  naturally  pretty ; 
and  this  disfigurement — for  they  themselves  acknowledge  it 
to  be  such,  and  never  adopted  it  in  the  heart  of  the  Chin 
hills — was  adopted  to  prevent  the  Burmese  from  carrying 
them  off,  as  they  once  did  constantly. 

The  stories  of  the  Maha  Yazawin  fully  account  for  and 
justify  these  queer  traditions  of  the  national  religion  of  the 
Chins.  But  it  is  not  in  such  minor  points  that  the  annalist 
is  seen  at  his  best.  It  is  when  he  vapours  about  Chinese 
and  Siamese  and  Munipuris,  who  come  in  armies  numbered 
by  hundreds  of  thousands,  with  elephants  in  tens  of  thousands, 
and  the  guardian  nats  of  the  nations  fight  on  their  respective 


xLvi  FORMING  THE  NATIONAL  CHARACTER  445 

sides  and  serve  to  account  for  Burmese  retreats — then  it  is 
that  the  spirit  of  the  Maha  Yazawin  comes  out  and  streams 
along  in  true  'Ercles  vein.  And  except  the  plays  the  Bur- 
man  has  no  other  literature  to  read.  It  is  not  wonderful, 
therefore,  that  he  has  as  good  an  opinion  of  himself  as  the 
"  centennial  Yankees." 

Breathes  there  a  Yank,  so  mean,  so  small. 
Who  never  says,  "  Wal  now,  by  Gaul, 
I  reckon  since  old  Adam's  fall 
There's  never  growed  on  this  'ere  ball 
A  nation  so  all-fired  tall 
As  we  centennial  Yankees.' 

The  writer  might  well  have  been  a  worker  on  the  Great 
Chronicle  of  Kings. 


CHAPTER    XLVII 

THE   LORD   OF   THE   CELESTIAL    ELEPHANT   AND   OF 
MANY  WHITE   ELEPHANTS 

The  Royal  History  of  Kings  enumerates  altogether  5  87,000 
kings,  following  one  another  in  regular  succession.  From 
Maha  Thamada,  the  great  first  ruler  of  land  and  of  sea,  there 
were  334,569  sovereigns  till  the  time  of  the  most  excellent 
Buddha  Gautama.  From  thence  onward,  the  Maha  Yazawin 
carefully  records  the  sequence  of  the  predecessors  of  the  last 
ruler  of  the  Eastern  Land,  Thibaw  Min.  Western  chroniclers 
point  out  incredulously  that  the  hunter  Aung  Zaya,  who  died 
in  1760,  founded  the  present  dynasty  under  the  title  of 
Alaungpaya  (commonly  written  Alompra),  and  till  his 
rescue  of  the  country  from  the  victorious  Peguans,  held 
no  more  exalted  rank  than  that  of  headman  of  his  native 
village.  But  this  scepticism  ignores  the  doctrine  of  Kan, 
which  provides  that  none  can  succeed  to  the  throne  of  the 
Arbiter  of  Existence  and  Great  Lord  of  Righteousness  but 
those  whose  merit  in  previous  existences  entitles  them  to  it. 
The  king  emphatically  rules  by  what  is  called  in  the  Western 
kingdoms  the  right  divine.  The  eldest  daughter  of  the 
reigning  king  was  always  declared  tabindaing,  she  was  for- 
bidden to  marry  till  the  death  of  the  sovereign.  When  that 
occurred,  if  there  were  no  sons  to  succeed,  there  was  an 
interregnum  till  the  tabindaing  could  find  a  husband  to 
ascend  the  throne.  This  selection  was  not  made  by  the 
laws  of  passion  or  personal  inclination,  but  was  solely  de- 
cided according  to  the  principles  of  kan.  A  royal  chariot 
was  harnessed  to  a  fiery  steed  and  driven  away  from  the 
palace  with  no  one  to  guide  it.     The  horse  roamed  about, 

446 


CH.  XLvii    THE  LORD  OF  THE  CELESTIAL  ELEPHANT  447 

suffering  no  one  to  enter  till  he  came  to  the  person  decided 
by  fate  to  rule  the  country,  usually  some  one  of  the  royal 
lineage,  or  of  some  other  princely  line,  who  had  wandered 
or  been  carried  off  from  court.  Then  the  horse  waited 
patiently  till  the  sleeper  should  wake  up ;  the  tales  always 
represent  the  prince  as  asleep  when  the  chariot  arrives. 
When  he  rouses  himself  he  steps  into  the  chariot,  and 
without  guidance,  the  horse  forthwith  gallops  back  to  the 
palace  and  the  tabindaing  finds  a  husband  and  the  country 
a  king.  Alompra  became  sovereign,  only  in  a  slightly 
different  way,  but  his  descent  from  Maha  Thamada  must 
be  unimpeachable. 

;  Long  before  he  took  up  arms  and  won  for  himself  the 
throne,  the  soothsayers  saw  about  him  signs  that  betokened 
his  coming  dignity.  When  he  slept  his  arms  shone  like  fire  ; 
vultures  perched  on  the  houses  of  his  enemies  ;  gorgeous 
butterflies  and  gay-plumaged  birds  and  strange  animals 
entered  his  dwelling ;  he  dug  up  an  ancient  image  of  the 
Buddha  not  far  from  his  doorstep  ;  when  he  came  to  fight 
it  was  manifest  that  he  was  favoured  even  beyond  the  great 
men  of  old.  He  possessed  a  sword  that  flew  through  the 
air  and  cut  off  heads  ;  his  shoes  enabled  him  to  clear  miles 
at  a  stride  ;  his  fairy  spear  could  spit  a  whole  line  of  soldiers 
at  once  ;  his  javelin  could  be  hurled  to  any  distance ;  finally, 
as  a  fifth  weapon,  he  had  a  gun  which  never  missed  its 
mark,  and  was  brought  down  to  him  by  a  thagya.  The 
possession  of  these  five  weapons  at  once  proved  his  right  to 
the  throne  and  secured  his  holding  it.  It  is  true  that  some 
of  the  omens  which  signalised  his  riglit  have  appeared  in 
others  with  very  different  result.  A  Karen  minlaung,  or 
embryo  king,  displayed  the  same  fire-streaming  arms,  and 
raised  a  rebellion  since  the  British  occupation  of  Pegu.  He 
gained  a  considerable  following,  and  seemed  formidable  for 
a  time,  till  the  English  wise  men  pointed  out  that  the  fiery 
glow  was  produced  by  rubbing  phosphorus  on  his  skin. 
Then  all  went  against  him  as  an  impostor,  and  he  very  soon 
vanished  into  the  hill-country.  Similarly,  in  1 8  5  8,  a  poor 
fisherman  at  Twante,  a  large  village  not  far  from  Rangoon, 
dragged  up  in  his  net  a  small  image  of  the  Buddha.  Such 
discoveries   are   always   looked   upon  as  an  omen  of  high 


448  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

destiny,  and  according  to  the  common  superstition,  the 
fisherman  believed  that  he  would  rise  in  dignity,  restore  the 
Taking  kingdom,  and  revive  religion.  He  announced  the 
supernatural  call  in  the  village  bazaar.  A  few  desperate 
characters  joined  him,  took  possession  of  the  town,  and 
issued  a  proclamation  calling  upon  all  the  faithful  to  rally 
to  his  standard.  But  the  British  civil  authorities  stepped  in 
and  broke  up  the  procession  which  was  going  in  solemn 
state  to  the  pagoda  to  inaugurate  and  consecrate  the  fisher- 
man in  his  new  profession.  The  claimant  of  royal  honours 
escaped  at  the  time,  but  was  afterwards  given  up  by  the 
villagers.  In  each  of  these  cases  there  was  deception  or 
misapprehension  of  the  meaning  of  the  omens,  but  the 
abundance  of  the  signs  in  the  case  of  Alompra  disposes  of 
the  assertion  that  he  was  a  mere  adventurer.  He  himself 
thoroughly  believed  in  his  high  destiny,  and  talked  of  it  in 
right  royal  fashion  to  Captain  Baker,  an  ambassador  sent  to 
him  in  1755  by  the  Honourable  East  India  Company.  This 
gentleman,  the  commander  of  an  East  Indiaman,  who,  under 
the  instructions  of  his  employers,  evidently  regarded  the 
great  conqueror  as  little  better  than  a  savage,  brought  him  a 
present  of  a  chest  or  two  of  gunpowder,  a  couple  of  muskets 
and  carbines,  a  gilt  looking-glass,  some  red  earth  in  bags, 
and  half  a  dozen  bottles  of  lavender  water  (there  is  no 
mention  of  glass  beads),  and  offered  Alompra  the  assistance 
of  the  great  company.  Whereupon  his  majesty  burst  into  a 
defiant  laugh  and  replied  in  the  following  fashion :  "  Have  I 
asked,  or  do  I  want  any  assistance  to  reduce  my  enemies  to 
subjection  ?  Let  none  conceive  such  an  opinion  !  Have  I 
not  in  three  years'  time  extended  my  conquests  three  months' 
journey  in  every  quarter  without  the  help  of  cannon  or 
muskets  ?  Nay,  I  have  with  bludgeons  only,  opposed  and 
defeated  these  Peguans  who  destroyed  the  capital  of  this 
kingdom,  and  took  the  prince  prisoner ;  and  a  month  hence 
I  intend  to  go  with  a  great  force  to  Dag6n  (Rangoon), 
where  I  have  an  army  now  lying,  when  I  will  advance  to 
the  walls  of  Pegu,  blockade  and  starve  them  out  of  it,  which 
is  the  last  town  I  have  now  to  take  to  complete  my  con- 
quest, and  then  I  will  go  in  quest  of  Bourno  (the  French 
governor  of  Syriam,  whom  he  afterwards  actually  did  put  to 


xLVii      THE  LORD  OF  THE  CELESTIAL  ELEPHANT       449 

death).  Captain,  see  this  sword  ;  it  is  now  three  years  since 
it  has  been  constantly  exercised  in  chastising  my  enemies  ; 
it  is  indeed  almost  blunt  with  use  ;  but  it  shall  be  continued 
to  the  same  till  they  are  utterly  dispersed.  Do  not  talk  of 
assistance.  I  require  none.  The  Peguans  I  can  wipe  away 
as  thus  (drawing  the  palm  of  one  hand  over  the  other).  See 
these  arms  and  this  thigh  (drawing  his  loose  coat-sleeve  up 
to  the  armpit,  and  lifting  his  pasoh,  so  as  to  display  a  bare 
tattooed  leg) ;  amongst  a  thousand  you  cannot  see  my 
match.  I  can  crush  a  hundred  such  as  the  King  of  Pegu." 
(Quoted  from  Crawford.) 

Two  years  later  he  talked  to  Ensign  Lester  in  the  same 
bombastic  strain,  ^telling  him  that  he  would  go  to  Madras, 
and  that  if  a  nine-pounder  shot  was  to  hit  him  it  could  do 
him  no  harm,  with  a  good  deal  more  to  the  same  effect.  He 
is  described  at  this  time,  when  he  was  about  forty-five  years 
of  age,  as  five  feet  eleven  in  height,  and  of  a  powerful  build, 
with  a  long,  but  not  a  thin  face,  the  expression  not  being 
improved  by  a  number  of  smallpox  pitmarks.  He  had  a 
broad  but  very  retreating  forehead,  a  characteristic  shared  by 
all  his  descendants,  and  prominent  in  the  case  of  King 
Minddn. 

Alaungpaya,  then,  was  no  feeble  founder  of  the  present 
line  of  successors  to  the  great  Maha  Thamada.  He  certainly 
had  the  power  to  command,  and  his  military  successes 
carried  the  peacock  flag  from  far  away  towards  Dacca,  down 
to  the  Siamese  capital.  Assuredly  he  was  a  worthy  follower 
of  the  great  first  king,  and  the  Burmese  believed  firmly  in 
the  unbroken  character  of  the  succession.  Accordingly  all 
the  old  Indian  and  Sakyan  customs  were  carefully  observed 
by  the  Burmese  royal  family.  Such  were  the  marriage  with 
half-sisters,  and  the  consequent  preserving  unmarried  of  the 
king's  eldest  daughter ;  the  reverence  of  the  three  most 
excellent  animals,  the  peacock  of  the  sun,  the  hare  of  the 
moon,  and  the  kalawaik,  the  carrying  bird  of  Vishnu,  whose 
eyes  like  jewels  look  friendly  on  the  stranger  ;  and  the  beit- 
theit,  the  consecration  by  pouring  out  of  water  at  the  acces- 
sion. Marriage  with  half-sisters  was  only  allowed  to  the  king, 
not  to  the  people  at  large,  or  even  to  the  princes  of  the  blood- 
royal.     The  throne  was  painted  over  with  representations  of 

2  G 


45°  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  peacock  and  the  hare,  typifying  the  descent  of  the  king 
from  the  solar  and  lunar  races,  which  was  also  directly  laid 
claim  to  in  the  title,  netwetbuyin,  sovereign  of  the  rising 
sun.  Similarly  with  the  titles  khattia,  implying  that  he  had 
dominion  over  the  crops,  and  yaza,  because  he  could  instruct 
men  in  the  laws,  a  somewhat  doubtful  ability  in  regard  to 
all  except  perhaps  King  Mind6n.  The  consecration  by 
beittheit  was  completed  in  three  special  ceremonies,  as  was 
the  case  with  the  Payalaung  chosen  to  be  the  first  ruler. 

1.  Yaza-beit,  the  consecrating  of  him  as  king. 

2.  Manda  beittheit,  the  solemn  marrying  him  to  a 
queen  of  royal  lineage. 

3.  Thenga  beittheit,  the  confirmation  or  renewal  of  his 
engagement  to  abide  by  the  laws,  whereupon  full  powers 
for  the  government  and  administration  of  the  country  are 
conferred. 

The  actual  coronation  ceremony  was  latterly  a  mere 
form,  but  was  intended  to  mark  the  claim  of  the  Lord  of 
the  Golden  Palace  to  be  the  representative  of  the  universal 
monarch,  the  Sekyawadd  king,  who  never  makes  his 
appearance  during  the  time  allotted  to  the  publication  and 
duration  of  the  religious  institutions  of  a  Buddha.  It 
consisted  principally  in  incantations  and  sprinkling  with 
holy  water  from  the  Ganges,  performed  by  the  pdnnas, 
the  Brahmin  astrologers ;  the  Burman  yahans  had  nothing 
whatever  to  do  with  it.  Besides  the  pdnnas,  only  a  few  of 
the  chief  ministers  were  present.  The  really  national  part 
of  the  ceremony  was  the  royal  progress  round  the  city 
moat,  made  seven  days  after  the  beittheit.  The  king  left 
the  city  by  the  Eastern  Gate,  the  precise  moment  being 
notified  by  a  discharge  of  cannon.  He  then  entered  the 
state  barge,  a  most  gorgeously  gilt  and  carved  construction, 
surpassing  even  the  traditional  coach  of  the  Lord  Mayor 
of  London.  This  boat  was  then  slowly  rowed  round  the 
moat,  with  music  clashing  all  around,  and  bands  of  dancers 
supplying  the  place  of  a  rejoicing  populace.  Then  when  the 
circuit  had  been  completed,  the  newly  crowned  monarch 
entered  again  between  the  guardian  ogres  of  the  Eastern 
Gate,  a  fresh  salvo  of  artillery  announcing  the  arrival  at 
the  palace.     The   ceremony  was  simple  enough,  but  King 


XLVii      THE  LORD  OF  THE  CELESTIAL  ELEPHANT       451 

Thibaw  never  went  through  it.  In  the  first  days  of  his 
reign  he  was  afraid  to  leave  the  nandaw,  lest  conspirators 
might  find  the  chance  too  good  a  one  to  lose,  and  later 
on,  a  fear  that  the  delayed  festival  might  suggest  ideas 
of  previous  faint -heartedness  came  in  the  way.  Con- 
sequently, though  he  was  crowned  successor  to  Maha 
Thamada  as  far  as  the  beittheit  was  concerned,  and  there- 
fore became  the  source  of  the  law,  the  guardian  of  the 
welfare  of  the  country,  the  recipient  of  the  revenues,  and 
the  chief  administrator  of  justice,  he  was  no  proper  successor 
to  the  warlike  Alaungpaya.  Possibly  the  failure  to  assume 
the  sturdy  spirit  of  the  first  of  the  family  may  account 
for  the  deficiency  in  some  of  the  attributes  derived  from 
the  first  king,  a  deficiency  which  even  the  most  loyal  of  his 
subjects  did  not  hesitate  to  admit. 

The  first  ruler  was  chosen  for  his  strict  adherence  to  the 
five  fundamental  precepts  now  incumbent  on  all  men,  and 
for  his  general  sanctity.  These  qualities  are  inherent  in 
all  successors,  though  sometimes  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish 
them.  From  them  sprang  four  other  laws  incumbent  on 
all  kings  and  rulers.  These  thengaha,  kingly  laws,  or 
byammazoya  are  as  follows  : — 

1.  Thathameda,  ordaining  that  he  shall  not  receive 
more  than  a  tithe  of  the  produce  of  the  country. 

2.  Purithameda,  ordaining  that  the  king  shall  engage 
to  pay  his  servants  and  army  once  every  six  months. 

3.  Thamapatha,  by  which  the  king  binds  himself  to 
assist  his  subjects  with  money,  and  to  receive  payment  of 
it  within  three  years,  without  charging  interest. 

4.  Wasapaya,  the  use  of  courteous  and  fitting  language, 
according  to  the  age  and  position  in  life  of  the  persons 
addressed. 

It  is  to  be  feared  that  these  kindly  kingly  laws  were 
not  found  suitable  to  the  conditions  of  modern  society.  At 
any  rate  they  were  not  very  strictly  observed  by  Thibaw 
Min. 

Nevertheless  that  monarch  was  very  far  from  being  such 
an  unlovely  character  as  most  Europeans  have  been  led  to 
believe.  It  was  explicitly  denied  by  many  that  he  drank  at 
all :  it  is  certain  that  whatever  excesses  he  may  have  plunged 


452  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

into  in  the  remorse  caused  by  the  massacres  of  February 
1879,  he  was  assuredly  not  a  confirmed  drunkard.  His 
worst  fault  was  that  he  was  easy,  or  call  it  weak-spirited 
if  you  like.  It  is  an  open  secret  that  he  was  not  intended 
to  be  king.  His  father,  Minddn  Min,  had  a  strong  liking 
for  the  young  yahan,  but  his  intention,  if  he  had  any,  was 
that  the  pious  and  well-read  Nyaungyan  prince,  who  died 
a  refugee  at  Barrackpore,  near  Calcutta,  was  to  be  his 
successor,  and  if  the  court  or  the  town  had  been  polled, 
the  choice  would  have  fallen  on  the  same  burly,  good- 
natured  individual. 

It  must  be  understood  that,  notwithstanding  the  pre- 
cautions for  the  preservation  of  the  pure  blood-royal,  the 
system  of  keeping  a  princess  tabindaing,  to  be  married  to 
the  new  ruler,  it  by  no  means  followed  that  the  eldest  son 
of  this  union,  or,  indeed,  any  son  by  this  queen  at  all, 
necessarily  succeeded  to  the  throne.  It  was  not  often 
that  there  was  a  recognised  Eingshemin,  an  heir-apparent 
to  the  throne,  but  when  there  was  such  a  dignitary,  he 
might  be  the  fifth,  or  the  tenth,  or  the  thirtieth  son,  the 
only  stipulation  being  that  he  should  be  the  child  of  one 
of  the  four  chief  queens.  The  nomination  rested  with 
the  king.  A  consideration  of  the  gruesome  history  of  the 
parricide  kings,  who  reigned  in  one  of  the  countries  of 
the  Myissi  Madetha,  the  middle  country,  as  India  is  called, 
each  of  whom  ascended  a  throne  stained  with  a  father's 
blood,  until  the  horrified  populace  of  Pataliputra  revolted 
and  exterminated  the  whole  house ;  the  reading  of  this 
bloody  chapter  in  the  royal  annals  may  have  prompted 
the  custom,  but  it  is  certain  that  it  is  not  often  that  the 
heir  to  the  throne  was  recognised.  Mind6n  made  no 
sign  till  his  last  illness  came  upon  him.  Then  when  it 
was  evident  that  he  could  not  survive,  he  named  the 
Nyaungyan  mintha  and  after  him  the  yellow-robed  Thibaw 
prince.  Then  palace  intrigue  began.  The  Thibaw  prince, 
it  was  well  known,  had  a  passion  for  the  tabindaing,  Selin 
Supaya  (Selina  Sophia  as  she  was  called  by  some  of  the 
English  residents  in  Mandalay),  and  the  second  of  the 
Supayas,  for  there  were  three  of  them,  was  equally 
enamoured    of   the    young  Patama    Byan.       Therefore    the 


XLvii      THE  LORD  OF  THE  CELESTIAL  ELEPHANT       453 

queen-mother    resolved   to   gratify  all    parties,  and    become 
herself  queen   dowager.     She    opened    up    communications 
with    the  then    all-powerful    Kin   Wunmingyi,  the  Premier 
as  he  was  usually  called.     That  able  minister  saw  continued 
power  in  store  for  himself  if  he  could  get  the  unsophisticated 
pyin-stn  placed  on  the  throne.     Therefore  he  threw  himself 
into  the  plot.     The  princes  were   summoned   by  a  forged 
royal   order  to  come  before  his  majesty,  bid  him  farewell, 
and  hear  his  nomination  of  a  successor.      As  they  came  up 
to  the  hmawgaw,  the  mirror  throne  room,  where  the  kings 
body   afterwards   lay  in   state,  they  were  seized   separately 
and  forthwith  hurried  off  to  prison.     The  Nyaungyan  and 
his  brother,  the   Nyaungdk  prince,  received  timely  warning, 
and  instead  of  coming  to  the  palace  went  straight  off  for 
sanctuary  to  the  English  Church,  whence   they  afterwards 
escaped,  disguised,  to  the  protection  of  the  British  flag  in 
the  compound  of  the  British  Residency.   But  though  they  thus 
saved  their  lives,  as  appeared  five  months  afterwards,  when 
the  other  princes  were  done  to  death,  the  throne  was  lost,  for 
Thibaw  was  left  master  of  the  situation,  and  soon  completed 
his  arrangements  for  securing  his  position.      At  first  every- 
thing  went   well.      It  was  necessary  to  retain  the  support 
of   the   Kin   Wungyi,   and   that   astute   minister,  acting  on 
the  idea  that  he  could  easily  manage  the  raw  young  ex- 
neophyte,  proceeded  to  draw  up  a  scheme  for  a  constitu- 
tional government,  the  greater  part  of    which  was  written 
for  him  by  the  late  Dr.  Clement  Williams,  the  first  English 
Resident    in    Mandalay,    and     afterwards    an     independent 
trader.       This    constitution    was    published    with    a     great 
flare  of  trumpets  and   much  talk  about  the   establishment 
of  Western  methods,  and  the  raising  of  Burma  to  the  rank 
of   a    first-class  Eastern  power.       The  people  at  large  did 
not  perceive  any  very  radical  difference,  as  far  as  the  pay- 
ment  of   moneys    was    concerned,  under    the   new  system. 
Perhaps   it   would  have   turned   out   well  if   it  had   lasted. 
But  it  was  not  destined  to  last. 

As  soon  as  the  funeral  rites  of  the  dead  king  were  over, 
and  Thibaw  Min  had  been  sprinkled  with  the  consecrated 
water  by  the  p6nnas,  he  proposed  to  marry  "  Selina  Sophia," 
and  take  the  younger  sister,  the  Supayalat,  along  with  her 


454  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

according  to  agreement.  But  the  tabindaing  was  not  willing. 
On  the  contrary,  she  took  the  altogether  unprecedented  step 
of  cutting  off  her  hair  and  entering  a  nunnery.  The  slighted 
golden  monarch  was  furious.  The  two  luckless  maids  of 
honour  of  the  scornful  beauty  had  their  hands  chopped  off 
by  the  "  spotted  man."  What  became  of  the  nun  herself  no 
one  seems  to  know.  Whether  she  went  to  her  grave  or  to  a 
jungle  convent  is  a  matter  which  neither  her  friends  nor  her 
enemies  ever  revealed.  Thibaw  Min  at  any  rate  had  to  be 
satisfied  with  the  Supayalat.  He  very  soon  found  that  he 
had  quite  enough  to  do  with  her.  The  mother  had  always 
been  known  as  strong-minded  ;  the  daughter  developed  an 
even  greater  amount  of  determination,  and  between  them 
they  soon  reduced  the  ruler  of  the  umbrella-bearing  chiefs  to 
submission.  It  had  never  been  their  intention  that  the  Kin 
Wungyi  should  derive  the  greatest  part  of  advantage  from 
the  scheme  for  enthroning  the  Thibaw  prince,  and  they  gradu- 
ally worked  his  majesty  into  a  state  of  desperation.  How- 
ever meek  he  might  be  towards  them,  he  soon  became 
embarrassingly  testy  with  his  courtiers,  and  after  a  time  took 
to  using  what  was  called  Tharrawaddy's  spear.  Kdnbaung 
Min,  that  fiery  descendant  of  Alaungpaya,  in  his  latter  years 
amused  himself  with  spearing  his  courtiers  with  a  javelin  he 
always  kept  by  him.  This  trait,  which  soon  grew  into  a 
regular  homicidal  mania,  and  led  to  his  being  smothered  in 
the  end,  seemed  to  have  broken  out  afresh  in  the  young  king, 
and  the  Rangoon  papers  began  to  talk  of  hereditary  insanity. 
Soon,  however,  the  whole  civilised  world  was  to  be  shocked. 
The  queen  mother  and  the  Supayalat  persuaded  the  king  that 
he  would  never  be  safe  till  the  princes  were  put  out  of  the 
way.  It  is  said  that  Thibaw  Min  at  first  flatly  refused,  and 
then,  broken  down  by  daily  taunts,  pleaded  the  danger  from 
the  British  Government.  Here  also,  however,  he  was  over- 
ruled. The  queen  dowager  called  in  a  European  (not  an 
Englishman),  and  asked  what  would  be  done  if  all  the 
imprisoned  princes  were  massacred  ?  He  answered  there 
would  be  a  great  deal  of  talk  and  nothing  more.  So 
Thibaw  gave  in,  and  said,  "  Shin-ba  se,  let  them  be  cleared 
away " ;  and  seventy  of  the  royal  blood,  men,  women,  and 
children,  were  murdered  in  the  next  three  days,  and  buried 


XLVii      THE  LORD  OF  THE  CELESTIAL  ELEPHANT       455 

within  the  palace,  in  a  long  trench  dug  for  the  purpose. 
The  eldest  prince,  the  Mekhaya,  a  man  nearly  three  times 
Thibaw's  age,  and  hated  for  his  fierce,  proud  demeanour,  died 
shrieking  for  mercy  at  the  hands  of  his  own  slaves,  whom  he 
had  often  tortured.  The  Thons^  mintha,  equally  over- 
bearing in  his  manner,  and  a  fanatical  hater  of  the  English, 
whom  he  lost  no  opportunity  of  insulting,  gained  in  his  death 
an  esteem  he  had  never  known  while  living.  With  his  last 
breath  he  hurled  defiance  and  imprecations  at  the  brother 
whom  he  had  always  despised,  and  prophesied  a  speedy  and 
bloody  end  for  the  "  runaway  monk."  The  weakly  and 
gentle-mannered  Maingtun  murmured  a  prayer  that  the 
hideous  sin  of  murder  might  be  pardoned  to  its  instigator 
and  perpetrators,  and  then  resigned  his  neck  to  the  club 
which  sent  him  to  the  blissful  seats  of  nat-dewas.  The 
princesses  were  subjected  to  nameless  horrors,  and  the  treat- 
ment of  the  children  recalled  the  days  when  ravaging  hordes 
marched  through  the  land  with  babes  spitted  on  their  pike 
staffs  for  standards.  The  poor  old  regent  of  Pegu,  governor 
at  Rangoon  when  the  British  came  in  1852,  had  his  nostrils 
and  gullet  crammed  with  gunpowder,  and  was  thus  blown  up. 
But  the  tale  of  horrors  is  not  one  to  enlarge  upon.  They 
were  conducted  by  those  who  became  the  king's  most  trusted 
advisers.  All  the  three  days  bands  of  music  were  playing 
throughout  the  palace,  and  dancers  posturing  to  divert 
attention  from  what  was  going  on,  and  to  drown  the  cries  of 
the  victims. 

The  custom  of  putting  to  death  all  dangerous  rivals  on 
the  accession  of  a  new  king  was  without  doubt  almost  a  re- 
cognised thing  in  Burma  whenever  there  was  a  new  sovereign. 
Many  Burmans  defend  it  warmly,  on  the  plea  that  it  secured 
the  peace  of  the  country.  Where  there  were  so  many  of  the 
royal  blood,  the  appointment  of  one,  possibly  among  the 
youngest,  to  the  supreme  power,  could  not  but  lead  to  discon- 
tent, breaking  out  into  open  rebellion  when  the  slighted  found 
themselves  strong  enough  to  feel  hope  of  success  for  a  rising. 
The  accession  of  Minddn  was  marked  by  no  such  atrocities, 
but  he  came  to  the  throne  under  exceptional  circumstances. 
His  brother,  the  Pagan  Min,  was  deposed  because  he  would 
do  nothing  to  make  peace  with  the  English,  then  threatening 


456  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

to  occupy  the  capital,  which  they  were  so  near  effecting  in 
the  first  war  of  1826.  The  deposed  king  was  allowed  to 
live  happy  with  his  game-cocks.  The  people's  idol,  the  fiery 
"  War  Prince,"  was  passed  over  because  he  was  pledged  to 
fight  to  the  death,  and  there  was  an  explicit  understanding 
that  he,  or  failing  him,  his  issue,  should  succeed  to  the  royal 
honours  on  the  death  of  King  Mind6n.  That  pious  and 
enlightened  monarch  was  forced  on  the  country  by  a  happy 
necessity.  But  it  was  very  different  when  he  died.  There 
was  no  war  to  distract  the  people,  and  further,  there  was  a 
multiplicity  of  candidates.  The  Convener  of  the  Fifth  Great 
Synod  had,  during  his  lifetime,  fifty-three  recognised  wives, 
besides  an  indefinite  number  of  handmaidens.  By  the  wives 
he  had  altogether  one  hundred  and  ten  children,  forty-eight 
sons  and  sixty-two  daughters.  Of  the  forty-eight  sons  only 
twenty-four  were  alive  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and  two  of 
these  were  detained  as  political  prisoners  in  India,  the 
Myingun  and  Myingundaing  princes,  the  originators  of  the 
rebellion  of  1866,  when  the  "War  Prince"  was  killed,  and 
the  king  himself  had  a  narrow  escape.  The  Myingundaing 
died  many  years  ago  in  India ;  the  Myingun  still  lives  on  an 
allowance  from  the  French  Government  in  Saigon. 

There  were  thus  twenty-two  possible  successors  to  the 
Golden  Throne.  One  was  a  lunatic — the  Kyabin  Mintha  ; 
four  were  little  boys  under  ten  years  of  age,  others 
were  disqualified  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  but  there 
remained  the  Thons^,  the  Mekhaya,  the  Nyaungyan,  and 
the  Nyaung6k,  all  of  whom  were  considered  as  having 
certainly  greater  claims  than  the  actual  successor.  Thibaw 
Min  wanted  to  keep  them  all  in  prison,  and  a  range  of 
barracks  was  actually  being  constructed  for  their  occupation 
when  the  massacres  occurred.  Whatever  foreigners  may 
think,  all  Burmans  lay  the  guilt  of  the  executions  at  the  door 
of  the  queen  and  the  queen  dowager.  When  some  were 
killed,  prudential  motives,  as  well  as  a  ghoul-like  thirst  for 
blood,  prompted  the  murder  of  all,  and  this  accordingly  was 
carried  out.  Of  all  the  twenty-four  princes,  excluding  the 
king,  there  were  left  alive  but  four  little  boys  in  sanctuary 
in  Mandalay  monasteries,  one  of  them  barely  five  years  old, 
and  three  refugees  in  India,  one  of  the  four,  the  Mingundaing 


xLvii      THE  LORD  OF  THE  CELESTIAL  ELEPHANT       457 

prince,  having  died  soon  after.  Of  the  princesses,  thirty- 
five  of  whom  survived  their  father,  four  were  killed  in  the 
February  massacres,  and  twenty-one  kept  in  confinement  in 
the  palace,  some  of  whom  almost  certainly  died  of  want 
or  external  violence.  The  remainder  were  of  too  little 
account  to  be  taken  notice  of  Thirty-seven  queens  were 
alive  when  the  late  king  died.  Thirteen  fled  when  his 
illness  became  dangerous,  and  so  extinguished  themselves. 
Twenty-three  were  kept  in  underground  dungeons,  or  under 
close  surveillance  in  the  palace  ;  one  only,  the  mother  of  the 
Mekhaya,  with  fourteen  of  her  children  and  grandchildren, 
were  killed  in  1879.  This  is  rather  a  dismal  list,  and  the 
shadow  of  it  rested  over  the  royal  throne.  Whether  Thibaw 
Min  was  the  direct  author  of  the  tragedy  or  not,  the  stain  of 
the  crime  and  the  recollection  of  it  clung  to  him.  After  its 
accomplishment,  the  king  fell  more  and  more  under  the 
malign  influence  of  the  termagant  queen.  The  Kin  Wungyi 
and  his  constitution  were  ignominiously  bundled  out  of 
the  palace.  The  former  all-powerful  minister  became  little 
more  than  a  private  citizen,  and  the  vile  conductors  of  the 
massacres  were  the  chief  in  authority.  With  their  lotteries 
and  monopolies  they  had  very  soon  brought  the  country  to 
ruin,  had  it  not  been  for  the  blessing  of  English  rule. 

Personally,  Thibaw  Min  could  jiot  be  otherwise  than 
miserable.  The  harridan  queen  kept  him  in  most  humble 
subjection.  Hitherto  every  king  of  Burma  had  had  at  least 
four  chief  queens,  those  of  the  east,  west,  north,  and  south 
palaces,  of  whom  the  southern  queen  was  supreme.  But 
Supayalat  persisted  in  remaining  sole  controller  of  the  royal 
heart.  Terrible  stories  are  told  of  the  death  by  lingering 
torture  which  proved  the  portion  of  maids  of  honour  on 
whose  charms  the  unhappy  king  is  said  to  have  looked  with 
favour.  Such  an  unusual  state  of  things,  such  a  disgrace  as 
a  woman's  slave  for  a  king,  had  never  befallen  any  country 
before.  A  son  was  born  in  the  end  of  1879,  but  he  died  of 
smallpox  in  the  epidemic  of  Mafch  1880,  and  a  daughter 
in  the  end  of  the  same  year  compared  but  badly  with  King 
Minddn's  three  or  four  a  year. 

The  king  was  practically  a  prisoner  within  his  golden 
walls.      No  king  of  Burma  had  ever  been  much  in  the  habit 


458  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    ch.  xlvii 

of  leaving  the  palace.  Possession  of  it,  with  the  vast  arsenal 
which  it  contained,  implied  the  subduing  of  the  entire  country. 
When  a  monarch  went  forth  to  worship  at  a  pagoda  or 
preside  at  some  function,  he  left  the  nandaw  in  charge  of 
the  prince  or  minister  whom  he  could  best  trust.  But  poor 
Thibaw  Min  could  trust  no  one,  or  at  any  rate  believed 
that  this  was  his  state.  From  the  time  he  succeeded  to  the 
throne  till  he  left  it  a  prisoner,  he  never  went  outside  the 
palace  walls. 


CHAPTER    XLVIII 

KING   THIBAW 

[The  following  three  chapters  remain  as  they  were  written  in  1880.] 

I. A  PRIVATE  INTERVIEW 

Time  was,  when  to  get  an  interview  with  the  Arbiter  of 
Existence  was  as  difficult  a  matter  as  to  see  the  Grand 
Lama,  or  the  Sherif  ul  Islam  of  Mecca.  When  the  servants 
of  "the  Foreign  Woman,"  Her  Most  Gracious  Majesty 
Queen  Victoria,  protested  in  1879  against  the  new  sovereign's 
summary  settlement  of  domestic  matters,  Thibaw  swore  a 
royal  oath  by  the  sacred  hairs  of  Gautama,  by  the  Lord,  the 
Law  and  the  Assembly,  the  three  precious  things,  that  he 
would  never  look  on  a  white  man  again.  For  a  year  the 
vow  was  religiously  kept,  and  ambitious  "  globe-trotters  "  and 
prying  special  correspondents  were  kept  at  a  distance,  and 
had  not  even  the  satisfaction  of  being  admitted  within  the 
outer  gate  of  the  nandaw.  In  time,  however,  the  royal 
coffers  got  low,  and  it  was  thought  foolish  not  to  make  use 
of  the  barbarian  merchants,  seeking  for  monopolies  and  grants 
of  forest  land,  and  able  and  willing  to  pay  enormous  sums 
for  such  concessions.  His  majesty's  ministers  therefore 
speedily  found  means  of  relieving  the  great  King  of  Right- 
eousness from  his  solemn  oath.  The  first  principle  of  the 
Buddhist  faith  is  charity.  How,  then,  could  the  Lord  of  the 
Rising  Sun  gain  more  merit  and  advance  some  miles  on  the 
noble  Eightfold  Path  better  than  by  conquering  his  just 
personal  antipathies  and  allowing  awe-stricken  foreigners  to 
grovel  before  the  splendour  of  his  effulgence  and  worship  at 

459 


46o  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

his  Golden  Feet !  When  once  they  had  experienced  that 
supreme  delight,  his  majesty's  ministers  might  be  trusted  to 
see  that  the  wealth  of  the  merchants  was  made  to  subserve 
the  royal  interests.  And  so  it  came  to  pass  that  Thibaw 
first  received  a  few  speculators  and  their  friends,  and  has 
ended  by  granting  an  audience  to  any  European  that  can 
get  a  minister  to  speak  for  him.  And  so  the  Golden  Hairs 
are  forgotten,  and  the  three  precious  things  calmly  flouted. 
Still  the  royal  barbarian  is  not  comfortable  at  these  inter- 
views. He  was  too  curious  to  be  dignified.  He  had  not 
the  fund  of  conversation  that  his  father  had,  and  he  was 
impatient  apparently  of  being  looked  at,  as  strangers  in 
remote  parts  of  China  and  wild  beasts  in  zoological  gardens 
may  be  supposed  to  be. 

Securing  an  interview  is  not  always  an  easy  matter, 
unless  you  are  a  great  capitalist,  desirous  of  a  grant  some- 
where. If  you  merely  wish  to  see  his  majesty,  the  process 
is  somewhat  difficult.  You  probably  apply  first  of  all  to  the 
Chevalier  Andreino,  Italian  Consul  in  Mandalay,  and  master 
of  ceremonies  and  mysterious  "  doing  duty "  man  at  the 
Burmese  Court.  He  may  get  you  the  desired  audience,  but 
more  probably  refers  you  to  one  of  the  higher  ministers. 
Almost  certainly  these  officials  will  say  that  it  is  impossible 
for  you  to  see  the  king.  His  majesty  is  too  busy,  "  working 
hard  all  day  at  affairs  of  state  "  ;  and  they  gaze  stolidly  upon 
you.  You  regret  the  circumstance  extremely,  make  the 
minister  a  present  of  a  few  hundred  rupees,  and  continue  to 
deplore  your  bad  luck.  Then  he  brightens  up  suddenly, 
recollects  that  on  such  and  such  a  day  his  majesty  is  possibly 
free.      He  will  find  out  and  do  his  best  for  you. 

Next  day  you  are  told  that  an  interview  will  be  granted, 
that  the  king  of  kings  graciously  permits  you  to  come  and 
place  your  head  under  his  gilded  feet.  If  you  are  a  wise 
man  and  have  been  warned  by  considerate  friends,  you  will 
now  commence  to  practise  sitting  on  your  feet.  It  is  as  well 
to  rehearse  the  process  frequently  beforehand,  for  they  must 
be  tucked  away  so  that  his  majesty  cannot  see  them  ;  and  if 
you  do  not  find  the  most  agreeable  way  of  effecting  the 
concealment,  your  audience  will  be  chiefly  memorable  to  you 
for    frightful    agony,    a  vast   amount   of  internal   "  popular 


XLviii       KING  THIBAW— A  PRIVATE  INTERVIEW  461 

language,"  and  vows  of  vengeance  against  the  ministers,  who 
seem  to  have  an  irritating  faculty  of  grinning  all  down  their 
backs. 

The  journey  to  the  palace  is  not  a  pleasant  preparation. 
It  is  too  hot  to  ride,  and  accordingly  you  decide  to  go  in  the 
apotheosis  of  a  dog-kennel  on  wheels,  which  does  duty  for  a 
carriage  in  Mandalay.  There  is  not  room  for  much  more 
than  one  Englishman  in  the  vehicle,  and  the  only  way  you 
can  get  in  is  by  scrambling  over  the  backs  of  the  bullocks. 
I  shall  never  forget  my  first  experience  of  a  Mandalay 
carriage.  After  an  exciting  ten  minutes  spent  in  trying  to 
circumvent  a  kicking  bullock,  I  at  length  got  in  and  sat  down 
on  the  floor — there  are  no  seats — to  gaze  out  at  the  round 
hole  by  which  I  had  got  in.  The  rest  of  the  party  followed, 
each  man  in  a  kennel  of  his  own.  The  beasts  set  off  at  a 
swinging  trot  over  roads  of  the  early  depraved  order,  and  in 
a  couple  of  minutes  we  were  all  regretting  that  we  did  not 
brave  the  sun  and  ride,  or  even  walk.  However,  the  drivers 
disregard  our  entreaties,  and  hustle  up  the  cattle  all  the  more 
energetically.  We  pass  over  the  moat,  and  through  the 
enormous  wooden  gateway  into  the  walled  town.  We  enter 
by  the  a-mingala  gate,  the  south-western,  the  only  one  through 
which  corpses  are  allowed  to  be  taken  from  the  city.  It  is 
almost  invariably  used  by  Englishmen  as  being  nearest  to 
the  Residency  and  the  river,  but  no  upper-class  Burman  will 
pass  through  it  if  he  possibly  can  avoid  doing  so.  After 
five  minutes'  more  jolting  we  arrive  at  the  outer  stockade  of 
the  palace,  and  get  out  of  our  conveyances  with  some  alacrity 
and  a  lot  of  bruises.  Immediately  inside  the  gate  is  a  guard- 
house, with  a  cluster  of  the  royal  soldiery,  who,  as  we  come 
up,  squat  down  on  the  ground  and  hold  their  Enfields  in 
front  of  them  at  the  third  motion  of  the  present,  looking  like 
frogs  on  a  Christmas  card. 

We  cross  a  wide  open  space,  pass  through  the  "  Red 
Postern,"  and  turn  to  the  left,  for  it  is  to  be  a  private  recep- 
tion, and  we  do  not  ascend  the  steps  to  the  Hall  of  Audience. 
We  pass  a  gallop  which  Thibaw  has  laid  down  for  his 
ponies,  and  enter  the  Royal  Gardens.  They  are  not  much 
to  speak  of.  Laid  out  in  squares,  with  raised  paths,  deep 
brickwork;  canals   running  in   every  direction,  grottoes  and 


462  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

"  fads  "  of  all  sorts  in  every  available  place,  they  are  rather 
tiresome,  and  we  prefer  to  talk  to  a  remarkable  gentleman 
who  meets  us  here.  This  is  the  Pangyet  Wun,  or  governor 
of  the  glass  manufactories — rather  a  mysterious  title,  seeing 
that  there  are  no  such  works  in  the  royal  city.  But  names 
mean  anything  or  nothing  in  Mandalay.  The  Pangyet 
Wun  is  the  familiar  example  of  Western  flippancy  triumphing 
over  Eastern  conceit  and  forgotten  good  manners.  He 
speaks  the  English  of  the  primer  overlaid  with  the  language 
of  the  young  subaltern  and  the  seafaring  man  on  Atlantic 
steamers  of  the  inferior  class. 

As  we  shake  hands  with  him  he  smiles  demurely,  and 
says  he  regrets  he  cannot  offer  us  "  a  liquor."  "  Wine  or 
spirits,  you  know,  are  not  drunk  in  the  palace,"  and  an 
apparition  suggestive  of  a  barbarian  wink  flits  across  his  face. 
We  have  not  long  to  talk  with  him,  however.  Everything, 
he  says,  is  ready,  and  we  make  for  a  side-door  into  the 
palace,  or  rather  into  one  of  the  numerous  audience  chambers 
connected  with  the  nandaw,  each  having  a  name  of  its  own, 
and  being  used  according  to  his  majesty's  whim.  We  are 
to  be  received  in  the  Hmaw-gaw,  "  the  Crystal  Palace,"  so 
called  from  the  decoration  of  its  walls,  resplendent  with  bits 
of  mirror  and  coloured  glass.  We  have  to  put  off  our  shoes 
before  stepping  into  the  palace,  and  do  so  not  without  dire 
misgivings,  for  in  times  gone  by  we  had  been  to  see  King 
Minddn,  and  have  lively  recollections  of  the  nails  in  the  floor. 
A  Burman,  they  say,  never  likes  to  finish  anything,  and 
therefore  does  not  drive  home  the  nails  in  the  planking  of 
his  house.  People  more  versed  in  the  ways  of  the  nandaw 
assert  that  this  is  not  the  true  reason,  and  declare  that  it  is 
an  ingenious  method  of  making  the  presumptuous  Kala 
approach  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Lord  of  Land  and  Sea 
in  respectful  fashion,  with  his  eyes  humbly  lowered.  It 
certainly  is  very  effective  in  that  way.  You  cannot  gaze  about 
you  with  any  degree  of  freedom  when  you  have  a  lurking 
suspicion  that  the  next  step  will  drive  a  nail  into  the  ball  of 
your  big  toe.  Consequently  every  one  used  to  go  in  with 
meekly  downcast  face,  and  respect  to  the  sovereign  was  thus 
triumphantly  enforced.  But  Thibaw  disdains  such  petty 
ways   of  compelling    outward   respect.      Has  he   not   made 


XLvm       KING  THIBAW— A  PRIVATE  INTERVIEW  463 

the  English  Resident  run  away?  Or  perhaps  it  is  the 
European  experience  of  the  Pangyet  Wun  that  we  have  to 
thank.  At  any  rate,  the  corridors  and  passages  are  covered 
with  thick  soft  carpets,  three  or  four  deep,  and  we  walk 
along  in  comfort,  if  with  a  somewhat  undressed  feeling. 

It  is  not  far  to  the  Hmaw-gaw.  We  find  the  chamber 
almost  empty;  A  thick  carpet,  woven  in  one  piece,  covers 
the  floor,  and  the  far  side  is  raised  a  couple  of  feet  above 
the  rest  of  the  room.  On  this  dais  stands  a  couch.  The 
Pangyet  Wun  tells  us  to  sit  down  and  not  to  speak.  We 
obey,  and  stare  at  the  couch  and  a  door  behind  it.  Again 
we  have  misgivings.  Mind6n  Min  used  to  keep  visitors 
waiting  a  trifle  of  an  hour  or  so,  till  they  got  so  cramped 
that  they  had  to  be  hoisted  on  to  their  legs.  But  it  is  not 
so  with  his  son.  He  comes  almost  immediately,  jerking 
himself  suddenly  in  at  the  door,  as  if  somebody  had  stuck 
a  pin  into  him  behind,  walks  hurriedly  to  the  couch,  kick- 
ing off  his  slippers  on  the  way,  and  throws  himself  upon 
it,  with  his  elbows  sunk  in  the  crimson  and  gold  cushions. 
He  looks  straight  at  us  for  about  thirty  seconds,  and  then 
falls  to  examining  his  finger-nails  and  the  carpet.  He 
is  embarrassed  ;  his  father  was  embarrassing.  The  pious 
potentate  used  to  scrutinise  his  visitors  (at  a  distance  of 
twenty  feet  or  so)  through  a  field-glass,  and  people  who  were 
not  overawed  used  to  grin,  which  required  explanation. 
King  Thibaw  comes  alone,  except  that  there  is  a  page 
with  cheroots.  The  gigantic  gold  spittoon  and  betel-nut  box 
and  other  salivating  and  chewing  paraphernalia,  which  were 
deposited  before  his  late  lamented  father,  are  wanting.  He 
knocks  off  the  ash  of  his  green  cheroot  on  the  carpet  and 
presently  lets  it  go  out.  Meanwhile  the  thandawsin,  the 
royal  herald,  has  commenced  chanting  our  names,  business, 
and  the  list  of  our  presents.  This  is  done  in  a  high- 
pitched  recitative,  and  takes  a  long  time,  for  all  the  names, 
styles,  and  titles  of  his  majesty  are  declaimed  for  a  matter 
of  quarter  of  an  hour,  each  sentence  ending  with  a  long- 
drawn  paya-a-ah. 

At  last  it  is  over,  and  Thibaw  asks  if  we  are  well.  We 
announce  that  we  are,  and  the  interpreter,  who  throughout 
sees  fit  to  translate  bald  monosyllables  into  obsequious,  not 


464  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

to  say  grovelling  periods,  says  that  by  his  majesty's 
merciful  permission  we  are  in  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  health. 
Thibaw  then  demands  our  business.  The  interpreter  replies 
that  we  have  come  to  view  the  glories  of  his  majesty's 
mighty  kingdom,  and  to  lay  our  heads  under  his  golden  feet. 
This  is  a  lengthy  formality,  for  an  epitome  of  the  titles  comes 
in  with  every  answer.  Thibaw  looks  very  ill  at  ease,  and 
has  an  occasional  glance  at  us  out  of  the  tail  of  his  eye. 
Having  inquired  after  the  well-being  of  the  Queen,  the 
Viceroy,  the  Chief  Commissioner  of  British  Burma,  and  his 
dear  brothers  in  Calcutta,  who,  he  hopes,  are  being  well 
treated,  as  befits  their  rank,  it  seems  as  if  there  was  going 
to  be  a  sudden  end  to  the  audience,  to  avert  which  we 
wildly  grasp  at  the  idea  of  saying  that  we  had  taken  tickets 
in  the  royal  lotteries,  but  had  not  been  successful  in  the 
drawing.  His  majesty  twirls  his  cheroot  over  his  shoulder, 
which  is  a  sign  that  he  wants  a  light,  and  says  he  is  very 
sorry,  but  hopes  we  will  try  again.  We  announce  that  we 
are  going  to  make  another  attempt,  and  add,  in  the  desperate 
hope  of  getting  his  majesty  into  a  controversy,  that  lotteries 
are  considered  a  very  bad  thing  for  the  people  in  Europe. 
The  interpreter  gazes  for  three-quarters  of  a  second  reproach- 
fully at  us  and  says,  that  by  reason  of  his  majesty's  great 
might,  glory,  and  clemency,  we  are  encouraged  to  make  a 
fresh  venture,  and  that  we  are  lost  in  wonder  at  the  wisdom 
which  has  fallen  upon  such  a  method  of  increasing  the 
revenue,  a  system  which  had  never  occurred  to  the  un- 
illuminated  minds  of  barbarian  financiers.  Burmese  is  a 
language  with  which  some  of  us  are  acquainted,  and  which 
affords  unusual  facilities  for  the  relief  of  the  irritated  mind, 
but  while  we  are  hesitating  as  to  whether  we  shall  break 
through  Court  etiquette  and  address  the  great  Lord  of 
Righteousness  mouth  to  mouth,  Thibaw  graciously  remarks 
that  he  is  glad  to  hear  that  the  wisdom  of  his  ministers  has 
increased  the  knowledge  of  political  economy  in  the  world, 
and  adds  that  he  is  unacquainted  with  any  trade  which  for 
an  outlay  of  two  rupees  will  bring  in  a  return  of  ten 
thousand.  Having  announced  that  he  will  give  orders  to 
his  ministers  and  officials  to  show  us  every  respect  while  we 
remain  under  the  shadow  of  his  throne,  he  suddenly  gets  up 


xLviii       KING  THIBAW—A  PRIVATE  INTERVIEW  465 

and  vanishes  as  rapidly  as  he  appeared.  The  Pangyet 
Wun  calls  out,  "  Get  on  your  legs,  gentlemen,  '  long  chairs ' 
are  better  than  this  sort  of  thing,"  and  we  obey  with  great 
alacrity,  and  are  regaled  outside  with  brandy  and  water  of 
considerable  potency,  poured  out  of  a  teapot  into  teacups. 


2  H 


CHAPTER    XLIX 

KING   THIBAW 

II. THE    MANY-TITLED 

His  most  glorious,  excellent  majesty,  the  present  ruler  of 
the  city  of  Mandalay,  or  Yatanab6ng  Nepyidaw,  ruler  of 
the  sea  and  land,  lord  of  the  rising  sun,  sovereign  of  the 
empires  of  Thumaparanta  and  Zampudipa,  and  of  other 
great  empires  and  countries,  and  king  of  all  the  umbrella- 
bearing  chiefs,  lord  of  the  mines  of  gold,  silver,  rubies, 
amber,  and  the  noble  serpentine,  chief  of  the  Saddan,  or 
celestial  elephant,  and  master  of  many  white  elephants,  the 
supporter  of  religion,  owner  of  the  sekya,  or  Indra's  weapon, 
the  sun-descended  monarch,  sovereign  of  the  power  of  life 
and  death,  great  chief  of  righteousness,  king  of  kings,  and 
possessor  of  boundless  dominions  and  supreme  wisdom,  the 
arbiter  of  existence,  has  a  very  bad  character.  He  killed 
his  brothers  and  sisters  and  he  drinks  gin. 

He  is  very  far  from  being  a  fool  for  all  that.  All  his 
predecessors  killed  certain  of  their  relatives  too  when  they 
came  to  the  throne  ;  only  they  had  not  so  many  as  Thi- 
baw,  and  there  were  no  electric  telegraphs  in  those  days. 
Besides,  they  had  not  such  pressing  need  to  clear  the  field. 
Thibaw  was  put  on  the  throne  by  a  palace  intrigue,  and  if 
he  had  not  disposed  of  his  brothers  they  would  probably 
have  killed  him.  So  say  all  his  majesty's  subjects,  and 
they  ought  to  know.  The  drinking  of  plebeian  gin  is  another 
matter,  and  is  likely  to  be  the  ruin  of  the  many-titled 
monarch.  It  is  telling  on  him  fast.  When  he  came  to 
the    throne   he  was   a  very  good-looking  young   man,  the 

466 


XLix  KING  THIBAW— THE  MANY  TITLED  467 

handsomest  Burman  in  the  country,  people  used  to  say.  Two 
years  and  a  half  have,  however,  made  a  very  great  difference. 
His  majesty's  flat  nose  has  become  flatter  than  ever ;  his 
forehead  seems  to  have  more  of  the  snake's  slope  back 
than  even  the  most  typical  of  his  family  ;  and  his  round  face 
is  all  bloated  and  blotched.  When  we  had  an  interview 
with  him,  he  had  a  scratch  across  his  face  from  the  eye  over 
the  left  cheek,  and  it  was  a  question  whether  the  queen 
had  done  it  or  not.  It  did  not  add  dignity  to  a  manner 
which  was  not  by  any  means  ideally  kingly.  It  was  a  private 
interview  certainly,  and  we  did  not  therefore  expect  to  see 
him  gorgeous  in  a  silk  surcoat  and  spire-like  tharapu  or 
crown.  But  it  seemed  somewhat  negligent  to  appear  in  a 
soiled  white  short  coat  and  a  plain  check  pattern,  yellow  silk 
pasoh,  such  as  any  ordinary  townsman  might  wear.  In  his 
ears  certainly  were  splendid  gold  cylinders,  with  magnificent 
clusters  of  diamonds  and  emeralds  at  the  ends,  and  on  his 
finger  glistened  a  sapphire  ring  worth  a  monarch's  ransom. 
There  was  a  spray  of  diamonds  in  his  hair  too,  but  it  only 
sufficed  to  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  he  had  neglected 
his  toilet,  which  is  a  bad  sign  in  a  young  man  !  All  Burmans 
wear  their  long  hair  tied  up  in  a  knot  on  the  top  of  their 
head.  Thibaw,  however,  stepped  out  of  a  monastery  on  to 
the  throne,  and  in  the  monasteries  every  one  has  his  head 
shaved.  The  royal  hair  has  therefore  not  had  time  to  grow 
very  long  yet,  and  his  majesty  makes  up  his  yaung,  or  top 
knot,  with  false  tresses,  as  many  humbler  Burmans  do,  only 
they  take  care  over  it,  which  he  does  not.  This  is  the 
worst  sign  of  all  ;  for  when  a  Burman  ceases  -  to  take  pride 
in  his  hair  he  must  be  very  far  gone. 

There  are  very  considerable  doubts  as  to  his  majesty's 
legitimacy.  In  any  case  he  is  not  a  pure  Burman.  His 
mother  had  a  good  deal  of  wild  Shan  blood  in  her  veins. 
Just  before  Thibaw's  birth  it  was  discovered  that  his  mother 
was  unpardonably  intimate  with  a  p6ngyi,  one  of  the 
mendicants  of  the  royal  monastery.  The  monk  was  thrown 
into  prison,  and  died  there  very  suddenly  of  official  colic. 
The  queen  was  sent  to  a  nunnery,  where  she  remained  till 
Thibaw  came  to  the  throne.  She  had  better  have  stayed 
there  for  good.     A  year  ago  there  was  a  fearful  scandal. 


468  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Some  thirty  people  about  the  Court  were  beheaded,  and  the 
queen  dowager  was  relegated  to  the  convent. 

Thibaw  himself  was  brought  up  in  an  uncle's  house 
and  used  to  be  unmercifully  bullied  by  his  cousins.  When 
Dr.  Marks,  the  eminent  S.P.G.  missionary,  came  to  Mandalay 
and  established  a  school,  the  late  king  asked  what  was  the 
best  age  for  a  Burman  to  commence  learning  English.  The 
reverend  gentleman  said,  "  About  twelve  years  old."  King 
Mind6n  called  for  "  all  his  sons  that  were  twelve  years  old 
or  thereabouts."  Eleven  were  produced,  and  among  them 
was  Thibaw.  The  future  king  went  to  the  royal  school, 
but  he  sat  apart  from  his  late  victims,  and  never  came  to 
school  on  the  same  elephant  with  them.  He  was  a  surly, 
morose  boy,  not  very  good  at  his  lessons,  and  once  or  twice 
narrowly  escaped  the  usual  result  of  such  conduct.  I  believe 
he  was  never  actually  birched,  but  he  had  several  times  to 
stand  in  the  corner.  When  he  left  he  was  able  to  read  a 
little,  but  he  has  forgotten  all  his  English  now.  He  used  to 
be  fond  of  cricket,  and  slogged  away  in  fairly  good  pendulum 
form ;  but  he  never  would  field  out,  and  used  unprincely 
language  to  any  one  who  bowled  him.  He  was  the  youngest 
of  the  batch  by  a  month  or  two,  and  was  always  quarrel- 
ling with  his  brothers  and  bullying  the  wretched  slave  who 
attended  him  and  carried  his  cheroots  and  betel-nut.  But 
nobody  paid  much  attention  to  his  vagaries  then,  for  he 
was  twentieth  or  thirtieth  son,  and  the  Mekhaya  prince, 
the  eldest,  might  very  easily  have  been  his  father,  or  even 
grandfather. 

After  he  left  the  S.P.G.  Royal  School,  King  Mind6n 
made  him  a  koyin,  a  neophant,  in  the  royal  monastery. 
There  he  seemed  to  get  on  better.  At  any  rate  when  his 
novitiate  was  over,  he  passed  with  honours  as  Patama  Kyaw, 
an  examination  in  the  Bitaghat  th6nb6ng,  the  three 
"baskets"  of  the  Buddhist  law,  and  sundry  other  volumes 
of  ritual  and  controversy.  This  was  what  first  drew  the  old 
king's  attention  to  him.  Mind6n  Min  was  a  very  pious 
old  gentleman,  and  had  a  particular  delight  in  his  title  of 
Convener  of  the  Fifth  Great  Synod.  When  therefore  young 
Thibaw  made  a  score  in  the  Turanian  Theological  Tripos, 
his  father  bored  everybody  with  his  talk  about  the  juvenile 


xLix  KING  THIB AW— THE  MANY-TITLED  469 

divine,  and  was  not  far  off  imagining  that  he  was  an  embryo 
Budh.  Thibaw  an  avatar  of  Arimadeya !  Bradlaugh 
in  the  Salvation  Army !  Other  people  knew  better  even 
then.  Even  in  those  days  Thibaw  was  a  disgraceful  little 
rip.  The  present  Queen  of  the  South  and  sundry  other 
little  petticoats  came  to  flirt  with  him  and  his  companions 
in  the  monastery.  An  ascetic ,  should  not  even  look  at  a 
woman,  and  the  old  kyaungpogo,  the  abbot  of  the  royal 
mendicants,  was  terribly  scandalised,  and  it  is  whispered 
about  that  he  tied  the  raffish  young  princeling's  hands  up 
to  a  tree  and  swished  him  soundly.  Some  colour  is 
lent  to  the  report  by  the  fact  that  Thibaw  dismissed  the 
venerable  recluse  as  soon  as  he  ascended  the  throne.  How- 
ever that  may  be,  the  old  king  heard  nothing  about  it,  and 
went  on  believing  the  "  Senior  Theolog ''  to  be  a  miracle 
of  piety  and  learning,  and  the  sacred  cocks  and  hens  on 
Mandalay  Hill  had  double  rations  for  a  month  in  honour  of 
the  event.  Nevertheless,  he  did  not  by  any  means  intend 
Thibaw  to  succeed  him  on  the  throne.  The  Nyaungyan 
was  the  man  he  named.  But  the  mother  of  the  Supayalat, 
now  Thibaw's  queen,  took  the  matter  in  hand.  She  knew 
that  Thibaw  was  deeply  in  love  with  her  daughter,  and 
thought  she  could  easily  manage  the  moon -struck,  Pali- 
spouting  novice.  She  communicated  her  views  to  the  Kin 
Wunmingyi,  the  head  of  the  ministry.  That  diplomatic 
old  gentleman  was  equally  deceived,  and  thought  he  would 
have  no  trouble  in  leading  the  verdant  recluse  as  he  pleased. 
The  matter  was  arranged  ;  the  elder  princes  were  all  seized 
and  thrown  into  prison  before  Minddn  Min  died.  Thibaw 
tolerated  the  Kin  Wunmingyi  for  a  short  time,  and  let 
him  formulate  a  wonderful  production  which  the  Turanian 
Foreign  Secretary  called  a  constitution.  When  the  simple 
quondam  mendicant  found  himself  firm  on  the  throne,  and 
when  the  Nyaungyan,  his  great  fear,  had  got  away  from 
the  British  Residency  in  Mandalay,  and  was  safe  in  Calcutta, 
Thibaw  threw  off"  the  mask.  Eighty -six  of  his  blood 
relations  were  battered  and  choked  to  death,  or  buried  alive. 
The  Kin  Wungyi's  hapless  constitution  was  crumpled  up 
and  chucked  over  the  frontier,  and  Thibaw  stood  forth  as 
the  most  inhuman  of  a  long  line  of  savage  despots.     The 


470  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  xlix 

Kin  Wunmingyi,  who,  after  all,  had  been  to  Europe  and  was 
versed  in  public  affairs,  lost  all  influence,  and  was  succeeded 
as  adviser  by  the  Taingda  Mingyi,  a  statesman  of  the  typical 
oriental  kind,  supple,  unscrupulous  and  grasping.  Thibaw 
even  achieved  a  certain  kind  of  popularity  with  his  subjects. 
He  insulted  our  representative  and  blustered  at  all  foreigners, 
and  finally  frightened  the  Indian  Government  by  covert 
threats  into  suddenly  withdrawing  the  whole  personnel  of 
the  Residency.  Then  it  was  announced  by  sound  of  gong 
all  over  Burma  that  the  Sovereign  of  Land  and  Water,  by 
reason  of  his  great  might  and  glory,  had  caused  the  hated 
English  to  flee  from  his  sight,  and  would,  in  his  own  good 
time,  carry  the  great  peacock  flag  to  the  south,  and  plant  it 
once  more  on  the  shores  of  the  Gulf  of  Martaban. 

It  is  a  great  triumph  for  the  pdngyi's  son,  as  he  was 
nicknamed  when  it  was  safe  to  do  so,  and  it  will  be 
remembered  about  him  quite  as  long  as  the  fiendish  cruelty 
of  his  massacres.  We  have  certainly  not  done  with  Thibaw 
yet.  We  cannot  go  on  for  ever  keeping  strong  garrisons 
at  Thayet-myo  and  Toungoo,  our  frontier  stations,  where 
the  soldiers  have  little  else  to  do  but  die  of  fever  and 
cholera  and  heat-apoplexy.  Constant  scares  ruin  the  trade 
in  Rangoon,  and,  as  Lord  Ripon  says,  when  we  are  attacked 
in  our  mercantile  interests  we  are  wounded  in  our  most 
irritable  point.  The  abrogation  of  the  monopolies  is  little 
better  than  a  sham,  and  the  negotiations  for  a  new  treaty 
are  little  more  sincere.  Thibaw  will  not  receive  a  new 
Resident  in  the  Royal  City,  except  shoeless  and  practically 
lying  on  his  stomach.     We  can  hardly  agree  to  that  again. 

The  rupture  came  six  years  later,  brought  about  by 
secret  treatings  with  France  and  autocratic  dealings  with 
the  Bombay  Burma  Trading  Corporation.  The  Burmese 
kingdom  fell  with  the  suddenness  of  a  paralytic  stroke,  and 
King  Thibaw  was  a  prisoner  within  a  month  of  his  rejection 
of  the  British  ultimatum.  He  now  lives  forgotten  at 
Ratnagiri. 


CHAPTER    L 

KING   THIBAW 

III. A   KADAW   DAY 

"  The  princes,  the  governors,  and  the  captains,  the  judges, 
the  treasurers,  the  counsellors,  the  sheriffs,  and  all  the 
rulers  of  the  provinces  were  gathered  together  and  fell  down 
and  worshipped  at  what  time  they  heard  the  sound  of  the 
cornet,  flute,  harp,  sackbut,  psaltery,  dulcimer,  and  all  kinds 
of  music." 

That  is  an  exact  description  of  the  course  of  proceedings 
in  Mandalay  on  a  kadaw  day.  The  gentlemen  of  the  court 
and  band  as  aforesaid,  in  the  plain  of  Dura,  must  have  greatly 
resembled  Thibaw's  worshippers,  though  it  would  be  unfair 
to  compare  Nebuchadnezzar  with  the  feckless  last  king  of 
the  Burmans.  A  kadaw-n6  means,  literally  translated,  "  a 
beg-pardon  day."  On  such  occasions  all  the  officials,  the 
tributary  chiefs,  and  most  eminent  men  in  the  country  have 
to  come  to  the  palace  and  do  homage  and  worship  at  the 
Golden  Feet.  There  may  be  as  many  "  Beg-pardon  Days  " 
during  the  year  as  his  majesty  pleases,  but  the  most  regular 
and  best-attended,  as  well  as  the  most  brilliant,  are  always 
at  the  beginning  and  end  of  Lent,  which  extends,  roughly 
speaking,  from  June  to  October.  The  end  of  Lent  is  prob- 
ably the  greatest  occasion  of  all,  and  the  audience  sometimes, 
as  was  the  case  in  1880,  extends  over  three  days. 

During  Lent,  every  one  is  supposed  to  fast  and  be  pious 
and  improve  his  mind  generally.  On  the  conclusion  of  such 
a  period,  therefore,  it  is  fitting  that  all  loyal  subjects  should 
renew  their  allegiance  to  the  Great  Lord  of  Righteousness, 

471 


472  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap, 

and  prostrate  themselves  with  humble  regard  at  his  magni- 
ficent feet.  The  giving  of  presents  or  kadaw — no  one  can 
go  near  the  king  without  a  present — is  represented  as 
a  deprecatory  offering  to  avert  deserved  punishment  for 
offences. 

The  whole  town  is  enfite  on  such  occasions.  The  Lord 
Mayor's  show,  or  the  transformation  scene  in  a  pantomime, 
which  are  the  stay-at-home  Englishman's  idea  of  supreme 
magnificence,  are  as  nothing  compared  to  the  procession 
round  the  moat  which  encircles  the  city  walls.  Mingyis, 
Atwinwuns,  Sawbwas,  Myosas ;  oflScials  and  vassals  in 
formidable  numbers  and  with  terrible  names ;  each  man 
accompanied  and  adorned  with  his  utmost  possessions  in  the 
way  of  man,  beast,  gauds,  and  raiment,  file  proudly  round 
preparatory  to  entering  the  palace.  The  description  of  a 
prince's  order  of  going  may  suffice  to  give  an  idea  of  the 
whole.  First  come  the  lictors,  prancing  along  with  their 
fasces  and  hoarse  shoutings,  yelling  to  everybody  to  clear 
the  way,  regardless  of  the  fact  that  the  populace  is  all  down 
on  its  knees  by  the  side  of  the  road,  shikhoing  reverentially. 
They  are  about  half  a  dozen  in  number,  and  to  a  short-sighted 
man  appear  to  be  stark  naked.  A  closer  inspection  with  a 
glass,  however,  reveals  the  fact  that  they  have  some  regard 
for  decency,  if  they  have  little  for  anything  else.  Behind 
them  comes  the  family  band,  braying,  and  clashing,  and 
skirling  its  loudest.  Undisturbed  by  the  din,  stalk 
composedly  in  the  rear  half  a  dozen  elephants,  the  first 
couple  splendid  tuskers,  in  complete  war-array,  with  fighting 
howdahs  on  their  backs,  and  brilliant  housings  trailing  to  the 
ground  ;  the  second  pair  with  ordinary  furnishings,  and  the 
others  with  no  further  encumbrance  than  the  mahaut  on 
their  backs.  As  near  to  these  as  their  syces  can  persuade 
them  to  go,  caper  a  number  of  led  horses,  harnessed  with 
gay  scarlet  saddles,  and  saddle  flaps,  with  tassels  of  the  same 
colour  sweeping  the  earth.  Immediately  in  their  rear  is  a 
bright-hued  cloud  of  retainers,  armed  with  guns,  spears,  and 
swords,  and  many  carrying  fans  of  all  sorts  and  sizes. 
Floating  over  their  head  like  a  great  red  cloud,  is  the  prince's 
wide  satin-fringed  umbrella,  or  perhaps  it  may  be  a  gold  one, 
if  he  enjoys  his  master's  favour.      Then  there  is  a  rabble  of 


I.  KING  THIBAIV—A  KADAW  DAY  473 

body- servants,  carrying  a  gold -sheathed  sword,  a  velvet 
pillow,  spittoons,  betel -nut  boxes,  and  a  variety  of  other 
things  of  uses  more  or  less  obvious.  Last  of  all,  surrounded 
by  his  page  body-guard,  comes  the  mintha  himself,  reclining 
in  a  wan,  a  finely-carved  litter,  borne  by  many  shoulders. 
Many  of  the  officials  are,  of  course,  unable  to  make  such  a 
grand  display  as  this,  but  every  one  does  his  utmost  to 
surpass  his  fellows  in  some  point  or  other,  and  the  result  is 
a  spectacle  which  would  furnish  abundance  of  valuable 
notions  to  a  pantomime  scenic  artist  racking  his  brains  for 
novelties. 

All  the  retinue  is  left  outside  when  they  come  to  the 
palace  and  ascend  the  broad  flight  of  steps  flanked  by  the 
two  great  gilded  cannon,  and  approach  the  nandaw,  the 
magnificent  Hall  of  Audience.  At  stated  points  they  pay 
lowly  reverence  to  the  graceful  spire  which  rises  over  the 
throne  and  marks  the  centre  of  the  palace,  of  the  town,  of 
Burma,  and  therefore  of  the  universe.  Inside  the  nandaw 
each  man  has  his  special  place,  according  to  his  rank.  English- 
men being  ordinarily  told  off  with  ministers  of  the  third 
grade.      They  sit  there  and  smoke,  placidly  awaiting  events. 

The  Hall  of  Audience  is  a  fine  building  of  its  kind  ;  a 
long  columned  chamber,  open  on  three  sides,  with  gilt  and 
red  pillars,  and  a  profusion  of  ornaments.  The  walls  are 
made  gorgeous  with  bits  of  looking-glass,  porcelain,  fragments 
of  coloured  glass,  a  mosaic  of  queer  odds  and  ends  fastened 
on  with  a  resinous  gum.  This  style  of  ornamentation  is 
peculiarly  Burmese,  and  is  really  very  striking,  though  the 
materials  may  not  seem  promising.  The  effect  of  the  whole 
is  unique,  if  a  little  bewildering.  It  is  like  a  compound 
chromotrope  out  of  order.  But  close  inspection  gives  an 
impression  of  tawdriness,  and  the  national  Burmese  careless- 
ness appears  through  all.  Round  the  tops  of  the  wooden 
walls  runs  beautifully  carved  lattice-work,  but  some  of  it  has 
got  broken  in  one  place,  and  at  another  all  the  gilding  has 
come  off".  There  are  some  richly  ornamented  doors,  but 
hinges  have  not  been  available  when  they  were  put  up,  and 
they  swing  on  a  sort  of  ball  and  socket  contrivance  which 
serves  the  purpose,  but  makes  close-fitting  and  easy  move- 
ment impossible. 


474  THE  BURN  AN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

The  throne  stands  at  the  far  end  of  the  hall  on  a  high 
raised  dais.  It  diminishes  by  a  gradation  of  little  ledges  to 
mid-height,  and  then  similarly  expands,  like  one  notched 
pyramid  thrust  down  on  another.  Those  of  the  royal  blood 
sit  ordinarily  in  front  on  either  side  of  the  dais,  but  there  are 
lamentably  few  of  the  royal  blood  nowadays. 

Every  one  is  collected  now.  The  scene  is  such  as  can 
be  seen  nowhere  in  the  world  but  in  Burma,  and  in  Burma 
only  in  perfection  in  the  Hall  of  Audience.  A  Burmese 
crowd  is  always  a  gay  sight,  but  when  all  the  highest  in  the 
land  have  assembled  in  the  ydndaw,  it  is  magnificent.  The 
Tennysonian  "  wind-stirred  tulip  beds  "  is  a  tempting  phrase, 
but  it  hardly  seems  sufficient.  A  stirabout  of  rainbows  has 
an  oriental  sound  about  it,  and  perhaps  more  fitly  suggests 
the  brilliant  contrasts  of  colour.  What  a  magnificent  sight 
it  must  be  from  the  throne ;  the  eye  passing  over  the  gaily 
dressed  figures,  every  face  bent  low  to  the  ground,  down  the 
broad  steps,  and  through  the  towering  eastern  gate,  over 
spires  and  pagodas  away  to  the  shaggy  dark  Shan  hills 
beyond,  like  the  entries  to  King  Arthur's  palace  that 

Open'd  from  the  hall 
At  one  end  one,  that  gave  upon  a  range 
Of  level  pavement  where  the  king  would  pace 
At  sunrise,  gazing  over  plain  and  wood  ; 
And  down  from  this  a  lordly  stairway  sloped 
Till  lost  in  blowing  trees  and  tops  of  towers. 

Little  wonder  the  king  of  Burma  thinks  himself  a  deity. 

Meanwhile  the  collected  worshippers  smoke  cheroots  and 
chew  betel,  and  talk  freely.  Suddenly  a  little  bell  tinkles, 
and  every  one  is  grovelling  on  his  stomach  in  a  second.  A 
purple  curtain  is  drawn  aside,  and  down  a  long  corridor,  laid 
with  crimson  and  gold  carpet,  the  Sovereign  of  Life  and 
Death  comes  with  a  hurried,  uneven  step.  He  is  in  full  regal 
dress,  and  the  broad  gold  shoulder-belt  of  the  salwe  and  the 
towering  jewelled  crown  on  his  head,  seem  to  weigh  heavily 
on  him  as  he  ascends  wearily  to  the  throne.  Now  comes 
the  presentation  of  the  kadaw.  The  actual  presents  are  all 
lying  tumbled  in  a  heap  somewhere,  and  his  majesty  prob- 
ably never  sees  them  at  all.  Lists  are  made  out  on  palm- 
leaf,  scratched  on  with  a  sharp-pointed  style,  and  these  are 


I.  KING  THIBAW—A  KADAW  DAY  475 

brought  up  by  a  thandawgan.  The  sight  is  in  every  way  a 
remarkable  one,  and  quite  in  keeping  with  the  semi-barbaric 
character  of  the  surroundings.  The  herald  starts  from  the 
eastern  gate,  about  three  hundred  yards  off,  and  in  full  view 
from  the  hall  the  whole  way.  Across  the  wide  open  space 
between  the  outer  and  inner  stockades,  and  up  between  the 
gilded  cannon  he  comes,  with  a  fantastic,  prancing  gait, 
waving  the  palm-leaves  at  arm's  length,  and  bowing  lowly 
to  the  ground  at  every  ten  paces.  Up  the  steps  and  between 
a  long  double  line  of  the  gorgeously  uniformed  ahmudan, 
and  the  blue-jacketed  marines  with  the  anchor  on  their 
spiked  helmets,  all  presenting  arms.  Throughout  the  whole 
ceremony,  the  courtiers  within  the  hall,  at  intervals  of  a 
minute  or  less,  raise  a  long-drawn  shout  of  paya — a  word 
expressive  of  deity.  When  at  last  the  thandawgan  reaches 
the  throne  he  bows  thrice,  deposits  the  palm -leaves 
reverentially,  and  lies  prone.  They  are  read  out  in  part,  or 
altogether,  or  not  at  all,  according  to  his  majesty's  pleasure. 
Then  he  commences  to  talk.  He  is  much  more  fluent  in  a 
grand  audience  than  he  is  at  a  private  interview.  He  asks 
one  minister  how  the  lottery  under  his  charge  is  filling  up  ; 
another  what  news  there  is  from  the  army  now  fighting 
against  the  Shans  :  a  French  engineer  is  questioned  with 
regard  to  some  works  going  on  in  the  royal  gardens  ;  a 
governor  of  a  remote  province  enjoined  to  be  regular  in 
collecting  the  ngwedaw,  the  royal  tax.  His  monastic  studies 
have  given  him  command  of  a  copious  fund  of  lofty  moral 
sayings,  and  these  he  scatters  about  freely,  and  sends  away 
aspirants  to  the  royal  favour  exultant  in  the  feeling  that 
some  golden  words  have  been  addressed,  if  not  to  them 
directly,  at  any  rate  to  some  one  near  them  in  the  row. 
An  audience  occasionally  lasts  a  couple  of  hours,  so  that 
Europeans,  if  they  are  at  all  stiff  in  the  joints,  are  apt  to  get 
frightfully  cramped,  and  afford  unrighteous  amusement  to 
malicious  old  wuns  by  their  uneasy  attempts  to  find  a  more 
comfortable  arrangement  of  their  legs.  Such  receptions  are, 
therefore,  not  in  favour  with  Englishmen,  except  those  who 
may  be  in  the  royal  service,  or  who  are  negotiating  for  a 
grant  of  some  kind,  and  therefore  wish  to  be  well  with  his 
majesty.     The  king  smokes  a  gigantic  white  cheroot  all  the 


476  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS     chap,  l 

time,  and  chews  betel  simultaneously,  making  up  the  morsel 
himself  very  often.  Many  of  those  in  the  hall  smoke  also, 
but  the  operation  cannot  be  conducted  with  any  great 
degree  of  comfort  when  your  nose  is  close  to  the  nether 
extremity  of  the  spine  of  the  man  in  front  of  you.  In 
former  days  pipes  were  often  smoked,  but  the  bowls  were 
always  thrust  through  holes  in  the  floor  made  for  the 
purpose. 

Thibaw's  apparent  affability  at  these  public  audiences 
counteracts  the  effect  of  any  other  habits  he  may  have,  not 
so  favourably  viewed  by  Buddhists,  and  there  are,  perhaps, 
not  a  few  of  his  subjects  with  whom  he  is  possibly  more 
popular  than  any  king  of  Burma  has  been  since  the  days  of 
Alaungpaya  the  founder  of  the  dynasty.  His  faults  are 
thought  to  be  those  of  his  ministers  and  advisers.  His  easy- 
going indolence  is  the  end  of  the  desire  of  all  his  race.  But 
it  is  not  likely  that  his  reign  will  be  long.  There  is  too  much 
scheming  and  plotting  going  on  in  Mandalay  just  now  for 
that.  If  Thibaw  dies  a  sovereign  he  will  be  lucky.  In 
the  meantime  the  king  rises  and  disappears  behind  the 
purple  curtain.  The  durbar  disperses  immediately.  The 
worshippers  return  home  rejoicing  and  damn  the  king's 
enemies. 


CHAPTER    LI 

THE   PALACE 

The  palace  of  Mandalay  lies  in  the  centre  of  the  four-square 
city,  like  the  innermost  of  a  series  of  Chinese  carved  boxes. 
The  capital  is  a  city  within  a  city.  The  greater  part  of  the 
wide  plain  from  the  Irrawaddy  to  the  Shan  hills,  a  space  of 
about  five  miles  broad  and  as  many  long,  down  to  the 
D6tta  wadi,  the  Amarapura  river,  is  laid  out  in  wide  roads 
running  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  with  abundance  of 
houses  of  all  kinds,  from  the  brick  house  of  the  Chinaman, 
with  its  cumbrous  tiles  that  bend  in  the  rafters,  and  the 
white-plastered,  flat-roofed  habitation  of  the  Mogul  or  Surati 
merchant,  to  the  wood  or  bamboo  dwelling  of  the  Burman. 
They  are  not  very  close  together,  but  there  is  plenty  of 
space,  and  every  house  has  its  patch  of  garden,  or  clump  of 
plantain  trees,  and  its  wide  court  where  the  buffaloes  and  the 
ox-cart  can  be  disposed  comfortably.  But  these  only  form 
the  suburbs.  The  Myo,  the  city  proper  of  Mandalay,  is  a 
huge  walled  square,  each  face  a  mile  and  an  eighth  long.  The 
mud  brick  built  walls  are  nearly  thirty  feet  high  and  about 
three  thick,  backed  with  a  heavy  mass  of  earth,  but  though 
they  would  be  hard  to  batter  down,  there  are  no  guns 
mounted  for  their  defence  on  the  bastions  which  rise  at 
intervals  of  about  two  hundred  yards,  each  surmounted  by  an 
open-sided  teak  pavilion,  carved  in  the  usual  gabled,  joss- 
house,  spire-like  fashion.  The  crest  of  the  parapet  is  deeply 
denticulated,  with  no  other  apparent  advantage  than  that 
of  ornament.  There  are  twelve  gates  to  the  city,  three  on 
each  side,  but  only  one  bridge  to  each  three  over  the  moat, 
except  on  the  west,  where  there  are  two,  one  opposite  the 

477 


478  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

amingala  or  south-west  gate,  specially  reserved  for  the 
passage  of  funerals.  Outside  every  gate  is  a  post  bearing 
the  name  and  emblem  of  the  gate,  the  latter  being  the  signs 
of  the  zodiac.  Sixty  feet,  or  thereabouts,  from  the  walls, 
runs  all  round  a  deep  moat,  about  fifty  yards  broad,  covered 
in  many  places  with  the  lotus  plant  that  the  Buddhist  loves. 
Here  and  there  upon  it  float  a  number  of  royal  craft,  state 
barges,  and  despatch  boats,  some  of  them  richly  gilded,  with 
the  kalawaik,  the  crane,  carved  on  the  stern,  others  foundered 
and  lying  rotting,  with  their  lofty  sterns  rising  high  in  the 
air.  Covering  each  gate  is  a  traverse,  or  crenelated  barbican, 
of  the  same  construction  as  the  walls.  Inside,  the  streets  of 
the  city  run  parallel  to  the  walls.  They  are  wide  and  fairly 
well  kept  wherever  the  king  is  likely  to  pass,  but  there  is 
no  attempt  at  metalling.  Young  trees  line  the  sides,  and 
down  most  of  them  run  little  streams  of  water.  There  is  no 
attempt  at  a  drainage  system,  but  the  town  is  essentially 
clean  and  airy,  the  pigs  and  pariah  dogs  acting  as  scavengers, 
and  the  constant  open  spaces  ensuring  ventilation.  Right 
in  the  centre  is  the  palace,  which  has  two  successive  en- 
closures. The  outer  is  a  quarter  of  a  mile  square,  and 
consists  of  a  high  teak  palisade,  very  massive  and  compact. 
Within  this  is  a  wide  open  space  laid  out  as  an  esplanade, 
inside  of  which  is  a  brick  wall,  edged  round  a  great  part  of 
the  way  by  the  houses  of  high  ministers  and  court  officials. 
The  outer  court  has  four  gates,  each  presided  over  by  a 
special  commander ;  the  north,  or  water  gate,  being  only 
available  for  the  royal  barges.  Except  for  members  of  the 
palace  household,  there  is  only  admittance  to  the  inner 
enclosure  by  the  gate  on  the  eastern  face.  There  is  a  special 
portal  in  the  centre  here,  opened  only  for  the  king,  and  none 
but  the  Lord  of  the  Golden  Throne  may  use  it.  All  else 
must  enter  by  the  taga-ni,  the  red  postern,  a  cramped  little 
gateway,  which  makes  the  smallest  man  involuntarily  bend 
his  head  as  he  approaches  the  golden  palace.  The  front  of 
the  building  is  decorated  with  gilding  and  tinsel  work,  which 
looks  well  when  it  is  new,  but  after  the  rainy  seasons  would 
be  better  not  there  at  all.  To  the  left  is  the  Hlutdaw, 
the  Hall  oif  the  Supreme  Council,  a  detached  structure,  raised 
some  feet  off  the  ground,  and  perfectly  open  ;  the  roof,  richly 


LI  THE  PALACE  479 

carved  with  flowers  and  figures,  and  adorned  with  the  usual 
flamboyant  pinnacles,  supported  on  massive  teak  pillars, 
painted  vermilion  colour  at  the  base,  and  gilt  higher  up. 
Straight  ahead  is  the  great  Hall  of  Audience,  a  colonnade,  or 
columned  arcade,  extending  along  the  entire  eastern  front, 
and  opening  directly  upon  it.  At  the  end  of  a  pillared  vista 
stands  the  throne,  on  a  dais,  reached  by  five  steps  from  the 
level  of  the  hall.  The  top  is  a  cushioned  ledge,  like  the  box 
in  a  theatre.  Just  over  the  throne,  and  in  the  centre  of  the 
palace,  which  is  the  centre  of  the  city,  which  is  the  centre  of 
Burma,  which  is  the  Turanian  "  hub  "  of  the  world,  rises  the 
seven-roofed  spire,  emblematic  of  royalty  and  religion.  The 
princes  of  the  highest  rank  sit  in  front  to  the  right  of  the 
throne ;  those  of  the  blood-royal,  but  not  so  closely  con- 
nected, to  the  left.  Then  in  regular  gradation,  opposite  one 
another,  the  wungyi,  atwinwuns,  wundauks,  and  the  minor 
officials.  On  either  side  of  the  hall  of  audience  and  behind 
are  a  number  of  minor  throne-rooms,  not  rooms  in  the  English 
sense  of  the  word,  but  simply  open  roofed  spaces,  separated 
from  each  other  by  skirtings  of  planking,  covered  with  gold- 
leaf,  and  supported  by  a  multitude  of  teak  pillars,  dyed  for 
the  greater  part  of  their  height  a  deep  red.  Some  rooms 
are  almost  entirely  gilt,  others  are  adorned  with  wall-paintings, 
others,  again,  with  the  favourite  mosaic  of  bits  of  mirror  and 
coloured  glass,  framed  in  a  gilt  network.  Every  room  is 
furnished  with  one  or  more  stands  of  arms  ;  there  is  a  rack 
of  sadly  ill-cared-for  muskets  round  the  throne  itself.  The 
palace  is,  in  fact,  a  gigantic  armoury.  All  the  cannon  and 
guns  in  the  country  are  kept  there.  Hence  it  is  that  when 
the  palace  is  taken  by  a  usurper,  the  country  is  conquered. 
The  abundance  of  gold-leaf  ought  to  make  the  effect  splendid, 
but  the  quantity  of  alloy  there  is  in  the  gilding  makes  it 
speedily  lose  its  glitter,  and  the  general  impression  is  that  of 
dinginess,  if  not  indeed  of  actual  slip-shod  tawdriness.  But 
to  be  seen  at  its  best  the  palace  should  be  visited  on  a  great 
beg-pardon  day,  when  the  rough  plank  floors  are  covered 
with  gorgeous  rugs  and  carpets,  and  the  halls  are  filled  with 
officials  dressed  in  all  the  hues  of  the  rainbow. 

There  are  a  variety  of  matters  to  be  carefully  observed 
by  all  who  enter,  or  have  anything  to  do  with  the  palace. 


48o  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Best  known  is  the  regulation  with  regard  to  the  wearing  of 
shoes.  Burmans  must  remove  them  as  soon  as  they  enter 
the  palace  enclosure,  just  as  they  would  on  going  inside  of 
the  parawun  of  a  pagoda  or  a  monastery.  Englishmen 
and  white  foreigners  generally  are  required  to  take  off  their 
boots  whenever  they  begin  to  ascend  a  step — the  whole 
palace  and  all  the  buildings  near  it  being  on  a  brick  platform 
some  ten  feet  or  more  above  the  level  of  the  ground.  There 
are  always  a  number  of  dancers  and  jugglers  and  loiterers 
about  the  royal  buildings,  and  the  necessity  of  being  sepa- 
rated from  your  shoes  sometimes  leads  to  the  loss  of  them 
altogether.  It  is  on  record  that  a  British  Resident  incurred 
this  misfortune,  and  had  to  make  the  best  of  his  way,  partly 
in  a  pair  of  Burman  sandals,  and  partly  on  his  stocking  soles 
— as  being  preferable — to  the  outside  of  the  teak  stockade 
where  his  pony  was  waiting  for  him. 

Another  ceremony  is  that  of  shekhoing  to  the  spire,  the 
external  emblem  of  the  throne.  All  Burmans  must  do  this 
at  each  of  the  gates,  at  the  foot  of  the  steps,  and  at  intervals 
in  between,  according  to  loyalty,  or  the  supposed  friendly 
or  hostile  attitude  of  lookers-on.  All  the  early  English 
ambassadors  had  to  conform  to  this  regulation,  notably 
Cox  and  Baker,  the  latter  dropping  on  his  knees.  After  an 
intermediate  stage  of  taking  off  their  hats,  permission  was 
gained  to  dispense  with  everything  but  the  removal  of  shoes 
and  sword.  But  the  court  rejoices  in  the  fact  that  no  one 
can  pass  through  the  red  postern  without  bending  his  head, 
regulations  or  no  regulations. 

No  arms  whatever  can  be  taken  into  the  palace,  not  even 
— perhaps  I  should  say,  least  even,  in  view  of  conspiracies — 
by  the  royal  princes.  Similarly,  all  umbrellas  must  be  left 
at  the  outer  gate  of  the  palace,  except  by  members  of  the 
royal  household,  who  may  carry  them  to  the  foot  of  the 
steps  of  the  audience  hall.  Common  people  must  lower  them 
when  they  pass  any  of  the  gates  outside.  Arrest,  or  rough 
handling  by  the  guards,  would  be  the  infallible  result  of  non- 
compliance. Another  rule  is  that  you  must  take  no  money 
out  of  the  palace.     You  may  take  in  as  much  as  you  please. 

No  one  in  the  palace,  or  indeed  in  the  whole  town,  must 
sleep  otherwise  than  with  his  feet  turned  outwards  from  the 


LI  THE  PALACE  481 

spire.  To  show  the  soles  of  the  feet  to  the  throne  is  high 
treason.  This  is  awkward  for  the  inhabitants  of  some 
quarters,  for  there  is  a  rule  applying  to  all  Buddhists,  that 
they  must  not  place  their  feet  towards  the  east,  where  the 
sun  rises  and  whence  the  next  Buddha,  Arimadeya,  will 
come,  nor  to  the  west,  where  the  bawdi  bin  stands,  or  stood, 
the  tree  under  which  Shin  Gautama  attained  the  supreme 
wisdom.  The  superstition  is  probably  derived  from  the 
Brahmins,  who  threaten  grievous  dangers  to  the  man  who 
places  his  feet  on  the  shadow  of  a  dewa,  a  king,  a  teacher, 
a  saint,  or  another  man's  wife. 

The  frequent  change  of  locality  of  the  palace,  and  there- 
fore of  the  capital,  is  a  peculiarity  of  Burma.  There  are 
about  a  score  of  towns  in  the  country  which  have  been 
at  one  time  or  other  the  metropolis.  Such  are  Tagaung, 
Old  Pagan,  and  Shwebo,  above  Mandalay ;  Prome  (under 
the  title  Tharekettara),  Pagan,  Sagaing,  Ava,  and  Amara- 
pura,  below  it.  The  last  two  are  the  best  known  ;  indeed 
some  people  to  the  present  day  persist  in  talking  of  the 
"  Kingdom  of  Ava,"  though  that  once  brilliant  capital  has 
been  little  better  than  a  jungle  for  a  great  many  years, 
and  the  lines  of  the  old  walls  can  only  be  traced  with 
difficulty. 

It  is  hardly  correct  to  say,  as  most  writers  on  Burma 
have  hitherto  done,  that  with  a  new  king  there  should  be  a 
new  capital.  This  has  very  frequently  been  the  case,  but 
the  matter  does  not  altogether  depend  upon  the  accession  of 
a  new  sovereign.  It  is  brought  about  by  a  very  much  more 
gruesome  (the  word  is  used  advisedly)  circumstance.  On 
the  foundation  of  a  new  capital,  there  are  always  a  certain 
number  of  people  buried  alive.  The  idea  is  that  they 
become  nat-thein,  that  their  spirits  haunt  the  place  where 
they  were  put  to  death,  and  attack  all  persons  approaching 
with  malevolent  intentions.  The  notion  is  entirely  due  to 
the  royal  astrologers,  the  Brahmin  pdnnas,  and  as  being 
repugnant  to  the  tenets  of  Buddhism,  is  strenuously  denounced 
by  the  true  brethren  of  the  yellow  robe.  But  it  fits  in  very 
well  with  the  popular  superstition  regarding  the  existence  of 
spirits,  and  has  hence  always  firmly  maintained  its  ground. 
It  is  a  matter    of  common   knowledge    that   this  idea   of 

2  I 


482  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

sanctifying  a  building  with  human  sacrifices  is  a  notion 
which  has  prevailed  in  all  parts  of  the  world  at  different 
times,  and  instances  of  horrors  of  the  kind  are  not  unknown 
in  Europe. 

The  virtue  of  the  sacrifices  only  lasts  a  certain  time,  and 
when  it  is  gone  a  new  city  should  be  built.  There  are 
certain  signs,  added  to  public  disasters,  which  point  out  to 
the  initiated  when  this  alteration  of  site  should  take  place. 
Mandalay  was  commenced  in  1858,  and  two  years  later  the 
seat  of  government  was  transferred  from  Amarapura,  some 
five  or  six  miles  down  the  river.  When  the  foundations  of 
the  city  wall  were  laid,  fifty-two  persons  of  both  sexes,  and 
of  various  age  and  rank,  were  consigned  to  a  living  tomb. 
Three  were  buried  under  each  of  the  twelve  city  gates,  one 
at  each  of  the  four  corners,  one  under  each  of  the  palace 
gates,  and  at  the  corners  of  the  timber  stockade,  and  four 
under  the  throne  itself.  The  selection  had  to  be  made  with 
care,  for  the  victims  were  required  to  be  representative 
people,  born  on  special  days  of  the  week,  and  the  boys 
buried  were  not  to  have  any  tattoo  marks  on  them,  the  girls 
not  to  have  their  ears  bored.  When  it  was  known  that  the 
troops  were  making  the  collection,  no  one  was  to  be  seen 
about  the  streets,  except  in  great  bands  in  the  middle  of  the 
day.  The  government  gave  a  series  of  magnificent  dramatic 
performances,  but  no  one  went  to  see  them.  Eventually, 
however,  the  tale  was  made  up,  and  the  building  went  on 
apace.  Along  with  the  four  human  beings  buried  at  the 
corners  of  the  city  were  placed  four  jars  full  of  oil,  carefully 
covered  over  and  protected  from  any  damage  that  might 
come  from  the  weight  of  earth  pressing  down  upon  them. 
These  were  examined  every  seven  years  by  the  royal  astrolo- 
gers, and  as  long  as  they  remained  intact  the  town  was 
considered  safe. 

At  the  third  examination  in  1880,  however,  it  was  found 
that  the  oil  in  two  of  the  jars  was  either  completely  dried 
up  or  had  leaked  out.  One  was  pretty  far  gone,  and  the 
fourth  alone  remained  in  a  tolerably  satisfactory  state.  At 
this  very  time,  the  January  and  February  of  1880,  a  terrible 
scourge  of  smallpox  was  decimating  the  town,  and  two  ot 
the  royal  house,  King  Thibaw's  infant  son,  his  only  child, 


THE  PALACE  483 


and  the  ex-Pagan  Min,  the  cock-fighting  king,  had  fallen 
victims.  This  was  bad  enough,  but  other  signs  portending 
evil  had  happened.  One  of  the  most  valued  of  the  crown 
jewels,  the  Nansin  Baddamya,  had  disappeared,  a  huge  ruby, 
cherished  as  emblematic  of  the  fortune  of  the  dynasty  since 
the  days  of  Alaungpaya.  A  tiger  in  the  royal  gardens 
escaped  from  his  cage,  a  most  ominous  circumstance,  not  for 
the  poor  wretch  whom  he  killed  and  half  ate  before  he  could 
be  recaptured,  but  for  the  city  and  the  entire  kingdom. 
The  appearance  of  wild  animals  in  a  town  is  a  sign  that  it 
will  speedily  turn  to  a  wilderness.  It  was  the  discovery  of 
a  tiger  and  some  deer  in  the  environs  of  Amarapura  which 
decided  the  fate  of  that  "  City  of  the  Immortals."  All  these 
circumstances,  coupled  with  the  outward  and  visible  sign  of 
the  wrath  of  the  spirits  in  the  shape  of  the  plague  of  small- 
pox, decided  the  p6nnas  at  once.  It  was  no  use  filling  the 
jars  with  oil  again,  or  putting  in  fresh  ones.  Such  parsi- 
monious measures  would  be  considerably  worse  than  useless. 
A  full  conclave  of  the  astrologers  voted  by  a  large  majority 
for  the  change  of  the  capital.  This,  however,  neither  the 
ministers  nor  Thibaw  Min  would  hear  of.  Mandalay  is 
very  different  from  Amarapura  and  Ava.  There  are  too 
many  solid  brick  houses  and  mills  and  public  manufactories 
— none  of  them  working,  it  is  true,  but  too  costly  to  be 
abandoned — in  the  present  capital  to  admit  of  its  being 
thrown  over  in  the  old  casual  way,  when  a  royal  order  forced 
everybody  to  migrate,  on  pain  of  imprisonment  or  death. 
The  p6nnas  therefore  held  another  meeting,  and  it  was 
decided  that  the  only  other  alternative  was  the  offering  of 
propitiatory  sacrifices.  At  the  instance  of  the  P6nna  Wun, 
a  truculent  old  villain,  it  was  resolved  that  the  number 
should  be  the  highest  possible :  a  hundred  men,  a  hundred 
women,  a  hundred  boys,  a  hundred  girls,  a  hundred  soldiers, 
and  a  hundred  foreigners.  This  the  king  agreed  to,  and  a 
royal  mandate  was  signed,  and  arrests  forthwith  commenced. 
A  frightful  panic  spread  in  Mandalay  after  the  first  day. 
Every  steamer  leaving  the  capital  was  crowded  to  suffoca- 
tion, boats  went  down  the  river  in  dozens,  and  there  seemed 
every  possibility  that  Mandalay  would  be  deserted.  Then 
the    ministers    took    fright    at    the    indignation    which    the 


484  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      chap,  li 

announced  massacres  caused  in  England,  and  the  whole 
thing  was  countermanded  and  denied.  But  upwards  of  a 
hundred  people  had  been  arrested,  and  some  of  these,  when 
liberated  months  afterwards,  declared  that  in  the  dark  nights 
of  terror,  when  no  one  ventured  about  Mandalay  streets, 
-people  were  buried  under  each  of  the  posts  at  the  twelve 
gates,  as  a  compromise  between  the  fear  of  the  spirits  and 
the  fear  that  the  English  troops  would  cross  the  frontier. 
Each  of  these  posts  bears  an  image  of  an  animal  from  one 
of  the  seals  of  the  king,  and  before  the  post  sits  a  figure  of 
a  bilu,  with  a  thick  club,  to  act  as  watchman,  in  case  the 
human  guard  should  go  to  sleep.  As  Burman  sentries 
generally  sleep  sounder  than  other  people,  the  propitiation 
of  these  spirits  at  any  rate  was  a  very  imperative  precau- 
tion. Whether  the  oil-jars  were  filled  and  reburied  alone  is 
a  dark  mystery.  But  the  smallpox  left  Mandalay,  and  the 
place  is  as  happy  as  ever  it  was,  which,  however,  is  not 
saying  much. 

The  British  town  of  Mandalay  is  very  different  from 
that  described.  The  Palace  stockade  has  gone,  and  with 
it  very  many  of  the  suites  of  apartments,  notably  in  the 
women's  quarter.  The  Hall  of  Audience  for  a  time  was 
converted  into  a  Tamil  Mission  chapel ;  the  Hlutdaw  into  a 
hideous  collection  of  clerks'  offices.  This  has  been  changed 
owing  to  the  indignant  protests  of  English  visitors.  Most 
of  the  Palace  Halls  are  now  empty  :  even  the  Upper  Burma 
Club  has  been  turned  out. 

The  old  City  has  now  become  cantonments  with  a  few 
scattered  barracks,  officers'  quarters,  and  wide  stretches  of  grass. 
What  formerly  constituted  the  suburbs  is  now  Mandalay 
town.  The  former  execrable  roads  are  now  among  the  best 
in  Burma.  But  many  of  the  notable  buildings,  the  elaborate 
monasteries,  and  gilt  shrines  have  been  burnt.  Mandalay  is 
certainly  a  dwindling  town  ;  the  only  question  is  how  long  it 
will  remain  the  second  town  in  Burma. 


CHAPTER   LII 

THE    LORD    WHITE    ELEPHANT 

The  importance  attached  to  the  possession  of  a  white 
elephant  is  traceable  to  the  Buddhist  system.  The  form  in 
which  Gautama  Buddha  entered  the  womb  of  Queen  Maya 
to  be  born  upon  earth  for  the  last  time  to  "teach  the  Law 
and  give  the  millions  peace"  was  that  of  a  white  elephant. 
The  Saddan,  or  celestial  elephant,  was  an  avatar  of  his 
many  existences  previously.  The  Saddan  is  gifted  with 
special  endowments,  and  is  one  of  the  seven  precious  things 
the  possession  of  which  marks  the  Sekyawad6,  the  Maha 
Chakra  Vartti  Raja,  "the  great  wheel-turning  king,"  the 
holy  and  universal  sovereign — a  ruler  who  appears  in  once  a 
cycle,  at  the  time  when  the  waxing  and  waning  term  of 
human  life  has  reached  its  maximum  of  an  athinkaya  (a 
huge  period  represented  by  a  unit  and  164  cyphers)  in 
duration.  Thus  the  possession  of  an  undoubted  white 
elephant  stands  as  a  sign  and  symbol  of  universal  sove- 
reignty ;  and  every  Burmese  king  longed  for  the  capture  of 
such  a  treasure  during  his  reign  as  a  token  that  his  legiti- 
mate royalty  is  recognised  by  the  unseen  powers^  The 
great  river  of  Burma,  the  Irrawaddy,  is  named  from  Aira- 
wata,  the  elephant  of  Indra,  a  sufficient  assertion  of  the 
proper  dwelling-place  of  all  his  successors.  Hence  the 
reverence  of  the  Hindoos  for  the  animal,  and  their  not  in- 
frequent pilgrimages  to  Mandalay  to  see  the  royal  creature 
and  have  a  dursun,  or  interview  of  worship,  with  him. 

All  the  elephants  in  the  country,  whether  wild  or  tame, 
belonged  to  the  king  :  whoever  captured  one  had  to  give 
him  up  to  the  king,  and  he  granted  permission  to  the  princes 
and  to  a  few  of  the  higher  dignitaries  to  use  them.     The 

48s 


486  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

lucky  discoverer  of  a  white  elephant  was  made  a  mingyi,  and 
was  exempted  from  taxes  and  burdens  of  every  kind  for  the 
rest  of  his  life.  Red  and  spotted  elephants  were  also  held 
in  great  esteem. 

White  crows,  rats,  mice,  and  hares  are  common  and 
easily  distinguished  ;  but  it  is  different  with  a  white  elephant. 
He  is  not  to  be  considered  as  snow-white :  very  far  from  it. 
All  the  white  elephants  now  existing  in  Siam  and  Burma 
are  of  a  light  mouse  colour,  somewhat  of  the  same  tint  as 
the  pale  freckles  to  be  found  on  the  trunk  of  almost  every 
ordinary  elephant.  This  light  grey  is  uniform  all  over,  the 
spots  on  the  trunk  being  white.  The  depth  of  the  colour, 
however,  varies  greatly ;  and  there  are  often  blemishes  in 
the  shape  of  darker  patches  which  would  seem  to  ruin  an 
otherwise  eligible  candidate's  claims.  It  has  been  therefore 
found  necessary  to  determine  some  infallible  test  points, 
which  will  demonstrate  the  right  of  the  animal  to  his  title. 
Determining  white  elephants  is  quite  a  science,  and  there  is 
a  very  considerable  literature  on  the  subject.  The  Burmese 
skilled  men  fix  upon  two  of  these  tests  as  superior  to  all 
others.  One  is  that  the  elephant  shall  have  five  toe-nails 
on  his  hind  feet  instead  of  four.  This  is  a  good  way  of 
making  certain,  but  occasionally  there  are  indubitably  black 
elephants  which  have  the  sacred  number  of  toes.  These 
are  white  elephants  debased  by  sin,  labouring  under  the 
evil  kan  of  previous  existences,  and  therefore  ineligible  for 
the  honours  accorded  to  the  real  animal.  The  other  test  is 
considered  perfectly  decisive,  no  matter  what  the  precise  tint 
of  the  skin  may  be.  It  is  this :  if  you  pour  water  upon  a 
"  white  "  elephant  he  turns  red,  while  a  black  elephant  only 
becomes  blacker  than  ever.  This  is  the  final  test  always 
resorted  to  in  Mandalay.  A  swarthy  specimen  who  had 
twenty  toe-nails  and  turned  red  when  he  was  washed  would  be 
forthwith  installed  in  all  the  honours  and  emoluments  of  the 
Sinbyudaw,  no  matter  what  scoffers  might  say  about  his 
colour.  Such  a  creature  was  the  last  Lord  White  Elephant 
in  Mandalay.  He  would  not  have  been  recognised  as  an 
albino  by  any  except  those  who  are  learned  in  the  science 
and  well  versed  in  the  voluminous  and  puzzling  minutiae  of 
the  question.     To  most  people  he  seemed  an  impostor,  for 


HI  THE  LORD  WHITE  ELEPHANT  487 

his  colour  was  a  mixture  of  light-brown  and  dingy,  smoke- 
smirched  cream  colour.  The  eye,  when  you  know  it,  is 
perhaps  the  best  rough  test  for  an  amateur.  The  iris  ought  to 
be  yellow,  with  a  reddish  outer  annulus.  The  effect  of  this 
is  decisive  to  the  connoisseur,  if  only  sinister  to  the  outsider. 
But  the  red  ring  represents  the  circle  of  the  nine  precious 
gems.  In  other  respects  the  Sinbyudaw  was  not  attractive 
in  appearance  ;  he  was  very  big,  but,  notwithstanding  the 
care  taken  of  him,  was  remarkably  lean  and  hollow-sided. 
His  tusks,  however,  were  magnificent — white,  smooth,  and 
curving  forward  in  front  of  his  trunk  so  that  they  almost  met. 
In  his  young  days  he  was  suckled  by  women,  who  stood  in 
a  long  row  outside  his  palace,  and  the  honour  was  eagerly 
sought  after,  for  the  creature  was  a  national  pride  and  not 
merely  a  royal  monopoly.  A  hundred  soldiers  guarded  his 
palace,  and  the  Sovereign  of  the  Golden  Throne  himself 
made  offerings  and  paid  him  reverence.  An  establishment 
of  thirty  men  waited  on  him,  and  among  them  was  a  Minister 
of  State,  who  managed  his  affairs  and  looked  after  the 
revenues  of  the  province  that  was  assigned  to  him  to  "  eat." 
His  palace  stood  within  the  inner  stockade  and  was  decorated 
with  the  royal  pya-that.  Every  day  he  was  bathed  with 
scented  sandal  water,  and  all  his  vessels  and  utensils  were 
made  of  gold.  Troupes  of  the  palace  coryphees  danced  for  his 
pleasure,  and  there  were  choruses  of  sweet-voiced  singers  to 
lull  him  to  sleep. 

Nevertheless  his  lordship  was  very  bad-tempered,  and 
his  attendants  were  much  afraid  of  him.  Such  things  are, 
however,  not  unknown  with  human  kings.  On  one  occasion 
the  Sinbyudaw  killed  a  man  who  had  ventured  too  near,  and 
there  was  a  good  deal  of  trouble  and  noise  before  the  body 
could  be  got  away  from  him.  The  king — Thibaw's  father — 
heard  the  commotion,  and  inquired  what  was  the  matter. 
When  he  was  told,  he  expressed  great  concern  and  not  a 
little  alarm  for  the  future  state  of  the  Lord  White  Elephant, 
with  the  red  stain  of  murder  on  him,  blotting  out  hosts  of 
previous  good  deeds.  But  the  elephant's  minister  calmed  his 
mind  and  restored  him  to  equanimity  by  saying,  "  Pray  do 
not  be  disturbed,  paya  ;  lu  ma  h6k  bu  kala — it  was  not  a 
man   only  a  foreigner." 


488  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Probably  because  he  was  so  vicious,  the  last  Lord  White 
Elephant  was  never  ridden,  as  previous  incumbents  were. 
No  one  but  the  king  himself  could  have  ridden  him  ;  and 
latterly  King  Mind6n  became  very  fat  and  feeble,  while  King 
Thibaw's  nerves  were  not  strong  enough.  The  Sinbyudaw 
is  king  of  elephants,  and  therefore  none  but  a  king  might 
mount  him.  His  royal  trappings  were  kept  in  his  palace, 
and  were  very  magnificent.  Draperies  of  silk  and  bands  of 
rich  red  cloth  ran  from  the  head-stall  to  the  back  and  thence 
to  the  tail,  hanging  in  curves  over  the  body.  They  were 
richly  embroidered  in  gold  and  studded  with  rubies  and 
emeralds.  On  the  forehead  was  a  plate  of  gold,  recording 
his  majesty's  titles,  such  as  was  worn  by  every  man  of  rank 
in  the  country  up  to  the  Arbiter  of  Existence  himself. 
Bosses  of  pure  gold  and  clusters  of  precious  stones  covered 
the  head-stall,  and  golden  tassels  hung  down  over  the  ears. 
When  he  went  forth  to  take  the  air,  he  was  shaded  by  golden 
and  white  umbrellas.  He  and  the  king  shared  all  the  white 
umbrellas  in  the  country  between  them.  The  king  of  men 
had  nine  ;  the  king  of  elephants  two,  but  he  had  also  four 
golden  ones.  Not  even  the  heir-apparent,  if  there  were  one, 
had  a  right  to  use  the  white  umbrella.  He  had  to  be  con- 
tented with  his  eight  golden  shades  ;  the  display  of  a  white 
one  would  have  been  regarded  as  a  declaration  of  rebellion, 
and  would  have  resulted  in  his  immediate  execution.  No 
wonder,  then,  that  the  attendants  and  visitors  took  off  their 
shoes  when  they  entered  Sinbyudaw's  palace,  and  that  the 
people  bowed  down  low  and  did  humble  obeisance  when  he 
passed  through  the  streets.  These  were  swept  and  sprinkled 
with  water  for  him  as  for  the  King  of  the  Golden  Throne 
himself 

The  Lord  White  Elephant's  suite  accounted  for  his 
irritable  temper  by  the  bad  treatment  which  he  met  with  in 
his  early  days.  The  royal  coffers  were  low,  and  the  English 
were  clamouring  for  the  last  instalments  of  the  Yandabo 
indemnity  money.  So  the  rents  of  the  elephant  were  appro- 
priated to  pay  off  the  troublesome  foreigners.  Every  care 
was  taken  to  soften  the  indignity.  The  king  himself  wrote 
a  long  address  on  a  palm-leaf,  requesting  the  Lord  White 
Elephant  not  to  take  it  amiss  that  his  revenues  were  devoted 


Lii  THE  LORD  WHITE  ELEPHANT  489 

to  the  payment  of  the  barbarians.  In  any  case  he  should 
not  suffer,  for  the  whole  sum  would  be  refunded  in  two  months' 
time.  The  circumstance,  however,  seems  to  have  preyed 
on  his  mind,  for  the  bodyguard  said  that  his  majesty  (the 
elephant)  had  never  been  the  same  since. 

There  are  frequent  reports  of  the  capture  of  white 
elephants,  and  special  questing  parties  are  sent  out  every 
now  and  then.  But  the  candidates  almost  invariably  fail  to 
satisfy  the  water  test,  or  the  tail  is  not  long  enough,  or  the 
position  of  the  eye  is  wrong,  and  the  red  ring  is  wanting. 
At  any  rate,  genuine  "  white ''  elephants  are  very  seldom 
found.  As  with  the  king,  when  the  Sinbyudaw  died  it  was 
not  permissible  to  say  so  in  as  many  rude  words.  It  had  to 
be  whispered  that  his  majesty  had  "  departed "  or  "  dis- 
appeared."     He  used  to  get  a  royal  funeral. 

When  Mandalay  was  taken  in  1886  the  Royal  White 
Elephant  was  sent  down  to  Rangoon,  where  he  was  to  have 
been  kept  in  the  Zoological  Gardens.  But  he  died  im- 
mediately after  he  arrived.  There  has  been  no  suggestion 
of  the  discovery  of  a  White  Elephant  since. 


CHAPTER    LIII 

MINISTERS    OF    STATE 

When  Mind6n  Min  heard  in  1874  that  the  elections  had 
gone  against  the  ministry,  and  that  Disraeli  was  to  be 
Premier,  he  sighed,  and  said :  "  Then  poor  Ga-la-sa-tong 
(Gladstone)  is  in  prison,  I  suppose.  I  am  sorry  for  him.  I 
don't  think  he  was  a  bad  fellow,  and  I  gave  him  the  Fifteen- 
string  Salwe  (the  Burmese  Order  of  Knighthood)  a  year  or 
two  ago."  That  is  the  Burmese  notion  of  how  to  settle  the 
Opposition.  The  lines  of  statesmen  in  the  Royal  City  of 
Gems  were  not  cast  in  pleasant  places.  If  they  rose  rapidly, 
they  came  down  with  as  much  precipitation  ;  and  their  fall 
was  as  crushing  as  ordinarily  it  was  inevitable.  The  coolie  ol 
to-day  might  be  the  minister  of  to-morrow  ;  and  a  month 
hence  he  might  be  spread-eagled  in  the  court  of  the  palace, 
with  a  vertical  sun  beating  down  upon  him  and  huge  stones 
piled  on  his  chest  and  stomach.  Or  he  might  be  treated  even 
more  summarily  than  this.  When  King  Tharrawaddy  suc- 
ceeded he  made  Bagyidaw's  ministers  work  as  slaves  on 
the  roads  for  a  time,  and  when  this  exercise  had  quite  worn 
them  out,  charitably  put  them  to  death,  without  the  frightful 
barbarities  which  characterised  his  treatment  of  the  upstart 
queen  dowager  and  her  quondam  all-powerful  brother  Min- 
thagyi.  A  more  recent  example  was  that  of  the  Nain- 
gan-gya  Wundauk.  This  unfortunate  statesman  was  sent 
in  1880  as  an  ambassador  to  the  English  Raj,  and  after 
eight  months'  stay  on  board  of  a  steamer  at  Thayetmyo,  a 
few  miles  inside  the  British  frontier,  came  back  to  say  that 
his  mission  had  failed,  and  that  in  fact  he  had  been  told  to 
go  away.      He  did  not  survive  long.      It  was  a  week  or  two 

490 


CHAP.Liii  MINISTERS  OF  STATE  491 

before  he  was  admitted  to  see  the  king ;  and  when  he  did 
see  him  the  meeting  was  unpleasant.  Next  day  the  portly 
wundauk  "  died  of  apoplexy." 

Sudden  deaths  were  not  at  all  uncommon.  An  ofificial 
displeased  him  in  some  way,  and  Minddn  Min  said  emphatic- 
ally, "  I  don't  want  to  see  that  man  any  more."  The  poor 
wretch  left  the  royal  presence  to  be  seized  by  lictors  outside 
and  killed  more  or  less  rapidly.  A  day  or  two  afterwards 
his  majesty  would  ask  where  so-and-so  was.  "  Alas  !  sire," 
was  the  answer,  "  he  died  of  chagrin  shortly  after  the  lord  of 
the  earth  and  ocean  cast  eyes  of  displeasure  on  him."  Then 
the  Convener  of  the  Fifth  Great  Synod  quoted  a  pious  saw 
from  the  Lawkanidi,  and  turned  his  mind  to  other  matters. 
He  made  it  a  special  boast  that  never  in  all  his  reign  had  he 
ordered  an  execution.  Yet  many  people  died  of  "official 
colic ''  during  the  time  he  was  on  the  throne,  and  Colonel 
Sladen  arrived  sixty  seconds  too  late  with  a  respite  for  one 
of  the  pious  monarch's  own  sons.  The  sound  of  the  hoofs 
of  the  English  Resident's  horse  as  he  galloped  past  the 
astrologers'  monastery  to  the  execution  ground  only  quickened 
the  headsman's  sword.  The  hapless  Padein  Mintha  should 
have  perished  with  the  setting  sun.  There  were  still  long 
shadows  slanting  up  from  the  trees  by  the  royal  foundry 
when  the  colonel  reined  in  and  upbraided  the  presiding 
Minister  for  his  bloodthirsty  haste.  The  Lingayama  Sadaw, 
when  he  heard  the  story,  said  the  ayebaing  should  have  been 
a  Buddhist  and  might  probably  become  a  yahanda  in  no 
very  distant  existence. 

Yet  King  Minddn  was  undoubtedly  a  kindly  man.  The 
stories  which  occasionally  appeared  about  him  in  the  English 
papers  of  twenty  years  or  so  back  were  not  true.  He  never 
got  a  pea-rifle  and  "potted"  his  subjects  from  the  palace 
verandahs  when  he  was  bored.  They  libelled  him  who  said 
he  did.  He  was  a  good  Buddhist ,  and  never  took  life  of 
man  or  animal.  King  Thibaw  was,  perhaps,  not  quite  so 
strict  in  his  notions.  When  he  first  came  to  the  throne  he 
unearthed  the  spear  with  which  his  grandfather  Tharrawaddy 
used  occasionally  to  spit  his  counsellors.  The  young  king's 
aim  was  not  quite  so  good,  or  his  purposes  not  quite  so 
deadly.       He  prodded  a  few  heralds  and  interpreters,  and 


492  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

flung  the  spear  at  one  or  two  of  his  father's  trusted  advisers  ; 
but  it  is  not  recorded  that  he  ever  actually  killed  anybody  with 
his  own  hands.  In  fact,  he  got  on  fairly  well  with  his  ministers, 
having  drilled  the  seniors  into  complete  submission  to  his 
wishes,  and  appointed  among  the  younger  members  those 
who  were  most  of  his  own  way  of  thinking.  The  most 
characteristic  man  in  the  Cabinet  was  the  Hlethin  Atwin- 
wun,  better  known  as  the  Hpaungwun.  He  was  only  of  the 
second  official  grade,  but  none  of  the  four  wunmingyis 
had  any  real  power.  They  dated  from  the  last  reign,  and 
were  practically  over-ridden  by  the  younger  party.  The  king 
did,  it  is  true,  marry  the  daughter  of  the  Kampat  Min- 
gyi,  but  that  stolid  old  gentleman  was  always  remarkable 
for  his  disinclination  to  do  anything  at  all,  and  was  not  at  all 
likely  to  exert  himself  unduly  for  the  sake  of  precarious  pre- 
eminence. Therefore  the  ex-Mayor  of  Mandalay,  in  con- 
junction with  the  Yanaung  prince,  a  favourite  of  the  Queen 
Supayalat's,  and  one  or  two  others  of  the  young  Burman 
party,  became  the  most  representative  ministers. 

The  Atwinwun  wore  the  dragon  tattooed  on  the  nape 
of  his  neck.  Fourteen  years  before  he  was  a  slave,  and  in 
position  little  better  than  a  coolie.  His  rise  from  this  rank 
might  have  been  a  credit  to  him  if  it  had  been  effected  by 
his  own  powers.  But  he  rose  by  a  mere  accident,  and 
carried  all  the  tendencies  of  his  original  position  with  him. 
In  1866,  when  two  of  King  Thibaw's  half-brothers,  the 
Myingun  and  Myingundaing  princes,  rose  in  rebellion  against 
their  father,  the  late  king,  the  Hpaungwun  —  he  seems 
more  familiar  under  his  old  title — was  one  of  the  guards  in 
the  palace.  After  the  rebels  had  killed  their  uncle,  "the 
War  Prince,"  they  made  for  the  Summer  Palace,  where  the 
king  was  at  the  time  along  with  Colonel  Sladen,  the  British 
Resident.  The  Summer  Palace  is  a  small  building  outside 
the  stockade  of  the  actual  nandaw,  and  it  was  foreseen  that 
his  majesty  would  make  immediately  for  the  eastern  gate, 
which  is  quite  close  at  hand.  A  man  was  therefore  stationed 
there  with  orders  to  kill  King  Mind6n  whenever  he  made 
his  appearance.  All  happened  as  had  been  surmised  with 
one  slight  exception.  Royal  blood  in  Mandalay  never  went 
outside  the  palace  on  its  own  legs,  and  when  his  majesty 


Liii  MINISTERS  OF  STATE  493 

reached   the    gate   he   promptly    jumped  on    the   intending 
regicide's  back  and  bade  him  carry  him  over  the  esplanade. 
The    man  was  so    overcome  by  the  royal  presence,  or  so 
slavishly  accustomed  to  do  what  he  was  ordered,  that  he 
obeyed.     When  they  were  safe  within  the  inner  stockade  he 
stooped  down  to  let  the  king  dismount,  and  his  sword  fell 
from  the  folds  of  his  waistcloth.      None  but  the  king  may 
carry    arms     within    the     nandaw,    and     the     Hpaungwun, 
grasping  the  situation,  snatched  up  the  sword  and  cut  the 
man's   head  off.      Minddn   Min,  with    a    curious  regard  for 
this  mixture  of  barbarity  and  rapidity  of  action,  made  the 
coolie  a  subordinate  official  on  the  spot,  and  since  then  the 
Hpaungwun    has    gone    on    distinguishing    himself    as    on 
this  occasion.      He  was  promoted  successively  through  the 
grades  of  slipper-bearer,  tea-server,  and  betel-box  holder  to 
that  of  the  Governor  of  the  Royal  Rafts  or  Barges  (Hpaung- 
wun),  and    Mayor    of   Mandalay    (Myowun),    which    latter 
steps  he  gained  through  his  activity  in  the  palace  massacres 
— loyalty  and  energy  his  patent  called  it.     King  Thibaw 
found    in    the    prompt    and    ruthless    wun    a    willing    and 
enthusiastic  helper  in  the  murder  of  the  princes  and  princesses. 
Naturally  he  was  one  of  the  king's  firmest  supporters,  for 
Thibaw's   fall   meant    his    own    certain    death.      His    squat 
figure  and  vulturine  face  made  him  the  most  easily  recognised 
of  the  court  circle,  and  he  repaid  the  aversion  of  English- 
men with  a  most  demonstrative  hatred.     Perhaps  this  was 
because  his   features,  and  especially  his  nose,  suggested   a 
European  among  his  forebears.      As  Hlethin  Atwinwun,  or 
Minister  of  the  Interior,  he  had  supreme  command  over  all 
the  lower  fluviatile  provinces,  and  had  a  large  military  force 
at  his  command.      He  escaped  punishment  and  became  a 
trader  after  the  annexation. 

Equally  high  in  the  king's  favour,  and  not  less  fierce  in 
their  denunciation  of  the  English,  were  the  Taingda  Atwin- 
wun and  the  Yenangyaung,  also  of  the  same  second  grade. 
They,  too,  were  prominent  in  the  massacres,  and  were 
reputed  to  drink  cura^oa  in  tumblers.  If  they  really  did, 
it  would  account  for  a  great  deal.  Both  were  slaves  of  the 
young  Thibaw  prince  when  he  was  a  boy  in  the  English 
Missionary  school,  and  followed  his  fortunes  into  the   Royal 


494  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Monastery.  As  chiefs  of  the  Letthdndaw,  the  Royal  Page 
Bodyguard,  they  had  the  opportunity  which  won  their  rank. 
A  daughter  of  the  Taingda  married  the  Hpaungwun, 
and  the  Atwinwun  in  consequence  gave  occasional  dinners 
to  the  European  and  quasi-European  dwellers  in  Mandalay. 
The  guests  were,  as  a  rule,  not  in  a  position  to  brave  his 
anger  by  a  refusal,  and  had  to  endure  most  elaborate 
indignities  at  his  hands.  All  the  most  humiliating  formalities 
of  the  palace  had  to  be  observed  towards  the  young  minister, 
and  the  -menu  was  said,  by  the  victims,  to  be  the  worst  of 
them  all.  In  regard  to  this,  it  must  be  remembered  that  it 
took  a  very  great  deal  to  hurt  the  dignity  of  some  Mandalay 
Europeans,  and  also  that  they  were  as  fickle  as  any  mob. 

These  three  atwinwuns  were  the  most  powerful 
ministers,  and  had  greater  influence  with  the  king  than  any 
of  their  technical  superiors.  The  four  wungyis  were,  with 
the  exception  of  the  Upathi,  of  very  little  account  with  any 
one.  The  Laungshwe  Mingyi  had  been  for  long  nearly 
bed-ridden,  and  was  not  able  to  appear  even  at  Minddn's 
funeral.  The  other  three  had  all  been  in  Europe,  but 
the  most  that  can  be  said  of  the  Kampat  Mingyi  is  that 
he  became  the  king's  father-in-law,  while  the  Yaw  was 
absent  for  nearly  two  years  on  an  expedition  against  the  Shan 
mountaineers.  He  effected  nothing  warlike,  and  rumour 
said  that  he  was  so  fully  occupied  in  keeping  the  troops  from 
dispersing  to  their  homes  that  he  had  no  time  to  fight.  The 
fourth,  however,  was  a  remarkable  man.  The  Upathi,  better 
known  as  the  Kinwunmingyi,  had  been  very  prominent  for 
years,  and  he  lived  for  twenty  years  after  the  annexation  as 
a  pensioner  of  the  British  Government.  He  used  to  be 
commonly  spoken  of  as  the  premier  on  English  analogy, 
but  there  was  really  no  such  dignitary  known  in  Burma, 
and  the  Kinwungyi's  substantive  appointment  was  simply 
that  of  foreign  secretary.  He  was  twice  to  Europe  on 
embassies,  and  his  naturally  acute  mind  was  thus  enlarged 
in  its  views.  Had  it  not  been  for  his  great  command  over 
the  public  feeling,  and  his  influence  even  over  King  Thibaw, 
there  would  certainly  have  been  war  between  Burma  and 
Great  Britain  in  1879.  The  foreign  secretary  was  the 
representative    of  order ;    and   it  was  a  bad  thing  for  the 


Liii  MINISTERS  OF  STATE  495 

country  when  he  was  almost  entirely  driven  from  power,  if 
not  from  office.  He  was  a  master  of  oriental  craft,  and 
tided  through  all  the  intrigues  against  him.  He  held  a 
document  from  the  late  king,  granting  him  immunity  from 
all  kinds  of  death.  The  list  is  a  very  frightful  one,  and  ranges 
from  vulgar,  obvious  beheading  to  the  refined  cruelty  of 
throwing  on  a  spread-eagled  victim  a  nest  of  the  fierce  red 
ants  known  as  kagyin,  whose  mandibles  drive  a  man 
raving  mad  in  little  over  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  But  the 
palm-leaf  patent  would  have  been  of  little  avail  without  a 
head  that  was  well  able  to  take  care  of  itself.  Like  many  of 
the  older  and  better  ministers,  the  Upathi  Mingyi  came 
from  the  cloister  to  office.  On  Minddn's  accession  to 
the  throne,  he  at  once  appointed  the  Pakhan  Mingyi  from 
a  monastery  to  be  an  atwinwun,  and  in  no  very  great  time 
to  the  supreme  rank  of  mingyi,  a  skipping  of  the  lower 
grades  which  was  very  unusual,  as  was  also  the  circumstance 
that  the  new  minister  married  one  of  King  Tharrawaddy's 
widows.  The  Kin  Wungyi  was  in  the  Pakhan's  monas- 
tery, shared  his  rise,  and  when  the  patron,  who  never  lost 
the  bilious,  monkish  look,  and  the  cold,  stiff  p6ngyi's 
manner,  obtained  the  deliverance,  succeeded  him  as  mingyi. 
Had  he  been  permitted,  the  foreign  secretary  would  have 
made  Burma  a  very  different  country  from  what  it  was. 

The  Upathi  was  certainly  a  superior  man,  and  compiled 
some  valuable  digests  of  Burmese  law  after  his  retirement  in 
Rangoon,  but  undoubtedly  the  most  singular  of  the  Mandalay 
court  officials  was  the  Pangyet  Wun.  He  was  a  polished 
gentleman,  spoke  English  fairly  and  French  and  Italian 
fluently,  and  had  considerably  more  than  a  veneer  of 
civilisation.  As  a  boy  he  was  at  school  in  Calcutta,  and 
having  been  well  grounded  there,  proceeded  to  France. 
There  he  took  his  degree  at  the  Pantheon,  obtained  a 
diploma  in  the  Central  Imperial  School  of  Arts  and 
Manufactures  in  Paris,  and  was  altogether  nearly  twelve 
years  in  Europe.  Notwithstanding  his  reminiscences  of 
Mabille  and  the  Champs  Elysdes,  however,  he  accommo- 
dated himself  very  well  to  circumstances.  When  the  young 
wun  returned  to  Mandalay,  King  Minddn  had  a  long  talk 
with  him,  and  finally  said  :  "  And  these  foreigners,  then,  have 


496        THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      chap,  mi 

they  in  any  of  their  cities  buildings  such  as  adorn  our  Royal 
City  of  Gems  ? "  Alas  !  your  majesty, "  he  replied,  "  the 
luckless  people  have  not  the  magnificent  teak  ;  how,  then, 
can  they  hope  to  raise  anything  comparable  to  the  meanest 
of  your  palaces  ?  "  This  courtier-like  caution  never  deserted 
the  Pangyet  Wun.  He  never  meddled  with  politics,  and 
was  content  with  his  governorship  of  the  glass  manufactories, 
which  meant  anything  or  nothing,  and  commanded  a 
nominal  salary.  But  none  of  the  ministers  had  any  salary 
from  King  Thibaw,  so  that  the  cultured  sinecurist  was  not 
worse  off  than  his  fellows.  He  consorted  a  good  deal  with 
foreigners,  but  averted  suspicion  by  saying  that  it  was 
merely  to  keep  up  his  knowledge  of  their  languages.  No 
doubt  he  might  have  had  a  much  higher  post,  but  he  had 
enough  money,  and  did  not  care  to  run  the  risk  of  trying 
for  more.  That  was  also  his  view  during  the  crisis  and  after 
the  annexation. 


CHAPTER    LIV 

THE   BURMESE   ARMY 

The  Burmese  army  was  not  thought  very  much  of  even 
by  the  most  patriotic  Burman  who  had  seen  soldiers  in  other 
parts  of  the  world.  Malignant  people  called  it  a  rabble  ; 
more  smooth-tongued  and  favourably-disposed  critics  were 
fain  to  acknowledge  that  it  was  deficient  in  discipline.  In 
physique  and  courage  the  men  were  formidable  enough,  but 
flintlocks  and  long  Enfields  do  not  avail  much  against  the 
breechloader,  and  when  complete  inability  to  manoeuvre  was 
added  to  this,  it  was  evident  that  even  in  jungle  warfare, 
except  against  an  equally  ill-armed  foe,  King  Thibaw's  forces 
would  make  but  a  sorry  show.  Military  instruction  of  a 
certain  kind  they  had,  but  it  never  extended  beyond  squad 
drill,  and  even  this  was  but  very  perfunctorily  learned,  while 
movements  of  large  bodies  of  men  were  never  attempted, 
except  the  so-called  reviews,  which  took  place  every  now 
and  again,  and  in  1 879  were  held  within  a  day  or  two  either 
way  at  the  full  moon  of  every  month.  These  "  reviews " 
were,  however,  nothing  more  than  marches-out  on  a  big  scale, 
and  were  only  useful  as  a  means  of  displaying  the  soldier  in 
the  glory  of  his  uniform,  and  giving  him  a  little  exercise. 
Except  on  these  occasions,  indeed,  it  was  seldom  that  the 
soldiery  appeared  in  military  dress.  Even  when  on  guard 
they  dispensed  with  every  article  of  warlike  attire,  except 
the  gun,  and  even  that  was  more  frequently  to  be  found 
in  the  rack  than  in  the  sentry's  hands.  These  military 
promenades,  therefore,  offered  the  most  favourable  oppor- 
tunity of  observing  the  royal  levies. 

The  troops  mustered  at  an  early  hour  in  the  wide  glacis 

497  2  K 


498  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

between  the  inner  and  outer  stockades  of  the  palace.  There 
they  fell  in,  in  a  theoretical  formation  of  fours,  and  remained 
placidly  waiting ;  conversation  went  on  freely,  and  smoking 
and  chewing  betel  were  not  interfered  with.  The  bogyi  and 
other  officers  of  rank  meanwhile  assembled  within  the  inner 
court.  After,  perhaps,  three  or  four  hours'  waiting,  the  king 
came  out  and  inspected  the  forces  through  a  field-glass  from 
the  head  of  the  broad  flight  of  steps  in  front  of  the  Hall 
of  Audience,  or,  perhaps,  a  notice  was  sent  out  that  his 
majesty  would  not  even  view  his  troops  in  this  easy  fashion, 
and  the  army  was  saved  from  the — to  English  notions — 
exceedingly  unmilitary  attitude  of  grovelling  on  its  stomach 
for  a  matter  of  two  minutes  while  the  king  looked  through 
his  binocular. 

This  over,  the  non-commissioned  officers  said  he !  and 
the  men  sloped  arms  and  started  off  anyhow.  Outside  the 
eastern  gate  a  halt  was  made  while  the  bogyis,  colonels  of 
regiments,  mounted  their  elephants,  got  into  position,  and 
marshalled  their  bodyguards  round  about  them.  The  lesser 
bos  and  thwethaukgyis,  "great  blood  drinkers,"  were  mounted 
on  ponies  and  had  their  personal  retainers  about  them  too. 
The  commanding  officer  came  at  the  head  of  his  regiment, 
preceded  by  twenty  pages  carrying  double-barrelled  smooth- 
bores in  red  cloth  covers.  These  pages  were  all  dressed 
alike,  according  to  the  individual  taste  of  the  commander, 
in  uniform  turbans,  tunic,  and  pason.  The  livery  of  the 
young  Kachin  colonel  of  the  Fourth  Regiment  was  the  most 
effective — red-flowered  turbans,  French  grey  jackets,  and 
red  pasos  of  the  wavy  "  dog's  tooth  "  pattern.  The  colonel 
of  the  Third  Regiment,  on  the  other  hand,  revelled  in  bilious 
contrasts — pea-green  gaungbaungs,  flowing  red  tunics,  and 
yellow  waistcloths  of  what  a  'Varsity  tradesman  would  call 
a  neat  quiet  plaid  pattern.  This  bodyguard  walked  at 
either  side  of  the  road  in  loose  Indian  file  to  see  that 
the  way  was  clear.  The  bo  himself  rode  an  elephant, 
gorgeously  caparisoned,  with  tassels  and  streamers  trailing 
to  the  ground  from  the  velvet-covered  howdah.  He  was 
dressed  in  the  national  turban  and  paso,  but  wore  a  tight- 
fitting  tunic,  covered  with  gold  lace.  All  of  them  were 
either  smoking  or  chewing  betel.      Behind  the  elephant  came 


liv  THE  BURMESE  ARMY  499 

the  umbrella-bearer,  or,  perhaps,  two  or  three  of  them  if  the 
officer  had  attained  such  distinction. 

The  actual  civilian  commander  of  the  regiment  seldom 
came  out  to  the  review,  so  that  there  were  comparatively  few 
gold  umbrellas,  but  the  red  and  green  military  sun-shades, 
with  deep  fringes,  added  perhaps  more  to  the  brilliance  of  the 
array,  considered  simply   as  a  spectacle.      Behind  the  hti- 
bearers  came  the  minor  officers,  mounted  on  ponies,  with  the 
ordinary  Burmese  scarlet  cloth  saddle  and  tassels  sweeping 
over  the  animal's  flanks.    Each  of  these  minor  chiefs  also  had 
his  umbrella  borne  over  his  head,  and  a  score  or  two  of  spear- 
men   guarded    the    flanks    of  the   cavalcade.      Mingled    up 
among  them  was  a  confused  crowd  of  cheroot-bearers,  spittoon- 
holders,  betel-box  carriers,  and  similar  functionaries  such  as 
accompany  a  Burmese  grandee  wherever  he  goes.      Behind 
this  motley  assemblage  came  the  regimental  colours.     These 
were  bifurcated  red  pennants,  burgees  bearing  the  number  of 
the  battalion,  and  leogryphs,  lions,  dogs,  dragons,  and  similar 
distinguishing  emblems   for   the   different  regiments.      The 
standard    was    not    very    ponderous,    but    occasionally    the 
bearer — he  was  not  an  officer — got  tired  of  carrying  it  over 
his  shoulder  and  lowered  it  to  the  trail  without  seeming  to 
injure  any  one's  sense  of  congruity.      He  was  followed  by 
the  band,  or  a  portion  of  it,  for  the  musicians  were  scattered 
in  twos  and  threes  all  over  the  regiment,  usually  at  the  head 
of   a    company,    but    not    by    any    means    necessarily    so. 
Burmese  music  is  ordinarily  far  from  soft  and  gentle.     At 
a   play  the  trumpets    blare,  and  the    gongs,  cymbals,   and 
clappers  clash  and  jingle  and  rattle  in  truly  inspiriting  fashion. 
But  no  such  spirit-stirring  strains  are  considered  necessary  to 
rouse  martial  ardour.      A    military  bandsman  required   no 
preliminary  education.     All  he  had  to  do  was  to  tap,  tap 
away    in    the   most  stolid    and    monotonous    fashion   on    a 
kyinaung.      This  is  a  brass  or  bell-metal  gong,  about  the  size 
of  a  dessert  plate  with  a  small  round  boss  in  the  centre. 
The  sound  is  sweet,  and  they  are  pitched  in  different  keys, 
but  a  low-country  Burman  is  at  a  loss  to  divine  their  precise 
use.      The  sound  does  not  travel  far,  and  they  are  not  beaten 
in  any  fixed  time,  besides  that  the  ahmudan  would  not  step 
to  it  if  they  were  ;  so  that  if  it  were  not  for  the  dignity 


500  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

of  the  thing,  there  might  just  as  well  have  been  no  band  at  all. 
But  there  they  were,  and  they  jingled  away  and  stopped  and 
began  again  in  the  most  casual  and  independent  possible  way. 

After  all  this  came  at  last  the  ahmudan,  King  Thibaw's 
army  of  "  immortals  "  in  full  array.  They  most  assuredly 
had  not  a  martial  appearance,  and  there  was  not  a  semblance 
of  discipline  among  them.  It  was  just  possible  to  make  out 
that  they  were  marching  in  column.  Here  and  there  was  a 
ragged  resemblance  to  an  alignment  of  fours,  achieved  for  a 
few  minutes  apparently  more  by  chance  than  anything  else. 
The  soldiers  were  very  gorgeous.  Peony  roses  and  sun- 
flowers were  as  nothing  to  them.  All  had  red  tunics,  but 
the  facings,  which  were  broad,  were  different  in  each  regiment. 
Some  were  yellow,  some  green,  some  blue,  some  nondescript, 
and  the  effect  on  the  red  ground  was  not  always  pleasing. 
The  trousers  were  very  various.  Blue,  with  a  broad  yellow 
stripe  down  the  side,  or  occasionally  for  the  sake  of  variety 
down  the  front  or  the  back,  green  and  red,  yellow  and 
maroon,  scarlet  and  brown,  were  a  ievf  of  the  combinations. 
On  their  heads  were  worn  helmets  with  burnished  spikes, 
and  a  small  metal  dragon  in  front.  These  helmets  do  not  suit 
at  all  with  long  hair.  The  topknot  of  a  good  many  is  so 
large  that  the  pickelhaube  balances  on  it,  and  wobbles  about 
in  undignified  fashion. 

The  majority,  however,  found  that  the  most  satisfactory 
way  of  avoiding  this  was  to  put  the  helmet  on  the  back  of  the 
head,  which  imparted  to  them  a  dissipated  appearance,  which 
was  far  from  martial-looking.  Not  a  few  found  the  difference 
in  weight  between  their  ordinary  silk  turban  and  a  papier- 
michd  or  plaited  wicker  helmet  more  than  they  could  bear, 
and  solved  the  difficulty  by  carrying  their  headpiece  on  the 
end  of  their  carbines.  This  met  with  no  remonstrance  or 
opposition  on  the  part  of  the  non-commissioned  officers,  who, 
armed  with  spears,  marched  at  irregular  intervals  along  the 
flanks  of  the  column.  The  soldiers  had  no  belts,  and  therefore 
no  scabbards,  and  proceeded  with  bayonets  fixed.  The  Fourth 
Regiment,  commanded  by  the  young  Kachin  before  alluded 
to,  had  a  habit,  whether  for  the  sake  of  distinction,  or  as 
signifying  that  they  were  prepared  at  any  moment  to  give 
cold  steel,  of  sloping  arms  in  an  eccentric  way.     Grasping 


uv  THE  BURMESE  ARMY  501 

the  rifle  at  the  upper  band,  they  threw  the  butt  over  the 
shoulder  and  proceeded  with  bayonets  sticking  out  in  front 
As  a  necessary  consequence  they  did  not  straggle  so  much  as 
the  others,  for  if  a  man  lagged  he  was  wakened  up  by  a  prod 
from  the  point  of  the  bayonet  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  or 
between  the  shoulders.  The  chief  objection  to  this  method 
of  keeping  the  men  at  fairly  regular  intervals,  was  that  a  prick 
in  the  rear  was  as  likely  as  not  to  pass  right  on  to  the  head 
of  the  column,  with  the  result  of  a  volley  of  abuse  and  very 
considerable  disorganisation. 

The  marines  were  the  strongest  in  point  of  numbers,  and 
far  and  away  the  best  in  drill.  They  kept  their  alignment 
very  fairly,  and  frequently  as  many  as  three  men  in  a  section 
kept  step.  Their  uniform  was  a  blue-frogged  red  tunic  and 
blue  trousers  with  a  scarlet  stripe.  On  the  helmet  they  wore 
an  anchor  instead  of  the  ordinary  dragon  of  the  line.  Their 
colonel  was  the  Hpaungwun,  Myowun,  nowHlethin  atwin- 
wun,  the  minister  who  was  so  energetic  in  the  palace  mas- 
sacres in  1879.  The  credit  of  their  discipline  was,  however, 
entirely  due  to  Commotto,  a  young  Italian  naval  officer  in 
the  king's  service,  and  engineer  of  all  the  river  forts.  The 
marines  were  quite  a  thousand  strong,  and  their  officers  were 
mounted  just  like  the  rest.  When  there  was  practice  in  the 
war-boats,  the  mayor-colonel  viewed  the  performance  from  the 
back  of  an  elephant  on  the  river-bank.  Like  all  the  great  men, 
however,  he  did  not  trouble  himself  to  go  out  to  the  reviews. 

The  men  smoked  in  the  ranks  and  hailed  their  friends 
along  the  route  in  the  freest  possible  fashion.  When  a  man 
wanted  a  light  or  a  drink  of  water  he  simply  fell  out  and  went 
in  search  of  it  among  the  spectators,  rightly  enough  assured 
that  none  of  the  officers  would  bother  their  heads  as  to  the 
reason  of  his  departure.  All  along  the  line  of  march  men 
who  had  been  delayed  in  this  way  might  be  seen  scuttling 
along  to  get  somewhere  near  their  proper  places.  Here  and 
there  one  was  left  far  away  from  his  regiment,  having  been 
seduced  into  conversation  with  a  friend.  Now  and  then 
the  non-commissioned  officers  caught  sight  of  an  Englishman 
looking  on,  and  woke  up  to  the  sudden  sense  of  their  responsi- 
bilities, delivering  sound  thwacks  with  the  butt  end  of 
their  spears  on  the  shoulders  of  any  stragglers  within  reach  in 


S02  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

most  energetic  and  official  fashion.  As  a  rule,  however,  they 
contented  themselves  with  getting  over  the  ground.  Many 
of  the  recruits  viewed  their  trousers  with  very  grave  suspicions. 
They  evidently  thought  that  unless  precautionary  measures 
were  adopted,  the  article  would  slip  oiif,  and  therefore,  with  a 
vigilance  which  did  credit  to  their  sense  of  modesty,  held 
on  tight  with  one  hand  to  their  continuations.  Perhaps  the 
tailors  were  to  blame.  But  in  any  case  the  attitude  was 
undignified,  and  certainly  not  military.  The  garment  was 
not  regarded  with  any  favour  even  by  the  veterans.  When 
the  ahmudan  were  on  guard  they  generally  wore  the  ordinary 
waistcloth  and  carried  the  trousers  in  one  hand  to  show 
their  status.  The  tunics  were  almost  never  worn  except  at 
the  reviews. 

Between  regiments  came  four  cannon,  pulled  by  men, 
and  with  little  pennons  stuck  in  the  touch-holes.  Two 
gunners  accompanied  each  two-pounder,  one  carrying  a 
galvanised  tin  bucket  and  the  other  a  big  canister,  intended 
for  shot  and  powder,  hut  singularly  unfitted  for  such  material 
on  a  campaign.  Sponges  and  rammers  were  wanting,  and 
were  said  to  be  intentionally  so  in  the  hope  that  the  guns 
might  be  mistaken  for  breech-loaders,  and  the  men  who 
drew  the  pieces  were  the  bombardiers. 

After  the  infantry,  at  an  interval  of  two  hundred  yards, 
came  two  regiments  of  cavalry,  numbering  about  five  hundred 
lances  in  all.  They  wore  helmets  of  Grecian  pattern,  like 
cuirassiers,  but  otherwise  were  in  the  national  dress.  The 
second  of  the  two  was  the  celebrated  "  Kath^  Horse,"  who 
have  won  in  English  books  on  Burma  a  fame  unknown  in 
their  own  country.  They  were  dressed  in  French  grey 
jackets  and  red  pasos,  and  looked  very  well ;  but  their 
mounts  were  very  poor  for  a  country  where  ponies  are  so 
plentiful  and  where  it  was  so  easy  for  the  commander  to 
demand  their  excellence.  The  saddles  had  long  flaps  or 
wings  hanging  down  in  front  to  protect  the  riders'  bare  legs 
when  riding  through  underwood,  but  it  was  so  long  since  they 
had  been  in  the  jungle  that  the  flaps  were  more  of  a  decora- 
tion than  a  necessity.  Cavalry  is  an  arm  of  the  service  of 
little  use  in  a  country  like  Burma,  but  with  their  long  slender 
lances  and  splendid  trappings  they  made  a  fine  show,  and 


Liv  THE  BURMESE  ARMY  503 

not  very  much  more  could  be  said  for  the  infantry — not  so 
much  in  some  cases. 

The  lancers  were  followed  by  the  commissariat  and  control 
departments,  a  rabble  of  men  carrying  pots  and  pans  and 
rolls  of  bamboo  matting  and  boxes  intended  for  ammunition, 
but  containing  none,  and  huge  wicker  baskets,  besides  a  lot 
of  other  baggage  which  might  be  useful,  but  did  not  look 
like  it.  There  were  five  or  six  hundred  of  these  men, 
guarded  by  a  handful  of  dah  and  spearmen. 

In  their  wake  followed  the  artillery  corps  ;  first,  thirty  or 
forty  two-pounders,  similar  to  those  between  the  different 
regiments,  and  with  the  same  complement  of  men  to  each 
gun,  and  the  same  appliances.  Then  the  elephant  battery, 
each  elephant  with  two  jingals  mounted  on  the  howdah. 
These  jingals,  throwing  a  half  or  three-quarter  pound  ball, 
with  their  long  pointed  tails  and  muzzles  pointed  up  to  the 
skies,  look  very  much  like  telescopes  from  a  distance.  In 
actual  warfare  they  would  probably  do  nothing  beyond 
scaring  the  elephant.  Besides  the  mahaut,  each  elephant 
carried  a  man  to  manage  the  guns.  Fifty  of  them  were  loaded 
with  this  mosquito  artillery,  and  behind  them  came  fifty 
more  with  nothing  on  them  but  the  mahaut.  Many  were 
most  magnificent  tuskers,  and  they  constituted  the  most 
valuable  part  of  his  majesty's  army. 

Behind  the  elephants  came  the  heavier  guns,  drawn  by 
buffaloes,  but  they  were  apt  to  stick  in  the  heavy,  unmade 
roads,  and  the  buffaloes  themselves  were  not  easy  brutes  to 
manage,  especially  on  a  warm  day  when  their  skin  begins 
to  crack.  This  battery,  therefore,  usually  went  but  a  short 
distance.  These  heavy  guns  were  mostly  very  ancient  ship 
guns  of  Portuguese,  Dutch,  French,  and  Arakanese  make, 
and  would  be  considered  valuE^ble  in  an  English  parish 
museum.  They  were  formidable  to  none  except  primitive 
mountaineers,  and  to  them  chiefly  from  the  noise  they  made. 

As  this  account  shows,  Thibaw's  army  was  neither 
threatening  nor  efficient,  and  the  events  of  1885  bore  out 
the  estimate.  When  the  time  came  for  adding  Upper 
Burma  to  the  British  dominions  it  was  effected  with  the 
least  possible  amount  of  bloodshed  on  either  side.  It  might 
be   supposed  from  what  has  been   said  that  the  ahmudan 


S04  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

had  no  drill,  but  this  was  very  far  from  being  the  case.  On 
the  contrary,  drill  was  going  on  constantly  inside  the  palace 
and  at  the  various  guard  stations.  The  French  and  Italian 
officers  were  always  instructing  them,  but  a  want  of  belief 
in  the  utility  of  mass  movements  rendered  all  their  efforts 
useless.  The  recruits  went  through  the  balance-step  with 
the  utmost  enthusiasm ;  when  it  came  to  forming  fours  they 
were  a  little  less  ardent,  but  by  the  time  they  ought  to  have 
been  counter-marching  and  right-forming  company  they  were 
tired  of  the  whole  business  and  poked  fun  at  the  instructor. 
European  officers  called  themselves,  and  were  called,  generals 
and  colonels  and  what  not,  but  they  were  simply  drill 
sergeants  with  very  unpromising  material.  They  were 
allowed  no  uniform  ;  they  never  took  command  on  a  review 
day.  Occasionally  they  complained  of  being  insulted  by 
their  squads,  and  were  told  by  a  sententious  mingyi  that 
patience  is  one  of  the  ten  virtues  which  go  to  the  making  up 
of  a  true  gentleman.  To  recompense  them  for  their  trials 
they  made  a  great  deal  of  money  in  a  variety  of  ways,  their 
salaries  being  the  least  part,  and  paid  at  long  and  uncertain 
intervals  in  a  lump  sum.  The  real  "generals"  were  men 
who  hardly  ever  came  out  at  all,  least  of  all  when  there  was 
a  chance  of  fighting.  The  commander-in-chief  was  for  many 
months  in  jail,  but  still  retained  his  title,  and  two  of  his  sons 
remained  in  command  of  regiments.  The  men  who  managed 
the  reviews  and  any  work  that  was  to  be  done  were  all  let- 
th6ndaw,  the  king's  pages  of  honour.  Few  of  them  were  over 
twenty,  but  their  duties  did  not  require  much  experience. 

Besides  the  legitimate  drill,  conducted  by  the  European 
instructors,  there  were  other  performances,  the  object  of  which 
would  hardly  be  apparent  to  the  compilers  of  the  Manual  of 
Field  Exercise.  The  instructor,  one  of  the  junior  officers, 
assembled  the  men  in  a  big  circle  round  about  him,  and 
proceeded  in  a  fashion  dictated  to  him  apparently  by  nothing 
but  his  own  fancy.  He  threw  his  gun  into  the  air,  caught 
it  and  cried  he  I  and  the  men  followed  his  example  to  the 
best  of  their  ability.  He  went  through  the  same  manoeuvre 
behind  his  back,  cried  he  !  again,  and  the  men  probably  got 
some  hard  knocks  in  dutifully  trying  to  imitate  him.  He 
cried  he  and  hunched  up  his  shoulders  ;  cried  M  and  brought 


i-iv  THE  BURMESE  ARMY  505 

them  down  again  ;  slapped  one  thigh  and  then  the  other  with 
a  hi ;  pirouetted  on  one  leg  and  brandished  a  jointless  limb 
in  the  air,  crying  he  vigorously,  all  which  performances  his 
squad  copied  as  best  they  could.  The  men  dropped  off  as 
they  got  tired,  and  by  and  by  the  instructor  sat  down  him- 
self, and  the  party  dissolved  or  not  as  it  pleased.  Laughter, 
criticism,  and  applause  were  constant  throughout.  This  sort 
of  exercise  was  almost  constant  in  the  capital  in  1879,  and 
it  was  pretty  nearly  the  only  drill  the  rural  levies  ever  got. 
These  latter  were  dressed  in  the  uniform  of  Minddn's  reign, 
mostly  cast-off  tunics  and  trousers  of  the  Madras  native 
infantry.  They  wore  round  soup-tureen-like  helmets,  with  a 
piece  of  looking-glass  in  front.  Of  these  they  were  very 
proud,  but  did  not  disdain  to  drink  water  and  eat  their 
dinner  out  of  them.  There  was  only  a  limited  supply  of 
these  adornments  for  the  provinces,  and  as  a  consequence  it 
was  frequent  for  the  man  on  guard  to  strip  and  hand  over 
his"  uniform  to  the  relief,  and  then  go  home  happy. 

There  was  no  musketry  practice.  Occasionally  on  feast- 
days,  or  when  his  majesty  went  out,  there  was  a  lot  of  powder 
burnt,  but  it  would  have  been  a  very  risky  matter  discharging 
some  of  the  more  ancient  firelocks,  and  so  it  was  perhaps  as 
well  that  class-firing  was  not  introduced.  The  artillery  never 
had  any  exercise.  Burmans  have  not  the  same  respect  for 
big  guns  that  the  natives  of  India  have.  They  imagine  that 
such  a  big  thing  as  a  field-piece  is  sure  to  hit  something,  if 
it  is  only  pointed  in  a  general  way  in  the  right  direction,  and 
conclude  therefore  that  any  fool  can  manage  a  big  gun  with- 
out preliminary  practice.  King  Mind6n  appointed  a  French 
officer  to  look  after  the  gunners.  This  gentleman  thought 
he  must  do  something  for  his  salary — rather  an  unusual  thing 
with  the  king's  servants — and  accordingly  as  the  men  could 
not  be  induced  to  drill,  took  a  battery  out  to  the  paddy-fields 
towards  Yankintaung  for  ball  practice.  There  he  got 
the  guns  into  position  and  commenced  firing.  Loud  sounds 
should  never  assail  the  royal  ears,  and  when  his  majesty 
heard  the  din,  he  was  fiercely  enraged.  The  Kath6  Horse 
were  sent  out  in  a  body  to  stop  it.  The  over-energetic 
Gaul  was  told  that  if  he  had  not  been  an  ignorant  foreigner, 
who  did  not  know  any  better,  he  would  have  been   made  a 


So6  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

target  for  his  own  battery,  but  the  Burman  officer  was  flogged 
round  the  town.  The  guns  were  stowed  away  in  the  palace 
lest  such  an  enormity  might  by  misadventure  be  again 
perpetrated.  There  they  remained  till  Thibaw  Min  got  them 
dragged  out  for  his  reviews.  They  had  never  been  cleaned 
all  this  time,  any  more  than  the  infantry  arms  ever  were. 
He  was  perhaps  less  sensitive  on  the  score  of  noise,  but  he 
did  not  send  his  gunners  out  to  practise,  and  they,  as  a  rule, 
kept  their  spare  clothes  and  cheroots  and  betel  stowed  away 
in  the  muzzles  of  their  pieces. 

The  strength  of  the  army  at  the  disposal  of  King  Thi- 
baw was  only  limited  by  the  number  of  men  in  the  country. 
Every  male  was  liable  to  serve  as  a  soldier  whenever  he  was 
called  upon,  and  in  1879,  when  war  with  England  was 
momentarily  expected,  levies  of  one  man  from  every  twenty 
houses,  every  twelve,  every  six,  were  called  out,  and  finally 
an  ameindaw,  or  royal  mandate,  was  issued,  summoning 
every  able-bodied  man  in  the  country  to  hold  himself  in 
readiness  for  taking  the  field.  But  in  ordinary  times  the 
amount  of  a  Burmese  force  depended  not  upon  the  number 
of  the  population,  but  on  the  body  of  men  the  neighbour- 
hood could  feed  in  a  collective  state,  for  it  was  the  district 
and  not  the  Government  that  supported  them.  At  the 
best  Thibaw  Min  could  supply  not  more  than  25,000 
and  30,000  men  with  muskets,  more  or  less  useless,  from 
long  Enfields  to  ancient  flintlocks,  which  would  be  most 
readily  induced  to  go  off  by  putting  them  on  a  fire.  The 
method  of  raising  forces  was  somewhat  as  follows.  The  king, 
with  or  without  the  advice  of  his  ministers,  decided  how 
many  men  were  wanted,  and  informed  the  Hlutdaw,  which 
thereupon  issued  orders  to  all  the  governors  of  provinces, 
calling  upon  them  to  muster  the  quota  which  custom  had 
decided  their  districts  must  provide.  The  provincial  rulers 
then  sent  their  instructions  to  the  myothugyis  and  taikthugyis, 
heads  of  townships  and  village  circles,  who  in  their  turn 
communicated  with  the  subordinate  headman  of  each  separate 
village.  This  last  official,  with  the  assistance  of  the  house- 
reeves,  singled  out  the  men.  Substitutes  were  allowed,  and 
as  every  thugyi  was  absolute  in  his  own  place,  he  usually 
made  a  very  pretty  thing  out  of  such  a  levy,  through  fines 


Liv  THE  BURMESE  ARMY  507 

and  sums  given  to  him  to  procure  another  man.  The  whole 
district  was  called  upon  to  pay  for  the  support  and  equipment 
of  its  contingent,  and  the  men  who  were  recruited  were 
usually  those  who  were  unable  to  furnish  their  share  of  this 
tax.  But  the  men  who  eventually  went  off  as  soldiers  were 
not  by  any  means  commonly  those  whom  the  headman  first 
nominated.  He  expected  to  have  money  extorted  from  him 
by  his  superiors,  and  made  his  arrangements  accordingly, 
naming  all  the  wealthiest  men  in  the  place  in  his  first  list. 
This  method  of  raising  troops  is  not  expeditious,  but  nothing 
under  Thibaw's  rule  was  expeditious,  and  it  gave  abundant 
scope  for  palavering  and  extortion,  the  two  chief  accomplish- 
ments of  the  rural  officials. 

The  inhabitants  of  certain  districts,  however,  were  con- 
sidered the  hereditary  soldiers  of  the  Alaungpaya  dynasty, 
and  these  levies  were  looked  upon  as  forming  the  standing 
army.  They  held  their  lands  by  military  service  and  were 
exempt  from  all  taxation.  They  considered  themselves  to  be 
the  flower  of  the  service  and  adopted  Junker  manners.  A 
dragon  was  tattooed  on  the  back  of  their  necks,  just  over  the 
shoulders,  to  signify  that  they  specially  belonged  to  the  king, 
and,  strictly  speaking,  they  alone  were  entitled  to  the  name 
ahmudan.  They  mounted  guard  in  the  palace,  and  were 
almost  never  required  to  leave  the  capital.  The  chief  Alaung- 
paya districts  are  in  the  north,  round  about  Motshobo,  now 
called  Shwebo,  whence  the  founder  of  the  present  dynasty 
came.  The  rural  levies  got  all  the  work  there  was  to  be 
done  against  marauding  Shans  and  Kachins,  and  garrisoned 
the  various  fortified  towns  along  the  frontier.  Many  of 
these  contingents  were  armed  with  nothing  but  spears  and 
dahs.  At  Minhla,  near  the  old  British  frontier,  where  there 
was  a  well-constructed  fort,  was  posted  the  strongest  and 
best-armed  detachment  out  of  Mandalay.  Near  Ava  there 
were  three  forts  :  one,  the  face  of  the  old  city  wall,  an  earthen 
rampart  thirty  feet  thick  and  twenty  feet  high,  faced  on  the 
outside  with  masonry  ;  a  second  on  the  other  side  of  the 
river  at  Sagaing,  and  the  third  farther  up  at  the  bend  of  the 
river,  at  Shwegyetyet.  These  commanded  the  river  at  a 
point  where  vessels  proceeding  up  the  river  had  to  round 
a    dangerous     reef   of    rocks.      But    with    regard    to  |these 


5o8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  liv 

forts  Captain  Barker  of  H.M.'s  89th  P.V.,  the  best  English 
authority  on  Upper  Burma  military  matters,  said,  "  without 
ditch,  without  flank  defence,  without  expense  magazines, 
without  traverses  to  protect  the  gunners,  they  are  mere  shell- 
traps  for  the  destruction  of  the  garrison."  He  might  have 
added  that  they  were  without  armament,  and  in  1885  they 
surrendered  without  firing  a  shot.  Mandalay  itself  has 
naturally  a  strong  position  because  of  its  inaccessibility. 
To  the  east  it  is  guarded  by  the  Shan  mountains  and  the 
marshy  plains  below.  Rivers  and  creeks  make  the  approach 
from  the  south  difficult.  On  the  north  is  an  impassable 
morass.  On  the  west  of  the  city  are  wide-spreading,  thickly 
populated  suburbs,  and  the  river-side  is  defended  by  a  high 
embankment.  But  the  weakness  of  Mandalay  lay  in  the 
worthlessness  of  the  army  and  the  feebleness  of  its  armament. 
The  kingdom  of  Burma  was,  in  fact,  nothing  like  so  powerful 
as  it  was  a  quarter  of  a  century  before,  when  the  second 
Burmese  war  was  ended.  When  the  end  came  Mandalay 
fell  to  a  force  twenty  miles  away. 


Note. — ^It  has  been  brought  to  the  writer's  notice  that  several 
worthy  Frenchmen  have  been  hurt  by  the  references  to  foreigners  in 
this  and  in  preceding  and  following  chapters.  It  may  therefore  be 
noted  here  that  the  count  who  sold  syrups  was  not  the  Comte  de 
Trevelec,  who  was  a  contemporary  of  the  Marquis  de  Ga.llifet  at  St. 
Cyr,  and  that  there  is  no  reference  to  General  de  Facieu,  a  popular, 
picturesque,  and  notable  French  gentleman.  Neither  were  Louis 
Vossion  nor  Monsieur  Femand  d'Av^ra  thought  of  when  this  book  was 
written.  Vossion  was  a  stubborn  patriot.  Monsieur  d'Avdra  is  a  genial 
patriot  with  a  doubt  whether  France  or  Upper  Burma  has  the  greater 
claims  on  him.  In  any  case  for  fifty  years  Femand  d'Avdra  has  been 
one  of  the  best  known  and  best  liked  men  in  Burma. 


CHAPTER    LV 

JUDICIAL   ADMINISTRATION 

Buddhist  law  as  it  was  administered  in  Upper  Burma 
dates  from  the  beginning  of  the  now  existing  world.  The 
first  crime  was  theft ;  the  first  punishment  was  a  scolding, 
speedily  followed  by  a  thrashing ;  and  the  first  judge  was 
Maha  Thamada,  elected  by  vote  of  the  people  to  be  ruler- 
over  them.  No  doubt  there  were  written  laws  then,  but 
they  have  not  come  down  to  us.  The  written  code  in  use 
was  given  to  the  world  by  Manu,  originally  a  cow-herd, 
but  afterwards  a  minister.  He  found  them  written  in  large 
characters  on  the  walls  of  another  world,  to  which  he  was 
transported  when  in  an  ecstasy.  These  laws  formed  the  first 
code.  There  have  been  since  compiled  from  them  eight 
other  codes  in  the  kingdom  of  Prome  and  other  ancient 
states  in  Burmah.  The  last,  called  Maha  Manu  Thaya 
Shwe  Myin,  was  drawn  up  on  the  foundation  of  the  sixth 
kingdom  of  Ava,  in  the  year  1137  B.E.  (1775  A.D.),  by 
Minhkaung  Gyi,  who,  with  the  aid  of  a  learned  monk, 
went  through  and  carefully  revised  all  the  codes.  These 
laws  in  their  integrity  are  those  which  governed  Upper 
Burma  and  now  govern  the  whole  of  Burma  in  so  far  as  they 
regulate  social  relations.  The  codes  were  written  in  San- 
skrit and  Magadha,  a  language  usually  called  Pali  through 
an  error.  The  name  Pali  signifies  really  not  a  language, 
but  "  The  Canon,"  handed  down  to  Buddhists,  as  com- 
posed by  pious  disciples  from  the  teachings  of  Shin 
Gautama.  The  Magadha  or  Pali  code  accepted  is  called 
Manu  Wunnana,  from  its  writer  and  compiler,  a  minister  of 
state  in  Ava.  It  is  looked  upon  as  a  commentary  on,  or 
a  key  to,  the  codes,  and  contains  the  whole  of  the  laws. 

S09 


Sio  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Besides  the  codes  there  exist  also  twenty  standard 
collections  of  decisions,  leading  cases  in  which  judgment 
was  delivered  by  kings,  queens,  princesses,  and  ministers. 
These  are  by  some  regarded  as  obsolete,  by  many  lugyis, 
however,  considered  to  have  still  the  force  of  law.  The 
best  known  of  these  are  : — 

The  decisions  of  Mahawthata,  the  embryo  Budh. 

„  Widuya,  one  of  the  ten  great  avatars. 

„  Thudhammasari. 

Kutha. 
„  Dwuttabaung,  first  king  of  Prome. 

„  Sinbyushin. 

The  laws  given  by  Manu  to  the  ruler  Maha  Thamada 
numbered  altogether  eighteen.  From  these  all  others  have 
been  framed.  The  eighteen  original  laws  had  regard  to : — 
I.  Borrowing  money.  2.  Deposits  of  money.  3.  Stealing 
and  altering  the  appearance  of  property  and  selling  it. 
4.  When  a  gift  may  be  had  back  on  demanding  it,  and 
when  not,  there  being  six  kinds  of  gifts.  5.  Deciding  the 
wages  of  carpenters.  6.  Deciding  the  wages  of  labourers. 
7.  Breach  of  promise.  8.  Deciding  disputes  between  the 
owners  of  cattle  and  neat-herds.  9.  Settling  disputed 
boundaries,  i  o.  Deciding  whether  property  purchased  may 
be  returned.  11.  Accusations.  12.  Theft  or  concealment. 
13.  Assault.  14.  Murder.  15.  Deciding  the  proper  conduct 
of  husband  and  wife.  1 6.  The  question  of  slavery.  1 7.  Decid- 
ing if  cock-fighting,  betting,  or  gambling  debts  shall  be  paid. 
1 8.  Partition  of  inherited  property. 

Manu  also  laid  down  that  persons  appointed  to  ad- 
minister the  laws  should  not  only  have  a  competent 
knowledge  of  the  code,  but  should  also  possess  fourteen 
qualifications,  as  follows : —  i .  To  decide  in  strict  accord- 
ance with  the  law.  2.  To  be  respectable.  3.  To  be  of 
moral  character.  4.  To  inspire  awe.  5.  To  command  love. 
6.  To  be  of  good  birth.  7.  To  be  religious.  8.  To  be 
virtuous,  9.  To  be  truthful,  i  o.  To  be  talented.  1 1 .  To 
be  devoted  to  the  study  of  the  law.  12.  To  possess  honesty 
of  purpose  and  intention.      1 3.  Knowledge  of  the  principal 


Lv  JUDICIAL  ADMINISTRATION  511 

parties  and  pleaders  in  a  suit.  14.  Fearlessness  in  deciding 
cases,  or  being  lion-hearted. 

The  supreme  court  in  Burma  was  the  Hlutdaw  con- 
stituted of  four  wungyis,  the  chief  ministers  of  state,  who 
held  their  meetings  in  a  hall  within  the  palace,  which  took 
its  name  from  the  court.  Each  wungyi  (great  burden) 
had  its  wundauk  (prop  of  the  burden)  as  an  assistant  to 
sit  with  him  in  court.  These  wundauks  formed  the  third 
rank  of  ministers,  under  the  four  atwinwuns  (inner  burdens), 
who  were  a  kind  of  household  ministers,  or  privy  councillors, 
and  sat  in  a  special  court,  called  the  Byadeit,  also  in  the 
palace.  The  latter  had  nominally  as  their  chief  duty  to  deal 
with  the  monopolies  which  Thibaw  Min  set  himself  to 
establish  in  such  abundance.  But  as  any  man,  no  matter 
what  special  education  or  preparation  he  might  have  had, 
was  considered  eligible  for  any  post,  political,  military,  civil, 
or  judicial,  so  both  the  Hlut  and  the  Byadeit  conducted  all 
manner  of  business,  from  the  external  relations  of  the  country 
to  ordinary  criminal  or  civil  appeal  cases  sent  up  from  the 
y6ndaw,  the  criminal  court,  where  the  myowuns  (city 
burdens),  usually  two  in  number,  sat  daily  ;  or  from  the 
tayaydn,  the  civil  court,  where  two  tayathugyis  (great 
men  of  the  law)  presided.  In  either  of  these  inferior 
courts  it  was  not  at  all  uncommon  for  a  wundauk,  or  even  a 
wungyi,  to  attend  and  investigate  important  cases.  But 
original  suits  were  also  frequently  heard  before  the  Hlut, 
and  many  cases  were  decided  by  the  wungyis  or  any  of 
the  subordinate  officials  in  their  private  houses.  Formerly 
indeed  this  was  the  chief  source  of  their  salaries,  for  costs  to 
the  amount  of  ten  per  cent  on  the  property  under  dispute 
went  of  right  to  the  judge.  The  late  king  instituted  the 
custom  of  fixed  salaries,  and  Thibaw  Min  retained  it,  but 
neglected  to  pay  the  money.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  law 
matters,  even  in  the  capital,  were  carried  on  in  a  very  casual, 
haphazard  sort  of  a  way.  There  was  no  attempt  at  a 
distribution  of  public  business  into  departments,  and  each 
individual  wungyi  took  his  part  in  deliberations  on  all 
kinds  of  subjects  with  as  much  confidence  as  if  he  were  an 
expert. 

If  the   capital   displayed  a  lack  of  system,   there  was 


512  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap, 

certainly  little   to   be   expected   from   the   provinces.     The 
same  general    system    prevailed    in    the  separate   districts. 
Each  one  was  ruled  by  a  governor,  or  myowun,  appointed 
by  the  Hlutdaw  or  by  the  king,  and  armed  with  full  powers, 
military,  judicial,  civil,  and  fiscal.     Appeals  might  be   sent 
from    his    decisions    to    the    Hlut,    but    otherwise   he    was 
entirely  irresponsible,  as  long  as  he  was  regular  in  forward- 
ing the   prescribed    revenue    to    the    myosa,  the  prince  or 
princess,  or  other  great  personage  who  "  ate  "  the  province. 
The  "  town-eater  "  almost  never  went  to  his  district,  so  that 
it  was    entirely  at  the  mercy  of   the  myowun,  and   might 
be  squeezed  by  him    as  much  as   he  thought  proper   and 
judicious.     The  subordinate  officials  varied  in  different  pro- 
vinces according  to  their  requirements.     All,   however,  had 
myosayes,  secretaries,  or  town-clerks,  nahkandaws,  "  receivers 
of  the  royal  orders,"  and  sikk^s,  chiefs  in  war,  military  officers, 
who  formed  a  provincial  council  or  court  holding  daily  sit- 
tings and  making  reports  to  the  myowun.      In  some  districts, 
according  to  the  duties,  there  were  in  addition  to  these  an 
akunwun,  or  revenue  superintendent,  an  akaukwun,  or   col- 
lector of  customs,  as  also  in   riparian  districts  a  yewun,  or 
myitsinwun,  who   had  a  jurisdiction   over   the  entire  river. 
This   authority,  however,  very   often  vested   in   one  of  the 
governors.     Thus  the  last  Wun  of  Minhla  had  power  of  life 
and  death,  as  high  sheriff  of  the  Irrawaddy,  from  his  own 
town,  close  on  the  British  frontier,  right  up  to  Sagaing,  not 
far  below  Mandalay.     Other  officials  were  the  htaunghmu, 
or    jailer,    the    tagahmu,    governors    of    the    gates,    called 
windawhmu  in  the  capital,  where  they  were  very  important 
officers,   and   the  ayatgaung,  heads  of  quarters,  in  all   the 
larger  towns.      Under  each  governor  of  a  province  were  a 
number    of    governors    of    the    separate    towns    under    his 
jurisdiction.     These  were  called   myo6k  when   the  appoint- 
ment was  temporary,  or  only  for  life,  and  myothugyi  when 
it  was  hereditary,  as  was  most  frequently  the  case.     Besides 
these,    in    some    of   the    provinces    there    were    taikthugyi, 
governors  of  circles  or  groups  of  villages,  each  of  which  had 
its  own  ywathugyi,  who  in  turn  had  under  him  sundry  gaungs 
to  look  after  each  his  specially  allotted  number  of  houses.    As 
each  of  these  subordinates  had  to  send  in  regularly  to  his 


JUDICIAL  ADMINISTRATION  513 


immediate  superior  a  certain  fixed  sum,  determined  without 
regard  to  favourable  seasons,  health  of  the  population,  or 
anything  of  that  kind,  and  as  each  man  was  judge  over  the 
people  in  his  charge,  it  may  naturally  be  supposed  that  the 
general  population  did  not  lead  a  very  happy  life.  Com- 
plaints might  be  made  against  extortion  and  illegal 
decisions,  but  the  heads  of  tracts,  if  they  had  the  money, 
could  always  stifle  inquiry. 

Some  of  the  laws  deduced  from  Manu's  eighteen 
original  enactments  strike  one  as  being  rather  singular. 
For  example,  if  two  men  quarrel  and  fight  and  one  of  them 
is  killed,  there  is  no  penalty ;  but  if  a  third  party  interferes 
and  kills  or  injures  one  of  the  original  combatants,  he  must 
pay  the  ordinary  fine  for  murder,  or  causing  hurt.  Should 
he  himself  be  killed,  the  other  two  are  subject  to  no  penalty. 
When  a  man  is  guilty  of  adultery  with  another  man's  wife,  if 
it  be  proved  to  be  the  first  time,  he  must  pay  the  fine  for 
adultery,  usually  the  price  of  the  woman,  assessed  according 
to  the  judge's  opinion  ;  if  it  is  her  second  offence,  he  only 
pays  half  the  fine ;  but  if  she  has  been  guilty  for  a  third 
time,  he  pays  no  penalty  at  all. 

If  one  man  curses  another  and  some  evil  happens,  he 
must  pay  twice  the  price  of  the  damage  incurred  ;  thus,  if 
the  man  dies  he  must  pay  twice  the  value  of  a  man  ;  two 
cows  if  a  cow  dies,  and  so  on. 

When  the  king  dies  there  is  a  general  pardon  of  all 
offences,  and  a  remission  of  fines,  except  in  the  case  of  debt. 
There  are  also  seven  things  which  cannot  be  reclaimed  after 
the  death  of  the  king  under  whom  they  were  promised  or 
given.  These  are: — i.  Deposits.  2.  Pledges.  3.  Money 
paid  wrongly  by  the  parties  in  a  law-suit.  4.  Things 
carried  off  by  violence,  or  seized  upon  without  sufficient  title. 
5.  Promises.  6.  Things  secretly  stolen.  7.  Things  that 
have  been  voluntarily  given  up  by  one  man  and  taken 
possession  of  by  another. 

The  decisions  of  Mahawthata,  Princess  Thudhammasari, 
and  others  are  of  little  value  from  a  strictly  legal  point  of 
view.  They  are  chiefly  of  a  religious  character.  The 
princess  begins  by  saying  that  her  cases  are  to  be  con- 
sidered as  guides  to  nobles  and  judges  as  to  the  line  they 

2  L 


514  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        cha/. 

should  follow.  To  an  English  barrister  they  would  seem  to 
be  excerpts  from  the  Arabian  Nights,  and  as  far  from  prece- 
dents as  it  is  possible  to  imagine  anything.  The  play  of 
Mahawthata  tells  of  the  Lord  Buddha  in  the  birth  in  which 
he  exhibited  the  most  consummate  wisdom  and  acumen,  as 
in  Wethandaya  he  embodies  the  spirit  of  liberality.  In 
both  these  births,  as  in  his  last,  Shin  Gautama  spoke  from 
the  moment  he  was  brought  forth.  As  Wethandaya  he 
immediately  entreated  his  mother  for  something  to  give  in 
charity  to  the  poor,  and  distributed  forthwith  the  four 
hundred  pieces  of  silver  she  gave  him.  As  Mahawthata  he 
appeared  in  the  world  with  a'  plant  in  his  hand,  and,  hold- 
ing it  up,  said,  "  This  is  medicinal  herb."  Throughout  all 
this  life  he  was  constantly  displaying  extraordinary  wisdom, 
jealous  ministers  being  in  the  habit  of  propounding  difficult 
cases  to  him.  Thus  he  was  shown  a  log  of  sha  {Acacia 
Catechu),  from  which  cutch,  stupidly  called  Terra  Japonica,  is 
obtained,  and  asked  which  was  the  upper  end  and  which  the 
lower  end.  He  solved  the  problem  by  putting  it  in  the 
water,  when  the  lower  end,  as  being  the  heavier,  sank  deeper 
in  the  water.  Another  case  is  exactly  similar  to  the  famous 
Biblical  decisions  of  Solomon.  These  decisions,  though  they 
may  be  interesting,  are  hardly  valuable  as  standard  leading 
cases. 

Some  of  the  definitions  of  crimes  in  the  Dhammathat 
are  a  little  singular.  Thus  among  the  ten  descriptions  of 
assault  are  mentioned  :  "  saying  in  regard  to  a  lunatic,  a 
drunkard,  or  a  half-witted  person  who  is  ill,  that  he  will  die, 
and  he  dies " ;  "  refusing  restitution  for  cattle  killed."  ; 
"  standing  near  an  assailant."  To  avoid  being  summoned 
for  one  of  the  twenty-seven  kinds  of  abuse  one  must  be  very 
circumspect,  for  there  is  ground  for  action  if  one  says  H6  to 
a  man,  as  the  Mandalay  people  were  fond  of  shouting  H^ 
Kala  after  Europeans.  It  is  equally  risky  to  address  a  man 
as  nin,  i.e.  in  the  third  person  ;  to  say  that  he  is  "  deficient 
in  strength  "  ;  that  he  is  a  stutterer,  bow-legged,  broken-down, 
squinting,  or  afflicted  with  white  spots  on  his  body  ;  that  he 
is  heretical,  or,  finally,  that  he  is  given  to  using  bad  language. 

The  niceties  of  the  law  may  be  illustrated  by  the  follow- 
ing case  from  the  Talaing  Dhammathat.     A  man  in  search 


JUDICIAL  ADMINISTRATION  515 


of  honey  climbed  up  a  high  tree  to  get  at  a  hive.  His  foot 
slipped  and  he  fell  off  a  large  branch  on  to  a  small  one  below. 
He  was  afraid  that  this  would  not  be  able  to  support  his 
weight,  and  called  out  for  assistance  to  a  mahaut,  who  was 
passing  by  on  his  elephant.  The  elephant-driver  held  up 
the  hook  with  which  he  guided  his  animal  and  told  him  to 
come  down  by  it.  The  bee-hunter  seized  the  hook,  and 
while  he  was  holding  it  the  elephant  took  fright  and  ran 
away.  There  were  then  the  mahaut  hanging  on  to  his  hook 
and  the  bee-hunter  clinging  to  the  slender  branch  which 
momentarily  threatened  to  give  way.  Fortunately,  just  at 
this  moment  four  persons  passed  by  and  were  called  to  by 
both  the  bee-hunter  and  the  elephant-driver  to  come  and 
save  them.  They  could  think  of  no  other  expedient  than  to 
hold  out  their  clothes,  which  accordingly  they  did,  spreading 
them  out  as  high  above  their  heads  as  possible,  so  as  to 
break  the  fall.  The  two  men  dropped  from  the  tree  on 
their  four  preservers,  but  what  between  their  own  weight  and 
the  awkwardness  of  the  iron  driving-hook,  the  whole  six 
were  knocked  senseless  and  fell  on  the  ground.  Whilst  they 
lay  in  a  swoon  a  doctor  came  up  and  gave  them  medicines 
which  brought  them  round.  When  all  had  recovered,  he 
demanded  his  fee.  But  the  question  was  who  was  to  pay 
him.  The  elephant-driver  said  he  should  not  be  asked  to 
pay  because  he  tried  to  save  the  bee-hunter's  life  and  was 
an  innocent  cause  of  the  injuries  sustained  by  his  rescuers. 
The  bee-hunter  on  his  part  maintained  that  he  should  not 
be  called  on  for  payment,  seeing  that  if  he  had  not  held 
on  so  tight,  the  mahaut  would  have  fallen  and  been  killed. 
Finally,  the  four  rescuers  said  that  it  was  utterly  unreason- 
able to  ask  them  to  pay,  seeing  that  it  was  through  pure 
generosity  that  they  had  held  out  their  clothes  to  save  the 
lives  of  the  mahaut  and  the  bee-hunter  and  through  this 
act  of  kindliness  they  themselves  had  been  hurt.  The 
elephant-driver  and  the  bee-hunter  somewhat  thanklessly 
retorted  that  if  a  ladder  had  been  brought,  or  had  been 
constructed,  they  could  have  come  down  in  perfect  safety 
and  without  hurt  to  any  one,  and  that  therefore  the  four 
rescuers  should  pay. 

The  question  as  to  who  is  liable  in  this  case  is  a  nice 


5i6  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap 

one,  as  also  is  the  point  as  to  who  should  be  made  defend- 
ants, and  who  should  be  the  witnesses.  The  Taking  Dham- 
mathat  says  that  the  incident  occurred  in  the  province  of 
Kawddnpayit,  in  Hindustan,  and  that  the  case  gave  rise  to 
the  recognition  of  the  root,  trunk,  and  branches  of  the  law, 
which  till  then  had  not  been  defined.  From  whom,  or 
whether  the  doctor  got  his  fee  at  all,  we  are  not  told. 

Advocates,  pleaders,  or  barristers  were,  it  is  stated,  un- 
known until  a  case  occurred  when  certain  suitors  from  the 
jungle  came  before  the  king  and  were  not  able  to  understand 
the  court  language.  A  court  official  was  therefore  allowed 
to  assist  them  and  turn  their  rustic  jargon  into  comprehensible 
speech.  These  as  ''  standing  before "  the  king  were  called 
Sh^n^,  as  it  were  mouthpieces  for  the  parties  to  the  suit,  and 
the  king,  who  acted  as  judge.  The  convenience  derived 
from  their  superior  knowledge  and  experience  afterwards  led 
to  the  establishment  of  a  regular  body  of  barristers. 

If  the  laws  are,  some  of  them,  somewhat  singular  to 
those  who  are  accustomed  to  the  scientific  Indian  penal  and 
civil  codes,  as  well  as  to  the  growth  of  centuries  of  Western 
practice,  the  method  of  binding  over  witnesses  to  tell  the 
truth,  or  at  least  the  book  on  which  they  are  required  to 
pledge  themselves,  is  sufficiently  startling.  The  Book  of  the 
Oath,  Kyeinsa,  is  still  used  in  British  courts  of  justice,  and 
it  is  to  be  hoped  that  all  the  younger  members  of  the 
population  know  what  terrible  punishments  they  are  drawing 
down  on  themselves  when  they  hold  it  over  their  heads  and 
promise  to  tell  the  truth  ;  what  frightful  penalties  will  befall 
them  if  they  swerve  in  the  least  degree  from  the  exact  facts 
of  the  case.  In  the  old  times  a  man  used  always  to  be 
sworn  on  this  book  in  a  place  where  there  was  no  shadow, 
or  in  a  pagoda,  and  this  custom  was  maintained  to  the  end 
in  native  Burma.  There  was  a  special  shrine  for  the  purpose 
in  Mandalay,  and  at  the  Shwe  Mingdn  Paya,  near  the  oil- 
wells  of  Yenangyaung,  there  is  a  stone,  ordinarily  deposited 
between  two  images  of  the  Hentha,  the  Brahminy  goose, 
which  the  swearer  takes  in  his  hand,  lamps  being  lighted  at 
the  same  time.  The  book  itself  might  not  be  kept  in 
ordinary  places.  Some  copies  were  kept  in  the  court  in  a 
specially  consecrated  box,  some  in  a  zayat,  and  some,  more 


LV  JUDICIAL  ADMINISTRATION  517 

terrific  in  their  denunciations,  in  little  receptacles  fixed  high 
up  in  trees. 

With  the  view  of  guarding  thoughtless  or  reckless  people 
against  themselves  there  were  certain  classes  enumerated 
who  should  not  under  any  circumstances  be  allowed  to  take 
the  oath,  or  to  appear  as  witnesses.  These  were  : — i.  Those 
who  do  not  believe  in  the  merit  of  good  works.  2.  Such 
people  as  trade  with  the  goods  of  others.  3.  Parties  in- 
terested in  the  case,  as  well  as  their  relations,  friends,  and 
enemies.  4.  Great  talkers.  5.  Sick  persons.  6.  Old  men. 
7.  Children.  8.  Overbearing  men.  9.  Public  singers.  10. 
Actresses.  11.  Women  of  ill  fame.  12.  Goldsmiths.  13. 
Painters.  14.  Blacksmiths.  15.  Cobblers.  16.  Asthmatic 
persons.  1 7.  Low  people.  1 8.  Gluttons.  1 9.  Gamblers. 
20.  Hot-tempered  people.  21.  Doctors.  22.  Thieves.  23. 
Pregnant  women.  24.  Hermaphrodites,  a  by  no  means  un- 
common class  in  Burma.  If,  however,  both  parties  to  the 
suit  gave  their  consent,  some  of  these  classes  might  be 
allowed  to  give  testimony.  Another  curious  old  provision 
was  that  when  one  of  the  litigants  produced  a  witness,  he 
himself  was  not  required  to  take  the  oath,  while  contrariwise, 
if  he  swore  on  the  book,  it  was  not  imperative  that  he  should 
call  witnesses. 

The  Book  of  the  Oath  is  not  quite  fixed  in  its  length, 
nor  in  the  number  of  the  imprecations  which  it  threatens 
against  false  witnesses.  Some  copies  are  much  more  diffuse 
than  others.  It  is  always  written  on  palm-leaf,  in  the 
ordinary  character,  and  these  in  English  courts  are  kept 
wrapped  up  in  the  ecclesiastical  kabbalw^,  usually  sewn  for 
greater  convenience.     The  commonest  version  is  as  follows : — 

I  will  speak  the  truth.  If  I  should  be  influenced  by  the 
laws  of  demerits,  namely,  passion,  folly,  anger,  false  opinion, 
immodesty,  pride,  scepticism,  hard-heartedness,  then  may  all 
these  calamities  attend  me  and  my  relations,  wherever  we 
may  be,  by  land  or  by  water,  travelling  or  remaining  quietly 
at  home.  May  the  nats  who  guard  the  sacred  heavens,  the 
athura  nats  and  all  other  giants,  the  nats  who  guard  the 
three  Baskets  of  the  Sacred  Law,  delivered  by  the  most 
excellent  Buddha,  and  all  the  other  holy  writings  and 
sermons  ;   may  the  nats,  the  guardians  of  the  sacred  relics 


5i8  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  holy  hairs,  the  teeth,  the  jawbone,  the  frontal  bone,  and 
all  the  other  relics  ;  the  keepers  and  warders  of  countless 
shrines,  all  golden  and  made  famous  by  sacred  memories ; 
the  protectors  of  the  images  and  figures  of  the  supreme 
Buddha  ;  may  the  nats  who  guard  the  sacred  mount  and  all 
the  hills  of  the  Southern  Island  ;  the  nats  who  watch  and 
ward  the  mighty  rivers,  the  lesser  streams,  the  lakes,  the 
torrents,  cataracts,  and  whirlpools  ;  the  nats  who  preside 
over  the  vast  forests  and  the  single  trees  ;  the  nats  of  the  sun, 
the  moon,  the  stars,  and  meteors,  the  clouds,  winds,  mists, 
and  exhalations  ;  may  the  naga  and  the  gal6n,  hideous 
dragons,  and  cruel  birds,  all  bilus,  ogres,  demons,  warlocks, 
all  the  evils  that  come  from  without  the  body  ;  may  all  these 
spirits  and  ill  things  unite  to  slay  me  and  mine,  to  the 
utmost  limits  of  kinship,  if  I  speak  not  the  truth. 

When  I  and  my  relations  are  on  land,  let  all  the  hideous 
land  creatures,  tigers,  bilus,  elephants,  male  and  female, 
demons  and  giants,  buffaloes,  poisonous  serpents,  the  cobra, 
and  the  hamadryad,  the  scorpion,  and  the  centipede ;  may 
they  all  seize,  bite,  crush,  strangle,  and  devour  us  ;  may  the 
earth  open  and  swallow  us  up  ;  a  thunderbolt  from  heaven 
descend  and  annihilate  us,  if  I  speak  not  the  truth. 

When  we  travel  by  water  may  our  boats  sink  and  be 
shattered  by  storms  ;  may  crocodiles,  writhing  snakes,  and 
ravenous  fishes  kill  and  devour  us,  that  we  suddenly  die, 
perish,  and  come  to  utter  destruction,  if  I  speak  not  the  truth. 

May  the  five  calamities  occasioned  by  fire,  water,  thieves, 
governors  and  enemies  oppress  us  ;  may  we  be  subject  to  all 
the  maladies  of  the  body ;  may  we  be  as  fools  and  idiots, 
aiiflicted  with  madness  and  leprosy,  with  all  kinds  of  loath- 
some disease  and  evils  that  deform  the  body,  with  itch, 
scurvy,  ulcers,  deafness,  blindness,  dysentery,  the  plague,  and 
all  manner  of  mental  and  corporal  miseries ;  may  we  incur 
the  hatred  and  punishments  of  judges  and  rulers  ;  may  we 
be  for  ever  separated  from  our  forefathers,  children,  and 
relations,  throughout  all  succeeding  worlds  ;  may  fire  destroy 
our  goods ;  lances,  swords,  arrows,  and  knives,  and  all  sorts 
of  weapons  cut  and  pierce  and  maim  our  bodies  ;  may  I 
die  instantly,  vomiting  up  clotted,  black  blood  before  the 
assembled  people,  if  I  speak  not  the  truth. 


JUDICIAL  ADMINISTRATION  519 


Moreover,  if  I  speak  not  the  truth,  may  I  and  all  my 
family  after  death  be  instantly  cast  into  the  abyss  of  hell, 
there  to  wander  for  a  cycle  of  worlds  through  the  eight  great 
hells,  and  all  the  smaller  ones,  suffering  from  all  the  torments 
of  these  places  ;  and  when  at  length  I  shall  emerge  thence, 
may  I  become  a  pyeitta,  or  a  thurak^,  and  thereafter  some 
hideous  animal,  passing  through  all  the  wretchedness  of  the 
four  states  of  punishment.  Finally,  when  after  innumerable 
worlds  I  shall  at  length  once  more  become  man,  may  I  be 
the  slave  of  other  men  a  hundred  and  a  thousand  times,  if  I 
speak  not  now  the  truth. 

But  if  I  speak  truth,  may  I  and  all  my  relations  escape 
the  three  calamities,  the  four  states  of  punishment,  and  the 
five  enemies  ;  may  all  the  ills  in  the  body  and  all  that  are 
without  the  body  keep  far  away  ;  may  our  wealth,  honour, 
and  estimation  ever  increase,  and  when  we  die  may  we 
attain  the  happiness  of  men  and  dewas,  and  speedily  enter- 
ing on  the  noble  path,  reach  the  cloudless  peace  of  Ne'ban. 

A  desire  to  avoid  denouncing  on  themselves  all  these 
fearsome  penalties  led  in  the  old  times  to  a  good  deal  of 
trying  by  ordeal,  a  form  of  decision  which  still  prevails 
extensively  in  country  districts,  and  occasionally  was  made 
use  of  even  in  Mandalay.  The  forms  used  are  those  familiar 
in  old  times  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  such  as  eating 
consecrated  rice,  like  the  first  English  corsnaed,  plunging 
the  finger  wrapped  in  a  thin  palm -leaf  into  melted  tin  ; 
immersing  accuser  and  accused  in  water  to  see  who  would 
remain  longest  below  and  prove  his  innocence  or  guilt.  The 
yahans  are  usually  present  on  these  occasions,  and  recite  certain 
formulae  beforehand,  a  great  concourse  of  people  assembling 
to  see  the  test.  The  opposing  parties  wade  into  the  river, 
or  into  a  tank,  up  to  the  chest  and  then  duck  under,  a 
couple  of  men  holding  a  board  over  their  heads  to  keep 
them  down.  The  one  that  comes  up  first  is  cast  in  the 
case.  Another  form  common  at  the  pagodas  is  for  both 
parties  to  resort  thither,  when  the  monks  again  recite  the 
precepts  and  sundry  other  phrases.  Then  equal  parts  of 
wax  are  carefully  weighed  out,  and  from  these  candles  are 
made  for  plaintiff  and  defendant.  They  are  lighted  simul- 
taneously, and  the  holder  of  the  candle  which  first  burns  out 


520  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

is  adjudged  to  have  lost  the  case,  and  judgment  is  delivered 
forthwith.  The  winning  party,  for  all  the  friends  are  always 
present,  immediately  cause  their  band  to  strike  up,  dancers 
perform  and  songs  are  sung,  and  every  token  of  triumph  is 
exhibited.  Unfortunately,  however,  for  any  supposed  efficacy 
of  the  system,  substitutes  are  allowed,  and  in  addition  to  this 
bribery  plays  as  important  a  part  almost  as  it  did  in  the  law- 
courts  themselves.  The  man  whose  money  went  farthest 
won  his  case,  whether  decided  according  to  the  principles  of 
the  Dhammathat  or  the  lottery  of  the  ordeal. 

The  punishments  inflicted  were  sometimes  very  cruel, 
and  the  treatment  of  the  prisoners  occasionally  savage 
in  the  extreme.  In  criminal  cases  torture  was  frequently 
applied  to  extort  confession  from  the  accused  or  evidence 
from  the  witnesses.  Rich  men  usually  suffered  nothing 
worse  than  a  fine.  For  the  impecunious,  sentences  varied 
from  sundry  stripes  with  a  rattan,  with  or  without  imprison- 
ment, to  mutilation,  perpetual  slavery,  and  death.  Except 
for  debt,  a  man  sentenced  by  the  court  to  slavery  became 
so  with  all  his  descendants  for  ever,  and  they  were  usually 
allotted  to  some  pagoda,  doomed  to  support  life  by  begging 
as  tadaungsa,  or  relegated  to  some  other  of  the  outcast 
classes.  Death  in  Mandalay  was  almost  invariably  by 
decapitation,  the  agony  of  the  condemned  being  occasionally 
prolonged  by  a  fiendish  executioner  ;  the  custom  of  throwing 
victims  to  be  devoured  by  wild  beasts,  or  trodden  to  death 
by  wild  elephants  in  the  elephant-trap,  was  latterly  wholly 
given  up.  In  the  provinces,  however,  other  methods  were  very 
frequently  adopted.  North  of  the  capital  "  crucifixion  "  was 
particularly  common.  The  letwakat,  or  wakattaing,  does 
not  at  all  resemble  the  ordinary  pictorial  representation  of 
the  cross.  It  is  more  like  a  double  ladder,  consisting  of 
three  stout  bamboos  fixed  upright  in  the  ground,  three  bars 
lashed  to  them  horizontally  with  canes,  and  over  these  again 
two  cross-bars  in  the  shape  of  a  St.  Andrew's  cross.  These 
punishment  stakes  were  most  frequently  put  up  on  the  river- 
bank  or  on  sandbanks  in  the  stream,  and  were  particularly 
common  where  the  Shan  and  Kachin  hills  come  down  any- 
where near  the  Irrawaddy.  Sometimes  the  criminal  was 
killed  before  he  was  lashed  up,  sometimes  he  was  tied  up 


i-v  JUDICIAL  ADMINISTRATION  521 

first  and  then  disembowelled  with  a  sword-gash  across  the 
stomach,  or  rendered  helpless  by  a  few  spear-thrusts.  In 
either  case  the  body  was  left  hanging,  to  be  picked  clean  by 
the  vultures,  and  the  bones  gradually  fell  off.  Formerly, 
when  the  mouth  of  the  Irrawaddy  was  Burmese  territory,  a 
favourite  method  used  to  be  to  tie  the  convict  down  at  the 
edge  of  the  stream  at  low  water  and  leave  him  to  be  drowned 
by  the  incoming  tide.  The  fishes  were  often  more  expeditious 
than  the  vultures  in  devouring  their  prey.  The  favourite 
kind  of  stake  for  this  purpose  was  the  "  stump  of  hell,"  the 
irregular  short  stem  of  the  undeveloped  trees  in  a  mangrove 
swamp,  looking  like  pinnacles  or  knobs  rising  out  of  the  con- 
fused network  of  exposed  roots. 

But  imprisonment  was  often  worse  than  death.  The 
prisons  had  never  been  cleaned  out  since  they  were  made, 
some  of  them  noisome  underground  cells,  some  flimsy  wooden 
or  bamboo  structures  open  all  round.  The  prisoners  sat 
with  their  feet  in  the  stocks  perpetually,  and  the  long  bamboo 
which  united  them  was  occasionally  triced  up  so  far  that  the 
poor  wretches  only  touched  the  ground  with  their  shoulders. 
A  favourite  time  for  thus  inverting  them  was  at  night.  But  a 
man  who  had  not  had  enough  money  to  satisfy  the  judge 
might  often  manage  satisfactorily  to  square  the  jailer.  If  he 
effected  that  he  was  on  the  whole  comfortable ;  he  was 
allowed  to  go  away  in  the  morning,  have  his  meals  at  home, 
and  go  back  and  deliver  himself  into  custody  at  night  again. 
But  if  he  had  no  money,  or  no  friends  to  pay  it  for  him,  his 
best  course  was  to  die  at  once,  indeed  he  certainly  would 
before  long,  for  the  only  food  to  be  had  in  prison  was  that 
supplied  by  relatives  of  the  convicts.  If  no  friend  brought 
it,  the  jailer  certainly  would  not  supply  any.  It  was  better 
to  be  "  proclaimed,"  to  suffer  maungkyaw,  than  to  go  to  jail. 
This  was  a  punishment  almost  confined  to  the  capital,  and 
greatly  resembling  the  old  English  naval  practice  of  flogging 
an  offender  ''  round  the  fleet."  The  criminal  was  taken  to 
each  gate  of  the  city,  to  the  corners  of  all  the  chief  streets, 
and  to  sundry  other  frequented  places.  At  each  of  these 
points  his  crime  and  sentence  were  read  out  and  he  was 
flogged.  None  but  the  strong-constitutioned  could  stand  it, 
but  those  who  survived  were  free  men. 


522  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS       ch.  lv 

Notwithstanding  the  severity  of  the  treatment  in  the  jails, 
the  laws  were  really  very  mildly  administered,  and  there  were 
few  whose  relations  could  not  muster  up  enough  to  secure 
them  immunity  from  torture.  Capital  sentences  were  on  the 
whole  rare,  except  when  political  considerations  came  in. 
Then  there  was  no  mercy.  Cattle-stealing  was  very  severely 
punished,  but  murder  could  almost  always  be  purged  by  a 
blood-bote. 


CHAPTER    LVI 

REVENUE   SYSTEM 

The  first  people,  when  they  took  counsel  together  and 
appointed  a  ruler  to  repress  crime  and  manage  the  affairs  of 
the  country,  agreed  that  each  man  should  pay  a  tenth  of  his 
thale  rice,  and  this  tithe  system  remained  in  force  in  Burma 
till  practically  the  end,  not  merely  for  supplying  the  royal 
coffers,  but  also  for  paying  all  public  servants.  King  Minddn 
abolished  the  tithe  system  as  far  as  the  payment  of  local 
officials  was  concerned,  and  arranged  to  give  them  fixed 
salaries  ;  but  even  in  his  time  this  law  was  somewhat  of  a 
dead  letter,  and  under  his  son  the  last  king,  if  governors  and 
secretaries  did  not  resort  to  old  methods  they  got  nothing. 
Unfortunately  for  the  people  the  ancient  system  was  by  far 
the  most  profitable,  and  the  collectors  were  not  at  all  inclined 
to  agitate  for  their  payment  at  stated  times  from  the  treasury. 
The  actual  exactions  of  these  worthies  far  exceeded  what 
appeared  in  their  black  parabaik  notebooks,  and  were  in 
fact  only  limited  by  the  possessions  of  their  victims,  and 
occasionally  by  a  slight  fear  of  consequences,  if  a  desperate 
man  should  complain  to  some  powerful  minister  in  Mandalay. 
Then  the  delinquent  might  be  turned  out  to  make  way  for  a 
friend  of  the  wungyi's.  But,  alas  for  the  people,  the  change, 
if  not  exactly  from  King  Log  to  King  Stork,  was  only  too 
likely  to  be  from  a  well-filled  stork  to  a  lean  and  hungry 
one. 

The  division  of  the  country  for  the  collection  of  revenue 
was  identical  with  that  for  administrative  purposes,  and  the 
several  duties  were  carried  out  by  the  same  persons  with  the 
same  assistants.     The  one  man  was  civil  administrator,  judge, 

523 


524  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

colonel  of  the  local  militia,  and  revenue  collector  for  his 
locality,  whether  province,  circle,  or  simple  village.  The 
fixed  revenue  demanded  by  the  myosa,  whether  prince  of  the 
blood-royal,  minister  of  state,  maid  of  honour,  royal  spittoon- 
bearer,  or  white  elephant,  was  remitted  to  Mandalay  by  the 
resident  lord-lieutenant  of  the  province,  together  with  a 
certain  over-plus  for  the  "  province-eater's  "  secretary,  clerk, 
and  treasurer.  The  whole  amounted  to  from  sixty  to  eighty 
per  cent  of  the  money  nominally  raised  from  the  people, 
and  the  money  kept  back  was  supposed  to  pay  for  the 
services  of  the  myowun  and  his  subordinates.  But  they 
would  have  been  very  much  less  great  people  if  they  got  no 
more  than  this.  It  is  impossible  to  say  how  much  money 
was  collected  in  any  one  district,  or  even  in  any  single  town. 
The  steatite  pencil  records  were  easily  effaced  and  altered, 
even  if  they  were  ever  accurate,  and  no  one  knew  anything 
of  the  details  of  taxation.  A  certain  circle  of  villages  was 
called  upon  to  produce  a  certain  amount  of  revenue  to  go  to 
the  capital,  and  as  long  as  this  was  regularly  paid  no 
questions  were  asked.  The  governor  divided  out  amongst 
the  circles  the  quota  each  was  expected  to  pay,  and 
the  taikthugyi  in  his  turn  made  the  allotment  for  the  villages 
under  his  control ;  finally  the  village  headman  gave  his 
instructions  to  the  tithing-men,  and  they  extorted  all  they 
could  from  the  householders  under  their  control.  The 
system  was  admirably  planned,  but  the  working  of  it  was 
execrable  in  its  cruelty.  Every  Burman  was  the  king's 
slave,  and  could  not  leave  the  district,  far  less  the  country, 
without  the  royal  permission  granted  through  the  local 
authorities.  The  men  who  came  down  to  reap  British 
Burma  paddy-fields  in  November  and  December  had  all  of 
them  to  leave  hostages  behind,  their  wives  and  families  or 
some  near  relation,  to  guarantee  that  they  would  return 
when  the  season  was  over  to  pay  their  ngwedaw. 

This  ngwedaw,  or  "  royal  silver,"  was  the  main  source  of 
the  revenue.  It  was  a  house-tax  or  family-tax,  not  a  capita- 
tion-tax, though  its  incidence  was  generally  so  arranged  that 
it  practically  came  to  be  a  poll  assessment,  or  at  any  rate  a 
kind  of  rude  property-tax.  The  amount  of  land  cultivated, 
which  naturally  varied  according  to  the  number  of  hands 


Lvi  REVENUE  SYSTEM  525 

available  for  the  purpose,  served  as  a  guide,  though  it  seemed 
to  be  a  very  misleading  one,  for  the  amount  demanded  in 
successive  years  and  in  adjoining  districts  differed  in  the  most 
capricious  way.  S^-einggaungs  never  failed  to  scent  out 
where  money  was,  and  to  get  the  lion's  share  of  it ;  for 
where  the  tax-collector  might  also  be  the  judge,  there  was 
small  room  for  hesitation  and  attempts  to  shirk  payment. 
The  myosa  had  a  very  summary  way  of  deciding  the 
matter.  He  announced  to  the  governor  that  there  were  so 
many  houses  in  the  province,  and  that  he  was  to  collect  three, 
or  five,  or  seven  rupees  a  head  from  them.  If  the  estimate 
of  the  number  of  houses  was  too  high,  the  myowun  shifted 
the  trouble  on  to  his  subordinates  ;  if  it  was  too  low — but 
there  is  no  use  considering  that  case,  for  it  was  unheard 
of  for  a  town-eater  to  underestimate  what  was  due  to  him. 

Next  in  importance  were  the  imposts  on  produce.  These 
were  estimated  in  a  still  more  arbitrary  way.  A  p^,  a  land 
measure  not  very  much  different  from  an  English  acre,  is 
assumed  to  produce  a  hundred  baskets  of  paddy.  Of  this 
any  amount  from  ten  up  to  forty  per  cent  was  taken, 
occasionally  in  money  value,  but  more  frequently  in  kind. 
Such  dues  would  be  heavy  enough  in  any  case,  but  they 
were  particularly  burdensome  when  the  land  did  not  produce 
the  hundred  baskets,  assumed  to  be  stored  in  the  public 
granaries,  where  all  the  farmers  must  lodge  their  grain. 
The  amount  assessed  would  be  a  good  crop  for  an  actual  pe; 
but  when  the  land-measurer  started  with  a  cubit  settled  by 
the  standard  of  the  breadth  of  his  own  hand,  the  result  was 
rarely  favourable  to  the  cultivator.  Sometimes  the  process 
was  varied  by  imposing  a  tax  in  kind  or  money  on  every 
plough,  or,  more  often,  on  every  yoke  of  oxen  or  buffaloes. 
In  a  similar  way,  tobacco,  cotton,  wheat,  sesamum,  pepper, 
onions,  and  all  kinds  of  vegetables  were  put  under 
contribution.  A  small  sum  was  also  levied  on  cocoanut,, 
areca,  and  palmyra  palms.  Fishermen  had  to  pay  in  coin 
or  fish-paste  for  each  of  their  nets  or  fish-traps  ;  sometimes 
the  fisheries  were  farmed  out.  Then  there  were  dues  on 
timber,  and  on  the  gums,  resins,  oils,  and  other  forest  produce, 
and  a  multitude  of  other  minor  imposts  ;  dues  on  the  sale  of 
cattle,  licenses  to  sell  various  articles,  a  tax  on  brokerage,. 


526  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

transit  dues,  and  so  on,  all  imposed  whenever  the  district 
offered  an  opportunity  for  them. 

A  fertile  source  of  profit  to  the  officials  were  the  fees  on 
law-suits  and  criminal  cases,  as  well  as  on  minor  matters, 
such  as  the  settlement  of  petty  quarrels,  divorce  suits,  and 
the  like,  which  did  not  require  to  be  formally  tried,  but  could 
be  settled  in  the  verandah  of  the  thugyi's  house  over  a 
cheroot  or  a  fid  of  betel.  At  the  beginning  of  the  year,  and 
on  other  great  kadaw  days,  special  sums  had  always  to  be 
wrung  out  of  the  people  to  furnish  the  presents  required  to 
be  offered  to  the  king  by  all  the  officials,  from  the  myosa 
downwards.  Corvees  and  enforced  duties  of  all  kinds  were 
frequent,  and  the  men  selected  for  such  service  could  only  get 
off  by  furnishing  a  substitute,  or  bribing  the  tithing  man. 
The  king  or  some  great  man  wanted  to  build  a  pagoda,  and 
orders  were  sent  round  to  the  various  circles  that  they  must 
furnish  a  regular  supply  of  workers  daily.  The  talk  or 
myothugyi  drew  up  a  roster,  and  each  man  had  to  go  and 
work  for  a  certain  number  of  days.  If  he  failed  to  go  he 
was  triced  up  to  a  post  or  a  tree  and  got  a  sound  flogging. 
Similar  forced  duties  were  the  protection  of  the  frontier  and 
the  pursuit  of  dacoits.  Such  work  was  particularly  detested, 
for  the  men  had  to  keep  themselves  supplied  with  food,  or 
get  their  friends  to  bring  it  to  them,  and  this  was  not  always 
an  easy  matter.  Besides  such  service  might  last  an  indefinite 
time. 

Added  to  all  the  ordinary  imposts  were  occasional 
extraordinary  contributions  to  the  Crown  on  the  occasion 
of  entering  upon  war,  or  upon  other  public  emergencies.  The 
Hlutdaw  in  Mandalay  fixed  the  amount,  and  it  was  divided 
among  the  governors  of  districts.  In  1798  a  call  of  thirty- 
three  rupees  was  made  from  every  house  in  the  country.  It 
was  two  years  before  the  collection  was  finished,  and  the 
result  was  six  million  rupees.  But  how  much  more  the 
people  paid  is  quite  another  thing.  Very  heavy  calls  were 
also  made  in  1827  to  meet  the  first  instalment  of  the 
indemnity  due  to  the  British  after  the  treaty  of  Yandabo. 
The  money  was  sent  down  at  dead  of  night  to  the  British 
Commissioners,  and  all  the  people  were  ordered  to  close  their 
doors  and  remain  inside  that  they  might  not  see  the  national 


Lvi  REVENUE  SYSTEM  527 

humiliation.  As  an  instance  of  Burman  carelessness  in 
money  matters  it  may  be  mentioned  that  when  the  final 
instalment  was  paid,  considerably  over  the  sum  due  was  sent 
to  Calcutta.  When  the  overplus  was  returned,  there  was 
great  discussion  among  the  Ministers  as  to  what  could  be 
the  motive  of  the  Indian  Government  in  being  so  singularly 
scrupulous. 

A  good  many  districts  were  almost  entirely  exempted 
from  taxes  in  recognition  of  special  services  required  of  them. 
The  inhabitants  of  the  capital  were  particularly  well  off  in 
this  respect.  They  furnished  the  troops  to  guard  the  palace 
and  city.  Moreover,  it  would  have  been  much  more  difficult 
to  oppress  them  with  impunity,  apart  from  the  fact  that  if 
they  were  disaffected  it  would  have  offered  a  premium  to 
rebels.  For  similar  reasons  some  of  the  townships  about 
Mdtshobo  were  free  from  the  ngwedaw.  It  was  from  this 
district  that  Alaungpaya,  the  founder  of  the  dynasty,  came, 
and  insurrectionist  princes  always  made  for  M6tshobo  when 
they  levied  war.  Several  villages  on  the  Irrawaddy,  in  con- 
sideration of  supplying  the  royal  gilded  boats,  manning  the 
royal  barges,  and  passing  on  Court  despatches,  were  relieved 
from  the  family  tax.  But  the  petty  officials  took  very  good 
care  that  they  did  not  grow  rich  on  their  immunities. 

All  these  methods  were  more  or  less  sanctioned  by 
ancient  custom.  Modern  ingenuity  and  requirements,  how- 
ever, found  out  new  ways  of  raising  money.  The  pious 
ardour  of  Mind6n  led  him  to  spend  vast  sums  on  the  erection 
of  pagodas  and  religious  buildings  of  all  kinds,  as  well  as  on 
the  manufactories,  cotton  mills,  foundries,  and  powder  mills 
with  which  he  crowded  the  suburbs  of  Mandalay,  and  closed 
when  he  got  tired  of  them.  All  this  cost  a  very  great  deal 
of  money,  which  even  the  exaction  of  benevolences  from 
wealthy  courtiers  failed  to  supply.  Consequently  Mind6n 
Min  turned  merchant  and  established  a  great  number  of 
royal  monopolies.  The  producers  were  allowed  to  sell  to 
none  but  to  him,  and  he  fixed  the  price  which  he  was 
prepared  to  pay.  For  long,  cotton,  jaggery,  timber,  wheat, 
precious  stones,  and  earth  oil  could  only  be  had  from  the 
royal  merchant,  and  the  trade  with  British  Burma  was  in 
anything  but  a  satisfactory  state.     Then  in   1867,  Colonel 


528  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Fytche,  holding  out  the  inducement  of  increased  customs 
dues  from  the  newly  started  Irrawaddy  Flotilla  Company's 
steamers,  persuaded  his  majesty  to  give  up  all  the  monopolies, 
except  those  of  earth  oil,  timber,  and  precious  stones  ;  and  to 
agree  to  a  uniform  import  and  export  duty  on  all  other  goods 
and  merchandise,  passing  between  British  and  Burmese 
territory,  of  five  per  cent  ad  valorem.  This  treaty  lapsed 
in  1 877  and  was  not  renewed.  Nevertheless,  King  Mind6n 
did  not  renew  the  monopolies. 

When  his  son  came  to  the  throne,  he  issued,  or  there 
was  issued  for  him,  a  proclamation,  stating  that  he  was  going 
to  adopt  Western  forms  of  government,  and  expressly 
announcing  that  he  had  no  intention  of  reviving  the  monopoly 
system.  He  was,  however,  with  his  wild,  extravagant  habits, 
very  soon  in  as  great  monetary  difficulties  as  his  father, 
and  from  1880  began  steadily  to  sell  monopolies  and  give 
grants  of  forest  land  for  hard  cash  payments.  The  new 
monopoly  buyers,  haunted  by  a  fear  of  British  interference, 
and  not  by  any  means  assured  in  their  minds  as  to  the 
stability  of  Thibaw  Min's  rule,  were  anxious  to  get  as 
much  money  as  they  could,  and  therefore  paid  only  the 
most  absurdly  low  prices  for  produce.  The  cultivators,  find- 
ing all  their  labour  in  vain,  began  consequently  in  large 
numbers  to  give  up  farming  or  working  in  the  forests,  the 
consequence  of  which  was  a  still  further  shock  to  the  trade 
with  British  Burma  and  an  entire  inability  on  the  part  of  the 
population  the  following  year  to  pay  the  house-tax.  Besides 
the  monopoly  system  derived  from  his  predecessors,  Thibaw 
Min  also  hit  on  the  notion  of  lotteries  for  the  replenishment 
of  his  treasury.  The  system  worked  very  well  for  a  time, 
and  brought  in  great  quantities  of  money,  but  latterly  the 
loose  coin  of  the  populace  had  all  been  netted,  and  the  lottery 
source  of  revenue  was  pretty  nearly  worked  out  In  1879 
and  1880  Mandalay  was  simply  flooded  with  lottery-offices, 
each  under  the  superintendence  of  a  minister  of  high  rank. 
Those  who  were  able  to  show  the  king  the  most  money 
were  highest  in  the  royal  favour,  and  consequently  the 
rivalry  between  these  worthies  ran  very  strong.  All  manner 
of  dodges  were  tried  to  entice  speculators  away  from  all 
other    offices    to    the    minister's    own.     The    Hpaung-wun, 


Lvi  REVENUE  SYSTEM  529 

Myowun,  the  lord  high  admiral,  and  lord  mayor's  establish- 
ment was  generally  admitted  to  be  the  largest  and  best, 
and  it  was  certainly  he  who  first  began  to  try  and  allure  the 
people.  He  secured  the  old  custom-house  buildings  for  his 
office,  and  enclosed  a  wide  expanse  round  about  it  with 
a  strong  bamboo  fence.  Porous  pots  of  deliciously  cool 
drinking  water,  each  pot  supplied  with  a  number  of  tin 
mugs,  were  arranged  on  stands  all  round  the  sides.  The 
antisoporific  letpet,  the  gigantic,  but  soothing,  green  cheroot, 
and  the  good  betel  lay  in  great  heaps  on  the  tables  every- 
where, and  vanished  with  extraordinary  rapidity.  A  dozen 
or  more  punkahs  were  hung  up  and  worked  by  coolies,  so  as 
to  calm  the  brains  and  cool  the  heated  faces  of  excited 
clients.  Later  on,  when  other  wuns  and  letthondaw  copied 
his  methods,  the  resourceful  Hpaungwun  added  bands  of 
music,  dancing  girls,  and  even  regular  dramatic  performances, 
kept  up  perpetually,  to  the  other  attractions  of  his  place 
of  business.  Some  managers  strove  to  get  the  better  of 
their  neighbours  by  giving  the  people  unlimited  supplies  of 
palm-toddy,  in  the  hope  that  the  heady  liquor  might  induce 
them  to  risk  their  last  coins.  Others  hit  upon  the  device  of 
returning  one  pice — about  one  farthing — on  each  ticket 
taken.  Others  again,  desperate  at  the  thought  of  being 
unable  to  render  a  good  account  to  their  royal  master, 
engaged  gangs  of  bullies,  who  went  about  threatening  people 
with  violence  or  false  accusations  in  the  law-courts  if  any 
but  their  master  were  patronised,  while  the  Zegyodaw 
Myowun,  U  Tha  O,  in  virtue  of  his  official  position  as  keeper 
of  the  markets,  sent  his  subordinates  to  the  Chinese  gambling- 
house  keepers,  and  forced  them  to  subscribe  periodically  for 
fifty  tickets  at  a  couple  of  rupees  each,  if  they  hoped 
to  retain  their  gambling  licenses.  Fired  by  his  example, 
the  Yaw  Shwedaik  and  Taingda  atwinwuns  also  made  use 
of  their  court  influence  to  draw  subscribers.  Brokers  and 
traders  of  all  nationalities  who  had  business  with  the  palace 
were  put  down  for  a  couple  of  hundred  tickets  or  so,  on  pain 
of  losing  their  contracts.  One  of  the  wundouks  was  ad- 
vanced and  heedless  enough  to  select  the  Dhammaydn,  a 
place  of  worship  and  prayer,  for  his  lottery -office.  All 
the  old  lines  were  upset.     Drawings  were  held  whenever  the 

2  M 


530  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  lvi 

lists  were  filled  up,  no  matter  whether  it  was  an  ubond, 
or  a  more  sacred  feast,  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  minds 
of  the  people  were  kept  in  a  state  of  perpetual  unhealthy 
excitement. 

Neither  buyers  nor  sellers  were  to  be  seen  in  the  bazaar. 
Cultivators  sold  off  their  farming  stock  and  implements,  and 
launched  all  their  money  into  the  state  lotteries.  Fathers 
sold  their  daughters,  and  husbands  their  wives,  to  have  a 
final  try  for  fortune,  until  the  lottery  managers  issued  a 
notice  that  they  would  give  no  more  tickets  in  exchange  for 
women.  To  fill  up  the  totals  faster,  and  draw  in  every 
available  coin,  twenty,  or  even  more,  people  were  allowed  to 
club  together  to  buy  a  single  ticket.  Business  was  entirely 
suspended,  and  all  the  people  hovered  about  the  lottery- 
offices,  longing  for  the  drawing,  while  cleaned-out  speculators 
prowled  about  day  and  night,  watching  for  an  opportunity  to 
thieve  and  rob.  How  it  was  that  the  plundered  people  did 
not  rise  against  the  government,  or  at  least  against  the  lottery 
managers,  is  a  mystery,  but  they  did  not.  The  suburbs  of 
Mandalay  were  filled  for  a  time  with  ruined  gamblers,  until 
the  soldiery  were  employed  to  drive  them  farther  afield,  when 
many  made  their  way  to  the  frontier,  and  recouped  them- 
selves by  raids  on  British  Burma  villages.  Eventually  money 
failed,  or  the  people  were  disillusionised,  and  the  lottery- 
offices,  though  several  remained  open,  drove  but  a  very  slight 
trade.  Then  Thibaw  Min  had  to  resort  to  other  measures 
to  meet  his  expenditure,  and  from  July  1881  began  dis- 
posing of  monopolies  right  and  left.  Having  finished  the 
export  monopolies,  he  commenced  with  those  on  imports. 
The  British  trade  with  Upper  Burma  was  being  steadily  ruined, 
and  the  war  which  ended  in  the  extinction  of  the  kingdom 
of  Burma  was  made  inevitable. 


CHAPTER  LVII 

LAND    TENURE 

In  India  the  Raja  has  always  been  considered  the  chief 
proprietor  of  the  soil  and  the  lord  paramount  over  all  those 
who  own  it  or  dwell  upon  it.  In  Burma  precisely  the  reverse 
of  this  system  obtained.  The  king  was  indeed  considered 
entitled  to  a  share  of  the  produce,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
undoubtedly  got  pretty  nearly  all  of  it ;  but  the  origin  of 
the  land  tenure  rested  on  an  entirely  different  foundation. 
The  Burmans  go  back  to  the  first  peopling  of  the  earth  and 
the  appointment  of  the  saintly  Payalaung  to  be  ruler 
over  them.  Maha  Thamada  came  after  the  lands  had  been 
pretty  generally  taken  up  by  the  people,  and  therefore  the 
cultivators  of  the  original  thal6  san  had  no  intention  of 
appointing  him  supreme  landlord,  when  they  chose  him  to  be 
the  source  of  the  Law  and  of  the  administration  of  justice. 
He  acquired  a  share  of  the  produce  of  the  country  only  by 
the  free  gift  of  the  people,  who,  to  provide  revenues  for  him,  of 
their  own  accord  surrendered  a  tenth  part  of  all  their  crops 
that  he  might  be  free  to  devote  himself  entirely  to  the 
management  of  the  public  affairs  and  the  execution  of  the 
laws.  This  right  to  a  tenth  of  the  produce  of  the  soil,  and 
no  more,  is  explicitly  laid  down  in  the  Indian  Buddhist  code, 
the  Dhammathat,  or  laws  of  Manu.  This  ancient  book, 
which,  by  the  way,  is  entirely  distinct  from  the  Indian 
Institutes  of  Manu,  enunciates  as  follows  in  the  sixth 
chapter :  "  The  king,  who  is  our  ruler,  must  abide  by  the 
ten  kingly  laws.  All  land  which  is  unclaimed  shall  be  his, 
but  he  shall  have  no  right  to  take  all.  Such  lands  as  are 
cultivated  by  man,  or  have  been  previously  reclaimed,  shall 

531 


532  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

remain  to  the  cultivator  and  his  heirs.  But  he  shall  have  a 
tenth  of  the  produce  of  all  rice-lands,  orchards,  and  gardens  ; 
and  all  excise  and  ferry  duties,  as  well  as  canals  and  public 
works,  shall  belong  to  him.  Through  a  succession  of  worlds 
the  first  king,  the  great  Maha  Thamada,  has  established 
one-tenth  to  be  his  portion  for  ever,  and  let  this  be  regarded 
as  an  everlasting  precedent." 

According  to  the  Dhammathat  there  are  seven  methods 
by  which  landed  property  may  be  acquired.  These  are  as 
follows  : — I.  By  gift  from  the  king.  This  is  made  only  to 
soldiers  and  officials.  2.  By  inheritance.  3.  By  purchase. 
4.  By  allotment  from  civil  officers.  5.  By  personal  reclaim- 
ing from  the  jungle.  6.  By  gift.  7.  By  unchallenged 
occupation  for  a  period  of  ten  years. 

The  first  two  titles  are  called  perfect.  The  remainder 
are  open  to  question,  and  may  be  disputed  by  any  one  who 
can  show  a  prior  claim.  In  actual  fact,  however,  it  may  be 
said  that  the  man  who  reclaims  for  himself  a  piece  of  land 
out  of  the  jungle  becomes  by  his  industry  proprietor  of  the 
clearing,  without  reference  to  local  authorities,  village  elders, 
or  any  one  at  all,  and  has  thereafter  an  inalienable  right  to 
his  tenure,  with  no  dues  to  pay  whatever,  except  the  sum 
the  taikthugyi  may  see  fit  to  assess  him  at.  That  worthy's 
valuation,  however,  always  displayed  an  enthusiastic  belief 
in  the  fertility  of  the  soil.  The  landed  proprietor  could 
dispose  of  it  by  gift,  or  he  might  sell  it ;  otherwise  it  descended 
to  his  heirs  and  assigns  in  the  order  of  succession  ;  the  whole 
right  and  title  was  essentially  vested  in  the  owner  and  the 
heirs  of  his  body.  The  tenure  was,  therefore,  by  what  lawyers 
call  fee-simple,  udal,  or  allodial  right.  The  estate  left  by  the 
original  occupier  was  seldom  broken  up.  The  heirs  tilled  parts 
of  it,  or  gathered  the  whole  crop  in  successive  years  ;  so  that 
the  land  did  not  require  to  be  split  up  into  infinitesimal 
parts.  This  practice  was  rendered  all  the  easier  by  the  thin- 
ness of  the  population.  It  was  open  to  any  one  at  any  time 
to  carve  for  himself  out  of  the  forest  a  holding  of  his  own, 
and  thus  there  was  no  temptation  to  break  up  the  original 
family  acres.  It  is  singular  that  under  a  rule  so  completely 
despotic  as  that  of  Burma,  where  every  man  was  the  king's 
slave,  and  could  not  cross  the  borders  without  his  permission, 


LAND  TENURE  533 


the  right  of  land  tenure  should  always  have  been  so  fixed 
and  certain.  The  fondness  with  which  the  people  cling  to 
their  ancestral  l^ids  has  something  of  almost  religions  fervmir 
injts  tenacity.  As  long  as  a  family  remains  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  their  inheritance  nothing  will  persuade  them  to  give 
up  their  connection  with  it.  In  Upper  Burma,  to  the  present 
day,  land  is  never  sold  as  the  term  would  bf  iinHprgtnnH  I'p 
Euro£ej^__'iliejtransaction  which  _go^_b}^the  name  of  a  sale 
is,  in  reality,  a  kind  of  mortgaging,  or,  more  exactly,  pawning, 
ir3i^K^^a-4erai-ean--benEeti^iyttlrTegayd~to4aad^  ~~^ 

The  estate  passes  from  one  occupant  to  another  for  a 
certain  sum  of  money,  and  it  is  clearly  understood  that  if  at 
any  time  the  original  owner  is  in  a  position  to  reclaim  his 
property  he  may  do  so  whether  the  purchaser  likes  it  or  not. 
Farther  than  this  even,  the  buyer  cannot  sell  the  land  to  a 
third  party  without  first  obtaining  the  consent  of  its  former 
owner.  Notwithstanding  this  feeling,  however,  it  is  seldom 
that  a  property  can  be  found  which  has  remained  for  any 
considerable  length  of  time  in  the  same  family.  This  is 
owing  to  the  constant  rebellions  and  wars  between  Peguans 
and  Burmese  and  Shans,  which  afflicted  the  country  for  five 
hundred  years.  All  those  who  were  not  killed  were  driven 
away  from  their  former  homes  by  ruthless  invaders  or  were 
drafted  off  to  fight  for  the  king.  In  the  short  intervals  of 
peace  rival  governors,  in  desperation  for  means  to  raise  the 
revenues  expected  from  their  provinces,  would  tempt  people 
away  from  their  former  homes  by  the  offer  of  rewards  or  a 
reduction  of  body  service.  Thus  in  some  cases  the  proprietors 
were  killed  out,  in  others  they  left  for  districts  so  remote  that 
it  was  impossible  to  retain  a  hold  on  the  ancestral  property, 
however  great  their  attachment  to  it.  As  an  illustration  of 
the  sanctity  attaching  to  ownership  of  land,  the  law  concerning 
church  lands  may  be  quoted  from  Buddhaghosha's  Parables  : 
"  Whoso  shall  take  for  himself  or  for  another  wutmye,  con- 
secrated or  glebe-land,  shall  become  a  mite,  or  a  white  ant 
upon  that  sacred  ground  for  the  whole  of  100,000  cycles." 

The  eighteenth  of  the  original  eighteen  laws  given  by 
Manu  to  the  king  refers  to  the  partition  of  property,  and  an 
elaboration  of  this  points  out  sixteen  descriptions  of  children 
who  cannot  claim  a  portion  of  their  parents'  property.     The 


534  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS         chap. 

distinctions  are  more  minute  than  is  at  all  necessary  or  indeed 
comprehensible.  They  include  all  children  born  out  of  wed- 
lock, among  whom  are  reckoned  such  as  are  born  before  the 
parents  have  been  married  ten  months  ;  all  children  that  are 
purchased,  or  adopted  by  any  other  ceremony  than  that  of 
abadita  or  keiktima  ;  and  such  as  "  from  respect  or  affection 
style  their  guardians  father  or  mother."  The  settlement  of 
boundary  marks  was  one  of  the  earliest  duties  of  the  first 
ruler.  The  thale  rice  became  constantly  scarcer  and  scarcer, 
and  it  was  determined  that  it  would  be  well  to  give  every 
person  his  share  and  mark  it  off  distinctly.  The  appointment 
of  persons  to  execute  this  duty  was  the  first  occasion  on 
which  executive  ofificials  were  found  necessary.  Manu 
enumerated  twenty-five  objects  suitable  for  legal  landmarks. 
These  included  all  natural  objects,  such  as  lakes,  rivers,  ridges, 
and  hills,  remarkable  large  trees  and  clumps  of  bamboos  ; 
artificial  boundaries  of  an  equally  permanent  character,  such 
as  pagodas,  shrines  for  demon-worship,  zayats,  or  rest-houses, 
stone  pillars  and  sacred  posts,  wells  and  cairns  ;  finally  such 
singular  distinguishing  marks  as  heads  of  cattle,  chaff,  ashes, 
charcoal,  sand,  broken  earthenware  vessels,  and  men's  bones. 
"  Beating  the  bounds,"  one  would  think,  must  have  been  very 
necessary  with  the  younger  members  of  the  household  in  the 
case  of  such  perishable  boundary  lines  as  could  be  constituted 
by  chaff,  or  even  sand.  In  Upper  Burma  the  cultivating 
population  was  so  sparse  that  no  difficulty  was  found  in  the 
matter  of  boundaries.  In  Lower  Burma  farms  are  as  dis- 
tinctly marked  off  as  land-surveyors'  chains  can  effect  the 
operation  in  pointing  out  the  little  raised  ridges  which 
separate  the  plots  of  paddy  land  from  one  another.  Never- 
theless they  are  hardly  such  as  the  South  of  England  farmers 
would  approve. 

These  allodial  tenures  are  the  only  ones  which  exist  in 
Burma  now.  In  independent  territory  there  were  two  other 
kinds  of  holding,  which  were  not,  however,  very  numerous  or 
extensive.  The  first  of  these  were  called  thugyisa  fields,  and 
consisted  of  certain  tracts  of  land  near  the  town  or  village 
set  apart  for  the  maintenance  of  the  headman.  As  that 
official  was  anything  but  a  permanency,  the  tenant  for  the 
time  being  very  seldom  cultivated  them  himself,  but  let  them 


LAND  TENURE  535 


out  to  farmers,  who  were  required  not  only  to  pay  him  his 
rent,  but  as  a  rule  had  also  to  supply  the  revenue  demanded 
from  the  owner  by  the  State.  There  was  therefore  no  very 
enthusiastic  bidding  for  his  lands,  but  he  always  got  a  tenant 
somehow  or  other.  It  would  have  been  a  bad  day  for  the 
village  if  no  one  came  forward.  Every  man  in  the  place 
would  have  been  called  upon  to  work  for  a  certain  period  on 
the  thugyi's  paddy-fields.  These  have  now  been  merged  in  the 
State  lands. 

The  third  class  of  arable  estates  consisted  of  the  lands 
known  as  bhanda,  treasury,  or  royal  fields.  These  were  the 
private  property  of  the  king,  and  were  cultivated  ordinarily 
by  the  outcast  lamaing,  crown  predial  slaves.  Sometimes, 
however,  the  whole  of  the  farmers  in  the  neighbourhood  were 
summoned  by  roster  to  do  their  one,  or  three,  or  five  days' 
work,  for  which  they  received  no  payment ;  on  the  contrary, 
if  they  tried  to  escape  they  were  tied  up  and  received  a  dozen 
or  two  according  to  the  humanity  of  the  district  governor. 
Near  the  capital,  where  oppression  never  was  so  gross  as  in 
the  outlying  provinces,  the  cultivators  of  the  Ledawgyi 
were  frequently  freed  from  all  taxation  but  the  payment  of 
the  family  tax,  and  some  even,  as  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Aungbinle,  whose  revenues  were  assigned  by  the  king  to 
the  great  Arakan  pagoda,  were  let  off  even  the  ngwedaw. 
But  these  corve'es  were  very  irksome,  for  the  payment  of  a 
little  money  would  always  ensure  the  omission  of  a  name  from 
the  taikthugyi's  list,  and  the  work  fell  all  the  harder  on 
the  luckless  remainder.  The  whole  of  the  produce  of  the 
bhanda  lands  belonged  of  course  to  the  king,  unless  where  he 
had  otherwise  assigned  it.  What  with  revenue  paid  in  kind 
and  the  crops  of  the  Ledawgyi,  the  king  had  granaries  as 
vast  as  those  which  Joseph  built  for  the  king  of  Egypt. 
Minddn  Min  drew  from  them  to  pay  his  soldiery,  varying 
the  monotony  from  time  to  time  with  pieces  of  rotten  Man- 
chester grey  shirting.  Offerings  to  the  Sacred  Order,  of 
whom  he  daily  fed  several  thousands,  also  served  to  keep 
the  storehouses  within  reasonable  bounds.  Thibaw  Min 
turned  his  grain  into  money  with  all  possible  expedition,  and 
the  money  vanished  with  equal  rapidity.  The  Ledaw  of 
course  became  State  land  on  the  Annexation. 


536  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

The  only  analogy  to  the  crown  lands  in  Lower  Burma 
was  found  in  the  reservation  of  forests  by  the  government  for 
the  preservation  of  teak  and  other  valuable  trees  such  as  the 
thit-ka  {Cedreela  toond),  thit-kado  {Pentace  Biirmanica),  and 
padauk  {Pterocarpus  Indicus),  which  are  absolutely  reserved, 
that  is  to  say,  no  tree  may  be  felled  which  has  not  been 
girdled  by  government  forest  officers,  even  by  those  who 
have  bought  the  right  to  remove  the  timber.  It  is  expressly 
stated  that  the  lessee  is  in  no  case  allowed  to  girdle  trees  on 
his  own  account,  and  the  rules  are  in  other  respects  of  the 
most  stringent  and  Oriental  description.  No  taung-ya,  or 
hill-gardens  may  be  made  in  the  demarcated  tracts.  A 
selection  of  rivers  and  streams  is  made  which  must  be  kept 
free  from  all  artificial  obstructions,  whether  for  fisheries, 
irrigation,  or  other  purposes.  Unauthorised  felling,  cutting, 
marking,  killing,  or  injuring  trees  of  all  kinds,  shrubs  or 
bamboos,  the  collection  of  wood  oil,  resin,  and  even  leaves, 
and  any  interference  with  the  soil  or  its  produce  without 
permission,  is  made  penal.  Even  the  use  of  existing  roads 
and  bridle-paths  may,  if  the  forest  officer  sees  fit,  be  pro- 
hibited. In  1882,  out  of  a  total  area  of  about  80,000 
square  miles  of  teak-producing  forests,  some  13,000  square 
miles  were  thus  reserved,  but  this  area  has  now  been  ten  times 
exceeded.  The  Burman,  who  knows  nothing  whatever  of 
game  laws  or  edicts  against  trespassers,  is  inclined  to  look 
upon  this  stringent  reservation  of  land  which  the  ancient 
code  declares  free  for  all,  as  something  far  more  despotic 
than  the  enforced  labour  and  extortionate  demands  of  national 
rule.  Doubtless  time  will  prove  to  him  that  it  is  a  wise  pre- 
caution to  guard  from  destruction  a  slow-growing  tree  like 
the  teak,  and  when  the  wandering  hunter  gets  to  understand 
that  forest  fires  are  a  calamity  and  not  simply  an  easy  method 
of  making  a  clearing,  the  State  forests  will  come  to  be  some- 
thing less  like  pheasant  coverts  than  they  now  are. 

Otherwise,  waste  lands,  as  in  old  Upper  Burma,  are  by 
the  law  of  the  Dhammathat  open  to  all-comers.  Any  one 
can  select  for  himself  a  tract  of  such  land  at  his  pleasure,  and 
may  clear  and  cultivate  in  any  way  he  chooses,  paying  his 
tax  upon  it  when  the  time  for  the  annual  assessment  of  land 
revenue  comes  round.      In  many  cases,  however,  he  is  allowed 


LAND  TENURE  537 


to  hold  his  land  free  from  taxes  for  such  a  period  as  may  be 
necessary  to  bring  it  into  a  thorough  state  of  cultivation.  In 
such  a  case  as  this  he  has  to  apply  to  the  thugyi — the  old 
hereditary  officers  being  retained  throughout  British  Burma 
' — of  his  circle,  if  the  land  does  not  exceed  five  acres  in 
extent.  If  it  is  above  that  area,  application  has  to  be  made 
to  the  English  Assistant-commissioner,  or  to  the  Deputy- 
commissioner  in  charge  of  the  district,  if  the  average  of  the 
new  claim  exceeds  fifty.  The  land  is  then  surveyed  and  a 
grant  is  drawn  up  specifying  the  term  of  years  during  which 
he  shall  be  free  from  imposts.  This  varies  according  to  the 
kind  of  jungle  which  is  to  be  cleared  away,  and  the  kind  of 
crops  intended  to  be  grown.  The  exemption  is  in  no  case 
for  less  than  a  year.  If  rice  is  to  be  grown,  seven  years  is 
the  longest  term  of  rent-free  tenure,  but  for  orchard  cultivation 
it  extends  to  twelve  years.  In  a  few  cases,  where  the  nature 
of  the  ground  necessitates,  in  addition  to  clearing  away  the 
forest  growth,  the  digging  of  channels  for  irrigation,  and  the 
erection  of  dams,  extension  even  of  this  long  period  is  granted. 
As  in  France,  Norway,  Japan,  and  Switzerland,  the  farms  are 
all  very  small,  in  some  cases  almost  absurdly  so.  Along  the 
old  frontier  the  holdings  averaged  only  about  five  acres,  in 
the  Rangoon  district  from  sixteen  to  twenty  acres  is  the 
ordinary  size,  but  here  and  there  are  a  few  considerably 
larger.  It  would,  however,  be  a  great  mistake  to  endeavour 
to  introduce  larger  tenancies.  It  is  entirely  against  the  genius 
of  the  people,  and  the  appearance  of  foreign  capitalists  could 
not  be  otherwise  than  disastrous.  The  present  mode  of 
cultivation  is  slovenly  enough,  and  larger  farms  would  most 
certainly  not  tend  to  remedy  the  defect,  which  is  due  in 
great  part  to  the  superabundance  of  available  arable  land 
lying  waste.  Burma  is  progressing  fast  enough  as  it  is. 
The  abundance  of  rich  land,  the  facility  with  which  rights 
over  it  can  be  acquired,  the  great  demand  for  rice,  and  the  ever- 
increasing  counter  demand  for  European  goods,  the  fixed, 
though  heavy  taxation,  the  cessation  of  all  irregular  and 
unexpected  collections,  the  absolute  personal  security  enjoyed 
by  all  under  the  English  administration  :  all  these  benefits 
have  resulted  in  the  trebling  of  the  population  of  Lower 
Burma  during  twenty-six  years  since  the  annexation  of  Pegu  ; 


538         THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        ch.  lvii 

in  the  more  than  trebling  of  the  trade — the  value  of  the  sea- 
borne merchandise  alone  having  doubled  and  reached  twelve 
and  a  half  millions  sterling  during  the  ten  years  previous 
to  1 88 1 — and  in  the  wonderful  increase  in  revenue,  which 
makes  Burma  the  most  valuable  of  all  the  provinces  under 
the  Indian  Government.  Now  that  all  Burma  is  one  province 
the  increase  of  revenue  and  the  contribution  paid  to  the 
Imperial  Government,  have  gone  on  increasing  with  a 
regularity  which  is  almost  automatic. 


CHAPTER    LVIII 

MANDALAY   AND    RANGOON 
[This  chapter  describes  these  towns  as  they  were  in  i88i.] 

Americans  talk,  and  with  good  reason,  of  the  magic  growth 
of  their  cities.  But  for  mere  mushroom  growth,  Mandalay 
might  compare  even  with  Chicago  itself,  and  if  we  are  to 
judge  of  the  progress  of  a  commercial  place  by  the  fair 
criterion  of  business  results,  Rangoon  may  hold  up  its  head 
in  confident  rivalry  with  any  of  the  typical  American  cities. 
In  the  middle  of  last  century  the  site  of  Mandalay  was 
swampy  paddy  land  and  rank  jungle.  Now  an  area  of  five 
square  miles  is  covered  with  houses,  many  of  them  squalid 
enough  certainly,  and  with  large  patches  of  unused  land 
round  about  them,  but  none  the  less  contained  within  the 
city  limits.  Rangoon  came  into  British  hands  in  1852,  and 
at  that  time  possessed  no  commerce  worthy  of  the  name, 
indeed  it  was  only  known  as  the  place  for  pilgrims  to  the 
Shwe  Dag6n  pagoda  to  stay  at,  and  the  residence  of  the 
Regent  of  Pegu,  as  being  the  guard  station  on  the  most 
accessible  mouth  of  the  Irrawaddy.  Ten  years  later, 
ships  entered  or  cleared  from  the  port  having  a  tonnage  of 
295,000  tons,  and  the  imports  were  worth  ;^  1,2 00,000,  the 
exports  ;^  1,400,000,  and  since  that  date — a  year  or  two 
after  Mandalay  had  been  founded — the  tonnage  has  increased 
to  1,000,000,  the  value  of  the  imports  to  ;£^5,ooo,ooo  sterling, 
and  the  exports  to  ;S'4,ooo,ooo.  In  a  quarter  of  a  century 
the  commerce  of  British  Burma  rose  to  nearly  ;^20,ooo,ooo 
sterling.  The  population  has  quadrupled  ;  public  works  are 
carried  on  ;  education  is  widely  disseminated  ;  the  adminis- 
tration is  carefully  managed  by  British  officials  ;    a  railway, 

539 


540  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

163  miles  long,  has  been  made;  there  are  1300  miles  of 
telegraph  lines  ;  stately  law  courts  and  other  public  buildings 
have  sprung  up,  and  so  far  from  the  work  being  a  tax  on 
the  Indian  Imperial  Treasury,  British  Burma  has  been,  after 
its  first  few  years,  more  than  self-supporting.  For  a  consider- 
able time  it  has  contributed  to  the  Imperial  Treasury  a  clear 
surplus  of  a  million  sterling.  The  mere  figures  are  in  them- 
selves surprising,  but  they  cannot  be  truly  appreciated  unless 
they  are  read  alongside  the  obvious,  undeniable,  and  acknow- 
ledged prosperity  and  contentment  of  the  native  population. 
Since  the  annexation  of  Upper  Burma  these  figures  have 
been  roughly  multiplied  by  ten,  and  there  is  a  steady  yearly 
increase  which  would  be  greater  if  Burma  were  allowed  to 
make  use  of  her  yearly  surpluses. 

As  long  as  there  was  a  king  of  Burma,  Mandalay  was  a 
larger  town  than  Rangoon  and  an  infinitely  more  picturesque 
one.  It  still  remains  by  a  long  way  the  second  town  in 
Burma,  but  Rangoon  has  over-passed  it  in  population. 
While  Rangoon  has  gained,  Mandalay  has  lost,  but  there 
seems  no  reason  why  it  should  go  on  declining. 

The  mushroom  growth  of  Mandalay  was  entirely  due  to 
an  autocratic  order,  but  the  number  of  ancient  capitals  in 
the  neighbourhood  shows  that  the  position  is  an  advantageous 
one.  The  astrologers  and  the  king  settled  the  new  site 
between  them,  and  when  this  was  arranged  a  royal  order 
came  out  bidding  all  remove  themselves  from  Amarapura  to 
Mandalay  on  pain  of  death  in  case  of  refusal.  The  trans- 
ference of  a  bamboo  hut  is  certainly  no  very  great  under- 
taking, and  occupies  less  than  a  week  in  the  pulling  down 
and  setting  up.  But  the  hardship  was  none  the  less  where 
the  people  had  gardens,  or  fruit-trees  growing  in  their  yards. 
The  Chinese  alone  remained  firm.  Their  houses  were  of 
the  usual  substantial,  heavy.  Celestial  architecture,  and,  more- 
over, they  had  built  for  themselves  an  elaborate  joss-house, 
in  splendour  quite  equal  to  the  best  in  Rangoon.  Conse- 
quently, they  flatly  refused  to  migrate  the  two  or  three  miles 
distance  to  the  new  capital.  The  astrologers  were  as  usual 
for  using  force,  but  Minddn  Min  had  more  sense.  The 
Chinamen  were  almost  all  British  subjects,  and  moreover  their 
dealings  contributed   substantially   to   the  revenue.       Their 


MANDALA  Y  AND  RANGOON  541 


village  therefore  remained,  and  has  served  to  drag  out  a  long 
suburb  beyond  the  Arakan  pagoda  as  a  kind  of  connecting 
link.  Numbers  of  later  arrivals,  however,  settled  in  the  royal 
City  of  Gems,  and  the  wealthier  merchants  all  eventually 
moved  their  headquarters  thither,  so  that  his  majesty 
triumphed  in  the  end.  The  best  houses  in  Mandalay,  the 
only  brick  ones,  in  fact,  till  the  British  came,  are  all  in  the 
possession  of  the  Chinese  and  Indian  merchants.  Burmans 
had  neither  the  right  nor  the  money  to  build  anything  but 
wooden  erections.  These  latter  have,  however,  the  compensat- 
ing advantage  that  they  stand  all  but  the  most  violent 
earthquakes,  while  the  brick  houses,  even  when  they  are 
strengthened  by  an  elaborate  wooden  framework,  usually 
collapse  when  there  is  anything  like  a  heavy  shock. 

But  the  great  majority  of  the  houses  are  simply  wattled 
huts,  with  large  open  spaces  in  their  rear  which  serve  to  keep 
the  town  airy  and  well  ventilated.  According  to  Burman 
custom  each  house  has  its  little  shop  with  the  entire  stock 
in  trade  displayed  to  the  view  of  the  passer-by.  As  in  all 
Eastern  towns,  those  who  occupy  themselves  with  a  regular 
handicraft  all  flock  together.  Thus  the  umbrella-makers  and 
sellers  of  saddlery  live  to  the  south  of  the  palace,  vendors  of 
bamboo-work  and  lacquered  boxes  to  the  west,  while  the 
potters  and  miscellaneous  goods  shops  are  mostly  along  the 
street  that  leads  to  Paya  Gyi,  the  Arakan  pagoda. 

There  was  no  attempt  at  metalling  any  of  the  roads,  except 
in  independent  times  the  broad  thoroughfare  which  led  up 
from  the  steamer  ghaut,  past  the  ministers'  residences,  up  to 
the  outskirts  of  the  town,  for  Mandalay  lies  two  miles  away 
from  the  river-bank,  the  idea  being  that  at  Amarapura 
the  noise  of  the  foreigners'  steamers  disturbed  the  royal 
repose.  The  big  stones  which  represented  the  metalling 
on  this  one  road  were  rather  a  trouble  than  otherwise,  except 
to  the  vultures  and  egrets  in  the  wet  weather,  when  all 
around  was  a  sea  of  mud,  and  the  boulders  formed  an 
eligible  coign  of  vantage.  Elsewhere  the  streets  were  cut 
into  huge  ruts,  and  the  bullock-carts  went  along  in  the  hot 
weather  in  a  pyramid  of  dust,  and  in  the  rains  a  ploughed 
field  would  be  smooth  going  in  comparison.  But  the  gaily- 
painted    carriages    which    always    suggest  a  dog-kennel  on 


542  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS         chap. 

wheels  to  a  European,  were  strongly  built,  and  the  fair  dames 
inside  were  used  to  the  jolting.  It  was  only  when  the  king  or 
one  of  the  queens  went  forth  that  any  attempt  at  road-mending 
was  carried  on.  Then  an  ameindaw  was  issued,  Shinbuyin 
Twet  daw  mumi,  the  Golden  Majesty,  will  make  a  royal 
progress,  and  all  along  the  route  the  house-reeves  saw  that 
the  rough  places  were  made  smooth,  and  the  crooked  places 
straight.  Thus  the  main  thoroughfares  were  kept  in  a  state 
of  fair  repair.  I  n  other  respects,  however,  Mandalay  was  vastly 
superior  to  all  Indian  towns.  In  all  the  city  there  is  not  a 
drain,  but  it  is  equally  certain  that  neither  is  there  a  smell. 
There  were  no  such  slums  as  constantly  offend  every  sense 
a  man  has  in  the  Black  Town  of  Madras  or  the  native 
quarters  of  Calcutta.  This  cleanliness  was  due  to  the  exertions 
of  the  great  multitudes  of  swine  and  dogs.  The  pigs  formed 
most  efficient  scavengers  during  the  day-time,  and  wandered 
all  about  in  the  most  independent  and  ownerless  fashion. 
Charitable  people,  in  search  of  merit,  set  out  daily  meals  for 
them,  while  all  in  common  threw  out  their  scraps  and  leavings 
in  the  confidence  justified  by  experience  that  nothing  would 
be  left  to  decay.  The  great  majority  of  the  dogs,  equally 
with  the  porkers,  belonged  to  nobody  in  particular,  and  made 
themselves  comfortable  under  any  house  they  chose,  sleeping 
nearly  all  day  and  howling  and  fighting  all  night.  These 
animals  were  all  strenuous  adherents  of  the  Old  Burman  party, 
and  cherished  a  most  fanatic  hatred  for  Europeans.  The  old 
boar  ran  between  the  legs  of  the  white  man  or  of  his  pony, 
in  a  simulated  state  of  alarm  at  his  faded,  ghost-like  face, 
and  the  pariah  dogs  let  all  the  town  know  the  progress  of 
a  foreigner  by  their  fierce  barking  and  snapping  of  teeth 
a  yard  or  so  off  his  calves.  The  dogs  of  one  street  passed  him 
on  to  the  next,  so  that  it  was  impossible  for  a  wandering 
Briton  to  go  about  the  town  unobserved.  It  will  not  soon 
be  forgotten  how  the  English  Assistant  Resident  had  to  run 
for  his  life  from  the  Mandalay  bazaar.  He  had  killed  a 
snarling  brute  with  a  quick  backward  swing  of  his  stick,  and 
the  pious  life-regarding  populace  came  out  upon  him  armed 
with  billets  of  firewood  and  formidable  dahs.  He  managed 
to  keep  away  from  them,  but  he  had  a  half-mile  race  of  it, 
and  the  Residency  gates  were  smashed  in  by  the  mob.     Then 


Lvin  MANDALA  Y  AND  RANGOON  543 

the  guard  dispersed  the  people.  Next  day,  an  old  lady,  who 
claimed  to  be  the  owner  of  the  dog,  visited  the  big  English- 
man and  told  him  she  forgave  him.      He  was  barely  polite. 

Burmans  had  no  trouble  with  the  pigs  and  dogs.  They 
found  their  own  countrymen  much  more  awkward  to  meet. 
There  was  constantly  some  prince  or  mingyi  passing  along 
the  streets,  and  then  the  road  had  to  be  immediately  cleared, 
and  every  one  knelt  humbly  till  the  great  man  passed. 
Any  delay  in  clearing  the  path,  or  an  imagined  want  of 
reverence  in  the  shikhoing,  met  with  very  summary 
punishment.  Before  every  dignitary  rushed  along  a  posse 
of  half-naked  lictors,  yelling  out  to  the  people  to  bow  down, 
and  hitting  round  about  them  with  their  fasces  and  dahs. 
These  masterful  rufifians  particularly  loved  to  insult  English- 
men. During  Minddn's  reign  an  edict  was  published 
exempting  Englishmen  from  the  necessity  of  getting  down 
on  their  knees  in  the  mud  and  dust,  but  ordaining  that 
they  should  lift  their  hats.  The  letyataung  dearly  loved  to 
launch  torrents  of  abuse  at  their  victim,  and  make  him  dis- 
mount from  his  pony  and  remove  his  hat  when  the  prince  was 
half  a  block  distant.  In  the  spring  of  1880  an  English 
mercantile  man  was  actually  bullied  into  going  down  on  his 
knees.  But,  as  a  rule,  where  it  was  possible,  foreigners  turned 
down  a  by-street,  or  into  one  of  the  waste  plots  of  ground. 
This  method  of  avoiding  the  annoyance  was  not  open  to  a 
Burman.  If  he  tried  to  avoid  paying  due  obeisance,  he  was 
denounced  as  a  disaffected  man  and  thrown  into  jail. 

But  there  were  plenty  of  other  obstructions  to  be  met 
with  in  the  streets  of  the  royal  city.  Each  householder  was 
considered,  or  considered  himself,  perfectly  at  liberty  to  do 
what  he  pleased  with  the  section  of  the  road  in  front  of  his 
house.  Accordingly,  when  the  spirit  moved  him,  he  calmly 
blocked  the  thoroughfare  by  erecting  a  temporary  theatre 
for  the  performance  of  a  pw^.  The  construction  of  such  a 
mandut  did  not  take  very  long.  A  framework  of  bamboo 
was  run  up  and  covered  in  on  the  roof,  and  one  side  with 
bamboo  matting,  and  all  was  ready ;  the  stage  was  the 
street,  and  the  spectators  deposited  themselves  where  they 
found  room.  After  the  three  or  four  days'  performance,  the 
stage  was  pulled  down,  and  the  thoroughfare  was  clear  again. 


S44  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

During  the  season  a  dozen  or  more  of  these  plays  went  on 
in  Mandalay  on  the  same  night,  and  the  entire  population 
turned  out  to  see  them,  thus  effectually  blocking  as  many 
streets  as  there  were  performances.  This  might  have  been 
awkward  for  the  ordinary  wayfarer  were  it  not  that  he  would 
probably  infinitely  prefer  staying  to  see  the  drama  to  con- 
tinuing his  journey.  Great  men  were  not  so  complaisant. 
Two  of  the  massacred  princes,  the  Mekkhaya  and  the 
Thonse,  seemed  to  take  a  special  delight,  when  they  were 
belated  on  some  roistering  expedition,  in  breaking  up  such 
plebeian  gatherings.  They  would  come  sweeping  down  the 
street  with  all  their  retinue,  and  the  spectators,  deafened  by 
the  music  and  engrossed  with  the  action  on  the  stage,  would 
get  their  first  hint  of  the  torrent  coming  from  the  vigorous 
blows  dealt  all  round  about  them  by  the  howling  lictors. 
Everything  would  be  disorder  and  alarm  for  a  time,  men 
and  women  down  in  the  ditch,  the  stage  deserted,  and  the 
spectators  scattered  far  and  wide.  Then,  ten  minutes  later, 
they  would  all  come  back  again ;  there  would  be  a  few 
remarks  concerning  his  Royal  Highness — "  very  often  out 
at  unexpected  times,  and  always  making  his  appearance  so 
suddenly/'  etc.  etc.  ;  the  bamboo  erection  would  be  propped 
up  again,  and  the  actors  continued  with  the  scene  as  if 
nothing  whatever  had  happened,  though  the  clown,  no  doubt, 
made  as  much  fun  out  of  the  incident  as  he  dared. 

Going  about  at  night  in  Mandalay  was  not  much  practised. 
Theatre-goers  usually  returned  home  with  the  rising  sun. 
There  were  no  lamps  in  the  streets,  and  so  every  one  who  had 
business  after  dark  was  required  to  go  about  carrying  a  lantern 
or  beating  a  drum  or  gong.  If  any  one  ventured  abroad 
without  thus  marking  his  movements,  he  was  promptly 
arrested  by  the  night  watch,  and  once  a  man  was  arrested 
in  Mandalay  it  cost  a  good  deal  of  money  to  get  free  again, 
no  matter  how  good  an  account  he  might  be  able  to  give  of 
himself  To  save  themselves  the  trouble  of  being  constantly 
on  the  look-out  as  well  as  to  trip  up  any  one  who  tried  to 
run  away,  the  guardians  of  the  peace  had  an  unpleasant  custom 
of  tying  ropes  across  the  road  an  inch  or  two  above  the 
ground,  and  these  were  quite  as  effectual  man-traps  as  have 
ever  been  invented. 


Lvm  MANDALAY  AND  RANGOON  545 

When  a  fire  occurred  in  the  Golden  City,  it  was  usually  a 
very  big  one  and  burned  until  it  could  find  no  more  fuel. 
There  were  two  reasons  for  this.  The  most  obvious  was,  of 
course,  that  wood  huts,  with  an  inflammable  roof  like  thin 
grass  thatch,  caught  fire  with  the  slightest  spark  ;  and  there 
was  nothing  in  the  shape  of  a  fire-engine,  even  in  the  palace. 
The  second  was  very  characteristic  of  a  despotism,  and  vastly 
more  disastrous.  Immemorial  tradition  associated  a  con- 
flagration with  a  revolution.  When  an  attempt  was  to  be 
made  to  seize  the  throne,  the  attention  of  the  people  and 
the  soldiery  was  always  diverted  by  incendiary  fires. 
Therefore  when  a  house  took  fire  the  people  found  nearest 
to  it  by  the  night  watchmen  were  always  arrested  and  made 
responsible  for  the  catastrophe.  As  a  natural  consequence, 
the  moment  flames  burst  out,  not  only  the  inmates  of  the 
house,  but  all  the  neighbours  took  to  their  heels  and  ran, 
without  incommoding  themselves  with  even  the  smallest 
portion  of  their  property.  A  few  of  the  royal  troops  came 
down  after  a  time  and  unroofed  a  house  here  and  there, 
and  perhaps  even  pulled  down  some  altogether,  but  their 
efforts  as  amateur  firemen  were  usually  of  the  most  feeble 
and  futile  description,  and  the  flames  went  on  till  there  was 
nothing  more  to  burn.  Next  day  the  unhappy  burnt-out 
people  came  back  and  made  for  themselves  little  hovels  of 
bamboo  matting  among  the  charred  posts  till  something 
better  could  be  run  up  again.  The  neighbouring  quarters 
contributed  something  to  support  them,  or  they  got  their  meals 
at  the  monasteries,  and  in  a  few  months  all  traces  of  the  fire 
had  disappeared,  the  same  rickety  huts  with  the  old  scanty 
store  of  wares  rose  up  again,  and  the  scorched  leaves  fell  off 
the  trees  and  were  replaced  by  fresh  green  foliage. 

The  population  of  Mandalay  was  a  very  queer  one.  Of 
the  Burmans  the  great  majority  were  soldiers  or  hangers-on 
of  the  various  great  men  about  the  court.  The  residuum  was 
composed  of  a  few  honest  tradesmen  and  a  vast  quantity  of 
bad  characters,  broken  agriculturists,  gamblers,  thieves  from 
Lower  Burma,  and  outlaws  from  all  parts.  The  number  of 
yellow-robed  yahans  was  extraordinary.  King  Mind6n  used 
to  give  alms  to  five  thousand  of  them  daily.  The  jars  of 
rice   were  arranged    in    long  rows   on   a    platform    erected 

2  N 


546  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

specially  for  the  purpose,  with  mountains  of  bananas,  and 
trays  heaped  up  with  ngapi,  curries,  and  condiments  of  all 
kinds.  Thibaw  Min  was  not  so  eager  for  merit,  and  actually 
went  the  length  of  driving  a  couple  of  thousand  of  the  holy 
men  out  of  the  capital.  Still  even  he  gave  them  periodical 
feasts,  and  there  were  at  least  ten  thousand  of  the  religious  in 
the  Golden  City  and  its  immediate  neighbourhood.  Besides 
these  there  were  numerous  other  nationalities  ;  the  Chinaman, 
smooth-shaven  and  prosperous  as  always,  whether  gaunt  and 
big-boned  from  Yiin-nan  and  Szuch'uan,  or  sleek  and  sturdy 
from  Rangoon  and  the  Straits,  defying  the  most  greedy  official 
to  rob  him  of  his  profits,  and  drinking  his  tea  and  smoking  his 
opium-pipe  with  supreme  composure  and  good-humour  ;  the 
bearded  Surati  with  solemn  face  and  Jewish  tricks  of  trade ; 
the  Palaung  come  down  from  the  north  with  his  bamboo 
rafts  laden  with  pickled  tea ;  the  stalwart  Shan  with  baggy 
blue  or  white  trousers  and  tattoo  marks  down  to  his  ankles, 
journeying  in  a  long  caravan  with  sword-blades  and  iron-work, 
and  a  cavalcade  of  mountain  ponies  ;  the  heavy,  easy-going 
Karen ;  the  lithe, treacherous  Kachin,bringing  presents  perhaps 
from  his  village,  and  on  his  way  down  spying  out  villages 
easy  to  raid  in  a  night  attack  ;  all  these,  and  a  host  of  others, 
might  be  seen  any  day  in  the  Royal  City  of  Gems.  There 
were  not  a  few  white  men  too,  even  latterly,  when  evil  times 
fell  upon  them,  and  there  were  not  the  pickings  that  were 
to  be  had  when  Minddn  Min  was  king.  But  many  of  them 
were  there  sorely  against  their  inclination.  Mandalay  had 
become  an  asylum  for  insolvent  debtors,  runaway  soldiers  and 
sailors,  and  unlucky  adventurers  from  British  territory,  just 
as  Rangoon  used  to  be  for  India  in  the  old  Burman  days. 
There  were  numbers  of  French  and  Italians  in  government 
service,  as  military  instructors  and  superintendents  of  the 
various  factories  ;  officers  who  had  been  cashiered,  or  dis- 
owned by  their  families,  or  were  in  other  ways  under  a  cloud. 
One  Count  there  was,  who  constituted  the  scientific  branch 
of  the  service  in  himself,  manufactured  and  sold  fruit  syrups 
to  the  captains  of  steamers,  preserved  a  pocket-handkerchief 
with  a  coronet  in  the  corner,  and  carried  his  lands  in  his 
finger-nails.  The  old  king  was  shamefully  cheated  by  a 
variety   of   speculators,   not    a   few    of    them    Englishmen. 


Lvm  MANDALA  Y  AND  RANGOON 


547 


Perhaps  it  was  his  own  fault.  He  had  a  perfect  mono- 
mania for  making  cannon,  and  thought  that  every  white 
man  must  have  some  notion  of  how  they  were  to  be  manu- 
factured. Consequently,  whenever  some  fresh  wanderer 
came  to  the  royal  city  and  requested  employment,  he  was 
brought  before  the  king,  and  some  such  dialogue  as  the 
following  ensued  :  "  What  is  your  name  ?  "  "  John  Smith." 
"  What  can  you  do  ?  "  "  May  it  please  your  majesty,  I  am 
a  sea-cook."  "  Can  you  make  a  cannon  ?  "  Whereupon  John 
Smith,  if  he  was  a  wise  man,  would  profess  his  ability  to 
make  the  attempt  at  any  rate.  A  lump  of  metal  would 
be  made  over  to  him,  and  he  would  chisel  and  hammer 
away  at  it  and  draw  his  monthly  pay  as  regularly  as  he 
could  get  it.  When  results  were  demanded  he  would  either 
run  away,  or  boldly  ask  for  a  grant  of  money  to  enable  him 
to  go  to  Europe  to  get  the  requisite  tools.  If  he  got  it 
neither  tools  nor  man  were  ever  seen  again.  Such  lack 
of  moral  principle  was  believed  by  the  king  to  arise  from 
the  want  of  a  Buddhist  training,  and  he  continued  to  be 
imposed  upon  to  the  very  end.  Thibaw  still  retained  some 
foreigners  in  his  service,  but  they  found  it  harder  to  get 
their  pay,  and  much  more  of  a  task  to  swindle  the 
Government. 

Thus  Mandalay  presented  a  series  of  violent  contrasts  : 
jewel-studded  temples  and  gilded  monasteries  standing  side 
by  side  with  wattled  hovels  penetrated  by  every  wind  that 
blew ;  the  haughty  prince  preceded  by  the  respited  mur- 
derer, his  lictor ;  the  busy  Chinaman  next  door  to  the 
gambling  scum  of  the  low  country ;  the  astrologer,  learned 
in  his  mantras,  overpersuaded  by  the  glib  talk  of  the  Western 
adventurer  ;  and  over  all  hanging  the  fear  of  prison  with  its 
nameless  horrors,  and  the  knife  of  the  assassin. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  century  Rangoon  was  in  much 
the  same  condition,  except  that  it  was  very  much  smaller, 
no  better  in  fact  than  a  village  with  the  Governor's  house 
and  stockade  in  the  middle  of  it.  Now  it  has  broad  smooth 
roads,  beautifully  laid  out  public  gardens,  abundant  street 
lamps,  spacious  mercantile  offices,  mills,  schools,  jails, 
hospitals,  clubs,  and  halls.  The  population  forms  an  even 
more  motley  assemblage  than  is  to  be  found  in   Mandalay. 


548  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS     ch.  lviii 

There  are  Chinese,  Japanese,  Malays,  Siamese,  natives  of 
India  of  all  parts,  Bengalis,  Madrassis,  Panjabis,  Parsis, 
Persians,  Suratis,  together  with  Armenians,  Jews,  English, 
French,  Germans,  Italians,  Greeks,  and  all  the  European 
nationalities,  mixed  up  with  the  native  races,  Burmese, 
Talaings,  Shans,  Karens,  but  they  are  all  kept  in  order  by 
the  strong  arm  of  the  law,  which  is  the  same  for  the  rich 
man  and  the  poor. 

The  same  benefits  are  now  extended  to  Mandalay,  but 
it  is  a  vastly  less  interesting  place  than  it  used  to  be.  A 
siding  from  the  railway  cuts  its  way  through  the  city  wall ; 
one  of  the  pyathats  on  the  battlements  has  thrown  out 
corridors  to  make  a  somewhat  barrack-like  Government 
house ;  a  carriage  drive  goes  round  Mandalay  hill ;  the 
pigs  have  all  been  eaten  up,  and  the  pariah  dogs  are  poisoned 
periodically  by  municipal  order.  There  never  were  any 
sludgy  sqwudgy  creeks,  but  the  roads,  which  were  a  passable 
imitation  of  them  in  the  rains,  are  now  eminently  fitted  for 
exceeding  the  speed  limit.  A,  B,  and  C  roads  testify  to 
the  unromantic  stolidity  of  the  Military  Intelligence  Depart- 
ment ;  electric  trams  make  it  easier  for  the  Burman  to 
move  to  the  suburbs  and  leave  the  town  to  the  hustling 
foreigner.  There  are  no  agreeable  scallywags.  There  are 
Cook's  tourists  instead  during  the  three  cool  months  of  the 
year.  The  palace,  instead  of  being  tawdrily  magnificent, 
smells  horribly  of  bats.  It  has  been  declared  to  be  an 
archaeological  treasure,  though  it  is  only  about  sixty  years 
old,  and  has  been  horribly  mishandled  by  unimaginative 
secretaries  and  a  Public  Works  Department  oppressed  with 
sealed  patterns. 


CHAPTER    LIX 

ERAS,    COMPUTATION    OF   TIME,   WEIGHT,    ETC. 

Burmese  chronology  recognises  five  different  eras,  only  the 
last  of  which,  however,  is  ever  practically  used.     These  are : — 

1.  The  Kawza  era,  which  was  abolished  by  Shin 
Gautama's  grandfather.  It  had  extended  over  8650 
years,  and  came  to  an  end  in  the  year  691  before  the 
Christian  era. 

2.  Bodaw  Insana,  the  Buddha's  grandfather,  then  estab- 
lished an  era  of  his  own.  It  lasted  only  148  years,  or  till 
543  B.C.,  in  which  year  Shin  Gautama  died. 

3.  The  Religious  era.  Fixed  by  Ayatathat,  King  of 
Magadha  in  India,  dating  from  the  death  of  the  most  excel- 
lent paya,  and  current  till  A.D.  82. 

4.  King  Thamdddayit's  era,  established  by  that  monarch 
in  A.D.  82  at  Prome,  and  lasting  till  A.D.  639,  or  for  a  period 
of  562  years. 

5.  The  current  era,  established  by  the  Yahan  Pdppasaw, 
when  he  usurped  the  throne  of  Pagan  in  A.D.  639.  The 
year  1244  of  this  era  begins  in  April  1882. 

The  changing  of  the  eras  was  in  most  cases  to  avoid 
calamities,  threatened  for  certain  years  by  old  prophecies, 
and  in  a  few  instances  of  eras  which  gained  no  permanent 
place,  merely  for  the  sake  of  gratifying  royal  vanity. 

The  ordinary  year  consists  of  twelve  lunar  months,  of 
twenty-nine  and  thirty  days  alternately.  Every  third  year 
a  thirteenth  month  is  intercalated  between  the  fourth  and 
fifth.  The  date  on  which  the  year  begins  in  the  month  of 
April  was  determined  by  the  calculations  of  the  royal  astro- 
logers in  Mandalay,  and  published  throughout  the  country 
by  the  p6ngyis  and  district  officials.     The  Chief  Secretary 

549 


550  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        ch.  lix 

to  the  Burma  Government  now  fixes  the  day.  He  consults 
the  astrologers  theoretically  and  sees  that  it  is  suitable  for 
the  polo  tournament  at  Maymyo,  the  hot  weather  head- 
quarters of  the  local  government. 

The  months,  with  their  corresponding  English  equiva- 
lents, are  as  follows  : — 

Tagu  about  April. 

Kas6n  „      May. 

Naydn  „      June. 

Waso  „      July. 

(A  second,  a  Dutiya  Waso,  intercalated  every  third  year.) 

Wagaung  about  August. 

Tawthalin  „  September. 

Thadingyut  „  October. 

Tasaungmdn  „  November. 

Na'daw  „  December. 

Pyatho  „  January. 

Tabodwe  „  February. 

Tabaung  „  March. 

The  days  are  not  counted  right  through  the  month  as  in 
the  European  system,  but  as  with  a  watch,  or  as  with  the 
"  day "  itself,  the  month  is  divided  into  two  parts  :  the  la- 
san,  or  waxing  moon,  which  lasts  from  the  first  to  the  la-byi, 
the  full  moon  ;  and  from  the  following  day,  the  i6th,  to  the 
end  of  the  month  (the  la-gwe)  comes  the  waning,  la-s6k  or 
la-byigyaw. 

Besides  this  there  is  a  division  corresponding  to  that 
into  weeks  in  the  European  system.  The  seven  days  are 
named  after  the  eight  planets,  or  astrological  houses.  Sun- 
day is  Taninganwe  (the  day  of  the  Ne  Yawi  or  Sun) ; 
Monday,  Taninla  (from  La,  or  Sanda,  the  Moon) ;  Tuesday, 
Inga  (from  Inga,  Mars) ;  Wednesday,  from  one  in  the  morn- 
ing till  noon,  Bdddahu  (B6dda,  Mercury);  the  rest  of 
Wednesday,  from  mid-day  till  midnight,  Yahu  (from  the 
dark  planet  of  the  same  name,  a  monstrous  foul  nat,  who 
strives  to  swallow  the  sun  and  moon,  and  causes  partial 
eclipses  by  licking  and  pawing  them  ;  once  every  three  years 
he  attacks  the  sun,  and  once  in  six  months  the  moon); 
Thursday,  Kyathabad^  (from  Prispati,  or  Py^pati,  Jupiter) ; 


Lix  ERAS,  COMPUTATION  OF  TIME,  ETC.  551 

Friday,  Thaukkya  (from  Thaukkya,  Venus) ;  Saturday,  San6 
(from  Thawri,  Saturn).  The  selection  of  the  planets  to  denote 
the  days  of  the  week  by  races  so  different  now,  whatever 
they  may  originally  have  been,  as  the  Chinese,  Scandinavians, 
Greeks,  and  all  the  Mohammedan  tribes,  is  singular. 

For  ordinary  purposes  the  day  and  the  night  are  divided 
into  four  periods  of  three  hours  each  :  from  six  to  nine, 
which  is  called  ta-chetti,  the  first  watch,  one  blow ;  twelve 
o'clock,  the  next  quarter,  is  announced  by  hni'-chetti,  the 
second  watch,  two  blows ;  three  o'clock,  th6n-chetti,  the 
third  watch,  three  blows  ;  and  six,  le-chetti,  the  fourth  watch, 
four  blows.  These  hours  were  sounded  in  Mandalay  by 
alternate  beating  on  a  huge  gong  and  drum  placed  in  the 
clock-tower  by  the  eastern  gate  ;  and  at  le-chetti,  sundown 
or  sunrise,  the  palace  gates  were  closed,  or  opened,  as  the 
case  might  be.  Noon  is  styled  m6n,  and  midnight  tha'gaung  ; 
and  the  word  byan  is  added  in  the  sense  of  the  English  P.M. 
Thus  nayi  byan  th6n-chetti  would  be  3  P.M. 

In  English  territory  of  course  the  English  system  has 
been  adopted,  and  now  prevails  over  the  whole  country.  Upper 
and  Lower.  For  astronomical  purposes,  such  as  the  casting 
of  the  horoscope  and  the  calculations  for  fortunate  days  and 
the  like,  an  exceedingly  elaborate  scale  exists,  but  it  is  never 
made  use  of  in  ordinary  life,  though  references  to  it  in  re- 
ligious books  are  not  uncommon.  The  unit  is  a  naya.  This 
is  the  period  of  time  in  which  ten  flashes  of  lightning  may 
take  place,  or  the  time  it  takes  to  wink  the  eye  ten  times,  or 
to  throw  out  the  arm  as  often. 

4  Naya  are  equivalent  to  one  Kana,  an  "  instant." 
12  Kana  „  „  Kaya. 

10  Kaya  „  „  Pyan. 

6  Pyan  „  „  Bizana. 

IS  Bizana  „  „  Pad. 

4  Pad  „  „  Nayi,  an  "  hour." 

60  Nayi  „  „  Yet,  a  day  and  night. 

15  Yet  „  „  Bekkha,  or  side  (of  the  moon) 

a  half  month. 

2  Bekkha  „  „  La,  a  month. 

12  La  „  „  Hnit,  ayear. 


552  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Besides  the  ordinary  names  given  above  for  the  twelve 
months,  the  soothsayers,  for  the  sake  of  the  increased  learn- 
ing it  seems  to  give  them,  are  accustomed  to  refer  to  the 
months  by  the  names  of  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac 
called  Yathi. 

Thus  Tagu  is  known  as  Meittha,  the  ram. 


Kas6n 

)) 

Pyeittha,  the  bull. 

Naydn 

)) 

Meddn,    the    union    of   the    pro- 
creating   powers    of   the    male 
and  female. 

Waso 

)) 

Karakat,  the  crab. 

Wagaung 

)) 

Thein,  the  lion. 

Tawthalin 

i> 

Kan,  the  virgin. 

Thadingyut 

» 

Tu,  the  scales. 

Tasaungmdn 

)) 

Pyeitsa,  the  scorpion. 

Na'daw 

)' 

Nu,  the  bow. 

Pyatho 

J' 

Makaya,  the  sea  monster. 

Tabodwe 

)> 

K6n,  the  water-pot. 

Tabaung 

»J 

Mein,  the  fish. 

There  are  reckoned  to  be  three  seasons,  the  cold,  the 
hot,  and  the  wet. 

The  cold  season,  saung-dwin,  heman,  or  hemanta  utu, 
lasts  from  the  first  of  the  waning  of  Tasaungmdn  to  the 
first  of  the  waning  of  Tabaung,  from  the  end  of  November 
to  the  beginning  of  March. 

The  hot  season,  nwe,  geman,  or  gemanta  utu,  lasts 
from  the  first  of  the  waning  of  Tabaung  to  the  first  of 
the  waning  of  Waso,  from  the  beginning  of  March  to  the 
beginning  of  July. 

The  wet  season,  mo,  wathan,  or  wathanta  utu,  lasts 
from  the  first  of  the  waning  of  Waso  to  the  first  of  the 
waning  of  Tasaungmdn,  from  the  beginning  of  July  to  the 
end  of  November. 

This  is  a  very  hard  and  fast  division,  but  it  is  fairly 
accurate.  The  cold  weather  is,  however,  only  perceptible 
in  the  early  morning.  Fifty  degrees  is  about  the  lowest 
known  in  Rangoon,  but  it  is  colder  in  other  stations.  Still 
you  have  to  journey  beyond  Bhamaw  in  the  north  before 
you  come  to  the  region  of  duck  frosts.     There  is  no  mistake 


Lix  ERAS,  COMPUTATION  OF  TIME,  ETC.  553 

about  the  rains.  In  Rangoon  the  annual  average  rainfall 
is  a  hundred  inches,  but  in  Maulmein,  Akyab,  and  other 
towns  considerably  over  twice  that  amount  is  registered.  In 
Rangoon,  on  3rd  November  1879,  between  one  o'clock  in 
the  morning  and  two  in  the  afternoon  eleven  inches  fell. 
Happily  this  sort  of  thing  is  not  usual. 

In  Mandalay,  time  was  calculated  by  means  of  a  water- 
clock,  which  stood  in  the  bo-ho,  the  clock-tower  by  the 
eastern  gate,  where  were  also  the  gong  and  drum  on  which 
the  watches  were  sounded  by  one,  two,  three,  or  four  alternate 
blows.  The  water-clock  is  a  simple  enough  affair.  It  con- 
sists of  nothing  more  than  a  large  vessel  filled  with  water, 
in  which  cups  are  placed,  perforated  so  that  an  hour — a 
Burmese  nayi — elapses  before  they  sink  to  the  bottom.  It 
is  only  at  the  vernal  and  autumnal  equinoxes  that  the  hours 
of  the  day  and  night  are  equal.  At  other  times  they  vary, 
and  the  Burmans  make  a  great  fuss  over  their  complicated 
calculations.  In  July  the  days  are  longest  with  thirty-six 
hours,  the  night  only  lasting  twenty-four,  while  these  figures 
are  exactly  reversed  in  January.  Any  inaccuracy  in  Bur- 
mese computations  arises  from  the  loss  of  the  fourth  book 
of  Bedin  (the  Indian  Vedas),  which  was  destroyed  in  the 
bonfire  made  by  the  religious  of  all  fishing-nets,  snares, 
weapons  of  war,  and  such  writings  as  are  denounced  in  the 
sacred  books.  It  was  by  pecking  at  the  ashes  of  this  volume 
that  the  domestic  fowls  of  Burma  acquired  that  astronomical 
lore  which  induces  them  to  crow  all  together  at  midnight 
(tha'gaung  kyet). 

It  is  only,  however,  in  the  capital  that  the  water-clock  is 
found,  and  in  the  rest  of  the  country,  and  especially  in  all 
the  smaller  villages  and  towns,  time  is  only  roughly  indi- 
cated by  a  reference  to  the  position  of  the  sun  or  the  moon, 
or  to  certain  daily  occurrences  taking  place  at  fixed  times, 
as  "  in  the  morning  when  the  sun  was  a  span  above  the 
horizon  "  ;  or  "  when  the  sun  was  as  high  as  a  toddy-palm  "  ; 
"  before  the  sky  was  light "  ;  "  when  the  light  gets  strength  " 
about  half-past  five;  "the  earliest  cock-crowing  time";  "  when 
the  monks  go  a-begging,"  that  is  to  say,  six  or  seven  in  the 
morning,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  local  monastery ; 
"  monks'  returning  time,"  usually  about   eight,  but  varying. 


554  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

of  course,  with  the  charity  of  the  neighbourhood  ;  "  breakfast 
time,''  usually  eight  o'clock ;  "  dinner  time,"  about  five ; 
"  after  mid-day  "  ;  "  sky-closing  time  "  about  6  P.M. ;  "  brothers 
don't  know  each  other  time,"  that  is,  just  after  dark  ;  "  when 
the  lamps  are  lighted  "  ;  "  children's  go-to-bed  time,"  about 
eight  o'clock ;  "  lads  go  courting  time,"  about  the  same 
period  ;  "  when  grown-up  people  lay  their  heads  down,"  ten 
o'clock  in  the  country,  twelve  with  the  kalathas  of  the 
towns  ;  "  all  the  world  quiet  time  "  ;  tha'gaung  gyaw,  "  the 
wee  short  hour  ayont  the  twal' "  ;  when  "  the  iron  tongue  of 
midnight  hath  told  twelve,"  as  Shakespeare  has  it ;  a-y6n 
kye-ni  paw,  "  when  the  red  star  rises," — all  these  and  a 
multitude  of  others  are  in  common  everyday  use,  and  from 
the  simple  habits  of  the  people,  and  their  own  graphic  force, 
are  quite  sufficient  to  mark  the  desired  time  and  ensure 
punctuality.  Many  can  tell  the  time  simply  by  looking  at 
their  own  shadow.  Burmans  not  being  yet  affected  by  this 
"  age  of  machinery,"  as  Carlyle  calls  it,  are  quite  satisfied 
with  equally  simple  methods  of  indicating  duration  of  time. 
Athet  ta-daung,  "  a  breath's  space,"  serves  to  denote  a 
moment ;  "  the  chewing  of  a  fid  of  betel "  occupies  ten 
minutes  ;  "  the  time  it  would  take  to  boil  one  pot  of  rice," 
twenty  minutes,  is  well  known  to  everybody  where  the  cook- 
ing goes  on  in  the  front  of  the  house.  These  being  recog- 
nised, the  chewing  of  two  betel  nuts,  the  boiling  of  three 
pots  of  rice,  do  not  imply  too  great  an  effort  of  mental  arith- 
metic. The  simple  rural  Burmans  understand  as  little  of  the 
English  system  of  horology  as  they  do  of  the  nayas,  and 
bizanas,  and  pads  of  the  royal  astronomers — measures  of 
time  which  nevertheless  appear  in  all  their  horoscopes. 

Measures  of  distance  are  described  in  equally  picturesque 
language.  Thus  we  have  "  a  stone's  throw,"  from  fifty  to 
sixty  yards,  bests  on  record  with  throwing  the  cricket  ball 
being  unknown  ;  "  a  call,"  about  a  couple  of  hundred  yards  ; 
"  a  musket's  sound,"  half  an  English  mile  ;  "  morning  meal's 
distance,"  that  is  to  say,  as  far  as  a  man  could  walk  between 
sunrise  and  breakfast  time,  say  six  miles  English  ;  a  mu, 
the  eighth  of  a  taing,  quarter  of  a  mile  ;  a  mat,  twice  as  far  ; 
"  nga  mu,"  literally  five  mus  or  half  a  taing,  an  English 
mile. 


lO  San-kyi 

6  Hnan 

4  Mu-yaw 

8  Let-thit 

3  Meik 

4  Taung 

7  Taung 

20  Ta 

lOOO  Ta 

20  Okthapa 

4  Kawtha 

4  Gawut 

Lix  ERAS,  COMPUTATION  OF  TIME,  ETC.  555 

The  book  measures  of  length  are,  however,  very  elaborate. 
A  san-kyi,  or  hair's  breadth,  is  taken  as  the  unit. 

one  hnan,  a  grain  of  sesamum  seed, 
one  mu-yaw,  a  barley-corn, 
one  let-thit,  a  finger's  breadth, 
one  meik,  the  width  of  the  fist  with  the 
thumb  extended, 
one  taung,  a  cubit  (19^  inches), 
one  Ian,  a  fathom, 
one  ta,  a  measuring  rod. 
one  6kthapa. 
one    daing,    one     Burmese,    nearly    two 

English  miles, 
one  kawtha. 
one  gawut. 
one  yuzana. 

A  yuzana  is  reckoned  to  measure  6400  ta,  that  is,  six 
daing  and  400  ta.  The  daing,  or  post,  is  the  standard  in 
common  use  with  the  Burmese  for  the  measurement  of  long 
distances.  It  is  also  used  as  a  generic  term  for  any  measure 
approaching  it  in  length,  such  as  a  league,  a  kos,  an  English 
mile,  and  so  on,  as  engaleik  daing,  an  English  mile. 

Twelve  fingers'  breadths  are  reckoned  equal  to  one  htwa, 
a  span.  Ta  implies  measure  in  general,  and  is  used  as  an 
auxiliary  to  the  other  measures  of  length,  as  taung  ta,  a 
cubit. 

The  hill  tribes  have  a  peculiar  way  of  speaking  of  a 
place  as  being  "one  hill"  or  "three  hills"  distant.  The 
expression  may  be  very  vague,  but  it  gives  the  wayfarer  an 
idea  of  what  is  before  him  which  could  not  be  expressed  in 
the  simple  statement  that  he  had  ten  miles  to  go.  The 
road  might  be  all  down  hill,  or  all  up,  for  all  this  would 
convey  to  his  mind.  Similarly  river  boatmen  talk  of  "  two 
reaches  "  or  "  four  reaches." 

The  measures  of  capacity  start  from  the  ear  of  corn. 
One  ear,  ta-hnan,  ought  to  contain  200  grains. 

200  A-se,  or  grains    =    one    let-s6n,    as    much    as    can    be 

placed  on  the  ends  of  the  fingers 
joined  together. 


5 

K6nsa 

2 

Pyi 

2 

Sa-ywet 

2 

Seit 

2 

Hkw^ 

4 

Tin 

20 

To 

556  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

2  Let-s6n      =    one   let-s6t,   the   quantity  of  grain  which 

may  be  grasped  in  the  fist. 

3  Let-s6t      =    one    let-hpet,   as   much   grain    as   can   be 

heaped  on  the  palm  of  the  hand. 
2   Let-hpet    =    one  let-kut,  the    quantity  which    may  be 
heaped  on   the   surface   of  both  hands 
joined  together. 
2   Let-kut      =    one  kdnsa,  what  is  sufficient  for  the  meal 
of  one  person. 
;    one  pyi,  a  small  measure. 
■■    one  sa-ywet. 

:    one  seit,  quarter  of  a  basket, 
one  hkw^,  half  a  basket, 
one  tin,  a  basket. 
:    one  to. 

■    one  ta-p6n,  or  ta-su,  a  heap  or  two  cart- 
loads— hl^  hni'  si. 

The  pyi  is  also  subdivided  into  four  saXh.  Practically, 
the  only  measures  used  are  the  tin,  the  seit,  the  pyi,  and 
the  sal^.  All  depend  upon  the  size  of  the  tin,  but  as  this 
varies  not  only  in  almost  every  district,  but  also  in  many 
parts  of  the  same  district,  the  results  are  somewhat  embarrass- 
ing to  merchants  making  purchases  from  the  cultivators. 
The  English  have  made  an  attempt  to  introduce  a  standard 
"  basket,"  containing  2218.19  cubic  inches,  but  without  any 
very  great  success.  Application  for  legal  establishment  of 
the  standard  would  cause  disturbance  to  trade  and  irritation 
of  the  old-fashioned  people,  but  it  is  evident  that  it  must 
come  some  day.  If  Burmans  had  the  money-grubbing 
instincts  of  the  natives  of  India  it  would  have  been  done 
long  ago,  but  as  long  as  everybody  gets  enough  to  eat  and 
there  is  overplus,  after  offerings  to  the  monks  and  the  pagoda, 
wherewith  to  get  money  for  new  clothes,  the  Burman  farmer 
cares  very  little  what  entangled  sums  in  arithmetic  have  to 
be  worked  out  by  the  unlucky  purchaser. 

The  standard  of  weight  begins  exceedingly  low  in  the 
scale.  Parama  nu-myu  are  atoms  of  a  subtle  fluid,  invisible 
to  men,  but  visible  to  nat-dewas  and  the  highly  advanced 
in  religion. 


ERAS,  COMPUTATION  OF  TIME,  ETC. 


557 


36  Parama  nu-myu 

= 

one  a-nu-myu,  visible  particles  of 
dust,  such  as  the  motes  dancing 
in  the  sunbeam. 

36  Anu-myu 

one  ka-nyit-che,  a  gross  particle, 
such  as  the  dust  which  falls 
from  the  style,  when  a  scribe 
writes  on  a  palm-leaf. 

7  Ka-nyit-che 

= 

one  than  6k-kaung,  a  louse's  head. 

7  Than  6k-kaung 

= 

one  mon-nyin  se,  a  mustard 
seed. 

3  Mon-nyin  se 

= 

one  hnan  se,  a  grain  of  sesamum. 

4  Hnan  se 

= 

one  san  se,  a  grain  of  rice. 

4  San  se 

= 

one  hkyin  ywe,  a  seed  of  the 
A  brus  precatorius. 

2  Hkyin  ywe 

= 

one  ywegyi,  a  seed  of  the  Aden- 
ant  hera  pavorina. 

4  Ywegyi 

= 

one  pe. 

2  P^ 

= 

one  mu. 

2  Mu 

= 

one  mat. 

4  Mat 

= 

one  kyat. 

5  Kyat 

= 

one  bo. 

20  Bo 

= 

beittha,  a  viss,  3.652  lbs.  avoirdu- 
pois. 

4  Beittha 

= 

one  tula. 

4000  Tula 

= 

one  tap6ng,  or  tasu. 

The  only  weights  in  ordinary  use  are  the  mu,  mat,  nga- 
mu  (or  hkwe),  half  a  kyat,  and  the  kyat.  The  standard 
weights  are  usually  formed  with  a  figure  of  the  sacred 
hantha  on  them,  or  sometimes  with  the  animal  representing 
the  royal  birthday. 

Formerly  the  Burmese  had  no  stamped  coinage,  and  the 
silver  and  gold  used,  mixed  in  greater  or  less  amount  with 
alloy,  which  necessitated  the  calling  in  of  an  assayer  for 
every  transaction,  was  always  dealt  out  by  weight.  King 
Minddn  struck  gold  coins  stamped  with  the  lion  and  the  pea- 
cock, silver  and  copper  with  the  royal  peacock,  and  lead 
with  the  hare.  The  lead  coins  were  simply  blobs  of  metal 
like  a  spherical  bullet  squeezed  out  of  shape.  One  might 
examine  thousands  of  them  and  never  see  a  hare.     Mandalay 


558  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap, 

rupees,  though  the  same  size  as  those  of  the  Indian 
Government,  were  not  in  favour  in  Rangoon.  They  usually 
ran  to  fourteen  annas,  so  that  there  was  a  loss  of  two  annas 
on  each.  The  gold  coins  were  practically  not  in  circulation 
at  all.  Englishmen  bought  them  as  curiosities  in  the  bazaar 
and  got  cheated  if  they  did  not  carefully  ring  every  one. 
The  smaller  ones,  struck  from  the  same  die  as  the  silver  two- 
anna  bit,  were  principally  used  by  the  king  to  fill  silver  cups 
presented  to  distinguished  visitors. 

Being  derived  from  the  measures  of  weight,  the  coins 
have  received  the  same  names.  The  rupee  is  kyat,  some- 
times also  called  ding-ga,  that  is,  a  circular  piece  of  metal, 
whether  a  coin  or  a  medal,  and  the  sub-multiples  go  by  the 
names  of  the  smaller  weights :  pe  is  one  anna ;  mu,  two 
annas  ;  mat,  four  annas ;  nga-mu,  eight  annas  ;  th6n-mat, 
twelve  annas ;  kyat-mu-din,  fourteen  annas,  literally  a  rupee 
less  two  annas  ;  one  piece  is  ti'-bya. 

The  Burmans  have  no  bankers.  In  native  times  there 
were  exceedingly  few  who  would  have  anything  to  lodge 
with  such  a  personage.  Those  who  have  superabundant  coin 
almost  always  disperse  it  in  giving  a  kyi-gyin  pw^,  or  in 
building  a  pagoda,  a  monastery,  digging  a  tank,  or  some 
such  work  of  merit.  Whatever  money  there  may  remain 
over  is  turned  into  use  or  display  in  the  shape  of  fat 
oxen,  and  silver  and  gold  cups  and  jewellery.  These  are 
pleasant  things  to  look  at  and  easily  convertible  into  money 
when  necessary.  Burmans  detest  hoarding.  A  miser  is 
threatened  with  as  terrible  a  hereafter  as  a  parricide.  The 
portion  of  both  is  in  awidzi,  the  lowest  hell. 

All  this  sort  of  thing  shows  a  very  unbusiness-like, 
certainly  a  very  uncommercial  spirit,  but  it  is  at  least  open 
to  argument  that  the  Burman  is  philosophically  right. 
He  cares  little  for  the  troubles  of  the  world  and  the 
manifold  questions  of  the  day  which  distract  the  more 
highly  cultured  nations.  His  eyes  are  fixed  uninterruptedly 
on  the  dark  mysteries  which  surround  our  beginning,  our 
end,  and  every  moment  of  our  life.  The  earth  is  only  a 
camping-ground,  in  which  it  does  not  repay  the  trouble  to 
establish  one's  self  firmly  and  comfortably.  The  rich  man 
carries  his  gold  and  silver,  the  poor  his  last  handful  of  rice, 


Lix  ERAS,  COMPUTATION  OF  TIME,  ETC.  559 

to  the  pagoda,  and  deposits  it  there  at  usurer's  interest  for 
his  future  home  beyond.  Let  the  black  coolie  of  India  talk 
all  day  and  dream  all  night  of  his  filthy  pice  ;  let  the  greasy 
Chetty  money-lender  gloat  over  his  bloated  money-bags  ; 
let  the  English  merchant  delight  in  all  the  refined  luxuries 
wealth  can  bring  him :  the  Burman  is  content  if  he  has 
enough  to  eat  and  remain  a  free  man,  happy  if  he  accumu- 
lates sufficient  to  build  a  work  of  merit,  or  give  a  free 
festival  to  his  less  fortunate  brethren.  Who  shall  say  he  is 
not  wise  1 


CHAPTER    LX 

THE   LANGUAGE 

The  Burmese  language  is  monosyllabic,  and  is  therefore, 
like  all  the  other  monosyllabic  languages,  forced  into  the 
tonic  system  on  account  of  the  limited  number  of  combina- 
tions of  which  the  consonants  admit.  The  multitude  of 
meanings  which  a  slight  difference  of  accentuation  gives  to 
an  otherwise  identical  sound  is  the  greatest  difficulty  which 
a  stranger  has  to  contend  with  in  studying  the  language, 
and  never  fails  to  land  the  beginner  in  a  most  embarrassing 
maze  of  complications.  The  modulations  of  the  voice  which 
European  nations  employ  only  to  express  astonishment, 
disbelief,  interrogation,  and  alarm,  become  in  Burmese  and 
other  Indo-Chinese  tongues  a  means  for  distinguishing 
between  words  of  different  meaning ;  and  this  peculiarity 
offers  particular  difficulties  to  the  phlegmatic,  monotonous- 
voiced  Englishman.  It  does  not  simplify  matters  that  Burmese 
is,  of  all  these  languages,  the  softest  and  most  pliable,  and 
has  therefore  received  the  title  of  the  Italian  of  the  Far  East. 
The  varying  cadence  of  the  sounds  produces  to  the  ear  the 
semblance  of  a  chant,  and  all  the  people  seem  to  speak  in  a 
kind  of  rhythm,  so  that  as  long  as  a  man  has  ideas,  it  is  not 
a  very  difficult  matter  to  compose  linga.  But  this  only 
renders  it  more  puzzling  to  the  Occidental,  and  accounts  for 
the  fact  that  very  few  Englishmen  learn  Burmese,  and  still 
fewer  speak  it  well.  Of  the  mercantile  community  not  one 
in  fifty  has  any  knowledge  of  Burmese  at  all ;  and  the  civil 
officers,  who  have  to  pass  examinations  before  they  get 
promotion,  are  but  poor  hands  in  conversation.  The  chief 
reason  of  this  is,  of  course,  that  the  European  is  accustomed 

560 


THE  LANGUAGE  561 


to  learn  by  the  eye,  while  the  Burman  learns  almost  entirely 
by  ear,  and  the  language  is  correspondingly  affected.  The 
semi-civilised  man  has  a  gift  for  catching  faint  distinctions 
of  sound ;  and  a  modulation  hardly  perceptible  to  the 
European  is  enough  to  give  to  the  Burman  an  entirely  new 
meaning  to  the  word.  Fortunately  the  grammar  is  of  the 
easiest  possible  character,  and  there  is  an  extensive  written 
literature,  so  that  recourse  may  be  had  to  the  system  of 
learning  by  the  eye ;  but  this  only  produces  book  scholars, 
and  without  a  knowledge  of  the  pronunciation  it  is  im- 
possible to  appreciate  the  smooth  flow  of  the  dramatic  metres. 
Individual  sentences,  too,  may  be  clear  enough,  and  the 
immediate  connection  of  subordinate  ideas  with  the  leading 
thought  is  a  great  help,  but  longer  compositions  can  often 
only  be  understood  by  a  careful  collating  of  the  whole 
meaning,  when  once  reading  aloud  would  make  the  whole 
idea  perfectly  evident  to  a  Burman. 

One  of  the  principal  features  in  the  language  is  the 
arrangement  of  words  in  a  sentence,  which,  as  is  the  case 
also  in  Thibetan,  is  the  exact  reverse  of  the  order  followed 
in  English.  This  is  the  more  singular  and  significant  to 
the  philologist,  because  the  surrounding  Shans,  Takings, 
and  Karens  observe  practically  the  same  sequence  as  in 
English.  Another  peculiarity  is  in  the  nouns,  adjectives, 
and  tenses  of  verbs,  which  are  all  formed  by  the  addition 
of  sufifixes  or  affixes  to  the  verbal  root.  Passive  verbs  are 
in  very  many  cases  transformed  into  the  active  form  by  the 
aspiration  of  the  initial  consonant,  and  transitives  from  in- 
transitives  in  the  same  way ;  as  kya-thi,  to  fall  ;  hkya- 
thi,  to  throw  down,  or  cause  to  fall ;  pyet-thi,  to  be 
ruined  ;  hpyet-thi,  to  bring  to  ruin  ;  lut-thi,  to  be  free ; 
hlut-gyi,  to  set  free.  The  language  is  written  from  left  to 
right,  and  there  are  no  spaces  between  the  words,  and  but 
very  few  paik,  or  stops,  to  mark  separate  sentences,  except 
the  paik-gyi  which  divides  paragraphs,  and  consists  of 
four  short  perpendicular  lines  arranged  in  couples.  The 
written  characters  are,  all  but  one  or  two,  composed  of 
circles,  or  segments  of  circles,  having  acquired  that  shape 
from  the  original  Nagari,  by  the  custom  of  writing  with  a 
pointed  style  on  palm  leaves.     The  alphabet  is  derived  from 

2  O 


562  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  Magadhi  or  Pali  (the  latter  word  properly  meaning  a 
text  and  not  a  language),  and  was  doubtless  imported  into 
Burma  with  the  teachings  of  Buddhism.  The  monosyllabic 
character  of  the  language  has,  however,  considerably  changed 
the  sound  of  many  of  the  letters.  There  are  ten  vowels 
and  thirty-two  consonants,  every  alternate  vowel  having  the 
sound  of  that  preceding  it,  but  considerably  longer  and 
broader  in  tone.  The  consonants  are  divided  into  groups 
of  gutturals,  palatals,  cerebrals,  dentals,  and  labials,  with  five 
liquids,  a  sibilant  pronounced  th,  and  an  aspirate.  In  each 
class  there  are  five  letters  ;  the  first  the  simple  sound,  the 
second  its  aspirate,  the  third  the  sound  rough  and  hard,  the 
fourth  its  aspirate,  and  the  fifth  the  corresponding  nasal. 
The  letters  of  the  alphabet  have  all  names  descriptive  of 
their  shapes,  beginning  with  ka-gyi  and  ka-gwe,  "  great  ka  " 
and  "  curved  ka."  Some  of  the  names  are  singular  ;  "  big- 
bellied  ta,"  "  elephant  shackles  hta,"  "  bottom  indented  da," 
"  steep  pa,"  "  hump-backed  ba,"  "  bridle  za,"  and  "  supine 
ya."  The  vowel  a  is  inherent  in  every  consonant,  and  is 
pronounced  in  every  case,  except  when  it  is  "  killed  "  by  the 
"  that "  mark,  when  the  consonant  itself  is  also  killed,  and 
the  effect  produced  is  a  short,  sharp,  abrupt  termination  to 
the  word,  as  if  the  letter  were  strangled  in  the  attempt  to 
pronounce  it. 

A  peculiarity  which  Burmese  shares  with  all  the  other 
cognate  tongues  is  the  use  of  help  words  in  counting — 
"  nouns  generic  "  as  they  have  been  called.  One  cannot  say 
in  Burmese,  as  in  English,  "  two  dogs,"  "  four  spears,"  "  three 
trees,"  and  so  forth.  It  is  requisite  to  mention  first  the 
thing  spoken  of ;  second,  the  number  or  quantity  of  objects ; 
and  finally,  the  genus,  or  class  to  which  they  belong.  Thus 
kwe  hni'-gaung,  dogs,  two  animals,  or  two  dogs ;  hlan 
le-sin,  spears,  four  long,  straight  things;  6n-bin  th6n-bin, 
cocoanut  palms,  three  trees,  and  so  forth.  The  cardinal  is 
not  placed  in  immediate  juxtaposition  with  the  noun,  but 
has  the  guiding  word  in  between.  There  are  a  vast  number 
of  these  generic  nouns,  and  they  come  quite  naturally  to  a 
Burman.  He  speaks  of  boxes  and  pots  as  so  many  "  round 
things  "  ;  books  and  letters  as  "  writings  "  ;  mats  as  "  flat 
things '' ;    horses  and  carts  as  "  things  to  be  ridden  on  "  ; 


LX  THE  LANGUAGE  563 

coats  and  waistcloths  as  "  things  to  be  worn  "  ;  and  so  forth 
in  infinite  variety.     Even  the  numeral  auxiliaries  applied  to 
human  beings  vary.     The  Buddha,  as  well  as  superior  beings 
and  pagodas,  is  spoken  of  as  a  ta-zu ;    kings,  members  of 
the  Sacred  Order,  and  persons  in  power  generally,  are  referred 
to  as  ta-ba  ;  respectable  people  to  whom  it  is  wished  to  be 
polite  are  numbered  as  ta-u  (so  many  "  foreheads ") ;    and 
in  ordinary  conversation,  mankind  generally  are  denominated 
ta-yauk.      Foreigners — regarded   as   aliens   and   indeed   not 
entitled   to  rank   as  human  beings  at   all,  since  they  have 
never  worn   the  yellow   robe — receive   but   scant   reverence 
from  the  tongues  of  the   older   people,  and  formerly  from 
Upper  Burmans,  the  same  auxiliary  being  applied  to  them 
as  would  be  used  in  speaking  of  a  buffalo  or  a  pig.     Thus 
you    would    say    kala   hni'-gaung,   foreigners,    two   animals, 
or  "  two  beastly  foreigners."      This  has,  however,  now  almost 
died    out,    certainly  in    regard   to    Europeans,   and  is   only 
occasionally    heard    with    reference    to    some    of    the    least 
civilised   of  the  hill  tribes.      A   hint  of  the  same  style   of 
enumeration  occurs  in  the  English  "  twenty  head  of  cattle," 
and  perhaps  in  the  military  "  five  hundred  sabres,"  or  "  two 
thousand  bayonets,"  where  the  weapon  is  more  typical  and 
perhaps  of  greater  value  than  the  man  who  wields  it. 

Chinese  and  Shan  perhaps  exceed  the  Burman  language 
in  the  number  of  almost  identically  sounding  syllables,  in 
which  the  slightest  difference  of  intonation  makes  a  change 
of  sense,  but  most  people  are  of  opinion  that  it  is  quite  rich 
enough.  Thus  pe  in  its  simple  form  may  mean  (i)  the 
palmyra  palm  or  leaf,  whence  pe-sa,  a  palm-leaf  book  ;  (2) 
an  anvil ;  (3)  to  have  the  edge  or  point  turned ;  (4)  to  lay 
the  ears  back,  as  a  horse ;  (5)  to  be  dull  of  sight,  or  blunted 
in  feelings  ;  (6)  to  be  dirty ;  (7)  an  euphonic  verbal  affix. 

Pe,  with  the  heavy  accent  (denoting  a  lengthening  of 
the  sound)  means  to  give,  and  pe-sa  in  this  form,  to  give 
in  marriage. 

Hpe,  with  the  heavy  accent  (practically  the  same  sound 
to  an  Englishman's  ears)  means  (i)  to  scab  over;  (2)  to 
ward  off  evil ;  (3)  to  tack  off  shore  with  a  boat  in  order  to 
gain  an  offing  ;  (4)  to  be  broken  down  in  bodily  strength  or 
ability. 


564  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

P^  with  the  light  accent  (cutting  the  sound  short)  means 
(i)  the  stern  of  a  boat;  (2)  to  steer;  (3)  to  be  broken  off, 
to  crumble.  Pfe,  with  the  heavy  accent,  means  ( i )  a  measure 
of  weight  equal  to  six  seeds  of  the  Abrus  precatorius ;  (2) 
any  leguminous  plant,  such  as  bears  seed  in  a  pod,  of  which 
there  are  many  varieties,  including  a  p^-sa  ;  (3)  to  put  aside, 
reject ;  (4)  madam,  a  familiar  term  applied  by  men  to  their 
intimate  female  friends;  (S)  a  square  measure  of  ground; 
(6)  one  of  the  four  states  of  punishment.  The  last  three 
usually  have  a-  prefixed  to  them. 

Hpe,  with  the  light  accent,  means  (i)  to  break  off,  as  a 
small  piece  from  a  larger ;  (2)  to  separate  and  take  a 
different  course. 

Hp^,  with  the  heavy  accent,  means  (i)  satin;  (2)  a 
playing  card,  hp^-sa  hpe-kye  meaning  to  have  shifting 
luck  ;  (3)  to  get  out  of  the  way  ;  (4)  to  rerhove.  Kye  hp6, 
derived  from  this,  means  to  be  splay-footed. 

Thus  we  have  nearly  thirty  separate  meanings  for  a 
syllable  which  in  rapid  speaking  seems,  to  an  unpractised 
ear,  to  have  throughout  the  same  sound.  This  is  philo- 
logically  interesting,  but  practically  it  spoils  the  temper. 

Myin  means  to  see,  high,  and  a  horse ;  and  to  translate 
the  sentence  "  I  saw  a  high  horse,"  and  read  the  same  aloud, 
is  a  good  test  of  the  knowledge  of  the  arrangement  of 
words,  of  the  accent,  and  of  the  power  of  appreciating 
delicacies  of  pronunciation. 

There  are  not  very  many  Englishmen  who  can  properly 
appreciate  the  difference  in  sound  between  kyaung,  a  cat, 
and  kyaung,  a  monastery.  They  are  apt  to  lose  their 
temper  when  the  lesson  is  many  times  repeated.  Hundreds 
of  other  instances  might  be  given,  but  they  would  only  tire 
and  perhaps  frighten  off  those  who  do  not  know  the 
language,  and  would  certainly  irritate  those  who  have  begun 
the  study  of  it. 

It  is  a  common  saying  that  you  cannot  pronounce 
Burmese  properly  till  you  take  to  betel-chewing.  This  may 
be  called  smart,  or  flippant  rather  than  true.  It  is,  however, 
undeniable  that  the  practice  of  chewing  renders  it  very  much 
more  difficult  to  catch  the  sound  of  a  word.  The  result 
appears  in  the  grotesque  names  which  have  been  given  to 


THE  LANGUAGE  565 


various  places  and  things  by  old  writers.  Captain  Hiram 
Cox  persisted  in  calling  the  town-clerks  mew-jerrys,  which 
was  neither  a  correct  nor  a  dignified  rendering  of  myosaye. 
Still  the  stately  old  king,  Upa-Raza,  had  greater  cause  of 
complaint  when  he  appeared  in  another  book  as  "  Upper 
Roger." 

It  is  certain  that  in  rapid  talk,  and  among  the  lower 
classes,  words  do  get  softened  down  most  remarkably. 
Nyaung-u,  the  great  lacquer  manufacturing  town,  dwindles 
away  in  the  colloquial  to  Nyi-a-u,  and  the  consequences 
are  lamentably  evident  in  the  transliteration  of  its  name  in 
many  English  books.  Similarly  a  youth  named  Tha  Htun 
Aung  will  respond  to  the  call  of  A-o-aw,  but  this  hardly 
justifies  the  assertion  that  you  do  not  need  consonants  in 
Burmese  at  all. 


CHAPTER    LXI 
SELECTIONS   FROM    THE   LITERATURE 

The  following  is  taken  from  the  Maha  Yazawin  : — 

The  Queen  Shin-saw-bu 

In  Ava  there  lived  a  very  learned  p6ngyi  called  Bame- 
soda,  and  a  rich  man  in  the  capital  gave  him  his  son 
Dhamma-sedi  to  bring  up  and  instruct.  This  youth  was 
possessed  of  very  wonderful  powers,  due  to  virtues  which  he 
had  exercised  in  previous  existences.  By  means  of  these 
powers  he  brought  to  life  one  day  a  fowl  which  had  been 
roasted  and  placed  on  the  platter  before  his  teacher.  From 
this  circumstance,  to  the  present  day,  the  place  where  the 
fowl  scratched  and  sought  its  food  is  called  Shwe  Gyet-yet 
(the  more  popular  legend  assigns  a  different  reason).  On 
the  same  day  it  happened  that  a  young  hunter  appeared  in 
the  monastery  and  begged  the  holy  brother  to  teach  him 
wisdom.  As  a  present  he  had  brought  with  him  a  roasted 
hare.  He  lifted  the  cover  off  the  basket  and  the  hare 
sprang  up  alive  and  healthy  immediately  and  ran  away. 
The  p6ngyi  was  very  much  struck  at  these  two  miracles, 
all  the  more  because  they  happened  on  the  same  day,  and 
he  took  the  two  highly  gifted  youths  for  his  only  scholars 
and  taught  them  all  he  knew  in  the  way  of  scholarship  and 
mystic  lore.  Both  were  very  zealous  in  their  studies,  but 
Dhamma-sedi  learnt  one  letter  more  than  his  fellow-student. 

Engwa-min,  Thihathu,  the  Burman  king,  levied  war 
upon  the  King  of  Rangoon,  Bya-ngya-yan,  and  having 
defeated  him,  carried  off  his  sister  Saw  Bomi.  The  young 
lady,  who  now  got   the    name    of   Shin-saw-bu,  agreed  to 

S66 


CHAP.  Lxi       SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  LITERA  TURE  567 


share  his  throne  on  the  condition  that  she  should  be  allowed 
to  institute  religious  ceremonies  to  remind  her  of  the  holy- 
pagoda  of  her  own  Taking  town.  Captivated  by  her 
charms,  the  king  consented,  and  recommended  to  her  notice, 
as  being  the  most  likely  to  give  her  aid,  the  two  most  highly 
honoured  p6ngyis  of  the  capital,  Dhamma  -  sedi  and 
Dhamma-bala,  the  ex -hunter.  The  wily  princess  managed 
to  arrange  a  love  intrigue  with  the  two  yahans,  and  by  their 
aid  succeeded  in  escaping  to  Rangoon,  where  in  no  very 
great  time  she  was  placed  on  the  throne,  and  built  a  golden 
monastery  for  the  two  holy  men  to  live  in.  Out  of  gratitude 
she  wished  to  raise  one  of  her  two  friends  to  share  the  throne 
with  her,  but  the  choice  was  a  hard  matter,  for  they  were 
both  equally  well  favoured,  and  no  man  could  say  which  was 
the  more  learned.  She  resolved  therefore  to  put  their  wit  to 
the  test  and  to  abide  by  the  issue. 

The  two  holy  men  were  summoned  to  her  audience- 
chamber,  where  before  her  throne  were  placed  two  alms- 
bowls  :  one  perfectly  empty  and  plain,  but  decorated  with  the 
royal  insignia  ;  the  other  more  elaborately  worked  and  full 
of  the  choicest  delicacies.  The  rivals  were  bidden  to  place 
themselves,  according  to  their  liking,  by  the  one  or  the  other. 
Dhamma-bala  chose  the  juncates,  but  the  wiser  Dhamma- 
sedi  walked  straight  to  the  royal  thabeit.  The  latter  there- 
fore received  the  hand  of  the  queen  after  he  had  left  the  order. 

Dhamma-bala  was  full  of  wrath  and  envy,  and  forthwith 
created  countless  armies  by  reciting  powerful  bedin  linga 
over  a  bowl  full  of  rice,  every  grain  of  which  grew  into  a 
soldier.  But  Dhamma-sedi  was  skilful  in  the  same  arts, 
and  by  virtue  of  the  additional  letter  which  he  had  learned 
was  able  always  to  overcome  the  machinations  of  his 
opponent,  so  that  at  last  Dhamma-bala  saw  himself  over- 
come at  all  points,  and  took  to  flight  to  save  his  life.  But 
he  had  not  thrown  off  his  long  monkish  robes,  and  his  feet 
got  entangled  in  them,  and  he  fell  and  was  overtaken  by  his 
pursuers,  who  killed  him  at  a  place  where  now  the  village 
Thengan  Nyon  stands,  "the  spot  where  the  yellow  robe 
betrayed."  The  queen  only  reigned  three  years,  but  in  that 
time  she  greatly  enlarged  and  beautified  the  pagodas  of 
Shwe    Dag6n    at    Rangoon    and     Shwe     Hmaw     Daw     at 


568  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Pegu.      Dhamma-sedi    reigned    after   her    gloriously    and 
highly  honoured  for  thirty-one  years. 

The  main  points  of  this  bit  of  Maha  Yaza-win  history 
are  correct.  Shin-saw-bu  was  carried  off  in  A.D.  1439  and 
did  escape  from  Ava  to  be  placed  on  the  Peguan  throne. 
Rangoon  cantonments  are  to  this  day  known  among  the 
Burmese  as  Shin-saw-bu  Myo.  King  Dhamma-sedi  was 
celebrated  for  his  wisdom  and  for  his  intercourse  with  foreign 
powers.  He  received  embassies  from  China,  Siam,  and 
Ceylon.  He  was  also  certainly  originally  a  monk ;  his 
magic  arts  are  another  thing.  His  death  is  placed  in 
A.D.  1 49 1.  The  slight  suggestion  of  the  casket  scene  in  the 
Merchant  of  Venice  will  be  noticed. 

The  following  is  a  favourite  fable : — 

Why  Ants  are  found  everywhere 

All  the  animals  of  the  forest  came  to  the  lion-king  to 
pay  him  homage.  The  little  ant  came  with  the  rest  to  bow 
down  before  the  king  of  beasts,  but  the  noblemen  drove  it 
away  with  scorn.  When  the  king  of  the  ants  heard  of  it  he 
was  very  angry,  and  sent  a  worm  to  creep  into  the  ear  of 
the  lion  and  torment  him.  The  lion  roared  aloud  with  pain, 
and  all  the  animals  came  running  from  every  side  to  offer 
their  services  and  fight  the  enemy,  wherever  or  whoever  he 
might  be.  But  none  of  them  could  do  any  real  good.  They 
could  not  get  at  the  worm.  At  last,  after  many  humble 
embassies,  the  king  of  the  ants  was  prevailed  upon  to  send 
one  of  his  subjects,  who  crept  into  the  lion's  ear  and  pulled 
out  the  worm.  Since  that  time  the  ants  have  enjoyed  the 
privilege  of  living  everywhere  and  in  any  country,  while 
the  other  animals  had  all  of  them  their  special  places  assigned 
at  the  division  of  the  earth. 

The  following,  the  fourteenth  decision  of  the  Princess 
Thudhammasari,  is  considered  a  legal  precedent  as  well  as 
the  inculcation  of  a  moral  principle  : — 

The  Dog,  the  Cat,  and  the  Ichneumon 

In  the  time  of  the  Buddha  Gawnag6ng,  four  pupils,  a 
prince,  a  young  noble,  a  rich  man's  son,  and  a  poor  man's 


Lxi  SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  LITERATURE  569 

son,  received  their  education  together  in  the  country  of 
Tekkatho.  When  they  had  finished  their  course  they 
asked  their  teacher  what  was  the  value  of  learning.  The 
saya  replied  as  follows : — Long  ago  there  dwelt  in  the 
land  of  Gahapatiwetha  four  wealthy  men  who  were  great 
friends,  and  each  sought  to  further  his  friends'  plans  as 
much  as  possible.  At  last  one  of  them  died  and  left  an 
only  son.  The  widow  said  to  him,  "  My  dear  son,  my 
husband,  your  father,  Maung  Ba  is  dead,  and  you  take  his 
place  and  succeed  to  all  the  property ;  but  you  are  still 
very  young.  It  would  be  well,  therefore,  if  you  went  to  your 
father's  three  friends  to  acquire  learning  and  prudence  from 
them."  With  that  she  gave  him  three  hundred  rupees  and 
sent  him  off  with  a  company  of  servants. 

On  the  way  they  met  a  man  leading  a  dog.  "  Hallo  ! 
you  there,"  said  the  boy,  "  will  you  sell  that  dog  ? "  "  If 
you  want  to  buy  him,"  replied  the  stranger,  "  you  must  give 
me  a  hundred  rupees."  The  youth  paid  the  money  and 
sent  the  dog  back  to  his  mother.  She  took  it  for  granted 
that  her  late  husband's  three  friends  had  approved  of  the 
purchase,  and  fed  the  dog  and  took  great  care  of  it. 

Another  day,  after  he  had  eaten  his  noontide  meal,  he 
met  a  man  carrying  a  cat,  and  called  out,  "  I  say,  you  sir, 
will  you  sell  that  cat?"  "Yes,"  isaid  the  man,  "for  a 
hundred  rupees."  The  money  was  paid,  and  the  cat  sent 
back  to  his  mother  as  before.  She  thought  that  this  cat 
must  have  been  recommended  by  the  three  merchants  as  a 
purchase,  and  took  as  great  care  of  the  cat  as  of  the  dog. 

Another  day,  after  his  dinner,  he  came  upon  a  man 
with  an  ichneumon  in  his  arms,  and  wanted  to  buy  it  also. 
The  man  agreed  to  part  with  it  like  the  others  for  a 
hundred  rupees.  The  rich  man's  son  paid  the  money  and 
sent  it  back  home.  The  mother,  still  under  the  same  im- 
pression, looked  after  it  as  carefully  as  the  dog  and  the  cat. 

Now  the  dog  and  the  cat  were  domestic  animals,  and 
she  kept  them  about  the  house  without  any  concern,  but 
the  ichneumon  was  a  wild  creature,  and  she  was  in  such  a 
state  about  it  that  she  wasted  away.  One  day  when  the 
monk  from  the  monastery  came  round  on  his  usual  alms'- 
begging   tour,   to   receive   his   dole   of  rice,   he  noticed  her 


570  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

appeai'ance  and  said,  "  Dear  me,  my  good  supportress,  how 
thin  you  have  grown."  The  rich  man's  widow  replied, 
"  Yes,  the  reason  is  this :  I  gave  my  son  three  hundred 
rupees,  and  sent  him  off  to  his  father's  three  old  friends  to 
learn  business  habits,  and  one  day  he  sends  me  a  dog,  the 
next  a  cat,  and  then  again  an  ichneumon  ;  and  he  gave  a 
hundred  rupees  apiece  for  them.  Now  I  don't  mind  about 
the  dog  and  the  cat,  for  they  are  house  animals,  and  I  get 
on  very  well  with  them  ;  but  the  ichneumon  is  a  jungle-beast, 
and  the  mere  sight  of  it  frightens  me  so  that  my  body  and 
limbs  and  eyes  are  all  pining  away."  The  yahan  advised 
her  to  turn  the  creature  loose  in  the  jungle.  It  is  wrong  to 
disregard  the  counsel  of  one's  teachers  or  one's  parents,  and 
so  she  set  the  ichneumon  free,  not,  however,  without  giving 
it  some  food  well  soused  in  oil  to  keep  it  alive  till  it  was 
able  to  look  out  for  itself 

When  the  ichneumon  got  into  the  forest  he  fell  a-think- 
ing :  the  rich  man's  son  gave  a  hundred  rupees  for  me,  and 
since  I  came  into  his  possession  I  have  been  well  looked 
after  and  fed,  and  better  than  all,  I  have  now  got  my  liberty 
again.  I  must  repay  him  the  debt  of  gratitude  I  owe. 
Then  he  found  in  a  pool  in  the  forest  a  ruby  ring,  and 
carried  it  off  to  the  rich  man's  son,  and  said :  "  This  is  no 
common  ring,  it  possesses  the  power  of  gratifying  every 
wish  of  its  owner.  Put  it  on  your  finger,  therefore,  and  be 
sure  you  do  not  allow  any  one  else  to  wear  it."  Thereupon 
he  went  off  to  the  jungle  again. 

The  rich  man's  son  wished,  and  during  the  night  a  great 
palace  with  a  pya-that  rose  up  before  his  house.  The  king 
of  the  country,  with  all  his  subjects,  came  to  see  the  sight, 
and  the  king  gave  him  his  daughter  in  marriage.  Soon 
after  this  the  princess's  spiritual  teacher  came  to  see  if  he 
could  spy  out  her  husband's  charm.  He  looked  everywhere, 
but  he  could  see  nothing  but  the  ring.  He  therefore  came 
to  see  the  princess  by  herself,  when  the  prince  had  gone  out, 
and  after  making  a  great  number  of  pretty  speeches  to  her, 
asked  if  she  was  sure  of  her  husband's  love.  "  What  a  stupid 
question,"  said  she  ;  "  he  is  only  a  rich  man's  son,  and  I  am 
the  daughter  of  a  king."  "  Oh  1  if  he  is  so  very  fond  of  you 
then,  you  have   probably  been   allowed  to  wear   his    ring," 


SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  LITERATURE  571 


insinuated  the  p6nna  sadaw.  "  If  I  have  not,"  returned  she, 
"  I  would  like  to  know  who  should  ? "  Then  the  reverend 
gentleman  went  away. 

A  day  or  two  afterwards,  the  princess  asked  her  husband 
to  let  her  put  on  his  ring.  He  was  very  fond  of  her,  and  so 
he  took  it  ofT  and  let  her  have  it,  but  told  her  on  no  account 
to  show  it  to  any  one,  but  to  wear  it  constantly  on  her 
finger.  The  p6nna  came  again  another  day  when  the  rich 
man's  son  was  out,  and  began  talking  in  his  usual  smooth- 
tongued way.  The  princess  said :  "  I  have  got  that  ring 
you  were  speaking  about  the  other  day."  "  Have  you  ?  "  said 
he  ;  "  where  is  it  ?  "  "  On  my  finger,"  she  said,  and  showed 
it.  He  begged  her  to  take  it  off  and  let  him  examine  it, 
and  her  nurse,  who  was  also  present,  at  last  prevailed  on  her 
to  gratify  the  sadaw's  wishes,  and  so  at  last  she  drew  it  off 
and  handed  it  to  him.  As  soon  as  he  got  it,  he  slipped  it 
on  his  finger,  changed  himself  into  a  crow,  and  flew  away 
to  the  middle  of  the  Tham6ddaya  ocean,  whither  no  one 
could  follow  him,  and  there  he  stayed  under  a  seven-roofed 
spire. 

When  her  husband  came  back  and  heard  what  the 
p6nna  had  done,  he  said  to  the  princess :  "  You  showed 
the  ring,  though  I  expressly  told  you  not  to  do  so,  and  now 
it  is  in  the  middle  of  the  great  Thamdddaya  sea,  and  we  shall 
never  be  able  to  get  it  back  again."  He  then  remained 
sunk  in  a  deep  melancholy. 

One  day  a  bevy  of  the  daughters  of  the  nat-dewas 
came  to  bathe  in  a  pond  grown  over  with  water-lilies,  not 
far  from  the  house  where  the  rich  man's  son  was  born. 
They  took  off  their  necklaces  and  jewellery  and  laid  them 
down  on  the  bank.  The  cat  found  them  there,  caught  them 
up,  and  ran  off  and  hid  them.  The  houri  maidens  came  to 
the  cat  and  begged  her  to  return  their  necklaces,  saying 
they  were  only  fit  for  nat-dewas  and  not  for  mortal  men. 
The  cat  replied,  "If  I  do,  will  you  promise  to  make  me 
a  road  to  the  place  where  the  p6nna  sadaw  is  living  under 
his  pya-that  in  the  middle  of  the  Thamdddaya  sea  ?  That 
is  the  only  condition  on  which  I  will  give  them  back."  So 
the  daughters  of  nats  made  the  road,  and  the  cat  crept 
stealthily  along  till  she  reached  the  spire,  where  she  found 


572  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

the  p6nna  asleep,  with  the  ring  on  his  finger.  She  pulled 
it  off  and  brought  it  back  to  her  master  as  a  return  for  his 
kindness,  saying,  "  You  paid  a  very  large  sum  for  me,  and 
have  fed  and  treated  me  well  ever  since."  The  sadaw,  for 
his  part,  fell  into  the  sea  and  was  drowned,  while  the  rich 
man's  son,  having  now  regained  his  talisman,  had  every  wish 
of  his  heart  gratified. 

Some  time  afterwards  a  band  of  five  hundred  robbers 
came  to  kill  the  rich  man's  son  and  carry  off  his  ring.  The 
dog  saw  what  their  purpose  was,  and  flew  straight  at  the 
leader  of  the  band,  and  bit  him  to  death  and  dropped  his 
body  down  a  well.  The  other  robbers  were  so  frightened 
that  they  ran  away.  Next  day  the  dog  said  to  his  master, 
"  I  did  not  get  any  sleep  last  night ;  I  had  hard  work  to 
do,"  and  then  he  told  how  the  robbers  had  come  to  slay  his 
master  and  pillage  the  place,  and  how  he  had  killed  their 
leader,  and  so  frightened  the  rest  away.  He  finished  by 
saying,  "  Now  I  have  made  some  return  for  your  kindness  to 
me.  I  have  been  enabled  to  save  your  life  and  property." 
"  Aha  !  "  answered  the  rich  man's  son,  "  everybody  called  me 
a  fool  for  giving  a  hundred  rupees  for  you  who  are  only  an 
animal,  but  I  owe  all  my  fortune  to  three  animals,  each  of 
which  I  purchased  for  that  sum."  Then  he  went  away  into 
the  jungle  and  brought  back  the  ichneumon  and  kept  him 
in  his  house. 

Now  the  ichneumon,  the  dog,  and  the  cat,  each  of  them 
asserted  that  he  had  a  right  to  eat  before  the  others.  The 
ichneumon,  because  he  first  gave  the  ring  to  his  master ; 
the  cat,  because  when  the  gift  was  lost  she  had  taken  the 
necklaces  of  the  dewa  daughters,  and  so  by  getting  a  road 
made  for  her,  had  recovered  the  ring  and  thus  restored  her 
master's  fortunes ;  the  dog,  because,  when  five  hundred 
robbers  came  to  strip  the  rich  man's  son  of  what  the  others 
had  given  him,  and  to  take  his  life,  he  killed  their  leader 
and  dropped  him  into  the  well,  whereupon  the  rest  of  the 
band  ran  away ;  "  and  thus,"  said  the  dog,  "  I  am  the 
preserver,  not  only  of  our  master's  property,  but  also  of 
his  life." 

At  length  they  agreed  to  leave  the  arbitration  of  their 
dispute    to    the    decision    of   Princess    Thudhammasari,  the 


Lxi  SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  LITERA  TURE  573 

daughter  of  King  Dhammarit,  who  reigned  at  Maadarit  in 
the  kingdom  of  Kambawsa.  She  dwelt  in  the  palace  of  a 
Tabindaing  (the  princess  who  remains  single  to  be  married 
to  the  next  king),  and  was  well  versed  in  the  Ten  Laws 
(l.  To  make  religious  offerings.  2.  To  keep  the  command- 
ments. 3.  To  be  charitable.  4.  To  be  upright.  5.  To  be 
mild  and  gentle.  6.  Not  to  give  way  to  anger.  7.  To  be 
strict  in  observing  all  the  religious  ceremonies.  8.  Not  to 
oppress  any  one.  9.  To  exercise  self-restraint.  10.  Not 
to  be  familiar  with  inferiors) ;  and  learned  in  the  civil  as 
well  as  the  criminal  code.  The  fame  of  her  wisdom  had 
spread  to  the  eight  quarters  of  the  world,  so  that  the  most 
eminent  men  from  every  country  came  to  her  for  judgment. 

The  three  animals  therefore  came  before  the  princess, 
and  the  ichneumon  opened  the  case  as  follows :  "  A  certain 
rich  man's  son  paid  a  hundred  rupees  for  me,  fed  me  and 
housed  me  well,  and  set  me  free  in  the  forest.  Having 
regard  for  his  kindnesses,  I  gave  him  a  ruby  ring,  by  means 
of  which  he  obtained  a  palace  with  a  royal  spire,  which 
sprang  out  of  the  earth ;  therefore  I  am  entitled  to  take 
precedence  and  to  eat  before  the  dog  and  the  cat."  The 
cat  then  followed,  and  recounted  how  the  pdnna  had 
carried  off  the  ring  which  the  ichneumon  had  given  her 
master,  and  how  she  had  got  it  back  again,  and  so  had 
renewed  all  his  fortunes.  Then  the  dog  stated  his  case, 
saying,  "  When  robbers  came  to  take  from  our  master  the 
ring  which  the  ichneumon  had  given  him,  and  which,  when 
it  was  lost,  was  restored  to  him  by  the  cat,  I  killed  the 
leader  of  the  band  and  then  they  all  fled.  Therefore  I 
preserved  not  only  my  master's  property,  but  also  his 
life,  and  therefore  I  ought  to  have  precedence  over  the 
other  two. " 

When  they  had  finished  their  arguments,  Princess 
Thudhammasari  pronounced  her  decision  as  follows :  "  The 
dog,  in  addition  to  saving  his  master's  treasures,  prolonged 
his  life  also;  therefore  he  is  entitled  to  the  first  place 
amongst  you  ;  but,  of  a  truth,  there  are  none  among 
animals  who  so  well  understand  how  to  repay  a  debt  of 
gratitude  as  you  three  do." 

Thus    ends    the    story   of    the    dog,  the    cat,    and    the 


574  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

ichneumon,  from  which  you  may  learn,  that  although  man 
is  superior  to  all  animals,  yet  kindness  shown  to  them  will 
always  meet  with  its  reward. 

The  following  sermon  of  the  Lord  Buddha  is  the  chief 
favourite  with  the  Burmese.  In  its  present  form  it  is  said 
to  have  been  handed  down  by  the  favourite  disciple,  Ananda, 
who  heard  it  from  the  lips  of  Shin  Gautama  himself.  The 
Mingala-thut  is  one  of  the  first  books  the  young  scholar 
gets  into  his  hands  after  he  has  learnt  the  ordinary  formulae 
of  worship.  There  are  few  Burmans,  even  in  these  later 
days,  who  cannot  repeat  the  Pali  text  from  end  to  end. 

Mingala-thut,  the  Buddhist  Beatitudes,  or  Chapter 
of  Blessings 

Praise  be  to  Buddha  the  holy,  the  all-wise. 

When  the  adorable  and  most  excellent  Buddha  dwelt  in 
the  great  monastery  of  Zetawun,  built  by  the  rich  man 
Anatabein,  in  the  country  of  Thawatti,  there  came  to 
him  a  d^wa  at  the  hour  of  midnight,  when  the  whole 
building  was  illuminated  by  the  effulgence  which  streamed 
from  his  body.  The  d^wa  placed  himself  neither  too  far 
nor  too  near,  neither  to  the  right  nor  to  the  left,  but  in  the 
proper  spot,  and  after  bowing  low  in  humble  obeisance,  thus 
addressed  the  Buddha : 

"  Most  adorable  and  excellent  Buddha,  during  twelve 
long  years,  many  d^was  and  men,  desirous  of  reaching  to 
the  holiness  of  Ne'ban,  have  striven  to  discover  what  things 
are  blessed,  but  they  still  remain  in  ignorance.  Do  thou 
therefore  instruct  us  in  those  matters  which  are  most 
blessed." 

The  Adorable  replied  : — 

"  Thou  son  of  ddwas,  to  shun  the  company  of  the 
foolish  ;  to  pay  homage  to  the  learned ;  to  worship  what 
ought  to  be  worshipped  ;  these  are  blessed  things.  D6wa, 
mark  them  well. 

"  Thou  son  of  d^was,  to  dwell  among  good  men  ;  to 
have  with  one's  self  the  conciousness  of  good  deeds  done 
in   a  former   state   of  existence ;    to  guard    well    all   one's 


I.XI  SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  LITERATURE  575 

actions ;     these    are    blessed    things.        D^wa,    mark    them 
well. 

"  Thou  son  of  d^was,  to  hear  and  see  much  in  order 
to  acquire  knowledge ;  to  study  all  science  that  leads  not 
to  sin  ;  to  make  use  of  proper  language ;  to  acquire  a 
knowledge  of  propriety  of  behaviour  (from  the  Wini) ; 
these  are  blessed  things.     Ddwa,  mark  them  well. 

"  Thou  son  of  d^was,  to  treat  parents  with  tenderness 
and  affection  ;  to  nourish  well  one's  wife  and  children  ;  to 
perform  no  action  under  the  influence  of  sinful  temptation  ; 
these  are  blessed  things.     Ddwa,  mark  them  well. 

"  Thou  son  of  ddwas,  to  make  offerings  and  give 
abundant  alms  ;  to  act  in  accordance  with  the  precepts  of 
the  law  and  of  virtue  ;  to  assist  relatives  and  friends  ;  to 
perform  virtuous  actions  ;  these  are  blessed  things.  D6wa, 
mark  them  well. 

"  Thou  son  of  d^was,  to  avoid  sin,  to  be  most  instant 
and  strenuous  in  such  avoiding ;  to  abstain  from  spirituous 
liquor ;  to  remember  always  the  principle  of  accumulation 
of  merit ;  these  are  blessed  things.  Ddwa,  mark  them  well. 
"  Thou  son  of  ddwas,  to  pay  respect  to  all  those  who 
are  worthy  of  regard  ;  to  be  ever  humble  ;  to  be  ever  con- 
tented ;  to  be  grateful  for  favours  received  ;  to  listen  to  the 
preaching  of  the  sacred  law  at  the  proper  times  ;  these  are 
blessed  things.     D^wa,  mark  them  well. 

"  Thou  son  of  ddwas,  to  be  patient  and  endure  suffering  ; 
to  rejoice  in  edifying  discourse  ;  to  visit  the  holy  men  when 
occasion  serves  ;  to  converse  on  religious  subjects  ;  these  are 
blessed  things.      Ddwa,  mark  them  well. 

"  Thou  son  of  d^was,  to  practise  religious  austerities  ; 
to  continue  firm  in  the  sublime  truth ;  to  study  always  to 
act  in  the  most  virtuous  way ;  to  keep  the  eyes  firmly  fixed 
on  the  attainment  of  Ne'ban ;  these  are  blessed  things. 
D6wa,  mark  them  well. 

"  Thou  son  of  d^was,  to  be  unmoved  ;  to  be  of  tranquil 
mind  ;  to  be  exempt  from  passion  ;  to  be  perfectly  composed 
and  fearless  amid  all  earthly  dangers ;  these  are  blessed 
things.     Ddwa,  mark  them  well. 

"  O  d^wa,  whoso  possesses  and  observes  these  thirty- 
eight    blessings    shall    never    be    overcome,  and  shall    find 


576  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS      ch.  lxi 

happiness  in  all  things.     D6wa,  mark  thou  them  well,  so 
shalt  thou  enjoy  the  peace  of  the  Ariyas." 
Thus  the  adorable  Buddha  replied. 

Of  this  sermon  the  venerable  Bishop  Bigandet  writes  : — 
"  Within  a  narrow  compass,  the  Buddha  has  condensed  an 
abridgment  of  almost  all  moral  virtues.  The  first  portion 
of  these  precepts  contains  injunctions  to  shun  all  that  may 
prove  an  impediment  to  the  practice  of  good  works.  The 
second  part  inculcates  the  necessity  of  regulating  one's  mind 
and  intention  for  a  regular  discharge  of  the  duties  incumbent 
on  each  man  in  his  separate  station.  Then  follows  a 
recommendation  to  bestow  assistance  on  parents,  relatives, 
and  all  men  in  general.  Next  to  that  we  find  recommended 
the  virtues  of  humility,  resignation,  gratitude,  and  patience. 
After  this,  the  preacher  insists  on  the  necessity  of  studying 
the  law,  visiting  the  religious,  conversing  on  religious  subjects. 
When  this  is  done  the  hearer  is  commanded  to  study  with 
great  attention  the  four  great  truths,  and  keep  his  mind's  eye 
ever  fixed  on  the  happy  state  of  Ne'ban,  which,  though  as 
yet  distant,  ought  never  to  be  lost  sight  of  Thus  prepared, 
the  hearer  must  be  bent  upon  acquiring  the  qualifications 
befitting  the  true  sage.  Like  the  one  mentioned  by  the 
Latin  poet,  who  would  remain  firm,  fearless,  and  unmoved, 
even  in  the  midst  of  the  ruins  of  the  crumbling  universe,  the 
Buddhist  sage  must  ever  remain  calm,  composed,  and 
unshaken  among  all  the  vicissitudes  of  life.  There  is  again 
clearly  pointed  out  the  final  end  to  be  arrived  at,  viz.  that 
of  perfect  mental  stability.  This  state  is  the  foreshadowing 
of  that  of  Ne'ban." 

Prefixed  to  every  Burmese  work  is  the  phrase  "  Na-maw- 
tatha  bagawa-daw  araha-daw  thamma  thamdddatha,"  which 
has  the  same  significance  as  the  A.M.D.G.  of  the  Jesuits 
— "  Praise  be  to  Bagawa  (the  Buddha  as  the  displayer  of 
the  six  glories),  the  holy,  the  all-wise." 


CHAPTER   LXII 

STRAY   NOTES 

There  are  some  curious  national  superstitions  about  the 
sabba-gyi  or  boa-constrictor.  Although  he  is  now  innocuous 
as  far  as  biting  is  concerned,  he  was  originally  the  only 
poisonous  snake.  The  way  in  which  he  lost  his  dangerous 
qualities  is  rather  curious.  The  crow,  that  great  benefactor 
to  the  entire  race  of  fable  writers,  one  day  set  himself  to 
annoy  the  python,  and  declared  that  though  he  might  think 
himself  very  big  and  very  dangerous,  he  never  killed  any- 
body for  all  his  biting.  The  sabba-gyi  got  very  angry,  and 
eventually  spat  up  all  his  poison  in  a  pet.  It  was  swallowed 
by  a  great  variety  of  other  creeping  things,  and  so  the  race 
of  thanatophidians  was  vastly  increased  in  numbers,  if  not 
in  size,  while  the  python  would  be  harmless  were  it  not  for 
his  vast  strength. 

Nevertheless  the  Tavoy  fishermen  make  a  domestic  pet 
of  him,  and  declare  he  is  invaluable  as  a  weather  prophet. 
When  they  put  out  to  sea  they  carry  their  boa  with  them, 
and  he  remains  coiled  up  comfortably  in  the  bows  of  the 
vessel  until  a  storm  is  coming  on.  Then  he  promptly  slips 
overboard  and  makes  for  the  shore,  and  the  sailors  hoist  sail 
and  follow  him  with  all  possible  expedition.  The  sabba- 
gyi  is  a  much  surer  guide  than  the  Meteorological  Oiifice. 
He  is  kept  quite  quiet  and  tame  by  being  well  fed  on 
nutriment  that  does  not  excite  his  blood.  His  diet  is  usually 
eggs,  with  vast  platters  of  pauk-pauk,  "  gummy  rice,"  which 
is  sufficiently  heavy  to  deprive  the  eater,  whether  man  or  boa, 
of  all  desire  to  exert  himself  unduly.  It  is  somewhat 
curious,  as  a  first  experience,  to  see  the  cat,  the  dog,  and  the 

577  2  p 


578  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

baby  curled  up  together  in  a  corner  with  the  boa,  making 
one  another  mutually  cosy. 

The  gall-bladder  and  fat  of  the  sabba-gyi  are  much 
prized  for  medicinal  purposes,  the  fat  especially  being 
esteemed  as  a  sovereign  remedy  for  rheumatism  and  strains. 

Of  the  poisonous  snakes  the  most  dreaded  is  the  ngan,  or 
u-gwet,  the  "  spotted  forehead."  This  creature,  the  hamadryad 
or  ophiophagus,  is,  as  his  name  imports,  a  cannibal,  and  lives 
on  his  neighbour  snakes.  Specimens  as  long  as  nine  feet 
from  nose  to  tail  have  been  killed  near  Rangoon,  and  in  the 
forests  which  are  his  proper  home  he  sometimes  grows  to 
fourteen  or  fifteen  feet.  Unlike  all  other  reptiles,  the  ngan 
does  not  get  out  of  the  way  of  a  man  approaching  his  haunts, 
but  attacks  him  immediately.  He  is  worse  than  the  walrus 
that  roused  the  indignation  of  the  French  poet. 

Bees  are  kept  in  a  good  many  places  in  the  country,  but 
it  is  necessary  to  be  very  careful  where  you  put  the  hives. 
It  is  a  most  ill-omened  circumstance  if  wild  bees  make  a 
nest  under  the  house,  or  if  bees  of  any  kind  fly  under  the 
floor.  On  the  other  hand,  a  hive  on  the  house-top  is  very 
lucky.  Honey  is  in  great  request  to  present  to  the  pdngyis 
at  various  feasts,  and  especially  for  the  embalming  of  the 
body  of  a  dead  brother  of  the  Robe.  After  the  cremation 
the  honey  is  sold  in  the  bazaar.  It  is  not  eaten  by 
Englishmen  in  Burma.  "  Tapping  the  governor  "  does  not 
commend  itself  to  everybody.  The  hill  tribes  in  the  Shan 
States  keep  bees  in  hives  made  of  blocks  of  wood. 

Rhinoceros  horns  are  in  as  great  favour  with  the  Burmans 
as  with  Chinese  medical  men.  Shavings  of  the  horn  are  con- 
sidered an  invaluable  cure  for  epilepsy,  and  also  guard  against 
poisons  of  all  kinds.  There  are  two  distinct  species  found  in 
the  eastern  forests — the  single  and  the  double-horned. 

Near  Yenangyaung,  in  the  petroleum  district,  when  a 
new  oil-well  is  wanted,  the  workmen  place  a  marble  image 
of  an  elephant  on  a  smooth,  flat  stone,  and  surround  it  with 
gifts  of  all  kinds,  and  then  sit  down  to  watch.  If  the 
elephant  itself  moves  it  indicates  the  direction  in  which 
borings  are  to  be  made  ;  if  not,  the  offering  on  which  its 
shadow  first  falls  as  the  sun  sinks  down,  is  marked,  and  a 
bedin  saya  consulted. 


STRA  Y  NOTES  579 


A  woman  who  has  seven  sons  or  seven  daughters  in 
unbroken  succession  is  almost  certain  to  become  a  witch  ; 
her  husband  had  better  not  quarrel  with  her  at  any  rate. 

At  Kama,  a  small  place  between  Prome  and  Thayet- 
myo,  there  is  a  spirit  flame,  a  kind  of  Jack  o'  Lantern,  in  a 
hollow  near  the  town.  Long  ago  a  smith  was  killed  in  a 
brawl  and  became  a  nat  after  death.  He  liked  his  old  pro- 
fession and  set  up  a  nat-fire,  and  worked  away  at  nights  on 
a  spectral  forge.  The  inhabitants  soon  found  out  what  was 
going  on,  and  after  their  first  terror  was  over  used  to  go  out 
in  the  middle  of  the  day  and  leave  a  piece  of  iron,  saying, 
"  Good  Mr.  Spirit,  make  me  an  axe,  a  dah,  a  hoe."  Next 
day  they  found  it  all  ready  made.  At  last  a  Chin — ^just  the 
sort  of  thing  one  of  those  stupid  people  would  do — hid  him- 
self, and  just  when  the  midnight  cocks  had  finished  crowing, 
up  rose  the  smith  in  human  shape,  dressed  in  a  red  paso 
and  a  flaring  red  turban.  He  began  hammering  away 'on 
his  anvil,  welding  a  sword.  The  infatuated  Chin  at  last 
shouted,  "  Make  it  quick."  The  demon  smith  whipped 
round  on  the  instant  and  flung  the  red-hot  dah  at  him, 
burning  his  cheek.  The  indiscreet  peeping  Tom  took  to 
his  heels  and  ran.  After  he  had  got  a  mile  away  he  rubbed 
his  blistered  cheek,  and  in  after-times  there  rose  at  that  place 
Pap6t,  "  the  cheek-rubbing  village."  A  mile  farther  on  he 
began  to  shake  all  over  with  fatigue  and  terror,  whence  the 
name  of  T6n,  "  the  trembling  village."  Finally,  when  he 
reached  the  site  of  Paukpogu,  the  "  swelling  burst,"  he  sank 
down  on  the  ground,  and  was  found  there  next  morning 
with  just  enough  life  left  to  tell  his  story.  The  smith  never 
worked  again,  but  his  fire  may  be  seen  to  this  day.  Once  a 
year  all  the  house  fires  in  Kama  are  put  out  and  lighted 
again  from  the  nat-mi.  Should  any  one  neglect  so  to  pay 
honour  to  the  nat,  his  house  and  all  his  goods  will  be  burnt 
before  the  year  is  out.  The  resemblance  to  the  legend  of 
Wayland  Smith  at  Lambourn  in  Berkshire  is  obvious.  The 
naming  of  the  villages  is  also  a  favourite  form  of  Home  Took 
etymology  prevalent  all  over  Burma. 

The  common  notion  of  earthquakes  is  that  the  earth  is 
supported  on  the  shoulders  of  four  creatures  called  nga-hlyin. 
These  monsters  are  less  sturdy  than  the  classical  Atlas,  and 


58o  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

occasionally  want  to  shift  shoulders.  When  they  do  so  an 
earthquake  is  the  result.  Others  declare  that  the  quaking  of 
the  earth  is  caused  by  gusts  of  wind  on  the  under  surface  of 
the  world.  The  idea  is  that  the  solid  mass  of  the  earth 
is  supported  on  a  double  thickness  of  water,  and  this  again 
by  twice  its  thickness  of  air,  below  which  is  a  vacuum, 
occasionally,  however,  disturbed  by  storms.  The  Buddha 
gave  a  much  more  extensive  explanation  to  his  favourite 
disciple  Ananda.  "  My  son,"  he  said,  "  eight  causes  make 
the  earth  tremble.  First,  the  earth  lies  on  a  mass  of  water, 
which  rests  on  the  air,  and  the  air  on  space  ;  when  the  air  is 
set  in  motion,  it  shakes  the  water,  which  in  its  turn  shakes  the 
earth  ;  second,  any  being  gifted  with  extraordinary  powers  ; 
third,  the  conception  of  a  paya  laung  for  his  last  existence ; 
fourth,  his  birth ;  fifth,  his  becoming  a  Buddha ;  sixth,  his 
preaching  the  Law  of  the  Wheel ;  seventh,  his  mastering 
and  renouncing  existence  ;  eighth,  his  obtaining  the  state 
of  Ne'ban.     These  are  the  eight  causes  of  earthquakes." 

The  Law  of  the  Wheel  is  the  doctrine  of  the  four  great 
truths  :  pain,  the  production  of  pain,  the  destruction  of  pain, 
and  the  way  leading  to  that  destruction.  These  constantly 
revolve  upon  themselves,  and  the  manifestation  of  these 
truths  is  the  great  work  a  Buddha  has  to  perform. 

Omens  are  drawn  from  the  appearance  of  the  sun  and 
moon,  and  especially  from  the  particular  constellation  which 
presides  over  one's  birth.  The  howling  of  dogs,  the  flight 
and  song  of  birds,  the  appearance  of  any  strange  creature, 
or  of  a  wild  animal  in  an  unexpected  place,  all  have  their 
special  meaning.  So  have  the  nervous  twitchings  of  the  eye„ 
or  of  any  part  of  the  body.  If  the  sun  or  any  of  the  planets 
approaches  the  moon  there  is  danger  about.  In  the  four 
months  when  Venus  is  not  to  be  seen,  in  a  month  when 
there  is  an  earthquake  or  an  eclipse,  and  on  the  first  or  last 
day  of  a  month,  it  is  advisable  not  to  cut  one's  hair,  marry, 
build  a  house,  or  begin  any  important  business  whatever. 
These  and  hundreds  more  may  be  found  in  the  Deitton, 
a  book  very  full  of  singular  information.  Palmistry  is  a 
science  of  which  every  educated  person  professes  to  have 
more  or  less  knowledge.  The  less  a  man  knows,  the  more 
truculent  his  deductions  are. 


Lxn  STRAY  NOTES  581 

A  state  envelope  was  a  very  curious  affair.  It  was  nothing 
else  but  two  large  elephant's  tusks.  Half-way  up  they  were 
hollow,  and  on  the  mouth  there  was  a  heavy  gold  cover.  The 
tusks  were  mounted  in  different  parts  with  gold  of  no  mean 
thickness.  The  letter  of  the  lord  of  the  Golden  Throne  was 
deposited  inside,  and  borne  to  its  destination  with  the  flourish 
of  trumpets  and  the  braying  of  drums.  The  majesty  of  the 
Burmese  king  would  have  suffered  if  he  had  forwarded  a 
communication  to  the  Viceroy  in  a  cover  which  cost  any- 
thing under  a  couple  of  hundred  pounds  sterling.  In  similar 
fashion  the  reports  of  subordinate  officials  were  written  with 
steatite  pencils  on  coarse  black  paper,  and  this  was  rolled  up 
and  put  in  a  hollow  joint  of  bamboo.  The  whole  was  then 
enveloped  in  cloth  and  sealed  with  a  peacock  seal.  Com- 
munications of  this  kind  were  sometimes  received  by  English 
officials  on  the  British  Burma  frontier. 

The  following  are  a  few  proverbs : — 

If  you  want  to  go  fast,  go  the  old  road. 

Wisdom  guards  life ;  no  one  can  escape  bad  luck.  The 
man  gifted  with  wisdom  is  never  left  in  peace. 

Every  bird  is  handsome  compared  with  the  vulture. 

A  mountain  is  climbed  by  degrees  ;  property  acquired  by 
degrees  ;  wisdom  learnt  by  degrees. 

Have  regard  for  a  whole  family  of  rats,  instead  of  for 
one  cat. 

The  more  you  know,  the  more  luck  you  have. 

A  short  boat  is  hard  to  steer  ;  a  dwarf  is  quick  in  the 
temper. 

If  a  cock  ruffles  up  his  feathers,  it  is  easy  to  pluck  him. 
If  a  man  gets  angry  he  is  done  for. 

Constant  cutting  dulls  the  knife  ;  constant  talking  dulls 
the  wits. 

A  pot  half  full  of  water  is  hard  to  carry  (on  the  head,  of 
course  ;  because  the  water  sways  from  side  to  side) ;  the  less 
a  man  knows,  the  harder  he  is  to  argue  with. 

A  cow  that  can  give  no  milk  will  kick.  An  ignorant 
man  is  to  be  feared  for  his  ignorance. 

If  there  is  much  paddy  (unhusked  rice)  in  the  bowl,  it  is 
hard  to  eat.  If  there  is  much  talking  it  is  hard  to  under- 
stand. 


S82  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS     ch.  lxh 

Don't  speak  like  a  mountain,  it  is  so  easy  to  fall  off. 

Eat  little,  stomach  slender ;  eat  much,  stomach-ache. 

Beware  of  a  man's  shadow  {i.e.  his  relations)  and  a  bee's 
sting. 

A  coward  tiger  growls  ;  a  coward  human  howls. 

The  well-born  are  fair  of  speech  ;  the  low-born  crooked. 

A  slave's  son  is  a  stupid  son. 

If  a  great  man  flatters  you,  be  afraid. 

A  great  man's  sword  is  never  blunt. 

There  are  three  chances  in  a  naga's  stare  ;  there  is  but 

one  in  a  king's.     (That  is  to  say,  you  may  escape  from  the 

dragon,  but  if  the  king  is  angry  with  you,  speedy  death  is 

all  you  can  expect.) 

Kyet-go  a-yo, 
Lu-go  a-myo. 

Blood  always  tells ;  literally,  you  know  a  game-cock 
from  his  bones,  a  man  from  his  family. 


CHAPTER    LXIII 

A  p6ngyi  byan 

The  veneration  and  respect  which  meet  the  yahan  all 
through  his  life  are  extended  to  his  remains  when  he 
dies,  or  rather  when  he  leaves  this  world.  The  monk 
does  not  "  die "  as  a  common  layman  does,  he  does  not 
even,  like  the  king,  "ascend  to  the  nat-d^was'  village." 
The  holy  man  in  his  last  existence  must  have  been  holy 
in  order  to  have  accumulated  the  sum  of  merits  which 
enabled  him  upon  earth  to  remain  steadfast  in  the  sacred 
order.  When  he  passes  away,  he  "  returns  "  to  the  highest 
heavens  of  nats,  or  to  the  meditative  states  of  zan,  or 
perhaps  even  to  the  pure  and  immaterial  realms  of  arupa. 
Therefore  a  mendicant's  funeral  is  called  a  p6ngyi  byan 
— the  return  of  the  great  glory.  Even  a  junior  member  is 
burnt  with  great  solemnity  and  state ;  but  when  a  dis- 
tinguished brother  dies,  one  famous  for  his  learning,  his 
austerity,  or  the  great  number  of  Lents  he  has  spent  in  the 
cloister,  the  obsequies  swell  into  a  ceremonial  which  attracts 
people  from  all  parts  of  the  country. 

As  soon  as  life  leaves  the  body,  the  corpse  is  carefully 
washed  in  the  usual  way  by  the  dead  p6ngyi's  chief 
supporters  and  some  of  the  monastic  scholars.  Then  the 
intestines  are  taken  out  and  buried  in  a  quiet  corner  of  the 
monastery  grounds,  or  near  the  pagoda.  The  cavity  of  the 
stomach  is  then  filled  up  with  hot  ashes,  sawdust,  a  few  spices, 
and  whatever  other  available  substances  may  be  presumed 
likely  to  dry  up  the  humours,  and  then  the  skin  is  sewed 
together  again.  A  layer  of  wax  is  sometimes  spread  all 
over  the  body,  but  more  often  it  is  simply  tightly  swathed 
in  white  cloth  from  head  to  foot.     This  linen  cloth  is  then 

583 


584  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

varnished  over  with  wood  oil,  so  that  every  particle  of  the 
corpse  may,  if  necessary,  be  covered  with  gold  leaf,  and  this, 
except  in  very  poor  neighbourhoods,  is  always  done.  Where 
there  is  not  money  enough,  the  yellow  sacred  garments  are 
wrapped  round  the  corpse  instead.  The  arms  are  always 
folded  on  the  chest.  The  body  is  then  placed  in  the  coffin. 
This  is  not,  as  is  the  case  with  laymen,  made  of  planks,  but 
of  a  single  log  roughly  hollowed  out,  and  with  a  very 
substantial  lid.  This  lid  is  not  fastened  down  for  a  con- 
siderable time,  and  occasionally  a  bamboo  pipe  leads  from 
the  coffin  into  the  ground  to  assist  in  drying  up  the  embalmed 
body.  The  fastening  down  of  the  cover  is  sometimes  rather 
an  unpleasant  spectacle.  Many  of  the  old  p6ngyis  keep 
logs  in  their  monasteries  to  serve  for  their  coffins,  and  these, 
when  hollowed  out,  are  not  always  a  satisfactory  fit.  Bishop 
Bigandet  tells  of  a  horrible  sight  he  witnessed,  when  the  lid 
had  to  be  crushed  on  with  wedges  and  the  blows  of  a  heavy 
mallet.  The  majority  of  aged  yahans  are,  however,  so 
shrivelled  and  shrunken  before  they  die,  that  such  an 
occurrence,  which,  it  must  not  be  supposed,  is  any  less 
dreadful  to  a  Burman  than  it  is  to  an  Englishman,  could 
only  happen  very  rarely,  and  then  probably  would  not  be 
carried  out  in  the  way  which  so  justly  shocked  the  good  bishop. 
The  inner  coffin  is  then,  like  the  body,  varnished  with 
thitsi,  and  gilt  all  over.  For  it  is  prepared  an  outer  casket 
called  a  payaung-b6ng,  which  is  as  magnificent  as  the  skill 
of  the  local  artificers  and  the  liberality  of  the  "  benefactors  " 
permit.  This  sarcophagus  is  often  very  large,  and  is  richly 
gilt  and  painted  in  the  panels,  which  are  fringed  with  the 
usual  mosaic  of  bits  of  mirror,  coloured  glass,  and  zinc. 
The  paintings  naturally  represent  religious  subjects,  usually 
scenes  from  the  life  of  Shin  Gautama  ;  his  famous  meetings 
with  the  old  man,  the  sick,  the  dead,  and  the  monk  ;  his 
departure  at  night  from  the  magnificent  court  of  King 
Thudawdana;  his  ascent  to  Tawadeintha,  and  the  like. 
Rearing  itself  over  the  top  of  the  sarcophagus  is  usually  the 
figure  of  a  naga,  recalling  the  pious  dragon  chief  that 
sheltered  the  Lord  Buddha  from  a  flood  of  rain  by  coiling  seven 
times  round  his  body  and  expanding  its  hood  as  a  covering. 
Meanwhile,  money  is  being    steadily  collected  for    the 


^^"'  A  pOnGYI  BYAN  585 

remainder  of  the  rites,  and  as  this  comes  in  from  the  elders 
of  the  surrounding  villages  and  the  kappiyadayakas  of 
neighbouring  religious  houses,  the  kyaungthagyi  of  the 
deceased's  monastery  sets  about  erecting  an  edifice  like  a 
thein,  a  "  monastery  of  the  dead."  This  is  a  building,  more 
or  less  substantial,  according  to  the  sanctity  of  the  departed, 
built  of  teak,  and  open  all  round,  with  the  tapering 
ecclesiastical  pya-that  rising  over  it.  Hither  the  coffin,  with 
the  sarcophagus,  is  carried  and  deposited  on  a  dais  in  the 
centre,  a  slight  railing  serving  to  keep  off  wild  animals. 
Over  it  a  large  white  umbrella,  with  a  deep  paper-lace  fringe, 
is  fixed,  and  round  about  hang  a  number  of  paintings,  similar 
to  those  on  the  payaung-b6ng,  some  of  them,  however, 
representing  the  favourite  subject  of  the  different  races  of 
men  as  known  to  the  artist — the  swarthy  Hindoo,  the 
oblique-eyed  Chinaman,  the  Kachin  with  his  pig  on  his 
back,  and  the  ghastly  white-faced  Englishman  with  dog  and 
gun.  Others  are  simply  grotesque,  and  a  few  horrible,  in 
their  delineations  of  the  horrors  of  hell.  Nevertheless,  they 
are  all  allowed  to  hang  there,  for  though  it  is  expressly 
stated  that  paintings  are  among  the  five  species  of  gifts 
which  are  not  meritorious  (dancing  is  another),  the  ordinary 
layman  thinks  that  the  painting  he  gives  must  certainly 
be  an  exception.  Here  and  there  in  this  odd  kind  of 
mortuary  chapel  are  also  keinnaya,  gay  tinselled  pasteboard 
figures  of  men  with  birds'  lower  extremities,  mandttha 
keinnaya  and  nat  keinnaya,  the  latter  having  the  wings 
and  gorgeous  aspect  of  nat-ddwas.  Here  the  body  lies  in 
state,  and  there  is  a  constant  stream  of  pilgrims — some  of 
them  from  far  distant  parts  of  the  country — who  come  to 
say  their  religious  sentences,  make  offerings  of  flowers  and 
fruit  as  they  would  at  the  pagoda,  and  contribute  what  they 
can  afford  towards  the  remainder  of  the  ceremony. 

The  body  remains  till  the  required  sum  is  collected. 
During  that  time  numbers  of  festivals  are  celebrated  at  the 
ne'ban  kyaung  ;  bands  of  music  play  frequently,  and  the 
same  people  often  make  three  or  four  different  offerings. 
The  lying  in  state  usually  lasts  several  months,  sometimes 
considerably  over  a  year,  and  it  is  to  be  noted  that  a  p6ngyi 
byan  never  takes  place  during  Lent. 


S86  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

At  last  all  the  funds  are  collected.  An  open  space 
outside  the  town  is  cleared  of  jungle,  and  in  the  centre  of  it 
is  erected  the  funeral  pyre.  This  is  constructed  of  bamboo 
matting,  pasteboard  brightly  painted,  and  covered  with  the 
usual  tinsel.  It  is,  of  course,  in  the  form  of  the  seven-roofed 
spire,  the  number  of  roofs,  as  some  think,  representing  the 
number  of  heavens  of  nat-ddwas.  It  is  square  up  to  a 
height  of  fifteen  or  twenty  feet,  where  there  is  a  platform, 
on  which  is  placed  a  sort  of  cenotaph,  resembling  the  payaung 
b6ng  in  construction  "and  decoration.  Above  this  towers  up, 
fifty  or  sixty  feet  higher,  the  bamboo  canopy.  When  this  is 
ready,  a  fortunate  day  is  selected  by  the  elders  of  the  town,  for 
they  have  the  management  of  the  funeral  rites,  to  the  exclu- 
sion of  the  brethren  of  the  yellow  robe.  This  is  announced 
all  over  the  country-side  by  sound  of  gong,  and  when  the 
appointed  dayarrives  the  people  come  flocking  from  every  side, 
each  quarter  or  village  bringing  its  pya-thats  and  padetha-bins, 
the  former  similar  in  construction  to  the  spire  on  the  funeral 
pile,  the  "  wishing  trees  "  laden  with  a-hlu  for  the  surviving 
brethren  of  the  pdngyi  who  is  to  be  cremated.  The  spires 
are  arranged  round  about  the  great  central  one,  to  be  burnt 
along  with  it ;  the  padetha-bins  are  delivered  at  the  kyaung. 

There  is  always  a  great  gathering  round  the  monastery 
of  the  dead,  where  the  sramana  has  been  lying  in  state. 
The  coffin  is  taken  down  with  great  ceremony,  and  placed 
on  a  strongly  built,  low  four-wheeled  car,  surmounted  by  the 
eternal  bamboo  spire.  Now  comes  a  part  of  the  ceremonial 
which  always  seems  strangely  absurd,  not  to  say  indecorous, 
to  foreigners.  Two,  or  sometimes  four,  stout  rattan  or  coir 
ropes  are  fastened  to  the  car,  and  forthwith  all  the  ablet- 
bodied  men  present  commence  a  frantically  contested  and 
uproarious  tug-of-war.  No  sides  whatever  are  selected,  or 
numbers  agreed  upon.  Reinforcements  are  always  ready  to 
back  up  a  side  which  seems  on  the  point  of  losing,  and 
prematurely  ending  the  struggle ;  and  when  a  man  loses  his 
wind  he  leaves  go  his  hold  and  sits  down  to  have  a  rest. 
Sometimes  the  rope  breaks,  and  then  the  progress  of  the 
funeral  has  to  be  suspended  till  a  new  one  is  procured  and 
fastened  on,  for  there  is  no  rule  as  to  a  side  abiding  by  its 
accidents.     Sometimes  the  contest  goes  on  for  two  or  three 


Lxni  A  PdNGYI  BYAN  587 

hours,  and  there  are  instances  recorded  where  it  was  not 
till  the  third  day  that  a  definite  result  was  arrived  at.  The 
explanation  is  simple  enough  to  a  Burman,  and  it  is  surprising 
that  it  has  not  hitherto  been  given  by  any  writer  on  Burma. 
It  is  a  work  of  the  greatest  possible  merit  to  drag  a  p6n- 
gyi's  body  to  the  funeral  pyre,  and  this  kutho  falls  to 
the  share  of  those  who  win  in  the  tug-of-war.  The  late 
Captain  Forbes  said  that  the  explanation  was  that  "the 
conquering  village  will  get  the  better  of  their  losing  rivals 
in  all  sports,  contests,  or  other  matters  during  the  year." 
But  this  is  impossible  where  the  winning  side  may  be 
composed  of  men  from  a  score  of  different  villages  in  circles 
remote  from  one  another.  Besides,  there  are  no  champion- 
ship meetings  in  Burma.  It  is  to  be  noted  also  that  during 
the  Idnswethi  it  is  usually  only  the  payaung  bdng  that 
is  on  the  car.  The  actual  coffin  is  brought  down  afterwards. 
At  last  the  coffin  is  brought  to  the  pyre  and  hoisted  up 
to  its  lofty  platform,  beneath  which  is  stored  a  great  quantity 
of  combustible  material :  wood  soaked  in  oil,  pitch,  and 
abundance  of  scented  chips.  Then  nothing  remains  but  to 
light  it  When  a  layman  is  burnt,  fire  is  set  to  the  pile 
by  the  nearest  relations  with  a  box  of  Bryant  and  May's 
matches.  But  this  is  much  too  worldly  a  method  for  a 
member  of  the  Thenga,  and  even  the  fire  obtained  by  the 
friction  of  a  plug  in  a  hollow  bamboo — an  ingenious  amplifi- 
cation of  the  two  dry  sticks  of  a  variety  of  barbarous  tribes, 
common  in  most  monasteries — would  fail  to  satisfy  the 
dignity  of  a  p6ngyi.  The  pyre  is  lighted  by  rockets 
fired  from  a  distance.  Scores  of  these  d6n  have  been 
prepared  weeks  beforehand,  and  many  have  been  carried 
round  triumphantly  in  procession  by  the  people  who  have 
made  them,  a  band  of  music  preceding,  and  young  men  and 
girls  dancing  and  singing  of  the  potency  of  the  powder  and 
the  accuracy  of  the  aim  which  will  gain  for  them  the  glory 
of  setting  fire  to  the  pyre.  Each  rocket  has  a  figure  of  some 
kind,  a  nat-d6wa,  a  tiger,  a  hare,  or  a  bilu  attached  to  it. 
Some  of  them  are  of  huge  size,  constructed  of  the  stems  of 
trees  hollowed  out  and  crammed  full  of  combustibles,  in 
which  sulphur  largely  predominates.  Many  are  eight  or 
nine  feet  long  and  four  or  five  in  circumference,  and  secured 


588  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS    ch.  lxiii 

by  iron  hoops  and  rattan  lashings.  Up  in  Mandalay  some 
are  very  much  larger.  These  are  let  off  at  the  funeral  pile 
from  a  distance  of  forty  or  fifty  yards,  the  largest  being 
mounted  on  go-carts,  and  many  others  guided  by  a  rope 
fastened  to  the  pya-that,  the  rocket  sliding  along  by  means  of 
twisted  cane  loops.  The  great  majority  fail  to  have  any 
other  effect  than  making  a  great  splutter  and  poisoning  the 
air.  A  few  refuse  to  budge  at  all ;  others  topple  off  their 
carts  and  fizzle  erratically  on  the  grass.  A  pdngyi  byan 
in  the  old  days  was  frequently  attended  with  loss  of  life. 
Some  one,  at  any  rate,  of  the  bigger  rockets  was  sure  to  fly  off 
at  a  tangent  and  plunge  into  the  crowd,  where  its  weight,  to 
say  nothing  of  its  fiery  belchings,  found  one  or  more 
victims.  Even  now  it  is  only  by  the  strictest  police 
regulations  and  a  rigorous  maintaining  of  order  among  the 
spectators,  and  system  in  the  pyrotechnists,  that  like  catas- 
trophes do  not  happen.  At  last  some  lucky  d6n  plunges 
right  into  the  inflammable  materials  piled  below  the  bier,  and 
in  a  few  minutes  the  flames  are  leaping  high  above  the 
topmost  pinnacle  of  the  spire.  Roof  after  roof  falls,  setting 
fire  to  the  offerings  placed  round  the  basement.  The  joints 
of  bamboo  explode  with  a  noise  like  a  pistol  shot ;  the  crowd 
cheer  each  separate  occurrence,  and  when  finally  the  central 
spire  falls  with  a  hiss,  a  shout  rises  from  the  multitude  which 
suggests  anything  but  death  and  pious  observance.  But  here 
in  the  mandtthapyi  all  is  changeful,  sad,  and  unreal,  and 
one  more  death  brings  but  nearer  to  the  final  rest  of  Ne'ban. 
When  the  last  smouldering  embers  have  cooled,  the 
monastic  brethren  search  for  any  pieces  of  bones  that  may 
remain,  and  these  are  carefully  gathered  up  and  buried 
somewhere  near  the  pagoda.  Sometimes,  in  the  case  of  a 
particularly  saintly  man,  they  are  pounded  down,  mixed  into 
a  paste  with  thitsi,  and  moulded  into  an  image  of  the 
Buddha,  which  is  stored  up  in  the  monastery.  The  custom 
followed  in  other  Buddhist  countries  of  erecting  a  shrine 
over  the  dead  is,  in  accordance  with  the  teachings  of  Shin 
Gautama,  an  honour  but  rarely  accorded  in  Burma.  In  the 
Shan  States  they  are  commoner,  but  are  rarely  anything 
more  elaborate  than  a  stucco-covered  block  of  bricks,  about 
three  feet  high  and  pointed  at  the  top. 


CHAPTER    LXIV 

DEATH   AND    BURIAL 

When  a  Burman  dies,  after  the  first  interval  of  poignant 
grief  on  the  part  of  those  present,  the  body  is  carried  to  the 
side  of  the  central  room  of  the  house,  abutting  on  the  front 
verandah,  and  there  deposited  between  the  house  posts. 
Messages  are  then  sent  to  the  monastery,  to  the  friends  and 
neighbours,  and  a  funeral  band  is  summoned.  Meanwhile 
the  corpse  is  carefully  washed  from  head  to  foot,  and  the  two 
big  toes,  and  usually  also  the  thumbs,  are  tied  together  with 
the  chema-gyo  and  the  letma  gyo,  which,  if  practicable, 
should  be  locks  of  the  hair  of  a  son  or  daughter  ;  but  if  this 
is  not  to  be  got,  a  strip  of  cotton  cloth  is  used.  The  whole 
body  then,  from  the  armpits  downwards,  is  closely  swathed 
in  new  white  cotton  cloth,  and  when  this  is  done  the  best 
clothes  the  deceased  possessed  are  put  on.  If  the  family  is 
wealthy  the  paso  or  tamein  is  often  very  rich  and  costly. 
The  face  is  always  left  uncovered,  unless  there  are  special 
reasons  for  concealing  it,  arising  from  the  cause  of  death. 
Between  the  teeth  is  placed  the  kado-ka,  a  piece  of  gold  or 
silver  as  ferry-money  to  pay  for  the  passage  of  the  mystic 
river,  which  is  known  to  exist,  but  concerning  which  no 
further  particulars  are  to  be  got  from  any  Burman.  It  is  no 
doubt  a  relic  of  old  demon-worship,  the  meaning  of  which  is 
forgotten,  while  the  custom  has  clung  on.  Charon's  toll  of 
course  immediately  occurs  to  the  classical  reader.  Probably 
the  race  on  their  march  from  their  ancestral  home  to  Burma 
had  to  cross  a  big  river.  If  the  family  is  very  poor,  a  copper 
or  lead  coin  is  used,  or  perhaps  nothing  more  valuable  than 
a    betel-nut.     The    coin,  whatever  it    is,  is  usually  quietly 

589 


590  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

carried  off  by  the  grave-diggers.  None  but  an  outcast  would 
venture  to  do  such  a  thing. 

By  this  time,  or,  if  the  death  occurred  at  night,  in  the 
early  morning,  the  band  has  arrived,  and  commences  to  play 
dirges  in  front  of  the  house.  The  Sula-gandi  monks  greatly 
disapprove  of  this  practice,  as  savouring  of  ostentation,  and 
their  followers  therefore  often  dispense  with  the  band,  as  do 
many  Burmans  in  the  large  English  towns.  But  otherwise 
the  band  is  always  engaged,  and  plays  on  steadily  till  the 
funeral  takes  place.  Almost  invariably,  too,  one  or  more  of 
the  yahans  from  the  monastery  come  along  and  stay  in  the 
house,  their  presence  being  invaluable  in  keeping  away  evil 
spirits,  who  might  otherwise  loiter  about  the  place.  The 
monk  may  or  may  not  deliver  a  discourse,  just  as  he  sees  fit. 
The  body  is  then  put  into  the  coffin,  which  is  a  very  flimsy 
kind  of  affair,  ordinarily  made  of  let-pan  {Bombax  mala- 
baricum),  a  very  light  and  porous  kind  of  wood  not  unlike 
deal,  or  sometimes  of  eng  tree  {Dipterocarpus  tuberculatus). 
This  is  fastened  down  roughly  with  any  kind  of  nails  that 
come  to  hand.  A  number  of  the  relatives  and  friends  now 
come  to  condole  and  lend  their  assistance  in  making  and  orna- 
menting the  bier  and  hearse,  most  of  them  bringing  presents 
of  money  or  food  with  them.  A  few  years  ago  a  very 
meritorious  society  called  Upathaka  was  started  in  Rangoon, 
the  object  of  which  was  to  provide  decent  and  honourable 
burial  for  all  members.  The  actual  society  did  not  last  very 
long,  but  it  served  to  show  that  the  old  feeling  of  mutual 
help  still  existed.  At  no  time,  however,  have  the  Burmans 
been  backward  in  this  meitswe  a-paung  a-paw,  which  is  one 
of  the  thirty-eight  points  insisted  on  in  the  Mingala-thut, 
the  most  favourite  sermon  of  the  Lord  Buddha's.  Friends 
and  neighbours  troop  in  with  presents  of  a  few  pice,  baskets 
of  rice,  meat,  fruit,  tobacco,  betel,  and  material  for  decorating 
the  bier,  so  that  a  man  who  in  his  lifetime  never  had  a  rupee  to 
bless  himself  with,  receives  in  Lower  Burma  a  funeral  grand 
enough  to  bring  everybody  connected  with  it  under  the  scope 
of  the  sumptuary  laws,  if  it  were  held  in  King  Thibaw's 
territory. 

The  body  is  kept  a  longer  or  shorter  time  according  to 
the  station  of  the  deceased.      If  he  was  rich,  the  preparation 


Lxiv  DEATH  AND  BURIAL  591 

of  the  funeral  paraphernalia  takes  some  time,  and  it  is  now- 
adays almost  a  matter  of  ceremonial  necessity  that  all 
children  and  blood  relations  should  assemble  for  the  burial. 
Technically,  if  the  death  occurred  on  the  last  day  of  the  month 
the  funeral  ceremonies  should  take  place  before  midnight, 
certainly  before  the  new  moon  appears.  This  rule,  however, 
is  far  from  being  strictly  observed  nowadays.  A  poor  man 
is  buried  as  quickly  as  possible  to  save  expense  ;  a  rich 
man's  obsequies  last  according  to  the  pride  of  his  family  and 
their  inclination  to  spend  money.  The  coffin,  called  hkaung, 
is  usually  covered  with  tinsel  paper,  or  perhaps  gilt.  The 
tala,  the  bier,  is  shaded  by  a  light  canopy,  or  spire  made  of 
bamboo,  and  carried  by  means  of  four  long  bamboo  poles. 
This  pya-that  is  usually  most  gaily  decorated  with  coloured 
pasteboard,  tinsel,  and  paintings  of  different  kinds,  and 
looks  strangely  bright  and  theatrical  to  Europeans.  It  is 
carpentered  and  decorated  in  the  street  before  the  house,  for 
it  is  from  eight  or  ten  to  twenty  or  thirty  feet  in  height,  and 
often  overtops  all  the  houses  in  the  quarter. 

When  the  day  fixed  for  the  funeral  arrives  the  yahans 
are  invited  to  the  house.  They  usually  come  in  numbers 
proportioned  to  the  amount  of  alms  given.  There  is  ordi- 
narily an  address  in  the  house,  dwelling  mainly  on  the  vanity 
of  human  wishes  and  the  uncertainty  and  misery  of  life  on 
earth.  Then  the  coffin  is  brought  out  and  placed  on  the 
platform  made  for  it  in  the  lower  part  of  the  pya-that. 
Over  it  is  then  thrown  a  paso  if  the  deceased  was  a  man,  or 
a  tamein  or  neckerchief  if  a  woman.  This  usually  conceals 
the  coffin,  unless  it  is  richly  gilt,  or  painted,  as  is  sometimes 
the  case,  with  figures  of  the  nobler  of  the  animals,  such  as 
lions,  tigers,  monkeys,  and  elephants.  Then  the  distinctive 
garment  is  looped  up  so  that  all  may  see.  Over  this  cloth 
are  usually  placed  short  sticks  wrapped  round  with  gold 
and  silver  paper,  shwe  bid6n  and  ngwe  bid6n  which  were 
forbidden  in  Mandalay  except  to  the  officials.  Equally 
contrary  to  the  Yazagaing  are  the  sanda  ya-mya,  two  long 
streamers  which  come  down  from  the  top  of  the  spire  and 
are  taken  in  the  hands  of  as  many  of  the  personal  friends 
as  can  get  hold  of  them.  The  musket  shots  which  are  fired 
often  during  the  processions  would  have  entailed  especially 


592  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

heavy  punishment  under  Burman  rule.  Latterly  some 
laymen  in  Rangoon  have  even  been  bold  enough  to  glorify  the 
funerals  of  their  relatives  with  keinnaya,  figures  of  men  or 
women  with  bird -like  feet  and  lower  extremities.  These 
spangled  toys,  which  are  commonly  to  be  seen  in  all 
monasteries,  are  properly  only  used  at  the  last  ceremonies 
of  a  member  of  the  sacred  order.  But  when  some  men  are 
bold  enough  even  to  flaunt  the  royal  white  umbrella,  it  is 
hardly  to  be  expected  that  the  distinctive  honours  of  the 
yahans  would  be  respected. 

The  procession  having  been  formed,  a  start  is  made. 
At  the  head  come  the  alms  intended  for  the  monks  and  for 
the  poor,  some  carried  by  men,  some  by  women,  the  sexes 
going  in  separate  lines.  After  this  come  the  pyin-sin,  never 
in  any  very  great  numbers,  unless  the  a-hlu  be  particularly 
bountiful.  Following  them  comes  the  band,  and  often  a  troop 
of  singers.  These  are  always  hired  for  the  purpose,  and  their 
callousness  is  as  little  to  be  cast  up  against  Burman  natural 
affection  as  the  unlovable  doings  of  the  mutes  at  an  English 
funeral.  Close  upon  the  musicians  comes  the  bier  carried 
by  six  or  eight  young  men.  Then  in  a  general  crowd  follow 
the  relations,  friends,  and  neighbours,  all  on  foot.  Many 
passers-by,  total  strangers,  join  in  the  procession  from  motives 
of  piety.  Here  and  there  the  men  carrying  the  bier  stop 
and  dance  in  a  curious  fantastic  way  to  the  measures  of 
the  dirge  of  the  singers.  The  funeral  misereres  are  usually 
the  composition  of  an  improvisatore  in  the  chorus,  and  deal 
with  the  life  and  death  and  good  actions  of  the  deceased. 
A  measure  called  maung  pyaung  is  the  most  generally  used. 
Occasionally  there  is  a  tug-of-war  with  a  rope  as  at  a 
pdngyi's  funeral,  one  side  exclaiming,  "  We  must  bury  our 
dead "  ;  the  other,  "  You  shall  not  take  away  my  friend." 
As  a  matter  of  necessity  the  former  party  must  conquer,  but 
they  sometimes  have  to  get  recruits  from  the  crowd  before 
they  can  manage  it. 

It  is  a  matter  of  regulation  that  a  funeral  should  never 
go  to  the  north  or  to  the  east.  The  graveyard  is  usually  to 
the  west  of  the  village,  and  the  dead  should  all  be  carried 
out  of  a  walled  town  by  a  gate  reserved  for  this  purpose. 
In  Mandalay  this  a-mingala  taga  was  that  to  the  south-west. 


i-xiv  DEATH  AND  BURIAL  593 

and  it  was  avoided  by  those  who  had  business  in  the  myo 
as  cursed,  as  indeed  its  name  imports.  Other  rules  are  that 
a  corpse  must  never  be  carried  towards  the  centre  of  the 
town,  still  less  can  it  be  taken  into  it.  If  the  man  has  died 
in  the  jungle,  and  the  funeral  has  to  pass  a  village,  it  skirts 
round  the  outside  of  it. 

When  the  cemetery  is  reached,  the  coffin  is  taken  out 
and  placed  on  the  ground  near  the  grave.  The  immediate 
mourners  collect  round  about  it ;  the  rest  of  the  people  go 
to  the  zayats,  of  which  there  are  always  several  at  every 
graveyard.  The  music  stops  as  soon  as  this  place  is  reached. 
The  alms  are  set  up  in  order  before  the  pdngyis,  and  these 
again  intone  the  five  secular  commandments,  and  the  ten 
good  works,  besides  a  long  string  of  Pali  doxologies.  As 
soon  as  they  have  finished  they  leave  and  file  off  to  the 
monastery,  the  a-hlu  being  carried  after  them.  The  chief 
mourner  at  the  same  time  pours  water  slowly  out  of  a 
cocoanut  shell,  saying,  "  May  the  deceased  and  all  present 
share  the  merit  of  the  offerings  made  and  the  ceremonies 
now  proceeding."  This  performance,  called  ye-set-kya,  is  a 
regular  accompaniment  of  all  almsgiving.  The  idea  is  that 
the  earth  will  bear  witness  where  men  may  forget.  When 
Shin  Gautama  ascended  the  throne  under  the  bawdi  tree, 
Man-nat,  the  devil,  claimed  that  it  was  his,  because  he  had 
discovered  it  first,  and  all  his  mighty  host  shouted  aloud 
when  he  called  upon  them  as  witnesses.  The  Lord  Buddha 
had  no  witness  but  the  earth,  and  to  it  he  appealed,  asking 
whether  he  had  not  achieved  the  Three  Great  Works  of 
Perfection,  the  Ten  Great  Virtues,  and  the  Five  Renounce- 
ments. The  earth  gave  testimony  to  this  kaung-hmu  with  a 
terrible  roaring  and  a  violent  earthquake,  so  that  Man-nat 
and  all  his  legions  fled  in  terror.  Hence  the  pouring  out  of 
water  when  alms  are  given. 

While  this  is  going  on  women  are  walking  about  the 
zayats  distributing  cheroots  and  sweet  drinks,  betel,  le'pet, 
and  biscuits  among  the  visitors.  The  nearest  relations  are 
carrying  out  the  final  rites.  The  coffin  is  swung  three  times 
backwards  and  forwards  over  the  open  grave,  and  then 
lowered  in.  This  ceremony,  called  utaikthi,  is  looked  upon 
as  a  kind  of  final  farewell,  and  after  each  person  has  thrown 

2  Q 


594  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

a  handful  of  earth  the  grave-diggers  fill  up  the  grave.  These 
sandalas  are  outcasts,  the  name  being  probably  derived  from 
the  Sanskrit  term  for  the  lowest  caste  of  the  Hindoos.  It  is 
considered  a  mark  of  respect  to  wait  till  the  grave  is  filled 
in,  and  when  this  is  over,  there  is  some  conversation  in  the 
zayat  over  the  refreshments,  and  then  all  make  their  way 
home.  The  pya-that,  bamboos,  and  other  paraphernalia  are 
the  perquisites  of  the  sandalas,  and  they  usually  get  all  the 
alms  intended  for  the  poor,  though  at  a  great  funeral  there 
is  often  much  competition  for  the  pasos,  turbans,  and  pieces 
of  muslin  given  away  in  alms.  It  is  to  be  observed  that 
there  is  no  tombstone  put  up ;  nothing  to  mark  for  future 
years  where  the  grave  was. 

Though  burial  is  becoming  common  with  all  classes, 
the  old  method  of  cremation  still  prevails  extensively  in 
the  jungle  districts,  and  was  invariable  in  Independent 
Burma  when  the  deceased  had  attained  considerable  age. 
When  the  body  is  to  be  burned,  mithingyothi,  it  is  not 
necessary  that  the  coffin  lid  should  be  fastened  down,  and 
sometimes  there  is  no  lid  at  all.  The  preparations  and 
procession  are  identical  with  that  for  burial.  The  pyre  is 
composed  of  billets  of  wood,  laid  two  and  two  at  right 
angles  to  each  other,  quantities  of  sweet-smelling  woods 
being  placed  in  the  intervals.  A  few  billets  are  placed 
above  the  coffin  as  well  as  below,  and  at  the  bottom  of  the 
funeral  pile  is  usually  an  iron  trough  into  which  any  un- 
consumed  bones  may  fall.  The  pyre  is  kindled  at  various 
points  by  the  nearest  relations,  and  the  sandalas  stay  by 
to  see  that  it  burns  freely,  and  that  all  is  consumed.  When 
the  fire  has  burnt  out,  two  or  three  of  the  nearest  of  kin 
come  and  search  about  among  the  ashes  for  the  bones. 
These  are  washed  clean  with  cocoanut  milk,  and  in  the 
case  of  great  people  in  Lower  Burma  of  late  years,  often 
with  lavender  water,  eau  de  cologne,  or  any  of  Atkinson's 
or  Piesse  and  Lubin's  scents.  They  are  then  wrapped  up 
in  clean  white  cloths,  and  placed  in  a  newly  made  earthen- 
ware pot,  which  is  not  uncommonly  gilt,  or  covered  with 
pictures  of  sacred  events  taken  from  the  birth  stories.  This 
is  then  taken  back  to  the  house  temporarily. 

For  seven  days  after  either   kind  of  funeral,  mourning 


DEA  TH  AND  B  URIA  L  595 


goes  on  in  the  house.  This  means  in  wealthy  houses 
indiscriminate  eating  and  drinking.  Cooking  goes  on  all 
night,  and  all  day  relays  of  condoling  visitors  come  and  eat 
and  enjoy  themselves.  The  yahans  also  come  every  morning 
and  receive  offerings,  and  recite  a  string  of  Pali  sentences. 
Friends  bring  contributions  towards  all  this  expenditure,  but 
the  result  of  it  too  often  is  that  the  heir  finds  that  not  only 
are  all  his  father's  hoarded  rupees  gone,  but  he  himself  has 
contracted  a  very  considerable  burden  of  debt.  Even  in  the 
case  of  poor  people,  where  the  feasting  is  limited  to  the 
seventh  day,  great  expense  is  incurred.  The  yahans  are 
as  necessary  then  as  at  the  funeral,  for  the  house  must  be 
purified,  and  the  evil  spirits  who  may  be  hanging  about, 
as  well  as  the  leip-bya  of  the  deceased,  have  to  be  exorcised 
and  driven  away.  Then  the  pot  containing  the  bones,  if 
the  dead  person  was  burnt,  is  taken  to  the  graveyard  and 
buried,  or  sometimes  is  put  into  a  hole  near  the  pagoda. 
Superstitious  people  at  burials  sometimes  affirm  that  they 
have  caught  the  "  butterfly "  of  the  deceased  in  a  hand- 
kerchief, and  take  this  home  to  the  house,  where  it  lies  till 
the  seventh  day,  when  it  is  opened  after  the  discourse  of 
the  yahans,  and  the  leip-bya  is  driven  from  the  house.  It 
can  then  give  no  more  trouble. 

Sometimes  a  small  pagoda  is  erected  over  the  cremated 
ashes  of  a  highly  respected  relative.  These  are  regarded 
simply  as  monuments,  even  when  they  are  over  a  king, 
to  whom  alone  of  laymen  in  Native  Burma  they  could 
be  erected.  They  must  not  be  used  as  places  to  offer 
worship,  and  that  this  may  be  known,  the  members  of 
the  sacred  order  ordain  that  such  pagodas  shall  have  no 
hti,  no  umbrella,  on  the  top.  To  obviate  this  it  is  usual 
with  the  builder  to  dedicate  the  place  to  Shin  Gautama, 
and  thus  at  once  secure  a  monument  and  a  hti.  Pagodas 
erected  in  honour  of  yahandas,  or  particularly  sainted 
pdngyis,  receive  the  umbrella  of  right,  and  are  places  very 
eminently  suited  for  the  pious  laymen  to  worship  at.  Such 
temple  tombs  are  called  ayo  sedi,  but  are  not  of  such  frequent 
erection  as  they  used  to  be. 

In  some  cases  the  relations  grind  down  the  bones  to 
powder,  and  mixing  this   with   the   wood  oil   called   thitsi, 

2  Q  2 


596  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

mould  the  paste  into  a  small  image  of  the  Lord  Buddha, 
which  they  set  up  in  an  honoured  place  in  their  houses, 
and  make  use  of  as  the  object  of  their  morning  and  evening 
doxologies.      Such  images  are  called  tha-yo. 

Nowadays  money  and  public  estimation  alone  determine 
the  character  of  the  funeral ;  but  formerly  in  Mandalay, 
apart  from  the  ceremonial  provided  for  a  pdngyi  byan, 
there  were  five  kinds  suitable  for  a  layman — one  for  the 
sovereign  ;  then  for  members  of  the  royal  family  ;  thirdly, 
for  nobles,  and  those  who  had  received  official  rank,  a  rather 
precarious  and  dangerous  possession  ;  then  for  thut6,  rich 
men — so  designated  by  special  patent,  which  placed  them 
under  the  "  protection  "  of  the  court,  that  is  to  say,  made 
them  accessible  for  the  demand  of  "  benevolences " ;  and 
finally,  a  funeral  for  ordinary  people.  The  burials  of  the 
poor  in  Mandalay  were  gruesome  spectacles.  The  body  was 
carried  to  the  graveyard  in  a  big,  roomy  box,  grown  rickety 
with  much  use,  or,  more  simply  still,  in  a  mat.  The  san- 
dalas  had  dug  a  hole,  little  more  than  three  feet  deep.  If 
it  was  not  long  enough  the  body  was  squeezed  in  without 
any  regard  for  relatives  feelings.  Enough  earth  to  cover 
it  slightly  was  thrown  on  by  the  grave-diggers,  and  the  howls 
and  fights  of  the  pariah  dogs  at  night  suggested  how  it  was 
that  epidemics  did  not  arise. 

In  the  case  of  the  funeral,  say  of  an  Atwinwun's  wife, 
the  coffin  might  be  gilt,  with  a  web  of  white  cotton  cloth 
fastened  at  the  head — velvet  was  only  permissible  for  a 
person  of  royal  blood  ;  the  bamboos  composing  the  bier 
were  covered  with  red  cloth  ;  the  pasos,  tameins,  and  so 
on,  given  in  alms,  were  carried  on  long  poles,  each  pole 
borne  by  two  men.  In  the  procession  the  insignia  of  the 
wun,  his  umbrellas,  fans,  kamauk,  and  the  rest  were  carried 
in  front ;  after  the  alms  and  yahans  came  a  dozen  or  more 
young  women,  carrying  the  court  dress  and  decorations  of 
the  deceased,  then  her  state  carriage  and  that  of  her  husband, 
hers  being  usually  a  palanquin.  The  billets  of  wood  on  the 
funeral  pyre  were  gilt.  These  honours  were  so  greatly 
valued  that  not  a  single  privilege  would  be  omitted,  though 
the  husband  had  to  borrow  money  for  every  single  item. 
Indeed,  were  he  to  have  omitted   any  of  them,  he  might 


Lxiv  DEATH  AND  BURIAL  597 

be  in  danger  of  losing  all,  as  not  sufficiently  appreciating 
the  dignities  conferred  upon  him. 

As  soon  as  Mind6n  Min  died,  or  at  least  as  soon  as 
it  was  officially  made  known  that  he  was  dead  (for  there 
are  great  doubts  as  to  whether  he  died  on  the  I2th 
September  or  on  the  ist  October  1878,  or  on  some  date 
between  these  two),  as  soon  as  the  ministerial  announce- 
ment came  out  on  the  latter  date,  the  bo-ho,  the  great 
drum  and  gong  suspended  in  a  tower  by  the  eastern  gate, 
were  stopped.  The  new  king's  drum  and  gong  were  not 
sounded  till  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening  of  the  funeral,  after 
which  they  were  struck  in  the  ordinary  way  every  three 
hours.  Bands  of  soldiers  and  police  with  gongs  patrolled 
the  streets  all  night  long  to  see  that  everything  was  quiet. 
The  princes  had  been  seized  and  cast  into  prison  some  time 
before,  but  there  was  a  chance  that  their  adherents  might 
raise  disturbances  on  their  behalf,  and  this  precaution  was 
kept  up  for  some  time.  Meanwhile  a  pagoda,  to  serve  as 
a  mausoleum,  was  being  run  up  with  the  greatest  expedition 
close  to  the  Mint,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  palace,  in  the 
outer  enclosure,  and  this  was  finished  in  four  or  five  days. 
The  king  had  specially  requested  that  his  body  should  not 
be  burnt  according  to  ordinary  royal  custom,  and  the  Sin- 
byume,  the  senior  queen  and  chief  mourner,  had  resolved 
that  this  wish  should  be  respected. 

The  corpse  was  laid  out  in  state,  and  on  the  3rd  October 
the  greater  number  of  the  foreigners  and  the  officials  of 
inferior  rank  were  admitted  to  look  upon  it.  This  ceremony 
was  conducted  in  the  Hman-nandaw,  the  "  Glass  Palace,"  a 
room  in  which  Thibaw  Min  has  received  most  Europeans 
since.  The  body  lay  in  the  fore  part  of  the  chamber  on  a 
gilt  couch,  or  bedstead,  studded  with  bits  of  glass,  and  was 
robed  from  head  to  foot  in  white,  a  piece  of  white  satin 
covering  the  face.  The  royal  number  of  white  umbrellas 
was  canopied  overhead,  and  at  the  top  part  of  the  couch 
were  arranged  the  regalia  in  a  row.  On  this  occasion 
the  Sinbyume  and  the  Anauk  Nammadaw,  the  favourite 
queen  of  the  West  Palace,  sat  by  the  couch  and  slowly 
waved  gorgeous  peacock  fans.  At  other  times  the  sonless 
queens  took  it  in  turn  to  watch  by  the  body,  two  at  a  time. 


S98  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

Round  about  were  grouped  all  the  other  queens  and  princesses, 
weeping  piteously.  The  deceased  king's  brother,  the  ex- 
Pagan  Min,  the  newly  elected  Thibaw  Min,  and  all  the 
high  officials,  were  behind  at  the  farther  end  of  the  room. 
Suspended  over  the  corpse  was  a  small  flat  piece  of  gold 
shaped  like  a  heart,  called  th^nyun,  and  in  this  the  leip- 
bya,  the  butterfly  spirit  of  the  departed  king,  was  supposed 
to  dwell  till  such  time  as  he  should  be  buried.  The  public 
lying  in  state  only  lasted  a  few  hours,  but  the  body  remained 
there  unaltered  till  the  time  of  the  funeral.  It  was  not 
certainly  known  whether  any  attempt  at  embalming  was 
made,  but  the  body  was  very  much  shrunk,  and  contrasted 
greatly  with  the  genial  presence  of  his  majesty  when  last 
he  was  seen  alive. 

The  funeral  took  place  on  the  7th,  at  noon.  It  was 
the  first  that  took  place  that  day,  and  no  other  was  allowed 
until  the  royal  obsequies  were  entirely  over.  The  city  gates 
were  shut  and  strongly  guarded  to  prevent  any  such  going 
forth  if  any  one  had  been  bold  or  ignorant  enough  to 
attempt  it.  From  the  gates  of  the  interior  palace  stockade 
to  the  tomb,  the  whole  route  of  the  procession  was  laid  with 
scarlet  cloth,  and  round  the  mausoleum  was  a  wide  bamboo 
fence  covered  with  long  cloth,  inside  of  which  were  some 
slight  sheds,  run  up  for  the  accommodation  of  the  queens  and 
the  chief  ministers.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  also  that,  in  a 
favourable  position  to  view  all  that  passed,  was  erected  a 
similar  mandut  for  the  accommodation  of  the  late  Mr.  Shaw, 
then  British  Resident  in  Mandalay,  his  assistants,  and  the 
Residency  Chaplain,  the  late  Rev.  J.  A.  Colbeck.  The 
Resident  and  Assistant  Resident  were  admitted  in  full 
uniform,  wearing  their  shoes  and  swords,  and  it  was  thought 
that  at  length  a  solution  of  the  great  shoe-question  had  been 
arrived  at,  for  though  in  the  outer  court  this  dignity  had 
always  been  allowed  them,  the  fact  that  later  on  they  saw 
the  king  not  very  far  off  roused  hopes  of  an  audience  at  a 
remote  date  with  similar  appendages.  But  alas,  the  hopes 
were  vain. 

Punctually  at  twelve  the  procession  left  the  palace  gates. 
At  the  head  of  the  cortege  came  the  late  king's  wan,  a  huge 
palanquin  borne  on  men's  shoulders.      Close  upon   it  came 


Lxiv  DEATH  AND  BURIAL  599 

six  elephants,  in  royal  purple  and  gold  housings,  and  after 
them  two  richly  caparisoned  ponies.      Following  these  were 
three  of  the  mingyis  and  a  wundauk,  the  fourth  chief  minister, 
the  Laungshwe  being  too  old  and  feeble  to  appear.     Then 
came   the   band,   called    byaing-daung,   on    such   occasions, 
playing  an  ancient  royal  miserere,  and  after  it  a  great  crowd 
of   the  minor  officials,  wearing  baungs,  white  official  hats. 
Behind  these  came  a  number  of  men  and  women  bearing  the 
regalia  and  the  utensils  of  the  royal  dead,  the  crown,  the 
heavy  court  dress,  the  gold  betel  box,  the  spittoon,  the  hentha, 
and  the  rest.     Then  came   an  empty  coffin,  overlaid  with 
scarlet  velvet  and  plates  of  gold,  and  immediately  behind  it 
the  body  in  a  ta-nyin,  or  hammock  of  white  velvet,  attached 
to  a  bamboo  swathed  in  red  velvet,  across  which  was  thrown 
a  white  velvet  covering  spangled  with  gold.       To  the  ta-nyin 
were  attached   two  long   cloths,   sanda-ya-mya,   held   by  a 
multitude    of    queens,    princesses,    and    exceedingly   young 
princes  (all  the  older  ones  being  in  jail).      Above  were  the 
eight   white   umbrellas,   and   over  the    Sinbyume,  the  chief 
mourner,  were  held  three  of  the  same  royal  colour.     Her  three 
daughters,   one   of   whom,  the    Supayalat,  became   Thibaw 
Min's   queen,  were  shaded  by  bright  yellow  htis,  a  colour 
which  ranks  even  over  gold.     Thus  they  proceeded  to  the 
bamboo  enclosure.      Then  it  was  announced  that  the  new 
king,   Thibaw   Min,  was  coming,  having  just  received  the 
beit-theit,    been    anointed    by    the    Brahmin    Pdnnas.     He 
appeared  shortly,  seated  in  a  lofty  wan,  at  each  of  the  four 
corners  of  which  crouched  a  maiden  with  bowed  head  and 
clasped  hands,  the  whole  being  carried  on  the  shoulders  of 
forty  men.      Preceding    him  was   his   bodyguard  of  twelve 
pages   all    dressed   alike    and   armed    with   double-barrelled 
breechloaders  in  red  serge  cases.      The  Shwe  nan-yin  paya, 
the  new  possessor  of  the  golden  throne,  remained  for  half  an 
hour,  looking  very  ill  at  ease,  and  little  inclined  to  inspect 
the  splendid  spectacle  before  him.     Then  he  gave  the  order 
for  the  last  rites,  and  in  accordance  with  custom  returned 
immediately  to  the  palace.     The  actual  ceremony  of  burial 
was    now  concluded  with  as   little    ceremony  as   previously 
there  had  been  superabundance  of  it,  and  in  a  very  short 
time  the  yahans,  of  whom  there  had  been  a  great  multitude 


6oo  THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS        chap. 

present,  were  superintending  the  carrying  off  of  the  io8 
(representing  the  number  of  divisions  in  the  foot  of  the  Lord 
Buddha,  and  the  beads  on  the  rosary)  heaps  of  alms  piled 
up  in  great  mountains  in  a  long  shed  to  the  east  of  the 
mausoleum.  This  was  the  last  of  the  pious  king,  Maung 
Lun,  Mind6n  Min,  the  Convener  of  the  Fifth  Great  Synod, 

The  following  is  the  substance  of  a  funeral  dirge  sung 
in  Mandalay  by  a  Rangoon  man  whose  wife  had  died  in  the 
royal  city : — 

Gone,  gone  art  thou,  sweet  wife  ;  gone  far  away, 

Fair  still  and  charmful,  stretched  on  thy  cold  bier. 

As  erst  thou  wert  upon  that  joyous  day 

When  first  I  wed  thee  ;  gladsome  brought  thee  here. 

And  joyed  to  think  that  thou  wert  mine.     Ah  me  ! 

The  butterfly's  silk  wings  are  shred  ;  no  more, 

Ne'er  more  to  rest  upon  thy  head,  Mah  Meit — 

Sweet  name  for  wife  :   "  affectionate."     Deplore 

Her  death  ye  nats  that  rule  forests  and  streams. 

The  hills  and  vales,  and  greater  ye  who  guard 

The  sacred  law,  the  holy  shrines,  the  beams 

Of  silent  moon,  and  sunlight  baking  hard 

The  hot-scorched  earth,  not  scorched  more  and  seared 

Than  is  the  parchment  of  my  tortured  heart. 

Nay,  bear  with  me,  good  neighbours.     Be  not  feared. 

I  am  not  mad.     The  nat-so  hath  no  part 

Of  me  or  mine.     The  spaewife  sure  hath  said  it. 

Ay,  thou  wert  mine  when  last  I  trod  the  earth. 

Ere  yet,  all  sinful,  I  was  bom  as  man. 

And  yet  again,  in  yet  another  birth, 

I'll  claim  thee  ;  when  mayhap  a  happier  kan, 

A  fairer  sum  of  merit,  hardly  won, 

Will  lead  us  on,  linked-armed,  to  linked  death, 

That  so  progressing,  joyful  we  may  run 

Through  all  life's  changes,  and  with  single  breath. 

Through  heavens  and  zan  arid  rupa,  we  may  bound 

To  Ne'ban,  blissful  home  of  rest.     So  mote  it  be. 

Alas,  thou  wert  from  Hanthawaddy's  plains, 

And  were  we  there,  where  thou  so  fain  hadst  stayed, 

A  stately  pomp  had  honoured  thy  remains. 

In  silk  and  velvet  wound,  with  gilded  shade 

Of  wide  umbrella's  pride,  and  regal  spire 

Had  towered  to  the  skies,  all  seemly  draped 

With  flowing  cloths  and  princesses'  attire. 

Such  as  now  thou  dost  wear,  from  earth  escaped 


DEATH  AND  BURIAL  6oi 

To  heavens  of  nats.     Yea,  and  of  fretted  gold 
With  mirror-work  inlaid  had  been  this  case, 
The  last  sad  dwelling  of  thy  earthly  mould  ; 
But  here  it  may  not  be,  not  in  this  place. 

In  Mamye's  soil  the  stranger  finds  a  tomb 
As  poor  as  doth  the  meanest  in  the  land. 
The  trumpet's  wailing  note,  the  drum's  low  boom 
May  not  be  heard ;  all  callous  as  the  strand 
That  threats  the  sailor  on  a  stormy  night. 
The  law  stands  fast  and  bids  the  mourner  pass 
With  smothered  moan  ;  and  hurry  from  its  sight 
The  alien  clay.     Far  from  thy  home,  alas  ! 
Thy  dirge  e'en  waxeth  faint.     Oh,  Awgata, 
The  Lord,  the  Law,  the  Order,  the  Three  Gems, 
I  bow  me  low.     Grant  me  the  holy  calm. 


INDEX 


Abuse,  twenty-seven  kinds  of,  514 
Acting,  289 
Akat,  ceremony  of,  34 
Alaungpaya,  446 

his  five  arms,  447 

opinion  of  himself,  448 
Alchemy,  401,  404 
Almanac,  prophetic,  348 
Alms,  merit  of  giving,  34,  142,  158 
Alphabet,  562 
Amade,  46 
A-mingala  gate,  461 
Anawrata-saw  Min,  175,  270 
Anchorites'  caves,  140 
Animals  esteemed,  loi 
Ansa  p3fitthi,  the  game,  378 
Ants,  568 
Anyathas,  245 
Apeitne,  218 
Apin,  423 
Arakan,  image,  169 

pagoda,  169 
Arimadeya,  the  next  Buddha,  90 
Army,  strength  of,  506 
Artillery,  503 
Assault,  ten  kinds  of,  5 14 
Athinkaya,  88 
Athurein,  296 
Athura  nats,  91 
Atumashi  kyaung,  172 
Augury,  405 

Aungthwe,  go-between,  54,  55 
Aung  Zaya,  the  hunter,  446 
A-yet  hke,  404 

Badda,  the  present  world,  how  popu- 
lated, 93 
Balachong,  281 
Band,  317 

military,  499 
Barani,  323 
Barristers,  516 


Baskets  of  the  Law,  settlement  of,  146 

Bathing,  72 

Bats,  legend  of  pious,  187 

Bawana,  doxology  of  the  Three   Pre- 
cious Things,  36 

Baw-di-tha-da,  44 

Bedin  Sayas,  239,  416 

Bees,  578 

Begging  tour  of  monks,  3 1 

Bells,  object  of,  204 

in  South  Kensington  Museum,  205 

Betel,  71 
boxes,  275 

Bigotry,  absence  of,  144 

Bi-it,  toilet-box,  275 

Bilu-gyun,  353 

Bi-nat-daw,  plinth,  162 

Birthday  candles,  6 

Boa-constrictor,  577 

Boat-racing    discouraged    by    Govern- 
ment, 364 

Boats,  varieties  of,  365 

Bongyo  fairies,  323 

Book  of  the  Oath,  517 

Boxing,  378 

Buddha,  characteristics  of  a,  185 

Buddhas,  seasons  when  they  appear, 
89 

Buddhism  introduced  into  Burma,  147 

Buddhist  Beatitudes,  574 

Buffalo  fights,  381 

Building  sham  pagodas,  442 

Bullock's  hide  of  ground,  442 

Bumazonat,  348 

Buoyancy  of  temper,  66,  384 

Bw^,  titles,  22 

Bya-bazan,  women's,  43,  61 

Byadeit,  511 

Cabalistic  figures,  415 
Carriages  in  Mandalay,  461 
Carts,  81,  213 


603 


6o4 


THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS 


Carving  in  wood,  67,  126,  129 

Casting  images  and  bells,  198,  206 

Cats,  83 

Cavalry,  502 

Changing  names,  7 

Characteristics  according  to  birthdays,  5 

Charmed  tattooing,  42 

Charon's  toll,  589 

Chetties,  250 

Child-birth,  ceremonials  at,  1,2 

Chinese  game  of  chess,  371 

Chinl&n,  376 

Chins,  oppressed  by  Burmese,  443 

Choral  dances,  313 

Church  lands,  134,  533 

Classification  of  the  people,  95 

Codes  of  law,  509 

Coffin  of  monk,  584 

layman,  590 
Coiners,  402 

Colours  used  for  lacquer  ware,  278 
Compliments  of  the  New  Year,  350 
Conjurers,  414 
Consecration  of  king,  450 
Constitution,  453 
Cookery,  objection  to  smell  of,  70 
Cooking  range,  79 
Coronation,  450 
Corvees,  66 

Councils  of  religion,  1 46 
Courting  time,  56 
Cryptographs,  166 

Daing,  ground-keeper,  376 

Dalizan  necklaces,  338 

Dancing,  varieties  of,  311 

Dat,  the  elements  of  the  body,  418 

Decisions,  standard  in  law,  510 

Dedication  of  pagoda,  157 

Deitt6n,  416 

Destruction  of  successive  worlds,  89 

Dewadat,  supposed  identity  with  Jesus 

Christ,  96 
Dibinkaya  Paya,  192 
Dietists,  418 
Difficulty  of  becoming  a  human  being, 

19 
Dirges,  592,  600 
Diseases,  80,  422 
Divorce,  60 
Dobatthan,  325 

Doctors'  prescriptions,  417,  420 
Dog,  cat,  and  ichneumon,  568 
Dogs,  82 
Doxologies,  186 
Dreams,  cause  of,  391 
Dress,  72 


Drill,  S04 

Druggists,  418 

Duke  of  York's  nose,  1 69 

Durian  fruit,  280 

Dyeing  silk,  272 

Earth,  guardian  spirit  of,  348 

Earthquakes,  causes  of,  579 

Edepat,  four  laws  of,  36 

Eing  saung  nat,  235 

Empress  play,  295 

Enforced  labour,  526 

English  carriages  in  Mandalay,  261 

Entada   pursatha,    gigantic    creeper, 

374 
Envelope  of  State,  581 
Excommunication,  120 
Executioners,  432 

Family  of  late  king,  456 

Farms,  smallness  of,  537 

Feminine  beauties,  266 

Festival  offerings,  331 

Fire-balloons,  229 

Fires  in  Mandalay,  545 

Firing  of  guns,  etc.,  at  the  New  Year, 

349 
Fish  oils,  283 
Fish,  tame,  137 

Fishermen,  punishments  of,  285 
Flogging  round  the  town,  521 
Forest  reservations,  536 
Forts,  507 
Fowls,  domestic,  84 

their  astrological  knowledge,  136 
Fox  and  geese,  378 
Freeing  birds,  a  work  of  merit,  84 
Friendly  societies,  590 
Funeral  of  monk,  583 

processions,  592 

five  classes  of,  411,  596 

Gaingok,  109 
Gardens,  82 
Gatas,  virtue  of,  241 
Gilding  a  pagoda,  176 
G8nnyinto,  373 

varieties  in  the  play,  374 
Gossip,  219,  267 
Grave-diggers,  431 

Hair,  72 

days  for  cutting,  386 
Hanthawaddy,  323 
Hare,  symbol  of  the  moon,  342 
Harmonicons,  drum  and  gong,  317 

bamboo,  318 


INDEX 


605 


Harp,  318 

Harvest-spirit  feast,  239 

Hauteur,  cause  of  Burman,  384 

Heart's  blood,  61 

Hells,  torments  of  the  eight,  99 

representations  of,  161,  309 
Hierarchy,  109 
Hilsa,  the  Indian  salmon,  282 
Hindoo  game  of  chess,  368 
Hkaung-se  Gyun,  353 
Hle-pyaung  lu-pyaung,  363 
Hlutdaw,  511 
Hmaw  Saya,  424 
Hnget-pyaw-bu,  158 
Hostile  pairs,  rhyme  of,  62 
House-posts,  76 

foundation  of,  76 

decorations,  337 

shops,  68 
Houses,  75-76 
Hpaungwun,  492 
Hti,  162 

Identical  sounding  words,  563 
Idolatry  repudiated,  184 
Illuminations,  227 

on  the  river,  228 
Image  houses,  192 
Images,  three  classes  of,  190 

growing,  196 
Initiation  to  the  monastery,  113 
Inscriptions  on  bells,  203,  206 
Instruments,  musical,  317 
Insults  to  foreign  missions,  440 
Islands,  the  four  great,  91 

Jars,  large,  282,  344 
Jewels,  411 

Kabalwe,  131 

Kachins,  443 

Kadaw,  presentation  of,  474 

Kado-ka,  Charon's  toll,  589 

Kaladet,  monastery  bell,  30 

Kammawasa,  113 

Wut-1^,  113 
Kan,  doctrine  of,  107,  1S6,  418,  433, 

446 
Kappiya  -  dayaka,     manciple     of     the 

monastery,  32,  150,  332 
Karens'  story  of  the  creation,  443 
Kauk-hnyin,  sticky  rice,  264 
Kaunghmu,  346 
Kayathan,  music,  324 

words,  321 
Kebo,  blackmail,  354 
Kemindine,  182 


King  of  the  wizards,  413 
Kinwunmingyi,  494 
Kosaung  nat,  235 
Ko-yin,  novice,  108 
KuUaga,  tapestry,  213,  337 
Kutho,  merit,  153,  220 
Ku-thu-daw  pagoda,  172 
Kyaik-hti-yo  pagoda,  167 
Kyauktaran,  rock-carvings,  194 
Kyaung-daw-gyi,  royal  monastery,  129 
Kyaung-taga,  33 
Kyet-sha-taing,  prayer  flags,  188 
Kyigyin  pw^,  291 
Kyizi,  triangular  gongs,  218 
Kyotothi,  tilting  at  the  string,  381 

Land,  ^ven  modes  of  acquiring,  532 
sanctity  of  ownership  of,  533 

Landrakrks,  legal,  534 

Language,  etiquette  of,  407 

Law  land  justice,  origin  of,  94 
of  the  wheel,  580 

Lawka,  duration  of  a,  88 

Lawki  seit,  390 

Laws,  the  ten,  573 
eighteen  original,  510 

Laziness  of  Burmese,  383 

Le'hpet,  pickled  tea,  298 

Leip-bya,  238,  391 

Lent,  221 

Lepers,  431 

Letthondaw,  pages  of  honour,  493 

Libraries,  130,  131 

Lictors,  432 

Life,  varying  duration   accounted  for, 
98 

Linga,  metres  of,  320 

Lonsw^thi,  tug-of-war,  326 

Loosening  of  the  elbow-joint,  314 

Lotteries,  528 

Lubyet,  297 

Lutwet,  434 

Lullaby,  85 

Madi,  the  model  wife,  323 
Magadhi,  562 
Maha  Ganda,  164,  202 
Mahagandi  monks,  149 
Mahathamada,  the  first  king,  95 
Maha  Yazawin,  435 

excerpt  from,  566  et  seq. 
Manaw,  the  sixth  faculty,  390 
Mandalay,  foundation  of,  540 

roads,  541 

hill,  141 
Mani-daw,  hair  on  head  of  Buddha, 
191 


6o6 


THE  Bt/RMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS 


Manot-tha-bong,  the  state  of  man,  97 
Manotthiha,  Assyrian  style  of  figures, 

126,  162 
Marines,  501 

MarrJE^e,  three  methods  of  contract- 
ing, 54 

age  at  which  contracted,  54 

ceremony,  57 

customs  at,  58 

forbidden  degrees,  59  ^ 

rhymes,  63 

lucky  months  for,  64 
Mats,  79 

Mattat  Kodaw,  standing  image,  191 
Maung    Tha   Byaw,    the   actor,    296, 

319 
Meals,  69 

Meditation,  103,  129,  390 
Menu,  95 

Mi-eing  byan,  fire-balloon,  227 
Military  officers,  498 
Mingala-thut,  sermon,  574 
Mengon  pagoda,  171 
Minhla,  garrison  and  fort  of,  507 
Monasteries,  construction  of,  125 

brick,  133 

their  names,  140 

of  astrologers,  135 
Monkish  laxities,  121,  136 
Monks,  their  duties,  11:,  118 

how  honoured,  122,  137 

mode  of  addressing  one  another,  120 

their  titles,  135 
Monopolies,  527 
Monuments  to  the  dead,  595 
Mortifications  discouraged,  135 
Mosaic  work,  473 
Mulberry-tree,  270 
Myosa,  512 

Naga,  294,  333,  335 

Naga  hie,  388 

Naingan-gyaw  Wundauk,  132 

Nakat,  for  the  ears,  50 

Names,    system    on   which    they    are 

given,  4 
Naming  children,  3 
Nantagon,  prayer-flags,  187 
Nat-king,  his  arms  and  mounts,  348 
Nat-meimma,  241,  421 
Nats  and  d^was,  difference  of,  232 
Nat-sein  or  Nat-thein,  240,  481 
Nat-sin,  shrine,  233 
Ne'ban,  104 

three  stages  in,  105 
Nekaza,  198 
Nemi,  drama  of,  99,  305 


Nga-hlut  pwe,  freeing  fish,  344 
Ngapi,  varieties  of,  281 
Nge-b)^,  pure  from  birth,  26 
Ngwedaw,  poll-tax,  524 
Nogana,  preparation  of,  334 
Nyaungye-o,  jars,  235 
Nyidaw,  Naungdaw,  spirits,  234 

Obstructions  in  Mandalay,  542 
Offerings,  189 

to  water-spirit,  357 

to  spirits  generally,  238 
Officials,  subordinate,  512 
Oil-press,  sesamum,  81 
Omens,  240 

kingly,  447,  482,  581 
Ophthalmic  medicine,  418 
Ordeal,  trial  by,  416,  424,  519 

Padetha  tree,  92,  332 
Paddy  morality,  248,  254 
Pagan,  173 

Pagoda  surroundings,  163,  165 
Pagodas,  classification  of,  155 
Pagwet,  spotted  man,  432 
Painting,  67,  585 
Palace  intrigues,  452 

massacres,  454,  456,  469 

rules,  480 

spire,  reverences  made  to  it,  480 
Paladotta,  green  vitriol,  403 
Palm-leaf  scribes,  1 30 
Panbin,  centre  of  stage,  287 
Pangyet  Wun,  462,  495 
Pan-taing,  flower  offering,  230 
Panthagu  thengan,  holy  robe,  149 
Parakyun,  pagoda  slaves,  427 

king  of,  430 
Paramats,  schismatics,  147 
Parawun,  sacred  enclosure,  127 
Parazikan,  deadly  sins,  119 
Pareit  y6tthi,  religious  ceremonial,  397 
Parricide  kings,  452 
Pasos,  designs  for,  273 
Patama  Byan,  225 

Patimauk,   Book   of  the  Enfranchise- 
ment, 28,  119,  121 
Pawlfin,  a  fillet,  73 
Paya  taya  cure,  423 
People  foredoomed  to  hell,  100 
Perfection,  three  great  works  of,  184 
Pestilence  in  a  village,  237 
Ploughing,  244 
Polygamy,  59 
P6ngyi,  108 
Ponnas,  134 
Potthwin  yata,  301 


INDEX 


607 


Pride,  thirteen  kinds  of,  222 

Prisons,  521 

Processions,  331,  345,  472 

Prodigies  denounced,  195 

Property  in  relation  to  marri^e,  60 

Proverbs,  581 

Pu  and  Tapaw,  founders  of  Rangoon 

pagoda,  1 80 
Punishment  of  Brahma,  120 
Punishments,  520 
Puzundaung  Creek,  252 
Pwe,  arrangements  for,  287 
Pyathat,  spires,  three  kinds,  1 26 
Pyatthada,  unlucky  days,  386 
Pyeitta,  10 1 
Pyin-sin,  108 

Qualifications  for  Sacred  Order,  1 1 1 

the  fourteen,  of  a  judge,  51° 
Queens,  456,  457 

Racing  boats,  358 

Ramayana,  368 

Rebellion  of  1866,  492 

Receptions,  339 

Red  Postern,  461,  478 

Refrain  in  the  yein  dances,  315 

Regard  for  life,  341 

Relic  chamber,  156 

Relics,  sacred,  154 

Renouncings,  the  five,  185 

Republican  tendency  of  Buddhism,  i  lO 

Rhyme,  321 

Rice,  varieties  of,  264 

Rice-mills,  hand,  80 

English,  2S5 
Roads,  village,  85 

in  Mandalay,  541 
Rockets  at  monk's  funeral,  587 
Roofing,  77 
Roofs,  monastic,  126 
Royal  lands,  S3S 

funeral,  598 

robes,  259 
Royal  despatch  boats,  365 
Ruler,  first  appointed  on  the  earth,  94 
Rules  for  travelling,  388 

partnerships,  389 
Rupa,  16  seats,  102 

Sabba-gyi,  boa-constrictor,  577 
Sacrifices  on  founding  a  city,  452 
Sada  horoscope,  7-13 
calculation  from,  9 
Sadaik,  MSS.  box,  35 
Sadaw,  109 
Saddan  Min,  the  Lord  Elephant,  305 


Sa-haw  saya,  improvisatore,  73 
Salaries  of  players,  290 

ministers,  511,  523 
Salt  manufacture,  282 
Sandathuriya,  king,  200 
Sapupati  Paya,  191 
Sa-si-gyo,  131 

Saungdan,  ascent  to  pagoda,  i6i,_329 
Sawpe  Sawm^  pWj  '7^'  '99 
Saya,  109 

School  studies  and  amusements,  15-18 
Seasons  of  the  year,  552 
Seats  of  nats,  102 
Seit  and  Seittathit,  390-91 
Sekyawade,  king,  450,  485 
Sermon  at  Tawadeintha  feast,  330 
Shampooing,  421 
Shan  tattooers,  41 
Shinbinthalyaung,     recumbent    image, 

191 
Shinpyuthi,    initiation    to    monastery, 

22-26 
Shins,  novices,  108 
Shin-saw-bu,  queen,  568 
Shin  Tabaung,  148 
Shin  Upago,  228 
Shwe  Dag&n  pagoda,  160  seq. 

foundation  of,  164,  178 
Shwegu,  17s 

Shwe  Gyet-yet  pagoda,  342,  566 
Shwe  Zet-daw  pagoda,  167 
Sitduyin,  367 

S'mah,  cabalistic  letters,  47 
Smoking,  70 
Sons,  wizards,  413 
Sonthi,  to  feed  monks,  335 
Spells,  426 

Spirits,  names  of  certain,  425 
Stage  books,  302 

State  of  man  specially  desirable,  97 
Stayin  monastery,  proper  duration  of,  26 
Still-born  child,  2 
Sulagandi,  149 

head  of,  151 
Sule  nat,  i8i 

pagoda,  227 
Supayalat,  4S3,  457 
Suppleness  of  dancers,  312 

Tabindaing,  446,  452 
Tadaungsa,  beggars,  430 
Tagaung  nat,  his  malevolence,  234 
Talapoins,  origin  of  name,  112 
Tamanfe  Hto-thi,  263 
Tamein,  woman's  skirt,  73,  312 
Tapana  taik,  relic  chamber,  156 
Tattooing  instrument,  40 


6o8 


THE  BURMAN:  HIS  LIFE  AND  NOTIONS 


Tattooing,  recipes,  46 
Taungya,  hill  cultivation,  243,  247 
Taw  1^-wa,  model  wives,  62 
Ta-zet,  27 

Ten  Commandments,  when  to  be  ob- 
served, 28 
Ten  Laws,  573 

Thabeit  hmauk,  excommunication,  1 20 
Thabye  bin,  the  sacred  tree,  235,  399 
Thadda,  knowledge  of,  26 
Thamatawi  Patthana,  36 
Thana'kha,  327 
Thanya,  391 

Tharana  G6n,  invocation,  36 
Tha-thana-paing,  109 
Tha-thaua-hlyauk  ceremony,  38 
Thaton,  175 

Thayfe  topthi,  roof-beating,  398 
Thein,  113,  128 
Thein-nats,  326 
Thengaha,  kingly  laws,  451 
Thibaw,  his  character,  451 

appearance,  467 

birth,  467 

education,  468 

a  Fatama  Byan,  468 

popularity,  470,  476 

his  titles,  466 
Thi'gyan  pwe,  347 
Thihadaw  island,  138 
Thiho  monastery,  130 
Thin-bon-gyi,  alphabet,  17 
Thinkaza  Sadaw,  151 
Thin-ki-ya,  18 
Thi'si,  its  uses,  113,  278 

proverb  about  it,  279 
Thi'sibin,  wood-oil  tree,  274 
Thodda,  the  current  of  perfection,  103 
Threshing  com,  245 
Throne,  474,  479 
Thudhammasari,  Princess,  573 
Thurakfe,  100 
Thuyaung  seed,  303 
Thuzata,  334 

Time,  modes  of  expressing,  549-551 
Tinmyinkw^,  sitting  image,  191 
Titles  royal,  450 
Toilet  of  ladies,  291 
Tonbulein  cheatery,  380 
Trade  of  Burma,  539 
Triple  consolation,  18 
Tug-of-war,  326,  586,  592 
Tunes,  298 

Ubone,  holy  day,  217 

Ugandaw  hill,  329 

U-gwet  snake,  the  hamadryad,  578 


Umbrellas,  varieties  of,  409 
Upekka,  highest  stage  of  meditation, 

391 
U  Hpo  Nya,  great  dramatist,  294 
Urushi  tree,  274 
Utensils,  the  sacred  eight,  112 

Virtues,  the  ten  great,  185 
Volcanoes,  mud,  167 

Wa,  Lent,  26,  223 

end  of,  wagyut,  223 
Wakening  sleepers,    disinclination    of 

Burmese  to,  394 
Wall- pictures  and  inscriptions,  133 
Washing    the  head,    proper   days  for, 

386 
Washing  the  king's  head,  353 
Waste  lands,  536 
Water-clock,  553 
Water  feast,  347 
Water-strainer  of  monks,  343 
Wayland  Smith,  579 
Weza,  wizards,  classes  of,  414 
Widuya,  294,  302 

Wini,  the  Whole  Duty  of  the  Monk,  35 
White   elephant,   reason   for  reverence 
paid,  485 

tests  of,  486 

establishment  and  housings,  488 
Whitlow,  prescriptions  for,  425 
Winning  post  in  boat-races,  360 
Wisdom,  six  kinds  of,  36 

praises  of,  221 
Witch  doctors,  393,  420,  423 
Witnesses,  persons  ineligible  as,  517 
Women,  independence  of,  52 
Wood,  petrified,  used  for  polish,  278 
World,  formation  of,  90 

system  of,  90 
Worlds,  two  kinds  of,  90 
Worship,  189,  219 
Wutdaw,  fate,  302 
Wuttu,  294 

Yabeins,  silk-growers,  269 
Yahandas,  90,  97 
Yahu,  the  foul  nat,  5,  550 
Yandabo  treaty,  436 
Yankin-taung  pagoda,  171 
Yatheit,  recluse,  140 
Yathemyo,  Kappilavastu,  309 
Yathi,  signs  of  zodiac,  552 
Yazamat,  royal  lattice  fence,  258 
Years,  matul^,  tawtulfe,  349 
Yedaya  yayi,  coffin  cure,  423 
Ye-hpaung  hmyaw-thi,  fire  rafts,  228 


INDEX 


609 


Yein  dances,  313 

Ye-set-kya  ceremonial,  157,  593 

Yethon  pw^,  350 

Yet  Yaza,  lucky  days,  387 

Yindaw  Ma  Le,  the  singer,  313 

Y6kthe  plays,  295 

Ywakyathi,  spirit  ftinction,  237 

Ywa  saung  nat,  village  spirit,  236 

Ywatan,  magic  rod,  423 


Zaingganaing,  image,  194 
Zan,  state  of,  103 
Zats,  the  ten  great,  294 
Zawtagomma  play,  299 
Zayat,  rest-house,  218 
Zediyan,  pagodas,  154 

reason  for  their  shape,  158 
Zewaka,  the  physician,  422 
Zodiac,  signs  of,  552 


THE   END 


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh. 


THREE    NEW    BOOKS 

Two  Vols.     8vo.     30s.  net. 

TRANS-HIMALAYA 

DISCOVERIES  AND  ADVENTURES  IN  TIBET 

BY 

SVEN    HEDIN 

With  388  Illustrations  from  Photographs,  Water-Colour  Sketches, 
and  Drawings  by  the  Author,  and  10  Maps. 

8vo. 

THE    GATES    OF   INDIA 

BEING  AN  HISTORICAL  NARRATIVE 

BY 

Colonel  Sir  THOMAS  HOLDICH,  K.C.M.G. 

AUTHOR  OF   'the   IXDIAN    BORDERLAND,'   ETC. 

With  Maps  and  Plans. 
Svo.      I  OS.  net. 

ADMINISTRATIVE  PROBLEMS  OF 
BRITISH  INDIA 


JOSEPH    CHAILLEY 

MEMBER   OF  THE   FRENCH   CHAMBER  OF  DEPUTIES 

TRANSLATED    BY 

Sir  WILLIAM  MEYER,  K.C.I.E. 
MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON. 


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S  WORKS  ON  INDIA 

FORTY-ONE  YEARS  IN  INDIA.  From  Subaltern  to 
Commander-in-Chief.  By  Field-Marshal  Lord  Roberts,  V.C- 
Library  Edition.  2  vols.  8vo.  36s.  Popular  Edition.  Extra 
Crown  8vo.     6s. 

INDIAN  SPEECHES,  1 907- 1 909.  By  ViSCOUNT  MORLEY. 
8vo.     2s.  6d.  net. 

THE  STORY  OF  THE  GUIDES.  By  Col.  G.  J. 
YOUNGHUSBAND,  C.B.,  Queen's  Own  Corps  of  Guides.  With 
Illustrations.     8vo.     7s.  6d.  net. 

INDIA:   ITS  ADMINISTRATION  AND  PROGRESS. 

By  Sir  John  Strachey,  G. C.S.I.     Third  Edition.     8vo.     ios.net. 

IMPRESSIONS   OF  INDIA.      By  Sir  H.  Craik,  K.C.B., 

M.P.      Crown  8vo.      3s.  net. 

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  INDIAN  MUTINY.  By  T. 
Rice  Holmes,  M.A.     Fifth  Edition.     Extra  Crown  8 vo.     12s.  6d. 

RELIEF  OF  CHITRAL.  By  Colonel  G.  J.  Young- 
husband  and  Sir  Francis  Younghusband.     8vo.     8s.  6d.  net. 

LIFE  OF  THE  MARQUIS  OF  DALHOUSIE,  with 
Portraits,  Map,  and  Plans.  By  Sir  W.  Lee-Warner.  2  vols. 
Bvo.      25  s.  net. 

WORKS   ON    BURMA 

By  H.  fielding  HALL 

THE  SOUL  OF  A  PEOPLE.  Cheaper  Edition.  Extra 
Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d.  net. 

A  PEOPLE  AT  SCHOOL.     8vo.      los.  net. 

THE  INWARD  LIGHT.     8vo.      los.  net. 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON. 



