--- [Page 1] ---
Menuruni tangga Candi Wisnu (Prambanan) ang curam perlu sedikit bantuan

32

NEW INVESTIGATIONS ON THE KEDUKAN BUKIT INSCRIPTION

By
Boechari
Faculty of Letters, University of Indonesia, Jakarta

I. On the 25th of March 1985 it was reported that at the
hamlet of Karanganyar, village of Bungkuk, subdistrict of
Jabung, regency of Central Lampung, was found a new stone
inscription. Through the intermediary of Mr. Uka
Tjandrasasmita, Director of the Directorate for Protection
and Development of Historical and Archaeological Heritage,
we got a photograph of the stone. It shows a weathered and
damaged stone inscription, of which the right and left
upper corners are abraded, maybe because it has been used
to sharpen hoes, sickles, knives and the like for a long
time. Also the right and left lower corners are abraded,
though to a lesser degree. With a flash magnifier we are
able to establish that the stone bears the same imprecation
formula as the inscription from Palas (South Lampung) and
Karang Brahi (Upper Jambi) and part of the inscription of
Kota Kapur on the island of Bangka, dated 686 A.D.

Now we have thus four more of less identical

imprecation inscriptions of Sriwijaya.1) Palaeographically

this recently discovered inscription may be considered
contemporaneous with the inscription from Palas Pasemah
(Boechari, 1979). The stone is inscribed with 12 or 13
lines of script,2) of which the first three and the last
three lines are too weathered to allow us a reasonable



--- [Page 2] ---
reading from the photograph. Anyhow we present here our

reading, as far as the flash magnifier can help us.

5 SS Sn KD)

Ze [esevecces | me me me me me me me we we [0 4)

3B. [eccccsseead -- — -- a  [
eeceeeee 5)

4. [eeceeeee hajraki unai tunai -- -- -- -- —— -- [.eceseee
eeeeeee ee ]6)

5. [....+6. kiJta tuwi tandrun luah wafiakta dewata nila
yan parsumpahan para [wis ......++e] ;

6. [...ee.00.- ] kadatuanku ini pardwis drohaka wahun
samawud dhi lawan drohaka mahujari [dro

7. {haka niJujari drohaka tahu din drohaka tida marppadah
tida ya bhakti tatwa Grjjawa diy=aku dnan di yan niga
{lar kku]

8. [.+eeeeee0)] miwunuh ya sumpah nisuruh t@pik ya mulan par
wwandan datu Sriwijaya talu muah ya dhan gotra santana

9. [fia ...... wa] fakfia yan wuatifa jahat maka Jahit uran
maka sdkit maka gila [....sseeeee! wisa pra

10. [yoga .... J saramwat kasihan wagikarana [........0000]

LL. [oecseccccc] tifa [ececccccccccccccsccccccesscescveeseel/)

12. [sccccccccccccccvccccccccnsccsccescssscscesccsesecsee|/)

13. [cecccccccccccccccccccsccccccscsccccccsscsscscssaccees 18)

For a translation of the complete text we refer the
readers to our edition of the inscription from Palas
Pasemah (Boechari, 1979).

II. This new piece of epigraphic material does not give us

other perspectives than that it forms evidence of another —
conquered territory by Sriwijaya along the Way Sekampung

34

river, in its southward quest for prosperous dependencies.
That is why we do not go into more details about this
inscription. Instead, on this occasion we will take a new
look into the Kedukan Bukit inscription, mainly because we
are stirred by an article of Dr. H.B. Sarkar in the
Bijdragen tot de Taal-Land- en Volkenkunde on the origin of
the Sailendra dynasty of Indonesia, in which as an appendix
he put forward his own ideas on this controversial piece of
historical evidence, with some of which we cannot agree
(Sarkar, 1985).

We give here a new transcription of the Kedukan Bukit
inscription by filling in the existing gaps based on our
own study of the paper prints and the original stone and on
the reading of a fragment found at Telaga Batu which
seemingly bears nearly the same text as this inscription
(de Casparis, 1956, p. 14 £.):

1. swasti Sri Sakawargdtita 604 9) ekddagi su

2. klapaksa wulan waigakha dapunta hiyan nayik di

3. samwau mahalap siddhayatra di saptami suklapaksa

4. wulan jyestha dapunta hiyan marlapas dari minaha

5. tamwan mamawa yan wala dua laksa dahan koga

6. dua ratus cdra di s&mvau dahan jalan sariwu

‘7. tlu  ratus sapuluh 10) dua wafiakita datay di mukha --p-
11)

8. sukhacitta di paficami Suklapakga wula [n asadha] 12)

laghu mudita datan marwuat wanua [ini seeee 113).

sriwijaya jaya siddhayatra subhiksa ni[t]y[akala] 14)

Translation:

May there be well-being and prosperity. In the elapsed

35



--- [Page 3] ---
3.

“4.

10.

of

Saka ‘year 604, on the eleventh
of the bright part of the month of Waigakha Dapunta
Hiyan boarded 15)
a boat to "mahalap siddhayatra" 16). On the seventh of
the bright -part
of the manth of Jyestha Dapunta Hiyan embarked from
Minaha 17)
while taking with him an army of 20.000 men 18) and
200 boxes [of supplies} going by boats and on foot
thousand
three hundred and twelve men and arrived at Mukha —p-
joyously. On the fifth of the bright part of the month
of Ksadha
easily 19) and delightedly [he] came and made [this]
settlement. [and so]
Stiwijaya was victorious, the journey successful and
became prosperous ever since.
Thanks to Dr. J.G. de Casparis who had found the name
the third month on a fragment from Telaga Batu (de

Casparis, 1956, p. 11 ff.) we now have three definite

dates, viz.

ae

be

the eleventh day of the bright part of the month of
Waigakha of the Saka year 604, or the 23rd of April 682
4.D., on which Dapunta Hiyan boarded a boat to "mahalap
siddhayatra, which we interpreted as “going to a
Buddhist shrine to celebrate the Waigak festivals and
at the same time praying for the success of his intended
expedition";

the seventh day of the bright part of the month of
Jyegtha of the same year, or the 19th of May 682 A.D.,
on which Dapunta Hiyan embarked from MinSha, taking with

36

him a huge army and came joyously at Mukha —p-, [after
which] ;

on the fifth day of the bright part of the month of
Asadha of the same year, or the 16th of June 682 A.D.
Dapunta Hiyan easily and delightedly came and built a
settlement [at the site where the inscription was
found]. And so Sriwijaya was victorious, the journey (=
expedition) successful, and became prosperous ever
since.

The first question to be raised is how many stages of

Dapunta Hiyan's journey were recorded in this inscription?
We propose three alternatives, i.e.

A, there were two stages, viz.

1. On the 23rd of April 682 A.D. Dapunta Hiyan boarded a
boat in his capital town which lies on the bank of a
_vriver to go to a buddhist temple to celebrate the
Waisak festivals and at the same time to pray for the
succcess of his intended military expedition. After
receiving the blessings from the Buddha, perhaps in
the form of good omens, he went back to the capital.
His return journey was not explicitly recorded in the
inscription, because it is self-evident.

After gathering his army, comprising troops of his

"governors" who ruled over the different regions of

the kingdom of §rIwijaya, he embarked from Min&fa on
the 19th of May 682 A.D. and came at Mukha --p- which
he conquered and where he built a new settlement on
the 16th of June.

B. there were three stages, viz.

1. The same as point 1 above
2. Dapunta Hiyay embarked from Minana on the 19th of May

37



--- [Page 4] ---
682 A.D. with his huge army and came at and conquered

Mukha --p- on a not specified ddate.

3. From Mukha --p- he proceeded to a certain place
where he made a new settlement (marwuat wanua [ini]
on the 16th of June 682 A.D. This place was most
likely the present Palembang where the inscription of
Kedukan Bukit was found. His departure from Mukha ——
p- was not specified.

C. There were four stages, i.e.

1. The same as no. 1 above

2. Dapunta Hiyan went [from his capital] to Minanga to
meet his victorious army. This trip was not explicity
recorded in this inscription, including the date of
his departure from the capital and his arrival at
Minanga.

3. On the 19th of May 682 A.D. he proceeded from
Minanga with his army to Mukha --p-, at which he
arrived at a not specified date. This place he
conquered.

4. From Mukha —-p- he proceeded on a not specified date
to another place at which he arrived and built a new
settlement (marwuat wanua [ini] ) on the 16th of June
682 A.D. But where to locate this site?

The third alternative, especially point 2, was
proposed by G. Coed&s and the late Dr. R.B. Slametmul jana.
Coedés identified Mina@ha Tamwan with an area on the Mekhong
Delta, where a native tribe called Tmon had lived (Coedés,
1964). He concluded that the inscription of Kedukan Bukit
was engraved to commemorate a victorious expedition against
Camboja. This was convincingly refuted by Sarkar in his
above mentioned article (Sarkar, 1985, p. 334-335). Slamet-

38

muljana also refuted this idea (Slametmuljana, 1981, p. 72-
73). We can add here that Coed&s apparently overlooked the
ScIwi jayan infantry of 1312 men. How did he imagine this
military unit taking the overland route back to SeTwi jaya?
Slametmuljana adopted our reading of the toponym from
which Dapunta Hiyan started the second stage of his journey
as Minha, and not as Minana Tamwan as other scholars did
up to now, taking the word tamwan as a conjuction introdu-
cing the next subsentence (Boechari, 1979). He identified
this Min3ha with the present town of Binangan on the Baru-
mun river in North Sumatra (Slametmuljana, 1981, p. 73-74).
He said in one of his latest books that Dapunta Hiyan's
first stage of his journey on the 11th of WaiSakha 682 A.D.
did not have an ultimate object, and that was why he he
proposed Minaha to be the final goal (idems, p.64). His
purpose was to meet his victorious army which had defeated
North Sumatra and made Binanga one of his harbours here.
Here lies one of Slametmuljana's weaknesses. He did
not realize the meaning why Dapunta Hiyan went on the 11th
of the bright part of the month of Waif&kha. For a buddhist
leader this is certainly to go to a buddhist temple to
celebrate the WaiSakha festivals, and at the same time
praying for the success of his coming military expedition
(mahalap siddhayatra). Ans so he did not see the difference
of the first and the second stage of Dapunta Hiyan's
journeys. And since he adhered to the generally accepted
opinion that the center of Sriwijaya was alwalys at
Palembang, he did not see that the 26 days (minus]. 20)
between the first and the second stage was not sufficient

for Dapunta Hiyan and his retinue to celebrate the

Wai$akha festivals, i.e. between the 1lth and at least to

39



--- [Page 5] ---
the 3rd of the next Krsnapaksa of the month of Waigakha,
and the trip from Palembang to Binangan, the distance of
which is approximately 3,5 times the distance from
Palembang to Jambi in a straight line, for which he only
had at the most 19 days left.

Another weak point of Slametmuljana's theories was
about the proposal of the Kedukan Bukit inscription. He
said that after returning from Binanga and coming back to
the capital, i.e. -Palembang, on the 16th of June 682 A.D.
Dapunta Hiyan built a wihdra, mentioned in a fragment from
Telaga Batu (idem., p. 63-64; de Casparis, 1956, p. 11-15).
Bukit this fragment was younger than the Kedukan: Bukit
inscription. According to J.G. de Casparis this fragment
was written at least eight months after the third date of
the Kedukan Bukit inscription (de Casparis, 1956, p. 14).
If Palembang was the age-old capital of §rfwijaya, why
should Dapunta Hiyan built a new wiha@ra? Were the older
wihdras in which more than 1000 buddhist priests lived
becoming too small, or had Dapunta Hiyan brought’ new
followers of buddhist priests from North Sumatra?

A new center or a new capital would be more plausibel,
because the geographical position of Palembang was more
advantageous. than Minaha. After transferring its new capi-
tal to this place, Sriwijaya could force all ships coming
from China, Mainland Southeast Asia and the eastern parts
of Indonesia going to India and vice versa to pay tribute
at Palembang.

Consequently the first or second alternative was to us
more appealing, with the note that the center of Stiwijaya,
at the date of Dapunta Hiyan's departure of his first stage
was at Miflaha, and that the end purpose of the inscription

40

of Kedukan Bukit was Provisionally to record Dapunta
Hiyan's military expedition on this ordinary river boulder,
to be replaced later on by a more appropriately shaped
stone. Palaeographically the inscription of Kedukan Bukit
was written by someone who was literate enough. The stone
thus to be found at the site in which Dapunta Hiyan made
the new center, i.e. Palembang.

In the first alternative Mukha --p- was Palembang. In
our previous paper we proposed the reading of Mukha Upan,
based on the fact that on a photograph published by Dr.
N.J. Krom in his "Heiligdommen van Palembang" (Krom 1938,
facing p. 26) a small round dot could be seen above the pa,
which G, Coedes interpreted as a virama, hence his reading
of matajap. Prof. Dr. O.W. Wolters hailed our reading of
Mukha Upan as an exciting advance in $riwijayan studies,
because now we have another fixed point. Upan is the name
of a small "island" surrounded by the rivers Musi and
Upang, situated some 40 miles downstream of Palembang (Wol-
ters, 19.., p. ...). So Mukha Upang, which means "the mouth
of Upang" or "in front of Upang" might well mean the pre-
sent Palembang. But as we have shown earlier the reading of
Upang cannot be maintained. Closer examination of the paper
prints and the original stone revealed that the anuswadras
‘at’ other loci are much bigger, whereas the virdma has the
form of .a small crescent.

Another drawback of the first alternative is that
although we have the advantage of not having to add
anything to the existing text except for the return journey
of Dapunta Hiyan from his pilgrimage to the capital, it

L-
does not give place to the conquest of Malayu by Sriwijaya.

This conquest was mentioned in I-tsing's Record, stating

41



--- [Page 6] ---
that when I-tsing came for the first time in Fo-she in 671
A.D. he stayed there for six months; then he proceeded to
Mo-lo-you "which is now called Fo-she", where he stayed for
two months. On his way back from India in 685 A.D. he again
came to Mo-lo-you which "has now become Fo-she". But in
Takakusu's edition it was said that the first statement was
in the form of I-tsing's note.

We are no Sinologist and we never have seen the Chi-
nese text, so that we do not know exactly what Takakusu's
statement means. But if it means that the phrase “which is
now called Fo-she" was added by I-tsing himself to his own
writing, then it might be interpreted indicating that Mo-
lo-yu was still an independent state when I-tsing came
there in 672 A.D., but that in 685 A.D. when he came for
the second time it was conquered by &cTwijaya. According to
Takakusu I-tsing wrote his Record and Memoire between 691-
692 A.D. (Takakusu, 1966, p. LX), that is to say some 20
years after his first arrival in Mo-lo-yu. The length of
the journey from Minaha to Palembang, i.e. 28 days, was
enough to make a fight at Mo-lo-yu, since Kedah could be
reached from Sriwi jaya within 2 x 15 days.

The second alternative is thus more preferable. In
this case Mukha —p- had to be-identified with the center
of the kingdom of Mo-lo-yu or its harbour, and had to be

located near the mouth of the Batanghari river, or somew-

here near the present town of Jambi. The end journey was

again the site in which the inscription of Kedukan Bukit

was found, i.e. Palembang, where Dapunta Hiyan made a new

fen
capital or a new center which made the kingdom of Sriwijaya
more prosperous.

A rather puzzling fact is that the imprecation

42

inscription indicating that the area around it had been
subjugated by er ivi jaya was found at Karangbrahi on the
Merangin river in Upper Jambi, near the town of Bangko, and
not on the lower reaches of the Batanghari river near the
coast. And now we have to turn our attention to the
infantry unit of 1312 men, the role of which, as far as we
can remember, was never discussed in particular by previous
scholars. In our opinion, if the now existing road system
was based on an ancient existing system since Sciwijayan
times - as was the case with many road systems in Java -
the infantry unit did not go to the east along the river,
but went southwards to Bangko. This are was the "“hinter-
land" area of Mo-lo-yu and was thus conquered by the
infantry unit of Sriwi jaya, while its fleet was striking
Mukha --p- on the coast.

After setting up its imprecation inscription at Karang
Brahi 21) the army went to Palembang by a shorter road via
Surulangun - Sekayu, or by a longer road via Lubuklinggau -
Lahat. We do not know whether this unit had to come at the
same time as the naval unit coming by fleet at Palembang,
or a few days/weeks later. The approximate distance from
Minana to Bangko, and from Bangko to Palembang via the

. é
shorter road is 720 - 750 km, snd via the longer road 880 -
900 km. If the infantry could walk 30 to 40 km a day, i.e.

10 hours a day walking, the distance could be covered
within 28 days and a few days more. Even the longer road
could be covered within the appointed time.

But where was Minafa? As we have shown above the late
Dr. Slametmuljana identified this Minaha with the present
Binanga on the Barumun river, which we considered too far

to the north. In our previous paper we have located it

43



--- [Page 7] ---
somewhere on the Batang Kuantan, based merely on the iden- }

‘tification of minafa with kuala, meaning "estuary", of

which the krama form is kuantan, and on one of I-tsing's F

statements, viz. that the kingdom of Fo-she included areas

around the equator. Actually we have a vague clue provided |

by the Kedukan Bukit inscription, i.e. 28 days sailing from
Palembang, either to the north, to the south or to the

west, upstream the Musi river which is the least likely. It

could not be located to the south of Palembang, because as

we have shown above Lampung was conquered territory. So we

have to look for Mingha to the north of Palembang.

In one our visits to Muara Takus we got the |

information that there is a village called Minanga on the
Kampar Kanan river, to the.east of Bangkinang. As is well
known the Muara Takus temples are located upstream the
Kampar Kanan from Bangkinang. 22) If we have to choose
between Minanga on the Kampar Kanan and Binanga on the

Barumun for the location of Minana in the Kedukan Bukit

inscription we will prefer the former, because it is more
in accordance with the sailing distance from Palembang.

This proposition, however, has to be substantiated by a

more intensive archaeological survey and digging around the |

present Minanga. 23) :

Our location of Minana, the former center of Sriwi jaya
before 682 A.D., in our present province of Riouw might
well agree with what was said in the Ming-shis that the
forerunner ‘of San-fo-ch'i or Sriwijaya was Kan-t'o-li
(Groeneveldt, 1960, p. 68). We are of the opinion that this
Kan-t'o-li is to be identified with [A}khandala[ pura]
mentioned in a Sanskrit inscription from the Ratu Baka

hills south of Prambanan (the inscription of Haralinga),

44

probably dating from 856 A.D., in which its promulgator,
Rakai Walain.pu Kumbhayoni, claimed descent from a deified
person coming: from Akhandalapura (de Casparis, 1956, p.
277-279).24) Dr. de Casparis conjectured that Akhandalapura
in. this inscription is a misspelling for Akhandalapura, and
since Akhandalapura is another name of Indra, Akhandalapura
is a-synonym of Indrapura. Although Indrapura is a vary

common name for a royal residence which can be located

f anywhere in Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula or even in Main-

land Southeast Asia, de Casparis was more inclined to

f locate it in Sumatra or the Malay Peninsula (de Casparis,

1956, p. 262). But in this case we will leave the Malay
Peninsula out of consideration, since up to now no Old
Malay inscriptions had been found there. We limit the
location of Akhangalapura in Sumatra, i.e.-in the neighbor-
hood of Minanga, or more generally in the present’ province

| of Riouw, with the Siak river, on which we now still have

the small town of. Siak Sri Indrapura as the northern

boundary, and che Indragiri river‘or‘ the Batang Kuantan‘as
} the southern boundary.

IfI. Concluding our renewed studies of the Kedukan Bukit
inscription ‘we will point here -once again that the
apparently picnic like journey of Dapunta Hiyan was in fact
a-‘big military expedition to create another center of the
kingdom from Minanga in the present Riouw province to
Palembang in 682 A.D. And this is, as many scholars agreed,
in contradiction with I-tsing's Record and Mémoire which

gave the impression that, at least during I-tsing's time,

f=
- the center of Sriwijaya was never shifted from one place’ to

another and was always at Palembang.

45



--- [Page 8] ---
As is well known I-tsing first came to STi jaya in
671 A.D. where he stayed for 6 months. Then he proceeded to
Mo-lo-yu on his way to India, which means that at that time
Sriwi jaya was already south of Jambi. But as we have said
earlier the phrase that Mo-lo-yu "was now called Fo-she"
was put by I-tsing in a note. On his return from India he

passed Kedah and Mo-lo-yu which were now parts of

$riwi jaya. Then he stayed in Sriwijaya from 685 to 695 |

A.D., with an interval of several months when he
incidentally went back to China in 689 A.D. to fetch an
assistant and writing materials to finish his translations
of the more than 500.000 Slokas which he took with him from
India. According to Takakusu I-tsing wrote his Record and
Mémoire in 691-692 A.D.

We have to consider the possibility that I-tsing wrote
his Record according to the conditions in 691/2 A.D., in
which the center of Sriwi jaya was already at Palembang.
That was why he put the note on the new status of Mo-lo-yu
when he notified his first visit there in 672 A.D. Or asa
buddhist monk he was oblivious to changes in political and
other worldly conditions, so that even the return of
Sriwi jaya's army from an expedition to Bhumi Jawa in 686
A.D.,25) of which he certainly had heard, if not seen with
his own eyes, was not notified in his two works although he
was fully aware of the changed status of Mo-lo-yu and
Kedah.26)

That Palembang was a new center built or created in |

682 A.D. was shown by the inscription of Kedukan Bukit
which was found at the village of Kedukan Bukit on the
Tatang river, a tributary of the Musi. This inscription was
most likely to be found at the area which had been

subjugated by Dapunta Hiya, and not at his age-old capital |
46

town; hence it was carved on a small and unobvious river

‘ boulder. If Palembang was the old capital town the stone

commemorating Dapunta Hiyag's big victory would be written
on a bigger and more neatly shaped stone like the
inscription of Telaga Batu, for instance. And there was
another more appropriately shaped stone with nearly the
same text as the Kedukan Bukit inscription, with the
additional information of the building of a new wihéra,
written at least eight months after the third date of the
Kedukan Bukit inscription (de Casparis, 1956, p. 14).
Another argument in favour of this assumption was the
occurrence of the inscription of Telaga Batu, containing a
more menacing imprecation directed against the crown-prince
high state
"governors" and royal servants (de Casparis, 1956, p. 32-

and other. royal princes, functionaries,
46). This inscription is more likely to be found in a newly

established center, unless it can be shown that
palaeographically the Telaga Batu inscription was much
older than the inscription of Kedukan Bukit. But according
to Dr. J.G. de Casparis the script of the Telaga Batu
inscription "appears to agree in every possible detail with
the variety used on the stone of Kota Kapur, dated, as is
well known, 686 A.D. It seems quite possible that both
inscriptions were engraved by the same scribe" (de
Casparis, 1956, p. 16). A statement of such and authority
like Dr. J.G. de Casparis is hardly to be doubted.

A more convincing argument would be if our assumption
that the missing word after marwuat wanua in the Kedukan
Bukit inscription is indeed ini, as we try to make it
plausible in note 13, which will clearly indicate that the

settlement made by Dapunta Hiyan after he defeated Mukha —

47



--- [Page 9] ---
- pe was the locality at which the inscription was found,
i.e. the present Palembang.

After settling at Palembang, building a new wihara for
the buddhist priests from Minanga a few months later, and
building a new park (the Sriksetra park) in 684 A.D.,
Dapunta Hiyay went to Bhumi Jawa in the present Lampung
districts in 686 A.D., because this area was not loyal to
Sriwi jaya. We still could not find reasonable grounds for
supposing that with Bhimi Jawa in the inscription of Kota
Kapur was meant West Java or the kingdom of Tarumanagara
(Moens, 1937, p. 363; Slametmuljana, 1981, p. 105), or
Central Java (Poerbatjaraka, 1952). West Java in general
was called Supga in an Old Malay inscription from the
regency of Bogor, supposedly dated 854 Saka or 932 A.D.
(Bosch, 1941). The kingdom of Tarumanagara was called in
Chinese Chronicles as T'o-lo-mo, or according to its center
as  Ho-lo-tan (=[CiJaruteun) or Mo-ho-sin (=  Bekasi)
(Slametmuljana, 1981, p. 25, 108). Chau-ju-kua called West
Java Sin-t'o or Sun-t'a (Hirth and Rockhill, 1966). The
occurrence of the imprecation inscriptions at jabung and
Palas Pasemah were evidences of Sriwijaya's attack to Bhumi
Jawa, mentioned in the inscription of Kota Kapur. It is
also possible that on his way to Bhiimi Jawa or backwards to
Palembang Dapunta Hiyay also subjugated areas on the Air
Mesuji, the Way Tulangbawang and the Way Seputih, but up to
now no imprecation inscriptions like that found at Jabung
or Palas Pasemah had been found on those rivers.

Notes:
1) We have asked Mr. Uka Tjandrasasmita to write to his

Branch Offices in Jambi, South Sumatra and Lampung to

48

make a more intensive archaeological research along the
rivers flowing to the east in their provinces for other
epigraphic materials. But after more than one year no
positive answer have been received.

2) We still can see traces of aksaras on line 12, but of
line 13 we only can see very vaguely traces of some
aksaras here and there. An examination on the original
stone will help us to find out the exact number of
lines,

3) Only traces of 7 aksaras are visible, but we are unable
to give a transcription of this part, because it is too
weathered. Considering the nearly complete line 7, on
which can be read 41 aksaras, a considerable portion on
the left and on the right part of the stone are abraded.

4) On line 2 can be discerned traces of 10 aksaras,.

5) Traces of 13 aksaras are discernible here, but too vague

to be read.

6) After raki unai tuhai traces of 7 aksaras are visible.

7) From the photographs it is very difficult to make out
how many aksaras are written on these two lines.

8) See note 2 above.

9) G. Coeds read the date as 605 Saka (Coedés, 1930, p.
34) but we follow here the reading of L.C. Damais
(Damais, 1952; 1955, p. 235).

10) Coedes read sapulu but we can clearly see a wisarga
after lu; so we read sapuluh.

11) We have to withdraw our reading of mukha upan, proposed
at the first SPAFA Workshop on Archaeological and
Environmental Studies on §rIwijaya “held in Jakarta
(Boechari, 1981). The round dot which we can see on the
Photograph of part of a paper print published by Dr.

49



--- [Page 10] ---
12)

13)

14)

N.J. Krom is not found on the stone. On a paper print at
is much
And we

cannot yet decide what aksara is written before the

our disposal we can see that this round dot
smaller than the anuswaras.in this inscription.
remnants of the pa. The reading of mukha, however, is
to be maintained.

The name of this month is rovided by a fragment found at

Telaga Batu, published by J.G. de Casparis (de Casparis,

1956, p. 14-15). It is most probable that the
inscription of which only a fragment was found bore
nearly the same text as the inscription of Kedukan
Bukit.

On the above mentioned fragment can be read wihara ini
di wanua ini. Based on this reading we propose to add
ini after wanua. It is also possible that therre are
still one or two aksaras after ini missing, since the

broken part is sufficient for there or at the most four

aksaras, If so then these aksaras had to be seen as a
conjunction, As we have proposed in our previous paper
the inscription of which the fragment was found at

Telaga Batu was written some time (according to Dr. J.G.
de Casparis it was written at least eight months after
the inscription of Kedukan Bukit) after the inscription
of Kedukan Bukit,
established

after the conditions in the newly
center at Palembang was more orderly and
peaceful, and Dapunta Hiyay could have a new wihara
built at this place to accomodate the monks who also had
to move from Minanga to this new settlement.

On the paper print at our disposal can be seen traces a
thin aksara with most of the left part of an ulu above

it; we identify this as ni. Under this letter can be

50

19)

20)

21)

seen the left part of the pasangan ya, So we propose to
add nityakala which makes good sense.

In the inscription the word is nayik, the Old Malay form
of the Indonesian word naik.= to embark. ‘There is thus
no nayaka or nayika in the inscription of Kedukan Bukit
(Sarkar, 1985, p. 334).

As we have saidin our previous paper we adopt Dr. W.F.

Stutterheim's interpretation of this term, viz.
"pilgrimage of victory" (Boechari, 1979, p. 32).

As we have said earlier the place from which Dapunta
Hiyan went for his second stage of his journey with his
army was Minana, and not Minana Tamwan as other scholars
conjunction

supposed. We consider the word tamwan as a

having as its synonym the Old Javanese word tamwayan,
meaning "while", or as Slametmuljana would have it to be
equalized with the Indonesian word tambahan, meaning

"moreover". So there is no corrupt from Sanskrit
minahka stambhan in this name (Sarkar, idem., p. 336).
In the Old Malay and Modern Indonesian language the word
laksa means 10.000, while 100.000 is keti. So Dr. Sarkar
is wrong when saying that in this case one has to
translate "an army of twice one hundred thousand"
(sarkar, idem., p. 334).

Laghu literally means "light", but we give it here, the
derived meaning of "easy". ,

He had to stay one full day at Binanga to continue his
"procession of victory" the next one.

If the stone was found on its original place, and not
transformed from somewhere else.

Unfortunately the date of the Muara takus temples is

still unknown. There were definite indications that

51



--- [Page 11] ---
23)

24)

25)

there were several phases of building activities. It is
to be regretted that restoration activities in the past
accompanied by excavations of the site were not always
carried out according to the
archaeological research, so that a lot of historical
data were "lost", Some palaeographic evidence recovered
up to now points to a date between the IXth and XIIth
centuries A.D. So it is not justified to say that
Dapunta went to Muara takus_ to

Hiyay " mahalap

siddhayatra. But aerial photographs recently made of

this area revealed that the Mahligai stupa compound |

known to us is not the only archaeological site. Other
ruins are still buried in the ground, scattered within
an area of 94,5 HA., surrounded by an earthen wall. It
is thus not impossible that one day remnants of a temple
dating from the VIIth century come to light here.

It is possible that the present Minanga is not at the
same locality as the ancient Minana of the VIIth
century. It is customary to give the name of an
abandoned settlement to anew one. So an intensive
archaeological survey along the Kampar river is highly
recommended.

We do not have B. Karlgren's Grammata Serica Recensa at
our disposal. So we rely on the authority of Prof. Dr.
T. Yamamoto who personally gave us the confirmation of
the identity of Kan-t'o-li with Khandala, hence [A]
khandala[ pura].
gratitude to Prof. Yamamoto.

We express here with our sincerest

translated kliwat manapik with "heeft
getuchtigd" = had chastised (Kern, 1917 p. 214), while

G.. Coedes translated it with "venait de partir en

H. Kern

52

fundamentals of

expédition" = had just left for an expedition (Coedés

1930, p. 49). Poerbatjaraka gave another translation,
viz. “sangat berusaha menaklukkan" = has done the utmost
to submit (Poerbatjaraka 1952,
that Poerbatjaraka was influenced by the Javanese word

p. 41). It is apparent
keliwat in his translation, but the Indonesian word

kelewat contains the meaning of "to pass" or
"something in the past". So we are more inclined to
translate kaliwat manapik with "had chastised" or "had
just returned from a military expedition". De Casparis,
however, has drawn our attention to the Minangkabau word
which has the meaning of "to defend oneself
p.- 352). But

this meaning is incompatible with the context of the

manape

against, to resist" (de Casparis, 1956,

whole phrase. If we adopt de Casparis' suggestion we
would rather expect the phrase reading "kaliwat manapik
yan bhumi jawa mar ..... Sriwijaya" , looking for a word
meaning "to attack" instead of "tida bhakti"

That Kedah was a dependency of Sriwijaya was mentioned
on his return journey from India in 685 A.D. On his way

to India in.672 A.D., when he stayed at Kedah, he said

ra
nothing about the relation of Kedah and Sriwijaya. But

about Malayu he already noted on his way to India that
"it was now called Fo-she",
(Takakusu 1966 , p. XXX, XXXIV).

although in a_ note

Jakarta, September 19, 1985;
September 6, 1986.



--- [Page 12] ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Boechari,
1979 An Old Malay Inscription of $riwijaya at Palas
Pasemah (South Lampung). Pra Seminar Penelitian

Sriwijaya. Pusat Penelitian Purbakala dan
Peninggalan Nasional. Jakarta, p. 18-40.

1981 Report on Research on Sriwijaya. Studies on
Srivijaya. Proyek Penelitian Purbakala. Jakarta,

p- 79-84.

Bosch, F.D.K.,
1941 Een Maleische inscriptie in het Buitenzorgsche.
B.K.I., C, p- 49-53.

de Casparis, J.G.,
1956 Selected

century A.D. Prasasti Indonesia II. Masa Baru,

inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th
Bandung.

Chavannes, Edouard,
1984 Memoire composé a l'epoque de la grande Dynastie
T'ang sur les religieux: éminents gui allérent
chercher la loi dans les pays d'Occident. Paris.
Ernst Leroux.
Coedes, G.,
1930 Les Inscriptions Malaises de €rivijaya.

tome XXX, p. 29-80.

1964 A Possible Interpretation of the Inscription of ‘

Kedukan Bukit (Palembang).

Indonesian Studies. J, Bastin and R. Roolvink, 4

54

BEFEO,, 4

Malayan = and %

eds. London, p. 24-32

Damais, L.C.,
1952 Etudes d'Epigraphie Indonésienne. III. Liste des
Principales Inscriptions Datées de 1"Indonésie.
BEFEO., tome XLVI, p. 1-105.
1955 Etudes d'Epigraphie Indonésienne. IV. Discussion

de la date des Inscriptions. BEFEO tome XLVII,
-p. 7-290.
3 Groeneveldt, W.P.,
1960 Historical notes on Indonesia and Malaya.

Compiled from Chinese sources. Penerbit

; Bhratara. Djakarta.

@ wirth, F. and W.W. Rockhill,

4 1966 Chau Ju-kua: His work on the Chinese and Arab
trade in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
entitled Chu-fan-chi. Oriental Press, Amsterdam.

e Kern, H.,

1917 Inscriptie van Kota Kapur (Eiland Bangka; 608
Caka). vG., VII, p. 205-214.

Krom, N.J.,
1938 De heiligdommen van Palembang. MKAW. afd.
Letterkunde, Nieuwe Reeks, deel I no. 7, p. 397-

423.

F'Moens, J.L.,
1937 Griwijaya, Yawa en Kataha. TBG., deel LXXVII, p.

55



--- [Page 13] ---
317-487.

Poerbat jaraka, R.Ng.,
1952 Riwayat
Pembangunan. Djakarta.

Indonesia, Djilid I. Penerbit

Sarkar, H.B.,

1985 The Kings of Sri $ailam and the Foundation of ©
the Sailendra Dynasty of Indonesia. BKI-, deel #

141, p. 323-338.

Slametmul jana, R.B.,
1981 Kuntala, SrIwijaya dan Suwarnabhumi, Yayasan_

Idayu. Jakarta.

Takakusu, J.,
1966 A Record of the Buddhist Religion as
in India and the Malay Archipelago (A.D. 671--

695). Munshiram Manoharlal. Delhi.

Wolters, O.W., ”
19 ” studying Sriwijaya. JMBRAS.,

56

practised

q serba baru, menambah kebanggaan,

MEMAHAMI ARTI SIMBOLIK DAN MISTIK BANGUNAN
MONUMEN ”YOGYA KEMBALI” YANG AKAN DIBANGUN

Oleh
Djoko Soekiman
Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta

Sebagai mahasiswa baru Universitas Gadjah Mada dengan
pengajar tidak sebangsa pada sekitar tahun 1953 merupakan
lebih-lebih dengan matakuliahnya
yang masih asing. Di samping gurubesar yang sudah fasih

kebanggaan tersendiri,

berbahasa Indonesia seperti Prof. Dr. Zoetmulder, Prof. Dr.

_ AA. Fokker, ada pula yang belum fasih benar, seperti Prof.

Dr. A.J. Bernet Kempers (yang kita rayakan ulang tahunnya
yang ke-80 dengan tulisan ini), Ny. Dr. Baudish (2), Dr.
Fischer, Prof. Dr. D.C. Mulder (kemudian juga fasih berba-
hasa Indonesia). Di dalam kuliah-kuliahnya sering mengguna-
kan kata~kata Indonesia yang membingungkan para mahasiswa.
Lebih sulit lagi bagi para mahasiswa yang baru datang dari
pelosok-pelosok, ditambah baru turun dari gunung untuk

4 menyesuaikan diri dengan kehidupan kota. Banyak mahasiswa

Prof. Kempers pada tahun-tahun tersebut adalah bekas geril-

yawan atau istilah dahulu extremist yang langsung ikut

| menghayati pertempuran di berbagai tempat. Mereka berasal
s dari berbagai kesatuan kelasykaran yang waktu belajar di
4 Sekolah Menengah tidak teratur.

Penampilan Prof. Kempers yang tinggi, besar dengan
kuliah-kuliahnya yang mantab, yang kami anggap sebagai
sehingga sangat sayang

57

i!
il
i
|

y
4

