--- [Page 1] ---
MADJALAH ILMU-ILMU SASTRA INDONESIA Vy \Wwad Ty

too, since any pointed object will do. One does not need a tanah, This
is seldom mentioned in connection with pudak ; perhaps because most
of the writers are not “carriers of the tanah”, not poets by profession.
The ivory pin, worn in the ear, or even the thorn of the pandan itself
suffice.

There are many passages alluding to the use of pudak’s as there
is hardly a kakawin without a love story, and hardly a love-story with-
out billets d’amour going to and fro on pudak’s, *There was a pudak
lying with a fragment of poetry not yet finished, and an ivory pin, ob-
viously what it had been written with.” says Parthayajna 33,12. "On a
stone in the woods lie the remains of whithered flowers and chewed
betel-leaf. One could guess somebody had rested there after having
abducted a woman. An indication could be seen in some lines of com-
plaint, left behind on the petals of a pudak.”

"In despair he wrote down a poem (kakawin) on a pudak, th>
expression of his passionate love.” ”There is not room enough for her
beauty on a pudak ; it has to be put down on karas through the point
of a tanah.” A woman separated from her beloved, will take a pudak
in her lap and fondle it as a baby, addressing it with words of endear-
ment, in which indirectly the supposed rather is blarned for having left
it behind ; and we can guess what the name of the drawings, which
are said to be on that pudak are about. And to close our collection of
quotations this protestation of unwavering and unbreakable faithful-
ness and love : ’When you should become a pudak, I'll be the writing
on it.”

We have tried to reconstruct from some scattered data in Old
Javanese poems, how those poems were written. and by doing that, to
lift the veil of a small part of cultural and literary history of Old Java-
nese court-life. It seems worth while to do the same for other parts.
When the kakawins, a considerable part of which have not yet been
published and translated in a satisfactory way, or published at all, will
have become more accessible ; and, more important still, when there
will be a more reliable Old Javanese dictionary, some of the impede-
ments, which hamper the performance of that work, will have been
removed,

240

nehe

ov 14.3, Okjober 1966

we

Preliminary Report on the Discovery of
an Old-Malay Inscription at
Sodjomerto.

Boechari
(Lembaga Purbakala dan Peninggalan Nasional)

1. It is a wellknown fact that inscriptions have been found issued by
Gailendra kings in Central-Java, dating from 778 A.D. to approxi-
mately the middle of the 9» century. From these inscriptions it
appeared that the Cailendras were adherents of the Buddhist religion,
especially the Mahayana in its later phases of development (Casparis,
1950). And it was to these buddhistic Cailendra kings that we owe the
inheritance of such lofty monuments like the Bardbudur, Mendut,
Sewu and others.

But we also have their civaitic counterparts, such as the Candi
Lara Jonggrang, the Gedong Sanga and Diéng temples, and no less
numerous civaitic inscriptions. The names of the civaitic kings issuing
these inscriptions, a list of which is found in the inscription of Man-
tyasih dated 907 A.D, (Stutterheim, 1927), are different from those
fourd in the buddhistic incriptions. All these facts had induced seve-
ral scholars to assume that there were two dynasties reigning in Central-
Java from the 8 to the beginning of the 10‘ century A. D. (Vogel,
1918 ; Bosch, 1928 ; van Naerssen, 1947). The civaitic dynasty was
supposed to have been the indigenous one, whereas the buddhistic
Gailendra dynasty was a conqueror from somewhere.

As to the place of origin of the Cailendras there are some cor-
flicting opinions. Indian scholars like R.C-Majumdar (Majumdar,
1933) and K. A, Nilakanta Sastri (Sastri, 1935) were ofthe opinion that
the Cailendras were immigrants from India, though both scholars did
not agree as to the region of origin. J.L. Moens posed the opinion
that the Cailendras were refugees from India, who had settled in Pa-
lembang at the beginning of the 6‘ century A.D., but were driven
out by Crivijaya (= the Malay Peninsula) in 683 A.D. and emigra-
ted to Java (Moens, 1937, pp. 435 ff.). Another opinion was posed
by G. Coedés who has tried to make it plausible that the Cailendras
were of Founanese origin (Coedés, 1934). And it is to this opinion of
Coedes’ that the communis opinio still adhers up till now (Casparis,
1950; 1956; 1958; Bosch, 1952), ;

One scholar; however, the late Prof. Dr R.M.Ng. Poerbatjaraka,
fervently defended the opinion that there was only one dyriasty in

241


--- [Page 2] ---
MADJALAH ILMU-ILMU SASTRA INDONESIA

Central-Java, the Cailendras. According to Poebatjaraka the Cailen-
dras were formerly gaivites, but for unknown reasons Sanjaya, a ¢ivai-
tic Cailendra king whom we know to have erected a Jingga-temple in
732 A.D., had ordered his son, Rakai Panangkaran, to abandon the
faith of his ancestors and to become a buddhist 1). Another branch of
this dynasty, however, still held to the civaitic religion, and conse-
quently had to migrate to East-Java (Poerbatjaraka, 1952 a; 1958).

2. Some time ago a new discovery was made which might throw a
new light upon this problem. In January 1963 the Archaeological In-
stitute received a message from the regent of Pekalongan, to the effect
that a stone inscription had been found at the village of Sajamerta
(Sodjomerto) by a reporter, Mr V. Soekandar Hadiwiyana. A facsimile
of the inscription was attached to the letter.

Although it was made by a layman, so that a reading of the whole
inscription was impossible, some very interesting features immediately
drew our attention. Several characters, e.g. the ma and the ya show
archaic forms. The ma resembles the older Pallava types from Kutei
and Taruma (Kern, 1917 a; 1917 b; 1917; Chhabra, 1949;
Casparis, 1949 ; Vogel, 1925), whereas the ya reminds us of the ya
of the Crivijaya inscriptions, especiallly the Kedukan Bukit inscription
dated 683 A. D. (Coedés, 1930), but this form can still be observed
in the Dinaya inscription dated 760 A. D. (Bosch, 1916 ; 1925 ; Cas-
paris, 1941), Based on these palaeographical considerations it is very
likely that the inscription has to be dated in the 7 ® century A. D.

A more interesting fact is the frequent occurrence of the ligature
nda, suggesting to us that the language of the inscription is Old-Malay.
Up till now only a small number of Old-Malay inscriptions are known
from Central-Java, viz. the stone inscription of Say Hyay Winatan
(Gondosuli I, O.J.0., CV ; Casparis, 1950, pp. 50 — 73), the stone
inscription of Day Puhawa 7 Glis (Gondosuli II, O.J.0., II;), a stone
inscription from the Diéng O.J.0., XCVI), a small fragment from
Bukatedja (Casparis, 1956, pp. 207 —211), and a recently discovered
inscription at the temple grounds of Candi Sewu, dated 792 A.D.
(Damais, 1963).

We immediately had an estampage and photographs made of this
new piece of historical evidence. Unfortunately the photographs are
not good enough, but the estampage turns out to be excellent. And
though the reading of some characters is still doubtful, we are able to
make a provisional transcription. Some more palaeographic features can
be observed. The ra has a very peculiar form, having an elaborate curl
tothe right, as if a ra with danda was meant. To our limited knowledge
this form is unknown from other inscriptions 2). The sa and the initial
a also look like that on the Kedukan Bukit inscription. The same form
of the initial a can be seem in a short inscription on the back of a stone

242



--- [Page 3] ---
!

AN OLD-MALAY INSCRIPTION AT SODJOMERTO

image of Lokegvara originating from Jambi (Jakarta Museum no.
247 ; Schnitger, 1936, p. 5, pl. 1), which reads dan dcaryya cyuta.
This inscription has never been mentioned before except by Mr Soek-
mono, but he erroneously referred to this inscription as stating a date
with four ciphers (Soekmono, 1958, p. 262). The na resembles that
of the inscription of Kedukan Bukit, too. The middle foot of the ka is
longer than the two others like the ka in the Kutei and Taruma inscrip-
tions ; it also still has a small horizontal stroke above the middle foot
which may be supposed to be a remnant of the socalled *blockhead’ of
the older. Pallava types ; this small horizontal stroke can also be ob-
served above the ta. Our first impression that the inscription must be
dated in the 7 century A. D. is thus strengthened by these features.
And we think it more likely to place the inscription at the beginning
of the 7 * century ; at any rate it must be older than the Kedukan Bu-
kit inscription.

3. In March 1965 we had the opportunity to visit the inscription on
the spot, together with our assistants Mr. A.S. Wibowo and Mr.
Ajatrochaedi. The stone is not very neatly shaped, especially its back
part. It measures 80 cm. in height and ca. 45. cm. in width at the
base, and it is 30 cm. thick. The right and left upper parts are broken
off. Only the front is inscribed with 11 lines of script, which run a bit
slantingly upwards. Though we were able to verify some doubtful
readings based on the estampage, there are still three or four charac-
ters the reading of which is uncertain. So it is still a provisional trans-
cription which we are presenting here.

Transcription :

we. o> Tyayon ori sata wo...
we. — 4 koti
seooossee Bamah ccivaya
bhataéra paramecva
. Ta sarvva daiva ku 9) samvah hiya
-- mih inan -is-Anda >) dapd
nta selendra namah santana
namanda bapanda bhadravti
namanda ayanda sampila
10. namanda vininda selendra namah
11. mamagappasarlempewangih ©
Notes :

CHMNIAARYNE

a

~

Instead of ku samvah the reading of kna samvah is also to be
considered. But the small curl to the right is too high for a na,
of which the small curl to the right is always found at the base. This
curl is thus to be interpreted as the suku itself, as is the case in the
older Pallava types, because the middle foot of the ka is longer
than the two others.

243


--- [Page 4] ---
MADJALAH ILMU-ILMU SASTRA INDONESIA

b) The first consonant of this word forms part of a ligature with the
” final na of the preceding word. With its pointed end at the left it
looks like a ca, but the possibility of dha is not to be left out. The
second part of the second ligature looks like a na. But this reading
meets with the difficulty that the first part of the ligature is a re-
troflex (sa); and since it is an internal cluster, the second part
should be a retroflex, too. It does not, however, resemble one of

the retroflex characters. ;
This word very likely denotes a kinship terminology, stating the
relationship between Dapiinta Selendra and Hiyayn-- mih, a
certain deity or deified person as can be inferred from the title
hiya is
c) The reading of this whole line is certain. But since we do not grasp
its meaning, we can not give the right separation of words. The
only word at whose meaning we may guess is mamdgap ; but what

it exactly means is still unknown.

Translation :

3) Homage to Civa

4) Bhataéra Paramegva .

5) ra and all the gods °) I honour. Hiya

6) -- mih is the ..........008 2a .

7) of the Honorable Dapiinta Selendra ©). Santana

8) is the name of his father. Bhadravati

9) is the name of his mother. Sampila

10) is the name of the wife of the Honorable Selendra.

Notes :
a) We expect to find the date on this first line, especially when we see
the word ¢ri sata ............ We have been tempted to read ¢ri saka
(VATSA) ......eeeceneee But the last character is unoubtedly a ta, since

the left part is closed at the base.

The reading of kofi is certain; of the preceding word only the
danda is left. And because the whole context is unknown, we can
not decide which meaning we have to attach to this word, which
may mean ’curved tip’, ’point’, "height’, *highest degree’, or ’ten
millions’.

c) We can not explain why the composer of the inscription used the
” derivative form daiva, which has an adjectival meaning.

b

LS

244

|
|

AN OLD-MALAY INSCRIPTION AT SODJOMERTO

d) As we have said in note b of the transcription we expect to find a
kinship terminology denoting the relationship between Dapinta
Selendra and Hiya y - - mih.

e

LY

We translate Selendra namah with ’the Honorable Selendra’, ta-
king namas in the sense of ’adoration’ or ’obeisance’. It is to be
noted, however, that the composer might have meant Selendranama.
Such a mistake is understandable since we see that he had made
other mistakes, e.g. namah ¢¢ivaya. But we think the first alter-
native to be the more acceptable.
f: As we have said in note c of the transcription the meaning of this
entire line is unknown to us.
4. The most interesting evidence in this new inscription is the occur-
rence of the name Selendra, which is undoubtedly an Indonesianized
form of Cailendra. Could it be that the illustrious Cailendravamca had
derived their family-name from this person? In this connection we
think it useful to cite J. Przyluski’s article when he contested Coedés’
theory on the origin of the Cailendras (Przyluski, 1935, p. 30): ”Since
Indonesian epigraphy mentions a Cailendravamca, if the question is
asked, what is here the vamcakara? — the answer necessarily is : the
*Cailendra” and it is already understood that the Cailendra must be a
divine personage. In the epics and elsewhere Civa is called Giriga and
this term is synonimous with Cailendra. It may, therefoze, be presumed
that Gailendra, the divine ancestor of the Gailendravamg¢a, is one of
the forms of the god Civa”. Well, it turns out that the Cailendra is a
personal name, and that he is not one of the forms of the god Civa,
but an ardent worshipper of Civa. Another example of a personal
name used as family-name is Girindravamga(ja) found in the Old-
Javanese kakawin Lubdhaka (Poerbatjaraka, 1952 b). According to
Prof. Dr P.J. Zoetmulder this king is one of the Girindrawardhanas
whom we know to have reigned in the last decades of Majapahit °).
And if our supposition might prove correct, it follows that the
Cailendras were native Indonesians. This may be inferred from the
fact that Dapinta Selendra used the Old-Malay language in his in
scription. Also the many mistakes when using Sanskrit forms may be an
indication that the composer was not an Indian priest thoroughly
versed in Sanskrit grammar 4).

Also worthy to note is the title dapdnta. In the Grivijaya inscrip-
tions we have the titles dapunta hiya n and punta hiya n which were
considered royal titles by G. Coedés (Coedés, 1930 3 cf. Yamin 1958 ;
Wirjosoeparto, 1958, p. 225). De Casparis, however, threw some
doubt on the validity of this opinion (Casparis, 1956, p. 9, esp. note 52).
And indeed, we have a large number of instances in Old-Javanese
epigraphy where the titles punta, dapunta and dapu hya_ were never
used by royal personages, but in most cases by clerical functionaries.
In Sindok’s inscriptions the title dapunta is frequently borne by a

245


--- [Page 5] ---
MADJALAH ILMU-ILMU SASTRA INDONESIA

samgat tiruan (e. g. O.J.0., XXXVII; XXXVIII; XLII; XLVII;
LID, one of the 7 upapattis in the Majapahit period (Naerssen, 1933).
Even in the Old-Malay inscription of Da » Puhawa y Glis the titles
dapunta and dapu hya_ were not used by a royal personage 5).

But this does not need to be considered as a serious drawback to
the supposition that Dapiinta Selendra might be the vamecakara of the
Gailendras. We have instances in Javanese history in which the reign-
ing dynasty was descended from a commoner, e.g. the dynasties of
Singhasari and Majapahit were descended from Ken Arok §), and the
They were, however, given a divine ancestry. And it seems that this is
kings of Moslim Mataram are descendants of Ki Ageng Pemanahan 7).
also the case with Dapinta Selendra, since we can see that he was
supposed to be in a certain relationship with Hiya 7 -- mih, a deity or
deified person. If it were only possible to give the exact reading of
-is-dnda we should be able to find out whether it denotes a kinship
terminology in the ascending line.

As we have said above, Dapiinta Selendra was an ardent Gaivite.
This evidence strongly supports Poerbatjaraka’s theory about the
existence of only one dynasty, the Cailendras, the first members of
which were Caivites, In this connection it is to be noted that all the
existing data used by Vogel, Bosch and van Naerssen to support their
views do not exclude other interpretations. The Sanskrit inscription of
Kalasan dated 778 A.D. (Bosch, 1928) was thought to contain two
parties, viz. the anonymous Cailendra king and his gurus who had a
Tara-temple and a vihdra built, and Panamkaran (a), Javanese vas-
sal of the Cailendras, who donated the village of Kalaca to these
buildings. This was based on the peculiar structure of the text in which
every statement was repeated twice or more in slightly different ver-
sions. But if we read it without preconceived ideas, especially strophes
5, 6 and 7, we necessarily will come to the conclusion that Panamka-
ran was the Cailendra king who had the Tara-temple and vihara built
and had made the village of Kalaga a freehold ®). Moreover, it is not
very likely that a vassal king should use such lofty epitheta ornantia
like mahdrdja(m) tejahpirnnapanna(m) papamkarana(m).

The difference between the names in the buddhistic inscriptions
and in the civaitic ones may also be explained in another way. As can
be seen on the list in the inscription of Mantyasih all the kings were
mentioned only with their rakai-titles, except for Sanjaya whose per-
sonal name was added to it. On the other hand the kings in the bud-
dhistic inscriptions bore Sanskrit titles except for Panamkaran. But we
see that Rakai Kayuwangi pu Lokapala, Rakai Watukura dyah
Balitung, Rakai Laya dyah Tulodhong, and Rakai Sumba (or Pang-
kaja) dyah Wawa had titles consisting of three parts, viz. the rakai-
title, the personal name preceded by pu or dyah and the Sanskrit part
which may be considered the abhiseka-name (Stutterheim, 1927 ; see

246

oe

AN OLD-MALAY INSCRIPTION AT SODJOMERTO

also the list of dated inscriptions arranged by Damais, 1952, pp. 35 —
57). It is thus possible that the different names were in fact comple~-
mentary to each other 9),

5. In conclusion we admit that the data contained in the Old-Malay
inscription from Sajamerta is not yet sufficient to prove beyond dispute
Poerbatjaraka’s theory on the existence of only one dynasty in Central-
Java, and our supposition that Dapinta Selendra was the vamcakara
of the Gailendra dynasty. Still so many problems have to be solved, e.g.
the place of Rakai Patapan pu Palar in the royal lineage, the identifi-
cation of Dhranindra or Sanggamadhanafijaya in the inscription of
Kelurak dated 782 A.D. (Bosch, 1928) and the possible connection of
this inscription with the recently discovered Old-Malay inscription
from. Candi Sewu dated 792 A.D., in which the enlargement of a
Maniucrigrha by a nayaka is mentioned whose name is unfortunately-
very difficult to read, and lastly the identification of Rakai Walain pu
Kumbhayoni, who was an ardent Caivite, and whose ancestors were
mentioned in a fragmentary inscription from Ratu Baka (Casparis

1959, pp. 341 — 343 19), ,

NOTES

1) It is to be noted that before 1947 nearly all scholars thought San-
jaya and Panamkaran to be Cailendras,

2) The only known example which resembles this form is found in

the inscription of Poh Dulur dated 890 A.D., which is undoub-

tedly a copy. But the curl of the ra in the Sajamerta inscription
is more elegantly drawn.

Prof. Zoetmulder has expressed his opinion in a paper read at the

2nd National Congress for Sciences held at Jogyakarta in 1962.

The Girindrawamcaja mentioned in the Lubdhaka is dyah Sura-

prabhawa whose name is also found in the inscription of Pamin-

tihan dated 1473 A.D. (Bosch, 1922; Muusses, 1923 ; Damais,

1952, p. 81).

4) We will leave it an open question whether Dapinta Selendra ori-
ginated from Java or Sumatra. For the writing of the National
History of Indonesia it is sufficient to prove that he was a native
Indonesian, and not a refugee or conqueror from abroad.

5) We also have the variant rapunti, e.g. in the inscription of Humandi
dated 875'A.D., and of Taragal dated 881 A.D. (both still unpub-
lished). It looks like a feminine form of dapunta, but in both
cases the title rapunti is used by a tuhan who was charged with
the execution of the foundation of the freehold. And it seems that

5 wey were males. ;

is story is found in the Pararaton edited by J. L.A.
(Brandes, 1897 ; 1920). y Ac Brandes
7) In the Babad Tanah Jawi (Olthof, 1941) Ki Ageng Pemanahan

3

LS

247


--- [Page 6] ---
MADJALAH ILMU-ILMU SASTRA INDONESIA

was said to be a decendant of Brawijaya, the last king of Majapahit.

and his ancestry was brought back even to Adam.

For the sake of clarity we will quote the three strophes :

(5) rajye pravarddhamane rajfiah cailendravameatilakasya
cailendrarajagurubhis tarabhavanam krtam krtibhih / /

(6) cakanrpakalatitair varsagataih saptabhir mmaharajah
akarod gurupijartham tarabhavanam panamkaranah / /

(7) gramah kalasanama dattah samghaya siksinah krtva /
pankuratavanatiripade¢adhyaksan mahapurusan / /

ie. :

(5) In the prosperous kingdom of the Jewel of the Gailendra-
dynasty a Tara-temple was built by the pious (or learned)
gurus of the Cailendra king.

(6) In the evolved caka-year 700 Maharaja Panamkaran made a
Tara-temple for the worship of his gurus.

(7) Having made as witnesses the pangkur, tawan, and tirip, the
eminent village superintendents, (he) donated the village of
Kalasa to the samgha.

This is, however, no more than a guess. We have a Dharm-

matunggadewa in the inscription of Ratu Baka dated 792 A. D.

(Casparis, 1950; 1961, pp. 241-248), in which also the namie

of Panamkaran seems to be found, Samaratungga in the inscription

of Kayumwungan dated 824 A.D., in which his daughter Pramo-
dawarddhani is mentioned and also Rakai Patapan pu Palar with
his wife (Casparis, 1950), and Bhijayottunggadewa in the Pre+

Nagari inscription from Candi Plaosan (Casparis, 1956, p. 180).

In this case we could at the utmost identify Rakai Panamkaran

with Dharmmatunggadewa, and may be Rakai Pikatan with

Bhajayottunggadewa, since we know that the Plaosan temples

were built during the reign of Rakai Pikatan (Casparis, 1958).

The identification of Samaratungga with Rakai Patapan pu Palar,

however, meets with serious difficulties.

1G) Unfortunately the names of Kumbhayooni’s ancestors (father,

grandfather, great-grandfather) are lost. But this data is suf-
ficient to disprove de Casparis’ theory about the indentification
of Rakai Walajn pu Kumbhayoni with Rakai Pikatan (Casparis,
1956, pp. 244-279).

8

LS

9)

REFERENCES.

Bosch, Dr F. D. K., _
1916. De Sanskrit-inscription op den steen van Dinaja.

T. B. G., LVI, pp. 410 — 444. .

1922. De oorkonde van Sendang Sedati. O. V., Bijlage B, pp.
22 — 27.

1924. Het Lingga-heiligdom van Dinaja. T. B.G., LXIV, pp.

248

f

AN OLD-MALAY INSCRIPTION AT SODJOMERTO
227 — 286.

1928. De Inscriptie van Kelurak. T. B. G., LXVIII, pp. 1 — 62.

1952. Crivijaya, de Cailendra- en de Sanjayavamgea. B. K, I.
dl. 108, pp. 113 — 123. ,

Brandes, Dr J.,

1897. Pararaton (Ken Arok) of het boek der Koningen van
Toemapel en van Majapahit. V.B.G., XLIX, pp. 1 — 314.

1920. Pararaton (Ken Arok) of het boek der Koningen van
Toemapel en van Majapahit. Met aantekeningen van Dr
N.J. Krom. V. B. G., LXII.

Casparis, J. G. de,

1941. Nogmaals de Sanskrit-inscriptie op den steen van Dinoj
T.B.G., LXXXI, pp. 499 313, more:

1949, Postscript (on Chhabra: Three more yipa-inscript-
ions ......... ). T. B.G., LXXXII, pp. 373 — 374.

1950. Inscripties uit de Cailendra-tijd. Prasasti Indonesia I.
A.C. Nix and Co., Bandoeng.

1956. Selected inscriptions from the 7 to the 9t» century
A. D. Prasasti Indonesia II. A.C. Nix and Co., Bandoeng.

1958. Short inscriptions from Candi Plaosan Lor. Bulletin of
the Archaeological Service of the Republic of Indonesia,
no. 4. Balai Pustaka, Djakarta.

1961. New evidence on cultural relations between Java and
Ceylon in ancient times. Artibus Asiae, XXIV, 3/4.
Fectation woume presented to Professor George

‘oedés, on the occasion of his fii i
oat Sag. seventy-fifth birthday, pp.
Chhabra, Dr B. Ch.,

1949. Three more yipa-inscriptions of King Malawarman from

Kutei. T. B.G., LXX . _
Codes, G, XIII, pp. 370 373.

1930. Les inscriptions malaises de Crivija
00 ae Tiption 30 Crivijaya. B.E.F.E.O. tome

1934, On the origin of the Cailendras of Indonesia. J. G.I. S.
vol. 1, pp. 66 — 70. °

Damais, L. Ch.,

1952. Liste des principales inscriptions datée: 4 ési
B.E.F.E.0., tome XLVI, DP. 1— 105. de Tr Indonésie

1963. pyponvertes récentes du Service Archéologique de

ndonésie, B.E.F.
Kem, Dr H., sie. B.E.F.E.O., tome LI, fasc. 2, pp. 579 — 582.
1917a. Over het Sanskrit-opschrift van Jambu i
450 A.D.) K.V.G. VIL, pp. 1 — 9. Batavia). (Ca
1917b. Over de Sanskrit-opschriften van (Muara Kaman, in)
Kutei_ (Borneo). (ca. 400 A.D.). In verband met de
geschiedenis van het schrift in den Indischen Archipel.
K. V. G., VII, pp. 55 — 76.

249


--- [Page 7] ---
MADJALAH ILMU-ILMU SASTRA INDONESIA

1917c. Het Sanskrit-opschrift te Tugu (distr. Bekasih, Batavia);
ca. 450 A.D. (Alsmede dat te Kebon Kopi, be N. W.
Buitenzorg). K. V.G., VII, pp. 129 — 138.

Majumdar, R.C.,
1933. Les Rois Cailendra de Suvarnadvipa. B.E.F.E.O., tome

33, pp. 121 — 141.

Moens, J. L.,
1937. Crivijaya, Yava en Kataha. 7.B.G., LXXVII, pp.
317 — 487.

Muusses, Martha A. Dr.
1923. Gedateerde inscripties van Nederlandsch-Indie (vierde

aanvulling). O. V., Bijlage I, pp. 103 — 109.
Naerssen, F. H. van,
1933. De Saptopapatti. Naar aanleiding van een tekstverbetering
in den Nagarakrtagama. B. K. 1., XC, pp. 239 — 258.

1947. The Cailendra interregnum. India Antiqua. A volume of
Oriental Studies presented to Jean Philippe Vogel, C.L.E.,
pp. 249 — 253.

Olthof, W. L.,
1941. Babad Tanah Diawi. In Proza. Javaansche Geschiedenis.

*s-Gravenhage, Martinus Nijhoff.

Poerbatiaraka, Prof. Dr-R. M. Ng.,
1952a. Riwajat Indonesia, djl.
1952b. Kepustakaan Diawa. Penerbit Di

1958. Crivijaya, de Cailendra- en de Sa
dl. 114, pp. 254 — 264.

Przyluski, J.
1935. Cailendrawamga. J. G. I. S., vol. 2, pp. 25 — 36.

Sastri, K. A. Nilakanta,
1935. Origin of the Cailendras. T.B.G., LXXV, pp.605 —~ 661.
Schnitger, F. M.,
oe-Oudheden aan de Batang Hari (Hindoo Anti-

1936. Hind
quities on the Batang Hari). Leiden, E.J. Brill.

Soekmono, R.
1958. Tentang lokalisasi

J, P.T. Pembangunan, Djakarta.
ambatan, Djakarta.
njayavamga. B.K. I.,

Griwijaya. Laporan Kongres Ilmu Pe-
ngetahuan Nasional Pertama. Dijilid kelima, seksi D. Di-
terbitkan oleh Madjelis Ilmu Pengetahuan Indonesia.
Djakarta, pp. 243 — 264.

Stutterheim, Dr W. F.

1927. Een belangrijke oorkonde uit de Kedu. T. B.G. LXVII,
p. 172 — 215.

Vogel, Dr J. Ph.,

1919. Het Koninkrijk Crivijaya. B.K.1.,
1925. The earliest Sanskrit inscriptions 0!
pp. 15 — 35.

dl. 75, pp. 626 — 637.
f Java. P.O. D. deel I,

250

AN >
OLD-MALAY INSCRIPTION AT SODJOMERTO

Wirjosceparto. Drs Soetjipto.
. (Sanggahan atas Yami
s _alas Yamin: Penjelidika ji
pagata  Serivvidjaja dari Radjakula Sjailend rab tentang
is viieje da Ha oo, .
Yami Djilid kelima, seksi Don eyelet Nasional Pertama
O58 Mr H. Muhammad , ~ 725.

. Redakal sjcdiarah tentang Negara Seriwidjaja d.
pee iaiea Sjailendra dalam kerangka-kesatuan K _
we n Indonesia. Laporan K.1.P.N. Pi Djilid

ima, seksi D, pp. 129241. rama, Did

ABBREVIATIONS

B.E.F.E.O. : Bulletin de [°
et 4 le PEcole Frangai: é i
er ; pybrimerie Nationale. Paris. “Extreme Orient
_K. : Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en
. ee . ? 7 Volk
eoninklifk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- on vole
ravenhage — M. Nijhoff. olkenixunde,

J.G.LS. : The Journ
: umal of the Greater Indi i
KV.G. : Verpreide Geschriften van Prof. Dri ken
Tavenhage — Marti ‘ho ° .
05.0 : Oud-Javaansche Oork en. poet

u conden, Nagelaten t ipti
mm er BGs prandes. Uitgegeven “door ‘Dr N. 7.
oy | ‘Gravenhes hy Ne Ni Gatavia- Albrecht and Co./
: Dienst in Nes Inge ee ne den Oudheidkundigen
mop. ‘sGravenag Indie. Niet len — Albrecht and Co./
.D. : ‘ iPlicaties van den Oudheidkundigen Die i
TBG ; th deci ean — Albrecht and Co mt in Ned
-G.: Ti voor Indische Taal-, Land. en nkun
. ?, ~ v
ern door het Koninklijk Batavinaseh “Genet,
ate unsten en Wetenschappen. Batavi:
; and Co./ Den Haag — M. Nijhoff / Bane
V.p.G, «40m = A.C. Nix and Co. > Mhoft / Ban-
et ven andelingen van het Koninklijk Bataviaasch ‘Ge:
se P we Kunsten en Wetenschappen. Bat: ia
cht and Co. /'s-Hage — M. Nijhoff

Acknowledgement :
fe vathor ree: here to express his sincerest gratitude
kine het ‘arrett of the University of Sidney f
ig the trouble to straighten his clumsy English.
Jakarta, August 15, 1965

251


--- [Page 8] ---
Pembitjaraan Buku

Winfred P. Lehmann, Historical Linguistics; an Introduction. Holt,
Rinehart & Winston, Inc. New York. 1963. 297 halaman ; Exercis-
es to accompany Historical Linguistics, an Introduction. idem 1963.
98 halaman.

Harimurti Kridaleksana
(Universitas Indonesia)

Sekalipun studi linguistik historis telah mentjapai umur lebih
dari 150 tahun, namun — hingga terbitnja buku Prof. Lehmann ini —
belum sekali djua terbit karja lengkap jang bersifat elementer maupun
pengantar (sebagai keketjualian adalah pasal 38-62 dari Hockett 1958:
‘A Course in Modern Linguistics). Buku? jang ada entah bersifat tek-
nig dan tidak untuk studi permulaan (seperti Hoenigswald 1960 :
Language Change and Linguistic Reconstruction) ataupun sangat
terbatas lapangannja (seperti Meillet 1937: Introduction a l'étude
comparative des Langues Indo-Européennes). Oleh karena itu keha-
diran buku ini dapat diterima oleh para peminat linguistik historis
dengan gembira.

Pertama-tama djudul buku ini. Tepatkah ?

Di Universitas Indonesia nama resmi untuk ilmu jang termuat
dalam buku ini kini ialah linguistik bandingan. Djelas ini adalah ter-
djemahan dari comparative linguistics atau vergelijkende taalkunde.
Nama lama ialah ilmu perbandingan bahasa. Menurut anggapan pe-
nulis pertimbangan buku ini comparison atau perbandingan hanja
merupakan salah satu aspek dari tjabang linguistik ini ; bahkan salah
satu metodenja disebut metode komparatif. Tudjuan ilmu ini ialah
menjusun sedjarah bahasa dengan segala aspeknja. Meskipun angga-
pan sematjam ini tidak dikemukakan oleh Lehmann, namun penulis
dapat menjetudjui istilah historical linguistics atau linguistik historis
(Perhatikan istilah Meillet 1925: La Méthode comparative en
Linguistique Historique. \stilah de Saussure linguistique diachronique
djarang® dipakai).

252

Sistimatik dan isi buku ini adalah sbb. :

1, Introduction. Diuraikan studi tentang “differences in languages between
two points of time” maupun "two or more points in space”. Pasal ini
memberikan gambaran sekilas tentang djangkauan buku ini. The classifi-
cation of languages.

2. Genealogical classification of languages. Sesudah menguraikan kekraba-
tan bahasa® dunia, ia menjimpulkan: Genealogical classification was
admirably suited to determine the interrelationships of languages such as
the Indo-European for which we have many records from several millennia.
For langvages attested only today we may be limited to classification
based on typology” (hal. 49) — walau bukan pendapat baru, namun kita
sependapat inilah jang mesti kita Jakukan tterhadap bahasa* di Asia Teng-
gara dan Oseania.

3. Typological classification of languages. Disini diuraikan klasifikasi Finck
jang kwalitatif, klasifikasi Greenberg dan Householder jang kwantitatif.

4. The use of written records. Sedjarah dan djenis? sistim tulisan.

5. The comparative method. Teknik? rekonstruksi-luar — salah satu. metode
jang hingga kini menguasai linguistik historis.

6 The method of internal reconstruction, Teknik? rekonstruksi-dalam.

7. Study of loss in language; lexicostatistics. Dengan singkat dipaparkan
sebuah metode linguistik historis jang amat penting dan paling baru dalam
abad ke-20 — sumbangan metode ini dan kekurangan-kekurangannja.

8. Broadening of language materials ; dialect geography. Prinsip? serta ke-
pentingan dialektologi bagi sedjarah bahasa.

9. Models of lanuage. Teori silsilah, teori gelombang, idiclek, dia-sistim.
Change in language.

10. Change in phonological systems.

11. Change in grammatical systems ; analogical change.

12. Change in semantic systems.
Pasal 10-12 menguraikan prinsip2 “linguistic change” sebagai aspek per-
spektif dari linguistik historis.

13. Borrowing: influence of one language or dialect on another.

14. Conclusion.
Annotated bibliography, symbols, technical terms and abbreviations. Index.
Tiap2 pasal diikuti petundjuk’ batjaan landjutan.

Dari isi buku ini kita melihat, bahwa seluruh lapangan linguistik
historis ditjakup, ketjuali teori migrasi. Pada hal. 29 dan 33 ada di-
sebut-sebut migrasi bangsa Junani dan bangsa? German, tetapi tidak
kita dapati uraian tentang metode ”Wérter und Sachen”, center of
gravity method dari Edward Sapir, ataupun migration theory dari
Isidore Dyen. Pada tjetakan kemudian tentulah bab jang amat penting
ini dapat ditambahkan.

Tampak bahwa pengarang menghindarkan hal? jang masih di-

253

