--- [Page 1] ---
SELECTED  INSCRIPTIONS 
FROM  THE  7TH  TO THE  9TH 
CENTURY  A.D. 
BY 
Dr J.G.  de CASPARIS 
II 
MASA BARU 
BANDUNG 
1956. 


--- [Page 2] ---


--- [Page 3] ---
PREFACE 
The present volume may be considered a continuation of Prasasti Indo­
nesia  I, Bandung 1950, although it is written in a different language and in 
a different  form.  As the first volume, this publication aims at making acces­
sible  some of the most important epigraphic remains discovered in Indone­
sia. The present writer hopes  that  series may be continued in order to 
furnish  new materials for the study of the  political  and cultural history of 
this country. 
Except  for No. I, d and e and No. IX, all the texts are published for the 
first time. They all originate  from  Indonesia 1) and belong to the 7th to 9th 
centuries  A.D.  ; as far as possible, they are chronologically arranged 2). 
The ív*xts  were chosen on account of their importance. The last  five  texts 
(Nos.  VIII  to XII inclusive) belong close together and constitute an  attempt 
at elucidating important events in 9th century Indonesia. 
I profoundly regret  that  it has not been possible to add reliable photo­
graphs of the inscriptions. The  clichés  proved hardly satisfactory and suitable 
paper for the copies was unobtainable here. I hope  that  it will  be possible 
to prepare a volume of  separate  photographs in the future. 
During  a visit  to Burma,  India and Europe in the second  half  of 1954 
I had the occasion to go through part of the proofs  with  Dr  G. H.  Luce 
(Rangoon),  Dr B. Ch. Chhabra  (Delhi),  Dr Georges  Cœdès  (Paris) and Dr 
D. L. Friedmann (London). As far as was  still  possible in  view  of the ad­
vanced  state  of the proofs, I took account of the valuable remarks I got  from 
these  scholars. 
In preparing the  English  text of the present publication I received 
very  substantial help  from  Prof.  L. A.  Hill  of the  University  of Indonesia 
at Djakarta. Mr  Hill showed admirable patience in making readable  English 
out of my manuscript  with  as few changes as porsible.  After  Mr  Hill  had 
left for Britain  in the spring of 1954, I got help  from  others, especially  from 
Mr A. H.  Christie of the  British  School  of Oriental and  African  Studies 
when  on tour in Indonesia. I am  fully  aware  that,  in spite of all the assis­
tance T received, the  English  text does not run ss smoothly as it should, 
but it seemed undesirable to delay this publication  still  longer. The  long 
time needed to print this volume (it has been in the press for more than two 
and half  years) also made some additions necessary. 
Finally,  I express my profound gratitude to the  Ministry  of Education 
of the Republic of Indonesia for all the help and  facilities  which  alone made 
this publication possible. 
Malang  (East Java), August 1955. 
1) There is no absolute certainty for No. HI, the place of  origin  of which  is unknown. 
It seems, however, safe to assume  that  they originate  from  somewhere in Indonesia, 
unless the contrary should he made acceptable. 
2) I made an exception for Nos. Iv‚ V and VI, all  three  of them undated,  which  were 
placed  after No. III  only  on account of their subject matter. 


--- [Page 4] ---


--- [Page 5] ---
TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 
Preface 
Introduction 
I. Five  fragmentary  inscriptions of South Sumatra . . . 1 — 15 
a 1 
b 2 
c 8 
d 10 
e 11 
II. The Old Malay inscription of Telaga Batu (South  Sumatra)  15 — 46 
Introduction 15 
Transcription 32 
Translation 36 
III. A Buddhist  text  engraved on gold  plates  . . . .47 —167 
Introduction ... 47 
Transcription 107 
Translation • 124 
IV. A gold  plate  with vajra and  short  inscriptions . . . 168 — 170 
V. A gold  plate  from  Tjaṇḍi  Plaosan 170 — 172 
VI. A small gold  plate  from  Tjaṇḍi  Idjo 172 —175 
VII. The  Pre-Nāgarī  inscription from  Tjaṇḍi  Plaosan . . 175 — 206 
Introduction l?- 1 
Transcription 192 
Translation 197 
VIII.  An inscribed  plate  from Bukatedja (Purbalingga, Central 
Java)  207-211 
IX. (a-b).  Two inscriptions from  Tjaṇḍi  Perot (850) . . . 211 — 243 
Introduction 211 
Transcription 231 
Translation 236 


--- [Page 6] ---
X. (a-c) . Three  Sanskrit inscriptions from the Ratubaka Plateau 244 — 279 
Introduction . . ' 244 
Transcription of a 269 
Translation of a 270 
Transcription of b  ......  - 273 
Translation of b 274 
Transcription of c 277 
Translation of c 278 
XL A metrical Old  Javanese  inscription  dated  856  A.D.  . . 280 — 330 
Introduction 280 
Transcription . 311 
Translation 316 
XII. An act of  judgment  dated  862  A.D.  ..... 330 — 337 
Addenda 338 — 343 
Index.  Words discussed in the  text's  and notes  .... 344 — 395 
a. Old  Malay  344 
b. Old  Javanese  353 
c. Sanskrit 372 


--- [Page 7] ---
INTRODUCTORY 
In editing  these  texts  I followed  the same  principles as in Prasasti In­
donesia I (1950), each  separate  text edition consisting of a, sometimes, lengthy, 
introduction,  transcription  with  foot notes, translation also  with  foot notes, 
with,  at the end, several indices. These different  parts  necessitate  a few 
remarks. 
(a) Introduction. In the introductions a definite order is preserved, viz. 
1st : site and time of discovery of the epigraph, its  state  of preservation, 
measurements, material etc.; 2nd : previous publications of or  with  ref­
erence  to the document; 3rd : script, spelling, language and, in the  case  of 
metrical  texts, metrics; 4th, various  aspects  of the meaning, historical, 
religious  or otherwise, of the text. 
(b) Transcription. To facilitate reading, metrical  texts  are printed in 
stanzas, but the ordinal numbers of the lines of the  original  document are 
added between  square  brackets.  Prose texts, however, are printed in lines 
as in the  original. 
If either side of a  stone  of metal document is inscribed the front is 
invariably  denoted by A, the back by B. If a text is engraved on a number 
of metal plates, the plates are denoted by small Roman letters, wheieas 
Arabic  ciphers are reserved to indicate the lines of the inscription. Thus, 
III, c-A-4  denotes  the 4th line of the front side of the third plate of inscrip­
tion No. III.  Small  Roman  letters  are also used for  separate  inscriptions 
going  under the  same  number, whereas the italics frum a to d refer to the 
pādas  of a strophe. 
Italics  in the transcription  denote  uncertain reading. Deletions are mark­
ed by square, additions by pointed, brackets.  Usually,  however, I also added 
a note  in such  cases  in order to make clear what exactly is  visible  on the 
stone. 
A lacuna at the beginning of the line is indicated by ], at the end of 
the line by [. Lacunae in the middle of the line are indicated by points the 
number of  which  is based upon my estimation of the length of the lacuna. 
In metrical texts, however, the  prosodie  scheme of the missing syllables is 
filled  in (viz. — for a  long,  `->  for a short, v— / for either long or short, and 
w� for either one long or two short syllables). 
Words  are separated in the way usual in transliterated texts. If word 
separation is made between the elements of a consonantal ligature, the = 
mark is used. However, I omitted the use of = in the  case  of vowel  con­
traction,  since it makes the text awkward to read. If no such mark is used 


--- [Page 8] ---
after a  final  consonant, it  follows  that  the  original  has a consonant  with 
virāma. 
Marks  of punctuation  follow  the original  as closely as possible. A daṇḍa 
is rendered by /, a double daṇḍa by /'/. In metrical texts, /  denotes  the end 
of the first ardha, twice //  with  a cipher between the end of the stanza. 
Capitals  are limited  to the beginning of strophes. 
Both  in Sanskrit and in Old  Malay  texts  the anusvāra  is rendered by 
ṃ, in Old Javanese, however, by ng, whereas the velar nasal is always trans­
cribed  by ri. I am  fully  aware  that  there  is something inconsistent in this 
mode of transliteration. It is, however, essential  that  the transcription should 
show whether an aksara iia or an  anusvāra  was used in the  original  (espe­
cially  because  there  is sometimes a  possibility  that  one might render something 
which  is only an accidental tiny hole in the stone), whereas it is, on the other 
hand, wise to keep as close to the usual methods of transliteration as possi­
ble. This is mainly why I maintained ng in Old Javanese. 
The mark for vocalic r is rendered by r in Sanskrit, but by re in Old 
Javanese, again according to the usual practice. 
Notes are added to the transcription in any  case  of doubt as to the 
correct reading, word separation etc. Conjectural readings, too uncertain 
to be printed in the  texts  even in  italics,  are referred to in the notes. As a 
rule,  notes  are copious, partly in order to compensate for the lack of photo­
graphs. 
(c) Translation. Translations of prose  texts  are divided  into paragraphs 
on account of the subject  matter,  but the numbers of the  original  lines are 
put in between brackets. It is not. of course, possible to translate line for 
line of the transliterated text since it is impossible to maintain the order 
of words of the  original  in the translation ; numberixig of lines in trans­
lations  agrees  only approximately  with  that  of the transliterated  texts  ; it 
only serves the practical purpose of facilitating the comparison  with  the 
transcriptions.  Metrical  texts  are translated by  stanzas  ; it appeared super­
fluous to add also the  original  line numbers in  that  case. 
Translation  of Old  Malay  and Old Javanese epigraphic  texts  still  poses 
enormous  difficulties,  especially, though not exclusively, on account of the 
numerous technical  terms  to denote  functions, different kinds of taxes, tra­
ditional  definitions of crimes etc. Such difficulties are further increased 
owing  to uncertain readings and lacunae. The type of language is  official 
and, usually,  rather  archaic. Old Javanese literary  texts  are not only dated 
centuries later (with one or two possible exceptions), but they also deal 
with completely  different  matters.  In addition,  critically  edited and trans­
lated  texts  are still  few in number. What is especially needed is the  publi­
cation  of more Old Javanese prose  texts  (such as  dharmaçāstras) . 
In order to make the materials accessible to  others  as well  as Old Ja­
vanese experts and Buddhologists I had to go further in translating than is 
usual in most of the former publications. As a  matter  of fact, I translated 


--- [Page 9] ---
as much as possible in order to  avoid  that  kind  of translation  which  keeps 
all the more  difficult  terms in their  original  forms. Whenever  there  existed 
an acceptable, though by no means precise, equivalent term in  English,  I 
adopted it, if necessary,  with  a point of interrogation. The relative degree 
of certainty  follows  from  the notes. As a matter of  principle,  the more 
important problems of interpretation are discussed in the introductions, 
whereas the details  which  are not essential for the interpretation of the text 
as a whole are referred to in the  notes  to the translations. 
In No. Ill and elsewhere, I had translations of Buddhist technical terms 
printed  with  initial  capitals in order to mark those words as mere conven­
tional  substitutes.  Thij  method, used especially by  Sylvain  Lévi  (e.g. in his 
translation of the  Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra) , has the advantage of  yielding  a 
translation  which  is not half­Sanskrit,  while  it shows at the same time  that 
the translated terms are nothing but substitutes having  only  a part of the 
connotations of the terms. 
Almost  all of the translations  from  Old Javanese hitherto published were 
in Dutch;  so I had almost always to refer to Dutch publications in the  notes 
to the translations. In order to facilitate the study of the documents for 
those who are unable to read or to procure themselves those publications, 
I thought it advisable to render the opinions and arguments of previous 
scholars  with  far greater detail than I should have done in a Dutch  publi­
cation,  where mere references  would  often have been largely sufficient. 
On the other hand, I intended the Prasasti Indonesia publications in the 
first place for Indonesian  readers  not specialised in epigraphic studies, espe­
cially  in order to arouse a greater interest in historical research.  Both  factors 
together are an apology for the considerable length of introductions and 
notes  to the translations 
(d) Indexes.  In order  tc` assist  readers  to find  their way in the materials 
scattered in  notes  and introductions I added  three  Indexes. References in 
the indexes are as  brief  as possible, but they seem  sufficiently  clear and 
need no further comment. 
These are the main considerations  which  determined the peculiar  form 
of this publication, I sincerely hope  that  the readers  will  not  spare  their 
remarks,  which  will  only  help to ameliorate the value of future publications 
in this series. 


--- [Page 10] ---


--- [Page 11] ---
I. FIVE  FRAGMENTARY  INSCRIPTIONS  OF  SOUTH  SUMATRA 
In addition to the  well­known  inscriptions of  Këdukan  Bukit  and of 
Talang  Tuwo 1), the town of Palembang (South Sumatra) and environs has 
yielded  a considerable number of smaller  stone  inscriptions. Except for the 
large  stone  inscription of  Télaga  Batu,  which  will  be discussed separately 2), 
these  texts  are either very short or fragmentary. Nevertheless, some of them 
might  furnish important additional information as to the earliest history of 
the empire of  Çrīvijaya. 
Some  of these  inscriptions were conveyed to the Djakarta Museum and 
of these  brief  descriptions have been published among the acquisitions 3). 
Other  stones,  however, remained at Palembang 4). 
Most  of the short inscriptions consist of the word  siddhayātra,  either 
alone (e.g. No. D. 157) 5), or preceded by iaya­ (D. 156 and 159), or even 
preceded by jaya­ and  followed  by sarvvasatvah (D. 158) or by sarvvasatva 
CD. 160). 
The exact meaning of  siddhayātra  has given rise to discussions. 
Cœdès,  taking  the word as a synonym of  siddhiyātra,  described its 
meaning as "un voyage ou un pelerinage dont on revient  doué  de pouvoirs 
surnaturels” 6), with  a reference to the inscription of  Nhan­Biêu,  where the 
same  meaning  appears  to be required by the context. The expression manambil 
!) G.  Oœdes,  Les  inscriptions malaises de  Çrtvijaya,  B.E.F.E.O.,  30 (1930), pp. 29 — 30, 
where all previous literature is mentioned. — Important later contributions are  : R.A. 
Kern,  Bijdr. K.I., 88 (1931), pp. 508­513; G. Ferrand, Quatre  textes  épigraphiques 
malayo­Sanskrits de Sumatra et de Banka, Journ. As.,  CCXXI  (1932), up.  271–326  ; 
J.W.J.  Wellan,  Çrlvijaya,  1250  jaren  geleden  gesticht  (i.e.  Çrīvijaya,  founded 1250 
years  ago).  Tijdschr. Kon. Aaidr. Gen.,  51 (1934), pp. 348 (including the reduction 
of the precise  dates  of the Kedukan  Bukit  and Talang Tuwo inscriptions by  W.  E. 
van Wijk)  : Cœdès,  B.E.F.E.O.,  33 (1933), pp. 10O2­7 (discussion of the interpretations 
by R.A.  Kern,  Ferrand and Wellan) ; B. Ch. Chhabra, Expansion oi  Indo­ Aryan 
Culture  during  Paílava  Rule, J.A.S.B.,  Letters,  I (1935), pp. 28­31 ; F.M. Schnitger. 
Oudheidkundige vondsten te  Palembang (i.e. Archaeological discoveries in Palem¬
bang), 4  vols.  (1935­36), especially the 2nd volume composed by Stutterheirn; F.M, 
schnitger. The Archaeology oí Hindoo Sumatra (1937), pp. 1­4; Nilakanta Sastri. 
J.G.I.S.,  IV (1937), pp. 128 sq.;  Krom,  Oudheden  van Palembang.  Meded.  K.A.W., 
N.R.,  I, No. 7 (1938), pp. 397­423; V. Obdeyn,  Volk  en Taal der  oude  Maleise 
Rijken  (People and Language of the oldest  Malay  Empires), Tijdschr.  Kon.  Aardr. 
Gen., 60 (1943), pp. 706­723 ; Ng. Poerbatjaraka, Riwajat Indonesia (1952), 
pp. 33­42. 
2) Inira, No. II. 
3) Jaarboek  B. G., 3 (1936), p. 198 sq. 
4) Infra, inscription a and most of the  siddhayātra–stones. 
5) The numbers preceded by D always refer to the Djakarta Museum. 
­) Art cit., p. 53. 


--- [Page 12] ---
siddhayātra,  occurring in line 3 of the inscription of  Kĕdukan  Bukit,  was 
translated by the  same  scholar as "(pour)  aller  chercher de la puissance 
magique” 7). R.  A. Kern,  very appropriately, compared the modern Sundanese 
expression rialap  bërkat  s). A different interpretation was proposed by 
Chhabra  9), but Nilakanta Sastri 10) and  Krorn  11) confirmed the  view 
ol Cœdès.  — It might be of interest to refer the  reader  to a  passage  in 
an Old Javanese inscription to be edited below, though the text  seems  to 
be rather  obscure  there  12). Anyhow,  it appears  that  siddhayātra  is used 
with  reference to merchants and several kinds of birds coming from a long 
distance to a tirtha, presumably to acquire supernatural forces. 
Besides  the  siddhayātra  stones,  there  remain  still  five  fragmentary 
inscriptions  not yet discussed in detail. Palaeographically, they clearly belong 
to the  same  period as the dated inscriptions of  Kĕdukan  Bukit,  Talang Tuwo 
and Kotakapur, I.e. end of the 7th  (perhaps  first  half  of the 8th) century 
A. D. 13), and must be assigned to the first period of the empire of  Çrīvijaya. 
a 
The first fragment to be discussed has the  following  measurements  : 
height 56 em, breadth 17 cm (average). It was discovered in 1928 during the 
construction of a road in the neighbourhood of a  hill,  called  Bukit  Sĕguntang, 
at a few miles' distance to the west of the town of Palembang 14). The 
fragment forms the left  part  of a presumably extensive  stone  inscription 
7) Arr. cit., p. 34. CI. also the  same  scholar in  B.E.F.E.O.,  33 (1934), pp.  1OO2­7. 
8) Bijdr. K.I., 88 (1931), p. 511. 9) Op. cit., pp. 19 sq. and p. 29. 
1­) Art. cit, pp. 128 sqq. n) Oudheden  van Pc!embang, p. 9; cf.  Geschiedenis,  p. 121. 
12) Infra, No. XI, strophe 22. — As to the  strange  combination of merchants, herons, 
cows and  haṃsas,  it is noted  that  the  three  kinds of birds mentioned an belong to 
the group of migratory birds. In addition, they have some connection  with  water. 
As far as crows are ccacerned, reference may be made to the Sanskrit expression 
ttrthakáka.  The merchants, of course, are “migratory men". In the  Kedali  inscription, 
discussed by Chhabra, the term  siddhayātra  occurs in connection  with  die merchant 
(mahānāvika)  Buddhagupta, and the  tales  of the  Kathāsaritsāgara,  quoted by Chhabra, 
also refer to voyages oversea. 
13) Stutterheim in his description of  these  stones  (Jaarboek  B. G., 3, 1936, pp. 198 sq.) 
uses sometimes the term  „late Palíava  script", mostly however  „Old  Javanese  script’’. 
Especially  the latter term might be misleading, as it  suggests  a relation  with  Java 
later than the  Tjaṅgal  inscription. Apart from minor differences (which sometimes 
occur  in one and the  same  text, such as the single and the double­stroked ra, both 
of which  are used in the Talang Tuwo inscription), they all clearly  represent  the 
same  type of script,  which  seems  a little more archaic than the type used in the 
Tjaṅgal  inscription. 
14) Oudh. VersL, 1928, p. 101. CI. also Annual  Bibf.  I. A., 1931, p. 29. —  According  to 
local  tradition, the low  hill  of Bukit  Seguntang is closely connected  with  the empire 
of Çrivijaya.  In addition, the  Malay  annals  Sëjarah  Malaya consider the  same  hill 
as the place of  origin  of the kings of  Malacca.  For  these  and other traditions we 
refer the  reader  to the article by L. C.  Westenenk, Uit het  land van Bittertong  (Zuid­
Soematra),  Djáwá,  I (1921), pp. 5—11, to  which  also  a map of the Palembang region 
is added. 


--- [Page 13] ---
and contains the  initial  portions of 21 lines of script. The remaining portion, 
probably  much larger than the existing fragment, has not been recovered. 
As far as we know,  only  Chhabra (with the help of Van Ronkel) made 
a study of the inscription 15), evidently without sufficient material at his 
disposal.  Nevertheless, he succeeded in reading some Sanskrit words occurring 
in the text and, besides, rightly concluded  that  the text was composed in 
Old Malay.  It did not prove to be correct, however,  that  an illness of the 
prince  is mentioned in the epigraph. The good  estampage  at our disposal 
allows  for the reading of almost the whole text on the fragment. As, how­
ever,  only  the  initial  words of the lines have been preserved, the result 
remains  rather  unsatisfactory. There are, however, sufficient interesting 
points to justify publication. 
As Chhabra already pointed out, the type of script corresponds closely 
to that  used in the dated  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions of the end of the 7th century 
A. D. The text must undoubtedly be assigned to the  same  period. The  only 
point  worthy of  note  is the  form  of the  akṣara  ra‚ written everywhere else 
with  two strokes, but in one word (muara,  line  16)  with  a single stroke. 
Both  the single­ and the double­stroked  form  occur in the Talang Tuwo 
inscription,  whereas the Kotakapur inscription (and, e.g., the  Tjaṅgal 
inscription  from  Central Java)  only  uses  the double  form.  It seems  that 
during  some time both forms  could  be used side by side. 
As noted before, the text is entirely composed in the Old  Malay  language. 
The dialect shows the  same  peculiarities as the other  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions. 
Thus,  the prefix mar­ is used instead of the common  Malay  her­ (e.g. in 
marsvastha,  line  8), and ni­ instead of di­ (e.g. in  nikāryyākan,  line  19) ltí). 
As possessive suffixes we  fLid  ­ñi and  ­(n)da,  the latter being the  hoíiorific 
equivalent of the former 1T). As a rule, a  final  vowel  of the root is lengthened 
if these  suffixes are added aS). Finally,  we note  the occurrence of the word 
parāvis, meaning  „all”  líj), of danan,  „companion",  but churn,  „with"  ­ 0), 
and of the remarkable orthography raijya, presumably for ra}ya (line 8). 
­­) Expansion of  Indo­ Aryan Culture (1935), p. 31. 
10) The prefixes mar­ and ni­ both occur in the Batak language (Northern Sumatra) and 
in some other places; cf. van  Ronkel,  Ada Orient., II (1924), pp. 14 sqq. On the 
other hand, the Old  Malay  inscription of Gandasuli (Central Java)  uses  the prefixes 
war­ (corresponding to modern  Malay  bër­)  and di­ ; cf. Pras.  Indon.,  I (1950), pp. 54 sqq. 
17) The  form  ­nda is used after vowels, ­da after consonants ; it is remarkable  that  these 
are almost the  only  examples of the use of  lingual  consonants in words  which  are not 
of Sanskrit  origin. 
18) CI.  maryyādānda  (line 2) and  makāryyāña  (line 4). As  appears  from  these  examples, 
Sanskrit  words are not excepted. 
19) As to the meaning of par  avis,  cí. Cœdès,  art. cit, pp. 72 sq. 
20) CI.  dañan  (line 5) at the beginning of a new  sentence  (therefore it  does  not  appear 
to be a preposition), but  dnan  (line 21), meaning  „with". 
It is, however, probable  that  this difference was not always made; cf.  line  12 of 
inscription  II (infra), where  danan  is used in the meaning of  dñan.  Most  probably, 
the latter is nothing but the  enclitic  form  or an orthographic variant of the former ; 
cI. the  soelling  mariapas, infra,  note  50. 


--- [Page 14] ---
Although  it is impossible to give a regular translation of this very 
lacunary text, it  seems  that  the main purport of the inscription is not 
doubtful.  The loss of the major  part  of the text is to be regretted. 
Several  passages  refer to battles. In line 10 the words  tīda  tahu  pira 
marvyū(ha),  „it is not known how many were drawn up in battle array”, 
seem to refer to the forces of the (internal or external) enemy. Another 
passage  (line 5),  vañak  pramirahña,  ‚‚much  was their blood (shed)'’, may 
refer to the losses either of the enemy or of the army of  Çrīvijaya.  The 
word  pauravirakta,  ‚‚red  with  (the blood of) the citizens”, referring to either 
the soil  or the big river (Sungai  Musi)  of Çrīvijaya,  might point to heavy 
losses of the  Çrīvijaya  army, too. The words  mamañcak  yam  prajā  ini (line 13) 
may refer to fighting  itself  or, more probably, to a victory dance [cf. modern 
Malay  mĕmĕñcak  for a  kind  of sword­dance  with  an imaginary opponent 
and the  well­known  Balinese  péñcak,  a martial dance]. This word  mamañcak 
does  not seem to be related to  mañcak,  which  occurs twice in the inscription 
of Talang Tuwo 21). 
The last lines of the text  appear  to contain a curse directed against 
possible malefactors, such as  those  guilty of (prohibited) love, anger and 
greed (line 15 :  kāma  krodha lobha,  three  well­known  kleças)  : they  will  be 
swallowed  by the river  (prajā  ini muara ya  umamgap).  At the very end 
(line  20),  there  is mention of women who might make their husbands crazy 22). 
Similar  passages  occur also in the inscriptions of Kotakapur 23) and of 
Télaga  Batu 24). The end of the inscription might be a sort of epilogue 
warning  any future insurgents. 
Transcription 
1. //  çrī yā‚.  25) //  parddātva 
2. ña maryyādāṇḍa  dari  
21) In lines 5 and 12. — As  Cœdès  pointed out (art. cit., p. 74), the meaning inquired 
by the context and supported by etymology, is  "full". 
22) Makahiit dam  svāmi.  —  Svāmi  (Sanskrit  svāmin)  also  means  "lord".  Therefore, the 
passage  might as  well  refer to slaves who make their  lord  crazy. The loss of the 
context makes it impossible to decide  which  of the alternatives is to be preferred. 
23) Line  11. — The spelling  makalah.it  in the Kotakapur inscription, as compared to 
makalhit of our text, offers a parallel to  dañan  and  dñan,  note  20). 
2*} Lines  8 and 13. * t f 
25) The aksara  following  yā‚  which  is not distinct,  seems  to be na. This  would  however 
be a  strange  beginning of an inscription. 
26) The length of the lacunae at the end of the lines cannot be estimated  with  any  degree 
of probability, but it is evident  that  there  is an extensive portion missing. The number 
of the points in the transcription is therefore arbitrary. — The last word is probably 
to be completed as  parddātvan,  "province of a  datvt*  (or: "office of a  dātu"  ?). The 
meaning of the term is probably different from  that  of kadatuan in No. II; the latter 
seems  to mean "royal palace, empire"  there. 
27> After  dari, the next sign is  still  partly  visible;  it seems  to be a ligature the  low« 
part of which  is a dít. 26) 
27) 


--- [Page 15] ---
3. dyata 28) jádi  anakda  valuṃ  uraṃ  
4. ...  mā ini makāryyāña  ta 
5. vañak  = pramiraḥña  . daṅan  
6. cúrikāṅku  29) jādi  vyasta dari so)  
7. mira  mana 31) parāvis  // 0 //  da  
8. marsvastha di iya raijya 32) pra  
9. pauravirakta  nitāpik  ma  
10. tīda tāhu  pira  marvyū<ha>  
11. bharu nirbhāra 33) nitāpik  parwā<ṇḍa>  M) 
12. risir = nibharu lpas 33) yaṃ rnati  
13. rnarnañcak  yaṃ  prajā  ini  
14. saṃkṣepa dua  tāṇḍa  sanyā<sa>  30)  
15. kan pasaṃ  kāma  krodha lo<bha> 37)  
16. <pra>jā  ini muara ya umaṃgap 3S)  
17. yan =  tīda  nariyāt = saṅkaṭe 3i,)  
18. hat  40) apa ta krama  amithyā  41)  
19. ṇḍa nikāryyākan  sida Hlu 42)  
2S) Other possibilities are  nyaka  or nyata. 
20) Evidently  for  chūrikāṅku,  "my  knife".  — One is  inclined  to conclude  that  the  king 
(if, at least, the first person refers to the  king  as seems  to be the case in the other 
Çrīvijaya  inscriptions) took part in the battle. 
S0) These words might mean: "they (the enemy) became isolated  from"  (their allies ?). 
33) Presumably to be separated in this way. The first word might be the end of timira; 
the two  following  words  could  perhaps mean: "everywhere". In  that  case, this portion 
of the inscription  ends  in: "(it became ?) dark everywhere’’. 
32) We referred to this  strange  spe!Hng of  rājya  (?) in the Introduction. 
"3) These words, if correctly transcribed, might mean  : "lord(s) without a charge (function)", 
but bh*­ru  is archaic in this meaning. The text might refer to the tactics of  Çrīvijaya, 
which  consisted in isolating the enemy commanders  from  their troops. 
34) Nitāpik parvānda  might mean: "(the commanders, isolated  from  their troops) were 
punished  by the  parvāṇdas" ; Jie latter term  seems  to be the title of rather high 
officials  in Çrīvijaya,  though lower in rank than a data; cf. infra, No. II, note 10 to 
the Introduction and note 83 to the translation. 
3r,) Except for the two last words, the reading of this  line  is rather uncertain. 
3C) Sanyāsa  (cf. Sanskrit  samnyāsa)  is rather often found in the  Crīvijaya  inscriptions, 
where it is used in the meaning "charged  with’';  cf. the Introduction to No. II. Does 
tānda  mean  "officer"  here, as is often the case in Old Javanese ? In  that  case, the 
meaning of this  line  would  be : "in brief, two officers were charged  with 
3T) As noted above, most of this  line  has already been read by B. Ch. Chhabra. 
3f!) The completion to  prajā  seems  evident. —  About  the  passage  itself,  which  seems  to 
be a sort of curse, cf. the Introduction. 
s9) Owing  to damage, the reading of this  line  is uncertain. 
40) This  syllable might constitute the end of  nipāhat,  "was engraved". We  find  the same 
term in the last  line  of the Kotakapur inscription. 
­1) The beginning of  amithyávāda  or  amithyācāra  ? — The compounds  with  mithya are 
very  common in Buddhism  (mithyádṛṣṭi,  mithyājñāna  etc.), but their opposites are almost 
always  replaced by compounds  with  samyag­  (samyagdṛṣṭi  etc.). 
–­•) Whereas  nikāryyākan  is perfectly clear, the  following  words appear to be rather strange. 
Sida occurs in the  Gaṇḍasuli  inscription as a particle used for introducing names of 


--- [Page 16] ---
20. makalṅit = daṃ  svāmi  maka ya  lṅit  daṃ 
21. trāṅku  4S) dṅan yaṃ uraṃ  pradhāna  
b 
The next fragment  appears  in its  present  state  as an irregular block 
of hardened clay of which only the front side has been smoothed in order 
to engrave the  akṣaras  of the inscription.  Owing  to its irregular form, only 
its average  dimensions can be given; they amount to 45 cm in length and 
31 cm in height. It was discovered at a place called  Tĕlaga  Batu  ("Stone 
Pond”),  kampung Sabukingking, 2  Ilir,  in the  eastern  part  of the town of 
Palembang', and was taken from  there  to the Djakarta Museum in 1936 
(No. D. 162) 44). 
The inscription consists of  three  very fragmentary lines of Pallava script, 
which  seem to form only a slight portion of a lengthy  text. 
The script  agrees  in every detail with  No. a above,  thus  making it probable 
that this fragment should also be assigned to  about  the end of the 7th 
century  A. D. and to the empire of  Çrivṇaya.  The only ra occurring in the 
text is written with a single stroke. 
The inscription, unlike most of the epigraphic documents known to 
belong to the  Çrīvijaya  empire, is written in Sanskrit 45). It is moreover 
undoubtedly metrical; in line 2 a portion of an  Anuṣṭubh  and in line 3 a 
part of a  Çārdūlavikrīḍita  may be recognized. The text presumably contains 
the poor remains of a lengthy  praçasti  issued on the occasion of a victory 
of the  king  of Çrīvijaya  over an army of revolting  subjects  (line 2  : netā 
maddāsasenāyāh,  „commander  of an army of my slaves”). — The inscription 
seems  to be composed in a personal style, as if it is pronounced by the ting 
himself.  This  appears  still  more clearly from line 3, where the  king,  as a 
result of considerations which must have been contained in the lacuna 
(iti vyatarkyata  maya),  concludes  that  the enemy army  (sā,  viz.  senā)  must 
be destroyed  (varjanīyā,  if correctly completed) 4C). Here It is perfectly 
clear  that  fighting took place with internal insurgents, not with an enemy 
from without. The extensive insular empire of  Çrīvijaya,  as we know it 
apparently high­class people  (vide  Pras.  1ndon.,  I, 1950, p. 52). Dr Goris informed 
me that  sida occurs in the  same  meaning also in Old  Balinese  inscriptions. Therefore, 
it seems  rather  improbable  that  this word should be related to Sanskrit siddha,  like 
we conjectured. — Sida Lilu might be the title and  name  of the person by whom was 
made  (nikāryyākan)  something which, owing to the lacuna, is unknown. 
––) Possibly,  °tranku  is the end of  znitrānku,  "my friends". 
4­) Jaarboek  B. G., 3 (1936), p. 199. 
45) Agreeing in this  respect,  however, with the large  stone  inscription of  Ligor  and with 
the inscription fragments c and (probably) d below. 
4(') Another possible interpretation of  var/anīyā  would be "has to be avoided, shunned". 
In that  ease,  the king  would avoid an open fight against too strong forces and use 
other  means  to beat  them. 


--- [Page 17] ---
from  the 8th century onwards especially  from  the Chinese and  Arabic 
accounts, must have struggled  with  much internal resistance before being 
consolidated. The imprecations  which  fill  up almost the entire texts of  Kota¬
kapur, Karangbrahi and  Tĕlaga  Batu (infra No. II) form together more than 
half of the epigraphical remains of  Çrīvijaya  ; they seem to be mainly, if 
not exclusively,  directed against internal foes. The fragments a and b are 
of special interest, because they prove  that  internal struggles did really 
take place, at least during the  initial  period of the empire. 
Transcription 
1. ]rn=<p>ṛth<i>vyāḥ patibhiḥ  pañcatvaṃ[  47) 
2. ]rīṣadaḥ  netā  maddāsasenāyāḥ  pratyala[ 4S) 
3. ]rvva iti vyatarkyata  rnayā  sā varja<nīyā>[ 
47) The first  line  of this fragment suffered at several spots; the transcription  seems 
however certain. In  prthivyāh,  both the first consonant and the  vowel  sign of the íha 
have disappeared, but the  rest  of it being certain, the reading of this word is not 
doubtful.  There is a curious problem about the metre of this passage; we see  only 
one possibility,  viz. a  vipulā  an uneven  pāda  of which  ends  after patibhih.  vipulās 
of the metrical scheme — —  `­— ­— ^ — are by no means rare ; they not 
only occur in the  Epics,  but also in the poems by  Açvaghoṣa  (cf. E. H. Johnston, 
The Buddhacarita, Part II, 1936, Introduction, p. lxv, No. 4 of the lists  there  given). 
If this presumption is correct, we know  that  there  are two syllables missing at the 
beginning  of the pida ending in patibhih. The next  pāda,  beginning  with  pañcatvaṃ, 
is then a second or fourth one of the strophe, so  that  the missing portion of it 
consists of  five  syllables tne metrical structure of  which  is known. We then get the 
following  reconstruction of the two  nādas  : 
^=^ — m= prthivyāh  patibhiḥ  pañcatvaṃ  —  — ` ::­=n / 
This  portion shows some peculiarities worthy of note.  First  of all,  there  is the use 
of pañcatva,  "fivefoldness",  which  is almost always used for denoting the dissolution 
cf the  individual  into its  five  elements of earth, water,  fire,  wind  and empty space 
(ákáça,  together the  pañca  mahābhūtānl),  i.e. death. The examples given in the Pet. 
Diet, show  that  the term usually occurs together  with  words meaning either  „going  to’’ 
or „bringing  to". If we notice the fact  that  the three  words  which  can be read all begin 
with  a p, then  there  is some reason to suppose  that  the last word of the  pāda  was 
pratipáditah.  Considering  that  in line  3 the  king  or, possibly, another person  bases 
his action on a thought  which  is quoted, we suppose  that  the words to be read in 
the first  line  should be interpreted in a  similar  way. Then the  king  says to  himself 
that old examples show  that  insurgents “were brought to  grief  by the (real) lords 
of the earth" (presumably, because they acted adharmena), so  that  now when an 
insurgent leads "an army consisting of the king's proper slaves" up against him, he 
need not refrain  from  action, for it is certain (on account of other considerations) 
that the insurgents  will  be wiped out.  This  seems  to be the  only  reasonable way of 
connecting  the different fragments; it makes us conclude  that  the text refers to a 
very  serious episode in the oldest history of  Çrīvijaya.  Obviously,  the menacing tone 
of the inscriptions of Kotakapur and Telaga  Batu  (No. II below) aimed at avoiding 
episodes  like  this one in the future. 
ls) The first word of this  line  is undoubtedly to be completed to  parīsadah  (,,of the 
assembly’’);  very probably, pratyala­ should be completed to pratyalabdha  („took, 
obtained’’).  As to the last  line,  cf. the Introduction and note 46 above. 


--- [Page 18] ---
— 8 — 
c 
The third  fragment, at present No. D. 163 in the Djakarta  Museum, 
was discovered at the same place and at the same time as 6. It is  likewise 
an irregular  block  of hardened  clay  ; its average dimensions amount to 37 cm 
in length and 24 cm in height 49). 
As, in addition,  other features  like script, language and  metrical  structure 
seem to correspond as  well,  it is not  impossible  that  b and c are two fragments 
of a single  inscription;  in that  case, however, the two fragments did 
not belong to the same part of the  original  stone, for they cannot be 
joined. 
Fragment  c contains parts of four lines of script. Shape and 
size of the  akṣaras  correspond in every detail  with  inscription  b. 
The inscription  on this fragment, too, is composed in  metrical  Sanskrit. 
In the  first  two  lines,  its metre can he  identified  as Sragdharā,  in lines 
3 and 4 as  Çārdūlavikrīḍita. 
Here,  too,  fighting  is alluded  to. In  line 2, a troop of enemies (ripuganam) 
is mentioned; presumably, the latter either  fled  or surrendered (this is not 
expressed in the preserved portion)  „at the approach of my  army’’  (madvale 
praviste ; the latter term may refer to entering the  walls  of a fortress, but 
this is not necessarily the case) ; as in  inscription  b, the text is as it were 
pronounced  by the  king  himself. 
In the first  line  of this fragment, the four  long  syllables  tatsaptamyām 
constitute the beginning of a second or fourth  Sragdharā pāda  (not of a 
first or third  pāda,  since in  that  case  there  would  have been a  daṇḍa  before 
tatsaptamyām). ; the  three  syllables  tyamuñcat,  to be completed to 
pratyamuñcat,  then constitute the end of a  first  or third  pāda ; after 
tatsaptamyām,  the  syllables  ala, the second of  which  must have been  followed 
by more than one consonant, are undoubtedly to be completed to alabdha 
(followed  by two consonants again) ; it is noted  that  the  word  following 
tatsaptamyām  necessarily was  trisyllabic,  for the  Sragdharā  has a caesura 
after each seventh  syllable. 
This  metrical  analysis makes it very probable  that  in the  first  line 
of this fragment two different events were mentioned, the  first  of these 
indicated  by pratyamuñcat,  the second by alabdha.  Evidently,  tatsaptamyām 
refers to the second event. As to  tatsaptamyām,  it does not seem doubtful 
that the  „seventh”  refers to a lunar day  (saptamyām  tithau). 
Now  it is very  striking  that  the same  date  saptam%  is mentioned in 
line 3 of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription;  this correspondence  would  hardly 
be worthy of note (it is just one chance out of fifteen), if  there  were not 
two other details in our text  which  appear to agree  with  the Kĕdukan  Bukit 
inscription.  The meaning of (pra)  tyamuñcat  in our text corresponds rather 
49) Jaarboek  B. G., 3 (1936), p. 199. 


--- [Page 19] ---
well with  that  of marlapas in  line 4 of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  stone 50), ála(bdha) 
with  mamāva  in line  5 of the latter. In  view  of these  correspondences it 
seems  almost certain  that  the first  line  of our fragment refers to the events 
about  which  the lines 3 to 8 of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription (the events 
of the second  date)  give us a  still  rather obscure account. Unfortunately, 
the very fragmentary  state  of our text makes it impossible to conclude how 
far the correspondence goes. As far as we are able to judge, no  military 
action  like  that  referred to in  line  2 of our fragment is mentioned in the 
Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription,  although the more than twenty thousand soldiers 
accompanying  the dapunta hiyam make it very probable  that  such action 
did take place 51). 
If our presumption of a close correspondence of the first  line  of our 
fragment  with  the events at the second  date  of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription 
is correct, we might arrive at a conclusion, unfortunately  only  negative, 
about the identity of the dapunta hiyam in the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription. 
If madvale in  line  2 refers to the king's army,  which  is very probable, 
then the text is issued by the  king  himself  ; the same is the case in the 
inscriptions  of Kotakapur, Karangbrahi and  Tĕlaga  Batu  (infra. No. II), 
where the  king  refers to  himself  by aku, ,,I”. But then it  follows  that  the 
third  person  (pra)tyamuñcat  (alabdha may of course be either first or 
third  person)  could  not refer to the  king.  Presumably,  (pra)tyamuñcat 
refers to the person who is the subject of marlapas in the  Kĕdukan  Bukit 
inscription.  I.e. the dapunta hiyam, but then it  follows  that  the latter, 
whatever his identity was, cannot be the same as the  king  of Çrīvijaya  52). 
50) G. Cœdès (art. cit., p. 35) translated marlapas by "se  Hbéra  de". As a matter of fact, 
the meaning of lepas corresponds as closely as possible to  that  of the Sanskrit, root muc; 
kalepasan is the exact equivalent of  moksa.  But how do the derivatives correspond? 
Pratyamuñcat  would  rather mean "liberated, set free", whereas marlepas is probably 
intransitive  (art. cit., p. 63, about the prefix mar­) ; on the other hand, mar­ has 
sometimes a clearly active meaning, e.~. in the frequently occurring  marvuat.  Although 
the exact meaning remains obscure, the equivalence of the two forms dcos not seem 
doubtful. 
51) N. J.  Krom  (quoted note 1 above) combined a very doubtful reading at the end of 
line 7 of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  epigraph  with  the  well­known  statement  by I­tsing about 
the country of  Malayu  and therefore concluded  that  a part of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit 
inscription  referred to an expedition against  Malayu;  although  there  is hardly any 
doubt  that  such an expedition did take place in about the same period,  there  are 
serious objections against the presumption  that  the fact should be mentioned in the 
Kĕdukan  Bukit  epigraph; cf. note 68 below. Others took the text to refer to the 
conquest of the Palembang region, where the capital of the empire was established. 
Neither  theory is satisfactory; since the fragments a and h seem to refer to an 
internal  revolt, it is possible  that  the same is the case in the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription 
(and our fragments c and e). 
52) As to the meaning of the title of (da)punta hiyam, cI.  Cœdès,  art. cit., p. 52, where 
some reserves are made. It cannot be doubtful  that  the Kotakapur inscription  emanates 
from  the  king  himself. But  there  (and in the Karangbrahi and  Tĕlaga  Batu  inscriptions), 
the term (da)punta  hiyaṃ  is not mentioned. As to the inscriptions of  Kĕdukan  Bukit 
and Talang  Tuwo,  not much may be concluded on general grounds; In  the`  Campese 


--- [Page 20] ---
— 10 — 
Although  the above does not appear to convey any substantial contribution 
to the solution of the main problems, it is not  devoid  of interest in as far as 
it draws attention to the brittleness of some of the conclusions hitherto 
accepted. 
The last two lines of our fragment seem to contain  only  laudatory 
verses addressed to the  victor.  It is mentioned  that  the rays of the sun 
are obscured (lit. :  „put  aside”) by the essence  (sāra)  of something  which 
is illegible,  while  at the end it seems  that,  as the  king  is away, the poet 
is obliged  to praise him during his absence (paroksam)  with  beautiful 
akṣaraš.  The next  word  candra suggests a  simile  in which  the poet's task 
of praising the  invisible  king  is compared to somebody  trying  to glorify 
the sun  during an eclipse 53). 
Transcription 
1. ]  tyamuñcat=tatsaptamyāni­­=ala  [ 
2. ] ṇaripugaṇam= mad  vale ye praviṣṭe  [ 
3. ] api ca //  mā—sāratiraskṛtārkkakiraṇāḥ  54) [ 
4. ] parokṣam=akṣaravaraiç=candrā  sr,) [ 
The next fragment was described by .Stutterheirn as ,,a stone, carved 
into the  form  of a wedge  with  smoothened, triangular front side" r,C). Its 
dimensions  are : length 13 cm. height 6 cm. The fragment was bought at 
the Bukit  Sĕguntang  to the west of the town of Palembang, South Sumatra. 
Afterwards  it was taken to Djakarta and placed in the  Museum  as No. D. 164. 
Close  examination proves  that  the wedge­form is not  original.  At the 
right  and under sides, traces of breaking are  visible,  thus making it probable 
inscription  quoted by  Cœdès  (p. 58) it is the  rājapurohita  who goes to Java in crder 
to acquire  siddhayātra.  for the empire. The  praṇidhāna  in the  Talang  Tuwo  inscription 
.might  have been pronounced by any distinguished person, provided  that  he be  suffi­
ciently  rich  to afford  the donation of a park, thus  following  the  illustrious  example 
of Anāthapiṇḍada.  — The title (da)punta hyang (also dapa  hyang)  occurs in Old 
Javanese inscriptions, where it is evident  that  it does not refer to the  king  (in O. J. O., 
XIX,  dated 891  A. D., a dapunta ramyah, a  dapu  hyang bharait and some others are 
granted some privileges, and numerous other examples may be added ;  these  and  similar 
titles  are frequent in the  Dieng  inscriptions). These Old Javanese examples may not 
be decisive for the interpretation of  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions, hut in any case they do not 
confirm  Cœdès’  interpretation of the  title;  this point deserves a detailed treatment. 
53) CI. the two notes  following. 
r»4) One  syllable,  metrically  long,  has almost disappeared. It might have been  yā. In that 
case, the beginning of this  Çārdūlavikrīḍita  strophe might be translated: "The rays of 
the sun,  concealed by the quintessence of  Illusion", 
55) Possibly  to be completed to:  candrāvrtam  bhásvaram  or something  similar. 
««) Jaarboek  B.O., 3  (1936),  p. 199. 


--- [Page 21] ---
— 11 — 
that the stone is  only  a left upper corner.  This  detail is not irrelevant, 
as it renders the interpretations of Stutterheim and Schnitger, who both took 
the inscription as a short, but complete text, very improbable. Stutterheim 
read the inscription as  çiksyaprajña  56), and was  followed  by Schnitger 57), 
who,  in addition, proposed as a translation :  „teachings,  words of  wisdom’’. 
The reading hitherto accepted does not seem quite correct. Besides, 
there  does not exist any Sanskrit  form  çiksya  having the supposed meaning. 
We presume  that  the stroke interpreted by Stutterheim as the ya after a 
consonant should be read as a  long  ­a. In the  Pallava  script, several varieties 
of the normal stroke for the  –ā appear to have been in use. As a rule, 
there  are obvious reasons 5S), but not rarely, it seems,  only  aesthetic 
considerations determined the use of some special variant. An exact parallel 
of the  form  occurring on this fragment is found, for instance, at the end 
of line  1 of the  Ligor  inscription (face A) 59), where  there  is no doubt 
that rnā,  not my a, is to be read. 
As to the last sign just before the break, the ligature  jña is perfectly 
clear,  but, in addition, we discern a distinct loop starting  from  the end of 
the middle horizontal stroke of the ja and running round the top of the 
akṣara.  This  is the usual way of expressing the  ­ā after ja. 
So we think  that  the reading should be corrected to  çiksāprajñā­,  forming 
the two  initial  terms of a compound. They probably once stood at the very 
beginning  of a perhaps extensive  praçasti.  The four  long  syllables might 
indicate  the use of the  Sragdharā  (or possibly,  Aryā  or Anuṣṭubh)  metre. 
Çiksā  and  prajñā  are two fundamental notions in  Mahāyāna  (and in some 
Hīnayāna  sects, too) : the first indicating the ordinary, mundane knowledge 
(including  the rules of  discipline),  which  iz acquired  from  others, the second 
the highest intuitive wisdom,  which,  in Mahāyāna,  is inseparable  from  the 
true vision  of the  Çūnyatā.  The two words together may have been used 
in an invocatory verse addressed to a perfect Buddha (or,  possibly,  to Mañjuçrī 
or Avalokiteçvara) . We can  only  hope  that  more fragments  will  be discovered. 
The last fragment to be discussed  here  was discovered at the same place 
as b and c above  (Tĕlaga  Batu) ; its dimensions are 33 cm in length and 
41 cm in height 60). Both  at the left and at the right hand side,  parts  of the 
stone are missing,  thus  leaving  only  the middle portion of the epigraph  with 
r‚7) Archaeology of Hindoo Sumatra  (1937),  p. 3. 
5g) Especially  in cases  where the use of the normal  form  would  involve  confusion, as is 
the case  with  pa and la  which,  with  the normal  ā­stroke,  would  be read as ha and na, 
respectively. 
5í*) Cf. the photograph published in the article by  Cœdès,  Le royaume de  Çrīvijaya, 
B.E.F.E.O.  18 (1918), PI. 1‚ and by Chhabra, op.  cit. t PI. 4. 
«0) Description by stutterheim in  Jaarboek  B.G., 3  (1936),  p. 199. 


--- [Page 22] ---
­12­
probably  eight lines of script in a badly weathered condition 61). The stone 
is at present in the Djakarta Museum (No, D. 161). 
Only  parts  of the text can be deciphered. As Stutterheim pointed out, 
at least a part of the text  agrees  with  the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription 62). 
Closer  examination, however, made it clear  that  this fragment contains an 
additional  passage  in the lines 7 and 8  which  does not correspond to anything 
in the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription. Besides, this fragment permits us to 
re­establish an important detail in the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription. At the 
end of  line  8 not  only  the final  n of vulan, but also the name of the month 
has been lost. Now, we read in  line  6 of our fragment the word  āsāda  just 
preceding  laghu mudita, the first words of  line  9 of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit 
epigraph.  So it  seems  certain  that  the lacuna at the end of  line  8 of the 
Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription contained just the  final  n of vulan and the name 
āsāda  (Āsādha). 
There is  still  a considerable amount of uncertainty as to the correct 
interpretation of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription  ; therefore, a  small  detail 
like this one might deserve attention.  Even  if it does not seem  that  it would 
allow  us to arrive at a definite solution of the main problems, it enables 
us to construct a sort of  „time  scheme’’ of the movements of the dapunta 
hiyam in the expired  Çaka­year  605. The result  would  be as  follows  : 
(a) At 11 quklapaksa of  Vaiçākha  : nāik  di sāmvau  ; 
(b) At 7  çuklapaksa  of  Jyaiṣṭha : marlĕpas  dari  mināna  ; 
(c) At 5 guklapaksa of  Aṣāḍha  : laghu mudita  dātam. 
If, as  seems  plausible enough,  these  dates  have been calculated according 
to the  Sūryasiddhānta  system  with  mean reckoning of the movements of 
sun and moon 63), the  three  months  would  follow  each other without 
adhirruLsa,  while  between the  dates  (a) and (b)  there  would  be one expunged 
tithi * 34). Then the distance in mean solar days between (a) and (b) amounts 
to 25, and between (b) and (c) to 28. 
61) Stutterheim  (loc.  cit.) mentions  only  seven lines of script ; this  would  not he impossible. 
It seems  to us, however,  that  above the first  line  in which  definite aksaras can be 
recognized  (line 3 of our transcription), two more lines  with  feeble  traces  of lettering 
may be discerned. Besides, two lines instead of one  would  better  agree  with  the 
length  of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription. 
62) Art. cit — In addition, Stutterheim gave the transcription of most of  line  5. 
63) W. E. van  Wijk,  in the article quoted in note 1 above, calculated the first two  dates 
on the same premises. 
64) With  the help of the  simplified  tables published by W. E. van  Wijk,  Redaction oi 
Hindu  Dates  from  the data of the  Sūryasiddhānta  (1938),  we  find  for the  Julian 
equivalent of True  Mmasaṃkranti  preceding the beginning of the  Çaka  year 605 the 
number of  49,362  days and for the distance to the first New  Moon  13,496  days. 
The 11th  tithi  of Vaiçakha  again begins  29,531  + 9,844  days later, totalling  102,233  days. 
The fraction  o,233  represents  about fifteen times the difference between a  tithi  and 
a mean solar day,  thus  denoting the expunction of a  tithi  about  half  a month later, 
in any  ease  between the  dates  (a) and (b). Then, of course,  there  cannot have been 
any expunged  tithi  between the  dates  (b) and (c). 


--- [Page 23] ---
— 13 — 
Might  these  dates,  the third of  which  was hitherto unknown, contribute 
to a solution of the mysterious movements of the dapunta hiyam ? — In 
view  of these  two periods, it is not probable  that  the inscription records a 
return journey  from  the capital of  Çrlvijaya  (if already situated in the 
neighbourhood  of the town of Palembang, as  seems  probable) to the estuary 
of the river  Musi,  since  that  journey  would  not take 28 days 65). Another 
point  which  is difficult  to understand in the case of a return journey is  that 
the dapunta hiyam  would  have taken his army  (mamāva  vala)  from  the 
place where he went in order to acquire  siddhayātra,  whatever  that  means. 
If the  possibility  of a return journey is excluded,  there  remain two other 
possibilities  : one single journey,  which  is in some way  interi  anted at the 
second  date,  or two different journeys starting at the  dates  (a) and (b) 
and the return  from  the latter of  these  at or before  date  (c). The  possibility 
of one throughout journey was suggested several times before 66) ; recently, 
Poerbatjaraka added new arguments to this conjecture 67) ‚ It seems  however 
difficult  to account for the fact  that  the dapunta hiyam  would  have begun 
his journey without an army to  join  his troops during  that  journey and 
twenty­five  days later.  This  does not seem probable. We rather suppose 
that the text records two different journeys at the  dates  (a) and (b) and 
a third event at  date  (c) ; this, in fact, is the interpretation given by  Cœdès. 
Then  we have : (a) a journey undertaken for the acquisition of  siddhayātra, 
(b) a  military  expedition, or, more exactly, a journey undertaken  with 
twenty thousand men, (c) some prosperous  arrival  (laghu mudita  dātam) 
followed  by the  „making”  (marvnat) of something unknown. There must 
have been a direct connection between  these  three  events. 
How  does this third  date  fit in  with  Krom's  hypothesis  that  the date 
(b) should lefer to an expedition to  Malayu  ? 68). It is obvious  that  it does 
not confirm  such an explanation ; twenty­eight days are rather a short period. 
65) This,  of course,  would  not exclude the  opinion  of R. A.  Kern,  who identified the 
enigmatic  Mināṅa  Tāmvan  (?)  witL  the mouth of the river  Musi  (Bijdr. K.L, 88, 
1931,  p. 510). Instead of  Cœdès’  reading  tāmvan,  the word has also been transcribed 
hamwar (van  Ronkel),  tāmhar  (Ferrand),  tamban  (Wellan); cf.  Cœdès,  B.E.F.E.O., 
33 (1933), p. 1007. 66) Especially  by V. Obdeyn, quoted in note 1 above. 
67) Quoted in note 1 above. Poerbatjaraka explains (pp. 34 sq.) the name  Mināáa Tāmvan 
as the place where two rivers meet.  Tāmvan  is explained as the equivalent of Old 
Javanese  temwan,  derived  from  the base  icmu, .‚to meet".  This  etymology is however 
in direct  conflict  with  the fact  that  the equivalent of Old Javanese  tĕmu  occurs six 
times in the inscription of Talang Tuwo (lines 4, 5‚ 9, 11, 13, and 14), but spelt 
tmu, thus  pointing to an  original  pepĕt.  The  long  ā of the name indicates however 
an original  a. It  seems  moreover doubtful whether  mināṅa  may be interpreted as 
"the confluence of two rivers" (presumably, in  that  case, of the Kampar  Kanan  and 
the Kampar  Kiri)  ; the data collected by R. A.  Kern  (art. cit., p. 510,  with  the  notes 
to that  page) seem rather to suggest the meaning "estuary" or "lower course" of a river. 
68) Quoted in note 1 above.  Krom's  reading of malayu at the end of  line  7 does not 
agree  very  well  with  the  traces  still  visible  on the  original  stone. As to the second 
aksara, it  seems  certain  that  the second and third verticals are connected at the upper 
side,  a feature  which  excludes la. The aksara is either a ta (as  Cœdès  read), or, 
more probably to our  opinion,  a ka. 


--- [Page 24] ---
— 14 — 
Our fragment contains an additional  passage,  which  is not found in 
the Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription  ; the words legible in the lines 7 and 8 do 
not correspond  with  anything in the latter. They seem to refer to a fourth 
event on a fourth  date  69). Since the reading of line 8 is relatively certain, 
we may conclude  that  either the foundation of, or the royal  visit  to, „this 
Vihāra  in this country’’ (vihdra ini di vanua ini) is mentioned. The twofold 
use of ini makes it probable  that  the Vihāra  was situated in the neighbourhood 
of Tĕlaga  Batu, where the fragment was discovered. F. M. Schnitger, in 
1935 and ’36, discovered only some  heaps  of bricks in  that  region 70). 
Our fragment is not an exact copy of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription. 
Presumably, the latter was engraved  after  date  (c) and this one at least eight 
months later. Probably, the fourth event was closely connected  with  the 
preceding  ones  so that  therefore the whole line of  events  was taken up again. 
This  might lead us to suppose  that  the foundation of, or the  visit  to, the 
Vihāra  was a direct consequence of the expedition  which  is presumably 
referred to in the  date  (b) ; it may have been the fulfilment of a vow made 
before the expedition. If such a vow  implied  the construction of a  Vihāra, 
the considerable lapse of time between the  dates  (c) and (d)  could  be 
accounted for. The  same  lapse of time might furnish an explanation for 
the fact  that  the whole string of  events  was taken up again. 
Although  this fragment, too, leaves us in the dark about the main 
problems connected  with  the foundation and the early history of  Çrīvijaya, 
it gives us a few details  which  might prove interesting. 
Transcription  71) 
3. ]ptamī  çuklapakṣa  imlan 
4. ]va 72) yaṃ  vala dua  lakṣa  
5. ] sapuluḥ  dua  vañakña  dātaṃ  di 
6. ] āṣāḍa  7S) laghu mudita  dātaṃ  
60) We read  varṣā  at the end of the  line.  The  t```o  preceding aksaras,  which  are only very 
faintíy  visible,  might  well  have been  çaka.  In that  case, it is certain  that  the date  did 
not fall  in the  same  year. Otherwise, the formula introducing the numbers of. the 
year  would ­ not have been repeated. 
70) The Archaeology of Hindoo Sumatra (1937), pp. 1 sq. 
7­1) Nothing definite can be read of the first two lines, although the few traces,  which 
are still  visible,  make it very probable  that  there  were two lines of script. This  would 
agree  with  the length of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription, two lines of  which  nearly 
correspond to one line of this stone. This fact  appears  clearly from a comparison 
of the readable words in this text  with  the place where they are found in the  Kĕdukan 
Bukit  inscription. We therefore consider the first line of our transcription to correspond 
to line 3 of the complete text. 
72) Obviously,  the end of  mamāva  occurring in line 5 of the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription. 
7­) Read:  āsādha.  Only  very few examples of the aksara dha are known from Indonesian 
inscriptions  (the only examples known to us are found in the Karangtenah inscription ; 
cf. Pras.  1ndon.,  I. I95o, p. 29) ; in the name of the month  Āsādha,  which  seems  to 
be the only Sanskrit word  with  dha adopted in Old­Javanese, it is always replaced 
by either da or dha. 


--- [Page 25] ---
— 15 — 
7. ] raḥ gī  varṣā  74) 
8. ] vihāra  ini di vanua ini  //  7r,) 
H. THE OLD  MALAY  INSCRIPTION  OF  TELAGA BATU 
(SOUTH  SUMATRA) 
As was  stated  in the introduction to No. I above, the discoveries at 
the place called  Télaga  Batu to the  east  of the town of  Palembang  (South 
Sumatra) include not only a large number of  stddhayātra  stones  axxd  three 
fragmentary inscriptions (No. I,  b, c and e), but also a very large  stone 
inscription,  measuring  118 cm' in height and  148 cm in breadth 1). The  stone 
was afterwards carried to the Djakarta Museum (D. 155). 
The stone  as a whole is of a very peculiar form. We cannot do  better 
than to quote most of the meticulous description by Stutterheim 2) : 
— ,,The  stone  is hooded by seven cobra  heads  with  flat, round crown 
jewels,  broad necks and neck wrinkles,  which  at the back of the  stone 
gradually  merge into the flat surface of the stone. On the front side, 28 
lines  of script are  visible,  badly weathered and  illegible  but for a few 
akṣaras.  The inscribed  part  of the  stone  is separated from the roughly 
flattened under  part  by a protruding horizontal ledge,  which  descends a 
little  before joining the surface of the stone;  thus  a groove is formed, 
passing in the middle  part  into a spout in the form of a  yoni". 
As will  appear  below, the text of the inscription gives a clear indication 
as to the meaning of  that  curious form. 
Others, too, emphasized the  illegibility  of the inscription. It seems, 
however,  that  this is partly due to the dark corner in the Museum where 
the stone  is at  present  situated. The  estampages  show  that  this  stone  is 
not at all a hopeless case, and it has gradually been possible to decipher 
most of the inscription. It is quite possible  that  in due course of time  those 
passages  of which  it has not up  till now been possible to give any certain 
reading  will  also become clear. As this inscription offers by far the most 
extensive text of the empire of  Çrīvijaya,  it might deserve  full  attention. 
Whereas Stutterheim  does  not mention any conclusion as to the variety 
of script, Schnitger was more definite and assigned the inscription to the 
7~) The reading of this word, though not perfectly certain,  seems  probable. The two  aksaras 
preceding are very faint on the stone, but might  well  have been  çaka.  The reading 
of gf seems  certain. Between the latter and the presumed  ça,  there  are  traces  of 
three  or four aksaras, possibly to be read  todyāna  followed  by a mark of punctuation. 
Gitodyāna,  if this conjectural reading may be relied upon,  would  appear  to be the 
name of a park (?) ; as to the (presumably two)  aksaras  preceding  raḥ,  no identification 
is possible. 
7°) The reading of the last line is relatively  well  preserved and  does  not seem doubtful. 
!) Jaarboek  B. G., 1936, p. 198.  with  a photograph opposite p. 203. 
2) Ibid.  The translation of the  passage  is as  literal  as possible. 


--- [Page 26] ---
­16­
ninth  or tenth century  A.D.  3). We do not know upon what details the 
above conclusion was founded. On the contrary, both  form  and style of the 
akṣaras  appear to  agree  in every possible detail  with  the variety used on 
the stone of Kotakapur  (Bangka)  ‚ dated, as is  well­known,  686  A. D. It  seems 
quite possible  that  both inscriptions were engraved by the same scribe 4). 
Though  no date  can be made out in the text, the  form  of script makes it 
rather probable  that  the inscription of  Tĕlaga  Batu  should be assigned to 
about the same year as the Kotakapur stone. I.e. the two last decades of 
the seventh century  A.D.  As  will  appear  from  the transcription, the text 
itself  also shows a close  affinity  to the Kotakapur epigraph,  thus  confirming 
the conclusion  arrived at above. 
The text is entirely composed in the Old  Malay  language, showing the 
same peculiarities as the other  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions.  The  long  text furnishes, 
moreover, copious data for our knowledge of  that  language. Some of the 
most interesting words  will  be discussed before the transcription. 
Some  Sanskrit words have a  slightly  different meaning  from  that  which 
they have in the  classical  language. Tatlidpi does not mean  „all  the same, 
nevertheless”, but  only  ,,and, moreover”.  As"in  the other  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions, 
we find  kadāci  instead of  kadācit  (­ei).  As words  with  final  dentals are very 
common  in Indonesian  ‚languages,  the difference cannot  well  be attributed 
to Indonesian adaptation,  while  the frequent use of the word excludes an 
error by the scribe. Forms without the  final  dental are however frequently 
met with  in the so­called  Gāthā  dialect, where forms  like  kadāci,  keci, 
karhici,  kimd  etc. are the usual ones 5). Kadāci  is always used as a 
‘conjunction 5 in our text, if we may use this, for Indonesian languages 
very  inappropriate, term;  every  where the translation by „if,  when’’  is 
satisfactory. As a matter of fact, this development may be observed in other 
cases, too ; thus, tatkala always means  „when”  in modern Indonesian (spelt 
tatkala) 6). 
A curious word is paracakm,  which  occurs quite a number of times 
3) The Archaeology oi Hindoo Sumatra (1937), p. 1. 
4) It is remarkable  that  the differences in script between the almost contemporary 
Çrīvijaya  inscriptions are far  from  being negligible. On account of  that  very peculiarity, 
the perfect identity is in this case the more  striking.  In both  cases  we note the same 
style  of the aksaras  with  their slender forms (in relation to their breadth, the aksaras 
are very high). The ra is double­stroked everywhere. 
5) Also  in the metrical  parts  of texts  like  the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka,  these  forms are often 
met with.  For details, cf. F. Edgerton, Bull. School Or.  Stud.,  8 (1936), pp. 510 — 516. 
6) Indonesian languages may use the same forms for the  'sdverbs'  and the corresponding 
'conjunctions'  of our grammar; thus,  ketika  may correspond both to  English  "then" 
and "when".  Mostly,  however, the terms become specialized to either the former or 
the latter use, but such a  limitation  of the meaning does not always  agree  with 
the original  function of the word; this  appears  to be the case for tatkala, for instance, 
which  in Sanskrit is always an adverb, although it is used as a conjunction meaning 
"when"  in modern Indonesian.  This  is exactly the same development  that  we note in 
kadāci(t).  Similar  developments may be observed in present­day Indonesian; cf. 
A. A. Fokker, Indonesische Syntaxis  (1951), pp. 151 sqq. 


--- [Page 27] ---
— 17 — 
in this  text  ; obviously, it  denotes  some  kind  of enemy, presumably a  „spy”. 
The term  would  correspond to the use of  caksus  in Indian  political  literature, 
and to  that  of mata­mata in modern Indonesian. The combination paracaksus 
is unusual in Sanskrit; as to the first part of the compound, one  could 
refer to the use of para to indicate a (usually honorific)  plural  in the modern 
language, if  that  use was not a direct borrowing  from  Javanese.  Very 
probably,  paracaksu should be explained as a Sanskrit compound, the first 
half of which  means  „enemy’’  (cf.  paradeça  etc.) ; paracaksu  would  then 
mean :  „the  eye of the enemy,  spy’’,  and the addition of  para°  is probably 
due to the necessity of stressing  that  the term does not apply to the spies 
in service of the  king  of Çrīvijaya.  In caksu } the loss of the  final  sibilant 
(or visarga) is remarkable ; here, too, one might consider the  possibility 
of Buddhist Sanskrit influence, where the same tendency is obvious 7). 
In this connection, we should also mention the word drohaka,  which 
occurs in the inscriptions of Kotakapur and Karangbrahi, too ; it  appears  to 
have a more  limited  meaning than in Sanskrit, probably  that  of „traitor’’, 
as is the case  with  durhaka in modern Indonesian (the metathesis may be 
due to so­called popular etymology in  view  of the numerous words borrowed 
from  Sanskrit  with  ditr­  in a pejorative sense). 
An important group of terms deserve to be treated  with  greater detail, 
viz. the designations for the various groups of people in service of the  state. 
If these  terms were clear,  which  unfortunately is not the case  with  all of 
these,  they  would  allow  us a  kind  of peep  into the organization of the empire. 
First  of all, the  Tĕlaga  Batu  inscription mentions several sorts of princes 
and an extensive  list of functionaries.  Almost  all the terms are Sanskrit. 
In the latter portion of the text, a group of  three  sorts of princes is mentioned 
several  times (lines 20, 21, and 22),  ruiming  as follows : yuvarāja, 
pratiyuvarāja,  rājakumāra,  probably respectively the crown prince (but taking 
part in the government after a special consecration), the prince immediately 
following  in age (who  would  be supposed to take the place of the first prince 
if something should happen to him) 8) and the other princes. It  appears 
7) Since many words in the Indonesian languages end in ­h and in ­s‚ it is not probable 
that the  loss  of the visarga or of the ­s should be attributed to a proper Indonesian 
development; the examples are all but rare (cf. Indonesian  tapa,  „asceticism",  from 
Sanskrit  tapas  or tapaḥ;  Javanese  teja  from  Sanskrit  tejah,  etc.). In Buddhist Sanskrit, 
nowever, the loss of the  final  visarga is frequent; it even leads to  sandhi  forms such 
as tejeva  for teja  iva.  Cf.  tama,  „nouveau thème  pracritisant pour  tamaś'  (E.  Sénart, 
Mahávastu,  I‚ p. 392). It is not relevant to our purpose, whether the loss of the  final 
consonant should be considered phonetical or morphological (consonantal  stems  being 
absorbed by the far more frequent  vowel  stems) ; the main point is  that  we have 
not an Indonesian, but an Indian development here. As is also the case  with  the 
examples quoted in the preceding notes,  there  are indications  that  Buddhist Sanskrit 
texts might have been an important source  from  which  words were incorporated in 
Indonesian languages, but the subject requires a detailed investigation on broader lines. 
8) We do not know of any instance of  pratiyuvarāja  in Sanskrit. 


--- [Page 28] ---
_ is _ 
that these  princes  could  hold  the  office  of dātu  °), in order to protect all 
the provinces of the empire 10). Cœdès’  interpretation of  dātu  as a  „governor 
of a province” 11) is undoubtedly correct. We learn moreover the interesting 
fact that  this  office  could  be held by the crown prince and other princes ; 
at the same time it  appears  that  there  were also  áātus  who did not belong 
to the  royal  family  and probably had less authority; at least, they 
undergo a less severe punishment for the same crimes than the princes 12). 
It is hardly astonishing to learn  that  the royal  princes were considered the 
more dangerous menace, especially when they held important offices far 
from  the capital. 
A long  list of lower functionaries is mentioned in lines 3 to 4. It consists 
of twenty­five terms, beginning  with  rājaputra  and ending  with  hulun  hāji. 
Although  the list  still  offers considerable  difficulties,  which  are only  in part 
due to uncertain reading, it is almost sure  that  it will  prove important. 
It may cast some light upon the organization and administration of the largest 
insular  empire of the Far East during the  Middle  Ages,  an empire known 
9) CI.  line  20 : yttvarāja  . pratiyuvarāja  . rājakumkra  yam nisamvarddhiku  akan  datūa, 
"who  are distinguished by me  with  the function of a  dātu  (lit.:  to be a  dātu)’’.. 
Nisamvarddhiku,  which  occurs several times in this  form,  is a derivative  from  the 
base  samvarddhi by means of the affixes ni­ and ­ku. There might be. some doubt 
whether the  original  Sanskrit  form from  which  samvarddhi is derived is samvrddhi 
or samvardhita. The meaning of the  form  found in the inscription is not doubtful. 
The expression nisamvarddhiku is reserved for the princes ; for the lower rank  state 
servants performing the function of a  dātu,  the expiession niga!arku, "are charged 
by me  with",  is used (also in !ine 4 of the Kotakapur inscription). 
1°) CI.  line  20 : mamraksāña  sakalamandaĭāña  kadatuanku. Kadatuan cannot possibly mean 
"office  of a  dātu"  (Cœdès, art. cit, .p. 67) here, and the meaning of Javanese  këraton, 
"royal palace", is also out of the question. Here, at least, kadatuan has clearly the mean¬
ing of "empire’’ as a whole; the latter is divided into a large number of (this seems 
implied  in sakala°)  uiaṇḍalas.  For the latter term, an exact translation is  difficult  to 
be given; presumably it is the main admiristrative  division  of the empire; other 
terms  like  visaya,  bhukti  etc. do not occur in the  Çrīyijaya  inscriptions. Probably, the 
empire was  divided  into a considerable number of  mand  alas, each of  these  under the 
authority of a  dātu.  It appears  from  line  21.  that  not all the  dátus  were princes; 
if we understand  that  passage, it is stated  that  the  dātus  who are not princes are 
not killed  by the curse for the same offences for  which  the princes  would  have been 
punished*  by death. — A function lower than  that  of a  dātu  is that  of a  parwānda ; 
the latter term does not mean "order" or "under command of" (Cœdès, art. cit., p. 73), 
hut rather some sort of army commander, the meaning suggested by  line  15 (sanyāsa 
parvánda  dy—āku,  on a  line  with  sanyāsa  datūa).  In line  26, where the same term occurs, 
the same  appears  to be the case (nisamvarddhiku  parwānda  is to be compared to 
nisamvarddhiku  datūa). 
U) Art. cit., p. 54, more precisely: "(Íe roi) nommait  des  dātu,  qui devaient  gérer  chacun 
un kadatuan,  et éventuellement  diriger  des expeditions  militaires"  ; we learn  from  our 
inscription  that  the territory under command of a  dātu  was denoted by  mandala,  whereas 
kadatuan  seems  to refer to the empire as a whole; cf. note 10 above. We suppose 
that the relation between kadatuan and  dātu  should be taken in a less direct way, 
the latter en bloc protecting the former. 
12) This  seems  to follow  from  the lines 21 sq. of our text; cf. the  notes  to the translation 
there. 


--- [Page 29] ---
— 19 — 
as xar as  Arabia,  Nepal and Peking,  which,  moreover, was able to maintain 
itself  during more than  five  centuries. In addition, since most of the technical 
terms  are Sanskrit, it  would  be important to examine on  which  of the Indian 
empires this administration was based. Such a piece of research  would 
however  fall  outside the scope of this publication; we confine ourselves 
to the meaning of the actual terms. 
The meaning of  rājaputra,  the first item of the  list,  is difficult  to be 
ascertained ; in Sanskrit, the use of the term varies according  tö time and 
place.  Here, it is anyhow clear  that  rājaputra  should be sharply distinguished 
from  the  three  kinds of princes mentioned above ; they may have been 
princes bom of concubines and holding an  office,  but vassal princes (usually 
sāmantarāja)  would  also be possible 13). Owing  to uncertain reading, the 
second term is obscure 14), whereas the third one, viz.  bhūpati,  seems  rather 
vague; here, too, one might consider the possibility  that  vassals should 
be meant. 
Among  the next  five  terms,  viz.  senāpati,  nāyaka,  pratyaya,  hājipratyaya 
and daṇḍanāyaka,  neither the first nor the last item offer real difficulties ; they 
have probably been army­commanders and judges, respectively. The  three 
remaining  terms  are however all but  lucid.  Nāyaka  and pratyaya are 
frequently met  with  in Old Javanese inscriptions, where they are regularly 
mentioned in the  initial  portion of the usually very detailed  lists  of people 
not allowed to  enter  the grounds of a religious foundation 
Almost  everywhere, the two  terms  occur  together,  which  does  not seem 
to be the  case  in Indian inscriptions. Presumably, they are two categories 
of district officers, or, more probably, administrators of the properties of 
the king  and of other members of the royal  family  16). Hājipratyaya  is 
strango as a compound, the first term being Indonesian, the second Sanskrit, 
whereas the compound as a whole  seems  to follow  the rules of a Sanskrit 
tatpurusa 17). The whole  could  mean something  like  "royal  sheriffs’’. 
Of the next term, only the end,  mūrdhaka,  can be deciphered. It must 
l­) In  that  ease,  however,  these  feudal chiefs  would  have come under the direct authority 
of the  king  of Çrīvijaya.  We consider the latter explanation less probable than the 
former one, since the composition of the  list  as a whole  would  rather  suggest  more 
direct servants of the  king. 
14) Cf.  note  4 to the transcription. 
lr‚) We mean the so­called lists of  mañilala  drawya  haji,  „those  who  claim  the king's 
property"; cf. the detailed study by W. F. stutterheim in T.B.G., 65 (1925), pp. 
245 — 267, and by F. W. van Naerssen,  Oud­Javaanse oorkonden  in Duitse  en Deense 
verzamelingen  (1941), the Introduction and passim. 
1(») The meaning of  nāyaka  in Sanskrit is  rather  vague ("leader" e.g. of an army), whereas in 
the modern Central Javanese courts the  nayákás  are councillors of the  king.  None of 
these  meanings is satisfactory in the Old Javanese inscriptions, where in any  case  a 
functionary  of intermediate rank is  meant. 
The pratyaya  „(man  of) confidence"  seems  to be an administrator of the property of 
deceased persons (cf. G.  Cœdès,  1nscr.  du Cambodge, I, p. 180, who  translates  "curateur"). 
­7) The reading of the first  part  of the compound  seems  certain. There might be influence 
of rájapraíyaya. 


--- [Page 30] ---
— 20 — 
be somebody at the head of some group of people. So are also the two 
following  items, viz.  „surveyors  of a group of labourers” 18) and  „inspectors 
of the low­castes’’ 39). Then  follow  vāsikarana,  „cutlers’’. 
The next  three  items are  kumārāmātya,  cāthabhata  and adhikarana. 
They  are all  well­known  from  Indian inscriptions, but their exact meaning 
is not quite clear and may have varied considerably according to place 
and time.  Kumārāmātya  is explained by  M. C. De and by  K. P. Jayaswal 
as a minister  (amātya)  not of  royal  blood,  but on account of merits con­
sidered  by royal  decree as an equal of a prince 20). It seems, however, 
that in this inscription the term indicates a lower rank, for it  would  be 
strange  if a prince were mentioned after cutlers and inspectors.  Also  in 
Indian  inscriptions  kumārāmātyas  are found together  with  cātabhatas  and 
adhikaranas 21). It is interesting to note  that  all these  terms seem to be 
confined  to inscriptions  from  Northern India (with the  inclusion  of 
Kaliṅga). 
The other terms present less  difficulties.  Wé meet  there  with  clerks 
(kāyastha),  architects  (sthāpaka ) 22), shippers  (puhāvara,  one of the few 
Indonesian terms in this  list),  merchants  (vaniyāga)  23), commanders 
(pratisāra),  royal  washermen  (mar śi haji,  if our translation is correct) and 
royal  slaves (hulun  hāji). 
At first, the  composition  of the above  list seems  to be very heterogeneous 
as it includes princes, army commanders, merchants and washermen. It is, 
however, to be noted  that  the enumeration as a whole is clearly hierarchical, 
and in the case of most of the categories it is clear  that  they are  royal 
servants. On the other hand, it is evident  that,  as such, the  list cannot be 
complete. So the next question  which  arises is why it is the above categories 
that are mentioned and not any others. It  appears  that  the contents cf 
the entire  inscription  allow,  at least partially, of an answer. As  will be shown 
by examination in  detail,  the inscription  consists of one extensive imprecation 
18) Túíihn  vatak=vurtth, — cf. the note the translation. 
19) Adhyaksa mcavarna. 
2°) Journ. Beh. and Or. Soc., 17 (1931), pp. 198 — 201 and p. 399. 
21) Art. cit., p. 199.  — Ibid.,  p. 2OO, a copper­plate grant is mentioned, the seal of  which 
bears  the legend  Kumārāmātyādhikaranasya.  Some other officers, frequently mentioned 
in Indian inscriptions in this connection, such as Mahattaras and  Rāj asthanlyas,  do 
not occur in our text. 
Cāṭabhaṭas  are often mentioned in Indian inscriptions among the persons who are not 
allowed  to enter  temple grounds, just  like,  e.g., the  nāyakas  and pratyayas in the 
Old Javanese inscriptions. CI. H.  Kern,  Verspr. Geschr., VII (article dated in 1881), 
p. 24, who wrongly translated the term by  „landloopers"  (vagabonds). None of the 
three  terms have as yet been met  with  in Old Javanese inscriptions. 
22) Including also sculptors. In later Old Javanese texts,  sthāpaka  seems  to denote a sort 
of priest who has an important function in funeral ceremonies (cf. Stuttetheim, 
T.B.G.,  72, 1934, p. 87); cf. note 11 to the translation. 
23) Wrong  spelling  for  vaṇyāga.  It is however curious  that  the word occurs in exactly 
the same orthographical  form  in an Old Javanese inscription to be discussed below. 


--- [Page 31] ---
— 21 — 
against  all kinds of possible  insurgents  and traitors. So  only  those categories 
of people need be mentioned  that  might constitute a possible danger. Seen 
from  that  point of  view,  the composition of the  list is self­explanatory. The 
dangerous  persons  in the empire are not  only  the princes and army­
commanders, who  could  organize revolts when they were far  from  the 
capital,  but also some lower servants who had easy access to the  king, 
such  as clerks, washermen and slaves.  Even  they  would  not, in general, 
act of their own accord, but they  would  be easy tools to the hand of 
revolting  princes. As  will  appear below, the inscription mentions some 
interesting harem intrigues. Shippers and merchants  could  be very dangerous 
because  they came into contact  with  foreign powers. The special mention 
of these  last groups quite fits in  with  the naval and commercial power 
of Çrīvijaya. 
For our knowledge of the Old  Malay  language, too, the inscription of 
Tĕlaga  Batu  furnishes ample materials. Referring the reader to the  Word 
Index for the details, we  shall  note  here  only  some of the more important 
points  which  require some explanation, or  which  are interesting to note 
individually. 
As in the modern language, the word  kamu  means  „you”  (plural). 
Here  we  find  also the  enclitic  form  –rnārnu,  „your’’.  It seems  that  kita 
(enclitic  ­ta) in Old  Malay  has the function of a polite equivalent. It does 
not occur in this text, but is used in the Kotakapur inscription. It is easily 
explained  by the fact  that  the latter text is not directly addressed to the 
possible  malefactors, but, on the contrary, to the divine powers who  will 
carry  oui; the punishments, whereas our text is directed against the male­
factors themselves. 
The word  malūn,  which  occurs several times in  this  text (e.g. in  line 11), 
undoubtedly corresponds to modern Indonesian  bélum  (or  : bĕlon) . It seems 
that in a small  number of words the  Çrīvija3­a  dialect has an  initial  m instead 
of the b in  classical  Malay  and modern Indonesian. An example,  which  is 
sufficiently  certain, is the  well­known  prefix mar­, corresponding to  ber­
in the modern language.  Anticipating  a more detailed discussion, we note 
the difficult  word  muah,  which  may correspond to  buah  in modern Indonesian. 
The word lai was rightly considered a  crux  in the inscriptions hitherto 
published.  Van  Ronkel  had taken it as meaning "being present”,  Cœdès 
explained  it as meaning "being hungry” 24). It  appears  that  in this text, 
where the word occurs rather frequently, neither interpretation is satisfactory, 
though  it is difficult  to determine its real meaning. In most of the places 
where the word occurs, the meaning corresponding to  that  of lain in the 
modern language  seems  to fit in  with  the context.  From  a linguistic  point 
of view,  there  does not seem to be any serious objection, as extension 
of an original  root, mostly monosyllabic, by adding  final  ­n is frequently 
24) Ph.S. van  Ronkel,  Ada Orient., 11 (1924), p. 16; G.  Cœdès,  art. cit., p. 75. 


--- [Page 32] ---
— 22 — 
met with  in several Indonesian languages 2G). In  line  5 of the inscription 
of Talang  Tuwo,  the words di antara  mārgga  lai  could  well  be translated 
„on another  road’’.  I.e. on a road they were not used to go 26). 
In line 13 of our text, we read kusta  kasīhan vaçīkarana  lai ; the Kota¬
kapur inscription, in the corresponding passage (line 6), reads  kasīhan 
vaçīkarana  . ityevœmādi.  One  gets  the impression  that  lai might more or 
less correspond in meaning to  ityevamādi.  This  would  indeed be the case 
if the words  fcuṣta  kasīhan  vaçīkarana  lai were to be translated :  "kustha 
(cf. note 51, below), philtres and other means to make people submit to 
their  will”.  Vaçīkarana  is the general term for such practices,  including 
the use of various kinds of herbs to  that  purpose ; although some of  these 
means are referred to in the two  inscriptions,  it is evident  that  such a  list could 
never be complete ; we then expect  that  an expression meaning "et cetera” 
or something of  that  kind  should be added. Since this is the case in the 
Kotakapur  inscription  (ityevamādi),  the use of lai  would  exactly come up 
to our expectations if the word may be translated as we suggested. 
In addition,  we find  our word  three  times after paracaksu (lines 6 and 7). 
Caksus, in the meaning  ‘‘spy'’,  is a  well­known  term in the  Arthaçāstras  ; 
its combination  with  para°  is unusual in Sanskrit, but affords no  difficulty  ; 
the compound is obviously used to  avoid  other possible interpretations of 
the word. Besides, Indian  political  science considered the use of spies quite 
normal  for the  vijigīsu  ; spying for the enemy was however something quite 
different  and the  passage  in cur text contains a sanction against it. If, then, 
lai means "other”, its addition to paracaksu may be understood in  view  of 
the necessity for an absolutely unambiguous expression in a document of 
this kind  27). 
In the loci just mentioned, this interpretation of lai  appears  satisfactory, 
but some reservations should be made in  view  of the rather frequent use 
of lai in combination  with  the pronoun  kāmu  (either as lai  kāmu  or, more 
frequently, as  kāmu  lai). What is the exact meaning of this combination ? — 
As is stated above, the imprecation is, unlike the Kotakapur inscription, 
2r,) Thus, in Old Javanese the negative particle tan  seems  to be a more recent  form 
than ta,  which  occurs, for instance, in the Old Javanese  Rāmāyana  (II, 57), and is 
implied  in tak,  tat, etc.; cf. H.  Kern,  Verspr. Geschr., 8 (1903), pp. 282 sqq.  Originally, 
the particle n belonged  only  to the third person. The Sanskrit conjunction yadi occurs 
in the  form  yadin (or  yadyan)  in Old Javanese (art. cit., p. 287). 
26) The idea  that  dying  people should be hungry  seems  strange  ; therefore, Cœdès was 
forced  to correct  āsannakāīa  to ásanakala.  In that  case, the  statement  makes sense, but 
the main  objection is  that  it would  constitute an anticlimax after the preceding  statement 
according  to which  the park is the most effective means (varopaya) to obtain bliss 
(sukha).  The general idea expressed by the latter  passage  is probably  that  all  living 
beings  will  participate in the punya acquired by the foundation. The  Hindu  practice 
of transporting people to die in a  holy  spot is  well­known  and  would  not be contrary 
to Buddhism of this age. 
27) As Dr R.  Goris  informed me, the term  caksu  is frequently found in Old  Balinese 
inscriptions.  There, however, it  denotes  a lower category of  officials,  possibly charged 
with the  collection  of taxes. 


--- [Page 33] ---
— 23 — 
directly  addressed to the possible criminals, who are all referred to by 
kāmu.  Usually,  no special  difficulties  of expression arise, but what is to 
be done if several of the groups of criminals choose to work together ? 
Then  the different groups such as those who conceive and organize and 
those who actually  perpetrate  the crimes should clearly be distinguished. 
The use of  kāmu  without further  definition  would  be ambiguous. In such 
cases, we suppose  that  kāmu  refers to those directly addressed in one of 
the paragraphs, whereas  kāmu  lai is used if, in addition to the  kāmu  group, 
other people (e.g. complices) are addressed. Thus, in  line  7 of our text a 
sanction  is pronounced against people who are in contact  with  different 
kinds  of enemies. The latter, however, were already cursed before. If, in 
that case,  kāmu  alone were used, the text might be interpreted to refer 
to the different kinds of enemies, not to those who, abiding in the capital 
or even  within  the  royal  palace, might be in regular contact  with  them ; 
so we presume  that  the latter group of collaborators is addressed by  kāmu 
lai in order to  avoid  such a misunderstanding. 
A similar  case occurs in  line  10. The curse is  there  directed against 
people who manage to escape after having committed various crimes against 
king and  state.  In addition to  these,  there  is a less obvious group of  guilty 
ones, who assist the above group in escaping. If now  kāmu  alone were used, 
the sanction  could  be taken to refer to the first category alone. I.e. those 
who really do the work, whereas the assistants  would  go free. Such a wrong 
interpretation is avoided by the use of  kāmu  to address the  principal  group, 
and of  kāmu  lai for their assistants. We may then translate the combination 
by „others  among you". We therefore presume  that  in combination  with 
kāmu,  too, the use of lai. apparently strange,  agrees  well  with  the meaning 
„others’’. 
It is obvious  that  most of  these  difficulties  are due to the fact  that 
in the  Tëlaga  Batu  inscription the king's servants are directly addressed. 
All the categories mentioned in the lines 3 to 5 must therefore be referred 
to in the second person.  Mostly,  no special  difficulties  arise ;  kāmu  then 
refers to all of the king's servants should they commit the crimes defined 
in each  separate  paragraph ; if, however, a  kind  of criminal  action in  which 
one group of king's servants collaborates  with  another of them is to be 
defined,  the expression becomes a  little  awkward  : kāmu  has to be reserved 
for the  principal  group, whereas the assistants have to be referred to by 
an expression meaning  ‚‚others  of you'';  we presume  that  this is what has 
been expressed by  kāmu  lai. 
If people belonging to the king's servants mentioned in the lines 3 to 5 
work  together  with  those not in direct service to the  king,  the definitions 
of the crimes afford no  difficulty.  In that  case, the latter are referred to 
in the thfrd person. Such a case occurs, for instance, in the lines 13 sqq., 
where the curse is directed against the king's servants should they be in 
contact  with  various sorts of people well­versed in the use of magical 


--- [Page 34] ---
— 24 — 
practices 2S). In  that  case, of course, the latter are referred to by the third 
person (ya and ­na respectively) and  there  arise no  difficulties  of the  kind 
mentioned above. In the inscriptions of Kotakapur and Karanghrshi, the 
expression  and distinction of different groups of possible criminals is much 
easier since the text is  there  addressed to the supernatural powers supposed 
to execute the sanctions directed against the  criminals  ; consequently the 
latter are always referred to in the third person. 
Another  awkward word, occurring rather frequently in the other 
Çrīvijaya  inscriptions,  too, is  muah.  H. Kern  29) and Van  Ronkel  30) connected 
it with  Old  Javanese  muwah,  „again”,  whereas  Cœdès  took it as an equivalent 
of āda  (ada), „to  be’’ (presumably not occurring in the  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions), 
indicating  the mere presence of something and often used as an emphatic 
particle  81). It appears, however,  that  no argument can be based upon the 
absence of  āda,  for the same word proves to be frequent in the  Tĕlaga  Batu 
inscription  (lines 10, 12, 13, 16, 18 and 25). Besides, at least in one 
passage  in the texts hitherto known neither interpretation is satis­
factory,  viz. in  line  5 of the Talang Tuwo inscription (tmu  muah  ya āhāra 
dnan  air mminumña).  Here, it is  difficult  to account for any special reason 
why tmu should have been stressed ; if it had been the intention to  stress 
the presence of  food  and water, one  would  have expected tmu  muahña 
āhāra  ; the meaning  „again”,  presumed by  Kern  and Van  Ronkel,  does not 
yield  a suitable meaning for the sentence.  Similar  arguments may be adduced 
with reference to the expression  talu  muah  (lines 5 and 7 of the Kotakapur 
inscription),  which  occurs also in this text (lines 8 and 22). 
We are therefore  inclined  to coiisider another  possibility.  In a  small 
number of  cases  some of  which  are beyond doubt (viz. the prefix mar­ in 
the ÇrMjaya  inscriptions corresponding to her­ in  classical  Malay  and modern 
Indonesian, and marnava corresponding to membawa; in addition, we 
consider  malūn  corresponding to  bĕlon  hardly doubtful) we see  that  the 
initial  m of the  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions corresponds to a b in  classical  and 
modern  Malay.  Muah  could  then he taken to correspond to the  well­known 
word  buah,  „fruit”  (with many derived meanings). In the  passage  quoted 
from  the  Talang  Tuwo inscription, such a translation  would  make good 
sense  : „they  find  fruits as  food  with  water to drink”  (lit.:  „which  may be 
drunk by  them’’)  ; especially those  trees  that  yield  edible fruits were planted 
in the park. 
In Buddhism, the word for  „fruit’’  (phala  ; cf. also terms  like  vipaka 
and paripāka,  based upon the same  simile)  is technically used to denote 
the consequences of an act in this  life or another ; this use might account 
28) This  passage  win be discussed  with  greater detail towards the end of the Introduction. 
2­) Verspr. Geschr.,  VXI,  p. 211. 
30) Ar*. át, p. 16. 
81) Art. cit, pp. 75 sq.  According  to this  opinion,  muah  would  especially be used to 
attach the notion of an optative to the preceding word. An optative, however, is 
not­the  form  to be expected in some of the cases. 


--- [Page 35] ---
— 25 — 
for the combinations  talu  muah  (Kotakapur, lines 5 and 7 ; our text, lines 8‚ 
where it occurs twice, 19, 21 and 22), vrddhi  muah  (Talang  Tuwo,  line  6), 
jāñan  muah  ya siddha (Kotakapur,  line  6), pulam ha iya  muah  yam  dosāña 
vuatña jāhat  inan (ibidem) , çānti  muah  kavuatāña  (ibidem,  line  7), subhiksa 
muah  yam  vanuāña parāvis  (ibidem,  line  9), çānti  muah  kavuatanāña  yam 
sumpah  niminumāmu  ini (our text,  line  26),  d%ya  siddha  muah  (ibidem, 
line 28). It  appears  that  in all the loci quoted  there  is question about the 
consequences of acts. There where  acts  against  the king  are concerned, the 
fruit  is qualified  as tāīu  (presumably :  „punishment’’),  or defined by a negative 
turn of speech  (jānan  siddha,  „will  not reach its perfect state’'. I.e. 
applied  to a revolt,  "will  not  succeed’’).  In the opposite case, if the king's 
orders  are duly carried out, the fruit is  qualified  by vrddhi (growth, pros* 
perity),  by subhiksa (prosperity), by siddha (arriving at its perfect  state, 
successful) and even by  çānti  (the eternal quietude of  Nirvaṇa)  32). The 
second  passage  quoted  from  the Kotakapur inscription  would  then  yield  a 
satisfactory meaning,  viz. : „to theni(selves) [I.e. those planning revolts etc.] 
the fruits  of the sins contained in their  wicked  deeds  will  be turned’’. 
The meaning is probably  that  their plans are not  only  doomed to  fail,  but 
that the result planned for others (i.e. violent  death)  will  be their proper sort. 
The meaning of  muah  seems  to imply  the different  shades  of meaning 
which  may be observed for Sanskrit phala ; curiously enough, the word is 
often  used as a  kind  of apposition to a preceding term as if it were translated 
from  a Sanskrit compound.  Finally,  we mention the use of nimuah in  line 26 ; 
its subject  seems  to be the preceding word  sumpah.  The meaning required 
by the context is :  „(the  day on  which  the curse) takes effect", or, if we 
retain the  simile  suggested by  muah  : „bears  fruit" ; here, too, the use of 
phalati in Sanskrit may be compared (cf.  Buddhac„  VII,  26 : tasmād  adharmam 
phalatīha  dharmah,  „then  dharma in this  world  bears  as its fruit what is 
contrary to dharma" (Johnston). 
Another  very awkward word is  mulam  which  Kern  and Blagden con­
nected  with  Malay  pulang, „to come  back’’,  but  Cœdès  with  Cham  mulan, 
„at once’’.  This  new inscription makes us prefer Kern's interpretation, 
although it does not solve all the  difficulties.  Our preference for Kern's 
translation is mainly due to a  passage  in line  21, which  is hardly susceptible 
of another interpretation. There the text runs  : pūrvvāña  mulam  kāmu tālu 
32) we presume  that  çānti  has the precise and technical meaning known  from  the Buddhist 
texts in this context, viz. the  state  in which  the forces  which  determine the continuation 
of the  Saṃsāra  have come to complete  rest;  it has almost become a synonym of 
Nirvana  ; cf. the  definition  of the latter by  çāntyekaÎaksanatvāt,  „car  Íe Nirvana  a pour 
unique caractere la cessation  des  passions et de la souffrance  de  soi et d'autrui" 
(translation by L, de la  Vallée  Poussin,  UAbhidharmakoça  de Vasubandhtt, IV, 1924, 
p. 78). To a Buddhist,  there  might be something  strange  in defining notions  like 
çānti,  nirodha, nirvana as the fruit of something (as we supposed). As a matter of fact, 
the Buddhists  had a very special  kind  of fruit to  that  purpose, i.e. the visamyogaphala, 
„fruit  de disconnection" (Abhidh,  Koça,  H, p. 291). 


--- [Page 36] ---
— 26 — 
muah  kāmu,  presumably meaning :  „before  you return home, you  will  be 
punished";  the idea is probably  that  the execution of the punishment is 
not delayed  until  the moment the  guilty  ones come home and  fall into the 
hands of the  king;  the imprecation automatically takes its effect at the 
moment the crime has been committed.  Very  often, the word  mulam  follows 
either  tuvi  or athavā,  especially in those  cases  where a new category of 
criminals  is introduced or, more often, when a further  definition  of crime 
is added to the fundamental  definition.  The combination  tuvi  mulam  would 
correspond  exactíy  to modern Indonesian  lagi  puía and should be translated 
by "moreover, once again”. The latter meaning of  mulam  is clearly derived 
from  the one based on the  passage  quoted  from  line  21; as a matter of fact, 
we see exactly the same in Old Javanese, where  muwah  and  (u)maluy  may 
both mean „to come back” and "again, at his  turn’’.  As to kamulam and 
nimulam, conjectural explanations are proposed in the  notes  49, 57 and 69 
to the translation. 
A small  number of other words and expressions for  which  the Tĕlaga  Batu 
inscription  might be of some importance  will  be briefly  mentioned. 
An interesting expression not yet known  from  the other  Çrīvijaya 
inscriptions  is huluntuhānku,  apparently meaning „my empire" (lines 7, 11, 
12, 14,,17 and 23) ; the  literal  meaning  seems  to be: „my slaves  (hulun) 
and lords  (tuhān)  ”, implying  classification of the subjects into two large 
groups, either slaves and free men or, more probably, the common people 
and the  ruling  class, the former comprising also the population of the 
conquered territories. 
With  reference to the word  hanun  in line 3 of the Kotakapur inscription, 
Cœdès  noted:  ‘inot  de sens  ineonnu” ?,z), whereas R. A.  Kern  considered 
it to be a derivative of an ancient Indonesian root  ñdn  (from  which  also 
banun, „to  build"  and „to  awake’’,  is derived) by means of the prefix  ha­, 
which  however in Old  Malay  and Old Javanese was no longer productive 34). 
R. A. Kern's conjecture is  fully  confirmed by our text,  which  in the same 
context gives  vānun  instead of  hanun  (cf. line  5 : drohaka  vānun,  and  line  7 : 
drohaka  vānun~dy=āku) . One  would  even be  inclined  to consider the 
possibility  of an error by the scribe in the case of  hanun  in the Kotakapur 
inscription,  since in this type of script va  with  a daṇḍa  is very  similar  to ha. 
A small  hint in this direction might be the fact  that  in hanun  the first 
syllable  is written  with  a short a, not  with  a long  one as we should have 
expected.  Anyhow,  the meaning  seems  clear : it is undoubtedly a euphemistic 
term for  „building’’,  i.e. organizing something against the safety of  state  and 
king.  We  find  a similar  tendency in many other expressions of this  kind, 
e.g. in  mjanujāri  drohaka, „to speak to. I.e. to plot  with,  traitors’’ (line 7); 
in ārambha  kadatuanku, „to organize, i.e. to attack, my kraton”, negative 
33) Art. át., p. 79. 
­4) Bjjdr. K.I., 88 (1931), p. 512 sq. 


--- [Page 37] ---
— 27 — 
expressions  like  tīda  bhakti,  „not  worshipping. I.e. revolting against’’, and 
several other expressions ; probably, drohaka, in the meaning of  „traitor”, 
might also be included in this  list. These euphemisms, common to  all languages, 
appear  to be  limited  here  to actions directed against  king  and  state. 
Finally,  we draw attention to the expression daṇḍaku daṇḍa in line 15, 
meaning "are fined by me  with  a fine”, in contrast to the graver  sentences, 
almost always death, pronounced against most of the criminals. It is curious 
that the expression daṇḍaku daṇḍa occurs dozens of times in Old Javanese 
records from the 10th century onwards, where it is mentioned regularly 
near  the end of the lists of crimes 33). Such  lists  belong to the privileges 
granted to so­called free villages,  which  enjoy autonomous rights. As Stut­
terheim pointed out 36), the main purport of  these  regulations is the right 
of the future free village to collect the fines imposed on  those  found guilty 
of a number of crimes mentioned in detail.  Normally,  the amount of such 
fines constituted a part of the income of the king. Stutterheim took da ṇḍa¬
kudaṇḍa to mean „all sorts of fines”, but made no attempt at explaining 
the strange  form of the compound. His translation  seems  to suggest  that  he 
took the form for a Sanskrit dvandva of the type  jīvitamara ṇam, „life  and 
death’’.  But daṇḍa­kudaṇḍa meaning  „fines,  bad  fines’’  (?) does  not  yield 
a suitable meaning 37). The occurrence of exactly the  same  expression in a 
Çrīvijaya  text dated some  three  centuries before the oldest Old Javanese 
example known before makes it very probable  that  the whole  phrase  was 
borrowed  from the administrative system of  Çrīvijaya.  It is only natural 
that the first  extensive Indonesian empire exercised an important influence 
on all later  states,  but the paucity of epigraphic documents of  Çrīvijaya 
rarely  enables us to get an impression of its extent  ­  á). 
The discussion of some linguistic peculiarities of this inscription leads 
us almost automatically to an examination of its contents. As is  briefly 
indicated  above, the text  consists  of a long imprecation directed against the 
35) Such  passages  occur only in inscriptions originating from Eastern Java. 
36) T.B.G.,  65 (1925), pp. 268—273. 
37) In  view  of such an interpretation, our printed transcription of Old Javanese edicts 
usually  separate  daṇḍa kudaṇḍa. Compounds of this  kind  are unknown in Sanskrit; 
one might compare such curious compounds as  phalāphala,  „all  kinds of fruits" 
(Mahāvastu,  ed. Senart, IH, p. 45, line 3 and elsewhere; cf. the Index s.v.), but 
the formation  is different. We take the expression to be a petrified little  sentence, 
which  in the  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions had the  original  meaning of  „will  be fined by 
me with  a fine", but was not understood afterwards so  that  it came to mean the 
(minor)  „offences  liable to punishment  with  a fine’’.  The curious repetition of daṇḍa 
in a verbal and then in a nominal form may be due to the influence of the common 
Sanskrit  combination daṇḍam  dand  ay ati. It is quite possible  that  some other  strange 
definitions  of crimes occurring in Old Javanese records should also be explained in 
a similar  way. A term  like  mandihāládī,  also spelt  bhandihālādi,  is not susceptible of 
explanation by Old Javanese alone. 
­~ 1) Other probable borrowings are to be found in the Ust of functionaries, (lines 3 — 4), 
especially  the combination  nāyaka  pratyaya (cf. supra p. 19) and  perhaps  also other terms. 


--- [Page 38] ---
— 28 — 
perpetrators  of all possible crimes against the  king  and the  state  of Çrīvijaya. 
So the tenor of the text  agrees  with  those  of the inscriptions of Kotakapur 
and Karangbrahi, but is elaborated into far  greater  detail. The two 
inscriptions  mentioned seem to be abbreviated copies of this stone,  which 
once stood  near  the presumed capital of the empire 39). The  Tĕ1aga  Batu 
inscription  likewise  begins  with  the hitherto almost entirely incomprehensible 
passage  known from the inscriptions of Kotakapur and Karangbrahi, 
presumably the curse in the narrower  sense  of the term. As  Cœdès  pointed 
out, it is probably a magical formula, addressed to the protecting divinities 
of the empire,  which  was intended to  kill  automatically all  those  guilty 
of the crimes mentioned 40). As if this menace was not considered sufficiently 
effective,  it is sometimes added  that  an expedition  will  also be  sent  out 
against them (line 21).  With  reference to some rebels of minor importance, 
it is stated  in line 21  that  the imprecation  will  not take effect, but  that 
they  will  be directíy  punished by the  king.  If, however, the  same  rebels 
try to get into contact  with  the princes (viz. for assistance), they  will 
immediately  be killed  by the imprecation.  Evidently,  the curse is especially 
directed against  those  foes  that  were considered the most dangerous. As to 
the others, military power  would  be sufficiently effective. 
In this connection, it  would  be important to examine whether the 
inscription  itself  could  give some clue as to the meaning of the  strange 
form  of the stone. It is clear  that  it cannot have been used in order to 
prepare  holy water, as has been previously proposed 41), for instead of 
holy texts  we find  imprecations. Nevertheless, the form of the  stone  proves 
that it must have been used for a  similar  purpose. The groove and spout 
under the inscribed portion of the  stone  were evidently used to catch water 
poured out over the stone. The  liquid  thus  obtained might  well  be termed 
M) At the  same  time, the Kotakapur inscription contains an additional  passage  at the 
end referring to the much discussed expedition to Java. It must probably be considered 
an addition specifying the time and circumstances of the erection of the copy stone. 
There is some chance  that  similar  copies were erected in other  parts  of the empire, 
not only in Upper  Djambi  and Bangka. 
It seems  that  the very last lines of the Telaga Batu inscription also refer to special 
circumstances. In line 26  there  is question of a  date  on which  the army is provided 
with commanders for an expedition, whereas in the very last line (28) the name 
of the month  Āsāḍha  can  still  be deciphered. It  seems  obvious  that  an imprecation 
like this one  would  not have been erected at a moment when all was quiet in the 
empire. The  absence  of any mention of the possibility of a direct attack on the 
king  would  suggest  that  the  king  himself was at the head of the expedition, so 
that the  imprecation  was necessary to  guarantee  order during the  absence  of king 
and army. It is particularly regrettable  that  of the two last lines of the text only 
some isolated words can be deciphered. 
*°> Art.  dt,,  p. SO.  Kern,  Verspr. Geschr., VII, p. 2lo sq., tried to translate the formula, 
but the result necessarily remains quite conjectural. — Recently a new  attempt  by 
V. Obdeyn (Tijdschr. Aardr. Gen. 6o, 1943, pp. 721 — 723) tries to explain the 
strange  forms as belonging to the old Minangkabau language. 
41) This is, for instance, expressed in the explanation in the Museum. 


--- [Page 39] ---
— 29 — 
„imprecation  water”. A  passage  in the text  itself  informs us of the manner 
in which  the liquid  was used. In  line  21 sq. the text gives twice an extension 
of the stereotypical ,,you  will  be killed  by the imprecation” by adding 
niminumamu,  „which  is drunk by  you’’  42). Evidently,  the imprecation water 
was offered to the high  officials  to drink, after  which  they were impregnated 
with  the curse, so  that  it would  immediately take effect if they committed 
one of the crimes mentioned. The text is an oath  which  all important  officials 
in Çrivijaya  must have had to take before they  could  assume  their 
task. 
The idea of  drinking  an oath is not unusual in the Indian  world  : as a 
matter  of fact, analagous ceremonies are known  from  the Indian law books. 
Santosh  Kumar  Das,  following  the  Dharrnaçāstras  of Nārada  43) and 
Yājñavalkya  44), describes the oath as  follows  : 
„The  person to be  tested  has to drink  three  mouthf  uls of water in  which 
(an image of) the deity whom he holds sacred has been bathed and worshipped. 
If he should  meet  with  any calamity  within  a fortnight (after having undergone 
this ordeal) it  shall  be regarded as a proof of his guilt” 45). 
Similar  ceremonies have been accomplished in recent times at the 
Cambodian  court.  Cœdès,  referring to the rites described by  Moura  46) and 
Leclère  47), mentions functionaries travelling to  Phnoṃ  Penh in order to 
„drink  the water of the  oath’’;  in addition, he pointed out the existence of 
ancient oath formulae in an inscription of  10ll  A. D., used during the reign 
of Sūryavarman  I 48). 
Finally,  we briefly  mention sundry points of interest contained in the 
definitions  of the crimes. 
Cœdès  has pointed out  that  in the seventh century  A. D. Buddhism in 
Çrivijaya  already contained  Tāntric  elements 49). Our inscription very 
definitely  refers to  Tāntric  rites. In  line  25, a  tantrāmala,  probably a  secret 
formula  leading to  Final  Liberation,  is promised by the  king  to his 
obedient subjects. In  line  12, however, reference is also made to conjurators 
who make use of magical  Tāntric  means  to attain their objects.  First,  mention 
42) r"f.  also lines 18, 24 and 27, where there also seems to be some question oí 
„drinking"  the imprecation. 
4S) Probably  of the 4th century  A. D. or later; cf.  Winternitz,  Geschichte der  Indischen 
Literatur,  1907  — 22, HI, p. 496. 
44) Probably  of the 3rd or 4th century  A. D.; cI.  Winternitz,  o.c, III, p. 498. 
­­) Santosh  Kumar  Das, Economic History oí Ancient India, 1925, p. 283. 
­­) J.  Moura,  Le royaume du Cambodge, 1883, I, pp. 251 sqq. 
47) Revue  Indochinoise, II (1904), p. 735. 
48) Etudes Cambodgiennes, IX,  B.E.F.E.O.,  13 (1913), pp.  11 — 17. 
Similar  ceremonies at the  Laotian  court are  known  to have existed in recent times. 
A French  translation of the oath  formula  was published by P.  Nginn  in France­Asie, 
66—67  (1951), pp. 573—576; cf. the last lines (ibidem, p. 576)  „des  Fonctionnaires 
grands et petits,  militaires  et civils,  ci­devant et a  l'intérieur,  qui  acceptent de bon 
coeur  de boire tous ensemble l'sau  de la Cérémonie  Royale  du Serment". 
­9) B.E.F.E.O.,  30 (193o),  p. 55. 


--- [Page 40] ---
­30­
is made of a group of conspirators  working  with  a jar  filled  with  blood 
(āda pātra  danan  dar  ah). After  that,  mention is made of the use of the 
çñyantra  by conspirators.  This  very complicated figure  (samsthāna,  which 
is also mentioned in the text) consists of a large number of triangles over­
lapping  each other,  which  are surrounded by concentric circles  with  lotus 
petals and aksaras, the whole being placed again  within  a bhūpura  50). 
Line  13 refers to rites by means of  which  people may be made crazy. 
Probably,  this passage  again alludes to  vaçīkarana  ceremonies used by rebels 
to bring others into their power by bereaving them of their common­sense. 
As to the means applied for  that  purpose, the text mentions, among other 
means,  rūpa  (images or drawings of the people to be bewitched), bhasma 
(ashes), vaidi (a  strange  form  which  might be interpreted either as vaidya : 
"doctors" presumably  well  acquainted  with  the use of magical herbs ; or 
as vaidika:  Vaidic  texts such as some Atharvaveda hymns or other  mantras) 
and mantras  (spells). It  seems  that  an image of the  king  himself  is also 
referred to in  these  practices  (rupinānku).  Also  a special plant is mentioned, 
viz. kusta  (Sanskrit  kustha).  We know  that  it was frequently used for 
magical  purposes. It is mentioned in the  Kauçikasūtra  among the means used 
in order to win the love of a woman (which is also a  kind  of vaçīkarana)  51). 
It here  occurs together  with  philter's  (kasīhan)  52). On the whole, one does 
not get the impression  that  in general the use of such means should have 
been prohibited. These  passages  refer rather to their use in order to foment 
resurrections. 
There is nothing particularly Buddhistic in all this. On the other hand, 
it is well­known  that  Buddhist  Tāntrism  made an extensive use of such 
means. As to the  vaçīkarana  ceremonies, we refer the reader to 
Bhattacharyya  5S) who  states  that  „Kurukullā  M) is said to confer success 
in the Tāntric  rite of  vaçikarana  of the rite of subduing or bewitching men, 
women,  ministers or even kings”. 
50) Gopinath Rao, Elements, I (1914), p. 33o. For a more detailed description  with 
references, cf. P.  H. Pott,  Yoga  en Yantra (1946), pp. 43 sqq. 
51) Kauçikasutra,  35, 12; CI. the translation by W.  Caland,  Ferh.  Kon.  Acad.  íVet.,  Aid. 
Lett,  N.R., HI. No. 2 (I9oo), p. 118:  "Einen  mit frischer Butter (unter Aussprechung 
des citierten Liedes) bestrichenen Costus Speciosus  (kustha)  waermt er dreimal taeglich, 
drei Tage hindurch, am Feuer". It is hardly doubtful  that  this, or a very  similar, 
rite is alluded to in our text. — Kustha is also mentioned as a medicine in an 
inscription  from  Indochina ; cf.  Cordier  in BJE.FÆ.O.,  6 (1906), p. 85, who translates : 
"racine  de costus (Saussurea  Lappa,  composees)".  — Thirdly,  kustha is  well­known 
from  Indian medicine as the name of a disease (a sort of leprosy)  ; cf. Sten  Konow's 
edition  of a  medical  text  from  Khotan,  Avhandl. Norske Vid. Ak,, Oslo, 1940, II 
(Hist HI. klasse, 88), passim, but cf. the  Word  Index, where  Konow  translates 
it by "black leprosy". — As a matter of fact, the  Mahāvyutpatti  mentions kustha 
as the name of a  medicinal  plant (231, No. 32, edition by  Minaiev­Mironov,  p. 76), 
but also in the  list  of diseases (284, No. 6; p. 116). 
52) The term  kasīhan  is also mentioned in  line  6 of the Kotakapur  inscription. 
53) Buddhist, Iconography (1924), p. 55. Cf. the additions. 
5*) One of the  çaktis  of Amitābha,  especially worshipped in  Nepal. 


--- [Page 41] ---
­­31­
It is evident  that  all these  Tāntric  rites must have been very  well­known 
in 7th century  Çrīvijaya  ; they  must  have constituted a real menace to the 
State. — On the other hand, it is stated in  line  25 that  the good citizens, 
who remain submissive to the  king  and to those who are invested  with 
executive power,  will  be recompensed  with  a Tantrāmala  — presumably 
a secret formula  which  will  give them all kinds of bliss in this  life  and 
hereafter. The text does not give any hints in  which  way this  „Immaculate 
Tantra” 55) was supposed to be effective ; possibly, special rites were per­
formed  to that  effect, but it  seems  more probable  that  we ought to imagine 
the Tantra  as something concrete,  which  may have been conferred by the 
king  in exchange for the good conduct of his subordinates 56). At the same 
time,  it is stated  that  the çapatha  itself  has the effect of conferring eternal 
bliss  (çānti)  on the submissive subjects. 
It is possible  that  these  imprecations were not considered  sufficiently 
convincing  to all the subjects of the  king.  As in other societies, the higher 
classes may have been sceptical; and even if they were not, they may have 
disposed  of private means,  viz. other mantras,  which  had effects  which  might 
neutralize the king's imprecations. For  that  reason, real punishment is also 
referred to. Unfortunately, the portion of the text in  which  this sanction 
is mentioned  could  only  partially be deciphered ; it is contained in the last 
three  lines of the inscription,  which  are far more weather­beaten than the 
rest of the stone. It is however certain  that  a military  expedition is referred 
to in  line  26 of the  inscription  ; in the very last  line  of the text, the name 
of a month is mentioned  (Āṣāḍha),  presumably  that  for which  the expedition 
was planned. It is to be regretted  that  these  last lines,  which  may have 
contained  valuable historical information, have become  illegible  except for 
a few words. The latter are however sufficient for establishing the fact 
of there  having been an expedition. It is  well­known  that  this is also the 
case with  the last  line  of the Kotakapur inscription. In both cases, we  find 
a combination of magical and  military  means used for subduing revolts. 
In both cases, the reference to a  military  expedition is reserved for the 
very  end of the text. As in modern law, the punishment for perjury is not 
left to the divine powers alone. 
The very elaborate text of this imprecation makes it probable  that 
there  were strong reasons for inaugurating ceremonies such as those alluded 
to in our text. It is  only  natural  that  an extensive insular empire such as 
Çrīvŋaya  is known to have been, should have faced tremendous  difficulties 
Tantrāmala,  — the order of the two  parts  of the compound is the inverse of what 
would  have been expected. The  literal  translation is: "immaculate as a consequence 
of Tantra" ; the  form  of this compound might  confirm  our assumption (cf. note 56) 
that something concrete is referred to, such as a definite object (a metal plate or 
a clay  tablet) on  which  the secret text was engraved. 
~'Q) The inscription  reads  (line 25)  : tantrāmala  pamvalyaṅku ; the latter  form  (cf.  Modern 
Indonesian  pĕngĕmbaliari)  probably means :  that  which  is given in return (by me), and 
would  thus  refer to something concrete. It may be supposed to be the recompense  which 
is to be handed over to the submissive chiefs at the end of the expedition. 


--- [Page 42] ---
— 32 — 
before succeeding in becoming a real  state.  The preservation of unity 
depended mainly on the  reliability  of the chiefs charged  with  almost royal 
powers over territories and islands far away from the central authority. 
An oath ritual, to  which  all chiefs should be submitted before starting for 
their respective dominions, was necessary. It may have been inaugurated at 
an early period, when the empire was not yet consolidated — very probably 
at a moment when the necessity for such  measures  became evident. 
The Tëlaga  Batu inscription  does  not supply us  with  any details as to 
the way  in which  the empire of  Çrīvijaya  acquired supremacy over so large 
a territory. It gives us, however, some idea about the way in  which  it 
was organized, especially about the methods used for maintaining order 
and unity. 
The following  transcription and translation are considered  provisional  ; 
it is possible  that  further study may reveal many interesting and more 
reliable  details. 
Transcription 
1. //  oṃ siddhaṃ  // titaṃ  hamvan  vari  avai . kandra  kāyet  nipaihumpa  . 1) 
an umuha 2) ulu 
2. lavan tandrun  luaḥ  makamatai tandrun  luaḥ  an hakairu  rnuaḥ  kāyet 
nihumpa  unai  tuṅai  . ume­
3. nteṃ bhakti ni ulun haraki  . unai tuṅai 3) // kāmu vañak=māmu 
rājaputra  .  proṣtāra 4). bhupati  .  senāpati  .  nāyaka  .  pratyaya  .  hāji¬
pratyaya  . daṇḍanāyaka  . 
4 murddhaka 5). tuhā  an vatak=vx–rUḥ  . addhvākṣī  nljavarṇa €). 
vāṣīkarana  . kumārāmātya  . cāthabhaṭa  . adhikaraṇa  . karmma ....  7). 
kāyastha  . sthāpaka  . puhāvaṃ  . vaṇiyāga  . pratisāra  . dā.. 8) 
5. kāmu  marsī hāji  . hulun=hāji  . vañak=māmu  uraṃ nivunuḥ sumpaḥ 
!) There  seems  to be a punctuation mark between nipaihumpa and an (unlike the  Kota­
kapur inscription). 
2) Kotakapur  inscription  : namuha. 
3) The Kotakapur inscription gives after the second tandrun luah the words  vinunu 
paihumpaan. For the  rest,  the formulae  ara  identical. — As long as the meaning 
of these  lines is quite uncertain, word separation is hardly more than a guess. On1y 
the visarga  is a certain indication of the end of a word (or at least of the end of a 
part of a compound) and likewise the use of the  virāma,  of the punctuation mark 
and of groups of syllables occurring more than once in the  same  order. 
­) Uncertain reading.  Only  the cakra, the combined  vowel  signs for  –o and the last 
syllable  na seems  certain. Instead af stá, apparently the most probable reading, mvá of 
mbhā  would  also be possible. We do not see any acceptable term  which  might satisfy 
these  conditions. 
5) Two  aksaras  at the beginning of the line are too vaguely  visible  for being identified. 
6) Read: adhyaksa mcavarna. 
7) One,  perhaps  two,  aksaras  illegible. 
8) Only  the da is certain. At the end of the  line,  there  is room for one more aksara. 
Dñan  would  be possible. 


--- [Page 43] ---
— 33 — 
dari maṃmaṃ  kāmu  . kadāci kāmu tīda  bhakti  dy=āku nivunuḥ kāmu 
surnpaḥ  . tuvi mulaṃ kaḍāci kāmu  drohaka  vaṅun  luvī yaṃ  marvuddhi 
6. lavan çatruṅku  . athavā larīya 9) ka dātu  paracakṣu  lai nivunuḥ kāmu 
sumpaḥ  . tuvi mulaṃ kadāci kāmu makānucāra dari çatruṅku dari 
dātu paracakṣu  lai . dari kulamāmu mitramāmu  . dari vaduamāmu  . 
dari hulu  vukan  paracakṣu 
7. lai . maṅujāri kāmu  drohaka  vaṅun=dy=āku rnalūn āda di kāmu  . 
tīda ya rnarppādaḥ dy=āku di huluntuhāṅku  . kadāci kāmu lai larī 
nivimuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . tuvi mulaṃ kadāci kāmu miāyuāyu  maṃmaṃ 
dari vātu  ...  10) 
8. athavā rnarcorakāra 11) hīnamadhyamottarnajāti  . yadi 12) makalaṅit= 
tāmva yaṃ prajā nfrakṣāṅku  . athavā makatālu  muaḥ  uraṃ  kalpita 
pūrva fcatālu  muaḥña  13) uraṃ ārambha kadātuanku nivunuḥ kāmu 
sumpaḥ  . tuvi mulaṃ dari kāmu  14 ) 
9. kāmu  marvuat  vini  hāji  an tāhu  an tṅaḥ  rumaḥ  maṅujāri yaṃ mamāva 
mas dravya  athavā maṅujāri dirīña 15) uraṃ  an tṅaḥ  rumaḥ  malūn 
uraṃ maṃlāri yaṃ  jana  mamāva  dravya  di luar  huluntuhāṅku lai 
varopāya ka kāmu larī­
10. yākan ka çatruṅku ka dātu  paracakṣu  lai nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  // 
athavā kadāci kāmu māti malūn maṃruruā athavā kāmu larīya maṃla¬
rīya lai kāmu  .  mvunuḥ kāmu sumpaḥ  //  athavā kāmu nicāri lai 
marvuat=nicāri  parddātuan  16) 
11. maṅalit  mas  mani  17) malūn maṃruruā kadātuanku  . marvuddhisāraṇa 
ri lai kāmu  . uraṃ  vukan  vaidika tahūña kāmu  marvuat  sākit  . tīda 
kāmu marppādaḥ dari huluntuhāṅku  . nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . kāmu 
tuvi nigalarniāmu maisaṃjñāvuddhi kulamāmu mañcaru  18 ) 
9) Oi : lurī ya  as two  words.  10) Or  dariy=āku (?). 
!1) Tha  second  aksara  is damaged.  Other  poosibilities  would be  bhā  and sá. Co  seems 
however  more  p_obable  on palaeographic  grounds.  As to the  meaning,  rnarcorakāra, 
though  not at all impossible, is not  quite  satisfactory. 
12) The first  aksara  is uncertain.  It might  be a ya the  three  verticals  of which are 
placed  very  close  to each  other.  Tadi  and  kadi  would  also  be possible.  As to the 
meaning,  none  of the  three  possibilities  seems  satisfactory.  (Sanskrit)  yadi  does  not 
occur  in any  Çrīvijaya  text.  For 'if’ or 'when’,  these  texts  always  seem  to use 
kadāci  (sic). 
13) The italics are  very  uncertain;  the  rest  is however  clear.  Instead  of purvaka  we 
note  the possibility of  mūrdhaka,  while  instead  of kalpita  the possibility of  çilpita 
cannot  be excluded.  The  reading  çilpitamūrdhaka,  though  in part  conjectural,  would 
not be  unsatisfactory. 
14) Two or  three  aksaras  at the end of the line  have  become  illegible. 
15) Vinlña  would  also  be possible. 
16) The  last  two  syllables  of the word are  very  vague.  The  reading  is conjectural. 
17) Except for the  very  end of the line, the  whole  of it is  very  clear.  We  suppose  that 
mani  is a  wrong  orthography  for mani.  It is  curious  that  this  word is  always  given 
as manik  in Old  Javanese. 
18) Two or  three  akṣaras  at the end of the line  have  almost  disappeared.  Rūpinanktt, 
occurring  also  in line 13,  might  be in  accordance  with the  traces,  but  remains 
conjectural. 


--- [Page 44] ---
— 34 — 
12. ṅku kāmu āda pātra  daṅan  daraḥ  nivunuḥ kāmu  surnpaḥ  . tuvi mulaṃ 
tāhu kāmu di sthānāña çatruṅku lai  nipiṅanna  19) makaçrīyantra di 
kata  20) luar  saṃsthāna tīda kāmu  21 ) marppādaḥ dy=āku 
di huluntuhāṅku nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . tathāpi kāmu  
13.................... di  22) samaryyādapatha di vanuā vāṅun=dy=āku  . tīda 
kāmu marppādaḥ nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . ini makalaṅit=prāna 2S) 
uraṃ marūpabhasmavaidimantraprayoga  .  tīda āhāra 24) dari sama¬
yaṅku rupiṇaṅku kuṣṭa kasīhan vaçīkaraṇa lai  . kadāci kāmu  25) 
14. rnarvuddhisāraṇa  mar a maryyāda 26). yathā vaçīkaraṇa  . tīda makagīla 
makalaṅit  prāṇāña  . athavā  vuatna  tāhu kāmu di deça  . tīda ya kamulaṃ 
dy=āku di huluntuhāṅku  . nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . athavā cihna dīri 
kāmu lai  marvuat  yaṃ  vuat  jāhat ini. i.i  prati  27 ) 
15. ti dirīṅa  28 ) di kāmu  . nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . athavā 
mulaṃ dari kāmu tālu dīya  . tīda āku  daṇḍaku  daṇḍa  . tuvi kāmu lai 
yaṃ sanyāsa datūa  . sanyāsa  .....  .ṇḍa 29). sanyāsa parvvāṇḍa diy=āku  . 
kadāci kāmu āçrayamāmu  rnakalaṅit  vuatāña  sata. . 30) 
16. tah nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . athavā mulaṃ āda uraṃ dari kāmu 
31) savanakna  kriyākarmmakāryyakarādi  i 32) 
nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . athavā mulaṃ kadāci āda  
prakārāña tīda nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  
17. kāmu  sumpaḥ  . tuvi rnulaṃ kadāci kāmu māntrika  
19) Most of the middle part of this line is very difficult to be read.  Nipiñanña  is not satis¬
factory. Other possibilities such as  nipananña, ditañanña  (?) cannot be excluded. 
20) One  might  suppose  dikit=kafluar). 
ni) Possibly : (tīda  kāmu)  bhakti  tlda  kāmu (marppādah). 
22) Of the  four  or five  aksaras  at the  beginning  of the line only  vague  traces  remain. 
2S) For  prāna? —  The spelling of the word with a  dental  instead  of a lingual is  strange. 
Everywhere  else,  this  common  word is  spelt  as it  should  be. As a  rule,  the orthography 
of Sanskrit  words  is remarkably  correct;  most  anomalies  may be  explained  in another 
way,  such  as the  influence  of Buddhistic  Sanskrit  (this  may be the  case  with  kadāci). 
There  ís however  one,  apparently  certain,  example  of a  replacement  of the lingual 
by the  dental  nasal  (mani,  1. 11). 
24) Except for the initial  ā, the  reading  is uncertain.  It seems,  however,  that  none  of 
the alternative  possibilities  (such  as ākāra, āpāra, ādhāra  etc.) is  acceptable.  The 
meaning  required  by the  context  is : "shrinking  back  from (the use of)", or  something 
similar. 
25) About  eight  aksaras  have  become  illegible. 
26) Except for the first word of the line,  uncertain. 
27) Five or six  aksaras  at the end of the line  have  almost  disappeared  from the  stone. 
The lines  14 to 19 (inclusive) and the  very  last  lines  of the  text  have  suffered 
much  more  than  the rest. 
2S) Five  aksaras  of which no  reliable  reading  can be  obtained. 
29) Possibly: dvilinda, which,  however,  does  not make  sense.  We  should  expect  the name 
of a function to be  mentioned  here. 
30) The  three  last  aksaras  of the line are  very  uncertain. 
31) About ten  aksaras  illegible. Only  about  in the  middle  of the  passage,  the  words 
dy=āku  can  still  be recognized. 
82) The end of the  compound  seems  to be  sthiti,  which,  however,  does  not  seem  to 
make  sense. 


--- [Page 45] ---
— 35 — 
marswasthā samaryyāda  athavā  lai katāhumāmu  dia  lai  
.. prakārāña  . tīda kāmu marppādaḥ dy=āku di huluntuhāṅku  . 
dṅan=kāmu parvuatāña  . nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  // tuvi mulaṃ 
kadāci  
18. mu 33) niminuṃña  nidaṇḍa  kāmu tīda lai āda kāmu kadāci  
dy=āku tīda  karnulaṃña  sarvvaprāṇa nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . 
athavā dātaṃ kāmu di sthānamāmu tīda āku  daṇḍa  çānti yaṃ  uraṃ 
nigalarku  maṃrakṣa  di kāmu  nivunuḥ S4) 
19 35) dnan  vinimāmu anakmāmu  3U ) pallavamāmu 
daṇḍaṅku  . tathāpi di  luar  uraṃ  nigalarku  nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . 
tālu muah  kāmu  dnan  anakmāmu vinimāmu santánaniāmu gotramārnu 
mitramāmu  // tathāpi  3T ) 
20. dy=āku sanyāsa datūa kāmu  maṃrakṣāña  sakalamaṇḍalāña  kadātu­
anku  . yuvarāja  . pratiyuvarāja  . rājakumāra yaṃ  nisamvarddhiku 
akan=  datūa niparsumpahakan=kāmu  . kadāci kāmu tīda  bhakti  tīdá 
tattva  dy=āku  marvuddhi  dṅan  çatruṅku kāmu di yaṃ lai mvunioḥ kāmu 
21. sumpaḥ  niminumāmu ini . nisuruḥ  tāpik=kāmu  . purvvāña mulaṃ kāmu 
tālu muaḥ  kāmu //tuvi mulaṃ  jana  vāṅun=kulagotramitrasantānamāmu 
dy=āku  . tīda yuvarāja  . pratiyuvarāja  . rājakumāra yaṃ  nisamvard­
dhiku akan=datūa  . yaṃ  mar vuat=  tīda kāmu nivunuḥ 
22. sumpaḥ niminumāmu ini  .  nisuruḥ tāpik=kāmu dṅan gotramámu  san¬
tānamāmu tālu muaḥ iya  .  ini graṃ kadāci ka yuvarāja  .  pratiyuvarāja  . 
rājakumāra yaṃ  nisamvarddhiku  akan=datua  lai kadāci  akan=nimulaṃ 
çāsanāña  . akan=dari  kāmu ni­
23. muaḥña  prajā abhiprāyāña  . niujāri kāmu purwāṅa  . uraṃ  vukan 
nisuruḥ  ya maṅujāri kāmu  sanmata  . kāmu tīda marppādaḥ dy=āku 
di huluntuhānku nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . athavā tuvi vañak=māmn 
mantrī  88) dūruṃ vala yaṃ  nisamvaxddhiku  akan 
24 30) luviḥ  dari  samaryyādamámu  . dari  lābhamāmu  . 
nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . sārambha  dari  uraṃ  drohaka  . tīda bhakfi 
tīda sārjjava  . dhava  vuatmāmu nivunuḥ kāmu  sumpaḥ  . mi vuatmāmu 
minuṃ  sumpaḥ  40 ) 
;'n) Presumably,  the end of  kāmu  or māmu.  After  kadāci  of line 17, we  suppose  vuaimā(mu), 
which  seems  to be in  accordance  with the  traces  still  visible, 
34) After  kāmu,  there  are faint  traces  of about  ten ak<saras.  Nivunuh,  at the end of line 18, 
is however  clear. 
35) Presumably : kāmu  sumpah. 
8n) About ten  aksaras  have  become  illegible. As  māmu  about  in the  middle  of this 
passage  may be  recognized,  there  was  probably  an enumeration  here  as at the end 
of the line. 
37) The end of the line is illegible. 
38) This  reading  is given with  reservation.  Most of the word  seems  certain,  but  other 
possibilities  might  also  be considered. 
39) Some  six aksaras  at the  beginning  of the line are  very  difficult to be  read.  The  last 
word  before  the transcribed  portion  of it  might  well be  vanun. 
40) our  reading  of the  last  eight  or nine  aksaras  at the end of  this  line  seems  too 
uncertain  to be  reproduced  here. 


--- [Page 46] ---
— 38 — 
25. kadāci  kāmu  mulaṃ kāryya 41) nivunuḥ  kāmu  sumpaḥ nirninu­
xnāmu  ini . ini graṃ  kadāci  kāmu  bhakti  tattva  sārjjava  diy=āku  . 
tīda rnarvuat  kāmu  doṣa ini  tantrāmala  pamvalyaṅku  // tīda  iya akan= 
nim^T­rari  kāmu  dṅan  anakvinimāmu  . kadāci  kāmu  minum  sumpáh  
26. vala yaṃ nivava di  samaryyāda  muaḥ yaṃ muaḥ  niminumārnu  . athavā 
kvara 42) lal . çānti  muaḥ kavuatanāna yaṃ sumpaḥ  niminumārnu  ini . 
Birr­~inḥ  di divasāña  vala yaṃ nisamvarddhiku parwāṇḍa  manāpik  . 
tathāpi  yaṃ  nitāpik  
27. tīda kāmu  nisaṃjñā kalpana akan  makāryya  avadya 
āsannaphalāna  savātu  gulas=savātu  samālarn  . 
athavā  nimintimāmu  4S ) 
28 maka  tīda  tamūña  dīya  siddha muaḥ yaṃ  kamāna  iya  nitarnūna 
vala  *  yaṃ  kāmu  vulaṅ āṣāḍha  44 ) 
Translation 
[1­2]  Oṃ !  Success  ! *). 
[3] All of you, as many as you are, —  sons  of kings 2) (?) 3), 
41) The first syllable is uncertain, except for the long  ­ā. There might be other possibilities 
than that  given  in the transcription, but they seem less  likely. 
*2) The lower  part  of this ligature is very uncertain. Instead of  leva,  kma  would  also 
be possible. Neither reading is satisfactory. Or are we to read : athavākṣara  lai ? 
*3) In this line and the very last one, only some isolated  passages  have been preserved. 
Extensive  portions have almost completely been wiped out This  state  of preservetion 
may  well  be explained by the way in  which  the  stone  was probably used. Water 
poured upon the  stone  from above did not spread evenly over the surface of the 
stone, bur chose the  easiest  way,  which  was along the side parts. As a consequence, 
the latter suffered much more than the central portion. A little above the protruding 
rim, however  there  are some irregularities in the stor.3 surface  which  make the 
liquid  almost always traverse certain special  paths.  So one can understand why some 
isolated  portions in  these  two lines are at  present  in rather  a good  state  of preservation 
(better  than the upper  part  of the stone), whereas other  parts  of the  same  lines 
hardly  show any  traces  of script. 
44) It is not certain  that  this line was inscribed up to the right edge. 
!) There  follows  an almost entirely unintelligible oath formula,  which  agrees  with  the 
one occurring at the beginning of the inscriptions of Kotakapur and Karangbrahi. 
It is the  çapatha  in its narrow  sense.  — A partial and conjectural translation has been 
given  by H.  Kern  (Verspr. Geschr., 7, pp. 210 sq.) and by V. Obdeyn (Tijdschr. 
Aardr. Gen., 60, 1943, pp. 721­723). Although a number of words  which  are not 
obscure by themselves occur in the formula, we completely  agree  with  Cœdès 
(art, dt, p. 61)  that  translation is impossible and  will  probably remain so for ever. 
2) Rājaputra,  — the word probably has some special meaning here,  which  it is  difficult 
to ascertain. As noted above (supra, p. 19), one might suppose either  „vassal  kings", 
or „princes  born of lower queens", who were in either  case  charged  with  a special 
function. 
3) The reading is uncertain; cf. the  note  to the transcription, where different possibilities 
were suggested. 


--- [Page 47] ---
— 37 — 
chiefs  4), army commanders,  nāyakas  5), pratyayas 6), confidants (?) of the 
king 7), judges, [4] chiefs of the (?), surveyors of groups of workmen 8), 
surveyors of low­castes, cutlers,  kumārāmātyas  9), cdtabhatas 9), adhika,ra­
nas 9), (?) 10), clerks, sculptors 11), naval captains, merchants, 
commanders, (?) 12), and you — [5] washermen of the  king  13) 
and slaves of the  king  14), — all of you  will be killed  by the curse of (this) 
4) Bhúpati,  — although this word is very  well­known,  we suppose it has some special 
meaning here. In Indian inscriptions, it means mostly  „vassals",  which  would  be 
possible  here  (in that  case,  rājaputra  would  have the second of the meanings mentioned 
above). In present­day Java, a  bhūpati  (bupati)  is a high district  officer  (chief  of a 
regency) and a  similar  meaning  seems  probable here. 
5) As noted above (note 16 to the Introduction),  nāyaka  (often spelt nayaka) is a term 
frequentíy  met  with  in Old Javanese inscriptions. The exact meaning is, however, 
unknown;  in any case, they must be lower  officials,  probably in some way connected 
with the  collection  of the king's revenue ; they may have been lower district officers. 
e) Pratyaya, — usually mentioned in combination  with  nāyaka  in Old Javanese inscriptions. 
They  must have been some  kind  of ‘confidants’ (cI. note 7 below), possibly admi­
nistrators of deceased persons’ property. Such, at least,  seems  to be the meaning of 
pratyaya in Cambodian inscriptions (cI. supra, note 16 to the Introduction). 
7) Here, the same term pratyaya occurs in combination  with  hāji.  The translation "con­
fidants of the  king"  is conjectural; a Tatpurusa compound the first  half  of which 
is Indonesian is very strange, but we do not see another alternative, 
8) Tuhā  an vaiak—vuruh, —  vatak  is probably the same word as Old Javanese  watëk, 
„group",  often used to confer a  plural  meaning on the term  following  [sang  watëk 
dewatā  = the gods]. In Old Javanese inscriptions,  tuhā,  .‚old,  elder", is often 
technically  used to denote some lower  officials,  who are always more closely 
identified  by some further term.  Usually,  but not always, they seem to be charged 
with the  supervision  of trades  and crafts  (tuhā  rang  mangrakĕt,  etc.). 
9) As to  these  three  tams,  cI. the Introduction. 
10) Only  the beginning of this term  (karmma 0) could  be deciphered. 
n) Sthāpaka,  —  "erector’’,  presumably of images or of buildings. In strophe 6 (line 16) 
of the Sanskrit inscription of  Dinaya,  Eastern Java,  vide  T.B.G.  81 (1941), p. 5OO, 
the sthāpakas  are the first mentioned among the priests, well­versed in the Vedas, 
who erect the Agastya image (rtvigbhih vedavidbhih  sthāpaKādyaih  
sthāpīio  agastyah). —  Sthāpakas  are often mentioned in later Old Javanese literature ; 
they seem to play an important role during several ceremonies (cf.  Nāgarakrĕtāgama,  57, 
2‚ and the Old Javanese  Ādiparvan,  ed.  JuynboH,  p. 19). Presumably, they do not 
really  do the work on the sculptures or buildings, but  only  give the important 
instructions and play a role in the inauguration ceremonies. The translation 'sculptors' 
is only  approximate. The  sthāpakas  seem to have been priests rather than craftsmen. 
12) As  appears  from  note 8 to the transcription, it is not certain whether  there  is a 
new term here. 
13) Mar  si haji,  — conjectural translation. The first word might  well  correspond to modern 
Indonesian  bërsih,  „clean’’.  The correspondence mar­ : bér­ is regular. As to the loss 
of the visarga  with  compensatory  vowel  lengthening, this same  line  appears  to give 
another example  (Iuvl  : luvih). — It is not astonishing to  find  this group mentioned 
here. The washermen, who e.g.  form  a separate  caste  in India, might be dangerous 
people. One  would  have expected to  find  cooks also mentioned here, but they may be 
included  in the next term. 
14) Hulun—hā]i,  — probably the personal slaves or servants of the  king.  As pointed out 
in the Introduction, the term  frequentíy  occurs in Old Javanese inscriptions, where 


--- [Page 48] ---
— 38 — 
imprecation  1r,) ; if you are not  faithful  to me, you  will  be  killed  by 
the curse. 
Besides,  — if you behave  like  a traitor, plotting  with  those (?) 16) who 
are in contact  with  my enemies, or if you [6] go over to  Dātus  spying for 
the enemy  3 7), you  will  be killed  by the curse. 
Besides,  — if you  form  part of the retinue (?) 1S) of my enemies, or 
of Dātus  spying for others, or of your families or friends, of your servants, 
or of other chiefs 19) spying for [7] others, — if you are in contact  with 
traitors plotting against me, before they are (actually) together  with  you, 
it is mostly immediately  followed  by watëk  i dalĕm  (or:  waiëk  i jto),  „groups  of the 
interior  (the part of the  kĕraton  where the  king  lives  with  his spouses and personal 
servants)". — In this  connection,  we might refer to the preceding note. The Old Javanese 
inscriptions  regularly mention, together  with  htdun  haji and  watĕk  i jro, the pamresi, 
a term  which  strongly reminds one of the marsl haji of our text. Stutterheim, on whose 
detailed  discussion of  these  three terms (in T.B.G., 65, 1925, pp. 266 sq.) most of the 
above is based, is also  inclined  to connect pamresi  with  bërsih,  „clean". 
15) Mammam,  — undoubtedly the Old Javanese  word  mangmang,  which  is almost a 
synonym  of sumpaḥ.  In the imprecations  which  are regularly found in the later Old 
Javanese  inscriptions  the three terms mangmang  çapatha  sumpah  are often used together. 
!6) Whereas the  first  paragraph refers to the  officials  mentioned in the  list  should they 
themselves  revolt,  the second paragraph refers to the same should they collaborate 
in different ways  with  enemies or rebels. It is quite possible  that  by vāṅun  luvī  lāvan 
is nat  meant plotting in the narrow sense of the  word,  but rather the execution 
of plots. For  vāṅun,  cf. the Introduction; the tendency to use rather innocent­looking 
words  for grave offences is seen in several terms in this context; besides vanun, 
we find  also  mañujāri,  „to speak to", i,e. „to plot  with",  mathuddhi lavan and, of 
course, negative expressions such as  tīda  bhakti and  tīda  marpādah. 
17> As noted in the Introduction, we take  dātu  paracalcsu lai to mean:  "dātus  [a  title, 
probably:  governors of provinces] who are the eyes of others [i.e. the enemies]". 
If this explanation is correct:, lai is  only  used for  laying  stress  on para­. 
1­) Makānucāra,  — undoubtedly Skr.  armcāra  with  the  prefix  maka­. The  prefix  does 
not seem always to have a causative meaning in Old  Malay.  Its use  would  agree 
fundamentally  with  that  of Old Javanese maka­. — The  word  anucāra  doe­ not appear 
to occur in Sanskrit in this very  form,  but anucara and  anucārin  do, both in the 
sense of  „attendant,  follower". 
19) Hulu vukan paracaksu lai, — there has been some disagreement on the meaning of 
vukan,  which  corresponds to modern Indonesian bukan. Van  Konkel  (Ada Orient., 
H, 1924, p. 18) took vukan in exactly the same meaning as modern bukan, i.e. an 
emphatical  negation  which  implies  the affirmation of the opposite alternative ;  Cœdès 
(art. cit., p. 78), however, made it probable  that  the modern use of bukan should 
be traced back to the more  original  meaning of  „other’’,  which  it has in the  Çrīvijaya 
inscriptions  ; R. A.  Kern,  however, did not adopt the  conclusion  arrived at by  Cœdès 
(Bijdr.  K.I., 88, 1931, p. 512), and came back to Van Ronkel's explanation. —  This 
passage in our text makes us prefer Cœdès' interpretation; this paragraph is directed 
against the king's servants should they serve the enemy or  revolting  subjects. The 
latter point is  specified  into a number of cases: the king's servants might collaborate 
with revolting  subjects who are  provincial  governors  (dātu)  or to whom they stand 
in the relation of a  family  member,  friend  or servant.  After  this  specification,  an 
additional  stipulation is needed should the king's servants collaborate  with  chiefs 
who did not belong to the above categories. 


--- [Page 49] ---
— 39 — 
people who are not submissive to me and to my empire 20), and if, (at last), 
you go over to them, — you  will  be killed  by the curse. 
Besides,  — if you embellish this curse on this stone (?) 21), [8] or if 
you commit theft 22) — whether you are of low, middle or high descent, — 
if by means of herbs (?) 23) you make the subjects, protected by me, 
mad  24), or, — if you (?) 25) of people who attack 26) 
my kĕraton,  — you  will  be killed  by the curse. 
Besides,  — if  from  you [9] 27) that  you induce my harem 
women  28) to get knowledge about the interior of my palace (?) 29) and 
get into contact  with  those who transport  gold  and property, or, if you 
are in contact yourselves  with  people  working  in the interior of the palace (?)  ‚ 
20) The second part of this paragraph  seems  to refer to functionaries staying in the 
capital.  They have not actually joined the traitors, but are in contact  with  them: 
obviously,  they make all preparations necessary for action, such as getting informations. 
21) Miāyuāyu  mammam,  — this is the first known example of the prefix mi­ in Old 
Malay.  Its use  agrees  with  that  in Old Javanese, where it is always causative  (vide 
H. Kern,  Verspr. Geschr., 8, pp. 224 sqq.).  Mi­āyu­āyu  would  mean: „to make beautiful"; 
if applied to the text of the imprecation, this  could  mean either to wipe out words 
like „you  win be  killed  by the curse", or even to write other words instead of them, 
such  as „you  will  succeed by the curse’’  (muaḥ  siddha  kāmu  sumpah). 
22) This  may also apply to the stone itself; instead of changing the text of the imprecation, 
the traitors  could  take the whole stone away. 
23) Conjectural translation. If  tāmva  has been read correctly, it might be connected  with 
Old Javanese tamba,  ‘'medicine’’. 
24) Makagī/a,  — cf.  line  5 of the Kotakapur inscription. —  This  term presumably refers 
to the use of sundry means to bereave people of their common­sense and  thus 
make them take the side of revolting chiefs. 
25) The  difficulties  of arriving  at an acceptable translation are mainly due to uncertain 
reading.  — If our interpretation of  tālu  muah  (cf. the Introduction) proves to be 
correct, it might as  well  refer to punishment as to a recompense. Here, we are 
inclined  to choose the second alternative ; in  that  case, the text refers to the king's 
servants should they recompense subjects who intend to attack the  king. 
­'•) Arambha, —  „enterprise",  probably used as an euphemism (undoubtedly due to some 
taboo about mentioning in an inscription a direct attack on the  king). 
­~) We expect in the lacuna something  like  : „if by you measures are taken" or „if by 
you orders are issued  with  the intention to". 
2­) Vint  haji,  — in Old Javanese, this term is generally (but not always) used  with 
reference to the lower­rank spouses of the  king,  sometimes however for the highest 
queen herself (cI. Van Stein  Callenfels,  Oudh. VersL 1922, p. 82 ;  Krom,  Geschiedenis 2, 
p. 214, and Stutterheim  T.B.G.,  65 (1925), p. 212). 
2Ô) Tñah  rumah, — cf. (classical  Malay)  tĕñah  astana, "the centre of a  royal  residence, 
formed  by the two central rows of pillars along the whole length of the  building" 
(H. von de  Wall  and  H.  N. van  der  Tuuk, Dictionary, I, p. 374).  Tañah  rumah, 
in the Minangkabau region, is the  living  room for the  family,  as opposed to the 
more private  parts  of the house;'cI. M. Joustra, Minangkabau, 1923, p. 155 and 
Plate 11. As  appears  from  the reference to the transport of gold and jewels,  which 
immediately  follows  the words  tñah  rumah, the latter  here  probably means especially 
that interior  part of the keraton where, among other things, the treasury is situated. 
The sanction presumably refers to people who  with  the help of harem women try 
to obtain information as to the place where  gold  and jewels are kept.  During  many 
centuries, the riches of the kings of  Çrīvijáya  were almost proverbial. 


--- [Page 50] ---
— 40 — 
before  these  people flee 30) with  the men (?) who transport property outside 
my empire and use shrewd means to you (?) to have it taken away [10] 
to my foes (or) to  Dātus  spying for the enemy 31), — you  will  be killed 
by the curse. 
Or, if you die (?) 32) before having succeeded in destroying (my palace) 
(?) * 3), or flee or help others to flee, — you  will be killed  by the curse. 
Or, if you (?) [11] spend 34) 
gold and jewels in order to 33) destroy my  kĕraton  or use shrewd means 
together  with  others among you, (or) physicians (?) 36), who know how to 
make people  sick  37), — then you are not submissive to me and to my 
empire and  will  be killed  by the curse. 
And you, too, who charge members of your  family  to conspire 
30) Malūn,  — probably modern Indonesian  bĕlon  (often written  belum).  — The meaning 
is evidently  that  if gold  and jewels are stolen and later on it  appears  that  provincial 
governors and other  officials  have been in contact  with  people inside the  kĕraton,  the 
governors etc. win be held responsible and are cursed by the imprecation. 
31) The words yam jana, if read correctly, are not clear.  Mamlári  could  possibly mean : 
„to flee  with  something" (as an active form), though one  would  rather have expected 
rnamlariyākan  in  that  meaning. The last mentioned  form,  however,  seems  to mean : 
„to make (others)  flee’'.  — The general  sense  of the  passage  seems  clear enough. 
It refers to rebels who conspire  with  servants inside the palace to make them steal 
gold and jewels and help them to flee  with  the valuables. The  gold  could  be used 
by the rebels »to finance revolts, not  only  by hiring  troops, but especially by  bribing 
vassals inside the empire and also potential enemies outside. The use of the word 
upāya  at the end of the  line  confirms such an interpretation. It is a  well­known 
term in­the  Arthaçāstras  for the (usually four) sorts of means used to obtain success 
in politics;  references  will  be given in/ra. No. III. note 125 to the translation. 
Gifts  (dāna)  is one of those means. 
32) Mati is strange; if read correctiy (the  passage  seems  clear  from  a palaeographic point 
of view),  we have to presume  that  the curse remains effective against those who 
die in an  attempt  at rebellion. In  that  case, the words nivurtuh  sumpah  should be 
taken to mean more than death  only  (to include, for instance, suffering in  hell). 
33) MaÎūn,  — for  malūn,  cf. note 30, above, and note 35, below. — Mamrurua is clearly 
causative. The  final  ­ā must almost necessary be explained as the so­called conjunctive 
suffix,  known  from  several Indonesian languages (e.g. Javanese). — The root ruru, 
„to fall",  occurs frequently in Old Javanese ; it is probably the same word as modern 
Indonesian luruh, "to  fall"  (usually applied to leaves  falling  off a tree). 
34) Manalit, — probably to be connected  with  Old Javanese (a)lit,  ''small’’.  The word 
disappeared in later  Malay,  but has been readopted into modern Indonesian, probably 
from  Javanese. H. D. van Perms' dictionary mentions it as characteristic of Java 
and Medan (the town of Medan has a large Javanese colony). — Manalit  would 
mean: "to make  small,  to divide into  small  parts", presumably for distributing the 
treasures  among possible rebels. 
3f») For  malūn,  cf. note 30 above. We have translated "in order to’' instead of "before" : 
the action performed  with  a view  to a certain result is represented as  only  preceding 
the latter. The passage­ undoubtedly refers to rebels trying to bribe servants inside 
the kĕraton. 
3f0 CI. the Introduction (p. 30 above) and note 42 below. Vukan probably means 'other* 
(Cœdès, art. cit., p. 78, but cf. the  criticism  by R.  A. Kern  in Bijdr. K. L, 88, 1931, p. 512). 
S7) "To make  sick"  (marvuat  sākit),  so that  they  would  offer no resistance to the rebels. 


--- [Page 51] ---
— 41 — 
38) [12], making use of a  bowl  filled  with  blood  39), — you 
will be killed  by the curse.  Moreover,  if you are  familiar  with  the whereabouts 
of my enemies and (?) 40) by means of magical figures 
(?), then you are not submissive to me and to my empire and  will 
be killed  by the curse.  Also  (if) you [13] plot against me in 
the frontier regions 41) of my empire,  (then)  you are not submissive and 
will be killed  by the curse. 
Those who make the minds of (other) people crazy by means of forms, 
ashes,  medicines (or)  mantras  42), without shrinking back  from  the use of 
(?) 43) my orders (?) 44), my pictures, 45), kustha  4G), philtres and other means 
38> Mañcaru,  — undoubtedly a derivative of Sanskrit (and Old Javanese) caru: "to sacrifice 
to demons". The term evidently applies to rites by means of  which  some symbol 
of the  king  (cI.  ­ṅku  at the beginning of  line  12, possibly an image) is sacrificed 
to demons. 
30) The  passage  probably refers to rites by means of  which  conspirators  confirm  their 
oath by  drinking  blood  (a mixture containing drops of  blood  of all the conspirators ?). 
It is, however, also possible  that  it refers to some  Tāntric  rite. 
40) For the  çrīyantra,  cf. the Introduction. It is to be regretted  that  our text does not 
make it clear how this symbol is used. For this point, we refer the leader to the  notes 
to the Transcription. 
4ĭ) Samaryyadapatha, — this term probably refers to frontier provinces (or rather: to 
frontier  roads, for it is  strange  that  a word  like  visaya has not been used). These, of 
course, are the regions where contact  with  the enemy  would  be relatively easy. 
42) About  these  means, cf. the Introduction. — By  „forms"  may be meant images or 
pictures of any  kind,  pethaps  to be buried under the houses of the persons whom 
traitors  attempt  to bewitch.  Rúpa  might refer to yantras, too. The use of  ashes 
for a similar  purpose is also  well­known.  It is however  difficult  to give a correct 
translation of vaidimanrra. One possible interpretation is vaidikamentra, "vedic mantras" ; 
cf. e.g. the  Atharvavedasaṃhitā,  which  contains numerous spells to be used for  vaçikarana 
purposes. Another  possibility  is, however,  that  vaidi is used for vaidya,  which  suggests 
the use of medicaments (herbs) for the same purpose (cf.  kustha  in note 51 to the 
Introduction). 
­?0 Conjectural translation; cf. the note to the Transcription. 
44) Samayaṅku,  — among the many meanings of samaya, we especially consider  that  of 
"orders" written by the  king,  which  could  be used for magical purposes. In Java, 
an order  from  the  king  was received  with  the same ceremonies as if the  king  had 
come himself. Written aksaras such as those on the  royal  seal, symbolized the  king 
himself.  Their ceremonial burning  could  be an effective means of fomenting revolts. — 
Another  possible explanation  would  be the forging of  royal  orders for the use of rebels. 
4") Rūpinaṅku,  — presumably, Sanskrit  rūpin  with  the  suffix  ­ṅku.  The insertion of a 
vowel  (always a) between the stem and the  suffix  is unusual, but not impossible. 
Similar  cases  occur in modern Javanese between the  suffix  ­an and a possessive  suffix. 
In Old  Malay,  however,  there  are no other examples known. It is therefore also possible 
that rūpina  is an incorrect adaptation of Sanskrit  rūpin.  The latter means :  „provided 
with  form,  material". So  rūpinaṅku  might refer to some material representation of 
the king  such as an image or a picture. Since, in the latter case, one  would  rather 
have expected to  find  rūpaṅku,  one might consider the  possibility  that  rūpinaṅku 
should  refer to something really belonging to the  king,  like  hairs and nails,  which 
are frequently used for magical purposes. 
4C>) Kustha, — the name of a plant  which  could  be used for different ceremonies; cf. 
note 51 to the Introduction. 


--- [Page 52] ---
— 42 — 
to bring (others) into their power 47); if you [14] sly means  ....... 
frontier (?) such as means to bring (others) into your power, without 
(however) succeeding in making their minds mad and crazy, or if (such) 
actions (of other persons) 48) are known to you in your region, when  these 
other persons  will  not be (?) 49) to me and to my empire, you 
will be killed  by the curse. Or, if you give orders (?) 50) yourselves to 
others among you in order to accomplish  these  wicked  actions [15] 
, you  will  be killed  by the curse. If, however, those persons 
have been punished by you, I  shall  not take measures against you 51). 
Also  you others who are charged by me  with  the function of a  Dātu, 
with the function  of (?) (or)  with  the function of a  parvānda  52), supply 
means to make crazy [16], you  will  be killed  by the curse. Or, 
if there  are people under your control to me as many 
actions as  there  are in present,  past  and future 53) , you  will  be killed 
47) Vaçtkarana,  — presumably the general term referring to all those actions ; cf. supra, p. 22. 
48) Vuatña,  —  „their  actions"; the  suffix  ­ña  cannot refer to the groups addressed (which 
are always referred to as  kāmu)  ; the latter, however, are held responsible for crimes 
committed  by those 'other people', if they may be supposed to have known of them. 
49) Kamulam, — the meaning is not clear. Perhaps the word is not directly connected 
with mulam  in tuvi  mulam  etc., but related to Javanese wulang, „to teach, to instruct'’, 
hi that  ease,  the meaning  would  be clear, and the words  tīda  ya kamulam  dy=āku 
di huluntuhānku  could  then be translated:  „they  [i.e. the persons committing those 
crimes]  are not reported to me and to my empire [I.e. the authorities acting on my 
behalf  all over the empire]". The  Çrīvijaya  dialect gives other examples of  initial 
'' d­ correspondi&g to b­ or v­ in  Malay  and Javanese.  Although  this explanation is 
conjectural  (this use of kamulam is not confirmed by  classical  Malay,  nor by modern 
Indonesian), it  would  certainly make good sense. The  passage  would  refer to those 
cases  in which  governors of provinces belonging to the  Çrīvijaya  empire, or other 
authorities, know  that  insurrection is being prepared, but do not take the appropriate 
measures (which consist, among other things, of reporting to the  king).  This  amounts 
to passive aid or  complicity. 
­0) Cihna, — lit.:  „signs,  indication"; we should have expected the use of a veib such 
as marvuat before cihna. If this explanation is correct, the  passage  would  especially 
refer to those  cases  in which  governors etc. lend a hand to rebels by  giving  them 
information  as to  thé  proper time and place to strike. 
51) Conjectural translation.  This  stipulation  would  seem rather self­evident. 
52) We see in the use of  sanyāsa  (Sanskrit  samnyāsa) parvānda  a clear indication  that 
parvānda  is to be considered the title of a rather high  official,  in command of troops 
or of a  small  district. The function must in any case be lower than a  dātu.  The term 
between  dātu  and  parvānda  is obscure ; the stone  seems  to give dvilinda. 
r*3) Krryākarmmakāryya, —kriyā  is action in general (it is used in grammar as an equivalent 
of our  Verb')  ; karman  is especiany 'action*  with  reference to retribution in this  life 
or another; whereas  kārya  is always 'future (intended) action'. So the  three  terms 
might  refer to the common classification of  acts  into present  (vartamāna),  past  (atīta) 
and future  (anāgata).  Of course,  karman  is not — properly speaking — a  past  ­ act; 
but if the term is used  with  reference to an actual situation, as is mostly the case, 
it applies to action effected in the  past,  just as when it is said  that  a certain person 
'has a lot of good  karman'.  — Probably as a consequence of uncertain reading, the 
end of the compound is not clear.  Kara  might be the 'perpetrators' of  these  three  forms 
of action, and  ­ādi  might  stress  the fact  that  not  only  actual perpetrators, but  likewise 


--- [Page 53] ---
— 43 — 
by the curse. Or if, on the other hand,  there  are their affairs, 
you will  not be  killed  by the curse [17] by the curse. Moreover, 
if you use spells (?) 54) to make all the frontier provinces indepen­
dent (from me), or, if others are known to you their affairs, then 
you are not submissive to me and to my empire and (since) you are those 
who act for them (?) 55), you  will  be killed  by the curse. 
Moreover,  — if your [18] are drunk by them  5Ô), you 
will be punished, but no other, and if you to me, 
you will  be killed  by the curse. (But), if you go back to your  dwelling 
places 58), you  will not be punished by me. Blessed are those people whom I 
ordered to watch over you  will  be killed  [19]  with  your 
wives  and children your posterity  will  be punished by me. 
Also outside 50) ‚ you  will be killed  by the curse. 
You will  be punished  with  your children, your wives, your posterity, your 
clans and your friends. 
In addition, [20] (invested by me  with  the charge of a 
Dātu,  you who protect all the provinces of my empire :  Crown  Prince, second 
Crown  Prince and other Princes 60), who are invested  with  the charge of 
a Dātu,  you are cursed if you are not submissive to me, if you are not sincere 
to me, if you are in league  with  my enemies, yourselves and the others (?) * 3­) 
you will  be killed  by this [21] curse  which  is drunk by you. I  shall  give 
assistants and all kinds of accessories are  implied.  The end,  sthiti,  if correctly read, 
does not seem clear. — We therefore suppose  that  this whole compound refers 
to the crimes mentioned before, and underlines the fact  that  not  only  those who 
commit  these  crimes at  p:esent  are to be punished, but also those who formerly 
committed  them, or who  will  commit .hem in future. The entire text strongly 
reminds one of a penal code (Chapler:  „Crimes  against the security of the  state"). 
54) Mántrika,  — might also mean:  „advisers,  give advice". 
­5) Dñan  kemu  parvttatána,  „with  you (who are) their  action’’,  which  may mean  : „you 
who are the tools to the hand of others’’. The curse is directed not  only  against 
the organizers, but also against the executors. 
56) It is possible  that  this lacunary  ­passage  refers to people who make others  „drink 
the curse’'  with  the purpose  that  it should not ba the criminals, but those 'others' 
who should undergo the sanctions. For the expression  minum  sumpaḥ,  cI. in/ra, 
lines  21, 24 etc. 
57) The words  tīda  kamulaṃña  sarvaprāna  are obscure. As to kamulam cf. note 49, above. 
If the meaning of kamulam presumed in the latter case proves to be correct,  these 
words  could  be translated :  „all  the  living  beings are not informed by  them’’,  „without 
giving  notice to all the  living  beings'*. It is, however,  difficult  to explain such a 
statement  in connection  with  the portion  which  precedes. 
*58) Although  these  words are clear by themselves, it is not possible to establish their 
exact meaning in this context. 
50) Although  the words uram  nigalarku,  "people ordered by me", are clear by themselves, 
it is, owing  to the lacuna, not clear how they fit in  with  the context. 
60) For  these  princes, cf. the Introduction, supra, p. 17. 
61) Kama di yam lai, "you to (for) the others’’ (?) ; the purport of  these  words is 
not at all clear. It  would  be possible  that  these  words were added to indicate  that 
the princes were not  only  guilty  if they were not  faithful  to the  king,  but also if 
they were not to one another, e.g. the  rájakumāras  to the  yuvarāja. 


--- [Page 54] ---
— 44 — 
orders  to punish you, (but) before your return (?) 62) you  will have expiated 
(your  sins). 
Moreover,  — if others 63) instigate 64) your  families,  clans, friends 
or descendants against me, without being a  Crown  Prince, a second  Crown 
Prince  of another Prince invested by me  with  the charge of a  Dātu  63), 
if you are  guilty  (?) 66), you  will  not be  killed  [22] by this curse  which 
is drunk by you, (but) orders  will  be issued to have you punished :  with 
your  clans and descendants you  will expiate. If, however,  these  (criminals) 67) 
(resort) to 68) the  Crown  Prince, the Second  Crown  Prince (or) the other 
Princes  who are invested by me  with  the charge of a  Dātu  and if their 
orders should be communicated (?) to you 69), with  the object  that  owing 
­2) Pūrwāña  mulam  kāmu,  — as we noted at several occasions, the meaning of  mulam 
is still  rather obscure. Here, the meaning "come back, return"  would  certainly make 
sense. Ás soon as the  king  would  receive information about suspect action by one 
of the princes, he  would  immediately take measures. He  would  organize an expedition 
in order to have the culprit brought to the capital, where he  would  be  liable 
to punishment; but, it is added, the expedition  would  hardly be necessary; 
the culprits  would  already have been  killed  by the effect of the imprecation. — 
In spite`  of all  that,  we are by no means certain  that  this is indeed the meaning 
of the words. The meaning of  mulam  is doubtful, and the use of the  suffix  ­ña  is 
strange, although it  could  be explained (cf. the corresponding term  sĕbelumña  in 
the modern language). 
63> : /ana, — presumably the Sanskrit word jana,  „people";  as appears  from the words 
following  in the text, jana should be taken to refer to those not being princes, but 
also charged  with  the function of a  dātu. 
64> Vánun,  — for this word cf. note 15 above. In this text, it has always a pejorative 
meaning. 
*55) Presumably, tnis is directed against those  dātus  who do not belong to the  royal  fair.ily. 
Because they are considered less dangerous, the sanction is lighter. 
66) Although  the reading is perfectly clear, it is not easy to establish the exact meaning 
of this passage. Here and in the immediately  following,  there  appear to be  three 
groups. The first of  these  is referred to in the third person (either as jana,  „people", 
or simply  as ya, "they"); the second is denoted by  kāmu  and  ­māmu  and refers to 
the people addressed in the whole inscription, i.e. the  state  servants of  Çrīvijaya ; 
the third group are the princes of  Çrīvijaya  charged  with  the function of a  dātu. 
Now it may happen  that  some people not specified (our first group) should prepare 
a revolt, but need collaboration ; they do not contact the  state  representatives themselves 
to that  purpose, but their relatives and friends. In such a case, it is probable  that 
the state  servants know something about the revolt, although they do not participate 
themselves.  They  are considered  guilty  since they should have enough control on 
their relatives to make such. an event impossible. It is passive collaboration. They 
are therefore punished, but  will  not be  killed  by the curse. 
­7) Ini probably refers to the first of the groups mentioned in note 66. 
** 8) Only  ka, „to", is used here, obviously for  „going  to" or something  similar.  The 
inverse occurs, for instance, in modern Javanese  meñang  and  datĕng,  both meaning 
„to go", but often used in the meaning „to, towards". 
69) Akan nimulam  çāsanāña.  The meaning of  mulam  is very doubtful; as in  line  14 above, 
the translation „to teach, to communicate" (cI. Javanese wulang)  seems  satisfactory. 
If the explanation proposed in note 66 proves to be correct, this  passage  treats 
about the case in  which  a group not specified (the first of the  three  mentioned 


--- [Page 55] ---
— 45 — 
to your collaboration (my)  subjects  [23] should have the consequences of 
your  deeds  (?) — if  these  (criminals) have been in contact  with  you before, 
to the effect  that  other people should be charged by them to speak according 
to your approval (?) 70) — then you are not submissive to me and to my 
empire and  will  be killed  by the curse. 
Or also, — all of you who are advisers (?) 71) before (the time when) 
the army charged by me to [24] T2) beyond your realms (or) 
your  (newly) acquired regions 73), you  will  be killed  by the curse. (As to) 
those who organize something according to the advice of traitors, not being 
submissive  and straight — the executors of your plans  will  be killed  by 
the curse. These  deeds  of your drink the curse (?) 7­) [25] 
if you transfer (the execution of) the actions, you  will  be killed  by this 
curse  which  is drunk by you 75). However, if you are submissive,  faithful 
(and) straight to me and do not commit  these  crimes, an immaculate tantra 
will be my recompense 76). You  will not be swallowed 7T) with  your children 
and wives. If you drink the curse [26] the army  which  is sent  to 
all the frontier provinces 7S); you  will  get the fruits  which  are drunk by 
in note 66) takes up contact  with  one of the princes (the third group). In this case, 
the state  servants of  Çrīvijaya,  who are submitted to the oath, are considered responsible 
if they may be supposed to have known about the affair. 
7<)) This  passage  was presumably added in order to  stress  the fact  that  the state  servants 
will only  be killed  by the curse if they have actually collaborated. Such a collaboration 
would  be possible if people planning a revolt get into contact  with  the state  servants 
and explain them what they intend to do. The  state  servants  would  think active 
participation  too dangerous, but approve of the plans, promising, of course, to offer 
no resistance. In  that  case,  which  is much more serious than the preceding one, 
the imprecation  would  take effect. 
71) Mantrt; the reading is however very uncertain. 
72) In the lacuna, we suppose  that  first a word  like  manapika is mentioned and after 
that a term meaning „to retire  from,  to flee  from".  CI. note 73. 
73) Ltr/ih  dart  samaryyádarnamu  . dari  lābhamān~u.  Maty ad a  seems  to refer rather to 
delimited  pieces of grounds than to the  limits  themselves ; possibly, districts are meant. 
Lábha  then refers to territories obtained (legally or  illegally).  In Java,  loyal  civil 
and military  servants were often rewarded pieces of ground. 
'4) Vuatmāmu  minum  sump  ah, —  „your  actions drink the curse (or: oath)", i.e.: it is 
your  actions  that  are submitted to the effect of the curse. Probably, the meaning 
is that  only  the higher  officials,  who take the oath, are directly subjected to its 
consequences ; if they do not do the work themselves but leave it to others, the effect 
is the same, for it is their action  which  is punished. 
7íí) Owing  to the uncertain meaning of  mu/aṃ  (cf.  notes  49 and 62), the translation is 
conjectural.  Here, it might mean: "to teach, to order",  thus  leaving the execution 
to other persons. 
76) Cf. the Introduction, supra p. 31. 
77) Nimakan, — the use of this word is a change  from  the usual  nivunuḥ.  It is a hint 
to the  kind  of death  which  the criminals were menaced  with.  They  would  be swallowed 
by the  N§gas,  which  are sculptured on the head of the stone and probably invoked 
at the beginning of the oath (at least, if Kern's conjecture as to the meaning of 
tandrun luah proves to be correct). 
7e> In the lacuna, one  would  suppose something  like  : „you  need not be afraid of". 


--- [Page 56] ---
— 46 — 
you. (?), or other (?) 70) : eternal peace  will  be the fruit produced by 
this curse  which  is drunk by you S0) ; (the curse)  will  bear fruit (?) 81) 
on the day when 82) the army  which  is distinguished 83) by me  with  officers 
(?) 83) will  undertake a punitive expedition. In addition, those who are 
punished  84) [27] [28]  (end). 
79) Conjectural translation. The words  muah  yam  muah  are difficult  in combination  with 
niminumāmu.  If we are allowed to read  sumpah  instead of the second  muah,  the 
meaning of the words becomes completely  lucid:  „the  fruits (consequences) of the 
curse  which  is drunk by  you’'.  Although  muaḥ  and  sumpah  resemble each other 
from  a palaeographic point of  view,  the stone  appears  to give the.former; but even 
then,  it might be considered a mistake made by the stone­cutter. The meaning of 
athavā  kvara lai, the reading of  which  is not beyond doubt, is obscure; we might 
read  athaváksara  lai Instead, but although  these  words  would  be clear by themselves, 
they would  not seem to make  sense  in the context. 
80) The meaning of  çānti  has been discussed in the Introduction. 
51) The subject of  rúmuah  cannot be anything else than the  sumpah  ini just before 
the punctuation mark. Presumably, the passive form ni­muah corresponds to berbuah 
in modern Indonesian; but  from  a grammatical point of  view,  the  form  is passive ; its 
literal  meaning might be:  „(the  curse) is transformed to its  fruit’’. 
52) As in modern Indonesian, the  suffix  ­ña  is used to introduce a dependent clause. 
One could  translate the sentence word for word into modern Indonesian as: 
„harinja  balatĕntara  jang  dipĕrkuatku dĕngan  prawira  bërangkat",  although it  would 
certainly  be preferable to put the last word more in the beginning of the sentence 
(bad  bërangkatnja  balaténtara,  etc.); obviously,  manaptk  is put at the end of the 
sentence to lay particular  stress  on it. 
8S) Nisamvarddhiku  parvānda,  — the use of  parvānda  in line  15 above makes it probable 
that this term refers to a rank, so  that  it could  not mean "orders’' as was presumed 
before; here, the latter meaning  could  make  senst.  but this is not the case  with 
the combination  sai*yāsa parvānda  in  line  15. As to th^ etymology of  parvānda,  the 
explanation  proposed by  Cœdès  (art. cit., p. 73) is net necessarily correct; the root  vā. 
though  known  from  related languages, does not actually occur in this  form  in Malay, 
and the  Kĕdukan  Bukit  inscription  uses  the double  form  (mamāva,  line  5) as in 
the modern language; in addition, the use of the prefix par­ cannot easily be 
accounted for. We might suggest a different interpretation by connecting the word 
with Sanskrit  pnrva(n)  with  the  suffix  (n)cfa (the use of  which  may be compared  with 
that in ayahanda or ayanda, ibunda etc.). The Sanskrit term is regularly used for 
all kind  of divisions,  especially for divisions of time. Its use for army  divisions, 
though not  attested,  would  not be astonishing. — Nisamvardhiku, whether derived  from 
Sanskrit  samvrddhi or  from  Sanskrit samvardhita, is used everywhere (cf. lines 20 sqq.) 
in the meaning of "distinguished  with"  ; here, too, we have a word used in a meaning 
which  differs  from  that  which  the word has in  classical  Sanskrit, and numerous other 
cases  may be added (such as drohaka, paracaksu,  kadāci,  marsamjñāvuddhi,  (s)ārambha). 
There are  some  slight indications  that  there  is influence  from  Buddhist Sanskrit, but 
the subject requires a detailed study. 
84) We prefer not to try to give a translation of the last lines of the text, in  which 
there  are very serious lacunae. Some points, however, deserve attention.  Makāryya 
avadya (line 27) obviously means "doing misschief" ; avadya is a  well­known  technical 
qualification  of karman  in Buddhism (cI. infra No. IH, note 29 to the translation). 
Âsannaphalāna  is interesting in  view  of the interpretation of  āsannakāla  in a  difficult 
passage  in the Talang Tuwo inscription (cf. note 26 to the Introduction); it appears, 
however,  that  no definite conclusions may be drawn on account of the use of the term 


--- [Page 57] ---
— 47 — 
HI. A  BUDDHIST TEXT ENGRAVED  ON  GOLD PLATES 
For several years, the Djakarta Museum has been in possession of 
a set of eleven  gold  plates, catalogued No. 7861, a — k. Of  these,  eight are 
of equal size, measuring 25,5 cm in length and 9,5 cm in height. In the 
transcription,  they are marked a — h. The  three  remaining plates (i — k) 
are considerably smaller, measuring about 21 to 6,5 cm. 
In general, the  state  of preservation of all  these  plates is excellent. 
On some of them, however, some curious black  spots  are  visible,  which 
cannot be removed by any means. It may be supposed  that  they are due to 
some carbonlike  matter,  which  penetrated into the  gold  when it was melting 
on the surface. The  akṣaras  have nowhere been seriously affected X) ; the 
difficult  reading of the text is mainly due to the fact of the  akṣaras  having 
been engraved in a very superficial way, as is almost always the  case  with 
gold plates. 
Except  for fc, all the plates are inscribed on either side.  Owing  to 
considerable differences in the size of both  akṣaras  and interlinear space, 
the number of lines inscribed is far from being equal on each plate : it 
varies between eight and eleven on the larger­sized plates, and between 
two and four on the smaller ones. The exact numbers  appear  from the 
Transcription. 
As to the plate marked k, it is not inscribed in the usual way. Instead 
of akṣaras,  a number of remarkable figures have been engraved on either 
side.  The lines are too vaguely sketched for making photographic reproduction 
possible.  In the drawing attached to  this  description, copying has been 
limited  to those  details  which  seem perfectly clear and unambiguous. It 
may not be complete : it  seems  as if  there  are some more lines, the exact 
form  of which  cannot be  fixed  with  any  degree  of certainty. 
Tne figures engraved offer several  points  of interest. Two of  these 
seem to  represent  terrace­like constructions, whereas the two forms in the 
middle  of the front side recall the so­called  maésans,  which  occur on  Moham­
medan graves in Indonesia. On the other side, a beautifully engraved lotus 
flower  is visible  beneath a cakra  with  eight rims 2), a moon (?) and two 
in line 27, since the context is too uncertain. In  savātu  (line 27),  vātu  might refer 
to a unity of weight; cf. the use of "stone’' in  English  ; one  would  then be  inclined 
to consider gulas as a variant of Sanskrit  guda;  the form  with  an 1 of probably 
Pracritic  origin  is known from Indian dictionaries only, but it has become the usual 
form  in Indonesian languages. The  final  sibilant is however strange. The most 
interesting word in the  final  line is the name of the month  Āṣāḍha  ; the words legible 
in the beginning of line 28 (especially  nitamūña  vala)  suggest  that  this is the 
month for  which  the military expedition (often alluded to in the text) was scheduled. 
1) It is not impossible  that  spectroscopie  examination,  which  it has not been possible 
to effect up to this moment, may establish the  origin  of the black  spots  with  certainty. 
Since  the akṣaras  are not damaged in the black­coloured portions, it is highly probable 
that the plates were already in the  same  condition at the moment when they were 
inscribed. 
2) Or a sketch of the sun ? 


--- [Page 58] ---
_ 48 — 
weapons,  which  may be identified as a  triçūla  and an  aṅkuça.  — The meaning 
of these  vaguely  visible  figures  seems  rather  difficult  to be settled. It  appears 
probable, though,  that  there  is some  kind  of relation  with  the text engraved 
on the other plates. As  will  appear  in the course of this Introduction, the 
text constitutes a small treatise about Dependent Origination  (pratītyasamut¬
pāda) , one of the principal tenets of Buddhism. It is obvious, however, that 
there  is nothing in the figures  which  is particularly Buddhistic, though, on 
the other hand,  there  is not anything either  which  would  be opposed to 
Buddhism.  It is not impossible  that  the engraved figures  represent  some 
of the manifold symbols of meditation, common in older  Mahāyāna  and 
much  more so in the  Tāntric  Schools. In spite of this uncertainly,  these 
drawings offer a pfoint of special interest : both the terracelike buildings 
and the form of the  maésan convey the impression of being Indonesian, — 
in any case,  these  symbols are more commonly met  with  in Indonesia than 
elsewhere. 
The latter conclusion is of some particular interest, since nothing is 
known  about where the plates were discovered. As they were unknown 
before the last war, but proved to be in the Djakarta Museum in 1946, 
they must have been brought  there  during the war or immediately after. 
Unless  some reliable data emerge from an unexpected quarter, the only 
information  available is contained in the plates themselves. Sundry peculiari­
ties, such as the type of script and the orthography, seem to confirm the 
provisional  conclusion suggested by the figures of plate k. Unless new details 
come to light in the future,  which  might make us conclude to another place 
of origin,  it seems  safe to  assume  that  the plates were engraved in the 
country where their presence was noted for the first time, viz. Indonesia. 
This  lack of information as to the place of  origin  necessitates  a close 
examination  of the type of script in  which  the text was engraved. As, 
moreover, the text is not dated, palaeographic analysis  is almost the only 
means  by which  it is possible to arrive at a rough estimation of the period 
in which  the plates were engraved. 
As was  stated  above, the  akṣaras  are very shallow. As to their size, 
considerable differences can be observed. These differences in size are the 
chief  reason for the varying number of lines on the plates. Thus, the very 
first plate of the series (a) is inscribed  with  11 lines on the front and 
only eight on the back. As to the manner in  which  the plates were engraved, 
it is very probable  that  a sharp metal instrument was used. Although  gold 
is rather  soft, this method requires a  great  amount of practice and, as a 
matter  of fact, the result is not always satisfactory.  Owing  to changes 
either in the instrument or in the scribe, the forms of the  aksaras  are 
reproduced far  better  on one plate than on another. Not seldom, the result 
gives an impression of carelessness (e.g. plate a), but just as often the 
engraving has been executed  with  great  care (e.g. plate e). Notwithstanding 
these  differences, the  type  of script is everywhere the same. 


--- [Page 59] ---
— 49 — 
From  a palaeographic point of  view,  the script of our plates  could 
be defined as a transitional  phase  between the Pallava script and the Old 
Javanese script of the oldest period.  Very  archaic forms frequently occur 
side by side  with  relatively modern forms. As a characteristic example, 
we may quote the form of the  akṣara  ka. In most cases, the ka is written 
as a long vertical line (descending considerably below the  level  of most 
of the other  akṣaras),  on which  the horizontal  part,  which  is only a small 
curve,  is attached not far below the top. I.e.  *†` . The latter form  agrees 
with that  found  in the  fifth  century inscriptions of Western Java 3). On 
the other hand, we often  find,  on the  same  plate, forms of the  same  akṣara 
which  could  hardly be distinguished from the type occurring in Old Javanese 
inscriptions  of the ninth (and even the beginning of the  tenth)  century 
A. D., I.e. rT\  • 
A characteristic  feature  of the older Pallava script is the  similarity 
of the  akṣaras  ta and na. In the inscriptions from Western Java quoted 
above, the two  akṣaras  are often very  difficult  to be distinguished 4). Usually, 
the loop  of the ta‚ (f) , is larger than  that  of the na,  çj^ , but  there  occur 
medium­sized  loops where it  would  have been impossible to decide whether 
ta or na was  meant  if the  akṣara  had stood by itself. In later Pallava script, 
however, the two forms developed in just the opposite direction : the loop 
of the ta increased in size, whereas the  similar  one of the na was reduced 
to a very small curve at the lower end of the  akṣara.  In the  Çrīvijaya 
inscriptions  dated the end of the 7th century  A. D„ the forms of the ta and 
of the na became (Jj and Q , respectively, so  that  their confusion is out of 
the question.  During  the eighth and ninth centuries­ no substantial change 
in the form of  these  akṣaras  can be observed, but it is interesting to  note 
that in the Eastern Java inscriptions of the 10th century onwards, the loop 
was re­established at the bottom of the na 5), but owing to several minor 
changes in the forms  there  was no possibility of the two forms being mistaken 
one for the other : ta was wiitten (Tj but ?ia :  Cfr # 
If now we compare  these  two aksara forms on our plates, it is obvious 
that,  as a rule,  there  is no possibility whatever of their being confounded. 
Both  the ta and the na are characterized by a loop, but the difference in 
size is rather  pronounced. On the other hand,  there  are quite a few examples 
of ambiguous loops, and this  does  not appear  to be a question of careless 
­) CI. the publication  with  clear photographs by J. Ph.  vogel,  7`he  Earliest Sanskrit 
Inscriptions of Java, Publ.  Oudh. Dienst,  I (1925), pp. 15—35, PL 27—35. 
4) As a  typical  example we may quote the name of the capital mentioned in  these 
inscriptions.  Their first editor.  Kern,  read it as  ivārumā,  which  reading was later on 
corrected to  Tārumā  (Voge1,  art. cit., p. 25). In a single  case  (bhúnena,  in line 2 
of the Tugu rock inscription), the workman who carved the text in the rock presumably 
mistook  the ta of his example for a na (ibid., p. 33). 
5) This fact may be due to the habit of  writing  on lontar ;  there,  just as in our cursive 
writing,  it is easier to execute a little loop,  which  requires no  lifting  of the instrument, 
than a  separate  little curve (cf. our written t  with  its printed form). 


--- [Page 60] ---
— 50 — 
engraving,  for the examples are mainly found in  those  parts  of the text 
which  make the impression of being very accurately written. In the first 
two lines of the front side of plate 6, for instance, the word ayatana occurs 
no less than  five  times, but in all  these  cases  the third and fourth  akṣaras 
of the word  appear  to be perfectly alike ;  these  two lines, however, are 
very  neatly written. We presume  that  these  difficulties may be accounted 
for in a satisfactory way only if we assign the time of engraving to a 
period  in which  the newer  akṣara  types were the current ones, although 
they had not yet completely superseded the older types. The latter being 
mainly  limited  to the neatly written portions of our text, it  seems  probable 
that they were due to conscious effort. 
Similar  remarks apply to the different forms of the  akṣara  la. More 
often than not, the  three  verticals are equal in height and then, the  fŏrṃ 
of the la  would  completely  agree  with  the type of la  which  was in common 
use from the late 7th century inscriptions of  Çrīvijaya  onwards. On the 
other hand,  there  also occurs on our plates a very different form of the 
akṣara ; although it is less common than the form mentioned above, it is 
by no means  rare. Its most characteristic  feature  is the prolongation of the 
third,  ascending, vertical,  which  bends  to the left and runs round the whole 
of the akṣara,  I.e. . One of the few dated inscriptions in  which  this 
form  is met  with  is a Cambodian Sanskrit inscription of 627  A. D.  6). 
The only example in Indonesia is the  Tuk  Mas rock inscription (Central 
Java),  which,  unfortunately,  does  not bear any  date,  but was assigned to 
the seventh century  A.D.  on palaeographic grounds 7). This type differs 
as much from the  Purṇavarman  la (5th century  A. D.) as from the  Çrīvijaya 
la, which  is expressed as f[j . It might constitute a  link  in the development 
of the form of the  akṣara  and  would  then confirm our conclusion arrived 
at above. 
Some other peculiarities,  which  will  not be examined in detail,  appear 
to be in keeping  with  the above considerations, e.g. the two forms of the 
initial  a : j4 and j­j and of medial  %: Q and © 8). 
These features, though apparently contradictory, may enable us to arrive 
at an approximate result concerning the period in  which  our plates were 
engraved. It is a well­known principle in palaeographic discussions  that, 
if chronologically different types of the  same  akṣara  occur in one text, 
the inscription  must be dated in the period during  which  the newer forms 
6) Finot,  B.E.F.E.O.,  28 (1928), pp. 43­46 (with an excellent photograph) ; cf. also Corp. 
No. XIII  (K 577 and 6oo), dated 611  A.D.  (Cœdès,  Inscr.  áu Camb., H, pp. 21 sqq.I. 
Corp.  No. Xd‚ dated 693  A.D.  (Cœdès,  II. pp. 2oo sq.), Corp. No.  VIII­IX,  assigned 
to the 6th century by  Cœdès,  II, p. 16. 
7) Krom,  Not. Bat. Gen., 1910, p. 77, and (in abbreviated form)  Geach~,  p. 103 ; photo¬
graph in Bijdr. K.I., 65 (1911), p. 335, where Kern had assigned the inscription to 
a much earlier  date  (about 5oo  A.D.)  ; the article was reprinted  with  a few additions, 
but without the good photograph, in Verspr. Geschr., VII, pp. 199 sqq. 
s) A characteristic example of the former occurs in line 2 (in  çrī)  of the inscription of 
Ci­Arutön  (Vogel,  op. cit., Plate 29). 


--- [Page 61] ---
— 51 — 
were in use. AS a  matter  of fact, a scribe may, on account of various 
considerations,  well  use rather  archaic forms, but he cannot possibly write 
down  any forms of  akṣaras  which  belong to a later period. Archaisms 
may have a very wide scope. In this case,  there  are very special circumstances 
in favour of the use of archaisms. As  will  appeal* during this introduction, 
the text of our plates  does  not constitute an  original  inscription. Presumably 
it was copied on the precious metal from some manuscript. Such copies 
are usually reproduced in the type of script  which  was current in the 
time of the scribe. But at the  same  time,  there  is often a tendency towards 
keeping  the copy as  similar  to the  original  as possible. In addition, the text 
constitutes a religious treatise, so  that  it is only natural  that  respect for the 
holy words  would  have induced the scribe to reproduce his  original  as 
accurately as he could. As may be expected in such circumstances, the result 
is unequal: sometimes the scribe went to very much trouble, and then 
the copy  was very  similar  to the  original  manuscript ; but almost as often, 
relatively  modern forms slipped into the copy — the  akṣara  forms  which 
the scribe was used to  writing  when he was not copying anything. Sometimes 
one has the impression  that  the script of the  initial  lines of the plates 
shows a more archaic style of  writing  than  that  of the  following  ones. 
When  taking all  these  circumstances into consideration, one arrives at the 
conclusion  that  the result  which  we have before us on the  gold  plates  could 
be explained very  well  if one presumed  that  the scribe was reproducing a 
manuscript written several centuries earlier. 
Before  considering other consequences of copymg an older text, we 
shall  try to arrive at a conclusion concerning the  date  the copy was made. 
In the examples quoted above,  there  are no  features  which  are necessarily 
later than the  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions dated the end of the 7th century. 
On the other hand, it is to be noted  that  this 7th century  Çrivijaya  script 
does  not show any substantial differences if compared  with  that  of the 
Tjaṅgal  inscription (732  A. D.),  or even  with  that  of the  Ligor  inscription 
(775  A. D.) 9). It would  not probably be much later, as  there  are no definite 
examples of  those  innovations  which  appear  in the  Dinaya  stone  inscription 
(760  A. D.) 10). We should, however, remain conscious of the fact  that  little 
9) Cf. the photograph published by  Cœdès,  B.E.F.E.O.,  18 (1918), No. 6,  facing  p. 30. 
In our text, we do not  find  any example of the peculiar way in  which  the  syllable 
bhū is regularly written in the inscriptions of  Ligor  and  Tjaṅgal.  It is an 
obvious  archaism,  which  appears in the Cambodian  inscription  of the year 627  A.D.,  too. 
As a matter of fact, the  inscription  of Kotakapur shows the same  form  in bhūmi 
(line  3), but the later  form  in bhūmi  in the last  line.  Therefore, it seems  that  no 
sound  conclusions  could  be based on the  form  of bhū.  The same applies to the  form 
of the ra,  which,  in our text, is always single­stroked. 
10) A photograph was published in the article by  F. D. K. Bosch,  Het  Lingga­heiligdom 
van Dinaja,  T.B.G.,  64 (1924),  facing  p. 228. — In the  Dinaja  inscription,  the akṣaras 
are rather cursive, whereas in our text they are everywhere straight.  This  cursive style 
of writing  is a  typical  feature of the Old Javanese script up to the beginning of 
the loth  century AJD. 


--- [Page 62] ---
— 52 — 
weight  should be attached to this last argument. The archaistic style of 
writing  makes it almost impossible to  base  any conclusions on the absence 
of innovations.  Allowing  a wide margin, we might conclude  that  the most 
probable time of engraving  would  be between about 650 and 800  A. D. 
As to the place of  origin,  it is obvious  from  the preceding remarks 
that no certain conclusions can be based on palaeographic considerations. 
At best,  we may  state  that  there  are no peculiarities  which  do not occur 
in inscriptions  from  Indonesia and  Malaya,  whereas it is doubtful whether 
all of them occur elsewhere, too. In any case, the analysis of the type of 
script  would  not oppose our provisional conclusion  that  it is probable  that 
the plates were inscribed somewhere in Indonesia. 
The text  itself  exhibits numerous examples of  typically  clerical  errors. 
Among  these,  omissions of one or more  akṣaras,  or, less frequently, of whole 
words,  are very common. The very first lines of the text contain quite a 
number of them. As a rule, the correction of such errors hardly offers any 
difficulty,  but they make it probable  that  the scribe did not understand 
much  of the text he copied 1X). Diplographies are far less frequent, but 
they do occur. Other mistakes are relatively rare. 
It is  striking  that  these  sorts of mistakes are far more frequent in 
one part of the text than in another. Sometimes we meet  with  passages 
which  are  full  of obvious lapses, whereas, on the other hand,  there  are 
relatively  long  portions in the text in  which  only  a very few lapses can 
be detected. The difference might be due to the  state  of preservation of the 
manuscript  from  which  the text was copied. Wherever the text was  difficult 
to decipher, the scribe made the  best  of it he  could.  If we presume  that 
in a number oí  cases  he had no idea of what  would  have been the correct 
reading,  and then preferred to give no reading rather than a text  which 
would  most certainly be wrong, we might arrive at a plausible explanation 
of the relative frequency of omissions. 
The text is completely written in Sanskrit. The most  striking  difference 
from  the  classical  language is the way in  which  the rules of  sandhi  are 
applied.  These rules are often observed  correctly,  but almost as often neglected, 
and, in a few cases, wrongly applied.  This  third case is relatively rare 
— except for two  passages  which,  on account of other peculiarities, too, 
may be considered interpolations not belonging to the  original  text 12). 
In any case, wrong  sandhi  is rare : it  would  not probably be more frequent 
than it is in the average Sanskrit inscription  from  India 13). These  cases 
do not offer any special interest. 
11) Unlike  the  original  manuscript, the text engraved in the plates was not probably 
copied  for the purpose of being read. We  shall  come back to this point at the end 
6f this Introduction. 
12) These two portions of the text  will  be discussed towards the end of this Introduction. 
13) As to the Sanskrit inscriptions from .Indonesia (and from Indochina), it is even 
striking  that  sandhi  is almost always correctly applied. The  Âdityavarman  inscriptions 
(14th century  A.D.),  where this is not the case, obviously mark the decline of Sanskrit 
scholarship. 


--- [Page 63] ---
— 53 — 
As to the second  case  mentioned above, it is not quite correct to  state 
that the rules of  sandhi  were often not observed at all. As a  matter  of 
fact, in all of  these  cases, the words were written in the form  which  they 
ought to have had if they had stood in pausa. Examples may be found 
in every line of the text. As a result, the text very often makes the impression 
of being cut into tiny  separate  sentences  often consisting of one word only. 
Thus,  we read in b — A  — 9  14): kāmabhavah rūpabhavah  ō,rūpyabhavah, 
each word constituting a unity by itself. In all enumerations of this  kind, 
omission  of sandhi  is regular; it produces a  rather  clumsy effect,  which 
makes the text almost unreadable.­It is as if a guru were pronouncing the 
words to his pupils  with  a considerable  pause  after each term,  thus  giving 
them sufficient time to memorize every single word. It  seems  probable 
that the omission of  sandhi  especially aimed at avoiding quick reading. 
Nevertheless, not all the  cases  of omitted  sandhi  are classifiable under this 
heading; other  cases  do occur, but they are relatively few.  Almost  always, 
definite  reasons  can be found accounting for the omission of  sandhi.  As a 
rule,  it is omitted in  those  cases  where  there  might be some chance of 
misunderstanding the  passage.  Such  cases  occur, for instance, if the negative 
prefix  a­ would  have disappeared by  vowel  contraction ; thus, in f — A — 4, 
pañcavidhā  avidyā  is written in order to prevent the ignorant from reading 
pañcavidhā  vidyā.  This method, though not very elegant, is sufficiently clear ; 
in normal Sanskrit, one  would  have used different  means  to avoid misunder­
standing, e.g. by  writing  pañcavidhā  cāvidyā.  As may be expected for this 
period,  the avagraha is unknown  ; its use  would  have avoided the  hiatus 
in cases  such as  pūrvvānte ajñānam  (a — A — 7). 
There remain a few  cases  which  could  not  well  be accounted for in 
this manner. In a — A — 9, it is evident  that  hetāv=ajñānam  would  have 
been easier to understand than  heto  ajñānam,  which  is, at first, startling lr>). 
These few remaining  cases  may however easily be understood : non­application 
of sandhi  became a  matter  of principle in all  these  combinations  with  ajñāna. 
The impression  that  the omission of  sandhi  is not due to the ignorance 
about  these  rules, but to definite considerations, is confirmed by  those 
cases  in which  even the less common rules are correctly applied. Examples 
occur  everywhere in the text, e.g. in a — A — 2:  bhagavāms  tān  and in 
a — A — 1  : bhagavāñ  chrāvastyām.  In the latter case, the conversion of 
ç to ch is considered preferable but not necessary by most of the gram­
marians 36). The use of  sandhi  rules in  these  examples gives the impression 
that the author wanted to show  that  he knew the rules very  well,  even 
if he did not apply them in special  cases  for a definite purpose. 
14) In these  abbreviations, the first  letters  refer to the plates, the capitals A and B to 
recto  and  verso  respectively, and the figures to the lines. 
15) This effect is partly due to the spelling o instead of au. In Old Javanese inscriptions, 
this is almost always the case, whereas e and ai are usually distinguished. 
16) Whithey's Grammar, p. 68. § 203  : Wackemagel, Altind. Gramm., I, 1 (1896), p. 332, 
Š 282. 


--- [Page 64] ---
54 — 
Though  it is not probable  that  the above  cases  of omission of  sandhi 
are to be explained by reference to  Vedic  hymns or to Buddhist  gāthās  Î7), 
there  may  be some chance  that  the occurrence of  similar  instances in the 
latter group of scriptures should have facilitated a certain freedom  from 
the rigid  sandhi  rules. It is perhaps not a mere accident  that  irregular 
sandhi  is sometimes found in the so­called Buddhist  Article  of Faith  and 
in older Buddhist Sanskrit texts in general 1S); in the older Buddhist texts, 
the use of  sandhi  may not have been as regular as it was elsewhere :  there 
was a certain tradition of laxness in  sandhi. 
It is however evident  that  these  parallels  could  not supply us  with 
a frill  explanation of the very peculiar way in  which  sandhi  is used in 
our text. We presume  that  these  facts should rather be explained by refer­
ring to the obviously didactic character of our text. It is  well­known  that 
the rules of  sandhi  constitute one of the main  difficulties  for the primary 
Sanskrit  reader, because they often make the words and grammatical forms, 
as they were taught in dictionaries and grammars, hard to recognize. If 
the text was especially intended for pupils, we can understand the author 
making  the task of reading and studying the text as easy as possible,  thus 
avoiding  the possibility  of misunderstanding. As to this latter point, we may 
especially  refer again to those very numerous  cases  in which  the  initial 
a of words such as  avidyā,  ajñana  and the  like  would  have disappeared 
as a consequence of  sandhi. 
17) One of the main  difficulties  in judging about the  sandhi  in these  cases  is that  our 
manuscript traditions are not reliable on this point; they contain numerous corrections, 
but the  original  forms can often be reconstituted to a certain extent  with  the help 
of metrics. In Buddhisi  gāthās,  forms such as bodhiangam, samuddecyate ayam, bud¬
dhacandra samuddecyate, sarvamitra bhajate atandritah,  yādrço  ayu (examples from 
the Gaṇḍavyūha  in Çiksāsamuccaya,  pp.  lol  sq.) are frequently met  with.  It appears, 
however,  that  these  examples are rather different  from  what we see in our text 
1S) CI. e.g. Quaritch Wales, Archaeol. Researches, Journ.  Mal. Br.  R.A.S., 18  (194o), 
p. 7:  rúrodho  evam°.  Also  in the Indonesian examples of the formula, we often  find 
prabnaváh  instead of  prabhavá  (before the h) end nirodhah or  rúrodho  instead of 
rúrodha  (followed  by evam).  — It is  striking  that  some of the Sanskrit texts found 
in Central  Asia  as a result of the  Mission  Pelliot show a very  similar  attitude 
towards  sandhi  as our text does. CI.  Sylvain  Lévi,  Textes  sanscrits de Touen­Houang, 
Journ,  As.,  lOième  Sér.,  XVI  (1910), pp. 433 sqq.  Lévi  notes  (ibid., p. 437)  : „Le scribe, 
ou le modele  qu'il  reproduit,  suspend volontiers  l’application  du sandhi, soit  pour 
marquer un  léger  arret  de la  voix  ,  soit  pour  éviter  une  equivoque  fácheuse  : 
sparee  asati,  f(euillet) r,  V 5, sadāyatane  asati,  ibid., 3, etc.  La  chute  de I's  initial 
reclamée  par  le sandhi aurait  efface  la negation  nécessaire".  These remarks  could 
almost have been written in an introduction to our text.  Although  the explanations 
given  by Lévi  are quite sufficient by themselves, it is nevertheless  striking  that  here, 
like in the case of our text, the  Dinaya  inscription and the examples of the Buddhist 
formula  of creed, the texts were composed outside India.  This  is hardly astonishing: 
the chances for misunderstanding the text, e.g. by concluding to  jñāna  instead of  ajñana, 
were not so  great  in India  with  her countiess Pandits than in other countries. Besides, 
and this might be even more important, the omission of  sandhi  rules in some particular 
cases  must have been less shocking to  Central­Asian  and Indonesian  e**rs  than they 
would  have been to Indians. 


--- [Page 65] ---
— 55 — 
In Indonesian epigraphy,  there  is one example of a Sanskrit inscription 
in which  all the rules of  sandhi  have been omitted  from  the beginning 
to the end. It is the  Dinaya  inscription dated 760  A. D.  19). There, all the 
words are given in the forms to be used in pausa, but it  appears  that  the 
correct metrical  form  of the text can  only  be re­established by applying 
the Sanskrit  rules  of sandhi.  Obviously,  the poet had first written the text 
in the normal way, but changed it afterwards to the  form  in which  it 
was engraved on the stone. Now the question arises why the text should 
have been put into this, apparently clumsy,  form  ? There  seems  to be  only 
one plausible reply to this question: the scribe preferred to make the 
inscription  as easy as possible for his readers. There may have been additional 
circumstances, too. The text was composed on Indonesian  soil,  and to Javanese 
readers  the use of  sandhi  rules must have appeared rather strange. In Indo­
nesian languages, the word constitutes a, phonetic unity, and as such, its 
form  is not influenced by words immediately preceding or  following  it 20). 
A Sanskrit text in  which  words  follow  each other without  sandhi  would 
therefore have seemed less  strange  in Indonesia than  would  have been the 
case in India. 
If some weight may be attached to the above considerations, four 
different  arguments, none of  which  decisive by itself, may be adduced in 
favour  of an Indonesian  origin  of our plates : (a) the plates were noticed 
in Indonesia for the first time ; (b) the figures engraved in plate k  seem 
to show Indonesian features ; (c) the type of script is in accordance  with 
the development  which  we observe in Indonesia ; (d) the peculiar way in 
which  the rules of  sandhi  are applied point to a non­Indian  origin,  whereas 
we find  analogies in Indonesian epigraphy, where, in addition, this feature 
is in part explicable by the  linguistic  structure of Indonesian languages. 
Although  it cannot be denied  that  one definite  statement  about the site oí 
discovery  would  have had more weight than all  these  points together have, 
1­) Cf.  Bosch,  T.B.G.,  57 (1916), pp. 410 sqq., and  T.B.G.,  64 (1924), pp. 227 sqq.; 
Poerbatjaraka, Agasiya (1926), pp. 51 sqq. and 109 sqq.; K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, 
T.B.Cr.,  76 (1936), pp. 512 sqq., and our transcription,  T.B.G.,  81 (1941), pp. 499 sqq. 
20) The question is however more complicated. There are some obvious exceptions, mainly 
enclitic  words; cf. Javanese  mboten,  derived  from  tan  wwantĕn  in Old Javanese, 
and tambuh  from  tan wruh  .* in these  two examples, the  final  n of tan was assimilated. 
In such cases, it is probable  that  the assimilation took place when the combination 
was no longer a word group but had already developed into a new word (the semantic 
development confirms this explanation). — On the other hand, it is  well­known  that 
the Sanskrit  rules of  sandhi  are often applied in Old Javanese, especially in inscriptions 
and in poetry. In the former, however,  cases  of sandhi,  though far  from  rare, constitute 
only  a small  portion of the  cases  where  sandhi  could  have been used if the Sanskrit 
rules were adhered to. On the whole,  sandhi  is exceptional and should probably be 
explained  as an occasional display of learning by the scribes. In Old Javanese poetry, 
the use of  sandhi  is only  natural since also the metrical and  prosodie  laws of Sanskrit 
are applied. In the (presumably) older phase, represented by the Old Javanese 
Rāmāyaṇa  (for  which  cf. the Introduction to No. XI below), even the  vowel  hiatus 
is common. 


--- [Page 66] ---
— 56 — 
it seems  safe to  assume  that  they were discovered somewhere in Indonesia ; 
we may only hope  that  a tip of the  veil  covering the  origin  of the plates 
will be lifted  in the future 21). 
In view  of this uncertainty, it  seems  rather  futile to examine from 
what  part  of Indonesia the plates  would  originate.  All we can  state  is that 
if (a) they do originate from Indonesia, and (b) they are to be assigned 
to the period between about 650 and 800  A. D., there  are only two  centres 
which  seriously come into consideration : the empire of  Çrīvijaya  22) and 
the Çailendra  empire in Central Java 23). 
The peculiar way in  which  the rules of  sandhi  are applied is the 
outstanding  feature  of our text as far as language is concerned. Some minor 
details may be added. 
Ignoring  clerical  errors, frequent only in  those  portions where the 
original  text may have been in a bad  state,  the language may be considered 
correct. Grammatical mistakes are almost  limited  to two particular portions 
of the text, in  which  they are however common; on account of other argu­
ments, too,  these  passages  should be considered later additions to the text 2i). 
Outside  these  two  passages,  the following  peculiarities are worthy of note. 
There are a few examples of wrong grammatical genders. In a—B — 7, 
rūpa is masculine ;  puspa  is used as a masculine in c — A — 10. A mistake 
of a different  kind  is the confusion between pattra and  pátra  in the  same 
line. Forms  like  vitarkayitvā  and  vicārayitvā  (instead of vitarkya and  vicārya ; 
f — B — 5 to 6) are sometimes met  with  in the  Epics  and in classical 
21) The most probable explanation is  that  the plates were acquired during the period 
in which  the Museum was under  Japanese  direction; in  that  case,  there  may have 
been particular  reasons  for not putting down their  origin.  But in  that  case, it is 
difficult  to imagine  that  they should have been imported into Indonesia. 
«­ 2) Some of the minor Buddhist centres, such as Western Borneo,  could  hardly come 
into consideration; the luxury displayed in engraving a text in twelve heavy  gold 
plates  would  rather  point to a gre?.t anJ  rich  state.  The  Malay  peninsula, or at 
least a  part  of it, should be included in  Çrīvijaya  in this period. There might even 
be a slight indication in favour of the latter in  view  of the remarkable parallel 
between some of the  strophes  mentioned in our text and  those  found inscribed in 
a clay tablet from  Malaya.  This point  will  be examined  with  greater  detail towards 
the end of this Introduction. 
23) There might be a slight indication in favour of Java, viz. the way in  which 
the rules of  sandhi  are applied. The only real parallel in South­East  Asia 
seems  to be the  Dinaya  inscription. In  view  of the very few Sanskrit  texts  known 
to us from Sumatra or the  Malay  peninsula, the argument is  rather  weak. There 
is however another point  which  would  be in favour of Java. The luxury mentioned 
in note  22 agrees  far better  with  all we know about Central Java  with  its numerous 
religious  foundations than  with  Çrīvijaya,  where we did not discover anything comparable. 
This  point may be especially interesting  because  there  is hardly any doubt  that  the 
plates once belonged to ­an important religious foundation (cf. the end of this Intro­
duction).  At present,  it seems  Impossible to decide what weight should be attached 
to either  these  arguments or  those  mentioned in  note  22. 
24) These  passages  win be  treated  in detail at the end of this Introduction. They contain 
very  serious mistakes. 


--- [Page 67] ---
­ 57 — 
Sanskrit;  they are common in Buddhist Sanskrit In addition,  there  are two 
strophes  in our text  which  are unfortunately very  baḍly  copied, but in 
spite of  that,  it may be concluded  that  they were written in the so­called 
Gāthā  dialect. They  will  be analyzed below. It is very probable  that  the 
abnormal metrical and linguistic  features  were the very reason why the 
text of the  strophes  was badly copied : as a rule, copying a hand­written 
text that  one  does  not understand is always  difficult  Fortunately, our 
copyist  did not  attempt  to ‘correct’ this  passage  (c — A — 4 to 5) ; as a 
matter  of fact, he almost never did. He even  seems  to have worked mechani­
cally  and omitted the words  that  he could  not read. 
The style of our text makes the impression of clumsiness,  which  is 
mainly  due to the excessive number of repetitions also in  cases  where they 
could  easily have been avoided. This is a common  feature  in the older 
Buddhist  scriptures such as the  Pāli Nikāyas  and the  Prajñāpāramitā  versions. 
The repetitions are mainly due to the didactic purposes of  these  texts  : 
things are  better  retained the more often they are repeated 25). 
After  these  more external details, we now proceed to a short examination 
of the contents. 
On two of the  three  smaller plates (i and ;) — the third one, fc,  does 
not bear any script — some presumably fundamental formulae of Buddhism 
are inscribed. They both begin  with  the Çloka Ajñānāc cīyate  karma,  which 
is already known from epigraphic records discovered in Western Borneo 
and Malaya  26), but has not been traced in Buddhist literature. It is  stated 
that want of knowledge  (ajñāna)  produces the accumulation of  Karman, 
which,  in its turn,  will  lead to re­birth; if, however, knowledge  (jñāna) 
takes  the place of ignorance,  there  will  be no accumulation of  Karman  and, 
therefore, one  will  not be reborn. Thus, a causal relation between  Ajñāna, 
Karman  and  Janman  is established , the arrangement is positive in the 
pādas  a­b, and negative in c­cl. As Chhabra notice^, the doctrine contained 
therein is not exclusively Buddhistic : it  rather  belongs to the common 
property of different systems of Indian thought, such as  Vedānta  and 
Sāṃkhya  27). According  to the Buddhist interpretation, the  Çloka  gives 
one of the principal  aspects  of the philosophical doctrine of Dependent 
Origination  ; this is obvious in our text, where it is used as a  kind  of motto 
to a text dealing  with  the latter subject 2S). The two  Çloka  halves correspond 
25) Winternitz,  Geschichte, II, 1 (1913), p. 42, pp. 52 sq., p. 248, etc. 
26) Published by Chhabra, Expansion, p. 15 and pp. 42 sqq. 
27> Op. cit., p. 15:  „The  doctrine herein expressed  seems  to be more closely related 
with the  Sankhya  and the Vedanta than  with  the Buddhist philosophy. It is however 
not alien to the latter." — The last  part  of this  statement  is rather  too weak in the 
light  of our  present  knowledge of Buddhism. 
28) Its main assertion  agrees  with  that  expressed in the most famous strophe of Buddhism, 
in which  a similar  paranelism between its two halves is worked out. The  same  is 
the case  with  the Samudaya and Nirodha  parts  of the  Pratītyasamutpada  formula. 
The relations between Buddhism and  Saṃkhya,  and between Buddhism and the 


--- [Page 68] ---
­­58­­
with the  positive  (anuloma)  and the negative (pratiloma)  arrangements  oi 
the Pratítyasamutpada  formula. There is also a close correspondence with 
the well­known  Mshāyāna  distinction of the twelve  Nidānas  as being either 
sāmkleçika,  '‘favourable to the continuation of the  Saṃsāra”,  or vaiyavadā¬
nika, ‘‘favourable to ultimate Liberation”. In the former case, the  Aṅgas  are 
classified  into  three  groups, which are styled  samkleças,  „great  Impediments”, 
viz. those  of Kleça,  Karman  and  Jāti  29). 
It appears  that  our text  attaches  great  importance to the  Ajñānāc cīyate 
karma  strophe  : it not only occurs on both of the smaller  plates  (i — A — 1 
to 2, and  j— A — 1 to 2) and is  repeated  a third time in the text  itself 
(C — A — 1 to 2), but it is even mentioned before the famous Ye  dharmā 
strophe  in each of the  three  cases. 
As to the latter, we may be short. It is undoubtedly the most famous 
strophe  of Buddhism and has often been styled the ‘Buddhist Creed* 30). 
Buddhists,  as a rule, considered it the very  essence  of the doctrine 81). The 
Tathāgata  is glorified  as the Expounder of the dharma theory : the way in 
which  the dharmas  originate, and the Path leading to their extinction. It 
is therefore closely associated with the theory of Dependent Origination. 
Plates i and j each contain a third strophe, but not the  same  on the 
two plates. The additional  strophe  occurring on plate j (j — B — 2 to 3) 
is also mentioned in c — A — 1. In each of  these  cases,  the text has been 
Upamsads are  stin  very obscure; the essential difference is, however,  that  Ignorance 
is never considered an  'original'  cause in Buddhism: it is 'created' at every moment 
of phenomenal existence. For the many problems connected  with  these  relations, cf. 
espedany the sober survey given by De la  Vallée  Poussin in  Indo­Européens  etc. (19361. 
pp. 277 sqq. and pp. 310 sqq. 
2d) There is some doubt as to the exact term applied to the third  samkÎeça.  Th.  Stcherbatskij. 
Buddhist Logic, I (1932), p. 137, notes: „In  Mahāyāna,  the 12  nidānas  are  called 
saṃkleças,  „great impediments" and are distinguished into three classes: the  kleça¬
samk!oça  —  avidyā,  trsna, upadána, two  kanna­samkleça  —  samskāra, bhava,  — 
and the remaining members are styled  jāti­saṃkleça".  E. Obermiller, Sublime Science, 
Acta Or., 9 (1931), p. 136, reconstituted  that  very term from the Tibetan translation 
of the Uttaratantra [which in Obermiller's translation corresponds to "repeated births"I. 
The Siddhi, however, mentions the third term as  phalasamkleça  ; cI. De la  Vallée 
Poussin's translation, I, p. 215: "Par  saṃkleça,  il faut  entendre  kleça,  karman et 
phala". The  same  scholar, referring to Obermiller's translation just mentioned,  states 
in Mélanges  chin,  et bouddh., I (1931­32), p. 403 : "Obermiller lit  jāti ce qui pour 
moi est douteux". The conjecture made by  Obermiller  and Stcherbatskij is confirmed 
by the  Madhyāntavibhāgatīkā,  ed. by Yamaguchi, Tokyo, 1934, p. 35, reading  kleça¬
karmajanmasamkleça,  in the translation by D. Friedmann (1935). p. 46: "the defilements 
of passion, action and birth" (cf. also the  notes  to that  translation,  note  1 on p. 123, 
and note  147 on p. 132). As our  Çloka  establishes the series  Ajñāna,  Karman, 
Janman,  there  is essential accordance  with  the  Saṃkleça  classification. 
30) For a  full  discussion (including the metrical anomalies and a comparison of the 
Pali and Sanskrit versions), cf.  Kern,  Geschiedenis  van  het  Buddhisme in  Indie, 
I (1882), pp. 285­287. 
31) Cf. especially H. von Glasenapp, Zur  Geschichte der  Buddhistischen Dhar ma­Theorie, 
Zeitschr. D.  Aforg.  Ges.,  92 (1938), pp. 383 sqq. 


--- [Page 69] ---
— 59 — 
very  carelessly written 32), so  that  the exact wording is open to doubt. 
Owing  to this uncertainty, the meaning of the  Çloka  remains doubtful; 
its main assertion  seems  to refer to the famous 'non­soul’ doctrine of 
Buddhism  33). 
The third strophe of i (B — 1 to 3),  which  does not occur anywhere 
else in the text, is incomplete ; if it really is an  Anuṣṭubh  strophe — this 
seems  probable in  view  of the choice of the words and the rhythm — no 
less than thirteen syllables, almost the  half  of the strophe, are missing. 
Here,  we have been fortunate enough to trace the strophe ; it occurs in 
the Mahāvastu,  but, as Senart pointed out 34), its  Pali  version is known 
from  the Dhammapada (V, 183). It is therefore probable  that  the strophe 
was borrowed  from  the Sanskrit Dharmapada, although it is not found in 
the few fragments preserved. The term  upasampadā  might suggest a reference 
to Buddhist ordination ceremonies, but this does not prove to be the case 
here  35} : the  Çloka  extolls the excellent qualities of the Buddha's instructions 
32) The same applies to the other strophes on the same plates.  Obviously,  these  strophes 
were so  well­known  that  it did not matter whether they were distinctly written or not. 
Therefore,  it is the more  striking  that  it has not yet been possible to trace any of 
these  strophes (except, of course, the Ye  dharmā  formula and, probably, the strophe 
i — B — 1 to 3 to be discussed hereafter). 
This  statement  might not be precise  with  a view  to the uncertainty about the last word 
of pāda  b, which  seems  to be  nirātmikāḥ  in plate i, but  nirāmanāḥ  in c. It is all 
but evident  that  the latter should be corrected to the former; one  would  rather 
correct it to  nirāmaṇāḥ  (i.e. the correction of the dental to the  lingual  nasal), but 
then, the meaning becomes quite different. Probably, we have one of the interesting 
cases  here  in which  different  sects  read a  Çloka  in different ways: the reading 
nirāmanāḥ  is clearly  Mahāyānic.  For the non­soul doctrine, a famous topic in Abhidharma 
literature, cI., for instance, Abhidh.  Koça,  IX  (Pudgalapratiṣedhaprakaraṇa). 
­4) Mahāv.,  III, p. 42o, lines 12 sq.; cf. also the note on p. 523. The  pādas  c and d 
are omitted in our text. 
85) For the  Upasampadā,  the  'full'  ordination of Buddhist monks, ci.  Kern,  op. cit., II, 
•pp. 25 sq.; Oldenberg, Buddha 8 (1923), pp. 386 soq.; Demievine,  Les versions chinoises 
da MiÎindapañha,  B.E.F.E.O.,  24 (1924), p. 159  : ‚‚upasampadā,  qui designe  l’ordination 
comma  thera a la fin du noviciat" ;  Mahāvyutpatt/,  ed.  Minaiev­Mironov,  Bibl. Buddh., 
13 (1911), p. 108, No. 270, 2. — In  Mahāyāna,  ordination ceremonies were of two 
kinds : Pravrajyā  and  Upasampadā  ; they took place under the guidance of an  Ācārya 
and an  Upādhyāya  respectively (cf. Nalinaksha Dutt,  Aspects  of Mahāyāna  Buddhism, 
1930,  pp. 311 sqq.). — An important fragment of an ordination ritual in Sanskrit 
was published by  Bendall  in Album Kern (1903), pp. 373­376 ; it probably belonged 
to the  Sarvāstivādin  School.  It does not contain anything  similar  to our  Çloka. 
Upasampadā  literally  means  „joining"  (cf.  Kern,  op. cit., p. 24, who tranlates  „toe­
treding").  In Mahāyāna,  the derivatives of upasampad­ are especially used to denote 
the ‘arrival’  at states  of Dhyāna  and Samadhi (or at the eight  Vimoksas);  cf. the 
Dacasāhasrikā,  published by  Sten  Konow,  Avh. Norske Vid.­Ak., 1941, II, pp. 97 sq.: 
katamāni catvāri dhyānāni  ? Yaduta viviktam  kāmair  viviktam  pāpakair akuçalair 
dharmaih  prathamaṃ  dhyānam  upasampadya viharati.  In a  similar  way, the 
derivatives  of upasampad are used to denote the  arrival  of the Bodhisattva on the 
different  bhūmis  (cq.  vihāras)  of the Path. As  appears  from  the above examples, 
upasampad­ always refers to a definite transition to a higher sphere, either due to 
special  ceremonies or to the accumulation of elements of virtue and wisdom, the 


--- [Page 70] ---
— 60 — 
(buddhānuçāsana)  with  reference  to the destruction of all kinds of  Evil 
and the inauguration into the Good Path. The main  purpose  of the  strophe 
is to stress  that  the Doctrine, including, for instance, the  Pratītyasamutpāda 
theory, has a moral bearing. 
The text  on the larger  plates  begins with the  Pra  tītyasamutpādasūtra. 
This  Sútrá  is very well­known from  Pāli  literature 36), from Buddhist Sanskrit 
literature 87>, from Indian epigraphy both in  Prākrit  3S) and Sanskrit 39) 
versions, and also from Burmese epigraphy in a  Pāli  version 40). In  Nālandā, 
this Sutra  must  have  been  considered of  paramount  importance ; A. Ghosh 
states  that  the brick inscriptions discovered in  Nālandā  consist either of the 
so­called  Buddhist creed, or of the  Pratityasamutpādasūtra  41). The above 
references  leave no doubt  that  this Sutra was studied all over the Buddhist 
world.  Our  text  enables  us to add Indonesia to this list. In addition, several 
versions of the Sutra are preserved in Chinese translations 42). 
The text  begins with the introduction usual in Buddhist  Sūtras.  It is 
mentioned  that  once upon a time the Bhagavat stayed at  Çrāvastī  in the 
Jetavana,  surrounded by monks, and revealed them the twelve­linked formula 
necessary equipment for the transition to a higher sphere. This whole question Is 
important for the problem about the main purpose of the text engraved in our 
gold plates. If the strophes ought to be considered a  kind  of motto above the text 
as a whole (and this  seems  to be the case), it  follows  not that  the text served for 
the ordination  of Buddhist monks, but rather  that  the doctrine expounded was a 
* means to arrive at a higher  state  and to be delivered from the  Evil. 
36) Thus; it constitutes the beginning of the entire Vinayapitaka  (Mahāvagga,  p. 1). Other 
references to the  Pāli  canon are given by Chakravarti in the article quoted in  note 
39 below. 
30 Examples are given in the articles quoted in  note  39. The complete text is also given 
in the  Daçasāhasrikā  (cf.  note  35 above), p. 96, 5. A Sanskrit version of  Sūtra  and 
Vibhanga  (the latter however completely different from the Vibhanga version in our 
text) was found by the  Mission  Pelliot  in Central  Asia.  It was discussed in detail 
by Sylvain  Lévi,  Journ. As.,  Xièrns  Série,  XVI  (191c),  pp. 435­440. 
38) It is written in  KharoṣthÎ  script on the  Kurram  casket and edited by  Sten  Konow, 
Corp.  Inscr.  Inc., H, 1 (1929) No.  LXXX. 
39) The Gopalpur brick; cI. Proc. As. Soc. Bengal, 1896, p. 99 ; the  Kasiā  copper­plate, 
Arch.  Surv.  India, Ann..Rep., 1910­11, pp. 76 sqq.; many examples have been found 
in Nālandā  ; cf. the survey by Hirananda Sastri,  Nālandā  and its Epigraphic material, 
Mem. Arch.  Surv.,  No. 66 (1942), pp. 75 sq.; two of  these  are especially interesting: 
(a) the text inscribed on a  brick  which  was published by Ghosh in Epigr. Ind., 24 
(1938), pp. 20 sqq.; it gives a version of the Sutra  which  is essentially different 
from  the other ones and, in addition, it is dated; probably in the Gupta era; (b) two 
Nālandā  bricks  which  each give both the  Sútra  and the Vibhanga texts, published 
by Chakravarti, Epigr. Ind., 21 (1934), pp. 199 sqq. 
40) . Viz. the  gold  plates of Hmawza (Prome  District);  cI. Ann. Rep. Arch.  Surv.  India, 
1926­27,  p. 2OO, and  Nihar  Ranjan Ray, Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma  (1936),  p. 4. 
41) Art. cit., p. 21. 
42) The Chinese version corresponding  with  the  Nālandā  text of the  Sūtra  and the 
Vibhanga,  was translated into  Englith  by P. C.  Bagchi,  A note  on the Pratttya 
Samutpáda  Sutra, Epigr. Ind., 21 (1934), pp. 199 sqq.  Also  other Chinese versions, 
mainly  of the Sutra alone, are mentioned there. 


--- [Page 71] ---
­61­
of Causation. The enumeration of the twelve links is preceded by the words 
asmin  satīdam  bhavati,  which  contain the fundamental expression of the 
relation  between the successive  Aṅgas.  This  is, as Vasubandhu explains, 
the Prat ītyasamutpāda  in its general  form,  in which  the separate  Aṅgas 
are not specified (abhedena) ; if the formula is given in the form  Avidyāpra¬
tyayā ḥ samskārā ḥ etc.,  Prat ītyasamutpāda  is expressed bhedena 43). 
As a rule, the words asmin  satīdam  bhavati 44) are followed by asyot¬
pādād  idam utpadyate, asya nirodhád idam nirudhyate. This is, however, 
not the case in our text :  only  the first clause is mentioned, immediately 
followed  by the enumeration of the twelve  Aṅgas.  The formula is given 
in its usual  form,  each  following  notion being stated to have the preceding 
term as its pratyaya. The very last  link  of the chain,  Jarāmaraṇa,  is taken 
to imply  a large  ‘complex’  of different  aspects  of suffering,  which  consist 
of çoka,  parideva, duhkha, daurmanasya and  upāyāsa  45). The enumeration 
ends  with  the conclusion  that  "thus  is the  origin  of this ‘autonomous' and 
'powerful’ complex of suffering” (evam asya kevalasya mahato duhkhaskan¬
dhasya samudayo bhavati) 46). The  Pratītyasamutpādasūtra  as a whole 
is stated to be the ‘beginning’  (ādi) , I.e. the fundamentals 47), of Dependent 
Origination. 
Very  often, this portion of the  Sūtra  — which  may be styled the 
Samudaya portion — is  followed  by quite an analagous portion, in  which 
it is stated  that  after the cessation (nirodha) of the first  Aṅga,  the second 
one also  ceases  to exist (or rather, is not produced at all) ; the third and 
following  Aṅgas  will  not arise and the last  Aṅga,  Jarāmaraṇa,  implying 
the great  complex of suffering, is not produced  owing  to the absence of 
the essential factor  (Jāti)  conditioning its arising. Then, the Sutra  ends 
with  the conclusion  that  "thus  is the cessation of this ‘autonomous’ (i.e 
independent of external factors) and  ‘powerful’  (i.e. without beginning or 
43) CI. G.  Tucci,  A fragment  from  the  Pratītya­samutpāda­vyākhyā  of Vasubandhu, 
J.R.A.S.,  1930, pp. 611 sqq.  This  commentary  will  be discussed in the course of 
this Introduction. For the title, cf. note 97 below. 
4­> There are often  small  differences in the wording of the formula, such as imasmin 
instead of asmin, or  bhavatīdam  instead of idam bhavati. 
­­) Infra, a — A — 5 and e — A — 6. The omission of  çoka  in the first of  these  references 
is probably  only  an error by the copyist; in the second reference it is mentioned 
in the right place. In the  passage  from  g — B — 2 to  g — B —10, a causal relation 
between  these  aspects  of suffering is established. The term  vyādhi,  "disease", does 
not occur in our text in this connection. As a matter of fact, some of the sources 
mention  it (after marana; cf. Divya, p. 210, and the  Daçasāhasrikā,  loc.  cit.), whereas 
most of the versions leave it out (also the Sutra version at the beginning of the 
Mahāvagga  does). The main reason is the  difficulty  where to place it;  there  is 
something  strange  with  disease mentioned after death, whereas the traditional  form 
of the formula did not  allow  to insert it, e.g. between  jarā  and marana. 
4*3) CI. note 18 to the Translation. 
­7) CI. note 99 to this Introduction. It is to be noted  that  the Vibhanga,  which  is 
to be discussed hereafter, is also a part of the Sutra ; the latter consists of  ādi  and 
vibhaṅga.  Here, we denote the former by Sutra. 


--- [Page 72] ---
— 62 — 
end) complex of suffering”.  This  second portion of the Sutra  stands  in the 
same relation to the Nirodhasatya as the first portion to the Samudayasatya. 
The Nirodha  portion of the  Sūtra  is not given on our plates, and the 
same is the case  with  the copper­plate  from  Kasiā  and the two  Nālandā 
bricks  which  give the text of the  Vibhaṅga.  The absence of the  Nirodha 
portion  might be connected  with  the fact  that  the third and last part of 
the introductory formula (asya  nirodhād  idam nirudhyate) is also omitted. 
In a single case 48), we  find  at the end of the Samudaya portion the 
words iyam  mithy āprakṛtiḥ samsk ṛtavartin ī, and at the end of the  Nirodha 
portion  iyam samyakprak ṛtir asa ṃskṛtaniyāmāvakkrāntih.  There is something 
strange  in the  definition  of the two  aspects  of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula 
as the wrong and the right prakṛti; the use of the latter term recalls the 
prakṛti conception of the  Sāṃkhyins  and  suggests  the interpretation of the 
twelve  Angas as a series of  parināmas  of the prakṛti either in the wrong 
(mAthyā°)  or in the right  (samyag°)  direction. If this interpretation is  consi­
dered correct, it is obvious  that  the opinion  here  expressed is an unusual 
one. It  seems  closely related  with*  the view  attributed to the  Mahīçāsakas, 
who considered  Pratītyasamutpāda  a dharma and even asamskṛta, i.e. a 
transcendental  conception  beyond the Twelve  Aṅgas  which  are samskṛta 49). 
Apart  from  this remarkable use of prakṛti, we  here  found the usual 
division  of Pratītyasamutpāda  into its two aspects.  Usually,  the former is 
denoted by  saṃkleça and then  Pratītyasamutpāda  expresses the Path of 
Defilement;  the latter is  vyavadána,  and after the destruction of  Avidyā  the 
Aṅgas  then constitute the Path of  Purification  50). These two  aspects  are 
48) Viz. the  Nālandā  brick  published by Ghosh, Epigr. Ind., 24  (1938),  pp. 2o sqq. 
49) References by Do la  Vallée  Poussin, Ablddh.  Koça,  III, p. 77, note 1. Not all of 
our sources  agree  in attributing this interpretation to the  Mahīçāsakas;  as a matter 
of fact, Vasubandhu  uses  the expression  nikāyānrarlyāḥ,  „certaines  écoles",  but Yaçomitra 
(Vyākhyā  ad  Bhās,,  4o,  21, in  Cosmol. Boaddh.,  p. 165,  line  12) comments upon 
Vasubandhu's explanation by  1ty  Āryamahīçāsakāh ; the  Vibhāsā,  however, attributed 
this opinion  to the Vibhajyavadins. It is not however certain  that  the  Vibhāṣā  refers 
to a definite school by  th**t  expression; cf. the detailed  notes  by De la  Vallée  Poussin 
in Abhidh.  Koça,  Introduction etc.  (1931),  pp. Iv —  lviii,  and pp. 133 sq. The 
interpretation of  pratītyasamutpāda  as an asamskṛtadharma is based upon an interesting 
Nikāya  passage  quoted in the  Vyākhyā  (loc.  cit.) ; there, the  well­known  formula 
yo bhiksavah  pratītyasamutpādam paçyati  sa  dharmam  paçyati,  yo dharmam pacyati 
sa buddham  paçyati  is taken to refer to  eṣā  dharmānām  dharmatā,  an interpretation 
accepted  only  by some schools. Vasubandhu's refutation (Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 77) 
is scholastic and hardly convincing for a modern reader; his main argument is  that 
utpāda  is one of the samskṛtalaksanas; how, then,  could  pratītyasamutpāda  be an 
asamskṛta? As a matter of fact, the law expressing the unstableness of things may 
be stable and eternal itself. The latter is essentially the  Mahāyāna  view,  which 
leads to the conception of  Nirvana  as Saṃsāra  viewed sub  specie  aeternitatis. 
50) De la  Vallée  Poussin, Siddhi, I, p. 215  (with  references).  This  distinction is prevalent 
in Mahāyāna,  but it is all but  strange  to Hmayana sources either. For  namkleça  and 
vyavadāna,  cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  H, p. 105, and HI, p. 115  ; Mahāv.,  Ill, p. 321  line  6 : 
samkleçavyavadánam yathābhūtam  prajānanti.  The  division  of the  pratityasamutpādāṅgas 
into three  samkleças  seems  to be confined to  Mahāyāna  (cf. Stcherbatskij, quoted 
in note 29 above). 


--- [Page 73] ---
­63­
also defined as  sāsrava  and  anāsrava  51). In addition, this same  Nālandā  text 
uses  two other curious terms for  these  two aspects, viz.  dharmāṇārn  ācayah 
and dharmānām  apacayah,  „increase  and decrease of dharmas". The terms 
dcaya and apacaya are probably based on a comparison  with  the different 
kinds  of food  (āhāra),  the effect of  which  is stated to be either upacaya 
(= ācaya)  or apacaya 52). 
Among  all the examples of the  Prat ītyasamutpādasūtra,  this  Nālandā 
brick  is especially important because it is the  only  one  which  is dated. 
Although  no era is mentioned, Ghosh rightly concluded  that  its date  could 
only refer to the Gupta Era,  which  brings the year to 516/17  A. D.  53). 
Ghosh  also noted the very frequent occurrence of this Sutra among the 
discoveries  at Nālandā  54), where the text must have been as  well­known 
as the famous ye  dharmā  stanza 55). 
Another  point to be noted is  that  in almost all of the  cases  the Prat ītya­
samutpādasūtra  was found in votive stupas, in  which  it took the place of 
a relic  56). These points might be of interest in connection  with  the incertitude 
as to where our plates were discovered 57). 
As was noted above, the  Nirodha  portion is omitted on our  gold  plates ; 
on the other hand,  these  plates give the text of a detailed commentary on 
the Sūtra,  which  is termed  Vibhaṅga  or Vibhāga  58). The translation by 
„commentary’’  is not quite correct and might convey a wrong impression : 
the twelve  Nidānas  are the  only  items explained in it;  there  is, for instance, 
no account of the notion of pratyaya and no definitions of the series  from 
goka to  upāyāsa  are given. 
The text of the  Vibhaṅga  is not as  well  known as  that  of the  Sūtra, 
but it is far  from  being new. We  find  it written, together  with  the  Sūtra, 
51) Stchethatskij, Central Conception, pp. 1 sqq.;  Sten  Konow,  Daçasāhasrikā,  p. 1 12, 
§§ 63 and 64, and p. 86 (with numerous references). 
52) Abhidh.  Koça,  HI, p. 128 (apacaya. in  hell).  The thing  which  either m­r3ases or 
decreases  is karman,  as is expressed in the  ajñānāc  c?yate karma fo*mula. 
53) Art. cit., p. 21. 
54) mid., p. 24. 
55) CI. also Hirananda Sastri,  Nālandā  and its Epi graphic Material, Memoirs Arch.  Surv. 
India, No. 66 (1942), pp. 75 sq. 
­6) CI. Cnakravarti, Epigr. Ind., 21 (1934), p. 196, and Hirananda Sastri, op. cit., p. 76. 
*57) It seems  probable  that  our plates, too, served as relics ; cf. the end of this Introduction, 
where this point  will  be examined  with  greater detail. As to the  Nālandā  point, 
it is as yet  difficult  to determine how much weight should be attached to it. 
The fact  that  there  are important differences to be noted between our  vībhaṅga 
version  and the  Nālandā  one, is not in favour of the assumption  that  our text 
should  be attributed to direct influence  from  Nālandā,  although it does not, of course, 
exclude  such a  possibility. 
­­) Vibhanga in a — A — 6 and in h —  A — 1 ; vibhāga  in b — B — 10. The  true  meaning 
of the term is  „division,  analysis (into  sets  of categories)’’. Thus, the  Vibhanga  explains 
Saṃskar§nga  by enumerating the  three  groups of  kāya­,  vāk­  and  manas­samskāras. 
Vibhanga  is therefore opposed to  ādi ; its Chinese equivalent means "derivatives" 
(Bagchi,  quoted in note 6o below). Vasubandhu explains  ādi  by  uddeça,  vibhanga 
by nirdeça  ; cf. infra, note 99. 


--- [Page 74] ---
— 64 — 
on two other bricks discovered at  Nālandā  59). Our text is fundamentally 
the same  as the  Nālandā  text of the  Vibhaṅga,  but there  are a number of 
differences in details. 
The Vibhaṅga  text is also preserved in a Chinese translation prepared 
by Hiuan  Tsang in the year 661  A. D.  60). Hiuan  Tsang's translation cor­
responds closely to the Sanskrit text from  Nālandā,  but there  are a number 
of minor differences again. The translation provides us  with  a reliable  date  ; 
the Nālandā  text is not dated; Chakravarti assigned it to the 6th century 
A. D. on account of sundry palaeographic  features  61). 
Not only the  Sūtra  (Samudaya and Nirodha portions) but also the 
Vibhaṅga  is preserved in a  Pāli  version in the  Saṃyuttanikāya  62). As  Bagchi 
pointed out, the Sutra portion corresponds closely  with  its Sanskrit version, 
but the  Vibhaṅga,  though fundamentally the same, shows considerable  dif­
ferences. Not only are the"  Aṅgas  explained in the converse order (beginning 
with Jarāmaraṇa),  but the Vibhanga portion is also much more amplified 
than  in the Nālandā  text. As a  matter  of fact, this  Pāli  version corresponds 
to section 298 of the Chinese  Saṃyukta,  translated by  Guṇabhadra  at the 
beginning  of the 5th century A  D., as Bagchi  concludes.  Also  the Sanskrit 
version  discovered in Touen­Houang by the  Mission  Pelliot  agrees  with  the 
latter  (Sylvain  Lévi,  art. cit., p. 435). Our  Vibhaṅga  texts  are therefore to 
be divided  into two  great  groups, one of  which  is represented by our text, 
the Nālandā  bricks and  Hiuan  Tsang's translation, the other by the  Pāli 
Saṃyutta,  the Chinese  Saṃyukta  and the Sanskrit fragment from Central 
Asia.  Since a comparison between  these  two lines of tradition  would  fall 
outside the scope of this introduction, we confine ourselves to a  brief  com­
parison  between the  three  texts  belonging  to the former group. 
Although  these  three  versions are almost  identical,  there  are some curious 
differences,  which  may help us in determining their relation. The most 
interesting point is the very beginning of the Sutra. In our text, the audience 
of the Bhagavat at the time when he promulgated the  Sūtra  consists only 
of Bhikṣus  without any further detail. The  Nālandā  text  adds  that  the 
Bhagavat was surrounded by a large group of  Bhikṣus (mahatā  bhik ṣu¬
samghena  sārdham) ; the number of monks is also added, viz. 1250 (ardhatra¬
yodagabhir  bhiksucataīh)  6S ). In the Chinese version, this modest number 
of monks was increased to  „innumerable”,  and the audience is not  limited 
59) Published by N. P. Chakravarti in Epigr. Ind. 21 (1934), pp. 193 sqq. 
60) Translated into  English  again by P. C.  Bagchi,  ibid., pp. 199­204 (preceded by an 
important introduction).  Sylvain  Lévi,  art. cit., p. 436, assigns a different  date  to 
the translation by  Hiuan  Tsang, viz. 649 A.D. 
61) Art. cit., p. 193. 
6­l) Samyutta,  II. pp. 1 sqq. 
63> Chakravarti  (loc.  cit.)  translates  „650".  We prefer  „1250",  which  is the usual meaning 
of ardhatrayodaça  ; cf.  Monier­Williams'  Dictionary, s.v. ardha; in addition, 1250 
. seems  more plausible as a round number.  Very  often, this number is even  multiplied 
by 10 (°sahasraih  instead of  °cataih;  cf. Nalinaksha Dutt, A Buddhist manuscript 
irom  Gil&t,  in Ind. Hist. Qu.,  VTII  (1932), p. 101). 


--- [Page 75] ---
— 65 — 
to monks but consists of  ,,Çrāvakas,  Bodhisattvas, gods and men ” 64). We 
generally  assume  that  such an increase in numbers points to a later age. 
As we saw above, the  Nālandā  bricks were assigned to the 6th century 
A. D. on account of their palaeography ; since the Chinese translation by 
Hiuan  Tsang was prepared in 661  A. D., it is considerably younger. These 
data confirm  our assumption based upon the beginning of the  Sūtra. 
There is a  similar  example in the enumeration of the different  aspects  65) 
of Avidyā.  In line  8 of the  Nālandā  text we read the  passage  : hīna­praṇīta­
kṛṣṇa­çukla­sapratibhāga­pratītyasamutpanneṣu  dharmesv  ajñanam,  which 
does not occur at all in our text. The Chinese translation closely  follows 
the Nālandā  text, but  there  is one  small  difference : the terms in the Chinese 
version  corresponding to Mna­praiuta­ are  „low  and bad and noble and good”; 
since,  as a rule, the Chinese translation renders a single Sanskrit term by 
a single Chinese word, it is probable  that  Hiuan  Tsang used a  slightly  more 
elaborate version, and perhaps translated  hīnāçubha­pranītaçiibha.  These, 
however, are the  only  certain points of difference. Some other points have 
been noted by Chakravarti in the foot­notes to Bagchi's translation, but they 
may be due to a more or less free translation rather than to a difference 
in redaction 66). 
The differences between our  Vibhaṅga  text and  that  of the  Nālandā 
bricks  are far more important. In quite a few cases, the  Nālandā  text is 
far more elaborate ; this proves to be especially the case  with  the definition 
of Avidyā,  and, in a lesser degree,  with  those of  Nāmarūpa,  Jarā  and  Mara ṇa, 
whereas  Tṛṣṇā  is divided  into a very different set of categories. 
In the  definition  of Avidyā,  we referred to the compound beginning 
with  hīna­pranīta° , which  is absent  in our version. These terms belong to 
the man­fold  classifications of  Karman ; as a matter of fact, they can hardly 
be considered necessary, since they do not introduce any new elements in 
the definition  of Avidyā  : they were probably added  only  for completeness’ 
sake.  Hīna  refers to the dharmas of Phenomenal Existence in as far as 
64) Art. cit., p. 199. In our text, we represent us the Bhagavat addressing a  small  number 
of pupils ; in the  Nālandā  »text,  the Bhagavat  could  hardly reach his audience without 
making  use of his supernatural faculties  (siṃhanāda)  ; in the Chinese version, however, 
the Jetavana  itself  was raised to a supernatural scene  with  gods resting upon clouds. 
(í5) 'Aspects' may not be the correct term. The vibhanga defines  Avidyā  by enumerating 
various  important notions in Buddhism to  which  Ignorance applies, technically, the 
ajñānasthānāni  (vyākhyā  in Cosmol. Bouddhique, p. 164,  line  21).  Only  at the end 
of the definition we find what we may designate by 'aspects’, viz. the terms anabhisa¬
maya, tarnas and sammoha, which, together with  ajñāna,  constitute  Avidyā.  No attempt 
at giving  a real  definition  and determining the  svabhāva  of  Avidyā  is made. 
66) The Chinese version has an addition : "It is nescience in cause and nescience in its fruit" 
(art. cit., p. 202, note 9), where the  Nālandā  text has  only  : hetāv  ajñanam;  in addition 
to the latter, the text used by  Hiuan  Tsang may have had phale  'iñanam ; the Chinese 
pilgrim  probably read the whole  passage  : hetāv  ajñānam,  phale  'jñár.am,  hetuphalayor 
afñānam.  — It is curious that our text (a — A — 9) has in this connection: pratttyasa¬
mutpáde  ajñanam,  which occurs neither in the  Nālandā  text, nor in the Chinese version. 
It is the  only  instance of our text having extra terms. 


--- [Page 76] ---
— 66 — 
they lead  to re­birth,  viz. if  they  belong  to the  Duḥkha  and  Samudaya  Truths. 
Pranīta,  on the  contrary,  is especially  applied to the Nirodha and  Mārga  67). 
Krsna and  çukla  are other  terms  which  refer  to Karman.  Çukla  is technically 
defined  as kuçalāvyākṛta  68), the  remaining  Karman  is krsna. 
Then, we  have  the term  yathabhūtasamprativedhe 'jñānam  (Chinese 
version : „nescience in the  insight  into  real  nature  of things”)  6íi). The  same 
form  yathabhūta  is also  added  at the  very  end of the  Avidyā  definition. 
There,  our text  (a — B — 1)  reads  : ajñānam  anabhisamayah  tamos  sammohah 
but the  Nālandā  text  gives  : yathabhūtasyājñānam  adarganam  anabhisamayah 
tamah  sammohah.  Neither  yathabhūta  nor  adarçana  are limited to  Mahā­
yāna 70), but both  notions  are certainlv  more  developed  there. 
In the  explanation  of the  other  Aṅgas,  the additions  are less  obvious, 
but they  are not  absent.  The  Aṅgas Nāmarūpa  and  Jarāmaraṇa  both  consist 
of two parts  ; accordingly, in  both  cases  the definitions  comprise  two  distinct 
portions  with a  statement  at the end implying  that,  in the  Aṅgas,  these 
components  should  be conceived  of as a  unity.  In our  text  (respectively  in 
a — B — 8 and in  b — B — 9)  this  ‘unity’ is only  expressed  by the  words  tad 
ubhayam,  but the  Nālandā  text  adds  after  these  : aikadhyam  abhisamksipya. 
literally : „throwing  them  together  into  a unity’’ 71). 
­7) Abhidh.  Koça,  VH pp. 32 sq. ; Mah āvyutpatti,  54, No. 12  (edition  Minaiev, p. 191. 
Cf. also  Abhidh.  Koça Vyā.,  edition  by Lévi and  Stcherbatskij  in Bibh  Buddh.  XXI 
(1918),  ad Bhās.  I, 33, 14,  where  Yaçomitra  defines  hma and pra ṇīta by kli ṣṭa and 
akliṣṭa respectively. 
68) Abhidh.  Koça,  IV, pp. 129 sq.;  Mah āvyutpatti,  48, No. 43 (p. 18). 
­9) The  term  samprativedha  does  not  seem  to occur  in the Abhidharmako ça, but it 
occurs  Divya, p. 46:  caturārypsatyasamprativedhaki  dharmad eçanā,  in  connection  with 
splitting up the  mountain  of Satkāyadṛsti  by means  cí a  vajra.  But the  Divyāvadana 
contains  additions  in Mahāyāna  spirit (Winternitz,  Geschichte,  II, 1, pp. 221 sq.) 
and this  might  well be one of  them.  For  yathabhūta,  cI.  note  7o. 
7°) Both  terms  are used  in the  Abhidharmakoça.  In Mahāyāna,  however,  they  play a  very 
prominent role:  yathabhūta, „«s  it really is", applies to the Highest Truth (param ārtha¬
satya) ; cf. the expression  yathābhūtam prajānāti,  which occurs innumerable times in 
the Prajñāpāramitās  and in  Mahāyāna  in general  (cf. E. Obermiller, Ind.  Hist.  Qu., 
9, 1933, p.  1028).  Darçana  refers  to the  mystic  vision of  that  Truth. The  important 
point  is not  whether  these  terms  occur  in Hínayána, too, —  there  is not  much  which 
is really 'new' in  Mahāyāna  — but the  fact  that  the  addition  of these  terms  was 
considered  necessary.  And  this  is obviously due to  Mahāyāna. 
71) The  other  versions  of the  Nāmarūpa  definition, which differ from  each  other  in 
some  small  details  only,  have  this  same  additional  passage;  cI. notes  85 to 90 
to this Introduction and note 36 to the Translation, where the versions in the Madhya¬
makavṛtti, Çiksāsamuccaya  and  Bodhic­pañjikā  are compared. The Abhidharmakoca, 
i.e. the  Bhāsya  by Vasubandhu,  seems  to agree  with our version; cI. the  trans­
lation by De la Vallée Poussin,  Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 35:  „Le  naman  et le rūpa, 
ces deux  sont  nommés  nāmarūpa".  The  Vyākhyā  ad III.  44, 29  (Cosm.  Bouddhique, 
p. 172)  adds  that  this  is the  explanation  of the Vibhanga  (vibhanga  evam  nirdeçād  iti) 
in the Pratítyasamutpadasutra, the  explanation  of Nāmarūpa (Pratttyasamutpādasūtre 
nāmarūpavibhaṅga  evam  nirdeçāt),  after  which the  beginning  (nāma  katamat  ? Catvāro 
'rūpinah skandhā  iti.  Rūpam  katamat?  Yat  kim  cid  rūpam  ) and the end (yac 
ca rūpam  yac ca  nama  tad ubhayam  nāmarūpam  ity  ucyata  iti) are  quoted. 


--- [Page 77] ---
— 67 — 
Among  the characteristic features of Old Age, the  Nālandā  text adds 
the expressive compound  khulakhulapr(içvāsakāyatā,  referring to  difficiult 
breathing, and among those of Death it gives the additional term  usmano 
hānih,  which  refers to the coldness of a corpse. 
It is evident  that  almost all the differences consist of additions in the 
Nālandā  text 72). They prove to be rather frequent if compared to the  small 
differences (in two  passages  only) between the  Nālandā  text and the Chinese 
version.  In the latter case, the difference in age cannot  well  amount to much 
less than a century, if the  Nālandā  bricks should be dated  sixth  century 
A.D.  73). As the differences between our  Vibhaṅga  text and  that  of the 
Nālandā  bricks are far more pronounced, it  seems  only  natural to assume at 
least a century's difference, if not more. In any case, our version must be 
considered  substantially older. 
There is one detail  which  might be very important because it concerns 
a real difference in  definition.  In the  Nālandā  text of the  Vibhaṅga,  Tṛṣṇā, 
Thirst,  is taken to be of  three  kinds  : kāmatrsnā,  rūpatṛṣṇā,  and  ārūpyatrsna 
(line  15).  This  is the  only  usual  division  in Mahāyāna  sources. The  H1nayāna 
sources, however, give a  great  variety of kinds of Thirst and the  three  items 
given  here  constitute  only  one of the possibilities 74). As a matter of fact, 
the division  into  Kama,  Rūpa  and  Arūpya  is the usual one for  Bhava  in 
all of the sources, whether  H1nayāna  or Mahāyāna.  Existence is analyzed 
into the three  levels, the  three  realms  (dhātu)  in which  existence is possible. 
If then the same  division  is applied to  Tṛṣṇā,  this means  that  the latter 
is interpreted as Thirst for Existence (bhavatrsna).  Although  such an 
interpretation is  logical  enough,  there  is a slight objection against it : the 
Aṅgas  Tṛṣṇā  and  Bhava  do not  follow  each other in the  Pratītyasamutpāda 
formula,  but are separated by  Upādāna.  The latter is of the utmost impor­
tance  from  a dogmatic point of  view  : it is essentially attachment to either 
pleasures or wrong views 75). Owing  to such attachment.  Karman  is produced 
72) For a single exception, cI. note 66 above. The addition  o* pratltyasamutpāde 'jñānarn 
is however totally superfluous; it  could  not be considered an addition in the  true 
meaning of the term; on the contrary. In  cases  like  this one, it is probable  that 
the omission  of the words is due to a later recension avoiding the verbosity of 
the previous  one, but adding a number of terms considered necessary. One  notes 
the same tendency in a  small  number of other  cases  ; thus, the  Nālandā  text replaces 
the awkward  and completely useless repetitions in  vuddhe  ajñānam  dharmme  ajñānam 
samghe  ajñānam  by vuddhadharmasamghesv  ajñānam  and may therefore be considered 
normalizing:  nothing is omitted, but the text becomes much clearer. The  Vyākhyā 
ad Abhidh.  Koça,  40, 5 (p. 164 ; cf. the quotation by De la  vallée  Poussin, Abhidh. 
Koça,  HI, p. 75, note 2) quotes the vibhanga (without however mentioning the source) 
in the same  form  as in our version  with  six terms ; in other respects the  avidyāvibhaṅga 
is shorter there. 
7S) This  is the approximate  date  suggested by Chakravarti on account of the type of 
script  used. CI. Epigr. 1nd., 21 (1934) p. 194. 
r4) References  will  be given in note 137 to the Translation. 
75) Properly speaking,  these  are  only  the first two kinds of  Upādāna.  The third and 
fourth  items are less important since they are already  implied  in dṛṣṭyupādāna : 


--- [Page 78] ---
— 68 — 
which  will  lead to re­birth. The consequence was  that  Upādāna  had to be 
interpreted as Thirst in a very high degree — the conclusion  which  was 
indeed  drawn in  Mahāyāna  76). 
This,  however,  represents  a later development. The  Pāli  sources, as a 
rule,  take  Tṛṣṇā  in the meaning of ‘desire’ in a general  sense  and  divided 
it into six kinds, each of them  linked  with  one of the six classes of  sense 
objects  (ṣaḍ  visayah :  visible,  audible etc. matter)  which  may become the 
objects of desire; in other words, they interpret Trsna as  kāmatrsnā.  Other 
interpretations, however, are also not unknown. Buddhaghosa, systematizing 
the different kinds of Thirst mentioned in the  Nikāyas,  arrives by means of 
various  combinations at the impressive number of a hundred­and­eight kinds 
of Thirst 77). 
The Valbhāṣikas  of Kashmir,  in their turn, also arranged the different 
kinds  of Thirst in order. They  laid  the main  stress  upon the set of  fcārna, 
bhava and vibhwoa 78), which  they interpreted as thirst for pleasure, for 
existence and for non­existence respectively. The first item was taken to 
refer to pleasure in this  life,  the second to eternal existence, the third to 
çilavratopádana  cannot  he separated  from  çilavrataparāmarçadṛṣṭi,  and  ātmavādopādāna 
is almost identical  with  satkāyadṛṣṭi. 
7–) Upadana is defined as  trsnávaipulya  (ÇaHstambhas.  in Çikṣās,,  p. 222, and  Bodhic­pañj., 
p. 388) or as  trsnāvivrddhi  (Daçabh,,  p. 48); important references by De la  vallée 
Poussin,  Siddhi, II, pp. 488 sq. 
7*ī) Visuddhimagga, chap.  XVII;  the  passage  was translated by Warren, Buddhism in 
Translations (1922), pp. 178­189. The number lo8 is based upon the combination 
of the six kinds of objects of sense, the triad  kāma,  bhava, vibhava, the triad  past, 
present and future and the 54 combinations of the above categories either exterior 
or interior. 
78) CI. the  Vibhāṣā  quotation in Abhidh.  Koça,  V, p. 29, note. The  Sautrāntikas  and 
Vasubandhu  only  recognize the triad of  Kama,  Rúpa  and  Ārupya  (Abhidh.  Koça. 
HI, pp. 85 sq. ; Vyākhyā  in Cosmol. Bouddh., p. 172, ad  Bḥāṣya  45, 2 ; cI. Vasubandhu's 
commentary to the  Pratityasamutpādasutra,  Tucci,  art. cit., p.  61^ : tisra<s>  trsnā 
iti vist  ar ah / atrāpi bhagavatā kāmarūpārūpyabhedena  trsnayah prabheda  ukto  ná tu 
svabhavatā m „(in  trsnāpratyayam  upšdānam),  the  three  thirsts (are referred to); 
here, however, the Bhagavat explains (only) the variety of thirst by analyzing it 
into Kama,  Rupa and  Ārupya,  not, however, its real nature"; this  division  is con­
sidered  intentional : vineyaviçesapeksayeti,  „considering  the different kinds of people 
to be converted". We understand  that  Vasubandhu explains  that  this  division  of Thirst 
was given by the Bhagavat not because it is essential, but because it is important to 
distinguish  these  three  kinds in  view  of the people to be converted. People suffering 
from  thirst for  Kama  should be explained  that  the body they love is nothing but 
­ a mass of bones,  blood,  etc., doomed to decay; but those suffering  from  thirst for 
Ārupya  all know this very  well  and should be converted by other arguments (by 
refuting,  for instance, the theories about an eternal soul). It does not appear what  division 
Vasubandhu  did consider essential; in any case, it was not the  Vaibhāsika  definition, 
which  is not less  ābhiprāyika.  It is in any case clear  that  Vasubandhu used the version 
ás we have it in the  Nālandā  bricks.  — For the terms bhava and vibhava, cf. also 
Mahāvastu,  HI. p. 448, where we have bhavadṛṣṭi =  çāçvatadṛṣṭi,  and vibhavadṛṣṭi = 
ucchedadṛṣṭi. Buddhist texts often use vibhava as the opposite of sambhava; cf. 
Daçabh.,  ed. Rahder, p. 47, sub VI  B : mahākarunāparipūranārtham  lokasyá  sambhavam 
ca vibhavam ca vyavalokayate. 


--- [Page 79] ---
— 69 — 
extinction  after death. Thus, the two latter kinds of  Tṛṣṇā  refer to the 
wrong  views about the two extremes  (antagrāhadṛṣṭi) . The reason why 
Mahāyāna  confined  itself  to the set of  kārna, rūpa  and  ārūpya  may be con­
jectured : it is  difficult  to see how vibhava­trsrw, should be interpreted ; 
in order to arrive at the interpretation mentioned, it is necessary to take 
vibhava in a very special sense, its usual meaning being  „power’’,  „richness’’, 
etc. If vibhava can be interpreted as  „liberation  from  Existence”,  there  is 
nothing  wrong  with  it. In addition, the interpretation of  bhavatrsnā  as 
çāçvatabhavatrmā  is not self­evident. 
Now  it is interesting to note  that  our  Vibhaṅga  text, in contrast to 
the Nālandā  version, mentions the set  karna,  bhava, vibhava (b — A —6), 
which  is presumably considered the essential classification of  Tṛṣṇā,  thus 
following  the orthodox  Sarvāstivādin  view. 
. Although  it is not doubtful  that  the  kāma,  bhava, vibhava  division 
represents  an older  stage  of speculation than  that  into  kāma,  rūpa,  ārūpya, 
it is very  difficult  to state  anything definite about when the substitution 
took place. Moreover, a simple substitution  would  be out of place  here  ; 
these  two classifications may have existed together for centuries, but in 
different  sects. The most interesting point is  that  our text  here  follows  the 
Sarvāstivādin  point of  view,  whereas the  Nālandā  version gives the usual 
Mahāyāna  division  of Tṛṣṇā.  This  point alone, though very characteristic, 
is not sufficient for assuming a direct relation between our  Vibhaṅga  text 
and the  Sarvāstivādins.  There are however some minor  points  which  would 
point  to the same  direction.  In our  Vibhaṅga  version no influence of  Mahāyāna 
can be traced ; the few  points,  however, in  which  the Nālandā  version differs 
from  our text, consist of additions in the former text  which  are undoubtedly 
due to  Mahāyāna  influence, especially in the case of the very beginning 
of the text. The same applies to the addition of the terms  yathābhūtasam¬
prativedhe  'jñānam  and  yathābhūtasyājñānam.  One has the clear impression 
that the Vibhanga text, such as we have it in the  Nālandā  bricks,  is an 
adaptation to  Mahāyāna  of a text  which  originally  belonged to  Hīnayāna. 
Only  some slight additions were necessary for  that  purpose.  This  case  seems 
to have been a common one. It is very probable, for instance,  that  the 
Lalitavistara,  one of the most famous  Mahāyāna  texts, is in its present  form 
a vaipulya version of what  originally  was a treatise of the  Sarvāstivādins  7í>). 
Our case  could  be compared  with  that  of the Lalitavistara. 
Among  the  Hīnayāna  Schools  writing  in Sanskrit, the  Sarvāstivādins 
were the  only  ones known to have possessed a real canon ; in addition, they 
were the  only  ones known to have developed missionary activity outside 
India  and it is evident  that  the presence of our text in Indonesia is to be 
attributed to such an  activity.  Since our  Vibhaṅga  version shows no  Mahāyāna 
influence  and, in addition, is written in correct Sanskrit,  there  is another 
79) CI. Winternitz, Geschichte, II, 1 (1913), p. 194, and Nalinaksha Dutt, Aspects of 
Mahāyāna  Buddhism (1930), p. 105. 


--- [Page 80] ---
— 70 — 
argument  in favour of a direct connection between our  Vibhaṅga  and the 
Sarvāstivāda  School  of Buddhism. 
Only  one  Sarvāstivādin  missionary, who stayed for many years in 
Indonesia, is known by name. It is  Guṇavarman,  the son of a  king  of Kashmir, 
who visited  the country of  Chö­po  in the beginning of the  fifth  century 
A. D.  so) in order to preach Buddhism there. The time of his  visit,  which 
preceded the  Nālandā  text by about one and a  half  centuries,  would  agree 
with the  period  which  we assumed above on account of the differences 
between the Vibhanga versions of the  Nālandā  bricks and of our  gold  plates. 
From  a palaeographic point of  view,  so early a  date  would  hardly present 
any difficulty.  Although  the text in its present  form  cannot be considered 
very  old (it might be referred to the eighth century), we already drew 
attention to some palaeographic features  which  belong to a much earlier age. 
We concluded  that  these  obvious archaisms  could  only  be accounted for satis­
factorily  by presuming  that  the text was copied  from  a manuscript  which 
had been written several centuries before. 
Now we have the famous testimony by I­tsing  that  about one and a 
half centuries after  Guṇavarman’s  visit,  the  Sarvāstivāda  School  had  great 
influence  in the lands of the South Sea — a testimony  which  has never 
yet been confirmed by epigraphy 81). Like  many other texts, no doubt, 
our Sutra and Vibhanga must have been copied and re­copied during some 
centuries,  until  they were reproduced on  these  gold  plates for some unknown 
reason; at the same time different texts,  which  will  be examined below, 
were added to the  Sūtra­Vibhaṅga.  Although  it is evident  that  any special 
connection  with  the activity of  Guṇavarman  is conjectural, several indications 
would  agree  with  the view  that  our text was brought to Indonesia in about 
the 5th century A.D. 
There is no doubt  that  both the Sutra and the  Vibhaṅga  texts were 
famous in  Buddhism.  The  Vibhaṅga  definitions of the  Pratītyasamutpādāṅgas 
have been  well­known  and were frequently quoted in Buddhist Sanskrit 
texts.  Curiously  enough,  these  quotations almost always exhibit  small  dif­
ferences. A few examples  will  be sufficient. 
The Vibhaṅga  definition  of Avidyā  is referred to in the  Abhidharaiakoça 
and quoted by the mere mention of its first term  pūrvānte `jñānam  in 
Vasubandhu's  Bhāsya  and  with  some greater detail (though also in a abbre­
viated  form) in  Yaçomitra's Vyākhyā  S2). The Vibhanga  definition  of Avidyā 
known  by Yaçomitra  seems  to agree  with  that  extant in the Chinese  Saṃyukta 
8°) P.  Pelliot,  Deux  Itinétmres,  B.E.F.E.O.,  TV (1904), pp. 274 sq. — CI.  Krom, 
Geschiedenis 2, p. 82 sq. An important account of the  life  and travels of Gunavarman 
was translated by Ed. Chavannes in Toang  Pao,  Série  II. Vol. V, pp. 193 — 206. 
Guṇavarman  lived  between 367 and 431 A.D. 
81) CI.  Krom,  Geschiedenis 2, p. 108;  Cœdès,  Histoire, p. 146.  Both  scholars  agree  in 
trusting I­tsing's  statements;  there  reaUy is no reason to doubt the correctness of 
the account by the Chinese  pilgrim,  who was not  only  perfectly honest, but also 
learned and  well  informed. 
82) Bhāṣya  ad kár. in, 28, a­b, translated by De la  Vallée  Poussin in CosmoL Bouddh., 


--- [Page 81] ---
— 71 — 
translation,  which  is however decidedly shorter than the definitions in our 
text, in  that  of the  Nālandā  bricks and  Hiuan  Tsang’s  translation 83), especially 
in its latter  part.  Thus, the only definition of  Karman  mentioned  there  is 
that into kugala, akugala and avyakṛta, whereas our text  adds  its divisions 
into sāvadya  and anavadya and into sevitavya and asevitavya (a — A — 9 
to 11). As we saw above, the  Nālandā  text and  (still  more)  Hiuan  Tsang’s 
translation add a number of other  terms  (hīnapranīta  etc.).  It is curious  that 
the Vyākhyā  and the Chinese  Saṃyukta  have  madhyānte Çjñānam)  instead 
of our  purvāparānte  (a — A — 7) ; the  Saṃyukta  probably read  avyākṛtesv 
(ajñanam)  instead of  kuçalākuçálesu  in our text. 
The Vibhaṅga  definition of  Jarā  is also quoted in the  Vyākhyā  and 
proves to have been famous in Buddhism in general ; most descriptions of 
Old Age in Buddhism reproduce some of the Vibhanga  terms  84). 
An interesting portion is the  Vibhaṅga  definition of  Nāmarūpa,  which 
is often reproduced but  with  more or less differences in details. It is  briefly 
referred to by Vasubandhu in the  Abhidharmakoça  (Bhāṣya)  and quoted 
by Yaçomitra  in an abbreviated form 85) ; more or less  full  versions occur 
in Candrakīrti’s  commentary to  Nāgārjuna’s Mūlamadhyamakakārikās  (the 
Prasannapada) 86), the  Bodhicaryāvatārapañjikā  87) and the  Çikṣāsamuccaya 
(in all of the  three  cases  based upon the  Çālistambhasútra)  8S). As was 
p. 39, lines 17 sq., and Abhidh.  Koça,  HI. p. 75; the  Vyākhyā  ad Bhaṣya,  40, 5, in 
Cosmol. Bouddh., p. 164. 
­3) Saṃyukta,  12, 21, and 18, 3; cf. De la  Vallée  Poussin's no4:e 1 to Abhidh.  Koça, 
HI, p. 92, and  note  2 to ibid., p. 75. It is curious  that  the Saṃyukta  reads  ávaranam 
instead of  sammohah  at the end of the  Avidyā  explanation (our text, a  – ­ B — 1) ; 
as we noted above, this translation was prepared by  Guṇabnadra  in the beginning 
of the 5th century A.D. Numerous  refer–=*nces  \o definitions of  Avidyā  are given 
by De 1a  Vallée  Poussin,  Théorie  des  douze  causes  (1913), pp. 6­9. 
­­) Abhidh.  Koça,  HI,  note  2 to p. 88  ; Vyākhyā  ad Bhāsya,  45, 31, in Cosmol. Bouddh. t 
p. 173. Further references are given by De la  VaUée  Poussin at the place first 
quoted here. CI. also  notes  60 sqq. to the Translation, below. — The differences 
from  the  Pali  versions are interesting; cf. Digha, H, p. 305 (Majjhima, I, p. 49; 
Rhys  Davids­Stede, s.v.  jarā):  yā  tesam  sattānam  tarnhi sattanikaye  jarā jtranatā 
khandiccam  pāliccam  vaĭittacatā  āyuso sarnhāni indriy?.nām  paripāko.  The beginning 
yā jarā  does  not occur in any of the Sanskrit versions ; it may be considered 
superfluous: if an  individual  creature  is born in a definite  sattvanikāya,  it is self­
evident  that  he becomes old in the  same  group of creatures. To khandicca  („the 
state  of being broken, of  teeth",  Rhys Davids­Stede, Pali Dictionary, s.v.) corresponds, 
in the Sanskrit versions,  khālitya,  "baldness’’. There is no doubt  that  the  Pali  version 
is more satisfactory  here  ; the order in  which  the different laksanas of Old Age are 
given  is not irrelevant and, in addition, the loss of  teeth  is certainly more characteristic 
of Old Age than  that  of hairs. But for  that  very reason, the term khandicca might 
well be a later correction, or, at least,  there  is no indication  that  it should be 
more archaic. 
85) Quoted in  note  71, above. 
86) Madhyamakavrtti, edition by De la  Vallée  Poussin in  Bibf.  Buddh., 21 (1931), p. 9. 
«7) Edition  by De la  Vallée  Poussin,  Bibf.  Indies (1901­14), p. 388; cf.  note  130 to 
the Translation. 
8s) Edition  by Bendall,  Bibf.  Buddh., I (1902), p. 222 (with important  notes  to the text). 


--- [Page 82] ---
— 72 — 
noted by  De la Vallée  Poussin 80), all  these  quotations differ in detail, 
though agreeing in the main points.  Obviously,  the definition presented 
difficulties  to the copyists. In our text the  Nāmarūpa  definition occurs 
twice  (a — B —  5 to 8, and e  — A —  8 to 10), both times  with  numerous 
mistakes 90). The  division  of Vijñana  into  ṣaḍ  vijñānakāyāh,  of  Saḍāyatana 
into ṣaḍ  ādhyātmikāny  āyatanāni,  and of  Sparça  into sat  sparçakāyah,  all 
occur  in the  Abhidharmakoça  91). Saṃskāra,  in the Vibhanga, is  divided 
into the  samskāras  of body  (kāya) , speech  (vāc)  and mind (rnanas). This 
is one of the usual divisions for  karman  92). Since the notions of  samskāra 
and karman  are very much related 93), this  division  is comprehensible, but 
the use of the  division  into  kāya>  vāc and  manas  is no* in accordance  with 
the texts.  Samskāra  has several different, though related, connotations, but 
here  we are only concerned  with  the second  link  of the  Pratītyasamutpāda 
formula,  technically,  samskārānga  94), i.e.  those  samskāras  which  condition 
Vijñāna.  In this connection, it is irrelevant whether action has been accom­
plished  by body, speech or mind; the essential point is the moral tenor 
of action. Therefore, the usual  division  of samskārānga  is into punya, apunya 
and āneñjya  95). Now it is remarkable  that  in another  passage  of the text 
89) Madhyamakavrtti, p. 5 (note). It is curious  that  the  three  versions quoted in  notes 
86 to 88 are all quoted from the  Çālistambhasūtra,  hut their wording is far from 
being  identical; the Tibetan translations show differences again. It is remarkable 
that already in a comparatively early age (none of  these  texts  seems  to be later 
than the 7th century  A. D.) the textual tradition of important definitions was  rather 
uncertain; in this particular case,  there  is no question of different schools since the 
definitions  are quoted in the  same  contexts and lead to the  same  conclusions. The MS 
traditions are only partly responsible for  these  differences; only some of the  lasser 
differences may be considered scribal errors. 
90) But the second quotation is much worse than the first one. There, for instance, 
Rūpa  (in  Nāmarūpanga)  is wrongly explained as  visual  matter  (i.e.  rūpāyatana). 
For reasons  to be expounded at the end of this Introduction, we consider it £  part 
of a clumsy interpolation. 
ei) Vijñānāṅga:  Abhidh.  Koça,  111,  p. 85,  note  1; cf. the  Vyākhyā  (ad  Bhās.,  44, 21­23) in 
Cocmol. Bouddh., p. 172. —  Sparçanga : Abhidh.  Koça,  IH, p. 95 ;  Vyākhyā  (ad  Bhās., 
49, 26) in Cosmo!. Bouddh., p. 177; cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  Index  General, p. 89. —  Āyatana : 
Abhidh.  Koça,  I, p. 65. 
92) Abhidh.  Koça,  IV,  kārikā  1; cI. the references in the  notes  to the Translation. 
9s) Warren (Buddhism in Translations, p. 116) even 'translated’  samskāra  in the  Pratītya­
samutpāda  formula by  karman.  Most  of the  Hīnayāna  sects  (Abhidh.  Koça,  111,  kār. 
21 b: samskārāh  purvakarmanah)  limited  Satnskārānga  to karman  during  past  existence 
in as far as it 'produced* (abhisamskaroti)  present  existence and  will  produce new 
existences as long as it  will  not have lost its effect. 
94) CI.  inira,  note  33 to the Translation. 
ô5) CI.  Çālist.  Sutra quoted  Çikṣāsamuccaya,  p. 223, and Bodhic.  pañjikā,  p. 479  : puṇyopagā 
apunyopaga  ániñjyopagāç  cema  ucyante  'vidyāpratyayāh samskāra  iti. — A combination 
of the two modes of  division  occurs in Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 84 : "II aceomplit la 
triple  action, corporeUe,  vocale, mentale  action  non­méritoire  (apunya), 
action  méritoire  (punya),  action "invariable"  (āniñjya)  Ces  actions sont  les 
8anwkmran qui sont en raison de  ravśdyā".  Here, it  does  not seem doubtful  that 
Vasubandhu  considered the  division  into  punya  etc. the more important one. 


--- [Page 83] ---
— 73 — 
engraved in the  gold  plates, the  Vibhaṅga  division  of Saṃskārāṅga  is not 
considered  correct, or rather, is considered a secondary  division  only  96) ; 
it is there  attributed to the  opinion  of „others”  (anye  punar  āhuh  ;, 
g — B — 4 to 5). The point is  that  more than one  division  of Saṃskārāṅga 
is mentioned in the canonical texts, so  that  the problem arose  which  of these 
should be considered primary; this point is the more complicated since 
Saṃskāra  is also  implied  in the third  link  of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula 
(Sāṃskāraskandha  in Nāmarūpāṅga) . This  detail is especially important 
because it may cast some light upon the relation between the  Sūtra­Vibhaṅga 
and the  rest  of the text to be discussed hereafter. 
The importance of the  Pratityasamutpādasūtra  and its Vibhanga  appears 
not only  from  the quotations in Buddhist literature, but also  from  the translat­
ions and commentaries. We already mentioned the translation by  Hiuan  Tsang. 
A detailed commentary was written by .Vasubandhu ; its complete text is 
preserved in a Tibetan translation, but important fragments of the  original 
were discovered by  Tucci  in Nepal  97). The latter  appears  to be an interesting 
text, in  which  almost every word of the Sutra­ Vibhaṅga  is accounted for. 
As this commentary is important for the correct understanding of the text, 
a few examples  will  be quoted. 
In the beginning of the  Sūtra,  the expression  pratītyasamutpādasyādih 
is used  with  reference to the formula of Dependent  Origination  (a — A — 2) ; 
this might  suggest the  opinion  that  Pratītyasamutpāda  has a beginning in 
its narrow sense, viz. a beginning  which  would  be uncaused in  that  case. 
In order to  avoid  such a wrong  opinion  os), Vasubandhu explains  that  the 
term  ādi  is used  with  reference to the  Sūtra­Vibhaṅga  as a whole : the 
Sutra  is termed  ādi because it precedes the more detailed exposition in the 
Vibhaṅga  ; it is the uddega preceding the nirdega 9í)). — The words  sādhu 
96) CI. the whole  passage  from  g — A — 10 to g — B — 4. There, the  division  into 
kā;*a,  vāc  and  tnanas  is considered a subdivision of  that  into  kuçala  etc. A  similar 
combination  of the two modes of  division  of Samskārānga  is given in the Madhya­
makavrtti, p. 543. 
97) Quoted in note 43, above. The  original  title of  Vssubandhu’s  commentary may have 
been  Pratītyasamutpādādivibhanganirdeca,  rather than  Pratītyasamutpādavyakhya  as 
Tucci  presumed (with Vibhanga as the designation of the  separate  chapters); cf. 
De la Valiée  Poussin Cosmol. Bouddh., p. 281, and the references given there. 
98) CI.  also  Abhidh.  Koça,  111,  kárika  19 d;  Bhásya,  translation in Abhidh.  Koça,  HI. 
pp. 70 sq. (about  ayoniçomanasikāra  as the cause of  Avidya).  The importance attached 
by Vasubandhu to this point might be the indication of a controversy among Buddhist 
schools.  Especially  the  Vaibhāsika  conception of  Pratītyasamutpāda  as twelve different 
'states*  (avastha)  might easily lead to the conception of the first  state  as some  original 
stuff, a conception  that  may be traced in  Brāhmaṇic  schools  (Vaiçesika,  Vedānta). 
The idea of an asamskṛtadharma  called  Pratītyasamutpāda  is attributed to various 
Buddhist  schools (cf. supra, note 49). 
") Art. cit., p. 61 : ādir uddeço nirdeçasya tatpūrvakatvat;  term  cadiyate yasmāt pratītya¬
samutpādah, „ādi  (here) means  'statement';  (it is denoted as  ādi,  'beginning’) because 
it precedes the explanation (i.e. the Vibhanga); so (it is styled  ‘beginning’),  because 
(the exposition of)  Pratītyasamutpāda  begins  with  it (i.e.  with  the  Sutra)’’.  — CI. also 


--- [Page 84] ---
— 74 — 
ca susthu  ca manasikuruta,  „bear  it well  and  firmly  in mind’’,  are not to 
be taken as a needless repetition of  three  rather  similar  terms : they have 
a pregnant meaning and are used to  avoid  three  particular  dosas,  viz. bad 
listening,  bad understanding and bad memory 100). 
For our purpose the most interesting question concerns  which  text 
Vasubandhu  used. Did the Bhagavat address  himself  to the  bhiksus  (as in 
our text), to a definite number of  bhiksus  (as in the  Nālandā  text), or to 
„Crāvakas,  Bodhisattvas, gods and  men’’  (as in the version  which  Hiuan  Tsang 
translated  into  Chinese)?  This  point is  difficult  to be ascertained, although 
we have a slight indication  that  Vasubandhu used a relatively elaborate 
version.  He makes a remark about bhiksavah in a — A  — 2  101) and tries 
to explain why the Bhagavat  addresses  the monks and no others. At first, 
one would  conclude  that  Vasubandhu used a text in  which  only  bhiksus 
are mentioned, but this does not prove to be the case : such a conclusion 
would  be correct  only  if the word  bhiksūn  in a  — A — 1 had been concerned. 
The Chinese version, however, makes  Vasubandhu’s  remark understandable. 
There,  it appears  that  the Bhagavat, although surrounded by a large group 
in which  gods  are also  included,  always  uses  "o monks’’  as a mode of address. 
This is a point  which  needs  explanation. Now Vasubandhu  states  that  the 
reason is  that  the monks are the  best  bhājana,  etc.; therefore, he especially 
addresses  the monks in the  small  intercalated sentences, in spite of the fact 
that many others are  listening,  too.  Only  in that  case,  Vasubandhu’s  explanat­
ion makes sense. Thus, the obvious conclusion is  that  the audience did not 
consist  only  of monks. Then,  Vasubandhu’s  version must have been more 
elaborate than ours; on the other hand, it certainly was less elaborate 
than the  version  used by  Hiuan  Tsang, for it is easy to see  that  the explanat­
ion of the monks being the  best  bhājana  could  not possibly have been given 
if there  were Bodhisattvas among the audience of the Bhagavat (as in the 
Chinese  version).  This  fact does not necessarily prove  that  the text used 
by Vasubandhu was later than our version (slightly different versions may 
have been used by different, though contemporary, sects), but in  view  of 
the authority of Vasubandhu all over the  world  of Sanskrit Buddhism, it 
would  not seem very probable  that,  at least in the  great  Buddhist centres, 
the very  beginning of the first fragment : ktvā  vidhir  vijñêyaie;  na  pūrvakālakriyārtha 
iti. The text of the Sutra proves  that  vidhir  does  not belong to the Sutra text, as 
Tucci  wrongly supposed: it  appears  that  vidhir is the explanation of another term 
in the Sutra, presumably of  ādi;  we may reconstitute:  <ādir ity>uktvā  vidhir 
vijñāyate. 
10°) The third of  these  is illustrated by the  simile  of a water­cask,  which  does not catch 
rain because its opening is placed at the wrong side. 
l01) Presumably, Vasubandhu read the sentence : pratītyasamutpādasyādim  vo bhiksavo 
vibhangam  cādeçayisyāmi.  Our text of this  passage  has been badly copied tvo was 
omitted  and instead of vibhangam,  °adim  (written  ādiñ,  with  sarndhi) is repeated]. 
In© order of the words explained makes the reconstruction of the text,  which  was 
explained,  possible, and it fonows  that  bhiksavah in the sentence just quoted and 
not in any other place, was commented upon. 


--- [Page 85] ---
— 75 — 
a pre­Vasubandhu version  would  have remained in use for centuries 
afterwards 102). Unfortunately, the problem of when Vasubandhu  lived  has 
not yet been completely solved ; after a  long  controversy, the most generally 
accepted  opinion  is fifth  century A.D. 103). Then, our version  could  be 
earlier  and, probably, it  could  not be very much later.  Although  this  line 
of argument necessarily remains rather vague, it might  agree  very  well  with 
the conclusion  arrived at above, where we presumed about a century's 
difference  with  the  Nālandā  text. In  that  case, the  following  chronological 
table can be established : 
(1) The Indonesian  Vibhaṅga  text (beginning of Vth century ?) ; 
(2) The text used by  Vasubandhu  (first  half  of Vth century ?) ; 
(3) The  Nālandā  text  (Vlth  century) ; 
­ (4) The  Vibhaṅga  text translated by  Hiuan  Tsang in 661 i04). 
The relation between the  Sútra­Vibhaṅga  and the  following  part of 
the text engraved on the plates is rather a loose one.  This  appears  clearly 
from  the  way  in which  these  parts  are connected. In  b — B —10, we read 
the beginning  of the  final  formula in the same  form  as it is given in the 
Nālandā  text. The sentence, however, is not continued up to the end since 
it did not  agree  with  the fact  that  a new portion was  following  ; as a matter 
of fact, the sentence is terminated  only  in h — A  — 1 to 2. Thus, the entire 
following  portion was intercalated, as it were, into the  final  sentence of the 
original  Vibhaṅga.  Only  a slight change in the wording has proved necessary : 
it is stated  that  the Bhagavat, after having terminated the  Sūtra  (plus 
Vibhanga),  will  now proceed to explain also the ‘meaning’ (artha) of Depen­
dent Origination.  The term artha  here  refers to the deeper meaning of 
Pratītyasamutpāda  and is contrasted wUh vibhanga,  which  refers  only  to 
the analysis  of the  separate  Aṅgas  into various sub­categories. The ‘meaning’ 
of Dependent  Origination  is stated to be expressed in a number of  Çlokas, 
which  are worked out in rather a  long  treatise. There, the meaning of 
Dependent  Origination  is discussed  from  two different points of  view,  both 
102) CI. the remarks by De la  Vallée  Poussin on the attitude of later Buddhism towards 
the Ahhidharmakoça,  a work  which  soon after its appearance eclipsed most of the older 
Abhidharma  literature (Abhidharmakoga, Introduction, 1931, p. XIV).  Initially,  there 
was however much opposition in the 'orthodox’  Sarvāstivādin  circles (op. cit., p. XII). 
Vasubandhu's commentary on the  Pratītyasamutpādasutra  and  °vibhanga  seems  to give 
the same views as the  Koça.  There are no apparent  Vijñānavāda  influences, so  that 
the commentary must be assigned to the earlier period of Vasubandhu's activity. 
103) fhe problem of when Vasubandhu  lived  is closely connected  with  that  of when his 
brother Asanga did (and therefore, indirectly,  with  the question of the authorship 
of the  Çāstras  attributed to  Maitreya­Asaṅga).  ‘Early  fifth  century  A.  D.' is the 
conclusion  arrived at by De la  Vallée  Poussin in chapter 11 of the Introduction 
to his  Abhidharmakoça  translation (where  full  references to other opinions are given). 
CI. also D. Friedmann,  Madhyāntavibhāgatīká  (1935), Introduction, pp. I sqq. 
*O4) As mentioned above, the  Pāli  recensions, showing too many differences, are left out 
of account. On the  date  of Hiuan  Tsang's translation, cI. also note 60, above. 


--- [Page 86] ---
— 76 — 
connected  with  the relations supposed to exist between the different  Aṅgas. 
Thus,  this portion of the text may roughly be  divided  into two parts. In 
the first  of these,  the twelve  nidānas  are  divided  into one to twelve groups, 
based upon various modes of  classification.  In the second portion, the relation 
between the two first  links  of the chain is examined in detail and conclusions 
are drawn there­from.  Both  portions together constitute a very  small  treatise 
about  Pratītyasamutpāda. 
The name of this treatise is not mentioned in the text, but may perhaps 
be inferred  from  an allusion  in f  — A — 1, where we read the words : evarn 
upadistah  pratītyasamutpādavidhih  ; the use of upadistah  there  might show 
that the text was considered to be an  Upadeça,  „instruction”  103). Its complete 
titíe may have been : Pratltyasamutpādavibhaṅgopadeça  or something  similar. 
The text  seems  to be unknown  from  other sources. 
As to its external  form,  the Upadeça,  as we  shall  henceforward indicate 
this part of the text,  consists  of a number of  Çlokas,  which  are subsequently 
explained  in the prose text. The relation between  Çlokas  and prose is a 
rather loose one; the latter is all but a commentary on  these  Çlokas.  We 
might  rather consider the  Çlokas  a kind  of motto above the treatise. 
Three of  these  (the first ones) are  only  indirectly connected  with  the 
Upadeça;  they also occur on the  small  plates of our set (i and ƒ) and 
have already been referred to above 106). The  three  following  Çlokas  bear 
directiy  upon the prose text. 
The first of  these  is perfectly clear. It is stated  that  Pratītyasamutpāda 
may be considered to be single,  twofold,  etc., up to twelvefold. The  form 
of the strophe is rather clumsy ; it  could  hardly be expected otherwise in 
view  of the necessity of mentioning all the numerals  from  one fo twelve. 
Its meaning is however clear.  Pratītya  (here  used substantially) is stated 
*­ 5) On the enact meaning of  upaieça,  cf. Nalinaksha Dutt,  Aspects  of Mahāyāna  Buddhis*n 
(1930), pp. lo ?qq.; p. 10: "It certainly means 'Instruction* and this is supported 
by the Tibetan rendering of the term". CI. also De la  Vallée  Poussin, Abhidh.  Koça, 
Introduction, etc. (1931), p. XX, translating a  passage  from  Guṇamati's  Çástra: 
**Apres  1a disparition du Bouddha,  Ānanda,  Kātyāyana,  etc. lirent­publierent ce 
qu'ils  avaient entendu. Pour expliquer 1e  sens  du Sutra, comme 1es disciples font, ils 
firent  un Çāstra  expliquant Íe Sutra, qui  est done  nommé  sūtra­upadeça.  La  Vibhása 
ensuite,  de ce qui se trouvait  dans  cet  upadeça,  tira un  upadeça".  It is in any  ease 
clear  that,  unlike Sutra and also Vibhanga, the use of  Upadeça  is limited  to scriptures 
which,  in the  form  of Çastras  (i.e. not, for instance, in  that  of a word­for­word 
commentary)  giving  a more or less systematic account, aimed at explaining the 
Doctrine.  The term is never used for the words of the Buddha, although the  Upadeças 
are always based upon the latter. The  three  portions of our text may be  deñned 
Uddeça  (the Sutra),  Nirdeça,  (the Vibhanga) and  Upadeça  (the  Çastra).  TJpadeça 
is one of the nine or twelve divisions of the scriptures, but  only  in the  Mahāyāna 
lists;  cI.  Kern,  Geschied.,  II, p. 37o. The  Mahāyāna  list  of ten  Aúgas  is given in 
Mahāvy.  62, 1­12 (p. 21); Dharmas., sect.  LXH  (p. 13), Saddharmap. and other sources 
mention  nine divisions (references in Dharmas., p. 48). In either case,  Upadeça  is 
the last item mentioned. 
106) Supra, p. 57 sqq. 


--- [Page 87] ---
— 77 — 
to grow out of (°ja) all of nine  links  (anga)  and to have originated  (utpanna) 
in a ten­ and eleven­fold  state,  though it is to be considered twelvefold. 
A large portion of the text explains in what ways Dependent Origination 
is single, twofold etc. (from c — A — 7 to e  —A  — 7). 
The last two  Çlokas  are in a very bad  state  ; in the first one some 
words have been left out, as  appears  from the metre, but the second one 
has not been copied at all; it may however be reconstructed out of the 
words  which  are explained in a  kind  of commentary one after the other. 
Obviously,  these  Çlokas  were  difficult  to understand (and, perhaps,  difficult 
to read in the  original  manuscript). Since they refer to the second portion 
of the Upadeça  (from f  — A —  1 toh — A —2), they  will  be discussed after 
the first portion. 
After  the last of  these  strophes, the prose text dealing  with  the first 
of them  does  not begin immediately. First, by way of an introduction, the 
etymology  of the term  pratītyasamutpāda  is given.  ‘Etymology’  should be 
taken is its 'etymological' meaning  here  : the true, real meaning of the term 
as it may be established by analysis. Such etymologies often serve as a 
kind  of peg on  which  theories may be hung ; they are frequently used to 
that purpose in Buddhist literature. The  Abhidharmakoça  gives numerous 
examples 107), including  the term  pratītyasamutpāda  108 ). The latter discussion 
appears  to be of direct importance for the interpretation given in our text. 
From  a grammarian's point of  view,  the form  pratītya  can be interpreted 
either as a gerund, or (theoretically) as a gerundive. In the  Abhidharmakoça, 
the Vaibhāṣika  doctor  takes  the former  view  (as we do) and interprets 
pratītyasamutpāda  as :  ‘‘combined  origination  (samutpāda)  in dependence on 
(lit.:  going towards,  prati­ityá)  [other dharmas]". The  Sautrāntika  dcctor 
disagrees and  argues  that  the gerund  denotes  preceding action; but how, 
then,  could  something go towards something else before it is actually in 
existence ? That  would  be absurd. Therefore, he  takes  pratītya  as a gerun­
dive ; itya  means  ‘‘what  must go" i09), I.e. "perishable" "doomed to destruction” 
­°7) Thus, dharma is derived from the root  dhr  "because  it 'holds'  (possesses)  its own 
characteristic marks"  (svalaksanadh arana t‚ Abhidh,  Koça,  I, p. 4). Gandharva, an 
important concept in some of the Buddhist Schools for the definition of the intermediate 
state  between death and re­birth  (antarábhava;  for the background of the Gandharva 
theory, cI. De la  Vallée  Poussin,  Indo­Européens,  etc., 1936, p. 288), is explained as 
gandha + the root arv (known from the  Dhatupātha),  thus  meaning  "il mange  1'odeur" 
(Abhidh.  Koça,  HI, p. 47). This  agrees  with  the Buddhist conception of an intermediate 
being  consisting of  Karman  only, and conceived of as something semi­material. By 
means  of this etymology, a popular  belief  could be incorporated into Buddhism. 
10s) Ibidem,  III, pp. 78­81; the  Vyākhyā  in Cosmo!.  Bouddh.,  p. 166, line 3 to p. 169, line 8. 
109) CI. ibidem, 111, p. 80,  note  3; the  Vyākhyā  in Cosm. Bouddh., p. 168:  itau  gatau 
sadhava  ityah  | tatra  sadhur  iti yatpratyayah |  itau  vinastau sadhavah |  anavastháyina 
ity arthah /  samupasargaḥ  samavāyārthaṃ  dyotayati,  i.e. "things  which  are itya are 
'good to  iti*,  i.e. to go ; the  suffix  vat (i.e. ­ya of the gerundive)  means  'good for  that'; 
the meaning is  that  they are 'good to go', i.e. 'good for destruction', i.e. 'unstable'; 
the particle  sam conveys the meaning of contact". This explanation of itya is based 
on Pāṇini,  Astādhy.,  Ill, 1,  kār.  109  (eti­stu­ças­vr­dṛ­juṣaḥ  kyap),  and the form 


--- [Page 88] ---
— 78 — 
(vinaçvara)  ; prati  is distributive,  utpāda  means  apparition. Therefore, 
pratītyasamutpāda  means  : „combined origination of perishable things, due 
to such and such a complex of causes’’ 110). Thus, the  Sautrāntika’s  view 
on Dependent  Origination lays particular  stress  on two  aspects  of it : (1) each 
result is due to a complex of  causes,  (2) each result is necessarily  unstable. 
If now we return to the definition given in our  text  (c — A — 5 sq.), 
it is evident  that  the latter  agrees  in the main with the  Sautrāntika’s  point 
of view. In  pratītya,  prati  is explained as  angam  prati,  „with  reference  to 
each  link”  and is  therefore  interpreted  vīpsārtham  ; the form  itya  is taken 
as a gerundive, too, since it is explained by  kotha,  „decay’’ m). 
The Sautrāntika’s  view is especially important  because  it has  become  the 
main  base  of the  Mahayānic  conception of  Dependent  Origination.  Nāgārjuna, 
in Ms Mulamadhyamakakārikās,  takes  up the  Sautrāntika  interpretation and 
uses  it to prove the voidness  (çūnyatā)  of all  that  arises  in dependence  112). 
Whatever is doomed to decay as soon as it  arises  does  not possess  any „nature 
of its own”  (svabhāva),  it is  ‘void’;  how could  there  be any real arising 
of entities  which  have  no real existence ? 113). Oppositions such as  samudaya 
and nirodha lose their force if both are  void.  As will  appear  in the  course 
of this Introduction, the main points of this conclusion  have  been  accepted 
in our  treatise,  too. 
The first portion of the  Upadeça  refers  to the  Çloka  in which  Dependent 
Origination  is stated  to be simple, twofold, etc., up to twelvefold.  Like  the 
whole  text,  it is composed in the form of  questions  and answers.  — In  what 
way is  Dependent  Origination twofold? — Because it  means  Cause and 
Fruit.  — After  that,  the Angas which are Cause and  those  which are Fruit 
are enumerated.  In this way, the different divisions of the links of the 
Pratītyasamutpāda  formula are discussed. The  arrangement  is progressive, 
based  on numerical  categories. 
Such  a 'numerical’  arrangement  of thoughts  is frequently met with in 
actually  occurs in the Bhattikavya (probably to illustrate  Pāṇini’s  rule), but it could 
not have the meaning supposed by the Bhadanta (it would  rather  mean .‚to whom or 
to what one should go" ; cI.  gamy  a). The meaning presumed by the Bhadanta might 
be due to a (wrong) etymology of nitya (explained as na­itya,  „permanent",  from 
which  itya could be isolated in the opposite meaning?). 
110) In this way, the view of the Bhadanta is summarized in the  Bhāṣya  (in De la  Vallée 
Poussin's translation  „naissance  ensemble, en raison  de tel  ou tel complexe  de causes, 
de choses  périssables",  i.e. samutpadas  tám  tarn  samagrim  pratítyánám). 
111) we do not know any example of the use of  kotha  in this connection. In addition 
to the use of the term in Indian medicine  (Suçruta)  mentioned in the dictionaries, 
we have only a single reference for the term in this connection, viz.  Rāṣṭrapālaparipṛcchā, 
edited by Finot,  Bibf.  Bttddh., II (1901), p. 46: ttrtakasthakothasama  paçyati 
satvarūpam,  .‚the  (viz. the Bodhisattva)  sees  the body of a being as if it were rottening 
grass  and wood". CI.  note  149 below. 
112) De la  Vallée  Poussin, Madhyamaka, Mél. chin, et  bouddh.,  II (1933), pp. 4 sqq. 
(with  an extensive bibliography). 
US) *n,ig Hue 0f argument is reproduced from a quotation from the  Sāgaramatipariprcchā 
written  on a clay tablet from Kedah (Malaya); cf. the end of this Introduction. 


--- [Page 89] ---
— 79 — 
Indian  religion  and science ; it is indeed an excellent help to the memory. 
In Buddhist literature, especially in the scholastic type, almost any important 
notion  has a  kind  of numerical value  which  can hardly be separated from 
the intrinsic meaning of the terms. There,  Upādāna,  Attachment,  means 
‘four’  as much as anything else. A striking example of the fascination of 
numbers has already been discussed : the Buddhist  sects  may disagree on 
the kinds  of Thirsts  which  exist, but they do  agree,  as a rule,  that  there 
are three  kinds of it. We know its divisions into : (a)  kāma,  bhava, vibhava, 
(b) kāma,  rūpa,  ārupya,  (c) bhava, itibhava, vibhava,  and  (d) rūpa, arūpa, 
nirodha. An even more striking example is given by  OUT  text  itself  in a 
portion  in which  the divisions of  samskāra  are given 114) : the latter can 
be divided  into : (a) punya, apunya,  āneñjya,  (b)  kuçála,  akuçala,  avyākṛta, 
(c) kāya,  vāc,  manas,  (d) prātisattvika,  aupapattyamçika,  ābhisāmsārika. 
Whatever one may think about the different kinds of  samskāra,  the fact 
that there  are three  of them is beyond any reasonable doubt. 
It is well­known  that  such a numerical arrangement served as the 
basis of composition of the  Pāli  Aṅguttaranikāya  115), the  Ekottarāgama  (the 
‘one­more’  collection of  Sūtras)  of the Sanskrit canon. De la  Vallée  Poussin 
stresses  the importance of various numerical lists  (mātrkās)  in the early 
history  of the Abhidharma Schools 116). These lists may have constituted 
an essential element in early Buddhist teaching, especially to young or 
simple  people ; this method, of course, is not alien to Western forms of 
teaching either. 
The different possibilities for  division  of the Twelve  Nidānas  are cf 
obvious  interest for a  full  comprehension of Dependent Origination. The 
survey given in our text is not devoid of a more general interest either, 
since it conveys a clear impression of the extreme subtleness of this doctrine, 
which  is liable to be interpreted in many ways. 
At present,  most scholars  agree  that  the theory of  Pratītyasamutpāda 
occupies a central position in Buddhism of all countries and of all  ages  117). 
114) infra, from f — A — 10 to f — B — 8. 
115) CI. Hasting's Encyclopaedia of  Rel.  and Ethics, sv. Ahguttara (article hy Rhys Davids). 
— Some characteristic examples are given by Winternitz, Geschichte, II. 1 (1913), 
pp. 45­50. 
lĭ6) UAbhidharmakoça  de Vasubandhu, Introduction (1931), p. VII, reprint  with  additions 
of the Avant­Propos to Cosmologie bouddhique (1919) ; cf. also the  Saṃgītisuttanta 
in the  Dīghanikāya  and its Sanskrit version the  Saṃgītiparyaya,  which  is one of 
the seven  'feet'  of the Abhidharma (op. cit., p.  XLII).  —  Similar  numerical lists, 
but not in progressive arrangement, are well­known in  Mahāyāna,  too.  Typical  examples 
are: the entire  Mahávyutpatti,  2nd edition by I. P.  Minaiev  and  N.  D. Mironov, 
Bibl.  Buddh.  XIII  (1911), and considerable portions of the different  Prajñaparamitā 
versions, cI.  Sten  Konow,  The  first  two Chapters of the  Daçasahasrikā,  Avh. Norske 
Vid.­Ak., 1941, II, pp. 1­17 (where numerous accordances  with  other versions 
are also given). 
117) CI. H. von Glasenapp, Die Dharma  Theorie des  Buddhismus, Z. D. Morg.  Ges.,  1938, 
pp. 383 sqq. Different opinions, mainly belonging to an older  phase  of Buddhist 
research, are  also  mentioned  there. 


--- [Page 90] ---
— 80 — 
The Ye­dharmā  formula, undoubtedly the  most  famous and  most  often 
reproduced strophe of Buddhism, is closely connected  with  the theory of 
Dependent  Origination;  the same applies to the Four Truths  (āryasatya) , 
the dharma theory as a whole (which is the  ‘central  conception of  Buddhism’, 
as Stcherbatskij put it), and, in  Mahāyāna,  the philosophical doctrines of 
Çūnyatā  and  Vijñānavāda. 
The different interpretations of  Pratītyasamutpāda  may all be reduced 
to (a) one general, and (b) several special interpretations based on the 
general one 118). The general interpretation is expressed in its most pregnant 
way by the formula asmin  sati  bhavatīdam  119) : the existence of one thing 
depends on the existence of something else ; it is the formula  which  in the 
Sutra  text immediately precedes the enumeration of the  separate  Aṅgas. 
Vasubandhu  informs us 120) that  the Discourses of the Buddha do not 
directly  refer to the general theory, because they are intentional; the general 
interpretation is however  implied  in them m). 
According  to the general interpretation, each  Aṅga  is a Cause  (hetu) 
and a  Fruit  (phala) at the same time : a Cause of the next  Aṅga  and a 
Fruit  of the preceding one 121). One of the special interpretations (c — A  — 7 
sq.), however, considers  five  Aṅgas  as Cause, but the remaining seven ones 
as Fruit;  the obvious reason is  that  for some  Aṅgas  the aspect of their 
being  a Cause is more important, whereas the  Fruit  aspect dominates for 
some other  Aṅgas.  This  special interpretation is not considered essential 
from  a philosophical  point of  view,  but intentional, having a moral bearing : 
Upādāna,  Attachment to pleasures and to wrong views, may be the effect 
of Tṛṣṇa,  Thirst; it is however far more important  from  a religious point 
of view  that  one should realize  that  it is the main cause of re­birth. On 
the other hand,  Jarāmaraṇa,  Old Age and Death, cannot be the end of 
everything  (that  would  amount to  ucchedavāda)  and must therefore be a 
Cause 122) ; but  from  a psychological  point of  view,  it is far more important 
H­) Th. Stcherbaiskij, Buddhist  Logic,  I (1932), p. 135. 
lld) In its complete  form,  this formula consists of  three  distinct parts, referring to dependent 
, existence, dependent origination  (utpëda)  and dependent cessation, respectively. Different 
interpretations,  with  reference to  Pali  sources, too, are given in the Abhidh.  Koça, 
HI, pp. 81 sqq., cI. also  Vyākhyā,  HI, 42, 25 sqq. in Cosm. Bouddh., pp. 169 sqq. 
120) Abhidh.  Koça,  HI. p. 67  (Bhaṣya). 
ĭ21) Stcherbatskij, op. cit., p. 135, note, infers  from  the  passage  by Vasubandhu quoted in 
the preceding note,  that  .‚the  generalized theory is a later development of the special 
one", supposed to have originated in the Abhidharma Schools. In any case, such a 
conclusion  cannot be based on  Vasubandhu’s  statement  quoted in the preceding note. 
There,  it is  only  stated  that  the Bhagavat:, whose teaching was adapted to his audience, 
did not mention it expressly, though it was  implied  in the Discourses. We have no 
reason to distrust  Vasubandhu’s  statement:  the early existence of the 'general' 
interpretation may be inferred  from  the formula asmin  sati  etc.,  which  in the  Pali 
sources, too, usually precedes the teaching of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula. 
122) Th. Stcherbatskij, Buddhist Logic, I (1932), chapter IV (and passim), has given a 
full.analysis  of the Buddhist conception of  ‘being’.  If reality is conceived of as a 
continuous play of causes and effects, in  which  nothing is eternal and nothing is 


--- [Page 91] ---
— 81 — 
to stress  its Fruit  aspect : thus, the Bhagavat shows  that  all existence inevita­
bly leads to  Jarāmaraṇa,  with  the entire complex of suffering  implied  in it 123). 
Some  of the other classifications are all variations on the  hetu­phála 
theme. The Cause comprises different  aspects  : the direct cause of re­birth 
is the existence of  karman  leading to re­birth ; but the existence of  karman 
itself  is conditioned by Defilement  (kleça).  Therefore, the Cause may be 
analyzed  into either  karman  or kleça,  and this leads to the important threefold 
division  of the  Aṅgas  into  kleça,  karman  and phala. At the same time, the 
interpretation of  karman  as the more direct cause of suffering may lead 
to a more pregnant expression of the  Fruit  aspect : it is then conceived of 
as the result of the  ‘ripening’  of karman  and is then  called  Ripening, 
Maturation  (vipāka) . This  result, in Buddhism, is always some  kind  of 
'suffering’;  it is not suffering in its narrow meaning (which is the case  with 
Jarāmaraṇa),  but always suffering in a broader  sense  : the result produced 
by karman  is inevitably unstable (anitya), since not  only  pleasant feelings 
in general  (sukhavedanīya) , but even heavenly existence comes to an end. 
Accordingly,  the terms phala and  vipáka  may be substituted by duhkha. 
In the fourth place, the same group of  Aṅgas  may be considered the object 
of Defilement and  Karman,  and therefore be termed  vastu.  This  last term, 
however, is not mentioned in our text, perhaps because it is too neutral 124). 
All the classifications mentioned are  only  variations of the Hetu­Phala clas­
sification:  twofold  (c — A —  7 sq.), threefold  (c — B — 4 to 6),  fourfold 
(c —B —8 to 10) and  sixfold  (d —A —3 to 5). 
Some  other special interpretations are based on a rather different  prin­
ciple.  The twelve  Aṅgas  are often considered as many  states  (avastha)  of 
Existence,  each of them corresponding to a definite period. Then, the  Aṅgas 
become  bhavāngas.  This  interpretation is accordingly termed  ‘static’ 
(āvasthika) , ur ‘extended’ (prakarsika) 125). As  ‘Existence’  (bhava)  is often 
destroyed, then 'being’ becomes synonymous  with  'being efficient', 'being a cause’ 
v'snd  a fruit as  well).  Consequently, something  which  is not a cause of something else, 
such  as a lotus in the sky, cannot exist. Therefore, if  Jaramaraṇa  were not cause, 
ic would  not exist. Its direct effect is the powerful 'complex of suffering' on the 
one hand, and re­birth on the other. 
123) In our text (infra,  f — B — 2 sqq.), the different compounds of the  duḥkhaskandha 
are analyzed and conceived in mutual interdependence, just like the  pratītyasamut¬
pādāṅgas.  This conception is unusual; as a rule, the whole complex  (çoka  etc.) is 
taken to arise together (samudbhavanti) in dependence on  Jaramaraṇa. 
124) Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 68,  kārikā  26. a­b : kÎeças  Mni  dvayam  karma sapta  vastu 
phalam  tathá;  so, the seven Angas  which  are neither  k!eça  (avidyā,  trsnā,  upādāna), 
nor karman  (samskāra,  bhava)  are named  vastu  or phala. Vastu is explained as  āçraya, 
"point  d'appui", in the  Bhāsya.  It is the chain interpreted as being partly subject 
(the forces of  kleça  and  karman)  and partly object; cI. the  Vyākhyā  ad Bhāsya,  35, 23 
(Cosmol. Bouddh., p. 158):  kleçakarmāgrayatvād  iti /  vijñānādini saptāngāni vastūni  / 
adhisthānāni kleçakarmanām  ity arthah.  De  la Vallée  Poussin (op.  cit.,  p. 68, note 3, 
and Théorie  des  douze  causes,  p. 34)  notes  that  the term  vastu  is not found elsewhere 
in that  meaning. 
125) Âbhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 66. — CI. ibid.,  note  5, where it becomes evident  that  the 
Sautrántikas  (including Vasubandhu) did not accept this interpretation. 


--- [Page 92] ---
— 82 — 
explained  as ‘existence  of the  five skandhas', the twelve  Aṅgas  would  represent 
twelve  stages  of evolution or development  (parināma)  ; or rather, each of 
the twelve  stages  is named after the  Aṅga  which  is prevalent in it 126). 
Thus,  the period in  which  the passions begin to arise, early adolescence, is 
denoted by  Tṛṣṇā;  the period in  which  these  passions are carried out, by 
Upādāna.  The  division  of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula into twelve  states 
is usually expressed by the  simile  of a  tree.  I.e. the Tree of Sorrow 
(duhkhavrksa). Then, the twelve  Aṅgas  are represented as its different 
stages  of development  from  seed to  fruit.  Since the  fruit  contains the seed 
from  which  a new  tree  may arise, the twelfth  link  (Jarāmaraṇa)  conditions 
a new series : the  cycle  of re­birth (Bhavacakra).  This  cycle  is without a 
beginning,  but it may end when one of its  stages  is destroyed : without 
the seed, the germ cannot arise.  This  is the 'exterior’ interpretation of the 
chain  of causation, explained in our text in the  passage  from  c — A — 9 
to 10.  Also  the  fivefold  (d — A —  1 to 3) and the sevenfold (d — A  — 5 
to 8)  divisions  are based on the above interpretation. 
The simile  of the seed and the germ  (bīja  and ankura) has become 
famous in  Buddhism  and does not seem to be  limited  to any particular 
form  of Buddhism;  on the other hand, its  definition  as the  ‘exterior’  Pratītya­
samutpāda  opposed to the  ‘interior’  (ādhyātmika)  interpretation (according 
to which  the  twelve­linked  formula is the expression of the general rule 
of causation)  seems  to be  limited  to Mahāyāna  127). This is an important 
126) ­The reason why the  āvasthika  interpretation was condemned by the  Sautrāntikas 
was probably  that  it resembled too much the theories of  satkārya  and  parināma  of 
Sāṃkhya  and other heretical systems. The term  parināma  is however used  with 
reference to  çoka,  parideva, etc., considered to be 'transformations' of  Jarāmaraṇāṅga 
(and not  separate  Aṅgas);  cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  HI, p. 83, note 5. 
127) This  is the  opinion  of De 1a  Vallée  Poussin, Bouddhisme, Histoire de la  Dogmat ique, 
p. 46, who makes, however, some reserves. It cannot be denied  that  the problems 
herewith  connected are very  complicated.  Saxnghabhadra, who was an orthodox  Vaibhasil:a 
(cI. Abhidh.  Koça,  introduction etc., 1931, p.  LIII),  „établit  que la  série  causale soit 
intérieure,  soit  extérieure,  — Ie kaí*úa,  etc.  d unc part; la graine, etc, de l'autre  •— 
c'sst  ce qu'on nomme  Pratītyasamutpāda"  (Abhidh.  Koça,  HI, note 1 to p. 6o); this is, 
however,  something very different  from  what is stated in our text. The  simile  of 
the seed and the germ is  known  in Yaçomitra's Vyākhyā  (cf. Cosm. Bouddh., p. 133, 
line 11 and p. 163,  line  12), but  there  is not the slightest  indication  that  it should 
have been considered the  ‘exterior’  interpretation of  Pratītyasamutpāda.  The distinction 
made by  Saṃghabhadra,  on the other hand,  uses  the terms 'interior' and 'exterior' 
in a way  qui<te  different  from  our text, viz. as either  pañcaskandhikā  avasihāh,  or 
bījāṅkurādi,  i.e. in about the same way as the distinction is made for the  áyatanas 
and the twelve first  dhatus.  In our text, however, 'exterior' refers to the  'special' 
interpretations of the chain, but  ‘interior'  to the 'general' rules  fixed  by the laws of 
causation  (hetūpanibandha).  Stcherbatskij (Buddh. Logic, I, p. 121, note)  rightly 
concludes  that  Vasubandhu  (Abhidharmakoça)  sharply distinguished the two inter­
pretations  (Koçasthāna  II: the general theory in connection  with  the exposition of 
Hetu, Pratyaya and Phala ; III: the special interpretations in connection with Lokanir¬
deça),  but the terms  ādhyātmika  (abhyantara) and bahya are not used in this connection. 
Some  references to the  Mahāyāna  conception win be  given  in note 89 to the Translation. 


--- [Page 93] ---
­83­
point  in view  of an attempt at tracing the  origin  of our  Upadeça  text. 
It is moreover noted  that  this  twofold  aspect of the chain of causation is 
not equally important in the two great Schools of  Mahāyāna  ; it is very 
often  referred to in  Mādhyamika  texts, but considered of a secondary 
importance in  Vijñānavāda  128). 
As has already been noted above, this classificatory portion of our 
text may be considered an elaboration of the first introductory  kārikā.  The 
following  part of the  Upadeça  is based upon the second and  third  kārikās, 
but the relation is less obvious. It is all but a  kind  of commentary, but 
rather an independent  ‘instruction’  (Upadeça)  for  which  the  kārikās  serve 
as what might be termed a motto. These two  Çlokas  were undoubtedly 
taken  from  an authoritative source, but our attempts at tracing them had 
no definite results as yet. An additional  difficulty  is the fact  that  the two 
strophes occur in a rather bad  state  in our treatise. Presumably, they were 
not understood by the copyist (or rather, by the 'chain’ of copyists) ; the 
result has been  that  the first of  these  Çlokas  is incomplete, whereas the 
second  does not occur in the text as a strophe. As a matter of fact, the 
latter is found in our text in a word­for­word commentary; the  Çloka  can 
however  be reconstructed by adding the words  which  are explained and 
connecting  them by means of particles  that  would  not probably require 
any explanation.  Although  the result thus obtained might not be  literally 
correct, we think  that  there  could  be little  doubt as to its meaning. 
For the first strophe, we arrived at the  following  reconstruction : 
Yaḥ kaçcit  samyag<  uddiṣṭān  sain  > avadhāryya  pratyaya / 
<a>vacya<ṃ> parmirvṛt<t>e bhagavati  çaraṇaṃ  yayau  / / 
128) The 'special’ interpretation  (bījad  ahkursun,  ankurāt  pattram,  etc.) is very important 
in Mādhyamika  (Asṭasāhasiika,  Lalitavistara,  Madhyamakavrtti, chapter  Dṛṣtiparīkṣā, 
Madhyamakāvatāra,  chapter VI), where it serves  mainly  ­to explain  the conception of 
Buddhism  as madhyama pratipad: just 8~ the ankura is neither  identical  with,  nor 
different  from  the blja, in the same way two piatltyasamutpadahgas succeeding one 
another are neither different nor  identical;  there  is theretore no eternal matter  (çāçvata), 
but also  no annihilation (uccheda). The conception of  Çunyata  avoided such an alter­
native.  CI. especially the analysis by De la  Vanée  Poussin mentioned in note 112 above. 
— It is obvious  that  the  simile  of the seed and the germ is much older than the 
philosophic  interpretations in  Buddhism.  A remarkable feature is  that  the  symbolism 
suggested by the  simile  is that  of the  tree  (duhkhavrksa), but at least one of the 
elements, viz.  nāla,  would  remind one of a lotus; its usual meaning is a  „hollow 
stalk  (esp.)  of a  lotus’’,  but  also  „reed".  Another curious detail is the use of garbha, 
which  represents the  stage  between  nāla  and  puspa  and therefore means  „bud’'  here, 
i.e. the 'womb' of the  flower.  Bīja  and ankura represent  Vijñāna  and  Nāmarūpa 
respectively  (cf.  Çālistambha  in Bodhicaryāvatārapanjikā,  p. 481, lines 11 sq.: 
vijñānabījatn  tatra  tatropapattyā  mátuh  kuksau  nāmarūpāṅkuram  abhinirvartayaii). Not 
only  phenomenal existence, but also the  Marga  is often compared  with  a tree, but a 
very  different one; then, the seed is bodhidtta (citta is often used as a synonym 
of vyñāna);  the stem, skandha, is  karunā,  etc.; this  simile  is well­known  in Mahāyāna 
(Madhyamakāvatāra,  VI) and is also referred to in the  inscription  of Kelurak  (strophe 17, 
vide T.B.G., 68, 1928, p. 20). 


--- [Page 94] ---
— 84 — 
A few points require explanation in  view  of a number of corrections 
introduced  into the text such as it was copied on our plate. They are based 
upon  two distinct factors : (1) among the mistakes by the copyist,  only 
omissions  are frequent, (2) the wording of the  passage  clearly  suggests  that 
the passage  is metrical and probably a  Çloka  ; it is unnecessary to add  that 
the mistakes should be understandable  from  a palaeographic point of  view. 
It is then easy to see where we have to assume an omission. The words 
samyag  avadhāryya  in the text are not  only  unmetrical, but also  difficult 
to be combined. We expect after samyag a word meaning  ‘‘revealed’’, 
"taught"; uddistan  would  be satisfactory, although it is not of course the 
only  possibility  (nirdistán,  for instance, might also be possible), but for the 
meaning of the strophe this point is not very important.  After  that  word, 
another syllable is missing at the beginning of  pāda  b. Sam­ is the easiest 
conjecture, but not the most satisfactory one ; no instances of sam­ava­dhr 
seem to be known, and, in addition, it is  strange  to find  a gerund in the 
meaning of a conjugated  form  here  129). It is not  difficult  to recognize 
avaçyam  in vagya given in the plate; the loss of the  initial  vowel  is 
obviously  due to a breach of  sandhi  1S0). The loss of the  anusvāra  and 
the spelling  of parinirvrte by a single instead of a double t require no 
comment 131). At the end of the strophe, the text on the plate  reads 
garanatrayam  yaiyá  (sic). There is no doubt  that  the second word is a 
mistake for yayau, easy to be understood  from  a palaeographic point of 
view  132) ; garanatrayam  could  be retained (in  that  case,  yayau  would  have 
stood  at the beginning of the next  Çloka) , but this is not  likely  (the Bhagavat 
being  only  one of the Three Refuges), and the addition of  °trayam  is easy 
to be accounted for since garanatraya  (= triçar aria)  is a very usual compound. 
Whatever one may think of this  attempt  at reconstruction, a few 
important points appear beyond doubt.  First  of all, the strophe cannot be 
a classical  Çloka.  Not  only  is the syllable preceding  pratyayá  considered a 
brevis>  but pāda  d also contains an inundant  syllable.  Either of  these  details 
is however  frequentíy  met  with  in older Buddhist poetry,  which  is based 
upon  somewhat different principles.  After  the studies by Senart (the  notes 
to the  Mahāvastu  edition, finished in 1897),  Kern  (Saddharmapuṇḍarīka), 
Bendall  (Çikṣāsamuccaya) , Buddhist metrics have especially been studied 
­29) In  view  of the objections, we consider a different  possibility  (cI. infra, note 138). 
130) We presume  that  the  original  manuscript read  pratyayāḥ  avaçyaṃ.  In the  Qātha  dialect, 
the nominative  plural  is commonly used in the meaning of an accusative (cI. note 137 
below).  Vowel  contraction after the correct omission of the visarga (i.e. a sort of 
double  sandhi)  is frequently found in the less carefully written manuscripts (cI. Whitney's 
Grammar, § 133 c). 
131) The correction of parinirvrte to parinirvrtte might not be necessary, although a diiambos 
at the end of an uneven  pāda  seems  very strange.  Spelling  by a single t might  well 
have been a  attempt  at correction. 
132) The ­au  vowel  must have been expressed by a double  taling  before, and a daṇḍa 
behind  the second ya; the error made by the copyist was  that  he put the double 
taling  before the first ya. 


--- [Page 95] ---
­85­
by Edgerton m). One of the  typical  features  of this old Buddhist prosody 
is the possibility of replacing a long syllable by two short  ones  in almost 
any kind  of metre  — a principle  which  in classical poetry is  limited  to the 
Āryā  group of  metres  134). This  seems  to be the  case  with  the fourth  pāda 
of our  Çloka,  where bhagavati counts as  three  syllables 135). Another  typi­
cal feature  of this prosody is  that  a syllable preceding an  initial  consonant 
group may be reckoned a brevis ; this is undoubtedly due to the prakri¬
tizing pronounciation of the Sanskrit words in Buddhist  Gāthās  (pratyaya 
in our text being pronounced paccaya, as in  Pāli)  136). Further we  note 
pratyaya used as an accusative 137) and, apparently, the gerund samava­
133) p # Edgerton, The Prakrit underlying Buddhist hybridic Sanscrit, Bull. School Or.  Stud., 
VIII  (1936), pp. 5ol­516. The principles of Buddhist metrics were  treated  with  greater 
detail  in an article by the  same  scholar  which  was published in the volume in honour 
of Professor Kuppusvami Sastri; the latter article is not at our disposal. 
134) Edgerton, art. cit., p. 5o5.  Especially  the long syllables at the beginning of the  pādas 
of metres  such as  Vasantatilak ā are often replaced by two short ones. CI. also  Louis 
Finot,  Rāṣṭrapālaparip ṛcchā, Introduction, p.  XIV:  “La resolution  d'une  longue initiale 
en deux breves  est un fait normal"; this particularity is not however  limited  to an 
initial  long syllable.  Especially  in the  Tri ṣṭubh and  Jagat ī groups of metres,  which 
really  form a single class  because  in the  Tri ṣṭubh one syllable may be added, entire 
passages  in which  Indravajr ā and  Vaṃçastha  pādas  are mixed up are very common 
(cI. Rástr.,  pp. 35 sq., pp. 18 sq. ; Bendall,  Çiksāsamuccaya,  Bibl. Buddh., I, 1902, 
Introduction, p.  XXII.  and Text, p. 92,  note  4); if we consider  these  strophes  to be 
Indravajrá  (which might be arbitrary), the  Var ṃçastha  pādas  are to be considered 
hypermetra.  For the frequent hypermetron in the  Çloka,  cf. Bendall,  op. cit., pp. XXI 
sq.; Hopkins, Great Epic, p. 253. There are many examples in the  Mahāvastu;  an 
example in  which  the additional syllable occurs about in the  same  place of the strophe 
as in our strophe is  Senart’s  edition, I (1882), p. 15, line 10, viz. the  pāda  macchaka ṭal¬
lagatā yathā,  "(les damnés) s'agitent comme des  poissons  jetés sur la berge" (ct. the 
note  by Senart  to ibid., p. 382). 
133) In this particular case, one might also consider the possibility  that  bhagavati was 
pronounced bhagvati or even  bhavati;  such a development did probably take place, 
since  bhavant,  frequently used in respectful address, is "doubtless a contraction of 
bhagavanf (Whitney's Grammar, § 456). We found a  similar  case  in the  Gaganagañja 
extract,  Çiksás.,  p. 45, line 1, where the vocative bhagavan is a disyllable  (pāda  a: 
vayam  utsahamo  bhagavan). 
iS6) Edgerton,  loc.  cit.; CI. also  Bendall,  op. cit., p.  XIX,  on the prosody of the  Gaṇḍavyuha 
quotation in  Çiksās,,  p. 101, lines 15 sqq. and the  following  pages  (up to 104, line 8). 
A group of consonants at the beginning of a word never makes position, presumably 
because  a single consonant was pronounced (as in  Pali  and most of the Prakrits ; it is 
needless to add  that  this peculiarity is not  limited  to the  case  of a mute  followed 
by a liquid).  If, however, the consonantal group comprises consonants belonging to 
two different words, the preceding syllable is always considered  long. 
1H~) The  original  reading probably was pratyaya(h) /  avaçyam.  The use of nominative forms 
instead of accusatives is very common in the  Gāthā  dialect. It is not necessary to add the 
visarga  after pratyaya; as a  matter  of fact, it is usually omitted in the plural forms ; 
if necessary for the metre, the  ­ā is even shortened. CI. Bhadracaii, strophe 26 d: 
sarvi  anágatakalpa  careyam (Dodhaka metre); sarvi is the usual shortening of sarve, 
corresponding to Sanskrit  sarvān  in meaning. As a rule, this protocanonical Buddhist 
Sanskrit  permits both the nomin. plur. and the regular ace. plur. (the  final  n of  which 
is replaced by the  anusvāra  in many texts) and may even use such different forms 


--- [Page 96] ---
— 86 — 
dhārya  used as a  verbum  finitum (?) 13S). 
Even  if this reconstruction is not  literally  correct,  there  cannot be any 
reasonable doubt  that  it is a Buddhist  Gāthā,  the meaning of  which  is clear 
in its essentials. In  view  of the strophe  which  precedes, we should expect 
something about the purpose of the one­ to twelve­fold divisions announced 
there.  An opponent might even  suggest  that  these  divisions are hardly re­
levant 189). This strophe anticipates such an objection by stating  that  in­
sight into the structure of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula automatically 
leads to seeking Refuge in the Buddha 140). Since the formula reveals the 
eternally active laws of Causes and Effects, it gives an explanation of the 
together.  Edgerton  (loc.  cit.)  quotes  the combination  sattvān  magnāḥ  from the Saddh. 
Puṇḍ.  This point is worthy of mention, since it proves  that  there  is no objection 
against our conjectural restitution of uddistan; if one prefers not to maintain the 
combination  uddistan ....  pratyayā(ḥ),  one  could  however restitute  uddiṣṭā(ḥ).  An 
argument in favour of the hypothesis  that  there  was no visarga after pratyaya is 
the fact  that  the copyist dropped the  initial  a of  avaçyam;  it is easy to understand 
how somebody seeing  pratyayā  avagyam (and being unaware of the metrical structure), 
presumed a mistake and put down  prafyayāvaçyam  as a compound. The result  would 
be less easy to be explained if the  original  read pratyayah avagyam. 
138) This point is however extremely doubtful; as a  matter  of fact, no other examples 
are iknown.  In addition, it was necessary to add the prefix sam­, since avadharyya, 
the form  given on the plate, is unmetrical. We therefore prefer another solution, 
which  does  not  meet  with  the difficulties just mentioned, but has the disadvantage 
of being less easily explained as a copyist's mistake. In protocanonical Sanskrit, we 
frequently  meet  with  forms ending in ­í or ­e,  which  are usually optatives (corresponding 
with ­et in normal Sanskrit), but sometimes aorists (corresponding  with  ­it); cf. 
Edgerton,  art. cit., p. 515. In some  texts  (Ratnolkādhāraṇī  in Çiksāsamuccaya,  pp. 2­5, 
and pp. 327­34 7; Bhadracari) they are extremely common ; we  note  from the Bhadracari 
(Watanabe's edition not being at our disposal, we quote from  Bnsch,  TJB.G.,  97, 1938, 
pp. 255 sqq.): pravartayi cakratn dharsayi  maram  (strophe 53, c­d),  dhārayi  vacayi 
(54 6), purayi (38 d), janayi (45 d),  bhavi  (16 b, 27 d). In all  these  cases, the 
forms clearly have the value of an optative (either first or third person singular); 
the ­i is always short  here  (examples of ­e and ­í as in the  Saddh. Puṇḍ.  do not 
seem to occur); it is remarkable  that  almost all of the  cases  are causative verbs. 
In view  of the above one is tempted to correct  avadhāryya  to avadhārayi  (=  avadhārayet ; 
cI. dharayi above). An optative  would  be just the form expected here, and the  metre 
would  be in order. It  would  no bet too  difficult  to understand how a copyist knowing 
classical  Sanskrit was startled on seeing the form  avadhárayi  and wrongly concluded 
that the latter was a mistake for avadharyya, a form he knew. 
13Ô) As a  matter  of fact, such an objection is only natural. The point is  that  these  divisions 
aim at stressing the fundamental  aspect  of Pratītyasamutpāda,  the explanation of 
the continuous  processus  of births and  deaths  (janmamaranaprabandha),  which  does 
not depend on external causes; cf. Siddhi, H, p. 502. 
140) We may understand this connection almost  literally.  The  Mahāvagga  explains us 
how the wandering ascetics  Sáriputta  (Çāriputra)  and  Moggallāna  (Maudgalyayana) 
are converted by hearing the formula ye  dharmá,  etc. (Warren, Buddhism in Translations, 
pp. 89­91). An even more striking example of a Brahmin being converted by hearing 
our dry  Pratītyasamutpādasutra  is the second tale of  Açvaghoṣa's  Sutrālarnkāra,  "ou 
Íe brahmane  Kauçika  est  converti par la lecture fortuite du texte, acquis  dans 
rintention  d'en.  préparer  sirnplernent un palimpseste"  (Sylvain  Lévi,  Jottrn. Asiat., 
loième  Série,  Tome 16,  191o,  p. 436). 


--- [Page 97] ---
— 87 — 
origin  of Suffering (samudayasatya) and so  suggests  the possibility  of brin­
ging it to an end (nirodhasatya) by  following  the  Mārga.  But now the 
question arises : in what exactly have we to seek Refuge ? 
A very definite reply to this question is given in our strophe in the 
words parinirvrtte bhagavati, „in the completely  ‘nirvāṇed’  Bhagavat’'. 
In one of his elucidating articles, De la  Vallée  Poussin examined the 
problem  of çaranagamana  throughout the history of Buddhism 141). The 
earlier  Buddhists did not, as a rule, pose  that  problem as pregnantly, but 
later on it was argued  that  'Refuge in the Buddha’  could  not mean 'Refuge 
in the Buddha's  body’,  which  was materially the same as the Bodhisattva's 
body  before the Enlightenment and, although it was distinguished  with 
many special marks, it was also subject to death and decay. Refuge in the 
Buddha's soul was of course out of the question since no such thing existed. 
The profound doctrine of the Three Bodies of a Buddha (in  Lokottaraváda 
and Mahāyāna)  provided a solution of this dilemma : Refuge in the Buddha 
was interpreted as a refuge in the eternal  Body  of the Law  (dharmakāya)  142 ). 
Although  the latter term does not occur in the text of the  Çloka,  this 
or a related notion  seems  to be  implied  by the words parinirvrtte bhagavati. 
As to parinirvrtta, this term  could  well  be rendered by  „transcendental”. 
It is the incomprehensible  state  in which  no such relative notions as  life 
and death exist: it is beyond thought. 
We have analyzed this strophe in detail in order to examine whether 
it would  enable us to arrive at a conclusion as to the  form  of Buddhism 
to which  it belongs.  Owing  to the vagueness of the terms, no definite 
conclusion  seems  possible ; the term  dharmakāya  in its technical meaning 
is not used  here  and it is  well­known  that  the  Hīnayāna  sects  had all 
the elements necessary for the  full  development of the doctrine of the 
Dharmakāya.  It is however obvious  that  our strophe  would  better  fit in 
with Mahāyāna  than  with  Hīnayāna  thought. 
Fortunately,  the last introductory strophe makes it very probable  that 
our surmise about the  Mahāyānic  character of the strophes is correct.  This 
last strophe  itself  is umitted in the text, but its important, technical, notions 
are quoted one after the other (by means of iti) and more or less explained. 
So it appears  that  the  kārikā  must have contained the  following  words : 
ataimirika,  caksusmān  143), pratītyasamutpāda,  kotha  and  upādāna.  As these 
words contain twenty­one syllables in all, we need eleven more syllables 
­.41) Mél. chin,  et bouddh., I (1931­32), pp. 65­109. 
142) The words parinirvrtte bhagavati most certainly exclude the worship of relics in a 
stupa.  The words  could  even point to a conscious effort to  avoid  such an interpretation. 
As a matter of fact,  parts  of the Law (such as the famous  Ye­dharmā  formula) may 
he considered a portion of the  Dharmakāya  ; it is  well­known  that  plates, preferably 
gold plates, inscribed  with  this famous text, gradually took over 'the function of 
relics  in ancient times.  This  point  will  be referred to at the end of this Introduction. 
1­ 3) Caksusmān  is certainly not a gloss on ataimirika, for iti is placed after  caksusmān, 
not after ataimirika. Instead of the latter, the reading on the plate runs: atairika, 
which  could  not, however,  well  represent anything else; cf. note 144. 


--- [Page 98] ---
— 88 
to complete the  Çloka.  These  latter syllables must, of course, have constituted 
non­technical  notions, for  which  there  was no need of explanation. It is easy 
to put the above words together and connect them in such a way  that 
they form  a Çloka.  The result, then, may not be  literally  correct, but  that 
is a matter of secondary importance. The meaning of the technical notions 
is sufficiently  pregnant to  allow  for a reconstruction the meaning of  which 
is at any  rate  certain. The result  would  then be as  follows  : 
Ataimirikaç=cakṣuṣmān  upādānavivarjitaḥ  / 
Sa pratītyasamutpādaṃ  kotha iti  vipaçyati  // 144) 
Instead of vivarjitah  there  might have been a synonym, but the  only 
word  which  is metrically possible,  nirankuçah,  affords an image  which  would 
not probably have suggested  itself  14S). As to the last word of  pāda 
d, vipaçyati  146) is not the  only  possibility,  but by far the most satisfactory 
term. As we noted above. Buddhism attached a  great  importance to 
etymology,  which  is only  natural in a  religion  in which  the correct inter­
pretation of canonical texts was essential. Buddhism created a precise 
philosophic  terminology and  fully  utilized  the almost unlimited possibilities 
of the Sanskrit language,  including  those subtle changes due to the use of 
various  prefixes. The latter often obtain a pregnant meaning 147). Thus, vi­, 
prefixed  to words pertaining to  empirical  knowledge, is regularly taken to 
convey  the shade  of discriminative knowledge  implying  the refutation of 
another alternative 148). This  is exactíy  the case  with  our  kārikā  : the wise 
144) A  small  detail, not essential for the meaning of the strophe, is whether we should 
read  ataimirikaç  cakṣuṣmān  as two v/ords, or  atainiirikacakṣuṣmān  as a single compound, 
rrcm  a metrical point of  view,  the latter is undoubtedly preferable.  Although  vipulās 
with four  long  syllables at the end of the uneven  pādas  are not rare (with a necessary 
caesura  aíter  the  fifth  syllable of the  pāda,  which  would  be the case  here  if the 
former  reading is accepted), it is usual  that  in this case the first four syllables of the 
same  pāda  constitute a diiambos.  Acvagho~a,  to take a Buddhist poet, is strict in 
this respect in the sixteen examples of this  vipulā  in the Buddnacarita and the 
Saundarananda together; cf. Johnston, The Buddhacarita, Part II, Introduction, p. Ixv. 
The first  pāda  of Buddhac., XII, 49, viz.  atho  viviktam  kámebhyo,  is a good example. 
Another  argument in favour of the latter reading is the occurrence of a very  similar 
compound  in a quotation  from  the Vajradhvajasutra in  Çāntideva's  Çiksāsamuccaya, 
Bendall's  edition, p. 30,  line  13,  viz. apratihatacaksusmattām  (ca sarvajagaty  utpādeyuh), 
‘‘may  they produce ‘the  state  of possessing unrestrained  vision’  with  reference to the 
entire  world".  Apratihatacaksusmant comes very near to ataimirikacaksusmant. 
145) For this use of vivarjita, "free  from",  cf. Buddhac., XII. 54 :  sukham  prttivivaxjitam, 
"blissful  but  void  of ecstasy" (Johnston). 
146) The term  jānāti  in our text (c — A — 5) may  well  be a gloss on  vipaçyati.  For the 
meaning of the latter, cf. note 148 below. 
147) There are many examples of sam­ (sampratyaya). It may be interpreted  samavāyārtha 
(in the meaning of contact), saha (together), sambandhartha (in the meaning of 
connection);  cf., for instance, Abhidh.  Koça,  Vyākhyā  ad Bhāṣya  55, 17, in Cosmol. 
Bouddh., p. 184 ; ad 42, 14, ibid., p. 168. For anu­, cf. Siddhi, H, p. 566, note 1. 
14S) For the meaning of  vipaçyati,  cf. the  well­known  expression dharmam  vipaçyati,  e.g. 
in the Sanskrit redaction of the Dharmapada ;  Sylvain  Lévi,  Textes  sanscrits de Touen­


--- [Page 99] ---
_ 89 — 
not only  see that  Dependent  Origination  is a process of decay  (kotha),  but 
they understand  that  a process  which  is usually expressed by terms meaning 
‘arising,  origination’ (bhava,  utpāda< áharmānām  upacaya, etc.) really is a 
process of decay ; we noted already above  that  this interpretation is supported 
by an etymology of itya (=  vinaçvara)  in the term  pratītyasamutpāda  149 ). 
The meaning of the  Çloka  now becomes clear. Its main purpose is 
to stress  that  he who does not suffer  from  optical  illusions  (timira) and 
therefore  sees  things as they really are, conceives of Dependent  Origination 
as a process of decay, but the  true  insight into the real  nature  of things 
is only  possible for those liberated  from  attachment to pleasures and wrong 
views  (upādāna) , which  is the direct factor  conditioning  phenomenal existence 
(bhava)  150). 
The most interesting detail in our strophe,  which  gives a clue as to 
the type of Buddhism to  which  the  Çloka  belongs, is the designation by 
ataimirika  for those possessing the  true  insight into the  nature  of things. 
Its opposite, the taimirika, i.e. a person suffering  from  a peculiar type of 
eye­disease  which  makes him perceive all kinds of objects such as hairs 
(keçādi),  which  are not seen by people  with  normal  vision,  is the famous 
Mahāyāna  simile  used to denote the  Pṛthagjana,  who  attaches  himself  to 
Houang, Joutn. Asiat., 1910, p. 450, feuillet b’ verso,  line  2; the  form  does not 
exactly  mean 'seeing’ the dharma hut rather distinguishing dharma  from  adharma; 
cI. also  vipaçyanā  (Mahāvastti,  I, p. 120,  line  10 ; Mahāvyutp.,  90, 2 on p. 29 ; 
especially Siddhi, II, pp. 596 sq., note h with important quotations from the Bodhisat¬
tvahh ūmi). This meaning of vi­ is also assumed for  vijñāna  (skandha), explained hy 
prativijñapti.  "1'impression relative a chaque ohjet" (Abhidh.  Koç&,  I. p. 30,  kār.  16; 
Vyākhyā  in Bibl. BuJdh.,  XXI,  p. 39, lines 23 sqe; cf. Stcherbatskij, Centr. Cone, 
p. 16 and p. 63); it includes the distinction of one object frotu the  other  but excludes 
the perception of various secondary marks belonging tc the domains of other skandhas. 
149) CI. supra, p. 77. For kotha, cf.  note  Hi above, where a  passage  is quoted  from  the 
Rāsṭrapāla.  A particular  state  of mind  :s needed to see Dependent  Origination  as a 
process of decay; this may  b<* the case  with  those practising  açubhabhāvanā  and other 
kinds  of concentration of the  mind,  for  only  samāhitacitto yathābhūiam prajānáti 
(Abhidh.  Koça  VIII,  p. 130,  with  numerous references by De la  Vallée  Poussin in 
note 5 to  that  page;  Mahāvy.,  81, 6:  Çiksās.,  p. 119,  etc.).  Cf. De la  vallée  Poussin, 
Mor.  Bouddh., p. 83 : "La meditation de Phorrible  est assurée  quand  l'sscète  n'sperçoit 
plus  qu’un  squelette sous  les sppats  féminins".  During  such practices, the ascetic may 
also see  pratītyasamutpāda  as it really is, i.e. as a process of putrefaction  (kotha); 
if this is correct, the latter term should be taken in its  literal  meaning. The mystical 
vision  (vipaçyati)  is primary, reasoning is  only  a means to make such a  vision 
possible.  It is hardly necessary to add  that  also the  vision  itself  is nothing but a 
means to arrive at a correct  view  about the Voidness of notions such as origination 
and decay and, therefore, of the dharmas themselves; one can go further: if a same 
process can be defined in terms of origination as  well  as in those of decay, it amounts 
to about the same if we conclude  that  there  is neither origination nor decay, so 
that the dharmas should be considered to be in the absolute  state  of rest  (nirvrtá): 
the Saṃsāra,  viewed sub specie aeternitatis, is  Nirvana;  the ataimirika becomes an 
advaita.  Although  the latter conclusions are not expressed in our  kárikā,  it seems  to 
us that  they are clearly  implied  by the use of the terms. 
150) To be more precise: conditioning the arising of  Karman  leading to re­birth  (Jāti). 


--- [Page 100] ---
— 90 — 
the notion  of a presumed reality and so produces  Karman  leading to re­birth. 
Just as the person suffering  from  timira may be cured by an able physician 
who removes the  veil  which  is the direct cause of the fool's  illusions,  in 
the same way the  Pṛthagjana  whose  vision  is impeded by the screen of 
Ignorance may be cured  from  his naive realism by the  King  of the Physicians, 
the Teacher of Gods and Men 151). Among  the means used by the Buddha 
to that  purpose, teaching of  Pratītyasatmutpāda  occupies a prominent place : 
the analysis  of Dependent  Origination  shows  that  nothing is stable; all 
elements of existence depend upon each other and are therefore devoid 
of existence of their own ; the dharmas are doomed to decay as soon as 
they arise  owing  to well­known  causes and conditions ; the analysis of this 
process shows  that  the dharmas are as unreal as the disc of the moon 
reflected  in the water and the hairs and others objects perceived by the 
taimirika.  If applied to things  which  have  only  illusionary  existence, opposit­
ions such as origination and decay are bound to lose their force, just as, 
for instance,  there  can be no question about beauty or ugliness of the 
daughter of a sterile woman,  Pratītyasamutpāda,  usually defined as the 
general law of origination, may just as  well  be called  a process of decay. 
We have no doubt  that  this is the  line  of thought  implied  by our 
last introductory  Çloka.  Not  only  are all the important words mentioned 
in the text, but it becomes also clear  that  the etymology discussed above 
is an explanation of the  Çloka  and quoted to  confirm  the thought suggested 
by the strophe. Then,  there  could  be no doubt  that  the strophe belongs 
to Mahāyāna  with  its  typical  theory of  dharmanairātmya  ir,2 ) and  thus 
confirms  our provisional conclusion based upon the preceding  Çloka 
(parinirvrtte  bhagavati  çaranam). 
The fact that  the two last  Çlokas  on which  the Upadcça  is based belong 
to Mahāyāna  is in an obvious contrast  with  the  Sūtra­Vibhaṅga  version, 
which  gives the point of  view  of the  ‘orthodox’  Sarvāstivādins  (Vaibhāṣikas) . 
This might seem  strange  at first, but we should not forget  that  such a 
combination  would  completely  agree  with  what we know about  Mahāyāna 
teaching. The doctrine of  Çūnyatā  is considered very dangerous for those 
who have not yet acquired a thorough knowledge about the Abhidharma 
151) Cf., for instance,  Prajñākaramati's  commentary to the  Bodhicaryāvatára,  VI. 2 (edition 
by De la  Vallée  Poussin, p. 364 sq.) ; a detailed analysis, De la  Vallée  Poussin, 
Madhyamaka, Mél. chin,  et bouddh., TL (1932­33), especially pp. 30 sq., p. 42 and 
p. 44. When taimirika is used to denote the Prthagjana,  caksusmant  remains its 
opposite and denotes the  Buddhā Bhagavantaḥ  who see things as they really (para¬
mārthatah)  are. These distinctions lead to three 'levels' of reality: (a) the imaginary 
truth (udakacandra,  indrajāīa,  marīci,  etc.),  (b) relative  (sámvrta)  truth (the reality 
of the dharmas, of  pratītyasamutpāda)  and (c) the highest truth (in  which  there  is 
no utpāda,  no nirodha, no distinction between  grāhaka  and  grāhya,  etc.). These 
distinctions  developed into the  Vijñānavādin  theory of the  three  svabhāvas  (parikalpita, 
paratantra  and parini spanna);  cf. the literature mentioned by De la  Vallée  Poussin, 
Siddhi, H, pp. 514­533; Friedmann,  Madhyāntavibhāgattkā  (1937), p. 93. 
152) In contrast to the  pudgalanairātmya  in  Hīnayāna  ; cf. Siddhi, H, pp. 567 sqq.: pudga¬
Janairātmya  is the antidote against  kleçāvarana, dharmanairātmya  against  jñeyāvarana. 


--- [Page 101] ---
­91­
theories,  otherwise  it might  lead  them  to nihilistic  views  3f>3): the  sāmvrta 
Truth  should  be  understood  before  the  paramārthīkasatya  could be 
explained  ir>4). 
The entire  final  part  of the  Upadeça  (from  f — A — 1  to h — A — 2) 
is based  upon  the  Çloka  just  mentioned.  The  preceding  portion  aimed  at 
giving a  true  insight  into  the internal  structure  of Dependent  Origination  ; 
its main  conclusion  was  that  Ignorance  constitutes  its basis.  But  Avidyā, 
which  dominates  the  Saṃsāra  Throughout  its entire  extent,  is essentially 
located  in past  existence.  It cannot  therefore  be combatted  directly.  There 
is however  a more  direct  factor  leading  to re­existence,  viz. fourfold  Upādāna. 
This  is how our  author  understands  the  term  upādānavivarjita  in the 
strophe  : by  becoming  liberated  from  attachment  to passions  and  wrong 
views,  one  becomes  a cak ṣuṣmant.  and  ataimirika.  One  might  object  that 
this is not the  opinion  suggested  by the  strophe,  but that  is a  matter  of 
secondary  importance.  The  Upadeça  is obviously  intended  for people  with 
limited  intellectual  faculties,  such  as pupils,  and an  exposition  about  such 
­"''•) Da la  vallée  Poussin, Morale Bouddhique, p. 163, note: ‚.Le Bouddhisme prend 
parfois  les aspects  d’une  thérapeutique:  ce qui  est poison pour l'un  est remède 
pour Î'sutre ; les doctrines  et les  pratiques valent par leurs effets".  Even  Çūnyatā 
itself  is not the ultimate truth: in  Mahāyāna,  one of the forms of  Çūnyatā  is 
çūnyatāçūnyatā  (Mahāvyutp.,  37, 4. on p. 15 :  Dharmasamgraha,  No. XLI. p. 8 of 
the edition by Kasawara,  Muller  and  Wenzel  in Anecd.  Oxon.,  vol. I, Part v, 1885); 
cI. Friedmann,  Madhyāntav.,  p. 74  : .‚In order to reflect on  these  two kinds of false 
discrimination  (i.e.  adhyātma­  and  bāhyaçūnyatā)  ‚ we have (as antidote) respec­
tively  the Non­Substantiality  of Non­Substantialtey  " ; cf. also Obermiller, A  Study 
oi the  Twenty  Aspects  of Çūnyatā,  Ind. Hist.  Qu.,  IX (1933), pp. 170 sqq., and Sublime 
Science, Ada Orient., IX (1931), pp. 161 sq. (quotation  from  the Fāçvapaparipṛcchā): 
„O Kācyapa,  the views maintaining tiie existence of  ~eal  individuals are a blunder 
as great  as the mount Sumeru. However  th_.se  who, being  full of pride,  cling  to 
the conception  of Non­substantial;ty (as an absolute principle) commit an error  still 
greater’’.  In Mādhyamika,  the doctrine of  Çūnyatā  is sometimes compared  with  a ship, 
necessary to cross the ocean cf  Saṃsāra,  but to be left as soon as tne 'other bank' 
is reached : it is  only  of temporary use ; cf. the article Madhyamaka by De la  Vallée 
Poussin,  quoted in  note  151 above. 
*­–) Cf., for instance,  Bodhic.­pañj ., p. 365. the strophe quoted from the  Çāstra  (i.e. Mūlama¬
dhyamakakārikās,  XXIV,  10, as De la  vallée  Poussin notes):  vyavahāram  anāçritya 
paramārtho  na deçyate,  „the  highest truth cannot be explained unless one accepts the 
dialectic  truth  (vyaváhara,  including  the differentiation between  gr'áhya  and grahaka, 
is almost a synonym of samvrti) as a base. The commentator,  Prajñākarama»ti,  explains 
vyavahāra  by upāya,  paramārtha  by upeya,  ,.for otherwise it (i.e. the latter) cannot be 
explained  (anyathā  tasya  deçayitum  açakyatvāt).  The same strophe considers  paramārtha 
in its turn as nothing but a means to reach  Nirvana  (paramártham  ana gamy  a nirvānam 
nād hi gamy  ate).  This  explains the relation between the  Sūtra­vibhaṅga  text on one, 
the Upadeça  on the other hand ; the contradiction is  only  apparent since the  Sūtra­
Vibhanga  represents  the samvrtisatya as a necessary introduction to the teaching of 
the paramārthasatya  included in the  Çlokas  upon  which  the Upadeça  is based. Such 
a gradual instruction is  typical  of Mahāyāna  with  its interpretation of the successive 
dharmacakrapravartanas;  cf. the  Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra  quoted by Obermiller, The 
Doctrine  of Prajñāpāramitā,  Ada  Orient.,  XI (1932), pp. 93 sqq.; cf. also Stcherbatskij*, 
1nd. Hist. Qu., X (1934), pp. 739­760. 


--- [Page 102] ---
— 92 — 
difficult  problems as the true meaning of the  Triple  Refuge  would  only 
cause misunderstanding; therefore, no explanation of the  difficult  terms 
in the Çlokas  is given.  The author concentrates his efforts on  upādānavivarjita 
and tries to  explain  what this term includes and especially why the Bhagavat 
used  the term  Upādāna  in this connection and not  Avidyā.  Most  of the 
classificatory  portion  definitely  suggests  that  Avidyā  is at the basis of the 
Pratītyasamutpāda  ; why then did not the Bhagavat use the term  avidyāvi¬
varjitah at the end of  pāda b  ? 
It would  not seem very  difficult  to give  a direct answer to this question ; 
a few  lines,  in the same style as we gave above,  would  be sufficient  to 
this purpose. The author of our treatise does not, however,  give  such a 
direct  reply.  With  his usual verbosity, he seems to  utilize  any possible 
occasion  for a digression. These digressions, often rather lengthy, make it 
rather  difficult  to follow  the argument. Immediately after the  classificatory 
portion  of our text, the  conclusion  that  Ignorance is the basis of Dependent 
Origination  and, therefore, of the  Saṃsāra  as a  whole,  is formulated. But 
what exactly is Ignorance ? — Instead of a direct answer,  there  follows 
a digression of considerable length, in  which  it is stated  that  Ignorance 
may be ‘one’,  ‘twofold’,  etc. up to  ‘fivefold’.  Ignorance is 'one’ because it 
comprises  all kleças  together. The four­ and  five­fold  Ignorance refer not 
to Ignorance itself, but to the way in  which  it is shunned  (heya),  respec­
tively  by the  Four  Truths and by the same  with  the addition of intense 
meditation  (bhāvanā) . The categories themselves,  which  for didactic purposes 
are given  in numerical order again, do not contain any points of  special 
interest, except  that  this one­ to  five­fold  classification  may not be  known 
from  other suuices 155). 
The next portion of our text (f — A — 6 to 9) deals  with  the meaning 
of pratyaya in  avidyāpratyayāh  samskārāh,  especially in connection  with  a 
possible  question why  avidyā  is not  called  the  hetu  of the  samskāras. 
Here  the rather strange reply is  given  that  there  is only  one  hetu,  but 
there  are many pratyayas ; the meaning is  obviously  that  not  only  Avidyā 
is required to produce the  Saṃskāras,  but also a number of other conditions 
must be present.  Usually,  however, the relation between the successive 
Aṅgas  of the  formula  is taken to be both  hetu  and pratyaya. In fact, all 
hetus  are comprised in one of the pratyayas, viz. the hetupratyaya 156), 
and in one of the  divisions  in the preceding part of the text,  Avidyā  was 
emphatically  comprised in the  hetu  part of  Pratītyasamutpāda  15T ). 
155) It is however noted  that  the twofold  Avidyā  is strange. It is explained (in f — A — 2 to 
3) as  hetutayāçrayatvāt  and  viiñānāçrayatvāt,  "since it is based either on causation (read : 
hetutvāçrayatvāt  ?) or on consciousness". It seems  that  these  two categories of Ignorance 
refer  to the transcendental and  empirical  forms of it. The latter  distinction  is well­
known  in Buddhist philosophy; cf. the terms  rnukhyā  and  pratibhāsikf  bhrënti,  discus­
sed by Stcherbatskij in Buddhist Logic, I. p. 154. 
!­ 6) Abhidh.  Koça,  H, p. 299 ; Siddhi, p. 229 and p. 436. 
l57) Infra,  c — B — 9 in the text. 


--- [Page 103] ---
— 93 — 
Probably,  we are to understand  that  the Sutra  uses  avidyāpratyayāh 
samskārāh  because  Avidyā  is neither necessarily nor always the direct  cause 
of the  Samskāras.  The direct  cause  may be something else, but even in 
that case, the presence of  Avidyā  is always required ; it is the conditio 
sine qua  non,  for the  Saṃskāras  cannot possibly arise if  there  is no  Avidyā 
present.  In this way, the  passage  would  agree  with  the immediately preceding 
argument, where it is  stated  that  the hetu  is inherent  (samçlista) } but the 
pratyaya is detached  (viçlista). 
The exposition  would  not be complete without a  full treatment  of the 
Saṃskāras,  too. The  Samskāras  are however always threefold; only the 
three  groups are not always conceived of in the  same  way. We already 
quoted this  passage  in another connection, viz. in our survey about the 
fascination  of numbers in scholastic Buddhism. Although the text was copied 
very  carelessly  here  (from f — A — 10 to  f — B — 8), it is clear  that 
the Saṃskāras  are classified in the  following  ways  * 
a) punyamaya, apunyamaya and  āneñjya  (?) 158); 
b) kuçala,  akuçala  and  avyākṛta  159); 
c) kāyakarman,  vākkarman  and manaskarman; 
d) prātisattvika,  aupapattyamçika  and  ābhisāmsārika. 
Now  somebody may ask  (f — B — 8 to 9) whether all  these  sorts  of 
Saṃskāras  are conditioned by Ignorance. Somebody might suppose, for 
instance,  that  only bad action is conditioned by Ignorance, good action, on 
the contrary, by Knowledge. Though such a supposition might seem 
reasonable enough, it is not correct since the  Saṃskāras  are, by definition, 
the actions of former  life  which  lead to re­birth. 
Owing  to a small lacuna in the text, the argument  which  follows  is 
not perfectly clear. If we understand the line of argument, the  treatise 
insists on the incorrect opinion mentioned just before. If somebody believes 
that some of the  Samskāras,  especially  those  defined as  kuçala,  may be due 
to Jñāna,  not to  Avidyā,  he gets  into direct  conflict  with  the text of the 
Pratītyasamutpāda ; for the Bhagavat did not  state  that  only the bad 
Saṃskāras  are due to  Avidyā  : the consequences of such a wrong opinion 
would  even be serious. For  those  who are convinced  that  some of the 
Samskāras,  e.g.  those  which  conditioned their own existence, are due to 
Knowledge  inevitably conclude  that  such an existence is not defiled ;  there­
fore they  would  consider their  life  something excellent. This is a very 
wrong  opinion,  technically denoted by  dṛṣṭiparāmarça  : the error of esteeming 
158) The term  āneñjya  does  not occur in the text as we have it. Presumably, the copyist 
got confused by the numerous repetitions. It is, however, hardly doubtful  that  tne 
original  had  āneñjya  as the third category ; cI. the  notes  to the transcription and to 
the translation of this  passage. 
l5.­*) As a  matter  of fact, the classifications (b) and (c) are combined and constitute a 
ninefold  classification not given in any other source known to us ;  there  is however 
nothing remarkable in such a combination. 


--- [Page 104] ---
— 94 — 
good  what in reality is bad, and the converse 160). From  one wrong  view 
he attaches  himself to another : conceiving of existence as something  which 
might be good, he  falls  a victim  to the wrong  view  of Eternalisrn, one of 
the Extreme  Views  (antagrahadṛṣṭi) 1G1). Owing  to the latter, he is forced 
to deny the Four Truths of a Saint  (mithyādṛṣṭi) , and, consequently, he 
attaches  himself to one of the many kinds of heretical doctrines according to 
which  good behaviour and rites alone  would  suffice to gain  Final  Liberation. 
This  would  imply  that  there  was some eternal  matter  which  could  be 
purified  in different ways. He then necessarily concludes  that  an Atrnan 
exists, and  falls  into the  Satkāyadṛṣṭi. 
Up to this point  there  is nothing irregular in the connections, although 
they might not seem convincing to everybody. The connection between 
dṛṣṭiparāmarça  and antagraha, for instance, is all but clear ; it  would  be 
easier to explain how  dṛṣṭvparāmarça  leads to  satkāyadṛṣṭi.  Presumably, 
the author of our  treatise  tries to make us believe  that  the  five  dṛṣtis 
constitute a small causal chain. We have not succeeded in tracing this  view 
elsewhere ; usually, the dṛṣṭis are considered to constitute a  kind  of complex 
the different elements of  which  cannot  well  be separated. The  belief  in the 
efficacity  of sundry rites of purification is an  aspect  of çīlavrataparāmarça­
dṛṣṭi  ; it may however also be called an  aspect  of dṛṣṭiparāmar ça, since it 
implies  the attachment  to something  hīna  which  is wrongly conceived of 
being  ucca; as a rule, the  same  belief  would  also  imply  antagrahadṛṣṭi, since 
those  adhering to the  view  that  purity may be obtained by  means  of rites 
believe  in eternalism; the  same  view  may again be termed  satkāyadṛṣṭi  because 
it is usually associated  with  the belief  in an eternal souk The order in  which 
the dṛṣṭis are connected  does  not show a  climax.  The third item,  mithyādṛṣṭi, 
‘‘the complete^ wrong  view”,  is by far the worst of the  five.  It is often repeated 
in Buddhist  texts  that  the adherence to this  view,  which  is essentially the 
denial  of the four Truths, destroys all the kucala gathered during myriads 
of existences in a single moment 102). The  Satkāyadṛṣṭi,  on the other hand, 
is undoubtedly incorrect and therefore constitutes a serious obstacle for 
160) Usually (cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  v, p. 18, quoted in note 163 to the translation),  dṛṣṭiparā¬
marça  is twofold, conceived of in the way formulated in the text. Our treatise, 
however,  states  that  it is  fivefold.  Presumably,  drsúparamarca  is explained  there 
as attachment  to each of the  five  dfstis,  including,  of course,  dṛṣṭiparāmarça  with 
reference to  dṛṣṭiparārnarça.  As a  matter  of fact, the dṛṣṭis overlap one another 
and cannot always be distinguished. A clear survey is given by  De la vallée  Poussin, 
Morale  Bouddhique  (1927),  pp. 154­163. 
161) Both  dṛṣṭiparamarça  and  antagráhadṛṣṭi  are twofold, and this might be the main reason 
why the two were put  together:  those  who are attached to the first  aspect  of 
dṛṣṭiparamarça  conceive  of existence,  which  is always  hīna,  as something  which  is 
ucca;  thinking  that  it is ucca, they go a  step  further and conclude  that  it is also 
çāçvata.  The other group, however, conclude  that  existence leads to uccheda  because 
they think  that  Nirvana  is hīna. 
l«2) Abhidh.  Koça,  IV, p. 170; cf. Morale Bouddhique, pp. 155 sqq. 


--- [Page 105] ---
— 95 — 
those  striving  after  Final  Liberation,  but it is not fundamentally bad 
The author of our treatise, however, thinks  that  satkāyadṛṣṭi  necessarily 
leads to  kāmopādāna,  and the beginning of a text is quoted to support 
this view  164). Nevertheless, the last conclusion is weak ; a  Vedāntin,  for 
instance,  would  not have much trouble in refuting the conclusion  that  the 
belief  in an eternal soul  would  lead to attachment to passions. It is evident 
that the whole  line  of argument in this part of our text is rather clumsy, 
at least in the  form  in which  it is given ; one  could  consider the  possibility 
that an original  text was abridged for the use of pupils  16 3). 
The aim of this whole portion is to point out  that  right knowledge of 
the relations between the different  links  of the twelvefold formula is essential. 
Especially  the non­comprehension of the connection between the first two 
links  leads to all kinds of wrong views and is therefore the ultimate cause of 
adherence to passions and the  like.  As is explained in the portion  which 
is following  in the text, adherence to passions and wrong views leads to 
re­birth  and the latter to old age and death and  the  'great  complex of 
suffering’  (mahāduhkhaskandha) . 
A rather  long  passage  (g — A — 6 to h — A — 2) is especially 
concerned  with  the latter.  After  it has been argued  that  non­comprehension 
of the relations between  Avidyā  and the  Samskāras  leads to attachment 
to phenomenal existence, it is now pointed out  that  the relation between 
the latter and suffering in its  nianyfold  aspects  is rather  similar  to that 
existing  between the first two  Aṅgas  of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula. 
The only  difference between the  Avidyā­Saṃskāra  and the  Upādāna­Bhava 
1<Î3) Cf. De Ia  vallée  Poussin,  Morale  Bouddhique, p.  16I. Euddhism does not deny  that 
those  believing  in the reality of an  ātman  and other conceptions of an eternrl soul 
may accomplish good  acts  (kuçala),  hut as  long  as they do not 'break’  jñeyāvaran« 
the road leading to  Nirvana  is barred. Without scholastic subtleties, it is impossible 
to distinguish  satkāyadṛṣṭi  from  çāçvatadṛṣṭi,  one of the two  antas,  and this is one 
of the unsatisfactory points in this  passage  of cur text. 
1<í4) For this Sutra fragment, cf. infra, pp. 97 sq. If we understand the connection suggested 
by the text, the point is  that  somebody who beiieves in the real existence of a  soul, 
whatever he chooses to  call  it (jíva, posa, purusa,  atman,  pud  gala,  etc.),  attaches 
himself  to something  which  is as imaginary as a flower growing at the sky (khapuspa), 
as unreal as the  vision  of a beautiful woman in a dream. Just as the  fool  who 
conceives  passion for his  illusion  seen in a dream, the person believing in the real 
existence of his soul  gets  attached to this imaginary thing and conceives  rāga  at 
its regard ; he then  falls  a victim  to kāmopādāna.  The  passage  which  is quoted to 
support this connection  will  be discussed below. 
165) As a rule, no arguments are given and the author confines  himself  to the enumeration 
of the categories. Often, the categories themselves are not even mentioned, but  only 
their number is stated; thus,  dṛṣṭiparāmarça  is fivefold  (g — A — 1) and  çīla 
(in çtlavratá)  is sevenfold (g — A — 2), although it is all hut clear  which  five 
(respectively  seven) categories are alluded to (cf. the Translation). The text had 
to be explained by an able teacher, and the pupils were supposed to remember the 
categories when they knew how many  there  were. One might compare modern school 
books in  which  a summary  states  that  there  were, for instance,  five  coalitions against 
Napoleon  in which  so and so many powers took part. 


--- [Page 106] ---
— 96 — 
relations  is that  the former applies to present, the latter to future existence 
(g — A — 6 to 7). One  could  well  conceive of a sort of  Pratītyasamutpāda 
series  which  just begins  with  the term  Upādāna.  It is argued  that  the separate 
forms  of suffering, contained in the  „great  complex’’,  are interdependent. 
Death,  as a rule, depends on old age (it may of course depend on disease 
or accident, but this is considered exceptional and therefore left unment¬
ioned) 166). Sorrow  (çoka)  depends on death since it is essentially sorrow 
about death, or rather, about the certainty  that  everything in the phenomenal 
world  will  necessarily lead to death. On sorrow depends lamentation 
(parideva), and  thus  a series of different  aspects  of sorrow, ending in 
despair  (upāyāsa) , have their  origin  in Jarāmaraṇāṅga.  These forms of suf­
fering  are here  considered to constitute a regular  Pratītyasamutpāda.  This 
is at least unusual : as a rule, all  these  aspects  of suffering are stated to 
constitute a complex ; this is even expressed by the formula of Dependent 
Origination  itself, where the whole complex is said to  „arise  together’’ 
(samudbhavanti), in dependence on  Jarāmaraṇa.  In order to underline  these 
relations,  our anonymous author  treats  the whole chain in the  prātīlomika 
order, too, beginning  with  upāyāsa  and ending  with  upādāna.  Most  of the 
notions belonging to this partial  Pratītyasamutpāda  are characterized by 
a brief  definition.  Almost  the  only  point worthy of note is the relation 
assumed to exist between duhkha and daurmanasya ; it is stated  that  the 
latter depends on the former, but the former on the latter, too :  these 
two notions arise together in mutual interdependence. It is  well­known  that 
in the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula, a  similar  reciprocity is often (especially 
in the  Pali  sources) understood  with  reference to the relation between the 
Aṅgas  Vijñāna  and  Nārnarūpa.  Almost  all the sources explain the relation 
existing  between the  mind  (citta, usually conceived of as a synonym of 
Vijñāna,  Consciousness) and the mental faculties (the caitta­dharmas such as 
166) A number of questions are connected  with  the points  here  mentioned. In the formula 
of causation, the group  çoka  etc. is almost always added to  Jaramaraṇaṅga ; cf. 
L. de la vallée  Poussin,  Théorie  des  douze  causes  (1916), p. 31: "quelques redactions 
seulement mentionnent  Vieillesse­Mort,  la plupart  ajoute chagrin  etc.’’.  — It is 
remarkable  that  disease  (vyādhi)  is never mentioned in this context in our treatise, 
as is usually the case (e.g. Divya, pp. 314 and 676:  jātijarāvyādhimaranaçokaparide¬
vaduhkhadaurmanasyopāyāsā°) . Why  jarā  and marana form only one  Aṅga  together, 
is explained in Siddhi, p. 485: "La vieillesse  n'est  pas  nécessaire  (niyata), on l'sssocie 
done a la  mort  pour en  faire  un  Aṅga".  The same applies to  vyādhi  as  well,  hut 
the latter is not even mentioned, because it is not  only  net necessary, but also not 
universal.  This  explains why  vyādhi  is often omitted. — In this passage, however, 
jarā is treated as if it were a real  Aṅga.  For the problem of accidental death 
(antarāmṛtyu),  cI. Abhidh.  Koça,  HI. p. 176. For the internal structure of the 
duhkhaskandha, cf. op. cif., HI. p. 83, note 5:  "Les  termes  çoka  upāyāsas 
sont compris (samgrhita)  dans  jarāmarana  et ne sont  pas des membres  h part 
(nāágantaram).  Ils proviennent  des  diverses  transformations  (parināma)  des  objets 
(visaya) et de la personne  (atmabhāvay'.  The definitions of the constituents of the 
duhkhaskandha and their mutual relations are also explained in the Dacabhumikasutra, 
ed. Rahder, p. 49, and in the Madhyamakavrtti, ed.  L de la  Vallée  Poussin, p. 563. 


--- [Page 107] ---
— 97 — 
Saṃjñā,  Vedanā,  Sparça  etc.) in the  same  way : no mental faculties exist 
without the mind, but, on the other hand, it is  difficult  to conceive of the 
mind  without the existence of mental faculties 167). On the basis of the 
above examples, one may conclude  that  duhkha refers to (bodily) pain, 
daurmanasya to mental sorrow. The former is used in a very narrow meaning, 
if we compare its use in the expression  mahāduhkhaskandha,  which  also 
includes  daurmanasya. 
This  repetition of the  terms  in prātīlomika  order serves a very definite 
purpose. It is not only important to know  that  Upādāna  conditions the 
various kinds of suffering, but even more essential to be aware of the 
fact that  all these  kinds of suffering have  Upādāna  as their ultimate cause. 
This point is almost evident if we bear in mind  that  the whole  final  portion 
of our  treatise  is a commentary on  upādānavivarjītah,  the last word of the 
last introductory strophe. The words  upādānam—iti  (g — B — 9) constitute 
the end of the words of the Bhagavat. In the lines immediately  following 
(h — A — 1 to 2) we read the usual end of Buddhist Sutras. 
This is therefore the end of the  Upadeça,  but it is not yet the end 
of the text on our  gold  plates. There  still  follows  some  kind  of epilogue, 
which  will  be examined at the end of this Introduction. 
We noticed at several occasions some characteristic differences between 
the Sūtra­Vibhaṅga  on one, and the Upadeca on the other side — differences 
in the type of  Buddhism.  The  Sūtra­Vibhaṅga  shows no  Mahāyāna  influence 
and the comparison  with  its slightly different version on the  Nālandā  bricks 
makes it clear  that  the latter version (and  still  more so the Chinese version 
by Hiuan  Tsang) is an adaptation to  Mahāyāna.  The  Upadeça,  however, 
makes the impression of being  Mahāy  ānic,  especially the taking of Refuge 
in the Bhagavat who passed completely in  Nirvana  and the reference to 
the taimirika. The conception of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  as eitner an 'internal’ 
or an ‘external’ series, the latter of  which  is represented by a comparison 
with  the various  stages  of a  tree  from the seed to the fruit, is almost entirely 
limited  to Mahāyāna  16S). 
Another  reference,  which  is not however beyond doubt, may be found 
in g — A — 4 to 5. There, a direct  link  between the wrong  view  on the 
existence of a real personality  (satkāyadṛṣṭi)  and  attachment  to passions 
(kāmopādāna)  is established by  means  of an unfortunately uncomplete 
quotation.  Only  the first words,  vālah açrutavān  prthagjanah  prajñaptim~ 
anupatitah  kāmopādānam.  were copied :  „the  fools, the ignorant and the 
common  people 1H9), following  the generally accepted opinion, 
I* 7) Another example is the relation between primary  (mahābhūta)  and secondary (bhautika) 
matter.  In the Buddhist theory of causation,  «the  concept of  sahabhūhetu  (cI. Abhidh. 
Koça,  II, p. 248:  "cause  en tant  que coexistents,  les  dharmas  qui sont effets  les 
uns des  autres")  explained  these  relations. 
1*8) CI. supra, p. 82. 
169) Vela (bala), agrutavant and prthagjana are technical notions; cf,  note  177 to the 
Translation. 


--- [Page 108] ---
— 98 ­r 
attachment to  passion’’.  Since this  passage  is to explain why  belief  in the 
existence of a soul leads to attachment to passion, it is possible to reconstruct 
the main  line  of the argument. Those who believe in the existence of an 
Atman  or some other eternal principle in phenomenal existence  live  in a 
dangerous  illusion,  owing  to which  they attach themselves to perishable 
things.  They  may be compared to somebody  falling  in love  with  a woman 
seen in a dream (as is often the case in Indian novels) and feeling miserable 
because his desire cannot be  fulfilled. 
Similar  passages  are well­known  from  Buddhist literature. In the last 
book  of the  Abhidharmakoça  dealing  with  the refutation of those Buddhists 
(the Vātsīputr1yas  and related sects) who believed in the existence of a 
pudgaía  (Pudgalapratiṣedhaprakaraṇa) , the words are quoted in about the 
same  form  as here  ; cf. p. 249 of the translation of the  Bhāṣya  by De la  Vallée 
Poussin,  where the  Vyākhyā  is quoted in the notes. In the third book of 
this text, this  passage  occurs again;  there  it is stated  that  the Bhagavat 
pronounced  these  words in the  Bimbisārasútra  17°). The  passage  is quoted 
in connection  with  ātmavādopādāna.  As a matter of fact, De la  Vallée  Poussin 
considered  it a canonical fragment in prose 171). 
There is however an important difference between the quotation in 
our text and  that  given in the  Abhidharmakoça.  Although  in our text  there 
is a lacuna after the first words, it is obvious  that  the aim of our author 
was not to point out how the ignorant etc.  fall a victim  to wrong notions 
about the existence of an  Âtman  and the  like  (pudgala,  kāráka,  poṣa,  jīva, 
ksetrajña  etc.), but rather how those attached to a wrong notion about an 
Atman  etc.  fall a victim  to Attachment to passion  (kāmopādāna) . It is evident 
that this is not explained by the  Abhidharmakoça  quotations. It is therefore 
natural to  look  for references where  similar  passages  occur in a connection 
which  would  make us understand the  line  of argument used in our 
text 
This appears  to be the case in the  Madhyamakāvatára,  where we 
read m) : „Comme  il est dit  dans  Íe Bhavasaṃkrāntisūtra  (Sutra de la 
Transmigration):  ‘De  rnêrne,  ô grand roi,  qu’un  homrne endormi  rêve  qu’il 
possède  la belle  de l’endroit,  et réveille  de son  sonimeil,  il pense  avec regret 
á la belle , de  même,  ô grand roi, íe sot,  l’homme  ordinaire, Fignorant, 
voyant  avec  les yeux  les objets,  s’applique  (abhiniviç)  aux objets  agréables, 
s’y étant  applique il produit attachement  ’  ’’. Other  Mahāyāna  works 
give almost the same text, especially the  Pitṛputrasamāgama,  in which  far 
!7c) Ma.dhya.ma , 11‚ 9, as De la  vallée  Poussin adds; the same scholar  notes  that  the 
Pali version in the  Majjhima  is rather different. CI. Abhidh.  Koça  Vyá. in  Cosmoíogie 
Bouddh., p. 173, lines 1 to 6. 
171) CI. the Index of Fragments of Sutras and  Çāstras  in the last volume of his Abhidharma¬
koça  translation (Introduction etc., 1931), p. 1 
172) i n Chapter VI (treating about the  pratītyasamutpāda  theory), translated  from  Tibetan 
by De la  Vallée  Poussin in  Muséon,  N.  S., 11 (1910), pp. 271­358; the quotation 
is found on p. 319. 


--- [Page 109] ---
— 99 — 
greater details are given ,7n). In all of  these  Mahāyāna  works, the quotation 
is taken to refer to the  Çunyatā  1T4); the  Bhavasaṃkrántisū(ra,  from  which 
the passage  is taken according to the  Madhyamakāvatāra,  is mentioned 
among works belonging to the  Mādhyamika  School  in the  Mahāvyutpatti  17r‚). 
It seems  probable  that  the quotation in our text may be  better  understood 
in this context if it is interpreted in a  similar  way as in the  Mahāyāna  texts 
quoted, than if it is compared  with  the  loci  taken  from  the Abhidharmakoça. 
Although  our copyist, who omitted the latter part of the quotation, made 
it impossible for us to arrive at a definite conclusion, we think  that  this 
detail,  too, confirms the  opinion  arrived at above, according to  which  the 
Upadeça  belongs to  Mahāyāna. 
Finally  we think  that  some argument in favour of  Mahāyāna  may 
be found in the composition of the treatise as a whole. The text begins 
with  an exposition of the ‘general’ theory of Dependent  Origination  by 
quoting  the text of the  Sūtra­Vibhaṅga.  Only  after  that  are the new elements 
introduced  in some  Çlokas  pointing out  that  all that  is subject to the laws 
of causality is  void  ; this voidness is however ‘seen'  only  by those liberated 
from  attachment to passions and wrong views. 
Now  it is remarkable  that  roughly the same  line  of thought may be 
traced  in the fundamental treatise of the  Mādhyamika  School  of Mahāyāna, 
the Mūlamadhyamakakārikās  of Nāgārjuna,  with the commentary Prasan¬
napadā  by Candrakīrti  17<;). This text begins with an analysis of the important 
notion  of pratyaya, especially in connection  with  the  Pratītyasamutpāda 
formula.  This  first chapter, named  Pratyayaparīkṣā,  gives the general theory 
of Causation. On this basis, many oiher subjects are treated : the principle 
of the identity of  pratītyasamutpāda  and  çūnyatā  is applied to all the 
fundamental concepts,  which  thus  appear in a new light.  Only  in the two 
last chapters, the main conclusions are drawn ; the results of the preceding 
chapters are applied to the 'special’ interpretation of the Dependent 
Origination  formula (Chapter  XXVI : Dvādaçāṅgaparīkṣā) , and,  finally,  in 
17;>) Quoted in the  Çikṣāsamuccaya.  ed. C. Bendall,  Bibl Baddh., I (1902), pp. 244­256. 
Cf. especially p. 252, lines 3 sqq. : tadyathêpi  nāma  mahārāja  purusah  svapnāntare 
janapadakalyānyā  striyā  sārdham  paricaret; sa  çayitavibuddho  janapadakaÎyānīm 
siriyam  anusmaret;  tat kim  manyase  mahārājāpi  nu sa purusah  panditajāttyo  bhavei? 
Evam  eva  mahārāja  bālo  'çrutavān  prthagjanaç  caksusā  rūpārxi  dṛṣṭvā  
samrajyate.  References to similar  passages  are given by De la  Vallée  Poussin in 
the Abhidh.  Koca  loci  quoted. 
­~ 4) This is especially clear in the  Pitṛpu–trasamāgama  quotation, where the beauty seen 
in a dream is the tertia comparationis between the  fool  believing in the reality of 
his vision  and the  Pṛthagjana  believing in the reality of the phenomenal  world. 
173) Ed.  Minaiev­Mironov,  Bibl. Buddh.,  XIII  (1911), 65, No. 54 (p. 22). 
17«) Edited by L.  de la vallée  Poussin, Bibl. Buddh., IV (1903­13). At  present,  the entire 
work  is available in translation, a result due to different scholars.  Five  chapters 
were translated by J. W. de Jong, Cinq chapitres de la  Prasannapadā,  Buddhica, 
1­ière  Série,  Mémoires,  IX, 1949. In the Introduction to the latter study (pp.  XIII­XVI), 
the translations of the other chapters,  which  existed already, and other materials 
important for the interpretation of the text, are mentioned. 


--- [Page 110] ---
— 100 — 
the analysis  of the  five  wrong views (Chapter  XXVII  : Dṛṣṭiparīkṣā) . So 
right  understanding of the principles of Dependent  Origination  literally 
constitutes the beginning and the end of the treatise.  Candrakīrti  himself 
stressed the fact  that  Nāgārjuna  intended his detailed exposition in the first 
place  to destroy the wrong views 177). 
The main lines of argument agree, although they are developed in 
a rather different way. Our text, clumsy and scholastic as it is,  seems  to 
reproduce the main argument  which  was developed by  Nāgārjuna  and 
Candrakīrti  in such a masterly and fervent way.  Only  to some extent is 
the impression of clumsiness produced by our treatise due to incompleteness. 
We should never forget  that  it is evident  that  the plates themselves were 
never intended to be read : they are  difficult  to decipher now, but in all 
probability  they have been so ever since the moment they were engraved. 
As a writing  material,  gold  is not very appropriate. The plates were 
undoubtedly  intended to serve as  deposits  in a  Stūpa  or other foundation. 
The text, inscribed on the pure metal,  could  be considered more or less a 
relic,  a portion of the  Dharmakāya  of the Buddha. In  that  case, some 
important  parts  of the text, just sufficient to  fill up the number of  gold 
plates  available,  would  have been sufficient. It was not of primary importance 
that ever3rthing should be copied and, if  here  and  there  a passage  was too 
difficult  to be read, it was just left out by the copyist. The number of 
omissions  is considerable, and  there  are quite a few portions of the text 
that could  not be understood by the reader unless he either was  well  trained 
in the subject, or had sufficient materials for comparison at his disposal. 
In view  of these  facts, it might seem contradictory  that  at the same time 
every  possible  attempt  to avoid  misunderstanding was made ; the countless 
repetitions and the suspension of  sandhi  rules in  cases  where a not very 
intelligent  reader  could  misunderstand the text,  would  make it probable 
that the text was  well  graduated to the pupils’ powers. The contradiction 
is only  apparent : whereas the  original  text(s) undoubtedly served didactic 
purposes, its (their) copy on our set of  &old  plates was  only  made  with 
a view  to gathering merit. 
This presumption explains several characteristic features of the text 
copied  on our plates. In addition to  those  which  were just mentioned, it 
makes it possible to understand how such different portions of texts and 
even  pictures (plate k)  could  be combined.  After  all, we have : (a) the 
strophes engraved in the plates i and ƒ‚ (b) the  Pratītyasamutpādasūtra  and 
its Vibhaṅga,  engraved in plates a and b, (c) the  Upadeça,  engraved in 
the plates c, d, e, ƒ, g and h, (d) the mysterious figures of the plate k. 
To these,  a fifth  item may be added. Our text contains two  passages  which 
cannot have belonged to the  original  texts  which  were copied. 
After the discussion of the various modes of division of the prat ītya¬
samutpādangas  (c — A — 1 to e — A — 7), the second part of the  Upadeça 
77) CI. the  Vrtti,  p. 364 : pratītyasamutpādasaṃjñayā  hi  deçitavān  sarvadṛṣṭiprahānarthatn  ití. 


--- [Page 111] ---
— 101 — 
does  not begin immediately ; the two portions are separated by twelve lines 
of the text (from e — A —  8toe  — B — 9),  which  do not fit in  with 
the line of argument. It  appears  that  this entire  passage  gives a different 
Vibhaṅga  version of the six  Aṅgas  from  Nāmarūpa  to Upādāna  inclusive. 
It is indeed a  rather  different version. Rupa is not defined as  ‘primary' 
(the mahābhūtas)  and derived (bhautika or  upādāya)  matter,  but as  ‘long 
and short,  square  and round’ etc. The latter definition is due to obvious 
misunderstanding : it is the explanation of  rūpāyaxœna  (the objects of vision) 
which  is given  here  17S). How far this misunderstanding  goes  appears  from 
the different categories mentioned. In the  Abhidharmakoça  twenty categories 
are enumerated : the eight kinds of  shape  (samsthāna) , the four 'primary' 
colours  (white, red etc.) and the eight 'secondary’ colours (light, shadow 
etc.  1íi>). In our text, only the eight  samsthdna  categories are enumerated, 
followed  by the  strange  conclusion  that  in this way  Rūpa  is twentyfold. 
It is obvious  that  the definition of  Rūpa  would  be wrong even if it were 
complete. In  Nāmarūpa,  Rūpa  includes not only  visible  matter  characterized 
by shape  and colour, but  matter  in general, whether  visible  or audible (eight 
kinds  of sounds) or capable of being perceived by the other  senses  (such 
as eleven categories of tangible  matter,  soft, hard, light, heavy etc.) 180). 
In another  passage  in this portion of the text, eighteen kinds of  Sparça  are 
mentioned,  followed  by the conclusion  that  these  are the  pañcadaça sparçāni 
(sic) 181). The set of  three  thirsts  (kārna­‚  ārupya­  and  ati­tṛṣṇā, e  — B — 5  sq.) 
has never been met  with  ; it is impossible to  guess  how the interpolator 
got this triad  together.  We have already examined the explanation of  Rūpa 
in Nāmarūpāṅga ; the  rest  of the definition of  Nāmarūpa  is also  full  of 
mistakes : it  would  be completely incomprehensible if we did not have other 
versions of the  same  definition at our disposal 1>2). In addition, the entire 
passage  contains all  sorts  of mistakes against grammar and  sandhi  rules. 
It is not probable  that  the text of this  passage  is based on any authorized 
source. It should  rather  be considered an addition due to some pious monk, 
perhaps  to the copyist himself. Such an addition was possible,  because  the 
17s) According  to the Abhidharma definitions,  Rūpa  (in  Nāmarūpāṅga)  comprises the  five 
sense  organs  (indriya), their  five  particular  spheres  of activity (visaya), and, according 
to the  Sarvāstivadins,  avijñapti  ; cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  1. pp. 20  sqq.; Stcherbatskij,  Central 
Conception, passim. This  Rūpa  notion may be translated by  „matter";  according 
to the etymology  rūpyateti  rūpam,  bādhyata  ity art hah, it is characterized by 'resistance’. 
Rupa in  Rūpāyatana,  however, is the 'external'  āyarana  which  is »the  object of the 
'internal’  caksurāyatana,  i.e. everything  which  may be observed by the eye (Abhidh. 
Koça,  I, p. 16). 
!7ô) Ibidem,  I, pp. 23 sqq. 
*–<>)  Abhidh.  Koça,  1, pp. 16 sq. 
181) It seems  that  the three  kinds of manahsamsparga (agreeable, disagreeable or neutral) 
were not comprised in the »total. The form  spargard,  no other example of  which  is 
known,  is probably only due to poor knowledge of Sanskrit grammar. 
182) p or the details, the  reader  is referred to the  notes  to the transcription and the 
translation. 


--- [Page 112] ---
— 102 — 
first part  of the  Upadeça  ended in line 7 of the front side of plate e, and 
its second  part  should begin on a new plate. It  would  have been a pity to 
leave such a large portion of the precious metal empty 183). Therefore, the 
pious monk thought it a good idea to  repeat  some of the important points 
in a slightíy  different form; although the idea was certainly good, the 
result was very unsatisfactory. 
Similar  considerations might account for another insertion in our 
text, viz. the  passage  from h — A — 2 (after the punctuation mark) to 
the end  (h — B — 3). The latter  passage  is not even considered to have 
been pronounced by the Bhagavat, since the lines immediately preceding 
contain  the usual  final  formula of Buddhist  Sūtras.  Here, too, the copyist 
(or whoever it was) may be supposed to have grasped the opportunity 
of adding a few details of his own on a portion of the plate  which  would 
otherwise have been left empty. This  passage  begins suddenly  with  the 
statement  that  there  are four continents  (dvīpa),  which  are enumerated in 
due order, but  with  several mistakes. Then  follow  similar  enumerations of 
the heavens  and hells. These lists end  with  the  strange  conclusion  that 
all the above is called Attachment to pleasure  (kāmopādāna) . Presumably, 
the author intended to  argue  that  the term  kāmopādāna  means  „Attachment 
to the  Kāmadhātu  in its twentyfold aspect’’ (I.e.  vimçatividhakāmadhātū¬
pādāna) . According to the Buddhist point of view, this cannot be correct : 
attachment  to some of the  Kāmadhātu  divisions, such as animal existence 
or Avlcinaraka,  is not easy to imagine. As a  matter  of fact,  Kāmopādāna 
is taken to refer to the  five  kinds of objects  which  may afford pleasure 
(pañvakāmagunāh)  in all our sources. 
After  this explanation of  Kámopādāna,  the author  procédés  to a  similar 
analysis of  dṛṣṭyupādána ; he there  mentions, among other  points,  the famous 
twentyfold  division  of satkāyadṛṣṭi.  Two other  dṛṣtis  are also analyzed (viz. 
antagraha­ and  mithyā­dṛṣṭi) , but the account is very confused 1S4). The 
final sentence  of our text is hardly comprehensible : it must have been 
composed by somebody who had not the least idea of Sanskrit grammar, 
although he knew the words 185). 
In spite of the clurnsyness of the additional  passage,  there  is one point 
which  might deserve attention. The addition might convey an idea of what 
the writer  of the additional  passage  considered the  implicit  conclusion of 
our text. As we have seen above, the discourse of the Bhagavat  ends  with 
183) It is not probable  that  the addition should be attributed to horror vacua; not only 
would  such considerations hardly be fitting to a  Çunyavādin,  but they also  would  not 
explain  why the plate  h — B was inscribed up to the third line only. 
184) Thus,  antagrāha  is considered threefold; such a  division  is not only unknown, but 
also very suspect: the two extremes (in the strict  sense  of the word  there  cannot 
be more than two antas) touch upon the very  essence  of Buddhism defined as the 
Madhyama  Pratipad. We do not understand what the interpolator  could  have  meant 
by his definition of  mithyādṛṣṭi ; it hardly  seems  worthwhile to try to explain it. 
18­) Cf.  note  120 to the Transcription. 


--- [Page 113] ---
— 103 — 
an argument in  which  the  origin  of Suffering is traced back to  Upādāna 
as its  principal  agent.  The foundation of this argument is  implied  in one 
of the introductory  Çlokas,  in which  it is stated  that  he who is free  from 
Attachment  sees  Existence as it really is, so  that  for him the Path leading 
to Final  Liberation  will  no longer be obstructed.  Possibly,  the copyist did 
not think this  line  of argument  sufficiently  clear for his readers. In order 
to help them, he tried to give this additional explanation. If we know 
Attachment to be the  principal  agent  of Suffering, it is essential to know 
what exactly this Attachment amounts to.  Although  this point was treated 
several  times in the  Vibhaṅga  and  Upadeça  texts, the copyist did not think 
it useless to analyze this important notion again. He rightly noticed  that 
not all  aspects  of Upādāna  were equally bad. Of course,  Satkāyadṛṣṭi  is a 
great  hindrance to  Final  Liberation  ; it certalnly is a wrong  view,  but if 
it is accompanied by much good  Karman,  as may be the case in non­
Buddhist  doctrines, it may even lead to existence in some of the heavenly 
spheres. It is nothing compared to  Mithyādṛṣṭi,  the view  of those who  assert 
that the Mārga  is not a  Mārga  at all, that  the Dharma is not a Dharma.  This 
view  is the worst obstruction ; it must be eradicated by all possible means. 
Since  Mithyādṛṣṭi  is essentially the  view  of those who are hostile to 
Buddhism,  the insistence on this point might indicate a special tendency 
of the text as it was conceived by the person who added the  passage  at 
the end of the text. It  would  be an exaggeration to use the term  ‘missionary' 
in this connection, but it  would  certainly come near to the truth. 
At the end of this Introduction, we  briefly  refer to two points of obvious 
interest: the sources of our text and the possible reasons why it was 
engraved on our  gold  plates; both questions are now capable of being 
partially  answered. 
The sources of the Sutra, of the  Vibhaṅga  and of the  separate  strophes 
engraved in the plates i and j have been treated in detail 186); we  limit 
ourselves to the  Upadeça.  As we pointed out above, this ‘Instruction’ is 
based on  three  Çlokas  the reconstruction of  which  was attempted in the 
preceding  pages.  With  the limited  sources at our disposal, it was impossible 
to trace the strophes, but we  could  arrive at a probable conclusion as 
to the type of Buddhism to which they belong : the references to the tai¬
mirika, to the Refuge in the „completely  nirvāned  Bhagavat” and to the 
division  of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  in an 'internal’ and an ‘external’ series, 
make it probable  that  the main part of the text belongs to  Mahāyāna  and 
there  being not the least  allusion  to any of the characteristic  tenets  of 
the Yogācāra­Vijñānavāda  School,  it should be attributed to either the 
Mādhyamika  School  or a type of early  Mahāyāna  reasonably near to it 187). 
186) Supra, pp. 57 — 70. 
187) Whereas the Madhyamikas appear to have  followed  the Sarvastivadms in all or nearly 
an of the details of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  and of the dharma classifications in general 
(although they considered it »to belong to the domain of relative Truth to be necessarily 
abandoned later on by the  vision  of the highest Truth), the  Yogācārins  introduced 


--- [Page 114] ---
­— 104 — 
With  reference to the latter point, it might not be devoid of interest 
to refer the  reader  to a definite proof of early influence of  Māḍhyamika 
ideas in the Indonesian  world.  Among the important discoveries in the 
neighbourhood of  Këdah  (Malaya) 188), there  is a small clay tablet inscribed 
with three  Çlokas  which all have been traced in the  Sāgaramatiparipṛcchā 189). 
The type of script used  there  corresponds  rather  closely to  that  of the more 
archaically  written portions of our  text.  Quaritch Wales assigned it to  „not 
later than early  Vlth  century  A.D.’’  190). This  date  might be too early; 
the forms of most of the  akṣaras  agree  with  those  found in the  Çrīvijaya 
inscriptions from the end of the seventh century  A. D. The form of the la 
(in balāni,  line 1)  agrees  however with the more archaic type of the aksara 
which  occurs in our plates. In either case, the text was probably copied 
from some existing and presumably much older manuscript. It may not be 
due to  mere  chance  that  the clay tablet from  Kĕdah  is inscribed with  three 
Anuṣṭubh  strophes,  whereas  on our gold  plates  there  are three  strophes 
in the same  metre, too.  Only  in our case, the  strophes  are followed by a 
lengthy prose text based thereon. It is moreover evident  that  the two  sets 
of three  strophes  belong to a very  cognate  sphere  of thought. The parallel 
very  important changes: the total number of dharmas was increased to a hundred 
(cf. the comparison between the  Sarvāstivādin  and  Yogacarin  lists of dharmas in 
Muséon,  6‚ 1905, pp. 178 sqq.) and important new notions (such as  ālayavijñāna  and 
other sorts of  vijñāna,  also new  divisions  of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  chain) were intro­
duced  ; no traces of this development appear in our text. 
188) H. G. ' Quaritch Wales, Archaeological Researches, Journ. Malay  Br.  R. A. S., 18, 
Part II. I94o, pp. 1 85. 
189) Xh« strophes we*"e  identified  by Lin  Li­kouang.  Prcf.  Johnston (quoted art. cit., p. 9) 
rightly  took  offence at  svabhavān  in  line  4, but this  difficulty  is probably due to a 
lapse in the transcription, for on the photograph (ibidem, plate 8) we read: j3 
sváithāvā  nu  vidyante  na  tesām  sambhayah kvacit, i.e.  „there  could  nowhere be any 
(possibility  of) arising for those  ‘realities'  which  do not even exist". The first thesis 
is that  the dharmas  which  arise in dependence (on other  dharœ*is)  cannot have any 
existence of their own  (svabhāva).  Having  no independent existence, they cannot 
even  originate, — a  line  of thought  familiar  in Mādhyamika. 
lô0) Art. cit., p. 10; cI. the  opinion  expressed by Dr Chakravarti quoted on p. 9, where 
thé conclusion  „in any case much earlier than the dated seventh century Sumatran 
inscriptions"  is added (I.e. the dated  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions  which,  however, belong to 
thé end  of the seventh century). We think  that  the differences  from  the latter should 
not be exaggerated; the two types of script  agree  rather  closely  and the  only  real 
difference  is the curious  form  of the la,  which  is however common in seventh century 
inscriptions  (cI. supra, p. 50). The agreement  with  the  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions is the 
more  striking  if one compares also the  Purṇavarman  inscriptions  which  are usually 
dated about in the middle of the  fifth  century. The differences  from  the latter are 
far more pronounced, especially for the na, the ka, the la and the bha. The script 
of the  Këdah  tablet  agrees  with  that  of the  Tuk  Mas  inscription  from  Java and some 
dated inscriptions  from  Indochina  which  were quoted on p. 50. If we  allow  about 
half a century's" difference  from  the dated  Çrivijaya  inscriptions, we arrive about in 
= the same period as the Indochinese inscriptions mentioned and, at the same time, 
we remain at a respectable distance  from  the  Purṇavarman  inscriptions. For  these 
reasons, wé consider the first  half  of the 7th century the most probable conjecture 


--- [Page 115] ---
— 105 — 
is very interesting, although the correspondence  seems  too vague to  allow 
any conclusions based thereon m). An essential condition to arrive any 
further is the  possibility  of tracing the strophes mentioned in our text, as 
it was possible in the case of the  clay  tablet  from  Kédah. 
With  reference to the second of the questions posed above, the reason 
why and the time when a number of different texts (and even drawings) 
were combined and engraved in a number of  gold  plates, we may take up 
a line  of argument already referred to several times. The use of the pure 
and precious metal,  which  is not an excellent  writing  material, makes it 
probable  that  the plates were inscribed to constitute a deposit in a religious 
foundation  such as a  stūpa.  Fundamental portions of the Dharma,  which 
in Mahāyāna  is often conceived of as the most universal of the bodies of 
a Buddha, gradually took the place of relics in older times ; relics not  only 
became very rare, but they also were nothing but the poor and perishable 
remains of an  only  apparitional body in  which  a Mahāyānist  should not 
take refuge 192). The Dharma, however, especially the eternal laws of  origin­
ation  and decay explained by the  pratītyasamutpāda  theory, was not  only 
considered  unperishable but also universal. 
If then the size and value of the deposit were in some relation  with 
the importance of the foundation,  which  is a reasonable presumption, our 
plates must have belonged to one of the large Buddhist temples in Indonesia, 
Long  before the inauguration of the sanctuary, a clever monk was 
charged  with  cop2ting a number of texts to be chosen by himself, but 
necessarily  treating of Dependent  Origination  and related subjects, in a 
191) A close examination shows further points of agreement. A  typical  point is  that  in 
both  cases  the first  Çloka  is a numerical one, referring «to numbers of categories (in 
our text the  divisions  of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula; in the  Kĕdah  tablet, the 
balas,  vaiçāradyas  and  āverdkadharmas),  whereas the second and,  still  more, the  third 
Çlokas  draw conclusions in  view  of the acquisition of perfect knowledge (ataimirika 
in our text, tasya  kotlm  gatam  jñānam  in the  Kédah  tablet). As we have noted above, 
the Kédah  strophes  could  be traced ; new the curious point is  that  the three  stronh3­s 
do not  follow  each other in the  Sāgaramatiparipṛcchā  from  where they were probably 
taken  („the  first verse after the other two  with  some verses in between", art. cft., p. 9). 
There is no reason to conclude to a different version of the text ; the above considerations 
could  account satisfactorily for the order in  which  the strophes were reproduced on 
the clay  tablet: jus* as in our text,  there  may have been a definite reason to  start 
with a Çloka  referring to categories and to continue  with  two  Çlokas  in which  the 
difficult  problems of  Çunyata  and perfect  wisdom  are touched upon.  Such  a reason 
might  be discovered if we presume  that  also the  Kedah  strophes were to be used 
as the basis of a  Upadeça.  Then we get a  kind  of 'progressive’ instruction. The 
exposition  of the supernatural forces, assurances and independent dharmas, provided 
with adequate  explanations,  would  be an excellent means to introduce á supposed 
pupil  into the material needed for an exposition of the  difficult  problems of  Mahāyāna 
metaphysics.  If this assumption based on the order of the strophes is correct, the 
correspondence  with  the text on our  gold  plates goes much further than it  would 
seem at first:. It  would  be very interesting to know whether  there  exist more examples 
where  three  strophes quoted  from  an authoritative  Mahāyāna  text were used as the 
basis for instruction. 
192) cI. the study by De la  Vallée  Poussin quoted in note 141 above. 


--- [Page 116] ---
— 106 — 
set of  gold  plates especially prepared to  that  purpose. This monk, whom 
we designate by the term "copyist” although he did much more than copying 
alone, was  rather  free in his choice: he was allowed to take whatever 
texts  were at his disposal, provided  that  they  treated  of the subject just 
mentioned. The 'copyist’ did his work as  could  have been expected in  those 
circumstances; he chose the  Pratītyasamutpādasutra  with  its Vibhaṅga  in 
the version  he disposed of  (which,  as we pointed out above, probably belonged 
to the  Sarvāstivādin  School  and might have been brought to Indonesia 
by Guṇavarman  in the  fifth  century AD.). He managed to engrave the 
complete  texts  of the Sutra and the  Vibhaṅga  in two of the eight large­
sized  plates at his disposal. For the remaining six large plates, he chose the 
text of an  Upadeça,  which  was at his disposal. The latter was a prose text 
of considerable length, based on  three  (or more)  Çlokas  treating of some 
special  aspects  of the  deeper  meaning of Dependent  Origination.  This  Upadeça 
may have been a lengthy text, but this was not an objection : the monk 
limited  himself  to those  portions  which  he thought particularly important 
for his purpose, viz. the portion in  which  it is explained how the twelve 
links  of Dependent Origination are single, twofold, threefold etc., and  that 
which  traced the ultimate  cause  of Phenomenal Existence back to  Upādāna. 
It is probable  that  these  two portions did not  follow  each other in the 
original  Upadeça  text; the copyist therefore preferred to begin his second 
extract on a new plate (our letter ƒ). This second extract ended in the 
second line of the eighth large-sized plate. This method of engraving left 
two portions of the  gold  plates blank; the copyist, considering it a pity 
not to make use of this occasion,  filled  these  portions in  with  two clumsy 
interpolations,  which  may have been composed by the cop3dst himself. Not 
considering  these  two  passages,  the Upadeca is certainly not clumsy, but 
it is rather  scholastic ; it was undoubtedly intended to be used by  those 
„children,  ignorant and ordinary people” (g — A — 4 to 5) who were  likely 
to attach themselves to sensual pleasures and the  like.  Endless repetitions 
and the suspension of  sandhi  rules wherever  there  would  be the least 
chance of misunderstanding were considered excellent  means  to instruct the 
ignorant m). As we tried to point out above, the  Upadeça  probably belongs 
to (early)  Mahāyāna  and sometimes is in direct  conflict  with  the Vibhanga 
text 194), but the copyist did not consider this point a serious objection 
against combining them : his resources may have been  limited  and the es­
sential  point was  that  the texts  should be considered  sufficienly  authoritative 
103) Xhe contradictions to be mentioned in  note  194 below,  would  be confusing, but they 
were not due to the  original  texts  used for instruction, but to their combination on 
the gold  plates. 
194) The most obvious detail is the different  divison  of Jāti  in the Vibhanga (b — A — 1 
to 3) and in the  Upadeça  (g — A — lo to  B — 1); we also noted  that  the  division 
of the Saṃskāras  in the Vibhanga (a — B — 2) and in the  Upadeça (f  — B — 1 to 8) 
do not  agree;  the Vibhanga analysis is considered a subdivision of a different analysis 
in the  Upadeça.  There are some minor points, too. 


--- [Page 117] ---
— 107 — 
to serve as a deposit in an important foundation. If we knew the foundation 
for which  the plates were intended, the latter might be much more important 
than they are now. Nevertheless, their importance should not be underestim­
ated even  with  the scarce data at our disposal. Not  only  does our  Vibhaṅga 
version  give us some badly wanted additional data about the history of a 
part of the Sanskrit canon, but the  Upadeça,  although not particularly 
interesting for the ideas explained therein, gives us some idea about how 
Buddhism  was taught and studied in the countries of the "Southern  Seas’’, 
and this is a point of an obvious interest, since it may indirectly help us 
in arriving  at a  full  understanding of the Buddhist monuments. 
Before  proceeding to the text and translation, we express our regret 
of not having some of the publications at our disposal  which  would  have 
made the interpretation of the text more satisfactory 195). 
Transcription 
a 
A. 1. // 3) evarn=mayā çrutarn=ekasmin=samaye  bhagavāñ=chrāvastyāṃ 
<vi>harati 2) sma jetavane anāthapiṇḍa<da>syārāme tatra bha¬
gavāṃs=tān=āma<n>trayati 3) sma bhikṣavo 
195) Vve especially regret not having been able to use L. de la  vallée  Poussin,  Théorie 
des dome  causes,  Univ.  de Gand,  Rea No. 40, 1913 ; Nyanatiloka, Paticca  Samuppāda, 
Calcutta,  1934; ard V. Gokhale.  D7laṅgha's  Pratītyasamutpādaçāstra,  Bonn,  193o. 
1) Instead of the double dash, C redds: siddham,  G: namah. — In the  notes  to the 
transcription,  the  following  abbreviations are used: 
C — the  Nālandā  bricks the transcription of  which  was published by Chakravarti ; 
cI. note 39 to the Introduction. 
G — the  Nāiandā  brick  published by Ghosh; cf. ibidem. 
Chinese  version — the Chinese version of the  Sutra–Vibhaṅga  translated by  Bagchi  ; 
cI. note 42 to the Introduction. 
P — the  Kasiā  copper plate published by Pargiter ; cf. note 39 to the Introduction. 
2) All the other texts read viharati,  which  moreover is evident. — It is remarkable  that 
just the  initial  part of the text is  full  of mistakes. On the first plate,  there  are 
almost as many lapses as on all the other plates together. Presumably, the beginning 
of the manuscript  from  which  the text is supposed to have been copied was in a 
rather bad  state  of preservation. It is obvious  that  the copyist cannot have understood 
much  of the text he copied ; omissions are relatively very frequent (cf. the Introduction). 
?') Instead of  tān,  G reads  bhiksūn,  C, however,  bhiksúnám.  The Sutra text on  which 
Vasubandhu  wrote his commentary (cI. note 43 to the Introduction)  appears  to have 
read  bhiksūn,  too. — In the  form  in which  the text is given here, tan cannot be 
correct; it cannot be clear  from  the context to whom it refers. There are two pos­
sibilities  : either the copyist has omitted a  small  passage  in which  it was stated  that 
the Bhagavat, when abiding in the Jetavana, was surrounded by monks (as is the 
case in the other versions), or the copyist might have put down  tān  instead of 
the bhiksūn  of his  original.  The latter  possibility  is not probable  from  a palaeographic 
point  of view. 


--- [Page 118] ---
— 108 — 
2. āmaṇtrayati  <ta>smin  pratyaçrokṣur  4) bhagavāṃs=tān=idam= 
avocat 5) pratityasamutpādasyādiṃ  bhikṣavaḥ  ādiñ=cādeçayiṣye  6) 
çṛṇu­
3. ta 7) sādhu ca suṣṭu s) ca manasiku<ruta> 9) //  bhāṣiṣye pratītya¬
samutpādasyādiḥ katamaḥ yad=utāsmin=sati bhavatīdam=ucyate 
yathāvat  lô) avi­
4. dyāpratyayās=saṃskārāḥ saṃskārapratyayaṃ vijñānaṃ vijñānapra¬
tyayaṃ <nāmarupaṃ nāmarupapratyayaṃ> U) ṣaḍāyatanam ṣaḍā¬
yatanapraṭyayaḥ sparçaḥ sparçapratyayā 
5. veḍaṇā vedanāpratyayā tṛṣṇā trṣṇāpratyayam=upādānaṃ upādāna¬
pratyayo bhavaḥ bhavapratyayā jātir=jātipratyayaṃ jarāmaraṇapa– 
ridevaduḥkhadaurmanasyopāyā­
6. saṃ 12) sambhavati evam=asya ke<va>lasya 1S) mahato duḥkha¬
skandhasya samudayo bhavati ayam=ucyate pratītyasamutpadasyā¬
diḥ 14) vibhaṅgaḥ 15) avidyāpratyayaḥ 
4) Read:  pratyaçrausur.  The form given in our text may he due to analogy (association 
with adrākṣur  ?). — The words bhiksavo pratyagrausur do not occur in the 
other versions known. The form bhiksavo is a breach of  sandhi ; it is however possible 
that the  sandhi  is correct, but  that  between bhiksavo and  amant  rayati, a word 
was omitted. 
5) Bhagavāms  avocat,  omitted by C and G. 
6) C reads:  ādiṃ  vo deçayisyāmi  vibhangam ca; the repetition of  ādi cannot be correct 
in our text. Since it is not probable  that  the copyist should have replaced  vibhaṅgañca 
in his  original  by adiñca,  one might consider the possibility  that  the  original  read 
arthanca; from a palaeographic point of  view,  ādiñca  and  arthañca  resemble each 
other very much. 
7) C reads: tac=chrnuta. 
8) Read:  susthu. 
9) Manasikuruta occurs in all the versions. — In G, the  following  portion is introduced 
in quite a special way, i.e. as  dharmanām  acayah and apacayah, referring to the 
Samudaya and to the Nirodha portions, respectively; cf. the Introduction. 
10) C and G read: yad uta, probably the correct form; as a  matter  of fact, it occurs 
also in  Vasubandhu's  commentary and in the  Pali  and Prakrit versions.  Also  the Chinese 
translation  seems  to be based on yad uta; at least,  there  does  not occur any equivalent 
of yathāvat. 
11) The whole  nāmarūpa  link  was omitted by the copyist. Although versions of the 
Pratītyasamutpāda  formula in  which  all the Angas are not enumerated do occur (in 
the Pāli  canon; cf. Von Glasenapp, art. cit.),  there  is no reason to consider the 
possibility  of a  Pratītyasamutpāda  version without  nāmarūpānga ; everywhere else 
in our text, this  link  is mentioned regularly. 
I.2) All  texts  read  çoka  between mararia and parideva. Here again,  there  is hardly any 
doubt  that  the term was omitted by the copyist, as is seen infra in e — A — 7 and 
g — B — 2 sq., where  çoka  is mentioned in its usual place. 
Usually, the whole compound is put in the plural ( jātipratyayā jarāmaranaçokaparide¬
vaduhkhadaurmanasyopāyāsāh  samtidbhavanti ; cf.  Vyākhyā  quoted Abhidh.  Koça,  III, 
p. 84 ; Daçasāhasrikā  § 5, ed. S.  Konow,  p. 96 and p. 14 ; Çāīistambha,  quoted 
Çiksāsamuccaya,  p. 222 ; De la  Vallée  Poussin,  Théorie  des  douze  Causes, pp. 31 sq.). 
1S) An texts: kevalasya. 
­–­) G : ayam  ucyate  dharmānām  ācayah;  cf. supra,  note  9. 
15) C: vibhahgah katamah; the second term is almost indispensable. 


--- [Page 119] ---
— 109 — 
7. saṃskārā  iti  avidyā katamā yattat=pūrvvānte  ajñānaṃ  aparānte 
ajñānaṃ  pūrvv āparānte  ajñānaṃ  āddhyātmany=ajñānaṃ  16) vāhye 
8. ajnānaṃ  karmmaṇy=ajñānaṃ  karmrnavipāke  ajñānaṃ  1T) vuddhe 
ajñānaṃ  dharmme  ajñánaṃ  saṃghe  ajñānaṃ  duḥkhasamudayaniro­
9. dha<mārggeṣv>  18) ajñānaṃ  heto  19) ajñānaṃ  hetusamutpanneṣu 
dharmmeṣv=ajñānaṃ pratītyasamutpāde ajñānaṃ 20) kuçaleṣu dhar¬
meṣv=ajñānaṃ akuça­
10. leṣu dharmeṣv=ajñānaṃ  kuçalákuçaleṣu  dharmrneṣv=ajñānaṃ  21) 
sāvadyeṣu  dharmeṣv=ajñānaṃ anavadyeṣu dharmmeṣv=ajñānaṃ 
sāvady<ānavadyeṣu>  22) dharmeṣv=a­
11. jñānaṃ  asevitavyeṣu dharmmeṣv=ajñānaṃ sevitavyeṣu dharrneṣv= 
ajñánaṃ  ṣaṭsu  vā  sparçāyataneṣu  yat=tatra  teṣu  23) 
B. 1. ajñānam=anabhisamayaḥ  tamas=sammohaḥ  avidyāndhakāram=iyam 
=ucyate  avidyā avidyāpratyayā  bhikṣavaḥ 
2. saṃskārá iti katame saṃskārāḥ trayas=saṃskārāḥ <kāyasaṃskā¬
rāḥ> váksaṃskāráḥ manassaṃskārāḥ 24) idam=ucyate saṃskārāḥ 
3. [sa] 25) saṃskārapratyayaṃ  bhikṣavo  vijñānam=iti  vijñānaṃ  katamat 
ṣaḍvijñānakāyāḥ  cakṣurvijñānaṃ  çrotra­
4. vijñánaṃ  ghrāṇavijñānaṃ  jthvāvijñānaṃ  kāyavijñānaṃ  manovijñānaṃ 
ity=ucyate  vijñānaṃ  vijñāna­
16) Read : adhyātmany ajñānam.  The  vrddhi  of the  form  in our  text is probably  due 
to the  confusion  with  ādhyātmi kam.  C, however,  reads  : adhyātmam.  The  latter version 
gives  also  vahirddhā  instead  of vāhye.  — In the  portion  which  now  follows,  the 
text of C  differs considerably from  our  version ; instead  of the  continuous repetition 
of ctjñānam  with  each term,  the  former brings  a number  of  terms together into 
compounds. These diiferences  will  not be  noted  here  in detail. There  are,  however, 
also some differences  which  are  more substantial;  cf. the  Introduction,  supra,  pp. 65 sqq. 
17) C reads:  vipāke ajñānam  (between  karmmany=ajñānarn  and karmrnavipāke  ajñānam). 
Tnis  term  is rather superfluous, sinco  vipāka  is always  karmavipaka  in this context. 
18) |t is  obvious  that  the last term,  mārga,  which  is indispensable, was omitted by the copyist. 
19) Read:  hetau,  or,  with  sandhi,  hetāv.  In  Sanskrit texts from Indonesia,  au is  almost 
always  replaced  by o. In our  text, however,  au does occur  in a few  cases  (f — B — 7 
and h — A — 4). 
20) In  C, pratītyasamutpāde ajñānam  is not  mentioned.  As a  matter  of fact,  it is  nothing 
but a repetition  of the  preceding terms. 
21) Here, our text  is a  little  more detailed than C. Instead  of kuçalesu  akuçalcsu  
kuçalākuçalesu,  C mentions  the  last item  only.  The  Madhyamágama,  quoted  in the 
Vyākhyā  to the  Abhidharmakoça  (vide  Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 92,  note  1) mentions 
three  terms,  too, but  replaces  kuçaīākuçalesu  by.  avyakṛtesu. 
22) This correction  seems  obvious, since  sāvadyesu  was  already mentioned before. 
23) After  sparçāyatanesu,  C adds : yathābhūtasamprativedhe,  which  is also reproduced  in 
the Chinese translation  (Bagchi:  „it is  nescience  in the  insight into real  nature 
of things’’). 
24) The  first  of these  three  groups  of samskāras  was  evidently omitted  by the  copyist. 
In C the  singular (°rah)  is used  for  each  of the  three  groups. 
25) Probably  due to  diplography. 


--- [Page 120] ---
— 110 ­— 
5. pratyayaṃ  bhiksavo  nāmarūpam=iti  nāmarúpaṃ  katamat 26) catvāraḥ 
arūpiṇaḥ  skandhāḥ  vedanāskandhaḥ 
6. saṃskāraskandhaḥ  saṃjñāskandhaḥ  vijñānaskandhaḥ  idam=ucyate 
nāma rūpam=iti nāmarūpayor=iti  27) 
7. yat=kiñci  28) rūpaḥ  29) sarvvan=tan=catvāri mahābhūtáni catvāri 
ca mahābhūtāny=upādāya  ca rūpam=iti  cai– 
8. tac=ca  rūpaṃ  pūrwakañ=ca  rupaṃ 30) tad=ubhayam  nāmarúpam= 
ity=ucyate  nāmarupam=iti  // <nāma>rūpapratyayaṃ  31) 
26) c reads : nāma  katamat,  which  was probably the reading on  which  the Chinese version 
was' also based. Our reading may be preferred, it being probable  that  the monks 
would  have asked the meaning of the entire term such as it occurs in the  pratītyasamut­
pāda  formula. The Bhagavat then replies by first defining  nāman  and rupa separately, 
and concluding  with  the statement  that  the two notions, such as they were defined 
before, together constitute  nāmarupāṅga. 
27) Nāmarūpayor=iti,  omitted by C and the Chinese version. These words are not entirely 
superfluous, since Rupa included in  nāmarūpāṅga  is not identical  with  the Rupa 
implied,  for instance, in  Rupáyatana  or in  Dharmāyatana,  referring to  visible  matter 
and avijñapti  respectively. 
28) C reads: kimcid, the correct Sanskrit  form.  In older Buddhist Sanskrit, the  final 
dental is usually dropped in words  like  this one. In the  Çrivijaya  inscription discussed 
before, the  form  kadāci  instead of  kadācit  occurs many times; cf. supra note 5 
to the Introduction to No. II. 
29) Read : rūpam,  the correct Sanskrit  form.  The  form  rūpah  cannot however be due 
to a mere lapse by the scribe, for the text continues  with  sarwan—tañ (catvāri)  instead 
of sarwan=tac  (catvāri).  Confusion  between the grammatical genders, especially between 
masculine  and neuter, is very common in older Buddhist Sanskrit ; cf. C  Bendall, 
Çiksāsamuccaya,  Bibl. Buddh., I (1902), Introduction, p. XV; a number of examples 
occur  in Aç/aghosa  (cf.  E. H. Johnston, The Buddhacarita, II, 1936, Introduction, 
p. box). A  strange  example occurs in this text, infra e — 3 — 4, viz. the  plural 
spargard  instead of spargah; the latter example occurs in a rather suspect portion 
of our text and is perhaps a mistake  only.  Everywhere else in cur text, sparga has 
its usual gender. CI. also  puspah  instead of puspam, infra  c — B — 10. 
30) Probably an error for  nāma,  which  is the reading in C. In the other versions of the 
Nāmarūpa  definition  (cI. note 130 to the Translation), the wording of the end of 
the formula is too different to make a close comparison possible, but  nāma  is also 
required  for the meaning of the  definition.  It is obvious  that  rūpam  in our text is 
not a mere lapse by the copyist, but rather an error due to the misunderstanding 
of the  definition;  as a matter of fact, two kinds of  rūpa (bhūta  and bhautika) were 
mentioned just before, and the copyist therefore concluded  that  there  should have 
been a  statement  that  both the former and the latter constitute  rūpa;  he probably 
did not notice  that  the end of the  definition  should also be changed in  that  case. 
The reason for the repetition of  nāmarupam=iti  might be connected  with  the change 
of nāma  to rūpam  mentioned above; before the conclusion  that  the whole of the 
above constituted  nāma­rūpam,  he missed something about the two kinds of  rūpa 
to be comprised into  Rūpa; if he had been consistent, he  would  have changed the first 
nāmarūpam  (in  line  8) to  rūpam,  but he did not go as far as  that.  CI. also note 31. 
31) The omission of  nāma  may be nothing but a lapse; it is not however impossible  that  it 
is a mistake connected  with  the wrong interpretation mentioned in note 3o (owing to 
the two  kinds of  rūpa  mentioned  there  ?). 


--- [Page 121] ---
— Ill — 
b 
A. 1. bhikṣavaḥ ṣaḍāyatanam=iti ṣaḍáyatanaṃ  katamat  ṣaḍ=ādhyātrni­
kāny=āyatanāni  cakṣu<ḥ>  çrotraghrāṇa­
2. jihvākāyamanāṃsy=ācthyātmikāni  idarn=ucyate  ṣaḍāyatanaṃ [ka­
tamat]  32) ṣaḍāyatanapratyayo 
3. bhikṣavaḥ sparça iti sparçaḥ katamaḥ ṣaṭ=sparçakāyāḥ cakṣus¬
saṃsparçaḥ çrotrasaṃsparçaḥ ghrāṇajihvā­
4. kāyamanassaṃsparçaḥ  ayam=ucyate  sparçaḥ  / /  sparçapratyayā 
bhikṣavo  vedanā iti vedanā katamā 
5. tisro  vedana<ḥ>  sukhavedanā duḥkhavedanā aduḥkhāsukhavedanā 
iyam=ucyate  vedanā  // vedanā­
6. pratyayā bhikṣavaḥ trṣṇā iti tṛṣṇā katamā tisraḥ <tṛṣṇāḥ> kāma¬
tṛṣṇā bhavatṛṣṇā vibhavatṛṣṇā iyam=ucyate <tṛṣṇā>  3:1) 
7. tṛṣṇāpratyayaṃ bhikṣavaḥ upādānam=iti up ādānaṃ katamat ca¬
tvāry=upādānāni kāmopādānaṃ dṛṣṭyo­
8. pādānaṃ 34) çilavratopādānam ātmavādopādānam=ity=ucyate upā¬
dānam  // upādānapratyayo 
9. bhikṣavo bhava iti bhavaḥ katamaḥ trayo bhavāḥ kāmabhavaḥ r ūpa¬
bhavaḥ ārūpyabhavaḥ ayam=ucya­
B. 1. te bhavaḥ  bhavapratyayā  bhikṣavo  játir=iti jātiḥ katamā  yattat 
teṣāṃ  satvānāṃ  tasmin=tasmin  satvanikāye 
2. jātiḥ saṃ[jñā]jātiḥ 3r>) avakrāntiḥ abhinirvṛttiḥ skandhapratilábho 
dhātupratilābhaḥ āya < ta > napratilā­
3. bhaḥ  shandhābhinirvṛttiḥ jīvitendriyaprādurbhāvaḥ  iyam=ucyate 
jātiḥ  // jātipratyayaṃ  bhikṣavo  jarāma­
4. raṇam=iti  tatra  jarā katamā yat 86) khalatatvaṃ  8?) valita­
32) This  term  may be due to the  fact  of the  copyist  looking at the line  above,  where  sada­
yatanam  is followed by  katamat. 
­,* The  omissions  of trsrm  are easily  explained  by the  frequent  repetitions  of the word. This 
very  term  should  have  occurred  no less  than  eight  times  in line 6 (and the  first  word 
of line 7). 
nt) Read:  drsíyupádánam ; the o is  undoubtedly  due to  analogy  with the  other  kinds  of 
Upadána. 
3r‚) C (and all the  other  comparable  texts)  : samjātih,  undoubtedly  the correct  form  (sarnjñā 
belongs  to a  later  stage  ; it is included in skandhapratílabho).  Probably,  the original 
used  by the  copyist  read  samjátih, which was  misunderstood  and  considered  a mistake 
for samjñājātih,  a combination  of two well­known  terms. 
3f») C:  yattaf. 
–7) This  term  and the  next  one are  certainly  not correct  in the form given on the  plate.  It 
seems  however  very  difficult to  determine  the original  reading,  as the  textual  tradition 
is rather  uncertain.  C reads  khalatyam,  which  seems  to be the  most  probable  form ; 
a quotation from the  Madhyamāgama  in the Sputartha, commentary to the Abhidhar¬
makoça  (Abhidh.  Koça,  HI, p. 88,  note  3),  reads  khālityaṃ,  whereas  the  Pali  versions 
in Anguttara,  I. p. 138, and visuddhi, p. 449,  have  a different  term  at this  place,  viz. 
khandiccam  („the  state  of being  broken,  of teeth’’,  Rhys Davids). We  presume  that  our 
copyist,  reading  khalatyam  in his original,  assumed  a mistake  in the  ending  tyaṃ  and 
substituted  the well­known  tatvam.  — The  other  versions  of this  passage  cannot  well 


--- [Page 122] ---
— 112 — 
tvaṃ  S8) valipracu<ra>tā jī<rṇatā>  39) bhugnatā kubjatā  40) 
gopānasīvaṅkatā 
5. ḍaṇḍaviṣkambhanatā  purataḥ  prāgbhārakāyatā tilakādikagātratā  41) 
mandatvaṃ andhatvaṃ  hāniḥ  parihā~ 
6. niḥ indriyāṇāṃ  paripākaḥ  paribhedaḥ saṃskārāṇāṃ  purāṇībhāvaḥ 
jarjarībhāvaḥ  ayam=ucyate 
7. jarā  42) maraṇaṃ katamat yat=teṣān=teṣāṃ  satvāṇāṃ  tasmāt= 
tasmāt  satvanikāyacyutiḥ  cyavanatābhedaḥ  43) 
8. antshāniḥ  44) āyuṣŏ  hāniḥ  45) jīvitendriyanirodhaḥ  saṃskārāṇāṃ 
nikṣepo  maraṇakālakṣaya 46) 
be compared. The Chinese version translated by  Bagchi  is difficult  to he used  because  the 
order of the terms has been changed there. The Lalitavistara, describing the Bod¬
hisattva's encounter with a old man (edition Lefmann, 1902, p. 186), is clearly based 
on the Vibhanga terms, but is not  literal  enough for a comparison ; cf. the  notes  to 
the translation of this  passage. 
38) Valitatvam, though not completely impossible (it  could  be explained as vali,  „wrinkles" 
+tatva,  „truth,  reality"), is not  likely  since it  would  be duplicated by the next term. 
We suppose  pālityam,  which  is the reading of C and of the Madhyama quotation in the 
Abhidhatmakoçavyākhyā  mentioned in  note  37. 
SÔ) The  correction of  pracutā  to pracuratā  is evident. — The correction of jt to  jīrnatā 
seems  rather  far­fetched; it is however not doubtful since all comparable versions 
(including  the Pali definition in  Dīgha,  II. p. 305,  which  has firanata) give the  same 
term here. Besides, the omission of one or more  aksaras  is the most common mistake 
found  in our text. 
40) In C,  kubjatá  is not a term by itself, but  kubja°  is compounded  with  the  following. 
The Chinese version  seems  to agree  with  our text (Bagcni translated : „hunchbackedness, 
.^crookedness", corresponding to  bhugnatā  kubjatā). 
41) C reads;  tilakālakācitagātratā,  probthly the  original  reading. Other  texts  give slightly 
. different forms; cf.  note  63 to the translation. 
42) After  the term mentioned in  note  41, C  agrees  almost completely  with  our text, 
except  that  it gives dhandhatvam instead of our andhatvam; on account of considera­
tions exposed in  note  64 to the translation, we presume  that  the reading of C was the 
original one. Besides, C has an additional term at the end, viz.  khulakhulapraçvāsa¬
kāystā,  „shortness  of breath" (a colourless translation if compared with the expressive 
Sanskrit  compound). The latter term  does  not occur in the Chinese translation either. 
43) Cyavanatah  bhedah,  „after  breaking up, cleavage". Since cyavana and  bheda  would  be 
synonyms in  that  case, and it is not clear why cyavana should be a process preceding 
bheda,  the reading of our plates is more satisfactory. The Chinese translation runs (in 
Bagchi's  translation) :  „(death  is) complete dissolution and cessation from existence", 
which  might correspond to  cyavanatā  bhedah  if we presume  that  the second term has 
been translated  rather  freely. — However,  bheda,  in Buddhist Sanskrit,  rather  often 
means:  „special  form of (something more general)"; cf. infra  note  105 to the Translation, 
Then,  cyavanatābhedah  should be taken as a single compound meaning „a special form 
of decay",  which­  seems  preferable to the Chinese interpretation. 
44) C: antarahānih,  „interior  exhaustion", presumably, exhaustion of the internal organs 
such  as the  heart;  our reading  antahānih  could  however be maintained if this term 
may be interpreted as  „ultimate  (final,  irreparable) exhaustion"; it  would  then be more 
characteristic of death than  antarahāni. 
45) C  adds  ūsmano hānih  after  āyuso  hānih. 
46) C reads: tnaranam  kālakrfyā.;  the Chinese version gives:  „death  is the arresting of the 
product, of time", probably  rather  a free translation of the same. The main objection 


--- [Page 123] ---
9. idam=ucyate maraṇaṃ  [etad=]  etac=ca 47) maraṇaṃ  pūrvvika  ca 
jarā tad=ubhayañ=jarāmaraṇaṃ  ity=ucyate  prat ī­
10. tyasamutpādasyādiḥ  vibhāgaḥ  katamaḥ  pratītyasamutpādasya  vo 
bhikṣavaḥ  arthañ=cādeçayiṣye  48) // 
c 
A. 1. rupiṇas=sarvvasattvā  hi sarvve santu 40) nirāmanāḥ  50) 
sarwe bhadrāṇi  paçyanti  mā  kaçcit=pāpam=āgamat  50) // 
ajñānāc=cīyate  karma  janmanaḥ  karma  kāraṇaḥ 
to the Chinese version is  that  it presumes the repetition of maranam in the  definition 
itself,  which  is unusual. On the other hand, our  definition,  though perfectly clear, does 
not add anything new. 
47) It  seems  that  the copyist first intended to write  etad  ca, but then thought it too 
strange  to put down ca after  etad,  so he repeated the  sandhi  form  after  etad. 
48) C  ends  as follows  (after  jarāmaranam) : ayam—ucyate  pratītyasamutpādasya  vibhāgaḥ. 
pratītyasamutpādasya ādim  vo  deçayisyāmi  vibhaṅgañ=ca  iti vo yad=:uktam=zidam= 
etat=pratyuktam  .  idam=avocad=bhagavān=<ātta>manasaḥ [s]te bhiksavo bha¬
gavato bhāsitam~abhyanandann—iti. 
Most  of the text of C occurs in our text at the very end of the treatise (h — A — 1/2). 
The Chinese text lacks this concluding portion. 
This  passage  may not be without interest for a determination of the relation between 
the different  versions, cI. the Translation. 
­9) Read:  santi  (?) ; the latter is the reading of j — B — 2. The  form  santu  is however 
capable of being explained  („they  should  be’’.  i.e.  „they  should be considered to be"). 
Neither  santi  nor santu  is completely satisfactory; the point just mentioned is  only  one 
of the  difficulties  in the reading and in the interpretation of this strophe. Cf. note 50. 
50) The open space at the end of lines 1 to 3 and at the beginning of  line  3 does not denote 
any lacuna in the text; it  only  serves to maintain the metrical  divisions.  — In spite 
of the fact  that  this whole strophe is r3peated on plate j, it  seems  hardly possible to 
establish  its correct reading.  This  is not  only  due to the careless way of engraving; 
the real  cause was probably  that  the copyist did not understand what he read in the 
original  and tried to make the  best  of it he  could.  Presumably, this strophe,  which 
precedes two other ones  which  aia  well­known  f"om other sources, occuis in Buddhist 
literature, though we have not been able lo trace it. Before  that,  any  attempt  at 
reestablishing  the correct  form  of the strophe remains conjectural. — The last word 
of the first  çloka  half  is clearly  nirāmanāḥ  ; this  form  cannot possibly be correct; the 
easiest correction is  nirāmartāh,  implying  a confusion between the dental and  lingual  na­
sals. This  correction  would  be obvious if j — B — 2 did not give the reading  nirātmikāḥ. 
For the meaning of the strophe, the latter reading is not unsatisfactory ; it is however 
difficult  to see how in  that  case the copyist came to put down  nirāmanāh,  which  is not 
very  similar  from  a palaeographic point of  view.  As a matter of  principle,  one might 
prefer the reading  nirāmanāh,  which  is the lectio  diíticilior.  We have then to conclude  that 
the copyist, of plate j, who may not have been the same person at the scribe who copied 
the large plates, substituted the  well­known  rúrātmikāh  for a reading in his  original 
which  he did not understand. The point as to  which  reading is the correct one is of 
an obvious interest. The  statement  that  the beings are  nirātmika  is a common­place 
of all  Buddhism  ; however, if they are stated to be  nirāmana,  there  is no reasonable 
doubt  that  the strophe belongs to  Mahāyāna.  The idea  that  the factors constituting 
a living  being are  „naturally  quiet’'  (prakṛtiçānta)  or  „originally  quiet"  (ādiçānta), 
their continuous movement being  only  apparent and due to the defilement of those 


--- [Page 124] ---
— 114 — 
2. jnānān=na cīyate  karma  karmābhāvāt  na jāyante  51) // 
ye dharmmā hetuprabhavā  hetun=teṣān=tathāgata  uvāca 
teṣāñ=ca  yo nirodhaḥ 
3# evamvádī  mahāçrama  < ṇa > ḥ  52) // 
ekadvitricatuṣpañcaṣaṭsaptāṣtenavāṅgajaḥ 
daçaikādaçadhotpannaḥ  pratītyaḥ  dvādaçaḥ  smṛtaḥ  // 
4. yaḥ kaçcit samyag=avadhāryya pratyayā  vacya<ṃ>parinirvṛte bha­
gavati çaraṇatrayaṃ yayau ^ 3) upadāna  iti ajnāndhakāre­
5. ṣu bhavaty=asāv=atai<mi>rikac=cakṣuṣmān=iti  54) kin=jānāti 
pratītyasamutpādaṃ  pratītya  iti kothaḥ aṅgam=prati ya  utpadyate 
sa pratye­
6. tītyaḥ  55) pratitya  sas=tāvat=katividhaḥ  samāsataḥ  ekavidhaḥ 
sarvvakleçāçrayatvāt  pṛthivīvad=iti  dvividhaḥ  pratītya­
7. samutpādaḥ  hetuphalārthena avidyālṛṣṇopādānasaṃskārabhavā  iti 
pañcavidhā  hetavaḥ  vijnānanāmarupa­
8. §aḍāyatanasparçavedanājātŋarādir=iti  saptavidhaṃ phalam=iti ayan 
=dvividhaḥ  pratityasamutpādaḥ  ayam=apy=aparaḥ  pratītya­
9. sarnutpādaḥ dvividhaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ vāhyaḥ pratītyasa¬
mutpādaḥ abhyantaraç=ca [çca] 56) vāhyas=tāvad=vījād=aṅkuram 
10. aṅkurāt=pātraṃ  5T) pātrāt=kāṇḍaṃ  kāṇḍān=nālaṃ  nālād=garbhaḥ 
who get the impression of movement, is  typical  of Mahāyāna.  Unfortunately the 
uncertain reading makes it impossible to decide whether this is indeed the idea  implied 
in our strophe. Although the aUusion to the ataimirika in one of the other introductory 
strophes  seems  to confirm the latter interpretation, it is  difficult  to see in what manner 
the third and fourth  pādas  should be connected  with  the thought expressed in the first 
half of this  çloka.  For a further discussion, the  reader  is referred to the  notes  to the 
Translation.  CI. also the Introduction to  these  plates and Addenda,, pp. 338 sq. 
51) Read:  jāyate. 
52) There is no lacuna at the beginning of this  line. 
53) This line and the next one are very carelessly written, and  appear  to be  full of mistakes. 
These two lines (and the very beginning of line 6) form a remarkable contrast to most 
of the  following,  which  is very correctly copied. 
The order and choice of the words form a clear indication  that  parts  of the text of 
lines  4 and 5 are metrical, whereas other portions contain dispersed fragments of a 
commentary (iti occurring in several places). It is this mixture of  çlokas  and com­
mentary  that  offers the possibility of a conjectural reconstruction. Considerable  parts 
of the text must have been omitted by the copyist. 
Referring  the reader  for a detailed discussion to the  notes  to the Translation, we confine 
ourselves  here  to some minor corrections  which  would  seem evident. 
Parinirvrte,  — read: parinirvrtte. 
Instead of  yayau  the plate  seems  to give  yaiyā.  Presumably, the sign for ­ai has been 
placed  before the first of the two yas. 
Ajñándhakáresu,  — read : ajñānāndhakārasu,  evidently a  case  of haplography. 
54) Atairikag — read : ataimirikag. One  aksara  has been omitted. 
55) One  would  have expected  here  something  like:  sa pratītyasamutpādah.  In any case, 
the text cannot be correct as given on the plate. 
5e) Obviously  due to diplography. 
57) Pātram  instead of  pattram  is a confusion  which  is common in the Old Javanese inscrip­
tions, too. 


--- [Page 125] ---
— 115 — 
garbhāt=puṣpaḥ 5?) puṣpát=phalam=iti ayaṃ váhyaḥ  pratitya­
samutpādaḥ 
B. 1. kathaṃ  abhyantaraḥ  pratītyasamutpādaḥ  // tadyathā avidyāpratyayāḥ 
saṃskārāḥ saṃskārapratyayaṃ <vijñānaṃ vijñānapratyayaṃ> 
2. nāmarūpaṃ nāmarūpapratyayaṃ ṣaḍāyatanaṃ ṣaḍāyatanapratyayaḥ 
sparççaḥ sparççapratyayā vedanā 
3. vedanāpratyayā tṛṣṇā tṛṣṇāpratyayaṃ upādānaṃ upādānapratyayo 
bhavaḥ  bhavapratyayā jātiḥ jātipratyayaṃ 
4. jarāmaraṇam=iti  //  vistareṇa ayam=abhyantaraḥ pratītyasamutpā¬
daḥ // kathaṃ trividhaḥ pratityasamutpādaḥ kleçakarrna­
5. duḥkhādinaḥ avidyātṛṣṇopādānam=iti kleçaḥ saṃskārabhava iti 
karmma  vijñānanāmarūpaṣaḍāyatanādīnām=iti S9) 
6. duḥkhaṃ ayaṃ trividhaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ ayaṃ cāparas=tri¬
vidhaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ  // avidyāsaṃskārā ity=atītaḥ 
7. prathamaç=ca jātijarādir=ity=ayam=anāgataḥ dvitīyaç=ca vijṅā¬
nanāmarupaṣaḍāyātanasparçavedanā­
8. tṛṣṇopādānabhava  ity=ayaṃ  varttamānaḥ tṛtīyaḥ pratītyasamutpā– 
daḥ // kathaṃ  caturvidhaḥ  pratītyasamutpādaḥ 
9. avidyāsaṃskārā iti hetukāṇḍaḥ vijñānanāmarupaṣaḍāyatanasparça¬
vedaneti vipākakāṇḍaḥ tṛṣṇopādā– 
10. nabhava iti hetukāṇḍaḥ jarādi iti vipākakāṇḍaḥ <kāṇḍa>bhede¬
na 60) caturvidhaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ  // 
d 
A. 1. kathaṃ  pañcavidhaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ avidyāsaṃskārā iti kārakaḥ 
vijñānanāmarupa iti  garbhaḥ  ṣaḍāyatanasparçaveda­
2. neti viṣayapravṛttiḥ tṛṣṇopādānabhava iti  prabhavaḥ  jātijarādir=iti 
pravāhaḥ iti  pancavidhaḥ  pratītyasamu­
3. tpādaḥ  kathaṃ  ṣaḍvidhaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ avidyeti kleçakāṇḍaḥ 
saṃskārā iti karmakāṇḍaḥ vijñāna­
4. nāmarūpaṣaḍāyatanasparçavedanā iti phatakāṇḍaḥ tṛṣṇopādānam=iti 
kleçakāṇḍaḥ 
5. bhava  iti karmakāṇḍaḥ jātijarādir=iti phalakāṇḍaḥ ayaṃ ṣaḍvidhaḥ 
pratītyasamutpādaḥ  kathaṃ  saptavidhaḥ 
6. pratītyasamutpādaḥ avidyeti bhūmiḥ saṃskārā iti varṣikāḥ vijñānam= 
iti vījaṃ nāmarūpaṣa­
7. ḍāyatanam=iti pātraṃ C1) sparçavedaneti  puṣpaṃ  tṛṣṇopādānabhavā 
iti phalam  jātijarādir=iti 
8. punarbhavavṛkṣabījaṃ  ayaṃ  saptav­|dhaḥ  pratītyasamutpādaḥ  kathaṃ 
aṣṭavidhaḥ  pratītyasamutpādaḥ 
5S) Read : puspam.  Some  other  mistakes  in grammatical  gender  occur  in this  text;  cf. 
rūpaḥ,  supra  b — B—7, and  sparçāni,  infra  e — B — 4. Cf.  also  note  29 above. 
59) The  genitive  plural is a little  strange  here. 
60) Kānda  was obviously  omitted  by the  copyist, 
*i) CI.  supra,  note  52. 


--- [Page 126] ---
— 116 — 
9. avidyeti saṃmohaphalaṃ saṃskārā iti ārambhaphalaṃ vtjnāna¬
nāmarupam=iti 
B. 1.  vipākaphalaṃ ṣadāyatanasparçavedaneti niṣyandaphalaṃ tṛṣṇopādā¬
nam=iti santānaphalaṃ <bhava>­
2. jātir=iti  nirvṛttiphalaṃ  jarāmaraṇādir=iti  aniṣṭaphalaṃ  phalabhedena 
ayam=a­
3. ṣṭavidhaḥ pratītyasamutpādah  kathaṃ  navavidhaḥ  pratītyasamutpādaḥ 
avidyeti mithyāndhabhedaḥ 62) 
4. saṃskārā iti kriyābhedaḥ vijnānam=iti santānabhedaḥ nārnarūpam= 
iti ekṣaṇabhedaḥ  ṣaḍāyatanam=iti 
5. āçrayabhedaḥ sparça iti samavāyabhedaḥ  vedaneti  cittabhedaḥ 
tṛṣṇopādānabhavā iti anāgatabhedaḥ 
6. jātijarādir=iti vināçabhedaḥ ayaṃ  navavidhaḥ  pratītyasamutpādah 
kathaṃ  daçavidhaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ avidyeti 
7. kleçamulaṃ saṃskārā iti karmamūlaṃ vijnānam=iti kalalamūlam 
nāmarupaṃ  <iti>  6S) skandhamūlaṃ ṣaḍāyatanam=iti 
8. āçrayaphalamūlaṃ 64) sparça iti trikamūlaṃ  vedaneti  vipākamūlaṃ 
tṛṣṇeti  hetumulaṃ  upādā­
9. nam=iti  grahaṇamūlaṃ  bhavajātijarādir=iti punarāvarttakamúlaṃ 
// iti ayaṃ daçavidhaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ 
10. katamā 65) ekādaçavidhaḥ pratītyasamutpādaḥ avidyeti svāmi saṃskārā 
iti valāddhyakṣāḥ vijnānam=iti 
e 
A. 1. āmātyā nāmarupam=iti  puraṃ  ṣaḍāyatanam=iti  gṛhaṃ  sparçñ iti 
pañca kāmaguṇāni  vedaneti  mitrāmitṛodāsīnādi 
2. trṣṇeti parasparajiyāṃsaḥ upadānam=iti ātmabhedaḍaṇḍāṇḍāva¬
pradāni 66) bhavajātir=ity=alçvaryasarnpattir 
3. jarāmaraṇādir=ity=alçvar2'yavipattir=ity=ayam=ekādaçavidhaḥ 
pratītyasamutpādah  kathaṃ  dvādaçavidhaḥ pratītyasa­
4. rnutpādaḥ avidyāpratyayās=saṃskāṛāḥ saṃskārapratyayaṃ vij ñā¬
naṃ vij ñānapratyayaṃ nāmarupaṃ nāmarupapra­
62) Probably  to be  corrected  to mithyāndhakérabhedah. 
6S) Obviously  omitted  by the  copyist. 
­­) Though  perhaps  not completely  impossible,  the use of  phala  and  mūla  together  seems 
suspect.  We  presume  that  the  copyist  erroneously  put  down  phala  instead  of the 
mūla  of his  example,  realized  his mistake  and,  being  unable  to erase  and  correct  the 
first syllable, added the correct form thereafter. The error is the more comprechen¬
sible because phala and  mūla  resemble each other from a palaeographic point of 
view; in  addition,  the two  notions  are natural  opposites  and therefore  closely  associated. 
65) To be  corrected  to katama,  or rather  to kaiarnah  since  as a  rale  no sandhi  is used  in 
cases  like  this  one. 
66) This  compound  was  badly  copied.  We  suppose  that  the original  read  sāmabhedadan~ 
dasampradānāni  or  something  similar, for  there  is no  doubt  that  the four  upāyas  are 
here  referred  to. 


--- [Page 127] ---
— 117 — 
5. tyayaṃ  ṣaḍāyatanaṃ ṣaḍāyatanapratyayaḥ sparçaḥ sparçapratyayā 
vedanā vedanāpratyayā tṛṣṇā  trṣṇā­
6. pratyayaṃ upādānaṃ upādānapratyayo bhavaḥ bhavapratyayā jā¬
tir=jātipratyayā jarāmaraṇa­
7. çokaparidevaduḥkhadaurmanasyopayāsāḥ <evaṃ> 67) rnahato duḥ¬
khaskandhasya samudayo bhavati  //  6S) 
8. dīrghahrasvaṃ  maṇḍaparimaṇḍaṃ unnata­avanataṃ  çātaviçātaṃ  iti 
ataḥ  viṃçatividhaṃ  rupam=iti  nāma  iti 69) 
9. catvāra<ḥ  arūpiṇaḥ>  skandhāḥ  70) tad=ubhayam  nāmarūparn=ity= 
ucyate kiṃ  tatra  námarupam  yatra  nāma  tatra  rūpaṃ  vā āha 71) 
yatra rupaṃ 
10. tatra nāma yatra nāma tatra rūpaṃ  72) ākāçavat  73) nāmarūpapra¬
tyayaṃ ṣaḍāyatanam=iti tatra ṣaḍvijñānaká­
11. ye ṣaḍ=āyatanāni bhavanti tadyathā cakṣu­āyatanaṃ 14t) çrotr ā¬
yatanaṃ ghrāṇāyatanaṃ jihvāyatanaṃ 
B. 1. kāyāyatanaṃ mano­āyatanaṃ  T5) ṣaḍāyatanapratyayāḥ sparçā  76) iti 
ṣaṭ sparçā  bhavanti cakṣuṣā  sparçaḥ  7T) 
2. çrotrasaṃsparçaḥ ghrāṇasaṃsparçaḥ jihvāsaṃsparçaḥ kāyasa ṃspa¬
rçaḥ manassaṃsparças=trikasamavāyaḥ 
3. sparçaḥ cakṣurādivijñānasamavāyaḥ sparçaḥ cakṣuṣi sparçaḥ  18) 
trividhaḥ [sparçaḥ] sukhasparçaḥ duḥkhasparçaḥ <aduḥkhāsukha¬
sparcaḥ> 79) evaṃ 
4. saṃkṣepataḥ  pañcadaça sparçāni  80) bhavanti  sparçapratyayā vedanā 
anubhāvanālakṣaṇā ve[sukha]danā  81) ti­
67) Probably, not  onīy  evam  but also some more words were omitted by the copyist.  After 
the compound ending in  °sáh,  one  would ! have expected: sambhavanti.  evam  asya 
kevalasya before mahato. 
­­) After  this punctuation mark, a  rather  long  passage  follows  (up to e­B­8),  whick  ís 
hardly  if at all connected  with  either the preceding or the  following  passage.  It is probably 
to be considered an interpolation ; cI. the Introduction, where this  passage  was discussed 
in detail.  This  whole portion is  full of omissions and other mistakes, some of  which  are 
rather  serious. In the  following, only  the most obvious  cases  will  be mentioned. 
** 9) Vimçaiividham,  — the word  itself  is correct, since the twentyfold  division  of Rúpa  is 
regular; the contradiction is due to the fact  that  only  the eight samsthana categories 
('form’ in the narrow  sense  of the word) are enumerated. 
70) Arūpinah  cannot be dispensed  with  here. 
71) Vá  āha  cannot be correct in this  form.  The intention is however clear. 
72) The last four words are evidently  only  a repetition. 
73) This  comparison is obscure. For its possible meaning, cf.  note  127 to the translation. 
74) Read  : caksurāyatanam. 
75) Read : manaāyatanam. 
76) The  plural,  though  perhaps  not impossible, is at least unusual. 
77) Probably a mistake for  caksus­  or caksuh­samsparçah . 
78) One  would  have expected something  like  cakstirādisamsparçah . 
79) The third category has evidently been omitted. 
80) Read : sparçaḥ,  or with  sandhi  : sparça. 
81) Sttkha  might have got into this  line from  the preceding one, where the word occurs almost 
at the  same  place. 


--- [Page 128] ---
— 118 — 
5. sro vedanā<ḥ> sukhavedanā duḥkhavedanā aduḥkhāsukhavedanā 
vedanāpratyayā tṛṣṇā  sutṛptilakṣa­
6. ṇā trṣṇā tisraḥ tṛṣṇā<ḥ> kāmatṛṣṇā ārūpyatṛṣṇā atitrṣṇā 82) trṣṇā¬
pratyayam=upādānaṃ kim=upādānaṃ bhavati catvā­
7. ryy=upādānāni bhavanti kāmopādānaṃ dṛṣṭiupādānaṃ 83) çīlavra¬
topādānaṃ ātmavādopādānaṃ kāmo­
8. pādānaṃ viṅçatividhaḥ 84) 
f 
A 1. vistareṇa  evam=upadiṣṭaḥ  pratītyasamutpādavidhiḥ  evaṃ  avidyā 
tāvad=avidyā na mitthyaivāvidyā tad=evājñānaṃ  kim=anyad= 
ajnānaṃ vṛçcati  prati­
2. çiddhaty=avidyā S5) avidyā tāvat katividhā samāsataḥ ekavidhā 
sarwaklecānām==avitathārthena dvividhā cāvidyā hetutayā­
3. çrayatvā <d> vijñānāçrayatvāc=ca trividhā cāvidyājñānaṃ saṃça¬
yajñānaṃ mithyājñānarn=iti caturvidhā cāvidyā 
4. duḥkhaprsheyā samudayapraheyā nirodhapraheyā mārgapraheyā 
pañcavidhā avi­
5. dyā < duḥkha > praheyā m) samudayapraheyā nirodhapraheyā bhā¬
vanāpraheyā evamādi 
6. yāvat pañcavidhā avidyā  jneyeti  avidyāpratyayāḥ saṃskārā iti 
kaṣmād=avidyā  hetur=i­
7. ti noktā eko  hetuḥ  vahavaḥ  8 7) pratyayāḥ svārthakārī  hetuḥ 
parārthakārī  hetuḥ  88) ya­
8. s=saṃçliṣṭahetuḥ  viçliṣṭapratyayaḥ  tasmād=avidyā  pratya<ya  i­> 
ti nāvidyā  hetuḥ 
9. hetu[ḥ]pratyayor  pratyayaṃ  prativibheṣu  avidyāpratyayāḥ saṃskārāḥ 
10. saṃskārā iti trividhāḥ saṃskārāḥ puṇyamayāḥ saṃskārāḥ apu­
ṇyamayās=saṃskārāḥ 
B. 1. apuṇyamayās=saṃskārāḥ 80) puṇyam?.yāḥ saṃskārā iti trividhaṃ 
kuçalaṃ kāyakarmakuçalaṃ 
82) Undoubtedly  not correct  in this  form; cf. the  Translation. 
83) Read:  dṛṣṭyupādānam.  Elsewhere,  the rules  of sandhi  are always  applied  between  the 
parts  of a  compound.  Here,  the reason  for their  non­application  is probably  the tendency 
to avoid the  ligature  ṣtyu,  which would  have  ended  far too  much  below  the line. 
8 4) Viñçatividham ; — the use of the  guttural  nasal  instead  of the  anusvāra  before  sibilants, 
though  occurring  elsewhere,  too, is the  usual  orthography  in Sanskrit  inscriptions  from 
Indonesia.  Though  far from  being  decisive,  this  small  detail  may be  considered  some 
indication in  favour  of an  Indonesian  origin of the  plates. 
85) Sic. We  suppose  pratisidhyate  (or °ti); cf. the  Translation. 
86) Dtthkha  was  probably  omitted  by the  copyist.  In that  case,  fourfold  Avidyā  applies  to 
the four  āryasatyārú,  whereas  it is fivefold if  referred  to the  latter  with the  addition  of 
bhāvanā.  If we  accept  the reading  given by our  text,  the first  category  would be aptaheyé, 
which,  though  unknown  from  other  sources,  would not be  completely  out of  place. 
87) Read:  bahavah. 
88) Obviously an  error  for pratyayah  (°yo with  sandhi). 
8d) Instead  of the third  category  of samskāra  (usually  given  āneñjya),  the  second  one 


--- [Page 129] ---
— 119 — 
2 vākkarmakuçalaṃ  manaskarmakuçalaṃ  apuṇyamayāḥ saṃskārā iti 
trividhaṃ  akuçalaṃ  kāyakarma­
3. akuçalaṃ vākkarma­akuçalaṃ manaskarma<­akucalaṃ> 90) akuça¬
lamayāḥ saṃskārā iti trividhāḥ 91) akuçalakāyakarma 
4. kāyakarma  [ma] avyākṛtamanaskarma 92) avyākṛtamanaskarma anye 
punar=āhuḥ  trividhāḥ  saṃskārāḥ  kāya[s]saṃskārāḥ  93) 
5. vāksaṃskārāḥ manassaṃskārā iti kāya[s]saṃskāro dvividhaḥ āçvāsa¬
praçvāsaḥ 94) vāksaṃskṛta iti vitarkayitvā 
6. vicārayitvā  bhāṣate manassaṃskāra iti  cetanā  anye  punar=āhuḥ 
trividhāḥ  samskārāḥ  kuçala­
7. akuçala­avyākṛtāç=ca  anye  punar=āhuḥ  trividhāḥ  saṃskārāḥ 
prātisattvikaḥ  aupapat  < t > yaṃçikaḥ  ābhisaṃsā– 
8. rikaḥ  kim=ime saṃskārā  avidyāpratyayā<ḥ>  syuḥ  iti neti  syuḥ 
saṃskārā  avidyāpratyayāḥ  syuḥ  saṃskārā  vidyāpratya­
9. yāḥ syuḥ saṃskārā vidyāvidyāpratyayāḥ syuḥ saṃskārā naiva¬
vidyānāvidyāpratyayāḥ praçnaḥ catuṣkoṭikaḥ 95) 
e 
A. l, çāntih  9C) astimānena  dairyyāṇiko  9T) iti  dṛṣṭiparāmarçaḥ  pañcavidhaḥ 
yuktaiṣā  atidṛṣṭir=  iti yuktai­
apuṇyamaya.)  was wrongly repeated. A  similar  mistake occurs in line 3 below. Probably, 
the word  āneñjya,  which  is not very common, was not recognized by the copyist. The 
whole  following  passage  became very confused. 
90) The insertion of this term is necessary ; its omission is undoubtedly due to haplography. 
The omission of  sandhi  in the compounds  with  akucala is certainly due to the necessity 
of avoiding misunderstarding  with  kuçala. 
ôĭ) As we noted in no*e S9 above, this whole passage is very confused. Instead of aku çala¬
ma/āh saṃskārā iti,  we have to r**ad  āneñjyāh sarr.skā.ā  iti. The last word of this 
line, akuçaiakāyakarma,  cannot be correct; it should have been  avyākṛtakāyakarma. 
There is one excuse for the copyist : the very numerous repetitions in this portion of the 
text are really confusing ; the editor, when typing the text of his pen­written transcrip­
tion had  similar  experiences. 
92) The first word of this line should have been  avyākriavākkarma.  The second  avyākṛta¬
manaskarma should be omitted. 
93) The double s  here  and in line 5 is probably due to analogy  with  manassamskára. 
94) Read  : āçvāsapraçvāsau  (or possibly : āçvāsapraçvāsiko/. 
95) Before  praçnaḥ,  some words must have been omitted, probably syur=iti. 
96) This reading is very uncertain. The word  which  we should have expected to  find 
here is itf. Although the first aksara, which is very carelessly written, might re¬
present an initial i (the lower part of which was erroneously written above instead of 
below  the  line),  the  following  is certainly a ligature consisting of either nt or tt (the 
aksaras  na and ta are sometimes undistinguishable) surmounted by  vowel  sign for 
medial  i. We suppose  that  the  original  read iti; the copyist, however, mistaking 
the initial  i for a  ça, did not understand the meaning of  çati  and therefore corrected 
the latter to  çāntiḥ.  Since the next two words are incorrect, too, the restitution of 
iti remains conjectural. 
­0–7) Sic. The word is obviously a copyist's error for  nair(y)yānika.  The word  which 
precedes,  astimānena,  is most certainly wrong: it  does  not make  sense.  We suppose 
that it is a copyist's error for  asti  mar go ; from a palaeographic point of  view  such 


--- [Page 130] ---
— 120 — 
2. ṣā antagrāhadṛṣṭir=iti yuktaiṣā mithyādṛṣṭir=iti yuktaiṣā çīlavrata¬
parāmarçadṛṣṭir=iti saptavidhena 
3. çilena  çuddhidṛṣṭir=iti  anekavidhena bhavitena  çuddhidṛṣṭir=iti  asti 
pudgalaḥ  kāraka  itye­
4­ vamādi yathāha ātmātmīya  iti bhikṣavaḥ vā­ 9S) 
5. laḥ açrutavān  pṛthagjanaḥ  prajñaptim=anupatitaḥ  kāmopādānam  &9) 
ukteme 10°) ca  avidyāpratyayāḥ 
6. saṃskāra iti upādānapratyayasya bhavasya ca tayoḥ kin=nānā¬
kāraṇaṃ avidyāpratyayāḥ saṃskārā iti a­
7. tītaṃ  bhavaṃ  pradiça[n]ti  10i) upādānapratyayo  bhava iti  anāgataṃ 
bhavaṃ  prakāçayati  ayaṃ tayor=vi­
8. çeṣaḥ upādānapratyayo bhava iti trayo bhavāḥ kāmabhavaḥ rūpa¬
bhavaḥ ārūpyabhavaç=ca kāmabha­
9. vaḥ viṃçatividhaḥ rupabhavaḥ ṣodaçavidhaḥ ārúpyabhavaḥ catur¬
vidhaḥ bhavo nāma janmakāmabhavaḥ 2Ô2) kāma­
10. bhavaḥ tathā rupārupyā iti bhavapratyayā jātiḥ skandhaprā¬
durbhāvāj=jātiḥ jātiç=caturvidhā 
B. 1. garbhajā sopapattijā svedajā aṇḍajeti jātipratyayā jagati 103) paripā¬
kendriyadaurvyāhāra­
2. rūpavaivarṇatā jarā jarāyāḥ samanantaraṃ maraṇaṃ skandhabheda¬
tattvāt maraṇam=iti maraṇapratyayaḥ çokaḥ 
3. çokaḥ tac=chokaḥ çūnyendriyavyavasthāna [n] dhátuçokaḥ 304) çoka¬
pratyayaḥ paridevaḥ abhilāpatā– 
4. lakṣaṇaḥ paridevaḥ paridevapratyayaṃ duḥkhaṃ  daurnianasyatvāt 
duḥham=iti duḥkhapratyayan=ca 
an error can easily be understood. The ga was mistaken for two  nas.  In addition, 
the mistake was reasonable: obviously, the copyist knew some lists of  kleças  by 
heart.  That  astímánena  did not  yield  a satisfactory meaning here, is a different 
question. 
9S) Only  the first  half  of this line was  filled  in. This is due to the f?ct  that  here, as in 
schoolboy  writing,  the preceding lines on the plate slope down considerably in the 
right hand  part  of the lines. 
") Here, at least one word (possibly  upādatte),  but probably more, must have been 
omitted by the copyist. CI. the  notes  to the translation of this  passage. 
1°°) Read:  uktā  ime; such  cases  of wrong  sandhi  are frequent in Sanskrit MSS, too. 
101) Pradiganti is very probably a mistake for  pradiçati ; the plural is out of place here. 
102) Read : janrnakarmabhavah. As we saw above in  note  97, the copyist probably knew 
many Buddhist lists by heart. Thinking of the well­known set of  kāmabhava, rūpa¬
bhava,  and  arūpyabhava,  which also occurred just before (in line 8), he substituted 
the first  of these  three  terms  for karmabhava, although the latter is very common, too. 
lot) Jagatí,  — this word, perfectly clear on the plate,  does  not make  sense  here, although 
it would  not be impossible to defend it. It is obviously a copyist's error for jareti ; 
probably,  the copyist did not understand the latter owing to the  sandhi;  in addition, 
the synables re and ga are very  similar  in this type of script. 
104) The  n after  sthana  does  not appear  to make  sense,  since the meaning of the  sentence 
seems  to require a single compound. But even then, the form  could  hardly be correct ; 
cI. the note  to the Translation. 


--- [Page 131] ---
— 121 — 
5. daurmanasyaṃ hṛtparitāpaṃ daurmanasyaṃ daurmanasyapratya¬
yo 105) upāyāsaḥ upāyāsa­
6. laksaṇam 108) upāyāsahetujñatvā<d>  daurmanasyam=iti vyastaṃ 
daurmanasyaṃ daurmanasyahetuṃ duḥkham=iti 
7. vyastan=duḥkham=iti vyastaduḥkham 107) duḥkhahetum paridevam 
=iti vyastaḥ paridevaḥ paridevshetuṃ  çokam=iti  vyasta­
8. ç=çokaḥ  çokshetuṃ  maraṇam=iti vyastaṃ maraṇaṃ maraṇahetukā 
jarīti  108) vyastā jarā jarāhetukī  jāti­
9. r=iti  vyastā  jātiḥ  jātihetuko  bhava iti vyasto bhavaḥ bhavahetukam= 
upādānam=iti  109) 
h 
A. 1. vibhaṅga iti  me  11°) yad=uktam=idam=etad 111) pratyuktam=iti 
idam=avocad=bhagavān=āptamanasas=te 112) bhikṣavo bha¬
ga<va>­
2. dbhāṣitaṃ 113) anandyan 114) maunyam=bhagavato ntikāt=pra¬
krāntāḥ  // O // O //  115) catvāro dvīpāḥ tadyathā 
i° 5) Read  : ya;  in this  passage,  there  are relatively many  breaches  of sandhi. 
106) Here, probably, one or more words have been left out; cf. the  note  to the Translation. 
107) A diplography ? — the second term, however, might be either a correction or an 
explanation of the former. 
108) Read: jareti. As we saw in  note  103 above, this unlucky combination  fell  already 
a victim  to the copyist's  attempts  at correction; how he came to put down  jarīti  is 
less clear; he may have thought of jerjartH. 
109) This line was not completely  filled  in;  there  would  have been room for two or  three 
akṣaras  more. 
n°) Me, though not impossible,  seems  rather  strange; one  would  have expected to  find 
vo here. Not only C,  which  contains this  final  sentence  at the end of the Vibhanga 
text, but also  & number of other  texts  which  give this stereotyped formula read vo, 
11!) Reed:  etat.  Real  breaches  of  sandhi  are relatively frequent in this  final  part 
of the text. 
112) All other versions of the formula read either  šttamanās  or  āttamanasas.  The reading 
āpta ° in the first  part  of the compound is  difficult  to be explained as a copyist's 
mistake ; cI.  note  2OO to the Translation. 
113) These words were carelessly copied; the last syllable of bhiksavo  could  hardly be 
recognized  ; there  seems  to be a va  with  the  vowel  signs of ­e and ­u attached to it. 
The ga of bhagavad was omitted; in spite of our remarks about this word in  view 
of its disyllabic  reading in verse (cf.  note  135 to the Introduction), we consider it 
a mere copyist's lapse. 
114) The other versions read abhyanandan. 
115) There is .a very elaborate mark of punctuation here. It is expressed by pairs of small 
vertical  strokes; between the first. and the second, and again between the third and 
the. fourth pair,  there  are three  small  ‚horizontal  strokes, whereas two concentric circles 
are placed between the second and third pairs of verticals. This elaborate mark 
of punctuation presumably aims at clearly separating the last portion of the text 
from  the  passage  which  follows. 


--- [Page 132] ---
— 122 — 
3. jambhudvīpaḥ 116) uttarakurukodvīpaḥ 117) purwavidehadvīpaḥ 
avaragodhānīdvīpaḥ 11S) ceti  aṣṭāmshā­
4. narakāḥ tadyathā sañjīva­kālasutra­saṃghāta­raurava­mahāraurava¬
tapana­sampratāpaka­
5. avīciç=ceti 119) saḍḍivokasamālayāḥ 12°) cāturmahārājika­trāyastriṃ¬
ça­yāma­tuṣita­nirmā­
6. ṇarati­parinirmitavaçavartti<na>ç=ceti  pretalokaḥ  tiryyagjātiç=ca 
teṣāṃ  samavāyaḥ 
7. viṅçotividhā 121) kāmadhātur=idam=ucyate kāmopādānam dṛṣṭyu¬
pādānam=iti pancadṛṣṭā­
8. yaḥ satkāyadṛṣṭiḥ antagrāhadṛṣṭiḥ mithyādṛṣṭiḥ dṛṣṭiparāmarçaḥ 
çilavrataparāmarçaḥ 
9. satkāyadṛṣṭiḥ viṅçatividhā 122) rúpe caturwidhā vedanāyāfi= 
caturwidhā 123) saṃjnāyāñ=caturwidhā 
B. 1. saṃskāreṣu caturwidhā vijñāne caturwidhā tesāṃ samavāyaḥ 
viṅçatividhā satkāyadṛṣṭiḥ antagrāha­
2. dṛṣṭiḥ trividhā ucchedātmā çāçvatātmā  asti  vā nāsti veti mithyādṛṣṭiḥ 
dvividhā saṭṇatanāçī 124) kiṃ vipra­
3. tyāgamī kiṃ nāstīdann=ādiḥ 125) astiduḥkhaṃ  kiṃ na nityaṃ iti 
a­astisamudayo  na hetuḥ  astinirodhaḥ  126) /// 
116) Read  either  jambudvipaḥ  or jambūdvīpah. 
117) Read:  uttarakurudv7paḥ. 
118) Read:  a"­aragoāānīyadvīpaḥ. 
4.19) Read : °avīcayaç=ceti,  since  the plural is  required  in a  copulative  compound  of 
this kind. Even  then,  the mode  of expression  remains  clum?y; one would  have  expected 
separate  terms  instead  of a  compound  (especially  in view of the use of ca  after  the 
last terms).  Similar  remarks  apply  to the  enumeration  of the  heavens  below. 
120) Read:  saddivaukahsamāÎayāh. 
121) The  three  first  aksaras  of the line »re  very  undistinctly  expressed  ; ° vidhā,  which is 
perfectíy  clear,  should  be corrected  to °  vidhah. 
122) Note  the curious  spelling  vincati  instead  of vitnçati  here,  in line 7  above  (?) and in 
h ­ B ­ 1. 
123) The  plate  seems  to read  citurvvidhā. 
124) 5/ C> *riie writing on the  plate  seems  clear,  but it is not  clear  what  the copyist  may 
have  meant  by this  word. If the  beginning  and the end are  correct,  we have  to look 
for something  sixfold  (sat),  which is  destroyed  by (°nāçl) Mithyādrsṭi.  The only  term 
which  resembles  a little the  reading  of the  plate  is sadáyatana, but  this  does  not make 
sense. 
125) The  words  nasttdannadih  might  be capable  of being  understood,  if we  presume  that 
they  were  written  by somebody  who had only a  shadowy  knowledge  of Sanskrit  gram­
mar. Since idam becomes idan in a number of cases (e.g., in asya  nÎrodhād  idan mm¬
dhyate), the writer may have considered iéan the normal form, the final n of which 
he doubled  before  an initial vowel. Cf. the  Translation. 
12«) Obviously,  this  is barbarous  Sanskrit:  the forms  are neither  declined  nor  even  con­
nected  with  each  other.  We  suppose:  a­asti­samudayo,  „(there is) no (the prefix a­) 


--- [Page 133] ---
— 123 — 
A. 1. ajnānāc=cīyate  karma  janrnanaḥ  karma  káraṇaṃ 
2. jñānā<n>  na cīyate  karma  karmmābhāvān=na jāyate  J2S) 
3. ye dharmmā  hetuprabhavāḥ  129) hetun=teṣāṃ 
4. tathāgato  avadat teṣān=ca yo 
B. 1. nirodha  <e>vamvādī  mahāçramaṇaḥ  130) kuçalaṃ 
2. sarvapāpasya  kāraṇaṃ  kuçalasyopasaṃ­
3. padā  131) // 
j 
A. 1. ajnānāc=cīyate  karmma janmanaḥ  karma  kāraṇaḥ  jñánān=na 
2. [c]  cīyate  karmma  karmmābhāvān=na jāya[n]te  132) // 
B. 1. ye  dharmmā hetuprabhavā  hetun=teṣāṃ  tathāgata uvāca  m) teṣāñ= 
ca yo niro­
arising  of (new) existence  (asti)", na  hetuh,  „(because  there  is) no cause", so  that 
there  will  be astinirodhah,  „cessation  from existence’’, i.e.  astisamudayābhāvād  dhetur 
na vidyata ity  astinirodhah. 
I­ 7) No translation of the  texts  on the plates i and j  will  be given; except for a single 
çloka  (?) to be discussed in note 130 below, all these strophes also occur in the begin¬
ning of plate  c – A. 
12s) Instead of  jāyate,  the  ÇloKa  reads  jay ante  in supra,  c –  A – 2 and infra, j ­ A  – 2. The 
latter is unmetrical, but the  piuial  is easier to be understood. 
129) CI. supra,  c – A – 2 to 3 and infra, j ­  B –  1 to 2 ;  there  are slight differences in spelling 
(and even in the  terms  used ; cf.  note  133 below). 
130) xhe  initial  e was obviously overlooked The whole strophe was very carelessly writ­
ten ; it  would  have been impossible to give a transcription of  these  lines if the strophe 
h?d not been known. This was probably the very reason why the copyist considered 
it useless to put it down in a form  which  could  be read. 
–3–­) About the meaning of this .strophe’, cf. the Introduction. Although only about  half 
of it was transcribed by the copyist,  there  is no doubt  that  the same  Çloka  is meant 
which  is quoted in  Mahāvastu,  HI, p. 42o, lines 12 sq.: 
Sarvapāpasyākaraṇaṃ  kuçalasyopasampadā  / 
svacittaparyādāpanam  etad  buddhānuçāsanam  //, i. e. 
.‚The  destruction of all  evil,  inauguration into the good, teaching (?) of  one's  own 
thoughts — this is the instruction of the Buddha(s)". 
Svacittaparyādāpana  probably means:  „giving  over  one's  own conclusions about the 
doctrine to others", the proper task of a Buddha and of a Bodhisattva, especially in 
a higher  stage.  The strophe was probably mentioned  here  because  this was just what 
our text aimed at. The omission of the  pādas  c and d, for  which  there  was sufficient 
room  left on the plate, may be due to the copyist, who often  seems  to have preferred 
to leave a  passage  out rather  than reproducing something about the reading of  which 
he was completely uncertain. 
i­2) CI.  note  128 above. 
1­­) An unusual variant for hy =  avadat. 


--- [Page 134] ---
— 124 — 
2. dha evamvādī  mahāçramaṇaḥ  // rupiṇas=sarvvasattvā  hi sarwa 134) 
santi 135) nirātmifcāḥ 
3. sarvve bhadraṃ  vipaçyanti  136) mā  kaçcit=pāpam=āgaman  137) // 
Translation 
[a — A — 1] Thus have I heard: 
— Once upon a time the Blessed One was  dwelling  at Çrāvastī  in the 
Jetavana in  Anāthapiṇḍada’s  park. There the Blessed One addressed the 
monks,  [2] who listened while he spoke 1). The Blessed One spoke to them 
the following  : 
— 1 will  expound, o monks, the principle of Dependent Origination 
and its meaning (?) 2), listen [3] and bear it  well  and  firmly  in mind. I  will 
explain  to you what the principle of Dependent Origination is : it  means 
that „that  being this  is” 3), in the  following  way 4) : 
13­) Read :  sarv(v)e. 
135) CI.  note  49 above. 
136) In c ­ A  ­1, the strophe  seems  to read  sarvve  bhadrāni  paçyanti. 
137) Read:  agamat. 
1) The translation is based upon the corrections proposed in  notes  1 to 4 to the trans­
cription  (bhiksava amantrayati  tastnin  pratyaçrausur).  It is the usual beginning of 
Buddhist  Sutras. In the Introduction, we drew attention to the fact  that  here  the 
audience consists of monks only, whereas the text on the  Nālandā  bricks  adds  the 
number of the monks (1250) and the Chinese version makes the audience consist of 
Çrāvakas,  Bodhisattva­,  gods and men. 
2) The translation is based on the corrected reading  (pratītyasamutpādasyādim  bhiksavo 
*rthañ  = cādeçayisye).  The reading of  (a)rthañ,  translated by ..meaning", is however 
uncertain; it is possible  that  the  original  read  vibhágam  (~ñ),  which  is the reading 
of C, and in  that  case, the mistake  would  be due to a mere repetition of the preceding 
term. For the meaning of  ādi,  cf. the Introduction, in  which  Vasubandhu's explanation 
is quoted  (vide  p. 73). 
3) Asrnin  satxdam  bhavati,  — the fundamental expression of the relation between the 
successive  links  of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula: the existence of each  link  depends 
on the (previous) existence of the  link  mentioned just before.  Usually,  this  statement 
is followed  by two corresponding  passages  implying  that  also the origination and 
the cessation of each  link  are conditioned by the origination and the cessation of the 
previous  link.  As a  matter  of fact, this formula gives the most general interpretation 
of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula (in contrast  with  its many special interpretations) ; 
it is even applied to all relative notions, e.g. in the  RatnávaÎi,  I, 48 sqq. (cf. the frag­
ments  published by G.  Tucci,  J.R.A.S.,  1934, pp. 307 sqq.), where the example is 
given  that  „short"  can only exist if  there  is also  „long"  (dīrghe  hrasvam  yathā  sati). 
In Abhidh.  Koça,  IH, p. 81, different interpretations of the formula are given; the 
notes  by De la  Vallée  Poussin (I.c) give  full  references, including  those  to the many 
existing  variants of this formula in Sanskrit and in  Pali. 
4) Although the  yathavat  of our text  would  not be quite impossible (but in  that  case, 
it would  rather  have been placed before, instead of after,  ttcyate),  we prefer the reading 
of the other versions. As a  matter  of fact, the  Pratītyasamutpāda  may be considered 
a special form of the more general rule expressed by  asmin  sati  etc. 


--- [Page 135] ---
— 125 — 
— Ignorance 3) conditions the Formative Forces) 6), [4] the Formative 
Forces condition Consciousness 7)? Consciousness conditions Name­and­
5) Avidyā  is analyzed in detail in the  passage  from a­A­6tob­A­1 (mainly in  view 
of the different objects to  which  it may apply), and from  f ­ A­ 1 to 8 (according to 
the different  aspects  of Avidyā,  which  are arranged in numerical order). Its relation 
with  Saṃskaraṅga  is discussed from f­A­6 to  g­A­8.  and the  same  passage  deals 
with the association of  Avidyā  with  the Wrong  Views  (dṛṣṭi). The classificatory portion 
of our text (from  c ­ A ­ 6 to e­A­7) contains many similes  which  are important  because 
they explain,  in a popular way, some of the essential  aspects  of Avidyā:  it is, for 
instance, considered as the  hetu  of phenomenal existence, as the  soil  on which  the 
passions grow, as the  vijigīsu  of the  Arthaçāstras,  and, if the twelve  nidānas  are dis­
tributed between the  past,  present  and future existences, it belongs to the first category. 
Its relation  with  ajñārta  is referred to in a  – B  ­ 1 and, especially, in  f ­ A ­ 1  (Avidyā 
there  comprises  ajñāna,  samçayajñāna  and  mithyājñāna).  — The translation of  Avidyā 
by „Ignorance"  is conventional,  Avidyā  being a  „notion  assez  complexe"  (cf. De la  Vallée 
Poussin,  Abhidh.  Koça,  Introduction etc., 1931, p. 25) ; it is narrowly associated  with 
the kleças sarvakleçānām  avītathārthena,  f­A­2,  but its double  aspect  as kÎeçāvarana 
and jñeyāvarana,  and sometimes (in the  case  of Hīnayāna  Arhats) the latter only, is 
not mentioned in our text. It seems, however,  that  jñeyāvarana  is alluded to in the 
term  tāvad­avidyā,  „mere,  exclusive. Ignorance" (probably: Ignorance  which  is not 
associated  with  kleças,  thus  corresponding  with  the avidyā āveniki  mentioned, for instan­
ce, in Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 84). —  Avidyā  is essentially the non­comprehension of the 
Four  Truths of a Saint and must be eliminated by the  vision  of these  (f ­ A ­ 4 to 5); 
cI. Abhidh.  Koça,  V, p. 71. The latter point is one of the characteristic differences from 
the Avidyā  conception of other Indian systems  (Sāṃkhya,  Vedānta). 
6) Samskára,  as a  link  in the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula,  does  not comprise all the 
sarnskāras  which  ccntitute  samskāraskandha  (inira, a­B­6). The latter is the  ‚col­
lection’  of all  sorts  c*f forces (their number varies in the different Buddhist  sects  ; 
the Abhidharmakoça  (mentions 58  sarnskāras),  but  samskārānga  only refers to  tho*e  force* 
which,  themselves conditioned by  /ividya,  make the arising of the  vijñānāṅga  possible. 
AS, in one of the most common interpretations of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula, the 
arising  of Vijñāna  marks the beginning of actual  life,  Samskārāṅga  may refer to action 
during  former existences (it is defined by pm sakarman in Abhidh.  Koça,  III,  kārikā 
21), and is conceived of as forces producing new existence (punarbhavam abhisams¬
karoti, ­5. g. in the  Madhyāntavibhāgaṭīkā ; cf. the translation by D. Friedmann, 1937, 
p. 47, and notes, p. 125). In  view  of the latter definition, the  best  translation for 
samskārāṅga  is „Formative  Forces" as Friedmann translated.  Most  of the similes in 
our text  stress  „activity’'  as one of the main  aspects  of the  Saṃskāras  (they are, for 
instance, the army commanders of the vijiglsu, the rains  which  make the seed develop 
into a sprout, etc.). For their analysis, cI. infra a — B — 2 and,  with  greater  detail, 
from  f — A — 10 to I. — B — 8. 
7) For  Vijñāna,  too, we have to distinguish between  vijñānāṅga  and  vijñānaskandha 
(one of the  five  divisions of  Nāmarūpānga;  infra, a — B — 3). In the special inter­
pretation of the chain,  Vijñāna  is considered the first moment of  present  existence 
(Abhidh.  Koça,  III. p. 88 ; Th. Stcherbatskij, Central Conception, p. 6) and is  the­
refore compared  with  the seed  (bi}a)  of the Tree of  Life  growing on the  soil  which 
is Ignorance and developing if the rains, sunshine etc.,  which  are the  Sarnskāras,  are 
also present  (infra, d — A — 6). In another  simile  (d — B — 7),  Vijñāna  is compared 
with the most primitive  stage  of embryonic  life (kalala), the arising of  which  depends 
on the existence of Ignorance as its general conditioning factor and on  that  of those 
deeds  in former existences  that  produce some form of new existence as its more 
direct factors  (Saṃskārāṅga).  — In the ‘general’ interpretation, however,  Vijñāna 


--- [Page 136] ---
— 126 — 
Form  8), Name­and­Form conditions the Six Bases of  Cognition  ô), 
the Six  Bases of  Cognition  condition Contact 10), Contact conditions 
(in this respect undistinguishable from  vijñānaskandha)  is conceived of as an uninter­
rupted stream  (saṃtāna,  infra,  d — B — 4) of moments of being conscious. Techni­
cally,  . these  two  aspects  are distinguished by the  terms  bíja­ and  pravrtti~vijñāna 
respectively  (especially in  Mahāyāna).  The latter is conceived of as a ‘stream' exten­
ding over all the separate existences and thus constituting a perpetual link. The Vi¬
jñānavāda  School of  Mahāyāna  laid a very special stress on this  Vijñāna  conception 
(the elements of  which  exist in all forms of Buddhism) and elaborated it under the 
influence  of Vedāntic  ideas; it  thus  became the  nearest  Buddhist equivalent of a 
'sour,  with  the essential difference, however,  that  Vijñāna  is only an  apparent  unity: 
just as .a river,  which  only  seems  one but really is a conglomeration of innumerable 
interdependent particles, in the  same  way the conception of a unique  Vijñāna  is due 
to the forces of  illusion.  — CI. also infra, a — B — 3 to 4. 
8) Nāmarūpa  is analyzed infra, a — B — 5 to 8, and,, in a different but very clumsy 
form,  infra, e — A — 8 to 10. CI. also ..the Introduction, passim. Together  with 
Vijñāna,  it is  vipakaphála  of former existence (d — A — 9) and compared to the 
fortress of the  vijigísu  (e — A — 1).  Nāmarūpa  is a very old compound (cI. H.  Kern, 
Geschiedenis  van  het Buddhisme, I. pp. 335 — 341); it is based on the analysis of the 
individual  into material and spiritual compounds,  originally  identified  with  the thing 
(the person) and its name (his soul). The main innovation in Buddhism consisted in 
splitting  up the name  ('sour)  into four non­material groups. 
s) Sadāyatana  is analyzed  in/ra,  e — B — 1 to 2 and (in the repetition  with  many 
mistakes) from e — A — 11 to  e — B — 1.  Sadāyatana  is based upon the  classi­
fication  of all the  dharmas  (including the  asamskṛtas)  into the six  senses  (indriya) 
and their respective classes of objects (visaya). For details, cf. Stcherbatskij, Centr. 
Cone, pp. 7 sqq. — The addition of sad­ is necessary, since in the  Pratītyasamutpāda 
formula  only the six 'internal'  bases  are referred to. —  Āyatana  is explained as  āya­
tana = āya­dvāra,  „entrance  door" (Abhidh.  Koça.  I. kār.  2o:  rāçāyadvāragotrārthāh 
skai.dhāyatanadhātavah) , for they (i.e. the six  abhyantarāny āya­+anāni)  are the  getes 
through  which  the impressions of the cuter  world  may reach Consciousness. A  better 
explanation considers  Āyatana  as the fabode'  (āyatana),  ie.  the material support 
(āçraya)  of the mind and the mental functions (cittacaitta). This explanation is sug­
gested by its comparison  with  a house (grha, e — A — 1),  with  a kind  of support 
(āçrayabheda,  d — 3 — 6), and, in the representations of the bhzvacakra,  Sadāyatana 
is expressed by a palace  with  six doors. 
10) Sparça  is analysed infra in b — A — 3 to 4 and in  e — B — 1 to 4. Its main charac­
teristic is the triple contact between one of the interior  āyat anas,  the corresponding 
exterior  āyatana  and  Vijñāna.  There was however a controversy in the Abhidharma 
Schools  about the question whether  Sparça  referred to the triple contact itself, or to 
the sensations arising from  that  contact. The  Abhidharmakoça  (III, p. 98) contains 
a discussion between a  Sarvastivādin  and a  Sautrāntika  on this point, in  which  each 
of the parties  quotes  a Sutra in a different way. It is evident  that  the correctness of 
the translation of the term depends on the point of view adopted by our text. Stcher¬
batskij's discussion on the term (Central Conception, p. 55) is not quite up to the 
point; he considers the usual translation By  „contact"  incorrect, but this is only  true 
if we  cling  to the  Sarvastivādin  interpretation; Stcherbatskij’s main argument  that 
Sparça  is usually classified as a caittadharma is hardly convincing since any dharma 
in which  Vijñāna  takes  an active  part  is bound to be ca:tta. Our text  agrees  with  the 
Sautrāntika  point of  view.  The Vibhanga (infra, b — A — 3 to 4) defines  Sparça 
as sixfold  samsparça,  „mutual  contact",  thus  explaining it as the contact itself. In 
"d — B — 5,  Sparça  is considered „a special form of meeting, of coming  together" 
~ (samavāyabheda) . 


--- [Page 137] ---
— 127 — 
Feeling  u), [5]  Feeling  conditions Thirst I2), Thirst conditions Attachment 
l3). Attachment conditions Existence 14), Existence conditions  Birth  15), 
Birth  conditions Old Age and Death, sorrow 3G), lamentations, pain,  grief 
and despair. [6] Such is the  origin  of this exclusive 17) and powerful mass of 
11) Vedanā  is analyzed in b — A — 5 and in  e — B — 5. 
12) Trsnā  is analyzed in b — A — 7 to 8 and in  e — B — 6 to 7; cI. also g — A — 5 
sqq. and h — A — 7. For the different kinds of  Tṛṣṇā  occurring in Buddhist literature, 
cI. infra, note 134. —  Tṛṣṇa,  Thirst, has to be taken in a very broad sense: the term 
may  well  be translated by  „desire".  In Chinese it is usually rendered by a term meaning 
"love"  (cI. P.  DemiéviUe,  Les  versions chinoises du  Milindapañha,  B.E.F.E.O.,  24, 1924, 
p. 131 and p. 135, who translates it by "amour"). 
13) Upādāna,  "seizing"  of the objects of thirst or desire, is always stated to be  fourfold; 
cf. infra, b — A — 7 to 8 and  e — B — 6 to 7. The  Aṅgas  Tṛṣṇā  and  Upādāna  are 
very  closely related, the latter being defined as trsnavivrddhi, "increasing of  Thirst’’ 
(Daçabhūmika,  p. 48), or as  trsnāvaipulya  (Çālistambhasutra,  quoted  Çiksāsamuccaya, 
p. 222, where  trsnāvaipulyam  was however erroneously printed as two words in 
Bendall’s  edition). CI. also  Bodhic.­pañj.,  p. 480:  aparityāgo bhūyo  bhūyaç  ca  prārthanā 
idam  trsnāpratyayam upādānam  ity  ucyate. 
14) Bhava  is analyzed infra,  b — A — 9 and  g — A — 8 to 10. — Bhava is a  difficult 
notion.  It means: becoming, existence in general as opposed to  final  liberation. As 
such, it includes the  Saṃsāra  as a whole, which is subject to the twelve­linked  pratī¬
tyasamutpāda.  Accordingly, these links are often termed  bhavāṅgas  (e.g., Abhidh. Ko¬
ça, HI. p. 69). If the twelve  nidānas  are attributed to the three different time periods 
(past,  present and future), bhava belongs to piesent existence (infra,  c — B — 8). 
Therefore,  it is not explained as punarbhava, but as karmabhava,  „arising  of karman". 
The latter is due to Attachment (to pleasure and wrong views): without Attachment 
no karman  arises  which  would  lead to re­birth, cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  V, pp. 1 sqq. — 
Both  samskāra  and bhava belong to the karznan­portion oí the  pratītyasamutpāda 
(infra,  c — B — 5), the former representing  karman  of past  existence, the latter oí 
present  life,  cf. infra, g — A — 6 to 7. Bhava is often taken as a synonym of the 
five upādānaskandhas  (Abhidh.  Koç*,  I. p. 14, cf. Stcherbatskij, Centr. Cone, p. 98). 
In the 'static’  (āvasthika)  interpretation of the  Pratīt>asamutpāda  formula, according 
to which  the twelve  Aṅgas  represent as many  states  in the development of the  five 
Skandhas (Abh:dh.  Koça,  III, p. 66; cf.  Vyākhyā  ad 33, 22, Cosm. Bouddh., p. 156: 
dvādaça  r>añeaskandhikā  avasthāh),  Bhava  denotes  the stage  during  which  the  living 
being accomplishes those acts which condition repeated existence (bhavisyadbhava¬
pháiam karma,  Vyākhyā  ad 33, 7, op. cit., p. 155). CI. infra, g — A — 7. Vasuban¬
dhu considers this interpretation intentional  (ābhiprāyika) , not essential (cf. Abhidh. 
Koça,  HI, p. 67). The interpretation of  Bhava  as the  link  connecting present and 
future existence leads to its interpretation as the transmigrating factor  (antarābhava); 
cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  111,  pp. 36 sqq. and infra, note 53. 
l3) Jāti  not  only  implies physical birth in its narrow sense, but includes the entire em­
bryonic  and foetal periods as  well.  Cf. the analysis, infra,  b — B — 1 to 3. 
16) Çoka,  not occurring in the text, has been translated since its omission is obviously 
due to a mere lapse by the copyist. CI. note 12 to the Transcription. As to the trans­
lations  of the terms  çoka  upāyāsa,  cI. infra,  g — B — 2 to 6. 
t7) According  to the  Vyākhyā  (Cosm. Bouddh., p. 170), kevala  denotes  that  the entire 
complex  of suffering depends on  Jāti  only,  not, for instance, on the existence of an 
Atman  (jātyām  eva  satyām jarāmaranādayah sambhavanti nānyasminn ātmani). Ke¬
valasya  is therefore explained by  ātmarahitasya;  cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  HI. p. 83, note 5. 
It is obvious  that  this is a scholastic interpretation. It  seems  much simpler to interpret 


--- [Page 138] ---
— 128 — 
Suffering  18). (All)  this is  called  the principle of Dependent  Origination  ld). 
The explanation (is as  follows)  20) : 
— As to  „Ignorance  conditions [7] the Formative Forces”, what Igno­
rance (is referred to) ? 
— It is want of knowledge 2i) concerning the  past,  want of knowledge 
concerning  the future, want of knowledge concerning  that  which  is both 
past and future 22), want of knowledge concerning the interior, want of know­
ledge concerning the exterior 23), [8] want of knowledge concerning the 
Act, want of knowledge concerning the ripening of the Act 24), want of 
knowledge  concerning the Buddha, the Dharma and the  Saṃgha,  want of 
knowledge  concerning Suffering 25), Origine,  Cessation and Path, [9] want 
kevala as a term denoting  that  the result of  Jāti  is exclusively  duhkha without any 
sukha  implied  in it. 
18) Mahato duhkhaskandhasya samudayo bhavati. The twelfth  link  of the chain, though 
expressed by  Jarāmaraṇa  only,  is taken to consist of many different aspects. Cf. 
Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 83, note 5:  „Les  termes  çoka  upāyásas  sont compris 
(samgrhitá)  dans  jarāmaraṇa  et ne sont pas  des membres  a part  (nāṅg āntaram).  Ils 
proviennent  des  diverses transformations  (parināma)  des  objets (visaya),  être  vivant 
ou non­etre vivant, et de la personne  (ātmabhāva)".  CI. De la  Vallée  Poussin,  Théorie 
des dome  causes  (1916), pp. 31 sq. 
19) For the meaning of adi (opposed to vibhanga), cf.  notes  97 and 99 to the Introduction. 
20) After  vibhangah, the word katamah was probably omitted by the copyist. Up to the 
end of plate b, the twelve  links  of the formula are explained by enumerations of the 
different  elements (aspects) into  which  they are  divided. 
21) As tó the relation between  ajñana  and  avidyā,  cf. infra, f — A — 3, where  Avidyā 
is stated to be­ threefold since it comprises  ajñana,  mithyājœna  and  samçayajñāna. 
Here,  at least,  ajñana  is only  the negative aspect of  Avidyā,  i.e.  w<mt  of knowledge. 
It appears  from  a — B — 1  that  the definitior of  Avidyā  as ajñana  with  regard  to 
the essential notions in Buddhism is  only  partial, since  tamas  and sammoha must 
everywhere be understood in addition to  ajñana.  With  the  passage  wnich  follows,  cf. 
the whole  passage  from  f — A — 1 to 7, where  Avidyā  is treated  from  another point 
of view  (essentially numerical). 
22) The terms  pūrvānte  and  aparānte  probably refer to hetir and phala respectively. Then, 
purvāntāparānte  (instead of  which  most of the other versions read  madhyānte)  refers 
to that  which  is both  hetu  (of future existence) and phala (of  past  existence), i.e. 
present existence. CI.  Vyākhyā  ad Bhāsya,  35, 1, in Cosmol. Bouddh., p. 157: the 
first two  Aṅgas  (Avidyā­Sainskāra)  are taught to eliminate  purvāntasammoha,  the 
last two  (Jāti­Jarāmaraṇa)  to eliminate  aparāntasammoka,  the remaining eight (from 
Vijñāna  to Bhava) to eliminate  madhyāntasammoha.  CI. infra,  c — B — 6 to 8. 
23) Âdhyātmika  and bahya are applied to the chain of Dependent origination, infra, 
c — A — 9 sqq. A  similar  distinction is also made for the twelve  āyatanas;  cf. infra 
b — A — 1 sq. 
­4) Karmavipaka, i.e. retribution of action. Cf. the  vipākaphaīa,  the morally  qualified 
fruit,  Abhidh.  Koça,  II, pp. 275 sqq.; Siddhi, II, p. 464; De la  Vallée  Poussin, Morale 
Bouddhique, 1927, pp. 174 sqq. 
25) In the Abhidharma, duhkha has become a technical term denoting the unrest of the 
dharmas (cf. Stcherbatskij, Centr. Cone, passim). It is however advisable to retain 
the notion  of „suffering,  misery" in the translation. Duhkha is used in different tech­
nical  meanings; cf. the  three  duhkhas  mentioned in the Abhidh. Koca,  VI, pp. 124­136; 
Siddhi, H, pp. 498 sq: 


--- [Page 139] ---
— 129 — 
of knowledge concerning the Cause and the  dharmas  sprung from a Cause 26), 
want of knowledge concerning Dependent Origination 27), want of know­
ledge concerning the good dharmas, want of knowledge concerning the bad 
dharmas, [10] want of knowledge concerning the  dharmas  which  are both 
good  and bad 28), want of knowledge concerning the blamable, unblamable 
and both blamable and unblamable  dharmas  29), [11] want of knowledge 
concerning  the dharmas  to be shunned and  those  to be practised 30), — or 
whatever want of knowledge  there  may be concerning the six  bases  of 
contact 31), whatever want of knowledge  there  is concerning the 
26) Hetusamutpannesu  dharmesu,  the dharmas  stated  to be hetuprabhava in the so­called 
Buddhist  Article  of Faith.  In most of the Buddhist texts, sam­ (in  samutparma)  is 
supposed to include the notion of 'arising  together'.  The  dharmas  here  referred to are 
the samskṛtadharmas (72 in all, according to the .Abhidharma Schools, but 94 in the 
Yogacara  system, in  which  vijñāna  was analyzed into a number of  dharmas  beginning 
with ālayavijñāna,  and the number of  sarnskāras  greatly increased; cf. the comparative 
account given by De la  Vallée  Poussin,  Suzuki  and Cordier,  Les  Soixante­quinze et 
les Cent  Dharmas,  Muséon,  lVouv. Sér., 6, 1905, pp. 178 — 194). 
27) As we  stated  in the Introduction, this term is not found in the other  Vibhaṅga  ver­
sions.  Originally,  it may have been a mere gloss on the preceding term. 
28) Kuçalākuçala,  — the meaning is probably:  kuçala  with  reference to one aim, but 
akucala  with  reference to another; usually, we  find  avyākṛta,  „undefined  as to moral 
consequences" as the third category: some of the  sarnskāras,  for instance, are always 
kuçala  (the  ktxçalamāhabhūmikas  such as  çraddhā,  virya etc., vid.  Mahāvyutp.,  104, 
12 — 22), other  sarnskāras  necessarily are akucala (the  kleçamahābhūmikas  such as 
moha  etc.), whereas most of the  dharmas  not included in  these  lists are avyakṛta 
(such as the cittaviprayuktas). CI. E. Lamotte,  Traité  de la demonstration de  Tacte, 
Mél. chin, et  bouddh.,  4 (1936), p. 224; Stcherbatskij,  Centr.  Cone, pp. 29 sq.; Siddhi, 
pp. 319 — 395, where the third category is denoted by aniyata;  Daçasāhasrikā  (quoted 
note  117 to the Introduction), pp. Ill sqq.; cf. also pp. 81 — 85. For the definition 
of kuçala,  cf. Abbidh.  Koça,  IV, p. l n6, where it is explained as istavipakatva:  „those 
acts which  produce agreeable consequences (such as re­t:rth in heaven) and  which, 
eventually,  may lead to  Nirvana". 
29) Sāvadya  and anzvadya are synonyms of the more usual  terms  sāsrava  and anasrava 
(Abhidh.  Koça,  IV, p. 255). In the former  ease,  the dharmas  are influenced by  defiling 
agencies  (kleça);  in the latter, they are purified by superior wisdom. It is evident 
that this distinction  does  not at all cover  that  mentioned in  note  28. An act may be 
•good'  and lead to re­birth in heaven, for instance, although it is influenced by Igno­
rance  (kuçalasāsrava,  Abhidh.  Koça,  IV, p. 106): a  Vedāntin,  ignorant of the  Bud­
dhist Truth, may accumulate good  karman.  It is not clear to us what  dharmas  may 
be considered  sāvadyānavadya;  the two notions seem to exclude each other. 
HO) Sevitavya, ‚.to be practised", is defined as  kuçalasamskṛta  in Abhidh.  Koça,  IV, p. 225. 
It is not exactly the  same  as kuçalasāsrava.  The example is given  (loc.  cit.)  that  the 
five skandhas  of a Saint may be pure  (vaiyavadānika).  although they are always 
produced by causes. 
31) Sparçāyatanesu  is translated according to the Chinese version (Epigr. Ind., 5, 1932, 
p. 203), but the expression is not perfectly clear. In any case,  sparçāyatana  does  not 
refer to the external  base,  the object of  kāyāyatana,  which  is its usual meaning; the 
use of the plural and the addition of  satsu  make such an interpretation impossible. 
Possibly,  the expression should be taken to refer to the six  bāhyāyatanāni,  which 
were not unambiguously included in the preceding categories. 


--- [Page 140] ---
— 130 — 
a — B above, [1] (including) not­understanding, obscurity and infatuation 32), 
the darkness of Ignorance, (all)  that  Ignorance is referred to. 
— As to  „Ignorance,  o monks, conditions [2] the Formative 
Forces'’,  what formative forces (are referred to)? 
— The  three  (kinds of) formative forces :  those  of body, speech 
and mind 33). These formative forces are referred to. 
— [33 As to  „the  Formative Forces, o monks, condition  Con­
sciousness”, what consciousness (is referred to) ? 
— The six groups of consciousness 34), viz. eye­consciousness, 
ear­consciousness, [4] nose­consciousness, tongue­consciousness,  skin­
consciousness 35) and mind­consciousness. That is the consciousness 
referred to. 
— As to  „Consciousness,  o monks, [51 conditions Name­and­
Form”,  what name­and­form (is referred to)? 
— The four immaterial  aggregates  36), (viz.)  the  aggregate  of 
82) The purpose of this addition is evident. In the entire preceding portion of the 
avidyā  definition, the latter is only referred to by  ajñana,  which  is the negative  aspect 
of avidyā ; the definition is not complete, for  avidyā  includes wrong and uncertain 
knowledge about the Truth (infra, f — A — 3). CI.  Rāstrapāīap.,  ed. Finot, Bibl 
Buddh., II (1901), p. 48, lines 3­4  : yathā  saṃmohaṃ  cāvidyāndhakāram. 
33) Samskārānga  does  not comprise all the  dharmas  included in  samskāraskandha  (cf. 
note  6 above). Here, the forces referred to are  those  of hody (such as  āçvāsa  and 
praçvāsa)y  speech (vitarka and  vicārá)  and mind. The mental forces are essentially 
cetanā,  „will",  since only  willful  action is included in  samskārānga  (not, for instance. 
the cittavipraytiktasamskaras). Although this threefold  division  is natural enough, it 
' is a little  strange  to find  it mentioned at this very spot; it is irrelevant for 
samskārānga  whether  acts  ar* produced by body, speech or mind ; the essential point 
is the moral  aspect  of the act:. In all other sources known to us,  samskārānga  is 
analyzed  into punyopaga etc. (infra, f — A — 9 sqq.; the Vibhanga text ol  C; 
Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 84;  Çāfistambhasūtra,  quoted  Çiksās,,  p. 223, and  Bodhic­pañj. 
p. 479). 
34) The  same  definition is given in Abhidh. Koca, HI, p. 70,  note  (quoted from the 
Vyākhyā)  and passim. Consciousness, though constituting one single dharma, is con­
ceived  of as a stream consisting of innumerable moments of being conscious (cI. 
not©  7 above). All  these  flashes of consciousness may however be classified into six 
'collections'  (kāya). 
35) It is remarkable  that  kāya  may be used in one  sentence  in two completely different 
meanings. The use of  kāya  in the meaning  „heap,  collection, group’’  seems  to be 
limited  to Buddhism; it  reposes  upon the (probably correct) etymology of  kāya 
derived  from ci(noti), „to accumulate" (cI. the use of the latter in the  ajñānāc čīyate 
karma formula)  ; cf. Pāṇini,  III, 3, 41. The Buddhists made a  full  use of the pos­
sibilities  offered by etymological analysis of words; in this case, the etymology of 
kāya  fully  confirmed the Buddhist conception of the body as a  heap  of bones, blood, 
hairs etc. without real unity (the  açubhabhāvanā  was considered an excellent exercise; 
.CI. the Ratnamegha quotation in  Çiksāsam.,  p. 209). 
3e) For the definition of  Nāmarūpa  as a whole, cI. the Introduction. The translation of 
arúpin  by immaterial" is not quite correct, for Buddhism rejects any real distinction 
between the material and immaterial  world.  It is  rather  a question of more or less ; 
it is often argued  that  the usual order in  which  the  five  skandhas  are enumerated, 
viz. rupa,  vedanā,  samskāra,  samjñā  and  vijñāna,  demonstrates  a gradual decreasing 


--- [Page 141] ---
—131 — 
Feeling,  [6] the  aggregate  of the Forces * 7), the  aggregate  of 
Ideation 38) and the  aggregate  of Consciousness 39) — such is the 
meaning of  Name.  Form,  in the compound Name­and­Form 40), means : 
[7] whatever kinds of  form  there  may be (?): the four Great Elements 
(themselves) and the  form  derived  from  the four Great Elements 41). 
of the material aspect (cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  I, pp. 11 sqq.). A more precise translation 
of arūpin  is „not  provided  with  rūpa"  or „other  than  rūpa". 
37) For  saṃskāra,  cI. note 33 above. For  saṃskāraskandha,  cf. the excellent survey given 
by Stcherbatskij, Centr. Cone, p. 98. We accept Stcherbatskij's translation by  „forces". 
The Sarvāstivādins  include 58 dharmas into this skandha, the  Yogācārins  no less than 
73. They are essentially divided into moral forces (such as  kleças, upakleças  and  kuça¬
lamahābhūmikas)  and those independent of the  will  (cittaviprayukta, such as  jarā, 
prāpti,  sabhāgatā,  the forces  which  make aksaras, words and  sentences  have a definite 
meaning and/or function, etc.). A  full  analysis of  samskāraskandha  and the dharmas 
included  in it is found in the article mentioned in note 26 above. 
3S) Samjñā  is the faculty of forming concepts capable of being expressed in speech. Whereas 
vijñāna  implies  only  being conscious of the mere presence of something  within  the 
field  of perception,  samjñā  includes the definite perception of an object  with  its 
characteristic properties. Cf. Stcherbatskij, Centr. Cone, p. 16:  „the  definite perception 
of a colour  will  be an 'idea' " ; Abhidh.  Koça,  I. p. 30, note 3  : „elle  i.e. la connaissance 
est associée  a un certain mental,  nommé  samjñā,  notion, qui  appréhende  un certain 
caractère  de la couleur  et de la figure  considérées  : c'sst  un hommc  e'est  une  femme, 
etc."; op. cit., I,  kār.  14,  c–d:  samjñā  nimittodgrahanātmikā,  „la  notion  (samjñā) 
consiste  dans  la prehension  des caracteres", and op. cit., II, p. 177, note 5 :  „la notion 
perçoit  l'objet en  tant  que susceptible  d’etre  défini  (paricchedyatārūpam)"  ; D. Friedmann, 
Madhyāntavibhāgatīkā,  p. 45  : „samjñā,  Ideation, is the exact discernment (pariccheda) 
of that  which  has been felt" ; Siddhi, I, p. 148 : "La  Saṃjña  a pour  nature  de saisir 
les *caracteres* de 1'obje1.  Elle  a pour  acte  (quand elle  est mentale) de  produire  les 
divers  noms–et–parc!es"; cf.  also  E. Lamotte MéÎ.  chin,  et bouddh., 4 (1936), p. 209, 
and S. Dasgupta,  Study  of Patañjali  (1920), pp.  i92­20 I. 
39) Vijñānaskandha  is not quite identica 1. with  vijñānāṅga ; cf.  note 7 above. As a skandh% 
„collection",  vijñāna  is defined by  prativijūāpti  in the Abhidh.  Koça,  I, kār.  16 ; cf. 
Stcherbatskij,  Centr. Cone, p. 16, who translates the latter term by  „&n  intimation, 
or awareness, in each single case" ; cf. also Buddh. Logic, II, 1930, p. 173, note : 
„undifferentiated  pure sensation, the mere sensation of something definite in the ken 
of our sense­faculties". 
40) Nāmarūpayor—iti ; these  words, not occurring in C, are not quite meaningless. They 
were probably added as a  kind  of gloss,  which  aimed at stressing  that  the 
definition  of Rūpa,  which  follows,  only  applies to  rúpa  in nāmarūpāṅga,  not, for 
instance, to the  rūpa  included in  rūpāyatana.  It is curious to note  that  in spite of 
this gloss,  the interpolator of the  passage  from  e — B — 8 to 11 misunderstood the 
meaning of  rūpa  in nāmarūpa  and gave an interpretation of it  which  was evidently 
based on  rūpāyatana.  Finally,  it is noted  that  the  Sarvāstivādins  and the  Yogācārins 
knew  a third  kind  of rūpa  to be included in  manaāyatana,  viz. the  avijñapti,  for 
which  they were attacked by most of the other Buddhist sects. 
41) Upādāyarūpa,  also  called  bhautikarūpa,  is the matter composed of the  five  elements. 
The five  elements themselves can hardly be  called  ‘material',  at least in later Buddhism. 
Stcherbatskij,  Buddh. Logic,  Ï, pp. 98—101, showed  that  in the dynamic conception 
of matter in Buddhism the  five  elements were considered to be conventional expressions 
of forces present in all kinds of matter. Thus, 'water' refers to the property of 
cohesion  between the particles constituting an object,  ‘fire*  to its possessing a definite 
temperature,  'ether'  to its occupying a definite space, etc.  Derived  matter is analyzed 


--- [Page 142] ---
— 132 — 
Both  this (latter) [8] form and the preceding name (?) 42), together  ­ 3), 
are name and form. That Name­and­Form is referred to. 
b A — As to  „Narne–and–Form  conditions, [1] o monks, the Six 
Bases of  Cognition”,  what six  bases  of cognition (are referred to) ? 
— (Only) the six ‘internal’  bases  of cognition: the internal 
bases  of eyes,  ears,  nose, [2] tongue,  skin  and mind. These are the 
Six Bases of  Cognition  referred to 44). 
— As to ,,the Six Bases of  Cognition,  [33 o monks, condition 
Contact”,  what  (kind  of) contact (is referred to)? 
— The six groups of contact 45), viz. mutual contact 46) of the 
eyes, mutual contact of the  ears,  mutual contact of the nose, tongue, 
[4] skin  and mind . This contact is referred to. 
— As to  „Contact,  o monks, conditions  Feeling’’,  what  (kind  of) 
feeling  (is referred to)? 
— [5] The  three  (kinds of) feeling,  viz. agreeable feeling, disagree­
able feeling and neither­disagreeable­nor­agreeable feeling 47). This 
feeling  is referred to. 
into the  five  organs and the  five  categories of objects of  sense,  to which  some  sects 
added  avijñapti  (Âbhidh.  Koça,  I. kár. 9;  Mahāvy.  101, 17 — 27; Nos. 6o — 7o of 
the Vijñānavadin  list  = Nos.  48 — 58 of the  Sarvastivādin  list  in the comparative 
account mentioned in  note  25 above. 
42) The translation is based on the correction of  rūpa  to nāma,  proposed in  note  30 to 
.the Transcription. 
­8) Tad=:ubhayam, i.e.  nāma  and rupa,  which  were defined separately before. The other 
versions of the  Nāmarūpa  definition (cI.  note  71 to the Introduction) add after  tad= 
ubhayam: aikadhyam abhisamksipya  (Çiksāsam,,  p. 222 ; Bodhicaryāvatātapañjikā, 
p. 388; Madhyamakavrtti, p. 10; the text of C), but  these  words were wrongly copied 
in the second and third of  these  quotations; thus, in the Madhyamakavrtti, the MSS 
read ekamadhyam  instead of aikadhyam (cI. the  note  by De la  Vallée  Poussin), whereas 
the Bodh.  Pañjikā  seems  to have omitted a number of words (it reads : catvāri 
mahābhūtāni copādānāni rūpam  aikadhyarūpam.) . The purpose of the addition aikadhyam 
abhisamksipya is evident: in  Nāmarūpaṅga,  the  five  skandhas do not constitute a 
real unity (which might lead to the wrong conception of a real  individual),  but are 
only  'thrown  together';  in a  simile  not devoid of humour, the  apparent  unity of the  five 
skandhas  in Nāmarūpa  is compared  with  that  of a good dish, in  which  the cook 
mixes  a number of ingredients. 
­­) For  sadāyatana,  cI.  note  9 above. 
45) Sparga is defined as the 'collection' of innumerable moments of  sparça,  classified into 
six groups. This  sixfold  division  is common to the  aṅgas  Vijñana,  ṣaḍāyatana  and 
Sparça,  which  represent  three  distinct  stages  in the process of cognition, the result 
of which  is Vedaná. 
46) „Mutual"  translates  the prefix in  samsparça;  this prefix almost always has a pregnan. 
meaning in the tethnical  terms  of Buddhism.  In every moment of  Sparça,  three  elements 
are implied:  an 'internal'  āyatana,  the corresponding 'external'  āyatana,  and  Vŋñāna. 
­7) Vedanā  is defined by  anubhāva  in Abhidh.  Koça,  I, p. 14, CI. our text, infra  e — B—4: 
anobhāvanālaksanā ; the  Vyākhyā  ad Abhidh. Koca, I, p. 14, quoted in the  Index 
­ General, p. 85, gives a mote detailed definition, viz. vastuno  hīādaparifāpa~taduhhaya¬
vinirmuktasvarúpasālcsātkararmsvabhāvah,  ,,the proper nature (of  Vedanā)  consists in 
_­ producing such  special'  characteristics of an object as  cold,  heat  or neither of the two". 


--- [Page 143] ---
— 133 — 
— As to  „Feeling,  [6J o monks, conditions Thirst”, what  (kind 
of) thirst (is referred to)  ? 
— The  three  thirsts : thirst for pleasure, thirst for existence and 
thirst  for non­existence 48). This  thirst is referred to. 
— [73 As to  „Thirst,  o monks, conditions Attachment”, what 
(kind  of) attachment  (is referred to)? 
— The four  attachments  : attachment  to pleasure,  attachment 
to Wrong  Views  49), [8]  attachment  to (non­Buddhistic) moral rules 
and vows 50), and  attachment  to the doctrine of (the existence of) 
an Atman  51). This  is the Attachment referred to. 
— As to  „Attachment,  o monks, conditions [9] Existence”, what 
(kind  of) existence (is referred to)? 
— The  three  (forms of) existence, I.e. existence in the  Realm 
of Carnal  Desire 52), existence in the  Realm  of Pure Forms and 
CI. the text of the  Spuṭārtha  in Bibl. Buddh. XXI (1931), p. 38, lines 6 sqq., where 
also a different  definition  is given. 
48) As we have already noted in the Introduction,  there  exist several  sets  of thirsts 
in Buddhism. A set of six thirsts is known  from  the Pali sources: they correspond 
with the  six  vīiñānas,  the six internal, and the six external  āyatanas.  The  Nālandā 
bricks  (C) give the usual triad of  kāma,  rūpa  and  ārūpya,  whereas cur set of thirsts 
agrees  with  that  attributed to the  Vaibhāsikas  in Abhidh.  Koça,  V, p. 29, note. 
The latter is explained  there  as (a) thirst for pleasure in this  life,  (b) thirst for 
existence, i.e. for existence for ever (bhava —  çāçvatabhavá),  (c) thirst for non­
existence, i.e. for annihilation after death. The second and third thirsts are therefore 
direcUy  connected  with  the two Extremes  (antagrāhadṛṣṭi) . 
49) The  five  dṛṣṭis are explained infra, g — A — 1 to 4, and enumerated in the portion, 
which  was presumably added,  from  h — A — 8 to 9. 
50) Çilavratopādāna  is  stated  to be sevenfold, infra g — A — 1 to 3. Attachment to 
çila implies the wron&  view  that  moral conduct as explained in the  Dharmaçāstras  etc 
would  alone be sufficient for reaching  final  liberation.  Çila,  of course,  does  not refer 
to the second  pāramitā.  Examples are given in Abhidh.  Koça,  HI, p. 86, where  çlla 
refers to tho  belief  according to  which  purity may be obtained by tirthas, sacrifices 
and the  like;  vrata refers to all  kind  of vows, such as  living  naked,  living  as a dog, 
all kinds of  tapas  etc.  Çīlavrata  H not  only  an upādāna  by itself, but it is also included 
in dṛṣṭyupādāna  (çīlavrataparāmarçadṛṣṭi) . 
­1) In  atmavādopādāna, °vāda  may be translated by „doctrine" ; thus, Buddhism is an āt¬
maváda or  çūnyavāda. Âtman  here refers to any kind of soul, not only to the atman 
of the Upanisads  etc«;  it thus  includes such notions as pud  gala,  posa,  purusa,  jīva, 
etc; sixteen different items are enumerated in  Mahávyutpatti,  207, 1 to 16 (edition 
Minaiev­Mironov,  p. 64).  Most  of these  terms  refer to definite doctrines. As  çilavrata, 
ātmavāda  also occurs more than once in the  list:  it cannot  well  be separated  from 
satkāyadṛṣṭi. 
52> For bhava, cf. infra,  note  54 (antarabhava) and supra,  note  14. The explanation  here 
given  is the usual one in the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula (cf.  Mahávyutpatti,  155, 
1 — 3): it is taken to refer to existence in one of the  three  realms into  which  the 
entire phenomenal  world  is divided.  They are narrowly associated  with  the cosmological 
ideas in Buddhism, explained by De la  Valiée  Poussin in Cosmologie Bouddhique, 
Troisième  chapitre de  VAbhidharmakoça,  kārikā,  bhāsya  and  vyākhyā,  avec  une analyse 
de la  Lokaprajñāpti  et de la  Kāranaprajñapti  de  Maudgalyāyana,  1914 —19 ; numerous 
additions in De la  Vallée  Poussin's translation of Abhidh.  Koça,  HI; cf. also the 


--- [Page 144] ---
— 134 — 
b — B Existence in the  Realm  of Formlessness.  This  is the Existence [1] 
referred to. 
— As to  „Existence,  o monks, conditions  Birth’’,  what birth 
(is referred to)? 
— Birth  into one special category among all kinds of  living 
beings [2]  that  exist 53), (comprising in due order the  following 
Introduction  to the latter (1931), Additions et Corrections, pp. 145 —147 ; substantial 
survey  in Hasting's Encyclopedia, s.v. Cosmology. — The compound tribhava is very 
common  in Buddhism, also in Indonesia (cI.  line  21 of the  Ligor  inscription and 
line 13 of the Kalasan inscription). The  three  realms comprise all the  manifold  forms 
of existence, conceived of as different worlds all situated on different levels  from  the 
hell Avici  up to the highest sphere, in  which  there  is neither notion nor non­notion 
(naivasam jñānāsaṃjñāyatana ). The divisions of the  three  dhátus  are explained infra, 
h — A — 2 to 7; cf. also infra, g — A — 8 to 10. Kama and  rūpa  have a special 
meaning here,  which  we tried to render by the almost too  well  sounding translations 
by Obermiller. Kama comprises all those forms of existence where  there  is some 
carnal  desire left, even if it is very refined  like  in the highest  Kamadhātu  heavens. 
The most  difficult  concept of the  three  is however  Ârupyadhatu : though formless, 
it still  belongs to existence and is even subdivided into four different realms,  which 
are not however considered real 'places' (cI. Abhidh.  Koça,  HI,  kār.  3 : ārūpyadhātur 
asthāna upapattyā  caturvidhah; the difference between the four divisions is  only  a 
difference  in mode of birth).  Many  references about the problem whether  there  is 
some  kind  of subtle  rūpa  in the  Ārupyadhatu  are given by De la  Vallée  Poussin, 
Abhidh.  Koça,  VIII.  pp. 135 sq., notes. 
63) Jāti,  Birth,  may be defined in several ways in Buddhism; infra, in  g — B — 1, 
a much simpler  definition  is given, by  which  birth is stated always to take place 
within  one of the four  great  classes (technically, the four yonis,  „wombs",  taken 
in a very extended meaning  which  includes  eggs  as in the case of birds, etc.). The 
very  usual  division  of birth into either  fiv­ 5. or six  gatis  is not mentioned in our text. 
Instead of  these  simple definitions, the Vibhanga gives a lengthy analysis in  which 
the succeeding  stages  of the birth process are enumerated; as usual, birth is taken 
to include the entire prenatal development, of  which  birth in its narrow meaning 
is only  the  final  stage  (upapatti}.  which  is only  its most obvious aspect (manifestation, 
prêdurbhāva,  of the  five  Skandhas) Our lengthy analysis serves a very definite purpose : 
the entire process is explained in detail in order to  stress  that  no eternal stuff, 
such  as a soul going over  from  one existence to another, is required. In the second 
place,  but this is more  striking  in other versions than in the sobre terms  here  given, 
the analysis is meant to provoke disgust, for it shows the continuous defilement 
during  the process. 
In the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula, the  link  bhavapratyayā  jātiḥ  is one of the most 
difficult  parts. Here,  there  is a sharp distinction between the general and the special 
interpretation of the formula. In the latter,  Bhava  comprises present existence as 
far as accumulation of  Karman  is concerned  (karman  which  is due to  upādāna,  as 
it is expressed in the preceding  link  of the chain). It is this  karman  which  conditions 
Jāti and  Jaramaraṇa,  which  comprise future existence.  This  implies  that  Karman 
is the  only  factor going over  from  one existence to another. On the other hand, 
Bhava,  in the general interpretation of  Pratītyasamutpāda,  is existence in general, 
i.e. not  limited  to present  life.  How does this existence condition birth in general ? 
As we have seen,  Bhava  is analyzed into the Three Realms in  which  existence is 
possible.  Jāti  therefore introduces the more special forms  within  these  realms.  This 
is expressed by the  initial  part of the formula, viz.  yattat  tesām (yesām  yesam  would 
.have been clearer)  satvānāṃ  tasmin tasmin  satvanikāye  ja`tih.  All  living  beings belong 


--- [Page 145] ---
stages):  becoming 54), descent  (into a  mother's  womb) 55), further 
to a special category, by birth; each of  these  special groups, such as dogs, worms, 
birds,  nien of the different  types  etc., have characteristic marks, which make them 
constitute  separate  nikāyas.  Many  Buddhists  (Sarvāstivādins,  Yogācārins  etc.) con­
ceived of a special dharma called  nikāyasabhāgatā,  a force included in the cittaviprayuk¬
tasaṃskāras  that makes all beings belonging to the same group (such as all dogs) 
resemble each  other;  the direction of this force  depends  on Karman. 
54) Samjāti,  Pāli  sañjāti,  is an unusual word outside Buddhism. It is obviously a  kind 
of birth preceding the  descent  into a womb (which is the next term), but its exact 
meaning is  difficult  to be  fixed.  The corresponding term of C  means  „becoming"  (Ep. 
Ind., 21, 1932, p. 293), but this is not exact; such a translation might as  well  correspond 
with Bhava,  for instance. In addition, C is to be used with care, since it  does  not 
agree  word for word with the Sanskrit Vibhanga  text ; cf. Bagchi's translation: 
„there  is becoming and production (if becoming corresponds to  saṃjāti,  production 
should  be taken to comprise botn  avakrānti  and abhinirvrtti of the Sanskrit text), 
. there  is becoming of the  skandhas  ('becoming’  does  not quite correspond to abhinirvrtti), 
there  is acquisition of  dhātu,  āyatana  and  skandha  (the order is different) and  there 
is becoming of the faculty of  life  (here,  'becoming' corresponds to  °prādurbhāva  in 
the Sanskrit text)’*. It  seems  certain  that  the Chinese translation  reposes  on essentially 
the .same  Vibhanga version, though  there  might be slight differences. It is known 
; that  Hiuan Tsang was extremely  accurate  and always tried to  translate  each word. 
Now,  'becoming’ seem, to correspond to  three  different Sanskrit notions, viz.  samjāti, 
~tbhinirvrtti  and  prādurbhāva,  which are by no  means  synonyms; 'production'  rather 
corresponds to  (sam)utpāda  than to either of the notions which it is supposed to 
translate  ; finally,  the order  dhātu,  āyatana,  skandha  is less satisfactory than skandha, 
āyatana,  dhāttt  in our version, since the order should be progressive and in the latter 
form  there  is progression (the  skandha  classification of the  dharmas  into  five  groups 
is the/coarsest'  one). It is not our intention to  base  any conclusions on this comparison 
(an English  translation of a Chinese text is not a reliable basis), but it should be 
stressed  that  he**e,  at least, the Chinese version cannot be relied upon. — For the 
meaning of  samjāti,  the Chinese rendering of the term is of no use to us. In Buddhist 
texts, the prefix sam­ is often used to convey a vaguer meaning to the original term 
. (samkleça  opp.  kleça ; sammoha  in Âbhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 67,  kār.  25, c­d, which is 
less definite than  moha;  it seems  that  sam­ is sometimes technically used by Buddhists 
to include related notions into the original term;  thus,  samkíega  means  „all  that  is 
associated with  kleça"  (such as the whole  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula if  Avidyā  is 
not eliminated). If  samjāti  is meant  to be a vaguer equivalent of  jāti,  it can only 
denote  the  ‘birth'  of that  which  will  descend into the womb, since  samjāti  precedes 
avakrānti.  If we consider  that  according to orthodox Buddhist opinion  Karman  is the 
only  thing remaining after physical  death  and continuing the  Saṃsāra,  it is evident 
that a lot of imagination is necessary to conceive of a  „mass  of Karman"  going into 
a yoni.  We therefore think  that  samjāti  denotes  a sort of preliminary 'birth’ during 
which  the  Karman  was supposed to  adopt  a more concrete form. The latter is an 
elephant in the  case  of a future Buddha. Some Buddhists knew the interesting con­
ception of the Gandharva, a semi­material being consisting of  Karman  only. and 
irresistibly  drawn towards the  yoni  corresponding to its  Karman  (for the metaphysical 
background, cI. De la  Vallée  Poussin,  Indo­Européens  etc., 1936, pp. 287 sqq.), 
and all Buddhists accepted the antarabhava,  „intermediate  existence" between two 
distinct forms of existence. 
55) Avakrānti  is  garbhāvakrānti ; cf. the  Prākrit  and"  Pali  forms  ukramti,  ókkanti  and 
avakkanti;  there  is an incription  bhagavato  okkanti  on one of the  Bharñut  reliefs 
<Barua  and Singha, Barhut inscription, 1926, p. 52). 


--- [Page 146] ---
— 136 — 
development 66), the grasping of the Groups (of dharmas) 57), grasping 
of the (eighteen) Constituents 5S), grasping of the Bases of  Cognit­
ion  59), [3] further development of the Groups (of dharmas), and 
apparition  of the  vital  sense  60). This  is the  Birth  referred to. 
— As to  „Birth,  o monks, conditions Old Age and  Death’’,  [4] 
what old age and death (are referred to)? 
— Old Age means 61): baldness, greyness 62), wrinkled  skin, 
56) Abhirúrvrtti,  in Abhidh.  Koça,  II. p. 123, and VI. p. 126, refers to the  antarābhava, 
which  cannot be the case here.  D. L. Friedmann,  Madhyāntavibhāgatīkā  (1937), note 127 
to p. 52, translates it by  „realization";  in op. cit.,  note  84 to p. 5o, abhinirvrtta (of 
the sadāyatana)  is translated by  „accomplished".  In Daçabhūmika,  p. 49,  abhirúrvattate 
is used  with  reference to the growth of the duhkhavrksa representing phenomenal 
existence in a symbolic  form.  There, each preceding  link  of the  Pratītyasamutpāda 
chain  is also stated to bring about the cause for the abhinirvrtti of the  following  link 
e.g. avidyā  hetum  ca dadāti  samskārābhinirvrttaye).  Here, the term might refer 
to the further development of the result of  samjāti  into the different prenatal  stages 
(kalala,  arbuda etc.). We then consider the next terms,  which  are compounded  with 
pratilābha  (or pratilambha) as a  kind  of explanation of  abhinirvrtti,  so that  one  could 
translate:  „further  development by grasping skandhas,  āyatanas  and  dhātus". 
­7) Pratilābha  or pratilambha is considered the first  stage  of prāpti,  „acquisition",  in 
Abhidh.  Koça,  H, p. 179. For the concept of  prāpti,  which is one of the cittaviprayuk¬
tasaṃkāras  in the  Sarvāstivāda  and  Yogācāra  systems, cI. Stcherbatskij, Centr. Conc., 
p. 105, and  Mahávyutp.,  lo4. No. 64. The existence of such a force is necessary, since 
without  that  it would  be impossible to explain why the embryo in its  initial  stage 
should  try to acquire such nasty things as  skandhas  etc. Skandha,  āyatana  and  dhātu 
are the  three  main classifications of the dharmas (Abhidh.  Koça,  1, kār.  20); they 
are based on  three  different principles. For the  five  skandhas, cf. supra, note 36. 
­8) The  dhātu  classification is based on the incorporation of the samskṛtadharmas into 
eighteen components of an  individual  stream of  life  (saṃtāna);  cf. Stcherbatskij, 
Centr. Cone., pp. 9 sq.  Dhātu  is however alsc used for the  five  great  elements  with 
vijñana ; cf. the important  Pitrputrasamágama  quotation in  Çiksās.,  p. 244;  which 
explains  the  well­known  words  saddhātw  ay am purusah (cf. Abhidh. Koca, I‚ p. 49, 
note 2, whore references are given). Four  great  element«,  viz. earth, water,  heat  and 
wind,  are denoted by  dhātu  in Mahavyutp., 101, 2 — 5 (p. 31). The term  dhātu  occurs 
also infra in  g — B — 3 in the  definition  of çoka. 
5Ô) For  āyatana,  cf. note 9 above. It is based on the incorporation of all the dharmas 
(including  the asamskṛtas) into the six  senses  (the internal or subjective part) and 
the six  kinds of objects particular to each of  these  senses  (the external part). 
*30) Jtvitendriyaprādurbhāva  is the moment of physical birth, the  final  stage  in the  Jāti 
process.  Life,  in its narrow  sense  (jtvita), is contained between this moment and the 
jfvitendriyanirodha,  mentioned below in the definition of  Maraṇa. 
ôl) As may be expected, the  definition  of Jarāmaraṇa  consists of two definite parts: 
first,  Jarā  is defined, then  Maraṇa,  followed  by a  statement  that  Jarāmaraṇa  comprises 
both notions together: as  Nāmarūpa  (cf. note 43 above),  Jarāmaraṇa  is composed 
of two notions, but constitutes a single  Anga.  The definitions of both  Jarā  and 
Marana  consist of an enumeration of a number of characteristic features and ad­
ditional  circumstances. As in the case of  Jāti,  there  are obvious reasons  which  account 
for the lengthy descriptions as compared  with  many other  Aṅgas.  The numerous 
descriptions of Old Age in Buddhism usually correspond to the. cliche  here  given, 
although  with  differences in detail. The poetical version in  Açvaghosa'ś  Buddhacarita 
in the description of the Bodhisattva's encounter  with  the old man (III. 28 sqq.) 


--- [Page 147] ---
— 137 — 
decrepitude, bowed­ness, hunchbackedness, crookedness  like  a 
roof (?) * 33), [5] (the necessity of) leaning on a stick, the  bódy  weight 
is undoubtedly based on it (cf.  terms  such as yastivisaktahasta corresponding  with 
daṇḍaviskambhanatā  in  the Vibhanga,  abhyupetah  keçaih  sit air  with  our  pāīitya,  etc.); 
the Lalitavistara version of the  same  encounter corresponds  still  more closely to the 
Vibhanga  (ed. Rajendralal  Mitra,  1877, p. 226, lines 4 to 11;  Krom,  The Life of Buddha 
on Barabudur, 1926, p. 62, translated this  passage  from Lefmann's edition,  which, 
unfortunately, is not at our disposal), but gives a more detailed version  with  a 
considerable number of additional terms; cI. also  Mahāvyutp.,  192,  1 —11,  pp. 57 sq., 
where the  following  list  is given,  which  may be compared  with  the Vibhanga: 
kubjaḥ,  firnatā,  valipracuratā,  pāÎityam,  daṇḍa  avastambhanatā,  khāÎityam,  kāsah  (the 
'cough'  is not mentioned in our definition, nor in the Lalitavistara  passage;  it may 
be a later addition),  kharukharāvasaktakanthah  (not mentioned in our text, but C has 
khulakhulapraçvāsakāyatā,  expressing  difficult  breathing),  prāgbhāreṇa  kāyena  daṇḍam 
avastabdhah, dhamanisamtatagattah (referring to the veins of the leg? The  same 
expression occurs in the Lalitavistara in the  passage  quoted ; it  seems  to replace the 
compound  tilakālakagātratā  in the Vibhanga ; for the latter cf.  note  63 below),  jttnah, 
vrddháh,  mahalíakah,  gatayauvanah (of the last terms, the first is a repetition of 
jīrnatā,  the second term of this  list,  whereas the  three  other  terms  are mere synonyms 
of 'old'),  valinicitakāyáh  (a useless repetition of  valipracuratā  mentioned above), 
vibhugnah and  āturaḥ.  The Abhidh.  Koça  (HI, p. 88,  Bhāsya)  refers to the Vibhanga 
definition  in general  terms  („Íe jaramarana  tel  qu’il  est  défini  dans  Ie Sutra")  and 
the Vyākhyā  (cf. loc. cit.,  note  2) quotes  the text of the definition such as it is 
found  in the  Madhyamāgama.  The latter definition gives not so many  terms  as our 
version  ; it rather  corresponds to the  Pali  version in Majjhima, I. p. 49 (cf. also the other 
Pali versions, quoted by Rhys Davids and  Stede,  Pāli  Dictionary, s.v.  jarā).  revised, 
of this definition  represent  a very old  list  (mātrkā),  which  was frequentiy The  terms 
62) It is a little  strange  to find  'greyness'  of the hairs mentioned after 'baldness'. The 
Pali versions have instead of  khālityam:  khandiccam, explained as  „the  state  of being 
broken  (of  teeth)"  in the  Pāli  Dictionary quoted above. 
63) Gopānasīvankatā  occurs in most of the Buddhist descriptions of Old Ape  (tne  Mahāvyutp. 
list omits it). The usual translation is  „crookedness  as a roof" (cI., fox instance, 
Krom,  op. cit., p. 62 ; here, Rajendralal Mitra's edition  reads  gopāna*lvaktro,  which 
cannot be correct).  Gopānaśi  is not clear; the data of the St. Petersb. Diet. (II, p. 803) 
are a little confusing; as a  matter  of fact,  gopānaśi  is explained as a compound of 
gopa and  anas,  but then one  would  expect it ío mean ..a  shepherd's  cart’'; th* 
translation given is however  „eine ausgehöhlte  Dachfette", disagreeing  with  the etymo­
logy.  The translation is probably correct; the word is mentioned between other 
architectural details in  Mahāvyutp.,  226, 87 (p. 74) and occurs  rather  often in the 
Mahāvastu  (cf. the  loci  enumerated in III, p. 546 ; both  gopānasīvaṅka  and  gopānasīvakra 
occur  in the  Mahāvastu  and Senart in I, p. 450 of his edition considers vahka as a 
„forme prácrite  du Sanscrit vakra  dans  Íe sens  moral" (the last words cannot apply 
to the compound  gopānastvaṅkatā,  where  there  is no question of morals). These 
contradictory data do not make the meaning of the compound clear. If the etymology 
given  in the Pet. Diet, is correct (it  seems  reasonable enough), then  gopānas  would 
be a  „shepherd's  cart’’.  Vahka  could  well he combined  with  it; cI.  Monier  Williams’ 
Diet., where s.v. vahka the translation '‘roaming about, vagabond’' is given; cI. also 
ibid., s.v.  vak  2, where vavakre,  „they  rolled",  is quoted from the Rigveda. Then 
gopānaśi  (better:  gaupānasī)  vaṅkatā  would  mean  „going  about as a  shepherd's  cart 
does", i.e.  slowly  wobbling on a bad country road. In  that  case, the term  would 
be an  adequate  comparison  with  an old man's gait. This explanation is however given 
with reserves : it is not yet clear to us how  gopānaśi  could  be used as an architectural 
detail  in that  case. 


--- [Page 148] ---
— 138 — 
leaning  forward,  the appearance  of black  spots  on the limbs 64), slow­
ness,  blindness  ( 65), tiredness, exhaustion,  [6]  ripening and splitting 
up of the  sense  organs 66), return  of the  forces  to their previous 
state  (?)  6T) and demolition. That  is the  old age referred  to. 
64) TilakāÎakagātratā;  C  reads  tilakāĭakācitagātratā,  the  Chinese version corresponds  to 
„the spread  of black spots" (the end  of the compound,  gātratā,  is not  rendered there). 
The Mahávasta  gives  a slightly different compound, viz.  tilakāhatagātro,  meaning 
„having  the  legs struck  by  (covered with) moles",  but  tílaka  is also  the  name  of 
a definite disease. TilakMaka undoubtedly refers  to  dark  spots  on the  lower  limbs, 
probably  those  due to lack  of resistance  of the  veins (varices). The  absence  of such 
spots  is mentioned among  the  eighty secondary marks  (anuvyañjanānī)  of a  Mahāpurusa; 
cf. Mahāvyutp.,  18, 41 (p. 6):  vyapagatatilakālákagātrah  ; further references  are  given 
by Sten  Konow,  Avhandl. Nnrske  Vid. Ak.,  Oslo,  1941, II, p. 62. 
65) It is  hardly  strange  to find  andhatva,  „blindness",  mentioned  in  this  list,  although 
the term is hardly necessary since blindness is already included in  indržyānām  paripākaḥ 
paiibhedáh,  which  follows.  There  are  however strong  reasons  to suppose  that  the 
reading andhatvam  is not  correct:.  As a  matter  of fact,  C reads  dhandhatvam,  and 
it is easy  to  understand  that  one of the  series  of  copyists working  on the  text 
substituted  the  more common term andhatvam. Here,  it is  almost obvious  that  the 
lectio  ditíicilior  should  be considered  the  correct one. The reverse substitution  would 
not have been  likely.  Dhandha was often mistaken  by  copyists ; cf.  Çiksāsamuccaya, 
p. 7, line  9: sa  tena  [dha]nvapra jño bhavati  so  'mtttarajñānamārgāt pratyākrsyate 
pratyudāvartyate  and  prajñendriyam prajñācaksuh  tad  apt tasya  dhanvikriyate.  Bendall 
(Index  n, p. 381),  translates  „dull",  which  is the  meaning required  by the  context, 
and remarks (Additional  Notes,  p. 395)  that  dhanva (c.q.  dhanvt)  should  perhaps  be cor­
rected  to dhandha (dhandhS),  as dha and va are  hardly distinguishable  in the  only 
existing  MS.  As for dhandha,  Bendall  refers  the  reader  to Sanskrit dhandhya,  „dullness", 
to Pāli  dandha  and to De la  Vallée  Poussin's  Pañcakrama  edition,  p. .53,  where 
dadhva  is an  evident corruption  of dhandha. The term  dhandhābhijñā  occurs  in the 
Abhidh.  Koça  (VI,  p. 28o). In the  "Additions  et corrections"  to the  Abhidh.  Kcça 
(in Introduction, etc.,  1931),  TJ. 152,  De la Vallée  Poussin  refers  t­­` Wogihara's thesis 
about.the  Bodhisa ttvabhūmi  (1908) and  does  not  consider Leumann's interpretation 
of the  term  as  dhy­andha,  „verstandes blind",  very probable  („ne s’impose  pas"). 
The Chinese Vibhanga version translated  by  Bagchi  (art.  cit., p. 204)  gives, among* 
other terms,  „mental  debility",  which  may correspond  to dhandhatvam,  but  this is 
not completely certain (the Chinese translation gives  the  terms  in a  slightiy different 
order).  —  Altogether,  we  think  that  dhandhatvam was  the  original  reading,  so that 
instead  of „blindness"  we have  to translate:  „mental  slowness". 
6€) The indriyas  are  obviously compared  to a  fruit,  which,  especially  in the  tropics, 
becomes rotten almost immediately after having become ripe. 
67) If the  reading  purānlbhāvah  of  our text,  which  here  agrees  with  C, is to be  accepted. 
The meaning  could  be  that  the  samskāras,  which  in that  case  refer  to  'forces'  in 
general, especially forces  of the  body such  as  breathing,  and  mental forces such 
as those  which  condition speech,  reassume  in old age the  state  which  they  had in 
the earliest years  of  life.  But  purāna  is mostly used  to denote  a very remote  past, 
ancient times.  The  Chinese version gives  „rotting  of the  samskāras",  which  might 
point  to an  original  reading  pūtibhāva.  In any  case,  samskāra  must  be  taken  in a 
non­technical  sense,  i.e. as vital  forces  ; cI. Abhidh.  Koça,  11,  pp. 122 sqq.:  āyuhsamskāra 
and jivitasamskāra,  not  occurring  in the  lists  of dharmas  (Musêon,  N.S., 6, 1905, 
pp. 178  —194).  Thus  samskāraskandha  includes forces  the  activity  of which  should 
be supposed  to increase  as age  advances, such  as jarā  (No.  68 of the  Sarvastivādin 
list and No.  79 of the  Yogācāra  list).  It is  obvious  that  samskārānga  should be excluded 
here:  the  karmic forces cannot  be  destroyed  na  kalpakotiçataīr  api. 


--- [Page 149] ---
— 139 — 
[7] — What Death is referred to ? 
— Death  means  : of all  sorts  of living  beings as  there  are, the 
act of  falling  out of their special groups 68), a distinct form of decay 69), 
[8] exhaustion of the interior (?) 70), exhaustion of  life,  cessation 
of (the activity of) the  vital  sense  T1), destruction of the (vital) 
forces  72),  and dissolution at the hour of death 73). [9] That is the 
Death  referred to. This Death and the preceding Old Age, both 
together  are called Old Age and Death. 
The above [10] is called the ‘beginning' 74) of Dependent 
Origination,  and (an answer to your question): what is the explanation 
thereof  75). (In the  following  portion) I  will  teach you, o monks, also 
the (deeper)  meaning of Dependent Origination 76). 
68) CI. supra,  note  53. At the time of death, the  living  being  ceases  to belong to a 
special  group. 
69) On  bheda  in the meaning „a special form or  aspect  of something more general", 
cf. note  107 below. C  reads  : cyavanataḥ  bhedo,  „and,  after having  fallen  out (of their 
special  group), dissolution". Cf. also  note  43 to the Transcription. This  means  that,  at 
the hour of death, man  ceases  to belong to the species  ‘man’;  he may or may not be­
come man again, but  that  is another question.  Having  ceased to exist as a man, his body 
is subject to complete dissolution. — The main objection to C’s reading is  that  the 
following  laksanas necessarily precede dissolution; as a  matter  of fact, dissolution is 
implied in the last term of the Marana definition (at least, if our reading  maraṇa¬
kālaksaya  is accepted). The Chinese version seems to be based on  cyavanatā bhedaḥ 
(art. cit., p. 204); cf.  note  43 to the transcription. There exist many kinds of  „falling  off", 
so that  death cannot be defined by  that  term only. This  'fall’  is sometimes interpreted 
in its literal  meaning ; cf. the nice tale in the Dhammapada, translated by Warren as 
„The  Devo+ed  Wife"  (Buddhism in Translation, Harv. Or. Ser., III. 1922, pp. 264 sqq), 
whera a celestial nymph, while  „playing  on the bough of a  tree,  fell from  that  existence, 
her body vanishing  like  the flame of a  lamp’’,  — to be reborn on earth. 
*4P) We translated according to the reading in C (cf.  note  44 to the Transcription). 
7ĭ) CI. supra,  note  60. 
72) we interprets  d niksepa ir the meaning of nihksepa: confusion between the two 
prefixes is not rare. The  sarnskāras  (here : ,/"ital  forces’’;  cf. note  67 above) are 
co­ordinated during life­time  (saṃskāras  may be defined as 'co­operating forces’; cf. 
Stcherbatskij,  Buddhist Logic, II, p. 311), but 'thrown asunder’ at the moment of 
death; they do not really disappear as long as  there  is Avidyā. 
73) MaranakāÎaksaya  is the reading in our text  ; C reads  maranam  kāÎakriyā  : Chin,  version : 
„death  is the arresting of the product of time",  which  is a translation of C's reading. 
In C, the repetition of the word to be defined (marana)  seems  strange, especially 
if it is taken to correspond to kalakriyeti maranam. In our version, the compound 
gives a  kind  of comprehensive notion at the end: in short, it is  (that  kind  of) 
annihilation  (which we regularly observe) at death. Cf. the last term of the  Jarā 
definition:  jar jarībhāvah,  also comprising the whole process. 
74) Cf.  note  19 above. 
75) Katamah refers to  vibhāgah  only. This quite  agrees  with  the external form of the text. 
The ādi  is expounded by the Bhagavat without  there  being any preceding question 
on the part  of the monks; the Vibhanga however, consists of explanations given by 
the Bhagavat in reply to a number of questions about the meaning of the  separate 
links  of the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula. 
76) Artha,  „meaning’',  is opposed to  vibhāga  (vibhanga),  „explanation’’  in the form of an 


--- [Page 150] ---
— 140 — 
­ A [1] (This meaning is expressed in the  following  strophes) : 
— „Material,  indeed, all  living  beings are, 
they are all devoid of  Soul  71); 
They  all see the  Good  Path (?) 7S): 
may nobody commit  evil’’. 
„From  Ignorance  Acts  accumulate, 
of Birth,  Acts  are the Cause ; 
[2] From  Knowledge no  Acts  accumulate, 
through absence of  Acts  they are not re­born’’ 79). 
„The  Buddha has the causes  told 
Of all things springing  from  a cause. 
And also how things  cease  to be — 
[3] ’T is this the  Mighty  Monk  proclaims’’  80). 
„From  one, two, three, four,  five, 
six, seven, eight, nine sections grown. 
Ten­  and eleven­fold arisen. 
analysis  of the  separate  terms into their different aspects. Artha refers either to the 
direct  meaning  (rūtārtha),  the 'letter'  (vyañjana)  of the Law, or to the indirect meaning 
(neyārtha),  which  is always more or less 'hidden’  (gūdha)  in the wording of the 
Sutras, hut considered to he of paramount importance for a real understanding. CI. 
Abhidh. Koga, IX, pp. 246 sqq. and the important references given hy De la  Vallée 
Poussin  in his Siddhi translation, H, p. 558. If artha is used without further indication, 
as it is here, it should be taken to include the  neyārtha,  too.  Usually,  the latter is 
especially  referred to in such cases; cf.  Mahāyānasūtrāl.,  I. strophe 4,  with  Lévi's 
translation (II, p. 5). It  appears  from  the  following  that  this is indeed the meaning 
of artha required here. 
We translated  nirātmikāḥ,  which  is the reading given hy j — B — 2 In c — A — 1, 
the text is not in order; cI. note 50 to the transcription, where the corrected reading 
nirāmanāh  is proposed. The latter is much more  similar  to the corrupt  form  on the 
plate and if it if accepted, it has important consequences for the interoretation of 
the Çloka  — which  it is however  better  not to include in the translation.  Full  details 
are given in the note to the transcription. Cf. also Addenda, pp. 338 sq. 
Sarwe bhadram na  pagyantí,  but plate j  reads  sarvve  bhadram vipagyanti. Neither 
reading is satisfactory; it  seems  that  the correct  form  of the  Çloka  can  only  be 
determined if it  could  be traced in literature. In the  form  in which  the strophe is 
given  in the text, it might be explained to mean  that  if it is  fully  realized  that  the 
living  beings are devoid of an eternal  soul,  one of the main conditions for  following 
the Path  is fulfilled. 
It is irritating  that  this strophe,  which  is found a few times more in the epigraphy 
of South­East  Asia,  could  not be traced. Its meaning is however perfectly clear: 
it aims at establishing the  well­known  triple  division  of Pratītyasamutpāda  into  kleça 
(here  called  ajñana),  karman  and duhkha  („suffering")  or jāti (here  called  janman)  ; 
it is the  pratltyasamutpādas trikāndakah  (Abhidh.  Koça,  III,  kār.  19;  Nāgārjuna's 
Pratītyasamutpādahrdaya;  Bodhicaryāvatārapañjikā,  p. 386); in the work last men­
tioned,  p. 351, the same  division  is caned trivartman instead of  trikándaka,  although 
the. former  term is usually reserved for the  division  of the  pratītyasamutpādāñéas 
into .past,  present and future; cI. Abhidh. Koga, III. p. 61; both threefold divisions 
are mentioned in our text, infra  from  c — B — 4 to 8). 
Translation  by Warren (Buddhism in Translations, Harv. Or. Ser., III, 1922, p. 89). 


--- [Page 151] ---
— 141 — 
is twelve­fold ‘in dependence’” 81). 
[4] „Whosoever  retains correctly 
all conditions,  well  taught  (?), 
TO the  Triple  Refuge surely he  will  come. 
Refuge in the completely  Nirvāṇed  Bhagavat” 82). 
(The term) ‘attachment’ means: such a man moves in the 
darkness of Ignorance 83); as to [5]  ‘Him  who  does  not suffer from 
visual  illusions,  whose  vision  is pure’ 84), what  does  he consider 
Dependent  Origination  ? — (As  follows):  ‘Dependent’  means  ‘decay’, 
which  originates  with  reference to each  link  (of the twelve­fold for­
mula),  that  is: [6]  ‘with  reference to things doomed to perish' 8S). 
— How manifold, then, is this Dependent  Origination  ? 
— Conceived as a whole 86), it is one  because  it constitutes the 
common  base  of all Defilement,  like  the Earth (which is the  base 
of all animal and vegetable  life)  86). 
— Dependent [7]  Origination  is twofold on account of its being 
partly  Cause, partly Fruit 87): Ignorance, Thirst, Attachment,  Form­
81) Pratítya is used as a substantive  (= prat/tya­saṃjñā,  „the  concept  pratītya").  This 
is quite normal in grammars and commentaries (Pan., 6, 1, 15 : prateç  ca‚  „and  of 
(the prefix) prati" But the use of  dvādaçah  (for  dvādaçavidhah?)  is strange. In  view 
of the etymology given below, we are  inclined  to correct to pratityah  dvādaça  smrtāh, 
„the perishable things are known to be twelve (in number)’'. 
82) For this strophe,  which  occurs in a mutilated  state  in our text, cf. the Introduction. 
The translation is based upon the reconstruction proposed  there. 
83) This is the explanation of another strophe,  which  was however omitted in the copy. 
An attempt  at reconstruction was made in the Introduction, to  which  the  reader 
is: referred. 
84) Atainúrikaç—caksusmān ; for this clear reference to the  Mahāyāna  doctrine of satyadvaya 
(samvrti  and  paramártha),  cf. the Introduction. Although the  Pratītyasamutpāda  theor" 
is usually considered to belong to the domain of  samvrti,  it is at the  same  time the 
most effective  means  to arrive at an intuition of  paramārtha ; only after having 
understood its theory, one may have a  vision  of the real Truth  implying,  among 
other things,  that  Pratītyasamutpāda  is anutpáda  and anirodha. Unfortunately, our 
treatise  leaves  these  terms  completely unexplained; for a scholastic manual, they 
may have been considered too  difficult  and the author thinks it more important for 
his pupils  that  they should know how to become an ataimirika, i.e. by becoming 
upádánavivarjita. 
83) This explanation is clearly based on the etymology of  pratītya  attributed to the 
Sautrāntikas  in the Abhidharmakoca. References have been given in the Introduction. 
sC) Samāsatah  is opposed to  vyāsatah,  „considering  the different  Aṅgas  by themselves" : 
it is the synthesis opposed to the analysis,  which  was  typical  of the Vibhanga. In 
Vasubandhu’s  commentary (quoted in  note  43 to the Introduction), the  samása  aspect 
of Pratītyasamutpāda  is explained by asmin sati etc., the vyása aspect by  avidyā¬
pratyayāh samskārāh  etc. A similar distinction is made in the explanation of the 
different  aspects  of Avidyā,  inira,  f — A — 2. — The conception  here  expressed is 
that the formula of Dependent Origination, conceived as a whole, is identical  with 
the Saṃsāra,  which  is the  base  (āçraya)  of all forms of Defilement  (sarvakÎeça). 
87) For the hetu­phala  division,  which  is essential, cf. the Introduction. The  strange  order 
. in which  the Angas belonging to the former group are given is due to the fact  that 


--- [Page 152] ---
_ 142 — 
ative Forces, and Existence are the  five­fold  causes  ; Consciousness, 
Name  and  Form,  [8] the Six Bases of  Cognition,  Contact, Feeling, 
Birth  and Old Age etc. 88) are the sevenfold fruits. This is twofold 
Dependent  Origination.  — There is, however, another twofold  (division 
of) Dependent Origination: [9] ‘exterior’ and  ‘interior’  Dependent 
Origination.  (Conceived of as)  ‘exterior’,  (it may be explained by the 
following  simile):  from the seed, the germ; [10] from the germ, 
the leaf; from the leaf, the stem ; from the stem, the bough ; from 
the bough, the bud ; from the bud, the blossom ; from the blossom, 
the fruit 89). This is ‘exterior’ Dependent Origination. 
c—B — [1] What is  ‘interior’  Dependent Origination  like ? 
— (As  follows):  Ignorance conditions the Formative Forces ; the 
Formative  Forces condition Consciousness ; Consciousness conditions 
[2] Name and  Form  ; Name and  Form  conditions the Six Bases of 
Cognition;  the Six Bases of  Cognition  condition Contact; Contact 
conditions  Feeling; [3] Feeling conditions Thirst ; Thirst conditions 
Attachment ; Attachment conditions Existence ; Existence conditions 
Birth  ; Birth  conditions [4] Old Age and Death. This is  ‘interior'  De­
pendent  Origination explained in  extenso  90). 
— What is threefold Dependent Origination  like ? 
— (It is its  division  into) Defilement, Act, [5] and Suffering 91). 
the hetu  itself  may be analyzed into the indirect  hetu  (kleça)  and the direct  hetu 
(karman);  cf. infra  c — B — 4 to 6. 
ss) 'Etc,'  is of course Death (marana); the different concepts  which  constitute the 
duhkhaskandha  (çoka  etc.) may also he included into  °ādi. 
The distinction between an 'exterior' and an 'interior* chain is  typical  of Mahāyāna 
(cf. the Introduction): it is  pratītyasamutpāda  viewed either aa the general rule of 
causation in the form in  which  it is conceived by Buddhism ('interior'), or as a chain 
of development of a  living  being ('exterior'). In either case, the chain may be considered 
hetūpanibandha  or pratyavopanibandha (Stcherhatskij, Bttddh. Logic, I, p. 84. note); 
according  to the  Çālistambhasūtra,  which  is one of the most authoritative  texts  on 
pratītyasamutpāda  in  Mahāyāna,  the  simile  in our text applies to the  hetūpanibandha 
(or: sahetuka)  interpretation, whereas the pratyayopanibandha (sapratyaya) interpre­
tation considers the  pratītyasamutpāda  as consecutive  stages  due to the contact  with 
the six dhātus  (earth, water etc.); cI. the lengthy  Çālistambha  quotation in the  Bodhic­
pañj,,  p. 576, line 13, to 579, line 15. The latter quotation gives a slightly different 
version of our  simile  by giving  two  terms  more, viz. ganda (between  nāla  and garbha), 
and çūka  (between garbha and  puspa).  In Mādhyamika  treatises, this  simile  is especially 
used in explaining  that  there  is neither eternity nor annihilation: the seed is not 
really  destroyed when the germ arises, but the germ is not the  same  as the seed. 
It need not be stressed  here  that  the  simile  itself  is common to all Buddhism; cf. 
for instance Abhidh.  Koça,  Vyā.  ad Bhās.  HI. 3o, 29; Cosm. Bouddh., p. 153, line 31, 
to p. 154, line 8. The comparison of  Pratītyasamutpāda  with  the development from 
seed to germ is probably very old; but the  Hīnayāna  sources do not  appear  to have 
considered it an 'external' interpretation of  Pratītyasamutpāda. 
°°) Vistarena i.e. by enumerating the different  Aṅgas ; the 'internal' series  could  also 
briefly  be explained by the formula  asmin  sati  etc. 
91) The  division  of the twelve  Aṅgas  into  Mega, karman  and duhkha is fundamental. 
It is closely related  with  the twofold  division  mentioned above  (fivefold  Hetu and 


--- [Page 153] ---
— 143 — 
Ignorance, Thirst and Attachment are Defilement; the Formative 
` Forces and Existence are Act; Consciousness, Name and  Form,  the 
Six Bases of  Cognition  and the remaining (Angas) are [6] Suffering. 
This is threefold Dependent  Origination.  — There is, however, another 
threefold  (division  of) Dependent Origination: Ignorance and the 
Formative  Forces are the  past  [7] and first portion ;  Birth  and Old 
Age etc. are the future and second portion ; Consciousness, the Six 
Bases of  Cognition,  Contact, Feeling, [8] Thirst, Attachment and  Exis­
tence  are the  present  and third portion of Dependent Origination 92). 
— What is  fourfold  Dependent Origination  like ? 
— [9] Ignorance and the Formative Forces are the section 
‘Cause’;  Consciousness, Name and  Form,  The Six Bases of  Cognition, 
­ Contact and Feeling are the section  ‘Result’;  Thirst Attachment, 
[10] and Existence are the section  ‘Cause’;  Old Age etc. is the section 
‘Result’.  This is  fourfold  Dependent Origination 93). 
d — A —  [1] What is  fivefold  Dependent Origination  like  ? 
— Ignorance and the Formative Forces are the producer; 
Consciousness and Name and  From  are the womb ; the Six Bases 
sevenfold  Phala), but the Hetu is  divided  into an indirect  cause  (the  cause  'in the 
back­ground’)  and a direct one, the active cause. Duhkha is taken in a broader  sense 
than  in Abhidh.  Koça,  VI, p. 124, where it refers to the two last  Aṅgas  on1y and 
may then be conceived in its triple  aspect  of samskaraduhkha  (Jāti),  parinamaduhkha 
(Jarā)  and duhkhaduhkha (Marana). The  division  here  given is usually referred to 
by the  three  saṃkleças,  the two first of  which  are  kleça  and  karman,  whereas the 
third  is denoted by phala,  vipāka  or  jātf.  Cf.  Siddhi, II, p. 487 : „En fait, lorsqu'sn 
envisage Íe fruit qui doit  etre  engendré  (Janya) cornrne futur, on  Ie décrit  dans  les 
termes  Naissance­Vieillesse­Mort,  pour provoquer  Ie dégout.  Lorsqu'on l'envisage comire 
arrive  au present,  nour enseigner la naissance  complexe  (siang cheng,  109,  et 4, loo) 
de ses divers  stades,  on Íe  décrit  comme  Vijñāna,  etc.’’.  The threefold  division  is 
discussed in detail in Siddhi, II, pp. 5OO sq., where numerous references are given. 
As to duhkha, it has almost a technical meaning,  which  Stcherbatskij (Centr* Cone, 
passim)  denotes  by the  'unrest  of the elements': the fruit of  karman  is anitya and 
therefore  duhkhe  Only  the fools may consider it  sukha  if it is  sukhuvedaníya. 
Ô2) The distribution of the twelve Angas to  past,  present  and future existences is very 
usual:  the first two  Aṅgas  belong to the  past  (Avidya  = pūrvakÎeça ; Samskara = 
purvakarman;  cI. Abhidh.  Koça,  HI,  kār.  21 a–b);  present  existence begins  with  the 
descent of  Vijñāna (vijnánávakrānti)  and includes the  following  Angas up to Bhava, 
which  constitutes  karman  belonging to  present  existence and conditioning future  Jāti ; 
future existence is included in the last two  Aṅgas  (lying  between re­birth and re­death). 
CI. the references in Abhidh.  Koça,  III, pp. 60 sqq. and H. von Glasenapp, art. cit., 
p. 40 I. The  Yogācārins  agree  with  the  Sautrāntikas  in condemning this classification ; 
cI. Siddhi, II, p. 490 :  „il est  parfaitement inutile de supposer avec Íe Petit  Véhicule 
(Koça,  III, 67) que  les douze  Aṅgas  indiquent deux fois la cause, deux fois Íe fruit" 
(Avidya–Saṃskāra : causes  of present  existence,  Tṛsṇopādana­Bhava : causes  of future 
existence). 
*8) The  fourfold  division  of Pratītyasamutpāda  reposes  on the twofold one into Hetu 
and Phala, but the former is subdivided into  past  and  present  causes, the latter 
into present  and future fruits. Instead of phala, the term  vipāka,  „ripening",  is used; 
it is the fruit due to ripening of  karman,  i.e. the morally qualified fruit. The 
nisyandaphala,  which  is only the mechanical fruit, has no moral bearing. 


--- [Page 154] ---
— 144 — 
of Cognition,  Contact and  Feeling  [2] are the  activity  with  regard 
to the objects of  sense  94); Thirst, Attachment and Existence are 
origination  95) ; Birth  and Old Age are the ‘series’ 96). [3]  This  is 
fivefold  Dependent  Origination. 
What  is sixfold  Dependent  Origination  like  ? 
Ignorance is the section Defilement; the Formative Forces 
are the section Act  ‚• Consciousness, [4] Name and  Form,  the Six 
Bases  of Cognition,  Contact and  Feeling  are the section  Fruit;  Thirst 
and Attachment are the section  Defilement;  [5] Existence is the section 
Act;  Birth,  Old Age etc. are the section  Fruit  97). This  is sixfold 
Dependent  Origination. 
— What is sevenfold [6] Dependent  Origination  like  ? 
— Ignorance is the  soil;  the Formative Forces are the rains; 
Consciousness  is the seed ; Name and  Form  and the Six [7] Bases 
of Cognition  are the  leaf  98); Contact and  Feeling  are the blossom; 
Thirst,  Attachment and Existence are the  Fruit;  Birth,  Old Age etc. 
are [8] the seed of the  tree  of re­birth 99). This  is sevenfold Dependent 
Origination. 
94) The  fivefold  division  is clearly  based on the threefold one into  past,  present and 
future: the Angas belonging to  past  and future constitute one  division  each, but 
present existence has again been subdivided into  three  categories. It is not exactly 
clear  what the author meant by  calling  Vijñāna  and  Nāmarūpa  the garbha,  „womb"  ; 
possibly,  he wanted to  stress  that  Vijñāna  and  Nāmarūpa  refer to the presence of 
Consciousness  and of the  five  Skandhas  only,  whereas  Sadāyatana  etc.  imply  the 
development of the dharmas so  that  they are m mutual relations towards each other 
(indriya  opposed to visaya in  Saḍāyatanāṅga ; three  groups in  Sparça,  the result of 
` which  is Vedanā)  ; the latter group of  three  therefore constitute visaydpravrttL . 
95) Prabhava,  „origination",  i.e. of  Karman ; the three  Angas  included  into this group are 
Bhava,  existence  viewed  as production of  Karman  leading to re­birth,  with  its ­ direct 
(Upādāna)  and indirect  (Traṇā)  causes.  According  to the  ávasthika  interpretation 
(Abhidh.  Koça,  HI, p. 64),  Tṛṣṇā  is explained as :  „l'état de celui  qui desire  les  jouis¬
sances et  l’union  sexuelle",  Upādāna  as:  „l'état de celui qui  court a  la recherche 
des jouissances", and  Bhpva  as:  „l’acte  qui aura  pour  fruit  l'existence  á venir".  — 
This  fivefold  division  of Pratītyasamutpāda  is the clearest example of the  āvasthika 
interpretation. The twelve  states  represent  five  stages,  viz. (a)  past  existence  viewed 
as the producer of present existence (1­2), (b) the beginning of present existence in 
its embryonic  state  (the different dharmas being formed, 3­4), (c) conscious existence 
as far as the relation between subject and object is concerned, but before the arising 
of desire during puberty, (d) adult existence  with  its passions and the  Karman  due 
to these,  (e) future existence  viewed  as a 'series' due to 'ripening* of d (11­12). 
86) Praváha,  a synonym of samtana,  denotes  the 'stream' of dharmas constituting phenomenal 
life in its narrow sense,  limited  by  Birth  on the one, and by Old Age and Death 
on` the other side. . 
­7) This  sixfold  division  is based on the first threefold one ; cf. supra,  c — B — 4 to 6. 
98) The  spelling  patra  for pattra, frequent in Old Javanese inscriptions, also occurred 
supra, c — A — lo. 
99) This  sevenfold  division  is closely  related  with  the so­called 'external' interpretation 
of the chain (supra, c — A — 9 to 10). Here, the first two Angas are the general 
conditioning  factors of existence. 


--- [Page 155] ---
— 145 — 
— What is eightfold Dependent Origination  like  ? 
— Ignorance is the fruit of infatuation 100); the Formative 
Forces are the fruit of enterprise 101); Consciousness and Name and 
d — B Form are the [1] fruit of retribution 102); the Six Bases of Cognition, 
Contact and Feeling are the fruit of efflux 103); Thirst and Attachment 
are the fruit of the ‘series’ (?) 104); Existence [2] and  Birth  are 
the fruit of annihilation (?) 105); Old Age and Death is the undesirable 
fruit  106). Thus, according to the different  sorts  of fruits, [3] Dependent 
Origination  is eightfold. 
— What is ninefold Dependent Origination  like  ? 
100) This eightfold  division  is difficult.  Whereas the twelve  Aṅgas  are partly defined as 
fruit and partly as  cause  in the twofold interpretation, this is by no  means  necessary : 
all of them may be considered fruit (and all may be considered  causes,  too), but 
they are fruits of different kinds ;  here,  the twelve  Aṅgas  are comprised into eight fruits. 
Only  some of them are technical terms, viz.  vipákaphala,  the fruit of retribution due 
to 'ripening' of  Karman,  and nisyandaphala, the natural outflow or mechanical result 
such as this is the  case  in the  world  of dead  matter  (e.g. the  ashes  as the  ‘fruit'  of 
a burning object ; cI. Abhidh.  Koça,  II, p. 289; Siddhi, II, p. 464; Stcherbatskij, 
Buddh. Logic, I. p. 224;  Mahāvyutp.,  116, 1­5). The other six fruits mentioned  here 
are no technical terms.  Avidyā  is called 'infatuation  fruit’;  cf. the definition of  Avidyā 
in Abhidh.  Koça,  V, p. 71  („saṃmoha  a l’endroit  des  vérités’');  although  Avidyā  is 
usually  considered a  cause  rather  than a fruit, it is of course the latter, too ; if not, 
it would be an original  cause  as in heretical systems. On the  causes  of Avidyā, 
cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  HI, pp. 70 sq., and the quotations given  there. 
101) Ārambhaphala,  — most of the divisions lay  stress  on the interpretation of  Saṃskāra 
as the active forces (essentially the power of  Karman)  producing new existence 
(punarbhavam  abhisaṃskaroti),  passim; cI. Friedmann,  Madhyāntavibhāgatlkā  (l937), 
p. 47.  Ārambhaphala  could be translated freely as an 'acting fruit'. 
102) vijñāna  and  Nāmarūpa,  the first  Aṅg<*s  belonging to  present  life,  are considered in 
their main  aspect  of being retribution of former existence. There is of course something 
arbitral  y in this definition, since  Jāti,  for instance, may as  well  be considered a fruit 
of retribution as the two  Aṅgas  mentioned. 
103) Cf.  note  99 above. If the two first  Aṅgas  of present  life  are considered retribution 
of former existence, the  following  three,  which were defined  visayapravrttí  in the 
fivefold  division,  do not contain any new moral  elements  (i.e. except for  those  already 
contained in  Vijñāna  and  Nāmarupa):  their relation with the two preceding Angas 
may then be considered a natural outflow (i.e. the use of factors already  present). 
l° 4) The meaning of  santánaphala,  the fruit which is a 'series’ (viz. of dharmas, apparently 
composing an individual), is not clear to us. 
105) Nírvrttí  phala, the fruit which is destruction,  seems  as obscure, in this connection, 
as santānaphala  mentioned above. The only explanation  that  we can see is  that  Bhava 
is interpreted as antarabhava, the  Karman  remaining after the destruction of an 
‘individual'  existence; in  that  case, it might be termed a fruit which is destruction. 
But why is  Jāti  also included in  rúrvritiphala  ? One might  suppose  that  it is  because 
Jāti may be considered a  pure  mechanical outflow of Bhava so  that  it might be 
included  into the  same  category. The idea of  Birth  being destruction remains  strange  ; 
it seems  that  the  Aṅgas  have sometimes been forced  rather  violently into some of 
these  classificatory  categories. 
106) Anistaphala is perfectly clear. The fools may be attached to prenomenal existence, 
but naturally they do not  care  for its undesirable consequences  (Jarāmaraṇa  with 
all the  çokas  implied). For this  division,  cf. infra, pp. 340 sq. 


--- [Page 156] ---
— 146 ­
— Ignorance is a  kind  of false infatuation 107); [4] the Formative 
Forces  are a  kind  cf action 10S); Consciousness is a  kind  of series 109); 
Name  and  Form  is a  kind  of looking  at something (?) 110); the Six 
Bases of  Cognition  are [5] a  kind  of support m); Contact is a  kind 
of meeting 112); Feeling  is a  kind  of thought 113); Thirst, Attachment 
and Existence are a  kind  of future 114); [6]  Birth  and Old Age etc. 
are a  kind  of annihilation 115). This  is ninefold  Dependent  Origination. 
— What is tenfold Dependent  Origination  like  ? 
— Ignorance [7] is the root of Defilement 116); the Formative 
Forces  are the root of  Karman  117); Consciousness is the root of the 
embryo n8); Name and  Form  is the root of the  five  Groups (of 
107) Bheda  seems  to mean a  'special  form  of something more general'  here  (cI. note 43 
to the Transcription, where it  seems  to have the same meaning), but this is unusual. 
The bheda  categories  here  mentioned are all common words (no technical terms). 
As to mithyāndhabhedah,  cf. note 62 to the Transcription, where we proposed to 
correct this incomprehensible  form  to mithyāndhakārabhedah.  The comparison of  Avidyā 
with 'darkness' is usual (a —  B — 1), but then  only  one aspect (i.e. its  ajñana  aspect) 
is referred to; the addition of mi thy  ā may then he understood: it probably serves 
to include also the positive aspect of  Avidyā,  i.e. sammoha, infatuation, into the 
definition. 
108) Since it  represents  atitakarman (cf. note 92 above). 
109) This  is the conception of  Vijñāna  as pravrttivijñāna  (cf. note 7 to this Translation). 
110) Eksanabhedah. The word eksana is unknown  from  other sources and therefore suspect; 
its meaning, if applied to  Namarupāṅga,  is obscure. 
*11) Āçraya  agrees  with  the usual meanings of  āyatana  („base,  dwelling  place, temple", etc.). 
The (internal)  āyatanas  such as eyes etc. are conceived of as the  bases  of cittacaitta ; 
cI. Stcherbatskij, Centr. Cone, p. 3 ; Sadāyatana  is compared  with  a house (grha); 
cf. infra, e — A — I.  This  undoubtedly is the correct interpretation o£  āyatana; 
a completely different one is given in Abhidh.  Koça,  1, kár. 20  <āya­tana  = āya­dvāra, 
„entrance  door" for the impressions  from  outside). 
112) As to  Sparça,  usually interpreted as the triple contact between an  ādhyātmikāyatana 
a bahyāyatana  and  vijñāœ>.  zf. note 10 above. 
113) Cittabheda is  strange  ; Vedanā  is a caittadharma, but this it has in common  with  many 
other dharmas, such as Sparc a. 
114) Obviously,  the meaning is  that  these  three  Aṅgas  are those factors in present existence 
which  condition the future. 
115) CI. note 105 above.  Life  in its narrow  sense  may he considered a  kind  of annihilation, 
because it necessarily leads to  annihilation. 
116) As  appears  from  the  similes,  'soot'  (mūla)  does not mean  „cause"  here, but rather 
„essence,  principal  aspect"; thus,  Nāmarūpa  may be denoted as  skandhamūla : the 
most characteristic aspect to  Námarūpaṅga  is that  it comprises the  five  Skandhas. 
--17) AS in most of the classifications given here, the essential feature of  Samskārānga 
consists in its being  karman. 
11S) Kalála  is the very first  stage  of embryonic  life,  the four other  stages  being arbuda, 
peçin,  ghana and  praçākhā  (Mahāvy.,  190, 1­5, and passim). The comparison  with 
Vijñāna  is probably suggested by the common Buddhist theory according to  which  life 
begins  with  the descent of  Vijñāna  into the womb  (vijñānāvakrānti,  Abhidh.  Koça, 
III. p. 88; cf.  ÇāHstambha  quoted in  Çīkṣās.,  pp. 224 sq.; p. 225, lines 2­4: 
atha ca  mātāpitrsamyogād rtusamavāyād sarvesām  ca  pratyayānām samavāyād 
āsvādānupraviddham vijñānabijam mātuh  kuksau  nāmarūpāṅkuram abhinirvartayati). 


--- [Page 157] ---
— 147 — 
dharmas);  the Six Bases of  Cognition  [8] are the root of  support  119); 
Contact is the root of the  three  ; Feeling is the root of  ‘ripening'  12°); 
Thirst  is the root of the  cause.  Attachment [9] is the root of 
‘seizing’  121); Existence,  Birth,  Old Age etc. are the root of re­birth. 
This  is tenfold Dependent Origination. 
— [10] What is elevenfold Dependent Origination  like  ? 
— Ignorance  is the  lord  ; the Formative Forces are the army 
e — A commanders ; Consciousness is [1] the ministers; Name and  Form 
is the  city  ; the Six Bases of  Cognition  are the  house  122); Contact 
is the  five  objects  of sensual  pleasure  123); Feeling is the friends, foes 
and neutrals  etc. 124); [2] Thirst is,  that  they  wish  to gain the victory 
over each  other  ; Attachment is negociation, provocation of discord, 
force and gifts (?) 125); Existence and  Birth  are acquisition of 
sovereignty ; [3] Old Age and Death are loss of sovereignly. This 
is elevenfold Dependent Origination 120). 
il­) CI. note  ill  above. 
120) "rhe  relation between  Sparça  and  vedanā  is a  very narrow one  ; cf. Siddhi,  II, p. 483 : 
„Ie Sparca  est cause  et la  vedanā  est  effet";  but  this hardly accounts for  the  expression 
vipākamu!a,  which  would  be  better  suiting  for the  relation between,  for  instance, 
Bhava  and  Jāti. 
121) Cf.  Siddhi,  p. 484: j.Ls  Bíja  peut  re ster 8OOOO  kalpas  sans  engendrer: pour engendrer 
il doit  être  mouillé  par la  Tṛṣṇā".  The  latter  is the  primary cause  of  re­birth‚  as 
far as the present  life factors  are  concerned. Then,  Upādāna  becomes  only  'augmentation 
of Thirst’  (trsnāvivrddhi, Duçabh.,  p. 48 ; trsnāvaipulya,  Çālist.  quoted  Çīkṣās.,  p. 222 ; 
the latter should  be considered  a single compound,  not two  words  as in  Bendall’s 
edition).  Grahana  is almost  a synonym  of upādāna  in its  etymological  sense  (upādatte  = 
gṛhrūte). 
122) cI.  notes  111 and  11£ above.  Saḍāvatana  is often represented  as a  house  with  six doors. 
123) The  pañca kāmagunāh  are  mentioned  in Ahhidh.  Koça,  v, p. 56; cf.  Rhys Davids 
and Stede,  s.v., and  Mahāvastu,  III, p.  109,  line  15. The  five  kāmagunāh  correspond  to 
the five  senses, although  there  are six  sparcas. 
124) Corresponding  to the  three  kinds  of Feeling,  viz.  sukha,  duhkha  and  aduhkhāsukha. 
125) *rhe  text  reads  atmabhedadandindavapradáni,  which  cannot  be  correct  in this  form. 
Bheda  and daṇḍa  are two of the  four means  which  are  recommended  by the  Arthaçāstra 
to beat  enemies. Then,  it becomes evident  that  the  other  two  means  are  'hidden' 
somewhere  in the  compound.  Ātma°  is obviously  an error  by the  copyist  for  sāma, 
the first of the  means ; such  an error  is understandable, since  sá and  ā resemble each 
other much  in writing;  presumably,  the  copyist read  āma  in his  original  and not 
understanding  that  word,  changed  it to the  well­known  term  ātma.  The end of the 
compound  gives more  difficulties  ; the  word  to be  expected  there  is dānāni,  „gifts’*, 
or some synonym  (sampradānāni  ?). The repetition  of nda is probably due  to diplography. 
Although  there  may  be some doubt about  the«  correct restitution  of the  original  form 
in our  text,  the  meaning  is perfectly clear:  the  four  upādānas  are  compared  with  the 
four means used by  the vijiglsu;  just as these  four means might lead him  to sovereignty, 
the four  upādānas  may  lead  one to  repeated existence. 
These four ‘means'  (upāya)  are  frequently alluded  to in  literature  and  epigraphy; 
for the  latter,  cf.  one of the  Mī­son  inscriptions,  B.E.F.E.O.,  IV  (1904),  p. 938, in the 
translation  by  Finot;  "les  quatre moyens,  a savoir :  la négcciation  (sāma),  la libérālité 
(dāna),  l'sttaque  (daṇḍa),  la discorde  (bheda)". 
126) The similes  are  interesting  from  several points  of view  ; cf.  the  Introduction. Dependent 


--- [Page 158] ---
_ 148 — 
— What is twelvefold Dependent [4] Origination  like ? 
— Ignorance conditions the Formative Forces ; the Formative 
Forces condition Consciousness ; Consciousness conditions Name and 
Form  ; Name and Form conditions [5] the Six Bases of  Cognition  ; 
the Six Bases of Cognition condition Contact; Contact conditions 
Feeling  ; Feeling conditions Thirst ; Thirst [6] conditions Attachment; 
Attachment conditions Existence ; Existence conditions  Birth  ; Birth 
conditions Old Age and Death [7] (including sorrow, lamentation, 
misery,  grief and despair V21). Such is the  origin  of the powerful 
mass  of suffering. 
[8] [ 128) Long  and short, round and  square,  high and low,  like 
and unlike, —  these  constitute twentyfold Form 129). ‘Name’  means  : 
[9] the four immaterial groups (of dharmas).  Both  together  are called 
‘Name  and  Form’.  — What  does  ‘Name and Form' (as a compound) 
mean  there  ? — (It  means  that)  wherever  there  is Name,  there  is 
also Form, or — He said — wherever  there  is Form, [10]  there  is 
also Name and wherever  there  is Name,  there  is also Form, just  like 
the sky  (?) 130). 
Origination  is compared with the history of some of the many petty kingdoms in 
Indian history. It is the prince who, with the help of his army commanders and 
ministers,  attacks  his neighbours and succeeds in building up an empire, — which, 
however, he loses afterwards. The use of similes  like  this one is an excellent  upāya; 
from  its very beginnings, Buddhism needed royal favour, and dialogues between 
Buddhist  monks or Bodhisattvas and kings must have been popular; the  MiUndapañha 
and the various  Paripṛcchās  give us excellent examples of this  kind  of literature, in 
which it was essential to stress that Buddhist Dharma could be combined with  rāja¬
dharmat. In such dialogues, it is only natural that many examples should have been 
borrowed from  Rājanīti  and Arthac"tstr­i literature. The simile given  here  illustrates 
in a popular way some of the most important  aspects  of Dependent Origination, The 
king  Avidyā  with the army commanders  dependent  on him (the  Samskāras)  dominate 
this mandala,  which is directed towards universal domination, just as the pratítyasa¬
mutpādāṅgas  are directed towards re­birth ; but just as the foundation ol an empire is 
necessarily followed by its dissolution, in the  same  way re­birth is always followed 
by re­death. 
127) Some words have been left out in the  text;  cI. the  notes  to the Transcription. 
128) The  following  passage  (up to the end of plate  e — B) has probably been added 
by the copyist. It is  rather  confused and  full  of mistakes. 
129) On the twenty categories of  Rūpa  (Le. rūpāyatana),  cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  I, p. 16 ; IV, 
pp. 9 sqq.; Lamotte, Karmasiddhiprakarana, Met. chin,  et bouddh.,  IV (1935­36), 
pp. 211 sqq.; Stcherbatskij, Centr. Cone, p. 11; A.B.  Keith,  Buddhist Philosophy 
(1923), pp. 188 sqq.;  McGovern,  Manual (1923), p. 114, etc. 
Rūpa  comprises eight categories of  shape  (samsthána),  the four principal and the 
eight secondary colours  (varna),  in all twenty categories. Since  Rūpa  is stated  to be 
twentyfold  in our  text,  there  is no doubt  that  the latter  division  is alluded to; 
probably, the copyist (or his source) did not understand why colours should be 
included  into  Rūpa;  he was quite right, since  Rūpa,  in Nāmarūpānga,  is characterized 
by impenetrability (sapratigha). He therefore left the colours out, without realizing, 
however,  that  he was copying a portion  about  rūpāyatana  including the  statement 
of its being twentyfold. 
ISO) The  Nāmarūpa  definition as it is given  here  partly  agrees  with its Vibhanga version 


--- [Page 159] ---
— 149 — 
— (As to)  „Name  and  Form,  o monks, conditions the Six Bases 
of Cognition’’,  [11]  there,  the Six Bases of  Cognition  originate in 
(supra, a — B — 5 to 8). As to the latter, cf.  note  36 above and the Introduction. 
It is interesting to compare the existing versions of this definition. in Buddhist 
Sanskrit  literature in  Yaçomitra's  Sphutārtha,  Çālistambhasutra  (quoted in  three  dif­
ferent forms in the Madhyamakvrtti,  Çikṣās.  and  Bodhic­pañjikā),  the two versions 
of our text, the text of C and a few others. The most striking point is  that  the 
text is never exactly the same. This is partly due to  the  fact of  there  having existed 
more or less elaborated versions (cf.  note  71 to the Introduction), partly, however, 
to the fact  that  the definition  appears  not to have been understood by copyists in 
rather  early times. CI.  Çikṣās.,  p. 222  : vijñānasahajāç  catvāro 'rūpina upādānaskandhās 
tan nāma,  catvāri  ca  mahābhitāni copādāya upādāyarūpam  aikadhyam abhisamksipya 
tan nāmarūpam.  The corrections proposed by  Bendall  in a time when the other versions 
were as yet unknown cannot be accepted (such as the correction of  nāma,  before 
the punctuation mark, to  nāmarūpam);  the only  changement  needed is to supply 
the words  catvāri mahābhūtāni  after  mahābhūtāni : „both  the four Great Elements 
(themselves) and the secondary  (upādāya°)  Form  derived from  (lit.:  which  ‘adopts' 
the different elements in the right proportions by the process called  prāpti)  the 
Great Elements’'. The words added have probably been omitted by haplography 
(or because  the copyist thought  that  they were due to diplography ?).  Still  more 
words were omitted in the version in the  Bodh.­pañj.  (p. 388  : catvāri mahābhūtāni 
copādānāni rūpam  aikadhyārupam;  vijñānasahajāç  <catvāro 'rūpina tipādānaskandhā 
nāma;  tan  nāmarūpam);  the latter text is due to a complete confusion; the  strange 
aikadhyārupam  is obviously due to the expression aikadhyam  abhisamksipya,  which  was 
misunderstood ; upādāya,  too, was not understood and changed to  upādānāni  (owing 
to a  kind  of anticipation of  upādānaskandha  ?).,  and the order of  nāman  and  rūpa 
was converted in the explanation. For the Tibetan version,  which  is less confused, cf. 
note  1 to p. 388 of De la V. Poussin's edition. The version found in the  Prasannapadā 
is discussed by the  same  scholar in the  note  to p. 9 of his edition in Bibl. Buddh.  XXI. 
We noted  with  reference to the Vibhanga definition of  Nāmarūna  that  a relatively 
simple  form of the definition was given  there  — ` without, for instance, the wcrds 
aik?*dhyam abhisamksipya,  which  seem characteristic of all of the versions used in 
Mahāyāna.  It is interesting to examine whether the  same  is the  case  with  the definition 
given  in this interpolated portion,  which  belongs to what we may.  call  the  Upadeça. 
Obviously,  it is not. This  appears  clearly from the words yatra  nama  tatra.  rūpam 
with its clumsy repetitions. If we  assume  that  the author of this  passage  meant 
something by stressing  these  words, it is obvious  that  they can only be a  kind  of 
popular explanation of the words aikadhyam abhisamksipya:  „thrown  together  into 
a unity"  means  that  „where  there  is Nāma  there  is also  Rūpa"  etc., as a gloss given 
by the teacher.  Then we also understand how  āha,  „he  said’’,  was added to the text : 
the words yatra  nāma  etc.  represent  the popular explanation given by the  teacher  to 
make the pupils understand the  difficult  expression aikadhyam abhisamksipya; the 
teacher's  idea is  that  Námarupānga  is something else than  nāman  +  rūpa : it is 
an apparent  unity, the first  stage  of prenatal existence, composed of the  five  skandhas. 
The copyist then substituted the popular explanation for the  original  terms. If this 
interpretation is correct; it  follows  that  the version of the  Nāmarupa  definition used 
in the.  Upadeça  was different from the Vibhanga one; the former has the additions 
occurring  in our  Mādhyamika  sources. 
­The next point is what our author  meant  by adding  ākāçavat,  „like  the  sky’’  or 
„like  empty space"; it is not quite clear what  could  have suggested the comparison 
between  Nāmarupa  and  Ākāça.  About the latter,  there  has been a famous controversy 
in the Abhidharma Schools (cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  II, p. 279), continued in  Mahāyāna, 


--- [Page 160] ---
— 150 — 
the six groups of Consciousness (?) m), such as the  bases  of eyes, 
e — B  ears,  nose, tongue, [1]  skin  and mind. 
(AS to) „the  Six Bases of  Cognition  condition  Contact’’,  there 
are six (groups of) contact 132): eye­contact, [2] ear­contact, nose­
contact, tongue­contact, skin­contact and mind­contact. Contact is the 
meeting of  three  (elements): Contact is [3] the meeting of the eye 
etc. with  Consciousness 133); eye­contact is threefold : agreeable con­
tact,  disagreeable contact and neither­agreeable­nor­disagreeable con­
tact  134). In this way, [4]  there  are, in  all, fifteen kinds of Contact 135). 
whether  Ākāça  is an asamskṛtadharma or not. The  Sarvāstivādins  and the Yogacarins 
consider it to be one of the  three,  respectively six,  asaṃskṛtas  (Abhidh.  Koça,  I, 
p. 8; McGovern,  Manual, p. 112; Siddhi, pp. 72 sqq.), whereas the Sautrantikas 
(Abhidh.  Koça,  II, p. 279) and the  Mādhyamikas  think the idea of  Âkāça  being 
an asamskṛta absurd; the latter attribute it to the opinion of Prthagjanas  (Madhyama­
kavrtti,  p. 505 : ākāçādtni  kalpyante  rútyāhiti  prthagjanaih);  Ākāça  is nothing but 
absence  of matter  (cf. the RatnavaH, ascribed to  Nāgārjuna,  quoted Madhyamakavrtti, 
p. 413 : rūpasyahhavamātratvad ākāçam  nāmamātrakam).  Could  the remarkable com­
parison  in our text be due to a misunderstanding of the  passage  last mentioned or a 
similar  one?  Naman  and rupa are  here  mentioned  together  with  ākāça,  and owing to 
a wrong reading (e.g.,  rúpasya  instead of  rupasyá°)  one might arrive at a  strange 
opinion  about  ākāça.  In any case, the  statement  in our text  could  only be due to some 
misunderstanding of an isolated  passage. 
181) This explanation must also be due to the interpolator. It  seems  to be an  attempt  at 
bringing  the six 'internal'  Āyatanas  into connection  with  the six groups of  Vijñānas. 
The converse  statement  (i.e. the sad  vijñānakāyāh  being in the  ṣad  āyatartāni)  would 
have been less strange; in any case,  there  must have been some misunderstanding. 
132) Sat  8parçah,  — read: sat  sparçakāyāh;  cI. Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 95, and supra, 
b — A — 3.  Sparça  is defined as the total of an innumerable numbar of  separate 
moments of contact, classified into six groups. 
13S) This explanation is  rather  clumsy, since only two items are mentioned. The meaning 
is of course: contact of Consciousness  with  visible  matter  (rūpāyatana)  by  means  of 
the eyes,  with  audible  'matter'  (çabda)  by  means  of the  ears,  etc.; the internal 
āyatana  is always the  dvāra  in this process (cf.  note  111 above). 
1S4) This is the  division  which  is usually given for  Vedanā,  not for  Sparça.  The point 
is that  if Sparça  may be agreeable etc., it  does  not really differ from  Vedanā. 
As a matter  of fact, the  Sarvāstivādins  (i.e. the  Vaibhāsikas)  drew this conclusion, 
which  they based on the fact  that  the triple contact  could  not be a caittadharma 
by itself  and its mention in the  Pratītyasamutpāda  formula  would  be superfluous 
in that  case  (Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 97). The interesting point is therefore  that  this 
interpolation  is based upon the  Sarvastivādin  interpretation —  which  is not the 
case  with  the  Upadeça  in general (cf. especially  d — B — 8  : sparça  iti trikamú!am  ; 
cf. also  d — B — 5  : samavāyabhedah,  and  note  10 to this Translation). The point 
might not be devoid of interest in  view  of the possibility of tracing the source of 
our interpolation,  which  was certainly not our Vibhanga; unfortunately, the text of 
this interpolation is so very clumsy  that  it does  not make the impression of being 
based on an authorized source. 
185) The number 'fifteen' is obviously due to a mistake in multiplication;  there  is however 
a slight chance  that  the interpolator shrank back from the consequences of his  multi­
plication:  how to imagine direct contact between the mind, the objects of the mind 
(dharmāyatana)  and Consciousness? 


--- [Page 161] ---
— 151 — 
— (As to)  „Contact  conditions  Feeling’’,  the characteristic feature 
of Feeling  is sensation. There are  three  [5] (kinds of) feeling : agreeable 
feeling,  disagreeable feeling and neither­agreeable­nor­disagreeable 
feeling. 
— (As to)  „Feeling  conditions Thirst”, the characteristic feature 
of Thirst is contentment 13G). [6] There are  three  (kinds of) thirst: 
thirst for pleasure, thirst for formlessness and excessive thirst (?) 137). 
— (As to)  „Thirst  conditions Attachment’’, what is Attachment 
(there)?  13S). 
— There are four (kinds of) Attachment [7]: attachment to 
pleasure, attachment to  Wrong  Views,  attachment to (non­Buddhistic) 
moral  rules and vows, and attachment to the doctrine of (the existence 
of) an Atman.  Attachment to pleasure is twentyfold 130). 
It is evident  that  such contact  could  only  be effected by means of preceding 
cakṣuḥsaṃsparça  etc., so  that  in that  case  there  would  be four factors getting into 
contact (for the difference between the first  five,  pratigha, Sparcas and the  sixth 
one without direct pratigha, cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  HI.  kār.  30 c­d). The interpolator 
may have realized this  difficulty  and therefore concluded  that  the  three  kinds of 
manaḥsaṃsparça  should be excluded  from  the total.  This  seems  more probable than 
a mere mistake in  multiplication. 
136) SutrptiÎaksanā  trsnā,  — usually, the characteristic element of  Tṛṣṇā  is āsvādana, 
„enjoying’’ ; cf.  Çālistambha  in Çiksās.,  p. 223, lines 8 sq. : yas  tāṃ  (viz.  vedanām) 
vedayati  viçesenāsvādayati,  abhinandaty adhyavasyaty adhitisthati,  sā  vedanāpratyayā 
trsnety  ucyate.  Sutrpti  is strange  since it  denotes  rather the aim than a characteristic 
feature of Thirst. 
1 37) The  three  sorts of  Tṛsṇā  mentioned  here  form  a strange  group,  which  appears  to be 
unknown  from  other sources. A group  which  is often found is the triad  kāma,  bhava 
and vibhava (e.g. in the  Mahāv:bhpṣā  ; cI. Abhidh.  Koça,  V, p. 29, note). The usual 
Mahāyāna  triad is  kātr.a­rūpa­āīúpya,  which  occurs in the text of C, but also in 
Hīnayāna  sources (Abhidh.  Koça,  HI. p. 85 ; Vasubandhu’s  commentary on the 
Pratītyasamutpādasutra,  J.R.A.S.,  1930, p. 616; references to  Pāli  sources in Rhys 
Davids­Stede,  s.v. tanha). Six thirsts (corresponding \o the six kinds of  Sparça)  are 
mentioned in the Chachakkasutta,  Dīgha,  III, p. 243. The  Dīghanikāya  also mentions 
the triad  rūpa,  arūpa,  nirodha (cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  V, p. 29, note,  from  which  most of 
these  references are borrowed). As to the relation between  these  different divisions of 
Tṛṣṇā,  cf. the Introduction. The set of  three  thirsts given in our text is very  strange  in­
deed ; it does not make sense. It is presumably based on the  division  kāma­rūpa­ārūpya, 
but the second item was omitted and a new third item, viz.  atitrsnā,  was added. 
It might seem futile to examine how the interpolator came to mention it; it is 
certainly  due to some misunderstanding (perhaps of  itibhavatrsnā,  „thirst  to become 
like 'that’  ’’, mentioned in Abhidh.  Koça,  VI, p. 137 ;  there  the example of somebody 
who wants to become Indra is given). 
138) The use of bhavati (and of bhavanti in the beginning of  line  7) is  strange  ; it seems 
to be a mere copula. 
139) The  origin  of twentyfold  kāmopādāna  can be traced; it is undoubtedly due to the 
twentyfold division of  kāmadhātu  (Abhidh.  Koça,  HI,  kār.  1  : kāmadhātuh  sa  naraka¬
dvīpabhedena vimçatih  ; cf. also note 202 below). The interpolator therefore interpreted 
kāmopādāna  as  kāmadhātūpādāna.  This  is certainly wrong, especially if the twentyfold 
division  of kāmadhātu  is stressed : what to think about attachment to the  hell  Avici  ? 
Such  an idea  would  not have entered the head of even the most systematizing Buddhist. 


--- [Page 162] ---
­— Í5_ — 
É —A [1] Thus, the rule  14°) of Dependent Origination was  taught 
in detail 141). So Ignorance (is its origin) 142), (i.e.) 'pure’ 143) 
Ignorance, Ignorance  which  is not wrong knowledge but only want 
of knowledge. — Is want of knowledge something different (from 
Ignorance)?  —(Certainly,)  Ignorance cuts (?) and is [2] denied (?) 144). 
— How many­fold, then, is Ignorance ? 
It is curious  that  the same  mistake of confounding the different meanings of  kāma 
occurs in h A 7; it is a clear hint  that  the two interpolations in our text 
were made by the  same  hand. 
140) After  the interpolation, the thread left at e — A — 7 is taken up again. The term 
vidhi is not usual in this connection, but its meaning is evident: it refers to the 
different classifications (ekavidha etc.) and might be rendered by  „distribution’'  (of 
the twelve  Angas among the different notions such as  hetu­phala  etc.). 
141) Vistarena is the opposite of  samāsatah  (cf.  note  86 to this Translation), hut in a 
different way than  vyásena  would  have been. The whole preceding portion of the 
Upadeça  (without, of course, the interpolation) may he considered an 'extension' of 
the last hut one introductory  çloka  (c — A — 3). 
142) There may he a small lacuna in the text  here  ; we should have expected something 
like:  evam  avidyā pratītyasamutpādādiriti  niçcayah,  followed  hy a question  avidyā 
katamā?  Then, the words  tāvad =avidyā  are an answer to the latter question. 
14S) Tāvad­avidyā,  "only­ignorance",  seems  to be a synonym of  avidyā kevalā  or  avidyā 
āvenikā,  „independent  ignorance'’  (Abhidh.  Koça,  HI. p. 84 : „not polluted hy  kleças", 
hut mere ignorance in its negative  aspect;  cf. also  ibid., H, p. 167,  note  3, where 
āvenika  is explained hy  rāgādiprthagbhūta ; cf.  also  Siddhi, I, pp. 277 sqq.); it is 
the most subtle  kind  of Avidyā  in its  aspect  of jñeyāvarana.  This aklistam  ajñānam 
is considered the basis of the  Saṃsāra  here  : abstention from the  evil  is not sufficient 
to be liberated from the  Saṃsāra  ; as a  matter  of fact, it  would  only lead to liberation 
from  the bad  gatis.  Since  Avidyā  itself  is one of the six fundamental  kleças,  it is 
difficult  to imagine  Avidyā  which  is not associated  with  kleças ; the Abhidh.  Koça 
(II. p. 165) therefore  uses  the term  parīttakleça,  „a  limited  kieça",  for this neculiar 
kind  of Avidyā  The  statement  that  tāvad­avidyā  (or  ajñāná)  iz at the basis of the 
Saṃsāra,  elicits the question whether this is  true  fo­ all kinds of  Avidyā. 
144) *j`he  reply to the question last mentioned begins  with  the remarkable words  avidyā 
VTçcati pratiçiddhyati  (sic),  which  cannot be correct in this form. In the  passage 
which  follows,  Avidyā  is analyzed from two different points of  view:  what is  Avidyā 
and how is  Avidyā  abandoned? In  view  of these  two points of  view,  one  would 
expect the two  terms  in the beginning of the exposition to refer to either  aspect 
of Avidyā,  e.g. the effect of  Avidyā  and the way in  which  it is destroyed.  Vrçcati, 
„cuts",  could only be applied to  Avidyā  if the latter  could  be taken to  imply  mithyādṛṣṭi, 
about which it is often stated that it 'cuts’ (cliinatti) the 'soots of salvation'  (kuçala¬
mūlāni;  cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  IV, pp. 170 sqq. and passim j, but it is by no means necessary 
that  Avidyā  should  imply  this completely wrong  view;  we therefore presume  that 
vrçcati  is a mistake by the copyist, but do not see a suitable term  which  is sufficiently 
similar  to the form given in the text to make the mistake understandable; the only 
form  wich  resembles it a little is  badhnāti  (which  would  have been written  vadhnāti, 
which  also begins  with  a va,  followed  by a not frequently occurring ligature, and 
ends  in ti) ; the correction suggested  would  mean  „binds"  (the  creatures  to the  Saṃsāra), 
and might be supported by Abhidh.  Koça,  III. p. 89, where also a number of other 
synonyms referring to the action of  Avidyā  are mentioned.  Pratiçiddhyati  could  be 
corrected to pratisiddhyati (or °te, but the latter correction  would  hardly be necessary 
in Buddhist Sanskrit); the  advantage  above other possible conjectures is  that  the 
difference is but slight; confusion between the sibilants is common, and the triple 


--- [Page 163] ---
— 153 — 
— Conceived of as a whole 145), Ignorance is one, since it is 
identical  with  all the defilements 14C). Ignorance is two  fold,  too, 
in as far as it is based either on causation, [3] or on Consciousness 147). 
Ignorance is threefold, too, in as far as (it comprises) want of 
knowledge,  uncertain knowledge and wrong knowledge 14S). Ignorance 
is fourfold,  too, [4] in as far as it is to be abandoned by (a) 
Suffering,  (b) the  Origin  (of Suffering), (c) the Cessation (of Suf­
ligature  ddhy  (with doubling of the consonant preceding ya) was copied  with  the 
omission  of the lowest portion. Pratisidhyate, „is driven back, suppressed’’, is just 
the term we should have expected. It then refers to the different  heya  categories 
to be mentioned below. The relation  with  the preceding portion of the text now beco­
mes clear: after the lengthy exposition of the different categories to  which  the twelve 
Angas  can be attributed, the conclusion  that  Avidyā  as a transcendental factor 
(āvenikā)  is at the basis of Dependent Origination is reached.  With  reference to 
the latter conclusion, it is asked in how far this  Avidyā  is the basis of the  Saṃsāra  ; 
the reply  is that  the relation between  Avidyā  and the  Saṃsāra  may be considered 
from  two different points of  view  corresponding to either the  sārnkleçika  or the 
vaiyavadānika  aspect.  This  samāsataḥ  statement  is consequently discussed vistarena. 
145) Qf t supra, c — A — 6, where essentially the  same  statement  refers to the formula 
of Dependent Origination. 
14<,) To explain the use of avitatharthena, we refer the  reader  to the  Bodhisattvabhūmi, 
edition  by Wogihara (1930­36), p. 292, and De la  vallée  Poussin,  Documents 
d'Abhidharma, in Melanges, v (1936­37), p. 159. There, the  same  kind  of analysis 
is applied to what might be termed the opposite of  Avidyā,  viz. Satyam; the latter 
is analyzed into one to six  aspects  there;  cI. the beginning of  that  passage: 
„avitatharthena  tavad  ekam  eva  satyam  na dvitiyam  asti  . dvividham  satyam 
samvrtisatyam paramarihasatyam ... .": „In as far as the Truth  means  'not differing 
from  the  'thus­ness'  of things, it  i«` just one and without a serond; the Truth is 
twofold  in its double  aspect  of relative and absolute Truth ". For the exact 
meaning of avitatha (and ananyatha) and its relation  with  the Tathat? in  Mahāyāna, 
cf. the copious  notes  in Appendice II to De la vallée Poussin's Siddhi translation (II, 
pp. 743 nqq.). CI.  Yaçomitra,  vyākhyā  ad Bhāṣya  40, 22, in Cosmol. Bouddh., p. 165, 
where the term occurs in a quotation from a  Yogācāra  source (Maitreyavacanam), 
i­7) It is remarkable  that  the most common twofold  division  of Avidyā,  viz. the two 
'sereens'  (āvarana)  of  Kleça  and  Jñeya,  is not mentioned in this place (for this 
division,  cf. Siddhi, II, pp. 566­572,  with  numerous references by De la  Vallée  Poussin). 
We do not understand what exactly the  division  mentioned in our text refers to. 
One may distinguish (a) transcendental  Avidyā,  which  constitutes the basis of phenomenal 
existence and is essentially 'non­vision of the Truths' (cf.  note  143 above) and 
(b) phenomenal  Avidyā,  which  arises at every moment and is due to wrong apperception 
(as in the  case  of the taimirika suffering from optical illusions) or to wrong inter­
pretation of phenomena correctly perceived (such as the man in the  desert  who 
believes in the reality of the iata morgana  that  he sees).  The first of  these  (a) might 
well be expressed by  hetutvāçraya,  „having  (the laws of) Causation  (fixed  in the 
Pratītyasamutpāda  formula) as its  ‘point  d’appui’ " ; the second form of  Avidyā  may 
well have been expressed by  vijñānāçraya,  since it is based upon the numerous moments 
of Consciousness. This makes  sense  and is  implied  in numerous  passages  in Buddhist 
literature, but we have no precise references to the  terms  mentioned in our text; 
the nearest  approach is the distinction between  mukhya  and pratibhasiki bhranti, 
made by the Buddhist logicians (cI.  note  153 to the Introduction). 
l48) Cf. supra, a — B — 1, and  note  32 to this Translation. 


--- [Page 164] ---
— 154 — 
fering),  and  (cl) the Path 149). Ignorance is  fivefold,  too, [5] in 
as far as it is to be abandoned by (a) Suffering 150), (b) the  Origin 
(of Suffering), (c) the Cessation (of Suffering), (el) the Path, and (e) 
Meditation  151). In this and other ways 152), [6] Ignorance must 
be known to be up to  fivefold. 
— (As to)  „Ignorance  conditions the Formative  Forces’’,  why is 
not Ignorance called the ‘cause’ (of the Formative Forces)? 
— [71 (The term  ‘condition’  and not 'cause’ is used in this con­
nection),  because  there  is only one ‘cause’ (in every single case), 
(whereas  there  always are) many conditions 153). The ‘cause’ is the 
149) This classification and the next one consider  Avidyā  from the point of  view  how it is 
eliminated.  Avidyā  is an immense complex of dṛṣṭis,  kíecas,  upakleças,  which  cannot 
be abandoned all at the  same  time and in the  same  way. In principle, they are 
all abandoned by, the  'vision*  of Truth, but the latter being analyzed into the famous 
Four  Truths, the question arises what  part  of Avidyā  is abandoned by duhkhasatya, 
what  part  by samudayasatya, etc. On this basis, one arrives at the  fourfold  division 
mentioned in our text. This question is discussed in detail in Abhidh.  Koça,  V, pp. 31 
sqq.;  their elimination constitutes the  darçanamārga  (ci. Siddhi, II. pp. 588 sqq., and 
the references given there). Cf. also Siddhi, II, pp. 496 sq. 
150) One arrives at a  fivefold  division  of Avidyā  by adding meditation  (bhāvanā)  to the 
'vision'  of the Four Truths. The  darçanamārga  is therefore  followed  by the  bhāvanāmārga. 
It can hardly be doubtful  that  this is the  fivefold  division  referred to by our author, 
but obviously, the copyist got entangled by the repetitions. Thus, duhkha was omitted 
in the copy before the first  heyā  ; since the preceding  vowel  is a long a, an ignorant 
reader  might understand  that  the first category mentioned is  aheyā,  but this  would 
of course be in direct contradiction  with  the Margasatya. 
151) Qf 9 the preceding note. Jn the Abhidh.  Koça  (V, pp. 11 sqq.), the examples of  kleças 
to be eliminated by  bhāváhā  are  rāga,  pratigha,  avidyā  and  mārta,  but this only applies 
to the more subtle forms of  these;  for their grosser forms the  vision  of the Four 
Truths is already sufficient:. In  Mahāyāna,  the  bhāvanāmārga  became more and mo­e 
important; this  appears  clearly from the  bhúmi  system, where ihe entire  d­rçanamārga 
is confined to the first  bhūmi,  whereas the  bhāvanāmārga  occupies the second up to 
the ninth  bhūmis  <cI.  Siddhi, II. pp. 562 sqq. and 606 sqq.. Obermiller, tne Doctrine 
oé Prajñāpāramitā  etc., Acta Orient. XI, 1932, pp. 41 sqq.I. 
152) Evamāéi  is rather  superfluous here; it probably  suggests  that  Avidyā  may be analyzed 
in many other ways, too. 
ins) The distinction between  hetu  and pratyaya in our text is  rather  curious since the 
former is always included in the latter from a  logical  point of  view;  all the  hetus 
are included into hetupratyaya, the first among the four kinds of pratyayas (Abhidh. 
Koça,  II, p. 299; Siddhi, II. pp. 436 sq.). The meaning  which  is required  here  is 
hetu  opposed to  those  pratyayas  which  are not  hetu  viz. the  three  other categories, 
and this leads to the opposition of pratyayopanibandha and  hetūpanibandha  in the 
interpretation of the relation between the  Pratītyasamutpāda  links.  This is the inter­
pretation of the  Çālistambhasūtra,  rightly termed  locus  classicus  by Bendall  (Çiksās., 
Inir. p.  XXXVD.  In the twelve­linked chain, each preceding  Aṅga  is not only the 
pratyaya, but also the  hetu  of the  following,  but the hetuphalopanibandha can only 
take place if in addition to the  hetu,  which  in that  case  is always one, viz. the 
preceding  Anga,  there  are a number of other pratyayas, too : for the arising of the 
ankura, not only its  hetu,  i.e. the  btja,  but also a varying number of additional  causes 
such  as rains, sun, earth etc. are required.  Obviously,  this is  meant  by our author 
when  he states  eko  hetuh,  báhavah  pratyayāh. 


--- [Page 165] ---
— 155 — 
JfiKent  (factor),  whereas a condition is an exterior factor. [8] The 
~3S8e’  is inseparable (from the effect), the  ‘condition’  is only  loosely 
*iioected  154). For  that  reason. Ignorance is defined as a condition, 
Mas the cause. [9] Of the two (notions) Hetu (cause) and Pratyaya 
Hfiáition),  the latter (applies to factors which)  ‘throw  light upon 
`—īrthing’  15  5). 
(In the Sutra  passage)  „Ignorance  conditions the Formative 
i%1ees’’,  [10] the latter are of  three  kinds : those constituted of 
­^­r^aMorious,  non­meritorious and [1] non­agitated  acts  156). The 
áíiference  between  hetu  and pratyaya is examined  from  three  different points 
.#^w.For the first of  these,  cf. note 153. The second point of  view  is related  with 
Wkzst  one :  hetu  is svārthakārin,  lit.:  „effecting  its own  object’’,  such as the seed 
^fe*s­g  the germ,  which  may not be styled different  from  the seed; pratyaya, on 
^jöntery,  is a factor separated  from  its object, such as the rains required for 
i**ripaation  of the germ; it is therefore styled  parārthakārin,  „working  on behalf 
#siaie#ing else’'. The third point of  view,  according to  which  the hetu  is samçlista, 
*&,iæe  pratyaya  viçlista,  cannot be separated  from  the two other differences.  This 
%&3sim  is important for a correct understanding of the relation between  Avidyā 
HÁ^æmskāra.  Why did the Bhagavat designate the former as the pratyaya, not as 
<^J*SŚM,  of the latter? The explanation  here  proposed is  that  Avidyā  does not 
_s£r ásvelop  into the  Sarnskāras,  or at least, this need not be the case (properly 
­"&īug.  this is  only  the  āvasthika  interpretation of the chain,  which  is only  one 
special  aspects); the point is rather  that  the existence of  Avidyā  is a necessary 
­sáitioB  for the origination of the  Saṃskārāṅga,  i.e. without  Avidyā,  the  Sarnskārāṅga 
­jáfe nat possibly arise (cf.  Çālistambha,  quoted  Çikṣāc.,  p. 220,  line  2 : avidyā  cert 
*&m?fa§an  naiva  samskārāh  prājñāsyanta ; note : the last word, reproduced according 
irêsndin's  edition, should be considered a lapse for  prājanisyanta,  due to the rare 
–/~r*eBcc  of the conditional). 
1Bs^t­­ is a literal  translation of the words such as th_.y are given in the text. Frativibhesu 
í*~ r«ca£ve  meaning „in the meaning  of’’  (common in the Indian  Koças  : cf. Speyer, 
%**sx,  % 140,  Rem.  2); prativibha  would  mean:  „shining  forth (vibha) towards 
bf*Si'\  but prati may also be interpreted in a distributive  sense  (cI. note 111 to 
laíioduction).  The etymology  impHed  by the term prativibhesu  would  therefore 
:*gauwibhātīti  pratyayah. As a matter of fact, the activity of a pratyaya may be 
v*?aaed  with  that  of the sunlight in the case ot the development of a seed into 
?. jam There is however a strong objection against this explanation: obviously, 
­ * !~*k>r  explains pratyaya by some  kind  of etymology (especially the repetition 
?'­nti  m the explanation points to an etymology), but  here  is nothing in the second 
=*T ­3ya  which  could  have suggested  .‚shining".  There is something  which  must have 
< vrcng.  The portion ­aya  could  only  have suggested the root i  (gatau);  the 
•}:_rr^iīogy  of pratyaya therefore is : (aṅgam)  praty  etiti  pratyayah. It is probable 
~ losiething of this  kind  should be read in our text. One might propose to correct 
­wE5ftnrib&esu  to prativigesu; as a copyist's error, this hardly requires explanation: 
`x>t  hha and ga are very  similar  in this type of script, but the objection is  that  ­vi­
moám  unexplained. 
***&Sts  already noted in the Introduction  that  this  division  of the  Saṃskāras  does not 
~pœ  with  that  given in the Vibhanga (cf. supra, a — B — 2), where the  Sarnskāras 
mt analyzed into  kāya,  vāc  and  manas;  it is  true  that  the latter  division  is aiso 
*œationed  here, but it is  only  a secondary  division,  whereas the analysis into  kāya, 
`ac and  manas,  conceived of as the primary  division,  is considered the  'opinion  of 
setters'  (anye  punar  āhuh,  f — B — 4). The obvious conclusion is  that  the author 


--- [Page 166] ---
— 156 — 
meritorious  formative forces (constitute) the threefold  ‘good’  157) : 
good  on account of  acts  of the body, [2] of the voice and of the  mind  ; 
the non­meritorious formative forces (constitute) the threefold  ‘evil’  : 
evil on account of  acts  of the body, [3] of the voice and of the  mind  ; 
the non­agitated formative forces (constitute) the threefold  ‘undefined’: 
of the  Upadeça  is another than  that  of the Vibhanga. The former is not the Bhagavat, 
although the  final  redactor (whom we denote by 'copyist') incorporated the  Upadeça 
into the words pronounced by the Bhagavat (this  appears  from  h — A — 1), hut 
this was effected in a rather clumsy way (the entire  Upadeça  having been inserted 
into the  final  sentence of the Sutra­Vibhanga). The external  form  of the  Upadeça 
clearly  shows this difference, especially by the absence of  bhikṣavaḥ  as an address 
(whereas the latter is used throughout the Vihhanga text). The author of the  Upadeça 
did not see any objection in coming into  conflict  with  the Vibhanga:  there  may 
have been some doubt about the canonical character of the Vibhanga (cf. the remark 
made by  Bagchi,  art. cit., p. 201), hut even if our author had no such doubt, he 
could  have considered the Vibhanga  division  intentional. The text of this portion 
was very carelessly copied; cf. note 89 to the Transcription. The verbosity of our 
author makes it however easy to correct the text; the translation  here  given is 
based upon this corrected text, for  which  cf. the  notes  to the Transcription. It was 
noted  there  that  the third primary  division,  āneñjya,  does not occur at all in the 
text; it was not probably understood and therefore replaced by a clumsy repetition 
of apunya. For the exact meaning of  puny  a, apunya and  āneñjya,  cf. Siddhi, pp. 473 
sqq. ; S. Lévi,  Vijñaptimātratásiddhi  (1925), p. 36, and  Matériaux  (1932), p. 108; 
Lamotte; Mél. chin, et bouddh. IV (1935­36), passim (translation of the Karmasiddhi¬
prakaraṇa),  etc. Properly speaking, the terms punya etc. apply to  Karman,  not to 
Samskārānga,  but since the latter consists of action, the  suffix  ­maya  is added; the 
usual  terms however are punyopaga etc. ; cI.  Çālistambha  quoted  Çiksās.,  p. 223, and 
Bodhic, p. 479. For  āneñjya  (variants : āniñjya,  āneñja;  Pāli  ānejja),  cf.  the note 
by Senart  on p. 399 of  Vol.  I of his  Mahāvastu  edition ; cI. also  Kern  in a personal 
communication  to De la  Vallée  Poussin in the  latter’s  Bodhic.­pañj.  edition (1901), 
p. 80, note 4:  „ānejya  et āniñja  n'ont rien de commun, sauf le son, avec  inj­ing 
Vous  avez bien  vu qu'il  est a peu pres  synonyme de  çubha".  Whereas the two first 
categories of  Karman  are retributed in the  Kāmadhātu,  the third is retributed in 
the two  higher  Dhātus  (Siddhi, 11, p. 474); the  three  categories are connected  with 
the three  kinds  of Vedanā  in Abhidh.  Koça,  HI. p. 84  (āneñjyakarman  is produced 
to obtain  aduhkhāsukhavedanā).  This  portion of our text is interesting because the 
division  does not  agree  with  anything known to us, at least, as far as the smaller 
details are concerned. We do not know any other examples of the use of the 
suffix  ­maya  in this connection (although variants of ­upaga do occur  ; cf. āniñjyaprāptena 
cittena in the  Saddharmapuṇḍarīka  quoted by Senart,  loc.  cit.); a far more important 
point is however the relation between the  punya­apunya­āneñ jya and the  kuçala­
akuçala­avyākṛta  classifications; cI. note 157. 
!­ 7) The  Samskāras  which  are pizrr/amaya are explained as threefold  kuçalakarman.  One 
concludes  that  punya and  kuçala  (and also apunya and  akuçala,  āneñjya  and  avyākṛta) 
are considered synonyms,  which  is in a direct  conflict  with  Abhidharma, where the 
two triads are sharply distinguished. CI., for instance, Abhidh.  Koça,  IH, p. 84 (punya 
are those actions retributed by agreeable sensations  within  the domain of the  Kāmadhātu) 
with op.  cit,,  IV, p. 106  (kuçala  are those actions  which  are retributed in any of 
the three  dhātus  and may even lead to  Nirvana;  cI. note 28 above). As a matter 
of fact,  kuçala  includes both punya and  āneñjya,  and even a  little  more;  akuçaÎa 
is essentially identical  with  apunya, whereas  there  is nothing in the punya etc.  classi­
fication  that  agrees  with  avyākṛta (çf.  note 158). 


--- [Page 167] ---
— 157 — 
undefined  on account of  acts  of the body, [4] of the speech and of 
the mind  158). 
Others, however,  assert  that  the formative forces are of thre^ 
kinds,  viz. formative forces of the body, [5] of the speech and of 
the mind  159). The formative forces of the body are  twofold,  viz. 
inhalation  and exhalation 1‘^°) ; those of the speech are the gross and 
refined  forms of thought preceding [6] speech 161) ; those of the  mind 
l­­) For  avyākṛta,  „undefined’’  (as to its consequences), cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  IV, pp. 105 sq.; 
Karmasiddhiprakarana  (quoted in note 156 above), p. 224,  which  gives a good idea 
about the complexity of the different  Karman  classifications. In the c1assifications 
of Karman,  the concept  avyākṛta  is very important  b^ause  it comprises the majority 
of acts  : those  acts  which  have no consequences whatever in future 1ife, i.e. the 
acts not morany  qualified.  For  that  reason, they are not included in  Saṃskārāṅga, 
which  only  comprises morally  qualified  action  which  bears  fruit in the  form  of 
retribution  ; cf.  Madhyāntavibh.,  translation by Friedmann, p. 47 :  „But  [they do] 
not [comprise] all [karma]’’ (i.e. exc1uding Undefined acts, and a1so those  which 
are retributed in the same existence). But then, it is very  strange  to find  in our 
text avyākṛtakarman  included in  Saṃskārāṅga,  which  should comprise  only  that  Karman 
which  punarbhavam  abhisaṃskaroti.  The  only  reasonab1e exp1anation is  that  our author, 
trying to arrive at an 'exhaustive’ treatment of the possible  Saṃskāra  divisions, con¬
founded  Saṃskāra  with  Karman. 
The division  of the  Saṃskaras  into  kāya,  vāc  and  manas  is that  of the  vibhaṅga 
(supra, a — B — 2, but not in the  Nālandā  version t); here, however, it is considered 
a sub­division  only.  As a matter of fact, the  division  is important for action in 
general, but not for  Saṃskārāṅga,  where  only  the moral qualification of the act is 
relevant. CI. note 159. 
­^) This  is the general classification of  Karman.  Buddhism, as a rule, did not however 
consider  these  three  categories equivalent ; manaskarman (i.e.  cetanā,  ,,will")  is primary, 
and kāya­  and  vāk­kārman  depend on it (Abh^dh.  Koça,  IV,  kārikā  1, c–d  : :­etanā 
mānasaṃ  karma  tajje  vākkā^aka^maṃ);  urwillful  action, i.e.  that  which  is either  kāya– 
or vāk­karman  witnout depending on manaskarman, is deliberately excluded. Stcher¬
batskij (Buddh. Lcgic, I, pp. 161 sqq.) devotes an interesting chapter to the Buddhist 
treatment  of the universal problem of the free  will  (especially in connection  with 
the Buddhist theory of Causation). An excellent survey of the Buddhist theories of 
Kamman  and  Vipaka  and of the related problem of th^ free  will  is given by De la 
Vallée  Poussin, Morale Bouddhique, 1927, pp. 119­217. Important materials are 
contained  in Lamotte’s  translation of the Karmasiddhiprakarana in Met. chin. et bouddh., 
IV. Here. however, the  three  saṃskāras  are treated as being equivalent. The  difficult 
point  in our text is what exactly is the  opinion  of 'others', for the threefold  division 
here  given is common to all forms 0f Buddhism.  Although  this point is not clearly 
expressed in our text. it  seems  probable  that  the 'others’ considered this  division 
of primary importance, whereas the 'correct'  opinion  of our  Upadeça  is that  the 
definition  of Saṃskārāṅga  as kāya­,  vāk­  and manas­karman is  only  a subdivision of 
punya etc. We noted above  that  the  opinion  of 'others' is exactly the  opinion  given 
in the  Vibhaṅga. 
16‘^) The particular importance attached to  these  two factors is remarkable ; it is undoubtedly 
due to influence  from  Yoga.  Obviously,  the two factors mentioned are  only  examples. 
On the other hand, most of the  cittaviprayuktasaṃskāras  are irrelevant here, because 
they are not subject to the  will  (such as  prāpti,  etc.). 
16 1) In Abhidh. Koca, II, p. 174, the interpretation of vitarka and  vicāra  as vāk–saṃskāras 
is attributed to the sautrantikas, who quote as evidence the Sutra  passage  vitarkya 


--- [Page 168] ---
— 158  — 
are volition  16^) . 
Others, however  assert  that  the  formative forces  are  threefold  ; 
viz. good,  [7]  bad and undefined l63). 
Others, again,  assert  that  the  formative forces  are  threefold  : 
effective with reference  to each  living  being, constituting  a part  of 
birth  and directed  to the  Saṃsāra  l64). 
[^] — Are all of  these  Formative Forces conditioned by Ignorance? 
Or are (all of  these)  Formative Forces conditioned not by Ignorance, 
(but) by Knowledge ? Or, (third possibility) [9]  are  these  Formative 
Forces conditioned  by  Ignorance and Knowledge?  Or  (finally),  are 
they conditioned  neither  by  Ignorance, nor  by  Knowledge  ? 
— This  is a  ‘four­edged’ question  165). Owing  to  such 
vicārya  vācaṃ  bhāṣate  (cI. also ibid., VII.  p. 93). In the  Abhidh.  Koça,  vitarka  is 
defined  paryeṣako manojalpaḥ,  ‚‚searching  internal conversation",  vicāra  by pratyaveksako 
manojalpaḥ,  ‚‚with  reference  to a  definite object".  The two  notions  represent  „1a 
grossiereté  et la  suhti1ité  de la  pensée"  respective1y  (cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  Introduction, 
p. XLVIII).  Very  detailed references, main1y  to Pā1i  Buddhism,  in F.  Heiler,  Buddh. 
Versenkung  (1922), pp. 74  sqq. 
162) CI.  note  159  above. 
163) I.e.,  these  doctors consider this  the  primary classification instead  of  puṇya­apunya– 
āneñjya  ; as we  noted above  (note  158),  action  of the  group  avyākṛta  should  not 
be included into  Saṃskārānga. 
1­­)The  division  of the  Saṃskāras  into  prātisattvika,  aupapattyaṃçika  and  ābhisāṃsārika 
is unknown  to us.  The  three  terms used make  it probable  that  the  division  refers 
rather  to  Saṃskāraskandha  than  to Saṃskārāṅga.  Prātisattvika  is a  derivative from 
pratisattvam, in  which  prati probably has  a distributive meaning  (vīpsā  ; Pāṇ.  I‚ 4, 9o ; 
cf. Weckernagel,  II. 1, pp. 257  sqq. ;  cI.  also the  etymology  of  pratītyasam^tpāda 
discussed in the Introduction): ‚‚belonging to each (separate) living being’’; th^ expres¬
­.ion might then refer to those forces which make one belong to a definite group 
c­f living  beings  (nikāyasabhāgatā  ; cI. Ahhidh.  Koça,  II,  pp. 195-198),  and associated 
forces (such  as prāpti,  aprāpti,  jivitendriya  (op.  ci^., pp.  178  sqq.I. The last  saṃskāra 
should  perhaps  be  included into  the  second category, whereas  the  third category com­
prises  the  karm^c forces. As  a rule, only  the  forces last mentioned  are  included  in 
Saṃskārāṅga,  and  therefore, this threefold  division  is strange.  It seems  as if  this 
whole  division  does  not  apply  to Saṃskāra,  but to  Viiñāna,  ^where  it is far  more 
natural;  we  actually  find  it as  such  in a  passage  from  the  Bhavasaṃkrāntisutra 
(Mahāvy.,  65,  54 ; ed.  Minaiev­Mironov,  p. 22)  quoted  Madhyamakāvatāra,  VI, 40  ; 
cI. the  translation  by De la  Vallée  Poussin  Musĕon,  XI (1910), p. 319,  where  the 
viiñānas  are  analyzed into  (a)  those  of birth represented  as  entering  the  womb,  (b) 
those  of a separate  living being,  and (c)  those  of  death, leaving  the  body  and 
continuing  the  Saṃsāra. 
1­­) In Buddhism,  the  four  kotis  comprise  the fo^r  logical  possibilities implying  that 
something  (a) is, (h) is  not, (^)  i^ and  is not, (d)  neither  is nor is  not. They  are 
frequently met  with  ir­. Buddhist discussions ; cf.  Keith,  ^uddh.  Philos.  (1923),  pp. 39 sqq. 
If such questions  are  posed  to a  Buddhist, each part should  be  answered separately 
as a rule.  With  reference  to a  truth,  as is the  case  in our  text,  the  first alternative 
is answered  with  an  unambiguous 'yes',  the  second  with  a no  less clear  ‘no’  ; as to 
the third,  the  Buddhist  should reply vibhajya, stating  that  the  first  half  of the 
statement  is correct,  the  second wrong;  the  fourth alternative  is absurd  and  should 
not be  answered  at all (sthāpanīya;  cf.  Abhidh.  Koça^  V, p. 48).  But this  does  not 


--- [Page 169] ---
— 159 — 
g—A  [1] considerations 166), he mistakes the Path leading to repeated 
existence for the Path of  Final  Liberation  167) and  falls  into  fivefold 
Attachment to  Wrong  Views  (?) 16^). Thinking  (of) the wrong  view 
about existence (?) 1^) is associated  with  it; [2] the wrong  view 
apply  to a11 questions. As a matter of fact, most Buddhists admit a number of questions 
to which  no definite answer can be given. The most famous one refers to the point 
whether the  Tathāgata  exists, does not exist, exists and exists not, neither exists nor 
exists not after death. The first a1ternative imp1ies  çāçvatadṛṣṭi,  the second  ucchedadṛṣṭi, 
the third is impossib1e, and the fourth is absurd. The  state  of Nirvana  cannot be 
expressed by dialectic methods  (anabhilāpya).  The important  Pā1i  text about this 
subject is the  Brahmajālasutta  in the  Dīghanikāya  (cf.  Keith,  loc.  cit.), where fourteen 
so­ca11ed 'undefined’ points  (caturdaça  avyākatavastūni)  are mentioned. Na1inaksha 
Dutt,  The  Brahmajālasutta,  lnd. Hist. ^u.,  VIII  (1932), pp. 706­746, has proved  that 
the whole  discussion given  there  could  on1y be understood in the 1ight of  Mādhyamika 
philosophy  ; cI. the same scho1ar in  Aspects  of Mahāyāna  Buddhism (1930), pp. 49 sqq. 
Thus,  the highest Truth is often described in  Mahāyāna  as being  catuṣkoṭivinirmukta 
(Laṅkāv.,  p. 96),  which  may be trans1ated as  ,,non­dialectical’’;  cf. Madhyamakavṛtti, 
p. 57:  paramārtho  hy  āryāṇāṃ  tuṣṃbhāvaḥ,  ,,la  realité  absolue,  c’est  Íe silence  des 
Saints"  (J.W. de Jong, Cinq chapitres de la  Prasannapadā,  Buddhica, 1­iére Sér., IX, 
1949,  p. 6, note 18, where other important references are also given ; the question 
is discussed in detail, ibid., pp. 82 sqq.). Cf. also Prabhubhai Pate1,  Catuḥstava,  lnd. 
Hist. ^u.,  VIII  (1932), p. 692 (= Acintyastava, yan  naikaṃ nāpy anekaṃ  ca 
nānubhayaṃ  na cobhayam, and  Subhāṣitasaṃgraha,  edition by  Bendan,  Musĕon,  N. S. 
IV (1903), p. 389  (= Madhyamakavṛtti,  p. 12,  line  13). In our text, an opponent 
seems  to suggest  that  the relation existing between the first two Ahgas of the 
Pratītyasamutpāda  formula belongs to the group of  avyākṛtavastūni,  or, at least,  that 
there  are other possibilities than the first alternative.  This  is a grave misunderstanding 
of Pratītyasamutpāda,  and the consequences of such a wrong  opinion  may be very 
serious. 
I­ 6) Cf. note ^6 ^.o the Transcription. The translation .'s based upon the correction of  çāntiḥ, 
undoubtedly an error by the copyist. to iti, the word we should have expected here. 
1­7^ c^. 97 to the Transcription. We translate the corrected reading  there  proposed 
(ity astimārgo  nairyānika).  For the meaning of  nairyānika,  cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  VII, pp. 32, 
where it is translated by : ,,sortie  définitive,  parce  ou’il  (i.e. the  Mārga)  fait passer 
au dela  d’une  maniére  définitive".  This  term always refers to  the  Mārga,  which  is 
essentially  a „way  out’’  (viz. out of the  Saṃsāra).  This  is also the case h^re. The 
ignorant, who do not Understand the relation between  Avidyā  and  saṃskāra  conclude 
that some of the  saṃskāras  (viz. their own  Karman)  are not due to Ignorance, but 
to Knowledge  ; they therefore wrongly conclude  that  their own existence is a path 
towards  final  liberation. Such a misunderstanding of the principles of  Pratītyasamutpāda 
is very dangerous since it leads to  dṛsṭiparāmarça  (cf. note 168). It is therefore 
unnecessary to presume a lacuna between f ­ B and g  – A. some  small  corrections 
in the beginning of g — A make the  line  of thought perfectly clear. 
16^) I^ṛsṭiparāmarça  is „la  dṛsṭi  qui consiste a  considérer  bon,  'haut’  (^ucca),  ce qui  est 
mauvais,  has,  abandonné  (hīna)"  (Abhidh.  Koça,  V, p. 18); cf. also De la  Vallée  Poussin, 
Morale  Bouddh., pp. 154­163, especially p. 160.  This  is exactly the  definition  of the 
preceding conclusion, if the corrections proposed in note 167 are accepted.  Dṛsṭiparā¬
marça,  implies all the other  dṛṣṭis  and is therefore fivefold. How the four other  dṛṣṭis 
are associated  with  dṛṣṭiparāmarça  is shown in the  following  portion of the text. 
l69) Atidṛṣṭi  in the  te.xt,  which  does not make sense, might be a lapse for  astidṛṣṭi. 
As appears  from  the  following,  the four other views are associated  with  dṛsṭiparāmarça  ; 
since  antagrāha­,  mithyā­  and  çīlavrata­dṛsṭi  are mentioned in the  following  passage, 


--- [Page 170] ---
— 160 — 
about the Extremes 17°) is associated  with  it ; the 'totally’ wrong 
view  171) is associated  with  it ; (and also) the wrong  view  (implying) 
attachment to moral rules and vows 172) is associated  with  it. Therefore 
(he infers  that)  by means of sevenfold moral rules 173), [3] purity 
is obtained (and concludes  that)  purity is obtained by being in some 
special  condition 174). (This leads him to the wrong  view  that)  there 
exists a Pudgala, a maker etc. 175) ; [4] as has been said  with  reference 
there  remains  only  one  possibility  for  atidṛṣṭi,  viz.  satkāyadṛṣṭi.  Astidrṣṭi,  which  has 
the advantage of being the easiest correction, might be considered a synonym of 
satkāyadṛṣṭi  (asti,  ,,existence", interpreted as  „real  existence’’),  but this is unusual. 
It might therefore be preferable to correct  atidṛṣṭi  to ātmadṛṣṭi,  „the  wrong  view 
about the existence of an (eternal)  Ātman". 
170) vi^.  çāçvata  and uccheda, in this case, the former : the  belief  in the existence of 
an Ātman  leads directly towards conceiving of it as something eternal. 
171) Mi.thya^h.s.ti  is by far the worst  dṛṣṭi.  It is essentially the denial of the four Truths 
in Buddhism. Those attached to the doctrine of  Çāçvata  get into  conflict  with  the 
Nirodha  and  Mārga  truths,  which  they are forced to deny. The  strange  order in 
which  the  five  dṛṣṭis  are given  here  (the usual order is  satkāya,  antagrāha,  mithyā, 
dṛṣṭiparāmarça,  çīlavrata  ; cf.  Mahāvy.,  104, 34­38) is due to an  attempt  at establishing 
a causal relation between them; this relation is expressed by  yukta.  „connected’’. 
in the text. 
172) Tb^ person who denies the Four Truths is forced to  find  a Refuge in another doctrine 
than Buddhism  and therefore  attaches  himself  to heretical systems such as those of 
Brahmans or Jains ; cf. note 173. ^ila  here  refers to non­Buddhist practices,  which 
according  to other  sects  would  be conducive to  Liberation. 
17^) ^ .­.^ what is meant  with  'sevenfold’  çīla  here; it probably refers to a 
list of seven different means by  which  non­Buddhists presumed to obtain purification 
(çuddhidṛṣṭi).  These seven means may have belonged to seven different sects. Cf. the 
Vyākhyā  quoted in the Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 86,  note  3, where a number of heretical 
means are enumerated ; the number  there  given amounts to seven ; we  find  the 
mention  of the  ashes  of the  Pāçunatas,  the skulls of the  Kāpālikas,  the triple danda 
of the  Parivrājakas  there. It is not however probable  that  the  vyākhyā  list  is referred 
to here  ; two of the  seven  groups mentioned  there  are sorts of vrata, not of  çīla. 
In the  Vibhāṣā,  çīlavrata  is considered  twofold  : 'exterior' (rites etc. practised by 
non­Buddhists)  or ‘interior‛  (Buddhists attached to ritual bathing etc.). 
l^ 4) This  probably refers to vrata, for  which  cf. the  Vyākhyā  quoted in note 173. There, 
the example of kukkuravrata, "the vow of  living  like  a dog’’,  and a few others are 
mentioned. Cosmof. Bouddh., p. 172  (Vyākhyā  and  Bhāṣya,  45, 9). 
175^ ^li^r i­^ the  efficiency  0f rites and vows implies  that  there  exists something  that 
can be  purified  by such means, i.e. something  originally  pure but contaminated by 
various  causes,  which  by  means  of çīla  or vrata  could  be brought back to its 
original  state  of purity.  This  implies the  belief  in some eternal stuff, such as an 
ātman,  a jīva etc. ; (cf. the  list consisting of sixteen items in Mahavy., 207, 1­16 (p. 64). 
The conception of a pudgala was developed  within  Buddhism  (Vātsiputrīyas,  Saṃmitīyas) 
and may have constituted the gravest  conflict  in the older  phase  of Buddhism. An 
entire book of the  Abhidharmakoça  (IX :  Pudgalapratiṣedhaprakaraṇa)  was devoted 
to the refutation of the pudgala theories. There were several kinds of  Pudgalavādins, 
most of whom based their conception on various Sutra passages, especially the 
Bhārahārasūtra.  The most subtle  Pudgalavādins  conceived of a pudgala neither  dif­
ferent  from  nor identical  with  the  five  Skandhas. A  full  documentation,  from  which 
the above details are  taken,  is given by De la  Vallée  Poussin in his introduction 
to Abhidh.  Koça,  IX, and  Abhidharmakoça,  Introduction (1931), pp.  XXXIV— XXXVI. 


--- [Page 171] ---
— 161 — 
to 'me’ and 'mine’ 176) : "O monks, the  child,  the ignorant, the ordinary 
people 177), [5]  following  the current opinions, attach themselves to 
the objects of pleasure’’ 17^). These are the Formative Forces [6] 
conditioned  by Ignorance 179) . ­—  What is the difference between  these 
(Formative  Forces) and Existence conditioned by Attachment ? — The 
Formative  Forces conditioned by Ignorance refer to [7]  past  existence, 
(but) Existence conditioned by Attachment refers to future exis­
tence  1^°) ; this is the difference between the two. [8] Existence  con– 
176^ Atmātmīya  is the usual reference to  satkāyadṛṣṭi,  for  which  cf. infra, h — A — 9 
to h — B — I. 
177^ ^āī.­,  açrutavant  and  pṛthagjana  are technical terms.  Bāla  is explained as  those  devoid 
of 'natural' knowledge,  açrutavant  as those  who have not 'heard' the Truth and therefore 
remain  ignorant,  pṛthagjana  as those  who do not understand the Highest Truth 
(cf. Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 87, and I, pp. 79 sq.); cf. the definitions in the  vyākhyā, 
Cosm. Bouddh., p. 173. The exact meaning of  pṛthagjana  is open to doubt since it 
depends  on the exact sources of our text ; the word^ is usually the exact ‘opposite’ 
of ārya  (the former defined as  mārgasyāprāpti,  the latter as  mārgasya prāpti)  ; 
pṛthagjanatā  is conceived of as a separate dharma (one of the  cittaviprayuktasaṃs¬
kāras)  in the  Yogācāra  system (No. 74 of the list published in  Musĕon,  N.S., 6, 1905, 
pp. 178 sqq ) ; the important sources  with  reference to the different opinions in 
Buddhist  Schools are mentioned in Siddhi, pp. 639 sqq. — In many Buddhist texts, 
āha (āhuḥ)  is used to quote an opponent's opinion (unlike  ucyate  referring to the 
words of the  Bhagavat)  ; this is indeed the use of  āhuḥ  in the  passage  about the 
Saṃskāras,  supra, f — B — 4 to 7 ; cf. also Siddhi, p. 736. This cannot be the  case 
here, at least if we understand the line of thought,  which  is not exactly clear ;  cf . 
notes  178 and 179 below. 
1^8) CI.  note  99 to the Transcription. This  passage,  occurring in different versions in 
several Buddhist texts, has been discussed in the Introduction. The line of the argument 
is not clear in our text, probably  because  it was quoted in an incomplete way. It 
appears  from the question  following  that  the  passage  could  be understood in such 
a way  that  the  Saṃskāras  due to  Avidyā  are identical  with  Bhava due to  Upādāna. 
The latter point is refuted by a reference to the difference in  adhvan  only. One 
may therefore conclude  that  the quotation proved the identity of  Avidyā  and  Upādāna 
(and  cf Saṃskāra  and Bhava),  apart  from the adhvan difference. It is to be noted 
that the  Yogācāra  system  stresses  the fact  that  the distinction of the twelve  Aṅgas 
according  to past,  present  and future is completely useless ; cf. Siddhi, II, p. 490 : 
,,il est  parfaitement inutile de supposer avec Íe Petit  Véhicule  (Koça,  III, p. 67) 
que les douze  Aṅgas  indiquent deux fois la  cause  (la cause  dans  les deux existences, 
d'une  part  Avidyā­Saṃskaras, d’autre  part,  Tṛṣṇā,  etc.), deux fois Íe fruit (Íe fruit 
dans  les deux existences,  etc.)’’.  The point is  that  the mechanism of  causes  and fruits 
can be satisfactorily explained by the complicated theory of  vāsanā  (and  bīja  etc.). 
It is not however correct to  state  that  the tryadhvan conception is characteristic of 
Hīnayāna  only ; it is even very important in  Mādhyamika  treatises  (last chapter of 
the Madhyamakavrtti  ; cf. also  Bodhic.­pañj.  pp. 479 sq.), but its instruction is con­
sidered intentional, and  does  not belong to the Highest Truth. 
17.)) Cf. the Introduction, pp.  97-99  and  note  99 to the Transcription (p. 120). 
180) „Theses  (ime^  does  not, of course, refer to the objects of pleasure.  Obviously,  some 
words have been omitted. The meaning of the omitted  passage  becomes clear by 
comparing  the  passage  quoted from the  Madhyamakāvatāra  on p. 98 .above : the 
ignorant and the fools, having  fallen  a victim  to kāmopādāna,  do anything to satisfy 


--- [Page 172] ---
— 162 — 
ditioned  by Attachment (comprises) the  three  forms of existence : 
existence in the  Realm  of Carnal  Desire, in the  Realm  of Pure Forms 
and in the  Realm  of Formlessness. Existence in the  Realm  of Carnal 
Desire  [9] is twentyfold 1^1), existence in the  Realm  of Pure Forms 
is sixteenfold 182), existence in the Realm of Formlessness is four¬
fold 183). ‘Existence’ means [10] ‘existence of desire (?) for re-birth 184) 
in the Realm  of Desire, and also in those of Forms and Formlessness’. 
The „Birth  conditioned by  Existence’’  is birth due to the manifestation 
^-— B of the Groups (of dharmas) 1^). Birth  is fourfold:  [1] born  from 
a womb, born by sudden appearance, born  from  exsudation, and born 
from  an egg l86). The ,,Old Age conditioned by  Birth’’  is Old Age 
(characterized by)  ‘ripening’  of the  senses  1‛,-, difficult  speech and 
their desires, — such  acts  are the  avidvāpratyayāḥ  saṃskārāḥ.  For the  line  of thought, 
cf. also Friedmann,  Madhyāntavibhāg^,  Transl.,  p. 47, and the  notes  on pp. 125 sq. 
181) I.e. the four  dvīpas,  eight heils, six heavens, the abode of the pretas and  tnat  of 
the animals;  cI. inlra,  h —­ A — 2 sqq. 
l­ 2) The sources do not  agree  on the number of ‘places’  (sthana)  in the  I^upadhātu.  The 
Abhidh.  Koça  (In,  kār.  2) mentions seventeen places  (saptadaçasthāno  rūpadhātuḥ) 
and a  small  detail  like  this one proves  that  this text cannot have  been  the direct 
source of our text. As to the different opinions about the number of 'places' in 
the Rupadhatu, cI. the lengthy  notes  by De la  Vallée  Poussin (Abhidh.  Koça,IH,  p. 2­4) 
Seventeen places is the  opinion  of the  Vaibhāṣikas  of Gandhāra  and other Western 
countries ; eighteen places is the  opinion  of the  Yogācāras  and some of the  Sautrāntikas. 
Most  of the other Buddhists  (including,  for instance, the  Vaibhāṣikas  of Kashmir) 
accepted the number sixteen. 
Is 3) Here, all sources agree. The four divisions (they are not 'places' but  differ  in the 
modes of existence) are mentioned in .Abhidh.  Koça,  Ill, p. 5 ;  Mahāvy.,  162, 1­4, 
p. 46, etc. 
1­­)­CI. note 1o2 to the Transcription, where it is considered probable  that  kāmabhavaḥ 
is a lapse for karmabhavah due to the  frequent  occurrence of the former (it occurs, 
for instance, twice in lines 8­9).  Tanmakarmabhavaḥ,  ,,tho existence of  karman  leading 
to re­birth" is more satisfactory 
­8^) The usual explanation. CI.  ^ikṣās.,  p. 222:  skandhaprādurbhāvo  jātiḥ;  Abhidh.  Koça, 
III, p. 64 :  ,,aprés  la mort, les  cinq skandhas au moment  oṅ a lieu  la réincarnation, 
c'sst  la jāt.i". 
18-’) This  explanation is very different  from  the lengthy exposition in the  Vibhaṅga  (b — 
B — 1 to 3).  Birth  is defined by a reference to the four  yonis  (cf. Abhidh.  Koça, 
IH, p. 26­28). There are some variations in the terms ; instead of svedaja, the usual 
term is  saṃsvedaja;  the prefix might be used for making the notion a  little  less 
precise  (cf.  saṃjāti,  saṃkleça,  saṃmoha,  in which  sam­ is not used  samavāyārtham, 
but rather to include kindred notions into the simplex;  saṃkleça  is all  that  is associated 
with  kleça;  in a  similar  way,  sveda  in its narrow meaning is not the origin of insects 
etc.); instead of garbhaja, the usual term is  jarāyuja  (garbha being used in many 
derived  and less precise meanings ; anda may be  called  a garhha, too); instead of 
upapattiia,  the usual  form  is upapāduka,  but  there  are many variants (cI. Abhidh. 
Koça,  HI, p. 27 note s). The term refers to birth without preceding pregnancy (the 
Devī  suddenly finds a  small  Deva  on her knees). 
187y For this short definition and the  following  ones, ^f. ^alist. quoted  ^:ikṣās.,  p. 222 ; 
Madhyam.­vṛtti,  p. 209;  Daçabh.,  p. 49;  Bodhic.­pañj.,  p. 480 (abbreviated by  peyātaṃ^; 
Vyākhyā  quoted Abhidh.  Koça,  III, p. 83,  note  5, where other references (to  Pali 


--- [Page 173] ---
— 163 — 
[2] decoloration of the matter (constituting the body) 1^1. The im­
mediate consequence 1^) of Old Age is Death; the latter is due to 
the splitting  up of the Groups (of  dharmas)  . Death conditions  Sorrow  ; 
[3^] Sorrow  means 'sorrow about that (death)’, 'sorrow about (the 
fact that) the constituents have become  void  of the senses’  1^°) . Sorrow 
conditions  Lamentation  ; the characteristic feature of lamentation is 
weeping.  [4] Lamentation conditions  pain  ; pain  is due to grief, but 
pain (at the same time) conditions  grief  1^1) ; [5] the characteristic 
feature of  grief  is torment of the heart.  Grief  conditions despair ; the 
sources and to De la  vallée  Poussin’s  Théorie des  douze  causes,  pp. 32 sq. and p. 80), 
are also  given.  Although  agreeing in their essentials, the  define  ­ions  are nowhere 
identical.  Thus,  Daçabh.,  p. 49 :  skandhaparipāko  jarā,  jīrnasya  skandhabhedo  maraṇam, 
etc. ; ^ikṣās.,  p. 222  : skandhaparipāko  jarā  vināço  maranaṃ  ; Madhyam.­vṛtti, p.  209  : 
jīrnasya  skandhasya  vināço  maranaṃ. Cf.  also the  vibhaṅga,  supra,  b —­  B — 4 to 9 
and the references  given  in notes  61 to 73 to this Translation.  Skandhaparipāka 
occurs in almost an the descriptions, but the vibhahga gives  indriyāṇāṃ  paripākaḥ. 
As appears  at several p1aces, the definitions in the Upadeca are not based on those 
of the  vibhaṅga  ; cf. the  division  of Jāti  (note 186 above) and especiany  that  of 
Saṃskāra  (note 156). 
188') Rupa,  „matter’’,  is characterized by  saṃsthāna  and  varna  (cf. the  definition  of 
.rūpāyatana,  note 129 above).  During  Old Age,  Rūpa  more and more becomes vivarna. 
l­ 0) The use of samanantara  suggests  samanantarapratyaya,  .‚condition  en qualité  d’antécédent 
égal et immédiat’’  (Abhidh.  Koça,  II, p. 100 ; cf. Siddhi, II, p. 437). 
1–,. Conjectural translation. The term  reads  çūnyendriyavyavasthānandhātuçoka,  which  cannot 
be correct in this form. The easiest correction is the omission of the n preceding 
^dhatu°,  as  was  proposed in note 104 to the Transcription. Then  çūnyendriyāvasthāna 
could  be explained as a  bahuvrihi  : „being  in the condition of empty indriyas" ; it is 
of course not the indriyas  that  become empty, but the organs  (āçraya,  i.e. eyes etc.) 
that lose the faculties findriya) of vision etc.  D^ātu  refers to th^  eighteen  saṃtāna 
compounds analysed into  three  groups : six internal  āy^tanas  or indriyas, six external 
āyatanas  or visayas and the six  vijñānas  (Abhidh.  Koça,  I, pp. 51 sqq. ; enumerated 
in Mahāvy.  107,  l–18,  p. 33 ; discussed by Stcherbatskij, Centr. Conc., passim). The 
meaning  of our compound  could  then be  that  at the moment of death, the first 
group (and the third) disappear; the eyes etc. do not disappear at  that  very moment 
but they become  ‘v^id',  and this is the cause of sorrow for the others. 
1.n) .Duḥkha  and daurmanasya are usually distinguished as  physical  pain and mental grief, 
respectively  ; thus, daurmanasya is defined as  mānasaṃ  duḥkham  (Çikṣās.,  p. 222). 
CI. also Abhidh.  Koça,  II, p. 133 :  duḥkham  = kāyikī  vedanā,  and p. 115 : daurmanasya 
= caitasī  vedanā  ; Daçabh.,  p. 49  : pañoendriyanṃāto duḥkhaṃ, manodṛsṭinipāto 
daurmanasyam ;  in the  Çiksās.  passage quoted above (which is taken from the  Çālist.¬
sūtra), duḥkha  is stated to be associated (samprayukta) with the five groups of 
Consciousness  (i.e. the six without  manoviiñāna),  whereas daurmanasya is associated 
with  manasikāra.  It is a well­known problem, also in W'sstern psychology, whether 
mental  grief  depends on  physical  pain or the converse. In  Buddhism,  they are considered 
interdependent factors (anyonyahetuka); the technical term for such reciprocal causation 
is sahabhuhetu,  „cause  en tant  que coexistants,  les  dharmas qui sont effet  les  uns 
des autres" (Abhidh.  Koça,  H, p. 248), such as the  Mahābhutāni  and their  lakṣanas 
(varna,  saṃsthāna),  or the  mind  (citta)  and the mental functions (caitta). CI. also 
saṃprayuktahetu,  „cause  en qualité  d'sssociés"  (op. cit., II, p. 268),  which  is a  subdivision 
of sahabhūhetu.  On  these  aspects  of causation,  which  touch us as  strikingly  ‘modern’. 
cf. Stcherbatskij, Buddh. I­ngic, I (1932), pp. 138 sq. 


--- [Page 174] ---
.— 164 —­
characteristic  feature  of despair is ..... (?) 192) ; [6]  grief  is due 
to the fact  that  it is known to be the  cause  of despair —  that  is 
grief  taken by  itself  l93). The knowledge  that  1^’ 4) pain is the  cause 
of grief  — that  is pain [7] taken by  itself  (or) pain isolated (from 
the complex  of suffering ?) 1^5) . The knowledge  that  lamentation is 
the cause  of pain —  that  is lamentation taken by itself. The knowledge 
that sorrow is the  cause  of lamentation —  that  is sorrow [8] taken 
by itself. The knowledge  that  death is the  cause  of sorrow —  that 
is death taken by itself. The fact  that  1^6) Old Age  causes  Death — 
that is Old Age taken by  itself  The fact  that  Birth  causes  Old Age 
­ [9]  that  is Birth  taken by itself. The fact  that  Existence  causes 
Birth  — that  1s Existence taken by itself. Existence is caused by 
Attachment 19^). 
1^2) There must be a small lacuna in the text here. 
l^ ^rhe  çokas  are not real Ahgas, but constitute a  great  complex  (mahāduḥkhaskandha) 
comprised  in Jarāmaraṇāṅga  (cf.  supra,  note  18; cf. also Siddhi, II. pp. 485 sq.). 
^:oka,  parideva,  duḥkha,  etc. do not therefore constitute a causal chain ; they an 
constitute different forms of suffering,  which  often  occur  together.  We may however 
lift one of  these  forms out of the complex and consider it by  itself  in its relation 
to other forms of suffering ; this probably is the meaning of  vyasta  (opposite :  samasta, 
the complex  as a whole); it is not  „analyzed’’  but the result of analyzing. 
I­ 4) Here, and in the  following  lines,  there  are a number of small intercalated  sentences 
followed  by lti. These  sentences  are to be taken in the accusative (cI. in line 7 : 
duḥkhahetuṃ  paridevam  ; the latter is a masculine noun),  which  must be considered 
to depend on a word  like  jñātvā,  ‚‚knowing  that",  which  is not expressed in the text, 
but suggested by  upāyāsahetujñatvād  (line 6). It is even possible  that  the latter word, 
the final  d of  which  is omitted on tb^ plate should be corrected to  upāyāsahetuṃ 
jñātvā,  which  is more satisfactory; as to  upāyāsa,  this word is  treated  as a masculine 
(instead of  upāyāsas.  c.q.  upāyāsohe^uṃ)  here  and in line 5, but this is very common. 
l^) The addition of  vyastad  uḥkham  a^ter  vyastan  = duḥkham  seems  quite useless. 
l^) The formulation becomes different as soon as the text  treats  about real  Aṅgas  ; in 
maranahetukā  jarā,  the relation is a ve­y close one; it is accepted as a fact, whereas 
the causal relation between  çoka  and parideva, e.g., is not necessary : it is  rather  one 
of the possible opinions about their relation and therefore subjective (cf. the use of 
jñātvā  concluded to in  note  194), it may be considered in such a way (although, 
properly  speaking, it is only a complex of associated notions). According to the 
dictionaries,  hetuka  at the end of compounds is always used in the meaning 'causing' 
and this is also the  case  here. 
l­^ Here, the text of the  Upadeça  ends  ; in the text such a^ we hav^ it on the  gold 
plates, the end was clearly indicated by (a) not  filling  in the line up to the end 
(there  is sufficient room left for two or  three  aksaras  more), and (b) by writing only 
nine lines of the plate, although a tenth one  could  have been added easily. The line 
of thought traced in the preceding portion is not continued any further back 
(upādānahetukā  tṛṣnā)  etc. up to  Avidyā.  That  there  was a definite reason to end 
with Upādāna,  appears  from the line of argument  which  precedes. This line begins 
in g — A — 7 :  upādānapratyayo  bhavaḥ  and aftar  that,  the pratyaya  chain is continued 
up to  upāyāsa.  When we see  that  in the portion  following  the line is drawn back  again, 
it is only natural  that  it should end at  Upādāna.  In addition, it is obvious  that  the 
final  part  of the text inscribed in the plates was added later on (cI. the  notes  that 
fonow)  to give a new (but clumsy) explanation of  IJpadāna  again.  Hnt the­, it  helmes 


--- [Page 175] ---
— 165 — 
h—­A  [1] — (The above is the) Explanation ^8). (The first  part  is) 
what has been enounced to you, (the second), what has been said 
in reply (to your questions) 1^). 
Thus spoke the Bhagavat; the monks, whose minds were en­
lightened (?) 2°°), [2] rejoiced at his discourse and silently withdrew 
from  his neighbourhood. 
­ There are four continents 2°1), viz. [3]  Jambudvīpa,  Uttara¬
kurudvīpa, Pūrvavidehadvīpa, Avaragodhanyadvīpa  ; eight great [4] 
hells,  viz.  Sañjīva,  Kālasūtra,  Saṃghāta,  Raurava,  Mahāraurava, 
Tapana,  Saṃpratāpaka,  and [5]  Avici  ; six divine  abodes,  viz.  (those 
of the) Four  Mahārājikas, Trāyastriṃças, Yāmas, Tuṣitas, Nirmāṇa¬
ratis,  [6] and  Parinirmitavaçavartins ;  (in addition) the abodes of 
obvious  that  there  should have been a definite reason owing to  which  the text should 
end in  Upādāna  : as we pointed out in the Introduction, the probable  reason  is that 
the Upadeça  is a commentary to the introductory strophes, and the latter part of 
the Upadeça  explains the term  upādānavivarjitaḥ.  Cf. supra, p. 91. 
19­) It  seems  that  this  final  formula was directly  taken  from the Sutra­vibhanga text, 
for no reference to the  Upadeça  is mentioned. As we saw above  (notes  75 and 76) 
the final  formula begins already in b — B — 10, but is changed  there  by intercalating 
a sentence  referring to the  (deeper)  meaning of  Pratītyasamutpāda.  After  that,  the 
entire  Upadeça  could  be added and at the end, the  final  sentence  of Sūtra–Vibhaṅga 
text was continued. 
I.'­ 9) –ṛh^  entire text may be considered to consist of two portions, very unequal in length, 
viz. (a) the principle  (ādi  = uddeça  = the Sutra),  which  is the nucleus of the 
Pratītyasamutpāda  theory, and (b) the explanation of the direct  (Vibhaṅga)  and 
indirect  (Upadeça)  meaning of the principle. The  Vibhaṅga  and the  Upadeça  are not 
exactly  enounced by the Bhagavat as the Sutra is, but consist of lengthy replies to 
the questions  rising  ^bout the meaning of the Sutra. The first portion (a) is therefore 
uktam,  the second (b) pratyuktam. 
200) Aptamanasas is at least unusual ; it  could  be ^ mistake by the copyist for  ātta^’, 
the usual form. The mistake is however,  difficult  ^o be explained from a palaeographic 
point  of view  : pa and ta oo not  resem  b1e each other at all. It  seems  that  ātta  (from 
ādadātī)  was interpreted as ^  Prākritism  instead of  āpta.  The latter  means  „fit, capable’’ 
(to understand the meaning of the words pronounced by the Bhagavat) and therefore 
makes good  sense.  Another point is the plural  āptamanasas.  Buddhist  te:^:ts  giving 
this stereotyped formula at the end of the Sutras often read  āttamanās  (cf. Sad¬
dharmapund., ed. Kern­Nanjio, BibL Buddh., X‚ 1909, p. 487  : idam avocad  bhagavān 
āttamanās,  and the  same  words occur at the end of the  Lalitavistara).  It is noted 
that C and G read  āttamanās,  too.  Although  the plural (in our text and elsewhere) 
is easier to understand than the singular (in  which  case  the term must either be 
referred to the Bhagavat or explained as an s­stem treated as an a­stem—for other 
examples, cf.  note  7 to the Introduction to No. II above), it  seems  impossible to decide 
which  form is the  original  one. Speyer (Album Kern, 1903, p. 43, note) proposed 
to correct  āttamanās  in the Lalit. to  āttamanasas  and to replace the mark of punc¬
tuation adopted in Lefmann's edition, but this seems very doubtful. Cf. also Maha¬
vastu, II, p. 54, line 19  : tān dṛṣṭvā anāttamanā puraṃdaro,  ity  abravīt āttamano 
sarveṣu.  Anāttamanā  is  acc. plur. fem. (cf. Sénart,  ibid., p. 505). 
2') 1) The portion of the next now  following  (up to the end) is an obvious addition ; 
as a matter of fact, the Bhagavat has already finished his discourse and the monks 
have left him. As we pointed out in the Introduction, the  passage  is however interesting 
because it gives an idea of what our author considered the  principal  aim of the  Upadeça. 


--- [Page 176] ---
­­­­­­ 166 ­­^ 
Pretas and animals ­ 9^). The total of (the above divisions) constitutes 
[7] the twentyfold  Realm  of Carnal  Desire.  This  is called  ‘Attachment 
to pleasure’ 203). 
‘Attachment  to Wrong  Views’  (means) the  five  wrong views : 
[8] the wrong  view  of a real personality, of the Extremes, the  ‘totally’ 
wrong  view,  attachment to wrong views  2°4) , and attachment to (non­
Buddhist)  moral rules and vows. [9] The wrong  view  of a real per­
sonality  is twentyfold :  fourfold  with  reference to  Form,  fourfold  with 
reference to  Feeling,  fourfold  with  reference to Ideation,  fourfold 
h—­B  [1] with  reference to the Forces and  fourfold  with  reference to 
Consciousness.  The total of the above (amounts to) the twentyfold 
202^ rhi^ enumeration of the twenty  Kāmadhātu  divisions corresponds to Abhidh.  Koça, 
III, kār.  1 : 
Nārakapretatiryaṅco  mānuṣāḥ  ṣaḍ divaukasaḥ  / 
Kāmadhātuḥ  sa narakadvīpabhedena  viṃçatiḥ  // 
Very  detailed references are given in De 1a  Vallée  Poussin’s  Ahhidharmakoça  translation, 
III, pp. 1 sqq. ('vingtquatre’, in the translation of this  Çloka,  is a lapse). Important 
additions are given in the Introduction to the same publication (1931), p. 145. The 
Vyākhyā  by Yaçomitra  to the third  Koçasthāna  was published by the same scholar 
in Cosmologie Bouddhique (1914­19), together  with  other materials ; a  brief  survey is 
found  in De la  Vallée  Poussin’s  article  ‘Cosmogony  and Cosmology’ in Hasting's 
Encyclopaedia  ; among the other, extensive literature on the subject, we mention 
especially  McGovern,  Manual, I, Cosmology (1923), especially pp. 60 sqq. (comparison 
of the  Theravāda,  Sarvāstivāda  and  Yogācāra  systems). —  Although  the enumeration 
here  given  agrees  exactly  with  that  cf the Abhidh.  Koça,  it is curious  that  the order 
differs.  The  Koca  enumerate^ the different portions systematically  from  the lowest 
to the highest regions (as is also the case  with  the  dhātu  enumerations), whereas 
our text  starts  with  th^  mānuṣaloka. 
203) This  is a curious misunderstanding, fo^. it is obvious  that  kāmopādāna  does not  mean 
kāmadhātūpādāna,  as our author  seems  to conclude. CI. the Introduction ; Vasubandhu 
thought  it even necessary to  avoid  such a misunderstanding (Abhidh.  Koça,  III. pp. 7 
sqq.). Attachment to some of the  Kamadhātu  divisions (infernal, animal or Preta 
existence) is something absurd. 
2c 4) This  translation might give a wrong impression  ; dṛsṭiparāmarça  is net of course the 
same as  dṛṣtyupādāna  ; cI.  note  168 above. 
20­) The usual explanation of  satkāyadṛsṭi  is ātmātmīyadṛsṭi,  ,,the Wrong  View  on the 
existence of an  Ātman  or what belongs to an  Ātman"  (Abhidh.  Koça,  V, p. 15; cf. supra, 
g – A ­— 4  : ātmātmīya).  For the explanation of the term  satkāyadṛṣṭi,  cf. the copious 
notes  by De la  Vallée  Poussin, Abhidh.  Koça,  V, p. 15, note. The suggestion by 
Senart (cI. Stcherbatskij, Buddh.  L^ogic,  I. p. 109), according to  which  satkāyadṛṣṭi 
was originally  a corruption of  satkāryadṛṣṭi,  so that  the fundamental  tenet  of Sāṃkhya 
became the fundamental error in Buddhism, is very attractive, although It is not 
capable of proof. As a matter of fact, Liebentbal  (Satkārya  in  der  Darstellung  seiner 
^uddhistischen Cegner, 1934) has tried to prove (pp. 11 sqq.)  that  satkāryavāda 
did not belong to early  Sārnkhya;  Keith,  Ind. H^ist. ^u., XII (1936), pp. 15 sq., 
seems  to accept  Liebenthal’s  arguments, though  with  some reservations. On the  striking 
resemblance  between  the dharmas of Buddhism and the  gunas  of Sāṃkhya,  a point 
closely  connected  with  the above, cI. Stcherbatskij, 1nd. Hist. ^u., X (1934), pp. 737­
7^0; a substantial survey of the relations  between  Saṃkhya  and Buddhism is given 


--- [Page 177] ---
— 167 — 
wrong  view  of a real personality  2°5) . The wrong  view  of the Extremes 
[2] is threefold, (referring to) annihilation, eternal existence of an 
Atman  (?), and (doubt) whether an  Atman  exists or not (?) 2°,L 
The 'totally’  Wrong  View  is twofold  ......  (?) 26^) : is  there  a Path 
[3] leading to  Liberation  (?), why is this a beginning (?), why is 
not the Suffering of Existence ever­lasting ? (Therefore, it is evident 
that after the destruction of  Mithyāḍṛṣṭi  ?), there  is no  origin  of (new) 
existence, no cause, cessation of Existence ­^). 
by De la  vallée  Poussin, 1ndo­Européens etc.,  Hisf.  du  Monde, III (1936), pp. 310 
sq. — The twentyfold division of  satkāyadṛṣṭi  is the usual one ; it is due to the 
fact that  the Buddhists,  when  refuting any doctrine about the existence of a  soul, 
almost always refer to the classification of ail the elements of conditioned existence 
into the  five  Skandhas. If  there  is a  soul,  either it must be identical  with  one of 
the five,  or it must  stand  in some relation to one of the Skandhas ; in the latter case, 
there  are  three  possibilities  : the  Ātman  is the possessor of Pupa etc.  (rūpavant), 
the Ātman  is dependent  on Rdpa  (like  a servant,  bhṛtyavat^),  or the Atman is  simply 
in l^upa  (like  in a vessel,  bhājanavat);  cf.  Mahāvyutp.,  208, 1­26 (p. 64).  Although 
the twentyfold division of  Satkāyadṛṣri  is the usual one (cf . Divya, p. 46  : viṃçati¬
çikharasamudgataṃ satkāyadṛṣṭiçailaṃ,  to be split ^ip by the vajra of Knowledge), 
the twenty categories themselves are not always enumerated in the same w^y ; many 
variants ha­^e  been  discussed by I^ahder, .La  satkāyadṛṣṭi  d'sprés  Vibhāsā,  s, in Met. 
chin. et bouddh., I (1931­32), pp.  22 ī s^. 
206) It: seems  useless to try to find out what the interpolator  meant  by the obscure words ; 
as far as one may judge, he did not understand much of the meaning of the  Dṛṣṭis. 
Antagrāhadṛṣṭi  is a fundamental concept of Buddhism,  which  was always considered the 
Middle  Path  (madhyamā  pratipad) between the two extremes of  ^:āçvata  and Uccheda, 
and if  there  is one point in  which  all forms of Buddhism agree, it is this one. 
207) H we understand the meaning of  these  words,  which  show a very poor knowledge 
of Sanskrit grammar so  that  the author's intention  could  only be guessed at,  Mithyādṛṣṭi 
is considered to be  twofold,  although  three  categories are mentioned, whereas the 
only  reasonable division is  fourfold  (the denial of each of the Four Truths). The 
three  categories mentioned in the words  following  seem to refer to a denial (put 
into the  form  of questions) of the  Mārgasatya,  Duḥkhasatya  (or Samudayasatya ?) 
and Nirodhasatya respectively. 
208) The translation is based on the (conjectural) interpretation of the obscure words, 
suggested in  note  126 to the Transcription. No translation of the texts inscribed in 
plates i and j is given  here  ; the strophes occurring  there  have been discussed in 
the Introduction. 


--- [Page 178] ---
— 168  –­
IV. GOLD  PLATE  WITH  VAJRA  AND  SHORT  INSCRIPTIONS 
Together  with  the  gold  plates discussed as No. Ill above, another 
gold plate, certainly not belonging to the same series, proved to be in the 
Djakarta  Museum after the last war. Its site of discovery as  well  as the 
way in which  it came into the Djakarta Museum are completely unknown. 
The plate is very thin, but considerably larger than the plates discussed 
as No. Ill ; its measurements are 24,5 cm in length and 12 cm in breadth. 
The plate is numbered No. 7862 ^). 
The vague lines of a  viçvavajra  are  visible  on the surface of the plate. 
The contours of the entire central part of the  Vajra  are, however, hidden 
owing  to the presence of a two­petalled lotus,  which  is represented to lie 
upon  the vajra. One has the impression  that  the round forms of the lotus 
were engraved by means of a sharp­pointed metal instrument, whereas 
the straight lines of the vajra must have been hammered in afterwards ­)  . 
In the  heart  of the lotus and in its two petals, some short inscriptions 
are visible.  The inscription in the  heart  of the lotus runs longitudinally, 
whereas the two inscriptions in its petals run latitudinally and in such 
a way  that  if the inscription in the upper petal is placed to be read in 
the usual  way,  that  in the lower petal is turned upside down and conversely. 
In addition, a few  akṣaras  are  visible  outside the lotus contours, but  still 
within  the  vajra. 
The akṣaras  are written in a  form  of Nāgari  which  gives the impression 
of being rather late. Since the  line  to which  the akṣaras  proper are attached 
proves to be perfectly closed,  there  is no doubt  that  the plate belongs to 
a considerably later period than, for instance, the Kalasan and  Kelurak 
inscriptions  from  Central Java dated 778 and 782 AD. respectively. The 
form  of the aksaras resembles much more the  Nāgarī  type used in the 
inscriptions  on images of  Tjaṇḍi  Djago (13th century  A.D.  ?)‚ but the ma­
terials for comparison are too scarce to assign the plate to a definite period 
1) There are some indications  that  this plate is connected  with  the set discussed in 
No. HI in some way or other. As a matter of fact, Nos. III and IV are the only 
gold plates suddenly found in the  Museum  after the  Japanese  occupation,  which 
is also the reason why they got  subsequent  numbers. They may have been brought 
by the same man and this might be a hint to a common place (or  region)  of origin. 
The suggestion to be made at the end of the discussion of this  gold  plate might 
therefore be indirectly of some importance  with  a view  to the problems connected 
with the  origin  of No. III.  Although  the above is extremely vague, it might give a 
hint in what direction further data  could  possibly be  looked  for. 
2) This  difference in technique  clearly  appears  from  an examination of the reverse. 
There,  we see  only  the •negative" of the vajra lines and of the aksaras, but not the 
slightest  traces of the lotus. It is obvious  that  hammering should necessarily leave 
pronounced  traces in the reverse of the plate, whereas engraving by n sharp needle 
would  not. Presumably, the lotus was engraved  first;  thereupon,  the contours of the 
viçvavajra  were hammered in and,  finally,  the aksaras were expressed by the same 
method. 


--- [Page 179] ---
— 169 — 
The lettering exhibits some abnormal  features  due to the way in  which 
the. plate was inscribed : the  akṣaras  were probably hammered in the plate 
by means  of a sharp­edged metal instrument. The consequence is  that  the 
akṣara  forms are broken up into a considerable number of  small,  straight 
strokes. 
Transcription 
a (upper  part)  : 1. hūṃ  amoghasiddhi /  oṃ oṃ 3) 
2. oṃ oṃ oṃ phaṭ  / oṃ phaṭ 
b (centre)  : hūṃ akṣobhya oṃ oṃ oṃ phaṭ 
c (lo^er  part)  : hūṃ ratnasambhava  / oṃ 4) 
Meaning 
The two­petalled  lotus  lying  on the  vajra  is inscribed  with  the names 
of three  Dhyānibuddhas  and a number of  bījākṣaras.  If one holds the plate 
horizontally  facing the East, the  Akṣobhya  inscription is directly .in front, 
Amoghasiddhi  to the left, and Ratnasambhava to the right hand side. The 
three  Jinas  are then located in the directions  with  which  they are associated. 
It then becomes evident why the inscriptions were engraved in  that  parti­
cular  way. 
The two­petalled lotus is undoubtedly a representation of the so­called 
Ajnācakra,  one of the six mystical  centres  in the human body. It is located 
between the two brows and plays an important role in both Buddhistic 
and non­Buddhistic  Yoga  5) . The forms known in  Tāntrism  usually  represent 
the çakti  Hakim  and other mystical figures  together  with  bījas.  Our plat:e 
appears  to represent  a more archaic and  specifically  Buddhistic form of the 
cakra ; the different  parts  of the lotus bear only the  names  of Dhyānibuddhas 
with bījas.  Presumably, the plate as a whole served as a yantra. 
In the Djakarta Museum,  there  is a very  similar  plate (No. 785  b) , which 
was discovered in the pit of the  Stūpa  ruin  at Tandjung Medan, district 
Rau‚  Western Sumatra. The latter plate was described by Brandes 6) and, 
more recently, by  Bosch,  who assigned the plate to the twelfth century 
A. D. 7). There we  find  a lotus flower, too, inscribed  with  the  names  of 
3) The syllables added to the right of the  dashes  in the transcription are found outside 
the lotus but  still  within  the vajra contours. 
4) After  this  oṃ,  the same aksara was probably repeated twice and  followed  by a single 
phaṭ ; the forms have, however, become very undistinct. 
­) CI. the drawing reproduced by Pott, Yoga en Yantra (1946), p. 40 ; description by 
Avalon,  The  Serpent  Po­ver (1933), p. 411,  with  additions by Pott, op. cit., pp. 39 sqq. 
As to the general meaning of yantras, cf. Pott, op. cit., passim and his Introduction 
to the Tibetan collection of the National Museum of Ethnology, Leiden (1951), 
pp. si sqq. 
6) In W. P. Groeneveldt,  Catalogus der  Archaeologische  Verzameling  van  het Bataviaasch 
Cenootschap (1887), p. 224, note I. 
7) Oudh.  Verst.  lg^o, p. 134. 


--- [Page 180] ---
— 170 — 
Dhyānibuddhas  in practically the  same  type of  Nāgarī  script, and also  lying 
on a viçvavajra.  The main difference from our plate is  that  in the Tandjung 
Medan  yantra the lotus is eight­petalled and inscribed with the  names  of 
all of the  five  Dhyānibuddhas‛').  The similarity of  these  representations 
is very striking and  seems  to suggest  that  the two  plates  originally belonged 
to a same  set of yantras. Unfortunately, the absolute lack of  data  on the 
origin  of our plate excludes any possibility of control. 
^. A  GOLD  PLATE  FROl^I  TJANDI  PLAOSAN 
During  the excavations effected in the Buddhistic temple complex of 
Tjaṇḍi  Plaosan Lor (Central Java), a plate of gold leaf was discovered 
between two small  stūpa  structures  belonging to the second row of small 
buildings  which surround the two main temples ; the two  stūpas  are desig­
nated as II, 21 and 22 ^). The plate  measures  20,2 cm in length and 2,2 cm 
in breadth; eight folds are  visible,  so that,  originally, the plate must have 
been folded into nine. 
The plate is inscribed with four lines of script ; the fourth  line,  however, 
is not continued up to the end, but finishes at  about  a quarter  of the  line. 
The akṣaras  were  rather  superficially engraved ; they are  rather  cursive 
and not capable of being dated  within  a short period. Obviously, the engraver 
met with considerable difficulties to execute the  akṣara  forms with the 
means  at his disposal. Technical  reasons  account for the  strange  forms of 
some of the  akṣaras  ; thus,  the va is expressed by a small equilateral triangle. 
The inscription, entirely written in Sanskrit, gives the text of a  dhāraṇ ī. 
After  an invocation addressed to the Buddha, the Dharma and the  Saṃgha, 
the text of the  dhāraṇī  proper is introduced by  tadyathā,  a word well­known 
from Buddhist Sanskrit­). The text ends in the  akṣara  pha five times, fol¬
lowed by  svahū. 
­) This  yantra, too, has  Akṣohhya  as its central figure. The transcript added hy Bra^des 
to his description mentioned in  note  6 is not quite correct :  there  seems no doubt 
that the word  preceding the names of each of the  Dhyānibuddhas  is hūṃ,  not hyang 
as Brandes presumed. — The eight­petalled lotus might he the representation of 
the Ānandakandapadma  ; cf. Pott, Yoga en Yantra, pp. 16 sqq. Two of the internal 
padmas are clearly alluded to in the Plaosan inscription (.infra, No. VII), viz. the 
Ānandakandapadma  in strophe 13 c  (hṛdayanīraja)  and the  Sahasrārapadma,  the 
thousand­petalled mind­lotus in strophe 8 d  (dhībhūridalayoja<naḥ^..).  These loci 
will be discussed in the introduction to  Ne.  VII below. 
1) Oudh. Versf., 1948, p. so; cf. also ibid., p. 28, the situation sketch. The numbers 
assigned to the  small  temples are based upon the same principles as those indicated 
in Pras. Indon., I  (195o),  pp. 116 sq., 1.e. the inner row is designated by I. whereas 
the second  and  third  rows  from  the centre of the complex are denoted by II and III. 
The Arabic  ciphers indicate the running number, starting  from  the South­Western corner. 
2) Tadyathā  is frequently used in Buddhist Sanskrit not only at the beginning of  dhāranīs, 
but also as an introduction to an analysis of something more general (corresponding 
to our  „viz.").  CI.  Cowell  and  Neill,  The  Divyāvadāna  (1886), Index, p. 68o, who 
compare  Pali  seyyathā. 


--- [Page 181] ---
— 171 — 
The text  belongs  to the simpler  sorts  of dhāraṇīs  without the  frequent 
meaningless,  we should  rather  say mystic, syllables. Its  most  characteristic 
feature  is the  frequent  occurrence  of derivatives of the  root  çudh  in dif­
ferent  forms, all conveying the idea of purification ; such derivatives occur 
no less  than  eleven  times  in our  short  text.  Among  these,  we note  the 
compounds  pāpāvaraṇaviçodhani  (line 1/2 and  karmmāvaraṇaviçodhani  (line 
2) : purification from the  obstructions  which are  either  evil  or karman 3). 
In view of the  above,  the dhāraṇī  was probably considered a  means  of 
purification from the  obstructions  on the  Mārga.  The  exact  name  is not 
mentioned in the  text  ; it probably was  Sarvāvaraṇaviçodhanī­nāma­dhāraṇī 
or something very similar. 
The text  seems  unknown from  other  sources.  A text  named 
Sarvakarmāvaraṇaviçodhanī­nāma­dharaṇī,  mentioned in the  catalogue  of 
the Mdo­man of the Tibetan collection in the  Bibliothèque Nationale  at 
Paris 4) proved to be very different according to a  reference  kindly supplied 
by Professor Filliozat at our request ^). Another  dhāraṇī,  named Sarvadur¬
gatipariçodhana,  shows a closer affinity with our text, but is not identical 
either  6). 
Transcription 
l oṃ  7) n^n^,  vuddhāya  ^) namo  dharmmāya namaḥ saṃghāya tadyathā 
çuddhe  viçuddhe çodhani viçodhani gaganaviçodhani ^) cittaviçodhani 
pā­
3) The usual  technical  term  for the  former  kind is  kīeçāvarana,  i.e. the  kleças  viewed 
as factors  which  obstruct  the Mārga. Karmāvarana  is the  production  of karman  leading 
to re­birth,  viewed as  another  kind of  obstruction  on the  Mārga  ; the  latter  is not 
necessarily  due to the  effect  c^ evil  actions,  s1nce  also  akhṣṭam  ajñānam  produces 
karman.  Karmāvarana,  if opposed  to pāpāvaraṇa,  might  refer  especially  to those  forms 
of subtle  ignorance  v­hith  obstruct  the  clear  intuition of the Truth, and would  then 
be closely  related  to jñeyāvarana.  It is  almost  impossible  to draw  a clear  line of 
separation  between  the two  kinds  of āvaraṇa  : the  dharmas  which  constitute  jñeyāvarana 
(such  as pudgalagrāha  and  dharmagrāha.)  are a  part  of satkāyadṛṣṭi,  which is a  kleca  ; 
cf. especially  the references  given  by De la vallée  Poussin,  Siddhf.  II, pp. 566 sqq. 
4) Marcelle  Lalou,  Catalogue  du Ponds  Tibétain  de ta  Bibhothéque  Nationale,  Buddhica, 
2iéme  série,  No. Iv (l93l), No. 40 on p. 20. 
.^) After a  Tibetan  introduction,  in which it is  stated  that  the  dhāraṃ  is addressed  to 
mi 'khrugs  pa (Aksobhya), it  begins:  // name  ratnatrayāya  / oṃ  kaṃkani  / kaṃkani  / 
rocani rocani  /  trotani trotani  /  trāsani trāsani  /  pratihana pratihana  /  sarvakarma¬
paramparāni  me  svāhā  // .... Almost the same text as this quotation in the Bka' 
•gyur,  I^gyud  XvII.  1 (Bibf. Nat. tib. 454, fol. 1). 
^) Bibf. Nat. sanskrit 59, fol. 6a 1. 3  : oṃ‚ çodhani çodhani viçodhani viçodhani sarvapā¬
paviçuddheḥ sarvakarmā[h]varaṇāni viçuddheḥ svāhā; Bibl.  Nat. Sanskrit 62, no. 25, 
fol. 58a,  1. 3­4  : oṃ çodhani çodhani sarvapāpaviçodhani çuddhe viçuddhe sarvapāpa– 
viçuddhe sarvakarmāvaranaviçuddhe svāhā.  references  by Prof. Filliozat. 
7) Not  distinct. 
'^) read  buddhāya. 
9) Instead  of a na, the  plate  shows  two  curves  one above  the other  ; it does  not however 
seem  doubtful  that  the  engraver  intended  to express  a na. This  appears  from a 


--- [Page 182] ---
— 172 — 
2. <pā>varaṇaviçodhani  1°) karmmāvaraṇaviçodhani  viçuddhe viçuddhe 
kṣīṇe  sarvakṣīṇe puṣpe supuṣpe rajoharaṇe  sarvapāpa­
3. viçodhani  hare hare  sarvāvaranāṇi  daha daha  sarvakarmāvaraṇāni  paca 
paca  sarvasthānagatāni  11) padme  padmākṣi  padmaviçā­
4. le pha pha pha pha pha  svāhā 
Translation  12) 
[1] Oṃ  1 Homage to the Buddha, Homage to the Dharma, Homage to 
the Saṃgha.  Thus (is the text): 
— Thou who art pure, perfectly pure, a purifier, a perfect purifier, 
a purifier of the atmosphere, a purifier of the mind, [^ a purifier from 
the obstructions of  Karman  — thou, perfectly pure, perfectly pure, lean, 
perfectly  lean,  flower­like,  perfectly  flower­like  13) , a remover of passion, 
a purifier from all  evil—  [3] take  away,  take  away all obstructions ; burn, 
burn all obstructions of  Karman  ; consume, consume (the impurities) gone 
into all the organs (?) 14) — thou who art a Lotus, lotus­eyed, powerful 
in the lotus. 
[4.I Pha­pha­pha­pha­pha  Svāhā. 
VI. A  SMALL GOLD PLATE FRO.M. TJANDI  IDJO  (CENTRAL JAVA) 
A small  gold  plate, measuring 16 em in length and 3,5 em in breadth, 
was discovered in the lowest  part  of the pit or the main temple of the 
Tjaṇḍi  Idjo complex,  which  is situated on a  hill  at about 6  km’s  distance 
to the so^th of Pramhanan in Central Java. For further particulars, the 
reader  is referred to Brandes, who gave a detailed description,  together 
comparison  with  other forms of the na in this plate, such as the fourth aksara  from 
the left of  line  3, and, more clearly, the fourteenth (the last aksara of  sarvāvaraṇāni)  ; 
there  it appears  that  the engraver expressed the na hy two distinct strokes, and  then 
a missformation as  that  which  we have  here  could  easily occur. 
1­) The omission of the second pa is easily explained as a haplography. 
11) The ga is not distinct on the plate. The lower side of the aksara  seems  almost closed. 
Although  ^'gatāni  might not he completely satisfactory, it  seems  difficult  to consider 
other possibilities. 
12) No real translation of a text in  which  the exact wording, or rather, the external 
form  is at least as important as the meaning of the words can be given. The translation 
which  follows  is only  an attempt  at giving  an idea of the text. 
13) Puspe is of course the vocative of the feminine  form  puṣpā.  The ending in ­e is even 
found  in hare  hare (line a), where it replaces the ­a of the imperative. 
14) The compound is not perfectly  lucid.  If the reading is correct,  sarvasthānagatāni 
should  be considered to depend on a term such as  malāni  (of.  Mahāvy.,  189, No. 132, 
edition  by  Minaiev­Mironov  in Bibf.  Buddh., XHI. 1911, p. s7).  Sthār­a  is used 
especially  to denote the organs of  sense  and of speech. CI.  Mahāvy.,  217, 24 (^. ^s): 
pañcasu  sthāneṣu  krtāvī  saṃvṛttaḥ. 


--- [Page 183] ---
173 — 
with his  transcript and translation of the text engraved in it as early as 
1887 l). Since, however, our transcription is  rather  different from  that 
prepared by Brandes in the very beginning of epigraphic studies in Indonesia, 
the inscription  will  be briefly  discussed again. 
The plate is  divided  into four portions by  means  of three  horizontal lines. 
The upper portion contains seven lines of Old Javanese script. In the second 
portion  from above, we see a two­armed figure, to the left of  which  a single 
akṣara  is engraved ; to its right,  three  akṣaras,  running from the top to the 
bottom, are  visible.  As Brandes correctly concluded, the  three  akṣaras  form 
the name kuvera. It is therefore certain  that  the figure is  meant  to represent 
Kubera,  although this identification  would  not have been suggested by 
the only attribute, viz. a  daṇḍa  in the left hand  ^) . The single  akṣara  to the 
left of the figure was transcribed  kham  by Brandes,  which  seems  doubtful 
to us, though not impossible ; the  akṣara  could  be described as an  initial 
u preceded by a  taling  and  followed  by a  daṇḍa,  the combination used to 
express ­o after a consonant  ; the anusvāra  is clear. The whole might  represent 
Cm, but expressed in an unusual way. 
The third portion of the plate is engraved  with  two sets  of four concentric 
circles  each.  Above  the left set, the  akṣara  o is clearly  visible  ; it is probable, 
though not certain,  that  an anusvāra  should be read above the  vowel.  Above 
the right hand set of circles, we distinguish faint  traces  of an  akṣara,  which 
should  probably be identified om, too.  Again,  there  is a line of  writing 
below  the two  sets  of circles, but no certain reading  could  be made out 
of it. Our conjectural reading is  : sāvithuççikha,  but this  does  not make  sense. 
Possibly, the word represents a vocative of a compound (probably a ba¬
huvrīhi)  ending in  ­çikha 3). 
The main  inscription,  engraved in the upper portion of the plate, consists 
of thirty syllables, probably to be considered two groups of fifteen syllables 
each. The text makes the impression of being a sddhana addressed to Kubera. 
Among  the epithets,  we find  virūpa,  „deformed”  ; the term  could  well  be 
applied  to the pot­bellied god. In addition, it  agrees  with  the usual Indian 
etymology  of the name Kubera  (Kuvera),  the literal  meaning of  which  would 
be : ,,a person  with  a deformed  body’’  4) . 
­) Notulen  B.C., 25 (1887), pp. 71 sqq. — Brandes' account was reprinted in an article 
hy J. Groneman, Tjandi 1djo nabii Jogjakarta, T.  B. C., 32 (1889), pp. 313 sqq. especially 
pp. 327 sqq. Cf. also  Krom,  Inleiding^,  I (1923), pp. 249 sq. 
2) Kuhera images known from Buddhist iconography are very different. As to the 
Brāhmaṇic  images of the god, cf. Gopinatha P:ao,  Elements  ol Hindu Iconography. 
Vol. II, Pt. II (1916), pp. 535 sq. The description of the two­armed form  there  given 
resembles the drawing on the plate ; the god should have a mace  (gadā)  in his right hand. 
3) The syllable transcribed thu is very uncertain. The two first syllables,  sāvi,  do not 
seem doubtful on the plate, but they do not make  sense.  It is possible  that  the 
carelessly written ulu above  the  va should be interpreted as a layar (an r preceding 
a consonant)  with  a taling  (an e  vowel  after a consonant) to its left. In  that  case, 
we should read sarve; but the words do not become clearer then. 
4) CI. Gopinath Rao, Elements, II, P1. II, p. 533. 


--- [Page 184] ---
— 174 — 
.Among  the other epithets we  note  jatila,  which  might be connected 
with Kubera’s  period of ascetism owing to  which  he acquired the Iordship 
over the riches in the Northern quarter of the universe. The word bhasma, 
„ashes”,  occurs  three  times (twice in compounds). The most curious com­
bination  is pāṇḍnraṅgabhasmaJa­  „born  out of pale­red  ashes’’.  The term  could 
not be connected  with  any well­known legend about Kubera, but it  would 
fit in with  the site of discovery of the  gold  plate, viz. the temple pit of the 
main  building  of Tjaṇḍi  Idjo.  Might  the compound refer to the resurrection 
from the material remains to the divine form of Kubera ? The compound 
bhasmacitta is  strange  ; it could, however, be connected  with  the conception 
here  suggested : the now divine being should sometimes think of the mortal 
remains left on earth. This explanation of the text remains, however, con­
jectural ;  perhaps  the sādhana  may be traced elsewhere in future. 
Transcription 
A. Upper portion : 
L ja­
2. ṭila nirjaṭa  5) 
3. bhūṣi  6) pāṇḍura­
4. ṅgabhasmaja 
5. bhasmeṣu  bhasma­
6. citta  nirdoça 7) 
7. ­ . .  8) virupa 
B. Middle portion  : 
a (to the left of the head of the figure):  oṃ^) 
b. (to the right of the figure, from top to bottom)  : kuvera 
C Under portion : 
a (above the left hand concentric  circles)  : o l0) 
b (below the latter):  sāvi  ­ 1). 
­) The reading of  these  two words is not doubtful. In nirjata, the little dash expressing 
the r preceding a  consonant  is attached to the middle horizontal stroke of the ja, 
as we find it more  often  in inscriptions from Java. The possibility  that  the little 
dash is  meant  to express a  daṇḍa  cannot be excluded, but  nīiāṭa  does  not seem probable. 
­.^ The sa (at least if it is a sa) has a curious form; the aksara is almost completely 
closed  at its upper side. In a  similar  way, we  find  s^ i^ li^ s. Bhusi, as a vocative 
of bhūṣin,  „adorned  with",  would  make  sense  if ­­^ consider nirjata an error for 
nirjaṭā;  we  then  get the compound  nirjaṭābhūsi^  „with  ornaments but without  jaṭā"  (?). 
7) For nirdosa? The wrong spelling makes some reservations necessary. 
8) Probably,  deva  is written here, but the  aksaras  ara  undistinct. 
^) Conjectural reading. We distinguish the  initial  u preceded by a  taling  and  followed 
by a danḍa. 
10) The o is certain, but  there  might be an  anusvara  over it. 
H) Very  uncertain. 


--- [Page 185] ---
— 175 — 
c (above the right hand concentric  circles):  ai 12) 
d (below the latter)  : . . ççikha  13) 
VH. THE  PRE­NAGARI  INSCRIPTION  FROl^I  TJANDI  PLAOSAN 
The origin  of the stone fragment numbered D. 82 in the Djakarta 
Museum  was considered unknown  until  in 1915, when  Bosch  succeeded 
in combining several data  which  made it probable  that  the fragment was 
discovered  in the ruins of  Tjaṇḍi  Plaosan, Central Java 1) . There, the stone 
was already noticed by  Crawfurd  ­) . Later on, it was incorporated into the 
collection  Klaring  at Djogjakarta 3) , from  where it was transferred to the 
Djakarta  Museum by 1890 4). The inscription was  briefly  discussed by  Bosch 
in the introduction to his publication about the  Kelurak  inscription in 1928 5) . 
Recently,  I examined a few  passages  in connection  with  other  Çailendra 
inscriptions 6). 
The stone is in a fragmentary  state.  A large portion in the left hand 
corner is lost and, in addition, the whole upper part and a smaller portion 
l­­) Or^  aiṃ?  CI.  note  lo above. 
13) Between the two  sets  of concentric  circles,  there  is another  akṣara,  which  might he thu. 
The meaning of the  akṣaras  in the lower portion of the plate is obscure. They shou1d 
probably  be connected in some way or other; if we exc1ude the two aksaras on 
the top of either set of concentric circ1es (probably  bījākṣaras,  especially if aim 
should  be read instead of ai) and connect the remaining ones, the result wou1d be : 
sāvithuççikhe,  which  does not resemble anything known. 
1) Oudheidk. Yersf., 1915,  Bijl.  X. pp. 89­91. 
­') Bernet Kemners,  Crawiurd's  beschriivmg va^ Prambanan in 1s15, T.  B. G., 83 (1949), 
pp. 177­193; cI.  Crawiurd  quoted p. 181 :  „About  midway between the  gates  I discovered 
a slab of black stone  with  an inscription in the  Deva  Nagari character, much effaced 
and I fear  illegible,  except in one or two places. The .:^tone is at least a foot thick, and 
as it  bears  no marks of the application of biows it  seems  somewhat  difficult  to 
account for its being broken as it is, unless we suppose  that  it was placed in an 
elevated situation and fractured in its  fall". 
3) Verbeek, Oudheden  (1891), p. 164 (description of the Collection  Klaring,  No. 3); 
Hoepermans,  Hindoe­oudheden van Java, Rapp. Oudh. Comm., 1912, p. 234, who 
stated  that  according to the informations he had obtained the  stone  originated  from 
Plaosan. In addition,  Hoepermans  mentions the presence of another fragment of the 
same  stone  ; if Hoepermans'  statement  is correct (the fact  that  Crawfurd, quoted in 
note  2, did not notice a smaller fragment necessitates some reservations), the latter 
fragment must have  been  lost in rather  recent  times. 
4) CI.  Notulen  B.C., 28 (1890), p. 54 and p. 76. As  Bosch,  quoted in  note  1, pointed 
out, the data about D. 82 had  been  lost during some time, because they were 
taken  to apply to D. 76, a  small  inscribed  stone  fragment,  which  either is lost or, 
more probably, has never arrived at Djakarta. 
5) T. B.  C., 68 (1928), pp. 8­13 (palaeographic discussion). A photograph of the stone 
is attached to this article. 
6) Pres.  Indon.,  I (1950), pp. 12­14, and pp. 103­105. The doubt as to the  origin  of the 
stone, expressed on p. 105, is not justified in  view  of the more detailed  treatment 
which  follows. 


--- [Page 186] ---
— 176 — 
at the left hand side, extending over the entire height of the stone, are 
missing 7). The  part  of the  stone  which  is preserved is however considerable 
(undoubtedly, it amounts to far more than  half  of its size)  , but is unfortuna­
tely badly weather­beaten.  Only  in the right hand lower corner, the  state 
of preservation is relatively good  ; there,  the reading  does  not offer serious 
difficulties.  More  or less considerable portions of twenty­three lines of script 
are preserved.  Although  such a fragmentary transcription necessarily remains 
unsatisfactory,  there  is a  still  considerable portion of the text left the reading 
of which  is sufficiently certain to justify its publication ; this applies especially 
to the latter  half  of the  inscription.  The fact of its being composed in metrical 
Sanskrit  is a great  advantage  since it makes some control of the transcription 
possible. 
The type of script is a Pre­Nagarl the essential  features  of which  were 
discussed by  Bosch  8)^ Bosch  pointed out  that  the four extant  Pre­Nāgarī 
inscriptions  from Central Java, viz.  those  of Kalasan, Ratuhaka,  Kelurak 
and Flaosan,  represent  two distinct types of script. That in  which  the Kalasan 
and Ratubaka charters are written shows a number of curious  features  not 
yet found  together,  at least in  that  very form, in any  Pre­Nāgari  inscription 
from India 9). The latter type,  that  in which  the  Kelurak  and Plaosan 
inscriptions  are written, exhibits no real differences from the script used 
by some of the  Pāla  kings in Bengal and  Bihar.  Whereas the Kalasan and 
Ratubaka charters are written in exactly the  same  type of script (no difference 
could  be discovered), the  Kelurak  and Plaosan types do not  appear  to be 
identical,  but it soon  appears  that  the differences are not essential in the 
latter  case  : they are differences in execution  rather  than in the forms of 
the akṣar^s  themselves. Thus, the height and the breadth of the Plao^an 
akṣaras  amount to about the double of  those  of the  Kelurak  ones  10). In 
addition,  the latter were executed without much care ; as a  matter  of fact, 
a considerable number of irregularities may be noticed and  there  are even 
some obvious lapses ll). Nothing of the  kind  could  be noticed in the Plaosan 
7) The  gaps  in the text of the inscription amount to ahout one  fifth  of the length of 
the entire lines as far as the  part  broken from the left  hand  side of the  stone  is 
concerned ; the exact length may be calculated by  means  of the metre. Th^ lacunae 
in the transcription are almost always considerably longer since, as a rule, only very 
faint  traces  of the  aksaras  immediately following the break remained  visible  on the 
stone. As a  matter  of fact, it is curious  that  the  state  of preservation of the text 
gradually  decreases  the more one  gets  near  the breaks at the upper and at the left 
hand side. Presumably, the  stone  was partly hidden in the  soil  with  the left  hand 
corner below and had remained in  that  position for centuries. The explanation given 
by Crawfurd  in the last clause of the quotation in  note  2 above might be the correct one. 
s) quoted in  note  5 above. 
^) Its most striking  feature  is the form of the ya after a consonant. Some other important 
details were summarized in  Pres.  Indon.,  I. pp. Is sqq. 
10) The average height of the  aksaras  in the Plaosan inscription is about 1 cm. In the 
Kelurak  inscription,  there  are considerable differences, but the average is considerably 
lower. 
11) A clear example occurs in strophe 2‚ where the exact reading on the  stone  is either 


--- [Page 187] ---
— 177 — 
inscription.  Wherever the  akṣara  forms are  well  preserved, they prove to 
have been executed  with  the utmost care.  This  is an enormous  advantage 
for the transcription, since even the smallest details may be  relied  upon : 
only a part  of an  akṣara,  if it is clearly  visible,  often makes an unambiguous 
identification  possible. 
As we noted above, one is  inclined  to assign the Plaosan inscription 
to a considerably younger  date  than the  Kelurak  charter 12) . The more care­
fully  written documents are often to be considered younger in  date,  but 
there  are, of course, numerous exceptions. In this case,  there  are, however, 
several  other data  which  would  make us  date  the Plaosan inscription con­
siderably  later than the  Kelurak  charter. We  shall  see in the course of this 
introduction  that  the form  of Buddhism appearing  from  this text belongs 
to a later stratum of ideas. A more important argument is the relation  with 
Tiaṇḍi  Plaosan, a complex rightly considered to belong to the younger group 
of Central Javanese temples on account of various, mainly technical, con­
siderations. We now have some idea about the  date  of Tjaṇḍi  Flaosan. Some 
of the short inscriptions in the  small  buildings of the complex mention the 
king  Rakai  Pikatan, who issued an edict in 850 (No. IK below), but ceased 
to reign in 856, as  will  appear  from  the introduction to No. KI below 13). 
dhatu,  or, more probably dhatta (the ­u  would  be very  similar  to the second ta), 
whereas it is obvious  that  dhartuṃ  (or  dharttuṃ)  was intended. In the  Kelurak  charter, 
there  is much confusion  between  aksaras  which  resemble each other such as pa‚ ma, sa 
and ya;  there  are many examples where a distinct sa was put down although the 
context requires ma. The stone­cutter may have copied an example  which  was not 
clear  everywhere (cf. some  typical  mistakes of this  kind  in No. X below, the last 
line of b). 
1–) CI.  Bosch,  art. cit., pp. 7 sqq. 
l3) Infra No. XI, strophe 9 ; cI. its transcription and translation, and ..he discussion of 
the data in the Introduction. Some note:^ about the short inscriptions of Plaosan, 
especially  the mention of the king I^.akai Pikatan (viz. the inscriptions dharmma  çrī 
mahārā:'s  rakai pikatan), were  given  in Pras.  1ndon., I (1950), pp. 116 sq. A more 
detailed  discussion  with  the complete number of inscriptions hitherto discovered is 
published  in the report of the  Archaeological  Service of the Indonesian republic 
for the years 1951­52. — We add  that  the  l.^akai  Pikatan has the title  Çrī  Mahārāja 
in these  inscriptions, whereas he is denoted by  ratu  in the Perot inscription dated 
850 A. D. For the meaning of the latter term, cf. the discussion in the Introduction 
to No. IX below ; if the conclusion to  which  we arrive  there  is correct, we have a 
definite  proof  that  the short Plaosan inscriptions must be dated afrer  Āsāḍha  850, 
whereas the terminus ad  quem  is Mārgaçīrṣa  856, the year in  which  the Rak^ai  Pikatan 
is succeeded by the  Rakai  Kayuwam.  The  Pre­Nāgarī  inscription does not seem to 
contain  a word  about the  small  temples surrounding the main buildings of the Plaos^n 
complex,  which  might he a, necessarily weak,  argument  in favour of the supposition 
that the  small  temples were constructed after the  Pre­Nāgarī  inscription.  On the 
other hand, the  wording  of some  passages  in the Plaosan inscription to he examined 
in the course of this Introduction make it almost certain  that  our text does not 
refer to the  original  foundation. If the above is correct, we have to assume at least 
three  different  stages  in the construction of the Plaosan complex: an old foundation 
presumably  alluded to in the former part of the  Pre­Nāgarī  inscription, the erection 
of an image together  with  the construction of new buildings and the carving of  relief 


--- [Page 188] ---
— 178 — 
If the above data may be  relied  upon (none of the above arguments is  really 
decisive),  the most probable  date  of the Plaosan  inscription  would  be before 
the middle of the 9th century  A. D. Unfortunately, neither a definite date, 
nor even the name of the reigning  king  could  be traced in the text of the 
inscription. 
As far as this text is preserved, it is entirely composed in Sanskrit 
verse. The language is correct ; no grammatical or orthographic errors  could 
be noticed and one  gets  the impression  that  the author of the epigraph pos­
sessed a thorough knowledge of the language. The strophes run remarkably 
well and might even have some poetical merit. 
The choice of the metres is remarkable.  Most  of the first part ^f the 
inscription  (up to  line  12) seems to be composed in  Aryā  metre, but uncertain 
reading  makes it impossible to  separate  the strophes. The  Aryā  strophes 
seem to alternate  with  some strophes in the  Malinī  metre in lines 6 and 7. 
From  line  13 on, the reconstruction of the strophes is possible. We then 
have ten stanzas in the  Anuṣṭubh  metre (strophes 1 to 10), seven strophes 
in Drutavilambita (11 to 17) and the two last strophes (18 and 19) in the 
Praharṣaṇī  (Praharṣiṇī)  metre. The names of the metres are mentioned in 
the strophes, a custom  well­known  from  handbooks on metrics and even 
from  literature  l4). Thus, we read the  word  anuṣtubhi  at the end of strophe 10, 
drutavilambita°  in 17 d. In the last strophe (19), one  would  have expected 
to read the  word  praharṣa(i)ṇī,  which  is not, however, the case 15); the 
term  probably occurred at the end of 18 d l6). 
panels,  which  appears to be the main subject matter of this  inscription,  and,  finally, 
the censtruction of the numerous  small  buildings between, presumably, 850 and 356. 
It is at le^st obvious  that  the history of the construction of the complex is a very 
complicated  one.  Architectural  analysis and continued excavations,  winch  are  still  going 
on, might perhaps give some precisions.  With  the materials at our disposal, the most 
probable  date  of the Plaosan  inscription  would  be the first  half  of the 9th century  A. D. 
1­) A good example is Chapter CIV of the  Bṛhatsaṃhitā,  in which  fifty­six  different 
metres are mentioned. 
1­) The reason probably is  that  the  word  praharṣaṃ  (or praharṣinī)  could  be used at a 
single  place in the  pāda,  viz. immediately before the end, so  that  there  remains 
a single  syllable  left. since  there  is only a  limited  choice of monosyllabics in Sanskrit, 
the difficulty  is usually  solved  by putting the gerundive  praharsanīya  at the end 
of the  pāda  ; cf. matipraharṣānīya,  Bṛhats.,  CIV, 22. The Old Javanese  ^Vrĕttisañcaya 
uses the words  prahārsiṇī  (read  : praharsinī)  t­vas  at the end of strophe 67 (vide Kern, 
V'srspr.  Ceschr., IX, p. 89 ; cf. also p. 154), but in Old Javanese  there  are more 
possibilities  for monosyllabics. Kern (op. cit., p. 154)  notes  the difference as to the 
place  of the caesura in the Sanskrit and Old Javanese strophes ; Old Javanese poets 
seem to use different rules in this respect  (there  seems to be a facultative caesura 
after the 3rd and the 8th syllables); it is not without interest to note  that  our poet 
shows the same peculiarities as those stated by  Kern  (at least, 19 b and c have no 
caesura after the  third  syllables). It is  well­known  that  Buddhist poetry knows different 
laws, but the  Praharṣaṇī  examples from  Açvaghoṣa  (quoted by Johnston in the Intro¬
duction to his translation of the Buddhacarita, p. lxiv) agree with the classical forms. 
The point deserves interest in  view  of the problem of the poetical tradition  followed 
by the Old Javanese poets. 
16) One  would  have expected the term at the end of strophe 19, but the poet may have 


--- [Page 189] ---
— 179 — 
The different metres correspond  to different portions of the  inscription. 
Thus,  the Çlokas  (with  at least two  vipulās  in 1 c and 6 a) 17) give  a descript­
ion of the  erection  of an  image ;  the  Drutavilambita  strophes,  with  their 
anapaestic cadence,  lend  themselves very  well  to the  vivid  descriptions of 
details of  a temple in stanzas 11  to 17, and the  Praharṣaṇī  strophes  (nomen 
est omen)  are  well  adapted  to the  two benedictory strophes  at the end 
of the  text. 
The poet makes  a moderate use of  the  alaṃkāras.  Yamakas are numer­
ous;  cf . prati . . prati (separated by one syllable)  in 1  d, çrānta  . . çrānta  in 
5 a­b, kana  .... kana in 12 a, vara  . . vara­vāra­varā  in 13 b‚  pratima­pratimā 
in 16 d, rāja­rāja  in 19  c, and a few others.  Upamās  are common, but not 
very  striking  ; we note  çiçiraraçmirucāpravarānvayaḥ  in 12 c, and the more 
elaborate  simile  sugatabhaktibharapraṇatai(r)  in 14  b ; in the  latter case, 
the burden  of bhakti  is not of course  the  real cause why  the  persons  are 
bowed;  the  simile  is an  utprekṣā  rather than  an  upamā 1^). 
Some  of the  similes  are  typically  Buddhistic.  A good example  is 
viçvāvaraṇavāraṇaḥ  in 6  b. Avaraṇa,  „obstruction,  fence,  wall,  screen’’,  is 
a well­known  technical Buddhist term  to denote  the  obstacles  of all kinds 
on the  Path leading  to Nirvāṇa  or Buddha­hood.  Its usual  division  is into 
two groups, viz.  kleça  and  jneya  1^) : the  former are especially the obstacles 
met on the  Path leading  to Nirvana,  the  latter,  which  are of a far  more 
subtle nature, are the obstructions  which  the Bodhisattva  encounters on the 
Path  leading  to Buddha­hood.  According  to a  more complicated  division 20), 
there is one obstacle, viz. the quality of being a  Pṛthagjana (pṛthagjanatvā¬
varaṇa),  which prevents most people from ascending the first Bhumi of 
the Bodhi^attvamārga  ; then,  there  are ten other kinds of  Avaraṇa,  viz.  the 
sorts of obstructions  to be  met on each  of the Bhūmis  : those  of the  first 
preferred  not to end the  text of a  Buddhist inscription  in such  a di^pl^y  of feeling 
as is necessarily suggested  by the  word  praharṣaṇi;  cf.  note 94 to the  Transcription. 
17) There  are  two  vipulās  against eight  pathyās,  but the  numbers  are too  small  to base 
any conclusions  on  this relation.  The  vipulā  of 1 c is a  very usual  one,  that of 
6 a is  unusual. 
1- ) O.  Bothlingk,  Daṇdin's  Poetik  (1890), p. 85. 
19) Dharmasaṃgraha,  CXv ; edition  by  Kasawara,  Muller  and  Wenzel  in Anecd.  Oxon., 
vol. I, Part  V (1885), p. 28, and  passim. These  two  'screens’ correspond  to the  two 
kinds  of sambhara  to he  mentioned  in note 98 below  : punyasambhāra  is the  equipment 
necessary  to  'leap over'  the  screen  constituted  by the  klec^s  and  jñānasambhāra  is, 
as it were,  the  weapon  hy  means  of which  the  Bodhisattva overcomes  the  more subtle 
screen  which  is jñeyāvaraṇa.  This  symbolism  may  be  noticed throughout  the  bhūmi 
conception  of Mahāyāna.  In the  Barabuḍur,  the  great Javanese monument  symbolizing 
these  bhūmis  by its  different terraces,  the  lower  bhūmis  are  separated one from  the 
other  by  real  walls,  making  the  monument  a „monde  clos",  to quote  the  term used 
by Paul  Mus  in his penetrating analysis of  Barabuḍur  symbolism  (B.E.F.E.O.,  32, 1932, 
Troisieme Partie,  pp. 35s  sqq.).  On the  other hand,  it seems hardly doubtful  that 
the weapons carried  by  many Bodhisattvas, such  as Mañjuçrī's  khadga,  Vajrapāṇi's 
vajra,  etc., symbolize  the  means  to overcome  the  different screens. 
2­) CI. De la  Vallée  Poussin,  La  Siddhi d'Hiuen Tsang,  II (1929), pp. 639 sqq. 


--- [Page 190] ---
— 180 — 
Bhūmi  must be vanquished to ascend the second  Bhūmi  and so on  ; those 
of the tenth  Bhūmi  must be eliminated to become a Buddha during 
vajropamasamādhi.  The  BodhisattVa  who succeeds in destroying all kinds 
of obstructions may be compared  with  an elephant 21). This  is one of the 
manifold  examples belonging to this group of similes ; some other examples 
such  as the Buddha (or  Bodhisattva  at the highest  stage)  being compared 
with a cloud  from  which  the soft rain of the Dharma descends  will  be 
mentioned in the survey of the type of Buddhism below.  Most  of these 
eases,  to be defined rather as  rūp^kas  (metaphors) than as  similes,  have 
become technical terms in Buddhism, although their metaphorical  nature 
is never forgotten ; our poet makes a  full use of the possibilities  that  offer 
themselves. 
Since  the text is badly damaged, it is not easy to determine its meaning. 
In the survey  which  follows  we limit  ourselves to those portions the reading 
and interpretation of  which  are  sufficiently  certain to permit conclusions. 
As was  briefly  noted above, neither the  date  of the inscription nor 
the name of the reigning  king  is preserved. There  could  not, however, be 
any reasonable doubt  that  this text was issued by one of the  Çailendra 
kings  in Central Java. The use of the  Pre­Nāgarī  script is a strong argument 
in favour of such a surmise, since the  only  three  other extant  Pre­Nāgarī 
documents all belong to the dynasty mentioned. In addition, the text is 
clearly  Mahāyānic.  Finally,  the last strophe of the inscription,  which  will 
be fully  discussed below,  seems  to refer to the founder of the  Çailendra 
dynasty. 
The first portion of our text (up to  line  12 inclusive) may have contained 
important  historical  d^ta, as  appears  from  the relatively  small  nortions  which 
could  be deciphered­­). It is hardly possible to make us^ of  these  isolated 
fragments, the meaning of  which  might be different if we knew their con­
texts. One  would  like  to comment on  jamvulakṣmyāḥ  .....  lolakirttyā 
vīlokinyāḥ  ; the reading of  jamvu^’  is certain and  that  of lakṣmyāḥ  is clearly 
confirmed  by the epithet;  jamvulakṣmī  cannot  well  be interpreted otherwise 
than as a queen originating  from  India  (Jambudvīpa)  , but the loss of the 
context necessitates reservations. In  line  6, a (third  ?) pāda  of a  Mālinī 
strophe 23) could  be read except for the last  syllable,  which  may be completed 
without  difficulty 24); it runs  : sm^raharavaravarṣṣad=  bhūjayottnngade(vaḥ)  . 
A royal  name may be recognized in the portion after the caesura, viz. 
Bhūjayottuṅgadeva.  Most  of the  Çailendra  princes known to us, if not all, 
took abhiṣeka  names in  which  the element  tuṅga  or uttuṅga  constituted 
an important part 25); the name  here  mentioned is unknown  from  other 
21) CI. the note to the translation of this strophe (note 106). 
22) Since the metre cannot be reconstructed, we miss an important  means  of control. 
23) That it is a third  pāda  seems  to follow  from  the single  daṇḍa  preceding it. 
24) The only point  which  is uncertain is whether the  form  is put in the nominative of 
the singular, but this is irrelevant for the discussion  following  here. 
2­) The names known to us are  Dha—^atuṅgadeva  (ratubaka charter),  Samaratuṅga 


--- [Page 191] ---
^ 181 — 
sources. There  is no  reason whatever why  we  should take  it to be the 
name of the reigning  king  in the time in  which  the inscription was composed. 
On the  contrary,  there  is a  strong indication  that  this is not the  case. The 
royal  name  is preceded  by the  epithet  smaraharavaravarṣad­,  meaning 
„causing  the rains,  which  are the  boons taking away passion,  to descend’’ 26) . 
Normally,  the  effect  of rains consists in refreshing  those  tortured  by  heat ; 
the latter  is however  a well­known metaphor for  the  heat  of passion  (rāga, 
kāma),  which  is cooled  by that  excellent rain  which  is the  exposition  of 
the Doctrine.  Only  Buddhas and Bodhisattvas abiding  on the  highest  stage 
of perfection,  which  is therefore called  Dharmameghā  27) , have acquired 
the complete possession  of the  forces necessary  to that  purpose.  It is not 
probable  that the  compound should refer  to a  Buddha,  to whom  the  simile 
of the  Ram  of Dharma might refer  as well  as to a  Bodhisattva abiding 
on the 10th  stage  ; the use of  ^deva  makes such an interpretation less  likely  ^ 8). 
Karangtĕṅah  inscription),  Māravijayottungavarman  and  Saṅgrāmavijayottuṅgavarman 
(the Cola  charters);  cf.  Ccedes,  B.EE.E.O.,  18 (191s), pp. 1-28; cf.  Pras. 1ndon.,  I, 
pp. 20, 101, 106.  The name  Saṅgrāmadhanaṃjaya  in the  Kelurak  inscription  (ibid., 
p. 102) is not  necessarily  an exception since  the  name  is not  probably complete  in 
this form. 
2­) Tatpurusa compounds the latter part of  which  is a participle are not common.  Whitney, 
Grammar,  § 1273 c,  gives  a similar  compound  prāsakārmukabibhrat. 
–7) Obermiller,  Acta Orient., XI  (1932), p. 57.  CI. also  Mahāvy.,  31, 10 (p. 14),  Dharmas. 
LXIV,  No.  10 (p. 14);  Siddhi, H,  p. 618 : „La terre  du  nuage  de  Dharma. Le nuage 
qu’est  le Mahādharmajñāna  porte  l’eau  de  tous les  biens spirituals (guna); cache  le 
dauṣṭhulya  (les  deux  Āvaraṇas),  comme  un  nuage  cache  l’espace  ; remplit  .....  Íe 
Dharmakāya".  A detailed description  in Daçabhūmika,  chapter  X (ed. by  Rahder, 
pp. 82-95).  Further references  in De la  Vallée  Poussin,  Siddhi,  loc.  ci^.;  Har  Dayal, 
The Bodhisattva  Doctrine,  pp. 64 sqq. The  Dharmameghā  stage  implies  a very elaborate 
symbolism.  Thus,  the  Dharma emanating  from  the  Bodhisattva abiding  on that  stage 
is compared  with  rain  in as far as it  extinguishes desire and suffering,  the  latter being 
symbolized  by  fire.  Prajñākaram^ti,  commenting upon  Bodhic.  Av.,  IX, 167.  notes 
with reference  to punyamegha (edition  by  De la Vallée  Pous^n,  p. 603,  lines  10 sq.): 
puṇyāny  eva  meghāḥ  . sarvaduḥkhasaṃtāpārtiçamanasuk^ 
dānatvāt,  with  which  cf.  duḥkhaçamanaçāsanaḥ  in  strophe  7 d of our  inscription. 
In the  same strophe quoted  from  the  Bodhic.  Av., the  notion contrasted  to 
punyamegha  is  duḥkhāgni,  for  which  the  commentator gives  the  sober explanation 
duḥkhāny  evāgnayaḥ.  The acts  of the  Bodhisattva  ahiding  on the  Dharmameghā  bhumi 
are explained  as jātyādiduḥkhānalatāpapraçamana.  The  rain  of the  Doctrine does  not 
only act as a  destroyer  of fire (viz.  Desire,  Tṛṣṇā,  and  duḥkha,  which  is narrowly 
associated): just  as ordinary rain makes  the  plants grow,  the  rain  of Dharma makes 
the development  of the  roots  of  virtue  (kuçalamūta)  possible ;  cI. the  important 
Caṇḍavyuha  quotation  in ^ikṣās.,  p. 103,  lines  1 sq. : dharmameghayugapatpravarṣaṇaḥ 
sarvaçukladharmaphalaçasyavardhanaḥ.  The dharmamegha  is not  visible  on the  pheno­
menal  sky, but exists  in the  transcendental  dharmadhātugagana  (op. cit.,  p. 102,  line 
15). We think  that  these  references make  it possible  to understand and connect  the 
mutilated  strophes  in our  text.  It is  well­known  that  one  form  of  symbolism  does 
not exclude another. Whereas here  the  Bodhisattva extinguishes  the  burning tire  of 
suffering,  the  same  Bodhisattva  may  be the  fire that  consumes  the  impurities  that 
are the  kleças,  the  simile  suggested  by  other passages  in our  text. 
2­) On the  other hand,  the  designation  by  deva  is not  unusual  for  Bodhisattvas abiding 


--- [Page 192] ---
— 182 — 
The interpretation of the quoted  passage  is strongly confirmed by  strophe 
8 of our inscription, where the  same  metaphor  is used in a more  elaborate 
form.  There, the image is compared with a twilight­cloud  (sāndhyābhra)  from 
which  a soft rain  (mañjuçīkara)  descends,  viz. the discourses  (vyāhāra) 
aiming  at saving the  creatures').  The dark­grey cloud as  seen  during 
twilight  suggests  the monk's  dress  (cīvara)  by its colour, as is expressed 
in the strophe. 
The above question  whether  the description  refers  to a Buddha or a 
Bodhisattva  is capable of being answered more definitely with the help of 
strophe  5. We  there  read  ^’vodhim  (bodhim)  esyati,  and the use of the future 
excludes the interpretation as a  Buddha 3°). 
Another  elaborate  metaphor,  interesting from several points of view, 
is contained in  strophe  1. There, the image, probably the  same  as that  dealt 
with  in the other  strophes,  is stated  to be provided with dharmasambhdra, 
the equipment of merits and wisdom necessary for the attainment of Buddha¬
hood. Now, the wording of the first two  pādas  of the strophe suggests that 
there  is a close relation between  ^armasambhārasamīta‘’  and  naranāthābhi– 
saṃskārabhāro  at the beginning of the  strophe  31). There is a pun on the 
meanings of sambhara and bhara, the former having the technical Buddhist 
connotation of merits and wisdom as the  Bodhisattva’s  equipment by which 
he is able to proceed from one  bhūmi  to the next one and,  finally,  to become 
a Buddha. Such an 'accumulation of virtuous elements’ (dharmasambhdra) 
on the loth  bhumi. Thus, in the  Daçabnumika,  such Bodhisattvas are equalled  with 
Mahādeva  as f^r as the supernatural faculties are concerned.  Among  the most  typical 
representatives of  loth  bhūmi  Bodhisattvas,  Avalokiteçvara,  Maitreya,  Mañjuçrī  and 
Samantabhadra, it is  Avalokiteç  ^ara who shows some vague  Çaiva  affinities, especially 
by his designation by a name ending in  ­īçva^. 
2^) The exact wording of the beginning of the strophe is open to doubt. The use of 
^pā^a°  suggests  a simile  of crossing the  Saṃsāra,  which  is often compared  with  an 
ocean, but it is obvious  that  this  would  imply  quite a different  simile  than  that 
b^sed r.pon the rain of the good ­doctrine. Something  which  is compared  with  rain 
could  however be used in a  simile  in which  phenomenal existence is compared  with 
fire or heat  (e.g. the fire of the  kleças,  kleçāgni).  Probably, our conjectural reading 
of the beginning of strophe 8 is not correct. 
30) In spite of the  gaps  in the transcript, it  seems  probable  that  all the strophes from 
1 to lo refer to the same image; it  seems  that  the subject of  these  strophes,  which 
are all in the same  Anuṣṭubn  metre, never changes. There is a far greater  amount 
of uncertainty about the fragmentary  passage  in line 6 ;  still,  the fact of the same 
simile  of the dharmamegha being used both  with  reference of  Bhujayottuṅgadeva  in line 
6 and in the elaborate  simile  of strophe 8 might be an indication  that  the same  statue  is 
meant. — On the other hand, we want to  stress  that  the strophes 11 to 17 
inclusive  clearly refer to a Buddha whose good influence is shown in a number of 
small  scenes; the use of the term nirvrta in 1^ c is conclusive since the term  could 
never be used  with  reference to a Bodhisattva. This apparent contradiction might 
be interpreted in two ways. Either the poet considered a Bodhisattva abiding on the 
loth stage  perfectiy equal to a Buddha,  which  does not seem probable, or the strophes 
11­17 refer to another image, e.g. one of the twenty Jinas mentioned in strophe 5 c. 
31) For details and references, the reader is referred to  note  98 to the Translation below. 


--- [Page 193] ---
— 183 — 
is something  difficult  to be expressed in a  statue,  but it is possible to represent 
the superhuman qualities  which  are the result of this accumulation by ade­
quate  symbols, viz. by the dress, ornaments and other attributes and 
distinguishing  marks of the image. If, therefore, a  statue  is stated to be 
provided  with  dharmasambhāra,  this  could  only  mean  that  the statue  is 
provided  with  such ornaments etc.  that  may be considered symbols of the 
presence of the accumulated virtuous elements. Thus, the sword in the 
right  hand of  Mañjuçrī  may be explained as the  symbol  pointing to the 
Bodhisattva’s  perfect mastership in removing all kinds of obstacles on the 
Path  — obstacles usually represented as  veils  or screens  (āvaraṇa)  to be 
cut by the sword of transcendent knowledge  (prajñā  and  jnāna).  The 
,,burden of  kingship’’  (as we may render  naranāthābhisaṃskārabhāra)  is 
less difficult  to be represented by  visible  symbols ; such symbols as thrones 
and crowns have this very function. The elaborate metaphor in strophe 
1 leaves no doubt that the relation between dharmasambhdra and nara¬
nāthābhisaṃskāra  is an intimate one : the two notions are applied to one 
and the same  statue.  The  only  acceptable explanation seems to be  that 
the statue  is provided  with  manifest  royal  ornaments (tiara, bracelets, 
nūpuras  etc.),  which  are, however, to be considered as many symbols of 
superior  qualities acquired on the  Mārga.  It is  well­known  that  Maitreya’s 
kingship  in Tuṣita  heavens is not anything else but the retribution of merit 
and wisdom  acquired during innumerable former  states  of existence. 
Especially  Paul  Mus  pointed out the great importance of  Maitreya’s  coronation 
ceremony  for a correct understanding of Buddhist art 32). We do not mean, 
of course,  that  the statue  would  certainly have been a  Maitreya  ; although 
the ceremony in  Tuṣita  heavens may have been the prototype, all the great 
Bodhisattvas  abiding on the tenth  bhūmi  of the  Mārga  may be considered 
transcendent kings, at least in full­developed  Mahāyāna  33). 
. ,. Paul  Mus^ Et. indiennes et indo^hinoises, II Le buddha pare,  B.E.F.E.O.,  28 (1928), 
pp. 153­278, especially pp. 267 sqq. CI. also the same scholar in Barabudur, Cinquiéme 
Partie,  Chap.  XIII.  ^ākyamuni  et Maitreya  dans  le rituel royal, in  B.E.F.E.O.,  33 
(1933),  1‚ pp. 830 sqq. 
33) In the most authoritative source on the Bodhisattvabhumis, the  Daçabhumikasutra, 
the tenth  stage  of the  Mārga  is called  both Abhisekabhumi and  Dharmameghā  Bhumf. 
The inauguration ceremonies are described in detail in the  fifth  section (E) of the 
tenth  Bhumi,  edition by Rahder, pp. 85 sq. As a consequence of this abhiseka, the 
Bodhisattva  becomes a Cakravartin ; he only  needs  a further perfection of the ten 
forces  (daçabala)  to become a Perfect Buddha. By these royal ceremonies, the Bodhi¬
sattva is installed in the  Dharmameghā  Bhumi ; cf. op. cit.. p. 86, lines 8 sq. : sa 
evam  abhiṣikto  'prameyaguṇajñānavivardhito  dharmameghāyāṃ  bodhisattvabhumau 
pratiṣṭhita  ity ucyate. As a rule, the combination of the  Clouds  of Dharma and 
royal  inauguration is characteristic of most of the extant descriptions of the tenth 
Bhumi.  It is very  clearly  expressed in the  Ratnāvali  quoted in translation  from 
Tibetan by  Ohermiller,  Acta Orient., IX (1931), p. 117,  note  5 : „It is (called) so, 
because the rain of the Highest Truth descends  upon  the saints and the Bodhisattvas 
are consecrated in the  light  of the  Buddha’'.  These conceptions are undoubtedly very 
important for a correct understanding of Buddhist dynasties since they establish a 
direct  link  hetween  kingship and the  Mārga. 


--- [Page 194] ---
— 184 — 
By combining  the  above arguments,  one  might arrive  at a  plausible 
conjecture  as to the  identification  of the  royal  name mentioned  in line 6 
of our  text. The combination  of kingship  with  a Bodhisattva abiding  on 
the tenth  bhūmi  completely  agrees  with  what we may conclude about  the 
founder  of the  Çailendra  dynasty  on  account  of other data 34). It would 
therefore seem probable  that  Bhūjayottuṅgadeva  is the  abhiṣekanāma  of 
that very  founder  —  or, to be  more precise,  the  name attributed  to the 
latter  by the  later  Çallendra  generations  in the  ninth century AD. The 
name  has  not been traced  in other sources. As  we  have  it, it  would  not 
disagree  with  the  other names  of Çailendra  kings 35). 
In this connection, we  call  again attention  to the  last strophe (19)  of 
this inscription 36). As a matter of fact,  it is  one of the  very few strophes 
in this text  that  could  be read  from  the  beginning  to the end ; its reading 
is certain except for  the  three  first syllables  of pāda  c 37). This  Prsharṣiṇī 
strophe contains  the  wish,  usual in  the  records of  Mshāyāna  foundations,  that 
the puṇya  acquired  by the  pious deed may serve  for the  liberation  of all 
the creatures 3’3). In this phase of  Buddhism,  however, one's own efforts  are 
not sufficient  to that  purpose ;  the  protection  of a  Buddha,  or rather,  of 
a Great  Bodhisattva  is necessary.  Now  we see  that  in the  pādas  c­d of strophe 
19 there  is an  appeal  for  protection  from  those impurities  (kleça)  which 
are the  Wrong  Views  (dṛṣti),  but this appeal is addressed not  to one of the 
well­known  Great Bodhisattvas,  but to the  king  of the  supreme kings  of 
Varanara 3^) (varanarādhirājarāja).  It  may  be concluded  that  this supreme 
34) CI. Pras. 1ndon.,  I (1950),  p. 174 
3^) CI. note  25  above.  It seems hardly  likely  ^o us  that  the  name should  be consiie­ed 
en authentic one.  revision  of  official  names and titles  of ancient kings  on the  base 
of the  titles used  in the  reviser's times  's only natural. For  the  artificial  character 
of some dynasties,  cf.  Ccedĕs,  Etudes  Cambodgiennes,  XXI,  .La tradition généaloglque 
des premiers rois d'Angkor,  in  B.E.F.E.C.,  XXVIII  (1928), pp. 124  sqq. Cf.  Berg, 
B.^idr.  98 (1g.^g),  p. 67  (about anachronisms  in the  titles  given  in the  Pararaton  to 
older  dignitaries)  and De  OraaI. ibid.,  lo9 (1953), pp. 62-82. 
^­) Cp. ^it., p.  104. 
37) For  these  three  syllables, we  shall  here give  a corrected reading,  which  is not absolutely 
certain  but has the  great advantage  of  accounting  for the  metre. 
3­) In the  Buddhist texts  and  inscriptions,  we  meet  with  all kinds  of variations  on  this 
theme. Indian inscriptions  often  show  the  well­known formula deyadharmo  'yaṃ  etc., 
which  has not  been  met  with  in any Buddhist inscription  from  Indonesia. The Kalasan 
inscription  ends  in the  curious  wish  that  all  people  may get  acquainted  with  the 
meaning  of Pratītyasamutpāda  (pratītyajātārthavibhāgaviiñāḥ)  as a  consequence  of the 
puṇya  acquired  by the  foundation.  Such  passages  have sometimes  been  interpreted 
as a gi^ft of puṇya  ; this  could  hardly  be called  a sacrifice,  since  the  puṇya  acquired 
by the  latter  gift  necessarily exceeds  the  amount  of punya acquired before. The idea 
is however  that the  founder pronounces the  wish  that  the  foundation may  be a  bridge 
(setu)  or a  ladder  (sopāna)  towards  the  stronghold  of liberation (muktipura). 
•^) This  Varanara should probably  be  identified ^ith Naravaranagara,  the  Na­fu­na  of 
the Chinese  sources,  which  is the  name  of the capital  of the  Fu­nan empire after  the 
kings  had left  Vy^dhapura  ; cf. Ccedĕs,  ^.E.F.E.O..  XLIII  (1943-46),  pp. s sq. and Pras. 


--- [Page 195] ---
— 135 — 
king  was endowed  with  powers characteristic of the Bodhisattvas abiding 
on the highest  bhumi 4°). Therefore, the last strophe of the inscription is 
very  probably an invocation addressed to the same  Bhūjayottuṅgadeva, 
conceived  of as a  Bodhisattva­Cakravartin.  If these  identifications are correct 
— the mutilated text necessitates some reservations — they supply us  with 
1ndon., I (1950), pp. 191 sq. The last line of the  Kélurak  inscription has the compound 
çrīsaṅgrāmadhanaṃjayanaravarasaṃskāralavdhagurunāmnaḥ,  in  which  the use of nara­
vara, all hut a usual term to denote a king in the only place in the text where the 
official  name of the reigning monarch is mentioned,  appears  to be an unambiguous 
reference to the last Fu­nan capital. Cf. also the important article by  Ccedés,  La 
tradition  généalogique  des  premiers rois d'Angkor d'sprés  les inscriptions de Yacovarman 
et de  .^ājendravarman,  EI.  Camb., No.  XXI.  in B.E.F.E.O.,  XXvIII  (1928), pp. 124­140; 
I^ājendravarman  uses  the title  adhirāja  to refer to the kings of  vyādhapura,  the 
Fu­nan  capital  from  where the kings retired to Naravara as a consequence of dynastic 
difficulties  after the death of Rudravarman (presumahly, in the second  half  of the 
sixth  century  A.D.;  cf.  Finot  in Melanges Sylvain Levi, p. 211, quoted by  Coedés 
art. cit., p. 130). Now it is curious  that  the same term adhnaja, unusual to denote 
kings  in inscriptions  from  Indonesia, is .also used m the last strophe of the Plaosan 
inscription  to refer to the king of varanara (=  Naravara,  as we presumed above); 
the title may therefore have  been  considered characteristic of the Fu­nan kings. 
It is not less striking  that  the much discussed inscription B of  Ligor,  which  contains 
the oldest mention of the  Çailendra  dynasty, begins yo 'sau  rājādhirājas,  thereby 
using the same title  adhu–āja  again.  We think  that  these  data make it very probable 
that Varanara,  combined  with  the  adhirāja  title, do refer to Fu­nan, viz. to the last 
capital  which  may have  been  situated on the  Gulf  of Siam,  possibly in the Northern 
part of the Peninsula, in any case to the South of  Vyādhapura,  which  is probably 
the present  Ba Phnoṃ  (Ccedés,  art. cit., p. 130).  Already  in 1924 (Journ. Cr. Ind. Soc., 
I, pp. 66­70),  Coedés  proposed to connect the  Çailendra  kings of Indonesia­  with  the 
ancient Fu­nan on account of various data  which  have not lost their weight, although 
they necessarily remained vague. The  loci  in the  Kelurak  a:^.d Plaosan inscriptions 
^ive it a strong support. An inevitable consequence is  that  new problems arise as 
soon  as one  trres  to arrive at further precisions. There remains a gap in our data 
between  about the middle of the 6th century and the second  half  of the 8th century 
when  the  Çailendra  dynasty suddenly appeared in the  Ligor  region and in Central 
Java.  We have to conclude  that  Fu­nan, though no more  than  a shadow of what it 
was before, continued to exist during about two centuries in Naravaranagara.  This 
would  not, however, be in  conflict  with  our data, especially in  view  of a  statement 
by I­tsing about in the middle of the dark period.  I–tsing  (cf.  Pelliot,  B.EP.E.O., 
III, 1903, p. 284) mentions the country  Pa­nan,  formally  called  Fu­nan‚  which  is 
situated on a month's sailing distance to the South­West of  Campā.  The fact of it 
being defined as not a  separate  island but the South­Eastern corner of  Jambūdvīpa 
points to the  Malay  Peninsula. In the  present  state  of research, it  seems  probable 
that a small  state  in the Northern  half  of the Peninsula claimed to continue the 
old empire of Fu­nan. It remained one of the numerous  small  states  on the Peninsula 
until,  in the eighth century, one of its petty kings made the  best  of the^ changed 
conditions and revived the old empire in narrow associations  with  Çrīvijaya,  adopting 
the old  but not yet forgotten tities of the kings of Naravara. 
40) CI.  Mahāvy.,  30, 47  : nānādṛṣṭyanuçayaparyavasthānakleçapraçamanakuçalaḥ.  The title 
of this chapter is given as  Bodhisattvānāṃ  sūtrāntanirgatāni kānicid  guṇanāmāni;  it 
appears  however  from  the first item  ekajātipratibaddhaḥ  that  only Bodhisattvas abiding 
in the Dharmameghahhumi are meant. ­ ­ ^ ^ ­


--- [Page 196] ---
— 186 ­
further materials about this mysterious  king  of Varanara, who became the 
founder  of the  Çailendra  dynasty in Central Java. 
The first twelve lines of the text must have contained many other data. 
At least a part of it makes the impression of being a  vaṃçāvali,  in which 
the excellent qualities of different  Çailendra  kings and  queens  are extolled  41). 
Unfortunately,  the text is too mutilated to make any conclusions possible. 
Much  more is preserved of the ten  Anuṣṭubh  strophes (1—10) and 
the seven Drutavilambita stanzas (11—17). The former all deal  with  the 
principal  image. The first strophe was already discussed above in connection 
with the identification of the statue. In the third, a very interesting exp1anat¬
ion of its origin is given. It is stated there that the image had miraculously 
fallen  down into the temple  (prasādādbhutasaṃbhraṣtaḥ)  owing  to its attach­
ment to the  Four  Sugatas, but in spite of its  fall, it continued to be  brilliant  42) . 
This  probably means  that  the temp1e had been  there  since some time before 
the date  of our  inscription  ; we also 1earn  that  not only  the temple buildings 
existed  already, but  there  were images, too, viz. the  Four  Sugatas, for if 
we understand the meaning of the strophe correctly, the presence of  these 
Four  Sugatas was the immediate cause of the descent of the marvellous 
image.  This  interpretation is greatly confirmed by strophe 18 c, where we 
read the words  ^tarakṛto  ^pi pālanīyaḥ,  applied to the foundation 43). These 
words mean : ,,(which) is to be protected also after having been made dif¬
ferent”. As a matter of fact, the protection of a foundation should imply 
that the things are to be left in the condition in  which  they were before. 
The contrast made by  these  words  could  only  be understood if we presume 
that the  king  had made considerable changes in the foundation, but added 
that this  fact  should not be an excuse for future generations of kings w^ho 
might  not be satisfied  with  the sanctuary. We should then expect some 
mention  of the  original  foundation in the  initial  part of the text in connection 
with one of the members of the  vamçāvali.  It is therefore quite possible 
that the words  priyatamam  eva  parīkhayā  pari  ..... 44) bear upon this  original 
foundation.  Our poet can hardly  state  anything without pointing to some 
antithesis. Here, the point is  that  nobody  likes  priyaviraha as a rule, but in 
­1) The impression of a  vaṃçāvali  is made  especially  by the words  janayām  = babhūva 
bhūpo  bhūbhṛtam  in line 10. In the lines 8 and 9‚ a  queen  (or queens) is (are)  extolled. 
­2) We analyze  prāsādādbhutasambhrasṭaḥ  as  prāsādam  adbhutena  sambhrasṭaḥ;  cf. note 
101 to the Translation.  Normally,  something  would  have lost its beauty by  falling 
down  from  unfathomable height.  Such  kinds of antithesis are very frequent in this 
text; some other examples are treated  below.  A similar  case of an image fallen  from 
heaven  and erected in a temple occurs in the  Karangtĕṅah  inscription  ; cf. Pras. 1ndon., 
I (195o),  p. 39.  Bosch  (B^idr. K. I.,  los,  1952, p. 194) rejects the interpretation proposed 
there  and  refers the  simile  of the portion of the lunar disc  fallen  to earth not to 
the image,  but to the mandira mentioned at the end of strophe 11 of the text; the 
simile  would,  however, seem very strange in  that  case. 
­3) For the meaning of kosa, the reader is referred to note 137 to the translation. 
–­) Pari­  is probably the beginning of one of the numerous words meaning ,,to surround’’ 
(paridadhati,  etc.). 


--- [Page 197] ---
— 187 — 
this particular case the temples, though being priyatama are nevertheless 
surrounded by a ditch  4^). Then we may presume  that  the subject matter 
of the strophes 1 to 19 deals  with  the changes at the occasion of  which 
this inscription was made. The most important change was undoubtedly 
the erection of the  inarvellous  image. But  there  was more. We may interpret 
the compound  ratnatrayāçayopetam  (strophe 10 a)  „(the  image) provided 
with  a Triratna  temple’’,  in such a way  that  the image is erected in a temple 
dedicated to the Triratna,  which  had been constructed on its behalf 46). 
Seven  strophes (11—17) are devoted to sundry details of this 47) temple. 
These seven strophes belong to the most interesting portion of the text 
in its present  form.  Each  of these  gives a  small  but  vivid  picture of a 
separate  detail. The Drutavilambita metre is  well  adapted to descriptions 
of this  kind.  Its lively  form,  which  is mainly due to the shortness of the 
pādas  and the preponderance of  breves,  suggests  the impressions made upon 
the visitors by  these  details. 
In the first of  these  strophes (11), we see a number of beautiful women 
before us, anointed  with  all kinds of  scents.  Since  only  the first  pāda  is 
preserved, we remain in the dark about what they are doing. Strophe 12 is 
very  interesting. There, we may represent us a Buddha 4^) who blinds others 
by the incomparable splendour emanating  from  the  çikhā  — a splendour 
due to a golden lotus hidden there. Here we have a clear  allusion  to one 
of the interior lotuses  (padma)  which  play a very important role in both 
Brāhmaṇic  and Buddhist  Yoga.  The lotus  here  mentioned is known as the 
Thousand­petalled one  (sahasrārapadma)  4^). It is evident  that  a Buddha 
image cannot have a  çikhā,  at least if this term is taken in its proper meaning ; 
but this is just the place where the  nṣnīṣa  is found in Buddha images. The 
splendour emanating  from  the  uṣṇīṣa  is often mentioned in the texts 5°) 
The blinding  splendour of the Buddha is in a  striking  contrast to his company, 
probably  Bodhisattvas, characterized by the soft rays of the moon. The latter 
are blended by the light issuing  from  the Buddha ; they cannot see what 
­.­) The (poetic)  reason  why this was  done  is not clear owing to a lacuna in the text. 
4‘.) Although  there  is no real proof for the latter  statement,  the use of  ^'upeta  suggests 
that the temple was  huilt  for the image. CI. strophe 3 of the Kalasan inscription 
where it is stated  that  a (statue)  of Tārādevī  was made, and also a temple for her 
(T.B.C., 68, 1928, p. 58  : tārādevī  kṛtāpi  tadbhavanam). 
^7) Tb^ wording of strophe 10, in  which  the poet expresses his  inability  of giving an 
adequate  description of the beauties of this image and this temple, is an excellent 
link with  the strophes 11 sqq., in  which  an (inadequate)  attempt  to mention at 
least some of its  adbhutāni  is made. 
4^) This  cannot he the image described in strophes 1 to 9,  which  is not a Buddha image 
if our interpretation especially of strophe 5 is correct. One might presume  that  the 
Buddha  of strophe 12 is sculptured in one of the reliefs of the temple. 
­^) CI. the detailed description by P. H. Pott, Yoga en Yantra, 1946, pp. 2o sqq. and 
p. 39,  with  numerous references. 
50) CI.  Mahāvy.,  244, 31­33 (p. 81):  uṣnīsavivarāntād  raçmiṃ  niçcarati  / sa  raçmiṃ 
niçcārya  parisphuṭo  'bhūt. 


--- [Page 198] ---
—­ 188 — 
they are  doing.  In the fourth  pāda,  of which  only  the beginning sakalakhadya­
is preserved, some accident must have been mentioned  with  the different 
kinds  of food  they were  carrying;  they probably let it drop. We can get 
some idea of the scene :  there  was probably a Buddha sitting on his throne 
with a number of Bodhisattvas intending to bring him  food  as a  form  of 
pūjā,  but when the latter were suddenly in the presence of the Buddha, 
they were frightened by his  divine  appearance and were unable to keep 
the food  in their hands. 
A different scene is described in strophe 13, where however the entire 
first pāda  is lost. The interpretation of the scene is therefore uncertain; 
we presume 51) that  the poet describes a number of lovers sporting  with 
their  beloved  ones, who  find  themselves suddenly in the presence of a 
Buddha.  This  symbol  of vairāgya  makes the lovers unable to continue  with 
what they were doing ; all their energy is hence­forward devoted to the 
sublime  ideal.  The poet expresses this sudden change by stating  that 
the Buddha takes their passions out of their heart­lotuses  (hrdayanīraja). 
Here,  we have another unambiguous reference to one of the interior padmas ; 
it is the heart­lotus,  which  is known  as the  ānandakandapadma  in Yoga  52) . 
Here,  too, the description is  strikingly  ‘plastic’  : one is more or less able to 
reconstruct the scene  which  is represented. We have probably a Buddha 
to whom a number of youths pay homage  while  their beloved ones are on 
the background.  If this interpretation is correct, the scene described in 
strophe 13 is closely related to that in strophe 12. In both cases, the super¬
natural power of the Buddha is stressed especially in connection with the 
interior  mystical  centres. 
Strophe 14 is interesting  from  a historical  point of  view.  Here, we 
represent us a Buddha temple (jinamandira) worshipped by a group of people, 
bowed  by the burden of devotion to the Buddhas. who continuously arrived 
from  the  Gurjara  country. We  briefly  mentioned this  simile  in a different 
context  ; bhakti  is represented  here  as a burden  which  makes  these  people 
humbly  pay worship to the temple. It our reading satkriyate is correct, 
the passage  refers to the  typical  forms of worship in later  Mahāyāna,  in­
cluding  vandana,  „praising”,  the bringing of scents and ointments  (gandhānu– 
lepa), the erection of Buddha images  (tathāgatapratimākaraṇa),  etc. 53). 
­l) For the details of the interpretation, cf. the  notes  to the translation of strophe 13. 
5.­) CI. Pott, op. cit., pp. 16 sqq. The term usual in  Yoga  is hṛdayapundarīka,  one of 
the most important mystic centres. 
53) These forms of worship, for  which  satkāra  and  pūjā  are the most usual terms, are 
very  well­known  from  Mahāyāna  ; they probably constituted one of the most important 
features of  living  Buddhism.  A systematic account  with  numerous quotations is  given 
by Çāntideva  in chapter  XVII  of the  Çikṣāsamuccaya  (under the title  Vandanānuçaṃsa  ; 
cf. the edition by  Bendall  in BibL  Buddh., I. 1902, pp. 297­3  Is). For the term  satkāra, 
cf. ibidem, p. 312, line 5  : sarvasatkāraiḥ  satkuryuḥ.  CI. also  Bodhicaryāvatāra,  II, 
lo to so, where we  find  the bathing of Buddha images  (snāna,  10­11), the gifts of 
^ ^clothing  (vastrāni,  especially  cīvarāni,  12­13), of scents, ointments and flowers 
(gandha. anulepa and  puṣpāni,  14­15), clouds of incense, foods and drinks  (dhūpameghāḥ, 


--- [Page 199] ---
— 189 — 
A v^ry interesting point is the mention of people  arriving  from  the Gurjara 
country.  One  would  especially  like to know what  kind  of people are meant 
here, whether  gurus  or merchants. We suggested the former alternative in 
a previous publication mainly on account of two considerations : the mention 
of a guru  from  Gauḍīdvīpa  (Bengal ?) in the  Kelurak  inscription and the 
possibility  of restoring gurubhir at the beginning of  pāda  c 54) . On the other 
hand, the use of satata at the beginning of the strophe  would  suggest a con­
tinuous coming and going  from  and to  Gurjaradeça,  which  would  agree  better 
with commercial than  with  religious and cultural contacts ^). In any case, 
this passage  leaves no doubt of  there  having been some regular contact, at 
least during some years, between Java and  Gurjaradeça.  The latter term is 
unfortunately vague. If we consider the approximate  date  of our inscription 
(the first  half  or the middle of the ninth century  AD.)  , the Gurjara­Pratihāra 
empire of  Kanauj,  though not the  only  possibility,  would  seem the most 
probable conjecture 56) . 
The next strophe (15) gives a  vivid  picture related  with  that  described 
in strophes 13 and 14. Some distinguished people bearing countless or­
naments were just on the point of revealing their feelings to their beloved 
ones, but it was just in time  that  they saw a Buddha image ; the sublime ma­
jesty of the Perfect  Being  devoid of passion withheld them  from  ceding to  that 
temptation  ^7). The word  kvacid,  with  which  this strophe begins, underlines 
that a different scene is described in each of  these  strophes. 
The two last strophes in the  Drutavllambita  metre (16 and 17) give an 
explanation  of the wonderful influence of the Buddha image expressed in 
the little  scenes  which  precede. The Buddha, although perfect, is not irritated 
at those who are not accomplished and  adhere  to different views  ; He aims at 
rescuing  the entire  world.  Since He is liberated  from  phenomenal existence 
(nirvṛta),  He must use special means to  that  purpose, viz. linages  which  are 
incomparable in destroying  worldly  existence 58) . At last, the  wish  is pronoun­
ced that  by these  means those obscured by the thick  veil  of ignorance may 
obtain  Deliverance. 
It thus  appears  that  the meaning of the scenes is not obscure as a rule. 
bhojyāni,  khādyāni,  peyāni,  16 ; this use of  khādya  confirms the interpretation of 
strophe 12 suggested above), etc. 
­4) CI. Pras.  rndon.,  I (1950), pp. 104 sq. 
^) At present, we are certain of the reading of  these  three  short syllables  which  were 
left open  in the survey mentioned in  note  54. 
––) CI. De la  Vallée  Poussin, L)ynasties et Histoire de r1nde in Histoire du Monde, 
Tome  VI (1935), pp. 118 sqq. In this period,  there  are several Curjara dynasties 
reigning  in different  parts  of India, but it  seems  very doubtful whether in such 
cases  the designation hy  Curjaradeça  could  he used. The term might  well  have been 
used for designating the country irrespective of the reigning dynasty; in  that  case, 
the present country of  Cujerāt  would  he the most probable conjecture. 
5 7) The last  pāda  is mutilated, but the meaning of the strophe as a whole does not seem 
doubtful.  There is something about the arrows of  Love  which  do not attain their aim. 
­­^ The latter are therefore compared  with  amṛta;  cf. the  notes  to the Translation. 


--- [Page 200] ---
— 190 — 
It is however very  difficult  to arrive at any conclusion about the way in 
which  they were represented. Was  there  a Buddha image in each of the 
reliefs  representing  these  scenes ?  This  is possible, but not necessary at all. 
One could  also suppose  that  the Buddha image was erected in the temple 
chamber, whereas the different scenes were represented on its  walls  in the 
form  of reliefs. In  that  case, all the figures in  these  reliefs  would  he directed 
towards the image and depicted in various forms of  devotion.  It is  well­known 
that a number of scenes is represented in  relief  in the two side chambers of 
each of the two central  buildings  of Tjaṇḍi  Plaosan ^). The place where  these 
reliefs  are found  agrees  with  that  we conjecturally concluded about the des­
criptions  in our text, but this is almost as far as the correspondence goes, 
unless a further comparison might reveal further points of agreements). 
Something  more may be stated about the  form  of Buddhism  appearing 
from  the  inscription.  Already  a superficial  examination shows  that  the text 
belongs to a  fully  developed  form  of Buddhism,  in which  bhakti and  differ­
^­) Description by  Krom,  Inleiding^,  II. pp. 11 sq. Photographs Din. Purb., Nos. 2117­2123. 
^0) If the second interpretation of the way in  which  the sculptor may have represented 
the scenes described in the text is correct, we expect to  find  only the effect of the 
influence  of the Buddha expressed there, i.e. different categories of people in attitudes 
of devotion. Then, the only other point  which  is essential is  that  the different groups 
should  be clearly  characterized as those mentioned in the  inscription.  If we  look  at 
the scenes  from  this point of  view,  we could  note some points of agreement  with  the text. 
Thus,  the  relief  representing two men bearing many ornaments and seated in  añjali 
attitude, each  with  his servant (cf.  Krom,  1.nleiding­, II, p. 11 ; it is one of the reliefs 
in the Southern chamber of the Southern  Vihara)  could  correspond to the description 
in strophe 15. The obvious point of disagreement, viz.  only  two princes ir. the relief, 
but a  plural,  not a  dual,  in the  inscription,  is hardly relevant : the sculptor who had 
to represent 'princes' leaving their  worldly  occupations to pay homage to the Buddha 
would  have  limited  their number to two of them, eath accompanied by an  attendant  to 
show  their rank, because their was not sufficient room to represent more princes. — 
In the same chamber,  there  is a scene representing two hi^h  clerical  dignitaries ; 
one of  these  is distinguished by a rather strange headgear for  which  Krom  very 
conjecturally  proposed  that  i^: denoted the  official  head of the  Çaiva  clergy (op. cit., 
H, p. 13). There would, however, be another possible interpretation of the two digni¬
taries, viz. that one of the high monks is a high Buddhist dignitary at the  Çailendra 
court, whereas the other, who is marked by the peculiar headdress, is a  ‘colleague’ 
from  abroad. In  that  case, one is  inclined  to connect the representation  with  the 
gurus  from  the  Gurjara  country in strophe 14. These gurus  would  have  been  the 
guests of the Javanese court; when they  went  to the temple to pay homage, they 
would  not go  there  by themselves but in the company of their hosts, vi^e. the 
Buddhist  priests of the  Çailendra  court. Here again, the sculptor, who had only 
limited  space at his disposal, and was, moreover, forced to express the  high  rank 
of the dignitaries by attributing them attendants,  could  represent  only one Javanese 
and one Gurjara dignitary.  Everything  depends on whether the remarkable headdress 
could  be brought into connection  with  Gujarat.  Special  attention is drawn to this 
pomt since it might be th^ ^nly case in  which  the correctness of our conjectural 
relation  between  the strophes 11­17 and the  small  scenes represented in  Tjaṇḍi 
Plaosan  could  be controlled. In all the other cases, as far as we can see, either the 
strophes in the inscription or the representations in the temple are too mutilated to 
make any identification possible. 


--- [Page 201] ---
— 191 — 
ent forms  of pūjā  are the outstanding features. A more peculiar feature is 
the reference to at least one, and probably more, of the internal  padmas, 
which  are characteristic of  Yoga  and of other systems  which  underwent 
strong  Yoga  influences. It is very doubtful whether we  could  characterize this 
type of  Mshāyāna  as Tāntric;  it mainly depends on how one  likes  to define 
Tāntrism.  If one associates the latter  with  the preponderance of vajra and 
mantra practices, together  with  the  five  makaras, and all of  these  elements 
as an essential part of the  Mārga,  then it is obvious  that  the type of  Mahāyāna 
exhibited  by the Plaosan inscription is not  Tāntric  ; on the other hand, it 
cannot be denied  that  a broader use of the term is easily misleading. It is 
not impossible to give a  Tāntric  explanation of at least one  passage  in our 
inscription.  Thus, the images  which  are incomparable in destroying  worldly 
existence (16 d) might easily suggest various  Tāntric  rites in  which  these 
images are used to obtain Deliverance or the transcendent powers of the 
Tathāgata.  But this interpretation of the  pāda  is not confirmed by the context. 
Its meaning probably is  that  the Buddha is in the unutterable (anahhilapya) 
state  of Nirvana  (nirvṛta);  in order to save mankind, he cannot act in this 
incomprehensible  state  but has to use his power of  Nirmāṇa.  To deliver the 
creatures  from  death and suffering, he has his own  upāyas  equal to  amṛta. 
These  upāyas  are the images in the temple(s)  ; they reveal the perfect tran­
quillity  of those liberated  from  the Saṃsāra  and their influence makes  itself 
felt in all  these  different scenes. The effect of the image is expressed by a 
metaphor of a type which is very common in all  Mahāyāna ^ 1). These me¬
taphors are based on a symbolism which probably was inherent in Buddhism 
from  its very  origin,  though  only  the Mahāyāna  sources  inform  us about its 
full extent. ^uite a few metaphors have completely lost their original fresh¬
ness and became loci communes or, even worse. technical terms. An inte¬
resting aspect of the symbolism. which is at their base is that transcendent 
reality,  which  is not susceptible of bemg expressed by words, is described 
by means of the same metaphors  which  are used to denote phenomenal 
reality.  If phenomenal existence is compared  with  a tree  sprung  from  the 
seed  which  is Defiled  Consciousness and producing fruits the  nature  of which 
is suffering, also trancendent existence is a  tree,  but a very different one : 
its seed is Bodhicitta 62) and its fruits are the  unexpressible  joys of  Nirvā¬
ṇa  63). Phenomenal existence is an ocean on which the ignorant creatures 
61) CI. Bodhic. Av., I, 10:  açucipratimām  imāṃ  gṛh^tvā  jinaratnapratimāṃ  karoty  anarghāṃ 
with  reference to the acquisition of  Bodhicitta. 
­2) The comparison  between  citta  (viiñāna)  and the seed (bija) is a very common one; 
cI. supra, No. III, d— A — 6 to 8. The  Vijñānavādins  (Siddhi, I. pp. 94 sqq.) distinguish 
the concept of  ālayaviiñāna,  which  contains all the  seeds  (sarvabīja^)  from  the six 
streams  of pravṛttrviiñāna  (cI. also Siddhi, II, pp. 433 sqq.) and the Manas.  Bodhicitta 
is the corresponding pure seed,  often  compared  with  a gem (e.g.,  Bodhic.  Av., I. 11); 
it is the first  simile  in the  Gaṇḍavyuha  quotation,  ^iksās.,  p. 5, line 20:  bodhicittaṃ 
hi......  bifjabhūtaṃ  sarvabuddhadharmāṇām. 
63) This  simile  is used e.g. the  Kelurak  inscription, strophe 11, the first word of  which 
we read  bodhicittamūtaḥ. 


--- [Page 202] ---
— 192 ­— 
roam  about without  finding  their way to the other shore 64), but also 
transcendent existence is an ocean itself, the ocean of the immeasurable 
qualities  (guṇa)  of the  Tathāgata  65). The relations between phenomenal and 
transcendent existence are clearly expressed  only  in the  Vijṅānavādin 
system; in the process  called  āçrayaparāvṛtti,  the mundane elements of exis­
tence develop into as many transcendent qualities of the  Dharmakāya  of 
the Buddha 66). 
In the transcription  which  follows  only  the first twelve lines (and the 
beginning  of line  13; we already noted  that  the numbering of the lines is 
conjectural) have been rendered as if it were a prose text.  From  line  13 on, 
the form  of the  metres  and the length of the lacunae  could  be determined 
with certainty.  From  there  on, we  start  counting the strophes.  Only  these 
nineteen strophes are given in translation below (as far as the lacunae  allow 
it) ; up to  line  13, we inserted occasional interpretations of the  passages  ca­
pable of translation in the  notes  to the Transcription; we are  fully  aware 
of the fact  that  such isolated interpretations necessarily remain conjectural. 
Transcription 67) 
[^ 5^]  ......vijarakāyavibham=vibhāti  guṇavibhāmalapntrajananaṃ  6^) yais= 
taruṇavala­
[^ 6^]  ......svaparahitaguṇasya  sva......ādvitīyaṃ  / smarsharavaravarṣṣad= 
bhūjayottuṅgade­  ^) 
­­) The  simile  of the  bhavārnava  needs  no comment. In  that  case,  Bodhicitta  is compared 
with a fish­hook  (badiça)  used to  lift  the drowning creatures. CI. the  Gaṇḍavyuha 
quotation mentioned in note 62, p. 6, lines 5 sq.  : badisabhūtaṃ saṃsārajalacarābhyud¬
dhāraṇat^yā. 
6­) Thus, one of the names of the Buddha is  Gunasāgara  (Mahāvy.,  I. 36 ; ed. hy  Minaiev­
Mir^nov,  p. 1). These transcendent qualities are acquired during the  Mārga  and the 
higher Bodhisattvas, too, are in the possession of a  great  number of them.  Cf . the same 
epithet applied to Bodhisattvas in  Bodhicarvyāvatāra,  II, 1  d : buddhātr^ajānāṃ  ca 
g^ṃodadhīnāṃ. 
66) CI. the  Siddhi  translation by De la  Vallée  Poussin,  II, pp. 661­667 and 681­692. Thus, 
the four (lokottara)  jñānas  of the Buddhas are due to the  parāvṛtti  of the eight 
v^ñānas.  Detailed references are given by Friedmann in  note  85 to p. 70 of his translation 
of the  Madhyāntavibhāgaṭīkā  (1937). CI. also the very important analysis by  Paul 
Mus,  Barabuḍur,  Siziĕme  Partie, Chapitre  VIII.  B.E.F.E.O.,  XXXIV  (1934), pp.  26O–276. 
67) up to  line  Is of our transcription, the reading is too fragmentary and too uncertain 
to make the reconstitution of the  metres  possible. One has the clear impression  that 
most of this portion is composed in the  Āryā  metre, or in one of the other  metres 
belonging to this group, such as  Gīti.  In view  of this uncertainty, the first portion of 
the text has  been  rendered as if it were prose in this transcription;  only  from  line 
13 on, transcription in strophes is possible.  Above  the first  line  given in transcription 
here, some definite traces of four lines of script are still visible on the stone; there¬
fore, the first line transcribed is numbered 5. The true number may have been higher. 
­­) The  italics  are very uncertain. 
­­) The transcribed portion of this  line  seems  sufficiently  certain. We take the metre to 
be Mālinī;  this may also be the case  with  line 7. If this presumption is correct,  there 
are a few  Mālini  strophes  between  the Āryās.Line  6 has been  briefly  discussed in the 
Introduction. 


--- [Page 203] ---
— 193 — 
[ 7^]  ...........  .saṅgaṃ  / .....  .ti  70) kuçalarāge  yaç=ca  vrddhim=vibhartti  7l) 
// çara­
[^8] ...............  jamvulakṣmyāḥ  72)/ .........  lolakīrttyā  vilokinyāḥ  7 2) // sa­
[^ 9^l  ...............  satatārthakāriṇi  varadā  / ............... bhāryyā  73) tāreva 
virājati  // gatinā kuçala­
[T0^l  ..............  .ṅjabhṛto  ...........  .ṣṭapādasatkāyaṃ 7 4 ) jj janayām=vabhūva 
bhuyo  7^) bhūbhṛtam=adyāṣṭahastāṅçam  // 
[T1^|  ........... .  sa j janataḍitkuliçabhṛt=kuleçaçaraṇaç  = ca . . . . .  .ḥ / valamālā  76) 
70) The word preceding  kuçalarāge  might  well  be jayati,  which  would  agree  with  the 
Mālinī  metre. 
71) The last word,  which  presumably  represents  a not unusual orthography for bib^artI. 
is uncertain. We have no examples of the combination  vṛddhiṃ  bibharti,  which  could 
however be understood in  view  of usual combinations such as  phalaṃ  bibharti. 
72) Th^ words given in transcription seem certain and make sense. The uncertainty about 
the metre makes however some reservations necessary. If it is a  Mālinī  strophe,  which 
seems  to be the case, then  there  would  be a syllable too much at the end of the 
strophe; this is not however the  only  possibility. 
73) Only  those words the reading of  which  appears  to be beyond reasonable doubt have 
been  given in the transcription of this  line.  Here, again, the metre gives the impression 
of being an  Āryā,  but an amphibrachys in the antepenultima cannot be correct. If this 
transcription  may nevertheless be  relied  upon,  it is probable  that  the epithets in 
line 9, presumably depending on  bhāryyā,  refer to the same  queen  (?) to whom the 
genitives in line 8 apply. CI. the Introduction. 
'74) Here, the metre is undoubtedly  Aryā.  The meaning of this  passage  is completely obscure 
to us;  aṣṭapādasatkāyaṃ  does not make sense, unless it  could  mean something  like 
aṣṭāṅgasatkāyaṃ;  but even then, the compound  would  not be  lucid.  Presumably,  there 
is a pun  with  aṣṭahastāṅçam  at the end of the  line  10, but this does not mean anything 
to us. Instead of  °ṅçam,  ṅgam  is also possible, but w^ cannot see how  that  would 
render the text more sati^fartory. 
7^) Instead of  bhuyo,  the possibility  of bhūpo  cannot be excluded; the latter reading might 
be more satisfactory for the meaning of the strophe,  which  could  then be rendered 
by: ‚.he, the protector of the earth, b^got an Earth­bearer whose body (?) has at 
present eight arms (?)". If the reading may be  relied  upon, we are able to conclude 
that (a) the text gives a  kind  of vaṃçāvali  of a dynasty of kings (a point  winch  is 
hardly  doubtful in  view  of the reading of  janavām babhūva  which  is certain), and (b) 
the king  mentioned in the genealogy is  ‚‚at  present" (  adya.)  eight­armed. The choice 
among eight­armed divine powers in the Buddhist pantheon is  limited;  an eight­armed 
form of  Mañjuçrī,  called  vāgīçvara Dharmadhātu,  is known from iconography (Bhat¬
tacharya, pp. 18 sq­). In view of the uncertain reading, this interpretation is however 
given  with  reservations. 
7^) The portion of this line capable of being rendered in the transcription  appears  to be 
a part of an  Āryā.  The words  sajjanataditkuliçabhṛt=kuleçaçaranaç=  are clear by 
themselves and  could  be translated: „holding the vajra  which  (emits) lightning to the 
good, being a refuge for the chief of his race". The text presumable suggests a Vajra¬
pāṇi image, whose vajra is considered the symbol of the powerful fire that burns the 
impurities  of those good men (sajjana) who have attained a high  state  of perfection. 
At the same time, the vajra­bearing Bodhisattva is represented as the protector of the 
kuleça,  who  could  only  be a Buddha. The conception of Buddhas and .Bodhisattvas as a 
family  (gotra)  is a common one in  Mahāyāna;  the Buddha is then designated by 
epithets such as  pitā bodhisattvānām  (Mahāvy.,  19, 35, ed. by  Minaiev­Mironov,  p. 7), 
the Bodhisattvas as buddhasuta or a synonym. If this interpretation is correct, we re­


--- [Page 204] ---
— 194 — 
fl2^l ............takalolatphalotpalālabhṛtaḥ  77) / priyatamam=eva  parikhayā 
Pari­  7 8) 
fl3^]  .................... ....jinasUtaḥ  //  ^) 
Naranāthābhisaṃskārabhāro  vibhāti  bhāsvaraḥ  / 
Dharmmasambhārasamitapratimāprati  [T4^]  — ^ ^  // 1 //  ^) 
—-.—.­—^^­–^^  / 
^ ^ ^  —­  —– nīrajān=varayānagān  81) //2  j/ 
^ ^ ḥ ^ ^ ^  yāvā  ..^ catUssUgatasaṅgataḥ  / 8–) 
Prāsādādbhutasaṃbhraṣṭaḥ  kiṃ=bhāti  tādṛçaç=ciram  // 3 // 
Bhūbhṛd=iva  vi [15^]  –—­—^  ^^^^^—­.^^  / 
^ ^ ^ .— ..^. raṇaḥ  pāpabhā ^ naḥ  // 4 //  8 3) 
Saṃl^avabhramaṇaçrāntaviçrāntavodhim=eṣyati  / 
Viṃ^atīha  virājante  jinā  jinasutānvitāḥ  // 5  /j 
Analpajanmopajitya  viçvāvaraṇavāraṇaḥ  / 
[T6^]  ­^^^^^­——­^ -^^–—^^—.^.^  //6/.’ 
^.—^.^.^. ^—..^—-.^.  ^ ^ ^ ^  ^ � ^ f 
^^^.^^—..^^  duḥkhaçamanaçāsanaḥ  // 7 //  ^­) 
Gahanapāraçāsārthavyāhāramañjuçīkaraḥ  / ^ 35) 
Cāracīvarasāndhyābhradhibhūridalayoja^  j/  8 // 
present us a Buddha accompanied on one side by a  Vajrapāṇi;  in that  case, one is 
inclined  to suppose  that  the second  pāda,  only the  heginning  of which  could  be de­
ciphered,  refers to the Buddha's other divine companion, usually  Lokeçvara. 
7^) Here, too, we have a part of an  Aryā;  we may translate :  „the  hees  of the blue lotus(es) 
with swinging  fruits  ......";  cI. the next note. 
7s) The second  pāda  deals  with  something very dear (priyatama)  which  for  that  very 
reason (this might have  heen  expressed by  eva)  was surrounded (pari^’ is probably the 
beginning  of one of the numerous words meaning „to  surround’’,  such as  pari­dhā) 
by a ditch  (parikhā).  If we try to establish a relation  between  the preceding part of 
the strophe and  these  words, we might conclude  that  the bees  (alabhrt) are attracted 
by the scent of the blue lotuses  (utpala^),  probably those carried by Bodhisattvas such 
as Mañjuçrī  (?); the  bees  are not of course  held  back by the  ditch  protecting the 
foundation  where the Bodhisattvas are placed. 
79) From  here on, the metre is capable of being re­established. We therefore transcribe the 
following portion in strophes; since the length of the lacunae is known, the  interpre¬
tation (and also the reading) becomes far less uncertain. 
­^) The preserved portion of this  cloka  is perfectly clear. For the  three  last syllables. 
we propose  –modayaḥ,  which  would  be in keeping  with  the  simile. 
^1) Although  the  third  pāda  is still  preserved on the stone, its reading is very uncertain. 
­­) The reading seems to be certain, except for the first  pāda,  where some of the aksaras 
are badly mutilated. For a conjectural reading, cf. the notes to the translation. 
­­­) The reading of the last syllables i­ v^ uncertain. The penultima might be a dha^ 
but then the preceding  syllable  cannot be  jbhā. 
–4) The reading of the  third  pa da, which  is preserved en the stone, is too uncertain to 
be given  here. 
^) The reading of the first  three  syllables of tbi^  cloka  is uncertain. Cahana is not 


--- [Page 205] ---
— 195 — 
...^. .^. .^. .^. ^ ^ ^ ^  ^--^  ^ ^--^  ^ ...^  / 
^^^^^^.—^  ^  kṣaṇārtham=vidīyate  // 9 // 8-) 
Ratnatrayāçayopetaṃ  samastaguṇaratnabhaṃ  / 
Kaçcin=na vaktuçakto  vas=tatpuṇyāyām=anuṣṭubhi /.’  10 // 
Vividhagandhasudigdhavarā^18^]  <ṅganāḥ>  ^7) 
^ ^ ^ —– ^ ^ ^ �^ ^  .— / 
^ ^ ^  .—....  ^ ^  —..  ^ ^ ^ 
^ ^ ^  .—  ^ ^  .—  ^ ^  .—  yate  ^s)  /f 11 /j 
Kanakakokanadodaravisphurad­
ruciradīpaçikhākṛtatāmasaḥ  / 
Çiçiraraçmirucāpravarānvayaḥ 
sakalakhādya[T9^  ^ —^ ^ ^  —^­  ^ –—  ^') // 12 // 
^ ^ ^­^  .—. ^ ^  —­  ^ ^ ^ —– 
pravarasamvaravāravarāṅganāḥ  / 
Hṛdayanīrajasāndrarasāntaraṃ 
harati  kāmijanasya  samantataḥ  // 13 // 
Satatagurjaradeçasamāgatais= 
sugatabhaktibharapraṇatai[^20^] ^  .— / 
^ ^...^ ^  —...^  ^  ­  ^  ...—  ^ —... 
^ ^ ^  .—  tkriyate  ^°) jinamandiram  // 14 // 
Kvacid=asaṅkhyacikhāmaṇibhuṣaṇāḥ 
praṇayinīprakaṭīkṛtamanmathāḥ  / 
Sugatavimvavllokananirjita– 
smaraçarākuçalāḥ  ça[^21^  ^ ­— —­ // 15 // 
^ ^  ­—  ^ ^  .—.  ^..^  -—– 
vigataroṣadṛço  ’ntaradṛṣṭiṣu  / 
Sakalalokam=asāv=api  nirvṛto 
bhavabhidapratimapratimāmṛtaiḥ  j 16 // 
satisfactory, since the context requires a word meaning  'fire'  (Buddhist teaching is 
often  compared  with  a soft rain.  which  calms the fire of passion). Dahana is impossible 
from  a palaeographic point of  view;  in addition, we should  rather  expect  some  com­
pound  like  kleçāgnf. 
‘^­) The reading is  rather  uncertain. 
87) The completion is uncertain, but a word meaning 'women'  seems  to be required by 
the context. 
8s) The preceding syllable might be  dī. 
8.)) For a conjectural reconstitution, cf. the translation. 
­^) If the ligature  tkri  is correctly transcribed, the preceding aksara was probably a sa 
(satkriyate). Then  there  still  remain  three  short syllables at the beginning of  pāda 
c, for which the adverb sapadi is suggested. The possibilities for reconstituting  three 
short syllables preceding a verbal form ar^  rather  limited. 


--- [Page 206] ---
— 196 — 
Vahulamohamahātimirāvṛto 
jinavad=astinirodha[^22^ ^ –­  ^^.­­–  9l) / 
^ ^ ^ —­– ^ ^ ­­– ^ ^  ­­­­­­  ^ –– 
drutavilambitasādhanavanditaḥ  92) // 17 // 
Saṃsārāvanicaratān=na  dharmato  ’nya­
jantūnām=varaçaraṇaṃ  triçarmmadhīraiḥ  / 
Koṣo  'sāv=itarakṛto  ’pi  pālanīya­  93) 
[^ —­——­  ^ ^ ^ —.<prsharṣaṇīyaḥ> ^ 4) // 18 /7 
Kṛtvemaṃ  çaçadharavimvaçuddham=āpam= 
yat=puṇyam—bhajatu jano jinakramasya  / 
Asmān=rakṣa  varanarādhirājarāja  9^ 
dṛṣṭikleçam=api  janā  na rāgabaddhāḥ  /j 19 // 
91) Pāda  h might be completed to jinavad=astinirodha(^n— avāpnuyāt).  Here the context 
requires a verbal form, preferahly in the optative, for the opposition  between  timira 
and nirodha makes it probable  that  a wish  should have  been  expressed here. 
92) ^rh^ reading of  pāda  d would  have  been  very doubtful, if on account of a comparison 
with pāda  d of strophe 10  there  was not a very  strong  reason  to presume  that  the 
name of the  metre  of these  strophes  should have  heen  mentioned here. 
93) The reading of  these  three  pādas  is sufficiently certain. The line  ends  in pālanīya;  the 
latter should not probably be reconstituted as  pālanryaḥ;  for in  that  case  the  final 
visarga  could  have easily been placed on line 22. Presumably, this word ended in a 
consonant  which  could  be combined into a  hgature  with  the first  consonant  of pāda  d‚ 
I.e. either a dental or a palatal sibilant (words beginning in a  lingual  are extremely 
rare). Pad's d ought then to begin  with  a sa,  ta, ca, tha or cha ; the two  cases  last 
mentioned are however  unlikely.  This point is of  interest  for a conjectural restitution 
of pāda  d; cf. the nex:: note. 
.^­) Since in this inscription the  names  of the  metres  appear  to be mentioned at the end 
of one of the  strophes  composed in a particular metre, it is very probable  that  ^.he 
word  praharṣiṃ  or praharṣaṃ  occurred at the end of either strophe 18 or strophe 19. 
It soon  appears  that,  if that  name is mentioned,  there  is only one possible place, i.e. 
in stronhe 18,  pāda  d, and in the  pāda  itself  there  is also a single place where the 
name can be fitted in into the metre. i.e.  when  ending at the penultima; (cI. the 
Old­  Javanese Wrtta­Saficaya, published by H. Kern, Yerspr. Ceschr. IX (1875,  date  of 
the original  publication), pp. 69 — 189, strophe 67 (on p. 89), where also one syllable 
is following in the 1st  pāda  (sasing  ramya mamuhara  praharṣirū  twas).  The feminine 
name  of the  metre  cannot fit in  with  the context; in addition, a single syllable is 
required by the  metre  after the  name  and the parallelism of the strophe  (pālanīya) 
suggests  praharṣaṃyaḥ.  Since such feelings as joy do not properly flatter a Buddhist 
practising  vairāgya,  we need some explanation here. Probably,  praharṣarūya  was pre­
ceded by api  again. 
9.^) The reading of pada c proposed in Pras. lndon., I. p. 104, is not correct;  there  was 
moreover a short syllable missing. The reading of the  three  first syllables of the pada 
remains conjectural since the lettering is badly preserved here. Ksa  seems  however 
certain; the preceding ligature,  which  was transcribed ndra before, proves to be nra. 
Thus,  we have the imperative  rakṣa  preceded by an n  which  must be the  final  consonant 
of the preceding word, presumably the ending of the accusative plural of a  disyllabic 
word.  Asmān  makes good  sense  and  seems  to agree  with  the traces  still  visible  on the 
stone. 


--- [Page 207] ---
— 197 — 
Translation 96) 
1. Bearing the burden of consecration as the  lord  of men, he shineth forth, 
the Brilliant  One, as the incomparable sunrise in the  form  of an image  ^ 7) 
adorned  with  the equipment of Dharma ^)  . 
9^) We made no  attempt  at translating the fragmentary readings in the first twelve lines 
of the inscription. The  impossibility  of reconstructing the metre prevents us  from 
connecting the  passages  that  could  be deciphered. A few important terms are discussed 
in the Introduction. 
97) T^he nse of  bhāsvaraḥ  at the end of  pāda  b suggests  the use of a  simile  with  the sun. 
II. then, the  statue  is compared  with  the sun, we conclude  that  the three  lost syllables 
at the end of  pāda  d contained a term capable of being applied to both the  statue 
and the sun ; the completion of prati­ to  pratimodayaḥ  would  satisfy this condition. 
.^8) For the meaning of the strophe as a whole, cf. the Introduction. Here, we add some 
details and references.  Sambhāra  is the Bodhisattva's equipment on the Path and has 
the twofold  aspect of being merits  (punya)  and wisdom  (jñāna);  cf.  Har  Dayal,  The 
Bodhisattva ­Doctrine  (1932)  pp. 169 sqq.; Siddhi, II. pp. 572 sqq.;  Dha.rmasaṃgraha, 
No. CXVII,  edition in  Anecd.  Oxon.,  VoL I, Part V, p. 29. The  sambhāra  concept is 
also known  from  Hīnayāna,  but the terminology  seems  less systematical. CI. Abhidh. 
Koça,  VII, p. 82, the compound  sarvagunajñānasaṃbhārābhyāsa,  considered the first 
aspect of  hetusaṃpad,  „perfection  de causes". The explanation given by De la  Vallée  in a 
note and presumably translated  from  the  Vyākhyā  is interesting :  „les  qualités  (gunas) 
sont de leur  nature  cinq  Pāramitās;  les savoirs  (Prajñā)  sont  la Prajñāpāramitā".  This 
is exactly the  well­known  Mahāyāna  view  according to  which  the first  five  Pāramitās 
are pu^yasambhāra,  the  sixth  is jñānasambhāra.  CI. also the  Mahāvastu,  edition by 
Senart, I, p. 239,  line  5: mahāsamudāgamanaṃ  ca  jñātvā  kuçalamūi'asambhāraṃ  ca 
cetopraṇidhānaṃ  jñātvā,  where  ku.çalamūlasaṃbhāra  comes very near to  puṇyasaṃbhāra; 
cI. also op. cit., II, n. 286, ^ines 6 sq.  : balavāṃ  bhavati  samādhi  saṃbhārato  puṇyānām, 
„the meditation becomes more powerful owing to the accumulation of good acts" (a 
very  similar  expression ibid., II, p. 417,  line  19 : balavāṃ  bhoti  samādhi  sambhāravatāṃ 
sapuṇyavatām).  The  Abhidharmakoça  states  that  all the Buddhas are equal in as far 
as they all have accumulated merits and wisdom (VII, pp. 8o s^.  : pūrvapuṇyajñana– 
saṃbhārasamudāgamatas).  The paramount importance of the  sambhāra  concept in 
Mahāyāna  appears, for instance,  f Aom the fact of it being almost the last word of ^uch 
an authoritative text a^ the  Bodhicaryāvatāra,  viz. IX, 16a  d.­ puṇyasaṃbhāram  ādarāt 
(ed. by De la  Vallée  Poussin in  Bibf.  1nd., 19o1­14, p. 60s). The  Pañjikā  (ibrd.,  p. 
604, lines 6 sq.) explains  : evam  upacitaḥ puṇyasaṃbhāro  buddhatādhigamāya  jāyate, 
ie. „the  provision of merits accumulated in such a way (viz. by realizing  that  neither 
the object given, nor the giver and receiver are real) becomes a  means  of reaching 
Buddha­hood".  The idea is  that  the sage  who  fully  understands the irreality of subject 
and object does not give in  view  of a later recompense, but just because it becomes 
natural : it is the highest degree of  puṇyasaṃbhāra  based on the comprehension of the 
Çunyatā,  which  is the essence of  jñānasaṃbhāra.  The latter quotation is especially 
interesting because it proves that even in the highest summits of Buddhism the under¬
lying idea of accumulating  puṇya  (the term upacita used by  Prajñākaramati  to explain 
saṃbhāra  leaves no doubt) is some  kind  of provision  by means  of which  the adept  is 
able to bring the  long  journey to the  city  of Buddha­hood to an end. In addition, in a 
similar  way as a definite amount of good  karman  brings about re­birth and existence 
in a definite divine sphere and for a definite period ­— during  which  the fruit of the 
punya is enjoyed  –, in the same way a sufficient quantity of  puṇya­  and  jñāna¬
saṃbhāra  brings about the superior qualities that constitute the  svasaṃbhogakāya  of 


--- [Page 208] ---
—198 — 
2. ......  passionless, going on the  best  vehicles). 
3. ......  from the  contact  with the Four  Sugatas 1°°); how is it possible 
that he continues to shine forth  after  having fallen into the temple by 
a miracle ? 1°1) 
the Tathāgata  ; cI. Siddhi, II. p. 705 (in De la vallée  Poussin’s  translation):  ‚,svasaṃ¬
bhogakāya.  —  C’est d’infinios réal1es (bhūta) qua1ités (guṇa), créées (nirvartita)  par 
^'accumulation  d’un  mérite  ot d’un savoir  (puṇyajñānasaṃbhāra)  cu1tivés  pendant  trois 
Asaṃkhyeyaka1pas; nn  corps  matérie1 (rūpakāya)  parfait  (muni  des  marques  et sous¬
marques)  ......’’. CI. a1so op– cit., II,  727, where  De 1a  Va11ée  Poussin  mentions some 
forms  of saṃbhāra  occurring in the  Abhisamayā1aṃkāra.  As a matter of fact, the 
Āl.^ka  to the latter text, quoted by Obermiller, Acta Orient., XI (1932), p. 87, note 3‚ 
mentions a  list  of different kinds of  saṃbhāras  beginning  with  dayā  and ending in 
dhāranī (dayām ārabhya  dhāranīparyantena).  Obermiller  mentions  these  kinds in the 
Index, art. cit., p. 111 ;  there  are fifteen  saṃbhārds  in all, but this high number 
includes  the six  Pāramitās  from  dāna  to prajñā.  . 1^harmasaṃbhāra,  the term used in 
our text, is less usual ; it is probably used to comprise both  puṇya  and  jñāna 
into a single compound; our  only  reference is the Bodhisattvapitaka, quoted in 
the Çikṣāsamuccaya,  edition by  Bendall,  pp. 190 sqq., especially p. 191,  line  4, the term 
dharmasaṃbhārayogaḥ  (sa  evāsya jñānasaṃbhāro bhavati) ; cI.  the terms  dharmaprāg¬
bhāratā  and  dharmapravaṇyatā.  Finally, we refer the reader to Pras. 1ndon., I (1950), 
pp. 161, where the compound  bhūmisaṃbhāra,  presumably the  original  name of the 
Barabuḍur  in Java (or rather, the beginning of  that  name), is discussed; the above 
references may be added to the  there  discussion. — The main  reason  why we quote 
the above data is to  stress  the almost concrete value of  saṃbhāra  as 'something'  which 
is carried by the Bodhisattva on the Path towards  Bodhi  and  which  gives him the 
strength to continue.  According  to the SiddhI. this 'something’ is not lost after the 
arrival,  ­but in the  āçrayaparāvṛtti  it develops into the transcendent  guṇas  of the 
Saṃbhogakāya  which  manifest themselves in the  Mahāpuruṣalakṣaṇas. 
^9) On1v the last  pāda,  nīrajān  .–arayānagān^  is legible.  Varayāna  is, of course, the  Ma­
hāyāna  or Bodhisattvayan^, in contrast to the lesser  yānas  of Çrāvakas  and Pratyeka¬
buddhas; sometimes, more  yānas  are mentioned, e.g. in the  Mahāvyutpatti,  edition by 
Minaiev and Mironov, p. 20, sub 59, 1­6  : mahāyānaṃ, pratyekabuddhayānaṃ, çrāva¬
kayānaṃ, ṅmayānam, prādeçikayānaṃ  and  ekayanaṃ  (for the latter term cf. Ober­
miller  quoting Haribhadra's  Abhisamayālaṃkārāloka  in Acta Orient., XI, 1932, pp. 
29 sq., note 1;  ekayāna  represents  the  three  main  yānas  conceiveu of as a unity); 
varayānagān  means  the same as  bodhisattvān.  Nīrajān,  to be analyzed as  nī­rajān  (= 
nīrajaskān),  not as  nīra­jān  (although  there  might be a pun), may  well  apply to 
Bodhisattvas  who  live  in the  world  without being attached to it. 
1^) Catuḥsugatasaṅgataḥ,  ,,from  (owing to) the contact  (saṅga,  also : attachment)  with 
the Four Sugatas (probably, the four Buddhas of the past.­)". The interpretation of 
this pāda  is the more  difficult  because the first  pāda  is lost.  Saṅgataḥ  could  also be 
interpreted as  saṃgataḥ,  „having joined", but this  seems  les^  likely  : we expect a term 
which  explains why the  statue  left the  lofty  realms to  fall  on earth; we understand 
that the Bodhisattva  follows  the example of  Vipaçyin  and the others, who obtained 
Bodhi  on earth. We do not think it probable  that  catuḥsugata  refers to the Four Jinas 
(why  not  Five  in this case?). If this is the correct interpretation, it  would  be a strong 
argument in favour of the suggestion made in the Introduction (supra, p. 183)  that  the 
image in strophe 1 is a  Maitreya. 
I01) Prāsādādbhutasaṃbhraṣṭaḥ  is analyzed as  prāsādam  adbhutena  saṃbhrasṭaḥ.  Compounds 
of the type  adbhuta–saṃbhraṣṭaḥ  are perfectly normal; cI. Speyer, Syntax, p. 1^o‚ ^ 217, 
sub a‚ and Wackernagel, Altind. Cramm., II, 1, p. .56, § 27 a^  Al^,  prāsādasaṃb^rasṭa, 


--- [Page 209] ---
— 199 — 
4. Like  a mountain (or :  like  a king)  ......  10^). 
5. He  will  obtain  (that)  Bodhi  1°3) which  is the ultimate  rest  for those 
tired  with  roaming through  worldly  existence 10^); twenty Jinas are 
shining  forth here, accompanied by Bodhisattvas 10^) . 
as a tatpurusa composed of a  nomen  verbale  preceded by an accusative of direction, 
is normal (Speyer, § 216, II b); a well­known  similar  compound, on  which  ours may 
have  been  inpired, is  garbhāvakrānta.  In the construction of larger compounds, we find 
certain freedoms in Buddhist Sanskrit; for our compound, cI., for instance, dharma¬
meghayugapatpravarṣaṇaḥ  (quoted in note 27 to the Introduction ; here, too, we find 
the adverbial form placed  between  the parts  dharmamegha–pravarṣaṇaḥ).  With  a view 
to the latter compound, we prefer this analysis to another possibility, viz. of taking 
prāsādādbhuta  as a unity („wonder of a temple", I.e. ‚‚a wonderful temple"). — This 
kind  of miracles, based  upon  the identity of the  statue  and  that  which  it represents, 
is very common in  Mahāyāna  ; one of the  best  known examples is Prince  Siddhārtha's 
visit  to the temple,  which  makes the divine  statues  leave their pedestals to pay homage 
to the young Bodhisattva. 
10­) Only  the words  bhūbhṛd  =iva are legible at the beginning of the strophe. 
IO3) The words vodhim=esyati may be considered a definite proof  that  the statue  described 
is that of a Bodhisattva, not of a Buddha. Since the strophes from 1 to 1o, all compos¬
ed in the same  Anuṣṭubh  metre, seem to give a continuous description of only one 
statue,  we may conclude  that  also strophe 1  relates  to a Bodhisattva image. The use 
of the future  esyati  does  not only express the certainty of ultimate Buddha­hood, but 
seems  also to  suggest  that  the event  will  not probably take place  within  a short period, 
for the poet  would  have used the  present  tense  to indicate something about to  happen. 
1­ 4) This  passage  gives a  typical  example of the close relationship of  Bodhi  and  Nirvana 
in this form of Buddhism.  Viçrānta  is a synonym of  çānta,  one of the common attri¬
butes of Nirvana. As a matter of fact,  çānta  is considered one of the four aspects of 
Nirodhasatya;  cI. Abhidh.  Koç^,  De la  Vallée  Poussin’s  translation, VII, pp. 31 sqq. 
(where a number of explanations of the four  ākāras  of Nirodhasatya are given); Ma¬
hāvyutp.,  54, No. 11 on p. 19 ^f the edition by  M:naiev–Mironov; 1^harmasaṃgrah­­­, 
edition  by Kasawara,  Mueller  and Wenzel in  Anecd.  Oxon., Ar. Ser., Vol. I,  Pt.  V, 
No. XCIX  on p. 23).  Nirvana  and  Bodhi  gradually become almost synonyms in the 
development of  Mahāyāna.  CI. De la  Vallée  Poussin, Siddhi, II. p. 676 : „Le  Nirvāṇa 
des Buddhas  n'est  pas distinct de la  Bodhi;  c'sst  la Tathatā  plus  les quatre  savoirs; 
c'est  dans  la réalisation  d^1  Dharmakāya  et par Intelligence parfaite de la  Tathatā, 
la paix absolue et  l’éternelle activité  : telles  de Brahma ou de  Kṛṣṇa".  The  Nirvāṇa 
of Çrāvakas  and Pratyekas is, of course, something very different. The  simile  suggested 
by bhramana is a very common one; it is  that  of phenomenal existence  (bhava) 
viewed  as a jungle through  which  only the Bhagavat can show the path. 
l­^) One wonders what the poet  means  to express hy  pādas  c­d following a­b. Probably, 
we have to consider the  statement  about the twenty Jinas a kind of  encouragement  : 
the Jinas, too, have accomplished the entire Path before having arrived at the  state 
of perfection; their presence proves the possibility of obtaining  Bodhi  to the  Bodhi­
sattva.  With  a view  to our explanation of  esyati  in note  10s, we may consider  pādas 
c­d some kind of elucidation. The mention of twenty Jinas might be important for 
our knowledge of  Tjaṇḍi  Plaosan. Twenty is not, of course, a usual number for Jinas 
and this point makes it probable  that  the number  relates  to a definite detail of the 
foundation : the foundation included already twenty Jina images before the installation 
of the Bodhisattva.  Buddhasutānvitāḥ,  ‚‚accompanied  by Buddha­sons, i.e. Bodhisattvas’’, 
probably  means  that  each Jina  would  be accompanied by two Bodhisattvas. This 
would  bring the  original  total of Jinas and Bodhisattvas to sixty. Now it is curious 


--- [Page 210] ---
­— ^ –^ 
After  having vanquished numerous  lifes  as an elephant breaking through 
all kinds of obstacles  ......  ^ 6). 
7. whose doctrine  appeases  suffering 1'37). 
8. Making  the gentle rain of his discourses,  which  aim at teaching (the 
converts) how to cross the  depths  (of the ocean of  Saṃsāra)  1°8) , descend, 
that the total number of sma11 structures surrounding the two main buildings in th^ 
Plaosan  complex amounts to 5S (i.e., excluding, of course, the Stupa structures,  which 
cannot contain any statues). If we add the two main buildings to this number, we arrive 
at a total of 6o buildings capab1e of containing images. This superficial comparison 
tends  to show  that  there  is at least some  agreement,  although it leaves a number of 
problems  open.  It is not, for instance, clear where the Bodhisattva  statue,  which  is 
not included into the number, was placed. In addition, the two main buildings gave 
place to more than two images. 
­‘­^) Analpajanmopajitya  viçyāvaraṇavāraṇ^ḥ.  — The use of  upajity^,  „having vanquished". 
seems  to be connected  with  the  bhūmi  conception of the Bodhisattva carreer; one 
of the current explanations of the term  bhūmi  is that  the latter are  „des étages  qu'il 
faut conquérir" (De la  Vallée  Poussin, Siddhi, II. p. 619,  parigrāhya);  the Path leading 
to Buddha­hood  is, in fact, a continuous struggle  with  the foes  that  are the  kieças 
( Hodhicaryāv.,  VI, 19 c  : saṃgrāmo  hi saha  kleçaiḥ)  and the  Bodhisattvas  are  victo­
rious  heros  (op. cit., VI, 2o  c : te te  viiayinaḥ çūrāḥ);  as a  matter  of fact, all  those 
foes have to be overcome and the Bodhisattva may lose no battle (VII, 55 a­b  : mayā 
hi sarvaṃ  jetavyam  idaṃ  jeyo  na kena  cit).; he strives after a victory over the triple 
world  (trailokyavijigīṣutvaṃ,  Bodhicaryāv.,  VII, 54  c; vāigīṣu  is the term used to 
denote  the would­be  world  conqueror in handbooks on  politics);  two of the transcend 
dent  virtues of the Bodhisattva  (vīryaparamitā,  Mahāvy.,  34, No. 4, p. 15) and 
balapārami^ā  (ihid., 34, No. 9) give him the superhuman courage and force to succeed. 
Only  after having accomplished the entire Path the Bodhisattva  will  become a real 
Victor.  (Jina). A freer translation of  analpa  janmopa jitya  would  be :  „having  victoriously 
pc.ss^d through a large number of existences". In each  life,  the Bodhisattva struggles 
against the ‚‚walls"  (āvarana)  ­^hich surround the „thronghold of Illumination" (bodhi¬
pura), viz. the thick walls of passion  (kleçāvarana)  and the subtle veils of. ignorance 
as to the real  nature  of everything (  jñeyāvarana).  The latter are even more dangerous 
since the  „eye  of wisdom"  (prajñācakṣus^,  unimpeded by timira (infra, strophe 17 a) 
is required to notice their existence. In order to be able to bring all  these  battles  to a 
successful end, the Bodhisattva should have the  „essence  of an elephant"  (eṣo  gaja¬
satvasāro, Mahāvastu,  III. p. 256, line 4; the expression is used in an Avadana in 
which  the Bodhisattva sacrifices himself to save his fellow­sailors; cI. also ibid., II, 
p. 13, line 19:  prasūyate  sā gajasatvasāraṃ,  "she (I.e. Maya)  will  bring forth (a 
child)  which  has the  essence  of an  elephant  nature"). The elephant,  which  is also 
one of the  Cakravartin's  jewels, is able to ,,take away the impetus of the  (weapons 
of the) army of Passion"  (madanabalavegāpanayanaṃ,  Mahāvastu,  I, p. 2lo line 6)^ 
10^) Only  pāda d, duḥkhaça.manaçāsanaḥ,  is legible. With the compound, cI.  sarvaduḥkha¬
praçāntikṛt, Bodhicaryāv.,  III. ^ d. The epithet expresses the very essence of the 
doctrine; the  Mārga,  after all, is the  duḥkhanirodhagāmim  pratipar, to use the technical 
term (Mahavyutp. 64, No. o^, and passim). 
108) Cahanapāraçāsārrhaṃ  is clearly based  upon  the well­known comparison of the  Saṃsāra 
with the ocean  with  its Unfathomable  depths  in which  the helpless  creatures  risk to 
be drowned. These  depths  are the wrong views (cI.  dṛsrigahanaṃ,  Mahavyutp., 2o5, 6). 
The compound  itself  does  not, therefore, afford any  difficulty.  However, this concept­
ion, cannot  well  be combined  with  the  simile  of the  „rain  of the discourse" descending 
out of the  .„cloud  of Dharma" (cI.  note  27 to the Introduction above), for it is obvious 


--- [Page 211] ---
­­^01— 
he is to be compared with a twilight cloud in his dark  monk’s  dress  1^9) , 
while  he concentrates  himself upon the manifold  petals  of his mind  11°) . 
9. ......  is distributed for protection (?) 111). 
10. Nobody could, in an  adequate  Çloka 112), give a description (of this 
statue)  which is endowed with an  abode  for the Three Jewels 113) and 
shines forth owing to the  presence  of those  jewels  that  are the complete 
(trancendent)  qualities 114). 
11. Beautiful women,  well  anointed with all kinds of  scents,  ............  11^). 
12. Owing to the blinding splendour of the  crest  of his head, from which ra­
diant light glittering from a hidden lotus in its interior  emanates  116), his 
that the  cooling  rain,  however efficient it should he in appeasing the  fire  of passion, 
could  not help the poor creatures roaming about on the ocean of existence. Perhaps, 
our poet combined the above conception  with  the common  Hindu  idea of a great  fire 
burning  beneath the earth; one  would  inevitably arrive  there  if, losing  one's way on 
the ocean, one is taken by storm up to the  limits  of the ocean. The latter interpretation 
is hardly  likely,  but seems to be the  only  choice if the reading of the beginning 
of pāda  a, which  is not beyond doubt, is accepted. 
l^ 9) CI. supra, note 27 to the Introduction. The dark­grey colour of the monk's dress 
(cīvara)  recalls a  twilight  cloud  from  which  rain,  viz^ the doctrine, descends. 
ll 0) The Buddha or Bodhisattva, expounding the doctrine, is represented in trance; the 
mind  upon  which  he concentrates  himself  is as a lotus the numerous petals of  which 
recall  the  Sahasrārapadma  (cf. the Introduction). 
Hi) uncertain  translation,  which  is based  upon  the completion of  pāda  d to  : rakṣaṇārthaṃ 
vidīyate. 
n 2) The  word  anuṣṭubhi  is used to mark. the strophes 1 to 1o as  Anuṣtubhs. ratpuṇyāyāṃ, 
here translated by  ‚‚adequate",  literally  means „as propitious as  that"  (statue). The 
poet wants to  stress  that  the above strophes are  only  a poor attempt at­ describing 
the marvellous  statue. 
ll 3) Ratnatravāçayopetaṃ,  ‚‚provided  with  an abode of the Triratna",  could  mean  that  a 
special  temple is  built  or arranged on behalf of the  statue  whose origin was explained 
by supernatural power in strophe a. In this case, the new temple in  which  the statue 
was erected  would  be dedicated ^o the Three Jewels. There is, however, another 
possibility  in as far as the  statue  itself  might symbolize the Three Jewels; the latter 
interpretation  could  be supported by strophe 14 of the  Kelurak  inscription (cI.  Bosch 
in T.B.c^., 68, 1928, p. 19), where the Buddha, the Dharma and the  Saṃgha  are 
stated to be present, though  invisible,  in a  kīrtistambha  (atra  buddhaç=ca dharmaç=ca 
saṅghaç=  cāntargataḥ  s.thitaḥ).  Bosch  (art.  cit.,  pp. 41  sq.) suggests this should be  taken  to 
mean that formulae of the Triratna divinities were inclosed in a cavity within the Manju¬
çrī image. In this case, one would think of a small gold plate in which the  çaraṇagamana 
formula  was inscribed. But  Bosch  does not exclude the  possibility  that  the  Mañjuçrī 
was placed in a real sanctuary dedicated to the Triratna, viz.  Tjaṇḍi  Lumbung (art. 
ciI., p. 52). Our strophe 1o gives rise to  similar  considerations.  After  the 'discovery' 
of the statue  a new  building  had to be erected (is this the  koça  mentioned in strophe 
18 a?) to give it a worthy place, .and this temple was dedicated to the  three  jewels. 
­­­) There is e pun on the different meanings of ratna. The second time, it serves as a 
tertium comparations for the  Tathāgataguṇas  (cf. note 65 to the Introduction). 
l1^) Strophe 11 is the first one of a series describing a number of  small  'scenes" as we 
might  call  them. It seems  that  in each of the strophes a  separate  description of a 
distinct  detail is  given;  cf. the Introduction. 
ll 6) The subject of this strophe is probably the compound ending in  ­anvayaḥ  in pāda  c, 


--- [Page 212] ---
—202— 
excellent  retinue, shining as the cool­rayed (Moon),  ............  all their 
dishes 117)­. 
13. .........  the excellent harem women belonging to his excellent  retinue  1 1 ’4) ; 
everywhere, he  takes  different feelings from the  heart­lotuses  of their 
lovers (?) 1 ,1. 
14. By (gurus?) who continuously arrived from the Gurjara  country 12°), 
to which  the compound extending over the  pādas  a­b refers. The radiant light  which 
issues from the  çikhā  of the Buddha image must have a cause in the interior (udara) 
of its head. It is due to the presence of a golden lotus there. The place of the  çikhā 
agrees  with  that  where we find the  uṣṃṣa  in the Buddha images ; the lotus is 
probably  to be identified  with  the  Sahasrārapadma  (cf. the Introduction)­. 
­–1^) The  blinding  splendour of the Buddha is contrasted to the soft moonlight emanating 
from  the Bodhisattvas. The  simile  is a common one. The meaning of the last  pāda 
is, however,  difficult  to be ascertained.  Khādya  is often  used to  denote  food, also 
in Buddhist texts ; cf., for instance,  Bodhicaryāvatāra,  II, 16 c, where it is contrasted 
with bhojya and  peya.  According  to the  Panjikā  (edition by De la  Vallée  Poussin, 
p. 53, lines 17 sq.), bhojya food  needs  only  be put into the mouth (yan  mukham 
āpūrya  bhujyate), whereas  khādya  has first to he cut into pieces  (kavadaçaḥ  chedya), 
e.g. ghṛtapāra,  a kind of sweetmeat. In the  Bodhic.  strophe quoted, the different 
foods and drinks are considered excellent  presents  to be made to Buddhas. This 
might  well  he the case here, too. It  would  seem  that  the scene  represents  a number 
of Bodhisattvas carrying large dishes to offer them to a Buddha ; owing to the 
dazzling  light,  which  emanated from the latter, they lose their controll and let their 
presents  drop. One might perhaps complete the last  pāda  to : sakalakhādya<m= 
apātayad=bhūtale>  or something  similar.  If this is correct, we get an idea of the 
scene represented.  Each  of these  strophes tries to illustrate a special aspect of the 
Buddha's activity. 
11­) This second  pāda  is a very artful one  (vara–vara­vārā–varā)  and therefore not exactly 
clear.  Yārāṅ^anā  usually  denotes  ganikās,  but this 1s not necessarily the case.  Anyhow, 
we have some love scene  here  ; cI.  note  119. 
110) Kamiiana are probably  those  sporting  with  the women mentioned in pada b. We 
suppose  that  the subject of har^ti is the Buddha who  takes  the passions away. Instead 
of passions, the text  uses  an elaborate compound in  pāda  c. The  scene  represents 
a number of young lovers who express their feelings to young women^ but the Buddha, 
who always tries to save the creatures, prevents them from executing their intention. 
He acts  in the peculiar way expressed by the strophe, viz. he  takes  the rasāntara  away 
from  their heart­lotuses. For the meaning of  rasāntara,  the reader is referred to the 
excellent study by J. Gonda, Altind. anta­, antara­,  us–­v.,  in Biidr. K.I.  XCVII  (1939), 
pp. 4ss­5OO,  where an exhaustive  treatment  of such compounds is given ; one might 
translate  „all  kind of feelings" (viz.  rāga,  kāma,  etc.);  sāndra  is somewhat pleonastically 
used,  which  is not, however,  rare  in these  kinds of compounds (cI. art. cit., p 486 : 
anyat  sthānāntaraṃ  gatvā,  and anyatamasya  rājño  viṣayāntaram  upajagāma,  „ . . . . . 
reached the realm of some  king",  Speyer's translation of a  Jātakamalā  passage 
quoted by Gonda). This pleonastic use might  confirm  our conjectural explanation 
.proposed for the  difficult  words di antara  mārgga  lai in the inscription of Talang 
Tuwo,  South Sumatra (cI. supra, p. 22); the words  could  correspond to Sanskrit 
anyasmin  mārgāntare.  — It is obvious  that  rasāntara  is used because it may refer 
to both  hṛdaya­  and  ­nīraja  ; in the latter case, it  denotes  such qualities as colour, 
smell,  etc. 
l20) The term  Gurjaradeça  is unfortunately rather vague ; it does not necessarily  denote 
Gujarat, although  there  is at least a  great  chance  that  it does (cf. the Introduction). 


--- [Page 213] ---
— 203 — 
bowed  by the burden of devotion to the Buddhas i 21), ......  a Jina temple 
is worshipped 1­­). 
15. Somewhere 123), a number of (young men) adorned  with  innumerable 
crown  pearls 1­4) had just revealed their love to their beloved ones, 
(but)  ......  12^) (from ?) the arrows of  Love,  which  lost their power 1^6) 
when  they saw a Jina image, they  ......  1­7). 
16. ......,  from whose eyes all anger about other, wrong views is gone 128) ; 
although in an incomprehensible  state,  he (rescues  ?) the entire  world 
by means  of the  amṛta  which  are the  statues  incomparable in breaking 
phenomenal existence. 
17. (May mankind) blinded by the thick layer of infatuation,  which  is as a 
veil covering the eyes 129), obtain the cessation of (worldly) existence 
(and become)  like  a Jina 130); .........,  praised by hymns  which  run 
I should he  inclined  to bring this strophe into connection  with  one of the  scenes 
represented in the main  building  of the Plaosan complex, where two high religious 
dignitaries are  visible  (Krom,  .Inleiding^,  H, p. 11 sq.).  Krom  conjecturally proposed 
to consider the two figures as the  heads  of the Buddhist and  Çaiva  clergy respectively. 
With  a view  to our text, one might also consider the possibility  that  we have two 
Buddhist  dignitaries here, one from Java and one from the Curjara country. Further 
research as to the  question  whether the  strange  headdress  of one of  these  figures 
could  be connected  with  his  origin  from abroad is required. 
l^l) We already noted in the Introduction  that  this might be an example of  utprekṣā  ; 
the gurus  are represented as people slightly bowed by the burden of old age, but 
the poet attributes the bowedness to their bhaktf. 
122) For the forms of worship  implied  by satkāra,  cI.  note  53 to the Introduction. 
12 3) The word kvacid probably occurred at the beginning of more  strophes  (perhaps  13 or 16). 
The term clearly  suggests  that  the descriptions refer to a number of  separate  scenes. 
If one presumes  that  the word had already been used before, one n.dght translate 
„elsewhere". 
124) ^ikhamani corresponds to the more usual  cūdāmaṇi  in meaning ; the young men are 
of a very high rank, probably princes. 
l2­) In the lacuna, we expect something  like  „not  influenced by"; cI. the  notes  which  follow. 
i­‘.) The conjectural reading  smaraçarākuçalāḥ  cannot be quite correct ; the end of the 
compound is not clear on the stone. One might  suggest  to correct the compound to 
smaraçarāviçarāḥ,  which  would  not be impossible from a palaeographic point of  view  ; 
aviçara  could  perhaps  be interpreted as  ‚‚not  torn asunder" (from the root  çṛ),  although 
viçara  only occurs in the active meaning of „tearing asunder" according to the  dictio­
naries. The meaning of the strophe  seems  hardly doubtful. The words  suggest  a simile 
based on the struggle  between  Mara  and the Buddha, where also the flowers of 
love do not reach the Saint. 
­­7) Tb^ missing syllables at the end of strophe 15 after  ça­  could  be completed 
to ça < raṇāgatāḥ  > , „came  to seek I^efuge". 
1).rs.ti,  ir1 Buddhism, always  denotes  the wrong views, usually analyzed into the  pañca 
dṛṣṭayaḥ  (mithyādṛṣṭi,  etc.);  here  again, antara is pleonastically used, for the Buddha's 
views  could  not be denoted by  dṛṣṭf. 
­20) For timira, cI. the Introduction. We gave a free translation of the strophe, especially 
by adding a few words between brackets. The words ,,may obtain" are based on the 
conjectural but very  likely  completion of the  pāda  proposed in  note  91 above. 
l30) Astinirodha is a very positive acquisition in this  phase  of Buddhism; most Buddhist^ 


--- [Page 214] ---
—204— 
sometimes fast, sometimes  slow  (or : composed in the Drutavilambita 
metre) 131). 
18. May this foundation 132) , an excellent refuge for the other creatures, 
who abide on this abode of misery 133) not  living  according to Dharma 
(?) 134), be protected by those  firm  in the  Triple  Refuge although it 
even  consider it some  kind  of fruit,  viz. the  fruit  which  is separation (from phenomenal 
existence,  visaṃyogaphala);  cf. especially Abhidh.  Koça,  II. p. 276, where nirodha 
is considered the fruit of the  Mārga.  During the last part of the  Mārga  (termed vimukti¬
mārga  in Abhidh.  Koça,  VI, p. 234),  „1’ascete  prend possession  (prāpti)  de la discon­
nexion"  (Abhidh.  Koça,  II. p. 276, note 2).  This  conception also supports our restitution 
proposed  in note 91 above. The term jinavat was probably chosen because the term 
jina is always associated  with  the idea of a  victory,  viz. over phenomenal existence. 
131) The words drutavilambita^ are of course chosen to indicate the metre in  which  the 
strophes 11­17 are composed. 
132) The orthography  koṣa,  although less common than  koça,  may be the correct one  from 
an etymological point of  view.  In addition, the  Amarakoça  (2nd edition by Colehrooke, 
Loiseleur  Deslongchamps, Thatte and  Kielhorn,  1s82),  III. 4, 29, 223, gives it in 
an enumeration of words ending in ­sa. For the different meanings of the  word,  cf. 
Pet. Dicf.,  II. p. 45o ; the fundamental meaning seems to be anything  which  envelops 
and protects something precious ; the secundary meanings such as  „treasury",  ‚‚envelop 
of a liṅga",  „womb",  etc. are based  upon  the fundamental concept. CI. the expressions 
such  as brahmakoça  (= hrdaya) and  hṛdayaṃ  jīvakoçaṃ  pañcātmakam,  ‚‚the  heart 
is the place where the  principle  of life,  comprising the  five  ātmans,  is hidden", 
brāhmaṇaḥ  / īçvaraḥ  sarvabhūtānāṃ  dharmakoṣasya guptaye,  ‚‚the  Brāhmaṇa  is the 
lord of ail the creatures for the protection of  that  treasure  which  is Dharma’'. CI. 
also such expressions as  guṇānāṃ  koṣaṃ  tvam  cMahāv.,  I. p. 210., 1.  S). Every  sanctuary 
may be considered a kosa since its function is essentially  that  ot protecting the  holy 
objects of  worship.  The use of just this term to denote the foundation in this  inscription 
agrees  particularly wen  with  the interpretation  that  we suggested for strophe s. 
The new foundation, on account of  which  the  inscription  was composed,  implies  the 
construction  of a  building  to protect the miraculously descended  statue.  Cf. the notes 
which  follow. 
133) Saṃsārāvanicaratāṃ,  lit.  : ‚‚of  those who  live  on the earth subject to the laws of 
transmigration".  As a matter o^ fact, the foundation is as it were an oasis for those 
roaming  about in the desert of phenomenal existence, where they  pass  from  one  form 
of existence into another  while  they are tortured  with  thirst. 
1.s4) ­V­ dharmato corresponds in meaning  with  adharmena and qualifies  ^'caratān.  For the 
use of the  suffix,  cf. nyāyataç=çāsti rājyam  in the last strophe but one of the Tjangal 
inscription  (vide Kern, Yerspr. Geschr., VII, p. 120); cf. Speyer's Syntax, ^ 104 
(p. 77). The adverbial use of the  suffix  sometimes corresponds better to  that  of 
the instrumental  than  to that  of the ablative. — The special mention of people net 
living  according to Dharma is interesting ;  with  a view  to the mention of the  Triple 
refuge in this same strophe, one is  inclined  to interpret Dharma in the special 
Buddhist  meaning of the term,  which  may be rendered by  „Doctrine’’,  ‚‚the  Good  Faith’’. 
As a matter of fact,  .‚taking  the  Triple  refuge"  (çaranagamana^  is almost identical 
with ^becoming  a Buddhist"; cf. De la  Vallée  Poussin in Melanges chin. e.t houddh., 
I (1931­32), pp. 65­1o9. It appears  from  the 4th pada of strophe 19,  that  the text 
is no^:  devoid  of some missionary tendency (cf. ^ote 14o below). If this is correct, 
a double  wish  is expressed in strophe 18 : may the Buddhists be  firm  in their devotion 
to the Three Jewels in order to protect the foundation, and may the non­Buddhists 
find Refuge  in the  Good  Faith. 


--- [Page 215] ---
—20^— 
was made  different 1^), ^ 6). 
13­) The words itarakrto 'pi  pālanīya(ḥ),  literally  : „to be protected although it was made 
different", must contain an antithesis (indicated by (a) pi); itarakrto  could  not therefore 
mean:  „made  by other people’', but should be interpreted as  „made  different". This 
agrees  with  the meaning of itara,  which  always implies a comparison between two 
different things or persons ; here,  .itarakṛto  could refer only to the comparison of 
the complex before and after the events commemorated by the text. Then the opposition 
expressed in this strophe becomes clear: the idea  implied  by  pratipā  is always „to 
maintain,  to protect’', i.e. to maintain the foundation in the form in  which  it is. 
One may conclude from the wording of this  pāda  that  the fact of changes having 
been mad^ in the  original  temple complex is all but an excuse for future generations 
to do the  same  (or rather:  to make arbitrary changes in the foundation).  Only  then, 
the words mean something. We insist on this point because it is of a decisive importance 
with a view  to the interpretation of the entire text: if this interpretation of the 
pāda  is certain, the Plaosan inscription  does  not deal  with  an entirely new foundation, 
but with  the renewal of an older foundation. The text gives no evidence whatever 
that the original  foundation  would  have been damaged ; on the contrary, strophe 3 gives 
a clue as to the possible reason why a renewal was necessary.  With  a little  imagination, 
we may  represent  us the  following  string of events. Since some time  there  had been 
a temple complex at Plaosan constructed by a former  king  (line 12 might refer to it), 
but owing,  perhaps, to the fact  that  the people did not  live  according to Dharma, 
the complex  showed signs of decay. It was, however, left in this  state  until,  suddenly, 
somebody discovered a marvellous Buddha or Bodhisattva  statue  within  the temple 
grounds. This supernatural event was interpreted by the Buddhist priests as a sign 
that the image wanted to be near the Four Sugatas  (catuḥsugatasaṅgataḥ  in strophe a); 
is was therefore necessary to provide for a suitable sanctuary in  which  the image 
could  find  a place near the Four Buddhas (this  would  then be the  kosa  mentioned 
in strophe Is); numerous arrangements had to be made to  that  effect and the old 
foundation  was really made a different one (itarakr^a). This is how we understand 
these  words in connection  with  the preceding strophes. We probably have  another 
example of a miraculous descent of an object of cult in one the I^atubaka inscriptions 
to be discussed below (infra, No. X, inscription a, the third  pāda  of the third strophe); 
there  it is a  lif.ga  the descent of  which  seems  to bo connected  with  an important 
dynastic change. Such miracles mav have a political importance. Recently, Berg pro¬
posed to interpret the miraculous disappearance of an Aksobhya image from  Tjaṇḍi 
Djawi  in 1331 as a supernatural sign to effect a profound change in Majapahit politics 
at the moment when Cajah  Mada  took the affairs of  state  in hand  (vide  Indonesia, 
V (1951­52), No. 3. pp. 2OO sq.). Owing to lack of data, it is impossible to conclude 
whether also the  descent  of the Bodhisattva or Buddha image mentioned in our 
text is connected  with  political  events ; this  could  well  be the case. — If the ahove 
interpretation is correct, we have a valuable indication  that  the Plaosan inscription 
does  not refer to an  original  foundation. 
l36) If our surmise  that  the name of the metre must occur in this  pāda  is correct, (cf. 
note  94 above), one  could  venture to reconstitute the  pāda.  Praharṣaṃyaḥ,  „to be 
enjoyed", is not a word  which  could  be used near the end of a Buddhist inscription 
without some kind of excuse. We therefore expect some antithesis more or less parallel 
to that  in pāda  c. The supposed meaning of the  pāda  then is :  „which  must be a 
cause of joy even to  those  devoid of passion and the  like."  One  could  even try to 
reconstitute the entire  pāda  on this base. If it  ends  in praharṣaṃyaḥ,  one may be 
almost certain  that  this word was preceded by api and  that  the latter,  again,  was 
preceded by a compound meaning „by  those  devoid of passion" or something  similar. 
Instrumentals  ending in ­air or ­dbhir are impossible on account of the metre ; we 


--- [Page 216] ---
—206— 
). May man by the merit which I acquired by constructing (?) this 
(temple) 317) pure  as the disc of the moon, participate in the  acts  of a 
Jina  138); protect us,  king  of the  supreme  kings of Varanara 139), against 
the impurity of wrong views; may not  the men be bound to passion 14°) ! 
need an instrumental ending in  ­bhir  preceded by a short  vowel.  We  then  arrive 
at the  following  partial reconstruction : 
..—. ­— —– �^  ­bhir=api  praharṣaṇīyaḥ. 
Up to this point, we  stand  on a  firm  base. Further reconstruction  could  only he 
conjectural.  Considering the terms possible on account of the metre and the meaning 
required  by the context, one  could  complete the  pāda  as : 
–s=tat=prajnamatibhir=api  praharṣaṃyaḥ  //, i.e. :  „which  should therefore be 
a cause of joy  even  to those whose mind is directed towards  wisdom’’.  The ­s at the 
beginning  constitutes the end of  pālanīya  in  pāda  c (cf.  note  94 above). For the 
compound  prajñāmatl  ( = yasya  prajñāyāṃ  matiḥ),  cf. such compounds as  prajñātman 
and Prajñākaramati,  the name of the well­known commentator on  ^āntideva’s  Bodhica¬
ryāvatāra.  At least in Buddhist Sanskrit, compounds ending in ­mati mean: „having 
the mind  directed towards’'; cf., e.g.,  dhāraṃmatir  nāma  samādhiḥ,  Mahāvy.,  21 
No. 99 (edition by  Minaiev  and  Mironov,  p. lo); it denotes the  state  of concentration 
during  which  the  mind  is directed towards  dhārarūs  only. For the use of  mati,  cf. 
also Çiksās.,  kārikā  No. 2‚ 3rd and 4th  pādas  : çraddhāmūlaṃ  d^dhīkṛtya  bodhau 
kāryā  matir  dṛdhā  (Bendall's edition, p. 2‚  line  14 ; his translation in the Introduction, 
p. XXXIX). 
^) Imaṃ,  viz. kosam, the term used in the preceding strophe (18 c). The compound 
çaçadharavimvaçuddham  (read: ^bimba"), a  karmadhār^ya  of the type  ūrnāmṛdu,  „soft 
as wool"  (Whitney, § 1291 a), may refer to either imam or  punyam  in pād^a  b. 
^) We construct  : yat punyam  āpaṃ kṛtvemaṃ  çaçadharabimbaçuddhaṃ  (tena  punyena) 
jano  bhajatu  jinakA  amasya. No other examples of the 1st  person  a^rist  āpam  are 
known to occur, but  āpaḥ,  āpat  and  āpan  are known according to the Pet.  Dict., 
s.v. āp. Bhajati (or: "te)  with  the genitive in the meaning „to partake of" is archaic 
hut well  attested. 
^) CI. Pras. 1ndon., I (195o), pp. 104 sq. ; the translation is based on the corrected 
reading defended in  note  95 above. Nevertheless, the construction  asmān  ^aksa 
dṛsṭikleçaṃ  is not completely satisfactory;  ^kleçād  would  have  been  the more regular 
construction. The interpretation may however be defended on account of the use Of 
a double accusative in the examples quoted by Whitney in § 277; the double accusative 
is used  with  verbs meaning ,,to shake off, to take something  from  somebody (or: 
something else)’' and occurs in the examples  vṛkṣaṃ pakvaṃ phalaṃ  dhūnuhi,  „shake 
ripe fruit  from  the tree", and  jitvā  rājyaṃ  nalam,  „having  won the kingdom  from 
Nala",  quoted there. 
^) The words api  janā  na  rāgabaddhāḥ  (viz.  bhaveyuḥ)  are loosely attached to the 
preceding words. Another interpretation,  which  might be preferable on account of 
the place  of api, is to consider the latter an interrogative particle (cf. Speyer's Syntax, 
p. 323), „are not men bound to passion r, i.e. ^‚is not it natural  that  man is bound 
to passion ?" Then, the appeal for protection is based on the fa^t  that  man is naturally 
inclined  to passion. 


--- [Page 217] ---
— 207 — 
VIII. AN INSCRIBED PLATE FROM BUKATEDJA (PURBA¬
LINGGA, CENTRAL JAVA) 
The gold  plate  to be discussed  hereafter  was discovered in the collection 
Tan Oen  Dji at Bukatedja in the regency  Purbahṅga  of the residency Banju¬
mas in Central Java. No precise data as to where the plate had been before 
are available.  A photograph was  made  immediately  after  its  discovery 1) . 
The measurements  of the  plate  are  14,2 cm  in height and  8,5  cm in 
breadth. 
Most  of the  space  on the  plate  is occupied  by an  engraved figure^ of  a 
four­armed  god  in standing  attitude.  The god holds  a camara in his front left 
hand,  a tr^çūla  in his front right hand, an  akṣamālā  in his back left hand and 
a kuṇḍī  in his back right hand. These  attributes  are  sufficient  to define  the 
figure  as a  Çiva  Mahādeva.  At the left hand side  of the  god, two  objects  are 
placed on the ground. The one  nearest  to the  god’s  feet  is an incense­burner, 
the other  is a jar,  which  is lower  and  broader  than  the  incense­burner. 
On the  top of the  jar, presumably on  its lid, an ornament  is visible which 
reminds one of  the form of  the three  teeth  of a  triçūla,  but is not quite identical 
with  the latter.  Immediately  to the right of the  triçūla,  a short  inscription  is 
engraved  the  akṣaras  of which run from top to bottom. 
This  short  inscription is written in  a rather  archaic type of Old  Javanese 
script. The  virāma  is expressed by  a tiny curve over the  akṣara,  a peculiarity 
no examples of which are known from inscriptions  dated  later than 850  A.D.­)  . 
The initial  i is  expressed by two tiny curves with  a third one  of equal size 
below  the two;  from  about  the middle of the ninth century  A.D.,  the  initial 
^ is always expressed by  the  akṣara  ga (sometimes slightly modified)  under 
which  a small curve  is added  a little below  the  line. Forms  of the  initial  i 
which  are very much  like  that in the  beginning of our inscription are found 
in the  Karangteṅah  (824  A.D.)  and  Gaṇḍasuli  (832  A.D.  ?) inscriptions. 
Another interesting detail  is the  form  of the  na. In the  older type of 
Old Javanese  script (from  the  Dinaya inscription on),  the  vertical  part  of 
the ṅa has a clear crack  about  in the  middle; this  feature  distinguishes  the 
na from  the da,  with  which it would be perfectly identical without the crack 3) . 
Ninth  century inscriptions which give  the  same  form  of the  ṅa are those 
from  Kuburan  Tjaṇḍi  (821  A.D.),  Naṅgulan  (822  A.D.)  4), Karangtéṅah  and 
1) No.  14323 in the  collection  of the  Dinas Purbakala  at Djakarta. 
2) The inscriptions from  Tjaṇḍi  Perot, dated  850  A. D., add  the  virāma  to the  right  of 
the aksara, and so  do all the later inscriptions.  In an  inscription dated  842  A.D.  (edited 
in Pras.  Indon.,  I. 195o,  No. VI),  various forms  for the  virāma  occur; they evidently 
represent  a transitional  phase  during  which  several forms were current.  All inscriptions 
dated before  842  use a tiny curve above  the  aksara. 
3) This  is probably  the  reason why  the da  gets a crack  in the  lower horizontal part  in 
later times, whereas  the ṅa gets a similar  crack  in the  upper horizontal part. 
4) Pras. 1ndon.,  I (195o), pp. 126-1so. The  Kuburan  Tjaṇḍi  inscription  was  discussed 
in detail  by  Ooris  in T.B.^r..  7o (193o), pp. 157-17o. 


--- [Page 218] ---
— 208 — 
Gaṇḍasuli^).  Already  in inscriptions dated 842 6) and 850  A.D.  7), the ver­
tical part  of the na is perfectly straight. 
The three  details mentioned may be considered clear indications  that 
the Bukatedja inscription is to be assigned to not later than about 840  A.D. 
We read the inscription as  follows  : 
// ini  paḍehānda  hawang  payangṅān  // 
The only  akṣara  which  might not be beyond doubt is the ha in the second 
word.  Its third vertical  bends  to the 1eft at its 1ower end and touches the 
second vertical. Since, however, no other  akṣara  cou1d be considered, the 
peculiar  form of the ha  would  probably be a mere lapse by the engraver. 
The most interesting  feature  is the language : the use of ini and of the suf­
fix ­nda makes it very probable  that  the language is Old  Malay.  It is curious 
that the suffix  is spelt by dentals and not by linguals as one  would  have 
expected. The form  paḍehūnda  is to be analyzed as  deha  provided  with  the 
affixes  pa­ and ­nda. Deha  could  hardly be anything else but Sanskrit  deha, 
,,body”^  The spelling by a  lingual  is not astonishing : presumably, the dentals 
and linguals were confounded 8). The lengthening of the  final  a of  deha  is 
normal  before the  suffix  9) , but we prefer a different explanation. Pa­dcha, 
followed  by ­nda,  does  not seem satisfactory. We prefer the interpretation of 
paḍehānda  as paḍehān  (i.e.  ḍeha  with  the affixes pa­ and ­an),  „the  place 
^) Pras. 1ndon., I. pp. 73 sqq. 
^) Op. cit., pp. 5o sqq. 
7) Infra, N.o. IX. 
8) It is  wen­known  tha^ modem  Malay  and Indonesian have  only  a single series in 
contrast t^ modern Javanese. On the other hand, the  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions dated the 
^nd of the 7th century  A.D.  do distinguish dentals and  linguals,  although the latter 
are very rarely used. If we leave the words borrowed  from  Sanskrit out of the account 
(kapaṭa,  kalyāṇamitra,  cintāmani,  jyesṭha,  drdha, ^tc. ;  cf . the Index by  C^edés, 
D.E.F.E.O.,  so, 193o, pp. 66­8o), there only remain the  prefix  da (in dapunta) and 
the suffix  ­nda. In other cases wherc one  would  have expected a  lingual  a dental 
is used (dang hyang, cf. Old Javanese dang hyang; cf. also  daṃ  in the fragment 
supra, No. I. inscription a, line 2o, p. 6  ; dātaṃ,  Old Javanese  : datang ; kadatuan, 
Old Javanese : kadatuan or kadatwan). The latter examples  would  make it doubtful 
whether there existed two series in the  Çrīvijaya  dialect. The words  hor rowed  from 
Sanskrit  were, of course, correctly written according to their etymology and do not 
prove  that  linguals were pronounced (just as the spelling  'théologie'  in French  would 
not prove the existence of aspirates). The spellings da­ and  ­(ṇ)da,  the only real 
examples,  could  be due to other  reasons  than  the pronounciation as  linguals.  The 
two affixes are  honorific  and this might be the very  reason  why a  spelling,  properly 
denoting  sounds  which  did not exist in the language, was chosen.  Modern  Javanese 
gives  close parallels; thus, the names of the Susuhunans of the Surakarta court in 
Java  are spelt by consonants  that  would  represent  Phakhubhuwaṇa  if the consonants 
had their  etymological  value. We therefore think  that  the linguals in the  honorific 
affixes  da­ and  ­(ṇ)da  are due to  similar  considerations. If our inscription writes ­nda 
instead of ­nda, this does not prove a difference in language, but rather a difference 
in spelling practice. 
9) CI. Ccedes, art. cit., p. 62; the lengthening is d11^ t^ tb^  ^hift  ^f th^ accent. 


--- [Page 219] ---
— 209 — 
where the body  is’’. May we interpret the latter to mean  „embodiment”  or 
„corporeal,  material  form’’  ? Since the words  which  follow  paḍehānda  contain 
a title and name to be examined below, one  would  conclude, on the basis of 
the above interpretation,  that  the divine, four­armed, form corresponds to 
the title and name  which  follow  — in other words,  that  the title and name 
belong  to a dignitary after his apotheosis. We  rather  think  that  paḍehān 
means  ,,the place where the material remains (especially  çarīra,  a synonym 
of deha  is often used in the meaning of ‚,relics”)  are’’,  probably in the form 
of ashes.  For the meaning of the inscription as a whole, the difference in 
translation is not essential. The  gold  plate is then narrowly associated  with 
the corporeal  remains and the divine figure engraved in the plate  could 
hardly  represent  anything else but the person mentioned after  paḍehānda 
in the form  which  he is presumed to have adopted after his apotheosis : it 
is the real form opposed to the poor material remains. Ini, referring to the 
latter, is, as it were, the  link  which  connects the divine figure  with  the 
deposit of  ashes. 
The exact value of hau^ang is  difficult  to be ascertained; in some in­
scriptions  from Eastern Java it is used as a title belonging to, presumably, 
high  dignitaries; it is always  followed  by a name  1°). On account of the above 
arguments, we translate the text by  „These  (presumably the deposit of 
bhasma)  are the corporeal remains of Hawang (title)  Payangṅān  (name)’’ 11). 
10) O. I. O. XXXI,  A -33, where the correct reading is : mamrati hawang  wicakṣaṇa  ; 
O. I O. XXXVIII.  B­4/5 : mamrati  hawang  wicaksana (the  word  hawang at the end 
of line  4 was omitted by Brandes); cI. also  O. L O.  XXXVII.  B-5 and  XLVI.  A-33. — 
It seems doubtful to us whether we should assume a connection  with  the  word 
(m)puhaw^ng,  „captain  of a commercial  ship’'  ; a puhawang is the main person in 
Old Malay  epigraph  from  Gaṇḍasuli  (unfortunately lost; cI. Brandes' transcription 
as o.1.o.  III;  Krom,  Geschiedenis­,  p. 151;  Goris  r.B.C., 7o, 1930, p. 160, who 
assigns the  inscription  to the year 787  A.D.,  which  is unacceptable  ; Damais  B.E.F.E.O., 
XLVI,  1, 1952, pp. 2S sq., dated it 827  A.D.  especially on account of a  calculation 
of the date);  Goris,  loc.  cit., gives some references to  Dapu  Hawang who has become 
a mythological  figure in the Bandjarmasin  Chronicle  and elsewhere); in No. II above, 
puhāvaṃ  is found in the  list of state  servants of  Çrīvijaya  (cf. supra, p. 20);  finally, 
we note the occurrence of the term ^in the Old Javanese  Harivaṅca  (edition by 
A. Teeuw, 1950, Canto  XXIII,  str. 7,  pāda  c). A curious point in favour of a possible 
connection  between the hawang in our text and the puhawang in the above references, 
is the fact  that  the oldest known examples of the occurrence of puhawang are both 
Old Malay  ones,  while,  on the other hand, our hawang appears in an Old  Malay 
context, too. There is not, however, the slightest indication  that  our hawang should 
have had any connection  with  navigation ; his attributes on the plate, especially the 
incense burner,  would  rather suggest some sort of priest. The meaning of the title 
still remains obscure. 
11) We have no idea as to the meaning of the name  Payangṅān,  which  sounds, or rather, 
looks  strange.  This  impression is  mainly  due to the  spelling  by a double  ṅ and a  long  ­ā. 
Possibly,  the name is a corruption  from  parhyaṅan,  with  which  it seems rather  similar 
in sound. In the  inscription  of Kuburan  Tjaṇḍi  (front part,  line  1S/ 19 ; cf. the  edition 
by Goris,  T.B.G.,  70, 19so, pp. 157 sqq., and a few notes in Pras. 1ndon., I, 195o, 
pp. 126-128)  we read the  village  name  Kayyaṅan  which  might represent the  well­


--- [Page 220] ---
— 210 — 
The main point of interest of the inscriptions is not the above interpre­
tation, which necessarily remains conjectural and furnishes no real proof of 
the existence of apotheosis rituals in the first  half  of the 9th century, but 
the use of the  Old  Malay  language. In this  respect,  our text may be compared 
with  the two  Gaṇḍasuli  inscriptions mentioned above. At  present,  only highly 
conjectural explanations of the occurrence of Old  Malay  texts  in Central 
Java before the middle of the 9th century  A.D.  can he given l­) . Influence 
from  Çrīvijaya  cannot be excluded, but  seems  hardly probable in view of 
the pronounced  Çaivism  found in all  these  Old  Malay  texts  from Central 
Java 13). There is an inscription in Old  Malay  from  Kebon  Kopi  (Western 
Java) ; there, the use of Old Malay i^ probably due to influence from  Çrīvi¬
jaya 14) , so that a connection would not be likely on the same grounds. 
A prisoners of war colony could hardly be considered even if such a thing 
would  not be an anachronism 15) . The situation in the  Malay  Peninsula and 
the neighbouring island groups is not clear in this period;  Çaiva  centres 
may have remained  there  16). 
The mention of a merchant group having their own temple in the Perot 
inscription  l7) ­­night give a hint as to the direction in which a solution of 
the problem  could be footed for. The  presence  of Indonesian, but non­Javane­
se, merchants  on Javanese  soil would hardly be astonishing; neither would 
non­  Javanese  soldiers be in view of what we see in many a period of Ja­
vanese  history 18). If the solution should be looked for in the direction 
suggested above, one is inclined to connect the occurrence of Old  Malay 
texts  in Central Java with the undoubtedly turbulent  events  which marked 
known  word  kahyaṅa­^.  ­The combination hy may have  been  pronounced y in common 
language from early times ; cf. also the form  kayaṅa^  in one of the Sukuh inscriptions, 
M. Muusses,  T.B.G...  62 (19231. pp. 509 sq. Doubling of a  finaA  consonant before the 
suffix  ­an is common ; in Javanese  writing,  this custom is  even  preserved up to now. 
12) CI. the conjectural explanations quoted or suggested by  Krom,  Geschiedenis 2, p. 155. 
13) As to the  Gaṇḍasuli  inscription published in Pras.  1ndon.,  I (19  50), No. IV,  Çaivism 
is beyond doubt and  thé  same  is true  for this text.  Also  the  Gaṇḍasuli  inscription 
published  by Brandes as  O.J.O.,  III (cI.  Goris,  art. cit., p. 160  with  note  4 to  that 
page  ; cI. also  note  9 above)  seems  Çaiva,  although  there  is no definite proof. 
14) Published by  Bosch,  Bijdr. K.I., 100 (1941), pp. 41 sqq. The  Kebon  Kopi  inscription 
is probably dated more  than  a century earlier  than  this text, so  that  therefore, too, 
a direct connection  with  the Old  Malay  texts  discovered in Central Java is not 
probable. We  note  that  the Kĕbon  Kopi  inscription, too, confounds dentals  andlinguals 
(sabdakalānda,  sunda).  ­­ We have  little  information about the  extent  of Çrīvijaya 
power in Western Java ;  even  Chau Ju­kua (writing in 1225) considers Sunda a 
dependency of  Çrīvijaya  (cI.  Krom,  Geschiedenis­,  p. 308), but his informations about 
Çrīvijaya  ^are based on sources before 117s, the  date  of the Ling wai tai ta by 
Chou  K'u­fei.  CI.  Coedés,  Biidr. K.I., 83 (1927), p. 469. 
l.^) This was the explanation suggested by  Rouffaer  as one of the possibilities in Bijdr. K. I., 
74 (1918), p. 142, but refuted by  Krom,  Geschiedenis,  p. 155. 
l^) CI.  the important excavations by (^uaritch Wales, Archaeological Researches on Ancient 
Indian Colonization in Malaya, in I M. ^r. R. A. S.,  XVIII,  Pt. 1 (1940), pp. 1.85 
(89 Plates). 
17) Gf.  inlra,  No. IX, the end of the Introduction. 


--- [Page 221] ---
— 211 — 
the decline of  Çai1endra  hegemony in Central Java about in the midd1e of 
the 9th century  A.D.  Our data about what happened in  these  times are  still 
rather confused, but the inscriptions X and  XI, to be discussed below, contain 
some important additional information. 
IX. TWO  INSCRIPTIONS  FROM  TJANDI  PEROT  (850) 
The two inscriptions to be discussed hereafter are cut in large 
stones  originating  from  Tjaṇḍi  Perot (regency  Temaṅgung,  residency  Keḍu)  ; 
as early as 1819, the two stone inscriptions were transported to Magelang ^). 
The stone  here  referred to as b was transported  from  there  to Djakarta (in 
a year unknown, but presumably very 1ong ago), where it was incorporated 
into the collection  of inscribed  stones  (No. D. 7) 2) . The other stone (b) re­
mained  at Magelang at  that  time,­  but was  likewise  transported to Djakarta 
in 1890 and incorporated into the  collection  of inscribed  stones  in the Museum 
(No.D.80) 3). 
The dimensions of a are 58 cm in breadth and 110 cm in height, of  b : 
59 cm in breadth and Ill cm in height. As far as the dimensions are con­
cerned, the two  stones  are therefore almost equal. For a, the number of lines 
with  which  it is inscribed, cannot be settled  with  certainty; this is due to the 
weathering especially of its lower portion. Probably,  there  are 26 lines of 
script,  perhaps one or two more. The stone b is inscribed  with  37 lines of 
script. 
As was noted above, a is badly weathered and considerable portions of 
the text have become  illegible;  b is in a good  state  op preservation on the 
­­) Settlements of foreign merchants keeping their own forms of organization have  been 
a common feature in Indonesian society; cf. especially J. C. van  Leur,  Benige be­
schouwingen  betreffende  den  ouden  Azia^ischen handel  (1934),  passim,  especially  pp. 
170 sqq. The picture  there  given is mainly hased on 17th centmy materials, hut 
seems  capable of being applied to earlier centuries, at least as far as the main 
lines  of this picture are concerned. In Bams (on the West coast of Northern Sumatra), 
there  existed a corporation of  Tamil  merchants in the  1 1th century  (Krom,  Geschiedenis^, 
p. 304; Nilakanta Sastri, A Tamil .merchant­guild in Sumatra,  T.B.G.,  72, 1932, pp. 
314^27 ; cI. also infra, No. IX,  note  85 to the Introduction). As far as Java is 
concerned, we meet groups of all kinds of foreigners in inscriptions of  Airlaṅga  (first 
half of the 11th century; cf.  Krom,  Geschiedenis­,  pp. 264 sq.) and later. For earlier 
times,  cf. Stutterheim,  Epigraphica,  III,  Een  Javaansche  acte  van  uitspraak uit het 
jaar g22  A.I^.,  T.B.G.,  75 (1935),  pp.  444­56, where the role of foreigners  in the 
collection  of the king's revenues is stressed. —­ Foreign (i.e.  non­  Javanese) troups were 
involved  in 17th century Mataram (Madurese under Trunajaya, Macassarese under 
Kraeng  Galesung,  Balinese  under Surapati); we have no data for  Hindu­  Javanese 
times, but the  possibility  of similar  events  could  not be excluded. Cf., however, the 
introductions to Nos. X and XL 
1) references are given in the Introductions to  Oud­Javaansche Oorkonden  (abbreviated 
O. J. O.I.  V and VI. 
2) Catalogus  Groeneveldt (1887), p. 374. 
3) CI.  Notulen  B..G.,  189o, pp. 11 sq. and p. 52. 


--- [Page 222] ---
— 21^ — 
whole,  but from line 23 on, the inscribed  stone  surface is damaged in several 
spots, owing to  which  there  remain considerable lacunae in the middle of 
the lines. 
Transcriptions  of a and b, prepared by Brandes, were published in 
Oud­Javaansche Oorkonden,  Nos.  V and VI, but Brandes’ transcription of a 
is very uncomplete (it  ends  in the middle of line 5 of the stone); the tran­
scription  of b is complete, but not reliable in detail. A few, but important, 
corrections to Brandes’ transcript were proposed by Damais 4). The most 
important discoveries were  that  (1) the inscriptions a and b are identical 
apart  from a few, but interesting, orthographic details, and (2) the inscriptions 
are dated 772  Çaka,  corresponding to 850  A.D.  In addition, Damais gave a 
correct interpretation of the meaning of the word  ratu  in line 5 5). 
The new transcriptions to be given below contain numerous other cor­
rections to the edition by  Brandes­Krom.  One has the clear impression  that 
Brandes’ transcript was not intended to be published in the form in  which  we 
have it now. Although  these  corrections hardly change the interpretation 
of the text as a whole, they are  rather  important for our knowledge of ancient 
Central  Javanese topography and  civil  administration. 
The script is of the usual Old Javanese type.  Almost  the only point 
worthy  of note  is the form of the  virāma  (paten in Javanese),  which  is written 
below  instead of above the  akṣara  in a few cases. The obvious explanation 
is that  it was  difficult  to express the  virāma  in the usual way when the  akṣara 
right above in the preceding line stretched far down. The unusual way of 
writing  the virāma  is therefore due to practical considerations only. 
We note  a few points about the orthography. The type of scrips used in 
the Old Javanese records was not  originally  adapted to the  writing  of charters 
in the Old Javanese language 6). The phonemic system of Old Javanese 
differs  considerably from  that  of the Sanskrit language. In the  vowel  system, 
the main  difference is the frequent use of the  pĕpĕt  (ĕ, the so­called toneless 
vowel;  a more correct term,  which  is used by Uhlenbeck in his  treatise  on 
the structure of the Javanese morpheme 7), is  ’undetermined’)  in Old Ja­
vanese. Gradually, a special  vowel  mark,  which  is probably derived from 
the upadhmānīya  in South Indian script, came into common use, but 
4) L. C. Damais, Epigraphische  Aantekeningen,  in T.B.C., 83 (1949). pp. 18 sq. 
–) Brandes (Cataf. Croeneveldt, p. 374) and  Krom  (Geschiedenis^,  p. 156, who  notes 
the absence of a royal title) considered  ratu  a part of the name of the  village.  The 
interpretation given by Damais is undoubtedly correct; it  seems  however doubtful 
to us whether  ratu  is completely equivalent to the Sanskrit title  ^rī  Mahārāja  (cf. 
.infra,  p. 219 sqq.). 
‘.) In spite of the uncertainty as to the exact  origin  of the so­called Old Javanese type 
of script (the older term is  •Kawi'  script), we take it for granted  that  it ­ originates 
from  India. 
7) E.  M. Inilenbeck,  De structuur  van  het Javaanse  morpheem,  in Verhand.  B. G.,  LXXVHI 
(1949), pp. 3o sqq.; the opposition ‘determined': 'undetermined' was introduced by 
Jacobson  (loc.  cif.,  note  4). It is doubtful whether the  ĕ should be considered an 


--- [Page 223] ---
213 ­–­
till recent times it was not used in all the  cases  wher^ ^ should have ex­. 
pected to  find  it. As a rule, Old Javanese records use the special  vowel 
mark  only  if it is necessary to  avoid  misunderstanding 8) . Although  the vowel 
mark for the  ĕ is known in our inscriptions, its use is  limited  to one single 
case ^) . Everywhere else where one  would  have expected to  find  it, a number 
of different modes of orthography are preferred. 
If an ĕ occurs in the first syllable of a  disyllabic  base, no  vowel  mark is 
expressed and the consonants at the beginning of the two syllables are  com­
bined  into a ligature  (cf . n^ka for  u^ĕka  in a 6 and  b^ 5) . This  spelling  is 
difficult  to be used if the second syllable begins  with  two consonants; in 
such  cases, the usual  spelling  is a (kambang or  kampang  for  kĕmbang), 
but no certain example is found in  these  inscriptions. An  ĕ in the last 
syllable  is usually written as an a ; it is obvious  that  it would  be impos­
sible  to end the word in a consonantal ligature  1°) . We therefore  find  forms 
such  as manapal (b 16),  which  probably  represents  manapĕl 11). Very  often, 
the first and the third modes of orthography are used together in a single 
word  in the first and second syllables respectively. We then  find  forms 
such  as sdang (b 18, probably representing  sĕḍĕng)  ; a similar  combination 
•undetermined'  vowel  in Old Javanese, too. The main arguments to consider the  ĕ 
an 'undetermined'  vowel  in modern Javanese — such as the  impossibility  of it being 
followed  by the 'undetermined' consonant h (op. cit., p. 54) or of constituting the 
final  vowel  of a word or word­base and the absence of  vowel  variants — either do 
not exist or cannot be controlled in Old Javanese; words ending in  ­ĕḥ  are rather 
common  (Old Javanese  sĕgĕh  corresponding to  suguh  in Modern  Javanese) and so are 
those ending in  ­ĕ (with usual lengthening of the final vowel, i.e. ­o in our transcript¬
ions); the  ĕ may also occur as the first vowel in words of the scheme CWC (Old 
Javanese  weas  corresponding to wos in the modern language). We have, of course, 
no means to ascertain whether the mechanism of  vowel  variants existed in Old 
Javanese. The  ĕ is written  long  (by the adoition of a  da^ḍa)  in the same  cases  in 
which  also the other vowels are. As far as a judgment based only  upon  written language 
is permitted, we may conclude th^t the  ĕ was equivalent to the other vowels in 
Old Javanese. The non­expression of the  vowel  in many  c^ses  is fully  explained by 
the absence,  originally,  of a distinct  vowel  mark in a system of  writing  borrowed  from 
India.  It is curious  that  it appears  from  inscription No. XI below  that  even such 
artificial  forms as  mnang  (for  mĕnang)  could  be used in poetry in those very forms, 
i.e. as monosyllabics. CI. the Introduction to No. XI. 
^) Such  cases  are not, however, rare  (mĕnang  : mĕnĕng,  etc.). Presumably as a consequence 
of normalizing tendencies in orthography, the use of the special  vowel  mark for  ĕ 
gradually  increases in the course of centuries, but spellings such as tka instead of 
tĕka are occasionally found in rather  modern  Javanese  writing. 
-') viz., in  maṅaso  (b 9 ; in the corresponding place in inscription a, viz. a 9, the  final 
consonant  is not lengthened). In  cases  like  this one, the use of the  ĕ cannot be avoided. 
lo) Neither in Sanskrit, nor in Old Javanese, a word may end in a consonant cluster; 
writing  down such a combination, even if it  meant  something completely different, 
may have been too shocking to the eyes. Sanskrit and Old Javanese  agree  in this 
respect. On the other hand,  there  was no objection against  writing  strange  ligatures 
due to the non­expression of the  vowel  mark for the  ĕ; ligatures such as tga, impos­
sible  in Sanskrit, frequentiy occur in Old Javanese inscriptions. 
H) Possibly  even  mĕnapĕf.  As a matter of fact, the first  ĕ is not usually expressed in 
writting  neither in Old nor in Modern Javanese. 


--- [Page 224] ---
— 214 — 
of the second and  third  modes of orthography occurs in mapakan (b 24, 
probably  representing  mapĕkĕn).  If we see  that  these  cases are easily ex­
plained  by the  difficulties  arising  from  the expression of the  ĕ, we have 
no reason whatever to assume  that  an a  would  have been pronounced in 
Old Javanese in  these  cases 12). 
There is one more method of expressing an  ĕ in the first  syllable  of 
a disyllabic  base, viz. by  writing  an a and geminating the consonant  which 
follows.  Only  a single example occurs in our texts, viz.  tangṅaḥ  in b 25, 
which  undoubtedly represents  tĕṅah 13). It is  difficult  to give a correct ex­
planation  of this  spelling.  ^Phonetically,  there  exists no consonantal 
gemination  in Javanese and we have no reason to assume  that  Old Javanese 
would  have been different in this respect 14). Clusters, on the other hand, 
are rather frequent between the two vowels of a  disyllabic  base 15). Now 
we see that  in most of the cases where we  find  a cluster in this place of the 
word  the vowel  in the first  syllable  is preferably an  ĕ  16). From  a historical 
point  of view,  we observe  that  the a of Sanskrit words usually developed into 
an ĕ in these  cases; the Sanskrit words bhakti,  çaktī, pakṣin,  sākṣin, 
mārga,  varna,  satya  became  bĕkti,  sĕkti,  pĕksi,  sĕksi,  mĕrga, vĕrna, sĕtya 
i­) We  stress  this point since most of the extant descriptions of Old Javanese suffer 
from  a confusion  between  the 1anguage and its orthography. Thus, we  1earn  trom 
Kats. Kusumavicitra (1929), p. 4, that the '1ong  pĕpĕt’  (represented by o in transcript¬
ion) is pronounced in Old Javanese as it is in Sundanese and that the long vowels 
are pronounced longer than the short ones.  Such  statements,  even  if they are given 
only  to pupils in order  that  they know how to read the Old Javanese text, are easily 
misleading  since they create an  artificial  difference  from  the modern language, a 
difference  which  probably existed  only  in writing and in reciting poetry. One cannot, 
of course, prove  that  Old Javanese pkan, as the  word  is spelt in tne inscriptions, 
was really  pronounced  pĕ.^.ĕn –s  in the modern language, but it is at lea...t true  that 
orthographic  considerations  fully  account for the  spelling  pkan;  there  is no reason 
to assume an evolution  from  Old Javanese a to  Modern  Javanese  ĕ in these  cases. 
For the  long  vowels in  writing,  a question  which  is far more complicated, cf. the 
discussion  below. 
13) The aksara na and the  anusvāra  were probably considered perfectly equivalent, but 
the former was reserved for the end, the latter for the beginning of a  syllable.  In 
words  such as  saṅka,  often  spelt sangka, either  spelling  occurs but the former is more 
lrequent on the whole. Examples of a  final  guttural nasal expressed by na  with  a 
virāma  occur,  mainly  in the older period (cI. Pras. 1ndon., I. p. 113 and p. 128), 
but they are very rare. 
14) CI. note 12 above. It seems a sound principle not to conclude to a phonemic dif¬
ference from Modern Javanese, unless there should be real arguments in  faveur  of 
such  a difference.  Spelling  is, of course. no argument if it is capable of being explained 
in a different way ; important cases are those in  which  the same  word  is written either 
tṅaḥ or tangṅaḥ  ; cf. also  infra,  note 47. 
15) CI. the description of  these  types in  Modern  Javanese by Dhlenbeck, op. cit., chapter 
IV sub C, pp. 149­18I. 
1­) Excluding,  of course, the combinations of a mute preceded by a homorganic nasal, 
where no such preference is noted. The preference for  ĕ is pronounced if the  com­
bination  consists of a mute and I or r (Uhlenbeck, p. 157) or of a number of less 
common  combinations (op. cit., p. 161). 


--- [Page 225] ---
— 215 — 
in Javanese 17). If we  assume  that  this tendency is an old one, although 
it is not expressed by  writing  as a rule, we  could  understand  that  the ĕ 
pronounciation  of an a in the first syllable was unambiguously indicated 
by creating an  artificial  cluster  which  could  not be misunderstood ;  writing 
a double consonant was an easy  means  to achieve this purpose since real 
gemination  did not occur 18). 
In addition to the  cases  dealt  with  above, we  find  double consonants 
written  in a small number of other cases.  More  often than not, a consonant 
following  r is doubled; cf. saru^a (b 6), paru^u)uu^us (b 15). This is only 
the application  of a Sanskrit rule of  sandhi  which  needs  no further comment. 
In addition,  we often  find  the final  consonant of a  base  doubled if it is  followed 
by the suffix  ­an,^  cf. ḍamiliḥhan, b  11/12,  u)laḥhan, b  12. The most  likely 
explanation is  that  the gemination is a  means  to denote  the shift of the accent 
from the  first  to the second syllable of the  original  word after the addition 
of a suffix;  the expression of a double consonant in Old  Javanese  would 
then have about the  same  function as  vowel  lengthening has in Old and 
Classical  Malay 19). 
The latter point naturally leads us towards the most awkward problem 
of this  kind,  viz. the expression of long vowels in Old Javanese. The  cases 
in which  long vowels are written in  these  inscriptions (which are, on the 
whole,  in accordance  with  the common practice in Old Javanese records) 
are classifiable into  three  groups. First, we have the words borrowed from 
Sanskrit, spelt according to the rules known from Sanskrit 20); cf.  çakan^ar¬
ṣātīta (b  1),  tatkāla (b  3/4 and  b 5), etc. Second, we find vowels written long 
in Old Javanese words if grammatical analysis combined  with  the Sanskrit 
rules of  vowel  contraction  tends  to show  that  a vowel  is the product of 
originally  two vowels. The inscriptions therefore  spell  tuhān  (b 15 and 16) 
since the word is analyzed into  tuha  and the  suffix  ­an and the Sanskrit rules 
of sandhi  prescribe a long  vowel  in such cases. We have no sufficient reason 
to conclude  that  this  vowel  lengthening corresponded to a  living  feature  of 
the Old Javanese language. As a  matter  of fact, the inscriptions give numerous 
examples of the use of Sanskrit rules of  sandhi  in the Old Javanese text. 
Some examples in the Perot inscriptions are ryy=umahnya (b 3), sy=ulihan 
17) Often, the forms  with  an a in the  first  syllable  still  occur in Javanese, but they 
are less common. uhlenbeck (op. cit., p. 169)  rightly  considers the forms  with  an ĕ 
the more adapted ones. 
18) It is the same  principle,  viz.  that  of using  means  offered by the system of orthography 
to a new purpose when the  original  function was not needed,  which  we observe 
in other cases, too. A clear example is the use of the ancient aspirates and other 
aksaras  which  were no longer needed (such as the na) as the  so­called  aksara  gede 
in Modern  Javanese  writing.  The  form  of the na, for instance, expressing a super­
fluous  sound in the modern language,  could  be used as a polite equivalent of the .na. 
10) CI.  Ccedés,  B.E.P.E.O.,  XXX  (1930), p. 62, who compares  jāhat  and  marjahāti,  dātu 
and datūa.  In  classical  Malay,  the accentuated  syllable  is denoted by the addition 
of an alif,  yā or wāw. 
20) It is hardly necessary to add  that  this is not always done correctly; some examples 
of mistakes in the  spelling  of Sanskrit words  will  be given  below. 


--- [Page 226] ---
— 2113 
(b 16), and  manusu.^—  ṣen^a (b  4); in the last example, we notice not  ^)nly 
the change  from  the dental sibilant to the  lingual  after the k but also a curious 
mistake in  spelling  to be examined below. 
In addition to the  long  vowels in either of the above groups, we  find 
a number of words not classifiable as loan words or as those in  which  the 
long vowels  could  be explained by the rules of  sandhi..  Some examples are 
manukū  (b 4), tuṅgū (b  5), manū  (b 7), u^adu^  (b 10),  manūt  (b 24), and 
rama (b 35)^ Properly speaking,  these  examples do not constitute a real group; 
the long  vowels are  difficult  to be accounted for. We confine ourselves to 
some remarks. 
The spelling  manū  may be due to the wrong  opinion  that  the word 
should  be spelt by a  long  vowel  21). Wadwā  gives the impression of a foreign 
origin 22). As to  rāma,  it is noted  that  the word is spelt by a  long  vowel  only 
if it means  „village  elder’’ 23); it is, however, written rama in the meaning 
„father’’,  although  there  is no doubt  that  we have the same word used in two 
meanings. It may, however, be very useful, sometimes even necessary, ^dis­
tinguish  these  meanings in  official  documents in order to  avoid  a misunder­
standing 24)^ The  .normal  form  is reserved for the meaning  „father”,  whereas the 
long  ā ṃ  the first syllable gives the word a more  official  tinge,  which  makes 
it very suitable to denote a technical term. If this conclusion is correct, the 
spelling  by a  long  vowel  could  be compared  with  our use of capitals in  similar 
case^.  Thus, we use the  spelling  „father’’  to denote the  family  relation, but we 
write  ‚‚Father”  a^a religious title  ^ 5). It is  well­known  that  another, but re­
2l) At least if .the word, used as a person's name in the text, is to he identified  with 
the name of the  great  Manu.  In that  case, it is nothing hut a wrong orthography 
to which  no importance should he attached. 
^) As far as  Modern  Javanese is concerned, the majority of the words of the type  CVCCV 
in­ winch  the second consonant of the cluster is ^ semi­vowel (y nr­ w) are of a 
non­Indonesian  origin  . (29 on a total of 52 ; cf. Uhlenheck, op.  ­cit.,  p. 168). 
23) We prefer this translation to  „village  authorities"  (dorpsautoriteiten  in many a Dutch 
translation). The meaning of  rāma  seems  to correspond to  that  o^ grāmavṛddha  in 
some Sanskrit inscriptions. The  rāmas,  in Old Javanese records, are  divided  into two 
groups : (a) those „holding a command" ( maṅagam  kon.),  i.e. charged  with  a definite 
function,  e.g.  with  the supervision over the bridges in the  village  (hulu  wuatan^), and 
(b) those „taking  rest"  (maratā^),  I.e., probably, those who were formerly charged  with 
a definite function, but retired afterwards. CI. infra,  notes  74 sqq. The  tuha  wanua, 
„the old ones in the  village’’,  constitute a  separate  group among the  rāmas  charged 
with  a definite function ; cf. infra,  note  75. 
24) Rama, meaning  „father’’  (apparently without the honorific tinge  which  the word has 
^ in Modern Javanese), frequentiy occurs in Old Javanese inscriptions in the combination 
rama ni  ‚‚father  of",  followed  by a name. Since identical names frequentiy occur 
within  the same  village,  the persons are often distinguished not by adding their 
father's name, as we sometimes do, but by mentioning the name of their eldest son 
or daughter. Grown­up men without a regular  family  do not count in essentially 
agricultural  societies. It is obvious  that  only  a small  number of the 'fathers' belonged 
to the group of  village  elders. 
25) As a matter ­of fact, written language, usually not provided  with  sufficient  s1gns 
to denote all the phonemes  . and : devoid.  .of means­ of rendering the more subtle elements 


--- [Page 227] ---
— 217 — 
lated, method is used in  1ater  Javanese to a  similar  purpose, viz. the repla­
cement of the common  akṣaras  by those  which  originally  denoted aspirates 26). 
Now  it is remarkable  that  the inscriptions of  Tjaṇḍi  Perot do not  appear  to 
make the distinction between rama and rama, for the word is written rama 
in a number of  cases  where the meaning  „village  elder’’ is required (e.g., in 
b 19, 20, 21 etc.) 27). 
The above refers to only a small  part  of the complicated problem of .the 
„long”  vowels in Old Javanese, but it  seems  sufficient to explain the ortho­
graphy found in  these  inscriptions. We shall take the  same  problem up again 
in connection  with  the prosodie  laws of Old Javanese poetry in the Intro­
duction  to No. XI below. 
The spelling of Sanskrit words is  rather  careless. We  note  āsādhamāsa 
for āṣāḍhamāsa  (b 2), duntīyā  for du^itīyā  (ibid.),  suklapaksa for  çuklapakṣa 
(h 3) , jīu^aṇa  for jīu^ana  (a 12), and many other examples may be added. 
A curious spelling, already noticed by Damais 28) , is manusuk=ṣema  in b 4, 
whereas the corresponding place a 5 gives the correct spelling  manusuk 
sīnta  29) as two words. In modern Javanese, the phonemes i and e are 
sometimes confounded, especially in  dialects 3°), and this may be an old 
feature 31), although the  cases  found in inscriptions  could  be explained in 
a different way 32). 
of language such as intonation,  needs  its own  means  of expression. The use of capitals 
in writing  often corresponds to a more emphatic expression in speech as is usual 
for proper names, titles and words associated  with  the  Divine.  Old Javanese has 
different means. Names of persons are introduced by an article (si, pu,  sang),  words 
associated  with  the  Divine  are preceded by  sang  hyang  (sang  hyang  dharma may he 
rendered by  ‚‚the  Temple",  sang  hyang  haji  praçasti  by „the  Royal  Ed^ct"). 
­6) We  mean  the so­called aksara  gĕde  in Javanese  writing,  commonly denoted by 
„capitals";  cf. note  18 above. The comparison  with  capitals in European  writing 
is not exact; their use is only honorific (which is one of the  aspects  of European 
capitals) and moreover, the aksara  gĕḍe  are not  limited  to the first sound of the words. 
­7) Also  some later inscriptions (e.g.  O.J.O.,  XXIII)  do not make this distinction  ­egularly. 
2s) (quoted in not.­. 4 above. 
­^) The completely correct spelling  would,  of course, have  been  sīmā,  hut the  final  a 
is usually written short in Old Javanese. There is a curious little problem whether 
the spelling  sīmā,  sometimes found in Old Javanese records,  represents  the etymologicany 
correct spelling or the so­called 'conjunctive', 1.e.  sīma  fonowed hy the  suffix  ­a. Often, 
the latter  appears  to be required hy the context, but we do not  want  to make this 
an absolute rule. 
3^) CI., for instance, Uhlenbeck, op. cit., p. 99. 
31) This is not, however, prohah1e. We add  that  the  vowel  e, which  has no particular 
position  in Modern Javanese, only occurs in  three  definite groups of  cases  in Old 
Javanese, viz. (a) in words borrowed from Sanskrit (e.g., dewa), (b) as a product 
of the contraction of an a at the end of a prefix  with  an i at the beginning of a 
base  (e.g.,  mesi,  i.e. isi  with  the prefix ma­), and (c) in a number of  cases  i^ which 
e alternates  with  ai (k^vaiḥ  —­ kweḥ, ^vaiḥ  —­ weḥ, dai  — de, rarai  ­— rare, etc.  ; 
the spelling by  ai is the more common one in inscriptions, hut it may he  ^an  archaism 
since also Sanskrit words  with  e are often found spelt hy ai ; cf. Old Javanese kanvala 
instead of kewala and the name kaisava instead of  keçava  mentioned above). 
32) As to our^ man^usuk=sema, one might consider the possibility of a confusion  between 


--- [Page 228] ---
— 21^ — 
The text  of the  inscriptions  a and b is  identical  apart  from  a small 
number  of minor  differences  mainly  in spelling.  The reason why  the  text 
was copied  twice can  only  be guessed  at. Perhaps­  the  territory  to which 
it applied  was very extensive so  that it was considered preferable  to place 
different  copies  at different spots. Another  possibility  is that  inscription  a 
soon  became almost  illegible,  so that a new copy was made  a few years  af­
terwards 33) ; then, the older stone  would  not have been destroyed (although 
it had become useless) because  it had been properly inaugurated 34). We 
have several examples  of inscriptions  which  were  copied  more than once, 
sometimes one on stone and another 3^) or  even two others 36) on bronze. 
In two other  eases,  we have the same  inscription  on the stones, but then one 
of the  copies  is either abbreviated  or incomplete 37). Here, the two  inscrip­
tions  appear to be complete, but  there  is no absolute certainty  owing  to the 
very  difficult  reading of a, especially of its  lower  portion  38) . The discussion 
which  follows  is based on  inscription  b. 
The inscription  is dated 850  A.D.  It deals  with the  foundation of  a free­
hold  39) by a Rakai  Patapān  named Pu  Manuku  under  the  reign  of the 
king  Rakai  Pikatan 40). The  king  is denoted by ratu. There may  be some 
doubt whether  the  latter term should be considered  perf  ectiy  identical  with 
the usual  royal  title in Old  Javanese  records,  viz. Çrī  Mahārāja.  The curious 
point  is that not  only the  title is short and  simple,  but the  king is even 
simā,  ‚‚boundary"  (the  extended meaning  „bounded  ground" and, especially,  ‚‚grounds 
separated  from  civil  administration  by the  king  and his  servants",  i.e.  free­hold) 
and ksema. 
33) The stone may have  been  in a  similar  state  from  the  very beginning;  it is a  ver^’ 
rough  type  of stone. 
34) In  that  case,  it would  have  been  kept  as the  authentic  original. 
3­) CI. the  inscription  published  by  Stuttetheim,  T.B.G.,  65 (1925), p. 209. 
36) T.B.G.,  67 (1927),  pp. 172  sqq. 
37^ ^ th^ two inscriptions of  Tjaṇḍi  Argapura,  the  stone in  the  Djakarta  Museum  (D.  al) 
is an  incomplete copy  of another stone  which  remained  in loco,  but is  probably lost 
by now; cI. Damais,  T.B.G.,  83 (1949),  pp. 4 sq. The inscription published  in Pres. 
fndon.,  I (195o),  No. V, contains  only  the  beginning  of that  published op. cit., No. VI. 
38) The length of  inscription  a might be about the same  as that  of b, hut on the estampage 
of a only  here  and  there  some vague traces  of  aksaras  are  visible  after  line  20. 
The size  of the  two stones  is almost equal. 
39) This  is the  translation  of sima  which  we  have adopted ;  cI.  note 32,  above. These 
free grounds  could  be  called  free  only  with  a view  to  civil  administration ; apart 
from a small  number  of  uncertain cases, they appear  to have always belonged  to 
a religious  foundation. 
40) This  important fact  was  first  pointed  out by  Damais,  loc.  cit. In  this connection, 
Damais  examined  a number  of other cases  in which  the  title ratu  is used (art.  cit., 
pp. 1a  sqq.). The data  there  mentioned  are  based  on  reliable readings,  but do  they 
prove  that  ratu  (sometimes: sang  ratu)  is a  full,  but  archaic, equivalent  of ^rr 
Mahārāja  ? — In  our opinion,  the  data  do not  necessarily point  to such  a conclusion 
as long  as we do not know  much about  the  real  position  of these  ratus.  It is  curious 
that also  in the  inscriptions  of Argapura  and  Pĕndĕm  the  ra^u  is mentioned after 
the founders  or, as we  could  put it, at the  head  of a  list of dignitaries. 


--- [Page 229] ---
— 219 — 
mentioned as  only  the first person in an enumeration of dignitaries. An even 
more  striking  fact is  that  king  Rakai  Pikatan is not the first person 
mentioned in the text. It  would  be contrary to all we know about Old Java­
nese  hierarchy to presume  that  the supreme  king  should have been mentioned 
after the founder  Rakai  Patapān  unless the latter was considered higher in 
rank 41). Normally,  it is stated  that  the  king  issues an order to the effect 
that a privilege is given, whereas the favoured one(s) is (are) mentioned 
afterwards 42). An  attempt  at explaining  the relation between the two autho­
rities  in the Perot inscription cannot be based on this text alone. Several 
explanations might be suggested, but  there  is one  which  is particularly attrac­
tive although it is not capable of real proof. The title  Rakai  Patapān  is known 
to have belonged to the  king  who preceded  Rakai  Pikatan 43); could  it be 
that the Rakai  Patapān  in the Perot inscription is nobody else but the pre­
ceding  king  himself  ? This  would  explain both the order in  which  the two 
authorities are mentioned and the modest title of the  Rakai  Pikatan. We do 
not want to suggest  that  the founder is a dead  king,  which  seems  absurd 44) , 
but that  he might be in  life after having resigned the throne. Then, the way 
in which  the foundation is mentioned in the inscription is not astonishing : 
the king­father,  as we might term the position of the  Rakai  Patapān  in that 
case, is  still  the highest authority in the country although he leaves the 
exertion  of his power to the  Rakai  Pikatan,  while  withdrawing into a pata­
^i) The wording of the Perot inscriptions  seems  to indicate  that  the  Rakai  Patapān 
acts entirely on his own responsahility, whereas the  king,  patih and the other dignitaries 
are only  the executors of the former's intention.  Krom  (Geschiedenis^,  p. 156, note 6), 
referring  to the Perot inscription (the year S5a is based on Brandes' reading of the 
th1.d  cipher,  viz. 775  Çaka),  conjecturally concluded to a lower position of the  Rakai 
Pikatan.  We thi:­k  that  Krom's opinion may  still  be maintained, although it is, at 
least partially, based on Brandes' interpretation of  ratu  as the end of the  village  name 
(CataL  G^neveldt, 18S7, p. 374). 
42) The formulation in the  initial  parts of the inscriptions deserves  full  attention. The 
inscriptions  from  Eastern Java  from  the 10th century onwards begin  with  the (elaborate) 
date  and  state  that  at „this  date"  (tatkāla^  or „on this day" (irika diwasa), the 
„order'’  ^ājñā)  or the  ‚‚favour"  (anugraha)  ‚‚descends"  (tumurun)  on a number of 
high  dignitaries,  from  whom it  „goes  down" (umingsor) to a number of lower  digni­
taries  until  it reaches the favoured one(s). There are, however, numerous variations 
on this theme. In a few cases, all during the reign of the  king  Siṇḍok,  the formula 
is completely different; in  these  cases, a high authority whose name is mentioned 
first,  requests  the  king  for some favour. In GJ.C. XL, dated 929 A.D., the  person 
who addresses  the  king  in such a way is a spiritual teacher (with the title dang 
ācārya),  and his mention before the king is probably  honorific.  We cannot give a 
full discussion of  these  problems,  which  would  require a  separate  article, but we 
think  that  the  way  in which  we formulated this  difficult  point is  sufficiently  flexible 
to account for some apparent exceptions. 
43) Cf. Pras.  Indon.,  I (195o),  pp. 122­126. 
^4) As a matter of  principle,  this  possibility  could  not be completely excluded in  view 
of the conclusions by Stutterheim on the identity of  king  Wāgīçwara  (T.B.G.,  75, 1935, 
pp. 422 sqq.), but if something of this  kind  should be presumed for our text, it is 
certain  that  such a fact  would  not have been omitted. 


--- [Page 230] ---
— 220 — 
pan 4^) . At present,  we could only  state  that  such a solution would  agree 
with the facts,  whereas  it would not be unlikely on more general grounds. 
More  positive  arguments  cannot  be given, but it  will  appear  in the Intro­
ductions to Nos. X and XI below  that  our conjectural explanation would 
probably be confirmed by the situation to which we conclude only six  years 
afterwards  (in 856  A.D.).  There,  these  problems  will  be examined with 
greater  detail. 
The Perot inscription is the oldest document known which gives a 
regular list of dignitaries (b 5 to 9) mentioned  after  the  king.  The first of 
these  is the patih, who  bears  the title Rakai Weka and the  name  Pu Puluwatu. 
The titles of the  other  dignitaries are  Sirikan,  Tiruan,  Maṅahuri,  Halaran, 
Palārhyang,  Wélahan,  Dalinan, Pangkur,  Tawān,  Tirip,  Lampi,  Wadihati and 
Makudur.  All these  titles are known from  other  inscriptions. Not only Weka, 
but also  Sirikan,  Manghūri  46) , Halaran, Palarhyang, Welshan and Dalinan 
are usually preceded by Rakai,  whereas  Tiruan, Wadihati and  Makudur  are 
always preceded by the term Pameget 47); the  three  tities Pangkṅr,  Tawān 
and Tirip  almost always occur  together 48), whereas  Lampi  is rarely met 
4­) The curious title  Patapān  (= Hermitage) might have been deliberately  chosen  with 
a view  to a later retirement into a hermitage. If our surmise about the identity of 
^ the tities Garung and  Patapān  is correct (Pras. 1ndon., I, pp. 125 sq.) the prince 
would  have changed his original title  Rakai  Garung to  Rakai  Patapān.  The reading 
741 Çaka  for the  Pĕngging  copper plate,  which  we hesitated to accept, is confirmed 
by Damais in  B.E.F.E.O.,  XLVI,  fasc. 1 (1952), p. 26. 
We give the tities m their usual spelling here.  Manghūri  became the designation 
for the  „court  historician", as one might term it, at the court of the 17th century 
Gélgél  (cf/Berg,  De Middeljav^ansche  historische traditie,  1927, pp. 42 sqq.). 
4^) Old Javanese  ^eharters  spell  this term in many different ways, vi.^.  pamgat;  pamg^t, 
pamagat,  pamaggat and the same forms  with  an  initial  sa (samgat,  s^mgĕt,  etc.). 
Van Naerssen, B^dr. K. I., 9o, 1933, pp. 241­244, has discussed this term  with  its 
different  spellings in detail ; he has made it probable  that­  the forms beginning  with 
^ sa­­­  should be considered contractions of  sang  pamgat  etc. ; we  follow  his example 
(art. ciI.,  note  1 to p. 243) in reproducing the title in the form  sang  pamĕgĕ.t  except, 
of course, in transcriptions. It is the easiest way to account for the different spellings, 
^ whereas it  would  he difficult  to explain the occurrence of forms  with  an ĕ in the 
last syllable if this  vowel  was an a. CI. the above discussion of the different spellings 
of the  ĕ. 
^ 1n a: few cases, the term  tawān  is replaced by  hadaṅan;  cI.  . K.­O^ No.’ I. 1st­ plate, 
front part, line 17. The  three  terms are mentioned together already in the Sanskrit 
charter of Kalasan dated 778  A.D.;  cI.  Krom,  Geschiedenis^,  p. 135; Van Naerssen, 
^ Indian  Antique 1947, p. 25o  ^ Pras. 1ndon., I. 195o, p. 15. In strophe 4 of the Kalasan 
inscription,  they are called/the  ādeçaçastrins  of the  king  (pāṅkuratavānafīripar^āmabh.ir 
. ^ ādeçaçastribhī  :rājñaḥ),  whereas they are denoted by  deçādhyaksa  an­d  rnahāpuruṣa 
in strophe 7  (sakṣiṇaḥ krfvā  paṅkuratavānatīripadeçādhyaksān  mahā^^u.usānI.  The 
exact meaning of  these  terms is open to doubt.  Bosch  (r.B.G.,  6a, 1^2a, p. 61) 
translated  deçādhyakṣān  mahāpurusan  by  ­„de notabele dorpshoofden"  (the notable 
village  chiefs)^ the translation  which  was adopted by  Vogel,  Aanteekeningen op de 
inscriptie  van rjanggal in Midden­Java, B.i7dr. K.I., 1oo (1941),  note  2 to p. 444, 
and.. by  van­  :Nāerssen,­  art.: cit., p. 25o:  ­‚‚the  Javanese pankur, tawan and tirip and 
the •notable  desa­heads'  . ... . .: the ramas  of the Old Javanese deeds". It does not 


--- [Page 231] ---
— 221 — 
with in this connection. As a  matter  of fact, the title  Lampi  occurs only in 
the Argapura  inscriptions (a 11, b 7), where it is however placed after, 
instead of before, the titles Wadihati and Makudur 49). A detailed compa­
rison  with  the  list  given in the Argapura inscriptions (a 7 to 12, b 4 to 
7) agrees  in the essentials, but shows numerous differences in details. 
The most striking  agreement  is the number of dignitaries,  which  is perfectly 
identical;  in addition, all the titles but one  agree,  but the order in  which 
they are enumerated is  rather  different The title  which  does  not agree  is 
Welahan,  not occurring in the Argapura inscriptions; on the other hand, the 
seem  likely  that  deçādhyakṣa  should correspond to  rāma  in the Old Javanese  texts  ; 
adhyaksa sounds  like  a royal functionary ; moreover, the term  does  denote  a royal 
functionary,  viz. a  kind  of sheriff, in later Javanese administration, and the  same 
meaning is required in the old  Çrivijaya  inscription (cf. supra, No. II, line 4), whereas 
the rāmas  could not possibly be considered royal servants.  Real  desa­heads  such as 
the lurahs and  petinggis  in more recent times,  appear  to he unknown in Old Javanese 
times.  We  have some doubt whether  deça  has the meaning „village" (i.e.  desa  in 
Modern  Javanese) in this context. In a  passage  where the meaning  „village"  is required 
beyond  doubt, the Kalasan inscription  uses  grāma  (strophe 7  : ^rāmaḥ  kālasanāmā), 
whereas Old Javanese inscriptions always use wanua (wanwa, banua,  ban­va)  in this 
meaning. So we prefer to translate  deçādhyakṣān  hy „inspectors (possibly surveyors 
or sheriffs) over the country" (which is ruled by the king). The fact of the  paṅkur, 
ta^vān  and tirip being regularly mentioned among the first of  those  forbidden to 
interfere  with  foundation grounds,  which  were free from royal taxation,  seems  to confirm 
this interpretation. We then translate  paṅkuratavānatiripadeçādhyaksān  by  „the  inspectors 
over the country, viz. the  Paúkur,  Tawan and  Tirip".  The meaning of  ādeçaçastrin, 
a term  which  is not  lucid^  may be looked for in the  same  direction. The translation 
. „those  armed  with  orders" (cI.  Bosch,  art. cit., p. 6o) might not be satisfactory  : 
could  ādeça,  in the compound, ^tand for  ā deçāt,  ‚,ovor the country", so that  ādeça¬
çastrin  means: „whose weapons (or: knives,  çastra)  reath (all) over the country". 
whereas the dignitaries themselves ab4de in the capital as most dignitaries do ^ Cf. 
such compounds as  ājānubāhu,  „one whose arms reach down to the knees" (Monier­
Williams).  Mahāpuruṣa,  a term used to denote the Buddha or  Viṣṇu,  is rather a strong 
expression for a dignitary of some rank; the term undoubtedly has a weaker mea1Aing 
here, presumably  that  of orang  bésar  in Malay.  Our  final  conclusion is  that  paṅku­, 
tawān  and tirip are the titles of  three  court dignitaries whose main task was the 
supervision  over forces to execute royal orders. 
–^1. Anticipating the publication of  these  two epigraphs, we quote the  passage  in which 
^ the authorities are mentioned according to the text of a (lines 6­12); for the relation 
between  the two  texts  of the Argapura inscription, cf. Damais, T. E.  G., 83 (1949), 
pp. 4 sq., who gives the transcription of the initial portions from which the correspon¬
dence clearly .’ appears. The second Argapura inscription (the original of which is, 
. unfortunately, lost) is not, however, a^ real 'duplicate' (Damais, p. 41. of the first one 
(Mus.^  Djak., D. 81)^ its text is about twice as long as  that  of inscription a and has 
entire paragraphs  which  do not occur in a. Inscription a may, therefore, be styled 
an abbreviated copy of b. The text of a, important for a comparison  with  the Perot 
inscriptions,  runs: [61 ..... ratu  tatkāla rakarayān  kayuwam [71 pu  lokapāla  . patiḥ 
rakarayān  wka pu  manūt  . sirika[aln pu  bahā  . halaran pu  wīryya  . paúgilhyang  pu 
tarafigal  . tirua[9]n pu sapi . sikhatan pu lamunjang .  maúuhuri  pu agriḥ  . dāli[1o]nan 
pu gnang . pankur pu brahma . tawan pucung . tirip pu mamanu[11]k . wadihati 
.­– pu menu . makudur pu  maṅiṇḍit  . lampi pu dhana[12]hu f/. — We add  that  the 
reading  sikhalān,  uncertain in a, is confirmed by the estampage of b (line 51. 


--- [Page 232] ---
— 222 ­
title Sikhalān  is mentioned in the Argapura inscriptions, but not in our 
text^). A minor difference is the title Palarhyang;  which  is replaced by 
Paṅgilhyang  in the  Argapura  inscriptions; the two  terms  are undoubtedly 
identical  since not only the second  parts  of the  names  agree,  but also the 
meaning of the former  parts  51). A more interesting point is the different 
order in  which  the titles are given in the two documents. In the  following 
list, we give the order of the dignitaries in the Perot inscriptions at the left 
hand side and of  those  in the Argapura inscriptions at the right hand side : 
1. Patih  Rakai  Weka;  Patih  Rakai  Weka; 
2. Sirikan; Sirikan; 
3. Tiruan; IIalaran; 
4. Manghūri;  ^ Paṅgilhyang; 
5. Halaran; Tiruan; 
6. Palarhyang;  Sikhalān; 
7. Welahan;  Manghūri; 
3. Dalinan; Dalinan; 
9. Pangkur; Pangkur; 
10. Tawān; Tawān; 
11. Tirip; Tirip; 
12. Lampi;  Wadihati; 
13. Wadihati; Makudur; 
14. Makudur;  Lampi. 
The numbers 1­2 and 8­11 remained unchanged. Tiruan went two,  Mang­
hūri went  three  places down so  that  Halaran and Palarhyang obtained the 
third  and fourth places respectively. These changes make it clear  that 
the hierarchy  fixed  by the tides was not absolutely  rigid.  The titie Tiruan, 
for instance, was sometimes higher (as in the Perot  mscriptioiis),  sometimes 
lower  (as in the Argapura inscriptions) than the title Halaran. The  same 
applies to the titie  Lampi  with  reference to Wadihati and Makudur. These 
facts do not, of course, prove a sort of degradation of the titles Tiruan and 
Lampi  (although this  would  not be impossible); they  would  rather  suggest 
­0) Or  rather:  the title  Sikhalān  is not mentioned in the  list  of the fourteen dignitaries 
in the Perot inscription. As a  matter  of fact, we do  find  Sikhalan mentioned after 
the list  in a 1o and h 9. The  same  strange  name,  spe1t  also hy the aspirate kha, 
occurs in line 2 of the  Pĕṇḍĕm  inscription; cI. Damais,  T.B.G.,  S3 (1949), p. 19. 
-1) The meanings of  paṅgil  ^nd palar are, at least, closely related, the former meaning 
„to call",  the latter „to look for, to hope". Pangil (or palar)  hyang  could  mean 
„calling  the gods" or something  similar  (cf., perhaps,  Vedic  devahu.^).  We are not as 
certain as some scholars were,  that  all these  I^akai and  Pamĕgĕt  tities are  originally 
toponymics ; their use as toponymics (hut then, never, it seems, as  names  of villages, 
hut always as  those  denoting groups of villages,  which  may or may not have constituted 
geographical units; it is well­known  that  later Javanese princes used to avoid  that 
the territories belonging to one nobleman constituted a geographical unity) might be 
secondary in many cases. The  origin  of the rakai titles, probably to be referred 
to a remote  past,  cannot be traced except, perhaps, in a few isolated cases. The title 
^akai  Halo  will  be discussed in the Introduction to No. XI below. 


--- [Page 233] ---
— 223 — 
that the  hierarchy  expressed by  the  titles depended not  exclusively  on the 
titles themselves, but also on  the  age of those bearing  the  tities.  The  three 
titles  Lampi,  Wadihati and Makudur were equivalent in rank,  but the  dig­
nitary  bearing  the  Lampi  title was older than those bearing  the  Wadihati 
and Makudur  titles in 850, but when, in 863,  three  other persons had inherited 
these  titles,  the  Lampi  was younger than  the  two others.  This  seems  the 
most probable conclusion based  on the  comparison between  the  two docu­
ments.  It is, moreover,  confirṃed  if more documents  from  Central Java  are 
taken into consideration. The order  of the  dignitaries  is fixed  only  up to a 
certain  extent, but free — i.e.  fixed  by considerations other than the intrinsic 
value  of the  tities,  consideration^  such  as the  age of the persons bearing the 
tities  ­. for the  remaining part, i.e.  within  certain groups. Two groups of 
three  dignitaries  could  easlly  be isolated  from  the  other names, viz.  the 
numbers 9­11 and 12­14. Then,  there  remain eight titles (Nos. 1­8) headed 
by the  pat^h.  In either case, this group  of eight begins  with  the  Rakais 
Weka  and  Sirikan  and  ends  in Dalinan.  It is  impossible  to decide whether 
this is only  due to chance  or to the  fact that  Weka  and  Sirikan  are always 
the highest tities  ^ of. the eight whereas  Dalinan  is the  lowest one.  If  other 
inscriptions  are  taken into account, we conclude  to the  former alternative. 
Thus,  in the  Keḍu  inscription dated 907  A.D. 52), the  Weka  is mentioned 
after instead of before the Sirikan and the Dalinan precedes instead of fol¬
lows the  Manghūri.  Only a very detailed comparison, which would consti­
tute a separate  study, ^ou1d establish whether  there  are  any intrinsic rules 
as to the  order of some  of the  tities; we may, however, conclude on account 
of the  above  ^that,  if there^  are  such rules, they may  be crossed  by  other 
considerations. 
Even  this  limited  ṃateṛial  enables  us to  make some conclusions  which 
appear beyond  doub^  The high dignitaries  following  the  founder and  the 
ratu (respectively  the  Rakai  Patapān  and the  Rakai  Pikatan  in the  Perot 
inscriptions  and the  Rakai  Pikatan and  the  Rakai  Kayuwaṅi  in the  Argapura 
inscriptions),  form  three  groups composed  of cight,  three  and  three  digni­
taries respectively. The group  of eight  is the  highest one;  it is  headed  by 
the patih. They probably surround  the  king  as the  eight  Lokapālas  do with 
reference  to Çiva,  a symbolism found in hinduized courts even up to rather 
recent times 53). The two groups  of three  dignitaries each  are on a  lower 
level.  The former seem to be especially connected  with the  perception of  the 
king's  revenue  ^ 4) , the  latter might  be associated  with  the  ceremonies  by 
––) Published  by  Stuttetheim  in  r.B.G.,  67 (1927), pp. 172-215. The  names  mentioned 
here occur in  the  transcription, pp.  206  sq., A, lines  10-12. 
­^) CI. the  excenent survey  with  further references  by Sir  Richard  Winstedt, Kingship 
^nd Enthronement  in  Malaya,  J. R. A. S., 1945,  pp. 139-149  (reprint  in J.  Mal.  Br. 
R.A^s.,  XX,  1947,  Pt. 1, pp. 1:^139I. 
.^ 4) The fact  of this trad  being  .regularly.  mentioned  at the  beginning  of the  lists of those 
forbidden  to tread  on  temple grounds (cf.  ^pra, p. 22o)  would  be a  hint  in that 
direction. 


--- [Page 234] ---
— 22 4 — 
means of  which  territories belonging to the  civil  administration by the  king 
and his servants are inaugurated to become temple grounds'). 
The list of these  dignitaries is  followed  by another  list of people all in­
cluded  in the term wadtva (a 9 to  1 4; b 9 to  14) . The titles of  these  persons, 
which  are all preceded by the honorific article  sang,  prove  that  ^wadwa  does 
not denote ordinary servants. There is no doubt  that  the persons mentioned 
after the dignitaries are the representatives of the latter, their ‘spokesmen’ 
(parwuwus, the term used in the Argapura inscriptions to denote the corres­
ponding  group; parujar is a synonym). We may be certain  that  the  digni­
taries did not do the work themselves; .they  would  not probably have assis­
ted at the foundation ceremonies, often far away. It  would  not even be too 
audacious to assume  that  these  dignitaries, whose main activities may have 
consisted  in ‚‚eating  the land", as the  Arthaçāstra  puts  it, were not able to 
perform  the various duties connected  with  the transfer of grounds  from  civil 
to religious administration,  implying,  among other formalities, dressing 
up acts. The dignitaries were therefore represented by presumably learned 
Brāhmaṇas  56), who took an active part in the foundation. We see  from  those 
documents  which  give a more or less detailed description of the inauguration 
ceremonies  that  the authorities themselves were not present, but the 
representatives were 57). As might have been expected, the number 
of representatives  agrees  with  that  of the dignitaries : it also amounts 
­^) We  limit  ourselves to this provisional  statement,  anticipating a^ more detailed research. 
^6) That they were  Brāhmaṇas  (or.  officially,  considered as such; the  caste  system existed 
at least in theory in hinduized Java, but the practice probably ^was rather different 
from  what we observe in India) may perhaps he concluded  from  the use of the  ‘article’ 
sang,  which  is in a  striking  contrast to the use of pu preceding the: names of the 
dignitaries  mentioned before. As  long  as no detailed study about the use of  thes^ 
^articles'  is available, it is n^t safe to  base  conclusions  ­on their u^e. There are, however, 
other arguments in favour of our surmise. A number of inscriptions issued during 
the reign  of Balitung  (898 ?­91O) give far more detailed and systematic lists of  these 
spokesmen; cf., e.g., the inscription of  raṇḍusari  I, dated 905 (published by  Stut¬
terheim in 1nscr.  Ned.­1ndiĕ,  I. 1940, pp. 3­28), where very detailed lists of 'spokesmen' 
(parujar), clerks (citralekha^) and lower administrative (?) personnel  (paṅurang)  are 
given  (PI. 1b, line 11, to PI. 2a, line 5). There, the spokesmen and the clerks each 
have two names, the former preceded by  sang,  the latter by pu. CI., for instance, 
PI. 1b, line 15 : parujar=i s^rikan sang  hujunggaluḥ  pu ayuddha anakwanua i tru¬
wanban watak  tirurāṇu.Now  we know from an almost contemporary record, that there 
was indeed a monastery in Hujunggaluh; cI.  F. H. van Naerssen,  Twee  koperen 
oorkonden  van Balitung, in B^idr^ K^ 1., 95 (1937), pp^. 441­461 the transcription. of 
No. I. A, line 10:  wihāra  i hujung  galuḥ.  It is not probable  that  the sang  name of 
the parujar in the  Raṇḍusari  inscription should be dissociated  from  that  of the mo­
nastery in the same period. In some other cases, too, some control is possible; we 
hope to deal  with  these  in another context. 
^7) This  point  appears  clearly  from  those records in  which  a description of the inaugu­
ration  ceremonies is given (e.g., Van  1^aer^sen,  art. cit., Inscription H, A,  line  11, 
to B,  line  1; cf.  Bosch,  Oudhefdk. v^ersf., 1925, ^p. 41­49, especially pp. 4a sq.). At 
the time  of the ceremonies, the different authorities present take in their places, one 
group at the  eastern  side, another atLthe southern side etc. The dignitaries, we mean 
those bearing tities such as  Rakai  or Pamĕgĕt.  are not mentioned in  that^  context. 


--- [Page 235] ---
^— 225 — 
to fourteen. As we already noted above, all of them are denoted by  sang, 
a honorific article,  followed  by a name. As to  these  names,  there  might be 
some doubt whether we have real personal names  here  or titles derived  from 
the places (perhaps monasteries, hermitages and  similar  sorts of dwelling) 
where  these  spokesmen used to stay. It cannot be denied  that  some of  these 
names give the impression rather of names of monasteries etc. than of per­
sons, especially sang Kamalagyan (a 13/14, b 14), sang Katuwuhan (a 14, 
b 14) and a few others^ 8). 
In this  list of fourteen representatives,  there  is a slight irregularity since 
the Wadihati  is not represented,­whereas the  Makudur  has two representati­
ves. Moreover, this  list is preceded by two persons (a 9/10, b 10) whose 
status  is not clear. As a matter of fact, it is indicated by the words anung 
maṅaso  ^ patapān  milu,  „those  who go to (?)  Patapān,  joining  (the authorities 
mentioned  before’’).  The main  difficulty  is connected  with  the uncertainty 
as to the exact meaning of  maṅaso.  Words in the meaning of  „going  to’’, 
such  as maṅaso, umaṅso,  umara, makna, mapara and a few others, 
do not necessarily  imply  a regular movement  from  one place to another, 
but may refer to some  form  of dependence — i.e., the revenues and compul­
sory  labour go  from  one place to another.  This  is certainly the meaning if it 
is stated  that  grounds or villages ,,go to” some authority, some foundation, 
an expression frequently found in Old Javanese inscriptions'). Then, the 
but the representatives are seated at one side, facing the South in the text published 
by Van Nae:rssen.and facing the East in  that  published by  Bosch. 
­­) Kamalagyan,. derived from^lagi, „a.  while",  seems  to denote a temporary hermitage 
Its designation by  „temporary"  may not refer to the  āçrama  itself, but father to 
the period  during  which  the permits stayed there, i.e. a place of temporary  retreat  (cI. 
kalagyan in  Nāgarakrĕt.  75, 2, and 78, 6; ^9,1)  . Katuwuhan, uerived  from  tuwuh, 
„to grow", may mean  „place  of prosperity";  hrĕtan,  derived  from  hĕrĕt,  „to retain", 
may mean „a place where one has to .stop, to stay '; damilihan,  from  pilih,  ‚‚to  choose": 
‚‚a chosen place". Gther names' occurring in our text, such as ^nvana,  ‚‚life",  talaga, 
„pond’',  dakukap, the name of a  tree,  a sort of Artocarpos, often planted .­t more or 
less sacred spots (cf. the Old­Javanese  Rāmāyana,  XVI,  44), are less characteristic, 
but, at least, not in  conflict  with  our interpretation. 
­.)) Gf.  O.J.O.,  XXXVIII  (929 A.D), front side, line 5, where a number of grounds, 
the (annual) revenue in  gold  of which  is mentioned, become temple domains in the 
future.,. ‚‚to depend on the holy  kahyaṅan  (a kind of sanctuary) at Panawan" (ma¬
nasea i sang hyang  kahyaṅan  i paṅawān).  The consequence is that the inhabitants 
^f the grounds are liberated  from  royal  taxes' but get duties  ^ towards the 
kahyaṅan,  viz. the obligation to furnish a  sheep  and a  fixed  quantity of rice (?) at 
the times of the yearly sacrifices  (mapaṅasĕa  ^dus 1  pāda  1 anken  kapuiān  ^ bhaṭāra 
i paṅawān ing pratiwarsa; Brandes'  reading  . ^vdu instead of  ^vḍus  is probably  only 
a printing mistake). CI. also  O.J.O.,  XXV  (9o5  A.D.),  Front parI.. lines 7ls  : maṅaso 
i lumku,  „dependent  on Lumĕku".  — Expressions such as tan  tumama,  ‚‚do  not enter" 
(grounds etc.) do not mean, literacy,  that  the persons to whom the words apply are 
forbidden  to touch the grounds. The expression is always used  with  reference to 
those  ‚‚claiming  the king's property"  (maṅilala  drawya hajiy who are forbidden to 
continue their activities in the villages situated  within  temple grounds. The meaning 
is that  the various collectors of taxes' exercising their unpopular .activities^ the 


--- [Page 236] ---
— 226 — 
words  anung  maṅas0  ^ patapān  milu mean :  ,,those  who are  dependent  on 
(act on behalf of)  Patapān'';  the two persons about whom  this  statement  is 
made are then representatives of the  Rakai  Patapān,  the founder of the free 
grounds. The reason  wliy  they are mentioned at the end of the  list of digni­
taries  could  be easily understood : they  represent  the favoured party. For 
after all, the  Rakai  Patapān  is the favoured one; he  separates  the grounds 
needed for his foundation from  civil  administration. The word milu, placed 
after the words  anung  maṅaso  i patapān,  denotes  that  the two persons are 
only loosely connected  with  the authorities mentioned before. 
The exact  status  of the two persons cannot be inferred from the text. 
They.might  have been younger sons or relatives of the  Rakai  Patapān.  In any 
ease,  they are not the subordinates of this dignitary, for a  separate  list of the 
latter is given in the  passage  from a 14 to 17 (= b 14 to  16) ; it is the  u^adu^d 
rakaray^  patapān,  consisting of at least seven persons (it is not absolutely 
clear where the  list ends). The  list of seven persons is made up of  five  people 
denoted as  tuhūn  followed by ni and further definitions, one secretary (mang¬
taṇḍa)  ^d one spokesman (parwuwus) . These servants are of a considerably 
lower  rank than all  those  mentioned before. This  appears  clearly from the 
use of the ^artide^ s^ before their  names  6^). 
If we try to  represent  us the  'status  which  the Rakai  Patapān  must have 
had, it is obvious  that  he must have had a considerable number of personnel 
at his disposal.. The tities  mangtaṇḍa  and parwuwus need no comment; the 
function  of the  five tuhans  is, however, less clear. The term  tuhān  frequently 
occurs in Old Javanese inscriptions. It is never applied to high dignitaries, 
although  it is als^clear  that  the people denoted by  tuhān  are not ‘commoners^ 
either. A hint as to the  status  of tuhans  is given by the expression  sang  tuhān 
mamuat  ­touu^us  used to  denote  ‘spokesmen’ in ^evera^ inscriptions 6l). Some 
people denoted by  tuhān  are regularly mentioned aft^r some  Pamegets  Wa­
name of the king (who probably ceded  these  rights in exchange for regular payments, 
a system  which  remained in use in Java  until  .baffles introduced the landrent system 
of perceiving taxes, a system  which  only  gradually extended over Java), had to cease 
their business on the grounds  which  had become free, i.e. attached to some foundation. 
The words tan  tumamā  could  be rendered by  „have  no competency over". The mea­
ning  of maṅaso  appears very  clearly  from  K.O., I,  first  plate,  line  15 : Parujar i 
tiruan  sumudan anak wanua ing kabikuan ing  siddhakāryya  maṅaso  i dihyang,  ‚‚the 
spokesman of (the  Pamĕgĕt)  Tiruan, Sumudan, resident in the monastery (called) 
Siddhakārya  dependent on the  Dieng",  cf. a  similar  expression in  O.J.O.  XXXVI, 
B (back),  line  6. The monastery was probably situated outside the temple plateau, 
but fell  under the competency of the  Diéng  authorities.  Many  derivatives of the root 
aso (or  : aṅso)  occur in the Old Javanese  inscriptions.  One of the most frequent forms 
is maṅasĕakan,  ‚‚to  give (to a person of higher rank)"  with  the passive  form  inaṅsĕan 
(i.nasĕan),  ‚‚(a higher person) is  given  (something)". 
60) The article si is used  with  all the persons who have no particular  title;  not  only 
ordinary  villagers  (anak wanua) have it before their names, but also  village  elders 
(rāma)  and other people not of a low  position. 
^i) CI. the Kembang  Arum  inscription (dated S24 ^aka, here corresponding to 9os  .A.D.I. 
Plate  III b,  line  5 (Bosch,  Oudh: v^f., 1925, p. 44; cf. also p. 48). CI. also the same 
inscription,  Plate I.  line  16. 


--- [Page 237] ---
­­^ 227 — 
dihati  and  Makudur,  whom they probably served as assistants or spokesmen 62). 
It is in any case clear  that  tuhān  does not denote the lords bearing titles such 
as Rakai  or Pameget, but those  working.  immediately under their orders; 
they are themselves chiefs over groups of lower servants. The lords  „eating 
the land’’ needed not only secretaries to make up acts of all kinds (the mang¬
taṇḍa  in our text), but also administrators of different groups. The text men­
tions  two  tuhan  ning nayaka. The meaning of Sanskrit  nāyaka,  from  which 
the word  is undoubtedly derived, is too vague to make a  definition  of the 
function  possible.  From  the designation as a whole one may infer  that  there 
were many  nāyakas  in the service of one  lord,  but working  under one chief. 
A more common designation for ^he same function is  tuhān  ning kanayakan 
or juru ning  kana^akān 63).­ The most important hint as to the meaning of 
nayaka in Old Javanese might be the fact  that  the nayakas .are usually men­
tioned at the beginning of the lists cf manilala drau^la haji 64). They are 
62) Cf. the inscription mentioned in the preceding note. Plate I.  line  13 : sang  tuhan 
ni ­­adihati 2  sang  miramiraḥ  si rayung mangrangkapi  sang  halaran si  rahula.  ........ 
sang  tuhan ni makudur ­2 etc.;  K.O.,  I, ­first  plate, lines 1o sq. and passim. —­ A  diffe­
rent use of tuhan is found  with  reference to crafts; then the term  seems  to indicate 
the independent craftsmen having others  working  under their orders. We  find  this 
use mainly in inscriptions  from  Eastern Java in  which  the rights of craftsmen exer­
cising  their professions in free territories are defined. CI.  O.J.O.,  LI, front, line so : 
anung tan  knāna  de sang  maṅilala  drabya  haji  tlung  tuhān  l sang  masambyawahāra 
ing sasīma  (Brandes, wrongly, sasama), I.e.  ‚‚those  who are not subject to those 
claiming  the king's property, are  three  ‘bosses’ for each  kind  of crafts and  trade  in the 
. whole freehold". The­ point is  that  crafts and  trade  were not subject to taxation 
by the  king  in free territories. If this principle was, however, carried through without 
restriction^,  the consequence  would  he that  craftsmen and  traders  would  leave the 
ordinary  villages to establish^ themselves  within  the bounds of free territories, where 
they could  exercise their occupations without duties. In order t^  avoid  that  this should 
happen, the rights of craftsmen and  traders  are  limited  in several ways. The most 
important restriction is the  fixation  of the numbers of craftsmen and  traders  allowed 
. to exercise their activities on the free territories (usually,  three  independent 'bosses' 
of each craft being admitted  .within  .the boundaries).  . Another restriction is  that  the 
duties are not completely abolished; the inscriptions  from  Eastern Java often mention 
detailed  regulations by adding, for instance,  that  the amount of taxes normally due to 
the king's servants is  divided  into  three  portions and one third goes to  ‚‚those  claiming 
the king's property", whereas the remaining amount goes to the temple and its guardians 
(cI. especially Stutterheim,  T.B.G.,  65, 1925, pp. 274 sqq.). 
'...) Tuhān  and juru seem to have exactly the same meaning in  these  lists.  Also  tuhān 
and tuha  occur side by side. 
^4) To be more precise, the  nāyakas  (together  with  pratyayas, patihs, wahutas and some­
times others, too) are usually. mentioned just before  these  lists.  A common formula 
is: tan  katamāna  dening  patiḥ  ^vahuta  rāma nāyaka  pratyaya samgat  ṅuniwaiḥ  sa¬
prakāra  ning  maṅilala  drabya haji, „not to be trod upon by the patihs, ^vahutas, 
village  elders,  nāyakas, pratyayas,^Pamĕgĕts,  and,  still  less, by all kinds of people 
claiming  the king's property" (cf., e.g.,  O.J.O.,  XXXVIII.  front part, lines 14 and 
15 ; we corrected a few minor lapses in the transcription by Brandes) ; another ex­
pression  is tan  parabyāpāra  ,,not to be interfered  with’’  (cI.  Stutterheim,  art. cit., p. 
234.  line  4 of plate Ib). 


--- [Page 238] ---
— 22^ — 
especially  forbidden to interfere  with  the affairs of free­holds 65). Pro­
bably,  they were some  local  chiefs managing the affairs of  greater  lords; they 
might then be compared  with  the bĕkĕls  in later times 66). At  present,  it 
would  not, however, be possible to define the function of a nayaka  with 
greater  detail ; it is not known, for instance, what the difference between a 
nāyaka  and a pratyaya is  6 •) ; also the patihs and  u)ahutas  may often have 
had similar functions. In spite of such uncertainty,  there  does  not seem to be 
any reasonable doubt about the  status  of these  people as a group • all the 
tities mentioned above  appear  to denote  different kinds of administrators 
acting  in behalf of high­class persons. 
Of the three  other  tuhāns,  those  of the  u^adtoā  rarai, kalula and manapal 
respectively,  only the last item  presents  no real  difficulty.  l^anapal, probably 
an orthography for  manapĕl,  is a derivative from  tapĕl,  „image,  mask’’  ; 
7nanapal  wrould  therefore mean  „those  who make images  etc.’’  68) and the 
tuhān  n^ng manapal  would  probably be a  chief  or a surveyor of sculptors etc. 
The meaning of the other two terms,  u^adu^ā  rarai and kalula, is obscure. 
The literal  meanings ‚,groups of  children’’  and ,,servants’’ do not bring us 
very  far; if the explanation suggested for manapal is correct,  there  are 
reasons  to suppose  that  also  tvadwā  rarai and kalula are connected  with 
crafts. The former might be connected  ^with  some handicraft frequently 
exercised by children, whereas the latrer might  denote  potters  (?) ^ 9). 
^) Perhaps the most interesting locus  with  reference to the function of nay.akas in Old 
Javanese society is the Barahudur copper­plate dated 9o6 A.D., published by  Bosch, 
C^ddh.  versI., 1917, p.  SS;  cf. Krom,  Geschiedenis^,  p. 186. In more recent thnes, 
the plate ­vas discussed and translated by H. Bh. Sarkar, IG.I.S., VI (1939), pp. 
124­130.  Sark^r's interpretation of the te­.t as a whole is the correct one:  „The  in­
scription  records a difference of  opinion  between the  rāmant^s  of Palĕpangan  and the 
nayaka, viz., bhagawanta Jyotisa" (ibid., p. 124). The difference of opinion concerned 
the amount of taxes (of different kinds). The  village  eiders, considering the amount 
^oo high,  applied to the  rakryān  Mapatih  and by order of the latter, the grounds 
were re­estimated  with  the result  that  the taxes were lowered.  From  the  high  title of 
the nāyaka  (Bhagawanta is derived  from  Sanskrit bha^avant), we may conclude  that 
the nāyakas  were by no means always lower­class people; their position may have 
been in relation  with  the authorities in whose name they acted. 
00) CI.^Van  Vollenhoven,  Het  adatrecht van  Nederlandsch­1ndiĕ,  II (reprint in 1925), pp. 
660 and passim. 
‘,. 1n the formulae such as those quoted in  note  64 above, the  nāyakas  are almost 
always  mentioned together  with  pratyayas. We may render the latter term by „men 
of confidence’’,  but that  gives  only  a slight indication as to their function. We adopted 
the interpretation by  Coedés  in Pras. 1ndon., I (1950), p. 93, according to  which 
the pratyayas  would  be connected  with  the administration of property of deceased 
people (in behalf of minor heirs or of the  king?);  in that  case, the  principal  diffe­
rence between  nāyakas  and pratyayas  would  consist in the former administrating  living 
people's property and the latter taking care of the not yet inherited dead persons' 
estates.  In this function, they  could  claim  taxes etc. in a  similar  way as the  nāyakas. 
08y CI. the detailed references to be mentioned in note 171 below. 
60), CI. note 170 below (kalula) and  note  169  (wadwā  rarai).  The group of people 
denoted by  tuhān  (or ^uha or  juru)  followed  by a further definition  will  be discussed 
separately. 


--- [Page 239] ---
— 2^— 
After  these  authorities, representatives and lower servants,  there  begins 
a completely different portion of the text in b 16 (a 17);  from  hereto 
the end, a  great  number of representatives are enumerated, but represen­
tatives not of authorities but of  villages.  The enumeration is archaic if 
it is compared  with  the lists given in later inscriptions  from  the reign of 
Kayuwam  on. In the  1atter  eases,  we find  more or 1ess systematic accounts 
of the  village  eiders in the village(s)  which  is (are) to become free and 
of the­ representatives of neighbouring villages who act as witnesses. Here, 
however^ no such distinction is made; the foundation  village,  Tu1ang Air, 
is nothing. but one of the villages represented, although its importance is 
clearly  marked by the relatively very  great  number of witnesses. 
Before  the ordinary  villages,  some important centres, the residences 
of authorities designated by the terms patih and .wahuta are mentioned 
(b 16 to 19), viz.  Kayumwuṅan  (a patih  with  his spokesman, paru)uu)us), 
Mantyasih  (idem),  Lwapaṇḍak  (a patih), Petir 76) (a u)ahuta  with  two clerks), 
and Paṇḍakyan  (a u^ahuta  with  two assistants). The toponymies  here  ment­
ioned  occur in other  Keḍu  inscriptions, too; they should be considered 
important centres, although one  could  only  have a vague idea about the 
reason of their importance 71). 
The village  where the foundation takes place, Tulang  Air,  is represented 
by (probably)  ­ twenty people 7­^); the latter are immediately  followed  by 
about thirty 72) Representatives of other  villages.  If the importance of the 
foundation  is in some relation  with  the number of villages represented, it 
is obvious  that^,the  foundation was an important one — a point  which  is 
in a striking  contrast to the  smallness  of the temple,  Tjaṇḍi  Perot, in the 
immediate neighbourhood of  which  the two inscriptions were discovered ' 3). 
Other titles such as  tuhān  ning lampuran, usually mentioned in  these  lists,  do not 
occur  here. 
7‘)) Spelt patir. Since other texts  spell  the name ptir (cf. Pras.  Indon.,  I. 1950/ p. 154), 
the a in the first syllable probably  represents  an ĕ. A village  named  Pĕtir–rĕdjo  still 
occurs in the innnediate neighbourhood of  Tjaṇḍi  Perot; cI. the Topographical Map, 
No. 46[XL  D. 
71) References to the occurrence of  these  names are given in Pras.  Indon.,  I (1950). pp. 
152­155.  Mantyasih was probably situated at about a mile's distance to the  North 
of the  present  village  Kĕḍu  (ibid., p. 158). — The importance of the centres  men­
tioned  might  he connected  with  their geographical situation,  which  is of a considerable 
strategic interest. The present regency  Tĕmaṅgung  dominates the communications 
between  the fertile plains in the South of Central Java and hoth the coast and the 
Dieng  plateau.  Especially  the  great  Kĕḍu  inscription of  Balitung,  dated 907 A.D., 
gives  a hint to the importance of this region. There have certainly been other factors, 
too, but they are more  difficult  to be ascertained. We especially suggest the  possibility 
of historical factors; there is some reason to suppose that there was a dynastic,  Ç:aiva¬
centre in these regions during the  ­Çailendra  domination in Southern Central Java; 
the Gaṇḍasuli  inscription  (Pras.^  Indon.,  I. No. IV) might give a hint in this direction. 
72y Owing  to numerous  small  lacunae in the transcription, the exact numbers  . cannof 
be ascertained. 
7^ Krom,  Inleiding  2, I, pp. 208 sqq. Another  small  temple,  Tjaṇḍi  Pringapus  is situated 


--- [Page 240] ---
— 230 — 
The functions of the representatives are always added.  Among 
the representatives of Tulang Air, we  find  well­known (or  rather  : often 
mentioned) indications such as  rāma  (village elder), kalima  („fifth",  but the 
function  denoted by this expression is unknown) 74) ^ paru^uwn^ (spokesman)  , 
u^ariga  (village astrologist)  , tuha  banua (literally : village elder, but the term 
is always distinguished from  rāma;  the  tuha  banua constitute a  separate 
group among the  rāmas)  75), tuhdlas  (surveyor of the woods) 76), and 
mapĕkan  (I.e.  mapĕkĕn,  surveyor of the market). Other functions are less 
frequently  found  in inscriptions. We  here  find  juru limus,  „surveyor  of fine 
metal  work’’  (?) 77); silijuru  seems  to be a compound of silih and juru, 
such  compounds are unusual, but not without parallels 78). The meaning 
would  be „acting  juru’’, i.e. somebody replacing the regular  jurn.  Jurukunci 
gives no  difficulty  ; it was undoubtedly a sort of guardian. 
A few  terms  are connected  with  irrigation. Hulair, a contraction of 
hulu  a^r was probably charged  with  the distribution of the water supply 
over the rice­fields 79). I^atamtoak  (b 23), derived from  tamwak  (tambak)  , 
„dam”  (in a river),  would  denote  the village elder charged  with  the super­
vision  of a larger water work  ’30). The meaning of mula (b 23) in this context 
is not clear. 
Among  the other  terms  occurring in the text, we  note  hulu  tangṅaḥ 
(I.e. tĕṅah)  81)^ ^ehief of the centre’’, whatever  that  means  82)^ and especially 
the marhyang ^ng prasada ing kaban^agan (b 34  8 3)^ ,,the priest  (?)  8­) ­tn the 
at only  a hundred meter's distance;  Krom  rightly  considers the  possibility  that  our 
text should he referred to the latter temple instead of to  Tjaṇḍi  Perot (op. cit., I, 
p. 210). 
74) One might, for instance, suppose  that  the  original  number of the ramas was four, 
but that  a fifth  elder might be added to this number for a special purpose. 
7^) These  tuha  wanua should probably be compared  with  the marakaki (synonyms : 
mĕrkaki,  pantjakaki, fuwa­tu^.a, kamituwa, winituwa, pinituwa, wong tuwa, tuwa  désa) 
in the later Javanese  village  organization; cI. van  vollenhoven,  op. cit., pp. 527 sqq. 
They  are possessors of grounds in the  village,  who transferred their rights to their 
heirs but played an important role in the  village,  where they were consulted in  difficult 
questions; having no more ground property, they  could  be considered disinterested. 
'6) A contraction of  tuha  alas; cf.  infra,  hulair, a contraction of hulu air. 
7^) CI. Stuttetheim,  T.B.G.,  LXv  (1925),  p. 248, and the references given there. 
7s) CI. the examples m van  der  Tuuk's  Dictionary,  III p. 239, sv. silih III. 
7' 0) For modern equivalents, cI. van  vollenhoven,  op. cit., p. 534. 
80) For  tambak,  cI. the references infra No. XI. 
8:.) For this orthography, cI. supra, p. 214. 
82) We do not think a connection  with  taṅah  rumah (supra, p. 29,  note  39 to the 
translation)  likely.  Some  village  functions were, however, distinguished into the centre 
and the four main directions; cf. such distinctions for  gusti,  among whom  there  is 
a gusti  tĕṅah  in the second Randusari  inscription,  line  5, edition by Stutterheim in 
1nscr.  Ned.­fndiĕ,  I (194o),  p. 29 and p. 32. 
83) Read:  prāsāda  ing  kabanyāgān  ; the latter term is derived  from  Sanskrit  banyāga 
with the  affixes  ka­ and ­an. 
8-) The  exact  meaning of marhyang is doubtful, although its derivation  from  hyang, 


--- [Page 241] ---
— 231 — 
temple of the merchant  guild’’  ; one concludes  that  there  must have been an 
establishment of merchants, who had their own temple, in the neighbourhood. 
The text  does  not make it clear whether  these  merchants were Javanese 
or foreign ; the use of the term kabanyagan, pointing to a  separate  group 
of merchants,  suggests  the latter  possibility  ; the term reminds one of the 
foreign  merchants  quarters  known from  rather  ancient times 85). 
A great  number of villages are mentioned in the text. ^uite a few 
of these  are known from other inscriptions, viz. Parang,  Kakalyan,  Tulang 
Air, Kayumwuṅan, Kaṇḍaṅan,  Samalagi,  Muṅgu,  Muṅgu­antan, Wunha  and 
Sulangkuning  86) . 
Transcription  87) 
a 
1. çr188) 
2. swasti  . çakawarṣātīta 
3. 772  āṣāḍamāsa  tithi  dwitiyā  . 
„divinity",  with  the prefix mar­ is clear; cI. also the term  parhyaṅan  to denote  a 
sanctuary. In an inscription dated S42  A.D.,  published in Pras.  1ndon.,  I (1950), pp. 
79­95,  somebody is denoted by marhyang  sthāpaka  (line 9/10); cI. op. cit., p. 94, 
where it is noted  that  the marhyangs are sometimes connected  with  different directions 
(just as the  gustis  sometimes are; cf.  note  S2 above). In any case, the marhyangs 
have some temple functions, although their special activities are unknown. 
8-) A regular  Tamil  guild  is known to have existed at Bams, Sumatra; cf.  K.A.  Nilakanta 
Sastri,  A T.—dl  merchant­guild in Sumatra, T.H.C., 72 (1932), pp. 314­27. Another 
Tamil  establishment existed in  Takuapa  on the West coast of the  Malay  peninsu­a 
in the 9th century  A.D.;  Nilakanta Sastri (Journ.  Mal. Br.  R.A.S.,  XXII.  1949, P1. 1‚ 
pp. 25­30'­ concludes (art. cit., p. 30)  that  there  must have  been  a good number of 
Tamils  including soldiers and merchants in this time, the latter  dependent  on the 
Manikkiraman,  a term derived from Sanskrit  vaṇiggrāma,  a merchant  guild  frequently 
mentioned in South Indian inscriptions 
^6) E.g., Wunha in the inscription mentioned in  note  abo^e  (ct. Pras.  1ndon.,  I‚ 195o, 
p. 155); references to  Kayumwuṅan  are given ibid., pp. 152 sq.; Tulang Air, Samalagi 
and Sulangkuning occur in the  Kĕḍu  inscription (ibid., p. 156);  K­–­kalyan  in the 
Gaṇḍasuli  inscription (ibid., p. 59). A village called Parang occurs in  K.O.,  I, Plate s, 
line s. A  Muṅgu­antan  is mentioned in  O.J.O.,  XVIII,  lines 3 and 6; it might have 
been a  „daughter  village’’  [antan is undoubtedly a 'pseudo­krama’ form of ari,  „younger 
brother or sister’; cf. Poerbatjaraka in T.B.C., 72 (1932), pp. 192 sqq.; it is curious 
that in C.J.C.  XVIII  the title of the founder is (Pamgat)  Muṅgu];  Kaṇḍaṅan  is 
mentioned in the Karangténah inscription (line 50; cI. Pras.  1ndon.,  I, p. 41). Some 
of these  villages  could  be localised (cf. the scheme, op. cit., p. 159). A few  names 
may be found back on  modern  maps, e.g.  Kaṇḍaṅan  to the north of  Tĕmaṅgung  (Top, 
map  47/XL  C; cI. Rapp.  Oudh.  Dienst,  1914­15, p. 283, No. 921). 
^7) Although a and b are identical in their essentials, a complete transcription is prefe­
rable, especially in  view  of the numerous slight differences in spelling and  other 
details. 
88) 'rbi^  beginning  does  not occur in b. As a rule, the differences between the two 
recensions are referred to in the  notes  to the transcription of b,  which  gives the more 
complete text. 


--- [Page 242] ---
— 232 — 
4. suklapakṣa 8^) . tu . pa . ā . wāra  hana ryy=umaḥnya ta-
5. tkāla  rakai  patapān  pu manukū  manusuk  sīma  i tulang  air. ra-
6. tu tatkāla  rakai pikatan ^).  patiḥ  rakai wka pu puluwatu  . sirikan 
pu sarwwa  . 
7. tiruan pu mahantara  . maṅuhuri pu landuta  . halaran pu maddhawa  . 
palarhyang  pu 
8. wairawa  . wlaḥhan pu  tugū  . dalinan=pu  manū  . pangkur=pu agra  . 
tawān=pu  mulung  . tirip=pu ga-
9. da . 1ampi pu mang1akṣa  . wadihati pu manawan  . makudur=pu raja  . 
anung maṅase i  patapā-
0. n mllu  sikhalān  rua pu bhadra  . pu tumak  . ḍatar=pu arka  wadwā 
rakarayān=mapatiḥ  mllu 
1. sang  ḍakalang  . i sirikan  sang  garawuy  . i tiruan  sang  talaga  . i maṅuhuri 
sang  katu-
2. ḍaing  . i halaran  sang  jīwaṇa  . i palarhyang  sang  ḍamiliḥhan  . i wlaḥhan 
sang  ḍakukap  . i dali-
3. nan sang  hretan  . i paṅkur  sang  ḍakampak  . i tawān  sang ḍawamlar  . 
i tirip  sang 
4. kamalagyan  . i lampi sang damalung  . wahuta makudur sang ka¬
tuwuḥhan  . sang ḍaragang wadwā raka-
5. rayān patapān tatkāla  taṇḍa‛’ 1) si maṇḍi  tuhān=ning kanayakān  rua 
si gandha si da– 
6. mo . parwwuwus si mangdana  . tuhān=ning wadwā  rarai si  çrīdhara  . 
tuhān=ning  kalula  si jaha  . tuhān=ning  ma­
7. napal si  uliḥhan  . patiḥ  wanua kayumwuṅan si  jāntan^ 2) mantyāsiḥ 
si jakkhāra  parwuwus­
8. nya punta  pramāna  si gaṇḍaḥ punta sḍang si murana lwapaṇḍak si 
mandtha wahuta pati­
9. r si hayu  . jurunya si saisa  . rāmanya  si rutung  . paṇḍakyan si  sanā  . 
jurunya  si maring 
0. kalima  si nihān^ 3). i tulang  air juru  limus  si balubu  rāma  si tārawana 
kalima 
1. ..... 94) 
h 
1. //  swasti  çakawarṣātīta 
2. 772  āsādhamāsa  ^') tithi  dwitīya 
^) read  : çuklapakṣa. 
^) For the  word  separation, cf. the Introduction. 
) Inscription  b (line 15) reads matanda here. 
­) The reading does not seem  doubtful;  h, however, reads dhantan (line 17). 
^) Inscription  b (line  19) reads nahan here. 
^) From  iine  21 on,  only  some  isolated  words  could  be deciphered ; as far as  these  few 
fragments  permit us to judge, the text seems to agree  with  that  of inscription  b. 
.) read:  āsādhamāsa;  cf.  also  dwitīya  instead of  dv^itīyā  in this same line and, in  line 


--- [Page 243] ---
— 233 — 
3. suklapakṣa  . tu . pa .  ā . wāra  hana ryy=umaḥnya ^ 36) tatkā­
4. la rakai  patapān  pu manukū  manusuk=ṣema 97) I ttilang ai­
5. r ratu  tatkāla  rakai pikatan  . patiḥ rakai wka pu puluwatu  . 
6. sirikan  pu sarwwa  . tiruan pu mantara  . maṅahuri ^ 8) Tnanduta  . 
halaran pu 
7. madhāwa  "). palarhyang pu wairawa  . wlaḥhan pu tuṅgū  . dalinan pu 
manū  . pangkur pu a– 
8. gra 1°°). tawān  pu mulung. tirip pu  gadā  . langpi pu manglakṣa 1°1). 
wadihati  pu manawan  . maku­
9. dur pu  gadā  . anung maṅaso i  patapān  milu  sikhalān  1°2) karua pu 
bhadra pu tuma­
10. k ḍatar pu aku  wadwā rakarayān  mapatiḥ  nlilu  sang  ḍakalang ­° 3). 
i sirikan  sang  garawuy l°4) i <ti­>  1°5) 
11. ruan  sang  talaga i maṅuhuri  sang  katuḍaing i halaran  sang  jiwana i 
palarhyang  sang  ḍa­
12. miliḥhan  i wlaḥhan  sāng  ḍakukap i dalinan  sang  hretan i pangkur  sang 
ḍakampa­
13. k i° 6) i tawān  sang  ḍawamlar  1°7) I tirip  sang  kamalagyan i lampi  sang 
damalung 1°^) wahu­
3, sukīapakṣa  instead of  çuklapakṣa.  — The third figure of the  date  was read 5 by 
Brandes in  O. J. O., No. VI. The correct reading was, however, given hy Damais in 
T. B.C., 83 (1949), p. 18. 
96) It is not at all certain whether  there  is an r above the ya; this seems, however,  likely 
in view  of the ya  which  was doubled. 
97) Read  manusuk  — sīma  ; the e might he due to a confusion  with  ksema. 
.,. In a 7  : maṅuhuri;  cI. also the  same  spelling of the  name  in b 11. The spelling 
manahuri,  which  we  find  in b 6, is probably due to a lapse. The word undoubtedly 
corresponds to  manghūri  in numerous other records. 
.^ 9) Brandes: manawang. We see in the second aksara of this line a dh.­ to  which  a daṇḍa 
is attached; a detail  which  is conclusive in our opinion is the fact  that  the two first 
verticals  are clearly closed at the bottom. The reading of a 7 is maddha^a,  which  is 
only  an orthographic variant. 
100) VVe  see unambiguous  traces  of the  initial  a, omitted by Br^ndes, at the end of line 7. 
101) Brandes  : lang  pisumanglakṣa.  Langpi is only a different spelling of lampi^ the  name 
occurring in a 9, a 14 and b 13. We think  that  the  anusvāra  (expressed by ­ng in our 
transcript of Old Javanese records) is used to  denote  the homorganic nasal (as is 
usual in inscriptions from India), not the guttural. The comparison makes it clear 
that the  word  separation adopted by Brandes is not correct. In addition, the syllable 
which  follows  pi is undoubtedly pu, not su. 
102) Brandes: si  lalān.  The  kha‚  though resembling a la,  seems  perfectly clear. Sikhaian 
is a title known from other inscriptions (cf.  note  162 to the Translation). 
103) Brandes:  sang  pu kalang (the second word printed in  italics). 
10­) The patén  (virāma)  is written below instead of above the ya; cI. the Introduction, 
supra, p. 212. 
10^) syllable  ti was already added by Brandes. 
106) Hr^ndes  –t, which  would  not be impossible. 
107) ^randes' reading dagumlar looks less  strange  than dawamlar in our transcript; the 
latter reading  agrees,  however,  better  with  the  traces  visible  in the stone. 
ros) P^^bly  : damulung; Brandes had transcribed:  sang  da ma(  ng)yung. 


--- [Page 244] ---
­.– 234 — 
14. ta makudur sang katuwuḥhan sang ḍaragang  wadwā rakarayān patapān 
tatkā­
15. Ia mangtaṇḍa  ^ 9) si maṇḍi  tuhān=ning  nayaka  rua si  bhantu  si damo 
parwwuwus  si mangdana  tuhān=ning 
16. wadwā  rarai si  çrīdhara tuhān=ning  kalula  si niha tuhān=ning manapal 
sy=ulihan  . patiḥ 11°) wa­
17. nua kayumwuṅan  si dhantan mantyasiḥ  si jakkhara  111) parwuwusnya 
punta  pramāṇa  si gandaḥ punta 112). 
18. sḍang  ^ 3) si  muranā  114) lwapaṇḍak  si mandiha wahuta patir  si 11^) 
hayu  jurunya  si saisa 
19. rama  si rutung  paṇḍakyan  si sana  jurunya  si maring  116) kalima  si 
nshan  i tulang  air ju­
20. ru limus  si balubung rama  si tarawaṇa  kalima  si jana  silijuru  117) si 
rgga  11^) parwuwus  si pasa­
21. t wariga  si ṅcung  119) i tulang  air  juru  kuṅci  si sayut rama  si kesawa 
kalima  si 
22. bhānu  12°) silijuru  si kala parwuwus  si wuri wariga  si dhasa tuha banua 
si baṅcung  si nana  121) 
23. ........  1­­)  sang  si warā  si ḍaṇḍa  . . ra 123) si jantra hulair  si layar 
matamwak  si tamuy mula  124) 
109) Perhaps  Brandes’  reading  mataṇḍa  should  he  preferred;  the  anusvāra  is very 
undistinct. 
110) The word patih, cleary  visible  on the  stone,  was  probably overlooked  by  Brandes. 
Hi) Brandes:  mi  rkkha (sic^).  The  reading given  in our  transcript  seems  certain.  The 
name,  which  is more often found  in Javanese inscriptions,  is neither Sanskrit  nor 
Old Javanese.  Both  the  spelling  .md the  trisyllabic form make  the  impression  of 
being  non­Indonesian.  It looks  like  Prakrit  or Pali  (a corrupt form corresponding  to 
a Sanskrit  bījāksa^a  or  vidyākṣara  with  the  loss  of the  first syllah1e?). 
11 2) Brandes: gandha.  Both  the  pasaṅan  da (not dha) and the  visarga  are  clear. 
11 3) Brandes:  sthang;  the da  seems  clear. 
114) Brandes: muraba­ (without word separation from  the  following).  The  name  muranā 
(written  by a  denta1  nasal)  is strange  again. 
11-) This word  is omitted  in the  transcription  by  Brandes. 
11 6) Brandes  : masi,  which  is not  correct. 
117) Hrar1des  adopted  a different word  separation  and  took  the  syllables sili  to belong 
to the  name  which  precedes.  The  term silijuru occurs  again  in line  22; as to its 
meaning,  cf. note  179  below. 
1^8) .si^; tb^  strange  orthography  may  represent  réga  in which  the  pĕpĕt  was  left out; 
since  the  consonant  then  followed  the r, it was  doubled. 
ll 9) This spelling  may  indicate  ĕñcung.  There exists  no aksara  to express  an  initial  ĕ in 
Old Javanese. 
l­­ 0) Brandes:  ganung,  which  is not  exact.  For  sili^,  cf.  note  117  above. 
121) This name  is omitted  in the  transcription  by  Brandes. 
122) Three, possibly four,  aksaras  have completely disappeared from  the  stone.  The  only 
detail  still  visible  is the  anusvāra  mark above  the  last aksara  in the  lacuna.  Sang 
cannot  be the  well­known article here,  but is the end of a  name  (....ngsang^). 
123) There may  be a  vowel  mark  for ­u  under  the ra. The  preceding syllable,  which  is 
seriously  damaged, might  be ju. The  correct reading  is prohably juru. 
124) ^rhis  word  is omitted  in the  transcription  by  Brandes. 


--- [Page 245] ---
— 235 — 
24. si  taguḥ  paḍahi  manggala  si manūt  mapakan  si mulyang  tuhalas  sy= 
awit  hulu 
25. tangṅaḥ  125) si  dawa  macaru  126) si  naran  i 27) jumputt  ing 128) ^-i 
maṇḍaki 12^) si niru 13°) ri kuñci si  siga  . ing 
26. prasinang  ing limus  131) si  krahu  i parang  132) si sanā ing  paṇing  si 
tawang  ing kakalyan  133) si mi-
27. liḥ ing  tiwrus  134) si haryyang  135) anak  ring  sīma ing 136) tulang  air  137) 
ing krodha  138) si  dhura  ing air=pa-
28. pi si  pagar  si paṅa ing  kakar  si paḍar  ing limus  watu  139) si  sañjanā 
ing talang  ai-
29. r 14^) si  malini  ing manāha si  guwasang  i kayu...u..m=si.....  ..........  141) 
ing kaṇḍaṅan si  11111-
125) aksara ṅa  is usually doubled by putting an  anusvāra  on the top of the preceding 
aksara; one might therefore transcribe  taṅṅah.  The double  consonant  often  serves to 
indicate the pronunciation as a  pĕpĕr  of the a  which  precedes. Then,  tangṅaḥ,  which 
looks  rather  strange,  is nothing but a particular method of expressing the  pĕpĕt  sound 
without making use of the  separate  vowel  sign. 
126) ^rn^ ca‚ omitted by Brandes, is clear on the stone. 
1­­7^ i^ certain  that  there  is another  aksara after the ra, to  which  a virāma  is attached; 
the aksara  itself  is however undistinct; its lower  part  resembles  that  of the na. 
:l­­8) Brandes: :i; the  anusvāra  is certain. 
129) Brandes:  çrī maṇḍakini.  The  stone  gives no  trace  of ni. Brandes probably recognized 
the well­known  name  of the  Gaṅgā,  hut it should have been spelt by dentals 
(Mandākinī). 
130) Brandes read jurl,  which  he corrected to juru. 
131) Brandes:  limut.  The last aksara is clearly a sa  with  virāma.  The  anusvāra  of prasiñang 
is very Uncertain. 
13­) Brandes: sarang,  which  is not correct. 
133) Brandes: wrongly transcribed kakabyan. The la is certain. 
134) Brandes: tiwran. The suku helow the wra is perfectly clear; the last aksara is un­
doubtedly a sa  with  virāma. 
1­­^) Brandes: haysima,  which  is impossible. Probably, Brandes mistook the ya (with a 
pasaṅan  ya helow and an r above, for the ligature ysi. No  traces  of a ma are  visible. 
136) Thsee words were left  open  hy Brandes. Their reading is not doubtful. 
137) The ai has almost disappeared from the stone; its lower  part,  however,  enables  us 
to identify it. 
138) Tne word krodha was left  open  by Brandes. 
139) Here,  again,  Brandes transcribed  limut  instead of limus. 
I­ 0) One would be inclined to correct tulang air, but this is uncertain. Cf.  note  197 below. 
141) In line 29­34,  there  are more or less considerable portions in the middle of the stone, 
where hardly any  traces  of aksaras  are recognizable. The lacunae are however less  great 
than  it would  appear  from the transcription by Brandes. The beginning and the end 
of the lines are  well  preserved and sometimes a few  aksaras  may be identified  within 
the damaged  part.  ­— In line 29, we may recognize the  name  Kayumwunan in the 
damaged portion. The reading  kayu  is certain; of the next aksara only the  suku  can 
be identified; since its place is lower than usual, we conclude  that  there  are two 
aksaras  one above the other,  which  we indicated in the transcript by two points. The 
following  aksara has completely disappeared, but the next one could be identified 
as a na  with  virāma. 


--- [Page 246] ---
— 236 — 
0. lya  ...wus  14^) hyang tiru...  ^) ing  prasāda  si wanasi  juru  ............ 
........  kalima  si 
1. siga parwuwus sang hada juru ing  . .la ...........  walaḥhan  si ..........  144) 
juru ing samala­
2. gi si tala  .................•....................•.......................  juru  i muṅgu  si 
pangsat 
3. kalima  si jati juru ing  wunha  si .................................  rama si napal 
mapakan ing 
4. muṅgu  antan si  laya  .....................  hāt  marhyang 1^) ing  prasāda  ing 
kabanyagān  si ka­
5. ṇḍi hulu  wras 146) si marowang juru ing  air=pyal  147) si huwus rama 
si rutus  148) juru ing ai­
6. r=hulu  si milar  rama si  taṅguḥ  juru ing  sulangkuning  si 14^) bantal 
i masalaficang 15°) 
7. ........  kalang  i lu.u...  si ........  // (end) 
Translation  151) 
[1] Hall!  In the  evolved  Çaka  year 772, [2] in the month  Aṣāḍha, 
he second lunar day [3] of the bright  half  of the month, on the weekdays 
bungle,  Paing  and Sunday  1^2), while  the ..... (?) is in its home (?) 1^3). On  that 
42) The first  syllable  of this  word  consists of a ligature;  there  might be a  vowel  mark 
to indicate ­e before the ligature. We have no idea about the  word  which  could  have 
been here. 
13) Possibly:  tiruan; the last aksara  seems  to be provided  with  a virāma 
^4) Possibly,  the  village  name tulang  :::Ir  was written after the words juru ing. We  then 
expect a name  followed  by ing;  then  follows  the  word  walaḥhan  and, after  that,  again 
a name preceded by si. such a restitution, though not  unlikely,  remains however 
conjectural. 
^) Brandes:  matya.  The reading marhyang is certain. The  word  kabanyagān,  a  little 
further in this  line,  is wrongly spelt by a dental n. 
­0) Brandes: ...duwas. Our reading is not doubtful. 
17) Brandes: aipyal. The layar above pya is distinct. 
­8) Brandes:  nutus.  Since the suku, if attached to the  aksara  ra, is not put right under 
the ra (presumably in order to  avoid  the  syllable  ru being expressed as a single  long 
vertical),  but a  little  to the right, it is easily confounded  with  nu. 
.0) Brandes: salangkung ni. The  village  name Sulangkuning,  which  is known  from  other 
inscriptions,  too (cI. Pras. 1ndon., I. 1950, p. 159), is  clearly  visible  here. 
'0) Perhaps:  mamalañcang,  which  looks  slightly  more acceptable as a  village  name. 
^l) Only  inscription  b, which  gives the more complete text, is translated here. 
^­) The  date  corresponds to the 15th of June, 850 A.D. (Damais,  B.E.F.E.O.,  XLvI, 
Fasc.  1, 1952, pp. 30 sq.). Tungle is the first day of the six days' week,  Paing  the 
first of the  five  days' week. 
­.3) The expression hana  ryy=umaḥnya,  placed at the end of the  date,  certainly refers 
to an astronomical detail, perhaps to the place of the sun. The expression  could  be 
used for the solstices, where the sun is supposed to remain for some days before 
changing  its course. Stutterheim  (^r.B.G.,  74, 1943, p. 86) also translates  „(de zon) 
in zijn huis zijnde"  (the sun being in its home), hut adds no explanation as to the 


--- [Page 247] ---
— 237 — 
date,  [4] the  Rakai  Patapān  (named) Pu  Manukū  founds a free­hold 154) 
in (the village) Tulang Air 155). 
[5] The  king  at that  time is the  Rakai  Pikatan  : the patih 156) is the 
Rakai  Weka  (named)  Pu Puluwatu ; [6] the  Sirikan  : Pu Sarwa, the Tiruan : 
Pu Mantara l57); the  Maṅahuri  15^): Pu Manduta ; the Halaran: Pu [7] 
Madhāwa  15^); the  Palarhyang:  Fu Wairawa ; the Welahan  : Pu  Tuṅgū  ; 
the Dalinan  : Fu  Manū  i 5.3) ; the Pangkur  : Pu [8]  Agra  ; the  Tawān  : Pu 
Mulung  ; the Tirip  : Pu Gada ;  the Lampi  : Pu  Manglakṣa  ; the Wadihati : 
Pu Manawan;  the Maku[9]dur: Pu  Raja 16°). 
Those who are  dependent  on Patapān,  joining (the ceremonies?) 1°1), 
meaning of  these  words. The  date  of the Perot inscription comes  rather  close to the 
date  of the summer solstice. By  means  of the tables given by Van  Wijk  in Acta 
Orient., II. (1942), pp. 247 sqq. (Tables VI and VII), the beginning of the Kar¬
kasaṃkrānti  in the year K.Y. evolved 3951 is dated 50,574 + 123,838 = 174,412, 
i.e. the  afternoon  of June  23, i.e. slightly more  than  a week after the  date  of our 
text. For the Argapura inscription, where the  same  expression occurs, the distance 
is considerahly  greater.  We have no certainty about the  date  of the inscription of 
Krapyak  (Stutterheim,  loc.  cit.). The meaning of the words hana  ryy=umaḥnya 
therefore  still  remains obscure. 
1^­) CI.  note  39 above. 
­.­’­) name  perhaps  means  „Bone  Water’’. 
1­^) It is evident  that  patih  denotes  a very high function here, probably the  same  as in 
later times. In  that  meaning, the older inscriptions almost always use  Rakarayān 
Mapatih  (rakryān  mapatīḥ);  cI. the Introduction. 
1­7) Inscription a  reads  Mahantara. Unless the aksara ha was omitted in b,  which  does 
not seem probable, the comparison between the two versions  suggests  that  the h 
became evanescent between two as as early as the 9th century A.D. 
l­8) The title probably corresponds to Manghuri in later records. 
1­­.)) For the orthographies of  these  names, cf. the Introduction. 
l6^) For the dignitaries and their titles, cI. the Introduction. 
1.61) Vve think  that  the meaning of  .mi.lu,  „joining",  is not  that  the three  people mentioned 
join the authorities, who are on too high a level  te assist at the inauguration ceremo¬
nies,  but that they  jein  those executing these ceremonies. We mean that the people 
mentioned in the lists  which  follow  aAe  those  who actually go to the village Tulang Air 
on the inauguration day to  represent  the  Rakai  Patapān.  Bosch,  Oudh. Yersf. p. 48, 
called  attention to the elaborate lists given in the  Kĕmbang  Arum  inscription, from 
which  it appears  beyond doubt  that  only the representatives of she authorities were 
present  at the ceremonies; the  statement  by Bosch  implying  that  there  is one ex­
ception to this rule, viz. the Makudur who  would  actually he  present,  is open  to 
doubt; it is undoubtedly based  upon  the­ presumption  that  sang  wahuta  hyang  kudur 
(mentioned in III­a­13) is the  same  person  as the Makudur, named Pu Sambrada 
(mentioned in I­ll/12). The wahuta is, however, a lower function, never mentioned 
in the lists of high authorities; he probably was one of the  assistants  of the Makudur 
mentioned in I­13  (sang  tuhan  ni makudur). The title  sang  makudur  in III­a­14 is 
undoubtedly this  same  assistant  who was mentioned in the preceding  line,  but  with 
an abbreviated title; it  appears  clearly from III­b­5 (the words  sinusuk  sang  wahuta 
hyang  kudur)  that  it is the wahuta  hyang  kudur  (and not the  Pamĕgĕt  mentioned in 
the list  of authorities), who has a function during the ceremonies, probably  that  of 
pronouncing the  sumpah  or çapatha.  — In  view  of the above considerations, we 
think  that  milu  could  be translated by  „(those  who) actually  go’’.  For the translation 
of .m^.ṅa^o,  cI. note  59 to the Introduction. 


--- [Page 248] ---
— 238 ­
are: the two (representatives of)  Sikhalān 162), viz. Pu Bhadra and Pu 
Tuma[10]k  and (the representative of) Datar 163): Pu Aku. 
The servant of the  Rakarayān  164) Mapatih,  joining  (the ceremonies), 
is Sang Dakalang 165), of the  Sirikan:  Sang Garawuy, of the  Ti[ll]ruan 
16­) Sikhalān  occurs as a title in the Argapura inscriptions, too (inscription b, line 5: 
tiruan pu  sapi  sikhalān  pu  lamuñjang);  cf. also the  heginning  of the  Pĕṇḍĕm  inscript­
ion (transcribed by Damais,  T.B.G.,  83, 1949, p. 19):  tatkāla  rake  sikhalān  pu  hāmā 
manusuk  ṣī<ma>.  It is probab1y the name of a p1ace or of an administrative unity 
dependent  on Patapān. 
i63) A village Datar is mentioned in K.O., No. I. PL 1. line 11: anak banua i datar wa¬
fak datar. The same village name occurs in an unpublished inscription in the Dja¬
karta Museum (No. D 35), viz. in line 2:  tatkāla rakarayān  kalangwatu pu  banā 
manusuk  suna  i datar. On account of other place  names  mentioned in the latter text, 
the village  should probably be  localized  in the  Tĕmangung  region. 
10­) ^Vad^vā,  also spelt  waduā  in inscriptions,  denotes  the servants as a group and also 
the army.  In this case, it  appears  from  the context (especially  from  the use of the 
rather honorific  sang  before the names of the  persons  following)  that  those comprised 
by wadwā  are persons  of some rank, probably representatives (parujar or parwuwus). 
Each  authority, to begin  with  the patih, is represented. The  rakarayān  mapatiḥ,  ment­
ioned  in line  1o, is, of course, the same authority as the  patiḥ  in line  5 above; the 
use of the more elaborate title in line 10 is easily explained by the fact  that  a num­
ber of lower patihs (whose  names  are preceded by the  ‘article’  si only) are mentioned 
in lines 16 sqq.; in  line  5, however,  there  would  not be any chance of misunder­
standing. 
163) Some of the names have the honorific prefix da­; for the latter and for  these  in 
general, cf. the Introduction. 
164) The reading of this name is uncertain; cI. note 107 to the transcription. 
l0­) It clearly  appears  from  this  list that  these  two wahutas are of thr^ same rank as the 
representatives mentioned before; they are about in the same relation to the Makudur 
as the other representatives are to the other authorities. The Makudur has two such 
representatives, whereas the  W^dihati  has none. For wahuta, cI. the  passage  in the 
Kemb^ng  Arum  inscription quoted in note 181 above: the wahutas  here  mentioned 
s^em to have the same function as the  sang  ­vahuta hyang  kudur  in the  Kĕmbang 
Arum  inscription. The latter is charged  with  the pronunciation of the imprecation 
formula  (III–a–14:  mamangmang  manumpaḥ  manapatai^ menacing any future  viol­
ators  of the rights of the free territory. The exact meaning of  wahuta,  a term very 
frequently found in inscriptions (cf. also infra, line 14), is obscure; they are sub­
ordinates of higher authorities, hut not necessarily of low rank; just as for the 
parujars, their  rank  prohahly depended  upon  whom they served or represented. We 
note  the same for the patihs. The  original  meaning of the term might he  ‚‚executor 
of orders" (Stutterheim,  T.B.G.,  74, 1934,  note  3 to p. 290, and  1nscr.  Ned.­1nd.,  I, 
1940,  p. 32); this might explain why not only the highest dignitary after the  king, 
but also not very high functionaries such as those mentioned in lines 16 sqq. are 
denoted by patih: the former executes the king's orders, the latter those of  local 
chiefs.  Patihs and wahutas are very often mentioned together and their functions 
were, therefore, probably closely related. There existed several pairs of functions in 
Old Javanese society; other examples are  nāyaka  and pratyaya,  paṅurang  and  kĕring, 
tapahaj:i and airhaji (and numerous other examples especially in the lists of the 
maṅilala  drawya haji). We may consider both patihs and ^vahutas representatives of 
the king  and the higher authorities such a^ rakais and  Pamĕgĕts,  in whose name 
they possessed  civil  cr (^nd)  military  power; they must have  been  all over the coun­


--- [Page 249] ---
^39 — 
Sang Ta1aga, of the  Maṅahuri  : Sang  Katuḍaing,  of the Halaran : Sang 
Jīwana,  of the Palarhyang : Sang Da[l2]milihan, of the Welshan : Sang 
Dakukap,  of the  Dalinan:  Sang Heretan, of the Pangkur: Sang Dakampa[l3]k, 
of the  Tawān  : Sang Dawamlar 164) , of the  Tirip  : Sang Kamalagyan, of 
the Lampi  : Sang Damalung ; the  u^ahu[14]tas  of Makudur 165) are Sang 
Katuwuhan  and Sang Daragang. 
The servants  of the  Rakarayān Patapān  at that  time [15] are : the 
secretary 166) : Si Maṇḍi,  the two chiefs 167) of the nayakas : si Bhantu and 
si Damo, the representative l68). ^I Mangdana, the  chief  of the youthful 
servants  (?) 16^): si  Çrīdhara,  the chief  of the  potters  (?) 17°): Si Ntha, the 
chief  of the sculptors (?) 171): Si  Ulihan. 
try, especially in the more important  centres.  It seems  impossible to go into further 
details; as is the  case  with  many  other  terms  denoting functions in Old­Javanese re­
cords, any  attempt  at too  great  a precision is almost certainly doomed to failure. 
l6^) Mangtaṇḍa,  usually  mataṇḍa,  is derived from  tanda,  „seal,  banner’’. For the former 
meaning, cf. the well­known expressions  rrnaṇda  garudamukha, „sealed with the Ga¬
ruḍa head" in edicts issued by the king  Airlaṅg,a, tinaṇḍa narasiṅha,  „sealed with 
the man­lion"  in edicts by Jayabhaya, etc. The  mataṇḍa  probably  denotes  the man 
who seals  the letters, orders, etc., and probably writes them, too, in this case, in the 
name  of the  Rakarayān  Patapān. 
167) T^hān—r­i^g  nayaka, ­­ a more usual expression is  tuhān  (or:  tuha,  juru)  ning 
.kanayakān.  Cf. the  notes  61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66 and 67 to the Introduction. 
168^ Probably not the representative of the  Rakai  Patapān,  for whom the article si would 
not be fitting, but  rather  a clerk representing the two  tuhans  or the  mataṇda.  The 
direct  representatives  of the  Rakarayān Patapān  are probably  those  mentioned in 
lines  9 sq. above. 
l^) Tne exact meaning of this function and the two next  ones  is obscure. For  ^vad^vā, 
cI. note  162 above ; rarai, corresponding to  tare  in modern  Javanese,  means  „child­
ren" so  that  the title as a whole would literally  mean  : „chief  of the group of  child­
ren", but this gives no idea of the real function. The term  ^vadwā  rarai is sometimes 
replaced by  wadwā  dmit  (e.g.  O.J.O.,  XXII.  line 19);  terms  such as rarai or  démit 
need not necessarily refer to smallness in age; .ney may also be applied to thr­ir 
social  position (cf. ^v^ng  ijilik  in modern  Javanese). May we compare  vālāgraḥ  (or: 
bālāgraḥ)  in Sanskrit? For the latter, cI.  Mahāvy.,  245, No. 86 (edition by  Minaiev­
Mironov,  p. 84). 
­7.­) Since manapél, the next term, undoubtedly  denotes  a kind of craft (cf.  note  171 
below),  we may consider the possibility  that  also kalula does. The meaning of the 
latter is not  lucid.  In a number of loci quoted by Juynboll (^oorde.nliist, s.v.) from 
the Old  Javanese  Rāmāyaṇa,  the meaning  appears  to he  ‚‚family'';  Goris (in the 
word  index to the first volume of Old  Balinese  inscriptions, which is being printed, 
s.v.) suggests  that  kalula is a derivative from Sanskrit kula, which might m^an: 
„a servant  born  in the house,  house  slave" (?). We might  suggest  the possibility of 
a different interpretation by connecting the term kalula in the expression  juru  ( tuhan.) 
ning kalula with Sanskrit  kulāla,  "potter".  Trisyllabic  words being uncommon in Old 
Javanese, the Sanskrit word could have been deformed in Old  Javanese  by its being 
^adapted  to a common word type, viz. a disyllabic  base  preceded by the prefix ka­. 
As we noted above, the  mention  of some kind of  craftsmen  would  well  agree  with the 
next term. 
17i) ManIapal, derived from  tapel;  the more common term in  these  lists is  mangrakét, 
sometimes spelt  mandakĕt,  a derivative of  rakĕt,  which may  mean  image, but, more 


--- [Page 250] ---
­— 240 ­— 
The patih 172) of the  vil[17]lage  Kayumwuṅan  173). ^i Dhantan  17­)^ 
of Mantyasih  Si Jakkhara ; their representatives (are)  : Punta  Pramāṇa,  Si 
Gandah  and Punta [18]  Seḍang,  Si Murana  1^); (the patih of) Lwa 
Paṇḍak  176) : Si Mandiha  ; the wahuta of  Pétir  170) : Si Hayu  ; his surveyor ; 
Si Saisa ; [19] the  village  elder  : Si Rutung ; (the wahuta of)  Paṇḍakyan  : 
frequentiy,  some sort of mask. CI.  karakĕtan  in the  Nāgarakrĕt.,  27, 2,  pāda  c, ment­
ioned  among the feasts given by the king during his  visit  to Patukanan and translated 
„maskerspelen"  (plays executed by masked persons) by Kern (Translation, 1905­14, 
p. 76).  Such  plays,  perhaps to be compared  with  the wayang wong in more recent 
times, are  known  from  the courts of  Tjĕrhon  (Hazeu,  Biidrage  tot  de kennis  van  het 
Javaansche  toneel,  1897, p. 95) and Bandjermasin.  They  are frequently mentioned 
in the Hikayat .Raja Bandjar dan Kotawaringin (Cense,  De Kroniek  van Bandjar¬
masin, 1928, pp. 20, 22, 52 and 154), where the word is, however, spelt rakit; the 
difference  may be irrelevant since all MSS of the latter text are in  Arahic  script. 
A few more references are added by Cense, op. cit., p. 154. In  Nāgarakrĕt.  91, 4, the 
.king  himself  is asked to  arakĕrakĕt.  In Arjuna­wiw.,  30, 8,  rakĕt  seems to mean 
„image".  — For manapel and mangrakét, one might hesitate between  „those  who 
make  masks, images, etc." and  ‚‚those  who perform mask  plays,  etc!’,  i.e. be­
tween the artisans and the artists. As a matter of fact, the  composition  of the  list  of 
these tuhan is still obscure ; similar lists add other items such as  tuhān  ning lam¬
puran and  maṅasĕakan,  the latter probably denoting a servant who conveys (literally: 
‚‚makes  arrive’')  messages and orders. There may be some  reason  to connect all these 
tuhan  with  the  collection  of some  special  taxes on  behalf  of the  Rakarayān.  Just as 
the king  has his 'army' of  maṅilala  drawya hap, the  Rakarayāns  have a  small  group 
of personnel  collecting  special  t^txes such as those on the ground (the nayakas, cf. 
supra, notes 64, sqq.), and on some arts and crafts; these  would  he their  main 
sources of income  from  their apanages, whereas all the other taxes are reserved for 
the king. 
u^­) CI. note 165 above. 
17^) For this place name and the other ones, cI. the Introduction. For the meaning of 
patih and wahuta, cI. supra, notes 161, 162 and 165. 
174) Tb^  spelling  by dha is strange; it  would  suggest a Sanskrit  word.  The name might 
be one of these „pseudo­krama" forms corresponding with Sanskrit dhara. Cf. wi¬
hantan  (wihantĕn)  for vihāra  and a few other words. 
17^) (Probably  there are  only  two, not four, representatives, but  with  double names, the 
former  preceded by si, the latter by punta; if there were four representatives, it 
would  be difficult  to account for the fact that the  first  and the  third  persons have 
names preceded by si, the second and fourth representatives those introduced by 
punta.  Double  names are not at all uncommon in Old Javanese; in this case, one 
could  consider the  possihility  of the representatives being monks possessing a  worldly 
name  which  they had already before entering  religious  life  and a  religious  one adop­
ted at the moment when they hecame monks. Punta and dapunta, also punta hyang, 
dapunta hyang,  ḍapu  hy^ng,  daman, bhagawanta and, probably, a few other terms, 
seem to be  religious  titles. A number of these occur in the  Sukabumi  inscription 
(published  by Van  Stein  Callenfels  in Meded.  Kon.  Ak. wet., Afd.  Lett.,  LXXVIII, 
B, 1934 pp. 115­130); cf. also  O.J.O.,  XIX,  in which  the titles dapunta, dapu hyang, 
daman and dapu  follow  each other in this order and may express differences in rank 
or age. CI. also the dapunta  i kabikuan  i panuṅgalarr  watak raja, in K.O., IX, PL 
1b, line 2. 
17^) For these important place names, occurring in several other inscriptions  from  the 
same region, cf. the Introduction. 


--- [Page 251] ---
— 241 — 
Si Sana ; his surveyor : Si  Maring  ,• the kalima 177) : Si Nahan. 
At Tulang Air (the  following  persons are represented): the surveyor 
[20] of the metal workers (?) l78) : Si Ba1ubung ; the  village  eider : Si 
Tarawana  ; the kalimu : Si Jana, the acting surveyor (?) 179) : Si Rega ; the 
representative : Si Pasat; [21] the astroiogist  18°) : Si Eñcung.  (Aiso)  at Tuiang 
Air, the guardian 181): Si  Kesawa  ; the kalima: Si [22]  Bhanu,  the acting 
suveyor  : Si  Kaia  ; the representative  : Si Wuri  ; the astroiogist si Dhasa ; 
the Vlliage  councillors  : Si Baṅcung,  Si Nana ; [23]  ......  18­): Si  Warā  and 
Si Daṇḍa;  the...... 183): Si Jantra ; the surveyor of water suppiy 184): Si 
Layar;  the surveyor of the dams 185): Si Tamuy ; the mula 1^6): [24] Si 
Taguh  ; the drummer during the ceremonies 187) : Si Manūt  ; the market 
17^) Literally:  "the  fifth";  the term denotes a rank or a function among the  village 
elders (cI. the Introduction). ­— A comparison  with  the  Kĕḍu  inscription (dated 57 
years later; cI. Stutterheim, T.B.C., 67, 1927, pp. 172­215, especiany the passage 
from  A­16 to A-2o) shows the continuity of administration in this region; there, too, 
Mantyasih and Kayumwuhan are the residences of patihs, whereas wahutas are estah¬
lished at  Pĕtir  and  Paṇḍakyan. 
178) For llm^s, of. Stutterheim, 7^.B.C., 65 (1925), p. 248,  with  references. 
17^) Silijuru is interpreted as sihh­juru. The loss of the h is strange; we may perhaps 
compare the loss of the h in the former  half  of a  word  compound  with  that  which 
regularly  takes place in  word  gemination; cf., for instance,  pili­pilih  in  Nāgarakrĕt, 
so, 1‚ where the metre  garanties  the loss of the h. 
­­80) -rhe ­neaning of wariga is not doubtful; his main activities probably concerned the 
calculation  of auspicious  dates  for the important actions in the  village. 
lsl) ^rb^ term is  still  in use for the guardians of cementeries, temples and the  like. 
182) The  word  is illegible,  possibly juru (cf. note 12s above). 
18.­) Owing  to the lacuna, we do not know whather the two  persons  who  follow  are  still 
included  in the  list  of tuha  banna  or have another function. In the latter case, the 
lacuna  at the beginning of  line  23 did not contain a name, but a term denoting a 
function. 
1'­­) For the meaning of hulair, of the  paṅulu  bañu  (with  numerous synonyms in modern 
Javanese villages (vide Van  Vollenhoven,  Jav^ansch Adatrec.^t, 1923, p. 29).  This 
village  elder was charged  with  the upkeep or the new construction of  small  canals, 
tunnels etc. for the irrigation of rice  fields,  including perhaps the just distribution 
of water supply to the different rice  fields. 
18.^) Tambak (usually spelt tamwak in Old Javanese records) denotes a dam in a  river. 
Such  dams are usually constructed  with  the intention of forming an  artificial  lake 
in the  river,  a guarantee in  view  of water supply during the dry  season.  At the same 
time,  such  artificial  lakes are a protection against dangerous  bandjirs  in the begin­
ning  of the rainy season. In Modern Javanese, tambak denotes r.ot only the dam 
itself,  but also the  artificial  lake before the dam: the latter is  often  used also as a 
fish pond.  In No. XI below, an undoubtedly  similar  work is used to change the 
course of a  river.  The dam  itself  required constant supervision, e.g. to regulate the 
outlet of the water, to repair it if necessary etc. The  artificial  lake, too, required 
constant care; from time to time it had to be deepened out. Pressumably, the ma¬
tam^vak was charged with the supervision over these and related activities. 
Ls6) ^rhe meaning of mula (prohahly, Sanskrit  mūla,  ‚.root’’  etc.) is obscure in this  con­
nection;  probably he has also something to do  with  irrigation. 
187) F^,r the padahi, prohably a  conical  drum, cf. J.  Kunst,  Hindoe­Iavaansche  muziek­
instrumenten  (1927), pp. 46 sqq. The exact meaning of mangala in this combination 


--- [Page 252] ---
— 242 — 
inspector  : Si Mulyang  ; the wood inspector : Si  Awit  ; the chief  [25] of the 
centre 188)­ Si Dawa; the sacrificer l8­). Si Naran. 
The witnesses (?) 19^) (are): from l91) Çrī  Maṇḍaki  : Si Niru  ; from 
Kuñci  : Si  Siga  ; from [26] Prasma ing  Limus  192) : Si Krahu  ; from Parang : 
Si Sana ; from  Paṇmg  193): Si Tawang ; from  Kakalyan  : Si  Mi[27]lih  ; from 
Tiwrus  : Si Haryang ; the inhabitant l^4) of the free territory at  Tulang  Air 
ing Krodha  195): Si Dhura; from Air Pa[28]pi  : Si Pagar  (and) Si  Paṅa, 
­from  Kakar  : Si Paḍar,  from  Limus  Watu 1^6) : Si Safijana, from Talang 
is difficult  to be settled. One might consider the possibility  that  the padahi mahgata 
was one of the  village  eiders who had to  beat  the drum at the beginning of the in­
auguration ceremonies and, probably, during several rites, too. 
issy  ^ the Introduction, especially  note  82. 
18­') C^ru  denotes  especially the sacrifices of rice etc.  strewn  on the ground to satisfy 
the lower  classes of  demons  lest they should interfere  with  the ceremonies. CI. one 
of the Ngabean copper­plates  (O.J.O.,  No. CVI), front  part,  lines 3­5 (pacarnan 
in line 3 of the transcript by Brandes is a printing mistake for pacaruan), where 
holders of rice fields in the free territory belonging to the  prāsāda  at Laṇḍa  presum¬
ably have the duty of furnishing rice for the caru sacrifices. The expression paca¬
ruan kyan maha^­a is interesting, mahala is a derivative from hala, ,,wicked", so that 
it is indeed probable  that  the caru was especially due to the  wicked  spirits. 
19^) We do not  understand  the meaning of  jumput  here. In  modern  Javanese, the word 
may denote  a kind  of pincers or nippers. Dijumput  means  : „(a small  portion)  is 
taken out (of something)". In Madurese (Kiliaan's Dictionary, II. p. 163), djhum¬
podhan ­denotes the part of a feast meal which the guests take home after having 
enveloped it in palm leaf. Since the long  list  preceding  jumput  is composed of  vil­
lage elders of  Tulang  Air (the village  which  is to become free as a consequence of 
this edict), whereas the  list  following  jumput  consists of people belonging to other 
villages,  the meaning of  jumput  required by the context is  sāksin,  „witnesses'’.  A 
number  o.ī witnesses from neighbouring villages are mentioned  with  every ground 
transaction; it was necessary ^o h^ve such witnesses in  view  of possible litigations 
about the exact  limits  of the temple domains. On account of the above, we presume 
that jumput  means­  „:hose  taken  out" (of the neighbouring villages to act as  wit­
nesses)­. 
Literally:  „at"; the meaning is  that  these  witnesses are established in the villages 
which  are mentioned for each of them and  which  they  represent. 
1^2) ^–­  īī­­^^  ^f. note  178 above.  Prasiña  is probably composed of  pras,  a kind of plate 
used during sacrifices, and ma,  „nurse". 
Or: Paṇi;  the  anusvāra  is uncertain. 
­94) Anak ri sima; the expression is on a line  with  anak  wanua, for the villagers enjoying 
full rights. One  gets  the impression  that  there  was already  another  free territory at 
Tulang Air prior to the foundation of 850 A.D. 
Tulang Air ing Krodha; the addition of ing krodha, „of the wrath" (^)‚ might  suggest 
that the  village  name  is to be distinguished from the Tulang Air where the foun­
dation  in 85o  takes  place. It is, however,  also  possible (cf. the preceding  note)  that 
there  had  been  a free territory within the  désa  grounds of Tulang Air belonging to 
an earlier foundation, possibly at a considerable distance from Tulang Air. Those 
living  on this free territory were, of course, not  ­dependent  on the village elders 
of Tulang  Air and  could  therefore  represent  something else. 
196) i^ limus, cf. the  notes  17S and 192 above. If the presumed meaning of  limus  ^s 
correct, one  would  get the impression  that  the industry of fine metal art was im­
portant .in this region, giving its  name  to several villages. 


--- [Page 253] ---
— 2 4^ — 
Air  197): [29] Si  Malini,  from  Manāha  (?) 198). SI Ouwasang (?), from 
Kayumwuṅan  (?) : Si ..... , from  Kaṇḍaṅan  : Si  Mu[30]lya  ; the ..... (?) 199) 
in the temple (?)  2°^) : Si Wanasi, the surveyor ..... , the kalima : Si [31] 
Siga,  the representative : Sang Hada (?), the surveyor in the .....  , Welahan : 
Si .....‚  the surveyor at Samala[32]gi : Si  Tala,  ..........  2°1), the surveyor 
at Muṅgu  : Si Pangsat, [33] the  kalima  : Si Jati, the surveyor at Wunha ­ 6­) : 
Si ..........,  the village elder : Si  Napal,  the market inspector at [3 4] 
Muṅguantan  2^3): Si  Laya,  .....,  ..... the priest  ­^ 4) in the temple of the 
merchant group: Si  Ka[35]ṇḍi  (?), the surveyor of the husked rice ­^): 
Si Marowang, the surveyor  at^Air  Pyal  : Si Huwus, the village elder: Si 
Rutus,  the surveyor at  .Ai[36]r  Hulu  : Si  Milar,  the village elder  : Si Taṅguh, 
the surveyor at  Sulaṇgkuning  : Si Bantal, at Masalaficang (?): [37] ..... the 
kalang at ..... : Si  // 2^). 
197) ^  note  140 above. Talang Air  would  mean  „water  pipe"; it is undoubtedly a  village 
different  from  Tulang Air in spite of the striking resemhlance. It  would,  moreover, 
have  been  strange if the foundation  village  should have been mentioned among the 
witness  villages,  usually situated in the neighbourhood. 
l­8)^ Tho reading is uncertain. The reconstitution of the names  followed  by (?) is doubt­
ful; ­I. the details in the  notes  to the transcription. 
199) ­ve have no idea ab^ut the term preceding  hyang.  Well­known titles (or functions) 
are guru  hyang,  pratyaya  hyang,  wahuta hyang and, of course, dang  hyang,  but the 
traces  visible  on the stone exclude any of  these  terms. It is, however, probable 
(o^ account of  hyang)  that  some sort of priest is mentioned here. 
200) Prasāda  is probably a wrong  spelling  of prāsāda;  prasāda  and  prāsāda  are very  often 
confounded  in Old Javanese inscriptions. CI. the preceding note. 
201) The lacuna is a lengthy one; cf. the Transcription. 
202) The  village  name  wunha,  which  looks suspect, proves to occur elsewhere, too ; cf. 
Pras. 1ndon., I  (195O),  p. 155. 
203) For the  village  name, prohably connected  with  Muṅgu  mentioned before, cf. the In­
troduction. 
204 ) The exact meaning of marhyang is unknown, but it is certain  that  the term denotes 
some  kind  of priest, probably not a very distinguished one (cf. the use of the article 
si). 
20­) The hulu wras is very often mentioned among the  rāmas.  The term probably de­
notes  the  village  elder who was in charge of a  provision  of rice belonging to the 
village  as a whole. Van  Vollenhoven  notices the presence of  similar  village  elders 
in modern Javanese villages (op. cif., p. 30), but considers the function an innovation 
of recent times; the latter conclusion might not he correct in  view  of what we see 
in Old Javanese inscriptions. 
206) Only  a few scattered words have remained legible in  line  37. 


--- [Page 254] ---
— 244 — 
X. (A - C).  THREE SANSKRIT  INSCRIPTIONS  FROM  THE 
RATUBAKA PLATEAU 
The Ratubaka plateau, situated at a few  km’s  distance to the South 
of Prambanan, Central Java, has yielded one Sanskrit inscription in  Pre-
Nāgarī  script 1) and  three  other Sanskrit inscriptions in Old Javanese 
script,  two of  which  were discovered in  rather  recent times. In  view  of the 
close relations between  these  three  epigraphs, they may  well  be treated  to­
gether.  Only  some  individual  details such as measurements, the kinds of  stone 
in which  the inscriptions are cut,  will  be mentioned in  brief  notes  preceding 
the transcriptions. The  three  inscriptions are denoted by a, b, and c, according 
to the order of the  dates  of discovery. 
The first of  these  inscriptions, a, has been in the Djakarta Museum 
since 1902; it is numbered D. 104 2). The second one (b) was discovered in 
1935 ; it was  briefly  discussed by Stutterheim 3) and by Damais 4) . Neither 
for a nor for b, the exact site of discovery on the Ratubaka plateau is known. 
The third inscription (c) was discovered in 1941 on the premises of a  peasant 
house in the hamlet  (padukuhan)  Dawangsari in the immediate neighbour­
hood  of the archaeological remains of the Ratubaka plateau 5) . Both  b and 
c are at  present  in the office of the Dinas Purbakala at Prambanan. 
Inscription  c is in an excellent  state  of preservation ; a is  rather  weather-
beaten  and, in addition, the rough surface of the  stone  makes its reading 
uncertain at several  spots  ; inscription b is by far the worst, especially in 
its middle  part  (lines 5 to 11). The lettering is badly weather-beaten  there, 
so that  the reading is not everywhere certain. Fortunately, the language and 
the metre  are of a  great  help since they make a valuable check on the cor­
rectness  of the transcription possible. 
The three  inscriptions are written in one and the  same  type of script, 
which  is hardly different from  that  used in the numerous Central Javanese 
inscriptions  dated the end of the ninth and the beginning of the tenth century 
A.D.  The u  following  a consonant shows a tiny curve to the right at its lower 
end, a  feature  which  is regularly found in the older inscriptions, but oc-
1) Mus.  Djak., No. D. 50.  Cf.  Bosch,  T.B.C., 68 (1928), pp. 63 sq. ; cf. also Pras. 
1ndon.  I (1950), pp. 11 sqq. 
2) Rouffaer,  Notulen  B.C., 1909, p.  LXXXIV.  Rouffaer  adds  that  according to data 
supplied  hy Van Erp the  stone  was discovered in 1901 and  sent  to Djakarta in 1902, 
but no account was entered into the minutes of the Society. Its origin from the Ra¬
tubaka plateau, which might not he beyond doubt if based upon these data alone, 
is greatly confirmed by the text of the inscription,  which  shows close affinities  with 
the inscriptions b and c. 
3) T.B.C., 75 (1935). p. 443,  note.  Stutterheim also gave a transcript of the first lines 
of the inscription and made a conjecture about the name  Lokapāla. 
4) T.B.C., 83 (1949), p. 3,  with  a small correction in Stuttetheim's reading and a slightly 
different conjecture about the name  Lokapāla.  This point  will  he discussed in the 
course of this Introduction. 
-) These data are based  upon  correspondence in the  ^ archives of the Dinas Purbakala 
at Djakarta. 


--- [Page 255] ---
— 2 4ā — 
casionally  extant in  10th  century texts 6). A more characteristic feature is 
the form  of the gha, two examples of  which  occur in  these  inscriptions (viz. 
in hastakāṅghray^,  a 3‚ and, more distinct, in  ghṛṣṭa^,  c, line  2) ; the gha has 
only three  verticals, but the left hand stroke begins  with  a slight curve to 
the left.  In all the later inscriptions, this curve has grown into a fourth 
stroke 7). 
The lettering is rather careless as a rule, especially in the inscriptions 
a and b. The differences in the  size,  in the degree of  cursivity  and even in 
the form  of the same  akṣaras  are  striking;  on the other hand, some other 
akṣaras  resembling each other (such as the ga and the bha, the ma and the 
sa, the da and the na) are hardly or not distinguishable on the stones. The 
impression  of carelessness is partly due to the rough  kind  of stone used for 
the inscriptions.  It is a very hard and coarse­grained variety of limestone, 
the surface of  which  was not  sufficiently  smoothed before the  akṣaras  were 
cut into the stone. 
All of the  three  inscriptions are composed in metrical Sanskrit. The 
strophes are  devoid  of poetical merit, although the poet  appears  to be  well 
trained  in the use of  alamkāras.  Also  the language is not everywhere correct. 
If we exclude some obvious lapses made by the lapicide  (these  will  be dealt 
with below),  there  remain some shortcomings  which  should be attributed to 
the poet. A case of incorrect  sandhi  is the change of the  final  ­s to a visarga 
before the dental mutes in  inscription  b, line  4 (namaḥ  tryamvakāya)  and 
line 7 (‘.’dātuḥ  tryamvakasya)  . A more serious point is the construction of 
the second strophe of  inscription  c. There, the accusatives presumably depend 
on a verb  which  is not expressed 8).^ The lengthy compound  which  fills  up 
the former  half  of strophe c 2 is not quite  lucid.  The compound in  tile second 
pāda  of c 4, viz.  varaçāstratalūnvitaḥ,  is h^sed upon an incorrect  simile;  instead 
of anvitah, a  word  such as  upe^aḥ  should have been used. Some other exam­
ples might be added, but they are either less  striking  or based upon a not 
completely  certain reading (such as the use of amita, presumably in the 
meaning  „innumerable’’,  in the first  pāda  of a  1) . 
The metres  are correct. The  only  remarkable point is the  vipulā  in the 
first pāda  of c 4, no other examples of  which  are known  to us (it  ends  in 
^ �^  — —).  Th^  vipnlā  in c 5, first  pāda,  is, however, a regular one. 
A few lapses by the lapicide are remarkable. In a 1, a  syllable,  pre­
sumably  ’stu,  was omitted.  ^uite  a number of mistakes occur in  inscription 
b, line  12, where the text runs  praṇvāpitaṃ  tryamvaliṅvam=ehat  instead 
of prasthāpitaṃ  tryambakaliṅgam=etat.  The four lapses, viz.  ṇvā for  sthā, 
6) This  feature is very pronounced in  Balitung’s  Kĕḍu  inscription dated 907  A.D.,  but 
exceptional  in other 1oth century inscriptions. 
7) This  change in the  form  of the gha may be explained by the necessity of  clearly 
distinguishing  the gha  from  the ya. The addition of a fourth stroke to the gha runs 
parallel  to the development  from  a spiral  to a  vertical  stroke in the left hand part 
of the ya. Of the two aksaras the ratubaka inscriptions show an intermediate  form. 
8) CI. the discussion of this passage,  infra  notes  151 sqq. to the Translation. 


--- [Page 256] ---
.— 24^ — 
the omission  of ka,  nva,  instead of nga and  ha instead  of ta, are typical  copyist’s 
errors  made  by somebody who did  not understand  the text  and  mechanically 
reproduced what  he saw.  A somewhat negligently written  ta might resemble 
a ha, a not  distinctly written  ga might  be mistaken  for a va and an  akṣara 
might  be overlooked.  A very curious mistake, which might convey  an idea 
about  the manner  in which  the lapicide worked,  is ṇvā  instead  of sthā.  The 
akṣaras  va and tha  resemble  one  another,  but  ṇa and sa do not  appear  to 
have  much  in common.  The  mistake could  be explained only  if we  presume 
that the  lapicide  worked  on an  example  in which  he mistook  the  single 
verticals  of the sa for  double  ones.  Now  it it  well-known  that  if one  writes 
with a blunt piece  of chalk  on a  rough surface,  one may  easily  put  down 
double lines instead  of single  ones.  This example  accounts  satisfactorily 
for the  mistake.  We  could  suppose  that  the  paṇḍit  who had  composed 
the text  wrote  it down on  the inscription  stone  by means  of a  piece  of chalk, 
so that  the  lapicide  had  only  to follow  the  lines  he saw. The  result  is that 
which  we  find on the  stone. 
In view  of the  above  cases  where  the  correction  seems  certain,  we 
assume  a similar mistake  in the  third  gana  of the  second  Aryā  half  in c 1. 
There,^  the form  abhihapat,  clearly visible  on the  stone,  does  not make  sense  ; 
it is probably  a mistake  for ahhitapat  ^). The  above points  are of an  obvious 
importance for  the interpretation  of the  texts.  The possibility  of similar  errors 
should be considered  in some  other  passages  where  the  text  visible  on the 
stone  does  not  seem  to make  sense.  The  beginning  of the  first  pāda  of 
strophe  a 2 is a  good example 19). 
We noted above  that  the  three  inscriptions  are  entirely written  in 
verse.  The  metre  is correct except  for a  slight irregularity  in the  vipulā 
c 4, which  we already mentioned above.  The  following  metres  are  used  : 
Indravajrā,  — a 3 and  b 4 ; 
Mālim,  — b 1 and 2 ; 
Rucirā,  — a 1 and 2 ; 
Aryā,  —cl  and 2 ; 
Anuṣṭubh,  — c 4 and  5 ; 
Svāgata,  — c 3 ; 
Ṭoṭaka,  — b 3. 
We now  proceed  to a  short  examination  of the  meaning  of the  texts. 
The composition  of the  three  texts  is very similar  in spite  of some  dif­
ferences  in details. They  all  begin with  a strophe  addressed  to Çiva,  fol­
lowed  by a  strophe  in the  same  metre  as the  first  one and  addressed  to 
some  form  of Lakṣmī­ÇrI.  The  third  strophes  of b and c  deal with  a prince 
who presumably arrived from foreign  shores  in ancient times  ; such  a strophe 
^) In  that  case,  we  should  have  exactly  the  same  mistake  as in ehat  instead  of etat 
(the last line  of b). The  form  abhitapat  might  not he  completely satisfactory,  but 
it is the  easiest  correction;  cf. note  147.  below. 
10) CI.  note  120  below. 


--- [Page 257] ---
— 247 — 
is, however, absent in a,  which  consists of  three  strophes  only.  The last 
strophe of a and b and the two last strophes of c relate  that  the  king,  a 
descendant of the mysterious prince mentioned above, erected a  liṅga. 
We find  different names of  Çiva  in each of the  three  inscriptions.  In 
a, the  initial  strophe is addressed to  Kṛttivāsas,  the god  clad  in a (tiger) 
skin.  It is  certainly  not a haphazard  synonym  of the name of  Çiva,  for 
the name  Kṛttivāsas  (with  the variant  Kṛttikavāsas,  probably chosen for 
metrical  considerations, in a 3) is repeated in the two other strophes of a, 
but no other name of the supreme god is mentioned. In b, the  initial  strophe 
is addressed to  Tryambaka  (spelt  Tryamvaka)  and the same name is used 
in the other strophes.  Finally,  inscription  c is addressed to  Hara,  the name 
which  is repeated in strophes 2 and 5. We therefore conclude  that  the 
three  Ratubaka  inscriptions  relate the erection of a  Kṛttivāso­,  a Tryambaka­
and a Hara­liṅga  respectively. 
The analysis of the  first  strophes of the  three  texts makes it clear 
that the  three  different  names denote as many different aspects of the 
supreme god. In a, the god is represented in a demonic  form  — clad  in 
a tiger  skin  and crowned  with  bloody  skulls  while  he dances in a cemetery. 
Inscription  b evokes the image of the  all­mighty  god who is seated on his 
lotus­throne  beset  with  jewels and surrounded by all the other gods and 
goddesses who obey his  will.  In c, the god is the  divine  warrior  who leads 
the army  of the gods in the fierce battle against the  Asuras  to destroy 
their fortress  Tripura. 
The three  second strophes are addressed to the female counterparts. 
In a, the goddess assists the  Divine  Dancer in his  terrific  cemetery dance ; 
in b, she is represented  while  embracing the god and  fulfilling  all his desires ; 
in c, she accompanies the gou in his battie against the  Tripurāsuras  11). 
It is curious  that  the goddess in the second strophes is nowhere denoted 
by one of the numerous  common  designations of  Çiva’s  spouse, as we might 
have expected. The  three  texts mention her by the names of  Çrī,  Çūralakṣmī 
and Mshallakṣm1  respectively. The  fir^,t  designation is a  common  one to 
denote  Viṣṇu’s  spouse, at the same time the  symbol  of prosperity and  royal 
majesty.  Çūralakṣm1,  the term used in b, suggests the same but  with  the 
special  shade of success in battle, although the designation is unusual as 
a precise term 12) . Mahallakṣmī,  undoubtedly a variant of  Mahālakṣmī,  again 
suggests  Lakṣmī­Çrī,  but the name is also used, in different texts, to denote 
the Devi  in the age of thirteen years or in the conception of  universal 
11) We already mentioned the difficulties in the interpretation of c 2. It is not there¬
fore exactly clear what the goddess did in the battle. The wording of the first 
pāda,  in which  the goddess is covered  with  the pollen of  Civa's  lotus­feet,  which 
attracts  such  bees  as Rāvaṇa,  Bāṇa  and  Arjuna,  might suggest  that  she accompanied 
the god­warrior in order to seduce the  Asuras. 
12) The synonymous  Vīralakṣmī  is known  as the name of the  main  queen of  Sāryavarman 
I of Cambodia in the beginning of the 11th century  A.D.  ; cf. the  inscription  of 
Sdok  Kak  Thom,  strophe  LXXIV,  edition by  Finot  in B.E.E.E.O.,  XV, 2 (1915) 
p. 66, and the references  given  by Coedés  in Les  Etats hindouisés, p. 228 and p. 23s. 


--- [Page 258] ---
Çakti  i 3). We therefore conclude  that  two of the  three  inscriptions address 
the namask āra to the combination of a  form  of Çiva  and a  form  of Lakṣmī­
Çrī, whereas the  initial  strophes of the third text refer to the combination 
of Çiva  and a rather ambiguous term to denote the goddess. These remarkable 
combinations  pose a curious problem,  which  will  be dealt  with  after a closer 
examination  of the remaining  parts  of the  three  texts. 
The namask āras are  followed  by what might be styled  historical  portions. 
Inscriptions  a and b are dated by the addition of the mere  Çaka  year 778 
after the strophes. Since no further details are mentioned, the  date  could 
correspond to 856 or 857  A.D.,  to be more precise, between the 10th of 
March  856 and the 27th of February 857 14). The  date  may even be  fixed 
within  slightly  narrower  limits  by comparing  these  texts  with  the inscription 
which  will be dealt  with  in No. XI. ^ It will  appear  that  the events mentioned 
in No. XI are necessarily posterior to  these  liṅga foundations.  This  makes 
^t very probable  that  bur texts are dated before the 11th of the  çuklapakṣa  of 
Mārgaçīrṣa,  i.e. between the 10th of  March  and the 12th of November 856. 
The name of the reigning  king  is mentioned in each of the  three  in­
scriptions,  vi2:. Ç^rī Kumbhaja in a and b, and  Kalaçodbhava  in c. These names 
are well­known  paraphrases of the name of the  ṛṣi Agastya, who was born 
in a jar according to tradition 15). The names  Kumbhayoni,  Kalaçaja  and 
Agastya  occur in the  Dinaya  inscription dated 760  A. D.  16) and also in 
the Pereng  inscription  dated 863  A. D. ; the latter was discovered in Central 
Java  in the immediate neighbourhood of the  Ratubaka  plateau  17) . There 
Kumbhayoni  is not exactly used to denote the ancient  sage  : it is the name 
of the founder of the  Çiva  temple  Bhadrāloka  by name. 
We conclude  from  the Ratubaka inscriptions a and b  that  there  was ^ 
­3) Gopinatha .Rao, Elements, II. Pt. 2, p. sss. The second interpretation is hased on 
the Mārkaṇḍeyapurāṇa  quoted ibidem, p. 337. —  Monier  Williams'  Dictionary s.v., 
explalns :  „the  great  Lakṣmī  (properly the  çakti  of Nārāyaṇa  or Viṣṇu,  hut sometimes 
identified  with  Durgā  or with  sarasvati)". It  would  not he impossible  that  the  poet 
substituted the term  Mahālakṣmī  just in order to  avoid  the interpretation as the  Devī 
and to  stress  her  Lakṣmī  aspect. In this case, the way in  which  the goddess is de­
noted  would  better  agree  with  the names  Çrī  and  Çuralakṣmī  mentioned in the two 
other texts. 
­­­) vi­ tb^ beginnings of the  Çaka  years elapsed 778 and 779. For the reduction of 
the dates,  cI. Damais in  B.EE.E.O.,  XL  VI, Fasc. 1 (1952), pp. 30 sq., No. 21. 
1­) For  these  traditions and numerous other data about Agastya worship in Java, cf. the 
monograph by R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, Agastya in  den Archipel  (1926), passim; cf. 
also Bosch  in T.B.C., 67 (1927), pp. 462­502, and Nilakanta Sa­tri in T.B.C., 76 
(1936), p. 471­545. 
16) First  edition by  Bosch  in T.B.C., 57 (1917), pp. 41o­444; discussed in detail by 
the same scholar in T.B.C., 64 (1924), pp. 227­291 (with a note by  B. Schrieke) ; 
cf. also Poerbatjaraka, op. cit., pp. 51­55; Nilakanta Sastri. art. cit., pp. 512 sq. ; 
J.G. de Casparis, T.B.C., 81 (1941), pp. 499­513. 
17) First  edition by  A.B.  Cohen Stuart, Ka­vi  Oorkonden  (1875), No.  XXIII.  The San^ 
skrit  portion was discussed by  Kern,  Yerspr.  Cesc.hr ., VI (article dated 1917), pp. 
277­286.  Some other publications dealing  with  special details in this inscription are 
mentioned in the  notes  which  follow. 


--- [Page 259] ---
­– 249 ^ 
king  reigning in Central Java in 856  A. D., who had Agastya, or  rather  one 
of the numerous  paraphrases  meaning  „Born  in a  Jar’’,  as his personal name. 
The first point to be examined is whether  there  might be a close connection 
between the  king  in the  three  Ratubaka epigraphs and the distinguished 
founder of a  Çiva  temple, owner of a considerable number of villages, in 
the Pereng inscription. As a  matter  of fact,  there  are several points in 
favour  of such a connection. The fact of both being denoted by common 
names  of the  ṛṣi Agastya is hardly an argument by itself, but it should 
not be forgotten  that  the fact is more relevant than it  seems  to be  because  the 
founder in the Pereng inscription, if not a reigning  king,  is at least a very 
high  dignitary. In addition, the  Pereng  inscription, dated about seven years 
later than the Ratubaka inscriptions, belongs to the  same  period and,  finally, 
the village  Pereng is situated in the very neighbourhood of the Ratubaka 
plateau. It is however obvious  that  these  points, interesting though they 
may be,  could  not prove  that  the royal erector of the  liṅgas  on the Ratubaka 
plateau should be identified  with  the distinguished founder of the  Çiva 
temple in its neighbourhood. 
It is well­known  that  the Pereng  inscription,  composed partly in Sanskrit 
verse, partiy in Old Javanese prose, records the foundation of the  Çiva 
temple  Bhadrāloka  by a  Rakai  Walaing Pu KumbhayonI. The first scholar 
who made a detailed study of the Pereng inscription, H.  Kern,  suggested 
that the text mainly  bears  upon an astronomical event ; as a  matter  of fact, 
Agastya  is not only the name of a  sage,  but also the common Indian desig­
nation of the  star  Canopus.  Kern  adopted the latter interpretation and pro­
posed to explain the  puzzling  name  Walaing,  occurring in the  Rakai  title 
of Pu Kumbhayoni, as a Polynesian equivalent of the name of the  star  1^) . 
Some years afterwards,  Krom  reexamined the contents of the Pereng in­
scription  and arrived at a completely different conclusion about the identity 
of the founder 11'). He refuted the astronomical explanation suggested by 
Kern  and rightly concluded  that  the text refers to a historical person whose 
name agreed  with  htat  of the  great  sage.  As to  Walaing,  Krom  interpreted 
the strange  word as a titie derived from a geographical name. A few years 
afterwards again, Poerbatjaraka dealt  with  the Pereng inscription 2°) and 
tried  to arrive at a  kind  of compromise postulating both a historical and a 
mythical  founder, the latter identical  with  the great  sage.  Bosch,  discussing 
Poerbatjaraka’s  interpretation 21) , agreed  with  Krom  on the whole, but tried 
to arrive at a further identification of the founder of the  Çiva  temple. He 
suggested  that  Kumbhayoni­Agastya might have been the king's purohita 
and supported this interpretation by a reference to a parallel in later Old 
Javanese history 22). Finally,  Krom  summarized the  state  of research on the 
I3) Kern,  art. cit., p. 282. 20) Agastya, pp. 45 sqq. 
10) BrJdr. K.I., 75 (1919), pp. 14­19. ­­1)  T.B.G.,  67 (1927), pp. 470 sqq. 
22) .An interesting passage in the Old Javanese  Hariwança,  dated in the reign of Jaya¬
bhaya of  Kaḍiri  (from about 1135 to 1157 A.D.), viz. Canto 53. strophes 2 sqq., 
mentions the incarnation of  Visnu  as Jayabhaya and of Agastya as the  official  head 


--- [Page 260] ---
—250 ­— 
Pereng inscription in 1931 and mainly  repeated  his conclusions arrived at 
in 1919.  Only  with  reference  to the  name  Walaing, he no longer insisted 
on his geographic explanation 23). As to the function performed by  Pu 
Kumbhayoni,  Krom  did not mention the explanation given by Bosch and 
used the  rather  vague  term of a  ‘high  dignitary’ 24). 
Krom's  last account of the Pereng inscription in the first of the clumsy 
volumes of  Stapers  History 25) shows no further progress. It is a carefully 
worded extract of the discussion in  Krom’s  History written seven  years  earlier. 
After  an introductory  note  about  the puzzling meaning of most of the  text, 
Krom  gives a survey of what he considers the most probable conclusions. 
The latter  include Agastya worship 26) and  homage  to ,,him whose  name 
is Walaing’’  27). Both conclusions seem  rather  doubtful­­^). It is curious to 
of the clergy  (paṇḍitādhikāra),  combining the function of a  rājaguru  and a 'prime 
minister'  (patih). These incarnations had taken place in a time when the island of 
Java  was in a panic and had lost its beauty (?). The importance of this  passage 
was pointed out by Poerbatjaraka (op. ciI., p. 36 sq.).  Bosch  (art. ciI., p. 47o) dis­
cussed this  passage  again and concluded  that  Kumbhayoni in the Pereng inscription 
may have stood in the same relation to the king as was the case  with  the head 
of the clergy in Jayahhaya's time.  Although  the parallel is remarkable, the conclusion 
is not necessarily correct: the Pereng inscription does not state at ail that Kumhha¬
yoni should have  heen  an incarnation of Agastya; even such names as  Çiwa, Nārā¬
yaṇa  etc. occurred as names of villagers. For the  Hariwaṅça,  we now dispose of the 
excellent  edition and translation by A. Teeuw,  Verhand.  K.I., LI  (195o),  where the 
passage  occurs in I, p. 84 (text) and H, p. 105 (translation). 
23) Ceschiedenis^, pp. 105 sq. 
­^­) This vague term (i.^.  .„hoogwaardigheidsbekleder"  in the Dutch text) was probahly 
chosen to  avoid  the necessity of  giving  an interpretation of the  difficult  words  puyut 
sang  ratu  i halu pakwiannira i  janglu^:an  (line 9),  which  follow  the name Kumbhayoni 
in the Pereng inscription. Several different interpretations of  these  words were 
proposed; they  will  be discussed below. 
25) Krom,  ­Het  Hindoe­tiidperk, in  Stapel,  I. pp. lo7 sq. 
26) .Krom,  op. cit., p. 168, leaves the choice between two alternatives, viz. either a 
foundation  attributed to the ancient  sage  himself, or a foundation by a dignitary 
connected  with  Agastya; in either case, we may ohtain some data ahout Agastya. 
This seems  too much value attached to the mere name of the founder. 
27) It is curious  that  the words  tāvad=bhaktn.=  valaiṅnāmnaḥ  were always interpreted 
in this way. The alternative  ‚‚homage  of (i.e. hy) him whose  name  is Walaing''  seems 
preferable. IValaing is the abbreviated expression of the founder's title  Rakai  Walaing 
in that  case. The meaning of the third strophe  would  then  imply  that  the cult associated 
with the foundation of the  Çiva  temple should he continued as long as the sun and 
moon are on the sky etc. Owing to its occurrence in  these  Ratubaka inscriptions, 
the word  Walaing may be less obscure than it might appear on account of the Pereng 
inscription  only. 
­^) There are some more points in  .Krom's  survey of the contents of the Pereng inscrip­
tion which  are subject to doubt.  Krom  states,  for instance,  that  a passage  near 
the end of the text implies the  with  that  Kumbhayoni's posterity may  find  a living 
in the foundation (i.e. in the fields attached to it). This is undoubtedly a paraphrase 
of the words  labdheṣṭapadajrvāḥ..  translated hy  Kern  „daarin  een standplaats 
en levensonderhoud naar wensch mogen ontvangen''.  We prefer to consider 
iṣtapada,  „the  desired place", a synonym of paramapada,  nirvāṇapada,  ^ivapada (cf 


--- [Page 261] ---
— 251 — 
note that  Kern’s  subtle interpretation continued to exercise considerable 
influence,  although it is based on an older  stage  of research. 
After  Krom’s  last account, Damais dealt  with  the Pereng inscription 
at two different occasions 29). In his first note, he tried to establish the 
identity  of the Ratu i  Halu;  the latrer is brought into some connection 
with the founder  Rakai  Walaing  Pu Kumbhayoni by the words  puyut  sang 
ratu ī halu pakwiannira i jangluran. Several different interpretations of  these 
difficult  words have been proposed.  Kern,  the first editor of the Pereng 
inscription  who discussed its meaning 3'3), chose an interpretation agreeing 
with his  view  that  the Pereng inscription related an astronomical event 31) . 
Poerbatjaraka,  critisizing  Kern’s  interpretation, rendered  puyut  by „great­
grandfather” 32), whereas  Bosch,  comparing the meaning of kabuyutan, con­
sidered  the word to mean  „object  of worship’’  33) . The latter interpretation 
would  not seem  likely  : ,,object of  worship’’  could,  at most, translate 
kabuyutan, but never  buyut  or puyut  34). Poerbatjaraka’s  translation 
is based upon the most common meaning of  puyut,  but, although it is not 
completely  impossible  that  somebody should be the great­grandfather of a 
living  king,  such a relation  would  not be  likely  35) . The most probable solution 
is that  proposed by Stutterheim. It is usual in Old Javanese inscriptions 
that a person who, for some reason or other, wants to  stress  his particular 
position  does so by referring to some illustrious ancestor. Since terms such 
as puyut  serve to indicate a definite genealogical distance, although it is 
not rare  that  they are used to denote both the ascendant and descendant 
.Zieseniss,  Studien  zur  Geschichte des  ^ivaismus, I. in Biidr. K.I., 98, 1939, pp. 2os 
sqq.), and to interpret  jīva  in the meaning  „soul,  vital  breath’’. The compound as 
a whole, has a  bahuvrīhi  meaning. 
­–) Epigrafische  Aantekeningen,  V1I. Sang Ra:.u i Halu, in  T.B.G.,  83 (1949), T^o. 21 
sq., and  B.E.1^.E.O.,  XLVI,  Fasc. 1 (1952), note 1 to p. 34. 
30) The first editor of the inscription  itself  (Cohen Stuart) had only given a (very 
provisional)  transcription ; cf. noto 17 above. 
31) It is needless to add  that  Kern's interpretation is mainly based  upon  the fact  that 
Kumbhayoni  is a synonym of Agastya,  which  is also the common name of the star 
Canopus. The  1atter's  rising and setting are important moments for the regulation 
of agricultural activities ; the  date  of the Pereng inscription  would  more or less 
agree  with  the period in  which  Canopus disappears  from  the sky. Kern's interpretation 
is based rather on general ideas ahout the dependence of mythology on the movements 
of planets and  stars  than on the text of the Pereng inscription. As far as  puyut  is con­
cerned, Kern's translation is based  exclusively  on the above interpretation,  which 
is not in the least supported by etymology. 
32) Agastya in  den Archipel,  p. 47. 
33) T.B.G.,  67 (1927), pp. 470 sq.  Bosch  appears  to accept Poerbatjaraka's comparison 
with (pu)puṇden  in modern Javanese. 
­4) This  meaning of kabuyutan is easily derived  from  buyut  in its usual meaning of 
„great­grandfather"  and, by extension,  „ancestor";  the combination of the affixes 
ka­ and ­an usually  denotes  the place. For the combination  sang  hyang dharmma 
kabuyutan, cf. Pras. 1ndon., I, p. 172. 
3­) The extreme minimum is about  fifty  years of difference in age, but this  would  not 
he completely impossible. A far more serious objection  will  be mentioned below. 


--- [Page 262] ---
line at the same time, it is far more probable  that  Kumbhayoni refers to 
an illustrious ancestor by the words  puyut  sang  ratu  i halu : he calls  himself 
the great-grandson of the Prince of  Halu  or, at least, his descendant, if a 
less precise meaning  could  be attached to  puyut 36). Finally,  Damais rightly 
accepted  Stutterheim’s  interpretation of this passage, although he disap­
proved  of the less precise meaning added by Stutterheim between brack­
ets 37). Damais’ argument  that  the precise meaning of a definite grade of 
relationship  should be required in a  passage  such as this one  seems  hardly 
relevant. Not  only  is a  statement  that  somebody descends  from  king  so-
and-so in a straight  line  a rather definite one, but Damais’ argument is 
directiy  refuted by our Ratubaka inscriptions b and c where the  king’s 
relationship  with  some famous ancestor is indicated by the words  tasy ātma-
nas=sant^tijena,  „sprung  from  his own descendency’’, — an expression 
implying  a direct descent but not a definite grade of relationship 38). It 
seems, therefore, safe to maintain the meaning  „descendant”  for puyut  as 
a possible alternative. 
With  a view  to the above, I am hardly convinced by the calculation by 
Damais  of when this Ratu i  Halu  may have  lived  and reigned. The average 
length  of a generation cannot be relevant if  only  three  or four generations 
are concerned. There is no reason to fix the difference between 80 and 100 
years even if the precise meaning  „great-grandfather’  ’ is attached to  puyut. 
The only  reasonable conclusion is  that  the number of years should be  fixed 
somewhere between 0 and  160  39). 
We therefore conclude  that,  if Stutterheim’s  interpretation is correct, 
which  it has every chance to be, the founder Pu  Kumbhayoni  defines his 
status  by (a) the title  Rakai  Walaing  and (b) his descent  from  the  Ratu  i 
Halu,  who presumably was a famous person. 
Former  editors of the Pereng inscription agreed at least on one point, 
viz. that  the founder was not a reigning  king.  The absence of a  royal  titie is 
conclusive 49). It is, however, obvious th^.t such a negative conclusion is 
hardly  satisfactory; for it is not doubtful  that  the founder in the Pereng 
inscription  certainly was a very distinguished authority. The foundation 
is an elaborate one, commemorated by a  bilingual  inscription; in addition, 
^•) Stutterheim, T.B.C., 65 (1925),  note  8 to p. 215. 
. ,. Damais, T.B.C., 83 (1949), pp. 21 sq. 
3s) 1ntra, inscription b, strophe 4,  pāda  a. Inscription c, strophe 4,  pāda  a, uses  the equiv-
alent  expression  tadanvayāt=  prasuto 'yam,  which  is not less vague. 
39 ) The minimum is hased on the theoretical  possibility  that  the great-grandfather was 
still alive  in 863, the maximum on the  possibility  that  the generations of both  great-
grandfather and great-grandson should he included into the total.  With  a view  to 
some arguments to be discussed below,  there  are strong  reasons  to suppose  that 
Kumbhayoni  was already aged at the time of the Pereng inscription, so  that  the true 
distance might be nearer the maximum than the minimum. The point  will  be further 
dealt  with  in the course of this Introduction. 
40) It is a sound principle not to conclude to kingship unless  there  is an unambiguous 
royal  title. 


--- [Page 263] ---
— 253 — 
the end of the Pereng inscription  (tuṅgang  ḍawĕt,  laṅkā  sĕrĕḥ  wulakan=nī  ^ 
walā  walaing  loāwāng  wanwanirang  dhīmān  kumbhayoni  ṅarannira)  makes 
it clear  that  he is the possessor of at least seven villages  (wanwa).  Dhīmān 
might be a  mere  commonplace, but it is a  rather  strong term; in Buddhism, 
e.g., it is almost a synonym of Bodhisattva 41), whereas  it appears  to be 
especially  used as an epithet of ancient  sages  in Brāhmaṇism  42) . 
After  the above digression, the question  about  a possible identification 
of Pu Kumbhayoni in the Pereng inscription with the  king  Çrī  Kumbhaja 
(Kalaçodbhava)  in the Ratubaka inscriptions may be posed again. We think 
that an easy explanation of the  absence  of a royal title in the 
Pereng inscription may be given if we  assume  that  the  king  in the Ratu­
baka inscriptions resigned the  throne  in the  years  preceding the Pereng 
epigraph. Before considering this point in detail, we want to  stress  that 
there  is a small detail, vi^. the title  Rakai  Walaing, which might be explained 
by the Ratubaka inscriptions to a certain degree. The name Walaing, occur¬
ring in this title, though not unknown from other inscriptions 43), is peculiar. 
Kern  considered it a  „Polynesian  equivalent’’ of the  name  of the  star  Cano– 
pus, I.e. Agastya in Sanskrit 44), whereas  Krom  interpreted it as the  mere 
name  of a locality  that  required no further explanation 45) . Krom  appears, 
however, to have changed his opinion on this point since  about  twenty 
years  later he considered the  name  Walaing  „puzzling”  46) . 
Walaing  occurs  three  times in the Pereng inscription. In the beginning 
of the Old  Javanese  portion, the founder, Pu  Kumbhayoni,  is denoted by 
Rakai  Walaing. At the end of the third introductory  Çloka,  the genitive 
valaiṅnāmnaḥ  occurs and,  finally,  Walaing is mentioned in the enumeration 
of villages  (^.vanwa)  of Kumbhayoni at the end of the text in a  passage  quoted 
above. As to its second occurrence, vi2:. in  v^laiṅnāmnaḥ,  we already cin¬
cluded that it may easily be connected with the Rakai title in the first 
reference if we consider it an abbreviated expression, easily explamed by 
the requirements of Sanskrit language ^nd metre, of the founder's title 47). 
41) Mahāvyutpatti,  edition by  Minaīev  and  Mironov  in Bibf.  Buddh.,  XIII  (1911), p. 10, 
chapt. 22^ No. s. 42) .s^. Petersb. ..Oiction., s.v.  dhīmant. 
­3) A few references were given hy Poerhatjaraka, op. cit., p. 49. In Balitung's  Kĕḍu 
inscription  dated 907  A.D.,  Walaing is the place where the scrihe  lived  (B­23  : likhita 
citrālekha  i walaing punta tarkka ; cI. Stutterheim  T.B.G.,  67, 1927. p. 212). 
44) Yerspr.  Geschr.;vI. p. 282. 
4.^) Biidr. K.I., 75 (1919), pp. 17 sq. 
46) Cf. supra, p. 250. 
47 ) This  valaiṅnāmnaḥ  should therefore he compared  with  kalaçajanāmnā  in the first of 
the two strophes at the end of the inscription.  Both  expressions undoubtedly refer 
to the founder. We do not understand why  Krom  concluded  that  it appears  from 
the introductory strophes  that  Walalng is certainly the name of a being to be 
worshipped  (p. 18). Neither do we understand what  Krom  considers mysterious in the 
last lines of the Pereng  inscription  where the names  Walalng  and  Kumbhayoni  are 
again connected  with  one another. Poerbatjaraka (Agastya, p. 49)  rightly  notes  that 
the connection is not a very mysterious one : Walaing is nothing but one of the do­
mains belonging to  Kumbhayoni.  Krom,  however,  rightly  noticed  that  the two last 


--- [Page 264] ---
— 25 4 — 
Then,  there  is no more reason to interpret Walaing as the name of some 
superhuman being: it is both a  locality  and a  Rakai  title, a combination  which 
is frequently found in Old Javanese epigraphy 48). 
Now  it is very important to  note  that  Walaing occurs twice in our 
Ratubaka inscriptions in the sanscritized form Valamga. We  find  it in in­
scription  b, strophe 4,  pāda  c (valaiṅgajetrā)  and in inscription a, strophe 3, 
pāda  c (valaiṅgagoptrā)  as epithets of  king  Kumbhayoni.  In the former case, 
one should translate the ,,victor of  Valamga’’  (or : of  Walaing)  ‚ in the 
latter, however, the ,,protector of  Valamga’’.  Since the two expressions must 
be more or less equivalent, Walaing  could  not be, for instance, 
the name of the enemy  beaten  by the  king  in the former expression; 
„•victor  of ^Valamga”  shou1d therefore be interpreted as either ,,conqueror 
of Va1aiṅga”  or ,, victorious  king  of Valamga’’  4^) . So we  conc1ude  that 
Walaing  is the name of some centre or territory dominated by the  king, 
probab1y as a result of an important  victory.  It seems  1ikely  that  this Walaing 
shou1d be identified  with  the village u)alaing  u^atak  u^alaing mentioned in a 
copper  p1ate  inscription from Central  Java 5°). An argument in favour of 
the identification is not only the  rare  occurrence of the name, but also the 
fact that  the 1atter  Walaing  is not an ordinary village but the centre of an 
administrative unity  (u)atak)  51). It must therefore have been a place of 
some importance, a fact  which  could  well  be connected  with  the loci in our 
Ratubaka inscriptions. In addition, one might attach some importance to 
the fact  that  Balitung’s  Keḍu  inscription dated 907  A.D.,  considered one of 
the most important documents not only by modern scholars but also in older 
times  (it is the only inscription  three  copies of  which  are known) 5­), was 
lines  of the Pereng inscription constitute a  Kawi  strophe, whereas Poerbatjaraka 
considered  them prose : it is a regular  Anuṣṭubh  strophe  with  a not unusual  Vipu1ā 
in its first  pāda.  This  exp1alns why the order of the words is s1.ghtly different  from 
what it  would  have  heen  in prose. One might  agree  with  Krom  that  not everything 
in the Pereng inscription is clear to us, but  even  scepticism may be exaggerated. 
48) we do not mean  that  an of the  Rakal  and  Pamĕgĕt  titles should he derived  from 
geographical  name^ ; the contrary, i.e. geographical names, especially those of so­called 
"circumscriptions’'  (we mean  the names  preceded by watek), being derived  from  the 
Rakai  titles of the lords, may also have happened. The essential point is  that  most 
of the names  we find after  watĕk  in inscriptions also occur as  parts  of Rakai  titles 
(Kayuwam,  Halaran,  Hino,  Halu,  Pikatan,  Patapān,  etc.). 
49) CI.  note  145 helow. 
50) C.LC.,  XXIX,  B­l to 2. CI. Poerhatjaraka, Agastya,  note  2 to p. 49. 
51) CI.  note  43 above. — It is hardly necessary to add  that  the  form  Walaing,  which 
we use throughout unless quoting the text of the Ratubaka inscriptions themselves, 
is the  original  one.  Valamga  is the  form  used in the Sanskrit texts. Words ending 
in ­ṅ occur  only  in a very few  cases  as a consequence of  sandhi  in Sanskrit (the stems 
in ­añc  in the nom. masc. singular).  This  kind of adaptation may  well  be understood ; 
some  similar  cases  were discussed by Gonda,  Bhujaṅga,  Biidr. K.I., 89 (1932), pp. 
253­26o  (lavaṅ  and  lavaṅga, kataṅ  and  kataṅga ; Gonda conjecturally  explains Java­
nese  lbujaṅga  as, originally,  a learned  form  of bujaṅ). 
^2) Stutterheim, T.B.C., 67 (1927), pp. 172 sq. 


--- [Page 265] ---
— 255 — 
written at Walaing 53). Finally,  it appears  that  the name  Walaing also occurs 
in the title Sang Watu Walaing, frequently found in inscriptions^ 4). 
There could be no  doubt  that  Walaing was  situated  in Central Java 55), 
but are  there  data  that  would  make  it possible to locate the  name  at a  more 
limited  place ? We think  that  a positive reply may be given to the latrer 
question if we  take  the above  materials into  account.  We concluded from 
the end of the Pereng inscription  that  Walaing is mentioned among the 
domains belonging to Kumbhayoni. This point  makes  it probable, though not 
certain,  that  Walaing should be located at not too  great  a distance  from 
Pereng. Now we see  that  a king who  erected  three  lingas  on the Ratubaka 
plateau  calls himself  protector  and conqueror of Walaing in two of the  three 
inscriptions dealing with  these  very  liṅga  erections. It is well­known  that 
liṅgas  are often  erected  as visible signs of a victory  (jayacihna)  56) . Now we 
see from  these  inscriptions  that  a victory over Walaing by Kumbhayoni is 
mentioned in the  texts  themselves.  One would naturally conclude  that  this 
very victory was the direct motive of the linga erections. It is also natural 
to conclude  that  the liṅgas  were  erected  on or  near  the place of the victory. 
Since we know the lingas to  have  been  erected  on the Ratubaka  plateau, 
the above  arguments  would lead us to the conclusion  that that  plateau  itself 
was the  scene  of the victory. If,  then,  we see  that  the inscriptions  themselves 
allude to a victory over Walaing, the  final  conclusion is  that  the  name 
Walaing  denoted  the Ratubaka  plateau  in ancient  times. 
This  conclusion  agrees  well  with the Pereng inscription, which  makes 
it probable  that  Walaing should be looked for in the neighbourhood; 
as a matter  of fact, the Ratubaka  plateau  is situated  in the immediate neigh­
bourhood. The  exact  site  of discovery of  O.JO.,  XKIX  i^ unknown ; the cop­
perplate  was incorporated into the Collection Dieduksman at Djokjakarta, 
but the place  names  mentioned in the  text  make  it very probable  that  it 
'^ 3) Art. cit., p. 212, B, line 23 : likhita  citrālekha  i walaing  punta  tarka. 
.­.­) The oldest reference is the  Naṅgulan  inscription dated 822 ; cI. Pras.  1ndon.,  I (195O), 
p. 129. We  find  it several times in the  still  unpublished inscriptions of the copper 
plates from  Poleṅan  (cI. Damais,  B.E.F.E.O.,  XLvI,  Fasc. 1, 1952, pp. 36­41), viz. 
in inscription II, dated 875 A.D., A, lines 6 sq.: tuhan 2 watuwalaing si mnang . pu¬
lung si jakhara ; in inscription III, dated 876 A.D., B, line 9  : tuhān  2 rolū  si manūt 
watuwalaing  si mnang;  the title also occurs in inscriptions from  Eastern  Java, e.g. 
in O.IO., XXXvIII (from Singosari), B, line 7 ; O.IO.,  XLIII  (also from Singosari). 
A, line 25,;  O.J.O.,  XLvTI  (from  Kudjon  Manis),  D, 1ines 2 sq. 
­­) That the titie occurs in inscriptions from Eastern Java too, is not astonishing: the 
kings  reigning in Eastern Java kept the o1d tradition of the Central Javanese  kraton 
in most of the titles of dignitaries ­— titles  which  probably had their geographical 
basis in Central Java; cf.  Krom,  Geschiedenis^,  pp. 206 sqq. 
­6) CI., for instance (one example out of many), an inscription from Cambodia quoted 
by Coedés,  BE. P. E.G., 28 (192s), p. 129: jitveman  deçam  ak.hilaṃ  girīçasyeha 
bhūbhṛti  liṅgan  niveçayām  āsa jayacihnam  ivātmanaḥ  //.  Coedés  translates  the last 
pāda:  "comme le signe de sa victoire". 


--- [Page 266] ---
— 256 — 
originated  from  the Prambanan region 57). These references are rather vague, 
but a third one is very precise. A stone fragment, part of the cornice of a 
temple  building,  which  was discovered during excavations at the Eastern 
side of the so­called  pĕṇḍapa  terrace at the Ratubaka plateau, proves to be 
inscribed  with  the very word u)alaing 58). Of course, one  could  never con­
clude  from  this inscription  that  Walaing  is the old name of the Ratubaka 
plateau or a part of it, but after having arrived at such a conclusion on 
account of the arguments discussed above one may consider the short in¬
scription  an important confirmation. 
On the above basis, one might try to reconstruct some of the events 
which  took place about 856  A.D.  A Prince, denoting  himself  by synonyms 
of the sage  Agastya, succeeded in conquering the Ratubaka plateau on an 
unknown  enemy in 856  A.D.  and erected  three  liṅgas  on the place of his 
victory.  In the stone inscriptions recording the linga erections, he refers to 
this feat of arms by  calling  himself  „Victor  of Walaing  (Valamga)’’  or, less 
precisely,  „Protector  of Walalng”.  This  was not just a deed of violence or 
revolt,  for the  victor  stresses  his rights to the throne by referring to his 
descent  from  a great  king  in old times in two strophes to be analyzed below. 
Some  time afterwards, he may have resigned the throne to devote  himself 
to a more contemplative  state  in which  he continues to  live  during a couple 
of years. Six years after his victory, he inaugurates a  Çiva  temple com¬
memorated by a bilingual inscription in which he again stresses his royal 
descent and  denotes  himself  by a  Rakai  title in  which  the name of the place 
of the, presumably decisive,  victory  is preserved. 
It is possible  that  the Pereng inscription contains an  allusion  to such 
a victory.  In the third introductory Sanskrit strophe, we read the words 
çiviravṛtāpy=atipūtā  çilā  yato  janmibhiḥ  pūjyā,  words  which  appear to have 
puzzled  the editors.  Kern  5^), not corrected by Poerbatjaraka 6°), considered 
the current meaning of  çivira  (çibira)  61) unsatisfactory, for a  royal  camp 
­7) For the plate, cI. also Damais, art. cit., pp. 50 sq. The inscription is a  çuddhapattra, 
„document  proving the repayment of a debt" (cf. No. XII helow). The place where 
the two  creditors  live  is Wurutuṅga1.  The same  village  name occurs in the inscription 
of Raṇḍusari  II (puhlished hy Stutterheim in  1nscr.  Ned.–1ndiĕ,  I, 1940, pp. 29­32), 
in line 12 and as the name of a centre preceded hy watak in line 2. In the inscription 
of Raṇḍusari  I (also published hy Stutterheim, ibid., pp. 3­28), it occurs as the name 
of an administrative centre on plate 1 h, line 19, in the  form  wurusiki  ^siki  and 
tuṅgal  are synonyms). The name walakas (watak  ^valakas^),  in line B­1 in  O.J.O. 
XXIX,  also occurs in  Raṇḍusari  I. Plate 2 a, line 10. 
­8) At present, the  stone  fragment is at the  office  of the Dinas Purhakala at Pramhanan. 
­9) Ve.rspr. Ceschr., VI pp. 281; cf. the note hy Gohen Stuart, ihid., p. 282, note 1. 
60) Agastya. p. 46. — Poerbatjaraka transcribed, however,  çivara,  which  is not correct. 
61 ) ^ibira.  „a sort of grain’’, is mentioned in Indian  Koças  only.  Even  if we accept 
Kern's  conjecture according to  which  the term  would  denote some  wild  herb (a con­
jecture for  which  there  exists no reference but the Pereng inscription  itself),  the 
contrast  with  atipūtā  çilā  is not comprehensible. 


--- [Page 267] ---
— 257 — 
(çibira)  62) and an extremely pure rock  (atipūtā  çilā)  63) are not such  nat­
ural oppositions  that  the expression  „this  rock, though surrounded by a royal 
camp, is extremely pure and therefore to be worshipped by the people’’  would 
be comprehensible; in addition, nothing whatever about a royal camp in 
the neighbourhood of Pereng was known, so  that  Kern  presumed  that 
çibira  would  have some meaning sharply contrasted to the holy rock 
and interpreted  ,,wild  herbs’’ or  „dirt”.  After  the preceding arguments 
it is, however, clear  that  it is quite unnecessary to consider such a forced 
interpretation. The contrast expressed in this strophe may  well  be understood 
if we presume  that  the temple  Bhadrāloka,  whose foundation is recorded 
in the Pereng inscription, was erected in a place where  there  had been royal 
camps some years before. The place may have been the  .scene  of fierce battles, 
soiled  with  the blood of numerous victims. It is self­evident  that  such a place 
is not the most suitable one for the erection of a temple;  that  this place was 
nevertheless chosen to  that  purpose, is  because  it was naturally pure, not 
susceptible of being influenced by  defiling  forces. It may be compared  with 
a grain of  gold  buried in mud or the Bodhisattva in  Māyā’s  womb, to take 
two similes famous from Buddhism 64). If this interpretation of the second 
introductory strophe is correct, the connection between the Ratubaka  epi­
graphs and the Pereng inscription is a very close one,  which  is an additional 
argument  to consider  these  texts  the work of the  same  king­sage 6^). 
It might not be useless to make an  attempt  at determining what  kind 
of battles  and victory made Kumbhayoni erect his  liṅgas  and resign the 
throne to lead the  life  of a royal ascetic. The question is not completely 
62) In spite of Cohen Stuart's  note  (cf.  note  59 above), some of the  loci  clearly  suggest 
a military camp ; cf., for instance, the Old Javanese  Bhīṣmaparwa,  edition by Gonda 
in Bibf.  Jav., No. 7 (1936), p. 86, lines 6 sq., where all the Kaurawas  k^pwāmĕgil  in 
çiwirāyatana  when  sunset  made it necessary to  cease  fighting ; cf. also, op. cit., 
95, line 6  (mundur  ta sakweh  saṅ  Korawa, kapwa mulih  riṅ çiwira).  Van  der  Tuuk, 
referring  to these  loci  in his dictionary (III, p. 209) correctly  paraphrases  „place 
where one  returns  after the battle". 
63) Poerbatjaraka's translation of this strophe is very different from  that  by  Kern,  but 
it is due to a confusion  between  çilā  and  çīla  (cf.  Bosch.  T.B.G., 67, 1927, p. 470). It 
is not clear what exactly is  meant  by çilā;  it might be the  stone  in which  the in­
scription was engraved, but this  does  not seem probable ; one  could  also suppose 
that çilā  refers to the vibudhageha mentioned in line 17, hut  çūnyāpi  (line 3)  seems 
strange in this case, unless we should interpret  çūnya  in its philosophical meaning, 
well­known  in Çaivasiddhānta  as well  as in  Mahāyāna  (cf. .Zieseniss,  Studien  zur 
Geschichte des  ^:ivaismus, I. in Biidr. K.I., 98, 1939, pp. 114 sqq.; p. 114:  „Das 
çūnya  ist das Kennzeichen  des  Aṣṭaciva’’).  This interpretation  could  more or less 
account for the sophisticated contrast: the  true  nature  of the supreme gods can only 
be expressed by a paradox. 
04) Cf.^ for instance, the numerous similes  which  aim at explaining the presence of the 
pure germ of Buddha­hood in the defiled bodies in the  urtaratantra,  Obermiller’s 
translation in Acta Orient., IX (1931), pp. 132 sqq. 
­­) One might add another,  small,  detail viz. the use of  atipūtā  çilā  in the Pereng in­
cription and the words  bhuvi  pūtaṃ  tadābhavat.  Cf. the detailed discussion in  note 
160 helow. 


--- [Page 268] ---
— 258 — 
hopeless if we consider the time in  which  the above events  would  have taken 
place. 
When  Krom  examined the problem of when the  Çailendra  kings had 
lost their power in Central Java, he concluded  that  the first unambiguous 
proof  for the cessation of  Çailendra  hegemony is the Pereng inscription dated 
863 A.D.  66). Krom  rightly argued  that  the Perot inscriptions dated 850 fur­
nished  no real proof 67). Now, we pointed out  that  the new interpretation of 
the beginning  of the Perot inscriptions suggested by Damais makes it clear 
that the Rakai  Pikatan, mentioned in  these  inscriptions, is indeed the  king 
to whom  that  very title is attributed in  Balitung’s  list of the preceding kings 
who protected the  kraton  of Meḍang  68) . It is, however, clear  that  the new 
interpretation hardly affects  Krom's  analysis : the  Çailendras  may have con­
tinued  to reign in the plains of Southern Central Java when descendants of 
Safijaya  had already succeeded in liberating themselves  from  Çailendra 
supremacy. It  appears  that  a prince belonging to the Safijaya dynasty 
had made  himself  completely independent  from  the  Çailendras  as early as 
832 A.D.  or eighteen years before the Perot inscriptions 6^) . From  about 832 
on, we have to presume the existence of a  Çaiva  centre, probably  claiming 
descent  from  Sanjaya, in the Northern part of Central Java. We do not know 
how the relations between the two dynasties developed in the years  following 
832, but later on, at least since the reign of  Kayuwaṅi,  the Çailendra  dynasty 
has disappeared  from  the Javanese  soil  and  Balitung  traces  his dynasty back 
to Sañjaya in his famous  Keḍu  inscription. In order to explain what must 
have happened in the meantime, we suggested  that  a king  belonging to the 
Sanjaya  dynasty, probably the  Rakai  Pikatan, married a daughter of the 
Çailendra  king  Samaratuṅga,  —­ a princess who is mentioned in the Karang¬
teṅah  inscription dated 824 and who appears to be identical with the queen 
who issued two charters in 842  A.D.  7°). In this way, one  could  fully  account 
for what happened in Java, but one important detail is left unexplained, viz. 
the problem why and how a son of the Javanese  Çailendra  king  Samaratuṅga 
could  become a  king  in Sumatra; we know, however,  that  this happened. If 
we assume  that  Balāputra  mounted the  Çrīvijaya  throne because he was 
entitled  to the succession  7 1) , we have  still  to explain why he renounced 
66) Geschiedenis 2, p. 165. 
­7) Cp. cit.. p. 156. In this connection,  Krom  called  attention  to the  stone  inscription 
Mus.  Djak.  D 28, in  which  traces  of a  Pre­Nāgarī  inscription are  visible  on its hack. 
The stone  is discussed as No. XI below. 
­8) cf. the Introduction to No. IX  ahove. 
69) Pras. 1ndon., I‚ No. Iv (the  Gaṇḍasuli  inscription issued by a  Ḍang Karayān  Par¬
tapān).  The date 832 A.D. is not heyond douht (cI. op. cit., pp. 56 sq.)); it is not cer­
tain that  the words at the  heginning  of the text do have a numerical value (cf. Damais, 
B.E.P.E.C.,  XLVI.  Fasc. 1, note 1 to p. 28), but the not quite natural choice of the 
words in  which  the text begins makes this interpretation probable, especially since 
the result  would  agree  with  other data. 
7­) Pras. 1ndon., I. Nos. V and VI. pp. 116 sqq. and 131 sqq. 
7i) According  to the  Nālandā  inscription (reverse, lines 52­62),  Bālaputradeva,  the king 
of Suvarṇadvīpa,  is a son of  Samarāgravīra  and his  principal  spouse  (agramahiṣī) 


--- [Page 269] ---
— 259 — 
any claims to the Central Javanese throne. It  seems  probable  that  those circles 
in Central Java who had been attached to the  Çailendra  court during several 
generations were not satisfied  with  the events as a consequence of  which 
they  would  lose their influence; if this  line  of argument is correct, we should 
expect them to support  Bālaputra  if he should make an  attempt  at obtaining 
the supreme power in Java. 
With  a little  imagination, we  could  represent us two groups struggling 
for supremacy in Central Java about in the middle of the 9th century. If 
now, on the other hand, it is known  that  a king  belonging to a  Çaiva  dynasty 
and denoting  himself  by the name of an ancient  sage  closely connected  with 
the expansion  of Brāhmaṇic  culture erected  liṅgas  in 856 A.D. probably 
as the commemoration of an important  victory  and in any case at a place 
which  had been associated  with  the Buddhist  Çailendra  dynasty in older 
times  7­) , there  are strong reasons to connect  these  facts  with  the struggle 
for supremacy  which  could  be presumed on more general and, unfortunately, 
rather vague arguments. The two lines of arguments fit in  with  one another 
as well  as could  have been expected. Fortunately, we now dispose of a strong 
argument  which  confirms the otherwise weakest  link  in the chain of events 
Tārā.  Samarāgravira  is the son of the king of Java,  ornament  of the  Çallendra  dynasty 
(52), Tārā  is the daughter of  Çrī  Dharmasetu (or  : Varmasetu ; in the most  recent 
transcript of the  Nālandā  inscription hy Hirananda Sastri in Mem. Arch.  Surv.  1ndia, 
No. 66, 1942, p. 99, line 59, the name is rendered  çrī­Dharmasātñḥ‚  hut Dr. Chakra¬
varti adds in note 3 to op. cit., p. 99, that „Majumdar reads  Yarmasātoḥ,  which is 
correct") of the lunar dynasty. Stutterheim (A Javanese Period, 1929, pp. 1o sq.) 
had considered Dharmasetu a synonym of the  Pāla  king  Dharmapāla,  hut without 
sufficient  arguments ; we accept  Krom's  conjecture (in  Stapel,  I, 1938. p. 162 ; cI. 
also Nilakanta Sastri in  B.E.E.E.O.,  XL, 1940, p. 267, and Pra­­ 1ndon., I. p. 110) 
according  to which  Dharmasetu or  Varr^asetu  would  have been a  king  of Çrīvijaya  : 
in that  case, he  could  have ascended the  Çrīvijaya  throne  owing  to, presumably,  com­
plicated  dynastic relations in  Çrīvijaya.  question :  could  Bālaputra  have been made 
king  in Çrīvijaya  in preference to and favoured above other possible  pretendents  on 
account of claims to Central Java? If it is correct  that  Dharmasetu was a  king  of 
Çrīvijaya,  we know  that  the reigning dynasty in  Çrīvljaya  was the  Somavaṃça  before 
Bālaputra,  who probably started the line of  Çailendra  kings who continued to reign 
in Sumatra  until,  at least, the first  half  of the 11th century (cI.  Ccedés,  .Les  Etats 
hindouīsĕs,  p. 185 and pp. 238 sqq.).  Bālaputra  calls himself  Suvarṇadvīpādhipama¬
hāraja (Nālandā  inscription, obverse, line 37), hut when he gives his  vaṃçāvalī  (re­
verse, lines 52 sqq.), he  starts  with  a yavabhūmipāla,  not  with  some  Çrivijaya  king. 
One may assume  that  such an important document as this  Nālandā  inscription, dealing 
with the relations  between  the two  great  Mahāyānic  powers, is very carefully worded. 
I am therefore  inclined  to attach some importance to this point : claims are an es­
sential  factor in  political  history of all countries and all times. CI. also below. 
72) This  appears  from  the  Pre­Nāgarī  inscription dated about 77a A.D. and discussed 
lastiy  in Pras. 1ndon., I. No. H.  Among  the scarce Buddhist remains discovered on 
the ratubaka plateau,  there  is a  small  gold  plate  with  an inscription ye te  svāha, 
undoubtedly the  initial  syllables of the two main  parts  of the Buddhist formula ye 
dharma  hetuprabhavā  etc. The archaic script, especially the  form  of the ­e, makes 
it probable  that  the inscription should be assigned to a considerably earlier period 
than  our  liṅga  inscriptions. 


--- [Page 270] ---
— 260 — 
reconstructed above. An Old Javanese inscription dated the  same  year as the 
Ratubaka inscriptions (856 A.D.) mentions the name  Bālaputra  (spelt  vāla¬
putra) in connection with a struggle in the preceding period, after which the 
Çaiva  king  acquired complete sovereignty in Central Java 73). 
The above is important for several reasons. It supplies us  with  an im­
portant  date  in Old Javanese history, something more precise than we knew 
before; it is also interesting for the history of  Çrīvijaya  and even for  that  of 
Bengal.  Pala chronology is  still  very uncertain; the  date  of the  Nālandā  in­
scription,  I.e. the 39th year of  Devapāla’s  reign, floats between 833 and 878. 
The above reconstruction gives us a  fixed  point. Since  Bālaputradeva  sends 
his ambassador as a  king  of Sumatra, the  Nālandā  inscription must be dated 
in or after 856  A.D.  It is not  unlikely  that  Balaputra should have made  haste 
to enter  into relations  with  Devapāla  : the  events  in which  he had been 
involved  in Java might have induced him to look for possible allies in the West. 
Is not it the  same  kind  of policy  as that  which  we vaguely distinguish in the 
beginning  of the 11th century when the friendly relations between  Çrivijaya 
and the  Cola  king  Rājarāja  I, which  are marked by the foundation of a  Vihāra 
at Nāgīpatṭana,  by the  Çrīvijaya  king  Māravijayottuṅgavarman  take place 
— only a few years after an attack by a Javanese fleet ? 74) If the presumed 
connection is correct, we have a strong argument to date the  Nālandā  in¬
scription  only a few years after 856 or about 860 AD. 75). 
Finally, one might ask again with  Krom  76) whether the famous trans¬
position of the Javanese court from Central to Eastern Java in the first half 
of the 10th century is not connected  with  a direct or indirect  attempt  by 
Çrīvijaya  at executing the claims  which  we suggested above. 
Krom’s  arguments, though based upon an explanation of the  Çailendra 
period  which  is no more accepted in  that  form 77), have not lost their force; 
7­) Strophe 7,  pāda  d‚ of No. XI below. The passage  will  be discussed in detail in the 
Introduction  to No. XI. 
74) CI.  Krom,  Geschiedenis 2, p. 229  ; Ccedés,  Les  Etats  hindouīsĕs,  p. 224.  Berg,  Indo­
nesië,  IV, No. 6 (May 1951), p. 511, note 3, is very sceptical about this Javanese 
expedition  since there  would  he too much chance for a misunderstanding hy the 
Chinese. This scepticism seems exaggerated since the precise references to the move¬
ments of the ambassador from  Çrīvijaya  give the impression of being reliable ; it 
seems  that  the only reasonable chance for a misunderstanding  could  be in the name 
of the country  that  attacked  Çrīvijaya.  It shou1d, however,  been  added  that  the ex­
planation  of the  Çrivijaya  amhassador’s  delay is strongly confirmed by a Javanese 
embassy in 992 where the same events are alluded to  ; cf.  Krom,  Geschiedenis^, 
p. 229. 
7^–) Possibly  later.  Also  if we assume  that  Bālaputra  sent  the emhassy shortly after his 
accession  to the throne, there  still  remalns the undetermined period between his 
expulsion  from  Java and the accession to the throne. 
7' 6) Geschiedenis^  p. 208. 
77) Recently, three different attempts at  defining  the relations between  Crīvijaya  and 
Central  Java in the period  from  about 775 to 85o A.D. have been made, viz. by 
Goad's,  Le  Çailendra  „Tueur  des Héros  ennemis''  in Bingkisan Eudi (195o), pp. 
5s­7o,  by myself,  Pras.  Indon., I (1950), pp. 99 sq., and by  Bosch,  B^idr. KJ., 1os 


--- [Page 271] ---
— 261 — 
the only  difference is  that  the motive for an attack is slightly changed : the 
relation  even becomes  rather  more  explicit  78) . 
Whatever one may think about the above suggestions,  which  seem to 
open new lines of research  that  may prove to permit more satisfactory 
interpretations of some of the most annoying problems of the older Indonesian 
history,  the meaning of the year 856 begins to stand out against the background 
of this period. Before proceeding to give a transcription and translation of 
the three  texts, we shall  briefly  discuss two other  aspects  of their meaning, 
viz. the two  strophes  dealing  with  the descent of  king  Kumbhayoni (b 3 
and c 3) and the  namaskāras,  interesting for our knowledge of the history 
of Çaivism  in Java. 
Strophe b 3 is very  difficult  to be read ; its transcript is not everywhere 
certain. Fortunately, the  metre  (Ṭoṭaka)  and the  abuse  of alliterations make 
some control possib1e. We understand  that  once  there  was a  king  who, 
driven  by his  great  pity, settled down in some country to reign in an excellent 
town.  The  names  of both the country and the town are uncertain. The name 
of the country  seems  to read Sargabhava, whereas the excellent town is 
probably  called  Yava  (pāda  d : yavākhyapure  pravare) 79). Also  if this reading 
is not correct,  there  is no reasonable doubt  that  the town and the country 
are situated in Java : the strophe deals  with  a prince who settled down out 
of pity and to this prince Kumbhayoni  traces  his descent. Strophe c 3 deals 
with the  same  events, but describes them from a different point of  view. 
There, the country in  which  our mysterious prince setrled down is not men­
tioned, but attention is drawn to the very marvellous  city  that  he left or, 
to use the  terms  of the text, from where he descended  like  a moon from the 
pure sky. The most important point is the mention of a definite place of 
origin  in this connection, viz.  Akhaṇḍalapu^a.  The supernatural plan upon 
which  the ‘descent’ is placed leaves no doubt  that  the marvellous  city  is 
conceived  of as some  kind  of other  world  ; the  simile  would  be completely 
out of the place if it had reference to the movement from one place to 
another in the neighbourhood.  Akhaṇḍalapura  must have been far away from 
the Ratubaka  hili,  probably not in Java. The former  half  of the name strongly 
reminds one of  Akhaṇḍala,  a well­known name of Indra. The spelling by 
a short  initial  a could  not be explained as a scribal error, for the  metre 
(it is the second syllable of a  Svāgata pāda)  requires a short syllable ; a 
(1952), pp. 113­123. The  three  attempts,  rather  different in their detalls,  agree  in as 
far as they mark a partial withdrawal from the complete dissociation of the  Çailendra 
kings  from the rulers of  Çrīvijaya.  Ccedés,  in this point  followed  by Bosch,  considers 
the first  Çailendra  king  a son of the  king  of Çrīv1jaya  and a princess descending from 
Fu­nan.  The solution  which  I proposed differs in detail, but  agrees  in postulating 
dynastic relationship between the  Çrīvijaya  and the Gailendra kings from the end 
of the 8th century onwards. 
7s) CI. the Introduction to No. XI below. 
79) Cf.  notes  131 and 143 below. 


--- [Page 272] ---
— 262 — 
mistake by the poet is, however, plausible on account of the numerous other 
inaccuracies in  these  inscriptions 8°). If, then, the name is to be considered 
a mistake for  AkhaṇḍalaPu­­­ 1, it would  correspond to Indrapura, a very com­
mon name especially cf a  rcyal  residence. This very fact, however, makes 
it impossible to identify it.  Tbc  first capital of Jayavarman II in Cambodia 
was called Indrapura; it was probably founded at the very beginning of 
the actual reign of Jayavarman II, i.e. in 802  A.D.  81). The well­known 
Cham  dynasty of Indrapura (which was situated in the province ^uang­nam) 
was in power from 875 A.D. on 82). In the  Malay  Peninsula, Indrapura 
appears  to have been a common designation for royal residences ; it has 
remained the court name of  Pahang 83). Other examples may probably be 
added  ^ the name is not uncommon in Sumatra 84) . These references do not 
bring  us much further : even if the equivalency of  Akhaṇḍalapura  and Indra­
pura is accepted,  there  are no materials to justify a choice between the 
numerous  Indrapuras.  One point, however, deserves notice : no examples of 
Indrapura  (or a synonym of  that  name) have been known from Java, whereas 
the name frequently occurs in Sumatra and the  Malay  Peninsula, to mention 
only the nearest­by regions. It  seeṃs  therefore more probable  that  the myste­
rious god­king came from Sumatra or the  Malay  Peninsula than from another 
region  in Java. 
so^ We already  called  attention  to the strange construction of strophe c 2  with  the ac­
cusatives not depending on any verb.  Also  the two compounds of  which  the strophe 
is composed are not completely  lucid.  A compound such as  varaçāstratalānvitaḥ  (the 
second  pad's  of c 4) is hardly correct: anvita is  „followed  by, accompanied hy, pro­
vided with", whereas the poet undoubtedly intended to use a term meaning  „pene¬
trating, going to (the bottom of the excellent  Çāstras)",  such as  āgata.  The last pada 
of strophe c 5, viz.  bhuvi  pūt^­ṃ  tadābhavat,  is not  lucid  ; pūtaṃ  i^,  presumably. used 
as a substantive in the meaning of  viçuddhi,  viçodhana,  „purification". One mi^ht 
find fault  with  kṛttikavāsa­liṅgam  (the 4th  pāda  of a s) instead o.f  kṛtti(k^vāso– 
liṅgam,  with  bhuvanāvakrāntaṃ  (overwhelming the earth, unless the meaning should 
he bhuvane  vyavatīrṇaṃ) ; prasthāpnaṃ,  in the meaning of  pratiṣṭhāpitam  is more 
often found in Sanskrit inscriptions from Indonesia (4th  pāda  of h ^;  cf.  Vogel, 
Aanteekeningen  op  de inscriptie  van rjanggal in Midden Java, Biidr. K.I., 1OO, 1941, 
pp. 443­447, who  notes  prātiṣṭhipat  instead of  pratyatiṣṭhipat  in the first strophe of 
the inscription ; cI. also  prātiṣṭhipan  in the  Karangtĕṅah  inscription, strophe 11 d, 
Pras.  1ndon.,  I, p. 39). — These inaccuracies are not devoid of  interest  in view 
of the interpretation of our epigraphs. Sometimes, e.g. in the two first  pādas  of a 2, 
we can only  guess  at what the poet  meant.  Uncertain reading and copyist's lapses 
could  be only partly responsible for  these  inaccuracies. 
81) Ccedés.  Les  capitales de Jayavarman 1I.  B.E.F.E.O., XXVIII,  (1928), pp. 117­119; 
Etats  hindouisés, p. 169. 
82^ Etats  hindouisés, p. 209 and pp. 212 sq. 
8s) R.O. WinstedI. Kingship and Enthronement in Malaya,  J.RA.S.,  1945, pp. 135 sq.; 
reprint in the JM.B.R.A.S., XX (1947), Pt. 1, pp. 129­139 (with references). 
84) Tha n.^ost striking example is Siak Sri Indrapura, the residence of the Sultans of 
Siak.  Another Indrapura is situated  near  Seulimeum to the  south­east  of Kotaradja 
in Atjeh;  a third one is found in the south of the Minangkahau at the foot of the 
so­called  ‚‚Peak  of Indrapural' (or=  „Peak  of Korintji").  Only  in the first of  these 
references, the association  with  a royal residence is evident. 


--- [Page 273] ---
­ 263 — 
About  when may this mysterious  king  have  lived  ? — It is obvious 
that the words  tasyātmanas=santatijena  (b 4) and  tadanvayāt=prasuto  ’yaṃ 
(c 4), by  which  the relation between  Kumbhayoni  and his ancestor is expres­
sed, do not  imply  a definite  grade  of relationship. The Sanskrit expressions 
suggest  some distance : they  could  not have been used for the relation 
between a son and his father, but this might be almost all  that  can be 
concluded.  Owing  to the scarceness of the data, an identification of the prince 
who descended from  Akhaṇḍalapura  is impossible ; if, however, the above 
reference to Sumatra or the  Malay  Peninsula may be relied upon, the descent 
of the god­king might be connected  with  some other data  which  point to 
the same  regions, too. Probably in 832  A. D., an inscription in the Old  Malay 
language is carved in a rock at  Gaṇḍasuli  in the  heart  of Central Java ; 
another Old  Malay  inscription, originating from the  same  vll1age, is dated 
827 A. D. 8­).^ In addition,  there  is the short inscription from Bukatedja  which 
was discussed above (No.  VIII).  Is there  any connection between all  these 
data? 86). 
When  discussing the  Gaṇḍasuli  rock inscription in an earlier publica­
tion  87), I made no  attempt  at suggesting an explanation of the use of Old 
Malay  in this edict, but only  briefly  mentioned the possibility  that  the use 
of the Old  Malay  language should be considered a  kind  of demonstration 
manifesting  the  origin  of the  vaṃça  to which  the  Rakarayān  Partapan be­
longed 88) ^ Recently, E. B. Vogler made a very interesting attempt at explain¬
ing the differences in style between the architecture of the northern 
and the southern  part  of Central Java in about the  same  period : 
85) According to the calculation hy Damais in  B.E.P.E.O.,  XLvI. Pt. 1 (1952), pp. 28 
sq., No. 11. 
88) Also  another  inscription, viz.  that  of Kebonkopi  near  Pogor in Western Java, is 
composed in Old  Malay  (cI. the publication by .:^osch in Biidr. K.I., 1OO, 1941, pp. 
49­53). It is possible  that  there  is seme  connection between the latter text and the 
documents quoted above, but this  does  not seem  likely.  unless new data should 
prove the contrary, it  :^eems  preferable to attribute the use of Old  Malay  in the 
Xebonkopi  inscription to influence from  Çrivijaya  and to dissociate it from the Old 
Malay  materials in Central Java.  Even  in the 12th century  A.D.,  a part  of Western 
Java  seems  still  to have  heen  under the influence of  Çrīviiaya  (Chou  K'u­Fei,  whose 
lost report constituted one of the main sources of Chau Ju­kua ; cI.  Ccedés,  A propos 
de la  chute  du royaume de ^rrviiaya in Biidr. K.I.. 83, 1927, pp. 468­472, and the 
survey hy  Krom,  Geschiedenis,  pp. 302­81. 
8^) Pras.  1ndon.,  I (195O), pp. 50­73. CI. especially p. 2OO. 
S8^ ^osch  (Biidr. K.I., 108, 1952, p. 196) interpreted my suggestion as if I had wanted 
to attribute the use of Old  Malay  in the  Gaṇḍasuli  rock inscription to Sumatranese 
influence and to the  Sañjayavaṃça.  I wish  to stress  that  I even excluded such an 
interpretation on account of various linguistic features,  which  seem to point to the 
Riau  Archipelago and the  Malay  Peninsula (op. cif., p. 55). As a  matter  of fact, I 
left the whole question open at  that  time, hoping to be able to deal  with  these 
problems in the light of new materials. The  passage  in the  English  Summary of 
Pras.  1ndon.,  I (p. 2oo),  which  was quoted above, is based on general impressions 
given  by the  Gaṇḍasuli  rock inscription in connection  with  the time and  thé  place 
of the latter. 


--- [Page 274] ---
— 264 — 
the difference in style exhibited by the buildings of the northern  part  (if 
compared with the  Çailendra  monuments) is attributed to a new  influx  of 
non­Javanese  elements  presumably connected with the  Rakai  Patapān  (Raka­
rayān Partapān)  8­). On account of the language used in the  Gaṇḍasuli  in­
scriptions the  origin  of the  Rakarayān Patapān  should be looked for in the 
Malay­speaking  regions, such as Sumatra or the  Malay  Peninsula. To be 
more precise, it is not necessary  that  the Rakarayān Patapān  himself originated 
from  these  regions ; it may have been his father or grandfather. As is sug­
gested by vogler, the  Rakarayān Partapān  and his  descendants  would not 
have acted as  strangers  ; they  would  have legitimated their actions by asso­
ciating  themselves with  descendants  of the  Saṅjayavaṃça  by marriage or 
otherwise 90) . 
Whatever  still  remains dark in the undoubtedly very complicated 
dynastic relations during the first  half  and the middle of the 9th century 
A.D.,  it seems  at least probable  that  several lines of  arguments  relate  to 
roughly  the same  string of  events  : the  descent  from  Akhaṇḍalapura  of king 
Kumbhayoni's  ancestor, the occurrence of Old  Malay  documents in Central 
Java in the first  half  of the 9th century, the  appearance  of a new style of 
architecture in the northern  part  of Central Java in roughly the  same  period 
— all these  arguments  seem to indicate  that  the Safrjaya dynasty, pushed 
to the background by the  Çailendra  rulers, was brought to new power by 
being associated with the chief of a new group of presumably warlike set¬
tiers from the Malay­speaking regions^ 1). 
Finally,  the materials of the Pereng inscription as far as the  descent 
of the founder Pu Kumbhayoni is concerned 92) would probably refer to 
89) ^iidr. K.I., 109  (1953),  pp. 256-265. 
were only too  willing  to accept the help of such an  Indonesian  (though non­Javanese) 
.)0) It may he supposed  that  the presumably weak descendants of  Safijaya  in tnis  period 
group since this w^s the only  means  to arrive at power again. Parallels  from  later 
Javanese history are easy to he found. rt is well­known, e.g.,  that  Pange­an  Pugĕr 
(the later Susuhunan Pakuhuwana I) associated  himself  with  the Macassarese  chief 
Namrud  hy taking him up into his  family,  wher.  his elder brother Amangkurat II 
recuperated the throne  with  the help of the  Dutch  East India Company. 
9i) Cf. especially No.  vIII  above. The tex^ of No.  vIII  had already  been  printed when 
I received the important article hy E.B. vogler,  Ontwikkeling  van  de gewijde bouw­
kunst  in het  Hindoeïstische  Midden­Java,  Hiidr.  K.I., 109  (1953),  pp.  249-272; 
especially  pp. 258 sqq. are interesting for the problems connected  with  influences 
from  the  non­  Javanese regions. 
^) vi-. the passage puyut sang ratu  i halu pakwianira i jangluran. According to  Stut¬
terheim's interpretation (T.B.G., 65, 1925, note 8 to p. 215), which the present 
author considers the correct one, the passage mentions two details of Kumbhayoni's 
descent: he was a great grandson of the ‚‚Prince of  Halu"  and his grandmother 
came  from  Jangluran. Stutterheim  fixed  the meaning of kwi  (kbi.)  „grandmother", 
in a later study (Epigraphica, I­V, in T.B.C., 75, 1935, pp.  42o-467,  especially No. 
III) ; pakwian therefore means  „grandmother's  place".  Stutterheim’s  suggestion.  that 
Jangluran  is a  toponymie  is confirmed by  recent  research  ; I hope to show in a later 
publication  that  a centre Jangluran was situated in the Purworedjo region. 


--- [Page 275] ---
— 265 — 
the same  events  93) . The main  difficulty  is that  the few accounts seem to 
pick out different details. It  does  not seem  likely  that  a reliable reconstruction 
should  be possible without new data. A few new data, mainly about  king 
Kumbhayoni  himself, are contained in No. XI below and  will  be discussed 
in the Introduction to the latter document. 
In the last part of this Introduction, a few details about the  liṅga  founda¬
tions, commemorated by the three Ratubaka inscriptions, should be briefly 
noted. We already  briefly  alluded to the curious problem whether each of 
the three  texts  commemorates a different  liṅga  foundation or only one  liṅga 
foundation considered from  three  different points of  view.  When considering 
the wording  of the texts, the former alternative  seems  preferable. The fact 
that inscription  a relates  the erection of a  Kṛtti(ka)vāsoliṅga  and  uses  only 
Kṛtti(ka)vāsas  and no other name of  Çiva  throughout the text, whereas the 
inscriptions  b and c mention only the  names  Tryambaka and Hara respec­
tively  ^ 4), is too striking to be attributed to just a haphazard choice between 
numerous synonyms. It may be supposed  that  a Tryambakaliṅga  was con­
sidered something different from a  Kṛttivāso­  and a  Hara–liṅga.  The  dif­
ferences need not necessarily be referred to the  liṅgas  themselves ; it is more 
likely  that  the different  aspects  of the supreme god  with  whom e^::ch of 
the three  liṅgas  was associated appeared from various details of the temples 
in which  the li ṅgas may have stood. 
Inscription  a abounds in ambiguous  terms  in its first two strophes. The 
key to its correct understanding is  implied  in the name  Kṛttivāsas  itself. 
Kṛtti,  ‘‘that  which  has been cut  off’’,  denotes  not only an animal  skin,  but 
also the bark of a  tree.  In the former case,  Kṛttivāsas  is connected  with 
the terrific god wrapped in a tiger skin ; in the latter, the same name de¬
notes somebody dressed in tree bark (valkala) , which is the usual dress of 
Çaiva  ascetics. The double  entente  is undoubtedly intentional, for the epithets 
have been chosen in such a way  that  they may apply to both the terrific 
god and the  austere  ascetic. Thus,  phaṇīn^ra  is not only the  Nāga  king  around 
the god's neck, but also a well­known synonym of the name of  Patafijali, 
the traditional  founder of  Yoga  as a Path leading to  Mokṣa  ; the second 
pāda  of strophe 2  suggests  both a famous pose of the dancing god and a 
particularly  tiring  attitude of an ascetic^ 5). Strophe 3 makes it clear what 
the poet intended by this  double  entente.  There,  king  Kumbhavoni  is called 
an ,,undifferentiated  portion’’  (advayāṃça)  ^ 5) of Çiva,  so that  the namaskdra 
03) On the basis of the identity of the  king  in the .Ratubaka inscriptions and the distin­
guished founder in the Pereng inscription,  which  was concluded to ahove (p. 253), it is 
very  likely  that  Kumbhayoni  traces  his descent  to the  same  ancestor in both cases. 
This  means  that  ‚‚the  god descended from  Ākhaṇḍa1apura"  is identical  with  „the 
Prince  of Ha1u". For the meaning of halu, the  reader  is referred to No. XI helow, 
strophe 12 d. 
94) CI. p. 247 ahove. 
­^) The  reader  is referred to the  notes  to the Translation for the details. 


--- [Page 276] ---
— 266 — 
addressed to the god is necessarily also a homage to the  king  practising 
austerities on the cemetery grounds. Inscription a is of a considerable im­
portance for the history of religious cults in Java. The text makes it clear 
that even  these  bloody forms of  Çaivism  were  well  established in Java in 
the middle  of the 9th century  A.D.  If the reading and interpretation of 
çavodvahe  (1 c) are correct,  there  is also an interesting reference to the 
famous  Vetā1a  rites 96). We already brief1y mentioned the fact  that  inscription 
b, strophe 2 shows us a most developed form of  Çāktism,  the  Devi  being 
represented in union  with  the god, while  Çrī is hidden in the most private 
part of the  Devi.  It hardly  seems  doubtful  that  here, as in inscription a‚ the 
strophes addressed to the god indirectly refer to the king who is his adva¬
yāmça  and fully enjoys  Çrī.  The representation as a whole reminds one of 
the famous tale about Ken  Arok  and Ken  Deḍes  in the Pararaton  97). With  a 
view  to these  demonic and sensual  aspects  of Çaivism,  it may not be super­
fluous  to stress  that  it is now beyond doubt  that  they were known during the 
greater  part  of Hindu­Javanese history. It has recently been argued  that 
these  hardly attractive forms of worship should have been imported by 
Kertanagara in the second  half  of the 13th century from  China  or Tibet to 
inaugurate an entirely new line of  politics  98) . It is at least clear  that  all 
the elements necessary to such a development were  present  in Java more 
than four centuries earlier  ^ 9) . Inscription c shows us the god in the battle 
against Tripura, the  three  casties built by the  Asura  architect  Maya.  The 
representation of the battie  does  not exactiy correspond to the descriptions 
known  from literature 190). The main difference is  that  Maya  is represented 
as the  Asura  warrior who defends the castles against  Çiva’s  attacks. It is 
possible  that  the text is based on a version unknown to us; a second  possibility 
96) This is based on our interpretation of  çavodvahe  in Inscription a, strophe 1 c. The 
çava is the  Apasmārapuruṣa  if applied to the dancing god, hut probably a corpse 
possessed by a  Vetā1a  if the term also applies to the  king  practising  Yoga,  as we 
suggested. Further details  will  be given in the  notes  to the Translation. 
^) Brandes,  Pararaten 2, Yerh. B.C.,  LXII  (1920),  p. 15, lines '•'­12, p. 58  (translation)  ; 
cf. Krom,  Ceschiedenis2, p. 31s sq. (with references). 
­8) C.C.  Berg,  De geschiedenis  van  pril  Majapahit, II. in  1ndonesiĕ,  V (1951).  p. 194; 
cf. also  note  3 (p. 225). CI. infra,  note  99. 
­^­) The lines of religious development in Java are  still  very obscure. One of Berg's 
arguments  that  Tāntrism  may have  heen  imported during the reign of Kertanagara 
because  there  was a  reason  for such an 'importation' is a very weak one :  there  would 
not have been any reason to import it if  Tāntrism  had been in Java for centuries. 
The non­Tantric character of the complex  Barabuḍur–Mĕndut–Pawon  cannot serve 
as an argument; one  could  as well  prove  that  there  is no  Çaivism  in India  because 
there  is Valṣṇavism.  All the material at our disposal  seems  to indicate a co­existence 
of many different forms of  religion  and worship during Old Javanese history.  Political 
considerations, but also personal religious convictions (why should kings have been 
different from other human beings in this respect) may lead to combinations of  dif­
ferent religious elements. 
100) CI. the  notes  to the Translation. 


--- [Page 277] ---
— 267 — 
is that  our poet, whose account seems rather confused, had misunderstood 
Maya’s  role;  finally,  one  could  consider the  possibility  that  the poet gave a 
slightiy  different version of the story in order to adapt it to  historical  circum­
stances. We saw  that  it was hardly doubtful  that  the inscriptions consider 
king  Kumbhayoni  a partial incarnation of the god, as appears especially 
from  inscription  a. Then we may conclude  that  a part of the praise addressed 
to the god is naturally referred to the  king.  To put it otherwise, the poet 
would  have worded his praise in such a way  that  at least part of it might 
be applied to the  king.  In view  of such an interpretation, one is  inclined  to 
suppose  that  the two first strophes of  inscription  c refer to a fierce struggle in 
which  Kumbhayoni  with  his group succeeded in beating an enemy; since 
this struggle reminded the poet of  Mahādewa’s  fight against  Tripura,  he 
addressed the first strophes of the text to  Çiva Tripurāntaka  but related the 
episode in a  slightly  different way in order to make it better agree  with  the 
historical  struggle. If, then,  Kumbhayoni’s  principal  adversary not  only  had 
a number of strongholds  built  but also defended them himself, the poet  would 
have been forced to represent the role played by  Maya  in a different way. 
Although  such an explanation necessarily remains conjectural, it hardly 
seems doubtful  that  we should  look  for a solution along  these  lines. 
If the three  Ratubaka inscriptions do refer to  historical  episodes, one 
might  conclude  that  the original  order is somewhat different  from  that  which 
is given  in this  edition  1^1) , viz. a (ascetism)  , c (struggle and  victory)  ‚ b (full 
exertion  of royal  power).  This,  of course, is  only  the order of the events to 
which  the inscriptions seem to allude: the inscriptions themselves, as  well 
as the  liṅgas,  should probably be attributed ro the same date. There is 
littie doubt  that  the three  liṅgas  and the  three  texts mark an important event 
1n the old history of Central Java; in the  light  of the preceding arguments, it 
is justified  to determine the event as a great  victory  over an unknown foe 
in or a  little  before 856  A.D.,  a victory  which  marks this  date  as the re­estab­
lishment  of Çaiva  power in Central Java 1^2). In adition,  there  is some 
reason to suppose  that  these  events are connected  with  the Ratubaka plateau 
in some way or other. 
Finally,  it may be useful to  call  attention to a few minor points. 
We have already  briefly  called  attention to the curious relation between 
the two first strophes in each of the  three  inscriptions. Whereas each of the 
three  first strophes is addressed to one of the forms of  Çiva  (Kṛttivāsas, 
lcl) The order adopted in this edition is based on the  dates  of discovery of the  three 
inscriptions  ; cI. the beginning of this Introduction. 
102) This  interpretation is  mainly  based on (a) the very remarkable fact of the erection 
of three  liṅgas  probably at the same time, (b) the analysis of inscription c. It is not 
impossible  to interpret  these  fa.^ts in a different way, but, as we  shall  see in the 
Introduction  to No. XI, the interpretation here  given  is fully  confirmed by other 
data. 


--- [Page 278] ---
— 268 — 
Tryambaka  and  Hara,  respectively), the  three  second strophes are addressed 
to Lakṣmī­Çrī  (expressed as  Çrī,  Çūra1akṣmī  and  Mahallakṣmī  respectively), 
not to  three  forms of the  Devi  as one  would  have expected. There is some­
thing  strange in this combination. It is possible  that  the poet denoted  Çiva's 
çaktī by Lakṣmi­Çrī  in order to  stress  the divine  symbol  of sovereignty ac­
quired  by the  god­king  1°3) . Although  such an interpretation wou1d  fully 
confirm  the above surmise about the meaning of the 1mga erections, it  could 
hard1y be considered satisfactory since one  would  have expected  that  the 
king  himself  should have been represented as an avatara of  Viṣṇu  in that 
case ­^ 4). In view  of this  difficulty,  one might suggest an interpretation  which 
is in a  line  with  tha^ proposed for the two first strophes of  inscription  c. There, 
I considered the  possibility  that  the poet gave a  slightly  different version 
of the Tripura  episode in order to make it agree  with  a historical  episode. 
If,. then, the relation between the  king  and the queen was an unusual one — 
which  would  be the case if, for instance, the  king  and the queen belonged to 
a different group or to a different dynasty —, it  could  be understood  that  the 
poet expressed such an incongruity by transferring it, as it were, to the 
divine  plan.  Such  an interpretation, though far  from  being evident by itself, 
would  agree remarkably  well  with  some data to be discussed in the Intro­
duction  to No. XI below. 
Secondly,  I should  like to lay some  stress  on the rather plastic descriptions 
of the god and the goddess in the two first strophes of each of the  three 
inscriptions.  This  applies as much to the  Naṭarāja  in a, as to the  āliṅganamūrti 
in b and the  Tripurāntakamūrti  in c.  Although  the inscriptions deal  only  with 
the erection of  liṅgas,  there  is no reason to suppose  that  only  1iṅgas  were 
erected. The liṅgas  would  not probably have been erected in the open air 
and, on the other hand,  there  is no reason to suppose  that  the three  liṅgas 
should have been different in  form  because they were associated  with  different 
aspects of the supreme god; but if this difference was not expressed in the 
shape of the  liṅgas,  it is  only  natural to assume  that  the poet  would  not have 
insisted  on these  different associations if the difference did not appear  from 
other details of the foundations. Presumably, the poet  only  mentioned the 
1mga  foundations because he considered  these  the essence of the foundation 
as a whole. By combining the above points one is  inclined  to conclude  that 
the inscriptions  refer to the foundation of  three  temples, in  which  the main 
objects of worship were  liṅgas,  whereas the different  mūrtis  with  which  each 
liṅga  was associated appeared  from  other temple details such as their reliefs 
or their iconography.  This  presumption is strongly supported by other  discov­
1^) cf‚ the excellent survey by Jatis Chandra De, Sidelights on the Hindu Conception 
of Sovereignty in The Cultural Heritage of 1ndia, Sri Ramakrishna Centenary Me¬
morial, HI (1937), pp. 249­25s. 
lc4) it: is curious  that  we have no definite proofs fo:I this conception in Indonesia before 
the 11th  century  A.D.  (Airlaúga  and the  Kaḍiri  period) ; in the  Kaḍiri  period it was 
however  very usual (cf.  Krom,  Ceschiedenis 2, p. 268 sqq.) ; thus, Jayahhaya is  called 
Madhusudanāvatāra,  Kāmeçwara  is a  Trivikramāvatāra  (O.J.O.,  LXXII.  A­3). 


--- [Page 279] ---
— 269 — 
eries on the Ratubaka plateau. In 1816, Crawfurd visited the Ratubaka 
plateau and noticed an image  there  described by him as ,,a mutilated  stone 
figure  which  I imagine to  represent  Mahādeva  destroying  Tripurāntaka’’  1°^) . 
Unfortunately,  no stone  figure of  that  kind  has been recovered, but  there  is 
no reason to doubt the correctness of  Crawfurd’s  statement;  one may  assume 
that he saw a group  which  was  familiar  to him from Indian iconography  1°6) . 
As to the  ālīṅganamūrti  suggested by inscription b, it is curious  that  an image 
of a god and a goddess embracing each other was also discovered on the 
Ratubaka plateau  1°7) ^ These references are the more striking  because  neither 
representation is common in Old Javanese iconography ; they make it prob­
able that  the stone  figures should be associated  with  the  liṅga  foundations 
in some way or other. Without .further data, it is impossible to conclude how 
the statues  were combined  with  the liṅgas.  The archaeologic research on the 
Ratubaka plateau,  which  is being continued at  present,  might possibly furnish 
new materials. 
a 
The dimensions of this  stone  are 68 cm in height and 31 cm in breadth. 
The stone  is inscribed on one side  with  1 4 lines of Old Javanese script and is 
rather  weather­beaten as a whole. The inscribed surface is very unequal, 
which  is mainly due to the rough  kind  of stone. The  akṣaras  are of considera­
ble size, the average height being about 2 cm. There are however striking 
differences between the  akṣaras,  both in the height and in the  degree  of 
cursivity. 
Transcription 
[1] //  ^açoṇitāmitanṛpamauli[2]māline  1°8) 
phaṇīndrabhūṣitagala[3]hastakāṅghraye  169) .’ 
10­) CI. the  quotations  from Crawiurd's description by A.J. Bernet Kempers in T.B.G , 
LXXXIH,  1949, p. 1S6. 
10­) CI. Gopinath rao, Elements, II, 1, pp. 164 sqq. Cf. also C. Sivaramamurti, Geogra­
phical and Chronological Factors in 1ndian 1conography, in Ancient 1ndia, VI (Jan. 
1950), pp. 58 sq. 
107) Jw.  IJzerman,  Beschriiving  der  Oudheden  nab–.7  de grens  der residenties  Soerakarta 
en Djogdjakarta (1891), p. 112. 
108) ­ṛ,’he 1atter  half  of the first line is  difficult  to be read and its transcription is not 
therefore  completely  certain. In maulI. the la is completely certain and  traces  of the 
–i are still  visible;  the first syllable is uncertain by itself, but the combination of the 
vowel  signs  does  not seem doubtful. The reading  mauti  is acceptable on account of 
the meaning and of the alliteration  with  māhne  at the  heginning  of line 2. We are 
not certain about (a)mita,  which,  in addition, is hardly satisfactory;  (a)mṛta  might 
also be considered, but is hardly more satisfactory. 
199) The first syllable of ­gala^ is uncertain. As a  matter  of fact, the aksara  seems  closed 
on the bortom; vala  does  not however make  sense.  Possibly, the line at the bottom 
is only a scratch in the  stone  surface. Cf. also h 4 helow, where the stone­cutter 
clearly  put down va instead of ga. 


--- [Page 280] ---
— 270 ­
pranṛtyate pi[^tṛni1aye çavodvahe ll9) 
namo  <'stu>  l11) [5.I te  daçadiçi  kṛttivāsase  // 1 7/ 
[6] .^avodyajambhajatilakāntisa[7]nnibhā^  112) 
suviijvaladbhaṭam^  ^) /^ 
purārcitāṃ  çriyam—  atha [^  kṛttivāsaso 
dadātu  vo [T0^]  varacaraṇāṅgulis=sadā  /j 2 // 
[Tl^]  Çrīkumbhajākhyena  nararṣabheṇa 
fl2^]  harādvayāṃsāmalabhaktinā  ca .’ 
^13^l  valaiṅgagoptrā  bhuvanāvakrā^l4^]ntaṃ 
saṃsthāpitaṃ  kṛttikavāsaliṅgam  // 3 // 778  çaka  .’/ 
Trans1ation 
I. Thou who art wrapped in a (tiger)  skin  [or : dressed in  tree  bark], 
bearing the b1ood­stained crowns of innumerable l14) kings as a wreath 
while  Thy neck 115) , arms and legs are adorned  with  the  king  of the 
hooded  ones  [or^ distinguished by Patanjalf]) 1l6), dancing at the abode 
ll 0) In the last compound of this  pāda,  at least the second and fourth syllables are certain 
(vo and he, respectively);  ça is however probable, though ga and bha  could  not be 
excluded.  As to the third  syllable,  it is a ligature in any case, but its reading is 
completely  conjectural ; other possibilities are vva or gva and probably some other 
readings, too. Our transcription is mainly based on the ending ­he; since a dative is 
required hy the context, the term must be a noun ending in ­h, a  rather  rare  type ; 
among  these,  compounds ending in ­vah are not unfrequent (indravah, havyavah.. 
apsuvah, etc. ; cf. Whitney's Crammar, ^ 403 and 4o4 ; the weak  cases  ought however 
to have ­uh  (Pāṇim,  Astādh.,  m, 2‚ kār.  64, and  IV,  1, kār.  61), hut  those  in udvah 
are not known to occur; cf. infra,  note  117. 
n 1) The short syllable required hy the  metre  may he reconstituted as 'stu,  which  could 
not he missed in the com:ext. 
n 2) The  three  firsr. syllables of the  pāda  are obscure, although their reading  seems  rather 
certain. CI.  note  120 below. 
II. ­) We are not certain about the correct reading of the  fifth  syllable of  pāda  b. The 
lower  part  of the ligature might he either a b'ha or a na. We consider the former a 
little  more  likely  than the latter,  because  the right hand  part  of the aksara begins 
above the middle of its height; this detail might not however he decisive in  view 
of the striking irregularities in the script of the  three  Ratubaka inscriptions. On the 
other hand, the reading  nata  might he slightly more satisfactory  with  a view  to the 
meaning of the  pāda,  although one might object  that  there  is no special „dancer's 
jewel";  bhata  could  be explained as a wrong orthography for  bhaṭṭa,  which  is not 
unacceptable in  view  of the spelling  bhaṭāra  instead of  bhaṭṭāra  from the  same  root, 
which  is the usual form met  with  in Old Javanese records. 
11­) Amita, if this is the correct reading (cI.  note  108 ahove) is used in a  rather  strange 
way.  1l^) This translation is hased on the reading  ^ gala  ^ ; cf. 109 above. 
116) Phamndrabhūṣita,  — „adorned  with  the  king  of the  Nagas",  used as an  upavīta  by 
the god,  is perfectiy clear. Since, however, it  seems  obvious  that  all the  terms  have 
a double meaning, referring not only to the dancing god but also to the  king  prac­
tising  Yoga  in the cemetery grounds, both conceptions being expressed by the  same 
compound  Krttivāsas,  it is probable that Pha ṇīndra has the second meaning of Pata¬
ñjali, the traditional founder of the Yoga system. The limbs of the king practising 
austerities  could  be considered  „distinguished  by (the lore of)  Patafijali".  CI. also 
the Introduction,  supra,  p. 266. 


--- [Page 281] ---
— 271 — 
of the Fathers and carrying away a corpse (?) 117) ­­­­ glory to Thee in 
the ten quarters. 
2. May always the toe of the excellent foot of (the god) wrapped in a (tiger) 
skin ^or : of him who is dressed in  tree  bark] grant you Prosperity [^or : 
the royal  dignity] besought in the empire [or :  entreated  in former 
times' 118), (Prosperity)  which  resembles the charm of  Çiva  [^or : of 
the ascetic] 119) with  ..................  (?), resplendent by the charm of the 
flaming  jewel of the  Lord  [^or : of the warrior] (?) 12°). 
117) ^:avodvahe  could  he only a dative of  çavodvah,  a compound  which  is not, however, 
quotable from other sources. The root form vah is often used as the last member 
of a compound (cf. the references in  note  110 above), but the form given  here  is not 
quite correct from a grammarian's point of  view  (cf. ibid.).  Çavodvah  would  mean : 
‚‚carrying  away, or  lifting  up, a corpse" (cI.  çavodvaha  for  which  the dictionaries 
give  ‚‚remover  of corpses" as a translation). In addition it is noted  that  çava  is more 
often combined with a root in its radical form (cf.  çavabhṛt, çavaspṛç).  The Apas¬
mārapuruṣa  on whose back the god performs the dance is not represented as a dead 
body as a rule. One  gets  the impression  that  a slightly different version is given in 
order to  imply  a second meaning to the term  which  could  be applied to the  king­
ascetic. The expression  „carrying  away a corpse" immediately  suggests  the famous 
Vetāla  practices by  which  the  Yogin  may acquire the  Vetālasiddhi;  cI., e.g., Pott, 
Yoga en Yantra  (1946),  pp. 85 sq. and the references to  Tāranātha  mentioned  there. 
Such  practices  could  well  be applied to the king­ascetic practising  Yoga  in the 
cemetery grounds in order to acquire the forces necessary for the victory. This inter­
pretation  agrees  remarkably  weil  with  the wo^­ds  purārcitāṃ  çriyam  in the third 
pāda  of the second strophe, if the former  half  of purārcitāṃ  is to be interpreted as 
purā;  cf. infra,  note  85. — The word pitrnilaya  could  denote  any cemetery, but 
when  the term is applied to the king­ascetic, pi^r may refer to the king's ancestors : 
it is well­known th^t ^p to relatively recent times the kings of Mataram used to 
make a pilgrimage to their  family  graves on the eve  o..t  important decisions. Even 
such  an innocent­lookmg term as  daçadiçi  was probably deliberately chosen  because 
it stresses  both the cosmic  aspect  of Çrva's  dance and the king's aspiration to 
acquire 'universal' power. 
­18) ft  does  not seem doubtful  that  also the words  purārcitāṃ  çriyam  are used in a 
double meaning.  Çrī  denotes  not only  Çiva's  partner in the dance, but is also the 
symbol  of royal dignity and power (=  Rājyaçri,  Rājyalakṣmī)  and,  finally,  Prosperity 
in its divinized  form. In the first and third meanings,  purārcitāṃ  is to be analyzed 
into pura and  arcitāṃ  „worshipped  in the  town  (or: empire, if one may translate pura 
in this way; cI. the Introduction)". If the  same  compound is however based on the 
second meaning of  Çrī,  purārcitāṃ  should be analyzed into  purā  and  arcitāṃ,  „wor­
shipped,  entreated,  in former times". We have  seen  in the Introduction  that  there 
are strong  reasons  to suppose  that  Kumbhayoni was not always in the possession of 
royal  power. 
11 9) Jatila,  literally  : wearing a  jaṭā  (twisted hair), is a characteristic common to  Çiva 
and to ascetics. 
120) We do not understand the meaning of the beginning of  pāda  a and  pāda  b is not 
perfectiy  clear either; cf.  supra,  notes  79 and 8o to the Transcription. If the  three 
first syllables are transcribed correctiy  which  seems  probable, one  would  suppose 
that the  pāda  begins  with  na^odyad­,  „just  rising"  ; in  that  case, we have to read 
a da instead of a ja (jambha),  which  is not impossible since the small horizontal 
stroke in the middle of the aksara might be a scratch in the stone. Navodyad­  could 


--- [Page 282] ---
— 272 — 
3. By the  Bull  among men, named  Çrī  Kumbhaja, whose devotion was 
immaculate since he was an inseparable portion of Hara l2l), the pro­
tector of  Valamga,  (this) linga of (the god) wrapped in a (tiger)  skin 
was erected after having  fallen  on earth 1^) . 
(In the)  Çaka  (year) 778. 
b 
The dimensions are 58 cm in height and 49 cm in breadth. The stone is 
inscribed  on one side  with  12 lines of Old Javanese script and is badly 
bo applied to the disc of the sun or of the moon.; the term  would  then  suggest the 
ardhacandra  in ^iva’s  jaṭāmukuta.  ^ut  then,  the word ambha  which  would  be follo­
wing  could  not he correct; we  then  expect to find a word meaning 'moon’ here, 
e.g. indu,  which  agrees  with  the metre. One might perhaps distinguish an  i­vowel 
above the da or ja and  mbha  could  possibly be explained as an error hy the lapicide 
for the ligature ndu in his example. The inscriptions b and c do give a numher of 
certain examples of mistakes made by the lapicide. We therefore conjecturally pro¬
pose to read  pāda  a as  navodyadindujaṭilakāntisannibhām, ,‚in  beauty resemhling the 
(god)  with  twisted hair in  which  the just  rising  moon is  visible".  If applied to the 
king  ascetic,  rndu  could  denote the drops (of sweat) due to the king's efforts in  Yoga  ; 
these  drops  could  be ceiled  navodyad,  „just  appearing" on his skin,  while  they are 
made brilliant by the splendour emanating from  Çrī.  — In  pāda  b, bhata, if transcribed 
correctly  (cf. note 80 above),  could  have a double meaning; it  could  be an ortho­
graphic variety for  bhaṭṭa  (originally  a Prakritism for bhartr), an orthography  which 
has an exact equivalent in the spelling  bhaṭāra  instead of  bhaṭṭāra  (cI. note 11s above) 
but it  could  also be Sanskrit bhata,  „soldier"  (cf. the compound  cāthabhaṭa,  supra, 
p. 20),  which  is, originally,  a Prakritism for bhrta. It is obvious  that  the first two 
• pādas  of the second stropne  could  hardly be considered satisfactory in spite of the 
suggestions for their interpretation. The poet probably intended to express the  com­
plicated  relations between the god­king and his  çakti  who is  royal  majesty and 
prosperity personified; in  view  of the antithesis usually ohserved in  these  cases, it 
would  be natural to presume  that  the poet wanted to express  that  crī  not  only 
derives her beauty  from  the splendour of her  Lord,  but also manages to make her 
Lord  brilliant  by her presence. 
1-- 1) Harādvavāṃsāmalabhaktinā,  —  aṃsa  could  only  he the — very common — wrong 
spelling  of aṃça,  „portion'' ;  then,  harādvayāṃsa  means : „an undifferentiated (i.e. 
unseparable; the use of the term is  well­known  from  Vedānta  and  Mahāyāna  Bud­
dhism,  but not at all alien to  Çaivism)  portion of Hara". Then, Hara  denotes  not 
the god­destroyer (as is the case in inscription c), but rather the god in his universal 
aspect  (Paramaçiva  in Siddhānta  thought). The compound, applied to Kumhhayoni 
then  means  : „with  immaculate devotion to  (Krttivāsas)  who is an unseparable por­
tion of Çiva".  The compound is, however, capable of being interpreted in a different 
way viz. as :  „possessing  the immaculate devotion of (i.e. natural for) somebody 
who is an unseparable portion of Hara". Then, the use of amala is easily explained : 
his devotion is immaculate hecause he is an  unseparable  portion of Hara. The use 
of advayāṃça  seems  to indicate  that  unlike the other human beings, who are differ­
entiated portions of  Çiva,  the  king  is considered an identical, though not complete, 
portion  of the god. The use of  aṃça  reminds one of the term  aṃçāvatāra,  frequentiy 
used: to denote the  king  as a partial avatara of the god in Old Javanese. The two 
interpretations of the compound  here  suggested ar^. probably both intended by the poet 
12^) Bhuvanāvakrāntaṃ,  —­ cf. the use of  avakrānta  in compounds such as  garbhāva¬
. krānta,  „descended into a womb", well­known from Buddhism (cI. the references 


--- [Page 283] ---
— 273 
weather­beaten, especially lines 5 to 11. The average  akṣara  height is about 
2 cm. 
T r a nscription 
f1^] // 0 //  svastir=bhavatu. 
Maṇimakuṭavirājallokapālai^2^r=vṛto  yaḥ  123) 
parijanayutadevIvṛndakair=bhūṣita[^3^|ṅgaiḥ  / 
amitavihitaçaktī  ratnapadmāsanastho 
vivudha^ 4^gaṇanutāyāsmai  namaḥ 124) tryamvakāya  // 1 // 
Vikacakama^5^]labhāsvattantramālāsarūpāṃ  1­5) 
yamayatiyatacandraiçvarya^6^mūrttīṣṭadātrīṃ  1­^) 
caraṇayuganidheyaçrīmatrṃ  l­7) çūralakṣmī[^n= 
tribhuvanshitadātuḥ  1­8) tryamvakasyāçrayaddh<v>aṃ  // 2  j/ 
given in No.  III above, note 54 to the Translation). The latter compound proves 
that avakrānta  may he used at the end of a Tatpurusa compound in  which  the 
former  half  denotes  the place of descent. We therefore have an example  here  of an 
object of worship supposed to have miraculously  fallen  from  heaven (cf. the so­
called  „Moon of Pedjeng"  (Bali),  which  is a kettle­drum, and strophe 12 of the 
Karangtĕṅah  inscription in Pras. 1ndon., I. 195o, p. 39, where a  statue  is supposed 
to have fallen  from  heaven ; cf., however,  Bosch  in B^idr. K.I., 1o8, 1952, p. 194, 
who refers the  simile  to a temple having fallen on earth,  which  does not seem 
acceptable). 
l­3) This  entire  line  has already been published in transcription by Stutterheim,  T.B.G., 
75 (1935), p. 443, note. Some  small  corrections to Stutterheim's transcription were 
suggested by Damais,  T.B.G.,  8s (1949), p. 3. The transcription  here  given  agrees 
with the latter one. Damais noted  that  the ta in ^makuta  s::.ems  strange; after the 
discovery  of inscription c, where exactiy the sam.:­  form  i^ found twice in  line  2 (in 
"makuṭakoṭi"),  there  can be no doubt  that  it represents  ṭa. 
124) Read :  names­­­­.  ; the same  sandhi  is found in  line  7 ("dātuḥ). 
12–) The first  half  of line  5 is not  only  badly weather­beaten, hut it  seems  also to have 
been  engraved in a very careless w.­y ; the transcription is uncertain.  Especially  the 
reading of  ^tantra"  i^ open to doubt. Its first ta is written under a ta which is cer¬
tain ; the first one is, however, very doubtful. Instead of ntra, ntu would be possible ; 
there  may  be other possibilities, too. 
l­^ 6) The reading of the second part of  line  6 is much less uncertain than  that  of its 
first part. The  passage  yamayatayafi" is perfectly clear, but the next aksara  would 
seem a va rather than a ca; since, however, the complicated ligature ndrai is beyond 
doubt, it  seems  certain  that  a ca‚ not a va, was meant. The very last ligature of line 
5 is uncertain ; the ya may still be recognized, but the layar over the aksara is doubt¬
ful ; probably there is another ya under that written on the line ; the transcription 
would  be ryya in  that  case; the latter detall is, however, irrelevant for the meaning. 
1­^7) The reading ­nidheya­ is given  with  some reservation. Its first aksara  seems  si on 
the stone, but the second vertical might be  only  a scratch in the stone; also the 
­e of dhe is damaged. 
128) For the  sandhi,  cf. note 124 abo^e. — The va supposed to be written under the  liga­
ture ddh in the last synable of  line  2 is hardly  visible  : there  is only  a tiny  circle 
engraved under the dh; nevertheless, it  seems  hardly doubtful  that  ddhvaṃ  is meant. 


--- [Page 284] ---
— 274 — 
Abhavad=bha[^8^vapādabhavatkaruṇā­
kṛtasarggavidhir—bhu^i  sarggabhave 1­9) / 
[^9^]vihhavoddhṛtaviçvshito  nṛpatiḥ 
kila çāsti  13°) yavākh^1^I)ure 131) pravare j/  3 // 
Tasyatmanas=santatijena tena 
çrīkumhhajā[Tl^khyena  nararṣabheṇa  / 
valaiṅgajetrā  varabhaktihetoḥ 
pra[T2^]sthāpitaṃ  tryamva<ka>liṅgam=etat 13^) /j  4 j/ 
778 çakābde. 
Translation 
May there  he Prosperity  ! 
1. Glory  to the Three  Eyed  (Çiva),  who is surrounded by the Guardians 
of the  World 133) brilliant  with  their pearl crowns and their bodies 
adorned  by (the presence of) multitudes of goddesses surrounded by 
their  servants,  (Çiva)  whose energy is  unlimited  and (at the same time) 
l­ 9) Most  of strophe 3 is very badly  weather­beaten,  too, except for the middle portion 
of the  lines,  which  is fairly  well  preserved. The strophe is composed in the  Ṭoṭaka 
metre, consisting of four  pādas  of four  anapaests  each. The monotony is  usually  com­
pensated hy a preference for puns, especially those based  upon  the repetition of 
identical  or similar  syllables or groups of syllables in a completely different meaning. 
This  is very  striking  in the few Old Javanese examples of this metre, too; cf. H.  Kern, 
Verspr. Ceschr., IX. pp. 145 sqq. The ahuse of  syllable  repetitions (bha  followed 
by va with  various vowels occurs six times; sargga is used twice) makes the tran­
scription  far less uncertain than it  would  have been without such puns. Thus, the 
reading sarggabhave at the end of  line  8, though uncertain by itself, is comirmed in 
this way.  CI. the Translation. 
130) Tb^ reading ^f  çā.­.ti  is uncertain.  Only  the ta under, and the  –i over the second 
syllable  are beyond doubt.  Since,  however, the  form  of a verb is required by the 
context  here, the  possibilities  are considerably  limited.  The reading  çāsti  satisfies 
these  conditions; it corresponds  well  to the aksarc forms  which  nave remained  visible 
and makes good sense. 
131) The reading of  yavākhya­  is conjectural except for the ya at the beginning of the 
word  and the  pasa:ṅan  ya in the  third  syllable.  The conjectural reading given in the 
text agrees  well  with  the traces of the other aksaras on the stone, hut  there  might 
be other  possibilities,  too. It seems therefore preferable not to  base  any conclusions 
on this reading unless it shou1d be  confirmed. 
132) The  state  of preservation of the 1ast 1ine of the epigraph is excenent, but the stone­
cutter made no less  than  four serious mistakes. The exact reading given on the  stone 
runs  : praṇvāpitaṃ  tryamvaliṅvameha.f.  CI. pp. 245 sq. above. 
l­ 3) Lokapāla;  Damais, T.B.C., 83 (1949), p. 5, supposed  that  the use of this  word 
might  be an  allusion  to the name of the  Rakai  Kayuwaṅi  : Pu Lokapāla.  He therefore 
conjecturally  referred this  inscription  to the reign of  Kayuwam.  This  assumption is 
especially weak since the reigning king would not probably be alluded to as a second¬
ary god. If it is an allusion, which might very ^vell be tho ease, one would rather 
conclude  that  Lokapāla  (Kayuwam)  was not (yet^ the reigning  king  — a conclusion 
fully  supported by the fourth strophe of this inscription, where the king is named 
Kumbhaja. 


--- [Page 285] ---
— 275 — 
well­apportioned,  while  he is seated on his lotus throne  beset.  with 
jewels,  and who is cheered by the groups of gods 134). 
2. Taketh thou refuge 135^)­ with  the  Heroic  Lakṣmī 136), whose beauty is 
equal  to the garlands of  ............  (?) 137) brilliant  with  fully  open red 
lotuses, who grants the wishes of Him whose appearance is (marked) by 
the domination of the moon of the ascetics subdued by  Yama  138), and 
who bears  Majesty necessarily hidden in the juncture of her legs 13^) , — 
i34) Çiva  is represented  here  as the Supreme God, omnipotent  with  his  three  eyes. His 
boundless  çakti  is well­directed  there  where it is needed (vihita),  while  the god is 
staying seated on His  briiliant  lotus throne.  This  image is seen reflected in the 
court ceremonies described in the Old Javanese poem the  Nāgarakrĕtāgama,  cere¬
monies which, in most of our translations, were wrongly interpreted as audiences in 
the modern  sense  of the word ; cI. Sturterheim,  de Kraton  van  MajapahiI.  Verhand. 
K.I., 7 (1948). pp. so sqq. 
13–) Translation of  āçrayaddhvam  ; cf. also note 128 to the transcription. For the gemina­
tion of the dha preceding va,  which  is frequently met  with  in manuscripts, cf. Whitney, 
Grammar­, ^ 232 a. The imperative is presumably addressed to the people in general; 
vandadhvam and pranamata are often used in a  similar  context. 
l­ 6) ^ūralakṣmī.  It is probably not a  fixed  compound to be left untranslated ; we take 
it as Lakṣmī  accompanying the god warrior and securing him success in the battles. 
l37) The meaning of  tantramālā  (possibly  tantumālā,  if the latter is to be considered the 
correct reading) is not  lucid.  The attribute  vikacakamalabhāsvat  seems  to refer to a 
lake or to a river; the river especially associated  with  Çiva  is the  Gaṅgā,  but we 
cannot see how  Tantramālā  (or a  similar  form,  for the reading is  uncertain)  could 
be a name of  Gaṅgā. 
1.38) We consider  candraiçvaryaṃūrtf,  ‚‚the  form  (of  Çiva)  which  is marked by  lis lordship 
over  the moon", a synonym of the term  candraçekharamūrtī  in iconographic literature; 
cf. its description in Gopinath Rao, Elements II, 1 (1916), pp. 113 sqq.  According 
to several sources (e.g., the  ^uprabhedāgama,  quoted hy Gopinatha Rao,  loc.  cit ), 
the moon  in Çiva's  jaṭāmukuṭa  was acquired by the god after a fierce battle  with 
a number of  ṛṣis.  The  initial  portion of the compound, viz. the terms yamayatayati^, 
seems  to allude to the  latte­.  story ; as a  marter  of fact, the ascetics  (yati)  were  killed 
(yamayata) by the god. The compound as a whole  seems  a little  clumsy since one 
would  have expected a term meaning  „conquered  from"  to connect  yamayatayati‘' 
with the  following.  ­– The last portion of the compound, viz.  ­iṣṭadātrīṃ,  „granting 
the wishes"  (of Çiva  in his  mūrti  denoted by the preceding portion of the compound), 
probably  represents  the goddess  (here  Çuralakṣmī)  while  ceding to the male desires 
of Çiva.  It appears  from  the description of the  candraçekharamūrti  given hy Rao 
(loc.  cit.)  that  this  form  of Çiva  is usually accompanied by the  Devi,  who may be re­
presented in an intimate union  with  the god  (āhnganamūrti).  Our text (also  pāda  c ; 
cf. note 14o below)  seems  to allude to such an image. 
l39) The translation is based on the reading  caranayuganidheyaçrīmatīṃ,  which  may not 
be completely certain (cf. note 127 above), especially as far as  nidheya°  is concerned. 
If the latter is correct, it  could  mean  only:  .‚which  should he hidden" or  „supposed 
to be hidden"  (cf.  nidhi, a hidden treasure, etc.). Caranayuga usually means „a pair 
of feet or legs", but tins does not seem to make  sense  here. We therefore suppose 
that yuga should be interpreted in the meaning  „yoke",  so that  caranayuga  could 
mean  „the  yoke  ^ (formed by) the legs". In  that  case, the compound  would  become 
clear.  It would  then point to a very developed  form  of Çāktism. 


--- [Page 286] ---
— 276 — 
(the Heroic  Lakṣmī)  of the Three­Eyed  (Çiva),  who  grants  welfare to 
the three  worlds 149). 
3. (Once)  there  was a  king  who, driven by the pity  present  in the  feet  of 
Çiva,  had granting (boons) as his principle 141) (while being) in the 
land Sargabhava (?) 14^) and, being good to all (people), who were 
raised by his majesty, ruled indeed in the excellent town  .........  (?) 143). 
4. By the  bull  among men named  Çrī  Kumbhaja, sprung from the 
very  lineage of the afore ­mentioned( king) 1l4), the victor of 
ll.)) For the type of image suggested hy the two first strophes of this text, probably an 
Umāmaheçvaramurti  of the  āhngana  type, cf. the Introduction.  Çuralakṣmī  is unusual 
as a precise term; it probably  denotes  I.akṣmī­Çrī  in her  çāktic  aspect of confer­
ring succes  in battle. CI. the synonymous  vīralakṣmī,  the name  of the first  queen  of 
Suryavarman I (inscription of Sdok  Kak  Thom, published by Finot in  B.E.P.E.C., 
XV, 1915, 2, pp. 5s­1O6, especially strophe LXXIv on p. 66) ;  Coedés  conjecturally 
connects the name  Vīralakṣmī  with  Jayavīravarman,  whose spouse she  seems  to have 
been before. 
­­­1) This  Ṭotaka  strophe  appears  to have many terms  with  a double meaning,  which  is 
a characteristic feature of this metre, capable of compensating its otherwise mono¬
tonous cadence. The partly uncertain reading ma^:es it difficult to determine its 
exact meaning. The compound  bhava­pāda–bhavat–karuṇā–kṛta–sarga–vidhir  could  mean: 
„having  as a rule of  life  (vidhi.) granting (sarga) due to (krta,  literally:  made 
hy) (his) pity  (karuṇā)  which  is present  in (bhavat;  the meaning probably is  that, 
being  present  in the feet of the god, the compassion  emanates  to him who  adores 
these  feet) the feet  (pāda)  of Çiva  (bhava)": owing to the king's intense devotion 
to Çiva,  the king  was able to feel the  same  compassion on behalf of his subjects as 
the god  ­does  with  respect to all the  living  beings. The compound  could,  however, 
also be translated :  „performing  an act of  creation  (kṛta–sarga­vidhir)  out of pit^ 
ckaruna) for you  (bhavat­;  the term may refer to the subjects addressed by the 
second person plural in strophe 2 d) who are subject to  (literally  : having their feet 
in, ^pāda.)  phenomenal existence (bhava)''. The choice of the words makes it prob¬
able that these two (perhaps even more) interpretations are intended.. The former 
is not much more  than  a common­place, but the latter  would  imply  some act of cre­
ation  on behalf of  those  subject to the laws of temporary existence, presumahly a 
foundation  which  could  liherate the  creatures  ; the expression  could  also refer to the 
foundation of an empire hy the mysterious  king. 
:t 42) Hhuvi sargabhave, if this is the correct reading. Sargabhava is  unknown  as the  name 
of a country; it is not necessarily a real name, but  could  as well  be a  paraphrase 
of another  name. Such  paraphrases  of geographical  names  have  been  frequent  hoth 
in India and in Java at all times. Recently, Poerbatjaraka recognized the name Ku ñ¬
jarakuñja  of the  Tjaṅgal  inscription in the present name Sleman (derived from alas 
liman,  which is an almost literal translation of  kuñjara­kuñj^  ; vide, Riwajat 1ndone¬
sia, 1952, p. 56 sqq.). 
1^ 3) If our conjectural reading (cf.  note  131 above) may be relied upon, the name of the 
excenent town  would  be Yava  (yavākhyapure). 
144) rasyātmanas=santat.^ena.  We tried to render  ātmanas  by (the) very (lineage). 
The use of this term is probably based on  that  in atmaja to  denote  a ‚‚son'’  ; ātma 
is, however, replaced by  ātmanas  santati  since the relation is not as close as  that  of 
a son  with  his father. The addition of  ātmanas  may not he arbitrary; it rather 
seems  to stress  that  there  is a direct  family  relation between the two kings mentioned 


--- [Page 287] ---
— 277 — 
Valaiṅga 145), this  liṅga  of the Three­Eyed  (Çiva)  was erected as a 
token of excellent devotion. 
In the Çaka  year 778. 
c 
The dimensions of the third Ratubaka  stone  are 71 cm in length and 35 
cm in breadth. This  stone  is in an excellent  state  of preservation; everywhere, 
the lettering is clear and unambiguous. The  akṣaras  are somewhat smaller 
than those  of the two other  stone  inscriptions  (average  height  about  11^ cm)  . 
Transcription 
[T^] Namaç=çivāya  146) 
Kamalabhavādisurava[2]rojjvalitamakuṭakoṭighṛṣṭacaraṇā[3]  ya / 
mayakaravālābhlhapattripurabhide  147) [4] smai  harāya  namaḥ  j/ 1 // 
daçavadanabāṇapā  [5] rthapramukhamadhukarātulābhinandakariṃ  / 
hara[6]pādapaṅkajarajaḥkaṇikāvodanmahalla[7]kṣmīṃ  // 2 // 
Asty=akhaṇḍalapurād=atibhāsvad= 
bhū^8^]ribhogabharitād=urukāntiḥ  / 
çarmado  tha vivu[^]dho vyavatlrṇnaḥ 
khād=ivātivimalād=dhimakā^l0^ntth  // 3 // 
Tadanvayāt=pra^uto  yaṃ  varaçāstratalānvi[Tl^]taḥ  / ­  � . ^ 
rarāja  manujaçreṣṭ<h>aḥ  kalaçodbhavasaṃjṅataḥ  14^) // 4  j/ 
[12] tenājapadakamalabhramai:—ṛtamolinā  l49) / 
[T3^]  sthāpitaṃ  haraliṅgaṃ tad=bhuvi  pūtaṃ  tadābhavat  // 5 // 
in the strophes 3 and 4;  there  probably were  many  others,  too, who claimed de 
scent  from  the mysterious  king. 
­­­) Probably to be interpreted as the victorious prince of  val:–­ihga  in a similar way as 
we may use expressions such a^  „the  Victor  of Trafalgar’’.  It seems  certain  that  this 
name is identical  with  Walaing,  which  occurs in the  Rakai  title of Kumbhayoni in 
the Pereng inscription. CI. the Introduction (supra, pp. 253 sqq.). 
.t46) ­­­^ above the punctuation mark, a  rather  strange  symbol  was  carved  on the stone. 
It does not resemble any of the symbols used for  oṃ.  Since  just  below  the tex^: 
of the inscription the ciphers 1941 were engraved in rather recent times, the possi¬
bility of the strange form having been recently added might be considered. The 
. . technique of engraving does not, however,  make  such  a supposition  probable.  The 
strange symhol rather belongs to the original  inscription. 
147) The  form  (a.)bhihapat­, perfectiy clear on the stone,  cannot  he correct.  Considering 
that in line  12 of  inscription  b the stone curter carved a ha  instead  of a ta (eha^ for 
etat),  one may presume  that  the same error was committed  here.  In that  case, 
(a)bhihapat'’ should be corrected to  (a.)bhitapat°.  Although  the latter term is not 
quite satisfactory (cf. note 150 to the translation), it seems to be the  only  obvious 
. way of  correcting  . the incomprehensible  form.  It is noted  that  the second strophe, 
.too,­  shows. some  . peculiarities  as to its language. 
14S) read:  ^saṃjñitaḥ. 
­49^ read  : "maulinā. 


--- [Page 288] ---
— 278 — 
Translation 
Glory  to Çiva  ! 
1. Glory  to that  Hara, whose  feet  are rubbed by the  tops  of the flaming 
crowns of (Brahman)  Born  in a Lotus and the other principal gods, 
and who destroyed Tripura glittering with the sword of  Maya  15°). 
2. (Pay homage to) 151) to the Great  Lakṣmī  152), who gives unequalled 
pleasure to (the  heroes)  with the  ten­headed  (Rāvaṇa)  153), Bāṇa 154) 
and Arjuna 155), (adoring her lotus  feet  like)  honey­making  (bees),  at 
their head 156), and from Whose body the granules of pollen of the lotus 
l.^ 0) The story of  Tripura,  huilt  by the  Asura  architect  Maya,  and destroyed by  Çiva­
Mahādeva  with  the help of many other gods, is well­known  from  Indian literature; 
it is told,  for instance in the Vanaparvan of the  Mahāhhārata  ; numerous references 
are given by  Gopinatha  Rao, Elements, II. 1, pp. 164 sqq., who, in addition, discusses 
the iconography  of this episod. Brahman, especially mentioned in this strophe, assists 
Mahādeva  as his charioteer.  According  to all accounts we were able to trace,  Maya 
is only  the architect of the Asuras ; nowhere, he is conceived of as the leader in the 
defence hy the Asuras, when the castles were attacked hy  Mahādeva  and the other 
gods. In our  inscription,  however, it is  Maya  who is the  principal  defender.  This  may 
he concluded  from  the use of  karavāla,  which  is not capable of heing interpreted in 
another way. The translation 'glittering’ renders abhitapat, corrected  from  the in­
comprehensible  form  abhihapat in the text (cf. note 147, above). The  form  abhitapat 
may not be quite normal ; one  would  rather have expected  abhitapyamāna  ; on the 
other hand,  tapati  in the meaning of  ‚‚emitting  heat  or light’’  is usual enough to 
account for the  form  abhitapat. 
151) I.^ term on  which  the accusatives depend is expressed in the text. We suppose  that 
a term  like  vandadhvam, namadhvam,  praṇamata,  or possihly  vande  etc. must he 
supplied  as to the meaning. CI. the Introductions supra, p. 245. 
152) Mahanak^nī,  — for tho translation, cI. note 7 to the Introduction. 
l­ 3) The  simile  with  Rāvaṇa  may refer to the relation of the ten­headed monster  with 
Sītā,  oft­m taken to he an incarnation of  Lakṣmī.  The  allusion,  however, is not very 
correct in  that  case, for abhinanda is just the thing  Sītā  did not give to  Rāvaṇa, 
anyhow  according to the  Rāmāyaṇa  version. Perhaps, we should not think here^ and 
not in the two  following  references either, of a weil­known incarnation of  Lakṣmī, 
but rather of success in hattle in general. 
1­54). ­­^ —  ^orb.^p­.  tho name of the  Asura,  son of  Bali,  who fought  with  the gods  from  the 
^ ^ Kraunca  mountain, but was  killed  by Skanda (the  Tārakādhyāya  of the  Çalyaparvan^. 
155) ^p^.t1^ usually, hut net always, a name of Arjuna („son of  Pṛthā"^). 
156) -rb^ exact meaning of this compound is not  lucid.  We analyze:  daçavadana­bāṇa­
pārthapramukhebhyo  madhukarebhyo  'bhinaṅdakarīṃ,  „giving pleasure to the  bees 
having as their chiefs  Rāvaṇa,  Bāṇa  and  Pārtha"  ; the  bees  coming to suck the honey 
from  her lotus­feet are the usual  simile  for the heroes worshipping the feet of 
the goddess. The identity of two of the chiefs,  Daçavadana  and Pārtha  is not  open 
to doubt, but it is not clear who is meant by  Bāṇa  ; one of the ancestors of  Rāma, 
^ great­grandchild of  Ikṣvāku,  the first  king  of Ayodhyā,  hears  that  name  (Bālakānda, 
^ 7o), but a better­known  Bāṇa  is the son of the demon  Bali,  killed  by Skanda in the 
. ^ ^Çalyaparvan  of the  Mahāhhārata.  If these  mythologie  heroes are  only  mentioned 
because they obtained boons  from  Laksmī,  they are not the most characteristic ex­
amples. Probably, the compound has a double meaning,  which  is not however clear 
to us; the compound seems clumsy. 


--- [Page 289] ---
— 279 — 
feet of  Hara  trickle  down  like drops of water (do  from  the body of those 
who have just taken a bath) 157). 
3. Once,  there  was a very charming, propitious God, who descended  from 
the very  brilliant  Akhaṇḍalapura  1^), rich  in 1^) manifold  pleasures, 
as a Moon  with  refreshing rays  from  the immaculate sky. 
4. This  prince, descended  from  the race of  that  God, well­acquainted  with 
the excellent  Çāstras,  reigned as the best of men,  known  by the name 
Kalaçodbhava. 
5. By him, whose diadem consisted of  bees  on the lotus­feet of Aja, this 
liṅga  of Hara  was erected; then,  there  was a  purification  (?) on the 
earth 16°). 
i.^7) Avodan is one of those  hahuvrīhis  the first part of  which  is an adverb. CI.  avakeça 
(Atharvav., VI, 30, 2‚ quoted hy  Monier­Williams)  : „having the  hair  hanging  down’’ 
and a few other examples ; for this  kind  of compounds, cf. Wackernagel, II, 1, p. 282. 
Pāṇini  (Aṣṭādhy.  VI. 4‚  kār.  29) mentions avoda, having become an a­stem, in the 
same meaning. The  upamā  is clear: the pollen of  Çiva's  lotus­feet drops down  from 
Mahallakṣmī's  body and is compared  with  the drops of water  trickling  down  from 
a woman who has just come out of the water. The  simile  expressed in the whole 
strophe is a rather complex one : the  hees.  who are the heroes worshipping the god­
dess, are attracted hy the pollen dripping down  form  her, hut the pollen  itself  does 
not belong to the goddess but is due to her worshipping the feet of  Hara. 
l.^8) A^ ^ noted in the Introduction, it is not yet possible to conclude anything on the 
basis of this name. The name is completely unknown. If it is permitted to consider 
Akhaṇḍala  an incorrect  spelling  of Ākhaṇḍala  (chosen for metrical reasons), the name 
could  be a synonym of Indrapura, but then the name is too common t^ permit iden­
tification.  For a con.:'sctu­e, cf! p. 262 above. 
l.^ 9) Bharita is  ­tsual  in the meaning  „rich  in,  full  of’’  in Buddhist  Sanskr1t;  cf. the note 
by Senart in his  Mahāvastu  edition, I. p. 453 ; it sometimes occurs in non­Buddhist 
Sanskrit,  too (Pet.  Dict.,  s.v.). 
•^9) Hhuvi  pūtaṃ  tadābhavat,  — the use of  puta  as a substantive is strange. It is prooable 
that its use is more important than it seems to he  ; cf. pūtikeçvarapāvitā  in the first 
strophe of the  Dinaya  inscription,  atipūtā  çilā  in the second strophe of the Pereng 
inscription,  and  pūteçwara  in line A — 6 of  Balitung’s  Kĕḍu  inscription  (T.B.G.,  57, 
1927,  p. 206). Important references,  which  may throw some  light  upon  the meaning 
of Putikeçvara  in the  Dinaya  inscription, were collected by  Bosch  in T.B.G.,  64 (1924), 
pp. 280 sqq.  Although  it is probably correct to interpret  Putikeçvara  as 'Lord  of the 
Stench',  associated  with  the chthonic aspects of  Çiva,  it is not doubtful  that  at least 
here and in the Pereng inscription puta and atipura are not connected  with  pūti  etc. ; 
pūta derived  from  pūyate  is known only  from  Indian dictionaries, whereas it is 
very  common as a derivative  from  punāti;  moreover, the wording of the Pereng in­
scription  leaves no doubt  that  the latter meaning is required.  Similar  considerations 
apply  to Putecwara in the  Kĕḍu  inscription,  which  could  hardly have another meaning 
than the  'Lord  of Purity'  (cf.  pūtamatI.  pūtamūrti  and  similar  compounds). Now we 
have the choice between two  possibilities  : pūtikeçvara  should either be disconnected 
from  Pūteçvara  and the other examples (all  from  Central Java), or its interpretation 
should  be revised; a point in favour of the latter  view  might be the fact  that  the 
compound  pūtikeçvarapāvitā  (puri) remains strange if it should mean :  „purified  by 


--- [Page 290] ---
— 280 — 
^I. A  METRICAL  OLD  JAVANESE  INSCRIPTION  DATED  856  A.D. 
The site of discovery of the stone inscription numbered No. D. 28 in the 
collection  of the Djakarta Museum is completely unknown. No details what­
ever are available 1). 
The measurements of the stone are 112 cm in height and 51 cm in 
breadth 2). The stone is inscribed on either side. Brandes noticed  that  there 
are traces  of a lengthy inscription on its back 3) , no transcription of  which 
can be given on account of its very bad  state  of preservation; the few  traces 
still visible  on the surface of the stone make it certain  that  the inscription 
was written in  Pre­Nāgarī 4). Some isolated  akṣaras,  which  are relatively 
well preserved, might permit a vague conclusion based on the script. The 
inscription  on the front of the stone is in a far  better  state  of preservation, 
although  it was damaged at several places. The text counts 48 lines in all 5) ; 
lines 1—6 have almost disappeared  from  the stone except for a few  akṣaras 
mainly  at the beginning of the lines; in the lines 7—10,  there  are extensive 
lacunae in the middle portions; the lines 16—24 are mutilated  owing  to a 
large hole in the surface of the stone, bringing about lacunae of two to nine 
aksaras in the different lines. Except for  these  lacunae, the text is  well  pre­
served. 
the Lord  of the Stench'', especially since the  Dinaya  inscription is completely devoid 
of puns. Unfortunately, no data about the  Putikeçvara­tīrtha,  situated on the  Nar¬
madā,  are avallahle (cI. Bosch, art. cit., p. 279). In all these cases, it is hardly doubt­
ful that  liṅgas  are meant; in our text, this is beyond doubt, and, as  Bosch  pointed 
out, it is very probable fo­ the  Dinaya  inscription,  too. In the Pereng inscription, it is 
less certain; the whole pada runs  çiviravṛtāpy::^atipūtā  çilā  (note: Poerbatjaraka, 
Agastya, p. 45,  reads  çivara  without further comment and introduces  that  word into 
Kern's  translation) and we do not understand why  Kern  (Verspr. Ceschr., VI, p. 
282) considers the  only  usual meaning of  çivira  (i.e.  çibira),  viz.  „royal  camp’ , 
impossible  and prefers the meaning „a sort of grain",  only  known  from  Indian  dic­
tionaries, but interpret­ tne latter meaning as  ‚‚weeds"  ; this  seems  arbitrary. The 
word  çibira  occurs in the Tugu inscription (in the compound  çibirāvani;  cf.  Vogel. 
PubI.  Cudh.  Dienst,  I. (1925), pp. 31 sq.), where it was explained as  „camp,  camping 
grounds" belonging to a  rājarṣi.  Is not the latter point a striking analogy  with  what 
we concluded ahout the identity of the founder in the Pereng inscription (cI. the 
Introduction) ? It is well­known  that  in Old­Javanese society  there  was a very strict 
separation between the domains of the king and those of the gods. A divine stone 
surrounded hy some sort of  royal  establishment is something very extraordinary and 
this would  explain the opposition made by api in the text; on the other hand, it 
would  be less strange if here, too, a 1mga is  meant  standing within a  royal  hermitage. 
1) CI. Brandes in  Catalogus  Croeneveldt (1887), p. 382. 
2) More  exact figures of the measurements of the stone inscription and its pedestal are 
mentioned by Brandes,  loc.  cit. 
3) The terms ‘front‛ and ‘back‛ refer to the present position of the stone in the Dja.¬
karta Museum; they imply no conclusion as to the priority of one of the sides. 
4) Although  here  and  there  a few aksaras are  sufficiently  well  preserved to make 
their  identification  possible, a complete word  could  nowhere be deciphered; except 
for some palaeographic remarks, we are forced to- exclude the back of the stone  from 
the discussion  which  follows. 
^) Brandes,  loc.  cit., mentioned 5o lines of script. 


--- [Page 291] ---
— 279 — 
feet of  Hara  trickle  down  like drops of water (do  from  the body of those 
who have just taken a bath)  ­^ 7). 
3. Once,  there  was a very charming, propitious Cod, who descended  from 
the very  brilliant  Akhaṇḍalapura  1^), rich  in 1^) manifold  pleasures, 
as a Moon  with  refreshing rays  from  the immaculate sky. 
4. This  prince, descended  from  the race of  that  God, well­acquainted  with 
the excellent  Çāstras,  reigned as the best of men,  known  by the name 
Kalaçodbhava. 
5. By him, whose diadem consisted of  bees  on the lotus­feet of Aja, this 
liṅga  of Hara  was erected; then,  there  was a  purification  (?) on the 
earth 16°). • 
l.^7) Avoda^ is one of those  bahuvrīhis  the first part of  which  is an adverh. CI.  avakeça 
(Atharvav., VI, 30, 2, quoted hy  Monier­Williams)  : „having the hair hanging  down’’ 
and a few other examples; for this  kind  of compounds, cf. Wackernagel, II, 1, p. 282. 
Pāṇini  (Aṣṭādhy.  VI, 4,  kār.  29) mentions avoda, having become an a­stem, in the 
same meaning. The  upamā  is clear: the  pollen  of Civa’s  1otus­feet drops down  from 
Mahallakṣmī’s  body and is compared  with  the drops of water  trickling  down  from 
a woman who has just come out of the water. The  simile  expressed in the whole 
strophe is a rather complex one : the  hees.  who are the heroes worshipping the god­
dess, are attracted hy the pollen dripping down  form  her, hut the poilen  itself  does 
not belong to the goddess but is due to her worshipping the feet of  Hara. 
1^8) A^ ­­^ noted in the Introduction, it is not yet possible to conclude anything on the 
basis of this name. The name is completely unknown. If it is permitted to consider 
Akhaṇḍala  an incorrect  spelling  of Ākhaṇḍala  (chosen for metrical reasons), the name 
could  be a synonym of Indrapura, but  then  the name is too common t^ permit iden­
tification.  For  a con.:'sctu^e, cI. p. 262 above. 
:­^9y L^harita is ^sual in the meaning  ‚‚rich  in,  full  of" in Buddhist  Sanskr1t;  cI. the note 
by Senart in his  Mahāvastu  edition, I. p. 453 ; it sometimes occurs in non­Buddhist 
Sanskrit,  too (Pet.  Dict.,  s.v.). 
:60) 1^.^vi  pūtaṃ  tadābhavat,  — the use of  pūta  as a substantive is strange. It is prooahle 
that its use is more important than it seems to be  ; cf. pūtikeçvarapāvitā  in the first 
strophe of the  Dinaya  inscription,  atipūtā  çilā  in the second strophe of the Pereng 
inscription,  and  pūteçwara  in line A — 6 of Balitung's  Kĕḍu  inscription  (T.B.G.,  57, 
1927,  p. 206). Important references,  which  may throw some  light  upon  the meaning 
of Putikeçvara  in the  Dinaya  inscription, were collected by  Bosch  in T.B.G.,  64 (1924), 
pp. 280 sqq.  Although  it is probably correct to interpret  Putikeçvara  as 'Lord  of the 
Stench^,  associated  with  the chthonic aspects of  Çiva,  it is not douhtful  that  at least 
here and in the Pereng inscription  pūta  and  atipūta  are not connected  with  pūti  etc. ; 
pūta derived  from  pūyate  is known only  from  Indian dictionaries, whereas it is 
very  common as a derivative  from  punāti;  moreover, the wording of the Pereng in­
scription  leaves no doubt  that  the latter meaning is required.  Similar  considerations 
apply  to Puteçwara  in the  Kĕḍu  inscription,  which  could  hardly have another meaning 
than the  'Lord  of Purity'  (cf.  pūtamati,  pūtamūrti  and  similar  compounds). Now we 
have the choice between two  possibilities  : pūtikeçvara  should either be disconnected 
from  Pūteçvara  and the other examples (all  from  Central Java), or its interpretation 
should  be revised ; a point in favour of the latter  view  might be the fact  that  the 
compound  pūtikeçvarapāvitā  (purī)  remains strange if it should mean :  „purified  by 


--- [Page 292] ---
— 280 — 
.^I. A  METRICAL  OLD  JAVANESE  INSCRIPTION  DATED  856  A.D. 
The site of discovery of the  stone  inscription numbered No. D. 28 in the 
collection  of the Djakarta Museum is completely unknown. No details what­
ever are available 1) . 
The measurements  of the  stone  are 112 cm in height and 51 cm in 
breadth 2). The  stone  is inscribed on either side. Brandes noticed  that  there 
are traces  of a lengthy inscription on its back 3), no transcription of which 
can be given on account of its very bad  state  of preservation; the few  traces 
still visible on the surface of the  stone  make it certain  that  the inscription 
was written in  Pre­Nāgarī 4). Some isolated  akṣaras,  which are relatively 
well preserved, might permit a  vague  conclusion based on the script. The 
inscription  on the front of the  stone  is in a far  better  state  of preservation, 
although  it was damaged at several places. The  text  counts  48 lines in all 5) ; 
lines 1­­­6  have  almost disappeared from the  stone  except for a few  akṣaras 
mainly  at the beginning of the lines; in the lines 7—10,  there  are extensive 
lacunae in the .middle portions; the lines 16—24 are mutilated owing to a 
large hole in the surface of the  stone,  bringing  about  lacunae of two to nine 
akṣaras  in the different lines. Except for  these  lacunae, the  text  is well  pre­
served. 
the Lord  of the Stench'', especially since the  Dinaya  inscription is completely devoid 
of puns. Unfortunately, no data about the  Putikeçvara­tīrtha,  situated on the  Nar¬
madā,  are available (cf. Bosch, art. cit., p. 279). In all these cases, it is hardly doubt­
ful that  hngas  are meant; in our text, this is beyond doubt, and, as  Bosch  pointed 
out, it is very probable fo^ the  Dinaya  inscription,  too. In the Pereng inscription, it is 
less certain ; the whole pada runs  çivfravṛtāpy­^atipūtā  çilā  (note  : Poerbatjaraka, 
Agastya, p. 45,  reads  çivara  without further comment and introduces  that  word into 
Kern's  translation) and we do not understand why  Kern  (Verspr. Ceschr., VI, p. 
282) considers the  only  usual meaning of  çivira  (i.e.  çibira),  viz.  „royal  camp' , 
impossible  and prefers the meaning „a sort of grain",  only  known from Indian  dic­
tionaries, but interprets tne latter meaning as  „weeds"  ; this  seems  arbitrary. The 
word  çibira  occurs in the Tugu inscription (in the compound  çibirāvani;  cf.  Vogel. 
PubI.  Cudh.  Dienst,  I. (1925), pp. 31 sq.), where it was explained as  „camp,  camping 
grounds" belonging to a  rājarṣi.  Is not the latter point a striking analogy  with  what 
we concluded about the identity of the founder in the Pereng inscription (cI. the 
Introduction) ? It is well­known  that  in Old­Javanese society  there  was a very strict 
separation between the domains of the king and  those  of the gods. A divine  stone 
surrounded hy some sort of  royal  establishment is something very extraordinary and 
this would  explain the opposition made by api in the text; on the other hand, it 
would  be less  strange  if here, too, a 1mga is  meant  standing within a  royal  hermitage. 
1) CI. Brandes in  Catalogus  Croeneveldt (1887), p. 382. 
­) More  exact figures of the measurements of the  stone  inscription and its pedestal are 
mentioned by Brandes,  loc.  cit. 
3) The terms ­front' and 'back’ refer to the present position of the  stone  in the Dja^ 
karta Museum; they  imply  no conclusion as to the priority of one of the sides. 
4) Although  here  and  there  a few aksaras are sufficientiy  well  preserved to make 
their  identification  possible, a complete word  could  nowhere be deciphered; except 
for some palaeographic remarks, we are forced to exclude the hack of the  stone  from 
the discussion  which  follows. 
^) Brandes,  loc.  cit., mentioned 5o lines of script. 


--- [Page 293] ---
­– 281 — 
Curiously  enough, the only scholar who took a real interest in the in­
scription was Brandes; his description of the stone in the  Catalogus  Groene¬
veldt bears a full testimony to this point. It appears from several remarks 
made  there  that  he succeeded in reading considerable portions of the text; 
among other details, Brandes discovered its  date  expressed in the words 
wualung  gunung  sang  unku,  which  correspond  with  the ciphers 778  Çaka 
or 856  A.D.  Krom  presumably knew only Brandes’ account, on  which  he 
based some provisional remarks in his Hindu­Javanese History 6) . Finally, 
the inscription  was  briefly  discussed by Damais in his  list of the main dated 
.inscriptions  of Indonesia  7) . 
The text is important for several reasons. In the first place it gives 
us the oldest dated specimen of Old Javanese poetry and may therefore 
prove interesting for the history of Old Javanese literature. Secondly, it con­
tains  some valuable data about important  historical  events  about in the middle 
of the 9th century  A.D.  Thirdly,  part  of the text contains a detailed description 
of an Old Javanese temple complex — something unique in Old Javanese 
epigraphy. On the other hand, the  great  difference between this inscription 
and the  texts  which  one is used to in epigraphy (and epigraphy is the only 
source of our knowledge of the Old Javanese language prior to about the 
eleventh century  A.D.)  8) makes its interpretation extremely  difficult.  The 
detailed discussion  which  follows  could  only be termed an introduction to 
future studies. 
The type of  Pre­Nāgar1  used at the back of the  stone  is rather  different. 
from  that  known  from some  Çailendra  inscriptions  ^). The  ’nail­heads’  at the 
top of the  akṣaras  already became small horizontal strokes,  which  do not yet 
constitute a continuous line although some  akṣaras  almost have their  typical 
Nāgarī  forms. In a ma of (probably) line 12,  the..:e  is a real horizontal 
line at the top of the  akṣara;  in addition, the aksara is characterized by a 
littie  loop  which  is completely  absent  in the  Çailendra  inscriptions.  Unfor­
tunately,  there  are only four or  five  akṣaras  which  are sufficiently  well 
preserved for a palaeographical analysis. They might permit the conclusion 
that the type of script  represents  a far more advanced  stage  in the develop­
ment of  Pre­Nāgari  script than  that  used in the  Çailendra  inscriptions; it is, 
however, impossible to  base  any more positive conclusions on the few  akṣaras 
that have remained  visible. 
The Old Javanese script on the front of the  stone  is extremely regular; 
it must have been engraved by a  firm  and very experienced hand. The ak­
6) Geschiedenis 2, p. 138. As to the relation  between  the two sides of the stone,  Krom 
suggests  three  possibilities. The  final  conclusion is only negative : the use of Pre­
Nāgarī  at the back of a  stone  with  a Çaiva  inscription in Old Javanese script  does 
not prove  that  Pre­Nāgarī  script  could  be used in non­Buddhist inscriptions in ­Java. 
­) Etudes  d'ĕpigraphie  indonesienne, HI: Liste  des  principales inscriptions  datees  de 
r1ndonesie, in  B.E.E.E.O.,  XL  VI, Fasc.  1 (1952), pp. so sq. 
s) With  one probable exception, viz. the Old Javanese  Rāmāyaṇa,  the  date  of which 
will be discussed in the course of this Introduction. 
^) CI. the detailed discussion by  Bosch  in T.B.G.,  68 (1928), pp. 3­16. 


--- [Page 294] ---
— 282 — 
ṣaras  are rather  small (the average height being about 0,5 cm) and slightly 
sloping.  The  same  akṣara  is everywhere expressed in exactly the  same  manner 
and this  statement  is even  true  for the smallest details. This regularity is a 
great  help in identifying partly mutilated ak ṣaras. A definite number of 
akṣaras, viz. the ka, ta, wa, bha, ga,  ça, sa, ra  and a few others, always  start 
with  a tiny, almost circular, hook at the left hand top ; a definite number of 
other  aksaras  such as the pa, ha,  l­a,  ṇa and  initial  a, have nothing of this 
kind.  These little hooks are  thus  made to serve a definite purpose instead of 
being  mere ornaments : they have become a real secondary distinguishing 
mark between forms  that  would  otherwise be very similar. Thus, the ra 
may be confounded  with  a simple  daṇḍa  in some of the oloer inscriptions, 
but here  the little hook gives it a certain  individuality.  As a  matter  of fact, 
later Old Javanese script has not only preserved the hook of the ra, but has 
even made it the most characteristic  feature  of that  akṣara  1°). 
The suku,  which  still  bends  to the right at its lower end, has a  typical 
form  when it is attached to the ka; instead of running right down, it is 
expressed as a curve open to the right hand side. The evolution of the ka 
during  the history of Pallava script makes us understand the function of 
this peculiarity.  In the older phase, the middle vertical of the ka was continued 
considerably  beneath the  line;  although in later  Fallava  script, e.g. in the 
seventh century  Çrīvijaya  inscriptions, the  three  verticals of the ka became 
ectual  in height, the form of a ka  with  a mere vertical stroke for the expression 
of the ­u  would  agree  with  the older form of the  akṣara  without any  vowel 
mark attached to it and might therefore be misunderstood. It was therefore 
considered necessary to express the  –u in a somewhat different way. Although 
this peculiar mode of expressing ku had lost its raison  d'etre  in the second 
half of the ninth century, it was kept as a sort of archaism in our inscription, 
possibly  because  it was considered ornamental. The most interesting point 
is that  our inscription is evidently based upon a tradition different from  that 
of tne contemporary Central Javanese inscriptions, in  which  ku is expressed 
in the usual way.  Exactly  the same  peculiar form of the ­u is used  with  the 
ra and  there  it is due to the  same  cause. These details are not only interesting 
for the history of Old Javanese script, but they are also a help to the tran­
scription  : the syllables ku and ru can be recognized even if the upper  part 
of the akṣaras  is badly damaged.  Finally,  I note  the frequent use of the  vowel 
mark for the  pĕpĕt,  although it is not found everywhere where one  would 
have expected it. It  appears  that  a disyllabic  word the first  vowel  of which 
is an ĕ may be expressed either by using the  vowel  mark for the  ĕ, or by 
making  the two consonants between  which  an ĕ is heard immediately  follow 
1°) In the  eastern  variety of Old Javanese script (in the tenth century and later), the 
little  hook of the ra developed into a  rather  elegant curve,  which  made the aksara 
almost as broad as the average aksara.  During  the  same  period, the little hooks at 
the top of most of the other aksaras, in  which  they had no definite function, disap­
peared. 


--- [Page 295] ---
­ 283 — 
each other 11). As  will  appear in the course of this Introduction, the choice 
concerning  which  of these  modes of expression is preferred depends on 
metrical  considerations. 
The orthography used in our record is interesting. The poet had a large 
amount of freedom in expressing  long  vowels, in using double consonants in 
some definite cases, in expressing or omitting the  pĕpĕt  in any syllable except 
the ultima and in several other cases. He made  full use of this freedom in 
order to meet his metrical needs, i.e. in a definite number of  cases  he could 
use a  long  vowel  if he needed one, but he  could  also put down a short one 
^ if this was necessary for the metre. The orthography  will  therefore be dis­
cussed in close connection  with  the metre. 
The choice of the  metres  is interesting. At least six different  metres 
are used 12) belonging to three distinct classes, viz. to the samavrtta, ardha¬
samavṛtta  and  ardhaviṣamavṛtta  groups 13) ; the author shows a considerable 
amount of learning and practice in their use. The first group is represented 
by four types, viz. Vasantatilaka, Rajani (also  called  Narkuṭaka),  Pṛthvi 
(sometimes  called  Pṛthvītala)  and  Çikhariṇī  ; the second and third groups 
are represented by the  well­known  Puṣpitāgra  metre and a, presumably rare, 
variety  of ardhavisama the exact name of  which  is unknown to us. The latter 
consists of two equal  pādas  of thirteen syllables each (the  pādas  b and d), 
whereas the  pādas  a and c are different, but consist of twelve syllables 
each 14). The  metres  are quite regular and require  only  a few remarks. 
For Vasantatilaka,  there  is no  fixed  caesura, as might have been expected 15) ; 
Çikhariṇī  has a caesura after the  sixth  syllable of each  pāda,  as is usual, 
but the  Pṛthv1,  which  usually has a break after the eighth  syllable,  does 
not appear to have any caesura here. In  Puṣpitāgra,  the last syllable of 
each  pāda  should be  long,  but th^s is not the case here 16). The Rajani 
^) A third  possibility,  viz.  that  of writing  an a instead of a  pĕpĕt,  also occurs, but far 
less frequently than the two methods mentioned in the text. For further details, cI. 
the Introduction  to No. IX, above. 
12) In the first six lines of the text, the metre cannot he re­established ;  only  a few  iso­
lated  words  could  be deciphered. 
13) The fourth  great  class of  metres  (Iāti)  is not represented, unless one of the  initial 
strophes was wrirten in  Āryā,  which  is not at all impossible. There might even be 
some reason to suppose  that  the poet wanted to show off his  skill  in handling all the 
four classes of  metres  and not  only  three  of these.  This  is also the case in, for in­
stance, the  Ligor  inscription (cf. B. Ch. Chhabra, Expansion, p. 21). 
1 ­) Its metrical scheme is : 
(a) ^^­^—  — ^ — .— ^ 
(b) ^ ^ ^ ^ ­— ^ .— ^ ­– 
1.^) The epic Vasantatilaka usually has a caesura at the fourth and again at the seventh 
syllable; the classical Vasantatilaka may have one at the eighth. However,  Açva¬
ghoṣa,  the treatise of Pmgala and most of the classical authors do not follow this rule; 
cf. the survey given by E.  H. Johnston, The Buddhacarita, II (1936), pp.  lxvi  sq. 
­'.) Açvaghoṣa  always makes the  pādas  a and c of the  Puṣpitāgra  strophes end in a long 
syllable,  but the last syllable of the  pādas  b and d may be either short or.  long. 


--- [Page 296] ---
— 284 — 
metre is used in no less than e1even stanzas ; the preponderance of short 
syllables  makes it very  suitab1e  for  vivid  descriptions and this might be 
the reason for its frequency in our text. 
The prosody is  still  more remarkable than the choice of the metres. 
The use of quantitative  metres  is more natural in a language such as Sanskrit 
than  in an Indonesian language in  which  there  is no phonemic opposition 
between  long  and short syllables 17). As far as we know, the prosody of 
the classical  Old Javanese poetry was based on the Sanskrit rules. Thus, 
o and e are always considered  long,  also in words of Indonesian  origin; 
a vowel  due to contraction of two vowels (such as  tĕkān,  analyzed as  tĕka  ^ 
and ­an) is  long  according to the Sanskrit rule of  sandhi  ; words borrowed 
from  Sanskrit  retain their  original  quantities in Old Javanese, etc. In most 
of the remaining cases, the vowels are reckoned short, unless they are  fol­
lowed  by more than one consonant 18). It cannot be denied  that  most of 
these  rules have something  artificial,  or rather, traditional. Thus, the rule 
that e and o are always  long,  does not seem to correspond to any phonemic 
feature of Old Javanese l9) : these  vowels are  long  because they were con­
sidered  diphthongs in Sanskrit. It must necessarily have taken much time 
before such a traditional prosody, reposing on an elaborate  ars poetica, was 
duly  fixed  and adhered to. The prosody of our text is particularly interesting 
because it shows us an early  stage,  in which  there  still  was a  great  amount 
of freedom in applying the above rules. The  treatment  of Sanskrit  vowel 
quantities depends almost  exclusively  on metrical exigencies ; consequently, 
the Sanskrit  words are sometimes hardly recognizable. A few examples  will 
be sufficient. In strophe 16, the poet, needing a number of short syllables 
'succeeding each other, made the word  avatāra,  provided  witn  the affixes 
pa­ and ­an,  pt^ṅau)ataran  (instead of  paṅau^atārān)  ; the Sanskrit word 
baṇyāga  is spelt correctly in strophe 27 a, but  baṇiyāga  in 22 a; in 10 b, 
Sanskrit  sandeha  (samdeha)  is spelt  sandihā  by substituting i for the e‚  which 
was necessarily  long.  A very beautiful example is duarapala, four short 
syllables  and a  long  one, instead of  dvārapāla  in 14  c ; since two  long  syl­
lables  never  follow  each other in Rajani metre and the syllable preceding 
dvārapāla  is necessarily  long,  the poet had to resort to drastic measures to 
17) 1t i^ necessary to summarize the conclusion of a rather complicated question,  which 
would  require a  separate  investigation.  Nobody  would  doubt the correctness of this 
conclusion  for the modern languages of Java and Sumatra, but there might be some 
doubt whether our  statement  holds good for Old  Malay  and Old Javanese, where 
quite a few cases of, at least apparent, opposition may be discovered. They might 
he divided  into several categories. Sometimes, both words are borrowed  from  Sanskrit 
(such  as çīla:  çilā,  vara:  vāra  and a few other cases occurring in Old Javanese). 
18) For the use of  long  vowels in Old Javanese epigraphy, cf. supra, pp. 215­217. 
l^) The vowel system of the modern Javanese language was discussed in detail by Uh¬
lenbeck,  De structuur  van  het Javaanse  morpheeṃ,  Verh.  B.C.,  LXXVHI  (1949), 
pp. so–41.  One has the impression  that  the Old Javanese  vowel  system agreed  with 
that of the modern language on the whole. The discrepancy between the  vowel  system 
of Old Javanese and the quantitative poetry in the  kĕkawin  literature was recently 
discussed  by A.  Teeuw, Taal  eh Versbouw  (1952), pp. 4­6. 


--- [Page 297] ---
— 285 — 
make the  word  (which  he could  neither  avoid  nor replace) agree  with  the 
m^tre. Tne  Rajani  metre had great advantages because it consists  mainly 
of short  syllables  2°) , but a number of Sanskrit words  could  never have 
been used, unless they were considerably  modified. 
About  the same considerations as for the  spelling  of long  vowels apply 
to the  poet’s  use of the rules of  sandhi.  In this respect, too, the poet enjoyed 
complete freedom,  which  he could  use for metrical purposes. Whenever one 
long  syllable  was required, he combined the  final  vowel  of one  word  with 
the initial  vowel  of the next, but when two short vowels suited better his 
purpose, he left the hiatus. The latter point has a particular interest for 
our knowledge of the history of Old Javanese poetry, as  will  appear in the 
course of this Introduction. Examples may be found everywhere in the text. 
The next point,  which  would  however require a far more detailed  treat­
ment than can be  given  here, is the  poet’s  use of the  alamkāras  known  in 
Indian  poetry.  Even  a superficial  examination shows  that  he had a profound 
training  in their use ; as a matter of fact, he seems to show off his  skill  and 
goes far beyond the discrete  limits  fixed  by the  classical  poets in India. 
The most  striking  point is the  lack  of proportions between the different 
alamkāras  used. The text is very poor in  upamās  and  rūpakas  : there  is 
indeed  nothing worthy of note  that  belongs to  these  categories ; the poet 
is however very  skilled  in handling the different kinds of yamaka and various 
plays  of words.  Especially  in the  Rajani  strophes,  there  is hardly any  pāda 
without  a repetition of at least two  syllables.  A few examples  will be sufficient. 
In 17 a, sama occurs  three  times ; in 17 b, we have the repetition bhakti ta 
bhaktita ; 16  b : apūrwwa  ri pūrwwadiça  ; 16  d ; hyaṅa i hyaṅ=apa  ; 15  d : 
ta pānti  tinapān=tiruan  ; 18 a  : diwyatama  diwyakĕnā ;  19 a •  manona 
manojña.  In 19  d, a far more complicated type of yamaka is used ; there, 
the second  half  of the  pāda  is almost a reflected image of the fh:st part, 
running  : atiçaya  tang  ṅaranya taṅaranya  mahātisa  ya, the meaning of  which 
is supposed to be :  „extraordinary  was their fame, a token  that  they  would 
bring  refreshment’’ 21). 
It is interesting to comnare the  poet’s  handling of the yamaka  with  the 
survey  given  by Daṇḍin  in the  third  pariccheda of his  Kāvyādarça  ­­) . As 
a matter of fact, most of the simpler kinds of yamaka occur in our text, 
although  there  is a definite preference for repetitions inside the same  pāda. 
In most of the  Rajani  strophes they are found in each  pāda.  Sometimes the 
repeated syllables  follow  each other (e.g., in 21 a, 22 a), more often, they 
are separated by one, sometimes by more syllables ; a  fourfold  yamaka occurs 
in 14 d  (matakut  maling  ta kumaling)  , whereas in the last strophe the repeti­
­­) In ordinary Old Javanese prose  (Ādiparvan),  there are about three times as many 
short  syllables  as there are long ones ; on pp. 24 sq. of  Juynboll's  edition,  we counted 
5oS long  syllables  on a  . total  of 2ooo  (calculated as if it were poetry).  This  is about 
the same  relation  as in the  Rajani  metre. 
21) CI. the notes to the translation of this strophe. 
^­) O.  Bothlingk,  Daṇḍin's  Poetik (189o), pp. S5 sqq. 


--- [Page 298] ---
— 286 — 
tion of gau^ainya  in b and d constitutes a sort Of refrain ; in the latter case, 
gau)aī  is moreover used in  tvVO  different meanings. 
An alamkdra of a different  kind  occurs in 23  c (unku  kumarī  kumara 
kamarān  maru). Further  wc note in 9  c lokapāla  in two different meanings 
and in strophe 8 : rau)iprakulastha in c, on a  line  with  mamratipurastha, 
the different meanings of dharma in 11 d and 12 a. A  typical  example of 
utprekṣā  23) occurs in 14 d‚ where the presence of the  dvārapālas,  probably 
huge  Rākṣasa  images, serves to frighten the thieves ; a less characteristic 
example occurs in 18 a. Examples of  atiçayokti  are not rare, but they are 
hardly  striking  ; almost the  only  typical  examples occur in the description 
of a tree  in 16 c and d. 
At least two different sorts of riddles occur in the text. Strophe 23 
is introduced by the term  akṣaracyutaka,  which  denotes  a riddle in  which 
a sentence or a strophe is pronounced  with  the omission of one or more 
akṣaras  ; the other person, in this case, especially the editor, should  guess 
what  akṣara  it is. Unfortunately, the editor did not  find  the solution; he 
might  partly be excused by the fact  that  some details in the reading are 
not certain. Strophe 24 shows another riddle  called  u)inducyutaka, more cor­
rectly  binducyutaka ; here, it is easy to  find  the  ‘lost’  anusvāra  : it is of 
course the  final  sound of  gunung.  In addition,  there  are three  strophes (from 
19 to 21)  which  are complete riddles to us, although they are not denoted 
as such. In strophe 19,  pāda  a may be understood up to a certain degree, 
but the  pādas  b – d and the entire strophes 20 and 21 make the impression 
of being ahacadahra. Strophe 20 is even  strange  from  a phonetical point of 
view  24) and not a single word  could  be recognized. The first impression 
is that  some unknown language was used.  Although  this is not completely 
impossible  25) , it seems  far more probable  that  here. too. a sort of riddle is 
given.  It is possible  that  the akṣaras  should be read in a different order, 
or even,  that  they should be replaced by other  akṣaras.  Strophe 21 is normal 
from  a phonetical point of  view,  but, although a number of words may be 
recognized,  it seems  impossible to make any  sense  out of the strophe. It is 
not clear to us what the word  prāk  rĕtasanniveça  refers to; does this mean 
that,  after the  strange  strophes, the poet goes back to a more  ’normal’ 
language ?  This  is not  likely;  I rather presume  that  the term refers to the 
immediately  following  strophe, vi^. 22, and then it might mean :  „transition 
to popular language’’. Strophe 22 does not give the  strange  impression of 
the immediately preceding one: considerable parts of it can even be under¬
stood, although it is far from being lucid as a whole; the strophe seems to 
2.­­) Cf. ibidem, p. 58,  where  the term is translated hy „witzige deutung". 
2­) CI. in  .pāda  a the consonant doubling in saggala muhojja and tuliiju; the consonant 
groups in  c (pum  nwasāy  ṅgua.);  the succession  wi–i–ni­ji­di  in d, etc. The word 
separation adopted in the transcription is arbitrary. 
2^) In any case, the strophe does not make the impression of being composed in a regular, 
though unknown, language. It is also noted that strophe 21, though likewise incom¬
prehensihle, is 'normal’ from a phonetical point of view. In sound, it resembles 
Sanskrit  and some of the forms also do; cf. the  notes  to the translation. 


--- [Page 299] ---
contain  an  invitation addressed first  to birds and merchants,  and  then  to 
village  elders. Such  a direct  address  wou1d make the use of  a more popular 
language understandable and this might be just the reason why  it is difficult 
for us. 
It appears  from  the  above  that  our inscription  is a  unique document. 
It is especially striking  that  the oldest metrical text known in Old Javanese 
is at the  same  time one  of the  most sophisticated ones. This is, however, 
hardly  astonishing  in view  of the  fact that  the  Sanskrit literature  of this 
period  and the  immediately preceding one  is very complicated, too. These 
are about  the  beginnings  of Old Javanese poetry and  the  smoother style, 
better  adapted  to the language, had  still to be  developed. 
Still there  is one Old Javanese  kdvya  with  which  the technique  of our 
strophes  (not, of course, their poetical merits) might  well  be compared,  vi^. 
the Old Javanese  Rāmāyaṇa.  About the  date  of the latter, different opinions 
were suggested.  Its  editor, H.  Kern,  assigned the work  to the 13th century; 
Stutterheim, however, dated  it in the  first  part  of the  Kaḍiri  period 26); 
Brandes thought  the  10th century more  likely  27), whereas Poerbatjaraka 
assigned  the  Rāmāyaṇa  to the  Central­  Javanese period about  in the  reign 
of Balitung  (898  —  910) 28). The arguments produced  by  Poerbatjaraka 
seem very strong; his conclusions are based on metrics (especially the use of 
the Aryā  metre  no  examples  of which  are  found  in the  Kekawins  of the 
Kaḍiri  period), on  prosodie  features  (especially the frequent occurrence of 
the hiatus)  , a list of village authorities  which  agrees  with  the lists given in 
the inscriptions  from  the  Central­  Javanese period,  but not  with  those  of 
Eastern Java,  a description  of a  temple complex,  which  agrees  with  the 
composition  of Hindu­Javanese monuments belonging  to the  Central­Java­
nese  period.  In our opinion,  these  points constitute  a rather  complete argu­
mentation, whereas none of the objections brought forward against such  an 
early  date  seems  decisive 29) . . 
A comparison between  the  Old Javanese  Rāmāyaṇa  and  the  strophes 
of our inscription may furnish new arguments  in  favour  of an  early  date 
of the  former. The prosody  of our text  agrees  in detail  with  that  of the 
Rāmāyaṇa;  I already noted  the  frequency  of the  hiatus  in both cases;  for 
vowel  lengthening and shortening  the  Rāmāyaṇa  gives  similar  examples  as 
our text;  final  consonants, especially nasals, may  be doubled before  a word 
20) H. Kern,  Rāmāyana  (19OO),  Introduction  p. vI.  where however important reservations 
were made; Stutterheim,  Rāma­legenden  (1924), p. 233. CI.  also  the  same  scholar 
in Biidr. K.I.,  85 (1929), pp. 483 sqq. 
2') Gr.  Krom,  Geschiedenis^  p. 174,  where  a brief  survey  of the  different opinions  is 
given. 
28) Gedenkschr.  K.I. (1926), pp. 265 — 272,  and,  in detail,  in T.B.G.,  72 (1932), pp^ 
151—214. 
2^) An apparently strong objection was formulated  by  Berg,  1nleiding  tot  de studie  van 
het Oud–Javaansch  (1928), pp. 51  sqq.:  cI.  also Sturtetheim  in  Biidr.  K.I., 35 
(1929), pp. 483—487 and the  survey  by  Krom,  Geschiedenis­,  p. 174. The  subject 
requires  a detailed  treatment:. 


--- [Page 300] ---
— 288 ­
beginning  with  a vowel.  As to the yamaka, this  alaṃkāra  is frequently used 
in the Rāmāyaṇa,  too, whereas  Kadiri  poets  seem to have no special prefer­
ence for it. In brief, it  seems  that  in a considerable number of details, the 
technique of the  strophes  agrees.  In the  notes  to the translation, we  call 
attention to some striking  passages  in which  the mode of expression in our 
text agrees  with  that  of the  Rāmāyaṇa.  Future research might establish 
whether such correspondences constitute a sufficient basis for assigning the 
Rāmmāyaṇa  to an early  date,  viz. in the  Central­  Javanese period. 
Our text contains important materials for the Javanese history of the 
9th century. The text is dated  Mārgaçīrṣa  856  A.D.,  i.e. the  same  year in 
which  also the  three  1mga inscriptions dealt  with  in No. X above are dated. 
In the Introduction to No. X, it was pointed out  that  the 1mga erections 
by Kumbhayoni probably mark an important event, presumably a victory. 
Not much  could  be concluded neither about the details of this victory nor 
about the identity of  Kumbhayoni.  This text gives some valuable precisions. 
In strophe 9 it is  stated  that  king  Jāti–ning–rat  resigned the throne 
after some  events  mentioned in the preceding  strophes  (tlas  maṅkanā). 
The term rendered by  „resigned”  is uparata, the  literal  meaning of  which 
is „reposed,  took a  rest’’.  It does  not seem  likely  that  this term should indicate 
the death of the  king;  it rather  suggests  a resignation by his  life.  This inter­
pretation is confirmed by the form  taṅanan,  which  seems  to imply  that  king 
Jāti–ning–rat  himself handed the symbols of royal power to his successor. 
A further argument in favour of this interpretation  will  be mentioned in the 
course of this discussion. 
The name of a  king  Jāti–ning–rat  is still  unknown in 9th century Java. 
This does  not, of course, exclude the possibility  that  the  king  himself is 
already  known  to us by a different nam^ or a title ; as ^  matter  of fact, 
there  are quite a few kings in the older history of Central Java who are 
known  to us by their  Rakai  titles only. Some examples are the kings  Rakai 
Panaṅkaran,  Rakai  Panuṅgalan,  Rakai  Warak,  Rakai  Garung,  Rakai  Pikatan 
and Rakai  Watuhumalang, all mentioned in  Balitung’s  great  Keḍu  charter 
dated 907  A.D.  30) . A very valuable detail is mentioned in strophe 9,  pāda  c, 
in which  the name of the  king  to whom the symbols of royal majesty were 
handed is given as  Dysh  Lokapāla  31) . Fortunately, the latter name is  well­
known  to us since a few years, when it was pointed out by Damais in one of 
his valuable epigraphical  notes  that  Lokapāla  is the real name of the  king 
usually  mentioned by his  Rakai  title  Rakai  Kayuwam  32) . The oldest­known 
document issued by  king  Kayuwam is the Argapura inscription dated 863 
30) Published by Stutterheim in T.B.C., 67 (1927), pp. 172­215. The  list  of preceding 
kings  is found in the beginning of the imprecation formula on the second plate (B, 
lines  7­9; p. 210 of  Stutterheim’s  publication). 
31) The poet makes a pun on the  name  Lokapāla  hy adding  that  Prince  Lokapāla  was, 
as it were, a younger brother of the heavenly Lokapalas. 
32) L.C. Damais, Epigraphische  Aantekeningen,  I. Lokapāla­KayuwangI.  in r.B.C., 83 
(1949), pp. 1­6. 


--- [Page 301] ---
289 — 
A.D.,  I.e. seven  years  later 33). Our text makes it certain  that  Kayuwaṅi 
ascended the  throne  in 856  A.D. 34), when royal power was transferred to 
him by king  Jāti­ning­rat.  But then it is obvious  that  Jāti­ning­rat  could be 
nobody else but the  king  immediately preceding  Rakai  Kayuwaṅi  in Balitung’s 
list, I.e. Rakai  Pikatan. This conclusion  agrees  as well  with other  data  as could 
be expected, for  Rakai  Pikatan  is known to have issued two  charters  in 850 
A.D.,  vi^. the two Perot inscriptions discussed in No. IX above 35) . Probably, 
Rakai  Pikatan  already reigned as early as 8 42 A.D.,  the year in which an 
influential  queen, denoted by the title  Çrī Kahulunnan,  issued two  charters 
pertaining to an important Buddhist foundation 36). In an earlier publication, 
I concluded that this queen was the daughter of the  Çailendra  king Sama¬
ratuṅga  and the spouse of king Rakai  Pikatan  37). Although there is no 
definite proof  that  Rakai  Pikatan did occupy the  throne  by 8­42  A.D.,  the title 
and the position of  Çrī Kahulunnan make it  rather  likely  that  this was indeed 
the case 3^). The regnal  years  of king  Rakai  Pikatan may then be  fixed 
between ^2 A.D. (possibly a few years earlier) and 856 A.D., those of Kayu¬
waṅi  between 856 and 882 A.D. (or, probably, a few years later) 39). 
The next question which arises is the identity of  king  Kumbhayoni who 
erected  three  liṅgas  on the  Ratubaka  plateau in this very year 856  A.D.  4°) 
in which royal majesty passed from  Rakai  Pikatan to  Rakai  Kayuwam. Is 
he the former or the latter, or even a third  king  not mentioned in  Balitung’s 
33) The same scholar has made it very probable  that  Rakai  Kayuwam  was the reigning 
king  in S63  A.D.,  although he is denoted by ratu, not by the usual  royal  title  Çrī 
Mahārāja.  A number of references to the use of  (sang)  ratu are  given  by Damais 
in Epigraphische  Aantekeningen,  VI, Sang Ratu —  Çrī Mahārāja,  in T.  B. G., S3 
(1949),  pp. 18 20.  Finally,  the reader is referred to  B.E­E.E.O.,  XLVI.  Fasc. 1 (1952), 
pp. 30 s^. and pp. 34 sq., Nos. 17, 18, 27 and 28, where the  principal  results are 
briefly  summarized by the same author. 
^4) It is curious that Damais already suggested the same on account of the use of loka¬
pālair  in the second Ratubaka inscription, the fir:n:  pāda  of strophe 1‚ which might 
be an  allusion  to the name of  Rakai  Kayuwam  ; cI. T.B.G., 83 (1949), p. 3. He there­
fore considered the  possibility  that  Kayuwam  reigned as early as 856 A.D. On ac­
count of the above discussion, the suggestion by Damais may be accepted  with  only 
a minor change : the  form  does allude to the name  Lokapāla,  but not as  that  of the 
reigning  king  at that  time (Kumbhayoni) but as  that  of the heir­apparent. The  simile 
is perfectly regular in  that  case, for the heir­apparent and the other princes surround­
ed the  king  as the  Lokapālas  do with  respect to  Çiva. 
­­) CI. supra, pp. 218­220. 
3..) Pras. 1ndon., I. Nos. V and VI. 
37) ^ oit., pp. 107­109. 
38) 1t appears  from  the short inscriptions of  Tjaṇḍi  Plaosan (cI. op. cit., pp. 116 sq. ; 
a complete publication of.  these  about  sixty  short texts is being printed)  that  the 
titie Çrī  Kahulunnan belonged to the king's consort, not to the crown princess. 
.­­) The last  date  might be changed to S87  A.D.  if Gurunwam is to be considered a syn­
onym  of Gurunwam; cf.  Krom  in Stapel's  Geschiedenis,  I (1938), p. 168. Damais 
considers this identification at least doubtful (T.B.G., 83, 1949, note 1 to p. 22), 
but. the. Plaosan inscriptions (cf. note 38 .above)  confirm  it. 
40) More  exactly, the  Çaka  year 778, I.e.  from  10/3­856 to 27/2­857  A.D.’  ­


--- [Page 302] ---
— 290 
list ? The choice between  these  three  possibilities is not so complicated. In 
the Introduction to No. X above, it was pointed out  that  the king who 
erected the liṅgas in 856 might  well  be identical with the distinguished 
founder of a  Çiva  temple in 863 A.D. In either  case,  the founder 
is denoted by a  name  meaning Agastya ; in either  case,  the founder 
has some  connection with Walaing, possibly the old  name  of the 
Ratubaka plateau; a few  other  points, not decisive by themselves, would 
confirm  the identity 41). There was, however, a serious objection which 
would  invalidate the above  arguments  unless a satisfactory reply could be 
given  to the question why Kumbhayoni in the Pereng inscription, though 
stressing his royal  descent,  is not a reigning  king,  whereas  the founder of 
the liṅgas in 856 is. After the above discussion it has, however, become 
obvious  that  the absence  of a royal title in the  Pereng  inscription is not only 
no objection  against  the identification, hut even a strong confirmation. As 
a matter  of fact, the  absence  of a royal titie is exactly what we should 
have  expected if the king in 856 had already resigned the  throne  before 863. 
And this is  just  the detail which is mentioned in this  text.  Unless it should 
be assumed  that  more than one king resigned the  throne  between 856 and 
863 A.D.,  which is hardly  likely,  it is  necessary  to conclude  that  Jāti–ning–rat 
is identical with  Kumbhayoni  in the  Ratubaka  inscriptions and in the Pereng 
epigraph. Since it was concluded above  that  Jāti–ning–rat  is identical with 
Rakai  Pikatan in the Perot inscriptions, the  short  inscriptions from  Tjaṇḍi 
Plaosan and  Balitung’s  Keḍu  charter,  the final  result is a triple identification: 
Kumbhayoni,  Jāti–ning–rat  and Rakai Pikatan  denote  the same  king. 
The next question which  arises  is the relation between  these  three 
names.  Kings  appear  to have  had three  different  types  of names  in the Central 
Javanese  period, viz. a Rakai title 42), a name  preceded by pu or  dyah  and 
an abhiṣcka  name; an example is Rakai  Kayuwaṅi  Pu Lokapāla Çrī  Sajjanot¬
savatuṅgadeva,  although the three elements have never been found together 4^). 
In a similar way, the  names  Kumbhayoni  and Rakai Pika^an are easily 
combined to Rakai Pikatan Pu Kumbhayoni. It is, however, obvious  that 
Jāti–ning–rat  could not be the  abhiṣeka  name  of the king 44), but  there  is 
another  possibility. It was concluded  that  the king resigned the  throne  in 
­l) CI. the introduction to No. X above. 
4­) It is hardly  necessary  to add  that  a Rakai title is not exactly a kind of  name  ; how­
ever, it comes very  near  to it in the Central  Javanese  period : in  many  inscriptions 
(cI. for instance, No. X above) kings are denoted by the Rakai titles only ; in Bali¬
tung's  Kĕḍu  charter all the preceding kings excepting  Sañjaya  are denoted in the 
same  way. The Rakai titie alone was sufficient to identify the  king. 
4.^) The only  element  which is never missing is the Rakai title Kayuwam; it is found 
alone (the common case), in combination with the pu  name  Lokapāla  (in the Argapura 
inscriptions), or, finally, in combination with the abhiseka name  Çrī  Sajjanotsawa¬
tuṅga  (K.O., No. XV). One has the impression that the choice of the titles was 
rather  arbitrary,  even  in such  official  documents. 
4 4) As a  matter  of fact, the abhiseka  names  are always Sanskrit and usually. if not al­
ways, preceded by  Çri. 


--- [Page 303] ---
— 291 — 
856 A.D.,  but continued to  live  and even to acquire merits by foundations. 
The easiest explanation is  that  he retired to devote  himself  to spiritual  life. 
A new status is often associated with a new name, at least for kings;  Jāti¬
ning­rat  might therefore be the spiritual name of the king as a  rājarṣi. 
This explanation of the name  would  have been very uncertain if  there 
had not been a very close parallel in later Indonesian history. It is very 
striking  that  exactly the same name  Jāti­ning­rat  occurs once more and 
exactly  as the spiritual name of a  king  who resigned the throne.  From  the 
Tjalon Arang it is known that the great  Airlaṅga  adopted the name  Jāti¬
ning­rat  alter having retired to a hermitage 4^’). The correspondence may be 
important. There is no doubt  that  tradition played a very  great  role in 
Indonesian history, so  that  it might not be impossible  that  Airlaṅga  was 
inspired  by an older example in history when he resigned the throne, adopted 
the name  Jātiningrat  and continued to  live  as a  royal  hermit.  From  the 
account  which  foliows  it will  appear  that  the correspondence extends over 
a number of other details. 
In the Introduction to No. X, it was concluded  that  the texts of the 
three  liṅga  inscriptions (a­c), if taken in the proposed order, show some 
sort of sequence  which  could  be expressed by the terms asceticism, struggle 
and victory  46). If this interpretation is correct, it  seems  likely  that  these 
three  terms refer to just as many periods of the  life of king  Kumbhayoni  : 
the period of ,,longing for  Çrī’’  and practising all kinds of asceticism 47) 
was followed  by a period of fierce battles comparable  with  those of  Mahādeva 
when  fighting the  Tripurāsuras  and  these  again by a complete  victory  and 
the acquisition of absolute sovereignty. A fourth and last period may be 
added on account of this inscription, vi^. resignation and spiritual  life.  It is 
well­known  that  the life of Airlaṅga  might be  divided  into  these  very four 
periods 48). It is not, however, sufficient to  base  this presumed parallel upon 
the above interpretation of the  three  liṅga  inscriptions ; the conclusions 
are too important to be accepted without further confirmations. Fortunately, 
this text not  only  confirms the lines sketched above  ^ but also makes it 
possible  to reconstruct some of the more important events. 
The text gives  little  information about the presumed first period.  This 
4^) CI. the  heginning  of chapter X in the edition hy Poerhatjaraka, Bijdr. K.I., 82 (1926), 
p. 36:  sang  prabhu  apuṣpata  Jātiningrat,  mahārāja  Erlanggyabhisekanira. Cf. also 
Krom,  Geschiedenis 2, p. 2 7 I. 
4‘^) The 'natural' order of the  three  liṅga  inscriptions is  a­c­b;  cf. supra pp. 267 sq. The 
order in  which  the inscriptions were published is the order of their discovery. 
4' 7) Cf. the  notes  to the translation of X a‚ especially note 118  (purārcitāṃ  çriyam^)  and 
note 117  (Vetāla  rites). 
48) The first period begins almost immediately after the destruction of the  Eastern  Java 
kĕraton,  when  Airlaṅga  retired to the woods with Narottama and others who had re¬
mained loyal ; there, the king lived as an ascetic (valkaladhara). The second period 
consists of numerous hartles against 'demons' (hanitu). In the third,  Airlanga,  having 
annihilated  his foes, hecomes a cakravartin.  Finally,  in the fourth and last period, 
Airiaṅga  is the  royal  ascetic who has remained famous in legend rather than in history. 


--- [Page 304] ---
— 292 ­­­­­
is hardly astonishing since the  first  six lines have almost disappeared  from 
the stone. A  period  of asceticism is, however, more or 1ess  implied  in the 
name of the great sage  Agastya­Kumbhaja  adopted by the  king.  A1so this 
text seems to allude to the name of a  ṛṣi in strophe 8,  pāda  c, vi^. the words 
kālap  kalāguṇarau^iprakulasthanāma,  ,,he adopted a name belonging to a 
family  of honoured  Brāhmaṇas’’  49), for it is  well­known  that  all the 
Brāhmaṇic  families  trace their descent back to one of the great  ṛṣis.  This 
passage not  only  confirms the  identification  of Jātiningrat  with  Kumbhayoni 
in the Ratubaka epigraphs, but it also proves  that  the name  Agastya­
Kumbhaja  was deliberately chosen by the  king  at a definite moment. The 
choice  of the name may be understood if one considers the relations in 
Central  Java about in the middle of the 9th century.  After  the  Çailendra 
period,  the new dynasty 59) had to  justify  the reason of the struggle in 
order  to establish a  firm  position  in the Javanese country.  Ancient  states 
did not fight  for democracy, but for the re­establishment of Dharma trodden 
upon  by the preceding dynasty. A  king  struggling  with  a Buddhist power 
could  consider  himself  a second  Agastya  who planted the roots of  Hindu 
Law and  Society  in more southern regions.  This  idea is  clearly  expressed 
in strophe 9 d, where it is stated  that  (after his  victory)  ,,the subjects became 
independent,  divided  into the four  āçramas  51) headed by the  Brāhmaṇas”, 
and in 12 ^‚ where the  king  is considered to be clever in distinguishing 
adharma  from  dharma.  This  zeal  for Brāhmaṇism  made him adopt the name 
of a rs^ connected  with  the expansion of  Brāhmaṇism  in older times 52). 
Now  it is  difficult  to announce oneself as a second  Agastya  without  imitating 
at least some of the most characteristic features of such a sage.  Agastya’s 
famous  feats such as subduing the  Vindhya  and  drinking  up the ocean were 
due to fierce asceticism,  which  gave him the powers to  bring  such acts to 
­­) „Honoured"  translates  the prefix of ra­wipra. One would have expected a term such 
as "upeta"  to connect  "kalāguna‘^  with ­ ra­wipra However, the  poet,  who did not 
m^an to write correct Sanskrit hut Old  Javanese,  took certain freedoms in the con­
struction of his compounds. Note also the partial y.^maka (with inversed vowel quan­
tities) in  ­kālap  kalā^.  IViprakulasthanāma  are  those  names  which are usual in  Brāh– 
maṇic  families. i.e.  those  traced back to one of the  great  ṛsis.  Instead  of kula, gotra 
would  have  heen  more correct, hut the  poet  probably considered the two  terms 
synonyms. 
^) It has  heen  pointed out (cf. the Introduction to No. X above)  that  this 'new' dynasty 
may have  heen  considered identical with the old  Saṅjayavaṃça  which  dates  hack 
from 717 A.D., the first year of the so­called Saniaya era (cI. Damais, Etudes d'épi¬
graphie  indonĕsienne,  II, Les  dates en  ére  de Sañjaya,  B.E.F.E.C., XLV‚ Fasc. 1, 
1951,  pp. 42­63). It is, however, very striking  that  none  of the inscriptions dated 856 
A.D , makes the  least  allusion to Sanjaya. The Sanjaya dynasty may have been some 
kind  of dynastic myth developed during the reigns ef Balitung and Daksa in the be­
ginning  of the loth century. 
­'1) ^Vrpramukhya might be an indication  that  caturāçrama  is used in the meaning of 
caturvarna, which is not Uncommon in Old  Javanese.  CI.  note  2o to the Translation. 
­­’) Especially of the  Çalva  forms of  ^Brāhmanism  ; this is also the  ease  with  king  Kum­
bhayoni. 


--- [Page 305] ---
— 293 — 
an end. The  king  acting as a second Agastya  could  not have acquired the 
force  necessary to re­establish Dharma otherwise than by fierce asceticism, 
too. This  line  of argument leads to exactly the same conclusion  which  has 
already been drawn on account of the practices alluded to by inscription 
X a, strophes 1­2. It is therefore  likely  that  the period of struggle was 
preceded by a period of asceticism, as was the case  with  Airlaṅga  in the 
11th century. 
Something  more definite may be concluded about the second period, 
that of struggle.  Especially  strophes 6 to 8, most of  which  has remained 
legible,  contain important information. The most interesting detail is the 
mention  of Balaputra at the end of 7 d. In spite of a lacuna of one syllable 
at the end of  line  9, the meaning of the  pāda  is not doubtful. I translate : 
„killing  ^ 3) as fast as (?)  ^ 4) the  wind  he attacked  ^ 5) Bālaputra’’.  In pāda 
7 b, the  passages  tĕpat=tahun=ni  lama  ning ..... ,  ‚‚exactly  a year was 
the time of the ..... (or :  that  he .....)”,  could  be referred to the period 
in which  the main (I.e. the last  phase  of the ?) struggle took place. If this 
inference is correct, the decisive battles continued for a year, i.e. in the 
period  of one year between  Caitra  and  Mārgaçīrṣa  of the elapsed  Çaka 
year 777 and the same  date  in the next year when the linga inscriptions 
were cut in 56). Pāda  c of the same strophe 7 mentions the term ungsyan, 
„(place  of) refuge’’,  probably to be connected  with  the words watunn=inatus, 
‚‚stones  (heaped up) by hundreds’’  ^ 7). By combining the above inter­
pretations it may be concluded  that  Bālaputra,  presumably after a defeat 
in the open country, retired to a place (this  seems  to be  implied  in ungsyan) 
which  could  be transformed into a stronghold by means of defence works 
built  up with  hundreds of stones. However before having succeeded in 
establishing  an almost unconquerable position, he was attacked and defeated 
by Kumbhayoni,  who was as  swift  as the  wind  and wiped him off  from 
there.  Presumably,  Bālaputra  was not  killed  in battie, but being chased 
^) This  use of  hantṛ  (Sanskrit  ­ṛ stems  are adapted in their nominative forms in Old 
Javanese) may be compared  with  jetr  (again in the nominative form) in 6d and  with 
waīaiṅgajetrā,  to be interpreted as the  ‚‚victorious  king of  Walaing"  in No. X,  inscrip­
tion b, strophe 4,  pāda  c. Another example, already mentioned in No. X above, is 
dātṛ in the  passage  çrīmān=dātā  kṛtajño  in the Djambu rock inscription  (Vogel,  The 
Earliest  Sanskrit Inscriptions of Java, in Pubf.  Oudh. Dienst,  I, 1925, p. 25). 
­4) I have no exact parallel for this use of  āwalī,  ‚‚string,  series", etc. CI. the Trans­
lation. 
­­) The missing syllahle may be conjecturally restored as mri; amrihi,  „directed  himself 
towards'’ (cI.  priḥ­priḥ  in 1o d^) is the only term  which  makes  sense  and  agrees  with 
the metre. The subject of the sentence .is probably the same as  that  of 7 a, viz. the 
king  (sira). 
^6) For the calculation of the  limits  within  which  No. X, a­c must be dated, cf. p. 248 
in the Introduction to No. X. There is no reasonable doubt  that  the hnga erections 
anticipate the foundation of a  Çiva  temple dealt  with  in No. X:I (dated 11  çuklapakṣa 
Mārgaçīrṣa  778  Çaka)  by a considerable lapse of time. The maximum is about nine 
months. 
­^) Cf. note 1o to the Translation. 


--- [Page 306] ---
— 294 — 
from  his strong positions he managed to  escape  to Sumatra, where he became 
a king  of Crīvijaya  in a manner  still  completely unknown ^). 
The above makes it possible to  fill in some awkward  gaps  in our know­
ledge hitherto acquired. The groups between  which  the struggle took place 
were (a) a  Çailendra  .group headed by  Bālaputra  and (b) a  Javanese  (?) 
group headed by Kumbhayoni, alias  Rakai  Pikatan ^).The struggle ended 
in the defeat  and  flight  of Bālaputra  and the complete victory of  Kumbhayoni. 
Now,  it was suggested  that  the three  liṅgas  on the Ratubaka plateau were 
erected by  Kumbhayoni  as symbols of a  great  victory  6°) . As a  matter  of fact, 
the texts  of No. X clearly give this impression. But then, a new conclusion 
about the spot where the decisive battle took place  seems  possible. As a 
matter  of fact, a  „token  of victory’’  is almost always erected on the spot 
where the victory was gained. The  three  liṅga  inscriptions originate from 
the Ratubaka plateau; therefore, the  final  victory should be located on 
the Ratubaka plateau. 
This  conclusion  is nothing but a natural outcome of the  arguments  exposed 
above, but it may be considered from different points of  view.  The Ratubaka 
plateau is an excellent place for a fortification. Situated due south of Pram¬
banan, it controls the fertile plains from Djogjakarta to  Klaṭen.  From many 
a place on the border of the plateau one has a wide  view  and, if the atmos­
phere  is clear, Djogjakarta and  Klaṭen  are visible.  No enemy  could  approach 
the plateau without being spotted a long time before. Its  steep  walls of 
granite make. it almost inaccessible except along a few  paths  cut into the 
rocks;  these  tracks could, however, be easily defended. And even if an 
enemy had managed to ascend the plateau, there were still numerous op¬
portunities for a successful defence. 
‘­––)  CI. infra, pp. 295 sqq. 
­ ­) In the present  state  of research it  would  not be wise to make an attempt at  defining 
the background of this struggle.  Religious  factors should not he stressed.  Religious 
fanaticism  has been extremely rare in J^va and when it occurred, it was  limited  to 
small  groups of the population. In all the cases  known,  political  and economic factors 
were the decisive ones, although religious factors were rarely completely ahsent. As 
a matter of fact, religious motives are  often  used for very materialistic  ends  hy poli­
ticians of all countries. It is not hard to  find  possible economic motives hehind the 
struggle mentioned in the text. The huge  Çailendra  foundations, such as  Tjaṇḍi  Sewu 
and Barabuḍur,  must have constituted a tremendous  hurden  on a population  which, 
presumahly,  was much less dense  than  it is at present.  Such  constructions  would  not 
have made the  Çailendra  kings popular, so  that  other pretendents  could  he certain 
of support hy the masses.  B.J.O.  Schrieke used  similar  arguments to explain the 
shift of the Javanese  kraton  from  Central to Eastern Java in the  heginning  of the 
10th  century  (Het  einde  van  de klassieke  Hindoe–Iavaanse  cultuur  op Midden­Java, 
22ste  kof.  vac. curs.  geogr.,  1941. pp.  3–21)  ; Schrieke's argumentation is doomed to 
fail as long  as there  is not a shadow of  proof  that  the shift of the  kraton  would  have 
heen  some  kind  of mass emigration ; in addition, the  Çailendra  foundations  could 
hardly  he considered responsible for such emigrations occurring  three  quarters of a 
century later.  Political  factors such as Sumatranese relations of  Bālaputra  will  he 
considered  in the course of this Introduction. 
6‘^) CI. supra,  p. 255. 


--- [Page 307] ---
— ^95  — 
Not only  physical features, but also history made the plateau an ideal 
place for the last Javanese  Çailendra.  It is known  from  a Pre­Nāgarī  inscrip­
tion,  to be dated in the latter  half  of the 8th century  A.D.  6l), that  there 
had been a  Çai1endra  foundation on the p1ateau. The  Pre­Nāgarī  inscription 
is stated to have been discovered on the so­called  pĕṇḍapa  terrace on the 
p1ateau 62), where not  only  some Buddhist  statues  (Dhyānibuddhas)  but 
also a  silver  plate inscribed  with  the words ye te  svāhā,  i.e. the abbreviated 
form  of the so­called Buddhist creed, were discovered 63). The plateau was 
associated  with  the  Çailendra  dynasty since more than  half  a century.  This 
may have been an additional reason for  Bālaputra  to select it as his last 
fortress in Central Java.  This  very association  with  the  Çailendras  made 
Kumbhayoni  transform the Ratubaka plateau into a  Çaiva  centre by erecting 
lingas  and probably other objects of cult, too ; then, the place  could  not 
easily  become a new centre of resistance against his dynasty. 
The period during  which  Bālaputra  made the Ratubaka plateau his 
residence and his stronghold might  well  be the  origin  of the famous tradition 
about the  „kraton  of Ratubaka’’.  It has been noticed  that  the Ratubaka 
plateau is all but a suitable place for a Javanese  kraton  64). This  is perfectly 
true for a normal  kraton,  but the objections  would  not count for a temporary 
residence chosen for its strategically and morally strong position. 
In the beginning of this Introduction, it was  briefly  mentioned  that  this 
text is indirectly important for the  date  of the  Nālandā  charter. Unless one 
should assume  that  Bālaputra  interfered  with  Central Javanese affairs in 
a time when he. was already a  king  of Çrīvijaya  — which  is extremely 
unlikely  —‚ it is necessary to conclude  that  he became a  king  in Sumatra 
after 856  A. D. Without further materials, the questions how and why he 
arrived  at such a  lofty  position after his defeat in Central Java cannot be 
answered; it might, however, be suggested  that  Bālaputra  could  assert 
claims  on the  Çrīvuaya  throne on account of  family  relations 6^) and it is 
61) Probably about the same time as the Kalasan charter (77S A.D.)  with  which  it has 
important  passages  in common (cf.  Pras.  1ndon., I, 1950, p. 15). 
62) CI. A.J. Bernet Kempers,  Crawfurd's  beschr.iiving van Prambanan in 1s15, in  T.B.G., 
S3 (1949), p. 186. 
­^) This  silver  plate was discovered in 1953 during excavations in the direct environs 
of the  „pĕṇḍapa  terrace". The script is no  Pre­Nāgarī,  but a very archaic type of Old 
Javanese script, which resembles the type used in the inscription ye  dharmmā  hetu¬
prabhavā  etc. from  Tjaṇḍi Mĕndut  (at present No. D. 122 in the Djakarta Museum ; 
cf. Krom,  Inleiding 2, I, p. 317, and Pras. 1ndon. I. p. 112). 
64) Cf.  Krom,  1nleiding­, I. p. 244 sqq., and, especially, Stutterheim in  Djawa,  vI (1926), 
pp. 129­135. 
­^) CI.  Krom  in Stapel's  Geschiedenis,  I (1938), p. 162; Pras. 1ndon., I (1950), p. 110 
and note 7 to that page.  Krom  suggested that king Dharmasetu, mentioned as  Bāla¬
putra's maternal grandfather in the  Nālandā  charter, was a king of  Çrīvijaya.  Without 
refuting  Krom's  suggestion, I added another  possihility  hy pointing out  that  the  Ligor 
inscription^)  could  he interpreted in such a way  that  it (they) suggest(s) a close 
relationship  between  the reigning dynasty of  Çrīvijaya  and the  Çailendra  kings of 
Central  Java (op. cit., pp. 99 sq.). In about the same time when I formulated the 


--- [Page 308] ---
— 296 ­
not impossible  that  Balaputra would have been preferred to possible other 
candidates  because  he alone could  assert  claims on Central Java 66). 
This,  of course, remains completely conjectural, but it has, at least, 
the advantage  of enabling us to distinguish some vague but important lines 
in Indonesian history during a few centuries.  Bālaputra,  after being chased 
from  Central  Java, could  assert  definite claims to the fertile plains of 
Central  Java. If he did not have forces to carry his plans into execution, 
his successors might be able to make use of his pretensions. The suggestion 
that Çrīvijaya  was the main factor at the background of the shift of the 
Javanese  capital from Central to Eastern Java in the beginning of the 10th 
century  A.D.  67) and, again,  that  Çrīvijaya  was the power essentially res­
ahove suggestion,  Ccedés  analyzed the  four­lined  Ligor  inscription B again and  con­
cluded  that  not one, but two kings, father and son, are mentioned in this  Sragdharā 
strophe; the former  would  have been identical  with  the  Çrīvijayeçvarahhūpati  of 
Ligor  A, whereas the latter  would  have hecome the first  Çailendra  after having mar­
ried a princess descending from the „Kings of the Mountain" of Fu­nan (Le  mailen¬
dra rueur  des Heros  ennemis, in Bingkisan Budi, 1950, pp. 58­70). Finally, Bosch 
(^rrv^iava, de ^ailendra­ en de  Sañjaya­vaṃça,  in Biidr. K.I., 108, 1952, pp. 113­123), 
adopting the main conclusions arrived at hy  C cedes, went much further hy inserting 
also the Sanjaya dynasty into the genealogical tree. It is hardly necessary to add 
that these  three  interpretations, however different they may he in detail, are all based 
upon  the assumptions  that  (a) there  is a close relationship  between  Ligor  A and B 
(although they are no more considered two parts of a single inscription) and (b)  there 
is also a close relationship hetween the reigning dynasty of  Çrīvijaya  and the Javanese 
Çailendras.  This  consensus  opinionum may he considered one of the  principal  results 
of post­war research as far as the  Çrīvijaya­Çailendra  relations are concerned. Cf also 
note 55. 
'­6) The  family  relations suggested in note 65  could  hardly account for everything. The 
Ligor  inscription  is dated ahout eighty years before Baiaputra  could  have hecome 
a king.  Being  a Çrīvijaya  king's grandson may have  meant  something more, hut  there 
is no reason to assume  that  Dharmasetu  would  not have had other grandsons  with 
. as many or more rights to the throne. It is necessary to assume the existence o^ other 
factors to arrive at a satisfactory explanation of the events. Without new materials, 
nothing  certain may he concluded ahout the presumed factors, i.e. nothing but their 
very  existence. One  could  suppose, for instance,  that  Bālaputra  was married to the 
eldest daughter of the king who preceded him  (which  would  have  heen  a kind of 
cross­cousin marriage), not exactly because he was considered the most capable can¬
did'ste to the throne, hut because he brought in important territorial claims. It might 
be inferred  from  the  Nālandā  charter  that  these  claims did  mean  something. Why 
else should  Bālaputra  have introduced  himself  as the son and grandson of a king 
of Java without giving any unambiguous reference to a former king of  Çrīvijaya 
The easiest explanation is  that  Bālaputra's  position in  Çrīvijaya  was a fact  which 
needed no further comment, whereas his references to kings of Java served a definite 
purpose as if he wanted to  stress  that  he, king of  Suvarṇadvīpa,  had a father and 
a grandfather who were kings of  Yavadvīpa.  •Tn international  politics  of those times 
this could  mean :  ‚‚if I am not a  king  of Java, too — although my father and grand­
father were — it is because I was robbed of the throne’'. —  Although  one has to 
realize  that  the above is completely conjectural, it may nevertheless be useful to 
consider  the possibilities in the  light  of our scarce data. 
67) Krom  (Creschiedenis 2, p. 209), when discussing the different theories about the causes 
of the shift of the Javanese centre to Eastern Java, thinks influence (indirectly. as 


--- [Page 309] ---
297 
ponsible for the destruction of the Eastern  Javanese  capital in 1016/17 68) 
might become less conjectural than it was before, though it is not, of course, 
capable of real proof. 
The data  about  Bālaputra  in this inscription make an important con­
clusion  about  the  Nālandā  inscription possible. Since  Bālaputra  was  still 
in Java by 856  A.D.  6^), the  Nālandā  inscription cannot possibly be dated 
before 856. If it is assumed  that  Bālaputra  did not become  king  of Çrīvijaya 
immediately after his  defeat  in Java, it is obvious  that  the Nālandā  inscription 
could  not be dated much earlier than  about  860  A.D.  On the other hand, 
there  are reasons  to suppose  that  Bālaputra  would not have waited too long 
to send a  „Cultural  Mission’’  to the  Pāla  king.  As a  matter  of fact,  there 
might be a close relation between  Bālaputra’s  defeat  in Central Java and 
his desire to establish friendly relations with the  greatest  Buddhist power 
in the West at  that  time.  With  a hostile power in the East, which could 
become a real  menace  in the future, it was essential for a maritime power 
to have an  ally  in the West 7°). On account of  these  considerations, the 
most  likely  date  for the  Nālandā  copper­plate would be between  about 
860 and 370  A.D. 
After  the above digression  about  Bālaputra  and the  Nālandā  inscription 
it is necessary to consider  Kumbhayoni  and Central Java again.  Kumbhayoni’s 
battie  against  Bālaputra  reminded the  poet  of inscription X c of  Mshādeva’s 
a menace)  from  Çrīvijaya  the most important factor. It is true  that  Krom  based his 
explanation mainly upon his interpretation of the  Çailendra  period as years of  Çrī¬
vijaya domination in Central Java. After being liberated from Sumatranese supremacy, 
Central  Java authorities  still  considered the possibih^y  that  the old rulers should 
return and therefore thought it safer to move to a plac^ farther away.  Although 
Krom's  interpretations are based upon a  conception^  of the  Çailendra  period  which 
cannot be accepted in this  form,  the general account remains true; in the  light  of 
these  new data, the reasons why an attack  from  Crivijaya  might have been expected 
become much clearer. CI. also Moens in  T.B.G.,  77 (1937), p. 411 and p. 442, and 
Co^dés,  Eta^s hindouises, pp. 217 sq. 
68) This  explanation was suggested by Van Stein Ca^lenfels in Oudh. Versl., 1919, pp. 
156­163.  Krom,  Geschiedenis^,  p. 241 did not consider this explanation very  likely, 
but mentions it as one of the possibilities.  Ccedés,  Etats hindouisés, p. 220, p. 224, 
appears to consider the explanation by Van Stein Callenfels very  likely  (p. 220 : 
le résultat  de cette  egression javanaise  fut  probablement une  contre–offen– 
sive du royaume sumatranais, que l'on a de  sérieuses  raisons de rendre responsable 
de l'expédition  de 1OO6­1OO7,  de la mort du  roi javanais et de la destruction de sa 
résidence’’).  As to the year in  which  the expedition took place, it is added  that 
Damais  is certainly right in dating it ten years later, i.e. in 1016/1017 instead of in 
1oo6/1oo7 (cI.  B.E.P.E.O.,  XLVI.  Pasc. 1, 1952, note 2 to p. 64). 
^) I do not consider the  possibility  that  Bālaputra  would  already have been  king  of 
^rīv^aya  when he took part in batties in Central Java. 
70) This  argument is considerably confirmed by a comparison  with  events in the end 
of the 1oth and the beginning of the 11th century  A.D.  After  the Javanese attack 
in 992  A.D.^  the  king  of Çrivijaya  got into contact  with  the  Cola  rulers and had a 
Buddhist  temple constructed at  Nāgīpattana  in about 1oo5 A.D. CI. the survey by 
Ccedés,  Etats hindouise^’, pp. 238 sq. 


--- [Page 310] ---
— 298 
struggle against  Tripura.  With  the he1p of the details supplied by this Old 
Javanese  inscription  it may be concluded  that  the mythic battle and the 
historical  one show some  striking  points of agreement. The stronghold 
consisting  of „stones  (heaped up) by hundreds’’ 71), to be  identified  with 
the Ratubaka  plateau brought into the  state  of defence by  Bālaputra,  is 
the poet’s  Tripura constructed by Maya and his Asuras as a mighty strong¬
ho1d against the Devas. It was, however, conquered by the Devas under 
the command  of Mahādeva  whose  divine  strength was essentially due to 
his fierce asceticism — just as the Ratubaka plateau was conquered by the 
armies commanded by Kumbhayoni, who, too, may have acquired the neces¬
sary forces by various forms of asceticism, if the above conclusions based 
upon  (1) the analysis of  inscription  X a, (2) the name  Kumbhayoni  adopted 
by the  king  and (3) the comparison  with  Airlaṅga  may be  relied  upon. 
In that  case it may be supposed  that  there  have been some more 
analogies between the mythic  Tripura  battie and the  historical  struggle on 
the Ratubaka  plateau.  Tripura  was  built  as a triple stronghold  from  where 
the Asuras  threatened the Devas and prepared an attack on the Sumeru 72) . 
In a similar  way,  Bālaputra  may have transformed the Ratubaka plateau 
into a fortress  from  where he threatened  Kumbhayoni’s  palace  which  may 
have been situated in the  plain  not very far away. Then it is obvious  that 
Kumbhayoni  was already a regular  king  before 856  A.D.,  whereas Balaputra's 
action  may be considered a revolt.  This  agrees  well  with  other data. The 
inscriptions  of Tjaṇḍi  Perot (No. IX a­b‚ above)  , are issued during the reign 
of king  (ratu)  Rakai  Pikatan  with  whom I  identified  king  Kumbhayoni  of 
the Ratubaka  epigraphs dated 856, i.e. six years later. Of course, the Perot 
inscriptions  from  the north­eastern slope of the  Mount  Sumhing  would  not 
necessary exclude an independent  Çallendra  centre under  Bālaputra  in the 
plain  of Prambanan and environs, although this  seems  less  likely.  But also 
the Plaosan  inscriptions mention  king  (çrī  mahārāja)  Rakai  Pikatan 73)^ 
Since  it is  known  that  Rakai  Pikatan resigned the throne in or before 
Māṛgaçīrṣa  856, the  Plaosan  inscriptions must have been cut in before the 
latter  date.  It could  be suggested  that  these  inscriptions were cut in between 
Caltra  and  Mārgaçīrṣa  of the  Çaka  year 778, i.e. between the  victory  and 
the resignation  7­), hut this is hardly possible. The latter suggestion  would 
imply  that  most of the Plaosan complex was constructed in about eight 
month's time and in a period when  Rakai  Pikatan  would  have been busy 
with other things, not just a Buddhist foundation 75). Unless such a forced 
7,. CI. p. 293 above. 
72) CI. pp. 266 sq. above. 
73) Cf. Pras. 1ndon., I. p. 117, and the Report on the Plaosan inscriptions (in print). 
^4) 1.^ hetween 1O­III­856 and  12­XI­856  A.D. (Damais,  B.E.P.E.O., XLvI,  Pasc. 1, 
1952,  pp. aO sq.). 
75) There remains the theoretical  possibility  that  only  the inscriptions were cut in within 
the eight months‛ period, whereas the buildings themselves  were  constructed in the 
years prior to 856, not by Kumbhayoni-alias  Rakai  Pikatan but by some other 


--- [Page 311] ---
— 299 — 
and unlikely  explanation should be adopted, it is necessary to assume  that 
the Plaosan  buildings were constructed and inscribed prior to the  liṅga 
erections on the Ratubaka plateau. But then it  follows  that  Rakai  Pikatan 
dominated the Prambanan  plain  prior to 856  A.D.,  including  the period in 
which  Bālaputra  settled down on the Ratubaka plateau to make it a strong­
hold  76) which  could  therefore be styled an act of revolt. Presumably,  Bāla­
putra  united chiefs and troops sympathizing  with  the  Çailendras  in order 
to attack the residence of  Rakai  Pikatan ; after having suffered a defeat, 
which  was not, however, decisive,  Bālaputra  withdrew to the Ratubaka 
plateau  which  he transformed into a stronghold  from  where he  could  attack 
Rakai  Pikatan again, but before having succeeded in making it a very strong 
base, he was attacked by  Rakai  Pikatan and expelled  from  Java. 
The presumed attack on  Rakai  Pikatan’s  residence is not  only  likely 
on account of the circumstances sketched above, but it is also confirmed by 
the text to a certain extent. In strophe 8 d it is mentioned  that  the  king 
constructed a new residence  (kĕraton)  after his  victory.  It would  not, of 
course, be impossible  that  the king’s  increase in power and prestige neces­
sitated a new residence, but in most of the  cases  known  from  later Javanese 
history  new residences are bullt after the destruction of or the occupation, 
even temporary, by an enemy. Thus, the residence of Plered, occupied by 
Trunajaya  in 1677  A.D.,  was not inhabited by Sunan Amangkurat II ; after 
Trunajaya’s  defeat, the new residence of Kartasura was constructed. For a 
similar  reason, the Kartasura residence was abandoned and replaced by 
Surakarta in 17 45. Other examples, such as the different Djohor residences, 
may be added. The construction of a new residence by  Kumbhayoni­Rakai 
Pikatan  might therefore be a hint  that  the older  kĕraton  had been destroyed 
or occupied by  Bālaputra.  Although  most of the details remain unknown, 
it is at least certain  that  the year 856  A.D.  marks the end of a very fierce 
period  of struggle between  Bālaputra  and  Rakai  Pikatan. 
A few more words  could  be said about the new residence. It was 
constructed at ­mamratipurastha madang, presumably  : „Meḍang  situated in 
(^stha)  Mamratipura”.  This  is the oldest mention of the famous  Meḍang 
kĕraton,  or rather, of one of the  Meḍang  kĕratons,  for it is  well­known  that 
king.  Such a solution seems, however, rather far­fetched. — Another point is  that 
a Buddhist foundation does not seem  likely  in the period  between  such pronounced 
Çaiva  documents as inscriptions X, a­c and XI. As to the period prior to 856  A.D., 
the situation was completely different.  Rakai  Pikatan had to reckon  with  an undoubt­
edly powerful  Çailendra  group  which  might hecome hostile un1ess the king should 
support Buddhist foundations, too ; his co­operation  with  the foundation of  Tjaṇḍi 
Plaosan might have aimed at winning Buddhist sympathies with his rule. After  Bāla¬
putra's defeat, it was less necessary to reckon with the Buddhists' feelings. 
7–) In later Javanese history,  there  are sufficient examples to show how easily things 
like this  could  happen in the very neighbourhood of the  king.  Thus,  Kuti's  revolt 
forced  king Jayanagara to leave his Majapahit residence ; Sunan Pakubuwana II 
had to flee to Panaraga when his residence at Kartasura was attacked by a Ma¬
durese prince with the help of a group of princes in the king's neighbourhood. 


--- [Page 312] ---
­— 300 — 
quite a number of  Meḍang kĕratons  survive in Javanese tradition. Three 
Meḍangs  are mentioned in O1d Javanese inscriptions, viz.  Meḍang i  bhūmi 
Mataram,  Mĕḍang  ri Pohpitu  (in Balitung’s  Keḍu  inscription dated 907  A.D.) 
and Meḍang  in Mamratipura (this text). Mamrati (without  ^pura)  is fre­
quently found as a title in inscriptions issued during the reigns of  Tuloḍong, 
Wawa  and  Siṇḍok  77). The name might be another example of a high title 
derived  from the name of a royal residence, or  rather,  of the region in  which 
a royal residence was situated. Other examples are Kanuruhan 7­) ^ṇḍ  pos­
sibly,  Halu  79). 
The more  historical  part  of this  inscription  serves as an introduction to the 
main  portion of the text  (strophes  11 to 29) dealing  with  a very extensive 
Çalva  foundation. The consolidation of the dynasty of  Rakai  Pikatan marked 
the beginning  of a new period,  which  had to be inaugurated by the foundation 
of a great  temple complex. This text gives by far the most detailed descrip­
tion of Hindu­Javanese temples known in epigraphy and the only examples 
known  from  Old  Javanese literature are dated centuries later  8°) . In addition, 
the text gives much more than mere descriptions ; it also gives us some 
idea of how the complex was constructed and the frequent similes in the 
text might even give us some idea about the religious background. Un­
fortunately, this material is contained in hightly artful Old Javanese poetry, 
some of the characteristic  features  of which  have been discussed in the 
preceding portion of this Introduction. As a consequence, the interpretation 
of the strophes  poses  tremendous difficulties  which  could  not be solved in 
this first  publication. Nevertheless,  there  still  remain materials  that  seem 
sufficientiy  clear to constitute the basis of the survey to be given hereafter. 
The part  of the text dealing  with  the foundations may be roughly 
divided  into two portions. The former  (strophes  11 to 23) deals  with  the 
erection of buildings and other foundations ; the main subject of the latter 
part (strophes  24 to 29) is the inauguration of the buildings and the grounds 
which  will  .guarantee  the autonomy of the temple complex. 
The portion dealing  with  the construction of temples etc. is all but 
systematic. The poet  limits  his account to  those  details and  those  aspects 
of the foundation in  winch  he is especially interested, or  rather,  which  lend 
themselves  well  to a poetical description. It is., therefore, impossible to  base 
any conclusions upon the  absence  of certain details in the description  which 
7^) In addition, Mamrati occurs as the  name  of a dignitary (preceded by the honorific 
prefix  ra­) in this text, too (strophe 10,  pāda  b). 
78) The origin of the well­known title should prohahly he traced hack to  Kāṅjuruhan, 
the name of the Eastern Java residence mentioned in the  Dinaya  inscription dated 
76o A.D.  (CI. T.B.C., SI. 1941, pp. 511­513). 
7­) For  Halu,  which  is, for instance, the  Rakai  title of  Airlanga,  cf. infra, strophe 12, 
pada d, the  note  to the  translaten  of this strophe, and infra, p. 342. 
8^) Such ­descriptions are found especially in the  Nāgarakrĕtāgama,  hut also in other 
kĕkawins.  As a rule, the  poets  describe the  adbhutāni;  cI.  Stutterheim’s  important 
notes  to Prapañca's  description of the  kĕraton  of Majapahit in the  Nāgarakrĕtāgama 
(De kraton  van  MajapahiI.  Verh. K.I., VII. 1948). 


--- [Page 313] ---
— 301 — 
is necessarily incomplete. The  poet  describes only what he thinks worthy 
of mention. 
In strophe  11, it is  stated  that  the king  had a dharma constructed as 
soon as the circumstances  made  peaceful activities possible. Dharma probably 
denotes  the foundation as a whole  8i) . so that  the descriptions  thereafter  should 
be referred to its various details. The precise meaning of dharma is  difficult 
to be ascertained. It is generally accepted  that  the term usually applies to 
sanctuaries in which the main object of cult is the  statue  of a deified  king, 
but there  is no proof  that  this should be the  case  with all the foundations 
denoted by dharma in the texts. No more  does  this text furnish such a proof, 
but it  seems  hardly doubtful  that  the temple inaugurated in 856  A.D.  was 
indeed a sanctuary of the type alluded to above. Thus, the term used to 
denote  the main object of cult in 24  (pāda  d) and in 28  (pāda  d) is bhatara, 
a term used for a deified  king  in at least the  great  majority of  cases  known  8 2) . 
In strophe  18, which is not, unfortunately,  lucid,  the term  diwyākĕna,  ,,to 
be deified’’,  applies to the temple complex as a whole, which is to be 
„deified”,  „made  divine’’  by means  of consecration ceremonies, but it is 
unlikely  that  such a term would have been used if the  poet  did not want 
to suggest  that  the principal aim of the construction was some  kind  of 
apotheosis 83). Finally,  perhaps  the most convincing  argument  is the allusion 
to patiha ceremonies 84) in 10a, a term denoting ceremonies connected with 
the cult of the dead, whatever its exact meaning is 85). 
81) There is an interesting pun on this meaning of dharma in connection with Dharma¬
Adharma in strophe 12 a; cf. notes 86 and 38 to the translation. 
­2) CI. Stutterheim, Prae­Hinduiistische B^zettingsgebruiken, in Med.  Kon.  Acad. wet., 
N.R.,  II (1939), p. 1o8 (.^ p. 4 of the  separate  edition). 
83) CI. infra, n^e 66 to the Translation. 
84) Cf. Van  der Tuuk's  Dictionary,  ­.v. tiwa (II, p. 674): In the Tantu  Paṅgĕlaran,  edition 
hy Pigeaud (1924), p. 112, wong atitiwa are stated to meet on cemetery grounds 
(sma).  CI. also  Stutterheim,  T.B.G.,  75 (1933). p. 429, where the Dayak tiwah cere­
monies are mentioned, interpreted as the ceremonies for th.^  final  redemption of 
the soul  of the dead  (.het laatste verlossingsfeest der  ziel'),  and  Berg,  who discussed 
the term in his  Kidung  Sunda edition (B^idr. KJ., 83, 1927, p. 126). A very  recent 
description of the Dayak tiwah ceremonies was given hy Badar Sulaiman usin, Ti¬
wah‚ in Mimbar Indonesia, VII. No. 37 (12/9­1953): pp. 12­14 and p. 29. 
8­) From  most of the references mentioned in note 84, it  would  appear  that  the tiwa 
ceremonies take p1ace a long time after death. During the Dayak feast, e.g., the 
hones are dug up, gathered and put into some kind of urn (sandang^) to he buried 
again  after the ceremonies. These details reca11 the  çrāddha  ceremonies known, e.g., 
from  Prapanca's description in the  Nāgarakrĕtāgama  (Cantos  LXIII  to LXIX)  ; the 
çrāddha  ceremonies for the  Rājapatnī  aim at complete  purification  in order  that  the 
(^ueen  may return to her  divine  form  of Prajñāpāramitā.  I have the impression  that 
the patiha mentioned in our text should be compared  with  the  Rājapatnī  ceremonies 
described  in the  Nāgarakrĕtāgama,  although  there  is no proof. Further research about 
what exactly is meant by tiwa in the different texts might furnish precisions. There 
are a few loci  which  do not  confirm  the above interpretation. The  Wirāṭaparwan  (Old 
Javanese text published by  Juynboll,  1912, p. 38,  line  32, and p. 4o,  line  3) suggests 
ceremonies  which  take place immediately after the death of a prince  (KIcaka  killed 


--- [Page 314] ---
— 302 — 
The foundation as a whole is denoted by  Çiwagreha  (I.e.  Çiwagṛha)  in 
26a and by  Çiwālaya  in 25a ;  there  is not, therefore, any doubt  that  the 
bhatāra  mentioned in 2 4d and in 28d was a  Çiwa  image. The  date  of its 
consecration  (sinangskāra  in 2 4 d) is given  with  great  detail (2 4 a­c). 
Strophe 13, unfortunately mutilated, might give some idea of how the 
complex  as a whole was built. One  gets  the clear impression  that  only the 
mam  building(s) (probably denoted by  teas,  the 'heart’ of the foundation, 
in 14b) were directly ordered to be built by the  king,  whereas the smaller 
buildings  were constructed by  others  who had made solemn vows to  that 
effect. The identity of  these  'others' is less clear, but if the enumeration 
in 13 a­b refers to  these,  not only high dignitaries (pramukha), but also 
friends  (mitra)  , servants  (bhṛtya)  and even low­caste people (nijakula) were 
included  into their number. Probably, all  these  people have close relations 
with the  king  in common  8 6); they may have been the people who accom­
panied the  king  during the  difficult  period of struggle 87)  wi­1en  they made 
solemn  vows to be  fulfilled  after the  final  victory  88)^  A.’f1er  this victory, 
everyone set himself cheerfully to this task. Strophe 17  pāda  a makes it 
clear  that  the buildings to be constructed by  those  who made the vows are 
small  temples in rows,  stated  to be all equal in height (samaroha) and equal 
in conception  (sārtha,  samacitta)  , though different in their details. As is 
hy Wṛhannalā=  Arjuna  in disguise), hut  these  references may not, perhaps, he relied 
upon since they occur in Old Javanese  paraphrases  of Sanskrit  strophes  ; they prove, 
however, that rhva, whatever its precise meaning is, could he used for different cere¬
monies connected with the cult of the dead. Cf. also note 22 to p. 319 helow. 
8^) Another example of an  enumeration  based  upon  similar  principles is found in the 
Old Malay  inscription deah  with  in No. II, ahove ; cI. supra, pp. 18­21.  Also  the 
numerous inscriptions on the small temples of the  Plaosan  Lor complex seem to 
prove  that  not only very high dignitaries hut  even  rather  modest servants of the 
king  contributed to the foundation as far as their  limited  resources reached (thus, 
one of the small buildings is  stated  to have  heen  erected hy the king in collahoration 
with no less than  three,  presumably, iower servants). It is well­known  that  class 
separations  were  often  less strict in so­called feudal societies than in modern ‘democ 
racy^  : in European medieval society it was not  rare  that  servants dined at the lord's 
tahle (which  still  occurs in countries such as Italy or Spain, where feudalism has not 
completely  disappeared), whereas a  rich  peasant  family  in Holland  would  not dream 
of allowing their lower servants at their tahle. This  does  not, of course,  mean  that 
feudalism should be regretted : the point is that social class distinctions (i.e. main¬
ly ­money’ distinctions in Western Society) tend to he stressed just because Consti­
tution  no more protects the  Lords.  Thus, the medieval  servant  would  not have had 
the idea to  abuse  his close relations  with  his lord's  family,  just  because  the gap was 
considered natural. 
­7) This,  however, is completely conjectural. Unfortunately, strophe 13 is badly muti­
lated by a hole in the stone; its interpretation, is, therefore,  difficult,  but the above 
is at least one of the ways in which the different parts of the strophe could be con¬
nected. For the details, cI. the notes to the translation of strophe 13. 
^ This is mainly based upon my interpretation of anumoda, the detailed discussion of 
which  is given in the publication of the Plaosan inscriptions ; cf. also  note  46 to p. 321 
below. 


--- [Page 315] ---
— 303 — 
well-known,  rows of  small  temples surrounding the central building(s) are 
found  in the great Central Javanese complexes such as  Séwu,  Plaosan and 
Lara  Djoṅgrang. 
In strophes 14 and 15, numerous other important details are  given. 
A liṅga  is probably mentioned in 14 a 89). Strophe 14,  pāda  b mentions 
the interesting detail  that  the central temples (the 'heart’ of the foundation) 
had their own  wall  (turus), by  which  they were separated  from  the  small 
constructions.  Such  a conception is not found everywhere ; it occurs, e.g., 
in the Lara  Djoṅgrang  complex, but not in  Tjaṇḍi  Séwu.  In the same  pāda 
the use of bricks is referred to ; it is stated  that  they were used for the 
construction  of tambak 96), presumably  brick  walls  either in the interior 
of a temple  building  or between some groups of buildings  ‛ 31). The next 
pāda,  14c, mentions  ’door-keepers’  (dvārapā^a),  probably huge  Rākṣasas 
protecting  the gate-ways in the  walls;  the explanation of their presence, 
given  in 14 d, was already quoted above as a  typical  example of  utprekṣā  ‛ 32) . 
Near  the gate-ways,  pavilion-like  buildings (rankang in 15 b) were erected ; 
there  were  only  two of  these  buildings probably placed one opposite the 
other, i.e. either in the eastern and western  walls  respectively or in the 
northern and the southern  walls.  One  gets  the impression  that  the two 
raṅkang  were situated  within  the innermost complex  (that  which  is denoted 
by teas  in 14  b) , whereas the outer temples (vi^. those outside the  wall  which 
presumably  surrounded the  tĕas)  are mentioned  only  in strophe 17. If this 
is correct, the situation of the two rankang  would  correspond exactly  with 
that the two so-called  ’court–temples’  in the inner complex of  Lara 
Djoṅgrang,  where they are placed near the northern and southern entrances 
respectively  ^ 3). 
Rather  a long  passage (15 c-d and the entire strophe 16) deals  with 
a very extraordinary tree.  Owing  to the God's neighbourhood, it had grown 
with a miraculous speed : though planted  only  a year before, it had come 
89) CI.  infra,  note 18 to the Transcription. 
90) Tamwaka  ......  istak^.  The larter  word  is undoubtedly a wrong spelling of Sanskrit 
lstaka,  „brick"  ; as to tamwaka, I consider this  form  a so­called  'form  of irreality’ 
(forms  with  the  suffix  ­a, styled  ‚‚irrealiteitsvorm'  hy  Berg,  Biidr.  K.I., 95, 1937, 
p. lo9 and passim), the use of  which  is much freer in Old Javanese  than  it is in 
the modern language. I translate :  „bricks  to become tamwak'' ; exactly the same 
use of the derivative tambak­a (but in a different shade of meaning of the  word 
tambak  itself  ; cI.  note  91) is found in the Old Javanese  Rāmāyaṇa  (Canto Xv, 
strophe 4). 
­•^ CI.  infra,  note 49 to the Translation. 
^2) Supra, p. 2a6. 
9^) CI.  Krom,  1nleiding^, I. pp. 456 sqq. and Oudh. Yersf. 19^1­^5 (1938), Plates 7 and 
8 (after the reconstruction). The usual designation hy 'court­temples’  („hoftempeltjes" 
in Dutch) is based upon the numerous ratna ornaments and the impression made by 
the buildings to modern eyes. It is curious  that  most of what is  known  about the 
meaning  of raṅkang  in Old Javanese  agrees  more or less  with  the  form  of the 
Prambanan  ’court  temples', as also the situation of the two  raṅkang  in this text does. 
The usual translation of  raṅkang  is „pavilion"  ; in  Bhomakāwya,  Canto  XLIII,  strophe 


--- [Page 316] ---
— 304 — 
to considerable height. A1though it was on1y a  Tañjung  tree  (15 c), it was 
equal to the divine  Pārijātaka  94): this is why it would become the place 
where the God would descend when coming to Earth, using it both as 
a ladder and as a  payung  — it could really be called a God for the God 95) . 
It is added  that  the tree  had been  planted at the Eastern side (ri  pūrwu^adiça= 
Sanskrit  pūrvāyām diçi,  — although it was  apūrva,  „unequalled’’,  as the 
poet adds,  unable to resist the opportunity for a pun). The simile  suggests 
24, pada a,  raṅkang  designates the pavilion inside the  kĕraton  in which  the princess 
^Yajñavatī  used to ahide to wait for her lover (cf. also the references in  note  53 to the 
Translation). The correspondence between  thé  conception of the Kingdom of Heav¬
ens, symbolized in the great Javanese temple complexes, and the earthly ahode of 
the king (who may be the  ‚‚Shadow  of God" even in  Moslim  terminology) is very 
striking;  in addition to the references given in the Introduction to No. X above, I 
stress  the correspondence  between  the  Pārijātaka  in heavens, the  Tañjung  tree  in 
our temple complex (cf. the  note  which  follows)  and the special  trees  planted in 
Javanese  kĕratons. 
94) 'rhe  Pārijāta  (or  Pārijātaka)  is one of the  five  divine  trees  which  originated at the 
time  of the Churning of the Ocean; it is usually located in Indra's heaven and 
mentioned in most of the works on cosmology. An interesting and detailed descrip­
tion is found in  Ahhidharmakoça,  III, p. 162 (of the translation hy De la  Vallée 
Poussin),  where the distance up to  which  the scent of its flowers extends either  with 
or against the  wind  is a point of controversy among theologists. The temple  with 
its immediate surroundings is a replique of paradise (cI., e.g., the use of diwyatama 
in strophe 18 a of this text) ; owing to the  similarity  of the  Tañjung  with  the divine 
Pārijātaka,  the God recognizes the temple as His ahode and may descend into the 
tree.  In reality, the  tree  is a  Tañjung  (Mimusops  Elengi),  one of the  trees  which 
are commonly planted in temple courts (cf. the Old Javanese  Rāmāyaṇa,  VIII,  53), 
but also m hermitages  (Bhomakāwya,  XV, 12) and in Javanese courts  (e.g.,  in the 
kĕraton  of Majapahit according to  Prapañca's  description in  Nāgarakrĕtāgama,  VIII, 
5 o). The  Pārijāta  is considered a real wishing  tree  (^kalpadruma) in the O1d Javanese 
Rāmāyana,  VIII,  53 d; cf. W.  Aichele  in Dj.aw^,  VIII  (1928), pp. 28 sqq., who 
determines the  Pārijāta  as a warmin especially on account of the (a)  Pārijāta  often 
being represented as a wishing  tree  and (h) the  original  meaning of  wariṅin  heing 
„wishing"  (= .bĕr­iṅin).  Neither  argument  is strong since  there  are several celestial 
trees  that  may be kalpadrumas. In India, the  Pārijāta  is considered to be a  „coral 
tree"  (Erythrina Indica),  which  is neither a Warimn nor a  Tañjung;  this is also the 
meaning of the word in Modern Javanese ; its  yellow,  sour fruits are stated to 
be eaten  by pregnant  women to get children  with  a heautiful skin colour (Tjan Tjoe 
Siem,  Hoe Koeroepati zich een vrouw verwerft,  1938, p. 224).  Cf.  also  Kern,  Yerspr. 
Ceschr., VII.  p. 6o; Stutterheim,  Djaw^,  VI (1926), pp. 333­349  ; Rassers, Biidr. K.I., 
88 (1932), p. 4o6; and, for the kalpadruma in one of the  Kutai  inscriptions.  Vogal, 
B^idr.  K.I., 76  (192o),  pp. 431 sqq., and Blagden, Bijdr. K.I., 74 (1918), pp. 615 sqq, 
^) Hyaṅa i hyaṅ=apa,  „would  not it be a God for the God Not too much value 
should  be given to  these  words,  which  may be due to the yamaka. It is also not 
certain  what the poet meant by the words and other interpretations cannot be ex­
cluded;  the words may not be more  than  an exaggerated expression (well­known as 
some kind of  alaṃkāra,  viz. atyuktf.^ „is not it really wonderful''). Ahyang is  often 
used by  Prapañca  in the meaning  „wonderful,  marvellous" applied to things  which 
have no direct connection  with  the  Divine.  ­


--- [Page 317] ---
— 305 ­
that the marvellous  tree  was right before the  main  entrance of the  main 
temple  building  ^ 6) which  would  have been at the eastern side. 
Another  interesting detail is the  „innumerable,  immovable  women’’ 
mentioned  in 17 d. They are in an obvious contrast to the artisans whose 
feverish  speed is stressed by 17 c. There is no doubt  that  these  ’women’ 
are either images (such as careotids) or reliefs on the temple. The  relief 
descriptions  in the Plaosan  inscription  (No. VII above, strophes 11 to 17) 
are interesting for a comparison. 
It seems  that  strophe 18 and the  first  pāda  of 19 aim at describing the 
impression  made by the temples upon the spectators.  Such  a subject offered 
a very favourable opportunity to  display  the poet’s  training in  alamkāras. 
In strophes 19 b­d, 20 and 21, the emotions of the spectators  could  not even 
be described in a  ’normal’  language : the poet therefore expressed  himself 
in a way  which  is not  prākṛta,  whatever  that  means 97). 
The last part of the text deals  with  the inauguration of the temples, 
of the temple grounds and  similar  subjects (strophes 22 to 29). Strophe 22 
would  certainly be very interesting if its meaning  could  be fully  understood. 
It contains a double  invocation,  the former addressed to the rather remarkable 
group  of three kinds of birds (herons, crows and  hamsas)  and merchants, 
the latter to different kinds of  village  elders. If I understand the meaning 
of the strophe correctly, birds and merchants are supposed to go to a  tīrtha 
within  or in the immediate neighbourhood of the temple complex to take a 
bath (diyus) in order to acquire  siddhayātra.  As to the remarkable group 
of birds and merchants, it is noted  that  these  heterogeneous  visitors  have 
travelling  over  great distances in common. On account of the numerous  dif­
ferent interpretations  which  been suggested, the occurrence of this term 
in an Old Javanese text might not be without interest, although the context 
is not very clear. I  ti1ink  that  the idea is  that  all kinds of travellers go to 
the tīrtha,  which  is clearly  associated  with  the foundation a^ a  whole,  in 
order  to acquire some sort of blessing  which  may guarantee good crossings 
and safe return for them. As a matter of fact,  siddhayātra  is usually  associated 
9­) At 1east if one expects the God to  enter  by the main entrance, not, for instance, by 
the roof.  The poetical description suggests the former alternative: the God descends 
out of the sky, as if by helicopter, and 'lands' just before the main entrance in the 
shade of the  Tafijung,  so that  he would  have a payung. 
97.’) This  appears  from  the words  prākrĕtasanniweça  between strophes 21 and 22, sug­
gesting  that  the preceding strophes were not  prākrĕta.  It is wen­known  that  prākrĕta 
does not denote the Indian dialects  usually  designated by the term in Old Javanese : 
it there designates Old Javanese (the 'natural' language opposed to learnt languages 
such  as Sanskrit).  This  does not necessarily mean  that  the strophes are in a 
language other but Old Javanese; another  possibility  is that that  the strophes are 
composed  in what might be  styled  'unnatural' language, I.e. some  kind  of riddle  or 
code,  the use of  which  is explained, e.g. in  Danḍin's  Kāvyādarça  (In, 97­124), where 
many  different kinds of riddles  (prahelikā)  are discussed. There is, however, none 
among  the number,  which  would  make our strophes understandable. The  possibility 
that the strophes are riddles is  confirmed  by the occurrence of other riddles in our 
text (aksaracyutaka and binducyutaka). 


--- [Page 318] ---
— 306 — 
with voyages oversea 98). It may then be understood why the poet also 
included  migratory birds into the number of visitors to the  tīrtha.  If the 
tīrtha  is a lake or a part of a  river,  one  would  regularly see herons, hamsas, 
crows  and other birds in its neighbourhood. The vulgar explanation is  that 
the birds dive into the water to catch  fish,  but the  poet’s  explanation,  which 
is also some  kind  of alamkara, is  that  the birds go  there  to be  purified 
by the  holy  water and to acquire a blessing for their  flight  to far away 
regions 99) . Strophe 22 a­b  suggests  that  the tīrtha  .is in the immediate neigh­
bourhood  of the temples. It is, however, obvious  that  it could  not have been 
inside  the two complexes already  known,  vi:^.  the ’heart’  of the foundation 
surrounded by its own  wall  and the anumoda buildings supposed to have 
been  built  in rows around the central part. The presence of a  tīrtha  within 
either of  these  complexes  would  he astonishing, if not impossible 199). It 
seems  far more  likely  that  the  tīrtha  was outside  these  two groups of 
buildings.  Now  there  are some other constructions mentioned in the text, 
which  shou1d be located outside  these  two groups of  buildings,  too. In 15 d, 
the poet mentions  small  buildings to be used as hermitages.  Even  when 
these  hermitages were very beautiful  (mahayu  in 15 d), they  cou1d  not be 
located  in the central complex, nor between the rows of anumoda  build­
ings  l91). Presumably, the poet does not always  follow  a systematic order 
(though he  seems  to do so as a rule), but  allows  himself  digressions whenever 
poetical  considerations or various associations give him a reason to take a 
side path.  Although  the considerable lacuna in 15 c makes it impossible to 
verify  whether this should have been the case  with  the hermitages in 15  d  l°2) , 
it is obvious  that  15 d is no argument to suppose  that  the hermitages were 
within  the central  complex,  which  is very  unlikely.  They  would  rather have 
been situated outside the temple complex, hut  within  the foundation as a 
whole,  just as was concluded  with  reference to the situation of the  tīrtha. 
­8) Gf. the references  given  in No. I ahove,  notes  6 to 12 to pp. 1 sq. 
.,. A very  similar  example of  utprekṣā  is given hy  Daṇḍin  in Kāvyādarça,  II, 222 
(Boehtlingk's  edition, p. 58). There an  elephant  goes into a pond at noon­time in 
order to cut off the day­lotuses  (padma^)  because they are the friends of the sun. 
The real  reason  is, of course, the elephant's desire to  hathe  and to drink, as  Daṇḍin 
explains in II. 223. 
100 There might, however, be an important exception, viz. in one of the complexes of 
the Ratubaka plateau to the  east  of the so­called  pĕṇdapa,  where a numher of water 
hasins  fed by sources were discovered (cf. the report by Soewarno in Laporan Tahun 
195o of the Dinas  Purbakala,  p. 18; one of  these  hasins  is shghtiy  visible  on the 
photograph No. 9 on p. 41).  Much  further research is necessary before something 
about the meaning of this part of Ratuhaka may be concluded; thus, real temple 
buildings  were not discovered there. 
101) Hermitages are never found between temple  buildings,  as far as is known. The im­
mediate neighbourhood of the temples  would,  however, appear to be an excellent 
place  for ascetics. 
­02) Curiously  enough, pada 15 d is put between 15 c and the entire strophe 16,  which 
all deal  with  the marvellous  tree.  It is therefore evident  that  15 d ahout the hermi­


--- [Page 319] ---
^ 307 — 
The above discussion is essential if one wants to get an idea of the 
situation  of the different buildings etc. mentioned in the text. The form of 
the complex  appears  to show some vague analogies  with  the Lara  Djoṅgrang 
complex  at Prambanan. There, too,  there  is a central complex surrounded 
by its own  wall  ; within  the central complex,  there  are two relatively small 
buildings  (the so­called  ’court­temples’)  , the place of  which  seems  to agree 
with that  of the two  raṅkang  buildings in this inscription (15 b). Outside 
the wall  surrounding the central temple group,  there  are four rows of small 
temples the situation of  which  might  well  agree  with  that  of the large number 
of small buildings — all similar, of the  same  height and having the  same 
function  193), but different in their details (wicitra) — mentioned in strophe 
17 a­b. These might be the  same  buildings as  those  denoted by anumoda 
in 13 d. There is nothing very  strange  in the fact of their being mentioned 
in the very beginning of the description : strophe 13 aims at explaining how 
the construction of the little buildings is connected  with  the preceding 
events. The text  does  not mention a second  wall  which  surrounded the 
anumoda buildings, but it is obvious  that  there  should have been one since 
the small  buildings  still  belong to the foundation. The poet describes  those 
details  which  he thinks worthy of mention ; the central temples  with  their 
own  wall  (teas  saturusnya)  constituted a peculiar  feature  which  deserved 
to be mentioned. It was, however, self­evident  that  the anu^noda buildings 
would  be surrounded by a  wall  again. But this is not  all. It was noted above 
that it is very  unlikely  that  the hermitages and the  tīrtha  should be located 
within  either the  ’heart’  of the foundation or the space occupied by the 
anumoda buildings. As to the possibility of the latter alternative, it might 
be added  that  the homogeneity clearly suggested by  sama,  two compounds 
tages  is a digression in any case. There must have been something in the latter 
half of 15 c  which  made the digression possible, hut I do not see the solution of 
this puzzle. 
103) T^his is a free translation of  sārtha.  The usual Sanskrit meanings („having a commis­
sion" etc. and  „successful,  rich";  cf. sārthavāha)  do not seem  likely;  I prefer to take 
sa^ in the  same  meaning as in  sarūpa,  sagotra etc. and to translate „having the  same 
aim or the same meaning", although artha is not included in the  list  of words given 
hy Pāṇini,  VI, 3, 85­89 (cf. Wackernagel, Grammatik, II, 1‚ pp. 76 sq., who  adds 
that sam­artha is used in the meaning  „von  gleicher Bedeutung, zusammengehorig"). 
Presumably, our poet did not  follow  Pāṇini's  rules exactly; the parallelism  with 
samaroha and samacitta is, however, a  strong  argument  to consider the interpretation 
of sārtha  as samartha the more  likely  one. The meaning probably is  that  the small 
buildings  were not only very  similar  to one  another,  but they also had the  same 
function  in the foundation as a whole. They were all anumoda buildings, erected to 
fulfil  a vow. 
104) CI.  Krom,  1nleiding 2, I. p. 449, and Sturterheirn,  Djawā,  XX (1940),  note  2) to pp. 
225 sq., who gives a precise description of the situation, measurements, numbers of 
temples etc. of the  Lara  Djoṅgrang  complex. As far as the buildings  within  the space 
between the second and third walls are concerned, Stutterheim  states  that  nothing 
is known about buildings in this  part  of the complex  („Omtrent  de bebouwing  van 
A weten  wij niets''). 


--- [Page 320] ---
with sama^ as their first  parts  and a compound  with  sa­ wouId be seriously 
disturbed in  that  case. If, however, the .hermitages and the  tīrtha  were 
outside the second  wall,  it is necessary to conclude  that  there  was even 
a third  wall  to separate  the foundation as a whole  from  the ordinary, 
profane grounds. 
It is interesting to examine the last part of the foundation, presumably 
situated between the second and third  walls,  with  greater detail. A  brief 
description  of the  „buildings  to be used as hermitages’’  (pāntī tinapān)  is 
given  in strophe 15 d. They are beautiful (mahayu). In spite of the austerities 
of the ascetics, the charm of hermitages amidst  trees  and flowers is  well­
known  from  Indian poetry and dramas. Our poet thinks  it,’ however, neces­
sary to add a  kind  of excuse : the hermitages are made beautiful so  that 
they would  be an  ‚‚example  to he imitated” (tiruan), i.e. to make other people 
choose religious  life ; it is almost some  kind  of propaganda. The meaning 
of this  passage  becomes very clear if one considers the above conclusion 
implying  that  the  king  himself  had already given the good example by 
becoming  an ascetic. 
Most  of the space between the second and third walls may have been 
occupied  by these  hermitages, almost hidden between  trees  and flowers. 
But where shou1d the  tīrtha  be located ? A conjectural reply to this question 
may be given by comparing the composition of the  Lara  Djoṅgrang  complex. 
As a matter of fact,  there  is a third  wall  in the  Lara  Djoṅgrang  complex, 
too ; the latter does not run parallel to the two other walls and, curiously 
enough, no ­remains of buildings have been discovered between the second 
and third walls 194). As far as I know, no conjectural explanation for  these 
curious  facts has been proposed. The most  likely  explanation fo^ the latter 
peculiarity  is that  the space between the second and third walls was not 
just left empty but was occupied by buildings made of wood, bamboo or other 
materials  which  wolild  not have left any distinct  traces  after so many 
centuries. On the other hand it is almost obvious  that  such buildings shou1d 
have been closely associated  with  the sanctuaries, I.e. they should have 
been either dwellings for the priests charged  with  the temple cults or 
hermitages for ascetics who  could  he inspired by the neighbourhood of the 
divine  buildings. The other peculiarity, the direction of the outer  wall,  is 
even more interesting. If the lines of the southern and western  parts  such 
as they may be sketched on account of the remains  which  have been dis­
covered,  are extended, it  appears  that  they  would  converge almost exactly at 
the bank of a  river,  the Kali  Opak. Now one might suggest the  possibility,  that 
the main  reason for the construction of the outer  wall  in this way was due to 
the necessity of  including  a small  part of the course of the river into the 
foundation.  If this was indeed the intention of the architects, it is clear  that 
the result  could  not have been attained in another way, for it  would  have 
been necessary  that  the first and second walls (which enclose the  ’dwellings 
for the gods’) were exactly orientated to the four main directions. For the 
third  wall  (separating  only  the dwellings of human beings  from  the rest  of 


--- [Page 321] ---
— 309 
the country),  no exact orientation was considered necessary and the 
advantage of having part of the  river  inside the foundation as a whole or 
at its very border  could  have been a plausible reason to construct the outer 
wall in the  form  which  could  be traced i° 5). The main advantage was  that 
clean  water for ablutions of priests, objects of cult etc.  would  be within  the 
foundation.  Unfortunately, the exact  form  of the southern and western outer 
walls  near the south­western corner has not been settled, so  that  no verifi­
cation  is possible at this moment. 
In this connection, I may  call  attention to an interesting  passage  in 
strophe 25,  pāda  b of this  inscription.  There, it is stated  that  the course 
of the river  (luaḥ  = lwah)  is changed  (inaliḥhakĕn)  in order  that  it might 
touch  (anitik, derived  from  titik)  the grounds (palmahan). It is not exactly 
clear  what grounds are meant by palmahan, the dry rice­fields  (huma) 
mentioned  in 25 d and 26 a or the grounds of the temple complex itself. 
The reference to the  ‚‚completion  of the  divine  Çiva  temple’’  (çiwālaya  samāpta 
diwyottama) in the  pāda  immediately preceding  that  in which  the change 
of the course of the  river  is mentioned (25 a)  would  suggest the latter 
alternative.  Presumably, a dam was constructed at some place of the  river 
after the  completion  of a new bed  which  touched the  limits  of the foundation. 
Could  this be connected  with  the tīrtha  to which  strophe 22,  pāda  a­b, alludes ? 
The unsystematical order in  which  the different  parts  of the foundation 
are mentioned in the text makes it impossible to answer this question in 
the affirmative,  but it is clear  that  it would  be difficult  to account for the 
t^rtha  in a different way 106). The  tīrtha,  visited  by birds, merchants and 
other travellers in order to acquire  siddhayātra  (?), might be the very part 
of the river  which  touched the foundation as a consequence of the measures 
mentioned  in strophe 25 a­b. If this is correct, it  follows  that  the  form  of 
the complex  as a whole  could  more or less correspond to  that  of the  Lara 
Djoṅgrang  temples.  Among  the detail^  which  show  striking  correspondence, 
I mention the two  raṅkang  in the  inscription  and the two ,court temples’ 
in the  Lara  Djoṅgrang  complex. 
The above discussion might even suggest the question whether the text 
could  be connected  with  the foundation of the  Lara  Djoṅgrang  complex. In 
spite of the curious correspondences,  there  is no sufficient reason to give a 
positive  answer to this question, although it cannot be denied  that  the shape 
of the complex  founded in 856  A.D.  agrees  with  the Lara  Djoṅgrang  temples in 
more than one respect and  Çaiva  complexes of such an enormous size have 
been rare. The main objection, however, is the  date  of Tjaṇḍi  Lara  Djoṅgrang, 
considered  to belong to the first  decennia  of the 10th century  A.D.  1°7), 
i.e. at least  half  a century later than this  inscription  is. On the other hand, 
10­) Another  advantage is that more space for the hermitages became  available. 
­06) Unless  the  possibility  mentioned in note loo above  should  be considered. 
1^7) Gf. especially  Krom, Geschiedenis^,  p. 192, and 1nleiding^. I. pp. 441 sq., and  Stut¬
terheim,  De stichter der  Prambanan–tempels,  in Dj^wa, XX (194o), pp. 218­233. The 
association  of the Prambanan temples  with  Daksa  (from  about 91o to 919 A.D.) 


--- [Page 322] ---
Krom  considers  Lara  Djoṅgrang  contemporaneous  with  the northern complex 
of Tjaṇḍi  Plaosan on account of apparently strong reasons 198), implying 
that both  temple groups should be assigned to the first  decennia  of the 10th 
century. For the northern complex of Plaosan this  date  can no more be 
accepted.  Among  the number of about  sixty  short inscriptions discovered 
after the publication of  Krom's  Introduction 1°9), the name of the  king  (çrī 
mahārāja)  Rakai  Pikatan is found several times 11°). This  very  inscription 
informs  us that  Rakai  Pikatan resigned the throne in 856  A.D.  If it is assumed 
that cutting  in the inscriptions  would  have been among the last activities 
preceding  the inauguration, it becomes obvious  that  the temple complex  could 
not be dated later than 856  A.D.  111). Also  in the  Lara  Djoṅgrang  temples 
a considerable number of  inscriptions  in red and white paint were discovered 
in recent times l12). Not much may be concluded about pikatan,  which 
occurs  among the number, since  there  is no  proof  that  it denotes the  king 
was first suggested hy Rouffaer in B^idr. K.I., 74 (1918), pp. 151­163. The arguments 
given  by Rouffaer, as weR as those of  Krom  and Stutterheim, are necessarily vague. 
Thus,  the argument considered the most convincing one hy Rouffaer is the fact 
that one of  Dakṣa’s  inscriptions probably originated  from  Gĕṭak  in the neighbour­
hood  of Prambanan .  Krom  stressed the use of  marl,  presumably  from  the Ratubaka 
plateau, a fact  which  would  prove  that  Prambanan  would  have  been  built  in a 
period  when the  royal  residence on the plateau had already  heen  abandoned;  even 
if it is certain  that  the  marl  did come  from  the Ratuhaka plateau and not  from 
some other place, it is hardly possible to use the  marl  argument before  there  are 
some more data avallable about when  there  was a  royal  residence on the Ratuhaka 
plateau; at another occasion  (Geschiedenis­^,  p. 149)  Krom  presumes  that  the  royal 
residence on the plateau was  that  of the  Çailendra  rulers ; since the last  – known 
document of a  Cailendra  ruler in Java is the  Karangtĕnah  inscription dated 824  A.D. 
the only  conclusion to be based on the mari argument is  that  Plaosan and  Lara 
Djoṅgrang  were  built  after ahout 824 A.D. — unless the R.­^tubaka  kĕraton  should 
have been used in the beginning of the  Çallendra  period  only.  The vagueness of the 
marl  argument is even stressed hy the uncertainty whether  there  ever was a  kĕraton 
on the Ratubaka plateau; 1 noted in the beginning of this Introduction  that  the 
famous tradition about the  royal  residence should perhaps he traced hack to th^ 
possibly  short period in  which  Bālaputra  had made the plateau his residence and 
his fortress. —  Stutterheim’s  strongest argument is the kanuruhan inscription  dis­
covered  on one of the minor temples of the  Lara  Djoṅgrang  complex (Tjandi  Lara 
Djonggrang  en Cost­Java. Cudheidk.  Aantek.  XXIX,  in Bijdr. K.I., 90, 1933, pp. 
267–2  7o), but here, too,  there  is the  difficulty  that  it is hy no  means  certain  that 
there  were no connections  with  Eastern Java hefore the beginning of the 10th  cen­
tury A.D. As a matter of fact, some  typical  Eastern Java titles are found in the 
Plaosan inscriptions, too. 
­08^ 1nleiding^ (1923), II. pp. 1­16. 
l‘^) For  full  details, the reader is referred to the  separate  publication on the Plaosan 
inscriptions  in Berita Dinas Purbakala, I (1955), Cf. also Pras. 1ndon., I (1950), 
pp. 116 sq. 
111) By combining a number of arguments based on the names in the Plaosan inscriptions, 
I concluded to the period between about 825 and 850 for the construction of the 
northern complex in the publication mentioned in note 109 above. 
11 2) I conected about  fifty  inscriptions in all, most of  which  short and very  difficult  to 
be read (the paint does not resist the  ages  as well  as the inscriptions cut into the 


--- [Page 323] ---
— 311 — 
of that  name  113); the type of script in which  these  inscriptions are written 
seems  identical with  that  of the Plaosan inscriptions, which is considerably 
more archaic than the script used in the inscriptions issued during the 
reigns of Balitung and  Dakṣa  114). It is  therefore  clear  that  the accepted  date 
for the Lara  Djoṅgrang  temples  might not be as strong an objection as it 
seems  at first. At  present,  the whole problem has to left undecided. Not 
only further study of this inscription (the interpretation of which  still  poses 
enormous difficulties) including the  Pre­Nāgari  portion, but also further  data 
are required before more satisfactory  results  may be arrived at. 
Transcription 
[1] //  swasti  .......................................................................  i) 
[2J nyalaka  ......................................................................... 
[3] .. //  saçrī  ..................................................................... 
[4] nang jetrakula  ............................................................... 
[5] nyāpita  .’/ ..................................................................... 
[6] wanti ­)  ....................................................................... 
[7] ring  kāla  sang mnang  makadhāraṇa  lokadhātu  :/ 5 // 3) 
Paryyantariṣta yuwanātha  sarājya  —–  —  4) 
mangrakṣa  bhūmi  ri jawārjawa jāta  — —  ^) / 
[8] saçrī  raṇautsawa ratejika  lain  prasiddha 
stones). Contrary to the Plaosan inscriptions  which  give the titles and the  names  of 
the dignitaries, the Lara  Djoṅgrang  inscriptions give the  (Rakai  or Pamĕgĕt)  titles 
only (such as pikatan, kanuruhan,  sirikan^  etc.),  which  makes identification almost 
impossihle.  A separate  publication about the  Lara  Dioṅgrang  inscriptions is in pre. 
paration. 
ll^) On the other hand, the shortness of all the  Lara  Djongrang inscriptions makes it 
impossible  to conclude  that  the absence of  royal  titles proves  that  pikatan  would 
not denote  the  king  Rakai  Pikatan. 
H 4) Among the most characteristic details of this script, I mention the form of the  suku 
with a very distinct curve at its lower end. This feature is common to all the oldcr 
inscriptions (such as the Perot and Ratubaka inscriptions including  that  which  is 
discussed  herey  but is very exceptionally found in inscriptions of the 9th  Çaka 
century. 
1) In the first six lines of the stone, only some isolated aksaras  could  be deciphered. 
These few syllables are not sufficient to determine the metre in  which  they were 
written.  Only  the few aksaras at the head of the lines  could  be transcribed. 
–) In line 6. something more  than  in the preceding lines may be recognized, but since 
its metre  could  not be  fixed.  its transcription is bound to be too uncertain to be 
given here. 
.–) Presumably,  thé  fourth pada of a Vasantatilaka strophe ; the  fifth  syllable should 
however have  been  a brevis. The correct reading might be  mnang  atha  dhāraṇa. 
4) The two last syllables of the  pāda  might be  lakṣmī;  this reading  would  well  agree 
with the  traces  still  visible.  The first compound  paryyantariṣṭa  is however  difficult 
to he combined  with  sarājyalakṣmī,  although the latter is satisfactory by  itself  ; arista, 
which  is not beyond doubt, might be wrong. 
5) The two last syllables of  pāda  b have completely disappeared from the stone. 


--- [Page 324] ---
—­ 31^ – 
jetā wirāga maharāja warānurāga  /j 6 //  6) 
Māheçwarā  ta sira  rīçwa[9]ri çūrapatnī 
tepat=tshun=ni  lama  ning  ——————.’ 
— — ^� —ṣṭala  watunn=inatus=yat=ungsyan  7) 
hantāwali  mwaṅ=anilā  ^ [10]hi  wālaputra  /j 7 /j 
Nātha  prasiddha ri jagat=ni �  — ^ —  ^ 
rakṣā  ni rowaṅ=atha  wira  waruḥ  swaçīla  / 
kālap kalāguṇarawi[^11^prakulasthanāma 
ginlar  ri mamratipurastha maḍang kaḍatwan /j  8 /f 
Tlas maṅkanoparata  sang  prabhu  jāti  ning  rat 
rājya  ka[12]ratwan=asiliḥ taṅanan inangso  8) 
dyaḥ  lokapāla ranujāmata lokapāla 
swastha=ng  prajā sacaturāçrama  wipramu[13]khya  // 9 // 
Rājñe  ta sang  patih=ayat=patihākalaṅka 
tar=sandihā  rakaki mamrati weḥ ri  wantil  / 
merang  ṅunin  ṅuni­ṅunin  sa[14]marān=thanīwung 
priḥ­priḥ  patoliha ni  tan pasisiha denya /j  10 // 
Dewānubhāwa  salakas ^) ni lawas=nira ṅke 
tapwan  [15]  hana=ng  musuh=asiḥ paṅaṅennaṅenta  i°) / 
pongpong hadep=ni hana ning  wibhawāwyayādi 
dharmā  ta rakwa ginawainira  sang  wida[16]gdha  // 11  /j 
Lāwan=ta  durlabha  wéruḥ  niṅ=adharmmadharmma 
ndātan  weruḥ heneṅakan duwane ^  —  kwan 11) / 
māntan=hale  sira  [17]  ta putra 12) hurip  prahātaḥ 
nā mūla  ning halu daṅū ginawai tinonta /j  12 // 
6) The wrong spelling  maharāja  is prohahly  due to metrical considerations. It  seems  that 
the quantity of vowels in Sanskrit words  could  be changed at  will  if this was neces­
sary for the metre. In any case, the stone­cutter is not responsible for the  strange 
spelling.  CI. the section on metrics •n the Introduction. 
7') The transcription of this portion of pada c, though apparently clearly  visible  on the 
stone, is not beyond doubt; cI. the Translation. 
^) The final a of  rājya  is scanded as a long syllahle ; although we have numerous exam¬
pies of arbitrary lengthening of vowels in Sanskrit words for metrical reasons, it is 
remarkable  that  the length of the  vowel  is not expressed by a  daṇḍa  here.  Although 
there  might be doubt as to the correctness of the reading (the ka,  which  follows 
is uncertain and the preceding syllable  would  be long  if there  was a ligature there), 
the metrical anomaly is confirmed hy  taṅanan,  the last syllahle of  which  is scanded 
long,  although the  final  ­n was not doubled. 
­') The word, if correctly transcribed, is to be considered an anomalous spelling for 
salĕkas.  A similar  example occurs in strophe 8‚  pāda  b (waruḥ  instead of  wĕruḥ),  but 
in numerous other  cases  the pĕpĕt  is expressed in  writing. 
10) Perhaps we should  separate  musuha  siḥ instead of  musuh=asiḥ.  Cf. the Translation. 
11) If kwan is correct, the two missing syllables may have been kala(kwan^); it is how­
ever possible  that  instead of kwan, twan should he read (perhaps the end of kadatwan). 
12) The  vowel  marks of this word and the next one are very uncertaln. 
13) Read  anāry  y)a^  there  is no reason why the a should have been shortened here. 


--- [Page 325] ---
— 313 — 
^ — ^  lang  sira sawargga anaryya 13) ka[18]baiḥ 
nijakula  mitra bhretya  manujān=.inutān=pramukha  14) / 
prawa<ra> � – �^  — ^ �^ lā magawai ya hayu 
[19] syapa wihaṅā kaaum i 5) maṅanumodanumoda 16) gawai  // 13 // 
Nya  17) sira  hi —  � — ^ �^  —  ^ � liṅgawayen 18) 
teasa[20]turusnya  19) tamwaka ta istaka ista  kariḥ  / 
duarapalā  2°) galak  .^­ — ^  —  ^ weḥ 
dadi matakut  maling  [21]  ta kumaling waruheriṅ=alap  // 14 // 
Griha  hayu ning hyaṅ=gawa ^  —  ^  —  lih=asiḥ 2°) 
ri lawaṅ=enaḥhi  ra [22] ṅkaṅ=aṅaliḥ  ta aliḥ  pamawān  / 
hana sawuit=ta tañjuṅ=ati  — —  kalawān 
mahayu  kuaiḥ  [23]  ta pānti tinapān=tiruan  sawaluy  // 15 // 
14) The  italics  are uncertain. The  pasaṅan  under the  final  ­n of  manujān  seems  to be 
either a pa or a sa. The  vowel  mark under the na  which  foilows  is uncertain ; instead 
of ­u, ­re (i.e. ­r) is also possible.  Finally,  the ta  which  immediately  follows  may he 
open at the left upper side and should  then  be transcribed ha. In  view  of these  possi­
bilities,  we suppose  that  pinrĕhan  is the correct reading,  which  would  also make 
sense. 
1­­) The  akṣara  au after the ka  seems  certain. It is expressed by the well­known  initial 
o, provided  with  a daṇḍa  of the same  form  which  is used  with  the aksaras pa, sa, 
and some others. 
10) This  form  is undoubtedly a contraction of  maṅanumoda  and anumoda; this example 
proves  that  even  an long  ā due to a contraction of two short as  could  he shortened 
for metrical purposes. 
1^) This  nya is undoubtedly the  suffix  attached to gawai at the end of stanza 13. It is 
a very audacious kind of  enjambement,  no examples of  which  are known  from  clas­
sical Old Javanese poetry, where, however, similar examples occur between two suc¬
ceeding  pādas  of one strophe. 
is) Probably to be separated as  hn=gawayĕn;  the objection against the separation linga 
wayĕn  is that the latter word cannot be explained. Then,  liṅ  is the end of the pre¬
ceding word. In view of the numerous puns towards the e^1d of the  pādas  in most 
of the strophes, one  would  suppose  that  the word  liṅga  did occur in the  pāda  ; this 
presumption is confirmed by th^ fact  that  it is evident  that  in this portion of the 
text all kinds of foundations are enumerated. If the word hnga did occur, the wording 
of the end of the  pāda  may be explained as a play of assonance on hnga. On this 
presumption, most of the  pāda  may be reconstructed. The passive imperative ga¬
wayĕn  must depend on a word meaning ,,to order", probably makon or  makonnakĕn, 
the subject of  which  is sira. Since the larter is only used for high authorities, we 
expect the syllahle hi,  which  follows  sira, to be the beginning of hino. Then we 
may reconstruct: nya sira  hino  makon  ^­��^^^  hnga  ^� liṅ=gawayĕn. 
19) The reading of this  pāda  seems  absolutely certain ; as to the word separation  chosen 
in the transcription, cf. the  notes  to the translation. 
20) This  is the most striking example of how even Sanskrit words are changed for 
metrical  exigencies, for  there  is no doubt  that  duarapalā  is identical  with  Sanskrit 
dvārapāla;  since the syllable preceding  dvārapāla  is necessarily  long,  and two  long 
syllables  can never  follow  each other in this metre, and,  finally,  this technical term 
could  neither be avoided nor replaced by a synonym, the poet was forced to .change 
its prosodic  form.  Since in Old Javanese words he was allowed to use either­ kuaih 
or kwaih, he took the freedom to change the Sanskrit w after a consonant to an u. 
In addition, he was forced to change the  vowel  quantities. 


--- [Page 326] ---
­­^ 314 
.Kayu  ki muhur=ttakanya  sa<tshun  ru>muhun  21) mala  was 
nikaṭa  bhaṭāra  [^] yan=tuwuḥ  apūrwwa  ri pūrwwadiça.  j 
atisaya 22) pārijātakatarūpama rū<pa>niyān 
paṅawataran  mshā[25]mayuṅa  hyaṅa i hyaṅ=apa  // 16 // 
Sama  samaroha  sārtha  samaeitta  wicitra  kuaiḥ 
syapa ta  kasandi[26]hā  ri sira bhakti ta bhaktita weḥ  / 
kṣuṇika  samāpta  deniṅ=aṅutus=inatus 23) magawai 
sagupura parhyaṅan  [27]  agaṇitāṅgana tā  pacalān  // 17 // 
Apa ta paḍanya diwyatama  diwyakenā  ya hanā 
patahati ^ 4) sang  tu[28]monya 25) karasān  rasa  tann=uliha  / 
matataganā  çatāgata  26) ṅ=amūja  tamojar–ujar 
atiçaya  tang  ṅara[29]nya taṅaranya  mahātisa  ya // 18 // 
21) ^r^  la^t  two words of  pāda  a were probably  sīlih=asiḥ;  this appears to make good 
sense,  especially in comparison  with  pāda  b. The spelling griha in 15 is interesting  with 
reference to griya in  modern  Javanese. The word is probably spelt according to its 
usual pronuncation; here,  there  is no metrical exigency whatever. In strophe 26, 
the same  word is written correctiy. Confusion  hetween  ṛ and ri is common in the 
less carefully composed Sanskrit records, too. 
22) Read:  atiçaya.  — The reconstruction of  rūpa,  the first syllable of  which  has disap­
peared in the lowest portion of the hole  that  brought ahout the lacunae in the 
preceding strophes, is recommended both by the yamaka and by its meaning. — 
Paṅawataran,  undoubtedly instead of  paṅawatārān,  is another  typical  example of the 
poet's  distortion of Sanskrit words for metrical  needs. 
2.^) The last syllable of  aṅutus  should be metrically  long;  it is a  similar  case  as that 
of final  ­n before a  vowel,  which  is also not expressed in  writing  (an example occurs 
in pāda  d of this  same  strophe, where the  final  syllable of  parhyaṅan  is considered 
long).  The only difference is  that  the doubling of a  final  n after a short  vowel  is a 
recognized  Sanskrit rule of Gandhi, whereas no  sandhi  rule about the  treatment  of 
final s before a  vowel  exists, simply  because  such a  case  cannot occur in Sanskrit. 
— Pāda  d gives examples of  vowel  shortening too, viz. sagupu^a instead of sagopura 
(here,  there  is no reason to presume the existence of a form gupura ; since o,  again 
according  to Sanskrit and not to Old Javanese principles, is necessarily and always 
long,  there  was no other choice for our  poet  needing a brevis but to abbreviate it 
(to u) and  spell  aṅgana  instead of  aṅganā. 
^4) The word  separation  may be pa ta  hati;  then,  pa should be explained as apa the 
first syllable  of which  constituted a long  ā together  with  the  final  a of hana at the 
end of  pāda  a. Such an  enjambement  would  he far less astonishing  than  that  of 
gawainya separated into gawai at the end of strophe 13, and nya at the beginning 
of strophe 14. Such an explanation  would  also account for the long  final  vowel  of 
hanā,  which  is difficult  to be explained otherwise  (there  is no metrical necessity). 
The pa at the  heginning  of pāda  b not heing perfectly clear, one might consider the 
possibility  of reading ma. Although not impossible from a palaeographic point of 
view,  the meaning  would  not be satisfactory  (mata  and  hati  should have been con­
nected in one way or another) and, in addition, it  would  leave the long  ā of hanā 
unexplained. 
2­) The last aksara of line 27 is not clear, except for the u­vowel attached to it ; ku or 
gu might also be possible, but they do not  yield  a satisfactory meaning. 
26) Catagata, „coming and going"  would  also he possible: the small curve  which  is 
visible  within  the aksara (the only distinguishing mark  between  a ga and a ca^ 
might not be  original. 


--- [Page 327] ---
— 315 — 
Syapa  kari  tan apurwwa ^') ta manona manojfia  dahat 
adakati yan=kim ni ku[30]nu  lāma kalāyu  wuat 28) / 
tuaku  dinuttakanya  ḍagthāni mahānirutan 
ṅya ^ 9) ajapahā warī  menuleḍo wu[31]leḍĕng  pañawān  // 19 / 
Ja­ipuṇueha saggala muhojja  tulijju  khamu 
areweni  colla  māra  ri ware  ri waḍaṅgegulo  / 
[32] mehadahapum  nwasāy  ṅgua yabek dalamok wrahaneḥ 
wi ini  jidmjaweçwaya mirātu rawān  mikuni  3°) // 20 // 
[33] Kwaramaya tatparam=parama sangguṇisangguṇitam 
hayuwa  mahā  manonna  tatan=uttamanuttanatah  / 
nama 31) tanu  tang  ha[34]ramyatama  pāpa mapā  ya haram 
gurumatatāpasa=ng samadanānalanāmarutam  32) // 21 // 
Prākretasanniweça  // 
Kita ba[35]ka  kāka  haṅsa  waṇiyāga  niyāga  wayat= 
ta diyus=anemwaha trasiha 33) siddha ta  yātra  siha  / 
kita ta kalang 34) anakba[36]nua gusti wagus=tinajar 
ta muja kawittha yaḥ çueiharaḥ 35) suraraḥ  sakāki  // 22 // 
Akṣaracyutaka  // 
Ri diwasa ning wua[37]tthyang ṅīka 3^) manghyang uang pamatiḥ 
kuath=asesek=masō  saṅ=adimantri 37) tama tritaya  / 
27) T.^  is metrically  long;  cf. notes  8 and 23 ahove. 
28) The word separation is uncertain ; we do not understand the meaning of  pāda  b 
and still  less  that  of the second  half  of the stanza. There, no importance whatever 
should  he attached to the word separation given in the transcription, since the latter 
is almost arbitrary. Except for the word separation, the transcription is however 
certam. 
­­') Sic. We do not think  that  many examples of such a ligature  could  be quoted ; it 
may be unisue. The  three  last  pādas  of strophe 19 and the strophes 2o and 21 
are quite  puzzling;  as we noted in the Introduction, it  seems  more probable to sup­
pose the use of some complicated 'trick'  than  of an unidentified language. 
­­'­) This  is abacadabra to us. The word separation is arbitrary. 
.n) There is perhaps an u­vowel beneath the ma; more probably, however, it is only 
a scratch in the stone. 
­­) This  stanza is normal  again,  although it is  full  of yamaka and therefore  difficult  to 
be understood ; its meaning  seems  obscure. Here, too, the word separation is not 
everywhere beyond doubt. 
^­) This  stanza is normal  again,  although it is  full  of yamaka and therefore  difficult  to 
understand. In  pāda  b, the word separation is not completely certain ; cI. the Trans­
lation. 
.•4) Kalang has its last syllable metrically long ;  similar  cases  occur for n and s (cf. 
notes  8, 23 and 27 to this transcription). 
­^) Owing  to slight damage to the aksaras, this word is not quite certain. Instead of ci, wi 
might  also be possible ;  there  might be an u­vowel attached to the ha. 
36) Here, too, the aksaras were  slightly  damaged; the  vowel  mark for ­i is uncertain and 
instead of ka, ta  would  also be possible. 
37) Presumably for  ādimantrr,  the  ā of which  was however shortened for metrical con­
siderations. Adfmantri(n) is not a usual titie and the da is not very distinct on the 
stone  ; other possibilities might therefore also be considered. 


--- [Page 328] ---
— 316 — 
wiku  kumarī kumāra kamarāf38^]n=mara  yan=paguru 
garuti  yatann=iṅūyana ḍaḍanya madaṇḍa kataḥ j/  23 // 
Winducyutaka  // 
Ri kāla  nikanang  sakā[39]bda  wualung gunu<ng> 38) sang  wiku 
samārggaçiraçuklapakṣa  sawelas ya nā  tang  tithi  j 
wrehaspati  wagai lawan ma[40]wurukung ya nā  wāra  weḥ 
yatekana tewek bhaṭāra  ginawai  sinangskāra  weḥ .’/  24 // 
Huwus=nikana  tang  çiwā[41]laya samāpta  diwyottama 
luaḥ ya inaliḥhaken  39) apaniyāniḍik  palmahan j 
tatan=hana  kasa[42]ndihe hala huwus  dinānān  kabeḥ 
sinīma  ya na tang  humet=trima harang 4°) humā  sahiyang  /j 25 // 
Aliḥ tampaḥ taikaing  [43]  huma tumama  rīkeng çiwagreha  / 
susuk samgat  wantil  saha nayaka  lāwan  saṅ=apatiḥ 41) j 
patiḥ  māran  [ 44] si kling  kalimanira  1nāran  rasi mresi 
tiga ṅ=wang gustmke si jana rasi kaṇḍut rasi  sanab  // 26 // 
Si baṇyāga=ng  winka[45]s wahuta waraṇīyā tati  wukul 
laḍuḥ  si gneng  yekā  pinakaparu  j ar=ny=akṣara waneḥ j 
ka[46]buḥ  mwang  sang  marsī  sira  makaṅaran  rāma maratā 
yatekāweḥ  sīrnā  saha  matshunn=āran  42) rasi  kawit  // 27 // 
Ri kahuwusnyan=nikaing sawaḥ  sinīma 
hana ta ya  sīma  puput  waluy  ya sīma  / 
patalesan=ni ma[47]ṇḍer duṭī karamwa 
ya ikana  sīma  puput mare  bhaṭāra  // 28 // 
Ya ta winaluyaken=kinon=mamūja 
pratidina  tan=malupā  rikang  gawainya  / 
tan=imur=imura  sang  hi yang  ri konya 
si khawali  nitya  a[48]j^nmahan gawainya /.’  29 // 
Translation 1) 
6. The young prince ..... 2), in possession of  royal  majesty (?), protected 
3­^ There is  certainly  no anusvāra  written ahove nu‚ hut it is evident  that  we should 
have gunung here. As we suggested in the Introduction, the reconstitution of the 
anusvāra  is probahly the correct solution of the  little  riddle  implied  in winducyutaka. 
Sakābda  is of course a mistake for  çakābda,  which  is not  justified  by any  metrical 
or other necessity. 
39) Here,  again,  the syllable  ending in a  final  ­n preceding a  word  beginning  with  a 
vowel  is considered  long. 
­0) For the  word  separation,  which  is not completely certain, cI. the Translation. 
–1) There  seems  to be an  anusvāra  above the sa; it might however  only  be an occasional 
hole in the stone. In any case, it should be omitted for  metrical  reasons. 
­­’) The  final  ­n of  matahun  should of course have been written single ; the metre 
(Prthvī)  requires a short  syllable. 
1) No  attempt  at translation of the  first  five  (.^) strophes has been made ;  only  a few 
isolated  words  could  be made out. 
2) I have accepted  yuwanātha  in the translation, although its reading is uncertain. Pary­¬
antarisṭa,  which seems to be the reading of the stone, is not perfectly clear. If the 


--- [Page 329] ---
.— 317 — 
the country of Java, righteous and  with  ..... 3), majestueus  in batrles 
and in  feasts  (?) 4) , full  of fervour 5) and perfect °), victorious but 
free from passion, a Great  King  of excellent devotion 7). 
7. He was a  Çaiva  in contrast to the queen, the spouse of the hero 8); 
exactly  a year was the time of the .....  ^) ; .....  stones  heaped up 
by hundreds l°) for his refuge, a  killer  as fast as the  wind  ..... 
Bālaputra  ll). 
8. A  king,  perfect in (this)  world  12), ..... , a protection for his comrades, 
indeed a hero who knew the duties of his rank 13); he adopted a name 
first part of the compound is correct (it is relatively certain), we should  rather  expect 
something  like  honoured or recognized by the border regions. We translated the 
conjectural  sarā  fyalakṣmī  (note  4 to the transcription),  which  makes good  sense. 
3) .Arjawa may have been especially chosen for its pun on Java.  „With"  translates 
jāta......  One might suppose  jātarāga:  the  king,  though devoid of passion  (wirāga 
in d), had righteousness as a passion and owing to his  ārjawa,  he protected Java. 
4) Ranautsawa.. mistake for  raṇotsawa  and to be interpreted as a dvandva ? ? Utsava, 
in Sanskrit, usually refers to religious festivals;  battles  and religious festivals are 
indeed  typical  occasions where the royal  tejas  (cf.  note  5) may become manifest. 
Another  word separation, viz. as  raṇautsa  waratejika, is  still  less satisfactory. 
^) Ratejika,, —­ the poet makes often use of the prefix ra­ ; cf. ranuja'’ in 9 c ; rakaki, 
1o b; ­rawipra^’, 8 c; rasi, 26 c and d. But tejika is not Sanskrit; it might however 
be due to analogy and equivalent  with  tejomaya. For  tejas,  cI. Vogel's monograph 
in Med.  Kon.  Ak. wet., Aid.  Lett,  70, B (1930), pp. 83­125. 
6) Lain occurs in the meaning  ‚‚and,  moreover' in the Old Javanese  Rāmāyaṇa,  I, 
strophe 13 d: kanaka rajata len  manik. 
7) Ietā is the nominative form,  which  was adopted in Old Javanese  ; cI. hantā  in 7 d. 
warānurāga  is probably chosen for its contrast with  wirāga; an^āga  occurs in abhi¬
seka names of later Javanese kings, e.g. in that of  Tuloḍong  (Krom, Geschiedenis­, 
p. 1941. 
8) Note the pun  māh^çvarā  ......  īçvari,  perhaps  also  with  çūra^,  which  may have 
resembled  īçwara  in sound. For the meaning, cI. the Introduction. 
–) On..’­  would  suppose : „of the  final  struggle" or something similar, in the lacuna. 
Here,  too, we refer the  reader  to the Introduction. 
10) 1natus  occurs in the  same  meaning in 17 c. 
11) Hantā  — cf.  jetā  in 6 d. — For our interpretation of awali  mwang,  „(on a)  level 
with,  as fast as", cf. the Introduction. The 8th syllable of the pada has almost completely 
disappeared from the stone. If it is supposed  that  the subject  remains  the  same 
throughout strophe 7, i.e. the king who is also the subject of  strophes  6 and 8, one 
expects a term meaning  „attacked  chased". Since hi is certain and  anilā  has a long 
final  a, the word .probably  began  with  a or a and ended in hi, it  seems  likely  that 
the missing syllable read mri. Amrihi (or amrih=i as  . two words)  would  mean  : „he 
strifed  after, tried to catch, i.e. persecuted". Although this interpretation  seems  plau­
sible  on account of the meaning of prih, I have found no exact parallel. 
12) The words prasiddha ri  jagat  contain an  ākṣepa  (Kāvyādarça,  II, 120). 
13) Note the alliterations r.aksa ­— rowang and  wīra  ­—  waruḥ. waruḥ  probably cor­
responds to  wĕruh  (also in 14 d); but 12 a and b read  wĕruḥ.  Swaçīla,  like  sva– 
dharma in Sanskrit, probably refers to the duty prescribed for his caste,  that  is 
for the  king,  the duties of a  Ksatriya  such as protecting his subjects. There obviously 
is a kind  of ākṣepa  with  the next  pāda,  in which  it is  stated  that  in spite of his 
k^atriyarva he took a name belonging to a  Brāhmaṇa  gotra. 


--- [Page 330] ---
— 318 — 
proper  to a  family  of honourable  Brāhmaṇas  (rich in)  arts  and virtues 14) , 
and established his  kĕraton  at Meḍang  situated in the country (?) of 
Mamrati  15). ^ 
9. After  these  (deeds)  1^), the  king  Jātiningrat  („Birth  of the  World’’) 
resigned 17); the kingship and the  kĕraton  were handed over to his 
successor  18): Dyah  Lokapāla,  who was equal to a younger brother of 
the (divine)  Lokapālas  19); free were the subjects, divided into the 
four āçramas  with the  Brāhmaṇas  ahead 2°). 
14) „Proper  to'' translates  ^stha^,  which  is used in the next  pāda  in a  slightly  different 
meaning.  The prefix ra­ is rendered by „honourable"; cf. ra­wiku, ra­kawi etc. ; the 
Indonesian  origin  of the prefix is no objection for the poet to use it in a Sanskrit 
compound.  We supplied a  word  the words  „rich  in‛’  (^’upeta,  ^samita),  which  in 
Sanskrit  would  have  been  necessary for connecting  kalāguṇa  with  the  following. 
As we pointed out in the Introduction, the name alluded to is undouhtedly  that  of 
Agastya. 
l.^) The meaning of pura in Old Javanese seems rather vague. In any case, it is not a 
kĕraton  here, for the  kĕraton  is established  (lit.  : „spread  out’’,  ginĕlar^)  in it. For 
Mamrati,  cI. lo b. 
1­) Tlas  maṅkanā,  —. the corresponding expression in  prose  would  have  heen  i télas 
ning maṅkana. 
17) For the meaning of uparata, cf. the Introduction. 
18) This  is a free translation of asilih  taṅanan inangsĕ.  The  word  sitih belongs to the 
group of predicate words  which  show the semantic peculiarity of heing capable of 
‚‚double­sided''  use (C.C.  Berg,  Biidr. K.I., 95, 1937, pp. 1 sqq., who used the term 
'dubbelzijdig'):  asiliḥ  does not refer to the grammatical subject of inangso, but to 
its 'logical'  subject. We translated  taṅanan  inangso, lit.: ,,was handed, was given 
to'', by a single term.  Taṅanan  is the passive of  manaṅani,  which  may precede an­
other verb meaning „to  give,  to strike etc." to denote  that  the action wh1ch  follows 
was done  by the own hands of the subject (cf.  Gericke­Roorda  . Jav.  Handw.,  I, p. 
721).  1nangso, or  usually  inangsean or  inangsĕakan,  occurs innumerable  times  in Old 
Javanese inscriptions in the meaning  „was  given", the polite equivalent of  wineḥ 
(winaiḥ).  Taṅanan  ir.angs^  could  then  he translated:  „was  given hy his own hands'‛. 
This  terminology is especially important because it proves  that  the old king  himself 
gave the  royal  dignity to his successor. 
1^) Ranujāmata  is a metrical liberty for  rānujamata,  i.e. ra­anujamata, „considered a 
worthy  ^ra­; cI.  note  5 above) younger brother of". It is, of course, a pun on the 
name  Lokapāla.  Perhaps, the use of anuja might  wel  be a  similar  pun on the title 
dyaḥ,  which  seems characteristic of the younger memhers of the  royal  family.  The 
pun would  then  mean  that  Lokapāla  used the title  dyaḥ,  which  is remarkable for 
the king himself, hecause he considered  himself  not a real king if compared  with 
the divine  Lokapālas.  Of course, this is the 'poetical‛  reason  (a kind of utpreksa as 
defined  in the Indian  Ars  Poetica ; cf. the Introduction); the  historical  reason  pro 
hahly  is that  the retired Kumbhayoni kept the  royal  dignity in name, though he 
handed over the  rājya  and the  kĕraton. 
2^) This  pāda  is interesting since it proves  that  the  Çaiva  restauration was represented 
as a national liberation (cf.. the use of swastha). The result of the restauration was 
that also the  Brāhmanic  structure of the society was introduced (or re­introduced), 
at least in theory. The  word  wipramukhya suggests  that  caturāçrama  may have been 
confused  with  caturvarna, as is more  often  found in Old­Javanese literature (cf. Van 


--- [Page 331] ---
— 319 — 
10. A royal  order 21) went out to the  Patih  that  he should prepare im­
maculate funeral ceremonies 22); without hesitation 23), Rakaki  Mam­
rati  24) gave (grounds) to  Wantil  ­^): he was ashamed for the past ­,­, 
especially for the fact that the village Iwung had been the battle¬
field (?) 27), (and) took the utmost care not to be equalled by him (?) –­). 
11. All his actions during the time he was here ­ 9) were inspired by a 
divine  majesty 3°); there  were no enemies anymore 31): love for his 
der Tuuk,  Dictionary,  I, p. 619).  This  is not, however, necessary : the reference to the 
āçramas  may he due to the fact  that  the king fonowed  these  roles by retiring  from 
government. 
21) Rājñe  is not a Sanskrit dative, hut  ra­ājñā  fallowed hy i  („to’’,  rendered hy 
„went  to"). 
22) Patihā  (note the yamaka  with  patih=a­, just before) is  pa­tihā  ; tiha (usually spelt 
tiwa.) is a  ‚‚funeral  ceremony" for a  king  (Van  der  Tuuk's Dictionary, II, p. 674)  , 
presumably  for the immediately preceding  king  of this line  (Rakai  Garung or  Pa­
tapān,  reigning in 832,  date  of the Gandasuli inscription, and possibly  still  alive  in 
85o, the Perot inscription, No. IX above, Introduction). These ceremonies were prob¬
ably immediately connected with the foundation, which is alluded to in the next 
strophe (11 d) and described in detail in the  following  part of the text. 
­­ 3^ Tar:^sandihā;  for this curious  form,  metrically  for sandeha  (saṃdeha.),  cf. the In 
troduction. 
2­) Who is this  Rakaki  Mamrati  ? We saw in 8 d  that  Mamrati  is the name of the 
country  in which  the new  kĕraton  was situated. Rakaki is  kaki,  ‚.grandfather"  with 
the prefix  ra­ (cf. note 5 above), but  kaki  (corresponding to Sanskrit  pitāmaha, 
which  is used as a titie in the Diéng inscriptions) should not be taken in its  literal 
meaning,  but is  honorific  here, an interpretation  which  is confirmed by  ra­.  I there­
fore think it very probable  that  Rakaki  Mamrati  is no other  than  the retired king 
himself:  the  honorific  title preceding the name of the  kĕraton  could  not  well  apnly 
to anv other person. It ^s, moreover, the  only  person whom we should have expected 
to give grounds. 
2­) As is confirmed by 26 b  (susuk  samgat  wantil), wantil (i.e. the  Pamĕget  Wan.il ) 
is the  person  who receives the grounds as the king's donation.  This  donation is a 
recompense, but, as appears  from  strophe 29, the donee has also obligations in res­
pect of the foundation. 
2^) l^tunin is  ṅuni  followed  by n;  ṅuni  (usually spelt  ṅūni;  a derivative of uni,  „sound", 
is impossible here)  means  ‚‚in the past" (contraction of ing uni), whereas the doubled 
form  ṅuni­ṅuni  means  „how  much more" (more often:  ṅuniwaiḥ,  ṅuniweḥI.  There 
obviously  is a pun on  ṅuni  alone and its doubled  form  which  has rather a different 
meaning.  The king made his donation in  view  of events in the past. It was a debt 
of honour. 
­­^) Conjectural translation. Presumably, the  village  Iwung  (thanhvung =  thani  iwung) 
had been  destroyed by battle actions in the preceding years.  After  his  victory,  the 
king  had the moral duty to give compensation. The  village  mentioned must have 
belonged  to the  Pamĕgĕt  Wantil. 
28) Thi^ probably  means  that  the king did his utmost to make his  gift  more precious 
than  the loss had  been  for the  Pamĕgĕt. 
20) Salakas, the reading of  which  is not certain, should he  taken  to correspond to sa 
lĕkas.  There is a play on words  with  lawas.  I.āwasnira ṅke  refers to the king when 
he still  was a king among his subjects. 
30) Dewān^bhāwa  is translated as a Sanskrit  bahuvriln. 
31) Lit.:  „the  enemies (i.e. the enemies he had in the times of struggle) were not’^ (tapwan 


--- [Page 332] ---
— 320 — 
subjects) was what he always strived after 32). When 33) he  could  at 
last dispose of power and riches etc. 34), it was only natural 35) that 
sanctuaries  ^ 6) were built by him, the able one. 
12. In addition 37), he possessed the knowledge,  difficult  to acquire, of 
Dharma  and Adharma 38), but he was unable to conceal the lies 
of ..... •,1. 
is an emphatic equivalent of tan). Here, the article  ṅ hefore  musuh  may  well  he 
rendered by the addition of „anymore’'. 
^2) .T,’^ enemies having disappeared, the king could love all his subjects. In  paṅaṅĕn¬
ṅaṅĕnta, ­ta  is the emphatic particle. The doubling is rendered by ‚‚always'' in the 
translation. 
^3) Pong­eng^  like  dum in  Latin,  means  both „as long as" and  „till"  (conjunction), and 
here, probably the latter. As a ‘noun’, it  means  ‚‚occasion''.  The meaning is  prohably 
that the  king  did not erect dharmas  till he had the means to do it. In  view  of his 
Attachment  to Dharma, one  would  have expected the  king  to build  sanctuaries  long 
hefore, but he was not ahle to do it.  During  the years of battle, he had no occasion, 
but after his  victory  he devoted  himself  with  a double energy to his religious duties. 
„When  at last",  seems  a satisfactory translation for pongpong. 
34) ^Vlbhawāwyayādi  for  wibhawawyayādi;  the  final  a of wibhawa,  which  is already long 
hy position, should not have  heen  lengthened. Sometimes there is something arbi¬
trary in the writing of long vowels. wibhawa might refer especially to the power 
of commanding people for corvee (to work on the construction of temples), wyaya, 
„expenses",  to the .funds necessary for the constructions. 
35) A free translation of rakwa,  which  usually  means  „as you  know’’,  ‚‚as may be un­
derstood''. 
^6) Here, dharma (the  final  a of  which  was lengthened for the metre) undoubtedly 
has the meaning it often has in Old Javanese, viz. a „temple‛’ and especially, 1t 
seems. a temple which is a funeral monument at the same tim^. The latter is prob¬
ably the case here ; cf. especially the  patihā  in 10  .^.  There is an obvious pun on 
the different meanings of dharma: the  king,  in 12 a, knew very  well  the distinction 
between dharma and adharma and therefore constructed dharmas. There may be 
doubt whether dharma in 11 d should oe rendered by the  plural;  the singular is 
perhaps preferable. It is possible  that  dharma  here  refers to a funeral monument 
which  should have  been  built  long before;  then  it is only natural (rakwa^  that  he 
performed  his duty as  soon  as he had the occasion to. 
3 7) Lāwan  (here  metri  causa spelt hy a long  ā in the first syllable) probably  means  that 
in addition to the qualities mentioned before, the king possessed correct know¬
ledge. 
38) Adharmadharma obviously corresponds to  dharmādharma  in Sanskrit: it is every 
king's  duty to protect Dharma and combat Adharma. The latter is the usual  justi­
fication  for kings enterprising campaigns, although they are attached to  Ahiṃsā.  This 
is probably the  case  here, too. 
39) It is not exacty clear what the king did not know in spite of his profound know­
ledge.  Hĕnĕṅakan  is clear by itself, but duwane,  which  seems  clear on the stone, is 
not. Duwa  could  correspond  with  dwa,  ‚‚lie,  falsehood''. An example such as  duarapalā 
for dwārapāla  in 14 c shows  that  the poet took the •dberty to make a complete syllable 
of a semivowel. The  passage  might refer to calumny about the  king  (other people 
might  have had different notions about Dharma and Adharma),  implying,  for in­
stance,  that  the  deeds  of the  king  were Adharma. Such lies need not, of course, be 
concealed:  the king hrought them to the  light. 


--- [Page 333] ---
— 321 — 
The wicked  ones ceased to act against  him^°),  ..... (?) 4­); 
this was the reason why the  Halu,  which  you see now 42) , was erected 43) . 
13. ..... he,  with  his servants, all simple people 44) , low­born  men, (but 
also)  friends, servants, and those placed in the foremost positions (?) 45) ; 
excellent  ..... made them beautiful : who  would  have been  unwilling 
to consent (?) in  bringing  their gifts (?) 16); (everybody)  worked 
cheerfully  46). 
40) Māntan  hale  sira,  „the  wicked  ones  (hala) ceased  (māntan  = mantĕn)  with  reference 
to (i,  which  is contained in hale = hala I.. here it is used in the meaning  ‚‚against, 
acting  against") him (siray'. There is a pun  with  halu in  pāda  b : the hala ceased, 
but the halu was erected. 
41) w^ do not understand the second  half  of pāda  c, the reading of which is uncertain. 
42) Tinonta, lit.: „seen hy you". 
4^) Halu .is an important  word.  Its  original  meaning, preserved in many Indonesian 
languages, is  „pestle,  pounder  ‘, which  is a very important object for a population 
mainly  occupied in growing  rice.  Its form  suggests a hnga and it is probable  that 
the latter is  meant  here. The same is presumably the case  with  the halu erected 
(pinratiṣṭha)  by  Airlaṅga  (cf. aupra, note 29 to the Introduction to No. XI) ; the 
latter halu erection is brought into connection  with  the ceremonies of  Airianga's 
consecration  as a  king.  This  might  explain  the frequent use of halu in titles  (Rakai 
Halu  always denotes one of the highest dignitaries at the Old Javanese courts and 
sometimes,  as is the case  with  Airlaṅga,  the king  himself).  If we correctly understand 
the meaning of this strophe, the aim of the halu erection was the protection of the 
empire  against the  wicked  ones. But then the words  nā mula ning should be trans­
lated:  „the  reason (explanation) of it (i.e. of the cessation of the activities of the 
enemies) is  that"  the  Halu  was erected, or more freely rendered:  „this  was due to 
the erection  of the  Halu  which  may  (still)  be seen by you". 
44) Lit:.:  „not  noble"  (anārya).  The loss of the six  fir.^t  syllables of the  pāda  makes its 
understanding  difficult. 
­‘­) This  is a very strange  list  composed of the most different groups of people. The 
enumeration  presumably aims at  giving  the impression of a motley group. If sira in 
13 a refers to the  king,  whicn  is very probable,  then  we have all kinds bf people 
accompanying  him or collaborating  with  him. The meaning of the last words of the 
pāda  is not certain ; we have translated  pinrĕhan,  one of the possible readings  (cf . 
note 14 to the transcription); between manuja  (manujān  is manuja + an.) and pra¬
mukha, one presumes a term meaning ‚‚considered, placed‛‛. 
40) Kaaum is  auṃ (oṃ)  preceded by the  prefix  ka-, the derivatives of  which  (such as 
umom,  umomakĕn^)  usually  mean  „to  confirm,  approve" in Old Javanese (it is prob­
ably derived  from  oṃ  in the meaning „indeed, it be  thus’‛,  when some service is 
required).  Anumoda is used twice in 13 d, and in such a case it may be considered 
certain  that  it is used in two different meanings. Now we  know  that  anumoda occurs 
in Java in a meaning unknown  from  Sanskrit (at least, not yet traced in Sanskrit): 
we find  the  word  inscribed on temples in Java, where the term is always  followed 
by a titie and (or) a name ; as such it occurs on many of the smaner temples of the 
Tjanḍi  Plaosan complex (cf. Pras.  1ndon.,  I, pp. 116 sq.). Its meaning probably is 
„votive  donation".  Then,.  a number of  these  small  buildings  were  built  as exvoto 
and those who had the  small  temples  built  to fulfil  their vows had their names 
engraved  in the  buildings  concerned. Then the  special  meaning may be derived without 
difficulty  form  the Sanskrit meaning of  ‚‚joy":  it is the expression of the joy due 
to the fact  that  the vow was granted. If this explanation is correct, the meaning 


--- [Page 334] ---
— 322 — 
14. ..... 47), the heart (of the complex)  with  its own  wall  4^) and bricks 
to construct the dam (?), for thus it was desired 4^). Fierce door­
keepers 59) ..... , so  that  thieves  would  become afraid to ..... being 
caught in taking away 51). 
of 13 d becomes clear ; the construction of the temples is a duty from which one can¬
not withdraw. IVihang means „to he disohedient’’ and the idea that people would 
he disobedient (syapa  wihaṅā)  to fulfil  their vows is considered absurd. The use of 
oṃ (auṃ) comfirms  this interpretation ; ‚‚indeed, thus he it I" is the expression used 
hy the people who consent in executing what they had taken  upon  themselves. Of 
course, they  fulfil  their vows  with  joy; otherwise, much of the effect  would  be lost. 
The latter is expressed by anumoda gawai. We  then  may translate  maṅanumodanu– 
moda gawai by ,,they  fulfilled  their vows (by constructing the  small  temples) and 
did it cheerfully". 
4 7) Nya at the beginning of the strophe can only he the  suffix  of gawai at the end 
of strophe 13. It is rather an extraordinary liberty to cut gawainya in this way. A 
conjectural  restitution of the beginning of strophe 14 (mainly based on the poet's 
use of yamaka) is mentioned in note la to the transcription. If this restitution may 
be relied  upon, we may translate: „He, the  Hino  (a very  high  title) gave order  that 
a ......  liṅga  ......  should be made'). The  three  short syllables preceding hnga might 
be upala, „a stone 1mga", hut  there  are of course other  possibilities. 
48) rĕasaturnsnya  interpreted as  teas  saturusnya  with  simple instead of double s, a 
metrical  licence for  which  there  exist parallels.  Teas  is the archaic spelling of Old 
Javanese  twas,  ‚.heart", here probably used for the central building(s). The  suffix 
­­nya of saturusnya proves  that  the centre was surrounded hy its proper  wail. 
^) lstaka and fata are incorrect orthographies for  iṣṭaka  and  iṣṭa.  The play of words 
cannot be expressed in the translation and then ista karih loses its force. The use of 
tamwaka  with  the 'conjunctive' ­a to denote the result might seem strange; tamwaka 
is however used in  exactiy  the same meaning in the Old Javanese  Rāmāyaṇa,  XV 
47 d. maṅatĕra  parwata len watu tam^aka, „to carry mountains and rocks for th­. 
dam’'.  The translation of tamwak by  „dam",  which  is the usual meaning of the 
word,  is not certain. One might defend it by referring to 22 a­b, dealing  with  a, 
perhaps  artificial,  lake (?), and to 25 b, where rt is stated  that  the course of a 
river was changed and the  building  of a dam was necessary to  that  purpose. The 
main  objection against such an interpretation is  that  strophe 14 seems rather to deal 
with temple  buildings,  or with  constructions in immediate relation  with  the latter. 
Tamwak may therefore have a different meaning here. In the Old Javanese  Rāmā¬
yaṇa,  vIII, 43, the word seems to refer to ring­walls (cI. Poerbatjaraka, T.B.C., 72, 
1932, p. 164) ; Juynboll's Clossarium to the Old Javanese  Rāmāyaṇa,  1902, s.v.  tam¬
bak, where the  Balinese  gloss  tembok,  ‚‚wall’‛,  is quoted; cf. also Ram., vIII, 57 a: 
wwara  teki  tambaki  yawā  maruhur, where  there  is no doubt  that  a high  (maruhur) 
wall is meant surrounding the entire complex. We therefore think  that  tamwak in 
our text refers to  walls  made of  brick  to separate  different parts of the complex 
from  each other. 
.­0) These are probably the  Rākṣasa  statues  mentioned in the Introduction. 
51) We quoted  pāda  d in the Introduction as a  typical  example of  utprekṣā.  The idea is 
that the Rākṣasas–are  so frightful  that  they  would  withhold  thieves  from  taking away 
ohjects from the temples. Ta kumahng, which we left untranslated, may be an in¬
tercalated little sentence: kumahng should .then be analyzed k=umaling, „in my 
opinion",  corresponding to Sanskrit  manye.  This  interpretation is confirmed by the 
fact that  manye  is usual in strophes containing an  urpreksā;  it occurs in the first 
­example  given by the  Kāvyādarça  (II, 222). We gave a free translation of waruhe­


--- [Page 335] ---
—323 — 
15. A beautiful  dwelling  for the god ^) ..... ; at the gateways, two  small 
buildings  ^’ 3) were erected, different in construction  ^ 4); there  also was 
a Tafijung  tree  ......  together (?) ^); beautiful were the number of 
small  buildings  ^ 6) to be used as hermitages,  which  might, in their 
turn,  be an example (?)  ^ 7). 
16. Of the  tree  Ki  Muhūr  (?) ^), the stem was  only  one year old; the 
neighbourhood  of the  Lord  was the reason of its matchless growth ^' 9) 
riṅ=alap,  interpreted as  wĕruha  iri ng alap, lit.:  „that  (they. the Raksasas)  would 
see them when taking away". 
^2) Tha  pādas  a and h probably still belong to the order given in 14 a (the passive 'im¬
perative'  gawayĕn  there suggests makon or a synonym in the lacuna). Probably, gewa¬
in 16 a‚ is the beginning of the same word  gawayĕn.  We translated griha (i.e. grha) 
by the singular, although the  plural  would  be preferred, especially if the completion 
silih=asiḥ  at the end of the pada is correct:  then,  griha ning hyang  would  .efer to a 
number of temples harmonizing  with  each other. 
.,. Rankang usually  means  a pavilion inside the  kĕraton;  cI. the Old Jav. Ram., 20 
79 (raṅkaṅ ĕmas);  Bhomakāwya,  43, 24 (the pavilion where the princess  Yajñawatī 
stays). Here, it seems  that  small  temple huildings are referred to,  which  resemble 
thé pavilions just mentioned. There are two of  these  (aṅalih.)  and their  pamawān 
was different; cI. the  following  note. 
^4) Pamawān,  lit.:  „the  place where something is brought (waway; cf.  Bhomakāwya, 
37, 7:  prāgjyotiṣekang pamawān  suputrr,  „Prāgjyotisa  was the place where the beau¬
tiful princess was brought". In view of these loci, we think that the difference be¬
tween the two rankang refers to the place where they were constructed, not to the 
constructions themselves. 
.­,. Owing  to the lacuna, it is not clear to what  kalawān,  which  may also mean  „and,  in 
addition",  refers. 
.,. Pānti,  probably pa +  anti,  „to wait", may mean a  „place  where a  ­Oyal  guest or a 
hermit  may^ lodge" (cI. Van  der Tuuk's Dictionary, IV, p. 31) and this certainly is 
the meaning  required here.  Tinapān  may mean: considered a  patapān,  used as a 
hermitage. 
­.7) ^rhe words tiruan sawaluy are  difficult.  We understand  that  these  words are a  kind 
of explanation of mahayu at the beginning of the  pāda.  In the temple complex, it 
is evident  that  everything is beautiful; but here the poet meets  with  a difficulty: 
why should the hermitages, intended for ascetics and their (sometimes)  royal  guests, 
be beautiful? Hermitages, should not be beautiful as a rule, so  that:  the poet has 
to account for this fact. He therefore gives the explanation  that  these  little  buildings 
were made beautiful to make  that  others in their  turn  (sawaluy^)  would  follow  the 
example  (tiruan) of the hermits they  would  see there. Technicany, this is  hetu  used 
as an  alaṃkāra;  some  similar  examples are given in the  Kāvyādarça  (II, 242 sqq.), 
cf. Bohtlingk,  Daṇdin's  Poetik (1890), pp. 62 sq. 
•^) We take  kimuhūr  to be the name of this very extraordinary tree. We  then  have to 
cut ki  muhūr.  Ki is probably an abbreviation of  kaki  ; ki is used in modern ^Javanese 
before names of  persons  (rarely things) to he honoured. It is sometimes considered 
an abbreviation of  kyai,  „religious  teacher". The name of the  tree  is explained by 
its miraculous growth;  muhur  may mean  „suddenly,  at once" in Sanskrit, but it should 
have been spelt by a short, not by a  long  u. As it is wrirten in the text, one  would 
rather have the name Muhurtta,  „hour"  (of 48 minutes), for the  long  ū would  then 
be correct. But in  that  case, the  following  words are incomprehensible. Takanya is 
interpreted as  tĕkĕn–nya,  ‚‚its  stem"  (lit.:  „stick"). 
^) Yan corresponds to matangyan ­or matangnyan in prose. 


--- [Page 336] ---
— 324 — 
at the Eastern side ; its beauty was extraordinary, equal to the (divine) 
Pārijātaka  tree  69); it was the place where the God  would  descend 61) 
and (its branches)  would  be a parasol (for the  God)  ; was not it a God 
for the God? 62). 
17. (The smaller buildings) were equal, of equal height, (served) the same 
purpose, (expressed) the same thoughts, (but) they were each different  in 
their number 63) ; who  would  hesitate in  worshipping  ? Out of worship 
(people) gave 64). In a moment, the temples  with  the gateways and 
innumerable, immovable women 65), were completed by the surveyors 
working  by hundreds. 
18. What  would  be comparable  with  this uivine (building): it was  there 
­^) For this comparison, cf. the Introduction. 
61) Paṅawataran  : Sanskrit  avatāra  with  the affixes pa­ and ­an,  „the  place for an  avatāra", 
The word should have been spelt  paṅawatārān,  hut the long vowels were shortened 
for metrical considerations. 
^2) Mahāmayuṅa  is derived  from  payung,  „parasol’’,  with  the prefix maha­ (spelt  mahā­
for metrical considerations, and also, perhaps, to associate it by a sort of  çleṣa, 
with maha­,  „great"),  after  which  the  base  was nasalized, and the  suffix  ­a. For the 
prefix  maha­, cf.  Kern,  Verspr.  Ceschr.,  VIII  (article dated 1901), pp. 228 sq.; its 
meaning is related with maka­, hut the nasal is irregular. Ram. 24, 136, is in¬
teresting because the prefix is used in a yamaka with  mahā–,  „great"  (mahaçuddhya 
citta nira  sang  mahājana).  Hyaṅa i hyaṅ=apa  is a play on words  which  may more 
or less be rendered in the translation. Apa  here  simply  introduces the question. 
63) Strophe 17 presumahly refers to the rows of  small  temples  which  in the Central 
Javanese complexes surround the main building(s).  Usualiy,^  these  small  buildings 
resemble .each. other very much, although th.^y are never exactly th^ same. They 
. were probably built by high dignitaries (cf. supra, note 46),  . who were bounu to 
conform  to the general rules such as the dimensions, hut were free in the execution 
of. detalls.  Vicitra  refers to the differences in details (especially colours, but probably 
ornaments, too). 
^4) Bhaktita  weḥ.  The choice of the words may have been influenced by the desire 
for a yamaka. The  only  possibility  I see is taking bhaktita as Sanskrit  bhaktitaḥ, 
„out of nevotion". The visitors in general prohahly are the suhject of  weḥ:  the beauty 
of the temples made people  give. 
^) Agaṇitāṅgana tā  pacalān.  Aganitāṅgana  is clear ; the  final  a was shortened  metri 
causa. As far as  tā pacalān  is concerned,  there  might he some doubt whether it 
should  be derived  from  Sanskrit cala or  from  Sanskrit chala. In the latter case, the 
aspirate  would  have  heen  neglected, hut this  would  be a very  small  thing if  com­
pared  with  such spellings as  paṅawataran  and  duarapalā.  If to he derived  from  chala, 
the meaning is „blameless, irreproachable" ; perhaps, the poet wanted the two inter¬
pretations at the same time as a kind of  çleṣa.  It is evident that this passage does 
not refer to women  working  on the temple; the  passage  is on a  line  with  other 
detalls of the temples and probably refers to either caryotides or (more probably) to 
reliefs  on the temple(s), as is the case in the Plaosan inscription (cf. the Introduction 
to No. VII above). Then, the 'immovable' women are the female figures in  relief 
and images. The words  aṅutus  1natus  may have been chosen on account of their 
similarity  in sound.  Aṅutus  are those who give instructions  (^utus.);  with  inatus, cf. 
Rām.,  V, 26: inatus­atus, „by hundreds". 


--- [Page 337] ---
— 32^ — 
for a deification (?) 66) ; was this the cause why the spectators were 
overwhelmed  and the (normal) sensations did not come back (?) 67^ 
The worshippers came in rows and in groups (?)  68), by hundreds 69), 
without  saying a word : extraordinary were their names — a token 
that they (the images worshipped ?)  would  bring refreshment (?) 70) . 
06) 1.^i^t^­^  „most  divine’’,  is often used in the meaning  „splendid,  marvellous’’ 
in Old Javanese. I kept the more  original  meaning in the translation on account of 
diwyakĕna.  Diwyākĕn,  no other example of  which  is known in Old Javanese,  could 
mean  only  ‚,to make  divine,  i.e. to  deify’'.  The  form  is used without  initial  nasal 
here  and should therefore be interpreted as a passive; in addition, it has the  suffix 
­a (here  written  long  on account of the metre),  which  usually  denotes  irreality or 
future.  Diwyakĕnā  therefore means: ‚,in order to be  deified,  for heing  deified"; 
together  with  ya hanā  (the  final  long a of  which  is strange  ; cf.  note  67 below), meaning 
„it (i.e. the temple complex?) was (there)'’, we  could  translate; „it was  (there)  for 
heing  deified"  ; in the translation, I gave a freer rendering of the text.  During 
thé time  that  the complex is in construction,  there  is nothing superhuman in it, 
although it may be diwyatama,  „marvellous"  ; by the ceremony of consecration, the 
temples are brought on a higher, divine  level,  they are  'deified',  as the poet  appears 
to express it. I insist on this point in order to  stress  that  this  passage  does not 
necessarily  prove  that  the text refers to a deification of a  king;  on the other hand, 
it does not seem prohable  that  the poet should have used terms such as this one 
if it was not his intention to  imply  such an idea. 
67) ^ ^4 .^, .^hle transcription. There obviously is a play on words  between  karasan 
and ^rasa  and it is not, therefore,  likely  that  the former should be considered a deriv­
ative of the larter. I therefore interpreted karasan as  kĕrasan,  a derivative of  ^ĕras, 
„hard,  strong" (or rather of  aṅĕrasi,  „to overpower somebody"). 
­^) Matatāganā  is interpreted as  matatā,  ‚‚in  regular order", compounded  with  maganā 
(for magana), „in groups'’; owing to the word compound the prefix of the larter 
was omitted. Compounds  with  fata as their first part are common in modern Javanese 
(the best­known example is tata­krama). 
69) If  çatāgata  should be read. As was noted above (note 26 to the transcription),  gatā¬
gata would also be possible („coming and going") but such a continuous va­et­vient 
would  not probably be suggested. 
70) Conjectural translation of a very complicated  pāda,  in which  the second  half  is the 
reflected  image of the first ; in such  cases  it is obvious  that  the  form  of 
the words is more important than their meaning, but they should mean something 
at least. The first  half  atiçaya  tang  ṅaranya,  „extra­ordinary  were their names'’, 
probably  means  that  the visitors to the temples included very distinguished people; 
then one may expect a kind of explanation in the second half. So I took  taṅaranya 
in the meaning of  tĕṅĕranya  (the  spelling  of a instead of  ĕ is rather  frequent  in our 
text; here,  there  is of course a special  reason  for doing so: the sound, or rather the 
writing,  should  agree  with  tang  ṅaranya),  i.e.  ‚‚it (the  visit  of the distinguished per­
sons) was a token  that",  „it was because"; cI. the use of cihna (the Sanskrit equiv­
alent of  tĕṅĕran)  in the Old Jav. Ram., IX, 45  d :  cihnāyan  bhrasṭā,  „as a token 
. that  (they)  would  be destroyed'’, „to indicate  that,  etc.".  Mahātisa  (for the prefix, 
cf. mahāmayuṅa  in 16 d) is a derivative of tis, ‚‚cool(ness)":  „that  (they)  would  make 
cool".  Coolness is an agreeable sensation to those tortured by the  heat  either of the 
sun or of passion, here, of course, of the larter: the temple  with  its images devoid 
of passion and helping to artain  moksa,  may  thus  be represented to give 'coolness' 
to the devout visitors. 


--- [Page 338] ---
— 326 — 
.19. Who, then,  would  not be the very first to go and  see?  7i)^ It 
very  charming ..... 72) . 
22. (transition to popular language) 7^): 
You herons, crows,  haṃsas,  merchants, ..... 7 4); g^ and take a bath 
to find  protection (?) ^) ..... (?) pilgrimage (?) ..... 7 6); ^md you^ 
kalang 7‘), village  members 7^) and handsome  gusti  7^ 
^­) Tan apurwwa, — here, a­ is of course the Sanskrit, not the Old Javanese  prefix. 
.­^) Fer  these  enigmatic strophes, no translation of  which  can he given, cf. the Intro­
duction. 
7^) Prākrĕta (prākṛta)  may he used as the opposite of the  artificial  (?) language of the 
preceding strophe.  Sanniveça  (Sanskrit  ^aṃniveça)  is not usual in the meaning  which 
it seems to have here, hut is hardly  could  he anything else. There is, however, another 
possibility.  When  we .::^e  that  also strophes 23 and 24 are introduced hy short  indi­
cations,.  it is natural to suppose  that  also  prākrĕtasanniveça  is intended to  state  some­
thing  more positive ahout strophe 2 2. One  could  translate  „popular  way of expres­
sion."  In that  case, we should have a unique example of popular Old Javanese of the 
9th century  A.D.  The latter interpretation  would  agree better  with  the meaning of 
. saṃniveça  in Sanskrit. 
^4) The words  niyāga  wayat are obscure to us;  niyāga  looks  like  a derivative of ni­yaj, 
which  does not however appear to occur in Sanskrit; but  then,  it is also  difficult 
to account for wayat. Another  word  separation, viz.  waṇiyāga–niyā  gawaya=t does 
not seem more satisfactory, although the words, if  taken  by themselves,  would  be 
clear. 
^) Here, too,  there  may he doubt as to the correct separation of the words;  diyus  (i.e. 
dyus.)  anemwaha,  ‚‚bathe  to pay homage'',  would  not be impossible, but what to do 
with trasiha  .P One  could  explain  tra  by Sanskrit atra, the  initial  a of  which  was 
combined  with  the  final  a of aner.^waha, whereas the necessary lengthening of the 
vow^l  was omitted. Then, siha  could  m­^an  „thow  your  love"  (?). One  could,  how­
ever, cut  diyus^anĕmwa hat–rasiha;  then,  the first throe words  would  make  sense 
(cf. the translation), but rasiha (i.e. ra­siha.) remains  difficult.  It might perhaps have 
the same meaning as siha translated above. 
7^) Siddha ta  yātra,  ­­ although it seems strange  that  a Sanskrit compound should be 
cut by an Old Javanese particle,  there  is no reasonable doubt  that  we have the 
famous  word  siddhayātra  here, for  which  cf. the Introduction to No. I, above. The 
mention  of water birds and of 'bathing’ make it very probable  that  siddhayātra  is 
acquired  in a  tīrtha  as it seems more often to be the case; cf. Chhabra, Expansion, 
p. 19. But what is the meaning of siha  then  ^ It seems rather meaningless to take it as 
the 'imperative’  „adore  t’‛ again. 
7^')- A  désa  functionary, frequentiy mentioned in O1d Javanese records. 
7s) Anak. wanua is the usual term in Old Javanese records to indicate those  village 
inhabitants who enjoy  full  rights to act. 
7^) Custi (as kalang,  with  whom it is frequently mentioned together in Old Javanese 
records) denotes a  village  functionary. There is nothing extraordinary in their being 
'handsome', except  that  this qualification might be due to the pun  gusti  wagus (ri). 
It is very striking  that  exactly  the same pun on  gusti  is made in the Old Javanese 
Rāmāyaṇa,  XXVI,  2 2 b.­ gusti  tātar  wagus  tīkṣṇabuddhi;  the correspondence is not 
less striking because in the  Rāmāyaṇa  locus the gustis are stated to be. „not hand¬
some". Especially in these last strophes of our text, there is much that reminds one 
of Rām.  XXVI,  22 ; this strophe was  fully  discussed by Poerbatjaraka in rB.C., 
72 (193 2), pp. 153 sqq. 


--- [Page 339] ---
— 327 — 
ordered (?) 8 0) to worship  with  smelling salt (?) 81) . . . (^) S2)  .^ith 
O1d men. 
23. (Omission  Of an aksara) 83). 
On the day  (fixed  for) compulsory work on behalf of the Gods 84), 
the People in command 8­) performed the ceremonies ; crowds of people 
came in and the first surveyor 8 6) e.^me .in the third place (?) 87). 
monks,  young man and women of rank 88). ..... (•?) 89^. . . . .  ^ (^) 99). 
there  were numerous guards (?). 
80) We suppose  that  tinajar is ta (the particle)  followed  hy inajar, hut te was shortened 
to ti ; a similar example is  kasandihā  in 17 b, derived from sandeha (cf. also sagu¬
pura instead of sagopura, in 17 d). 
81) Kawittha also occurs in the  Kĕmbang  Arum  inscription, edited by  Bosch,  Oudh. Versf., 
1925,  p. 43, III, line 11  : pañcopacāra  kamwang, kawittha,  dīpa,  dhūpa,  gandhalepa. 
Stutterheim  (1nscr.  Ned.­1ndiĕ,  I, 1940, p. 23) connects it  with  Sanskrit wida, hut 
not only  the ttha  and the prefix ka­, hut also the fact  that  smelling  salt might al­
ready  heen  implied  in gandhalepa,  ‚‚perfumes  and unguents’', does not make this 
interpretation probable; we do not however know any hotter one; kawittha makes 
the impression  of being  Prākrit. 
82) We do not understand the meaning of surarah. It is moreover obvious  that  most of 
the strophe, though apparently written in a 'normal' language, remains obscure. 
8­) Ie., a shor+ riddle by  which  a 'lost' aksara must he found hack; cf. the Introduction. 
84) wuarthyang (a strange  sandhi  form for wuat hyang; obviously, wuaddhyang fright¬
ened even our author) denotes compulsory work hy the villagers in behalf of tem­
ples etc.; cf.  wuat  haji,  „compulsary  work for the  king''. 
85) Uang (i.e. ^vwang,  often  spelt wuang in Old Javanese inscriptions ; the larter spelling 
would  however have made the preceding syllable long)  pamariḥ.  CI. mamatiha in 
Ram., XIV, 24, „in order to arrange"; n^anghyang is  ‚‚to  address the gods" rather 
than „to  pray". The combination of the two terms implies an  āksepa  (Kāvyād.,  II. 
120 sqq.). 
8­) The  form  ādimantri  is uncertain (cI.  note  37 to the transcription);  ādimantri,  though 
unusual,  may be understood (cf. such compounds as  ādideva,  ādiçūra  etc.; the  initial 
a may have been shortened for metrical considerations) ; one might also suggest 
adhimantri,  which  is however unusual, too. The meaning does not seem doubtful. 
87) rritaya is  puzzling;  in Sanskrit, it  could  only  mean „a triad", but  three  āoimantrins 
(?) would  seem strange. We rather suppose  that  it is used for trriya: people entered 
in three  groups, first the surveyors, then the crowds of workers, and as the third 
and last the  ādimantrin.  This  is not very clearly expressed, but we should not forget 
that the  pāda  is very mannered (a  three  syllable yamaka not separated by another 
aksara). 
8s) K^tmarī  is probably used for  kumāri. 
89) We do not understand the second part of c, nor the  pāda  d except for the last words. 
Kamarān  might be derived either  from  mar,  „soft".  of from  amĕr,  „to cherish"; mara 
van (marayan) paguru  would  mean „so  that  they behaved  like  gurus" ; presumably, 
the clearness of expression was sacrificed to the complicated  form  of the  pāda,  and 
the meaning might therefore be rather far­fetched.  Possibly,  the  pāda  means  that 
in addition to the people mentioned above,  there  came people of  high  rank, too, in 
order to give  instructions.  ^Then,  kamarān  could  be supposed to mean  that  these  high 
rank people were flartered in order  that  they should assume the task attributed 
to them. 
90) Garuti  yatann=iṅūyana  dadanya  could  be made to  agree  with  the conjectural ex­


--- [Page 340] ---
­— 328 — 
24. (omission of an anus^ara) : 
In the time of the  Çaka  year (denoted by) eight, mountains and 
monks  91), in the bright  half  of the month  Mārgaçīrṣa,  the eleventh 
lunar  day, on the week­days Thursday,  Wagai  (of the  five  days’ week) 
and Wurukung (of the six days’ week) . . . . . ^’ 2) — that  was the  date 
at which  the (statue  of the) God was  finished  and inaugurated  ^ 3). 
25. After  the  Çiva  sanctuary had been completed in its  divine  splendour, 
the (course of the)  river  was changed so  that  it rippled  along the 
grounds 94); there  was no danger 95) from  the  wicked  ones, for they 
had all received their due  ^ 6); then the grounds were inaugurated as 
temple grounds ..... 97) with  the ^ods. 
26. Two  tampah  was the size of the rice­fields belonging to the  Çiva 
planation of  pāda  c which  we proposed in the preceding note. It  could  then be 
translated;  „their  hreasts  were scratched (got scratch wounds) because they did not 
spare themselves'’ (?). The idea is then  that  these  high­rank people were so enthu­
siastic  in fulfilling  their tasks  that  they did not mind receiving scratch wounds 
by hurting against  hamhoos  with  their uncovered hreasts. 
­i) Çaka  77S 856 A.D. 
­­) ^Veḥ  at the end of c and d has nothing to do  with  „to  give’’,  hut is probably an 
adverb (also written  wiḥ),  meaning  „also,  in addition, then’’ etc. As such, it  often 
occurs  in the Old Javanese  Rāmāvaṇa;  cI. I. 19  c: maṅkana  sang  daçaratha  weḥ,  „in 
a similar  way,  Daçaratha,  too,......". The meaning is, then,  that  the date,  which  was 
already  clearly  defined hy the  indication  of year, month, paksa and  tithi,  was also 
defined  by the  three  week­days. The latter are never omitted m dating Old Javanese 
records: the choice of a favourable combination was essential. 
­'­) ^Veḥ,  at the end of pada d, may have been added to  stress  that  the completion of 
the last detalls (this is probably the meaning of ginawai here) was immediately 
followed  by the inauguration of the image. 
^4) As we argued in the Introduction, it is probable  that  palmahan ( f.e.  palĕmahan) 
should  refer to the temple grounds on  which  the complex was  built,  not to the  rice­
fields  which  are mentioned only in 25 d. The  river  course was changed so  that  it 
touched,  rippled  against (lit.  ‘ticked‛  ; anitik is the nasalized  form  of ṭiṭik)  the 
outer  limit  of the temple grounds; we conjectured  that  these  measures were  taken 
to include the  tīrtha  (strophe 22) in the temple complex. 
-'-) We consider kasandiha (kasandihe = kasandiha i) a derivative of Sanskrit  saṃdeha 
(cf. note  23 ahove, where the same spelling occurs). 
96) There is no douht  that  these  words refer to the  wicked  spirits  (bhutas  etc.), who 
might  disturb the ceremonies if they were not satisfied. These  ‘gifts‛  include caru, 
for instance, rice  strewn  on the ground, and perhaps meat for the  Rākṣasas  etc. 
^7) 1 do not understano the words humet=trima harang^ if at least the words should 
be separated in this way. Trima (= tarima^) makes good  sense  here; in 25 c, gifts 
to the low spirits were mentioned, so  that  the  parallelism  between the  pādas  would 
suggest  that  in 25 d gifts to the Gods were referred to. One might connect trima 
harang  huma  sahiyang,  „the  rice­fields  with  the Gods received  ......"  (harang in the 
meaning of  harĕng,  „charcoal’’  does not make sense). I have no idea about what 
humet  could  mean. 


--- [Page 341] ---
­­­­­ 329 — 
temple  ^);  It was a freehold 99) of the  Pamegĕt  Wantil  10°) with 
his nayaka and his patih  i° 1); the  patīh  was  called  si Kling  and his 
kalima  1°2) was  called  rasi 1°3) Mrĕsi  ; there  were  three  gustis  : si Jana, 
rasī Kaṇḍut  and rasi Sanab. 
27. The  wīnĕkas  1°4) was si  Baṇyāga  ; the wahutas were  Waranīyā,  Tati 
and Wukul  (?); the laduh 105) was si Geneng; the  following  persons 
were representatives, speaking in the name of other people 1°6), vi:^. 
Kabuh  and sang  Mars1,  the latter representing the  village  elders without 
definite  function  1°7). 
98) A  taṃpah  is an area measure frequently mentioned in Old Javanese records and is 
especially  used to define the size of  rice­fields. 
.^) Susul(cI.  manusuk,  sumusuk,  „to found a freehold") seems to be a synonym of  sīma 
here ; the meaning is  that  future kings  will  have no right to impose taxes etc. on 
the .grounds. 
l0^) Samgat  is usual as a contraction of sang  pamgat  (cf. van Naerssen,  Biidr.  K.I., 90 
(1933),  p. 257). For  Wantil,  cf. 10 b above, where the king  (Rakaki  Mamrati,  if 
correctly  interpreted) made a  gift  to Wantil.  By this act, the freeho1d was ceded 
to the  Pamĕgĕt  Wantil,  of course  with  the stipulation  that  he (and his heirs) 
should  supply the means. to guarantee future conservation of the temples.  Such 
gifts of grounds by kings  imply  that  all the rights exercised by the sovereign on the 
territory  (i.e. numerous kinds of taxes, the duty of work in the  royal  residence or 
in hehalf of  'public  works’,  viz. the construction of roads, bridges etc., by those who 
possessed grounds) are transferred to the freeho1d, so  that  the foundation  gets 
complete autonomy. 
191) Nayaka and patih denote functions frequently mentioned in the Old Javanese edicts, 
always as executors of orders issued hy higher authorities such as the king and dig¬
nitaries with rakai and  pamĕgĕt  titles. The rank of nayakas and patihs therefore 
depends on whose orders they execute. Here, they assist the  Pamĕgĕt  Wantil. 
l^ 2) Ka.dmanira,  „his  kalima'', refers back to the  Pamĕgĕt,  not to the patih; this  follows 
from  tne use of the  suffix  ­nira,  which  is too  high  to be applieu to the patih (the 
larter's name is introduced by the 'article' si, to  which  corresponds ­nya as a  suffix). 
.I 03) Rasi  may be analyzed into the (honorific)  prefix  ra­ (cf.  AAote  5 above) and the 
'article'  si; it is rarely found in Old Javanese edicts. Considering  that  the  three 
gusti^  mentioned in the end of the strophe have names preceded hy si‚ rasi and 
rasi respectively, one  gets  the impression  that  the difference in rank  could  only 
be very  small;  perhaps rasi here refers to older men, hut metrical considerations 
might  also have had influence  upon  the choice. 
104) w^ĕ^­^.  grammatically a passive of  wĕkas,  may he translated „he who receives 
orders'’;  but  unlike  the patihs, nayakas, wahutas who receive orders  from  court 
dignitaries  and functionaries, the  winĕkas  acts in the name of the vinage elders 
(rama) as a group (to  which  he also belongs  himself). 
1‘^) unknown  from  other sources as the name of a function. It is also possible  that  laduh 
is a proper name, continuing the  list  of wahutas; in  that  case,  there  would  be no 
less than  five  wahutas (since si  Gĕnĕng  would  be a wahuta, too), but this is only 
a minor objection. Another possihle objection against the latter interpretation is 
that laduh is not preceded by si (or by another  'article’);  it follows  from  Kabuh 
in pāda  d that  si could  be omitted in poetry. 
l^) The words ny=aksara  waneḥ  explain the meaning of parujar; a  similar  explanation 
of the same  word  occurs in the Old Javanese  Rāmāyaṇa  (XXVI,  22), quoted by 
Poerbatjaraka in  T.B.G.,  72 (1932), p. 154. 
107) Tbo  former presumably represented the  rāmas  with  a definite function  (rāma  maṅagam 


--- [Page 342] ---
— 330 — 
28. After  the inauguration of the wet rice fields 198), the freehold existed, 
.f^­ed  to remain a freehold (?) l99), ......  (?) 11°), this was the freehold 
that would  belong to the god for ever (?) 111). 
29. Those (in charge) were  sent  back  with  the order to worship, every 
day, without forgetting their duties 112) ; they should not be negligent 
in obeying the commands of the gods ; continuous re­birth in  hell  would 
be the result (if they ^veTe negligent) 112). 
XII. A  JUDGMENT  OF  LAW DATED  860 A.D. 
In 1935, Mr. E.W. van Orsoy de  Flines  discovered a fragment of an 
inscribed  copper plate, brought to light during irrigation works on the  Kali 
Putjanggading near the  village  Plumbangansari in the regency Demak 
(Central  Java). The measurements of the fragment are 22^ cm in length 
and 15^ cm in breadth ; the right hand portions of ten lines of script are 
preserved on one side of the plate, the other side being empty. Examination 
of the text shows  that  the plate is the last one of a set,  giving  only  the 
end of an  inscription.  The fragment is  only  the right hand part of the plate. 
The text makes it possible to conclude  that  the 1ost portion is considerable, 
hard1y smaller than the part  which  was recovered 1). The fragment was 
incorporated  into the private  collection  of Mr. van Orsoy de  Flines  at Ungaran 
(No. 246). There is an excellent photograph in the  collection  of the Dinas 
Purbakala  at Djakarta. 
kon, such as kalang,  gusti,  winékas, tuhalas etc.), the latter those who gave advices 
to the  village  council  after having transferred their possessions to their heirs  ^cf . 
supra, p. 230). 
108^ 1^ Inauguration as a freehold  (snna).  It is curious  that  the text  here  uses  sawah, 
whereas the territories are prohahly the same as those denoted hy  huma  in 26 a. 
10­) Conjectural translation. Puput means  ‚‚finished’’;  in this context, this  could  only 
mean  that  there  would  he no more question ahout it,  that  its status  was  fixed  for 
ever; the words waluy ya  sīma  are ohscure to me. 
11 0) Pāda  c is incomprehensible; it may consist of an enumeration of villages  which  he­
come  sīma  attached to the foundation.  Patalĕsan  could  well  he the name of a  village. 
but Nimaṇḍĕr,  Duṭī  and Karamwa seem  strange  as village  names. 
111) In this  pāda,  there  is the same  difficulty  with  puput  (cf. note 109 above). For the 
metre of strophe and  that  of the next one, cf. p. 283 ahove. 
11 2) Cawainya is used in two different meanings at the end of  pāda  h and  that  of pāda 
d. The repetition of the term is a kind of yamaka. Cawai undoubtedly has the two 
shades  of meaning characteristic of  karman  in Sanskrit, viz. (a) act in general, (h) 
act considered the only 'thing' remaining after the end of an  individual  existence 
and capable of ripening  (karmavipāka^). 
1) At the end of  line  1, the name of a  village  breaks off (air ha­), hut in the begin­
ning  of line  2, one  reads  the beginning of a new  date.  The aksara  çi, followed  by 
çuklapakṣa,  is undoubtedly the end of the indication of the  ti^hi,  the shortest of 
which  is dwādaçī  (the  spelling  by a short ­.i is no objection since  similar  cases  are 
very  frequent in  Old .  Javanese inscriptions). Before  dwādaçī  (or another ordinal 
number), one expects to find in the lacuna: (a) a mark of punctuation, probably 
a double  daṇḍa, (b)  çakawarsātīta,  followed  by three  ciphers, (c) the name of a 


--- [Page 343] ---
— 331 — 
The script belongs to the older Central Javanese type. The  akṣaras  are 
relatively  large and  slightly  sloping.  Owing  to considerable differences in 
size between the  akṣaras,  the  writing  gives the impression of carelessness 
or clumsiness. The most  striking  peculiarity of this script is the use of 
rather  large hooks at the starting point of a number of  akṣaras,  especially 
of the ra. The left hand vertical of the ka  bends  considerably inwards at 
the foot of the  akṣara.  The ­e after a consonant  (taling  in modern Javanese) 
starts  at the normal height, but is not continued down to the botom of the 
akṣaras.  Most  of these  features  give the impression of being archaisms  which 
gradually  disappear during the development of Old Javanese script.  Already 
the Perot inscriptions (850) are writren in a less archaic type of script. 
Our plate is, however, dated 860 A.D. 2), I.e. ten years after the Perot 
inscriptions,  so that  the apparent  archaisms are to be considered peculiarities 
of a region where archaeological and epigraphic remains of the  Hindu­
Indonesian period are very scarce. 
A few details of  spelling  and language are worthy of mention. 
Consonants are doubled before the suffixes ­a and  ­akan  (cf. misanna and 
kinonnaka<n>  in  line 2). The  spelling  of Sanskrit words is correct excepting 
patra  instead of pattra,  which  is, however, very frequently found in Old 
Javanese texts. 
A curious form is pinakakuannakan in line 2. Considering that kinon¬
naka<n>,  a derivative of the same base  kon,  occurs in line 3, it cannot 
be doubted  that  the  spelling  kuan  was an archaism already in the middle 
of the 9th century  A.D.  It should however be added  that  derivatives of 
kwan even occur in poetry dated centuries later 3). The form pinakakuan¬
nakan is remarkable for another reason, too : it is the only case known 
of kon  with  the prefix  maka­  (pinaka­) 4). The meaning of pinakakuannakan 
cannot be determined  owing  to the lacuna  following  this word almost 
immediately.  The  form  is perhaps  to be translated  „was  considered an 
order’’  ^). 
month  (two to four aksaras), (d) probably the  word  tithi. One  should  add the end 
of the  village  name; two  village  names known to occur in Old Javanese records are 
Airhaji  and  Airhaṅat,  which  makes one to two aksaras. The total is: 1^+2 (the 
punctuation mark)  +6+3+3  (the average month) + 1^ (syllables preceding  ­çi) 
= 17 aksaras. The preserved portion, calculated hy the same method, shows an 
average of about 25  aksaras.  From  this rough  calculation  it fonows  that  . the lost 
portion  amounts to about two  fifths  of the entire  lines. 
2) As  will  be examined  below,  860 is the last  date  mentioned in the text; at least two 
earner  dates  must have occurred in the inscription, but the  date  on which  the copper 
plate was  inscribed  is, of course, the last one. 
3) JuynboH's  Oudjavaansch­Nederlandsche woorderdiist mentions examples  from  the 
Bhomakāwya  and the  Arjunawiwāha,  but no references to Old Javanese prose  works. 
It is therefore  likely  that  metrical  considerations are  largely  responsible for the 
use of such forms in later times. 
­) In  addition,  the combination of the  prefix  with  the  suffix  ­akan is very strange. 
5) I.e. some unknown other document was considered an order which had to be exe¬
cuted in spite of objections made by the other party. The word sang before the 


--- [Page 344] ---
­—­ 332 — 
Although  the text is very badly mutilated, it is not impossible to 
Understand something of the document. 
A complete  date  is mentioned in line 5.  According  to the calculation 
by Damais, it corresponds to the. 27th of  March,  860  A.D.  6). This is not, 
however, the only  date  found in the text; also in line 2, the  final  part 
of a date  is still  preserved. Since this  date  is not placed at the very beginning 
of the text, it is certain  that  at least one more  date  was mentioned in 
the original  text. It may be concluded  that  an original  edict was confirmed, 
modified  or revised several times, at least twice, the last time in 860  A.D. 
In line 9 the document is termed a  çuddhapātra,  an incorrect spelling 
for çuddhapattra.  Another document of this  kind  is O. J. O. XXIX,  dated 
912 A.D. 7), but hardly other examples are known. The meaning of çud¬
dhapattra is „a receipt of discharge of a debt’’. It appears from line 1 that 
the debt  was paid in the presence of witnesses. The rarity of such documents 
is certainly due to the fact they were ordinarily written on perishable 
materials such as lontar. The act inscribed on the copper­plate fragment 
relates, however, an extraordinary  case  in which  there  had arisen 
disagreement between parties concerning the payment of the  debt.  Owing  to 
such  dissensions, decisions had to be taken by competent authorities. It 
appears  from the text  that  there  has been some  kind  of law­suit after  which 
one of the parties, Dapunta  Aṅgada,  probably representing some monastery  ^) ‚ 
lost the ease  (inalahakan in line 8). The identity of the other party is not 
completely  clear from the text ; it probably was the village elders  (rāmanta) 
of a dĕsa  the name of  which  begins  with  Air­ha  (Airhaji  or Air­haṅat  ?) . 
It is mentioned in line 1  that  an amount of  gold  and  silver  was in deposit 
with the above­mentioned village elders  (kinmit,  literally:  ,,was guarded^). 
The point of controversy is not clear. The text mentions  that  it was the 
Dapunf.a's intention to misanna ^kanang mas, the  same  expression  whicn 
also occurs in the beginning of line 3. Misan, a derivative of pisan,  „once”, 
might mean „to do something  once’’,  here  perhaps  „to acquit (a large  debt) 
all at the  same  time’’.  The term may  perhaps  apply to a number of different 
financial  obligations  which  the Dapunta wanted to  finish  by paying one 
(large) sum, presumably in order to  recuperate  the amount of  gold  and 
silver  from the village elders. Probably, the latter did not  agree  with  such 
a solution,  perhaps  because  the amount offered by the Dapunta was 
considered too low. The latter point is, however, completely conjectural 
since nothing of the  kind  is alluded to in the fragmentary text. Considering 
lacuna  at the end of line 2 must have denoted the subject of pinakakuannakan and 
could  not therefore have introduced the  name  of a  person.  I suppose  sang  hyang 
ājñā haji  or something of this  kind.  The main  difficulty  is, however, the  suffix  ­akan 
which  seems  superfluous. 
­) B.E.F.E.C.,  XLvI.  Fasc. 1  (1952),  pp. 5o sq. 
­) There, too, the  same  term  çuddhapattra  is mentioned. A related document was puh­
lished  by Stutterheim in 1nscr.  Ned–1ndiĕ,  I (194o),  pp 29 sqq. 
8) Dapunta  seems  to he a title of monks; cf. K.O. IX, line 1 (dapunta  i kawikuan i 
^ panuṅgalan  watĕk  raja). CI. infra. 


--- [Page 345] ---
­­­333.­­­
that the term misannais especially stressed, it might be suggested  that  the 
point  of controversy was not so much the sum itself, but the fact of the 
enttre  amount being acquitted all at once. If, for instance, the deposit exceded 
the amount of the debt by a considerable sum, it may be understood  that 
the village  elders  would  have preferred  that  the payment of the debt should 
be effected by smaller amounts extending over a considerable lapse of time. 
Something  of the  kind  might have been specified in an earlier contract. 
The first decision about this affair was made by a  Rakarayān  Weka, 
who had died in the meantime and was buried at  Bulai  (sang  lumāḥ  ing Bulai, 
line 4). ­He had decided  that  the­ deposit of  gold  remained  with  the village 
elders (tanmolah,  line  4). It  appears  that  this old decision was confirmed 
by the  Rakarayān  Mapatih  of Weka  in 860. The latter listened to the 
statements  of both parties. The  village  elders spoke first ; afterwards the 
Dapunta  repeated his intention (maharap) of acquitting  himself  of the debt 
all at once (line 6). He had, however, no more success than the first time. 
The new  Rakarayān  Mapatih  ^) considered the reasons upon  which  the 
former  decision was based ­^), undoubtedly thought  these  convincing and 
therefore confirmed the sentence by his predecessor : .Dapunta  .Aṅgada  lost 
the case (inalahakan). The edict  ends  with  the mention of witnesses — 
representatives of high dignitaries 11) — and clerks 12). 
Considering  the above, this document, though denoted by  çuddhapattra, 
could  also have been  called  a jayapattra,  „document  of victory’’,  containing 
the final  sentence to be preserved by the party who gained the process 13). 
There is no doubt  that  the process was an important one : no less than 
two Rakarayans  Mapatih  (which is the highest function after the king) are 
concerned  with  the affair. The reason for its importance may  only  be guessed 
at. First, it is noted that the amount of the debt is considerable ; if  Stut¬
terheim’s  calculation of Old Javanese weights is approximately correct 11), 
the total amount  would  equal more than one and a  half  kg of  gold  and 
two and a  half  g of  silver  1^). Although  one cannot have an idea of how 
­) The former  Rakarayān  Mapatih  is designated hy  rakarayān  mapatiḥ  sang  rumuhun 
(line 7) and by  rakarayān  sang  matuha, the 'old'  Rakarayān  (line S). 
10) If the reading  sadon  in line 7 is correct, this might he formulated  slightly  differently. 
The point of controversy might not have  been  the sentence hy the late  Rakarayān 
itself,  but its interpretation. In  that  case, the last decision aimed at establishing 
the exact meaning of the former decision, not so much its  literal  meaning as the 
intention  which  the late  Rakarayān  had in arriving at his decision. It is almost as 
in modern  jurisdiction. 
11) Sang  mamuat  ujar, lit.:  „those  who make the  words’’,  i.e., ‚‚spokesmen’'; cf.  tuhān 
mamuat  wuwus in the  Kĕmbang  Arum  inscription  with  the  note  by Bosch  in Oudh. 
Yersf.,  1925, p. 48.  More  common designations are parujar and parwuwus. 
12) Or rather, those who dressed up the  official  act and had it wrirten on the copper­
plate. CI. below. 
13) It is obvious  that  the gaining party had more interest to keep the  official  act than 
­the losing one. 
14) 1nscr.  Ned.–1ndiĕ,  I (1940), p. 17 and p. 31. 
1­) More  exactly, T,524786 kg of  gold  and O,OO2412 kg of  silver. 


--- [Page 346] ---
— 334 — 
much  this represented in Old Javanese society, it is obvious  that  it was 
sufficient  to risk  a process for it. 
This document is the more interesting because it originates  from  a 
region  where remains  from  the Pre­Islamic age are very scarce. Since the 
copper­plate fragment was discovered under the earth, it seems hardly 
doubtful  that  it originates  from  the region where it was discovered, the 
regency Demak 16). Since the plate is dated 860  A.D.,  it belongs to the 
reign  of king  Rakai  Kayuwam  who ascended the throne in 856  A.D.  17). 
Since  the edict was issued by the  Rakarayān  Mapatih,  it may further be  con­
cluded  that  the Demak region belonged to  Kayuwaṅi’s  empire 18). In ad­
dition,  the copper­plate fragment proves  that  a regular administration of 
state  existed also in the more remote regions of the empire 1^). The procedure 
strongly  reminds one of cases  known  from  later times 2°). 
Finally,  it might be interesting to examine the background of this  law­
suit in spite of the scarcity of the materials. It has already been noted 
that the dispute goes between the Dapunta  Aṅgada  and the  village  elders 
of a desa  the name of  which  is only  incompletely  known.  The precise value 
of the titie dapunta is unknown.  Grammatically  the form  may be analyzed 
into pu preceded by the  honorific  prefix  da and  followed  by the  suffix  ­(n)ta, 
which  is the possessive  suffix  corresponding to kita as an independent 
pronoun.  The  suffix,  too, might be merely  honorific  as in  rāma­nta,  reṇanta, 
bhagau^nta..  .A.n interesting reference is  K. O. IX, dated 886  AD.,  in which 
16) Since  half  of the village  name  is lost, the text  itself  cannot confirm  that  the plate 
does. originate from  that  place; copper­plates are easily transported. The only place 
name  mentioned in the text is  Bulai  (line 4), probably to he identified  with  the 
Cunung Wule in the  Brahol  inscription as was concluded hy Damais  (B.E.P.E.C., 
XLVI,  Fasc. 1, 1952, p. 32). This Gunung Wule was situated  near  the Dieng accor­
ding  to the  same  text. This  Bulai  in our text is, however, only the place where the 
former  Rakarayān  is buried  (lumāḥ),  so that  nothing justifies the conclusion  that  1. 
would  have been situated in the neighhourhood of the place of  origin  of our record. 
1^) CI.  supra,  p. 289. 
18) Ail the  other,  numerous, inscriptions of Kayuwam's reign were found either in the 
Kĕḍu,  or in the Prambanan plain and its immediate neighbourhood. Although the 
king's  titie  does  not occur in the epigraph, the mention of two  Rakarayāns  Mapatih 
is a guarantee  that  the edict was issued by the Central  Javanese  court, which must 
therefore have dominated the  northern  coast. This  entire  region becomes especially 
important in the 16th century. 
19) At least as far as the  great  majority of  Hindu  Javanese  monuments and inscriptions 
are concerned, the Demak region is relatively very poor. It is impossihle to conclude 
whether this region was also  remote  from the  seat  of the central  government  in those 
times; as a  matter  of fact, Stutterheim considered it  likely  that  the  kĕraton  of the 
old Central  Javanese  empire was situated in the north of Central Java, not in the 
south where most of the later  kĕratons  (Padjang, Pasargedé, Kerta, Pléréd, Karta¬
.sura,  Surakarta  and Djogjakarta) .were situated  (Oudheidkundige  Aanteekeningen, 
XXVI,  in B^jdr. K.I., 89, 1932, pp. 278 — 282). 
26) CI., for instance, the so­called Jayapattra Dieduksman, published by Brandes in 
T.B.C.,  32 (1889), pp. 98­149, and Stutterheim,  Een  Iavaansche  acte  van  uitspraak 
uit het jaar  922  A.D.,  in Epigraphica, III,  r.H.C.,  75 (1935),  pp.  444 — 456. 


--- [Page 347] ---
—­335 — 
a dapunta or  ḍapuntas  in the monastery of  Panuṅgalan  are granted  privi­
leges  ^ 1). It might be concluded  that  dapuntas  could  represent monasteries ; 
although  there  is no  proof  that  this was always the case,  there  is not, on 
the other hand, anything  which  would  oppose this  conclusion.  If this was 
the case  with  the Dapunta  .Aṅgada  in our document, too, the decision might 
be important since it concerned a matter of principles : a  conflict  in rights 
between the  village  and a monastery, between  worldly  and  spiritual  power. 
Then  it is not astonishable  that  no less than  three  decisions were needed 
before the affair was  finally  solved  : in a case such as this one any decision 
is bound to be a precedent for  similar  cases. 
Transcription 
1. ^lor 22). mas  kā 2 su 7  mā 8 pirak  mā 1 kinmit  rāmanta  i airha­
2. ^]çi  23) çuklapakṣa  . wu po so .  tatkāla  muwaḥ  pinakakuannakan sang 
3. ^]<msha>rap  misanna ikanang mas . ujar  rakarayān=mapatiḥ  i 
wka . k.m.onnaka<n> 
4. ^]<raka>rayān=mapatiḥ  sang  lumāḥ  ing  bulai  . tanmolaha  tātaḥ 
kinmit  rāma<nta> 
5. ^]ta 782  waiçākhamāsa  . dwitīya  çuklapakṣa  . pa  ka bu . tatkāla 
mu<waḥ> 
6. ^<tumu>luy mojar  ḍapuntāṅgada  . maharap misanna ikanang mas ataḥ 
7. ^<u>laḥ­ulahan  tātaḥ  sadon 24) rakarayān=mapatiḥ  sang rumuhun 
8. ^]wkas  rakarayān  sang matuha  . inalahakan  ḍapuntāṅgada  . na­
9. ^<i>kaing  çuddhapātra  ing  tāmraçāsana  : sākṣī  sang mamuat ujar 
10. ^]likhita  halangmanuk dharmmasinta  .  25) 
Translation 
[^ ] .....  26) North  27) : 2 kāti,  7 suvarṇa  and 8  māṣa  gold  and 1  māṣa 
silver  28), k^ b­^  the village  elders  29) of Air  Ha .....  3°) [2]  ....., 
­­­­) Plate I  b‚ line 1  : dapunta i kawikwan i panuṅgallan. 
­­^) Only  traces of the taling  before the la have remained  visible. 
23) Read  : çī.  The length of the  final  ­ī of feminine adjectives is  often  neglected in Old 
Javanese. 
2­) The second'  syllable  of this  word  looks rather  like  ­dān,  which  does not, however, 
make sense. It seems  that  the tiny hook before the da is to be considered a  taling. 
As a marter  of fact, this  vowel  mark is wrirten remarkably  small  in some other 
words,  too. 
^2­) The mark of punctuation is uncertain.  Since,  however, the rest of the line was left 
open,  there  is no douht  that  the inscription ended here. 
26) For the length of the lacunae at the  heginning  of the  lines,  cI. note  1 above. 
27) Probably the second part of the name of a  village. 
28) An artempt at calculating  these  weights is given in the Introduction (cI. note 15). 
Although  the calculation is conjectural, it cannot be doubted  that  the amount was 
considerable. 
29) Rāmanta  might be  slightly  more  honorific  than rama; cf. the Introduction. 
30) The end of the  village  name is lost. For possihle reconstructions of the name, cf. 
the Introduction. 


--- [Page 348] ---
— 336 — 
the ­teenth  (lunar) day of the bright  half  of the month 3l), on the days 
Wurukung  (of the six  dāys^  week),  Pon  (of the  five  days’ week) and Monday 
(of the seven days’ week), — at this time ..... was again considered an 
order 32) [3] to acquit the amount of  gold  all at the  same  time 33). Such 
were the words of the  Rakarayān  Mapatih of  Weka  34) . ..... was ordered 
141 .....  the Rakarayān  Mapatih who is buried 35) at 36) Bulai.  (The amount 
••­–) Unfortunately, the greater  part  of this  date  is lost since neither the year, nor the 
month is preserved. The numher of the lunar day is imperfectly known (11th, 12th, 
13th 14th or 15th of the hright half). A definite combination of  three  week davs 
is hound to  repeat  itself  after 210 days. The chance  that  a ­^definite combination 
falls on one of the possihle  tithis  is therefore: 5 X 2lo or 1050, i.e.  once  in ahout 
s years. 
^2) Translation of the words  muwaḥ  pinakakuannakan. In the Introduction it was pointed 
out that  the combination of pinaka­(and  maka­)  with  ­akan  is unusual,  whereas  kuan 
(for kon)  is an archaism. There is no douht  that  the meaning of the form is entirely 
different from that of kinonnakan in line 2. Since the most usual meaning of pinaka¬
is ‚‚considered to he (that which is indicated hy the hase)", the use of this form 
suggests  that  something else is again considered an order. Consequently,  there  have 
been some arguments to prove  that  an older decision in this  question  would  not 
have to be considered an order, probably  because  there  may have  heen  some douht 
whether it was  valid  or not. It may he concluded  that  the first decision was due to 
a Rakarayān  Mapatih in former times, undoubtedly the  same  who is mentioned in 
line 4, was re­examined and confirmed twice, the last time in 86o A.D. 
33) Maharap fkanang mas, the  same  expression  which  occurs in line 6. It is, 
however, to he noted  that  misan  cannot he used in this meaning in Modern Javanese 
where the form misani is used instead. The Javaansch­Nederlandsch  Handwoorden­
boek  by Gericke and Roorda, II, p. 276, explains  .mīsani  hy  ṅuwisi,  „to  finish 
with something''. The prevalent notion of pisan and its derivatives is th^t an act 
is completed in a single time without being delayed or split up into a number of 
separate  acts; thus, ka^isanan  means  „killed  by one  blow’'.  If used  with  reference to 
a large  amount  of gold,  the term  would  prohahly  mean  „acquitting it" instead of 
dividing  it up into several payments. It has  heen  suggested in the Introduction  that 
there  may be circumstances in  which  it is more advantageous for the debtor to pay 
an amount  off in a single time  rather  than acquitting it by a number of payments. 
34) I suppose  that  ujar  rakarayān=mapatiḥ  i wka refers back to the preceding deci­
sion. The lacuna between lines 2 and 3 may be reconstituted as  follows:  tatkāla 
muwaḥ  pinakakuannakan  sang  < hyang  rājapraçasti.  inalahakan  dapuntāṅgada maha> 
rap misanna ikanang mas. Although the precise wording remains uncertain, the con¬
text requires words of about this meaning and the length of the added words would 
correspond  with  the supposed length of the lacuna, viz. about 20 syllables. 
­^) Lumāḥ,  literally  „lying",  does  not necessarily  imply  a burial in its usual meaning. 
The term may also he used for a deposit of  ashes. 
­^) It was rightly noted by Damais  (B.E.P.E.O..  XLVI,  Fasc. 1,  notes  1 and 4 to p. 32) 
that Wulai  might be identical  with  the Gunung  Wule  mentioned in the  Bĕrahol 
inscription dated 861  A.D.,  since  Wule  and  Bulai  may he only orthographic variants. 
If this identification proves correct, the translation at  Bulai  should be changed to 
on the  Bulal.  This point is the more interesting  because  the Gunung  Wule  of the 
Bĕrahol  inscription is stated to he situated on, or in the immediate neighbourhood 
of, the Dieng plateau As a  matter  of fact,  there  are several Diéng inscriptions dated 
in about the  same  period, inscriptions  which  will  he examined in detail in the third 
volume  of Prasasti Indonesia  which  is being prepared for print. We then learn the 


--- [Page 349] ---
— 337 — 
of gold) would remain on deposit 37) ^rith the village elders [5]  ......  [Hail. 
Çaka  years  evolved^] 782, in the month  Vaiçākha,  the 2nd (lunar) day of 
the bright  half  of the month, on the weekdays Paniron (six days’ week), 
Kaliwon  (five days’ week) and Wednesday, — at this time again [6] ..... 
After  that  (?) 38) Dapunta Angada spoke, expressing his intention of 
acquitting himself of the  debt  .all at once 39). [7] ..... the former  Rakarayān 
Mapatih’s  aim had been to avoid any trouble in the future 4°). [8] ..... 
the intention (?) of the former  Rakarayān.  Dapunt:a  Aṅgada  lost the case. 
Thus (?) 41) [9] ..... this act of acquitment engraved in a copper­plate. 
The witnesses were : the representative of [10] ..... clerks from Halang­
manuk and Dharmasinta 42). 
interesting fact  that  the funeral temple of a  Rakarayān  Mapatih was situated on 
(possibly:  in the immediate neighbourhood of) the  Diéng.  One might  even  suggest 
who this  Rakarayān  Mapatih was. The patih mentioned in the Perot inscriptions 
(No. IX above) is a  Rakai  Weka, named Pu Puluwatu (supra p. 233, line 5 of the 
transcription).  Since  another  patih is mentioned in the Argapura inscriptions dated 
863 A.D., viz. the  Rakarayān  Wĕka  Pu  Manut (cf. the quotation by Damais in 
T.B.G.,  83, 1949, p. 5), it is certain  that  Pu Puluwatu resigned his office of a patih 
between  S5O and 863, probably by  dying.  It is therefore ail hut un1ike1y  that  the 
Rakarayān  Mapatiḥ  sang  lumāḥ  ing Bulai is this Pu Pu1uwatu of the Perot inscrip­
tions. 
­7) Literal1y:  „guarded  by’’  (kinmit). 
­^) The trans1ation is based on the completion of luy to  tumuluy. 
.^9) The last words are a free translation of misanna ika­­ang mas; cf. the Introduction 
and note  33 above. 
­0) Ulah­u^ahan is one of the euphemistic terms used in inscriptions for  violating  royal 
edicts or changing their text. The tern. is frequently found at the beginning of the 
oath formula in Old Javanese inscriptions (cI., f^r instance, O.IO.  LVIII,  back, line 
29, and passim). 
41) Na­ is probably the beginning of nahan,  ‚.thus'’. 
42 ) The  names  Hala^gmanuk and Dharmasinta are always associated  with  the Rakais 
W^ka  and  Sirikan  repectively. As to the former, cI., for instance, the  Kĕmbang 
Arum  inscription (pubhshed by  Bosch  in Oudh. Yersf. 1925, pp.  41-49),  second plate 
(II), line 2/3: citralekha halangmanuk si govinda, mentioned immediately after the 
parujar i wka and just before the representative of Tiruan, the title  which  follows 
Weka immediately in this period. As to the relation between Sirikan and Dharma¬
sinta, which is the same as that between  Wĕka  and Halangmanuk, cf. the same 
Kĕmbang  Arum inscription, second plate (II), line 2: citralekha dharmmasinta si par¬
bwata. mentioned immediately after the parujar i sirikan and before the parujar i 
wka. It is not without interest to  call  attention to the fact  that  Halangmanuk is 
mentioned before Dharmasinta in this copper­plate inscription; it  agrees  with  the fact 
that Rakai  Wĕka  is a higher titie  than  Rakai  Sirikan  in the Perot and Argapura 
inscriptions,  since the former titie is  that  of the patih, the dignitary mentioned im­
mediately after the  king.  During the reign of  Balitung,  however, the patih has the 
title Rakai  Hino,  whereas the  Rakai  Sirikan is mentioned before the  Rakai  Wĕka 
and, therefore, considered higher in rank. The ahove  agrees  well  with  the conjecture 
mentioned in  note  a6 above. 


--- [Page 350] ---
ADDENDA 
I. One of the introductory  strophes  in No. Ill 
During  my  visit  to London in December 195 4 I succeeded in tracing 
the strophe mentioned in No. Ill,  c­A­l  (113), or  rather,  three  of its four 
padas,  which  are quoted by Pentti  Aalto,  Prolegomena to an edition of the 
Pncarakṣā,  ed. Soc. Orient. Fennica, XIX (195 4), No. 12, pp. 48 set. The 
strophe is found in the  Mshāmāyūrī  (d’Oldenburg,  p. 222, lines 16 sqq.) in 
the following  form  : 
Sarve  sattvāḥ  sarve  prāṇāḥ  sarve  bhūtāç  ca kevalāḥ  // 
Sarve  val sukhinaḥ santu  sarve  santu  nirāmayāḥ  / 
Sarve  bhadrāṇī  paçya7itu mā kaçcit  pāpam  āgamat  // 
Maitracittaṃ  samāsthāya  karomi  viṣadūṣaṇaṃ  / 
Rakṣāṃ  parigrshaṃ caiva tathaiva  paripālanam  // 
It is obvious  that  the three  padas  printed in italics  agree  with  those  of 
the çloka  in No. HI except for a few minor details. Instead of  nīrāmanāh, 
which  is, of course, impossible, the  Mshāmāyūrī  reads  nirā­m­ayaḥ,  which 
yields  a satisfactory meaning. The correction to  nirāmaṇāḥ,  which  I pro­
posed in  note  50 to p. 113, may be left out. My doubt about the correctness 
of santu  proves unjustified. 
It is, however, curious  that  the first  pāda  disagrees ; in our text we 
have  rūpiṇas  = sarvvasattvā  hi, whereas the  Mshāmāyūrī  reads sarve ^a¬
sukhinah santu. On the other hand,  rūpiṇaḥ  and sukhinah resemble each 
other and an equivalent of  sarvasattvā  hi,  vi2:.  sarve  sattvāḥ,  occurs in the 
preceding line of the  Mahāmāyūrī  quotation. As a  matter  of fact, the reading 
rūpinaḥ  of our text is meaningless so  that  I am very much  inclined  to cor­
rect it to sukhinah. Presumably, the copyist did not understand sukhinah 
in this connection and replaced it by  rūpīṇaḥ,  a term he knew  well.  If this 
is correct, the strophe may be reconstituted as  follows  : 
Sukhinas =  sarvasattvā  hi sarve santu  nirāmayāḥ  / 
Sarve  bhadrāṇi  paçyantu  mā  kaçcit  = pāpam  = āgamat  // 
I translate  : „May  all living  beings be happy, may they all be in good 
health ; may they all see what is good for them and may nobody commit 
evil 1^ 
The disagreement of the first  pāda  proves  that  the  Mshāmāyūrī  could 
not have been the source from where the  compilator  of the text of No. Ill 
took the  çloka.  Presumably, both the  Mshāmāyūrī  and the  compilator  of 


--- [Page 351] ---
—339 — 
No. III took it  from  the same source ; as  seems  to be the case  with  the ajndnac 
= cīyate  karma formula (cf. supra, pp. 57 sq.), it may have been a  well­known 
strophe  which  occurred  with  differences in detail. 
There is no doubt  that  the strophe belongs to some  kind  of praṇidhāna 
for the well­being of all  living  beings. In the  Mshāmāyūrī,  the first chapter 
of the Paṅcarakṣāsūtra  (cf. also Jean  Filliozat  in L. Renou et J.  Filliozat, 
LTnde  Classique, II (1853), § 2014, p. 374), the strophe is used as a charm 
against the disastrous effect of snake bites : by uttering the ardent  wish 
for the health and happiness of all  living  beings, by practising the spirit of 
love towards the creatures (maitracitta) one creates a force which is an  anti¬
dote against snake poison (karomi  viṣadūṣanam  etc.). There is, however, no 
reason to assume  that  the strophe was  originally  and  exclusively  intended 
to be used as a snake charm ; as a matter of fact, it has a different, more 
general, purpose in the text of  No. Ill : it refers to superior  wisdom,  especially 
knowledge  of the causes of  origination  and decay, as a  kind  of antidote against 
the evil  influences of ignorance and  karman. 
Although the occurrence of the greater part of the strophe in the Pan¬
carakṣā  does not establish from where the  compilator  of No. Ill took the 
çloka,  the correspondence proves important for several reasons.  First,  it ena­
bles us to determine the correct wording of the strophe  with  a reasonable 
degree  of certainty  ; second, it reveals the meaning of the  çloka  and its bearing 
upon  the text of No. HI ; and third, it may bring us a  step  nearer to the 
source  from  which  the compilator  of No. HI took the  çloka. 
II. Some  notes  on Ullaṅgha’s  Pratityasamutpādaçāstra 
In the autumn of 1954 I had the occasion to  visit  some librariers in Europe 
and to consult some of the works I badly needed for the edition of No. Ill 
(cf. supra, note 195 to p. 107). L. de la  Vallee  Poussin,  Theorie des  dou^e 
causes  (1913),  did not supply important  additional  information, mainly because 
the author referred to his previous conclusions in his  great  Abhidharmakoça 
translation.  On the other hand, the  publication  by Vasudev  Gokhale,  Ullaṅgha's 
Pratītyasamutpādaçāstra,  Doctoral  Thesis  Bonn  (1930)  , 31 pp., V  Tafeln,  prov­
ed to be very useful.  Ullaṅgha’s  Çāstra  proves to give most of the divisions 
found  in No.  Ill, c­A­6  to e–B–7  (pp. 114–117)  ; cf. especially pp. 8 sq., Tabelle 
der .Einteilungsarten  der  2:wolfglīedrigen  Kausalreihe nach  Ullaṅgha^s  Lehr¬
buch. As a matter of fact, seven different divisions are given there : 
(a) the threefold (or  sixfold)  division  into  kleça  (aṅgas  1 ; 8, 9) , karman 
(2 ; 10) and  vipāka  or duḥkha  (3,  4, 5, 6, 7  ; 11 and 12) in strophe 6. 
(b) the threefold  division  into  pratīta,  pratyutpanna and anagata in 
strophe 7. 
(C) the two­ or  four­fold  division  into  hetu  (1, 2 ; 8­10) and phala (3­7 ; 
11, 12) in strophe 10. 


--- [Page 352] ---
—340— 
(d) a  twofold  division  into  avidydmūla  (1­7) and  tṛṣṇāmūld  (8­12). 
(e) a  division  into four groupings,  saṃkṣepa  (1­2 ; 3­7 ; 8­10 ; 11­12) 
with three  nodes,  saṃdhī  (between 2 and 3 ; 7 and 8 ; 10 and  11)  . 
(f) a fivefold  division  into  pañca duḥkhasthityaḥ  denoted by terms 
which Gokhale translated from the Chinese text by ,,Agens’’,  ,,Mut¬
terschoss”, „Sinnesbereich”,  ,,Auswirkung’’  and ,,Entstehen’’ cor¬
responding to the  aṅgas  „zwei, zwei,  drei, drei, zwei’’. It is obvious 
that this  division  is identical  with  that  of No. Ill,  d–A–l  to 2,  which 
gives  : 
1. kāraka  (aṅgas  1 and 2), 
2. garbha (3 and 4), 
3. viṣayapravṛtti  (5‚ 6 and 7), 
4. prabhava (8, 9 and 10), 
5. pravāha  (11 and 12). 
For 1 and 2,  Gokhale  reconstituted the very terms  kāraka  and  gar­
bha on the basis of the Chinese terms. For 3,  Gokhale  reconstituted 
visaya, but  vīṣayapravṛtti  seems  more satisfactory. However, Nos. 
4 and 5 do not  agree  ; it may be doubted whether the Chinese in­
terpretation or, perhaps, the interpretation of the Chinese version 
is correct, for  ,,Auswirkung’’  and ,,Entstehen’’ do not appear to 
make  sense  in this connection. The terms prabhava and  pravāha 
do make sense, the former denoting existence  (bhava)  with  its di­
rect and indirect causes  (upādāna  and  tṛṣṇā),  the latter the  ever¬
returning cycle of deaths and re­births. 
The text published by Gokhale has the  great  advantage of  yielding 
a more satisfactory interpretation of the  fivefold  division.  It now 
seems  clear  that  this  division  is based upon  five  stages  of a disease 
in its complete  form  (Gokhale translates  „die  fūnf Zustānde wāhrend 
der Dauer  des Leidens”  from  Chinese,  which  corresponds to  pañca 
duhkhasthityaḥ  or duḥkhāvasthāḥ).  The disease is, of course, exist­
ence; the indirect cause is Ignorance, the more direct  kāraka  is 
samskara,  which  is threefold (cf. the  three  doṣas).  Garbha corres­
ponds  with  the latent period,  viṣayapravṛtti  with  the first symptoms 
announcing  the ailment, prabhava is the outbreak of the disease 
followed  by the ever­continuing series  (pravāha)  of births and 
deaths,  like  a recurrent fever. 
(g) an eightfold  division  into eight ,,fruits” (Gokhale, strophes 15­17) 
corresponding  with  the  division  of No. Ill, d­A­9 to d­B­2 (p.  116)  . 
The eight terms used by Gokhale are :  Betörung,  Entfaliung,  Ver¬
geltung, natiirliche Folgeerscheinung, Leidenschaft, Elend, Entwick¬
lung, natiirliche Folgeerscheinung. No. Ill has  : saṃmoha– ārambha, 
vipāka,  niṣyanda,  santāna,  .........  (?),  nīrvṛttī,  aniṣta.  There is com­


--- [Page 353] ---
—3­41 — 
p1ete  agreement  between the first, third and fourth fruits ; the 
second fruit disagrees ; the  fifth  fruit,  santāna  does  not make  sense 
in our text, but should be corrected to santdpa  which  is excellent 
for tṛṣṇā  and  upādāna  and corresponds  with  „Leidenschaft”  ; the 
sixth  fruit was erroneously omitted by the copyist of No. III ; it 
could  have been  kārpaṇya  or a synonym. For  nirvṛttī  I gave a wrong 
translation on p. 145 ; the Chinese interpreted it correctly in the 
meaning of  abhīnirvṛtti  as it is used in Ill,  b–B–2  (Ill) ; for the 
eighth and last fruit the Chinese version  seems  to repeat  the fourth 
term,  which  is unsatisfactory, whereas No. Ill gives  aniṣtaphala. 
It follows  from the above analysis  that  four of the eight fruits  agree 
and a  fifth  may be made to  agree  by a small emendation  (santāpa)  ; 
of the three  fruits  which  remain one is indecisive for a comparison 
because it was left out in No. Ill. Only for two fruits is there seri¬
ous disagreement, for which I do not see a plausible explanation. 
In spite of this,  there  can be no reasonable doubt as to the funda­
mental identity of the eightfold  division  in Ullaṅgha’s  Çāstra  and 
the text of No. Ill. 
In addition,  Ullaṅha’s  Çāstra  throws an interesting light upon the im­
portance attached to the above divisions in  Mshāyāna.  As is expressed in 
the third  kārikā  (Gokhale, p. 29) it is a  means  of arriving at an intuition of 
Çūnyatā  — which  is, by the way, an idea  similar  to that  expressed in Ill, 
c­A­4/5  (114), if my interpretation in the Introduction to No. HI is correct. 
On the  whole^  it seems to me that the correspondences with  Ullaṅgha’s  Pra¬
tityasamutpādaçāstra  give an additional and strong argument in favour of 
my surmise (supra, pp. 99 sqq.) about the  Mahay  anic  and, more precisely, 
Mādl1yamika  character of the  Upadeça  of No. Ill above 
c. Recent discoveries on the Ratubaka plateau 
After  the text of Prasasti Indonesia H had already been printed, four 
new inscriptions,  three  of which  were fragmentary, were discovered on the 
Ratubaka Plateau in Central Java. One of the fragments is inscribed  with 
Pre­Nāgarī,  it proves to be the right hand  part  of the Buddhist inscription 
five other fragments of  which  were dealt  with  in Prasasti Indonesia I (1950) . 
Considering  the important new data contained in this fragment, I intend to 
publish  the entire text again. 
The other two fragmentary inscriptions and the complete text are  Çaiva  ; 
they belong  to the  same  .group as the  texts  published above as No. X, a­c 
(pp. 244 to 279). At least two of the  three  new  texts  relate the erection of 
Çivaliṅgas  by king  Kumbhayoni  ; again two different  names  of the god are 
used, vi^.  Çambhu  and  Pinākin.  Among  the most important new data sup­
plied  by the complete inscription I mention the name of the kingdom over 


--- [Page 354] ---
— 3 42 .— 
which  the mysterious god­king, ancestor of  Kumbhayoni,  ruled, given as 
musalākhyarāṣtra.  Since the Sanskrit word musala means  „pestle”,  it is the 
exact equivalent of the Old Javanese name  Halu,  which  is the name of the 
kingdom  of Pu  Kumhhayoni’s  ancestor according to the Pereng  inscrip­
tion  l). So this new  inscription  gives a strong confirmation to my conclusion 
(supra, p. 253)  that  Pu Kumbhayoni  in the Pereng epigraph is identical 
with the  king  Ç1 Kumbhaja or  Kalaçodbhava  in the Ratubaka inscriptions. 
Again  it confirms  that  Halu,  in the title  sang  ratu  i halu, is not an abbre­
viation  of the title  Rakai  Halu,  but the name of the empire of the myste­
rious  god­king.  This,  by the way, easily explains how the halu became a real 
symbol  of royal  power, as is reflected in the title  Rakai  Halu  of one of the 
highest court dignitaries throughout the history of Java and,  still  more, in 
the symbolical  erection of a rice pestie by  king  Airlaṅga  at the beginning 
of his reign 2). 
One of the fragmentary inscriptions 3) gives  still  further materials. 
There,  a complete genealogy of Kumbhayoni is given in strophes 2 to 5 ; 
first we have the god­king (strophe 2), then his son  (tasmāt  — prasūto  ......) 
about whom we learn the usual common­places in strophe 3 4). The third 
king  (strophe 4) is again the son of the  king  mentioned in strophe 3  (tasya 
sūnur  ......) ; his sphere of action seems to have been the sea, for it is stated 
that he was foremost in protecting the ocean, just as  Varuṇa  (pātī pāçabhṛd 
= ivārṇn­avam  = agryaḥ)  . The fourth and last  king  is Çrī  Kumbhayoni 
(strophe 5), whose knowledge of the  Çāstras  is praised as in the  three  texts 
of No.  X. above (strophe 5,  pāda  d: çāstrā.^hanirmmalamatir)  . Strophe 6 is 
particularly  interesting since it mentions, in each of its  pādas,  four succeed­
ing capitals of  Kumbhayoni,  vi2:. the  lofty  Dava  (tuṅgam  dau^ākhyam 
puram)  , then  Laṅkapura,  further  Nirljhara  and,  finally,  Walaing.  The last 
strophe strongly confirms the interpretation of  Walaing  (Valamga) suggested 
on pp. 255 sq. At least it  follows  from  the new discovery  that  Walaing  was 
1) CI. supra, pp. 251 sqq. 
2) Cf. line 14 of the Old Javanese part of the Calcutta inscription (ik^nang halu pinaka¬
kapratiṣṭhān çrī mahārāja  . matangyan rake halu  crī lokeçwara dharmmawangça 
airlaṅgānantawikramottuṅgadewa  saṃjñā  kāstwan çrī  mahārāja  de  mpuṅku  sogata 
māheçwara).  Kern's translation in  Verspr. Ceschr. VII  cannot he maintained  ; I fully 
agree  with  the interpretation suggested hy  Bosch  in Oudh. YersI.  19.2.5,  p. 47. It  seems 
that inscription  No. XI above alludes to a  similar  ceremony in strophe 12 ; the text 
is unfortunately hadly mutilated, hut the interpretation does not seem doubtful in 
its essentials (cI. note 42 to p. 321). The  possibility  of Halu  having  heen  an ancient 
royal  residence, as was suggested in the last sentence of the first  alinea  of p. 3OO 
above, ­becomes at least a probability. 
3) The fragment is the left hand part of a beautifully inscribed stone,  giving  a little 
more than  half  of the text. The text contalns nine Sanskrit strophes in nine different 
metres  (viz.  Anuṣtuhh,  Āryā,  Indravajra,  Svāgata,  Vasantatilaka,  Çārdulavikriḍita, 
Bhraraltākṣara,  Praharsiṇī  and  Drutavilamhita)  . 
4) Thus, the king was a  pureça,  he tamed the multitude of his foes  (çamitāgharāçi), 
being  a rāçir  guṇānām  himself. 


--- [Page 355] ---
— 343 — 
the last of the four residences of  king Kumbhayoni,  undoubtedly connected 
with his final victory. I hope to be able to deal with the location of Kum¬
bhayoni’s  three other residences in the near future in a detailed publication 
about the new Ratubaka epigraphs. At present I confine myself to the re¬
mark that the king's four succeeding residences might well be connected 
with the struggles for supremacy discussed in the introductions to Nos. X 
and XI. 


--- [Page 356] ---
— 3 44 — 
WORD INDEX 
a. Old Malay  l) 
­a — suffix,  often spelt  –ā, used to  form  abstract nouns  (cf . C. 63) or, possibly, 
to express future or  irreality  ; cf. s. v.  datu,  ruru,  vuat. 
abhiprāya  — abhiprāyūna,  H­23 (35). 
āçraya  — āçrayamāmu,  H­15 (3 4) . 
ada — H­7,  12, 16, 18 (33­35)  ; cf. 2 4 and  Pras.  Indon.,  I, 71, 
addh7jākṣī  — II­ 4 (32)  ; wrong  spelling  for adhyakṣa ? 
adhikaraṇa  — II­ 4 (32)  ; 20. 
ūhūra  (?) —  H–13  (3 4) ; C.  66. 
akan  — 11­20, 21, 22 (35), 25, 27 (36). 
āk^u H­5^  '7 (33), 12, 13, 14, 15  (3 4), 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 (35), 25 (36)  ; C.  66. 
alit — maṅalit,  11­11 (33)  ; 40. 
amala  — cf. s.v.  tantrāmala. 
amātya  — cf. s.v.  kumārāmatya. 
amgap  — umamgap, I, a­16  (5). 
amithyā  —  I, a­18  (5). 
an—H­2(?)‚ 4(32),9(33). 
anak  — anakda, I, a­3  (5) ; anakmāmu,  II­19  (35)  ; anakvīnīmāmu,  II­25  (36)  . 
anucāra  — nu1kānucāra,  II­6  (33)  ; 38. 
apa — I‚ a­18  (5). 
ārambha  — 11­8 (33)  ; 26, 39  ; cf. s.v. sārambha. 
ārjava  — cf. s.v. sārjava. 
āsannakāla  — 22  ; C.  66. 
āsannaphala  — āsannaphalāna,  II­27  (37)  ; 46. 
āṣāḍha  — I, e­6  (14)  ; II­28  (36)  ; 12, 18. 
athavā  — II­6,  8, 9, 10 (33)  ; 14, 16  (3 4) ; 17 (?),  18 (35)  ; 26, 27 (36). 
avadya  — II­27  (36)  ; 46 ; cf  Index  c, s.v. 
āyu­āyu  —  mi­āyu­āyu,  II­7  (33)  ; 38. 
b^tī  —  II^3  (3^),  ^ (33), 20, ^4  ^ ^ (^ ; C.  74 ; the word  is always 
used in the meaning  ,,loyal,  submissive’’  ; cf 27, 38. 
bharu — I, a­10 (5)  ; nibharu  (?),  I, a­12 (5). 
bhasma — in  marūpabhas7navaidimantraprayoga,  H­13 (34) ; 30. 
bhūpati  ­ II­3 (32) ; 37. 
bhūpura  — 30. , . . 
1) Numhers preceded hy C refer to the  word  Ind^ b^ G^  Coedés, B.E.F.E.O.,  XXX 
(1930),  pp.  6380. 


--- [Page 357] ---
— 345 — 
cakṣu  — 17, 22  ; cf. s.v. paracakṣu. 
cāthabhata  — II­4  (32)  ; 20 ; the correct  spelling  is cātabhata. 
cāri — nicārī, II­10  (33)  ; owing  to a lacuna in the transcription, the context 
is not clear; the  word  may be derived  from  Sanskrit carin,  „going 
around’’  etc. ; tjari, in modern Indonesian, means ,,to  look  for, to  seek’’. 
caru — 7nancaru, II­11 (33) ; 41. 
— II­14 (3 4) . 4^ 
corakāra  (?) —  mañcorakāra,  II­8 (33) ‚ but the reading is not certain ; pre¬
sumably Sanskrit caurakara, but this compound is not known to occur. 
cūrikā  — cūrikāṅku,  I, a­6 (5) ; undoubtedly Sanskrit  chūrikā. 
çānti  — II–26  (36)  ; 21, 25  ; C.  78. 
çāsana  — çāsanāna,  11­22  (35)  . 
çatru  — çatruṅku, H­6,  10 (33), 12  (3 4), 20 (35). 
cihna  — II–14 (3 4) ; 42. 
çrī — I, a­1 ( 4). 
çrīyantra  —  makaçrīyantra,  II­12 (3 4) ; 30, 3 4, 41. 
–ḍa — suffix,  3 ; cf . s.v. ­ṇḍa. 
dam —  I, a–20  (6) ; C.  70. 
daṅan  — I, a­5  (5) ; II­12  (23)  ; 3 ; C.  70 ; cf. s.v. dṅan. 
daṇḍa  — II­18  (35)  ; nidaṇḍa, II­18  (35)  ; daṇḍaṅku, H­19  (35)  ; daṇḍaku– 
daṇḍa, H­15  (34)  ; 27. 
daṇḍanāyaka  — II­3  (32)  ; 27. 
ḍapunta hiyam  — 9  sq. ; C.  68 sq., 73 sq. (s.v.  punta)  . 
daraḥ  –— II­12 (3 4). 
dari — I, a­2 ( 4), a­6  (5) ; II–5,  6, 7,  8‚ 11 (33), 13, 16  (3 4), 22, 2 4 (35)  ; C.  70. 
dātam  — I, e­5,  6 (14)  ; II­18  (35)  ; C.  70. 
dātu  — II–6,  10 (33)  ; datūa,  H–15 ^3 4), 20, 21 (35)  ; parddatvan, I‚ a–l  (3) ; 
parddatuan, II–10  (33);  kadātu^n,  II­8,  11 (33), 20 (35); 17;  C. 70 
(dātu, datūa),  67 (kadātuan),  the new texts seem to establish that ka¬
datuan has the meaning „royal residence’’  (kraton  in Javanese), rather 
than ,,territoire sous rautorite  d’un  dātu’’  (C. 67) . As to  datūa,  one might 
hesitate between the interpretations of  Kern  (Verspr. Geschr.,  VII,  213) 
and Ccedes (art. cit., 63, 70). 
ḍeha  — paḍehānda,  VIII­1  (208) ; the use of dentals and  linguals  is just the 
contrary  of what  would  have been expected. 
deça  — 11­14 (3 4). 
dhava — II­2 4 (35) ; C. 7L 
^ī I. ­­^ (5), ^­5 (^?), 8 (14)  ; II­7, 9 (33), 12, 13, 14, 15 (3 4), 17, 18, 19, 20, 
23 (35) ; 26 (36)  ; C. 70  ; cf.  s.v. dia,  dīya,  dy­. 
dia — 11­17 (35)  ; cf. s.v.  dīya. 
^ — II­14  (3 4) . dirīṅa,­H­?9  (33), 15 (3 4). 
divasa —  divasāna,  11­26 (36). 
^ — II­15 (3 4), :^8 (36)  ; C.  7L 
^.ṅ­.n  —­ l‚ a­21 (6), 11­17, ?19, 20, 22 (35), 25 (36)  ; C. 71  ; cf. s.v. danan. 


--- [Page 358] ---
— 346 — 
doṣa  ­— II–25  (36)  ; C.  71. 
dravya  — II­9 (33). 
drohaka  — II–5,  7 (33),  2 4 (35)  ; 17, 27,  C. 71. 
dua — I, a–14  (5),  e­5 6 (14)  ; C.  71. 
dūrum  — II­23  (35). 
dy — instead of  di before a  vowel,  H­5,  7 (33), 12, 13, 14  (3 4), 17, 18, 20, 23 
(3^5) ; sometimes, however, we  find  diy in the same position  : II­15 (34), 
25 (36)  ; C. 71. 
galar  — nigalarku, II­18 (35)  ; nigalarmāmu,  II­11 (33) ; 15  ; C. 71 ; cf. s.v. 
samvarddhI. 
gīla — makagīla,  II–14 (3 4) ; 38. 
gītodyāna  — perhaps  I, e–7  (15). 
gotra  — gotramāmu,  II–19,  22 (35)  ; kulagotramitrasantānamū^nu,  II–21  (35)  ; 
C. 68. 
graṃ  — II­22  (35), 25 (36). Here and at the two loci mentioned by C. 68, 
the word  is found before  kadāci.  Although  it is obvious  that  the word 
is connected  with  gĕraṅan  in modern Indonesian (cf.  Blagden, 
J.S..B.R.A.S.,  6 4, 1913, 70; 65, 1913, 37), its use seems  slightly  different. 
The meaning of gram  kadāci  appears to be . „if, on the  contrary’’,  ‚‚if, 
however’’.  As a matter of fact,  kadāci  alone is used to formulate crimes 
with their  sanctions, whereas gram  kadāci  is found towards the end 
of the texts when good acts  with  recompenses are mentioned. 
gulas — II­27 (36) ; presumably  identical  with  gula in Indonesian (Sanskrit 
and Prākrit  guḍa  or gula), but the  final  ­s is strange. 
hdj^ — vini  hāji,  II 9 (33)  ; hulun  hāji,  II­5 (32) ; probably in the  hybrid 
compound  haji–pr^tyaya,  II­3 (32) ; 20. 
hanun — 26 ;  inscription  K gives  vāṅun  in the same context  ; C. 79 (,,mot 
de sens  inconnu’’)  ; R.A.  Kern,  Bijdr.  K.I.,  88 (1931)  , 512 sqq. ;  cf . s.v. 
vāṅun. 
havam —  VIII­1  (208 sq.), transribed hau^ang. 
hīnamaddhyamottamajāti  —  II–8  (33). 
hulu—II­6  (33). 
hulun — II­5 (32) ; 20, 37  ; cf. s.v.  hdji. 
huluntuhāṅku  — II­7, 9, 11 (33), 12, 14 (3 4), 17, 23 (35) ; 26. 
i^ī — I, 13, 16 (5)  ; e­8 (15)  ; 11­13, 14 (34), 21, 22, ?24 (35), 25, 26 (36) ; 
VIII­1  (208 sq.)  ; C. 66. 
iya — I, a­8 (5)  ; 11­25, 28 (36)  ; C. 66. 
jādi — I,  a–6 (5) ; C. 68. 
jāhat  — 11­14 (34)  ; C. 68. 
jana — H­9 (33), 21 (35) ; 44. 
jāṅan  — 25  ; C. 68. 
jayasiddhayātra  — 1  ; C. 68 ; cf. Index b‚ s.v.  siddhayātra. 


--- [Page 359] ---
— 347 — 
ka — II­6,  9, 10 (33), 22 (35)  ; C.  67 ; cf. s.v.  kamāna. 
kadāci  — II­5,  6, 7 (33), 13, 15 (34), 17, 18, 20, 22 (35), 25 (36)  ; 16 ; C.  67. 
kalnana  — II­27  (36). 
kāma  — I, a­15  (5) ; 4. 
kamāna  — II­28  (36)  ; cf. s.v.  māna. 
kāmu  — H­3, ?5  (32), 5,  6‚ 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 (33), 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17  (3 4), 
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,  2 4 (35)  ; 25 (36)  ; 21­23  ; of. s.v. kita.  Curiously 
enough, the word does not occur in any other  Çrīvijaya  inscription. 
karmma... (?) — II­ 4 (32). 
kāryya  —  makārryāna,  I, a­ 4 (5) ; nikāryyākan,  I, a­19  ; makāryya,  II­27 
(36) ; perhaps  kāryya,  II­25 (36)  ; cf. s.v.  kriyākarmmakāryyakarādi. 
kasīhan  — H­13  (3 4) ; 22, 30  ; C. 67. 
kāyastha  — II– 4 (32) ; 20. 
kita — 21. 
krama — I, a­18  (5) . 
kriyākarm7nakāryyakarādi  –­–  II­16  (3 4) ; ­42. 
krodha — I, a­15 (5) ; 4. 
­ku —  suffix,  in kadatuanku, II­8, 11 (33)  ; daṇḍaku,  11­15  (3 4) ; nigalarku, 
H­18,  19 (35)  ; nisamvarddhiku, II­20, 21, 22, 23 (35), 26 (36). 
kula — kulamamu, II­6, 11 (33)  ; kulagotra^nitrasantā7^amāmu,  II­21 (35). 
kumārāmātya  — II­ 4 (32) ; 20. 
kusta  — Sanskrit  kuṣtha,  II­13  (3 4) ; 22, 30, ­41. 
lābha  — lābhamāmu,  II–2 4 (35)  ; 44. 
^ī —  H–6,  7, ^10,  ii (33), 13,  L4, 15 (3 4), 17, 18, 20 (35)  ; 21­23  : C.  77. 
laṅit  — makalaṅīt, II­8  (33), 13, 14, 15  (3 4) ; C 7 4. Kern,  Verspr. Geschr., 
VII, 212. I translated  ,,making  crazy”, but  ,,making  impotent’’ might 
be preferable.  Lĕngit,  in modern Indonesian (especially at Djakarta), 
means  „indolent,  lazy’’,  but then  with  the back­thought of making money 
by sly means without  working.  Thus, Poerwadarminta, Kamus Umum 
(1952), p. ­409,  adds  „banjak  akal  buruk”  between brackets. 
larī — II–6,  7, 10  ; mamlarī,  II–9  (33)  ; larīyakan,  II–9/10  (33)  ; 40. 
lavan  — II–6  (33)  ; C.  76. 
lilu — I, a–19  (5) , possibly a name. 
—. makalṅit. I,  a–20  (6) ; 4 ; cf. s.v. laṅit. 
lobha  — I, a–15  (5) . 
lpas  — I, a–12  (5) ; 12 sq. ; C.  75, s.v. marlapas. 
luar — H–9  (33), 12  (3 4), 19 (35). 
luvī — II–5  (33)  ; U. 
ma­ — prefix, in  makāryya,  II–27  (36)  ; makāryyāna,  I, a­4  (5) ; marūpa– 
bhasmavaidimantraprayoga,  II­13  (34)  ; ma­  followed  by a  base  with 
initial  nasal, cf. s.v. mam­  ,• cf . also s.v. mar­ and maka­. 
maka — maka ya linit, a  kind  of tmesis (?)  , I, a­20 (6) . 


--- [Page 360] ---
— 348 — 
maka­  ­ in  makalṅit,  I, a­20 (6)  ; makamataī (?),  II­2 (32)  ; makānucāra, 
II­6 (33)  ; makatdlu,  H­8 (33)  ; makaçrīyantra,  II­12 (34)  ; makagīla, 
II­14 (34)  ; makalaṅit,  H­14, 15 (34). 
mākan  — nimākan,  11­25 (36)  ; 45. 
mālam  — samālam, H­27  (36). 
— H..7,  9, 10, 11 (33)  ; pp. 21, 24, 40. 
mam­  ­ prefix,  with  assimilation  of the  nasal  before  stems  beginning  with 
velars,  palatals  and labials, in  maṅujārī,  H­7, 9 (33)  ; maṃlarI.  II­9 (33) ; 
maṃruruā,  II­10,  11 (33)  ; maṃrakṣa,  II–18  (35)  ; mamrakṣāna,  II–20 
(35) ; maṅalit,  II–11  (33)  ; 7namūva,  II–9  (33) ; mañcaru,  II–11  (33)  ; C.  63. 
mammam  — II–5,  7 (33)  ; 38; C. 74. 
­māmu  — suffix, corresponding with  kāmu,  in vanakmāmu, II–5  (32)  ; kula¬
māmu, II–6,  11 (33)  ; mitramāmu, II–6, ?19  (35)  ; vaduamāmu, II–6  (33)  ; 
āçrayamāmu,  II–15  (3 4) ; katāhumāmu,  II–17  (35)  ; sthānamāmu,  II–18 
(35) ; vinimāmu,  II–19  (35)  ; anakmāmu, H–19  (35)  ; anakvinimāmu, 
11­25 (36)  ; santānamāmu,  11­19,  22 (35)  ; gotramāmu,  11­19,  22 (35)  ; 
kulagotramitrasantānumāmu,  11­21 (35)  ; pallavamāmu, H­19  (35)  ; nimi– 
numāmu, H­21,  22 (35)  ; 26, 27 (36)  ; samaryyādamāmu,  II­2 4 (35)  ; 
lābhamāmu,  11­24 (35)  ; vuatmāmu,  II–24  (35). 
māna  — I, a­7  (5) ; cf. s.v. kamāna. 
.mancak  — m^maūcak, I‚ a–13  (5) ; 4 ; C.  74 
maṇḍala  — 18  ; cf. s.v.  sakalamaṇdala. 
mani  — instead  of maṇi,  11­11 (33). 
mantri  (?) — 11­23 (35), but the  reading  is uncertain. 
mantrika  — II–17  (34) . 
mar­ — prefix, in  marsvastha,  I, a­8 (5), 11­17 (35)  ; marvyūha (?),  I, a­10 
(5) ; marvuddhi,  II­5 (33), ^0 (35)  ; marppādah,  II­7, 11 (33), 13 (34), 
17 (35)  ; marcorakāra,  II­8 (33) ;  marvuat,  II­9. 10, 11 (33), 14 (3 4), 21 
(35), 25 (36)  ; marvuddhīsāraṇa.  II–11  (33), 14  (3 4) ; marsamjnāvuddhi, 
II–11  (33)  ; the prefix ma­  (cf supra)  is probably  mar­ the final ­r of 
which  disappeared  as a  consequence  of dissimilation (cf  . makaryya  and 
marūpa^),  just  as in  modern  Indonesian  (cf. bĕladjar).  For the use of 
the prefix cf.  Ccedès,  63, who  states  that  ,,il donne  aux verbes  une valeur 
analogue  ā celle  du moyen’’ ;  there  are,  however,  exceptions  such  as 
marvuat  above  and  marjahāti  in line 7 of the  Kotakapur  inscription. 
mars­ī  .— ^a7^ī h^ī,  II­5 (3:^)  ; 20, 37. 
muara  — I, a­16 (5). 
maryyāda  —-  maryyādaṇḍa,  I, a­2  ( 4) ; samaryyādapatha,  11­13 ;  samaryydda, 
11­26 (36)  ; samaryyādamamu,  R­2 4 (35). 
^ .^.  II.^. II (33). 
māti — II­10 (33) ; 40. 
mi­ — prefix, only in  mi­āyuāyu,  H­7 (33). The  meaning  is clearly  causative 
as in Old  Javanese  and in  modern  Javanese  (cf. misah). 


--- [Page 361] ---
— 349 — 
minum  — II­2 4 (35), ?26 (36)  ; niminumāmu,  II–21,  22 (35), 25, 26, 27 (36)  ; 
C. 72, s.v. niminumnya. 
7nitra  — mitramāmu,  II–6  (33),  ?19  (35)  ; mitrāṅku (?), I, a–21  (6) ; kula­
gotramitrasantānamāmu,  II–21  (35). 
— II–3  (33), 21,  :^ (35), ^6, ^23 (36)  ; ^aḥña.  H–26  (36)  ; nimnaḥ^ 
II–26  (36)  ; nimuaḥña,  H–23/2 4 (36).  Cf 21,  2 4 sq., 46; C.  75 sq. Dr. 
Ccedes  rightly  noted  that  my explanation of  muah  in the Talang  Tuwo 
inscription  (p. 2 4) meets  with  the serious objection  that  vuah  also occurs 
in the same text. It is true  that  the objection might not be decisive, but 
it is safe to wait  till further materials are available. 
mulam — II­7, 8 (33), 1^ 15, 16, 17 (3 4), 17, 21 (35)  ; nimulaṃ,  II­22 (35) ; 
kamularnna,  II­18  (35)  . Together  with  muah  above, the meaning remains 
a cru^c  ; cf. the conjectural explanations, 25 sq., 42, 43, 44, 45 ; C. 76. 
muara — I, a­16 (5). 
­na —  suffix,  in pramiraḥña,  I, a–5 (5) ; vaṅakūa,  I, e­5 (14)  dirīña  (?), 
II­9 (33)  ; tahūna,  II–11  (33),  sthānāna,  II–12  (34)  ; vuatna,  prāṇān^1, 
II­14 (3 4) ; dirīna,  H–15 (3 4) ; prakārāna,  II­16 (3 4), 17 (35)  ; sakala– 
maṇḍalāna,  II­20  (35)  ; çāsanāna,  II­22  (35)  ; abhiprāyāna,  11­23 (35)  ; 
pūrvvāna,  H­23  (35)  ; divasāūa,  11­26 (36)  ; āsannaphalāna  ; 11­27 (36)  ; 
tamūna,  H–28  (36). Together  with  the  suffix  ­a (­ā)  in vnatāna,  II–15 
(3 4) ; with  ma­,  makāryyāna,  I, a­ 4 (5) ;  with  ka­,  kamulamna,  II–18 
(35) ;  with  ni–, nipiṅanna  (?)‚  H­12 (3 4) ; nitamūūa,  11­28 (36)  ; with 
7nam­, mamrakṣāna II­20  (35)  ; with  sa­, savanakna,  11­16  (3 4) ; with 
par­ and  ­ā, parvuatāna,  11­17 (35)  ; with  ka­,  ­an and ­a,  kavuatanāna, 
11­26 (36). 
nariyāt  (?) — I, a­17 (5). 
nayaka — H­3 (32) ; 19, 27, 37 ; of. also Index b, s.v. 
ni­ —  prefix,  in nitāpik,  I‚ a­9, 11 (5) ; H­26 (36)  ; nīvunuḥ,  II­5 (32), 6, 7, 8, 
10, 11 (33), 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 (3 4), 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 2 4 (35), 25 (36) ; 
nicāri,  11­10 (33)  ; nisuruḥ,  II ­21, 23 (35)  ; nimākan,  11­25 (36) ; nivava, 
II–26  (36)  ; nimuah, H­26 (36)  ; nisamjnā,  11­27 (36) ; together  with  ­kan‚ 
nikāryyākan,  I, a­19 (5) ; with  ­i, niujāri,  11­23 (35) ; with  –(ṅ)ku,  nirak¬
ṣāṅku,  II­8 (33) ; nigalarku, II­18, 19 (35) ; nisamvarddhiku, II­20, 21, 22, 
23 (35) ; 26 (36) ;  with  ­māmu,  niminu^nāmu,  H­21, 22 (35), 25, 26, 27, 
(36) ; nigalarmāmu,  II–11  (33)  ; with  –na,  cf. s.v. ­na ;  with  par­ and  ­(a)  kan, 
niparsumpahakan, II­20 (35)  ; cf . 3 ; C. 63. 
nibharu — I‚ a­12 (5) ;  with  the prefix  ni­ ? 
nījavarṇa  — II­ 4 (32). 
ni.rbhara  — I, a­11 (5). 
^ .—  U­l (3.^) 
pādah­  ­ ^rppād^h,  H­7,  11 (33),  1^, 13 (3 4), 17 (35), 23 (35) ; 38  ; C 75. 
p^n­ in pamvalyanku, H­25 (36) ; cf. note 56 to p. 31. 
par^caksu ­ n­6,  10. (33) ; 22. 


--- [Page 362] ---
— 350 — 
pa^ .— with  ­an,  parddātvan (?),  I, a­1 (4),  parddatuan,  II­10 (33)  ; with  ni­
and ­(a)  kan, niparsumpa hakan, II­20  (35) ;  with  ­a and ­na,  parvuatāna, 
II–17  (35);  with  ­ṇḍa^  parvvāṇḍa, I, a–11  (5);  H­15  (34), 26 (36);  perhaps 
also in  paravis, I, a–7  (5) ; 3, 18, 42, 46  ; C.  63 (par­), 73  (parvāṇḍa),  72 
sq. (parāvis). 
paracakṣu  — II–6,  10 (33)  ; 22. 
parāvis  — cf. s.v.  par­. 
pallava  — pallavamāmu,  II­19  (35). 
pasam  — I, a­15  (5). 
pātra  — 11­12 (34). 
pauravirakta  — I, a­9  (5). 
piṅan  (?) —­ nīpiṅanña,  II­12  (34). 
prajā  — I‚ a­13,  16 (5)  ; H­8  (33), 23 (35). 
pradhāna  — I, a­21  (6). 
prakāra  — 11­16, 17 (35). 
pramīraḥ  — pramiraḥna, I, a­5  (5) . 
prana  (sic)  — 11­13 (34)  ; cf. s.v. praṇa. 
prāṇa  — prāṇāna,  11­14 (34)  ; cf. s.v.  prāna  and  sarvvaprāṇa. 
pratisara  — II­ 4 (32)  ; 20. 
pratiyuvarāja  — II­2O,  21, 22 (35)  ; 17. 
pratyaya  — II­ 4 (32)  ; cf.  19, 27, 37  ; I add the  following  references in in­
scriptions  from Cambodia, G. Ccedes, Inscriptions du Cambodge, I 
(1937), 180; II (19 42), 56, 109; HI (1951), 75; 168. Ccedes translates: 
shomme  de confiance”,  ‚,curateur’’  and  „commis”,  the last term kept 
intentionally  vague  („Volontairement  Vague’’). 
proṣtāra  (?) — H­3 (32), but the heading is uncertain. 
puhavam  — II­ 4 (32) ; 12 ; cf. Index b, s.v. hau)ang. 
pūrvva  — perhaps  in II­8 (33)  ; pūrvvāna  II­21, 23 (35) ; as to the uncertain 
reading of  II–8,  I add  that  a recent re­examination of the  stone  con­
vinced  me that  the correct reading is  pūrvvāna  tālu  muahna, instead 
of pūrvva  katālu  muahna as printed on p. 33 above. 
raijya  ­ I‚ a­8 (5) ; presumably for  rājya. 
rājakumara  ­ II­20, 21, 22 (35) ; 17. 
rakṣa  — mamrakṣa, II–18  (35)  ; maṃrakṣāña, II­20  (35). 
rumaḥ  — II­9  (33)  ; cf. s.v. tṅaḥ. 
rūpa  — cf. the compound  which  follows. 
rūpabhasmavaidimantraprayoga,  preceded by ma­ — II­13  (3 4) ; 30, 41. 
ruru —  mamruruā,  II­10, 11 (33) ; 40. 
sa­ — prefix, in samaryyadapatha, II­13 (34)  ; samaryyāda, II–17  (35)  ; sa­
maryyādamamu, II­24  (35);  sārambha,  11­24  ; sārjjava, II­2 4 (35), 25 (36); 
savātu,  II­27  (36)  ; samālam,  II­27  (36). — In several  eases  there  may 
be doubt whether sa­ is the Indonesian, or the Sanskrit prefix.  Only 
for sārjjava,  it seems  certain  that  the Sanskrit prefix  with  associative 


--- [Page 363] ---
— 351 — 
meaning is used; cf the examples given by  Wackerṇagel,  Altind. 
Gram^m., II, 1 (1905), § 30, b, (^ (p.  7 4) ; Whitney, § 1305 (p. 509) ; espe¬
cially for adverbs, Whitney, § 1313f (p. 513). Unlike Ccedes (p. 79), I 
take sa­ in  sārambha  as the Indonesian prefix, translating all the  enter­
prises (used as a euphemism; cf. note 16 to p. 38). The Indonesian 
prefix  sa­ means either  ,,one’’  (in samālam  and  savātu)  or  all’’  (all the 
other examples) ; cf. in modern Indonesian,  sĕhari sĕmalam,  ,,one day 
and night’’  and  sĕtauku,  for all I  know’’. 
sakalamaṇḍala  — sakalamaṇḍalāna,  II­20 (35). 
sākit—  II–11  (33). 
samaryyāda  — cf. s.v. sa­  and  maryyāda. 
samaya  — samayaṅku, H­13 (3 4). 
samjnā  — nisamjnā,  11­27 (36)  ; cf. s.v. san^jnāvuddhI. 
samjnāvuddhi  — marsamjnāvuddhi, II­11  (35)  ; cf. s.v. samjnā  and  s.v. 
vuddhI. 
samkṣepa  — I, a–1 4 (5) ; cf.  Index  b, s.v. saṃkṣepataḥ. 
saṃsthāna  — II–12 (3 4) ; 30. 
samvarddhi  — Sanskrit  samvrddhi (,,power,  might’’),  in nisamvarddhiku, 
H–20,  21, 22, 23 (35), 26 (36)  ; 18, 46.  Unlike  nigalarku (cf s.v.  galar)  , 
the term applies to honorary functions. 
sankate  (?) — I, a­17 (5). 
sanmata — 11­23 (35) . 
santāna  — santānamāmu,  II­19 (35)  ; kulagotramitrasantānamāmu,  11­21  (35)  . 
sanyāsa  — Sanskrit  samnyāsa  (sannyāsa),  I, a–1 4 (5) ; II­15 (3 4), 20 (35)  ; 
18,  41 ; C  78. 
sārambha  — cf. s.v. sa­ ^nd s v. ārambha ; C.  79. 
sāraṇa  — cf . s.v. vuddhisāraṇa. 
sārjjava  — II­2 4 (35), 25 (36)  ; cf. s.v. sa­  and  C. 78. 
sarvva  — cf. s.v. sarvvaprāṇa  and  ^arvvasattva. 
sarvvaprāṇa  — II­18  (35)  ; cf. s.v.  prāna. 
sarvasattva  — 1. 
senāpati  — II­3  (32). 
savanakna  — cf. s.v.  sa­,  vanak  and  ­na. 
sida — I‚ a­19  (5) ; cf. Pras.  Indon.  I, 52, 70, where, however, the reference 
to Sanskrit siddha cannot be maintained. 
siddha — II­28 (36) ; 25 ; cf s.v. siddham. 
siddham — II­l (32). 
sutanayātra  — 1 sq., 10, 15 ; cI. Index b, s.v. 
sthāna  — sthānāna,  II­12  (3 4) ; sthānamāmu,  II­18 (35). 
sthāpaka  — II­ 4 (32) ; 20, 37. 
sumpah  — II­5 (32), 5, 6, 7, 8, 9‚ 10, 11 (33), 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 (34), 17 
­ 18, 19, 22, 23, 24 (35), 25, 26 (36) ; niparsumpahakan, H­20 (35)^  ; C. 79. 
suruh  ­— nisuruḥ,  H­21, 22, 23 (35). ... 
svāmi  — I‚ a­20 (6)  ; 4 sq. 


--- [Page 364] ---
— 352 — 
svasthā  — marsvasthā,  I, a­8  (5) ; II–17  (35)  ; cf. C.  79, who  translates  : „dans 
un état  normal, en bonne  sante”.  I translated  „independent”,  which  seems 
to make  better  sense  in the  passages  of I and II, although it is not the 
normal  meaning of  svastha  in Sanskrit. 
ta — particle, I, a­18 (5) ; cf. Index b, s.v. 
­ta —  suffix,  21. 
tāhu — I, a­10 (5) ; II­9 (33), 12  (3 4) ; tahūna,  11­12 (33)  ; C. 70. 
tālu — II­8 (33), 19, 21, 22 (35)  ; makatālu,  II­8; the word is  followed  by 
muah  in all of  these  cases  ; cf. 2 4, 25, 26 and C. 70. 
tāmu  — tamūna,  nitamūña,  II­28 (36). 
tāmva:  — II–8  (33)  ; 38. 
tāpik  — nītāpik, I, a­9,  11 (5)  ; II­26  (36)  ; manāpīk, II­26  (36). —  Cf. C.  70, 
who quotes  the explanation given by Ferrand, where it is compared 
with  tafika in  Malagasi,  meaning ,,army, military  expedition’’.  My trans­
lation  is based on the above interpretation. Poerbatjaraka, Riu)ajat In­
donesia, 1952, p. 41,  translates  the words kaliu)at  manāpīk  in line 10 
of the Kotakapur epigraph by  ,,sangat  berussha  mena’lukkan”  (= made 
a vigorous  attempt  to submit)  , but adds  in note  2 to p. 41  that  the word 
might  rather  be compared  with  Minaṇgkabau  manape,  which,  according 
to Westenenk  (quoted  ibidem)  means  „to strife  after’’.  As a  matter  of 
fact, Poerbatjaraka  combined the two interpretations. However, accord­
ing to information  kindly  supplied by Mr. Muhammad  Yamin,  which 
was also confirmed by my Minangkabau  students,  the word is always 
used in the meaning ,,to defend oneself against, tot  resist’’  in the  Minang­
kabau language. If the latter meaning,  which  has the  advantage  of still 
being  current in a  part  of Indonesia, is adopted, it  follows  that  the 
action  alluded to in the  Kotakapur  and Telagabatu epigraphs is defensive 
rather  than offensive. 
tanḍa  — I, a­14 (5). 
tathāpi  — H­12  (3 4) ; 16  ; C. 69. 
tatkāla  — 16. 
tattva  — 11­25 (36). 
tīda — I, a­10 (5)  ; II­5, 7 (33), 11 (33), 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 (3 4), 17, 18, 20, 21, 
23, 2 4 (35), 25, 28 (36)  ; C. 70 ; for tu.la  bhakti,  cf. 27. 
timira  — I, a­7 (5), but the reading is conjectural. 
tṅaḥ — tṅaḥ rumaḥ,  II­9 (33)  ; 39. 
tuha  — II­ 4 (32)  ; 37 ; cf. s.v. huluntuhāṅku. 
tuvi — II–5,  6, 7, 8, 11 (33), 12, 15, 17  (3 4), 17, 21, 23 (35)  ; C.  70. The word 
is followed  by mulam  in most of the cases. 
ujar — maṅujāri,  II­7 (33), 33 (35)  ; niujāri,  11­23 (35) ; 26; C. 71, 7 4. 
u.^­ṃgap  — I,  a–16  (5) ; I translated  „devour,  swallow’’  (p. 4) ; a  better 
translation might be ,,to  seize’’  ; cf. taṅgĕp  in Javanese. The word must 
have existed in Old Javanese, as  follows  from  sāṅgappan,  ,,nine’’,  i.e. 
one taken off (vi^. from ten). 


--- [Page 365] ---
— 353 — 
upāya  — cf s.v.  varopāya. 
— I, ^i  (6) ; II­5  (3^), 8, 9,  li (33), 13, 16  (3 4), 18, 24 (35)  ; C 67. 
vā — parvvānḍa,  cf. s.v.  par­­. 
vaçīkaraṇa  —  II­13 (3 4) ; 22, 30  ; C.  77. 
vaduā  — vaduāmāmu,  II­6  (33)  ; cf.  Index  b, s.v. wadwā. 
vaidi  — cf. s.v.  rūpabhasmavaidima7^traprayoga. 
vaidika  — II­11  (33). 
vala—  H­28  (36). 
valuṃ  — I, a­3  (5) ; cf  Old Javanese  wwalung. 
vanak  — vaūakmāmu,  II­5  (32)  ; savanakna, II­16 (3 4). 
vaṇiyāga  — II­ 4 (32)  ; 20 ; for Sanskrit  baṇyāga  ; cf . Index  b, s.v.  waṇiyāga. 
vanua  (vanuā)  —  I, e­8  (15)  ; II­13 (3 4) ; cf.  Index  b, s.v. wanua. 
vaṅun  — H­5,  7 (33), 13  (3 4) ; 26, 38,  44. 
varopāya  — II­9  (33). 
vaṣīkaraṇa  — II­ 4 (32)  ; 20 ; not to be confounded  with  vaçīkaraṇa. 
vatak  — II­5 (32) ; 37  ; cf Pras. Indon., I, 73. 
vātu — savātu,  H­27 (36) ; perhaps, II­7 (33). 
vihāra  — I, e­8 (15). 
vini haji —  II­9,  11 (33) ; 38. — As I was  informed  by Mr. Muhammad  Yamin, 
the term is used for noble women in present  Minangkabau  language. 
vrddhi — 25. 
vuat  — 11­14  (3 4) ; vuatna, II­14  (3 4) ; vuatāña,  11­15  (3 4) ; cf. s.v. ­ā)  ; 
marvuat, H­9, 10, 11 (33), 14 (3 4), 25 (36)  ; kavuatanāiīa,  11­26 (36) ; 
C. 77 (vuatāña,  vuatku  and vuatna). 
vuddhi  — marvuddhi, IL5 (33)  ; marvuddhisāraṇa,  II­11  (33)  , 14 (3 4) . 
vukan  — II­6, 11 (33) ; 38, 40 ; C. 78. 
vulan — 11­28 (36). 
— ^iv^n^ II­5 (32). 6, 7‚ 8, 9, 10, 11 (33), 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 (3 4), 17; 
18, 19, 20, 2L 23, 2 4 (35), 25 (36). 
vuruh — II­5 (32) ; 37. 
vyasta I, a­6 (5). 
vyūha  — ^narvyūha,  I, a­10  (5) . 
b. Old Javanese. l) 
a­ —  prefix,  in asilih,  XI­9b  (312)  ; ?asiḥ,  lib (312), 15a (313) ; ?agalak, 
XI­14c  (313)  ; asĕsĕk,  23b (315) ; apatih, 26b (316)  ; aweḥ,  27d (316) ; 
aran,  27d (316) ; combined  with  the  suffix  ­an (attached to the root 
with  an h as connecting consonant) in ajanmahan, 29d (316). For a­
prefixed  to a nasalized or pre­nasalized root, cf. s.v. an­. A­ is  clearly 
l) Abbreviations  : p. : name of a person  ; t. : title  ; v. : name of a  village.  After  p., the 
article  preceding the name is added between brackets (such as si, pu, sang).  ^ 


--- [Page 366] ---
— 35 4 — 
far less frequent than ma-, and it is curious  that,  as far as the  texts  of 
this collection are concerned, it is found exclusively in the metrical 
inscription  No.  .XI. 
-a —  suffix,  not rarely spelt -a, in  musuha,  XI-llb  (312)  ; unhaṅā,  13d (313) ; 
tamwaka, 14b (313) ; ?waruha, 14d (313, for wruha  ?) ; uliha, 18b (314) ; 
hyaṅa,  16d (314) ; siha, 22b (315) ; after a doubled root, imur-imura, 
29c (316) ; combined  with  another  affix,  patoliha, 10d (312) ; pasisiha, 
10d (312)  ; ?kasandihā,  17b (314) ; manona, 19a (315)  ; ?matataganā,  18c 
(314 ; uncertain, cf s.v.  tatag)  ; diwyakĕnā,  18a (314)  ; mahātisa,  18d 
(314)  ; ?anĕmtoaha, 22b  (315)  ; mahāmayuṅa,  16d  (314)  ; iṅūyana,  23d 
(316 ; presumably  : iṅū  followed  first by -an,  with  y as a connecting 
consonant, then by -a)  ; hyaṅā  XI–16d  (314) cf. 322. 
adharmadharma.  XI–12a  (312). 
adimantri —  XI–23b  (315, for  ādimantrī  ?) . 
agam  — maṅagam kon^  216. 
agaṇita  — agaṇitāṅgana,  XI–17d  (314)  ; 324. 
agra  — p.  (pu)  of Paṅkur  in Perot inscriptions,  IX, a–8  (232)  , b–7 (233) . 
air — air  pyal,  v., IX, b–35  (236)  ; air hulu,  v., IX, b–35/36  (236)  ; air papi, 
v., IX, b-27/28  (235)  ; air ha (ji?),  v., XII–1  (235)  ; air haji,  t., 238  ; cf. 
s.v. talang, tulang,  hulu. 
ajar —  tinajar (=  ajar  with  prefix  t– and  infix  -in-)  , XI-22c  (315) ; 327. 
akalaṅka  — XI-10a (312). 
aksara —  XI-27h  (316)  ; akṣaracyutaka,  23a (315) ; 305. 
-akan  (-akĕn)  — hĕnĕnakan,  XI-12b  (312) ; combined  with  other affixes, 
ditoyakĕnā,  18a (314)  ; inaliḥhakĕn,  25b (316)  ; u)inaluyaken, 29a (316) ; 
pinakakuannakan,  XII-2  (335) ; 331. 
aku — p. (pu) of the Datar in the Perot inscriptions, IX, b-10 (233) ; cf., 
however, s.v- arka. 
alah — inalah^kan,  XII-8  (335) ; 332 sq. 
alap —  riṅ = alap,  XI-14d  (313)  ; kālap,  XI-8c  (312). 
alas — cf. s.v.  1:uha. 
alih —  XI-15b  (313)  ; aṅaliḥ,  XLl5b  (313), 26a (316)  ; inalihhakan,  XI-25b 
(316) ; 309. 
--an  — suffix,  in pikatan, IX, a-6 (232)  , b-5 (233) ; sirikan, IX, a-6 (232)  , b-6, 
10 (233)  ; tiruan, IX, a-11, 7 (232), b-6, 10/11 (233)  ; wlaḥhan,  IX, a-8, 
12 (232) ; b-7, 12 (232), b-31 (236) ; dalinan, IX, a-8, 12/13 (232) ; b-7, 
12 (233)  ; tatvān,  IX,  a-8/13  (232), h-8, 13 (233)  ; ?sikhalān,  IX, a-10 
(232), b9 (233) ; halaran, IX, a-7 12 (232), b-6, 11 (233)  ; kaṇḍaṅan,  IX, 
b-29 (235)  ; IX, b-29 (235)  ; tuhān,  IX, a-15, 16 (232), b-15, 16 (23 4) ; 
ungsyan,  XI-17c  (312)  ; ?samarān,  XI-10c  (312)  ; taṅanan,  XI-9b  (312) ; 
tirudn,  XI-15d  (313) ; combined  with  other affixes, kamalagyan, IX, 
a-14 (232), b-13 (233)  ; katuwuḥhan,  IX, a-1 4 (232), b-14 (233)  ; tinapan, 
.XI-15d  (313)  ; parhyanan,  cf . s.v. hyang  , pacalān,  cf . s.v. cala  ; dinānān, 
cf. s.v.  dāna  ; ajanmahan, cf. s.v. a-. 


--- [Page 367] ---
— 355 — 
anak  — for  anak  wanua, 242 ;  anak  wanna (banua), XI­22c (315) ; 226, 326. 
anaryya — for Sanskrit  anārya, XI–12d  (312)  ; 321. 
anīla  — XI–7d  (312). 
antan  — māntan, XI–12c  (312)  ; 321  ; cf. s.v.  muṅgu. 
antī — cf. s.v.  pānti. 
anubhāwa  — dewānubhāwa,  .XI–lla  (312). 
anuja  — ranujāmata, XI–9c  (312)  ; 318. 
anumoda  — XI­13d  (313)  ; ma7īanumoda,  ibid.  ; cf.  302, 306, 321. 
anung  — IX, a­9  (232),  b–9 (233). 
anurāga  — cf. s.v.  u)arānurāga. ^ 
aṅ– — prefix  a– before a nasalized  base,  aṅaliḥ,  XI­15b  (313)  ; ^ṅutus,  Xl­17c 
(314)  ; amūja,  XI­18c  (314)  ; anitik,  XI­25b  (316). 
aṅĕn  — paṅaṅĕn7^aṅĕnta,  Xl­llb  (312)  ; 320. 
aṅgada  — p. (ḍapunta),  XII­8  (335). 
aṅgana  — for Sanskrit  aṅganā,  cf. s.v. agaṇita. 
apa — XI­16d  (314)  ; apaniya,  XI­25b  (316)  ; ?hanāpa,  XI­18a/b  (314)  ; cf. 
note  24 to p. 314. 
apūrwa  —  XI­16b  (314),  19a  (315). 
aran  — māran, XI­26b  (316)  ; āran, XI–27d  (316)  ; makaṅaran,  XI–27c  (316)  ; 
ṅaranya,  XI–18d  (314). 
arka  — p.  (pu)  of the  Datar  in Perot  inscr., IX, a–10  (232)  ; inscr. b  reads, 
however,  aku. 
artha  — sārtha, XI­17a  (314)  ; 307. 
aso (asĕ),  also  aṅso  — maso,  XI­23b  (315)  ; inangso,  XI­9b  (312)  ; maṅaso, 
IX, a­9 (232),  b­9 (233)  ; umaṅso,  225 sq. ; maṅasĕakan,  240  ; cf.  318. 
asīh — XLllb  (312)  ; ?silih–asih, XI­15a  (313)  ; cf. s.v. sih. 
ataḥ — XII­6  (335)  ; tātaḥ  (= t^ ataḥ),  XII­4,  7 (335). 
atha  — XI–8b  (312). 
atisaya  — for Sanskrit  atiçaya, XI–16c  (314),  18d  (314). 
atus  — inatus,  XI–7c  (312),  17c  (314)  ; 293, 317,  32 4. 
aum — for Sanskrit  om (?) ka­aum,  XI­13d  (313)  ; 321. 
awatāra  — paṅawataran  (sic),  XI­16d  (314)  ; 284, 324. 
aw^t  — p. (si), IX, b­24  (235). 
ayat  — XL10a  (312). 
ā — abbreviation of  ādityawāra,  IX, a–4  (232)  ; b–3  (233). 
ācārya  — t. (ḍang)  , 219. 
āçrama  — sacaturāçrama, XI–9d  (312)  ; 318  sq. 
ādi—XI–lld(312). 
ājnā — rājne (=  ra­ājñā  i ?)‚ Xl–10a  (312)  ; 319. 
ālaya  — cf. s.v.  çiwālaya. 
ārjawa  — XI­6b  (311)  ; 317. 
āṣāḍhamāsa  — IX, a­3  (231, spelt  āṣāḍa), b­2  (232, spelt  āsādha)  . 
āu)ali  (?) —  XI–7d  (312)  ; 293, 317. 


--- [Page 368] ---
— 356 — 
baka — XI­22a (315). 
balubu(ng)  — p. (si), IX, a­20 (232), b­19/20 (23 4). 
bancung — p. (si), IX, b­22 (23 4). 
bantal  — p. (si), IX, b­36 (236). 
baṇyāga  — kabaṇyagān  (sic), IX, b­3 4 (236) ; 230 sq. 
bu — abbreviation of  budhawāra,  XII­5  (335). 
bulai  — name  of a mountain  (?),  XII­4  (335) ; 336. 
buyut  — 251 sq. ; cf. s.v. puyuI. 
bhadra — p. (pu), IX, a­10 (232), b­9 (233). 
bhagawanta — for Sanskrit  bhagavant,  228. 
bhakti  — XI­17b (314) ; bhaktita (for Sanskrit bhaktitah ?),  ibid. 
bhānu  — p. (si), IX, b­22 (234). 
bhatāra  — for Sanskrit  bhat^āra,  XI­16b (314), 24d (316), 28d (316). 
bhrĕtya  — for Sanskrit bhrtya, XI­13b (313). 
bhūmi  —XI­6b  (311). 
carū  — macaru, IX, b­25 (235) ; 242. 
caturāçrama  — sacaturāçrama,  cf . s.v. āçrama. 
ç^la — cf. s.v.  su)aç^la. 
citta — samacitta,  XI­l7a  (314) . 
çiwa — çiu)agrĕha,  XI­26a (316). 
çiu)ālaya,  — XI­25a  (316). 
çrī — saçrī,  XI­6c  (311)  ; çrī maṇḍaki, v., IX, b­25  (235)  ; orīdhara, p.  (si) , 
IX, a­16  (232),  b–16 (23 4). 
çuciharaḥ  (?) —  XI–22d  (315). 
çuklapakṣa  — XH–2,  5 (335)  ; ^amārggaçiraçuklapaksa, XI­2­4b  (316)  ; spelt 
suklapakṣa, IX, a– 4 (232),  b­3 (233). 
^.^­ —  çūrapatnī.  XI–7a  (312).  Cf. Index  c. s.v. çūralakṣmī. 
ḍa– — prefix, in  ḍakalang, IX, a­11  (232),  b­10  (233)  ; ḍakampak,  IX, a­13 
(232),  b–12/13  (233)  ; ḍamiliḥhan, IX, a­12  (232),  b–ll/12  (233)  ; ḍau^am– 
lar, IX, a­13  (232),  b­13  (233)  ; ḍakukap, IX, a­12  (232),  b­12  (233)  ; 
ḍaragang, IX, a­14  (232). 
dadi — XI­14d  (313). 
dalinan  — t. (rakai), IX, a­8,  12/13 (232),  b­7,  12 (233)  ; 220, 221, 222, 223. 
damalung  — I. (p. ?), IX, a­14  (232),  b­13  (233). 
ḍaman  — 240. 
damo  — p. (si), IX,  a­15/16  (232),  b­15  (234). 
dana  — mangdana, p. (si), IX, a­16  (232),  b­15  (234). 
dāna  — dinānān,  XI–25c  (316). 
daṇḍa  — madaṇḍa,  XI–23d  (316)  ; p. (si),  IX, b–23 (23 4). 
ḍang  — ḍang  hyang,  208, 243  ; cf. s.v.  ācárya. 
daṅū—XI–12d(312). 
ḍapu  — ḍapu  hyang,  240 ; ḍapu  hau)ang,  209. 
ḍapunta  — XH–6,  8 (335)  ; 2.40. 


--- [Page 369] ---
— 357 — 
ḍatar  — I., IX, a­10  (^32),  b­10  (233)  ; 238. 
dawa p. (si), IX, b­25  (235). 
de — denya,  XI–10d  (312)  ; dening,  XL17c  (314). 
dewa  — dewānubhāwa,  cf s.v. anubhāwa. 
dhantan  — p. (si),  IX, b–17  (234)  ; inscr.  a, however,  reads  jāntan. 
dharma  — XI–11d  (312, spelt  dharmā)  ; dharmmasinta,  XH–10  (335)  ; 337  ; 
cf. also 320. 
dhasa  — p. (si), IX, b–22  (234). 
diça — for Sanskrit  diç,  in pūrwwadiça,  XI–16b  (314). 
diwasa  — XI–23a  (315). 
diwya  — diwyatama,  XI–18a  (314)  ; diwyottama,  XI–25a  (316)  ; diwyakĕnā, 
XI–18a  (314). 
diyus  — (= dyus),  XI–22b  (315). 
^ (^?)  .— ^KII..7  (335). 
duarapalā  — for Sanskrit  dvārapāla,  XI–14c  (313)  ; 284. 
durlabha  — XI­12a  (312). 
duu^a  (?) —  duwane  (?),  XI­12b  (312). 
dwitīya  — for Sanskrit  dvitīyā  (tithī),  IX, a­3  (231),  b­2 (232)  ; XII­5  (335). 
dyaḥ  — XI­9c  (312). 
­ĕn — suffix,  in gawyĕn (?),  XI­14a  (313). 
ĕnaḥ  — ĕnaḥhī,  Xl­15b  (313). 
(ĕ)ncung  — p. (si, in combination  with  the name  : sīñcung),  IX, b­21 (234). 
gaṇḍah  — p. (si) of patih of Mantyasth who has the title (or : religious 
name?)  punta  pramāna,  IX,  a–18  (232),  b–17  (23 4). 
gandha — p. (si), IX, a­15 (232), b­15 (23 4). 
gada — p. (pu), IX, a­8/9 (232), b­9 (233, spelt  gadā). 
galak  — agalak,  XI–14c  (313). 
gaṇita  ­­ cf . s.v. aganita. 
garawuy — p. (t.  ?), IX, a­11 (232), b­10 (233). 
garung — t. (rakai) of a  king,  220. 
garuti (?) —  XI­23d  (316). 
gatagata (?) —  XI­18c  (314)  , but perhaps to be read  çatāgata  ; cf. 325. 
gawai — XI­13d (313)  ; gawainya,  XI­29b,  d (316)  ; ginawainira, XI­12d 
(312)  ; magawai,  XI­13c  (313)  ; gawayĕn  (?),  XI­14a  (313), 15a (313) ; 
ginawai,  XI­24d  (316). 
g(ĕ)lar  — ginlar,  XI­8d  (312) ; cf. 318. 
g(ĕ)nĕng  — p. (si),  XI­27b  (316). 
grĕha  — spelt griha,  XI­l5a  (313)  ; cf. s.v.  çiwa. 
guṇa  — kalāguṇarawiprakulasthanāma,  XI–8c  (312). 
gunu(ng)  — to denote the number 7,  XI–24a  (316). 
gupura —for Sanskrit gopura, in sagupura,  XI–17d  (314). 
guru  — gurumatatāpasa,  XI–21d  (315)  ; yan paguru,  XI–23c  (316)  ; guru 
hyang,  243. 


--- [Page 370] ---
— 358 — 
gusti  — XI-26d  (316)  ; gusti  u)agus,  XI-22c  (315)  ; gusti  tĕṅaḥ,  230. 
guwasang  (?) — p. (si),  IX, b-29  (235)  . 
hada  — p.  (sang),  IX, b-31  (236). 
haḍaṅan  — I., 220, 222. 
XI-llc  (312). 
haji — cf. s.v.  air. 
hala — XI-2 4d (316)  ; halc  (= hala i),  XI-12c  (312)  ; cf.  328. 
halangmanuk  — I. (also  v. ?),  XH-10  (335)  ; 337. 
halaran  —  I. (rakai), IX, a-7  (232),  b-6 (233)  ; 220, 221. 
halu — XI-12d  (312)  ; 251  sq., 312. 
hāna  — IX, a- 4 (232)  , b-3 (233)  ; XI-11b,  c (312)  , 15c (313)  , 18a (314)  , 28b (316) . 
haṅsa  — Sanskrit  hamsa,  XI-22a  (315)  ; 1, 7 4. 
hantā  — nom.  of Sanskrit  hantṛ,  XI-7d  (312)  ; 317. 
harang  (?) —  XI-25d  (316). 
—. ^aharap.  XII-3  (?),  6 (335). 
hawang  — ḍapu hau)ang,  209 ; cf. s.v. puhau)ang. 
hayu  — .Xl-13c,  15a  (313)  ; p. (si), IX, a-19  (232),  b–18 (23 4) ; mahayu, 
XL15d  (313)  ; hayuwa (=  hayu  with  suffix  –a ?), XI-21c  (315). 
hĕnĕng —hĕnĕṅakan,  XI-12b  (312). 
hino — presumably,  XI-14a  (313)  ; cf.  note 18 to p. 313. 
hiyang  — cf . s.v. hyang. 
hrĕtan  — p. or I.  (sang),  IX, a-13  (232),  b-12  (233). 
hulu—  hulu  tangṅah (=tĕṅah),  IX,  b-2 4/25 (235)  ; hulu  wras,  IX, b-35  (236)  ; 
hulu  wuatan,  216  ; hulair  (contraction of  hulu  air),  IX, b-23 (23 4) ; cf. 
230, 2 41, 2 43. 
huma  (humā)  —  XI–25d,  26a (316). 
humet  (?) —  XI-25d  (316). 
hurip  (?) —  XI–12c  (312). 
huwus  — XI–25a,  c (316)  ; p. (si), IX, b-35  (236)  ; ri kahu7t)usnyan,  XI-28a 
(316). 
hyang  (also spelt  hiyang)  — XI, 16d  (314)  ; sang  hyang,  Xl-29c  (316)  ; -wuat 
hyang (wuatthyang  with  sandhi),  XI-23a  (315)  ; ḍang  hyang,  208, 243  ; 
ḍapu  hyang,  240 ; sahyang,  XI–25d  (316)  ; marhyang, IX, b-34  (236)  ; 
parhyaṅan,  XI–17d  (314)  ; manghyang,  Xl–23a  (315)  ; hyaṅā,  XI-16d 
(314)  ; cf.  209 sq. ; cf.  also  s.v. guru,  palar, paṅgil. 
-ī — suffix,  in ĕnaḥhi,  Xl-15b  (313)  ; perhaps in  maṅuhuri, IX, a-7  (232)  ; 
maṅahuri, IX, b-6  (233)  ; garuti (?),  XI-23d  (316). 
ilu — milu, IX, a-10  (232),  b–9 (233)  ; 237. 
–in– — infix,  in inatus,  XI-7c  (312),  17c (314)  ; ginlar, 8d  (312)  ; inangso, 9b 
(312)  ; ginawai, 12d  (312),  2 4d (316)  ; ginau^ainira,  11d  (312)  ; tinonta, 
XI-12d  (312)  ; tinapān,  15d  (313)  ; sinangskāra,  2 4d (316)  ; inaliḥhakĕn, 
25l) (316)  ; dinānān,  25c  (316)  ; sinīma,  25d  (316),  28a  (316)  ; winkas, 
27a (316)  ; pinakaparujar, 27b  (316)  ; winaluyakĕn, 29a  (316)  ; kinon, 


--- [Page 371] ---
­— 359 –.– 
29a (316)  ; kinonnakan,  XII­3  (335) ; pinakakuannakan,  kinmit,  XII­1, 
4 (335)  ; inalahakan,  XII­8  (335). 
ika (ikā)  — yekā  (= ya  īkā),  XI­27b  (316) ;  yateka  (= yata  ika),  XI­27d 
(316). 
ikan^a  — yatekana,  XI­24;d  (316), 28d (316)  ; īkanang,  XII­3,  6 (335). 
ikeng  (ikaing) — XI­26a (316) ; XH­9 (335). 
imur  — tan  īmur­imura,  XI­29c  (316)  . 
ina — cf s.v. pras. 
īṇk^ ­­ (= i nke),  XI­^26d  (316). 
inū — iṅūyana,  XI­23d  (316). 
irang  — merang,  XI­10c  (312). 
iring  —­ (= ī ring  ?), waruheriṅ  = alap^  XI­14d  (313). 
ista — wrong spelling of Sanskrit  iṣta,  XI­l4b  (313). 
istaka — wrong spelling of Sanskrit  iṣtaka,  XI­l4b  (313). 
iwung — v. (?)‚  XI­10c  (312). 
īçwari  — Sanskrit  īçvarī,  XI­7a  (312). 
jagat —  XI­8a  (312). 
jaha — p.  (si)  , IX, a­16 (232)  , but inscr. b  reads  niha. 
jakkhara  — p. (si), IX, a­17 (232), b­17 (23 4). 
jana — p. (si), IX, b­20 (23 4). 
jangluran  — v., 251. 
janmah — ajanmahan,  XI­29d  (316) ; cf. s.v. a­. 
jantan (?) — p. (si), IX, a­17 (232), but b  reads  dhantan. 
jantra  — p. (si), IX, b­^3 (23 4). 
jati — p. (si), IX, b­33 (236). 
jāti — in  jāti ning  rāt,  name of a  king,  XI­9a  (312) ; 288­293. 
jawa  — bhūmi  ri jawa,  XI­6b  (311). 
jetā — nom. of Sanskrit  jetṛ,  XI­6d  (312)  . 
jīwana  — p. or I.  (sang),  IX, a­12 (232), b­11 (233). 
jumput  — IX, b­25 (235) ; 2 42. 
juru — IX, b­23 (23 4) ; b­31, 32, 33, 36 (236) ; jurunya, IX, a­19 (232), 
b–19/20  (23 4) ; silijuru, cf. s.v.  siliḥ ;  juru limus, IX, a­19 (232), b­19/20 
(23 4) ; juru  kunci,  IX, b­21 (23 4) ; cf. 230, 2 41. 
ka — abbreviation of kaliwuan,  XII­5  (335). 
ka­ — prefix, in  kālap,  XI­8c  (312) ;  ka­aum,  XI­13d  (313) ;  perhaps  in 
karih,  XI­14b  (313), in kalula, IX, a­16 (232), b­16 (23 4) ; kalima, IX, 
a­20 (^32), b­19, 20, 21 (23 4), 30, 33 (236) ;  XI­26c;  together  with  ­i 
in kasandihe,  XI­25c  (316) ;  with  ­nyan  in kahuu)usnyan, XI­28a (316) ; 
with ­an in  katuwuḥhan,  IX, a­14 (232), b­1 4 (233)  ; kanayakān,  IX, 
a­15 (232)  ; kakalyan, IX, b­26 (235)  ; kabanyagān,  IX, b­3 4 (236) ; 
kadatwan,  XI­8d  (312) ; karatwan,  XI­9b  (312)  ; ?karasān,  XI­18b  (314) ; 
kamarān,  XI­23c  (316). 


--- [Page 372] ---
—360 — 
kā —­ abbreviation of  kūti,  XII­1 (335)  ; cf.  333. 
kabaiḥ  (kabeḥ)  — XI–13a  (313),  25c (316). 
— XI­27c  (316). 
^^­ — XI–22a  (335)  ; cf.  1. 
kakalyan  — v„ IX, b–26  (235)  ; 231. 
kakar—v.,  IX, b–28  (235). 
kakī — rakaki,  XI–10b  (312)  ; sakaki,  XI–22d  (315). 
k^la..— p.  (sī),IX,  h–20 (23 4). 
kāla — Xl­5d  (311)  ; 2 4a (316). 
— kalāgnṇarawiprakulasthanāma.  XI­8c  (312). 
kalang  — IX, b–37  (236)  ; XI­22c  (315)  ; ḍakalang,  I. or p.  (sang),  IX, a­11 
(232),  b–10  (233). 
kalī — cf. s.v. kakalyan. 
kalima  — cf s.v.  lima. 
kaling  (?) —  kumaling, XI­14d  (313), but  cf s.v.  ling. 
kalula  — tuhān  ning kalula, IX, a­16  (232),  b–16  (233)  ; 228. 
kamalagyan  — cf s.v. lagi. 
kampak  — ḍakampak, t.  or p.  (sang),  IX, a­13  (232),  b­12/13  (233). 
kaṇḍaṅan  — v.,  IX. b–29  (235). 
kaṇḍi  — p. (si), IX, b–34/35 (23 4). 
kaṇḍut  — p. (rasi),  XI­26d  (316). 
karamba  — p., XI–28c  (316). 
?karas  — karasān.  XI–18b  (314)  ; or a derivative of rasa, cf. 325. 
karī — XI–19a  (315)  ; cf. s.v.  karīḥ. 
kariḥ  — XT–14b  (313)  ; cf. s.v. kari 
kataḥ—XI­23d  (316). 
katuḍaīng  — p. or I.  (sang),  IX, a­11/12  (232),  b­11  (233). 
katuu)uhhan  — p. or  t., cf. s.v.  tutouh. 
kawit  — p. (rasi),  .XI–27d  (316). 
kaunttha  — XI–22d  (315)  ; 327. 
kayu—XI–16a  (314). 
kayumwuṅan  — v.,  IX, a–17  (232),  b­17 (23 4), ?29  (235). 
k(ĕ)ling  — p. (si),  XI–26c  (316). 
k(ĕ)mit  — kinmit,  XII­1,  4 (335). 
k(ĕ)ring  — 238. 
kesawa  — from  Sanskrit  keçava,  p. (si),  IX, b–21 (23 4). 
khawali  — .XI­29d  (316, preceded by si). 
ki—XI–16a  (314). 
kilala  — maṅilala  drĕwya  haji,  227, 238, 2­40. 
kita — .XI–22a,  c (315). 
kon — konya,  XI–29c  (316)  ; kinon,  XI–29a  (316)  ; kīnonnakan,  XH–3  (335)  ; 
cf. s.v. kuan. 
^ p. (^ I.^ h^.26  (235). 
kṣuṇika  — XI–17c  (314). 
kuaiḥ  — XI­15d  (313),  17a (31 4), 22b  (315). 


--- [Page 373] ---
— 361 — 
kuan  — pinakakuannakan,  XII-2  (335) ; cI. 33L 
kudur  — wahuta hyang  kudur,  237 ;  makudur,  I., IX, a-9  (232)  , b-8/9 (233) ; 
wahuta  makudur,  IX, a-14 (232), b-13/14 (233 sq.) ; cf. 220, 221, 222, 
223, 225, 227, 237, 238. 
kukap — dakukap, t. or p., IX, a-12 (232), b-12 (233). 
kula —  kalāguṇarawiprakulasthanāma,  XI–8c  (312)  ; nijakula,  XI–13b  (313)  . 
kuma–  — prefix  (?), kumaling,  XI-14d  (313)  ; more probably, however, the 
form  is to be analyzed as the -um-  form from  waling  with  prefixed k-
or rather ku- (without lengthening of the u) for the first person. 
kumāra  —  XI-23c  (316). 
kumarī  — for Sanskrit  kumārī,  XI-23c  (316). 
kunci  — v., IX, b-25 (235). 
laḍuḥ  — p.,  XI-27b  (316). 
lagi — kamalagyan,  t. (sang),  IX, a-13/14 (232), b-14 (234) ; 225. 
lain—XI-6c  (311). 
lakas — salakas (for  salĕkas  ?) , XI-lla  (312) . 
lama—XI-7b  (312). 
lampi  (langpi) — I., IX, a-9, 14 (232), b-8. 13 (233) ; 220, 221, 222, 223. 
lamnuran — 229, 240. 
lawan —  XI-12a  (312), 24c (316), 26b (316) ; kalawan  XLl5c  (313). 
lawang —  XI-15b  (313). 
lawas — malawas,  XI-l6a  (314) ; lawasnira.  XI-lla  (312). 
laya — p. (si), IX, b-34 (236). 
layar — p. (si), IX, b-23 (23 4). 
l(ĕ)mah  — palmahan,  XI-:25b  (316). 
likhita  —XII-10  (335). 
lima — kalima, IX, a-20 (232) ; b-19, 20, 23 (234), 33 (236) ; kalimanira, 
XI-26c  (316) ; cf 230, 241. 
limus  — limus  watu,  v., IX, b-28 (235) ; juru  limns,  IX, a-20 (232)  , b-19/20 
(234) ; 241, 2 42. 
liṅga  — XI-14a  ; cf. note 18 to p. 313 ;  cf . also Index c, s.v. 
loka — lokadhatu,  XI-5d  (311)  ; lokapāla,  XI-9c  (312). 
luah—XI-25b  (316). 
^ā^  —  XII- 4 (335) ; 336. 
lupa—  XL29b  (316). 
lwapaṇḍak  — IX, a-18 (232), b-18 (23 4) ; 229. 
ma- — prefix, in  madaṇḍa,  XI-23d  (316)  , mawurukung,  XI-2 4c (316)  ; māran, 
XI-26c  (316)  ; maratā,  XI-27c  (316) ; matahun,  XI-27d  (316),  malupā, 
XI-29b  (316)  ; magawai,  XI-l3c  (313), 17c (314)  ; māntan,  XI-12c 
(312),  matakut,  XI-14d  (313)  ; mahayu,  XI-15d  (313) ; malawas, 
XI-16a  (314) ;  matamwak,  IX, b-23 (23 4) ; mapakan, IX, b-2 4 (235) ; 
macaru, IX, b-25 (235)  ; marowang, IX, b-35 (236) ; merang,  XI-10c 
(312) ;  makudur,  cf s.v.  kudur;  mapatih, cf. s.v.  patiḥ;  ma(ng)taṇḍa, 
cf. s.v.  taṇḍa;  together  with  negative particle, tamojar-ujar,  .XI-l8c 


--- [Page 374] ---
­­ 362 — 
(314) ;  with  suffixes,  matataganā  (—  tatag  with  prefix ma­ and suffixes 
­anand–a?)‚XI–18c  (314). 
mā — abbreviation of  māṣa,  XII–1  (335). 
maddhawa  ­­’­ p. (pu)  , IK, a–7  (232)  ; cf . s.v. madhāwa. 
madhāwa  — p. (pu)  , IK, b–7  (233)  ; it is curious  that  the name  occurs in two 
different forms in corresponding places ; it is  still  more curious  that  both 
maddhau)a and madhawa are wrong spellings, the correct form being 
.mādhawa. 
maha–  (mahd­)  ­ archaic prefix, exclusively and not frequently found in 
the older  Old Javanese  writings, in  mahāmayuṅa,  XI­l6d  (314)  , mahātisa, 
XI­18d  (314)  ; references,. 324. 
mahantara  — p. (pu)  , IX, a^7  (232)  ; 237  ; the corresponding place in  b 
reads  mantara. 
māheçwarā  — wrong spelling for Sanskrit  māheçwara,  XI­7a  (312). 
maka­  (pinaka)  — makadhāraṇa,  XI­5d  (311) ; pinakaparujar,  XI­27b  (316) ; 
makanaran,  XI­27c  (316) ; pinakakuannakan,  XII­2  (335) ; 331. 
maling  — XI­14d  (313). 
.m^ī.n‚ī  ^ IX, b­29 (235). 
mamratī  — mamratipurastha,  XI­8d  (312) ; rakaki  mamrati,  XI­10b  (312). 
manahā  (?) — v., IX, b­29 (235). 
manau^an  — p.  (pu),  IX, a­9 (232), b­8 (233). 
manḍakī  — ef . .^.v.,  çrI. 
mandĕr  — p. (?),  XI­28c  (316). 
maṇḍī  — p.  (sī),  IX, a­15 (232), b­15 (234). 
mandiha — p. (si), IX, a­18 (232), b­18 (23 4). 
manduta  ­­ p. (pn)^ IX, a­7 (232), b­6 (233). 
maṅgala  — paḍahi maṅgala,  IX, b­2 4 (235). 
manghūri  (sp^lt  maṅahurī  and  maṅuhuri)  — I. (rakai), IX, a­7, 11 (232), 
b­6, 11 (233) ; 220, 221. 
mangkanā  — tlas  mangkanā,  XI­9a  (312) . 
manglakṣa  — p.  (pu),  IX, a­9 (232), b­8 (233). 
manojna —  XI­19a  (315). 
mantara — p. (pu), IX, b­6 (233) ; 237 ; of. s.v. mahantara. 
mantyasiḥ  — v., IX, a­17 (232), b­17 (23 4) ; 229, 241. 
manū—  wrong spelling of Sanskrit  manu,  p. (pu),  IX, a­8 (232), b­7 (233). 
manuja (?) —  manujan  (= manuja  followed  by an?),  XI­13b  (313). 
manuk  — cf s.v. halangmanuk. 
manūt  ­ p.  (sī),  IX, b­2 4 (235). 
mar (?) —  (= mĕr?),  kamarān,  .XI­23c  (316). 
mārg(g)açira  — santārggaçraçuklapakṣa,  XI­24b  (316). 
maring  — p. (si), IX, a­19  (232),  b–19  (234). 
mas — XH–1,  3, 6 (335). 
masalancang  (?) —  v., IX, b­36  (236). 
mata  — ranujāmata,  XI­9c  (312). 
milar ­– p. (si), IX, b­35/36  (236). 


--- [Page 375] ---
— 363 — 
mitra  —XI-13b  (313). 
mrĕsi  — p.  (rasi),  XI-26c  (316). 
muhūr  (?) —  Xl-16a  (314), where it is supposed to be the name of a  tree 
(preceded by ki) ; cf. note 58 to p. 323. 
mukhya  — .wipramukhya,  XI-9d  (312). 
mula — IX, b-23 (23 4) ; 2 41. 
mūla—  XI-12d  (312). 
mulung — p. (pu), IX, a-8 (232), b-8 (233). 
mulya — p. (si), IX, b-29/30 (235 sq.). 
mulyang — p. (si), IX, b-2 4 (235). 
mungu  — v., IX, b-32 (236) ; cf 231  ; muṅguantan,  v., IX, b-3 4 (236) ; 231. 
murana  (muranā)  — p. (si), IX, a-18 (232), b-18 (23 4). 
musuh—XI-llb  (312). 
mwang  — XI-7d  (312)  . 
n — watu  = nn =  i7^atus,  XI-7c  (312) ; 293. 
ṇ .— .^i-9^  lib (31^), ^ (3JA), ^ ^ (3I^ 
nā — XI-12d  (312), 2 4b, c (316), ?25d (316). 
nahan — p.  (si)  , IX, b-19 (23 4) , but the corresponding place in inscr. a  reads 
nihān. 
nana — p. (si), IX, b-22 (23 4). 
naran (?) — p. (si), IX, b-25 (235). 
naran — cf. s.v. aran. 
nātha  — XI-8a  (313). 
nayaka (nayaka) —  tuhan  ning nayaka rua, IX, b-15 (23 4) ; tuhan  ning ka-
nayakān,  1.X, a-15 (232) ; 227, 228, 238, 239. 
ndātan  XI-12b  (312). 
ni — passim, e.g.,  XI-7b,  8a, lOd,  11a, c (312), 28c (316) ; ny,  XI-27b  (316). 
niha (?) — p.  (si)  , IX, b-16 (23 4) , but inscr. a  reads  jaha. 
nihan — p. (si), IX, a-20 (232), but inscr. b  reads  nahan. 
nijakula  — XI-13b  (313). 
nikaing  — XI-28a  (316) . 
nikana —  XI-25a  (315)  . 
nikanang —  XI-2 4a (316). 
nikata —  XI-16b  (314). 
ning — passim, e.g.  XI-9a,  11c, 12a, d (312). 
nira — suffix, in lawasnira, XI-lla (312) ; kalimanira, XI-26c (316) ; gina¬
wainira, XI-lld (312). 
(^?)  ^ (^ī),  IX, b-25 (235). 
nitya —  XI-29d  (316). 
niyaga (?) —  XI-22a  (315), but the  word  separation is not certain. 
ṅke — cf. s.v. iṅke. 
-(n) ta —  tinonta,  XI-12d  (312)  ; paṅaṅĕnnaṅĕnta,  XI-llb  (312). 
ṅuni  — ṅunin ṅuni-ṅunin,  XI-10c  (312). 


--- [Page 376] ---
— 36 4 — 
­nya —­  suffix,  in umaḥnya,  IX, a­ 4 (232), b­3 (233)  ; parwuwusnya, IX, 
a­17/18  (232), b­17 (234)  ; jurunya, IX, a­19 (232), b­18, 19 (234) ; 
rāmanya,  IX, a­19 (232) ;  denya,  XI­lOd  (312) ; gawainya,  XI­13d  to 14a 
(313 ; presumably, the  base  at the end of strophe 13 and its  suffix  at 
the beginning of the next strophe)  ; XI­29b,  d (316)  ; takanya,  XI–16a 
(314)  ; paḍanya, XI–18a  (314)  ; tumonya,  XI–18b  (314)  ; taṅaranya, 
XI–18d  (314)  ; ṅaranya,  XI–18d  (314)  ; rūpaniyān  (=  rupāniya,  metrical 
license for  rūpanya,  followed  by an).  XI–16c  (314)  ; ri kahuwusnyan, 
XI–28a  (316). 
pa — shbreviation of Pahing, 1st day of the 5 days’ week, IX, a­4 (232), 
b­3 (233) ; abbreviation of  Paniruan,  4th day of the 6 days’ week,  XII­5 
(335). 
pa­ — prefix, in  patihā,  XI­10a  (312)  ; pānti,  XI–15d  (313)  ; paguru,  XI­23c 
(316) ; before a nasalised  base,  pamatih,  XI­23a  (315) ;  together  with 
a suffix, patoliha, XI­10d (312),  paṅaṅĕnnaṅĕnta,  XI­llb (312) ; pasi¬
siha, XI­10d;  pamawān,  XI­15b (313)  ; paṅawatarān,  XI­16d (314) ; tan 
pacalān,  XI­17d  (314)  ; palmahan,  XI­25b  (316)  ; patalĕsan,  XI­28c  (316)  ; 
patapān,  IX, a­5,  9/10, 15 (232),  b­4,  9 (233), 14 (234). 
paḍa  — paḍanya,  XI–18a  (314)  . 
paḍahī  — paḍahī maṅgala,  IX, b­2 4 (235)  ; 241 sq. 
padar  — p. (si),  IX, b­28  (235). 
pagar  — p. (si),  IX, b–28  (235). 
pakan  ( = pĕkĕn)  — in  mapakan,  XI, b–24  (235),  b–33  (236)  ; 230. 
palarhyang —I. (rakai),  IX, a­7 (232),  b–7 (233)  ; 220, 222;  cf. s.v. paṅgilhyang. 
pamĕgat  (pamĕgĕt)  — 220. 
paṅa  — p. (si),  IX, b–28  (235). 
pandakyan  — IX, b–19  (234)  ; 229. 
pangsat  — p. (si), IX, b–32  (236). 
paṅgilhyang  — I. (rakai),  221, 222. 
paṇi (paṇing ?)  — v., IX, b–2C  (235). 
paṅkur  — I., IX, a­8  (232),  b–7 (233)  ; 220, 221, 222. 
pānti  — etymologically,  anti  with  prefix  pa–,  XI–15d  (313) . 
paṅurang  — 238. 
papi  — cf. s.v.  air. 
par­ — prefix, in parw(w)uwus, IX, a­16, 17 (232) ; b­15, 17, 20, 22 (23 4) ; 
b­31 (236)  ; parhyaṅan,  XLl6d  (314) : pinakaparujar,  XI­27b  (316). 
para —  mure,  XI­28d  (316). 
parang — v., IX, b­26 (235). 
pārijātaka  — pārijatakatarūpama,  XI–16c  (314). 
pasat  — p. (si), IX, b­20/21 (234). 
patapān  — t. (rakai), IX, a­5, 9/10, 15 (232) ; b­4‚ 9 (233), b­14 (234) ; 218, 
219, 220, 223, 225, 226, 237, 239. 
patiḥ  —IX,  a­6, 17 (232), b­5 (233), b­16 (234);  XI­26c  (316);  saṅ=apatiḥ,  XI­
26b (316) ;  sang  patih,  XI­10a  (312)  ; rakarayān  mapatih, IX, a­10 (232), 


--- [Page 377] ---
— 365 — 
b­10 (233)  ; XII­3,  4, 7 (335)  ; mamatiḥ,  XI–23a  (315)  ; 227, 228, 237, 
238, 240,  2 41. 
patnī  — XI­7a  (312,  çūrapatnī). 
payung  — mahāmayuṅa,  XI–16d  (314)  ; 324. 
pĕtir  (speIt  ptir, patir)  — v., IX, a­18  (232),  b–18 (23 4) ; 229,  2 41. 
pikatan  — I. (rakai)  of a  king,  IX, a–6  (232)  , b–5 (233)  ; cf . the Introductions 
to Nos. IX, X, XI,  passim. 
piliḥ  — ḍamīliḥan,  p. or  I. (sang),  IX, a–12  (232), b­11/12 (233). 
pirak  — XII–1  (335). 
pisan — misanna,  XII­3,  6 (335) ; 336. 
po — abbreviation of  pon,  2nd day of the 5 days’ week,  XII­2  (335). 
pongpong —  XI­llc  (312). 
prabhu  —sang  prabhu,  XI­9a  (312). 
prahātaḥ  (?) XI­12c  (312). 
prajā  — XI­9d  (312). 
prākrĕtasanniweça  — XI­between strophes 21 ^ 22 (315) ; 286 sq., 326. 
pramāṇa  — t. (punta),  IX, a­18 (232),  b–17  (23 4). 
pramukha —  XI–13b  (313). 
pras  — pras  = iūa  ing limus, v., IX, b­26 (235) ; 2 42. 
prasāda  — for Sanskrit  prāsāda,  IX, b­3 4 (236) ; possibly, b­30 (236) ; 230. 
prasiddha  — XI­6c  (311), 8a (312). 
pratidina  — XI­29b  (316). 
pratyaya — 227, 228, 238 ; pratyaya  hyang,  243. 
prawara  — XI­13c  (313). 
^ḥ..pr^  —  XI­10d  (312). 
puhawang — 209 ; cf s.v. hawang. 
pūja — for Sanskrit  pūja,  in amūja,  XI–18c  (314)  ; muja (preceded by ta, 
so that  the form  might also be amuja  with  neglected lengthening of the 
a ; the length of the u is also neglected)  ‚ XI­22d  (315)  ; mamūja,  XI­29a 
(316) ; cf. Index  c, s.v.  pūjā. 
puluwatu — p. (pu) of the patih  Rakai  Weka  in 850, IX, a­6 (232), b­5 (233) ; 
220. 
— IX, a­18 (232),  b–17  (234) ; 240. 
puput  — XI–28,  b, d (316). 
pura — mamratipurastha,  XI­8d  (312). 
pūrw(w)a  — cf. s.v. apūrwwa  and s.v.  diça. 
putra —  XI­12c  (312). 
puyut  — 251 sq. ; cf. s.v.  buyut. 
pwa — cf. s.v. tapwan. 
pyal — cf s.v. air. 
ra­ — prefix, in  rakarayān,  IX, a­10, 14/15 (232), b­10 (233) ; b­14 (23 4) ; 
rakai, IX, a­5, 6 (232), b­4, 5 (233) ; ratejika,  XI­6c  (311)  ; rawipra,  XI– 
8c (312)  ; ranujāmata,  XI­9c  (312)  ; rājne,  XI­10a  (312) ; rakaki,  XI­10b 
(312)  ; cf.  s.v.  rasī ;  s.v.  rakarayān, 


--- [Page 378] ---
— 3^ ­– 
ra^a^  —  .^ra^ar^, t.  (:sa^),  IX, a–14  (232),  b–14  (234). 
^ —  ^ (^­)­ ­­ 9 (–^. ­­ 9 ( 23^) 
XI­9b  (312). 
rakai  — cf. s.^v.  r^­. 
rakarayān  — rakarayān  patāpān,  IX,  a­14/15  (232),  b­14  (234)  ; rakarayān 
mapatiḥ,  IX, a­10  (232),  b­10  (233)  ; XII­3,  4, 7 (335)  ; rakarayān  sang 
matuha,  XII­8  (335)  ; cf. s.v. ra-. 
rakĕt  — mangrakĕt,  maṇḍakĕt,  239  sq. 
rakṣa  — XI­8b  (312, spelt  rakṣā)  ; ma.ngrakṣa,  XI­6b  (311). 
rakwa  — XI­11d  (312)  ; 320. 
rama  (rāma)  ­ IX, b­33  (236),  a­20  (232),  b­20  (234)  ; b­35  (236)  ; b­36 
(236)  ; XI–22c  (312)  ; rāmanya,  IX, a­19  (232),  b­19  (234)  : rāmanta, 
XII–1  (?),  4 (335)  ; 216  sq.,  220  sq.,  230. 
raṇautsau^a  — Sanskrit  raṇotsava (?),  XI–6c  (311). 
raṅkan.g  — XI–15b  (313). 
ranujāmata  — cf. s.v. anuja. 
rarai  — cf. s.v. wadwā. 
rasi — composed of  ra– and si (?),  XI–26c,  d (312)  ; 27d  (312). 
rat —  cf. ^.v.  jātī. 
ratā — rāma  maratā,  XI–27c  (316)  ; 216. 
ratejik^  — XI–6c  (311). 
ratu — IX, a­5/6  (232),  b–5 (233)  ; karatwan,  XI­9b  (312)  ; 212, 218, 219. 
raunpra  — cf. s.v. wipra. 
rgga ­­– p. (si), IX, b­20  (234)  ; the name  is probably  rĕga  with  non­writing 
of the ĕ and doubling of ga after r) . 
ri —  XI­7a  (312), 8a, d (312), 10b (312). 
roha — samaroha, .XI­17a (314). 
rowa.^g —  XI­8b  (312)  ; marowang, p. (si), IX, b­35 (236). 
rua — IX, a­10, 15 (232), b­15 (234) ; karua, b­9 (233). 
ruhun  .­– rumuhun, XI­16a (314) ;  XII­7  (335). 
rūpa  — rūpaniyān  (= rūpaniya,  for rūpanya,  followed  by an)  , XI­16c  (314)  . 
rutung — p. (si), IX, a­19 (232), b­19 (234). 
rutus  — p. (si), IX, b­35 (236). 
sa­ — prefix, in  saçrī,  XI–6c  (311)  ; sacaturāçrama,  XI­9d  (312)  ; sawargga, 
XI­13a  (313)  ; saturusnya,  XI­14b  (313)  ; sawuit,  XI­15c  (313)  ; sawaluy, 
XI–15d  (313)  ; satahun  (?), XI­16a  (314)  ; sārtha,  XI­17a  (314)  ; sagu– 
pura,  XI­17d  (314)  ; sakaki,  XI­22d  (315)  ; samārggaçiraçuklapakṣa, 
XI­24b  (316)  ; sawĕlas,  XI–24b  (316)  ; sahiyang,  XL25d  (316). 
saha  — XI–26b  (316)  ; 27d  (316). 
–^ .– (^ IX, a­19  (232),  b–13  (234). 
sakābda  — incorrect spelling for Sanskrit  çakābda,  XI­24a (316). 
sāksī  – XII­9  (335). 


--- [Page 379] ---
— 367 — 
sama  — XI­17a (314)  ; samaroha, samacitta, XI­17a  (314) . 
samalagi  — v., IX, b­31/32  (236)  ; 231. 
samāpta  — XI­17c  (314)  ; 25a  (316). 
samara —  samarān  (= samara  followed  by an  ?) , XI­10c  (312) . 
samgat  — XI­26b  (316)  ; cf. s.v.  pamĕgat. 
—. (^),  i^, ^ (^), b–i9  (.^3 4) ; (^ī), IX, b­26  (235). 
sanab  — p. (rasi),  XI­26d  (316). 
sandiha  — Sanskrit  saṃdeha,  XI­10b  (312)  ; kasandihā,  XI­17b  (314)  ; 
kasandihe  (= kasandiha i),  XI­25c  (316). 
sang,  — XI­9a,  10a, 11d  (312),  18b (314),  22b (315),  26b, 27c, 29c  (316)  ; 217, 
22 4, 225  ; cf. s.v.  hyang. 
sangskāra  — Sanskrit  samskāra,  in sinangskāra,  XI–24d  (316) . 
sanjanā  — p. (si), IX, b­28  (235). 
sarw(tv)a  — p.  (pu)  of the  Rakai  Sirikan  in 850,  IX, a–6  (232),  b–6 (233). 
sawah  — XI­28a  (316). 
sayut  — p. (si), IX, b–21  (234). 
s(ĕ)ḍang  — I.  (punta),  IX, a­18  (232),  b­18 (23 4). 
sĕmbaḥ  (?) —  anĕmwaha,  XI­22b  (315), but word separation is uncertain. 
sĕsĕk  — in  asĕsĕk,  XI­23b  (315). 
si —  passim  before  names  of persons,  e.g.  XI­26c,  d ; 27a,  b ; 29d (316) ; cf. 
217, 226, 2­43. 
siddha —  XI­22b  (315) ; cf s.v. prasiddha and Index  c, s.v. siddhayātra. 
^ — (^), IX, b­25 (235) ; b­31 (236). 
^ .— ^  XI­11b  (312), 15a (313) ; siha,  XI­22b  (315). 
sikhalān  — I., IX, a­10 (232), b­9 (233) ; 221, 222, 238. 
silih — asilih,  XI­9b  (312)  , 15a (313) ; silijuru, presumably for  siliḥ­juru,  IX, 
b­20,  22 (23 4) ; 230, 2 41. 
sīma — IX, a­5 (232) ; spelt  sema,  which  became  sema  after  k at the end of 
the preceding word,  IX, b­ 4 (232) ;  aT^ak  ring  sīma,  IX, b­27 (235)  ; sīma, 
XI­28b,  d (316) ;  sin^ma,  XI­25d,  28a (316)  ; sīmā,  XI­27d  (316) ; cf 217, 
218, 237. 
sira — XI­7a,  12c (312) ; 13a‚ 14a (313) ; 17b (314) ; 27c (316)  ; cf. s.v.  ­nīra. 
sirikan  — t. (rakai), IX, a­6‚ 11 (232), b­6, 10 (233) ; 220, 221, 222. 
sisih — tan pasisiha,  XI­10d  (312) . 
so — abbreviation of  somawāra,  XII­2  (335) . 
su — abbreviation of  suwarṇa,  XII­1 (335) ; 333. 
suklapakṣa  — cf.  s.v. çuklapakṣa. 
sulaṅkuning  —­ v., IX, b­36 (236)  ; 23L 
surarah (?) —  XI­22d  (315). 
susuk  — XI­26b  (316) ;  manusuk,  IX, a­5 (232), b­4 (233). 
swaçīla  — XI­8b  (312). 
syapa  — XI­13d  (313), 19a (315). 


--- [Page 380] ---
— 368 — 
t­ –— prefix,  in tinajar  (so­called conjugated  form,  Dutch  : ’vervoegde vorm’ 
of the 2nd person  plural  ; the meaning, presumably, is : ,,you should 
receive  orders  to’’,  but I know no other example of t­ used before a  base 
with  the  infix  ­in­ ; cf., however,  tājarakĕn, Nagarakṛt.  89, 1d, ed. 
Kern­Krom,  1919, p. 196),  XI­22c  (315) ; probably, ta  dyus  (22b) and 
ta muja (22d) contain the same prefix and should rather have been cut 
t := adyus  and t = amuja ; trasiha  could  be cut  t = rasiha and rasiha 
could  be considered a more respectful equivalent of asiha, to be trans­
lated:  ,,you should acquit yourselves of the pilgrimage  (siddhayātra) 
with respectful  love’’  (?). 
ta — particle,  XI­7a,  10a, 11d, 12a, c (312) ; T7b, 18a (314) ; 19a,  22b‚  c, 
d (315), 28b, 29a (316). 
­ta ­— suffix,  in paṅaṅĕnnaṅĕnta,  XI­llb  (312) . 
tā —– tā pacalān,  Xl­17d  (314)  ; cf  Old  Jav.  Rām.,  II­57. 
— (^ī), IX, b­24  (235). 
ta^.un,  — XI–7b  (312)  ; satahun,  XI­16a  (314)  ; matahun,  XI­27d  (316). 
takan  — takanya  (archaic  spelling  for tĕkĕn­nya ?),  XI–16a  (314). 
takut  — matakut.  XI–14d  (313). 
tala — p. (si), IX, b­32  (236). 
talaga  — I. or p.  (sang),  IX,  a–ll  (232),  h­11  (233). 
talang  — talang  air,  v., IX, b­28/29  (235)  ; possibly, but not necessarily, to 
be corrected to tulang air, q.v. 
tales  — patalĕsan,  p. (?),  XI­28c  (316). 
tama  — XI­23b  (315) ;  tumama,  XI­26a  (316) ; tan  tumama,  225 sq. 
tama  — tamojar­ujar,  XI­18c  (314). 
tampaḥ  — XI­26a  (316). 
tāmraçāsana  ­—  XII–9  (335)  . 
tamuy  — p. (si), IX, b­23 (234). 
tamwak  — tamwaka,  XI­l4b  (313)  ; matamwak,  IX, b­23 (234) ; 230, 241 ; 
note 49 to p. 322. 
tan —  XI­10d  (312) ; 18b (314)  ; 29c, d (316)  ; cf. s.v.  tā and tama,  tatan,  tar, 
tanmolah. 
tanmolah — tanmolaha,  XII­4  (335). 
taṅan  — taṅanan īnuṅso,  XI­9b  (312)  ; 288. 
taṅar–  — taṅaranya  (for  tĕṅĕranya ?  cf . s.v. takan)  ‚ XI–18d  (314)  . 
taṇḍa  — IX, a­15  (232)  ; mangtaṇḍ^ IX, b­15  (234)  ; 226, 239. 
tang  — XI–18d  (314)  ; 24b, 25a, d  (316). 
taṅguḥ  — p. (si), IX, b­36  (236). 
tanjung  — XI­15c  (313). 
tapa — tinapān,  XI–15d  (313)  ; tapa hajī,  238 ; cf . s.v. patapān. 
tapal (tapĕl)  — tuhān  ning manapal, IX, a­16/17  (232),  b­16  (234)  ; 228, 239 
sq. ; napal, p. (si), IX, b­33  (236). 
tapwan  — XI­llb  (312)  ; 319  sq. 
tar—XI­10b  (312). 


--- [Page 381] ---
— 369 — 
tarawaṇa  — p. (si), IX,  a-20  (232), b-20 (23 4). 
taru — pārijatakatarūpama,  XI-16c  (3l 4) . 
tatag  (?) —  matataganā,  XI-18a (314). 
tatan  — XI-25c  (316). 
t^ī — ^  ^?, XI-27a (316). 
tatkāla  —  IX, a-^/5, 6, 15 (232) ; b-3/ 4, 5 (233), 14/15 (23 4) ; XII-2,  5 (335). 
tawān  — I., IX, a-8, 13 (232), b-8 (232) ; b-13 (233) ; 220, 221, 222, 223. 
tatvang — p. (si), IX, b-26 (235). 
^ —  XI-l 4b (313) ; 322. 
^(ĕ)la^  — XI-9a  (312). 
tĕṅaḥ  — cf. s.v.  hulu  and s.v.  gusti. 
tĕpat  — XL7b  (312). 
— XL2 4d (316). 
thani  — thanīwung  (=  thani  iwung?),  .XI-10c  (312). 
tiga—XI-26d  (316). 
tiha —  patihākalaṅka, XI–10a  (312)  ; 319. 
^.ip —  t., IX, a-8, 13 (232)  ; h–8  (232), 13 (233)  ; 220, 221, 222, 223. 
tiru — tiruan,  XI-15d  (313)  ; 323;  tiruan,  I., IX, a-7,  11 (232),  b-6,  10/11 
(233)  ; 220, 221, 222,  22 4. 
tithī — IX, a-3  (231)  ; b-2  (232)  ; XL2 4b (316). 
titik — anitik.  XI-25b  (316). 
tolih  — patoliha,  XI-10d  (312). 
ton —  tinonta,  XI-12d  (312)  ; tumonya,  XL18b  (3l 4) ; manona, XI-19a  (315)  ; 
manonna (?),  XI-21b  (315). 
tritaya  — XI-23b  (315). 
^u — abbreviation of  Tunglai,  IX,  a- 4 (232),  b-3 (233)  ; 236. 
tugū — p. (pu)  , IX, a-8  (232)  ; inscr. b,  however,  reads  tuṅgū. 
tuha  — matuha,  XII-8  (335)  ; tuhān,  226-228, 237  ; tuha  wanua (banua), IX, 
b-22 (234)  ; 216, 230;  tuhalas  (tuhālas),  IX, b-24  (235)  ; 230;  cf. s.v. 
nayaka, wadwā, kalula,  tapal. 
tuku  — manukū,  p. (pu)  of Rakai  Patapān  in the Perot inscriptions, IX, a-5 
(232), b-4 (233) ; 218, 237. 
tulang — tulang air, v., IX, a-5, 20 (232), b-4/5 (233), 21 (234) ; 229, 231, 
237;  tulang air ing krodha, IX, b-27 (235) ; cf. s.v. talang. 
tuluy  (?) —  tumuluy  (?),  XII-6  (335). 
— ^. (^1), IX, a-10 (232). b-9/10 (233). 
tuṅgū  — p. (pu), IX, b-7 (233), but  cf s.v.  tugū. 
turus  — saturusnya,  XI-l4b  (313). 
tuwuh  — XI-l6b  (314)  ; katuwuḥhan.  1. (sang),  IX, a-14 (232) ; b-14 (23 4). 
uang  — XL23a  (315). 
ujar — XII-3  (335) ;  mamuat  ujar,  XII-9  (335) ;  mojar,  XII-6  (335) ;  tamojar-
ujar,  XI–18c  (314) ; parujar, 22 4 ; pinaka-parujar,  XI-27b  (316). 
ulah — ulah-ulahan,  XII-7  (335) ; 337. 
ulih -— tann  = uliha,  XLl8b  (314)  ; uliḥhan,  p. (si),  IX, a-17 (232), b-16 (23 4). 


--- [Page 382] ---
— 370 — 
­.u^..  ­­­­­­ i^fi^,  hut prefix if the  base  begins  with  a vowel  or a w (in  that  case 
um­ is often changed to m­ even in the oldest texts), in milu, IX. a­10 
(232), b­10 (233) ;  mnan^  .XI­5d  (311)  ; rumuhun (?),  XI­16a  (314) ; 
tumonya,  XI­18b  (314) ;  maso,  XI­23b  (315) ;  humet  (?),  XI­25d  (316) ; 
tumama,  .XI­26a  (316). 
.— ryy  = umaḥnya,  IX, a­4 (232), b­3 (233) ; 236 sq. 
ungsi  — ungsyan,  XI­7c  (312) ; 293. 
upama  — Sanskrit  upama  at the end of  a bahuvrīhi,  XI–16c  in pārijatakata­
rūpama,  XI 16c (314). 
uparata —  XI­9a  (312) ; 288, 318. 
utsau^a (?) — cf. s.v. ranuutsawa. 
utus  — aṅutus,  XI­17c  (314). 
.^al^  .^­uu­aḥ.  XII­2,  5 (?) (335). 
wadihati — I.  (pamĕgat),  IX, a­9 (232), b­8 (233) ; 220, 221, 222, 223, 225, 
227, 238. 
wadwā  — IX, a­10, 14 (232)  ; b­10 (233), 14 (234) ; 216, 224, 226, 238  ; wadwā 
ḍĕmit,  239;  tuhān  ning  wadwā  rarai, IX, a­6 (236), b­16 (234) ; 228, 239. 
wagai — 3rd day of the  five  days’ week,  XI­24c  (316)  . 
wagus  — gusti  wagus,  XI­22c  (315)  . 
wahuta —  .XI­27a  (316)  ; IX, b­13/14 (233 sq.)  ; wahuta ptir, IX, a­18 (232), 
b­18 (234) ; wahuta  makudur,  IX, a­14 (232), b­13/14 (233 sq.) ; wahuta 
h^ang,  243 ; further references : 227, 228, 237, 238, 2.40, 2 41. 
waiçākhamāsa  ­ XH­5  (335). 
wairau^a  — p^ (pu), IX, a­8 (232), b­7 (233). 
walahhan — v., IX,  b-3.ḷ.  (236) ; possibly another  form  for wĕlahan,  which 
occurs as a title  ; cf. s.v. wĕlahan. 
walaing  —. t. (rakai),  25 4­256, 290, 293 ; ^atu walaing, 255  ; of. Index c‚ s.v. 
valainga. 
waluy  — XI­28b  (316) ; sawaluy,  XI­15d  (313)  ; winaluyakĕn,  XI–29a  (316). 
wamlar —  ḍawamlar^  t. or p.  (sang),  IX, a­13 (232), b­14 (233). 
wanasi — p. (si), IX, b­30 (236). 
a^aneh  — XI­27b  (316). 
wang  — XI–26d  (316)  ; cf. s.v. uang ;  the usual  spelling  of the word in Old 
Javanese literature is wwang. 
waṇiyāga  — Sanskrit  baṇyāga,  XI–22a  (315). 
wantil — v.  (?),  XI­10b  (312) ; t.  (samgat),  XI­26b  (316). 
wanua —  patiḥ  wanua kayumwunan, IX, a­17 (232) ; b­16/17 (23 4). 
wara —  warānuraga,  XI­6d  (312)  . 
warā  — p. (si), IX, b­23 (23 4). 
wāra—XI–2 4c (316). 
waraṇ^yā  — p. (?)‚  XI­27a  (316). 
warg(g)a  ­­­– sawargga,  XI­13a  (313). 
wariga  — IX, b­21, 22 (23 4) ; 2 41. 
wāruḥ  — XI­8b  (312) ; 317. 


--- [Page 383] ---
— 371 — 
watu  — watu  = nn = inatus.  XI­7c  (312) ; 293. 
watva —  pamawān, XI–15b  (313). 
wayat  (?) —  XI–22a  (315), but the  word  separation is uncertain. 
weḥ — XI–10b  (312)  ; 2 4b, c (316)  ; 17b  (314). 
w(ĕ)ka  — I.  (rakai)  of the  Rakarayān Mapatih  in 850,  IX, a­6 (233),  b­5 (23 4). 
w(ĕ)kas  — pawkas,  XII–8  (335)  ; winkas,  XI–27a  (316). 
w(ĕ)lahan  — I.  (rakai), IX, a­8  (232),  b–7 (233)  ; 220, 222. 
wĕlas  — sawĕlas,  XI­24b  (316). 
w(ĕ)nang  — mnang,  XI–7a  (311). 
w(ĕ)ruḥ  — .XI–12a,  b (312)  ; cf. s.v. waruḥ. 
wibhawa  — Xl­11c  (312). 
wicitra  — XI­17a  (314). 
widagdha  — sang  widagdha,  XI­11d  (312). 
wihang  — wihaṅā, XI­13d  (313). 
wiku  — XI­23c,  2 4a (316)  ; kawikuan, kabikuan,  335, 2­40. 
wipra  — kalāguṇarawiprakulasthanāma, XI­8c  (312)  ; wipramukhya,  XI–9d 
(312). 
wīra — XI–8b  (312). 
wirāga  — XI–6d  (312) . 
wras  — cf. s.v. hulu. 
wrĕhaspati  (wāra)  —  XI–24c  (316). 
wu — abbreviation of  wurukung,  3rd day of the six days’ week,  XII­2  (335) ; 
cf. s.v. wurukung. 
wualung —  .XI­24a  (316) ; 281. 
wudt — wuatthyang (irregular  sandhi  for wuat hyang), .XI­23a (315) ; ma¬
muat, XII­9 (335) ; hulu wuatan (wwaran), 216; cf. Index a, s.v. vuat. 
^n^īt:  — sa.wuit,  .XI­15c  (313). 
wule  — gunung wule, 336 ; cf. s.v. bulai. 
u)unha — v., IX, b­33 (236) ; 231, 2­43. 
..^ ^. (^ IX, b­22 (23 4). 
u^urukung — mawurukung,  XI­2 4c (316) ; cf. s.v. wu. 
wuwus—parwuwus  (parwwuwus),  IX,  a­16 (232), b­15, 20, 22 (23 4), 31 (236); 
parwuwusnya, IX, a­17/18 (232)  ; b–17  (23 4) ; 226, 230 ; cf. s.v.  ujar. 
wyaya —  unbhawāwyayādi,  XI–llc  (312)  . 
^ —  XI­13c  (313)  ; 18a, d (314)  ; 2 4b‚ c ; 25b,  d ; 28b,  d ; 29a (316). 
yan —  XI­16b  (314), 23c (316). 
yat —  XI­7c  (312). 
yatan(n)  — XI­23d  (316). 
yateka  — XI­27d  (316). 
yatekana —  XI­2 4d (316). 
yekā—XI­27b  (316). 


--- [Page 384] ---
— 372 — 
c. Sanskrit. 
akuçala  — samskāra,  karman,  Ill,  a­A­9/10  (109)  ; trividham  (v^. kāya­, 
vāk–  and  manas­karman),  III, f­B­2  to 3 (119)  ; in a slightly  different 
division,  Ill, f­B­7 (119) ; probably VII­15d (195) ; cf 71, 79, 93, 129, 156 ; 
cI. also  s.v. karman,  saṃskāra,  apuṇya,  kuçala  and  kuçalākuçala. 
aṅkura  — in  vījād  aṅkuram,  aṅkurāt pātram, III, c­A–9/10 (II 4) ; cf  82 sq., 
97, 15 4. 
aṅga  — III, c–A–9 (II 4) ; cf.  77 ; bhavāṅga,  81. 
ajñāna  — m the avidyā  definitions,  III, a­A–7  to a–B–l  (109)  ; f–A–l,  3 ; ajñā¬
nāndhakāra  (?)‚  III, c­A–4 (II 4) ; ajnānasthānāni,  65 ; akliṣtam ajñānum, 
152 ; cf. s.v. ajnānāc cīyate  karma  and avidyā ;  cf . also  65, 67, 115,  128­130. 
ajnānāc cīyate  karma  — first  pāda  of a çloka  frequently  quoted  in Indonesia 
and Malaya, HI, c­A­1 to 2 (113 sq.) ; i­A­1 to 2 (123) ; j­A­1 to 2 (123) ; 
cf. 57 sq., 140. 
andajā  (jātiḥ)  — HI, g­B­1  (120). 
atitṛṣṇā  (?) —­ HI, e­B­6 (118) ; cf 101, 151. 
atidrsti  (?) — IH‚ g­A­1 (119) ; cf. 159 sq[. 
atīta — pratītyasamutpāda, IH‚  c­B­6 (115) ;  bhava,  Ill, g­A­6 to 7 (120) ; 
cf. 143. 
ataimirika — IH, c­A­5 (114) ; cf. 87, 88, 89, 90, 141. 
adarçana  — 66. 
aduḥkhāsukha (vedanā)  ­­ HI,  b–A–5  (Ill)  ; e­B­5  (118)  ; cf.  147  ; (sparça), 
IH, e–B–3  (117)  ; cf.  150. 
advayāmça ­–­ m harādvayāmsāmalabhaktinā  (sic)  , X–a–3b  (279)  ; Cf.  266. 
adhirāja  — in  varanarādhirājarāja, VH–19c  (196)  ; cf.  184 sq.,  206. 
adhvan  (tryadhvan)  — 161  ; cf. s.v. pratītyasamutpāda. 
anabhisamaya  — IH,  a–B–l  (109)  ; cf.  65 sq., 130. 
anavadya  — (dharmas),  III, a–A–10  (109)  ; also  in sāvadyānavadyesu  (dhar­
meṣu),  IH‚ a­A­10  (109)  ; cf.  129. 
anāgata  — pratītyasamutpāda, III, c–B–7  (115)  ; bhava,  III, g–A–8  (120)  ; bheda, 
HI‚ d–B–5(116). 
anāsrava  — 63. 
anitya  — 81. 
aniṣta  — phala,  III, d–B–2  (116)  ; cf . 145. 
anu–  — meaning  of the prefix in Buddhist  texts,  88. 
anubhāvanā  — lakṣaṇu  of vedanā,  Ill, e­B­4  (117). 
anuloma  — 58. 
anuṣtubh  — tatpuṇyāyām  anuṣtubhi,  VII­10d  (195)  ; cf.  201. 
anta  — pūrvānta, madhyānta, aparānta,  71. 
antagrāha  — dṛsti,  HI, g­A­2  (120)  ; h­A­8  (122)  ; h­B­1  to 2 (122)  ; cf. s.v. 
dṛṣtI. 
antara  — rasāntara, VH­13c  (195)  ; 202  ; antaradṛṣtiṣu, VII­16b  (195)  ; cf. 
203. 
andhakāra  — cf. s.v. ajnāna. 


--- [Page 385] ---
— 373 — 
andhatva  (?) — Ill, b­B­5 (112) ; ef. 138. 
anvita  — not  quite  correctly  used  in varaçāstratalānvīta. X­c–4b  (277)  ; ef . 262^ 
anacaya  — dharmāṇām^  63. 
apī — ^o^. 
apuṇya  ­— apunyamayāḥ saṃskārāḥ. IH^ f–A–10 ;  f–R–l,  2 (118  sq.) ;  these 
samskāras  are  defined  as threefold  (kāya, vāc,  manas)  akuçala ; cf  93, 
156, 158  ; apuṇyopaga,  72. 
aprāpti  — 158, 161. 
abhīnirvṛtti  —­  III, h–B–2  (111)  ; skandhābhinirvṛttī,  III, b­R­3  (111)  ; cf.  83, 
135, 136. 
abhilāpatā  —– lakṣaṇa  of parideva.  HI, g­R­3/ 4 (120). 
abhiṣeka  ­— 183,  18–4. 
abhedena  — cf. s.v.  bheda. 
abhisamskāra  — in  naranāthābhisamskārabhāra, VII­la (19 4) ; cf.  182  ; cf 
also s.v. saṃskāra. 
abhīsarnkṣipya  –— in  aīkadhyam  abhisamkṣipya,  66, 132, 149. 
abhyantara  ­— pratītyasamutpāda.  HI,  c­A­9  (114)  ; c­B­l,  4 (115)  ; cf.  82, 142. 
^bhr^  ­— in  sāndhyābhra. vll­8c (19 4) ; cf  182. 
amoghasiddhi  — 169. 
ayoniçamanasikāra  —­ 73. 
arūpa  — 151  ; cf s.v.. tṛṣṇā. 
arūpin  — catvāraḥ  arūpi7u1.ḥ  skandhāḥ (sic), III, a­A­5/6  (110)  ; cf. III, e­A­9 
(117),  where  the term  was,  however,  erroneously  omitted;  cf. also  130 
sq., 149. 
ar^ha  — pratītyasamutpādārtha,  Ill, b­B­10 (113)  ; hetuphalārthena,  Ill, c­A­7 
(114)  ; avitath  ārthena,  HI, f­A­2 (118)  ; svārthakārin, parārthakārin,  Ill, 
f­A­7  (118)  ; pratītyajātā^tha^nbhāgavijna,  184  ; paramarthasatya,  91, 
141 ‚ n^tārtha,  neyartha,  140 ; cf also  75, 139 sq., 153, 155. Cf  Index  b, s.v. 
ardhatrayodaça  — 64. 
arbuda  — 146. 
alabhṛt  — lolatphalotpalālabhṛtaḥ,  VH­1, 12 (19 4) . 
avakrānti  — Ill, b­B­b (Ill)  ; cf.  135  ; vijnānāvakrānti,  143, 1 46 ; cf.  bhuva­
nāvakrānta^  X­a­3c (270)  ; cf.  272 sq. 
avadya  — sāvadya,  Ill, a­A­10 (108)  ; sāvadyānavadya,  presumably,  Ill, 
a­A­10 (109)  ; cf.  129  ; cf.  also  s.v. anavadya. 
avasthā  — pratītyasamutpdda  viewed as a  number  of successive  states,  cf. 
73, 81, 127 ; cf.  also  s.v. āvasthika. 
avijnapti  — 132. 
avitatha  — avitathārthena,  Ill, f­A­2 (118) ; cf. 153. 
avidyā  — first anga of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula, cf. s.v.  avidyāpratya¬
yāḥ samskārāḥ  ; explained as  ajnāna  with reference to a great number 
of notions,  Ill, a­A­7 to a­B­1 (109) ;  analyzed  into  one to five divisions, 
III, f­A­1 to 9 (118) ;  considered  hetu,  c­A­7  (114),  c­B­9 (115)  ; kleça, 
III, c–B–5  (115)  ; kleçamū^a, d­B­7  (116)  ; kāraka, III, d­A­1  (115)  ; 


--- [Page 386] ---
— 374 — 
bhūmi,  d­A­6  (115)  ; mithyāndhakārabheda III, d­B­3  (116)  ; svāmin, 
d­B­10  (116)  ; belongs  to the  past  portion of  pratītyasamutpāda,  c­B­6 
(115) ;  sammohaphala,  d­A­9 (116) ;  pratyaya,  not hetu,  of the  samskaras, 
f­A­6  to 9 (118) ; included  into  kleçasamkleça,  58, 62, 143 ;  different 
versions  of the  avidyā  definition in the  Vibhaṅga,  65 sq., 71 ; conditioned 
by ayoniçamanasikāra,  but  considered  an original  cause,  even  an 
asamskṛtadharma  by some  sects,  62, 73 ;  basis  of pratītyasamutpādā,  92 
sqq. ; relation with  samskāra,  cf s.v.  avidyāpratyayāḥ samskārāḥ  ; with 
the five  dṛṣtis,  93 sq. ; with  kāmopādāna,  97­99,  161 ; with  ajnāna,  cf. 
s.v. ajnāna;  various  references,  125,  128­130,  145, 146, 148,  152­155; 
avidyāndhakāra,  a­B­1 (109)  ; tāvad­avidyā,  HI, f­A­1 (118)  ; avidyā 
kevalā,  152 ;  based  on either  causation  or consciousness  (?) , HI, f­A­1 to 
2 (118) ; cf. 153 ; cf.  also  s.v. ajūāna, āvaraṇa, kleça, pratītyasamutpāda 
etc. 
avidyāpratyayāḥ samskārāḥ  — first  aṅga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula, 
always  .given in  this  form, not in the  singular,  in No. HI, a­A­3 to 4 (108) , 
a­B­6 to 7 (108 sq.), a­B­1 to 2  (109),  c­B­1  (115),  e­A­4 (116) ; the 
meaning  of avidyā  in this  formula, cf. s.v.  avidyā  ; of  samskāra,  cf. s.v. 
samskāra  ; pratyaya,  not hetu,  of the  saṃskāras,  HI, f­A­6 to 9 (118) , 
cf. 15 4 sqq. ; are all of the  samskāras  conditioned by  avidyā,  HI, f­B­8 
to g­A­6 (119 sq.) ; if the  Bhagavat  intended  to explain why  karman  is 
conditioned by  kleça,  why did he express this idea both by  avidyāpra¬
tyayāḥ samskārāḥ  and by  upādānapratyayo  bhavah ?, HI, g­A­6 to 8 
(120^ 
av^napti  — 132. 
avīcī  — IH,  h­A­5  (122). 
avodan  — harapādapaṅkajarajaḥkaṇikāvodan,  X­c­2b (277) ; cf. 279. 
avyākṛta  — applied to  karman.  samskāra,  HI,  f­B­ 4, 5, 7 (119) ; cf. 71, 79, 
93, 156 sqq. 
açubhabhāvanā  — 89. 
açrutavant  — vālaḥ açrutavān  pṛthagjanaḥ,  HI,  g­A­ 4 to (120)  ; cf.  161. 
aṣtamahānarakaḥ  —  III, h­A­3/ 4 (122). 
aṣtavidha  — pratītyasamutpāda, III, d­A­8  to d­B­3  (115  sq.). 
asamskṛta  — 62, 73, 136, 150. 
asevitavya  — III, a­A­11  (109)  ; cf.  109  ; cf  also  s.v. sevītavya. 
asti — perhaps  in the  compound  astidṛṣti,  Ill, g­A­1 (109)  , but the  text  reads 
atidṛṣti  (cf. 160)  ; astinirodha,  VII–17b  (196)  , cf . 203 sq.  ; astiduhkha, 
IH‚ h–B–3  (122)  ; a–astisamudaya  (?), HI, h­B­3 (122)  ; astimarga  (?), 
IH, g­A­1  (119),  cf. 119 sq. and 159. Cf s.v.  ātman. 
asmin  sati  bhavatīdam  — HI, a­A 3 (108) ; cf. 61, 80, 12 4, 14L 
ākāra  — of the  āryasatyas,  199. 
ākāça  — ākāçavat,  HI, e­A­10 (117) ;  cf . 149 sq. 
ācaya  — the  samudaya  portion of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula  defined  as 
dharmāṇām  ācayah,  63 ; cf. s.v.  upacaya. 


--- [Page 387] ---
— 375 — 
ātman  — ātmātm^ya,  HI,  g­A­ 4 (120),  cf. 161, 166  sq. ;  ātmadṛṣti,  perhaps 
to be read instead of  atidṛṣti,  Ill, g­A­1 (119) , but cf. s.v. asti  ; ātma¬
vādopādāna,  Ill, b­A–8  (Ill)  ; e–B–7  (118) , cf. 161, 166 sqe1.  ; tasyātmanas 
santatijena,  X–b–4a  (27 4) , cf. 252, 276  ; ātmarahita,  explanation  of kevala 
in the pratītyasamutpādasūtra,  127 sc^q.  ; cf. s.v.  ādhyātmika, nirātmika‚ 
nairātmya.  Atman  in a  spurious  passage,  Ill, h­B­2  (122). 
ātmīya  — cf. s.v.  ātman. 
ādi — of  pratītyasamutpāda,  Ill,  a–A–2,  3 (108),  6 (108),  b–B–10  (113)  ; cf.  58, 
61, 63, 73, 165  ; at the end of  compounds,  especially  jarādi, jarāmaraṇādi, 
for jarāmaraṇāṅga  including the  çokas,  Ill,  c–A–8  (115)  ; c­A­10 (115) ; 
d­A­2 (115) ; d­A­5 (115) ; d­B­9 (116) ;  other  angas  abbreviated  by ādi, 
c–B–5  (115). 
ādeçaçastrin  — 220 sq. 
ādhyātman  — cf. 82, 91, 128; Ill,  a–A–7  (109). 
ādhyātmika  —  opposite  of bāhya  (applied  to āyatana)  , Ill,  b­A­1,  2 (Ill) ; 
cI. 72, 82, 146 ; of.  also  s.v. abhyantara. 
ānandakandapadma  ­­­­­ 170. 
ānenjya  — 72, 79, 93, 156. 
āp — aor.  āpam,  VH–19a  (196)  ; cf.  206. 
āptamanas  — IH, h­A­1  (121)  ; cf.  165. 
ābhiprāyika  —  interpretation  of pratītyasamutpāda,  127. 
ābhisāmsārika  — one of  three  divisions  of samskārāṅga,  Ill, f­B­9 (119) ; 
cf. 79, 93, 158. 
āyatana  — āyatanapratilābha,  Ill, b­B­2/3 (Ill)  ; cakṣurāyatana, çrotrāya­
tana,  ghrāṇāyatana, jihvāyatana, m^naāyatana, kāyāyatana, cf. s.v. cak­
ṣus etc.  ; rūpāyata^a,  101, 150  ; sparçāyatana, III, :^­A­11  (109)  . cf . 129 ; 
bāhyāyatana,  129  ; 7^īvasamj^ānā^a^ṇjūāyat^na, 13 4 ; Buddhist  ety­
mology, 126;  various  references,  82, 133, 135, 136, 146, 150, 163  ; cf. s.v. 
ṣaḍāyatana. 
āyus — āyuḥsaṃskāra,  138. 
ārambha  — ārambhaphala,  III, d­A­9  (116)  ; 145.  Cf. Index  a, s.v. 
ārūpya  — ārūpyabhava,  III, b–A–9  (111),  g–A–8,  9 (120)  ; rūpārūpyā  (bhavāḥ), 
g–A–10  (120)  ; ārūpyadhātu,  134^;  ārūpyatṛṣṇā, III, e­B­6  (118)  ; cf.  67, 
68, 69, 79, 101, 133. 151. 
ārya — opposite  of pṛthagjana,  161 ; āryasatya,  80 ; Ignorance  with  reference 
to each  of the Four  Truths,  Ill,  a–A–8  to 9 (109) ; the Four  Truths  as 
antidotes  to four  kinds  of Ignorance,  Ill,  f–A–4  (118)  ; mithyādṛṣti  as the 
denial of the Four  Truths,  160. 
ālayavijnāna  ­­­ 191. 
āliṅganamūrti  —  suggested  by X–b–2  (273) ; cf. 275 sq. and 268 sq. 
āvaraṇa  — pāpāvaraṇaviçodhani,  V–l/2  (171 set.)  ; karmāvaraṇa, V­2  (172), 
cI. 171  ; sarvakarmāvaraṇāni, V–2/3  (172)  ; viçvāvaraṇavāraṇa, VII–6b 
(179),  cf. 179;  kleçāvaraṇa, jñeyāvaraṇa,  90, 95, 125, 152, 153, 171, 179, 
200 ; pṛthagjanatvāvaraṇa,  179.  Further  references,  71, 180, 181, 183. 


--- [Page 388] ---
— 376 — 
āvasthika  –­ interpretation of  pratītyasamutpāda,  81, 82, 127, 144, 155. 
āveṇika  — dharmas,  105 ; avidyā  (āvenikī),  125, 152. 
āçraya –— āçrayabheda, d­B­5  (116)  , cf. 126, 146  ; parāvṛtti,  192, 198  ; sarva¬
kleçāçrayatvāt, III, c­A­6  (114)  ; hetutayāçrayatvāt  (read  : hetutvāçra¬
yatvāt?), IH‚ f­A­2/3  (118),  cf.  92, 153;  vijṅānāçrayatvāt, III, f–A–3 
(118),  cf 92, 153  ; cf also 81, 126, 141, 163. 
āçvāsa  — IH‚  f–B–5  (119)  ; 130. 
āsrava  — sāsrava,  anāsrava,  63. 
āsvādana  –— 151. 
āha, āhuḥ  — III, e–A–8  (117)  ; f–B–4,  6, 7 (119). 
itara  — ītarakṛta^  VH–18e  (196)  ; cf . 205. 
itibhava  —– kind  of tṛṣṇā,  151. 
itya — presumably,  IH‚  c­A­5  ; cf  77, 78, 89, 141. 
īndrajāla  –­­ 90. 
indriya  — indriyāṇām paripākaḥ parībhedaḥ, III, b–B–6  (112)  ; paripāken¬
driyadaurvyāhārarūpavaivarṇatā, III, g–B­1/2  (120)  ; çūnyendriyāva¬
sthānadhātuçoka, III, g–B­3  (120)  ; cI.  101, 126, 138, 144, 163  ; cf.  also 
s.v. jīvita. 
iṣta — iṣtapada,  250 sq. ; iṣtadātrī, X­b –2b  (173)  ; cf . 275 ; cf.  also  Word  In­
dex b, s.v. 
ucca  — opposite of  hīna  in the explanation of  dṛṣtiparāmarça,  94, 159. 
uccheda  — ucchedātma,  IH, h­B­2  (122)  ; ucchedadrsti, 68, 159  ; ucchedavāda, 
^; cf.  ^3‚ 94, 160, 167. 
uttuṅga  — 130 sq. 
utpala —  cf. s.v. alabhrt. 
udakacandra — 90. 
udan  — cf. s.v. avodan. 
udd^ṣta,  uddeça  — 73, 76, 83, 8 4, 165. 
upacaya, — 89. 
upadiṣta, upadeça  — HI, f­A­1 (118) ; 7b, 83, 156. 
upanibandha — hetopanibandha, pratyayopanibandha, 82, 142. 
upapatti  — sopapattija  (jātiḥ)  , HL g­B­1  (120) ; 83,  13 4. 
upapāduka  — 162. 
upasaṃpadā  — Ill,  i­B­2  3 (123)  ; cf. 59 sq. 
upādā^u:t  — ninth  aṅga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula, cf s.v.  tṛṣṇāpratya¬
yam upādānam  and  upādān­apratyayo bhavaḥ  ; fourfold, Ill, b­A­7 to 8 
(Ill)  ; e­B­6 to 8 (118) ; considered  hetu,  HI, c­A­7 (114), c­B­9/10 
(115)  ; kleça,  c­B­5 (115), d­A­4 (115)  ; vartamana portion of  pratītya­
samutpāda,  c­B­8 (115) ; prabhava, d­A­2 (115) ; phala, d­A­7 (115) ; 
santānaphala,  d­B­1 (116)  ; anāgatabheda,  d­B­5 (116)  ; grahaṇamūla, 
d­B­9  (116)  ; ātmubhedadaṇḍāvapradānī  (sie), e­A­2 (116) ; cf 67, 68, 
79, 80, 81, 82, 95, 97, 103, 127, 133, 144, 147, 161, 16 4, 165  ; upādānavivar¬
jita, IH, c­A­4 (presumably, cf. 87, 88, 97)  ; upādānaskan­dha,  127, 149 ; 
cf also s.v.  kāma,  drṣti,  çīlavrata,  ātmavāda. 


--- [Page 389] ---
— 377 — 
upādānapratyayo bhavaḥ  ­­ ninth  anga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula, 
III. a­A­5  (108),  b­A­7/8  (111),  c­B­3  (115),  e­A­6  (117),  g­A­6,  8 (120)  ; 
cf s.v. upādāna, bhava. 
upādāya  (rūpa)  — III, a­B­6  (110)  ; ef.  101, 131, 149. 
upāya  — 147  sq., 191. 
upāyāsa  — III, a­A­5/6  (108),  e­A­7  (117)  ; daurmanasyapratyayo  (sic) 
upāyāsaḥ,  g–B­5  (121)  ; upāyāsahetujnatvād  daurmanasyam, g­B­6  (121)  ; 
cf. 61, 96,  16 4. 
uṣṇīsa  —­ 187. 
ekṣaṇa  (?) —  ekṣanabheda, III, d­B­ 4 (116)  ; cf  146. 
ekadvitricatuṣpanca–  etc. —  çloka,  III, c­A­3  (114)  ; cf.  78 sq. 
ekavidha  — (pratītyasamutpāda), III, c­A­6  (114)  ; (avidyā),  III, f­A­2  (118). 
ekādaçavidha  — (pratītyasamutpāda), III, d­B–10  to e­A–3  (116). 
evam  asya  kevalasya  mahato  duḥkhaskandhasya  samudayo  bhavatī  — III, 
a–A­6  (108)  ; e­A­7  (117)  ; cf.  61, 127  sq. 
evam  mayā  çrutam  —  III, a­A­1  (107). 
aikadhyam  — abhisaṃkṣipya,  66, 132, 149. 
aupapattyāmçika  (saṃskāra)  — HI,  f–B–9  (119)  ; cf  79, 93, 158. 
karman  — karmaṇy  ajnānam,  III, a–A–8  (109)  ; c–A–l  (113)  ; c­A–2  (II 4) ; 
i–A–l,  ^2 (123)  ; j–A–l,  2 (123)  ; a part  of pratītyasamutpāda (saṃskāra 
and bhava),  HI,  c­B­ 4 to 5 (115),  d–A–3,  5 (115  : karmakāṇḍa); karmavi– 
pāka,  III, a–A–8  (109),  cf. 128;  karmamūla,  d­B­7  (116)  ; kāya­,  vāk­, 
man^­karmaknçala,  f–B–l  (118  sq.)  and the  same  combinations  with 
akuçala,  f–B–2  to 3 (119) ; probably in janmakarmabhava,  g–A–9  (120 ; 
the text gives, however,  janmakāmabhava),  cf. 127, 162;  karmāvaraṇu, 
cf. s.v.  āvaraṇa  ; karma^amkleça,  143, 58  ; pūrvo  kalman,  143  ; atītakar– 
man,  146. Various references  , 58, 65, 71, 72, 81, 127, 128, 129, 134, 140, 
142, 143,  14 4, 145, 146,  155, 156, 157, 159, 162, 171, 172 etc.  Cf also s.v. 
samskāra. 
kalala  — kalalamūla,  Ill, d­B­7 (116) ; cf. 125, 146. 
kalaçodbhava  — kalaçodbhavasaṃjnataḥ  (read  : ­jñitaḥ)  , X­c­ 4d (277) ;  cf . 
248 ; cf. also s.v. kumbhaja and Kumbhayoni. 
kāṇḍa  — used to  denote  groups of  pratītyasamutpādāṅgas  comprised by 
notions such as  hetu  opposed to vipaka, HI, c­B­8 to 10 (115), or the 
sequence  of kleça,  karman  and phala, Ill, d­A­3 to 5 (115) ; in a  simile, 
Ill, c­A­10  (114). 
kāpālika  — 160. 
kāma  — kāmabhava,  Ill, b­A­9  (Ill),  g­A­8 (120) ; considered twentyfold, 
g­A­9  (120)  ; janmakāmabhava,  cf . s.v.  karman  ; panca  kāmaguṇāḥ, 
e­A­1  (116)  ; kāmadhātu,  h­A­7 (122)  ; kāmopādāna,  b­A­7  (Ill),  e­B­7 
(118), e­B­7/8 (118), g­A­5 (120) ; considered twentyfold, h­A­7 (122) ; 
cf 95, 97, 102,  kāmatṛṣṇā,  b­A­6  (Ill),  e­B­6 (118) ; cf. 67, 68, 69, 95, 
97, 101, 102, 13 4, 147, 151, 152, 161, 162, 166. 


--- [Page 390] ---
— 378 — 
kāya ­– kāyavijnāna­  HI,  a–B–4  (109)  ; kāyasamskāra,  presumably  a­B­2 
(109),  but omitted  by the  copyist;  ṣaḍ vijnānakāyāḥ,  a­B­3  (109),  e­A­
10/11 (117)  ; ṣat sparçakāyāḥ,  b­A­3  (111),  e­B­2 (117)  ; kāyasamsparça, 
b­A­ 4 (111), e­B­2 (117)  ; kāyāyatana,  b­A­2 (111), e­B­1 (117)  ; kāyā¬
karmakuçala,  f­B­1 (118)  ; kāyakarma­akuçala,  f­B­2/3 (119)  ; akuçala¬
kāyakarman,  f­B­3 (119)  ; dharmakāya,  87 ; kāyakarman,  93 ; svasaṃ¬
bhogakāya,  198 ; cf 129, 130, 155. 
kāraka  ­ referring  to avidyā  and  samskāra  in a simile, Ill, d­A­1 (115) ; 
some  kind of soul, HI, g­A­3  (120). 
kāla — kālakṣaya,  cf. s.^v.  maraṇa  ; kālakriyā,  139. 
kālasūtra,  ­ name  of a hell, Ill, h­A­ 4 (122). 
kāsa — 137. 
kiñci  —­ in yat  kinci,  HI, a­B­7  (110). 
kīrtistambha  — 201. 
kubjatā  — HI, b­B­4 (112) ; cf. 137. 
kumbhaja  — çrī kumbhajākhyena,  X­a­3a (170) ; X­b­4b (274) ; cf. s.v. 
kalaçodbhava  ; cf.  also  s.v. Kumbhayoni 
kumbhayoni  — 248 ; cf. s.v.  kumbhaja. 
kuliça  — sajja.^taḍitkuliçabhṛt,  VH­line  11 (193). 
kuvera  — VI­B­b  (174). 
kuçala  .–—  kuçaleṣu  dharmesv  ajnānam, III, a­A­9  (109)  ; kuçalasyopasampadā, 
1­B­1/2  (123)  ; trividham  kuçalam : kāyakarmakuçalam vākkarmaku– 
çalaṃ manaskarmakuçalam,  f­B­1 to 2 (118)  ; kuçalāku^ala, a­A­10  (109)  ; 
kuçalamūla^ambhāra,  197  ; kuçalasamskṛta,  129  ; kuçalāvyākrta,  66 ; ku¬
çalasāsrava,  129  ; kuçalarāga, VH–line  7 (193)  ; various references  : 71, 
93, 94, 95, 129, 152, 156, 181 
kṛ^tivāsas –—  name  of Çiva, X­a­1d, 2c,  3d (270)  ; cf.  247, 265, 266, 267. 
kṛṣṇa  — qualification  of karman,  65, 66. 
kevala  — in  asya  kevalasya  mahato  duḥkhaskandhasya  samudayo  bhavati‚ 
III, a­A­6  (108)  ; cf  61, 127  ; avidyā kevalā,  152. 
kokanada  — in  kanakakokanadodaravisphurat,  VII–12a  (195)  ; cf s.v.  padma, 
nīraja. 
koti (kotī)  — 105, 158. 
kotha  — III, c­A–5  (114)  ; 78, 87, 88, 89. 
koṣa  (koça)  — VII–18c  (196)  ; cf  186, 201, 204  ; brahmakoça^  dharmakoça,  204. 
kleça  — a  part  of pratītyasamutpāda, vi:^.  the aṅgas  avidyā, tṛṣṇā,  upādāna, 
III, c–B–4,  5 (115),  which is  therefore  styled  kleçakāṇḍa, d–A–3  (115)  ^ 
sarvakleçāçrayatvāt, III, c–A–6  (114)  ; kleçamūla, d–B–7  (116)  ; sarva.. 
kleçānām avitathārthena,  f–A–2  (118)  ; kleçāvaraṇa,  cf . s.v. āvaraṇa ; 
drṣtikleça, VII–19d  (196)  ; kleçasamkleça,  58, 143  ; pūrvakleça avidyā, 
143 ; parīttakleça,  152. 
kvacid  — VII–15a  (195)  ; cf  189. 
khalatatva  (read  : khalatva  ?) — III, b–B­4  (111)  ; cf . 71, 157. 
khādya  —– VH–12d  (195)  ; cf.  189, 202. 


--- [Page 391] ---
— 379 — 
khulakhulapraçvāsakāyatā  — 67, 112, 137. 
gaṇḍa  — 142. 
gatī — five or six,  13 4. 
gandha  — vividhagandhasudigdha,  VII­lla  (195)  ; 188. 
gandharva  — 77. 
garbha  — in a simile to explain  ’exterior’ pratītyasamutpāda,  Ill, c­A­10 (ll 4 
sq.) ; the  aṅgas  vijñāna  and  nāmarūpa  compared  with  garbha,  d­A­1 
(115)  ; garbhajā (jāti)  , g­B­1 (120)  ; garbhāvakrānti,  135  ; further 
references  : 83, 142,  14 4, 162. 
gahana  — gahanapāra^āsārtham, VII­8a (19 4) ; cf.  200  ; gahanadrṣti,  200. 
guṇa  — VH­line  5, 6 (192)  ; panca  kāmaguṇāni, III, e­A­1  (116)  ; samasta– 
guṇaratnabha,  VII­10b  (195)  ; tathāgataguṇa,  181, 185, 192, 197, 201  ; 
sarvaguṇajnānasambhārābhyāsa,  197. 
gurjara  — in  satatagurjaradeçasamāgatais, VH­14a  (195)  ; 189, 202  sq. 
gūḍha  — 140. 
gotra  — concept  in Mahāyāna,  193  sq. 
gopānasīvaṅkatā  —  III, b­B­ 4 (112)  ; 137. 
grahaṇa  — grahanamūla  (upādānI1)  , III, d­B­9  (116)  ; 147. 
grāha—  pudgalagrāha, dharmagrāha,  171. 
ghana  — 146. 
grhāṇa  — ghrāṇavijñāna, III, a–B–4  (109)  ; ghrāṇasaṃsparça, b–A–3  (111)  ; 
e–B–2  (117)  ; ghrāṇāyatana, III, b­A­1  (111),  e–A–11  (117). 
cakṣus  — cakṣurvijnāna, III,  a–B–3  (109)  ; cakṣuḥsaṃsparça, III, b–A–3  (111), 
e–B–1  (117)  ; cakṣurāyatana, b–A–1  (111),  e–A–11  (117)  ; prajnācakṣus, 
200 ; cf.  151  ; cf.  also  s.v. cakṣu^manI. 
cakṣuṣmant  — III, c–A–5  (114)  ; cf.  87, 88, 90, 91, 141. 
caturvidha  — pratītyasamutpāda, III, c–B–8  to 10 (115)  ; avidyā, f–A–3/4 
(118)  ; ārūpyabhava,  g–A–9  (120)  ; Tāti, g–A­10  to g–B–l  (120)  ; (sotkā– 
yadṛṣtir)  vimçatividhā :  rūpe  cāturvidhā, vedanāyāñ caturvidhā  samj– 
nāyān  caturvidhā, samskāreṣu caturvidhā, vijñānc caturvidhā, h­A­^  to 
h­B­1  (122). 
catuṣkotika  (praçna)  — III, f­B­9  (119)  ; 158  sq. ;  catuṣkotivinirmukta,  159. 
candraçekharamūrti  ­— 275. 
candraiçvaryamūrtī  — candraiçvaryamūrtīṣtadātrī, X­b­2b  (273)  ; 275. 
cāturmahārājika  — svarga,  III, h­A­5  (122). 
citta  — cittabheda,  III, d­B­5  (116)  ; cittaviprayuktasaṃskāra,  157, 161  ; cf. 
83, 146, 191  ; cf  also  s.v. bodhicitta. 
cīvara  — VII­8b (19 4) ; 182, 188, 201. 
cetanā  — III, f­B­6  (119)  ; 130  ; 157. 
cyavanatā  — cyavanatābheda, III, b­B­7  (112)  ; 139. 
jatā — nirjata,  VI­A­2  (17 4). 
jatila  — VI­A­1/2  (174)  ; navodyajambhajatilasannibha,  X­a­2a  (270)  ; cf  271. 
janman  — III, c­A­1  (113)  ; cf s.v.  jāti. 


--- [Page 392] ---
— 380 — 
jamvuh1^:ṣmī  — VII­line  8 (193)  ; cf  180. 
jarā — defined, HI,  b­B­ 4 (Ill) to  b­B­7  (112)  ; g­B­1 sq.  (120)  ; cf  65, 71, 
96, 136­138  ; cf.  also  s.v. jarāmaraṇa. 
jarāmaraṇa  — 12th  link  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula,  cf. s.v. jātipratya– 
yaṃ jarāmaranam  ; the Vibhaṅga  definition in No. Ill consists of a defi­
nition  of jāra  followed by one of  maraṇa,  q.v. ; relation  between  the two 
parts  of the compound, g­B­2 (120), g­B­8 (121) ; 'complex of suffering’ 
included into the  aṅga, cf.  s.v. duhkha;  sometimes  abbreviated  jarādi, 
c­A­8  (114), c­B­7 (115) ; considered  duhkha,  c­B­5/6 (115), phala, 
c­A­8  (114),  phalakāṇḍa,  d­A­5 (115),  vipākakāṇḍa,  c­B­10 (115) ; 
anistaphala, d­B­2 (116)  ; andgata,  c­B­7 (115)  ; pravāha,  d­A­2 (115) ; 
punarbhavavṛkṣabīja,  d­A­7/8 (115)  ; punarāvartakamūla,  d­B­9 (116) ; 
vināçabheda,  d­B­6 (116)  ; aiçvaryavipatti, e­A–2  (116) ; included into 
jāti– or phala­samkleça,  58 ; into the  vastu­  part  of pratītyasamutpāda, 
81 ; further  references  : 61, 66, 80, 82, 96, 136­139, 145, 164. 
jarāyu  — jarāyuja,  162. 
jarjarībhāva  — one of the  terms  explaining  jarā,  HI, b­B­6 (112) ; 139. 
jātī — 11th  aṅga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula, cf. s.v.  jātīpratyayam 
jarāmaranam  ; the  Vibhaṅga  definition, HI, b­B­1 to 3 (Ill) ; four kinds 
of jāti,  g­A­10 to g­B­1 (120) ; relations with the preceding and  fol­
lowing  aṅgas,  jarāhetukī  jātiḥ,  g–B­8/9  (121),  jātīhetuko  bhavaḥ, g­B­9 
(121)  ; considered  phala, c­A–8  (114),  d–A–5  (115)  ; duḥkha,  c­B­5/6 
(115) ; anāgata, c­B­7  (115)  ; vipāka, c­B­10  (115, where, however, the 
term was erroneously omitted)  ; pravāha,  d­A­2 (115) ; punarbhava¬
vṛkṣab^ja, d­A–8  (115)  ; nirvṛttīphala, d­B­2  (116)  ; vināçabheda, d­B­6 
(116) ; punarāvartakamula, d–B­9  (116)  ; aiçvaryasampatti, e­A­2  (116)  ; 
explanation of the  Vibhaṅga  definition with  references,  134­136 ;  other 
references,  127, 162  ; jātisamkleça,  58 ; tiryagjāti,  Ill,  h–A–6  (122) . 
jātipratyayā  jarā  — HI, g­B­1 (120). 
.^ātipratyayam  jarāmaranam  — (with,  usually, the enumeration of  other  aspects 
of suffering following  muraṇa)  HI, a–A–5  (108) ; b­B­3/4 (Ill) ; c­B­3/4 
(115) ; e­A­6 (117)  ; cf s.v.  jarā  and marana. 
jina — jinā  jinasutāvitāḥ,  VII­5d  (194)  ; jinamandira, VII­14d  (195)  ; jinasuta, 
VII­line  13 (194)  ; jinavat, VII­17b  (196)  ; jinakrama, VII­19b  (196)  ; 
jinaratnapratimā,  191. 
jihvā  — jihvāvijnāna,  III, a­B­4  (109)  ; jihvāsamsparça, b­A­3  (111)  ; e­B­2 
(117) ; jihvāyatana,  b­A­2  (111)  ; e­A­11  (117). 
jīrṇatā  — in the definition of  jarā,  HI, b­B­4 (112) ; 137. 
jīva — 95, 160. 
jīvitendriya  — jīvitendriyaprādurbhāva,  HI, b­B­3 (Ill)  ; jīvitendriyani­
rodha, b­B­8 (112) ; cf 139. 
jnāna  — 93, 183 ; lokottara, 192  ; jñānasambhāra,  179, 197 sq.  ; cf s.v.  ajnāna, 
mithyā,  samçaya. 
jneya  — IH, f­A­6 (118)  ; jneyāvaraṇa,  90, 95, 152, 153, 171, 179. 


--- [Page 393] ---
— 381 — 
totaka  (metre)  — X­b­3  (274) ; cf. 276. 
tathatā  —  153, 199. 
tadyathā  —  Ill, c­B­1  (115)  ; e­A­11  (117) ;  h­A­2  (121) ;  h­A­ 4 (122) ; cf. 
170; V­1  (171). 
tapana  — name  of a  hell, Ill, h­A­4  (122). 
tamas  — in the  Vibhaṅga  definition  of avidyā,  Ill,  a­B­1 (109) ; cf.  65 ; cf. 
also s.v.  timira. 
tāvant  — tāvad­avidyā,  Ill, f­A­1  (118) ; cf. 152. 
timira  — vahulamohamahātimirāvṛta, VII­17a  (196)  ; 90, 200,  203 ; cf. s.v. 
tamas,  taimīrika, ataimirika. 
tiryagjāti  –— III, h­A­6  (122). 
tilaka  — tilakādīkagātratā,  a lakṣaṇa  of  jarā,  III,  b­B­5  (112)  ; cf.  138 ; 
tilakāc^tagātratā,  138. 
tuṅga  — 180  sq. 
tuṣita  — name  of a  paradise,  Ill,  h­A–5  (122). 
tṛṣṇā  — 8th  aṅga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula,  cf. s.v.  tṛṣṇāpratyayam 
upādānam  ; different kinds  of tṛṣṇā : kāma,  bhava,  vibhava,  Ill, b­A­6 
(Ill)  ; kāma, ārūpa,  ati (tṛṣṇā ?)  , e–B–6  (118)  ; rūpa, arūpa, nirodha,  151 ; 
itibhava,  151  ; kāma, rūpa, ārūpya,  151  ; tṛṣṇāvivrddhi, tṛṣṇāvaipulya, 
68, 127  ; sutrptilakṣaṇā tṛṣṇā, c–B–5/6  (118)  ; considered  a hetu,  c–A–7 
(114),  c–B–9  (115)  ; duḥkha,  c–B–5  (115)  ; belongs  to the  vartamāna  part 
of pratītyasamutpāda, c–B–8  (115)  ; prabhava,  d–A–2  (115)  ; kleça, d–A–4 
(111)  ; phala, d–A–7  (115)  ; santānaphala,  d­B–l  (116)  ; anāgatabheda, 
d­B­5  (116)  ; hetumūla,  d­B­8  (116)  ; parasparajīyāmsaḥ,  e­A­2  (116)  ; 
various  references  : 65, 67­69,  79, 80, 81, 82,  101, 127, 133,  144, 147. 
tṛṣṇāpratyayam  upādānam  — III, a­A­5  (108)  ; c­B–3  (115)  ; b–A–7  (Ill)  ; 
e­A­5/6  (117)  ; e­B­6  (118)  ; cf. s.v.  tṛṣṇā  and  s.v.  upādāna. 
tejas  — 317. 
ta^mirika  — 81, 90, 97,  153 ; cf. s.v.  timira, ataimirika. 
trāyastriṃça  —  III, h–A–5  (122). 
trika — with  reference  to the  three  elements  .implied  in each  act of  sparça, 
trikamūla,  Ill, d­B­8  (116)  ; trikasamavāya, e–B–2  (117). 
tripura  — mayakaravālābhitapattripurabhid,  X–c–lb  (277)  ; cf.  247, 267, 278. 
triratna  — cf. ratnatraya, VII–10a  (195)  ; cf  also  187, 201. 
trividha  —  pratītyasamutpāda,  III,  c–B–4  to 8 (115)  ; avidyā, f–A­3  (118)  ; 
saṃskāra,  f­A­10  (118) to  f–B–9  (119). 
triçaraṇa  — cf triçarmadhīra, VII–18b  (196)  ; çaraṇatraya, c­A­4  (114)  ; 84, 
86, 87, 90,  203, 20 4. 
tryadhvan  — 161. 
tryambaka  — name  of Çiva,  X–b–ld  (273),  2d (273),  4d (27 4) ; 2 47, 265 sq., 
268, 275. 
daṇḍa  — daṇḍaviṣkambhanatā,  characteristic  of jarā,  III,  b­B–5  (112)  ; cf. 
137 ; ātmabhedadaṇḍāvapradāni  (?)  , III,  e–A–2  (115)  , 147 ; cf  also  173. 
darçana  — darçanamārga,  154. 


--- [Page 394] ---
— 382 — 
daçavidha  — pratītyasamutpāda,  HI,  dB­6  to 9 (116). 
duḥkha  — duḥkhaskandha,  comprising  çoka, parideva, duḥkha  (in the nar¬
rower meaning of physical pain) , daurmanasya and  upāyāsa,  Ill, a­ A­6 
(108), e­A­9 (117) ; cf. 61 sq., 81, 128, 163 sq.  ; paridevapratyayam duh¬
kham,  daurmanasyatvād duḥkhaṃ, duḥkhapratyayan  ca daurmanasyam, 
HI, g­B–4/5  (120  sq.)  ; duḥkha  for those  aṅgas  which  are neither  kleça 
nor karman,  c–B–5/6  (115)  ; duḥkhasparça, e–B–3  (117)  ; duḥkhavedanā, 
b–A–5  (111),  e–B­5  (118)  ; duḥkhapraheya,  f–A­4  (118), probably,  f–A–5 
(118), but omitted by the copyist;  astiduḥkha, h–B–3  (122)  ; samskāra– 
duḥkha,  pariṇāmaduḥkha,  duḥkhaduḥkha,  143  ; duḥkhavṛkṣa,  82, 83  ; 
duḥkhasatya,  154  ; duḥkhaçamanaçāsa7la, VII­7d  (194)  ; sarvaduḥkha¬
samtāpārtiçamana­,  181  ; duḥkhanirodhagāminī pratipad,  200  ; sarva¬
duḥkhapraçāntikṛt,  200  ; various references  : 61, 81, 82, 83, 96, 97, 128, 
140, 142, 147,  16 4. 
dṛṣtī  –— panea āṛṣtayaḥ  enumerated  III, h­A­7  (122)  ; dṛṣtyupādāna,  b­A­7/8 
(111)  ; e­B­7  (115)  ; h­A­7  (122)  ; dṛṣtiparāmarça,  g­A­1  (119)  ; h­A­8 
(122)  ; atidṛṣti  (presumably a lapse for  astidṛṣti)  , cf s.v.  asti  ; dṛṣtikleç^, 
VH­19d  (196)  ; antagrahadṛṣti, III, g­A­2  (120)  ; h­A­8  (122)  ; h–B­1/2 
(122)  ; mithyādrṣti,  g–A–2  (120)  ; h–A–8  (122)  ; çīlavrataparāmarçadṛṣti, 
g–A–2  (120)  ; cf.  çīlavrataparāmarça,  h–A–8  (122)  ; çuddhidṛṣti,  g–A–3 
(120)  ; satkāyadṛṣti  vimçatividhā,  h–A­9  to h–B–l  (120)  ; antaradrṣti, 
VII­16b  (195)  ; çācvatadṛṣti, ucchedadṛṣti,  93 ; dṛṣtigahana,  200 ; further 
references: 93,  9 4, 95, 97,  158–161,  166 sq., 18 4, 203, 206. 
deva  ­– 181  sq. 
deçādhyakṣa  — 220  sq. 
daurmanasya  — IH‚ a­A­5  (108)  ; e­A­7  (117)  ; hṛtp^ritāpam daurmanasyam, 
g­B­4/5  (120  sq.) ; daurmanasyapratyayo  (sic)  upāyāsaḥ,  III,  g–B–5  (121); 
further reference^  : 61, 96, 97, 163,  16 4 ; cf  also  s.v. duḥkha. 
daurvyāhāra  — a lakṣaṇa  of Old Age,  III, g–B–l  (120)  ; cf.  162. 
drutavilambita  — drutavilambitasādhanavandītaḥ,  VII–17d  (196). 
drohaka  — cf. Index a,  s.v. 
dvādaçavidha  — pratītyasamutpāda,  III, e–A–3  to 7 (116  sq.). 
dvividha  — pratītyasamutpāda,  III.  C–A–6  to c–B­4  (115  sq.) ;  avidyā,  f–A–2/3 
(118). 
dvīpa  — catvāraḥ  (sic)  dvīpāḥ  enumerated,  III,  h­A­2/3  (121  sq.). 
dhandhatva  — one of the  lakṣaṇas  of jarā,  possibly mentioned III, b­B­5 (122), 
although the text  reads  andhatva ; cf. 112, 138. 
dhamanisantatagātra  — 137. 
dharma — No. HI,  passim  ; cf especially a­A­9 to 11 (109) ; c­A­2 (114) ; 
V­l (171)  ; dharmakāya,  87, 100, 181, 199  ; na dharmatah, VII­18a (196) ; 
dharmasambhāra,  VH­lc  (194) ; cf. 182 sq., 197 sq. ; dharmamegha, 181 
sq., 183 ; dharmanairātmya,  90 ; āvenikadharma,  105  ; çukladharma,  181 ; 
dharm^dhātugagana,  181 ; further referencec : 58, 65, 67, 77, 80, 88, 
89, 90, 97, 103 sq., 129. 


--- [Page 395] ---
— 383 — 
dhātu  — dhātupratilābha, III, b­B­2  (111)  ; çūnyendriyāvasthānadhūtuçoka^¬
g­B­3  (120)  ; kāmadhātu, h–A–7  (122)  ; dharmadhātugagana, cf. s.v. 
dharma  , cf.  also  67, 82, 134, 135, 136, 163, 166. 
dhāraṇī  — 170, 171  ; dhāraṇīsambhāra,  198  ; dhāraṇīmati,  206. 
naraka  — aṣta  mahānarakāḥ,  enumerated  III, h–A–3  to 5 (122) . 
navavidha  — pratītyasamutpāda, III, d–B–3  to 6  (116). 
nānākaraṇa, III, g–A–6  (120). 
nāman  — in  nāmarūpa,  defined,  III, a–B–5/6  (110),  e–A–8  to 10 (117)  ; cf 
s.v. nāmarūpa. 
nāmarūpa  — 4th anga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula,  cf. s.v. nāmarūpa¬
pratyayam ṣaḍāyatanam ;  the  Vibhaṅga  definition,  a– III, a­B­5  to 8  ; 
e–A–8  to 10 (116)  ; belongs  to the  phala  part  of pratītyasamutpāda,  c­A­7 
(114) ;  considered  duḥkha,  c–B–5  (115)  ; vartmāna  in the  tryadhva  divi­
sion,  c–B–7  (115)  ; vipakakāṇḍa, c–B–9  (115)  ; garbha,  d–A–l  (115)  ; phala– 
kāṇḍa,  d­A­4  (115)  ; pātra  (i.e.  pattra),  d­A­7  (115)  ; vipākaphala, d­A­9 
to d­B­1  (116)  ; ekṣaṇabheda,  d­B­4 (?  116)  ; skandhamūla, d–B–7  (116)  ; 
compared  with  a pura,  e–A–l  (116)  ; various  references  : 66, 71  sq.,  73, 
101, 102, 126, 131, 132,  148­150  ; cf. also  s.v. nāman,  rūpa  and  skandha­
nāmarūpapratyayam ṣaḍāyatanam  — 4th  link of the  pratītyasamutpāda  for¬
mula,  Ill, a­A­4  (108)  ; a­B­8/9  (100  sq.) ; c–B–2  (115)  ; e­A­4/5  (116)  ; 
– cf. s.v. nāman  and  rūpa. 
nāla — in a simile, Ill, c­B­10 (114) ; cf. 83, 1 42. 
nikāya  — sattvanikāya,  Ill,  b­B–1  (111)  ; b–B–7  (112)  ; nikāyasabhāgatā,  135, 
138. 
nikṣepa  — (perhaps  for niḥkṣepa),  III, b–B–8  (112)  ; c 4^. 139. 
nitya  — 78. 
nidheya  — X–b–2c  (273)  ; cf.  275. 
nirāmana  — (either  for nirāmaṇa  or for  nirātman),  Ill,  c–A–I  (113)  ; cL  59. 
nirodha  — III, a–A–8/9  (109)  ; nirodhapraheya, f­A­ 4 and 5 (118)  ; jīviten¬
driyanirodha, III, b–B–8  (112)  ; nirodhatṛṣṇā,  79 ; astinirodha, III, h­B­3 
(122)  ; VII­17b  (196)  ; nirodhasatya,  87, 199  ; the nirodha  portion of  pratī­
tyasamutpāda,  61­63  ; cf.  136. 
nirdeça  — 63, 73, 76. 
nirmāṇarati  —  III, h­A­5/6  (122). 
nirvāṇa  — 191, 199. 
nirvṛt(t)a  — VII­16c  (195)  ; 182, 189, 191  ; cf. s.v. parinirvṛt(t)a. 
nirvṛtti  — nirvṛttiphala, III, d­B­2  (116)  ; 145.  Cf. Add. 
niṣyanda  — niṣyandaphala,  III,  e–A–l  (116)  ; 145. 
nīraja  — hṛdayanīrajasāndrarasāntaram, VH­13c  (195)  ; cf. s.v.  kokanada, 
padma  ; cf . also  VII­2c (19 4) and 198. 
netṛ  — I‚ b­2  (7). 
nairātmya  — cf. s.v.  dharma  and  s.v. pudgala. 


--- [Page 396] ---
— 334 — 
nairyānika –  attribute  of the  Mārga  mentioned  in HI, g­A­1  (119),  if the 
correction  proposed  in note  97 to p. 119 is  accepted  ; 159. 
7^ivasamjnānāsamj^^ata^  ­­– 134. 
pancatva  — 7. 
pañcavidha  — pratītyasamutpāda,  HI,  d–A–1  to 3 (115)  ; avidyā, f­A­4  to 6 
(118)  ; dṛṣtiparāmarça, g–A–1  (119). 
pada  — iṣtapada,  paramapada,  nirvāṇupada,  çivapada,  250. 
padma  — padme,  padmākṣi,  padmaviçāle, V­3/4  (172)  ; sahasrārapadma,  170, 
187 ; ānandakandapadma,  170, 188  ; cf  187  sq. ; cf.  also  s.v. kokanada, 
nīraja. 
paracakṣu  — 16. 
paramārtha –– paramārthasatya,  153, 159. 
parāmarça  — dṛṣtiparāmarça, III, g–A–1  (119)  ; çīlavrataparāmarçadṛṣti, III, 
g–A–2  (120)  ; çīlavrataparāmarça, III, h­A­8  (122)  ; cf.  93, 94, 95, 159, 160. 
parārthakārin  — HI,  f­A­7  (118)  ; 155. 
parāvrttī  — cf. s.v. āçraya. 
parikhā  — VH­line  12 (194). 
pariṇāma  — 82, 128, 143. 
parideva  — considered  to belong  to the  'great’  duḥkhaskandha,  HI, a­A­5 
(108) ; e­A­7 (117)  ; çokapratyayaḥ paridevaḥ,  HI, g­B­3 (120)  ;  abhila¬
patālakṣaṇaḥ paridevaḥ,  g­B­3/ 4 (120)  ;  duhkhahetum paridevam, g­B­7 
(121)  ; vyastaḥ  paridevah,  g­B­7 (121)  ; paridevahetum  çokam,  g­B­7 
(121) ; cf 61, 96, 16 4. 
paridevapratyayam  duhkham,  IH, g­B­4  (120). 
parinīrmitavaçavartin  (or rather  : paranirmita°) — ^  class  of gods,  HI, h­A­6 
(122) . 
parinirvṛt(t)a  — IH‚ c­A­ 4 (114) ; 83, 3 4, 87 ; cf. s.v.  nirvrt(t)a. 
paripāka  — indriyānām paripākaḥ,  HI, b­B­6 (112)  ; paripākendriyadaur­
vyāhārar^pavaivarṇatā,  g­B­1 sq. (120)  ; cf  81, 162 sq. 
^aribheda,  — cf s.v.  īndrīya. 
parimaṇḍa  — HI,  e–A–8  (117). 
parivrājaka  — 160. 
parihāṇi  — III, b–B–5/6  (112)  ; cf. s.v. hāni. 
paç — vipaçyati, cf.  88 sq. 
pāṇḍuraṅgabhasmaja  — VI–A–3/ 4 (17 4). 
pātra  — wrong  spelling for  pattra,  III, d–A–7  (115). 
pālitya  — 137. 
pāçupata  — 160. 
pitṛnilaya  — X–a–lc  (270)  ; cf  271. 
puṇya  — punyamayāḥ, samskārāḥ,  HI,  f–A–10  (118)  ; f–B–l  (118)  ; tatpunyā– 
yām anuṣtubhi,  VH­10d  (195)  ; punyasambhāra,  179, 197  sq. ; sambhārato 
puṇyānām  (sic), 197;  puṇyamegha,  181; gift of  punya  (?), 18 4; 
puṇyopaga,  72, 130  ; further  references  : 72, 93, 156, 158, 201. 
pudgala  — IH‚ g­A­3  (120)  ; pudgalanaīrātmya,  90 ; cf.  95, 98, 160. 


--- [Page 397] ---
— 385 — 
punarāvartākamūla  — Ill,  d­B­9  (116). 
punarbhavavrkṣabīja  — III, d–A–8  (115). 
purataḥ  prāgbhārakāyatā  — III, b­B­5  (112). 
purāṇībhāva  (saṃskārāṇām)  —  III, b­B–6  (112)  ; 138. 
purārcita,  presumably in a double meaning —  X–a–2c  (270)  ; 271. 
puruṣa  — 95. 
puspa  (as a masculine) —  Ill, c­A­10  (115) ; 142. 
pūjā (different forms of) — 188. 
pūta  — X­c­5d  (277)  ; atipūta,  Pūteçvara,  Pūtīkeçvara,  pūtamatī,  pūtamūr– 
^i, 279 ; cf.  257, 262. 
pūrva  — pūrvakarman,  pūrvakleça,  1­43. 
pṛthagjana  — HI,  g­A­5  (120)  ; çf.  89, 97, 161  (pṛthagjanatva). 
peçin  — 146. 
poṣa  — 95. 
prakṛtī  —­  mithyā–  and  samyak­prakṛtī  used to indicate the  samudaya  and 
nirodha  parts  of pratītyasamutpāda  respectively, 62. 
prajnaptī  — prajūaptim anupatitaḥ, IH g­A­5  (120)  ; 97. 
prajūā  — 183, 197  ; prajñācakṣus,  200  ; prajnāmati,  conjecturally restitued, 
VII­18d  (196)  ; cf  206. 
praṇīta  (opposite of  hīnu,  applied to  dharmas)  — 65, 66, 71. 
prati  — 158. 
pratīgha  — sapratigha,  148, 151, 154. 
pratilābha  — skanclha­, dhātu­, āyatana–pratilābha,  Ill, HI,  b–B–2/3  (111)  ; 
cf . 136. 
pratiloma  — 58. 
prativijnapti  — 89, 131. 
prativibha  — IH,  f–A–9  (118)  ; 155. 
pratisiddh  (?) —  pratiçiddhaty avidyā, III,  f–A–1/2  (118)  ; 152,  sq. 
pratīti  (?) —  pratītyaḥ,  III,  c–A–3,  5 (114)  ; 141. Or have we to read  pratītyāḥ, 
1st plural of a substantivised  pratītya  ? 
pratītya  — pratītyajātārthavibhāgavij7^āḥ,  184.  Cf.  s.v. pratīti  and s.v.  pratī­
tyasamutpāda. 
pratītyasamutpāda  — No. Ill (47­167)  , passim  ; some more important referen­
ces : Sūtra,  Ill, a­A­1 to 6 (107 sq.) ; its  Vibhaṅga,  a­A­6 to b­B­10 (108­
113) ; translation of  Sūtra  and  Vibhaṅga,  124­139 ; different versions of 
Sutra, 60­63 ; of  Vibhaṅga,  63­75 ; conjectural dating of versions, 75 ; 
Vasubandhu’s  commentary, 73­75 ; etymology of the term, 77 sq., 141 ; 
different version of a  part  of the  Vibhaṅga,  Ill, e­A­8 to e­B­8 (117 sq.) , 
g­A­8  to g­B­9 (120 sq.)  ; Upadeça,  c­A­1 to g­B­9 (113­121)  ; aṅgas  clas­
sifiable  under different headings in numerical order, c­A­6 to e­A­7 (114­
117 ; translation, 141­148 ; discussion, 78­83)  ; Mshāyānic  features of Upa¬
deça,  97­100 ; considered an  asamskṛta  by some schools, 62 ; more precise 
references  to the numerical divisions, cf. s.v. eka, dvividha, trividha etc. ; 


--- [Page 398] ---
— 386 — 
for the  separate  aṅgas,  cf. s.v. avidya,  samskāra  etc. ;  references  to one 
of the introductory  çlokas  and to  Ullaṅgha’s  Çāstra,  cf. the Add. 
pratītyasamutpanna  — 65. 
pratyaya — to  denote  the relation between successive  aṅgas  of the  pratītya­
samutpāda  formula, Ill,  passim  , cf especially, Ill, c­A­4 (114) ; f­A­7 
to 9 (118) ; pratyayopanibandha, 82, 142, 154 ; various  references  : 61, 83, 
92, 142, 152, 154, 155. 
prabhava ­ to  denote  the angas  tṛṣṇā,  upādāna  and bhava, HI, d­A­2 (115) ; 
cf 144. 
pravāha  — HI, d­A­2 (115) ; 144. 
pravṛttī  — viṣayapravṛtti,  HI, d­A­2 (115) ; 144  ; pravṛttivijnāna,  126, 146, 191. 
praçākhā  —– 146. 
^çvāsa  — HI,  f­B­5  (119)  ; 130. 
praheya  ­— duḥkhapraheya, IIII, f­A­4,  5 (?) (118)  ; samudayapraheya, niro¬
dha–, ­mārga­, bhāvanāpraheya, f­A­4/5  (118)  ; apraheya (?), f­A5  (118). 
prākarṣika  ­— interpretation of  pratītyasamutpāda,  81. 
prāgbhārakāyatā  —– cf. s.v. purataḥ. 
prātisattvika  (samskāra)  –­ III, f­B­7  (119)  ; 79, 93, 158. 
prādurbhāva  –— jīvitendriya,  III, b­B­3  (111)  ; skandha, g­A­10  (120)  ; cf.  134, 
135, 162. 
prāpti  — 136, 157  sq., 161. 
pretaloka  — IH,  h–A­6  (122). 
phat  — 169. 
phan^ndra  — X­a­lb  (269)  ; cf.  270. 
phala  — hetuphalārthena, III,  c–A­7  (114)  ; phala  part  of pratītyasamutpāda, 
c–A–8  (114)  ; in a simile,  c–A­10  (115)  ; phalCsaṃkleça, 5O‚  143 ; sammo¬
haphala, ārambhaphala, d­A­9  (116)  ; vipāka­, niṣyanda­, santāna–phala, 
e–A–l  (116)  ; nirvṛtti–, aniṣta­phala, e­B­2  (116)  ; visaṃyogaphala,  20­4  ; 
various  references  : 80, 81, 141, 142, 143, 145. 
bala — 105.;  daçabala,  183 ; balapāramitā,  200. 
bāla (written  vāla)  — III, g–A­4.’5  (120)  ; cf.  97, 161. 
bāhya  (written  vāhya)  — pratītyasamutpāda, III,  c–A–9  (114)  ; c–A–10  (115)  ; 
bāhyaçūnyatā,  91 ; bāhyāyatana,  129  ; cf.  also 82, 142. 
bīja (written  vīja)  — III, c–A–9  (114)  ; d–A–6  (115)  ; punarbhavavṛkṣabīja, 
d–A­8  (115)  ; sarvabīja,  191 ; bījabhūta,  191 ; various  references  : 82, 83, 
125, 154, 169. 
buddha  (written  vuddha)  — III, a­A­8  (109)  ; V­l  (171)  ; 67 ; buddhasuta, 
199 sq. 
bodhicitta  — 83, 191  ; bodhicittamūla,  191. 
bhagavant  — III, a­A­1  (107), 2 (108). 
bhakti  – bhaktibharapraṇata,  VH­14b  (195)  ; 188. 
bhaj (bhajati)  — VII­19b  (196)  ; 206. 
bhata  — suvijvaladbhatamaṇikāntiçobhinī, X­a–2b  (270)  ; 272. 
bharita  — bhūribhogabharita,  X–c–3b  (277)  ; 279. 


--- [Page 399] ---
­— 387 ­
bhava  — tenth  aṅga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula cf s.v.  bhavapratyayā 
jatiḥ  ; three  forms of  bhava,  Ill, b­A­9 to b­B­1 (Ill) ; g­A­8 to 10 ; 
considered  hetu,  c­A­7 (114) ; c­A­9 (ll 4) ; karman,  c–B–5  (115)  ; d­A­5 
(115)  ; vartamāna, c­B­8  (115)  ; prabhava, d­A–2  (115)  ; phala, d–A–7 
(115)  ; nirvṛttiphala, d–B–2  (116)  ; anāgatabheda, d–B–5  (116)  ; punarā– 
vartakamūla,  d­B­9  (116)  ; aiçvaryasampatti, e­A­2  (116)  ; anāgatabhava, 
atītabhava, g­A­6/7  (120)  ; antarābhava,  77, 127, 135, 136  ; bhavacakra, 
82; bhavaṅga,  81;  tribhava, 13 4; punarbhava, karmabhava,  127;  bha¬
vabhid­, VII­16d  (195)  ; bhavapāda­, X­b­3a/b (27 4) ; sargabhava, 
X­b­3b  (­27 4) ; various  references  : 81, 95, 127,  13 4, 14 4, 145, 161, 276. 
bhavapratyayā  jātiḥ  — tenth  link  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula, Ill, 
a­A­5 (108) ; b­B­1 (111) ; c­B­3 (115)  ; e­A­6 (117) ; g­A­10 (120) ; cf. 
13 4 ; cf. also s.v.  upādāna. 
bhasma  — pāṇḍuraṅgabhasmaja,  VI­A­3/ 4 (174)  ; bhasmeṣu  bhasmacitta, 
VI­A­5/6  (174). 
bhāra  — naranāthābhisaṃskārabhāra,  VII­1a (19 4) ; 182. 
bhāvanā  — bhāvanāpraheya,  Ill,  f­A­5  (118)  ; cf. 15 4. 
bhugnatā  — attribute  of jarā,  Ill,  b­B­ 4 (112) . 
bhūjayottuṅgade (va)  — VII­line  6 (192)  ; cf.  180, 181, 182, 18­1  sq. 
bhūmi  — avidyā  compared with,  III, d–A–6  (115)  ; bhūmisambhāra,  198 ; cf. 
also 179  sq.,  185, 200. 
bheda  — cyavanatābheda, III, b­B–7  (112)  ; mithyāndhabheda (?), b­B­7 
(112)  ; phalabheda, d–B–2  (116)  ; kriyā–, santāna­bheda,  d–B– 4 (116)  ; 
ekṣaṇabheda (?),  d–B– 4 (116)  ; āçraya­, samavāya­,  citta­,  anāgata­bheda, 
d­B­5  (116)  ; vināçabheda, d–B–6  (116)  ; bhedena,  abhedena,  61 ; ātma ? 
bhedadaṇḍāvapradāni,  e­A­2  (115)  ; cf.  68, 126, 13^, 146, 147. 
bhojy^  — 202. 
bhaūtika  (rūpa)  — 101, 131. 
bhrānti  — 92. 
maṇḍa  — III, e–A–8  (117). 
mati  (at the end of a compound) — 206. 
manas  — manassaṃskāra,  Ill, a­B­2 (Ill)  ; f–B–5  (119)  ; manassamsparça, 
b–A–4  (Ill)  ; e­B­2 (117)  ; manovijūāna,  a­B­4 (109)  ; mana­āyatana, 
b­A­2 (Ill) ; e­B­1 (117)  ; manaskarmakuçala,  f­B­2 (119) ; manaskarma¬
akuçala,  f­B­3 (119)  ; avyākṛtamanaskarman,  f­B­4 (119) ; manasikuruta 
(?), a­A­3 (108) ;  manaskarman,  93 ; cf. 72, 73, 74, 131, 155. 
mandatva  — Ill, b­B­5 (112). 
maya  — ^nayakaravālābhihapattripurabhid,  X­c–lb  (277)  ; cf.  266  sq.,  278. 
maraṇa  — jarāmaraṇa, cf. s.v.  jarāmarana;  Vibhaṅga  definition,  III, b–B–7 
(112) to  b­B­9  (113)  ; jarāyāḥ  samanataram  maraṇam,  skandhabheda– 
tattvād  (read  : skandhabhedatvān ?) maraṇam, g­B­2  (120)  ; maraṇakā¬
lakṣaya  (or  : kriyā ?) , b­B­8  (112)  ; çokahetum maraṇam, vyastam 
maraṇam, maraṇahetukā  jarā,  g­B­8  (120)  ; cf.  also 65, 96, 139, 142. 


--- [Page 400] ---
— 388 — 
maraṇapratyayaḥ çokaḥ  —– HI, g­B­2  (120). 
marīci  — 90. 
mahallakṣmī  — – harapādapaṅkajarajaḥkaṇikāvodanmahallakṣmī,  X–c–2b 
(277)  ; cf  247. 
mahabhūta  –— HI, a–B–7  (110)  ; 101, 163. 
mātṛkā  — 79. 
māna  — 154. 
mārga  — mārgapraheya, III, f­A­4  (118)  ; astimārga  (?), g­A­1  (119)  ; dar– 
çanamārga,  bhāvanāmārga,  154 ; cf.  119  sq.,  159, 183  ; cf  also  s.v. 
nairyānika. 
mithyā  — na mitthyaivāvidyā. III, f­A­1  (118)  ; mīthyājnāna,  f­A­3  (118)  ; 
mithyādṛṣti, g­A­2  (120)  ; h­A–8  (122)  ; h–B­2  (122)  ; mithyāprakṛti,  62  ; 
further  references  ; 5, 94, 103, 152  ; cf . also  s.v. bheda. 
muc–  — pratyamuncat,  8­10. 
mūrti  — can.draiçvarya,  X­b­2b  (273)  ; āliṅgana­, tripurāntakacandraçekhara­
mūrti,  268  sq.,  275, 276, 278. 
mūla  — kleça­,  karma­  kalala­, skandha­mūla, III, d­B­7  (116)  ; āçraya 
(phala)­, trika­, vipāka­,  hetu­mūla,  d­B­8  (116)  ; grahaṇa­, punarāvar­
taka­mūla,  d­B­9  (116)  ; kuçalamūla,  152, 181  ; kuçalamūlasambhāra, 
197 ; cf  also 146  sq. 
megha  — punyamegha,  181 ; cf s.v.  dharma  and abhra. 
maitreya  — 183. 
yamayatayatī  —  X­b­2b  (273)  ; 275. 
yaṣtiviṣaktahast^t  -— 137. 
yāma  — a  kind  of gods, HI,  h­A–5  (122). 
yat.^ābhūtasampra.tivedha  — 66, 69, 109. 
yah kaçcit  samyag......  –— beginning of a  strophe,  HI,  c–A–4  (114) ; conjec­
tural restitution, 83­87. 
yāna  — 198. 
ye aharmā  hetuprabhavā  — beginning of a  strophe,  HI,  c–A–2  to 3 (114) ; 
i­A­3  to i­B­1 (123) ;  j­B­1  to 2 (123) ; cf 58, 63, 80, 86, 140, 259. I  here 
add the translation by  Filliozat  in Louis Renou et Jean  Filliozat,  LTnde 
Classique, Tome II (1953)  , p. 538  : ’’Les  choses  qui naissent  d’une  cause, 
celui  qui est arrive  ā declarer ce qui  est en a  dit la cause,  et, leur  arret, 
il est celui  qui ra dit tel  qu’il  est, Ie grand  religieux”. 
yoni  — 134, 162. 
ratna  — ratnatraya,  V­l  (171)  ; ratnatrayāçayopeta, VII­10a  (195)  ; samasta­
guṇaratnabha;  VH­10b  (195)  ; cf  201. 
ratnasambhava  — 169. 
rasa —  rasāntara,  VII­13c  (195). 
rāga — 15 4. 
rūpa ––  in nāmarūpa,  defined HI,  a–B–7  to 8 (110)  ; considered twentyfold, 
e­A­8  to 10 (117)  ; h­A­9  (122)  ; rūpavaivarṇatā, g­B­2  (120)  ; rūpabhava, 


--- [Page 401] ---
— 389 — 
b­A­9 (111)  ; g­A­8 (120) ; considered sixteenfold, g­A­9 (120)  ; rūpā¬
rūpyā (bhavāḥ),  g­A­10 (120)  ; rūpatṛṣṇā,  67, 68, 69, 79, 133, 151;  cf. 
101, 148, 162, 163  ; cf.  also  s.v. nāmarūpa. 
raurava  — name  of a hell, Ill, h­A­4 (122)  ; mahāraurava,  ibid. 
lakṣaṇa  — anubhāvanālakṣaṇā vedanā,  Ill, e­B­4 (117)  ; sutṛptilakṣaṇū 
tṛṣṇā,  e­B­5/6 (118)  ; abhilāpatālakṣaṇaḥ paridevaḥ,  g­B­3/4 (120) ; 
upāyāsalakṣaṇam,  g­B­5/6  (121). 
laksmī  — jamvulakṣmī (?),  VII­line 8  (193). 
liṅga  — kṛttikavāsalīṅga,  —  X­a­3d  (270)  ; tryambakalīṅga, X­b­4d  (274)  ; 
haraliṅga, X­c­5c  (277)  ; cf.  247,  255­257,  259, 267  sq.,  280, 289  sq.,  294. 
lokapāla  — X­b­1a  (273)  ; cf.  274. 
vajra  — vajropamasamādhi,  180  ; cf. s.v. kuliça. 
vandana  — 188. 
varanara  — varanarādhirājarāja, VII­19c  (196)  ; 184­186. 
varjanīya  — 7. 
varṇa  — 148, 163. 
vartamāna  (pratītyasamutpāda)  —  III, c–B­8  (115). 
varsikaḥ  — samskārāṅga  compared  with,  III, d­A–6  (115). 
vali — valitattva,  III, b–B–4  (111  sq.) ; valipracuratā, b–B–4  (111  sq.) ;  valini– 
citakāya,  137. 
valaiṅga  — valaiṅgagoptṛ,  X–a–3c  (270)  ; valaiṅgajetṛ,  X–b–4c  (274)  ; cf. 
250­256. 
valkala  — 265. 
vastu  (to denote  a number  of pratītyasamutpādāṅgas) ­–  81. 
vah — (at the end ot a  compound)  270, 271. 
vāc — vāksamskārāḥ,  Ill, a­B­2 (109)  ; vākkarmakuçala, f­B–2  (119)  ; vāk– 
karma­akuçala,  f­B­3  (119)  ; vāksaṃskāra, vāksamskṛta, f­B­5  (119)  ; 
vākkarman,  93  ; cf.  72, 73, 155. 
vi­ — 88, 89. 
vimçatividha  (also  spelt  viṅçatividha)  —  kāmopādār^a, III, e­B­8  (118)  ; 
kāmabhava, g­A­8/9  (120)  ; viṃçatividhā  (sic)  kāmadhātuḥ, h­A­7  (122)  ; 
satkāyadṛṣti, h­A­9  to h­B­1  (122). 
vicāra  — vicārayitvā, III, f–B–6  (119)  ; cf  130, 157. 
vijigīṣu  — 147  sq. ;  200. 
vijūāna  — 3rd  aṅga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula,  cf. s.v. vijnānapra– 
tyayam  ṣaḍāyatanam ;  explained by  ṣaḍ vijnānakāyāḥ  (cakṣurādi)  , III, 
a­B­3/4  (109)  ; cf.  also  the spurious  passage  with  ṣāḍ vijūā.u:tkāye,  e­A­
10/11 (117) ;  instead  of taking  ­kāye  as a locative, one  might  consider 
the possibility of a  nominative  plural in ­e, common in Buddhist hybrid 
Sanskrit ;  although  this  assumption  would not  make  the meaning  clear, 
it might  suggest  a reason  why the copyist got  entangled  in his  words  ; 
of course,  we have  to add a  mark  of punctuation  after  vijnānakāye  in 
that case.  Vijnānaskandha,  Ill, a­B­6 (110) ; h­B­1 (122)  ; vijnānāçrayat­


--- [Page 402] ---
— 390 — 
vāt, IH‚ f­A­3  (118)  ; cakṣur–, çrotra­, ghrāṇu­, jihvā­, kāya­, mano¬
vijnāna, IH, a­B­3/4  (109)  ;  considered  phala, c­A­7 (II 4), d­A­3  (115)  ; 
vipākaphala, d­B­1  (116)  ; duḥkha,  c­B­5  (115)  ; vartamāna, c­B­7  (115)  ; 
vipāka, c­B­9  (115)  ; garbha, d­A–l  (115)  ; bīja, d­A–6  (115)  ; santāna¬
bheda, d–B– 4 (116)  ; kalalamūla, d–B–7  (116)  ;  compared with  amātyāḥ, 
e–A­1  (116)  ; vijnānabīja,  83 ; bījavijnān­a,  126  ; pravṛttivijnāna,  126, 146, 
191 ; ālayavijnāna,  191  ; vijnānāvakrānti,  143  ; further  references  : 104, 
125, 126, 130, 132, 133, 144, 145, 146, 153, 158. Finally, the  reader  is refer­
red to Vittore Pisani,  Kośapariśiṣtāni,  in Vāk,  II (Poona,  1952), p. 21. 
vijnānapratyayam nāmarūpam  — 3rd link of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula, 
HI, a­A­4 (108) ; a­B­4 (109) ; c­B­1/2 (115) ; e­A­4 (116)  ; cf s.v.  vijnāna 
and nāmarūpa. 
vipaç­  — 88. 
vipāka  —  vipākaphala,  HI, d­B­1 (116)  ; vipākakāṇḍa,  c­B­9, 10 (115)  ; vipā¬
kamūla, d­B­8  (116)  ; cf. 81, 126, 147  ; cf also  s.v. karman. 
vibhaṅga (vibhāga)  — HI,  a­A­6  (108)  ; b­B­10  (113)  ; h­A­1  (121)  ; cf  63, 
64, 75, 139, 156;  pratītyajātārthavibhāgavijñāḥ,  184. 
vibhajya  — 158. 
vibhava  — vibhavatṛṣṇā, III, b­A­6  (111)  ; cf  68, 69, 79. 
virūpa  — VI­A­7  (174)  ; cf.  173. 
vivarjita  — presumably  in upādānavivarjita,  88. 
viçāta  — IH‚ e­A­8  (117). 
viçodhani  — in  pāpāvaraṇa­, karmāvaraṇa–,  gagana­.  sarvapāpa­viçodhani, 
V­1/2  (171  sq.) ; sarvakarm­āvaraṇaviçodhanīnāma­dhāraṇī,  171. 
viçrānta  ­—  viçrāntabodhim  eṣyati,  VH­5b  (19 4) ; cf.  199. 
viçliṣta  — pratyaya,  IH, f–A–8  (118)  ; 155. 
viçvavajra  — 168. 
viṣaya  — viṣayapravṛtti, IH, d–A–2  (115)  ; cf  101, 126, 144, 145, 163. 
visamyoga  — vīsamyogaphala,  204. 
vistara  — vīstareṇa^ III, c–B–4  (115)  ; f–A–l  (118)  ; 142, 152. 
vīrya  — vīryapāramitā,  200. 
^‚ṛ^ .– ^cati  (?)‚  III,  f–A–l  (118)  ; 152. 
vetāla  — 266, 271  ; vetālasiddhi,  271. 
vedanā  — 7th aṅga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula,  cf. s.v. vedanāpratyayā 
tṛṣṇā;  division into  sukha,  duḥkha  and  aduḥkhāsukha, III, b­A­4/5 
(111)  ; e–B–5  (118)  ; vedanāskandha, a–B–5  (110)  ; h­A­9  (122)  ; consi­
dered  phala, c–A–8  (114),  d–A–4  (115)  ; niṣyandaphala,  d–B–l  (116)  ; 
vipāka,  c­B–9  (115)  ; vartamāna, c–B–7  (115)  ; viṣayapravṛtti, d­A–l/2 
(115) ; puspa,  d­A­7  (115)  ; cittabheda,  d­B­5  (116)  ; vipākamūla, d­B­8 
(116) ; mitrāmitrodāsīnādi,  e­A–l  (116)  ; anubhāvanālakṣaṇā vedanā, 
e–B–4  (117)  ; further  references  : 97, 127, 130, 132, 147, 150. 
vedanāpratyayā tṛṣṇā  — 7th link of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula,  III, 
a­A­5  (108)  ; b­A­5/6  (111)  ; c–B–3  (115)  ; e–A–5  (117)  ; e–B–5  (118)  ; cf 
s.v.^ vedanā  and  tṛṣṇā. 


--- [Page 403] ---
— 391 — 
vaiyavadānika  — 58, 129, 153. 
vaiçāradya  —­ 105. 
vyaūjana  — 140. 
vyavadāna  — 62  sq. 
vyavahāra  — 91. 
vyasta  — III, g–B–7  to 9 (121  : eight  times)  ; 141, 164. 
vyādhi  — 61, 95. 
vyāhāra  — vyāhāramanjuçīkharah, VII–8b  (194)  ; 182. 
vrata  — 160. 
çakta  — vaktuçakta, VII­10c  (195). 
çaktī  — amitavihitaçakti,  X­b–lc  (273). 
çabda  — 120. 
çaraṇa  — çaranatraya, III, c–A–4  (II 4), cf 8 4 ; triçaraṇa,  84 ; kuleçaçaraṇa, 
VII­line  11 (193)  ; varaçaraṇa, VII–18b  (196)  ; çaraṇagamana,  201, 204  ; 
cf. s.v. çarman. 
çarman  –—  triçarmadhīra,  ­—  VII–18b  (196). 
çava  — çavodvah,  X­a­lc  (270)  ; 266. 
çāta—III, e­A­8  (117). 
çāçvata  — çāçvatātma  (?)  , III, h–B–2  (122)  ; çāçvatadṛṣti,  68, 159  sq. ; cf.  83, 
94, 167. 
çikṣāprajnā  — 11. 
çikhā  — ruciradīpaçikhākṛtatāmasaḥ, VII–12b  (195)  ; asaṅkhyaçikhāmaṇibhū­
ṣaṇāḥ, VII­15a  (196). 
çibira (çivira)  — 256  sq. ;  280. 
çīkara  — vyāhāramaūjuçīkaraḥ, VII­8b  (19 4). 
çīla — 95, 133, 160  ; cf s.v. cīlavrata. 
çtlavrata  — çīlavratopādāna, III, b–A–8  (111)  ; e–B–7  (118)  ; çīlavrataparā¬
marça, III, h­A­8  (122)  ; çīlavrataparāmarçadṛṣti, g­A­2  (120)  ; cf.  68, 
94, 95, 133, 160  ; cf.  also  s.v. çīla  and  vrata. 
çuddhi  — çuddhidṛṣti,  III, g­A­3  (120). 
çukla  ­­ (karman)  65, 66. 
çūka ­–  142. 
çūnya  — çūnyendriyāvasthānadhātuçoka, IH,  g–B–3  (120)  ; cf.  78, 83, 91, 99, 
163, 257. 
çūralakṣmī  —  X–b–2c  (273)  ; 2 47, 276. 
— III, ^–7 (1T7) ; g­B­2,  3 (120)  ; 61, 96, 127, 163, 164  ; cf s.v. çoka¬
pratyayaḥ paridevaḥ. 
çokapratyayah  paridevaḥ  — III, g–B–3  (120). 
^.ī — X­a­2c  (270)  ; 247, 271  sq. 
çrotra  — çrotravijnāna, III, a­B­3/ 4 (109)  ; çrotrasarnsparça, b–A–3  (111)  ; 
e–B–2  (117)  ; çrotrāyatana, b­A­1  (111),  e–A–11  (117). 
ṣaḍāyatana  — 5th aṅga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula,  cf. s.v. ṣaḍāyata¬
napratyayaḥ sparçaḥ ;  defined as  ṣaḍ ādhyātmikāny āyatanāni, III, 


--- [Page 404] ---
— 392 — 
b­A­1/2 (Ill) ; e­A­10 to e­B­1 (117) ;  considered  duhkha,  c­B­5 (115) ; 
phala,  c­A­8 (114) ; d­A­4 (115)  ; nisyandaphala,  d­B­1 (116)  ; vartamāna, 
c–B–7  (115)  ; vipāka, c­B­9  (115)  ; viṣayapravṛtti,  d­A­2  (115)  ; pātra 
(i.e. pattra),  d­A­6/7  (115)  ; āçrayabheda,  d–B­5  (116)  ; āçrayamūla, 
d–B–8  (116)  ; gṛha,  e­A­1  (116)  ; further  references  : 72, 126, 132, 136, 
143, 146. 
ṣaḍāyatanapratyayaḥ sparçaḥ  — 5th link of the  pratītyasamutpāda,  HI, 
a­A­ 4 (108)  ; b­A­2/3  (111)  ; c­B­2  (115)  ; e­A­5  (117)  ; cf s.v. āyatana  and 
s.v. sparça. 
ṣaḍdivaukasamāyalāḥ  —  enumerated,  III, h–A–5  (122). 
ṣaḍvidha  — pratītyasamutpāda,  HI,  d­A­3  to 5  (115). 
samyac  — samyak,  IH, c­A­4  (114)  ; cf.  83 ; samyakprakṛti. 
samvrti  — samvṛtisatya,  91, 141. 
samçaya  — s^mçayajnāna, III, f–A–3  (118)  ; 125. 
samçliṣta  — samçliṣtahetu,  HI,  f­A­8  (118)  ; 155. 
samsāra  — samsārāvanicaratām, VII–18a  (196)  ; 191. 
samskāra  — 2nd  aṅga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula,  cf. s.v. samskāra¬
pratyayam vijnānam ;  divided into  kāya–, vāk­  and  manaḥ–samskāra, III, 
a–.^–2  (109)  ; divided  into  puṇyamayāḥ, apuṇyamayāḥ  and  (presumably, 
but omitted  in the  text)  ānenjyamayāḥ  (with the  above  division  into 
kāya, vāc,  manas)  as sub­divisions  of each  of these  three  groups),  f­A­10 
to f­B­ 4 (118 sq.) ; divided  into  kāya, vāc  and manas,  the former  subdi­
vided  into  āçvāsa  and  prāçvāsa,  the second  into  vitarka  and  vicāra,  the 
third explained  by cetana,  f­B­4 to 6 (119) ; divided  into  kuçala, akuçala 
and avyākṛta,  f­B­6/7 (119) ; divided  into  prātisattvika, aupapattyāmçika 
and ābhisāmsārika,  f­B­7/8 (119) ;  considered  hetu,  c­A­7 (114) ; c­B­9 
(115) ; kāraka,  d­A­1 (115) ;  past,  c­B­6 (115) ;  karman,  d­A­3 (115) ; 
varṣikāḥ,  d­A­6 (115)  ; ārambhaph^la,  d­A­9 (116)  ; kriyābheda,  d­B­4 
(116) ; karmamūla,  d­B­7 (116)  ; valāddhyākṣa  (i.e.  balādhyakṣa),  d­B­10 
(116)  ; samskāraskandha,  a­B­6 (110)  ; saṃskārānām purāṇībhāvaḥ, 
b–B–6  (112)  ; samskārānām nikṣepaḥ, b­B­8  (112)  ; āyuḥ–, jīvita­sams¬
kārc,  138  ; cittaviprayuktasamskāra,  157  ; samskāraduḥkha,  143  ;  various 
references  : 72 sq. 79, 95, 125, 130, 131, 138, 139, 143, 146,  155­158,  159, 
161 ; cf . s.v. abhisamskāra,  samskṛta,  asaṃskṛta. 
samskārapratyayam  vijñānam  — III, a­A­4  (108)  ; a­B­3  (109)  ; c­B­1  (115)  ; 
e­A­4  (116)  ; cf. s.v. samskāra, vijnāna. 
samskṛta  (dharma)  — 129. 
samsthāna  — 101, 148, 163. 
samsparça  — IH‚  b­A­3,  4 (111)  ; e­B­2  (117)  ; 126, 132, 151. 
samsvedaja  — kind of birth, 162. 
samkleça  — three  samkleças,  58, 62  sq., 143, 162  : (kleça­,  karma­,  phala­  or : 
jāti­,  janma­,  vipāka­). 
samkṣepatah  — III, e­B­4  (117). 
samgha  — HI,  a­A­8  (109)  ; V­l  (171)  ; 67. 


--- [Page 405] ---
— 393 — 
samghāta  — name  of a  hell,  Ill, h­A­4 (122). 
samjāti  — Ill, b­B­2 (111) ; 135, 162. 
saūjīva  — name  of a  hell,  Ill, h­A­4 (122). 
satkāya  — dṛṣti,  Ill,  h–A–8  (122) ; twentyfold,  h­B–1  (122)  ; aṣtapādasatkāya– 
(?), VII­line  10 (193)  ; cf.  68, 94, 95, 97, 166, 171. 
satkāra  — 188. 
satkārya  — 82, 166. 
sattvanikāya  —  III, b­B–1  (111)  ; b–B–7  (112)  ; 71, 134  s^. 
satya  — samvrti­,  paramārtha–satya,  91, 141, 153  sq.,  167  ; ef. s.v.  duḥkha^ 
samudaya,  nirodha, mārga. 
santāna  –—  126, 136, 144, 153  ; santānapha^, cf. s.v. santāpaphala. 
santāpaphala  — presumbly  the correct form for  santānaphala,  Ill,  e–A–l 
(116)  ; cf.  Add.  II, sub  g ; note  104 to p. 145  therefore  loses its meaning. 
saṃnyāsa  ­— 5. 
saptavidha —  pratītyasamutpāda,  Ill, d­A­5 to 8 (115)  ; çīla,  g­A­2 (120) . 
sabhāgatā  — nikāyasabhāgatā,  135, 158. 
sam­ — meaning of the prefix, 88, 129, 135. 
samanantara —  jarāyāḥ  samanantaram  rnaraṇam,  IIII,  g–B–2  (120) ; 163. 
samavadhṛ  — samavadhārya (?),  83 sq. 
samavāya  — samavāyabheda, III, d–B–5  (116)  ; trikasamavāya, e–B–2  (117)  ; 
cakṣurādivijnānasamavāya,  e–B–3  (117)  ; used in the meaning  „total”, 
h–A­6  (122)  ; cf. 126. 
samāsa  — samāsatah,  HI,  c­A–6  (114)  ; 141, 152. 
samudaya  — IH, a–A–6  (108)  ; samudayapraheyā (avidyā), III,  f–A­4,  5 (?) 
(118)  ; samudayasatya,  87 ; cf.  78, 128. 
sampratāpaka  — name  of a  hell,  IH,  h–A–4  (122). 
sambhava  — sambhavabhramaṇaçrāntaviçrantabodhim =  eṣyat^,  VII–5^  (194)  . 
santhhāra  ­ ­ dharnu:tsambhāra,  VII–lc  (19 4), cf.  182  sq.,  197  sq. ;  puṇya­^ 
jnānasambhāra,  179, 197  sq. ; sambhārato  (sic)  puṇyānām, soṃbhāravant, 
kuçalamūlasambhāra,  197  ; dayāsaṃbhāra, dhāraṇīsaṃbhāra, dharma¬
sambhārayoga,  198 ; cf. s.v. guṇa. 
sammoha  — III, a­B­1  (109)  ; saṃmohaphala, d­A­9  (116)  ; pūrvānta­, 
aparānta–,  madhyānta­saṃmoha,  128  ; cf . 65, 145, 162. 
sarga  — bhavapādabhavatkaruṇākṛtasargavidhi,  presumably in different 
meanings,  X–b–3a/b  (27 4) ; cf. 276. 
sarvapāpasyākaraṇaṃ  — beginning of a Buddhist  çloka,  Ill,  i–B–2  to 3 (123) ; 
in addition to the  reference  to the  Mahāvastu  in note  131 to p. 123, the 
reader  is referred to the important publication by E.  Lamotte,  La Grande 
Vertu de la  Sagesse  (= Mahāprajñāpāramitāçāstra) ,  II (1949)  , p. 1075, 
where  the following translation is given : ,,Eviter  tout  peche,  pratiquer 
le bien, purifier sa  pensêe  : tel est  Fenseignement  des Buddha”.  Lamotte 
refers the reader also to  Dīgha,  II, p. 49  ; Dhammapada,  V–183  ; Nettipa¬
karana, 43, 171, 186. 


--- [Page 406] ---
— 394 — 
sahasrārapadma  — not mentioned, but probably alluded to, VH­12ajb (195) ; 
cf 187, 202. 
sāmkleçika  —  dharmas,  58, 153. 
samjnā  — Ill, h–A–8  (122)  ; saṃjñāskandha,  Ill, a–B–6  (110)  ; naivasaṃjñānā– 
saṃjñāyatana.  13 4 ; cf.  97, 130, 131. 
sādhana  — drutavilambitasādhanavanditaḥ,  VII–17d  (196)  ; 173. 
sādhu  ca suṣthu  ca manusikuruta^ III, a­A­3  (108)  ; 73 sq., 77. 
sāma  — 147. 
siddhayātra  (siddhiyātra)  — 1  sq. ; ef XI–22b  (315)  ; siddha ta  yātra  (in Old 
Javanese)  ; cf  also 326.^ 
sukha  — sukhavedanā, III,  b­A–5  (111)  ; e–B–5  (118)  ; sukhasparça, e­B–3 
(117)  ; cf  147  ; cf  also  s.v. aduḥkhāsukha. 
sugata  — catussugatasaṃgataḥ,  VU–3b  (194)  ; sugatabhaktibharapraṇataiḥ, 
VH­14b  (195)  ; sugatavimvavilokananirjita,  VH­15c  (195). 
sutṛpti  — sutrptilakṣaṇā  tṛṣṇā,  HI,  e­B­5/6  (118)  ; 151. 
suṣthu  — ef s.v. sādhu. 
setu  — 184. 
sevitavya  — dharma, III,  a–A–ll  (109)  ; 71, 129. 
skandha  — catvāraḥ  arūpiṇaḥ skandhāḥ (vedanā­,  samskāra­,  saṃjñā–‚ 
vijnāna–skandhāḥ),  III, a–B­5/6  (110)  ; e–A–9  (117)  ; duḥkhaskandha, 
; a­A­6  (108)  ; e–A–7  (117)  ; skandhapratilābha,  a stage  of jāti,  IH,  b–B–2 
(111)  ; skandhābhinirvṛtti, b–B–3  (111)  ; skandhamūla, d–B–7  (116)  ; 
skandhaprādurbhāvāj  jātiḥ,  g­A–10  (120)  ; skandhabhedatattvāt  (sic) 
maraṇam, g­B­2  (120)  ; skandha­paripāka,  –bheda,  163. Further referen­
ces : 82, 83, 95, 96, 97, 130, 131, 132, 135, 136, 144, 149. 
stūpa  — 87, 100. 
sthānu  — sarvasthānagatāni (malāni  ?) , V­3  (172) . 
sthāpanīya  (praçna)  — 158. 
sparça  — 6th aṅga  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula,  cf. s.v. sparçapratyayā 
trṣṇā;  defined as  ṣat sparçakāyāḥ (vi^. cakṣuḥ­,  çrotra­,  ghrāṇa­,  jihvā­‚ 
kāya­,  man^ḥ­samsparça)  , b–A–3/4  (Ill) and, in a very clumsy form, 
e­B­1 to 3 (117) ;  sukha­,  duhkha­  and (presumably, but omitted in the 
t:^xt)  aduḥkhasukhasparça, e–B–3  (117)  ; pañcadaça sparçāni  (sic),  e–B–4 
(117)  ; considered  phala,  c­A–8  (114),  d–A–4  (115)  ; niṣyandapha^a, d–B­1 
(116)  ; duḥkha, c–B–5  (115, where  sparça  is not, however, mentioned, 
but implied  in –ādīnām) ; vipāka,  c­B­9 (115)  ; viṣayapravṛtti,  d­A­2 
(115)  ; puspa,  d­A­7 (115)  ; samavāyabheda, d–B–5  (116)  ; trikamūla‚ 
d–B–8  (116)  ; paūca  kāmaguṇāni,  e–A–l  (116)  ; further  references  : 97, 
126, 132, 147, 150  ; cf.  also  s.v. sparçāyatana. 
sparçapratyayā  vedanā  — 6th  link  of the  pratītyasamutpāda  formula, HI, 
a­A­4/5 (108),  b–A–4  (111),  c–B­2  (115), e­A­5 (117),  e­B–4  (117)  ; cf. 
s.v. sparça, vedanā  and  pratyaya. 
sparçāyatana  — HI,  a­A­11  (109)  ; 129. 
svacīttaparyādāpana  — 123  ; ef.  also  s.v. sarvapāpasyākaraṇam. 


--- [Page 407] ---
— 395 — 
svabhāva  — 78, 90, 104. 
svārthakārin  ­—  III, f–A–7  (118)  ; 115. 
sveda  — svedajā  (jatiḥ),  III, g­B­1  (120)  ; 162. 
hara  — harādvayāṃsāmalabhaktinā, X–a­3b  (270)  ; harapādapaṅkajarajaḥ­, 
X­c­5c  ; harāya  namaḥ,  X­c­1d  (277)  ; haraliṅga, X­c­5c  (277)  ; cf.  247, 
265 sq. 268. 
hāni — III, b–B–5  (112)  ; āyuṣo  hāniḥ, antahāniḥ (?), b–B–8  (112)  ; cf.  139  , 
cf. also  s.v. parihāṇI. 
hīna — of karman,  65, 66, 71, 94, 159. 
hum — 169. 
hrtparitāpa  — hrtparitāpaṃ  daurmanasyam,  III, g­B­5  (121) . 
hetu — III, c­A­2 (11 4, in the ye dharma strophe) ; a number of  pratītyasamut¬
pādāṅgas  in opposition to phala, c­A­7 (11 4) ; its difference from pratyaya, 
f­A­6  to 9 (118)  ; hetusamutpanneṣu  dharmeṣv  ajṅānam,  a­A­9 (109) ; to 
define  the relation  between  elements  of the  duhkhaskandha,  g­B­5 to 9 
(121)  ; hetukāṇḍa  as a part of  pratītyasamutpāda,  c­B­9, 10 (115) ; hetu¬
prabhava, IH, c­A­2 (11 4) ; hetumūla,  d­B­8 (116)  ; hetutayāçrayatvād 
(read:  hetutvāçrayatvād  ?), f­A­2/3  (118);  hetūpanībandha,  82, 142; 
hetupratyaya,  92, 15 4 ; sahabhūhetu,  97, 163  ; sahetuka  (pratītyasamutpā­
da) , 1­42 ;  anyonyahetuka,  163 ;  further  references  : 80, 81, 92, 129, 141, 
142, 15 4, 155, 163, 16 4. 
heya  — 92 ; cf. s.v.  praheya. 
