--- [Page 1] ---
philippine studies
Ateneo de Manila University • Loyola Heights, Quezon City • 1108 Philippines
The Date of the Laguna Copperplate Inscription
Hector Santos
Philippine Studies  vol. 44, no. 4 (1996): 514–525
Copyright © Ateneo de Manila University
Philippine Studies is published by the Ateneo de Manila 
University. Contents may not be copied or sent via email 
or other  means to multiple sites and posted to a listserv 
without the copyright holder’s written permission. Users 
may download and print articles for individual, noncom -
mercial use only. However, unless prior permission has 
been obtained, you may not download an entire issue of a 
journal, or download multiple copies of articles.
Please contact the publisher for any further use of this 
work at philstudies@admu.edu.ph.
http://www.philippinestudies.net
Fri June 27 13:30:20 2008

--- [Page 2] ---
The Date of the Laguna Copperplate 
Inscription 
Hector Santos 
One of the most interesting things in the Laguna Copperplate Inscrip- 
tion (LCI) that Antoon Postma revealed to the world when he deci- 
phered the document was its date. As he pointed out, it pushes back 
the window of Philippine history some six hundred years or so, al- 
beit with a big gap that needs to be filled in. This is a big challenge 
to historians who may have to come up with new and imaginative 
ways to make the record complete and seamless from the new start- 
ing point to 1521 when records become available again. 
The LCI Date 
The date of the LC1 is contained in its first line, the last word car- 
rying on to the second line: 
swasti iaka wargitita 822 waisikha mesa ding jyotiga / caturthi 
kranapakga somgwara 
Postma (1991, 12) translates the above as follows: 
Hail! In the Saka-year 822; the month of March-April; according to 
the astronomer: the 4th day of the dark half of the moon; on Monday. 
I would translate it basically the same but would reword it differently: 
Greetings! Shaka year 822, month of Waisakha according to the 
stars, fourth day of the waning moon, Monday. 
At first glance, the determination of a Julian equivalent of the date 
seems easy enough but, for some reason, nobody has come up with 

--- [Page 3] ---
THE DATE OF LC1 
a date yet. I decided to tackle the problem and it turned out to be 
not as trivial as it seemed. It involved the reconstruction of an an- 
cient calendar used in the Philippines over a millennium ago using 
clues provided by Indian and Indonesian calendars from which it 
was derived. 
Let me present the answer right at the start. Then I will show how 
this equivalent date was derived. The Julian equivalent is: 
Monday, 21 April 900 A.D. 
At this point, let me state that there are references by Casparis 
(1978,4748) and Chakravarty (1975,46) to tables published by Sewell 
and Dikshit in 1896 and by van Wijk in 1924 that reportedly give 
information for converting Indian calendar dates to Julian dates. 
Casparis, in particular, suggests using the tables to prevent compu- 
tational errors from happening. 
There are three good reasons for determining the date from scratch 
and not using the suggested tables. Use of the tables can actually 
lead to errors instead of preventing them from happening. 
First, the published tables were computed for India. Applying such 
data indiscriminately to Indonesia and the Philippines could result 
in errors. Because a new moon occurs simultaneously throughout the 
world and there is a three-hour difference in local time between In- 
dia and the Philippines, the computed time of the new moon may 
fall on different dates. More importantly, the new moon may occur 
before sunrise in India, but after sunrise in the Philippines, making 
a difference in the day count as I will explain later. 
Secondly, the computation of new moons, full moons, and other 
celestial phenomena for dates over a millennium ago involves errors. 
We have better correction factors available today than we did a cen- 
tury ago. Chakravarty (1975, 46) even states that the Dikshit tables 
were based on K.L. Chatre's earlier tables published in Poona in 1851, 
which in turn were based on still earlier European tables by Delambre 
and others. 
The margin of error using present-day techniques is no.w down 
to about a few minutes. I have no idea what it was for the tables 
mentioned above, but they were manually computed with the help 
of logarithmic tables, thus susceptible to a lot of errors. 
My astronomer-friends wonder why historians insist on using 
old lunar tables for determining new moons when more accurate 
methods are available today. I tell them that historians feel more 

--- [Page 4] ---
PHILIPPINE STUDIES 
comfortable using tools they've already seen in purnals because if 
they are proved to be wrong later, somebody else must have been 
wrong earlier. 
Thirdly, the above mentioned tables according to accounts 
(Chakravarty 1975,52 ff.) were based on the modem sirrya siddhhnta 
which took effect during the late tenth century A.D. in India. At that 
time the use of mean motions of the heavenly bodies was replaced 
by their true motions. Naturally, such a reform would not have 
been in effect yet in the Philippines or Indonesia in 900. Chakravarty 
has shown that the differences between the two systems can be 
considerable. 
The Philippine Calendar 
Let us now examine the Indian calendar as it relates to the one 
introduced into the Philippines. I will limit my discussion to the rel- 
evant components that appear on the LCI. I will discuss in tum the 
length and the starting point of a year, the names and the length of 
a month, the "half of the moon" submonth, the numbered dates, and 
the days of the week. 
There is a dearth of material on Indian and Indonesian calendars. 
(None is available for ancient Philippine calendars because its dis- 
covery was fairly recent.) The few that are available are sometimes 
contradictory and one even contains many errors. Some were writ- 
ten by good historians with inadequate mathematical or astronomi- 
cal knowledge. 
Where there is a conflict in written source materials, I give pref- 
erence to Chakravarty (1975) over Basham (1954) and Casparis (1978). 
Basham's material is not detailed enough and Casparis's explanation 
of calendrical information contains some errors. 
The Indian year is a variable length year based on lunar months. 
Since its nominal length of twelve lunar months (mhsa) or 354.37 days 
is shorter than that of a solar year of 365.25 days by 10.88 days, it is 
periodically corrected to keep in step with the solar year. 
In the system that was established in Indonesia and the Philip 
pines, the year beg.lns and ends with the first new moon after the 
sun enters the sign of Pisces according to Casparis (1978, 8). 
Chakravarty says that the year starts with the first new moon prior 
to the vernal equinox (1975, 35-36). The first day of the year is actu- 
ally the next day after whatever new moon marker is used. 

--- [Page 5] ---
THE DATE OF LC1 
These two new moons of Casparis and Chakravarty do not nec- 
essarily coincide. Occasionally, two new moons will fit between the 
time the sun enters Pisces and the vernal equinox because it takes 
the sun 30.44 days to traverse the 30 degrees between these two 
points while a lunar cycle, on the average, is only 29.53 days. 
Depending on how soon the first new moon occurs after the sun 
enters Pisces, it is also possible to fit in thirteen lunar months until 
the sun's next entry into Pisces. Most years would have twelve lu- 
nar months but there would be a thirteen-month year every two or 
three years. 
Just what exactly does "the sun enters the sign of Pisces" mean? . 
Two thousand years ago, the Greeks and other cultures in the Medi- 
terranean divided the skies along the path of the sun into twelve 
equal zones, each named for the star constellation that was promi- 
nent in that zone. This was called the zodiac and is the band along the 
path of the sun extending appmximately thirty degrees on each side. 
At that time, the constellations coincided with the zones and the 
start of the measurement was at the point where the sun crossed from 
the south of the ecliptic to the north. That point marked the vernal 
equinox or the time Winter turned to Spring. 
However, because of the phenomenon called "precession," the 
constellations have moved west in relation to the vernal equinox. The 
sign of Aries which represents the area from zero to thirty degrees 
now no longer coincides with the location of the constellation Aries. 
Today, the stars have shifted 15.3 degrees from where they were in 
900 A.D. and almost 30 degrees from their location 2000 years ago. 
Whereas the vernal equinox was considered to be at the point 
where the sun entered Aries two thousand years ago, it now occurs 
in the constellation Pisces. However, the astrological signs moved 
with the vernal equinox and are now just imaginary zones in the 
ecliptic relative to the vernal equinox. The Indians adopted this sys- 
tem and the names of the signs are literal or exact translations of 
I their Greek originals (Basham 1954, 493). So when we say "the sun 
enters Pisces," we mean the time in which the sun reaches 330 de- 
grees (the sign Pixes is located 330-360 degrees) in the ecliptic and 
has nothing to do with the constellation at all. 
The Indian signs and their respective Western equivalents are as 
follows: 
mega Aries 
vrigabha Taurus 

--- [Page 6] ---
PHILIPPINE STUDIES 
mithuna 
karkaf a 
~imha 
kanya 
tuli 
vriichika 
dhanus 
makara 
kumbha 
mina Gemini 
Cancer 
Leo 
Virgo Libra 
Scorpio 
Sagittarius Capricorn 
Aquarius 
Pisces 
There were many ways of numbering years during different eras but 
the only system that reached Southeast Asia was the one used to 
mark the taka (Shaka) era. The era's origin is still not clear but it 
started in 78 A.D. In most cases, the Shaka year cited was the elapsed 
instead of the current year, but this was not necessarily true for all 
Indian systems. In any case, we will assume that the elapsed year 
count was used in the Philippines. Thus, 78 A.D. was Year 0, not 
Year 1. To convert from Shaka years to Christian years, we add 78, 
instead of 77, to the Shaka count. 
The ancient Filipinos probably determined new moons through 
computation rather than from observation as was customary in the 
Islamic system. The true new moon is unobservable, its first crescent 
only becoming visible ten to sixteen hours after the true new moon. 
A lunar cycle is variable and is complicated by many factors that 
detennine its apparent path. This makes computations fairly complex 
and we are actually in a better position today to compute ancient 
lunar phases than the people of long ago. 
Although we do not know exactly how they computed their lu- 
nar cycles, we know that they used a mean moon that travelled at a 
specified rate along a specified path. The sophisticated concept of true 
moon motion did not become available until the late 10th century. 
The names of the lunar months are: 
caitra asuji 
waisakha karttika 
j~e~lha mirgasira 
a964 ha PoWa 
sr6wana magha 
bhadrawdda ph5lguna 

--- [Page 7] ---
THE DATE OF LC1 
In the LCI waiUkha (waishaWla) is spelled waisgkha (waisakha), which 
could be an indication of its local pronunciation. 
Casparis states that any of the twelve months can be doubled 
during a thirteen-month year and act as a leap month (1978, 8). 
However, Basham claims that only eqedha and srgwana may act as 
leap months (1954, 492). Perhaps, Indonesian practice was different 
from Indian practice in this instance. 
Whatever the true story is, the leap month is called "second 
(dwitiya) month name." It may appear that Chakravarty supports 
Casparis in this discrepancy (Chakravarty 1975, 42-45) but his dis- 
cussion was limited to modem sirrya siddhdnta which did not take 
effect till late tenth century in India, too late to have had any effect 
in 900 A.D. Philippines. 
Each month is divided into two halves, the bright half suklapak~a 
tshuklapaksha) and the dark half kr~napakqa (krishnapaksha) of the 
moon. They represent the waxing (new moon to full moon) and 
waning (full moon to new moon) phases of the moon, respectively. 
The half of the moon is what we know as a fortnight. 
Although most writers have said that the basic unit of the Indian 
calendar was a "lunar day" (tithi) which was 1/30th of a lunar month, 
it is not the whole truth. Since a lunar month is 29.531 days or 
708.744 hours, a tithi is 0.984 day or 23.625 hours, 22.5 minutes short 
of a solar day. 
Each half of the moon or pakw (paksha) has 15 tithi that are num- 
bered from 1 to 15. The tithi are named (numbered) as follows: 
pratipeda 
dwitiye 
tritiye 
caturthi 
pahcami 
$a$ti 
saptami 
aqlami 1 nawami 9 
2 dasami 10. 
3 ektidasi 11 
4 dwedasi 12 
5 trayodagi 13 
6 caturdaii 14 
7 paiicadasi 15 
8 
The mismatch between the length of a tithi and that of a solar day 
causes another problem. Since a lunar month does not contain an 
integral number of days, a tithi may begn and end at any time of 
the day. This is not a very practical way to keep track of days. 
As a matter of fact, the ancients did not really keep track of days 
by tithi as some writers suggest. They used tithi as markers or tags 

--- [Page 8] ---
PHILIPPINE STUDIES 
for solar days which were what they used to keep track of dates. A 
day in ancient Indonesia and the Philippines started at sunrise and 
ended with the next sunrise. This compares with our system of mid- 
night to midnight and the Jewish system of sunset to sunset. The 
tithi in effect at sunrise is the date for the whole solar day. 
Because a tithi is shorter than a day by 225 minutes, it will occa- 
sionally happen that a tithi which begins just after sunrise will end 
before the next sunrise. Naturally another tithi will begin at that point 
and will be in effect for the next day. This particular tithi that began 
just after sunrise will never be used as a solar day marker and will 
be a "lost" tithi or k~yatithi. You can readily see that if tithi were 
really used for dates, there will be no 'lost" tithi because they will 
always occur in sequence from 1 to 15, no matter what. 
Casparis explains (1978, 50) that a tithi is lost when a tithi "start- 
ing just after sunrise ends before sunset." This is, of course, impos- 
sible and he should have written "the next sunrise" in place of 
"sunset!' He also says (1978, 81, "It therefore happens about once in 
every two months that two tithi begn within the same solar day, 
with the result that the second tithi is 'lost' or expunged." It is not 
the second tithi that gets lost (it is in effect the next day), but rather 
the first one. 
The length of the artificial unit tithi was based on one thirtieth of 
their computed mean lunar cycle of 29.531 days. Corrections were 
periodically applied as the actual length of a lunar month, being 
variable, was not an exact multiple (thirty) of a mean tithi. It is prob- 
able that a new moon spawns another set of thirty tithi, the correc- 
tion being applied at this point. This places the full moon in an 
inconsistent position relative to the tithis at times but may not have 
been a problem because the exact point of a full moon is difficult to 
determine from observation. 
We do not really know whether they reckoned their day from 
observed sunrise to sunrise or from mean sunrise to sunrise. We will 
assume that they used a mean sunrise of 6:00 A.M. in their compu- 
tations. This is not only convenient but is not too inaccurate for places 
near the equator. Passage of time was reckoned by days and the tithi 
in effect at sunrise was effective for the whole day. 
Although there were three-, five, and sixday weeks as well in 
Indonesian systems, the system we are concerned with had a seven- 
day week just as we do. It is the same sevenday week we have and 
is in step with it. The days of the week (wiira) came from the Greeks, 
too. They have the same names, as a matter of fact, which were 

--- [Page 9] ---
THE DATE OF LC1 
derived from the seven "planets" of the ancients visible to the 
naked eye: Sun (ravi or sijrya), Moon (candra or soma), Mars 
(mangala), Mercury (budha), Jupiter (brihaspati), Venus (sukra), and 
Saturn (sani). 
The Indonesian versions of the names are' the following: 
edityawera Sunday 
somawera Monday 
aqgirawera Tuesday 
budhawira Wednesday 
brihaspatiwera Thursday 
iukrawera Friday 
6anaiicarawiira Saturday 
This is the last of the components of the specific version of the 
Indian calendar that we are interested in. The Indian calendafs other 
features are not present in the LC1 and may never have been used 
in the Philippines. 
The U=I year: Shaka 822 
The first item on the LC1 date is the year Shaka 822. All we have 
to do is add 78 to arrive at the Christian equivalent of 980 A.D. The 
year therefore started sometime in early 900 and ended in early 901. 
The Julian calendar was in effect in 900 A.D., so the year was a 
leap year and February had twenty-nine days. Under Julian rules, 
every year divisible by four is a leap year. This is different from our 
present rules (Gregorian calendar) that state a year is a leap year if 
it is divisible by four unless it is the end of a century when it has to 
be divisible by 400. 
To determine the start of the year and the months that followed, 
Robert W. Oliver of Portland, Oregon provided help. He has written 
1 a QBasic computer program which he ran to determine the phases 
of the moon. His program incorporates data and formulas from the 
book, Astronomical Algorithms, by Jean Meeus (Richmond 1991) and 
has a correction factor of thirty-four minutes for the year 900. Oliver 
has checked the results of his program against another one written 
by Ala'a H. Jawad of Kuwait and the results are similar. 
The new moons and full moons for February to May 900 in Ma- 
nila are: 

--- [Page 10] ---
PHILIPPINE STUDIES 
New February 
Full 
New March 
Full 
New April 
Full 
New May 
Full 
The sun entered Pisces at 1921 hours Manila time on 14 February. 
The vernal equinox occurred at 0141 hours Manila Time on 16 March. 
The first new moon after 14 February as well as the last new moon 
prior to the vernal equinox was that of 4 March at 0931. Therefore 
the new year started on 5 March, the next day when the tithi be- 
came effective. 
The year starts with the month of caitra (Chaitra) which either 
starts on the day after the first new moon after the sun enters Pisces 
or the last new moon prior to the vernal equinox depending on 
whether you believe Casparis or Chakravarty. Luckily, this doesn't 
matter for Shaka 822 for the two new moons are one and the same. 
The next month of Waisakha (Philippine spelling) started on 3 April 
because that was the first day the first tithi (pratipada) became effec- 
tive. It was also the start of the first half of the moon or shuklapaksha. 
Again, we are fortunate that the year Shaka 822 did not have a double 
month and we do not have to decide on which month was doubled. 
The next half of the moon or krishnapaksha started on 18 April 
because pratipada started before sunrise, the official start of day. 
The text on the LC1 actually reads caturtha (chaturtha), instead of 
caturthi (chaturthi). We don't know if this was a mistake or the Phil- 
ippine version of the word. 
Since 18 April was pratipada (11, chaturthi (4) must be 21 April. 
Somawara is the second day of the week or Monday. Shaka 822, 
Waisakha, Krishnapaksha, Chaturthi, Somawara therefore translates as 
Monday, 21 April 900. A check of the Julian calendar confirms that 
21 April 900 was a Monday. 
,Before I close, let me take care of three more words in Line I that 
I haven't discussed yet. Swasti means "blessings" in Sanskrit 
(Lanmann 1983, 283) and is used as a salutation much like 
"Mabuhay" or "Aloha." Warqiitita means "the year related-to" 
(Postma 1991, 24). Finally, jyotiqa is defined as "One of the subsidi- 
ary studies (vedsnga) of Vedic lore ..., a primitive astronomy designed 

--- [Page 11] ---
THE DATE OF LC1 
mainly for the purpose of settling the dates and times at which pe- 
riodical sacrifices were to be performed" (Basham 1954, 489). It is 
also mentioned by Chakravarty (1975, passim) over and over to re- 
fer to a body of knowledge pertaining to astronomical and calendrical 
science. It should not be confused with jyotis which means "light of 
dawn or daylight." 
I have used the latest available astronomical data and formulas to 
amve at a starting point for Shaka Year 822. From there, I used com- 
putations similar to what that people of that era would have em- 
ployed (like using mean motions instead of true motions) to recreate 
the calendar. The Shaka calendar is shown on page 524 and the cor- 
responding Julian calendar on page 525. 
References 
Basham, A.L. 1954. The wonder that was India: A survey of tk culture of the 
Indian sub-continent before the coming of the Muslims. London: Sidgwick and 
Jackson. 
Casparis, J.G. de. 1978. Indonesian Chronology. Leiden: E.J. Brill. 
Chakravarty, Apurba Kumar. 1975. Origin and development of Indian calendrical 
sclnce. Calcutta: R.K. Maitra. 
Cowan, Harrison J. 1958. Time and its measurement. Cleveland: The World 
Publishing Company 
Lanrnann, Charles Rockwell. 1983. A Sanskrit reader with wcabulary and notes. 
2nd ed. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications. 
Oliver, Robert W. 1994. QBasic program for computing phases of the moon, 
incorporating formulas and data from Jean Meeus, Astronomical Algo- 
rithms (Richmond 1991). Portland: Unpublished Computer Program. . Postma, Antoon. 1995 The Laguna copperplate inscription (LCI): A valuable 
Philippine document. In Nati0~1 Museum Papers 2 (Manila), 1: 1-25. Na- 
tional Museum 

--- [Page 12] ---
THE DATE OF LC1 
The Year 900 
Mon Tue Wed Thu Fn Sat un Mon Tue Wed Thu Fn Sdl 

--- [Page 13] ---
