--- [Page 1] ---
ISBN 974-7809-04-4 SPAFA/WS 11/83

SAAFA

FINAL REPORT

CONSULTATIVE WORKSHOP
ON ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL
STUDIES ON SRIVIJAYA (TW3)
Bangkok and South Thailand

March 29 April 11, 1983

SEAMEO PROJECT IN ARCHAEOLOGY AND FINE ARTS ( SPAFA)

Southeast Asian Ministers of Education Organization



--- [Page 2] ---
SEAMEO PROJECT IN ARCHAEOLOGY AND FINE ARTS

S P AFA

FINAL REPORT

CONSULTATIVE WORKSHOP ON ARCHAEOLOGICAL

AND ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES ON SRIVIJAYA (T-W3)

UNIV.
LEIDEN
BIBL.

Bangkok and South Thailand March 29 - April 11, 1983


--- [Page 3] ---
“a Databases . Search. Liat. Account. iia. “8968! ctary , Resources

SPAPA Fiocl Reps ‘FF, Ons. bse bg hap
AS

- 67 ~

Appendix 4b

Country Report of Indonesia
for
SPAFA Consultative Workshop on Archaeological and
Environmental Studies on Srivijaya (T-W3)
Bangkok and South Thailand, March 29 - April lL, 1983
by Mr. Machi Suhadi

SEVEN OLD-MALAY INSCRIPTIONS FOUND IN JAVA
RR EE END FOUND IN JAVA

Introduction

In this paper an attempt is made to look for evidences in Old
Malay inscriptions found in Java. Seven inscriptions were found, 6 of
which in Central Java and one in West Java, Those from Central Java were
issued in the 8th and 9th centuries while the inscription from West Java
was issued in the 10th century. The existence of these inscriptions in
Old Malay show that this language was indeed Lingua Franca in the Indone-
sian archipelago. Some scholars opine that inscriptions written in Sans-
krit were meant to be read by Brahmins and high dignitaries, while Old
Javanese was meant to be read by the common people. ‘he Tuk Mas inscrip-
tion which is very brief was written in Pallava script and Sanskrit (6th
century) and so was the Canggal inscription of 732 A.D. However an early
inscription found at Sojomerto at the regency of Batang in the northern
part of Central Jaya was written in Old Malay; which palaeographically
could be dated to the 8th century. This important inseription made sur-
prising news as the name Sailendra with the title Dapunta is' mentioned,
This person could have been the ancestor of the famous Buddhist Saileadras
who reigned im Central Java circa 750 till cirea 836 A.D.

The inscriptions digcussed here are those of Sojomerto, Dieng III,
Manjusrigrha, Pu Hawang Gelis, Bukateja, Gandasuli and the Kebon Kopi ins-
exription of West Java,

The Inscription ef Sojomerto

This is the oldest Malay inscription found in Java, ‘The edict
was discovered in 1963 and published by Boechari in 1966 with the title:
"Preliminary Report on the Discovery of an Old Malay Inscription at Sojo-
merto" (MISI, October, No. 3, pp. 241-251).

Tt contains a salutation to Siva, Bhatara Paramesvara and other
gods. It mentions Dapunta Sailendra and the name of his father, Santanu,
his mether Bhadravati and his wife Samula. Some phrases are illegible as
the characters are damaged. On ground of its palaeographie character, it
has been dated to the 7th-8th centuries A.D,

toy



--- [Page 4] ---
- 65 -

The appearance of the name Sailendra in this edict gives strong
evidence that the Sailendra dynasty originated in Java not in other coun-
tries as some scholars have supposed. Besides the use of the Old Malay
language shows that it was not only popular in the areas under the suze~
rainty of Srivijaya but also in Java. It is possible that Old Malay was
used here to be read by Old-Malay speaking residents in Java who had come
from ether countries.

The Inscription of Dieng IIT

. This undated inscription is written in Old Malay with a few
Old-Javanese words. The inscription stone is kept at the National Museum
in Jakarta with the number D. 11. The edict is written in two sides, the
front part contains 10 lines, while the reverse side has 9 lines. The
inscription contains a salutation to Siva and refers to slaves and various
objects required in connection with worship. The numerals are among others:
duapuluh (20), sapuluh (10), dua (2), lima (5) and tiga (3). Other words
are: batu cermin (mirror stone), tambaga | (copper), tanda-tanda’ (signs,
marks) and bala (army).

The Inscription of Manjusrigrha

This stone inscription found on the compound of Chandi Sewu in
1960 is now kept at the Prambanan office for Historical and Archaeological
Remains. It is called the’ Manjusrigrha inscription as Chandi Sewu has been
identified with the temple dedicated’to Manjusri as mentioned in the Kelurak
inscription of 782 A.D. (Bosch, T.B. Ges 1928).

The inscription of 792 A.D. is written in Old Javanese script and
in Old Malay. Some building activities by order of anavaka (sea captain)
named Lurawa are mentioned, presumably ‘additional constructions to the Sewu
temple (Dumargay, 1981:133). There are also some Old Javanese words in
this Old-Malay ioscriptien.

. It is remarkable fact that a sea captain was ordering the construc-
tions just as-in the inscription of Gandasuli (1) issued by Pu Hawang (sea
captain) Gelis of 827 A.D,

This inscription has been transcribed by Mr. Boechari and is still
unpublished.

The Inscription of Pu Hawang Gelis (Gandasuli I)

This edict is dated 749 Saka (827 A.D.)}. The majority of words ©
used here was Old-Javanese but there are some elements of Old Malay in the
affixes ada and such words as: tatkala and dapunta. The edict mentions
some ebjects which are used in religious ceremonies such as padamaran (lamp),
pangliwattan (rice cooker), pamapirnyangan (?) and curing (bracelet or musi-
cal instrument), The ceremoay was held in connection: with the establishment
of a freehold by Pu Hawang Gelis.



--- [Page 5] ---
“GQ Datanases , Search, .... i lust . Aceount. infa © . 8°4%6*! | suators . Rasoutzen 8 oY

- 69 -

An Inscribed Plate from Bukatejia

This very short inscription is engraved on a plate measuring
14,2 cm. high and 8.5 cm. wide. Most of the space on the plate is occu-
pled by an engraved figure of a four-armed god in standing attitude. The
god holds a camara in his front left hand, a trisutla in his front right
hand, an aksamAla in his back left hand and a kundi in his back right hand.
These attributes are sufficient to define the figure as a Siva Mahadeva
(De Casparis, 1956:207).

De Casparis by making a comparative study with other inscriptions:
Karang Tengah (824 A.D.), Gandasuli (832 A.D.), Kuburan Candi (821 A.D.) and
Nanggulan inscription (822 A.D.) came to the conclusion that considering the

palaeography of the Bukateja inscription it could not have been issued later
than about 841 A.D,

The Old Malay elements consist of words such as ani (this) and :
suffix nda. The word padehanda is derived from deha a Sanskrit word meaning
"body" with the prefix pa, while the suffix nda is a Malay element meaning f
"the place where the body is". Hawang is the title for high dignitaries,
it is always followed by a name. The meaning of the inscription is "These
(presumably the deposit of bhasma) are the corporeal remains of Hawang :
(title) Payangnan (name) (De Casparis, 1956:209).

The Inscription of Gandasuli

The inscription was fouad in the regency of Temanggung in Central
Java, It starts with salutation to Siva which is followed by a candrasang-
kala (chronogram): sahina alas partapan (which is equal to 754 Saka or 832
A.D.). On that date Dang Karayan Partapan established a freehold ealled
Saaghyang Wintang Prasada.

The relatives of Dang Karayan Partapan are also mentioned: his 4
wife is Busu Iti, his mother is Jantakabbi, his mother-in-law is Panuahhan, a .
his brother is Busu Tarba, his brothers-in-law are Busu Bajra and Busu Ut- .
tara, his stepsons are Busu Taray and Busu Dandai, the stepbrother of the

queen is Busu Huwuriyan, his uncle is Wisnurata, Other high officials are
also mentioned in this edict. cos

One could make a comparative study of this edict and the Srivi-
Jayan edicts of Sumatra with regard to the Old Malay language.

At the time, the ruler in Centrai Java was King Samaratungge whose
name is mentioned in the Karang Tengah inscription (824 A.D.), originally
Called the inscription ‘of Kayumwurgan. The stupa of Borobudur was still

being contrueted and Java was a prosperous country which was sending missions
to the Chinese court.



--- [Page 6] ---
-70-

The Inscription of Kebon Kopi, West Java

It is still to be found in the village of Kebon Kopi, district
of Leuwiliang, Bogor regency, In the same area ware found the Purnawarman
inscription stones of Ciaruteun, one carved with human footprints and an
inscription and the other one with elephant footprints and an inscription
as well as the Ciampea inscription with strange characters, The Purnawarman
inscriptions are in Sanskrit-date to the middle of the Sth cefitury whereas
the inscription we are discussing now was issued in the 10th century, It
is written in Old Malay.

This inscription contains a suryasangkala (a chronogram to be
read from left to right) runs as follows: “kawihaji panca pasagi", which
‘is equivalent to : 854 (thus the date is 854 Saka or 932 A.D.). The edict
has only 4 lines, mentioning Rakryan Juru Pangambat who in 854 Saka returned
the King of Sunda to the throne. Here follows the complete text:

/ / In sabdakalanda rakryan juru pangambat i
kawih@ji panca pasagi marsandesa barpulihkan haji
sunda//,

T am of the same opinion with Dr. Bosch (Bosch, 1941) that. before
that date Sunda had been under the suzerainty of Srivijaya and that the
king of Sunda was returned to power in 932 A.D. When Srivijaya emerged
in the later half of the 7th century, the missions of To-lo-mo (Taruma,
according to Moens, 1937) to China, which had been sent in 523 and 535
(Sui dynasty) as well as in 666 and 669 A.D. during the reign of the Tang
dynasty, were discontinued. Damais disagrees with Moens with regard to the
rendering of To-lo-mo as Taruma as Lo does not correspond with xu, but with
ra. Wolters however agrees with Moeas (Studying Srivijaya, 1979). Wolters
located He-lo-tar (Ciaruteun) as well as Ho-ling also im West Java,

Though epigraphical remaias were lacking between the 5th and 10th
centuries, there were proofs of religious activities and trade relations
with countries outside West Java in the form of monuments and statues,

1. Chandi Cangkuang

This small temple ta the district of Leles, west of the
town of Garut, has been restored. This Hinduistic monuments
shows a simple architecture and was probably erected in the 8th
or 9th century A.D, ‘

2. The Durga Statue from Tenjolaya

Tenjolaya is a village near the town of Cicalengka, east
of Bandung. It is's Durga fighting the steer demon, the Durga-
mahisasuramardini. Judging by the style and dress, it is con-
temporenous with Central Javanese Statues ef the 9th century
A.D. The statue is kept at the National Museum in Jakarta.



--- [Page 7] ---
3.

i behh i Account tonto | MeaNehe Nistory . Reaources Sry

-7l-

The Vishnu Images from Cibuaya

At first only one statue was found, followed by another
one a few years later. Both statues are now at the National
Museum in Jakarta (Photo in Bernet Kempers: Ancient Indonesian
Art). The statues are thought to be made in a style influenced
by Pallawa art which flourished in South India in the 7th century
A.D. (Bernet Kempers, 1959).

The Ruins of Brick Foundations near Cibuaya (Karawang)

As the foundations are very damaged it is hard to make
a reconstruction of the original ground plan. An excavation
was carried out there in 1957. These ruins are thought to be
those of religious monuments of the period prior to the 10th
century A.D. In the Buni area, sherds of Romano-Indian rou~
letted pottery were also found, connects the area with South '
India of the 7th century (Walker and Santoso, 1977). On
ground of these finds, Wolters revised his location of Ko-ying f
(which he previously located in Sumatra but instead is located
in) from Sumatra to the Karawang area (Studying Srivijaya, 1979).



--- [Page 8] ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ambary, Hasan Muarif

1981

Boechari |
1966

1979

Bosch, F. D. K.
1928

194)

Casparis, J. G. de
1950

1956

Dumargay, J.
1981

Groeneveldt, W. P.
1960

Kempers, Beret
1959

Krom, N. J.
1903

Lapian, A. B.
1981

- 72+

Notes on Research on Sites from the Srivijaya
Period. Study on Srivijaya, 1-11. National
Research Centre of Archaeology, Jakarta.

Preliminary Report on the Discovary of an Old
Malay Inscription at Sodjomerto. MISI, djilid
TII Nomor 2-3, p. 141-151,

An Old Malay Inscription of Srivijaya at Palas
Pasemah (South Lampong). Pra Seminar Penelitian
Srivijaya, p. 19-42. Pusat Penelitian Purbakala
Dan Peninggalan Nasional, Jakarta.

De Inscriptie van Keloerak, TBG., 68:1~64.

Een Malaeische inscriptie in het Buitenzorgsche,
BKI.

inscripties uit de Gailendra-Tijd, A.C, Nix

& Co., Bandung.

Selected Inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th

Century A.D. Masa Baru, Bandung.

Candi Sewu et L'Architecture Boudhique da
Centre de Java. Publications de 1'Eeole .
Francaise d'Extreme-Orient. Paris,

Historical Notes on Indonesia and Malay Compiled
from Chinese Sources. Bhratara, Jakarta.

Ancient Indonesian Art, Amsterdam.

De Inscriptie van Karang Brahi, TBG., 59:426-431,

Navigation in the Srivijaya Pertod, Study on |
Srivijaya, 71-78. National Research Centre of |
Archaeology, Jakarta.


--- [Page 9] ---
“& Databases, Search , , bist Account; info) .#S¥98! History Resources

- 73 -
Moens, J. L, . . :
1937 : Srivijaya, Java and Kataha. TBG., 772363.
Poerbatjaraka, R. M.
1952 : Riwajat Indonesia. Djakarta.
Sarkar, Himansu Bhusan
1972 : Corpus of the Inscription of Java, Vol. I-II,
Calcutta.

Suleiman, S. :
1977 : Studi Ikonografi masa Sailendra di Jawa dan
Sumatra. Pertemuan Ilmiah Arkeologi, Cibulan,
21-25 Februari 1977,

1979 : Penelitian Sejarah dan Sejarah Kesenian
Sriwijaya. Pra Seminar Penelitian Sriwijaya,
Jakarta, 7-8 Desember 1979.

Walker, N, J. and Santoso S.
1977 : Romano-Indian Rouletted Pottery in Indonesia.
Mankind, no. 11:39-45,

Wirjosoeparto, R, M. Soetjipto :
1963 : The Second Vishnu-Image of Cibuaya in West Java. '
MISI, djilid 1 nomor-2, p. 170-187. :

Wolters, 0. W.

1967 : Early Indonesian Commerce. A Study of the :
Origins of Srivijaya. New York, Cornell :

University Press.

1970 — : The Fall of Srivijaya in Malay History. Kuala
Lumpur, Oxford University Press.



--- [Page 10] ---
- 74 -

THE INSCRIPTION OF PU HAWANG GELIS (GANDASULI I), 749 $.

swasti Sakawarsatita
749 jyestamasa ti
thi astami Suklapaksa
wagai wara hri pa
hing tatkala [ta] ndda pu ha
wang glis anakwbi sipirakhu |
t wiki [nga] naya hu
minamahkan pangliwattan
1 padamaran 1 pamapi [r]) nya
ngan 6 curi [ng] 1 nihan praca
ktinda dang pu hawang glis
tatra saksI dapunta likha
dapunta Suradri hyang guru
gawai hyang guru gowar
likhita kubha dangan

di pabwaya y da
dang pu wang glis cihna
ndati palupadi sima
nda //

10.
ll.

12.
13.
14,

THE INSCRIPTION OF SOJOMERTO 1s

namah $$iwaya

bhatara paramegwa

Ya sarwwa daiwa kna samwah hiya
ramih inan -is .anda dapu

nta selendra namah santanu
namanda bapanda bhadrawati
namanda ayanda samila

namanda wininda selendra namah
mamagappasar lempewanih

a.

TRE INSCRIPTION OF GANDASULI, 754 $.

// namaSSiwaya, om mahajana di sahifalas partapan tuha fuda laki
wini mandanar wuat tanta parawis, dharma~ .
gatinda dang karayaén partapan ratnamahegwara sida busu plar namanda
dang karayan 1aki busu iti namanda dang karayan wini
atyanta dharmasta sida dua, ayandang karayan laki parpuanta jantakabbi
namanda. ayanda dang karayan wini parpuanta panuahhan nama-~ .
nda. sida inan dua adhiraksa sida waranak putra maratna waranak stri-
ratna, adinda dang karayan laki busu tarbba namanda. iparda dang
karaya~

- 75 -

n parttapan busu bajra busuttara udanda sanak busu taray busu dandai
udanda sapopo busu huwuriyan pamanda wisnurata namanda sarabhara di
nayaka watak bunut tathapi udanda sapopo busu padaranan namanda sara-
bhara di nayaka watak kahuluan tathapi waranak sida busu putih padi.
taijah

pahik swasta pagarwwassi awat-indu anakda kulaputri inan parawis
tathapi pagarwwastu pagarduri si buha sampuh. witaka dadang winarab
rari inan sabafa- .

kafia anakda. dang karayan Partapan punya prabhawanda dang karayan
partapan kathamapi sukha subhiksa. yang rajya dirakga iya sabanakna
yang dega itas tatah

Pirwwa dakgina paécima uttara itas tatah iya manastuti gunanda dang
karayan partapan. tathapi ada @caryyanda dhalawa namanda sthapaka
sida tathapi .

bapuh munda dang karayan Siwarjita namanda nayaka di prang kapulang
sida inan patawis sida ta sahayanda di dharmma punya kuéala. iya
makajadi pra- .

tista di hyang haji tarkalaut sang hyang wintang prasada suprayukta
ksair sahita iya matraéna winihnya ksetra di tanah buna tlu barih
pragéluh ampa lattir

Pamandyan tlu lattir tina ayun ampa lattir wunu tlu lattir pawijahhan
dua lattir kaywara mandir dua lattir wanur waharu sa lattir mundu
dua lattir kakalyan sa lattir tarukan sa lattir matraia winih di tanah
buha parawis ampa puluh sa lattir parttakan di walunuh pu posuh

di pragaluh parpuanta warpatih manulu namanda naiyaka di kyu bungnhan
sahayanda warpatih pu lihasin namanda nayaka di mantyasih

dapunta marhyang jfanatatwa namanda // 0 //

THE INSCRIPTION OF DIENG III (undated)

1. namassiwaya dewadra

2. wya hulun duapuluh

3. karbo sapuluh alas

4. kacanan dua, padyusan

5. dua / gagun / karaha padwa

6. tu / tatas lanang / caranti li
7. ma/ watu / parsarinasi
8. yan tambaga / sapuluh wu

9. ta / mis dutahil / jang mi
tiga padwatu / caturanggang

1. kail laki / sajugala //

2. lungsir sawatu // wita

3. dua watu / tanda tanda

4. dqualapan / suruy ga

5. ding / carmin / batu cérmi

6. n / wungwung bala / karantiga du
7. a / sanduk dua / guci

8. patwatu / watu kakkyab

9. dua / dang / ika teja dang hyang



--- [Page 11] ---
- 76 -

THE INSCRIBED PLATE FROM BUKATEDJA

(Purbalingga, Central Java)

// ini padehanda hawang payangnan //

THE INSCRIPTION OF KEBON KOPI, 854 $.

(Bogér, Vest Java)

// ini sabdakalanda rakryan juru panambat i kawihaji patica
pasagi mars ndeSa barpulihkan haji su nda //

THE INSCRIPTION OF KEDUKAN BUKIT

swasti sri Sakawargatita 605 ekadadi gu .
klapaksa wulan waisakha dapunta hiyang nayik di
samwau manalap siddhayatra di saptami Suklapaksa
wulan jyestha dapunta hiyang marlapas dari minana
tamwan mamawa yang wala dua laksa dana koga

dua ratus cara di samwau danan jalan sariwi

tlu ratus sapuluh dua wahakna datang di matayap
sukhacitta di pdiicami Suklapaksa wulan ......
laghu mudita datang Marwuat wenua ......
$riwijaya jaya siddhayatra subhiksa ...

(Poerbatjaraka: Riwajat Indonesia, I, 1952)
THE INSCRIPTION OF TALANG TUWO

swasti Sri Sakawarsatita_606 ding dwitiya $uklapaksa wulan caitra

sana tatkalana parlak Sri ksetra ini niparwuat.— .

parwanda punta hiyang sri jayanaga. ini pranidhananda punta hiyang

sawafiakfia yang nitanang di sini niyur pinang hanau ru-

mwiya dnan samigrafia yang kayu nimakan wiahna, tathapi. haur wuluh

attum ityewamadi, punarapi yang parlak wukan . .

onan tawad taldga sawata yang wuatfia sucarita parawis prayojanakan
rane a a tm

punyaha sarwwa satwa sacfracara, waropa yana a. a

sukha di asannakala di antara margga dat. om muah ya ahara dnan air

niminumha sawanakha wuatha huma parlak maficak mu~ ..

ah ya manghidupi paguprakara. marhulun tuwi wrddhi muah ya janan ya

niknai sawanakna yang upasargega. pidanna swapnawighna,. werang was

taiia kathamapi. anukula yang graha naksatra pardwis di ya. nirwya

ajara kawuatanana. tatkapi sawanakfia yang bhgtyéna.

10.
ll,
12.
13.

14.

10.

-77-

satyarjjawa drdhabhakti muah ya dya. yang mitrafia tuwi jana ya kapata
yang winifia mulang anukila bharyya muah ya waram stha.

nafia lagi janan curi ucca wadhafla paradara di sana. Punarapi tmu ya
kalyanamitra marwwanun wodhicitta dhan mattri

udhani di dang hyang ratnatraya janan marsarak dian dang hyang ratna-
traya. tathapi nityakala ty&ga marSila ksanti marwwanun wiryya rajin.
tahu di samiérana Silpakala pardwis. samahita cinta. tmu ya prajia
smrti medhawi. punarapi dhairyyamani mahasattwa.

wajra$arira. anupamagakti. jaya. tathapi jatismara. awikalendriya.
maficak rupa. subhaga hisin halap. ade

yawakya. wrahmaswara. jadi laki swayambhu puna [ra] pi tmu ya cinta-
mani nidhana. tmu janmawagita. karmmawasita. klesawagita.

awasana tmu ya anuttarabhisamyaksamwodhi.

THE INSCRIPTION OF KOTA KAPUR
SE OF. KOTA KAPUR

// siddha // kitang hamwan wari awai. kandra kayetni paihumpaan
numuha ulu lawan tandrun luah maka matai tandrun luah winunu pai-
humpaan hangkairu muah kayet nihumpa unai tunai.

umenteng bhakti ni ulun haraki. unai tuhai // kita sawafakta dewata
maharddhika sannidhana, mangraksa yang kadatuan Sriwijaya. kita tuwi
tandrun luah wafiak ta deawata milana yang parsumpahan

parawis. kadaci yang urang di dalangta bhimi parawis drohaka wanun.
samawuddhi lawan drohaka. mahujari drohaka. niujari drohaka tahu

ding drohaka. tida ya

marpadah tida ya bhakti. tida ya tatwarjjawa diyaku. dian di iyang
nigalarku sanyadsa datiia. dhawa watia urang inan. niwunuh ya sumpah
nisuruh tapik ya mulang. parwwandan datu griwi-

jaya. talu muah ya dian gotra santanaiia. tathapi sawafiakila yang
wuatfla jahat. maka lanit urang. naka sakit. maka gila. mantragada
wigaprayoga. upuh tilwa_tamwal

saramwat. kasihan. wagikarana ityewamadi. Jaaan muah ya siddha.
pulang ka iya muah yang dosafla wuatha jahat inan. tathapi niwunuh

ya sumpah. tuwi milan yang mafu

tuh marjjahati. yang marjjahati yang watu nipratistha ini tuwi niw-
nuh ya sumpah talu muah ya mulang. saérangbhaffa urang drohaka tida
bhakti tida tatwarjjawa diyaéku dhawa waa

tia niwunuh ya sumpah. ini grang kadaci iya bhakti tatwirjjawa diyaku.
dian di yang nigalarku sanyasa datUa. anti muah kawuataiia. dnan gotra
santanana.

samrddha swastha niroga nirupadrawa subhiksa muah yang wanudna parawis
// Sakawarsatita 608 ding prati pada Suklapakga wulan waidakha. tatka-
lafia

yang mangmang sumpah ini. nipahat di welana yang wala érivijaya kaliwat
manapik yang bhumi jawa tida bhakti ka. Srivijaya. // //0// /f

|



--- [Page 12] ---
10.

ll.

12.

13.

14,

15.

16.

- 78 -

THE INSCRIPTION OF KARANG BRAHL

// siddha // kitang hamwan wari awai. kandra kayetni

paihumpaan namuha ulu lawan tandrun luah maka matai ta

ndrun luah wununy paihumpaan. hangkairu muah kdyet nihumpa u

nai tufai. umenteng bhakti ni ulun haraki. unai tuhai // kita

cata maherddhikea sannidhana. mangraksa yang kadatuan Sriwijaye.

tush tBhacte deweta mulan yang parsumpahan parawis. kadaci yang

di delanga bhumi @jnana kadatuanku ini parawis. drohaka wanun.

oan techuka, nabujérd drohaka. nivjari. drohaka tahu ding drohaka.

ye narppidah tida ya bhakti. tatwarjjawa diyaku. dhan di iyang niga-
ya Cumeah aiausah tapi ye eulang. parwwandan datu $riwijaya. talu
jotta centanata. tathapi sawaflakna yang wuatha jahat. maka lanit urang.
ue ava gila. mantragada. wisaprayoga. fpuh tuwa. tamwal. saramwat.
ons wadikerana ityewamadi. janan muah ya siddha. pu lang ka iya muah
Ltt jabat inan, ini 2rang kadaci iya bhakti tatwarjjawa diyaku.
selec suayisa datia. santi muah kawatana. dian gotra santanana.
coatthe. niroga. nirupadrawa subhiksa muah yang wanuana parawis //
mangmang sumpah ini. nipahat di welafa yang wala Sriwijaya

THE INSCRIPTION. OF PALAS PASEMAH

i ‘i a@yet. ni paihu [mpaan]
ten aes vanivua Juah aks nara eendeua Tuah wi {nunu pai-
same gkairu muah. kdyet nihumpa unai tunai. umenteng {bhakti ni ulun]
haraki unai tunai. kite sawaiiakta dewata maharddhika san nidhana mangra
Me artetgane hice. tuwi tandrun luah wanakta dewata milla yang parssum-
ane eengeai dalanten Ubiiat ajnana kadatuanku ini parawis. drohaka wanu
te acobebe, aanayart drohaka. niujari drohaka. tahu din drohaka

. tida ya marpadah] . -
tas ya bhakti tatea @rjjawa di yaku dnan di yang nigalar kku sanyasa

datiia niwunuh ya su [mpah ni}

9.
10.
ll.
12.

13.

10.

ll.

- 79 -

suruh tapik muang parwwa / ndan da / tu ériwijaya talu muah ya dhan
gotra santanafia. tathapi sa [wafia] .

kfia yang wuatna jahat maka lahit urang maka sakit ma ka gila mantra-
ganda wigaprayoga Upuh tiwa ta [mwal sa]

ramwat kasihan. wadikarana ityewamadi janan muah ya siddha pulang ka
ya muah yang dosafia wu [a]

tifa jahat inan. “ini grang kadci ya bhakti tatwa arjjawa di yaku dan
di yang nigalarkku sanyasa datéa Santi muah [ka]

wuatta@na dhan gotra santinaha smrddha swastha niroga niru padrawa
subhiksa muah yang wanuaha parawis.

THE INSCRIPTION OF TELAGA BATU
EEL OF TELAGA BATU

// om siddam // titam hamvan vari avai. kandra kayet nipaihumpa. an
umuha ulu

lavan tandrun luah makamatai tandrun luah an hakairu muah kayet nihumpa
unai tunai. ume-

ntem bhakti ni ulun haraki. unai tunai // kamu vatiak = mamu rajaputra.
prostara. bhupati, senSpati. nayaka. pratyaya. haji pratyaya. dandan-
ayaka.

+++. murdhaka. tuha an atak = vuruh. addhyaksi nijavarna. vasikarana.
kumaramatya. cathabhata. adhikarana. karmma .... . kAyastha. sthapaka,
puhBvam. vaniyaga. pratisara. da...

kamu marel haji. hulun = haji. vanak = mama uram vinunuh sumpah dari
mammam kamu. kadaci kamu tida bhakti dy = aku nivunuh kamu sumpah.
tuvi mulam kadaci kamu drohaka vaiun luv yam marvuddhi

lavan Satruiku. athava larlya ka datu paracaksu lai nivuruh ka@ou
sumpah. tuvi mulam kadaci kdmu mak@nucdra dari datrunku dari datu
paracakgu lai. dari kulamamu mitramam. dari vaduamamu. dari hulu
vukan paracaksu “

lai. manujari kamu drohaka vahun = dy = Sku maliin da di kamu. tida
ya marppadah dy = aku di huluntuhanku. kadaci kamu lai lari nivunuh
kimu sumpah. tuvi mulam kadaci kamu miayuayu mammam dari vatu....
athava marcorakara hinamdhyamottamajati. yadi makalanit = tamva yam
praja niraksanku. athava makatflu muah uram kalpita purva kataélu
nuahiia uram’a@rambha kadatuanku nivunuh kamu sumpah. tuvi mulam dari
kamu marvuat vini haji an tahu an thah rumah mahujari yem mamava mas
dravya athava manujari dirina uray an thah rumah malin uram mamlari _
yam jana mamava dravya di luat huluntuhafiku lai rarophya ka kamu lari-
yakan ka Satrunku ka ditu Paracakgu lai nivunuh kamu sumpah // athava
kadaci kému mati malin mamrurua athava kamu lariya mamlariya lai kim.
nivunuh kamu sumpah // athava kamu nicari lai marvuat = nicari pard~
datuan

mahlit mas mani maliin mamrurud kadatuanku. marvuddhisarana ri lai
kamu. uram vukan vaidika tahufia kamu marvuat sakit. tida kamu marp-
padeh dari huluntuhaaku. nivunuh kamu sumpah. kamu tuvi nigalarmamu
marsaminavuddhi kulamfmu mancaru......



--- [Page 13] ---
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

24.

25.

- 80 -

Aku kamu ada patra danan darah aivunuh kamu sumpah. tuvi mulap tahu
kamu di sthanana Satrunku lai nipihanna makagriyantra di kata luar
samsthana tida kamu...... marppadah dy = aku di huluntuhanku nivunuh
kmu sumpah. tathapi kamu.
eeeseeeeeees Gi samaryyadapatha di vanua vatun = dy = aku. tida kamu
marppadan nivunuh kamu sumpah. ini makalahit = pradna uram marupabhas-
navaidimantrayoga. tida ahara dari samayanku rupinanku kusta kasihan
vaSikarana lai, kad&ci kamu......

uarvuddhisarana Mara maryyada. yatha wasikarana. tida makagila makalanit
pranafia. athava vuat®a tahu kamu di dega. tida ya, kamulam dy = &ku di
huluntuhafku. nivunuh kamu sumpah. athava cihna diri kam lai marvuat
yam vuat jahat ini. .i. prati ......

ti dirifia.... di kamu. nivunuh kamu sumpah. athava mulam dari kam

talu _ diya. tida aku dandaku danda. tuvi kamu lai yam sanyasa datta.
sanyasa., ++..nda. sanyasa parwvanda diy=aku. kadaci kamu asrayamamu maka
lanit vuatana sata. .

tah nivunuh kamu sumpah. athava mulam ada uram dari kamu .......
savanakna kriykarumakaryyakaradi sneees in nivunuh kamu sumpah.
athava mulam kadaci ada ...... prakarana tida nivunuh kamu sumpah .
kamu sumpah. tuvi mulam kadaci kamu mantrika ...... marswasthd sama~
ryyada athava lai katahumamu seovee dia lai ...... prakarana. tide

kamu marppadah dy = aku di huluntuh@aku. dian = kamu parvuatna.
nivunuh kamu sumpah // tuvi mulam kad&ci ......

mu nininuniva nidanda kamu tida lai Gda kamu kad&ci ...... dy = aku

tida kamulamfia sarvvaprana nivunuh kamu sumpah. athava datam kamu di
ethanamamu tida aku danda Santi yam uram nigalarku mauraksa di kamu
eeeee. nivunuh

seeee. dhan vinimamu anakmamu ...... Pallavamamu dandanku. tathapi di
luar ...... uran nigalarku nivunuh kau sumpah. t@lu muah kamu dian
anakmamu vinimanu santanamamu gotramanu mitramamu // _tathapi eeeene

dy = aku sanyasa datta kimu mamraksana sakalamandalana kadatuanku,
yuvaraja. pratiyuvaraja. rajakumara yam nisamvarddhiku akan = datua
niparsumpahakan = kamu. kadaci kamu tida bhakti tida tattva dy = @ku
matvuddhi dian Satrunku kamu di yam lai nivunuh kamu

sumpah niminumamu ini. nisuruh tapik = kamu. pirvvaina mulam kamu talu
muah kamu // tuvi mulam jana vahun = kulagotramitrasantanamamu dy = @ku.
tida yuvaraja. pratiyuvaraja. rajakumara yam nisamvarddhiku akan = da~
tua. yam warvuat = tida kamu nivunuh

sumpah nimunumamu ini. nisuruh tapik = kamu dnan gotramimu santanamamu
talu muah iya. ini gram kadaci ka yuvaraja. pratiyuvaraja. rajakumara
yam nisamvarddhiku akan = dattia lai kada@ci akan = nimulam Sasanana.
akan = dari kam ni-

muahiia praja abhiprayana. aiujari kau pirvvaha. uram vukan nisuruh

ya mahujari kamu sanmata. kam tida marppadah dy = aku di huluntuhah-
kunivunuh kamu sumpah. athava tuvi vanak = mamu mantri durum vala yan
Nisamvarddhiku akan

+eeees luvih dari samaryyadamamu, dari Yabhawamu. nivunuh kamu sumpah.
sarambha dari uram drohaka. tida bhakti tida sarjjava. dhava vuatmamu
nivunuh kamu sumpah. ini vuatramu ininun sumpah eeeees

seeees kadacd kamu mulam karyya nivunuh kamu sumpah niminumamu ini.

ini gram kadaci kamu bhakti tativa sarjjava diy = Glu. tida marvuat

26.

27.

28.

~ 81 -

kamu dosa ini tantramala pamval.

al og ai yanku // tida iya akan imal

kamu dhan anakvinimamu. kadaci kamu minum aumpah wees ninakan
vala yam nivava di sSamaryyada muah yam muah nimunumamu. athava
kvara lai. ganti muah kavuatanafia™ yan sumpah niminumamu ini. nimuah

di divasana val.
nitapik : vala yam “nisamvarddhiku Parvvanda manapik. tathapi yam

