--- [Page 1] ---
philippine studies
Ateneo de Manila University • Loyola Heights, Quezon City • 1108 Philippines
The Laguna Copper-Plate Inscription:
Text and Commentary
Antoon Postma
Philippine Studies  vol. 40, no. 2 (1992): 183–203
Copyright © Ateneo de Manila University
Philippine Studies is published by the Ateneo de Manila 
University. Contents may not be copied or sent via email 
or other  means to multiple sites and posted to a listserv 
without the copyright holder’s written permission. Users 
may download and print articles for individual, noncom -
mercial use only. However, unless prior permission has 
been obtained, you may not download an entire issue of a 
journal, or download multiple copies of articles.
Please contact the publisher for any further use of this 
work at philstudies@admu.edu.ph.
http://www.philippinestudies.net
Fri June 27 13:30:20 2008

--- [Page 2] ---
The Laguna Copper-Plate Inscription: 
Text and Commentary 
Antoon Postma 
Based on the stone tools that have been recovered during archaeo- 
logical excavations, the history of man in the Philippines can be 
considered to have started at least 40,000 years ago. Since that early 
starting point, a variety of human remains, tools and artifacts, still 
being excavated, testify to a consistent human habitation of the Phil- 
ippine archipelago, and its social interaction and trade. However, 
until recently Philippine history is less than 500 years old, if the 
history of a country is understood to begin with the first established 
calendar-dated document, originating in, referring to, and/or recov- 
ered within the boundaries of that country. General consensus has it 
that the dividing line between Prehistory (or Protohistory as Dr. 
Manuel called it) and History in the Philippines, is the year 1521, 
when Antonio Pigafetta wrote his diary notes for the records of his 
Captain Ferdinand Magellan on his "discovery1'-voyage to the group 
of islands now known as the Philippines. 
The Philippines' southern neighbor, Indonesia, can claim a much 
earlier history, since the oldest documents, the Kutai Inscriptions, dis- 
covered in East-Kalimantan, are estimated to date from the fifth 
century A.D. These inscriptions, written on stone or thin sheets of 
copper, have contributed significantly to the history of Indonesia 
during its first millennium of our era. 
The Philippine Copper-Plate Inscription 
In January 1990, a crumpled, blackened, thin piece of metal was 
offered for sale to the National Museum in Manila, after previous 
efforts to sell it to the world of antiques had met with little interest. 
The attractive aspect of this plate of copper (as laboratory analysis 
later established) was the fact that this copper sheet, measuring about 

--- [Page 3] ---
PHILIPPINE STUDIES 
20 x 20 cm., was fully covered on one side with an inscription in 
ten lines of finely written characters. 
When I saw the inscription on the copper-plate I immediately 
thought that this was from Indonesia, and had nothing to do with 
the Philippines. Because nothing similar had ever been found in the 
Philippines before. It could well be another faked "document" like 
the ones that at first were considered "National Treasures," but 
afterwards proved to be clever falsifications. Because the copper-plate 
had been discovered along the Lake of Laguna east of Manila, 
I decided to call it the Laguna Copper-Plate Inscription or LC1 
for short. 
The script appeared to me rather similar to the standard form of 
the Early Kawi Script used around the tenth century A.D. (Stutter- 
heim 1940, 3-28) like the OJ Randoesari inscription of Central Java, 
dated 905 A.D. (Stutterheim 1940, 3-28). According to Dr. de Cas- 
paris, an expert in Indonesian paleography, this type of script can 
be found from Balie (Indonesia) in the East, to Thailand and Champa 
(Central Vietnam) in the West, since the scripts of these areas were 
not yet differentiated from each other during that period. With the 
help of Holle's lists of Indonesian Scripts (Holle 1882) I was able to 
identify most of the aksaras (letters), notwithstanding the poor trac- 
ing I had made. But after returning several times to Manila, I made 
some clear photographs of the inscription that settled any previous 
doubts as to the correct reading of the LCI. 
I continued contacting Dr. de Casparis, and he clarified several 
characters that were doubtful to me. As of now, the whole LC1 has 
been transcribed, but the interpretation of certain parts of the text 
still remains difficult, and not all the individual words are properly 
understood as yet. 
Contents 
The LC1 seems to be a semi-official certificate of acquittal of a debt 
incurred by a person in high office, together with his whole family, 
all relatives and descendants. The debt mentioned involved a sub- 
stantial amount in gold, that dpparently was still unpaid. Our "docu- 
ment" of acquittal (the LCI) is confirmed by other leaders and offi- 
cials, some of whom are mentioned by name, as well as the place 
(or arca) of their jurisdiction. 

--- [Page 4] ---
LAGUNA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION 
The tenth or last line of the LC1 seems to be a warning1 to any- 
one who might question or doubt the truth of the "document." But 
the complete pronouncement we probably will never know for sure, 
because this tenth line ends in mid-sentence, inferring that at least 
one more copper-plate is part of the whole inscription. Unfortunately, 
the LC1 is the only one known to have "survived." 
Date and Provenance 
It is fortunate that this inxription is supplied with a date so ac- 
curate that the exact moment of issuance can still be determined 
centuries afterwards, thanks to an elaborate system of astronomical 
calculations, which were usually mentioned at the beginning of an 
inscription. The LC1 bears the Saka date of 822, or 900 A.D.? which 
situates it at the beginning of the reign of King Balitung of Central 
Java, without implying that the LC1 necessarily originated from that 
area? In connection with the reign of King Balitung (899-910), a great 
number of inscriptions on copper-plate have been found, all of them 
in the OJ language, and most of them charters or official Royal 
Decrees. The majority have the customary mention of the name of 
the King. However, in contradistinction to that, the LC1 is not writ- 
ten in the OJ language, is not a charter, nor does it mention the name 
of the King, or any other name in the traditional formula. 
It is unfortunate that the LC1 was not found in the context of a 
scientifically controlled archaeological excavation, but discovered 
during dredging activities with a mechanical conveyor in the Lum- 
bang River, a job done by local sand-and-gravel companies at vari- 
ous locations along Laguna de Bay in the Province of Laguna. My 
subsequent investigations along the Lumbang River indicate that the 
LC1 was indeed retrieved from that river around 1987. Moreover, 
certain persons, after viewing a photopicture of the LCI, alleged, 
without being asked, that they had seen a similar piece of coppcr- 
plate with inscriptions around the same time (1987). Its importance, 
however, was not realized'then, and the possible second page of 
the LC1 might have ended up in a local junk yard and been irre- 
trievably lost to posterity. The surviving page of the copper-plate, 
however, provqcs sufficient evidence for scholarly investigation and 
study. The text and analysig of the Lapna Copper-Plate Inscription 
follow: 

--- [Page 5] ---
I?HILIPPINE STUDIES 
1) swasti &ka wargtita 822 waiskha masa ding jyotip caturthi knpa- 
paksa so- 
2) maw5ra1 sa'na tatkila dayang ahkatan lawan dhanfia Gnak barhzran 
si bukab 
3) anakda dangZ hwan3 namwran dibari warad'lna wi hddhapztra ulih 
sang4 pamgat seniipati di tu~pu- 
4) n barjS5 dang hwan n'iyaka tuhk6 pailah jayadewa.dikrama dang hwan 
namwran dian dang Eya- 
5) stha Buddhii nu diparlappas7 hutangda walznda ki 1 sue 8 dihadapan 
dang hwan iiayaka tuhHn pu- 
6) liran kasumuran dang hwan nzyaka tuhZn pailab barjidi ga?alakti. 
dang hwan n'lyaka tu- 
7) hln binwHAan barjiidi bigruta tathspi Gdinya sanak kapafiwis ulib 
sang pamgat de- 
8) wata bar jidi sang pamgat mdang9 dari bhaktinda diparhulon sang 
pamgat.ya makZfia Gdlfia anak 
9) cucu dang hwan namwran guddha ya kapariiwis dihutangda dang 
hwan namwran di sang pamgat dewata.ini grang 
10) sy3t syHpant5ha paBcZt ding iri kamudyan 3da grang urang barujara 
wlung lappas hutangda dang hwa . . .I0 
1. The second day of the seven-day week. Old-Javanese (OJ) inscriptions usually 
mention the days of the five- and six-day weeks as well. Old-Malay (OM) ones do not. 
2. dung is a honorific partide occurring in OJ and OM texts. 
3. hGn seems to be honorific but it is not known in any OJ or OM 
inscription. Could it be Old-Tagalog (OT)? 
4. vrng is a typical 0) honorific particle, used frequently in OJ inscriptions and 
usually combined with hyang. It occurs in combination with pam(a)tat as well. 
5. brrjii as suggested by de Casparis, should be read as barjzdi (to become, repre- 
sent, delegate), as in lines 6, 7 & &-and is probably an error of the engraver. 
6. tuhin is related to tuba (old, the Elder), and to tua of Malay and Kapampangan 
in the same meaning. Here it means: a Leader, an Alderman, etc. 
7. laps in OT has the same meaning as OM in the expression found in the "V* 
cabulario . . ." of San Buenaventura: "lops rn ang utang ko sa iyo" (my debt to you 
has now been dissolved, or acquitted. 
8. k5 is an abbreviation of knti, and su of suwmm. Both words signify a certain 
weight of gold. See below. 
9. M4ang 6rrurs as an old place name in Indonesia. 'lhe MQang of the LC1 might 
have been introduced to the Philippines by Indonesian migrants in memory of their 
original homebase in Java. 
10. From here the text continues on a second plate, which probably was recov- 
ered, but not preserved. 

--- [Page 6] ---
LACUNA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION 
Translation of LCI1 
(1) Hail! In the Saka-year 822; the month of March-April; according to 
the astronomer: the fourth day of the dark half of the moon; on (2) Mon- 
day. At that time, Lady Angkatan together with her relative, Bukah by name, 
(3) the child of His Honor Namwran, was given, as a special favor, a docu- 
ment of full acquittal, by the Chief and Commander2 of Tundun (4) repre- 
senting the Leader of Pailah, Jayade~a.~ This means that His Honor 
Namwran, through the Honorable Scribe4 (5) was totally cleared of a sal- 
ary-related5 debt of 1 kati and 8 suwarna (weight of gold): in the presence 
of His Honor the Leader of Puliran, (6) Kasumuran; His Honor the Leader 
of Pailah, representing Ganasakti; (and) His Honor the Leader (7) of Bin- 
wangan, representing Bisruta. And, with his whole family, on orders of the 
Chief of Dewata (a), representing the Chief of Mdang, because of his loy- 
alty as a subject (slave?)' of the Chief, therefore all the descendants (9) of 
his Honor Namwran have been cleared of the whole debt that His Honor 
owed the Chief of Dewata. This (document) is (issued) in case (10) there is 
someone, whosoever, some time in the future, who will state that the debt 
is not yet acquitted of His Honor. . .B 
1. To be considered as preliminary, pending further research. 
2. The Chief of Tundun seems to have occupied a higher position than the others, 
because he additionally was a Sm-pati (Commander). 
3. Although the name is Sanskrit, meaning "Divine (or Royal) Victory," it don 
not necessarily mean that this person was a foreigner. Preferring foreign names to 
indigenous ones, was as much a fashion in former times as it is today. See further: 
line 6, ~ana&kti ("Host of Powcr"), and line 7, ~igruta ("Famous"). 
4. Official clerks were usually employed for important documentary transactions. 
5. The word is obscure in this context. However, if waldnda could be read as 
~[iinda, it could be translated as: (a debt) "to the amount of' . . . 
6. One kati is about 617.6 grams, and one suwarna (the 16th part of a katD is about 
38.6 grams. The total weight of gold that had to be paid was 1.5 hti, or approxi- 
mately 926.4 grams. 
7. 0J hulun means slave, but also covers: "being subordinate subservient." It might 
be that Sir Namwran had technically become a slave, because of his debt, including 
his fam!ly and descendants, as was usually the case. (See Bibliography: Placencia) 
8. The name that follows is probably Namwran. This last line might be part of a 
curse formula, whereby transgressors are threatened with punishment, here or in the 
hereafter. 

--- [Page 7] ---


--- [Page 8] ---
LAGUNA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION 
Authenticity and Script 
An important aspect of the LCI, that had to be established with- 
out a shadow of a doubt, was its authenticity, especially bearing in 
mind the various fake "historical documents" that in the past have 
been presented in a Philippine context. Fortunately, some of the fore- 
most experts in the fields of Paleography and Old Malayan4 lan- 
guages were readily available with their professional opinions. They 
assured me that the LC1 is genuine and authentic, based on the iden- 
tical script-type known to have existed during the tenth century, and 
the correctness of the language(s) employed, substantial elements that 
would be hard to imitate or falsify at the present time without being 
noticed by the experts. 
Altogether, it was the opinion of these experts of Indonesia and 
the Netherlands, that in a final analysis of the LCI, the Philippines 
would play an important role. In connection with this, they gave 
credence to my theories regarding the location of the toponyrns or 
placenames mentioned in the LCI, that I thought to bc situated in 
the Philippines. 
The type of script used in the LC1 belongs to the so-called Early 
" Kawi Script that was also employed in the inscriptions that were 
found in lndonesia during a period of almost two hundred years 
(about 750-925 A.D.h5 It is ultimately derived from the script-types 
used on the Indian mainland, that gradually spread into Southeast 
Asia and further into the Malayan Archipelago. The Pllava Script, 
used in the sixth century by the kings of that Dynasty in South In- 
dia for their decrees, lies at the root of the Kawi Script and its sub- 
sequent development in Southeast Asia, including the Philippines. 
The LC1 bears the date of 900 A.D., and the script of that period 
(85CL925) is considered to be the standard form of Early Kawi, used 
for a great number of inscriptions in stone or on copper-plate, not 
only in Java, but on the Southeast Asian mainland as well, with few 
or no variations in style or outward appearance. Therefore, the LCI, 
as far as the script is concerned, could have originated from Central 
Java of the tenth century as well. 
The script of the LC1 is well executed, in a regular style, and does 
not present great difficulties in reading. The aksaras (letters) ba and 
wa are usually well distinguished, except in line 7, where bisruta is 
written instead of the usual Sanskrit wisruta and in line 8, where it 
reads warjadi instead of barjadi. 

--- [Page 9] ---
PHILIPPINE STUDIES . 
A curious writing-error-cumcorrection can be found in line 3, 
where the last part of a compound Sanskritderived OJ word was 
accidentally omitted by the engraver of the copper-plate. When he 
afterwards noticed his mistake, he deftly inserted tra (of patra = 
Sanskrit pattra( under its intended position, and gave dotted indica- 
tors of his amended correction. Another error of omission, but with- 
out correction, is probably at barja'in line 4, where barjdi should have 
been written, a word that occurs three more times. 
The Language 
Regarding the language of the LCI, there are a number of techni- 
cal Sanskrit words, common to this type of inscription, and some OJ 
words expressing ceremonious forms of address, but the main lan- 
guage of the LC1 is clearly Old-Malay (henceforth OM), containing 
several words that are identical or closely related to the Old-Taga- 
log language (henceforth OT) of the Philippines. Clear cognates to 
Tagalog (Old and/or Modern) of certain words found in the LC1 are: 
anak (child), dayang (noblewoman), hadapn (in front), hutang (debt), 
lap(p)as (acquitted of debt), ngaran6 (name), pam(a)gat (Chief), tuhan 
(honorable person), and other etymologically related words. As a 
clarification, however, it should be said that several of these words 
are shared by the OJ and OM languages as well, as members of the 
same linguistic family. 
It should further be noted that the OM language had its lingbistic 
development in the course of the centuries, and therefore, the famous 
Sriwijaya Inscriptions of the end of the seventh century, and the 
several OM inscriptions of the ninth century' found in Central Java, 
are not identical with the OM of the LCI, but certainly related. 
The inscriptions in the Early Kawi Script found in Indonesia thus 
far, are either in a local language like Old-Balinese of Bali Island, 
Old-Javanese of the big Island of Java, or Old-Malay that was spo- 
ken in the Kingdom of Sriwijaya in Sumatra, and the Malayan Pen- 
insula, and their dialectical variations. "Overlapping" into neighbor- 
ing language-areas did happen. 
These Malayan languages acquired, in the course of their expo- 
sure to Indian culture, .commerce and religion, a great number of 
Sanskrit words, and adapted these to their own linguistic needs and 
rules, equipping them with their own affixes, and simplifying the 
spelling of these (formerly) "foreign" words. 

--- [Page 10] ---
LACUNA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION 
However, certain standard, legal and astronomical formulas or 
expressions, among others, were presented unchanged, and regularly 
occur in their inscriptions. The LC1 is no exception, and contains a 
liberal amount of words derived from Sanskrit, starting as it does 
with a line in traditional Sanskrit astronomical terms that indicates 
the date of the inscription in 'detail. 
The main language of the LC1 is OM, and as the 'lingua franca" 
or trade language of the whole Malayan area during those times, it 
was the medium of communication with outlying regions like the 
Philippines that used their own indigenous languages. Problems in 
understanding this trade language were slight, because the Philip- 
pine languages were closely related to the Malayan vernaculars of 
their southern neighbors. 
One of the reasons, therefore, that the LC1 was written in OM (and 
not in OJ or any other Malayan language), might be its intended 
purpose, namely for communication with a "foreign" country (in casu 
the Philippines) outside the immediate language (OJ?) domain, where 
the local (Javanese) language was no longer well understood. If that 
is indeed the case, the LC1 might have been issued by recognised 
authorities outside the Philippines kg. in Java), who had personal 
or national interests there. It might then be possible that important 
person(s) in the Philippines, with a substantial debt in gold, had 
appealed to these foreign authorities for help in hidtheir quandary, 
to arrange for a debt-acquittal, officially sanctioned, under certain 
conditions not mentioned in the LCI. 
Another reason for the LC1 to have been written in OM, might 
also be because it was issued by Sriwijayan authorities in Sumatera 
Sclatan, where OM was the vernacular and current language of 
communication, serving also as the trade language farther afield. In 
that case, however, certain OJ words and influences, clearly notice- 
able in the LCI, would have to be explained to make that supposi- 
tion acceptable. 
In the LCl, aside from the expected Sanskrit words, and the OJ 
cognates with OM, there occur also a number of pure 0J words, like 
ngaran (name) and parn(a)gat (leader or Chief), that have no cognates 
in OM, and, moreover, have not occurred in any OM inscription thus 
far. These words are accepted as OJ words, but could be OT as well, 
because they exist in both of these languages. 
With the help of the Tagalog language more insight could be to 
brought to bear to solve this perplexity, especially since ngaran (OJ) 
is used with the prefix bar- (OM)." In an OM inscription, one would 

--- [Page 11] ---
PHILIPPINE STUDIES 
have expected barnama, instead of barngaran (to name), because nama 
is the (Sanskritderived) word for "name" in Old & Modem Indone- 
~ian/Malay.~ 
Pamgat (or pamagat) is another OJ word that frequently occurs in 
OJ inscriptions (not in OM ones), often preceded by the honorific OJ 
sang as in the LCI. On the other hand, those acquainted with the 
Tagalog language will recognize pamagat immediately as a Tagalog 
word as well, in rather common use, though at present mainly with 
the meaning of "title of a book," or "heading of a chapter." The oldest 
Tagalog dictionarie~,'~ presenting the linguistic picture of the sixteenth 
century (and probably earlier, since words are slow to change!), 
mention pamagat as a title or "special name" for persons. It seems, 
moreover, that even at the beginning of the twentieth Century, pam- 
agat was still used as a title for important persons, as evidenced in 
the book "Capitan Bensio" by G.B. Francisco (Maynila, 1907), where 
he mentions a ". . . pamagat na maginoo" (p. 31, and ". . . isang Pan- 
gulong punong cawal, na may pamagat na Gobernador general" (p. 20)" 
The abbreviated forms magat and gat were used as well, and were 
still fashionable in the Philippines at the amval of the Spaniards in 
the sixteenth century. Moreover, until now there are the surnames 
of persons like Gatdula, Gatmaitan, Gatbonton, etc., as reminiscences 
of once existing titles for Chiefs [( pama)gat] in charge of certain, 
limited territories in pre-Spanish Philippines. Likewise, there was the 
title of a noblewoman, or the wife or a Chief, who was addressed in 
Tagalog as dayang (San Antonio 1738), a word occurring in the LC1 
as well (line 2). 
Therefore, the word pam(a)gat, repeatedly (five times!) mentioned 
in the LCI, might well be the common honorific reference to Chiefs, 
or important persons, in the Philippines of the 10th Century A.D., 
"borrowed" from the OJ pam(a)gat, a common word also in that 
language of those early times, though not used anymore in Modem 
Javanese.I2 
Personal and Place Names 
A number of names, or possible names, of persons and/or places 
are mentioned in the LCI, and close attention should be paid to them, 
because they furnish vital clues regarding the political and topo- 
graphic background of the LC?. 
One of the personal names, Bukah, cannot be doubted, because it 
is introduced by the OJ personal marker si (line 2).13 Other names 

--- [Page 12] ---
LAGUNA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION 
without the si preceding them, seem to be more in conformity with 
its use in OM inscriptions. Other possible personal names are: 
Angkatan (line 2); Namwran (passim); Jayadewa (line 4) and 
Kasumuran (line 6). Maybe also: ~anabkti (line 6) and ~i&uta (line 
7). The toponyms or placenames are: PailahI4 (lines 4 and 6); Tundun 
(line 3); Puliran (line 6) and Binwangan (line 7). Dewata (line 8) and 
Mdang (line 8) could be either personal names or toponyms. 
Malayan (including Philippine) names are: Angkatan, Binwangan, 
Bukah, Kasumuran, Pailah and Puliran. Maybe Namwran as well. 
names of Sanskrit origin are: BiSruta, Dewata, ~anahkti, Jayadewa 
(G. & J. are both compound words), Mdang and Tundun. The last 
two names, because of their lingual consonants (n and d) that are of 
Sanskrit origin might originally be toponyms existing on the Island 
of Java.I5 Javanese settlers in a foreign country (LC. the Philippines), 
might have brought these names along, and applied them to the 
places of their occupation as a remembrance of their home country. 
Regarding the names mentioned in the LCI, it is interesting to note 
that in the Catalogo Alfabetico de Apellidos, appended to a Decree 
promulgated in 1849 by the Spanish government in the phi lip pine^,'^ 
the names Angcatan, Buca, Diwata, Paela, Puriran, Somuran and 
Tundo, are mentioned as possible surnames. 
In August 1990, during my stay in Yogyakarta, Indonesia when 1 
attended the 14th Congress of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Associa- 
tion (IPPA), and presented a preliminary paper on the LCI, I availed 
myself of the opportunity to consult research data on the Indone- 
sian presence of placenames mentioned in early inscriptions recov- 
ered there. The key works in this field are undoubtedly Damais and 
Darmosoetopo (see: Bibliography) that contain a complete listing of 
all the toponyrns occurring in the Indonesian inscriptions from the 
earliest periods till the reign of king Airlengga (1049 A.D.) inclusively. 
Aside from Mdang I didn't find any of the placenames mentioned 
in the LCI. Moreover, it was confirmed by experts in Indonesia that 
to their knowledge the toponyms of the LC1 (Mdang excepted) had 
not been encountered thus far. 
Since the LC1 was allegedly found in the Laguna de Bay area, 
Pulilan, the old name for the Southeastern Lake area, according to 
some old Tagalog dicfionaries (San Buenaventura 1613; Noceda- 
Sanlucar 1860; ~aktawJ914 are among them), might be considered 
as one of the equivalents of the LC1 Puliran." In fact, I personally 
was convinced at first, that in Pulilan (=SE Laguna de Bay area) I 
had located the place Puliran mentioned in the LC1 (linc 61, and also 

--- [Page 13] ---
PHILIPPINE STUDIES 
Pailah (lines 4 and 61, which easily could have been the earlier name 
of Pila, Laguna. Moreover, scientific archaeological excavations near 
Pila had indicated this area to be "one of the most important cen- 
ters of trade, as well as of culture during the early part of the pres- 
ent millennium . . ." (Tenaza 1968, 13). 
However, one of the problems was that Pulian along Laguna de 
Bay, according to the dictionaries, was a region, comprising several 
villages, Pila being one of them, situated within the area of Pulilan. 
On the other hand, the LC1 clearly indicates that they were two sepa- 
rate localities, each with its own leader. For that reason it is very 
probable that the town Pila, in Laguna Province, was not the Pailah 
1 wanted to locate as the LC1 toponyrn. 
1 
PULILAN = southeastern shore region 
@ = LC1 recovery site 
14O30'N - 
Los Baiios 
0 5 lOkm - 
1 

--- [Page 14] ---
LAGUNA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION 
Moreover, it seems that Pulilan was a popular town name in the 
early Philippines, because there was another one in Bulacan Prov- 
ince. Therefore, I thought Pulilan, along the Angat (pronounced: 
Anggat) River, in the province of Bulacan, north of Manila, (coordi- 
nates: 14-54.2 & 120-50.8)18 to be a better candidate. All the more so 
because, after carefully studying the map of Bulacan province, I found 
at the headwaters of the same river, the village of Paila,lg in the 
Barangay of San Lorenzo at the eastern part of the municipality of 
Norzagaray, with coordinates: 14-54.5 & 121-06.9. 
Furthermore, along Manila Bay, north of Manila (and Tondo!), is 
located the village of Binwangan, belonging to the municipality of 
Obando, situated at the mouth of the Bulacan River, with coordinates: 
14-43.2 & 120-543. One can further find, as an unexpected bonus, to 
the North of the town of Calumpit, along the large Pampanga River, 
the village of Gatbuca (coordinates: 14-55.5 & 120-45.9), that seems 
to refer to the name Bukah in line 2 of the LCI.20 All this encour- 
aged me to consider the northern Manila district of Tondo (coordi- 
nates: 14-36.9 & 120-58.3), a separate town in earlier times, situated 
at the mouth of the Pasig River, as the synonym of the name Tundun 
in line 3 of the LCI. 
At this point, I am confident that five of thc (place) names men- 
tioned in the LCI, find their equivalents within the limited area of 
what is now known as Bulacan Province in the Philippines, the text 
of this same LC1 can be considered to refer indeed to these places, 
already existing already under identical names in the tenth century. 
It is important to note that all five places mentioned?' separated 
from each other by varying distances, are situated along a river, or 
rivcrs, that enabled the tenth century Filipinos to make use of them 
as an cffective (and often only) means of transportation and commu- 
nication between the different settlements. Moreover, these "water- 
highways" emptied (and still do) into the open sea (China Sea), by 
way of Manila Bay, offering the seafaring traders of China and South- 
east Asia of early times an easy access to interior trading centers via 
these riverine communication-lines. It can further be presumed that 
during those times, these rivers must have been much deeper and 
certainly were more navigable than they are today, considering the 
deteriorating ecology of the area and the Ipo and Angat flood-con- 
trol dams that have been constructed in the huge water-shed area of 
the Angat River. 

--- [Page 15] ---


--- [Page 16] ---
LACUNA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION 
Gold, Debt, Slavery and Class 
A dictionary usually gives the equivalent word from one language 
to the other. However, in the "Vocabulario de la Lengua Tagala" of 
Fr. Pedro de Buenaventura, (henceforth SB), printed in "la noble 
Villa" of Pila in 1613, you will get much more. SB will give you an 
adequate definition and description of each word, its origin and use, 
and will illustrate this with a number of related sentences in both 
Tagalog and Spanish. In the "Vocabulario de la Lengua Tagala" of 
Fr. Francisco Blancas de San Joseph, (henceforth SJ), a forerunner of 
the above, but only available in manuscript form, similar definitions 
can be found, thought not as comprehensive as in SB. 
As concepts like gold, debt, slavery and class-distinctions occur 
in the LCI, I tried to familiarize myself with these words in the SJ & 
SB dictionaries, and early Spanish writings. 
Scott, in his essay on Tagalog Technology culled from SB, wrote: 
"One of the richest vocabularies in the whole dictionary is that per- 
taining to metallurgy and metal-working, including special subdivi- 
sions for goldsmithy and jewelry" (Scott 1982, 531). The quality of 
gold was subdivided in accordance with its karat contents, and the 
weighing scales were always available (there was a special bag for 
carrying them around!) to determine the differences from twenty-four 
Karat, the dalisay gold, to the poorest kind (below ten Karats), the 
hotoc gold, that was mixed with so much silver and copper, that it 
could hardly be called "gold" at all. 
As to the practical use of gold, Scott further writes: 
Goldsmithing almost doubles the metal-working vocabulary with more 
delicate tools and sophisticated techniques like soldering, fusing enam- 
eling, filigreeing-and adulterating--to produce dozens of varieties of 
chains and necklaces, brooches and pendants, pectorals and collars, 
diadems and bracelets, beads, rings, anklets and arm-bands, earring 
and plugs, and dental inlays. It was, as a matter of fact, the glitter of 
just such gold chains dangling from Filipino necks that first dazzled 
the eye of the Spanish conquistador--those kamagi as thick as a man's 
finger and reaching down to the chest, or the six-strand gamay or lokay- 
lokayan which so completely disappeared into colonial coffers that the 
terms were already archaisms when Father Sen Buenaventura recorded 
them (Scott 1982, 533). 
Since gold appeared to be in the possession of almost everyone 
to a greater or lesser degree, it was not uncommon. But it seems, 

--- [Page 17] ---
PHILIPPINE STUDIES 
that rather suddenly, for one or other reason, one could find his gold 
treasure completely gone. SB presents various Tagalog words for the 
Spanish acabarse, "to find oneself without any valuable possessions 
whatsoever." One of the reasons for this sudden reduction to the state 
of poverty,might be explained by the central theme of the LCI, ex- 
pressed the the word, hutang or debt, mentioned there several times. 
In the SB the process of incurring debt is graphically described 
by a series of related words expressing the notion of borrowing in 
various degrees, with the attached rates of interest upon repayment. 
Depending on the agreement, a debt could increase on a daily, 
monthly or yearly basis by as much as 100 percent or, upon repay- 
ment within any time period agreed upon, with an increase from 50 
to 150 percent interest. If not paid with money, land property was 
another means of payment, or service to the person indebted to. 
However, any food or other needs provided during these "service" 
activities, was chalked up additionally again as debt, etc. When a 
debt was finally paid, one could say (in OT): "lapas na ang utang ko 
sa iyo" (my debt to you is now dissolved), using almost the same 
words present in the LCI. 
If, however, in the end, the debt could not be paid, either by 
money or by temporary servitude, the debtor could legally be forced 
to become a slave, often together with his whole family and descen- 
dants, thus becoming the victim of a purposeful scheme of the one 
who lent him the money, i.e., to acquire a cheap but valuable work- 
ing force. 
When the Spaniards arrived in the Phillippines in 1521, and fifty 
years later in Manila, they found established among the local popu- 
lation an elaborate and complicated system of permanent servitude 
or slavery. A wealth of early Spanish documents is still available 
attesting to this, and explaining in detail the intricate complexity of 
an enslavement maze that displayed the whole gamut of subservi- 
ence and merciless exploitation. Many slaves were born that way, 
and acquired as "heritage" by a new master after the death of the 
former one. Others were purchased, after having been captured by 
pirates on one of their frequent maritime raids from the North or 
the South. The term given by SB for buying or selling slaves, is 
simply bayar, also meaning: "to pay." 
On the highest rung of the enslavement ladder stood the namama- 
hay, the slave who could live with his family in a house of his own, 
a privilege he had acquired by paying for it in gold. He could be 

--- [Page 18] ---
LAGUNA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION 
called upon by his master for work activities, but had more freedom 
than the slaves of a lower class. The sagigilir slave stayed in the the 
bottom-part of his master's house, who claimed total "ownership" 
of him and his family, and treated him in any way thought fitting. 
The lowest types of slaves, and the most wretched, were those whose 
master was a slave himself, whether a namamahay or a sagigilir, for 
there was little or no hope for any improvement in their miserable 
state. 
Freedom from slavery could be obtained by "paying the price" 
which was higher for slaves of a lower class. Sometimes they be 
came free, or maharlika, at the death of their master, through an 
express stipulation in his testament. Once free, a maharlika could be 
considered on the same social level as a timawa, a commoner, or a 
person who had never been a slave before. 
Altogether, slavery was a taken-for-gran ted social institution dur- 
ing the sixteenth century. All the indications are there, and it is clear 
that, in view of its complex design, enslavement had first started 
many centuries earlier. 
From the above it is clear that there were different degrees of social 
recognition in pre-Spanish Philippine society. Those on the top were 
the Principalities, the Chiefs, the Leaders. They possessed most of 
the gold and the power that came with it. However, the territory of 
a Chief or Dato (also Maginoo) was usually rather limited. The early 
Spanish reports on the Philippines mention that the Chiefs "ruled 
over but few people, sometimes as many as a hundred houses, 
sometimes even less than thirty" (Plasencia 1589). Also: "it often 
befalls that in one village,however small it may be, there are five, 
six, or ten chiefs, each of whom possess twenty or thirty slaves, 
whom he has the power to sell, or treat as he pleases" (Blair and 
Robertson 1903-1907, 3: 154). With regard to the different Chiefs 
referred to in the LCI, their tenitory would indeed be limited, if the 
placenames discussed above, prove to be Pulilan, Paila, Binwangan 
and Tondo, because these places are located within a relatively short 
distance from each other. 
The next social level, below the Chiefs who were a class in them- 
selves, was apparently occupied by the timawa, the commoner, and 
the maharlika, who was no longer a slave.* Still, they had their obli- 
gations to their Chiefs, and had to avoid the dangers that could cause 
them to .be punished or even be reduced to enslavement for often 
flimsy reasons. 

--- [Page 19] ---
PHILIPPINE STLJDlES 
The lowest of the social ranks in early Philippine society, proba- 
bly constituting the majority of the population, was composed of the 
slaves, who among themselves had their own ranking system, as 
described above. 
The skill and competence of such a refined and exquisite technique 
on goldsmithing, the elaborate and ruthless debt-and-repayment 
usury apparatus, that could, and often did end up in abject slavery 
for generations to come, and the inevitable subdivisions in the class- 
strata of established society, didn't sprout up like mushrooms over- 
night, but had to take root over a considerable time, before they could 
develop into the incredibly complicated systems as described by SB, 
and to a lesser extent by his contemporary lexicographer SJ. 
Returning to the LCI, we note the brief and matter-of-fact men- 
tion there of the situations described in detail by SB and others, as 
propounded above. There is no need for s&aining the imagination 
to construe a possible link between these two extremes in time, even 
if separated by a considerable number of years. 
Conclusion 
It seems that,the Laguna Copper-Plate Inscription (LCI) can be 
considered the oldest calendardated Philippine "document" existing 
at present in the Philippines, predating the Pigafetta account by some 
620 years. It also seems that the Philippines, or part of it, under 
whatever name, can now take its rightful place on the tenth Cen- 
tury map of Southeast Asia, in the presence of the Kingdoms of Sri- 
wijaya (Sumatera), Mataram (Java), Angkor (Kampuchea), and the 
Cham Dynasty (Vietnam). 
De Casparis called the LCI: "One of the most important discover- 
ies of late," because the Philippines has now been freed from its pre 
Spanish isolation, a well-organized form of government based on 
customary law has been shown to exist for more than a thousand 
years, and an important link in the history of the Malay (and the 
Tagalog) languages has been established. 
In the light of this new historical evidence for an organized po- 
litical existence of part of the Philippines, all previous pre-Spanish 
historical data pertaining to the Philippines, will have to be reexam- 
ined and reevaluated. For example a certain Chinese Record of the 
thirteenth ccnturyt2 where mention is made of the place P'u-li-lu, and 
another Chinese rc~ord of the fourteenth century2' where Ma-li-lu is 

--- [Page 20] ---
LAGUNA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION 
mentioned, both of which are considered to be identical. Scott men- 
tions that "a consensus of scholars has come to consider (Ma-li-lu to 
be) Manila" (Scott 1982, 73). I wonder if P'u-li-lu could have been 
identical with Pulilan. In the light of the LC1 much new research has 
to be conducted. 
Notes 
I. It is not uncommon to find threats or curses against misbehavior expressed in 
similar inscriptions. See Kern (1917, 27); Casparis (1930, 15-46). 
2. I am grateful to Dr. de Casparis for correcting my previous erroneous reading 
of aka 844 or 922 A.D. 
3. The Saka Era was one of the various dating systems that have been used in 
India at different times and places. A separate dating system was usually introduced 
with the reign or dynasty of a new ruler, often on the occasion of having defeated an 
opponent. This happened with the Saka Era that started in 78 A.D. in Southwest In- 
dia, and was afterwards used for dating inscriptions. This (Saka) dating system had 
been adopted as well for inscriptions on the Early Kawi Script, and rcmaincd in use 
for all subsequent inscriptions, well into the seventeenth Century A.D. To convert the 
S6ka dating to a more common dating system of the westem (influenced) world, 78 
yean have to be added to obtain an A.D. date. 
4. With "Malayan" as area of language, I understand the whole of the region of 
Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines combined, where the languages generally are 
considered to belong to the same Austronesian language family. 
5. I am indebted to "Indonesian Palaeograph)" by de Casparis (1975) for much of 
the following information. 
6. In the Transcription, I write the initial "ng" as an "n" to distinguish it from the 
"ng" formed by the final nnuswrn dot. This distinction is not applied here. 
7. For the small number of OM inscriptions found so far, xc: Bocchari o.c. 1966, 
Casparis, O.C. 1950 & 1956, and Coedes, O.C. 1930. 
8. &r- in Modem Indonesian/Malay: mag- in Tagalog. 
9. For the repeated nnmnndn (his/her/their name) in OM inscriptions, scc Boechari 
(1966) and de Casparis (1950, 6142). 
10. Fr. Ulanos de San Joseph (1610 [?I) (or: SJ), P. de San Bucnavcntura (1613) 
(or: SB). 
11. I am grateful to Dr. Jean-Paul G. Potct, a French scholar of Tagalog. for draw- 
ing my attention to this publication. 
12. See also Kern (1917, 51), where he refers to the Tagalog pamagat, pamgat. 
13. Used identically in the Tagalog language as well. 
14. "Ai" is written in the LC1 with the diphtong script-character for "ay" or "ai." 
15. Mdang and Tundan (not Tundun!) do occur in OJ inscriptions earlier than the 
LCI. For Mddng as toponym, scc Stuttcrhcim (1940, 20). 
16. This kcc, issued under Narciso Claveria y Zaldua, Governor and Captain 
. General, presents all existing Philippine family name that could be collected, enlarged 
,. with other "namcs," e.g. from flora and fauna, in order to make them available to 
those Filipinos who were advised to adopt another surname. 

--- [Page 21] ---
PHILIPPINE STUDIES 
17. The r/l shift is a rwar feahue in Philippine linguistics [e.g.: ngaranhgalan 
(name)] and does not change the meaning. 
18. As recorded in the : "Gazeteer of the Philippine Islands," Washington 1945. 
Better read as: 14O54.2'N 6r 120°50.8'E., etc. 
19. "Pai" being pronounced as one syllable, like the diphtong "ay" in the insaip 
tion. 
20. I am grateful to Isagani Medina for pointing this out to me. Later 1 found it 
confirmed by the Official census Data for 1%0. 
21. These five placenames are dearly pre-Spanish in origin, but, except for Tondo, 
they don't appear-as very important dGg spanish times.- 
22. On these points the early Spanish reports were rather cunfusing, and some- 
times contradictory. My reconstruction is baed on information culled from SB. 
23. Chao Ju-kua's "Chu Fan Chih" (An account of the various barbarians) of 1225 
A.D. 
24. Wang Ta-yuan's 'Tao I Chich Lueh" (Summary notices of the barbarians of 
the isles) of 1349 A.D. cf. Scott (1984, 73, and Wada (1929, 147). 
References 
Blair, E.H. and J.A. Robertson (B & R). 1903-1907. The Phili~ine lslands 1493- 
1897, 55 vols. Ohio. 
Bocchari, S.S. 1966. Preliminary report on the discovery of an old-Malay In- 
scription at Sodjomerto. Indonesian Journal o/ Cultural Studies 3 (October): 
241-51. 
Bosch, F.D.K. Een Maleische Inscriptie in het Buitenzorgsche. BTLV 100, pp. 
49-54. 
Casparis, J.G. de. 1975. Indonesian Palaeography. Iridcn. 
. 1950. Prasasti Indonesia i. Bandung. --- . 1956. Selected inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th century A.D. 
Bandung. 
Coedes, C. 1930. Les Inscriptions Malaises de Crivijaya. BEFEO, XXX: 27-80. 
. 1960. The lndianized States of Southeast Asia. Honolulu. 
Damais, L.-Ch. 1970. Repertoire Onomastique de 1'Epigraphic Javanaise 
(Jusqu'h Pu Sindok Sri . . .), Etude d'Epigraphie Indoncsiennc. BEFEO 
LXVI. Paris: Ecole Franqaise d'Extr6me Orient. 
Darrnosoetopo, Riboet. 1976/77. Laporan Penelitian Repertoire Onomastique 
(dari Sindok sampai dengan Airlengga). Proyek PPPT-UCM No. 103. 
Jakarta. 
Hall, Kenneth R. 1985. Maritime trade and state development in early Southeast 
Asia. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
Hollc, K.F. 1882. Tabel van Oud- en Nieuw-lndischc Alphabettcn. 's Grav- 
cnhagc. 
Kcm, H. 1917. Vcrspreide Geschriftcn. Vol. VI-VII: Inscriptics van dcn In- 
dischcn Archipcl. 's Cravcnhagc. 

--- [Page 22] ---
LAGUNA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION 
Laktaw, P.S. 1914. Diccionario Tagalog-Hispano. Manila. 
Medina, I.S. 1983. Ang kasaysayan panlipunan ng Pilipinas: isang rekon- 
struksyon mula sa mga diksyunaryo't bokabularyong Tagalog 1600-1914. 
Asian Studies 21 (April-December): 20-40. 
Noceda, J. de & P. de Sanlucar. 1860. Vocabulario de la Lengua Tagala. 
Manila. 
Panganiban, J.V. 1972. Diksyunaryo-Tesauro Pilipino-lngles. Quezon City. 
Plasencia, J. de. 1589. Relacion de 10s Costumbres de 10s Tagalos. In E. Blair 
and J.A. Robertson, Tk Philippine Islands 1903-1907, 173 sqq., vol. 7. Ohio. 
Postma, A. 1975. Tagalog Rhyming Dictionary. Ms. Panaytayan, 1975. . 1974. Old-Javanese/lndonesian/Pilipino Wordlist. Panaytayan. 
San Antonio, J.F. de. 1738. Cronicas de la Apostolica Provincia de San Cre- 
gorio. . . ." In E. Blair & J.A. Robertson, The Philippine Islands, 1903-1907, 
296 sqq., vol. 40. Ohio. 
San Jose(pK), Fr. Blancas de. 1610(?). Vocabulario de la Lengua Tagala, 
Bataan. 
San Buenaventura, P. de. 1613. Vocabulario de la Lengua Tagala, Pila. 
Scott, W.H. 1982. Sixteenthcentury Tagalog technology from the "Vocabu- 
lario de la Lengua Tagala of Pedro de San Buenaventura" in GAVA, Band 
17, pp. 523-35, Berlin. 
. Prehispanic Source Materials. Quezon City, 1984. 
Stutterheim, W.F. 1940. Oorkonde van Balitung uit 905 A.D. In INSCRIPTIES 
van Nederlandsch-Indie, pp. 3-28, Batavia. 
Teeuw, A. 1959. The history of the Malay Language. Bijdragen tot de TLV, 
115(2): 138-56. 
Tenazas, Rosa C.P. 1968. A report on the archeology of the Locsin-Univer- 
sity of San Carlos excavations in Pila, Laguna. Manila. 
Wada, S. 1929. The Philippine Islands as known to the Chinese before the 
Ming period. In Memoirs of tk Research Department of tk Toyo Bunko 4: 
121-66. 
Wilkinson, R.J. 1959. A Malay-English Dictionary. 2 Vols. London: Macmillan. 
Zoetmulder, P.J. 1982. Old-]avanese-English Dictionary. 2 Vols. 's Gravenhage. 