=== [PDF Page 224 | Journal Page 167] ===
THE YUPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MULA-
VARMAN, FROM KOETEI (EAST BORNEO). !

Dr J. Pa. VOGEL.

In a meeting of the Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences
held on 3" June, 1879, Mr. Kk. F. Holle drew attention to
an inscribed stone reported to exist, together with a large-sized
pirogue, somewhere in the Native State of Koetei, East Borneo.
Inquiries subsequently made from the Assistant Resident of
Koetei proved the report to be true. That official in a letter
dated 9" September of the same year informed the Batavian
Society that some inscribed stones and other relics of the Hindu
period did exist at Moeara Kaman, three stages above Pelarang
and that on the same spot the remains of a Chinese junk were
found. On the 26" August, 1SSU, the Assistant Resident sent
a further communication to the effect that His Highness, the
Sultan of Koetei, had generously decided to present the four
inscribed stones to the Society and that they were ready to be
despatched to Batavia at the first opportunity. They arrived
before the close of the year and were deposited in the archae-
ological section of the Batavia Museum.

In the meanwhile a facsimile of one of the inscriptions had
reached Professor Kern who made the first announcement of
the important discovery in a meeting of the Royal Academy
of Sciences held at Amsterdam on 13" September 1880. He at
once gave a transcript and translation of the inscription which
was composed in pure Sanskrit and which, in Kern’s opinion,

' T here wish to give expression to mv indebtedness to Mrs, Kuenen-
Wicksteed for her kindly revising my manuscript. and to Mr. G. P. Rouffaer
for some useful suggestions made in connection with this paper.

2 Notulen Batariaasch Genootschap, vol. XVII, 1879. pp. 9 and 142; vol.
XVIII, 1880. pp 9S. 187 sq, 14 sqq. and Its. W. P. Groeneveldt and
J. . A. Brandes. Catalogus der Arch ologisehe versameling van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap, Batavia 1887, p. 372


=== [PDF Page 225 | Journal Page 168] ===
los THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING Ma@LAVALAMDAN.

was to be assigned to the fourth century of our era .\fter
this preliminary announcement Professor hern received from
Mr. Holle copies of the three inscriptions (including the one
mentioned above), that on the fourth stone being almost com-
pletely obliterated. The materials supplied enabled him at a
subsequent meeting of the Royal Academy to present a paper
in which the Koetei inscriptions were discussed in detail. It
appeared in the Proceedings of the Academy together with
facsimiles of the inscriptions. ' In his article Kern gave complete
transcripts and translations of the three inscriptions, discussed
the various questions they raise, and gave special attention to
the chronological problem in connection with the palaeographical
evidence afforded by the inscriptions. He added an interesting
disquisition on the history of the various alphabets in use in
the Eastern Archipelago.

The Koetei inscriptions having been deciphered and discussed
by so great an authority on Indian and Javanese epigraphy as
the Jate Professor Kern, a fresh treatment of these documents
will perhaps seem an undertaking as bold as superfluous. There
were, however, two considerations which induced me to re-edit
them, the reasonableness whereof, I am glad to add, was fully
admitted by that great scholar himself in a letter written only
a few months before his lamented death.

In the first place, it was no slight advantage to be able tu
utilize a set of excellent inked estampages for which I am greatly
indebted to Dr. F. D. Kan Bosch, Director of Archaeology in
Netherlands-India, whereas Professor Kern's edition of these
epigraphs was based on eve-copies which, though executed
with evident care, could never have the authority of mechani-
cally prepared impressions and which, indeed, were misleading
in several respects. The use of more reliable materials has
enabled me to correct and supplement in some points the
readings proposed by my predecessor.

The other ground on which a fresh treatment of these im-
portant documents seemed desirable is the circumstance that
during the period which has elapsed since Professor Kern's

1 Verslagen en Mededeelingen der Kon Akademir ran Wet nsehappen. Afd: clang
Letterkunde. 2%* Series, vol. NX (Amsterdam Isat) pp. 143 sq: and vol. XI
(Amsterdam 1s2) pp. 109, 123 and ts2 sqq ‘Reprinted in Versprede Ge-
schriften van Prof. Dr. H Kern, vol. VIL. 117, pp. 55 sqq , with tacsnniles.)


=== [PDF Page 226 | Journal Page 169] ===
THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN, 169

article appeared, very considerable progress has been made in
epigraphical studies both in Southern India and in Indo-China.
It will hardly need demonstration that this advancement of our
knowledge promises in no small degree to benefit allied studies
in the Indian Archipelago.

The investigation of South-Indian epigraphy in the course of
the last thirty years is mainly associated with the names of
Fleet, Hultzsch and Venkayya. It is Dr. E. Hultzsch. late
Government Epigraphist and now Professor of Sanskrit at Halle
University to whom the progress made in this department of
studies is due in the first place, as is evidenced by his three
imposing volumes South Indian Inscriptions. + Kern, when writing
his paper on the hoetei inscriptions, had to rely largely on
Dr. A. C. Burnell's Elements of South-Indian Palacography, the
second edition of which had appeared only a couple of years
before (in 15878). Now the author of this work, while dedicating
it to the Philosophical Faculty of the Strassburg University.
modestly qualified it as an ‘Erstlings-Arbeit auf einem bisher
unbebauten Felde’. It has now been superseded by Georg
Buhler's standard work /udtsche Palacographtc (Strassburg 1896),
which forms part of the Excyclopedia of Indo-Aryan Research. ?

Whilst archaeological researches in India proper have been
conducted by scholars of various nationality giving them quite
a cosmopolitan character, the progress made in Indo-China in
this department of knowledge is entirely due to the enthusiastic

1 Archaeological Survey of India. South Indian Inscriptions, edited and trans-
lated by E. Hultzseh. Vols. I-III, Madras 1890-1903. Numerous inscriptions
from Southern India have, moreover, been discussed by various seholars
in the Indian Anéwuary and the Epigraphia Indica Two other important
publications are Mr. B. Lewis Rice’s Coorg Inscriptions (1886) and Epigraphia
Carnatica (1859-1903), a revised edition of which has partly appeared.
Accounts of recent discoveries will be found in the Progress Report of the
Assistant Archaeological Superintendent for Epigraphy, Southern Circle, which are
brought out annually. in the first year (1907—05) by Mr. Venkayya and
further by his successor Mr Krishna Sast.ii. In two Native States of
Southern India the work of epigraphical research is being carried on vigo-
rously. as is evident from the Report of the officer in charge of Archaeological
researches in Mysore [R. Narasimhachar) and from the Travancore Archaeological
Series, by T. A. (ropinatha Rao, (since 1910).

2G. Buhler. Indische Palaeographie von circa 350 a. Chr. — circa 1300 p.
Chr. Mit 17 Tufeln in Mappe (Grundriss der indo-arischen Philologie und Alter-
tumskunde Band I, Hett 11) An English translation by Dr J. F. Fleet
appeared in 1904 as an Appendix to the Indian Antiquary, vol. NXNIIL



=== [PDF Page 227 | Journal Page 170] ===
17 EEL VORA INSORIPLIONS OL KING MOL AVARMAN,

cforts of French scholarship. With regard to epigraphy we
have to note, first of all, the monumental work on the Sanskrit
inscriptions of Campa and Kambodia by Auguste Barth and
-\bel Bergaigne. It is accompanied by two portfolios of beautiful.
large-sized facsimiles. The Feole frangazse @kxtréme-Orient, a
model institution founded at Hanoi in the vear L900, has nobly
carried on the work of research in this as in many another
field. It is particularly M. Louis Finut who has continued the
work of those two great scholars in a series of articles which
have appeared in the pages of the “Bulletin” of the French
Schoo! under the tite “ors “Lprgraphic’.? Of late years a
young Sanskrit scholar of great promise, M. George Coedes,
has also entered the lists and contributed some remarkable epi-
graphical studies to the same periodical.

In the South of India there existed from early times three
powerful kingdoms, named Cola, Pandya, and Cera (or Kerala),
which are mentioned as independent states in the edicts of
Acoka (c. 250 B.C.). The Cola country was called Cola-mandala
(lit. the Cola Circle ), a name from which the southern part
of the east coast has become known in Europe as the Coast

of Coromandel. The Pandya kingdom occupied the extreme
south of the peninsula; its capital in later days was Madura. The
country of Cera or Kerala stretched along the southern portion
of the west or Malabar coast, its territory nearly corresponding
to that of the modern State of Travancore.

Now there is one important fact in particular which has been
established by recent epigraphical research, namely, the pre-
eminence of an almost forgotten dynasty. that of the Pallava's,
in the history of southern India during a period of no less than
five centuries. Dr. Burnell in his ‘Z/ements’ (p. 30) complained
that of the Pallavas but little was known. * That little he sums

1 Notwes ct ertrarts des manuscrits de ln Bibliothiyne Nutronale ct autres
biblivthéques Tome NXVIT «1? partie) 1%
Cambodyz, par M_ RBarth “Paris 1s95), 22 faseienle. Inscriptions sangerites de
Campa et de Cambodge, par M. Abel Bergaigne, (Paris isy3:

? The ,Bulletin” will be qnoted BOE POEL O.
saine complaint, Ind inf vol. Wop. 50, ef.

aserenle — Taseripteans sanserites div

3 In 1si6 Dr. Fleet made the
also vol VIEL, INT9, p 170,


=== [PDF Page 228 | Journal Page 171] ===
THE YORA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MULAVARMAN. 171

up in a few lines. The general use of the title varman, he
says, is common to them and the Vengi kings: and this and
some other facts make it most probable that they belonged to
one family. They had numerous contests and alliances by mar-
riage with the Cera, Cola and Calukya families, but in the
11" century they were mere feudatories of the Colas, and on
this account were. apparently . repeatedly attacked by the Western
Calukyas. They disappear ‘about the 14" century A. D. Less
than thirty vears after this was written Mr. Venkayya, whose pre-
mature death is a severe loss to South-Indian epigraphical studies.
contributed a very full paper to the Archavolegical Annual for
the year 19N6—07, in which he gave in a condensed form an
accurate account of all that antiquarian research had brought to
light regarding the history of that remarkable dynasty. ?

It is not a little curious that the Pallavas derive the origin
of their race not from the Sun or the Moon, as is usual among
the princely families of India. but from Ag¢vatthiman who,
like his father Drona, fs one of the leading heroes in the great
epic Mahabharata. The salient point about those two ancient
warriors is that they were Brahmins, belonging to the priestly
house (gotra) of Bharadvaja. Like so many a bishop of
mediaeval Europe those two Brahmins distinguish themselves by
their valour on the battlefield. In the genealogy (vamgavali)
found in some of the later documents of the Pallavas, it is
said that Acvatthdman had a son, named Pallava, by a divine
nymph or apsaras. Once , says the Amaravati pillar * inscrip-
tion, surrounded by [other] celestial maidens, the famous nymph
Madani who wished to see the abode of the hermits, entered
the path of sight of that ascetic (Agvatthaman). The saint ap-
proached her, while, seated amongst a group of agoka-trees,
she was wistfully regarding the male swans, which were afraid
of being separated from their beloved ones, whenever they
lost sight of them behind a lotus of the lake which was agitated

© Ayhacolagwal Surcey of India Annual Report. 10607. Caleutta 1909,
pp 217-243. In composing the present outline of Pallava history, T have
vs arucle,

largely drawn on Mr. Venka

2 South Indian Inver vol. UL pp 27 sq The genealogy 1s a

sO given in
the Kailesanitha temple inscription and in the Karam, Kacakudi and
Udasendiram copper-plate charters which all belong to the Jatest period of
Pallava history. In- the Kieakudi grant the heavenly mother of Pallava is
called Menaka, and a son named Acokavarman is attributed to him.


=== [PDF Page 229 | Journal Page 172] ===
72 THE YGPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN,

bij the wind. Perceiving him who resembled Cupid in the dress
of a saint, she lost her self-control, just as Uma (Parvati) on
seeing ('arva (Civa). Then the nymphs united the couple which
had conceived a deep affection. In due time, the nymph gave
birth to a protector of the earth, which is girt by the ocean.
The father called his son Pallava, as he was lying on a couch
[covered] with a heap of sprouts (pallava):.

Such is the poetical conceit by which the heros eponymos
of the Pallava race is connected with the priestly hero of the
epic. At the same time an attempt is made to account for the
name which, as an appellative, means «a sprout or shoot: in
Sanskrit.

There is another curious legend preserved in Tamil poetry which
connects the origin of the Pallavas with the ancient rulers of Coro-
mandel. It relates that the first *Tondaiman» (i. e. Pallava) was
the son af a Cola king by a Nagi or female serpent-demon.

These ancient legends have a certain poetical charm, but do
not enlighten us on the true origin of the Pallavas which is to
be sought in quite a different direction. There is, indeed, some
reason to assume that they were of Parthian extraction, as the
word Pallava appears to be identical with Pahlava which,
like the older form Parthava, is the designation by which
the Parthians were known in ancient India. A further discussion
of this interesting question would be out of place in the present
paper. This much is certain that, when the Pallavas of Coro-
mandel first make their appearance in history, they are thoroughly
hinduized; in their documents we find no trace of their alleged
Iranian ancestry. They bear Indo-Aryan names ending in
varman and reckon themselves to belong to the gotra of
the Bhiaradvajas. Jt must, however, be borne in mind that
during the first period of their history those documents — three
copper-plate charters composed in Prakrit — are extremely
scanty. Two of these grants acquaint us with a king of the name of
Civaskandavarman who in one of them is said to have performed

' The Tamil poom Manimegalai in which this legend oecurs, also
mentions 2 town named Nigapuram in (ayaka-nadu which, as Mr. Venkayya
says, appears to be the Tamil name of the island of Java. Two kings ‘of
Nagapuram are mentioned, viz. Bhiimicandra and Punyarija, who claimed
to be descended from Indra Archl Survey Annual Report for 1906—07, p-
221, footnote 1.


=== [PDF Page 230 | Journal Page 173] ===
THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN. 73

the agnistoma, vajapeya and agvamedha sacrifices. The
king mentions in it a previous donation by Maharaja Bappa-
svamin who is praised for his munificence and who, in all
probability, was the donor’s father. The charters are dated
only in regnal years, but the use of Prakrit in official docu-
ments, according to Buhler, perhaps indicates that they are not
later than the first half of the fourth century A.D. The do-
minions of Civaskandavarman included not only Kajicipuram
(Conjeeveram) from whence his grants ware issued, and the
surrounding country, but also the Telugu country as far north
as the river Kistna. }

That from a very early date Conjeeveram, about forty miles
south-west of Madras, was the capital of the Pallava kingdom
is also evident from the famous pragasti or eulogy on the
Allahabad pillar which, originally set up by the Buddhist em-
peror Agoka to promulgate the good Law», was afterwards
utilized by the Gupta king Samudragupta to extol his conquests
by the sword. Among the rulers of the South (Daksinapatha)
vanquished by the great Gupta monarch, we tind Visnugopa of

_ Kafici, who consequently must have lived about the middle of
the fourth century. ?

For the next period of Pallava history, the fifth and sixth
centuries, we possess another series of title-deeds, engraved
on copper, which are distinguished from the earlier documents
of the same type in that they are in Sanskrit. Their technical
execution is also decidedly superior to that of the Prakrit
charters. Three of the Sanskrit title-deeds which were’ issued
from different places belong to the reign of a king named

1 The three Priikrit charters in question are: 1** The Mayidavolu grant of
the Yuvamahiraja Civaskandavarman, dated in the 10! year of the
unnamed king (mahira&ja) then ruling. (Hultzsch, £p. Ind. vol. VI pp.
84 sqq.); 2" the Hirahadagalli grant of the Dharmamaharajadhir
Civaskandavarman, dated in the Sth year of his reign (Buhler, Ep. Ind. vol.
I pp. 2 syq.; 3" the British Museum grant of Queen Carudevi, consort of
the Yuvamaharaja Vijaya-Buddhavarman and mother of Buddhyankura.
It is dated in some regnal vear of the Maharaja Vijaya-Skandavarman
(Fleet, Ind. Ant. vol IX pp. 101 sq. and Hultzsch, Ep Ind. vol. VUI pp.
143 sqq.). All three title-deeds are written im a very cursive writing: the
execution is poor. Biihler classes the character of the Prikrit grants among
the precursors of the southern alphabets (Indische Palacographie p 41, Fleet's
transl. p. f4: plate ITD.

27. F Fleet, Gupta Inseriptions (Corpus Inser Ind vol Ul) p. 13



=== [PDF Page 231 | Journal Page 174] ===
174 THE VORA INSCRIPPIONS OF KING VEL AN ARMAN

Simhavarman. They furnish, moreover, the names of several
other princes of the Pallava dynasty which it will be unnecessary
to repeat here. Suffice it to say that these kings are described
as Bhagavatas, that is to say, as worshippers of Bhagavat,
the Lord (Viynu), and as scions of the Brahmanical house
ot Bharadvaja. They bear names which. with only one exception,
end in varman. ’

It will be noticed that for a period of three centuries the
documents relating to Pallava history are confined to a few
copper-plate inscriptions. These charters bear no other date
than the regnal year of the ruling monarch who in most cases
was the donor of the grant. The chronulogy of this period is
consequently very uncertain, the only criterion for dating these
inscriptions being the palaeographical evidence of the character
used in them.

Spigraphs on stone are entirely wanting.

For the third and last period of Pallava rule, the time of
their greatest power as well as of their decline and final over-
throw, which comprises the seventh and the first half of the
eighth century , archaeological materials are much more abundant.
We now have a fresh series of kings usually indicated as «the
line of Simhavisnu-, all bearing names endingin varman with
the only exception of their progenitor, Simhavisnu himself. In
the inscriptions we find these kings often indicated by a number

of subsidiary names or birudas. Paramecvaravarman, for in-
stance, is also called by such names as Ugradanda( he of the

1 The Sanskrit charters are the following: 1 the Omeodn grant of
Vijasa-Skandavarman ([f}, issued from Tambrapa in the

year of his
rewn, Tt is supposed to be the earliest of the Pallava Sanskut records
mined sv far” and, on aceount of the character, 13 asenbed to the be

ginning of the fifth century (ef. Progress Report Epigraphy S C., for WAS—18,
p. 118). 28 the Pikia grant of Sunhavarman issued frum Menmatnra in
the St year of his reign Hultzsch, Ep. Ind. vol. VIL pp. 159 syq.i. ot the
Manga

grant of Sinhayarman, issned froin Dacanapura in the Sth year
of his reign Bleet, Ind. Ant. vol. Vio pp. 154 sqqis 4 the Uruvupall grant
of the Yuvamaharaja Vignugopavarman, issued from Palakkada in the
11% year of Spphavarman (Fleet, Ind ut. vol. Vo pp 50 sqq.: St the frag
mentary Darg: grant of the great-

randson of Virvkorcavarman (Ep. Lud.
397 sqq): bt the Ceudalu grant of Kumorayisyn (IL) issued
trom Kaieipmia in the second year of Ins reign (Hnitasch, Ep. Ind vol, VILL
pp. 283 sqq); 7 the spurious Cdavendiram grant ot Nandivarman, issued
from Kaheipura in the first sear or lus vega) Kielhoin. Ap. Ind. vol. HL
pp 142 sqqe.

vol. Te. yp.


=== [PDF Page 232 | Journal Page 175] ===
THE Yara INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN,. 175

fierce rod-) and Lokaditya ( Sun of the World ). Another
difficulty is the frequent recurrence of the same names in this
as well as in the earlier lines of Pallava kings. There seems to
have existed a regular fashion of naming a child after its grand-
father.

The epigraphical records of the house of Simhavisnu comprise
not only copper-plate charters but also numerous inscriptions

on stone. The former are extensive poems in flowery Sanskrit
which contain a good deal of historical information. especially
in the first portion dealing with the Pallava rulers and their
ancestry. They are very appropriately designated in the in-
scriptions themselves by the term pragasti (‘eulogy ) which
otherwise is hardly ever applied to copper-plate grants. ? They
are also remarkable for their excellent workmanship.

Among stone inscriptions we may mention, in the first place,
those of Simhavisnu’s son and successor, Mahendravarman I.
They are found on rock-cut temples at Trigirapalli (vulgo Tri-
chinopoly), Civamangalam, Dalavanar, and Mahendravadi. The
cave temple at the last-mentioned place was dedicated to the
god Visnu, the other three to Civa. The double inscription in
the upper cave of Trichinopoly is of special interest, as it men-
tions also the erection of a stone image of the king himself. A
fifth inscription in a cave temple at Pallavaram near Madras
contains nothing but a number of birudas of the king in
Sanskrit, Telugu, and Tamil. A cave inscription in Tamil found
at Vallam near Chingleput records the dedication of a cave
temple by a vassal of Mahendravarman. Finally, there is a cave

' The charters of the third period are the following: 1* the Kitram grant
of Parameyvaravarman I (Hultzsch, South Indian Inse vol. I pp. 144 sqq.i,
2" the IK
than eleven copper-plates op. eff. vol. IL pp. 342 sqqe; 3! the spurns
Udayendiram grant of Nandivarman Pallavamalla (op ee vol IT pp 361
$qq). These charters are written partly in Sanskrit(in the Grentha characte:
and partly in Tamil.

2 Of Fleet. Gupta Inser, p. 67 n.

3 'Trichimopoly [upper] cave inser. (Hultzsch, oy. cit. vol. I pp. 25 sqq. and
IL, plate NX). Giyamangalam cave inser. (Hultzsch, Ep Ind vol. VI pp. 319
sqq.); Dalavantir cave imser. ‘Hultzseh, Ep. Ind. vol. NUL, pp. :
Mahendravadi cave inser (Hultzsch, Ep. Ind vol. IV, pp. 152 s
OS—09, pp.

vakudi grant of Nandivarman Pallavamaila, engraved on no less

varam eave inser. (Progress Report for Epigraphy, S C.;
Valluam cave inser. ;Hultzseh, op. cit, vol. TL pp. 840 sq; Mandagappaton
cave inser, (Progress Report for Epigraphy. 8 C., 14—05. part IT. x 3


=== [PDF Page 233 | Journal Page 176] ===
176 THE \VOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVAKM.

at Mandagappattu dedicated to the gods Brahma, Tevara (Civa)
and Visnu, but unfortunately the king's name in the inscription
is illegible.

It appears that under Mahendravarman I the great struggle
between the Pallavas and Célukyas commenced which lasted for
one century and a half and ended with the downfall of both.
His great antagonist was the Calukya prince Pulikecin II (A. D.
609—642). In the words of the famous pragasti of .\ihole,
the latter caused the splendour of the Pallavas, who had
opposed the rise of his power, to be obscured by the dust of
his army and to vanish behind the walls of Kafcipura .' And
in the same eulogy it is stated that Pulikegin caused great
prosperity to the Colas, heralas and Pandyas, he being the
hot-rayed sun to the hoar-frost — the army of the Pallavas..

Pulikecin also succeeded in occupying the Vengi country,
situated between the mouths of the Kistna (Kr na) and Godavari
rivers, over which he established his younger brother, Visnu-
vardhana, who first ruled the country with the title of yuva-
raja, but subsequently made himself independent and thus
became the founder of the Eastern Calukyva empire.

Evidently, however, the splendour of the Pallavas was only
temporarily obscured. It was Mahendravarman’s son and successor,
Narasimhavarman I, who retrieved the fallen fortunes of his
house. It is stated in the Kiram copper-plate grant that he not
only repeatedly defeated the Colas, Keralas, Kalabhras and
Pandyas, but also that he «wrote the syllables of the word
vijaya (victory) on Pulikegin’s back which was caused to be
visible in various battles» and that he even destroyed Vatapi,
the capital of the Cdalukyas. That this was no idle boast is
proved by a rock inscription which the Pallava king left in the
very capital of his opponent.* The conquest of Vatapi (the

1 The Chinese pilgrim Hinen Tsiang (Si-yu-k1, transl Beal, vol. II pp.
sqy.) has left an interesting account of Pulikecin (vhom he mentions bs
name) and of his kingdom which he cally Mo-ho-la-cha. ae Maharastra or
Maharattha. ~
2? Ep Ind. vol. VI, p. 11, vers
3 Ind, Ant. vol. XX pp. 9 sq
+ This interesting record, whieh unfortunately is partls obliterated, was
discovered in the season IS76—77 by the late Dr. Fleet who edited it
(Indian Antiquary, vol. IX (1530) pp, 99 sq. together with a hthograph from

an estampage prepared by hinself The inseription. which is written in the

2.

29 and 31


=== [PDF Page 234 | Journal Page 177] ===
THE VOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN, 177

present Badami in the Bombay Presidency) by Narasimhavarman
which, according to the late Dr. Fleet, must have taken place
abeut 642 A.D. and marks the culminating point of Pallava
power, is repeatedly mentioned in the documents of the period.
The Pallava king assumed the title Vatapi-konda Conqueror
of Vatapi , and in the inscriptions he is compared to the
“pitcher-burn” Agastyva, the great Saint uf Southern India, of
whom it is related that he overcame a demon of the name of
Vatapi. }

In the Singhalese chronicle Mahavamsa? it is recorded
that in his wars with Pulikegin the Pallava king was assisted by
the pretender Manavarman whom he twice supplied with an army
to invade Ceylon.

Among the numerous birudas or epithets bij which Nara-
simhavarman I is designated is also that of Mahamalla «the
great Wrestler . It appears to be preserved in the name of
Mamallapura (i.e. Mahamallapura) or Mavalivaram, as it is
called in Tamil, a locality on the coast, about 30 miles south
of Madras, which by its wonderful ancient temples and sculptures
still recalls the bygone glories of the Pallava race. This remark-
able group of monuments, now-a-days best known under the
Anglo-Indian appellation of the ‘Seven Pagodas’ has excited the
curiosity and admiration of many a traveller. The Venetian
adventurer Nicolao Manucci, whose wanderings through nearly
the whole of India fall in the reigns of the Great-Moghuls Shah-
Jahan and ‘Alamgir (Aurangzeb), was one of the first Europeans
in whose writings they are noticed. «On the coast of Coro-
mandels, he say

, snear the sea, there is also a rock called
Mavelivaras [i.e. Mavalivaram], distant four leagues from a place
called Sadrastapatas [i. e. Sadrastapatam or Sadras], where there

same character as the contemporaneous Pallava imscriptions of Coromandel,
consists of six lines, of whieh II. 1—2 contain a date, whilst im H. 3—6 we
find a stanza in the Cardilavikridita metre. It is followed by the
reinnants of a few lines in the Calukya character
1 ‘The Dinaja stone mseription ot the Caka year 6x2 (A. D. 760: edited by
Dr. F. D. Kan Bosch establishes the interesting fact that in ancient Java
too there existed a regular cultus of Avastya | Tydschrijt can het Bataviaasch
Genootschap tan Kunsten cu Weteaschappen, vol LVIL, pp. 410 sqq.) The story
of Agastya and Vatapi is told both in the Mahabharata Bombay ed. IT,
adhy W—99 and in the Riimayana ‘Bombay ed) IIE, sarya Ut (ot. 43.
2 Mr Wuyesinha’s Translation, pp UW saq.
DI. 7. 12


=== [PDF Page 235 | Journal Page 178] ===
17s THE VORA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN,

are many sculptured figures resembling Chinese . Manucci had
a fantastic notion that the Chinese were once lords of Hin-
dustan, and that they were ejected by the Pathans . and the
Chinese character which — strange though it may seem — he
assigned to the remains of Mavalivaram, was adduced by him
as an argument in favour of his thesis!

About a century later a servant of the Dutch FEast-India
Company, Jacob Haafner by name, gives a much fuller account
of the wonderful ancient remains of Mavalivaram, which in the
course of his prolonged stay at Sadras, then a Dutch “factory”,
he had frequently had occasion to inspect. In the twenty-four
pages which he devotes to ‘‘Maveliewarom", as he calls the
place, Haafner largely indulges in musings on the transitory
nature of human things and the vanity of royal pomp. But the
temples and images inspired him at the same time with a
genuine admiration for what had been achieved by the ancient
Indians in the field of architecture and sculptural art. Herein
lies the chief interest of Haafner’s account: in his appreciative
and warm sympathy with India and Indians he is the herald
of a new period.

His actual description of the temples and sculptures which is
conceived in the somewhat inflated style than in fashion, is
rather vague and not free from exaggeration. Yet, on the whole,
it is possible to make out the individual monuments he alludes
to. Thus he refers to the so-called “Shore Temple”, in which
he notices «the image of a male of a gigantic size, bearing
a mitre on his head, who, chained both at hands and feet,
lies in a kind of sarcophagus (grave) which stands in the middle
of the temple». He speaks also of the colossal image of Visnu
reclining on the serpent Cesa, which is carved on the wall of
one of the cave temples. The five so-called “raths” which are
popularly named after the five Pandava brothers and_ their
common spouse, Draupadi, are also duly noticed by Haafner
who correctly describes them as carved out of a single rock.
He calls special attention to the rath of Bhima, and adds
that in the roof there is a large rent probably caused by lightning.

' J. Haafner, Reize in einen palanyuin, Amsterdam 105, vol. IT pp. 415—
434. The anthor lived at Sadras till 17% June, 1781. For further particulars
T may refer to my paper Jucob Hanfner. Schets uit de laatste jaren der Ovst-
Indivche Compagnie (De Tndisehe (ids, March 1900).


=== [PDF Page 236 | Journal Page 179] ===
THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN. 179

His description is accompanied by a sketch in which the rath
of Bhima, conspicuous by its roof, and that of Draupadi, smallest
in size and simplest in shape, are perfectly recognisable. Haafner,
as a matter of course, accepted the popular tradition which
connects the remains of Mavalivaram with the Pandavas, and
duly enlarged upon the pristine glories of the ancient city of
‘Joudishter". «On several of these monuments and ruins,- he
says, «there are inscriptions, but the characters are wholly
unknown, and among the most learned Pundits no one has
yet been found who could read the same. They differ entirely
from those of the Sanscrit, Nagari, Grindam [i. e. Grantha!], or
other ancient Indian languages . !

It is due to the scholarship of Professor Hultzsch that the
true history of the remains of Mavalivaram has at last been
revealed. ? From the numerous inscriptions found on them it
follows that one of the earliest monuments of the site must be
the so-called ‘rath of Dharmaraja (alias Yudhisthira)», the
largest of the group of five rock-cut temples. It is covered with
a number of short epigraphs which were first erroneously be-
lieved to refer to the images of deities under which they are
found, but which Hultzsch has shown to be in reality birudas
of a Pallava king, Narasimha, whom he identifies with Narasimha J,
the conqueror of Vatapi. Consequently the «Dharmaraja-ratha»
must have been sculptured in the first half of the seventh
century of our era.

Somewhat later in date are the monolithic Ganega temple and
the two cave temples called Dharmaradja-mandapa and
Ramanuja-mandapa. In the inscriptions they are assigned
to a king of the name of Atyantakama whom Hultzsch identifies
with Narasimhavarman I’s grandson: Paramegvaravarman I.

Finally we have the quaint tiger-cave at Caluvanguppam, a
village 2 miles north of Mavalivaram. It bears a bilitteral epigraph
in which the praises of a Pallava king Atiranacanda are sung.
Hultzsch believes him to be the same as Nandivarman under

' Jt will hardly be necessary to point out that Nagari and Grantha
are not languages, but alphabets im which the Sanskrit is usually written
in North- and South-India respectively.

2 Prof. Hnultzsch has first edited the Pallava inscriptions of the Seven
Pagodas in his South Indian Inseriptions, vol. I pp Lb sqy., and subsequently
given a revised edition of them in Kp. Ind vol. XN pp. 1 sq


=== [PDF Page 237 | Journal Page 180] ===
Iso THE VPA INSCRIPPIONS Ob KING MiP AVAKAVEAN.

whom, as we shall presently see, the power of the Pallavas
collapsed. This sudden collapse, in Dr Hultzsch’s opinion, may
account for the fact that so many of the excavations at the
Seven Pagodas have remained untinished.

It would be impossible in the present paper to give an
adequate account of the wonderful monuments of Mavalivaram
which were raised by the Pallava princes of the seventh century.
Suffice it to say that they form the most striking memorials of
that remarkable dynasty and that, moreover, they are of great
interest as the prototypes of Dravidian architecture. !

Next to Mavalivaram, it is the former Pallava capital Conjeeveram

(k

of art. Foremost among its ancient shrines stands the temple

iicipura) which still bears testimony to their piety and love

dedicated to Civa under the name of Kaildsanatha ( Lord of
Mount Kailasa’). It was built by Rajasimha who is the same
as Narasimhavarman [I. The central shrine bears an inscription
of twelve Sanskrit verses which. after praising the mythical
ancestors Bharadvaja. Drona, Agvatthiman and Pallava, eulo-
gizes the royal founder of the temple which after him is desig-
nated by the name of Rajasimhegvara. Round the inside of the
enclosure of the shrine we find, moreover, a great number of short
inscriptions containing an enumeration of several hundred
birudas of the same king. ?

Two points may here be parenthetically noted: the prevalence
of the worship of Civa, especially under the form of the linga
or phallus and the absence of dates in the inscriptions of the
period.

While the Pallava princes were adorning Conjeeveram and
Mavalivaram with sanctuaries, the war with their hereditary
enemies, the Calukyas, continued with undiminished vigour
and alternating success. In the Ktram copper-plate grant a

' For the architecture and iconography of ythe Seven Pagodas” I may
refer to James Fergusson’. Hist of Indian and Eastern Architecturs . revised
edition by Burgess and Spiers (London 1910) vol. T pp. 327 sqq.3) Vincent
A Smith, Hist. of fine art in India and Ceylon (Oxford 1911) pp 220 aqq 5
G Jouveau-Dubrenil, Archcologee du Sud du UInde, Pans ivtd (Annales du
Musée Gunmoet. Bibl. d’Etudes. Tomes XXNVI—NXVIIi passin; and my
fronographical notes on the Seven Pagodas” .4rehl. Survey Annual Report,
1910—L1, pp. 49 sqq..

2 A. Rea, Pallava Architecture (Archl. Survey New Imp Series.) Madras 1909.
Inltazsch. South Indian Inser. vol. I pp. s sqq.


=== [PDF Page 238 | Journal Page 181] ===
THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OL KING MOLAVARKMAN. 181

lengthy description is given of a fearful battle fought between
Narasimhavarman I's grandson, Paramecyaravarman | and the
Calukya Vikramaditya I, (A.D. 655—680), surnamed Ranarasika,
who was a son of Pulikegin II. The end was, in the words of
the inscription, that the Pallava king :made Vikramaditya, whose
army consisted of several lakhs, take to flight, covered only
by a rag» '. Vikramaditya, on the other hand, boasts in one
of his records that «this lord of the earth, conquering Icvara-
potaraja (i. e. Paramecgvaravarman 1), took hdfici whose huge
walls were insurmountable and hard to be broken, which was
surrounded by a large moat that was unfathomable and hard
to be crossed . ?

It appears that on the death of Paramegvaravarman II the
Pallava kingdom was torn by internal dissensions. His suc-
cessor was Nandivarman Pallavamalla. but from some obscure
allusions found in the records of his reign, it would appear
that he had usurped the throne. This much is certain that he
belonged to a collateral branch of the royal line, as he was des-
cended from Bhimavarman, a younger brother of Simhavisnu.
The Calukya king, Vikramaditya II, was not slow to take ad-
vantage of the weakness of his opponent. As stated in one of
his own charters (the Vakkaleri grant) he resolved to uproot
completely his natural enemy, the Pallava, who had robbed of
their splendour the previous kings born from his race, reached
with great speed the Tundaka-visaya [¢.¢. the Pallava country],
attacked at the head of a battle and put to flight the Pallava,
called Nandipotavarman, who had come to meet him. .....
and entered /¢the city of / Kaiici which seemed to be the hand-
some kaiici (girdle) of the nymph of the southern region, —
without destroying it». Not only did he spare the capital of
his enemy, but he also bestowed his bounty on the twice-born,
the distressed and the helpless and acquired great merit by
rich gifts to the Kailisanatha and other temples. A half obli-

t South Indian Inser. vol. Lp. 154 In an inseription in the Kailasanatha
temple of Conjeeveram it 1s said that the valour of Lokiditva (a biruda
of Parameyvarayarman. meaning the Sun of the World”) dried up the army
of Ranarasika, just as the heat of the Sun does the mud. (op. eat. vol. I
p. 23).

2 South Indian Inger vol. Lp 1h.

3 South Indian Inser. p. 146


=== [PDF Page 239 | Journal Page 182] ===
Is2 PEE YQPA INSCRIPTIONS Ob KING AEGL AVARMVEAN,

terated Kanarese inscription on a pillar of the NKailasanatha
temple still bears testimony to the conquest of the Pallava
capital by the Calukya. This defeat of the Pallavay by the
Calukyas+, Mr. Venkayya savs, seems to have dealt the
death-blow to the sovereignty of the former. Thus the history
of the Pallavas emphasises the oft-repeated lesson of Indian
history that, when internal dissensions set in in a dynasty’, its
decline and disappearance is only a question of time. Powerful
kings could by their personal prowess only put off the down-fall
to a more distant date. Pallava ascendancy came to an end
about the middle of the Ss" century and, curiously enough,
their rivals, the Cdalukyas of Badami, also ceased to be the
reigning power about the same time .

The above survey of Pallava history will perhaps, at first
sight, seem somewhat out of place in a paper dealing with
inscriptions from Borneo. It should, however, be borne in mind
that it is during the period of Pallava ascendancy that we meet
with the first epigraphical monuments of Hindu influence in
the Archipelago. Now there is reason to assume that in the
history of the spread of Indian civilisation the Coromandel
coast played an important part, although the Indian emigrants
who set sail for the eastern islands did not exclusively come
from that part of the Indian continent. That during the 4" to
7 centuries of our era there must have been a lively inter-
course between India, Indo-China, and the islands of the Ar-
chipelago is evident from the accounts of the Chinese pilgrims
who during that period travelled to «Jambudvipa by sea to
visit the sacred places associated with the life of the Buddha.
It goes without saying that on their voyages from China to
India and back those pilgrims had to adopt the routes which
were then being followed by the sea-borne trade. Earliest in
date is the itinerary of Fa-Hian which gives us a remarkably
vivid impression of the dangers of the deep which the mariners
of those days had to brave. Starting from China in the year
399 A. D., he had accomplished the journey from China to
India by the hardly less dangerous overland route and, after
visiting the sacred vestiges at the Bodhi tree and other places
of pilgrimage in Upper India, he had embarked at Tamralipti
(Tamluk), the port of Bengal, and, sailing along the coast for


=== [PDF Page 240 | Journal Page 183] ===
THE YUPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MULAVARMAN. 183

fourteen days and nights, he reached «the country of the lions

(Simhala, Ceylon). There he stayed for no less than two
years, before undertaking the voyage home. He then shipped
himself on board a great merchant vessel, which carried about
two hundred men; but after a few days a terrible tempest
arose, and the ship sprung a leak. The merchantmen were
greatly terrified, but Fa-Hian invoked Avalokitegvara and paid
reverence to the Buddhist saints. After the hurricane had blown
for thirteen days, they reached a small island and here they
were able to repair the leak. They put to sea again. <In this
ocean:, Fa-Hian writes, there are many pirates, who, coming
on you suddenly, destroy everything. The sea itself is boundless
in extent; it is impossible to know east or west except by
observing the sun, moon, or stars, and so progress. If it is
dark, rainy weather, the only plan is to steer by the wind with-
out guide. During the darkness of night we only see the great
waves beating one against the other and shining like fire, whilst
shoals of sea-monsters of every description ‘surround the ship].
The merchants, perplexed, knew not towards what land they
were steering. The sea was bottomless and no soundings could
be found, so that there was no chance of anchoring. At length,
the weather clearing up, they got their right bearings, and
once more shaped a correct course and proceeded onwards;
but if they had happened to have struck on a hidden rock,
there would have been no escape. Thus they vovaged for ninety
days and more, when they arrived at a country called Ye-po-ti
(Java, or perhaps, Sumatra)». Fa-Hian’s account of the island,
where he stopped the best part of five months, is disappoint-
ingly meager after his effuse description of the voyage thither.
It is contained in the one sentence: «In this country heretics
and Brahmins flourish, but the law of Buddha is not much
known:. The pilgrim then relates how he embarked on board
another merchant vessel, having a crew of some two hundred
men, and set sail for China. After a month and some days,
in the middle of the night the ship once more was assailed by
a storm of such violence that it was in great danger of being
lost. Again Fa-Hian turned to Avalokitegvara «the Great Com-

1 T quote Beal's transl. from the Introduction to his Si-yu-ki Buddhist
Records of the Western world. Vol. I, p. LXXX.


=== [PDF Page 241 | Journal Page 184] ===
lat THE YOPA TNSCRIPTIONS OF KING VMOQE AV AKMAN,

passionate for help, but the Brahmins ascribed their ill luck
to the presence of the bhik yu and resolved te tand him on
any isand they should come across Fortunately Va-Hian’s reli-
gious patron interceded on his behalf and threatened them with

the vengeance of the king of China who was a firm belicver

in the law of Buddha. After a long and perilous voyage the
pilgrim at last reached ‘the land of Han».

The most celebrated of the Chinese pilgrims, -the Master
of the Law-, Hiuen Tsiang', whose very accurate and detailed
itinerary is uf inestimab’e value for the knowledge of ancient
India, does not supply any intormation regarding the sea-borne
trade which in those days was carried on between India and
the Archipelago. Both on his way to India and back he chose
the overland, route. Yet his Life. described by two contempe-
raneous authors contains a passage which is of some interest
for our present purpose. There it is stated that Kafcipura, the
capital of Dravida [i. e. the Tamil country” was the sea-port of
South India for Ceylon, the voyage to which took three days. *

It follows that Kaficipura was in those days an intermediate
port on the route from Tamralipti in Bengal to Ceylon, and that
apparently it then had the position now held by Madras May
we not assume that there existed also a direct intercourse be-
tween the ancient Pallava capital and the .\rchipelago ?

Hiuan Tsiang returned to China in the year 645 A. D. after
an absence of sixteen years. It appears that his example excited
the enthusiasm of another famous divine, whose religious name

to Hinen Tetang personally visited Nefeipura, the capital of Dravida, as
he ealls it, in 610 and giyes a valuable aceount of th+ town whieh interested

him particularly as othe native place ot Dharmapala, According to the pil-
gum the country counted sume eighty Brehiaanic

To temples and. some
hundred Buddhist monasteries Si-vu-kietrans). B

2 Vol IL pp 225 syq
2 Mistoie de la civ d Miouen-theany, traduire par Stanislas Juhen. Paris
sss. pp Wt sq. Thomas Watters. On Yoon Chirung’s trards in blur, London
14 vol, I. p. 2
Koheipia desertbed as a sea-port. considering the position of the modern
town of Conjeeverain at the distance of some 10 iailes

At first sighr rt may seem somewhat surprising to tind

2 as the crow thes,
from the mouth of the Pakir giver Bur at should be remembered that several
lunportant ports of ancient India such as Bharnkaccha, (modern Browehs on
the West coast, and Tamialipty Guoedern Taaalik, im Bengal were similarly
placed at considerable distanee tom the coast. Tunluk, © gy is now some
60 ailes from thes Moreover, the course of Pndian rivers is lable te
change. In the case of the Pilar this ts explenly noted hs Eo Reelus,
Noneclle qeographww uneersell Paris ssa. vol VUE p. 327



=== [PDF Page 242 | Journal Page 185] ===
THE VORA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MULAVARMAN. 185

was [tsing. This pilgrim, however, is distinguished from his
great predecessor in that he travelled by sea both on his voyage
out to India and home. In 671 he sailed on a Persian ship
from Kanton and, favoured by the north-east monsoon, reached
Fo-che (Bhoja), also called Cri-Bhoja, which apparently was the
capital of a State of the same name and in all probability was
situated somewhere near Palembang.

That Bhoja was a centre of Hindu civilisation appears from
the fact that I-tsing sojourned there for six months in order
to acquaint himself with Sanskrit grammar. He then continued
ris journey to Mouo-louo-yu (Malayu) ', where he stopped again
for two months. His next station was Kie-tch’a which has been
identified by M. Chavannes with Achin, but which more pro-
bably, according to Kern's identification, represents the port of
Kedah in Malacca.

By the end of 072 he sailed from this place for the Indian
continent and on his way visited «the land of the naked
yeople: ze. the Nicobar Islands, of which he has left us an
interesting description. In the course of the following year he
anded at Tamralipti from where he continued his pilgrimage
by land to the Mahibodhi temple and the famous Convent of

Nalanda. We need not follow him on his further wanderings.
For our present purpose the main point of interest in his
itinerary is that it acquaints us with another trade-route, which
connected the Archipelago with the chief port of Bengal.

On the route from Tamralipti to Bhoja (or Cri-Bhoja) there
were probably other intermediate ports besides the three men-
tioned by I-tsing. I may remind the reader of the pillar inscrip-
tion of the Buddhist sea captain (mahanavika) Buddhagupta
of Raktamrttika which has been found in the Wellesley district
of the Malay peninsula, and which, according to Professor
Kern, may be assigned to about 400 A.D. The character is
very similar to that of the early Sanskrit inscriptions of Java. *

I-tsing has not, like Hiuen Tsiang, composed a detailed account
of his pilgrimage. The information regarding the countries he

' Mr. Routiaer (Notulen But. Gen , 190%, p. 116) proposes to identify this
locality with Djambi (Jambi: on the north coast of Sumatra

2H. Kern, rer cenge oude Sanskritopschriften van “t Maleische schireiland
Veisl_ en Meded. Kon Ak. vy. Wetenseh 3''s.. vol. I. pp. 5 syy. Reprinted
in Verspreide Gesehiiften run Prof Kern, vol. TH, 1915, pp. 255 qq



=== [PDF Page 243 | Journal Page 186] ===
186 THE YOVA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MiLAVAR VAN.

visited is only incidentally contained in his two works, one of
which A record of the Buddhist religion as practised in India
and the Malay Archipelago! , is chiefly interesting for the history
of Buddhism in those countries. In his other work he gives
short biographies of no less than sixty eminent Chinese pilgrims
who had visited India in his days. M. Chavannes ? in the in-
troduction to his French translation of that work calls attention
to the remarkable fact that in a single generation sixty persons
were found willing to undertake such a perilous journey. More-
over, M. Chavannes shows good reason for assuming that there
were many more pilgrims of whose wanderings no record has
been preserved and that the actual number of those pious
palmers must have amounted to several hundreds.

A vrai dire, M. Chavannes says in his introduction, -les
difficultés que rencontraient ces voyageurs auraient di décourager
les audacieux qui ctaient tentés de les imiter; ceux qui passaient
par terre devaient traverser le désert de Gobi ou les mirages
trompeurs entretenaient des épouvantes indicibles, ot le vent
qui soulevait des flots de sable menacait d’ensevelir les caravanes,
ou la route a suivre était marquée par les ossements des bétes
et des gens qui y avaient trouvé la mort. Ceux qui hasardaient
leur vie sur de lourdes jonques qui se perdaient parfois, corps
et bien; ‘quoique les Chinois fussent au VI siécle de notre ¢re
les plus hardis navigateurs de l’Orient et quoique leurs embar-
cations pussent porter jusqu’ a six ou sept cents personnes,
ils n’étaient pas stirs de triompher des vagues déchaincées; ou
bien ils se trompaient dans leur route et venaient échouer sur
des récifs qu’ils croyaient ¢tre le dos du monstre marin makara.
Méme arrivés en Inde, ils n’étaient pas a l’abri des dangers:
les fleuves Ctaient parcourus par des barques de pirates; les
routes étaient infestées par des bandes de brigands. Malgré

' A record of the Buddhist religion as practised in Indian and the Malay

Archipelogo (A D. 671 695) by I-tsing, transl. by J. Takakusu. Oxford Isa
On the difticult problem of ident

ng the geographical names mentioned
ing cf Kern's article Een Chin eveh reizuyer op Sumatra (I- tsing in
895 A Di in Tydsehrift voor Ned. Indw, 2" New Series, vol. I, 1897.
(Reprinted in Verspreide Geschriften van Prof. Dr. H. Kern, vol VI, 1917.
qq).

Voyages des prlertns bouddhistes Les religreuc eminents qui allérent chercher
lu loi dans les pays @'Ocerdent Mémoire compos: it Udpoque de la grande dynastic
Tang par [-tsing. traduit en franyais par Edouard Chavannes. Paris N94,



=== [PDF Page 244 | Journal Page 187] ===
THE VOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN. 187

tout, les ptlerins ne perdaient pas leur enthousiasme sacre et
s€ passaient de main en main la torche de la Loi

If we admit that the study of the Pallava inscriptions of
Coromandel is important for the right understanding of the
beginnings of Hindu civilisation in the Archipelago, the same
may be said with even greater justice of the early records of
two ancient kingdoms of Further India, Campa and Kambodia,
which have received and absorbed in such a remarkable degree
that wave of culture from the coast of the Indian continent.
Here too we find Brahmanical civilisation — which, after taking
its origin among the Indo-Arvans of Aryavarta (Hindistan) had
first been carried to the Dravidian peoples of the Deccan —
grafted anew on two nations, the Cam and the Khmer, which,
like the Dravidas, were widely different from the Indo-Aryans
in race and tongue. These peoples which, from the Brahma-
nical point of view’, were in reality Mlecchas (barbarians) have
reshaped that ancient Indian civilisation in accordance with their
own national genius, as is evident, in the first place, from
those grand monuments of architectural and sculptural art which
still excite the admiration of travellers from all parts of the globe.

It is particularly the ancient kingdom of the Cam! which
has played an important part in the spread of Hindu civilisation
in the Far East and which, owing to its situation on the east
coast of Further India (the present Annam) formed a natural
link between Java and China. The name Cam by which this
«Mleccha> nation called itself, was bound to remind the Brahmin
immigrants of one of the great ancient cities of their homeland,
Campa on the right bank of the river Ganges, and it was, no
doubt, on that account that in their Sanskrit inscriptions they
designate the Cam country by that famous and familiar name. *

' Abel Bergaigne, L'ancien royaume de Campa dans U Indo-Chine @apris les
inseriptions (Journal asiatique, IssS, pp. 5—105). Georges Maspero. Le
royaume de Champa, (T’oung Pao, 1910 and 111).

2 On the close relations between Cam and Javanese art ef) Dr. Kroi's
remarks Rapport Oudh Onderzoek Ned. Indie, 1911. pp. i
monument of the conelnding period of Hindu civilisation in Jaya is the
tomb of the Cam princess, known as Ratu Putri Campa at Majapahit. Its
date is (aka 1370,

3 Campa was the capital of the Anga country. Iu the ancient Pali text
Mahaparinibbinasutta (The Book of the great Decease) Sacred Books

sqq. An interesting



=== [PDF Page 245 | Journal Page 188] ===
Iss THE YOPA INSCRIP PEONS

YW RING MOQLAVARMAN,

The state of Campa, according to some Chinese sources, had
been founded in the vear 137 A.D." It is sti!l referred to by
Maree Polo (c. 1292) as sla grant contree de Cvamba . By the
end of the fifteenth century it was finally overpowered by the
Annamites who were originally settled in Tonkin and who in
the Sanskrit records of Campa are, curiously enough, indicated
by the name Varava. a term which in India proper was, in the
first instance, applied to the Greeks. ? At present the Cam nation
is reduced to some 100,000 people who survive in Binh Thuan
(the southern-most district of Annam) and in Kambodia. Their
chief settlement is the valley of Phan-rang, a locality which in

the Sanskrit inscriptions occurs under the name of Panduranga. *

It is due, principally, to the labours of M. Louis Finot that
of late years an enormous stride has been made in the elucidation
of the early history of that country. The oldest epigraphical
document of Campa (and of the whole of Indo-China) is the
rock inscription of Vé-canh, 4 kilometers from Nha-trang, and
since 1910 in the Hanoi Museum, * This inscription, which
unfortunately is partly illegible, is ascribed to the third (or
perhaps the second) century of the Christian era. The existence
of a Sanskrit inscription of so early a date in a far-off country
like Campa is not a little remarkable.

Special interest attaches to the three inscriptions > which
come next in time and which are associated with a king of the
name of Bhadravarman who begins the line of historical rulers
of Campa. None of these three epigraphs is dated, but for
of the East. vol. XI. it is mentioned first among the six great cities of
Buddhist India. On its position ef. A. Cunningham, Ancient Geography of
India, vol. 1 (1371). pp. 477 squ.

Ce

2 Kern, Yaroni als naam van Annam (Bijdr. Kon Inst., vol. LANIL, tous,
pp. 399 sq.

3 Finot, Punduranga. Albwn Kern, 1908, pp 381 sqqui

vannes, Les religieur cminents ete, p. 2038

4 Bergaigne, Inscriptions sanscrites du Campi et du Cambodge (1s93), yp.
TL—-18 “191 19S} n? XN (lb) Finot, BE FE 0, vol. TE t9021, p. INS
and vol. XV (1915). n° 2, pp. ¢

—5 (with facsnnile). The inscription is partly
defaced and, consequently, the king's name lost But in the preserved por-
tion he is said to belong to the race of ('1i-Mara.

* Bergaigne, Inseriptioms, pp. 10—26 [199- 206] n° XXI (415) Finot, B. E.
F. EB. 0, vol. IL. pp. 185-191 (cf vol. ILE. p, 209 and [V. p. 917), also vol.
XVonv 2. p 5 Cf Edonard Huber. BOE FE, 0, vol. XI (1911), pp.
v6E 7 and G Maspéro, Le royaume de Champa, Toung Pao 1910, pp.
BAT sqy.



=== [PDF Page 246 | Journal Page 189] ===
THE VOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MfiLAVARMAN. 1s9

palaeographical reasons they have been attributed to about 400
A.D. Two of them are short rock-inscriptions: the one is found at
Cho'-dinh in the province of Phu-ven, the other is incised
on a rock called Hon-cuc, at a distance of 28 kilometers
south-east of Tourane (Turan). The Cho’-dinh inscription refers
to a sacrifice instituted on behalf of the Dharmamaharaja
Bhadravarman. The title by which the king is here disignated
is also borne by the Pallava prince Civaskandavarman in one
of the copper-plate charters of the 4 century which have been
noted above (pp. 172 sq.). The sacrifice apparently was offered
to (iva under the appellation of Bhadregvara. The Hon-cuc
inscription is nothing but an invocation of «the Lord Mahadeva
Bhadregvara-svamin. It does not contain the name of any king,
but it isso similar to the rock-inscription of Cho’-dinh that it may
be assumed to belong likewise to the reign of Bhadravarman I.

We now come to the third and most important inscription of
that king. It was discovered by M. Finot in December 1899 on the
site of Mi-so’n which is described by him in the following terms:
«A une heure de marche du village [i. e. Mi-so’n] est un vallon
d'un accés difficile, clos de toutes parts d'une ceinture de
collines rocheuses et envahi par une brousse épaisse. Ce cirque
solitaire rectle le plus magnifique ensemble de monuments
qui nous soit resté de l’ancien Champa. Sur les deux rives d'un
ruisseau qui le traverse du Sud au Nord se groupent plus de
trente édifices ou édicules de briques, dont un habile et patient
ciseau a délicatement sculpté les murs, les baies et les frontons.
Les constructions principales étaient: dans le groupe Ouest, deux
vastes salles rectangulaires servant sans doute de lieux de reunion;
dans le groupe Est, une haute et spacieuse tour, dont le sanc-
tuaire ne contient plus aujourd’hui que le grand piedestal de
pierre, qui portait autrefois la statue de la divinité du lieu,
probablement (liva».

Here then we have the chief sanctuary of that Giva Bhad-
recvara who is invoked in the two rock inscriptions, one of
which — that of Hon-cuc — is situated at a distance of only 8 kilo-
meters to the north-west of Mi-so’n. s\According to a universal
Indian practice to which I shall have occasion to revert, we
find the god as well as his shrine indicated by a compound in
which the name of the founder Bhadra(varman) is combined
with the word igvara «the Lord» (i.e. Giva). The inscription


=== [PDF Page 247 | Journal Page 190] ===
190 THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MUL AVARMAN.

is incised on the two faces of a stele of a type similar to that
found in Java. It was discovered by M Finot in front of the
main temple. The inscription is composed in Sanskrit prose, but
it betrays an imperfect knowledge of grammar, and the wording
is clumsy. It records that the land enclosed between the moun-
tains, in other words, the valley in which te shrine is situated,
together with its inhabitants is bestowed on the god, Civa
Bhadrecgvara. It contains no date.

The first instance of a dated inscription in Campa is afforded by
another stele ' found in the same spot as the one just discussed.
Unfortunately the slab is broken in two and the inscription
otherwise damaged, so that portions of the text are lost. Of the
date only the figure indicating the hundreds has been preserved.
This inscription is important for the further history of the
Bhadrecvara temple. It relates that the ancient shrine had been
destroyed by a conflagration in the reign of Rudravarman and
that after the king’s death, his son and successor, Cambhuvar-
man, rebuilt the temple which henceforth became known under
the name of Cambhubhadrecvara. It will be observed that in this
appellation we find the names both of the founder and of the
restorer of the temple coupled with the word igvara indicating
Civa. Originally the inscription must have contained no less
than three dates for the chief events related therein, to wit,
the destruction of the temple, the death of Rudravarman, and
the restoration by Cambhuvarman, but of these three dates
only that of the conflagration has been partly preserved, the
figure indicating the hundreds being alone extant. From the
words catursu varsagatesu (akanam vyatitesu it
follows that the event in question must have happened in the
fifth century of the Caka era, or, in other words, between 479
and 377 A.D.

The site of Mi-so'n, after having been completely cleared
under the supervision of M. Parmentier, vielded several more
inscriptions. Among the total of twenty-five inscribed stones
found on the spot, the stele indicated by M. Finotas «stele III.
is of special interest for the early history of Campa, because
it supplies the names of several kings who must have ruled some

\ Finot, BOE. FE. O, vol. ILL (1908), pp. 206-211 vet, vols LY (1904).
pit: NE G9LD. p 26E and XV. uw" 2p 31 7 Ci. Maspiro, Tung Pao,
1910, pp. SIG sq.


=== [PDF Page 248 | Journal Page 191] ===
THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN. 191

time subsequent to Bhadravarman’s reign. ' Those princes trace
their origin back to a king of the name of Gangiraja. It is
tempting here to suspect some connection with that branch of
the Pallavas, the scions whereof in their charters called them-
selves Gangeya «sons of Ganga-, and who by writers on
Indian history are usually designated as Ganga-Pallavas. The
inscription on «stele IfI* contains two dates, — the Caka years
579 and 601(?), corresponding to A.D. 657 and 679,

Among the early inscriptions of Campa there are two more
to which I wish briefly to refer. One is the stele inscription of
the monument of Po Nagar ® which belongs to a king of the
name of Satyavarman. The contents of this inscription may be
summarized as follows. A very ancient Civa temple, said to
have been founded by a mythical king, Vicitra-sagara, had been
burnt down and the mukhalinga (/¢ a linga carved with
the face of Civa at the top) enshrined in it robbed by pirates
who are described as very black, very lean and as cannibals.
This had happened in Caka 696 (A. D. 774). Satyavarman pursued
the enemy and beat him in a naval battle. He did not, how-
ever, recover the head of Civa nor the temple treasures which
likewise had been carried off by the invaders. Both vanished
in the ocean. The king then rebuilt the temple and placed in
it a new mukhalinga called after him: (ri-Satyamukhalinga.
The restoration of the temple took place in Caka 706 (A. D.
784), exactly ten years after its destruction.

The Yang Tikuh stele inscription of Indravarman, ? which is
in excellent preservation, tells in Sanskrit prose and verse a
very similar story, but here the interesting point is that the
invaders who had come across the sea are distinctly called
Javanese (Fava). The sanctuary which forms the subject of the
present inscription was also a Civa temple, named Bhadradhipa-
tigvara, which stood near the village of Takoh in the valley of

' Finot, B. E. F. E. O., vol. IV, pp. 918 sqqg. (CL vol. XT. p. 265 and XY,
n° 2, p. 5-6) G. Coed’s, B. EL F. E. O., vol. XI, n" VIIE, pp. —16. CE
G. Maspéro, T oung Pao, 1910, pp. 345 sq. According to the Chinese sources
Ti Tehen (= Gangiraja} was a son of Fan-Hou Ta whom M Masp¢ie proposes
to identify with Bhadravarman I.

2 Bergaigne, Inscriptions, pp. 62—-SO [242-260], nv NNVI - t07) Cy. G.
Masptro, T’oung Pao, 1910, pp. 552 sqq.

3 Ibidem, pp. 27—3S [207215], n° NNIT (YT) Cf, G Maspére. Tow Pao,
1910, pp. 539 squ.



=== [PDF Page 249 | Journal Page 192] ===
Lor THE YOrN\ INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MO@P AVARMAN.

Phan-rang (Sanskrit Panduranga). It was burnt down by the

Javanese in Caka 709 (A.D. 787) and was rebuilt by Indravarman
in €

ka 721 (A.1) 799), whence it was renamed Indrabhad-
recvara.

Among the Sanskrit inscriptions of Kambndia editel by M.
Barth the earliest dated specimen is that on a stele placed
inside the temple of Bayang.' It records the erection (or resto-
ration) of a Civapada and the construction of a tirtha inthe
vicinity in Caka 604 (A.D. 682) and o24 (A. 1). 702) respectively.

With regard to these early epigraphica!l records of Indo-China
two points deserve special notice. the prevalence of the worship
of Civa and the exclusive use of the Caka era. This era we
find also regularly employed in the inscriptions of the Archi-
yelago, as far as they are cated. Whatever the origin of the
Caka era may be, it is decidedly the era of Southern India,
whereas in Northern India it was the Vikrama (or Malava)
era which was preferably used.? Here again, therefore, we
ave a peculiarity which points to the southern origin of that
varticular form of Indian civilisation which is found in the
Far East.

It is certainly astonishing that in the inscriptions of the Pal-

avas and other Southern dynasties no reference whatever is

made to the relations which in those davs must have existed
between Coromandel and the Far East. The explanation probably
is that those relations, of which the accounts of the Chinese
pilgrims have left us such a valuable record were of a perfectly
peaceful nature. Supposed the powerful Pallava’ princes of
Kaficipura had equipped armadas and carried their arms to
the remote shores of Campa and Java, may we not assume that

their conquests on the far side of the ocean would have been
extolled in their pragastis with no less effusion than we find
Javished on their victories over the Calukyas?

If then, in the present case, some weight may be attached to
an argumentum ex silentio, we are perhaps justified in

' Barth. Inseripteons Sanserites du Cambodge. po. 31—8s n° Voi2s3i.
2 F, Kiellora, Ep Ind. vol. VIL, 1902-03, Appendia. pt.

S Tr omust, however, be admutted that the known insersptions omit to
mention Natasnnhavarman’s interfering in the Ceylon snecession to whieh
reference is made in the Mahavainsa (f above pe 7s


=== [PDF Page 250 | Journal Page 193] ===
THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN. 193

concluding that the penctration of Hindu culture in the Far East
took place along the peaceful lines of trade and traffic. Pa-Hian
found Brahmins settled in Ye-po-ti. The merchants on the vessel
which brought the pilgrim home from his long pilgrimage, were
partly at least — he says so explicitly — Brahmins. It was, no
doubt, through the Brahmins in the first place, that Brahmanical
civilisation, together with their religion, their sacred lore, and
their ancient language was carried across the eastern ocean,

In the records of Campa, on the other hand, as well as in those
of Java there is likewise a remarkable paucity of direct references
to the homeland of that Indo-Aryan civilisation, of whose great-
ness those very records are so eloquent witnesses. Indirect
testimonies, however, are not altogether wanting. In the course
of my survey of Pallava history I have mentioned some curious
legends regarding the mythic origin attributed to that famous
royal line. Pallava, the Aeros cfponrmos, was believed to have
been borne by a heavenly nymph, named either Madani or
Menaka, to the warlike Brahmin hero of the great epic , Drona’s
son Agvatthaman. According to another legend the first Pallava
prince had sprung from the union of Ag¢vatthaman and a Nagi,
whereas in Tamil poetry it is not Agvatthiman, but a Cola
king, named Killi, who entered the snake-world and married
the daughter of the Serpent lord.

Now the Sanskrit inscription on stele III from Mi-so'n to which
reference has already been made, contains a curious passage
which accounts for the origin of the kings of Kambodia in the
following terms. I quote M. Finot’s translation.

«[C’est 1a que] Kaundinya, taureau des brahmanes de cette
[cite], planta le javelot qu'il avait regu de l'éminent brahmane
Agvatthaman, fils de Drona.

Il y avait une fille du roi des Nigas, de naissance
qui fonda sur la terre la race qui porte le nom de Soma: avant
adopté cet état, chose remarquable, elle habita une demeure
humaine. . .

Le taureau des Munis nommé Kaundinya !’épousa pour lac-
complissement des rites. A l’égard de ce qui concerne la nature
des causes des événements 4 venir, incompichensible en vérité
est l’action du destin!

M. Coedés, while calling attention to this remarkable adap-

tation, concludes: “De quelque fagon que nous lenvisagions ,
DL 74. 1s


=== [PDF Page 251 | Journal Page 194] ===
Lot THE VORP INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVAKMAN,

la legende cambodgienne nous ramene a la cour des Pallavas.
Le fait est d’autant plus digne d’attention que cette legende
est attachce en Indochine au nom de Kaundinyva, qu'on appelle
volontiers l'indouisateur du Cambodge.. !

Another point which may be mentioned here is the nomen-
clature of Hindu (er rather, Hinduized) Rajas in the Far Fast.
M. Bergaigne was one of the first to draw attention to the
fact that in the Sanskrit inscriptions of Indo-China — with the
only exception of the Nha-trang (eo V5-canh) rock inscription
which, as we saw, is earliest of all — we meet with royal
names ending exclusively in varman.

Or a partir du n XXI [the Cho’-dinh rock inscription] ,
that author says with regard to Campa, nous ne trouverons
pas un seul nom royal sans cette terminaison, exclusivement
usitee aussi au Cambodge deés I'époque des plus anciennes in-
scriptions, comme elle l'a ete d’ailleurs dans les iles de la Sonde,
et avant tout chez plusieurs dynasties de I'Inde du sud, rois
de Vengi, Pallavas, Kadambas, des le V* ou meme le IV
sitcle., ® Considering that among the dynasties of India
proper there is a great variety of such royal *surnames» as

aditya. gupta, candra, deva, pala, raja, vardhana,

simha, and sena, the almost universal employment of names
in varman in the Far East is certainly very remarkable. ? In the
course of our summary of Pallava history we have had occasion
to note that the great majority of princes belonging to that
illustrious line did bear names of that type. It is true that
among other southern dynasties too such names were common.
But if we remember that for a long period the Pallavas stood

VG. Covd)s, Etudes Cumbodgunnes, L La léyende de la Nagi. B ELFLE 0.
tr XE Qt) pp St sqq Ir as enrious that in a Chinese source the kings
ot Polt are said to bear the family name of Kaundinya WP. Groeneveld,
Notes on the Malay Archipelayo and Malarea, compiled from Chincse sources,
(IS76:, Verh vr hb Bat Gen r K. en W.. vol NIX. 1580. p St.: Reprinted
in 18s7, p 20t

2 Bergaigne, [nveriptions sanserites, p. 12.

$In Northern India there were but few dynasties which employed royal
nines ending im rarman, especially during the earlier period of Indian
history. They are the Maukharis of Magadha, the Candellas, the Paramiras
of Malaya cosines e 1100 A T)), the Utpala dynasty of Kashmir (from e.
si0 A. 1), the early rajas of the West-Himalayan Hill-State of Brahmapura-
Camp. Gnodern. Chamba, Cf C. Mabel Dut, The chronology of Ind, West-
minster ISau.


=== [PDF Page 252 | Journal Page 195] ===
THE YOP\ INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN. 195

foremost in political importance, may we not assume that
their royal house set a fashion which was followed first by
their feudatories and neighbours and subsequently also by the
Hinduized princes of the Far East?

Do we find any reference to the Pallavas in the ancient
records of Java? The inscriptions, as far as T know, do not
mention them, but it is interesting that Kafcipura, the Pallava
capital, is mentioned in the Old-Javanese chronicle Nagara-
krtagama. This work was composed by the poet Prapafica
in honour of Hayam Wuruk, the king of Majapahit, in Caka 1287
(A. D. 1365). In the 93" canto of his poem the chronicler says,
no doubt, with some exaggeration that all pandits in other
countries composed eulogies in honour of his patron, King
Hayam Wuruk. Among them he makes special mention of -the
illustrious bhiksu Buddhaditva -who lived in Jambudvipa
"i.e. the Indian continent) in the town of Kaficipuri with its

sD

viharas».! In view of the scarcity of references to India
in Javanese documents, the passage in question is certainly
remarkable, though the work in which it occurs belongs to a
period many centuries posterior to the time when hafcipura
witnessed the glories of the Pallava dynasty.

In this connection another point may be noted. In 1903
Professor Kern drew attention to an interesting paper on
certain funeral ceremonies of the mérga Simbiring, by Mr. M.
Joustra of the Netherlands Missionary Society ?  Simbiring
(meaning the Black-) is the name of one of the five tribes
(mérga) of the Karo-Bataks who are settled round Lake Toba
in West-Sumatra. The Simbiring tribe is again subdivided. Now it
is very curious that in the names by which these subdivisions
are designated — Coliya, Pandiva, Méliyala, Dépari,

1J. L. A. Brandes, Tyande Stngasare en Panataran (Archaeological Survey
of Java and Madura, vol Th. The Hague-Batavin, 109. p 23. C7 N. J.
Krom, De eiyennamen in den Nagarakrtigama. Alphubetisch Register )Tyd-
sehr. v. h, Bat. Genootschap vy. K. en W., vol. LVI, Batavia lvld, p. 515).
Tt i» curious that the rak

ma mentions also a locality in Java ot
the name of Kanei

2H. Kern, Draridische volksnamen op Sinatra, Bijdy. tot de Taal-, Land: en
Volkenkunde van Ned. Indie, 7! series. yol. 1.1903) pp. 35s syq Reprinted
in Verspreide Geschriften, vol. TIL, (15, pp. 67 sqye. Me. Jousniavs paper
appeared in the Tydschrift roor Taal-, Land: en Volkenkunde van Ned Inde,
vol, NLY, (Batavia 1902), pp. SEE say



=== [PDF Page 253 | Journal Page 196] ===
195 THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOL AVARMAN,

Pelawi!, etc. — Professor Kern recognised well-known ethnic
names from the Dravida or Tamil country which clearly point
to the South-Indian origin of the tribe in juestion. .Among
those names we have, in the first place, Coliva and Pandiva
which clearly represent Cola and Pandya, two nations which, as
we saw above, were settled along the southern portion of the
cuast trom the earliest times we have cognizance of. The name

Meélivala is evidently identical with Malayalam or Malabar.

As to the term Peélawi it would be extremely interesting, if
we were allowed to identify it with the name Pallava. The
connection with the Colas and the Pandyas in which the name
vecurs, would seem to render the identification perfectly plausible.
Professor Kern, however, while suggesting it, expressed some
f

doubt as to its correctness on account of the 7 at the end «
the word Pélavi.

It is curious that among the other tribes of the haro-Bataks
the -Kéling origin of the Simbiring is a recognized fact. This
term Kéling or Kling by which immigrants from the Indian
continent are generally designated among the inhabitants of the
Archipelago is clearly derived from Aa/mga *, the ancient name
of the Telegu country situated on the east coast of India between

the rivers Mahanadi and Godavari. I may note parenthetically
that the use of this term indicates that the Telugu country too must
have had a considerable share in the colonisation of the Far East.

If now we turn our attention to the Koetei inscriptions, we
find that they are records of a ruler of the name of Mialavar-
man. One of the inscriptions (1), moreover, acquaints us with the
names of his father, Agvavarman, and of his grandfather,
Kundunga. * Here too, therefore, in one of the earliest docu-
ments of Indian civilisation in the Archipelago, we meet with
two royal names ending in varvman. It is certainly remarkable
that, whereas both Milavarman and his father bear personal

' Mr. Joustra informs me that Dépari (p. 554), not Sépari (p. 545),
is the correct form, the latter being merely due to a misprint. In his opinion,
Peélawi may also stand for Mélawi, meaning Malay.

> There exists, In my opinion, no reason to doubt this derivation, as
Van der Tuuk does in bis Kawt-Balinese Dictionary, vol Il (1809), p. 282.
cf Kern. Verspr Gesehr , vol TL \i9ts;, p 72

’ Professor Kern read the grandfather's name Kundanga,


=== [PDF Page 254 | Journal Page 197] ===
THE \VOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING Mil AVARMAN, 197

names of Indo-Aryan origin, his grandfather's name has deci-
dedly a barbarous. sound. Professor Kern concluded that it
was possibly under Kundunga that Indian civilisation had been
introduced in Eastern Borneo. The name of Milavarman’s
grandfather , he says, «is non-Sanskritic, but that prince too
must have been an adherent of Hinduism. Otherwise, he would
not have given his son an Indian name>. It is, of course, also
possible that Agvavarman adopted this name himself on his
conversion to Hinduism. Kern's conclusion, at any rate, would
seem to imply that Kundunga was not an immigrant from the
Indian continent, but probably a native of Borneo, and that
the personages to which these inscriptions refer were Hinduized,
rather than Hindu princes.' his inference agre

with our
assumption regarding the peaceful penetration of Hinduism in
the Archipelago. Although the Koetei inscriptions do not make
mention of any historical facts, they are important in showing
that at the time to which they belong Brahmanical culture was
established on the borders of the Mahakkam.

As regards the first member af the name Milavarman, the
Sanskrit word mtila, as an appellative, means -a root» (whence
several secondary meanings have been derived), and, if used as a
proper name, designates an asterism which in Indian astronomy
figures among the lunar mansions (Sanskrit naksatra). Hence
the name Milavarman may be compared with personal names,
the first member of which is Pusya (¢. g. Pusyamitra) or Tisya. ?

' Parallel instances can be quoted from the Indian coatiment The princes
of the Kusina dynasty who were Indo-Seythians have foreign names ~- Ka-
niska, Vasiska, Huviska — but after Huviska there comes a king who bears
the purely Indo-Aryan name of Vasudeva, A less notorious example 1s
afforded by the ancient} rulers of the West-Himalayan Hill State Chamba
who have names ending in carman, but who in their earliest inscriptions
designate themselves as ,.borne from the house of Mostina (or Musuna). (7.
my Antiquities of Chamba State, Part I (Caleutta 1911) pp. 97 sq.

2 Among the various meanings of the word mila, the Petersburg Dictio-
nary mentions that it is also used as an epithet of Sadaciva. I doubt whether
Sir Alexander Cunningham (Ancient Geography of India, (1871), p. 234) 1s
right in assuming that Mila is an appellation of the Sun-god, on account
of the previous existence of a famous temple dedicated to that deity in the
well-known city of Multan (ancient Miilasthiina) in the Panjib. It is very
curious that the sanctuary at Tirukkalukkunram , half-w.
and Sadias, on the Coromandel coast 1s designated in inscriptions by that
same name of Mitlasthana. Cy) Hultzsch, 8. J S. vol. If, ne 60, 1.84 (p. 1b
Ep. Ind. TE, 276 and Ind. Ant NXT, 343,

y between Chingleput



=== [PDF Page 255 | Journal Page 198] ===
19S CHP VORA INSCRIPLIONS Of KING MULAVARMAN,
It is a point of considerable interest that the Noetei stones
are described in the inscriptions as sacrificial posts (Sanskrit

yUpa) In the ritual of the animal sacrifice, as described in

the Brahmanas, the yipa to which the victim is tied plays
an important part. It was a wooden post preferably made of
weod of the khadira (acacia catechu) which hence Is called
vOpadru(ma) “4. the vipa tree. Occasionally, however,
in order to perpetuate the memory of some great sacrifice, stone
yupas were erected on the spot where it had been solemnized.
As far ay we may judge from the results of archaeological
researen, such monumental yiipas were extremely rare. In
India proper only three instances of stone viipas have been
brought to our notice. In Further India no such monument
appears to have come to light, whilst in the Archipelago the
four inscribed stones from hoetei are the only specimens hitherto
found. This circumstance invests them with a special interest.
In view of the extreme rarity of monuments of this type it
will be worth our while to make a survey of the examples of
stone \fipas which are known on the Indian continent. The
earliest and undoubtedly the most remarkable instance is af-
forded by the two sacrificial posts, one of them inscribed,
which were discovered by Pandit Radha hrishna, R. B., in the
bed of the river Jamna_ near ‘Tsapur opposite the city of
Mathura (Muttra) during the hot season of the year 19t0.! In
the Sanskrit inscription incised on one of these pillars it is
recorded that the ytipa in question was set up by a Brahmin,
named Dronala the son of Rudrila, who belonged to the Brah-
manical house (gotra) of the Bharadvajas, on the occasion of
a twelve days’ sacrifice (sattrena dvadacarattrena). The
inscription is dated in the reign of Shahi Vasiska and in the
24" vear of an unspecified cra. The time in which this Vasiska
reigned has not yet been established with certainty, but there
can be little doubt that he belonged to the dynasty of the
so-called Indo-Scythian kings of Northern India who designate
themselves by the name Kusaua. There is much reason to

assume that Vasiska was the successor of King Kaniska, the

ToT omy paper The sacrifleral posts of Tei par (Archl Suriy Anwral Report
for INO - Ths pp. 40 sqq , plates NNT NNIV) Po have eiven a résumé of
the ritual practised at the amunal sacriiee according to the Gatapatha-
brahmanua.


=== [PDF Page 256 | Journal Page 199] ===
THE YOUPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MULAVARMAN. 199

most prominent monarch of the hKusana house and that he
continued to date his inscriptions from the anointment (ab hi-
seka) of his great predecessor. The view that this «era of
Kaniska» is identical with the Caka era seems still to hold
good, although it was opposed by the late Dr. Fleet. If then
we refer the date of the ‘Isdpur inscription to the Caki era, it
would correspond to A. D. 102. Whether this conclusion be
correct or not, the ‘Tsdpur inscription must be one of the
earliest, if not ¢#e earliest inscription in pure Sanskrit hitherto
found in India.

As regards the object on which it is incised, both the in-
scribed pillar and the uninscribed one discovered at the same
time are of great interest, because they appear to be exact
copies in stone of the actual sacrificial posts used in ancient
India. Their curious shape corresponds generally to the descrip-
tion of the Catapatha-brahman a. The shafts, except for
the lower portion, are octagonal and they are bent at the top.
They are, moreover, distinguished by a head-piece or top-ring
(casala) which is repeatedly mentioned in the ritual. The
girdle-rope (ragana) is also carved on both the pillars, and,
in the case of the uninscribed one. it is wound three times
round the shaft in close agreement with the sacred text. Finally
a garland is shown hanging down from the top of the pillar; it
is’ not referred to in the Brahmana, but we may assume that
it represents the wreath with which the sacrificial animal was
adorned.

Another instance of a monumental vipa found in India
proper is a red-sandstone pillar which was discovered in 1871—’72
by General Cunningham's assistant, Mr. A. C. L. Carlleyle,
inside the hill-fort of Bijayagarh near Biana in the Native State
of Bharatpur (Rajputana).' It will be noticed that Biana is
situated only some fifty miles in a south-western direction from
Mathura (v/go Muttra) where the two ‘Isapur pillars have been
brought to light. There seems, however, to be some doubt
whether the Bijayagarh pillar now occupies the position in which
it was first set up. Unfortunately the extreme top portion is

1 A. Cunningham, Archi. Survey Report, vol VI (isis. pp. 59 sqq., plate
VIII. The inscription was edited by Dr J. F. Fleet, Gupta Inscriptions
(Corpus Inser Ind, vol. HI, 1558), pp. 252 suq, plate NNNVI. ¢


=== [PDF Page 257 | Journal Page 200] ===
200 THE YOUPA INS ORTEEEONS Of RING MIGE AS VRVAN,

broken: a metal spike which projects from it, indicates that it
was originally surmounted by some kind of capital As its
shape does not resemble that of the ‘Tsapur pillars in the least.
we may safely assume that in the Bijavagarh column we have
not an imitation of the wooden pest in actual use at the
Brahmanical sacrifice. That it is, indeed, a monumental vipa
is detinitely stated in the Sanskrit inscription incised on it which
records that it was erected by the Varika Visnuvardhana
after the performance of a Pundarika sacrifice in the year 42s,
The era is not stated; but Dr. Fleet, when editing the inscription,
expressed the view that the date must be referred to the Malava
or Vikrama era, with the result of A.D. 371—72 expired and
ALD. 372-73 current. The Varika Visnuvardhana is not
otherwise known to Indian history: in Dr. Fleet's opinion, he
may have been a feudatery of the great Gupta emperor, Samu-
dragupta, whose death probably occurred about the year 375 A.D.
It should, however, be noticed that the character used in this
inscription differs very considerably from that employed in the
AMilahabad pillar. Fleet draws attention to what he calls the
Indo-Scythic form of mea which, as he points vut, disappeared

in Northern India very soon after the commencement of the
Gupta era (319—'20 A.D.). It should, however, be observed
that the ancient form of me was preserved in the alphabets of
Southern India. Other palaeographical peculiarities too characterize
the Bijavagarh pillar inscription as a South Indian epigraph of
a very early type. We shall, therefore, have to assume that
the pillar was brought to Biana as a trophy from a military
expedition to the Deccan. '

I may note parenthetically that in a contemporaneous
numismatic document, a gold medal of the Emperor Samudra-
gupta, there is a curious representation of a sacrificial post. *

1 fnstances are known in India of monohth pillars having been removed a
considerable distance from the place where they had originally been set
up. The two Acoka pillars of Delhi were brought there by Sultan Fires
shah ‘Tughtay.

There is reason to assume that the famous fron Pillar’ of anerent Delhi
toy does net occupy now its ouginal position, as the inscription 1s written
tuthe Eastern vaniety of the Gupta alphabet.

2 Vincent A, Smith, Ubserrafions on the Guptu vonage (Journal Rayal Asiatic
Sovietys for 1893) pp. WT sqy. with plate illustrating the stone horse at the
entrance of the Lucknow Museum, Jolin Allan, Catalogue of the coins of the
Gupta Aynasties Loudon 1914) pp. 2b sqq, plate V


=== [PDF Page 258 | Journal Page 201] ===
THE YOVA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVAKMAN, 201

We have had occasion to refer to the conquests of that monarch
which are recorded on the Allahabad pillar and which included
both hKafici and Vengi. It was presumably after his return from
his expedition to the south that Samudragupta decided to celebrate
his dig-vijaya by means of the ancient rite of the horse-
sacrifice (agvamedha) and that the gold medal was struck in
commemoration thereof. It shows the sacrificial horse standing
in front of the y ipa to which itis tied. The scale is, of course,
too small to bring out all the details, but the ytiipa has a
distinctly curved shape, whilst pennons attached to the top of
it fly over the back of the victim. Another memorial of Samu-
dragupta’s horse-sacrifice is extant in a quaint stone horse of
life size which was excavated about 1890 near an ancient fort on
the border between Oudh and Nepal and has since been preserved
in the Lucknow Museum. The fragmentary Prakrit inscription
it bore, when discovered (...ddha-guttassa deyadhamma),
has unfortunately disappeared owing to exposure to the weather.
As the stone horse of Lucknow was meant to commemorate a sacri-
fice, it may be said to belong to the same category of monuments as
the stone y & pas under discussion, although in the present instance
it was not the sacrificial post but the victim itself which was
fashioned in stone to serve as a lasting memorial of the oblation.

Finally I wish to draw attention to a curious pillar, described
as a yiipa-stambha, which stands wear the Kodandarama
temple at the village of Hirimagalar in Mysore. Mr. Narasim-
hachar, archaeological officer in Mysore State, who published a
photo of this monument in his Annual Report, describes it as
‘a stone pillar, about 9 feet high, with the top fashioned like
a trident or spear». The top portion which is pointed and
appears to be slightly curved, has indeed some resemblance to
a spear-head. The three grooves converging towards the pointed
top which are plainly visible on the published photograph, probably
suggested the term strident» in the above description. The
thick-set shaft, which is square beneath, octagonal in the middle
and rounded above, is provided with a distinct top-ring (c asala)
which is surmounted by the pointed top first described. Though
considerably differing in detail, the Hirimagaltir pillar shows in
its general appearance a certain resemblance to the ‘Tsapur
columns. So we may perhaps assume that in the present case
also there has been an intention to imitate the wooden ya pa.


=== [PDF Page 259 | Journal Page 202] ===
2 THE YaPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN.

There is unfortunately no inscription to enlighten us regarding
its history. Popular tradition, with a characteristic disregard
of the limitations of time and space, believes it to commemorate
the famous serpent sacrifice of the Pandava king Janamejaya:

If now we turn our attention again to the four monumental
ytipas from hoetei, we notice a very striking point of difference
between them and some of the allied monuments from the
Indian continent. From their general appearance it is evident
that here we have not copies of the wooden yipa of the
Vedic ritual. They are described as four roughly dressed stones
of irregular shape, measuring respectively 1 m.87 (A), 1m. 55 (B),
1 m. 69 (C) and 1 m. 21 (D) in height. The material is fine
andesite. Their width varies from o.m. 27 to o.m. 38. ¢

It we remember that the ‘Tsapur pillars measure about 5 meters
in height, whilst their width is nearly the same as that of the
Koetei stones, it will be seen that, both as regards size and
shape, there is no similarity whatever between the two sets of
monuments. May we, perhaps, venture to conclude that at the
sacrifices to which the hoetei inscriptions refer no yapas of
the type prescribed in the Vedic ritual were in use? Had such
sacrificial posts been known in the island of Borneo, we might
have found them imitated in the stone monuments. The masons
who produced the beautiful inscriptions would certainly not have
lacked the ability to fashion the stones too, if required, into
the prescribed shape. But obviously no such attempt was made.

That the Koetei stones do represent sacrificial posts is definitely
stated in the inscriptions. This alone would be sufficient to
establish the Brahmanical character of these monuments. For it
is well known that the Buddhists reject the animal sacrifice;
sacrificial posts have consequently no place in their worship.
Besides, the inscriptions mention that the erection of these

yiipas was due to the assembled — twice-born- priests, on
whom hing Milavarman had bestowed rich gifts in gold, cattle
and land. Here fagain, therefore, we meet with those Brahmins
who had carried their ancient civilisation and religion to Borneo
as well as to Java and Sumatra.

Another question which presents itself is whether these monu-
ments can be assigned to a special sect of Hinduism. To this

1 Brandes, Catalogue Batarin Musewn, p. 372.


=== [PDF Page 260 | Journal Page 203] ===
THE VOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN. 203

question the inscriptions give no definite answer. They do not
mention (as is often done in copper-plate charters) whether the
royal donor was a (‘aiva or a Vaisnava. Nor does his own name
or that of his father afford any indication as to the peculiar
creed which they confessed.

Inscription B, however, contains an expression which, perhaps,
may be interpreted so as to give a clue to the question here
raised. It is the word Vaprakegvara which occurs in the 4" line.
Professor Kern rightly observed that from the at the end of
the immediately preceding word dattam it follows that the
initial of Vaprakegvara was not @ but 4 in pronunciation.
But I must confess that my predecessor's conjectural rendering
of the word as «sacred fire (= Agni)+ does not satisfy me. It
will be seen that in the third line of the same inscription the
estampage here published very clearly shows the word ksetre,
whereas in the facsimile accompanying Professor Kern's article
the vowel-mark belonging to the first aksara of this word had
been left out. We, therefore, have to read punyvatame
ksetre, meaning in the most blessed fields.' If we further
connect this expression with the word Vaprakegvare in the
next line (both words, it will be noticed, are in the locative
case), it is obvious that Vaprakecvara must be a proper name
designating the sacred place or the sanctuary which witnessed
Miilavarman's munificence to the ¢twice-born.. If my interpre-
tation is correct, we may infer from the word igvara, which
is the second member of the compound, that Vaprakegvara was
the name of a spot or a temple (or perhaps both)? sacred to
the Lord» (ig¢vara) i.e. Civa. This conclusion is to a certain
extent corroborated by the circumstance that the Hindu images
which have come to light in various localities of the island of
Borneo appear largely to pertain to the Caiva Pantheon. *

1 That the Sanskrit word ksetra meaning ,.a field” is also used in the
sere of wa sacred place’ is evident from the Amaravati pillar inseription
(now Madias Museum) edited by Hultzseh, South Indian Inser, vol. Lp 27,
Lobes op. 2s. It here stands for punvaksetra ,.a field of religious
merit”, an expression which oceurs in an Eastern Calukya grant edited by
Hultzseh, op. eit, vol. I. p. 36, 1 97.

2 M. Barth says with regard to Indo-China: ,,Beaucoup de noms de dieux
sont aussi des noms de lieux”. Tins remark 1s also true of India proper.

3 AL W. Nieuwenhiis, Quer durch Borneo (Leiden 1907.) vol Tl, pp 114
sq., plate X (showing five stone sculptures including a small-size Nandi and
a dinga. found at the contlnenve of the Mahakkam and the Rata rivers).



=== [PDF Page 261 | Journal Page 204] ===
Lod THE YOPA INSCKIPLEONS Ob RING MOD AV ARMAN

We may perhaps go a step further and recall a curious custom
in connection with the naming of temples te which we have
already had occasion to refer in the course of this paper. In
naming temples dedicated to Civa it was a common practice
to couple the founder's name with the word igvara («the Lord ),
by which that deity is often indicated. The prevalence of this
custom in Kashmir is evident from numerous instances quoted
in Kalhana’s famous chronicle Rajatarangini. Thus we read
of two Civa temples which were ascribed to the great Acoka
and which consequently were known by the name of Agokegvara. !

The same custom of nomenclature prevailed both in Southern
India and in Indo-China. It is exactly during the period of
Pallava ascendancy that several instances testify to its existence
in Coromandel. Here we find the word igvara usually com-
bined not with the founder's actual name, but with one of his
birudas. Thus the early cave temple at Dalavanir in the South
Arcot district bears an inscription which in a single Sanskrit
cloka records that the cave was caused to be excavated by
Narendra Catrumalla after whom it was called Catrumallec-
varalava ‘the abode of Catrumallecvara-. The inscription on the
rock-cut shrine at Civamangalam in the same district mentions
that it was founded by Lalitaikura and named Avanibhajana-
Pallavegvara. Now it appears that Catrumalla, Lalitankura and
Avanibhajana are all birudas of the Pallava king Mahendra-
varman TI.

In the same manner the largest of the five so-called raths
at Mavalivaram which popular tradition associates with Dhar-
maraja (7s. Yudhisthira) is called in two inscriptions ('ri-
Atyantakéma-Pallavegvara-grha{m] and Atyantakama-
Pallavegvara-grham, meaning «the Igvara (Civa) temple of
Atyantakama-Pallava». As we saw above, Aty antakama is supposed
by Professor Hultzsch to be a biruda of the Pallava king Nara-
simhavarman I, the conqueror of Vatapi. There are two other

A hist of antiquities trom Koetei 1s given by Mr. UW. Witkamp (Tydschrist
1h Kon, Ned. Aardrijkskundig Genootschap. vol. XXXL 1914) pp. 805 syq.
They include sub hk a Nandi, perhaps trom Seboeloe, and sub x a (iva
image of uncertain provenance but perhaps trom Koetei. Both are preserved
in the Batavia Museum Cf. also Oudheidkundig Verslag, Oudheidk. Dienst in
Nederl. Indie, WL (4h Quarter) pp. 140--153.

'Kalhana’s Rajatarangini, a Chronicle of the Kings of Kasmir,
transl, by M. A. Stein, vol I. p. 20 (1, 106 and footnote)


=== [PDF Page 262 | Journal Page 205] ===
THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN. 205

temples at Mavalivaram, the Ganega temple and the so-called
Dharmaraja-mandapa which are likewise designated as Atyan-
takama-Pallavegvara-grha, but here the name is believed
to refer to Narasimhavarman's grandson, Paramecvaravarman.
The Tiger Cave at (aluvanguppam is described in an inscription
as «the Iovara temple of Atiranacanda». This is supposed to
be a biruda of Nandivarman. The Ktram copper-plate grant
mentions a prince of the name of Vidyavinita—Pallavadhiraja ,
after whom the local Civa temple was called Vidyavinita-
Pallava-Paramegvara. In the ancient Pallava capital Con-
jeeveram there still exists the main temple in which Civa is
worshipped under the title of Kaildsanatha, «Lord of Mount
Kailasa~ (the Indian Olympos), but, as we have seen, the original
name of that famous shrine was Rajasimha-Pallavegvara,
as it was founded by the Pallava king Narasimhavarman II, who
was also called Rajasimha,

The same habit with regard to the nomenclature of temples
prevailed in the ancient Hindu States of Indo-China, as has been
duly noticed both by Bergaigne and by M. Finot. The former
refers to the existence of this custom both in Campa and ham-
bodia. «C'est un usage constant, M. Finot says, -de designer
le Civa de chaque sanctuaire par le nom d'Igvara precedé de
la premiére partie du nom du roi fondateur. ' We have already
had occasion to note an instance in the Bhadregvara temple,
the remains of which are found near the village of Mi-so'n.

If now we meet with a term Baprakegvara in one of the
Koetei inscriptions, we feel naturally inclined to take it to bea
similar formation as those quoted from Sanskrit inscriptions in
Southern India and Indo-China. A serious obstacle, however,
in the way of such an explanation is that, whereas in all the

instances enumerated above we could at once recognize the
founder’s name in the first member of the compound, the word
vapraka does not even present the appearance of a personal
name. On the other hand, it must be admitted that it is
equally hard to account for it as an appellativum.

It was noticed by Professor Kern in the course of his paper
that the term Baprakecvara is also met with in Old-Javanese
records. Dr. Krom has been good enough to supply me with

\ Bergaigne,
sol. TIL, 1908, p. 207.

Sanserites, p 20 “2007, n° 3. Finot, BOE FL BO,



=== [PDF Page 263 | Journal Page 206] ===
200 THE VORA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOL AV ARMAN

further information on this point. Baprakeevara . he writes,
vecurs repeatedly in Old-Javanese inscriptions, namely in the
passage in which a number of deities are invoked as witnesses
on the occasion of some pious foundation. The term must
indicate a locality or sanctuary. The formula mentions in the
first instance: bhatdra i cri Baprake¢vara, or, more
commonly kamung hyang (= ‘ye gods , always in the plural)
igri Baprakegvara, meaning ye gods at Baprakeevara . The
particle 7 is but rarely omitted, «... in the spurious Kawi Record
n’ Hl, quoted by Kern, and in one other instance. Unless this
omission be merely due to the mason, the word may here be
taken to be in the Genitive case: hyvang Baprakecvara
(cri is omitted here and elsewhere) = ve gods of B. In all
other examples we find the word preceded by the particle 7.
Now the question is whether the names of deities immediately
following are to be taken as a more precise definition of those
‘gods at B. or are to be regarded as an entirely new category
of divine beings. These names, it should be noticed, are not
always the same. In one instance I found Brahma Visnu
Mahadeva, but usually we have either Agasti maharsi,
or gri Haricandana Agasti maharyi».

Dr. Krom further informs me that in an Old-Javanese inscrip-
tion of Caka 830 mention is made of a sanctuary which bears
a name ending in igvara. The passage in question has kapijan
bhatara i Mankucgegvara adoration to the gods (or gods)
at Mankugegvara . There exists no reason to assume that the
first member of the compound indicates the founder's name.

In connection with the above question it would, of course,
be of the utmost importance to examine the spot where the
four inscribed yipas have come to light. For if that locality
could be proved to contain the remains of a temple dedicated
to Civa, the proposed interpretation of Vaprakegvara would
greatly gain in probability. There would, moreover, be a chance
of some further epigraphical documents being found to settle
the question definitely. Now it is much to be deplored that such
an investigation ez /eco appears to be impracticable in view of
the circumstance that a great deal of uncertainty prevails regarding
the exact provenance of the inscribed stones. It will not be out
of place to consider the available data.


=== [PDF Page 264 | Journal Page 207] ===
THE YOUPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN. 207

We have seen above that, after Mr. Holle had first drawn
attention to the existence of inscribed stones in the Sultanate of
Koetei, the <Assistant-Resident in his letter of 9" Sept. 1879
informed the Batavian Society that the inscribed stones in
question together with some other relics of the Hindu period
did exist at Moeara Kaman. This village, as the name implies,
is situated at the confluence of the Mahakkam river with its
tributary the Kaman. It lies at a distance of three stages above
Pélarang. In his subseguent letter, however, dated Poth
August of the following year, the Assistant-Resident wrote that
the stones had xof been found at Moeara Kaman, but at Koetei
Lama(+Old Koetei_),a locality not very far from the northernmost
mouth of the Mahakkam river. This place, as its name indicates ,
had been the seat of government of the sultans of NKoetei, but
on account of its being exposed to piracy and subject to
kidnapping raids had been abandoned for Ténggaroeng (Tengarung)
which is situated higher up the river. The stones, it was said,
had been accidentally found on a spot in the immediate neigh-
bourhood of the site of the Kraton (the citadel) in the course
of a search for treasure, reported to be buried there, which
the Sultan had ordered to be made, but without succes. One
of the stones had been found at a depth of 16 meters [s/c]
under the surface. It was added that His Highness was not in
the possession of any antiquities from Moeara Kaman and that
the reports regarding such antiquities were very conflicting, but
that the Assistant-Resident intended, when an occasion should
occur, to make personal inquiries locally and would not fail to
communicate the result to the Society.

The promised further communication apparently never arrived.
There exist, however, some other references to this question
which render it very doubtful whether the last-mentioned report,
however accurate seemingly, may be accepted as trustworthy.
In his description of the Koetei subdivision, published in 1905,
Mr. S. C. Knappert deals with the question of the provenance
of the four inscribed stones.' After quoting the Assistant-Resident’s
letter of 26™ August 1880, he expressed his astonishment at the
assertion it contains that the Sultan did not possess any anti-

' Bijdragen rh Kon. Inst. v. Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunds tan Ned -fute.
Mh Series. vol. TV (1905) pp. 576 squ.



=== [PDF Page 265 | Journal Page 208] ===
20s TIED VORA INSCKIPTIONS OL KING MOLAVARMAN.

quities from Moeara Kaman, in view of the fact that two
objects — a gold Visnu statuette and a gold tortoise — were known
to have come from that place The author had <cen those two
objects with his own eves, and no less a personage than the
Suitan himself (the son and successor of the prince reigning
in 1580) had assured him that they had been found at Moeara
Kaman. His Highness had never spoken to him ot any antiquities
from Koetei Lama

After reading Mr. Knappert’s remarks, anvone slightly acquainted
with the East will know how to interpret the report regarding
the discovery of the inscriptions contained in the Assistant
Resident's letter of 26" August 1880. Evidently that official had
been misinformed with the express purpose of concealing the
fact that Moeara Kaman had yielded not only the inscribed
slabs in question but also some minor antiquities of precious
metal which had been deposited in the State Treasury.

The finding of the antiquities referred to by Mr. Knappert
is also mentioned by two previous writers, H von Dewall !
who visited Moeara Kaman in 1847 and S. W. Tromp who
passed the place in the course of his travel in the interior of
Koetei in the year 1885. The former writes: On the 20" April
"18474 arrived at Moeara Kaman, a kampong of thirty-nine
houses and /extings (rafts) situated at the confluence of the
river of the same name “i.e. the Kaman] and the Mahakam,

on the left bank of both. Here are found a number of stone
slabs ? piled up under ground. It was on this spot also that
the idol of massive gold, weighing 8 thal, was discovered,
which the Sultan wears round his neck on State occasions. This
image is four-armed, well proportioned and of good workmanship
and seems to represent some god of Hindu mythology. The.
youthful. prince, moreover, wears beneath this idol another
golden, box-shaped object on which various mythological figures
_of the Hindu religion are shown in a@lto-re/ievo. The same appears
to be of higher antiquity than the golden image, but, like the

1H. von Dewall in A. L. Weddiks, Oversigt ran het ryk can Koetei (Indisch
Arehief. vol. I. y 93) 8. W. Tromp Ji. Een re’s naar de borenlanden van
Koetei 11 Aug.—15 Sept. Issh1. (Lydsehrif? Batariaaseh Genvots hap, vol.
XXNIT (1999) p. 276

2 The rei flagstone iyvlocrsteen™) used by the author would seem to

Indieate thar the shubs iiade parr of a pavement


=== [PDF Page 266 | Journal Page 209] ===
THE \GPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING M{iLAVARMAN. 209

idol, it was discovered beneath the stone slabs in the reign of
Sultan Muhammad Siélih-ud-Din>. !

In Mr. Tromp’s itinerary we read the following: «At 10.15
we passed Moeara Kaman. Several years ago some Hindu anti-
quities were found here, including a beautiful golden statuette
which now belongs to the State insignia. On my previous visit
to the place in the company of the Sultan we made a hundred
men dig in order to make a further search for similar curiosities,
but without result. We only found at a depth of ten feet bricks
and pot-sherds evidently belonging to an early period .

Recently the provenance of the ytipa stones has been dis-
cussed again by the mining engineer, Mr. H. Witkamp ?, who,
in the course of an excursion to the caves of Goenoeng Kombeng,
used the opportunity, on his way back to the coast, to visit
both Moeara Kaman and Koetei Lama. .\t the former place
he examined the site where excavations had been made by Mr.
Ss. W. Tromp. The traces of those diggings were still plainly
marked by depressions, but of actual remains nothing was to
be seen except a pillar of volcanic stone and a few sandstone
slabs mostly in a broken condition. According to local reports
a great number of such stones had been removed to the capital,
Tengarong, where they had been utilized for paving. After his
arrival at that place, however, Mr. Witkamp did not find anything
to confirm that report. On a subsequent visit to the old capital,
Koetei Lama, no remains of the pre-Mahomedan period were
noticed. On the whole, Mr. Witkamp is inclined to assume
that the four inscribed stones actually came from Moeara Kaman. *

The question is, however, far from settled. What renders
it stil more complicated is the circumstance that there is a
third locality by which the discovery may be claimed. Carl

1 Tn Mr. von Dewall’s spelling: Mohhammad Tsalehh Oedien

1 Tijdschrift v. h. Kon. Nederl. Aardrijkskundig Genootschap , vol. XXNT(1914),
pp 7 sqq (esp. pp. 601—607).

3 In the Catalogue of the Batavia Museum (Batavia 1887) p 372. Moeara
Kaman is said to be the find-place of the four inscribed yipas. In the
Voorloopige Lyst van Oudheden in de Buitenbezittingen, published in the Oud-
heidkundiy verslag, Oudheutk. dienst van Ned.-Indie for 19d 3" Quarter), p
150, the four stones are registered unde: Koetei Lama. But Dr. Kium who

compiled that list writes me that chietly on account of Mr. Witkamp’s
communication he now considers Moears Kaman as the more likely find-

place of the inseriptions.
Di. 74. it


=== [PDF Page 267 | Journal Page 210] ===
210 THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN,

Bock ' mentions three large inscribed slab» which had been
found at Sangoelirang [read: Sangkoelirang, situated on the
coast, 14° north of the mouth of the Mahakkam] and which were
in the possession of the Sultan. Mr. Witkamp, while quoting this
report, suggests that these slabs may be identical with the
stone yiipas subsequently presented by H. H. to the Batavian
Society. This supposition is, no doubt, correct, for in the
Proceedings of the Society for S™ June L880 (p. 98) we find
recorded that Mr. Carl Bock had submitted «the drawing of a
standing Buddha image from Kota Bangau * (Koetei), and the
eyve-copy of an inscription on a Hindu monument in the vicinity
of Sang Bélirang, the character of the inscription being similar
to that of the inscribed stones at Djamboe, Tjiroenten (Buitenzorg)
and Bekasih». Now the eve-copy prepared by Mr. Bock which
is still preserved at Batavia is indeed, as Dr. Krom informs me,
a copy of one of the vipa inscriptions which form the subject
of the present paper. It follows that the names Sangoelirang»
and “Sang Bélirang> indicate one and the same place. The
only question is whether Mr. Bock was rightly informed that
the stones had come from that locality. Taking il all into con-
sideration, [ should say that Moeara Kaman has the strongest
claim.

From the various accounts quoted above it may be gathered
that, apart from the question of the origin of the inscribed
ytipas, Moeara Kaman must be an ancient site of some im-
portance. It is, therefore, highly desirable that it be examined
by an expert archaeologist. Mr. Witkamp, it is true, doubts
whether fresh excavations will yield any results in view of the
extent to which the soil has been disturbed by previous diggings.
It is certainly very much to be deplored that in bygone years
the site has been spoilt by unauthorized persons with the
inevitable consequence that here as elsewhere valuable evidence
has been irreparably lost. But it is perhaps not altogether
unreasonable to hope that the eve of the expert will still
succeed in detecting something of importance which has escaped
the notice of previous amateur explorers.

1 Carl Bock, Reis in Oost- en Zuid-Borneo, p 30. Notulen Batariaasch Genoot-
schap, vol. XVIIT (1880), p. 93.

2? Read: Kota Bangoen. The place is situated onthe Mahakkam river above
Moeara Kaman.


=== [PDF Page 268 | Journal Page 211] ===
THE YfiPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVAKMAN. Pit

There are other sites in Koetei which still await a detailed
survey by an archaeologist. In the first place there are the caves
of Goenoeng Kombeng which contain a collection of Hindu images.
These images appear to have been put in safety there at some
remote period, but in all probability belonged originally to
some temple or temples, the remains of which may still be
extant at no great distance. At any rate, the images themselves
deserve to be described and photographed. A close examination
would perhaps reveal some inscription. We are, no doubt,
indebted to Mr. Witkamp for the account he has given us of
those curious relics of Hinduism, but he will be the first to
admit that the hasty sketch accompanying his paper is insufficient
and does not enable us either to judge of their artistic merit
or to identify them.

The only one out of the ten images in Mr. Witkamp's sketch
which it is possible to identify with absolute certainly is his
figure f which shows the familiar type of the elephant-headed
Ganega, four-armed and seated cross-legged. The four-armed
seated figure 7 is possibly a Visnu holding a conch (Sanskrit
gankha) in his upper right hand, and a wheel (Sanskrit cakra)
in the corresponding left hand. Fig. 7, standing with his left
hand leaning on a club, Mr. Witkamp describes as a Raksasa.
The head figured in 7 may, of course, belong to one of the
three headless images (a, 6, or ¢). As it has four faces, we
may perhaps assume that it belongs to a Brahma image. Besides
the ten images figured in his plate, Mr. Witkamp also noteda
Nandi which would point to the existence of a Civa temple. !
It was observed above (p. 203, n. 3) that in other places of
the island of Borneo Nandi images have been noticed.

Borneo is a practically unexplored field of antiquarian research
and no one can tell what discoveries it still has in store.

Before giving my transcripts and translations of the yipa
inscriptions, attention may be drawn to their very fine execution
which testifies to a remarkable ability on the part of the masons.

1H. Witkamp, op. cit. pp. 595 sqq. Dr. Krom, Voorloopige Lijst p.
n° 204 identifies also a Karttikeya, probably in Mr. Witkamp’s fig. i showing
a seated male deity with what indeed appears to be the head of a peacock
(the viihana of Kirttikeya) to his left. Dr. Krom states that three Viva
images from Goenoeng Kombeng haye been removed to the Batavia Museum,



=== [PDF Page 269 | Journal Page 212] ===
212 THE YG&PA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING Mil AWARMAN

The letters are large-sized and very clearly cut so that the
reading of the inscriptions «1, 2 and C may be said to be absolutely
certain, In inscription A which consists of twelve lines the letters
are the largest in size. The single aksaras like pe and ma
measure 2.5 centimeters in height, akyaras with long verticals
like 4a and ra 6 to 7 centimeters, and ligatures like ¢ri 0
centimeters. For inscription #, which has eight lines, these

figures are 2 to 2

5 and S centimeters respectively. The
aksaras of C are again »omewhat smaller, they measure
2, 4, 5 and 7 centimeters respectively. The number of lines
is the same as in B. As far as we can judge from the little
that remains of /), it appears that here the letters are smallest
in size, the single ak yaras measuring 1.5 to 2.5 and 4 to 5
centimeters. Dr. Brandes states that inscription ) must originally
have consisted of eleven lines. | From the first two lines. however,
which, except for a few akyaras. can still be made out, it
appears that this inscription, like 4 and 2, is composed in
glokas (anustubh), so that the number of lines, in all pro-
bability, amounted to twelve.

The inscriptions are remarkable for their preservation with the
exception of D, the lettering of which is defaced to such an
extent that hitherto no attempt has been made to decipher it.

It will be seen that I have changed the order of the inscrip-
tions as given by my predecessor so as to give the first place to
the one which is both largest in size and most important on
account of its contents. In my transcripts I have noted any
points in which my readings and renderings differ from those
of the previous editor.

I now proceed to give my transcripts and translations of the
inscriptions.

Iuseription A (Kern's n° 11) Text.

(1) crimatah cri-narendrasya

2

(2) Kundungasya ? mahatmanah

' Cat. Batavia Museum, p

2? Kern read Kundangasya IT take the very pronounced down stroke
at the bottom of the aksgara to represent the vowel-mark for medial u. The
ligature nda occurs in mandalena (Mangalfir grant II 6, |. 1.) and in
mandalasya (Uruvupalli grant Ia, 1.1 and Wkira grant Ila, 1 4). The
aksara ndu is found in Kundukira (Uruvupall: grant {11 6, 1. 3 and
IV a, l. 1). In the inscriptions of Kambodia neither of these two ligatures
appears to ocenr (Barth, fustr. Sanscrites du Cambedge, p. 4 sq.



=== [PDF Page 270 | Journal Page 213] ===
THE YGPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARM. 213

(3) putro ¢vavarmmo ' vikhyatah
(4) vancakartta vathanguman

(5) tasya putra mahatmanah

(6) travas = traya ivagnayah

(7) tesin = trayanam = pravarah
(8) tapo-bala-damanvitah

(9) gri-Malavarmma rajendro ?
(10) yastva ? bahusuvarnnakam
(11) tasya yajfiasva vipo yam
(12) dvijendrais

samprakalpitah
Translation.

‘The illustrious lord-of-men, the great Kundunga, had a
famous * son, Agvavarman [41 xame], who, like unto Amcumant, >
was the founder of a noble race. His were three eminent sons
resembling the three sacrificial fires. Foremost * amongst these
three and distinguished by austerity, strength, and self-restraint 7
was the illustrious Mtlavarman, the lord-of-kings. who had
sacrificed a Bahusuvarnaka * sacrifice. For that sacrifice this
sacrificial post has been prepared by the chief amongst the
twice-born». *

1 Kern has evavarmunii; ef. the facsimile.

trajendrah (Kern.

% In Kern's facsimile the subscribed va has been omitted. He according-
Iv read: yayti. The correct form would be istva.

$ The past participle vikhyatah can, of course, also simply mean
named”, as Kern has rendered it.

> Aineumant «the Radiant one’) 15 an epithet of the Sun-god, and is
here taken by Kern in this sense. It is, however, also the personal name of
the grandson of Sagara who 1s mentioned in the first lme of inscription
D. Both the Sun-god and Sagara’s grandson mav be described as progenitors.

6 As Kern has pointed out, the word pravara means as well .,foremost
in age (tz. eldest)” as ..foremost in rank or excellence “

7 The compound tapo-bala-daminvita may also be interpreted in a
slightly different manner, as Kern does, by making tapas subordinate to
bala It then would mean: .distinguished bv (lt. provided with) the power
of austerity and by self restraint.”

» Kern takes bahusuvarnaka to be synonymous with bahuhiranyva
which is the designation of a special kind of Soma sacrifice. Hultzsch notes
that the expression often occurs in inscriptions. Ep Ind. vol. IV, 1s96—97,
p. 194, n° 3.

® The term ,twice-born” ‘Sanskrit dvija, dvijatt, dvijanman) is
really applicable to all Aryans, as the initiation which is symbolised by the
investment with the sacred thread is regarded as a second birth. But com-
monly as in the present instance it is applied in particular to the members
of the Brahmanical or priestly caste



=== [PDF Page 271 | Journal Page 214] ===
214 THE VORA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MGLAVARVAN,
Inscription B. (Kern's IIT) Transcript

(1) crimate nrpamukhyasya
rajfiah ' ¢ri-Milavarmmanah.
(3) dinam ? punyatame ksetre '
(4) vad = dattam =Vaprakecvare
5) dvijatibhyo gnikalpebhyah +
6) vincatir = ngosahasrikam *
7) tasya punvasya yipo vam
bs

3) krto viprair = ihagatai[h
Translation,

When the illustrious and eminent prince, King Malavarman,
had given a gift of a thousand kine and a score to the twice-
born who resemble the sacrificial fre, at the most blessed field
»

— for that deed of merit this sacrificial
post has been made by the priests who had come hither».

“named Vaprakecvara,

Inscription C. (Kern's i’ 1) Transcript.

(1) crimad-viraja-kirtteh

(2) rajiah 7? ¢ri- Milavarmmanah punyam
(5) crnvantu vipramukhyah

(4) ve canye sadhavah purusah

(5) bahudana-jivadanam

(©) sakalpavrksam sabhtmidanaii = ca
(7) tesdm = punyagananam

(8) yaipo yam sthapito vipraih

1 Kern has rv

Laie)
£ Kern has ja?) ta
Io Kern's jaesimile the vowel mark of the firs

ak ara of this word
had been left out. He accordingly read kgatie and followed this reading
in his translation.

* gnikalpasya’h ain Kern's reading, the vowel mark im the third
akyara having been omitted. In his translation Kern accordingly connected
the word with the Genitive Milavarmmanah.

5 ggosahasrikam (Mern).

6 On the meaning of Vaprakevyvara (pronounced Baprakecvara, ef.
above, pp. 203 sq.1

7 Here as in Bl 2 Kern read raja). In both cases the visarga which
had been oinitted in his facsimile, 1s distinctly visible in the estampages which
were supplied to me by Dr. Bosch.



=== [PDF Page 272 | Journal Page 215] ===
THE YUPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN. 215
Translation.

«Let the foremost amongst the priests and whatsoever other
pious men ‘there de} hear of the meritorious deed of Mtlavarman,
the king of illustrious and resplendent fame — [lef them hear]
of his great gift, his gift of cattle(?)', his gift of a wonder-
tree, ? his gift of land. For these multitudes of pious deeds
this sacrificial post has been set up by the priests.»

Inscription D. Transcript.

(1) Sagarasya yatha rajfiah
(2) Samutpanno Bhagirathah
(3) .

(4) Malavarmma

Translation.

As Bhagiratha was born of King Sagara
Miilavarman.

The four inscriptions of Milavarman are all composed in
Sanskrit poetry. Inscription 4 consists of three stanzas in the
anustubh metre, B of two stanzas in the same metre and C
of two stanzas in the arya metre. We saw that in D too the

1 The term jivaddana is known trom Sanskiit literature only as the
title of a work on medicine. But probably Kern was right in taking it here
in the sense of ,a gift of live animals”. It could also refer to the inhabitant»
of the land granted to the Brahmins Cf jivaloka ,the world of living
creatures.”

2 The mention of ‘a wishing-tree’ (kalpaverksa) among the gifts of
Milavarman is somewhat surprising, as such an object belongs to the realm
of mythology. It is the wonder-tree which fullfills all wishes. Kern supposed
it to mean here a tree laden with precious things. a kind of Christmas tree.
As far as I am aware, however, there is no indication of such trees having
been known in ancient India. It is not unusual in Sanskrit inscriptions that
the royal donor himself is compared to a kalpa-druima or wishing-tree.
e. g. in the Udayendiram grant in which the Pallava king Nandivarman is
said to be ,,devoted [to liberalityjas the Kalpaka/tree}” (kalpakavratah)
and called ,u Kalpa tree to good men” (satim kalpavrakgah ([l.
ovrkyah]) S. 2 vol IT, p. 367, verses 29 and 31. —- In the Mangalar
grant (1. 6) the epithets anantakalpadayin ,,who gratified endless de-
sires’ and anantakalpa .who performed an endless number of rites” are
apphed to the donor’s grandfather Skandavarman. (/nd. Ant. vol. V, p. 155).
Possibly the mention of the kalpavrkya in the present inscription is due
to a misunderstanding of such-like adjectives.



=== [PDF Page 273 | Journal Page 216] ===
Lie THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOL AVAKAMAN,

anustubh metre was employed, presumably the number of
stanzas amounted to three, as is the casein ./. It will be noticed
that the verses are arranged on the stone in such a manner
that each pada occupies one line.

As regards their form, these inscriptions bear a certain
resemblance to some of the cave inscriptions of the Pallava
king Mahendravarman I, namely those of Mahendravadi and
Dalavanir, in which we find one stanza of poetry (in the
kokilaka and anustubh metre respectively), each pada
occupying a separate line. In the Ci

admangalam cave inscription

of the same king we have a single ary @ stanza, each half-verse
of which is written in two lines without reference to the sub-
division in pidas. The two Sanskrit verses found in the upper

cave of Trichinopoly consist each of four stanzas composed in
various metres, but in this instance the lines do not correspond
with the padas. Perhaps the agreement noted here will not
seem te be very striking, but it should be borne in mind that
the usual practice in Indian inscriptions is to arrange the lines
without any reference to the verses.

The Sanskrit verses of Malavarman’s inscriptions were qualified
by Professor Kern a> insignificant, but irreproachable . The latter
qualification is, indeed, applicable to them as far as metrical
exigencies are concerned. Grammatically, however, they are
not quite as accurate, as would appear from Kern’s readings.
Ay a matter of fact, that scholar in some cases in which his
facsimiles were indistinct unconsciously corrected grammatical
errors committed bij Milavarman’s pandit. In the third line
of <1 we have clearly the reading gvavarmmo (cf. Miila-
varmma in 1.9), for which Kern substituted the correct form
¢vavarmma. The last word of 1.9 in the same inscription
reads rajendro which, of course, would be perfectly correct,
if we were to apply the samdhi rule in connection with the
word yvastva which forms the commencement of the next
pada. As, however, the author of these inscriptions rightly
regards the caesura as pausa and treats the closing syllable
of each pada accordingly,! he ought here also to have put
rajendrah, the form chosen by Kern in his transcript more

UM. Barth, Insrr sanserites du Cumbodge, p 1. n. 3. calls special attention
to this peculiarity of the Koetei inscriptions.


=== [PDF Page 274 | Journal Page 217] ===
THE YaPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN. D7

serious mistake is the impossible form yastva (4, 1. 10), for
which we must read istvd. In the facsimile accompanying Kern's
article the subscribed wz had been erroneously left out; hence
his reading yasta. In the sixth line of inscription A, I read
with some hesitation vingatirngo®, but it is quite possible
that the strange appearance of the fourth aksara is merely
due to the mason. The form which is given in Kern’s transcript
vingatirggo is, no doubt, what was meant; for it will be
noticed that generally in these inscriptions any consonant com-
bined with + is doubled. ' In the second line of both this and
the following inscription (C) Kern read rajiia(c). In .both
cases the inscriptions have rajhah, but in the previously pu-
~ been
left out. It follows, therefore, that in Mtlavarman’s inscriptions

blished eve-copies the sign for visarga had erroneously

a final sibilant preceding an’ initial sibilant is not retained in
writing, but expressed by visarga.? In the same manner the

signs for jihvamiliyva and upadhmaniya which are used
in some early Sanskrit inscriptions both in India and in Kam-
bodia (the upadhmaniya occurs in one of the rock-inscriptions
of Pirnavarman from Western Java) are here replaced by the
visarga.

Kern has called attention to the substitution of the anusvara
by the guttural nasal before sibilants in the Noetei inscriptions
(vanga’ and anicguman, in A, 14; vingatir in 21. 6), a
peculiarity which, as he pointed out, is found also in Sanskrit
inscriptions from Kambodia. I may add that in India proper
this mistaken spelling is not unusual in Sanskrit inscriptions.
T may quote the Bijayvagarh yt pa inscription, referred to above,
where we find the forms °vinigesu and °vanga®’. +

On the whole, it may be said that, although the Koetei
inscriptions are extremely simple records, if compared with the
extensive and highly artificial pragastis of the Indian continent,
they betray a very fair knowledge of Sanskrit. In this respect
they are decidedly superior to the nearly

contemporaneous

' The consonant is not doubled in putro, iA, Lb 3), putra (4. 1 5),
kyetre (B, |. 3), viprair (BLL 8, yipra®’ iC, 1 3), and vipraih (1. 81.

? On the contrary the final sibilant is retained in dvijendrais 1A, 1. 12)
so that in this respect too the spelling is inconsistent.

8 Fleet, Gupta [nser , pp. 253 sq Cf. also my Jnser. of Chamba State. Part

J, pp. 165 and 18



=== [PDF Page 275 | Journal Page 218] ===
21s THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MiLAVARMAN.

epigraphs of Bhadravarman I of Campa. Both the scholarship
and the workmanship of our y ipa inscriptions bear testimony
to a considerable degree of Hindu culture in Eastern Borneo
during the period to which they belong.

It now remains to consider the important question of the
palaeographical evidence afforded by the Koetei inscriptions.

That the alphabets of the inscriptions of Java and Sumatra»,
Dr. Burnell wrote, ' «present many points of similarity with old
Indian and Pali alphabets was early noticed, and traditions
pointed to Kalinga as the source of the old civilisation of Java,
but proof of the true origin of the Kawi and Javanese alphabets
has only lately been furnished by the discovery of the late Dr.
Cohen Stuart that two Sanskrit inscriptions in W. Java are in
a character identical, so to speak, with that of the Vengi
inscriptions; these very interesting lines are in Sanskrit verse,
and are engraved on rocks at Tjampea and Djamboe, places
not far from Buitenzorg».

The term «Vengi character» was adopted by Kern and has
since been invariably used by Dutch archaeologists to designate
the peculiar script from Southern India which we find employed
in the early Sanskrit inscriptions of the Archipelago. The term
is, no doubt, convenient, but I may point out that later writers
on South-Indian epigraphy like Fleet, Hultzsch and Venkayya
never use it. Nor is it found in Buhler's standardwork on Indian
palaeography.

The document from which Burnell derived the expression
Vengi alphabet» was a copper-plate charter of the Calankayvana
king Vijayanandivarman, the son of Caydavarman, who issued
it in the seventh year of his reign. ? Burnell assigned it to the

' Burnell, Elements? (1875), pp 180 sq. Appendis B. The author points
out in a footnote that Raffles Jaca, vol. I, p. 371) ,,noticed the almost
complete identity of the Kawi and the syuare Pali characters.”

2 After Burnell had discussed the character of this inscription (Elements?
pp. 16 sy. and 135 -q.; plates I & XXIV) Dr. Fleet has edited it with proper
facsimiles (/nd Ant vol V, pp 175 sqq. n° XVIIL) Another charter of the
same dynasty is the Prakrit copper-plate grant of the Culankiyana king,
Vijavadevavarman, who was presumably an ancestor of the two rulers
mentioned in the Sanskrit charter. It was likewise issued from Vengipura.
The alphabet resembles that of the three grants of Simhavarman Pallava
and of the nskrit charter just referred to. It was edited by Hultzsch,
Ep. Ind. vol. IX, 1904—05, pp. 56 sqq.



=== [PDF Page 276 | Journal Page 219] ===
THE YirA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MO&LAVARMAN. 219

fourth century of our era. The Vengi country comprised the
tract on the mouths of the Godavari and Krishna (Kistna) rivers.
It consequently is that portion of the east coast which is
situated between Kalinga on the north and the Pallava kingdom
(Tondainddu) on the south. About the middle of the fourth
century Vengi appears to have been an independent state, as
the Allahabad pragasti of Samudragupta mentions Hastivarman
of Vengi among the princes of the South vanquished by that
emperor. Dr. Burnell thought ‘that the Vengi dynasty which
ruled on the Telugu sea-coast and the Pallavas of the Tamil
coast near what is now Madras, were probably of the same
family.» ' This supposition, however, is not confirmed by the
evidence of the copper-plate grant of Vijayanandivarman, in
which the donor is neither called a Pallava nor is reckoned to
belong to the Brahmanical house (gotra) of Bharadvaja.

This much is certain that in the fifth century the Vengi
country made part of the Pallava empire, as the Pallava king
Simhavarman in one of his charters granted to some Brahmins
the village of Mangaltir in Vengorastra. It probably remained in
the possession of the Pallavas till the beginning of the seventh
century. For we have seen above (p.176) that in the course of
the war between Mahendravarman I and Pulikegin II Caélukya
the latter wrested the Vengi country from his opponent and
established his younger brother Visnuvardhana as yuvardja
in the conquered territory. This happened in A. D. 615. Sub-
sequently Visnuvardhana made himself independent and thus
founded the Eastern Calukya empire which remained in existence
for five centuries at least. *

It was probably on account of this historical connection be-
tween the Calukyas and the Vengi country that Dr. Brandes
used the term Calukya or Vengt type to indicate the script
of the Koetei and contemporaneous inscriptions of the Archi-
pelago. ?
objection. The connection between the Calukyas and Vengi, as

The use of this expression, however, is open to

we saw, dates only from the commencement of the seventh
century, whereas the early Sanskrit records of Java and Borneo

1 Burnell, Elements. p. 131.

2 (f. Fleet, The Chronology of the Eastern Calukya hings \{nd Ant. vol XX,
1d91, pp. 93 sqy.

3 (qt, Batavia Museum, » 851.


=== [PDF Page 277 | Journal Page 220] ===
een THE VOP\ INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN

are about two centuries anterior. Moreover, it will be evident
from the above that during the period with which we are here
chiefly concerned the early kings of Vengi never wielded a
political power equal to that of their neighbours, the Pallavas,
to whom, indeed, the Vengi territory appears at a time to
have been subordinate. Nor have they left any inscriptions or
monuments of importance. !

It will be advisable, in my opinion. entirely to discard the
term Vengi alphabet. from the terminology used by writers
on Javanese epigraphy and to substitute for it the expression
-Pallava alphabet . For of all ancient scripts of Southern India
it is the character employed in the early records of the Pallava
rulers that shows the nearest approach to that of the Koetei
and contemporaneous Javanese epigraphs. This is by no means
a new observation: Dr. Burnell had in reality arrived at the
same conclusion, though he expresses it somewhat differently.
*~Now if the character-, he wrote ®, used in the W. Java in-
scriptions [those from hoetei were not yet known at the time
when this was written] be compared with that of the Vengi
and Pallava inscriptions, it will at once be seen that it is
nearest to the last . For these reasons , he continued, «it ap-
pears to me that the source of the primitive Hindu civilisation
in Java must be looked for in the N. Tamil coast, rather than
in Kalinga proper, or the Telugu sea-coast; to seek it in Bengal
is out of the question, and it is also impossible to seek it
directly in Western India, though that is the ultimate source
of all S. Indian civilisation of which we have any traces».

Professor Buhler, in dealing with the various ancient alphabets
of Southern India, applies the term -Grantha> to the script
used in the Sanskrit records of the Pallava dynasty. ? The

.

1 Mr. R. Sewell remarks .,ft does not appear that the kingdom of
Vengi was at any period one of very great importance”. See his Lists of
antiynurian remains in the Presidency of Madras Vol. 1, Madras 1882 (Archi.
Survey of Southern India. N. 1.8. vol VID, p36.

ments, p. 182. Elsewhere (p. 35) Dr Burnell used for the Pallava
character the not very appropriate term “Eastern Cera’, as he assumed that
this alphaber had been introduced into Tondainadn trom the Cera country.

3G. Buhler, /ndische Palaeographie (1494, pp. 6S sqq (Fleet’s transl. (1904),
pp. 70 syq)}. We have seen that Buhler ‘ibidem, p. 44: Fleet p. 1) classes
the alphabet of the Pallava Prakrit grants under ,,the precursors of the
southern alphabets” He even remarks that .the characters of the Sanskrit



=== [PDF Page 278 | Journal Page 221] ===
TIE YUPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MO@LAVARMAN, 221

Grantha (meaning a composition, a text, a literary work»),
in the ordinary acceptation of the word, is the peculiar alphabet
employed in Southern India up to modern times for literary
works composed in Sanskrit, in contradistinction from the al-
phabets in which the various Dravidian vernaculars, such as
Tamil and Telugu, are rendered. What Buhler’s use of the word
really implies is that the Grantha, viz. the literary alphabet
of the South is derived from the ancient character found in
the Pallava records. Buhler recognizes three successive stages
in the development of this ancient -Grantha~ which he indi-
cates as the archaic, the middle, and the transitional variety.
To the archaic type he reckons all Pallava Sanskrit inscriptions,
including those of Nara

imhavarman I; but from the Kiram
copper-plate charter of Narasimha’s son Paramegvaravarman |
his middle variety commences. He further states that the archaic
variety is also met with in the rock inscription from Jambu
in Java.

If now we endeavour to test the correctness of Buhler's
remark with the aid of the Koetei inscriptions (the character
found therein being practically the same as that of the early
rock-inscriptions from W. Java), we are confronted by a serious
difficulty. It has been noticed above that during the earlier
period of Pallava rule their documents are restricted to copper-
plate charters. It is only by the commencement of the seventh
century that the first stone inscriptions make their appearance.
We, consequently, possess no lithic records from Coromandel
which may be supposed to be approximately contemporaneous
with the Koetei inscriptions. The only documents available for
comparison are the copper-plate charters, but it will be readily
understood that the difference of material brings on a different
execution. In general the copper-plates which served the purely
practical purpose of recording a donation of land, are engraved
in a much simpler style of writing than the stone inscriptions
which were meant to be public memorials. It so happens that
the Prakrit grants which are the earliest documents of the
Pallavas, are written in a very slovenly manner, whereas the

charters of Simhavarman (illustrated in his plate VIE, cols. XX and XXD,
show no closer connection with those of the Prikrit inscriptions of the
Palla

gories of inscriptions are so similar that they cannot be very well separated,

* It seems to me that the alphabets employed in these two cate-


=== [PDF Page 279 | Journal Page 222] ===
LLL THE VOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN,.

hoetei inscriptions are distinguished by their careful workman-
ship and highly ornamental character.

On the other hand, the absence of stone inscriptions of so
early an epoch in Coromandel imparts the Koetei inscriptions
with a peculiar interest for the history of South Indian epigraphy.
It is in the distant islands of the Indian Archipelago and on
the coasts of Indo-China that we thus find the prototypes of
that remarkable group of lithic records which Coromandel owns
to the Pallava kings of the

eventh century. We may say that
the Archipelago and Campa have preserved the earliest examples
of archaic Grantha carved in stone, of which no specimens
are now extant in the mother country.

We now proceed to examine the chief palaeographical cha-
racteristics of the hoetei inscriptions. They are the following: —

1“. The heads of the letters are marked by means of small,
deeply cut squares which are found not only at the tops of
the long verticals of the letters ka and ra, but at the head of
practically every aksara, except initial i, kha (in khya),
ga, fa (in nga etc.), fia (in fica), na, tha and dha. Occa-
sionally it is found in ja too, though it will be noticed that
in general it is absent in those aksaras which are finished
off at the top by means of a horizontal stroke.

Buhler notes the same peculiarity with regard to the early

script of Central India in its more developed form. He say
that in this script «the heads of the letters bear small squares
which are either hollow or filled in. These squares, to which
on account of their resemblance to small boxes the script owes
the name «box-headed>, are, like the wedges, artificial deve-
lopments of the serifs. The solid, filled in, squares probably
have been invented by writers who used ink, and the hollow
ones by persons writing with a stilus, who feared to tear

their palm-leaves-.' He further notes that this characteristic is

not restricted to Central India, but occurs also in some early

ocuments from the South, such as two Kadamba inscriptions
of the 5" century and the Uruvupalli copper-plate grant of
Simhavarman Pallava which has been assigned to the same period.

' Buhler, op. ef. pp 62 sy. (Fleet's transl. pp 64 sq) A typical instance
ot this box-headed script is afforded by the charters of the Va
Pravarasena [LT , Fleet. Gupte Znser. net 55 and 5).

taka king


=== [PDF Page 280 | Journal Page 223] ===
THE YUPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING Mi@LAVARMAN. 223

«Box-heads» are also peculiar to the inscriptions of Bhadra-
varman of Campa. This was first noticed by M. Bergaigne with
reference to the Cho’-dinh rock-inscription noted above (p. 189).
«Secondement», he wrote, ' les relations entre le royaume de
Campa et ceux de l'Inde du sud étaient assez fréquentes pour
gue l’alphabet s’y modifiadt exactement de la méme maniere:
on verra méme qu’un simple appendice ornemental, un carré
profondément creusé a la tcte des lettres, qui parait avoir cteé
dans I'Inde propre une véritable mode dont la durée coincide
a peu prés avec celle du V® siécle, se retrouve dans notre n"
XXI [e7z. the Cho’-Dinh inscription] ».

M. Bergaigne has also drawn attention to the fact that the
«fashion», as he calls it, of the box-headed letters had pene-
trated as far as Borneo, as is evident from the Roetei inscrip-
tions. The Tjaroenten (Tji Aroeteun) rock inscription of Ptrna-
varman shows the same peculiarity.

24, Another feature of the Koetei inscriptions (it is mentioned
by Biihler among the characteristics which distinguish the
Southern alphabets from those of Northern India) ? is the little
hook attached, on the left. to the foot of the long verticals.
It wil be noticed in ka. fia (in jfia) and ra, and also in the
subscribed w, if expressed by a downward stroke (in ku and in
the ligature ntu [in C, 1. 3] medial ~ is rendered ina different
manner). In a slightly more developed form we find this little
hook in the aksara re (4, 1 1), where it is prolonged
upward,

It is interesting that similar little hooks or curves are found
in the Pallava Prakrit grants of the fourth century, whereas in
Simhavarman’s charters of the fifth century those excrescences
are usually prolonged so as to reach up to almost half the
length of the vertical. Such is also the case in the cave inscrip-
tions of Mahendravarman I. A still further development is noti-
ceable in the later Pallava inscriptions of the seventh century

1 A. Bergaigne, L'ancien royaume de Campz, yp. 16 (tirage a part), and
Inser. Sanserites, pp. 23 [203] sy. M. Finot (B. E F. LE. O. vol HU, p. 188)
notes the same peculiarity with regard to the Hon-cue and Miso'n inscrip-
tions of Bhadravarman.

2 On the inscription of Caruntén (rudgo Tjaroenten) ef H. Colijn Neerlands
Indié, vol. I (1913) p. 220, with text-ilnustration on p. 21 Verspreide Ge-
schriften van Prof. Dr. Kern, vol. VII, p. 5, with faesinule.

3 Buhler, op. cit., p. 6U (Fleet’s transl., p. 61) sub 1.


=== [PDF Page 281 | Journal Page 224] ===
Rod THE VOGPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MOLAVARMAN.

which. to use Buhler’s terminology . exhibit the middle variety

te
of the lithic Grantha alphabet. Here the upward stroke is
prolonged up to the top ef the aksara, so as to form a
second vertical, in the letters a, a, ka and ra as wel! as in
medial u and G Such forms with double verticals are regularly
found in the very ornamental epigraphs of -the Seven Pagodasy
(Mavalivaram).

It is noteworthy that in the Campa inscriptions of Bhadra-
varman which otherwise betray so marked a palaeographical
affinity to those of Noetei, the long verticals show no trace of
the little hook. In this respect they represent an earlier stage
of writing than the Noetei inscriptions, a conclusion which is
confirmed by other observations.

In the Tjaroenten (Carunten) rock inscription, on the other
hand, we notice a more advanced stage, as here the hooks are
prolonged in the same manner as in the charters of Simha-
varman Pallava.

The Djamboe (Jambu) rock inscription , likewise from Western
Java, shows again a somewhat later development, if we may
judge from the published photograph.

3°. In the akyaras ja, pa, ba, la and ha the left hand
stroke bulges outward. The origin of this peculiarity can be

traced back to the famous Girnar pracgasti of Rudradaiman,
in which Buhler noticed the pa and ba with a notch in the
left vertical. The notched pa is even found in Kusana in-
scriptions.

Burnell observed the same in the so-called Vengi alphabet
with regard to the letters ja and ba (also na). It is, however,
commonly found in the documents of the Pallavas, Kadambas
and Vakatakas, especially in their lithic records.

A later development is the notching of the base-lines of
certain aksaras, a fashion of which the first tendency is

noticeable in the Jaggayyapetta inscriptions with regard to pa,
ma and va, but which becomes a very striking feature of the
very ornamental Pallava script of the seventh century, where
we find it not only in pa, ma and va, but also in ja, ba,
la, sa and ha.. -

It is interesting that here again the alphabets of Southern
India, Indo-China and the Archipelago exhibit a parallel
development. The inscriptions of Bhadravarman represent ap-

5

en

oe etnies


=== [PDF Page 282 | Journal Page 225] ===
THE YOUPA INSCRIPPIONS OF KING MULAVARMAN. 295

proximately the same stage as the yiipa inscriptions of Mula-
varman. The left-hand verticals of certain aksaras are notched,
but the base lines are throughout straight. It is the same stage
which in Southern India is represented by the Pallava Prakrit
grants of the fourth century. In the Sanskrit charters of Simha-
varman we notice a transitional stage, the base-lines of several
aksaras (ca, tha, dha, pa, ba, ma, la and sa) showing
that peculiar twist which becomes so pronounced a feature of
the seventh century inscriptions. In the same manner «la ten-
dance a faire onduler les lignes» as M. Bergaigne formulates
it !, has become one of the chief features of the ancient script
of Campa and Kambodia.

In the Tjaroenten (Caruntén) inscription we find a stage in
this development which might perhaps be described as inter-
mediate between that of the Prakrit and that of the Sanskrit
charters of the Pallavas. For here we tind slightly ondulating
base-lines in only a few aksaras, namely pa, ma and va. In
this respect also the script of Tjaroenten is more advanced than
that of the Koetei inscriptions which, like the epigraphs of
Bhadravarman of Campa, have straight base-lines throughout.

+". Another peculiarity of the Koetei inscriptions to which
I wish to call attention is the little hook which we find attached
to the right-hand stroke of the letters tha (4, 1.4, also ), ll.
1 and 2, and in the ligature stha in C, 1. 8), ga and sa.
In tha it replaces the central dot, in ¢a and sa the cross-bar
of the earlier Indian scripts. The feature here noted is of special
importance, as it is peculiar to the alphabet of the Pallava
inscriptions, but appears to be unknown in other South-Indian
scripts. On that account it is mentioned by Buhler among the
chief characteristics of what he calls the archaic type of the
Grantha alphabet. It deserves notice that in the Prakrit grants
of Civaskandavarman these forms of tha, ga and sa are not
yet found. But in the earlier Jaggayyapetta inscriptions (third
century A.D. >), the script of which, as we have seen, Buhler
classes under the precursors of the southern alphabets, the tha
presents exactly the same appearance as in the Koetei inscrip-
tions. The script of Jaggayyapetta, it will be observed, is also
of a very ornamental type.

Whereas, therefore, in this respect the Koetei inscriptions

show a very close relationship to the Pallava documents, it is
Di. 74. nu)


=== [PDF Page 283 | Journal Page 226] ===
226 THE YOVA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING WOLAVAKVEAN,

worthy of note that in the epigraphs of Bhadravarman of Campa
only ga is treated in a similar fashion, whilst sa has preserved
the cross-bar and tha the central dot.

In this connection it may be noted that dha, which occurs
only once in the Koetei inscriptions, namely in 1. 4. of C,
appears likewise to be destinguished by a little stroke attached
to the right hand side of the aksara

5", One of the most remarkable features of the Koetei inscrip-
tions is the looped form of the three letters ta, na and na.
The ta and na are consequently so similar in appearance that
they could easily be mixed up in documents less carefully
executed than the present. I need only refer to those two
letters in the first line of inscription <4. It will be seen that in
the case of the ta the loop extends farther upwards and con-
sequently the vertical is shortened. I may note that, whereas
the looped ta may be called an innovation, the looped na is
an archaic form which is regularly found in the Gupta inscrip-
tions and occasionally even in documents of the Kusana and

Andhra dynasties. Buhler! classes it among the characteristics
of the Western variety of Southern alphabets: it is found in
Valabhi, Gurjara and Rastrakita inscriptions. It appears in other
southern scripts too, ¢. g., in a Kadamba inscription of the
fifth century (though here in a slightly modified form, the loop
being particularly smal!) and in a Ganga inscription of c.675 A. D.

In the Pallava epigraphs the na is, as a rule, not provided
with a loop. With regard to the Pikira grant of Simhavarman
Professor Hultzsch remarks that here «the forms with and with-
out loop are used for both ta and na, though in the majority
of cases ta has a loop and na has none». In the charter of
the Calankayana king Vijayanandivarman of Vengipura the ta is
always looped, whilst na is sometimes looped and sometimes not.

M. Bergaigne ? notes with reference to the charter of Vijaya-
nandivarman that in this script, as shown on plate | of Burnell’s
Elements of South Indian Palacography both ta and na are
looped. This, however, does not appear to be quite correct.
From an examination of the facsimile published by Dr. Fleet |
have come to the conclusion that in the inscription in question

1 Buhler, op ecit., p 61 (Flect’s transl, p 63).
1 Bergaigne, Inser., p 14 [194].


=== [PDF Page 284 | Journal Page 227] ===
THE YOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MULAVARMAN. 22

“I

ta is always looped, whereas the looped and the unlooped forms
of na occur side by side, and the na is without loop except
in one instance (IV 1. 3).

I cannot, therefore, point to any South-Indian inscription in
which we find the looped forms of ta and na consistently used
side by side, as they are found in the Koetei inscriptions. In
the rock inscription of Cho’-dinh, however, we do find those
forms, so that in this respect also that epigraph shows a close
relation to the y pa inscriptions. This is the more remarkable
as in the earlier Vd-canh (Nha-trang) inscription which, as we
have seen, is the oldest epigraphical document of Indo-China,
(above p. 188) both ta and na are unlooped. !

The looped na, like the looped na, is an archaic form which
occurs in early Gupta inscriptions, e. g. the pragasti of
Samudragupta on the Allahabad pillar and also in the Bijayagarh
yt pa inscription.

In the Tjaroenten rock inscription the three aksaras under
discussion appear in exactly the same shape as in the Koetei
epigraphs, with the only exception that in the word Taraima®
which opens the third line, we have clearly a ta without loop.
This exception, however, may be a mere accident. For it is
very curious that in later Javanese inscriptions it is exactly
the ta which is looped, whereas the na has lost the loop.

6". The absence of the vowel is not expressed by the
virama, as in the Nagari of Northern India. The vowelless
consonant is written in smaller type beneath the line. In the
Koetei inscriptions this vowelless letter (z and ) is about
half the size of the ordinary aksaras.

Burnell * says: «The Java character has the peculiar small
m used for a final w (i. e. with virdma), and we find this
also in both the Vengi and Pallava characters, and in them
only. From this remark it would be wrong to infer that in
other Indian alphabets this manner of rendering the vowelless
consonant is unknown. We find it, ¢.g., in the word siddham

8

at the beginning of the ‘Isipur yipa inscription. It is also

' Bergaigne, /mser. pp. 12 sy. and 22. It is curious that in the Hon-euc
rock-inseription B. E, F. E. O., vol. Il, pp. 156 sq., which M. Finot assumes
to be contemporaneous with that of Cho'-dinh, we tind ta without loop. The
employment of looped and unlooped torms of the aksaras in question
appears, indeed, to be, to a certain extent, arbitrary.

2? Burnell, Elements, p. 132.


=== [PDF Page 285 | Journal Page 228] ===
22s THE VOPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MiLAVAKMAN,

peculiar to Gupta inscriptions, but here the small wz is surmounted
by a short horizontal stroke. It is from this stroke that the
well-known virdma of the >

sari alphabet has developed. In
the very conservative Carada alphabet of the Panjab the ancient
mode of expressing the absence of the vowel has been retained
until quite modern times. !

In his discussion of the Cho’-dinh inscription Bergaigne says:

Il faut signaler surtout absence du yirdma, dont I’usage est
genéral au Cambodge des les plus anciennes inscriptions. Ici,
comme dans l'inscription precedente d'ailleurs, la consonne
finale non rattachee au groupe suivant est écrite, avec des
dimensiuns moindres, au-dessous de la ligne. C’est l'usage
ancien, qui parait s’étre modifié dans I'Inde du sud a partir
des Calukvas, mais qui est géneral encore au V® sitcle dans
les inscriptions des Pallavas, des Vakatakas et des Kadambas:.?

On the whole, therefore, the mode followed in the Koetei
inscriptions may be regarded as a sign of great antiquity. It is
interesting to note that at the end of the Tjaroenten rock in-
scription the vowelless » (in the word padadvayam) is
expressed by a small-sized akyara, which, however, is provided
with a curve issuing from its left hand top and slanting upwards
towards the right. * In this respect too the Ijaroenten inscription
represents a more advanced stage of writing than the Koetei
documents.

7". T now wish to consider the rendering of medial (post-
consonantic) i and i. In the Koetei inscriptions we find the
short i expressed in the ancient fashion by a single superscribed
curve to the left, but always open, except in the ak>ara vi
(1, 1. 3), where the extremity of the vowel mark rejoins the
top of the akyara and consequently a closed curve is formed.

This closed curve, which assumes the appearance of a super-
scribed circle, becomes the regular manner of expressing medial
iin later alphabets, namely: 1“ in the Grantha where the
open curve is usual in the Sanskrit charters of Simhavarman

' Buhler, op. vit, p. 45 Fleet, p. 48) (171; plate IV: 31, XV and 43 VIL

Ch wy Chamba taser. p. dS,
7 Bergaigne, Inser, p. 23 203". Cf. Pinot, B. BE. FL E. 0., vol. IL, p. 156.
3 It is interesting to compare the m im the Kailasanatha inscriptions of
the seventh century. Buhler, op. eit, p. 69, plate VII: 41, XXIII, cf. plate
VUIT 17, NIL


=== [PDF Page 286 | Journal Page 229] ===
THE YUPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MULAVARMAN. 229

(the archaic variety!), whereas it has become closed in the
documents of the seventh century representing the middle
variety of that script. A transitional stage is found in the cave
inscriptions of Mahendravarman I in which the two forms appear
side by side. 2° in the ancient script of Indo-China. The
primitive form of the i is found in the inscriptions af Bhadravar-
man, as observed by Messrs. Bergaigne and Finot.! 3" in the
Old-Javanese script, ¢.g., in the Dinaja stone inscription of
Caka 682 (A.D. 760) and also in as early a document as the
Tjaroenten rock inscription.

A similar development can be traced in the case of medial i.
In the Koetei inscriptions it is expressed in the ancient fashion
followed in the early Gupta inscriptions, to wit, by a double
curve over the aksara, the long right-hand curve (similar to
the sign for short i) running round the left hand curve which is
smaller and assumes the appearance of a spiral. Sometimes, as
in the case of the aksara cri, the two curves rise from the
opposite ends of the horizontal top-stroke and are consequently
separated. Or. e.g. in ji (C, 1. 5) the two curves have coalesced
into one flourish resting on the extremity of the top-stroke
(cf. also ki in C, 1. 1).

In the Cho’-dinh rock inscription the 1 in ¢ri is written in
exactly the same manner as in the Koetei inscriptions. In later
epigraphs both in Campa-Kambodia and in Java we find that
the double curve has become closed so as to assume the ap-
pearance of a circle similar to that marking the short i, but
differentiated from the latter by means of a dot in the centre.
The spiral vowel mark in the word ¢ri of the Tjaroenten in-
scription appears to represent a transitional stage in this de-
velopment.

8". Finally attention may be drawn to the sign for medial
(postconsonantic) ¢ consisting of a little curve which sometimes
has the appearance of a spiral and is invariably attached on
the left-hand side to the top of the consonant. If combined
with j (4, Il. 9 and 12), t (4, 1. 7 and C, 1. 7) and ra (4,
1.1), we find it hanging down, as it were, from a short
horizontal stroke which is attached to the top of the consonant.

1 Bergaigne, Mser., p. 23 [203]; Finot, B. E. F. £. 0., vol. IL, p. 136.
Foy the later forms ¢f. Bergaigne , Histoire, pp. 15 sq.


=== [PDF Page 287 | Journal Page 230] ===
O30 THE VORA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING Mil AVARMAN,.

The sign for medial &, it is true. is also slightly curved (very
much so in the case of ja in B, 1. 5), but it does not present
the very peculiar appearance of medial
tai (A, 18.4, prai [B, 18 and C, 1 and ndrai [4,1
123) is expressed by a double ¢ stroke, and medial o by a

«AAs medial ai (in

eC
i

combination of the signs for medial a@ and medial ¢«, we notice
in both these vowels the same peculiarity as in ¢. In this
respect again the script of the Koetei epigraphs approaches the
Pallava character very closely, particularly the ornamental writing
of the inscriptions of Mavalivaram and Conjeeveram.

Here again the inscriptions of Bhadravarman of Campa appear
to denote a somewhat earlier. stage, as in them medial ¢ is
rendered by a short straight stroke to the left in accordance
with the most ancient fashion of Indian writing. In these in-
scriptions medial 0, as pointed out by M. Finot, is expressed
in two different ways. -L’ o a une double forme:, that scholar
remarks,' l'une de deux petits traits rectilignes tombant ver-
ticalement des extremités du rectangle terminal [the so-called
‘box-head J], l'autre de deux courbes divergentes surmontant le
meme rectangle:.

Our final conclusions, therefore, with regard to the palaeo-
graphical evidence of the Koetei inscriptions are the following.
Among the epigraphical records of Southern India we cannot
point to any specimen which exhibits exactly the same style
of writing as is found in the earliest inscriptions of the Archi-
pelago. But among Southern alphabets, it is undoubtedly the
archaic type of the ancient Grantha character (to retain Buhler’s
terminology), used by the early Pallava rulers of the Coromandel
coast, which appears to be most closely related to the character
of the Koetei epigraphs. This point it would, in all probability.
have been possible to establish with greater clearness, if side
by side with the copper-plate charters of the fourth and fifth
centuries we possessed also lithic records for that early period
of Pallava rule. As unfortunately no documents in stone have
hitherto come to light, we may say that the Koetei inscriptions,
as it were, exhibit the prototype of that style of writing which
we find employed in the Pallava stone inscriptions of the seventh

‘BE. FE. O, vol HU, p. ise.

,


=== [PDF Page 288 | Journal Page 231] ===
THE YtPA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING MaLAVARMAN, 231

century of which the cave inscriptions of Mahendravarman I
stand foremost as regards age. We are, therefore, perhaps justified
in qualifying the Roetei inscriptions as the earliest specimens
of the Grantha used in stone records.

In documents of some other contemporaneous Southern dy-
nasties, such as the Calankayanas of Vengi, we meet with an
alphabet very similar to that used by the Pallavas and, conse-
quently, also closely allied to that of ancient hoetei. This
circumstance, however, does not, in my opinion, justify the
use of the term «Vengi alphabet» to denote the script employed
in the early inscriptions of the Archipelago.

We have further had occasion to note the very near palaeo-
graphical affinity existing between the hoetei inscriptions and
those of Bhadravarman of Campa which, next to the Vo-canh
(or Nha-trang) rock inscription, are the earliest epigraphical
records of that ancient kingdom and, indeed, of the whole of
Indo-China. In certain respects, however, the inscriptions of
Bhadravarman appear to represent a somewhat earlier stage of
writing. On the contrary, the Tjaroenten rock-inscription of
Pirnavarman, the ancient ruler of Western Java, exhibits a
more advanced style of writing, so that we arrive at the chro-
nological succession: Bhadravarman, Milavarman, Piirnavarman.
The intervening period in each case may be roughly estimated
at half a century.

However abundant the epigraphical materials now available
for comparison may be both in India proper and in Indo-China,
they do not allow us to arrive at a very definite conclusion
with regard to the chronological question. The reason is that |
as we have noted above, neither in India nor in Indo-China the
early records in question bear any date, except, in the case
of the copper-plates, the regnal year of the ruling prince. ' As,
therefore, on the basis of palaeographical evidence only an

approximate date can be assigned to those documents, it follows
that we stand on no very firm ground, if we endeavour to
utilize them in order to settle the chronology of the inscribed
ytpas from Koetei. Professor Kern hesitated between the fourth
and fifth century and finally proposed 490 A. D. as the ap-

1 On the question whether A. D  436—37 may be aceepted as the date
of Smbhasarman Pallava's accession see Fleet's paper A new Ganga record.
iJ. ROA, S. for 1915, pp. 171 sqq.)



=== [PDF Page 289 | Journal Page 232] ===
232 THE VGA INSCRIPTIONS OF KING ML AWARWAN.

proximate date to assign to these inscriptions. I believe we
may still adhere to this view.

It would follow that the inscriptions of Bhadravarman belong
to the middle of the fourth century, a somewhat earlier date
than that proposed by M. Finot who has assigned them to
approximately 400 A. D., !

The Tjaroenten inscription I am inclined to attribute to the
middle of the fifth century, a conclusion agreeing with that
arrived at by Professor Kern.

It is highly desirable that the early Sanskrit inscriptions from
Western Java be re-examined and edited with proper facsimiles.
At present the study of those interesting documents of Javanese
history is impossible, as no reliable reproductions are available.
It must be emphasized that only estampages prepared and
reproduced by a purely mechanical process are of real use for
purposes of study. In this respect a great deal still remains to
be done.

The publication of the future (may it be a near future!)
which is anxiously awaited by all that are interested in the
early history of the Archipelago is a Corpus /nscriptionum
Favanicarum which will comprise all ancient records both in
Sanskrit and Old-Javanese known to exist in Java and the
other islands of the Archipelago.

1 Finot, B. E F. EB. 0, vol. IE (1902), p. 186. Cf. Bergaigne, 7... C,
pp 203 sqq.

If M. Maspero is mght in identifying Bhadravarman I with the Campa
king Fan-Hou-Ta of the Chinese sources (Toung Pao. 1910, yo 347), it would
follow that the date of ¢, 400 A. D. ibed to that rnler must be correct
T would then attribute the Koeter inscriptions to c¢. 450 A. D. and the
Tyatuventen inscription to ¢ 500 \ D Tt must, however, be pointed ont that

M Maspéro himself qualities his identifieanion as ytrés contestable”
