--- [Page 1] ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Adelaar
The relevance of Salako for Proto-Malayic and for Old Malay epigraphy
 
In: Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 148 (1992), no: 3/4, Leiden, 381-408
 
This PDF-file was downloaded from http://www.kitlv-journals.nl


--- [Page 2] ---
K. ALEXANDER ADELAAR .. . 
THE RELEVANCE OF SALAKO FOR PROTO- 
MALAYIC AND FOR OLD MALAY EPIGRAPHY 
Dedicated to Jan Schoterman (1 948-1 989)* 
l. INTRODUCTION 
Salako is spoken in the Lundu district of Sarawak's First Division and in 
three discontinuous areas in Kabupaten Sambas in West Kalimantan, 
Indonesia. Despite the persistent belief of some scholars that Salako is a 
Land Dayak isolect, it belongs to the Malayic-Dayak linguistic subgroup, 
as Hudson (1970) already pointed out, and is closely related to Kendayan c 
and Belangin'cboth spoken in Kabupaten Pontianak). These three dialects 
are mutually intelligible, and 1 cal1 them West Malayic Dayak to distin- 
guish them from Iban, Mualang and other Ibanic isolects of the Malayic 
Dayak subgroup, which are spoken east of the Land Dayak linguistic area 
(see map 42 in Wurm and Hattori 198 1-3). I use Hudson's term 'isolect' 
as it is connòtationally neutra1 with respect to the distinction between 
language and dialect (cf. Hudson 1967). A phonological outline of Salako 
has appeared earlier (Adelaar 199 1). 
Malayic Dayak isolects are important for the history of the Malayic 
linguistic subgroup, as they have developed in relative isolation from other 
Malayic isolects. They have undergone to a much smaller degree the long- 
standing and intensive influence from lingua franca varieties of Malay 
such as Standard Malay and Bazaar Malay, which have also brought with 
them considerable lexica1 influence from Indian languages, Javanese, 
Arabic, Persian and European languages. West Malayic Dayak. is of 
particular interest for the linguistic history of the Malayic subgroup, as on 
* I dedicate this article to Jan Schoterman, who always stimulated me greatly in my research 
into the culture-historica1 aspects of Austronesian linguistics. As a Sanskritist, Jan made 
a very important contnbution to Sanskrit philology. Javanese Studies is much indebted to 
him for his translations of Sanskrit passages in Old Javanese texts. 
K. ALEXANDER ADELAAR, a specialist in Austronesian comparative linguistics, obtained 
his PhD at the University of Leiden and is cutrently a Humboldt Fellow at the Goethe 
University in Frankfurt. He is the author of 'Malay influence on Malagasy: Linguistic and 
culture-historica1 inferences', Oceanic Linguktics 28-1:l-46 (1989), and Proto-Malnyic: A 
reconstruction of its phonology and part of its morphology and lexicon, Canberra: Research 
School of Pacific Studies, 1992. Dr. Adelaar may be contacted at the J.W. Goethe-Universitat, 
Fachbereich 11, Sudostasienwissenschaften, Postfach 11 1932,6000 - Frankfurt am Main 
11, Germany. 

--- [Page 3] ---
382 K Alexander Adelaar 
the one hand, West Malayic Dayak isolects possess a rich, consewative 
morphology, which in other Malayic isolects (including the Ibanic ones) 
has been reduced. On the other hand, they have undergone some specific 
phonological changes which make it possible for us to distinguish between 
(not too old) loanwords and other vocabulary. Most of these phonological 
changes are also found in part of the Land Dayak area and in some Ibanic 
areas directly adjacent to it: they are area1 features criss-crossing the 
boundaries between Land Dayak and Malayic Dayak. Misinterpretation 
of these area1 features must be responsible for the fact that some scholars 
still classify Salako with Land Dayak. 
In this paper I would like to demonstrate that Salako is of geat import- 
ante for the reconstruction of Proto-Malayic (henceforth referred to as 
PM) phonology, lexicon and, particularly, morphology.' I also wish to 
show that Salako, because of its conservative morphology and lexicon, 
throws new light on the inscriptions of Telaga Batu (South Sumatra) and 
Gandasuli (Java). It provides key arguments for considering the language 
of these inscriptions as an early form of Malay. The identification of this 
language has in the past been a matter of doubt, in spite of the fact that 
for the sake of convenience it has usually been referred to as 'Old Malay'. 
2. THE IMPORTANCE OF SALAKO FOR THE RECONSTRUCTION OF PM 
2.1 Phonology 
2.1.1 Retentions from PM which are not found in Malay 
Although Salako has retained a few PM phonological distinctions which 
have become lost in Standard Malay, these retentions are of limited 
importance, as they are also found in Hulu Banjarese (which was a key 
isolect in the reconstruction of PM, see Adelaar 1992). They re-affirm, 
rather than refine, the reconstruction of PM phonology. 
The two main retentions are: 
(1) Maintenance of the distinction between *í' and *h in intewocalic 
position (PM *? is a merger of Proto Austronesian "7, *S and *H; PM *h 
reflects Proto Austronesian *q). Examples: 
1 The West Malayic Dayak data presented in this paper were collected during four short field 
trips which I made to West Kalimantan between 1986 and 1990 under the auspices of the 
Lembaga Ilmu Pengetahuan Indonesia in Jakarta. Three of these trips we& funded by 
NWO, the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research, and the fourth (in 1990) by 
the Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University, Canberra. My main 
informant was Mr. Vitus Kaslem (72 years old) from Nyarumkop, Kecamatan Tujuhbelas, 
Kabupaten Sambas. I am very grateful for his helpfulness. I would also like to express my 
gratitude to Dr. D.J. Prentice and Prof. J.G. de Casparis for their useful comments on this 
paper. 

--- [Page 4] ---
The Relevante of Salako for Proto-Malayic 383 
PM Salako Banjar Hulu Malay 
*tu?(ua)t 'knee' tu?ut id. tu?ut id. lultut id. 
/ *ba?ah 'flood' bhha?;! id. ba?ah id. air bah id. 
*jah(aa)t 'bad, evil' jahat id. jahat id. jahat id. 
*la?un 'taking a long time' aí'utn id. - laun id. 
*tuhag 'pour' tuhàkg id. - tuag id. 
(2) Maintenance of PM antepenultimate high vowels (Malay has as a rule 
merged all'antepenultimate vowels in a). Examples: 
PM Salako Banjar Hulu Malay 
*sumagat 'spirit' sumagat id. sumagat id. samaqat id. 
"kulilig 'around' kuikg id. kulilig id. kalilig id. 
*(mb)inantu 'child-in-law' minantu id. minantu id. manantu id. 
2.1.2 Sound changes ffom PM to Salako 
More important for linguistic purposes, however, are some of the Salako 
sound changes, as they allow us to distinguish between loanwords and 
inherited vocabulary. The following sound changes have taken place from 
PM to Salako: 
(a) A merger of *a and *a to a. This a is realized as a closed low vowel 
[3] in final position, before a final glottal or before a final preploded nasal. 
It is also realized as [z11 directly after another closed a, or after a closed 
a followed by a glottal. In other positions a is realized as an open low vowel 
[a]. For the sake of convenience I write 'à' whenever a has a closed 
l- realization, and 'a' when it has an open realization. Examples: 
1 PM Salako Malay 
*ba?ah 'flood, inundation' 
*-jalan 'go, walk' 
*akar 'root' 
*habu 'ashes' 
*lima 'five' 
*pulaq 'go back' I *lalat 'fly (insect)' 
*hatap 'thatch' 
*talu 'three' 
*anam 'six' bàhà? id. 
ba-jààtn id. 
akar id. 
abu id. 
imà id. 
puàkq id. 
aat id. 
atap id. 
tau id. 
anam id. (air) bah id. 
jalan 'road' 
akar id. 
abu id. . 
Iima id. 
pulag id. 
lalat id. 
(h)atap id. - 
anam id. 
2 With metathesis of the glottals. 
1 

--- [Page 5] ---
3 84 K Alexander Adelaar 
N.b.: [z11 becomes [a] again where the necessary phonotactic conditions for 
its occurrence change through affixation, e.g. ba-jàatn vspajaanan 'walk- 
ing, going'; puakg 'go back" vs puagan! 'bring back!'. 
'. 
(b) A split of *i and *u into high vowels and mid-vowels. Although mid- 
vowels seem to occur more often before preploded nasals and before rand 
0 < *l, there is no consistent rule to account for the distribution of high 
vowels and mid-vowels. Examples: 
PM Salako Malay 
*bibir 'lip' 
*palir 'testicle' 
*talur 'egg' beber id. 
paer id. 
taor id. 
*niur 'coconut' piur id. 
*bisul 'boil (n)' ka-binso-àtn 'have a boil' 
*mulut 'mouth' moot id. 
*kunit 'turmeric; yellow' upit 'turmeric'3 
*banih 'seed' banih id. 
*bunuh 'kill' bunuh id. 
*jatuh 'to fall' janto' id. 
*ban? 'give' bare2 id. 
*baru? 'hibiscus' baru? id. 
*di hulu? 'before; first; ahead' daoho? id. 
*hati 'liver' ati id. 
*halu 'pestle' au id. 
*puggug 'lower part of back' pogokg id. 
*lasug 'mortar' asukq id. 
*dindig 'wal]' dinikg id. 
*putig 'protrusion; nipple' potekg id. 
*la?un 'slow' aí'utn id. 
*rihan 'light, not heavy' rehetn id. 
*manuk 'domestic fowl' manok id. 
*duduk 'sit' duduk id. bibir id. 
palir id. 
talur, 
talor id. 
piur id. 
bisul 'boil' 
mulut id. 
kupit id. 
banih id. 
bunuh id. 
jatuh id. 
ban id. 
baru id. 
dahulu id. 
hati id. 
alu id. 
puggug id. 
lasug id. 
dindig id. 
putig id. 
lambat-laun 
'slowly, 
bit by bit' 
riglan id. - 
duduk id. 
N.b.: In some cases the co-occurrence of a high vowel and a schwa or a 
has yielded a pair of like mid-vowels, as, for example, in: 
With unexplained loss of *k. 

--- [Page 6] ---
The Reievance of Salako for Proto- Malayic 3 85 
*lipat 'to fold' epet id. lipat id. 
*karnpug 'collection kornpokg 'collection ka rn pug 
(of trees, or houses)' of field huts' 'village' 
*rihan 'light (weight)' rehetn id. riglan id. 
(early Malay) +ajljig 'dog' epekg 'dornestic pig' apjig 'dog' 
(see 2.2 below) 
(C) The rnonophthongization of *-ay and *-aw to -e and -o respectively. 
Exarnples: 
*gaway 'traditional feast, gawe 'traditional feast' pa-gaway 
cornrnunal work' 'official' 
*hintay 'wait for; spy upon' inte id. intay id. 
*hijaw 'green' ijo id. hijaw id. 
*kasaw 'rafter' kaso id. kasaw id. 
(d) The loss of *h in initia1 position, but its retention in intewocalic and 
final position. Exarnples: 
*hidug 'nose' 
*hatap 'thatch' 
*tihag 'pole, mast, pillar' 
*tuhag 'to pour' 
*jah(a,a)t 'bad' 
*babah 'below; under' 
*rumah 'house' 
*puluh 'ten' idukg id. 
atap id. 
tihàkg id. 
tuhàkg id. 
jahat id. 
babàh id. 
rurnàh id. 
puluh id. 
In a nurnber of cases *-h has becorne i: cornpare: 
*ruruh 'collapse; roro? id. 
fade (colour)' 
*jatuh 'to fall' janto? id. hidug id. 
(h)atap id. 
tiag id. . 
tuag id. 
jahat id. 
bawah id. 
rurnah id. 
puluh id. 
luruh id.4 
jatuh id. 
(e) The loss of *l in rnany cases. Nowadays Salako does have an 1, 
however. It is hard to tel1 whether this l is entirely4he result of borrowing 
(frorn Malay andlor the neighbouring Kendayan dialect) or whether it rnay 
in some cases still reflect a regularly inherited PM *l. Exarnples of the loss 
of *l: 
4 Malay lunch has undergone regressive dissimilation, which is a regular change wherever 
two r's occur i,n the same word. Other evidence for PM *ruruh is Minangkabau luruah, 
ruruah (Thaib 1935), Hulu Banjarese ruruh id. (Abdul Jebar Hapip 1976), Iban luroh, ruroh 
'drop, shed (as dead leaves)' (Richards 1981). Compare also 'Old Malay' mamruruä 'to 
destroy' (De Casparis 1956), which also does not reflect *-h. 

--- [Page 7] ---
386 K Alexander Adelaar 
PM Salako Malay 
*lima 'five' imà id. 
*lalu 'pass' au id. 
*-jalan 'go, walk' ba-jààtn id. 
*taggal 'detach, come loose' j tagà id. lima id. 
lalu id. 
jalan 'road' 
taggal id. 
(f) Cluster reduction. In inherited vocabulary, original consonant clusters 
consisting of a homorganic nasal + voiced stop were reduced to their 
homorganic nasal. Examples: 
PM Salako Malay 
"ambun 'dew' amutn id. 
*tumbuh fgrow' tumuh id. 
*mandi? 'bathe' manil id. 
*ipjam 'borrow' ipàpm id. 
*tiqgi 'high' tiqi id. 
*taggal 'detach, come loose' taqà id. ambun id. 
tumbuh id. 
mandi id. 
plipjam id. 
tiggi id. 
taggal id. 
(g) The preplosion of final nasals. Preplosion applies to inherited.fina1 
nasals historically preceded by a consonant other than a nasal within the 
Same syllable. Examples: 
"hasam 'sour-fruit' asàpm 'a sour fruit' (m-)asam 
'acid' 
*-jalan 'go, walk' ba-jààtn id. jalan 'road' 
*pulaq 'go back (home)' puàkg id. pulaq id. 
Preplosion als0 applies to inhented final nasals which were historically 
preceded by a voiced stop, even when this voiced stop has become lost and 
a nasal now precedes as a result of cluster reduction. Examples: 
*ipjam 'borrow' ipàpm id. plipjam id. 
"ambun 'dew' amutn id. ambun id. 
"lindug 'shaded, protected, ba-salinukg 'hide' bar-linduq 
covered' 'shaded, 
protected, 
covered' 
Preplosion als0 applies to inherited final nasals which are now preceded 
by another nasal but which were historically preceded by *l, e.g.: 
*pulag > puàkq --. muàkq 'go back' 
*tuluq 'assistance' > tuukg --. nuukg-i? 'help someone' 
*talan 'to swallow' > tààtn --. nààtn 'to swallow' 

--- [Page 8] ---
The Relevance of Salako for Proto-Malayic 387 
If the .final nasal is preceded by another nasal, preplosion does not take 
place (except where this preceding nasal is the result of cluster reduction). 
Examples: 
*anam 'six' anam id. anam id. 
*agin 'wind' aqin id. agin id. 
*kaniq 'eyebrow' kanig 'forehead' kanig 'eyebrow' 
If a preploded nasal is preceded or followed by a nasal through affixation, 
it loses the preplosion. Compare ba-jààtn VS pa-jaan-an (see (a) above) 
and buàkg! 'throw away!' (imperative = root) vs muag 'to throw away' 
(indicative = root with nasalization of initia1 consonant). 
(h) Acquisition by intemocalic *s of a preceding n in many cases. 
Examples: 
PM Salako Malay 
*kap 'suck' insap id. : isap id. 
*isi? 'meat, contents' insi? id. isi 'content' 
*asah 'to grind, sharpen's ansàh id. asah id. 
*bisul 'boil (n)'6 ka-binso-àtn 'have a boil' bisul 'boil' 
This has also happened in a Malay loanword (ultimately deriving from 
Arabic), cf. munsuarah 'deliberation' < Malay musyawarah id. 
(i) Metathesis of *h and liquids where *h preceded a liquid in a trisyllabic 
root. Examples: 
*di hulu? 'before; first; ahead' (daloho? >) 
daoho? id. dahulu id. 
*bahira? 'defecate' barihà? id. berak id. 
*halia? 'ginger' (> lahia? >) ahià? id. alia id. 
*baharu? 'new' barahu? id. baharu, baru id. 
2.1.3 Chronologica1 order of the changes from PM to Salako 
Loanwords can often be distinguished from inhented vocabulary by the 
fact that they have a different phonological history, that is, they have not 
undergone the Same sound changes vis-à-vis an older stage of the language 
5 Other evidence for PM *asah is Minangkabau asah (Thaib 1935), Middle Malay asa(h) 
(Helfrich 1904), Iban ansah (Richards 198 l), Jakartanese ase 'to grind, sharpen' (Abdul 
Chaer Mad'ie 1976). 
6 Other reflexes of PM *bisul are Minangkabau bkua (Thaib 1935), Middle Malay (Seraway 
dialect) bkul 'boil' (Helfrich 1904), Hulu Banjarese bi/icul (Abdul Jebar Hapip 1976), Iban 
bapcul 'swelling'. 

--- [Page 9] ---
388 K Alexander Adelaar 
as have inherited words. Furthermore, if one knows the chronological 
order in which these sound changes have taken place, one can sometimes 
also determine the relative age and adaptation of loanwords by checking 
which of these changes have affected them and which have not. For a 
detailed analysis of loanwords it is therefore essential to establish the 
chronological order in which the sound changes must have taken place. 
As far as the sound changes from PM to Salako are concerned, it is 
obvious that preplosion must have begun before cluster reduction became 
operative. Otherwise it would be impossible to explain why the final nasal 
in amutn, ipapm and ejlekg underwent preplosion, whereas the final nasal 
in muag and kanig did not. 
Preplosion must also be older than the loss of *l, judging from the fact 
that nasalization of initia1 consonants does not entail the loss of preplosion 
in the final nasal in verbs like taam (- naam) and puakg (- muakg). In 
spite of the fact that preplosion must be older than the loss of *l, it must 
also have outlived this loss, however. Some borrowings testify to this in that 
they display preplosion while still having retained 1 from the lending 
language. For instance, lawakg 'door' and ba-lawakg '(go through the door 
of spouse's parents' house =) to get mamed' display both preplosion and 
presence of l. This lawàkg must be a loan, possibly from Javanese, which 
has lawag 'door'. One may conclude from this that preplosion is a less 
useful diagnostic criterion for spotting loanwords than is the loss of *l, as 
it has continued to affect the lexicon until relatively recently. 
With these three changes of preplosion, cluster reduction and loss of *l in 
mind, it is often easy to tel1 loanwords from inhented vocabulary. For 
instance, examples 1 to 7 below comprise doublets, that is, pairs of words 
that have the same origin but one member of which is inherited from 
PM (and reflects the above changes) whereas the other is borrowed 
from Malay. Their meanings have usually (but not necessarily) become 
different. 
(1) *tumbuh 'grow' > tumuham 'a graft' VS tumbuhan 'vegetation, plants7 (< Malay tumbuhan id.); 
(2) *lalu 'to pass' > au 'to pass' VS lalu 'subsequently' (< Malay lalu 'to 
pass; subsequently'); 
(3) *batul 'correct, right' > bat0 'beautiful' VS bat01 'correct, true' (< 
Malay batul id.); 
(4) *diam 'be quiet; dwell' > diàpm 'live, stay' VS diam 'be quiet' (< 
Malay diam 'stay; be quiet'); 
(5) *kaban 'companion; herd' > kabatn 'group, herd' VS kawan 'com- 
panion' (< Malay kawan 'companion; herd, flock'); 
(6) *asam 'sour-fruit' > asapm 'a sour fruit' VS masam 'sour' (< Malay 
mmam 'sour, acid'); 
(7) timu 'emerge' vs timbul id. (< Malay timbul id.). 

--- [Page 10] ---
The Relevante of Salako for Proto-Malayic 389 
Examples 8 to 1 1 contain pairs of synonyms of different origin. Again, one 
synonym is inherited, and the other is borrowed from Malay (not having 
undergone preplosion or loss of *l) : 
i (8) *SA-puluh talu 'thirteen' > sapuuh tau id. vs tiga balas (< Malay tiga 
balas id.); 
(9) bukatn 'other; not this one' vs lain 'other' (< Malay lain id.); 
(10) sa-napatn-e 'beforehand' vs sa-balum-e id. (< Malay sa-balum-pa 
id.); 
(1 1) insi' 'meat, contents' vs dagigldagin 'meat' (< Malay dagig; dagin 
probably < Sambas Malay). 
Example 12 comprises a borrowed doublet, i.e., a pair of words with a 
common root, both borrowed from Malay, but at different times and with 
a differing degree of assimilation. 
(1 2) bar-ukupm 'to deliberate' (showing preplosion) vs the more recently 
borrowed form ba-ukum 'have a law system' (lacking preplosion). 
Both are borrowed from Malay hukum 'law', which in turn is bor- 
rowed from Arabic. 
l The remaining examples (1 3-23) are easily identified as Malay loanwords, 
as they show little or no assimilation to Salako phonology (not having 
undergone preplosion, cluster reduction or loss of *l) and are suspiciously 
similar to their corresponding form in Malay. 
(13) sambilan 'nine' (cf. Malay sambilan id.); 
(14) dalapan 'eight' (cf. Malay dalapan id.); 
(15) soleg 'flute' (cf. Malay sulig id.); 
(16) kambig 'goat' (cf. Malay kambig id.); 
(17) bawag 'onion' (cf. Malay bawag id.); 
(1 8) ucig 'cat' (cf. Malay kucig id.); 
(19) tukag 'craftsman' (cf. Malay tukag id.); 
(20) ba-dayug 'to row' (cf. Malay bar-dayug id.); 
(21) dukun 'traditional healer' (VS baiatn 'shaman', which denotes a dif- 
l ferent office in Salako traditional life; cf. Malay dukun 'traditional 
l healer'); 
I (22) salatan 'south' (cf. Malay salatan id.); i (23) kurag 'less' (Malay kurag id.), etc. 
As is clear from the above borrowings, Salako is undergoing marked 
influence from Indonesian, to the extent that it may soon be reduced to a 
Malay dialect with only a handful of phonological and lexica1 curiosities 
of its own. Many present-day Malay dialects must have preceded Salako 
in this process of language convergence. Nevertheless, for the time being 

--- [Page 11] ---
390 K Alexander Adelaar 
it.still possesses a number of phonological characteristics which are useful 
for distinguishing between inherited and borrowed items in a significant 
part of the vocabulary. Cluster reduction and loss of *l seem more reliable 
criteria than preplosion, which is also observed in frequently used and 
well-integrated loanwords. 
2.2 Lexicon 
Salako has retained some interesting archaic lexica1 items, which have 
usually been replaced in other Malayic isolects. Compare: 
PM Salako Malay 
*[hlui 'rattan' 
*asu? 'dog' 
*sida? 'they' 
"ulu?. 'head' 
*kunit 'turmeric; yellow' 
"ama? 'go inside' 
*manuk 'domestic fowl' 
*(a)sa? 'one' 
*talu 'three' 
*gaway 'traditional feast; 
communal work' ui 
asu? 
ne? idà?' 
uu79 
kupit 'yellow'lo 
tamà? 
manok 
asà? 
tau 
gawe id. rotlan 
a~jig 
mareka* 
kapala (< Sanskrit) 
kunig 11 
masuk 
ayam 
suatu 
tiga 
karja (< Sanskrit) 
'work; traditional feast'l2 
In some cases Salako has kept the underived PM root, which in other 
Malayic languages only occurs in combination with some fossilized ele- 
ment, as follows: 
*bu?uk 'head hair' bu?uk Minangkabau albua? 
(Malay rambut) 
*tu?(ua)t 'knee' tu?ut Malay lultut < *hulu? *tu?(ua)t 
7 The phrase ne?ida?refers to elders and people from the past. The word ne?is also used 
before personal names of old or deceased people. It is a short form of neneS6grandparent'. 
The loss of *s- in i&? is unexplained. 
8 An Old-Javanese borrowing (Adelaar 1992:126 f.n.73). 
9 In pucuk uu? 'fontanel'. The more genera1 term for 'head' is kapala. 
'0 Cf. also Bacan Malay kupit 'yellow' (Adelaar 1992:142). Salako kupit is nowadays being 
replaced by kunig. Salako has another reflex, upit, meaning 'turmeric'. 
11 A regularly inherited form kupit does occur in Malay, but it only means 'turmeric'. 
12 Other terms which have replaced *gaway are khanduri (< Persian), jamuan 'traditional 
feast, ceremony'. 

--- [Page 12] ---
The Relevanee of Sahko for Proto-Mahyie 39 1 
*apa? '(o.'s own) father' apà? Malay b/apa/k 
*rihan 'light' rehetn *rihan-an > *rihn/an > Malay riqlan 
Salako vocabulary sometimes displays semantic retentions vis-à-vis PM, 
or it shows semantic changes which cast a new light on the semantic 
development .of cognates in Malay. Compare the following examples, 
which are discussed separately in more detail below: 
PM Salako Mala y 
a. *hayam ayam-an 'domestic animal' ayam 
' 1. domestic (tame) animal; 'chicken' 
2. pet, plaything' 
b. - epekg 'domestic pig' apjiq 'dog' 
c. *bukan 'other' bukàtn 'other, foreign; not' bukan 'not' 
d. *baraq 'hip, upper leg baràkq id. salbaraq 
of animal' 'opposite 
side of nver' 
e. *uraq 'human being; uràkg id. oraq 'human 
stranger, potential enemy' being' 
a. ayam-an , 
In Austronesian comparative linguistics, the meanings 'dog', 'pig', 
'chicken', 'domestic animal', 'pet' and 'plaything' are al1 part of the Same 
semantic configuration, and Proto Austronesian *qayam can be recon- 
structed with the meaning 'l. domestic (tame) animal, 2. pet, plaything'. 
Many Austronesian languages have a reflex of Proto Austronesian *qayam 
meaning 'to play', 'plaything, toy', 'pet' or 'domestic animal', whereas 
reflexes with the meaning 'dog' are found in the Philippines, reflexes with 
the meaning 'chicken' in Malay and Javanese, and a reflex with the 
meaning 'tame pig' in North Borneo. In Siraya, an extinct language of 
Taiwan, 'ajam' basically refers to an anima1 in genera1 (Adelaar forth- 
coming). 
The meanings 'domestic (tame) animal' and 'pet, plaything' can also be 
assigned to PM *hayam. Compare the following Malayic reflexes: Iban 
ayam 'plaything, toy, pet', uduk ayam 'pet dog', and g-ayam 'to play' 
(Richards 1981), Salako ayam-an 'domestic animal', Kendayan pa- 
hayam-an 'livestock', Malay ayam 'chicken'.'3 Malay ayam 'chicken' is a 
lexica1 replacement of an earlier PM *manuk 'chicken', which still retains 
this meaning in Iban manuk (Richards 198 l), and Kendayan and Salako 
manok. PM *manuk in turn is a reflex of Proto Austronesian *manuk 'bird'. 
l3 Aside from ayam, Malay main 'to play' must also be denved from PM *hayam. Although 
the phonological history of main is less transparent, it must be denved from *hayam 
through some fairly regular sound changes (Adelaar in press). 

--- [Page 13] ---
392 K Alexander Adelaar 
b. epekg 
The form ejlekg must have developed from a Malay loanword a/ljig 'dog', 
which in turn, according to Van der Tuuk, emerged in the donor language 
as a 'high' form of *asu? (Van der Tuuk, see Brandes 1884:88). Nowadays 
epekg occurs along with the inherited word asul 'dog' (a form now no 
longer found in Malay except in the expression gigi usu 'canine tooth') and 
has acquired the meaning 'dornestic pig'. The usual pattern for the creation 
of 'high' forms in Malay is by replacing the final syllable with the sequence 
-lntan, as in the following pairs: *jalu 'male' > jantan id.; *halu 'rice 
pounder' > antan id.; *sari 'essence, gist' (< Sanskrit) > santan 'coconut 
cream'; cf. also *kuali 'k.o. frying pan' > Banjar Hulu kuantan id. (cf. 
Adelaar 1992:52 f.n. 95). The creation of apjig frorn an original word 
*asu? has therefore followed an unusual pattern. It is not an exceptional 
one, however, as is shown by the parallel derivation of a 'high' forrn mapjig 
'go inside' frorn an original *rnasuk.'4 
c. baràkg 
The supposition of a relation between barakg (Iban barag id., Richards 
1981) and salbarag is supported by the fact that in large parts of the 
Malayic-speaking world the river is seen as a body. In Malay a river is 
referred to as batag 'trunk', and the river head as hulu 'head'. It is not 
surprising that other parts of the body should also form part of this 
rnetaphor, and that the root barag 'hip, upper leg' should be identifiable 
with the denvative salbarag 'opposite shore'. The Same metaphor is found 
in Toba Batak and in Jarai.15 Toba Batak has the terms batag aek 'river', 
hlulu 'upstrearn', hae 'downstrearn', and pa-hae '(name of a place down- 
river)'. The basic meanings of the Toba Batak words batag, ulu and hae, 
however, are 'body, trunk', 'head' and 'hip, leg of a slaughtered animal' 
respectively. Jarai has the terms ia krdg 'river' (ia 'water'), aks ia 'upriver 
area', and to'kai ia 'downriver area'. The basic meanings of ako" and to'kui 
are 'head' and 'foot' respectively. 
d. bukàm 
The original meaning of bukàtnlbukan was 'other' (in Malay, this meaning 
shifted to 'not (this one, of several alternatives)'. This is apparent from its 
use in Old Malay inscriptions, where Çoedès, by assigning the meaning 
'other' to it, succeeded in improving the translation of some passages. It 
is also apparent from cognate forms meaning 'other' outside the Malayic 
'4 Note also that the application of the general rules for forming 'high' forms to both *halu 
and *asul would probably have resulted in homonymous forms. 
15 An Austronesianlanguage belonging to the Chamic subgroup and spoken in Pleiku 
Province, Vietnam. 

--- [Page 14] ---
The Reievance of Salako for Proto-Malayic 393 
subgroup, cf. Proto Chamic *tukOn 'other'l6 and Acehnese bukÖn.17 Blust 
attributes the meaning of 'negator of nominals' to his Proto-West-Malayo- 
Polynesian etymon *bakan (a doublet of *bukan), but some of the reflexes 
that he gives for it.have the meaning 'other' (including that in Tagbanawa, 
a Philippine language). 
e. urakg 
Salako urakg does not simply mean 'human being': referring to one's 
relatives as urakg is considered an insult among West Malayic Dayak 
speakers. The word actually means 'outsider, stranger, a person one does 
not have any dealings with'. If we posit this as the meaning of the PM 
etymon *uraq, we wil1 also be able to understand the implication of Malay 
expressions such as nagari orag 'foreign countries' and barag orag 'things 
which do not belong tuus'. The Same connotation of 'outsider' als0 exists 
in some non-Malayic cognates. The Acehnese word uriag 'human being' 
(Hoesein Djajadiningrat 1934) is more derogatory than the neutra1 term 
göb id., and Jarai aräg is regularly translated as 'others, someone else' 
(French autrui, Lafont 1963:390 and passim). 
3. SALAKO AND 'OLD MALAY' 
3.1 Lexicon 
Salako shares some vocabulary with 'Old Malay'. Compare the following 
items, to some of which I assign a different meaning from that given in 
De Casparis (1950, 1956): 
Old Malay Salako 
a. mammam 'imprecation' mamaq 'pray' 
b. tämva 'drug, medicine' ta/tamà id. 
c. an '(relative marker)' aN- (id.) 
d. mars1 '(reciprocal prefix)' ba-sig - '(media1 prefix)', 
(De Casparis: 'washerman') Malay bar-sa- 
'(reciprocal prefix)' 
e. marppädah 'to report, relate' 
(De Casparis: 'be submissive') ba-padàh id. 
'6 Lee reconstructs *t-, but the initia1 nasal in Rhade mkan clearly shows that the etymon 
should be reconstructed with *b- (Lee 1966). 
17 This forrn is indicated as a negator, but that it onginally meant 'other' is still evident frorn 
the line siuròë iaën simaiam bukon 'each day and each night' (Hoesein Djajadiningrat 
1934). 

--- [Page 15] ---
394 K Alexander Adelaar 
f. lanit, lnit 'disappeared', 
maka-lanit 'make disappear' 
(De Casparis: 'make crazy' or 
t 'make impotent') agit 'disappeared' 
g. manalit mas 'steal gold' 
(De Casparis: 'spend gold') kait, qait 'steal'lg 
h. parttakan 'bean field' 
(De Casparis: 'witness') ratak 'bean' 
It is almost impossible to demonstrate the advantages of the glosses I 
propose without reproducing the full text and translation of the Telaga 
Batu and Gandasuli inscriptions.19 Besides, an alternative translation of 
one lexical item often entails the re-interpretation of a string of other 
lexical items or phrases, as there is an almost discouraging number of 
unknown factors involved in the transliteration, translation and cultural 
interpretation of Old Malay inscriptions. This is due to the restricted corpus 
of these inscriptions, the physical wear and tear which they have under- 
gone, and our lack of knowledge of the period in which they were produ- 
ced. In fact, they are just fragments of an unknown world long past. 
I shall restrict myself here to a short explanation of my translations of 
the above words. For items a., b. and c. I do not propose alternative 
translations, as I agree with the translations given for them by De Casparis. 
Readers who prefer to have a fuller appreciation of the relevant arguments 
are advised to read the next section in conjunction with De Casparis 1950 
and 1.956. 
d. marsi 
In lines 3 to 5 of the Telaga Batu inscription an enumeration is given of 
al1 the categories of people who wil1 be killed by a curse if they are not 
faithful to their king. 
'(3) /l kämu vañak=mämu räjaputra. prosfära.. bhüpati . senäpati. 
näyaka . pratyaya . häji-pratyaya . dandanäyaka . (4). . . mürddhaka . 
tüha an vatak=vuruh . addhyäksi nijavarna . vasikarana . 
kumärämätya . cäthabhara . adhikarana . karmma . . . käyastha . 
sthäpaka . puhävam . vaniyäga . pratisära . dä . . . (5) kämu marsi 
häji . hulun=häji . vañak=mämu uram nivunuh sumpah dari 
mammam kämu. kadäci kämu tida bhakti dy=äku nivunuh kämu 
sumpah . . .' (De Casparis 1956:32-33.) 
Kendayan kait, plir id. 
l9 The Telaga Batu inscription dates from about 686 A.D. and was found in the Palembang 
area (De Caspans 1956:15-16). The Gandasuli inscnption dates from 824 A.D. and was 
found in Java, in the village of Gandasuli (Kecamatan Parakan, Temanggung, Kedu). 

--- [Page 16] ---
The Relevante of Salako for Proto-Malayic 395 
Translation: 
'(3) Al1 of you, as many as you are, - sons of kings . . ., chiefs, army 
commanders, näyakas, pratyayas, confidants (?) of the king, judges, 
(4) chiefs of the . . . (?), surveyors of groups of workmen, surveyors 
of low-castes, cutlers, kumärämatyas, cäfabha.~, adhikaranas, . . . 
(?), clerks, sculptors, naval captains, merchants, commanders,. . . (?), 
(5) and you - washermen of the king and slaves of the king, - al1 
of you will be killed by the curse of (this) imprecation; if you are not 
faithful to me, you will be killed by the curse.' (De Casparis 1956: 
36-37.) 
De Casparis translates marsïhäji as 'washermen of the king', which, as he 
admits in a footnote, is conjectural: 
'Marsï haji, - conjectural translation. The first word might wel1 
correspond to modern Indonesian barsih, "clean". The correspond- 
ence mar- : bar- is regular. As to the loss of the visarga with 
compensatory vowel lengthening, the same line appears to give 
another example (luvï : luvih). - It is not astonishing to find this 
group mentioned here. The washermen, who e.g. form a separate 
caste in India, might be dangerous people. One would have expected 
to find cooks also mentioned here, but they may be included in the 
next term.' (De Casparis 1956:37 f.n. 13.) 
Although it is correct to say that there is an 'Old Malay' mar- correspond- 
ing with present-day Malay bar-, this does not mean that there is a regular 
m- : b- correspondence. The correspondence only applies to the intrans- 
itive verba1 prefix bar- (/PM *mAr-/'Old Malay' mar-, a bound mor- 
pheme), and does not as a rule apply to initia1 syllables of vocabulary items. 
The change from PM *m- to b- in this prefix is due to a concatenation of 
specific phonotactic conditions which do not apply to the pair of lexica1 
items marsï : barsih (Adelaar 1992:163). Another argument against a 
relation between marsland barsih is the absence of -h in the former, as 'Old 
Malay' -h and Malay -h do regularly correspond in most of the vocabulary. 
I analyse marsï- as a prefix combination (mar- + si-) with reciprocal 
meaning, which is related to Malay bar-sa- or bar-si-, Salako (ba)sin- and 
Minangkabau ba-si-, and the second part of which reflects a (West) Ma- 
layo Polynesian prefix *si- forming reciprocal (and medial?) verbs. Proto- 
(West) Malayo Polynesian *si- is also still reflected in the second part of 
the Toba Batak prefix combination mar-si- denoting reciprocity. In Malay 
the combination has ceased to be productive and only appears in a few 
derivatives with reciprocal or media1 meaning. Examples: 
tumpu 'take-off, abutment' bar-sa-tumpu 'take off against each other 
(e.g. in tug-of-war game)' 

--- [Page 17] ---
396 K Ahander Adelaar 
tubuh 'body' bar-sa-tubuh 'have sex' 
manakan (takan) 'to press' bar-si-takan lutut 
'with one's arms (leaning) on one's knees' 
tagal) 'tended, tense' bar-si-tagag urat leher 
'(to cause each other's neck muscles to 
become tense =) to fight with each other' 
[rayutl barsa-rayut (labelled as Kelantanese in 
Iskandar) 'hang down (of many clothes)' 
The corresponding Minangkabau combination basi- seems to be more 
productive than Malay bar-sa-lbar-si-, and it also seems to have a wider 
meaning (Moussay 1981:197-199). Salako has ba-siN- or siN-, which in 
the four available instances only forms media1 verbs. Compare: 
[soor] 
muhà 'face' 
[komor] basig-koí'opm 'put entirely into one's 
mouth' 
sin-soor 'throw oneself to the floor out of 
recalcitrance, rol1 oneself over the Boor' 
basi-muhà 'wash one's face' 
basig-komor 'rinse one's mouth' 
For (kämu) marsjhäji I propose the translation '(you) who treat each other 
as royal', which implies '(you) the inner circle of the king', 'members of 
the court', or possibly even 'relatives of the king'. The lines in question thus 
read: 
'(. . .) clerks, sculptors, naval captains, merchants, commanders,. . . (?), and 
you - intimates and slaves of the king -, al1 of you will be killed by the 
curse of (this) imprecation; if you are not faithful to me, you will be killed 
by the curse.' 
e. marppädah 
Old Malay malppädah occurs six times in the Telaga Batu inscription, 
and in al1 of these instances the translation 'to report' fits in better with 
the context than De Casparis' 'be submissive'. Compare the following 
lines: 
'(6) . . . tuvi mulam kadäci kämu makänucära dari çatrunku dari 
dätu paracaksu lai . dari kulamämu mitramämu. dari vaduamämu . 
dari hulu vukan paracaksu (7) lai . manujäri kämu drohaka 
vanun=dy=äku mälun äda di kämu . tfda ya marppädah dy=äku di 
huluntuhänku . kadäci kämu lai lari nivunuh kämu sumpah . . .' (De 
Casparis 1956:33; my italics.) 

--- [Page 18] ---
The Relevante of Salako for Proto-Malayic 397 
Translation: 
'Besides, - if you form part of the retinue (?) of my enemies, or of 
Dätus spying for others, or of your families or friends, of your 
servants, or of other chiefs spying for (7) others - if you are in 
contact with traitors who are plotting against me, before they are 
(actually) together with you, people who are not submissive to me and 
to my empire, and if (at last), you go over to them, - you will be 
killed by the curse.' (De Casparis 1956:38.) 
In my alternative translation, I also prefer to translate manujän as 'to tell, 
to say to', and to interpret di kämu as an agent, '(some of) you', of the verb 
marppädah, rather than as a comitative adjunct 'together with you'. I 
translate larl'as 'to flee' and prefer not to make the contextual inter- 
pretation ('go over to them') made by De Casparis. Finally, I analyse 
huluntuhänku as a compound consisting of hulun 'servant' + tuhä 'old; 
senior' (+ -nku 'my'), and translate 'my senior servants' instead of De 
Casparis' 'my empire'. Compare: 
'Besides, - if you form part of the retinue (?) of my enemies, or of 
Dätus spying for others, or of your relatives or friends, of your 
servants, or of the chiefs spying for (7) others - if (some)one tells 
you that traitors are plotting against me, and someofyou fail to report 
it to me or to my senior servants, and if (at last) you flee - you will 
be kilied by the curse . . .' 
f. lagit, makabit 
De Casparis, following Kern (Verspreide Geschriften VIL2 12), translates 
makabit in the Telaga Batu inscription as 'making crazy', although in his 
wordlist (on p.347) he also considers as alternative translation 'to make 
impotent', pointing to the fact that Indonesian (and more particularly 
Jakartan) has the word lagit 'indolent, lazy', 'but then with the back- 
thought of making money by sly means without working' (De Casparis 
1956:357). I propose a translation 'to disappear' for the root /wit, as this 
meaning is more compatible with Salako agit and Kendayan iagit, and 
furthermore with Old Javanese lagit 'vaguely visible in the distance, van- 
ishing from sight' (Zoetmulder 1982) and Sundanese ligit 'gone, lost, 
disappeared; in disuse' (Eringa 1984). The literal translation of the deriv- 
ative makalanit would then be 'to cause to disappear', and in the relevant 
passage of the Telaga Batu inscription 'to reduce' or 'to take away' (for 
the prefix maka- see below). 
From a translation point of view, the difference between my translation 
and the one by De Casparis may not be readily apparent. The form 
makalwit occurs four times in the Telaga Batu inscription. In two cases, 
De Casparis' rendering yields 'to make the minds20 of people crazy' (lines 
20 Sanskrit präna- 'heart, rnind, inner life' (Gonda 1973:lOS). 

--- [Page 19] ---
398 K A Alexander Adelaar 
13 and 14 in the transliteration, De Casparis 1956:34), and in one case 
simply 'to make crazy' (line 15), without a following object. From a 
stylistic point of view these translations are correct, and the phrase 'to 
make the minds of people crazy' sounds better than 'to cause the minds 
of people to disappear' or 'to reduce the minds of people'. But this does 
not remove the fact that the primary meaning of makabit must be 'to 
cause to disappear', as is demonstrated by the fourth case. Here (De 
Casparis 1956:33, line 8) De Casparis is forced to translate tämva 'herb' 
as an instrument, although syntactically it occupies the place of the object, 
viz.: 
(8) 'athavä marcorakära hinamadhyamottamajäti . yadi . makalanit 
tämva yam prajä niraksänku . [. . .l21 nivunuh kämu sumpah . . .' 
Translation: 
(8) 'or if you commit theft - whether you are of low, middle or high 
descent, - if by means of herbs (?) you make the subjects, protected 
by me, mad, [. . .] you will be killed by the curse.' (De Casparis 
1956:39.) 
It is awkward to interpret tämva as the instrument in the above phrase, and 
it is anyway unnecessary to dus0 if the word makalanit is translated as 'to 
take away'. The sentence then reads: 
(8) 'or if you commit theft - whether you are of low, middle or high 
descent, - if you take away herbs belonging to subjects protected 
by me, [. . .] you will be killed by the curse.' 
The passage (like most other passages in Old Malay inscriptions) admit- 
tedly remains vague, but at least the structure of the sentence becomes 
somewhat more transparent. Moreover, a meaning 'to take away' can be 
more satisfactorily linked with cognate forms in Salako, Old Javanese and 
Sundanese than if the word is translated as 'making crazy' or 'making 
, impotent'. 
g. manalit 
De Casparis translates the word manalit in the following (only partly 
translatable) line of the Telaga Batu inscription as 'to spend'. 
'(10) athavä kadäci kämu mäti malün mamruruä athavä kämu 
lariya mamlarïya lai kämu. nivunuh kämu sumpah l/ athavä kämu 
Here I have omitted a co-ordinate clause which was left untranslated by De Caspans and 
which is not relevant for my argument. 

--- [Page 20] ---
The Rehance of Salako for Proto-Malayic 399 
nicäri lai marvuat=nicäri parddätuan (l l) manalit mas mani malün 
mammruä kadätuanku . . .' (De Casparis 1956:33). 
Translation: - 
'(10) Or, if you die (?) before having succeeded in destroying (my 
palace) (?), or flee or help others to flee, - you will be killed by the 
curse. Or, if you . . . (?) (1 1) spend gold and jewels in order to destroy 
my keraton . . .' (De Casparis 1956:40). 
In a footnote, De Casparis explains manalit as a form'that is related to 
Javanese a-Zit 'small', so that its genera1 meaning must have been 'to make 
small, to divide int0 small parts', 'presumably for distributing the treasures 
among possible rebels' (De Casparis 1956:40 f.n.34). However, the sen- 
tence would make more sense if manalit were translated as 'to steal', which 
would entail a derivation from a root kalit. Compare the resultant trans- 
lation, viz.: 
'(10) Or if you die (?) before having succeeded in destroying (my 
palace) (?), or flee or help others to flee - you will be killed by the 
curse. Or, if you . . . (?) (1 1) steal gold and jewels in order to destroy 
my keraton . . .' 
Besides the Salako word kuit and Kendayan kalit, Old Javanese a-kalit 
'appropriating, seizing, taking hold of (Zoetmulder 1982) is probably als0 
related to manalit. 
h. parttakan 
In the Gandasuli inscription, an enumeration is given of the pieces of land 
belonging to a particular hermitage and their areas. Compare the relevant 
passage and its translation (my English translation of the original Dutch 
one made by De Casparis). 
'(1 1) iya mätraña winihnya ksetra di tanah buna tlu barih pragäiuh 
ampa lattir. (1 2). . . (1 3). . .z2 tarukän salattir mätraña winih di tanah 
buna paräwis ampa puluh salattir parttakan di walunuh pu posuh 
(14) di- pragäiuh parpantua warpatih manulu namanda . . .' (De 
Casparis 1950:62). 
22 The enurneration of land-holdings continues in a number of grarnrnatically identical 
constructions which do not need to be repeated here. 

--- [Page 21] ---
400 K Alexander Adelaar 
Translation: 
'(1 1) The tilled surface areas of the land are as follows: in Tanah 
Buna ('The Land of Flowers'), three barih; in Pragäluh, four lattic 
(1 2) . . . (1 3) . . . in Tarukan, one lattir. The total area of the tilled 
land in Tanah Buna is 4 1 lattir. The partakan [sic] in Walunuh is Pu 
Posuh; (14) in Pragaluh: the wife of the Warpatih named Manulu.' 
(Original Dutch in De Casparis 1950:65-66.) 
De Casparis, in his translation, has: 'The partakan [sic] in Walunuh is Pu 
Posuh; in Pragaluh: the wife of the Warpatih named Manul~'.~3 With my 
interpretation of the word parttakan, the last lines would read as follows: 
(1 3) 'The total area of the tilled land in Tanah Buna is 4 1 lattir. The 
beanfield in Walunuh belongs to Pu Posuh; (14) (the one) in Pragaluh, 
(belongs) to the wife of the Warpatih named Manulu.' 
The following arguments support this (admittedly prosaic) translation with 
'beanfield': 
- De Casparis clearly has some difficulty in interpreting parttakan. His 
translation with 'witness' is not based on linguistic arguments, but is 
prompted by the observation that in Old Javanese inscriptions, in similar 
contextual settings, witnesses would be expected to occur. 
- Moreover, De Casparis in a few cases uses erroneous spellings for 
parttakan. In his transcription on p.62 he writes 'parttakan', but in his 
translation on p.65 'partakan', and in note 44 on p.64 and (twice) in note 
27 on p.69 'parttakkan'. These spellings are not without relevance for a 
further interpretation of this form. In the 'Old Malay' script, there is no 
symbol for schwa as such, but its presence is often implied by a doubling 
of the following consonant.24 On the basis of a spelling 'parttakkan', De 
Casparis tries to link the form with the Javanese takan 'staff, speculating 
that the alleged witnesses in this passage may have had a staff in their hand 
(De Casparis 1950:69 note 27). If the spelling 'parttakkan' were correct, 
however, there would have been some ground for inferring a root *takan, 
at least from a phonological point of view. But the geminated 'tt' would 
likewise imply a preceding schwa, and this would contradict a derivation 
*par- f *takan as suggested by De Casparis. It is quite likely that De 
Casparis' transliteration 'parttakan' is the correct one, and this implies a 
phonological */paratakan/. 
23 In the original Dutch translation: 'De Partakan te Walunuh is Pu Posuh; te Pragaluh: de 
vrouw van de Warpatih, Manulu geheten' (De Casparis 1950:65-66). 
24 That is, a schwa is irnplied between a consonant that is irnrnediately followed by another 
consonant which is gerninated (as between 'r' and 'tt' in 'parttakan'), or where a written 
'a' is irnrnediately followed by a geminated consonant (as, e.g., in the second syllable in 
'parttakkan'). 

--- [Page 22] ---
The Relevante of Salako for Proto-Malayic 40 1 
- Judging from the transliteration 'parttakan', the root of this derivative 
had a schwa and must phonologically have been *ratak. Comparative- 
linguistic evidence supports a root *ratak 'bean': besides Salako and Ken- 
J dayan ratak, other forms corresponding to it would be Old Javanese 
(h)atak (Zoetmulder 1982), Cham rata? (Moussay 197 l), Acehnese ritia? 
(Hoesein Djajadiningrat 1934), Ngaju haretak, saretak (Hardeland 1859) 
and Iban ratak (Richards 198 l), al1 meaning 'bean'. 
- A derivative *pa-ratak-an meaning '(the place where beans are found 
=) beanfield' from *ratak 'bean' would be entirely regular. 
- As the relevant passage in the Gandasuli inscription describes the 
division and size of terrains, 'beanfield' for parttakan would not be out of 
place. It fits in better with the context than 'witness', and yields a better 
reading of the passage. 
3.2 Morphology 
Salako reflects an older stage of Malayic morphology in many respects 
than does Malay. It has retained some affixes which have become lost in 
Malay but still have correspondences in Old Malay. Like Malay, Salako 
has developed a passive prefix di-, which is an innovation that is not yet 
present in Old Malay. However, Salako di- never acquired the.same 
I prominence as Malay di-. 
a. The subjunctive marker -a? 
Salako has a subjunctive marker -a? which corresponds in form and 
meaning with -a in 'Old Malay'. On the basis of this evidence, I reconstruc- 
ted a PM subjunctive suffix *-a?, which in turn is a reflex of the Proto 
Austronesian subjunctive marker *-a (Adelaar 1992: 163- 164). Salako 
examples are: 
Dameà mare-à? ià pian? 
what give-à? them this 
l 'What should we give to them?' 
0, adi?-à! aku nabakq-à? tabu kità? ap-pian! 
hey young. sibling! I chop-à? sugar-cane you(r) which this 
'Hey, younger brother! I'm going to (/I intend to) chop your sugar-cane!' 
Compare also the following sentence, where -à7 is suffixed to a locative 
phrase: 
ià anà? sampat sidi ka umà-?à? 
he .not have opportunity absolutely to the field-à? 
'He had no opportunity at al1 to go to the field' 

--- [Page 23] ---
402 K Alexander Adelaar 
b. The transitive marker maka- 
Salako has a transitive prefix maka-. As the only two instances that I have 
found have intransitive verba1 roots, it seems to form factitive verbs (as it . 7 does in many other Austronesian languages). Examples are: 
maka-lalu moot 'keep one's promise, act according to what one has said' 
maka-rehetn 'make light (particularly a punishment)' 
maka-lalu moot must have been borrowed from Kendayan, which has 
retained *l, and where this idiom is also found. A cognate prefix with a 
similar (apparently factitive) function is 'Old Malay' maka-. On the basis 
of Salako and 'Old Malay' maka-, I reconstructed *maka-, a transitivizing 
prefix which, in turn, reflects the Proto Austronesian transitivizing prefix 
*maka- (Adelaar 1992: 195). 
c. The passive marker di- 
Salako has the 'passive' marker di-, but its use here is different from that 
in other Malayic languages and dialects. It is prefixed either optionaily to 
the agent (which as a rule directly precedes the passive verb) or directly 
to the verb in cases where the agent is not expressed. 
Examples of di- in verb phrases without an agent: 
Kalaw ià diundag pak tandà, jare uràkg, 
if 3p di-invite uselwith token (=written invitation) say people 
'If they are invited by means of a token, as people say, 
pake undagan jaman kanià?, ià berà, bai? atàkg. 
uselwith invitation period present 3p angry refuse come 
by means of a written invitation as is used nowadays, they usually get angry 
and refuse to come: 
Jukut ià diaggap urakg. Tapi ka10 uràkg tuhà añ-ñian tai 
indeed 3p di-consider outsider but if parent this anaphoric 
they are regarded as outsiders, after all. But if the parents 
naik ka rumàh-rumàh kamarde, añ-ñian undagan sidi, 
go up . tolin house-house intimate this invitation real 
cal1 in to visit each of the intimates, that is a real invitation, 
jadi añ-ñian batol-bat01 diñaru?, ià sukà 
so this (one) thelreal - truelreal di-N-called 3p happy 
and the people in question are properly invited, they are happy.' 

--- [Page 24] ---
The Relevante of Salako for Proto-Malayic 403 
Examples of di- prefixed to the agent: 
uràkg an-di-ñà naiki? .rumah-e añ-ñian tai 
person which-di-3pAgent go up house-hislher this anaphoric 
nanag topokg 
see betel set .' 
'The person whom he's calling on sees the betel set.' 
Jadi padà suatu ari ià di Sariana ñuruh nahan bubu 
so at one day 3p di Sariana N-send to set fish-trap 
'So one day he was sent by Sariana to set fish-traps.' 
Ñamae Kulup ke kau ani? mati di pate? numbak? 
How Kulup Emphatic particle 2p.singular not dead di trap . N-pierce 
'How come you have not been stabbed to death by the pate' trap, Kulup?' 
Examples of passive constructions without di-: 
Jadi anà7 ate? sambar rumàh .agkoà 
so not lightning strike house. that 
'So the lightning did not strike that house.'25 
Nanà nage ka10 dah mañak padi 
soon Emphatic particle if already a lot paddy 
anà? kità? piharà anà? kità? hormati? 
not 2p.plural look after not 2p.plural respect 
'The next thing you know, when there is a lot of paddy, you won't look 
after it well, you won't treat it with due respect.' 
If Salako di- is prefixed to the verb at all, it is not necessarily prefixed 
directly to the verba1 base. Nasalization, which in Salako is a marker of 
the realis mood in passive verbs, fills the slot immediately before the verba1 
base. This can be seen above in a form like diñaru?, which consists of di- + nasalization + the verba1 base sarui? This behaviour of Salako di- 
suggests that it only recently developed from a preposition into a prefix, 
and this corresponds well with the fact that 'Old Malay' did not have a 
prefix di-. It had instead a prefix ni-, which is a reflex of the Proto 
Austronesian passive marker *ni-/*-in-. Examples (taken from De Caspa- 
ris 1956) are: 
25 In this sentence, the passive voice is indicated in two ways, viz.: (l) word order, i.e., nothing 
intewenes between the agent and the verb, and (2) the absence of a nasalized initia1 
consonant in the word sambar (which in Salako implies the passive voice and arealis 
mood). 

--- [Page 25] ---
404 K Alexander Adelaar 
(p.33 line 5) 
kadäci kamu tida bhakti dy=äku nivunuh kämu sumpah 
'if you are not faithful to me, you will be killed by the curse' 
(p.35 line 20) 
niparsumpahakan=kämu . kadäci kämu tida bhakti tida tattva dy=äku 
'you are cursed if you are not submissive to me, if you are not sincere to 
me' 
(p.36 line 25) 
nivunuh kämu sumpah niminumämu ini 
'you will be killed by this curse which is drunk by you' 
The fact that di- still has a vowel i (instead of an expected schwa) in almost 
al1 the Malay dialects where it is attested also testifies to its recent devel- 
opment from a preposition int0 a prefix. It was not part of the PM 
morpheme inventory (Adelaar 1992: 16 1 - 163). 
4. Conclusions 
It is apparent from the evidence presented above that Salako is an import- 
ant link in the reconstruction of PM, particularly in the lexical and mor- 
phological fields. It has kept many of the affixes lost elsewhere in the 
Malayic subgroup, and conversely, it has not completely followed other 
Malayic isolects in their development of new affixes. Particular develop- 
ments in Salako phonology make it possible for US to distinguish between 
inherited vocabulary and fairly recent loanwords. 
It does not necessanly follow that Western Malayic Dayak, or for that 
matter Malayic Dayak, is an early offshoot within the Malayic subgroup. 
'Malayic Dayak' is actually a geographically and religiously (rather than 
linguistically) determined label for Malayic isolects spoken by non-Mus- 
lims in Borneo (Hudson 1970). It remains to be seen through further 
investigation whether there is a linguistic basis for such a subgroup, and, 
if there is, whether Malayic Dayak constitutes a primary branch or is just 
a lower-order subgroup within Malayic. 
The Salako material is furthermore of great value for the interpretation of 
'Old Malay' inscriptions. Several 'Old Malay' sentences become clearer 
when the meaning of some of their lexical items is checked against that 
of their Salako cognates. 
The importance of comparative-linguistic data is als0 evidenced by the 
fact that Çoedès was in many ways more successful in translating 'Old 
Malay' inscriptions than, his predecessors (Çoedès 1930). For Çoedès 
profited from his knowledge of Cham in improving and supplementing the 

--- [Page 26] ---
The Relevante of Salako for Proto-Malayic 405 
translations made by Kern (1 9 13) and others. The latter, on the other hand, 
often relied on their knowledge of Javanese where their knowledge of 
Malay and Sanskrit proved insufficient for an accurate translation. From 
an Austronesianist point of view, there are strong reasons for considering 
the Chamic languages and Acehnese to be more closely related to Malay 
than Ja~anese.~6 Hence it is not entirely surprising that Çoedès was able 
to give better translations of some lexical items, although he may not have 
been aware of the extent of the genetic affinity between Malay and Cham 
at the time. 
From this point of view, the use of Salako for the study of 'Old Malay' 
inscriptions is at least as appropriate as is that of Cham, as it is genetically 
even closer to 'Old Malay'. A knowledge of Javanese language and culture 
also remains an indispensable tool. Malay and Javanese have been influ- 
encing each other strongly for more than a millennium, while moreover 
we happen to know more about early Javanese than early Malay language 
and culture. On the other hand, we have no absolute evidence that this 
mutual influencing goes back to as early as the seventh century A.D., so 
that too much recourse to Javanese may eventually yield unsatisfactory 
results. 
At any rate, we should keep an open mind with respect to evidence from 
other - more closely related - languages in the study of 'Old Malay' 
inscriptions. 
The question as to whether or not 'Old Malay' is a form of Malay has been 
discussed by a number of scholars. In brief, Ferrand (1932) believed it to 
be an early form of Malagasy. Aichele interpreted several morphological 
and lexical items in the inscriptions as Batak (see Teeuw 1959). Most other 
scholars (Coedès 1930, Kern 19 13, De Casparis 1950, 1956, Teeuw 
1959), however, tended to interpret the language of the inscriptions as an 
early form of Malay, and presumed that some of the problematic morpho- 
logica1 and lexical elements in it were archaisms lost in later Malayic 
isolects. The Salako evidence goes a long way in showing that they were 
right. 
That Ferrand's approach to the matter was unsystematic and his con- 
clusions wrong has already been sufficiently demonstrated by Damais 
(1968). Aichele's arguments were certainly more to the point, although it 
is now possible, thanks to the available Salako evidence, to discard most 
of them. Aichele's evidence for Batak elements in the inscriptions was'as 
follows: 
- The occurrence of the compound sapuluh dua 'twelve'27, where Toba 
Batak has sampulu dua, whereas the Malayic isolects use a compound 
26 Although this matter still requires systematic investigation. 
27 In the Kedukan Bukit inscription (AD 683) in South Sumatra (De Caspans 1956:14). 

--- [Page 27] ---
K Alexander Adelaar 
with balas for the formation of numbers between ten and twenty (with 
the exception of Brunei Malay, which follows the pattern of the inscrip- 
tions). In everyday speech, Salako and Kendayan both have balas, but 
in more elevated language one still finds Salako sapuuh dua, sapuuh tau 
etc. (Kendayan sapuluh dua, sapuluh talu). It seems reasonable to as- 
sume that sapulu dua was a PM retention, and not a borrowing or a loan 
construction from Batak. 
- The occurrence of the passive verba1 prefix ni- instead of di-. This prefix 
admittedly is not found in Malayic isolects, but does not necessarily have 
to be interpreted as a Batak borrowing, as it may equally wel1 have 
developed from Proto Austronesian *ni-/*-in-. As for the widespread 
prefix di-, there is no ground for its reconstruction (as a prefix) in PM 
(cf. section 3.2 above). 
- The occurrence of a verba1 prefix maka- corresponding to Toba Batak 
maha- (< Proto Batak *maka-, see Adelaar 1981). As was seen in 
section 3.2, this prefix is also attested for West Malayic Dayak, and we 
may assume that it is a retention in 'Old Malay'. 
- The occurrence of an intransitive verba1 prefix mar-. Some forms of 
Batak (e.g., Toba Batak) also have mar-, whereas Malayic isolects today 
al1 have bar- (or a related form) as an intransitive prefix. 
Aichele's conclusion that constructions like sapulu dua and the prefix 
maka- were Batak can be discarded with the help of the West Malayic 
Dayak evidence. His assumption that ni- was Batak can be discarded on 
the basis of our knowledge of Proto Austronesian morphology. Finally, his 
assumption that mar- was a Batak prefix was rejected earlier on the basis 
of phonotactic arguments (Adelaar 1992: 163). It therefore looks very 
much as if 'Old Malay' is Old Malay after all. 
ABBREVIATIONS USED 
BEFEO Bulletin de l 'Ecole Française d'Ejctrême- Orient 
BM Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde of the KITLV 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Abdul Chaer Mad'ie,1976, Kamus dialek Melayu Jakarta - Bahasa Indonesia, Jakarta: Nusa 
Indah. 
Abdul Jebar Hapip, 1976, KamusBanjar Indonesia, Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengem- 
bangan Bahasa. 
Adelaar, K. Alexander, 198 1, 'Reconstruction of Proto-Batak phonology', Nusa 10: 1-20. 
-, 1991, 'A phonological sketch of Salako (West Kalimantan)', in: Ray Harlow (ed.), VICAL 
2, Western Austronesian and contact languages; Papers from the Fifth International 
Conference on Austronesian Linguistics, pp. 1-19, Auckland: Linguistic Society of New 
Zealand. 

--- [Page 28] ---
The Relevante of Salako for Proto-Malayic 407 
-, 1992, ~roto-~ila~ic: A reconstruction of its phonology and part of its morphology and 
lexicon, Canberra: Research School of Pacific Studies, Linguistics, Australian National 
University. [Pacific Linguistics Series C-1 19. Revised version of 1985 PhD Thesis.] 
-, in press, 'The history of thing, animal, person and related words in Malay', in: A.K. Pawley 
.i and M.D. Ross (eds), Ausnonesian terminologies, Canberra: Research School of Pacific 
Studies, Australian National University. [To appear in 1993 in the Pacific Linguistics 
series.] 
-, forthcoming, [article on the linguistic history of Siraya, a now extinct Formosan lan- 
guagel. 
Aichele, W., 1942-1943, 'Die altmalaische Literatursprache und ihr Einfluss auf das Altja- 
vanische', Zeitschrift fiir Eingeborenen-Sprachen 33:37-66. 
Blust, Robert A., 1980, 'Austronesian etymologies', Oceanic Linguistics 19- 112. 
I Brandes, J.L.A., 1884, Bijdrage tot de vergelijkende klankleer der Westersche afdeeling van de 
Maleisch-Polynesische taalfamilie, Utrecht: Van de Weijer. [Leiden PhD thesis.] 
Casparis, J.C. de, 1950, Prasasti Indonesia I, Bandung: Nix. 
-, 1956, Selected inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th century A.D.; Prasasti Indonesia II, 
Bandung: Masa Baru. 
Çoedès, C., 1930, 'Les inscnptions malaises de Srivijaya', BEFEO 30:29-80. 
Damais, Louis-Charles, 1968, 'Etudes soumatranaises 111; La langue B des inscnptions de 
Sri Wijaya', BEFEO 54:523-566. 
Ennga, ES., 1984, Soendaas - Nederlands woordenboek, Dordrecht, Netherlands 1 Cinna- 
minson, USA: Foris. 
Ferrand, C., 1932, 'Quatre textes épigraphiques malayo-sansknts de Sumatra et de Bangka', 
Journal Asiatique 221:271-326. 
Gonda, J., 1973, Sanskrir in Indonesia, New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture. 
Hardeland, August, 1859, Dajacksch - Deutsches Wörterbuch, Amsterdam: Muller. 
Helfrich, O.L., 1904, Bijdragen tot de kennis van het Midden Maleisch (Besemahsch en Sera- 
wajsch dialect), Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap 53. 
Hoesein Djajadiningrat, 1934, Atièhsch - Nederlandsch woordenboek (2 vols), Batavia: 
Landsdrukkerij. 
Hudson, A.B., 1967, The Barito isolects of Borneo, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
[Southeast Asia Program, Data Paper No.68.1 
-, 1970, 'A note on Selako: Malayic Dayak and Land Dayak languages in Western Borneo', 
Sarawak Museum Jouml 18-36/37 (New Series):301-318. 
Kern, H., 1913, 'Inscriptie van Kota Kapur (eiland Bangka; 608 çäka)', BH 67:393-400. 
[Also published in H. Kern, Verspreide Geschrifien VII, The Hague: Nijhoff, pp. 205-2 14.1 
Lafont, Pierre Bernard, 1963, Prieres jarai, Paris: École Francaise d'Extrême-Orient. [Col- 
lection de textes et documents sur 1'Indochine VIII.] 
Lee, Ernest Wilson, 1966, Proto-Chamic phonologic word and vocabulary, PhD thesis, 
Indiana University, Bloomington, Ind. 
Moussay, Gérard, 197 1, Dictionnaire cum - viernamien - français, Phanrang: Centre Culture1 
Cam. 
-, 1981, La langue minangkabau, Pans: Association Archipel. [Cahier d'Archipel 14.1 
Richards, A., 1981, An Iban - English dictionary, Oxford: Clarendon Press.. 
Teeuw, A., 1959, 'The history of the Malay language', BKI 115:138-156. 
Thaib, gl. St. Pamoentjak M., 1935, Kamoes bahasa Minangkabau - bahasa Melajoe Riau, 
Batavia: Balai Poestaka. 
Warneck, Joh.,1977, Toba-Batak - Deutsches Wörterbuch (neu herausgegeben von R. Rool- 

--- [Page 29] ---
408 K Alexander Adelaar 
Wurm, S.A., and Shirô Hattori, 198 1-3, Linguisticatlasof the Pacl& area, Canberra: Research 
School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University. [Pacific Linguistics C 66-7.1 
Zoetmulder, P.J., with the collaboration of S.O. Robson, 1982, Old Javanese - English 
dictionary, The Hague: Nijhoff. 