--- [Page 1] ---
68 ANGLO DUTCH RELATIONS IN THE EAST.

«As far as the actual occupation of the Karimoun Islands was
concerned, the local Government practically acquiesced to the
“statu quo.” The final minute of the Governor still shows a
certain sense of grievance at the hasty manner in which Major
Elout has acted and a marked suspicion that further aggressions
were to be feared. Happily, since then, the clear definite division
of the English and Dutch spheres of influence has removed all causes
of friction between the two nations and, Anglo-Dutch relations have
ever since been governed by the spirit of the note attached to the
Treaty of 1824, . .

“The differences which gave rise to the present discussion are
such as it is difficult to adjust by formal stipulations ; consisting, in
great part, of jealousies and suspicions, and arising out of the acts
of subordinate agents, they can only be removed by a frank declar-
ation of intention, and a mutual understanding as to principles be-
tween the Governments themselves. Under the arrangement which
is now concluded, the commerce of both nations will flourish, and
the two allies will preserve inviolate in Asia, no less than in Europe,
the friendship which has of old times subsisted between them. .

The disputes being now ended, which, during two centuries,
have occasionally produced irritation, there will henceforward be
no rivalry between the. English and the Dutch nations in the East,
except for the more effetual establishment of those principles of
liberal policy which both have this day asserted in the face of the
world.”

qs Brae 64. OH (43)

Jour. Straits Branch

The Kota Kapur (Western Bangka) Inscription.
By C. 0. Bracpun.

In Part 67 of the Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-, en Volken-
keunde van Nederlandsch-Indié Professor Kern has edited and dis-
cussed the above-named document, which though discovered some
21 years ago had not previously been explained. It is on a stone
pillar which was removed to the Batavia Museum shortly after its
discovery. The writing, which is well preserved, is in an early
Southern form of the Indian alphabet presenting no serious diffi-
culty to the decipherer. ‘The language is an archaic form of
speech allied to Malay. ‘The date, given in the inscription itself,
falJs probably in the year 608 Saka expired (A.D, 686-7) ; but the
first of the numeral figures in which it is expressed is somewhat
doubtful. The form of the alphabet generally is however quite
consistent with this relatively high antiquity, and assuming the
date to be correctly read; this inscription ranks among the oldest
Indonesian records that have been discovered hitherto.

The interpretation offers many difficulties, for there are a
number of words in the inscription which have not been identitied
with modern’ équivalents. But the general purport is pretty clear
and amounts, in short, to this. Sri Wijaya, ruler of a country
named Parawis, wherever that may have been, after having as
‘it appears punished or raided the rebellious land of Jawa (which
may be Java or else some part of Sumatra, perhaps), sets up this
inscription to warn hig subjects against treason, disobedience, and
various other offences (including sundry forms of evil-working
charms, poisoning, etc.). On those who do such things or who
damage the inscribed stone he invokes a deadly curse. On his
loyal and faithful subjects of the land of Parawis he calls down
various blessings. . :

The chief interest, however, of the document consists in the
language in which it is framed. I extract a number of words by
way of illustration, most of which may be readily compared with
Malay. Of the spelling I need only say that n= our ny; f= our
ny; 8 is a Sanskrit sibilant pronounced like the English shy h=
final h.

Nouns (simple) : hamba, kayet (= kait, “hook ”), uran (=
orang), sumpah, datu (=dato’), watu (= batu), tuwa (= tuba),
wulan (= bulan) ; (in phrases): di dalaniia ( = di-dalam-nya),
wanuaia (= bénua-nya) ; (compound) : kasthan (= “love-charin”),
hadatuan ( =“ kingdom ”), parsumpahan. Note the use of the
formatives -an, ka—an, and par—an (modern ké-an, and per—
an). The prefix ka- is also used by itself, like the Lé& of the
unodern kéhéndak:, kékaseh.

R. A. Soc., No. 64, 1913



--- [Page 2] ---
70 THE KOTA KAPUR (WESTERN BANGKA) INSCRIc LION.

Verbs (simple): pulan, wuatita (= buat-nya) ; (compound) :
in m-, mulan (from pulan, as modern minta’ from pinta’, mohon
from pohon) ; in ma-, masakit (= “to make sick”) ; in mane, ete.
(=modern méng-, ete.), mamiuruh (= ményuroh), mandpik (from
a word tapik also found in this inscription and apparently meaning
“chastise ” or something of that kind) ; in man—i, manujari (=
“to speak with”); in mar—i, marjjahdti (=“to do harm to,”
from jahat, “evil,” which also occurs; mar— is more or less repre-
sented by the modern bér-, which occasionally survives in the more
archaic form mér-, as in mérayt, though here its force is rather
adjectival) ; in maka-, makagila ( = “to make mad ”), makamatat
(either from mata or else from matai, an older form of matt).
ven more interesting are the passive verbs: in n-, nwari (probably

a passive from wari modern béri) ;in ni-, niujari ( =“ to be spoken |

to”), nisuruh, nipahat (= “was chiselled”), niwunuh ( =‘ was
killed,” from wunuh = modern bunoh), nigalarku (=“ were ‘ap-
pointed by me”) ; in -in-, winunu (for winunuh, from wunul).

Articles: dt, diy, “in, to, at” (also din =di+the article n,
which is found in Old Javanese, etc.) ; ka; dnan (= déngan)* ;
tida (= modern tidak: apparently the -k in this word is not
original, any more than in datok = datu) ; janan (=jangan).

Pronouns: dku, -kw (enclitic), Ist. person; kita (used appa-
rently for the 2nd. person plural); iya, ya, -fia (enclitic), 3rd.
person ; yan, iyan, relative, the former also used as a definite article
(ya appears to be similarly used) ; ini, “ this,” inan, “ that.” .

Note also sawatakia ( = sa-banyak-nya) which occurs in the
phease tathapi savatiakia yan wuatia jahat, “ut as many of them
as do evil”; and the word gran, which may be the stem of ‘the
modern gérangan.*

It will be noticed that many of the above words have w which
modern Malay has replaced by b. Javanese often retains the old
w, as in watu, wulan. Another point of interest is the shifting of
the stress in consequence of the addition of a suffix (or even an
enclitic), as shown by the long vowels of the forms kasihan, manu-
Jari, wanudiia, ete. "This is an old Indonesian law which has been
somewhat obliterated in modern Malay as spoken in the Peninsula,
but the standard Malay spelling attests its former prevalence,

‘The inscription contains a large proportion of Sanskrit words,
showing that Hindu influence was already pretty strong at this
period. Some of these words are still current in Malay: the fol-
lowing are examples :—bhakti, dewata, mahardhika (now used in a
modified form with the sense of “ free”), milafa (= mula-nya
with the enclitic pronoun), drohaka, tathapi, mantra (for mantra),
dosaita ( = dosa-nya), tatkaléna (= tatkala-nya), wala ( =“ army,
forces,” vf. modern balatantéra), bhiimi. But perhaps the most

* The Indian alphabet has no symbol for the Indonesian sound ¢ (by the
Javanese styled pépét). Javanese had to invent one, but it is often omitted
altogether in the old inscriptions.

Jour. Straits Branch

THE KOTA KAPUR (WESTERN BANGKA) INSCRIPTION, 71
remarkable feature of the language of the inscription is the pecu-
liar Passive in mi-, which is completely wanting or lost in Malay
The Malay passive in di- is however somewhat analogous, for both
di and ni are found as prepositions in various I le
The passive in -in-, though hardly traceable in

a very wide range in Indonesia and is evide:
formation.

ndonesian languages,
Malay, has of course
ntly a very ancient

R, A, Soc., No, 64, 1913.



--- [Page 3] ---
ISBRAS 65:34 (1918)

A further note on the Kota Kapur Inscription.
By C. 0. Biaepen.

In my rote on the above in No. 64 of this Journal the printer
was unfortunately unable, for want of suitable type, to differentiate
between the ordinary letters n, s, and h and their dotted varieties.
As this may possibly have tended to mislead some readers, it seems
desirable to add the following remarks.

All the words ending in /. quoted from the inscription were in
the original written with the Indian symbol named visarga, which
is usually represented in transcription by an h with a dot under it.
In the case of Indonesian languages this point is of no particular
etymological importance and may in practice be neglected. I only
mention it here for the sake of strict literal accuracy. The s with
a dot under it (representing our sound sh) occurs in the word dosa,
which is therefore to be regarded as if written dosha. That again is
a small matter of detail. The distinction between simple n and n
with a dot over it is, however, important. The latter stands for the
guttural (or rather velar) nasal which we usually in Romanized
Malay write ng. It seems worth while, therefore, to repeat here the
words quoted from the inscription which exemplify the use of it,
substituting our Romanized ng for the more strictly scientific
symbol. They are the following: urang (“man”), dt dalangiia,
pulang, mulang, the prefix mang-, the compound prefix-and-suffix
mang—t, mangujari, ding (compounded of the preposition di and
the artcile ng), dngan (for déngan), jangan, yang, iyang and grang
(probaly for gérang). Thus spelt, these words display even more
plainly their close connexion with the corresponding Malay equi-
valents.

Jour. Straits Branch R. A. Soc., No. 65, 1913.
