--- [Page 1] ---
258 Journal Malayan Branch, Royal Asiatic Society [Vol. IL:
this face of the inscription being sharply seored roun
with a single deeply cut line. I understand that th
date thus given, A. H, 702 '(A. D. 1803) is historicall
doubtful, but the point is discussed in Mr: Blagden’
aper, :
(a)mbil, A close examination of the stone
seems
to reveal traces of the final 1. I would conjecture thi
preceding word to be jtka ia, which has an echo
line 6. This leaves a lacuna of probably not mor
than two words.
su-titah “it is the command” (c!
this to the alternative sa-bantah.

inkar balachara hembalang. The second word is an
almost certain restoration, as the stone shews traces
of the upper parts of three tall letters \alif) witl
precisely. the same spacing as in 1. 7, and I can see
no alternative 0 inkar; In whieh case, however, th
meaning would appear nonsensical, “if they d
offence (they shall yet be) stoned! ” ey deny the
sa-puloh tengah tiga. I incline this, with the
word tahél understood, rather than the alternative
104 saga, Ti, as there is reason to believe, a saga:
is one-twentieth part of a tahil the fine imposed on
the child of a reigning prince is light indeed com-
pared with fines of 73 or 5 dahils for those of lower
rank.
Tn these brief notes I have purposel i i
J posely dealt with nothing b
yond the obvious and superficial points which have presented them
selves on what is, rT believe, the first serious attempt to master.
‘the Gontents of this, inscription. nee intrinsic details of the his-
and philological side of 1
mane philologi e record are beyond the scope of
In conclusion I wish to express my thanks to all
; 1 > a who 1b
assisted me in the preparation of this article and in partionlar 15
nove o o: Bingen, who besides allowing me to use his translation,
r in addition the privilege of his advice and
which I have not hesitated to avail myself. Hee and comments of

B. Line 3.

B. Line 7.

ALL). I prefer

B. Line 12.

CG. Line 1.

A Note on the Trengganu Inscription.
By C. 0. Bracpen.

The most important point about this interesti is.
the date at which the enactments of Islamic Law toe i eetaine
are recorded by it to have been promulgated. That much is
obvious, for the wording of the record indicates that the
promulgation was an act of state and that at that time the
Muhammadan religion had hecome the “established church”.
of Trengganu. Whatever the precise date may be, it is at any

_ astrological import.

1984] Braeoen: A Note on the Trengganu Inscription, 259

rate earlier than any hitherto recorded establishment of Islam
as a state religion in the Malay Peninsula. But of course one
would like something more definite than that.
Most unfortunately the first face of the sto
words di-tahun Saratan di-sasanakala Baginda R
lalu tujok ratus duc. Now to me it seems that t is is necessarily
an incomplete statement, and that in order to complete it there
must have been on the next face the word tahun, “ years.” Taking
the words félah lulu literally one is tempted to interpret them
in the sense that the number of years stated had actually completely
elapsed at the time referred to (when the edict was promulgated).
do not, however, interpret them in that way. The years of the
Islamic Calendar, like our own years, are eommonly reckoned as
current years. In the case of Indian inseriptions (Hindu or
Buddhist) the reckoning is very generally (but not always) expressed.
in expired years, ie. the number of years ac ually completed
since the initial point of the particular era used, this being then
ollowed by a statement of the month (lunar or solar) and day,
and very often by various other details of astronomical and

I am disposed to think that the use here
of an expression which, if literally interpreted, implies the mention.
of expired years was merely due to a traditional habit and that
he Muhammadan year given is, in spite of the formula emp oyed,
to be taken as the year current at the moment. But even so
the Malay phrase, as such, seems to me to be incomplete without
the word taken after it.

If, however, the statement of the date ran over onto the
next face, the upper part of which is unfortunatey lost, various
possibilities arise. The dua may then have been not the mere
integer “two” but a part of either (i) dua-lapan, the old well-
attested form now reduced to délapan or lapan, “eight”, or (ii)
dua-puloh, “twenty.” Bither- of these could have completed the
number of the years, and either could have been further followed
by other numbers, Consequently there may have been two more
alternatives, these being groups of years, viz. (ili) dua-puloh
followed by any integer from satu, “one” to sémbilan, “nine”,
and (iv) dualapan-puloh, either by itself or followed by any
integer, as before. Thus the range of possible alternative years
is enlarged to the series 702, 708, 720-729, and 780-789, if we
regard merely the year number. However with the given month
(Rajab) the alternatives as expressed in our reckoning come down
to these: (1) the lunar month beginning 19 February 1303, (2)
the lunar month beginning 15 December 1307, (3) one of the
months of Rajab comprised in the period beginning 7 August 1320
and ending 30 May 1329, and (4) one of the Rajabs of the
period beginning 24 October 1378 and ending 16 August 1387.

The record further defines the given year as a year of Cancer
(Seratin), and the question arises “what does this mean?”. In

me ends with the
asul Allah télah



--- [Page 2] ---
“ 1924] Braepey: A Note on the Trengganu Inscription. 261
260 Journal Malayan Branch, Royal Asiatic Society [Vol. IT * .
mechanical repetition occurred, if in fact it did occur, there is
therefore no possibility of identifying the year by its sign-name.
Supposing, however, that the system was still understood to

be in relation with the movements of the planet, how was it
worked after the introduction of the Muhammadan Calendar?
€ the Hindu practice was still followed, the year being named
‘n accordance with the sign in which Jupiter stood al the entrance 7
of the Sun into the Indian representative of Aries, then A. H. .
708 becomes impossible, and the same is true of A. H. 708.
Neither of the Indian years, beginning on the 25th March, 1302
and 1308, in which these Muhammadan years begin, is a Cancer
‘year under the Indian system. On the other hand, 13827 and
©1986 are Cancer years, and it is conceivable that A. H. 728
“(which began 17 November 1327) and A. H. 789 (which began
2 January 1387) might have been. so styled.
It is possible, however, that the Indian system received a
‘urther modification to adapt it to the Muhammadan Calendar.
erhaps the Muhammadan year was named after the sign in which
upiter stood, not at the last preceding time of the Sun’s entry
into Aries, but at the moment when the Muhammadan year itself
egan. That would he a possible and perhaps natural modifica-
ion, as the Hindu practice took the initial point of the Indian
lar year, so the Islamized method may have taken the beginning’
¢ the Muhaimadan year as the determining point. In_ that

every year the Sun appears to us to pass in turn, through each |)
of the twelve Zodiacal signs, of which Cancer is the fourth
How, therefore, can any particular year be identified with an
individual sign? It can hardly mean that the Syn was in Cancer
when the year began, for such a system, of which I have never
heard, would if applied to Muhammadan Iunar years cause tw
(or more) successive years to be called after the same sign, .
jnasmuch as the Muhammadlan year shifts its beginning ‘back “Li
days each year (with an extra margin for leap-years), but the;
Sun stays a month or so in each sign, If there ever was such a
system, the year A. H. 702 would not under it have been a Cancer
year, for that year began on 26 August 1302 and the Sun hed
passed out of Cancer about a month previously. Nor would any-
single year comprised in the alternatives given ahove satisly th
condition: they ail begin at wrong times, as anyone can see by
referring to a Muhammadan Calendar. That conceivable explane
tion, therefore, mmst be dismissed.
To my mind the only reasonable explanation seems to involve.

the existence at that period of some 12-year cycle of year-names
following the names of the Zodiacal signs. Of such a system in
‘connection with the Muhammadan Calendar I have never heard;
‘but the Hindus had one, and it seems probable that we have here”
again a relic of Indian tradition, This Hindu cycle was based on
the revolution round the Sun of the planet Jupiter, which takes : age A. H. 702 would. rank as a Cancer year, A. HT. 708 would not,
a little less than twelve of our years, the planet during that ad in each of the periods A. H. 720-729 and 729-789 there would
period passing through each of the twelve signs and being nearly e a year which could have heen so styled, viz. A. H. %27 and
a year in each. Now the Hindu solar year, wl hich was used for the A. FL 788, which began on 27 November 1326 and 2 February
purpose of this computation, began when the Sun entered the 1386, respectively.
Indian sign corresponding with our Aries, and whatever sign ‘All this is very inconelusive, but it seemed worth while to state:
Jupiter happened to be in at that moment, the year then beginning’ he elements of the problem, so far as I understand them, in the
received the name of that sign. Assuming that the writer of the hope that something may turn up some day which will help us
Trengganu reeord was following a traditional system inherite to decide between all these conceivable alternatives. On general
from Hindu times, there remains’the further question whether erounds, I am inclined to lean towards the latest possible date.
. that system te still understood (by those who used it) to be (But T am free to confess that this feeling, for it is nothing more,
degen ‘ation, to the mee nied thie whee i is based on our ignorance of the condition of the Malay Peninsula
uuccession by names which had ceased to have any relation t in the “th cory oot of Tala elatively ieee el
stronomical facts. To me the latter alternative seems the less Northern Sumatra, That, however, is not tantamount to proof,

2a

probable one in view of the curious circumstance that we have a0) : .
the name Cancer given in Arabic, not in any traditional India it is merely calculated to raise some degree of presumption ; and
form. It looks as if the persons who used it knew that it had if anybody prefers to accept one of the possible earlier dates for

the Islamization of Trengganu, it appears fo me that on the
evidence as it stands at present, it cannot be shown. that his view
js wrong. Whatever the date may have been, I think the record
was made at no long interval after it and there is, therefore, no
reason to doubt that it gives a true date, if only we could be sure

an astronomical reference, at any rate. If we are forced to the’
conclusion that the name had become a merely arbitrary one,:
there is no point in paying any further attention to it, for it can
give no clue to the year intended. This is due to the circumstance
that at intervals of 85 or 86 years a sign-name would properly
have had to be suppressed because of the fact that in that period what that date really is.

Jupiter, owing to his time of staying in any one sign being some. T append a few notes on words that stand in need of a little
days less than the length of our year, gets a whole year behind, explanation.

As we have no means of knowing when the change to  merel;



--- [Page 3] ---
262 Journal Malayan Branch, Royal Asiatic Society [Vol.

A 3. dérma has one of the meanings, “law”, of the Sans-
krit dharma from which it is derived, méraksa is from the stem
of the Sanskrit verb rakshati, “to govern”, “to guard”, “to
protect”, or from the corresponding noun raksha, “ guard”, with
the ordinary Malay prefix. Tha Kota Kapur inscription has
mangraksha with reference to the gods protecting the realm
A 4 di-bénua-lu: ib might be possible to read aku or hau
instead of bu, but the spelling is against the first and the sense
against the second alternative (in place of which one would
anyhow rather expect mz): pénénéu is a very doubtful reading,
assumed to be the agent form of ménéniukan (in the sense of
formulating or possibly establishing and enforcing).
eonceivable reading would be pébantu or péndantu,
help or support”; either form would be irregular in spelling,
though nob much worse than the spelling of Trengganu in A 9.
Raja mandalika literally means “regional rajas”, (from Sanskrit
mindalika, “relating to a region”, mandalam). Whether these
are local independent rulers as opposed to the Khalifah of Al
Islam, or territorial chiefs within the State of Trengganu, seems
uncertain. But mandalika in B 12 refers to territorial chiefs.
The Nigarakrétigama (1365 A. D.) uses the term to describe the
“vassal” states of Majapahit, of which it claims Trengganu a
“ore.

A. 6. béhumi is nearer to the Sanskrit bhimi than modern
bumi. péntniue : the reading and meaning of this or the conceivable
alternative pénbantua stand or fall with the doubtful pénéntu
of A 4, The termination a for an may be due to local dialec
(like the spelling of bujan for bujang in B. 8, C. 1-3). But the
Kota Kapur inscription has kawueta-nya as the noun of action
of wuat, modern buat, “to do”, where we should now have
péerbuatan-nya.

A. 8 bérbajiki is doubtful, both in reading and in sense.
I have attempted to interpret it on the assumption that a verb
with the suffix + could (like some modern verbs in kan) tak
both accusative and dative objects without more, as + was originall:
itself a preposition.
A. 9. The spelling Tukan was not always reserved for th

Deity. It occurs in a Sumatran inscription of 13847 A. D. in the:

title of a minister of State. médudokkan may he due to local
dialect, or it may be an engraver’s error for méndudokkan; tamra,

which evidently denotes the record itself (and in this particular:

ease could have been rendered “ edict”) is probably an abbreviatio
of the Sanskrit tamrasasana, “an edict, etc., inscribed on copper-”,
which was the usual Indian way, alternatively with stone.
tmagine that the long association of the word with royal edicts,
grants, ete. coupled with ignorance of its true etymologica
meaning, led to its abbreviation and to its use to describe thi
stone record. Trengganu is spelt in this line with a dental (n
instead of the velar ‘nasal (ng). adi-pértama (Sanskrit ad:
beginning, prathama, “ first”) is a doubtful reading, at any rat
ag regards the adi.

1924] Buacprn: A Note on the Trengganu Inscription. 268

A. 10. sasanakala (Sanskrit Sdsanam, “ Command, religion ”,
Kala, “ time”) seems to be a certain reading.
BT I take balachara to be a compound of Sanskrit bala,
« childish, foolish ”, and deara, “ conduct » (also “rule, ordinance ”
s in D 5 achara).
B 9. The spelling rautan (with alif) seems to indicate a
pronunciation as in rau, more archaic than modern rotan.
B 10. atawa (Sanskrit wlevd) should perhaps be written
-ulawa, and in any case is more archaic than modern. ataz.
Bil. hémbalang occurs in Javanese in the sense of “ pelting,
throwing”, stones, etc. It is perhaps significant that the record
does not use the technical Arabic term, which would probably not
have been generally understood at this period.
B 1g. Is obscure, there being some doubt as to the reading.
It is to be borne in mind that Islamic law requires for the proof
of sexual offences of the kind contemplated by the record the
evidence of four lawful male eye-witnesses of the act, or alternative-
ly a confesion, which the culprit may subsequently retract.
Possibly the line means that if the culprit denies an offence which
would involve stoning, then he is still to be fined. Such a case
“might arise if there were not four witnesses as the law requires,
pi it was morally certain that the offence had in fact been
committed. The commutation of a penalty into a money payment
; seems to be a concession to Indonesian ideas, not strict Muham-
-madan law. he top stroke of the second jéka in B 12 has been
-omitted, making the & look like 1.
G3. The reading téfua is doubiful; I take the word to be

Soon variant of taa-tua, from tua, “old”, with the sense of hétua,

(village) elder.” .
C4. béndara (spelt, like mérdeka, in a less archaic form than

© in modern Malay) here has its original sense of “ store-house,
| treasury” (Sanskrit bhéndara, for bhandagdra). The use of

‘béndakara as a title is due to its having been preceded by dato’

(like our “Lord of the Treasury”)

C. 6. After baluchara I think itu kéna dénda seem probable
‘readings; tida (also in D 1, 2, 4) agrees with the tida of the
Kota Kapur inscription and seems to show that the glottal stop
(represented by # in modern tidak) is a later accretion, as it
‘so is in dato’ (Kota Kapur date).

D 2. After tide I doubtfully conjecture tépérbeya, cf.
Javanese beya, “expenses, tolls”, also a verb meaning to pay
- such expenses. (It is supposed to come from ‘Sanskrit vyaye,
-“ expenditure”).

D 3. pémain is a doubtful reading.

A grammatical point worthy of mention is the use of the
“preposition dt before words of time (A 10}, whereas good modern
-usage (now, however, not always observed) would confine it to words
-of place.

I need hardly add, after what has been said above, that I
yegard the translation I have proposed as being in many respects
tentative and provisional.

