--- [Page 1] ---
THE INDIANIZED STATES OF SOUTHEAST ASIA , 

--- [Page 2] ---
yu EAST-WEST CENTER—formally known as “The Center for Cultural and Technical Interchange Be-
tween East and West’’—was established in Hawaii by the 
United States Congress in 1960. As a national educational 
institution in cooperation with the University of Hawaii, 
the Center has the mandated goal “to promote better re-
lations and understanding between the United States and 
the nations of Asia and the Pacific through cooperative 
study, training, and research.” 
Each year about 2,000 men and women from the 
United States and some 40 countries and territories of Asia 
and the Pacific area work and study together with a multi-
national East-West Center staff in wide-ranging programs 
dealing with problems of mutual East-West concern. Par-
ticipants are supported by federal scholarships and grants, 
supplemented in some fields by contributions from Asian/ 
Pacific governments and private foundations. 
Center programs are conducted by the East-West 
Communication Institute, the East-West Culture Learning 
Institute, the East-West Food Institute, the East-West Pop-
ulation Institute, and the East-West Technology and De-
velopment Institute. Open Grants are awarded to provide 
scope for educational and research innovation, including 
a program in humanities and the arts. 
East-West Center Books are published by The Uni-
versity Press of Hawaii to further the Center’s aims and 
programs. 

--- [Page 3] ---
THE INDIANIZED STATES 
OF SOUTHEAST ASIA by 
G. COEDES Edited by Walter F. Vella | 
Translated by Susan Brown Cowing 
RN FAST-WEST CENTER BOOK THE UNIVERSITY PRESS OF HAWAII 
HONOLULU 

--- [Page 4] ---
This translation was done under the auspices of the Research Pub-
lications and Translations Program of the Institute of Advanced 
Projects, East-West Center. 
French edition copyright © 1964 by Editions E. de Boccard, Paris 
English edition copyright © 1968 by East-West Center Press 
(since July 1971, The University Press of Hawaii) 
All Rights Reserved 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 67-29224 
ISBN 0-8248-0368-X 
Manufactured in the United States of America 

--- [Page 5] ---
NOTE ON SECOND EDITION 
A first edition of this work appeared in Hanoi (Imprimerie d’Ex-
tréme-Orient) in 1944, under the title Histoire ancienne des 
états hindouisés d’Extréme-Orient. It was soon out of print in 
Indochina. 
Insofar as possible, this second edition takes into account 
the relatively few works that were published during the time 
Indochina found herself isolated and deprived of relations with 
Europe and America. Many pages dealing with Funan, pre-Angkor-
ian Cambodia, and early Champa have been rewritten in order to 
take into account the recent Sinological and epigraphical studies, 
still unedited, that will be published in the Bulletin de I’Ecole 
Francaise d’Extréme-Orient or elsewhere. 
Paris, November 1947 
NOTE ON THIRD EDITION 
The second edition having in turn gone out of print in 1962, a 
third edition has become necessary. | have taken advantage of 
this opportunity to bring up to date a work that was greatly in 
need of it. Since the end of the war, numerous studies devoted 
to Southeast Asia have greatly advanced our knowledge of its past. 
! was thus obliged to enlarge the bibliographic references and, 
above all, to rewrite completely a number of sections that, as 
originally written, no longer reflected the present state of research. 
| hope that, in fifteen years or so, this third edition will in its turn 
be made obsolete by the progress made by an increasing number 
of scholars attracted to the study of the Indianized states, whose 
history | believe | was the first to synthesize.1 
Paris, November 1963 

--- [Page 6] ---
BLANK PAGE 

--- [Page 7] ---
EDITOR’S NOTE 
It would be difficult to overestimate the contribution of George 
Coedés to the field of Southeast Asian studies. He is revered by 
other scholars in the field as the unchallenged dean of Southeast 
Asian classical scholarship. Since 1904 a truly prodigious and un-
interrupted flow of articles, books, and papers on various aspects 
of early Southeast Asian history has issued from his pen: he has 
discovered and translated primary materials (inscriptions and an-
nals in Pali, Sanskrit, Cambodian, Thai); he has interpreted the 
meaning of these materials in approximately two hundred schol-
arly articles; and he has synthesized his own work and that of his 
colleagues by writing integrated, readable accounts for specialists 
and the general public. Any one of his many epochal discoveries 
would be regarded as the proudest achievement of many a scholar. 
Coedés’ primary interest has been in the history of the 
Khmer Empire. His contribution here has been to supply a reliable 
historical chronology and an incisive delineation of the nature of 
Khmer kingship and other traditional Khmer institutions. What 
we know of ancient Cambodia stems predominantly from the work 
of Coedés. In other areas of Southeast Asia, Coedés is most famous 
for his pioneer depiction of the origin of Sukhothai, the first his-
torical kingdom of Thailand, and his dramatic identification, in 
1918, of the name, geographical scope, and importance of the 
ancient Indonesian empire of Srivijaya. His discovery of Srivijaya 
has been called, by Paul Wheatley, “possibly the most significant 
contribution ever made to the progress of Southeast Asian history.” 
Coedés’ major work of synthesis is his study Les Etats 
hindouisés d’Indochine et d’Indonésie, here translated, that cov-
ers the period from approximately A.D. 1 to A.D. 1500. This work 
has been universally acclaimed and—the surest proof of its impact 
—heavily relied on by all later scholars. Revised by Coedés in 
1964, it is the basic text for all those who seek to understand 

--- [Page 8] ---
viii Editor’s Note 
Southeast Asia—not only its ancient past but also its immediate 
present—for the Southeast Asia of today cannot be understood 
without a knowledge of the traditional values and institutions, 
which remain vital and which present leaders seem increasingly 
to esteem as a guide to the future. 
A few notes on editorial policy may be in order for those 
who wish to compare the translation with the French original. 
The aim throughout has been to adhere scrupulously to the mean-
ing of the original text. The format of Coedés’ footnotes has been 
modified: full citations of sources have been provided for first 
references in each chapter; titles frequently referred to have been 
abbreviated, and a key to all abbreviations has been supplied. All 
quotations from English sources have been searched and supplied 
as they appear in the original quoted material. A few minor edi-
torial changes have been made for the sake of clarity. Finally, the 
entire English text has been submitted to Professor Coedés, and 
approved by him. 
A note on the system of transliteration used: An attempt has 
been made to adhere to the spirit of Coedés’ transcription of 
Indian, Chinese, and Southeast Asian words and names—that is, 
to use as simplified a system as possible consistent with good 
usage. Many common geographic and other terms (e.g., Mekong, 
Vishnu, Mahayana) have been given in the spellings that appear 
in standard dictionaries. Tonal marks are not indicated for Chi-
nese, Vietnamese, Burmese, or Thai. For most words and names 
the following systems were used as guides: for Chinese, the 
Wade-Giles system; for Vietnamese, the standard quoc-ngu; for 
Thai, the system recommended by the Royal Institute of Thailand 
in 1941; for Sanskrit and Pali, the system used by most Indologists. 
WALTER F. VELLA 
Honolulu, Hawaii 
July 12, 1967 

--- [Page 9] ---
CONTENTS 
Page Introduction XV 
|. The Land and Its Inhabitants 3 
1. Geographic Sketch 2. Prehistory 3. Austro-Asiatic Civilization 
4. Ethnological Outline Il. Indianization 14 
1. Definition of Indianization 2. First Evidence of the Indianization 
of Farther India 3. The Causes of Indian Expansion 4. How the 
First Indian Establishments Were Formed _ 5. The Points of Departure 
and the Routes of Indian Expansion 6. The Degree of Penetration 
of Indian Civilization into the Autochthonous Societies 
Il. The First Indian Kingdoms 36 
(FROM THEIR ORIGINS TO THE MIDDLE OF THE FOURTH CENTURY) 
1. The Beginnings of Funan (First Century A.D.) 2. The Indian States 
of the Malay Peninsula in the First Centuries of the Christian Era ) 
3. Funan (Second to Third Centuries) 4. The Beginnings of Champa: 
Lin-yi (from the End of the Second to the Middle of the Fourth 
Centuries) 
IV. The Second Indianization 46 
(FROM THE MIDDLE OF THE FOURTH CENTURY TO THE MIDDLE 
OF THE SIXTH CENTURY) 
1. Funan: Reign of the Indian Chan-t’an (357) 2. Champa: The First 
Sanskrit Inscriptions of Bhadravarman (Third Quarter of the Fourth 
Century) 3. The States of the Malay Peninsula and Indonesia from 
the Fourth to the Sixth Centuries 4. The Resumption of Indian 
Emigration and the Second Indianization of Funan in the Fifth Century 
5. Champa from the End of the Fourth Century to 472 6. The Last 
Kings of Funan (480-550); Champa from 484 to 529 7. The Oldest 
Evidence of the Pyus of the Irrawaddy and the Mons of the Menam 
V. The Dismemberment of Funan 65 
(FROM THE MIDDLE OF THE SIXTH CENTURY TO THE END 
OF THE SEVENTH CENTURY) 
1. The End of Funan and the Beginning of Cambodia or Chenla 
(550-630) 2. Champa from 529 to 686 3. Pre-Angkorian Cambodia 

--- [Page 10] ---
Xx Contents , Page 
(635-85) 4. The Mon Kingdom of Dvaravati 5. The Pyu Kingdom of 
Srikshetra 6. The States of the Malay Peninsula in the Seventh 
Century 7. Indonesia: Ho-ling in Java and Malayu in Sumatra 
VI. The Rise of Srivijaya, The Division of Cambodia, and the Appearance of the Sailendras in Java 81 
(FROM THE END OF THE SEVENTH CENTURY TO THE BEGINNING 
OF THE NINTH CENTURY) 
1. The Beginnings of the Kingdom of Srivijaya (End of the Seventh 
Century) 2. The Division of Cambodia: Land Chenla and Water 
Chenla (Beginning of the Eighth Century) 3. Dvaravati and Srikshetra 
in the Eighth Century 4. Java: Sanjaya (732) and the Buddhist 
Sailendras (End of the Eighth Century) 5. Cambodia: The Two 
Chenlas (Second Half of the Eighth Century) 6. Southern Champa, 
or Huan-wang (Second Half of the Eighth Century) 7. Burma: 
Conquest by Nanchao (around 760) and the Decline of Prome_ 8. The 
Expansion of Mahayana Buddhism in the Eighth Century 
Vil. Foundation of the Kingdom of Angkor; The Sailendras in Sumatra 97 
(FIRST THREE QUARTERS OF THE NINTH CENTURY) 
1. The Beginnings of the Kingdom of Angkor: Jayavarman II (802-50) 
2. Southern Champa: Panduranga from 802 to 854 3.Burma: 
Kingdoms of P’iao and Mi-ch’en; Foundation of Pegu (Hamsavati 
in 825 and of Pagan (Arimaddanapura) in 849 4. The Malay Peninsula 
5. The Sailendras in Java and Sumarta from 813 to 863 
VIIl. The Flowering of the Kingdoms of Angkor | and Srivijaya 110 
(FROM THE END OF THE NINTH CENTURY TO THE BEGINNING 
OF THE ELEVENTH CENTURY) 
1. The Kingdom of Angkor (877-1001) 2. The Cham Dynasty of 
Indrapura 3. The Javanese Kingdom of Mataram 4. San-fo-ch’i, 
or the Sumatran Kingdom of Srivijaya 5. Burma 
IX. Three Great Kings: Suryavarman | in Cambodia, 
Airlanga in Java, and Anoratha in Burma 134 
(FIRST THREE QUARTERS OF THE ELEVENTH CENTURY) 
1. Cambodia: Stiryavarman | (1002-50) and the Expansion to the West; 
Udayadityavarman Il (1050-66) 2. Champa from 1000 to 1074 
3. Srivijaya and Its Relations with the Cholas of Tanjore (1003-30) 
4. Java: Airlanga (1016-49) 5. Srivijaya and the Cholas (1067-69) 
6. Burma: Anoératha (1044-77) 
X. The Mahidharapura Dynasty of Cambodia, the Pagan 
Dynasty of Burma, and Javanese Kingdom of Kadiri 152 
(END OF THE ELEVENTH CENTURY AND FIRST THREE QUARTERS 
OF THE TWELFTH CENTURY) 
1. Cambodia: The First Kings of the Mahidharapura Dynasty (1080- , 
1112) 2. Champa from 1074 to 1113 3. Burma: The Kings of Pagan, 

--- [Page 11] ---
Contents xi 
Page 
Successors of Anoératha (1077-1112) 4. Indonesia from 1078 to 1109; 
The Kingdom of Kadiri 5. Cambodia from the Accession of 
Suryavarman II (1113) to the Taking of Angkor by the Chams (1177) 
6. Champa from 1113 to 1177. 7. Burma from 1113 to 1173 
8. Indonesia from 1115 to 1178; The Kingdom of Kadiri 
XI. Cambodia at the Height of Its Power; The Introduction 
of Singhalese Buddhism in Burma; and the Javanese Kingdom of Singhasari 169 
(LAST QUARTER OF THE TWELFTH CENTURY AND THE FIRST TWO THIRDS OF THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY) . 
1. Cambodia: Jayavarman VII (1181-ca. 1218) and the Annexation of 
Champa 2. Burma: Narapatisithu (1173-1210) and the Introduction 
of Singhalese Buddhism 3. Indonesia at the End of the Twelfth 
Century: The Weakening of Srivijaya (Palembang) to the Benefit of 
Malayu (Jambi) 4. Cambodia in the First Half of the Thirteenth 
Century 5. Champa after the End of the Khmer Occupation (1220-
57) 6. Burma: The Last Kings of Pagan (1210-74) 7. Srivijaya on the 
Eve of Its Dismemberment (1225-70) 8. Java: The End of the Kingdom 
of Kadiri (1222) and the Begirining of the Kingdom of Singhasari (up 
to 1268) 
XII. The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 189 
(LAST THIRD OF THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY) 
1. The Thai 2. Cambodia: Defeat of a Mongol Incursion in 1282 
3. Champa: The Mongol Invasion (1283-85) 4. Burma: From 1271 
to the Seizure of Pagan by the Mongols (1287) 5. The Liberation of 
the Thai of the Menam in the Second Half of the Thirteenth Century: 
The Beginnings of the Kingdom of Sukhothai (from around 1220 to 
1292) 6. Java: The End of the Kingdom of Singhasari (1269-92); the 
Mongol Expedition of 1293; and the Foundation of the Kingdom of 
Majapahit 7. Sumatra and Its Dependencies at the Time of Marco 
Polo; the Beginnings of Islam 8. The Thai Kingdom of Sukhothai 
at the End of the Thirteenth Century: Rama Khamhaeng 9. The Thai 
Kingdom of Lan Na: Foundation of Chiangmai (1296) 10. The Thai 
in Burma at the End of the Thirteenth Century 11. Cambodia at the 
End of the Thirteenth Century: Account of Chou Ta-kuan (1296) 
12. Champa at the End of the Thirteenth Century 
XIII. The Decline of the Indian Kingdoms 218 
(FIRST HALF OF THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY) 
1. The End of the Thai Kingdom of Sukhothai and the Founding of 
Ayutthaya (1350) 2. The Founding of the Laotian Kingdom of Lan 
Chang (1353) 3. The Thai Kingdom of Lan Na 4. Burma under the 
Domination of the Thai 5. Cambodia: The Last Kings Mentioned in 
Epigraphy 6. Champa 7. The Malay Peninsula and Sumatra: The 
Spread of Islam _ 8. Java: The Kingdom of Majapahit to the Accession 
of Hayam Wuruk (1350) 

--- [Page 12] ---
xii Contents 
Page 
XIV. The End of the Indian Kingdoms 235 
(FROM THE MIDDLE OF THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY TO THE 
SEIZURE OF MALACCA BY THE PORTUGUESE IN 1511) 
1. Cambodia: From 1350 to the Abandonment of Angkor in the Middle 
of the Fifteenth Century 2. Champa: From the Accession of Ché 
Bong Nga (1360) to the Final Abandonment of Vijaya (1471) 3. Java: 
From the Accession of Hayam Wuruk (Rajasanagara) in 1350 to the 
End of the Kingdom of Majapahit around 1520 4. Sumatra: The Heirs 
of the Old Kingdom of the Maharaja in the Fourteenth Century 
5. Malacca: From Its Foundation in 1403 to Its Seizure by the 
Portuguese in 1511 Conclusion 247 
Abbreviations Used in Notes 257 Notes 259 Index 371 

--- [Page 13] ---
ILLUSTRATIONS 
endsheets 
General Map of Southeast Asia , 
other maps and charts following text 
Cambodia 
Indochinese Peninsula 
Indochinese Peninsula, Ancient Place Names 
and Archaeological Sites 
Indonesia and Malaysia 
Central and Eastern Java 
Genealogy of the Kings of Majapahit 
Genealogy of the Kings of Cambodia 

--- [Page 14] ---
BLANK PAGE 

--- [Page 15] ---
INTRODUCTION 
The present volume complements the one which Louis de La 
Vallée-Poussin contributed to the Histoire du monde series in 
1935 under the title Dynasties et histoire de I’Inde depuis Kanishka 
jusqu’aux invasions musulmanes (Vol. VI, Part 2). The present 
work is announced there (p. 296) and is to some extent anticipated 
there by substantial notes and bibliographic references (Appendix 
| 2: Navigation et colonisation, pp. 291-97). Perhaps | should have 
followed the same method as La Vallée-Poussin, offering readers a 
simple outline accompanied by critical notes and, when possible, 
glimpses of the whole. The historical study of Southeast Asia is 
even less advanced than that of India, and it might seem pre-
mature to attempt to produce an unbroken and coherent nar-
rative from incomplete information.’ | have, nevertheless, tried 
to do this, for my purpose is less to produce a history presenting 
all the details than to offer a synthesis showing how the various 
elements of the history are related. 
The geographic area here called “Farther India” consists of 
Indonesia, or island Southeast Asia except for the Philippines; 
and the Indochinese Peninsula, or India beyond the Ganges, in-
cluding the Malay Peninsula. Excluded are Assam, which is simply 
an extension of India and Bengal, and northern Vietnam, whose 
history developed outside Indian influence. 
The natural riches and geographic position of the region 
thus defined confer on it a place of primary importance. Around 
the beginning of the Christian Era, Southeast Asia was the “land 
of gold” toward which the Indian navigators sailed; a few cen-
turies later, it (especially Indonesia) became the land of spices, 
camphor, and aromatic woods for the Arabs and Europeans; more 
recently, the region has become one of the most important pro-
ducers of rubber, tin, and oil. Moreover, the position of the 
Malay Peninsula and of the Sunda Islands makes them a necessary 

--- [Page 16] ---
xvi Introduction 
port of call for seamen going from the West or India to China and 
vice versa—hence their importance in maritime commerce. 
Culturally speaking, Farther India today is characterized by 
more or less deep traces of the Indianization that occurred long 
ago: the importance of the Sanskrit element in the vocabulary 
of the languages spoken there; the Indian origin of the alphabets 
with which those languages have been or still are written; the 
influence of Indian law and administrative organization; the 
persistence of certain Brahmanic traditions in the countries con-
verted to Islam as well as those converted to Singhalese Buddhism; 
and the presence of ancient monuments which, in architecture 
and sculpture, are associated with the arts of India and bear in-
scriptions in Sanskrit. 
The expansion of Indian civilization “to those countries and 
islands of the Orient where Chinese civilization, with strikingly 
similar aspirations, seemed to arrive ahead of it,”2 is one of the 
outstanding events in the history of the world, one which has 
determined the destiny of a good portion of mankind. “Mother 
of wisdom,” writes Sylvain Lévi, “India gave her mythology to her 
neighbors who went to teach it to the whole world. Mother of 
law and philosophy, she gave to three-quarters of Asia a god, a 
religion, a doctrine, an art. She carried her sacred language, her 
literature, her institutions into Indonesia, to the limits of the 
known world, and from there they spread back to Madagascar 
and perhaps to the coast of Africa, where the present flow of 
Indian immigrants seems to follow the faint traces of the past.’”’ 3 
The great importance of the civilizing activity of India can 
be measured by a simple fact of observation. On the basis of 
somatological, or physical, characteristics a Cambodian peasant 
scarcely differs from a Pnong or a Samré. But the Pnongs, like 
the Mois of Vietnam, have remained in a stage of tribal organiza-
tion; they settle their differences by means of an oral tradition; 
they have no religion but a rather crude animism, the elements 
of which vary from one tribe to the next; their cosmology is 
rudimentary; they have no system of writing their language. The 
least advanced Cambodian, on the other hand, is caught up in 
the wheels of a strongly hierarchical state; he is subject to courts 
that judge according to a written code; he fervently practices a 
religion that possesses dogmas, sacred writings, and a clergy and 
that. at the same time, gives him coherent views of the world and 

--- [Page 17] ---
Introduction xvii 
the hereafter that are shared by a large part of Asian humanity; 
finally, he uses a system of writing that gives him access to a vast 
literature and enables him to communicate from a distance with 
his fellow men. All this he owes to India. To reduce these facts 
to a rather crude formula, it can be said that the Cambodian is an 
Indianized Pnong. If we vary the terms of this formula, it can 
be applied to the Burmese, to the southern Thai, to the ancient 
Chams, to the Malays,4 and to the Javanese before Islam. 
From this Indianization was born a series of kingdoms that 
in the beginning were true Indian states: Cambodia, Champa, and 
the small states of the Malay Peninsula; the kingdoms of Sumatra, 
Java, and Bali; and, finally, the Burmese and Thai kingdoms, which 
received Indian culture from the Mons and Khmers. Through re-
action with the indigenous substratum, however, each of these 
states developed according to its own genius, although their 
cultures never lost the family resemblance that they owed to their 
| common origin. 
Curiously, India quickly forgot that her culture had spread 
over such vast domains to the east and southeast. Indian scholars 
have not been aware of this fact until very recently; it was not 
until a small group of them, having learned French and Dutch, 
studied with the professors of the Universities of Paris and Leyden 
that they discovered, in our works and those of our colleagues 
in Holland and Java, the history of what they now call, with 
justifiable pride, ‘Greater India.’ 5 
A first chapter entitled “The Land and Its Inhabitants” pre-
sents a very brief geographic outline, as well as a résumé of 
present knowledge of the prehistory and ethnology of Farther 
India.® It is certainly important to have some notion of the sub-
stratum over which Indian civilization spread. The second chapter 
examines the causes, the times, the methods, and the first results 
of the progressive Indianization of the area defined in the pre-
ceding chapter. The twelve following chapters recount the im-
portant facts in the ancient history of Farther India, up to the 
arrival of the Europeans. 
The simplest method of dividing such a vast and complex 
subject into chapters seemed to be to cut it up, so to speak, into 
vertical, or geographical, segments, as René Grousset, for example, 
has done in his works; 7 and to summarize, in the light of the most 
recent research, the works of Etienne Aymonier,®? Paul Pelliot,3 

--- [Page 18] ---
xviii Introduction , 
Georges Maspero,’® Bijan Raj Chatterjee, Ramesch C. Ma-
jumdar,’4 and Lawrence P. Briggs ?? for Funan and Cambodia; 
those of Georges Maspero'™ and Ramesch C. Majumdar? for 
Champa; of Arthur P. Phayre’® and Godfrey E. Harvey’ for 
Burma; of William A. R. Wood and Phanindra N. Bose? for 
Siam; of Paul Le Boulanger”? for Laos; of Gabriel Ferrand,*! 
Ramesch C. Majumdar,22 K. A. Nilakanta Sastri,23 Richard O. 
Winstedt,44 Roland Braddell,2? Lawrence P. Briggs,26 and Paul 
Wheatley 2” for Malaysia; and of Nicholaas J. Krom,?® Frederik W. 
Stapel,2? Bernard H. M. Viekke,2° and Hermanns J. de Graaf! for 
Indonesia. 
This method requires constant repetition in all cases of 
relations between states or even of facts that pertain to more than 
one country. | prefer to treat Farther India as a whole and divide 
the subject into horizontal, or chronological, segments. 
Such a division is simpler than one would suppose, for the 
various countries of Southeast Asia that were civilized by India 
also moved in the political orbit of China because of their 
geographic position. Most of them experienced the great shocks 
that shook the Indian Peninsula or the Middle Kingdom. The 
conquests of Samudragupta in the Ganges Valley and southern 
India in the fourth century, the expansionistic policy of the Chola 
emperors of Tanjore in the eleventh century, had repercussions on 
the other side of the Bay of Bengal. Moreover, events in China 
clearly influenced the history of Farther India. The Chinese never 
looked with favor on the formation of strong states in the southern 
seas, and it is a fact worth noting that the periods of the greatest 
strength of Funan, Cambodia, and the Javanese and Sumatran king-
doms correspond in general to the periods of weakness of the 
great Chinese dynasties. In addition, the countries of Farther India 
are bound together by geographic and economic ties, and any 
revolution in the interior of one, by stirring up the populace, has 
had repercussions on the others. The disintegration of the Funan 
empire, the birth of the Sumatran kingdom of Srivijaya, the ac-
cession of Andratha in Pagan or Siryavarman II in Angkor, the 
founding of the Thai kingdom of Sukhothai, all had distinct ef-
fects beyond the borders of the countries in which these events 
took place. There are, then, critical dates which constitute real 
“turning points” in the history of Farther India and which make 

--- [Page 19] ---
Introduction xix 
it possible to delimit a certain number of epochs, each having 
its own characteristics, each marked by the imprint of a strong 
personality or by the political supremacy of a powerful state. 
A concluding chapter attempts a brief evaluation of the 
heritage left by India in the countries that benefited from its 
civilizing activity for more than a thousand years. 
Far more often than | would like, this account will assume 
the nature of dynastic annals and give the impression of a skeleton 
without flesh. This is because of the nature of the sources used— 
Chinese annals, epigraphy—and also because of the relatively un-
advanced state of Southeast Asian studies. The most important 
task facing researchers at the outset is to identify the ancient 
place names and establish the reign dates—in other words, to 
sketch a geographical and chronological framework. This work is 
very nearly complete for most of the countries, and reasonably 
complete for many of the others. The religions and arts of the 
countries are beginning to be better known, but much remains to 
be done on the history of their political institutions and their 
material culture. Epigraphy may furnish much information on 
these questions, as soon as the interpretation of texts in the 
vernacular—often difficult work that attracts only a small number 
of scholars—becomes more advanced.%2 
Another defect that the reader cannot help but notice is the 
difference of tone, | would say almost of style, between various 
sections of the same chapter. Thus, when the Burmese kingdom 
of Pagan comes on the scene in the eleventh century, one has the 
impression that its history is infinitely more lively than that of 
Cambodia; thus, furthermore, the history of Cambodia in certain 
periods appears much less rich in precisely dated political facts 
than that of Champa. This lack of unity among the diverse parts 
of the account is, again, due to the nature of the sources used. 
The history of Cambodia at present is founded chiefly on epi-
graphy, whereas that of Champa profits from abundant doc-
umentation in Chinese and Vietnamese annals and that of Burma 
relies on chronicles. If there were the same romanticized chron-
icles for Cambodia as for Burma, it is probable that the hazy 
figures of a Yasovarman or a Suryavarman II would become much 
clearer and would come to life as vividly as the kings of Pagan. 
Proof of this is found in the case of Jayavarman VII: because his 

--- [Page 20] ---
XX Introduction 
inscriptions depart from the usual mythological bombast to re-
late precise biographical facts, his personality immediately has a 
concreteness that makes it possible to trace a living portrait. 
The documents on which the history of the Indianized states 
of Southeast Asia is founded—inscriptions, local chronicles, for-
eign accounts (Chinese, Arab, European)—are enumerated in the 
general works mentioned previously. The two great sources of 
information are the Chinese annals and the inscriptions. The chief 
value of these sources lies in their chronological accuracy, but 
they have many deficiencies. They report only certain kinds of 
facts, such as religious endowments and the diplomatic or com-
mercial relations of China with countries to the south. The abun-
dance of these sources in a certain epoch or their scarcity in an-
other may often give a false impression, and argument a silentio 
in the case of an absence of sources is still more dangerous. 
For example, Jayavarman Il, king of Cambodia from 802 to 
850, did not leave a single inscription, but it would be a mis-
interpretation to infer from this that his reign was without interest. 
As for the Chinese sources, their silence with regard to a par-
ticular country does not necessarily signify its eclipse, but is often 
the result of a momentary weakening of Chinese foreign policy. 
From the time that Europeans began to take an interest in 
the countries of Farther India, chiefly for colonial reasons, they 
have studied the archaeology and history of the area. But these 
studies have been pursued unequally in the different territories. 
Those who have undertaken the archaeological exploration 
of Cambodia, Champa, and Java deserve praise; however, the 
work is far from complete, and each year new inscriptions are 
dug up from the soil of Angkor. Excavations have scarcely begun 
in Sumatra, are just beginning in Siam and in the Malay Peninsula. 
Epigraphy has progressed quite satisfactorily everywhere except in 
Burma, where it consists of only a very insufficient number of 
translations.23 The examination of Chinese sources, completed for 
Funan, Champa, and certain parts of Indonesia, is still very in-
complete for Cambodia, Burma, and the Thai countries. 
The unevenness in research and in the utilization of docu-
ments is an inevitable consequence of the division of Farther 
India into several states or colonies, which have been subject to 
different regimes and have developed unequally. This, in ad-
dition to the disparate character of the sources mentioned above, 

--- [Page 21] ---
Introduction Xxi 
renders difficult, and perhaps premature, the attempt—undertaken | 
here for the first time—to produce a historical synthesis of the 
countries of Farther India. 
| hope | will be forgiven for offering for Cambodia a 
generally more detailed account, with more numerous references 
to original sources. It is not that, by a sort of professional distor-
tion, | accord an exaggerated pre-eminence to the history of the 
Khmer people. But whereas for Champa and for Java one can use 
the historical treatises of Georges Maspero and Nicholaas J. 
Krom, who give a complete résumé of present knowledge, there 
is no parallel for Cambodia.*4 | have thought it advisable to fill 
this gap to a certain extent by dividing among the various chapters 
of this work the elements of a summary of the ancient history of 
Cambodia that take the most recent studies into account. 
Since | am not writing exclusively for the general public, but 
also for those historians, philologists, and ethnologists who lack 
a background in the history of this part of the world, | have not 
hesitated to give a sketch of current discussions concerning con-
troversial matters when the occasion presented itself. The nar-
rative is thereby interrupted, but silence or, on the other hand, 
too pat an affirmation would risk giving a false idea of the state 
of knowledge. If this work proves useful by summarizing what 
has been learned so far * and by indicating the points on which 
research ought to be encouraged, | hope it will be pardoned for 
its faults. 

--- [Page 22] ---
BLANK PAGE 

--- [Page 23] ---
THE INDIANIZED STATES OF SOUTHEAST ASIA 

--- [Page 24] ---
BLANK PAGE 

--- [Page 25] ---
CHAPTER | 
THE LAND AND ITS. INHABITANTS 
1. GEOGRAPHIC SKETCH 
There will be no attempt made here to give a detailed 
geographic description of the vast and complex area over which 
Indian civilization spread from the east coast of India. An ex-
cellent description of this area of the globe can be found in the 
second volume of L’Asie des moussons, by Jules Sion, under the 
heading ‘‘Quatriéme partie: L’Indochine et I’Insulinde.” 7 It will 
suffice here to indicate some of the general features that give the 
area a certain unity and that must be known in order to under-
stand the historical events that took place there. 
The Indochinese Peninsula and the islands of Indonesia are 
among the tropical lands dominated by the monsoons. Although 
there are some variations from one year to the next—variations 
which can be disastrous for wet rice culture, the only method of 
cultivation that assures an abundant supply of grain—in general 
there is an alternation of dry seasons and rainy seasons that con-
ditions the life of the sedentary populations and an alternation of 
dominating winds that determines the direction of navigation by 
sail. 
From Burma, the Malay Peninsula, and the island of Sumatra, 
the western face of Farther India is turned toward the Indian 
Ocean, where, to quote Sylvain Lévi, “the pattern of currents and 
the pattern of periodic winds that govern navigation have long 
fostered a system of trade in which the African coast, Arabia, the 
Persian Gulf, India, Indochina, and China continually contributed 
and received their share.” 2 
On the other side of the natural barrier formed by the 
Malay Peninsula and the islands that extend from it, there is a 
veritable Mediterranean formed by the China Sea, the Gulf of 
Siam, and the Java Sea. This enclosed sea, in spite of its typhoons 

--- [Page 26] ---
4 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
and reefs, has always been a unifying factor rather than an obstacle 
for the peoples along the rivers. Well before the arrival of foreign 
navigators, these peoples had their mariners, and although the 
remote origins of these peoples were probably quite diverse, they 
had developed, through continual trade, a certain similarity of 
culture that will be discussed later. This pre-Indian culture de-
veloped near the sea: in the valleys and deltas of the great rivers, 
the Mekong, the Menam, the Irrawaddy, and the Salween; in the 
low plains of Java; and in the basins of the coastal rivers of Viet-
nam, the Malay Peninsula, and Sumatra, which are scarcely suit-
able for navigation, but excellent for irrigation. “The civilized man 
of that area,” writes Jules Sion, “is essentially, uniquely a man of 
the plains; he leaves to the aborigines the high places, which are 
not necessarily poor, for the aborigines have long been able to 
utilize them thanks to millet, certain kinds of rice, and herds.” ? 
This retreat of the aborigines and of the “less civilized” to the 
mountains is undoubtedly a very ancient phenomenon; the pro-
cess has continued over the centuries and must have been partic-
ularly evident during the period of Indianization. It explains to a 
large degree the ethnic stratification of the countries of Farther 
India. The mountains of these countries have remained the 
province of peoples who are sometimes nomadic, who practice 
hunting, gathering, and slash-and-burn agriculture, and who, in 
the midst of the twentieth century, seem scarcely to have evolved 
from Neolithic life. 
2. PREHISTORY 
In spite of the works of Henri Mansuy,4 Madeleine Colani,° 
Etienne Patte,6 Jacques Fromaget and Edmond Saurin,’ and Paul 
Lévy 8 for Indochina; of Ivor H. N. Evans,2 H. D. Collings,’9 M. W. F. 
Tweedie," Pieter V. van Stein Callenfels,!4 A. N. J. Thomassen a 
Thuessink van der Hoop, G. H. Ralph von Koenigswald,™ and 
H. R. van Heekeren 4 for Malaya and Indonesia; of Fritz Sarasin," 
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin,” and H. R. van Heekeren 78 for Siam; 
and of J. Coggin Brown,'9 T. O. Morris,29 and Hallam L. Movius, 
Jr.21 for Burma, the prehistory of Farther India is still in the ex-
ploratory stage, and the brilliant attempts at synthesis by Robert 
von Heine-Geldern 22 and Jean Naudou 23 can only be considered 
working hypotheses. We must be content here with a factual 
treatment that will give an approximate idea of the cultures and 

--- [Page 27] ---
The Land and Its Inhabitants 5 
ancient distribution of the ethnic groups over which India was 
to exert a civilizing influence by means of a process to be dis-
cussed in the next chapter. 
_ From earliest times, the population of Farther India was 
composed of very diverse elements, some of which were related 
to the Negritos and Veddas, others to the Australoids and the 
Papuan-Melanesians, and still others to the Indonesians.24 This 
fact leads to a clear conclusion: that the earliest inhabitants of 
Farther India are related to those who inhabit the islands of the 
Pacific today, and that the Mongolian element in Farther India 
is Of very recent origin. But races are less important for our pur-
poses than types of culture. 
These ancient peoples have left stone, bone, and metal 
implements, pottery fragments, glass trinkets, and, in certain 
regions, megaliths. The chronology of these remains has by no 
means been satisfactorily established. Not only is it difficult to fix 
absolute dates, but even the order of succession of the various 
types of implements has not yet been established. The fact that 
polished stone is often found with iron objects shows that the 
prehistoric period lasted much later here than in Europe. One can 
say without great exaggeration that the peoples of Farther India 
began to use metals widely, under the influence of their neighbors, 
only in the last century before the Christian Era. This was the 
period during which the historic civilizations of China and Aryan 
India began to exercise their profound influence. 
We must disregard the Pleistocene remains discovered in 
Java (Pithecanthropus of Trinil, Neanderthaloid of Solo, Proto-
Australoid of Wajak), which are outside the framework of this 
book because they are too ancient, and limit ourselves to an in-
dication of the principal periods of the prehistory of Southeast 
Asia. 
Paleolithic industry, in the sense meant by the term in 
European prehistory, is represented in Burma by the “ancient 
Anyathian,’”’ characterized by pebbles shaped into axes, specimens 
of which have also been found in Siam (Fing Noi) and in upper 
Laos (Ph’u Loi). This industry was the work of the proto-Aus-
tralians, who have also left traces of the “Chellean” type in Java. 
Remains of the following period, characterized by stone 
chopper tools and the almost complete absence of pottery, have 
been found in Tongking (Hoa-binh Province) and in North Viet-

--- [Page 28] ---
6 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
nam, in Laos (Luang Phrabang), in Siam (Chiangrai, Lopburi, Rat-
buri), and in Malaya (Gua Kerbau, Perak). On the eastern coast of 
Sumatra, axes ground on one side seem to date from the same 
period. This civilization, commonly called ‘Hoabinhian,” is 
classified by some authors as Mesolithic. 
In some deposits, the chipped stones are mixed with sharply 
polished instruments characteristic of Bacsonian industry (dis-
covered in the mountainous mass of Bac-sén, Tongking) along 
with a little cord-marked pottery and some bone implements. . 
Some of the human remains found in the Hoabinhian and 
Bacsonian sites exhibit characteristics that relate them to the 
Australian and Papuan-Melanesian races;2> others are of Indo-
nesian type, already showing some of the Mongoloid char-
acteristics that were later to increase. 
However, the human remains that are associated with an 
industry marked by an abundance of chips and microliths and 
seen in Sumatra, Java, Borneo, and the Celebes, seem to be con-
nected with Negrito and Veddoid types. 
Finally, a last form of late Paleolithic or Mesolithic culture 
characterized by bone artifacts and seen in Indochina, Siam, Ma-
laya, and from Sumatra to Japan through Java, the Celebes, Borneo, 
the Philippines, Taiwan, and the Ryukyus, is perhaps the result of 
the emigration or expansion of a race yet to be determined. 
Neolithic industry, traces of which have been found all over 
the Far East, may have been introduced in part by newcomers— 
undoubtedly the Indonesians, who at present constitute the ma-
jority of the population of Farther India. Rich in pottery with de-
signs that sometimes recall those of ancient China 2° and of the 
West, Neolithic civilization did not disappear with the introduc-
tion of metals; we could almost say that its spirit lives on today 
among certain backward groups of the mountains and the interior. 
In the Neolithic period, we notice a split between the 
northern and southern regions of the geographic area studied here, 
perhaps caused by a migration of the first Mongoloid or Mon-
golized ethnic elements. Mainland Southeast Asia, southern China, 
and northeast India are the region of the axe with a shouldered 
tenon, the characteristic utensil of peoples speaking languages of 
the Austro-Asiatic family,4” while the region of the Indonesian 
languages, situated to the south, is scarcely familiar with anything 

--- [Page 29] ---
The Land and Its Inhabitants 7 
but the chiseled axe that is semicircular or triangular in cross 
section. 
It is apparent from the implements associated with them 
that the megaliths found throughout Farther India had already 
appeared by the age of metals, that is, in the proto-historic epoch. 
The oldest of the megaliths, in association with which we find only 
bronze and no iron, are the dolmens of eastern Java, from which 
the Balinese sarcophagi trace their descent. These dolmens and 
the vaults of central Java, southern Sumatra, and Perak,?8 the 
monolithic jars of upper Laos, and the menhirs of upper Laos, 
Malaya, Sumatra, and Java are always funerary monuments, re-
lated to the worship of ancestors and departed chiefs. This fact 
has led to some very bold theories.?? 
There is some question about whether it is proper to speak 
of a “Bronze Age” in Farther India. The use of stone continued 
very late there, and iron appeared almost simultaneously with 
bronze. We must not forget that in China under the Han, in the 
last two centuries before the Christian Era, weapons were still 
made of bronze, and iron had only recently been imported.*° 
There are no remains from Dongson civilization—which cor-
responds to the age of bronze in Tongking and North Vietnam 31 
(probably the centers of diffusion of bronze drums)—that can 
be considered to have preceded the last centuries before Christ. 
Pieter V. van Stein Callenfels has proposed placing the arrival of 
bronze in Indochina around 600 B.C.; in the archipelago, around 
300 B.C.2 
In most cases, we pass without transition from the late 
Neolithic to the first Indian remains. On the coast of Vietnam and 
in Cambodia, there is nothing between the Neolithic strata of 
Sa-huynh 33 and Samrong Sén 34 and the Xuan-l6c megalith on the 
one hand * and the first monuments of Champa and Cambodia 
on the other. The Indian establishments of Oc Eo 3® (in Cochin 
China) and of Kuala Selinsing (in the state of Perak in Malaya),°7 
from which come seals engraved with Sanskrit names in the 
writing of the second to fourth centuries, have also yielded in-
struments of polished stone. In the Celebes a bronze Buddha of 
the Amaravati school was found at Sempaga above a Neolithic 
layer.28 So we can say, without great exaggeration, that the people 
of Farther India were still in the midst of late Neolithic civilization 

--- [Page 30] ---
8 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
when the Brahmano-Buddhist culture of India came into contact 
with them. 
3. AUSTRO-ASIATIC CIVILIZATION 
But this late Neolithic contact was not the first contact. 
The extensiveness of the diverse types of culture just enumerated 
and, notably, the abundance of glass beads of Indian origin found 
in the Neolithic strata of Farther India prove that from pre-
historic times maritime relations existed not only between the 
various parts of Farther India but also between the latter and 
India proper. 
This is also indicated in the remarks of Arthur M. Hocart 39 
and of Paul Mus “° concerning the similarity of some fundamental 
beliefs and certain essential rites in all of monsoon Asia. It ap-
pears from implements *’ and vocabulary *2 that there was a com-
munity of culture between pre-Aryan India on the one hand “3 and 
Farther India on the other. 
According to some scholars,44 one or more ethnic waves 
originating either in the Indochinese Peninsula or in the islands 
spread throughout India before the Aryan invasion. According to 
others,® the Dravidians or the Aryans, entering India from the 
northwest, pushed the aboriginal populations into eastern and 
southern India; these peoples spread to Southeast Asia, where 
they brought about a sort of pre-Aryan Indianization, while the 
Indonesian peoples in their turn left the continent to populate the 
islands.*© It will be best for the moment not to attempt to be too 
precise, but to use the prudent formula of Jean Przyluski,4”7 who 
says that “during the second Bronze Age [in Europe], the Indo-
chinese Peninsula entered the orbit of a maritime civilization com-
prising both the mainland and the archipelago of Southeast Asia.” 
Whatever its origin, this civilization was carried all the way 
~ to Madagascar by the Indonesians, either before * or after their 
Indianization.*? It is possible that it also touched Japan; relations 
between Japan and the countries to the south have been indicated 
in various ways by prehistoric implements? language? and 
folklore.° 
One scholar has proposed 3 linking the Austro-Asiatic cul-
tural complex with the ‘‘Austronesoid” cycle, characterized by the 
use of the bow, the practice of the matriarchate, and totemic be-
liefs. We must be on guard against the dangers of forcing a 
flexible reality into too rigid categories.°* At the same time, we 

--- [Page 31] ---
The Land and Its Inhabitants 9 
can indicate what seem to have been the characteristic traits of 
this pre-Aryan civilization: with regard to material culture, the 
cultivation of irrigated rice, domestication of cattle and buffalo, 
rudimentary use of metals, knowledge of navigation; with regard 
to the social system, the importance of the role conferred on 
women and of relationships in the maternal line, and an organiza-
tion resulting from the requirements of irrigated agriculture; with 
regard to religion, belief in animism, the worship of ancestors and 
of the god of the soil, the building of shrines in high places, burial 
of the dead in jars or dolmens; with regard to mythology, ‘a 
cosmological dualism in which are opposed the mountain and the 
sea, the winged race and the aquatic race, the men of the heights 
and those of the coasts’; > with regard to linguistics, the use of 
isolating languages with a rich faculty for derivation by means of 
prefixes, suffixes, and infixes.*® 
To a great extent it was undoubtedly this unity of culture 
that led the Chinese to group the diverse peoples of Farther India 
together under the name K’un-lun.>’ This name, it is true, did not 
appear until after Indianization, and we may well wonder if the 
unity of Indian culture explains the term. This opinion could be 
argued from the fact that the Chinese speak of ““K’un-lun writing,” 
and writing was a basic Indian contribution. But when they speak 
of “K’un-lun language” and of “K’un-lun merchants and pirates,’”’ 
they seem to apply this term to an ethno-linguistic entity. 8 The 
word K’un-lun has been interpreted in various ways. The re-
searches of Gabriel Ferrand indicate that the word must have been 
used to transcribe many different indigenous terms that had be-
come confused in Chinese usage. Sylvain Lévi has interpreted the 
term as the equivalent of the Sanskrit expression dvipantara, “the 
people of the islands.” °? Nicholaas J. Krom has indicated the pos-
sibility of equating K’un-lun and Malaya, and the recent hy-
potheses of Ramesch C. Majumdar,®! even if we allow for what is 
a little superficial in his comparisons, give some consistency to 
this view in that they assign a preponderant place to the “Malay” 
element, that is, the Indonesian element developed in contact 
with the foreigners of Mongoloid origin, as the vector of Austro-
Asiatic civilization. 
Thus, the Indians found themselves among not uncultivated 
savages but organized societies endowed with a civilization (no-
tably Dongson civilization) © that had some traits in common with 
their own. Some peoples of the mountains and back country of 

--- [Page 32] ---
10 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Indochina and Malaya today can give us an approximate idea of 
these societies. 
The apparent unity of the elements known to us, of which 
language is the most important, certainly conceals a great racial 
diversity, in spite of the conclusions drawn from certain measure-
ments by Father Wilhelm Schmidt. | 
Austro-Asiatic culture has obscured the culture of peoples 
who have long existed, and still exist in small pockets, by borrow-
ing from them or by assimilating some of their material and spir-
itual elements. What there is in common among the various ethnic 
groups of the area in question is very often the contribution of 
one of them or of a common substratum that has now disappeared. 
And the remarks of P. Rivet concerning the common traits of the 
languages he calls “oceanic” © appear applicable not only to the 
languages but also to other elements of the civilization of the 
Austro-Asiatic complex. 
4, ETHNOLOGICAL OUTLINE 
Now let us discuss the peoples, more or less impregnated 
by this culture, over whom Aryan India had a civilizing influence. 
At the time when the Indianization of Southeast Asia began, 
that is, around the beginning of the Christian Era, the great pre-
historic migrations of the Melanesians, Indonesians, and Austro-
Asiatics had come to an end; in the south of the Indochinese 
Peninsula and in the archipelago, the principal ethnic groups oc-
cupied approximately the areas they do now. Indeed, from the 
time of the appearance of the first vernacular inscriptions we see 
the use of Khmer in Cambodia, of Cham in the Cham provinces 
of Vietnam, of Malay in Sumatra, and of Javanese in Java. In the 
central and northern peninsula, however, we see during historic 
times the retreat of the Chams of central Vietnam from the Viet-
namese and of the Mons of the Menam and of the Irrawaddy 
from the Thai and the Burmese. 
This “push to the south,” © caused by the attraction of the 
deltas and the sea, is an ancient phenomenon. It explains the 
present distribution of ethnic groups in the Indochinese Peninsula 
and, to a certain extent, in the islands, since, as has been said 
above, they received their populations and their cultural complex 
from the continent. 

--- [Page 33] ---
| The Land and Its Inhabitants 11 
Even if it were true that the migrations could have pene- , 
trated Southeast Asia only by the narrow valleys of rivers origi-
nating in China and the confines of Tibet, it would nevertheless 
be wrong to represent these movements of populations as a series 
of outpourings leading to superficially contiguous ethnic forma-
tions; this would, | believe, be a false idea, unfortunately fostered 
by the appearance of ethnographic maps registering present popu-
lation patterns. Once these waves reached the mainland plains 
or the islands, they spread and overlapped. 
Moreover, it is necessary in some cases to view this process 
as the expansion of a culture or of a language rather than as an 
actual migration. 
Apparently the actual migrations resulted usually not in 
the annihilation or complete eviction of the old occupants of 
the soil by the newcomers but in the adoption by the former of the 
language and customs of the conquerors or new ruling class. The 
expansion of the Thai, for example, was not necessarily the result 
of the displacement of a large human mass, especially in the 
south of the peninsula; a military aristocracy was able to impose 
its language, which spread among the other racial groups. 
Moreover, the successive ethno-linguistic waves did not com-
pletely mask one another. In some cases a later wave extended 
beyond the preceding one in a certain direction while not reach-
ing as far in another direction and skipping over some peaks, 
some small pockets, and certain fringes of territory. The Mon-
Khmers did not thoroughly impose themselves on the Indonesians 
and, in their turn, were not completely overlapped by the Thai; 
the Vietnamese worked their way along the coast and streams, 
settling only in the deltas; the aborigines, related to the Negritos, 
Veddas, or Dravidians, still roam the mountainous interior of the 
islands and of the Malay Peninsula. 
Wherever there were migrations to already settled areas, 
intermarriage took place, from which physical and cultural char-
acteristics associated with the oldest groups survived. 
These considerations suffice to explain the great wealth and 
variety of Southeast Asian ethnological material. This book is de-
voted to Farther India insofar as it was culturally dependent on 
India proper; it will not deal with the backward tribes driven into 
the mountains where Indianization could not reach them. By treat-

--- [Page 34] ---
12 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
ing only the ethnic groups touched by Indian civilization, we can , 
represent their distribution and their geographical situation toward 
the beginning of the Christian Era in a systematic fashion. 
Given the direction of the “push to the south,” the ethnic 
groups situated farthest to the south are most likely to have lived 
in their present habitat longest. In fact, the Indonesians, who 
constitute the basis of the island population,©6 have undoubtedly 
been there since Neolithic times. ‘The Indonesians,” writes Jules 
Sion, “were the proto-Malays, whose sojourn in the interior of the 
large islands permitted them to better conserve their racial purity, 
in spite of mixture with the aborigines—for example, the Bataks of 
Sumatra, the Dyaks of Borneo, the Alfurs of the Celebes and the 
Moluccas. The Malays were simply Indonesians of the coasts, who 
became much less pure racially because of very diverse cross-
breeding... ; it is a mixed race, great in its diffusion and multiple 
in its varieties.” ©’ We have seen that it was undoubtedly these 
Malays of the coast to whom the Chinese and Indian seamen 
applied the names K’un-/un and Dvipantara. These are the Malays 
of Sumatra, the Sundanese, Javanese, and Madurese of Java, and 
the Balinese, who were the principal agents for the reception and 
diffusion of Indian culture in the archipelago. In his Indo-Javanese 
history, Nicholaas J. Krom ®® has presented a picture of Malay 
civilization, particularly of Javanese civilization, before Indianiza- | 
tion that consists largely of hypotheses, for it is based chiefly on 
the present ethnology of the non-Indianized Indonesians; thus he 
enumerates among the characteristic elements of their material 
culture the irrigation of rice fields, the dyeing of fabrics by the 
process called batik, and the development of the gamelan orches-
tra and the wayang shadow theater.®? Documents of inestimable 
value for the study of Indonesian social organization are the col-
7 lections of customary law diligently compiled by the Dutch in the 
archipelago.” 
On the peninsula, in those areas where Malays now con-
stitute the majority because of relatively recent migrations from 
Sumatra and Java, the Indians undoubtedly encountered on the 
coast proto-Malays—Indonesians already strongly Mongolized, 
whose descendants are known today by the name Jakun.”! 
On the Indochinese Peninsula, the Indians found: on the 
coast of central and southern Vietnam, the Chams, whose language 
was Malayo-Polynesian, and whose last descendants still occupy 

--- [Page 35] ---
The Land and Its Inhabitants 13 
some districts of South Vietnam (Phan-rang, Phan-thiét); in the 
delta of Cochin China, present-day Cambodia, and the basin of 
the central Mekong, the Khmers, who were subsequently sup-
planted in part of Cochin China by the Vietnamese and driven 
from the north by the Thai; 7 in the Menam Valley and Lower 
Burma, the Mons, also called Peguans or Talaings,’? linguistic rela-
tives of the Khmers, who today are confined to the Irrawaddy 
Delta and to Tenasserim, or pushed back in Siam; in the basin 
of the Irrawaddy and the Sittang, the vanguard of the Tibeto-
Burman peoples, of whom the most important element, then still 
kept in check by the Mons, was the Pyus, who have disappeared 
or been assimilated by successive waves of Burmese or Thai im-
migration. 
These are the ethnic groups upon which we shall see India 
exercising its civilizing influence. 

--- [Page 36] ---
CHAPTER II 
INDIANIZATION 
1. DEFINITION OF INDIANIZATION 
The history of the expansion of Indian civilization to the 
east has not yet been told in its entirety. We are beginning to be 
familiar with the results of this expansion in the various countries 
considered separately, but we are reduced to hypotheses con-
cerning its origins and its processes. | do not pretend to solve 
these problems in the pages that follow. | shall only attempt to 
assemble the results that have been established and to set down 
some general traits common to all the Indianized kingdoms of 
Farther India. 
| have so far, for the sake of convenience, used the terms 
‘Indianization’”” and “expansion of Indian culture” as if they re-
ferred to a simple historical fact that took place in a specific epoch. 
This concept must be made more precise. As has been seen in 
the preceding chapter, the relations between India proper and 
Farther India date back to prehistoric times. But from a certain 
period on, these relations resulted in the founding of Indian king-
| doms on the Indochinese Peninsula and in the islands of Indo-
nesia. The oldest archaeological remains these states have left us 
are not necessarily evidence of the first civilizing wave. It is prob-
able, a priori, that the priests who consecrated the first Brahmanic 
or Buddhist sanctuaries and the scholars who composed the first 
Sanskrit inscriptions were preceded by seamen, traders, or im-
migrants—founders of the first Indian settlements. These settle-
ments, in turn, were not always entirely new creations; in many 
cases (Oc Eo in Cochin China, Kuala Selinsing in Perak, Sempaga , 
in the Celebes, etc.), they were built on Neolithic sites that the 
seamen from India had frequented perhaps from time immemorial. 
The coming of the Indians to Southeast Asia cannot be 
compared to the arrival of the Europeans in America, for in this 
part of the world the newcomers were not strangers discovering 
new lands. At some time that we must try to date, following cir-

--- [Page 37] ---
Indianization 15 
cumstances that we can attempt to determine, the sporadic influx 
of traders and immigrants became a steady flow that resulted in 
the founding of Indian kingdoms practicing the arts, customs, and : 
religions of India and using Sanskrit as their sacred language. 
“It seems,” writes Alfred Foucher,! “that the numerous emi-
grants—like those who still swarm into eastern Africa—encoun-
tered only savage populations of naked men. They implanted in 
these rich deltas or favored. islands nothing less than their civiliza-
tion or at least its copy: their customs and their laws, their alpha-
bet and their scholarly language, and their entire social and 
religious establishment, with,as close a likeness as possible of 
their castes and cults. In short, it was not a question of a simple 
influence but, in the full meaning of the term, a true colonization.” 
We will see later that this “colonization” did not involve political 
ties with the mother country. 
The nudity of the natives, mentioned by Foucher, is no more 
a criterion of “savagery” in this case than it is in the case of the 
hill tribes of Laos or Vietnam. We have seen before that the In-
dians were not confronted by uncultured “savages” but, on the 
contrary, by people endowed with a civilization that had traits 
~ in common with the civilization of pre-Aryan India. The speed and 
ease with which the Aryanized Indians propagated their culture 
is undoubtedly explained in part by the fact that, in the customs 
and beliefs of these immigrants, the natives discovered, under an 
Indian veneer, a base common to all of monsoon Asia. 
It is then neither a question of a contact between strangers 
or of a first contact. If the Indianization of Farther India around 
the beginning of the Christian Era seems to be a new development, 
it is because the Indians—who were not on their first voyage, but 
were arriving in greater numbers—were accompanied for the first 
time by educated elements capable of spreading the religions and 
arts of India and the Sanskrit language. The Indianization of Farther 
India is the continuation overseas of a ‘Brahmanization” that had 
its earliest focus in Northwest India and that “having begun well 
before the Buddha, continues to our day in Bengal as well as in 
the south.” 2 And, in fact, the most ancient Sanskrit inscriptions of 
Farther India are not much later than the first Sanskrit inscriptions 
of India itself. 
Indianization must be understood essentially as the expan-
sion of an organized culture that was founded upon the Indian 
conception of royalty, was characterized by Hinduist or Buddhist 

--- [Page 38] ---
16 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
cults, the mythology of the Puranas, and the observance of the 
Dharmasastras, and expressed itself in the Sanskrit language. It 
is for this reason that we sometimes speak of “Sanskritization” 
instead of “Indianization.” 
This Sanskrit or Indian civilization, transplanted into South-
east Asia and called, according to the country, “Indo-Khmer,” 
‘Indo-Javanese,” etc., is the one we are able to recognize in the 
epigraphical or archaeological documents. Perhaps the only dif-
ference between it and the “Sanskrit civilization” of Bengal and 
the Dravidian countries is the fact that it was spread by sea while 
the other was spread by land and, in a sense, by “osmosis.” The 
Indian civilization of Southeast Asia was the civilization of an 
elite and not that of the whole population, whose beliefs and way 
of life are still very insufficiently known. Since nothing more is 
known, it would be vain to try to arbitrate the conflict between 
those who hold that the indigenous societies have preserved the 
essence of their original character under an Indian veneer and 
those who believe they were integrated into a society of the 
Indian type.3 
2. THE FIRST EVIDENCE OF THE INDIANIZATION 
OF FARTHER INDIA 
An attempt has been made to find in a passage of the 
Arthasastra—the treatise on politics and administration by the 
Brahman Kautilya, minister of Chandragupta (end of the fourth 
and beginning of the third century B.C.)—proof that the coloniza-
tion of India dates back at least to the Maurya emperors. Louis 
Finot * has justly disposed of this theory, which is based on a text 
that, in its present form, is of uncertain antiquity. And regardless 
of its age, the Arthasastra, which simply recommends to the king 
that he “people an old or new country either by taking the territory 
of another or by sending forth the excess inhabitants of his own,” 
cannot prove much and is less explicit than the Jatakas, with their 
tales of seamen, and the Ramayana? which mentions Java and 
perhaps Sumatra. The Niddesa, a Pali canonic text which dates at 
the latest to the very first centuries of the Christian Era, is even 
better informed; it enumerates a number of Sanskrit or Sanskrit-
ized place names that Sylvain Lévi has suggested may be identified 
with localities of Farther India.® In our present state of knowledge, 
neither archaeological and epigraphic documents nor foreign 
sources can be dated any farther back than the Niddesa. Let us 

--- [Page 39] ---
Indianization 17 
anticipate the following chapter somewhat and seek the oldest 
evidence of the existence of Indian kingdoms in Farther India. 
In Burma—apart from the religious mission of the Buddhist 
monks Sona and Uttara which Emperor Agoka sent in the third 
century B.C. to Suvannabhumi, the “Land of Gold” (generally 
identified, rightly or wrongly, with the ancient land of the Mon, 
and especially with the town of Thaton)—there is no trace of 
Indian penetration before about 500 A.D., the date of the frag-
ments of the Pali canon found at Méza and Maungun, on the 
ancient site of Prome.’ 
In the Menam Basin, the site of Phra Pathom and, farther 
to the west, the site of Phong Tuk® on the Kanburi River have 
yielded the substructures of edifices and Buddhist sculptures in 
Gupta and post-Gupta styles,? and also a bronze statuette of the 
Buddha that was first considered to belong to the Amaravati 
school ' and therefore to date back to the third or fourth century 
A.D. but that really is considerably later.” 
The Brahmanic statues of Si Thep on the Nam Sak are per-
haps not as old as | believed when | first wrote about them in 
1932, but inscriptions found at the same site cannot be more 
recent than the fifth or sixth century A.D.13 A bronze statuette 
of the Buddha that shows Gupta influence and possibly dates back , 
to the fourth century has been found in the region of Khorat.%4 
In Cambodia, the Chinese place the founding of the kingdom 
of Funan by the Brahman Kaundinya in the first century A.D. 
China entered into relations with Funan in the third century A.D., 
and the oldest of the four Sanskrit inscriptions that this country 
has bequeathed to us dates back to this time. The bronze 
statuette of Poseidon found at Tra-vinh (Cochin China), which 
was inspired by the famous statue by Lysippus on the Isthmus of 
Corinth, and the various objects that came from the excavations 
at Oc Eo in western Cochin China, south of Phnom Bathé—the 
most ancient of which is a gold medallion bearing the likeness 
of Antoninus Pius, dated 152 A.D.’’—obviously do not constitute 
evidence of Indianization. But this Roman medallion from Oc Eo 
was found near other objects that are definitely Indian, notably 
intaglios and seals with Sanskrit inscriptions which date from the 
same epoch and from following’ centuries.18 
The Chinese begin to speak of the kingdom of Champa, on 
the coast of present-day Vietnam, in 190-93 A.D. The most an-
cient archaeological vestige found to date in the Cham territory 

--- [Page 40] ---
18 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
is the Déng-dudng (Quang-nam) Buddha, which is one of the 
most beautiful specimens of Buddhist art. It has been identified 
with the style of Amaravati,"9 but it is in reality of Gupta influence 
and dates at the earliest back to the fourth century. 
On the Malay Peninsula, the Chinese mention petty Indian 
states from the second century A.D. Sanskrit inscriptions do not 
go back any farther than the fourth century.” 
In the archipelago, the Sanskrit inscriptions of Milavarman 
in the region of Kutei, Borneo, date back to the beginning of the 
fifth century A.D. and those of Pirnavarman, in the western part 
of Java, to the middle of the same century. But certain images of 
the Buddha are more ancient; the most notable of these are the 
one discovered in the Celebes,2! which is the oldest and corre-
sponds to the tradition of Amaravati and of Ceylon (fourth to 
fifth centuries?), the one found in southern Jember Province (east-
ern Java),22 which shows Singhalese influence (fourth and fifth 
centuries), and the Buddha of the hill of Seguntang at Palembang 
(Sumatra). 
In summary, none of these findings can be dated before 
the time of Ptolemy (second century A.D.).24 Ptolemy’s geograph-
ical nomenclature for trans-Gangetic India was full of place names 
with Sanskrit correspondences. In the preceding century, Pom-
ponius Mela, Pliny the Elder, and the Periplus of the Erythrean 
Sea» were still only vaguely aware of a country of gold, ““Chryse,” 
lying beyond the mouth of the Ganges. 
Yet, Gabriel Ferrand, erroneously believing that Java was 
already Indianized in 132 A.D. and supposing ‘that the Indianiza-
tion of the Javanese was effected only slowly, during the course 
of many years,” concluded that “the beginnings of Indianization 
In trans-Gangetic India and in Indonesia must have been before 
our era.” #6 This conclusion is not supported by the evidence if 
we recall what has been said about the antiquity and permanence 
of the contacts between India proper and the countries beyond 
the Ganges. A greater flow of traders and immigrants, including 
some religious leaders and scholars, would have sufficed to start 
the rapid founding of Indian kingdoms in Southeast Asia where 
there had previously been only aboriginal tribes. The oldest San-
skrit inscription of Funan is no later than a century and a half 
from the date fixed by the Chinese for the founding of Funan by 
the union of a Brahman and a naked woman. It seems to me 

--- [Page 41] ---
Indianization 19 
prudent to say simply that Indian colonization was intense in the 
second and third centuries of our era and came to fruition in 
the fourth and fifth. 
We could add that the presence of Buddha images of Indian 
Origin on the coast of central Vietnam and in the Celebes before 
the fifth century is proof of the extensiveness of the voyages 
which, during the first centuries of the Christian Era, carried the 
Indians to the farthest limit their colonization was to attain. 
3. THE CAUSES OF INDIAN EXPANSION 
How can we explain this maritime drive of a people who 
regarded crossing the “black water” and contact with the Mlecch’a 
barbarians as bringing defilement and pollution? 2”7 Remote causes 
have been sought in the bloody conquest of Kalinga on the eastern 
coast of India by Asoka in the third century B.C. and the exodus 
of population it presumably provoked, but we might well ask why 
the effects were not felt until three centuries later. At most, we 
can suppose that the fugitives, if there were any, opened the way 
to a more important later emigration. 
One theory is that pressure was exerted on the mass of the 
Indian population by the invasions of the Kushans in the first 
century A.D.,28 an idea chronologically more acceptable. But this 
is nothing more than a hypothesis, still not supported by any 
precise fact. 
Another hypothesis is that high-caste Indian adventurers 
were allowed to seek their fortunes overseas.2? But this is only a 
hypothesis. 
On the other hand, there are a number of indications that 
the Indian expansion in the first centuries A.D. was commercial in 
origin. 
The contact that was established between the Mediterranean 
world and the East following the campaign of Alexander, the 
founding of the empire of Asoka and later that of Kanishka in 
India, and the birth in the West of the Seleucid Empire and the 
Roman Empire caused an increase in the luxury trade that was 
deplored by the Latin moralists of the first century.2? Gold, spices, 
aromatic woods (sandalwood, eaglewood), and fragrant resins 
(camphor, benzoin) were among the products of the countries 
and islands beyond the Ganges. The names Takkola (“market of 
cardamom”), Karpiradvipa (the island of camphor”), Narike-

--- [Page 42] ---
20 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
ladvipa (“the island of coconut palms”), and many other similar 
Sanskrit place names show what attracted the Indians to these 
regions. 
But perhaps the attraction of these countries would not have 
been so great if they had not also had the reputation of being 
endowed with a richness in gold, a reputation that is echoed in 
the Greek and Latin geographic names. 
“| would like,” writes Sylvain Lévi31 “apropos of Kanaka-
puri, ‘the city of gold’ in Dvipantara, to stress the role played by 
the search for gold in the Indian expansion in Farther India; it is 
not only the classical appellations of Survarnabhimi and Suvar-
nadvipa that give evidence of this. The names of rivers and streams 
recorded by Ptolemy in his tables evoke the ‘fabulous metal’ which 
the sands of Indonesia still bear. The multiple dialectic alterations 
of these names may reveal the origins of the seekers for gold. It 
was gold that attracted India to the Eldorado of the Far East.” 
To us, for whom the nineteenth century has revealed the 
rich veins of California and South Africa, the gold capacity of 
Farther India does not seem to justify a parallel “rush.” But gold 
was much rarer then and—an important fact that does not seem 
to have been considered in relation to the Indianization of Farther 
India—India had just lost its principal source of the precious 
metal shortly before the beginning of the Christian Era. India had 
obtained gold from Siberia by way of caravans that crossed 
Bactria, but the great movements of the peoples of Central Asia 
in the last two centuries before the Christian Era 32 had cut this 
route and deprived India of the gold it needed. India therefore 
imported a great number of coins from the Roman Empire in the 
, first century A.D., as is shown by the fact that, although some 
coins must have been melted down for current use, many of these 
old Roman coins have been found in Indian soil.3? The emperor 
Vespasian (69-79 A.D.), however, succeeded in arresting this flight 
of currency, which carried a grave threat to the imperial economy, 
and it is possible that the desire to find another source was one 
of the reasons for the exodus of adventurers toward the ‘Golden 
Chersonese.” 
Their distant voyages abroad were to be favored, moreover, 
by two circumstances of very different character. 
The first was material: the development of the Indian and 
Chinese navies *4 and the construction of seaworthy junks that 
were capable of transporting from 600 to 700 passengers. These 

--- [Page 43] ---
Indianization 21 
junks were constructed by a technique in use in the Persian Gulf,25 
A detailed description of this technique given in a Chinese text 
of the third century A.D.%° shows that the fore and aft rigging 
may have made possible sailing “close to the wind,” a major 
innovation in the art of navigation. We know, moreover, that 
around the middle of the first century A.D. the Greek pilot Hip-
palos discovered the periodic alternation of the monsoons, which 
the Muslims knew but had kept secret. From this discovery re-
sulted a prodigious increase in maritime commerce between 
India and the ports of the Red Sea, door of the West. “We must 
come down fourteen centuries later,” writes Sylvain Lévi3” “to 
encounter an economic revolution comparable to this one, when 
the Portuguese revolutionized the commercial routes of all Asia.” 
Communications by sea between India and the lands and islands 
of the East could not help but be affected. 
The other circumstance, of a moral nature, was the devel-
opment of Buddhism. By abolishing, for the Indians converted to 
the new religion, caste barriers and exaggerated concern for racial 
purity, it removed, with one stroke, the shackles previously placed 
on their maritime voyages by the fear of being polluted by con-
tact with barbarians. 
We are thus led to represent the eastward expansion of 
Indian civilization at the beginning of the Christian Era as the 
result, at least to a considerable degree, of commercial enterprises 
—as the result of a continual outflow of seamen, originally re-
cruited from among ‘‘merchants of the sea,” of whom many types 
are depicted in ancient Buddhist literature and who seem to have 
had a particular devotion to the Buddha Dipankara, “Calmer of 
the Waters.” °8 “A great number of Jataka tales,” says Sylvain 
Lévi, “have dealt with maritime adventures; the sea and seafaring 
clearly occupied an important place in the life of India at the 
time when these tales were conceived.” 39 
4. HOW THE FIRST INDIAN ESTABLISHMENTS WERE FORMED 
By what process did traders in quest of spices and adven-
turers in search of gold succeed in constructing communities 
homogeneous enough and strongly enough organized to give 
birth to veritable Indian kingdoms? 
We can only attempt to give an idea by observing what 
happened in similar circumstances in other places and at other 
times. 

--- [Page 44] ---
22 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Gabriel Ferrand has written many pages about the Indian-
ization of Java that undoubtedly contain a good deal of guesswork 
but that can be applied with some reservations to other countries 
of Farther India.” | will cite a few extracts: 
The true picture must have been something like this: two or three 
Indian vessels sailing together eventually arrived at Java. The newcomers 
established relations with the chiefs of the country, earning favor with 
them by means of presents, treatment of illnesses, and amulets. In all the 
countries of primitive civilization where | have lived, from the Gulf of 
Aden and the east coast of Africa to China, the only effective means of 
peaceful penetration is the same: welcoming gifts, distribution of curative 
medicines and of preventive charms against all ills and dangers, real and 
imaginary. The stranger must be or pass for a rich man, a healer, and a 
magician. No one could use such procedures better than an Indian. He 
would undoubtedly pass himself off as of royal or princely extraction, and 
his host could not help but be favorably impressed. 
Immigrants to this terra incognita, the Indians did not use inter-
preters. Thus they had to learn the native language which was so different 
from their own, thereby surmounting the first obstacle to acquiring the 
freedom of the city among the Mlecch’as. Next came union with the 
daughters of the chiefs; 41 only then were the strangers able to use their 
civilizing and religious influence with any chance of success. Their native 
wives, instructed for this purpose, became the best propaganda agents for 
the new ideas and faith; since they were princesses or noble daughters, if 
they affirmed superiority over the manners, customs, and religions in-
herited from the ancestors, their compatriots could scarcely contradict 
them. 
The Javanese had no equivalent terms to use in transmitting these 
social, moral, and religious innovations. It was therefore necessary to 
impose Indian terminology in all these domains, terminology that is still 
being used in Indonesia after two thousand years. 
Ferrand bases this hypothetical reconstruction on his per-
| sonal experience of the Islamic penetration among the Sakalava 
of Madagascar. R. O. Winstedt, an expert on the Indonesian world, 
paraphrases this passage in his A History of Malaya‘*2 and adds 
other parallels: “In time,” he writes, “a few [of the Indians] mar-
ried into leading Indonesian families and brought Hindu ideas of 
kingship, just as more than a thousand years later the Muslim 
Tamils married into the families of the Sultans and Bendaharas of 
Malacca. The coming of the Hindu appears to have been very 
similar to the later arrival of the Muslim from India and the 
Hadramaut, the Brahmin and the Kshatriya taking the place to be 
usurped by the Sayid.” 

--- [Page 45] ---
Indianization 23 
This was without doubt the first stage of Indianization. It con-
sisted of individual or corporate enterprises, peaceful in nature, 
without a preconceived plan, rather than massive immigration 
which would have resulted in greater modification of the physical 
type of the Austro-Asiatic and Indonesian peoples than has oc-
curred. This is, basically, the opinion of N. J. Krom,*# to which it 
has been objected that it would have been difficult for the Indians 
assembled in coastal settlements to establish the sort of contacts 
necessary for exerting any cultural influence whatever over the 
indigenous societies in the interior.“4 
But after the merchants, and in a sense in their wake, came 
the cultivated elements, belonging to the first two castes. We 
must assign a large role to these elements, without which we could 
not understand the birth of these civilizations of Farther India, so 
profoundly impregnated with Indian religion and Sanskrit litera-
ture. In this regard, one scholar has come forward with the 
hypothesis that the Brahmans, whom the merchants described 
as famous for their magic powers, were summoned by the native 
chiefs to augment their power and prestige.” We have, moreover, 
proof of this, for in Funan, the first kingdom about which the 
Chinese give us precise information, some officials were Indians, 
as is shown by the fact that their family name was the ethnic 
term Chu * by which the Chinese designated people native to 
India. It is not certain that all of these immigrants, of a much higher 
social class than the first seamen, were pure Indians of ancient 
Aryan stock, however. Among them there were undoubtedly a 
good number of non-Aryans who, in these new lands and in their 
relations with the natives, had a good chance for pretending to 
belong to social classes that had rejected them in India proper. 
| have already indicated the influence of Buddhism on the 
increase in maritime commerce, and we have seen that, in many 
cases, the most ancient evidences of Indianization are the images : 
of the Dipankara Buddha, who enjoyed great favor with the sea-
men frequenting the southern islands. The role of Buddhism is , 
undeniable; it seems to have opened the way, thanks to its mis-
sionary spirit and lack of racial prejudice. But most of the king-
doms founded in Farther India soon adopted the Sivaite concep-
tion of royalty, based on the Brahman-Kshatriya pairing and 
expressed in the cult of the royal linga.4” K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 
writes that “... just as in classical times the Greek colonists car-

--- [Page 46] ---
24 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
ried with them the fire from the sacred hearth of the city, a token 
of their filial relation to the land they left in search of new abodes, 
so also the Hindu colonists carried a cult with them, the cult of 
Saivism in which Siva played the role of the guardian of the state, 
thanks to the kind offices of his chief devotee... .’’ #8 
The founding of these kingdoms, the transformation of a 
simple commercial settlement into an organized political state, 
could come about in two different ways: either an Indian imposed 
himself as chief over a native population that was more or less 
strongly impregnated with Indian elements, or a native chief 
adopted the civilization of the foreigners, strengthening his power 
by becoming Indianized. The change must have occurred in both 
ways. In cases of the first type, however, where the dynasty was 
purely Indian in origin, it is hardly possible that it could long 
remain so because of the mixed marriages the Indians of necessity 
entered into. A marriage of this kind was the origin of the dynasty 
of Funan, as reported by the Chinese. But the elevation of native 
chiefs to the level of Kshatriya by means of the vratyastoma, the 
Brahmanic rite for admitting foreigners into the orthodox com-
munity,4? must have been the rule, and epigraphy furnishes exam-
ples. The king Mulavarman, who left Sanskrit inscriptions in Borneo 
at the beginning of the fifth century,°° was the son of Asvavarman, 
whose name is purely Sanskrit, but his grandfather’s name was 
Kundunga, which is certainly not. Sanjaya, founder of the Javanese 
dynasty of Mataram in the eighth century,' was the nephew of 
a certain Sanna, whose name sounds like the Sanskritization of a 
Javanese name. 
Generally speaking, the social structure of India, dominated 
by the caste system, seems to have undergone profound modifica-
tions upon contact with native societies. The genealogies of 
ancient Cambodia often present a curious mixture of Sanskrit 
and Khmer names, a fact that prompted Auguste Barth to say 
that the Brahmans of Cambodia ‘‘do not appear to have been 
very scrupulous about racial purity.” >2 It seems, rather, that these 
Brahmans were obliged to stretch the rules of endogamy con-
siderably if they wanted to found a family. The occurrence of 
such mixed marriages has been contested.°? However, a Chinese 
text of the fifth century * affirms that “in the kingdom of Tun-sun 
there are more than a thousand Brahmans of India. The people 
of Tun-sun practice their doctrine and give them their daughters 

--- [Page 47] ---
Indianization 25 
in marriage; consequently, many of these Brahmans do not go 
away.”” 99 
On this point we can evoke the example of South India, 
where the strictest Brahmans are, physically speaking, pure Dravid-
lans. Louis de La Vallée-Poussin has outlined, with supporting 
bibliographic references, a living picture of the role assigned 
to the Brahmans among the tribes of Bengal “in the process of 
Brahmanization” and shows that “the Brahmans put themselves 
in the service of the clan for all spiritual matters: either the hard-
ships of the Iron Age forced the worst concessions on them, or 
the clan truly adapted itself to the exigencies of an obliging ortho-
doxy.’” 56 
For his part, Sylvain Lévi>” notes that Brahmanism, ‘an 
amorphous religion without a leader, clergy, orthodoxy, or pro-
gram,’ which nevertheless unified India, is still carrying on its 
work before our eyes. “It recruits new converts relentlessly. Even 
jungle tribes aspire to possess their own Brahmans. The Brahman, 
who is brought in through enticement or by raids, begins to 
recognize in the fetishes of the clan the disguised avatar of his 
divinities; he then discovers that the genealogy in use by the chief 
of the clan has a relationship to the epic cycles; in return he im-
poses his practices, especially the respect for the cow, the initial 
article of his credo.” It may be added that the particular character 
of Indian civilization, “in which the way of life is bound up with 
a certain philosophic-religious doctrine, inevitably led to its adop-
tion en bloc by the native elite which it attracted. The adoption 
of Hinduism brought in its train the Indian way of life, and the 
adoption of the Indian way of life brought in its train the practice 
of Hinduism. The Indians brought the native chiefs not only a 
complete administration but an administrative technique capable 
of being adapted to new conditions in foreign countries.” °° 
The inferences we can draw from what still goes on before 
our eyes in India’? tend to confirm the evidence in the ancient 
Chinese sources that the common traits of the countries of the 
Southern Seas are not those of colonies Indian in population but 
those of Indianized native societies. 
“Thus,” says W. F. Stutterheim, speaking of Bali,©? “small 
domains appeared, governed by Indian or Indianized princes, in 
which only the members of the court had to have Indian blood 
in their veins. The mass of the population remained Indonesian. 

--- [Page 48] ---
26 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Today the trivamSa (the three highest castes) constitute 7 per cent 
of the population; the rest are called kaula (servants) or Sudra.” 
This process continued over many centuries by means of the 
commercial interchange that the founding of the first Indian king-
doms of Farther India favored and intensified, an interchange that 
may be inferred from Chinese texts. | say “interchange” advisedly, 
for it is true that, parallel with the voyages of the Indians to the 
countries of the Orient, there were, after a certain date, voyages 
of Southeast Asian traders to India, and these Southeast Asian trad-
ers settled in “colonies” in a few large ports in India. In analyzing 
the penetration of Indian civilization, we must consider another 
element which seems to have been forgotten: that is, the activity 
of the natives of Southeast Asia who, on returning from a sojourn 
abroad, must have contributed a great deal to the spread of 
Indian customs and beliefs in their countries. This assumption 
seems Justified if it is permissible to judge the past by what has 
happened recently in Asia: Western styles, customs, dress, external 
signs of good breeding, and taste for certain forms of art, literature, 
and amusement have been introduced more quickly and easily 
by Asians returning from Europe or America than by Europeans 
themselves. It must have been the same at other times in the 
countries of Farther India, where the penetration of Indian culture 
was perhaps in part the work of natives impressed by a superior 
civilization. 
Finally we must take account of the propensity of the In-
dians to reduce to treatises (Sastras) the various aspects of their 
civilization, from law (dharmasastra) and politics (arthasastra) to 
the search for pleasure (kamasastra). Without claiming, as has 
been done,®! that “the whole of Indian culture in Indonesia was 
acquired through books and manuals, the Indians themselves play-
ing a quite insignificant or even negligible role,” it is certain that 
all this technical and didactic literature in Sanskrit must greatly 
have facilitated the penetration of Indian culture abroad. 
To conclude these paragraphs on how the Indian establish-
ments were formed, | think it would be well to repeat what | 
have said elsewhere: © 
Indian-style kingdoms were formed by assembling many local 
groups—each possessing its guardian genie or god of the soil—under the 
authority of a single Indian or Indianized-native chief. Often this organ-
ization was accompanied by the establishment, on a natural or artificial 

--- [Page 49] ---
Indianization 27 
mountain, of the cult of an Indian divinity intimately associated with the 
royal person and symbolizing the unity of the kingdom. This custom, 
associated with the original foundation of a kingdom or royal dynasty, is 
witnessed in all the Indian kingdoms of the Indochinese Peninsula. It 
reconciled the native cult of spirits on the heights with the Indian con-
cept of royalty, and gave the population, assembled under one sovereign, 
a sort of national god, intimately associated with the monarchy. We have 
here a typical example of how India, in spreading her civilization to the 
Indochinese Peninsula, knew how to make foreign beliefs and cults her 
own and assimilate them—an example that illustrates the relative parts 
played by Indian and native elements in the formation of the ancient 
Indochinese civilizations and the manner in which these two elements 
interacted. 
5. THE POINTS OF DEPARTURE AND THE 
ROUTES OF INDIAN EXPANSION 
What routes did the voyagers follow, and what were the 
centers in India from which this civilization radiated over the 
Indochinese Peninsula and the islands of the south? 
It is obvious that the penetration of the archipelago was by 
sea, but we must wonder if land routes did not also play a role 
on the peninsula.® 
Mainland Southeast Asia, extending down through the Malay 
Peninsula, and island Southeast Asia have been described as con-
stituting a natural ‘barrier’; “it is only by means of relatively 
narrow passes like the channel of Singapore or the Sunda Strait 
that boats coming from the west by way of the Indian Ocean, or 
from the east by way of the China Sea, can pass from one side 
to the other.” The author of these lines, Father H. Bernard,® adds: 
“The territorial shortcuts were formerly impracticable because the 
deltas of the Irrawaddy, the Salween, the Menam, the Mekong, 
and the Red River, sometimes obstructed by tropical vegetation, 
were backed up by a rugged and inhospitable interior which was 
not easily crossed until the advent of aviation.” 
But the Indochinese deltas and their mangroves did not alto-
gether stop the adventurers in search of gold, just as the deserts 
of Central Asia or the snows of Pamir did not stop the silk mer-
chants or the Buddhist pilgrims in search of sacred texts. Geo-
graphic obstacles were sometimes less formidable than the pirates 
of the sea; it was the growth of piracy in the.straits, and later the 
tyrannical commercial policy of the kingdom of Palembang, 
that made the land routes so very important, as is demonstrated 
by archaeological finds. 

--- [Page 50] ---
28 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
What could be more tempting, moreover, than to avoid the 
long way around through the Strait of Malacca and profit by the 
narrowness of the Isthmus of Kra and of the Malay Peninsula to 
carry merchandise by one of those natural routes which to our 
day allow one to go “easily by bicycle from one sea to another 
in a few hours’? (| do not speak of the Sunda Strait, much 
farther south in relation to India, which, although sometimes used 
in antiquity, only achieved real importance after the great sailings 
by way of the Cape of Good Hope.) 
Those seamen who, proceeding from southern India to the 
countries of gold, did not coast along the shores of Bengal but 
risked crossing the high seas were able to make use of either the 
10-degree channel between Andaman and Nicobar or, farther 
south, the channel between Nicobar and the headland of Achin. 
In the first case they would land on the peninsula near Takuapa; 
in the second, near Kedah. Archaeological research has uncovered 
ancient objects at these two sites.® 
One passes without difficulty from Kedah to Singora; from 
Trang to Phatthalung, to the ancient Ligor, or to Bandon; from 
Kra to Chumphon; and especially from Takuapa to Chaiya. The 
importance and antiquity of these routes have been revealed by 
archaeological research.® 
It was, moreover, possible for travelers coming from central 
India and for those who sailed along the coast to approach the 
Gulf of Siam and the China Sea by the route that, from Tavoy, 
crosses the mountains at the Three Pagodas Pass and descends 
to the Menam Delta by the Kanburi River. It was on the shores 
of this river that we noted earlier the very ancient site of Phong 
Tuk, which is near that of the equally ancient Phra Pathom. 
Farther north, the approach to the Menam Basin is passable from 
the west by the route that now joins the port of Moulmein to the 
town of Rahaeng on one of the branches of the Menam. 
Finally, one scholar has postulated the existence of a route 
connecting the Menam to the Mekong by way of the Khorat 
Plateau via Si Thep, another ancient site, and the Mun Valley.® 
The cradle of the Indian kingdom of Kambuja, founded in the 
region of Bassac in the middle Mekong,”? separated from the lower 
Mekong and the sea by the unnavigable rapids of Khon, consti-
tuted in a sense the terminus of this route. 
Still farther north, there was a route connecting India and 
China through Assam, Upper Burma, and Yunnan. There is clear 

--- [Page 51] ---
Indianization 29 
evidence that this route was used from the beginning of the 
second century A.D.,”! and its use probably dates back to the 
second century B.C. By this route Indian influence, after affecting 
Upper Burma, reached Nanchao.’4 
Whence came the Indians who emigrated to Farther India, 
and where did they embark? Much research has been done on this 
subject. Unfortunately, those who are most involved in this re-
search, the Indian historians, have not always approached it with 
the desired objectivity: if they were natives of Madras, they at-
tributed the honor of having colonized “Greater India’ to the 
Tamil lands; if they were from Calcutta, to Bengal. 
Apart from a Tamil inscription in Sumatra 73 and two on the 
Malay Peninsula 74—which allow the Madras school to score a 
point, although none of these inscriptions date back to the be- _ 
ginning of Indianization—the colonists did not leave vernacular 
documents abroad that could inform us of their place of origin. 
Our sources of information on this point are the texts of geog-
raphers and of European and Chinese travelers, Indian texts al-
luding to navigation, and finally the place names, traditions, 
scripts, and plastic arts of Farther India. 
“All the eastern ports of India up to Tamralipti (Tamluk) 
contributed to this Indian expansion,” writes La Vallée-Poussin,”° 
“but the South played the greatest role.” 
In fact, although the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea (§60) in-
dicates that Kamara (Khabari of Ptolemy, i.e., Kaviri-pattinam in 
the Kaveri Delta),”““ Podouké (Pondicherry?),””7 and Sopatma were 
the three large neighboring ports whence the great ships named 
kolandia”® set sail for Chryse, Ptolemy (VII, 1, 15) locates the port 
of departure (apheterion) of the voyagers to the Golden Chersonese 
farther north, near Chicacole.”? It was at Tamralipti (Tamluk on the 
mouths of the Ganges) that the Chinese pilgrims Fa-hsien, in the 
beginning of the fifth century, and I-ching, at the end of the 
seventh century, embarked on their return from India to China. 
lt was undoubtedly also at Tamralipti that merchants starting from 
Benares or Champa, in the valley of the Ganges, took to the sea 
in the direction of Suvannabhimi, the Land of Gold, from the 
time of the composition of the Jatakas.®° Finally, it is certain that 
the large ports of the western coast—Bharukacch’a (Greek Bary-
gaza, modern Broach), Surparaka (Souppara, Sopara), and Muchiri 
(Greek Muziris, modern Cranganore)—were in touch with the 
Golden Chersonese.®! 

--- [Page 52] ---
30 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
The information we can draw from the Indian place names 
transplanted into Farther India is not very conclusive, for these 
names often appear for the first time in writings of a later date, and 
, the choice of names like Champa, Dvaravati, Ayodhya, and other 
famous cities of Puranic legend does not necessarily prove the 
Gangetic origin of those who transplanted them into foreign lands. 
Place names that are less well known offer better evidence. One 
can, for example, establish a relationship between Taruma, which 
the earliest inscription of Java places on the western part of that 
island,82 and a locality of the same name located near Cape 
Comorin. Likewise, the use of the term Ussa (Odra, i.e., Orissa) 
for Pegu and of Srikshetra (i.e., Puri) as an old name for Prome in 
Burma ® certainly indicates a relationship between these states 
and Orissa. The name Kalinga resembles that of Kling used by the 
Malays and the Cambodians to designate the Indians. The ap-
pellation Talaing, applied to the Mons by the Burmese, seems 
to indicate that at a certain epoch Telingana, or the Madras region, 
was in particularly active relations with the Mon country.® Fol-
lowing the same liné of thinking, we can recall the presence of 
ethnic names originating in Dravidian India among the Karo 
Bataks in Sumatra: Chola, Pandya, Pallava, Malayalam.® 
Dynastic traditions can furnish precious data. An attempt has 
been made to establish a relationship between the Sailendras of 
Java and Sumatra and the Sailas of Orissa,86 but a more satisfactory 
comparison can be made between the dynastic tradition of the 
sovereigns of Funan and that of the Pallavas of Kanchi (Con-
jeeveram).®” Both the founder and the great Indianizer of Funan 
were of the Brahmanic clan Kaundinya, a clan that originated in 
northern India, one branch of which exerted great influence over 
Mysore around the second century.®8 Various references to the 
sage Agastya and his cult in Farther India suggest a contribution 
of the Pandyas of southernmost India ® to the work of Indianiza-
tion. 
The paleography of inscriptions furnishes useful particulars: 
for example, a wave of Bengali influence from the end of the 
seventh century to the beginning of the ninth century has been 
attested to by the short-lived use of a pre-Nagari script.9° Un-
fortunately, the various types of Indian writing are less clearly 
differentiated the older they are. R. C. Majumdar has tried to 
show 7! that the script of the oldest Sanskrit inscription of the 

--- [Page 53] ---
Indianization 31 
Indochinese Peninsula (which dates back to the third century and 
which came from Funan, not Champa) ” is derived from the script 
of the Kushans, used in the central part of northern India. But 
this revolutionary opinion has been opposed with good argu-
ments by K. A: Nilakanta Sastri,?3 defender of the classic thesis 
that the alphabets of Farther India originated in southern India, 
with the influence of the script of the Pallavas predominating.%4 
The plastic arts are of no great help, because the most 
ancient remains are generally several centuries later than the be-
ginning of Indianization. An exception are the Buddhas called 
Amaravati—in reality of Gupta or Singhalese influence—whose 
presence in various parts of Farther India has been noted above. 
They give evidence of a southern preponderance at the beginning 
of Indianization, although the subsequent influences that have 
been noted in sculpture—that of Gupta art, then of Pala and 
Sena, and the influence of Orissa on images of Burma and Java % 
—give an idea of the diversity of the sources that contributed to 
the formation and evolution of the plastic arts. 
The same conclusion would undoubtedly be revealed by a 
study of architecture, if we possessed remains dating before the 
sixth century. In the present state of documentation, the monu-
ments of Farther India are so differentiated from and already so 
far from their Indian prototypes that one scholar was able to 
write: ‘The relationship between the earliest of these edifices 
and those of india, present or past, is far from striking; without 
their images, their inscriptions, and various texts that have now 
disappeared no one at first glance would dream of relating them 
to Indian temples. At most one senses among them a family like-
ness, by no means a direct kinship.”” The author of these lines %” 
attributes this fact to the disappearance of an architecture that 
used light and perishable materials which, if we were familiar with 
it, would undoubtedly supply the connection we seek. It is 
generally believed that the monolithic temples of Mamallapuram, 
constructed at the beginning of the seventh century by the Pallava 
sovereigns, show the closest affinity with the ancient Indian 
monuments of Farther India. But southern India is not the only 
region of India that can claim to have influenced the Indian 
architecture of Southeast Asia; we cannot help but be struck by 
the resemblance of the brick towers of pre-Angkorian Cambodia 
or of ancient Champa with certain brick monuments of central 

--- [Page 54] ---
32 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
India,?8 and especially with the temple of Bhitargaon of the Gupta 
era in the Ganges Valley,’ possibly a descendant of a common an-
cestor of the brick towers of India and of Farther India. 
From this brief and incomplete review of our sources of 
information on the origins of Indian expansion toward the east, 
we derive an impression that can be stated by summarizing with 
slight modifications the formula of La Vallée-Poussin already cited: 
all regions of India contributed something to this expansion, and 
it was the south that played the greatest role. We have perhaps had 
a tendency to magnify the role of southern India by attributing an 
exaggerated influence to the Pallavas.1 Except in Funan, the ap-
pearance of the first epigraphic texts and the most ancient ar-
chaeological remains coincides with the ascension of the Pallava 
dynasty; this is probably a coincidence, but it has been trans-
formed into a cause-and-effect relationship. We will see in the 
following chapter that, at least for Funan, there may be reason to 
take into account influences from Northwest India, scarcely con-
sidered up to now. Nevertheless, the influence of southern India, 
on the whole, was preponderant ™! and that of Ceylon was far 
from negligible.12 
But the Indian expansion was not, | repeat, a historical fact 
clearly delimited in time and space. It was a phenomenon that 
touched vast and diverse regions and lasted several centuries; it 
involved successive waves, local currents of various origins. It was 
aided by the centers of diffusion constituted by the first Indian 
kingdoms of the Malay Peninsula, which served, in effect, as re-
lay stations between India proper and the rest of Farther India. 
The Brahman Kaundinya, second Indianizer of Funan, came from 
the kingdom of P’an-p’an located on the peninsula.1% In the 
south of Sumatra, a great center for the diffusion of Buddhism in 
the seventh century was Palembang, where foreign scholars like 
the Chinese |-ching 1 came to study. 
Finally, in the research on the origins of this expansion, we 
must not forget that our sources consist for the most part of data 
from Farther India, which tell us about the result but rarely about 
the chain of events that produced it. 
Given the nature of the documents on the Indianization of 
Farther India in the first centuries of the Christian Era—epigraphy, 
archaeology, and foreign sources—we can write about the evolu-
tion and transformation of Indian culture upon contact with 

--- [Page 55] ---
Indianization 33 
indigenous societies and about the retreat of Indianization, but 
we can say very little about the history of the expansion of In-
dianization itself and even less about its origins. 
6. THE DEGREE OF PENETRATION OF INDIAN CIVILIZATION 
IN THE AUTOCHTHONOUS SOCIETIES 
To what extent did Indian civilization penetrate the mass of 
the population of Farther India or remain the privilege of an elite? 
Was the decline of this civilization in the thirteenth century caused 
by its adoption by a greater and greater number of natives, who 
caused it gradually to lose its distinctive traits? Or was it caused 
by the disappearance of a refined aristocracy, impregnated with a 
culture that remained foreign to the mass of the population? On 
these questions our sources—notably epigraphy, which especially 
informs us of the religions and the organization of the courts and 
ruling classes—do not furnish the desired information. 
Historians agree that, under an Indian veneer, most of the 
population preserved the essentials of their own culture. This at 
least is the view of Nicholaas J. Krom with regard to Java; and with 
regard to Bali, W. F. Stutterheim tells us that “Hinduism has always 
been and still is the culture of the upper classes, but never be-
came completely that of the masses, who were attached to In-
donesian animism and to the ancestor cult.” 1 It must have been 
the same in Cambodia, the decline of which in the fourteenth 
century seems to have been caused by the decline of the Brah-
manic aristocracy in the thirteenth century, recorded in an in-
scription of Sukhothai.1% 
Hinduism, under the particular aspect of the royal cult that 
it assumed in Farther India,"°” was essentially an aristocratic re-
ligion which was not designed for the masses; this explains the 
ease and speed with which the masses adopted Singhalese 
Buddhism and Islam at precisely the time when the Indian world 
was shaken by the repercussions of the Mongol conquests and the 
Muslim invasions. 
Even in the countries where indigenous traditions reacted 
most strongly and splintered the Indian veneer, however, such 
was the force of the penetration of Indian culture that its legacy 
is far from being negligible. We will see, in the Conclusion of this 
work, that this legacy includes the system of writing, a great part 
of the vocabulary, the lunar-solar calendar, the virtually un-

--- [Page 56] ---
34 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
changed cosmogonic myths, the great epic themes of the 
Ramayana and the Puranas, certain artistic formulas, the ad-
ministrative and legal framework, and a keen feeling of social 
rank, last vestige of the caste system. 
It is astonishing that in countries so close to China—coun-
tries that entered into commercial and diplomatic relations with 
her from the first centuries of the Christian Era—the cultural in-
fluence of the Middle Kingdom has been insignificant, although 
it was intense in the deltas of Tongking and North Vietnam. We are 
struck by the fundamental difference of the results obtained in 
the countries of the Far East by the civilizing activity of China and 
India. 
The reason for this lies in the radical difference in the 
methods of colonization employed by the Chinese and the In-
dians. The Chinese proceeded by conquest and annexation; sol-
diers occupied the country, and officials spread Chinese civilization. 
Indian penetration or infiltration seems almost always to have 
been peaceful; nowhere was it accompanied by the destruction 
that brought dishonor to the Mongol expansion or the Spanish 
conquest of America.!°° Far from being destroyed by the con-
querors, the native peoples of Southeast Asia found in Indian 
society, transplanted and modified, a framework within which 
their own society could be integrated and developed. 
The Indians nowhere engaged in military conquest and an-
nexation in the name of a state or mother country. And the Indian 
kingdoms that were set up in Farther India during the first cen-
turies of the Christian Era had only ties of tradition with the dy-
nasties reigning in India proper; there was no political dependence. 
The exchanges of embassies between the two shores of the Bay of 
Bengal were made on the basis of equality, while the Chinese al-
ways demanded that the “southern barbarians’’ acknowledge 
Chinese suzerainty by the regular sending of tribute. 
The Chinese commanderies of Vietnam were administered 
by Chinese governors, while the Indian kingdoms of Farther 
India were governed by independent sovereigns of native origin 
or of mixed blood, advised by Indian or Indianized counselors 
whose activity was chiefly cultural. 
Thus, although China exercised a more or less successful 
| political guardianship over these countries for centuries, her civ-
ilization did not spread beyond the area of her military conquests. 

--- [Page 57] ---
Indianization 35 
The peaceful penetration of the Indians, on the other hand, from 
the beginning extended to the limits of their commercial naviga-
tions. 
The countries conquered militarily by China had to adopt or 
copy her institutions, her customs, her religions, her language, and 
her writing. By contrast, those which India conquered peacefully 
preserved the essentials of their individual cultures and developed 
them, each according to its own genius. It is this that explains the 
differentiation, and in a certain measure the originality, of the 
Khmer, Cham, and Javanese civilizations, in spite of their common 
Indian origin. 

--- [Page 58] ---
CHAPTER III 
THE FIRST INDIAN KINGDOMS 
From Their Origins to the Middle of the Fourth Century 
The various factors analyzed in the preceding chapter resulted in 
the creation of small Indian states governed by leaders bearing 
Sanskrit names. These states began to appear at the beginning of 
the third century A.D., thus confirming the data of the tables of 
Ptolemy. 
These states have left only a few archaeological or epi-
graphical traces from before the fifth century. We know very little 
about most of them before that date except for the names men-
tioned by Ptolemy, by the Niddesa,’ and, most important of all, 
by the Chinese dynastic annals, which carefully register embassies 
from the countries of the South Seas. The locations of most of 
these states are uncertain or only approximate. 
The smallest of these countries usually had to move in the 
orbit of the most powerful kingdoms—kingdoms destined for a 
brilliant future, the history of which we can outline from Chinese 
texts and epigraphy. 
1. THE BEGINNINGS OF FUNAN (FIRST CENTURY A.D.) 
The most important of these kingdoms was unquestionably 
the one the Chinese called Funan. This name is the modern Man-
darin pronunciation of two characters once pronounced b’iu-ndm/ 
which is the transcription of the old Khmer word bnam, the mod-
ern form of which is phnom, “mountain.” The kings of this coun-
try had as their title the term meaning “king of the mountain’”—in 
Sanskrit parvatabhupala or Sailaraja, in Khmer kurung bnam. The 
Chinese came to designate the country by this royal title. 
The center of the country was located on the lower course 
and delta of the Mekong, but its territory at its apogee must have 
encompassed southern Vietnam, the central Mekong, and a large 
part of the Menam Valley and the Malay Peninsula. Its capital for 
a time was Vyadhapura, “the city of hunters’ 4—in Chinese T’e-mu, 

--- [Page 59] ---
The First Indian Kingdoms 37 
which is perhaps a transcription of a Khmer term (dmak, dalmak) 
having the same meaning.° The city was situated in the vicinity of 
the hill of Ba Phnom and of the village of Banam, two places in 
the Cambodian province of Prei Véng which, in their names, per-
petuate to our day the memory of the ancient name. According to 
the History of the Liang® this capital was 500 /i (200 km.) from 
the sea. This is approximately the distance that separates Ba Phnom 
from the site of Oc Eo,” where there was located, if not that port 
itself, at least an emporium where foreign merchants were 
established. 
The first information about Funan comes from an account 
left by the mission of the Chinese envoys K’ang T’ai and Chu 
Ying who visited this country in the middle of the third century.® 
The original of their narrative is lost, but there remain fragments 
of it scattered in the annals and in various encyclopedias. These, 
along with a Sanskrit inscription of the third century, constitute 
our basic documentation on the first two centuries of the history 
of this kingdom. 
According to K’ang T’ai, the first king of Funan was a cer-
tain Hun-t’ien, that is, Kaundinya, who came either from India or 
from the Malay Peninsula or the southern islands.? This king, hav-
ing dreamed that his personal genie delivered a divine bow to him 
and directed him to embark on a large merchant junk, proceeded 
in the morning to the temple, where he found a bow at the foot 
of the genie’s tree. He then boarded a ship, which the genie caused 
to land in Funan. The queen of the country, Liu-ye, “Willow 
Leaf,” wanted to pillage the ship and seize it, so Hun-t’ien shot 
an arrow from his divine bow which pierced through Liu-ye’s 
ship. Frightened, she gave herself up, and Hun-t’ien took her for 
his wife. But, unhappy to see her naked, he folded a piece of 
material to make a garment through which he had her pass her 
head. Then he governed the country and passed power on to his 
descendants. 
This is the Chinese version of the dynastic origins of Funan. __ 
It is without doubt a distortion of an Indian legend, reported more 
faithfully by a Sanskrit inscription of Champa.'® According to this 
version, the Brahman Kaundinya, having received a javelin from 
the Brahman Asvatthaman, son of Drona, threw it to mark the 
location of his future capital, then married a daughter of the 
king of the Nagas, named Soma, who gave birth to a royal line.” 

--- [Page 60] ---
38 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
This mystical union—which was still commemorated at the court 
of Angkor at the end of the thirteenth century in a rite mentioned 
by the Chinese envoy Chou Ta-kuan," and of which the modern 
. Cambodian annals have preserved the memory —is identical with 
that from which the Pallava kings of Kanchi, in southern India, 
claim to issue.4 Opinions differ, however, on the vague origin of 
this legendary theme.» 
In any case, the historical events that were forced to fit this 
plot could not have occurred later than the first century A.D., for 
as early as the following century we find in Funan historical per-
sonages whose existence is documented by epigraphy and by 
Chinese historians. 
According to the History of the Liang, one of Hun-t’ien’s 
descendants, named Hun-p’an-huang in the Chinese, was over 
ninety years old when he died. He was succeeded by “his second 
son P’an-p’an who transmitted the care of his affairs to his great 
general Fan Man,” 1 whose full name was Fan Shih-man, accord-
ing to the History of the Southern Ch’i.’” “After three years’ reign, 
P’an-p’an died. The people of the kingdom all chose [Fan Shih-
man] as king. He was brave and capable. Once more, with his 
powerful troops, he attacked and subjected the neighboring king-
doms; all acknowledged themselves his vassals. He himself took 
the title Great King of Funan. Then he had large ships built, and 
sailing all over the immense sea he attacked more than ten king-
doms, including Ch’ti-tu-k’un, Chiu-chih, and Tien-sun. He ex-
tended his territory five or six thousand /i.” 78 
2. THE INDIAN STATES OF THE MALAY PENINSULA 
IN THE FIRST CENTURIES OF THE CHRISTIAN ERA 
Rolf Stein believed that in the above text Ch’ti-tu-k’un ought 
to be read Ch’ti-tu, Tu-k’un, etc., and that Ch’ti-tu should be 
identified with Ch’ii-tu-ch’ien (or -kan), which he believed cor-
responded to the Kattigara of Ptolemy.!? This country, founded by 
emigrants from Chu-wu (north of Quang-tri, between Cua 
Tung and Cua Viét), should be sought in Cochin China, where 
the most recent studies also tend to place Kattigara.2° But 
Ch’ti-tu-k’un must probably be dissociated from Ch’t-tu-ch’ien.”! 
Tien-sun is undoubtedly identical with Tun-sun, which a 
text of the fifth-sixth centuries describes as a dependency of 
Funan.22 We can locate it with some probability on the Malay 

--- [Page 61] ---
The First Indian Kingdoms 39 
Peninsula, and more precisely on the two shores of the Isthmus of 
Kra; 23 the sparse data available on the other countries lead in the 
same direction.24 The conquests of Fan Shih-man should then in 
part have been carried out on the peninsula, where some other 
Chinese texts reveal the existence of small Indianized states at an 
early period. 
The most ancient of these states appears to have been 
Lang-ya-hsiu, the founding of which the History of the Liang 
(502-56) places ‘more than 400 years ago.” This kingdom, 
which will reappear at the end of the seventh century under the 
names Lang-chia-shu, Lang-ya-ssu-chia, etc., is the Langkasuka 
of the Malayan and Javanese chronicles; 26 its name survives in 
modern geography as the name of a tributary to an upper reach 
of the Perak River.2” It must have been situated astride the 
peninsula and have had access at the same time to the Gulf of 
Siam in the Pattani region 78 and to the Bay of Bengal, north of 
Kedah, therefore controlling one of the land transportation routes 
discussed in the preceding chapter. 
Tambralinga, on the eastern coast of the Malay Peninsula 
between Chaiya to the north and Pattani to the south, had its 
center in the region of Ligor,2? whence comes a Sanskrit inscrip-
tion dating from the sixth century or afterward.29 Mention of it in 
the Pali Buddhist canon (Niddesa) in the form ‘Tambalingam” 31 
proves that this kingdom already existed around the second 
century. 
It is the same with Takkola,32 cited in another Buddhist text, 
the Milindapanha; it is generally agreed that this town was located 
at Takuapa on the west coast of the Isthmus of Kra or perhaps 
farther south.> As for the port whose name is transcribed by the 
Chinese T’ou-chu-li and which is sometimes identified with Tak-
kola, Paul Wheatley 34 has shown that this name is in reality 
Chi-li and that it corresponds to the Koli of Ptolemy, probably 
on the estuary of Kuantan. It was from here that the embassy sent 
by Funan to India in the third century embarked. 
If we disregard the megalithic tombs of Perak and Pahang 
and the discoveries of Indian and ‘‘Roman” pearls at Kota Tingi in 
Johore,* which belong to the domain of proto-history, it is from 
the region of Kedah and of Perak that the most ancient epi-
graphical and archaeological remains of the Malay Peninsula 
come. 

--- [Page 62] ---
40 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Those discovered at Kedah are from various periods. They 
attest to the antiquity of this site, which we will hear of again 
later under its Sanskrit name Kataha and its Chinese name Chieh-
ch’a. But, like the other inscriptions and archaeological dis-
coveries,*© they do not date as far back as Ptolemy, the Niddesa, 
or the Chinese texts, that is, as far back as the time of the con-
quests of Funan on the peninsula.?7 
3. FUNAN (SECOND TO THIRD CENTURIES) 
It is difficult to be precise about the extent of Fan Shih-man’s 
conquests. There is good reason to consider his name as a tran-
scription of that of the king Sri Mara mentioned in the venerable 
Sanskrit stele of Vo-canh (in the region of Nha-trang).°° This in-
scription was long thought to be Cham,?9 but in 1927 Louis Finot 
attributed it to a vassal state of Funan.*”° If the identification of 
Sri Mara“! with Fan Shih-man is correct, the inscription—which 
emanates from a descendant of Sri Mara who reigned, to judge 
by the script, in the third century—must be considered as one of 
the sources for the history of Funan. It is apparent from this in-
scription that at the time when it was engraved and in the region 
where it was erected (that is, present-day Khanh-hoa) Sanskrit was 
the official language of the royal chancellery. 
The Chinese texts already cited inform us that the great 
conqueror Fan Shih-man died in the course of an expedition 
against the Chin-lin, or Frontier of Gold, which, there is cause 
to believe, corresponds either to Suvannabhtmi, the Land of Gold 
of the Pali texts, or to Suvarnakudya, the Wall of Gold of the 
Sanskrit texts (Lower Burma or the Malay Peninsula).44 A nephew 
of Fan Shih-man, named Fan Chan, murdered the legitimate heir, 
Chin-chéng, and usurped power. But about twenty years later, 
Fan Chan was assassinated by a son of Fan Shih-man named 
Ch’ang. This was vengeance without result, for Ch’ang was mur-
dered in his turn by the general Fan Hstin, who proclaimed himself 
king. 
These events took place roughly between 225 and 250,3 and 
it is between these two dates, during the reign of Fan Chan, that 
Funan entered into relations with the Indian dynasty of the 
Murundas and sent its first embassy to China. | have emphasized 
elsewhere “4 that the significance of ‘this event, which has more 

--- [Page 63] ---
The First Indian Kingdoms 41 
to do with commercial preoccupations than with political am-
bitions, confers a certain importance on his reign. In this epoch, 
that of the Three Kingdoms, southern China (the Kingdom of Wu), 
finding it impossible to use the land route held by the Wei for its 
commercial relations with the West, sought to procure for itself 
by sea the luxury goods it wanted.*® Now Funan occupied a priv-
ileged position on the route of maritime commerce and constituted 
an inevitable way station for the seamen who used the Strait of 
Malacca as well as for those, probably more numerous, who 
crossed the isthmuses of the Malay Peninsula. Funan was perhaps 
even the terminus for navigation hailing from the eastern Mediter-
ranean, if it is true that the Kattigara of Ptolemy was located on 
the western coast of Cochin China.” 
“The reign of Fan Chan is important,” writes Paul Pelliot; 46 
“it was this usurper who was the first to enter into official and 
direct relations with the princes of India. A text of the fifth cen-
tury tells that a certain Chia-hsiang-li, native of a country T’an-yang, 
which was located, it seems, west of India, reached India, and 
from there Funan. It was he who taught the king Fan Chan what 
marvels this country could show the visitor, but the voyage was 
long; to go and return might take three or even four years. Was 
King Fan Chan captivated by the report of Chia-hsiang-li? At least 
we know from a reliable source that he sent one of his relatives 
named Su-wu on an embassy to India. This person embarked from 
T’ou-chii-li, perhaps Takkola,4”7 which indicates that the influence 
of Funan extended as far as the Indian Ocean at that time. The 
embassy arrived at the mouth of the Ganges and ascended the 
river to the capital of a prince who undoubtedly, as Sylvain Lévi 
has recognized; belonged to the Murunda dynasty. The Indian 
king took the foreigners on a tour of his country; he then took 
leave of them, entrusting them with four horses of the Indo-
Scythian country as a present for their king and giving them the 
Indian Ch’en-sung as a companion. By the time Su-wu got back 
to Funan, four years had passed since his departure.” 
It was also Fan Chan, according to the History of the Three 
Kingdoms, who in 243 “sent an embassy [to China] to offer a pres-
ent of musicians and products of the country.” #8 
Was it also he who was author of the previously cited 
Sanskrit inscription, and whom this text designates as a member 

--- [Page 64] ---
42 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
of the family of Sri Mara? This is not impossible, for Fan Chan, 
son of the sister of Sri Mara, might well have claimed to be related 
to his predecessor. 
The usurper Fan Hstin, who succeeded Fan Chan after having 
murdered a son of Fan Shih-man, received some time about 245 
to 250 the Chinese mission of K’ang T’ai and Chu Ying, who met 
an envoy of the Murundas at his court? 
This Chinese mission established relations with Funan that re-
sulted in the dispatch by Fan Hstin of a series of embassies to China 
from 268 to 287. These embassies are mentioned in the History 
of the Chin.® The last three, those from 285 to 287, were per-
haps a consequence of the resurgence of maritime commerce 
after the reunification of China by the Chin in 280, a reunification 
that stimulated an increased desire on the part of the court for 
the products and imported luxuries of the countries to the south. 
It is undoubtedly to K’ang T’ai that we are indebted for the 
first information about the country: “There are walled villages, 
palaces, and dwellings. The men are all ugly and black, their hair 
frizzy; they go about naked and barefoot. Their nature is simple 
and they are not at all inclined toward thievery. They devote 
themselves to agriculture. They sow one year and harvest for 
three. Moreover, they like to engrave ornaments and to chisel. 
Many of their eating utensils are silver. Taxes are paid in gold, 
silver, pearls, perfumes. There are books and depositories of 
archives and other things. Their characters for writing resemble 
those of the Hu [a people of Central Asia using a script of Indian 
origin].’”>" 
4, THE BEGINNINGS OF CHAMPA: LIN-YI 
(FROM THE END OF THE SECOND TO THE MIDDLE OF THE FOURTH CENTURIES) 
The History of the Chin inserts a report in the biography of 
T’ao Huang, Chinese governor of Tongking, in which he com-
plains, in around 280, of the raids of Lin-yi. This kingdom, he 
says, “touches Funan in the south. Their tribes are numerous; 
their friendly bands render mutual aid; taking advantage of the 
ruggedness of their region, they do not submit [to China].” ° 
Lin-yi was the first center of the Cham country, which enters 
into history at the end of the second century. In fact, Chinese 

--- [Page 65] ---
The First Indian Kingdoms 43 
texts place its foundation about the year 192.3 A native official, 
Ch’ii-lien, profiting by the weakening of power of the later Han 
dynasty, carved a domain for himself at the expense of the Chinese 
commandery of Jih-nan (between Hoanh-sdn and the Col des 
Nuages) and proclaimed himself king in the southernmost sub-
prefecture, that of Hsiang-lin, which corresponds roughly to the 
southern part of the present-day Vienamese province of Thua-
thién. At first it was thought that Lin-yi, ‘‘the capital Lin,” was an 
abbreviation of Hsiang-lin-yi, “the capital of Hsiang-lin,” °* but 
one scholar has proposed more recently that it is an ethnic name. 
The creation of the kingdom of Lin-yi in 192 had been preceded 
a half-century before, in 137, by a first attempt to invade Hsiang-
lin by a band of about a thousand barbarians from beyond the 
] frontiers of Jih-nan;°° their name Ch’i-lien, although written 
with different characters, can scarcely be dissociated from that of 
the founder of Lin-yi.°’ 
In any case, it is almost certain that these “barbarians from 
beyond the frontiers of Jih-nan’”’ were, if not all Chams, at least 
Indonesians who, if they were not already Indianized, soon be-
came so. 
We will see, in the course of its history, that the Cham coun-
try was divided into a certain number of natural provinces cor-
responding to the coastal plains. Present-day Quang-nam, with 
the archaeological sites of Tra-kiéu, Mi-son, DOng-duong, is in 
a sense the holy land of Champa.°® The beautiful bronze Buddha 
found at Ddéng-duGdng is evidence of the antiquity of Indian 
penetration in this region which bears—is it pure chance?—the 
name Amaravati. South of Amaravati, the principal centers men-
tioned in epigraphy are Vijaya in present-day Binh-dinh, Kauthara 
in the plain of Nha-trang, and Panduranga in the region of Phan-
rang. The inscriptions show that in the eighth century Cham was 
spoken in the southern provinces. But originally these southern 
provinces were part of Funan. This is proved by the presence, in : 
the region of Nha-trang, of the inscription of the third century 
emanating from a king of Funan—the descendant of Sri Mara (i.e., 
Fan Shih-man) who perhaps was none other than Fan Chan. 
We have no ancient evidence, like that for Funan, of the 
Indianization of the Chams and the dynastic tradition of their 
kings; the Chinese are silent on these two points, and it is not un-

--- [Page 66] ---
44 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
til an inscription of the ninth century that there appears for the first 
time the name of Maharshi Bhrigu, personage of the Mahabharata, 
eponymous ancestor of the dynasty of the Bhargavas, from which 
the kings of Champa claimed they had descended. As for the 
name of Champa itself, whence is derived the name of the Chams, 
although it does not appear in epigraphy until the beginning of 
the seventh century, it may be much older. 
The descendants of Ch’ii-lien took advantage of the dis-
memberment of China at the fall of the Han to expand to the 
north. Between 220 and 230, one of them sent an embassy to Li 
Tai, governor of Kwangtung and Chiao-chih (Tongking), in con-
nection with which the name Lin-yi, along with that of Funan, 
appears for the first time in a Chinese text. Lui Tai, says the History 
of the Three Kingdoms, “sent emissaries to spread Chinese 
civilization south beyond the frontiers. Also the kings of Funan, 
Lin-yi, and T’ang-ming (?) each sent an embassy to offer tribute.” >? 
This was purely a formality, for in 248 the armies of Lin-yi rose 
to pillage the villages of the north and retained from their raid, 
following a great struggle on the bay south of Ron, the territory 
of Ch’ii-su, that is, the region of Badén on the Song Gianh.® 
Finally the king Fan Hsiung, grandson of Ch’t-lien in the female 
line,6! renewed these attacks around 270, aided, it was said, by 
the king of Funan, Fan Hsitin. It took ten years for the governor 
of Tongking, T’ao Huang, to force the people of Lin-yi back within 
their frontiers. From the beginning, their attempts at expansion 
toward the north clashed with the push of the Vietnamese toward 
the south. The battles fought by these two representatives of rival 
civilizations—the Indianized Chams and the Sinicized Vietnamese 
—were waged from Hoanh-son to the Col des Nuages; they were 
to result in the final retreat of the Chams in the fourteenth century. 
In 284, Fan Yi sent the first official embassy to China—if we 
do not count the one sent to the governor of Chiao-chih between 
220 and 230. During the second half of his long reign of over 
fifty years, Fan Yi had a certain Wen as his counselor. Wen is 
identified in various texts as a Chinese, native of Yang-chou in 
Chiang-su, who had settled in Lin-yi, but he may have been a 
Sinicized native.62 He went to China in 313 and 316, and there 
learned various techniques; his knowledge of the material civiliza-
tion of China was of great value to his master. By gaining the 
confidence of the old king, he managed to get himself named 

--- [Page 67] ---
The First Indian Kingdoms 45 
general in chief and then to brush aside the heirs to the throne. 
At the death of Fan Yi, which took place unexpectedly in 336, he 
succeeded him. 
Fan Wen, whose capital was located in the region of Hué, 
pacified the savage tribes and in 340 sent an embassy to the Chin 
emperor requesting that the northern frontier of his kingdom be 
fixed at Hoanh-soén Mountain. When the emperor hesitated to 
abandon the fertile lands of Jih-nan to him, he seized them in 
347, thus giving his states the boundary he had desired. He died 
in 349 in the course of another expedition north of his new 
frontier. 

--- [Page 68] ---
CHAPTER IV 
THE SECOND INDIANIZATION 
From the Middle of the Fourth Century to the Middle of 
the Sixth Century 
1. FUNAN: REIGN OF THE INDIAN CHAN-T’AN (357) 
In 357, for reasons that are not known, Funan fell under the 
domination of a foreigner. In the first month of this year, accord-
ing to the dynastic histories of the Chin and the Liang, ‘‘T’ien Chu 
Chan-t’an, king of Funan, offered tamed elephants as tribute.” 7 
Tien Chu is the Chinese name for India, and the expression 
“Tien Chu Chan-t’an” means “the Indian Chan-t’an.” 2 Sylvain 
Lévi has shown? that Chan-t’an is a transcription of chandan, a 
royal title in use among the Yuieh Chih, or Indo-Scythians, and 
especially among the Kushans in the line of Kanishka. “Tien Chu 
Chan-t’an or Chu Chan-t’an,” he writes,4 “was thus a royal per-
sonage who originally came from India; his title Chan-t’an seems 
to connect him to the same stock as Kanishka. The connection is 
not at all surprising. A century before Chu Chan-t’an, in the time 
of the Wu (220-64), between 240 and 245 according to the cal-
culations of Paul Pelliot, the king of Funan had sent one of his 
relatives on an embassy to India to the sovereign Mou-luan 
(Murunda) who reigned on the Ganges, and in return Mu-
runda had sent four horses of the Yueh Chih as a present to the 
king of Funan. We know what close lines united the Murundas 
with the Yiieh Chih; it has even been maintained> that Murunda 
was the dynastic title of the Kushans. We also know that the 
Kushans extended their domination over the Ganges, at least as 
far as Benares, where they installed a satrap. In 357, under the 
great emperor Samudragupta, all of northern India had submitted 
to the Gupta dynasty; the Scythian invaders had been driven back. 
It is possible that a branch of the Kushan family, driven from the 
banks of the Ganges, sought its fortune beyond the Bay of Bengal, 
in this Land of Gold (Suvarnabhumi, or Chryse) which had been 
opened to adventurers from India.” 

--- [Page 69] ---
The Second Indianization 47 
Perhaps the reign of this foreigner, coming after the ex-
change of embassies with the Murundas, accounts for some con-
nections we are tempted to establish in several fields between 
Funan and ancient Cambodia on the one hand and the Iranian 
world on the other. We will see later ® that at the end of the fifth 
century the servant of a king of Funan bore the name or title 
Chiu-ch’ou-lo, which could be identical with the title kujula in 
use among the Kushans. A little later, in the seventh century,’ we see 
a Scythian (Saka) Brahman arriving from the Dekkan and marrying 
the daughter of the king Isanavarman I. The pre-Angkorian iconog-
raphy of the images of Surya, with their short tunics, short boots, 
and sashes similar to those of the Zoroastrians, is clearly of Iranian 
inspiration. Perhaps these images represent the sun considered 
as a Magian or Scythian Brahman, who is designated by the name 
Sakabrahmana in Angkorian epigraphy.? Even the cylindrical 
coiffure of the pre-Angkorian images of Vishnu can be regarded 
as showing Iranian influence. It is true that the immediate model 
for this hair style is found in the sculpture of the Pallavas,’° but 
we know that one group of scholars is convinced of the northern 
origin of the Pallavas, maintaining that they are descendants of 
the Pahlavas, that is, the Parthians.” Finally, even the name of the 
Kambujas, heirs of Funan, may be related to that of the Iranian 
Kambojas.’* It would be imprudent for the moment to push these 
comparisons too far, but they are worth pointing out, especially 
because the discovery at Oc Eo,"3 in western Cochin China, of an 
intaglio representing a libation to fire and of a cabochon with a 
Sassinid effigy 4 has furnished tangible proof of Funan’s relations 
with the Iranian world. 
The reign of the Indian or Indo-Scythian Chan-t’an con-
stitutes a sort of interlude in the history of Funan. The date 357 is 
the only one we know for his reign, and we hear nothing more 
of Funan before the end of the fourth century or the beginning of 
the following century. 
2. CHAMPA: THE FIRST SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS 
OF BHADRAVARMAN (THIRD QUARTER 
OF THE FOURTH CENTURY) 
In Lin-yi the son of Fan Wen, named Fan Fo by the Chinese 
historians, continued the traditional policy of expansion to the 

--- [Page 70] ---
48 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
north. But following unsuccessful campaigns in 351 and 359, he 
was obliged to restore Jih-nan to China and to send embassies 
there in 372 and 377.% | 
Fan Fo was succeeded by Fan Hu-ta, who was either his son 
or his grandson. Fan Hu-ta is ordinarily identified with Bhadravar-
man, whose Sanskrit name we know from the inscriptions he left 
in Quang-nam and in Phu-yén.” This identification is based on 
the probable date of the inscriptions %—around the year 400 ac-
cording to Abel Bergaigne 19 and Louis Finot.2? But another author 
has advanced strong paleographic arguments that the inscriptions 
are several decades older; 2! we would then have to attribute them 
to Fan Fo, whose name could be an exact Chinese transcription of 
Bhadravarman.22 
Rolf Stein 23 has suggested, as an explanation for the dis-
crepancy between the Chinese and Sanskrit names of the kings 
of this epoch, that the kings of Lin-yi who were known to the 
Chinese, with their capital in the region of Hué, may in fact have 
been different from the kings with Sanskrit names living in Quang-
nam, which was conquered later by Lin-yi. 
Bhadravarman was the founder of the first sanctuary con-
structed in the cirque of Mi-sdn and dedicated to Siva Bhadreé-
vara, whose name—following a custom we encounter constantly 
from then on—recalls that of the founder. This temple was de-
stroyed by a fire two and a half centuries later. 
Bhadravarman’s capital was discovered east of Mi-sdn, on 
the site of present-day Tra-kiéu, whose environs have yielded 
stone inscriptions in a script identical with that of the inscriptions 
mentioned above. Two of them 74 mark the limits of the domain 
consecrated to BhadreSvara; and the third,2? which is the oldest 
known text in the Cham language or in any Indonesian dialect, 
contains an imprecatory formula ordering respect for the ‘naga 
of the king’—undoubtedly a reference to the protective divinity 
of a spring or well. This vernacular text shows that in the fourth 
century the country was inhabited by a Cham-speaking population. 
Did these representatives of the Indonesian linguistic group 
receive Indian civilization directly by sea or through the inter-
mediary of already Indianized neighbors in territories to the west 
or south? It is as difficult to answer this question as it is to know 
whether the Ch’t-lien, founders of Lin-yi at the end of the second 
century, were already Indianized. The discovery in Quang-nam of 

--- [Page 71] ---
The Second Indianization 49 
the famous Buddha of Déng-dudng, a bronze statue of Gupta 
influence, perhaps of Indian origin, and dating in all probability 
from the fourth century, unfortunately does not prove much either 
about the origin of Indianization or about the possible priority of 
Buddhism in a country which, except for a Buddhist upsurge at the 
end of the ninth century, manifested an especially profound at-
tachment to Hindu cults. Such images are easily transportable, and 
there is nothing to prove that the D6ng-dudng Buddha was brought 
to Indochina immediately after it was made. 
Nor is it easy to say whether, as some believe, the east coast 
of the peninsula, on which the Indian expansion took place, was 
already impregnated by Dongsonian civilization, remains of which 
are found north of the natural frontier of Hoanh-sdn. 
What is important is that, through the Chams, Indian civ-
ilization spread to this frontier—which, moreover, it never crossed. 
It was assimilated by the Chams. And, although their divided 
country was poorly suited for the building of a strong and cen-
tralized state, this civilization nevertheless resisted the pressure of 
Sino-Vietnamese civilization for centuries.? 
The inscriptions of Bhadravarman are the first documents we 
possess dealing with the religion of the court. They reveal ‘the 
dominance of the cult of Siva-Uma, without prejudice to the 
homage rendered to the two other members of the Trimirti.’”’ 2” 
Later inscriptions found at Mi-soGn show us that the god Bhadres-
vara was represented by a linga. It is the oldest known royal 
linga 78 jn Farther India. 
The following information on the customs of Lin-yi at this 
time has been extracted from Ma Tuan-lin: 79 
The inhabitants build the walls of their houses with baked bricks, 
coated with a layer of lime. The houses are all mounted on a platform 
or terrace called kan-lan.30 The openings are generally placed on the 
north side, sometimes on the east or west, without fixed rule....Men 
and women have no other costume than a length of ki-pei cloth 31 
wrapped around the body. They pierce their ears so they can suspend 
little rings from them. The distinguished people wear leather shoes; the 
common people go barefoot. These customs prevail equally in Funan and 
in all the kingdoms situated beyond Lin-yi. The king wears a tall hat deco-
rated with gold flowers and trimmed with a silk tassel. When he goes 
out he mounts an elephant; he is preceded by conches and drums, 
sheltered under a parasol of ki-pei, and surrounded by servants who wave 
banners of the same material.... 

--- [Page 72] ---
50 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Weddings always take place in the eighth moon.32 It is the girls 
who ask for the boys in marriage, because the girls are considered to be 
of inferior nature.33 Intermarriage among people who bear the same 
family name is not prohibited. These foreigners are of a bellicose and 
cruel character. Their weapons consist of bows and arrows, sabers, lances, 
and crossbows of bamboo wood. The musical instruments they use are 
very similar to those we use ourselves: the cithern, the violin with five 
strings, the flute, etc. They also use conches and drums to warn the 
people. They have deep-set eyes, noses that are straight and prominent, 
and black, frizzy hair. The women fasten their hair on top of the head in 
the form of a hammer.... The funeral ceremonies of a king take place 
seven days after his death, those of the great mandarins three days after 
death, and those of the common people the day after death. Whatever 
the status of the deceased, the body is carefully wrapped, carried to the 
shore of the sea or of a river accompanied by the sound of drums and by 
dances, and then burned on a pyre set up by those present. When a 
king’s body is burned, the bones spared by the fire are put in a gold urn 
and thrown into the sea. The remains of mandarins are put in a silver urn 
and thrown into the waters at the mouth of the river. In deaths of com-
pletely undistinguished persons, an earthenware vase taken to river waters 
suffices. Relatives of both sexes follow the funeral procession and cut 
their hair before turning away from the shore; it is the only mark of the 
very short mourning. There are, however, some women who stay in 
mourning in another form throughout their lives: they let their hair hang 
loose and dishevelled after it has grown out. These are the widows who 
have vowed never to marry again. 
3. THE STATES OF THE MALAY PENINSULA AND INDONESIA 
FROM THE FOURTH TO THE SIXTH CENTURIES 
The appearance of the first inscriptions in the Sanskrit 
language in Champa, in the second half of the fourth century, 
slightly preceded that of similar texts on the Malay Peninsula and 
in Borneo and Java. 
The fragmentary stone inscriptions found at Cherok Tekun, 
opposite Penang, have been attributed to the fourth century.*4 
The inscription of Bukit Meriam at Kedah, which reproduces two 
Buddhist verses, dates from the same or a slightly later time.* 
Archaeological research in the vicinity of Kedah has brought to 
light an inscription of the fifth or sixth centuries containing three 
Buddhist stanzas.2° A bronze statuette of the Buddha found in this 
region dates from the same era.?” 
The most interesting document comes from the northern 
district of Province Wellesley.?8 It is an inscription carved on the 
upper part of a pillar, on each side of which is delineated a stupa 

--- [Page 73] ---
The Second Indianization 51 
crowned by a seven-tiered parasol. The Sanskrit text consists of a 
Buddhist stanza and a prayer for a successful voyage formulated by 
the master of the junk (mahanavika), Buddhagupta, of the Red-
Earth Land (Raktamrittika). The script seems to date from the middle of the fifth century. 
This Red-Earth Land,7? known to the Chinese under the 
name Chih-t’u, must have been located on the Gulf of Siam, in 
the region of Phatthalung * or Kelantan.4! The Chinese do not 
speak of it before 607,44 but it had by then already existed at 
least a century and a half, since, as we have seen, it is mentioned in 
the inscription of Buddhagupta. 
In Perak, the late Neolithic site of Kuala Selinsing, probably 
occupied at an early date by Indian seamen, has yielded a Cor-
nelian seal, engraved with the name of Sri Vishnuvarman. This 
seal has caused much ink to flow; * the writing appears to be 
earlier than the sixth century and recalls that of certain seals of 
Oc Eo. 
On Tun-sun, which was discussed in the last chapter, a 
Chinese text of the fifth-sixth centuries gives us some informa-
tion worth citing: ‘When they are sick they make vows to be 
buried by birds. They are led outside the city with songs and 
dances, and there the birds devour them. The bones that are left 
are burned and placed in a jar which is thrown into the sea. If 
the birds do not eat them, they are put in a basket. As for those 
buried by fire, they are thrown into the fire. The ashes are col-
lected in a vase which is buried and to which sacrifices of un-
limited duration are made.” * 
Lang-ya-hst, or Langkasuka, which has also been discussed 
in the preceding chapter, first established relations with China in 
51546 under a king who bore the name Bhagadatta. ‘The in-
habitants,” says the History of the Liang,” “men and women, let 
their hair hang loose and wear sleeveless garments of a material 
they call kan-man,48 whose fiber is ki-pei cotton. The king and 
the dignitaries of the kingdom add a piece of dawn-red material 
over their dress which covers the upper part of the back between 
the shoulders. They gird their loins with a cord of gold and 
suspend gold rings from their ears. The women adorn themselves 
with beautiful scarves enriched with precious stones. The walls 
in this country are built of brick. The houses have double doors 
and pavilions surmounting terraces. The king leaves his palace 

--- [Page 74] ---
52 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
seated on an elephant, sheltered under a white canopy, pre-
ceded by drums and banners, and surrounded by ferocious-looking 
soldiers.” 
To the north, Langkasuka bordered on P’an-p’an,*? a country 
located on the Gulf of Siam, very likely on the Bay of Bandon. 
P’an-p’an’s first embassy to China goes back to the period 
424-53,°" and others followed up to 635. At about the time of the 
first embassies, as we shall see, another Kaundinya, second In-
dianizer of Funan,! came from P’an-p’an. 
“Most of the people,” writes Ma Tuan-lin,? “live on the 
shores of the sea. These barbarians do not know how to build 
defensive walls; they are content to set up palisades. The king 
half reclines on a golden couch shaped like a dragon. The im-
portant persons of his entourage go on their knees before him, 
bodies straight and arms crossed in such a way that the hands 
rest on the shoulders. At his court one sees many Brahmans, who 
have come from India to profit from his munificence and are 
very much in favor with him.... The arrows used in the kingdom 
of P’an-p’an have tips made of very hard stone; the lances have 
iron tips sharpened on both edges. In this country there are ten 
monasteries for monks and nuns who study the sacred books of 
Buddhism and who eat meat but do not drink wine. There is also 
a Taoist monastery. The rules of the latter are very strict; these 
monks abstain from both meat and wine.” 
Paul Wheatley °2 proposes to locate another state, Tan-tan, 
which sent ambassadors to China in 530 and 535, much farther 
south, in the region of Trengganu. 
In Borneo, the seven inscriptions on pillars found in the 
sultanate of Kutei seem to date back to around 400.°4 They 
emanate from a King Mulavarman, grandson of a certain Kundunga 
(whose name is perhaps Tamil or Indonesian,9°> but surely not 
Sanskrit) and son of the Asvavarman who is considered the founder 
of the dynasty (vaméakartri). These inscriptions are associated with 
a sanctuary bearing the name Vaprakesvara, in which must be 
recognized Siva or Agastya or a local divinity—unless, of course, 
the sanctuary is not a funerary monument at all.°® 
Furthermore, there are scattered over Borneo—along the 
Kapuhas, Rata, and Mahakam rivers—more or less clear traces of 
Indianization. A beautiful bronze Buddha of Gupta style has been 
found at Kota Bangun °” in the province of Kutei. Aside from the 
inscriptions already mentioned, Kutei has yielded some Brahmanic 

--- [Page 75] ---
The Second Indianization 53 
and Buddhist images of undetermined date °° in a grotto of Mount 
Kombeng and in an estuary of the Rata River. 
Someone has proposed placing the Barhinadvipa named in 
the Vayupurana (XLVI, 12) on Borneo.>? This name recalls, in 
fact, the name P’o-ni by which the Chinese designated Borneo 
from the ninth century.© But that is a very fragile connection. 
There is also a P’o-li in the Chinese, from which a king with the 
family name Kaundinya sent embassies to China in the first 
quarter of the sixth century.®! If this P’o-li does not refer to the 
island of Bali, it might refer to Borneo (unless, of course, it was 
not situated east of Java at all). 
The island of Java is probably mentioned in the Ramayana 
(Yavadvipa) © and in Ptolemy (labadiou). But because of a 
curious phenomenon of inhibition, the scholars who are most 
audacious in other matters of phonetic relationships seem stricken 
with incomprehensible timidity when presented with a place name 
distantly, closely, or even very closely resembling Java. They use 
all pretexts to seek locations anywhere but on the island that 
bears this name. It is true that Java and Sumatra were often 
thought to form one island and that Marco Polo called Sumatra 
“Java Minor.” But is this sufficient reason to brush Java aside and 
systematically relate all the evidence concerning countries denom-
inated Java, Yava (dvipa), Yeh-p’o-t’i, and She-p’o to Sumatra, or, 
indeed, sometimes to Borneo or even to the Malay Peninsula? 
In Java, aside from the Buddha of Gupta style found in the 
east that has already been mentioned, the oldest traces of 
Indian penetration are the four stone inscriptions discovered in 
the westernmost part of the island, that is, the region commanding 
the Sunda Strait. “It is significant,” writes the scholarly editor of 
these inscriptions,© ‘that these earliest records of Hindu settle-
ment are found exactly in that part of the Island where the Dutch 
traders first established their ‘factories’ and which became the 
centre from which the power of Holland has spread over the 
whole of the Indian Archipelago. The geographical position of the 
Batavian coast with regard to the continent of India and Sumatra 
and the special advantages its configuration offers to shipping and 
trade are circumstances which will easily account for a coincidence 
that is certainly not due to mere chance.” 
Purnavarman, king of the land of Taruma, is the author of 
these Sanskrit inscriptions. The script can be dated around 450, a 
little later than that of Mulavarman in Borneo. The name Taruma, 

--- [Page 76] ---
54 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
which is preserved to our day in the name of the river Chi Tarum, 
in the region of Bandung, is also encountered in southern India 
about twenty kilometers north of Cape Comorin.® The inscriptions 
reveal that Purnavarman, who talks about his father and grand-
father without naming them, observed Brahmanic rites and was 
engrossed in irrigation works in his kingdom. Two of the inscrip-
tions reproduce his footprints; it has been suggested, not without 
some justification, that what we see here is a symbol of the 
taking possession of the neighboring region of Buitenzorg where 
the inscriptions were found.®” The kingdom of Taruma still existed 
in the seventh century, if it is this kingdom that the New History of 
the T’ang mentions under the name To-lo-ma as having sent 
ambassadors to China in 666-69.§8 
In Sumatra, as in Java and the Celebes,®? the most ancient 
, Indian archaeological vestige is a statue of the Buddha in Amara-
vati style.” It was found west of Palembang, in the vicinity of the 
hill Seguntang. It is unusual in that it is made of granite, a stone 
unknown in Palembang; it must therefore have been brought from 
elsewhere. Perhaps it came from Bangka, an island off the east 
coast of Sumatra, which, if Bangka can be identified with the 
Vanga mentioned in the Pali Niddesa, was certainly frequented at 
an early date by Indian seamen.”! The presence of this statue of 
the Buddha in Palembang is proof of the antiquity of the Indian 
penetration in the country. 
There has been much discussion about whether three coun-
tries mentioned by the Chinese from the fifth century, Yeh-p’o-t’i, 
She-p’o, and Ho-lo-tan, were located in Java. Yeh-p’o-t'i is where 
the pilgrim Fa-hsien stopped in 414 on his return voyage from India 
to China and where he found ascetics but few traces of Bud-
dhism.”? She-p’o is where the monk Gunavarman, early prince of 
Kashmir, preached Buddhism shortly before 424. She-p’o sent 
ambassadors to China in 433 and 435.73 Ho-lo-tan is placed on the 
, island of She-p’o by the History of the Early Sung (470-78). It also 
sent ambassadors between 430 and 452.74 The most recent re-
search tends to place these three countries on the Malay Pen-
insula,”? marking, in this case, a regression with regard to the 
conclusions of Pelliot, according to whom they corresponded 
wholly or in part to the island of Java. Yet there seems to be 
better evidence for locating Yeh-p’o-t'i on the western coast of 
Borneo 6 than for identifying it with Java. As for Ho-lo-tan, the 

--- [Page 77] ---
The Second Indianization 55 
question is complicated by the fact that the king who promoted 
the embassy of 434 bore the name Shih-li-p’i-ch’o-yeh, which tran-
scribes perfectly into Srivijaya. Since it is customary usage in this 
region for kings to lend their names to their kingdoms, one 
wonders if the name of this king was the origin of the name of 
the kingdom which appears at the end of the seventh century in 
southern Sumatra.’” 
Kan-t’o-li, first mentioned in the History of the Liang in con-
nection with events occurring in the middle of the fifth century, 
is located by general agreement in Sumatra. It presumably pre-
ceded Srivijaya and may have had its center at Jambi.78 Between 
454 and 464, a king of Kan-t’o-li, whose name in Chinese char-
acters can be restored to Sri Varanarendra, sent the Hindu Rudra 
on an embassy to China. In 502 a Buddhist king, Gautama Su-
bhadra, was reigning. His son, Vijayavarman, sent an embassy to 
China in 519. 
4, THE RESUMPTION OF INDIAN EMIGRATION 
AND THE SECOND INDIANIZATION OF FUNAN 
IN THE FIFTH CENTURY 
In summary, a wealth of Chinese and archaeological ev-
idence indicates that the Indian penetration is as ancient in the 
islands as on the peninsula. And the inscriptions of Mulavarman in 
Borneo and Purnavarman in Java and the development of diplo-
matic relations with China indicate a sudden renewal of Indianiza-
tion of Farther India in the first half of the fifth century that can 
be attributed, if not to an influx of immigrants, at least to the 
influence of cultural elements that we can assume, on the basis 
of various kinds of evidence, came from eastern and southern 
India. 
The immediate causes of this movement have been sought 
in the history of India, and much imagination has been used to 
connect the new dynasties of Farther India to Indian royal houses. 
| shall not follow the authors who have ventured onto this shaky 
ground.”? It does seem probable, however, that the conquests of 
Samudragupta (around 335-75) in southern India, and the sub-
sequent submission of the Pallava sovereign with his viceroys,®9 
produced serious perturbations that in turn resulted in the exodus 
of certain elements of the southern aristocracy to the countries 
to the east. We have seen that Lévi attributes the probable pres-

--- [Page 78] ---
56 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
ence of an Indo-Scythian on the throne of Funan in 357 to the 
conquest of the Ganges Valley by Samudragupta. This episode was 
perhaps merely the prelude to a more general movement which, 
from the middle of the fourth century to the middle of the fifth, 
brought princes, Brahmans, and scholars to the peninsula and | 
islands, which were already Indianized and in regular contact with 
| India. These Indians were responsible for the introduction of 
Sanskrit epigraphy in Champa, then in Borneo and Java. 
It was in the same period and doubtless for the same reasons 
that Funan was infused with a new dose of Indian culture, to which 
we owe the oldest inscription of Funan after the stele of Vo-canh. 
The History of the Liang informs us that one of the successors 
of the Indian Chan-t’an was Chiao Chen-ju (Kaundinya).8’ “He 
was Originally a Brahman from India. There a supernatural voice 
told him: you must go reign over Funan. Kaundinya rejoiced in 
his heart. In the south, he arrived at P’an-p’an. The people of 
Funan appeared to him; the whole kingdom rose up with joy, 
went before him, and chose him king. He changed all the laws to 
conform to the system of India. Kaundinya died. One of his suc-
cessors, Shih-li-t’o-pa-mo (Sri Indravarman or Sreshthavarman), 
during the reign of the emperor Wen of the Sung (424453) pre-
sented a petition and offered products of his country as a pres-
ent.” 8 This offering of products refers to the embassies that the 
History of the Early Sung places in 434, 435, and 438. It is without 
doubt this King Shih-li-t’o-pa-mo who is referred to in the same 
work in the passage stating that, in 431-32, “Lin-yi wanted to 
destroy Chiao-chou [Tongking] and borrow soldiers from the king 
of Funan. Funan did not consent.’’83 
5. CHAMPA FROM THE END OF THE FOURTH CENTURY TO 472 
Before going on with the history of Funan, which, from 
around 480, offers an almost continuous thread, we must say a 
few words about what was taking place in Lin-yi. 
At the death of Fan Fo (Bhadravarman?), his son or grandson 
Fan Hu-ta, who had succeeded him in 380, invaded Jih-nan in 
399, but suffered defeat. Encouraged by the anarchy that marked 
the fall of the Chin dynasty in China, he renewed his incursions 
in 405 and 407, then in 413 embarked on a new expedition in the 
territories situated north of Jih-nan, from which he did not return. 
The son of Fan Hu-ta, whom the History of the Liang calls 
Ti Chen, succeeded him, but abdicated in favor of a nephew and 

--- [Page 79] ---
The Second Indianization 57 
went to India. Perhaps it is he whom an inscription of the seventh 
century 84 names Gangaraja, celebrated “for his qualities, among 
which knowledge and heroism were recognized as royal qualities. 
The royalty difficult to abandon [he abdicated it]. The view of the 
Ganges is a great joy, he told himself, and went from here to the 
Ganges.” It seems that he was succeeded by a person who ap-
peared in an inscription of the seventh century under the name 
of Manorathavarman ® and who was perhaps his nephew.® 
What happened following this is not very clear. Around 420 
a king of obscure origin appeared who called himself Yang Mah, 
“the Prince of Gold.” After an unsuccessful raid in Tongking, he 
requested investiture from the court of China in 421. At his death, 
which took place the same year, his young, nineteen-year-old son 
succeeded him under the same name and continued to engage 
in piracy north of his states. In 431 he sent more than a hundred 
ships to pillage the coasts of Jih-nan. The Chinese reacted vigor-
ously and, while the king was absent, laid siege to Ch’t-su (in 
the region of Badén on the lower Song Gianh). The Chinese, 
however, were hindered by a storm; they were unable to exploit 
their success fully and had to lift the siege. It was at this point 
that Yang Mah tried in vain to borrow troops from Funan “to 
destroy Chiao-chou ‘[Tongking].” In 433 he requested from the 
court of China that he be given the government of Chiao-chou; 
this request had no success whatsoever. The Cham excursions 
having begun again stronger than ever, the new governor of Tong-
king, T’an Ho-chih, in 446 undertook strong repressive measures. 
Renouncing the negotiations in which the Chams had shown most 
remarkably bad faith, T’an Ho-chih laid siege to Ch’ti-su, which 
he took and sacked. Another battle delivered the capital, situated 
in the region of Hué,®” to the Chinese; from it they withdrew 
100,000 pounds of pure gold..The king died brokenhearted. 
His successor was his son or grandson Fan Chen-ch’eng, who 
sent embassies to China in 456, 458, and 472. This king is probably 
none other than Devanika, who left a Sanskrit inscription at Bassac 
near Vat Ph’u.®8 : 
6. THE LAST KINGS OF FUNAN (480-550); 
CHAMPA FROM 484 TO 529 
Around 480 the History of the Southern Ch’i speaks for the 
first time of the Funanese king She-yeh-pa-mo (Jayavarman), whose 
family name is Chiao Chen-ju—that is, descendant of Kaundinya.®9 

--- [Page 80] ---
58 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
“This prince,” writes Pelliot,?? “sent merchants to Canton who, on 
their return, were thrown up on the coast of Lin-yi (Champa), as 
was the Indian monk Nagasena, who -was on board with them. 
Nagasena reached Funan by an overland route and, in 484, King 
Jayavarman sent him to offer presents to the Chinese emperor and 
to ask the emperor at the same time for help in conquering Lin-yi. 
Several years earlier, a usurper had taken possession of the throne 
of that country; the texts on Lin-yi call him Tang-ken-ch’un, son 
of the king of Funan, but King Jayavarman represents him as one 
of his vassals named Chiu-ch’ou-lo.2! The emperor of China 
thanked Jayavarman for his presents, but sent no troops against 
Lin-yi. Through the often obscure phraseology of Jayavarman’s 
petition we distinguish at least two things: we see that Sivaism was 
dominant in Funan but that Buddhism was practiced at the same 
time. The petition is in great part Buddhist, and it was delivered 
by an Indian monk who had resided in Funan. Furthermore, it 
was during the reign of Jayavarman that two Funanese monks es-
tablished themselves in China; 22 both knew Sanskrit quite well, 
for they had used it during their lives to translate the sacred 
books.” 
The same passage of the History of the Southern Ch’i from 
which Pelliot extracted his information adds some facts on the 
material civilization of Funan that merit reproducing: 
The people of Funan are malicious and cunning. They abduct and 
make slaves of inhabitants of neighboring towns who do not pay them 
homage. As merchandise they have gold, silver, and silks. The sons of 
great families cut brocade to make themselves sarongs; the women pass 
their heads [through some material to dress themselves]. The poor cover 
themselves with a piece of cloth. The inhabitants of Funan make rings 
and bracelets of gold, and plates of silver. They cut down trees to make 
their dwellings. The king lives in a storied pavilion. They make their city 
walls of wooden palisades. An enormous bamboo, with leaves eight or 
nine feet long, shoots up along the seashore. Its leaves are woven to 
cover the houses. The people also live in raised dwellings. They make 
boats that are eight or nine chang long.93 These are hewn to six or seven 
feet in width. The bow and stern are like the head and tail of a fish. 
When the king travels, he goes by elephant. Women can also go on 
elephants. To amuse themselves, the people have cock fights and pig 
fights. They have no prisons. In case of dispute, they throw gold rings 
and eggs into boiling water; these must be pulled out. Or else they heat 
a chain red-hot; this must be carried in the hands seven steps. The hands 
of the guilty are completely scorched; the innocent are not hurt. Or else 
the accused are made to jump into the water. The one who is right 
enters the water but does not sink; the one who is in error sinks.%4 

--- [Page 81] ---
The Second Indianization 59 
A later text, the History of the Liang adds these details: 
There where they live, they do not dig wells. Several scores of 
families have a pond in common where they draw water.96 Their custom 
is to worship the sky spirits. They make bronze images of these sky 
spirits; those that have two faces have four arms, and those that have 
four faces have eight arms. Each hand holds something—sometimes a 
child, sometimes a bird or a four-legged animal, or else the sun or the 
moon. The king, when he goes out or returns, travels by elephant; the 
same is true of the concubines and people of the palace. When the king 
sits down, he sits sideways, raising his right knee and letting his left knee 
fall to the ground.9”7 A piece of cotton material is soread before him, on 
which vases of gold and incense-burners are laid. In time of mourning, 
the custom is to shave off the beard and hair. There are four kinds of 
burial for the dead: “burial by water,’ which consists of throwing the 
corpse into the river currents; ‘burial by fire,” which consists of reducing 
it to asnes; “burial by earth,” which consists of burying it in a pit; and 
“burial by birds,” 98 which consists of abandoning it in the fields. 
The reign of Jayavarman marks for Funan an epoch of 
grandeur which is reflected in the regard shown Funan by the 
Chinese emperor. On the occasion of the embassy of 503, an im-
perial order says: “The king of Funan, Kaundinya Jayavarman, 
lives at the limits of the ocean. From generation to generation 
he [and his people] have governed the distant lands of the south. 
Their sincerity manifests itself afar; through their many interpreters 
they offer presents in homage; it is fitting to reciprocate and show 
them favor and accord them a glorious title. This is possible [with 
the title of] General of the Pacified South, King of Funan.” 9 
We have seen that a son or vassal of Jayavarman who fled to 
Champa had himself proclaimed king there on the death of Chen-
ch’eng and that in 484 Jayavarman asked the emperor of China 
in vain to help him punish the usurper.129 We do not know what 
Jayavarman did. What is certain is that in 491 the usurper still 
reigned under the name Fan Tang-ken-ch’un and got himself rec-
ognized by the court of China as king of Lin-yi. But in the following 
year, 492, he was dethroned by a descendant of Yang Mah, named 
Chu Nong, who reigned six years and was drowned in the sea 
in 498. We know nothing about his successors, Fan Wen-k’uan, 
Fan T’ien-k’ai (perhaps Devavarman), and P’i-ts’ui-pa-mo (Vijaya-
varman), except the dates of the embassies of 502 to 527. In 529 
there came to power a new dynasty whose origins and history will 
be traced in the following chapter. 
Jayavarman, “Great King of Funan,” died in 514. We have 
no inscriptions emanating from him, but his first queen, named 

--- [Page 82] ---
60 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Kulaprabhavati, and one of his sons, named Gunavarman, have 
each left us a Sanskrit inscription in the writing of the second half 
of the fifth century. 
On a stele found in Cambodia in the southern part of the 
province of Takéo, Queen Kulaprabhavati, desiring to retire from 
the world, tells of the founding of a hermitage consisting of a 
dwelling and an artificial lake.1' The prefatory stanza of the text 
is Vishnuite in inspiration. 
It was also a Vishnuite inscription, in a script that appears 
to be slightly older, which was engraved by order of Gunavarman, 
son of the king who was “the moon of the Kaundinya line,” on 
the pillar of a small temple at Thap-muai, in the Plaine des Joncs 
in Cochin China. It commemorates the foundation “of a realm 
wrested from the mud,” of which Gunavarman, “although young,” 
was chief, and of a sanctuary named Chakratirthasvamin 1° that 
contained the footprint of Vishnu. Whereas the footprints of 
Purnavarman in Java perhaps marked, as has been said, the taking 
possession of a country after a military conquest, these prints of 
Vishnu mark a peaceful conquest, after drainage and partial raising 
of embankments in a region that is even today very marshy and 
inundated during part of the year.1% 
It is probable that the mother of Gunavarman is none other 
than Queen Kulaprabhavati.1° And it is not impossible that Gu-
navarman was that son of Jayavarman’® who, according to the 
History of the Liang,°© was deprived of the throne at the death 
of his father in 514 and assassinated by his eldest brother, Liu-t’o-
pa-mo (Rudravarman), the offspring of a concubine. 
Rudravarman, who sent various embassies to China between 
517 and 539, was the last king of Funan. A Sanskrit inscription of 
the province of Bati?” tells us that he was reigning at the time 
the Buddhist monument mentioned in the inscription was con-
structed. That Buddhism was flourishing in Funan at this time is 
clear from a passage in the History of the Liang which states that 
a Chinese embassy was sent to Funan between 535 and 545 to 
ask the king of this country to collect Buddhist texts and to invite 
him to send Buddhist teachers to China. The king of Funan chose 
the Indian Paramartha or Gunaratna of Ujjayini, who was then 
living in Funan, for this mission. He arrived in China in 546, bring-
ing 240 bundles of texts with him.’ A stele of the seventh cen-
tury names Rudravarman as the predecessor of Bhavavarman I, the 

--- [Page 83] ---
The Second Indianization 61 
first king of pre-Angkorian Cambodia. An inscription of the 
tenth century represents him as the founder of a line of kings 
tracing their origin to the couple Kaundinya-Soma, who reigned 
after the successors of Srutavarman and of Sreshthavarman, de-
scendant of Kambu."? We will see in the following chapter how 
this genealogical tradition must be evaluated. It suffices here to 
say that the irregularity of the succession of Rudravarman to the 
throne seems to have provoked in the provinces of the middle 
Mekong a movement of unrest, directed by Bhavavarman and 
Chitrasena, that resulted in the dismemberment of Funan in the 
second half of the sixth century. 
Funan was the dominating power on the peninsula for five 
centuries. For a long time after its fall, it retained much prestige 
in the memories of following generations. The kings of pre-Angkor-
ian Cambodia, as we shall see in the next chapter, adopted its 
dynastic legend; those who reigned at Angkor strove to relate their 
Origin to the Adhirajas, or supreme kings, of Vyadhapura; ™™ and 
the Javanese sovereigns of the eighth century revived the title 
Sailendra, “king of the mountain.” 
| have already reproduced extracts from the Chinese dynastic 
histories that reveal what little we know about the society and 
customs of the inhabitants of Funan. From the point of view of 
religion, the various Indian cults are seen there successively or 
simultaneously. The two Kaundinyas who Indianized the country 
were Brahmans; they stayed to implant Sivaite rites, which were 
certainly flourishing in the fifth century. The History of the 
Southern Ch’i states that during the reign of Jayavarman ‘the 
custom of this country was to worship the god Mahesvara (Siva). 
The god continually descends on Mount Mo-tan.” 1 This un-
doubtedly refers to the sacred mountain from which the kings 
and the country itself got their name. Near the capital and marking 
the center of the kingdom, it was the place where the heavens 
communicated with the earth, which explains why “the god con-
tinually descends” there. He was no doubt materialized there in 
the form of the linga of Siva Giriga,“3 “frequenting the mountain.” 
A passage of the History of the Liang cited earlier speaks of images 
with two faces and four arms, which must have been of Harihara 
—that is, Vishnu and Siva united in a single body. The existence 
of Vishnuite cults is clear from the inscriptions of Gunavarman 
and his mother. Finally, the Theravada Buddhism that used the 

--- [Page 84] ---
62 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Sanskrit language, of which we have evidence from the third cen-
tury, was flourishing in the fifth and sixth centuries, during the . 
reigns of Jayavarman and Rudravarman. 
Apparently no architecture has survived. But, even if every-
thing has perished, an interesting hypothesis 4 gives us reason to 
believe that at least certain edifices of pre-Angkorian art, covered 
with a series of minute terraces decorated with little niches, re-
produce the principal characteristics of the monuments of Funan. 
In this hypothesis the mukhalinga, or linga with a face, is intimately 
associated with this architecture. 
As for human sculpture, the statues of the Buddha in Gupta 
style,""> the mitred Vishnus and the Hariharas of pre-Angkorian 
Cambodia,"® and, most of all, the images of Sirya found in Cochin 
China,'” although not, strictly speaking, belonging to the art of 
Funan, give some idea of what its statuary may have been like. 
/. THE OLDEST EVIDENCE OF THE PYUS OF THE IRRAWADDY 
AND THE MONS OF THE MENAM 
Finally, we must say a few words about the Indianized 
states of the western part of the Indochinese Peninsula. Because 
of their geographical position it would seem that they ought to 
have been penetrated by Indian culture earlier and more pro-
foundly. than Funan, Champa, and the other kingdoms of Farther 
India; they offer, however, only rare and quite late archaeological 
and epigraphical remains for the period before the middle of the 
sixth century. It would be imprudent to conclude from this nega-
tive argument that they were Indianized later, for various circum-
stances may have caused the disappearance or delayed the dis-
covery of older remains. The almost total silence of Chinese 
sources for the period in question is due to the fact that the 
envoys from China to the kingdoms of the south at that time 
used the sea route and the countries situated farthest from China 
for the seamen were the last to establish relations with her.18 
It seems, however, that by the third century the Chinese 
had entered into contact via Yunnan with the kingdom of P’iao, 
which corresponded roughly with the Irrawaddy Basin. The name 
of this kingdom is the Chinese transcription of the word Pyu."9 
The Pyu tribe, which constituted the vanguard of the Tibeto-
Burman migration and called itself Tirchul,!2° occupied the region 
around Prome. The ancient sites surrounding this town have 
yielded fragments of texts extracted from the Pali canon written 

--- [Page 85] ---
The Second Indianization 63 
in a script that goes back to around the year 500.121 These docu-
ments prove the existence of a Buddhist colony of southern origin 
in a region which the Chinese pilgrims of the seventh century 
called Srikshetra and in which a dynasty of kings bearing Sanskrit 
names reigned in the eighth century. 
The Pyus had for neighbors the Burmese to the north and 
the Mons to the south. Local chronicles trace the history of these 
peoples back to the time of the Buddha, who, according to the 
chronicles, himself came to the region. They give a long list of 
kings 124 which cannot be verified at all. The example of the Cam-
bodian chronicle, which bears no relation to the reality revealed 
by epigraphy for the pre-Angkorian epoch, scarcely encourages us 
to consider the Burmese lists reliable. Moreover, the dates given 
in the Burmese lists differ extraordinarily from one text to an-
other. For the period before the sixth century, all we can really 
learn from the local chronicles is that there existed in the north, 
in the rich rice-producing plain of Kyaukse and in the region of 
Pagan, clusters of Pyus who had received Buddhism from northern 
India 13 and that in Lower Burma there were colonies of Indians 
who had come from Orissa. Of these colonies the principal one 
was Sudhammavati (or Sudhammapura)—that is, Thaton 124—at 
the mouth of the Sittang, where a local legend has it that Bud-
dhaghosa, the celebrated monk of the Singhalese church of the 
fifth century, was born and died.125 
In the Menam Basin, the only sites that are earlier than the 
middle of the sixth century are those already mentioned: Si 
Thep,12 Phra Pathom, 127 and Phong Tuk.128 We are almost com-
pletely ignorant of the kingdoms that have left these remains: 
we know neither their names nor the names of their sovereigns. 
All we can say is that they must have recognized the more or 
less effective sovereignty of Funan. The Buddhist sites of Phra 
Pathom and Phong Tuk from the seventh century on were part 
of the Mon kingdom of Dvaravati, which may or may not have 
existed already in the fifth or sixth century. As for Si Thep, where 
the images of Vishnu are preponderant, it was part of the Khmer 
territory—perhaps as early as the end of the sixth century, but in 
any case during the period when the Angkor kings extended their 
domination to the west. 
In summary, in the first period of the history of Farther India, 
which came to an end around 550, we witness the birth of a series 
of Indian or Indianized kingdoms in regions like the Irrawaddy 

--- [Page 86] ---
64 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Basin, the valley of the lower Mekong, and the plains of central 
Vietnam, which were to remain seats of powerful states through 
the centuries, and, inevitably, in sites such as Kedah, Palembang, 
and the western extremity of Java, whose contemporary history 
has confirmed their privileged economic, commercial, or strategic 
position. 
In most cases, Buddhism seems to have opened the way for 
the cultural penetration of India: the statues of the Buddha found 
in Siam (Phong Tuk and Khorat), in Vietnam (Déng-dudng), in 
Sumatra (Palembang), in Java, and in the Celebes mark, right from 
the start, the extreme limits of the domain reached by Indianiza-
tion. State Sivaism with its cult of the royal linga is not witnessed 
until a little later. As for Vishnuism, it did not appear before the fifth century. . 
Too often we know nothing about these kingdoms other 
than their names, recorded by Chinese historians on the occasion 
of the sending of embassies. Only Funan and Champa, which en-
tered into relations with China at an early date, have a fairly 
continuous history. 
Even before their constitution into an organized state at the 
end of the second century, the populations of Indonesian language 
who formed the nucleus of the Cham people were seeking to 
expand to the north, into the Vietnamese provinces of the Middle 
Kingdom. This was the first act of a dramatic conflict between 
the pioneers of Indian culture and the representatives of Chinese 
culture, a conflict that lasted fifteen centuries. 
As for Funan, which at times played the role of a true em-
pire, the civilization that it developed in the valley of the Mekong 
prepared the soil for the efflorescence of Khmer civilization, one 
of the most beautiful flowers that Indian influence has produced 
in India beyond the Ganges. 

--- [Page 87] ---
CHAPTER V 
THE DISMEMBERMENT OF FUNAN 
From the Middle of the Sixth Century to the End of the 
Seventh Century 
1. THE END OF FUNAN AND THE BEGINNING OF CAMBODIA 
. OR CHENLA (550-630) 
The last embassy to China from Rudravarman of Funan was 
in 539. Although the New History of the T’ang continues to men-
tion embassies from Funan in the first half of the seventh century,! 
it indicates that meanwhile a great change had taken place in the 
country: “The king had his capital in the city T’e-mu.* Suddenly 
his city was subjugated by Chenla, and he had to migrate south 
to the city of Na-fu-na.” 
The oldest text that mentions Chenla is the History of the 
Sui: ‘The kingdom of Chenla is southwest of Lin-yi. It was orig-
inally a vassal kingdom of Funan.... The family name of the king 
was Ch’a-li [Kshatriya]; his personal name was She-to-ssu-na 
[Chitrasena]; his ancestors had gradually increased the power of 
the country. Chitrasena seized Funan and subdued it.’’ 3 
The name Chenla, used consistently by the Chinese to des-
ignate Cambodia, remains unexplained: no known Sanskrit or 
Khmer word corresponds to its ancient pronunciation t’sien-lap. 
But we can locate the center of this state on the middle Mekong, 
in the region of Bassac, which must have come under the domina-
tion of Champa by the end of the fifth century, since a stele has 
been found there bearing a Sanskrit inscription in the name of the 
king Devanika, known to the Chinese by the name Fan Chen-ch’eng.* , 
Indeed, the History of the Sui, which gives information dat-
ing before 589 and so before the total conquest of Funan and the 
transfer of the capital of Chenla to the south, says: “Near the 
capital is a mountain named Ling-chia-po-p’o, on the summit of 
which a temple was constructed, always guarded by a thousand 
soldiers and consecrated to the spirit named P’o-to-li, to whom 
human sacrifices are made. Each year, the king himself goes to 

--- [Page 88] ---
66 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
this temple to make a human sacrifice during the night.”° The 
mountain of Vat Ph’u which dominates the site of Bassac bears on 
its summit a great stone block similar to that which earned Varella 
the Chinese name Ling (Lingaparvata) © and its modern European 
name which, in Portuguese documents, is used to designate pa-
godas.’ As for P’o-to-li, we can recognize here the first two sylla-
bles of Bhadresvara, which was the very name of the god venerated 
at Vat Ph’u.8 
According to a Cambodian dynastic legend preserved in an 
inscription of the tenth century,’ the origin of the kings of Cam-
bodia goes back to the union of the hermit Kambu Svayambhuva, 
eponymic ancestor of the Kambujas, with the celestial nymph 
Mera, who was given to him by Siva. Her name was perhaps in-
vented to explain that of the Khmers. This legend, entirely different 
from that of the Nagi,”° shows a certain kinship with a genealogical 
myth of the Pallavas of Kanchi (Conjeeveram). 
A line of kings was born from this couple Kambu-Mera. The 
first of these kings were Srutavarman and his son Sreshthavarman." 
The latter gave his name to the city Sreshthapura, and this name 
still existed in the Angkorian era—at least as the name of a dis-
trict located in the region of Bassac. This city may have been 
founded as a consequence of the taking over of the country from 
the Chams at the end of the fifth century or beginning of the sixth 
century. The memory of this conquest is preserved to our day in 
the oral tradition of the Cambodians, according to which their 
country was originally constituted at the expense of the Chams 
of Champasak (Bassac).’2 Kings Srutavarman and Sreshthavarman, 
according to the tenth-century inscription mentioned above," 
“broke the ties of tribute in the beginning”; that is, they attained a 
more or less genuine degree of independence from Funan, or, as 
the Chinese text says, ‘gradually increased the power of the coun-
try.” They felt themselves strong enough, during the second half 
of the sixth century, to attack the empire to the south. The king 
of Chenla at that time was Bhavavarman, grandson of the universal 
monarch (sarvabhauma) 4—that is, of the king of Funan. A late 
but reliable epigraphic text adds this important detail, that Bhava-
varman was the husband of a princess issuing from the maternal 
family of Sreshthavarman,’ Princess Kambujarajalakshmi, whose 
name means “fortune of the kings of the Kambujas.” 

--- [Page 89] ---
The Dismemberment of Funan 67 
Bhavavarman, whose residence, Bhavapura, must have been 
located on the northern shore of the Great Lake (Tonle Sap),1® 
was thus related to the royal family of Funan and became king of 
Chenla through his marriage to a princess of this country. This 
fact enables us to understand why the tenth-century inscription 
cited previously says that the line of descent of Kambu unites the 
sun race, which it claimed as its own, with the moon race, that 
of Funan. We also understand why the line of descent after Sruta-
varman and the descendants of Kambu shows reigning kings 
who traced their origin to Kaundinya and the Nagi Soma and who 
claimed Rudravarman of Funan as head of their line. Finally, we 
understand why the kings of Chenla, successors to those of Funan, 
adopted the dynastic legend of Kaundinya and the Nagi.’” In fact, 
they were merely preserving their own heritage, since Bhavavar-
man was himself a prince of Funan. 
What were the circumstances surrounding the successful 
transfer of sovereignty from Funan to Chenla? If, as is probable, 
the opportunity was provided by the irregularity of the accession 
of Rudravarman, son of a concubine and murderer of the legiti-
mate heir, two hypotheses present themselves. Either Bhavavarman 
represented the legitimate branch and took advantage of the 
death of Rudravarman to make the most of his rights or else 
Bhavavarman was a grandson of Rudravarman and defended the 
rights inherited from his grandfather against an attempt at restora-
tion by the legitimate branch. The second hypothesis is the more 
probable, for the first hypothesis, which makes Rudravarman the 
last sovereign of a fallen empire, is hard to reconcile with the 
fact that Rudravarman is later considered “head of the line” while 
the second hypothesis is in perfect accord with this fact, for it 
definitely makes Rudravarman the head of the line through which 
Bhavavarman and his successors connected themselves to the 
great Funan.18 
Perhaps religious motives and an antagonism between the 
Buddhism of Rudravarman and the Sivaism of Bhavavarman also 
played a role. The Chinese pilgrim I-ching, who wrote at the end 
of the seventh century, said indeed that formerly in Funan “the 
law of the Buddha prospered and spread, but today a wicked king 
has completely destroyed it and there are no more monks.” If 
we recall what has been said about the prosperity of Buddhism 

--- [Page 90] ---
68 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
in Funan in the fifth and sixth centuries, and if we consider that 
the epigraphy of the conquerors of Funan and of their successor 
is exclusively Sivaite, we are tempted to identify Bhavavarman (or 
Chitrasena) with the “wicked king” of I-ching.” 
In the second half of the sixth century, Bhavavarman and 
his cousin 29 Chitrasena attacked Funan and, judging by their in-
scriptions, pushed their conquest at least up to Kratié on the Me-
kong, to Buriram between the Mun River and the Dangrek Moun-
tains, and to Mongkolborei west of the Great Lake. The capital of 
Funan must have been transferred from T’e-mu (Vyadhapura, i.e., 
Ba Phnom) to a locality farther south named Na-fu-na (Naravara-
nagara).2! There are various indications that this city should be 
placed at Angkor Borei, an archaeological site very rich in ancient 
remains, the name and topography of which indicate that there 
was a Capital there.?2 
The conquest of Funan by Chenla in the guise of a dynastic 
quarrel is really the first episode we witness in Cambodia of the 
‘“oush to the south,” the constant latent threat of which we have 
already seen.22 There is the same opposition between the high 
lands of the plateau of the middle Mekong and the alluvial plains 
of Cambodia as between the upper and lower valleys of the 
Menam or of the Irrawaddy. The effort of the kings, in Cambodia 
as in Siam and Burma, has constantly been directed toward the 
unification of two geographically, economically, and sometimes 
ethnically antagonistic regions; the division between them tends 
to reappear every time the central power shows signs of weakness. 
Bhavavarman |, says an inscription,7+ “took power with 
energy.” Until recently we possessed only one epigraphic docu-
ment concerning him, a Sanskrit inscription from the environs of 
Mongkolborei which commemorates the erection of a linga. 
Another Sanskrit inscription recently discovered on a stele at Si 
Thep in the valley of the Nam Sak in Siamese territory tells of the 
erection of the stele by Bhavavarman on the occasion of his ac-
cession to power.2© Bhavavarman’s capital, Bhavapura—the name 
of which afterward seems to have designated the territory of old 
Chenla, and particularly of Land Chenla in the eighth century #”/— 
must have been located on the northern shore of the Great Lake, 
in the environs of the archaeological site Ampil Rollm, about 
thirty kilometers northwest of Kompong Thom.*® We do not know 
how long Bhavavarman reigned; we only know that he was king 

--- [Page 91] ---
The Dismemberment of Funan 69 
in 598.47 But it was undoubtedly during his reign that his cousin 
Chitrasena had short Sanskrit inscriptions engraved telling of the 
erection of other lingas along the Mekong, in the regions of Kratié 
and Stung Treng,2° and to the west of Buriram between the Mun 
River and the Dangrek Mountains.*! And it is therefore clear that 
Bhavavarman bequeathed a vast domain extending west to the 
valley of the Nam Sak to Chitrasena, who took the coronation 
name of Mahendravarman at the time of his accession around 600. 
Aside from the inscriptions he had engraved when he stil 
called Chitrasena, Mahendravarman left others at the confluence 
of the Mun with the Mekong, and at Surin between the Mun 
and the Dangrek Mountains,*? that tell of the establishment of 
lingas of the ‘“mountain” Siva (Girisa) and the erection of images 
of the bull Nandin. Since these lingas and images were set up on 
the occasion of “the conquest of the whole country,” we can 
conclude that Mahendravarman followed the expansionist policies 
of his predecessor. We know, moreover, that he sent an ambas-
sador to Champa to “ensure friendship between the two coun-
tries.’” 34 
The successor of Mahendravarman was his son Iganavarman. 
He managed to absorb the ancient territories of Funan, which led 
the New History of the T’ang to attribute the effective conquest of 
the country to him.*° Although we have not found an inscription 
of Mahendravarman south of Kratié, we have some of [sanavarman 
that come from the provinces of Kompong Cham, Prei Véng, 
Kandal, and even Takéo.78 To the west, territory accepting his 
authority extended at least to Chanthabun.29 
The earliest known date of the reign of [sanavarman, a date 
that must not have been long after his accession, is that of his first 
embassy to China in 616-17; the latest certain date is that of an 
_ inscription which names him as the king reigning in 627.41 The 
Old History of the T’ang, which mentions, one after the other, 
two embassies in 623 and 628, encourages us to think that he was 
still reigning at this latter date, and the New History of the T’ang, 
which attributes to him the conquest of Funan at the beginning 
of the period 627-49, gives us some basis for supposing that his 
reign lasted until at least around 635. 
Is4navarman’s capital was named [sanapura; the great pil-
grim Hstian-tsang called Cambodia by this name in the middle of 
the seventh century.® This city has been identified with some 

--- [Page 92] ---
70 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
probability with the group of ruins at Sambor Prei Kuk, north of 
Kompong Thom,“ where the inscriptions of Isanavarman are par-
ticularly numerous; © one of the inscriptions, moreover, mentions 
Isanapuri.46 Apparently the first buildings of Phnom Bayang in the 
province of Takéo date from the reign of Isanavarman.’” 
Continuing the policy of his father, lsinavarman maintained 
good relations with Champa—relations that were to be sealed, as 
we shall see, by a matrimonial alliance between the two royal 
houses. 
2. CHAMPA FROM 529 TO 686 
In about 529, a new dynasty began to reign in Champa—a 
dynasty that reigned for a little over a century. At the death of 
Vijayavarman around 529, the throne was occupied by the son of 
a Brahman and the grandson of Manorathavarman.*® He was a 
descendant of the king who went on a pilgrimage to the shore 
of the Ganges, and he had only tenuous lines of relationship with 
his immediate predecessor. He took Rudravarman for his reign 
name and obtained investiture in 530 from China. In 534 he sent , 
an embassy to China. 
In 543, Rudravarman | of Champa, as his predecessors had 
done before him, attempted a raid to the north, but he was de-
feated by Pham Tu, a general of Li Bon who had just revolted 
against the domination of the Chinese and had made himself 
master of Tongking. The fire at Mi-sdn that destroyed the first 
sanctuary of Bhadregvara probably took place during his reign.” 
We do not know the date of the death of Rudravarman I, but we 
are tempted to attribute the embassies to China of 568 and 572 
to him °° for fear of otherwise attributing an overly long reign to 
his son and successor, Sambhuvarman, who died in 629. 
The new king Sambhuvarman (Fan Fan-chih in the Chinese 
texts) took advantage of the weakness of the Ch’en dynasty (557-
89) “to liberate himself from every manifestation of vassalage to 
China. When he saw the power of the empire reborn in the 
hands of Yang Chien, who proclaimed himself emperor of the Sui 
(589), he thought it prudent to renew relations spontaneously and 
presented the emperor with tribute in 595.’”°' But ten years later, 
the emperor ordered Liu Fang, who had just reconquered Tong-
king for him, to launch a campaign against Champa. The resistance 
of Sambhuvarman was in vain, and once more the Chinese armies 

--- [Page 93] ---
The Dismemberment of Funan 71 
occupied Ch’t-su and the capital, then at Tra-kiéu,-* whence they 
brought back great booty. After they withdrew, Sambhuvarman 
again assumed control of his country and begged pardon from 
the emperor. For a while he neglected the obligation of tribute, 
but after the accession of the T’ang (618) he sent at least three 
embassies—in 623, 625, and 628. 
It was probably Sambhuvarman who received the minister 
Simhadeva from Cambodia, sent by Mahendravarman to establish 
friendly relations with Champa. In the course of his long reign, 
which came to an end in 629, Sambhuvarman rebuilt the temple 
of Bhadresvara, which had burned during the reign of his father, 
and gave the new sanctuary the name Sambhubhadreévara, thus 
uniting his name with that of his distant predecessor Bhadravar-
man.*? Scholars for a long while identified this new sanctuary with 
the great tower of Mi-sdn,>* but the revised chronology of Cham 
art established by Philippe Stern attributes a much later date to 
this tower.>° 
Sambhuvarman was succeeded by his son Kandarpadharma 
(Fan T’ou-li of the Chinese), whose reign was peaceful and who 
sent rich presents to the emperor T’ai Tsung of the T’ang in 630 
and 631. 
Prabhasadharma (Fan Chen-lung), son of Kandarpadharma, 
succeeded his father at an unknown date. We know very little 
about him except that he sent embassies to China in 640 and 642 
and that he was assassinated in 645 by one of his ministers. 
After a relatively short reign by Bhadresvaravarman, son of 
the Brahman Satyakausikasvamin and a younger sister of Pra-
bhasadharma, the throne returned in the legitimate line to another 
sister of Prabhasadharma, the daughter of a wife of the first rank 
of Kandarpadharma. The Old History of the T’ang tells us that this 
princess was crowned, but the inscriptions do not breathe a word 
of it°© They say only that a daughter of Kandarpadharma had a 
grandson named Jagaddharma who went to Cambodia,°” where he 
married the princess Sarvani, daughter of King Iganavarman. A 
son, Prakasadharma, was born of this marriage; at his accession 
to the throne of Champa in 653 he took the name Vikrantavar-
man.>8 This king used his long and peaceful reign to multiply the 
religious buildings in the cirque of Mi-sén, at Tra-kiéu,>? and in 
various other places in Quang-nam. Many of these buildings show 
the existence in Champa at this time of a cult of Vishnu which 

--- [Page 94] ---
72 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
“seems to have been literary rather than sectarian in nature.” 6 
A stone inscription found in the province of Khanh-hoa, north of 
Nha-trang*! proves that Vikrantavarman’s domination extended 
far to the south. He sent missions to China in 653, 657, 669, and 
670. Unless we wish to attribute an overly long reign to him, we 
must suppose that he had a successor around 686 bearing the 
same name, Vikrantavarman; it was probably Vikrantavarman II 
who sent about fifteen missions to China between 686 and 731. 
3. PRE-ANGKORIAN CAMBODIA (635-85) 
After Isavavarman |, who ceased to reign around 635, the 
inscriptions of Cambodia tell us of a king named Bhavavarman 
whose lines of relationship with his predecessor are unknown. 
The only dated inscription we have from him is of 639 and comes 
from the region of Takéo.63 We can probably also attribute to 
him an inscription from the great tower of Phnom Bayang ™ and 
one from Phnom Preah Vihear at Kompong Ch’nang.® It is un-
doubtedly he, and not Bhavavarman | as was long believed, who 
is mentioned in the first two inscriptions published in the collec-
tion of Barth and Bergaigne. 
These two texts speak of a son of Bhavavarman who suc-
ceeded him. This must have been Jayavarman I, for whom the ear-
liest known date is 657 & and who perhaps began reigning some 
years before.®” The inscriptions dating from his reign have been 
found in an area extending from Vat Ph’u in the north to the 
Gulf of Siam in the south; he built structures in the region of 
Vyadhapura (Ba Phnom) ®8 and at the old sanctuary of Lingaparvata 
at Vat Ph’u.®? As far as relations with China are concerned, the 
Old History of the T’ang speaks in very general terms about em-
bassies from Chenla received by the emperor T’ang Kao Tsung 
(650-83); it gives no precise dates. The reign of Jayavarman I, 
which seems to have been peaceful, lasted about thirty years and 
ended after 690.72 Perhaps it is he whom an inscription of 713 
designates by the posthumous title “the king who went to Siva-
pura.” 71 He apparently left no heir, for the country was governed 
at that period by a Queen Jayadevi, who complains of ‘bad 
times.” 72 The first sovereigns of Angkor did not connect them-
selves with the dynasty of Jayavarman I, whose fall was apparently 
the determining cause of the division of Cambodia in the eighth 
century.”3 

--- [Page 95] ---
The Dismemberment of Funan 73 
From the conquests of Bhavavarman | to the end of the 
reign of Jayavarman I, we observe the progressive strengthening of 
power of the Khmer kings over the territories of ancient Funan 
situated in the valley of the lower Mekong and the basin of the 
Great Lake. Numerous archaeological remains—monuments, sculp-
tures, inscriptions—survive from this ‘pre-Angkorian” epoch of 
the history of Cambodia. The architecture, characterized by single 
towers or groups of towers, almost always of brick 74 with doors 
framed in stone, has been studied exhaustively by Henri Parmentier 
in his Art khmér primitif.7> The statuary, of which there are some 
remarkable specimens, preserves certain traits of Indian proto-
types,” but it already shows tendencies toward the stiffness and 
frontality that characterize the art of Cambodia as compared with 
that of other countries of Farther India. Decorative sculpture 
already shows a richness that anticipates the exuberance of the 
Angkorian period.”” 
The inscriptions on the steles and on the pillars of the 
doors are written in a very correct Sanskrit, and always in poetic 
language. The inscriptions in Khmer, which begin to appear in 
greater number, have preserved an archaic stage of this language, 
a language that has undergone much less change over fourteen 
centuries than have Indo-European languages during the same 
period. These epigraphic texts constitute the principal source of 
information on the history and institutions of the country. They 
reveal a strongly organized administration and a whole hierarchy 
of officials whose titles we know better than their duties. 
These inscriptions are most informative on the subject of 
religion. Their prefatory stanzas, containing prayers addressed to 
the divinities who are invoked on the occasion of the erection 
of the monuments, are particularly instructive. The major Hindu 
sects seem to have co-existed in Cambodia as in India proper, 
and among those already mentioned we find the Sivaite sect of 
the Pasupatas and the Vishnuite sect of the Pancharatras,”8 each of 
which in its sphere played a leading role in the Angkor period. 
Both epigraphy and iconography ”? show the importance in this and 
the following century of a cult of Harihara, or Vishnu-Siva united 
in a single body, which we scarcely hear spoken of later. The 
cult of Siva, especially in the form of a linga, enjoyed royal favor 
and was already almost a state religion. There is little trace of 
Buddhism—aside from the Buddhas of Gupta style mentioned in 

--- [Page 96] ---
74 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
connection with Funan.®°—except for a unique inscription naming 
two Buddhist monks (bhikshu).®! Buddhism seems to be in regres-
sion, if we recall the favor it enjoyed in Funan in the fifth and sixth 
centuries. Although the report of the Chinese pilgrim |-ching 
refers to Funan (called by him Po-nan), it is undoubtedly Chenla 
that he has in mind when at the end of the seventh century he 
writes: ‘The law of the Buddha prospered and spread. But today 
a wicked king has completely destroyed it and there are no more 
monks.” 82 The literary culture that the Sanskrit inscriptions give 
evidence of was based on the great Indian epics, the Ramayana 
and Mahabharata, and on the Puranas, which furnished the of-
ficial poets with their rich mythological material. 
With regard to social structure, some epigraphic texts show 
the importance of descent in the maternal line 84 which we find 
again in the Angkor period with regard to the transmission of 
offices in many great priestly families. The matriarchal family 
system is widespread throughout Indonesia ® and is found among 
various ethnic groups of the Indochinese Peninsula.®” In ancient 
Cambodia, it may have been imported from India, where it is 
seen among the Nayars and the Nambutiri Brahmans.88 
For knowledge of the material civilization in Cambodia dur-
ing the seventh century, we rely on a passage of the History of the 
Sui which gives an account of the reign of Ilsanavarman. This 
passage has been reproduced in full by Ma Tuan-lin in his eth-
nographic study of the peoples outside China, composed in the 
thirteenth century, and, in the absence of any better information, 
| think it will be useful to quote this account here. | follow the 
translation of Marquis d’Hervey de Saint-Denis: ® 
This prince makes his residence in the city of |-she-na, which | 
contains more than twenty thousand families. In the middle of the city 
is a great hall where the king gives audiences and holds court. The king-
dom includes thirty other cities, each populated by several thousands of 
families, and each ruled by a governor; the titles of state officials are the 
Same as in Lin-yi. 
Every three days the king proceeds solemnly to the audience hall 
and sits on a couch made of five kinds of aromatic wood and decorated 
with seven precious things. Above the couch there rises a pavilion hung 
with magnificent fabrics; the columns are of veined wood and the walls 
of ivory strewn with flowers of gold. Together this couch and this pa-
vilion form a sort of little palace, at the back of which is suspended, as 
in Chih-t’u, a disc with gold rays in the form of flames. A golden incense-
burner, held by two men, is placed in front. The king wears a dawn-red 

--- [Page 97] ---
The Dismemberment of Funan 75 
sash of ki-pei cotton that falls to his feet. He covers his head with a cap 
laden with gold and precious stones, with pendants of pearls. On his 
feet are leather, or sometimes ivory, sandals; in his ears, pendants of 
gold. His robe is always made of a very fine white fabric called pe-tie. 
When he appears bareheaded, one does not see precious stones in his 
hair. The dress of the great officials is very similar to that of the king. 
These great officials or ministers are five in number. The first has the 
title ku-lo-you [guru?]. The titles of the four others, in order of the rank 
they occupy, are hsiang-kao-ping, p’o-ho-to-ling, she-ma-ling, and jan-
lo-lou. The number of lesser officials is very considerable. 
Those who appear before the king touch the ground in front of 
them three times at the foot of the steps of the throne. If the king calls 
them and commands them to show their rank, they kneel, holding their 
crossed hands on their shoulders. Then they go and sit in a circle around 
the king to deliberate on the affairs of the kingdom. When the session 
is finished, they kneel again, prostrate themselves, and retire. More than 
a thousand guards dressed in armor and armed with lances are ranged at 
the foot of the steps of the throne, in the palace halls, at the doors, and 
at the peristyles.... 
The custom of the inhabitants is to go around always armored and 
armed, so that minor quarrels lead to bloody battles. 
Only sons of the queen, the legitimate wife of the king, are quali-
fied to inherit the throne. On the day that a new king is proclaimed, all 
his brothers are mutilated. From one a finger is removed, from another 
the nose is cut off. Then their maintenance is provided for, each in a 
separate place, and they are never appointed to office. 
The men are of small stature and dark complexion, but many of 
the women are fair in complexion. All of them roll up their hair and 
wear earrings. They are lively and vigorous in temperament. Their houses 
and the furniture they use resemble those of Chih-t’u. They regard the 
right hand as pure and the left hand as impure. They wash every morning, 
clean their teeth with little pieces of poplar wood, and do not fail to 
read or recite their prayers. They wash again before eating, get their 
poplar-wood toothpicks going immediately afterwards, and recite prayers 
again. Their food includes a lot of butter, milk-curds, powdered sugar, 
rice and also millet, from which they make a sort of cake which is 
soaked in meat juices and eaten at the beginning of the meal. 
Whoever wishes to marry first of all sends presents to the girl he 
seeks; then the girl’s family chooses a propitious day to have the bride 
led, under the protection of a go-between, to the house of the bride-
groom. The families of the husband and wife do not go out for eight 
days. Day and night the lamps remain lit. When the wedding ceremony 
is over, the husband receives part of the goods of his parents and goes 
to establish himself in his own house. At the death of his parents, if the 
deceased Jeave young children who are not yet married, these children 
receive the rest of the goods; but if all the children are already married 
and endowed, the goods that the parents have retained for themselves 
go to the public treasury. 

--- [Page 98] ---
76 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Funerals are conducted in this way: the children of the deceased 
go seven days without eating, shave their heads as a sign of mourning, 
and utter loud cries. The relatives assemble with the monks and nuns of 
Fo or the priests of the Tao, who attend the deceased by chanting and 
playing various musical instruments. The corpse is burned on a pyre made 
of every kind of aromatic wood; the ashes are collected in a gold or 
silver urn which is thrown into deep water. The poor use an earthenware 
urn, painted in different colors. There are also those who are content to 
abandon the body in the mountains, leaving the job of devouring it to 
the wild beasts. 
The north of Chenla is a country of mountains intersected by 
valleys. The south contains great swamps, with a climate so hot that 
there is never any snow or hoar-frost; the earth there produces pestilential 
fumes and teems with poisonous insects. Rice, rye, some millet, and 
coarse millet are grown in this kingdom. 
In sum, the civilization of pre-Angkorian Cambodia, which 
was the heir of Funan particularly in matters of agricultural hy-
draulics and also in religion and art and was influenced in archi-
tecture by Champa, assumed in the course of the seventh century 
a dynamism which enabled it, even after an eclipse in the follow-
ing century, to dominate the south and center of the peninsula 
for a long time. 
4, THE MON KINGDOM OF DVARAVATI 
West of Isanapura, i.e, Cambodia, the Chinese pilgrim 
Hslian-tsang, in the middle of the seventh century, placed a king-
dom of T’o-lo-po-ti.%2 This name, T’o-lo-po-ti, with its many vari-
ants,2! corresponds to that of the country Dvaravati whose name is 
preserved in the official names of the Siamese capitals Ayutthaya,? 
founded in 1350, and Bangkok, founded in 1782. We will see 
later 9 that Ayutthaya was founded following the abandonment of 
a town situated in the region of Suphan, and it seems reasonable 
to infer from this that the name Dvaravati was originally applied 
to a city situated in this region.2* Moreover, the lower basin of the 
Menam, from Lopburi in the north to Ratburi in the west and to 
Prachin in the east, contains archaeological and epigraphical re-
mains of Buddhist origin ? which are similar enough to each other 
to lead us to consider them as vestiges of the same state: the 
kingdom of Dvaravati.° The birth of Dvaravati perhaps cor-
responds with the dismemberment of Funan. But we know vir-
tually nothing about this state of Dvaravati. The inscriptions of 
Phra Pathom and of Lopburi, in archaic Mon language,” prove 

--- [Page 99] ---
The Dismemberment of Funan —77 
that the population was basically Mon.% Furthermore, a legend 
having a certain historical character attributes the foundation of 
the city of Haripunjaya (Lamphun) ” to a colony of emigrants 
from Lavo (Lopburi) led by the queen Chammadevi. We will see 
a dynasty known through many inscriptions in the Mon lan-
guage ! reigning in Haripunjaya in the twelfth century. 
Dvaravati poses a problem for which a solution is not yet 
in sight. The tradition of the Mons places the center of their 
race at Sudhammavati (Thaton, at the mouth of the Sittang), a 
site that has not revealed a single important archaeological ves-
tige; this tradition seems to be unaware of the Menam Basin, 
where, on the other hand, these remains are fairly numerous. 
5. | THE PYU KINGDOM OF SRIKSHETRA 
West of Dvaravati the Chinese pilgrims Hstian-tsang 1 and 
I-ching 12 place the kingdom of She-li-ch’a-ta-lo, that is, Srikshetra, 
which is the ancient name of Prome (in Burmese, Thayekhet-
taya).193 We have seen in the preceding chapter that the site of the 
ancient capital of the Pyus is represented by the archaeological 
site of M6za near Prome.'4 The city was encompassed by a cir-
cular enclosure of brick. The Buddhist images found here are in 
the late Gupta style. We have in the seventh century, notably in 
the works of I-ching, proof that there existed at Srikshetra, con-
currently with the Theravada Buddhism witnessed from the end of 
the fifth century by inscriptions in the Pali language, a Theravada 
sect that used the Sanskrit language; this was the sect of the 
Mulasarvastivadins, which probably came originally from Ma-
gadha. 10 
The environs of Prome have also yielded funerary urns con-
taining human remains. The Pyus cremated their dead and kept 
the ashes in earthenware urns. In the case of kings, however, the 
urns were of stone and bore inscribed on them the names of the | 
deceased." The inscriptions that have been found deal with kings 
who reigned at the end of the seventh and the beginning of the 
eighth century, about whom we will speak in the following chapter. 
6. THE STATES OF THE MALAY PENINSULA 
IN THE SEVENTH CENTURY 
West of Dvaravati and southeast of Srikshetra the great pil-
grim Hstian-tsang places the country of Kamalanka,!°” which is 

--- [Page 100] ---
, 78 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
‘near a large bay’’ and is perhaps identical with the Lang-chia-shu 
(i.e., Langkasuka) of I-ching.1 In any case it must be located on 
the Malay Peninsula. Hstian-tsang gives no details on this region, 
which he did not visit, and other texts give us historical facts only 
sporadically. 
The information presented by Ma Tuan-lin in his chapter 
on Chih-t’u, or the Red-Earth Country, mentioned in the last 
| chapter, dates back to the beginning of the seventh century. Here 
are some extracts that give an idea of the civilization of the small 
Indian states on the peninsula at this period: 1°9 
The family name of the king of Chih-t’u is Ch’ii-t’an,110 and his 
personal name is Li-fu-to-hsi. To what period the history of the ancestors 
of this prince dates back we do not know. We are told only that his 
father, having abandoned the throne to become a monk, transmitted to 
him the royal position, a position he has held for sixteen years.111 This 
king Li-fu-to-hsi has three wives, all of whom are daughters of neighbor-
ing kingdoms. He lives in Séng-ch’i (or Séng-che), a city supplied with 
three walls, the gates of which are about a hundred paces apart. On 
each of these gates, wreathed with small carved gold bells, are painted 
Bodhisattvas and immortals who soar in the air.... The buildings of the 
palace have only one story. All the doors are on the same level and face 
north. The throne, raised on a three-step-high platform, also faces north. 
The king appears there, dressed in a robe the color of the rising sun. His 
cap is adorned with golden flowers and pendants of precious stones. 
Four young girls stand at his side. His guards number more than a hun-
dred. Behind the throne is a sort of large niche made of five kinds of 
aromatic wood encrusted with gold and silver, at the back of which is 
suspended a disc with rays of gold in the form of flames. On each side 
of the royal platform are placed two large metallic mirrors; in front of 
each of these mirrors is a vase of gold, and in front of each vase is an 
incense burner, also of gold. At the foot of the platform is a recumbent 
golden ox, sheltered by a canopy, and, in addition, some very valuable 
fans. Hundreds of Brahmans, seated in two rows facing each other on the 
right and left of the platform, attend the royal audience. 
The high dignitaries, charged with collectively handling the affairs 
of the kingdom, consist of a first minister with the title sa-t’o-chia-lo,112 
two officers with the title t/o-na-ta,113 and three other assistants with the 
title chia-li-mi-chia.114 The repression of crime is specifically entrusted to 
a great magistrate with the title chiu-lo-mo-ti.15 Finally, each town is 
placed under the authority of two principal mandarins called na-ya-
chia 116 and po-ti.117 
For marriages, first of all a propitious hour is chosen. The five days 
preceding the appointed date are spent in rejoicing and drinking. On the 
sixth day, the father places the hand of his daughter in that of his son-

--- [Page 101] ---
The Dismemberment of Funan 79 
in-law,118 and on the seventh day the marriage is consummated. When 
the nuptials are completed, all take their leave and the newlyweds go to 
live by themselves—unless the husband’s father is still alive, in which 
case they go to live with him. 
Those who have lost their father, their mother, or their brothers 
shave their heads and wear white clothing. They build a bamboo hut 
over the water, fill it with small sticks, and place the corpse in it. Stream-
ers are put up, incense is burned, conches are blown, and drums beaten 
while the pyre is set on fire and the flames consume it. At the end, 
everything disappears into the water. This ceremony never varies. Nothing 
distinguishes the funeral of a high official from that of a common man. 
Only for the king is care taken to perform the cremation in such a way 
as to collect the ashes, which are placed in a golden urn and deposited 
in a funerary monument.119 
7. INDONESIA: HO-LING IN JAVA AND MALAYU IN SUMATRA 
We have seen the debate concerning the location of the 
country Ho-lo-tan, which sent its last embassy to China in 452.120 
As for Ho-ling, whose first three embassies are dated 640, 648, and 
666,'41 a recent theory places it on the Malay Peninsula. This 
theory fits in quite well with certain geographic data from Chinese 
sources.'44 But in other respects it raises serious difficulties that do 
not present themselves if we agree that Ho-ling was located in 
the center of Java.'43 Besides, it is in the center of Java that the 
kingdom of Walaing was situated, and the name Walaing, ac-
cording to L. C. Damais, is in all likelihood the source of the 
Chinese name Ho-ling.’74 The archaeological remains of this 
period are unfortunately quite rare; we can scarcely cite any-
thing but the inscription of Tuk Mas, probably from the middle of 
the seventh century,” and perhaps the oldest edifices of the Dieng Plateau.126 , 
Ho-ling, whose richness is praised in the New History of the 
T’ang,'*”7 was a center of Buddhist culture in the seventh century. 
It was the homeland of the monk JfAanabhadra, under whose 
direction the Chinese pilgrim Hui-ning, who came to the country 
in 664-65, translated the Sanskrit texts of the Theravada into 
Chinese.128 
In 644-45, almost the same time as the first embassy of Ho-
ling in 640, the New History of the T’ang mentions the first em-
bassy of Mo-lo-yu.'7? This name refers to the country of Malayu 
situated on the east coast of Sumatra and centered in the region 

--- [Page 102] ---
80 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
of Jambi. The pilgrim |-ching stopped off there for a time in 671.192 
He informs us in his memoirs that between 689 and 692 Malayu 
was absorbed by Shih-li-fo-shih (Srivijaya).431 This name had per-
haps already appeared in the faulty transcription Chin-li-p’i-shih in 
a text based on data earlier than the voyages of I-ching."32 

--- [Page 103] ---
CHAPTER VI 
THE RISE OF SRIVIJAYA, THE DIVISION OF 
CAMBODIA, AND THE APPEARANCE OF 
THE SAILENDRAS IN JAVA 
From the End of the Seventh Century 
to the Beginning of the Ninth Century 
The development of navigation, which was due in great part to 
Arab merchants’ and is documented by the voyages of Buddhist 
pilgrims and the increasingly frequent exchanges of embassies 
between China and the countries to the south,? inevitably gave a 
special importance to the southeast coast of Sumatra, whose out-
lines then differed appreciably from those of today. Since this 
coast was situated at equal distance from the Sunda Strait and 
the Strait of Malacca, the two great breaks in the natural barrier 
formed by the Malay Peninsula and Indonesia, it was the normal 
point of landfall for boats coming from China on the northeast 
monsoon. Moreover, the fall in the early seventh century of Funan, 
a state that had been the dominant power in the southern seas for 
five centuries, left the field open for the inhabitants around 
Sumatran estuaries and harbors to develop control of commerce 
between India and China. It was thanks to these circumstances 
that the rapid rise of the kingdom of Srivijaya took place in the 
eighth century. 
1. THE BEGINNINGS OF THE KINGDOM OF SRIVIJAYA 
(END OF THE SEVENTH CENTURY) 
When the pilgrim I-ching made his first voyage from China 
to India in 671, his first port of call, less than twenty days after his 
departure from Canton, was Fo-shih, where he stopped six months 
to study Sanskrit grammar.’ “In the fortified city of Fo-shih,” he 
says, “there are more than a thousand Buddhist priests whose 
minds are bent on study and good works. They examine and study 
all possible subjects exactly as in MadhyadeSa [India]; their rules 
and ceremonies are identical with those in India. If a Chinese 
priest wishes to go to the west to understand and read [the 
original Buddhist texts] there, he would be wise to spend a year 
or two in Fo-shih and practice the proper rules there; he might 
then go on to central India.” > 

--- [Page 104] ---
82 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
On his return from India, where he had spent ten years at 
the university of Nalanda, |-ching spent four more years at Fo-shih 
—the years between 685 and 689, during which he copied and 
translated Sanskrit Buddhist texts into Chinese. In 689, after a brief 
voyage to Canton, where he recruited four collaborators, he 
returned to settle in Fo-shih and there wrote his two memoirs, 
one “on the eminent monks who sought the law in the western 
countries” and the other “on the spiritual law, sent from the 
southern seas.” 
In 692 he sent his manuscripts to China, to which he himself 
returned in 695. During this last stay, he noted in the second of 
the above works that Mo-lo-yu, where he had stopped and stayed 
two months in 671, “is now the country of Shih-li-fo-shih.” ® 
A group of inscriptions in Old Malay,” four of which were 
found in Sumatra (three near Palembang, another at Karang Brahi 
on the upper course of the Batang Hari) and a fifth at Kota Kapur 
on the island of Bangka, show the existence in 683-86 in Palem-
bang of a Buddhist kingdom that had just conquered the hinter-
land of Jambi and the island of Bangka and was preparing to launch 
a military expedition against Java. This kingdom bore the name 
Srivijaya, which corresponds exactly to I-ching’s (Shih-li-) fo-shih.® 
The oldest of the three inscriptions from Palembang, the one 
that is engraved on a large stone at Kedukan Bukit, at the foot of 
the hill of Seguntang, tells us that on April 23, 682,9 a king began 
an expedition (siddhayatra) by boat, that on May 19 he left an 
estuary with an army moving simultaneously by land and sea, and 
that, a month later,!° he brought victory, power, and wealth to 
Srivijaya. This text has caused much ink to flow. Some scholars 
have chosen to view this inscription as a statement that the capital 
Srivijaya ™! was founded by an armada from the outside, perhaps 
from the Malay Peninsula,’ and some have even interpreted this 
inscription as meaning that the primitive site of Malayu was at 
Palembang, which took the name of Srivijaya following this 
expedition. It seems to me that this is building very fragile hypoth-
eses on a stone that differs from other inscribed stones found in 
Palembang 4 and on Bangka™® only in the personality of the 
author of the inscription and the circumstances under which it 
was engraved, All we can say is that the events commemorated 
must have been considered important enough to merit giving a 
considerable wealth of chronological detail which other stones of 

--- [Page 105] ---
The Rise of Srivijaya 83 
the same type do not give. The king who in 682 set up this votive 
offering in some sacred place near Seguntang did so on returning 
from a victorious expedition that earned Srivijaya new power and 
prestige.16 
This anonymous king is almost certainly the Jayanasa who 
founded a public park two years later, on March 23, 684,!7 at 
Talang Tuwo, west of Palembang and five kilometers northwest 
of Seguntang, and on this occasion had a text engraved expressing 
the desire that the merit gained by this deed and all his other good 
works should redound on all creatures and bring them closer to 
enlightenment. 
As for the three other inscriptions, one of which is dated 
February 28, 686, we wonder if the conquests that they imply do 
not represent the continuation of the expansionist policy com-
memorated by the stone of Kedukan Bukit. These three texts, in 
part identical,'® deliver threats and maledictions against any in-
habitants of the upper Batang Hari (the river of Jambi whose basin 
must have constituted the territory of Malayu) and of the island of 
Bangka who might commit acts of insubordination toward the king 
and toward the officials he had placed at the head of the pro-
vincial administration. The inscription of Bangka closes by men-
tioning the departure of an expedition against the unsubdued land 
of Java in 686.19 The land referred to may have been the ancient 
kingdom of Taruma,2° on the other side of the Sunda Strait, which 
we do not hear spoken of again after its embassy to China in 
666—-69.2! Taruma may have become the nucleus of the expansion 
of Sumatran influence on the island of Java which is evidenced in 
the following century by the inscription of Gandasuli in the prov-
ince of Kedu.”2 
Although King Jayanasa is named in only one of the five 
inscriptions, they probably all emanate from him: the military 
expedition in 682, the foundation of a public park in 684, the 
affirmation of authority in the northwest and southeast of the 
kingdom, and the sending of an expedition against Java—all these 
mark the various stages in the career of a king whom we are 
tempted to recognize as the conqueror of Malayu. Perhaps it was 
also he who sent the embassy of 695 23 to China, the first one from 
Srivijaya for which we have a definite date. Before this embassy 
we have only a vague mention of embassies beginning with the 
period 670-73; 24 after it, we know of embassies of 702, 716, and 

--- [Page 106] ---
84 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
724 in the name of the king Shih-li-t’o-lo-pa-mo (Sri Indravarman) 
and of 728 and 742 in the name of the king Liu-t’eng-wei-kung.” 
Srivijaya’s expansion northwest toward the Strait of Malacca 
and southeast toward the Sunda Strait is a very clear indication of 
its designs on the two great passages between the Indian Ocean 
and the China Sea, the possession of which was to assure Srivijaya 
of commercial hegemony in Indonesia for several centuries. 
The inscription of 684, the first dated evidence of Mahayana 
Buddhism in Farther India, confirms what I-ching said about the 
importance of Srivijaya as a Buddhist center2”? and about the 
various Buddhist schools in the southern seas. He asserts, it is 
true, that the Mulasarvastivada, one of the great sects of the 
Theravada Buddhism that used the Sanskrit language,2® was al-
most universally adopted there, but he mentions followers of 
Mahayana Buddhism at Malayu 2? and records the existence in 
Srivijaya of the Yogacharyabhumisastra?° one of the major works 
of Asanga, founder of the mystic school Yogachara, or Vijhiana-
vadin.*! 
The prayer (pranidhana) of King Jayanaga on the occasion of 
his founding of a public park—expressing as it does the desire that 
all beings should obtain a series of felicities, the first ones purely 
material, but the later ones rising gradually to the moral and mys-
tical planes until enlightenment is achieved—gives Louis de La 
Vallée-Poussin “the impression that all of this is in keeping with 
Mahayanist Sarvastivada.” °? It has even been suggested that the 
doctrine reflected by this prayer was perhaps already tinged with 
Tantrism.3 
The archaeology of the region of Palembang,*4 although 
quite scanty, especially in architectural remains, confirms the 
evidence of I-ching and epigraphic data. The sculptures that have 
been found are all Buddhist, with a definite predominance of 
Bodhisattva images. But on the whole they are later than the 
period under consideration here. 
After 742, the date of the last embassy from Shih-li-fo-shih 
mentioned in the Chinese texts,> our sources remain silent until 
775; at that date a Sanskrit inscription engraved on the first face 
of the stele of Wat Sema Muang *° reveals that the Sumatran king-
dom had established a foothold on the Malay Peninsula at Ligor, 
where a king of Srivijaya, probably named Dharmasetu,?” had 
built various edifices, including a sanctuary dedicated to the 

--- [Page 107] ---
The Rise of Srivijaya 85 
Buddha and to the Bodhisattvas Padmapani and Vajrapani. How-
ever, from 732 on central Java becomes of greatest interest to us. 
But before telling what took place there, it is important to relate 
the little that we know about events that took place on the Indo-
chinese Peninsula from the end of the seventh to the middle of 
the eighth centuries. 
2. THE DIVISION OF CAMBODIA: LAND CHENLA AND WATER 
CHENLA (BEGINNING OF THE EIGHTH CENTURY) 
The T’ang histories 38 tell us that shortly after 706 Cambodia 
came to be divided in two? and returned to the anarchic state 
that had existed before it was unified under the kings of Funan 
and the first kings of Chenla. “The northern half, a land of moun-
tains and valleys, was called Land Chenla. The southern half, 
bounded by the sea and covered with lakes, was called Water 
Chenla.” 4 
The breakup of Cambodia apparently originated in the 
anarchy that followed the reign of Jayavarman I, who died without 
a male heir. In 713, the country was governed by a queen named 
Jayadevi; we have an inscription of hers found at Angkor,“! in 
which she complains of the misfortunes of the times and mentions 
donations to a sanctuary of Siva Tripurantaka. This sanctuary was 
founded by the princess Sobhajaya, a daughter of Jayavarman | 
who married the Sivaite Brahman Sakrasvamin born in India. 
Jayadevi is named in another inscription from which we learn 
that she herself was a daughter of Jayavarman |.42 
Around the same time, a prince of Aninditapura named 
Pushkara or Pushkaraksha became king in Sambhupura “—a site 
represented by the group of ruins at Sambor on the Mekong, up-
stream from Kratié “—where he had an inscription engraved in 
716.% It has been suggested that he obtained this royal status “by 
marriage,” © but this is a gratuitous hypothesis; we can just as 
easily hypothesize that he seized power because the throne was 
vacant. 
It is possible that it was this Pushkaraksha who received at his 
death the posthumous name of Indraloka, a name mentioned in an 
inscription of Sambor as that of the great-grandfather of a queen 
reigning in 803.47 Be that as it may, his taking possession of 
Sambhupura seems to have marked the beginning of the breakup 
of Cambodia. 

--- [Page 108] ---
86 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
All we know about Land Chenla in the first half of the 
eighth century is that it sent an embassy to China in 717 * and 
sent an expedition to Vietnam in 722 to aid a native chief in his 
revolt against China.4? As for Water Chenla, it seems that this 
country was itself divided into several principalities. That of Anin-
ditapura, in the south, had a certain Baladitya as its chief at an 
undetermined date. Baladitya perhaps gave his name to a city 
Baladityapura mentioned by the Chinese, under the name 
P’o-lo-t’i-po, as the true capital of Water Chenla.° Baladitya 
claimed to be descended from the Brahman Kaundinya and the 
Nagi Soma and was considered later by the kings of Angkor as 
the ancestor through whom they were related to the mythical 
] couple; °! he must, therefore, have somehow been related to the 
ancient kings of Funan. In view of the resemblance of the names, 
we can presume that his successors included a certain Nripaditya 
who left a Sanskrit inscription in western Cochin China.*2 This 
inscription is undated, but it may go back to the beginning of the 
eighth century—that is, to the beginning of the division of 
Cambodia. 
3. DVARAVATI AND SRIKSHETRA IN THE EIGHTH CENTURY 
We have no precise data on Dvaravati in the eighth century; 
all we can say is that remains of monuments and some of the 
sculptures rightly or wrongly attributed to Dvaravati probably 
date from this period. 
At Prome, legends in the Pyu language engraved on royal 
funerary urns give us the names and ages of three kings, with 
the dates expressed in an era system that is not specified.** If we 
assume that this era system was that of 638 (in which the first 
year is the equivalent of 638 A.D.)—a system that may have been 
of Indian origin but was first used in Burma before spreading 
later to the Thai and to Cambodia—we have the following dates: 
673— 
688, death of Suryavikrama, at the age of 64 
695, death of Harivikrama, at the age of 41 
718, death of Sihavikrama, at the age of 44 
We know from elsewhere the names, but not the dates, of 
Prabhuvarman and of Jayachandravarman. In view of the fact that 
their names end in “varman,” these two would seem at first glance 

--- [Page 109] ---
The Rise of Srivijaya 87 
to belong to a dynasty other than that of the ‘“vikrama’” kings.» 
But a Sanskrit inscription engraved on the pedestal of a statue of 
the Buddha~°® tells us that Jayachandravarman was the elder 
brother of Harivikrama and that, to end the rivalry between the 
two brothers, their spiritual master had two identical cities built 
for them where they resided separately.°” 
It is believed that the Buddhist monuments of Prome whose 
ruins bear the names of Bébdégyi, Payama, and Payagyi were built 
during the eighth century. These stupas are of a cylindrical type 
with a hemispherical or pointed dome. The origin of this type of 
stupa is to be sought in northeast India and on the coast of Orissa; 
the relations of Orissa with the Burmese delta have already been 
cited. The origin of another architectural form characteristic of 
the Pyu kingdom—an edifice with an inner chamber that supports 
a cylindro-conic superstructure (sikhara)—must also be sought 
on the coast of Orissa. This form was to undergo a remarkable 
development at Pagan. Theravada Buddhism, witnessed at Prome 
before the seventh century in the fragments of the Pali canon 
previously mentioned,” was either supplanted or at least relegated 
to second place by a school with the Sanskrit canon, perhaps the 
Mulasarvastivada, whose predominance in Farther India I-ching has 
affirmed.© But farther north, at Pagan, it seems that Mahayana 
Buddhism was already firmly established and had assumed, under 
the influence of Bengal, an aspect that is sometimes said to be 
Tantric.@ 
4. JAVA: SANJAYA (732) AND THE BUDDHIST SAILENDRAS 
(END OF THE EIGHTH CENTURY) 
Apart from the inscription of Tuk Mas of uncertain date and 
slight historical interest,62 Java furnishes us with no epigraphic 
documents for some time after the inscriptions of Purnavarman in 
western Java that date from the middle of the fifth century.™ Java 
re-enters the scene with a Sanskrit inscription of 732 found in the 
central part of the island among the ruins of the Sivaite sanctuary 
of Changal on the hill of Wukir, to the southeast of the Borobu-
dur.®* Its author was the king Sanjaya, son of the sister of Sanna 
named Sanna,® whose name seems very much like the Sanskritiza-
tion of a native name. The inscription tells of the erection of a 
linga on the island of Yava, “rich in grain and gold mines,” in the 
country of Kunjarakunja.® 

--- [Page 110] ---
88 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Although Java does not produce gold, the context prevents 
us from searching elsewhere for the island of Yava. Nevertheless, 
one scholar has proposed that Yava be identified with the Malay 
Peninsula and has worked out a story ®” concerning the Indian 
origins of Sanjaya, his reign on the peninsula, and his flight to 
Java, where he became the vassal of the Sailendra dynasty that 
was driven from Palembang by Srivajaya—a story that is pure fic-
tion. The highly fantastic character of this story has been dem-
onstrated by another scholar.® 
As for Kunjarakunja, an inexact reader of the text thought 
that it was the name of a foreign locality from which the linga had 
been brought, and hypotheses about the relations between Java 
and the Pandya country in southern India have been built on this 
erroneous interpretation.°? There is indeed a locality with this 
name near the frontier between Travancore and Tinnevelly, and at 
this exact spot is located the sanctuary of the sage Agastya, the 
Hinduizer of southern India who is greatly venerated in Java 
under the aspect of the bearded and pot-bellied Bhatara Guru. 
But the reconstruction of the true reading 9 has made it possible 
to prove that Kunjarakunja is the name of the country where 
Sanjaya built his sanctuary, that is, all or part of the Kedu Plain. 
This true reading does not, of course, prevent us from relating 
the name of this Javanese district to an identical name in southern 
India. 
A late text credits Sanjaya with incredible conquests in Bali, 
in Sumatra, and in Cambodia up to China.”! An inscription dated 
907 inspires more confidence: ” it represents Sanjaya as a prince 
of Mataram (southern part of central Java) and as the first of a 
line. According to an inscription of Kalasan, the second in this 
line, Panangkaran, reigned in 778, under the suzerainty of the 
Sailendra dynasty. 
The name Sailendra, “king of the mountain,” is an equivalent 
of (Siva) Giriga, and perhaps expresses an Indian adaptation of In-
donesian beliefs which place the residences of gods on moun-
tains.”3 One scholar “4 believed that it indicated the Indian origin 
of these newcomers, whom he thought were related to the 
Sailodbhava kings of Kalinga. But serious objections have been 
raised to this theory.” In any case, the appearance in the southern 
islands of the Sailendras, with their imperial title maharaja, was, 
we can safely say, ‘‘an international event of major importance.” 76 

--- [Page 111] ---
The Rise of Srivijaya 89 
| wonder if these “kings of the mountain” were not, in fact, 
attempting to revive the title of the ancient kings of Funan, who 
were zealous adherents of the linga Girisa’” and set themselves 
up as universal sovereigns. This hypothesis has gained some ground 
since J. G. de Casparis identified Naravarnagara, the last capital 
of Funan in the southern Indochinese Peninsula,”® with the variant 
Varanara in an inscription of the ninth century. This inscription 
mentions that the country Varanara was ruled by a king Bhut-
jayottungadeva, who appears to have been the founder of the 
Sailendra dynasty in Java.79 
This dynasty increasingly assumed the aspect of a suzerain 
power, exercising its supreme authority over the local dynasty 
governing the Kedu Plain. F. H. van Naerssen in fact has shown 
that, in the inscription of Kalasan, “the ornament of the Sailendra 
dynasty” was not the Maharaja Panangkaran, author of the mon-
ument and the inscription, but his suzerain monarch.®9 
The first known king of the local dynasty reigning in the 
Kedu Plain seems to have been Sang Ratu i Halu, of whom we 
have evidence around 768.8! Only one thing is certain: the com-
ing of the Sailendras was marked by an abrupt rise of Mahayana 
Buddhism. In 778, Maharaja Panangkaran founded, at the request 
of his spiritual teachers, a sanctuary dedicated to the Buddhist 
goddess Tara and consecrated the village of Kalasa to it; ® this 
is the monument now called Chandi Kalasan, located in the plain 
of Prambanan, east of the city of Jogjakarta.8 
In 782, during the reign of a Sailendra king known as “the 
killer of enemy heroes’ 8 and crowned under the name of 
Sangramadhananjaya,®> a teacher from the country of Gaudi 
(western Bengal) named Kumaraghosha consecrated in Kelurak, 
not far from Kalasan, an image of the Bodhisattva Manjusri, who 
is a synthesis of the Three Buddhist Jewels (Triratna), the Brah-
manic trinity (Trimurti), and all the gods.8 The temporary vogue 
for the script of northern India which was used in the inscriptions 
of Kalasan and Kelurak, and later in Cambodia,®” was apparently 
owing to this influence of western Bengal and the university of 
Nalanda. 
It was at the beginning of the establishment of the Sailendras 
in Java, roughly in the second half of the eighth century, that the 
great Buddhist monuments of the Kedu Plain were built. The 
chronology of these monuments is still a bit shaky. Kalasan, 

--- [Page 112] ---
90 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
temple of Tara, dated 778 by its inscription, furnishes a point of 
reference for dating the other monuments. Chandi Sari, a mo-
nastic dwelling provided with a sanctuary, appears to be con-
temporaneous with Kalasan, while Chandi Sewu, with its 250 little 
temples, a veritable stone mandala, must be a bit later.8® As for 
the most dazzling of these monuments, the Borobudur—together 
with its subordinate structures, Chandi Mendut and Chandi 
Pawon 8—the paleography of the short contemporary inscriptions 
on its foundation prevents us from considering it as dating from 
before the middle of the ninth century, that is, at the end of the 
Sailendras. The Borobudur, which is decorated with bas-reliefs 
illustrating some of the great texts of Mahayana Buddhism,” is a 
Buddhist microcosm, another stone mandala, and it is perhaps 
also the dynastic temple of the Sailendras.21 Chandi Mendut 
shelters a magnificent triad, the Buddha preaching between two 
Bodhisattvas, executed in post-Gupta style. From the religious 
standpoint, this architectural ensemble % belongs to the esoteric 
Buddhism of Vajrayana that was codified later in the treatise 
entitled Sang hyang Kamahayanikan.® 
The advent of the Buddhist Sailendras seems to have pro-
voked the exodus to the east of Java of conservative elements 
faithful to the Hindu cults. The prosperity of these Hindu ele-
ments in the seventh century and the first half of the eighth is 
attested to by the most ancient monuments of the Dieng Plateau 
and the inscription of Sanjaya. Evidence from Chinese sources, 
which place the moving of the capital of Ho-ling to the east 
and its transfer from She-p’o to P’o-lu-chia-ssu by the king Chi-yen 
between 742 and 755,°4 is confirmed by the presence at Dinaya, 
to the northwest of Malang, of a Sanskrit inscription of 760,% the 
oldest dated inscription coming from the eastern part of Java.% 
This inscription mentions the construction of a sanctuary of 
Agastya by a son of the king Devasimha, named Gajayana,?” who 
was reigning over Kanjuruhan.%® Both Devasimha and Gajayana, 
who were perhaps related in some way to Sanjaya, were devotees 
of Siva and the guardians and protectors of a linga named 
Putikesvara, which embodied the essence of royalty. Here is a 
new example of the cult of the royal linga that was to become 
the great state religion of Cambodia in the Angkor period—the 
cult of which Bhadresvara of Mi-soén in Champa furnished us 
with the first certain evidence. 

--- [Page 113] ---
The Rise of Srivijaya 91 
The interesting inscription of Dinaya throws some light on 
the history of eastern Java in the second half of the eighth cen-
tury, but the light is only a single ray in the night.?? In the last 
quarter of the century, interest is concentrated on the Sailendras 
in the center of the island. 
The accession of the Sailendras, which is marked in the field 
of internal affairs by the development of Mahayana Buddhism, is 
marked in the field of foreign affairs by incursions of the Sailendras 
on the Indochinese Peninsula and attempts to install themselves 
there. 
In 767, Tongking was invaded by bands that the Vietnamese 
annals say came from She-p’o (Java) and K’un-lun (the southern 
islands in general). The governor Chang Po-i defeated them near | 
modern Sodn-tay and drove them back to the sea. In 774 “men 
born in other countries,” says a Sanskrit inscription of Po Nagar 
at Nha-trang,!9' “men living on food more horrible than cadavers, 
frightful, completely black and gaunt, dreadful and evil as death, 
came in ships,” stole the linga, and burned the temple. They were 
‘followed by good ships and beaten at sea” by the Cham king 
Satyavarman. In 787, ‘‘the armies of Java, having come in vessels,” 
burned another temple.1 
At about the same time, no earlier than 782, an inscription 
in the name of a king bearing the personal name Vishnu, “de-
stroyer of his enemies,” was begun at Ligor but not finished. This 
inscription was carved on the second face of the stele erected in 
Ligor in 775 by the king of Srivijaya.1 
The text of the inscription states that King Vishnu “bore the 
title of maharaja to indicate that he was a descendant of the 
family of the Sailendras.” This king was undoubtedly the king of 
the inscription of Kelurak—that is, Sangramadhananjaya.!% 
For some time it was thought that the Sailendras reigned in 
Srivijaya from the beginning and that during the second half of 
the eighth century and a large part of the ninth central Java be-
came subject to the Sumatran kingdom.™ But although the 
Sailendras were, as we will see, kings of Srivijaya in the eleventh 
century and undoubtedly also in the tenth, we have no proof that 
such was already the case in the eighth.!% 
R. C. Majumdar, who has the honor of being the first to 
distinguish between the two faces of the Ligor stele 1 on which 
the assumption of Sailendra rule in Srivijaya from 775 was based, 

--- [Page 114] ---
92 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
accepts the possibility that the seat of the power of the Sailendras 
was on the Malay Peninsula.’? But we scarcely know where to 
locate it, for in the eighth century Chinese sources are poor in in-
formation on this region." Someone has suggested Chaiya, which 
seems to have experienced a period of prosperity in the eighth 
century, judging by the quality of the archaeological remains dat-
ing from this epoch. In any case, there is no reason to doubt 
that in the preceding century Srivijaya had its center at Palem-
bang." 
On the basis of the documents available at present, Java does 
not appear to be the native country of the Sailendras of Indonesia, 
who, as has been seen, claimed rightly or wrongly to be related 
to the “kings of the mountain” of Funan. Java is, rather, the place 
in the archipelago where they first made themselves known. But 
this does not imply, as has been believed,"3 that Srivijaya was a 
dependency of its neighbors to the east, for the evidence we can 
draw from the Charter of Nalanda, to be discussed later," is 
valid only for the second half of the ninth century. According to 
this text, Suvarnadvipa (Sumatra with its possessions on the Malay 
Peninsula) was governed at this time by a Balaputra, that is, a 
“younger son’’—in this case the “younger son’ of a King Sama-
ragravira, who was himself a son of a king of Yavabhiimi (Java), 
who was called “the ornament of the Sailendra dynasty” and bore 
a name followed by the title of “the killer of enemy heroes.” This 
Sailendra of Java seems to be the same as that of the inscriptions 
of Kelurak and Ligor (second face), and his son Samaragravira can 
be identified with the king Samaratunga who reigned in Java in 
824.15 Samaragravira’s son, Balaputra, undoubtedly governed 
Sumatra for and under the authority of his father, a situation similar 
to the one that we will find in Bali in the eleventh century, where 
we will see a younger son of the king of Java perform the functions 
of a viceroy.“ We can conclude from all this that in the second 
half of the ninth century Java and Sumatra were united under the 
rule of a Sailendra reigning in Java, but nothing authorizes us to 
think this was already the case in the second half of the eighth 
century. 
On the other hand, the Sailendras of Java may have had 
some claim over Cambodia in the eighth century, for in the fol-
lowing chapter we will see the founder of Angkorian royalty in-
augurate his reign with a ceremony designed to completely liberate 

--- [Page 115] ---
The Rise of Srivijaya 93 
him from vassalage to Java. The vassalage of Cambodia to Java 
may have originated in an incident that an Arab author has given 
us a romanticized account of—an account dating from the be-
ginning of the tenth century.” The Arab author tells us that a 
Khmer king expressed the desire to see the head of the maharaja 
of Zabag (Javaka) before him on a plate and this remark was re-
ported to the maharaja. The maharaja then, on the pretext of tak-
ing a pleasure cruise in the islands of his kingdom, armed his fleet 
and prepared an expedition against Cambodia. He sailed up the 
river leading to the capital, seized the king of Cambodia and de-
capitated him, then ordered the Khmer minister to find a suc-
cessor for him. Once he had returned to his own country, the 
maharaja had the severed head embalmed and sent it in an urn 
to the king who had replaced the decapitated sovereign; with it 
he sent a letter drawing the moral of the incident. ‘‘When the news 
of these events reached the kings of India and China, the maha-
raja became greater in their eyes. From that moment the Khmer 
kings, every morning upon rising, turned their faces in the di-
rection of the country of Zabag, bowed down to the ground, 
and humbled themselves before the maharaja to render him 
homage.” 
It would be unwise to accept this account as a page from 
history. It is possible, however, that it was inspired by the recol-
lection of some historical fact and that the Sailendras of Java did 
indeed take advantage of the weakness of Cambodia during its 
disunity to assert over it the rights of its ancient masters, the 
“kings of the mountain.” But it is also possible that the exploit 
of the maharaja should really be attributed to King Jayanaéa of 
Srivijaya at the end of the seventh century.™8 
5. | CAMBODIA: THE TWO CHENLAS 
(SECOND HALF OF THE EIGHTH CENTURY) 
Land Chenla, which was also called Wen-tan and P’o-lou by 
the Chinese and which perhaps corresponded to the original 
territory of Chenla, in 753 sent to China an embassy led by a son 
of the king. In 754 this same prince or another son of the king 
accompanied the Chinese armies that were operating against 
eastern Nanchao, where a King Ko-lo-feng reigned. According to 
G. H. Luce,''? the Man Shu mentions that, during the period of the 
division of Chenla, an expedition from Nanchao may have reached 

--- [Page 116] ---
94 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
“the sea,” perhaps the Great Lake. In 771 an embassy was led by 
the “second king,’” named P’o-mi; then a new embassy was sent 
in 799.'20 The itinerary of Chia Tan by land from China to India 1! 
places the capital of Land Chenla, at the end of the eighth century, 
at a point which was at first placed in the region of Pak Hin Bun 
on the middle Mekong 12 but which was undoubtedly located 
much farther south, around the center of early Chenla.?% An in-
scription in the name of a King Jayasimhavarman found at Phu 
Khiao Kao 1% in the Chaiyaphum district of the province of Khorat 
may date back to this period. 
As for Water Chenla, we have some inscriptions from the 
region of Sambhupura (Sambor). Two of them, dated 770 and 
781, emanate from a king named Jayavarman.!6 An inscription 
of 791 found in the province of Siem Reap,'2” which mentions 
the erection of an image of the Bodhisattva Lokesvara, is the most 
ancient epigraphical evidence of the existence of Mahayana Bud-
dhism in Cambodia. We do not know what dates to attribute to a 
series of princes, ancestors of the first kings of Angkor, on whom 
the genealogies confer the title of king; they were apparently the 
rulers of the various principalities into which central and lower 
Cambodia were divided.'8 A “senior’’ queen, Jyeshtharya, grand-
daughter of Nripendradevi and great-granddaughter of King In-
draloka,'4? made an endowment at Sambor in 803,!3° a year after 
the accession of Jayavarman Il. 
It would be a mistake to believe that at this troubled period 
in the history of Cambodia there was a corresponding eclipse of 
Khmer art. On the contrary, art historians agree that some espe-
cially interesting works of pre-Angkorian art, intermediate between 
the style of Sambor Prei Kuk and that of the Kulén,!31 date from 
the eighth century. 
6. SOUTHERN CHAMPA, OR HUAN-WANG 
(SECOND HALF OF THE EIGHTH CENTURY) 
The middle of the eighth century, which was notable be-
cause of the advent of the Sailendras in the southern seas, was 
also a critical era for Champa. 
In 749 the reigning king in Champa was Rudravarman Il, 
an obscure personage whose name we know only because of an 
embassy he sent to China in that year.132 

--- [Page 117] ---
The Rise of Srivijaya 95 
Until that time, the heart of the Cham kingdom had been 
located at Thua-thién and then at Quang-nam. In the middle of 
the eighth century, however, we see a movement of the center 
of gravity to the south, to Panduranga (Phan-rang) and to Kauthara 
(Nha-trang). At about the same time, in 758, the Chinese stop 
speaking of Lin-yi and substitute for it the name Huan-wang.133 
Moreover, the new dynasty reigning in the south inaugurates the 
use of posthumous names indicating the divine presence of the 
king after his death, the god with whom the deceased king has 
been united. We do not know the origin and the exact dates of 
the first of these kings, Prithivindravarman, whose posthumous 
name was Rudraloka.'34 We do know, however, that he was suc-
"ceeded by Satyavarman (Isvaraloka), the son of his sister, and 
that the Javanese raid of 774 occurred during his reign. This raid 
destroyed the original sanctuary of Po Nagar at Nha-trang, which, 
according to tradition, was built by the legendary sovereign 
Vichitrasagara.'*° After repelling the invaders, Satyavarman built 
a new sanctuary of brick that was completed in 784.136 
His younger brother, Indravarman, who succeeded him, is 
said to have been warlike. Indravarman, like his predecessor, was 
subjected to a Javanese raid; the one during Indravarman’s reign : 
occurred in 787 and destroyed a sanctuary of Bhadradhipatisvara, 
located west of the capital Virapura, near modern Phan-rang.137 
Indravarman sent an embassy to China in 793 138 and in 799 re-
constructed the temple destroyed by the Javanese. He was still 
reigning in 801.199 
7. BURMA: CONQUEST BY NANCHAO (AROUND 760) 
AND THE DECLINE OF PROME 
The establishment in the first half of the eighth century of 
the kingdom of Nanchao,"4° which occupied the west and north-
- west of Yunnan, had serious consequences for the Pyu kingdom 
of Burma. The second king of Nanchao, Ko-lo-feng, who was 
allied with the Tibetans against China, was anxious to establish 
communications with the west, and to this end he had to secure 
Upper Burma. Between 757 and 763, he conquered the upper 
Irrawaddy Valley.144 We may wonder if the capital of the Pyus 
remained at Prome in this period or if it was not transferred 
farther north, to Ha-lin,'’44 but few facts have been established 

--- [Page 118] ---
96 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
for this period of Burmese history. The introduction of Mahayana 
Buddhism, which undoubtedly dates back to the “vikrama’’ dy-
nasty, is confirmed by the discovery of Bodhisattva images, some 
of which appear to date back to the eighth century.8 
8. THE EXPANSION OF MAHAYANA BUDDHISM 
IN THE EIGHTH CENTURY 
The expansion of Mahayana Buddhism in the countries of 
Farther India, which coincides roughly with the advent in India 
of the Pala dynasty in Bengal and Magadha around the middle of 
the eighth century,'44 is the dominant fact of the period dealt 
with in this chapter. 
Aside from the inscription of Palembang of 684, whose 
Mahayanist inspiration seems to remain on the plane of the 
Sarvastivada,45 a sect of Theravada Buddhism that used the 
Sanskrit language, the facts that are known are as follows, in chronological order: 146 | 
775, on the Malay Peninsula, construction at Ligor of a sanctuary 
of the Buddha and the Bodhisattvas Padmapani and Vajrapani 
by the king of Srivijaya; 
778, in Java, construction of a sanctuary of Tara at Kalasan by 
Panangkaran; 
782, in Java, erection of an image of Manjusri at Kelurak by a 
teacher from Bengal, perhaps also in the reign of Panangkaran; 
791, in Cambodia, erection of an image of the Bodhisattva Lokes-
vara at Prasat Ta Keam. 
These facts prove that in the last quarter of the eighth cen-
tury, probably under the influence of the Pala dynasty and the 
teachers of the university of Nalanda,!4”7 Mahayana Buddhism 
established a definite foothold on the peninsula and in the archi-
pelago.'48 Its principal characteristics were: (1) a tendency toward 
the Tantric mysticism of the Vajrayana, popular in Bengal from 
the middle of the eighth century; (2) a syncretism with Hindu 
cults which, already manifest in the inscription of Kelurak, was 
to become clear in Cambodia in the Angkor period and was to 
culminate later in Java in the cult of Siva-Buddha; and (3) the 
importance attached to the redemption of the souls of the dead, 
which gave Javanese and Balinese Buddhism the aspect of a 
veritable ancestor cult.149 

--- [Page 119] ---
CHAPTER VII 
FOUNDATION OF THE KINGDOM OF 
ANGKOR; THE SAILENDRAS IN SUMATRA 
First Three Quarters of the Ninth Century 
1. THE BEGINNINGS OF THE KINGDOM OF ANGKOR1: 
JAYAVARMAN II (802-50) 
The liberation of Cambodia from the suzerainty of Java was 
the work of Jayavarman II, founder of the kingdom of Angkor. 
He was only distantly related to the ancient dynasties of pre-
Angkorian Cambodia: he was the great-grandnephew through 
the female line of Pushkaraksha,2 the prince of Aninditapura who 
became king of Sambhupura (Sambor),3 and also the nephew of a 
King Jayendradhipativarman about whom we know nothing.* An 
inscription from the beginning of the tenth century, speaking of 
Jayavarman II’s advent to the throne, says: ‘For the prosperity of 
the people, in this perfectly pure race of kings, great lotus which 
no longer has a stem, he rises as a new flower.” Official genealo-
gists used metaphors of this sort to veil the occasional disruptions 
of the regular succession in the dynastic order. Jayavarman II is 
almost unique among the kings of Cambodia in that he did not 
leave a single inscription; at least, none has been found. For-
tunately, the principal episodes of his reign are related in some 
detail in an inscription of the eleventh century on the stele of 
Sdok Kak Thom.® 
“His majesty,” the text tells us, “came from Java to reign in 
the city of Indrapura.” The family of Jayavarman II, which was 
linked with the dynasties of the eighth century, no doubt took 
refuge in Java during the disturbances over the succession—unless 
it had been taken there by force following one of the maritime 
raids discussed in the preceding chapter. 
Jayavarman II’s return from Java, perhaps motivated by the 
weakening of the Sailendras on the island, took place around 800, 
for we have abundant evidence that the effective beginning of the 
reign was 802.’ The country was in a state of almost complete 

--- [Page 120] ---
98 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
anarchy, apparently without a king 8 or divided among many rival 
principalities, and before he could obtain respect for his rights or 
his pretensions to the throne of Cambodia, the young prince had 
to conquer at least part of the kingdom. 
He began by establishing himself in the city of Indrapura. 
Various epigraphical fragments make it possible to locate a city 
of this name in the province of Thbong Khmum, to the east of 
Kompong Cham,? where he perhaps had familial ties. The site 
may possibly have been Banteay Prei Nokor, the name of which 
(“Citadel of the Royal City’) proves that there was an ancient 
capital there; its monuments of pre-Angkorian art manifest the 
style of the ninth century in certain details.7° But the remains along 
the western bank of the Western Baray (to be discussed in a 
moment) are not excluded as a possible site of Indrapura. 
It was at Indrapura, it seems, that the young king took into 
his services as royal chaplain a Brahman scholar, Sivakaivalya, 
who was to follow him in all his changes of residence and to be-
come the first chief priest of a new cult, that of the Devaraja, or 
“God-King.” 
After remaining some time in Indrapura, Jayavarman I! left 
this residence, accompanied by Sivakaivalya and his family, and 
made his way to a region north of the Tonle Sap, or Great Lake, 
that regulator of irrigation and inexhaustible fish pond. This region, 
where the first city of Angkor would be erected a century later, 
had constituted the fief of Bhavapura, as we have seen before.” 
“When they arrived at the eastern district,” says the stele of Sdok 
Kak Thom, “the king bestowed an estate and a village called 
Kuti upon the family of the royal chaplain.” The ‘eastern district’ 
refers to the region to the east of Angkor. The name Kuti survives 
in the name of Banteay Kdei, a late monument which was built 
near a much earlier one.?2 
‘Later,’ continues the stele, ‘‘the king reigned in the city of 
Hariharalaya. The royal chaplain also settled in this city, and the 
members of his family were appointed to the corps of pages.” 
Hariharalaya corresponds to a group of ruins called the 
“Roldos group,” situated some fifteen kilometers southeast of 
Siem Reap and including a monument, Lolei, the name of which 
is vaguely reminiscent of the old name Hariharalaya.43 On this 
site were many edifices belonging to pre-Angkorian art: Jayavar-
man II was, by and large, content to make repairs on them, al-

--- [Page 121] ---
Foundation of the Kingdom of Angkor 99 
though the construction of some new edifices can be attributed to 
him."4 
“Afterwards,” the inscription says, “the king went to found 
the city of Amarendrapura, and the royal chaplain also settled in 
this city to serve the king.” 
In 1924 Georges Groslier’ attempted to revive an old 
hypothesis of Etienne Aymonier 1 and identify Amarendrapura 
with the great temple of Banteay Ch’mar, but it is now known that 
this monument does not date farther back than the twelfth cen-
tury. The geographic arguments advanced for locating Amaren-
drapura in the northwest of Cambodia are still of some value; 
however, this region does not possess monuments that can be 
attributed by their architectural or decorative style to the reign of 
Jayavarman II. And it is not clear why, after having begun to 
establish himself in Angkor, he would have chosen another area 
that was so distant from the Lake and that must always have been 
relatively barren. On the other hand, the terrain along the western 
bank of the Western Baray has revealed a series of walls associated 
with edifices whose style places them at the very beginning of 
Angkor art, before the art of the Kulén; it is possible that this 
group, if it does not represent the Indrapura mentioned above, 
corresponds in part to the city of Amarendrapura founded by 
Jayavarman 11.17 
“Then,” continues the inscription, “the king went to reign 
at Mahendraparvata, and the Lord Sivakaivalya followed him, 
establishing himself in this capital to serve the king as before. 
Then a Brahman named Hiranyadama, learned in the magical 
science, came from Janapada 78 at the king’s invitation to perform 
a ritual designed to ensure that the country of the Kambujas would 
no longer be dependent on Java and that there would be no more 
than one sovereign who was chakravartin [universal monarch]. 
This Brahman performed a ritual according to the sacred Vinagikha 
and established a Lord of the Universe who was the king [Sanskrit: 
devaraja]. This Brahman taught the sacred Vinasikha, the Nayottara, 
the Sammoha, and the Siraccheda. He recited them from beginning 
to end in order that they might be written down and taught to 
Lord Sivakaivalya, and he ordained Lord Sivakaivalya to perform 
the ritual of the Devaraja. The king and the Brahman Hiranyadama 
took an oath to employ the family of Lord Sivakaivalya to con-
duct the worship of the Devaraja and not to allow others to 

--- [Page 122] ---
100 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
conduct it. The Lord Sivakaivalya, the chief priest [purohita], as-
signed all his relatives to this cult.’ 
Mahendraparvata (i.e, Mount Mahendra) has long been 
identified with Phnom Kulén, the sandstone plateau that dom-
inates the northern part of the Angkor Plain.19 Recent researches 7° 
have revealed an archaeological group there that undoubtedly 
shows the skeleton of the religious edifices of the city of Jaya-
. varman II, for its style 2! lies between that of the last pre-Angkorian 
monuments and that of the first edifices of Angkor art, grouped 
not so long ago under the designation of the art of Indravarman.”4 
It is worthwhile to dwell a moment on what happened at Phnom 
Kulén, the more so since Jean Filliozat 22 has shown recently that, 
in southern India, Mount Mahendra was considered the residence 
of Siva as king of all the gods (devaraja), including Indra Devaraja, 
and as sovereign of the country where the mountain stands. 
We have seen in the preceding chapter that the Sailendras 
of Java appear to have claimed for themselves the title of universal 
emperor which had belonged in other times to the kings of Funan. 
This could explain the method that Jayavarman II, upon his re-
turn from Java,24 used to restore his authority over Cambodia at 
the beginning of the ninth century. In order to free himself from 
the vassalage of the “king of the mountain,” whose very title 
conveys the quality of maharaja or chakravartin, it was necessary 
that he become one himself, receiving from a Brahman, on a 
mountain, the miraculous linga in which resided henceforth the 
royal power of the Khmer kings. This was why he established his 
capital on Mount Mahendra (Phnom Kulén) and summoned a 
Brahman who instituted the ritual of Devaraja and taught it to the 
chaplain “so that the country of the Kambujas would no longer 
be dependent on Java and so that there would be no more than 
one sovereign [in this kingdom] who would be chakravartin.” 
If the more or less effective sovereignty of distant Java had 
been nothing but the result of the expeditions at the end of the 
preceding century, there would have been no need, it would 
seem, for all these ceremonies to achieve liberation. But if the 
Sailendras of Java exercised sovereignty as heirs of the old owners 
of the soil, that was a different matter, and a new ritual associated 
with a new mountain became necessary.*° 
In the Indianized kingdoms of Southeast Asia, the Hindu 
cults developed even further a tendency they had already shown 

--- [Page 123] ---
Foundation of the Kingdom of Angkor 101 
in India and eventually became royal cults. This was particularly 
true of the worship of Siva. The essence of royalty, or, as some 
texts say, the “moi subtil’” of the king,26 was supposed to reside 
in a linga placed on a pyramid in the center of the royal city, 
which was itself supposed to be the axis of the world.2” This 
miraculous linga, a sort of palladium of the kingdom, was thought 
to have been obtained from Siva through a Brahman who deliv-
ered it to the king, founder of the dynasty.28 The communion be-
tween the king and the god through the medium of a priest took 
place on the sacred mountain, which could be either natural or 
artificial. 
Since the only monument at Phnom Kulén that suggests a 
pyramid is Krus Preah Aram Rong Chen, it undoubtedly corre-
sponds to the first sanctuary of the Devaraja. When Jayavarman 
Il and his successors ceased to reside on Mahendraparvata, they 
built other temple-mountains at the center of their subsequent 
capitals.29 
The ritual of the Devaraja established, by the Brahman 
Hiranyadama was based on four texts—Vinasikha, Nayottara, Sam-
moha, and Siraccheda—which the Sanskrit portion of the stele 
calls ‘‘the four faces of Tumburu.” Louis Finot, in publishing the 
inscription,*° expressed the opinion that these texts were of Tantric 
origin; two Indian scholars 3! have confirmed this point of view 
by pointing out, in a bibliography of Nepal, a group of tantras 
that have titles somewhat analogous to these. They were supposed 
to have been uttered by the four mouths of Siva represented: by 
the gandharva Tumburu, but we do not know their contents pre-
cisely enough to give us an idea of the ritual instituted on Phnom 
Kulén. This does not prevent us from establishing a relationship, 
perhaps illusory, between the Siraccheda, “the beheading,” and 
the story of the decapitation of the king of Cambodia by the 
maharaja of Zabag reported by the Arab voyager.°? If the suzer-
ainty of Java originated in an act of this sort, we can easily under-
stand that the essential act of the ritual designed to end the 
subjection of Cambodia was the decapitation in effigy of the 
suzerain king. But another explanation is possible. A rite of suicide 
by self-decapitation designed to obtain a favor for a third party 
from the divinity is known in India.?3 It is possible that such a 
suicide, real or simulated, formed a part of the installation cere-
monies of the Devaraja. In any case, the magical role of decapita-

--- [Page 124] ---
102 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
tion, real or simulated, is too well known 34 for us to be surprised 
at finding it at the beginning of the kingdom of Angkor. 
We might ask why Jayavarman II did not perform this rite 
at the beginning of his reign and why he waited until he had 
already resided in three capitals before declaring his independ-
ence. It was because he first had to conquer a part of the king-
dom, to “reassemble the land” divided among several chiefs, 
each of whom claimed to be a king, to strengthen his power, to 
defend himself against the Chams,26 and to re-establish order be-
fore daring to let the miraculous linga, the source of sovereign 
power, descend onto the sacred mountain. His changes of capitals 
must have been accompanied by military operations, to which an 
inscription of the eleventh century alludes by saying that the 
king ‘ordered the chief officers to pacify all the districts.” 3” Fore-
most among these officers was Prithivinarendra, “burning like fire 
the troops of the enemies,” to whom was entrusted the task of 
reconquering Malyang, i.e., the region south of Battambang.*8 
In succeeding centuries, the establishment of Jayavarman 
Il on Phnom Kulén was considered a historical event marking the 
beginning of a new era: Jayavarman II is most often cited in the 
inscriptions as ‘the king who established his residence on the 
summit of Mount Mahendra.” A number of families were to 
trace their first ancestor back to his reign, and several charters of 
endowment of land ownership attribute their origin to his reign. 
We do not know the duration of Jayavarman II’s stay on 
Kulén. “Afterwards,” the inscription continues, ‘the king returned 
to rule in the city of Hariharalaya and the Devaraja was brought 
back also; the chaplain and all his relatives officiated as before. 
The chaplain died during this reign. The king died in the city of 
Hariharalaya where the Devaraja resided.” 
Several monuments of the Roliios group seem to date from 
the second stay of Jayavarman II at Hariharalaya.*? As for the 
location of the royal residence, there seem to be two possibilities. 
It could correspond either to the large quadrangle called Prei 
Monti, the name of which is derived from the Sanskrit mandira 
meaning precisely “royal palace,” or to the quadrangle in the 
eastern district from which rise the towers of Preah K6, funerary 
temple of Jayavarman II and of the ancestors of his second suc-
cessor, Indravarman. This temple, following a custom of which 
there are other examples, might have been erected on the site 
of a royal residence. 

--- [Page 125] ---
Foundation of the Kingdom of Angkor 103 
Jayavarman II died at Hariharalaya in 850, after reigning 48 
years.” He received the posthumous name of Parameévara; this 
is the first definite example of the use of a name indicating deifica-
tion for a sovereign of Cambodia.“ 
Jayavarman II’s reign made a profound impression on the 
country. Although his effective authority undoubtedly did not 
extend beyond the region of the Great Lake, Jayavarman II began 
the pacification and unification of the country. He sought the site 
of the future capital in a region near that inexhaustible fish-
preserve that is the Tonle Sap, slightly beyond the limit of the 
annual inundations, about thirty kilometers from the sandstone 
quarries of Phnom Kulén, and quite close to the passes giving 
access to the Khorat Plateau and to the Menam Basin. It remained 
for his grandnephew and third successor, Yafovarman, to found 
there the city of Yasodharapura, which remained the capital of 
the Khmer empire for 600 years. 
Jayavarman II instituted the cult of the Devaraja in which 
the sanctuary in a pyramid, erected on a natural or artificial moun-
tain and sheltering the linga of stone or precious metal in which 
the Devaraja of each reign resides, henceforth marks the center 
of the royal city: the Bakong at Hariharalaya (Roldios), the Bakhéng 
in the first city of Angkor, the great pyramid at Koh Ker, the 
Phimeanakas, the Baphuon.*2 
Art during the reign of Jayavarman II, who came from abroad 
but apparently was anxious to renew his connection with the 
national traditions, shows the transition between the art of the 
pre-Angkor period, to which the king was still closely attached, 
and that of the Angkor epoch, which owed to him some of its 
new forms. These forms were particularly influenced by the art 
of Champa and Java.*3 
Jayavarman II was succeeded by his son Jayavardhana,“ a 
great elephant hunter,” who continued to reside at Hariharalaya. 
This king, who reigned from 850 to 857 under the name of Jaya-
varman (III), did some building in the region of Angkor.*® At his 
death he received the posthumous name of Vishnuloka. 
2. SOUTHERN CHAMPA: PANDURANGA FROM 802 TO 854 
In Champa, the kings continued to reside in the southern 
provinces. Harivarman | succeeded his brother-in-law Indravarman 
| around 802.7 In 803 he launched a successful expedition in the 
Chinese provinces; in 809 he renewed his campaign there with 

--- [Page 126] ---
104 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
less success. Around the same time, that is, at the beginning of the 
reign of Jayavarman II, Cambodia also appears to have suffered 
from attacks led by a Cham military leader, the Senapati Par.’8 
Harivarman | was still reigning in 813 and probably in 817, a 
year in which the Senapati made endowments at Po Nagar of 
Nha-trang. He was succeeded by his son Vikrantavarman III, about 
whom we know only that he made a few endowments at Po 
Nagar of Nha-trang and at Po Nagar of Mong-duc (854).°! 
3. BURMA: KINGDOMS OF P’IAO AND MI-CH'EN; 
FOUNDATION OF PEGU (HAMSAVATI) IN 825 
AND OF PAGAN (ARIMADDANAPURA) IN 849 
In Burma, China’s subjection of Nanchao in 791 4 led to 
the establishment of relations by land between China and the 
Pyu kingdom. In 802, the king Yung-ch’iang, surnamed K’un-mo-
ch’ang, sent an embassy to China led by his brother (or his son) 
Sunandana.*? Another was sent in 807.°4 The information on the 
kingdom of P’iao given in the accounts of these two embassies 
in the histories of the T’ang and the Man Shu is summarized in 
the following paragraph. 
If the journey is short, the king travels in a palanquin of 
golden cord; if it is long, by elephant. He has several hundred 
wives and concubines. The wall of the capital, measuring 160 /i 
in length, is made of green glazed brick and is protected by a moat 
lined with bricks; it is pierced by twelve gates and armed with 
towers at the corners. Its population includes several tens of 
thousands of families. The houses are roofed with lead and tin 
shingles. There are more than a hundred Buddhist monasteries, 
decorated with gold, silver, and many colors of paint and hung 
with embroidered cloth. In the palace of the king there are two 
bells, one gold and the other silver, that are struck in a certain 
way if the kingdom is threatened by invasion; the sounds the 
bells make are interpreted as presaging good luck or bad. Near 
the palace there is a statue of a large white elephant 100 feet 
high, in front of which all those who have grievances kneel, re-
flecting inwardly about the justice or injustice of their own causes. 
In case of public misfortunes, the king himself bows down before 
the elephant, burning incense and blaming himself for the offenses 
he has committed. The women pile their hair on top of their 
head, forming a large knot that they decorate with tin flowers, 

--- [Page 127] ---
Foundation of the Kingdom of Angkor 105 
pearls, and various stones. They all carry fans, and those of the 
upper class suspend five or six of them from their girdles. Young 
boys and girls have their heads completely shaved at seven years 
of age and are then placed in the temples and convents. They live 
there until their twentieth year, studying the religion of the 
Buddha, and then they re-enter the world. Their clothes consist 
only of a white cotton robe and a girdle whose red color imitates 
the shade of the clouds that surround the rising sun. They spurn 
the use of silk because it is hecessary to take life in order to 
procure silk. The inhabitants of the country profess a love of life 
and a horror of killing. Neither shackles, manacles, nor any in-
struments of torture are used on accused persons, who are simply 
tied up. Those who are found guilty receive lashes of bamboo on 
the back: five blows for grave offenses, three for those less serious. 
Only murder is punished by death. They use neither tallow nor 
oil, and make candles of perfumed beeswax. They have silver 
crescent-shaped money, They carry on commerce with the neigh-
boring nations, to which they sell white cloth and clay jars. They 
have their own special music and refined dances. (The Chinese 
sources give considerable detail about these.) 
During the entire first half of the ninth century, Nanchao 
was master of Upper Burma. In 832, it abducted three thousand 
Pyus from the population of the capital Ha-lin to populate the 
eastern capital of Nanchao, Cha-tung, which corresponds to the 
modern Yunnan-fu (K’un-ming). This was the beginning of the 
Pyu decline. 
The depopulation of Prome profited Pagan (Arimaddana-
pura), a city formed by the union of several villages, well situated 
close to the confluence of the Irrawaddy and the Chindwin, at the 
crossroads of the routes leading to Assam, Yunnan, and the region 
occupied today by the Shan states,5& and not far from the rice 
plain of Kyaukse, which was the cradle of the Burmese and the 
center of the expansion of these racial brothers of the Pyus who 
followed the Pyus down from the confines of Tibet at the end of 
the eighth and the beginning of the ninth centuries.°”? This was 
also the place where the Burmese entered into contact with the 
Mons, who were established there in considerable numbers. The 
Mons taught them their Indic script and introduced them to the re-
ligions of India. Native chronicles date the origin of Pagan back 
to the second century and give a long list of chiefs of undeter-

--- [Page 128] ---
106 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
mined authenticity; it was one of these, the monk usurper Poppa 
So-rahan, who is supposed to have founded the Burmese era in 
638.58 Charles Duroiselle 59 believes that the ‘Ari’ Buddhist sect, 
rich in Tantric rites including erotic practices, had penetrated to 
Pagan as early as the eighth century. But we do not hear the 
arahhika, or “forest monks,” spoken of before the beginning of 
the thirteenth century, and nothing indicates that at this time they 
professed any Mahayanist belief or that they practiced Tantric 
rites: their nonconformity was limited to partaking of meat and 
alcohol on the occasion of certain festivals.©° In 849, Pagan en-
tered definitively into history, if not in epigraphy at least in the 
annals, with the construction of its city walls by the king Pyinbya. 
According to native chronicles, Pagan began as a group of 
nineteen villages, each possessing its “Nat,” or local spirit. When 
these villages were fused into a single city, the king, in agreement 
with his subjects, sought to establish the cult of a common “Nat” 
that would be worshiped by all, which would become superior 
to the local spirits and the worship of which would unify the 
various tribes into a true nation. Mount Poppa, an ancient volcano 
situated not far from the city and already enjoying the veneration 
of the Burmese, was chosen as the place for the establishment of 
a pair of spirits: they were a brother and sister who, after, having 
been unjustly put to death by a neighboring king, were incarnated 
in a tree. This tree was cut down and floated to Pagan, and the 
images of Min Mahagiri, “Lord of the Great Mountain,” and of 
his sister Taunggyi Shin, whose name has the same meaning in 
Burmese, were carved from its trunk. This legend is interesting 
because it shows the establishment of a cult of a spirit on a moun-
tain in order to achieve religious and territorial unification and 
the birth of a nation. 
At the beginning of the ninth century, the New History of the 
T’ang mentions among the vassal states of P’iao the kingdom of 
Mi-ch’en, which sent an embassy to China in 805 © and was a 
victim of Nanchao aggression in 835.3 According to an itinerary 
given in the same text,6* Mi-ch’en must have been situated on the 
Gulf of Martaban, perhaps in the region of old Pegu.® 
In this period, the center of gravity of the kingdom of 
Ramafinhadesa, that is, the Mon country,®® shifted to the west: a 
chronicle gives 825 as the date for the foundation of Pegu (Ham-
savati) by Samala and Vimala, twin brothers from Thaton.®’ This 

--- [Page 129] ---
Foundation of the Kingdom of Angkor 107 
date seems to be preferable to the earlier or later dates furnished 
by other texts.6° The chronicles of Pegu, like those of Pagan, give 
lists of kings ®? which are impossible to verify. The importance of 
the Brahmanic remains in lower Burma proves that before this 
period Buddhism was not the dominant religion. The conversion 
of the heretic King Tissa to Buddhism was to be accomplished by 
the queen, who originally came from Martaban.7 
4, THE MALAY PENINSULA 
On the Malay Peninsula, the only document that can be 
attributed to the first half of the ninth century was found at 
Takuapa, not far from the Vishnuite statues of Khao Phra Narai, 
which are perhaps contemporaneous.”! It is a short inscription in 
Tamil indicating that an artificial lake named Avani-naranam was 
dug by Nangur-udaiyan (which, according to K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, 
is the name of an individual who possessed a military fief at Nang-
ur, a village in Tanjore district, and who was famous for his 
abilities as a warrior) and that the lake was placed under the pro-
tection of the members of the Manikkiramam (which, according 
to Nilakanta Sastri, was a merchant guild) living in the military 
camp.”? Since Avani-narayana is a surname of the Pallava king 
Nandivarman II] who reigned from 826 to 849,73 we can deduce 
the approximate date of this inscription. The inscription merits 
mention, since it, along with the inscription of Labu Tuwa on 
Sumatra dated 1088,” is one of the few documents composed in 
one of the vernaculars of India that has been found in Farther 
India. These two inscriptions alluding to the commercial activities 
of guilds known in southern India provide an interesting indica-
tion of the nature and geographic origin of the relations between 
India and Southeast Asia. 
5. THE SAILENDRAS IN JAVA AND SUMATRA FROM 813 TO 863 
Chinese sources list the last embassies of Ho-ling in 813 or 
815 and in 818; ” embassies of 820 and 831 are attributed to 
She-p’o.”6 She-p’o, which in the fifth century, it will be recalled, 
designated all or part of the island of Java,7”7 was in the eighth 
century the name of the capital of Ho-ling. This capital was aban-
doned between 742 and 755 for P’o-lu-chia-ssu, situated farther 
east.”8 This change of capital was the result of the rise of the 
Buddhist Sailendras in central Java. The reappearance of She-p’o 

--- [Page 130] ---
108 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
in 820 can be interpreted either as the reunion of the center and 
the east under the aegis of the Sailendras or, more probably, as the 
return to power in the center of the island of Sivaite princes who 
had migrated to the east. ~ 
We know little about the successors of Panangkaran, founder 
of Kalasan, except their names. The inscription of Balitung of 907 
already cited 7? lists, without telling us their genealogical relations, 
the Maharajas Panungalan, Warak, and Garung. Garung, about 
whom we have an inscription dated 819,°9 perhaps took religious 
vows, which would explain his name Patapan in an inscription 
of 850.8! 
In 824 the ruler was Samaratunga.®* Samaratunga is not in-
cluded in the list of the inscription of 907 because he was one of 
the Sailendra sovereigns of the Sanjaya dynasty of which Balitung 
was the heir. Perhaps, in view of the resemblance of the names, 
we can identify him with Samaragravira, brother of the Sailendra 
king of Java mentioned in the Charter of Nalanda.® 
The next to the last king mentioned in the inscription of 
907 is Pikatan, for whom we have an inscription dated 850. 
According to J. G. de Casparis, he may have begun reigning around 
842. He seems also to have been known under the names of 
Kumbhayoni and Jatiningrat. He married the Princess Pramo-
davardhani, a daughter of the Sailendra Samaratunga, who was 
himself the husband of the princess Tara of Srivijaya. The salient 
fact about the reign of Pikatan was his conflict with his brother-
in-law Balaputra, “younger son” of Samaragravira, also known as 
Samaratunga. Pikatan’s victory over Balaputra in 856 8 was ap-
parently the reason why Balaputra moved to Srivijaya, the country 
of his mother Tara. The Charter of Nalanda (ca. 860) informs us 
that Srivijaya at this time was governed by the “younger son” (Ba-
laputra) of Samaragravira.8? Thus, the earliest mention of the 
maharaja of Zabag (Javaka) by an Arab author (Ibn Khordadzbeh) *8 
refers to a Sailendra reigning in Java rather than to a Sailendra of 
Sumatra, as will be the case later. 
But the decline of power of the Sailendras at the center of 
Java, accompanied by a renewal of Hinduist worship there that is 
indicated by an inscription coming from the vicinity of Prambanan 
(863),89 resulted in the strengthening of the power of the Sailendras 
in Sumatra. This growth of Sailendran power in Sumatra is reflected 
in the Arab and Persian sources. It is certain in fact that in the 

--- [Page 131] ---
Foundation of the Kingdom of Angkor 109 
tenth century Zabag corresponded to the San-fo-ch’i of the Chi-
nese, that is, to the Sumatran kingdom of Srivijaya. 
All that we know about Srivijaya around the middle of the 
ninth century 9% is—and here | repeat some information from the 
preceding chapter—that the “‘maharaja of Suvarnadvipa” was a 
‘vounger son” (Balaputra) of the king of Java Samaragravira 
(i.e., Samaratunga) and a grandson of the Sailendra “king of Java 
and killer of enemy heroes” who was probably the Sangrama-
dhananjaya of the inscription of Kelurak, that is, the Sailendra 
mentioned on the second face of the Ligor stele. Through his 
mother Tara, he was grandson of a King Dharmasetu—a king 
whom one scholar has sought to identify with Dharmapala of the 
Pala dynasty of Bengal 7! but who was much more probably the 
king of Srivijaya who built the sanctuary that prompted the in-
scription on the first face of the Ligor stele.2* This Balaputra was 
undoubtedly the first Sailendra sovereign of Srivijaya. He had a 
monastery built in India, at Nalanda, to which the king Deva-
pala, in the thirty-ninth year of his reign (ca. 860),%* offered many 
villages. This donation was the subject of a charter containing 
the genealogical information that has been incorporated in the 
preceding pages. 

--- [Page 132] ---
CHAPTER VIII 
THE FLOWERING OF THE KINGDOMS OF ANGKOR AND SRIVIJAYA 
From the End of the Ninth Century 
to the Beginning of the Eleventh Century 
1. THE KINGDOM OF ANGKOR (877-1001) 
After the somewhat surprising silence of Jayavarman II and 
Jayavarman III, Indravarman, who came to power in 877, resumed 
the epigraphic tradition of his predecessors of the pre-Angkorian 
period. Perhaps we owe this fortunate circumstance to the in-
fluence of his spiritual master, the Brahman Sivasoma, a relative 
of Jayavarman II‘ and a disciple of the famous Hindu philosopher 
Sankaracharya, the restorer of orthodox Brahmanism.? Apparently, 
Indravarman was not related to his two predecessors. Genealogists 
of the following reigns tried after a fashion to make him the 
grandson or grandnephew of the parents of Jayavarman II's wife, 
but this claim did not appear in any of his inscriptions. He was son 
of a King Prithivindravarman and, on his mother’s side, great-
grandson of a King Nripatindravarman; we know nothing else 
about these so-called sovereigns.4 Through his wife Indradevi, de-
scendant of Pushkaraksha, he undoubtedly acquired rights over 
Sambhupura, where his two predecessors may not have exercised 
effective sovereignty. He continued to reside at Hariharalaya 
(Roldios), and in the first year of his reign, in 877, he undertook 
to construct north of the capital the Indratataka, the great artificial 
lake, which is now dry and in the center of which the monument 
of Lolei was later built. The lake served practical as well as ritual 
purposes: it was a reservoir for irrigation during the dry season. 
Thus, Indravarman set an example for his successors, whom we 
will see exercising great care in the planning of larger and larger 
reservoirs designed to retain running water during the rainy season 
and to distribute it at the proper time to the rice fields surrounding 
the capital.° In 879, he dedicated the six stuccoed brick towers of 
Preah K6® to statues of his parents, his maternal grandparents, 
and Jayavarman II and his wife, deified in the forms of Siva and 
Devi.’ Finally, in 881, he inaugurated the first great monument in 

--- [Page 133] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 111 
stone, built for the royal linga Indresvara, the name of which 
linked, according to custom, the name of the god Iévara (Siva) with 
that of the founding king. This was the pyramid of Bakong,® south 
of Preah K6. 
Indravarman’s rather short reign seems to have been peace-
ful. His authority extended from the region of Chaudoc, where he 
dedicated a vimana to Siva in the old sanctuary of Phnom Bayang,? 
to the region northwest of Ubon, from which comes a Buddhist 
inscription of 886 mentioning him as the reigning king.1° His 
teacher Sivasoma affirms that with regard to external affairs “his 
rule was like a crown of jasmine on the lofty heads of the kings 
of China, Champa and Java,” ™ a claim that is certainly greatly ex-
aggerated but gives some idea of the diplomatic horizon of Cam-
bodia in this period. 
At his death in 889, Indravarman received the posthumous 
name [évaraloka. He was succeeded by his son Yasovardhana, 
whose mother Indradevi was a descendant of the ancient royal 
families of Vyadhapura (Funan), Sambhupura, and Aninditapura. 
The new king thus restored the pre-Angkorian legitimacy ™ which 
had been interrupted by the reigns of Jayavarman II and III and of 
Indravarman. Moreover, his teacher was the Brahman Vamasiva, 
who belonged to the powerful priestly family assigned by Jayavar-
man II to the cult of the Devaraja?3 and who was connected, 
through his master Sivasoma, to the great Hindu philosopher 
Sankaracharya. 
The reign of Yasovarman | lived up to the promises of this 
double ancestry, and the building program he realized was later 
to serve as a model to his successors. 
The very year of his accession, 889, he had about a hundred : 
monasteries (asrama) built in the various provinces of his kingdom, 
near ancient sanctuaries or at places of frequent pilgrimage. Each 
monastery had a royal pavilion (rajakuti) reserved for the sovereign 
during his travels.14 We know a dozen locations of these lightly 
constructed monasteries, each marked by the presence of a stele 
bearing a Sanskrit inscription in ordinary characters on one face 
and on the other face the same text in a script of northern India 
(pre-Nagari) similar to the script introduced in Java a century 
earlier.’> The text of all of these “stone posters,” as Bergaigne has 
called them, is basically the same, differing from one stele to 
another only in the name of the divinity to which the monastery 

--- [Page 134] ---
112 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
was dedicated. After a detailed genealogy of Yasovarman, and a 
eulogy of this king who, if the panegyrist is to be believed, com-
bined physical power and skill with the highest degree of intelli-
gence, the inscriptions give the rules of the monasteries, uniformly 
called Yasodharasrama, in the form of a royal ordinance (asana). 
In 893, Yasovarman erected a sanctuary in the middle of the 
Indratataka, the great artificial lake dug by his father north of the 
capital. The sanctuary was composed of four brick towers designed, 
like those of Preah K6, to shelter the statues of the king’s parents 
and grandparents; ' it is the monument known today under the 
name Lolei, which seems to recall, as | have said earlier, the name 
of Hariharalaya. 
Yasovarman did not reside in this capital for long, and it is 
possible that from the moment of his accession he had planned 
to move the sanctuary of the Devaraja and the seat of the tem-
poral power: “Then,” says the inscription of Sdok Kak Thom,” 
“the king founded the city of YaSodharapura and took the Deva-
raja away from Hariharalaya to establish it in this capital. Then the 
_ king erected the Central Mountain. The Lord of Sivagrama [sur-
name of the teacher Vamasiva] erected the sacred linga in the 
middle.” 
For a long time it was thought that this text referred to the 
foundation of Angkor Thom and of the Bayon. But Philippe Stern, 
in a monograph that has become a classic,8 has proved that it is 
impossible that a monument built and decorated the way the 
Bayon is could date back to the end of the ninth century, and | 
for my part have shown that Angkor Thom as it appears today 
was built not earlier than the end of the twelfth century.19 The 
city founded by Yasovarman has been identified by Victor Golou-
bew with a vast quadrangle bounded on the west and south sides 
by a still visible double wall of earth and a moat now transformed 
into rice fields and on the east side by the river of Siem Reap, 
which was deflected from its original course.2° The center of the 
quadrangle is marked by the hill Phnom Bakhéng, crowned by a 
pyramidical structure built in a style that is certainly of this period; 
an inscription indicates that it sheltered the linga Yasodha-
resvara.?! 
What reasons provoked this relocation of the capital and 
determined the choice of the new location? 
The site of Hariharalaya, crowded with monuments built 
during the preceding reigns, undoubtedly did not lend itself to the 

--- [Page 135] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 113 
realization of the urban projects of the young king. Besides, if, 
as | believe, the temple of the loyal linga had to become the 
mausoleum of its founder, it had to be rebuilt at each change of 
reign, at the same time that the linga changed names or was re-
placed by a new linga.*4 That Yasovarman might want to surpass 
his father’s Indresvara by constructing a temple for the linga Yaso-
dharesvara on a natural hill would be in no way surprising. Now, 
of the three hills he had to choose from in the vicinity of Harihara-
laya, Phnom Bok was too high and awkward to mark the center 
of a city, and Phnom Krom was too close to the Great Lake. There 
remained Phnom Bakhéng. The height and dimensions of Phnom 
Bakhéng were well suited to the king’s purpose, and this is un-
doubtedly why he chose it. He was satisfied to construct a triple 
sanctuary dedicated to the Trimurti on each of the other two 
hills.23 
At the same time that Yagovarman laid out his capital and 
connected it to the old one by a road which went from its eastern 
entrance to the northeastern corner of the Indratataka, the artificial 
lake dug by his father, he constructed another artificial lake, an 
immense reservoir measuring seven kilometers long and 1800 
meters wide, northeast of the new city. This reservoir, named 
Yasodharatataka, was bordered by a strong earthen levee, in the 
four corners of which Yasgovarman placed steles with long San-
skrit inscriptions in pre-Nagari script reproducing his genealogy, 
developing his panegyric, and exalting his work.*4 On the southern 
bank of this immense body of water, now dry and known by the 
name Eastern Baray, the king had a series of monasteries built for 
the various sects 2 that his religious eclecticism permitted him to 
divide his favors among: the Sivaite Brahmanagrama for the Saivas, 
the Pagupatas, and the Tapasvins; 2° the Vishnuite Vaishnavasrama 
for the Pancharatras, the Bhagavatas, and the Sattvatas; 2” and per-
haps also a Buddhist Saugatasrama, the stele of which, moved 
from its original site, has been found at Tép Pranam in Angkor 
Thom.” 
It was also during the reign of YaSovarman that construction 
was begun on the Sivaite temples of Sikharigvara (the Siva of the 
summit”) at Preah Vihear and of Bhadregvara at Sivapura (Phnom 
Sandak).”? 
, The foundation of Yasodharapura, on the site that was to 
remain the capital of Cambodia until the fifteenth century, must 
suffice to illustrate the reign of Yasovarman, since the political 

--- [Page 136] ---
114 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
history of his reign is largely unknown. His two-script inscriptions 
cover a vast area, extending from lower Laos in the north 2° to the 
coast of the Gulf of Siam between the regions of Chanthabun 2 
and of Hatien in the south. A campaign in Champa that was at-
tributed to him not long ago on the basis of a text of the twelfth 
century really took place in the twelfth century.*3 The boundaries 
assigned to Yasovarman’s kingdom by an inscription of his nephew 
Rajendravarman *4 are the Sukshma-Kamratas (on the coast of 
Burma), the sea (Gulf of Siam), Champa, and China. The “China” 
must mean Nanchao, which a Chinese text expressly mentions as 
bordering Cambodia in the second half of the ninth century.> The 
mention of a naval victory “over thousands of barks with white 
sails’ © may refer to the Chams, or perhaps to some new Indo-
nesian raid. 
Yasovarman’s reign ended around 900,37 and he received 
the posthumous name Paramasivaloka.*8 
We know very little about his two sons who succeeded him. 
The elder, Harshavarman I, who made a donation in 912 in 
the ancient capital of Funan,?9 was the founder of the little temple-
mountain of Baksei Chamkrong at the foot of Phnom Bakhéng.*? 
He was undoubtedly still reigning in 922.47 At his death, which 
followed shortly afterwards, he received the posthumous name 
Rudraloka. 
About the younger brother, lsanavarman II, we know scarcely 
anything except his posthumous name Paramarudraloka. He ap-
parently was reigning in 925,42 but it is stated that in 921 4 one 
of his maternal uncles “left the city of Yasodharapura to reign at 
Ch’ok Gargyar, taking the Devaraja with him.” “ It seems likely 
that there was a usurpation on the part of this uncle, who reigned 
under the name Jayavarman (IV). A later text gives the date of this 
uncle’s accession as 928.* This was perhaps the date of the death 
of Isanavarman II, thanks to which the uncle was finally able to 
play the part of a legitimate sovereign. 
Jayavarman IV built his new residence on the present-day 
site of Koh Ker,*® in the vicinity of a large body of water designed 
by him. He decorated this site with monuments of colossal dimen-
sions; 47 the most remarkable of these is the great five-stepped 
pyramid, on the summit of which one still finds the pedestal of 
the royal linga Tribhuvanesvara. The inscriptions designate this 
linga by the name kamrateng jagat ta rajya, ‘the god who is the 

--- [Page 137] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 115 
royalty,” and describe the raising of the linga to the height of 
thirty-five meters as an unparalleled wonder.*® About twenty years 
after the construction of this splendid edifice, which undoubtedly 
constitutes an innovation in the conception of the Devaraja,*? 
the new capital was abandoned in its turn in favor of the old. 
Jayavarman !V—whose posthumous name was Paramasiva-
pada—married a sister of Yagovarman, Jayadevi,°° by whom he had 
a son who succeeded him in 941 >! under the name Harshavarman 
Il. Harshavarman II—whose posthumous name was Brahmaloka— 
reigned only two or three years. 
Another sister of Yagovarman, an older sister named Mahen-
dradevi, had married a certain Mahendravarman whom the geneal-
ogists connect to the remote dynasties of pre-Angkorian Cambodia 
in a loose and highly suspect fashion. He was chief of Bhavapura, 
that is, of the nucleus of ancient Chenla,-? which had continued 
to lead an independent existence after the death of Jayavarman I. 
A son, Rajendravarman, was born of this union. Rajendravarman 
was thus at the same time nephew of Jayavarman IV and of Yaso-
varman and the elder cousin (the inscriptions say “brother’’) of 
Harshavarman Il. 
The death of Harshavarman II, from natural causes or other-
wise, when he was still a child,9°4 brought Rajendravarman to power. 
Rajendravarman was himself very young, but his claims seem to 
| have been more substantial than those of his uncle and his cousin, 
for he came into the inheritance of Bhavapura through his father. 
He applied himself immediately to resuming the Angkorian tradi-
tion by returning to establish himself at YaSodharapura, bringing 
back the Devaraja.>> “Just as Kuga [son of Rama and Sita] had done 
for Ayodhya, he restored the sacred city of Yagodharapuri, which 
had been abandoned for a long time, and made it superb and 
charming by constructing a palace with a sanctuary of brilliant 
gold, like the palace of Mahendra on earth.” °© Perhaps this passage 
refers to a first state of the Phimeanakas, which is situated, as has 
been noted,” at the intersection of the north-south axis of Yaso-
dharapura (centered at Phnom Bakhéng) and the east-west axis of 
the Yasodharatataka (Eastern Baray)—therefore, at the intersection 
of the axes of the two great accomplishments of Yasovarman. 
Following the example of Yasovarman, who had built the 
sanctuary of Lolei, consecrated to the memory of his parents deified 
in the forms of Siva and Uma, in the middle of the Indratataka dug 

--- [Page 138] ---
116 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
by his father Indravarman,>® Rajendravarman in 952 built a temple 
known as the Eastern Mébon in the middle of the Yagodharatataka 
dug by his uncle Yasovarman. In its five brick towers, arranged in a 
quincunx, he placed statues of his parents in the forms of Siva and 
Uma, statues of Vishnu and Brahma, and, in the center, the royal 
linga Rajendresvara (perhaps placed here until it was possible to 
consecrate a special temple to it in the restored city). This complex 
was surrounded, as at Bakong, by eight towers sheltering eight 
lingas of Siva.°? Nine years later, in 961, perhaps this time in imita-
tion of Preah K6, built south of the Indratataka, he built, to the 
south of Yasodharatataka, the temple-mountain of Pré Rup, com-
prising (1) in the center, the linga Rajendrabhadresvara, the name 
of which evokes both that of the king and that of Bhadregvara, a 
sort of national divinity venerated in the ancient sanctuary of Vat 
Ph’u, cradle of the Kambujas; © (2) in the four corner towers of the 
upper terrace, another linga named Rajendravarmesvara, “erected 
in view of the prosperity of the king and as if this were his own 
royal essence,” an image of Vishnu Rajendravisvarupa in memory 
of his early ancestors, a Siva Rajendravarmadevegvara in memory 
of his predecessor Harshavarman II], and an Uma on behalf of his 
aunt Jayadevi, mother of Harshavarman II; and (3) the eight forms 
(murti) of Siva.® 
The monuments that are associated with the name of Rajen-
dravarman or that date from his reign are numerous. Most of them 
were sponsored by officials or high-ranking Brahmans who must 
have taken advantage of the tender age of the sovereign to assure 
themselves of privileged positions at the court. This sort of tutelage 
of the king by great dignitaries also continued in the following reign 
and undoubtedly for the same reason: the extreme youth of the — 
king at the time of his accession. Among the persons of note dur-
ing Rajendravarman’s reign we must cite in first place the Rajaku-
lamahamantri, ‘‘great adviser of the royal family,” who seems to 
have played the role of a regent or prime minister; © the Brahman 
Sivacharya, who had been in the service of the kings since I$ana-
varman II as a hotar (royal chaplain); ®* and finally the emissary 
(chara) Kavindrarimathana, whom the king charged with the con-
struction of his palace and of the sanctuary known as the Eastern 
Mébon.© Kavindrarimathana was a Buddhist, and he had Sanskrit 
inscriptions engraved on the three towers of the monument of Bat 
Chum founded under his supervision to shelter the images of the 

--- [Page 139] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 117 
Buddha, Vajrapani, and Praja. These inscriptions stand chronologi-
cally between the stele of Tép Pranam, which tells of the construc-
tion of a Buddhist agrama by Yasovarman,®® and the stele of Vat 
Sithor.6” They prove the continuity, in certain quarters, of Maha-
yanist Buddhism, from whose adherents the Sivaite sovereigns did 
not disdain to recruit their officials. 
All that epigraphy tells us about the political history of Cam-
bodia under Rajendravarman is that “his brilliance burned the 
enemy kingdoms beginning with Champa’; © this is probably an 
allusion to the expedition that he sent to Champa about 950, in 
the course of which, as we shall see presently,o? the Khmer armies 
removed the gold statue from the temple of Po Nagar at Nha-
trang. 
Rajendravarman’s reign ended in 968, and he received the 
posthumous name of Sivaloka. In the last year of his reign, 967, the 
temple of Tribhuvanamaheévara at I$varapura (Banteay Srei) was 
founded by Yajhavaraha, a grandson of Harshavarman | who, in the 
Khmer text of the stele of Banteay Srei, is known as “holy teacher,” 
i.e. (Steng An’) Vrah Guru.” It is possible that this was the Brahman 
scholar who was promoted in the following reign to the dignity of 
Kamrateng an’ Vrah Guru. In any case, a high dignitary bearing this 
title appears in numerous inscriptions of Jayavarman V and seems 
to have played a leading role at the beginning of the reign. 
Jayavarman V, son of Rajendravarman, was in fact very 
young when he came to power in 968, for it was not until six 
years later, in 974, that he finished his studies under the direction 
of the Vrah Guru.”! His reign of about thirty years, the political 
history of which is as little known as that of the preceding reigns, 
was occupied in part by the construction of a new residence, 
named Jayendranagari, work on which was in progress in 978.72 
Its center was distinguished by the “gold mountain” or the ‘gold 
horn” (Hemagiri, Hemasringagiri, classical designations of Meru). 
We are tempted to place this ‘gold mountain” at Ta Kéo, an in-
complete temple-mountain situated west of the western bank of 
the Eastern Baray,”3 but this monument cannot be earlier than the 
first years of the eleventh century. 
Jayavarman V gave his sister Indralakshmi in marriage to the 
Indian Brahman Divakarabhatta, who had been born in India on 
the banks of the Yamuna and who was the builder of various 
Sivaite structures.”“* During Jayavarman V's reign we see two “for-

--- [Page 140] ---
118 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
eign” Brahmans (paradeSa), undoubtedly Indians, buying land and 
founding Sivaite sanctuaries on it.> The great dignitaries revealed 
by the inscriptions were, in general, like the king himself, adherents 
of the official Sivaism. But, as during preceding reigns, Buddhism 
continued to be practiced by some officials of high rank. The 
inscriptions ”° give some idea of this Buddhism. From the doctrinal 
point of view, it presented itself as the heir of the Yogachara 
school” and the representative of the “pure doctrines of the 
void and of subjectivity” restored in Cambodia by the efforts of 
Kirtipandita, but in practice it borrowed part of its terminology 
from Hinduist rituals and involved above all the worship of the 
Bodhisattva Lokesvara.”8 
Jayavarman V died in 1001 and received the posthumous 
name Paramaviraloka. He was succeeded by his nephew Udayi-
dityavarman I, who reigned only a few months.”9 
The reigns from Indravarman to Jayavarman V, which oc-
cupied more than a century, constituted on the whole a period 
of grandeur that corresponded in part to a period of anarchy in 
the history of China lasting through the end of the T’ang and 
throughout the Five Dynasties. During this stable period of its 
history, Angkorian civilization, which was to play such an im-
portant role in the cultural evolution of the central Indochinese 
Peninsula and the brilliance of which was to exercise such a great 
influence on the Thai kingdoms of the Mekong and the Menam, 
assumed a distinctive form and fixed the characteristics that were 
to remain its own until its decline in the fourteenth century. It is 
not my intention to describe this civilization in detail here— 
especially since the work has already been started by Etienne 
Aymonier with the sources he has at his command.® Inscriptions 
by their very nature are incomplete sources; they tell us nothing 
directly about the life of the people, their material civilization,®! 
their beliefs and customs. We must wait until the end of the 
thirteenth century, until the eve of Cambodia’s decline, to find a 
living picture of Cambodia and its inhabitants in the account of 
the Chinese envoy Chou Ta-kuan. The inscriptions from the ninth 
to eleventh centuries tell us mostly about the high clergy of the 
official religion and the world of the court insofar as their activity 
was oriented toward the construction of religious edifices. No 
archives or documents written on hides or palm leaves are extant, 
and because all Khmer monuments, except for a few bridges, are 

--- [Page 141] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 119 
religious edifices, the inscriptions engraved on these monuments 
are above all religious in character and we are obliged to study 
Angkorian civilization through this distorting mirror. 
The king,®2 “master of all from the highest to the lowest,” 
was the pivot of the whole political organization of the state, the 
source and sum of all authority. But we must not go so far as to 
represent the sovereign reigning at Angkor as an absolute despot, 
ruling only to suit his own pleasure. On the contrary, he was bound 
by the rules of the princely caste and by the maxims of policy and 
royal conduct; he was the guardian of the law and established 
order, the final judge of cases litigants wished to submit to his | 
decision.®83 The inscriptions, which by their very nature inform us 
mostly about the religious side of Khmer civilization, represent 
the king as the protector of religion, the preserver of religious 
establishments that were entrusted to his care by donors. He per-
forms the sacrifices and all the ritual ceremonies that are expected 
to bring divine favor to the country, defends it against foreign 
enemies, and insures domestic peace by imposing on everyone the 
obligation to respect the social order, that is, the division between 
the various castes or corporate bodies. We do not know for cer-
tain whether he was considered the ultimate owner of all the 
land of his kingdom, but we see him distributing unoccupied land 
and confirming land transactions. The sovereign, for whom reign-
ing consists of ‘devouring the kingdom” (as a governor “devours” 
his province), appears less as an administrator than as a god on 
earth. His capital, with its walls and its moat, represents the universe 
in miniature, surrounded by the chain of mountains of Cha-
kravala and by the ocean.® Its center is marked by a temple-moun-
tain that represents Meru, and on the summit of this temple-
mountain is the Devaraja (kamrateng jagat ta rajya), the royal linga 
received from Siva through the intermediary of a Brahman.® We 
do not know whether this linga that contained the “royal essence,” 
the “moi subtil” of the king, remained the same linga throughout 
the successive reigns 8 or whether, on the other hand, each of the 
various lingas consecrated by the kings upon their accession and 
bearing their names (Indregvara, YaSodharesvara, Rajendresvara, 
etc.) was in its turn the Devaraja. Each king who had the time and 
means built his temple-mountain in the center of his capital, and 
we have some reason to think that at his death this personal tem-
ple became his mausoleum.®” When he died, the sovereign re-

--- [Page 142] ---
120 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
ceived a posthumous name indicating the heaven (svargata) to 
which he had gone and the god in whom he had been absorbed. 
The government of the country was in the hands of an aris-
tocratic oligarchy, and the great offices were held by members of 
the royal family. The offices of chaplain of the king, officiating 
priest of the Devaraja, and tutor of the young princes were re-
served to members of great priestly families, within which offices 
were transmitted in the female line, the normal heir being the 
son of the sister or the younger brother. The Brahmanic families 
were Often related to the royal family: the marriages between 
Brahmans and Kshatriyas seem to have been frequent, these two 
castes, representing the intellectual element and Indian culture, 
constituting a class separate from and superior to the masses. We 
need not conclude, however, that this aristocracy was different 
racially from the rest of the population; Khmer names were com-
mon among the royal family and even among the priests. The 
inscriptions emanating from this aristocracy, the only literary works 
that have come down to us, give an idea of the extent of its San-
skrit culture, which must have been renewed from time to time 
by the arrival of Brahmans from India, already. noted. 
The inscriptions inform us of a whole hierarchy of officials, 
which implies a highly developed administration. There were 
ministers, army leaders, advisers, inspectors, provincial heads, dis-
trict heads, village chiefs, chiefs of the population, chiefs of ware-
houses, chiefs of corvée labor, and many other officials whose 
titles are more or less clear. These officials were divided into four 
categories, but these categories are not clearly defined. 
We know very little about the life of the peasants and the 
villagers except that they must have been impressed in great num-
bers as servants in the service of the sanctuaries and monasteries 
or hermitages with which the piety of the ruling classes continually 
covered the countryside. The inscriptions give interminable lists of 
names of these slaves about whom we know nothing but their 
names, which are often very uncomplimentary epithets (“dog,” 
“cat,” “detestable,” “stinking’”) that signify the scorn in which 
these people were held. These names have weathered the ravages 
of time and been passed on to posterity. 
The religion of the governing classes was never unified.% 
In the ninth and tenth centuries, Sivaism predominated. It was not 

--- [Page 143] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 121 
until the twelfth century that, parallel to what was then occurring 
in India, Vishnuism became powerful enough to give rise to great 
establishments of the importance of Angkor Wat. Buddhism al-
ways had some adherents, and we shall see great kings like Surya-
varman | and especially Jayavarman VII sponsor it officially in the 
following centuries. This reciprocal tolerance, moving at times 
toward a true syncretism, which was expressed in sculpture and 
epigraphy 8 and was not peculiar to Cambodia,” is explained by 
the very structure of society in Farther India. As Sylvain Lévi has 
rightly observed: “In the Indochinese Peninsula, in Indonesia, the 
presence of the Brahmanic religion in no way threatened the exist-
ence of Buddhism. Sivaism and Vishnuism, like Buddhism, were 
imported things, foreign to the land. The kings, the court, the 
nobility, were able to adopt them as an elegant and refined cul-
ture; it was not a civilization that penetrated deeply into the 
masses. Social life there continued on without regard to Manu and 
the other Brahmanic codes. But in India it was otherwise: Brah-
manism was responsible for social order; the two were identi-
cal.” 91 This explains India’s intolerance with regard to Buddhism, 
a phenomenon of which there is no evidence in Cambodia until 
the thirteenth century, after the Buddhist fervor of Jayavarman VII. | 
From the ninth to the end of the twelfth century, an un-
interrupted line of evidence shows the existence of worship of 
images that have the attributes of great figures of the Brahmanic 
and Buddhist pantheons but bear names that recall the titles and 
appearance of human beings—dead or even living. 
Only a few of the innumerable statues of Vishnu, Siva, Hari-
hara, Lakshmi, and Parvati and of the Bodhisattvas that ancient 
Cambodia has bequeathed us are “impersonal” representations of 
these great figures of the Indian pantheon. The great majority of 
these images are of kings, princes, or great dignitaries represented 
with the traits of the god into which they have been or will be 
absorbed at the end of their earthly existence. The names borne 
by the statues, usually composed by fusing the name of the human 
counterpart with that of the god, indicate strongly that what is 
involved here is a personal cult. 
Most of the great Khmer monuments were consecrated to 
this aristocratic cult. They did not originate from popular devotion; 

--- [Page 144] ---
122 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
they were royal, princely, or mandarin structures which served as 
mausoleums and in which the worship of deceased parents and 
ancestors was conducted. They were mausoleums that could be 
built even during the lifetime and under the direction of the indi-
viduals who were to be adored there.”4 
The purpose of these structures explains their architectural 
symbolism. The gods of India reside on the summits and move 
about in flying palaces. The use of the pyramid in architecture is 
evidently an attempt to evoke a mountain. For want of a high 
pyramid, five sanctuaries arranged in a quincunx recall the five 
summits of Mount Meru. As for the flying palaces, it is sufficient 
that a basement be decorated with garudas or birds forming 
atlantes for the idea to be suggested immediately. 
Such are the essential traits of this civilization that, in the 
ninth and tenth centuries, with the temples of Kulén, Roltios, and 
Bakhéng and the great monuments of Koh Ker, Eastern Mébon, 
Pré Rup, Banteay Srei, and the Khleang, marks a high point from 
the artistic point of view that will be surpassed only by Angkor Wat. 
We have no information about what happened in this period 
in the lower Menam Basin, site of the ancient kingdom of Dva-
ravati. The sole document that comes from this area is a Sanskrit 
and Khmer inscription found on the island of Ayutthaya.% Dated 
the year 937, it tells about a line of princes of Chanasapura: 9” the 
first of the line was the king Bhagadatta; then, after an undeter-
mined number of generations, we hear of Sundaraparakrama, his 
son Sundaravarman, and finally the kings Narapatisimhavarman 
and Mangalavarman, both sons of Sundaravarman. Mangalavarman, 
the author of the inscription, consecrated a statue of Devi, a like-
ness of his mother. These names are not found in the epigraphy of 
Cambodia, but the inscription in the Khmer language, which gives 
a list of slaves, proves that three-quarters of a century before the 
area was incorporated into Cambodia the Khmers had replaced 
the Mon population that had occupied it in the seventh century.% 
2. THE CHAM DYNASTY OF INDRAPURA 
In Champa in 875, after a twenty-year gap in documentation, 
we are suddenly presented with a new dynasty reigning in the 
north,2? at Indrapura in the modern province of Quang-nam, and 
at the same time the Chinese historians change the name of the 

--- [Page 145] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 123 
country once more—this time to Chan-ch’eng,1 “the Chan city’ 
(Champapura). 
The founder of the dynasty of Indrapura, who took the name 
of Indravarman (II) at his accession, was called by his personal 
name Lakshmindra Bhiimisvara Gramasvamin. This was done so 
that he could pass for a descendant of the mythical ancestor 
Uroja; cloaking his grandfather Rudravarman and his father Bha-
dravarman with the title of king, he insists in his inscriptions that 
“the royalty was given to him by neither his grandfather nor his 
father but he assumed the sovereignty of Champa solely by means 
of destiny and thanks to the merit he acquired in numerous pre-
vious existences.” Indravarman I] may have been designated king, 
at the request of the great men of the kingdom, by Vikrantavarman 
II], who died without posterity.° He seems to have had a peace-
ful reign. In 877 Indravarman II sent an embassy to China. Two 
years before, in 875, he had constructed a great Buddhist monu-
ment that is the first evidence of the existence of Mahayana Bud-
dhism in Champa: this was the monastery of Lakshmindralokegvara, 
the name of which recalls the personal name of the founder. The 
Buddhist ruins of Déng-ducng southeast of Mi-sdn have been 
identified with this monastery.1° 
At his death, Indravarman II received the posthumous name 
of Paramabuddhaloka. He was succeeded by his nephew Jaya 
Simhavarman I, for whom we have only two dates, 898 and 903, 
given by the inscriptions that deal with the erection of statues of 
apotheosis made during his reign.1°3 Around the same time, a 
relative of the queen Tribhuvanadevi, Po Klung Pilih Rajadvara, 
who was to continue to occupy high offices under the three fol-
lowing kings, went on a pilgrimage (siddhayatra) to Java (Yavadvi-
papura).'°4 Perhaps this was the beginning of the Javanese influ-
ence on Cham art that is found in this period at Khudng-my and 
at Mi-sdn,195 
The inscription left by this official tells of the successor to 
Jaya Simhavarman I, his son Jayasaktivarman. We know nothing 
else about this successor except that he must have had a very 
short reign. Bhadravarman II, who reigned next but whose family 
ties with his predecessor are not known, seems to have had a 
troubled accession. He was reigning in 908 and in 910.1% 
Bhadravarman Il’s son, Indravarman III, whose literary and 
philosophic knowledge is praised in epigraphy,’ consecrated a 

--- [Page 146] ---
124 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
golden statue of Bhagavati in 918 at Po Nagar in Nha-trang. Dur-
ing his reign, which lasted more than forty years, he had to 
repel a Khmer invasion around 950 in the region of Nha-trang; 18 
the gold statue was stolen by the invaders “dominated by cupidity 
and other vices,” but the Khmer armies of Rajendravarman finally 
suffered a bloody defeat. Before his death, which took place 
around 959, Indravarman III had time to renew relations with 
China, which had been interrupted during the period of anarchy 
lasting through the end of the T’ang and throughout the Five Dy-
nasties: in 951, 958,19 and 959, embassies were sent.to the court 
of the Later Chou. 
Indravarman IIl’s successor, Jaya Indravarman I, in 960 sent 
presents to the first emperor of the Sung, whose accession coin-
cided with his. Five embassies sent at intervals from 962 to 971 
prove the regularity of the relations between the two countries." 
In 965, Jaya Indravarman | restored the sanctuary of Po Nagar that 
had been pillaged fifteen years previously by the Khmers and 
installed a stone image of the goddess there." 
In 972 a new king appeared on the throne of Champa. We 
have no inscriptions for him, but his name, judging from the 
Chinese transcription, must have been Paramesvaravarman.'* He 
showed great punctuality in relations with China, to which he sent 
no less than seven embassies between 972 and 979. He was the 
first Cham king to have trouble with the newly independent Viet-
namese kingdom of Dai Cé Viét. That state had shortly before 
liberated itself from Chinese domination, and after the founder of 
the independent Dinh dynasty had been assassinated in 979, a 
member of the Ng6 dynasty took refuge in Champa and asked 
Paramegvaravarman to help him reconquer the throne that his 
family had occupied from 939 to 965. A sea-borne expedition, or-
ganized in 979, was approaching Hoa-lu, the Dinh capital," when 
it was destroyed by a gale that spared only the junk of the Cham 
king.176 
In the following year, a palace intrigue brought a high digni-
tary named Lé Hoan to the throne of Dai Cé Viét. Lé Hoan, founder 
of the early Lé dynasty, immediately sent an embassy to Champa. | 
When King Paramegvaravarman made the mistake of holding the 
envoy of Dai Cé Viét as a prisoner, L@é Hoan organized a retaliatory 
expedition that cost the life of the Cham sovereign and led to the 
destruction of the Cham capital in 982. The new king, whose name 

--- [Page 147] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 125 
in Chinese characters seems to correspond to Indravarman (IV), 
left Indrapura just in time to take refuge in the southern part of 
his kingdom, from which in 985 he asked in vain for aid from 
the emperor of China. 
During this time, in the north of the country a Vietnamese 
named Luu Ké T6ng seized power. In 983 he successfully resisted 
an attempted invasion by Lé Hoan. On the death of Indravarman 
IV, he officially proclaimed himself king of Champa, and in 986 he 
notified the court of China of his accession. This domination by a 
foreigner led to an exodus of inhabitants, a certain number of 
whom took refuge at Hainan and Kwangchou.!” 
In 988, the Chams rallied around one of their own. They 
placed him on the throne at Vijaya, in modern Binh-dinh, and 
when the Vietnamese usurper Luu Ké Téng died in the following 
year, they proclaimed him king under the name Harivarman Il. 
Scarcely had he been installed when he had to face a new Viet-
namese invasion in the north of his kingdom in 990, After a short 
period of peace, marked by the erection of an Isanabhadresvara 
at Mi-sdn in 991,118 by an exchange of presents with the emperor 
of China in 992, and by the liberation in the same year of 360 
Cham prisoners detained at Tongking, hostilities with Lé Hoan 
began again, this time because of the activities of the Chams, 
who in 995 and 997 multiplied their raids along their northern 
frontier. 
Harivarman II reinstalled himself at Indrapura, but his suc-
cessor, who reigned from 999 and for whom we have only an 
incomplete name, Yang Pu Ku Vijaya Sri—,"9 finally abandoned 
this extremely vulnerable capital in the year 1000 and established 
himself at Vijaya, in the region of Binh-dinh.’2° Champa never 
ceased to be subjected to the increasingly strong pressure of its 
neighbor to the north, and from the eleventh century, in spite 
of some revivals, the history of Champa was to be no more than 
the history of the retreat of Indian civilization before that of China. : 
3. THE JAVANESE KINGDOM OF MATARAM 
The decline of the power of the Buddhist Sailendras in cen-
tral Java is indicated, as we have seen,!2! by the presence near 
Prambanan of a Sivaite inscription of 863 that perhaps relates to 
the cult of Agastya.124 The construction of the Hindu monuments 

--- [Page 148] ---
126 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
of the Prambanan group 1 in the beginning of the tenth century 
confirms this evidence. But it does not necessarily follow that 
Buddhism disappeared completely from this region: the Buddhist 
monuments of the Borobudur,’44 Plaosan, and Sajivan’?” prove 
the contrary, and there are numerous indications that the recipro-
cal tolerance between Buddhism and Hinduism, and in some 
cases the syncretism of the two, was as marked in Java as in 
Cambodia.126 
The embassies sent to China by She-p’o in 860 and 873 are 
the principal sources of the information given by the New History 
of the T’ang on the country and its inhabitants: 127 
The people make fortifications of wood and even the largest 
houses are covered with palmleaves. They have couches of ivory and 
mats of the outer skin of bamboo. 
The land produces tortoise-shell, gold and silver, rhinoceros-horns 
and ivory.... They have letters and are acquainted with astronomy.... 
In this country there are poisonous girls; when one has inter-
course with them, he gets painful ulcers and dies, but his body does 
not decay.128 
The king lives in the town of Djava (Djapa), but his ancestor 
Ki-yen had lived more to the east at the town Pa-lu-ka-si.129 On different 
sides there are twenty eight small countries, all acknowledging the su-
premacy of Djava. There are thirty two high ministers and the Da-tso-
kan-hiung is the first of them.130 
From epigraphy we hear of: 
in 856-60, Lokapala, who is sometimes identified with the 
following; 131 
in 863-82, Rakai Kayuwangi, also known as Sajjanotsava-
tunga; 12 
in 887, Rakai Gurunwangi, perhaps identical with the pre-
ceding; 13 
in 890, Rakai Limus dyah Devendra, reigning perhaps in the 
east; 134 
in 896, Rakai Watuhumalang.!> 
All these princes left inscriptions in the Kedu Plain near 
Prambanan. It was in this region, where the modern city of 
Jogjakarta is located, that the center of the state of Mataram was 
located. The name Mataram, applied retrospectively to the king-
dom of Sanjaya,!26 was adopted in the tenth century as the official 
name of the country that reunited the center and east of the island 
under the same authority in order to indicate that the state was 

--- [Page 149] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 127 
no longer confined to eastern Java. Since all the monuments of 
this southern region are of a funerary character, it is possible that 
the kraton, or residence of the sovereign, was located farther 
north. 137 
With the king named Balitung we leave a period that is 
in general very poorly known and step once more onto firmer 
ground. Certain indications lead us to think that Balitung was 
Originally from the eastern part of the island, and that he acquired 
rights to the center by marriage.138 |t is in the inscriptions of his 
reign, which occur at intervals between 899 and 910,729 that the 
name Mataram appears for the first time. It seems that Balitung 
had plans to resume, by means of real or fictitious dynastic ties, 
the Sivaite tradition interrupted by the episode of the Buddhist 
Sailendras.140 
Balitung was succeeded around 913 ™! by King Daksha, who 
had appeared in the charters of his predecessor as one of the 
highest dignitaries (rakryan ri Hino, mapatih i Hino).14 Like Bali-
tung, Daksha joined the center and east of Java under his authority 
and resided in the region of Jogjakarta. Perhaps it was he who 
had the monument of Loro Jonggrang built at Prambanan as the 
funerary temple of his predecessor,'43 whose eastern origin would 
explain the affinity of the art of this group with that of the eastern 
part of the island.™4 In any case, it was he who instituted an era 
of Sanjaya that begins with March 18, 717, and is attested to by 
two inscriptions, one dated 910 (before his accession) and the 
other 913.145 
The reign of Daksha was short, and so were those of his 
successors Tulodong and Wawa. 
Tulodong, for whom we know the dates 919-21, seems also 
to have reigned over both the center and the east.146 In 919 the 
name Rakai Halu, Lord Sindok,'*” appears in one of his inscriptions. 
Sindok, probably a grandson of Daksha, was to mount the throne 
ten years later. 
Wawa reigned in 927-28.'% The highest dignitary during 
his reign was still Sindok. The original location of the epigraphic 
documents indicates that during Wawa’s reign the administrative 
center of the kingdom was moved to the east; however, we can-
not be sure that the central part of the island had already been 
abandoned. In any case, his inscriptions come exclusively from 
the east. 

--- [Page 150] ---
128 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
It has been claimed, rightly or wrongly, that around 927 
Wawa became a priest under the name of Vagisvara.49 If he did, 
he may have continued to maintain nominal power, for the first 
act of his successor Sindok !° is dated 929. 
The accession of Sindok marks the definitive transfer of the 
capital to the east, between the mountains Smeru and Wilis. This 
move is evidenced in archaeology by the decline and then aban-
donment of the center and by the multiplication of structures in 
the east. The reason for this move is not completely clear.' One 
scholar has thought that an earthquake or epidemic devastated 
the center of the island.2 Others have put forth the hypothesis 
that a viceroy in the east became independent and absorbed the 
suzerain state,53 as Chenla or the principality of the Kambujas 
had done with regard to Funan. And still others have envisioned a 
return to the offensive on the part of the Sailendras from Sumatra 
or have seen at least a desire of the Javanese sovereigns to remove 
themselves from dangerous rivals who were always ready to lay 
claim to the ancient cradle of their power.’>* One thing is certain: 
abandonment of the center of Java did not mean a spiritual break; 
the kings reigning in the east continued to invoke the gods of 
Mataram. 
Although Sindok was probably the grandson of Daksha, as 
| have said, up to the beginning of the thirteenth century Sindok, 
under his reign name Sri Iéana(vikramadharmottungadeva), was 
always considered the founder of Javanese power in the east of 
the island. The result of his move of the capital to the east was a 
new incursion of Srivijaya in the west of the island, where we see 
the Sumatran kingdom re-enthroning a prince of Sunda in 942.1 
The inscriptions of Sindok, which number about twenty and ap-
pear at intervals between 929 and 948,'° constitute one of the 
most valuable sources for the study of the organization and insti-
tutions of Java. They come from the upper Brantas Valley, and we 
can undoubtedly attribute to Sindok some of the structures in this 
region (at Belahan, Gunung Gangsir, Sangariti).’°” None of these 
structures, however, is comparable to the monuments built by 
his predecessors in the Kedu Plain. 
The Javanese Ramayana was composed a little later in Sin-
dok’s reign,'°® and, in spite of the clearly Hindu character of his 
inscriptions and structures, we still attribute to his reign the com-
position, by Sambharasuryavarana, of the work named Sang hyang 
Kamahayanikan,'59 a Tantric Buddhist treatise that is infinitely 

--- [Page 151] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 129 
valuable for the understanding of Javanese Buddhism and the in-
terpretation of architecture and iconography. 
According to an inscription of Airlanga of 1041,16° Sindok 
was succeeded by his daughter [sanatungavijaya, who was the 
wife of a certain Lokapala. 
Their son and successor was Makutavamsavardhana, about 
whom we know nothing except that his daughter Mahendradatta, 
as we shall see, married a prince of Bali. 
The island of Bali from the eighth or ninth century shows 
traces of Buddhism that are perhaps of Javanese or Sumatran 
origin but could also have been brought directly from India. The 
first dated documents appear in Bali shortly before the accession 
of Sindok in Java. The inscriptions of 896 and 911 do not bear the 
name of any king, but that of 914 is in the name of the adhipati 
Sri Kesarivarma.'® The first inscriptions of Ugrasena (915-39), who 
reigned at Simhamandava or Simhadvalapura, appear in the fol-
lowing year. These inscriptions reveal an Indo-Balinese society 
that was independent of Java, used a dialect peculiar to the island, 
and practiced Buddhism and Sivaism at the same time.1 
In 953, an inscription mentions a sovereign who had among 
his names that of Agni. 
Beginning in 955, Balinese epigraphy emanates from a dy-
nasty whose kings all bear names ending in -varmadeva: 163 
955, Tabanendravarmadeva and Subhadrikavarmadevi: 
960, Chandrabhayasimhavarmadeva; 
975, Janasadhuvarmadeva; 
984, Sri Vijayamahadevi.164 
Then, from 989 to 1011 the inscriptions are in the name of 
the king Udayana (Dharmodayanavarmadeva) and the queen 
Mahendradatta (Gunapriyadharmapatni), who was, as we have 
just seen, the daughter of Makutavamsavardhana, the grandson , 
of Sindok. This Javanese marriage resulted in greater penetration 
of Hinduism in Bali and the introduction of Javanese culture, 
particularly of Tantrism. It also resulted in the birth in 1001 1© of 
Airlanga, the future Javanese sovereign whose history will be 
told in the next chapter. 
The most ancient information of Chinese origin concerning 
the island of Borneo (P’o-ni),'6 which, it will be recalled, had 
been touched by Indian culture very early, is from this period 
(977). 
But let us return to Java. 

--- [Page 152] ---
130 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Around 990 a son or son-in-law of Makutavamsa, Dharma-
vamgéa Tguh Anantavikrama,'®” came to power. It was during his 
reign, in 996, that the poem Virataparva was composed. Dharma-
vamsa inaugurated an aggressive policy with regard to Srivijaya. 
At least that is what appears from the information given in 992 
to the court of China by the ambassadors from Java and Srivijaya, 
who speak of the invasion of San-fo-ch’i by She-p’o and of con-
tinual hostilities between the two countries.'® We will see in the 
following chapter that this Javanese aggression around 990 1 
probably resulted in a counteroffensive on the part of the Suma-
tran kingdom. There are good reasons for attributing the Suma-
tran expedition of 1016-17, the death of the Javanese king, and the 
destruction of his residence ultimately to this Javanese aggression. 
4, SAN-FO-CH’I, OR THE SUMATRAN KINGDOM OF SRIVIJAYA 
In a passage of his Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, N. J. 
Krom has characterized very well the measures which the Sumatran 
kingdom felt forced to take in order to protect its privileged posi-
tion. The choice of a port for the seamen in this part of the archi-
pelago was limited. The port had to fulfill the following conditions: 
it had to be a center possessing a certain degree of civiliza-
tion; it had to be well located geographically; it had to have a 
well-protected harbor, for example, at the mouth of a river; and 
it had to have a safe anchorage. But the possession and defense 
of such a port of call was not possible without perpetual recourse 
to force. To preserve his monopoly, the master of this port had to 
neutralize his rivals or make vassals of them; this was necessary 
in order to maintain the upper hand over the commerce of the 
straits and make his influence felt on both shores. 
For those astute merchants, the Arabo-Persians,’”! it was 
clearly possession of both sides of the straits that constituted the 
power of the maharaja of Zabag. Throughout their accounts, the 
affirmation that the maharaja reigned simultaneously over Kalah 
(on the Malay Peninsula north of the Isthmus of Kra) 72 and over 
Sribuza (Srivijaya = Palembang = Sumatra) is repeated like a re-
frain. Here is what one of them wrote around 916: !73 
The city of Zabag faces in the direction of China. The distance be-
tween the two is a month by sea, and even less if the winds are favorable. 
The king of this city is known by the name of maharaja....It is said that 

--- [Page 153] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 131 
the circumference is 900 parasangs.174 This king is, in addition, the sover-
eign of a great number of islands that extend for 1,000 parasangs and 
even more. Among the states over which he rules is the island called 
Sribuza, whose circumference is 400 parasangs, and the island called Rami 
[Achin, north of Sumatra], the circumference of which is 800 para-
sangs....Also part of the possessions of the maharaja is the maritime 
state of Kalah, which is situated halfway between China and Arabia. ... 
It is to this port that the ships of Oman come, and it is from this port 
that the ships leave for Oman. The authority of the maharaja is felt in 
these islands. The island where he resides is as fertile as land can be, 
and the inhabited places follow upon one another without interruption. 
A reliable source reports that when the cocks of this country crow at sun-
rise, as they do in Arabia, they answer one another over stretches extend-
ing up to 100 parasangs and more, because the villages are contiguous 
and follow on one another without interruption.... 
In 995, the geographer Mas’udi spoke in grandiloquent terms 
of the “kingdom of the maharaja, king of the islands of Zabag, 
among which are Kalah and Sribuza and other islands in the China 
Sea. All their kings are entitled maharaja. This empire of the ma-
haraja has an enormous population and innumerable armies. Even 
with the fastest vessel, no one can tour these islands, all of which 
are inhabited, in two years. Their king possesses more kinds of 
perfume and aromatic substances than are possessed by any other 
king. His lands produce camphor, aloes, cloves, sandalwood, 
musk, cardamom, cubeb, etc... .’” 179 
For the Chinese, Shih-li-fo-shih has become San-fo-ch’i,!”6 
which from 904-905 on sent numerous embassies to the court of 
China. All the commerce of China and India is said to have passed 
through this uncontested master of the straits.17”7 After having be-
come a great economic power, however, Srivijaya seems to have 
neglected the spiritual values that attracted the Chinese pilgrim 
I|-ching there in the seventh century. In fact, while the Javanese 
kings were covering their island with religious buildings, the 
Srivijayan sovereigns were preoccupied with superintending the 
traffic of the straits rather than with building lasting monuments, 
and they have left us only insignificant brick towers and a very 
small number of inscriptions. 
Among the Srivijayan kings, the History of the Sung 178 tells 
us of Si-li Hu-ta-hsia-li-tan in 960 and of Shih-li Wu-yeh in 962; 
both these names are probably transcriptions of the same name, 
Sri Udayaditya(varman).179 The accounts of embassies to China in 
971, 972, 974, and 975 do not give any king’s name; embassies 

--- [Page 154] ---
132 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
| of 980 and 983 are said to come from a King Hsia-ch’ih, in Malay 
Haji, which is simply a royal title. It was during the reign of this 
king in 983 that “the priest Fa-yi, returning from India where he 
had been seeking sacred books, arrived at San-fo-ch’i and there 
met the Indian priest Mi-mo-lo-shih-li [i.e., Vimalagri], who after 
a short conversation entrusted him with a petition in which he 
expressed the desire to go to the Middle Kingdom and translate 
sacred books there.” 189 
“In 988,” says the History of the Sung, “an ambassador ar-
rived for the purpose of presenting tribute. During the winter of 
992, it was learned from Canton that this ambassador, who had 
left the capital of China two years before, had learned in the 
south that his country had been invaded by She-p’o and, as a 
consequence, had remained in Canton for a year. In the spring of 
992, the ambassador went to Champa with his ship, but since he 
did not hear any good news there, he returned to China and 
requested that an imperial decree be promulgated placing San-
fo-ch’i under the protection of China.” 
We have seen that the Javanese envoys of the same year, 
992, brought corroborative information to China, saying that their 
country was continually at war with San-fo-ch’i, but what they 
did not say was that the aggression came from Java.'®! Perhaps it 
was the more or less effective protection of China, or perhaps 
only its tacit consent, that encouraged Srivijaya to undertake 
reprisals on Java which will be discussed in the following chapter. 
5. BURMA 
For the period covered by this chapter, the Burmese chroni-
cles continue to furnish, for Pagan as well as for Pegu, lists of | 
kings 182 that are unverifiable because of the lack of cross-refer-
ences in epigraphy or Chinese annals. The dependence of these 
chronicles on legend and folklore is obvious. For example, they 
place a usurper, Nyaung-u Sé-rahan, on the throne of Pagan in 
: 931. He was an old gardener who supposedly killed the king 
Theingo (Singho) because the latter had picked cucumbers in his 
garden.'83 The same story, however, has been used for the origin 
of the present Cambodian dynasty, and other versions of it are known.184 , | 
According to the Burmese chronicles,'®* the gardener-usurper 
was in turn overthrown in 964 by Kunshé Kyaungphyu, a repre-

--- [Page 155] ---
Kingdoms of Angkor and Srivijaya 133 
sentative of the legitimate line who took over as his wives the 
three queens of his predecessor. But in 986, the two brothers of 
the gardener and the two first queens lured this prince into a 
monastery and forced him to don monk’s robes. After a reign of 
six years, the elder brother, Kyiso, perished in a hunt. The younger 
brother, Sokkate, who succeeded him in 992, was killed in 1044 
by a son of Kunshé Kyaungphyu by his third queen. This son was 
the famous Andratha (Aniruddha), whose history will be told in 
the following chapter. 

--- [Page 156] ---
CHAPTER IX 
THREE GREAT KINGS: SURYAVARMAN | 
IN CAMBODIA, AIRLANGA IN JAVA, AND 
ANORATHA IN BURMA 
First Three Quarters of the Eleventh Century 
1. | CAMBODIA: SURYAVARMAN | (1002-50) AND THE 
EXPANSION TO THE WEST; UDAYADITYAVARMAN II (1050-66) 
Neither Khmer epigraphy nor Chinese documents give a hint 
about the developments that led to the accession in Cambodia of 
Siryavarman |, that sovereign. of the sun race whose family ties 
with his predecessors may have been entirely fabricated by the of-
ficial genealogists. The late chronicles of the principalities of the 
upper Menam Valley, written in Chiangmai in the fifteenth to six-
teenth centuries, deal only with the expansion of Khmer power in 
the Menam Basin; it would in any case be unwise to give too much 
credence to this data. 
, The Khmer epigraphy of the first ten years of the eleventh 
century shows three kings reigning simultaneously. The relation-
ship between these kings is not clear, but they seem to have been 
antagonists. 
The nephew of Jayavarman V, Udayadityavarman I, whose 
only two known inscriptions come from Koh Ker? and Mlu Prei,? 
came to the throne in 1001. In that same year, a prince bearing 
the name Suryavarman and the title kamtvan, which apparently 
denotes royal ancestry in the female line,? is mentioned in an 
inscription from Sambor on the Mekong?* and another from the 
vicinity of Kompong Thom. In the following year, 1002, we have 
two more of his inscriptions from the same region.® A King Jaya-
Viravarman appears from 1003 to 1006; according to his inscrip-
tions,” he had been established on the throne of Angkor since 
1002. After this, Suryavarman became the uncontested master in 
the capital, and in 1011 he had the oath of allegiance, followed by 
long lists of names of dignitaries in the form of signatures,’ en-
graved on the inner surface of the entrance pavilion of the Royal 
Palace. 

--- [Page 157] ---
Three Great Kings 135 
We can gather from these inscriptions 9 that the accession of 
Udayadityavarman | in 1001 led to rivalry between Jayaviravarman, 
who reigned at Angkor at least from 1003 to 1006, and Suryavar-
man, who had established himself in the east. The inscriptions 
indicate that between 1005 and 1007 Suryavarman led a large-
scale expedition in which sacred places were damaged.!? “He 
seized the kingdom from a king in the midst of a host of other 
kings,’ says one of them.'! The war lasted nine years,!2 and the 
installation of Suryavarman at Angkor must date around 1010; but 
later, in his inscriptions, he dated his accession in 1002, that is, 
the time of the death or disappearance of Udayadityavarman I. 
Suryavarman claimed to have descended, on the maternal 
side, from Indravarman 73 and to be related through his wife Vira-
lakshmi to the son of Yasovarman."4 The first assertion cannot be 
verified. As for the second, the name of Viralakshmi seems to 
indicate that this princess was related in some way to Jayavira-
varman, and we may have here an example of the legitimization 
of power by means of marriage to the wife or daughter of a predecessor. | 
The favor Suryavarman accorded to Buddhism earned him 
the posthumous name Nirvanapada. His sponsorship of Buddhism 
in no way, however, interrupted the continuity of the worship 
rendered to the Devaraja, thus exemplifying the syncretism we 
spoke of earlier.!© ‘During his reign,” says the inscription of Sdok 
Kak Thom,” “the members of the family [of priests of the De-
varaja] officated for the Devaraja as before.” He even singled out 
from this family a nephew of the great priest Sivacharya, named 
Sadasiva, had him quit the religious state, gave him one of his 
sisters-in-law in marriage, and elevated him to the dignity of 
Kamsteng Sri Jayendrapandita, the first step in a career that was 
to become particularly brilliant during the following reign. Con-
tinuing the work begun by his uncle, Sadasiva-Jayendrapandita 
“restored the structures that had been destroyed when the king 
led forth his army.” 78 
The installation of Suryavarman | at Angkor was accom-
panied, as | have said, by the taking of a solemn oath by certain 
officials, the formula for which was engraved at the entrance of 
the palace. It was apparently also marked by the completion of 
the Phimeanakas, notably its vaulted gallery, and of Ta Kéo 19 and 

--- [Page 158] ---
136 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
by the construction of the entrance pavilions (gopuras) of the 
Royal Palace.2? Other important works that can be attributed to 
him include the temple of Phnom Chisor,21 the name of which 
recalls the ancient name of the hill on which it was built (Strya-
parvata, ‘‘mountain of the sun or of Surya[varman]”’), certain parts 
of Preah Vihear 22 and of Preah Khan of Kompong Svay,*? and the 
monuments of Vat Ek and of Baset near Battambang.”4 All these 
works are associated with the names of Brahman scholars who oc-
cupied high positions and who are known to us from epigraphy. 
It may be that in 1012 or shortly afterwards, Suryavarman I, 
feeling himself threatened, solicited the aid of Rajendrachola | 
by making him a present of a chariot.2° According to R. C. Ma-
jumdar,” the threat undoubtedly came from the king of Srivijaya, 
Maravijayottungavarman, established at Kataha, against whom 
we see Rajendrachola | launch a first expedition a little later. 
The story of the Khmer expansion in the Menam Basin is 
reported in the following fashion by the various Pali chronicles 
composed in Chiangmai: the Chamadevivamsa (written at the be-
ginning of the fifteenth century),28 the Jinakalamali (finished in 
1516),29 and the Mulasasana.2° A king of Haripunjaya (Lamphun) 
named Atrasataka (var. Trabaka, Baka) went to attack Lavo (Lop-
buri), where Ucch’itthachakkavatti (var. Ucch’itta-, Ucchitta-) 
reigned. At the moment when the two sovereigns were preparing 
for battle, a king of Siridhammanagara (Ligor) named Sujita (var. 
Jivaka, Vararaja) arrived off Lavo with a considerable army and 
fleet. Confronted by this third depredator, the two adversaries 
fled in the direction of Haripunjaya. Ucch’ittha arrived first, pro-
claimed himself king there, and married the wife of his adversary, 
who withdrew by boat to the south. Sujita, the king of Ligor, 
established himself as master at Lavo. At the end of three years, 
his successor, or perhaps his son,?! Kambojaraja, went to attack 
Ucch’ittha again at Haripunjaya, but he was defeated and had to 
return to his capital. 
As we have seen, this little drama had three principal actors: 
two rival kings who disputed the possession of Lavo,74 and a 
foreign king from the south, who settled the quarrel by installing 
himself there and whose successor, ‘King of the Kambojas,” then 
launched an unsuccessful expedition against the former king of 
Lavo established in his new state. We are tempted to identify 
this Kambojaraja with Stryavarman I, for even if these conflicts 

--- [Page 159] ---
Three Great Kings 137 
between Cambodia and the Mon kingdom of Haripunjaya, related 
in the chronicles cited above, are imaginary, we nonetheless still 
have clear manifestations of Cambodian expansion in the era of 
Suryavarman | in the region west of the Great Lake, where his 
inscriptions are particularly numerous. The reclaiming of those 
lands, until then left fallow or scarcely exploited, was effected 
by the expedient of setting up religious establishments and mak-
ing grants of unused land to private persons.33 This resulted in 
the creation of villages serving the temples and the cultivation 
of the soil by means of irrigation works. 
Evidence of the Khmer occupation in the lower Menam in 
the eleventh century is given by a group of inscriptions from 
Lopburi,*4 at least one of which emanates from Siryavarman I. 
How far north did this sovereignty or suzerainty of the king of 
Angkor extend? The local chronicles speak of a Khmer occupa-
tion that embraced the whole Menam Basin and the Mekong 
Basin up to Chiangsaen or beyond,*> but the archaeological re-
mains that are attributable to Khmer influence—and these are, 
moreover, later than the eleventh century—do not go beyond 
Luang Phrabang °° on the Mekong and Sukhothai-Sawankhalok 
on the Menam.’’ For the era of Siryavarman I, it is prudent to 
limit ourselves to the particulars given in the epigraphy of Lop-
buri. An inscription of 1022-25 tells us that during Stryavarman 
I’s reign monks belonging to two schools of Buddhism (bhikshu 
mahayana and sthavira) and Brahmans practicing the exercises of 
Yoga (tapasvi yogi) lived side by side in Lavo. Another Khmer 
inscription, the date of which is lost, but which must date back 
almost to the same era, is Vishnuite. “In short, epigraphy attests 
for us that the various religions practiced in the Khmer empire 
had their priests and sanctuaries at Lavo, but the predominance 
of Buddhist monuments and images at Lopburi proves that, even 
under Khmer domination, Buddhism preserved the importance 
there that it had at the time of the kingdom of Dvaravati.” 38 
At the beginning of the year 1050,39 Stiryavarman | died and 
received the posthumous name of Nirvanapada. He was succeeded 
by Udayadityavarman II. The new king conferred the semi-royal 
title of Dhuli Jeng (‘dust of the feet’) Vrah Kamrateng An’ Sri 
Jayendravarman on the former chief priest of the Devaraja, Sa-
dasiva-Jayendrapandita, who had married a sister of the queen 
Viralakshmi and become the king’s spiritual master.4° 

--- [Page 160] ---
138 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
lt was undoubtedly under the inspiration of this high dig-
nitary who belonged to the illustrious family of the priests of the 
Devaraja that Udayadityavarman II decided to build a new temple-
mountain for the royal linga more beautiful than those of his 
predecessors. “Seeing that in the middle of the Jambudvipa, the 
home of the gods, rose the mountain of gold (Meru), he had 
constructed, as in emulation, a mountain of gold in the center of 
his city. On the top of this gold mountain, in a gold temple 
shining with a heavenly light, he erected a Sivalinga in gold.” “ 
This edifice, “ornament of the three worlds,” was none other than 
the Baphuon,*2 “the sight of which is really impressive” the Chi-
nese Chou Ta-kuan* said at the end of the thirteenth century. 
This monument marked the center of a city whose boundaries 
coincided approximately with those of Angkor Thom today. The 
capital did not yet have its permanent walls of laterite, for these 
walls were a contribution of Jayavarman VII's, but it was furrowed 
by a great number of canals the network of which has been re-
discovered.“ 
At the same time, Udayadityavarman II had a huge artificial 
lake dug west of the capital. The lake was 8 kilometers by 2.2 
kilometers, even larger than the Yasodharatataka of Yasovarman, 
or Eastern Baray, which perhaps was already showing signs of 
drying up. In the center of this Western Baray, he had a temple 
built on an islet, and beside the temple he placed a colossal bronze 
statue representing the god Vishnu deep in his cosmic slumbers 
and resting on the waters of the ocean.® 
During his sixteen-year reign, Udayadityavarman I] had to 
cope with a series of uprisings. The repression of these uprisings, 
which was entrusted to a General Sangrama, is recounted in epic 
style by a Sanskrit stele 4© placed at the base of the Baphuon, the 
temple of the royal linga, to which the conquering general made 
a gift of his booty. 
The first revolt took place in 1051. It occurred in the south 
of the country, and its leader was Aravindahrada, ‘well instructed 
in the science of archery, leader of an army of heroes, who force-
fully held, in the southern region, the burden of half the land.” 
Vanquished by Sangrama, the rebel “fled with the greatest haste 
to the city of Champa.” 
The year 1065, the last of the reign, saw two other revolts. 
In the northwest,4” “a clever man favored by the king, a valiant 

--- [Page 161] ---
Three Great Kings 139 
hero named Kamvau whom the king had made general of the 
army, blinded by the brilliance of his grandeur, and secretly plan- , 
ning the ruin of the very one to whose powerful favor he owed 
this grandeur, left the city with his troops.’’” He wounded San-
grama in the jaw before being killed by three arrows. 
Shortly afterwards, in the east, a man named Slvat, his 
younger brother Siddhikara, and a third warrior named Sagan-
tibhuvana, fomented new troubles. Sangrama quickly put them 
down and celebrated his victories by various pious endowments. 
We do not know the posthumous name of Udayadityavar-
man Il. He was succeeded in 1066*8 by his younger brother, 
Harshavarman III. 
2. CHAMPA FROM 1000 TO 1074 
In the preceding chapter we saw the first fall of the Cham 
capital before the Vietnamese thrust from the north. The eleventh 
century was to see this pressure accentuated to the point of forc-
ing the Chams to abandon their northern provinces. Up to the 
middle of the century epigraphy is silent, and the historian must 
rely on Chinese and Vietnamese sources. 
The king Yang Pu Ku Vijaya, who came to the throne in 
the very last years of the tenth century, evacuated Indrapura 
(Quang-nam) in the year 1000 to establish himself at Vijaya 
(Binh-dinh).*? In 1004-1005 he sent to China an embassy that 
announced this change of capital.>° 
He was succeeded before 1010 by a king whose name in 
Chinese characters appears to be a transcription of Harivarman 
(Ill). This king reigned about ten years.> 
In 1021, Paramesvaravarman II,>4 who had sent an embassy 
to China three years before, saw the northern frontier of his states, 
in modern Quang-binh, attacked by the eldest son of Ly Thai-té 
(founder of the Vietnamese dynasty of Ly), Phat-Ma, who later, 
in 1028, was to succeed his father under the name Ly Thai-téng. 
The Chams were beaten and suffered a new invasion in 1026. 
Between 1030 and 1041, King Vikrantavarman IV reigned. 
Details of his reign are obscure, but it was apparently troubled. 
In 1042 his son Jaya Simhavarman II °3 requested investiture from 
the court of China. The following year, he went to pillage the 
coast of Dai Viét. King Ly Thai-t6ng prepared, in reprisal, a mari-
time expedition and took command of it himself in 1044. At the first 

--- [Page 162] ---
140 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
encounter, probably in modern Thua-thién, the Chams were routed 
and their king decapitated on the battlefield. Ly Thai-to6ng pushed 
on to Vijaya, seized it, and took the royal harem away with him.4 
The successor of Jaya Simhavarman II was a warrior of noble 
family who at his accession took the name Jaya Paramesvaravarman 
|. With his reign, inscriptions appear again in the south. In 1050, 
when the people of Panduranga, ‘vicious, threatening, always in 
revolt against their sovereign,” refused to recognize him, he or-
dered his nephew, the Yuvaraja Sri Devaraja Mahasenapati, to 
go and subdue them.°> The Yuvaraja did, and to celebrate his 
victory, he had a linga erected on the hill of Po Klaung Garai and 
set up a column of victory.°© For his part, the king proceeded the 
same year with the restoration of the sanctuary of Po Nagar at 
Nha-trang and gave it slaves, among whom were Khmers, Chi-
nese, and men of Pukam (Burmese of Pagan) and Syam (Siamese, 
or Thai).°” Anxious to remain on good terms with his neighbors 
to the north, he sent three embassies to China between 1050 and 
1056, and five to Dai Viét from 1047 to 1060.°8 
All we know about the next king, Bhadravarman III, is that 
he reigned for only a brief time and that he was reigning in 
1061.°? At the end of the same year, his younger brother Rudravar-man II] succeeded him. , 
Rudravarman III sent an embassy to China in 1062. He also 
sent three embassies to Dai Viét—in 1063, 1065, and 1068. But 
from the beginning of his reign he had been preparing for a war 
against Dai Viét, and he launched his attack at the end of 1068. 
King Ly Thanh-t6ng, quick to respond, led his fleet to Sri Bangi 
(Qui-nhdn), near the Cham capital. He defeated the Cham army 
that waited for him in the interior. Since Rudravarman III had left 
the city during the night, his people surrendered to Ly Thanh-téng, 
who made his entry there without difficulty. “He immediately 
sent troops to follow the fleeing king, who was caught and made 
prisoner in Cambodian territory (in the fourth month of 1069). 
The following month, he held a great feast for all his ministers in 
the palace of the king of Champa and, to show positively that he 
had conquered him and reduced him to nothing, he executed a 
shield dance and played a shuttlecock game on the steps of the 
throne room. At the same time he hastened to announce the 
news of his victory and of the capture of the king to the Chinese 
emperor, Shen Tsung. After taking a census, which showed more 

--- [Page 163] ---
Three Great Kings 141 
than 2,560 families, he ordered that all the houses in the en-
closure and suburbs of Vijaya be set on fire.” © 
King Ly Thanh-t6ng carried King Rudravarman III and his 
family off to Tongking as prisoners, but he freed them in 1069 in 
exchange for Rudravarman III’s abandonment of his three northern 
provinces, corresponding approximately to Quang-binh and 
Quang-tri. We do not know whether, upon his return from cap-
tivity, the Cham king was ever able to re-establish his authority 
over his greatly troubled and reduced country. It is clear, how-
ever, that the dynasty that had reigned since 1044 perished with 
him in about 1074. 
3. SRIVIJAYA AND ITS RELATIONS WITH THE CHOLAS OF TANJORE (1003-30) | 
We have seen in the preceding chapter that during the last 
decade of the tenth century Srivijaya was subjected to a Javanese 
invasion and requested protection from China. In the beginning 
of the eleventh century the king Chulamanivarmadeva, during 
whose reign the master Dharmakirti composed a commentary on 
the Abhisamayalankara,’ continued to maintain the best of rela-
tions with China. “In the year 1003, the king Sé-li-chu-la-wu-ni-fu-
ma-tiau-hwa sent two envoys to bring tribute; they told that in 
their country a Buddhist temple had been erected in order to 
pray for the long life of the emperor and that they wanted a name 
and bells for it, by which the emperor would show that he ap-
preciated their good intentions. An edict was issued by which 
the temple got the name of Ch’éng-t’ien-wan-shou [‘ten thousand 
years of receiving from Heaven’] and bells were cast to be given 
to them.” ©&2 Other embassies were sent to China in 1004, 1008, 
1016, 1017, and 1018.8 
At the same time, around 1005, the king of Srivijaya, fol-
lowing the example of his predecessor Balaputra, who had built 
a monastery at Nalanda in Bengal,64 had a Buddhist temple bearing 
his name, the Chulamanivarmavihara,© built at Nagipattana 
(Negapatam, on the Cormandel coast). The Chola Rajaraja | of-
fered the revenues of a large village to this temple. 
This friendly attitude of Chulamanivarmadeva toward the 
two great powers of the era—China and the Cholas of Tanjore © 
(the latter, in spite of their distance, were able, as the future would 
prove, to become dangerous enemies)—made it possible for his 

--- [Page 164] ---
142 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
son Maravijayottungavarman to have a free hand against Java. He 
certainly took striking revenge for the Javanese aggression of 992, 
if it is true that the catastrophe that befell Java in 1016, and about 
which we are so poorly informed, was the consequence of re-
prisals by Srivijaya. We know that Maravijayottungavarman was 
already on the throne in 1008, for in that year he sent tribute to 
China.® 
An inscription known as the “great charter of Leyden,” © 
made during the reign of Rajendrachola I, which began in 1014, 
informs us that the new Chola king composed an edict for the 
village offered by his father Rajaraja to the Chilamanivarmavihara. 
This inscription styles Maravijayottungavarman the ‘descendant 
of the Sailendra family, king of Srivijaya and Kataha [Kidara in 
the Tamil inscription].” This combined mention of Srivijaya 
(Palembang) and Kataha (Kedah on the Malay Peninsula) confirms 
startlingly the evidence of the Arab geographers, for whom the 
maharaja of Zabag is master of Sribuza and’ Kalah (Kra).”? The 
two poles of the empire, Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula, are 
the same in the two cases: the maharaja holds the two shores of 
the straits. 
But the expansionist policy and the commercial methods 
that the kings of Srivijaya were obliged to apply to maintain 
themselves in this privileged position were bound to put them 
soon in conflict with the thalassocracy of the Cholas. The conflict 
occurred shortly after Srivijaya had accomplished its aggressive 
designs against Java, thus bringing to an end the temporary need 
for conciliating the Cholas. 
As early as 1007, Rajaraja | bragged of having conquered 
twelve thousand islands.” Ten years later, his son Rajendrachola | 
may have attempted a first raid against Kataha,”* that is, against the 
peninsular possessions of the Sailendras of Sumatra.”3 If this ex-
pedition did take place, it was only the prelude to the great 
raid of 1025, details of which are given in an inscription of Rajen-
drachola at Tanjore dated 1030-31.”4- The inscription states that, 
after having sent ‘numerous ships into the midst of the rolling 
sea and seized Sangramavijayottungavarman, King of Kadaram,” Rajendrachola | conquered successively: 7° | 
Srivijaya (Palembang), 
Pannai (Panai on the east coast of Sumatra, facing Malacca), 
Malaiydr (the Malayu of the seventh century, that is, Jambi), 

--- [Page 165] ---
Three Great Kings 143 
Mayirudingam (the Jih-lo-t'ing of the Chinese,76 some part of the 
Malay Peninsula), 
llangasogam (Langkasuka),77 
Mappappalam (Papphala, located by the Singhalese chronicle, 
Mahavamsa, on the coast of Pegu), 
Mevilimbangam (identified by Sylvain Lévi 78 with Karmaranga, or 
Kamalangka, on the isthmus of Ligor), 
Valaippandiru (perhaps Pandur[angal, in Champa,’”? preceded either 
by the Tamil word valai [fortress’”] or the Cham word palei 
[‘village’’]), 
Talaittakkolam (Takk6la of Ptolemy and of the Milindapanha, on 
the Isthmus of Kra), 
Madamalingam (Tambralinga,89 or Chinese Tan-ma-ling, whose 
center was at Ligor), 
lamuridesam (Lamuri of the Arabs and Lambri of Marco Polo,81 at 
the northern tip of Sumatra), 
Manakkavaram (the Nicobar Islands), 
Kadaram (Kedah). 
It is not certain that the order in which these places are 
listed indicates the chronology of events, but if it does, it shows 
that, after the attack on the island capital Srivijaya, i.e., Palembang, 
and the capture of King Sangramavijayottungavarman, the Chola 
king occupied a few points on the east coast of Sumatra, then 
the various possessions of the maharaja on the Malay Peninsula,® 
then Achin and the Nicobars, and finally Kedah, the continental 
capital. Perhaps this raid has left some traces in the memory of 
the Malays of the peninsula, for their annals tell how the Tamil 
king Raja Cholan (or Suran) destroyed Ganganagara on the Din-
ding River, as well as a fort on the Lengiu, a tributary of the Johore 
River, and finally occupied Tumasik, the site of the future Singa-
pore.83 
However that may be, the expedition of Rajendrachola | 
seems not to have had lasting political consequences. At most, 
the capture of Sangramavijayottungavarman resulted in the acces-
sion of a new king. In 1028 this new king sent an embassy to China. 
The History of the Sung gives his name as Shih-li Tieh-hua, that is, Sri Deva (undoubtedly incomplete).®4 , 
Nevertheless, the shock felt by Srivijaya led it to come to 
terms with its old rival: we will see that the reconciliation with 
Java was probably even sealed by a matrimonial alliance. 
We have seen above that Dharmakirti lived in Srivijaya 
during the reign of Chulamanivarman. He must have continued 
to reside there under Maravijayottungavarman, since, according 

--- [Page 166] ---
144 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
to the Tibetan Bu-ston,® it was from 1011 to 1023 that Atisa “went 
to follow the teaching of Dharmakirti, head of the Buddhist con-
gregation in the island of Suvarnadvipa,® during the reign of King 
Dharmapala.” This name Dharmapala does not correspond to 
any of the royal names that the Chinese texts and epigraphy give 
us for Srivijaya. Perhaps it is the title (“Protector of the Law”) 87 
of Maravijayottungavarman or of his successor. 
In any case, the persistence of Mahayana Buddhism in 
Sumatra is evidenced at Tapanuli, on the west coast, by the cast-
ing in 1024 of a statue inscribed to Lokanatha, that is, the Bodhi-
sattva Lokesvara, represented standing between two figures of 
Tara; 8 and a Nepalese iconographic manuscript from the begin-
ning of the eleventh century attests to the popularity enjoyed in 
the Buddhist world by a certain statue of Lokanatha in Srivijaya-
pura.89 
4. JAVA: AIRLANGA (1016-49) 
We have seen” that the king of Bali, Udayana, married the 
Javanese princess Mahendradatta, great-granddaughter of Sindok. 
A son of this marriage was born in Bali around 1001; this was 
Airlanga, who in the prime of his youth was invited” to come 
and conclude his betrothal with one of the daughters of the king 
reigning in the east of Java at that time.22 He was at the court 
of this king at the time of the tragic events of 1016.% The causes 
of the disaster that led to the destruction of the capital and the 
death of the king have been the subject of as many and various 
conjectures as the transfer of the capital from the center to the 
east seventy-five years earlier. The most likely and generally ac-
cepted hypothesis is that, since Srivijaya was at peace with India 
and more or less effectively protected by China, it took its re-
venge in 1016 for the Javanese invasion of 992. The restoration 
of Java did, indeed, coincide with the temporary weakening of 
the Sumatran kingdom following the Chola raid of 1025.94 The 
role of Srivijaya in 1016, however, may have been limited to pro-
voking or supporting an internal revolt in the Javanese state. The 
principal assailant was in fact a prince of Wurawari, who has been 
regarded as coming from the Malay Peninsula % but who may 
simply have been a local chief.% 
, After the “debacle” (pralaya), as it was called by the Javanese 
Inscription that tells about the events of 1016,97 the young Air-
langa, then sixteen years old, took refuge among hermits on Mount 

--- [Page 167] ---
Three Great Kings 145 
Vanagiri, where he stayed four years. Notables and Brahmans came 
to plead with him to accept the royal power as successor of his 
father-in-law, and in 1019 he was officially crowned with the 
title Sri Maharaja Rakai Halu Sri Lokegvara Dharmavaméa Airlanga 
Anantavikramottungadeva. His authority at that time did not ex-
tend beyond a small territory situated on the northern coast of the 
island between Surabaya and Pasuruhan. He had to wait another 
ten or so years before beginning the reconquest of his states, a 
task that was undoubtedly facilitated by the weakening of Srivijaya, 
victim of the Chola aggression of 1025. 
It is possible that as early as 1022 Airlanga succeeded his 
father in Bali, where the catastrophe of 1016 had no repercus-
sions,”° but this is not certain, and the Dharmavamsavardhana Ma-
rakatapankajasthanottungadeva, whose inscriptions we have in 
Bali from 1022 to 1026, is undoubtedly an entirely different per-
son from Airlanga, perhaps a viceroy governing in his name.?? 
Airlanga began his campaigns in Java in 1028-29 with the 
aim of recovering his kingdom, divided among many competitors. 
He seems first to have attacked Bhishmaprabhava, who was the 
son of a king; then, in 1030, Vijaya, prince of Wengker (on the 
plain of Madiun), who suffered a temporary defeat. In 1031 he 
defeated Adhamapanuda and set fire to his residence. In 1032 
he rid the country of a woman “endowed with a formidable 
power, similar to a rakshasi,” and devastated the southern region, 
“which he burned with his tongue like a fiery serpent.” Then he 
may still have had to fight against the prince of Wurawari. As 
for Vijaya, prince of Wengker, beaten and obliged to flee “aban-
doning his wife, children, treasures, and royal vehicles,” he was 
seized by his own troops and died in 1035.10 
In 1037, Airlanga, “having placed his feet on the head of 
his enemies, took his place on the throne of lions, decorated 
with jewels.” Since his states were considerably enlarged, he es-
tablished his residence in the east, at Kahuripan, the site of which 
has still not been identified. 
Following his victories, Airlanga founded the monastery of 
Puchangan (in Sanskrit Pugavat, “the mountain of the areca 
palms’’), not, as has been believed, on Penanggungan, but on 
Puchangan in the delta of the Brantas. It was dedicated in 
1041,19 perhaps on the occasion of the death of a princess who 
from 1030 to around 1041 is mentioned in the edicts of Airlanga 
as first dignitary of the court (Rakryan mahamantri i Hino).1 Her 

--- [Page 168] ---
146 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
name, Sangramavijaya Dharmaprasadottungadevi, closely resem-
bles that of Sangramavijayottungavarman, the king of Srivijaya 
who was led away into captivity at the time of the Chola raid of 
1025. The presence in Java, shortly after these events, of a princess 
bearing a name that recalls a Sumatran title, and the foundation 
by Airlanga in 1035 of a monastery named Srivijayagrama, seem 
to indicate a rapprochement between the two rivals following 
the weakening of Srivijaya and the coming to power of Airlanga. 
As for the ties that united the princess to her namesake on the one 
hand and to Airlanga on the other, the most probable theory is 
that she was the daughter of Sangramavijayottungavarman whom 
Airlanga had married around 1030.1 From this time a certain 
balance comes into being between the two states that had been 
rivals for such a long timne, Srivijaya maintaining political suprem-
acy in the west of the archipelago 1” and Java in the east. Con-
temporary documents show, however, that the commercial rela-
tions of Java extended also to the west: the inscriptions 18 mention 
the Kling (Indians of Kalinga), the Arya (non-Dravidian Indians), 
the Gola (Gauda of Bengal), Singhala (Singhalese), Karnataka 
(Kanarese), Cholika (Cholas of Coromandel), Malyala (Malabars), 
Pandikira (Pandyas and Keras), Dravida (Tamils), Champa (Chams), 
Remen (Mons or Malays of Ramni, i.e., Achin), and Kmir (Khmers), 
~ who must have arrived in the states of Airlanga by the ports situ-
ated at the mouth of the Brantas in the bay of Surabaya and, far-
ther north, around Tuban. 
Inscriptions that mention the three religious sects of Saiva 
(Sivaites), Sogata (Buddhists), and Rishi (ascetics) or, on the other 
hand, of Sogata, Mahegvara, and Mahabrahmana prove the co-
existence, the symbiosis, of Buddhism and Sivaite Hinduism in 
Java, just as in Cambodia in the same era. But, as his successors 
were to do, Airlanga represented himself as an incarnation of 
Vishnu. 
From 1042 on, he perhaps entered the religious life, al-
though still retaining his power. At his death in 1049, he was 
buried at a place called “Bath of Belahan,” on the eastern slope 
of Penanggungan. Once to be seen there was a beautiful statue 
of Vishnu on Garuda between two images of Lakshmi, probably 
representations of the king and two of his wives, as well as a 
stone bearing a chronogram which gives in a sort of rebus the 
date saka 971, i.e., 1049.10. 

--- [Page 169] ---
Three Great Kings 147 
The reign of Airlanga, which was of such great political im-
portance, was also marked by a certain literary activity," but 
works have wrongly been attributed to his reign that were really 
composed during the reign of his predecessor, Dharmavamsa 
Tguh Anantavikrama, with whom Airlanga has erroneously been 
identified.1!2 It is almost certain that the Arjunavivaha (‘‘Marriage 
of Arjuna”) 13 was written in 1035 by the poet Kanva as an epitha-
lamium for the marriage of Airlanga with the Sumatran princess.™ 
Before his death, Airlanga divided his kingdom in two, and 
this division lasted, theoretically at least, until the end of the Indo-
Javanese era. We can only ‘make conjectures about the reasons 
that inspired such a step in a man whose every other action was 
directed toward unifying his states. We do not know of any legiti-
mate sons of his,"5 and we may guess that, to avoid a conflict 
after his death between two children born of concubines and 
having the same rights, he resolved to settle the question during 
his lifetime.™® 
The frontier between the two kingdoms of Janggala and 
Panjalu was marked either by a wall, the ruins of which can still 
be seen between Mount Kawi and the southern coast of the 
island,” or by the course of the Brantas.™!® Janggala lay to the 
east and must have included the region of Malang and the Bran-
tas Delta with the ports of Surabaya, Rembang, and Pasuruhan. 
Its capital was Kahuripan, Airlanga’s capital. On the west was 
Panjalu, better known by the name Kadiri, which included the 
residencies of Kediri and Madiun, with an access to the sea on the 
bay of Surabaya. Its capital was Daha (present-day Kediri). In 
fact, although it had precedence and was the theoretical successor 
of the kingdom of Airlanga, Janggala was soon absorbed by 
Panjalu.179 
For the island of Bali, we have inscriptions from 1050 to 
1078 120 emanating from a person who is known as anak wungsu, 
that is, ‘younger son” (balaputra) or perhaps ‘‘son-in-law’’—very 
probably of the parents of Airlanga; he was, therefore, probably 
the younger brother or brother-in-law of Airlanga. 
5.  §RIVJAYA AND THE CHOLAS (1067-69) 
The sources are silent about what happened in Srivijaya 
from 1030 to 1064. In 1064 the name of a certain Dharmavira, 
otherwise unknown, is inscribed at Solok, to the west of Jambi, 

--- [Page 170] ---
148 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
on a makara image executed in a style that seems to show the 
influence of Javanese art.721 
In 1067, one of the highest dignitaries of San-fo-ch’i, whom 
the History of the Sung calls Ti-hua-ch’ieh-lo,!22 the normal tran-
scription of Divakara, arrived in China. Some authors 123 see here 
rather a transcription of Devakula. They base their argument on 
the fact that the Chola king Rajendradevakulottunga (also known 
as Kulottunga I), who sent an embassy to China ten years later 
in 1077, is designated in the History of the Sung by an almost 
identical name (Ti-hua-chia-lo).124 According to them, it was the 
same person in both cases: born of a daughter of Rajendrachola 
and of Rajaraja | of Vengi,!2> he is presumed to have held many 
high offices in Srivijaya before coming to the throne of the Cholas 
in 1070; he himself seems to allude to such a background in the 
first inscriptions of his reign. 
However that may be, the year that followed the embassy 
of 1067 saw a new aggression of the Cholas against the Malay 
Peninsula. In the seventh year of his reign, in 1068-69, Virarajendra, 
son or grandson of the Rajendrachola who had led the expedi-
tion of 1025, “conquered Kadaram on behalf of the king who had 
come to ask for his aid and protection and delivered the con-
quered country to him.” 16 Perhaps it was on the advice of his 
Chola minister Devakula,'2” if this identification is indeed cor-
rect, that the king of Srivijaya made an appeal for assistance from 
Virarajendra to repress a revolt or an attempt at secession on the 
peninsula. Was it also the presence of a Chola adviser at the 
court of Srivijaya, and the willingness of the Chola king to 
} reconquer territory on behalf of this country, that led Chinese 
historians to believe that during the period 1068-77 “Chou-lien 
(Chola) was a vassal of San-fo-ch’i’’? 128 
6. BURMA: ANORATHA (1044-77) 
“When a standard history of Burma comes to be written,” 
writes G. E. Harvey,?2? “it will be necessary to divide the reigns 
of such kings as Anawrahta into two parts: the first will be The 
Evidence, e.g., inscriptions showing him to have actually existed 
and what he did, and the second part will be The Anawrahta 
Legend.” The time has not yet come to write such a history, and 
in the lines that follow, the data extracted from an epigraphy that 

--- [Page 171] ---
Three Great Kings 149 
has only recently begun to be utilized ° are interwoven with 
the least improbable elements of the legend." 
We saw at the end of the preceding chapter that And-
ratha 132 was the son of King Kunsh6 Kyaungphyu and of one of 
the three princesses who had previously been married to the 
regicidal gardener. He spent his youth in the monastery in which 
his father was in compulsory residence. Getting into a quarrel 
one day with his cousin, King Sokkate, he killed him in single 
combat at Myinkaba near Pagan. The throne having thus become 
vacant, he offered it to his father, but his father refused it, pre-
ferring to remain in the monastery. 
Anoratha, who became king in 1044,’3 increased the ter-
ritory of the kingdom of Pagan, which at the beginning was still 
small. In internal affairs, his two most remarkable achievements 
were the creation of a system of irrigation east of his capital, in : 
the rice plain of Kyaukse, which became the granary of northern 
Burma,'34 and the conversion of the country to Theravada 
Buddhism.15 
The establishment of Theravada Buddhism in Pagan was, 
according to legend, the result of a campaign in 1057 against 
Sudhammavati (Thaton, in Pegu). 
Lower Burma, that is, the Mon country, was one of the 
earliest countries converted to Buddhism. But numerous vestiges 
of Hinduism have also been found in this country, and they 
prove that Buddhism was not the only religion known there. It 
has been suggested,!37 not without some probability, that Bud-
dhism could have been introduced or at least fortified by the mass 
arrival in the first half of the eleventh century of Mons from 
Haripunjaya who were fleeing from a cholera epidemic and 
perhaps also from the Khmer armies of Suryavarman lI. 
When Buddhism began to decline in India, the Mons main-
tained spiritual contact with southern India (Kanchi, i.e., Con-
jeevaram) and with Ceylon, holy land of Theravada Buddhism. In 
1056, the monk Shin Arahan,'38 son of a Brahman of Thaton and 
undoubtedly a disciple of the Kanchi school, came to Pagan and 
won the king over to his doctrine. 
Desiring to obtain a collection of the sacred writings of the 
Pali canon, Andratha sent one of his ministers to Thaton.13? His 
request was refused by King Makuta.4° Anératha then organized 

--- [Page 172] ---
150 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
an expedition against his uncooperative neighbor, and in 1057, 
after a three months’ siege, he took the city of Thaton.""1 There 
he found thirty collections of the Tripitaka, which he took back 
to Pagan along with King Makuta, his ministers, monks, and a 
great number of artisans. 
The political result of the conquest of Thaton was the sub-
mission of the whole delta 2 and its Indian principalities,43 thus 
Opening a window on the sea for the Burmese; the cultural result 
was the conversion of Pagan to Theravada Buddhism and the 
decline of Tantric Mahayana," which was undoubtedly obliged to 
transfer its temples extra muros. In sum, the influence of the more 
refined Mon civilization was brought to bear on the still relatively 
unrefined Burmese population. The numerous prisoners brought 
back from Thaton taught the Burmese their literature, their art, 
and, above all, their script. The first inscription in the Burmese 
language, written in Mon characters, dates from the year after 
the conquest, 1058.14 Two of the most ancient monuments of 
Pagan, Nan-paya and Manuha, were built by the captive King 
Makuta around 1060.146 
Anératha was certainly a great conquerer who, not content 
with having brought all of the Irrawaddy Basin under his domina-
tion, turned his forces against his neighbors. Unfortunately, we 
have very few details concerning the campaigns that dominate 
his legend. To the west, he conquered the north of Arakan and 
seems to have pushed on to Chittagong.’4” In the direction of 
Cambodia, the chronicles of the Thai principalities of the upper 
Menam "8 attribute a campaign to him, although there is no hint 
of such a campaign in contemporary Khmer sources. In the 
north, he is supposed to have gone beyond Bhamo to Ta-li in 
Nanchao in an attempt to obtain a tooth-relic of the Buddha, 
and to have returned with nothing but a jade image.149 One fact 
is certain: votive tablets in his name have been found from the 
mouths of the Irrawaddy River in the south to the town of Mong 
Mit in the north.1° 
His reputation having spread to Ceylon, King Vijayabahu 
| (1055-56—1110-11) 1" at first requested his military aid to re-
pel a Chola invasion,’»? then, having succeeded in meeting this , 
threat on his own, contented himself with asking Andratha in 
1071 for monks and canonic texts in order to restore the ravages 
caused by the war.'3 In exchange, the Burmese envoys brought 

--- [Page 173] ---
Three Great Kings 151 
back to Pagan a copy of the famous tooth-relic of Ceylon. This 
prize was placed in the great temple of Shwezigon, the con-
struction of which had been started in about 1059 14 but was not 
completed until the reign of Kyanzittha. 
Anoratha died in 1077 in a hunting accident. He left a 
kingdom that extended from Bhamo to the Gulf of Martaban, em-
bracing northern Arakan and the north of Tenasserim, and was 
defended by a series of fortified cities; 1° a kingdom that had 
been won over to Theravada Buddhism and refined from the 
artistic and cultural point of view by Mon influence; a kingdom 
that was capable of playing the role of a great power on the 
Indochinese Peninsula. 
This chapter has concentrated on Kings Suryavarman I, Air-
langa, and Anoratha. Their reigns had political consequences of 
great importance, for it was during their reigns that Javanese 
power was restored and the power of the Mons in the basins of 
the Menam and Irrawaddy was replaced by the power of the 
Khmers and Burmese. Moreover, this period marks the retreat of 
the Chams before the Vietnamese, to whom they abandoned their 
northern provinces. It also contains the first signs of weakness 
on the part of Srivijaya, which had been shaken by the Javanese 
invasion of the preceding century and was further shaken by the 
Chola raids. Burma, Cambodia, and Java, taking advantage of the 
weakness of Sung China, were henceforth to be the three great 
protagonists in the history of Farther India. 

--- [Page 174] ---
CHAPTER X 
THE MAHIDHARAPURA DYNASTY OF 
CAMBODIA, THE PAGAN DYNASTY OF 
BURMA, AND THE JAVANESE 
KINGDOM OF KADIRI 
End of the Eleventh Century and First Three Quarters of the 
Twelfth Century 
1. CAMBODIA: THE FIRST KINGS OF THE 
MAHIDHARAPURA DYNASTY (1080-1112) 
| Harshavarman HI, who came to the throne in Cambodia in 
1066, busied himself with repairing the structures ruined in the wars 
of the preceding reign.’ Between 1074 and 1080, he himself had 
reason to quarrel with the Chams, whose King Harivarman IV is 
said to have “defeated the troops of Cambodia at Someévara and 
seized the prince Sri Nandavarmadeva, who commanded _ this 
army and who had been sent with the rank of sendpati.”2 Per-
haps it was on the occasion of this battle that Prince Pang, 
younger brother of the king of Champa, and later king himself 
under the name of Paramabodhisattva, “went to take [in Cam-
bodia] the city of Sambhupura [Sambor on the Mekong], destroyed 
all its sanctuaries, and gave the Khmers whom he had seized to 
the various sanctuaries of Sri Iganabhadregvara [at Mi-son].” 3 
“In 1076, the Chinese, having decided on an expedition 
against Tongking, persuaded the neighbors of this country, Champa 
and Cambodia, to take part in the battle: while the army of Kuo 
K’uei moved down on Hanoi by the way of Lang-sdn, the Chams 
and Cambodians invaded Nghé-an. The defeat of the Chinese 
led to the retreat of their allies; we have no information about 
their movements.” 4 
Harshavarman III received the posthumous name Sadaéi-
vapada.? He was succeeded in 1080 by Jayavarman VI.6 The 
genealogy of Jayavarman VI, as it is given in an inscription of his 
grandnephew Siryavarman II,7 indicates no relationship either 
with the dynasty founded by Sdryavarman | or with preceding 
dynasties. He was the son of Hiranyavarman from Kshitindragrama, 
an otherwise unknown locality, and of Hiranyalakshmi. Later, the 
inscriptions of Jayavarman VII say that he belonged to the nobility 
of Mahidharapura,’ a city whose site remains unidentified. Per-

--- [Page 175] ---
Cambodia, Burma, and Kadiri 153 
haps he was a high dignitary, a provincial governor, who, taking 
advantage of the weakening of central authority following the 
troubled reign of Udayadityavarman II, became more or less in-
dependent in the north, where his establishments and those of 
his successors are particularly numerous. He seems to have been 
aided in the realization of his plans by the priest Divakarapandita, 
who, after having been in the service of Harshavarman III for 
some time, threw in his lot with the newcomers, conducted the 
coronation of Jayavarman VI and his two successors, and re-
ceived quasi-royal titles from them.? 
It is not certain that Jayavarman VI ever reigned at Angkor, 
where he is mentioned only in an unfinished inscription 1 and 
where Harshavarman may have been succeeded by a king named 
Nripatindravarman™ who reigned there until around 1113. We 
shall see, in fact, that Suryavarman II claimed to have seized 
power from two kings at this date. The first was his uncle 
Dharanindravarman |, for whom -there are no longer any in- | 
scriptions remaining in the Angkor group; ' one is tempted to 
see in the other king a successor of Harshavarman III who main-
tained power in the capital through the first decade of the twelfth 
century. 
Little is known about the reign of Jayavarman VI. The in-
scriptions of his successors, and even more clearly those of the 
Brahman Divakara, associate his name with some constructions 
in the Sivaite monuments of Phnom Sandak, Preah Vihear, and 
Vat Ph’u 73 and at the Buddhist temple of Phimai. At his death he 
received the posthumous name Paramakaivalyapada. 
Of his two brothers, the younger, who had received the , 
title of Yuvaraja, or heir apparent, died prematurely,"* and it was 
the elder, Dharanindravarman |, who succeeded Jayavarman VI 
in 1107; 15 he was crowned, as | have already said, by Divakara. 
“Without having desired royalty,’”” says an inscription, ‘“when the 
king, his younger brother, had returned to the heavens, through 
simple compassion and yielding to the prayers of the human 
multitudes without a protector, he governed the land with pru-
dence.’” 16 He continued the building and endowment program 
of the preceding reign and pursued traditionalism to the point 
of taking as a wife Queen Vijayendralakshmi, who had first been 
married to the heir apparent prince who died before reigning, 
then to Jayavarman VI.17 

--- [Page 176] ---
154 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
He had reigned for five years when his grandnephew in the 
female line, “still quite young,” says the same inscription, “at the 
end of his studies, proved to be the answer to the desires of the 
royal honor of his family, a family now in the dependence of two 
masters.” 18 This was Siryavarman II, whose brilliant career we 
shall see presently. 
2. CHAMPA FROM 1074 TO 1113 
In Champa, Prince Thang (Vishnumirti, Madhavamirti, or 
Devatamurti), who was a descendant through his father of the 
coconut palm family (narikelavamsa) and through his mother of 
the areca palm family (kramukavamga), was proclaimed king in 
1074 under the name of Harivarman (IV)."9 At the very beginning 
of his reign, he repulsed a Vietnamese attack,2° and, as we have 
seen above, he was victorious over the Khmers and carried the 
war into their country to the Mekong. In 1076, he took part, 
somewhat reluctantly, in the coalition led by China against Dai 
Viét; the following year he sent tribute to Dai Viét.2! 
Harivarman IV spent a great part of his reign “restoring 
to Champa its ancient splendor,” 22 restoring Champapura and 
Simhapura (in Quang-nam) and making numerous endowments 
at Mi-sdn. In 1080, he had his nine-year-old son, Prince Vak, 
crowned under the name Jaya Indravarman (II), and he died in 
retirement in the following year.?3 
Since the young king “did not know how to govern the 
kingdom properly and did everything contrary to the rules of 
the government,” 4 it was necessary to find a regent at the end 
of a month. The choice fell on an uncle of the king, the Prince 
Pang who had conquered Sambhupura from the Khmers during 
the preceding reign. He was crowned king under the name 
Paramabodhisattva. Apparently, he held onto the power to the 
point of true usurpation, for, after six years of a reign during 
which the uncle sent tribute to Dai Viét each year® and re-
pressed an attempt of the always rebellious Panduranga to achieve 
autonomy,”° the faction of the nephew again got the upper hand 
and placed him back on the throne by means of a coup de force 
in 1086.27 
Upon his re-establishment on the throne, Jaya Indravarman 
Il resumed relations with China. Until 1091 he also sent regular 
tribute to Dai Viét. After an interruption of several years, for which 
he was rebuked, he resumed sending missions to Dai Viét from 

--- [Page 177] ---
Cambodia, Burma, and Kadiri 155 
1095 to 1102. In 1103, however, after a Vietnamese refugee had 
encouraged him to believe he would be able to recover the three 
Cham provinces in the north that had been lost in 1069, he dis-
continued the missions again and launched an attack on the 
provinces. The campaign was successful at first, but he was able | 
to hold the provinces only a few months.28 He then reigned 
peacefully until around 1113, continuing the restorations of his 
predecessors and building structures at Mi-son. 
3. BURMA: THE KINGS OF PAGAN, 
SUCCESSORS OF ANORATHA (1077-1112) 
Concerning the descendants of Anératha who reigned after 
him at Pagan, late chronicles report many anecdotes—often ro-
mantic, sometimes scandalous—that are outside the domain of 
history. Epigraphy permits us to fix the dates of their accessions 
and of the edifices they built that made their capital one of the 
richest archaeological sites of the Indochinese Peninsula.?9 
Anoratha left two sons when he died in 1077: Sdlu, born 
of a wife he had married before becoming king,2? and Kyanzittha, 
son of the Indian or Arakanese princess 31 Panchakalyani but 
probably really fathered by a mandarin who had been entrusted 
with bringing her to Pagan.32 After having barely escaped death 
in his early years during a ‘massacre of the innocents” ordered by 
Andératha,?? Kyanzittha, suspected of being the lover of Queen 
Manichanda, or Chandadevi, daughter of the king of Pegu, was 
banished from the court.34 
Sélu, named Mang Lulang, ‘the young king,” in epigraphy, . 
came to power in 1077. He began his reign by marrying his 
stepmother, the Peguan queen, whom he gave the title Khin U. 
He then recalled Kyanzittha, but Kyanzittha was soon sent back 
into exile for the same reason he had been banished before.*6 
Kyanzittha’s unequaled bravery got him recalled again to aid in 
putting down a revolt by a foster-brother of Sdlu’s, Ngayaman 
Kan,°”7 to whom the king had entrusted the government of Pegu. 
In spite of Kyanzittha’s aid, S6lu was unsuccessful in putting down 
the revolt and, after various romantic incidents, was killed by the 
rebel.?8 
Kyanzittha, designated in epigraphy by the title Thiluing 
Mang,’ or King of T’ilaing (in the northeast of Meiktila), was 
chosen to succeed Sélu in 1084.*° He first had to reconquer his 
kingdom from the Mons of Pegu. Ngayaman Kan entrenched 

--- [Page 178] ---
156 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia , 
himself at a site where the city of Ava was later built. Kyanzittha 
assembled his forces in the rice plain of Kyaukse and marched 
on Pagan; he had no difficulty in defeating the Peguans. Ngayaman 
Kan perished in the retreat.*! 
Kyanzittha was then crowned, probably in 1086,42 by the 
venerable Shin Arahan. He took the name _ Tribhuvanaditya 
Dhammaraja, a title that was borne from then on by all the 
kings of the dynasty. Following his predecessors, he in his turn 
married the Peguan Khin U,* possession of whom perhaps le-
gitimized the sovereignty of the king of Pagan over the Mon 
country. His only daughter, Shwe-einthi, born of the queen 
Abeyadana (Abhayaratana) whom Kyanzittha had married before 
his coronation, was married to Sdyun, son of Sdlu. She had a 
son by this marriage, the future Alaung-sithu (Jayasira I), whom 
from his birth Kyanzittha proclaimed king, declaring himself 
regent in his name.* In addition, at the time of his exile during 
the reign of his father Anératha, Kyanzittha had had a son by 
Sambhula, the niece of a hermit whom he had met in the forest.*® 
When she presented herself at court,4” he accepted her as fourth 
queen, with the title Trilokavatamsika (Burmese U Sauk Pan),*® 
and entrusted the government of Dhafifavati (northern Arakan) to 
her son Rajakumara, whom he gave the title of Jayakhettara.” 
The great achievement of Kyanzittha, which by itself would 
have been enough to establish his fame, was the construction of 
the temple of Ananda (Anantapajfifia, “infinite wisdom’’) at Pagan 
in imitation, legend says," of the grotto of Nandamula on Mount 
Gandamadana. One scholar has tried to identify this legendary 
grotto with the temple of Udayagiri in Orissa; >! the king must 
have heard about this temple from the Indian monks who came 
to Burma to escape the persecution Buddhism suffered in their 
country. But it is also possible that the temple of Paharpur, in 
northern Bengal, served as a model for the architect of the 
Ananda.°? The architect was not allowed to survive the dedication 
of his masterpiece, which took place in 1090; he and a child were 
buried alive to serve as guardian spirits of the temple.*3 
Among other works carried out during the reign of Kyan-
zittha were the completion of the pagoda of Shwezigon, where 
Kyanzittha’s most important inscriptions were placed,** and re-
pairs on the temple of Bodhgaya in India.*° Kyanzittha also under-
took irrigation works, built a new palace around 1101—1102,°6 

--- [Page 179] ---
Cambodia, Burma, and Kadiri 157 
and had numerous inscriptions engraved in the Mon language, 
still considered at that time the language of civilization.5” 
There is no doubt that the restorer of Bodhgaya and the 
founder of the Ananda, where he had his statue placed in the 
attitude of prayer,°8 was a fervent follower of Buddhism. He did 
some proselytizing himself on occasion: he converted a Chola 
prince, who was passing through Burma, by sending him a text 
on The Three Jewels that he himself had composed and written on 
a gold leaf. But we still find numerous traces of Hinduism during 
his reign,°° and Brahmans played a dominant role in the royal cere-
monies at court.®' Kyanzittha obviously held the Mons in great 
esteem, as is shown by his inscriptions in the Mon language and 
the Mon style of the sculptures and decorations of his mon-
uments. 
In 1103, Kyanzittha sent to China the first Burmese embassy 
that is mentioned in the History of the Sung.® Three years later, in 
1106, ‘‘envoys of the kingdom of P’u-kan (Pagan) having come to 
offer tribute, the emperor at first gave the order to receive them 
and give them the same treatment accorded the envoys of Chou-
lien (Chola), but the president of the Council of Rites made the 
following observations: ‘Chou-lien is a vassal of San-fo-ch’i; © 
that is why during the hsi-ning years (1068-1077) it was enough 
to write to the king of this country on heavy paper, with an en-
velope of plain material. The king of P’u-kan, on the other hand, 
is a sovereign of the great kingdom of the Fan (the Brahmans; 
that is, the Indian countries). One must not behave disdainfully 
toward him. One ought to accord to him the same honors 
as to the princes of Ta-shih (Arabs) and Chiao-chih (Tongking), 
by writing to him on silk with flowers of gold, white on the back, 
a letter which you enclose in a little box ringed with gold, with 
a silver lock and double envelope of taffeta and satin.’ The em-
peror approved of his observations and decided that it would be 
thus.” © | have cited this passage in its entirety because it shows 
the prestige that the kingdom of Pagan already—only sixty-two 
years after the accession to power of Andératha, who was its real 
founder—enjoyed at the court of China, which was always anxious 
to maintain an exact hierarchy among foreign sovereigns. 
Kyanzittha died in 1112 or shortly afterward, for it was 
undoubtedly on the occasion of the illness that led to his demise 
that his son Rajakumara, son of the queen Trilokavatamsika, had 

--- [Page 180] ---
158 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
a gold ‘statue of the Buddha cast and inscribed in four languages 
(Pali, Pyu, Mon, Burmese); this is the extremely valuable inscription 
of the pillar of Myazedi, south of Pagan.® 
4. INDONESIA FROM 1078 TO 1109; THE KINGDOM OF KADIRI 
For the period that includes the last quarter of the eleventh 
century and the first decade of the twelfth, the only record we 
have of San-fo-ch’i in the histories is the mention in the History 
of the Sung of a series of embassies it sent to China between 1078 
and 1097. In addition, the relations between Sumatra and south-
ern India are shown by an inscription in Tamil found near Baros 
on the west coast of the island. This inscription is dated 1088 and 
emanates from a powerful corporation of merchants of southern 
India.” In 1089-90, at the request of the king of Kidara, the Chola 
Kulottunga |®8 granted a new charter to the Sri Sailendra 
Chudamanivarmavihara,™ that is, to the sanctuary built at Ne-
gapatam at the order of Sailendra Chidamanivarman around 
1005.” 
During the same period, information is not much more 
abundant for Java and Bali. 
For Java, Chinese evidence of the eleventh century gives 
so slight an impression of a division of the ancient kingdom of 
Airlanga into two states that we can suppose that Kadiri, the 
only one that has left epigraphic traces, occupied all the ports 
of the coast and was the sole representative of She-p’o for the 
merchants from the Middle Kingdom. Kadiri sent an embassy 
to China in 1109.7! 
We have a great number of inscriptions from Kadiri that 
tell us the names of kings with their dates but contain very little 
else of historical substance. The composition by Triguna of the 
Krishnayana,? an epic poem dealing with the legend of Krishna 
depicted in the bas-reliefs of Chandi Jago’? and Panataran,”“ 
dates from this period. 
In 1098, Sakalendukirana, a princess whose complete title 75 
indicates dynastic ties with the family of Airlanga,” appears in 
Bali. 
The History of the Sung registers an embassy to China in 1082 
from King Sri Maharaja of P’o-ni, that is, from the west coast of 
Borneo.”” 

--- [Page 181] ---
Cambodia, Burma, and Kadiri 159 
5. CAMBODIA FROM THE ACCESSION OF SURYAVARMAN || 
(1113) TO THE TAKING OF ANGKOR BY THE CHAMS (1177) 
In Cambodia, the accession of Suryavarman I] coincided 
exactly with the death of Jaya Indravarman II in Champa and that 
of Kyanzittha at Pagan. If the relationships between all these 
countries were better known, perhaps we could find a cause-and-
effect relationship between the disappearance of these two 
powerful sovereigns and the assumption of power by this am-
bitious Khmer king who was to lead his troops to the east as well 
as to the west. 
We have seen that Siryavarman II had “taken the royalty 
by unifying a double kingdom.” 78 We are certain that one of the 
two kings was Dharanindravarman |: “After a battle that lasted 
one day, King Sri Dharanindravarman was stripped of his defense-
less kingdom by Sri Suryavarman.” 79 The struggle must have been 
violent: “Releasing the ocean of his armies on the field of com-
bat, he [Suryavarman II] gave terrible battle; leaping on the head 
of the elephant of the enemy king, he slew him, just as Garuda 
swooping down from the top of a mountain kills a serpent.’ °° 
Dharanindravarman | received the posthumous name of Para-
manishkalapada. We do not know the name of the other king 
from whom Suryavarman II took power; as has been said,8! he 
was perhaps a descendant of Harshavarman III. The indispensable 
Brahman Divakara legitimized the coup de force of Siryavarman 
Il by conducting his coronation in 1113.®2 
The new king did not lose any time in renewing relations 
with the court of China, which had been interrupted, it seems, 
for several reigns. The History of the Sung mentions embassies in 
1116 and in 1120. 
Suryavarman II was a great conqueror who led the Khmer 
armies farther than they had ever been before. ‘He saw the kings 
of the other countries that he desired to subjugate coming to bring 
tribute. He himself went into the countries of his enemies and 
eclipsed the glory of the victorious Raghu [an ancestor of 
Rama].’”” 8 In his Royaume de Champa, Georges Maspero gives 
very precise details on the battles against Dai Viét and Champa; | 
can do no better than to reproduce his account ® here: 
From the time that he took the crown, Siryavarman II began ha-
rassing Champa. In 1123 and 1124, in fact, Dai Viét constantly gave 

--- [Page 182] ---
160 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
asylum to bands of Cambodians or Chams who sought refuge in its 
territory from the pursuit of their enemy. In 1128, Siiryavarman led 20,000 
men against Dai Viét. After having been driven from Nghé-an by Ly Céng 
Binh, the following autumn he sent a fleet of more than 700 vessels to 
pillage the coasts of Thanh-hoa, and from then on he attacked this 
| empire continuously, often dragging Champa along with him, willingly 
or by force. Thus we see Champa, which in the beginning of 1131 sent 
tribute to the emperor Ly Than-téng, invading Nghé-an the following 
year together with the Khmers.85 They were soon driven away, however, 
by the garrisons of Nghé-an and Thanh-hoa reunited under the command 
of Dudng Anh-nhe. Jaya Indravarman Ill did not wish to carry these 
exploits further, and in 1136 he performed his duties of vassalage toward 
Ly Than-t6ng. He did not take part in the new campaign that Stiryavarman 
led against Dai Viét (1138).86 The Khmer sovereign, unsuccessful in this 
undertaking, turned on him with all his conquering ardor. In 1145 he 
invaded Champa, seized Vijaya, and made himself master of the kingdom. 
Jaya Indravarman II] disappeared during the war, prisoner of the victor or 
dead on the battlefield. 
The Khmer occupation of the northern part of Champa, with 
its capital at Vijaya (Binh-dinh), lasted until 1149.27 When a new 
king, Jaya Harivarman I, established himself in 1147 in the south 
at Panduranga,®® Suryavarman II sent an army against him. This 
army, composed of Khmers and Chams and under the orders of 
the senapati Sankara, was defeated in 1148 on the plain of 
Rajapura.8’ An army ‘a thousand times stronger’ met the same 
fate at Virapura.% At this point Siryavarman II proclaimed ‘a 
Kshatriya, Prince Harideva, his brother-in-law, younger brother of 
his first wife,” 9! king of Champa at Vijaya. Jaya Harivarman | 
, marched on Vijaya and on the plain of Mahiga “defeated and 
killed Harideva, destroyed this king with all the Cham and Cam-
bodian senapati and the Cham and Cambodian troops; they all 
perished.” 9% The Cham king entered Vijaya and was crowned 
there in 1149.% That was the end of the Khmer occupation. 
After this defeat, Suryavarman I! resumed hostilities against 
Dai Viét and “in 1150 sent a new expedition. The result was even 
worse than before. The expedition had been sent on its way in 
the fall without regard for the season. The rains of September and 
October were disastrous. Fever swept through the troops while 
they were crossing the Wu-wen Mountains, that is, the Annamite 
chain, and they arrived at Nghé-an so weak that they withdrew 
voluntarily without ever going into action.” ” 

--- [Page 183] ---
Cambodia, Burma, and Kadiri 161 
We have some indications of the battles in the west in the 
chronicles of the Thai principalities of the upper Menam. These 
chronicles tell of struggles between the Kambojas of Lavo (Lopburi) 
and the Ramafihas (Mons) of Haripunjaya (Lamphun). Haripunjaya 
was the upper Menam principality, founded in the seventh cen-
tury by the Mons from Lavo,® that had been involved in the 
troubles marking the accession of Stryavarman 1.% Since Lavo 
had been part of the Khmer kingdom from the preceding century, 
we must understand the “king of Lavo” to have been either a 
Cambodian viceroy or governor or the Cambodian sovereign 
himself. The chronicles, moreover, put a certain number of ex-
pressions that are pure Khmer into the mouths of the Kambojas 
of Lavo.?” The wars were provoked, according to these texts, by 
Adityaraja, the builder of Mahabalachetiya (Vat Kukut) and the 
discoverer of the Great Relic of Lamphun,?8 who came to power 
at the latest around 1150 after a series of kings whose histories 
we do not know.” He allegedly came to Lavo to challenge the 
Khmers but they put his army to flight and pursued it up to the 
walls of Haripunjaya. The Khmers were unable to take the city and 
had to turn back, but they returned to the attack on two oc-
casions: the first time, the expedition ended with an agreement 
with Adityaraja and with the establishment of the Khmers in a 
village called Kambojagama southeast of Haripunjaya; since the 
pact was not approved by their sovereign, however, the Khmers 
had to conduct a new expedition, and this one failed com-
pletely.100 
Given the unreliability of the chronology, it is not certain 
that these events all took place during the reign of Stiryavarman 
Il. We cannot help but notice that the war against the Mons of 
the upper Menam, like the campaigns against the Chams, had an 
unfortunate end for the Cambodians. But we know of these 
events only from sources hostile to Cambodia, sources that may 
have intentionally distorted the facts. However that may be, a 
great expansion of Cambodian sovereignty on the Indochinese 
Peninsula in the middle of the twelfth century is recorded in the 
History of the Sung,'°! which states that Chenla (Cambodia) was 
bordered by the southern frontiers of Chan-ch’eng (Champa) in 
the north, by the sea to the east, by P’u-kan (the kingdom of 
Pagan) in the west, and by Chia-lo-hsi (Grahi, in the region of 

--- [Page 184] ---
162 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Chaiya and of the Bay of Bandon on the east coast of the Malay 
Peninsula) 1 in the south. 
In 1128, the emperor of China “conferred high dignities on 
the king of Chenla, named Chin-p’ou-pin-shen,! who was rec-
ognized as a great vassal of the empire. Some difficulties having 
to do with affairs of commerce were then examined and settled,” 
between 1131 and 1147.1 
With regard to internal affairs, the reign of SUryavarman II, 
as it appears in epigraphy, was marked by endowments at Phnom 
Chisor, Phnom Sandak, Vat Ph’u, and Preah Vihear and by a 
series of buildings including the principal elements of Preah Pithu 
| in Angkor Thom, Chau Say Tévoda and Thommanon east of 
the city, and finally the masterpiece of Khmer art, Angkor Wat, 
constructed during the lifetime of the king for whom it was to 
serve as a funerary temple. It was in Angkor Wat that Suryavar-
man II was to be deified in the form of a statue of Vishnu with 
the posthumous name Paramavishnuloka. 
The name Paramavishnuloka is an indication of the favor 
Vishnuism enjoyed at the court, a favor that manifested itself 
less in the building of temples dedicated to Vishnu than in the 
decoration of edifices inspired for the most part by the legendary 
cycle of Vishnu-Krishna.!"” This fervor for a cult that was more 
capable than Sivaism of inspiring devotion (bhakti), the mystic 
pouring out of the soul toward the divinity, is found in the same 
period in Java, where the kings of Kadiri all represented them-
selves as incarnations of Vishnu. It is also synchronous with the 
religious movement that in India, at the beginning of the twelfth 
century, inspired Ramanuja, the founder of modern Vishnuism.1 
The end of the reign of Siryavarman II is obscure, and the 
date of his death is still unknown. The last inscription in his name 
is of 1145,199 but there is every reason to believe that he was the 
instigator of the campaign of 1150 against Tongking and, there-
fore, that he reigned at least until that date. 
It is possible that the question of Khmer suzerainty over 
Lavo (Lopburi) was reopened by the death of Stiryavarman II. This 
state, which the Chinese called Lo-hu, had already sent a mission 
to China on its own in 1115, only two years after the accession 
of Siryavarman II, at a time when this young king undoubtedly 
had not yet established his authority over the outlying depend-
encies of his kingdom. A new embassy in 1155, perhaps following 

--- [Page 185] ---
Cambodia, Burma, and Kadiri 163 
the death of Suryavarman II, probably corresponded with a new 
attempt to cut the ties of dependence to Angkor."9 An inscription 
of 1167 found in Siam in the region of Nagara Svarga (Nakhon 
Sawan) mentions a sovereign king, named Dharmagoka, who may 
well have reigned in a kingdom of Lavo that had become inde- — 
pendent." 
The successor of Suryavarman II, named Dharanindravar-
man II, was not his direct descendant, but his cousin.™2 Perhaps 
he became king as a result of some palace revolution. If he did, 
this would explain the silence of epigraphy concerning the last 
days of Suryavarman II. In addition, the new sovereign was Bud-
dhist,3 and although the Hindu kings had been tolerant of 
Buddhism, there had nevertheless been a long tradition of Hindu 
orthodoxy. This tradition was now broken. All we know about 
Dharanindravarman II is that he married a daughter of Harshavar-
man III, Princess Chudamani, by whom in about 1125 he had a 
son who was to reign much later under the name of Jayavarman 
Vil.14 We can, with some probability, attribute the major part of 
the building of the Preah Khan of Kompong Svay to him. 
Dharanindravarman I! was succeeded at an undetermined 
date by a Yasovarman (II) whose genealogy is not known. His 
reign was marked by a dramatic incident mentioned in an in-
scription of the temple of Banteay Ch’mar and represented on a 
bas-relief of the same monument: a mysterious being, to whom 
the text gives the name—and the sculpture the likeness—of 
Rahu (Asura, who devours the sun and the moon at the time of 
eclipses), attacked the king, who was saved by a young prince, 
probably a son of the future Jayavarman VII. 
Around 1165, Yasovarman II was overthrown by a mandarin 
who proclaimed himself king under the name of Tribhuvanaditya-
varman. The future Jayavarman VII, then in Champa, returned 
precipitately to defend Yasovarman, to whom he must have been 
related, or simply allied, during this troubled period, but he 
arrived too late. 
At the same time that this rebel took possession of the 
throne of Cambodia, another seized that of Champa in 1166-67 
under the name of Jaya Indravarman IV. After coming to an 
agreement with Dai Viét in 1170, he turned against Cambodia. 
“Jaya Indravarman, the king of the Chams, presumptuous as 
Ravana, transporting his army in chariots, went to fight the 

--- [Page 186] ---
164 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
country of Kambu, like to heaven,” says an inscription.™6 But the 
struggle was indecisive. Then, changing his plans, Jaya Indravarman 
tried to take over Cambodia by sea. The expedition was sent in 
1177.1” Sailing along the coast, the Cham fleet, guided by a 
Chinese castaway, arrived at the mouth of the Mekong and sailed 
up to the Great Lake. Angkor was surprised, the usurper Tri-
bhuvanaditya killed, and the city pillaged. Such a catastrophe, 
coming after twenty years of internal troubles, would seem to 
have made it inevitable that restoration of the country could be 
accomplished only with great difficulty. 
6. CHAMPA FROM 1113 TO 1177 
King Jaya Indravarman II of Champa died around 1113 and 
was succeeded by his nephew Harivarman V, who reigned peace-
fully, continuing the establishments at Mi-son and remaining on 
excellent terms with China and Dai Viét, with which he exchanged 
numerous embassies between 1116 and 1126.18 Perhaps for lack 
of a suitable heir to succeed him, in 1133 Harivarman V seems to 
have adopted as Yuvaraja a prince of uncertain origin, born in 
1106, who succeeded him in 1139 under the name of Jaya In-
dravarman (III).19 
The endowments of the new king at Mi-sdn. in 1140 129 and 
at Po Nagar in Nha-trang in 1143 7? prove that his authority was 
recognized in the north as well as in the south. We have seen 
above 124 how, after having aided the Khmers in an expedition 
against Nghé-an in 1131, he reconciled his differences with Dai 
Viét and then underwent the Khmer invasion of 1145, in which 
he disappeared. 
Since the capital and the greater part of the country were 
in the hands of the Khmers,!#3 the people of Panduranga gave 
asylum to the new king Rudravarman IV, who had been crowned 
in 1145 and had fled to the south. He never reigned. This king 
received the posthumous name Brahmaloka.'2* His son Ratna-
bhumivijaya, Prince Sivanandana, was a descendant of Paramabo-
dhisattva and had been in exile under Harivarman V and Jaya 
Indravarman Ill. “At first he left his country and for a long time 
he met with fortune and misfortune in foreign countries; then he 
returned to the land of Champa.” He had accompanied his father 
in the flight to Panduranga, where the inhabitants proclaimed 
him king in 1147 under the name of Jaya Harivarman (I).725 It was 

--- [Page 187] ---
Cambodia, Burma, and Kadiri 165 
he who in 1148 victoriously withstood the attack of Siiryavarman 
I] and in 1149 reconquered the capital of Vijaya from the Khmer 
Prince Harideva. Immediately after reconquering Vijaya, he had 
himself crowned there. 
But his task had only begun, for during his seventeen-year 
reign, he was constantly fighting to maintain his authority. First 
he had to contend with the-Kiratas, that is, the hill tribes, “Radé, 
Mada and other barbarians (Mlecch’a),” grouped under the com-
mand of his disloyal brother-in-law, Vamégaraja.126 Vaméaraja, 
beaten in 1150, requested aid from the emperor of Dai Viét, who 
gave him five thousand soldiers from Thanh-hoa and Nghé-an.127 
“The king of the Yavanas [Vietnamese],’” says an inscription of 
Mi-son, ‘‘because he learned that the king of Cambodia created 
obstacles for Jaya Harivarman, proclaimed Vaméaraja, a man of 
Champa, king; he gave him many Yavana senapati, with many 
very valorous Yavana troops numbering a hundred thousand men 
and a thousand.... They advanced to the plains of Dalva [and 
of Lavang]. Then Jaya Harivarman led all the troops of Vijaya. 
The two parties engaged in a terrible combat. Jaya Harivarman 
defeated Vamsaraja. The Yavana troops died in great num-
bers.” 8 After he had pacified this area, Jaya Harivarman | sub-
dued Amaravati (Quang-nam) in 1151,129 then Panduranga in 1160 
after five years of battle,130 
Victorious all along the line, he multiplied the religious 
establishments at Mi-sén and Po Nagar,"3' the two great sacred 
places of the kingdom. He sent an embassy to China in 1155 and 
a series of embassies to Dai Viét between 1152 and 1166.13 
Jaya Harivarman | had at his court a high dignitary named 
Jaya Indravarman of Gramapura, “expert in all weapons;... 
versed in all the sastras; learned in grammar, astrology, etc.; 
knowing all the philosophic doctrines; learned in the doctrine of 
the Mahayana, etc.; expert in all the Dharmasastras, following 
especially the Naradiya and the Bhargaviya; taking pleasure in the 
dharma... .’ 13 In 1163-65, we see him making endowments at 
Mi-son.134 
We do not know exactly what happened at the death of 
Jaya Harivarman | in 1166-67. It is not certain that his son Jaya 
Harivarman (Il) ever reigned.’ In any case, Jaya Indravarman of 
Gramapura succeeded in supplanting him and_ requested in-
vestiture from the court of China in 1167.16 , 

--- [Page 188] ---
166 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
The whole beginning of the reign of Jaya Indravarman (IV) 
was taken up with hostilities against Cambodia, in anticipation of 
which he attempted to conciliate the emperor of Dai Viét in 1170 
by sending presents.” In 1177, guided by a Chinese castaway,!38 
“the king of Chan-ch’eng attacked the capital of Chenla without 
warning with a powerful fleet, pillaged it, and put the king of 
Chenla to death without listening to a single peace proposal. 
These events produced a great hatred that bore fruit in the fifth 
year of ch’ing-yuan [1190].’’ 139 
7. BURMA FROM 1113 TO 1173 
At Pagan, Kyanzittha, who died in 1112 or shortly after, 
was succeeded by his grandson Alaung-sithu (Chan’sti = Jayasira), 
who had been born in 1089. Alaung-sithu was crowned under the 
name Tribhuvanaditya Pavaradhammaraja. The new sovereign, 
perhaps of Mon origin on his father’s side,’4° was the great-
grandson of Andratha on his mother’s side. At the beginning of 
his long reign of fifty-five years, he had to put down a rebellion 
in the south of Arakan, and he made his domination felt down to 
Tenasserim.141 
On his return from these expeditions, Alaung-sithu saw 
the old Shin Arahan die at the age of eighty-one 42—the man 
who, about sixty years earlier, had converted Anératha to Thera-
vada Buddhism and indirectly instigated the conquest of 
Thaton.143 
In 1118,14 Alaung-sithu placed Letyaminnan on the throne 
of Arakan. Letyaminnan was the son of the legitimate sovereign 
who had been overthrown by a usurper. In gratitude for this 
restoration,’ Letyaminnan had repairs made on the sanctuary of 
Bodhgaya in India.146 
The Glass Palace Chronicle attributes to Alaung-sithu a 
series of journeys through his states, the construction of various 
works of public utility, and the erection of a great number of 
monuments. He supposedly went to Malaya, to the islands of the 
Arakan coast, to Chittagong and perhaps even Bengal, and to the 
forests of the Bhamo district. As early as 1115, he is supposed to 
have sent a mission to Nanchao,'47 and he then went there him-
self in an unsuccessful attempt to obtain the tooth-relic 8 sought 
previously by his great-grandfather AnGratha. 
The principal constructions of his reign in the capital are 
the temple of Shwegu of 113114? and the beautiful Thatbyinnyu 

--- [Page 189] ---
Cambodia, Burma, and Kadiri 167 
(Sabbanfu, “the Omniscient”) %° of 1150. They mark the transi-
tion between the period of Mon influence and the typically Bur-
mese period of the following reigns. The composition in 1154 of 
the famous Pali grammar Saddaniti by the Burmese Aggavamsa 151 
proves that, a century after the introduction of Theravada Bud-
dhism, Pagan had become an important center of Pali scholar-
ship.152 
The Glass Palace Chronicle says that, since the eldest son 
of the king, Minshinsé, born of the queen Yadanabon, had been 
exiled because he was violent and insolent,3 the second son, 
Narathu (Narasura), born of the daughter of a minister of King 
Kyanzittha, was brought to power. In 1167,154 when the eighty-
one-year-old Alaung-sithu fell ill, Narathu did not hesitate to 
hasten the death of the old man.15 Then began a whole series of 
assassinations. After three years of a bloody reign, marked by the 
murder of his brother Minshinsd, a great number of nobles, of-
ficials, and servants, and the princess of Pateikkaya,56 Narathu 
himself died as the victim of an emissary of the princess's father.157 
Before dying, and to calm his remorse, he had time to build the 
Dhammayan (Dhamaramsi), the largest monument of Pagan.158 
The son of Narathu, Naratheinkha (Narasingha), reigned no more 
than three years, from 1170 to 1173, and was killed by his young 
brother Narapatisithu (Narapatijayasira, or Jayasiira Il), whose 
wife he had stolen.159 
This is the Chronicle’s very romanticized account of the 
events following the death of Alaung-sithu. But all we can con-
clude from epigraphy is that Alaung-sithu died a septuagenarian. 
His successor Narathu died in 1165, assassinated by foreigners, 
probably Singhalese who had invaded the country the year be-
fore.©° The Chronicle claims that Narathu had a son Naratheinkha 
who, after a reign of three years, supposedly was assassinated in 
1173 by his younger brother. This Naratheinkha does not seem to 
have ever existed. In fact, we know of no kings of Pagan between 
1165 and 1173. In 1173, perhaps with the aid of the Singhalese, 
the dynasty of Anératha was restored in the person of Narapatisi-
thu.161 
8. INDONESIA FROM 1115 TO 1178; THE KINGDOM OF KADIRI 
Compared with the wars of the Khmers and Chams and the 
dramas of the Burmese, the history of the states of Indonesia dur-
ing this whole period is singularly colorless. 

--- [Page 190] ---
168 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
For San-fo-ch’i, we have only the mention in the History 
of the Sung of one embassy sent to China in 1156 by the king 
Sri Maharaja and another embassy in 1178.16 Ma Tuan-lin cites 
a third embassy in 1176 and adds that the king who sent the 
embassy of 1178 began his reign in 1169.16 The Arab geographers 
continue to speak of Zabag and the maharaja, but they are copy-
| ing from one another without adding much information to that 
of their predecessors. Edrisi, who wrote in 1154, gives, however, 
an interesting detail: “It is said that when the state of affairs of 
China became troubled by rebellions and when tyranny and 
confusion became excessive in India, the inhabitants of China 
transferred their trade to Zabag and the other islands dependent 
on it, entered into relations with it, and familiarized themselves 
with its inhabitants because of their justice, the goodness of their 
conduct, the pleasantness of their customs, and their facility in 
business. It is because of this that this island is so heavily populated 
and so often frequented by foreigners.” 164 
For Java, we have only the names of a series of kings of 
Kadiri, mentioned in foundation charters: 16 
Bamesvara (1117-30),166 who received privileges from the emperor 
of China in 1129 and 1132.167 
Varmesvara, also known as Jayabhaya (1135-79),168 who was per-
haps the son of Bamesvara. During his reign, in 1157, the poet 
Sedah began the Javanese version of the Bharatayuddha,169 
a history of the battles of the Mahabharata that was finished 
by Panuluh, author of the Harivamsa,170 a collection of 
legends about Vishnu. 
Sarvesvara,!71 who was reigning in 1159-61. 
AryeSvara,172 who was reigning in 1171. 
Kroncharyadipa (also known as Gandra),173 who was reigning in 
1181. 
For Bali, we have only the names of Suradhipa in 1115-19 and 
of Jayasakti in 1146-50.17%4 

--- [Page 191] ---
CHAPTER XI 
CAMBODIA AT THE HEIGHT OF ITS POWER; 
THE INTRODUCTION OF SINGHALESE 
BUDDHISM IN BURMA: AND THE 
JAVANESE KINGDOM OF SINGHASARI 
Last Quarter of the Twelfth Century and First Two Thirds of 
the Thirteenth Century 
1. CAMBODIA: JAYAVARMAN VII (1181-—CA. 1218) 
AND THE ANNEXATION OF CHAMPA 
Jayavarman VII inherited the difficult task of pulling Cam-
bodia from the “sea of misfortune into which it had been 
plunged’? by the Cham invasion of 1177. 
Through his father, Dharanindravarman II, he was a second 
cousin of Suryavarman Il, and through his mother, Chudamani, 
daughter of Harshavarman III, he was a descendant of the kings 
of the dynasty that had reigned over the country for almost the 
whole of the eleventh century and that was related, on the female 
side, to the ancient kings of pre-Angkorian Cambodia. He was 
born at the latest in 1125,2 during the reign of Siryavarman HI, 
and he married, undoubtedly while still young, Princess Jayaraja-
devi, who seems to have had great influence over him. 
Jayavarman left Cambodia—just when is not known—to 
conduct a military expedition in Champa, at Vijaya (Binh-dinh), 
where he learned of the death of his father, the accession of 
Yasovarman II, and finally of the usurpation of Tribhuvanaditya. 
“He returned in great haste to aid King Yasovarman,” says the stele 
of the Phimeanakas. We may assume that he also wanted to 
assert his rights to the throne. “But,” continues the inscription, 
“Yasovarman had been stripped of throne and life by the usurper, 
and Jayavarman remained in Cambodia waiting for the propitious 
moment to save the land heavy with crimes.” He had to wait 
fifteen years. 
When the Cham invasion had rid the country of the usurper, 
Jayavarman realized that the hour had come. But before proclaim-
ing himself king, he had to deliver the country from the invaders. 
He waged a series of battles against the Chams; especially note-
worthy was a naval battle—represented in almost identical fashion 

--- [Page 192] ---
170 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
on the walls of the Bayon and of Banteay Ch’mar—that finally 
succeeded in liberating the country.? 
By 1181, four years after the invasion of 1177, Cambodia 
had become calm again and Jayavarman had himself crowned. He 
then undertook the restoration of the capital, encircling it with 
the moats and the wall that constitute the enclosures of present-
day Angkor Thom.* 
At the time of the Cham invasion, Jayavarman, in the words 
of Ma Tuan-lin,= “decided to wreak terrible vengeance on his 
enemies, which he succeeded in doing after eighteen years of 
patient dissimulation.” 
But, before keeping his oath and waging war against the 
Chams, he had to cope with a revolt in the interior of his states 
that broke out at Malyang, in the south of the modern province 
of Battambang. To put it down, he solicited the assistance of a 
young refugee Cham prince, who is described in a Cham inscrip-
tion of Mi-sdn 7 in these terms: 
When he was in the prime of youth, in Saka 1104 [1182 A.D.], 
Prince Vidyanandana went to Cambodia. The king of Cambodia, seeing 
that he had all the thirty-three marks [of the fated man], took an interest 
in him and taught him, like a prince, all the sciences and military skills. 
While he was living in Cambodia, a city in this kingdom named Malyang, 
which was inhabited by a throng of wicked men over whom the Cam-
bodians had established their mastery, revolted against the king of Cam-
bodia. This king, seeing that the prince was well versed in military 
science, charged him with leading the Cambodian troops to take the city 
of Malyang. He complied completely with the wishes of the king of 
Cambodia. This king, seeing his valor, conferred on him the high rank 
of Yuvaraja and gave him all the possessions and good things that could 
be found in the kingdom of Cambodia. 
This young Cham prince served as an instrument of Jayavar-
man’s revenge against Champa. Jayavarman prepared for this re-
venge, the fruit of long years of “patient dissimulation,”” by making 
sure of the neutrality of the emperor of Dai Viét, Ly Cao-tong, in 
1190.8 He then had only to wait for a propitious occasion. This 
was offered him the same year by a new attack of the Cham king 
Jaya Indravarman ong Vatuv.? 
Did he himself take part in the battle against Champa? We 
are not certain, although an inscription of the temple of Po Nagar 
at Nha-trang says that he “took the capital of Champa and car-
tied off all the lingas.” 1 In any case, he entrusted the command 

--- [Page 193] ---
Cambodia at the Height of Its Power 171 
of his troops to the young Cham prince Vidyanandana. This prince 
seized the capital Vijaya (Binh-dinh) and King Jaya Indravarman, 
whom he brought back as a prisoner to Cambodia. In Jaya Indravar-
man’s place he put Prince In, the brother-in-law of King Jaya-
varman VII, who took the reign name Suryajayavarmadeva. Vid-
yanandana carved out a kingdom for himself to the south, at 
Panduranga, under the name of Suryavarmadeva. Thus Champa 
was divided between two kings, one of whom was related 
to the king of Cambodia and the other enfeoffed to him. This 
state of affairs did not last long. A revolt at Vijaya drove the 
brother-in-law of Jayavarman VII back to Cambodia and put in 
his place the Cham prince Rashupati (Jaya Indravarman V). Vidya-
nandana, i.e., Suryavarmadeva, master at Phan-rang, took advan-
tage of this revolt to throw off the yoke of the king of Cambodia 
and reunify the country in his own interest, killing successively the 
two Jaya Indravarmans, the one from Vijaya (i.e., Rashupati) and 
the other the former prisoner of Cambodia, whom Jayavarman 
VII had probably sent against Vidyanandana. 
By 1192, Vidyanandana-Suryavarmadeva was reigning “with-
out opposition” over the unified country. In 1193 and 1194, 
Jayavarman VII tried unsuccessfully to bring him back to obe-
dience."? It was not until 1203 that the Cham king’s paternal uncle, 
the Yuvaraja ong Dhanapatigrama, in the pay of Cambodia, suc-
ceeded in expelling him.13 Vidyanandana-Suryavarmadeva re-
quested asylum from the emperor of Dai Viét; he was turned 
down, even though the emperor had granted him investiture in 
1199, and he disappeared without a trace. From 1203 to 1220, 
Champa was a Khmer province, under the government of the | 
Yuvaraja ong Dhanapatigrama, who was soon joined by a grand-
son of King Jaya Harivarman I, Prince Angéaraja of Turai-vijaya, 
who had been raised at the court of Jayavarman VII and promoted 
by him in 1201 to the rank of Yuvaraja.14 This prince led the 
Cambodian troops, with Burmese and Siamese contingents, against 
Dai Viét in 1207.1 We shall see that in 1226 he became king of 
Champa under the name Jaya Paramesvaravarman II. During this 
reign Khmer art continued to have some influence on Cham art 
at Binh-dinh."® 
Jayavarman VII’s quarrels with his neighbors to the east did 
not prevent him from extending the limits of his empire in the 
north and west. The northernmost of the Cambodian inscriptions, 

--- [Page 194] ---
172 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
that of Sai Fong, on the Mekong across from Wiangchan, dated 
1186, dates from his reign. 
The list of the dependencies of Chenla given by Chao Ju-kua 
in 1225,'” but borrowed in part from the Ling-wai Tai-ta of 1178, 
shows that Cambodia then exercised at least nominal suzerainty 
over a part of the Malay Peninsula and even into Burma. Express-
ing the same general idea, an inscription of Jayavarman dated 
1191 78 tells us that his daily wash-water was furnished by “the 
Brahmans beginning with Suryabhatta, by the king of Java, by 
| the king of the Yavanas, and by the two kings of the Chams.” The 
Brahman Suryabhatta was probably the chief court Brahman. The 
king of the Yavanas was the emperor of Dai Viét who came to 
the throne in 1175 under the name of Ly Cao-téng and reigned 
until 1210. The king of Java was undoubtedly Kamesvara. The 
two kings of Champa were, as we have just seen, Suryajayavar-
madeva, king at Vijaya (Binh-dinh), brother-in-law of Jayavarman 
Vil, and Stryavarmadeva, king at Panduranga (Phan-rang), the 
former Prince Vidyanandana, protégé of Jayavarman VII. We know 
that the tribute of water was a sign of allegiance. It is possible that 
the two kings of Champa actually paid such tribute, but it is in-
finitely less likely that the two others did. 
At the death of Jayarajadevi, the king conferred the title of 
first queen on her elder sister Indradevi, who “surpassed in her 
knowledge the knowledge of philosophers” and whom he had 
named principal teacher at a Buddhist monastery, where she in-
structed the women. It was she who composed in impeccable 
Sanskrit the inscription of the Phimeanakas,!? a panegyric of her 
sister, from which we draw most of our biographical information 
concerning the career of Jayavarman VII. 
We do not know the exact date of Jayavarman VII's death,”° 
but he probably reigned until around 1218.4! He received the 
posthumous name Mahaparamasaugata.”4 
In physical appearance, he was a rather corpulent man with 
heavy features who wore his hair pulled back on top of his head 
in a small chignon. All these details, which appear clearly on the 
bas-reliefs,23 are found on four statues which obviously represent 
the same person and are almost certainly portraits of Jayavarman 
VII1.24 
From the exceptionally rich biographical data on Jayavarman 
VII emerges the image of an energetic, ambitious man who, after 

--- [Page 195] ---
Cambodia at the Height of Its Power 173 
long years of waiting and trial, saved his country from ruin and 
raised it to the height of its power. The inscriptions represent him 
as a fervent Buddhist who received this faith from his father 
Dharanindravarman II, who had broken with the tradition of his 
Hindu predecessors and ‘found his satisfaction in this nectar that 
is the religion of Sakyamuni.” > Theirs was the Buddhism of the 
Greater Vehicle. Devotion to Lokesvara was central in their Ma-
hayanist faith; it was in the form of this compassionate Bodhisattva 
that individuals, dead or even living, were apotheosized. 
Although we can scarcely doubt that Jayavarman VII was 
personally a Buddhist, we nevertheless observe that Brahmans 
continued to play a more than negligible role at court. An inscrip-
tion of Angkor Thom tells us about the curious figure of a 
Brahman scholar who “having learned that Cambodia was full of 
eminent experts on the Veda, came here to manifest his knowl-
edge.” His name was Hrishikega; he belonged to the Brahmanic 
clan of the Bharadvaja and came from Narapatidesa, ‘“which can 
be identified with some probability with Burma, where King Nara-
patisithu was reigning at precisely this time.” 2” Jayavarman VII 
made him his chief priest (ourohita) and conferred on him the 
title of Jayamahapradhana. He continued to serve under the two 
successors of Jayavarman VII. 
The personality of Jayavarman VII, which the inscriptions 
provide only glimpses of, finds full expression in the architectural 
work he conceived. This work consists of Angkor Thom with its 
walls, its moats, its five gateways, and the Bayon in the center; it 
consists, in the environs of the capital, of Banteay Kdei, Ta Prohm, 
Preah Khan, Neak Pean, and a whole group of sanctuaries of lesser 
importance; it consists of Banteay Ch’mar in the northwest, Vat 
Nokor at Kompong Cham, Ta Prohm at Bati, almost all character-
ized by towers decorated with large human faces; 28 it consists of 
the rest houses placed along the long raised highways, many of 
which may have been laid out by him; and it consists of 102 
hospitals widely distributed throughout the kingdom. 
In view of the extensiveness of this work, we may ask our-
selves whether in certain cases he might not have finished monu-
ments begun by his predecessors and taken full credit for them 
himself or whether, on the other hand, the edifices begun by him 
might not have been finished by his successor. One flaw in the 
first hypothesis is the fact that from the end of the reign of 

--- [Page 196] ---
174 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia , 
Suryavarman II, the creator of Angkor Wat, to the beginning of the 
reign of Jayavarman VII the country was prey to a series of revo-
lutions, a situation scarcely favorable to the construction of large 
architectural groups.?? The second hypothesis would have greater 
validity if there had not been, as | believe there was,3° a temporary 
restoration of Sivaite orthodoxy, which encouraged acts of van-
dalism from which the monuments of Jayavarman VII suffered, 
, preceding the reign of his second successor, Jayavarman VIII, in 
the second half of the thirteenth century. | 
The earliest of these monuments is perhaps Banteay Kdei, 
which was constructed east of the capital on the ancient site of 
Kuti >! and directly to the east of which is the magnificent basin, 
still full of water in all seasons, that is called the Sras Srang, or : 
“Royal Bath.” Lacking the stele which would undoubtedly have 
told us the ancient name, we can suppose that Banteay Kdei 
corresponded to the Purvatathagata, or “Buddha of the East,” of the inscriptions.22 , 
Rajavihara, today Ta Prohm, so close to Banteay Kdei that 
its southeast corner almost touches the northwest corner of 
Banteay Kdei, was constructed in 1186 to shelter an image of the 
queen mother Jayarajachudamani in the form of Prajhaparamita 
_ (the “Perfection of Insight,” mystic mother of the Buddhas) and | 
an image of Jayamangalartha, guru of the king.°3 
Five years after Ta Prohm, in 1191, the king dedicated north 
of the capital the temple of Jayagri, which today bears the name 
Preah Khan and which was designed to shelter the statue of his 
father, King Dharanindravarman II, deified in the form of the 
Bodhisattva Lokesvara under the name Jayavarmeévara.34 
Among the lesser structures of Preah Khan the foundation 
stele of the temple mentions the little temple of Rajyagri, built 
in the middle of the great artificial lake dug to the east of the 
monument. This temple, now known under the name Neak Pean, 
is described as “an eminent island, deriving its charm from its 
lake and cleansing the impurity of sin from those who come to 
it.” It is the architectural representation of Lake Anavatapta, 
which, according to Indian tradition, is located in the confines 
of the Himalayas, and its waters gush out of gargoyles in the form 
of the heads of animals.* 
From around 1190 on, important alterations, particularly the 
construction of towers with human faces and of new encircling 

--- [Page 197] ---
Cambodia at the Height of Its Power 175 
galleries, were made in earlier monuments. It was also at the 
end of the reign that work was begun on Banteay Ch’mar and on 
the Bayon, or central temple of Angkor Thom, which was situated 
in the geometric center of the restored city. It is important to note , 
that both the Bayon and the twelve-kilometer wall around the 
city were new. Although the architectural symbolism of the Bayon 
is obscured by the fact that its plan underwent two, or perhaps 
three, modifications in the course of its execution,26 we can state 
that its central solid mass corresponds to the central mountain of 
the ancient capitals. Instead of the Devaraja of the preceding 
reigns represented by a gold linga, however, the central sanctuary 
sheltered an enormous stone statue?” of the Buddharaja. This 
statue was not only a Buddhist substitute for the Sivaite Devaraja 
but also a statue of apotheosis of the founder king, whose fea-
tures are undoubtedly also to be seen on the upper parts of the 
towers in the form of the Bodhisattva Lokegvara Samantamukha, 
“who has faces in all directions.” 3° The interior and exterior gal-
leries of the Bayon are covered with bas-reliefs which are invalu-
able for understanding the material life of the Khmers in the 
twelfth century.?9 
The inscriptions engraved at the entrance of the chapels of 
the Bayon * reveal further that it was a sort of pantheon where 
the family cults of the king and the provincial cults of the country 
were centered. Just as the city with its wall and central mountain 
represents the universe in miniature, the Bayon represents the kingdom in miniature. , 
Four axial avenues extend in the four directions from the 
Bayon; these avenues are augmented by a fifth that begins at the 
entrance of the old Royal Palace, an inheritance from the pre-
ceding reigns, and proceeds to the east. These avenues lead to 
five monumental gates, each of which reproduces the basic motif 
of the central temple, that is, the tower with human faces looking 
toward the four cardinal points. Outside the gates the city is ap-
proached by causeways flanked by balustrades in the form of 
nagas. These balustrades symbolize the rainbow, which in Indian 
tradition is the connecting link between the world of men and 
the world of the gods, represented on earth by the royal city. 
Among the numerous religious monuments of the king 
enumerated in the stele of Preah Khan “ are twenty-three statues 
named Jayabuddhamahanatha that have been preserved in many 

--- [Page 198] ---
176 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
cities, among which are Lopburi, Suphan, Ratburi, Phetchaburi, 
and Muang Sing, all of which are in Thailand today. The name 
given to these statues recalls that of the king. Perhaps it was in 
order to shelter these statues that some of the provincial sanctu-
aries, whose style permits us to attribute them to the reign of 
Jayavarman VII, were built: for example, Vat Nokor of Kompong 
Cham and Ta Prohm of Bati.*2 As for Banteay Ch’mar,“ it was a 
temple consecrated to the memory of one of the sons of Jayavar-
man VII, Prince Srindrakumara, and four companions in arms who 
saved the life of the prince, notably at the time of his combat 
against the monster Rahu * and in the course of a military expedi-
tion in Champa. 
The stele of Preah Khan “© mentions 121 “houses with fire,” 
or rest houses, about fifteen kilometers apart, built by Jayavarman 
VII along the routes cutting across the kingdom: fifty-seven are on 
the route from Angkor to the capital of Champa (Phan-rang or 
Vijaya in Binh-dinh), seventeen (of which eight have been found) 
on the route from Angkor to Phimai on the Khorat Plateau, 
forty-four on a circuit marked by cities the locations of which 
are still uncertain, one at Phnom Chisor, and two others that are 
still unidentified. A century later, this system still existed and 
caught the attention of the Chinese envoy Chou Ta-kuan, who 
wrote in the account of his voyage: “On the major roads there 
are rest houses comparable to our post houses.” 4” 
The creation of rest houses was coupled with the construc-
tion of 102 hospitals,** distributed throughout the entire country. 
We are sure of the sites of about fifteen of them, thanks to the 
discovery in situ of their foundation steles, the Sanskrit texts of 
which are almost uniformly identical.*? If we add seventeen other 
monuments that are similar in architectural arrangement to the 
remains in which the steles were found and that seem to date 
from the same period, we can say that we know the locations of 
more than thirty of the 102 hospitals of Jayavarman VI, or close 
to a third.°? 
The foundation steles give us interesting information on the 
organization >! of these establishments, which were placed under 
the protection of the healer Buddha, Bhaishajyaguru Vaidurya-
prabha, “the master of remedies who has the brilliance of beryl,” 
who is still one of the most popular Buddhas today in China and 
Tibet.>4 

--- [Page 199] ---
Cambodia at the Height of Its Power 177 
Such, in short, was the work of Jayavarman VII, a very heavy 
program for a people who were already exhausted by the wars 
and the constructions of Suryavarman II and who henceforth would 
find themselves helpless against the attacks of their neighbors. 
2. BURMA: NARAPATISITHU (1173-1210) 
AND THE INTRODUCTION OF SINGHALESE BUDDHISM 
The Glass Palace Chronicle claims that Narapatisithu (Nara-
patijayasura, or Jayasura Il), who became king at Pagan in 1173 
after the murder of his older brother Naratheinkha (Narasingha), 
began his reign by ridding himself of the perpetrator of the crime 
that he himself had ordered as the principal counselor of the 
late king. But epigraphy says nothing about these events, al-
though this does not mean that they are necessarily entirely 
Imaginary. 
At the beginning of his reign, Narapatisithu had a disagree-
ment with the representative of King Parakramabahu | of Ceylon, 
a representative who was established in one of the ports of the 
delta, probably Bassein. The vexation of the king mounted to such 
a point that he imprisoned Singhalese envoys and tradesmen and 
seized their merchandise and finally captured a princess of Ceylon 
who was crossing Burma on her way to Cambodia. The result was 
a retaliatory raid launched by Parakramabahu in 1180. Surprised 
by a storm, the Singhalese boats were scattered. One of them 
landed at Kakadipa (“island of the crows”), five others at Kusumi 
(Bassein); the one carrying the leader of the expedition reached 
Papphala. The Singhalese disembarked pillaging, burning, mas-
sacring, and taking prisoners.%4 
This raid did not keep the relations between Ceylon and 
Burma from drawing closer on the spiritual plane. Panthagu, suc-
cessor of Shin Arahan as the head of the Buddhist clergy, had 
left Pagan in 1167 after the first crimes of King Narathu and had 
gone to Ceylon; »° he returned to Burma shortly after the accession 
of Narapatisithu. He died in Pagan at the age of ninety, shortly 
after 1173, apparently not without having praised the excellence 
of Singhalese Buddhism, which was then being reinvigorated by 
King Parakramabahu | (around 1153-86), who recognized the 
orthodoxy of the sect of Mahavihara.°° The successor of Panthagu, 
a Mon named Uttarajiva, embarked for Ceylon in 1180°7 with a 
group of monks, bearers of a message of peace addressed to the 

--- [Page 200] ---
178 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
sovereign of the island.°8 He left there a young Mon novice, twenty 
years old, named Chapata, who remained in Ceylon for ten years 
and returned in 1190 with four other monks who, like him, had 
received ordination according to the rites of the Mahavihara; 
one of them, Tamalinda, was a son of the king of Cambodia,°? 
undoubtedly Jayavarman VII. 
Their return brought about a schism in the Burmese church, 
which, we remember, had been founded by Shin Arahan, a disci-
ple of the Kanchi school, and marked the beginning of the per-
manent establishment of Singhalese Buddhism on the Indochinese 
~ Peninsula.' Chapata, also known as Saddhammajotipala, was the 
author of a series of works in Pali, notably the grammatical treatise 
Suttaniddesa and the Sankhepavannana, a commentary on the 
compendium of metaphysics named Abhidhammatthasangaha.© 
Another Mon monk of the same sect, Dhammavilasa, who 
as a monk was known as Sariputta, was the author of the first col-
lection of laws composed in the Mon country, the Dhammavilasa 
Dhammathat, written in Pali and known through a Burmese trans-
lation of the eighteenth century.® 
In 1197, Narapatisithu received new relics from Ceylon. 
Narapatisithu, whose authority extended to Mergui and to 
the Shan states, seems to have had quite a peaceful and prosper-
ous reign which permitted him to develop his irrigation works.© 
He enriched his capital with several monuments, of which the 
two main ones were: Sulamani & (1183), which marks the final 
decline of Mon influence; and Géd6palin (before 1230). 
Before dying in 1210, he chose as heir apparent his young 
son Zeyatheinkha (Jayasimha), whose mother was a concubine,®” 
and succeeded in getting him recognized by his elder brothers 
of higher rank.®8 
3. INDONESIA AT THE END OF THE TWELFTH CENTURY: 
THE WEAKENING OF SRIVIAYA (PALEMBANG) 
TO THE BENEFIT OF MALAYU (JAMBI) 
We have already mentioned the embassy to China from 
San-fo-ch’i in 1178, the last registered in the History of the Sung. 
This same year saw the publication of the Ling-wai Tai-ta of 
Chou Ch’i-fei, the information in which was reproduced for the 
most part in 1225 in the Chu-fan-chih of Chao Ju-kua.® In reading 

--- [Page 201] ---
Cambodia at the Height of Its Power 179 
Chao Ju-kua, we get the impression that the Sumatran kingdom 
was beginning to break apart by the end of the twelfth century: 
Chan-pei (Jambi), the former Malayu, is not listed among the 
; dependencies of San-fo-ch’i, and the Ling-wai Tai-ta says that as 
early as 1079, and then in 1082 and 1088, this state had sent em-
bassies to China on its own initiative.”? Tan-ma-ling, Ling-ya-ssu-
chia, Fo-lo-an, Sin-t’o, Chien-t’o, Chien-pi (Kampe), and Lan-wu-li 
(Achin), although listed among the dependencies of San-fo-ch’i, 
were the subject of separate notices,”1 and concerning Chien-pi the 
text explicitly states that “formerly it was a dependency of San-fo-
ts’i, but, after a fight, it set up a king of its own.” ” 
If it is premature to speak of the decline of Srivijaya as early 
as 1178,”3 it is nevertheless necessary to take into account new 
factors in the large island, especially concerning Malayu (Jambi), 
which perhaps as early as this period became the center of gravity 
of the empire of the maharaja at the expense of Palembang.”* In 
1183, a king named Trailokyaraja Maulibhishanavarmadeva cast 
a bronze Buddha called the ‘Buddha of Grahi” at Chaiya on the 
Bay of Bandon.” the name of this king recalls in striking fashion 
the title system in use in Malayu,76 and we wonder if the king 
responsible for this statue on the Malay Peninsula was not a king 
of Malayu. 
Whether it had its center at Palembang or at Jambi, the 
Sumatran kingdom known to the Chinese under the name of 
San-fo-ch’i was still a great power, “an important thoroughfare,” 
says Chou Ch’i-fei, “on the sea-routes of the Foreigners on their 
way to and from (China),” 7” and continued to draw its power 
from the simultaneous possession of the two shores of the straits. 
In Java, during the last two decades of the twelfth century, 
we know the names of two kings of Kadiri: Kamesvara and 
Sringa. 
For Kameégvara we have inscriptions of 1182 and 1185.78 
During his reign Tanakung composed the metric treatise named 
Vrittasanchaya.”? It was also during his reign that Dharmaja wrote 
the Smaradahana, a poem tracing the history of Love reduced to 
cinders by Siva ®? but also a poem written for the times, as its 
name alone clearly shows.®! Kamesvara’s wife was a princess of 
Janggala, and it was perhaps this royal couple who served as the 
historical basis for the tales of the Raden Panji cycle,82 which be-

--- [Page 202] ---
180 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
came very popular and, under the name /Inao (Javanese Hino), 
spread to Thailand 8 and to Cambodia ® and became very pop-
ular there also. 
, For Sringa, who will be discussed later under his name 
Kritajaya, we have inscriptions dated from 1194 to 1205.8 
The commercial prosperity of Java in this period is apparent 
from a remark by Chou Ch’ii-fei in his Ling-wai Tai-ta (1178): 
“Of all the wealthy foreign lands which have great store of 
precious and varied goods, none surpass the realm of the Arabs 
(Ta-shi). Next to them comes Java (Sh6-p’o); the third is Palem-
bang (San-fo-ts’i). . . ./” 86 
In Bali, the inscriptions between 1178 and 1181 are in the 
name of Jayapangus; ®” those of 1204, in the name of Adikuntike-
tana and his son Paramesvara.®8 The funerary site and the stone 
cloister of Tampak Siring, one of the archaeological curiosities of 
the island,®? date from this period. 
4. CAMBODIA IN THE FIRST HALF OF THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 
The circumstances in which the critical succession to the 
throne vacated by Jayavarman VII took place are very obscure. 
He had many sons, of whom we know at least four: Siryaku-
mara, author of the inscription of Ta Prohm; % Virakumara, author 
of the inscription of Preah Khan and son of the queen Rajen-
dradevi; ————indravarman, governor of Lavo 92 and son of the 
queen Jayarajadevi; and finally Srindrakumara, whose statue, sur-
rounded by those of four companions in arms, was placed in the 
central chapel of Banteay Ch’mar.% Was it Srindrakumara who suc-
ceeded his father under the name of Indravarman (Il)? The sim-
ilarity of the names proves little. Moreover, if, as it appears from 
the inscription of Banteay Ch’mar,% Srindrakumara was old enough 
| to aid King Yasovarman II against Rahu before 1165, it is difficult 
to believe that he was still living in 1243, the date of the death 
of Indravarman II. The lack of epigraphy for the whole begin-
ning of the thirteenth century condemns us to ignorance. 
We are informed by Chinese and Vietnamese sources that in 
1216 and in 1218 “for the last time, Cambodian armies descended 
on Nghé-an; they came through Champa and with a contingent 
of troops of that country; the allies were nevertheless defeated 
again and had to withdraw.” % In 1220, the Cambodians evac-
uated Champa,” restoring the throne of Vijaya to the Cham 

--- [Page 203] ---
Cambodia at the Height of Its Power 181 
prince Angsaraja of Turai-vijaya. Angsaraja was the eldest son of 
Jaya Harivarman II], who, as we have seen, had been raised at 
the court of Jayavarman VII and had been returned to his country 
at the beginning of the Khmer occupation.%8 This retreat of Cam-
bodia, contemporaneous with the emancipation of the Thai princi-
palities, was perhaps a consequence of the death of Jayavarman | 
VII.99 
In his Chu-fan-chih, published in 1225, Chao Ju-kua refers 
to the wars between Cambodia and Champa in the last quarter 
of the twelfth century and to the annexation of the second by the 
first. According to Chao Ju-kua, Cambodia touched, on the 
south, Chia-lo-hsi (Grahi), a vassal of San-fo-ch’i situated, as we 
have seen, on the Malay Peninsula at the latitude of the Bay of 
Bandgn."" Its dependencies were: 
Teng-liu-mei (on the Malay Peninsula),12 
Po-ssu-lan (on the coast of the Gulf of Siam), ~ 
Lo-hu (Lavo, Lopburi), 
San-lo (the country of Syam on the upper Menam?),13 
Chen-li-fu (on the coast of the Gulf of Siam),1% 
Ma-lo-wen (perhaps Malyang, in the south of Battambang), 
Lu-yang (2), 
T’un-li-fu (2), 
P’u-kan (Pagan), 
Wa-li (in upper Burma), 
Si-p’eng (?), 
Tu-huai-siin (2). 
This list shows that, on the eve of the Thai expansion, Cam-
bodia was still master of the Menam Basin and of a part of the 
Malay Peninsula. Its claims over Burma were perhaps based on 
the fact that Burmese contingents accompanied Cambodian armies 
in their expedition of 1207 against Dai Viét.1% 
We know only one date for King Indravarman II, that of his 
death, 1243.19 
5. CHAMPA AFTER THE END OF THE KHMER OCCUPATION 
(1220-57) 
That it was impossible for the successor of Jayavarman VII 
to maintain the unity of the Cambodian empire became clear in 
Champa as early as 1220. In this year, says an inscription, ‘the 
Khmers went to the sacred country and the people of Champa 

--- [Page 204] ---
182 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
came to Vijaya.” 1” This evacuation, voluntary or imposed, was 
, followed six years later by the coronation, under the name of 
Jaya Paramesvaravarman (II),'°8 of Prince AngSaraja of Turai-vijaya, 
who, we recall, was a grandson of Jaya Harivarman I and had been 
brought up at the court of Jayavarman VII. “Thus ends,” says 
Georges Maspero,! “this Hundred Years’ War between the Chams 
and the Khmers. The latter, henceforth engrossed with a new 
enemy, Siam, no longer will dream of the conquest of Champa. 
They will limit themselves, for centuries, merely to following the 
events that will occur in this kingdom. Adventurers greedy for 
booty and glory will go to the head of irregular bands, putting 
their forces at the service of various pretenders and playing a 
large part in all the civil wars.” A great part of the reign of Jaya 
Paramesvaravarman I] was taken up with the restoration of irri-
gation works and the rebuilding of ruins that had accumulated in 
the country during the wars. “He reestablished all the lingas of 
the south save those of Yang Pu Nagara [Po Nagar of Nha-trang] 
and the lingas of the north save those of Sriganabhadregvara [Mi-
sdn]./”” 171 
Toward the end of his reign, he came into conflict with 
Dai Viét, where a new dynasty, the Tran, had been reigning since 
1225. The emperor Tran Thai-téng sent to the Cham king protests 
against the incessant piracy to which the Chams subjected the 
coasts of Dai Viét; Jaya Paramesvaravarman responded by de-
manding the retrocession of the three provinces of the north, a 
constant source of trouble between the two countries. In 1252, 
the emperor of Dai Viét himself led a punitive expedition that 
brought back many prisoners, among whom were dignitaries and 
women of the palace.12 
This conflict may have resulted in the death of the king, 
for shortly afterward we find on the throne his younger brother, 
Prince Harideva of Sakafi-vijaya, who as Yuvaraja had in 1249 
conducted an expedition against Panduranga.”3 This new king, 
who “knew all the sciences and was versed in the philosophy of 
the various schools,” ™ took Jaya Indravarman (VI) as his reign 
name. He reigned for only a short time; in 1257 he was assassi-
- nated by his nephew Harideva.15 
6. BURMA: THE LAST KINGS OF PAGAN (1210-74) 
The Glass Palace Chronicle says that, before dying in 1210, 
Narapatisithu chose as his heir his young son Zeyatheinkha (Jaya-

--- [Page 205] ---
Cambodia at the Height of Its Power 183 
simha), also known as Nadaungmya, whose mother was a con-
cubine; that his other brothers of higher birth accepted him be-
cause ‘the royal parasol miraculously inclined itself’ toward him 
(hence the name T’i-lo-min-lo by which he is known); and that 
the new king had the wisdom to relinquish power to his broth-
ers.116 It seems that in reality things happened differently: Zeya-
theinkha resigned only part of his power to his ministers after 
his accession to the throne in 1211.1” His reign, which came to 
an end no later than 1231, was marked by the construction of the 
last two great monuments of the capital, the Mahabodhi,™® a 
replica of the famous temple of Bodhgaya in India, and the T’i-lo-
min-lo,"9 built on the spot where “the parasol inclined itself.” 
If we believe the Chronicle, T’i-lo-min-lo was succeeded by 
his son Ky6zwa, a prince of great piety who abandoned effective 
power to his son Uzana so that he could spend his days with the 
Buddhist monks.'29 But, according to epigraphy, Nadaungmya 
was succeeded first by his eldest son Narasimha Uzana,"*' then 
in 1235 by his younger son Kyézwa (l).124 Kyézwa strengthened 
internal security and restored finances. His reign was marked by 
some literary activity, especially grammatical.’43 He died in 1250. 
Uzana, who was both his nephew and his son-in-law, succeeded 
him; he reigned only four years and died in a hunting accident.'*4 
At Uzana’s death in 1256, the legitimate heir, Thingathu 
(Singhastra), was supplanted by Narathihapate (Narasihapati),125 
the sixteen-year-old son of a concubine. He is known by the name 
Tarukphyi, “he who fled before the Taruks [Mongols].” The Chron-
icle says that the minister Yazathinkyan (Rajasankrama), to whom 
he owed his elevation, was quickly brushed aside, as one removes 
the scaffolding once the pagoda is built,!2° but was soon recalled 
to repress the troubles at Martaban and in Arakan.!?” We have no 
epigraphic proof of these assertions. 
In 1274 the king undertook the construction of the temple 
of Mingalazedi (Mangalachetiya) as a site for statues of the princes 
and princesses of the dynasty. Soothsayers predicted that the 
temple’s completion would mark the end of the kingdom.18 
Pagan did in fact soon fall into the hands of the Mongols. 
7. SRIVIAYA ON THE EVE OF ITS DISMEMBERMENT (1225-70) 
Despite the portents of its approaching breakup, San-fo-ch’i 
was still a great power at the beginning of the thirteenth century. 
Chao Ju-kua attributes to it no less than fifteen vassal states: 12? 

--- [Page 206] ---
184 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
P’eng-feng (Pahang), 
Teng-ya-nung (Trengganu), 
Ling-ya-ssu-chia (Langkasuka), 
Chi-lan-tan (Kelantan), 
Fo-lo-an (Kuala Berang),!°? 
Jih-lo-t’ing (on the eastern coast of the peninsula?),!91 
Ch’ien-mai-pa-t’a (?),152 
Tan-ma-ling (Tambralinga, in the region of Ligor), 
Chia-lo-hsi (Grahi, on the Bay of Bandgon),' 
Pa-lin-feng (Palembang), 
Sin-t’o (Sunda, western Java),134 
Chien-pi (Kampe, on the east coast of Sumatra), 
Lan-wu-li (Lamuri, northern extremity of Sumatra), 
Si-lan (Ceylon). 
This list covers all of the Malay Peninsula south of the Bay 
of Bandon and all of western Indonesia; the maharaja always 
drew his strength from the simultaneous possession of the two 
shores of the strait: Srivijaya-Kataha, or Sribuza-Kalah. 
This thalassocracy, however, seems to have degenerated into 
an outright piratical enterprise. “This country,” writes Chao Ju-
kua,> “lying in the ocean and controlling the straits through 
which foreigners’ sea and land traffic, in either direction must 
pass....If a merchant ship passes by without entering, their boats 
go forth to make a combined attack, and all are ready to die 
(in the attempt). This is the reason why this country is a great 
shipping centre.” 
We have seen in the preceding chapter that, by the end of 
the eleventh century, Kampe and Malayu, on the eastern coast of 
Sumatra, had broken away from Srivijaya. Chao Ju-kua no longer 
includes Jambi or Malayu in his list, but he includes Palembang, 
which, consequently, could no longer have been the capital of the 
empire.'36 The weakening of the empire’s authority is undeniably 
established in 1230 on the Malay Peninsula. At this date, Dharma-
raja Chandrabhanu, King of Tambralinga (Ligor), belonging to the 
‘family of the lotus’”’ (padmavaméa), had an inscription engraved 1” 
at Chaiya, on the former site of Grahi, which had undoubtedly 
recently been annexed. This inscription shows every sign of ema-
nating from an independent sovereign.'78 Chandrabhanu is named 
in the Singhalese Mahavamsa with the epithet of the king of the 
Javakas, and it must also have been he who appeared in the epig-
raphy of the Pandyas of southernmost India 1? with a title of 

--- [Page 207] ---
Cambodia at the Height of Its Power 185 
Savakan. Comparative study of these texts 19 and of the Pali chron-
icle Jinakalamali 1 permits us to state that in 1247 Chandrabhanu, 
perhaps with the peaceful intention of obtaining a relic or an 
image of the Buddha, sent a mission to Ceylon that ended in an 
armed conflict and the probable establishment of a colony of Ja-
vakas on the island. Around 1263, Jatavarman Vira Pandya was 
called to Ceylon to put down disturbances that resulted from the 
establishment of the suzerainty of the Pandyas on the island in 
1258 by his brother Jatavarman Sundara Pandya. He had to fight 
against two Singhalese princes and a Javaka prince, perhaps a son | 
of Chandrabhanu, who was established at Ceylon and whose sub-
mission he obtained. Around 1270 Chandrabhanu sent a second 
expedition, this time to demand the tooth relic and the bowl of 
the Buddha; he suffered a new and serious defeat.'* 
The weakening of Tambralinga, the most important of the 
dependencies of Srivijaya on the peninsula, which maintained only 
very loose ties with the Sumatran mother country, was to facilitate 
the task of the Thai conqueror some twenty years later. Chan-
drabhanu, moreover, seems to have maintained friendly relations 
with the Thai, perhaps already indicating a sort of recognition 
of the suzerainty of Sukhothai.’44 But the first blow was dealt 
Srivijaya by Java, whose history during the first three quarters of 
the thirteenth century must now be traced. 
8. JAVA: THE END OF THE KINGDOM OF KADIRI (1222) 
AND THE BEGINNING OF THE KINGDOM OF SINGHASARI 
(UP TO 1268) 145 
At the beginning of the thirteenth century, the throne of 
Kadiri was occupied by Kritajaya (also known as Sringa).146 Near 
the end of his reign (in 1222), an adventurer named Angrok, who 
had taken over the government of Tumapel northeast of Malang, 
brought the former Janggala under his power. He then took ad-
vantage of the first occasion that presented itself to revolt against 
his master, the king of Kadiri. The founding of a new dynasty at 
Tumapel in Janggala has been regarded as marking the reunion 
of the two kingdoms of Janggala and Panjalu (Kadiri), which con-
stituted the two halves of the kingdom of Airlanga. Actually, 
Janggala, we recall, had from the start been absorbed by Kadiri 14” 
and the merger had in fact taken place long before. But, since 
Janggala contained the old capital, the usurper, in proclaiming 
himself sovereign in the more important of the two halves of the 

--- [Page 208] ---
186 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
kingdom of Airlanga, gave the impression of restoring the tradi-
tions of the former Javanese state. 
The account of Java in the Chu-fan-chih of 1225 reflects the 
troubled situation in the second decade of the thirteenth century, 
and the contradictions of Chao Ju-kua are manifestly caused by 
the rapidity with which events moved, culminating in the final 
fall of Kadiri in 1222. 
In his fourteenth chapter,'48 Chao Ju-kua uses the old name 
She-p’o, which he says is also called P’u-chia-long (Pekalongan), 
in giving information drawn for the most part from the Ling-wai 
Tai-ta of 1178. He concludes by saying that to prevent the smug-
gling of copper money outside of China, “Our Court has repeat-
edly forbidden all trade (with this country), but the foreign traders, 
for the purpose of deceiving (the government), changed its name 
and referred to it as Su-chi-tan.” And it is under the name Su-chi-
tan that Chao Ju-kua describes the Javanese kingdom of his times 
in his fifteenth chapter. 
Su-chi-tan has been identified with several places, the most 
probable of which seems to be Sukadana, in the immediate vicin-
ity of Surabaya.'9 The territory it covered is very difficult to deter-
mine, for the information given by Chao Ju-kua is contradictory. 
The reason for this is that the information is for various dates 
and the most recent seems to come after the fall of Kadiri. Thus, 
at the beginning of his chapter, Chao Ju-kua says that Su-chi-tan 
touches Sin-t’o (Sunda) in the west and Ta-pan (Tuban or Tumapel) 
in the east, thus giving it an area corresponding roughly to the 
territory of Kadiri without Janggala; this description assumes that 
| Janggala is independent. But in the list of the dependencies of 
Su-chi-tan,8 Chao Ju-kua includes Ta-pan and Jong-ya-lu (Jang-
gala or Ujung Galuh, a port in the Brantas Delta), a statement 
that expresses a former state of affairs. Finally, at the end of his 
chapter on San-fo-ch’i,"1 Chao Ju-kua writes that this country 
(which includes Sin-t’o, or Sunda, among its dependencies) touches 
Jong-ya-lu on the east, which can only mean that Janggala not 
only became independent but even absorbed Kadiri. 
Aside from Ta-pan and Jong-ya-lu, Chao Ju-kua mentions 
among the dependencies of Su-chi-tan: 152 
On the island of Java: 
Po-hua-yuan (2), 
Ma-teng (Medang), 

--- [Page 209] ---
Cambodia at the Height of Its Power 187 
Hsi-ning (¢), 
Teng-che (the eastern cape). 
On the neighboring islands: 
Ta-kang (2), 
Huang-ma-chu (2), 
Ma-li (Bali?), 
Niu-lun (2), 
Tan-jung-wu-lo (Tanjong Pura, southwest Borneo), 
Ti-wu (Timor), 
P’ing-ya-i (Bangai, east of Celebes), 
Wu-nu-ku (the Moluccas).153 
With Angrok, the founder of the kingdom of Tumapel, Jav-
anese historiography assumes a new character that it is to retain 
until the end of the Indian period. It is in fact based to a great 
extent on two chronicles in Javanese, the Nagarakritagama of 
Prapancha (1365) 4 and the Pararaton (dating from the end of the 
fifteenth century).° These two Javanese chronicles, like the Bur-
mese chronicles, give detailed biographies of the kings and 
persons of their entourage, details on their private lives, and ac-
counts of the scandals and dramas of the court that epigraphy 
ignores. 
Angrok was the son of peasants, but he had himself rep-
resented as a son of Siva Girindra (Siva king of the moun-
tain’), an epithet that recalls, perhaps intentionally, the old 
title of the Sailendras. After spending his youth as a highway rob-
ber, he entered the service of Tungul Ametung, governor of Tu-
mapel, whom he assassinated and whose wife Dedes he married.197 
He strengthened his position east of Mount Kawi and then took 
advantage of a conflict between King Kritajaya and the clergy, in 
which the clergy sided with him, to proclaim himself king under 
the name of Rajasa.18 
In 1221 he marched on Kadiri and waged a decisive battle 
at Ganter,™? the site of which is unidentified. Kritajaya fled and 
disappeared without a trace. Kadiri consequently became an in-
tegral part of the kingdom of Tumapel, which subsequently be-
came better known by the name of its capital, Singhasari, at first 
called Kutaraja. 
After a reign of six years that seems to have been peaceful, 
Rajasa was assassinated in 1227 at the instigation of Anushapati, 
son of Queen Dedes and the former governor of Tumapel. Anu-
shapati thus avenged the death of his father.1&© 

--- [Page 210] ---
188 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Anushapati, also known as Anishanatha, then succeeded 
Rajasa and reigned until 1248. In that year, in the course of a 
cockfight, he in turn was assassinated by Tohjaya, son of Rajasa 
and a concubine.'®! His funerary temple is Chandi Kidal,1®? south-
east of Malang, a monument still completely permeated with the 
Indo-Javanese classical tradition. 
Tohjaya reigned only a few months in 1248 and met his death 
in a palace revolt fomented by his two nephews, Ranga Wuni, the 
son of Anushanatha, and Mahisha Champaka, the grandson of 
Rajasa.'©3 These two princes reigned together, the first under the 
name Vishnuvardhana and the second under that of Narasimha-
miirti.1¢ The main event of the reign of Vishnuvardhana (1248-
68) was the repression of the revolt of a certain Lingapati.1© By 
1254, Vishnuvardhana had turned over effective power to his son 
Kritanagara, and it was at this time that the capital Kutaraja took 
the name of Singhasari.46 At his death, which took place in 1268, 
Vishnuvardhana was deified in the form of Siva at Waleri (Meleri, 
near Blitar) and in the form of Amoghapasa (one of the forms of 
the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara) at Jajaghu (Chandi Jago).'®” The 
famous temple of Chandi Jago, decorated with bas-reliefs illus-
trating episodes from various Indo-Javanese poems—the Kunjara-
karna,® the Parthayajfia,©? the Arjunavivaha,’”° and the Krish-
nayana 171—is more Indonesian in style than preceding funerary 
monuments.!74 This decline of Indian culture, with the return to 
ancestral traditions of the autochthonous substratum, is a general 
phenomenon in Farther India in the thirteenth century. 
To the internal causes of this decline that have been men-
tioned previously,’ we can add two others here: the Muslim 
invasions in India, which, after having stimulated an exodus of 
intellectuals abroad,’ dried up for a time the source on which 
the Indian colonies depended to reinvigorate themselves; and the 
Mongol conquests, which brought about the ruin of the old In-
dianized kingdoms, as we shall see in the following chapter. 

--- [Page 211] ---
CHAPTER XIl 
THE REPERCUSSIONS OF THE 
MONGOL CONQUESTS 
Last Third of the Thirteenth Century 
The thirteenth century found all of Eurasia under the banner of 
the Mongols. Farther India did not escape their thrust, for from the 
time of his accession as Great Khan in 1260, Kublai Khan, grand-
son of Genghis Khan and conqueror of China (where he founded 
the new dynasty of Yuan in 1280), sought to obtain oaths of vas-
salage from the foreign sovereigns who had been offering such 
oaths to the Chinese Sung dynasty. Although in this area the 
Sino-Mongol armies met with only defeat or short-lived success, 
their impact produced deep repercussions, the most important 
of which was the advent of Thai power in the Menam Basin and 
Burma ! with all its consequences for Cambodia and for the princi-
palities of the Mekong and the Malay Peninsula. 
1. THE THAI 
The Thai, established in Yunnan, where for a long time it 
was believed they had founded the kingdom of Nanchao in the 
eighth century (it seems that actually a Tibeto-Burman dialect, 
Lolo or Min-chia, was spoken there),2 were to achieve their inde-
pendence only much later in the valleys of the central Indochinese 
Peninsula and of Burma. One hears occasionally of the “invasion 
of the Thai,” a consequence of the ‘Mongol pressure” of the 
thirteenth century. Actually the Thai “invasion” was instead a 
gradual infiltration along the rivers and streams that had un-
doubtedly been going on for a very long time, part of the general 
drift of population from the north to the south that characterizes 
the peopling of the Indochinese Peninsula.? But it is a fact that 
around 1220, perhaps following the death of Jayavarman VII, which 
can be placed shortly before that date, there was a great deal of 
change and unrest on the southern borders of Yunnan. According 
to traditional dates, given here with a great deal of reservation, 

--- [Page 212] ---
190 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
the Thai principality of Mogaung, north of Bhamo, was founded 
in 1215; that of Moné or Muang Nai, on a western tributary of 
the Salween, was founded in 1223; and Assam was conquered by 
the Thai in 1229.4 At about the same time, the Thai chiefs of 
Chiangrung and Ngoen Yang (site of Chiangsaen) on the upper 
Mekong formed an alliance by means of a marriage between their 
children. The legendary descent of Khun Borom and the mass 
arrival of the Thai, via Nam U, at the site of Luang Phrabang 
probably date back to this same period.® By the middle of the 
thirteenth century, the Thai had already “drowned” the Khmer, 
Mon, and Indianized Burmese communities of the valleys of the 
south. And when the Thai had acquired some cohesion, their 
chiefs seem, in the internal organization of their principalities as 
well as in their policy toward the old Indian civilizations of the 
valleys and deltas, to have been inspired by the example of the 
Mongols, whose epic feats captured their imagination. We shall 
see that the inscription of Rama Khamhaeng, the great Siamese 
conqueror of the end of the thirteenth century, even sounds some-
times like an echo of the exploits of Genghis Khan. For their part, 
the Mongols, after their seizure of Ta-li on January 7, 1253 and 
their pacification of Yunnan in 1257, did not look with disfavor 
on the creation of a series of Thai principalities at the expense 
of the old Indianized kingdoms, for they believed that these prin-
cipalities would be easier to maintain in submission to the Middle 
Kingdom. But this combination of political events seems to have 
resulted not so much from a sudden change in the population 
stock of the peninsula as from the seizure of power by a governing 
class of Thai origin. In Burma, the seizure of Pagan by the Mongols 
in 1287 resulted in the temporary disappearance of the Burmese 
kingdom and the division of the country into principalities gov-
erned by Thai chiefs. In the upper Menam Basin, a Thai chief from 
Chiangrai drove the Mon dynasty from Haripunjaya and founded 
a new capital, Chiangmai, a short distance from the old one. At 
Sukhothai (Sukhodaya) a proclamation of independence was fol-
lowed by a rapid conquest that resulted in the substitution of the 
government of the Thai for the Khmer administration in the Me-
nam Basin and on the upper Mekong. 
The Thai first enter the history of Farther India in the elev-
enth century with the mention of Syam slaves or prisoners of war 
in Cham epigraphy, where they were included along with Chinese, 
Vietnamese, Cambodians, and Burmese.’ In the twelfth century, 

--- [Page 213] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 191 
the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat represent at the head of the great 
procession of the southern gallery a group of warriors who wear 
a costume entirely different from that of the Khmers and whom 
two short inscriptions identify as Syam.8 They were very probably 
Thai of the middle Menam, for it was to the kingdom of Sukho-
thai that the Chinese applied the name Sien, used for the first time 
by the History of the Yuan in connection with an embassy of 
1282 sent by sea and intercepted by the Chams.9 
These “savages,” as the Syam of Angkor Wat are sometimes 
called, were savages only in their dress. They must have had a 
social organization of which there are still some traces in the 
social organization of the Laotian principalities,°9 and of which 
the feudal regime of the Muangs of upper Tongking and of 
Thanh-hoa undoubtedly gives an approximate idea.” Having lived 
for a long time in Yunnan in the orbit of Chinese civilization, they 
not only must have had a considerably advanced material culture 
but also must have had some contact with India and Buddhism 
by means of the route that joined India and China through 
Assam and Yunnan." Such contact would explain the very clear 
evidence of the influence of the art of the Palas and Senas of 
Bengal on the Buddhist art of the Thai in the northernmost part 
of the Menam Basin.”3 Moreover, the Thai have always been re-
markable assimilators: they have never hesitated to appropriate 
for themselves whatever in the civilization of their neighbors and 
masters might place them in a position to fight victoriously 
against them. 
The rapid success of the Thai in the Menam Basin was, as we 
shall see, the consequence of the weakening of Cambodia and 
also of the decline, then fall, of Burmese power under the blows 
of the Mongols. We are more and more disposed to believe that 
the Thai success was less the result of a mass migration than the 
consequence of the gradual engulfing of the sedentary popula-
tions (Mon-Khmer- or Tibeto-Burman-speaking peoples) by im-
migrants who arrived in ever greater numbers and finally imposed 
themselves as masters over the earlier inhabitants. 
2. CAMBODIA: DEFEAT OF A MONGOL INCURSION IN 1282 
In Cambodia, Indravarman II was succeeded, perhaps not 
immediately, by Jayavarman VIII, during whose reign the Mongols 
made their appearance in Cambodia, although in a rather benign 
fashion. 

--- [Page 214] ---
192 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
In 1268, when the emperor of Dai Viét complained to Kublai 
Khan of the attacks by Cambodia and Champa, the Great Khan 
ordered him to defend himself with the aid of Burmese contin-
gents.4 But it was only about fifteen years later that Cambodian 
territory was invaded by a Mongol force dispatched by a General 
Sogatu, who, as we shall see, was to invade the north and center 
of Champa in 1283. He sent to Cambodia, probably by the route 
from Quang-tri to Savannakhet,!> a chief of a hundred and a chief 
of a thousand named Sulayman. They “were captured and never 
returned.” 1© Nevertheless, Cambodia found it prudent to offer 
tribute to Kublai Khan in 1285.7” We shall see that Jayavarman VIII 
was less fortunate with the Thai of the Menam. 
3. CHAMPA: THE MONGOL INVASION (1283-85) 
In Champa, Harideva,’® who had “seized the throne,” took 
the royal name Jaya Simhavarman, then changed it in 1266 at the 
time of his coronation to Indravarman (V).1? Anxious to preserve 
good-neighbor relations with Dai Viét, he sent no less than four 
embassies there from 1266 to 1270. But he soon had to face a 
Mongol invasion.2° 
In 1278, then again in 1280, Indravarman V was invited to 
present himself at the court of Peking. He succeeded in avoiding 
this invitation by sending embassies and presents. But in 1281 
Sogatu and Liu Shen were ordered to establish a Mongol admin-
istration in Champa. The populace, stirred up by Prince Harijit, 
son of the king, did not readily accept this protectorateship. 
Then Kublai organized an expedition that lasted more than 
two years (1283-85). The details, which lie outside the scope of 
this work, are fairly well known. The retreat of the old king into 
the mountains 2! and the refusal of the Vietnamese to let the 
Mongol army pass over their territory resulted in a long, drawn-
out, difficult battle that was scarcely popular among the assailants. 
The invasion of Tongking by Toghan, a son of Kublai, although 
it resulted in the seizure of the capital in 1285, turned out badly 
for the Mongols, who were finally defeated by Tran Nhan-téng 
in Thanh-hoa. Toghon was driven to the north, and Sogatu, who 
had come from the south to join him, after debarking in Champa 
was killed and decapitated. 
“Thus Champa was rid of the Mongols, who lost many men 
and officers there without gaining any advantage to speak of. In-
dravarman V, desiring to prevent their return, sent an ambassador 

--- [Page 215] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 193 
to Kublai, who was presented to him on October 6, 1285, at the 
same time as an envoy from Cambodia.” 22 
Indravarman V, who, according to Marco Polo’s account, was 
then “exceedingly old,” 23 must have died shortly afterward. 
4. BURMA: FROM 1271 TO THE SEIZURE OF PAGAN 
BY THE MONGOLS (1287) 
The Mongols annexed Yunnan in 1253-57, and in 1271, per-
haps at the instigation of Thai intriguers, the governor of this 
province sent a mission to Burma charged with demanding the 
tribute of vassalage in the name of Kublai Khan.24 King Narathiha-
pate (Narasihapati) did not receive the members of the mission 
and sent them back with an official bearing a message of friend-ship for the Great Khan. , 
In 1273, an embassy from Kublai, which left Peking on 
March 3, arrived in Pagan with a letter demanding the dispatch 
of a delegation of princes and ministers to the court of Peking. 
It is generally believed that King Narathihapate had the ambassa-
dors executed, but it is possible that they were assassinated in 
Yunnan on their way back to China. The matter was reported to 
Peking by the governor of Yunnan, but the emperor decided to 
allow this insult to go unavenged for a little while. 
In 1277, the Burmese invaded the State of the Golden 
Teeth, on the Taping upstream from Bhamo, which had submitted 
to Kublai. They did it, says Marco Polo, “with such a force that 
the Great Kaan should never again think of sending another army 
into that province.” The chief asked for the protection of Kublai 
Khan, who, deciding to act, entrusted the execution of his plans 
to the local garrisons. The army of Ta-li advanced toward the 
Burmese and defeated them on the banks of the river, but this 
was merely a border incident. 
“During the winter of 1277-1278, a second Chinese expedi-
tion commanded by Nasr-uddin ended in the seizure of Kaung-
sin, the Burmese stronghold that defended the Bhamo pass.... 
These two expeditions, however, did not succeed in penetrating 
beyond the thick curtain of the many small Thai principalities that 
today still separate Yunnan from Burma proper. The final catastro-
phe did not take place until 1283.’ 26 
It was in that year, 1283, that a new expedition commanded 
by Hsiang-wu-t’a-erh (Sangqudar), after a battle at Ngasaungkyam 
on December 3, took the fort of Kaung-sin again on December 9 

--- [Page 216] ---
194 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
and pushed farther south in the Irrawaddy Valley. It did not, 
however, reach Pagan. King Narathihapate evacuated Pagan before 
the imminent approach of the Chinese and fled to Prome. Negotia-
tions for the establishment of a Chinese protectorate were begun 
after Tagaung was seized (January, 1284). In the following year, 
the king tendered his submission and sent to Peking an embassy 
that succeeded in persuading the emperor to give orders to with-
draw his troops. The north of Burma became the Chinese province 
of Cheng-mien and remained so until 1303; the south became the 
province of Mien-chung, which was abolished as early as August 
18, 1290. 
King Narathihapate was on the verge of regaining his cap-
ital in 1287 when he was poisoned at Prome by his own son 
Thihathu (Sihastra). Unrest followed, and the governor of Yunnan 
ignored the orders of evacuation. 
“In 1287, a fourth Chinese expedition commanded by Prince 
Ye-sin Timour finally reached Pagan at the cost of considerable 
losses. We do not know if the capital had to admit the presence of 
Chinese troops.” 27 
The fall of Pagan produced effects on the Thai of Burma 
which we will discuss later; we shall now proceed to examine its 
repercussions on the Thai of the Menam. 
5. THE LIBERATION OF THE THAI OF THE MENAM 
IN THE SECOND HALF OF THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY: 
THE BEGINNINGS OF THE KINGDOM OF SUKHOTHAI 
(FROM AROUND 1220 TO 1292) 
It will be recalled that the Menam Basin, originally popu-
lated by the Mons, had been the seat of the kingdom of Dvaravati 
in the seventh century. In the eleventh the Khmers had established 
themselves at Lavo, and in the twelfth they had extended their 
domination to the borders of the kingdom of Haripunjaya, coming 
into conflict with King Adityaraja. 
At the beginning of the thirteenth century, the kingdom 
of Haripunjaya was still governed by a Mon dynasty. One of the 
kings mentioned in the chronicles of Haripunjaya left inscriptions 
in the Mon language intermingled with passages in Pali at Lam-
phun, on the site of ancient Haripunjaya. This king was Sabba-
dhisiddhi, for whom we have two inscriptions containing the dates 
1213, 1218, and 1219. They tell of various endowments to Bud-

--- [Page 217] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 195 
dhist monuments,?8 one of which, Vat Kukut, corresponds to the 
Mahabalachetiya built by Adityaraja.29 For the period after the 
reign of Sabbadhisiddhi up to the time of the Thai conquest, the 
chronicles provide us with only a list of the names of the kings.30 
These kings had as neighbors to the northeast the Lao 
princes of Ngoen Yang (Chiangsaen), the last of whom, Mangrai, 
born in 1239, succeeded his father in 1261. The following year, 
moving his capital south, he founded Chiangrai. Then, extending 
his authority toward the northeast and southwest, he took 
Chiangkhong in 1269 and founded Muang Fang in 1273.31 In 
1287, says an ancient text, Mangrai, prince of Chiangrai, Ngam 
Muang, prince of Muang Phayao (on the upper Mae Ing), and 
Rama Khamhaeng, king of Sukhothai, ‘met in a propitious place, 
concluded a strong pact of friendship, and then each returned to 
his own country.” 32 
It is undoubtedly no mere coincidence that this alliance of 
the three Thai chiefs took place in the same year that Pagan was 
taken by Sino-Mongol troops. We shall see that, in the decade 
that followed, Mangrai ended the Mon domination over Haripun-
jaya and founded, at some distance from this city, Chiangmai, the 
“new capital’ of the Thai. As for Rama Khamhaeng, who was to 
have even more brilliant success, the following paragraphs relate 
the origins of the dynasty to which he belonged. 
On the middle Menam, the Thai, known to their neighbors 
under the name Syam, had undoubtedly gained a foothold quite 
a long time before.23 The Khmer remains that are still to be seen 
at Sukhothai and at Sawankhalok 34 prove that the Khmers were 
dominant over this region at least from the time of Jayavarman VII 
and perhaps from the era of Suryavarman I]. But around the middle 
of the thirteenth century the Syam of Sukhothai became inde-
pendent under circumstances that are revealed to us by an in-
scription of about a century later.* 
A Thai prince, Pha Muang, chief of Muang Rat2& and 
perhaps son of the former Thai chief of Sukhothai under Khmer 
suzerainty, had received the title of Kamrateng An’ Sri Indrapa-
tindraditya from the Cambodian sovereign and had married the 
Khmer princess Sikharamahadevi. He had ties of friendship with 
another Thai prince, Bang Klang Thao, chief of Bang Yang. Fol-
lowing events that are not clear,” the two Thai chiefs came into 
conflict with the Khmer governor of Sukhothai. After the seizure 

--- [Page 218] ---
196 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
of Si Satchanalai (present-day Sawankhalok), the twin city of 
Sukhothai, the two allies drove the Cambodian governor out of 
Sukhothai. Pha Muang installed his friend Bang Klang Thao there, _ 
crowning him king and conferring on him his own title of Kamra-
teng An’ Pha Muang Sri Indrapatindraditya. 
We have no precise dates for any of the events that marked 
the acquisition of political independence by the Thai of Sukhothai 
and led to the enthronement of Indraditya. But since Rama 
Khamhaeng, his third son, who was his second successor, reigned 
in the last two decades of the century, we can date the coronation 
of Indraditya around 1220. Later, the country of Lavo seems also 
to have become detached from Cambodia, for from 1289 to 1299 
we see it sending embassies to China.328 We shall see that in the 
middle of the following century it was governed by a Thai prince. 
All we know about Indraditya and his immediate successor 
is what we are told by the stele of Rama Khamhaeng, composed 
~ in 1292.39 This famous inscription in addition gives interesting 
details on Rama Khamhaeng’s youth that merit citing: 
My father was named Sri Indraditya; my mother was named Nang 
Suang; my older brother was named Ban Muang. We were five children 
born of the same womb: three boys, two girls. My eldest brother died 
when he was still little. When | had grown and reached the age of nine-
teen, Khun Sam Chon, chief of Muang Chot, came to attack Muang 
Tak.40 My father went to fight him from the left; Khun Sam Chon came 
from the right and attacked in force. My father’s people fled and dispersed 
in complete disorder. | did not flee, | climbed on the elephant Anekaphon 
[Anekabala, “immense power”] and drove it in front of my father. | began 
a duel of elephants with Khun Sam Chon: | smote his elephant named 
Mat Muang [gold of the country”] and put it out of the battle. Khun 
Sam Chon fled. Then my father gave me the name Phra Rama Khamhaeng 
[Rama the Strong”] because | had smitten the elephant of Khun Sam Chon. 
During the lifetime of my father, | served my father, | served my 
mother. If | caught some game or fish, | brought it to my father; if | had 
any fruit, acid or sweet, delicious and tasty, | brought it to my father. If | 
went on an elephant hunt and caught some, | brought them to my father. 
If | went to attack a village or city and brought back elephants, boys, girls, 
silver, gold, | gave them to my father.‘1 
When my father died, there remained my elder brother.42 | con-
tinued to serve my elder brother as | had served my father. When my 
brother died, the whole kingdom passed on to me. 
We shall soon see the brilliant career of this king, during 
whose reign the young Thai kingdom was transformed by Singha-

--- [Page 219] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 197 
lese Buddhism and Khmer civilization. During this process of 
transformation the social structure of the kingdom did, however, 
retain some characteristics corresponding to those of the Mongols. 
Just as in the “family of gold” at the top of the Mongol 
social structure the Great Khan was the chief and the princes were 
the sons of the Great Khan,# so Rama Khamhaeng was the pho 
Khun (the father [of the] khun) and the princes and high dignitaries 
were the luk khun (sons [of the] khun). Just as the Mongol aristoc-
racy, in defining the various social classes, distinguished its own 
members, ‘warriors or faithful persons who are free men par 
excellence,” from ‘the plebians who comprise the common peo-
ple and, finally, the serfs who are basically of non-Mongolian 
race,” #4 so the Thai military aristocracy distinguished itself at this 
time from the conquered populations: the ethnic term Thai took 
on the meaning of “free man” in Siamese,*® thus differentiating the 
Thai from the natives encompassed in Thai society as serfs. Finally, 
the division of the Mongol population capable of bearing arms 
into tens, hundreds, thousands, and ten thousands under the 
orders of commanders furnished by the aristocracy of the noyan 
is duplicated exactly in the military and administrative organiza-
tion of the Thai.*” 
We do not know the date at which Rama Khamhaeng, son 
of the founder of the dynasty of Sukhothai, succeeded his elder 
brother Ban Muang. His inscription “8 mentions only three dates: 
1283, the date of the invention of Siamese writing, or more exactly. 
of the type of writing used in the inscription. “Heretofore 
these characters of Thai writing did not exist. In 1205 [i.e., 
A.D. 1283], the year of the goat, King Rama Khamhaeng ap-
plied all his energy and all his heart to inventing these 
characters of Thai writing, and these characters exist because 
_ the king invented them.” We know that these characters 
constitute an improvement over a proto-Siamese writing, 
which was itself an adaptation of Khmer cursive writing of 
the thirteenth century put to use in writing Thai.49 _ 
1285, the date of the erection in the center of Si Satchanalai (Sri 
Sajjanalaya, i.e., Sawankhalok) of a stupa that took six years 
to build.50 
1292, the date of the construction at Sukhothai of a stone throne 
named Manangsilapatra,>1 “placed here so that all can gaze 
on the king Rama Khamhaeng, son of the king Sri In-
draditya, sovereign of Muang Si Satchanalai and Muang 
Sukhothai as well as of the Ma, Kao, Lao, the Thai who live 

--- [Page 220] ---
198 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
under the canopy of heaven,>2 and the river-dwelling Thai , , of the Nam U and the Mekong, coming to render him homage.” : , 
, This chronological data would indicate that Rama Khamhaeng 
came to power before 1283. | 
: And if the date of 1281 for the seizure of power of Makatho 
at Martaban 3 is correct, it is necessary to date the accession 
| , of Rama Khamhaeng even earlier than that date, since by then 
he was already powerful enough to be able to grant investiture 
to one of his protégés in a quite distant region. 
6. JAVA: THE END OF THE KINGDOM OF SINGHASARI (1269-92); 
THE MONGOL EXPEDITION OF 1293; AND THE 
FOUNDATION OF THE KINGDOM OF MAJAPAHIT 
The Javanese king Kritanagara, known later under the name 
Sivabuddha, was king of reunited Janggala and Panjalu, and the 
inscriptions he has left, notably those of 1266 and 1269, give us 
some idea of the administration of his times.°4 | 
Internally, the king was, once again, confronted by rebels: 
Bhayaraja in 1270, Mahisha Rangkah in 1280.°° 
Abroad, the\reign of Kritanagara was marked by a consider-
able expansion of Javanese power in all directions. In 1275, taking 
advantage of the decline of Srivijaya, he sent a military expedition 
to the west which established Javanese suzerainty over Malayu *© 
and probably also over Sunda, Madura, and part of the Malay 
Peninsula, for Pahang is listed among the dependencies of Kritana-
gara in the Nagarakritagama.°’ 
After establishing his authority in Sumatra, Kritanagara turned 
toward Bali, whose king he brought back as a prisoner in 1284.°8 
Kritanagara must have felt himself strong enough, and above all 
far enough away from China, to resist the demands of the Mongols, 
who from 1279 had been insisting that a member of the royal 
family be sent to the court of Peking. The missions of 1280 and 
1281 came to nothing. In 1289 it seems that the envoy of Kublai 
was mistreated by the Javanese, and to avenge this insult the 
Great Khan decided in 1292 to send to Java an expedition that 
} will be discussed presently.°9 
King Kritanagara, whose portrait-statue in the form of the 
| Buddha Akshobhya can be seen at Surabaya,®? was a personality 
who is very differently evaluated by the historical sources, the 

--- [Page 221] ---
| The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 199 
Nagarakritagama and the Pararaton: he is represented by one as a 
fine scholar, by the other as a drunkard. What is certain is that he 
was a great king, remarkable for his ardor in extending the author-
ity of Java over the neighboring countries and for his zeal for the 
kalachakra form of Tantric Buddhism. This form, coming from 
| Bengal where it had been developed toward the end of the Pala 
dynasty, spread to Tibet and Nepal and into the archipelago. It | 
reached its culmination in Java because of syncretism with the 
worship of Siva Bhairava. The cult of Siva-Buddha,®' by applying | 
itself particularly to the redemption of souls of the dead, found re-
ceptive ground in Indonesian ancestor worship. 
Kritanagara met death under dramatic circumstances. He ele-
vated a common man to the rank of Arya Viraraja, but, not feeling : 
sure of him, sent him far from the court and named him governor , 
in the east on the island of Madura.® The viceroy of Kadiri since 
1271 had been a certain Jayakatwang,8 who very probably wasa _ 
descendant of the ancient kings and dreamed of supreme power. 
He joined forces with Viraraja and notified him of the propitious 
moment to attack Kritanagara. The battle took place in 1292 and, 
after various incidents reported by the Pararaton,*4 ended in the 
seizure of the royal residence at Singhasari and the death of King 
Kritanagara between May 18 and June 15 of that year. 
_ Jayakatwang, master of Java, became in a way the founder , 
of a new kingdom of Kadiri. This new kingdom, however, had 
only a momentary existence, for the Mongol expedition designed 
to chastise Kritanagara actually resulted in restoring the throne to its legitimate possessor. , 
Jayakatwang, now master of Singhasari, immediately en-
countered opposition from Raden Vijaya.© This prince, who was 
a grandson of Mahisha Champaka and great-grandson of Rajasa 
and was thus a direct descendant of the founder of the dynasty 
of Singhasari, had in addition married Gayatri (a rajapatni), a 
daughter of the King Kritanagara who had just been killed in the 
revolt of Jayakatwang. Together with Ardharaja, a son of Jayakat-
wang but also a son-in-law of Kritanagara, Raden Vijaya com-
manded in 1292 a corps of troops that Kritanagara, before his 
death, had sent north against the rebels and that Jayakatwang’s 
troops had not yet encountered. 
Vijaya attacked Jayakatwang’s forces and inflicted three de-
feats on them. But these successes were only temporary, and the 

--- [Page 222] ---
200 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
situation at first favorable to Vijaya was reversed both by the ar-
rival of reinforcements from Kadiri and by the news of the fall of 
Singhasari, which had a demoralizing effect on Vijaya’s troops.® 
Forced to flee, Vijaya reached the island of Madura to solicit 
the aid of Viraraja, of whose treason he was not aware. Viraraja 
decided it was in his interest to side with Vijaya from then on. 
With Viraraja’s aid, Vijaya returned accompanied by a group 
of Madurese to establish himself in the lower Brantas Valley ©” on 
the site of Majapahit, which was to become the capital of the restored Javanese kingdom. , 
This restoration took place in the last months of the year 
1292, when Kublai Khan had already launched his punitive expedi-
tion against Kritanagara, of whose death he was unaware. On 
learning of the arrival of this expedition, Vijaya conceived the in-
genious idea of using the Chinese to realize his great plans. We 
shall see how the Chinese fleet sailed along the coast of Champa 
without being able to land.® It then went on to Java by way 
of the archipelago of the Karimatas. At the little island of Gelam 
(southwest of Borneo), at the beginning of 1293, the three chiefs 
of the expedition—Shih-pi, a Mongol, Yi-k’o-mu-su (or Ye-hei-
mi-she),© a Uighur experienced in overseas voyages, and Kao-
hsing, a Chinese—stopped to hold counsel. Before reassembling 
in the port of Tuban, on the north coast of Java, they sent a mes-
senger to Singhasari who, on his return, reported the news of the 
death of Kritanagara and the submission of Vijaya. 
The Javanese fleet of Jayakatwang, assembled at the mouth 
of the river of Surabaya, was captured by the Chinese, who then 
began to penetrate into the interior. Vijaya sent them messages 
soliciting their aid against Jayakatwang, who was advancing on 
Majapahit. The Chinese succeeded in stopping Jayakatwang and 
rescuing Majapahit on March 3, 1293; they then marched on Kadiri, 
with Vijaya in the rear guard. After a long and bloody battle, the 
troops of Kadiri took flight, and Jayakatwang, besieged in his pal-
ace, ended by submitting on April 26, 1293. 
Vijaya then requested permission from the Chinese to return 
to Majapahit with a Chinese escort to seek there the tribute 
promised to the Great Khan. In reality, he was seeking to rid him-
self of his allies, who were no longer useful to him after the defeat 
of his adversary. He began, on May 26, 1293, by massacring his 
escort; then, with his Javanese, he turned against the Chinese 

--- [Page 223] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongo! Conquests 201 
establishtd at Kadiri and forced them to get back on their ships. 
On May 31 they sailed again for China, where they arrived on 
August 8, 
When the Chinese chiefs left Java they took with them about 
a hundred prisoners, among whom were the children of Jayakat-
wang. As for Jayakatwang himself, he must have died in Java 
after a brief captivity. The Mongol expedition designed to chas-
tise Kritanagara thus had the unintended result of placing his 
legitimate heir on the throne. 
Vijaya, the founder of the kingdom of Majapahit, took the 
reign name Kritarajasa Jayavardhana. His wives were the four 
daughters of Kritanagara.”2 By the eldest, Queen Parameévari 
Tribhuvana,”! he had a son Kala Gemet, who was crowned in 
1295 as Prince of Kadiri, with the title of Jayanagara.72 
Normal relations seem to have been restored with China, 
for we find mention of four Javanese embassies during the reign 
of Kritarajasa.73 
With respect to internal affairs, it is now clear that Kritarajasa 
faced various revolts, for a chronology proposed by C. C. Berg 74 
has shown that the revolts that were formerly believed to have 
occurred during the reign of his son Jayanagara actually took 
place during Kritarajasa’s reign. These revolts will be discussed 
in the following chapter. 
/. SUMATRA AND ITS DEPENDENCIES AT THE TIME OF 
MARCO POLO; THE BEGINNINGS OF ISLAM 
Tangible proof of the ascendancy of Java over Sumatra is 
furnished by an inscription found7> on the upper Batang Hari, 
the river of Jambi. This text states that in 1286 an image of the 
Buddha Amoghapagalokegvara (in whose form the father of 
Kritanagara had been deified at Chandi Jago) was brought from 
Java (bhumi Java) to the country of gold (Suvarnabhimi) by four 
Javanese officials and erected at Dharmagraya by order of the 
Maharajadhiraja Sri Kritanagara Vikramadharmottungadeva and 
that this statue was the joy of all the subjects (praja) of the country 
of Malayu, beginning with the king Maharaja Srimat Tribhuva-
naraja Maulivarmadeva.”6 
The ascendancy of Java over its neighbor to the west was 
contemporaneous with the conquest of the Malay Peninsula by 
the Thai. This conquest is alluded to by the Mon chronicles before 

--- [Page 224] ---
202 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
1280.” In addition, the History of the Yuan tells us that in 1295 
“the people of Sien [the Syam, or Thai, of Sukhothai] and of Ma-li-
yu-erh [Malayur] have long been killing each other.” 
The simultaneous, if not combined, action of the Javanese 
and the Thai stripped Srivijaya at once of its island and continental 
possessions and snatched from it the mastery of the straits of 
Malacca and Sunda. At the same time, the Sumatranese kingdom 
began to feel the effects of another cause of the disintegration 
of Indo-Malaysian culture. By 1281, Islam, propagated by mer-
chants, must already have made great progress there, for the court 
of China chose to send Muslims, named Sulayman and Chams’ud-
din, to Malayu.”? Ten years later, in his description of Perlak, in 
the extreme north of Sumatra, Marco Polo ® notes “that in the 
kingdom of Ferlec the people were all idolaters, but, on account 
of the Saracen traders who frequent the kingdom with their ships, 
they have been converted to the Law of Mahomet.” And the 
Islamization of the principality of Samudra around the same time 
has been revealed by the discovery of the tombstone of the Sultan 
Malik al-Saleh, who died in 1297.81 
Immediately following his chapter on Champa, Marco Polo 
gives a very short paragraph on Java, “the largest island in the 
world,” an island which he had not visited himself. His informa-
tion on the archipelago dates from before the Mongol expedition, 
for he says of the Javanese that they “pay tribute to no one” and 
“that the Great Kaan was never able to take it on account of the 
great distance, and the dangers of the voyage thither.” ®* He would 
not have said that they ‘pay tribute to no one’’—a phrase he re-
peats later in connection with the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra— 
after the expedition of 1293, for we know that in 1293 Yi-k’o-
mu-su, who left for the Java campaign, “sent Cheng-kuei to 
announce the imperial orders in Mu-lai-yu and in other small 
kingdoms; all [the kings of these countries] sent their sons or their 
brothers to make their submission.” 8 
After mentioning the islands of Sondur and Condur (Poulo 
Condore), Marco Polo speaks of the kingdom of Lochac, that is, 
Langkasuka on the Malay Peninsula.™ ‘They pay tribute to no one, 
for their land is so situated that no one can enter it to do any 
mischief. If it were possible to do so, the Great Kaan would soon 
make it submit to him.” ® 

--- [Page 225] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 203 
Coming then to the island of Pentan (Bintang) and the city 
of Malaiur, Marco Polo says: “The city is very large and noble. 
There is a great deal of trade in spices and other wares. For there 
is great abundance in that island of such products.” ® 
Marco Polo seems not to have known when he was at 
Malaiur that he was already on Sumatra, which he calls “Java 
Minor” and on which he says there were eight kingdoms, each 
having its own king and language. He stopped at six, all of which, 
except for the last, were located in the extreme north of the 
island. The six kingdoms were: 
Ferlec (Perlak), where he observed, as we have seen, the presence 
of Muslims: “...only, however, the inhabitants of the city. 
The inhabitants of the mountains are like beasts.’ 87 
Basman (Pasaman, on the southwest coast): “...they are people 
who have no Law, unless it be that of brute beasts. They 
call themselves lieges of the Great Kaan, but pay him no 
tribute, as they are so far away that the Great Kaan’s armies 
could never go there.” 88 
Sumatra (Samudra, i.e., Pasai): 89 “Here Marco Polo in person re-
sided five months, because the weather prevented him from 
continuing his voyage.”” Here the Venetian drank palm liquor, 
which was “better than any wine or any other drink that was 
ever drunk.” 99 
Dagroian, where he describes cannibalistic rites; 91 
Lambri (Lamuri, i.e., Achin), where he mentions men with tails; 92 
Fansur (Baros, on the west coast), the country of camphor and of 
the tree that yields flour used in making bread. “Messer 
Marco...repeatedly ate this bread’ and found it ‘very 
good.” 93 
Finally Marco Polo speaks of the Nicobars, the Andamans, 
and Ceylon. 
Marco Polo does not appear to have suspected that he was 
traveling over the ruins of an empire which, three-quarters of a 
century before, Chao Ju-kua still spoke of as a great commercial 
center controlling the two shores of the straits. No longer do we 
hear of the empire of the maharaja, but of eight states, each of 
which is a “kingdom by itself.” It is true that the six states he 
mentions were minute principalities grouped at the northern tip 
of the island. Malayu, which he mentions only briefly and which 
he undoubtedly did not visit, must still have constituted a state 
of some importance: it sent embassies to China in 1299 and 

--- [Page 226] ---
204 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
1301.%4 But the Javanese expedition of 1275 had snatched mastery 
of the straits from the heir of Srivijaya.> The establishment of the 
Javanese at Tumasik % (located at the site of present-day Singapore) 
perhaps also dates from this period; the Javanese placed here a 
stele with a Javanese inscription that has, unfortunately, been 
destroyed.” 
We can say that at the end of the thirteenth century the 
empire of the maharaja (Srivijaya, Zabag, San-fo-ch’i) had ceased 
to exist. With it disappeared the only state that had succeeded 
in dominating the islands and the peninsula simultaneously. The 
reason for its power and duration was that, possessing simulta-
neously the maritime routes of the straits and the land routes of 
the peninsula, it was absolute master of the traffic between the 
West and the China Sea. Its fall was caused by the simultaneous 
pressure on its two flanks of Siam and Java: Siam wrested from 
it its continental possessions; Java, its island possessions and 
mastery of the straits. One cause of weakness was the harshness 
of its commercial policy, which gave rise to rivalry and conflicts. 
And Islam accomplished the ruin of its Indian spiritual patrimony, 
which in the seventh century had aroused the admiration of the 
Chinese pilgrim I-ching. 
8. THE THAI KINGDOM OF SUKHOTHAI AT THE END OF THE 
THIRTEENTH CENTURY: RAMA KHAMHAENG 
By 1292, the probable date of his stele and also of his dis-
patch of a golden letter to the court of the Mongols,9® Rama 
Khamhaeng had already created a sort of hegemony over a great _ 
number of Thai tribes. A postscript to the inscription, which seems 
to have been carved after this date, gives details on his conquests: 
Rama Khamhaeng is the chief and the sovereign of all the Thai. He 
is the master who instructs all the Thai so that they know in truth the 
merits and the Law. Among all the men who live in Thai country, one 
would search in vain for his equal in science and in knowledge, in cour-
age and in endurance, in strength and in energy. He has defeated the 
throng of his enemies possessing large cities and numerous elephants. In 
the east he has conquered the country to Saraluang [Phichit], Song Khwae 
[Phitsanulok], Lum [Lomsak], Bachai, Sakha as far as the shores of the 
Mekong, and beyond to Wiangchan and Wiangkham that mark the bor-
der. In the south, he has conquered the country to Khonthi [on the Mae 
Ping between Kamphaeng Phet and Nakhon Sawan], Phraek [Paknam Pho], 
Suphannaphum, Ratburi, Phetchaburi, Si Thammarat [Ligor], up to the sea 
that marks the border. In the west, he has conquered the country up to 

--- [Page 227] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongo! Conquests 205 
Muang Chot [Mae Sot], Hongsawati [Pegu], and up to the sea that marks 
the border. In the north, he has conquered the country up to Muang 
Phlae [Phrae], Muang Man, Muang Phlua [on the Nan River], and from 
the other side of the Mekong up to Muang Chawa [Luang Phrabang], 
which marks the border. 
He has established and maintained all the inhabitants of these 
countries in the observance of the Law, without exception.” 
That this enumeration of conquered countries was not idle 
boasting is proved by checking against various foreign sources. 
The conquest of former Khmer possessions in the Menam | 
and Mekong basins was apparently the result of a war that, in 
1296, Chou Ta-kuan, envoy of the Mongols to Cambodia, spoke 
of in these terms: “In the recent war with the Siamese, all the 
Khmer people have been obliged to fight, and the country has 
been entirely destroyed.” 1 
The final conquest of the Malay Peninsula, where Thai pene-
tration had begun as early as the era of Chandrabhanu,"™' must 
have taken place around 1294. The History of the Yuan, after re-
counting that an envoy from Siam was presented at the court of 
China in 1295, received a gold tablet, and returned with a Chinese 
mission, goes on to say that “since the people of Sien and of Ma-
li-yii-erh have long been killing each other and are all in sub-
mission at this moment, an imperial order has been issued telling 
the people of Sien: do no harm to the Ma-li-yu-erh and hold to 
your promise.” 12 |n order to direct this campaign, Rama Kham-
haeng apparently established himself for a while at Phetchaburi, 
for in 1294, just before the mention of an imperial order of the 
seventh month enjoining “the king of the kingdom of Sien, Kan-
mu-ting [Kamrateng, Khmer royal title], to come to the court,” 1 
the History of the Yuan mentions the arrival in the sixth month of 
the ambassador from Kan-mu-ting, from the city of Pi-ch’a-pu-li, 
who came bearing tribute.14 
The extension of the domination of Rama Khamhaeng to the 
west, which will be studied in more detail when speaking of 
Burma, Originated in a romantic adventure. Legend tells of a young 
merchant from Donwun (near Thaton) of Thai origin and named 
Makatho who went one day to Sukhothai, where he entered into 
the service of the king. Very intelligent, he was soon in favor and 
became governor of the palace. In the absence of the king, he 
seduced one of the king’s daughters and fled with her to Martaban, 

--- [Page 228] ---
206 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
, where he succeeded, after various incidents, in getting the Bur-
mese governor, Aleimma, assassinated and installing himself in 
his place. These events took place in 1281, before the fall of 
Pagan. Having become all-powerful in the country, Makatho asked 
for investiture from Rama Khamhaeng, who pardoned him for the 
abduction of his daughter and granted him the Thai title of Chao 
, Fa Rua: ' this is the Wareru of the Burmese chronicles, who will be discussed later. | 
The inscription of Rama Khamhaeng says that Luang Phra-
: bang marks the border in the north of the country, although, 
strictly speaking, it is located northeast of Sukhothai. Straight north 
and to the northwest, the region bordering Rama Khamhaeng’s 
states was under the control of two Thai princes, Ngam Muang, 
chief of Phayao, and Mangrai, chief of Chiangrai, who in 1287, the 
year of the fall of Pagan, concluded an alliance with Rama Kham-
haeng. 
Rama Khamhaeng himself was involved in a romantic ad-
venture: an amorous intrigue with one of the wives of Ngam 
Muang.'°° Ngam Muang, having succeeded in proving him guilty, 
| hesitated to put him to death, fearing lest the spirit of revenge 
reign from then on between the two countries. He decided to 
appeal to the prince of Chiangrai, their mutual friend, to arbitrate: 
_ this prince succeeded in reconciling the two rivals, at the price of 
a fine of 990,000 cowries to be paid by the seducer. Then the 
three princes renewed their oath of alliance by drinking a brew 
, in which each of them had mixed a bit of his blood; thus they 
| showed the feeling of ethnic unity which was the power of the 
Thai chiefs in the era of their expansion.197 
The History of the Yuan, which dates the first diplomatic 
: relations between China and Siam back to 1282, mentions em-
bassies from Sien in 1292, 1294, 1295, 1297, and 1299 198 and up 
to 1323. We do not know if the imperial order of 1294, enjoining 
the king of Sien “to come to the court, or, if he had an excuse, to 
have his son, his brother, and some envoys come as hostages,’” 109 , was indeed obeyed. 
Siamese tradition claims that Phra Ruang—the name under 
which the Siamese confuse the first kings of Sukhothai, although 
it is applied most particularly to Rama Khamhaeng—himself went 
to China once, and perhaps twice, and that he brought back the art 
of ceramics.” On this point, tradition perhaps bears some truth, for 

--- [Page 229] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 207 
it is hardly to be doubted that some pottery kilns of Sukhothai and Sawankhalok were established by Chinese.1™ , 
The inscription of 1292 gives a picture of Rama Khamhaeng’s government that is worth reproducing in its entirety: | 
During the lifetime of Rama Khamhaeng, this city of Sukhotai is 
prosperous. In the water there is fish, in the fields there is rice; the lord 
of the country does not levy taxes on his subjects who go along the road 
together, leading cattle to market, riding horses for sale. Whoever wishes 
to trade in elephants or in horses, does so; whoever wishes to trade in 
silver, in gold, does so. If a common man, a noble, or a chief falls ill, dies, 
or disappears, the house of his ancestors, his clothing, his elephants, his 
family, his rice granaries, his slaves, the areca and betel plantations of his 
ancestors are all transmitted to his children. If the common people, the 
nobles, or the chiefs get into disagreement, the king conducts a thorough 
inquiry, then settles the matter for his subjects with complete impartiality; 
he does not connive with the thief and the receiver of stolen goods; if 
he sees the rice of others, he does not covet it; and if he sees the treasure 
of others, he is not envious of it. Whoever goes by elephant in search of 
him and places his own country under his protection, he gives him aid 
and assistance; if the stranger has neither elephants, nor horses, nor serv-
ants, nor wives, nor silver, nor gold, he gives him some and invites him 
to regard himself as in his own country. If he captures warriors or enemy 
soldiers, he neither kills nor beats them. There is a bell suspended in the 
embrasure of the palace doorway: if an inhabitant of the kingdom has any 
grievance or any matter that is gnawing at his entrails and tormenting his : 
spirit and he wants to reveal it to the king, it is not difficult; he has only 
to strike the bell hanging there. Every time King Rama Khamhaeng hears 
this appeal, he questions the plaintiff about his affair and judges it with 
complete impartiality.12 
The inscription then describes the city of Sukhothai with its 
triple wall and its four gates, the pond that marks its center, the 
‘marvelous pond of clear and delicious water like the water of 
the Mekong in the dry season,” the sanctuaries within the walls; 
then to the west of the city the Aranyika monastery (Wat Taphan 
Hin), where there lived a learned Mahathera from Nagara Sri 
Dharmaraja (Ligor); to the east a great lake; to the north the 
market (talat pasan, i.e., bazaar) and a prasat which must cor-
respond to the Khmer monument of Wat Phra Phai Luang; 73 to 
the south, the hill (Khao Luang) on which resided a formidable 
spirit, Phra Khaphung,'"4 “superior to all the spirits of the country. 
If the prince who is sovereign in Muang Sukhothai worships this 
spirit properly and presents it ritual offerings, then this country 
will be stable and prosperous; but if he does not perform the 

--- [Page 230] ---
208 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
prescribed worship and does not present ritual offerings, then 
the spirit of this hill will no longer protect or respect this country, 
which will fall into decline.” These animistic rites did not prevent 
the king and his people from practicing the Theravada Bud-
dhism using the Pali language, which, during the reign of Rama 
Khamhaeng’s successors, was to submit more and more to Sin-
ghalese orthodoxy. “King Rama Khamhaeng, sovereign of this 
Muang Sukhothai, as well as the princes and princesses, men as 
well as women, nobles and chiefs, all without exception, without 
distinction of rank or sex, devoutly practice the religion of the 
: Buddha and observe the precepts during the period of retreat 
during the rainy season. At the end of the rainy season, the cere-
monies of the Kathin [offering of robes to the monks] take place 
and last a month.” The most important of these ceremonies took 
place west of the city, at the monastery of the Aranyika, from 
which the population returned forming a joyous and noisy pro-
cession. The end of Kathin coincided with the feast of lights, a 
rite of Indian origin (Divali or Dipavali),5 which the Chinese 
envoy Chou Ta-kuan describes at Angkor at the same period." 
‘This Muang Sukhothai has four gates: an immense crowd pushes 
in through them to see the king light the candles and to enjoy the 
fire, and this Muang Sukhothai is full to bursting with people.” 
9. THE THAI KINGDOM OF LAN NA: 
FOUNDATION OF CHIANGMAI (1296) 
While Rama Khamhaeng was establishing Thai domination 
over the populations of the central Indochinese Peninsula from 
Luang Phrabang to Ligor, with the exception of Lavo (Lopburi), 
which was not named in the inscription and which sent a series of 
embassies to China from 1289 to 1299,1!7 his ally Mangrai, who 
founded Chiangrai in 1262, drove the Mons from Haripunjaya 
(Lamphun). 
As early as 1288, the year that followed the fall of Pagan 
and the conclusion of the alliance with Rama Khamhaeng and 
Ngam Muang, Mangrai sent to Haripunjaya an emissary who was 
able to win the confidence of the Mon king Yiba and was given the 
office of preceptor. When he had sufficiently exasperated the in-
habitants with his exactions, he notified Mangrai, who in 1291-92 
marched on the town and plucked it like a ripe fruit.“ The Mon 
king fled to Khelang (the old site of Lampang), where his son lived; 

--- [Page 231] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 209 
after an unsuccessful attempt at reconquest during which the son 
was killed, Yiba took refuge at Phitsanulok. 
In 1296, Mangrai founded on the Mae Ping, about twenty 
kilometers north of Haripunjaya, the city of Chiangmai, “the new 
city.” Mangrai and his two allies chose the site as early as 1292 
and presided over the construction of the temple of Wat Chiang 
Man, built to mark the site.129 The new city had a brilliant destiny 
not only as a political center but also as a cultural center,!2! and it 
is even today the second city of Thailand. The state of which it 
was the capital bore the name of Yonarattha or Yonakarattha 
(kingdom of the Yion) or of ‘Bingarattha (kingdom of the Mae 
Ping) in the Pali chronicles; 12 it is the Lan Na of the Siamese and 
the Pa-pai-si-fu of the Chinese. Pa-pai-si-fu is mentioned for the 
first time under the date October 11, 1292, in the History of the 
Yuan.123 
The chronicle of Chiangmai states that Mangrai went to 
Pegu and married a princess there and then went to Burma, from 
which he brought back artisans,144 but we have no confirmation 
of these journeys from the Mons or Burmese. 
10 THE THAI IN BURMA AT THE END 
OF THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 
After the fall of Pagan, the Irrawaddy Basin fell into anarchy, 
and it is impossible to proceed here with a detailed history of the 
Thai principalities which, under the nominal authority of China, 
built themselves on the ruins of the Burmese dynasty. Roughly, the 
country was divided into three parts: in the south, the delta, 
peopled by the Mons, under the authority of Makatho, also known 
as Chao Fa Rua or Wareru, who by 1281 had established himself 
at Martaban; in the north, Upper Burma, the future kingdom of 
Ava, where the descendants of the kings of Pagan continued to 
reign under the tutelage of three Thai brothers, Athinkhaya 
(Asamkhya), Yazathinkyan (Rajasamkram), and Thihathu (Sihastra), 
sons of a Thai chief who had become estranged from his family 
and around 1260 had established himself at Myinsaing, where he 
got married; and in the southeast on the Sittang River, the prin-
cipality of Toungoo, founded in 1280. 
We have seen that in 1287, Narathihapate, driven from Pagan 
by the Mongols, had been poisoned at Prome by his son Thihathu 
(Sihasira).129 Thihathu then rid himself of some of his brothers 

--- [Page 232] ---
210 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
and tried to seize Hamsavati (Pegu), but he lost his life in the 
attempt and the city remained in the hands of the governor 
Tarabya, who had become independent there even before the fall 
of Pagan.126 
Makatho, or Wareru, the Thai chief of Martaban, made com-
mon cause with Tarabya, whose daughter he married and to whom 
he gave his own daughter. The two allies succeeded in occupying 
the delta after driving out the Burmese governors, but soon dis-
cord arose between them and Wareru had to get rid of his rival. 
After he became sole king of Pegu he continued to reside at 
Martaban, where he died in 1313, a victim of assassination by the 
children of Tarabya, who were also his own grandsons. The name 
of Wareru is associated with a version of the code of laws 127 
known under the name of Wagaru Dhammathat, which is un-
doubtedly one of the first vehicles by which the laws of Manu 
moved into Siam.128 
What was happening during this period in the center ‘and 
the east? 
At the death of Thihathu (Sihastira), killed at Pegu, the throne 
of Pagan reverted to his elder brother Kyézwa (II), who had re-
sisted him and who established the Burmese government again 
at Pagan; he was crowned there at the end of the month of May 
of the year 1289.179 In 1297 he sent his eldest son (Simhapati) to 
China to receive investiture in his place. But the court of Peking 
was apparently following a policy of “divide and rule,” and in 
consequence it crowned as many local chiefs as possible. Thus in 
1297, China gave a silver seal and a title to the king and at the 
same time gave an honorific tablet to Athinkhaya, the eldest of 
the three brothers who divided the government of the rice district 
of Kyaukse and who since 1294 had gradually arrogated royal titles 
to themselves. 
These three brothers had been presented by their father to 
Narathihapate, who had entrusted them with various missions, 
and they remained in royal favor under King Kydzwa (II), who 
turned over to them the administration of the three provinces of 
Myinsaing, Mekkaya, and Pinle. They also continued to administer 
a large portion of the rice district of Kyaukse, which they had 
taken over during the interregnum from 1284 to 1289. The king 
was poorly repaid for his favor, for in the same year that Athin-
khaya received his honorific tablet, in July 1297, he seized the king 
| and held him captive at Myinsaing. 

--- [Page 233] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 211 
The country was by this time in full revolt: the Mons of the 
delta were in rebellion from 1289 on, and in 1298 the northern 
tribes followed suit. The city of Pagan was destroyed and set on 
fire by the rebels. Athinkhaya went through the formality of re-
placing Ky6zwa with his son Zo-nit, who gave his first audience 
on May 8, 1299; he is known in epigraphy by the name Mang 
Lulang.3° On May 10, the three brothers had King Ky6zwa and his 
son Simhapati executed. Another son, Kumarakassapa, rival of Zo-
nit, was able to flee to China, where he was proclaimed king on 
June 22, 1300. At his instigation, a fifth and last expedition came 
down into the Irrawaddy Valley during the autumn of 1300. It 
besieged Myinsaing during the winter of 1300-1301. Athinkhaya 
and his two brothers succeeded in raising the siege by bribing the 
Mongol general staff. The Chinese troops withdrew with Kumara-
kassapa, the province of Burma was abolished on April 4, 1303, and 
Zo-nit and his son Zo-moun-nit continued to reign at least in name 
at Pagan. 
11. CAMBODIA AT THE END OF THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY: 
ACCOUNT OF CHOU TA-KUAN (1296) 
We have seen that, shortly before the Chinese envoy Chou 
Ta-kuan came to Cambodia in 1296, a disastrous war with the 
Thai of Sukhothai had ravaged the country. King Jayavarman VIII 
was elderly at the time of these events: “A land ruled by an old 
king,” says an inscription,!3! “clearly demonstrates the incon-
venience of having a superabundance of brambles [enemies].” 
According to two inscriptions of the following century,'? he abdi-
cated in 1295 and had the crown bestowed on Prince Srindravar-
man, who had married his eldest daughter Srindrabhipesvara-
chuda.'*? But, according to the evidence of Chou Ta-kuan, who 
arrived in Cambodia the following year, the change of reign was 
more dramatic. 
“The new prince,” says Chou Ta-kuan, “is the son-in-law of 
the former; he had pursued a military career. The father-in-law 
loved his daughter; the daughter stole the golden sword from him 
and took it to her husband. But then the son deprived of suc-
cession plotted to raise troops. The new prince learned of this, 
cut off the son’s toes, and shut him up in a dungeon.” 134 An in-
scription of Srindravarman seems in fact to make a discreet al-
lusion to the rivalries that preceded his accession. ‘The land, 
once sheltered at the same time and in all parts under a multitude 

--- [Page 234] ---
212 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
of white parasols of kings, suffered the burning of the sun; now, 
in the shade of a single white parasol [of the new king] it no longer 
feels it.’” 135 
The scanty facts we have concerning the successors of 
Jayavarman VII have been extracted from epigraphic sources. 
These inscriptions emanate from Brahman scholars who seem to 
have wanted to renew the tradition of the great priestly families of 
preceding centuries, a tradition interrupted by the Buddhist fervor 
of Dharanindravarman II, Jayavarman VII, and their wives. This 
temporary restoration of Sivaite orthodoxy was undoubtedly re-
sponsible both for the iconoclastic violence that was directed 
toward the monuments of Jayavarman VII’s era and resulted in the 
effacement of innumerable bas-relief images of the Buddha that 
had decorated the walls and pillars of the temples and for the 
replacement of these images by lingas or images of ascetics in 
prayer. 
The little that the inscriptions tell us of the reign of Jayavar-
man VIII, or of him under his posthumous name Parameésvara-
pada,!36 seems to permit us to impute to him part of the respon-
sibility for these acts of vandalism. One of his wives, Queen 
Chakravartirajadevi, was the daughter of the Brahman who had 
come from Burma at the time of Jayavarman VII and had received 
the title Jayamahapradhana."¥” A sister-in-law of this Brahman 
married a scholar-professor, Jayamangalartha, by whom she had 
a son who was awarded the same title. Jayavarman VIII held this 
son, who was a cousin of the queen, in such favor that in 1295, the 
same year as his voluntary or forced abdication, he had a temple 
erected in the capital 18 in which to place a statue of him. (In-
cidentally, this second Jayamangalartha must have been over a 
hundred years old when he died during the reign of the second 
successor of Jayavarman VIII.) 139 In addition, the last Sanskrit in-
scription from Cambodia, that is, the one from Angkor Wat, in-
forms us of another Brahman scholar named VidyeSsavid, a de-
scendant of the Brahman Sarvajfamuni who was “born in Aryadega 
[i.e., India] and came through piety to the country of Kambu.” 
It was this Brahman who, at the request of Jayavarman VIII, whose 
royal chaplain (hotar) he was, crowned Jayavarman VIII’s son-in-
law Srindravarman king.™41 
But Singhalese Buddhism, which, as we recall, one of the 
sons of Jayavarman VII went to study in Ceylon,’ already had its 

--- [Page 235] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 213 
followers and monks at the time of Chou Ta-kuan’s visit. Chou 
accompanied the ambassador sent to Cambodia in 1295 in order 
to try to obtain tribute. He left Wen-chou (Che-chiang) on the 
twentieth day of the second month of the year 1296 and returned 
on the twelfth day of the eighth month of the year 1297.18 “The 
embassy, according to him, was very successful, and homage was 
rendered; but perhaps he was too interested in the affair for us 
to accord full credence to what he says. As a matter of fact, there 
is no trace of regular officical relations following the mission of 
1296.” 14 
More important for the historian than the obtaining of 
tribute, the principal result of the voyage of Chou Ta-kuan was 
the composition of his famous memoirs on the customs of Cam-
bodia, translated as early as 1819 by J. P. Abel Rémusat,’* and 
again by Paul Pelliot in 1902.1 
After giving the geographic position of the country of Chenla 
or Chanla, also called Kan-pu-che or Kan-p’u-che (Kambuja), Chou 
Ta-kuan briefly describes his itinerary: from China to the mouths 
of the Mekong, then the way up the river and the arm of the Great 
Lake via Ch’anan (Kompong Ch’nang), Fo-ts’un (Pursat), and 
Kan-p’ang (Kompong), the port of the capital, to the capital itself. 
He describes a city that corresponds exactly to the city of Jayavar-
man VII, present-day Angkor Thom, with its walls and moats, its 
five gates preceded by bridges with balustrades of nagas, the gold 
tower (the Bayon) in the center of the city, the copper tower (the 
Baphuon) one /i to the north, the Royal Palace another /i farther 
north. Outside the city he mentions: to the south, the tower of 
Lu Pan (Phnom Bakhéng) and the tomb of Lu Pan (Angkor Wat); 
to the east, the eastern lake (Eastern Baray); to the north, the 
northern lake (Veal Reachdak, or the Baray of Preah Khan) with 
the temple of Neak Pean in the middle. 
Chou Ta-kuan then describes the various kinds of dwellings, 
beginning with the Royal Palace in which “there is a gold tower 
[the Phimeanakas] at the top of which the king sleeps. All the 
natives claim that there is a spirit in the tower, a serpent with 
nine heads, which is the master of the soil of the whole kingdom. 
It appears every night in the form of a woman. It is with this 
spirit that the king first sleeps and unites himself.” 
With regard to dress, he notes the fashion for Western 
materials, and describes the royal costume in this manner: ‘Only 

--- [Page 236] ---
214 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
the prince is allowed to wear closely woven floral materials. He 
wears a gold diadem, similar to those that are on the head of the 
Vajradharas. When he does not wear the diadem, he simply winds 
a garland of fragrant flowers into his chignon. The flowers remind 
one of jasmine. Around his neck he has nearly three pounds of 
large pearls. On his wrists, ankles, and fingers, he wears bracelets 
and gold rings set with cat’s-eyes. He goes barefoot, and the soles 
of his feet and the palms of his hands are tinted red with a red 
dye. When he goes out, he holds a gold sword in his hand.” 
With regard to the officials, “ministers, generals, astron-
omers,’”” and lesser employees, Chou Ta-kuan notes very accurately 
the character of the aristocratic oligarchy that was Cambodian ad-
ministration. “Most of the time, those chosen for offices are 
princes; if they are not, they offer their daughters as royal con-
cubines.” He confirms the evidence of epigraphy on the insignia 
of office: palanquins with shafts of gold or silver, parasols with 
gold or silver handles. “Officials having the right of a gold parasol 
are called pa-ting or an-ting (mrateng, amteng); those that 
have silver parasols are called ssu-la-ti (resthin).” 
The Chinese visitor recognized the existence of three re-
ligious sects: the Pan-k’i (pandita), that is, the Brahmans, “whom 
we see dressed like other men, except for a strand of white 
thread that they wear around the neck and that is the distinctive 
mark of the educated’’; the Chu-ku (Siamese chao ku, “lord,” term 
of address for Buddhist monks), who “shave their heads, wear yel-
low garments, uncover the right shoulder, fasten a skirt of material 
around the lower part of the body, go barefoot,’ worship an image 
“altogether similar to Buddha Sakyamuni, and which they call Po-
lai [Preah],’”” take only one meal a day, and recite numerous texts 
written on palm leaves; the Pa-ssu-wei ([ta]pasvin, ascetics), wor-
shippers of the linga, “a block of stone very similar to the stone 
of the altar of the god of the soil in China.” 
Chou Ta-kuan professed some scorn for the morals of the 
‘large and very black” inhabitants, but he saw women of the 
aristocracy ‘‘white as jade.” According to him, “the sovereign has 
five wives, one of the private apartment properly speaking, and 
four of the four cardinal points,” not to mention thousands of 
concubines. 
In a long paragraph based on information whose accuracy : 
he does not guarantee (as Chinese are not allowed to witness 

--- [Page 237] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 215 
these things, we cannot know the exact truth”), he describes under 
the obscure name chen-t’an a rite of defloration of nubile girls. 
Slaves appear to have been recruited almost exclusively 
among savages, ‘men of mountain solitudes,” who understood the 
common language; other savages, ‘“who do not submit to civiliza-
tion, wander in the mountains.” 
Chou Ta-kuan very exactly characterizes the Khmer language, 
in comparison with Chinese, by the order of words in a phrase, 
the modifier following the word modified in reverse of Chinese. 
The words Chou Ta-kuan cites, numerals and kinship terms, are 
easily recognizable. No specimens have come down to us of the 
writings in chalk on blackened skin mentioned by Chou Ta-kuan, 
but undoubtedly the krang on black paper are modern counter-
parts. 
The festivals of the twelve months are the subject of an 
interesting chapter in which there seems to be some confusion 
between the numbers of the Chinese months and the Cambodian 
months. Among these festivals, Chou Ta-kuan mentions a feast 
of lights, which must have been connected with the feast of the 
dead; a “throwing of the ball,”” which in modern times accom-
panies the alternate chants of boys and girls at the time of the 
new year; the washing of Buddha images, which also took place 
at new year’s; the survey of the population, a sort of census that 
was also at one time conducted in Siam; and the burning of rice, 
an agricultural celebration marking the end of the harvest. 
As far as justice was concerned, Chou Ta-kuan notes that — 
“disputes of the people, however insignificant, always go to the 
sovereign.” Beyond this, he speaks only of tortures and ordeals. 
Among the illnesses, he cites leprosy, “a malady caused by 
the climatic conditions of the country. There was a sovereign who 
contracted this malady; perhaps that is why the people do not 
consider it with scorn.” 
On the matter of funeral rites, he mentions hardly anything 
but the exposure of the body to wild animals. “Now, there are 
also a few people who burn their dead; these are for the most 
part descendants of the Chinese. ...The sovereign is interred in 
a tower, but | do not know if his body is buried or only his bones.” 
Chou Ta-kuan then speaks of agriculture, mentioning in this 
regard floating rice; he then describes the physical configuration 
of the country, its products, the commerce that took place there, 

--- [Page 238] ---
216 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
the Chinese goods in demand there, the plants and animals. He 
describes the furniture and tableware of the Cambodians, which 
have always been and still are rudimentary, the vehicles and 
palanquins, and the boats (junks and canoes). 
Among the ninety provinces, he names Chen-p’u, Ch’a-nan, 
Pa-chien, Mu-liang, Pa-hsie, P’u-mai, Che-kun, Mu-tsin-po, Lai 
Kan-k’eng, and Pa-ssu-li, very few of which it is possible to 
identify.14” 
“Each village has a temple or a stupa. Even villages with very 
few inhabitants have a police officer called mai-tsieh (mé srok?). 
On the major roads there are rest houses comparable to our post 
houses; they are called senmu (samnak).” 
After some details on the collection of human bile (which 
was still practiced at the time when the French protectorate was 
established), on baths, and on armaments,148 Chou Ta-kuan con-
cludes his account with a description of an outing of the king that 
is worth citing in its entirety: 
| have spent more than a year in the country, and | have seen him 
go out four or five times. When the prince goes out, troops head the 
escort; then come the standards, the pennants, and the music. 
Young girls of the palace, three to five hundred in number, who 
wear floral materials and flowers in their hair and hold candles in their 
hands, form one troop; even in broad daylight their candles are lit. Then 
come girls of the palace carrying gold and silver royal utensils and a 
whole series of ornaments, all of a very peculiar shape and the uses of 
which are unknown to me. Then there are the girls of the palace carrying 
lances and shields, who comprise the private guard of the prince; they 
also form a troop. Following are goat-carts and horse-carts, all decorated 
with gold. The ministers and princes are mounted on elephants; in front 
of them one can see from afar their red parasols, which are innumerable. 
After. them come the wives and concubines of the king, in palanquins, in 
carts, on horses and elephants. They have, certainly, more than a hundred 
parasols flecked with gold. After them is the sovereign, standing on an 
elephant and holding the precious sword in his hand. The tusks of the 
elephant are also sheathed in gold. There are more than twenty white 
parasols flecked with gold, with handles of gold. 
Numerous elephants crowd around him, and there are more troops 
to protect him. If the king goes to a nearby place, he uses only gold 
palanquins carried by ten girls of the palace. Most frequently the king, 
on his outings, goes to see a small gold tower in front of which is a 
gold Buddha. Those who see the king must prostrate themselves and 
touch the ground in front of them. This is what is called san-pa (sam-
peah). If they do not, they are seized by those in charge of the cere-
monies, who do not let them go until they have paid for their transgres-

--- [Page 239] ---
The Repercussions of the Mongol Conquests 217 
sion. Twice each day the king holds audience for the affairs of 
government. There is no fixed agenda. Those officials or commoners 
who wish to see the sovereign, sit on the ground to wait for him. After 
some time, one hears distant music in the palace, and, outside, conches 
are blown in welcome to the king. 
| have heard it said that he uses only a gold palanquin. He does not 
have to go far. An instant later you see two girls of the palace raise the 
curtain with their tiny fingers, and the king, holding the sword in his 
hand, appears at the golden window. Ministers and common people 
clasp their hands and strike the ground in front of them; when the sound 
of the conches stops, they can raise their heads again. Immediately there-
after the king sits down. In the place where he sits there is a lion skin, 
which is a hereditary royal treasure. 
When business is concluded, the prince returns; the two girls let 
the curtain fall, and everyone rises. 
We see from this that, even though this is a barbarous kingdom, 
these people know what a prince is. 
12. CHAMPA AT THE END OF THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY . 
In Champa, Indravarman V, already quite old at the time of 
the visit of Marco Polo in 1285, must have died shortly afterward. 
He was succeeded by his son, Prince Harijit, who took as his 
reign name Jaya Simhavarman (Ill). This is the Ché Man of the _ 
Vietnamese.'* 
Jaya Simhavarman IH, by his firm stance in 1292, when the 
Mongol fleet passed by on the way to the archipelago to avenge 
the Javanese insult to the envoys of Kublai and to obtain the sub-
mission of the small states of Sumatra, was able to prevent the 
Mongols from landing on the coasts of Champa.1° 
After marrying a Javanese princess, Queen Tapasi, he sought 
the hand of a Vietnamese princess, and in 1306 he obtained from 
the Emperor Tran Anh-t6ng—in exchange for two Cham provinces 
situated north of the Col des Nuages '°!—the hand of the Emperor’s 
sister, Princess Huyén Tran, who received the title Paramesvari.'>2 
He died the following year, after having erected at Phan-
rang the temple of Po Klaung Garai 3 and at Darlac the temple 
of Yang Prong.'>4 

--- [Page 240] ---
CHAPTER XIII 
THE DECLINE OF THE INDIAN KINGDOMS 
First Half of the Fourteenth Century 
We have seen in the preceding chapter the political repercussions 
of the coming to power of the Mongols in China. These political 
changes were accompanied by great changes in the spiritual realm. 
At the beginning of the fourteenth century, Sanskrit culture was 
in full decline; the last Sanskrit inscriptions date from 1253 in 
Champa, from around 1330 in Cambodia, from 1378 in Sumatra. In 
the Menam and Mekong basins, what remained of Hinduism and 
Mahayana Buddhism gave way to the orthodoxy of Singhalese 
Buddhism, which had been introduced on the Indochinese Penin-
sula by the Mons of Burma and was disseminated further by the 
Thai. In Sumatra, Islam began to make its appearance. In Java and 
Bali, Indian Tantrism was strongly influenced by the native In-
donesian substratum, at least in its literary and artistic expression. 
The Indian period in the history of Farther India was be-
ginning to close following the decrease in cultural exchanges with 
India proper that resulted from the Muslim invasions that took 
place there. 
1. THE END OF THE THAI KINGDOM OF SUKHOTHAI 
AND THE FOUNDING OF AYUTTHAYA (1350) 
We do not know the exact date of the death of Rama 
Khamhaeng. A passage of the History of the Yuan’ seems to in-
dicate that it took place sometime between the embassy of 1295 
and that of 1299. In 1299, this history says, “the king of Sien 
presented a petition to the throne stating that, when his father was 
on the throne, the court had granted him a gift of white horses 
with saddles and bridles and vestments of gold thread, and he 
requested that the same be granted to him in conformity with this 
precedent.” This petition, which met with a partial refusal, would 
seem to have emanated from a new king. However, accession of 
the successor of Rama Khamhaeng before 1299 seems difficult to 

--- [Page 241] ---
The Decline of the Indian Kingdoms 219 
reconcile with the statement in the Rajadhiraja, or History of Mar-
taban, that, at the death of Wareru in 1313, his successor received 
from ‘‘Phra Ruang” the title of Ramapratishtha, i.e., “established 
by Rama”; this title could scarcely have been conferred by anyone 
but Rama Khamhaeng.* Moreover, if the son of Rama Khamhaeng 
had succeeded his father before 1299, he must have reigned about 
fifty years, which seems very long for a king about whom we know 
so little. It is more probable that Rama Khamhaeng ceased to 
reign shortly before 1318, the date at which the king of Martaban 
invaded Tavoy and Tenasserim.3 
If this conjecture is accurate, it was still Rama Khamhaeng 
who in 1313 organized the raids on Champa that are mentioned 
by the annals of Vietnam.* To conduct these raids, his troops had 
to cross territories that had belonged to Cambodia and that Cam-
bodia had either lost or was no longer able to defend against its 
formidable neighbor. 
Legend claims that Phra Ruang disappeared in the rapids of 
the rivers of Sawankhalok.> It is difficult to say whether this legend 
rests on historical fact or even whether it applies to Rama Kham- , 
haeng or to some other king of his dynasty. 
Rama Khamhaeng was succeeded by his son Loe Thai. 
Scholars, following an incorrect reading,® for a long time called 
him Sua Thai, or “the Tiger of the Thai’; this idolum libri still 
appears from time to time in books. 
The name of Loe Thai can be associated with only a few 
historical events. 
With respect to Burma, he seems to have taken advantage of 
the troubles that arose in Martaban to recapture Tavoy and Tenas-
serim.” But he was less fortunate when he tried to revenge the 
death of his grandson who had tried to seize power at Martaban: 
his army was defeated and Martaban ceased to recognize his 
suzerainty.® 
It was still Loe Thai, judging from the date, who in 1335 
sent a delegation to the Cua Rao Pass in the Indochinese cordil-
lera to greet the Emperor of Dai Viét, Tran Hién-t6ng, who was 
then conducting a campaign against the Thai kingdom of Ai-lao 
(southwest of Yunnan).9 
Loe Thai designated his son Lu Thai as viceroy at Satchanalai 
(Sawankhalok) around 1340, and he very probably died in 1347.10 
Loe Thai’s devotion to Buddhism and his religious works earned 

--- [Page 242] ---
220 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
him the title Dharmaraja or Dharmikaraja, ‘pious king,” which 
his successors bore after him. We owe to him particularly the 
construction of many Buddhapada, or imprints of the foot of the 
Buddha, made in imitation of the one worshipped in Ceylon on 
the summit of Sumanakita,’* or Adam’s Peak. 
The relations between Sukhothai and Ceylon, the main 
center of Buddhism, became closer during the reign of Loe Thai, 
in part thanks to the activities of a Thai prince who assumed the 
yellow robe and made a journey to India and Ceylon, from which 
he brought back miraculous relics. This prince, who after his 
journey received the title of Mahathera Sri Sradharajachilamuni 
Sri Ratanalankadipa Mahasami, was a grandson of the Pha Muang 
who had placed the father of Rama Khamhaeng on the throne of 
Sukhothai. After a worldly youth, “now doing good, now doing 
evil, now laughing, now crying, now winning, now losing, now 
happy, now unhappy, turning, going and coming, the unquiet heart 
in the midst of this world of transmigrations,”’ it seems that around 
the age of thirty he lost a son and this bereavement made him 
understand that ‘this world of transmigrations is unstable, ephem-
eral, illusory.” After having “practiced the perfection of liberality,” 
in imitation of the Buddha in his last earthly existence, ‘he put on 
the robes and quit the world, carrying the beggar’s bowl in a sash 
slung over his shoulder.’”’ Siam has seen many such curious figures 
of “prince monks” even well into the twentieth century. A long 
inscription that comes from Sukhothai, and from which the above 
passages are extracted, gives a detailed account of this prince’s 
career.13 He is undoubtedly the same person spoken of in an in-
scription 4 that tells of a prince’s travels in the north to Muang 
Fang, Phrae, Lamphun, and Tak, then to India “to the Kingdom 
of Kalinga, to Pataliputra, to Cholamandala, to the kingdom of 
the Mallas, and to the island of Lanka [Ceylon] to try to find 
precious relics,”” 
The religious buildings attributed to this prince by these two 
inscriptions are designated in too vague a way to be identified 
with certainty. He was responsible for important works of enlarge-
ment and restoration in a monument that corresponds to, and 
must be, Wat Mahathat of Sukhothai.1> These labors were executed 
in part by workers brought back from Ceylon; here is a valuable 
indication of the possible origins of the Singhalese influence that 
has been detected in the art of Sukhothai." 

--- [Page 243] ---
The Decline of the Indian Kingdoms 221 
Loe Thai was succeeded by his son Lu Thai, viceroy at Si 
Satchanalai (Sawankhalok).'’” This prince was a scholar who in 
1345 composed a massive treatise on Buddhist cosmology, the 
Traibhaumikatha, which has come down to us in a little-altered 
old Siamese translation known as the Traiphum Phra Ruang. 
Modern versions of it today still constitute the basis of popular 
concepts of Buddhism in Siam and Cambodia. 
In 1347, Lu Thai went to Sukhothai, where troubles seem 
to have broken out, undoubtedly at the death of his father. He 
seized the city and had himself crowned king there with the title 
Sri SUryavamga Rama Mahadharmarajadhiraja.9 
Once on the throne of Sukhothai, LU Thai seems to have 
been more concerned with the morals and religion of his sub-
jects than with military conquests. 
“His Majesty,” says one of his inscriptions, “has thoroughly 
studied the sacred scriptures. He has studied the Vinaya and the 
Abhidharma according to the system of the traditional masters, 
beginning with the Brahmans and the ascetics. The king knows 
the Veda, the treatises and traditions, the law and the maxims, 
beginning with the treatises on astronomy....His knowledge is 
unequaled....He knows the short years and the years with in-
tercalary months, the days, the lunar mansions. Using his authority, 
he has reformed the calendar.” 2 
“This king,” says another inscription, “reigned by observing 
the ten royal precepts. He knows how to take pity on all his sub-
jects. If he sees the rice of others, he does not covet it; if he 
sees the wealth of others, he is not annoyed by it.... If he catches 
people guilty of deceit and insolence, people who put poison in 
his rice in order to cause him sickness and death, he never kills 
or beats them, but he pardons all who behave wickedly toward 
him. The reason why he represses his heart and quells his spirit 
and does not become angry when it would be proper for him to 
do so, is that he has the desire to become a Buddha and the de-
sire to lead all creatures beyond the ocean of sorrows of trans-
migration.” 21 
Unfortunately for him, this wise and pious monarch who 
reformed the calendar and pardoned offenses had a more am-
bitious neighbor to the south, the kingdom of Lavo. We have 
only one historical fact about the kingdom of Lavo in the thir-
teenth century: according to the History of the Yuan, which men-

--- [Page 244] ---
222 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
tions it by the name Lo-hu, it sent several embassies to China be-
tween 1289 and 1299.44 According to tradition without known 
historical basis,2 a Thai chief named Jayagri, a descendant of a 
prince of Chiangsaen, had settled in Phra Pathom and had taken 
as his son-in-law the chief of Muang U Thong, an ancient city the 
remains of which can still be seen in the Suphan region.*4 Around 
1347, following a cholera epidemic, this prince of U Thang, who 
meanwhile had succeeded his father-in-law, abandoned his res-
idence and went to found a new capital ® fifty kilometers south 
of Lavo (Lopburi) on an island of the Menam, at a crossroads of 
major river routes. He gave it the name of Dvaravati Sri Ayudhya 6 
at the time of his coronation in 1350 under the name Ramadhipati. 
The preceding year, in 1349,27 he had launched an expedition to 
the north which, without striking a blow, brought about the sub-
mission of Sukhothai and its pious king, whose peaceful inclina-
tions perhaps had some influence on the decision of the founder 
of Ayutthaya. Deprived of his independence, King Lu Thai turned 
more and more to religion, building temples and monasteries, 
welcoming monks from Ceylon, and finally entering into the 
order himself in 1361. 
At Sukhothai, between 1250 and 1350, the Siamese were 
able to develop their own characteristic civilization, institutions, 
and art. The city was situated on the border between the zone of 
Khmer influence and the zone of Mon and Burmese influence. 
Via the Mae Yom River, it was in close relations with Lopburi and 
the former Khmer provinces of the lower Menam. It was, more-
over, situated at the end of the route coming from Lower Burma, 
which assured its relations with the west, and especially with 
Ceylon. 
During the Sukhothai era, then, the Siamese showed a 
marked and perhaps deliberate contrast with Khmer civilization 
in some areas, notably in politics and art.28 On the other hand, 
from the beginning of the foundation of Ayutthaya, they borrowed 
from Cambodia its political organization, material civilization, 
system of writing, and a considerable number of words. The 
Siamese artists were beholden to the school of the Khmer artists 
and transformed Khmer art not only according to their own genius 
but also as a result of the strong influences of their contact with 
their neighbors to the west, the Mons and the Burmese. From 
the Mons and the Burmese the Siamese received their legal tra-

--- [Page 245] ---
The Decline of the Indian Kingdoms 223 
ditions, of Indian origin, and above all their Singhalese Buddhism 
with its artistic traditions. 
2. THE FOUNDING OF THE LAOTIAN KINGDOM 
OF LAN CHANG (1353) 
We have seen that, by the beginning of the fourteenth 
century, the Thai of Sukhothai had consolidated their authority 
over all the territory of present-day Thailand with the exception 
of the eastern provinces, which were still Cambodian. But these 
in their turn soon fell in part under the domination of another 
branch of the Thai family, that which we call Laotian. 
lt will be recalled that at the end of the twelfth century 
Khmer domination extended up the Mekong to Wiangchan, a 
fact that was proved by the discovery at Sai Fong of a stele of one 
of the hospitals of Jayavarman VII. ‘We know, moreover,” writes 
Henri Maspero,”#? “that Wiangchan came under Siamese domina-
tion in the last years of the thirteenth century, conquered by Rama 
Khamhaeng who probably seized it from the Cambodians; un-
fortunately, the silence of Vietnamese and Chinese documents in 
the thirteenth century prevents us from establishing the fact pre-
cisely. What is certain is that after the loss of Wiangchan the 
Cambodians still remained for a long time masters of the country 
situated downstream from the great bend of the Mekong, and that 
they still occupied it during the first half of the fourteenth century. 
It took the formation of a powerful enough Laotian state, formed 
from the union of the principalities of Muang Chawa, modern 
Luang Phrabang, and of Wiangchan, to drive the Cambodians to 
the south and to gradually confine them to territories that were 
Cambodian in population.” 
The formation of this Laotian state was favored by the 
weakening of Sukhothai; it is undoubtedly significant that the 
founding of the kingdom of Wiangchan by Fa Ngum took place 
in 1353,°9 four years after the submission of Sukhothai to the 
young kingdom of Ayutthaya. 
“Native tradition,” writes Louis Finot,21 “knows nothing 
about the period between the mythical Khun Lo (son of the 
legendary Khun Borom) and the fourteenth century. It only pre-
serves a list of names of chiefs designated first by the title khun, 
then by that of thao, finally by that of phraya. There were fifteen 
khun and six thao. The last of the thao, Thao Tavang, had a son, 

--- [Page 246] ---
224 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Phraya Lang, the first of the phrayas; it is to him that the memories 
of Laotians about their history go back.” 
Phraya Lang, having governed his kingdom badly, was exiled to the 
mountains (or put in a cage at Pak U, according to another tradition) 
and replaced by his son Phraya Khamphong. When the latter had a son, 
he sent a message to the dethroned king to ask him what name he 
wanted his grandson to be given. The angry old man only answered: 
“Phi fa pha!” (“May Heaven strike you down!”) Upon receiving this answer, 
Phraya Khamphong, without further ado, called his son Phi Fa, Spirit of 
Heaven. This pompous name was hardly justified. Phi Fa had nothing in 
common with the god whose name he bore except a lively taste for 
women, which did not stop even at the doors of his father’s harem. He 
was driven out and did not reign. Before his expulsion, he had a son, the 
future Phraya Fa Ngum, in 1316. 
The exiled prince and his son found refuge at the court of 
the king of Cambodia, who must have then been Jayavarmadi-
paramesvara, the king who came to the throne of Angkor in 1327.*4 
The young Fa Ngum was raised by a religious scholar of the capital 
whom the Laotian chronicles call Maha Pasaman Chao (Phra 
Mahasamana). When he was sixteen years old, the king of Cam-
bodia gave him in marriage his daughter, Princess Kaeo or Yot , 
Kaeo, also known as Kaeo Lot Fa. Then at a date that is unknown, 
but must have been between 1340 and 1350, the king gave Fa 
Ngum an army so that he could reconquer the kingdom of his 
fathers. 
The Laotian chronicle Nithan Khun Borom ?3 tells—with a 
great deal of detail, the historicity of which needs to be con-
firmed by other evidence—the story of the victorious advance of 
this expedition along the Mekong Valley through Bassac, Kham-
muan, Tran-ninh, the Hua Phan (where Fa Ngum negotiated with 
Dai Viét and fixed the border at the watershed separating the Red 
River and the Mekong), and the Sip Song Phan Na and then the 
| descent on Chiangdong-Chiangthong (Luang Phrabang), where 
} Fa Ngum was proclaimed king. According to the chronicle, Fa 
Ngum then went back up the Mekong and conducted a victorious 
campaign against Lan Na, whose king Sam Phaya, after having 
tried to resist at Chiangsaen, fled to Chiangrai and there negotiated 
a treaty with Fa Ngum. On his return, Fa Ngum conquered the 
Kha populations. Thus far Fa Ngum had avoided Wiangchan. He 
now seized it by using a classic ruse: he left a stock of gold and 
silver arrows, feigned retreat, then pounced on his adversaries 

--- [Page 247] ---
The Decline of the Indian Kingdoms 225 
when they left their ranks to gather up the precious metal. After 
taking Wiangchan, Fa Ngum advanced on the Khorat Plateau to 
Roi-et; then, having organized all his conquests, he returned by 
Wiangchan to Chiangdong-Chiangthong, where his solemn coro-
nation took place. The Nithan Khun Borom, in its account of all 
these events, attributes the facility with which Fa Ngum obtained 
the submission of the chiefs in the conquered countries and the 
friendship of the neighboring kings to a feeling of a common origin. 
“Like you, we are descendants of Khun Borom,” the envoys of 
Tran-ninh told him. “We are brothers through Khun Berom and 
must not fight with armies between us,” affirms a Lu chief of the 
Sip Song Phan Na. The king of Ayutthaya himself, to stop the 
march of Fa Ngum on the Khorat Plateau, reminded him that they 
were “brothers since Borom,” offered him territories, and promised 
him one of his daughters in marriage. Here is a new example 
among the Thai chiefs of this feeling of a common ethnic origin 
that has already been noted in connection with Rama Kham-
haeng.*4 
Another source, the Phongsawadan,» gives a shorter itinerary 
for the expedition of Fa Ngum, having him go directly from Tran-
~ — ninh to Chiangdong-Chiangthong. The Phongsawadan also gives a 
somewhat different chronological sequence of events: it places 
after his coronation, rather than before it, Fa Ngum’s negotiations 
with Dai Viét for the delimitation of the border and his campaign 
on the Khorat Plateau. 
However that may be, various texts agree that the solemn 
coronation of Fa Ngum, which marks the founding of the kingdom 
of Lan Chang,® took place in 1353; this date has most probably 
been transmitted correctly. To my knowledge, the only mention of 
Fa Ngum in epigraphy is found in an inscription of Sukhothai 
dating after 1359; this inscription says that Sukhothai had for a 
neighbor to the east, on the Mekong, Chao Phraya Fa Ngom.37 
The accession of Fa Ngum is important not only because it 
marks the establishment of a state destined to play a major political 
role in the central Indochinese Peninsula but also because it re-
sulted in the introduction into the upper Mekong of Khmer cul-
ture and of Singhalese Buddhism through the intermediary of 
Cambodia. Shortly after his accession, in fact, Fa Ngum sent to 
Cambodia a mission led by his old religious tutor, Maha Pasaman, 
and made up of monks and artisans. In addition to a number of 

--- [Page 248] ---
226 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
sacred texts, they brought back the famous statue of Phra Bang 
that was to give its name to the capital of Lan Chang. This mission 
had all the more success because its efforts were brought to bear 
on a terrain already marked by the imprint of Cambodian 
Buddhism.78 
3. THE THAI KINGDOM OF LAN NA 
We have seen that, in the course of his campaign against 
Lan Na, Fa Ngum advanced to Chiangrai, where the king of Lan 
Na, Sam Phaya, had taken refuge. In view of the date, this must 
have been King Pha Yu, great-grandson of Mangrai. 
The death of Mangrai around 1315,39 after a reign of about 
fifty years, was the signal for competition between his heirs. Of 
his three sons mentioned in the chronicles, he had passed over 
the eldest 4° and had removed the youngest by sending him to the 
Thai of the upper Salween, where he founded the principality of 
Muang Nai (Moné).47 There remained the second son, Grama 
(Khun Kham), or Jayasangrama, who had taken part in the battle 
against Yiba, the last king of Haripunjaya.*? It was he who suc-
ceeded Mangrai. After a few months, however, he had himself 
replaced at Chiangmai by his son Saen Phu, established two other 
sons at Muang Fang and at Chiangkhong, and himself retired to 
Chiangrai.# 
But, when the prince of Muang Nai received the news of 
the death of his father, Mangrai, he came to claim the throne, or 
at least his part of the inheritance. Saen Phu and his brother Nam 
Thuem, prince of Chiangkhgng, took refuge near their father at 
Chiangrai, while their uncle, the prince of Muang Nai, occupied 
Haripunjaya.¥ 
What happened afterwards is very confused, and it suffices 
to note here that Nam Thuem succeeded in driving out the in-
vader and retaking Haripunjaya. But his father did not leave him 
there; he sent him to Chiangtung * and put Saen Phu back on the 
throne of Chiangmai in 1322 or 1324.% 
Saen Phu in his turn soon established his son Kham Fu at 
Chiangmai so he could go to Chiangrai to care for his father 
(Jayasangrama), who died in 1325 or 1327.4” 
Then Saen Phu regained power over the whole territory. In 
1325 or 1328 48 he founded the city of Chiangsaen, which bears 
his name, on an already ancient site. He died in 1334 and was 

--- [Page 249] ---
The Decline of the Indian Kingdoms 227 
replaced by his son Kham Fu, who reigned only a few years and 
died at Chiangrai.*° 
Kham Fu was succeeded by his son Pha Yu, who was 
crowned at Chiangrai but at the end of three years established 
the capital at Chiangmai again. He enlarged and fortified the city 
of Chiangmai.°! At its center he built a temple in which to place 
the ashes of his father; °2 this temple later took the name of Wat 
Phra Sing when the statue of Phra Sing, or Phra Sihing, “the 
Singhalese Buddha,” was installed there? The date of Pha Yu's 
death is uncertain. 
4. BURMA UNDER THE DOMINATION OF THE THAI 
The events that took place in Burma in the Thai principalities 
during the first half of the fourteenth century are complex; it will 
suffice to give the following facts. 
In the south, the assassination of Wareru was the signal for 
a series of conflicts with the kingdom of Sukhothai to which we 
have already alluded.°> The descendants of the Thai chief, be-
ginning with Binnya U (1353-85), established themselves at 
Hamsavati (Pegu),5© where they reigned until the conquest of the 
city in 1539 by the Burmese king of Toungoo. 
In the central region, the three Thai brothers, after suceeding 
in getting rid of the Mongols, made every effort to win their 
favor and succeeded in getting the Chinese province of Burma 
abolished in 1303. The youngest brother, Thihathu, who had af-
firmed his supremacy in 1306,57 was crowned king on April 20, 
1309.°8 At the death of the eldest brother Athinkhaya in 1310, he 
and his other brother were left masters of the situation. In 1312, 
he chose Pinya, also known as Vijayapura, as his residence.°? His 
descendants continued to reign there until 1364. 
One of Thihathu’s sons, Athinkhaya,®° established himself in 
1315 at Sagaing, from which he dominated the north and west. 
It was an offshoot of this branch from Sagaing, Thaddminbya, who 
in 1364 founded the city of Ava® on the Irrawaddy, at the en-
trance to the Kyaukse plain, a city that was to remain the capital 
for five centuries. 
Finally, in the east, the powerful city of Toungoo, which 
had been founded in 1280 and remained the place of refuge for 
Burmese desiring to escape Thai domination, became the ‘capital 
of a new Burmese state in 1347 when Thinkhaba took the title of 

--- [Page 250] ---
228 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
king there.® It was one of his descendants who in 1539 was to 
conquer Hamsavati (Pegu) and found a powerful Burmese state 
there. 
5. CAMBODIA: THE LAST KINGS MENTIONED IN EPIGRAPHY 
At Angkor, King Srindravarman, who was reigning at the 
: time of the visit of Chou Ta-kuan, remained in power until 1307, 
at which date “he abdicated in favor of the prince heir apparent 
(Yuvaraja) and retired into the forest.” 3 We owe to him the oldest 
Cambodian inscription in the Pali language, an inscription com-
memorating the construction of a vihara and of an image of the 
Buddha in 1309, two years after the abdication of the king. 
We do not know the relationship of the new king to 
Srindravarman; an inscription tells us that he was a relative 
(vamsa) without being more specific. On coming to the throne, he 
took the name of Srindrajayavarman. He reigned twenty years. 
He embellished the temple built in the capital by Jayavarman VIII 
in honor of the Brahman Jayamangalartha who died during his 
reign at the age of 104.6 Aside from the coming of a Chinese 
mission in 1320 charged with buying tame elephants in Cam-
bodia,66 we know no other events which we can attribute to his 
reign. 
In 1327, Srindrajayavarman was replaced by Jayavarmadi-
parameévara,*” whose relationship to him is not known. We know 
this king only through a Khmer inscription from the Bayon ® 
and through a Sanskrit inscription that is called the Angkor Wat 
inscription ©? but was actually found at a site formerly called 
Kapilapura, to the northeast of the temple.” This Sanskrit in-
scription, which was composed by the Brahman scholar Vidyesa-
dhimant, servant of Kings Srindravarman, Srindrajayavarman, and 
Jayavarmadiparame§gvara,”' is the last Sanskrit inscription of Cam-
bodia. Completely impregnated with Sivaite mysticism, it proves 
that, in a country where Singhalese Buddhism must already have 
made very great progress, Hinduism found a last refuge at the 
court of the successors of Jayavarman VII. Indeed, even today, six 
centuries later, it has still not been driven out; the Bako, or court 
Brahmans, still officiate in the royal ceremonies of modern Cam-
bodia.”4 
We do not know how long Jayavarmadiparamesvara reigned. 
It was undoubtedly he who sent an embassy to China in 13307 

--- [Page 251] ---
The Decline of the Indian Kingdoms 229 
and in 1335 dispatched a delegation to the Cua Rao Pass to greet 
the Emperor of Dai Viét, Tran Hién-téng, a delegation that must 
have met there the delegation from Sukhothai.” It is impossible 
for the moment to establish the connection between Jayavar-
madiparamesvara, the last king mentioned in the great inscription 
of Angkor Wat, and the first kings of the Cambodian chronicle, 
which begins around 1350 with a king bearing the posthumous 
name Mahanippean or Nippeanbat, i.e., Nirvanapada.”> The break 
between the kings of ancient epigraphy and those of the chronicle 
is for the moment complete. 
It is interesting to note that in the middle of the fourteenth 
century, on the eve of the founding of Ayutthaya and the corona-
tion of the first king of the Siamese dynasty that would bring 
about the ruin of Angkor, Wang Ta-yuan could still write in his 
Tao-i Chih-lioh that the country of Cambodia was commonly 
called “Chenla the rich.” 7 
6. CHAMPA 
In Champa, the “son of Sri Harijit,” that is, of Jayasimhavar-
man III and Queen Bhaskaradevi, came to the throne in 1307 at 
the age of twenty-three. Georges Maspero 7” somewhat arbitrarily 
gives him the name of Jayasimhavarman IV. The annals of Vietnam 
call him Ché Chi. Persistent rebellions in the old Cham prov-
inces north of the Col des Nuages that had been ceded to Dai 
Viét in exchange for the Vietnamese princess 78 obliged the Em-
peror Tran Ahn-téng to lead an expedition there in 1312. The 
expedition resulted in the capture of the Cham king, who was 
brought back a prisoner and died in Tongking in 1313.79 His 
brother was entrusted with the administration of the country as 
‘feudatory prince of the second rank.” It was thus as suzerain 
protector of Champa that the emperor of Dai Viét defended it 
in this same year 1313 against the Siamese raid that has been mentioned.® , 
In 1314, Emperor Tran Ahn-téng abdicated in favor of his 
son Tran Minh-téng, and this provided the ‘‘feudatory prince,” 
whom the Vietnamese annals call Ché Nang, the opportunity to 
try to reconquer the provinces of the north and to make himself 
independent. He was defeated in 1318 and took refuge in Java.®! 
The emperor of Dai Viét then placed a military chief, called 
Ché A-nan in the Vietnamese sources, on the throne of Champa. 

--- [Page 252] ---
230 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
This chief soon attempted in his turn to liberate himself by rely-
ing on the Mongols. His victory over Vietnamese troops in 1326 
allowed him to cease performing acts of vassalage.®* Thereafter 
he had a peaceful reign. During his reign the Franciscan priest 
Odoric of Pordenone visited the country; in his account of his 
journey,> Odoric devotes a paragraph to the kingdom “which is 
called Zampa,*4 and 'tis a very fine country, having great store of 
victuals and of all good things.” He attributes to the king the 
procreation of two hundred children, ‘for he hath many wives and 
other women whom he keepeth.” He notes the abundance of the 
schools of fish that frequent the coast, fish that come “in order to 
pay homage to their emperor.” The most interesting statement in 
his account is his allusion to the Indian practice called sati: ‘When 
a man dies in this country, they bury his wife with him, for they 
say that she should live with him in the other world also.” ® 
At the death of Ché A-nan in 1342, his son-in-law, called 
Tra-hoa B6-dé in the Vietnamese sources, succeeded in supplant-
ing the legitimate heir Ché M6, although he had to fight against 
him for some ten years before he finally eliminated him. The suc-
cess he achieved over Vietnamese troops brought in by Ché M6 
stimulated him to attempt to reconquer the Hué region in 1353, 
but in this enterprise he failed. His reign was marked by the visit 
of the Berber traveler Ibn Battta, if, as has been suggested,®° the 
country of Tawalisi mentioned by this author in his account really 
refers to Champa. We do not know when Tra-hoa B6é-dé’s reign 
came to an end.® 
7. THE MALAY PENINSULA AND SUMATRA: 
THE SPREAD OF ISLAM 
On the Malay Peninsula, the recommendation made by the 
court of Peking in 1295 to the Thai of Sukhothai to “do no harm 
to the Ma-li-yu-erh and hold to your promise’’ 88 seems not to 
have been observed for very long if we are to believe Wang Ta-
yuan, who writes in the middle of the fourteenth century in his 
Tao-i Chih-lioh: 8? ‘The people [of Sien] are much given to piracy. 
...in recent vears thev came with seventy odd junks and raided 
Tan-ma-hsi 9° and attacked the city moat. (The town) resisted for 
a month, the place having closed its gates and defending itself, 
and they not daring to assault it.” The same author also mentions, 
among others, the states of Ting-chia-lu,2! P’eng-heng (Pahang),?2 

--- [Page 253] ---
The Decline of the Indian Kingdoms 231 
Chi-lan-tan (Kelantan), 93 Tan-ma-ling (Tambralinga),94 and Lung-ya-
hsi-chiao (Langkasuka) ® and various islands; he enumerates their 
products but does not give any historical details. 
At Trengganu, on the east coast of the peninsula, a Malay 
inscription which is presumed to date from 1326-27, but which 
could have been later, is the oldest document relating to the Is-
lamization of the peninsula.% On the other hand, around 1345-46 
lbn Batita, the envoy of the Sultan of Delhi, Muhammed Ibn 
Toghluk, who visited Kakula 9%” on his way to China, speaks of the 
Sultan of Mul Djawa (the name by which he designates the Malay 
Peninsula) as being an infidel.9%® We have seen in the preceding 
chapter that for Sumatra the evidence concerning the introduction 
of Islam begins about 1281. Ibn Batita claims to have been re-
ceived in the sultanate of Sumutra by Malik az-Zahir, a claim 
that has been placed in doubt.99 However that may be, the account 
of Ibn Batuta contains some interesting details. It says that the 
sultan is a devotee of the sect of the Shafi‘ites and that his country 
is surrounded by infidels. ‘He makes war often, especially against 
the infidels....His subjects also follow the Shafi/ite rite; they 
love to fight the heathens, and march willingly with their sovereign. 
They have been victorious over the neighboring infidels, who pay 
them tribute in order to obtain peace.” ™ The oldest tombstone 
inscription found at Samudra-Pasai dates from 1320.10 
Islam, which seems to have been imported to Sumatra prin-
cipally by people from Gujarat and the Gulf of Cambay,12 was 
still far from having conquered all the small principalities of the 
north of the island by the middle of the fourteenth century. Odoric 
of Pordenone in 1321 mentions some of these principalities: 1% 
Lamori (Achin), where “all the women be in common” and where 
the people “eat man’s flesh’; Sumoltra, whose inhabitants “brand 
themselves on the face with a little hot iron in some twelve places; 
and this is done by men and women both.” 1% As for Wang Ta-
yuan, he lists the same states under the names of Nan-wu-li 1% 
and Su-wen-ta-la, and he adds Tan-yang1” (Tamiang, the 
Dagroian of Marco Polo?2); again he is content to enumerate 
products without describing the political situation. In the center 
and south of the island, we know of only two states: San-fo-ch’i,1 
which for Wang Ta-ylan corresponded to the Jambi River Val-
ley, that is, the ancient Malayu, which, as we have seen, had 
become in the thirteenth century the center of gravity of the old 

--- [Page 254] ---
232 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
empire of the maharaja; and Ch’iu-chiang, “the old estuary,” 1 
which is undoubtedly Palembang. 
For its part, epigraphy shows that Malayu remained the only 
Sumatranese state of some political importance and that it had 
become the refuge of Indian culture in opposition to the sultanates 
of the north that were already Islamized or in the process of 
becoming so. But Malayu’s center tended gradually to become 
more and more distant from the eastern coast of the island, to 
sequester itself in the interior near what was to be Minangkabau. 
Many inscriptions tell us that in this region in the middle of 
the fourteenth century there was a “sovereign of the Land of Gold” 
(kanakamedinindra) 1 named Adityavarman, son of Advayavar-
man. His name appears in Java as early as 1343 on an image of 
the Bodhisattva Manjugri that was originally in Chandi Jago." 
Its presence there seems to indicate that at this date the future 
king, who was somehow related to Queen Rajapatni, wife of 
Kritarajasa, lived at the court of Majapahit.1 
In 1347 he was at Malayupura, where he had a Sanskrit text 
engraved ™4 on the back of an image of Amoghapasa. This image, 
found at Rambahan, was, according to the inscription of Padang 
Rocho, brought from Java in 1286.75 At Malayupura, Adityavar-
man bore the royal title of Udayadityavarman (or Adityavarmodaya) 
Pratapaparakramarajendra Maulimalivarmadeva, a title in which 
one scholar believes he can detect an attempt at synthesis of the 
royal titles traditionally in use in Srivijaya and Malayu." 
This inscription gives, moreover, interesting indications 
about the Tantric rites that were practiced in Indonesia in the 
fourteenth century, many of which are perpetuated in Bali to this 
day.17 The Buddhism of King Adityavarman, who represented 
himself as an incarnation of Lokeévara, like that of the kings of 
Majapahit, stemmed from the kalachakra system." 
Another inscription of the same date, but without historic 
interest, has been found at Pagar Ruyung, in the heart of Minangka-
bau.19 This region has furnished many other inscriptions from this 
long reign that lasted at least until 1375. 
8. JAVA: THE KINGDOM OF MAJAPAHIT TO THE 
ACCESSION OF HAYAM WURUK (1350) 
We have seen above that, according to a new chronology,’ 
the reign of Kritarajasa, which we had once thought peaceful, was 

--- [Page 255] ---
The Decline of the Indian Kingdoms 233 
on the contrary troubled by a series of rebellions, rebellions that 
were once assumed to have taken place during the reign of his 
successor Jayanagara. In 1295 there was an abortive revolt in the 
Tuban region of one of Kritarajasa’s former companions in arms, 
Ranga Lawe, who had become one of the highest dignitaries of 
the kingdom.”7! Then the old Viraraja declared himself independ-
ent at Lumajang,'” situated in the eastern part of Java, imme- | 
diately south of the island of Madura. The years 1298 to 1300 were 
taken up with a battle against Sora, another of the king’s former 
companions in arms, who was finally defeated and killed. Then 
Nambi, a son of Viraraja, withdrew to Lembah and fortified him-
self there. Finally, in 1302, there was a revolt of Juru Demung, one of the accomplices of Sora.123 | 
Kritarajasa died in 1309. From his Sivaite funerary temple 
situated at Simping 14 comes the beautiful statue, now in the 
Museum of Batavia, representing him in the form of Harihara.125 
His son Jayanagara (the Kala Gemet of the Pararaton) took the 
reign name Sri Sundarapandyadevadhiévara Vikramottungadeva, a 
name which emphasized the spiritual relations between Java and 
the Pandya country at the extreme south of India, witnessed as 
early as the era of Sanjaya.’ Two years after his accession the 
elderly Viraraja, who had given so much trouble to his predeces-
sors, died. In 1312, the king proceeded with the burial, at Purva 
Patapan,'”” of Kritanagara, who had been dead for twenty years. 
In the following year Juru Demung, who had revolted in 1302, 
died, thus ridding Jayanagara of another adversary of his father. 
But in 1314 a new rebellion broke out, that of Gajah Biru, another 
of the accomplices of Sora.128 
After the death of Nambi in 1316 and the submission of 
the district of Lumajang,’79 one would think that tranquillity would 
return, but in 1319 Kuti revolted, and this revolt forced the king 
to abandon his capital temporarily. He was escorted by twenty-
five palace guards under the command of Gajah Mada,?30 whom 
we will hear more about when we come to the regency period 
(1328-50). 
In spite of these troubles, which are stressed in the chronicle, 
the power of Majapahit was evident. Odoric of Pordenone, who 
visited Java in 1321, gives an interesting description of this island, 
“which hath a compass of a good three thousand miles. And the 
king of it hath subject to himself seven crowned kings. Now this 

--- [Page 256] ---
234 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
island is populous exceedingly, and is the second best of all 
islands that exist.... The king of this island hath a palace which 
is truly marvelous. For it is very great.... Now the Great Khan of 
Cathay many a time engaged in war with this king; but this king 
always vanquished and got the better of him.” 1! 
From 1325 to 1328, Jayanagara sent annual embassies with-
out fail to the court of China.'32 One of the ambassadors of 1325, 
Seng-chia-li-yeh, must have been identical to the Seng-ch’ia-lieh-
yu-lan whom we meet in 1375 as king of Sumatra.’3 In 1328 
Jayanagara died, assassinated by a noble whose wife he had se-
duced."34 A great part of the Panataran group dates from his reign.’ 
Since Jayanagara had no sons, the crown reverted to the 
daughter of Kritanagara, the Rajapatni Gayatri, first wife of Kri-
tarajasa. But she had entered religious orders as a bhikshuni 1% 
and her daughter Tribhuvana therefore assumed the regency in 
her name.37 In 1329 or 1330, Tribhuvana married a noble, Cha-
kradhara 138 or Chakregvara, who received the name Kritavardhana 
with the title of Prince of Singhasari.9 She had a son by him in 
1334, and this son, Hayam Wuruk,14? became king at the death 
of his grandmother in 1350. 
The great figure of the regency period was Gajah Mada, 
whom we have seen above sharing the fortunes of King Jayanagara 
when he fled before the rebel Kuti. At first pati, that is, prime 
minister, of Kahuripan, then of Daha, he became pati of Majapahit 
in 1331.741 His unceasing efforts were devoted to the extension of 
Javanese supremacy in the archipelago.142 On Bali, for example, 
where the accomplishments of the campaign of Kritanagara in 
1284 had been lost so completely that the island had become in-
dependent again, an expedition of 1343 led to the destruction of 
the local princely family 43 and a Javanization of the island that 
was to be intensified during the reign of Hayam Wuruk. 
The History of the Yuan ™* mentions a Javanese embassy to 
China in 1332 led by Seng-chia-la, apparently the same person who 
led the embassy of 1325. Wang Ta-yiian ™ in 1350 describes Java 
(Chao-wa) as a prosperous, fertile country whose numerous and 
peaceable people are “foremost of the barbarians of the eastern 
seas.” 
The death of the old Rajapatni in 1350 ended the regency of 
her daughter, and she made way for her son, Hayam Wuruk, who 
reigned under the name Rajasanagara. 

--- [Page 257] ---
CHAPTER XIV 
THE END OF THE INDIAN KINGDOMS 
From the Middle of the Fourteenth Century to the Seizure 
of Malacca by the Portuguese in 1511 
The middle of the fourteenth century may be considered a turning 
point in the history of Farther India. The year 1347 was marked 
by both the founding of the Burmese kingdom of Toungoo, from 
which the creator of the powerful Burmese state of Pegu was to 
arise in the sixteenth century, and the founding of the Sumatran 
kingdom of Adityavarman, a kingdom that still bore the name of 
Malayu but already corresponded to the future Minangkabau. 
The year 1353 saw both the founding of the Laotian kingdom of 
Lan Chang by Fa Ngum and the restoration of Hamsavati (Pegu) 
by Binnya U. 
By an unusual coincidence, 1350 saw both the accession of 
Hayam Wuruk (Rajasanagara), the greatest king of Majapahit, the 
king who extended its suzerainty to its farthest limits, and the 
accession of Ramadhipati, the founder of Ayutthaya, the unifier 
of the countries of Syam (Sukhothai) and Lavo (Lopburi). Ayutthaya 
and Majapahit, the first continental, the second insular, became 
the two poles of Farther India, the greatest part of which was thus 
divided into two zones of influence. The lists of the dependencies 
of Ayutthaya and Majapahit even overlap to some extent in the 
southern part of the Malay Peninsula. 
It is significant that the regrouping of the small states within 
the spheres of influence of these two great powers took place 
just at the time of the beginning of the decline of the Mongol 
dynasty, which had followed the opposite policy of encouraging 
the creation of numerous small principalities whose obedience 
was easier to maintain. 
The history of the states that arose around 1350—the Thai 
kingdoms of Ayutthaya and Lan Chang, the Burmese kingdoms of 
Toungoo and Ava—lies outside the scope of the present work, 
devoted as it is to the ancient period of Farther India. It will suf-
fice here to follow the Indian kingdoms of Southeast Asia up to 

--- [Page 258] ---
236 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
their decline, relating very briefly what happened in Cambodia 
up to the abandonment of Angkor around 1430, in Champa up 
to the conquest of Vijaya by the Vietnamese in 1470, in Malaysia 
and the archipelago up to the seizure of Malacca by the Portu-
guese in 1511. 
1. CAMBODIA: FROM 1350 TO THE ABANDONMENT OF ANGKOR 
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY 
Cambodia in the middle of the fourteenth century ’ was the 
only one of these old kingdoms whose kings still resided in their 
ancient capital; the Khmer kings still occupied Yasodharapura 
(Angkor). But they were hardly secure there. As early as 1352, Ra-
madhipati, founder and first king of Ayutthaya, went to lay siege 
to the city? where Lampong-raja, son of Nirvanapada (1346-51), 
was then reigning. If we believe the Annals of Ayutthaya, Angkor 
was seized the following year and the king of Siam placed one 
of his sons on the throne. This prince died almost immediately. 
Two other Siamese princes, one succeeding the other, reigned 
until 1357, when a brother of Lampong-raja who had _ taken 
refuge in Laos reconquered the city and was crowned there under 
the name of Suryavamsa Rajadhiraja.? 
Suryavamsa Rajadhiraja defended his country from new 
Siamese attacks and seems to have maintained his border at Khorat 
in the north and at Prachin in the west. It may have been he who 
in 1370 received an order from the first Ming emperor to submit 
| and send tribute immediately; the History of the Ming calls this 
king Hu-erh-na.4 He reigned about twenty years and was suc-
ceeded by one of his nephews, a son of Lampong-raja, known 
under the name of Paramarama. 
In 1379, the History of the Ming> mentions for the first 
time King Ts’an-ta Kan-wu-che-ch’e-ta-che (Samdach Kambuja-
dhiraja). This king must undoubtedly be identified with Parama-
rama, but we know nothing else about him. 
Around 1380, Paramarama was succeeded by his brother 
Dhammasokarajadhiraja,°> who appears in 1387 in the History of 
the Ming’ under the name of Ts’an-lie Pao-p’i-sie Kan-p’u-che 
(Samdach Chao Ponhea Kambuja). 
In 1393, the King of Siam, Ramesuan (Ramesvara), invaded 
Cambodia and besieged its capital. According to the Siamese an-
nals, Angkor was taken the following year.8 King Dhammasoka 

--- [Page 259] ---
| The End of the Indian Kingdoms 237 
was killed and replaced by a son of the king of Siam, Indaraja, 
but Indaraja was soon assassinated.? 
The History of the Ming? mentions under the date 1404 
a King Ts’an-lie P’o-p’i-ya (Samdach Chao Ponhea), whose identity 
is not known." His death was announced at the court of China 
in 1405, and he was succeeded by his son Ts’an-lie Chao-
p’ing-ya,'* who certainly corresponds to the Chao Ponhea Yat of 
Cambodian sources.'3 Chao Ponhea Yat took the glorious name 
Suryavarman upon his accession. It was during the course of his 
long reign of almost fifty years, in 1431, that the decision was taken 
to abandon the capital because it was too exposed and too difficult 
to defend. After a short stay at Basan (Srei Santhor), from which 
he was driven by floods, Chao Ponhea Yat proceeded to establish 
himself at the Quatre-Bras (Four Branches), on the site of the 
present-day city of Phnom Penh.%4 
2. CHAMPA: FROM THE ACCESSION OF CHE BONG NGA (1360) 
TO THE FINAL ABANDONMENT OF VIJAYA (1471) 
In chapter nine of his Royaume de Champa, Georges Mas-
pero gives an account of the reign of Ché Béng Nga under the 
title “L’apogée.” This term runs the risk of giving a completely 
inaccurate idea of the importance of this reign. It is true that the 
reign was rich in military glory, but this glory can be compared 
to the last rays of a setting sun. In view of the dynamism of 
the Vietnamese and their centuries-long demographic pressure, 
the attempts at reconquest by Ché Béng Nga were something of 
an anachronism and his hold over reconquered areas was doomed 
in advance to be short-lived. 
We do not know the origins of Ché Béng Nga, whom the 
History of the Ming calls Ngo-ta Ngo-che and who seems to have 
survived in the historic legend of the Chams under the name of 
Binasuor.’? His reign must have begun around 1360. By taking 
advantage first of all of the decline of the Mongols and later 
coming to an agreement with the first Ming emperor, who recog-
nized him as king of Champa in 1369,1° he was able to lead 
a series of victorious campaigns against Dai Viét from 1361 to 
1390. These campaigns were almost continuous: in 1361, the 
pillage of the port of Da-li; 1” in 1368, the defeat of the Vietnamese 
ina place called ‘(Cham Cavern’ in present-day Quang-nam; 78 
in 1371, the invasion of the Tongking Delta and the sack of 

--- [Page 260] ---
238 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Hanoi; in 1377, the defeat of the Vietnamese before Vijaya 
(Cha-ban) in Binh-dinh and the killing of King Tran Dué-tdng, 
followed by a new invasion of Tongking and a new pillage of 
Hanoi;*9 in 1380, the pillage of Nghé-an and Thanh-hoa;2" in 
1384, an attack on Tongking by land; 2? in 1389, a new victorious 
campaign in Tongking which brought the Chams to the present-day 
province of Hung-yén.?? “At this point the treason of a low-rank-
ing officer stopped the victorious march of the Chams and saved 
Annam from an invasion in which its independence might have 
been destroyed.” #4 Ché Béng Nga, whose ship was surrounded, 
was killed (February, 1390), and his troops withdrew. 
One of Ché Béng Nga’s generals, whom the Vietnamese 
sources call La Khai and a Cham inscription of Binh-dinh calls Jaya 
Simhavarman,* succeeded him after driving out his sons. Jaya 
Simhavarman had to abandon to Dai Viét all the territory situated 
north of the Col des Nuages (an area corresponding to the present-
day provinces of Quang-binh, Quang-tri, and Thua-thién), which 
had been recovered by his predecessor.”6 
He died in 1400 and was replaced by his son Ngauk Klaung 
Vijaya, who first took the name Virabhadravarman and in 1432 
was crowned under the name of Indravarman.”’ The History of the 
Ming calls him Chang-pa-ti-lai (Champadhiraja); the Vietnamese 
annals call him Ba Dich-lai. 
His reign began badly, for in 1402, in order to avoid a new 
war with Dai Viét, he had to cede the province of Indrapura, 
corresponding to present-day Quang-nam, in the northern part 
of the territory of Amaravati.28 This is the region where the heart 
of ancient Champa beat in the sanctuary of Bhadregvara (Mi-sdn). 
He regained it in 1407 2? thanks to the support of China, which 
had just annexed Dai Viét outright in suppressing the usurping 
dynasty of the H6 (1400-1407). 
Now safe in the north, the Cham king took vengeance on 
Cambodia, where Chao Ponhea Yat, the last king of Angkor, was 
reigning. In 1421 he commemorated his victories over the Khmers 
by the inscription of Vishnu of Bién-hoa.2® 
Peaceful relations between Champa and its neighbor to the 
north were re-established in 1428 with the accession of Lé Lai, the 
liberator of Vietnam.*! 
A Javanese tradition that is difficult to reconcile with the last 
evidence of Cham epigraphy, still completely Hindu, claims that 

--- [Page 261] ---
The End of the Indian Kingdoms 239 
at the beginning of the fifteenth century Islam was introduced to 
Java by a Cham princess, a sister of the king, who was married 
to one of the sovereigns of Majapahit.24 We have, however, no 
real proof that Islam had penetrated into Champa before the 
Chams were driven out of Vijaya in 1471. 
After the long and relatively successful reign of Ngauk 
Klaung Vijaya, or Indravarman VI, which came to an end in 1441, 
the country fell into a rapid decline. In thirty years, five kings 
succeeded to the throne in the midst of civil wars and Vietnamese 
invasions of the Lé kings Nhan-t6ng and Thanh-tong.*? The Cham 
capital, Vijaya, in Binh-dinh (Cha-ban) was taken by the Vietnam-
ese in 144634 then reconquered by the Chams. In 1471, it fell 
permanently into the hands of the Vietnamese, who killed 60,000 
people there and took away 30,000 prisoners, among whom were 
the king and 50 members of the royal family.2> From then on, 
Champa continued to exist for a while, but it was reduced to the 
territories situated south of Cape Varella, where today are located 
the last remnants of the Cham people.*6 
3. JAVA: FROM THE ACCESSION OF HAYAM WURUK 
(RAJASANAGARA) IN 1350 TO THE END OF THE 
KINGDOM OF MAJAPAHIT AROUND 1520 
In Java the long reign of Rajasanagara (1350-89) marks the 
apogee of the kingdom of Majapahit. The reign opened with a 
bloody drama, the victim of which was a certain King Maha-
raja whom an inscription of 13337” presents as the founder of 
the kingdom of Pajajaran, a Sundanese kingdom that still occupied 
the western part of the island of Java at the beginning of the 
sixteenth century.*® In 1357 he came to Majapahit, bringing his 
daughter who was to marry Rajasanagara, and established himself 
with his followers at Bubat, north of the capital. He thought the 
marriage was to be a union between equals, but the prime min-
ister, Gajah Mada, insisted on treating the fiancée as a vassal 
princess brought in tribute. The discussion degenerated into an 
armed conflict in which the Sundanese king and his followers 
met their death.*? 
The expansion of Javanese suzerainty in the time of Raja-
sanagara is evident from the list of dependencies of Majapahit 
transmitted by the Nagarakritagama.*” Roughly, the kingdom com-
prised all of what was to become the Dutch East Indies (with 

--- [Page 262] ---
240 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
perhaps the exception of the north of Celebes) and a great part of 
the Malay Peninsula,*’ but it did not extend to the Philippines. 
In Bali, the charters of 1384-86 in the name of Vijayarajasa, 
or Bhre Wengker,” seem to indicate that this uncle of Rajasanagara 
exercised a sort of viceroyalty, if not true sovereignty, there. The 
intensive Javanization of Bali in the fourteenth century, the initial 
cause of which was the conquest of 1343, was more important 
for the ultimate destiny of the island than the mass Javanese emi-
gration of the following century.” , 
A Javanese inscription of this period found on the island 
of Sumbawa“ constitutes tangible evidence of the expansion of 
Majapahit in the east of the archipelago. According to the Naga-
rakritagama,® the countries maintaining friendly relations with 
Majapahit were Syangkayodhyapura (“Siam with Ayutthaya”), 
Dharmanagari (Ligor), Marutma (Martaban), Rajapura (?), Singha-
nagari (?), Champa, Kamboja, and Yavana (Dai Viét). 
Information on the relations of Rajasanagara with China is 
provided by the History of the Ming,46 which mentions between 
1370 and 1381 many embassies from King Pa-ta-na-pa-na-wu, or 
Bhatara Prabhu, which is simply a royal title. Between the entries 
concerning the embassies of 1377 and 1379 the Chinese text 
notes that there was on the island of Java a king in the west and a 
king in the east: the first was named Wu-lao-po-wu, another tran-
scription of Bhatara (or, rather, Bhra) Prabhu; the second was 
named Wu-ytian-lao-wang-chieh,*#” which in my opinion repre-
sents Bhre Wengker, or Vijayarajasa, whose decrees in Bali in 
1384-86 have been mentioned above. If the information given by 
the History of the Ming for 1377-79 is accurate for this period, 
it seems clear that the division of the kingdom in two, which 
must have had fatal consequences for the following reign, dates 
from the reign of Rajasanagara, who entrusted to his uncle the 
government of one part of his domain. 
The Nagarakritagama, a historical poem composed during 
this reign by Prapancha,*® gives some idea of the internal admin-
istration of the country at the beginning of the reign.49? At the 
center was the king, assisted by his father, Kritavardhana, and his 
uncle, Vijayarajasa. Below them was a hierarchy of officials headed 
by a council of five ministers. The most important of these 
ministers, the mapatih (mahapati), was the old Gajah Mada. He 
disappeared from the scene in 1364, after a half-century devoted 

--- [Page 263] ---
The End of the Indian Kingdoms 241 
to service of the dynasty. His name is connected with the drafting 
of a law code of which we have only a later version.°° 
Aside from Prapancha, the author of the Nagarakritagama 
already mentioned, the reign of Rajasanagara was, from the literary 
point of view, given luster by the poet Tantular, the author of the 
Arjunavijaya and of the Purushadasanta (or Sutasoma). The Puru-
shadasanta is particularly valuable for the information it gives on 
Siva-Buddha syncretism.>! 
The religious monuments of the reign are numerous. The 
only one worth mentioning here is the central temple of Pana-
taran,9* with its famous bas-reliefs representing scenes of the 
Ramayana and of the Krishnayana. It was begun in 1347 during the 
regency period, but it was completed by Rajasanagara and it was 
his favorite sanctuary. 
Rajasanagara died in 1389. He was succeeded by Vikrama-
vardhana, who was both his nephew and his son-in-law. Vikrama-
vardhana’s reign marks the beginning of the decline of Majapahit, 
a decline that accelerated greatly during the reigns of his succes-
sors. The main cause of the decline was the development of 
Malacca as a commercial center and a nucleus for the diffusion 
of Islam. Islam, introduced at first on the coast,-2 soon penetrated 
to the interior. The oldest evidence of the presence of Islam in 
the island is the inscription of Leran, dated either 1082 or 1102,°4 
but it is a completely isolated document. Then comes the in-
scription of 1419 at Gresik >> on the tomb of Malik Ibrahim, who 
was perhaps a propagator of the new religion. 
Another cause of Majapahit’s decline was the war of suc-
cession between Vikramavardhana and his brother-in-law Vira-
bhumi, a son of Rajasanagara by a concubine. Virabhumi was es-
tablished in the east as his great-uncle Vijayarajasa (Bhre Wengker) 
had been. Hostilities began in 1401 and ended in 1406 with the 
death of Virabhumi.5® This war of succession resulted not only 
in the weakening of the kingdom of Majapahit but also, indirectly, 
in the founding of Malacca in 1403 if it is true that the creator 
of this new political and commercial center, Paramesvara, was 
one of the protagonists who later fled from Java to take refuge 
at Tumasik (Singapore).°/ 
Still another reason for the decline of Majapahit was the 
effort China made, under the emperor Yung Lo, to supplant Java 
as suzerain over the archipelago and on the peninsula: to effect 

--- [Page 264] ---
242 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
this was one of the aims of the famous missions of the eunuch 
Cheng Ho,°8 which resulted in the sending of various embassies to 
China from the former tributaries of Majapahit.59 
Suhita, the daughter of Vikramavardhana, reigned until 1447 
and was succeeded by her brother Bhre Tumapel, or Kritavijaya 
(1447-51).°° From this period it seems that the Indian cults, already 
contaminated by native rites, withdrew before the advance of 
| Islam. They withdrew to the mountains, which were generally the 
ancient places of the pre-Indian Indonesian cults. There are rec-
ords of the building of religious edifices connected with Indian 
cults on the Penangungan in 1434-42, on the Wilis in 1449, on 
the Merbabu in 1438 and 1449, and on the Lawu in 1437-57. 
The genealogical relationships among the last kings, Raja-
savardhana (1451-53), Purvavisesha (1456-66), Singhavikrama-
vardhana (1466-78),6* are obscure, and the dates given for them 
are subject to revision. 
In 1478, Majapahit put down an invasion (the origin of this 
invasion is disputed), and in 1486 there appeared a new dynasty, 
that of the Girindravardhana. This dynasty was still Indian in cul-
ture, as its charters show.®4 The last embassy from Java to China 
was in 1499.® Islam made rapid progress; the last positive evidence 
of Hinduism in Java dates from 1513-15, not long after the 
seizure of Malacca by the Portuguese. 
Evidence of the existence of the kingdom of Majapahit ends 
between 1513 and 1528, but what remained of the kingdom can-
not be said to have fallen suddenly under the blows of the 
Muslims. There was rather a progressive weakening of the capital 
at the same time that the port establishments in Muslim hands 
increased in prosperity and power.® 
Indian culture took refuge in certain districts of the east, and 
especially on Bali. Thus, this island became, and to the present 
has remained, an intellectual center preserving the essentials of 
Indo-Javanese literature and religion which Islam rapidly caused 
to disappear in Java. Bali played the same role of preserver for 
Java as Tibet did for Buddhist India. 
4. SUMATRA: THE HEIRS OF THE OLD KINGDOM OF THE 
MAHARAJA IN THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 
In Sumatra, in the region of Minangkabau, Adityavarman 
continued to reign at least until 1375, the date of the last inscrip-

--- [Page 265] ---
The End of the Indian Kingdoms 243 
tion we have from him.®® It is undoubtedly this king, whose fervor 
for Tantric Buddhism of the kalachakra we have seen, who is rep-
resented in the form of Siva Bhairava in the beautiful statue of 
Sungei Langsat.®9 
His Yuvaraja, or heir apparent, was his son Anangavarman; 
we do not know if he actually succeeded him.” 
For the east coast of the island we lack information on the 
period between 1350, the date of the Tao-i Chih-lioh, and 1370, 
the date when the first Ming emperor sent ambassadors to for-
eign countries to obtain the tribute of vassalage. 
In 1371 the History of the Ming mentions a King Ma-ha-la-
cha Pa-la-pu (Maharaja Prabhu) 7! of San-fo-ch’i, whose center was 
then Jambi; in 1373, a King Ta-ma-sha-na-a-che; ”* in 1376, the , 
replacement of the latter by his son Ma-na-che Wu-li (Maharaja 
Mauli.. .).73 
But at this time the country was divided among three 
kings; 74 the two others were Ma-na-ha Pao-lin-pang (Maharaja 
Palembang), who sent an embassy to China in 1374, and Seng-ch’ia-
lieh-yu-lan,”? who sent one in 1375. We have seen that the latter 
was perhaps the former Javanese ambassador who had been sent 
to China in 1325 and 1332 by the court of Majapahit.” 
We do not know how the three kings divided the ancient 
_ territory of Srivijaya. But the title of Maharaja Palembang in itself 
gives his location, and that of Maharaja Mauli... indicates an heir 
of the Maulivarmadeva of Malayu and therefore a king reigning 
in the Jambi region and in the valley of the Batang Hari. In 1376, 
the latter obtained from the emperor of China the restored title 
of “King of San-fo-ch’i,” but according to the History of the 
Ming: 7” “At that time however San-bo-tsai [San-fo-ch’i] had al-
ready been conquered by Java, and the king of this country, hear-
ing that the Emperor had appointed a king over San-bo-tsai, 
became very angry and sent men who waylaid and killed the 
imperial envoys.” 
The Javanese conquest mentioned here was apparently a 
punitive expedition against a vassal that was displaying a distressing 
tendency toward independence.”® “After this occurrence,” adds 
the History of the Ming, San-fo-ch’i “became gradually poorer 
and no tribute was brought from this country any more.” 7? And 
further on: “At that time Java had completely conquered San-
bo-tsai and changed its name to Ku-kang [the old estuary (of the : 

--- [Page 266] ---
244 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Musi), or Palembang].2° When San-bo-tsai went down, the whole 
country was disturbed and the Javanese could not keep all the 
land; for this reason the Chinese, who were established there, 
stood up for themselves, and a man from Nan-hai (Namhoi) in 
Canton, called Liang Tau-ming, who had lived there a long time 
and roamed over the sea, followed by several thousand men from 
Fukien and Canton, was taken by them as their chief.” ® 
| shall leave off here with the history of the old impoverished 
Sumatran kingdom, in full decline, fallen into the hands of Chinese 
pirates. We have seen that the inheritance of its former depend-
encies had been divided between the suzerainties of Siam and 
Java. A Siamese law that is dated 1358, but must actually be from 
the fifteenth century,®* cites Uyong Tanah (Johore), Malaka, Ma-
layu, and Varavari 8° as southern dependencies of Ayutthaya. For 
its part, the Nagarakritagama, in 1365, enumerates the following as 
possessions of Majapahit: & 
On the Malay Peninsula: 
Pahang, Hujung Tanah (Johore), Lengkasuka, Sai (Saiburi), 
Kalanten, Tringgano, Nasor (Pattani??), Paka (south of Dun-
gun), Muwar (northwest of Johore), Dungun (south of 
Trengganu), Tumasik (Singapore), Sang Hyang Hujung (Cape 
Rachado), Kelang (Trang), Keda, Jere (Gunung Jerai, near 
Kedah), Kanjap (?), and Niran (2); 
On Sumatra: 
Jambi, Palembang, Karitang (south of Indragiri), Teba (i.e., 
Toba, upper Jambi), Dharmasraya (upper Batang Hari), Kandis 
(north of DharmaSraya), Kahwas (west of Kandis), Manang-
kabo, Siyak, Rekan (Rokan, south of Panai), Kampar, Panai, 
Kampe, Haru (south of Kampe), Mandahiling, Tumihang, 
Parlak, Barat (western coast of Achin), Lawas (south of Perlak), 
Samudra, Lamuri, Batan (2), Lampung, and Barus.85 
But the true heirs of the commercial prosperity of Srivijaya 
were the Arabs, who monopolized the spice trade and made 
themselves the allies and protectors of the little Malay states. 
China, after the great maritime voyages of the reign of Yung Lo, 
retreated into itself and from then on was content with a nominal 
political suzerainty over the countries of the south. 
With the Arabs masters of commerce, Islam, which had al-
ready obtained a foothold in Sumatra in the state of Perlak (Marco 
Polo), then in that of Samudra (Ibn Batuta), spread rapidly over 
the island. At the beginning of the fifteenth century Ma Huan, the 

--- [Page 267] ---
The End of the Indian Kingdoms 245 
Chinese Muslim who accompanied the eunuch Cheng Ho on 
the mission of 1413, noted in his Ying-yai Sheng-lan the existence 
of Islam in the states of A-lu (Haru) and Nan-po-li (Lambri).86 The 
importance of the northern part of Sumatra as a center for the 
diffusion of Islam stems from the fact that in the thirteenth cen-
tury Pasai, neighbor of Samudra, had replaced Kedah (on the 
peninsula) as the commercial center of the area.®” In the fifteenth 
century, Malacca supplanted Pasai, but after the fall of Malacca, 
Sumatra became, with the rise of Achin, once more the principal 
Muslim commercial center.®8 
5. MALACCA: FROM ITS FOUNDATION IN 1403 TO ITS 
SEIZURE BY THE PORTUGUESE IN 1511 
Malacca is not mentioned by Marco Polo or Odoric of 
Pordenone or Ibn Batuta or even the Nagarakritagama (1365).® 
It is possible that there may already have been an establishment 
of Sumatran origin on this site and that the stone makara of 
St. Paul’s Hill is what remains of such an establishment.” But as 
a political and commercial center, Malacca really dates only from 
the first years of the fifteenth century. 
The founder of Malacca was a certain Paramegvara, who 
was, according to Albuquerque, a native of Palembang and who 
was, in any case, the husband of a princess of Majapahit.9! He 
revolted, probably following the death of Hayam Wuruk (1389), 
taking advantage of the decline of the power of Majapahit which 
followed that event. He then took refuge at Tumasik (Singapore), 
which, of all the peninsular possessions of the kingdom of Palem-
bang, was the most distant from the kingdom of Ayutthaya. He 
slew its Malay chief, who governed in the name of Siam or, more 
probably, of a vassal of Siam (Pahang or Pattani). After reigning 
a few years at Tumasik, he was driven out by Ayutthaya and fled 
first to Muar, then to Bertam, and finally to Malacca, where the 
eunuch Yin-ch’ing found him established in 1403.9 His policy 
consisted of relying on China. In 1405, he sent an embassy to 
China, after which the emperor conferred the title “King of 
Malacca” on him. After the visit of the eunuch Cheng Ho in 1409, 
he himself visited China with his family in 1411.93 He founded at 
Malacca the basis of a prosperous settlement *4 and returned to 
China for another visit in 1414. He and his family went to China 
again in 1419 to request support against Siam, with which Ma-

--- [Page 268] ---
246 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
lacca was in a chronic state of hostility, for the kingdom of Ayut-
thaya was seeking to substitute its suzerainty for that of weakening 
Majapahit. He married a daughter of the king of Pasai, whose 
dynasty may have maintained claims over the former peninsular 
possessions of Palembang, and was converted to Islam at the 
age of seventy-two.% From then on he took the name Megat 
Iskandar Shah.?7 
He was succeeded in 1424 by his son, Sri Maharaja, who 
went to China in the year of his accession. He returned there in 
1433 with his family and sent embassies there until 1435.9 At his 
death in 1444, he was replaced by his son Raja Ibrahim,9? whom 
the History of the Ming calls Si-li Pa-mi-si-wa-erh-ch’ti-pa Sha 1 
(Sri Paramegvaradeva Shah),10 
Raja Ibrahim was killed after two years in the course of a 
palace revolution that placed his half-brother, Raja Kasim, on the 
throne. Raja Kasim was the son of a concubine who was the daugh-
ter of a Tamil Muslim merchant of Pasai.1°2 He took the title of 
Muzaffar Shah 1 and reigned thirteen years, until 1459. 
Raja Kasim’s son Sultan Mansur Shah 1+ enlarged his state, 
incorporating into it notably the tin-bearing districts of the king-
dom of Kedah,’ but he was the victim of harem intrigues. At 
his death in October 1477, he was succeeded by his son 
Ala’ud-din Riayat Shah, who died mysteriously in 1488 and was 
replaced by his younger brother Mahmud, the last sultan of 
Malacca.19%8 
Malacca became a first-rate political power that was capable 
of resisting the pressure of Siam; a great commercial center; and 
a powerful nucleus of Islamic expansion. This was the era when 
Vasco da Gama, after rounding the Cape of Good Hope, arrived at 
Calicut (1498), opening a new route to the spice trade which had 
made the fortune of the Arabs and Venetians. The Portuguese 
soon pushed farther to the east, in search of the sources of pro-
duction of these luxuries so much sought after in Europe. On 
August 1, 1509, the first Portuguese vessels, under the command 
of Admiral Diogo Lopes de Sequeira, entered Malacca. On land 
some members of the expedition were badly treated, and in revenge 
for this two years later Affonso de Albuquerque, the conqueror of 
Goa (November 25, 1510), appeared at Malacca. Taking ad-
vantage of the unrest that reigned in the city, he seized it on 
August 10, 1511, a date that marks the beginning of a new 
period in the history of the countries of the Far East. 

--- [Page 269] ---
CONCLUSION 
A review of the fourteen centuries of history treated in this work 
will help to clarify the sequence of the main events and the re-
lationship between them. And, as | have indicated in the “In-
troduction,” it can be seen at a glance that the twelve chapters 
devoted to this history (Chapters Ill to XIV) correspond roughly 
to as many epochs, each set off by critical dates that are related to 
developments in India and, even more closely, to developments in 
China. 
The history of the first Indian kingdoms in Southeast Asia 
begins in the second century A.D. The oldest and best known of 
these kingdoms, thanks to the Chinese historians, are Funan and 
Lin-yi. Funan, predecessor of Cambodia in the lower Mekong 
Basin, extended its conquests to the Malay Peninsula in the second 
century and seems to have been a sort of empire or federation of 
small Indianized states whose sovereigns bore the title “King of 
the Mountain.” Lin-yi, or ancient Champa, which had its cradle in 
the Hué region, sought to expand to the north only to run 
into the expansive drive of the Vietnamese toward the south and 
into the political opposition of the Chinese Empire. This was the 
prologue of a drama that for centuries set the Indianized Chams in 
opposition to the Sinicized Vietnamese. (Chapter III) 
In the middle of the fourth century, the conquests of the 
emperor Samudragupta in the Ganges Valley and southern India 
provoked a new exodus to the east that resulted not only in the 
coming to power of an Indo-Scythian in Funan but also in a gen-
eral resurgence of Indianization abroad in which southern India, 
especially the region dominated by the Pallavas of Kanchi, seems 
to have played a preponderant role. Inscriptions, almost non-
existent before the fourth century, reveal the presence in the 
fifth century of small Indian kingdoms on Borneo and Java. Such 
epigraphic evidence permits us to cross-check the data relating 

--- [Page 270] ---
248 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
to Funan and Lin-yi contained in the Chinese annals from the 
fourth to sixth centuries. (Chapter IV) 
This whole period is characterized by the supremacy of 
Funan. It is significant that the period corresponds roughly to a 
troubled era in the history of China: that of the Three Kingdoms 
and the Six Dynasties. 
In the second half of the sixth century the empire of Funan 
in the lower Mekong Valley collapsed. The kingdom of the Khmers, 
or Kambujas, was built on its ruins. At the same time, two new 
powers appeared in the western part of the Indochinese Peninsula: 
the Mons in the Menam Basin, cradle of the kingdom of Dvaravati, 
and the Pyus in the Irrawaddy Basin. The weakness of the Chinese 
Chin and Ch’en dynasties facilitated the strengthening of the 
authority of the Cham kings on the coasts both above and below 
the Col des Nuages. Java began to enter into history with the 
appearance of a state called Ho-ling in the Chinese histories. 
(Chapter V) 
The birth and rapid expansion of the Sumatran kingdom of 
Srivijaya (Palembang) at the end of the seventh century, an in-
direct consequence of the dismemberment of Funan, marks the 
beginning of a new era. In Cambodia, during the whole of the 
eighth century, there was virtual anarchy, and the country was 
divided into upper and lower regions; in Champa, the central 
power withdrew to the south of the country. In central Java during 
the second half of the eighth century, a Buddhist dynasty abruptly 
succeeded a Sivaite sovereign. This new dynasty revived the im-
perial title “King of the Mountain” (Sailendra), covered the coun-
try with great Buddhist monuments, and seems to have exercised 
a sort of hegemony in the southern seas that extended even to 
Cambodia. At the same time, a series of maritime raids, con-
ducted from the Sunda Islands, ravaged the coasts of the Indo-
chinese Peninsula from north to south. This agitated period, which 
followed the accession of the T’ang emperors in China and coin-
cided with the apogee of the Buddhist dynasty of Java, also saw 
the expansion of Mahayana Buddhism in Farther India under the 
influence of the Indian Pala dynasty and the university of Nalanda 
in Bengal. (Chapter VI) 
In the ninth century, the power of the Buddhist Sailendras in 
Java progressively declined. This decline facilitated the revival of 

--- [Page 271] ---
Conclusion 249 
the Khmer kingdom in 802, its liberation from Javanese suzerainty, 
and the foundation of the Angkorian royal house, which was to be 
one of the dominant powers of Farther India for four centuries. 
The decline of the Buddhist dynasty of Java was accompanied by a 
Sivaite renaissance in the center of the island, a renaissance that 
had its origin in the east, to which the princes of the former 
Sivaite dynasty had retired. The Sailendras did not disappear, 
however; they established a new center of power in Sumatra at 
Srivijaya, which they had governed in the middle of the ninth 
century as a dependency, and their power there was to last for 
many centuries. The two future protagonists of Burmese history, 
the Mon kingdom of Pegu and the Burmese kingdom of Pagan, 
founded their respective capitals within the space of a few years 
during the first quarter of the ninth century. (Chapter VII) 
_ At the end of the ninth century and during the tenth, Ang-
korian civilization flowered, the center of the Cham kingdom was 
re-established in the Quang-nam region by the Indrapura dynasty, 
and the maritime power of Srivijaya was built up as a result of its 
complete mastery of the straits. These developments coincided 
with the weakening of the authority of China toward the end of 
the T’ang and during the Five Dynasties. Near the end of the 
tenth century, China, restored by the accession of the Sung, was 
once more in a position to interfere in the southern seas and it 
played a part in the quarrels between the Sailendras of Sumatra 
and the Javanese sovereigns of the kingdom of Mataram that had 
been established in the east of the island. (Chapter VIII) 
The first three-quarters of the eleventh century was a period 
rich in strong personalities and events of great consequence. In 
Cambodia, Suryavarman I, the founder of a new dynasty in 1002, 
extended his sovereignty to the Menam at the expense of the 
Mons who had previously occupied the valley. His reign cor-
responds almost exactly with that of Airlanga, who drew Java 
out of the anarchy into which the aggressive policy of Srivijaya 
had plunged it, enlarged the territory of his reconquered states, 
and took advantage of the temporary weakness of Srivijaya fol-
lowing a Chola raid around 1025 to confine his old rival to 
Sumatra and force it to accede to an alliance. Just at the time 
when Suryavarman | and Airlanga disappeared from the scene 
in the middle of the eleventh century, Andratha, the king of 

--- [Page 272] ---
250 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Pagan, pushed his conquests into the Irrawaddy Delta and brought 
back to Pagan Mon civilization, including its Theravada Buddhism, 
which he firmly established in his country. (Chapter IX) 
The weakening of the Chinese Sung dynasty at the end of 
the eleventh century favored the ambitions of the Khmer, Cham, 
and Burmese sovereigns. In Cambodia, a new dynasty founded in 
1080 by the conquering king Stryavarman II, the builder of 
Angkor Wat, brought the country to a peak of power for the 
first time, but the troubles that followed Stryavarman’s death led 
the country to the brink of ruin and resulted in the seizure of 
Angkor by the Chams in 1177. In Burma, the successors of Ané-
ratha enlarged their state and covered the capital with mon-
uments. In Indonesia, the Sumatran kingdom continued to play 
the role of a great maritime power, while the kingdom of Kadiri 
in Java, heir of the states of Airlanga, pursued a relatively peace-
ful policy. (Chapter X) 
At the end of the twelfth century, Cambodia, in an almost 
miraculous recovery, reached a second peak under the Buddhist 
king Jayavarman VII, the great builder of temples; it annexed 
Champa for about twenty years and then, after the exertion of 
this immense effort, began to decline. In Burma, the cultural in-
fluence was felt through the intermediary of Ceylon: Singhalese 
Buddhism, revived in the island by King Parakramabahu in the 
twelfth century, penetrated to Burma, a center from which it was 
to radiate over the Indochinese Peninsula. In Indonesia, Malayu 
(Jambi) prepared to assume the inheritance of Srivijaya (Palem-
bang), which was beginning to show signs of age and disintegra-
tion. On Java, the advent of the kingdom of Singhasari, which 
succeeded Kadiri in 1222, marked the beginning of the retreat 
of Indian culture before the resurgence of the Indonesian sub-
stratum. (Chapter XI) 
The Mongol conquests of the thirteenth century and the 
attempts of Kublai Khan, successor of the Sung emperors, to 
establish hegemony over the countries of the southern seas be-
ginning in 1260 had severe repercussions in these countries.’ The 
campaigns of the Mongol military chiefs in Champa, Burma, and 
Java, and the policy of the court of Peking favoring the splitting-
up of the old Indian states into small principalities, led in the 
first half of the thirteenth century to the liberation of the Thai 
of the middle Menam, who had previously been under the 

--- [Page 273] ---
Conclusion 251 
Khmers, and to the foundation of the Thai kingdom of Sukhothai. 
The last fifteen years of the thirteenth century saw the fall of the 
kingdom of Pagan, which was destroyed in 1287 by the Mongols, 
and the expansion of the Thai into Burma. These years also saw 
the expansion of the Thai in the valleys of the Menam’s upper 
tributaries at the expense of the Mons and in the lower basin of 
this river and on the Mekong at the expense of the Khmers. At 
the same time, the Chams abandoned the provinces north of the 
Col des Nuages to the Vietnamese. And on Java the Javanese 
kingdom of Majapahit, founded in 1292, exerted a pressure on 
the Sumatran kingdom that, combined with the expansion of the 
Thai of Sukhothai in the Malay Peninsula, led to the dismember-
ment of the old empire of the maharajas. The Muslim invasions 
in India proper and the spread of Islam in Indonesia sounded the 
death knell for Indian culture in Farther India. At the same time, 
Singhalese Buddhism, introduced from Burma to Siam, made rapid 
progress in the riverine lands of the Menam and the Mekong. 
(Chapter XII) 
In the first half of the fourteenth century, the Thai con-
solidated their hold on the Indochinese Peninsula. Already masters 
of Burma and the upper Menam Valley (kingdoms of Sukhothai 
and Lan Na), they founded at the same time the Laotian kingdom 
of Lan Chang on the Mekong and the kingdom of Ayutthaya in 
the basin of the lower Menam. The Ayutthayan kingdom soon 
absorbed its neighbor to the north, the kingdom of Sukhothai. 
Cambodia, threatened by its former vassals, was able, thanks to 
the prestige of its former glory, to transmit to the Thai what it had 
preserved of Indian culture. Champa submitted more and more to 
Vietnamese pressure from the north. In the south, Majapahit 
exercised an unchallenged suzerainty, for Srivijaya had perished. 
The Indian period in Farther India was coming to an end. (Chapter 
XII) 
The decline of the Mongol dynasty in the second half of the 
fourteenth century facilitated the regrouping of the small states 
under the spheres of influence of the two great powers: Ayutthaya 
and Majapahit. The abandonment of Angkor by the Khmer kings 
in the middle of the fifteenth century and the abandonment of 
Vijaya by the Chams in 1471 marked the final withdrawal of the 
two old Indianized kingdoms before the “push to the south” of 
the Thai and Vietnamese. In Indonesia, Islam triumphed in Java 

--- [Page 274] ---
252 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
around 1520, and Indian culture took refuge in the island of Bali. 
Malacca, heir of the commercial power of the Sumatran kingdoms 
from the beginning of the fifteenth century, fell into the hands of 
the Europeans in 1511. (Chapter XIV) 
It is apparent from this résumé that Farther India felt the 
repercussions of political events in India and, even more so, those 
in China and that it received over the centuries contributions from 
the great spiritual currents of India. 
Although Farther India was the theater of revolutionary 
changes, these changes had no notable effects on the history of 
the world, and, except in the realm of the arts, the area did not 
enrich the intellectual patrimony of humanity with any master-
pieces. 
It is because of this purely receptive character that Farther 
India was so long ignored. It has not entered history except to the 
extent that it was civilized by India. Without India, its past would 
be almost unknown; we would know scarcely more about it than 
we know about the past of New Guinea or Australia. 
Even though the countries whose history is outlined in this 
work owe everything from their titles of nobility to their privilege 
of possessing a history to India, it would be unjust to pass silently 
, over what Farther India contributed indirectly in exchange. First 
of all, the region gave the Indians the feeling of having been, in 
the noblest sense of the term, a great colonizing people, in spite 
of all the ritual obstacles and racial prejudices that would seem 
to have prohibited them from playing such a role. The expansive 
power of their culture and the dynamism of their civilization, of 
which the Indians seem never to have been completely conscious, 
manifested themselves in all the countries to which they emigrated. 
Study of Farther India, then, provides very valuable doc-
umentation that cannot help but further our knowledge of 
ancient India. General observation shows us that colonies pre-
serve in their customs, beliefs, and language many archaic traits 
that date back to the origin of colonization and fall into disuse 
in the mother country. Farther India has been no exception to this 
rule, and the study of ancient India “viewed from the East,” ? 
which has scarcely begun,’ seems to promise rich results. 
But the importance of studying the Indianized countries of 
Southeast Asia—which, let us repeat, were never political de-
pendencies of India, but rather cultural colonies—lies above all in 

--- [Page 275] ---
Conclusion 253 
the observation of the impact of Indian civilization on the primi-
tive civilizations. The present work has no other object than to 
provide the historical and chronological framework of the im-
plantation of Indian culture and its continued transformation on 
contact with the native societies. We can measure the power of 
penetration of this culture by the importance of that which re-
mains of it in these countries even though all of them except 
Siam passed sooner or later under European domination and a 
great part of the area was converted to Islam. 
Except on the island of Bali* and among some Cham 
groups, the Indian cults in their old form—Sivaism, Vishnuism, 
the Theravada Buddhism that used the Sanskrit language, and 
Mahayana Buddhism—have disappeared, but not without leaving 
traces. In Phnom Penh and Bangkok, Brahmans of very mixed 
blood, Brahmans who follow Buddhism but wear chignons and 
the Brahman thread, officiate at all the great royal ceremonies, the 
ritual of which is an inheritance from the Indian epoch. But 
these ceremonies are holdovers that interest only the court and 
do not affect the general population. 
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries the common people 
received a new contribution from India in the form of Singhalese 
Buddhism. The penetration of this new faith to the masses cannot 
be doubted: in Cambodia, Siam, Laos, and Burma, Buddhist cos-
mogony and cosmology and the doctrines of retribution for one’s 
acts and of transmigration have been deeply implanted in the 
humblest classes by the teaching of the Buddhist monks. 
It is difficult to say what would have happened in Indonesia 
if Islam had not come to cut the spiritual ties with Brahmanic 
India. The mildness and tolerance of Islam in Java are often 
attributed to the character of the Javanese population. But 
Javanese peoples are not fundamentally different in origin from 
the other Indonesian peoples, the Bataks of Sumatra, the Dayaks 
of Borneo, and the mountain people of the Indochinese cordillera, 
none of whom are known for the gentleness of their ways. So we 
may ask ourselves if the particular aspect assumed by Islam in 
Java was not due rather to the influence that Indian religions ex-
ercised over the character of the inhabitants of the island for more 
than ten centuries. 
The literary heritage from ancient India is even more ap-
parent than the religious heritage. Throughout the entire Indian 

--- [Page 276] ---
254 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
period, the Ramayana’ and the Mahabharata, the Harivamsa, and 
the Puranas were the principal, if not the only, sources of inspira-
tion for local literature. In all of the Indianized mainland, in 
Malaysia, and on Java, this epic and legendary literature, to which 
was added the Buddhist folklore of the /atakas, still makes up the 
substance of the classical theater, of the dances, and of the 
shadow-plays and puppet theater. From one end of Farther India 
to the other, spectators continue to weep over the misfortunes of 
Rama and Sita and to be moved by the virtues of the Bodhisattva, 
and the theatrical performances they attend have retained their 
original character of pantomime: the positions and the movements 
of the arms and legs and the gestures of the hands constitute a 
silent language capable of suggesting a subject, evoking an action, 
or expressing a sentiment, exactly as in Indian choreography. 
The influence of Indian law has been no less profound. The 
dharmasastras, and especially the most famous of them known as 
the “laws of Manu,” have formed the framework for the ordering 
of local customs of the Indianized countries in somewhat the 
same fashion that Latin law served the barbarian societies that 
were constructed on the ruins of the Roman Empire.® 
The arthasastras, or political treatises, have also had an in-
fluence. They have contributed to the fashioning of the hier-
archical administration of the states of Farther India, an admin-
istration that is dominated by the person of the king, whose 
conduct is still theoretically guided by the precepts of the rajaniti, 
or “royal conduct.” 
Although the Indian colonists undoubtedly spoke Prakrit 
dialects or Dravidian languages, it was the scholarly language, 
Sanskrit, that served and still serves to enrich the vocabulary of 
the native languages with a considerable number of words. And, 
Christian Era to the first known monuments, which do not date 
and abstract terms that were borrowed. Technical terms referring 
to the material world were also borrowed. And so were gram-
matical particles, which had the important effect of making the 
native isolating languages more flexible, enabling them to express 
| thoughts natural to the vehicle of flexible languages. 
The native languages have not only been enriched and made 
more flexible by India; they have above all been stabilized, thanks 
to the use of Indian script. The common origin of the Mon, Bur-

--- [Page 277] ---
Conclusion 255 
mese, Thai, Khmer, Cham, Javanese, and Balinese systems of 
writing is still recognizable. 
To turn to another area of knowledge: in spite of the 
virtually universal adoption of the Gregorian calendar for official 
purposes, the Indian lunar-solar year is still in popular use; and 
the dating systems in use, including both the Buddhist era system 
based on 543 B.C. and the “little era’ system based on A.D. 638, 
are also of Indian origin. 
Finally, the beneficial influence of a superior civilization 
freely accepted was strikingly felt in the realm of the arts. In fact, 
as Sylvain Lévi has said,9 India ‘produced its definitive master-
works only through the activity of the foreigner or on foreign 
soil.... In architecture, it is in distant Cambodia and Java that 
we must seek the two marvels born of the Indian genius: Angkor 
and the Borobudur.” 
How did the Indian aesthetic, transplanted to Cambodia, 
Java, and the other countries of Farther India, give birth to Khmer 
art, Javanese art, and the other Indian arts of the Far East? This is 
one of the most delicate problems facing archaeologists. In the 
study of the common Indian origin of these arts, we must not 
forget that there is an enormous gap in documentation for the 
period from the start of Indianization around the beginning of the 
Christian Era to the first known monuments, which do not date 
back any farther than the sixth century. The very remarkable 
differences that clearly distinguish the oldest architectural and 
sculptural monuments of Champa, Cambodia, and Java from those 
of India proper would undoubtedly surprise us much less if we 
had the intermediaries we lack, intermediaries that in architecture 
were undoubtedly made of perishable materials, , 
The influence of the native substratum on Indian art was 
mostly formal, external; that is why, from the very first, it is 
more striking than the internal ties that unite the plastic arts of 
Farther India to India. We know no monument in India resembling 
even remotely the Bayon of Angkor Thom or the Borobudur. And 
yet these monuments are pure productions of the Indian genius, 
the deep meaning of which is apparent only to the eyes of the 
Indianist.” 
Much the same thing is true in the other domains: religious, 
literary, and legal. Underneath the diversity of the civilizations of 

--- [Page 278] ---
256 The Indianized States of Southeast Asia 
Farther India, underneath their apparent uniqueness, the cause 
of which has been defined in Chapter II,2 lies the imprint of 
the Indian genius, which gives the countries studied in this volume 
a family likeness and produces a clear contrast between these 
countries and the lands that have been civilized by China. 

--- [Page 279] ---
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN NOTES 
AA Artibus Asiae 
ABIA Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeology 
ARASB Annual Report, Archaeological Survey of Burma 
ARASI Annual Report, Archaeological Survey of India 
BCAI Bulletin de la Commission Archéologique Indochinoise 
BEFEO Bulletin de I’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 
BKI Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde van Neder-
landsch-Indié, uitgegeven door het Koninklijk Instituut 
voor Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-
Indié 
BMFEA Bulletin of the Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities 
BRM Bulletin of the Raffles Museum 
BSE! Bulletin de la Société des Etudes Indochinoises de Saigon 
BSOAS Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 
Cahiers EFEO Cahiers de I’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 
CRAIBL Comptes-Rendus ‘de I’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-
Lettres 
Et. Asiat. EFFEO Etudes asiatiques. Publications de I’Ecole Francaise d’Ex-
tréme-Orient (Paris, 1925), 2 vols. 
FEQ Far Eastern Quarterly 
IAL Indian Art and Letters 
IHQ Indian Historical Quarterly 
ISC Auguste Barth, Inscriptions sanscrites du Cambodge (in 
Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, Notices et 
extraits des manuscrits de la Bibliothéque du roi et autres 
bibliothéques, v. 27, no. 1, Paris, 1885), pp. 1-180. 
Abel Bergaigne, Inscriptions sanscrites de Campa (in ibid., 
1893), pp. 181-292; Inscriptions sanscrites du Cambodge 
(in ibid., 1893), pp. 293-588. 
JA Journal Asiatique 
JAOS Journal of the American Oriental Society 

--- [Page 280] ---
258 Abbreviations 
JAS Journal of Asian Studies 
JASB Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 
JBRS Journal of the Burma Research Society 
JFMSM Journal of the Federated Malay States Museum 
JGIS Journal of the Greater India Society 
JRAI Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 
JRAS Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
JRASCB Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 
JRASMB Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 
JRASSB Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 
JSEAH Journal of Southeast Asian History 
JSS Journal of the Siam Society 
JSSS Journal of the South Seas Society 
| MKAWAL Mededeelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van Weten-
schappen, Afdeeling Letterkunde 
Publ. EFEO Publications de |’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 
RA Revue archéologique 
RAA Revue des Arts Asiatiques 
TBG Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde 
uitgegeven door het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kun-
sten en Wetenschappen 
TKNAG Tijdschrift van het Koninklijk Nederlandsch Aardrijkskun-
dig Genootschap TP T’oung Pao 
VBG Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van 
Kunsten en Wetenschappen 
VKI Verhandlingen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, 
Land-, en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indié 
VMKAWAL Verslagen en Mededeelingen der Koninklijke Akademie 
van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letterkunde 
VKNAWAL Verhandlingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie 
van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letterkunde 

--- [Page 281] ---
NOTES 
Note on Third Edition 
1. | have been happy to note that my example was soon followed 
in the following works: André Masson, Histoire de I’Indochine, 
Que sais-je?, no. 398 (Paris, 1950); Reginald le May, The 
Culture of South-East Asia (London, 1954; 2nd ed., 1956); 
Brian Harrison, South-East Asia: A Short History (London, 
1955); D. G. E. Hall, History of South-East Asia (London, 1955); 
Lé Thanh Kh6i, Histoire de I’Asie du Sud-Est, Que sais-je?, 
no. 804 (Paris, 1959). See D. G. E. Hall, ed., Historians of 
South-East Asia (London, 1961). 
Introduction 
1. The principal general bibliographies to consult are: Henri 
Cordier, Bibliotheca Indosinica, Publ. EFEO, XV—XVIII, 4 vols. 
and index (Paris, 1912-32); John F. Embree and Lillian O. 
Dotson, A Bibliography of the Peoples and Cultures of Main-
land Southeast Asia (New Haven, 1950); Cecil C. Hobbs, 
Southeast Asia: An Annotated Bibliography of Selected Refer-
ences (Washington, D.C., 1952); American Institute of Pacific 
Relations, Southeast Asia: A Selected Bibliography (New York, 
1955). 
2. Sylvain Lévi, L’Inde civilisatrice: Apercu historique (Paris, 
1938), p. 136. 
3. Ibid., p. 30. 
4, Compare Richard O. Winstedt, “Indian Influence in the Malay 
World,” JRAS (1944), p. 195. 
5. Upendra N. Ghoshal, Progress of Greater Indian Research 
(Calcutta, 1943). 
6. Further details on these questions can be found in Coedés, 
Les Peuples de la péninsule indochinoise (Paris, 1962), ‘Ire 
partie, Le peuplement de I’Indochine,” pp. 8-40 (translated 
under the tithe The Making of South East Asia, by H. M. 
Wright [London, 1966)). 
7. Histoire de I’Asie (Paris, 1922); Histoire de I’Extréme-Orient 
(Paris, 1929); Les Civilisations de [Orient (Paris, 1929-30); 
L’Asie orientale jusqu’au XVé siécle (Paris, 1941). 
8. Le Cambodge (Paris, 1900-1904), Vol. Ill: Le Groupe d’Angkor 
et l'histoire (Paris, 1904). 

--- [Page 282] ---
260 Notes to Pages xvii-xxi 
9. “Le Fou-nan,” BEFEO, Ill, pp. 248-303. 
10. L’Empire khmer, histoire et documents (Phnom Penh, 1904). 
11. Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia (Calcutta, 1928). 
12. Kambuja-Desa, or an Ancient Hindu Colony in Cambodia 
(Madras, 1944). 
13. The Ancient Khmer Empire (Philadelphia, 1951). 
14. Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928). 
15. Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far East, 1: Champa (Lahore, 
1927). 
16. History of Burma (London, 1883). 
17. History of Burma (London, 1925). 
18. A History of Siam (London, 1926). 
19. The Indian Colony of Siam, Punjab Oriental (Sanskrit) Series, 
XIII (Lahore, 1927). 
20. Histoire du Laos francais (Paris, 1930). 
21. “L’empire sumatranais de Crivijaya,” JA (1922). 
22. Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far East, \l: Suvarnadvipa 
(Dacca, 1937-38). 
23. “Sri Vijaya,” BEFEO, XL, pp. 239-313; History of Srivijaya 
(Madras, 1949). 
24. “A History of Malaya,” JRASMB, XIII (1935), pp. 1-210 (2nd 
ed., Singapore, 1962); Malaya and Its History (London, 1948). 
25. “An Introduction to the Study of Ancient Times in the Malay 
Peninsula and the Straits of Malacca,” JRASMB, XIII-XIX (1935-
41); “Notes on Ancient Times in Malaya,” JRASMB, XX-XXIV 
(1947-51). 
26. “The Khmer Empire and the Malay Peninsula,” FEQ, IX (1950), 
pp. 254—305. 
27. The Golden Khersonese (Kuala Lumpur, 1961). 
28. Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The Hague, 1926; 2nd ed., 
1931). 
29. Geschiedenis van Nederlandsch-Indié, 2nd ed. (Amsterdam, 
1943). 
30. Nusantara, A History of the East Indian Archipelago (Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, 1943); Geschiedenis van den Indische 
Archipel (Roermond, 1947); Nusantara: A History of Indonesia 
(Chicago, 1960). 
31. Geschiedenis van Indonesié (The Hague, 1949). 
32. On this subject, see Coedés, “L’avenir des études khméres,” 
paper read at public session of Académie des Inscriptions et 
Belles-Lettres on November 26, 1960. 
33. It should be noted, however, that the University of Rangoon 
has published during recent years, under the editorship of 
Gordon H. Luce and Pe Maung Tin, five magnificent albums 
of reproductions entitled Inscriptions of Burma, Oriental 
Studies Publications, Nos. 2-6 (Rangoon, 1933-39), which 
cover the period from 1131 to 1364. 
34. Aside from the work of Lawrence P. Briggs cited above, n. 13, 
as well as two brief popular works: Madeleine Giteau, His-

--- [Page 283] ---
Notes to Pages xxi-4 261 
toire du Cambodge (Paris, 1958) and Achille Dauphin-Meunier, 
Histoire du Cambodge; Que sais-je?, no. 916 (Paris, 1961). 
35. The bibliography given in the notes of the text does not 
pretend to be exhaustive. It cites only the basic works, where 
the reader will find the elements of a more complete bibli-
ography. 
Chapter |! 
1. Paris, 1929. See also Pierre Gourou, Les Pays tropicaux (Paris, 
1947); L’Asie, IV@ partie (Paris, 1953), chaps. XVII-XIX. For 
eastern Indochina, see Charles Robequain, L’Indochine fran-
caise (Paris, 1935); for the Malay Peninsula and Indonesia, 
Charles Robequain, Le Monde malais (Paris, 1946). 
2. “Pour I’histoire du Ramayana,” JA (January-February, 1918), 
p. 147. 
3. L’Asie des moussons (Paris, 1928-29), II, p. 513. 
4, Exposition coloniale internationale: Indochine francaise, Sec-
tion des Sciences, La Préhistoire en Indochine (Paris, 1931), 
which contains a bibliography of his works; ‘Préhistoire et 
protohistoire,” in Un Empire colonial francais: I’Indochine, 
ed. Georges Maspero (Paris, 1929), 1, pp. 83-92. 
5. In addition to studies cited in Mansuy’s “Préhistoire et proto-
histoire,” see ‘Recherches sur le préhistorique indochinois,”’ 
BEFEO, XXX, pp. 299-422; Mégalithes du Haut-Laos, Publ. 
EFEO, XXV—XXVI (Paris, 1935); Emploi de Ja pierre en des 
temps reculés, Publications des Amis du Vieux Hué (Hanoi, 
1940). 
6. ‘Notes sur le préhistorique indochinois,” Bulletin du Service 
Géologique de I’Indochine (1923-32); ‘L’Indochine préhis-
torique,” Revue anthropologique (1936), pp. 277-314. 
7. “Note préliminaire sur les formations cénozoiques et plus 
récentes de la chaine annamatique septentrionale et du Haut-
Laos (Stratigraphie, Préhistoire, Anthropologie),” Bulletin du 
Service Gedlogique de I’Indochine, XXII, 3 (1936). For dis-
coveries since that date, see the works of the same authors in 
Proceedings of the Third Congress of Prehistorians of the Far 
East (Singapore, 1938), pp. 51-90. 
8. Recherches préhistoriques dans la région de Mlu Prei, ac-
compagnées de comparaisons archéologiques, Publ. EFEO, 
XXX (Hanoi, 1943). 
9. Papers on the Ethnology and Archaeology of the Malay 
Peninsula (Cambridge, England, 1927); numerous articles in 
the Journal of the Federated States Museum, VII, IX, XII, XV. 
10. “Pleistocene Site in the Malay Peninsula,” Nature, 142 (Sep-
tember 24, 1938), p. 575; and his articles in the BRM, Singa-
pore, Ser. B. 
11. “Prehistory in Malaya,” JRAS (1942), pp. 1-13, and “The Stone 
Age in Malaya,” JRASMB, XXVI, No. 2 (1953), which contains 
a good bibliography. 

--- [Page 284] ---
262 Notes to Page 4 
12. “Report on Cave Excavations in Perak,” Oudheidkundig 
Verslag (1926), pp. 184-93; “Report on Cave Excavations in 
Perak,” JFMSM, XII (1928); Note préliminaire sur les fouilles 
~ dans l’abri sous roche de Sampung (Batavia, 1932); “Bijdrage 
tot de chronologie van het Neolithicum in Zuid-Oost Azié,” 
Oudheidkundig Verslag (1926), pp. 174-80; “Korte Gids voor 
de prehistorische verzameling,” Koninklijk Bataviaasch Ge-
nootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen, Jaarboek, II 
(1934), pp. 69-106; and his articles in the BRM, Singapore, 
ser. B. 
13. Megalithic Remains in South-Sumatra (Zutphen, 1932); and 
the chapter on prehistory in Frederik W. Stapel, ed., Ge-
schiedenis van Nederlandsch-Indié (Amsterdam, 1938-40), 
|, pp. 8-111. 
14. “Uber altpaleolithische Artefakte von Java,” TKNAG (1936), 
pp. 41-44; ‘Das Neolithicum der Umgebung von Bandoeng,” 
TBG, LXXV (1935), pp. 324-419; “Das Pleistocan Javas,” 
Quartar (Berlin, 1939), pp. 28-53. 
15. The Stone Age of Indonesia, VKI, XXI (The Hague, 1957); 
The Bronze-lron Age of Indonesia, VKI, XXII (The Hague, 
1958). 
16. “Prehistorical Researches in Siam,” JSS, XXVI (1933), pp. 171-
202; ‘Recherches préhistoriques au Siam,” L’Anthropologie, 
XLIII (1933), pp. 1-40. Wilhelm G. Solheim, Il, “Thailand and 
Prehistory,” Silapakara, VIII, No. 3 (September, 1966), pp. 42-
77. 
17. “Le paléolithisme du Siam,” L’Anthropologie, LIV, p. 547. 
18. “Prehistoric Discoveries in Siam,” Proceedings of the Pre-
historic Society, n.s. 14 (1948), 2, p. 24; “A Preliminary Note 
on the Excavation of the Sai-Yok Rock Shelter,” JSS, XLIX 
(1961), p. 99; “A Brief Survey of the Sai-Yok Excavations, 
1961-62,” JSS, L (1962), p. 15. 
19. “Relics of the Stone Age in Burma,” JBRS, XXI (1931), pp. 
33-51. 
20. “The Prehistoric Stone Implements of Burma,” JBRS, XXV 
(1935), pp. 1-39; “Copper and Bronze Antiquities from 
Burma,” JBRS, XXVIII (1938), pp. 95-99. 
21. “The Stone Age of Burma,” Transactions of the American 
Philosophical Society, 32 (1943), pp. 341-93; “The Lower 
Paleolithic Cultures of South and East Asia,” Transactions of 
the American Philosophical Society, 38 (1948); “Paleolithic 
Archaeology in South and East Asia,” Cahiers d’histoire mon-
diale, || (Paris, 1954). 
22. “Urheimat und friheste Wanderungen der Austronesier,” 
Anthropos, XXVII (1932); “Ein Beitrag zur Chronologie des 
Neolithicums in Stidost-Asien,” in Festschrift... P.W. Schmidt 
(Vienna, 1928); “Prehistoric Research in Indonesia,” ABIA, 
IX (1934), pp. 26-38; ‘Vorgeschichtliche Grundlagen der 

--- [Page 285] ---
Notes to Pages 4-7 263 
kolonialindischen Kunst,” Wiener Beitrage zur Kunst- und 
Kulturgeschichte Asiens, VIII (1934); Prehistoric Research in 
the Netherlands Indies (New York, 1945); introduction to 
Indonesian Art, Asia Institute (New York, 1948). 
23. In L’Homme avant I’écriture, ed. André Varagnac (Paris, 1959), pp. 153, 315. 
24. Pierre Huard and Edmond Saurin, “Etat actuel de la craniolo-
gie indochinoise,” Bulletin du Service Géologique de I’Indo-
chine, XXV, | (1938). 
25. Pieter V. van Stein Callenfels, “The Melanesoid Civilizations 
of Eastern Asia,” BRM, Ser. B, | (1936), pp. 41-51. 
26. Per Sorensen, ‘North-South Indication of a Prehistoric Mi-
gration into Thailand,” Fast and West, n.s. XIV, Nos. 34 
(September-December, 1963), p. 211. 
27. Louis Finot, “L’Indochine préhistorique,” Asie francaise (Feb-
ruary-July, 1919). See below, p. 8. 
28. Richard O. Winstedt, “Slab-Graves and Iron Implements,” 
JRASMB, XIX, 1 (1941), pp. 93-100. J. Lowenstein and G. 
Sieveking, “Papers on the Malayan Metal Age,” JRASMB, 
XXIX, 2 (1956). 
29. William J. Perry, The Megalithic Culture of Indonesia (Man-
chester, 1918); The Children of the Sun, 2nd ed. (London, 
1927). H. G. Quaritch Wales, The Making of Greater India 
(London, 1951, 1961); “The Pre-Indian Basis of Khmer Cul-
ture,” JRAS (1952), pp. 117-23; The Mountain of God (Lon-
don, 1953); Prehistory and Religion in South-East Asia 
(London, 1957). 
30. C. B. Seligman and H. C. Beck, “Far Eastern Glass: Some 
Western Origins,” BMFEA, 10 (1938), pp. 49-50. 
31. Victor Goloubew, “L’Age du bronze au Tonkin et dans Nord-
Annam,” BEFEO, XXIX, pp. 1-46. Olov Janse, Archaeological 
Research in Indo-China (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1947, 
1951, Bruges, 1958), 3 vols. 
32. ‘The Age of Bronze Kettledrums,’”” BRM, Ser. B, |, No. 3, p. 
150. These dates seemed too early to Victor Goloubew, “Le 
tambour métallique de Hoang-ha,” BEFEO, XL, No. 1, p. 396, 
but they agree very well with the results of the researches of 
Bernard Karlgren, who tends to place the beginning of 
Dongson culture in the fourth or third centuries B.C. See 
Karlgren’s “The Date of the Early Dong-son Culture,’ BMFEA, 
14 (1942), p. 128. See also Basil Gray, ‘“China or Dong-son,” 
Oriental Art, Il (1949-50), pp. 99-104. 
33. Henri Parmentier, “Dépéts de jarres 4 Sa-huynh (Quang-ngai, 
Annam),”” BEFEO, XXIV, pp. 321-43. Madeleine Colani, Méga-
lithes du Haut-Laos, Il, pp. 237 ff. 
34. Henri Mansuy, Stations préhistoriques de Somrong-seng et de 
Longprao (Cambodge) (Hanoi, 1902); “Résultats de nouvelles 
recherches effectuées dans le gisement préhistorique de 

--- [Page 286] ---
264 Notes to Pages 7-8 
Somrong-Sen (Cambodge),” Mémoires du Service Géologique 
de I’Indochine, X, 1. 
35. Henri Parmentier, “Vestiges mégalithiques a Xudn-l6c,’” BEFEO, 
XXVIII, pp. 479-85. Emile Gaspardone, “The Tomb of Xudn-
loc,” JGIS, IV (1937), pp. 26-35. 36. Below, p. 17. | 
37. Ivor H. N. Evans has published many notes on this site in the 
]FMSM, XII and XV. Alastair Lamb, ‘Miscellaneous Archaeologi-
cal Discoveries,” JRASMB, XXXVII, 1 (July, 1962), p. 166. 
38. Frederik D. K. Bosch, “Het bronzen Buddha-beeld van Celebes’ 
Westkust,” TBG, LXXIII (1933), pp. 495-513. See also F. D. K. 
Bosch, “Summary of Archaeological Work in Netherlands India 
in 1933,” ABIA, VIII (1933), p. 35. 
39. Kingship (London, 1927); “India and the Pacific,” Ceylon 
Journal of Science, |, 2, pp. 61-84. 
40. “L’Inde vue de |’Est: Cultes indiens et indigenes au Champa,” 
BEFEO, XXXII, pp. 367-410. 
41. See above, p. 6. 
42. Wilhelm Schmidt, ‘Les peuples Mon-Khmer, trait d’union 
entre les peuples de l’Asie centrale et de l’Austronésie,” 
BEFEO, VII, pp. 213-63; VIII, p. 35. The critics of Guillaume 
de Hevesy (Finnisch-Ugrisches aux Indien [Vienna, 1932] and 
numerous articles in linguistic journals) have not been able to 
explain away the undeniable lexicographical relationship be-
tween the Mon-Khmer languages and the Munda languages 
of India (cf. Lawrence P. Briggs, ‘How Obsolete Are the 
Theories of Professor Dixon and Pater Schmidt,” JAOS, 65 
[1945], pp. 56 ff.). 
43. The works of Sylvain Lévi, Jean Przyluski, and J. Bloch on the 
pre-Aryan and pre-Dravidian civilizations of India have been 
brought together by Prabodh C. Bagchi in one volume: Pre-
Aryan and Pre-Dravidian in India (Calcutta, 1929). See also 
C. Régamey, “Bibliographie analytique des travaux relatifs 
aux éléments anaryens dans la civilisation et les langues de 
Inde,” BEFEO, XXXIV, pp. 429-566. 
44, James Hornell, “The Origins and Ethnological Significance of 
Indian Boat Designs,” Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
VII (1920). Stein Callenfels and Heine-Geldern in their articles 
cited above. Nicholaas J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschie-
denis (The Hague, 1931), pp. 38 ff. 
45. Sylvain Lévi, “Pré-aryen et pré-dravidien dans I’Inde,” JA 
(July-September, 1923), pp. 55-57. Hendrik Kern, Verspreide 
Geschriften (The Hague, 1913-29), XV, p. 180. Jean Przyluski, | 
“Les Udumbara,” JA (January-March, 1926), pp. 1-59; “Les 
Salva,” JA (April-June, 1929), pp. 311-54. Hocart, Kingship; 
R. C. Majumdar, “The Malay,” JGIS, Ill (1936), pp. 86-96. 
46. Kern, “Taalkundige gegevens ter bepaling van het stamland 
der Maleisch-Polynesische Talen,” Verspreide Geschriften, VI, 
p. 105. 

--- [Page 287] ---
Notes to Pages 8-9 265 
47. In Indochine, ed. S. Lévi (Paris, 1931), I, p. 54. 
48. This is the thesis of Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis. 
49. Gabriel Ferrand, “Le K’ouen-louen, et les anciennes navigations 
inter-océaniques dans les mers du Sud,” JA, 1919, March-
April, pp. 239-333; May-June, pp. 431-92; July-August, pp. 
5-68; September-October, pp. 201-41, places this event in 
the second to fourth centuries A.D. James Hornell, “Indo-
nesian Influence on East African Culture,” JRAI (1934), p. 315, 
would place it a little later. See also C. Nooteboom, “De 
betrekkingen tussen Madagascar en Indonesie,” Zaire, III 
(1949), pp. 881-94. 
50. P. V. van Stein Callenfels, “Die Aufgaben der japanischen 
Prahistorie im Rahmen der internationalen Forschung,” Shi-
zengaku-Zasshi, IV (1932), p. 6. 
51. Nobuhiro Matsumoto, Le Japonais et les langues austro-asia-
tiques, Austro-Asiatica, | (Paris, 1928). O. Gjerdman, “Word-
Parallels between Ainu and Other Languages,” Le Monde ori- | 
ental, XX (1926), p. 29. 
52. Nobuhiro Matsumoto, Essai sur la mythologie japonaise, 
Austro-Asiatica, I] (Paris, 1928). 
53. G. Montandon, Traité d’ethnologie culturelle (Paris, 1934). 
54. It would be imprudent to attempt to delineate too precisely 
the composition of a civilization on which ancient documents 
are sporadic and about which ideas must be based solely on 
folklore and ethnology. In his Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiede-
nis, pp. 47 ff., Krom sketches a picture of the Indonesian 
civilization of Java before the arrival of the Hindus and men-
tions the wayang, or shadow theater, among its characteristics. 
But the shadow theater (chayanataka) was known to theorists 
of the Indian theater in the Sanskrit language. (R. Pischel, “Das 
alt indische Schattenspiel,” Sitzungsberichte der k6niglich 
Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften [Berlin], XXIII 
[1906], pp. 482-502; G. Jacob, Geschichte des Schattentheaters 
[1925].) Compare Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, “The Shadow-
Play in Ceylon,” JRAS (1930), p. 627, and History of Indian 
and Indonesian Art (New York, 1927), p. 89. Was the wayang 
imported into Java by the Hindus or was it part of a common 
substratum? Anker Rentse, “The Origin of the Wayang Theatre 
(Shadow Play),” JRASMB, XX (1947), pp. 12-15, repudiates an 
Indian origin. The same question can just as well be put for 
other cultural elements. i 
55. Przyluski in Indochine, p. 54. 
56. Coedés, “Les langues de I’Indochine,” Conférences de IInstitut 
de Linguistique de l'Université de Paris, 8 (1940-48), pp. 63-81. 
57. Ferrand, “Le K’ouen-louen et les anciennes navigations inter-
océaniques.” 
58. On this question see R. Stein, “Le Lin-yi,’” Han-hiue, Il (1947), 
pp. 211 ff. A. H. Christie, “The Name K’un-lun as an Ethnic 
Term,” Comptes Rendus du XXIIl¢ Congrés International des 

--- [Page 288] ---
266 Notes to Pages 9-12 
Orientalistes (Cambridge, 1954), p. 297. Gordon H. Luce, “The 
Early Syam in Burma’s History,” JSS, XLVI (1958), p. 191. 
59. “K’ouen-louen et Dvipantara,” BKI, 88 (1931), pp. 621-27. 
60. Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 110. 
61. “The Malay,” JG/S, Ill (1936), p. 86. A similar opinion is ex-
pressed by K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “Dvipantara,” JGIS, IX (1942), 
pp. 1-4. 
62. We know that bronze drums of the earliest type and com-
parable bronze objects have been found in southern Indo-
china, in the Malay Peninsula, and in the Indonesian islands. 
See particularly L. Malleret, “Objets de bronze communs au 
Cambodge, a la Malaise et a I’Indonésie,”” AA, XIX (1956), p. 
308; W. Linehan, “Traces of a Bronze Age Culture Associated 
with Iron Age Implements in the Regions of Klang and the 
Tembeling, Malaya,” JRASMB, XXIV, 3 (1951); H. Deydier, 
“Note sur un tambour de bronze conservé au Musée de 
Batavia,” BSEI, XXIV (1949), p. 53; H. R. van Heekeren, ‘““Tam-
bours de bronze,” Amerta, II (1954), p. 37 (summarized by 
L. C. Damais, “Bibliographie indonésienne,” BEFEO, LI [1963], 
p. 544). On the late Neolithic finds recently discovered in 
Cochin China, see E. Saurin, ‘Station préhistorique a Hang-gon 
prés de Xuan-loc,” BEFEO, LI (1963), p. 433. 
63. “Le groupe océanien,” Bulletin de la Société de Linguistique 
de Paris, 27 (1927), p. 152. “It is clearly evident that the lan-
guage community of peoples so different [as the Australians 
and the Melanesians, the Indonesians and the Polynesians] is 
a secondary phenomenon and that the language of one of 
them must have been imposed on all for reasons and under 
circumstances which now escape us.” 
64. It must be clearly understood that the ethnic terms used in 
what follows always designate linguistic or ethno-linguistic 
groups and never races in the physical sense of the word. In 
the absence of precise anthropological data, it is necessary to 
define an ethnic group provisionally on the basis of its cus-
toms and beliefs and the language it speaks. 
65. Sion’s wording in L’Asie des moussons, II, p. 403. 
66. J. P. Kleiweg de Zwaan, De rassen van den Indischen Archipel 
(Amsterdam, 1925); Physical Anthropology in the Indian Archi-
pelago and Adjacent Regions (Amsterdam, 1923). J. H. Nyes-
sen, The Races of Java (Weltevreden, 1929). Jaap Kunst, The 
Peoples of the Indian Archipelago (Leyden, 1946). 
67. L’Asie des moussons, ll, p. 483. 
68. Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, chap. 2. 
69. On the wayang, see above, n. 54. 
70. Published under the title Adatrechtbundel (The Hague, 1911-). 
71. W. W. Skeat and C. O. Blagden, Pagan Races of the Malay 
Peninsula (London, 1906). 

--- [Page 289] ---
Notes to Pages 13-17 267 
72. On the ethnography of French Indochina, see Bonifacy, Cours 
d’ethnographie indochinoise (Hanoi, 1919). Georges Maspero, 
L’Indochine, Vol. | (Paris, 1929). Jean Przyluski, “Les popula-
tions de I’Indochine francaise’ in Indochine, ed. Lévi, |, pp. 
47-60. A. Bigot, “Ethnologie sommaire de I|’Indochine fran-
caise,” in Indochine francaise (Hanoi, 1938), pp. 33-58. L. 
Malleret, Groupes ethniques de I’Indochine francaise (Saigon, 
1937). 
73. C. C. Lowis, Tribes of Burma (Rangoon, 1910). R. Halliday, The 
Talaings (Rangoon, 1917). 
Chapter II 
1. L’Art gréco-bouddhique du Gandhara, étude sur les origines 
de l’influence classique dans I’art bouddhique de I’Inde et de 
l’Extréme-Orient (Paris, 1922), Il, p. 618. 
2. Louis de La Vallée-Poussin, Dynasties et histoire de I’Inde 
depuis Kanishka jusqu’aux invasions musulmanes (Paris, 1935), 
p. 360. See also M. N. Srinivas, “A Note on Sanskritization and 
Westernization,” FEQ, XV (1956), p. 481. V. Raghavan, “Variety 
and Integration in the Pattern of Indian Culture,’” FEQ, XV 
(1956), p. 497. J. F. Staal, “Sanskrit and Sanskritization,” JAS 
XXII (1963), pp. 261-75. 
3. On these discussions between sociologists and Indianists, see 
F. D. K. Bosch, “Local Genius” en oud-javaansche Kunst (Am-
sterdam, 1952). Coedés, “Le substrat autochthone et la super-
structure indienne au Cambodge et a Java,” Cahiers d’histoire 
mondiale, |, 2 (Oct., 1953). 
4. “Les origines de la colonisation indienne en Indochine,” 
BEFEO, XII, 8, pp. 1-4. 
5. Sylvain Lévi, “Pour I’histoire du Ramayana,” JA (January-
February, 1918), pp. 80 ff. 
6. “Ptolémée, le Niddesa et la Brihatkatha,’”” Et. Asiat. EFEO, Il, 
pp. 1-55. 
7. See below, pp. 62-63. 
8. See below, p. 63. 
9. The Gupta period began in India in the fourth century A.D. 
At Phra Pathom have been found many stone “Wheels of the 
Law” that represent the old aniconic tradition of Buddhism 
but that, to judge by their decoration, did not precede the 
sixth century. See Coedés, “Une roue de la Loi avec inscrip-
tion en pali provenent du site de P’ra Pathom,” AA, XIX 
(1956), p. 221. 
10. “Amaravati, situated not far from the mouth of the Krishna,” 
writes Foucher (Art gréco-bouddhique, ||, p. 617), “seems to 
have been one of the great ports of embarkation from which 
Graeco-Buddhist influence was exported to Indochina and 
Indonesia.” 

--- [Page 290] ---
268 Notes to Pages 17-18 
The Amaravati school flourished in India from the 
second to the fourth centuries A.D. The images of the Buddha, 
generally standing and dressed in pleated monastic robes, 
which in many cases constitute the oldest tangible evidence 
of the coming of the Indians to Farther India, belong to this 
school. These images represent the Buddha Dipankara, whose 
name evokes the islands (dipa, dvipa), and who seems to have 
been the protector of seamen (Alfred Foucher, Etude sur 
l’iconographie bouddhique de I’Inde, d’aprés des documents 
nouveaux [Paris, 1900-1905], I, pp. 77-84). On the dating and 
the Indian or Singhalese origin of the images of the Buddha 
called Amaravati in Southeast Asia, see Mirella Levi d’Ancona, 
“Amaravati, Ceylon and the Three ‘Imported Bronzes,’” Art 
Bulletin XXXIV (1952). Pierre Dupont, “Les Buddhas dits 
d’Amaravati en Asie du Sud-est,” Proceedings, XXIIl¢ Congrés 
International des Orientalistes (Cambridge, 1954), p. 269. 
11. Not to mention a bronze Alexandrine lamp (Charles Picard, 
“La lampe alexandrine de P’ong Tuk [Siam],’”” AA, XVIII [1955], 
pp. 137-49), evidence of relations with the West that may 
date back to the period when the Chinese mention the voyage 
of Roman musicians and acrobats from Burma to China (A.D. 
120) and the so-called “embassy” of Marcus Aurelius (A.D. 
166). 
12. Etudes d’orientalisme (Mélanges Linossier), pp. 159-64. See on 
this subject, Pierre Dupont, “Vishnu mitrés de I’Indochine 
occidentale,” BEFEO, XLI, pp. 233-54. 
13. H. G. Quaritch Wales, ‘The Exploration of Sri Deva, An 
Ancient City in Indochina,” IAL, X (1936), pp. 66, 85. See B. 
Ch. Chhabra, “Expansion of Indo-Aryan Culture,” JASB, 
Letters, | (1935), pp. 54-55. 
14. Coedés, ‘The Excavations at P’ong Tuk and Their Importance 
for the Ancient History of Siam,” JSS, XXI (1928), pl. 18. 
15. For Funan, Champa, Malaysia, and Indonesia, see the refer-
ences in the following chapter. 
16. Charles Picard, “A Figurine of the Lysippan Type from the 
Far East: The Tra Vinh Bronze ‘Dancer,’’”” AA, XIX (1956), pp. 
342-52. 
17. Louis Malleret, L’Archéologie du delta du Mékong (Paris, 
1959-63), Ill, p. 115. 
18. On the discoveries made at Oc Eo, see Coedés, ‘Fouilles en 
Cochinchine: Le Site de Go Oc Eo,” AA, X (1947), pp. 193-99. 
Louis Malleret, ‘La trace de Rome en Indochine,” Actes du 
XxIle Congrés International des Orientalistes (Istanbul, 1951), 
p. 332 (with a very complete bibliography); L’Archéologie du 
delta du Mékong. 
19. Virgile Rougier, ‘Nouvelles découvertes chames au Quang-
nam,” BCAI (1912), pp. 212-13. “Chronique,” BEFEO, XI, p. 
471. “L’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient depuis son origine 

--- [Page 291] ---
Notes to Pages 18-19 269 
jusqu’en 1920,” BEFEO, XXI, p. 72. Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, 
History of Indian and Indonesian Art (New York, 1927), p. 197. 
20. Recalling to our minds that fragments of Attic vases dating 
back to the fourth and fifth centuries before the Christian 
Era have been found at Tenku Lembu (Perlis). See P. D. R. 
Williams-Hunt, ‘Recent Archaeological Discoveries in Malaya,” 
JRASMB, XXV (1952), p. 187. 
21. See above, p. 7. 
22. William Cohn, Buddha in der Kunst des Ostens (Leipzig, 1925), 
p. 28. 
23. F. M. Schnitger, The Archaeology of Hindoo Sumatra (Leyden, 
1937), pl. I. 
24. The text to consult for India and the Far East is that of Louis 
Renou, La Géographie de Ptolémée, I’Inde, VII, 1-4 (Paris, 
1925). For the attempts at “redressing” the map of Ptolemy 
and the identification of geographic names of trans-Gangetic 
India, see especially: G. E. Gerini, Researches on Ptolemy’s 
Geography of Eastern Asia (London, 1909); André Berthelot, 
L’Asie ancienne centrale et sud-orientale d’aprés Ptolémée 
(Paris, 1930); Albert Herrmann, Das Land der Seide und Tibet 
im Lichte der Antike (Leipzig, 1938). Results based on mathe-
matical calculations are very deceiving, and up to now only 
philology has permitted us to obtain satisfying identifications. 
25. According to J. Pirenne, “La date du Périple de la Mer Ery-
thrée,” JA, CCXLIX (1961), p. 441, this text dates from around 
the year A.D. 230 and was consequently later than Ptolemy. 
26. “Le K’ouen-louen,” JA (July-August, 1919), p. 21. The identi-
fication of Ye-tiao as Yavadvipa (Java), accepted by Gabriel 
Ferrand (Ye-tiao, Sseu-tiao et Java,” JA [November-Decem-
ber, 1916], p. 520), has been challenged by R. Stein (‘Le Lin-
yi,’ Han-hiue, Il [1947], pp. 211 ff). See below, p. 283, n. 63. 
27. At least this is widely believed. But, on this subject, Jean 
Filliozat has brought to my attention a passage of the Mrigen-
dragama ‘which considers sea voyages for conquest or profit 
permissible and prescribes the use of a bright flame for rites 
involved.” (N. R. Bhatt, Mrgendragama, Publications de I’In-
stitut Francais d’Indologie, 23 [Pondicherry, 1962], p. 76.) 
28. Louis de La Vallée-Poussin, L’Inde aux temps des Mauryas et 
des barbares, Grecs, Scythes, Parthes et Yue-tchi, Histoire du 
Monde, VI, 1 (Paris, 1930). Compare Sylvain Lévi, “Kanishka 
et S’atavahana,” JA (January-March, 1936), p. 94. 
29. Cornelis C. Berg, Hoofdlijnen der Javaansche Litteratuur-Ge-
schiedenis (Groningen, 1929). 
30. Eric H. Warmington, The Commerce between the Roman Em-
pire and India (Cambridge, 1928). Gabriel Jouveau-Dubreuil, 
L’Inde et les Romaines (Paris, 1921). H. G. Rawlinson, Inter-
course between India and the Western World (Cambridge, 
1916). M. P. Charlesworth, Trade-Routes and Commerce of 

--- [Page 292] ---
270 Notes to Pages 20-23 
the Roman Empire (Cambridge, 1926). Jean Filliozat, ‘Les 
échanges de |’Inde et de L’Empire romain aux premiers siécles 
de |’ére chrétienne,” Revue historique (January-March, 1949). 
In his review of the present work (JA, CCXXXVII [1949], p. 368), 
Filliozat gives interesting details on the cinnamon or canelle 
trade. See also, on the trade in camphor and other luxuries, 
O. W. Wolters, “The ‘Po-ssu Pine Trees,’ BSOAS, XXIII (1960), 
pp. 323-50, and Buddha Prakash, ‘“Parasikadvipa,” AA, XXIV 
(1961), pp. 399-402. 
31. “K’ouen-louen et Dvipantara,” BKI, 88 (1931), p. 627. 
32. La Vallée-Poussin, L’Inde aux temps des Mauryas. 
33. Robert Sewell, ‘“‘Rornan Coins Found in India,” JRAS (1904), 
pp. 591-638. William W. Tarn, The Greeks in Bactria and 
India, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, England, 1951), pp. 106-109. Pierre 
Meile, “Les Yuvanas dans |’Inde tamoule,” JA (1940-41), pp. 
86-87. The most recent and complete list has been given by 
R. E. M. Wheeler, “Arikamedu,” Ancient India, 2 (1946), pp. 
116-21. 
34. On the first relations between India and China by sea, see 
Paul Pelliot, ‘“L’origine du nom de ‘Chine’,” TP, XIII (1912), 
pp. 457-61, and K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “The Beginnings of 
Intercourse between India and China,” JHQ, XIV (1938), pp. 
380-87. Sastri’s conclusions are perhaps debatable, but he 
gives references. See also the important article of Wang 
Gungwu, “The Nanhai Trade: A Study of the Early History of 
Chinese Trade in the South China Sea,” JRASMB, XXXI, 2 
(1958). 
35. Paul Pelliot, “Textes chinois concernant |’Indochine hindoui-
sée,”” Et. Asiat. EFEO, \l, p. 261. 
36. Ibid., p. 255. 
37. L’Inde civilisatrice: Apercu historique (Paris, 1939), p. 156. 
38. Sylvain Lévi, “Les ‘marchands de mer’ et leur réle dans le 
bouddhisme primitif,” Bulletin de |’Association Francaise des 
Amis de /’Orient (October, 1929), pp. 19-39. 
39. “Manimekhala, divinité de la mer,” Bull. Lettres Acad. Bel-
gique (1930), p. 282. See IHQ, VII (1931), pp. 173, 371. 
40. “Le K’ouen-louen,” pp. 15 ff. 
41. On the mixed marriages, substantiated by various texts, see 
below, p. 24. 
42. “History of Malaya,” JRASMB, XIII (1935), p. 18; “Indian In-
fluence in the Malay World,” JRAS (1944), p. 186. 
43. Nicholaas J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The 
Hague, 1931). 
44. F. H. van Naerssen, Culture Contacts and Social Conflicts in 
Indonesia (New York, 1947); “De aanvang van het Hindu-
indonesische acculturatie process,” Orientalia Neerlandica 
(1948), pp. 414-22; “Het sociaal aspect van acculturatie in 
Indonesia,” Zaire June, 1948). 

--- [Page 293] ---
Notes to Pages 23-28 271 
45. Jacob C. Van Leur, Indonesian Trade and Society (The Hague, 
1955). 
46. Abbreviation of T’ien-chu, i.e., India. See Paul Pelliot, “Le 
Fou-nan,” BEFEO, Ill, p. 252, n. 4. 
47. Frederik D. K. Bosch, “Het Lingga-Heiligdom van Dinaja,” 
TBG, 64 (1924), pp. 227-91. Robert von Heine-Geldern, ‘’Con-
ceptions of State and Kingship in Southeast Asia,” FEQ, Il 
(1942), pp. 15-30. 
48. ““Agastya,” TBG, 76 (1936), p. 503. 
49. Louis de La Vallée-Poussin, Indo-européens et Indo-iraniens 
jusque vers 300 av. J.C., Histoire du Monde, III (Paris, 1924), 
pp. 168, 169, 174, 178; Dynasties et histoire de I’Inde, p. 361. 
Sylvain Lévi, Le Nepal (Paris, 1905-1908), I, p. 220. L. Renou, 
Bibliographie védique (Paris, 1931), pp. 143, 334. 
50. Above, p. 18, and below, p. 52. 
51. See below, pp. 87-88. 
52. ISC, p. 159, n. 10. Barth’s remark is prompted by a text of the 
eleventh century, but these mixtures of names are observed 
much earlier. 
53. Van Leur, Indonesian Trade and Society, p. 100. 
54. Pelliot, ‘Le Fou-nan,” p. 279. 
55. Tun-sun was a dependency of Funan, probably on the Malay 
Peninsula; see below, pp. 38-39. This text remains interesting, 
even if the p’o-lo-men of the Chinese text were not all of 
Brahmanic caste. 
56. Dynasties et histoire de I’Inde, p. 361. 
57. L’Inde civilisatrice, p. 23. 
58. Coedés, Les Peuples de la péninsule indochinoise (Paris, 
1962), p. 55. 
59. And in Ceylon. See Filliozat’s review of the present work, JA, 
CCXXXVII (1949), p. 369. 
60. Indian Influences in Old Balinese Art (London, 1935), p. 6. 
61. W. F. Stutterheim, Indian Influences in the Lands of the Pacific 
(Weltevreden, 1929), pp. 4-5. F. D. K. Bosch, Het vragstuk van 
de Hindoe-Kolonisatie van den Archipel (Leyden, 1946). 
62. Les Peuples de la péninsule indochinoise, p. 57. 
63. Albert Herrmann, “Die Alten Verkehrswege zwischen Indien 
und Stidchina nach Ptolemaus,” Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft 
fur Erdkunde (1913), p. 771. Paul Wheatley, The Golden Kher-
sonese (Kuala Lumpur, 1961). 
64. Pour la compréhension de I'Indochine et de l’Occident (Hanoi, 
1939), p. 51. 
65. See below, pp. 130, 142, 184. 
66. E. Lunet de Lajonquiére, ‘‘Le domaine archéologique du Siam,” 
BCAI (1909), p. 259; cf. p. 256. 
67. Ibid. H. G. Quaritch Wales, “A Newly Explored Route of | 
Ancient Indian Cultural Expansion,” IAL, IX (1935), pp. 1-35; 
Towards Angkor (London, 1937); ‘Archaeological Researches 

--- [Page 294] ---
272 Notes to Pages 28-29 
on Ancient Indian Colonization in Malaya,” JRASMB, XVIII, 1 
(1940). 
68. Jean Y. Claeys, “L’archéologie du Siam,’’ BEFEO, XXXI, p. 378. 
Quaritch Wales, “A Newly Explored Route.” Wheatley, The 
Golden Khersonese, p. 190, gives a map of the maritime 
routes of the Indians and of trans-peninsular routes used by 
travelers. The same author in “Panarikan,” JSSS (1954), pp. 
1-16, retraces the two routes from Malacca to Pahang follow: 
ing two rivers, with short portages. 
69. Quaritch Wales, Towards Angkor, p. 111. 
70. See below, p. 66. 
71. Paul Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires de Chine en Inde, a la fin du 
Ville siécle,” BEFEO, IV, pp. 142-43. Gordon H. Luce and Pe : Maung Tin, “Burma down to the Fall of Pagan,” JBRS, XXIX 
(1939), p. 264. The use of this route has been placed in doubt 
by Walter Liebenthal, ‘The Ancient Burma Route: A Legend?” 
JGIS, XV (1956), p. 6, but is accepted by Buddha Prakash, 
“Purvavideha,”” JGIS, XV (1956), p. 93. 
72. Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,” pp. 154 ff.; “L’origine du nom de 
‘Chine,’ ”’ pp. 733-34. Walter Liebenthal, “Sanskrit Inscriptions 
from Yunnan,” Monumenta Serica, XII (1947), pp. 1-40. 
73. Inscription from Labu Tuwa near Baros, of 1088. See Krom, 
Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 304, and below, p. 107. 
74. Inscriptions from Khao Phra Narai at Takuapa of the seventh 
to ninth centuries and from Wat Mahathat of Ligor from the 
tenth to eleventh centuries. See Coedés, Recueil des inscrip-
tions du Siam (Bangkok, 1924-29), II, pp. 49, 57. 
75. Dynasties et histoire de I’Inde, p. 293. 
76. Cambridge History of India (Cambridge, 1922), |, p. 212. For 
a description of this port at its height, drawn from the litera-
ture of Sangam, see K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, 2nd ed. 
(Madras, 1955), pp. 96, 99. See also Pierre Meile, “Les Yavanas 
dans I’Inde tamoule,” JA (1940-41), p. 98. 
77. Excavations by Gabriel Jouveau-Dubreil (“Padouké-Pondi-
chéry,” Le Semeur, no. 10 [Pondicherry, 1938]; ‘Les ruines , 
romaines de Pondichéry,” BEFEO, XL, pp. 448-50) and by 
Brother L. Faucheux (Une Vielle cité indienne prés de Pondi-
chéry, Virapatnam [Pondicherry, 1946]) on the site named 
Arikamedu have shown that there was an emporium there 
in commercial contact with the Mediterranean West in the 
first centuries of the Christian Era (P. Z. Pattabiramin, Les 
Fouilles d’Arikamedou [Podouké] [Pondicherry, 1946]). Other 
excavations carried out more recently by R. E. M. Wheeler 
have been the subject of an important report in Ancient India, 
No. 2 (1946). See also Jean Filliozat, ‘Les échanges de I’Inde 
et de I‘Empire romain,” Revue historique (1949), p. 15. 
78. The word kalam in the Tamil texts of Sangam, and the word 
kola in the Sanskrit Buddhist texts, have the meaning of 

--- [Page 295] ---
Notes to Pages 29-31 273 
“boat.” (See Meile, “Les Yavanas dans I’Inde tamoule,” pp. 
90-92.) The Chinese used an expression K’un-lun-tan, which 
could be an equivalent of the Greek kolandia (information 
from R. Stein). For his part, Anthony H. Christie, “The Name 
K’un-lun as an Ethnic Term,” Proceedings, XXIIle Congrés 
International des Orientalistes (Cambridge, 1954), p. 29, ex-
plains the expression kolandiaphonta megista (Periplus, §60) 
as a distortion of kolandiapha onta (ta) megista, and considers 
kolandiapha as a Greek transcription of the Chinese k’un-/un-
po, the character representing the name for “boat” in various 
dialects of Southeast Asia. This thesis is developed in Christie’s 
“An Obscure Passage from the Periplus,’” BSOAS, XIX (1957), 
pp. 345-53. 
79. Sylvain Lévi, “Notes sur la géographie ancienne de I’Inde,” JA 
(January-March, 1925), pp. 46-57. 
80. Samkha Jataka, No. 442; Mahajanaka Jataka, No. 539. 
81. An old Gujarati proverb alludes to the riches of the seamen 
returned from Java (Ras Mala, !I, 82, cited in Henry Yule and 
Arthur Burnell, Hobson-Jobson: A Glossary of Colloquial 
Anglo-Indian Words and Phrases [London, 1903], p. 456). 
82. Below, p. 53. But K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, History of Srivijaya 
(Madras, 1949), p. 16, is inclined to adopt the opinion of 
Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 78, who sees in 
taruma an Indonesian word meaning indigo. 
83. Below, p. 77. 
84. But see L. C. Damais, “Etudes sino-indonésiennes,” BEFEO, 
Lil, No. 1 (1964), p. 97. 
85. Hendrik Kern, ‘“Dravidische volksnamen op Sumatra,” Ver-
spreide Geschriften (The Hague, 1913-29), III, pp. 67-72. 
86. Ramesch C. Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far 
East, Il: Suvarnadvipa, 1 (Dacca, 1937), pp. 226-27. 
87. Coedés, “La légende de la Nagi,’ BEFEO, XI, p. 391. 
88. Kashi P. Jayaswal, ‘History of India c. 150 A.D. to 350 A.D.,” 
Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society, XIX (1933), 
p. 169. Bijan R. Chatterjee, “Recent Advances in Kambuja 
Studies,” JG/S, VI (1939), p. 139. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “A Note 
on the Kaundinyas in India,’’ AA, XXIV (1961), p. 403. 
89. Nilakanta Sastri, ‘“Agastya,”” pp. 503-504. 
90. F. D. K. Bosch, ‘De inscriptie van Keloerak,” TBG, 68 (1929), 
pp. 3-16. 
91. “La paléographie des inscriptions du Champa,’”’ BEFEO, XXxiIl, pp. 127-39. | 
92. Below, p. 40. 
93. “L’origine de |’alphabet du Champa,” BEFEO, XXXV, pp. 233-
41. 
94, Jean Philippe Vogel, “The Yupa Inscriptions of King Milavar-
man from Koetei (East Borneo),” BKI, 74 (1918), pp. 222-32. 
With regard to these inscriptions Nilakanta Sastri, History of 

--- [Page 296] ---
274 Notes on Pages 31-33 
Srivijaya, p. 17, has made it clear that it is better to speak of 
“writing of the eastern coast of Madras” than of ‘‘Pallava writ-
ing,” for the Telugu country has furnished ancient specimens 
of this type of writing which is not specifically “Pallava’’ but 
was used by the Salankayanas. 
95. Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, History of Indian and Indonesian 
Art (London, 1927); The Influences of Indian Art (London, 
1927). René Grousset, “L’art Pala et Sena dans I’Inde extérie-
ure,” Etudes d’orientalisme (Mél. Linossier), |, pp. 277-85. A. 
J. Bernet Kempers, The Bronzes of Nalanda and Hindu-Java-
nese Art (Leyden, 1933). 
96. Devaprasad Ghosh, “Migration of Indian Decorative Motifs,” 
JGIS, \ (1935), pp. 37-46; “Relation Between Buddha of 
Orissa and Java,’ Modern Review (November, 1933). 
97. Henri Parmentier, ‘Origine commune des architectures hin-
doues dans I’Inde et en Extréme-Orient,” Et. Asiat. EFEO, I, 
p. 200. 
98. The comparison is proposed by Reginald S. le May, A Concise 
History of Buddhist Art in Siam (Cambridge, 1938), pp. 63-65. 
99. Alexander Cunningham, Archaeological Survey of India, An-
nual Reports, XI (1875-78), pp. 40-46. On the possible influ-
ence of northern India, see also Gilberte de Coral Rémusat, 
“De l’origine commune des linteaux de I’Inde Pallava et des 
linteaux khmers préangkoriens,” RAA, VIII (1934), p. 249. 
100. B. Ch. Chhabra, “Expansion of Indo-Aryan Culture during 
Pallava Rule, as Evidenced by Inscriptions,” JASB, Letters, | 
(1935). 
101. However, see Stutterheim, Indian Influences in the Lands of 
the Pacific. Moreover, Robert Lingat has brought to my atten-
tion a passage of the Dharmaéastra of Baudhayana which cites 
the practice of traveling by sea (I, I, Il, 4) as among the cus-
toms peculiar to the Brahmans of the north. This practice 
everywhere else is regarded as bringing contamination (al-
though this idea of contamination seems to be exaggerated 
[see above, p. 269, n. 27)). 
102. Dupont, ”Les Buddhas dits d’Amaravati en Asie du Sud-est,” 
p. 631; L’Archéologie méne de Dvaravati (Paris, 1959-63), |, 
pp. 164-67. J. G. de Casparis, ‘New Evidence on Cultural 
Relations between Java and Ceylon in Ancient Times,” AA, 
XXIV (1961), p. 241. 
103. See below, p. 52. 
104. See below, p. 81. On the penetration of Indian civilization 
into Java, see J. G. de Casparis, “Quelques mots sur les 
groupes sociaux dans l’ancienne Java,’’ Amerta, Il (1954), p. 
, 44 (summarized by L. C. Damais, “Bibliographie indoné-
sienne,”” BEFEO, LI! [1963], p. 546). 
105. Indian Influences in Old-Balinese Art, p. 7. F. D. K. Bosch, 
“Uit de grensgebieden tussen Indische invloedsfer en oud-
inheems volks-geloof op Java,” BKI, 110 (1954), pp. 1-19, 

--- [Page 297] ---
Notes to Pages 33-37 275 
repudiates at the same time the Indian exaggeration of 
Ordhendra C. Gangoly (‘Relation between Indian and Indo-
nesian Culture,” JG/S, VII [1940], pp. 51-69, and see my re-
view in BEFEO, XL, p. 452) and the Indonesian exaggeration of 
Stutterheim in order to analyze the various forms of “Javaniza-
tion” of the Indian elements, which for him is fundamental. 
106. Stele of Nagara Jum of 1357. See Coedés, Recueil des in-
scriptions du Siam, |, p. 85; “L’année du liévre 1219 A.D.,” 
India Antiqua (Leyden, 1947), p. 83. 
107. Above, p. 24, and below, p. 119. 
108. This point has been well clarified by Suniti K. Chatterji, 
“Hindu Culture and Greater India,” in The Cultural Heritage 
of India (Calcutta, 1936), III, p. 87-96, and by K. A. Nilakanta 
Sastri, Indian History Congress, 9th Session (Patna, 1946), 
Presidential Address, p. 18. 
Chapter III 
1. See above, p. 16. Since this work is not a treatise on geog-
raphy but an attempt at historical synthesis, | will mention in 
this and the following chapters only those names that are of 
some significance in the history of events or dynasties. A dis-
cussion of the various opinions put forth on the location of 
the geographic names of Ptolemy can be found in Roland 
Braddell, “Study of Ancient Times in the Malay Peninsula,” 
JRASMB, XIII (1935). 
2. This is the T’ang period pronounciation, according to Bern-
hard Karlgren, Analytic Dictionary of Chinese and Sino-Japa-
nese (n.p., n.d.), Nos. 41 and 650. 
3. Louis Finot, ‘Sur quelques traditions indochinoises,” Mélanges 
| d’indianisme offerts par ses éléves a M. Sylvain Lévi (Paris, 
1911), p. 203, and “Seance du 14 Janvier 1927,” JA (January-
March, 1927), p. 186. Coedés, “On the Origin of the Sailendras 
of Indonesia,” JG/S, | (1934), p. 67. This mountain was ap-
parently one of those mountains on which, as has been said 
above (pp. 26-27), the founder of a kingdom of the Indian 
type instituted the worship of a national god, generally that 
of a linga or of another manifestation of Siva. 
4. Coedés, “Les traditions généalogiques des premiers rois d’Ang-
kor,” BEFEO, XXVIII (1956), p. 127. 
5. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge (Paris, 1937-), Il, p. 110, 
n. 5. Perhaps Vyadhapura means “the city of the hunter 
(king).”” O. W. Wolters, in fact, has kindly informed me (letter 
of November 6, 1960) that the T’ai-p’ing Yu-lan, citing the 
account of K’ang T’ai (below), mentions a king of Funan 
named P’an-huang-chao (identical ? to Hun P’an-huang, be-
low, p. 38) who captured large elephants in the jungle and 
domesticated them, bringing about the submission of many 
countries in this way. 
6. Paul Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” BEFEO, Ill, p. 263. -

--- [Page 298] ---
276 Notes to Pages 37-38 
7. Above, p. 17. Pierre Gourou, ‘Civilisations et géographie 
humaine en Asie des moussons,” BEFEO, XLIV (1954), p. 469, 
after showing that “the birthplaces of superior civilizations 
seem to correspond to crossroads of traffic,” adds: “The 
nucleus of the civilization of Funan, out of which the whole 
of Khmer history was to develop, originated on the western 
coast of Indochina, at the landing point of Indian cultural 
influences,” 
8. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 303; “Quelques textes chinois con-
cernant I’Indochine hindouisée,” Et. Asiat. EFEO, Il, p. 243. 
9. Pelliot, ‘“Quelques textes,” pp. 246-49. On the preponderant 
role of the Kaundinya clan in southern India, see Bijan R. 
Chatterjee, ‘Recent Advances in Kambuja Studies,” JG/S, VI 
(1939), p. 139, and above, p. 30. 
10. Louis Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn (No. Ill),’ BEFEO, IV, 
p. 923. See Coedeés, “‘L’inscription de Baksei Chamkrong,”” JA 
(May-June, 1909), pp. 476-78, and Inscriptions du Cambodge, 
IV, p. 88. 
11. Eveline Porée-Maspero, “Nouvelle étude sur la Nagi Soma,” 
JA, CCXXXVIII (1950), pp. 237-67. 
12. Paul Pelliot, trans. and ed., “Mémoires sur les coutumes du 
Cambodge,” BEFEO, Il, p. 145. 
13. Finot, “Sur quelques traditions indochinoises,” p. 205. 
14. Coedés, “La légende de Ia Nagi,” BEFEO, XI, p. 391. 
15. Victor Goloubew (‘Les légendes de la Nagi et de |’Apsaras,” 
BEFEO, XXIV, pp. 501-10) has it come from the west, while 
Jean Przyluski (“La princesse a l’odeur de poisson et la Nagi 
dans les traditions de |’Asie orientale,” Et. Asiat. EFEO, Hl, pp. 
265-84) thinks it was born in the maritime regions of South-
east Asia. On a Malaysian version of this legend, see R. O. 
Winstedt, “Indra and Saktimuna,’” JRASMB, XXII (1950), p. 
151. 
16. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 265. According to R. Stein, ‘Le 
Lin-yi,” Han-hiue, Il (1947), pp. 251 ff., the “Fan” that the 
Chinese prefix to the names of most of the kings of Funan 
as well as those of Champa was not an equivalent of the 
ending varman taken as a family name, as was believed by 
Georges Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928), p. 
53, n. 7, and Gabriel Ferrand, ‘Ye-tiao, Sseu-tiao et Java,” 
JA (November-December, 1916), pp. 524-30. Stein believes 
that it is a clan name, of ethnic origin, designating the indig-
enous element of the royal family. The Fan,.as in Champa, 
are opposed to the Indian elements and seem to be main-
tained in power by the people. But Paul Demiéville (review of 
Stein’s “Lin-yi,” TP, XL [1951], p. 344) expresses doubts over 
the firmness of the foundation of this hypothesis. 
17. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 257. 
18. Ibid., pp. 265-66. The /i equals about 576 meters. On the 

--- [Page 299] ---
Notes to Pages 38-39 277 
reading “Ch’ii-tu, Tu-k’un’”’ instead of ‘Ch’U-tu-k’un” (Pelliot), 
see Stein, “Le Lin-yi.” 
19. “Le Lin-yi,” p. 119. But Demiéville, review of Stein’s “Lin-yi,” 
p. 341, contests this identification. 
20. As early as 1938, Kattigara was located in the region of Saigon 
by Albert Herrmann, “Der Magnus Sinus und Cattigara nach 
Ptolemaus,” Compte-rendu du Congrés international de géog-
raphie (Amsterdam), pp. 123-28. The most recent research is 
that of Louis Malleret, who, following his discoveries at Oc Eo 
(above, p. 17), was led to seek Kattigara in this region. His 
views are set forth in detail in L’Archéologie du delta du Mé-
kong (Paris, 1959-63), III, pp. 421-54. 
21. On this rather involved question, and on the location of 
Chiu-chih or Chi-li, see Paul Wheatley, The Golden Kher-
sonese, pp. 21-25. 
22. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 279. 
23. Ibid., p. 263, n. 1. Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese, pp. 
15-21. 
24, Pelliot, ‘Le Fou-nan,” p. 266, n. 2 and 3. Gordon H. Luce, 
“Countries Neighbouring Burma,” JBRS, XIV (1924), pp. 147, 
151. 
25. Paul Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires de Chine en Inde, a la fin du 
Ville siecle,” BEFEO, IV, p. 320, n. 7. Gabriel Ferrand, “Malaka, 
le Malayu et Malayur,” App. III, JA Quly-August, 1918), p. 
139. Luce, ‘Countries Neighbouring Burma,” pp. 161-69. 
26. Ferrand, “Malaka,” p. 143. See Sylvain Lévi, ‘“Pré-aryen et 
pré-dravidien dans I’Inde,” JA (July-September, 1923), p. 37. 
27. R. O. Winstedt, “A History of Malaya,” JRASMB, XIII (1935), 
p. 21. 
28. Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese, pp. 252-67, discusses the 
location of Langkasuka in detail. 
29. Coedés, “Le royaume de Crivijaya,”” BEFEO, XVIII, 6, p. 17. 
Lévi, ‘‘Pré-aryen,” p. 45. 
30. Coedés, Recueil des inscriptions du Siam (Bangkok, 1924-29), 
Il, p. 51, no. XXVII. The date seventh to ninth centuries in-
dicated by Barth is too early. The script is similar to that of the 
last inscriptions of Funan. See K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “Agastya,” 
TBG, LXXXVI (1936), pp. 508-09. On Tambralinga, see O. W. 
Wolters, “Tambralinga,’”’ BSOAS (1958), pp. 587-607. 
31. Sylvain Lévi, “Ptolémée, le Niddesa et la Brihatkatha,” Et. 
Asiat. EFEO, ll, p. 26. 
32. Ibid., pp. 3 ff. 
33. Roland Braddell, “Ancient Times in the Malay Peninsula,” 
JRASMB, XVII (1939), |, pp. 204-206, and XXII (1949), p. 1. 
Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese, pp. 268-72, has furnished 
good arguments for locating Takkola in the region of Trang. 
34, Transactions and Papers of the Institute of British Geographers, 
21 (1955), p. 69. On this point see Wang Gungwu, “The 

--- [Page 300] ---
278 Notes to Pages 39-41 
Nanhai Trade: A Study of the Early History of Chinese Trade 
in the South China Sea,” JRASMB, XXXI, 2 (1958), p. 41, n. 53. 
35. On these sites, see Braddell, “Ancient Times,” passim. H. G. 
Quaritch Wales, “Archaeological Researches on Ancient In-
dian Colonization in Malaya,” JRASMB, XVIII (1940), |, pp. 56-
73; “Further Work on Indian Sites in Malaya,” JRASMB, XX 
(1947), pp. 1-11. R. O. Winstedt, ‘Slab-Graves and Iron 
Implements,” JRASMB, XIX (1941), |, pp. 93-98. 
36. For example, the bronzes of Gupta style described in the state 
of Perak and on the Bujang River in Kedah (H. G. Quaritch 
Wales, “Recent Malayan Excavations and Some Wider Impli-
cations,” JRAS [1946], p. 142). These archaeological discover-
ies are analyzed by Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese, pp. 
273 ff. 
37. On other Indian textual sources, see Vasudeva S. Agrawala, 
“Some References to Katahadvipa in Ancient Indian Litera-
ture,” JGIS, XI (1944), p. 96, and K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, History 
of Srivijaya (Madras, 1949), pp. 25-26. 
38. On the date of this inscription, see D. C. Sircar, ‘Date of the 
Earliest Sanskrit Inscription of Campa,’ JGIS, VI (1939), pp. 
53-55. Coedés, ‘La date de l’inscription sanskrite de Vo-canh,” 
IHQ, XVI, 3 (1940), pp. 72, 484. Sircar, ‘Date of the Earliest 
Sanskrit Inscription of Campa,’”’ [HQ, XVII (1941), pp. 107-10. 
Emile Gaspardone, “La plus ancienne inscription d’Indochine,” 
JA, CCXLI (1953), pp. 477-85. K. Kumar Sarkar, “The Earliest 
Inscription of Indochina,” Sino-Indian Studies, V, 2 (1956), 
pp. 77-87. Kamalesvar Bhattacharya, “Précisions sur la 
paléographie de I’inscription dite de Vo-canh,” AA, XXIV 
(1961), pp. 219-24. E. Gaspardone, “L’inscription de Vo-canh 
et les débuts du sanskrit en Indochine,” Sinologica, VIII, No. 3 
(1965), pp. 129-36. 
39. Auguste Barth and Abel Bergaigne, ISC, No. XX, p. 191. Louis 
Finot, “Les inscriptions du musée de Hanoi,” BEFEO, XV, 2, 
p. 3. 
40. ‘‘Séance du 14 Janvier 1927,” JA lanuary-March, 1927), p. 186. 
See Louis Finot, review of Maspero’s Le Royaume de Champa, 
BEFEO, XXVIII, pp. 286-87. 
41. Jean Filliozat has kindly informed me that Maran “is a fre-
quent designation of the king Pandya, substantiated from 
one of the most ancient Tamil texts of Sangam, dating around 
the beginning of the Christian Era.” 
42. Lévi, ‘“Ptolémée,” pp. 29 ff. Luce, “Countries Neighbouring 
Burma,” pp. 151-58. 
43. Pelliot, ‘Le Fou-nan,” p. 303. 
44, Les Peuples de la péninsule indochinoise (Paris, 1962), p. 62. 
45. Wang Gungwu, “The Nan-hai Trade,” pp. 31-45. 46. “Le Fou-nan,” p. 292. , 

--- [Page 301] ---
Notes to Pages 41-46 279 
| 47. But, see above, p. 39. 
48. Pelliot, ““Le Fou-nan,” p. 303. 
49. Above, p. 40. See Robert von Heine-Geldern, “The Drum 
Named Makalamau,” India Antiqua (Leyden, 1947), p. 176. 
50. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 252. 
51. Ibid., p. 254. 
- 52. Ibid., p. 255. 
53. For this whole section, in addition to other indicated sources, 
see Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, pp. 43-59 (reviews by 
L. Aurousseau, BEFEO, XIV, 9, pp. 8-43, and Louis Finot, 
BEFEO, XXVIII, pp. 285-92). Stein, “Le Ltn-yi,” pp. 1-123. 
54. Aurousseau, review of Maspero’s Le Royaume de Champa, 
p. 27. 
55. Stein, “Le Lin-yi,”” pp. 209-41. But Demiéville, review of Stein’s 
“Lin-yi,” p. 346, seems to prefer the first interpretation. 
56. Up to now we have always understood that they came from 
the south, that is, from present-day Quang-nam. But Stein 
(Le Lin-yi’’) has shown that they may also have come from 
the west, and even from the regions of Siang-lin, away from 
Chinese domination. The crystallization of the barbarians in a 
principality Lin-yi took place inside the limits of Jih-nan. 
57. On the ethnic Ch’u, see Stein, “Le Lin-yi,”” Appendix VI, pp. 
209 ff. 
58. Henri Parmentier, Inventaire descriptif des monuments cams 
de [’Annam (Paris, 1909-18), I, pp. 241-505. Jean Y. Claeys, 
“Introduction a |’étude de l’Annam et du Champa,” Bulletin 
des Amis du Vieux Hué, 21 (1934), pp. 46-48. 
59. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 251. 
60. Stein, “Le Lin-yi,”” pp. 1-54. 
61. Perhaps through wives of Funanese birth, which, according to 
Stein, “Le Lin-yi,”” would explain his clan name Fan, on which 
see above, p. 276, n. 16. Eveline Porée-Maspero remarks that 
the Fan kings made their appearance in Champa at the mo-
ment when they disappeared in Funan after Fan Hsiin. On the 
“historical parallels between Cambodia and Champa” that she 
establishes from this period, see Etude sur les rites agraires 
des Cambodgiens (Paris, 1962), pp. 144 ff. 
62. Stein, “Le Lin-yi,” p. 243. 
Chapter IV 
1. Paul Pelliot, ““Le Fou-nan,” BEFEO, Ill, pp. 252, 255, 269. 
2. R. Stein, “Le Lin-yi,’” Han-hiue, Il (1947), pp. 257-58, n. 277, 
is of the opinion that T’ien-chou means only that his family 
once came from India. 
3. “Kanishka et S’atavahana,” JA (January-March, 1936), pp. 61-
121. 
4, Ibid., p. 82. 

--- [Page 302] ---
280 Notes to Pages 46-48 
5. Kashi P. Jayaswal, “History of India c. 150 A.D. to 350 A.D.,” 
Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society, X!IX (1933), 
pp. 287-89, 301-303. 
6. Below, p. 58. 
7. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge (Paris, 1937-), IV, p. 27. 
8. Victor Goloubew, ‘Les Images de Sitirya au Cambodge,”’ 
Cahiers EFEO, no. 22 (1940), pp. 38-42. Kamaleswar Bhatta-
charya, Les Religions brahmaniques dans I’ancien Cambodge 
(Paris, 1961), pp. 128-31. See Louis de La Vallée-Poussin, 
Dynasties et histoire de I’Inde (Paris, 1935), p. 350. 
9. Coedés, “La date du Bayon,” BEFEO, XXVIII, p. 105; “Les 
capitales de Jayavarman II,” BEFEO, XXVIII, p. 116, n. 1; 
“Quelques suggestions sur la méthode a suivre pour inter-
préter les bas-reliefs de Bantay Chmar et de la galerie ex-
térieure du Bayon,” BEFEO, XXXII, p. 73; Inscriptions du 
Cambodge, |, p. 195. In the Mahabharata, VI, 436, a Brahman 
from Sakadvipa bears the name of Maga, i.e. Magus, sun 
worshiper. See La Vallée-Poussin, Dynasties et histoire de 
I’Inde, p. 350, and Bhattacharya, Les Religions brahmaniques, 
pp. 128-31. 
10. Pierre Dupont, “Vishnu mitrés de I’Indochine occidentale,” 
BEFEO, XLI, p. 249. 
11. References in R. Gopalan, History of the Pallavas of Kanchi 
(Madras, 1928), Chap. Il. Cadambi Minakshi, Administration 
and Social Life under the Pallavas (Madras, 1938)—reviewed 
in BEFEO, XXXVIII, pp. 331-32. 
12. Sylvain Lévi, “Pré-aryen et pré-dravidien dans |’Inde,” JA 
(January-March, 1926), p. 53. On the Kambojas, see B. C. Law, 
“Some Ancient Indian Tribes,’ Indian Culture, |, p. 386; 
Sten Konow, “Notes on the Sakas,” Indian Culture, Il, p. 189; 
B. R. Chatterjee, “A Current Tradition among the Kambojas 
of North-India Relating to the Khmers of Cambodia,” AA, 
XXIV (1961), p. 253. 
13. Above, pp. 17, 37. 
14. Louis Malleret, L’Archéologie du delta du Mékong (Paris, 
1959-63), III, pp. 294 and 304. 
15. Georges Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928), pp. 
58-61. 
16. Louis Finot, “Deux nouvelles inscriptions de Bhadravarman 
|,” BEFEO, ll, p. 187. R. C. Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies 
in the Far East, |: Champa (Lahore, 1927), Inscription No. 4. 
B. C. Chhabra, “Expansion of Indo-Aryan Culture during 
Pallava Rule,” JASB, Letters, | (1935), p. 50. 
17. Auguste Barth and Abel Bergaigne, ISC, XXI, p. 199. Finot, 
“Deux nouvelles inscriptions,” p. 186. Majumdar, Ancient 
Indian Colonies, |, Inscription No. 2. Chhabra, “Expansion of 
Indo-Aryan Culture,” p. 47. 
18. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 63. 

--- [Page 303] ---
Notes to Pages 48-50 281 
19. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, pp. 203-205. 
20. ‘‘Deux nouvelles inscriptions,” p. 186. 
21. Jean Philippe Vogel, “The Yupa Inscriptions of King Milavar-
man from Kotei (East Borneo),’”’ BKI, 74 (1918), p. 232. 
22. The old pronunciation of the character fo, which commonly 
was used to transcribe the word buddha, is b’iuat, which is 
an acceptable way of rendering bhadra. On the other hand 
hu ta is pronounced huo d’at, which would be a much less 
satisfactory transcription. The equation of Fan Fo with Bha-
dravarman resolves the difficulty. 
23. “Le Lin-yi,” pp. 71, 111. 
24. Those of Hon Cuc (Finot, ‘Deux nouvelles inscriptions,” p. 
| 186; Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies, |, Inscription No. 6, 
p. 9) and Chiém-sdn (Louis Finot, “Deux nouvelles inscrip-
tions indochinoises,”” BEFEO, XVIII, 10, p. 13; Majumdar, 
Ancient Indian Colonies, |, Inscription No. 5, p. 8). 
25. Inscription of Déng-yén-chau (Coedés, “La plus ancienne 
inscription en langue chame,” Mélanges F. W. Thomas, New 
Indian Antiquary, extra ser. | [1939], pp. 46-49). 
26. This paragraph and the two preceding ones are taken from 
Coedés, Les Peuples de la péninsule indochinoise (Paris, 
1962), p. 70. 
27. Finot, ‘‘Deux nouvelles inscriptions,” p. 190. 
28. See above, p. 23. 
29. Ethnographie des peuples étrangers a la Chine, ouvrage 
composé au XI/l/le siécle de notre ére, trans. Marquis d’Hervey 
de Saint-Denys, I]: Méridionaux (Geneva, 1883), pp. 422-25. 
30. In Cham kalan. 
31. On this word, see Paul Pelliot, trans. and ed., Mémoires sur 
les coutumes du Cambodge de Tcheou Ta-kouan, Posthumous 
Works of Paul Pelliot, v. Ill (Paris, 1951), pp. 160-62. 
32. The month of harvest. 
33. On the other hand, the History of the Liang, cited by Maspero, 
Le Royaume de Champa, p. 31, explains this custom in a way 
that seems more accurate. It says: “The man is of little im-
portance; only the woman is important.” 
34. Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies, Il: Suvarnadvipa (Dacca, 
1937), pp. 88-89. See a reproduction in R. O. Winstedt, 
“History of Malaya,’”” JRASMB, XIII (1935), pl. IV, p. 18. 
35. Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies, Il, p. 90. Chhabra, ‘Ex-
pansion of Indo-Aryan Culture,” p. 15. 
36. H. G. Quaritch Wales, “Archaeological Researches on Ancient 
Indian Colonization,” JRASMB, XVIII (1940), pp. 8-10. These 
stanzas seem to be drawn from a sutra of the Madhyamika 
school, a school of Mahayana Buddhism founded by Nagar-
juna (René Grousset, Philosophies indiennes [Paris, 1931], I, 
pp. 200-344). On the archaeology of Kedah in general, see 
Roland Braddell, “Most Ancient Kedah,” Malaya in History, 

--- [Page 304] ---
282 Notes to Pages 50-52 
vol. 4, no. 2 (1958), pp. 18-40, and especially Alastair Lamb, 
“Miscellaneous Papers on Early Hindu and Buddhist Settle-
ments in Northern Malaya and Southern Thailand,” JFMSM, 
VI, n.s. (1961), pp. 1-47. 
37. R. O. Winstedt, “Indian Influence in the Malay World,” JRAS 
(1944), p. 187. On the Buddhist images in Gupta style found 
in Malaysia, see above, p. 278, n. 36, and R. O. Winstedt, 
“Buddhist Images from Malaya and Sumatra,” IAL, XVI (1942), 
p. 41. 
38. Chhabra, “Expansion of Indo-Aryan Culture,” pp. 16-20 (in-
scription preserved in the Indian Museum of Calcutta). 
39. Gabriel Ferrand, “Le K’ouen-louen et les anciennes naviga-
tions inter-océaniques dans les mers du Sud,” JA (March-
April, 1919), p. 256. Gordon H. Luce, “Countries Neighbouring 
Burma,” JBRS, XIV (1924), pp. 173-78. 
| 40. J. L. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha,” TBG, LXXVII (1937), 
pp. 343-44. This article (pp. 317-487 of the TBG volume) 
was translated into English in JRASMB, XVII (January, 1940). 
41. Paul Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese (Kuala Lumpur, 1961), 
p. 36. On Chih-t'u, see below, p. 78. 
42. Paul Pelliot, ‘Deux intinéraires de Chine en Inde, a la fin 
du Ville siécle,” BEFEO, IV, p. 276, n. 4, and p. 281. 
43. Summary of the discussion in Roland Braddell, “An Intro-
duction to the Study of Ancient Times in the Malay Peninsula 
and the Straits of Malacca,” JRASMB, XVII, pt. 1 (1939), pp. 
168-69. 
44. Above, p. 17. 
45. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 279. 
46. Gabriel Ferrand, ‘Malaka, le Malayu et Malayur,” JA July-
August, 1918), p. 140. 
47, W. P. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago and 
Malacca (Batavia, 1876), p. 10. | reproduce here the text in-
corporated by Ma Tuan-lin in his Ethnographie, pp. 455-56. 
48. On this word, see Pelliot, Mémoires ...de Tcheou Ta-kouan, 
p. 162. 
49. Pelliot, “Deux intinéraires,” p. 229. Wheatley, The Golden 
Khersonese, pp. 47-51. Luce, “Countries Neighbouring 
Burma,” pp. 169-72, believes the country was conquered by 
the king of Funan, Fan Shih-man, and named after his prede-
cessor, P’an-p’an. Stein, “Le Lin-yi,’’ p. 258, seems to share 
this point of view (see below, p. 284, n. 81). 
50. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 269, n. 2. 
51. See below, p. 56. 
52. Ethnographie, pp. 463-64. 
53. The Golden Khersonese, pp. 51-55. See also Hsii Yun-ts’iao, 
“Notes on Tan-tan,” JRASMB, XX (1947), pp. 47-63. 
54, Vogel, “The Yipa Inscriptions,” pp. 167-232. B. R. Chatterjee, 
India and Java (Calcutta, 1933), II, Inscription, pp. 8-19. B. C. 
Chhabra, “Three More Yipa Inscriptions of King Malavarman 

--- [Page 305] ---
Notes to Pages 52-54 283 
from Kotei (E. Borneo),” JGIS, XII (1945), pp. 14-17 (reprinted 
in TBG, LXXXIII [1949], pp. 370-74, with an additional note 
by J. G. de Casparis); ‘“Yipa Inscriptions,” India Antiqua 
(Leyden, 1947), pp. 77-82. 
55. Chhabra, ‘Three More Yapa Inscriptions,” p. 39, and Braddell, 
“An Introduction to the Study of Ancient Times,” JRASMB, XV, 3 (1937), pp. 118-19. , 
56. R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, Agastya in den Archipel (Leyden, 1926). 
K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, ‘“Agastya,” TBG, LXXVI (1936), pp. 515 ff. 
Nicholaas J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The 
Hague, 1931), ps 72. W. F. Stutterheim, ‘“Waprakecwara,’”’ BKI, 
92 (1934), p. 203. 
57. F. D. K. Bosch, “Ouheden en Koetei,”” Oudheidkundig Verslag 
(1925), p. 142. 
58. Ibid., p. 132. On the Indianization of Borneo, see Ordhendra 
Coomar Gangoly, “On Some Hindu Relics in Borneo,” JGIS, 
Ill (1936), p. 97. E. Banks, “Ancient Times in Borneo,” JRASMB, 
XX (December, 1947), pp. 26-34, and especially the special 
number of the same periodical, XXII (September 4, 1949), 
which gives information on the important discovery of Indian 
statuettes of Gupta and Pala style at Sambas, in the west of 
the island, previously announced by Y. S. Tan in JS5SS, V 
(1948), pp. 31-42. See also A. B. Griswold, “The Santubon 
Buddha and Its Context,” Sarawak Museum Journal, X (1962), 
p. 363. 
59. “Notes,’”” Ripam, 7 (1926), p. 114. 
60. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 296, n. 2. 
61. Ibid., p. 283. 
62. Sylvain Lévi, “Pour I’histoire du Ramayana,” JA (January-
February, 1918), p. 80. 
63. The History of the Han, under the date 132, mentions a 
country, Yeh-t’iao, which has been identified with Java (Pel-
liot, ‘Deux itinéraires,” p. 266, and Gabriel Ferrand, ‘Ye-tiao, 
Sseu-tiao et Java,”” JA [November-December, 1916], p. 520). 
Stein, “Le Lin-yi,” p. 138, disputes this comparison, but Paul 
Demiéville, review of Stein’s “Lin-yi,” TP, XL (1951), p. 346, 
defends the identification of Yeh-t’iao with Yavadvipa (Greek 
labadiou). 
64. Above, p. 18. 
65. Jean Philippe Vogel, “The Earliest Sanskrit Inscriptions of 
Java,” in Publicaties van den Oudheidkundigen dienst in 
Nederlandsch-Indié, | (Batavia, 1925), pp. 15-35. Chatterjee, 
India and Java, II, Inscription, pp. 20-27. Joseph Minattur, “A 
Note on the King Kundungga of the East Borneo Inscriptions,” 
JSEAH, V, No. 2 (September, 1964), p. 181. 
66. F. M. Schnitger, “Tarumanagara,” TBG, LXXIV (1934), p. 187. 
See W. F. Stutterheim, “Note on Cultural Relations between 
South-India and Java,”” TBG, LXXIX (1939), p. 83. 

--- [Page 306] ---
284 Notes to Pages 54-56 
67. W. F. Stutterheim, ‘De voetafdrukken van Pirnawarman,” 
BKI, 89 (1932), p. 288. 
68. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 284. L. C. Damais (review of 
Poerbatjaraka’s Riwajat Indonesia in BEFEO, XLVII [1957], 
p. 611) regards this equivalence as imperfect, since the Chi-
nese characters call forth a restitution such as Tarama or 
| Talama, but perhaps this is being too scrupulous. 
69. Above, pp. 7, 18. 
70. Oudheidkundig Verslag, 1928. F. M. Schnitger, The Archae-
ology of Hindoo Sumatra (Leyden, 1937), pp. 2-3. Nicholaas 
J. Krom, “Antiquities of Palembang,” ABIA (1931), pp. 29-33. 
Devaprasad Ghosh, JGI/S, III (1936), p. 36 (which gives refer-
ences to the literature produced by the discovery of this 
statue). 
71. Sylvain Lévi, ““Ptolémée, le Niddesa et la Brihatkatha,” in Et. 
Asiat. EFEO, Il, p. 27. Baros, on the western coast of Sumatra, 
is mentioned in Ptolemy under the form Barousai. 
72. Hsiian-tsang, Si-yu-ki: Buddhist Records of the Western World, 
trans. by Samuel Beal (London, 1884), I, p. Ixxxi. 
73. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” pp. 274-75. On Gunavarman, see 
W. Pachow, “The Voyage of Buddhist Missions to South-East 
Asia and the Far East,” JGIS, XVII (1958), p. 9; on the identifi-. cation of She-p’o with Java, see Damais, review of Poerbat-
jaraka, p. 641. L. C. Damais, BEFEO, LII (1964), p. 126. 
74. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” pp. 271-72. L. C. Damais, BEFEO, 
LII (1964), p. 96, n. 1. 
75. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha.” See the critique of K. A. 
Nilakanta Sastri, ‘Notes on the Historical Geography of the 
Malay Peninsula and Archipelago,” JGIS, VII (1940), pp. 15-42. 
76. A. Grimes, “The Journey of Fa-hsien from Ceylon to Canton,’ 
JRASMB, XIX (1941), p. 76. Roland Braddell, “An Introduction 
to the Study of Ancient Times,” JRASMB, XIX (1941), pp. 46 ff.; 
A Note on Sambas and Borneo,” JRASMB, XXII, 4 (1949), p. 3. 
Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese, p. 39. 
77. W. T. Kao, “A Primary Chinese Record Relating to Ho-lo-tan, 
and Miscellaneous Notes on Srivijaya and Fo-che,” JRASMB, 
XXIX (1956), p. 163. 
78. Gabriel Ferrand, “Le Kan-t’o-li’” (App. III of “Le K’ouen-
louen,” JA [September-October, 1919], pp. 238-41). Jean 
Przyluski, “Indian Colonization in Sumatra before the Seventh 
Century,” JGIS, | (1934), pp. 92-101. 
79. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha.” 
80. La Vallée-Poussin, Dynasties et histoire de I’Inde, p. 40. 
81. Perhaps this name is a corruption of that of the first Kaun-
dinya. It would then refer to a legitimate representative of the 
Indian element of the royal family, opposed to the indige-
nous Fan clan (above, p. 279, n. 61). Stein, “Le Lin-yi,” p. 258, 
| thinks that this was simply a king descending from Kaundinya 

--- [Page 307] ---
Notes to Pages 56-60 285 
through king P’an-p’an, and that there is no question here of 
the country of P’an-p’an, about which see above, p. 52. 
82. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 269. 
83. Ibid., p. 255. 
84. Louis Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” BEFEO, IV, p. 922. 
85. See below, p. 70. 
86. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 65. See Louis Finot’s 
review of Maspero’s Le Royaume de Champa in BEFEO, 
XXVIII, p. 288. 
87. On the location of Chii-su and of the capital, see Stein, “Le 
Lin-yi,” pp. 1 ff. 
88. See below, p. 65. 
~ 89. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,’” p. 257. 
90. Ibid., p. 294. 
91. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 75, n. 2, gives sufficient 
reasons for regarding these two persons as one. But see Stein, 
“Le Lin-yi,” p. 257. We may wonder if this name is not the 
title kuju/a, in use among the Kushans. See above, p. 47. 
92. The monks in question were Sanghapala and Mandrasena, 
whose translations appear in the Chinese Tripitaka (Bunyin 
Najio, A Catalogue of the Chinese Translations of the Buddhist 
Tripitaka, the Sacred Canon of the Buddhists in China and 
Japan [Oxford, 1883], Appendix II, Nos. 101 and 102). See 
Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” pp. 284-85. On these two monks, see 
W. Pachow, “The Voyage of Buddhist Missions to South-East 
Asia and the Far East,” JG/S, XVII (1958), p. 13. 
93. The chang equals ten feet. This passage of the History of the 
Southern Ch’i on the boats is based on a more detailed sec-
tion from the account of K’ang T’ai in the T’ai-p’ing YUu-lan 
encyclopedia—a section reproduced in Paul Pelliot, ‘Textes 
chinois concernant I’Indochine hindouisée,” Ft. Asiat. EFEO, 
I, pp. 252-53. 
94. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” pp. 261-62. 
95. Ibid., pp. 269-70. 
96. This is the system of trapeang still in use in Cambodia. 
97. It is the pose of “royal ease” often represented in iconography. 
98. See Coedeés, “La destination funéraire des grands monuments 
Khmeérs,”” BEFEO, XL, p. 320. These four customs are Indian 
and date back to the Vedic period (Atharvaveda, XVIII, 2, 34). 
99. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 269. 
100. Above, p. 58. 
101. Coedés, “A New Inscription from Fu-nan,” JGIS, IV (1937), 
pp. 117-21. 
102. Coedés, “Deux inscriptions sanskrits du Fou-nan,” BEFEO, 
XXXI, pp. 1-12. 
103. On this site, see Etienne F. Aymonier, Le Cambodge (Paris, 
1900-1904), |, pp. 138-39. 
104. It seems increasingly probable to me that the reigning king 

--- [Page 308] ---
286 Notes to Pages 60-62 
of the inscription of Thap-mudi (stanza Il), whose incomplete 
name begins with the letter ja followed by a letter that is 
partly obliterated but resembles a ya, is no other than 
Jayavarman. 
105. This hypothesis, which | have already formulated (A New 
Inscription from Fu-nan,” p. 119), can be reconciled with the 
apparently contradictory fact that the inscription of Gunavar-
man is paleographically earlier than that of Queen Kulapra-
bhavati. The inscription of Thap-mudi had in fact been com-
posed when Gunavarman was still very young (stanza VII), 
while the other inscription was composed when the queen 
planned to retire from the world; her withdrawal was perhaps 
the result of the murder of her son and the usurpation ‘of the 
throne by his rival. 
106. Pelliot, ““Le Fou-nan,” p. 270. 
107. Coedés, “Deux inscriptions sanskrits du Fou-nan,” pp. 8~12. 
108. Pachow, ‘Voyage of Buddhist Missions,” p. 14. 
109. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, no. XI, p. 66. 
110. Coedés, ‘‘L’inscription de Baksei Chamkrong,” JA (May-June, 
1909), pp. 479 ff. See also Coedés, “La tradition généalogique 
des premiers rois d’Angkor,” BEFEO, XXVIII, pp. 131 and 139, 
and Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, Il, pp. 10 and 155. 
111. Coedés, “La tradition généalogique,” pp. 127-31. 
112. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 260. Kalyan Sarkar, “Mahayana 
Buddhism in Fu-nan,” Sino-Indian Studies, V (1955), expresses 
the opinion that MaheSvara designates the Bodhisattva and 
that everything in the petition of the monk Nagasena relates 
to Mahayana Buddhism, but this is not very likely at such an 
early date. 
113. Coedés, “La tradition généalogique,” pp. 128-30. 
114. Henri Parmentier, “L’art présumé du Fou-nan,” BEFEO, XXXII, 
pp. 183-89. 
115. Georges Groslier, ‘Note sur la sculpture khmér ancienne,” 
Et. Asiat. EFEO, |, pp. 297-314. 
116. Dupont, “Vishnu mitrés,” pp. 233-54; “Les premieres images 
brahmaniques d’Indochine,” BSEI, n.s., XXVI (1951), pp. 131-
40. 
117. Louis Malleret, Catalogue... Musée Blanchard de la Brosse, 
| (Hanoi, 1937), Nos. 68-70, pl. XIII-XV. See Goloubew, “Les 
images de Surya au Cambodge,” pp. 38-42. 
118. It is necessary to make an exception for the enigmatic king-
doms of Huang-chih and Fu-kan-tu-lu (Paul Pelliot’s review 
of F. Hirth and W. W. Rockhill’s Chau Ju-kua in TP, XIII 
[1912], pp. 457-61). It has been thought possible to identify 
Fu-kan (tu-lu) with Pagan in Burma (see the discussion in 
G. H. Luce, “Fu-kan-tu-lu,” JBRS, XIV [1924], pp. 91-99). 
119. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” pp. 172-73. 
120. G. H. Luce, ““Names of the Pyu,” JBRS, XXII (1932), p. 90, and 

--- [Page 309] ---
Notes to Pages 63-65 287 
XXVIII (1937), p. 241; “Burma down to the Fall of Pagan,” 
JBRS, XXIX (1939), p. 269. 
121. Gold plaques of Maungun containing the formulas ye dhamma 
and iti pi so and the enumeration of nineteen categories, 
described in Tun Nyein, Fpigraphia Indica, V, p. 101, and 
Louis Finot, “Un nouveau document sur le bouddhisme bir-
man,” JA (July-August, 1912), p. 131; three fragments of an 
inscription on stone (or baked earth) from Bébdgyi near 
Méza, containing a fragment of the Vibhanga, described in 
the same Finot article, p. 135, and the sequel in JA (July-
August, 1913), p. 193; a reliquary from Mé6za bearing the in-
scribed names of four Buddhas and four disciples, described 
in ARASI (1926-27), p. 175; one gold leaf found at Kyundézu 
giving the formula iti pi so, described in ARAS/ (1928-29), 
pp. 108-109; twenty gold leaves found at Méza containing 
extracts from various passages of the Pali canon, described in 
ARASB (1938-39), pp. 12-22. See Nihar-Ranjan Ray, Sanskrit 
Buddhism in Burma (Calcutta, 1936), pp. 3-4. 
122. A. P. Phayre, History of Burma (London, 1883). 
123. Finot, “Un nouveau document,” pp. 121-30. Charles Duroi-
selle, “The Ari of Burma and Tantric Buddhism,” ARASB 
(1915-16), p. 80. 
124. C. O. Blagden, “Thaton,” JBRS, V (1915), pp. 26-27. 
125. On the meaning of this legend, see Louis Finot, ‘‘La légende 
de Buddhaghosa,” Cinquantenaire Ecole Hautes Etudes (1921), pp. 101-19. , 
126. H. G. Quaritch Wales, “The Exploration of Sri Deva, an 
Ancient Indian City in Indochina,” IAL, X (1935), pp. 61-99; 
“Early Indian Art from the Siamese Jungle,” I//ustrated London 
News (Jan. 30, 1937), pp. 174-76; Towards Angkor (London, 
1937), Chap. VII. See above, p. 17. 
127. References in Reginald Je May, A Concise History of Buddhist 
Art in Siam (Cambridge, 1938). On the recent excavations of 
the Pierre Dupont mission, see Dupont’s accounts in BEFEO, 
XXXVII, pp. 688-89; XXXIX, pp. 351-65; XL, pp. 503-504; and 
especially his L’Archéologie méne de Dvaravati (Paris, 1959), 
2 vols. 
128. Coedés, “The Excavations at P’ong Tuk,” JSS, XXI, pt. 3 (1928), 
pp. 195-209; “Excavations at P’ong Tuk in Siam,” ABIA (1927), 
pp. 16-20. H. G. Quaritch Wales, “Further Excavations at P’ong 
Tiik,” IAL, X (1936), pp. 42-48. 
Chapter V 
1. Paul Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” BEFEO, Ill, p. 274. 
2. See above, pp. 36-37. 
3. Paul Pelliot, trans. and ed., “Mémoires sur les coutumes du 
Cambodge,” BEFEO, Il, p. 123; “Le Fou-nan,” p. 272. Instead 

--- [Page 310] ---
288 Notes to Pages 65-68 
of kshatriya, it might be better to read Ch’a-li as $ri, which 
is prefixed to all names of kings and may have been taken 
by the Chinese as a family name. 
4. Coedés, “Le site primitif du Tchen-la,” BEFEO, XVIII, 9, pp. 
1-3. Also see Coedeés, “La tradition généalogique des premiers 
rois d’Angkor,’”” BEFEO, XXVIII, p. 124; “Nouvelles données sur 
les origines du royaume khmer,” BEFEO, XLVIII (1956), pp. 
209-20. 
5. Quoted from Ma Tuan-lin, Ethnographie des peuples étrangers 
a la Chine, trans. Marquis d’Hervey de Saint-Denis, II: Méri-
dionaux (Geneva, 1883), p. 483. 
6. Paul Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires de Chine en Inde, a la fin du 
Ville siécle,’’” BEFEO, IV, p. 217. 
7. Sir Henry Yule and Arthur C. Burnell, Hobson-Jobson (London, 
1903), under the entry “Varella.” 
8. Coedés, “La tradition généalogique,” p. 124. This name, 
which, as we have seen, was that of the royal linga erected 
in the fourth century by the Cham king Bhadravarman, may 
have been chosen by Chenla to mark its victory over Champa. 
9. Inscription of Baksei Chamkrong, st. XI—XII, in Coedés, In-
scriptions du Cambodge (Paris, 1937-), IV, p. 95. 
10. Victor Goloubew, “Les légendes de la Nagi et de I’Apsaras,” 
BEFEO, XXIV, p. 508. 
11. Stele of Ta Prohm, st. VI-VII, in Coedés, “La stéle de Ta 
Prohm,” BEFEO, VI, p. 71. 
, 12. Eveline Porée-Maspero, “Nouvelle étude sur la Nagi Soma,” 
JA (1950), pp. 237 ff. 
13. Baksei Chamkrong, st. XIII, in Coedés, Inscriptions du Cam-
bodge, IV, p. 96. 
14. Inscription from the mouth of the Mun, in Erik Seidenfaden, 
“Complément a L’Inventaire descriptif des monuments du 
Cambodge pour les quatre provinces du Siam _ oriental,” 
BEFEO, XXII, pp. 57-58. See also “Chronique,” BEFEO, XXII, 
p. 385. 
15. Stele of Ta Prohm, st. IX, in Coedés, “La stéle de Ta Prohm,” 
p. 71. 
16. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, VI, p. 102. 
17. Louis Finot, “Sur quelques traditions indochinoises,” Mélanges 
d’Indianisme offerts par ses éléves a M. Sylvain Lévi (Paris, 
1911), pp. 209-11. 
18. In ibid., p. 211, Finot seems already to have foreseen this 
solution. 
19. Coedés, Les Peuples de la péninsule indochinoise (Paris, 
1962), p. 90. 
20. And not his brother as has been believed. See the inscription 
of Si Thep (K. 978) in Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, 
VII. 

--- [Page 311] ---
Notes to Pages 68-70 289 
21. Coedés, ‘“Quelques précisions sur la fin du Fou-nan,” BEFEO, 
XLII, pp. 3-4. 
22. Considered as that of Funan before its fall (Finot, “Sur 
quelques traditions indochinoises,” pp. 211-12). But see 
above, pp. 36-37. 
23. See above, p. 10. 
24. Auguste Barth and Abel Bergaigne, ISC, No. XI, p. 69. 
25. Inscription of Phnom Banteay Neang, in Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, No. lll, pp. 26-28. . 
26. Unfortunately, the date is incomplete. This inscription (K. 
978) is published in Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, VII. 
27. Pierre Dupont, “La dislocation du Tchen-la,” BEFEO, XLII, p. 
44, 
28. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, VI, p. 102. | 
29. Coedés, ‘“Quelques précisions sur la fin du Fou-nan,” p. 2. 
30. Louis Finot, “Inscription de Thma Kré,” BEFEO, Ill, p. 212. | 
Adhémard Leclére, ‘Une campagne archéologique au Cam-
bodge,”” BEFEO, IV, p. 739. 
31. Seidenfaden, ‘“Complément,” p. 92. 
32. Auguste Barth, “Inscription sanscrite du Phou_ Lokhon,” 
BEFEO, Ill, p. 442. Seidenfaden, “Complément,” pp. 57-58. 
“Chronique,” BEFEO, XXII, p. 385. 
33. Seidenfaden, “Complément,” p. 59. 
34. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 69. 
35. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 275. 
36. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, Nos. VI (p. 38) and IX (p. 51). 
37. Ibid., no. VII, p. 44. 
38. Ibid., no. VIII, p. 47. 
39. Coedés, “L’extension du Cambodge vers la sudouest au 
Vile siécle,” BEFEO, XXIV, p. 357. 
40. Pelliot, “Mémoires...du Cambodge,” p. 124; “Le Fou-nan,” 
p. 272. 
41. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 38. 
42. Pelliot, ‘Le Fou-nan,” p. 275. 
43. Mémoires sur les contrées occidentales, trans. S. Julien 
(Paris, 1857-58), Il, p. 82. 
44. Henri Parmentier, L’Art khmér primitif (Paris, 1927), |, pp. 
44-92. 
45. Louis Finot, ‘Nouvelles inscriptions cambodgiennes,’” BCAI 
(1912), pp. 184-89. 
46. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, IV, pp. 20-23. 
47. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, no. V, p. 31. Coedés, Inscriptions 
du Cambodge, |, p. 252. Henri Mauger, “Le Phnom Bayang,” 
BEFEO, XXXVII, pp. 239-62. 
48. Louis Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” BEFEO, IV, p. 922. 
See also Coedés, “Note sur deux inscriptions du Champa,” 
BEFEO, XII,-8, p. 16. 

--- [Page 312] ---
290 Notes to Pages 70-72 
49. Louis Finot, “Stéle du Cambhuvarman a Mi-sdn,” BEFEO, Il, p. 207. , 
50. Georges Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928), p. 
81, n. 4. 
51. Ibid., p. 82. 
52. R. Stein, “Le Lin-yi,” Han-hiue, 2 (1947), p. 129, shows that 
it is the itinerary of the expedition of Liu Fang in 605 that 
enables us to locate the capital of Lin-yi for the first time 
with any certitude south of the Col des Nuages, in Quang-
nam, undoubtedly on the present site of Tra-kiéu, where 
excavations have revealed an important center. It was around 
the same period that the term Champa, applied to this re-
gion, appeared in the Sanskrit inscriptions of Cambodia and 
South Vietnam;. the Chinese transcription Chan-ch’eng did 
not come until more than a century later. 
53. Finot, “Stéle du Cambhuvarman,” p. 207. 
54. Finot, ‘Les inscriptions de Mi-son,” p. 910. 
55. The beginning of the tenth century. See Philippe Stern, 
“L’Art du Champa (ancien Annam) et son évolution (Paris, 
1942), p. 70. The monument of Mi-sén numbered E£, is the 
oldest (middle of the seventh century). See Jean Boisselier, 
La Statuaire du Champa (Paris, 1963), chap. Hl. 
56. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 89, n. 1. | cannot 
understand why this author affirms twice (pp. 89 and 91) 
that this princess was married to Prakasadharma, since it is 
known that she was the great-grandaunt of the latter. No 
source, to my knowledge, alludes to such a marriage, which 
Maspero seems to have invented to justify the accession of 
PrakaSadharma to power. A comparison of Chinese sources 
with the inscriptions yields disconcerting results (see ibid.). 
To reconcile these sources, irreconcilable at first glance, they 
ought to be subjected to a new critical examination. 
57. “Because of an offense,” says the New History of the T’ang; 
“because of certain circumstances,” says the inscription with 
more reserve. 
58. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” pp. 923-24. Edouard 
Huber, “L’inscription de Tra-Kiéu,” BEFEO, XI, p. 263. 
59. The sculptures of Tra-kiéu that have been discovered to 
date are later and in a style corresponding to that of Mi-sodn 
at the beginning of the tenth century (Stern, L’Art du 
Champa). On the date of the oldest monument of Mi-sdn 
(E,), see Jean Boisselier, “Arts du Champa et du Cambodge 
préangkorien: La date de Mi-son E,,” AA, XIX (1956), p. 197, 
and above, n. 55. 
60. Paul Mus, “L’inscription a Valmiki de PrakasSadharma,’”’ BEFEO, 
XXVIIL, p. 152. 
61. Inscription of Lai Cam, in Louis Finot, “Une nouvelle in-
scription de Prakagadharma,’”’ BEFEO, XV, 2, p. 112. 

--- [Page 313] ---
Notes to Pages 72-74 291 
62. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 92. 
63. Coedés, “Inscription de Bhavavarman II," BEFEO, IV, pp. 
691-97, 
64. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, p. 252. 
65. Ibid., p. 3. On Bhavavarman II, see Pierre Dupont, “Tchen-la 
et Panduranga,” BSEI, XXIV (1949), pp. 10-18. 
66. Louis Finot, “L’inscription de Kompong Rusei,” BEFEO, XVIII, 
10, p. 15. 
67. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, Il, p. 193. 
68. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, no. IX, p. 59. 
69. Auguste Barth, “Stéle de Vat Phou,’’ BEFEO, Il, pp. 235-40. 
70. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, II, p. 40. (Ed. note: Date 
corrected by Coedeés; Third Edition had 681.) 
71. “Chronique,” BEFEO, XXXIX, p. 341. On this difficult question, 
see Coedeés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, IV, pp. 56-57. 
72. Below, p. 85. 
73. Dupont, ‘La dislocation du Tchen-la,” pp. 17 ff. 
74. One of the most remarkable exceptions is Asram Maharosei. 
See Henri Mauger, “L’Asram Maha Rosei,” BEFEO, XXXVI, pp. 
65—~95. 
75. See also Henri Parmentier, “Complément a I’art khmer 
primitif,”” BEFEO, XXXV, pp. 1-115. 
76. Philippe Stern, ‘Motifs indiennes au début de |’art khmér,” 
Compte rendu, XXle, Congrés International des Orientalistes 
(Paris, 1948), p. 232, attributes these elements to an extensive 
contribution around the end of the sixth century or the 
beginning of the seventh from the Pallava country in southern India. | 
77. Pierre Dupont, “Les linteaux khmérs du VIle siécle,” AA, 
XV (1952), pp. 31-83; La Statuaire préangkorienne (Ascona, 
1955). 
78. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, p. 5; II, p. 193. On 
these sects, see below, p. 113. See also Kamaleswar Bhat-
tacharya, “The Pancaratra Sect in Ancient Cambodia,” JGIS, 
XIV (1955), pp. 107-16; Les Religions brahmaniques dans 
l'ancien Cambodge, Publ. EFEO, XLIX (Paris, 1961). 
79. Dupont, La Statuaire préangkorienne. 
80. Above, p. 62. 
81. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, No. X, p. 63. 
82. Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan,” p. 284. See above, p. 67. 
83. Manuscripts of these texts are mentioned in the inscriptions 
of the period. See Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, No. IV, p. 30, 
and Coedés, “Une inscription du sixiéme siécle caka,” 
BEFEO, XI, p. 393. 
84. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, No. IV, p. 29 (contrary to Indian 
usage, the son of a Brahman and a princess of royal blood 
is born a Kshatriya); No. X, p. 63. 
85. Ibid., pp. 124-26. 

--- [Page 314] ---
292 Notes to Pages 74-76 
86. Ibid., p. 360, n. 1. 
87. Marcel Ner, “L’organisation familiale en pays moi,” Cahiers 
de la Société de Géographie de Hanoi, No. 15 (1928); “Au 
pays du droit maternel,” BEFEO, XXX, p. 533. J. S. Furnivall, 
“Matriarchal Vestiges in Burma,” JBRS, | (1912), pp. 15-30. 
88. Edgar Thurston, Castes and Tribes of Southern India (Madras, 
1909), vol. V. Govind §S. Ghurye, “Dual Organization in 
India,” JRAI, LIIl (1923), pp. 79-91. 
89. Pp. 477-81. In Paul Pelliot, trans. and ed., Mémoires sur les 
coutumes du Cambodge de Tcheou Ta-kouan, Posthumous 
Works of Paul Pelliot, Vol. Ill (Paris, 1951), p. 152, we find 
a translation of the passage of the History of the Sui per-
taining to the audience hall. 
90. Mémoires sur les contrées occidentales, Il, p. 83. See G. H. 
Luce, “Countries Neighbouring Burma,” JBRS, XIV (1924), pp. 
178-82. 
91. Chuan-lo-p’o-t’i and T’o-lo-po-ti (New History of the T’ang); 
She-ho-po-ti, To-ho-lo-po-ti, and To-ho-lo (I-ching). See also 
Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” pp. 223, 232, 360, n. 1. 
92. Krung Devamahanagara Pavara Dvaravati Sri Ayudhya Ma-
hatilaka Bhavanavaratna Rajadhani Puriramya. See Prince 
Dhani Nivat, “The City of Thawarawadi Sri Ayudhya,’” JSS, 
XXXI (1939), p. 147. 
93. Below, p. 222. 
94. H. G. Quaritch Wales, “Some Notes on the Kingdom of 
Dvaravati,” JGIS, V (1938), pp. 24-30; Towards Angkor (Lon-
don, 1937), pp. 132-46. During the printing of the present 
work, the discovery near Phra Pathom of two pieces of 
silver bearing the name of a King Sridvaravatigvara of 
Dvaravati has been announced. Descriptions of these pieces 
wilf be published in the Comptes-rendus de Il’Académie des 
Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres and in the Journal of the Siam 
Society. See also Archeologia, No. 1 (November-December, 
1964), p. 58. 
95. As far as architecture is concerned, we have at Phra Pathom 
the lower part of a Buddhist monument resting on a double 
substructure with steps; on each face, five images of the 
seated Buddha are placed in niches flanked by colonnettes and , 
pilasters. Other substructures, perhaps older, have been 
found farther west, at Phong Tuk on the Kanburi River, 
associated with a bronze lamp of Hellenistic origin and with 
statuettes of the Buddha in post-Gupta style. See Pierre 
Dupont, L’Archéologie méne de Dvaravati (Paris, 1959). 
96. E. Lunet de Lajonquiére, “Le domaine archéologique du 
Siam,” BCAI (1909), pp. 200-37; “Essai d’inventaire archéo-
logique du Siam,” BCAI (1912), pp. 100-27. Coedés, ‘‘Tablettes 
votives bouddhiques du Siam,” Et. Asiat. EFEO, |, p. 152, 
n. 1.; “Les collections archéologiques du Musée National 

--- [Page 315] ---
Notes to Pages 76-78 293 
de Bangkok,” Ars Asiatica, XII (1928), pp. 20-24; Recueil 
des inscriptions du Siam (Bangkok, 1924-29), Il, pp. 1-4. 
Pierre Dupont, ‘‘Musée Guimet, Catalogue des collections 
indochinoises,” BCAI (1931-34), pp. 45-53; “Vishnu mitrés 
de I’Indochine occidentale,” BEFEO, XLI, pp. 233-54; “Mis-
sion au Siam,” BEFEO, XXXVII, pp. 686-93; L’Archéologie 
méne de Dvaravati. Reginald le May, A Concise History of 
Buddhist Art in Siam (Cambridge, Eng., 1938), pp. 21-34. L. P. 
Briggs, “Dvaravati, the Most Ancient Kingdom of Siam,” | 
JAOS, 65 (1945), pp. 98-107. 
97. Coedés, “Documents sur l'histoire politique et religieuse du 
Laos occidental,” BEFEO, XXV, p. 186; Recueil des inscriptions 
du Siam, Il, pp. 17-19; “A propos de deux fragments d’in-
scription récemment découverts a P’ra Pathom,” CRAIBL 
(1952), p. 146. Robert Halliday, “Les inscriptions méns du 
Siam,” BEFEO, XXX, pp. 82-85. 
98. Pelliot already had intimations of this; see “Deux itinéraires,’’ 
p. 231. Basing his conclusions on the study of skeletons of 
doubtful age exhumed at Phong Tuk, H. G. Quaritch Wales 
claims that Thai were already in the region at an early period 
(“Some Ancient Human Skeletons Excavated in Siam,” Man 
[June, 1937], pp. 89-90), but this opinion is contested by Erik 
Seidenfaden, “Recent Archaeological Research Work in Siam,” 
JSS, XXX (1938), p. 245. 
99. Coedés, “Documents...Laos,” pp. 16-17. Camille Notton, 
Annales du Siam (Paris, 1926-32), H, pp. 7-33. 
100. Coedés, ‘‘Documents...Laos,” pp. 189-200, and Halliday, 
“Les inscriptions m6éns du Siam,” pp. 86-105. 
101. Mémoires sur les contrées occidentales, Il, p. 82. 
102. Junjiro Takakusu, trans., A Record of the Buddhist Religion 
as Practised in India and the Malay Archipelago (A.D. 671-695) 
by I-Tsing (Oxford, 1896), p. 9. 
103. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” pp. 174, 223. Luce, “Countries 
Neighbouring Burma,” pp. 160-61. 
104. Léon de Beylié, L’Architecture hindoue en Extréme-Orient 
(Paris, 1907), p. 238. On the excavations of Prome, see the 
excellent bibliography of G. H. Luce in JBRS, XXIX (1939), p. 
278, n. 19. 
105. Nihar-Ranjan Ray, Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma (Calcutta, 
1936), pp. 19-30. 
106. G. H. Luce, “The Ancient Pyu,” JBRS, XXVII (1937), p. 247. 
107. Mémoires sur les contrées occidentales, II, p. 82. 
108. See above, p. 51. Pelliot, ‘““Deux itinéraires,” p. 406. Gabriel 
Ferrand, ‘Malaka, le Malayu et Malayur,’” JA (July-August, 
1918), pp. 134-45. Sylvain Lévi, ‘“Pré-aryen et pré-dravidien 
dans I’Inde,” JA (July-September, 1923), pp. 37 ff. Luce, “Coun-
tries Neighbouring Burma,” pp. 161-69. 
109. Ethnographie, pp. 467-70. In Pelliot, Mémoires ...de Tcheou 

--- [Page 316] ---
294 Notes to Pages 78-79 
Ta-kouan, pp. 150-52, we find the passage of the History of 
the Sui used by Ma Tuan-lin. See also in Paul Wheatley, The 
Golden Khersonese (Kuala Lumpur, 1961), pp. 26 ff., the 
other probable sources of Ma Tuan-lin. 
110. Gautama. 
111. This information is probably from 609, the date at which a 
Chinese mission went to the country. 
112. Sadhukara, “doer of good,” or, more likely, sardhakara, 
“fellow-worker.” 
113. Dhanada, “dispenser of good things,” a title found engraved 
on a seal found at Oc Eo. 
114. Karmika, “agent.” 
115. Kulapati, “head of the family,” a title seen in Cambodian 
epigraphy, where it designates the head of a religious 
establishment. 
116. Nayaka, “guide,” seen in an inscription of Lopburi (Coedés, 
Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, Il, p. 14). 
117. Pati, “chief,” still in use as a Javanese title. 
118. The “taking of the hand” (panigrahana) constitutes the basic 
rite of Hindu marriages. 
119. All this ritual is strictly Hindu. On the construction of a 
funerary monument for the kings, see below, pp. 119-22; 
Coedés, “La destination funéraire des grands monuments 
khmeérs,” BEFEO, XL, pp. 315-43. 
120. Above, p. 54. 
121. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 286. We will notice that they 
occur during the period of the final fall of Funan. 
122. J. L. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha,”” TBG, LXXVII (1948), 
pp. 350 ff. R. A. Kern, “Ho-ling,” in Orientalia Neerlandica 
(Leyden, 1948), pp. 402-13, distinguishes two Ho-lings, one in 
Kedah, the other in Java. Roland Braddell, “Notes on Ancient 
Times in Malaya,” JRASMB, XXIV (1951), pp. 3 ff., places Ho-
ling on Borneo. See Hsiti Yun-ts’iao, “A Study of Gnomon 
Recorded in Ancient Chinese Accounts,” JSSS, VI (1950), pp. 
7-12. 
123. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 265. This was already the opinion 
of Edouard Chavannes, trans., Voyages des pélerins boudd-
histes: Les religieux éminents qui allerent chercher la loi 
dans les pays de I’Occident, mémoire composé 4a I’époque 
de la grand dynastie T’ang par I-tsing (Paris, 1894), p. 42, n. 2. 
124. Review of Poerbatjaraka’s Riwajat Indonesia, BEFEO, XLVIII 
(1957), pp. 612 and 644. See also BEFEO, LII (1964), p. 93. 
125. H. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften (The Hague, 1913-29), VII, 
pp. 199-204. B. Ch. Chhabra, ‘Expansion of Indo-Aryan Cul-
ture,” JASB, Letters (1935), pp. 33-34. B. R. Chatterjee, India 
and Java (Calcutta, 1933), Il, Inscr., p. 28. 
126. Nicholaas J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The 
Hague, 1931), p. 127. According to L. C. Damais (review of 

--- [Page 317] ---
Notes to Pages 79-82 295 
Poerbatjaraka, p. 627), Dieng, the original form of which was 
Di Hyang, represents the Sanskrit Devalaya, “residence of the 
gods.” 
127, W. P. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago and 
Malacca (Batavia, 1876), p. 13. 
128. Chavannes, Voyages des pélerins bouddhistes, p. 60. 
129. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 324. 
130. Chavannes, Voyages des pélerins bouddhistes, pp. 116-20. 
131. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 342. 
132. Ibid., p. 324 and n. 5. 
Chapter V] 
1. They had a factory at Canton from the fourth century (James 
Hornell, “The Origins and Ethnological Significance of Indian 
Boat Designs,” Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, VII 
[1920], p. 199). The Chinese designated them by the term 
Ta-shih, which corresponds to the name Tajika, by which 
they were known in India. See J. A. E. Morley, “The Arabs and 
the Eastern Trade,” JRASMB, XII (1949), pp. 143-75. G. R. 
Tibbetts, “Pre-Islamic Arabia and South-East Asia,” JRASMB, 
XXIX (1956), p. 182. 
2. Gabriel Ferrand, ‘Le K’ouen-louen et les anciennes navigations 
inter-océaniques dans les mers du sud,” JA (1915); see espe-
cially May-June, pp. 450-92, and July-August, pp. 5-68. 
3. V. Obdeijn, “De oude Zeehandelsweg door de straat Mal-
akka,”” TKNAG, LXX (1942). R. Soekmono, “Early Civilization 
of Southeast Asia,” JSS, XLVI (1958), pp. 17-20. On the his-
torical geography of the southern coastal region of Sumatra, 
see “La ligne cétiére de Crivijaya,” Amerta, II] (1955), p. 3. 
This article is summarized by L. C. Damais, “Bibliographie 
indonésienne,” BEFEO, LI (1963), p. 550. 
4. Edouard Chavannes, trans., Voyages des pélerins bouddhistes: 
Les religieux éminents qui allerent chercher fa loi dans les 
pays d’Occident, mémoire composé a |’époque de la grand 
dynastie T’ang par I-tsing (Paris, 1894), p. 119. 
5. Junjiro Takakusu, trans., A Record of the Buddhist Religion as 
Practised in India and the Malay Archipelago (A.D. 671-695) 
by I-Tsing (Oxford, 1896), p. xxxiv. 
6. Ibid., p. 10. O. W. Wolters, “Srivijayan Expansion in the Sev-
enth Century,” AA, XXIV (1961), p. 418. 
7. Coedés, ‘Les inscriptions malaises de Crivijaya,”” BEFEO, XXX, 
pp. 29-80. Gabriel Ferrand, ‘‘Quatre textes épigraphiques 
malayo-sanskrits de Sumatra et de Banka,” JA (October-
December, 1932), pp. 271-326. 
8. The placing of Shih-li-fo-shih at Palembang was proposed in 
1886 by Samuel Beal, “Some Remarks respecting a Place 
Called Shi-li-fo-tsai,” in Livre des merveilles de I’Inde, edited 
by P. A. van der Lith and Marcel Devic (Leyden, 1883-86), 

--- [Page 318] ---
296 Notes to Pages 82-83 
pp. 251-53. More recently, H. G. Quaritch Wales has at-
tempted to place Srivijaya at Chaiya on the Bay of Bandon, | in the Siamese part of the Malay Peninsula (“A Newly Ex-
plored Route of Ancient Indian Cultural Expansion,” JAL, IX 
[1935], pp. 1-31), but this hypothesis is improbable. See 
Coedés, “A propos d’une nouvelle théorie sur le site de 
Crivijaya,” JRASMB, XIV (1936), pp. 1-9. 
9. This date and the following were calculated by W. E. van 
Wijk (see W. J. Wellan, “Criwijaya,”, TKNAG, LI [1934], p. 363) 
as corresponding respectively to the 13th of April and the 
3rd of May, 683. But | have adopted the results of a new 
calculation by L. C. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions 
datées de I'Indonésie,” BEFEO, XLVI (1952), p. 98. 
10. This delay of a month is established by the inscription of 
Telaga Batu published in J. G. de Casparis, Prasasti Indonesia 
(Bandung, 1950, 1956), Il, pp. 12 ff. 
11. Ph. S. van Ronkel, “A Preliminary Note concerning Two Old 
Malay Inscriptions in Palembang,” Acta Orientalia, Il (1924), 
p. 21. N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The Hague, 1931), p. 121. : 
12. J. L. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha,” TBG, LXXVII (1937), pp. 333-35. , 
13. N. J. Krom, “De Heiligdommen van Palembang,” MKAWAL, 
N. R., I, No. 7 (1938), pp. 25-26. See K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, 
“Sri Vijaya,” BEFEO, XL, p. 249; History of Srivijaya (Madras, 
1949), p. 30. 
14. F. M. Schnitger, Oudheidkundige vondsten in Palembang, 
Bijlage A: Verslag over de gevonden inscripties door Dr. 
W. F. Stutterheim (Palembang, 1935). See Krom, “De Heilig-
dommen,” p. 8. 
15. B. Ch. Chhabra, “Expansion of Indo-Aryan Culture,” JASB, , 
| Letters, | (1935), p. 31. 
16. Coedés, review of Wellan’s Criwijaya, in BEFEO, XXXII, pp. 
1003-1004. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “Siddhayatra,” JG/S, IV 
(1937), pp. 128-36. On the nature of this expedition, the date | 
of which coincides with the end of the reign of Jayavarman | 
_in Cambodia, | have risked a hypothesis that | do not think 
it necessary to elaborate on here but that can be found on 
pages 23-32 of the volume of miscellany offered in homage 
to Sir Richard Winstedt (John Bastin, ed., Malayan and Indo-
nesian Studies [Oxford, 1964]). 
17. The date calculated by Damais, “Liste des principales inscrip-tions,” p. 98. 
18. The inscription of Telaga Batu (de Casparis, Prasasti Indonesia, 
Il, pp. 15 ff.) gives a more detailed text. 
19. Showing once more the reluctance to accept the first mean-
ing of “Java” that presents itself naturally to the mind. P. V. 

--- [Page 319] ---
Notes to Pages 83-84 297 
van Stein Callenfels has proposed that this word be considered 
not as a proper name but as an adjective meaning “exterior”; 
the inscription would then refer to an expedition “abroad” 
(see ““Correspondance,”” BEFEO, XXX, p. 656). 
20. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha,” p. 363. 
21. Paul Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires de Chine en Inde, a la fin du 
Ville siécle,” BEFEO, IV, p. 284. 
22. F. D. K. Bosch, “Een Maleische inscriptie in het Buitenzorg-
sche,” BKI, 100 (1941), p. 51. 
23. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 334. 
24. Ibid. 
25. Ibid., p. 335. On this name, see L. C. Damais, review of 
Poerbatjaraka’s Riwajat Indonesia, BEFEO, XLVIII (1957), pp. 
624 ff. 
26. This question has been studied by Wolters in “Srivijayan Ex-
pansion”; he places the conquest of Kedah on the Malay 
Peninsula between 685 and 689, basing his conclusions on a 
, passage in a work by I-ching. 
27. One of the teachers of I-ching, Sakyakirti, lived there (Taka-
kusu, A Record, pp. lviii, lix, 184). On the other pilgrims who 
lived or stopped there, see Chavannes, Voyages des pélerins 
bouddhistes, pp. 63-64, 126, 144, 159. 
28. Takakusu, A Record, p. 10. 
29. Ibid., p. 11. 
30. Chavannes, Voyages des pélerins bouddhistes, pp. 76-77. 
31. René Grousset, Philosophies indiennes (Paris, 1931), Il, pp. 
7-149. 
32. “Correspondance,” BEFEO, XXX, p. 656. 
33. Coedés, “Les inscriptions malaises de Crivijaya,” pp. 55-57. 
The presence of Tantrism in Sumatra toward the end of the 
seventh century is not surprising. Its introduction may date 
back to Dharmapala of Kanchi, a contemporary of the pilgrim 
Hsuan-tsang, if it is true that this spiritual descendant of the 
logician Dignaga, a pupil of Asanga, left the university of 
Nalanda after thirty years of study to go to Suvarnadvipa 
(Sumatra or Malaya). See Anton Schiefner, trans., Taranatha’s 
Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien (St. Petersburg, 1869), 
p. 160. F. D. K. Bosch throws doubt on this evidence (“Een 
Oorkonde van het Groote Klooster te Nalanda,” TBG, LXV 
[1925], p. 559, n. 80). But if Tantrism had not yet reached 
Srivijaya in 684, it must have reached Srivijaya about thirty 
years later, for the Indian Vajrabodhi, the introducer of the 
doctrine in China, stopped at Srivijaya in 717 (Pelliot, “Deux 
itinéraires,”” p. 336). 
34. N. J. Krom, “Antiquities of Palembang,” ABIA (1931), pp. 29-
33. F. M. Schnitger, The Archaeology of Hindoo Sumatra 
(Leyden, 1937). Devaprasad Ghosh, “Early Art of Srivijaya,”” 

--- [Page 320] ---
298 Notes to Pages 84-85 
JGIS, | (1934), pp. 31-38; “Sources of the Art of Srivijaya,” 
JGIS, Ill (1936), pp. 50-56; “Two Bodhisattva Images from 
Ceylon and Srivijaya,” JGIS, IV (1937), pp. 125-27. W. F. 
Stutterheim, “Note on a Newly Found Fragment of a Four-
Armed Figure from Kota Kapur (Bangka),” IAL, XI (1937), pp. 
105-109. 
35. Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,” p. 335. 
36. Coedés, “Le royaume de Crivijaya,” BEFEO, XVIII, 5, pp. 29-
31; Recueil des inscriptions du Siam (Bangkok, 1924-29), Hl, 
No. XXIII, pp. 35-39; “Origin of the Sailendras of Indonesia,” 
JGIS, | (1934), pp. 64-68. B. R. Chatterjee, India and Java 
(Calcutta, 1933), II, Inscription, pp. 40-44. Chhabra, ‘Ex-
pansion of Indo-Aryan Culture,” pp. 20-27. Nilakanta Sastri, 
Sri Vijaya,” pp. 252-54. The statuette of LokeSvara, found in 
a tin mine in the Perak region, which exhibits undeniable 
similarities with the art of Srivijaya, may date from this period 
(H. G. Quaritch Wales, “Archaeological Researches in Malaya,” 
ABIA, XII (1937), p. 41, n. 1, and pl. XII). On the stele of Wat 
Sema Muang, see below, pp. 91-92. 
37. A hypothesis first formulated by N. J. Krom, in Frederik W. 
Stapel, ed., Geschiedenis van Nederlandsch-Indié (Amsterdam, 
1938-40), |, p. 162, and then accepted by F. D. K. Bosch, 
“Crivijaya, de Cailendra-en de Safjayavamg¢a,” BKI, 108 (1952). 
| have brought forth various arguments in favor of this hy-
pothesis; see my “L’Inscription de la stéle de Ligor: Etat 
présent de son interprétation,” Oriens Extremus, VI, 1 (1959), 
p. 44, 
38. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 211. 
39. This period has been studied by Pierre Dupont in “La dis-
location du Tchen-la,”’ BEFEO, XLII, pp. 17 ff.; ““Tchen-la et 
Panduranga,” BSEI, XXIV (1949), pp. 1-19. 
40. Ma Tuan-lin, Ethnographie des peuples étrangers a la Chine, 
trans. Marquis d’ Hervey de Saint-Denys, II: Méridionaux 
(Geneva, 1883), p. 483. 
41. In the Western Baray. “Chronique,” BEFEO, XXXIX, p. 341. 
Coedés, Les Inscriptions du Cambodge (Paris, 1937-), IV, p. 
54. 
42. Inscription of Vat Khnat, in Coedés, Inscriptions du Cam-
bodge, VII. 
43. Auguste Barth and Abel Bergaigne, ISC, p. 369. If there is 
some relationship between the name of Sambhupura_ and 
that of the king Sambhuvarman who left an inscription at 
Thap-mucdi concerning the construction of a sanctuary of 
Pushkaraksha (Coedés, “A propos du Tchen-la d’eau,” BEFEO, 
XXXVI, p. 4) and if, moreover, this Pushkaraksha, which might 
simply be a statue of Vishnu, has some connection with the 
king Pushkaraksha of the inscription of 716, it is necessary to 
admit that the city of Sambhupura received this name only 

--- [Page 321] ---
Notes to Pages 85-87 299 
after the reign of Pushkaraksha, of whom Sambhuvarman was 
a successor. But all this is as hypothetical as the identification 
of this Sambhuvarman with the Cham king of the same name. 
44, Etienne F. Aymonier, Le Cambodge (Paris, 1900-1904), I, pp. 
299-310. Adhémard Leclére, “Une campagne archéologique au 
Cambodge,” BEFEO, IV, pp. 737-49. Henri Parmentier, L’Art 
khmér primitif (Paris, 1927), |, p. 213. 
45. Louis Finot, “Inscription de Prah That Kvan Pir,’” BEFEO, IV, 
p. 675. 
46. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 356. 
47. Below, p. 94. Indraloka is also mentioned in the stele of 
Bakong (Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, p. 35). 
48. Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,” p. 212. 
49. Henri Maspero, “La frontiére de l’Annam et du Cambodge du 
Ville au XIVe siécle,” BEFEO, XVIII, 3, p. 29. 
50. Coedés, “A propos du Tchen-la d’eau,” pp. 3, 11. 
51. Ibid., p. 11. R. C. Majumdar, “Les Rois Sailendra de Suvarnad-
vipa,” BEFEO, XXxXIll, pp. 137-38. Coedés, Inscriptions du 
Camboadge, I, p. 74. 
52. Inscription of Phnom Bathé. Coedés, “A propos du Tchen-la 
d’eau,” p. 7. 
53. Pierre Dupont, “Vishnu mitrés de I’Indochine occidentale,” 
BEFEO, XLI, pp. 233-54. M. C. Subhadradis Diskul, ‘“Mueng Fa 
Daed, an Ancient Town in North-East Thailand,” AA, XIX 
(1956), p. 362. 
54. C. O. Blagden, “The Pyu Inscriptions,” Epigraphia Indica, XIl, 
pp. 127-32; “The Pyu Inscriptions,” J/BRS, VII (1917), pp. 37-
44. Louis Finot, ‘“L’épigraphie indochinoise,” BEFEO, XV, 2, 
pp. 132-34. See ARASB (1924), p. 23. 
55. Charles Duroiselle, ARASI (1926-27), p. 176, n. 2. 
56. Ibid. (1927-28), pp. 128, 145. 
57. Nihar-Ranjan Ray, Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma (Calcutta, 
1936), pp. 19-20. Gordon H. Luce, “The Ancient Pyu,” JBRS, 
XXVII (1937), p. 243. 
58. Above, p. 30. 
59. Above, pp. 62-63. 
60. Ray, Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma, pp. 19-30. 
61. Below, p. 106. 
62. Above, p. 79. 
63. Above, pp. 53-54. According to R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, Java was 
under the domination of Srivijaya from 697 to 708; then 
from 708 to 719 it tried to liberate itself; and, finally, from 
719 to 730 Sanjaya brought about the conquests mentioned 
in the third paragraph below. (See Damais’s review of Poer-
batjaraka’s Riwajat Indonesia, BEFEO, XLVII! [1957], p. 639.) 
64. H. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften (The Hague, 1913-29), VII, 
pp. 115-28. Chatterjee, India and Java, Il, Inscription, pp. 
29-34. 

--- [Page 322] ---
300 Notes to Pages 87-89 
65. Chhabra, “Expansion of Indo-Aryan Culture,” p. 37. J. Ph. 
Vogel, “Aanteekeningen op de inscriptie van Tjanggal,’”’ BKI, 
100 (1941), p. 446. 
66. On the name of this country, see Damais’s review of Poer-
batjaraka, pp. 628-31. 
67. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha,” pp. 426-35 and passim. 
68. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “Kataha,” JGIS, V (1938), pp. 128-46. 
69. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “Origin of the Sailendras,” TBG, LXXV 
(1935), p. 611; “Agastya,’”” TBG, LXXVI (1936), pp. 500-502. 
70. W. F. Stutterheim, “Note on Cultural Relations between 
South-India and Java,” TBG, LXXIX (1939), pp. 73-84. Vogel, 
“Aanteekeningen,” p. 445. 
71. R. Ng. Poerbatjararaka, “De Tjarita Parahijangan,” TBG, LIX 
(1920), pp. 403-16. Damais’s review of Poerbatjaraka, pp. 
633-37. 
72. W. F. Stutterheim, “Een belangrijka oorkonde uit de Kedoe,’”’ 
TBG, LXVII (1927), pp. 172-215. R. Goris, “De eenheit der 
Mataramsche Dynastie,” Feestbunde! uitgegeven door het 
Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten-
schappen (Weltevreden, 1929), |, pp. 202-206. 
73. Jean Przyluski, “The Sailendravamfa,” JGIS, II (1935), pp. 25-
36. 
74. R. C. Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies of the Far East, II: 
Suvarnadvipa (Dacca, 1937), pp. 225-27. 
75. Nilakanta Sastri, “Origin of the Sailendras,” p. 610; History of 
Srivijaya (Madras, 1949), pp. 46-50. 
76. Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies, Il, p. 159. L. P. Briggs, 
“The Origin of the Sailendra Dynasty,” JAOS, LXX (1950), pp. 
76-89, 
77. Coedés, “On the Origin of the Sailendras of Indonesia,” JGIS, 
| (1934), pp. 66-70. We can reasonably ask ourselves if the 
breakup of Cambodia does not mark a last gasp of Funan, 
whose heritage Water Chenla perhaps claimed that it ac-
quired. 
78. See above, p. 68. 
79. De Casparis, Prasasti Indonesia, Il, pp. 184-85. Naravara also 
appears in the inscription of Kelurak (/bid., 1, p. 191). 
80. “The Cailendra Interregnum,” India Antiqua (Leyden, 1947), 
pp. 249-53. 
81. L. C. Damais, “Epigrafische aantekeningen,” TBG, LXXxXIII 
(1949), pp. 21-25. BEFEO, LII (1964), p. 128. 
82. The Sanskrit inscription of Kalasan in pre-Nagari letters was 
published by J. L. A. Brandes, TBG, XXXI (1886), pp. 240-60; 
R. G. Bhandarkar, JRAS Bombay, XVII (1887-89), II, pp. 1-10; 
F. D. K. Bosch, TBG, LXVIII (1928), pp. 57-62; B. R. Chatterjee, 
- India and Java, Il, Inscription, pp. 44—48. 
83. Description in N. J. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche 

--- [Page 323] ---
Notes to Pages 89-90 301 
Kunst (The Hague, 1923), pp. 257-64. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava 
en Kataha,” p. 434, has given an overly ingenious explanation 
for this iconography, an explanation inspired by his highly 
debatable theory of the Indian origin of Sanjaya. See also 
F. B. Vogler, “Ontwikkeling van de gewijde boukunst in het 
Hindoeistische Midden-Java,” BKI, 109 (1953), p. 249. 
84. Coedés, “Le Cailendra, ‘tuer des héros ennemis,’” Bingkisan 
Budi: A Volume of Oriental Studies Presented to Professor 
Ph. S. van Ronkel (Leyden, 1950), pp. 58-70. 
85. De Casparis, Prasasti Indonesia, p. 102. 
86. F. D. K. Bosch, “De Inscriptie van Keloerak,” TBG, LXVIII 
(1928), pp. 1-56. 
87. Ibid., p. 26. 
88. An inscription of A.D. 792 in Old Malay was found in 1960 
at Chandi Sewu. See L. C. Damais, “Bibliographie indonési-
enne,” BEFEO, LI (1963), p. 580. 
89. J. L. Moens, “Barabudur, Mendut en Pawon en hun onder-
linge samenhang,” TBG, LXXXIV (1951), p. 326. 
90. Notably Jatakamala, Lalitavistara, GandavyGha, Karmavibhanga. 
91. De Casparis, Prasasti Indonesia, |, p. 204. 
92. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 152. For the de-
scription and the bibliography of these monuments, see N. J. 
Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst. For a de-
scription of the Borobudur, see the beautiful monograph of 
N. J. Krom and T. van Erp, Beschrijving van Borobudur (The 
Hague, 1920). For interpretations, see especially the basic 
work of Paul Mus, “Barabudur,’’ BEFEO, XXXII-XXXV; see also 
W. F. Stutterheim, Tjandi Bara-Boedoer, Naam, Vorm, Betee-
kenis (Weltevreden, 1929), and P. H. Pott, Yoga en Yantra in 
hunne beteekenis voor de Indische Archaeologie (Leyden, 
1946), and two works by A. J. Bernet Kempers: “Borobudur’s . 
Verborgen Voet,” BKI, 111 (1955), pp. 225-35, and Ancient 
Indonesian Art (Amsterdam, 1959). The hypotheses of J. G. 
de Casparis presented in Prasasti Indonesia, |, particularly on 
the old name of the monument (p. 164), apparently need not 
be retained. 
93. Below, pp. 128-29. The Sanskrit lexicon Amaramala was trans-
lated into Javanese during the reign of Jitendra, an unidenti-
fied Sailendra. 
94. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 225. Ferrand, “Le K’ouen-louen,” 
p. 304, n. 3, has recognized in P’o-lu-chia-ssu a Javanese ex-
pression waruh gresik, “beach of sand.” It still survives in the 
name of the port of the residency of Surabaya, commonly 
called Grise, but P’o-lu-chia-ssu was not necessarily in the 
same place, since the same name may have been brought 
from another site to eastern Java. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en 
Kataha,” pp. 382-86, proposes to identify P’o-lu-chia-ssu 

--- [Page 324] ---
302 Notes to Pages 90-91 
with Baruas, which is southeast of Kedah, the presumed old , 
capital. This relationship is less acceptable phonetically, and 
it implies that Ho-ling was located on the peninsula, which raises serious difficulties. , 
95. F. D. K. Bosch, “De sanskrit inscriptie op den steen van 
Dinaja (682 caka),”” TBG, LVII (1916), pp. 410-44; “Het Lingga-
Heiligdom van Dinaja,” TBG, LXIV (1924), pp. 227-86. 
96. W. F. Stutterheim has called attention to a short undated, but 
paleographically older, inscription from eastern Java: “De 
oudste inscriptie van Oost-Java?” BKI, 95 (1937), pp. 397-401. 
97. R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, Agastya in den Archipel (Leyden, 1926), 
pp. 109-10, considered Chi-yen of the Chinese sources as a 
transcription of Gajayana, but R. A. Kern, “Joartan Weder-
gevonden?” BKI, 102 (1943), p. 545, followed by L. C. Damais, 
in his review of Poerbatjaraka’s Riwajat Indonesia, prefers to 
see here a transcription of the Javanese title (ra)kryan, al-
though this word is more often and more exactly rendered 
in Chinese as lo-chi-lien (see Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Ge-
schiedenis, p. 283). 
98. J. G. de Casparis, ‘“Nogmaals de Sanskrit-inscriptie op den steen 
van Dinojo,” TKNAG, LXXXI (1941), p. 499, proposes identify-
ing this country with the Kanuruhan of the inscriptions of 
Sindok (see below, p. 128) and also recognizes the name 
Kanjuruhan in the name of the village of Kejuron, west of 
Malang. 
99. The Chinese sources mention only the embassies of Ho-ling 
in 767 and 768 (Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,”” p. 286). 
100. Georges Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928), pp. 
97-98. : 
101. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 252. 
102. Ibid., p. 217. 
103. Above, p. 84. 
104. On this second inscription and the numerous discussions to 
which it has given rise, see Coedés, “L’inscription de la stéle 
de Ligor,” pp. 42-48. 
105. N. J. Krom, De Sumatraansche periode der Javaansche Ge-
schiedenis (Leyden, 1919), part of which was translated into 
French in BEFEO, XIX, 5, pp. 127-35. 
106. Below, pp. 109 and 142. 
107. Coedés, “Origin of the Sailendras of Indonesia,” p. 65. Never-
theless, Nilakanta Sastri, History of Srivijaya, pp. 46 and 56, 
arguing from the presence in Sumatra of inscriptions in pre-
Nagari writing and from the resemblances between the stupas 
of Ligor and those of Padang Lawas, accepts the possibility of 
the establishment of the Sailendras in Sumatra from the end 
of the eighth century. 
108. “Les rois Sailendra de Suvarnadvipa,” BEFEO, XXXII, pp. 126-
27. 

--- [Page 325] ---
Notes to Pages 92-94 303 
109. Ibid. 
110. The itinerary of Chia Tan (Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” pp. 231-
33, 349-64, 373) mentions only Lo-ytieh and Ko-lo. Lo-yueh un-
doubtedly represents (Se)/uyut on the river of Johore, as 
proposed by Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha,” p. 337, and 
N. J. Krom, “De Naam Sumatra,” BKI, 100 (1941), p. 10. 
As for Ko-lo (-fu-sha-lo), Paul Wheatley discusses the relation 
of this place name with Ko-lo-she-fen, Ko-ku-lo, and others 
and concludes that this country was situated west of Dvaravati, 
on the western coast of the Malay Peninsula, in the region of 
Phuket (The Golden Khersonese [Kuala Lumpur, 1961], p. 270). 
111. Notably the beautiful bronze Lokesvaras of the Museum of 
Bangkok related to statues of Mendut in Java (Coedeés, “Les 
) collections archéologiques du Musée National de Bangkok,” 
Ars Asiatica [1918], XII, pls. 15-17). See above, p. 296, n. 8, for 
the theory of H. G. Quaritch Wales on the identification of 
Srivijaya with Chaiya. 
112. This is also the view of O. W. Wolters, “Srivijayan Expansion 
in the Seventh Century,” AA, XXIV (1961), pp. 417-18. 
113. W. F. Stutterheim, A Javanese Period in Sumatran History 
(Surakarta, 1929). See the review by F. D. K. Bosch in TBC, 
LXIX (1929), pp. 135-56. 
114. Below, p. 108. 
115. Below, p. 108. 
116. Below, p. 147. 
117. AbG Zayd Hasan, Voyage du marchand arabe Sulayman en 
Inde et en Chine, rédigé en 851, suivi de remarques par Aba 
Zayd Hasan (vers 916), trans. and ed. by Gabriel Ferrand (Paris, 
1922). On the author of this text, who may not have been the | 
merchant Sulayman, see Jean Sauvaget, ed. and trans., “Ahbar 
as-sin wa I-hind: Relation de la Chine et de I’Inde, rédigée en 
851 (Paris, 1948), pp. xix ff. It is Aba Zayd’s addition to the 
‘Ahbar as-sin wa I-hind that contains the story of the Khmer 
king. 
118. See above, p. 83. 
119. G. H. Luce, “The Early Syam in Burma’s History,” JSS, XLVI, 
pp. 143-44. 
120. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,”” p. 212. 
121. Ibid., pp. 213-15, 372. 
122. Henri Maspero, “La frontiére de l’Annam et du Cambodge du 
Vile au XIVe siécle,” BEFEO, XVIII, 3, pp. 30-32. 
123. R. Stein, “Le Lin-yi,’” Han-hiue, II (1947), p. 41. Pierre Dupont, 
“La dislocation du Tchen-la,” pp. 41-44. 
124. Erik Seidenfaden, ‘““Complément a L’Inventaire descriptif des 
monuments du Cambodge pour les quatre provinces du Siam 
oriental,’ BEFEO, XXII, p. 90. 
125. The inscription of 770 comes from Preah Theat Preah Srei in 
Thbong Khmum (Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, V, p. 

--- [Page 326] ---
304 Notes to Pages 94-96 
33). That of 781 was found at Lobdk Srot, in the region of 
Kratié (Coedés, “Note sur une inscription récemment décou-
verte au Cambodge,” BEFEO, V, p. 419). 
126. Which | have numbered 1 bis, in order not to change the 
numbers of the kings of Angkor from Jayavarman I! to VIII. 
127. Louis Finot, “Lokegvara en Indochine,” Et. Asiat. EFEO, |, 
p. 235. 
128. See Coedeés, “A propos du Tchen-la d’eau,” p. 12, n. 1. See 
below, pp. 98, 110. Dupont (‘La dislocation du Tchen-la,” pp. 
17 ff.) has attempted a genealogical and chronological classifi-
cation of these princes. 
129. Above, p. 85. 
130. Etienne Aymonier, Le Cambodge, |, p. 305. Coedés, Inscrip-
tions du Cambodge, III, p. 170. 
131. Gilberte de Coral Rémusat, L’Art khmer (Paris, 1940), p. 117. 
Pierre Dupont, “Vishnu mitrés de I’Indochine occidentale,” 
BEFEO, XLI, pp. 233-54; “Les linteaux khmérs du Vile siécle,” 
AA, XV (1952), pp. 31-83; La Statuaire préangkorienne (As-
cona, 1955). 
132. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 95. 
133. Ibid. Pierre Dupont, ‘Tchen-la et Panduranga,” BSEI, XXIV 
(1949), pp. 1-19. 
134. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 224. 
135. Ibid., pp. 252, 256. 
136. Ibid., p. 253. 
137. Ibid., p. 217. 
138. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 104. 
139. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 226. 
140. Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,”” p. 152. 
141. Ibid., pp. 155-56. The pages that follow give important in-
formation on the Indian penetration into Yunnan by the 
Burma route. On the expansion of Nanchao, see Wilfrid Stott, 
“The Expansion of the Nan-Chao Kingdom between the 
Years A.D. 750-860,” TP, L (1963), p. 190. 
142. G. H. Luce, “The Ancient Pyu,” JBRS, XXVII (1937), p. 249. 
143. Nihar-Ranjan Ray, Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma, p. 41. 
144. La Vallée-Poussin, Dynasties et histoire de I’Inde, p. 95. 
145. Above, p. 84. 
146. Above, pp. 89-91, 94. 
147. See H. B. Sarkar, “The Cultural Contact between Java and 
Bengal,” /HQ, XIII (1937), pp. 593-94. On Nalanda, see H. D. 
Sankalia, The University of Nalanda (Madras, 1934). 
148. On Mahayana Buddhism in Champa in this period, see the 
images of Buddha enumerated by Jean Boisselier, La Statuaire de Champa (Paris, 1963), pp. 75 ff. , 
149. F. D. K. Bosch, “Buddhistische Gegevens uit Balische Hand-
schriften,’” MKAWAL, LXVIII, Ser. B, No. 3, pp. 43-77. J. 

--- [Page 327] ---
Notes to Pages 97-99 305 
Przyluski, “Le bouddhisme tantrique a Bali,” JA (January-
March, 1931), pp. 159-67. P. H. Pott, Yoga en Yantra. 
Chapter VII 
1. See the basic article on this subject: Pierre Dupont, “Le début 
de la royauté angkorienne,” BEFEO, XLVI (1952), pp. 119-76. 
2. See the genealogical tables of the inscriptions of YaSovarman 
in Auguste Barth and Abel Bergaigne, ISC, I, p. 361. On the 
stele of Pré Rup, see Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge 
Paris, 1937-), |, p. 74; on the reign of Jayavarman II, see also 
Coedés, Pour mieux comprendre Angkor (Paris, 1947), pp. 
151-75, certain passages of which are reproduced here. 
3. Above, p. 85. 
4. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, pp. 37-44. 
5. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, pp. 344-45. 
6. Louis Finot, ‘’L’inscription de Sdok Kak Thom,” BEFEO, XV, 
2, pp. 53-106. Coedés and Pierre Dupont, “Les stéles de Sdok 
Kak Thom, Phnom Sandak et Prah Vihar,” BEFEO, XLIII, pp. 
56 ff. 
7. R. C. Majumdar, “The Date of Accession of Jayavarman II,” 
JGIS, X (1943), p. 52. 
8. An inscription of 803 mentions the foundations of an “elder” 
queen, Jayeshtharya, who reigned at Sambor. See above, p. 94. 
9. Coedés, “Les capitales de Jayavarman II,” BEFEO, XXVIII, pp. 
117-19. 
10. Henri Parmentier, L’Art khmér primitif (Paris, 1927), |, p. 206. 
11. Above, p. 67. 
12. Coedés, “Les capitales,” pp. 119-20; “Discovery of a Pre-
Angkor Monument in the Group of Angkor,” ABIA (1930), 
pp. 14-16. Henri Marchal, “Kuticvara,” BEFEO, XXXVII, pp. 
333-47. 
, 13. Coedés, “Les capitales,” p. 121; Inscriptions du Cambodge, 
I, p. 187. 
14. Philippe Stern, “Hariharalaya et Indrapura,” BEFEO, XXXVIIIL, 
pp. 180-86 (first and second periods). 
15. “Amarendrapura dans Amoghapura,” BEFEO, XXIV, pp. 359-72. 
16. Le Cambodge (Paris, 1900-1904), III, p. 470. 
17. Stern, “Hariharalaya et Indrapura,” p. 180, rejects this identifi-
cation because in this group that is comprised notably of Vat 
Khnat, the ruins submerged in the Western Baray (which 
was dug in the eleventh century), and the old parts of Prasat 
Kok P6 “there is uniform reuse of materials from the pre-
ceding era’ while Amarendrapura is supposed to have been 
| “founded” by Jayavarman II. This argument does not seem 
very convincing to me. The “founding” of a city, especially 
by a nomad king like Jayavarman II, does not preclude the 
use of materials appropriated from older nearby monuments. 

--- [Page 328] ---
306 Notes to Pages 99-102 
18. Probably Prasat Khna in Mlu Prei (Coedés, “Le Site de Jana-
pada,” BEFEO, XLIll, p. 8). 
19. Aymonier, Le Cambodge, |, p. 428. See Coedés, “Les capi-
tales,” p. 122. 
20. Philippe Stern, “Travaux exécutés au Phnom Kulén,” BEFEO, 
XXXVIII, pp. 151-73. 
21. Philippe Stern, “Le style du Kulén,” BEFEO, XXXVIII, pp. 111-
49, 
22. Henri Parmentier, “L’Art d’Indravarman,” BEFEO, XIX, 1, pp. 
1-91. 
23. In a communication to the Société Asiatique, February 8, 
1963, entitled ““Civaism tamoule et civaism khmer.” 
24. A good argument in favor of the identification of Java in the 
inscription of Sdok Kak Thom with the island of Java has been 
furnished by Gilberte de Coral Rémusat, who draws attention 
to “Influences javanaises dans l’art de Roltioh,” JA (July-
September, 1933), p. 190. See also Coral Rémusat, ‘‘Concern-
ing Some Indian Influences in Khmer Art,” IAL, VII (1933), p. 
114. These influences have also been studied by Stern, “Le 
style du Kulén,” pp. 127-28. 
25. Coedés, “On the Origin of the Sailendras of Indonesia,” JGIS, 
| (1934), p. 70. 
26. Coedés, ‘Note sur l’apothéose au Cambodge,” BCAI (1911), 
p. 46. 
27. Robert von Heine-Geldern, ‘““Weltbild und Bauform in Sidos-
tasien,” Wiener Beitrage zur Kunst und Kultur Asiens, IV 
(1930), pp. 28-78. 
28. F. D. Ki Bosch, “Het Lingga-Heiligdom van Dinaja,’”’ TBG, 
LXIV (1924), pp. 227-86. 
29. Philippe Stern, “Le temple-montagne khmer, le culte du linga 
et le Devaraja,” BEFEO, XXXIV, pp. 612-16. 
30. “L’inscription de Sdok Kak Thom,” p. 57. 
, 31. B. R. Chatterjee, Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia (Cal-
cutta, 1928), p. 273; “Tantrism in Cambodia, Sumatra and 
Java,” Modern Review (January, 1930), p. 80. P. C. Bagchi, “On 
Some Tantrik Texts Studied in Ancient Kambuja,’” [HQ, V 
(1929), pp. 754-69; VI (1930), pp. 97-107. 
32. Above, p. 93. See Coedés, review of Bagchi’s “On Some 
Tantrik Texts’ in BEFEO, XXIX, pp. 356-57. 
33. Jean Philippe Vogel, “The Head-Offering to the Goddess in 
Pallava Sculpture,’ BSOAS, VI, 2 (1931), pp. 539-43. 
34. Coedés, “Statuettes décapitées de Savankalok,” Institut Indo-
chinois pour l’Etude de l’Homme, Bulletins et Travaux, Il 
(1939), p. 190. 
35. The New History of the T’ang still attributes an embassy of 
813 to “Water Chenla.” Paul Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires de Chine 
en Inde, a la fin du Ville siécle,” BEFEO, IV, p. 215, n. 1. See 
Coedés, “A propos du Tchen-la d’eau,” BEFEO, XXXVI, p. 13. 

--- [Page 329] ---
Notes to Pages 102-105 307 
36. See below, p. 104. | 
37. Coedés, “La stéle de Palhal,” BEFEO, XIII, 6, p. 33. 
38. “Chronique,” BEFEO, XXXI, p. 621. Coedés, “Quelques sug- | 
gestions sur le méthode a suivre pour interpréter les bas-
reliefs de Bantay Chmar...,’’ BEFEO, XXXII, p. 80, n. 1. 
39. Stern, ‘Hariharalaya et Indrapura,” pp. 186-89 (third period). 
40. Coedés, “Nouvelles précisions sur les dates d’av€nement de 
quelques rois des dynasties angkoriennes,” BEFEO, XLIII, p. 12. 
41. A stele from Sambor of the Mekong, dated 803 (Aymonier, Le 
Cambodge, |, p. 305), published in Coedés, Inscriptions du 
Cambodge, III, p. 170, mentions an Indraloka, who was the 
great-grandfather of the author of the inscription. This seems 
to be a posthumous name, but we do not know to whom it 
was applied. | have already indicated that the appearance of 
a posthumous name at Sambor and the mention of the God-
King in another inscription of the same locality tend to place 
the origin of these rites in the kingdom of Sambhupura, home-
land of the ancestors of Jayavarman II. See Coedés, ‘Note sur 
l’‘apothéose au Cambodge,” p. 48. 
42. Coedés, “Le culte de la royauté divinisée, source d’inspiration 
des grands monuments du Cambodge ancien,” Conferenze, 
Serie Orientale Roma V (Rome, 1952), pp. 1-23. 
43. Stern, “Le style du Kulén.” Gilberte de Coral Rémusat, L’Art 
khmér, les grandes étapes de son évolution (Paris, 1940), pp. 
117-18. 
44, Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 370. 
45. Aymonier, Le Cambodge, |, p. 422. Coedés, “La stéle de 
Palhal,” p. 34; “Les capitales de Jayavarman II,” p. 116. 
46. Coedés and Pierre Dupont, “Les inscriptions du Prasat K6k 
P6,”” BEFEO, XXXVII, p. 381. Stern, “Hariharalaya et Indrapura,” 
pp. 186-89. 
47. Georges Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928), p. 
105, n. 3. 
48. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 269. 
49. Etienne Aymonier, “Premiére étude sur les inscriptions 
tchames,” JA (January-February, 1891), p. 24. 
50. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 269. 
51. Ibid., pp. 231-37. 52. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 153. : 
53. G. H. Luce, “The Ancient Pyu,” JBRS, XXVII (1937), p. 249. 
54. Ibid., p. 250, n. 3. 
55. Ma Tuan-lin, Ethnographie des peuples étrangers a la Chine, 
trans. Marquis d’Hervey de Saint-Denys, Il: Meridionaux (Ge-
neva, 1883), pp. 228-35. E. H. Parker, Burma, with Special 
Reference to Her Relations with China (Rangoon, 1893), p. 12. 
G. H. Luce, “The Ancient Pyu,” pp. 250-52. 
56. J. S. Furnivall, “The Foundation of Pagan,” JBRS, I, 2 (1911), 
pp. 6-9. 

--- [Page 330] ---
308 Notes to Pages 105-107 
57. R. Grant Brown, “The Origin of the Burmese,” JBRS, II 
} (1912), pp. 1-7. G. H. Luce, “Economic Life of the Early Bur-
man,” JBRS, XXX (1940), pp. 286-87; “Old Kyaukse and the 
Coming of the Burmans,’”” JBRS, XLII (1959), pp. 75-112; “The 
Early Syam in Burma’s History,” JSS, XLVI (1952), p. 127. 
58. See above, p. 86. 
59. “The Ari of Burma and Tantric Buddhism,” ARASI (1915-16), 
pp. 79-93. On the etymology of the word Ari, see Edouard 
Huber, Review of the Superintendent, Archaeological Service 
Burma, in BEFEO, IX, p. 584; Louis Finot, “Un nouveau docu-
ment sur le bouddhisme birman,” JA (July-August, 1912), pp. 
123-28; Maung Tin, “Derivation of Ari,” JBRS, IX (1919), p. 
155 (and the discussion that follows this note in JBRS, X [1920], 
pp. 28, 82, 158, 160). 
60. Than Tun, “Religion in Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” JBRS, XLII, 
2 (1959), p. 59. 
61. Coedés, Les Peuples de la péninsule indochinoise (Paris, 1962), 
p. 110. See Htin Aung, “The Lord of the Great Mountain,” 
JBRS, XXXVIII (1955), p. 82, and above, pp. 26-27. 
} 62. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 172, n. 1. 
63. Ibid., p. 156, n. 4. 
64. Ibid., pp. 223-24. G. H. Luce, “Burma down to the Fall of 
Pagan,” JBRS, XXIX (1939), p. 272. 
65. Luce, “The Early Syam in Burma’s History,” p. 192. 
66. C. O. Blagden, “Mon and Ramajfifadesa,” JBRS, IV (1914), pp. 
59-60; ‘Mon, Rman, Ramafifa,” JBRS, V (1915), p. 27. Some 
Arabic scholars have thought they could recognize this name 
in the form of Rahma in various accounts of voyages, but 
Jean Sauvaget, Relation de la Chine et de I’Inde (Paris, 1948), | 
p. 52, has shown the impossibility of this relationship. 
67. They were sons of Tissa Dhammaraja Siharaja, who, accord-
ing to the legend, descended from a dragon, as did his wife 
(J. S. Furnivall, ‘Notes on the History of Hanthawaddy,” 
JBRS, Ill [1913], p. 167). 
68. May Oung, “The Chronology of Burma,” JBRS, II (1912), pp. 
15-16. See R. Halliday, “Lik Sming Asah,” JBRS, VII (1917), 
p. 205; “Slapat Rajawang Datow Sming Rong, A History of 
Kings,” JBRS, XII (1923), p. 48, n. 81. 
69. A. P. Phayre, History of Burma (London, 1883), p. 289. G. E. 
Harvey, History of Burma (London, 1925), p. 368. Maung Hla, 
“The Chronological Tables of the Kings of Burma Who 
Reigned at Thayekhittaya (Ancient Prome) and at Pagan,” 
JBRS, XIII (1923), pp. 82-94. 
70. G. H. Luce, Mons of the Pagan Dynasty (Rangoon, 1950). 
71. Alastair Lamb, “Miscellaneous Papers on Early Hindu and 
Buddhist Settlement in Northern Malaya and Southern Thai-
land,” JFMSM, n.s. VI (1961), p. 67, n. 2. 
72. The translation by E. Hultzsch, published in JRAS (1913), p. 
337, and JRAS (1914), p. 397, is reproduced in Coedés, Recueil 

--- [Page 331] ---
Notes to Pages 107-10 309 
des inscriptions du Siam (Bangkok, 1924-29), II, p. 50. K. A. 
Nilakanta Sastri, “Mahipala of the Candakausikam,” Journal 
of Oriental Research, VI (1932); “Takuapa and Its Tamil In-
scription,” JRASMB, XXII (1949), pp. 25—30. 
73. R. Gopalan, History of the Pallavas of Kanchi (Madras, 1928), 
p. 138. 
74. See below, p. 158. A third Tamil inscription at Ligor (above, 
p. 29) is too mutilated to be useful. 
75. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 286. 
76. Ibid., pp. 286-87. 
77. Above, p. 54. 
78. Above, p. 90. 79. Above, p. 88. : 
80. L. C. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions datées de 
I’Indonésie,” BEFEO, XLVI (1952), p. 27. 
81. J. G. de Casparis, Prasasti Indonesia (Bandung, 1950, 1956), 
Il, p. 219. 
82. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions,” p. 27. 
83. Above, p. 92, and below, p. 109. 
84. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions,” p. 31. 
85. De Casparis, Prasasti Indonesia, Il, pp. 289-90. 
86. Ibid., pp. 294-97, and I, pp. 107-109 and 133. 
87. Above, p. 92. Since Balaputra’s mother was a princess of 
Srivijaya, he was returning to her native land. 
88. This author, whose work dates from 844-48, says simply that 
“the king of Zabag, king of the islands of the southern sea, 
is called the maharaja.” Gabriel Ferrand, Relations de voyages 
et textes géographiques arabes, persans et turks relatifs a 
l’Extréme-Orient du Ville au XVIIle siécles (Paris, 1913), pp. 
23-24, 29-30; ‘‘L’empire sumatranais de Crivijaya,” JA (July-
September, 1922), pp. 52-53. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, History of 
Srivijaya (Madras, 1949), p. 62. 
89. Inscription of Pereng. N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Ge-
schiedenis (The Hague, 1931), p. 165. 
90. Thanks to the Charter of Nalanda published in Hirananda 
Shastri, “The Nalandé Copper Plate of Devapaladeva,” Epi-
graphia Indica, XVII (1924), pp. 310-27. 
91. W. F. Stutterheim, A Javanese Period in Sumatran History 
(Surakarta, 1929), pp. 9-12. 
92. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “Sri Vijaya,” BEFEO, XL, p. 267. 
93. For the ‘location of this vihara among the ruins of Nalanda, 
see F. D. K. Bosch, “Een oorkonde van het Groote Klooster te 
Nalanda,” TBG, LXV (1925), pp. 509-88. 
94. De Casparis, Prasasti Indonesia, II, p. 297. Chapter VII] : 
1. He was the grandson of King Jayendradhipativarman, maternal 
uncle of Jayavarman II. See above, p. 97. 

--- [Page 332] ---
310 Notes to Pages 110-11 
2. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge (Paris, 1937-), |, p. 37. 
See K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “A Note on the Date of Sankara,” 
Journal Asiat. Res., Madras, XI, p. 285. ! 3. Auguste Barth and Abel Bergaigne, ISC, p. 361. Coedés, 
“L’inscription de Baksei Chamkrong,” JA (May-June, 1909), p. 
485; Inscriptions du Cambodge, IV, p. 88. | 
4. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 361. Coedés, Inscriptions du 
Cambodge, |, p. 24. Pierre Dupont, “La dislocation du Tchen-
la et la formation du Cambodge angkorien,” BEFEO, XLIII, 
p. 17. 
5. Victor Goloubew, “L’hydraulique urbaine et agricole a 
l’époque des rois d’Angkor,’” Bulletin Economique de I’Indo-
chine (1941). B. P. Groslier, Angkor: Hommes et pierres (Paris, 
1956); Indochine, carrefour des arts (Paris, 1961), pp. 94 ff. 
6. The old name of the monument is Paramesvara, posthumous 
name of Jayavarman II. The towers were built in the eastern 
part of a large quadrangle, situated to the south of the In-
dratataka, that perhaps corresponds to the puri of Jayavar-
man II (above, p. 102). The Sanskrit inscriptions of this monu-
ment have been published by Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 18. 
The Khmer inscriptions, which give long lists of servants, have 
been analyzed by Etienne Aymonier, Le Cambodge (Paris, 
1900-1904), Il, p. 439, and reproduced in volume IV of 
Corpus. 
7. Coedés, ‘Note sur |’apothéose au Cambodge,” BCAI (1911), 
p. 40. 
8. The excavations at Bakong have revealed that on the site of 
the sanctuary (unfinished or destroyed) of the linga Indres-
vara, on the top of the pyramid, a new tower was constructed 
in the twelfth century. The eight towers of stuccoed brick at 
the base of the pyramid and the adjoining structures are con-
temporaneous with the founding of the temple. The inscrip-
tions of Bakong have been published in Barth and Bergaigne, 
ISC, p. 310, and in Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, p. 31. 
9. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 313. 
10. Erik Seidenfaden, “Complément a L’Inventaire descriptif des 
monuments du Cambodge pour les quatre provinces du Siam 
oriental,” BEFEO, XXII, p. 63. 
11. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, p. 43. 
12. Coedés, “La tradition généalogique des premiers rois d’Ang-
kor,” BEFEO, XXVIII, p. 124 ff.; “A propos du Tchen-la d’eau,” 
BEFEO, XXXVI, pp. 1 ff. 
13. He was the grandnephew in the female line of Sivakaivalya, 
the chief priest of Jayavarman II. Louis Finot, ‘L’inscription de 
Sdok Kak Thom,” BEFEO, XV, 2, pp. 80, 89. See Coedés and 
Pierre Dupont, ‘Les stéles de Sdok Kak Thom, Phnom Sandak 
et Prah Vihar,” BEFEO, XLIII, p. 62. 
14. Coedés, “A la recherche du Yacodharacrama,” BEFEO, XXXII, 
pp. 84 ff. 

--- [Page 333] ---
Notes to Pages 111-14 311 
15. Above, p. 89. On the characteristics of this script, see the 
note by Auguste Barth in Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 346. 
16. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 319. The Khmer inscriptions are 
analyzed by Aymonier, Le Cambodge, II, p. 450, and repro-
duced in volume IV of Corpus. 
17. Finot, “L’inscription de Sdok Kak Thom,” p. 89; Coedés and 
Dupont, “Les stéles de Sdok Kak Thom,” p. 113. 
18. Le Bayon d’Angkor et I’évolution de I’art khmér (Paris, 1927). 
19. “La date du Bayon,” BEFEO, XXVIII, p. 81. 
20. “Le Phnom Bakheng et la ville de Yagovarman,”” BEFEO, XXXIII, 
p. 319; “Nouvelles recherches autour du Phnom Bakhéng,’’ 
BEFEO, XXXIV, p. 576. Since this river flows down from 
Phnom Kulén, one scholar has wondered whether this sacred 
hill did not play a role in regard to Angkor analogous to that 
played by the religious city of Mi-sdén with regard to Tra-
kiéu, whose river flowed down from the cirque of Mi-son 
(Séance du 10 Février, 1939, JA [April-June, 1939], p. 281). 
21. Coedés, “Une nouvelle inscription du Phnom Bakhéng,’’ 
BEFEO, XI, p. 396. On the symbolism of Phnom Bakhéng, see 
Jean Filliozat, ‘‘Les mythes cosmiques dans les religions in-
diennes,” Proceedings of the 7th Congress for the History of 
Religions (Amsterdam, 1950), p. 135; “Le symbolisme du 
monument du Phnom Bakhéng,” BEFEO, XLIV (1954), pp. 
527-54. 
22. Philippe Stern, “Le temple-montagne khmer, le culte du linga 
et le Devaraja,”” BEFEO, XXXIV, p. 611. See below, p. 119. 
23. Maurice Glaize, “Le dégagement du Phnom Krom,” BEFEO, 
XL, p. 371. 
24. Published in Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, pp. 413 ff. 
25. On these sects, see Sir Charles Eliot, Hinduism and Buddhism: 
An Historical Sketch (London, 1921), vol. Il. 
26. Represented by the ruins of Prei Prasat excavated by G. 
Trouvé. See his ‘Etude sur le Prei Prasat,’ BEFEO, XXXIl, p. 
113. The stele has been published in Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, 
p. 418. See Coedés, “A la recherche du Yacodharacrama,” 
p. 85. 
27. Represented by the ruins of Prasat Komnap. See G. Trouvé, 
“Etude sur le Prei Prasat,” p. 113. | have published the stele 
in “A la recherche du Yacodharacrama,” p. 89. 
28. Coedés, “La stéle de Tép Pranam,” JA (March-April, 1908), 
p. 203. 
29. These monuments are described in Henri Parmentier, L’Art 
. khmér classique (Paris, 1939), pp. 136, 270. 
30. Stele of Huei Thamo. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 389. 31. Stele of P’aniet (K. 479). | 
32. Stele of Kuhea Preah. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 388 (under 
the name of Phnom Trotoung). 
33. Coedés, ‘Nouvelles données chronologiques et généalogiques 
sur la dynastie de Mahidharapura,’’ BEFEO, XXIX, p. 316. 

--- [Page 334] ---
312 Notes to Pages 114-15 
34. Coedés, “Inscription de Baksei Chamkrong,” p. 499; Inscrip-
tions du Cambodge, IV, p. 88. 
35. Henri Maspero, “La frontiére de l’Annam et du Cambodge du 
Vill€ au XIVe siécle,” BEFEO, XVIII, 3, p. 32. See Georges 
Maspero, “La géographie politique de I’Indochine aux environs 
de 960 A.D.,” Et. Asiat. EFEO, Il, pp. 94-95. 
36. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 492, n. 3. 
37. Coedés, ‘Nouvelles précisions sur les dates d’avenement de 
quelques rois des dynasties angkoriennes,” BEFEO, XLII, p. 13. 
One inscription mentions Paramasivaloka as having issued a 
decree dated 902 (Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, V, pp. 
151-52). 
38. Aymonier, Le Cambodge, III, p. 139. 
39. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 551. See also Coedés, “La tra-
dition généalogique,” pp. 127-28. 
40. Coedeés, “L’inscription de Baksei Chamkrong,” p. 500. 
41. Coedés, “La date de Koh Ker,” BEFEO, XXXI, p. 17. 
42. Coedés, “A Date of Isanavarman II,” JGIS, Ill (1936), p. 65. 
43. Coedés, “La date de Koh Ker,” p. 12. It is from the same year 
as the Vishnuite monument of Prasat Kravan, erected east of 
Angkor by various high dignitaries. 
44, Finot, “L’inscription de Sdok Kak Thom,” p. 90; Coedés and 
Dupont, “Les stéles de Sdok Kak Thom,” p. 119. 
45. Inscription of Prasat Neang Khmau, in Coedés, Inscriptions 
du Cambodge, Il, p. 32. See Coedés, “La date de Koh Ker,” 
p. 17. 
46. “Island of glory,” a distortion of the word gargyar (modern 
koki), name of the Hopea tree of the Dipterocarp family, 
generally known under its Vietnamese name of sao. 
47. Parmentier, L’Art khmér classique, pp. 15 ff. On the epigraphy 
of Koh Ker, see Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, pp. 
47-71. 
48. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, pp. 68-71. 
49. Coedés, ‘The Real Founder of the Cult of Divine Royalty in 
Cambodia,” Swami Vivekananda Centenary Memorial Volume, 
1963, ed. R. C. Majumdar (Calcutta, 1964); “Le rdle de la 
pyramide de Koh Ker dans I’évolution du temple-montagne 
khmer,” Paranavitana Felicitation Volume (Peradinya, to be 
published). 
50. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, I, p. 75. 
51. Ibid., pp. 260-61. 
52. Ibid., p. 74. 
53. Above, p. 67. 
54. He was in fact the younger brother of Rajendravarman, whom | the stele of Pré Rup represents as very young himself at the 
time of his accession. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, 
p. 75. 
55. Finot, “L’inscription de Sdok Kak Thom,” p. 91. Coedés and 
Dupont, ‘‘Les stéles de Sdok Kak Thom,” p. 120. 

--- [Page 335] ---
Notes to Pages 115-18 313 
56. Coedés, “Les inscriptions de Bat Chum,” JA (September-
October, 1908), p. 239 (revised translation). 
57. Stern, Le Bayon d’Angkor, p. 55. 
58. Above, p. 110. 
59. Stele of Mébon, published in Louis Finot, “Inscriptions 
d’Ankor,’”” BEFEO, XXV, p. 351. See Coedés, “La tradition 
genéalogique,” p. 137, n. 1. 
60. Above, p. 66. 
61. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, pp. 73 ff. 
62. Aymonier, Le Cambodge, II], pp. 490-91. 
63. His name continues to appear in the inscriptions of Jayavar-
man V. 
64. Finot, “Inscriptions d’Ankor,” p. 362. He was related to a 
priestly family made known to us by the inscription of Vat 
Thipdei. When | published this inscription in Mélanges d’In-
dianisme offerts par ses éléves a M. Sylvain Lévi (Paris, 1911), 
p. 213, | thought | could identify this Sivacharya with another 
Brahman of the same name mentioned in the inscription of 
Sdok Kak Thom as officiating priest of the Devaraja (Finot, 
“L’inscription de Sdok Kak Thom,” p. 91). But Louis Finot has 
shown the difficulty of such an identification (“Inscriptions 
d’Ankor,” p. 365). On this question, see L. P. Briggs, ‘The 
Genealogy and Successors of Sivacharya,” BEFEO, XLVI, p. 177. 
65. Coedés, ‘‘Les inscriptions de Bat Chum,” p. 251. 
66. Above, p. 113. 67. Below, n. 76. 
68. Coedés, ‘Les inscriptions de Bat Chum,” p. 245. 
69. Below, p. 124. 
70. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, p. 148. On Banteay Srei, 
see Ecole Frangaise d’Extréme-Orient, Mémoires archéologi-
ques, |: Le temple d’Icvarapura (Paris, 1926). Coedés, “La date 
de Banteay Srei,’” BEFEO, XXIX, p. 289. 71. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, Il, 65. 
72. Coedés and Pierre Dupont, ‘Les inscriptions du Prasat K6k 
Pd,” BEFEO, XXXVII, pp. 383, 386. 
73. Gilberte de Coral Rémusat, Victor Goloubew, and Coedés, 
“La date du Ta Kev,” BEFEO, XXXIV, p. 401. See also Coedés, 
“La date de Baphuon,” BEFEO, XXXI, pp. 18-22; Coedés and 
Dupont, ‘Les inscriptions du Prasat K6k P6,” pp. 383-84, 411. 
74. Preah Einkosei in Siem Reap (Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 
77), and Prasat Komphus in Mlu Prei (Coedés, Inscriptions du 
Cambodge, I, p. 159). 
75. Finot, “L’inscription de Sdok Kak Thom,” p. 94. Coedés and 
Dupont, “Les stéles de Sdok Kak Thom,” p. 131. 
76. E. Senart, “Une inscription bouddhique du Cambodge,” RA 
(1883), p. 82. Coedés, “Un document capital sur le boud-
dhisme en Indochine: le: stéle de Vat Sithor,” Studies on 
Buddhism in Japan, IV (1942), p. 110; Inscriptions du Cam-
bodge, VI, p. 195. H. Kern, “Over den aanhef eener buddhis-

--- [Page 336] ---
314 Notes to Pages 118-21 
tische inscriptie uit Battambang,” VMKAWAL (1899), p. 66 
(translated by Louis de La Vallée-Poussin in Muséon, n.s. 7 
[1906], p. 46). Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, Il, p. 202. 
77. Above, p. 84. 
78. Louis Finot, “Lokecvara en Indochine,” Et. Asiat. EFEO, |, 
p. 227. 
79. Coedés, “Une inscription d’Udayadityavarman 1,” BEFEO, XI, 
p. 400. F. D. K. Bosch, “De Laatste der Pandawa’s” BKI, 104 
(1948), pp. 541-71, would identify him with Udayana, king of 
Bali (below, p. 129). 
80. Le Cambodge, III, pp. 530-98. 
81. On this subject, see Georges Groslier, Recherches sur les 
Cambodgiens (Paris, 1921). 
82. Robert von Heine-Geldern, “Conceptions of State and King-
ship in Southeast Asia,” FEQ, Il (1942), pp. 15-30. Jean Imbert, 
Histoire des institutions khméres (Phnom Penh, 1961). 
83. R. Lingat, “L’influence juridique de |’Inde au Champa et au 
Cambodge d’aprés l’épigraphie,” JA, CCXXXVII (1949), pp. 
273-90. 
84. Robert von Heine-Geldern, “Weltbild und Bauform in Sutd-
ostasien,” Wiener Beitréage zur Kunst und Kultur Asiens, IV 
(1930), p. 28. 
85. See above, p. 101. 
86. It seems improbable, if not impossible, that the large linga 
erected on the pyramid of Koh Ker, and called kamrateng 
jagat ta rajya in the inscriptions, was taken from Angkor by 
Jayavarman IV and brought back by Rajendravarman. In the 
eleventh century, the inscriptions speak of a linga of gold 
(below, p. 138). 
87. Coedés, “Le culte de la royauté divinisée, source d’inspiration 
des grands monuments du Cambodge ancien,” Conferenze, 
Serie Orientale Roma V (Rome, 1952), p. 1. Opinions vary 
concerning the principles governing royal succession. See 
Eveline Porée-Maspero, “Nouvelle étude sur la Nagi Soma,” 
JA, CCXXXVII (1950), p. 237; Etude sur les rites agraires des 
Cambodgiens, | (Paris, 1962), pp. 152-82. Coedeés, ‘‘Les régles 
de la succession royale dans |’ancien Cambodge,” BSEI, n.s. 
XXVI (1951), pp. 117-30. 
88. K. Bhattacharya, Les religions brahmaniques dans I’ancien 
Cambodge (Paris, 1961). 
89. Coedés, “La stéle de Tép Pranam,” p. 205; “Les inscriptions de 
Bat Chum,” pp. 223-25. And for the following centuries: in-
scription of Tuol Prasat in Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, 
Il, p. 97; Louis Finot, ‘L’inscription de Prah Khan,” BEFEO, 
IV, p. 673; Coedés, “La stéle de Ta Prohm,” BEFEO, VI, p. 70, 
n. 4. 
90. We shall see the cult of Siva-Buddha in Java, below, p. 199. 
91. L’Inde et le Monde (Paris, 1928), p. 121. 
92. Below, p. 212. “Actually,” writes Louis de La Vallée-Poussin in 

--- [Page 337] ---
Notes to Pages 121-23 315 
Dynasties et histoire de I’Inde (Paris, 1935), p. 334, “it is a 
misinterpretation to speak of Indian ‘tolerance’ in the sense 
of ‘respect for the beliefs of others,’ ‘freedom accorded beliefs 
and practices of which one does not approve.’ No Indian 
sovereign could, without seriously neglecting his duties, fail to 
establish Dharma (‘Good’) and exterminate Adharma (‘Evil’), 
for in India, just as in China, even the changing of the seasons 
depends on the virtue of men. What gives this impression is 
the fact that, as a general rule, the rulers, like their subjects 
(and like the educated Brahmans, who, in all truth, do not 
believe in any god), worship all the gods, believe in the utility 
of all the liturgies: the kings make donations to the Buddhists, 
to the Brahmans..., as our sovereigns of the Middle Ages 
gave to various.religious orders, each having their chosen 
god.” 
93. Coedés, “Note sur l’apothéose au Cambodge,” p. 28; Pour 
mieux comprendre Angkor (Paris, 1947), pp. 44-67. 
94. Coedés, “La destination funéraire des grands monuments 
khmers,” BEFEO, XL, p. 315. 
95. Coedés, Pour mieux comprendre Angkor, pp. 86-120. 
96. Coedés, “Une nouvelle inscription d’Ayuthya,” JSS, XXXV 
(1944), p. 73. 
97. Also mentioned in the inscriptions. Coedés, “Nouvelles don-
nées épigraphiques sur I’histoire de I’Indochine centrale,” 
JA, CCXLVI (1958), pp. 127-28. 
98. Above, pp. 76-77. 
99. Louis Finot, ““Premiére stéle de Dong-duong,” BEFEO, IV, p. 
84. 
100. Georges Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928), p. 6, 
writes incorrectly Tch’eng-cheng. 
101. The question about whether the grandfather and father of 
Indravarman actually reigned, or whether he himself was the 
founder of the dynasty, has been the subject of a discussion 
between Louis Finot (“Inscriptions de Quang-nam,” BEFEO, 
IV, p. 96; “L’épigraphie indochinoise,” BEFEO, XV, 2, p. 126; 
review of Maspero’s Le Royaume de Champa, BEFEO, XXVIII, 
p. 288) and Georges Maspero (Le Royaume de Champa, p. 110, 
n. 5) which, it seems to me, must be settled in favor of the 
latter; the terms in which the king relates the circumstances 
of his accession appear to me explicit. 
102. Description in Henri Parmentier, Inventaire descriptif des 
monuments cams de |’Annam (Paris, 1909-18), I, p. 439. On 
the particular form of the Mahayana at Ddéng-dudng, see 
Finot, ‘“‘Lokecvara en Indochine,” p. 232. 
103. Inscriptions of Ban-lanh (edited by Finot, “Inscriptions de 
Quang-nam,” p. 99) and of Chau-sa (edited by Edouard Huber, 
“L’épigraphie de la dynastie de Dong-dudng,” BEFEO, XI, 
p. 282). 
104. Edouard Huber, in translating the stele of Nhan-biéu (‘L’épi-

--- [Page 338] ---
316 Notes to Pages 123-25 
graphie de la dynastie de Dong-dudng,” p. 299) has rendered 
this expression as “to acquire the magical science.” On this 
word siddha-(or siddhi-)yatra, which designates a pilgrimage 
to a particularly sacred territory charged with magical power, 
see above, p. 82. 
105. Philippe Stern, L’Art du Champa (ancien Annam) et son évo-
lution (Paris, 1942), pp. 66-68, 109. On a possible Chinese 
influence, see Pierre Dupont, “Les apports chinois dans le 
Style bouddhique de Dong-dudng,”’ BEFEO, XLIV (1951), pp. 
267-74, 
106. Inscriptions of Phu-ludng and of Lac-thanh published in 
Edouard Huber, “L’épigraphie de la dynastie de Dong-dudng,” 
pp. 283, 285. 
107. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 247. 
108. The earliest mention of this battle is found in the stele of the 
Mébon of 952 (st. CXLVI, Finot, “Inscriptions d’Ankor,” p. 
346). 
109. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 260. . 
110. According to Kodo Tasaka, “Islam in Champa,” Tohogaku, IV 
(1952), p. 52, the envoy P’u Ho San was a Moslem named 
Abt Hasan and what we have here is the earliest evidence of 
the existence of Islam in Champa. The Arabic inscriptions 
discovered in 1902-1907 and deciphered by Paul Ravaisse, 
‘Deux inscriptions coufiques du Champa,” JA, XX (1922), p. 
247, prove that a Moslem colony, enjoying a certain auton-
omy, existed in Champa in the middle of the tenth century. 
111. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 119. 
112. Ibid., p. 120. 
113. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 260. 
114. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 121, n. 1. 
115. In the present-day province of Ninh-binh. 
116. Henri Maspero, “Le protectorat général d’Annam sous les 
T’ang,’”’ BEFEO, X, p. 678. 
117. For this whole period, on which the epigraphic sources are 
silent and which is known only through Chinese texts, see 
Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, pp. 121 ff. 
118. Inscription of Mi-sdén published in Finot, “Inscriptions de 
Quang-nam,” p. 113. On the date of this inscription, see 
Louis Finot, ‘Les inscriptions de Jaya Paramecvaravarman I,” 
BEFEO, XV, 2, p. 49, and Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, 
p. 126, n. 3. 
119. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 129. 
120. Perhaps on a site marked by the tower of Binh-lam, which 
seems to date from the eleventh century. The citadel of Cha-
ban possibly marks the location of Vijaya at a later date, for 
the Tower of Copper that marks its center dates from the 
thirteenth century (Stern, L’Art du Champa, pp. 71-72). 
121. Above, p. 108. 

--- [Page 339] ---
Notes to Pages 125-27 317 
122. Hendrik Kern, Verspreide Geschriften (The Hague, 1913-29), 
VI, p. 277. N. J. Krom, “De inscriptie van Pereng,” BKI, 75 
(1919), p. 16. R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, Agastya in den Archipel 
(Leyden, 1926), p. 45. 
123. N. J. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst (The 
Hague, 1923), |, p. 440; Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The 
Hague, 1931), p. 172. 
124. See above, p. 90. 
125. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst, Il, p. 4; 
Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 171. 
126. Ibid. See above, pp. 113, 118, 120-21. 
127. W. P. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago and 
Malacca (Batavia, 1876), p. 13. 
128. On the vishakanyaka in India, see C. H. Tawney, The Ocean of 
Story, ed. N. M. Penzer (London, 1924-28), Il, p. 275. 
129. See above, p. 90. 
130. Perhaps a transcription of the name of Daksha-, who before 
succeeding Balitung in 915, appeared in the charters of this 
country around 901 as the highest dignitary of the court. See 
Poerbatjaraka, Agastya, p. 110, and below, p. 127. 
131. L. C. Damais, ‘Epigrafische Aantekeningen,” TBG, LXXXIII 
(1949), pp. 1-6; “Méthode de réduction des dates javanaises 
en date européenes,” BEFEO, XLV (1951), pp. 21-23. 
132. L. C. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions datées d’Indo-
nésie,” BEFEO, XLVI (1952), pp. 34-43. 
133. The identification proposed by N. J. Krom (in F. W. Stapel, 
ed., Geschiedenis van Nederlandsch Indié [Amsterdam, 1938-
40], |, p. 168), contested by Damais (‘Epigrafische Aante-
keningen,” p. 22; “Liste des principales inscriptions,” p. 42), 
but confirmed by J. G. de Casparis (“Short Inscriptions from 
Tjandi Plaosan-Lor,” Berita Dinas Purbakala: Bulletin of the 
Archeological Service of the Republic of Indonesia, 4 [1958], 
p. 22). 
134. W. F. Stutterheim, “Oudheidkundige Aanteekeningen,” BKI, 
90 (1933), p. 269. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions,” 
p. 43. 
135. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions,” p. 43. 
136. Above, p. 88. 
137. W. F. Stutterheim, “Oudheidkundige Aanteekeningen,’”’ BKI, 
89 (1932), p. 278; 90 (1933), p. 287. 
138. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 187. 
139. They name him Rakai Watukura, lord Balitung in the East, 
and Sri IgvarakeSava Utsavatunga (or Samarottunga Dharmo-
daya Mahasambhu in the center). For the list and the dates of 
these inscriptions, see Damais, “Liste des principales inscrip-
tions,” pp. 42—-51. 
140. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 191, n. 1. R. Goris, 
‘De eenheid der Mataramsche dynastie, Feestbunde! door het 

--- [Page 340] ---
318 Notes to Pages 127-28 
Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten-
schappen (Weltevreden, 1929), I, p. 202. 
141. On this date, see Damais, “Epigrafische Aantekeningen,” p. 
25; “La date des inscriptions en ére de Sanjaya,” BEFEO, XLV 
(1951), pp. 42 ff. 
142. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 188. His complete 
name is Dakshottama Bahuvajratipakshakshaya. 
143. Goris, “De eenheid der Mataramsche dynastie,” p. 206. 
144. Ibid. W. F. Stutterheim, “Oudheidkundige Aanteekeningen,” 
BKI, 90 (1933), p. 267. 
145. “The establishment of this new era in the name of a great 
sovereign of the past makes plausible the hypothesis of a 
special tie—of kinship?—between Daksha and Sanjaya.’ 
Damais, “La date des inscriptions en ére de Sanjaya,” p. 62. 
146. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 194 (Rakai Layang, 
lord Tulodong, Sri Sajjanasanmatanuragatungadeva). See 
Himansu Bhusan Sarkar, “A Geographical Introduction to the 
Study of Kawi Oorkomden,” BKI, 105 (1949), pp. 107-10. 
| Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions,” pp. 52-55. 
147. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 196. 
, 148. On this date, see Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions,” 
pp. 54-57. His complete name is Rakai Pankaja, lord Wawa, 
Sri Vijayalokanamottunga. 
149. W. F. Stutterheim, ‘Een Oorkunde van Koning Pu Wagi¢wara 
uit 927 A.D.,” TBG, 75 (1935), p. 420. 
150. Sri Isanavikrama Dharmottungadeva. 
151. See the discussion in News Letter from the South East Asia 
Institute, no. 6 (March, 1948), which cites a study by Bertram 
Schrieke, “Het einde van de klassieke Hindoe-Javaansche cul-
tuur op Midden Java,” 22 Koloniale Vacantiecursus voor Ge-
ografen (Amsterdam, 1941). 
152. J. W. Ijzerman, Beschrijving der oudheden nabij de grens der 
residentie’s Soerakarta en Djogdjakarta (Batavia, 1891). 
153. Pieter Jan Veth, Java, geographisch, ethnologisch, historisch 
(Haarlem, 1896), I, p. 45. J. L. A. Brandes, in Encyclopaedie van 
Nederlandsch-Indié (The Hague, 1895-1905), Ill, p. 132. 
154. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 208. J. L. Moens, 
“Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha,” TBG, 77 (1937), pp. 411, 442. 
155. F. D. K. Bosch, “Een Maleische inscriptie in het Buitenzorg-
sche,” BKI, 100 (1941), pp. 49-53. 
156. For these dates, see Damais, ‘““Epigrafische Aantekeningen,”’ p. 
26; ‘Liste des principales inscriptions,” pp. 56-63. In spite of 
this rich epigraphy, the historicity and the very existence of 
Sindok have been challenged by C. C. Berg (see “Javanese 
Historiography,” in D. G. E. Hall, Historians of South-East Asia 
[London, 1961], p. 18). On the theories of C. C. Berg, see 
below, p. 344, n. 145. 

--- [Page 341] ---
Notes to Pages 128-30 319 
157. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst, Il, pp. 27-35, 
307-309. 
158. R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, ‘‘Dateering van het Oud-Javaansche 
Ramayana,” in Gedenkschrift van het Koninklijk Instituut voor 
de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indié (The 
Hague, 1926), p. 265; “Het Oud-Javaansche Ramayana,” TBG, 
72 (1932), p. 151. Christiaan Hooykaas at first believed he 
could attribute the Javanese Ramayana to a poet named Yogi-
Svara (The Old-Javanese Ramayana Kakawin [The Hague, 1955], 
VKI, XVI), but he has renounced this hypothesis in an article 
showing that this poem was directly inspired by the Sanskrit 
Bhattikavya (The Old-Javanese Ramayana; an Exemplary Ka-
kawin as to Form and Content [Amsterdam, 1957], VENAWAL, 
65, no. 1). 
159. Edited by J. Kats (The Hague, 1910). Translated into German 
by Kurt Wulff (Copenhagen, 1935) in Historisk-filologiske 
Meddelelser, XXI, 4. See Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschied-
enis, p. 219. 
160. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions,” p. 62, n. 8. 
161. L. C. Damais, “La colonnette de Sanur,’”’ BEFEO, XLIV (1947-
50), pp. 121-28; “Liste des principales inscriptions,” pp. 82-83. 
162. W. F. Stutterheim, Oudheden van Bali (Singaradja, 1929), 1; 
Indian Influence in Old-Balinese Art (London, 1935). R. Goris, 
“Enkele medeelingen nopens de oorkonden gesteld in het 
Oud-balisch,’’ Djawa, XVI (1936), pp. 88-101. 
163. See the résumé by L. C. Damais of an article by R. Goris on 
this dynasty in BEFEO, L (1962), pp. 482-83. 
164. Damais, ‘Liste des principales inscriptions,” p. 85, n. 5, pro-
poses to identify this princess with the daughter of Sindok, 
named above Sri Isinatungavijaya. 
165. Ibid., p. 62, n. 5. 
166. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 108. 
167. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions,” p. 63. 
168. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, pp. 18, 65. 
Gabriel Ferrand, ‘L’empire sumatranais de Crivijaya,” JA 
(July-September, 1922), pp. 18-19. 
169. L. C. Damais, ‘Une trace de |’expédition de Dharmavamca 
a San-fo-ts’i,” Actes, XXIl@ Congrés International des Ori-
entalistes (Istanbul, 1951), p. 323. 
170. Pp. 113-14. 
171. On all these texts, see Gabriel Ferrand, Relations de voyages 
et textes géographiques arabes, persans et turks relatifs a 
’Extréme-Orient du VIlle au XVIle siécles (Paris, 1913-14). See 
also Ferrand, “‘L’empire sumatranais,” pp. 56—57. 
172. On Kalah, see Jean Sauvaget, ed. and trans. ‘Ahbar as-sin wa 
l-hind, Relation de la Chine et de I’Inde, rédigée en 851 
(Paris, 1948), p. 43; O. W. Wolters, “Tambralinga,” BSOAS. 

--- [Page 342] ---
320 Notes to Pages 130-32 
XXI (1958), p. 602; Paul Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese 
(Kuala Lumpur, 1961), pp. 224 ff. On the location of Kalah, 
see S. Q. Fatimi, “In Quest of Kalah,’”” JSEAH, |, 2 (1960), p. 
65. 
173. In part according to the documentation of Abi Zayd Hasan, 
in his addition to the ‘Ahbar as-sin wa I-hind. Before his pre-
mature death, Jean Sauvaget, the eminent Arabic scholar who 
: edited and translated the ‘Ahbar as-sin wa !-hind, kindly called 
to my attention that “the name by which the Arabs supposedly 
knew the empire of Srivijaya, Sribuza, does not exist: the 
Arabic transcription Srbza should be interpreted, according 
to the oldest Arabic system of transcription (in which the 
foreign v is rendered as b, and j as z; there are many other 
examples of this), as Srvja. Thus it transcribes exactly, but 
naturally without the notation of the vowels, Srivija(ya); the 
, omission of the last syllable could be accidental, but it may 
also have been intentional, for the syllable -ya may have been 
taken for the Arabic ending -ya that had no place there.” 
174. The parasang equals around 6'/4 kilometers. 
175. Ferrand, Relations de voyages, pp. 109-10; “‘L’empire su-
matranais,” p. 63. 
176. This transcription has not yet been explained in a com-
pletely satisfactory manner. The attempt of L. Aurousseau to 
interpret san as a faulty transcription of a character formerly 
read che = &ri (““Chronique,” BEFEO, XXIII, p. 477) apparently 
has not convinced the Sinologists. In any case, fo-ch’i cer-
tainly corresponds to vijaya. 
177. The factory for commercial navigation opened at Canton in 
971 received, among other foreigners, persons from San-fo-ch’i 
(W. W. Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China 
with the Eastern Archipelago and the Coast of the Indian 
Ocean during the Fourteenth Century,” TP, XV [1914], p. 420, 
n. 1). In 980, the History of the Sung mentions the arrival of a 
merchant of San-fo-ch’i at Ch’ao-chou (Swatow). In 985, the 
same history cites a purely commercial embassy from San-
fo-ch’i. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 64. 
178. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, pp. 62-68. 
Ferrand, “L’empire sumatranais,” pp. 15-22. 
179. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha,” p. 457. 
180. Edouard Chavannes, “Les inscriptions chinoises de Bodh-
Gaya,” Revue de l'histoire des religions, XXXIV (1896), p. 52 
(relying on the History of the Sung, CCCCXC). 
181. According to L. C. Damais, “La date de l’inscription de Hu-
jung Langit,” BEFEO, L (1962), p. 284, the discernible Javanese 
influence in an inscription of southern Sumatra in Old-Malay 
dated 997 was an indirect consequence of this campaign. 
182. Arthur P. Phayre, History of Burma (London, 1883), p. 280. 
G. E. Harvey, History of Burma (London, 1925), pp. 364, 368. 

--- [Page 343] ---
Notes to Pages 132-35 321 
Maung Hla, “The Chronological Dates of the Kings.of Burma 
Who Reigned at Thayekhittagu (Ancient Prome) and at Pa-
gan,” JBRS, XII (1923), p. 93. 
183. Harvey, History of Burma, p. 18. 
184. Ibid., p. 315. See Edouard Huber, “Le jardinier régicide qui 
devint roi,” BEFEO, V, p. 176; R. Baradat, “Les Samré ou 
Pear, population primitive de l’ouest du Cambodge,”’ BEFEO, XLI, p. 11. : 
185. Harvey, History of Burma, p. 19. The dates given by this au-
thor seem too early, for they tend to ascribe too long a reign 
to Sokkate and have An6ératha dying at almost one hundred 
years of age. 
Chapter IX 
1. Coedés, ‘La date de Koh Ker,” BEFEO, XXXI, p. 15, n. 2. 
2. Inscription of Prasat Khna. Coedeés, ‘Une inscription d’Udaya-
dityavarman I,” BEFEO, XI, p. 400. 
3 Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge (Paris, 1937-), VI, p. 9, 
n. 3. 
4, Coedés, “La tradition généalogique des premiers rois d’Ang- } 
kor,” BEFEO, XXVIII, p. 142. 
5. Inscription of Robang Romeas. Gilberte de Coral Rémusat, 
Victor Goloubew, and Coedés, “La date du Ta Kév,” BEFEO, 
XXXIV, p. 422. 
6. Coral Rémusat, Goloubew, and Coedés, “La date du Ta Kév,” 
p. 422. 
7. See ibid., p. 423, and Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, p. 
189. L. P. Briggs, “The Khmer Empire and the Malay Penin-
sula,” FEQ, IX (1950), p. 285, n. 125, identifies Jayaviravarman 
with Narapativiravarman, elder brother of Udayadityavarman 
(of the inscription of Prasat Khna; see above, n. 2). He 
accepts the hypothesis of F. D. K. Bosch identifying Narapa-
tiviravarman with Narottama, prince of Bali (see above, p. 314, 
n. 79). 
8. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, III, pp. 205 ff. 
9. See Coral Rémusat, Goloubew, and Coedés, “La date du Ta 
Kev,” p. 424. 
10. Ibid., p. 425; Coedés and Pierre Dupont, “Les stéles de Sdok 
Kak Thom, Phnom Sandak et Prah Vihar,” BEFEO, XLII, p. 122. 
11. Louis Finot, “L’inscription de Prah Khan,” BEFEO, IV, p. 676. 
12. Coral Rémusat, Goloubew, and Coedeés, “La date du Ta Kév,”’ 
p. 427. 
13. Coedés, “Les deux inscriptions de Vat Thipdei,” in Mélanges 
d’Indianisme offerts par ses éléves a M. Sylvain Lévi (Paris, 
1911), p. 216. 
14. Ibid. and Inscriptions du Cambodge, I, p. 196. 
15. Probably a daughter, as Pierre Dupont suggests in “La disloca-
tion du Tchen-la,” BEFEO, XLIII (1943-46), p. 36, n. 2. 

--- [Page 344] ---
322 Notes to Pages 135-37 
16. See above, pp. 120-21. 
17. Louis Finot, “L’inscription de Sdok Kak Thom,’ BEFEO, XV, 
2, p. 91. Coedés and Dupont, “Les stéles de Sdok Kak Thom,” 
p. 121. 
18. Ibid. 
19. Coral Rémusat, Goloubew, and Coedés, ‘La date du Ta Kev,” 
p. 401. 
20. Described by Henri Marchal, “Pavillons d’entrée au Palais 
Royale d’Angkor Thom,” Et. Asiat. EFEO, Il, p. 57. 
21. Georges Groslier, “Le temple du Phnom Chiso,” Arts et 
archéologie khmérs, | (Paris, 1921), p. 65. 
22. Henri Parmentier, L’Art khmér classique (Paris, 1939), I, p. 
338. 
23. Henri Mauger, “Prah Khan de Kompong Svay,” BEFEO, XXXIX, 
p. 197. 
24. E. Lunet de Lajonquiére, Inventaire descriptif des monuments 
du Cambodge (Paris, 1902-11), III, pp. 427, 432. 
25. Etienne Aymonier, Le Cambodge (Paris, 1900-1904), Ill, pp. 
500-502. 
26. Annual Report on Indian Epigraphy (1949-50), p. 4. 
27. “The Overseas Expeditions of King Rajendra Cola,’ AA, XXIV 
(1961), p. 341. 
28. Coedés, “Documents sur histoire politique et religieuse du 
Laos occidental,” BEFEO, XXV, p. 158. Camille Notton, An-
nales du Siam (Paris, 1926-32), Il, pp. 34-35. 
29. Coedés, “Documents... Laos,’”” p. 80. 
30. Perhaps earlier than the two other texts. Bangkok edition, 
1939, pp. 182-83. 
- 31. According to the Chamadevivamsa. See Coedeés, ‘Documents 
... Laos,” p. 159. 
32. At the beginning of the eleventh century, before its annexation 
by Cambodia, Lavo still constituted an independent state 
(heir of the kingdom of Dvaravati?). It is mentioned under 
the year 1001 by the History of the Sung (Paul Pelliot, ‘Deux 
itinéraires de Chine en Inde a la fin du Ville siécle,” BEFEO, 
IV, p. 233). 
33. Dupont, “La dislocation du Tchen-la,” pp. 68-70. 
34. Coedés, Recueil des inscriptions du Siam (Bangkok, 1924-29), 
I, pp. 21-31. 
35. Georges Maspero, “La géographie politique de I’Indochine,” 
Et. Asiat. EFEO, pp. 94-103. Notton, Annales du Siam, I. 
36. Paul Lévy, “Les traces de l’introduction du bouddhisme a 
Luang Prabang,”’ BEFEO, XL, p. 411. 
37. See below, p. 195. 
38. Coedés, Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, Il, p. 10. 
39. The eighth day of the crescent moon of phalguna 971, ac-
cording to the inscription of Prasat Roluh (Aymonier, Le 

--- [Page 345] ---
Notes to Pages 137-41 323 
Cambodge, Il, p. 326, and Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, 
Vil). 
40. Finot, ‘“L’inscription de Sdok Kak Thom,” p. 93; Coedés and 
) Dupont, “Les stéles de Sdok Kak Thom,” pp. 121, 126. 
41. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 139. 
42. Coedés, “La date du Baphuon,” BEFEO, XXxXI, p. 18. 
43. Paul Pelliot, trans. and ed., “Mémoires sur les coutumes du 
Cambodge,” BEFEO, Il, p. 142. 
44. Victor Goloubew, “La double enceinte et les avenues d’Ang-
kor Thom,” Cahiers EFEO, 14 (1938), p. 33; “L’hydraulique 
urbaine et agricole a l’6poque des rois d’Angkor,’” Bulletin 
économique de I’Indochine (1941), p. 5. 
45. “Chronique,” BEFEO, XXXVI, p. 611, pl. 93. 
46. Inscription of Preah Ngdék, in Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, p. 
| 140. Georges Maspero, “Le connetable Sangrama,” Revue 
indochinoise, | (1904), p. 8. 
47. Aymonier, Le Cambodge, Ill, p. 507. 
48. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, |, p. 222. 
49. Above, p. 125. 
50. Georges Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928), p. 
132. 
51. Ibid. 
52. A very questionable restoration. See ibid., p. 132. 
53. A very questionable restoration. See ibid., p. 134. 
54. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, pp. 134-36. 
55. Louis Finot, “Panduranga,” BEFEO, III, p. 645. 
56. Ibid., p. 646. 
57. Etienne Aymonier, “Premiére étude sur les inscriptions 
tchames,” JA (January-February, 1891), p. 29. 
58. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, pp. 138-39. 
59. Ibid., pp. 139-40. 
60. Ibid., pp. 141-42. 
61. In the subtitle of the Tibetan translation of this work, called 
Durbodhaloka (a translation by AtiSa, the future reformer of 
Buddhism in Tibet), it is said that it was composed “during 
the reign of Sri Chiidamanivarmadeva, of Srivijayanagara, in 
Malayagiri, in Suvarnadvipa.” (For this information, we are 
obliged to J. Naudou.) 
62. W. P. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago and 
Malacca (Batavia, 1876), p. 65. See also Gabriel Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais de Crivijaya,” JA (July-September, 
1922), p. 19. 
63. O. W. Wolters, “Tambralinga,”” BSOAS, XXI (1958), p. 604. 
64. See above, p. 109. 
65. Perhaps it still existed in the middle of the last century (Sir 
Walter Elliot, “The Edifice Formerly Known as the Chinese or 
Jana Pagoda at Negapatam,” Indian Antiquary, VII [1878], p. 

--- [Page 346] ---
324 Notes to Pages 141-42 
224) and was destroyed by the Jesuits in 1868. See K. V. 
Subrahmanya Aiyer, “The Larger Leiden Plates,” Epigraphia 
Indica, XXII, p. 229. On the date of the construction, see K. 
A. Nilakanta Sastri, History of Srivijaya (Madras, 1949), p. 76. 
: 66. On the Cholas, from whom the Coromandel (Cho|amandala) 
Coast derives its name and whose rise at the expense of the 
Pallavas dates from the middle of the ninth century, see 
Louis de La Vallée-Poussin, Dynasties et histoire de I’Inde 
(Paris, 1935), p. 271. 
67. The History of the Sung shortens his name to Ssu-li Ma-lo-p’i 
(i.e., Sri Maravi). On the identification of this name and that 
of his predecessor, see Coedés, “Le royaume de Crivijaya,” 
BEFEO, XVIII, p. 7. 
68. Published by Subrahmanya Aiyer in ‘The Larger Leiden Plates,” 
p. 213. See K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “Sri Vijaya,” BEFEO, XL, p. 281. 
69. According to Nilakanta Sastri, History of Srivijaya, p. 79, n. 3. 
70. Above, p. 130. 
71. R. C. Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far East, Il: 
Suvarnadvipa (Dacca, 1937), p. 171. According to K. A. Nila-
kanta Sastri (The Colas [Madras, 1935-37], |, p. 220, and History 
of Srivijaya, p. 79, n. 13), these were the Maldives. 
72. Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies, Il, p. 171, n. 2. Nila-: kanta Sastri (The Célas, |, p. 254, and History of Srivijaya, p. 
79, n. 13) questions that this expedition ever occurred and 
asserts that the arguments of R. C. Majumdar are unfounded. 
But Majumdar has given new epigraphic arguments in favor 
of his thesis in ‘The Overseas Expeditions of King Rajendra 
Cola,” pp. 338-42. 
73. The king who sent an embassy to China in the same year, 
1017, is called Hsia-ch’e-su-wu-cha-p’u-mi, that is, Haji Samu-
drabhimi (“King of Sumatra’), by the History of the Sung. 
(Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 65; Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais,” pp. 19-20.) According to N. J. Krom 
in “De naam Sumatra,” BKI, 100 (1941), pp. 5-25, Sumatra, 
synonym for Suvarna, may have become popular because it 
was homonymous with Samudra, the name of a port located 
in the north of the island. 
74. Published in E. Hultzsch, South Indian Inscriptions (Madras, 
1891), Il, p. 105, and Epigraphia Indica, |X, p. 231. See Coedés, 
“Le royaume de Crivijaya,” pp. 4-5, 9 ff., and Nilakanta Sastri, 
“Sri Vijaya,” p. 286. 
75. This list has been studied by Coedés, “Le royaume de Crivi-
jaya,” pp. 9ff.; G. P. Rouffaer, ‘““Was Malaka emporium voor 
1400 A.D. genaamd Malajoer?” BKI, 77 (1921), pp. 76 ff.; Fer-
rand, “L’empire sumatranais,” p. 45; Majumdar, Ancient Indian 
Colonies, Il, pp. 175 ff. In the inscription, each name is ac-
companied by an epithet. But the documentary worth of 

--- [Page 347] ---
Notes to Pages 143-44 325 
these epithets is extremely doubtful, for they constitute sorts 
of puns, playing on the meanings of the component parts of 
the geographic terms. Thus, to cite only two examples, Talait-
takkolam is called “praised by great men versed in the sci-
ences” because in Tamil kalai = science and takkor = scholar, 
and Valaippandiru is described as “(possessing both cultivated 
and uncultivated land” because vilaippu = sowing and tdru = bush. , 
76. See below, p. 184. Ma-, here and in the other words in this 
list, equals the Sanskrit maha (‘great’). Mayirudingam has 
been located by Paul Wheatley (The Golden Khersonese 
[Kuala Lumpur, 1961], p. 71) in the neighborhood of Ligor. 
77. Above, p. 39. 
78. “‘Pré-aryen et pré-dravidien dans I’Inde,” JA (July-September, 
1923), p. 43. But Wheatley (The Golden Khersonese, p. 200) 
rejects this identification as “a flight of fancy” and seems 
inclined (p. 257) to see in Kamalangka an equivalent of , 
Langkasuka. 
79. Rouffaer, ‘Was Malaka emporium,” pp. 78, 81. J. L. Moens, 
“Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha,” TBG, 77 (1937), p. 468. The 
identification is rejected by Wheatley in The Golden Kher-
sonese, p. 200. 
80. Above, p. 39. In 1001, a “Tan-mei-liu’” sent an embassy to 
China (Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 233). On this embassy, | 
actually sent by Tan-liu-mei (Tan-mei-liu’ probably being 
the result of an error by the scribe), and in general on the 
complicated question of the possible relationships between 
these various place names, see Wolters, “Tambralinga,” pp. 
587-607, and Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese, pp. 65-67. 
81. On this name, see H. K. J. Cowan, “Lamuri,” BKI, 90 (1933), 
p. 422. 
82. Panduranga (Phan-rang) is located outside the circuit, but 
the identification of Valaippandiru is anything but certain. 
The opinion expressed above is challenged by Wolters (“Tam-
bralinga,” p. 601), who observes that some of the places 
listed, notably Tambralinga, may have been independent 
States. 
83. John Leyden, trans., Malay Annals (London, 1821). 
84. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 65. Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais,” p. 20. 
85. Translated by Sarat Chandra Das, Indian Pandits in the Land 
of Snow (Calcutta, 1893), p. 50. 
86. Around 1030, Al-Birdni said that the islands of Zabag were 
called Sdwarndib in India (i.e., Suvarnadvipa; see Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais,” p. 64) in conformity with the usage of 
Atisa (above, p. 323, n. 61). 
87. This King Dharmapala, whom the Tibetans call the guru 
Dharmapala of Suvarnadvipa, may also have been the 

--- [Page 348] ---
326 Notes to Pages 144-46 
teacher of AtiSa and of Kamalarakshita and the author of 
various works related to the Bodhicharyavatara. (For this 
information, we are obliged to J. Naudou.) 
88. J. L. A. Brandes, in Notulen van de Directievergaderingen van 
het Bataviaasch Genootschap (1887), p. 176. 
89. Alfred Foucher, Etude sur I’iconographie bouddhique de I'Inde, 
Bibliotheque de I’Ecole des Hautes Etudes, XIII (Paris, 1900), 
pp. 105 and 193, n. 23. 
, 90. Above, p. 129. 
91. Perhaps it was this circumstance that earned him the name 
Airlanga, the most probable meaning of which is “he who 
crossed the water,” that is, the strait separating Java from 
Bali. See R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, “Erlangha,” Djawa, X (1930), 
p. 163, where earlier interpretations are summarized. 
92. C. C. Berg, “De Arjunawiwaha, Er-langga’s levensloop en 
bruiloftslied,” BKI, 97 (1938), pp. 49-64. 
93. The date established by L. C. Damais, “Liste des principales 
| , inscriptions datées d’Indonésie,” BEFEO, XLVI (1952), p. 64, 
, n. 2. The inscriptions in the name of Airlanga date from | 
1019 to 1042 (ibid., pp. 62-65). 
94. P. V. van Stein Callenfels, “De veroveraar van Dharmma-
wangca’s kraton,”” Oudheidkundig Verslag (1919), p. 156. 
95. Rouffaer, ‘‘Was Malaka emporium.” 
96. N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The Hague, 
1931), pp. 241-42. 
97. H. Kern, “De steen van den berg Penanggungan (Surabaya), 
thans in’t Indian Museum te Calcutta,” Verspreide Geschriften 
(The Hague, 1913-29), VII, p. 83. B. R. Chatterjee, India and 
Java (Calcutta, 1933), II, Inscriptions, pp. 63-74. R. Ng. Poer-
batjaraka, “Strophe 14 van de Sanskritzijde der Calcutta-
oorkonde,” TBG, LXXXI (1941), pp. 424-37. 
98. W. F. Stutterheim, “Oudheidkundige Aanteekeningen,” BKI, 
92 (1934), pp. 200-201. 
99. Berg, “De Arjunawiwaha,” p. 82. 
100. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften, VII, p. 83. 
101. G. P. Rouffaer, in Notulen van de Directievergaderingen van 
het Bataviaasch Genootschap (1909), p. 180. 
102. Stutterheim, “Oudheidkundige Aanteekeningen,” p. 406. 
103. W. F. Stutterheim, “De Beelden van Belahan,” Djawa (1938), 
p. 307. 
104. Berg, “De Arjunawiwaha,” p. 92. 
105. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 262. 
106. Berg, “De Arjunawiwaha,” p. 64. It is also possible that she 
was the widow of Sangramavijayottungavarman and_ that 
Airlanga, following a custom of which we have seen earlier 
examples, married the king’s widow in order to justify even-
tual claims on Srivijaya. 
107. And even in the west of the island of Java, for up to the 

--- [Page 349] ---
Notes to Pages 146-48 327 
beginning of the thirteenth century Sunda remained a vassal 
of Srivijaya. See below, p. 184, and F. D. K. Bosch, “Een. 
maleische inscriptie in het Buitenzorgsche,” BKI, 100 (1941), 
pp. 49-53. 
108. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften, Ill, p. 71; VII, p. 30. Krom, 
Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 264. 
109. Stutterheim, “Oudheidkundige Aanteekeningen,” p. 196. 
110. Ibid. and Stutterheim, ‘De Beelden van Belahan,” p. 299. 
111. On the literature in Old-Javanese, see Himansu Bhusan Sarkar, 
Indian Influences on the Literature of Java and Bali (Calcutta, 
1934). 
112. See above, p. 130. 
113. Edited by R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, ‘Arjuna-Wiwaha, Tekst en 
vertaling,” BKI, 82 (1926), p. 181. 
114. Berg, “De Arjunawiwaha,” p. 19. 
115. Unless the hypothesis of C. C. Berg (ibid., p. 92) is con-
firmed. According to this hypothesis, Mahamantri i Hino Sri 
Samaravijayadharma...suparna...uttungadeva, who from 
1037 on replaces the Sumatranese princess in the charters of 
Airlanga, was none other than his son. 
116. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 272 ff. 
, 117. N. J. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst (The Hague, 1923), Il, p. 50. : 
118. Stutterheim, “Oudheidkundige Aanteekeningen,” p. 101. 
119. For Janggala, we have only epigraphic documents of ques-
tionable date, notably one of 1060 (?), an ordinance concern-
ing works of irrigation that emanated from King Rakai Halu, 
lord Juru Sri Samarotsaha Karnakesana Dharmavaméa_ Kir-
tisimha Jayantakatungadeva. 
120. P: V. van Stein Callenfels, “Epigraphia Balica,” VBG, LXVI, 3 
(1926). W. F. Stutterheim, Oudheden van Bali (Singaradja, 
1929), I, p. 190. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions,” 
pp. 88-93. 
121. J. L. A. Brandes, “Bijschrift bij de door den heer Neeb gezon- , 
den photo’s van oudheden in het Djambische,” TBG, 45 
(1902), p. 128; Notulen van de Directievergaderingen van 
het Bataviaasch Genootschap (1902), p. 34. Krom, Inleiding 
tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst, Il, p. 425. 
122. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 66. Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais,” p. 20. O. W. Wolters has kindly 
pointed out to me, in a letter of December 4, 1963, that 
Groeneveldt committed an error in writing that an embassy 
from Srivijaya was sent to China in 1067. The correct date, 
provided by Ma Tuan-lin, is 1077. This is the same year that 
Chola also sent an embassy. 
123. S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar, “Rajendra, the Gangaikonda Chola,” 
Journal of Indian History, Il (1922-23), p. 353. R. C. Majumdar, 
Ancient Indian Colonies, Il, p. 186. Nilakanta Sastri, “Sri 

--- [Page 350] ---
328 Notes to Pages 148-49 
Vijaya,” p. 290. In his History of Srivijaya, however (p. 84, n. 
22), Nilakanta Sastri abandons this hypothesis in favor of the 
interpretation of the Chinese name as Divakara, for he no 
longer believes that Kulottunga made a voyage abroad be-
fore his accession. 
124. Friedrich Hirth and W. W. Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua: His Work 
on the Chinese and Arab Trade in the Twelfth and Thirteenth 
Centuries (St. Petersburg, 1911), p. 100. 
125. The country between the Godavari and the Krishna. 
126. For the correct interpretation of this text, see Nilakanta Sastri, 
“Sri Vijaya,” p. 289, n. 1, 
127. Since Ti-hua-ch’ieh-lo was in China in 1067 on behalf of 
San-fo-ch’i, | cannot see how S. K. Aiyangar, Ancient India 
(London, 1911), p. 130, and Nilakanta Sastri, “sri Vijaya,’’ p. 
290, can suggest that Devakula, the future Rajendradevakulot-
tunga, could have come to Malaya in the expedition of 
Virarajendra, which took place the following year. Nilakanta 
Sastri has, moreover, renounced this idea (above, p. 327, n. 
123). But see Wolters’ correction of the date 1067 above, 
p. 327, n. 122. 
128. Ma Tuan-lin, Ethnographie des peuples étrangers a la Chine, 
trans. Marquis d’Hervey de Saint-Denys, II: Meéridionaux 
(Geneva, 1883), p. 586. Nilakanta Sastri, History of Srivijaya, 
p. 84, writes on this subject: “This can only be explained as 
the result of a wanton misrepresentation on the part of the 
envoys of $i Vijaya who perhaps represented the party that 
gained the upper hand for a time in that country and against 
whom the other side had appealed to the Chola emperor 
Virarajendra.” 
129. History of Burma (London, 1925), p. 17. 
130. By G. H. Luce and his school, in the most recent issue of the 
JBRS. Pe Maung Tin and G. H. Luce have assembled, under 
the title Inscriptions of Burma, published by the University 
of Rangoon in its Oriental Studies Publications (Nos. 2-6) be-
tween 1933 and 1959, five large folios containing excellent 
facsimiles of 609 inscriptions dating from 1131 to 1364. This 
collection constitutes the basic material on which this team 
of researchers is working. 
131. Condensed in Hmannan Yazawin, part of which appeared as 
the Glass Palace Chronicle of the Kings of Burma, trans. Pe 
Maung Tin and G. H. Luce (London, 1923). 
132. This Burmese pronunciation corresponds to the Pali Anurud-
dha (calmed, pacified”), but on the votive tablets (ARASB, 
1906, p. 10; 1912, p. 19; 1915, p. 15) he is called Aniruddha 
(“without obstacle’). 
133. The dates given for AnGratha differ from one text to another. 
Those that have been adopted here are based on epigraphy 
(Charles Duroiselle and C. O. Blagden, ed., Epigraphia Bir-

--- [Page 351] ---
Notes to Pages 149-50 329 
manica [Rangoon, 1919-36], |, p. 4) and have been accepted 
as definitive by historians. See Maung Hla, “The Chronologi-
cal Tables of the Kings of Burma who reigned at Thayekhit-
tagu (Ancient Prome) and at Pagan,” JBRS, XIII (1923), pp. 
82-94. 
134. J. A. Stewart, “Kyaukse Irrigation, Side-Light on Burmese His-
tory,” JBRS, XIl (1921), p. 1. 
135. On Burmese Buddhism, see Than Tun, “Religion in Burma, 
A.D. 1000-1300,” JBRS, XLII (1959), pp. 47-69, and “Religious 
Buildings of Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” JBRS, XLII (1959), pp. 71-80. | 
136. Above, p. 17. 
137. H. G. Quaritch Wales, “Anuruddha and the Thaton Tradition,” 
JRAS (1947), pp. 152-56. 
138. Shin Arahan is a title. His religious name seems to have been 
Silabuddhi or Dhammadassi (Glass Palace Chronicle, pp. 71-
72, 74). 
139. Very little is known about the history of the Mons. W. Schmidt 
published in 1906, in the Sitzungsberichte of the Academy of 
Vienna (vol. CLI), a Mon chronicle, the Slapat Rajawang datow 
smim rong, translated by him in the same volume, and more 
recently by Robert Halliday in JBRS, XIII (1923), p. 1. The 
Sudharmavatirajavamsa and the Siharajarajavamsa were pub-
lished in 1910 at Paklat, and the Dhammachetikatha was pub-
lished in 1912. These texts await a translator. 
140. The name of Manuha, usually given to this king, is the result 
of a false reading. See C. W. Dunn, “Dr. J. A. Stewart,’”” JBRS, XXXII (1948), p. 89. , 
141. Duroiselle and Blagden, Epigraphia Birmanica, |, p. 6. 
142. With the exception, perhaps, of Pegu, which the chronicles 
do not mention and to which emigrants from Haripunjaya, 
who settled at first in Thaton, went for refuge at the time of 
the conquest of that city by AnGratha (Coedés, ‘‘Documents 
... Laos,” pp. 24, 80). 
143. Srikshetra (Prome) and four principalities situated in the 
region of Rangoon: Pokkharavati, Trihakumbha, Asitanjana, 
and Rammanagara (Duroiselle and Blagden, Epigraphia Bir-
manica, |, p. 6). 
144. On this alleged Tantrism, see above, p. 106. 
145. The authenticity of this inscription (Original Inscriptions Col-
lected in Upper Burma [Rangoon, 1913], no. 1) is contested. 
It has not been included in volume | of the Inscriptions of 
Burma of Pe Maung Tin and G. H. Luce. See Duroiselle and 
Blagden, Epigraphia Birmanica, |, pp. 67, 73. 
146. V. C. Scott O’Connor, Mandalay and Other Cities of the Past 
in Burma (London, 1907), pp. 245, 249, 283-85. Léon de 
Beylié, L’Architecture hindoue en Extréme-Orient (Paris, 
1907), p. 283. On the monuments of Pagan in general, see 

--- [Page 352] ---
330 Notes to Pages 150-53 
R. S. le May, “The Development of Buddhist Art in Burma,” 
Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, XCVII (1949), pp. 535-55, 
and Lu Pe Win, Pictorial Guide to Pagan (Rangoon, 1955). 
147. Harvey, History of Burma, pp. 29-30. 
148. Coedés, “Documents... Laos,” pp. 113-14. 
149. Harvey, History of Burma, p. 30. 
150. ARASB, 1906, p. 10; 1912, p. 19; 1915, p. 15. U Mya, Votive 
Tablets of Burma (Rangoon, 1961), part | (in Burmese; with 
reproductions). 
151. On these dates, see Senerat Paranavitana, “Panakaduva Cop-
per-Plate Charter of Vijayabahu I,” Epigraphia Zeylanica, V 
(1955), pp. 10ff.; A History of Ceylon (Colombo, 1960), II, 
pp. 419, 436; A Concise History of Ceylon (Colombo, 1961), pp. 187, 198. , 
152. Cilavamsa, LVIII, translated by Wilhelm Geiger (Colombo, 
1953), |, p. 202. 
153. Ibid., LX, p. 214; C. Rasanayagam Mudaliyar, ‘Vijaya Bahu’s 
Inscription at Polonnaruwa,” JRASCB, XXIX (1924), p. 274; 
Epigraphia Zeylanica, Il, pp. 246, 253-54. 
154. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 87. O’Connor, Mandalay, p. 247. 
De Beylié, L’Architecture hindoue en Extréme-Orient, p. 255. 
According to G. H. Luce, Zig6n is a corruption of Zib6n (i.e., 
Jayabhimi). See his Mons of the Pagan Dynasty (Rangoon, 
1950), p. 13. 
155. Glass Palace Chronicle, pp. 96-97. 
Chapter X 
1. Auguste Barth and Abel Bergaigne, ISC, p. 176. Etienne 
Aymonier, Le Cambodge (Paris, 1900-1904), III, p. 508. Coedés, 
Inscriptions du Cambodge (Paris, 1937-), I, p. 221. 
2. Louis Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,’” BEFEO, IV, p. 938. 
3. Ibid., p. 945. 
4. Henri Maspero, “La frontiére de l’Annam et du Cambodge du 
Ville au XIVe siécle,”” BEFEO, XVIII, 3, p. 33. 
5. Inscription of Samrong (Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, 
IV, p. 175). A bad reading by Aymonier, Le Cambodge, II, p. 
391, made it seem that he had reigned until 1089, which made 
it necessary to consider Jayavarman VI as a usurper who was 
reigning in the north while Harshavarman reigned at Angkor. 
6. Inscription of Pré Rup. See Coedés, “Nouvelles précisions sur 
les dates d’avénement de quelques rois des dynasties ang-
koriennes,”” BEFEO, XLIII (1943-46), p. 14. 
7. Stele of Phnom Rung (Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, V, 
p. 297). 
8. Coedés, “La stéle de Ta Prohm,” BEFEO, VI, p. 72; ‘Nouvelles 
données chronologiques et généalogiques sur la dynastie de 
Mahidharapura,’’ BEFEO, XXIX, p. 297, n. 1. 
9. Aymonier, Le Cambodge, |, pp. 395-96; III, p. 510. His bi-

--- [Page 353] ---
Notes to Pages 153-55 331 
ography is presented in two parallel inscriptions of Preah 
Vihear and of Phnom Sandak published in Coedés and Pierre 
Dupont, “Les stéles de Sdok Kak Thom, Phnom Sandak et 
Prah Vihar,” BEFEO, XLII] (1943-46), pp. 134—54. 
10. At Pré Rup. Aside from the inscription of Nom Van of 1082, 
we know of only two others dating from his reign: the first, 
that of 1101, comes from Preah Phnom, fifty kilometers north-
west of Angkor (Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, III, p. 
121); the second is an inscription of Phnom Da in the far 
south of the country that dates from 1106 (ibid., V, p. 278). 
11. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, VI, p. 294. 
12. The inscriptions in his name come from Phnom Sandak (1110, 
Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, VI, p. 300) and from Phi-
mai (1109, Coedés, “Epigraphie du temple de Phimai,’” BEFEO, 
XXIV, p. 345) in the north; from Prasat Trau (1109), thirty kil-
ometers northwest of Angkor (Coedés, Inscriptions du Cam-
bodge, Ill, p. 97); and from Phnom Bayang (1107) in the far 
south of Cambodia (ibid., I, p. 267). The presence: of inscrip-
tions of Jayavarman VI and of Dharanindravarman | in the 
south makes it necessary to revise the opinion that | earlier 
expressed (‘Nouvelles données chronologiques,” pp. 299- | 
300) on the area over which these two exercised their au-
thority. Nevertheless, their principal constructions were 
located in the north. 
13. All these monuments are described in Henri Parmentier, L’Art 
khmér classique (Paris, 1939). 
14. Coedés, ‘Nouvelles données chronologiques,” p. 302. 
15. Inscription of Phnom Sandak (Coedés, Inscriptions du Cam-
bodge, |, p. 267, and Ill, p. 121). 
16. Louis Finot, ‘L’inscription de Ban That,” BEFEO, XII, 2, p. 26. 
17. Coedés, “Nouvelles données chronologiques,” p. 302, n. 1. 
18. Finot, “L’inscription de Ban That,” p. 27. 
19. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” pp. 937-38. 
20. Georges Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928), p. 
143. 
21. Ibid., p. 145. 
22. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” p. 940. 
23. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 147. 
24. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” p. 949. 
25. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 148. 
26. Etienne Aymonier, ‘Premiére étude sur les inscriptions 
tchames,” JA (January-February, 1891), pp. 33-36. 
27. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, pp. 148-49. 
28. Ibid., p. 150. 
29. The epigraphical data have been utilized by Than Tun in 
“History of Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” Bulletin of the Burma 
Historical Commission, | (1960), pp. 39-57. 
30. Glass Palace Chronicle of the Kings of Burma, trans. Pe 
Maung Tin and G. H. Luce (London, 1923), p. 65. 

--- [Page 354] ---
332 Notes to Pages 155-56 
31. G. E. Harvey, History of Burma (London, 1925), p. 316. Charles 
Duroiselle and C. O. Blagden, ed., Epigraphia Birmanica 
(Rangoon, 1919-36), I, pp. 4, 155. 
32. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 66. In fact, Kyanzittha did not 
claim to be descended from Andératha in any of his inscrip-
tions; he only claimed to belong to the solar race through 
his father’s family. 
33. To whom magicians had announced the birth of an infant 
destined to rule. Ibid., p. 67. 
34. Ibid., p. 93. 
35. Probably under the name Bajrabharana, which appears on 
the votive tablets and on a stele found at Mergui (Louis 
Finot, “Inscriptions du Siam et de la Péninsule Malaise,” 
BCAI [1910], p. 153). 
36. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 100. 
37. Ibid., p. 101 (Raman Kan). 
38. Ibid., p. 104. 
39. The name Kyanzittha, by which he is usually designated, is a 
corrupted pronunciation of Kalan cacsa, which means “‘soldier-
official.” 
40. Duroiselle and Blagden, Epigraphia Birmanica, |, pp. 4, 89. 
41. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 104. 
42. ARASB (1916-17), p. 19; Duroiselle and Blagden, Epigraphia 
Birmanica, |, p. 4. In any case, before 1093 (Duroiselle and 
Blagden, Epigraphia Birmanica, Ill, p. 3). 
43. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 105. 
44, At least that is what the Chronicle says, but Than Tun, ‘“His-
tory of Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” p. 47, suggests that this 
daughter actually married Nagasman, a great-grandson of the 
Mon king Makuta. Their son Alaung-sithu would be Mon 
through his father and Burmese through his mother, which 
would have assured him a legitimacy which Kyanzittha seems 
to have lacked. 
45. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 105. 
46. Ibid., p. 93. 
47. Ibid., p. 107. 
48. Duroiselle and Blagden, Epigraphia Birmanica, |, p. 5. 
49. Ibid., p. 6. 
50. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 110. Léon de Beylié, L’Architecture 
hindoue en Extréme-Orient (Paris, 1907), p. 265. 
51. Harvey, History of Burma, p. 40. 
52. Charles Duroiselle, “The Ananda Temple at Pagan,’” Memoirs 
of the Archaeological Survey of India, 56 (1937). S. K. Sa-
raswati, ‘Temples of Pagan,” JGI/S, IX (1942). 
53. Harvey, History of Burma, p. 41. 
54. Duroiselle and Blagden, Epigraphia Birmanica, |, p. 90. 
55. Ibid., |, pp. 154, 164. 
56. Ibid., Ill, p. 5. This building was dedicated according to 
Vishnuite rites, the place of honor being reserved for the 

--- [Page 355] ---
Notes to Pages 157-58 333 
Mons (Than Tun, ‘History of Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” p. 46). 
57. Duroiselle and Blagden, Epigraphia Birmanica, |, p. 74. Just 
as the explanatory captions of the scenes taken from the 
Jatakas represented on the ceramic plaques that decorate the 
Ananda and are published in Duroiselle and Blagden, Epi-
graphia Birmanica, vol. Il, are in the Mon language. See 
Edouard Huber, “Les bas-reliefs du temple d’Ananda a Pagan,” 
BEFEO, XI, pp. 1-5. 
58. De Beylié, L’Architecture hindoue en Extréme-Orient, p. 267. , 
59. Duroiselle and Blagden, Epigraphia Birmanica, |, pp. 164, 165. 
60. Nihar-Ranjan Ray, Brahmanical Gods in Burma: A Chapter in 
Indian Art and Iconography (Calcutta, 1932). 
61. Duroiselle and Blagden, Epigraphia Birmanica, III, p. 4. 
62. Friedrich Hirth and W. W. Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua: His Work 
on the Chinese and Arab Trade in the Twelfth and Thirteenth 
Centuries (St. Petersburg, 1911), p. 59. | do not know what 
basis G. E. Harvey (History of Burma, p. 43) has for saying 
that this embassy did not pass through Yunnan. | 63. Above, p. 148. 
64. Ma Tuan-lin, Ethnographie des peuples étrangers a la Chine, 
trans. Marquis d’Hervey de Saint-Denys, II: Méridionaux 
(Geneva, 1883), p. 586. For the account according to the 
History of the Sung, see Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua, 
p. 59. 
65. Duroiselle and Blagden, Epigraphia Birmanica, |, p. 1. 
66. W. P. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago and 
Malacca (Batavia, 1876), pp. 66-67. Gabriel Ferrand, “L’empire 
sumatranais de Crivijaya,” JA (July-September 1922), pp. 21-
22. 
67. Inscription of Labu Tuwa. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “A Tamil 
Merchant Guild in Sumatra,” TBG, 72 (1932), p. 314. 
68. Above, p. 148. 
69. An inscription known by the title “the smaller Leyden grant,” 
published in K. V. Subrahmanya Aiyer, “The Smaller Leiden 
Plates (of Kulotungga 1),” Epigraphia Indica, XXII (1934), p. 
267. See K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “Sri Vijaya,” BEFEO, XL, p. 299. 
70. Above, p. 141. On the history of this vihara, after its con-
version to Theravada Buddhism, see Senerat Paranavitana, 
“Negapatam and Theravada Buddhism in South India,” JGIS, 
XI (1944), pp. 17-25. 
71. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 19. 
72. Himansu Bhusan Sarkar, Indian Influences on the Literature of 
Java and Bali (Calcutta, 1934). 
73. J. L. A. Brandes, Beschrijving van de ruine de desa Toempang, 
genaamd Tjandi Djago (The Hague, 1904), p. 77. 
74. N. J. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst (The 
Hague, 1923), If, p. 250. P. V. van Stein Callenfels, “De 
Krsnayana aan Pantaran,” TBG, 64 (1925), p. 196, 
75. iSanagunadharma Lakshmidhara Vijayottungadevi. | 

--- [Page 356] ---
334 Notes to Pages 158-62 
76. N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The Hague, 
1931), p. 280. 
77. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 110. 
78. Inscription of Vat Ph’u. Coedés, “Nouvelles données chrono-
logiques,”” pp. 303, 304; Inscriptions du Cambodge, V, p. 292. 
79. Inscription of Prasat Chrung. Coedés, ‘Nouvelles données 
chronologiques,” p. 307; Inscriptions du Cambodge, IV, p. 
230. 
80. Finot, ‘L’inscription de Ban That,” p. 27. ; 
81. Above, pp. 152-53. 
82. Coedés, “Nouvelles données chronologiques,” pp. 303-304. 
83. Finot, “L’inscription de Ban That,” p. 27. 
84, Pp. 155-56. 
85. Maspero, “La frontiére de l’Annam et du Cambodge,” p. 34, 
explains that “the Cambodians, having come through Champa, 
probably crossed the Annamite Chain by way of Lao Bao 
(Savannakhet-Hué).” 
86. Maspero (ibid.) thinks that this time the Cambodians must 
have passed “by way of Ha-trai (Keo Nua pass), or perhaps 
the Mu-gia pass, since Champa was closed to them.” 
87. This occupation has left traces in Cham art, notably at Hung 
Thanh (Philippe Stern, L’Art du Champa (ancien Annam) et 
son évolution [Paris, 1942], pp. 65, 108; Jean Boisselier, La 
. Statuaire du Champa [Paris, 1963], pp. 303 ff.). 
88. Inscription of Da-né or Batau Tablah (Aymonier, “Premiére : : étude,” p. 39). 
89. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,”’ p. 965. 
90. Aymonier, “Premiére étude,” p. 40. 
91. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sén,” p. 965. 
92. Ibid. 
93. On the dates of these events, see Louis Finot, “Les inscrip-
tions de Jaya Paramec¢varavarman 1,’ BEFEO, XV, 2, p. 50. 
94, Maspero, “La frontiére de l’Annam et du Cambodge,” p. 34. 
95. Above, p. 77. 
96. Above, pp. 136-37. 
97. Coedés, “Documents sur l’histoire politique et religieuse du 
Laos occidental,” BEFEO, XXV, p. 168. 
98. Ibid., pp. 83-86. Camille Notton, Annales du Siam (Paris, 
1926-32), II, pp. 39-53. J. Y. Claeys, “L’Archéologie du Siam,” 
BEFEO, XXXI, pp. 429-53. 
99. Coedés, ‘‘Documents... Laos,” p. 23. 
, 100. Ibid., pp. 82-83, 162-71. Notton, Annales du Siam, ll, pp. 
36-40. 
101. Reproduced in Ma Tuan-lin, Ethnographie, p. 487. 
102. Below, pp. 179, 181, 183-84. | | ] 103. On this name, which must actually have been a title or a 
polite form by which the Khmer king was designated in his 
messages, see Coedés, ‘Nouvelles données chronologiques,” 
p. 304. 

--- [Page 357] ---
Notes to Pages 162-65 335 
104. Ma Tuan-lin, Ethnographie, p. 487. 
105. Coedés, “A propos de la date d’édification d’Angkor Vat,’’ 
JA (January-March, 1920), p. 96. 
106. Coedés, “La destination funéraire des grands monuments 
khmérs,” BEFEO, XL, pp. 339 ff. (with a bibliography of works 
on this subject). 
107. See the five volumes on the ornamental sculpture and the 
bas-reliefs in Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, Mémoires 
archéologiques, Il: Le temple d’Angkor Vat (Paris, 1929-32). 
108. René Grousset, Philosophies indiennes (Paris, 1931), Chapter 
XI. 
109. Inscription (lost) of Vat Sla Ket. Etienne Aymonier, Le Cam-
bodge, ll, p. 287. Published in Coedés, Inscriptions du Cam-
bodge, VI, p. 312. 
110. The exact origin mentioned by the History of the Sung is not 
certain, for it is attributed to Chen-la Lo-hu (O. W. Wolters, 
“Tambralinga,’” BSOAS [1958], p. 605). 
111. Coedés, “Nouvelles données épigraphiques sur I’histoire de 
l’Indochine centrale,” JA, CCXLVI (1958), p. 139. 
112. His father, Mahidharaditya, was the brother of Narendralak-
shmi, mother of Sdryavarman Il. This princess was the daugh-
ter of a sister of Kings Jayavarman VI and Dharanindravarman 
| (Coedés, “Nouvelles données chronologiques,” p. 301). 
113. Stanza 17 of the inscriptions of Jayavarman VII. Coedés, “La 
stele de Ta Prohm,” BEFEO, VI, p. 72; “La stéle du Prah Khan 
d’Ankor,” BEFEO, XLI, p. 285. 
114. For this reign and those following, see Coedés, “Nouvelles 
données chronologiques,” pp. 304 ff. 
115. A period during which, however, great monuments such as 
Beng Mealea and Banteay Samré were constructed. 
116. Coedés, “Nouvelles données chronologiques,” p. 324. 
117. Below, p. 166. 
118. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 151. 
119. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” p. 954. 
120. Ibid. 
122. Above, p. 160. 
121. Aymonier, “Premiére étude,” p. 37. 
123. We now have a tendency to attribute the characteristics of 
the architecture of the monuments of Binh-dinh and the 
importation of Khmer sculptures in Champa to this first 
Khmer occupation, which was followed a half-century later 
by a second occupation. 
124. Finot, ‘Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” pp. 959, 961. Aymonier, 
“Premiére étude,” p. 39. 
125. Ibid. 
126. Finot, ‘Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” p. 965. Aymonier, ‘‘Pre-
miére étude,” p. 42. 
127. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 158. 
128. Finot, ‘Les inscriptions de Mi-sGn,” p. 965. 

--- [Page 358] ---
336 Notes to Pages 165-67 
129. Aymonier, “Premiére étude,” p. 42. See Maspero, Le Royaume 
de Champa, p. 159. 
130. Aymonier, “Premiére etude,” p. 41. 
131. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” pp. 965, 966, 968. Ay-
monier, ‘“Premiére étude,” p. 42. 
132. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 160. 
133. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” p. 973. 
134. Finot, ‘Les inscriptions de Jaya Paramecvaravarman 1,” p. 50. 
135. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 162. 
136. Ibid. 
137. tbid., p. 163. 
138. According to information from the Ling-wai Tai-ta, cited in 
ibid., p. 164. 
139. Ma Tuan-lin, Ethnographie, p. 557. 
140. Above, p. 332, n. 44. 
141. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 119. 
142. ARASB (1919), p. 23. 
143. Above, p. 149. 
144. ARASB (1919), p. 22. 
145. Glass Palace Chronicle, pp. 120-21. 
146. ARASB (1911), p. 18. 
147. Camille Sainson, trans., Nan-tchao Ye-che: Histoire particuliére 
du Nan-tchao (Paris, 1904), p. 102. 
148. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 122. 
149. G. H. Luce, “The Shwegugyi Pagoda Inscription,” JBRS, X, 
(1920), p. 67, gives 1141, but see Than Tun, “History of 
Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” p. 47. 
150. De Beylié, L’Architecture hindoue en Extréme-Orient, p. 278. 
V. C. Scott O’Connor, Mandalay, and Other Cities of the Past 
in Burma (London, 1907), pp. 257, 259, 263. Lu Pe Win, 
Pictorial Guide to Pagan (Rangoon, 1955), p. 32. 
151. Mabel Haynes Bode, The Pali Literature of Burma (London, 
1909), p. 16. Helmer Smith, La Grammaire palie d’Aggavamsa (Lund, 1928). : 
152. On life in Pagan in this period, see Than Tun, “Social Life in 
Burma, A.D. 1044-1287,”: JBRS, XLI (1958), pp. 37-47. 
153. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 126. 
154. ARASB (1919), p. 22. 
155. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 127. 
156. This princess was offered to King Alaung-sithu by her father 
and seems, as was the custom, to have subsequently been 
married by Narathu. Pateikkaya (Patikara) has sometimes been 
placed to the west or southwest of Pagan, but it was more 
probably north of Chittagong, in the district of Tipperah. See 
G. E. Harvey, History of Burma, p. 326; Nihar-Ranjan Ray, 
Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma (Calcutta, 1936), pp. 93-94. 
157. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 133. 
158. De Beylié, “L’Architecture hindoue en Extréme-Orient, p. 287. 

--- [Page 359] ---
Notes to Pages 167-70 337 
O'Connor, Mandalay, p. 221. Lu Pe Win, Pictorial Guide to 
Pagan, p. 48. 
159. Glass Palace Chronicle, pp. 134-38. 
160. Calavamsa, trans. Wilhelm Geiger (Colombo, 1953), II, pp. 
64—70. 
161. Than Tun, “History of Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” p. 48. 
162. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 67. Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais,”” p. 22. 
163. Ma Tuan-lin, Ethnographie, p. 566. 
164. Ferrand, “L’empire sumatranais,” p. 66. 
165. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 289-97. On their 
names and their dates, see L. C. Damais, “Liste des principales 
inscriptions datées d’Indonésie,” BEFEO, XLVI (1952), pp. 66-69. . 
166. His complete name was: Sri BameSvara Sakalabhuvanatush-
tikadrana Sarvanivaryavirya Parakrama Digjayottungadeva. 
167. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 19. 
168. Sri Varmesvara Madhusiidanavataranindita Suhritsingha Para-
krama Digjayottungadeva. 
169. Edited by J. G. H. Gunning (The Hague, 1903). See Himansu 
Bhusan Sarkar, Indian Influences on the Literature of Java 
and Bali, p. 249. This poem is replete with allusions to con-
temporary historical facts. See C. C. Berg in F. W. Stapel, ed., 
Geschiedenis van Nederlandsch Indié (Amsterdam, 1938-40), 
Il, pp. 62-64. J. E. van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, “The Beginnings 
of Old-Javanese Historical Literature,” BKI, 112 (1956), p. 384. 
170. Sarkar, Indian Influences on the Literature of Java and Bali, 
p. 261. 
171. Sri Sarvesvara Janardhanavatira Vijayagrajasama Singhanadani-
varyavirya Parakrama Digjayottungadeva. 
172. Sri Aryesvara Madhusiidanavatararijaya Parakramottungadeva. 
173. Sri Kroncharyadipa Handabhuvanapalaka Parakramanindita 
Digjayottungadeva. 
174. P. V. van Stein Callenfels, Epigraphia Balica (Batavia, 1926), pp. 
33-35. 
Chapter XI 
1. Inscription of the Phimeanakas, in Coedés, Inscriptions du 
Cambodge (Paris, 1937-), Il, p. 117. 
2. For the biographical details that follow, see Coedés ‘“Nou-
velles données chronologiques et généalogiques sur la dynas-
tie de Mahidharapura,” BEFEO, XXIX, pp. 304-28; Pour mieux 
comprendre Angkor (Paris, 1947), pp. 176 ff. B. R. Chatterjee 
has devoted an article to ‘Jayavarman VII, the Last of the 
Great Monarchs of Cambodia,” in Proceedings of the Indian 
History Congress (Calcutta, 1939), pp. 377-85. 
3. Coedés, ‘“Quelques suggestions sur la méthode a suivre pour 

--- [Page 360] ---
338 Notes to Pages 170-73 
interpréter les bas-reliefs de Banteay Ch’mar et de la galerie 
extérieure du Bayon,” BEFEO, XXXII, pp. 76-78. 
4. Coedés, “La date du Bayon,” BEFEO, XXVIII, pp. 88-89. 
5. Ethnographie des peuples étrangers a la Chine, trans. Marquis 
d’Hervey de Saint-Denys, II: Méridionaux (Geneva, 1883), p. 
487. 
6. Coedés, “Quelques suggestions,” p. 80, n. 1. 
7. Louis Finot, ‘Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,’” BEFEO, IV, p. 974. 
8. Etienne Aymonier, Le Cambodge (Paris, 1900-1904), III, p. 527. 
9. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” p. 975. Georges Maspero, 
Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928), p. 161, identifies Jaya 
Indravarman ong Vatuv with Jaya Indravarman (IV) of Grama-
pura, instigator of the aggression of 1177. Louis Finot, “Les 
inscriptions de Jaya Paramecvaravarman 1,” BEFEO, XV, 2, p. 
50, n. 2, has cast doubt on the accuracy of this identification, 
but it nevertheless remains plausible. 
10. Etienne Aymonier, ‘Premiére étude sur les inscriptions 
tchames,” JA JIanuary-February, 1891), p. 48. 
11. These events are related in an inscription of Mi-sdn translated 
in Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” p. 975. 
12. Ibid. 
13. Ibid., p. 940. For the date, see Maspero, Le Royaume de 
Champa, p. 367. 
14. Aymonier, “Premiére étude,” p. 48. 
15. Ibid., p. 51. 
16. Philippe Stern, L’Art du Champa (ancien Annam) et son 
évolution (Paris, 1942), pp. 65-66, 108-109. 
17. Friedrich Hirth and W. W. Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua: His Work 
on the Chinese and Arab Trade in the Twelfth and Thirteenth 
Centuries (St. Petersburg, 1911), pp. 53-54. See below, p. 181. 
18. That of Preah Khan. See Coedés, “La stéle de Prah Khan 
d’Ankor,” BEFEO, XLI, p. 299. 
19. Published in Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, II, p. 161. 
20. In “Nouvelles données chronologiques,” p. 328, | thought | 
could conclude, from an embassy attributed to Cambodia 
and sent to China in 1200 by a king who had been reigning 
twenty years, that Jayavarman VII was definitely still reigning 
at that date. But this embassy actually came from Chen-li-fu 
(below, p. 181), at that time a dependency of Cambodia 
(see O. W. Wolters, ‘Tambralinga,’”” BSOAS [1958], p. 606). 
21. Below, p. 189. 
22. Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, Mémoires archéologiques, 
I: Le temple d’Icvarapura (Paris, 1926), p. 91, n. 2. 
23. References in Coedés, “Quelques suggestions,” pp. 71 ff. 
24. Coedés, “Le portrait dans l’art khmér,” RAA, VII (1960), p. 
179. 
25. Coedés, “La stéle de Prah Khan,” p. 285. 
26. Louis Finot, “Inscriptions d’Ankor,” BEFEO, XXV, p. 402. Ecole 

--- [Page 361] ---
Notes to Pages 173-76 339 
Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, Mémoires archéologiques, |, p. 
102. 
27. Finot, “Inscriptions d’Ankor,” p. 396. 
28. For a description of them, see Aymonier, Le Cambodge, III; 
E. Lunet de Lajonquiére, Inventaire descriptif des monuments 
du Cambodge (Paris, 1902-11), Ill; and the Guides archéologi-
gues d’Angkor by Jean Comaille (1912), Henri Marchal (1928), 
Henri Parmentier (1936), Maurice Glaize (1948), etc. See also 
Jean Boisselier, ‘“Réflexions sur l’art de regne de Jayavarman 
VII,” BSEI, XXVII (1952), pp. 261-70; Philippe Stern, “Le 
probleme des monuments khmérs du style du Bayon et Jaya-
. varman VII,” Actes, XXl¢ Congrés International des Oriental-
listes (Paris, 1948), p. 252. 
29. See, however, above, p. 335, n. 115. 
30. Below, p. 212. 
31. Above, p. 98. 
32. Coedés, “La stéle de Prah Khan,” p. 298, n. 2. 
33. Coedés, “La stéle de Ta Prohm,” BEFEO, VI, p. 75. 
34. Coedés, “La stéle de Prah Khan,” p. 288. 
35. Louis Finot and Victor Goloubew, ‘Le symbolisme de Neak 
Pean,” BEFEO, XXIII, p. 401. 
36. Henri Parmentier, ‘Modifications subies par le Bayon au cours 
de son exécution,” BEFEO, XXVII, p. 149; “La construction dans 
l’architecture khmeére classique,” BEFEO, XXXV, p. 281. 
Coedés, ‘Excavations at the Bayon,’”’ ABIA, XII (1937), p. 42. 
37. Uncovered in 1933. See “Chronique,” BEFEO, XXXIII, p. 1117. 
38. Paul Mus, ‘Le symbolisme a Angkor Thom,” CRAIBL (1936), 
p. 57; “Angkor vu du Japon,” France-Asie, 175-76 (1962), p. 
521. The decorative motif of human faces is doubtless Indian 
in origin; it is noted by I-ching at Nalanda (H. Parmentier, 
“Les bas-reliefs de Banteai-Chmar,” BEFEO, X, p. 206, n. 1). 
According to Jean Boisselier, ‘“Vajrapani dans |’art du Bayon,” 
Actes, XxX/I/@ Congrés International des Orientalistes (Istanbul, 
1951), p. 324, these faces were those of Vajradhara in the 
form of Vajrapani, the form assumed by Lokesvara teaching 
the Law. 
39. Reproduced by the Commission Archéologique de I’Indo-
chine, Henri Dufour and Charles Carpeaux, Le Bayon d’Ang-
kor Thom, bas reliefs (Paris, 1910). 
40. Coedés, “Les inscriptions du Bayon,” BEFEO, XXVIII, p. 104; 
“L’épigraphie des monuments de Jayavarman VII,’ BEFEO, 
XLVI, p. 97. 
41. Paul Mus, “Angkor in the Time of Jayavarman VII,” IAL, XI 
(1937), p. 65. Martti Rasanen, ‘“’Regenbogen-Himmelsbrticke,” 
Studia Orientalia, XIV (1950), pp. 1-11. 
42. Coedés, “La stéle de Prah Khan,” pp. 295-96. 
43. Lunet de Lajonquiére, Inventaire, |, pp. 37, 92. 
44, Ibid., Ill, p. 391. 

--- [Page 362] ---
340 Notes to Pages 176-79 
45. Above, p. 163. 
46. Coedés, “La stéle de Prah Khan,” pp. 296-97. See also 
Coedés, “Les gites d’étape a la fin du XIle siécle,” BEFEO, XL, 
p. 347. 
47. Paul Pelliot, trans. and ed., “Mémoires sur les coutumes du 
Cambodge,” BEFEO, II, p. 173. 
48. The number given by the stele of Ta Prohm. See Coedés, “La 
stéle de Ta Prohm,” p. 80. 
49. Louis Finot, “L’inscription sanskrite de Say Fong,” BEFEO, Ill, 
p. 18. 
50. Coedés, “Les hdépitaux de Jayavarman VII,’”” BEFEO, XL, p. 344. 
51. Coedés, “L’assistance médicale au Cambodge a la fin du Xile 
siecle,” Revue médicale francaise d’Extréme-Orient (March-
April, 1941), p. 405. 
52. Paul Pelliot, “Le Bhaisajyaguru,” BEFEO, III, p. 33. 
53. Glass Palace Chronicle of the Kings of Burma, trans. Pe 
Maung Tin and G. H. Luce (London, 1923), pp. 138-39. 
54. Culavamsa, LXXVI, trans. Wilhelm Geiger (Colombo, 1953), 
I, pp. 65-70. 
55. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 133. 
56. Calavamsa, LXXVIII, p. 103. 
57. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 142. 
58. Cdalavamsa, LXXVI, p. 70. 
59. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 142. 
60. Above, p. 149. 
61. On these events, see Taw Sein Ko, “A Preliminary Study of 
the Kalyani Inscriptions,” Indian Antiquary, XXII (1893), pp. 
17, 29-31. 
62. Mabel Haynes Bode, The Pali Literature of Burma (London, 
1909), pp. 17-18. 
63. Emile Forchhammer, An Essay on the Sources and Develop-
men of Burmese Law (Rangoon, 1885), pp. 35-36. Bode, The 
Pali Literature of Burma, pp. 31-33. 
64. G. H. Luce, “Note on the Peoples of Burma in the 12th-13th 
Century A.D.,” JBRS, XLII (1959), p. 67. 
65. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 141. 
66. Léon de Beylié, L’Architecture hindoue en Extréme-Orient 
(Paris, 1907), p. 271. V. C. Scott O’Connor, Mandalay, and 
Other Cities of the Past in Burma (London, 1907), pp. 269, 
280. Lu Pe Win, Pictorial Guide to Pagan (Rangoon, 1955), 
pp. 41, 63. 
67. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 141. 
68. Ibid., p. 151. 
69. On these works, see Paul Wheatley, “Geographical Notes on 
Some Commodities Involved in Sung Maritime Trade,” 
JRASMB, XXXII, 2 (1959). 
70. Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua, p. 66, n. 18. 
71. Ibid., pp. 67-72. 

--- [Page 363] ---
Notes to Pages 179-80 341 
72. Ibid., p. 71. 
73. As | did in 1927, “A propos de la chute du royaume de 
Crivijaya,” BKI, 83 (1927), p. 459. R. C. Majumdar (Ancient 
Indian Colonies of the Far East, Il: Suvarnadvipa [Dacca, 1937], 
p. 197) and K. A. Nilakanta Sastri (“Sri Vijaya,” BEFEO, XL, 
p. 296) propose reacceptance of this date. 
74. Such a shift would explain why the title Chan-pei ([king of] 
Jambi) was given to the king of San-fo-ch’i in the History of 
the Sung in an account that must date from the period of 
Chao Ju-kua (W. P. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archi-
pelago and Malacca [Batavia, 1876], p. 63; Gabriel Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais de Crivijaya,” JA [July-September, 
1922], p. 66). See Paul Pelliot, “Les grands voyages maritimes 
chinois,” TP, XXX (1933), p. 376; J. L. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava 
en Kataha,” TBG, 77 (1937), p. 459. 
75. Coedés, “Le royaume de Crivijaya,” BEFEO, XVIII, 6, p. 34, 
and Recueil des inscriptions du Siam (Bangkok, 1924-29), II, 
p. 45. For the date, see Coedés, “A propos de la chute du 
royaume de Crivijaya,” p. 468. The naga is of this period; the 
statue of the Buddha may be later (Pierre Dupont, “Le 
Buddha du Grahi,” BEFEO, XLII, p. 105). On the Mahasenapati 
Talanai named in the inscription, see Coedés, “Talanai,” /GIS, 
VIII (1941), p. 61. On Grahi, see above, pp. 161-62, and below, 
pp. 181, 184. 
76. Below, p. 201. 
77. Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua, p. 23. 
78. N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The Hague, 
1931), p. 298. Complete name: Sri Kameévara Trivikramavatara 
Anivaryavirya Parakrama Digjayottungadeva. L. C. Damais, 
“Liste des principales inscriptions datées d’Indonésie,’”’ BEFEO, 
XLVI (1952), pp. 68-71. 
79. Edited by R. Friederich, VBG, XXII (1849). See Hendrik Kern, 
Verspreide Geschriften (The Hague, 1913-29), IX, p. 70; 
Himansu Bhusan Sarkar, Indian Influences on the Literature 
of Java and Bali (Calcutta, 1934), pp. 115-17. 
80. Published and translated by R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, Bibliotheca 
Javanica, Ill (Bandung, 1931). See Sarkar, Indian Influences on 
the Literature of Java and Bali, p. 307. 
81. J. E. van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, ‘The Beginnings of Old-Javanese 
Historical Literature,” BKI, 112 (1956), p. 385. Smara is another 
name for Kama, first element of the name of the king, and 
-dahana is an allusion to Daha, the other name of Kadiri. 
82. R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, ‘“Pandji-verhalen,” Bibliotheca Javanica, 
IX (Bandung, 1940). R. O. Winstedt, “The Panji Tales,’ 
JRASMB, XIX (1941), p. 234. 
83. Part of the text of the Siamese drama composed by King Phra 
Phuttha Loet La at the beginning of the nineteenth century 
was published in Bangkok in 1921 by Prince Damrong with 

--- [Page 364] ---
342 Notes to Pages 180-82 
a historical introduction. See Dhani Nivat, “Siamese Versions 
of the Panji Romance,” India Antiqua (Leyden, 1947), p. 95. 
84. Jean Moura, Le Royaume du Cambodge (Paris, 1883), II, pp. 
416-45. 
85. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions,” pp. 69-73; “Epi-
grafische Aantekeningen,” TBG, LXXXIII (1949), pp. 10-15. 
86. Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua, p. 23. 
87. Damais, “Liste des principales inscriptions,” p. 95. 
88. P. V. van Stein Callenfels, Epigraphia Balica (Batavia, 1926), 
pp. 35-59. Damais, ‘Liste des principales inscriptions.” 
89. N. J. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst (The 
Hague, 1923), Il, pp. 52, 420. W. F. Stutterheim, Oudheden 
van Bali (Singaradja, 1929), |, pp. 86, 145, 192, considers this 
place the funerary site of the king ‘younger son’ (anak 
wungsu) mentioned above, p. 147. 
90. Coedés, “La stéle de Ta Prohm,” p. 81. 
91. Coedés, “La stéle de Prah Khan,” pp. 269, 301. 
92. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge, Il, p. 176. See also Coedeés, 
“Nouvelles données chronologiques,” p. 326. 
93. Coedés, “Nouvelles données chronologiques,” pp. 309-19. 
94. Ibid. 
95. Finot, “Inscriptions d’Ankor,”” pp. 296, 394. 
96. Henri Maspero, “La frontiére de l’Annam et du Cambodge du 
Ville au XIVe siécle,” BEFEO, XVIII, 3, p. 35. 
97. Aymonier, “Premiére étude,” p. 51. 
98. Above, p. 171. 
99. Coedés, “L’année du liévre 1219 A.D.,” in India Antiqua 
(Leyden, 1947), p. 83. 
100. Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua, p. 54. 
101. Above, pp. 161-62, 179, and below, p. 184. 
102. Paul Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires de Chine en Inde a la fin du 
Ville siécle,” BEFEO, IV, p. 233. If this country is really Tam-
bralinga (which is not certain, for Tambralinga is elsewhere 
called Tan-ma-ling by Chao Ju-kua), we must conclude that 
it had already absorbed Chia-lo-hsi (Grahi). It certainly must 
have by 1280 (below, p. 184) because we cannot see how 
Grahi could have been a dependency of San-fo-ch’i if Tam-
bralinga (Ligor) was dependent on Cambodia. 
103. An identification challenged by G. H. Luce in “The Early 
Syam in Burma’s History; A Supplement,” JSS, XLVII (1959), 
p. 60. 
104. O. W. Wolters, “Chén-li-fu,” JSS, XLVII (Nov., 1960), pp. 1-
35. Aside from an embassy in 1200, this country also sent 
missions to China in 1202 and 1205 (O. W. Wolters, ““Tambra-
linga,”” p. 606, n. 2). 
105. Above, p. 171. 
106. Finot, “Inscriptions d’Ankor,” pp. 296, 394. 
107. Aymonier, “Premiére étude,” p. 51. 

--- [Page 365] ---
Notes to Pages 182-84 343 
108. Ibid. 
109. Above, pp. 171, 180-81. 
110. Le Royaume de Champa, p. 169. 
111. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” p. 976. 
112. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 172. 
113. Aymonier, ‘““Premiére étude,” p. 57. For the date, see Louis 
Finot, “Les inscriptions de Jaya Paramecvaravarman 1,’’ BEFEO, 
XV, 2, p. 51. 
114. Finot, ‘Les inscriptions de Mi-sdn,” p. 954. : 
115. Finot, “Les inscriptions de Jaya Paramecvaravarman I,” p. 51, 
n. 1. 
116. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 153. 
117. His official title was Tribhavanaditya Pavaradhammaraja. See 
Than Tun, “History of Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” Bulletin of the 
Burma Historical Commission, | (1960), p. 50. The Pali chron-
icle Jinakalamali attributes to him the composition of a com-
mentary (tika) on the Bodhivamsa (Coedés, “Documents sur 
histoire politique et religieuse du Laos occidental,” BEFEO, 
XXV, p. 11, note). 
118. De Beylié, L’Architecture hindoue, p. 299. O’Connor, Manda-
lay, pp. 221, 270, 275. Lu Pe Win, Pictorial Guide to Pagan, 
p. 44. 
119. O'Connor, Mandalay, p. 260. Lu Pe Win proposes to see in the 
name of this monument an erroneous reading of a Mon ex-
pression representing Tilokamangala (Pictorial Guide to Pagan, 
p. 25). 
120. Glass Palace Chronicle, pp. 155-56. 
121. Tribhavanaditya Pavaradhammarajadhiraja Danapati (Than Tun, 
“History of Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” p. 51). 
122. Tribhavanaditya Pavarapandita Dhammaraja (ibid., p. 53). 
123. Bode, Pali Literature of Burma, p. 25. A mission of monks went 
to Ceylon between 1237 and 1248. It returned accompanied 
by Singhalese monks who helped purify the Buddhism of 
Pagan by drawing on Singhalese rites (Than Tun, “History of 
Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” p. 53). 
124. Glass Palace Chronicle, pp. 156-58. 
125. Than Tun, “History of Burma, A.D. 1000-1300,” p. 54. Title: 
Tribhavanaditya Dhammaraja Jayasira. 
126. Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 161. 
127. Ibid., p. 162. 
128. Ibid., p. 171. 
129. Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua, p. 62. Ferrand, “L’empire 
sumatranais,” p. 13. Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies, II, p. 
| 193. Nilakanta Sastri, “Sri Vijaya,” p. 294. 
130. A point located about thirty miles upstream on the Trengganu 
River, where the oldest remains of Islam on the peninsula have 
been discovered. Paul Wheatley, ‘Geographical Notes,” p. 11; 
The Golden Khersonese (Kuala Lumpur, 1961), p. 70. 

--- [Page 366] ---
344 Notes to Pages 184-85 
131. Above, p. 143. 
132. Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese, pp. 71-72. 
133. See above, pp. 161-62, 179, 181. 
134. Chao Ju-kua ends his account of San-fo-ch’i by saying that 
“This country to the east is conterminous with Jung-ya-lu,” 
that is, Janggala. We shall see that, in fact, in his period, in 
1225, the former Janggala, eclipsed at the outset by Panjalu, 
or Kadiri, had just regained supremacy with Tumapel as capi-
tal. This is not to say that the dependencies of San-fo-ch’i 
comprehended the west and the center of the island up to 
the borders of Janggala, for Chao Ju-kua mentions only Sin-t’o, 
i.e., Sunda, among the vassal states. For him, Jung-ya-lu (Jang-
gala) no doubt corresponded to the whole Javanese kingdom 
that was heir to that of Airlanga. See Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava 
en Kataha,” pp. 410, 414. 
135. Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua, p. 62. Ferrand, “L’empire sumatranais,” p. 13. 
136. Wheatley, “Geographical Notes,” p. 12, has remarked in this 
connection that, although we do not know just when the 
transfer of the capital from Palembang to Jambi took place, 
this transfer had taken place by the thirteenth century when 
the expedition of Kritanagara to Sumatra was led against 
Jambi (below, pp. 198, 201). 
137. Coedés, Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, II, p. 41. 
138. Perhaps he recognized the suzerainty of Cambodia, if the 
country of Teng-liu-mei, mentioned by Chao Ju-kua among 
the dependencies of Cambodia (above, p. 181), corresponded 
wholly or in part to his kingdom. 
139. Louis de La Vallée-Poussin, Dynasties et histoire de I’Inde 
depuis Kanishka jusqu’aux invasions musulmanes (Paris, 1935), 
pp. 251 ff. 
140. Discussion of these texts in: N. J. Krom, “De ondergang van 
Crivijaya,’” MKAWAL, 62 (1926), series B, no. 5; Coedés, “A 
propos de la chute du royaume de Crivijaya,” p. 459; K. A. 
Nilakanta Sastri, “Srivijaya, Candrabhanu and Vira-Pandya,” 
TBG, 77 (1937), p. 251. 
141. Coedés, “Documents... Laos,” p. 99. 
142. Ibid. On these events according to Singhalese sources, see C. 
W. Nicholas and Senerat Paranavitana, A Concise History of 
Ceylon (Colombo, 1961), pp. 281-89. 
143. Coedeés, “Documents... Laos,” p. 99. 
144. At least this is the opinion of F. H. Giles, “The Koh Lak Tradi-
tion,” JSS, XXX (1938), pp. 18-21. 
145. C. C. Berg has published a series of studies on the end of the 
kingdom of Kadiri and the beginning of Singhasari. These 
studies are listed in F. D. K. Bosch, “C. C. Berg and Ancient 
Javanese History,” BKI, 112 (1956), p. 1. The last and most 
important of these memoirs has appeared recently in the 

--- [Page 367] ---
Notes to Pages 185-87 345 
VKNAWAL, LXIX, 1, under the title Het rijk van de Vijfvoudige 
Buddha (Amsterdam, 1962). Undoubtedly many readers will 
wonder why | do not utilize these scholarly works of Berg, 
works in which there is much of value. The reason is that 
they depart from the “events” concept of history. Their object 
is not to reconstruct the drama of events by utilizing the 
contemporaneous indigenous documents and reliable foreign 
sources. Berg adheres to the principle (revealed in his article 
“Javanese Historiography” in D. G. E. Hall, Historians of 
South-East Asia [London, 1961], p. 13) that the history that we 
can reconstruct according to known epigraphic and annalistic 
texts does not correspond to what really happened but is only 
what the kings and their historiographers wanted their con-
temporaries to believe. Berg therefore tries to determine what 
the political and religious principles are that have been re-
sponsible for the alleged ‘falsification’ of the history. This 
reconstruction, which is of great interest for a study of the 
sociology and psychology of the ancient Javanese, is foreign 
to my conception of history properly defined. Reluctant to 
take part in a polemic bearing on an area outside of my com-
petence, | shall be content to reproduce the judgment of 
L. C. Damais (‘Etudes javanaises,’’ BEFEO, L [1962], p. 416): 
‘It is necessary, before developing bold theories, to ex-
amine without preconceived ideas the contemporaneous docu-
ments that have come down to us and to determine from them 
if possible the concrete facts by means of paleographic and 
philological study as careful as their state permits, instead of 
seeking to support one’s own theories at any cost, for one 
cannot fail, in the process, to accord unique trust to those 
among them that seem to corroborate the said theories and 
to consider those that are in flagrant contradiction with them 
as spurious sources, whose evidence must be rejected.” 
146. On the identity of Sringa and of Kritajaya, see above, p. 180. 
147. Above, pp. 147, 158. 
148. Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua, pp. 75-82. 
149. B. Schrieke, ‘“Prolegomena tot eene sociologische studie over 
de volken van Sumatra,” TBG, 65 (1925), p. 126, n. 36. On 
Su-ki-tan and Ta-pan, see also R. A. Kern, “Joartan weder-
gevonden?” BKI, 102 (1943), pp. 549-51. 
150. Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua, p. 83. 
151. Ibid., p. 62. 
152. This list has been studied by Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua, 
p. 86; G. P. Rouffaer, “Was Malaka emporium voor 1400 A.D. 
genaamd Malajoer?” BKI, 77 (1921), p. 137; Krom, Hindoe-
Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 309. 
153. On the last two identifications, see Gabriel Ferrand, ‘Le 

--- [Page 368] ---
346 Notes to Pages 187-88 
K’ouen-louen et les anciennes navigations dans Jes mers du 
sud,” JA (March-April, 1919), p. 281. 
154. Edited by J. L. A. Brandes, VBG, 54 (1902), and translated by 
H. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften (The Hague, 1913-29), VII 
and VIII (reedited by N. J. Krom in 1919). Under the title Java 
in the 14th Century (The Hague, 1960-63), Theodore G. Th. 
Pigeaud has provided a third edition in five volumes. 
155. Edited by J. L. A. Brandes, VBG, 49 (1896). Reedited by N. J. 
Krom, VBG, 62 (1920). The references that follow are to the 
Krom edition. 
156. Nagarakritagama (H. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften, VIII), p. 7. 
157. Pararaton, p. 61. It was probably this woman who is repre-
sented in the form of the famous Prajfapadramita of the Mu-
seum of Leyden (N. J. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-
Javaansche Kunst [The Hague, 1923], pl. 54). 
158. Pararaton, p. 62. 
159. Ibid., p. 63. 
160. Ibid., pp. 64-65. 
161. Ibid., p. 72. 
162. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst, Il, p. 55. 163. Pararaton, pp. 73-76. | 
164. Ibid., p. 77. 
165. Nagarakritagama, p. 12. 
166. Ibid., p. 13. On the archeological remains of this site, see 
J. L. A. Brandes, Beschrijving van Tjandi Singasari (The Hague, 
1909); Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst, pp. 
68-93; Jessy Blom, The Antiquities of Singasari (Leyden, 1939). 
167. Nagarakritagama, p. 14. See Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Ges-
chiedenis, p. 327. 
168. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften, X, pp. 1-76. Sarkar, Indian In-
fluences on the Literature of Java and Bali, pp. 83-87. 
169. Sarkar, Indian Influences on the Literature of Java and Bali, pp. 
224-78. 
170. Above, p. 147. 
171. Sarkar, Indian Influences on the Literature of Java and Bali, 
pp. 322-23. 
172. J. L. A. Brandes, Beschrijving van de ruine bij de desa Toem-
pang, genaamd Tjandi Djago (The Hague, 1904). Krom, In-
leiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst, pp. 95-136. 
173. Above, p. 33. 
174. Taranatha says that at the time of the conquest of India by 
the Turushkas (this was the invasion of Muhammad-i-Bakh-
tivar in the last years of the twelfth century) a number of 
Buddhist scholars, including Sangama Srijhana, Ravisribhadra, 
Chandrakaragupta, sixteen mahantas, and 200 minor pandits 
fled to Pukkam (Pagan), Munjan (Haripunjaya?), Kamboja, 
and other countries. See Nihar-Ranjan Ray, Sanskrit Buddhism 
in Burma (Calcutta, 1936), pp. 76, 81, 85. 

--- [Page 369] ---
Notes to Pages 189-92 347 
Chapter X!] 
1. On the theories concerning the dispersion of the Thai, see 
L. P. Briggs, ‘‘The Appearance and Historical Usage of the Terms 
Tai, Thai, Siamese, and Lao,” JAOS, LXIX (1949), pp. 60-73; 
Jean Rispaud, “Introduction a I’histoire des Tay du Yunnan et 
de Birmanie,” France-Asie, n.s. XVII, no. 166 (1961), pp. 1849-
79. 
2. G. H. Luce, “The Early Syam in Burma’s History,” JSS, XLVI 
(1958), p. 141. See Hsii Yiin-ts’iao, JSSS, IV, 2 (December, 1947), 
p. 11. 
3. Above, p. 10. 
4. P. Lefévre-Pontalis, “Les Younes du royaume de Lan Na ou de 
Pape,” TP, XI (1910), p. 107. These dates are challenged by G. 
H. Luce in “The Early Syam in Burma’s History,” p. 126; he 
asserts that the prestige of Pagan remained intact throughout 
the thirteenth century and that there is epigraphic evidence 
demonstrating Burmese sovereignty over the provinces of the 
north. 
5. Camille Notton, Annales du Siam (Paris, 1926-32), III, p. 20. 
6. Mission Pavie, Etudes diverses, II (Paris, 1898), pp. 7-17. Louis 
Finot, ‘Recherches sur la littérature laotienne,’’ BEFEO, XVII, 5, 
pp. 160-64. 
7. Above, p. 140. 
8. Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, Mémoires archéologiques, 
Il: Le temple d’Angkor Vat (Paris, 1929-32), pls. 558, 559, 572, 
573. 
9. Luce, “The Early Syam in Burma’s History,” p. 140. 
10. Jean Rispaud, ‘Les noms d’éléments numéraux des princi-
pautés tai,” JSS, XXIX (1937), p. 77. P. Lévy, “Doublets ono-
mastiques au Laos,” Bulletin de I’Institut Indochinois pour 
l’Etude de /Homme, V (1942), p. 139. 
11. Pierre Grossin, La Province Muong de Hoa-binh (Hanoi, 1926). 
Charles Robequain, Le Thanh-hoa (Paris, 1929), I. 
12. Paul Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires de Chine en Inde, a la fin du 
Ville siécle,”” BEFEO, IV, p. 162. 
13. Coedés, “Les collections du Musée de Bangkok,” Ars Asiatica, 
XII, p. 31; “India’s Influences upon Siamese Art,’”” JAL, IV 
(1930), p. 36. Reginald le May, A Concise History of Buddhist 
, Art in Siam (Cambridge, England, 1938), p. 103. 
14. History of the Yuan, according to information we owe to the 
kindness of Mr. Tran Van Giap. 
15. Henri Maspero, ‘La frontiére de l’Annam et du Cambodge du 
Ville siécle,” BEFEO, XVIII, 3, p. 35. 
16. According to Chou Ta-kuan. See Paul Pelliot, trans. and ed., 
“Mémoires sur les coutumes du Cambodge,” BEFEO, Il, p. 
140; “Deux itinéraires,” p. 240, n. 5. In his posthumous edition 
of Chou Ta-kuan (Paris, 1951), pp. 119 ff., Paul Pelliot ex-
presses doubt concerning the veracity of this assertion. 

--- [Page 370] ---
348 Notes to Pages 192-95 , 
17. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 240, n. 5. 
18, Louis Finot, “Les inscriptions de Jaya Paramecvaravarman I,” 
BEFEO, XV, 2, p. 51, n. 1. 
19. Etienne Aymonier, ‘Premiére étude sur les_ inscriptions 
tchames,” JA (January-February, 1891), p. 58. For the dates, see 
Finot, ‘Les inscriptions de Jaya Paramecvaravarman I,” p. 51. 
20. For this episode, see Georges Maspero, Le Royaume de 
Champa (Paris, 1928), pp. 175-87. 
21. “The King,” says Marco Polo, who visited Champa in 1285 
(The Travels of Marco Polo, edition of L. F. Benedetto, trans-
lated into English by Aldo Ricci [New York, 1931], p. 278), 
“who was exceedingly old, and had by no means as large an 
army as the Great Kaan’s, being unable to defend himself in 
the open, held out in his cities and towns, which were so 
very strong, that he needed fear no one.” According to 
Benedetto, the name Accambale given to the Cham king by 
certain texts of Marco Polo was the result of a mistake. This 
opinion is shared by A. C. Moule and Paul Pelliot, Marco 
Polo: The Description of the World (London, 1938), I, p. 366, 
n. 5. 
22. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 186. 
23. The Travels of Marco Polo, p. 278. 
24. For the relations of the Burmese with the Mongols and the 
fall of Pagan, see Edouard Huber, “La fin de la dynastie de 
Pagan,” BEFEO, IX, p. 633, and especially G. H. Luce, “The 
Early Syam in Burma’s History,” JSS, XLVI (1958), p. 123, and 
XLVII (1959), p. 59, and Than Tun, “History of Burma, A.D. 
1000-1300,” Bulletin of the Burma Historical Commission, | 
(1960), p. 39. It is from these two important articles that the 
historical and chronological facts pertaining to Burma in this 
chapter and the ones following are taken. 
25. The Travels of Marco Polo, p. 196. 
26. Huber, “La fin de la dynastie de Pagan,” pp. 679-80. 
27. Ibid. The frescoes decorating the monument known as the 
“vault of Kyanzittha,” near the temple of Shwezigon at Pagan, 
have preserved curious representations of a Mongol chief and 
of an archer (ARASB [1922], p. 17, pl. 1). 
28. Coedés, “Documents sur I’histoire politique et religieuse du 
Laos occidental,” BEFEO, XXV, pp. 19-22, 189-94. Robert 
Halliday, ‘Les inscriptions M6n du Siam,” BEFEO, XXX, p. 86. 
29. Above, p. 161. 
30. Coedés, ‘‘Documents... Laos,” p. 86. 
31. Ibid., p. 87. 
32. Ibid., p. 88. 
33. For the first mentions of the Syam in the epigraphy of Cam-
bodia and Champa, see above, p. 190. They appear for the 
first time in Burmese epigraphy (as Rham) in 1120 (Luce, ‘The 
Early Syam in Burma’s History,” p. 124). In China, the first 

--- [Page 371] ---
Notes to Pages 195-97 349 
mention of the Thai under the name Pa-yi is found in the 
History of the Yuan under the date 1278 (ibid., p. 125). 
34. Jean Yves Claeys, “L’archéologie du Siam,” BEFEO, XXXI, pp. 
410-20. 
35. Coedés, “Les origines de la dynastie de Sukhodaya,” JA (April-
June, 1920), p. 233; Receuil des inscriptions du Siam (Bangkok, 
1924-29), |, pp. 7, 49. 
36. An unidentified locality, perhaps on the upper course of the 
Nam Sak. 
37. Perhaps the death of Jayavarman VII. R. C. Majumdar, “The 
Rise of Sukhodaya,” JG/S, X (1943), pp. 44-51, suggests that 
Pha Muang Sri Indrapatindraditya was none other than the 
son-in-law of the Khmer king Jayavarman VIII, the future 
Srindravarman, and the liberation of Sukhothai thus consti-
tuted an episode in his struggle with his brother-in-law and 
might be dated before 1275. But this hypothesis lacks firm 
foundation. 
38. Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,”” p. 241. 
39. Coedés, Receuil des inscriptions du Siam, |, p. 37. 
40. Present-day Rahaeng. Muang Chot corresponds to present-
day Mae Sot, north of Rahaeng. 
41, This passage resembles the oath of the electors of Genghis 
Khan too closely to be coincidental: “We shall march at the 
front in battle; if we win women and girls, we will give them 
to you. We shall go to the hunt in the first ranks; if we catch 
game, we will give it to you’”’ (René Grousset, L’Empire des 
steppes [Paris, 1939], p. 258). 
42. Named above Ban Muang, “protector of the kingdom”; the 
Palaraja of the Pali chronicles. Coedés, “Documents sur la 
dynastie de Sukhodaya,” BEFEO, XVII, 2, pp. 34-44. 
43. Grousset, L’Empire des steppes, p. 281. 
44. Ibid. 
45. This is the same semantic evolution that the word ‘Frank’ 
underwent at the beginning of the feudal era. Since only 
free men composed the “populus Francorum,” the legal 
status and the national name became synonymous. See Marc 
Bloch, La société féodale (Paris, 1939), p. 390. 
46. Grousset, L’Empire des steppes, p. 282. 
47. H. G. Quaritch Wales, Ancient Siamese Government and 
Administration (London, 1934). But this system may also have 
been of Indian origin. 
48. Coedés, Receuil des inscriptions du Siam, |, p. 37. 
49. J. Burnay and Coedés, “The Origins of the Sukhodaya Script,” 
JSS, XXI (1928), p. 87. 
50. Probably Wat Chang Lom. See Claeys, “‘L’archéologie du 
Siam,” pp. 411-12. 
51. Brought back to Bangkok by King Mongkut at the same time 
as the stele and preserved in the Royal Palace (JSS, XVII [1923], 

--- [Page 372] ---
350 Notes to Pages 198-99 
pp. 117-18 and the plates facing pp. 120 and 165), where it 
is used in the coronation rites. 
52. The “Thai who live under the canopy of heaven” were per-
haps the Thai living in China, since the Chinese expression 
T’ien-hsia (“under heaven’) at that time designated the Chi-
nese Empire. 
53. Below, pp. 205-206. 
54. N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The Hague, 
1931), pp. 328-30. 
55. Nagarakritagama, trans. H. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften (The 
Hague, 1913-29), VIII, pp. 15-16; Pararaton, ed. N. J. Krom, 
VBG, 62 (1920), p. 79. 
56. Ibid. See also, below, p. 204. 
57. Nagarakritagama, p. 17. According to N. Venkataramanayya, 
“Tripurantakam Inscription of Vikramottunga Rajendra Cakra-
varti’” (/GIS, XIV [1955], pp. 143-49), the author of this in-
scription, suzerain of four islands, was none other than 
Kritanagara. But the date of his offering to the god of Tripuran-
taka, Monday 5 Pusya 1214 Saka, i.e., December 15, 1292 A.D., 
must have been after the death of Kritanagara; see p. 
199. 
58. Nagarakritagama, p. 17. 
59. On the relations of Java with the Mongols in this period, see 
F. G. Kramp, “De zending van Meng K’i naar Java en de 
stichting van Madjapahit,” in Opstellen geschreven ter eere 
van Dr. H. Kern (Leyden, 1903), p. 357; W. W. Rockhill, “Notes 
on the Relations and Trade of China with the Eastern Archipel-
ago and the Coast of the Indian Ocean during the Fourteenth 
Century,” TP, XV (1914), pp. 444—45. 
60. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 341-42. Repro-
duction in TBG, 52 (1910), p. 108. The inscription has been 
published by H. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften, VII, p. 190; B. 
R. Chatterjee, India and Java (Calcutta, 1933), II, Inscriptions, 
p. 75. 
61. To whom Kritanagara consecrated a temple, Chandi Jawi. 
Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 328-29, 340-41; 
Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst (The Hague, 1923), 
I], pp. 138-50. J. L. Moens, “Het buddhisme op Java en Suma-
tra in zijn laatste Bloeiperiode,”” TBG, 64 (1925), p. 522; “Het 
Berlijnsche Ardhanari beeld en de bijzettingsbeelden van Kri-
tanagara,” TBG, 73 (1933), p. 123. See W. F. Stutterheim, 
“Nachschrift,” TBG, 73 (1933), p. 292. On the Siva-Buddha 
syncretism, see also H. Kern, “Java, Bali, and Sumatra,” in 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics (New York, 1910-27), 
VII, p. 495, and Himansu Bhusan Sarkar, “Siva-Buddha in Old-
Javanese Records,” Indian Culture, | (1934), p. 284. P. H. Pott, 
“Le bouddhisme de Java et l’ancienne civilisation javanaise,” 
Conferenze, Serie Orientale Roma V (Rome, 1952), p. 109. 
62. Pararaton, p. 79. 

--- [Page 373] ---
Notes to Pages 199-202 351 
63. Nagarakritagama, p. 24. J. E. van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, ‘Was 
het optreden van Jayakatwang een usurpatie of restauratie?”’ 
Wegens zijn bizondere verdienste opgedragen aan J. P. Suy-
ling (Amsterdam, 1949), pp. 151-62. 
64. P. 79. L. C. Damais, “L’expédition a Java des troupes de 
Qubilai Qagan et la date de fondation de Majapahit,” Actes, 
XXIle Congrés International des Orientalistes (Istanbul, 1951), 
p. 322. The chronology adopted in the following pages is taken 
from this article. 
65. His complete name was Naraya Sangramavijaya (Pararaton, p. 
98). 
66. These events are described in detail in an inscription of 1294, 
- edited and translated by J. L. A. Brandes in “Pararaton,’”” VBG, 
49 (1896), pp. 94-100. 
67. The Pararaton says he thus feigned submission to Jayakatwang, 
but this is not what seems to be indicated by the Chinese 
sources. See R. C. Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies of the 
Far East, Il: Suvarnadvipa (Dacca, 1937), p. 315. 
68. Below, p. 217. 
69. The Chinese characters represent an original Yighmis (infor-
mation due to the kindness of L. Hambis). 
70. Nagarakritagama, pp. 28-29. R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, ‘Vier 
oorkonden in koper,” TBG, 76 (1936), pp. 380-81. 
71. This follows from an inscription published in Poerbatjaraka, 
“Vier oorkonden in koper,” p. 381, and strongly contradicts 
the Pararaton (pp. 92, 123), which says that the mother of 
Jayanagara was a Sumatranese princess, Dara Petak, brought 
from Malayu following the Javanese expedition. 
72. Nagarakritagama, p. 31. 
73. W. W. Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China,” 
p. 446. 
74. “Chronologie van de oudste Geschiedenis van Maja-pahit,”’ 
BKI, 97 (1938), p. 135. 
75. Inscription of Padang Rocho, published by N. J. Krom in 
VMKAWAL, 5th series, II (1916), p. 306. See Gabriel Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais de Crivijaya,”’ JA (October-December, 
1922), pp. 179-81. 
76. On this image, see C. M. Pleyte, “Over een paar Hindoe beel-
den van Padang-tjandi,’” TBG, 49 (1906), pp. 171, 177; Krom, 
Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst, pp. 131-33; and 
F. M. Schnitger, The Archaeology of Hindoo Sumatra (Leyden, 
1937), pl. XVI, and Forgotten Kingdoms in Sumatra (Leyden, 
1939), pl. IV. 
77. C. O. Blagden, “The Empire of the Maharaja,” JRASSB, 81 
(1920), p. 25. 
78. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 242. 
79. Ibid., p. 326. 
80. The Travels of Marco Polo, p. 282. | 

--- [Page 374] ---
352 Notes to Pages 202-204 
81. Rapporten van den Oudheidkundigen Dienst in Neder-
landsche-Indié (1913), p. 1. R. O. Winstedt, “The Chronicles 
of Pasai,” JRASMB, XVI, 2 (1938), p. 25, says that Pasai was 
the first Malay kingdom to embrace Islam, during the second half of the thirteenth century. 
82. The Travels of Marco Polo, pp. 279-80. 
83. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” pp. 326-27. The History of the 
Yuan specifies elsewhere (W. P. Groeneveldt, Notes on the 
Malay Archipelago and Malacca [Batavia, 1876], p. 30) that 
the states in question are Nan-wu-li, Su-mu-tu-la, Pu-lu-pu-tu, 
Pa-la-la, and Mu-lai-yu, which are exactly the states mentioned 
by Marco Polo. 
84. Gabriel Ferrand, “Malaka, le Malayu et Malayur,” JA (July-
August, 1918), p. 138. 
85. The Travels of Marco Polo, p. 280. 
86. Ibid., p. 281. 
87. Ibid., p. 282. This is the Pa-la-la of the Chinese. Under the 
name of Pieh-li-la, the History of the Yuan attributes to it an 
embassy in 1284 (W. W. Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations 
and Trade of China,” p. 439). See Paul Pelliot, “Les grands 
voyages maritimes chinois au début du XVé€ siécle,” TP, XXX 
(1933), p. 308, n. 3. 
88. The Travels of Marco Polo, p. 282. Paul Pelliot (Notes on 
Marco Polo [Paris, 1959-63], |, p. 86, under the word “Bas-
man”) is of the opinion that Marco Polo visited neither 
Basman nor Fansur (below). 
89. See above, p. 324, n. 73. This state, founded around 1250, 
sent an embassy to China in 1294 (Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,” 
p. 327 and n. 4). 
90. The Travels of Marco Polo, pp. 284-85. 
91. Ibid., pp. 285-86. Dagroian is perhaps a coypist’s error for 
Damian, present-day Tamiang (between Deli and Achin), 
named in the Nagarakritagama under the form Tumihang and 
in the Chinese texts under the form T’an-yang or Tan-yang 
(Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 328, and Ferrand, ‘Malaka,’ 
p. 65). T’an-yang sent an embassy to China in 1294. 
92. The Travels of Marco Polo, p. 287. The Nan-wu-li of the 
Chinese also sent embassies in 1284 (W. W. Rockhill, “Notes 
on the Relations and Trade of China,” p. 439) and in 1294 
(Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 327 and n. 3). 
93. The Travels of Marco Polo, pp. 287-88. 
94. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” pp. 243, 328. 
95. Above, p. 198. 
96. The Tan-ma-hsi of the Chinese. Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,’”’ 
p. 345, n. 4. 
97. G. P. Rouffaer, ‘Was Malaka emporium voor 1400 A.D. 
genaamd Malajoer?” BKI, 77 (1921), pp. 35-67, 370-72, 404-
406. On the history of Singapore before the founding of 

--- [Page 375] ---
Notes to Pages 204-207 353 
Malacca, see W. Linehan, “The Kings of Fourteenth Century 
Singapore,” JRASMB, XX (1927), 2, pp. 117-26, and on Tama-
sik, see Roland Braddell, ‘“Lung-ya-man and Tan-ma-hsi,” 
JRASMB, XXIII (1950), pp. 37-51. 
98. Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,” p. 242. 
99. Coedés, Receuil des inscriptions du Siam, |, p. 48. 
100. Pelliot, “Mémoires...du Cambodge,” pp. 173, 176. 
101. There may be traces of the memory of this penetration in 
local legend. See F. H. Giles, “The Koh Lak Tradition,” JSS, 
XXX (1938), p. 1. 
102. Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,” p. 242. 
103. Ibid. 
104. Communication from Paul Pelliot (letter of March 10, 1928). 
105. C. Hardouin, “Légendes historiques siamoises: Légende de 
Makkatho,” Revue indochinoise (February, 1904), p. 121. 
106. Notton, Annales, III, pp. 30-34. 
107. Below, p. 225. 
108. Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,” pp. 240-43. G. H. Luce, “The Early 
Syam in Burma’s History,” p. 140. (The name of the city of 
Sukhothai is mentioned under the date of June 15, 1299.) 
109. Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,”” p. 242. 
110. Jean Baptiste Pallegoix, Description du royaume Thai ou Siam 
(Paris, 1854), Il, p. 66. Camille Notton, Légendes sur le Siam 
et le Cambodge (Bangkok, 1939), pp. 21-23. 
111. On the ceramics of Sukhothai and Sawankhalok, see R. S. 
le May, “The Ceramic Wares of North-Central Siam,” Burling-
ton Magazine, LXIII (July-December, 1933), pp. 156-66, 203-
21; P’raya Nak’on P’ra Ram, “Tai pottery,” JSS, 29 (1937), 
p. 13. 
112. Coedés, Receuil des inscriptions du Siam, pp. 44-45. 
113. Claeys, ‘“L’archéologie du Siam,” p. 417. 
114. Khpong is a Khmer word that means ‘‘mountain crest.” Phra 
Khaphung is the lord of the heights, the lord of the summit. 
This name evokes at once that of the Nat, or Burmese spirit, 
Mahagiri, who, it is said, lived on Mount Poppa, the sacred 
mountain located southeast of Pagan, and whose installation 
marked the reuniting under the authority of a single chief, 
the chief of Pagan, of many territorial entities, each possessing 
its own spirit. We have seen in Funan that the mountain from 
which the country derived its name and upon which a power-
ful divinity was supposed to have been enthroned, also sym-
bolized the union of various populations assembled under the 
authority of a single sovereign, “king of the mountain.” And 
the establishment in 802 by the Khmer king Jayavarman II of 
the royal linga on the hill of Kulén coincided with the re-
unification of the country, which had been split up in the 
preceding century. We are thus led to consider Phra Kha-
phung of Sukhothai, the lord of the summit, “superior to all 

--- [Page 376] ---
354 Notes to Pages 208-210 
the spirits of the country,” as playing the same role of pro-
tector and unifier as the Burmese Mahagiri on Mount Poppa 
and the royal linga of the Khmers installed on the Kulén. The 
spirit brought about the reunion, on a magico-religious plane, of 
territories conquered and united by Rama Khamhaeng. He was 
a sort of national spirit, dominating from his heights, near 
the royal city, all the other local spirits. His cult, during the 
reign of Rama Khamhaeng, was purely animistic, but this 
national cult over the centuries came to be integrated with 
Buddhism, and the powerful spirit “superior to all the spirits 
of the country” became incarnated in a statue of the Buddha 
and identified with it (Coedés, Les Peuples de la péninsule 
indochinoise [Paris, 1962], p. 136). 
115. Celebrated in Siam until the nineteenth century. See H. G. 
Quaritch Wales, Siamese State Ceremonies (London, 1931), 
pp. 288-94. 
116. Below, p. 215. 
117. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” pp. 241-43. 
118. Coedés, “Documents... Laos,” p. 88. Notton, Annales, Ill, 
pp. 34-44. | am adopting the dates of the Pali chronicle 
Jinakalamali. 
119. Coedés, “Documents... Laos,” p. 90, n. 1. Notton, Annales, 
Ill, pp. 61 ff. 
120. Coedés, “Documents... Laos,” p. 89, n. 1. Notton, Annales, 
Ill, pp. 54-61. Inscription of Wat Chiang Man, in Mission 
Pavie, Etudes diverses, II, p. 308. 
121. Coedés, “Note sur les ouvrages palis composés en pays thai,” 
BEFEO, XV, p. 39. 
122. Bingarattha designates especially the region of Chiangmai and 
Yonarattha, the old principality centered on Chiangrai 
(Coedés, ‘Documents... Laos,” p. 91, n. 2). 
123. Pelliot, ‘Deux itinéraires,” p. 244, n. 4. G. H. Luce, “The 
Early Syam in Burma’s History,” p. 186. 
124. Notton, Annales, III, pp. 47-52. 
125. Above, p. 194. We must not confuse this Burmese prince with 
one of the three Thai brothers bearing the same name. 
126. A. P. Phayre, History of Burma (London, 1883), p. 64. G. E. 
Harvey, History of Burma (London, 1925), p. 75. 
127. Published by John Jardine, King Wagaru’s Manu Dhammasatt-
ham: Text, Translation and Notes (Rangoon, 1892). See Emil 
Forchhammer, An Essay on the Sources and Development of 
Burmese Law (Rangoon, 1885), pp. 36—42. 
128. Robert Lingat, L’Influence hindoue dans I’ancien droit siamois 
(Paris, 1937). 
129. With the title Tribhavanaditya Pavarapandita Dhammaraja. 
The history and chronology of the events that follow are 
essentially based on the works of G. H. Luce (“The Early 
Syam in Burma’s History”) and Than Tun (‘History of Burma, 
A.D. 1000-1300”). 

--- [Page 377] ---
Notes to Pages 211-17 355 | 
130. Tribhavanaditya Pavaradhammaraja. , 
131. Ecole Francaise d’Extr€éme-Orient, Mémoires archéologiques, 
|: Le temple d’Icvarapura (Paris, 1926), p. 89. 
132. Ibid., p. 105. Auguste Barth and Abel Bergaigne, ISC, p. 584. 
133. Ecole Frangaise d’Extréme-Orient, Mémoires archéologiques, 
I, pp. 80—81. 
134. Pelliot, “Mémoires ...du Cambodge,” p. 176. 
135. Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, Mémoires archéologiques, 
|, p. 89. 
136. Ibid., p. 80. 
137. Above, p. 173. 
138. Henri Marchal, Guide archéologique aux temples d’Angkor 
(Paris, 1928), pp. 136-38. Maurice Glaize, Les Monuments du 
groupe d’Angkor (Saigon, 1914), pp. 179-80. 
139. Louis Finot, “Inscriptions d’Ankor,” BEFEO, XXV, pp. 395-406; | 
Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, Mémoires archéologiques, 
|, pp 95-106. 
140. Barth and Bergaigne, iSC, p. 579. 
141. Ibid., p. 584. On this inscription, see below, p. 228. 
142. Above, p. 178. 
143. Pelliot, “Mémoires ...du Cambodge,” p. 141. 
144. Ibid., p. 131. 
145. Nouvelles annales des voyages, Ill; reprinted in Nouveaux 
Mélanges Asiatiques, | (Paris, 1829), pp. 100-52. 
146. ‘Mémoires sur les coutumes du Cambodge,” BEFEO, II, pp. 
123-77. See Coedés, “Notes sur Tcheou Ta-kouan,” BEFEO, 
XVIII, 9, p. 4; “Nouvelles notes sur Tcheou Ta-kouan,” TP, 
XXX (1933), p. 224. A new translation, copiously annotated, 
has appeared in Vol. III (Paris, 1951) of the posthumous works 
of Paul Pelliot. It has been used here in every case where 
it represents an improvement over the old. 
147. Ch’a-nan is Kompong Ch’nang, whose fresh-water shrimps are 
still as large as in the time of Chou Ta-kuan (“The shrimp of 
Ch’a-nan weigh a pound or more’); Mo-liang is Malyang 
(above, p. 170); P’u-mai may be Phimai; the other names are 
not identifiable at the moment. 
148. “In his right hand he holds the lance, in his left hand the 
shield,” which is in conformity with what is shown in the 
bas-reliefs. But when he adds “The Cambodians have neither 
bows, nor arrows, nor arbalests, nor shot, nor cutlasses, nor 
helmets,” he is in error, or else armaments had suffered a 
serious regression in his time as compared with the period of 
Angkor Wat, when warriors wore helmets and cutlasses, and 
the period of the Bayon, on which are depicted curious 
arbalests of Chinese origin (Pau! Mus, ‘Les balistes du Bayon,” 
BEFEO, XXIX, pp. 331-41). 
149. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 188. 
150. Ibid., p. 392. 
151. Ibid., pp. 189-90. 

--- [Page 378] ---
356 Notes to Pages 217-22 
152. Etienne Aymonier, “L’inscription chame de Po Sah,” BCAI 
(1911), p. 15. 
153. Henry Parmentier, Inventaire descriptif des monuments Cams 
de I’Annam (Paris, 1909-18), |, pp. 81-95. 
154. Ibid., pp. 557-59. 
Chapter XIII 
1. Paul Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires de Chine en Inde, a la fin du 
Ville siécle,” BEFEO, IV, pp. 243, 251. 
2. Prince Damrong, “Siamese History prior to the Founding of 
Ayudhya,” JSS, XIII (1919), p. 51. 
3. Ibid., p. 52. 
4, Georges Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928), pp. 
196-97. 
5. Camille Notton, Légendes sur le Siam et le Cambodge (Bang-
kok, 1939), p. 26. 
6. Mission Pavie, Etudes diverses, || (Paris, 1898), p. 235. See 
Coedés, “Documents sur la dynastie de Sukhodaya,” BEFEO, XVII, 2, p. 5. | 
7. A. P. Phayre, History of Burma (London, 1883), p. 66. 
8. Ibid., p. 67. 
9. Henri Maspero, “La frontiére de l’Annam et du Cambodge,” 
BEFEO, XVIII, 3, p. 35. 
10. Coedés, “Documents sur la dynastie de Sukhodaya,” pp. 9, 45 
11. On this point | adopt the conclusions of P’raya Nak’on P’ra 
Ram, “Who Was Dharmaraja | of Sukhothai?’ JSS, XXVIII 
(1935), p. 214. 
12. Coedés, Receuil des inscriptions du Siam (Bangkok, 1924-
29), |, pp. 89-90, 127-29. In agreement with the article cited 
in the preceding note, | now attribute the construction of 
these prints to Loe Thai and not to his son Lu Thai. 
13. Ibid., pp. 49-75. 
14. Ibid., pp. 145-49. P’raya Nak’on P’ra Ram, “Who Was 
Dharmaraja | of Sukhothai?” pp. 218-20. 
15. Lucien Fournereau, Le Siam ancien (Paris, 1895-1908), I, p. 
257 (under the name of Vat Jai). 
16. Reginald le May, A Concise History of Buddhist Art in Siam 
(Cambridge, England, 1938), pp. 114-19. 
17. Above, p. 219. 
18. Published in Bangkok in 1912; see Coedés, ‘Documents sur 
la dynastie de Sukhodaya,” pp. 4-6; “The Traibhimikatha, 
Buddhist Cosmology and Treaty on Ethics,” East and West, 
VII (1957), p. 349. 
19. Coedés, “Documents sur la dynastie de Sukhodaya,” pp. 13, 
45. 
20. Coedés, Receuil des inscriptions du Siam, |, pp. 98-99. 
21. Ibid., p. 107. 
22. Above, p. 208. The Tao-i Chih-lioh of Wang Ta-yuan (1350) 

--- [Page 379] ---
Notes to Pages 222-25 357 
names among its dependencies certain countries that are 
rather difficult to identify but that the Chu-fan-chih of Chao 
Ju-kua in the preceding century listed among the depend-
encies of Cambodia. 
23. Summarized and discussed by Prince Damrong, “Siamese 
History prior to the Founding of Ayudhya,” pp. 35-40. 
24. H. G. Quaritch Wales, Towards Angkor (London, 1937), Chap-
ter IX (“A Cholera-Stricken City”), pp. 132-46; “Some Notes 
on the Kingdom of Dvaravati,” JGIS, V (1938), pp. 24-32. 
| 25. Prince Damrong, ‘Siamese History prior to the Founding of 
Ayudhya,” pp. 63-66. 
26. On this name, in which | believe it is possible to discern a 
survival of the name of the kingdom of Dvaravati, whose 
center was indeed in the lower Menam (above, p. 76), see 
Prince Dhani Nivat, “The City of Thawarawadi Sri Ayudhya,” 
JSS, XXXI1 (1939), p. 147. 
27. The date given by the Tao-i Chih-lioh, according to Edouard 
Huber’s review of Nai Thien’s Burmese Invasions of Siam, 
BEFEO, IX, p. 586. On the evidence from the Pali chronicles 
concerning this battle, see Coedés, ‘Documents sur la dynas-
tie de Sukhodaya,” pp. 40, 43. 
28. Coedés, Les Peuples de la péninsule indochinoise (Paris, 
1962), pp. 136-38; “L’art siamois de l’époque de Sukhodaya,” 
Arts Asiatique, | (1954), p. 281. On art, see A. B. Griswold, 
“New Evidence for the Dating of Sukhodaya Art,” AA, XIX (1956), p. 240. ) 
29. “La frontiére de l’Annam et du Cambodge,” BEFEO, XVIII, 3, 
p. 36. 
30. “The annals of Wiangchan and of Luang Phrabang,” writes 
Henri Maspero (ibid.), ‘attribute the conquest of Wiangchan 
to King Fa Ngum and place these events in the second half -
of the fourteenth century; since the successor of this Fa 
Ngum, King Sam Saen Thai, received the Chinese title of 
Suan-wei-shih in 1404, the date of the Laotian chronicles 
must not be too inaccurate. All these foreign documents, by 
complementing each other, enable us to identify—if not 
precisely, at least approximately—the moment when Cam-
bodian domination in Laotian territory came to an end.” 
31. “Recherches sur la littérature laotienne,” BEFEO, XVII, 5, pp. 
164-65. 
32. Below, pp. 228-29. 
33. Translated in Mission Pavie, Etudes diverses, Il, pp. 1-77. For 
Fa Ngum, see pp. 17-38. 
34. Above, p. 206. 
35. Utilized by Paul Le Boulanger, Histoire du Laos Francais (Paris, 
1930), pp. 41-51. 
36. On this name, see Coedés, “A propos des anciens noms de 
Luang Prabang,” BEFEO, XVIII, 10, pp. 9-11. 

--- [Page 380] ---
358 Notes to Pages 225-27 
37. Coedés, Receuil des inscriptions du Siam, |, p. 129. 
38. Paul Lévy, “Les traces de l’introduction du bouddhisme a 
Luang Prabang,” BEFEO, XL, p. 411. Above, p. 137. 
39. In 1311 according to the Jinakalamali (Coedés, ‘Documents 
sur l'histoire politique et religieuse du Laos occidental,” 
BEFEO, XXV, p. 91); in 1317 according to the Chronicle of 
Chiangmai (Camille Notton, Annales du Siam [Paris, 1926-
32], Il, p. 74). 
40. Notton, Annales, III, p. 72. 
41. Coedés, “Documents... Laos,” p. 92, n. 2. Notton, Annales, 
Il, p. 73. 
42. Notton, Annales, III, p 71. 
43, Coedés, “Documents... Laos,” pp. 91-92. Notton, Annales, 
Hl, p. 74. 
44. Coedés, “Documents... Laos,” p. 92, Notton, Annales, Ill, p. 75. / 
45. Coedés, “Documents... Laos,” pp. 92-93. Notton, Annales, 
Hl, pp. 75-77. 
46. The first date is that of the Jinakalamali (Coedés, ‘Documents 
... Laos,” p. 93); the second date is that of the Chronicle of 
Chiangmai (Notton, Annales, III, p. 77). 
47. Seen. 46. 
48. Seen. 46. 
49. Coedés, “Documents...Laos,” p. 93. Notton, Annales, III, 
p. 80. 
50. In 1336 according to the Jinakalamali (Coedés, “Documents 
... Laos,” p. 94); in 1345 according to the Chronicle of 
Chiangmai (Notton, Annales, III, p. 85). 
51. Coedés, “Documents... Laos,” p. 94. 
52. Ibid. Notton, Annales, Ill, pp. 84-85. The urn containing 
these ashes was discovered in 1925 (see Notton, Annales, III, 
plate facing p. 84, and L’Il/ustration, Sept. 5, 1925, p. 238). 
53. The history of this miraculous statue is told in the Jinakalamdli 
(Coedés, ‘“‘Documents... Laos,” pp. 97-103). 
54. In 1355 according to the Jinakalamali (Coedés, “Documents 
... Laos,” p. 94); in 1367 according to the Chronicle of 
Chiangmai (Notton, Annales, III, p. 85). 
55. Above, p. 219. 
56. Phayre, History of Burma, pp. 67-68. G. E. Harvey, History of 
Burma (London, 1925), pp. 111-12. 
57. By taking the title of Anantasihasiira Jeyyadeva. 
58. Under the name of Tribhavanaditya Pavarasihasira Dham-
maraja. 
59. Phayre, History of Burma, p. 59. Harvey, History of Burma, 
pp. 78-79. 
60. The Sawyun of Phayre, History of Burma, p. 59, and Harvey, 
History of Burma, p. 79. 
61. Phayre, History of Burma, p. 63. Harvey, History of Burma, 

--- [Page 381] ---
Notes to Pages 228-30 359 
p. 80. On this whole period, see Than Tun, “History of Burma, 
A.D. 1300-1400,” JBRS, XLH, 2 (1959), pp. 119-33, and Tin Hla 
Thaw, “History of Burma, A.D. 1400-1500” JBRS, XLII, 2 (1959), 
pp. 135-50. 
62. Phayre, History of Burma, p. 83. Harvey, History of Burma, 
p. 123. 
63. Coedés, “La plus ancienne inscription en pali du Cambodge,’”’ 
BEFEO, XXXVI, p. 15. 
64. Ibid., pp. 14-21. 
65. Louis Finot, “Inscriptions d’Ankor,” BEFEO, XXV, pp. 403-406. 
Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, Mémoires archéologiques, 
|: Le temple d’Icvarapura (Paris, 1926), pp. 103-106. 
66. Pelliot, ‘‘Deux itinéraires,” p. 240, n. 5. 
67. Coedés, “La date d’avénement de Jayavarmaparameg¢vara,” 
BEFEO, XXVIII, p. 145. 
68. Coedés, Inscriptions du Cambodge (Paris, 1937-), II, p. 187. 
69. Published by Auguste Barth and Abel Bergaigne, ISC, pp. 560- | 
88. 
70. Finot, “Inscriptions d’Ankor,” p. 365. 71. Barth and Bergaigne, ISC, pp. 585-88. | | 
72. Adhémard Leclére, Cambodge, Fétes civiles et religieuses 
(Paris, 1917). For the Brahmans at the court of Siam, see 
H. G. Quaritch Wales, Siamese State Ceremonies (London, 1931). 
73. Pelliot, “Deux itinéraires,” p. 240, n. 5. 
74. Above, p. 219. 75. Below, p. 236. : 
76. W. W. Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China 
with the Eastern Archipelago and the Coast of the Indian 
Ocean during the Fourteenth Century,” TP, XVI (1915), p. 
106. The passage of the Tao-i Chih-lioh has been translated 
anew and more accurately by Paul Pelliot in the notes of his 
Mémoires sur les coutumes du Cambodge de Tcheou Ta-
kouan, Posthumous Works of Paul Pelliot, v. II (Paris, 1951), 
pp. 136 ff. 
77. Le Royaume de Champa, p. 193. 78. Above, p. 217. | 
79. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 195. 80. Above, p. 219. , 
81. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, pp. 197-98. 
82. Ibid., pp. 199-200. 
83. Henri Cordier, ed., Les Voyages en Asie au XIVe siécle du 
, bienheureux frére Odoric de Pordenone (Paris, 1891), p. 187. 
| [Ed. note: English translation from Henry Yule and Henri 
Cordier, ed., Cathay and the Way Thither (London, 1913), Il, 
pp. 166-67.] 
84, The Latin and Italian texts say Zampa, Zapa, Campa, Canpa, 
and Capa. 

--- [Page 382] ---
360 Notes to Pages 230-31 
85. This passage concerning sati is translated directly from the 
Old French. The Latin text says more exactly that his living 
wife was burned with him: comburitur ejus corpus una com 
uxore viva. See the note in Yule and Cordier, Cathay and the 
Way Thither, Il, p. 167. 
86. Tatsuro Yamamoto, “On Tawalisi Described by Ibn Batita,” 
Memoirs of the Research Department of the Toyo Bunko, 8 
(1936), p. 93. The proposed identification is based upon an 
ingenious tie-in with the princely title taval then in use in 
Champa, which would be precisely represented by the tran-
scription trae hoa (bé6-dé = pati) of the Vietnamese annalists. 
87. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, pp. 201—203. 
88. Above, p. 205. 
89. Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China,” p. 
100. 
90. Tumasik, the site of Singapore. See above, p. 204. 
91. Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China,” p. 118. 
92. Ibid., p. 120. 
93. Ibid., p. 121. 94. Ibid., p. 123. 
95. Ibid., p. 125. See Paul Pelliot, “Les grands voyages maritimes 
chinois au début du XVe siécle,” TP, XXX (1933), p. 330, n. 3. 
96. H. S. Paterson, “An Early Malay Inscription from Trengganu,” 
JRASMB, \t (1924), p. 252. C. O. Blagden, “A Note on the 
Trengganu Inscription,” JRASMB, II (1924), p. 258. 
97. On this country, see Paul Wheatley, The Golden Khersonese 
(Kuala Lumpur, 1961), pp. 224-28. 
98. Gabriel Ferrand, Relations de voyages et textes géographiques 
arabes, persans, et turks relatifs a l’Extréme-Orient du VIIIe au XVIle siécles (Paris, 1913-14), II, p. 450. | 
99. J. P. Moquette, Rapporten van den Oudheidkundigen Dienst 
in Nederlandsch-Indié (1913), p. 11. Gabriel Ferrand, ‘Malaka, 
le Malayu et Malayur,” JA (May-June, 1918), pp. 474-75. But 
see N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The Hague, 
1931), p. 396. 
100. Ferrand, Relations de voyages, II, p. 440. , 
101. H. K. J. Cowan, “Een interessant getuigenis betreffende de 
vroegste Islam in Noord-Sumatra,” BKI, 117 (1961), pp. 410-
16. 
102. J. P. Moquette, “De graafsteenen te Pasé en Grissee vergleken 
met dergelijke monumenten uit Hindoestan,” TBG, 54 (1912), 
pp. 536-48. But this opinion is challenged by G. E. Marrison 
(‘The Coming of Islam to the East Indies,” JRASMB, XXIV 
[1951], pp. 28-37), who gives confirmation for the Malay 
tradition that Islam came from the Coromandel coast. See 
Raden Abdulkadir Widjojoatmodjo, “Islam in the Netherlands 
Fast-Indies,” FEQ, II (1942), pp. 48-49. 
103. Cordier, Les Voyages en Asie, p. 136. 

--- [Page 383] ---
Notes to Pages 231-33 361 
104. Ibid., p. 153. [Ed. note: English translation from Yule and 
Cordier, Cathay and the Way Thither, H, pp. 447+50.] 
105. Rockhill, ‘“Notes on the Relations and Trade of China,” p. 148. 
106. Ibid., p. 151. 
107. Ibid., p. 143. 
108. Ibid., p. 134. Gabriel Ferrand, “L’empire sumatranais de 
Crivijaya,” JA, July-Sept., 1922), p. 30. 
109. Pelliot, “Les grands voyages maritimes chinois,” p. 376. 
110. Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China,” p. 135. 
Ferrand, “L’empire sumatranais,” p. 31. 
111. H. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften (The Hague, 1913-29), VII, 
p. 219. 
112. J. L. A. Brandes, Beschrijving van Tjandi Singasari (The Hague, 
1909), pp. 99-116. 
113. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 392-93. K. A. 
Nilakanta Sastri, “Sri Vijaya,” BEFEO, XL, p. 303. 
114. Hendrik Kern, “De wij-inscriptie op het Amoghapaca-beeld 
van Padang Chandi,” Verspreide Geschriften, VII, p. 163. 
B. R. Chatterjee, India and Java (Calcutta, 1933), II, Inscrip-
tions, pp. 79-84. 
115. Above, p. 201. 
116. J. L. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha,” TBG, LXXVII (1937), 
p. 457. 
117. Sylvain Lévi, Sanskrit Texts from Bali (Baroda, 1933). 
118. J. L. Moens, “Het buddhisme op Java en Sumatra in zijn laatste 
bloeiperiode,” TBG, LXIV (1924), pp. 558-79. 
119. Hendrik Kern, ‘Het zoogenaamde rotsinschrift van Batu Be-
ragung in Menangkabau,” Verspreide Geschriften, VI, p. 249. 
120. C. C. Berg, ‘““Opmerkingen over de chronologie van de oudste 
geschiedenis van Maja-pahit,” BKI, 97 (1938), p. 135. See also 
Berg’s De middeljavaansche historische traditie (Santpoort, 
1927). 
121. Pararaton, ed. J. L. A. Brandes (VBG, 62 [1920]), p. 125. C. C. 
Berg, Rangga Lawe, middeljavaansche roman (Weltevreden, 
1930). 
122. Pararaton, p. 125. 
123. Pararaton, pp. 125-26. 
124. N. J. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst (The 
Hague, 1923), pp. 159-66. 
125. Ibid., pl. 65. 
126. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, ‘“Agastya,’” TBG, 76 (1936), p. 502. See 
also his “Origin of the Cailendras,” TBG, 75 (1935), p. 611. 
127. Pararaton, p. 125. This place has not been identified exactly. 
N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 345. 
128. Pararaton, p. 126. 
129. Pararaton, pp. 126-27. Nagarakritagama (trans. Hendrik Kern, 
Verspreide Geschriften, VIII), p. 34. 
130. Pararaton, pp. 127-28. 

--- [Page 384] ---
362 Notes to Pages 234-36 
131. Cordier, Les Voyages en Asie, pp. 161-62. [Ed. note: English 
translation from Yule and Cordier, Cathay and the Way 
Thither, ll, pp. 151-55). 
132. Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China,” TP, 
XV (1914), pp. 446-47. 
133. Below, p. 243. 
134. Pararaton, pp. 128-29. 
135. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst, ll, pp. 245-
84. M. E. Lulius van Goor, “Notice sur les ruines de Panataran,” 
Et. Asiat. EFEO, Il, p. 375. 
136. Nagarakritagama, p. 257. 
137. With the title Tribhuvanottungadevi Jayavishnuvardhani. Krom, 
Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 383. Nagarakritagama, 
p. 257. 
138. Pararaton, p. 129. 
139. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 384. : 
140. Pararaton, p. 139. 
141. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 387. 
142. Ibid., p. 390. 
143. Ibid., p. 391. Nagarakritagama, p. 37. 
144. Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China,” TP, 
XV (1914), p. 447. 
145. Ibid., TP, XVI (1915), pp. 236-37. 
Chapter XIV 
1. On the various recensions of the Cambodian chronicle, see 
Coedés, “Essai de classification des documents historiques 
cambodgiens conservés a la bibliothéque de |’EFEO,” BEFEO, 
XVIII, 9, p. 15. The recension of Vongsa Sarpéch Nong (1818) 
has been translated by Francis Garnier, “Chronique royale du 
Cambodge,” JA (October-December, 1871), p. 336. See also 
Georges Maspero, L’Empire khmér (Phnom Penh, 1904), and 
Adhémard Leclére, Histoire du Cambodge (Paris, 1914). For 
the Chinese sources, see J. P. Abel Rémusat, Nouveaux mé-
langes asiatiques (Paris, 1829), I, pp. 90-97. All the dates given 
below, except those taken from Chinese sources, are subject to revision. . 
2. W. A. R. Wood, A History of Siam (London, 1926), p. 65. The 
account that follows is based on the Annals of Ayutthaya and 
assumes that there were two seizures of Angkor before the 
final abandonment of the capital in 1431. These occupations 
of Angkor, however temporary, seem quite certain, and re-
solve textual difficulties. They have been challenged by L. P. 
Briggs, in an article entitled ‘Siamese Attacks on Angkor 
before 1430” (FEQ, VIII [1948], pp. 1-33); his conclusions, if 
not proved, have at least some probability. 
3. Garnier, “Chronique royale,” pp. 341-42. Leclére, Histoire 
du Cambodge, pp. 195-207. 

--- [Page 385] ---
Notes to Pages 236-39 363 
4, Rémusat, Nouveaux mélanges asiatiques, I, p. 91. : 
5. Ibid., p. 92. 
6. Garnier, “Chronique royale,” p. 343. Leclére, Histoire du 
Cambodge, p. 211. 
7. Rémusat, Nouveaux mélanges asiatiques, |, p. 93. 
8. Wood, A History of Siam, p. 76. 
9. Garnier, ‘Chronique royale,” p. 344. 
10. Rémusat, Nouveaux mélanges asiatiques, |, p. 95. 
11. Leclére, Histoire du Cambodge, p. 215, mentions two reigns 
between the second conquest of Angkor and the accession of Chao Ponhea Yat. | 
12. Rémusat, Nouveaux mélanges asiatiques, I, p. 96. 
13. Garnier, “Chronique royale,” p. 344. Maspero, L’Empire 
khmer, p. 56. Leclére, Histoire du Cambodge, p. 216. 
14. Coedés, ‘‘La fondation de Phnom Penh,” BEFEO, XIII, 6, p. 6. 
15. Etienne Aymonier, ‘‘Légendes historiques des Chames,’”’ Ex-
cursions et reconnaissances, XIV, No. 32 (1890). 
16. Georges Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa (Paris, 1928), p. 
203. 
17. Ibid., p. 204. 
18. Ibid., p. 205. 
19. Ibid., p. 206. 
20. Ibid., pp. 209-10. 
21. Ibid., pp. 211-12. 
22. Ibid., p. 214. 
23. Ibid., pp. 216-17. 
24. Ibid., p. 217. 
25. Louis Finot, “Les inscriptions du Musée de Hanoi,” BEFEO, 
XV, 2, pp. 13-14; Finot’s review of Maspero’s Le Royaume de 
Champa, BEFEO, XXVIII, p. 291. 
26. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 220. 
27. Finot, ‘‘Les inscriptions du Musée de Hanoi,” pp. 13-14. 
28. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, p. 221. 
29. Ibid., p. 224. 
30. A. Cabaton, “L’inscription chame de Bién-hoa,” BEFEO, IV, p. 
687. 
31. Maspero, Le Royaume de Champa, pp. 226-27. 
32. Ibid., p. 228. N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis 
(The Hague, 1931), pp. 452, 463. 
33. Bi-cai (Chinese Pi Kai = Vijaya), 1441-46, nephew of In-
dravarman VI; Qui-lai (Chinese Kui-lai), 1446-49, son of 
Indravarman VI; Qui-do (Chinese Kui-you), 1449-58, younger 
brother of Qui-lai; Ban-la Tra-nguyét (Chinese P’an Lo-yue), 
1458-60, son-in-law of Vijaya; Ban-la Tra-toan (Chinese P’an-
lo T’u-ch’tan), 1460-71, brother of Ban-la Tra-nguyét. Mas-
pero, Le Royaume de Champa, pp. 230-39. 
34. Ibid., p. 231. 
35. Ibid., pp. 237-39. 

--- [Page 386] ---
364 Notes to Pages 239-41 
36. Jeanne Leuba, Un Royaume disparu: Les Chams et leur art 
(Paris, 1923). 
37. Inscription of Batu Tulis at Buitenzorg. The most recent work 
on this inscription, which is one of the oldest known, is R. 
Ng. Poerbatjaraka, TBG, 59 (1921), p. 380. 
38. Jodo de Barros, Da Asia (Lisbon, 1778-88), IV, 1, chapter 12. 
39. Pararaton, ed. J. L. A. Brandes (VBG, 62 [1920]), pp. 157-58. 
C. C. Berg, “Kidung Sunda,” BKI, 83 (1927), p. 1. Krom, 
Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 402-404. 
40. Trans. Hendrik Kern, Verspreide Geschriften (The Hague, 
1913-29), VIII, pp. 240-42, 278-79. 
41. See below, p. 244, the list of the dependencies on Sumatra 
and on the peninsula, corresponding to the ancient posses-
sions of Srivijaya. 
42. W. F. Stutterheim, Oudheden van Bali (Singaradja, 1929-30), 
I, p. 191. 
43. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 410. 
44, G. P. Rouffaer, Notulen van de Directievergaderingen van het 
Bataviaasch Genootschap (1910), pp. 110-13. F. H. van Naers-
sen, “Hindoe-Javaansche overblijfselen op Soembawa,” 
TKNAG (1938), p. 90. 
45. P. 279. 
46. W. P. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago and 
Malacca (Batavia, 1876), pp. 35-36. Pararaton, p. 164. 
47. Restored by Groeneveldt (Notes on the Malay Archipelago) 
as Bogindo Bongkit, and by Gabriel Ferrand (/L’empire su-
matranais de Crivijaya,” JA [July-September, 1922]) as Bhra 
Wangye. Neither of these names corresponds at all to known 
ones. Ferrand thinks that the second character yiian should 
be deleted, which is probable. Wang-chieh appears to be the 
conventional transcription of Wengker. 
48. Edited and translated by Hendrik Kern, Verspreide Geschrif-
ten, VII and VIII. New edition, with translations and com-
mentary, in Theodore G. Th. Pigeaud, Java in the 14th 
Century (The Hague, 1960-63). See Himansu Bhusan Sarkar, 
Indian Influences on the Literature of Java and Bali (Calcutta, 
1954), p. 385. 
49. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 419-21. On the 
capital, see W. F. Stutterheim, De kroton van Majapahit, VK], 
VII (The Hague, 1948). 
50. Pararaton, p. 196. 
51. H. B. Sarkar, Indian Influences on the Literature of Java and 
Bali, pp. 230, 318-22. 
52. Above, p. 234. 
53. In his Ying-yai Sheng-lan, Ma Huan, who accompanied the 
eunuch Cheng Ho on his journey of 1413, distinguishes three 
types of inhabitants on Java: the Westerners (Muslims), who 
came to establish themselves as merchants; the Chinese, who 

--- [Page 387] ---
Notes to Pages 241-42 365 
follow the customs of the Muslims; and the natives (W. W. 
Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China with 
the Eastern Archipelago and the Coast of the Indian Ocean 
during the Fourteenth Century,” TP, XVI [1915], p. 242). 
54. J. P. Moquette, Handelingen van het Eerste Congres voor de 
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Java (Weltevreden, 1921), 
p. 31. Paul Ravaisse, “L’inscription coufique de Léran a Java,’ 
TBG, 65 (1925), p. 668. 
55. Bertram Schrieke, Het boek van Bonang (Utrecht, 1916), p. 28. 
56. Pararaton, pp. 177, 180. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschied-
enis, pp. 430-32. The History of the Ming (Groeneveldt, Notes 
on the Malay Archipelago, p. 36) notes under the year 1403 
the division of the country between the king of the West, 
the prince of Tu-ma-pan (Tumapel), and the king of the East, 
P’u-ling Ta-ha, Bhreng (or Putreng) Daha. The eunuch Cheng 
Ho, sent by the Ming emperor Yung Lo, in the course of his 
first journey abroad found himself in the kingdom of the 
East in 1406 at the moment of its fall and received the apolo-
gies of the conqueror for the death of 170 persons in his 
entourage (Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, 
pp. 36-37). 
We learn from this text that the prince of Tu-ma-pan 
(Tumapel) must be identified with Vikramavardhana, or per-
haps with his son who actually bore the title of Bhre Tumapel 
and whom P’u-ling Ta-ha (Putreng Daha) called Virabhaimi 
(Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 431-32). The 
abstruse and confused data of the Pararaton concerning the 
genealogical lines among the members of the royal family of 
Majapahit make it quite difficult to reconstruct the history of 
that period; the data are susceptible to divergent interpreta-
tions. Thus, R. C. Majumdar (Ancient Indian Colonies of the 
Far East, Il: Suvarnadvipa [Dacca, 1937], pp. 339-45) has 
formulated a theory that Vikramavardhana abdicated in 1400 
in favor of his wife, who died in 1429. Vikramavardhana must 
have assumed power again around 1415, for the History of 
the Ming (Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 37; 
Paul Pelliot, ‘“Notes additionelles sur Tcheng Houo et sur ses 
voyages,” TP, XXXI [1935], p. 301) says that in that year the 
king took the name Yang Wei-si-cha, Hyang ViSesha, which 
was actually one of the names of Vikramavardhana. He ap-
pears to have reigned not merely until 1429 as has been 
believed, but until 1436, and he apparently was succeeded at , 
that date by a daughter named Bhre Daha, another name of 
the princess Suhita. 
57. Below, pp. 245-46. 
58. On the voyages of Cheng Ho between 1405 and 1433, see 
Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, pp. 41-45; 
Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China,” pp. 

--- [Page 388] ---
366 Notes to Pages 242-43 
81-85; J. J. L. Duyvendak, Ma Huan Re-Examined, VEKNAWAL, 
XXXII, No. 3 (Amsterdam, 1933); Paul Pelliot, “Les grands 
voyages maritimes chinois au début du XVée siécle,” TP, XXX 
(1933), p. 237; Tatsuro Yamamoto, ““Chéng Ho’s Expeditions to 
the South Sea under the Ming Dynasty,” Toyo Gakuho, XxXI 
(1934), pp. 374-404, 506-54; Pelliot, ‘Notes additionelles sur 
Tcheng Houo,” p. 274; J. J. L. Duyvendak, “The True Dates of 
the Chinese Maritime Expedition in the Early Fifteenth Cen-
tury,” TP, XXXIV (1938), p. 341. 
59. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 439. 
60. Pararaton, pp. 177-90. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, 
pp. 429-32, 444-46. 
61. N. J. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst (The 
Hague, 1923), Il, pp. 325 ff. W. F. Stutterheim, “The Explora-
tion of Mount Penanggungan,” ABIA, XI (1936), pp. 25-30. 
F. M. Schnitger, “Les terrasses mégalithiques de Java,” RAA, 
XIII] (1939-42), pp. 105-12, 
62. Pararaton, p. 199. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 
448. 
63. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 449-50. 
64. Ibid., pp. 450-51. 
65. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 39. 
66. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 458. 
67. C. Hooykaas, “Kamandakiya Nitisara etc., in Old-Javanese,” 
JGIS, XV (1956), p. 21. 
68. Hendrik Kern, Verspreide Geschriften, VI, pp. 257-61. 
69. F. M. Schnitger, The Archaeology of Hindoo Sumatra (Leyden, 
1937), p. 8, pls. XIII-XVI. 
70. N. J. Krom, VMKAWAL, 5th series, II (1916), p. 338. 
71. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 68. Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais,” p. 24. 
72. This name, which is undoubtedly only a simple transcription 
of maharaja, has been read by J. L. Moens (“Srivijaya, Yava en 
Kataha,” TBG, 77 [1937], p. 456) as Haji Dharmaéraya, with 
the inversion of the two words following Chinese syntax. It 
will be recalled that Dharmasraya designates the region of 
the upper Batang Hari where the statue of Amoghapaéa that 
was brought from Java was erected in 1286 (above, p. 201). 
73. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 69. Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais,” p. 25. 
74. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 69. Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais,” p. 25. 
75. Moens, “Srivijaya, Yava en Kataha,” p. 457, proposes that 
this name be read as Sang Adityavarman, but this reading is 
difficult to justify phonetically. 
76. Above, p. 234. 
77. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 69. Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais,” pp. 25-26. 

--- [Page 389] ---
Notes to Pages 243-45 367 
78. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 412. 
79. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 69. Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais,” p. 26. 
80. On the changing of this name, see Pelliot, “Les grands voy-
ages maritimes chinois,” pp. 274, 372-79. 
81. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 71. Ferrand, 
“L’empire sumatranais,” pp. 27-28. 
82. The Palatine law (Kot Mandirapala), published in volume | of 
the edition of Siamese laws of D. B. Bradley (Bangkok, 1896) 
and in volume I, p. 58, of the edition of Robert Lingat (Bang-
kok, 1938). See G. E. Gerini, Researches on Ptolemy’s Geog-
raphy of Eastern Asia (London, 1909), pp. 531-32, and C. O. 
Blagden, review of Krom’s Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis in 
JRAS (1928), p. 915. 
83. On this place name, which has not yet been identified, see 
above, pp. 144, 145 (Wurawari). 
84. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften, VIl, pp. 241, 278-79. Krom, 
Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 416-17. No explanation 
is given here for names still in use or easily recognizable. 
85. On the history of some of the small Sumatran states in the 
first half of the fifteenth century, we find some details in the 
History of the Ming, as well as in the Ying-yai Sheng-lan of 
Ma Huan and the Hsing-ch’a Sheng-lan of Fei Hsin, both 
written following the voyages of the eunuch Cheng Ho 
(Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, pp. 77-101; 
Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China,” pp. 
129-59; Pelliot, “Les grands voyages maritimes chinois,” pp. 
275, 290-94). 
86. Rockhill, “Notes on the Relations and Trade of China,” pp. 
141, 150. 
87. But not as political center, since, according to Tomé Pires 
(The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires, ed. Armando Cortesao 
[London, 1944], I, p. 108; II, p. 248), the kingdom of Kedah 
retained supremacy over the tin-bearing districts until its 
conquest by Mansur Shah (below, p. 246). See, however, 
R. O. Winstedt, “Did Pasai Rule Kedah in the Fourteenth 
Century?” JRASMB, XLVIII, 2 (1940), p. 150. 
88. R. O. Winstedt, “The Advent of Muhammadanism in the 
Malay Peninsula and Archipelago,” JRASSB, 77 (December, 
1917), p. 171. On the propagation of Islam on Sumatra, this 
author adds that Islam spread from Achin to Ulakan, then to 
Minangkabau. In the seventeenth century, the peoples on the 
coast of the district of Lampong began to be converted, and 
in the eighteenth century Islam spread into the interior. In the 
middle of the sixteenth century, a missionary from Palem-
bang went to Borneo and propagated the religion at Sukadana 
and at Madan. In 1606, a merchant of Minangkabau converted 
the Raja of Pallo in the Celebes. 

--- [Page 390] ---
368 Notes to Pages 245-46 
89. C. O. Blagden, “The Mediaeval Chronology of Malacca,” in 
Actes, Xl@ Congrés International des Orientalistes (Paris, 1897), 
Hl, pp. 239-53. Gabriel Ferrand, “Malaka, le Malayu et Ma-
layur,”” JA (May-June, 1918), pp. 391-484; July-August, 1918), 
pp. 51-154. G. P. Rouffaer, “Was Malaka emporium voor 1400 
A.D. genaamd Malajoer?” BKI, 77 (1921), pp. 1-174, 359-604. 
R. J. Wilkinson, “The Malacca Sultanate,” JRASMB, XIII, 2 
(1935), pp. 22-67. 
90. Historical Guide to Malacca (Singapore, 1936), p. 25. 
91. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 436-37. R. O. 
Winstedt, History of Malaya (Singapore, 1962), p. 45. P. V. van 
Stein Callenfels, “The Founder of Malacca,” JRASMB, XV 
(1937), p. 160. For the history and chronology of events, | 
adopt the views of R. O. Winstedt in his ‘The Malay Founder 
of Medieval Malacca,’ BSOAS, XII (1948), p. 728, and his 
History of Malaya. 
92. Pelliot, “Les grands voyages maritimes chinois,” p. 397. The 
History of the Ming calls him Pai-li-mi-su-la (ibid., p. 389); 
another text of the sixteenth century calls him Si-li-pa-erh-
su-la (J. J. L. Duyvendak, “Sailing Directions of Chinese Voy-
ages,’ TP [1938], p. 366, n. 3). 
93. Pelliot, “Les grands voyages maritimes chinois.” On the ex-
changes of embassies between China and Malacca, see Victor 
Purcell, “Chinese Settlement in Malacca,” JRASMB, XX (1947), 
pp. 115-25. 
94. Description in the Ying-yai Sheng-lan (Rockhill, “Notes on the 
Relations and Trade of China,” pp. 114-17). For the commer-
cial reasons for the founding and prosperity of Malacca, a 
port of exchange and a port of call commanding the straits, as 
Srivijaya had been before it, see Paul Wheatley, The Golden 
Khersonese (Kuala Lumpur, 1961), Part VII, p. 306. 
95. Pelliot, ‘Les grands voyages maritimes chinois,” pp. 397-98, 
451. 
96. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 438-39. Winstedt, 
History of Malaya, p. 49. 
97. The History of the Ming (Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay 
Archipelago, p. 130; Ferrand, ‘Malaka, le Malayu et Malayur,” 
p. 403) calls him Mu-kan Sa-yi-ti-erh Sha, which must surely 
be corrected to Mu-wo Sa-kan-ti-erh Sha. According to a 
communication from R. O. Winstedt, it is this change in name 
which has caused the Chinese sources to regard a single in-
dividual as two separate kings. 
98. Pelliot, “Les grands voyages maritimes chinois,” p. 398. The 
History of the Ming (Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archi-
pelago, p. 130; Ferrand, ‘Malaka, le Malayu et Malayur,” p. 
403) calls him Si-li Ma-ha-la. 
99. Winstedt, History of Malaya, p. 50. 

--- [Page 391] ---
Notes to Pages 246-52 369 
100. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, p. 131. 
101. Ferrand, ‘Malaka, le Malayu et Malayur,” p. 404. 
102. Winstedt, History of Malaya, p. 50. 
103. This is the Su-lu-t’an Wu-ta-fu-na Sha of the History of the 
Ming (Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago, pp. 131-
32; Ferrand, “Malaka, le Malayu et Malayur,” p. 404). On the 
hostilities with Ayutthaya, see G. E. Marrison, “The Siamese 
Wars with Malacca during the Reign of Muzaffur Shah,” 
JRASMB, XXII (1949), pp. 51-66, and XXIV (1951), p. 191. 
104. Su-tan Mang-su Sha (Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Archi-
pelago, p. 132; Ferrand, “Malaka, le Malayu et Malayur,” p. 
404). 
105. The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires, Il, p. 248. 
106. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, p. 453. Winstedt, 
History of Malaya, p. 55. 
107. “The Grave Stone of Sultan Mansur Shah of Malacca,” Malaya 
in History, | (February, 1959), p. 36. 
108. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, pp. 453-54. Winstedt, 
History of Malaya, pp. 57-60. In the History of the Ming, 
Mahmud is called Ma-ha-mu Sha (Groeneveldt, Notes on the 
Malay Archipelago, p. 133; Ferrand, “L’empire sumatranais,” p. 18). , 
Conclusion 
1. “Although the decline of Indian civilization in all of South-
east Asia in the thirteenth century may have been accelerated 
by the impact of the Mongols, it was not directly caused by 
them, for we see symptoms of it in the preceding century. 
The underlying causes of this decline were the adoption of 
Indian civilization by an increasingly large number of natives 
who incorporated into it more and more of their original 
customs, and the gradual disappearance of a refined aristoc-
racy, the guardian of Sanskrit culture. Hinduism and Mahayana 
Buddhism, in the special form of royal and personal cults, 
were religions that were hardly suited to the masses; this ex-
plains the ease and speed with which the masses adopted 
Singhalese Buddhism. The disruption caused by the Mongol 
conquests simply succeeded in breaking up old _ political 
groups, old cultural complexes: the Khmer empire, the Cham 
kingdom, and the Burmese kingdom. Their dissociated ele-
ments were finally regrouped to form the combinations we 
see taking their places: the Burmese kingdoms of Ava and 
then Pegu, the Thai kingdoms of Ayutthaya, Lan Na, Lan 
Chang.” (Coedés, Les Peuples de la péninsule indochinoise 
[Paris, 1962], p. 128.) 
2. The expression is from Paul Mus, “L’Inde vue de I’est: Cultes 
indiens et indigenes au Champa,” BEFEO, XXXIII, p. 367. 

--- [Page 392] ---
370 Notes to Pages 252-56 
3. Valuable leads can be found in K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, “Agas-
tya,”’ TBG, 76 (1936), p. 533; W. F. Stutterheim, Bulletin of the 
Raffles Museum, ser. B, | (1937), p. 148. 
4. W. F. Stutterheim, Indian Influences in Old-Balinese Art (Lon-
don, 1935). K. C. Crucq, Bijdrage tot de kennis van het Balisch 
Doodenrituee! (Santpoort, 1928). P. de Kat Angelino, Mudras 
auf Bali (The Hague, 1923). R. Goris, Bijdrage tot de kennis der 
Oud-Javaansche en Balineesche Theologie (Leyden, 1926). 
Sylvain Lévi, Sanskrit Texts from Bali (Baroda, 1933). 
5. Antoine Cabaton, Nouvelles recherches sur les Chams (Paris, 
1901). Jeanne Leuba, Un Royaume disparu: Les Chams et leur 
art (Paris, 1923). 
6. Adhémard Leclére, Cambodge, Fétes civiles et religieuses 
(Paris, 1917). H. G. Quaritch Wales, Siamese State Cere-
monies (London, 1931). 
. 7. W. F. Stutterheim, Rama-Legenden und Rama-Reliefs in Indo-
nesien (Munich, 1925). 
8. Robert Lingat, “L’influence juridique de I’Inde au Champa et 
au Cambodge d’aprés l’épigraphie,” JA, CCXXXVII (1949), pp. 
273-90; ‘Evolution of the Conception of Law in Burma and 
Siam,” JSS, XXXVIII (1950), pp. 9-31; “La conception du droit 
dans I’Indochine hinayaniste,” BEFEO, XLIV (1951), pp. 163-88. 
F. H. van Naerssen, ‘De Ashtadagawyawahara in het Oudja-
vaansch,” BKI, 100 (1941), pp. 357-76. 
9. L’Inde civilisatrice (Paris, 1938), p. 28. On sculpture, see Dora 
Gordine, “Sculpture in Indochina, Siam and Java,” JRAS (1942), 
pp. 132-38; R. O. Winstedt, “Buddhist Images from Malaya 
and Sumatra,” IAL (1942), p. 41. 
10. F. D. K. Bosch, “Een hypothese omtrent den oorsprung der 
Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst,” in Handelingen van het Eerste 
Congres voor de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Java (Wel-
tevreden, 1921)—translated into English in Rapam, XVII (1924). 
Henri Parmentier, ‘Origine commune des architectures hin-
doues dans |’Inde et en Extréme-Orient,” Et. Asiat. EFEO, pp. 
199-251. A. K. Coomaraswamy, History of Indian and Indo-
nesian Art (London, 1927), Chap. VI. Henri Marchal, L’Archi-
tecture comparée dans I’Inde et |’Extr6éme-Orient (Paris, 1944). 
H. G. Quaritch Wales, “Culture Change in Greater India,” 
JRAS (1948), pp. 2-32; “The Dong-So’n Genius and the Evolu-
tion of Cham Art,” JRAS (1949), pp. 34-45; The Making of 
Greater India (London, 1951). See above, p. 267, n. 3. 
11. Paul Mus, “Barabudur,” BEFEO, XXXII-XXXIV; “Le Symbolisme 
a Angkor Thom,” CRAIBL (1936), pp. 57-69. Coedés, Pour 
_ mieux comprendre Angkor (Paris, 1947); Angkor, an Introduc-
tion (Hongkong, 1963). J. E. van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, “South-
East Asian Architecture and the Stipa of Nandangarh,” AA, 
XIX (1956), p. 279. 
12. Above, p. 34. 

--- [Page 393] ---
INDEX 
[. GEOGRAPHIC, ETHNIC, AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL TERMS 
Achin, 28, 131, 143, 146, 179, 203, Arimaddanapura, 105 
231, 244, 245, 367 n. 88 Arya, 146 Adam’s Peak, 220 AryadeSa, 212 Aden, Gulf of, 22 Aryans, 5,8 
Africa, xvi, 3, 15, 20, 22 Asitanjana, 329 n. 143 Ai-lao, 219 Assam, xv, 28, 105, 190, 191 Alfurs, 12 Atjeh, see Achin A-lu, 245 Australia, Australian, 5, 6, 252, 266 
Amaravati (in Champa), 43, 165, 238 n. 63 
Amaravati (in India), 7, 17, 18, 31, Australoid, 5 54 Austro-Asiatic, 6, 8, 9, 10, 23 
Amarendrapura, 99, 305 n. 17 Ava, 156, 209, 227, 235, 369 n. 1 Ampil Roltim, 68 Avani-naranam, 107 
Ananda (of Pagan), 156, 157 Ayodhya, Ayodhyapura, 30, 115 Anaryen, 23 Ayutthaya, 76, 122, 222, 223, 225, Anavatapta, 174 229, 235, 236, 240, 244, 245, Andaman, 28, 203 246, 251, 369 n. 1 
Angkor, xviii, xx, 38, 61, 63, 72, 73, 
74, 85, 86, 94, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, Bachai, 204 
103, 110, 119, 135, 153, 163, 164, Bac-son, Bacsonian, 6 
176, 208, 224, 228, 229, 236, 238, Bactrian, 20 
249, 250, 251, 255, 362 n. 2 Badon, 44, 57 
Angkor Borei, 68 Bakhéng, Phnom, 37, 68, 72, 103, 
Angkor Thom, 112, 113, 138, 162, 112, 113, 114, 115, 122, 213 
170, 173, 175, 213, 255 Bakong, 103, 111, 116, 310 n. 8 
Angkor Wat, 121, 122, 162, 174, Baksei Chamkrong, 114 
190, 191, 212, 213, 228, 229, Baladityapura, 86 250, 355 n. 148 Bali, xvii, 7, 12, 25, 33, 53, 88, 92, 
Aninditapura, 85, 86, 97, 111 129, 144, 145, 147, 158, 168, 180, Anyathian, 5 187, 198, 218, 232, 234, 240, 242, 
Arabia, Arab, xv, xx, 3, 21, 81, 93, 252, 253, 255 
108, 130, 142, 157, 168, 180, Banam, 37 244, 246, 295 Bandon, Bay of, 28, 112, 162, 170, 
Arakan, 150, 151, 156, 166, 183 173,175, 179, 181, 184, 213, 228, 
Arikamedu, 272 n. 77 255, 310 n. 8, 355 n. 148 

--- [Page 394] ---
372 Index 
Bandung, 54 Bertam, 245 
Bangali, 187 Bhamo, 150, 151, 166, 189, 192, 193 Bangka, 54, 82-83 | Bharukacch’a, 29 
Bangkok, 76, 253, 303 n. 111, 349 Bhavapura, 67, 68, 98, 115 n. 51 Bhitargoan, 32 Bang Yang, 195 Bién-hoa, 238 
Ban-lanh, 315 n. 103 Bingarattha, 209 
Banteay Ch’mar, 99, 163, 170, 173, Binh-dinh, 43, 125, 139, 160, 169, 
175, 176, 180 171, 172, 176, 238, 239, 335 n. 123 
Banteay Kdei, 98, 173, 174 Binh-lam, 316 n. 120 
Banteay Prei Nokor, 98 Bintang, 203 
Banteay Samré, 335 n. 115 Blitar, 188 
Banteay Srei, 117, 122 Bobdégyi, 87, 287 n. 121 
Ba Phnom, 37, 72 Bodhgaya, 156, 157, 166, 183 
Baphuon, 103, 138, 213 Bok, Phnom, 113 Barat, 244 Borneo, 6, 12, 18, 24, 52, 53, 54, 55, 
Barhinadvipa, 53 129, 158, 187, 247, 253, 367 n. 88 
Baros, 158, 203, 272 n. 73, 284 Borobudur, 87, 90, 126, 255 n. 71 Brahmanasrama, 113 
Barousal, 284 n. 71 Brantas, 128, 145, 146, 147, 186 Baruas, 302 n. 94 Broach, 29 Barus, 244 Bubat, 239 Barygaza, 29 Buitenzorg, 54, 364 n. 37 Basan, 237 Bukit Meriam, 50 Basman, 203 Buriram, 68, 69 | 
Bassac, 28, 57,65, 224 Burma, Burmese, xvil, xix, xx, 3, 5, Bassein, 177 10, 13, 17, 28, 30, 31, 62, 63, 77, Bataks, 12, 253 86, 87, 95-96, 104-107, 132-33, Batan, 244 140, 148-51, 155-58, 166-67, 173, 
Batang Hari, 82, 83, 201, 243, 244 177-78, 182-83, 190, 191, 193-94, 
Batau Tablah, 334 n. 88 205, 206, 209-11, 218, 219, 222, Batavia, 53, 233 227-28, 235, 250, 253, 254 
Bat Chum, 116 
Bathé, Phnom, 17, 299 n. 52 Calcutta, 29 Bati, 60, 173, 176 Calicut, 246 
Battambang, 102, 170, 181 Cambay, Gulf of, 231 
Batu Tulis, 364 n. 37 Cambodia, Cambodian, xvi-xxi, 7, 
Bayang, Phnom, 70, 72, 111, 331 13, 17, 24, 33, 47, 60, 61, 62, 65-n.12 70, 71, 72-76, 85-86, 89, 90, 92-
Bayon, 112, 173, 175, 213, 228, 255, 94, 96, 97-103, 104, 110-22, 134-355n. 148 39, 150, 151, 152-54, 159-64, 166, Belahan, 128, 146 169-77, 180, 181, 190, 191-92, Benares, 29, 46 193, 211-17, 218, 221, 222, 223, 
Bengal, xv, 15, 25, 30, 87, 89, 96, 225, 226, 228-29, 236-37, 247, 
141, 146, 156, 166, 191, 250, 253, 255, 300, 334 n. 85, 199, 248 . 355 n. 148 
Bengal, Bay of, xviii, 34, 39, 46 Canton, 57, 81, 82, 244, 295 n. 1, 
Beng Mealea, 335 n.115 320 n. 177 

--- [Page 395] ---
Geographic, Ethnic, and Archaeological Terms 373 
Celebes, 6, 7,12, 14, 18, 19, 54, 64, Chenla, 65-70, 85-86, 93-94, 128, 
240, 367 n. 88 161, 166, 172, 213, 229, 288 n. 8 
Ceylon, Singhalese, 18, 31, 32, 149, | Chen-li-fu, 181, 338 n. 20 
150, 151, 167, 177, 178, 184, 185, Chen-p’u, 216 
203, 220, 222, 250, 251 Cherok Tekun, 50 
Cha-ban, 238, 239, 316 n. 120 Chersonese, Golden, 20, 29 
Chaiya, 28, 39, 92, 162, 179, 184, Chia-lo-hsi, 161, 181, 184, 342 n. 102 296 n. 8 Chiangdong-Chiangthong, 224, 225 Chaiyaphum, 94 Chiangkhong, 195, 226 Chakravala, 119 Chiangmai, 134, 136, 190, 209, Cham Cavern, 237 226, 227 
Champa, Cham, xvii, xix, xx, xxi, 7, | Chiangrai, 6, 190, 195, 206, 208, 224, 
10, 12, 17, 29, 30, 31, 35, 42-45, 226, 227 
47-48, 49, 56-57, 58, 59, 62, 64, Chiangrung, 190 
66, 70-72, 76, 91, 94-95, 102, Chiangsaen, 137, 190, 195, 222, 
103-104, 111, 114, 117, 122-25, 224, 226 
138, 139-41, 143, 146, 151, 152, Chiangtung, 226 
154-55, 159, 160, 163, 164-66, Chiao-chih (Tongking), 44, 157 
167, 169, 170, 171, 180, 181-82, Chiao-chou, 56, 57 
191, 192-93, 217, 218, 219, 229-  Chicacole, 29 
30, 236, 237-39, 240, 247, 248, Chieh-ch’a, 40 
250, 251, 253, 255, 288, 290 n. 52, Chiém-sdn, 281 n. 24 316 n. 110 Ch’ien-mai-pa-t’a, 184 
Champa, Champapura, 43, 70, 128, Chien-pi, 179, 184 138, 154, 240 Chien-t’o, 179 
Champa (in India), 29, 30 Chih-t’u, 51, 74, 75, 78 Champasak, 66 Chi-lan-tan, 184, 231 
Ch’a-nan, 213, 216, 355 n. 147 China, Chinese, xvi, xviii, xix, xx, 3, ChanaSapura, 122 6,9, 10, 11, 12, 17, 18, 21, 23, 24, 
Chan-ch’eng, 123, 161, 166, 25, 26, 29, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 290 n. 52 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 47, 48, 51, 52, 
Chandi (temple), see specific name 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 63, Changal, 87 64, 65, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 79, 81, Chanla, 213 82, 84, 86, 92, 93, 94, 95, 103, 104, 
Chan-pei, 179, 341 n. 74 105, 106, 107, 109, 111, 114, 118, 
Chant’an, 46-47, 56 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 129, 130, Chanthabun, 69,114 131, 132, 134, 135, 138, 139, 140, 
Chao-wa (Java), 234 141, 144, 151, 152, 154, 157, 158, Cha-tung, 105 159, 162, 165, 166, 168, 178, 179, Chaudoc, 111 180, 189, 191, 193, 194, 196, 198, 
Chau-sa, 315 n. 103 200, 201, 203, 206, 207, 210, 211, 
Chau Say Tévoda, 162 214, 215-16, 218, 222, 228, 231, 
Chawa, Muang, 205, 223 234, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, Che-chiang, 213 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 256, 364 Che-kun, 216 n. 53 Chellean, 5 China Sea, 27, 28, 84, 204 Cheng-mien, 194 Ch’in-chiang, 232 
Ch’éng-t’ien-wan-shou, 141 Chindwin, 105 

--- [Page 396] ---
374 Index 
Chin-lin, 40 Dalva, 165 
Chin-li-p’i-shih, 80 Damian, 352 n. 91 
Chisor, Phnom, 136, 162, 176 Da-né, 334 n. 88 Chi Tarum, 54 Dangrek Mountains, 68, 69 
Chittagong, 150, 166 Darlac, 217 Chiu-chih, 38 Dayak, 12, 253 Ch’ok Gargyar, 114 Dekkan, 47 Chola, 30 Delhi, 231 
Cholamandala, 220, 324 n. 66 Deli, 352 n. 91 Cholika, 146 Dhamaramsi, 167 
Ch’ot, Muang, 196, 205 Dhammayan, 167 Chou-lien, 148, 157 Dhafifiavati, 156 
Chryse, 18, 29, 46 Dharmanagari, 240 
Chuan-lo-p’o-t'i, 292 n. 91 Dharmasraya, 201, 244, 366 n. 72 
Chilamanivarmavihara, 141, 142, Dieng Plateau, 79, 90 158 Dinaya, 90, 91 Chu-li, 39 Dinding, 143 Chumphon, 28 Djava (Djapa), 126 
Ch’i-su, 44, 57, 71 Déng-duang, 18, 43, 49, 64, 123 Ch’ii-tu, 38 Dongson, Dongsonian, 7, 9, 49, Ch’ti-tu-ch’ien, 38 263 n. 32 Ch’u-tu-kan, 38 Ddéng-yén-chau, 281 n. 25 Ch’u-tu-k’un, 38 Donwun, 205 Chu-wu, 38 Dravida, 146 
Cochin China, 7, 13, 14, 17, 38, Dravidian, 8, 11, 16, 25, 30, 46, 254 41, 60, 62, 86 Dungun, 244 
Col des Nuages, 43, 44, 217, 229, Dutch East Indies, 239 
238, 248, 251, 290 n. 52 Dvaravati, 30, 63, 76-77, 86, 122, 
Comorin, Cape, 30, 54 137, 194, 222, 248, 292 n. 94, Condur, 202 303 n. 10, 322 n. 32, 357 n. 26 
Conjeevaram, 30, 66, 149 Dvipantara, 9, 12, 20 
Corinth, Isthmus of, 17 
Coromandel Coast, 141, 146, Eastern Baray, 113, 117, 138, 213 324 n. 66 Eastern Mébon, 116, 122, 216, 217, Cranganore, 29 227, 230 
Cua Rao Pass, 219, 229 Cua Tung, 38 Fang, Muang, 195, 220, 226 Cua Viét, 38 Fansur, 203 
Ferlec, 203 
Da, Phnom, 331 n. 10 Fing Noi, 5 
Dagroian, 203, 231, 352 n. 91 Fo-lo-an, 179, 184 
Daha, 147, 234, 341 n. 81 Fo-shih, 81, 82 Dai Cd Viet, 124 Fo-ts’un, 213 
Dai-Viét, 139, 140, 154, 159, 160, Fukan-tu-lu, 286 n. 118 
164, 165, 166, 170, 171, 172, 181, Fukien, 244 
182, 192, 219, 224, 225, 229, 234, Funan, xx, 17, 23, 24, 30, 31, 32, 36— 237,238 38, 39, 40-42, 43, 46-47, 56, 57-— Da-li, 237 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 76, 

--- [Page 397] ---
Geographic, Ethnic, and Archaeological Terms 375 
92, 111, 128, 247, 248, 276 n. 7,  Hoanh-son, 43, 44, 45, 49 353 n. 114 Ho-ling, 79, 90, 107, 248, 302 n. 94 
Ho-lo-tan, 54, 79 Gandamadana, 156 Hon Cuc, 281 n. 24 Gandasuli, 83 Hongsawati, 205 Ganganagara, 143 Hou, 42 
Ganges, xv, xviii, 19, 29, 32, 41, Hsiang-lin, 43 56, 64, 251 Hsiang-lin-yi, 43 Ganter, 187 Hsi-ning, 187 
Gauda, Gaudi, 89, 146 Huang-chih, 286 n. 118 Gelam, 200 Huang-ma-chu, 187 Goa, 246 Huan Wang, 94—95 Godavari, 267 n. 10 Hua Phan, 224 Géddépalin, 178 Hué, 48, 57, 230, 247 Gola, 146 Huei Thamo, 311 n. 30 
Golden Chersonese, see Cher- Hujung Tanah, 244 sonese, Golden Hung Thanh, 334 n. 87 
Golden Teeth, State of the, 193 Hung-yén, 238 
Good Hope, Cape of, 28, 246 
Grahi, 161, 181, 184, 342 n. 102 labadiou, 53 
Gramapura, 165, 338 n. 9 ll4muridesam, 143 
Great Lake (Tonle Sap), 67, 68, 73, llangasogam, 143 
94, 98, 99, 103, 104, 113, 137, India, Indian, xv, xvi, xvii, 3, 5, 8, 9, 164, 213 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, Gresik, 241 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, Grise, 301 n. 94 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, Gua Kerbau, 6 41, 46, 48, 49, 51, 55, 56, 61, 62, Gujarat, 231 64, 82, 89, 94, 96, 101, 107, 120, 
Gunung Gangsir, 128 121, 122, 158, 184, 218, 220, 233, Gunung Jerai, 244 235, 242, 247, 248, 251-56 
Indian Ocean, 3, 27, 41, 84 Hadramaut, 22 Indochina, Indochinese Peninsula, Hainan, 125 3, 8, 10, 12, 14, 27, 31, 49, 55, 62, Ha-lin, 95, 105 91, 121, 151, 155, 189, 204, 208, 
Hamsavati, 106, 210, 227, 228, 235 225, 250, 251 
Hanoi, 152, 238 Indonesia, Indonesian, xv, xvi, xx, 3, 
Hariharalaya, 98, 102, 103, 110, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 23, 43, 48, 52, 112, 113 79, 81, 86, 121, 158, 167-68, 178-
Haripunjaya, 77, 136, 137, 149, 161, 89, 184, 188, 250, 253 
190, 194, 195, 208, 209, 226, Indo-Scythian, 41, 46-47, 56, 247 
329 n. 142, 346 n. 174 Indragiri, 244 Haru, 244, 245 Indrapura (in Cambodia), 97, 98 Hatien, 114 Indrapura (in Champa), 122, 123, Ha-trai, 334 n. 86 125, 139, 238, 249 
Hemagiri, Hemasringagiri, 117 Indratataka, 110, 112, 115, 116, 310 Himalayas, 174 n. 6 
Hoa-binh, Hoabinhian, 5, 6 Iran, 47 Hoa-lu, 124 Irrawaddy, 4, 10, 13, 27, 62, 64, 

--- [Page 398] ---
376 Index 
68, 95, 105, 150, 151, 194, Kalah, 130, 131, 142, 184 209, 248, 250 Kalanten, 244 |sanapura, 69, 70, 76 Kalasa, 89 I-she-na, 74 Kalasan, Chandi, 88-90, 96, 108 
ISvarapura, 117 Kalinga, 19, 30, 88, 146, 220 
Kamalangka, 77, 143, 325 n. 78 | 
Jago, Chandi, 158, 188, 201, 232 Kamara, 29 Jajaghu, 188 Kamboja (in Cambodia), 136, 161, Jakun, 12 240, 346 n. 174 
Jambi, 55, 80, 82, 142, 179, 184, 201, Kamboja (in India), 47 
243, 244, 250, 344 n. 136 Kambojagama, 161 
Jambudvipa, 138 Kambuja, 28, 47, 66, 99, 100, 116, Janapada, 99 128, 213, 248 
Janggala, 147, 179, 185, 198, 327 Kampar, 244 
n. 119, 344 n. 134 Kampe, 179, 184, 244 Japan, 6, 8 Kamphaeng Phet, 204 Java, 97,99 Kanakapuri, 20 
Java, Javanese, xvii, xx, xxi, 4,5, 6,7, Kanarese, 146 
10, 12, 16, 18, 30, 31, 35, 53, 54,  Kanburi, 17, 28, 292 n. 95 
55, 64, 79, 85, 87-93, 95, 96, 97, Kanchi, 30, 38, 66, 149, 178, 247, 
103, 107-109, 111, 125-30, 132, 297 n. 33 
141, 144-47, 151, 158, 168, 179, Kandal, 69 
180, 185-88, 198-201, 217, 218, Kandis, 244 
232-34, 238, 239-42, 243, 244, Kanjap, 244 
247, 248, 249, 250, 254, 255, 299 Kanjuruhan, 90, 302 n. 98 n. 63, 306 n. 24 Kan-p’ang, 213 
Javaka, 93, 184, 185 Kan-pu-che, Kan-p’u-che, 213 Java Minor, 53, 203 Kan-t’o-li, 55 Java Sea, 3 Kanuruhan, 302 n. 98 
Jawi, Chandi, 350 n. 61 Kao, 197 Jayasri, 174, 222 Kapilapura, 228 Jayendranagari, 117 Kapuhas River, 52 Jember Province, 18 Karang Brahi, 82 Jere, 244 Karimata, 200 
Jih-lo-t’ing, 143, 184 Karitang, 244 
Jih-nan, 43, 45, 48, 56, 57 Karmaranga, 143 
Jogjakarta, 89, 126, 127 Karnataka, 146 
Johore, 39, 143, 244, 303 n. 110 Karo Batak, 30 
Jung-ya-lu, 186, 344 n. 134 Karpiiradvipa, 19 
Kashmir, 54 
Kadaram, 142, 143, 148 Kataha, 40, 136, 142, 184 
Kadiri, Kediri, 147, 158, 162, 168, Kattigara, 38, 41 
179, 185, 186, 187, 199, 200, 201, Kaungsin, 193 
250, 341 n. 81, 344 n. 145 Kauthara (Nha-trang), 43, 95 
Kahuripan, 145, 147, 234 Kaveri, 29 Kahwas, 244 Kaviri-pattinam, 29 Kakadipa, 177 Kawi, Mount, 147, 187 Kakula, 231 Keda, 244 

--- [Page 399] ---
Geographic, Ethnic, and Archaeological Terms 377 
Kedah, 28, 39, 40, 50, 64, 142, 143, Kra, 28, 39, 131, 142, 143 
244, 245, 246, 297 n. 26, Kratié, 68-69, 85, 303 n. 125 367 n. 87 Krishna, 267 n. 10, 328 n. 125 
Kedu, 83, 88, 89, 126, 128 Krom, Phnom, 113 
Kedukan Bukit, 82, 83 Krus Preah Aram Rong Chen, 101 Kejuron, 302 n. 98 Kshitindragrama, 152 Kelang, 244 Kuala Berang, 184 
Kelantan, 51, 184, 231 Kuala Selinsing, 7, 14, 51 
Kelurak, 89, 91, 92, 96, 109, Kuantan, 39 300 n. 79 Kuhea Preah, 311 n. 32 
Kéo Nua Pass, 334 n. 86 Kulén, Phnom, 94, 100, 101, 102, Kera, 146 103, 122, 311 n. 20, 353 n. 114 Kha, 224 Kunjarakunja, 87, 88 Khabari, 29 K’un-lun, 9, 12, 91 Khammuan, 224 K’un-ming, 105 Khanh-hoa, 40, 72 Kusumi, 177 Khao Luang, 207 Kutaraja, 188 
Khao Phra Narai, 107, 272 n. 74 Kutei, 18, 52 Khelang, 208 Kuti, 98, 174 
Khmers, xvii, xxi, 10, 13, 35, 66, 122, | Kwangchou, 125 
124, 136, 137, 140, 146, 149, 151, | Kwangtung, 44 
152, 154, 160, 164, 167, 175, 181, | Kyanzittha, vault of, 348 n. 27 
182, 190, 191, 194, 205, 222, 236, Kyaukse, 63, 105, 149, 156, 210, 227 
238, 250, 251, 255 Kyund6zu, 287 n. 121 
Khon, 28 Khonthi, 204 Labu Tuwa, 107 
Khorat, 17, 28, 64, 94, 103, 176, Lac Thanh, 316 n. 106 225, 236 Lai Cam, 290 n. 61 Khudng-my, 123 Lai Kan-k’eng, 216 Kidal, Chandi, 188 Lambri, 143, 203, 245 Kidara, 142, 158 Lamori, 231 Kirata, 165 Lampang, 208 Kling, 30, 146 Lamphun, 77, 161, 194, 208, 220, Kmir, 146 244 
Koh Ker, 103, 114, 122, 134, Lampong, 367 n. 88 314 n. 86 Lampung, 245 Kdli, 39 Lamuri, 143, 184, 203, 244 
Ko-lo, 303 n. 110 Lan Chang, 223, 225, 226, 235, 251, 
Ko-lo-fu-cha-lo, 303 n. 110 369 n.1 
Ko-lo-she-fen, 303 n. 110 Land Chenla, 68, 85, 86, 93, 94 
Kombeng, Mount, 53 Lang-chia-shu, 39, 78 
Kompong Cham, 69, 98, 173, 176 Langkasuka, 39, 51, 52, 78, 143, 202, 
Kompong Ch’nang, 213, 355 n. 147 231, 325 n. 78 
Kompong Svay, 136, 163 Lang-son, 152 
Kompong Thom, 68, 70, 134 Lang-ya-hsu, 39, 51 Kota Bangun, 52 Lang-ya-ssu-chia, 39 Kota Kapur, 82 Lanka, 220 
Kota Tingi, 39 Lan Na, 209, 224, 226, 251, 369 n. 1 

--- [Page 400] ---
378 Index 
Lan-wu-li, 179, 184 Madhyadesa, 81 Lao, 195, 197 Madiun, 145, 147 
Lao Bao, 334 n. 85 Madras, 29, 30, 274 n. 94 
Laos, 5, 6, 7,114, 223-26, 236,251, Madura, Madurese, 12, 198, 199, 253 200, 233 Lavang, 165 Mae Ing, 195 
Lavo, 77, 136, 161, 162, 163, 180, Mae Ping, 204, 209 
181, 194, 208, 221, 222, 235, 322 Mae Sot, 205 n. 32 Mae Yom, 222 Lawas, 244 Magadcha, 77, 96 Lawu, 242 Mahabalachetiya, 161, 195 Lembah, 233 Mahabodhi (of Pagan), 183 Lengiu, 143 Mahakam River, 52 Lengkasuka, 244 Mahavihara, 177, 178 . Leran, 241 Mahendraparvata, 99-101 
Leyden, charters of, 142, 333 n. 69 Mahidharapura, 152 
Ligor, 28, 39, 84, 91, 92, 96, 109,136, | Mahisa, 160 
143, 184, 204, 207, 208, 240, 302 Majapahit, 200, 201, 232, 233, 235, n. 107 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 245, 246, Ling, 66 251, 365 n. 56 Lingaparvata, 66, 72 Malabars, 146 
Ling-chia-po-p’o, 65 Malacca, 22, 236, 241, 242, 245-46, 
Ling-ya-ssu-chia, 179, 184 252 
Lin-yi, 42-45, 47-50, 56-57, 58, 95, Malacca, Strait of, 28, 41, 81, 84, 202 
247, 248, 279 n. 56, 290 n. 52 Malaiur, Malaiyur, 142, 202, 203, 
Lobok Srot, 303 n. 125 see also Malayu Lochae, 202 Malaka, 244 
Lo-hu, 162, 181, 222 Malang, 90, 147, 185, 188 
Lolei, 98, 110, 112, 115 Malaya, Malay, Malay Peninsula, xv, Lolo, 189 xvii, xx, 3, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 18, Lomsak, 204 32, 38-40, 41, 50-54, 77-79, 81, 
Lopburi, 6, 76, 77, 136, 137, 161, 84, 92, 96, 107, 142, 143, 144, 146, 
162, 176, 181, 208, 222, 235 148, 166, 181, 184, 198, 201, 203, Loro Jongrang, 127 205, 230-31, 244 
Lo-ytieh, 303 n. 110 Malayagiri, 323 n. 61 
Luang Phrabang, 5, 137, 190, 205, Malayalam, 30 
206, 208, 223, 224, 226 Malayo-Polynesian, 12 Lum, 204 Malayu, 79, 80, 83, 84, 142, 179, 184, Lumajang, 233 198, 203, 231, 232, 235, 243, Lung-ya-hsi-chiao, 231 244,250 Lu Pan, 213 Malayupura, 232 Lu-yang, 181 Ma-li, 187 
Ma-li-yui-erh, 202, 205, 230 Ma, 197 Ma-lo-wen, 181 Mada, 165 Malyala (Malabars), 146 
Madagascar, xvi, 8, 22 Malyang, 102, 170, 181, 355 n. 147 
Madamilingam (Tambralinga),143 = Mamallapuram, 31 Madan, 367 n. 88 Man, Muang, 205 

--- [Page 401] ---
Geographic, Ethnic, and Archaeological Terms 379 
Manakkavaram (Nicobar Islands), Mon, 10, 11, 13, 17, 30, 62, 63, 76—-143 77, 105, 122, 146, 149, 150, 151, 
Manangkabo, 244 155, 157, 161, 190, 194, 195, 207,. Mandahiling, 244 208, 211, 218, 222, 226, 248, 249, Mangalachetiya, 183 250, 251, 254, 264 n. 43, 329 n. Manikkiramam, 107 139 Manuha, 150 Moné, 189, 226 Mappappalam, 143 Mong-duc, 104 
Martaban, 106, 107, 151, 183, 198, Mongkolborei, 68 
205, 209, 210, 219, 240 Mong Mit, 150 Marutma, 240 Mongol, Mongoloid, 9, 12, 33, 34, 
Mataram, 24, 88, 126, 127, 128, 249 183, 188, 189-217, 218, 227, 237, Ma-teng, 186 250, 251 
Maungun, 17, 287 n. 121 Mon-Khmer, 11, 191, 264 n. 43 
Mayirudingam, 143, 325 n. 76 Mo-tan, Mount, 61 Medang, 186 Moulmein, 28 Meiktila, 155 Méza, 17, 77, 287 n. 121 
Mekkaya, 210 Muang (town), see specific name 
Mekong, 4, 13, 27, 36, 61, 64, 65, 68, | Muangs, 191 
73, 85, 93, 118, 134, 137, 152, 154, Muar, 245 
163, 172, 190, 204, 207, 213, 218, | Muchiri, 29 223,225 Mu-gia Pass, 334 n. 86 Melanesians, 5, 10 Mu-lai-yu, 202, 352 n. 83 Meleri, 188 Mul Djawa, 231 
Menam, 4, 10, 13, 17, 27, 28, 36,62, Mu-liang, 216 
118, 122, 137, 150, 151, 181,189, Mun River, 28, 60, 69 190, 194, 218 Munda, 264 n. 43 
Mendut, Chandi, 90, 303 n. 111 Mungan, 346 n. 174 Merbabu, 242 Musi River, 244 
Mergui, 178, 332 n. 35 Mu-tsin-po, 216 
Meru, 117, 119, 122, 138 Muwar, 244 Mevilimbangam, 143 Muziris, 29 Mi-ch’en, 106 Myazedi, 158 Mien-chung, 194 Myinkaba, 149 
Minangkabau, 232, 235, 242, 367 Myinsaing, 209, 210, 211 n. 88 Mysore, 30 
Min-chia, 189 Mingalazedi, 183 Na-fu-na, 65, 68 
Mi-son, 43, 48, 49, 70, 71, 90, 123, | Nagara Sri Dharmaraja, 207 
125, 154,155, 164, 165,170,182, Nagara Svarga, 163 238, 311 n. 20 Nagipattana, 141 
Mlecch’a, 19, 22, 165 Nai, Muang, 189, 226. See Moné. 
Mlu Prei, 134, 306 n. 18, 313 n. 74 Nakhon Sawan, 163, 204 Mogaung, 189 Nalanda, 82, 89, 92, 96, 108, 109, Mois, xvi 141, 248, 297 n. 33 Mo-liang, 355 n. 147 Namhoi, 244 Mo-lo-yu, 79, 82 Nam Sak, 17, 68, 69 Moluccas, 12, 187 Nam U, 190, 198 

--- [Page 402] ---
380 Index 
Nan, 205 Pahlava, 47 
Nanchao, 29, 93, 95, 104, 105,114, — Pa-hsie, 216 164, 189 Pajajaran, 239 Nandamila, 156 Paka, 244 Nangur, 107 Pak Hin Bun, 94 Nan-hai, 244 Paknam Pho, 204 Nan-paya, 150 Pak U, 244 Nan-po-li, 245 Pa-la-la, 352 n. 83, 87 
Nan-wu-li, 231, 352 n. 83 Palembang, 18, 27, 32, 54, 64, 82, 
NarapatideSa, 173 83, 84, 88, 92, 96, 130, 142, 143, 
Naravara, 300 n. 79 179, 180, 184, 232, 244, 245, 246, 
Naravaranagara, 68, 89 248, 250, 295, 344 n. 136, 367 n. Narikeladvipa, 19 88 Nasor, 244 Pa-lin-feng, 184 
Neak Pean, 173, 174, 213 Pallava, 30 
Negapatam, 141, 158 Pallo, 367 n. 88 Negritos, 5,6, 11,13 Pa-lu-ka-si, 126 . Nepal, 144, 199, 201 Pamir, 27 New Guinea, 252 Panai, 142, 244 
Ngasaungkyam, 193 Panataran, Chandi, 158, 234, 241 
Nghé-an, 152, 160, 164, 165, 180, Pandikira, 146 238 Panduranga, 95, 103-104, 140, 143, 
Ngoen Yang, 190, 195 154, 160, 164, 165, 171, 172, 182, Nhan-biéu, 315 n. 104 325 n. 82 
Nha-trang, 40, 43, 72, 91, 95, 104, Pandya, 30, 88, 233, 278 n. 41 
117, 124, 140, 164, 170, 182 P’an-huang-chao, 255 n.5 
Nicobar Islands, 28, 143, 203 P’aniet, 311 n. 31 
Ninh-binh, 316 n. 115 Panjalu, 147, 185, 198, 344 n. 134 Niran, 244 Pannai (Panai), 142 Niu-lun, 187 P’an-p’an, 32, 38, 52, 56, 284 n. 81. 
Nom Van, 331 n. 10 Pa-pai-si-fu, 209 
North Vietnam, 5, 7, 34 Papphala, 143, 177 
Oc Eo, 7, 14, 37, 47, 51, 294 n. 113 Papuan-Melanesians, 5, © Odra, 30 Parlak, 244 a, Pasai, 203, 231, 245, 246, 352 n. 81 Oe 1. Pasaman, 203 rissa, 30, 31, 63, 87, 156 Pa-ssu-li, 216 
Pa-chien, 216 Pasuruhan, 145, 147 
Padang Lawas, 302 n. 107 Pataliputra, 220 
Padang Rocho, 232, 351n. 75 Pateikkaya, 167, 336 n. 156 
Pagan, xviii, xix, 63, 87, 105, 106, Patikara, 336 n. 156 
107, 132, 140, 149, 150, 156, 157, Pattani, 39, 244, 245 
166, 167, 181, 183, 190, 193, 194, | Pawon, Chandi, 90 
195, 206, 208, 209, 210, 211, 249,  Payagyi, 87 
250, 251, 346 n. 174, 353 n. 114 Payama, 87 
Pagar Ruyung, 232 Pegu, 13, 30, 106, 107, 132, 143, 
Pahang, 39, 184, 198, 230, 244, 245 149, 156, 205, 209, 210, 227, 228, Paharpur, 156 235, 249, 329 n. 142, 369 n. 1 

--- [Page 403] ---
Geographic, Ethnic, and Archaeological Terms 381 
Pekalongan, 186 Pinya, 227 
Peking, 192-94, 198, 210, 230 Plaine des Joncs, 60 
Penanggungan, 145, 146, 242 Plaosan, Chandi, 126 P’eng-feng, 184 Pnongs, xvi, XVii P’eng-heng, 230 Podouké, 29 Pentan, 203 Po-hua-yuan, 186 
Perak, 6, 14, 39, 51, 298 n. 36 Pokkharavati, 329 n. 143 
Pereng, 309 n. 89 Po Klaung Garai, 140, 217 Perlak, 202, 203, 244 P’o-li, 53 Perlis, 269 P’o-lo-t’i-po, 86 Persian, 108, 130 P’o-lou, 93 
Persian Gulf, 3, 21 P’o-lu-chia-ssu, 90, 107, 301 n. 94 
Phan-rang, 13, 95, 171, 172, 176, Polynesians, 266 n. 63 217,325 n. 82 Po Nagar (at Mong-duc), 104 
Phan-thiét, 13 Po Nagar (at Nha-trang), 91, 95, 117, 
Phatthalung, 28, 51 124, 140, 164, 165, 170, 182 Phayao, 206 Po-nan, 74 
Phetchaburi, 176, 204, 205 Pondicherry, 29 Phithit, 204 P’o-ni, 53, 129, 158 
Philippines, xv, 6, 240 Poppa, Mount, 106 
Phimai, 153, 176, 331 n. 12, Portuguese, 21, 66, 236, 242, 246 355 n. 147 Po-ssu-lan, 181 
Phimeanakas, 103, 115, 135, 169, Poulo Condore, 202 172, 213 Prathin, 76, 236 
Phitsanulok, 204, 209 Prambanan, 89, 108, 125, 126 
Phlae, Muang, 205 Prasat Chrung, 344 n. 79 
Phlua, Muang, 205 Prasat Khleang, 122 
Phnom (mountain), see specific Prasat Khna, 306 n. 18, 321 n. 2 name Prasat KOk Pd, 305 n. 17 Phnom Bathé, 17 Prasat Komnap, 311 n. 27 
Phnom Penh, 237, 253 Prasat Komphiis, 313 n. 74 
Phong Tuk, 17, 28, 63, 64, 292 n. Prasat Kravan, 312 n. 43 95, 293 n. 98 Prasat Neang Khmau, 312 n. 45 Phrae, 205, 220 Prasat Roluh, 322 n. 39 Phraek, 204 Prasat Ta Kedm, 96 
Phra Pathom, 17, 28, 63, 76, 222, Prasat Ta Kéo, 117, 135 
267 n. 9, 292 n. 94, 95 Prasat Trau, 331 n. 12 Phuket, 303 n. 110 Preah Einkosei, 313 n. 74 
Phu Khiao Kao, 94 Preah Khan (of Angkor), 173, 174, Ph’u Loi, 5 175, 180, 231 
Phu-luong, 316 n. 106 Preah Khan (of Kompong Thom), Phu-yén, 48 136, 163, 180 
P’iao, 62, 104, 106 Preah K6, 102, 110, 111, 112, 116 
Pi-ch’a-pu-li, 205 Preah Ngok, 323 n. 46 Pieh-li-la, 352 n. 87 Preah Phnom, 331 n. 10 Pinang, 55 Preah Pithu, 162 P’ing-ya-i, 187 Preah Theat Srei, 303 n. 125 _ Pinle, 210 Preah Vihear, Phnom, 72 

--- [Page 404] ---
382 Index 
Prei Monti, 102 Red River, 27, 224 
Prei Prasat, 311 n. 26 Red Sea, 21 Prei Véng, 37, 69 Rekan, 244 
Pré Rup, 116, 122, 305 n. 2,312 Rembang, 147 n. 54,331 n. 10 Remen, 146 
Prome, 17, 30, 62, 77, 86, 87, 95, Rham, 348 n. 32 
105, 194, 209, 329 n. 143 Robang Romeas, 321 n. 5 
Province Wellesley, 50 Roi-et, 225 Puchangan, 145 Rokan, 244 
P’u-chia-long, 186 Roldios, 98, 102, 110, 122 Pugavat, 145 Rome, Roman, 17, 254 Pukam, 140 Ron, 44 Pu-kan, 157, 161, 181 Ryukyus, 6 
Pukkam, 346 n. 174 
P’u-ling Ta-ha, 365 n. 56 Sabbafifiu, 167 , 
Pu-lu-pu-tu, 352 n. 83 Sagaing, 227 
P’u-mai, 216, 355 n. 147 Sa-huynh, 7 Puri, 30 Sai, 244 Pursat, 213 Saiburi, 244 
Purva Patapan, 233 Sai Fong, 172, 223 
Pyus, 13, 62-63, 77, 86-87, 95, 104, Saigon, 277 n. 20 105, 106, 248 Sajivan, Chandi, 126 
Sakadvipa, 280 n. 9 
Quang-binh, 139, 141, 238 Sakalava, 22 
Quang-nam, 43, 48, 71, 95, 139, Sakafi-vijaya, 182 165, 237, 238, 249 Sakha, 204 
Quang-tri, 38, 141, 192, 238 Salween, 4, 27, 190, 226 Quatre-Bras, 237 Sambas, 283 n. 58 Qui-nhén, 140 Sambhupura, 85, 94, 97, 110, 111, 
152, 154, 298 n. 43, 307 n. 41 
Rachado, Cape, 244 Sambor, 85, 93, 94, 97, 134, 152, Radé, 165 307 n. 41 
Rahaeng, 349 n. 40 Sambor Prei Kuk, 70, 94 Rahma, 308 n. 66 Samré, Xvi Rajapura, 160, 240 Samrong, 330 n.5 Rajavihara, 174 Samrong Sén, 7 Rajyaéri, 174 Samudra, 202, 203, 231, 244, 245, Raktamrittika, 51 304 n. 73 Ramajfifia, 161 San-bo-tsai, 243, 244 
Ramanfiadesa, 106 Sandak, Phnom, 113, 153, 162 
Rambahan, 323 San-fo-ch’i, 109, 130, 131, 132, 148, 
Rami, Ramni, 131, 146 157, 158, 168, 178, 179, 180, 181, 
Rammanagara, 329 n. 143 183, 186, 204, 231, 243, 320 n. 
Rangoon, 329 n. 143 177, 328 n. 127, 341 n. 74, 344 n. Rat, Muang, 195 134 
Rata River, 52, 53 Sangam, 272 n. 76, 278 n. 41 
Ratburi, 6, 76, 176, 204 Sangariti, 128 
Red Earth Land, 51, 78 San Hyang Hujung, 244 

--- [Page 405] ---
Geographic, Ethnic, and Archaeological Terms 383 
San-lo, 181 Si-p’eng, 181 Saraluang, 204 Sip Song Phan Na, 224, 225 Sari, Chandi, 90 Siridhammanagara (Ligor), 136 
Saugatasrama, 113 Si Satchanalai, 196, 197, 219, 221 
Savannakhet, 192, 334 n. 85 Si Thammarat, 204 
Sawankhalok, 195, 196, 197, 207, Si Thep, 17, 28, 63, 68 219, 221 Sittang, 13, 63, 77, 209 Scythian, 46, 47 Sivapura, Phnom Sandak, 72, 113 
Sdok Kak Thom, 97, 98, 112, 135, Siyak, 244 
306 n. 24,313 n. 64 Smeru, Mount, 128 Seguntang, 18, 54, 83 Solo, 5 Seluyut, 303 n. 110 Solok, 147 Sempaga, 7, 14 Somesvara, 152 
Séng-ch’i, Séng-che, 78 Sondur, 202 Sewi, Chandi, 90 Song Gianh, 44, 57 Shan, 105, 178 Song Khwae, 204 She-ho-po-ti, 292 n. 91 Sdn-tay, 91 | She-li-ch’a-ta-lo, 77 Sopara, 29 
She-p’o, 53, 54, 90, 91, 107, 126, SSpatma, 29 
130, 132, 158, 180, 186 Souppara, 29 
Shih-li-fo-shih, 80, 82, 84, 131, Sras Srang, 174 295 n. 8 Srbza, 320 n. 173 Shwegu, 166 Srei Santhor, 237 
Shwezigon, 151, 156, 348 n. 26 Sresthapura, 66 
Siam; Siamese, xx, 5, 6, 13, 64, 140, Sri Bandi (Qui-nhdn), 140 
163, 182, 205, 236, 237, 240, Sribuza, 130, 131, 142, 173, 184, 
244, 245, 246, 251, 253 ; 320 n. 173 
Siam, Gulf of, 3, 28, 39, 51, Srikshetra, 30, 63, 77, 329 n. 143 
52,114, 181 Srivijaya, xviii, 55, 80, 81-85, 88, 91, 
Siem Reap, 94, 98, 112, 313 n. 74 92, 93, 108, 109, 130-32, 141-44, 
Sien, 191, 202, 205, 206, 218, 230 145, 148, 151, 178, 179, 183-85, 
éikhariévara, 113 198, 202, 204, 232, 243, 244, 248, Si-lan, 184 249, 250, 251, 297 n. 33, 298 n. , - 36, 299 n. 63, 309 n. 87, 320-n. Simhacvalapura, 9 173, 326 n. 106, 327 n. 107, 328 imhamandava, 129 .- on. 128 Simhapura, 154 iz, a, Srivijayapura, 144 Simping, 233 éfviiava 146 jayasrama, Sing, Muang, 176 Srvja, 320 n. 173 
Singapore, 27, 143, 204, 241, Stung Treng, 69 244, 245 Su-chi-tan, 186 Singhala, 146 Suddhammavati, 63, 77, 149 
Singhalese, see Ceylon Sukadana, 186, 367 n. 88 
Singhanagari, 240 Sukhothai, xviii, 130-32, 137, 185, 
Singhasari, 187, 188, 199, 200, 190, 191, 194-98, 202, 204-208, 
234, 250, 344 n. 145 211, 218-23, 225, 227, 229, 230, Singora, 28 235, 251, 349 n. 37 
Sin-t’o, 179, 184, 186, 344 n. 134 Sikshma-Kamratas, 114 

--- [Page 406] ---
384 Index 
Sulamani, 178 Tambralinga, 39, 143, 184, 185, Sumanakita, 220 231, 325 n. 82, 342 n. 102 
Sumatra, xviii, xx, 4, 6, 7, 12, 16, 30, Tamiang, 231, 352 n. 91 
32, 54-55, 64, 79-80, 81, 91, 92, Tamils, 22, 29, 52, 107, 142, 143, 
108, 109, 147, 148, 179, 201-204, 146, 158, 246 
231-32, 234, 235, 242-45, 249, Tamluk, 29 
253, 324 n. 73, 367 n. 85 Tampak Siring, 180 Sumbawa, 240 Tamralipti (Tamluk), 29 Sumoltra, 231 T’ang-ming, 44 Sumutra, 231 Tanjong Pura, 187 
Su-mu-tu-la, 352 n. 83 Tanjore, xviii, 107, 141, 142 
Sunda, Sundanese, xv, 12, 128, 184, Tan-jung-wu-lo, 187 
186, 198, 248, 327 n. 107, 344 Tan-liu-mei, 325 n. 80 n. 134 Tan-ma-hsi, 230, 352 n. 96 
Sunda Strait, 27, 28, 81 Tan-ma-ling, 143, 179, 184, 231, Sungei Bujang, 278 n. 36 342 n. 102 
Sungei Langsat, 243 Tan-tan, 52 
Suphan, 76, 176, 222 T’an-yang (on Sumatra), 231, Suphannaphum, 204 352 n. 91 
Surabaya, 145, 146, 147, 186, 198, T’an-yang (west of India), 41 301 n. 94 Ta-pan, 186 Surin, 69 Tapanuli, 144 SUurparaka, 29 Taping, 193 Suryaparvata, 136 Ta Prohm (of Angkor), 173, 
Suvannabhimi, Suvarnabhimi, 174, 180 
17,29, 40, 46, 201, 297 Ta Prohm (of Bati), 173, 176 
Suvarnadvipa, 20, 92, 109, 144, 297 Taruks, 183 
n. 33, 232 n. 61, 325 n. 87 Tarum4, 29, 53-54, 83 Suvarnakudya, 40 Ta-shih, 157, 180, 295 n. 1 
Sdwarndib, 325 n. 86 Tavoy, 28, 219 Su-wen-ta-la, 231 Tawalisi, 230 
Syam, 140, 181, 190, 195, 202, 235 Teba, 244 
Syangkayodhyapura, 240 Telaga Batu, 296 n. 10, 18 
Telingana, 30 Tagaung, 194 Telugu, 274 n. 94 Taiwan, 6 T’e-mu, 36, 65, 68 Tajika, 295 n.1 Tenasserim, 13, 151, 166, 219 
Tak, Muang, 196, 220 Teng-che, 187 Ta-kang, 187 Teng-liu-mei, 181, 344 n. 138 
Takéo, 60, 69, 70, 72 Teng-ya-nong, 184 
Ta Keo, Prasat, 117, 135 Tenku Lembu, 269 n. 20 
Takkola, 19, 39, 41, 143, 277 n. 33 Tép Pranam, 113, 117 
Takuapa, 28, 39, 107 Thai, xvii, 10, 11, 13, 140, 180, 181, Talaing, see Mon 185, 189-91, 192, 193, 194-98, 
Talaittakkolam (Takk6la), 143 201, 202, 204, 205, 206, 208, 211, Talang Tuwo, 83 218-23, 226, 227, 230, 250, 251, Ta-li, 150, 190, 193 255, 293 n. 98, 350 n. 52 
Tambalingam, 39 Thanh-hoa, 160, 165, 191, 192, 238 

--- [Page 407] ---
Geographic, Ethnic, and Archaeological Terms 385 
Thap-mugi, 60, 286 n. 104, Tumasik, 143, 204, 241, 244, 245 298 n. 43 Tumihang, 244, 352 n. 91 Thatbyinnyu, 166 T’un-li-fu, 181 
Thaton, 17, 63, 77, 106, 149, 150, Tun-sun, 24, 38, 51,271 n. 55 
166, 205, 329 n. 142 Tuol Prasat, 314 n. 89 
Thayekhettaya, 77 Turai-vijaya, 171, 181, 182 
Thbong Khmum, 98 Turushka, 346 n. 174 
Thommanon, 162 Three Pagodas Pass, 28 Ubon, 111 | 
Thua-thién, 43, 95, 140, 238 Udayagiri, 156 
Tibet, Tibetan, 95, 176, 199, 242, Uighur, 200 323 n. 61, 325 n. 87 Ujjayini, 60 
Tibeto-Burman, 13, 62, 189, 191 Ujung Galuh, 186 T’ien Chu, 46 Ulakan, 367 n. 88 Tien-sun, 38 Ussa, 30 T’iliang, 155 U Thong, Muang, 222 Timor, 187 Uyong Tanah, 244 
Ting-chia-lu, 230 Tinnevelly, 88 Vaishnavasrama, 113 
Tipperah, 336 n. 156 Valaippandiru, 143, 325 n. 82 Tirchul, 62 Vanagiri, 144 Ti-wu, 187 Vanga, 54 Toba, 244 Varanara, 89 
To-ho-lo, To-ho-lo-po-ti, 292 n. 91 Varavari, 244 To-lo-mo, 54 Varella, Cape, 66, 239 
T’o-lo-po-ti, 76, 292 n. 91 Vat Khnat, 305 n. 17 
Tongking, 5, 7, 34, 44, 57, 70,91, —-~Vat Kukut, 161, 195 
125, 141, 152, 157, 162, 191, Vat Nokor, 173, 176 
192, 229, 237, 238 Vat Ph’u, 57, 66, 72, 116, 153, 162, 
Tonle Sap, see Great Lake 334 n. 78 T’ou-cht-li, 39, 41 Vat Sithor, 117 
Toungoo, 209, 227, 235 Vat Sla Ket, 335 n. 109 
Tra-kiéu, 43, 48, 71, 290 n. 52 and Vat Thipdei, 313 n. 64 59,311 n. 20 Veal Reachdak, 213 
Trang, 28, 244, 277 n. 33 Veddas, 5, 6, 11 Tran-ninh, 224, 225 Venetians, 246 Travanacore, 88 Vengi, 148 Tra-vinh, 17 Vietnam, Vietnamese, xv, 4, 10, 11, 
Trengganu, 52, 184, 231, 244 12, 13, 44, 64, 91, 139, 151, 154, 
Trihakumbha, 329 n. 143 155, 165, 190, 192, 217, 229, 230, Tringgano, 244 236, 237, 238, 239, 247, 251 Trinil, 5 Vijaya, 43, 125, 139, 140, 141, 145, Tripurantaka, 350 160, 165, 169, 171, 172, 176, 180, 
Tuban, 146, 186, 200, 233 200, 201, 236, 238, 239, 251, 316 Tu-huai-stin, 181 n. 120 Tuk Mas, 79, 87 Vijayapura, 227 
Tumapel, 185, 186, 187, 344 n. Virapura, 95, 160 134, 365 n. 56 Vo-canh, 40, 56 

--- [Page 408] ---
386 Index 
Vyadhapura, 36, 61, 68, 72, 111 Wurawari, 144, 145 
Wu-wen, 160 
Wajak, 5 Walaing, 79 Xuan-léc, 7 
Waleri, 188 Wa-li, 181 Yamuna, 117 
Wang-chieh, 364 n. 47 Yang-chou, 44 
Wat Chang Lom, 349 n. 50 Yang Prong, 217 
Wat Chiang Man, 209 Yang Pu Nagara, 182 
Water Chenla, 85, 86, 94, 300 n. Yasodharapura, 103, 112, 114, 115, 77, 306 n. 35 236 
Wat Mahathat (of Ligor), 272 n. 74 YasSodharasrama, 112 
Wat Mahathat (of Sukhothai), 220 YaSodharatataka, 113, 116, 138 
Wat Phra Phai Luang, 207 Yavabhumi, 92 Wat Phra Sing, 227 Yavadvipa, 53 
Wat Sema Muang, 84 Yavana, 165, 172, 240 
Wat Taphan Hin, 207 Yeh-p’o-ti, 53, 54 
Wellesley, Province, 50 Yeh-t’iao, 283 n. 63 Wen-chou, 218 Yonakarattha, 209 
Wengker, 145, 361 n. 47 Yonarattha, 209 Wen-tan, 93 Ytieh Chih, 46 
Western Baray, 98, 138, 305 n. 17 Yunnan, 28, 62, 104, 105, 189, 190, 
Wiangchan, 171, 204, 223, 224, 191, 193, 194, 219 225, 357 n. 30 Yunnan-fu, 105 Wiangkham, 204 Yiion, 209 
Wilis, 128, 242 Wu, 46 Zabag, 93, 101, 108, 109, 130, 131, Wukir, 87 142, 168, 204 Wu-nu-ku, 187 Zampa, 230 
Il. PERSONAL NAMES 
Abeyadana, 156 185, 249, 250, 326 n. 91, 344 n. Abhayaratana, 156 106 and n. 134 
Abt Hasan, 316 n. 110 Ala’ud-din Riayat Shah, 246 
Abd Zayd Hasan, 303 n. 117, Alaung-sithu, 156, 166, 167, 332 320 n. 173 n. 44, 336 n. 156 
Accambale, 348 n. 21 Al-Birdini, 325 n. 86 
Adhamapanuda, 145 Albuquerque, Affonso de, 245, 246 
Adikuntiketana, 180 Aleimma, 206 Adityaraja, 194, 195 Alexander, 19 
Adityavarman, 232, 235, 242 Anak Wungéu, 147, 342 n. 89 
Adityavarmodaya, 232 Anangavarman, 243 Agastya, 30, 52, 88, 90, 125 Anantasihastra, 358 n. 57 | 
Aggavamsa, 167 Anantavikramottungadeva, 145 Agni, 129 Angrok, 185, 187 
Airlanga, 129, 144-47, 151, 158, Angéaraja, 171, 181, 182 

--- [Page 409] ---
Personal Names 387 
Anératha, Aniruddra, Anuruddha, Bhavavarman I, 60, 61, 66-69, 72, 73 
xviii, 133, 148-51, 155, 156, 157, | Bhavavarman Il, 72 
166, 167, 249, 250, 321, 328 n. Bhayaraja, 198 133, 332 n. 32 Bhishmaprabhava, 145 Antoninus Pius, 17 Bhre Daha, 365 n. 56 
Anushanatha, Anishapati, 187,188 | Bhreng Daha, 365 n. 56 
Aravindahrada, 138 Bhre Tumapel, 242, 365 n. 56 Ardharaja, 199 Bhre Wengker, 240, 241 Aryesvara, 168 Bhrigu, 44 Asamkhya, 209 Bhdjayottungadeva, 89 
Asanga, 84, 297 n. 33 Bi-cai, 363 n. 33 Asoka, 17, 19 Binasuor, 237 Asvatthaman, 37 Binnya U, 227, 235 
Asvavarman, 24, 52 Borom, Khun, 190, 223, 225 
Athinkhaya (of Pagan), 209, 210, Brahmaloka (Harshavarman II of ‘211, 227 Cambodia), 115 
Athinkhaya (of Sagaing), 227 Brahmaloka (Rudravarman IV of 
Atisa, 144, 323 n. 61, 325 n. Champa), 164 86 and n. 87 Buddhaghosa, 63 
Atrasataka (Trabaka, Baka), 136 Buddhagupta, 51 Avani-narayana, 107 Bu-ston, 144 
Ba Dich-lai, 238 Chakradhara, ChakreSvara, 234 
Bajrabharana, 332 n. 35 Chakravartirajadevi, 212 Baka, 136 Ch’a-li (Kshatriya), 65, 287 n. 3 Baladitya, 86 Chammadevi, 77 
Balaputra, 92, 108, 109, 141, Champdadhiraja, 238 309 n. 87 Chams’ud-din, 202 
Balitung, 108, 127, 317 n. 130 Chandadevi, 155 Bamesvara, 168 Chandrabhanu, 185, 205 
Bang Klang Thao, 195, 196 Chandrabhayasimhavarmadeva, 129 
Ban-la Tra-nguyét, 363 n. 33 Chandragupta, 16 
Ban-la Tra-toan, 363 n. 33 Chandrakaragupta, 346 n. 174 
Ban Muang, 196, 197, 349 n. 42 Ch’ang, 40 Bendahara, 22 Chang-pa-ti-lai, 238 
Bhadravarman (father of Chang Po-i, 91 
Indravarman II), 123 Chan’sd (Jayastira), 166 
Bhadravarman I, 47, 48, 49, 71, Chan-t’an, 46, 47, 56 281 n. 22, 288 n. 8 Chao Fa Rua, 209 
Bhadravarman II, 123 Chao Ju-kua, 172, 178, 179, 181, 183, 
Bhadravarman III, 140 184, 186, 203, 341 n. 74, 344 Bhadresvaravarman, 71 n. 134 
Bhagadatta (of Chanasa), 122 Chao Ponhea Yat, 237, 238 ; 
Bhagadatta (of Lang-ya-hsil), 51 Chapata, 178 Bharadvaja, 173 Ché A-nan, 229, 230 Bhargava, 44 Ché Bong Nga, 237, 238 Bhaskaradevi, 229 Ché Chi, 229 
Bhatara Prabhu (Bhra Prabhu), 240 Ché Man, 217 

--- [Page 410] ---
388 Index 
Ché M6, 230 Dhammavilasa, 178 
Ch’en dynasty, 70, 248 Dhanapatigrama, 171 
Ché Nang, 229 Dharanindravarman |, 153, 159, 331 Chen-ch’eng, 57, 59, 65 n. 12 
Cheng Ho, 242, 245, 364 n. 53, 365 Dharanindravarman II, 163, 169, n. 56 and n. 58 173,174, 212 Cheng-kuei, 202 Dharmaja, 179 Ch’en-sung, 41 Dharmakirti, 141, 143, 144 
Chia-hsiang-li, 41 Dharmapala (of Bengal), 109 
Chiao Chen-ju, 56, 57 Dharmapala (of Kanchi), 297 n. 33 
Chia Tan, 94, 303 n. 110 Dharmapala (of Suvarnadvipa), 144, 
Chin dynasty, 42, 45, 56, 248 325 n. 87 Chin-chéng, 40 Dharmaraja, 184, 220 
Chin-p’ou-pin-shen, 162 Dharmasetu, 84, 109 
Chitrasena, 61, 65, 68, 69 Dharmasoka, 163 
Chiu-ch’ou-lo, 47, 58 Dharmavamsa Tguh Anantavikrama, Ch’iu-tan, 78 130, 147 
Chi-yen (Ki-yen), 90, 126 DharmavamSavardhana..., 145 
Chola, xviii, 30, 141-43, 144, 145, Dharmavira, 147 
146, 147-48, 150, 151, 157, 249, Dharmodayanavarmadeva, 129 324 n. 66 Dignaga, 297 n. 33 
Chou dynasty, Later, 124 Dinh dynasty, 124 
Chou Ch’t-fei, 178-80 Divakara, 148, 153, 159, 328 n. 123 
Chou Ta-kuan, 38, 118, 138, 176, Divakarabhatta, 117 
205, 208, 211, 213, 214, 215, 228 Divakarapandita, 153, 159 
Chidamani, 163, 169, 174 Drona, 37 
Chilamanivarmadeva (Chilamani- Duong Anh-nhe, 160 
varman, Chidamanivarmadeva), 
141, 143, 158, 323 n. 61 Edrisi, 168 
Ch’ti-lien, 43, 44, 48 Chu Nong, 59 Fa-hsien, 29, 54 
Chu Ying, 37, 42 Fan, 157, 276 n. 16, 279 n. 61, 284 
n. 81 
Daksha, Dakshottama, 127,128,317 = Fan Chan, 40, 41, 42, 43 
n. 130, 318 n. 145 Fan Chen-ch’eng, 57, 59, 65 
Dara Petak, 351 n. 71 Fan Chen-lung, 71 
Da-tso-kan-hiung, 126 Fan Fan-chih, 70 Dedes, 187 Fan Fo, 47, 48, 56, 281 n. 22 
Devakula, 148, 328 n. 127 Fa Ngum, 224-26, 235, 357 n. 30 Devanika, 57, 65 Fan Hsiung, 44 Devapala, 109 Fan Hstn, 40, 42, 44, 279 n. 61 
Devaraja Mahasenapati, 140 Fan Hu-ta, 48, 56 Devasimha, 90 Fan Shih-man, Fan Man, 38, 39, 40, Devatamurti, 154 42,43, 282 n. 49 Devavarman, 59 Fan Tang-ken-ch’un, 58, 59 Devendra, 126 Fan T’ien-k’ai, 59 
Dhammadassi, 329 n. 138 Fan T’ou-li, 71 
Dhammiasokarajadhiraja, 236 Fan Wen, 45, 47 

--- [Page 411] ---
Personal Names  —s- 3389 
Fan Wen-k’uan, 59 Hippalos, 21 Fan Yi, 44, 45 Hiranyadama, 99, 101 Fa-yii, 132 Hiranyalakshmi, 152 Fel Hsin, 367 n. 85 Hiranyavarman, 152 
Five Dynasties, 118, 124, 249 H6 dynasty, 238 
Hrishikesa, 173 
Gajah Biru, 233 Hsia-ch’e-su-wu-cha-p’u-mi, 324 
Gajah Mada, 233, 234, 239, 240 n.73 Gajayana, 90 Hsia-ch’ih, 132 Gandra, 168 Hsiang-wu-t’a-erh, 193 
Gangaraja, 57, 70 Hsuan-tsang, 69, 76, 77, 78, 297 n. 33 Garung, 108 Hu-erh-na, 236 
Gautama Subhadra, 55 Hui-ning, 79 Gayatri, 199, 234 Hun P’an-huang, 38, 275 n.5 
Genghis Khan, 189, 190, 349 n. 41 Hun-t’ien, 37, 38 
Girindravardhana, 242 Huyén Tran, 217 Grama, 226 Hyang Visesha, 365 n. 56 
Gunapriyadharmapatni, 129 
Gunaratna, 60 Ibn Battita, 230, 231, 244, 245 
Gunavarman (of Funan), 60, 61, 286 Ibn Khordadzbeh, 108 n. 105 I-ching, 29, 32, 67, 68, 74, 77, 78, 80, 
Gunavarman (of Kashmir), 54 81, 82, 84, 87, 131, 204, 339 n. 38 
Gupta, 17, 18, 31, 32, 49, 52, 53, 62, In, 171 
73,77,90, 267 n. 9, 282 n. 37, Indaraja, 237 292 n. 95 Indradevi (queen of Indravarman ]), Gurunwangi, 126 110, 111 
Indradevi (queen of Jayavarman Haji, 132 VIN), 172 
Haji Dharmasraya, 366 n. 72 Indraditya, Indrapatindraditya, 195, 
Haji Samudrabhimi, 324 n. 73 196, 197 
Halu, 127, 145, 327 n.119 © Indralakshmi, 117 Han, 7, 43, 44 . Indraloka, 85, 94, 307 n. 41 
Harideva (of Cambodia), 160, 165 Indravarman | (of Cambodia), 100, 
Harideva (Indravarman V), 182, 192 102, 110, 111, 116, 118, 135, 238 
Harideva (of Sakafi-vijaya), 182 Indravarman | (of Champa), 95, 315 Harijit, 192, 217, 229 n. 101 
Harivarman I, 103, 104 Indravarman II (of Cambodia), 180, Harivarman II, 125 181, 191 
Harivarman III, 139 Indravarman II (of Champa), 123 
Harivarman IV, 152, 154 Indravarman II! (of Champa), 123, Harivarman V, 164 124 Harivikrama, 86, 87 Indravarman IV, 125 
Harshavarman I, 114, 117 Indravarman V, 192, 217 
Harshavarman II, 115, 116 Indravarman VI, 239 
Harshavarman III, 139, 152,153,159, Isanagunadharma, 333 n. 75 
163, 169, 330n.5 Isanatungavijaya, 129, 319 n. 164 
Hayam Wuruk, 234, 235, 245 lsAnavarman |, 47, 69, 70, 71, 72, 74 
Hino, 127, 145, 180, 327 n. 115 lSanavarman Il, 114, 116 

--- [Page 412] ---
390 Index 
ISdnavikrama, 128 Jaya Simhavarman (Phu Khiao Kao), lSvarakeSava, 317 n. 139 94 
ISvaraloka (of Cambodia), 111 Jaya Simhavarman I, 123 
Isvaraloka (of Champa), 95 Jaya Simhavarman II, 139, 140 
Jaya Simhavarman III, 217, 229 
Jagaddharma, 71 Jaya Simhavarman IV, 229 
Janasadhuvarmadeva, 129 Jaya Simhavarman V, 238 
Jatavarman Sundara Pandya, 185 Jayasri, 222 
Jatavarman Vira Pandya, 185 Jayasiira |, 156, 166 Jatiningrat, 108 Jayasura II, 167, 177-78 
Jayabhaya, 168 Jayavardhana (Jayavarman III), 103 
Jayachandravarman, 86, 87 Jayavarmadiparmesvara, 228, 229 
Jayadevi (daughter of Jayavarman |), | Jayavarman (of Funan), 57-62, 285 72,85 n. 104 
Jayadevi (queen of Jayavarman IV), | Jayavarman (Kaundinya), 57-59 115, 116 Jayavarman (of Water Chenla), 94 
Jaya Harivarman |, 160, 164-65,171, = Jayavarman |, 72, 73, 85, 115, 296 182 n. 16 
Jaya Harivarman Il, 165, 181 Jayavarman II, xx, 94, 97-103, 104, | 
Jaya Indravarman |, 124 110, 111, 305 n. 17, 309 n. 1, 310 
Jaya Indravarman II, 154, 159, 164 n. 6 and n. 13, 353 n. 114 
Jaya Indravarman III, 160, 164 Jayavarman III, 103, 110, 111 
Jaya Indravarman IV, 163, 164, Jayavarman IV, 114—15, 314 n. 86 165-66, 171 Jayavarman V, 117, 118, 134 
Jaya Indravarman V, 171 Jayavarman VI, 152, 153, 330 n. 5, 
Jaya Indravarman VI, 182, 338 n. 9 331 n. 12 
Jaya Indravarman ong Vatuv, 170, Jayavarman VII, xix, 121, 138, 152, 338 n.9 163, 169-77, 178, 180, 181, 182, 
Jayakatwang, 199, 200, 201, 351 n. 67 189, 195, 212, 213, 223, 228, 250, Jayakhettara, 156 338 n. 20, 349 n. 37 
Jayamahapradhana, 173, 212 Jayavarman VIII, 174, 191, 192, 211, 
Jayamangalartha (12th century), 174 212, 228 , 
Jayamangalartha (13th century), 212, Jayavarmaparamesvara, 224 228 Jayaviravarman, 134, 135, 321 n. 7 
Jayanagara, 201, 233, 234, 351 n. 71 Jayendradhipativarman, 96, 309 n. 1 
Jayanaga, 83, 84, 93 Jayendrapandita (Jayendravarman), Jayapangus, 180 135, 137 , Jayendravarman (Jayendrapandita), Jaya Paramesvaravarman I, 140 “* ; 135, 137 Jaya Paramesvaravarman II, 171, 182 , -. pee - 4. , Jitendra, 301 n. 93 
Jayarajachadamani, see Chidamani Jivaka, 136 
Jayarajadevi, 169, 172, 180 JAanabhadra, 79 Jayasakti, 168 Juru, 327 n. 119 
JayaSaktivarman, 123 Juru Demung, 233 
Jayasangrama, see Grama Jyestharya, 94, 305 n. 8 
Jayasimha, 178, 182-83 
Jaya Simhavarman (IndravarmanV), — Kaeo, 224 192 Kaeo Lot Fa, 224 

--- [Page 413] ---
Personal Names 391 
Kala Gemet, 201, 233 Kumarakassapa, 211 
Kamalarakshita, 326 n. 87 Kumbhayoni, 108 Kambojaraja, 136 Kundunga, 24, 52 Kambujadhiraja, 236 K’un-mo-ch’ang, 104 : 
Kambujarajalakshmi, 66 Kunshé Kyaungphyu, 132, 133, 149 
Kambu Svayambhuva, 61, 66, 67, Kuo K’uei, 152 164, 212 Kuga, 115 
Kamesvara, 172, 179 Kushan, 19, 31, 46, 47, 285 n. 91 Kamvau, 139 Kuti, 233, 234 
Kandarpadharma, 71 Kyanzittha, 154, 156, 157, 159, 166, 
K’ang T’ai, 37, 42,275 n.5 167, 332 n. 32 and n. 39 Kanishka, 19, 46 Kyiso, 133 Kan-mu-ting, 205 Ky6zwa I, 183 Kanva, 147 Ky6zwa II, 210, 211 
Kao-hsing, 200 Kao Tsung, 72 La Khai, 238 
Kaundinya (of Borneo), 53 Lakshmindra Bhimisvara 
Kaundinya (clan), 30, 53,276 n.9 Gramasvamin, 123 
Kaundinya |, 17, 37-38, 56, 61, 67, Lampong-raja, 236 86, 284 n. 81 Lang, Phraya, 224 
Kaundinya II, 32, 52, 56, 57, 60, 61 Layang, 318 n. 146 
Kaundinya Jayavarman, 57-59 Lé dynasty, early, 124 Kautilya, 16 Lé dynasty, late, 239 
Kavindrarimathana, 116 L&é Hoan, 124, 125 Kayuwangi, 126 Lé Ldi, 238 Kesarivarma, 129 Lé Nhan-téng, 239 Kham, Khun, 226 Lé Thanh-t6ng, 239 Kham Fu, 226, 227 Letyaminnan, 166 
Khamphong, Phraya, 224 Liang Tau-ming, 244 Khin U, 155, 156 Li Bon, 70 Kirtipandita, 118 Li-fu-to-hsi, 78 
Ki-yen (Chi-yen), 90, 126 Lingapati, 188 Ko-lo-feng, 93, 95 Liu Fang, 70, 290 n. 52 Kramukavaméa, 154 Liu Shen, 192 
Kritajaya, 180, 185, 187 Liu-t’eng-wei-kung, 84 
Kritanagara, 188, 198-201, 233, 234, Liu-t’o-pa-mo (Rudravarman), 60 
344 n. 136, 350 n. 57 Liu-ye (“Willow Leaf’), 37 
Kritarajasa, 201, 232—34 Lo, Khun, 223 
Kritavardhana, 234, 240 Loe Thai, 219-21, 356 n. 12 Kritavijaya, 242 Lokapala, 126, 129 Kroncharyadipa, 168 Lu Pan, 213 
Kublai Khan, 189, 192, 193, 198, 200, —_ Lu Tai, 44 250, 348 n. 21 Lu Thai, 219, 221, 222, 356 n. 12 Kui-lai, 363 n. 33 Luu Ké Tong, 125 Kui-you, 363 n. 33 Ly dynasty, 139 
Kulaprabhavati, 60, 286 n. 105 Ly Cao-t6ng, 170, 172 
Kulottunga I, 148, 158, 328 n. 123 Ly Céng Binh, 160 Kumaraghosha, 89 Ly Phat-ma, 139 

--- [Page 414] ---
392 Index 
Lysippus, 17 Mansur Shah, 246, 367 n. 87 Ly Thai-t6, 139 Manuha, 329 n. 140 
Ly Thai-tong, 139, 140 Mara, Sri, 40, 42, 43 
Ly Thanh-téng, 140, 141 Maran, 278 n. 41 
Ly Than-téng, 160 Maravijayottungavarman, 136, 142, 
143, 144, 324 n. 67 
Madhavamirti, 154 Marco Polo, 53, 143, 193, 202, 203, 
Maga, 280 n. 9 217, 231, 244, 245, 348 n. 21 
Ma-ha-la-cha Pa-la-pu, 243 Marcus Aurelius, 268 n. 11 
Ma-ha-mu Sha, 369 n. 108 Mas’adi, 131 
Mahanippean, 227 Ma Tuan-lin, 49, 52, 74, 78, 168, 170 
Mahaparamasaugata, 172 Maulivarmadeva, 243 
Maha Pasaman, 224, 225 Maurya, 16 
Maharaja (of the southern islands), | Megat Iskandar Shah, 246 
88, 89, 91, 93, 100, 101, 108, 109, Mera, 66 
130, 131, 142, 143, 179, 184, 203, Mi-mo-lo-shih-li, 132 
204, 239, 366 n. 72 Ming dynasty, 236, 237, 240, 243 
Maharaja Mauli..., 243 Minshins6, 167 
Maharaja of Pajajaran, 239 Mongkut, 349 n. 51 
Maharaja Palembang, 243 Mou-luan, 46 
Maharaja of P’o-ni, 158 Muhammad-i-Bakhtiyar, 346 n. 174 
Maharaja Prabhu, 243 Muhammed Ibn Toghluk, 231 
Mahasamana, Phra, 224 Mu-kan Sa-yi-ti-erh Sha, 368 n. 97 
Mahendradatta, 129, 144 Milavarman, 18, 24, 52, 53, 55 
Mahendradevi, 115 Murunda, 40, 46, 47 
Mahendravarman (Chitrasena), 69, Mu-wo Sa-kan-ti-erh Sha, 368 n. 97 71 Muzaffar Shah, 246 
Mahendravarman (father of 
Rajendravarman), 115 Nadaungmya, 183 
Mahidharaditya, 335 n. 112 Naga, Nagi, 37, 48, 86, 175, 213 
Mahisha Champaka, 188, 199 Nagarjuna, 281 n. 36 
Mahisha Rangkah, 198 Nagasena, 58, 286 n. 112 Mahmud, 246 Nagasman, 332 n. 44 » 
Ma Huan, 244, 364 n. 53 Nambi, 233 
Makatho, 198, 205, 206, 209, 210 Nambutiri, 74 
Makuta, 149, 150, 332 n. 44 Nam Thuem, 226 Makutavamsavardhana, 129, 130 Nandavarmadeva, 152 | Malik al-Saleh, 202 Nandivarman III, 107 
Malik az-Zahir, 231 Nangur-udaiyan, 107 
Malik Ibrahim, 241 Narapatijayastra, 167, 177 Mallas, 220 Narapatisimharvarman, 122 
Ma-na-che Wu-li, 243 Narapatisithu, 167, 173, 177, 178, 
Ma-na-ha Pao-liu-pang, 243 182 
Mangalavarman, 122 Narapativiravarman, 321 n. 7 
Mang Lulang, 155, 211 Narasihapati, 183, 193 
Mangrai, 195, 206, 208, 209, 226 Narasimhamirti, 188 Manichanda, 155 Narasimha Uzana, 183 
Manorathavarman, 57, 70 Narasingha, 167, 177 

--- [Page 415] ---
Personal Names 393 
Narastira, 167 Panuluh, 168 
Naratheinkha, 167, 177 Panungalan, 108 
Narathihapate, 183, 193, 194, 209, Par, Senapati, 104 210 Parakramabahu I, 177, 250 
Narathu, 167, 336 n. 156 Paramabodhisattva, 152, 154, 164 
Narendralakshmi, 335 n. 112 Paramabuddhaloka, 123 
NarikelavamSa, 154 Paramakaivalyapada, 153, 159 
Narottama, 321 n. 7 Paramanishkalapada, 159 Nasr-uddin, 193 Paramarama, 236 Nayars, 74 Paramartha, 60, 236 
Ngam Muang, 195, 206, 208 Paramarudraloka, 114 
Ngauk Klaung Vijaya, 238, 239 Paramasivaloka, 114 
Ngayaman Kan, 155-56 Paramasivapada, 115 Ng6 dynasty, 124 Paramaviraloka, 118 
Ngo-ta Ngo-che, 237 Paramavishnuloka, 162 
Nippeanbat (Nirvanapada), 229,236 §ParameSvara (of Bali), 180 
Nirvanapada (Nippeanbat), 229, 236 Paramesvara (Jayavarman II), 103, 
Nirvanapada (Stryavarman ]), 135, 310 n. 6 137 Paramesvara (of Malacca), 241, 245 Nripaditya, 86 Paramesvarapada, 212 
Nripatindravarman (8th century), ParameSsvaravarman |, 124 110 Paramesvaravarman II, 139 
Nripatindravarman (12th century), Paramesvari, 217 153 Paramesvari Tribhuvana, 201 
Nripendradevi, 94 | Pa-ta-na-pa-na-wu, 240 
Nyaung-u S6-rahan, 132 Patapan, 108 
Pham Tu, 70 
Odoric of Pordenone, 230, 231,233, Pha Muang, 195, 196, 220 245 Phat-Ma, 139 
Pha Yu, 226, 227 Pai-li-mi-su-la, 368 n. 92 Phi Fa, 224 , 
Pala, 31, 96, 109, 191, 199, 248, 283 Pi-kai, 363 n. 33 n.58 Pikatan, 108 
Palaraja, 349 n. 42 Pilih Rajadvara, 123 
Pallava, 30, 31, 32, 38, 47, 55, 66,  P’i-ts’ui-pa-mo, 59 
107, 130, 247, 273 n. 94,291n.76, Pliny the Elder, 18 324 n. 66 P’o-mi, 94 
Panangkaran, 88, 89, 96, 108 Pomponius Mela, 18 
Panchakalyani, 155 Poppa Sé-rahan, 106 
Pandya, 30, 146, 184, 185 Prabhasadharma, 71 Pang, 152, 154 Prabhuvarman, 86 
Pan-huang-chao, 275 n.5 Prakasadharma (Vikrantavarman 1), Panji, Raden, 179 71,290 n. 56 
Pankaja, 318 n. 148 Pramodavardhani, 108 
P’an-lo T’u-chuan, 363 n. 33 Prapancha, 187, 240, 241 
P’an Lo-yue, 363 n. 33 Prithivinarendra, 102 
P’an-p’an, 282 n. 49, 284 n. 81 Prithivindravarman (of Cambodia), Panthagu, 177 110 

--- [Page 416] ---
394 Index 
Prithivindravarman (of Champa),95 = Ravana, 163 
Ptolemy, 18, 20, 29, 36, 38, 40, 41, Ravisribhadra, 346 n. 174 53,143,275 n.1 Ruang, Phra, 206, 219 | P’u Ho San, 316 n. 110 Rudra, 55 
Pu-ling Ta-ha, 365 n. 56 Rudraloka (Harshavarman |), 114 
Parnavarman, 18, 53, 54, 55, 60 Rudraloka (Prithivindravarman of Parvavisesha, 242 Champa), 95 
Pushkara, Pushkaraksha, 85, 97, Rudravarman (of Funan), 60, 61, 62, 110, 298 n. 43 65, 67 
Putreng Daha, 365 n. 56 Rudravarman (grandfather of Indra-Pyinbya, 106 varman II, of Champa), 123 
Rudravarman | (of Champa), 70 Qui-do, 363 n. 33 Rudravarman II, 94 
Qui-lai, 363 n. 33 Rudravarman III, 140, 141 : Rudravarman IV, 164 
Raden Vijaya, see Vijaya Raghu, 159 Sabbadhisiddhi, 194 Rahu, 163, 176, 180 Sadaéiva, 135, 137 
Raja Cholan (or Suran), 143 Sadasivapada, 152 
Raja Ibrahim, 246 Saddhammajotipala, 178 Raja Kasim, 246 Saen Phu, 226 Rajakulamahamantri, 116 Saila, 30 Rajakumara, 156, 157 Sailendra, 30, 61, 88-93, 97, 100, 
Rajapatni, 199, 232, 234 107-109, 125, 127, 128, 142, 187, 
Rajaraja | (the Chola), 141, 142 , 248, 249, 302 n. 107 
Rajaraja | (of Vengi), 148 Sailodbhava, 88 -
Rajasa, 187, 188, 199 Sajjanasanmatanuragatungadeva, Rajasamkram, 209 Sri, 318 n. 146 
Rajasanagara, 234, 235, 239, 240, 241 Sajjanotsavatun ga, 126 Rajasankrama, 183 Sakabrahmana, 47 
Rajasavardhana, 242 Sakalendukirana, 158 
Rajendrachola I, 136, 142-43, 148 Sakrasvamin, 85 
Rajendradevakulottunga, 148 Sakyakirti, 297 n. 27 Rajendradevi, 180 Salankayana, 273 n. 94 
Rajendravarman, 114,115, 116,117, | Samala, 106 
124, 312 n. 54, 314 n. 86 Samaragravira, 92, 108, 109 
Rama, 115, 159, 254 Samaratunga, 92, 108, 109 
Ramadhipati, 222, 235, 236 Samaravijayadharma..., 327 n. 115 
Rama Khamhaeng, 190, 195, 196-98, | Samarotsaha Karnakesana, 327 
204-208, 218-19, 220, 223, 225, n.119 353 n. 114 Sambharasiryavarana, 128 Ramanuja, 162 Sambhula, 156 Ramesuan, 236 Sambhuvarman (of Cambodia), 298 RameSvara, 236 1.43 Ranga Lawe, 233 Sambhuvarman (of Champa), 70, 71, Ranga Wuni, 188 298 n. 43 Rashupati, 171 Sam Chon, Khun, 196 
Ratnabhimivijaya, 164 Samdach Chao Ponhea, 237 

--- [Page 417] ---
Personal Names 395 
Samdach Chao Ponhea Kambuja, Shih-li-t’o-pa-mo (Sri Indravarman), 236 56, 84 
Samdach Kambujadhiraja, 236 Shih-li Wu-yeh, 131 
Sam Phaya, 224, 226 Shih-pi, 200 
Sam Saen Thai, 357 n. 30 Shin Arahan, 149, 156, 166, 
Samudragupta, xviii, 46, 55, 56, 247 177,178 
Sangama Srijhana, 346 n. 174 Shwe-einthi, 156 
Sanghapala, 285 n. 92 Siddhikara, 139 Sangqudar, 193 Sihastira, see Thihathu Sangrama, 138, 139 Sihavikrama, 86 
Sangramadhananjaya, 89, 91, 109 Sikharamahadevi, 195 
Sangramavijaya Dharmaprasadot- Silabudhi, 329 n. 138 
tungadevi, 146 Si-li Hu-ta-hsia-li-tan, 131 
Sangramavijayottungavarman, 142, Si-li Ma-ha-la, 368 n. 98 
143, 146, 326 n. 106 Si-li-pa-erh-su-la, 368 n. 92 
Sang Ratu i Halu, 89 Si-li Pa-mi-si-wa-erh-ch’ii-pa Sha, 
Sanjaya, 24, 87, 88, 90, 108, 126, 127, 246 
_ 233, 299 n. 63, 318 n. 145 Simhadeva, 71 Sankara, 160 Simhapati, 210, 211 
Sankaracharya, 110, 111 Sindok, 127, 128, 129, 144, 302 n. Sanna, 24, 87 98, 318 n. 156 Sanna, 87 Singhasira, 183 Sariputta, 178 Singhavikramavardhana, 242 Sarvajhamuni, 212 Singho, 132 Sarvani, 71 Sita, 115, 254 
Sarvesvara, 168 Sivabuddha (Kritanagara), 198 
Sasantibhuvana, 139 Sivacharya, 116, 135, 313 n. 64 Sassanid, 47 Sivakaivalya, 98, 99, 100, 
Satyakausikasvamin, 71  310n. 13 Satyavarman, 91, 95 Sivaloka, 117 / . = Savakan, 185 Sivanandana, 164 
Sawyun, 358 n. 60 Sivasoma, 110, 111 Sayid, 22 ne Dynasties, 248 Slvat, 139 Sedah, 168 pivat, 139° Seleucid, 19 soa too é-j-chu-la-wu-ni-fu-ma-tiau-h ogatu, , 
ee U-la-wueni-Tu-ma-tau-nwa, ate, 133, 149, 321 n. 185 
Sélu, 155, 156 Sena, 31, 191 -Soma, 37, 61, 67, 86 Seng-chia-la, 234 Sona. 17 
Seng-ch’ ia-lieh-yu-lan, 234, 243 Sora, 233 Seng-chia-li-yeh, 234 Séyun, 156 
Sequeira, Diogo Lopes de, 246 Sradharajachilamuni . .. , 220 Shen Tsung, 140 Sreshthavarman, 56, 61, 66 
She-to-ssu-na (Chitrasena), 65 Sri Deva, 143 
She-yeh-pa-mo, 57 Sridvaravatisvara, 292 n. 94 
Shih-li-p’i-ch’o-yeh, 55 Sri Indravarman (of Funan), 56 Shih-li Tieh-hua, 143 Sri Indravarman (of Srivijaya), 84 

--- [Page 418] ---
396 Index 
Sri [sana(vikramadharmot- 159-63, 165, 169, 174, 177, tungadeva), 128 195, 250 
Sri Maharaja of Malacca, 246 Stiryavikrama, 86 
Sri Maharaja of P’o-ni, 158 Su-tan Mang-su Sha, 369 n. 104 
Sri Maharaja of Srivijaya, 168 Su-wu, 41 
Sri Mara, 40, 42, 43 
Srindrabhipegvarach da, 211 Tabanendravarmadeva, 129 
Srindrajayavarman, 228 T’ai Tsung, 71 
Srindrakumira, 176, 180 Talanai, Mahasenapati, 341 n. 75 
Srindravarman, 211-13, 228, 349 Tamalinda, 178 _ =n. 37 Ta-ma-sha-na-a-che, 243 Sringa, 179, 180, 185 Tanakung, 179 
Sri Parameévaradeva Shah, 246 T’ang dynasty, 71, 72, 118, 124, 
Srivijayanagara, 323 n. 61 248, 249, 275 n. 2 
Sri Vishnuvarman, 51 T'ang Kao Tsung, 72 
Srutavarman, 61, 66, 67 Tang-ken-ch’un, 58, 59 
Ssu-li Ma-lo-p’i, 324 n. 67 T’an Ho-chih, 57 Suang, 196 Tantular, 241 Sua Thai, 219 T’ao Huang, 42, 44 
Suhita, 242, 365 n. 56 Tapasi, 217 Sui dynasty, 70 Tara, 108 
Sujita (Jivaka, Vararaja), 136 Tarabya, 210 
Sulayman (envoy of the Mongols), Taranatha, 346 n. 174 192, 202 Tarukphyi, 183 
Sulayman (traveller), 303 n. 117 Tavang, Thao, 223 
Su-lu-t’an Wu-ta-fu-na Sha, rracomin yas 227 369 n. 103 ang, Sunandana, 104 Theingo, 132 
Sundarapandya, 233 Thihathu (of Pagan), 194, 209, 210 
Sundaraparakrama, 122 Thihathu (of Pinya), 209, 227 
Sundaravarman, 122 thins ae 155 
mung dynasty, 124,151, 189, 249, Thinkhaba, 227 
Sung dynasty, the early. 56 Three Kingdoms, 41, 248 : g dynasty, the early, . , oO! Ti Chen, 56 Stradhipa, 168 Ti-hua-chiao-lo, 148 Sdryabhatta, 172 Ti-hua-ch’ieh-lo, 148, 328 n. 127 
Stiryajayavarmadeva, 171, 172 T'i-lo-min-lo, 183 Sdryakumara, 180 Tissa, 107 
Siryavamsa Rajadhiraja, 236 Tissa Dhammaraja, 107 
Stiryavamsa Rama Mahadharmara- Toghon, 192 jadhiraja, 221 Tohjaya, 188 
Sdryavarmadeva, 171, 172 Trabaka, 136 
Siryavarman (Chao Ponhea Yat), Tra-hoa B6-dé, 230 237 Trailokyaraja Maulibhishana-Sdryavarman I, 121, 134-37, 149, varmadeva, 179 | 
151, 152, 249 Tran dynasty, 182 
Suryavarman Il, xix, 152, 153, 154, Tran Ahn-tOne, 217, 279 

--- [Page 419] ---
Personal Names 397 
Tran Dué-téng, 238 U Sauk Pan, 156 
Tran Hién-tong, 219, 229 Uttara, 17 Tran Minh-tong, 229 Uttarajiva, 177 Tran Nhan-tong, 192 Uzana, 183 
Tran Thai-t6ng, 182 
Tribhavanaditya Dhammaraja Vagisvara, 128 
Jayasiira, 343 n. 125 Vajrabodhi, 297 n. 33 
Tribhavanaditya Pavaradham- Vak, 154 
maraja, 343 n. 117, 355 5 Vamasiva, 111, 112 n. 130 VamSaraja, 165 
Tribhavanaditya Pavaradham- Varanarendra, 55 
marajadhiraja, 343 n. 121 Vararaja, 136 
Tribhavanaditya Pavarapandita VarmeSvara, 168 
Dhammaraja, 343 n. 122, Vasco da Gama, 246 354 n. 129 Vatuv, 338 n. 9 
Tribhavanaditya Pavarasihasira Vespasian, 20 
Dhammaraja, 358 n. 58 Vichitrasagara, 95 Tribhuvana, 234 Vidyanandana, 170, 171, 172 
Tribhuvanadevi, 123 Vidyesadhimant, 228 
Tribhuvanaditya Dhammaraja, 156 Vidyesavid, 212 
Tribhuvanaditya Pavaradham- Vijaya (of Champa), 199 maraja, 166 Vijaya (Kritarajasa), 232-34 
Tribhuvanadityavarman, 163, 164, — Vijaya (of Wengker), 145 169 Vijayabahu I, 150 
Tribhuvanaraja Maulivarmadeva, Vijayalokanamottunga, 318 n. 148 
Maharaja Srimat, 201 Vijayamahadevi, 129 Triguna, 158 Vijayarajasa, 240, 241 
Trilokavatamsika, 156, 157 Vijaya Sri... , 125, 139 
Ts’an-lie Chao-p’ing-ya, 237 Vijayavarman (of Champa), 
Ts’an-lie Pao-p’i-sie Kan-p’u-che, 59,70 236 Vijayavarman (of Kan-t’o-li), 55 
Ts’an-lie P’o-p’i-ya, 237 Vijayendralakshmi, 158 
Ts’an-ta Kan-wu-che-ch’e-ta-che, Vikramavardhana, 241, 365 n. 56 236 Vikrantavarman I, 71, 72 Tulodong, 127 Vikrantavarman II, 72 
Tungul Ametung, 187 Vikrantavarman III, 104, 123 
Vikrantavarman IV, 139 
Ucch’itthachakkvatti, 136 Vimala, 106 
Udayadityavarman (of Srivijaya), Vimalasri, 132 131 Virabhadravarman, 238 
Udayadityavarman I, 118, 135, Virabhimi, 241, 365 n. 56 321n.7 Virakumara, 180 
Udayadityavarman II, 137-39, 153 Viralakshmi, 135, 137 
Udayadityavarman Pratapaparakra- Viraraja, 200, 233 
marajendra..., 232 Virarajendra, 148, 328 n. 127 and Udayana, 129, 144 n. 128 Ugrasena, 129 Vishnu, 91 Uroja, 123 Vishnuloka, 103 

--- [Page 420] ---
398 Index 
Vishnumirti, 154 Yasovardhana, 111 
Vishnuvardhana, 188 Yasovarman I, xix, 103, 111-14, 
Vishnuvarman, 51 115, 116, 117, 135, 138 
Vrah Guru, 117 Yasovarman II, 163, 169, 180 
Wang Ta-yiian, 229, 230, 231, 234 Vat, Chao Ponhea, 237, 238 
Yazathinkyan (of Myinsaing), 209 Warak, 108 Yazathinkyan (Rajasankrama), 183 Wareru, 206, 209, 210, 219, 227 i, ’ Ye-hei-mi-she, 200 Watuhumalang, 126 _— Ye-sin Timour, 194 Watukura, 317 n. 139 Yiba, 208, 209, 226 Wawa, 127, 128 , vy . Yighmis, 351 n. 69 Wei dynasty, 41 “ Yi-k’o-mu-su, 200, 202 Wen (of Champa), 44 ; , , Yin-ch’ing, 245 Wen (emperor of China), 56 -Yogisvara, 319 n. 158 Wu, 41, 46 Yot Kaeo, 224 Wu-lao-po-wu, 240 
Wu-ytian-lao-wang-chieh, 240 Yuan dynasty, 189 
Yung-ch’iang, 104 Yadanabon, 167 Yung Lo, 241, 244, 365 n. 56 
Yajfhavaraha, 117 Yang Chien, 70 Zeyatheinkha, 178, 182, 183 Yang Mah, 57, 59 Zo-moun-nit, 211 
Yang Wei-si-cha, 365 n. 56 Zo-nit, 211 
Hl. RELIGIOUS NAMES AND TERMS 
Akshobhya, 198 Bodhisattva, 78, 84, 85, 90, 94, 96, 
Amoghapasa, 188, 201, 232, 366 118, 121, 144, 173, 174, 175, n. 72 188, 232, 254, 286 n. 112 Arannika, 106 Brahma, 116 
Aranyika, 207, 208 Brahman, Brahmanic, xvi, 14, 15, 17, Ari, 106 22, 23, 24-25, 32, 33, 37, 52, 54, Asura, 163 56, 61, 78, 89, 98, 99, 100, 101, 
Avalokitesvara, 188 107, 110, 111, 116, 118, 120, 137, 
145, 157, 159, 172, 173, 212, 214, Bak6, 228 221, 228, 244, 253, 271 n. 55, 274 
Bhadradhipatisvara, 95 n. 101, 291 n. 84, 314 n. 92 
Bhadresvara (of Cambodia), 66, Buddha, Buddhism, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 113, 116 21, 23, 27, 31, 32, 39, 43, 49, 50, 
BhadreSvara (of Champa), 48, 49, 51, 53, 54, 55, 58, 60, 62, 63, 64, 70, 71, 90, 238 67, 73, 74, 76, 77, 79, 81, 82, 84, Bhagavata, 113 85, 87, 89, 90, 104, 105, 106, 107, Bhagavati, 124 113, 116, 117, 118, 119, 121, 123, 
Bhairava, 199, 243 125, 126, 127, 129, 135, 137, 141, 
Bhaishajyaguru, 176 144, 146, 151, 153, 156, 157, 158, Bhakti, 162 163, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 179, Bhatara Guru, 88 185, 191, 194-95, 198, 201, 212, 
Bhikshu, bhikshuni, 74, 137, 234 214, 215, 216, 219, 220, 221, 226, 

--- [Page 421] ---
Religious Names and Terms 399 
228, 242, 248, 249, 250, 253, 267 Krishna, 158, 162 
n. 9 and n. 10, 281 n. 22, 282 n. 
37, 285 n. 92, 292 n. 95, 314 n. Lakshmi, 121, 146 
92, 323 n. 61, 341 n. 75, 346 n. — LakshmindralokeSvara, 123 174 Linga, 23, 49, 61, 62, 64, 68, 69, 73, 
Buddhapada, 220 87, 89, 90, 100, 101, 102, 103, 112, 
Buddharaja, 175 113, 114, 115, 116, 119, 138, 140, 
170, 175, 182, 212, 275 n. 3, 288 
Chakratirthasvamin, 60 n. 8, 310 n. 8, 314 n. 86, 353 n. Chao ku, 214 114 Chen-t’an, 215 Lokanatha, 144 Chu-ku, 214 Lokegvara, 94, 96, 118, 144, 173, 
174, 175, 232, 298 n. 36, 303 
Devaraja, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, n. 111, 339 n. 38 
111, 112, 114, 115, 119, 120, 135, 
137, 138, 175, 313 n. 64 Madhyamika, 281 n. 36 Devi, 110, 122 Mahabrahamana, 146 
Dharma, 314 n. 92 Mahagiri, 106, 353 n. 114 
Dipankara, 21, 23, 268 n. 10 Mahantas, 346 n. 174 
Dipavali, Divali, 208 Mahayana, 84, 87, 89, 90, 91, 94, 96, 
106, 117, 123, 144, 163, 173, 218, Fo, 76, 281 n. 22 248, 253, 281 n. 36, 286 n. 112, 
304 n. 148, 369 n. 1 
Garuda, 122, 146, 159 Mahendra, 115 Girindra, 187 Mahesvara, 61, 146, 286 n. 112 GiriSa, 61, 69, 88 Manjusri, 89, 96, 232 
Mukhalinga, 62 
Harihara, 61, 73, 121, 233 Miulasarvastivadin, 77, 84, 87 
Hinduism, 25, 33, 53, 100, 108, 118, | Muslims, 22, 33, 188, 202, 203, 218, 
126, 128, 129, 149, 157, 163, 218, 242, 244, 245,251, 316n. 
228, 238, 242, 243, 265 n. 54, 369 110, 364 n. 53 
n. 1 
Nandin, 69 Indra, 100 Nat, 353 n. 114 
Indresvara, 111, 113, 119, 310 n. 8 
[Sanabhadregvara, 125, 152, 182 Padmapani, 85, 96 
Islam, xvi, xvii, 22, 33, 202, 204, 218, | Pancharatra, 73, 113 
231, 232, 239, 241, 242, 244, 245, Parvati, 121 
246, 251, 253, 316 n. 110, 343 n. ~~ Pa-ssu-wei, 214 
130, 352 n. 81, 367 n. 88 Pasupata, 73, 113 
Phra Bang, 226 
Jayabuddhamahanatha, 175 Phra Khaphung, 207, 353 n. 114 
Jayavarmesvara, 174 Phra Sihing (or Sing), 227 
Po-lai, 214 
Kalachakra, 199, 232, 243 Poseidon, image of, 17 Kama, 341 n. 81 P’o-to-li, 65, 66 
Kamrateng jagat ta rajya, 114, 119, Prajhaparamita, 117, 174, 314 n. 86 346 n. 157 

--- [Page 422] ---
400 Index 
Preah, 214 Tantrism, 84, 87, 96, 101, 106, 128, Pitikesvara, 90 129, 150, 199, 218, 232, 243, 
Rahu, 163, 176 297 n. 33 
: RajendrabhadreSsvara, 116 Tao, Taoism, 92, 76 
Rajendravarmadevesvara, 116 Tapasvin, 113, 137, 214 2 Tara, 89, 90, 96, 108, 109, 144 Rajendravarmesvara, 116 . OL: 
Rajendravigvariipa, 116 Taunggyi, Shin, 106 
Rajendreévara, 11 6 119 Theravada, 61, 77, 79, 84, 87, 96, Richi 146. 149, 150, 151, 166, 167, 208, co 250, 253 
Sakabrah mana, 47 Tribhuvanamahesvara, 117 
Sakyamuni, 173,214 Tribhuvanesvara, 114 
Samantamukha, 175 Trimarti, 49, 89, 113 Sambhubhadresvara, 71 Tripurantaka, 85 
Sarvastivadin, 84, 96 Triratna (Three Buddhist Jewels), Sattvata, 113 89, 157 Shafi’ites, 231 Tumburu, 101 
Sikharigvara, 113 
Singhalese Buddhism, xvi, 18, 33, -
63, 177-78, 196-97, 208, 212,218, Ma M19, 116 
220, 222, 223, 225, 227, 228, 250, 
251, 253, 343 n. 123, 369 n. 1 Vajradhara, 214, 339 n. 38 
Siva, Sivaism, 23, 24, 48, 52, 58, 61, | Vajrap4ni, 85, 96, 117, 339 n. 38 
64, 66, 67, 68, 69, 73, 85, 87, 90, Vajrayana, 90, 96 
100, 101, 110, 111, 113, 115, 116, | Vaprakesvara, 52 
117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 125, 127,  Vijhanavadin, 84 
129, 146, 153, 162, 174, 179, 187, Vishnu, Vishnuism, 47, 60, 61, 62, 
188, 212, 228, 233, 248, 249, 253, 63, 64, 71, 73, 91, 102, 107, 113, : , 275 n. 3 116, 121, 137, 138, 146, 162, 168, Siva Bhairava, 199, 243 238, 253, 298 n. 43 
Sivabuddha (Kritanagara), 198 Vratyastoma, 24 
Siva-Buddha, 96, 199, 241, 314 n. 90 
iva Girindra, 187 YaSodharesvara, 112, 113, 119 
Sivalinga, 138 , ~ Yoga, 137 Siva-Uma, 49 Yosachara, 84, 118 Sogata, 146 OBAaCN ara, O%, 
Sthavira, 137 Surya, 47, 62 Zoroastrians, 47 
IV. TEXTS 
Abhidhammatthasangaha, 178 Arjunavijaya, 241 Abhidharma, 221 Arjunavivaha, 147, 188 
Abhisamayalankara, 141 Arthasastra, 16, 26, 254 
Ahbar as-sin wa I-hind, 320 n. 173 | Amaramala, 301 n. 93 Baudhayana (dharma§astra) , 274 
Annals of Ayutthaya, 236, 362 n. 2 n. 101 

--- [Page 423] ---
Texts 401 
Bharatayuddha, 168 Kamasastra, 26 
Bhargaviya (dharmasastra), 165 Karmavibhanga, 301 n. 90 
Bhattikavya, 319 n. 158 Kot Mandirapala, 367 n. 82 
Bodhicharyavatara, 326 n. 87 Krishnayana, 158, 188, 241 
Bodhivamsatika, 343 n. 117 Kunjarakarna, 188 
Chamadevivamsa, 136 Lalitavistara, 301 n. 90 
Chu-fan-chih, 178, 181, 186 Ling-wai Tai-ta, 172, 178, 179, 180, 
186, 336 n. 138 
Dhammachetikatha, 329 n. 139 oe 
Dhammavilasa Dhammathat, 178 Mahabharata, 44, 74, 168, 254, 280 
Dharma§sastra, 16, 26, 165, 254, 274 n.9 n. 101 Mahavamsa, 143, 184 
Durbodhialoka, 323 n. 61 Man Shu, 93, 104 
Manu, Laws of, 121, 210, 254 
Gandavyiha, 301 n. 90 Martaban, History of, 219 
Glass Palace Chronicle, 166, 167. Milindapanha, 39, 143 177, 182, 183 Mrigendragama, 269 n. 27 
Malasasana, 136 Harivamsa, 168, 254 -
History of the Chin, 42, 46 Nagarakritagama, 187, 198-99, 
History of the Early Sung, 54, 56 239-41 , 244, 245, 352. 91 
History of the Liang, 37, 38, 39, 46, Naradiya -5155 56 59.60.61 Naradiya (dharma§sastra), 165 
History of the Ming, 236, 237, 238, Nayottara, 99,101 240. 243. 246. 367 n. 85 New History of the T’ang, 54, 65, 
History of the Southern Ch’i, 38, 57, 69, 79,104, 106, 126 58 61.285 n. 93 Niddesa, 16, 36, 39, 40, 54 
History of the Sui, 65, 74, 293 n. 109 Nithan Khun Borom, 224, 225 
iyele or me ee ae eB 4 nT Old History of the T’ang, 69, 71, 72, 
History of the T’ang (New), 54, 65, 104 
69, 79, 104, 106, 126 Pararaton, 187, 199, 233, 351 n. 67, 
History of the T’ang (Old), 69, 71, 365 n. 56 72, 104 . Parthayajfhia, 188 
History of the Three Kingdoms, 41, _ Perjplus of the Erythrean Sea, 18, 29 44 Phongsawadan, 225 
History of the Yuan, 191, 202, 205, Puranas, 16, 30, 34, 74, 254 
206, 209, 218, 221, 234 Purushadasanta, 241 
Hmannan Yazawin, 328 n. 131 
Hsing-ch’a Sheng-lan, 367 n. 85 Rajadhiraja, 219 
Rajaniti, 254 Inao, 180 Ramayana, 16, 34, 53, 74, 128, 241, 
254 
Jataka, 16, 21, 29, 254, 333 n. 57 Jatakamala, 301 n. 90 Saddaniti, 167 
Jinakalamali, 136, 185, 343 n. 117, Sammoha, 99, 101 
354 n. 118, 358 n. 39-54 Sang Hyang Kamahayanikan, 90, 128 

--- [Page 424] ---
402 Index 
Sankhepavannana, 178 Vayupurana, 53 
Siharajarajavamsa, 329 n. 139 Veda, 173, 221 Siraccheda, 99, 101 Vibhanga, 287 n. 121 
Slapat Rajawang, 329 n. 139 Vinasikha, 99, 101 Smaradahana, 179 Vinaya, 221 
Sudharmavatirajavamsa, 329 n. 139 Virataparva, 130 Sutasoma, 241 Vrittasanchaya, 179 
Suttaniddesa, 178 
T’ai-p’ing Yi-lan, 275 n.5, 285 n.93 “agaru Dhammathat, 210 
Tao-i Chih-lioh, 229, 230, 243 
Traibhamikatha, 221 Ying-yai Sheng-lan, 245, 367 n. 85, 
Traiphum Phra Ruang, 221 368 n. 94 Tripitaka, 150 Yogacharyabhumisastra, 84 
V. FOREIGN TERMS 
Adhipati, 129 Kamtvan, 134 Amteng, 214 Kan-lan, 49 Anak wungéu, 147 Kan-man, 51 An-ting, 214 Karmika, 294 n. 114 Asrama, 111 Kaula, 26 
Khpong, 353 n. 114 
Balaputra, 108, 109, 147 Khun, 197, 223 Bnam, 36 Ki-pei, 49, 51, 75 
Kola, 272 n. 78 
Chakravartin, 99, 100 Kolandia, 29, 273 n. 78 Chandan, 46 Kramukavam§a, 154 Chara, 116 Krang, 215 
Chayanataka, 265 n. 54 Kraton, 127 Chen-t’an, 215 Kujula, 47 Chia-li-mi-chia, 78 Kulapati, 294 n.115 Chiu-lo-mo-ti, 78 Ku-lo-you, 75 
K’un-lun-po, 272 n. 78 Dalmak, 37 K’un-lun-tan, 272 n. 78 
Dhanada, 294 n. 113 Kurung Bnam, 36 Dmak, 37 
Lo-chi-lien, 302 n. 97 
Fan, 276 n. 16, 279 n. 61, 284 n. 81 Luk khun, 197 
Hotar, 116, 212 Mahanavika, 51 Hsiang-kao-ping, 75 Mahapati, 240 
Maharaja, 88, 100, 130 Jan-lo-lou, 75 Mai-tsieh, 216 | Makara, 148, 245 Kalam, 272 n. 78 Mapatih, 240 Kamrateng, 205 Mé srok, 216 

--- [Page 425] ---
Foreign Terms 403 
Mrateng, 214 Sampeah, 216 
San-pa, 216 
Narikelavam$a, 154 Sardhakara, 294 n. 112 Na-ya-chia, 78 Sarvabhauma, 66 Nayaka, 294 n. 116 Sati, 230, 360 n. 85 Noyan, 197 Sa-t’o-chia-lo, 78 
Senapati, 152 Padmavaméa, 184 Senmu, 216 Pandita, 214 She-ma-ling, 75 
Panigrahana, 294 n. 118 Siddhayatra, 82, 123, 296 n. 16, 315 Pan-k’i, 214 n. 104 Parvatabhapala, 36 Sikhara, 87 
Pati, 234, 294 n. 117 Sresthin, 214 Pa-ting, 214 Sri, 287 n. 3 Pe-tie, 75 Ssu-la-ti, 214 Phnom, 36 Stidra, 26 
Pho khun, 197 Phraya, 223, 224 Talat pasan, 207 P’o-ho-to-ling, 75 Tantras, 101 
P’o-lo-men, 271n.55 Taval, 360 n. 86 Po-ti, 78 Thao, 223 Pralaya, 144 T’o-na-ta, 78 Purohita, 100, 173 Trivaméa, 26 ; T’sien-lap, 65 
Rajakuti, 111 
Rajanitl, 2 o4 Vihara, 228 Rajapatni, 199 Vimana, 111 imana, Rakryan, 302 n. 97 Vishakanyaka, 317 n. 128 Rakshasi, 145 Yana, ote ne 
Sadhukara, 294 n. 112 Wayang, 12, 265 n. 54 
Sailaraja, 36 
Saka, 47, 146, 170 Yuvaraja, 153, 170, 171, 182, 228, Samnak, 216 243 

--- [Page 426] ---
BLANK PAGE 

--- [Page 427] ---
l} Mun River a UBON € Phimai + e ~\ Nom V * >a om van N fo) KHORAT BURIRAM © \ © SURIN t BASSAC Vat Ph’u + \ 
(Lingaparvata) 
Ban That + 
DANGREK MOUNTAINS 4 presh vinear 
+ Banteay Ch’mar \ (} + Ph nom Sandak + Prasat Khna AY + Preah Phnom +K % Khon Falls . oh Ker © MLU PREI Sdok Kak Thom + Pr, Roluh  ~ Prasat Ta ee LEN (Ch’ok Gargyar) 6 
MONGKOLBOREI > { es an (Mahendraparvata) | ¥ anteay Srel ANGKOR -, STUN o SIEM REAP +p ( Sir PROLUOS reah Khan f Vat Ek + KROM, (Harihardlaya) BATTAMBANG of * Baset a , oe a NG 1 0, % / “~ & > Sambor Prei Kuk + ff Ap (ISanapura) + Sambor v > ° @ CHANTHABUN 70 KOMPONG THOM (Sambuphura) , PURSATe A SS) © KRATIE 9 X\ + Samrong Sen ' Mekon Kompong Ch’nang AXP. Preah Vihear one Y, Z ) THBONG KHMUM po CHAM ) >a + Preah Theat Preah Srei % OR pe | + B. Prei Nokor ty { e + Vat Sithor i) PHNOM PENH 
KANDAL ° mee \) Ta Prohm + ° BONO NOM © TAY-NINH ye BATI (Vyadhapura) 
Pr. Neang Khmau + MT. CHISOR Ta Keo + + Angkor Borei 4 
PHNOM DA Asram Maharosei = A % CHAUDOCY “Hs thap Mush aa g + Kuhea Preah , \ PLAINE DES JONCS ) > MT. BAYANG WD , 
CAMBODIA . “é HATIEN LONG-XUYEN®\ SS ' 3 mune PR. KROL KO - Pr. Prei + THEE *G seas 
penensd eV EAL NEANEA DAKig TA SOM r aL pa ae | cy PREAH KHAN[s]NEAK PEAN: H * Pre KOK Po mn Eh einer m: 
art nnrencee ee aN EMME mnUM AHA a apranaeenemeer taming f | r~C~S  prvvesreremet rerarn eases 3: lh CANAKAS: | +22 Ta Nei EASTERN BARAY = # ne " o> peqt Pr. Pithu-+ Thommanon 5 (YaSodharatataka) 2: mn AARNE ea mstuntnumanenunerne amu uuuuins BAPHUON s+ Pr, Khieang + Chau Say MEBON Hi L i iE 777 BAYON + Takeo Banteay Samreé 33 + ei i Esau nstevununaunerninnan ant ntti rngenene ett ansdereeet es wo, 2 . # ANGKOR THOM Coe" TA PROHM PRE RUP + Pr. Komnap "ide + Mébon df (YaSodharapura) II LES [gsigvbaca SRAS a ANG . + 3 WESTERN BARAY rf _ ed ANTEAY KDE! (KUTI) Pret Prasat 
i Baksei Chamkrong + *emmnaniiatnen tg ant iay Bat Chum += saver esnenta maeeatesataty Sane teen tt etatanomianarsaabirtenemauntununnannante miss PLIRIOM, BAKHENG 43+ Kani Perea nee anne eae ereery ere Aan zz Kapilapura =z + 22 23 i: Ak Yom #? ANGKOR wate + Pr. Kravan + Vat Khnat £2 7% # # 
R GROUP $235 (YaSodharapura) | is z THE ANGKO G sd J Eawumtuaouvnutmnuie nen 3 3: 
$5 ene cn " : Jw Aenea Anetrey seueanee sueeten vee See we decay # eS 

--- [Page 428] ---
© MOGAUNG o TALI 
0) gs NANCHAO © YUNNAN-FU 
NGASAUNGKYAM TIPPERAH RW BHAMO CHINA cs OKAUNG-SIN YUNNAN 
Y s -9° CHITTAGONG C o R, -> o oO yr a SIP SONG PHAN NA 2. Re . = je MANDALAY S . oO yan d a AVA No KYAUKSE > PHIANGRENG BAC-SON 9 LANG-SON , oS PINYA(SGMYINSAING “i TONGKING PAGAN ‘PINLE ” 0 CHIANG TUNG SGN-TAY fi. AE HANOI fi 7) \) HOA-DINH ig) QO. w o MONE & @ HUNG-YEN wy S$ " CHIANGSAEN o/ HUA PHAN Ws & c CHIANG KHONG LUANG \ NINH-BINH © eg Yy = = CHIENGRAI © PHRABANG THANH-HOA \) Re n M. FANG 9 ©.PHAYAO N S TOUNGOO (LAN NA) (LAN CHANG) Xcua RAQ 
Or s OPROME CHIANGMAI aap NAN TRAN-NINH NGHE-AN 
~ OLAMPANG tance COL DE KEO NUA/e 
m) PHRAE od LANGGHAN, KHAMMUAN So anti sch PEGU a Jy YOR PORTE D'ANNAM _ SAL FQNG COL DEY Bay of Bengal ° | DAWANKHALOK PAK HIN BUNS = MU-GIA RANGOON THATON AHAENG SUKHOTHAI QUANG-BINH™\ QUANG-TRI OBASSEIN ® ° oo LOMSAK : ARTABAN MAE SQT SAVANNAKHET HU KAMPHAENG PHET COL DEY, , ; MOULMEIN x (THU'A-THIENYs DA-NANG PHICHIT ~ ~eRQiet \tA0 Bad COL DES NUAGES 
NAKHQN SAWAN \ PAKNAM PHO © CHAIYAPHUM UBON QUANG-NAM Ws \ BURIRAM < PAGODAS ° u ° © SURIN BASSAC PASS CUPNAN o o LOPBURI © KHORAT R a 9 LX AYUTTHAYA ) aI @w Vv KANBURI ©PRACHIN MT. KULEN MLU EREI\KHONA BINH-DINH RATBURI © BANGKOK MONGKOLBORE! BENG QUI-© SIEMREAP EN (Cape Varell on brduasun BATTAMBANG ROLUOS Aen anes ANDAMAN ISLANDS \ o KOMPONG DARLAK & > .* b MERGUI é i, PURSAT THOM }okraTi€é KHANH-HOA QNHA-TRANG ° Y CHANTHABUN KOMPONG by ~ 20 v y) ' KOMPONG TENASSERIM CH’NANG OCHAM ~~ zr 2 $ & PHNOM PENH 4 pre ‘VENG — SPHAN-RANG ° D ) BAT! \SpBANAM ( ) U 4 BA PHNOM BIEN-HOA go PHAN-THIET 3 TA KEO | g 4 TA KEO SAIGON A) CHUMPHON HATIEN 9 Isthmus of Kra q zo v q A é cHlalva. Bay of Bandgn S 
TAKUAPA * POULO CONDORE oO \ 9 oO LIGOR OR NAKHQN SITHAMMARAT @ ¢ \ NICOBAR ISLANDS PHATT H ALUNG 2 TRAN v SINGORA 
© PATTANI v Osa/BUR 
9 * \REDAT KEDANTAN INDOCHINESE PENINSULA 9 . ACHIN PROVINCE 
PENANG WELLESLEY TRENGGANU PERAK { ~7\, 
PERLAK 
BARUAS HARU DINDING\ CP ocr DEL 5 PAHANG “ Cy 4g We ANAMBAS & “4, 7) Sy %, Cape Rachado q PANE Ce MALACCA \ a SAROS JOHORE 
& SS TAPANULI SINGAPORE BORNEO NIAS “. 0) Gp BINTANG 

--- [Page 429] ---
3d & \ cS « &/ §/ NANCHAO , g RS x (8 CHINA 8 2 < Ny Cc Ww © w Y 2 2 C So WN © wa v e y 3 “ vk ° & BAC-SON ee Arimaddanapura CHIAO-CHIH i. 4 - ee) i” ° 2 S z ~ Ngoen Yang o HOA-LU \ Ns do <~ 7, Ly > S $ \ N a g LAN CHANG s Lo @Jo Srikshetra & i S £ 0%" = Yb Haripunjaya 8 KHelang 5 . aw, : oC Hamsavati 2 Plae = © SAI FONG >, ) é , Bay of Bengal v, Si Satchanalai 
o Kusumi ' Sudhammavati 0 A Chet o QUANG-BINN QUANG-TRI - ° _ fi: + Phu Khiao Kao Amarivati avatl ca | mun & Mi-son + M Jra-kiéu \ \} Si\Thep + + Phimai Dong Dudng 
U thoig +S 6 Lay, ‘ NGREK Vat Ph’u + +\ Sa-huynh °° W 2 9 Preah Vihear + Qe S MLU PREI Vi hong Tuk +\+Phra Pathom Koh Ker + 0 ijaya Q y (OR + O + Preah Khan Cape Varella 
ROLUOS + Beng Mealea Lingaparvata ° 0 / + Sambor P. Kuk fr sa & + Sambor Kauthara 9 7 8 b + d Vo-canh ° 5 f % Fetes ¢) 4 ° Angkor Borei + XUAN-LOC 
rn) Isthmus of Kra ©0C — DES JONCS Oe 2p KALAH ? QW 
Bay of Bandon 3 -{ Grahi Khao Phra Narai$>+ , 
; Takkola Nagara Sri Dharmaraja, Dharmanagari 
fe) 
g G INDOCHINESE PENINSULA > ANCIENT PLACE NAMES a -Katah o. ane AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES Lamuri Samudra » Pasai © 5 ° + Kuala Un Selinsing Sun dy S. 
Cy, O6 xg Ay ey 9 a % 4 & 
Cape Rachado , oy PANE oN & ~) Hujung Tanah / aay) <s Tumasik rt 4 r WOO) 
siyak 

--- [Page 430] ---
O° my < *. Ss “ -y oe, “oS fe . é A ; = Na J Z S Uo ° = Z = . % - <<. . A) , faa) ot e °. ~ pay ° Gg iN e . Ld 
. O. . 7 a hrf % oe oe a \ oe e , , . O ry ofthe 5S n © __ ". * ca © & .. 7%; = g » a + nese = . ..  O é. _) 4 z < n A 9 po < S eye) < *. < ea Cc 1) *. faa) xB < oe . h - E ef 2 “aS > YW \ a4 we Q — ‘ + x Fe O =) ~ ca _ “|e — Oy: Z S é ‘. . op -% WY _ jaa) WO (<< o> Z Z nk 
maa) o co Sit< 5 «(NS Of Spe’ a ZL] DOL G. ow = ZZ | fa) e@-¥ wr =) % < 3% 2 oy Zz o- <§ ty T PENG IL g Za S & ' a» ny > rm ' <x o < < SS < 2 ex At > So < o~ s < = | SAls < s ~ -~)c*HuW9O $ . Lf py az ZbuU<O > 6 CO . O O SZz = $ NS, 7 << a a0 Z < “aS <Z & <>. = = -€3 < Sy W Z oe 2 < ~ < ve Ss) t<eqQy: Sy fe 2 ‘a ¥-“~Oo ° a fs 2 es OG 9 ats «<X < € - ZS_, © ~ ID QO Zz 2 . <6 O < woz LU . * ~— ay Zz < DO Pease us KE nm ‘es “9 SE Se © O “te © x 2% Zhu “5S < Zz a5 ~ w Lu S a) 4 Cre a. a eZ; £ a ~ O aL, ~% 223 —Ssic ae s © Zz. o ‘a ~ O56 . TO O I fQ, 6 Sek /s S Sze ZY OY A aess a 3 z vo“ — ) ££ Se <“so ox Qfur § = S) 7 Wd < « < st x v S 5S < YO O ~_ju/é= £ + @ < 
< z ( S4ynse22 g(= )e Ce ‘ s E 20 Zn % BH : O<| vz lz me > xr => Ww Sha Zz < . tw ‘ [o) 8) —62° xE-~eons Z.cages! 3 YY A xX Ose VY Oo S-< oO SSF 5 pW < OF fz Z sfxie 29 SZ 23a < ) 0 of & < Q we “gx erg < = Z Z Axdos as . ES — a Lu < "BA —-<s ad DY 9 O. = TH LL ° 23 i>. #5 ° fa Z seypeiwES OF * O 3 ace wm < ys; thd < er ft Z | ° wnt a tn — Zz - 2 = 5a zis J 0 yy, 

--- [Page 431] ---
\ os O 5 . w c < Ne 8 7-3 QO. ° Ua <> . — + 2% o © Oo co a4 = VU O Ss 4 ' a Z + © 0 S < aw & 2 Zz Ss <f\ << —_—" 5 og 00 w © < o ac ve) =< ea) YD + O . . a2 Nee NS om oe) U Os < Ss) = ns a A + + < o Ma a), o S 5 S a ° 0 
UO 
Zz < 
$ < 2 2 we = — ~ 5 O ow i) < ZD Oe 2 QO 2 s Zza w aa fo _ -SY ec — s Lu <q O “S'S 2fa 5 _ ~~ oO a ees S2G5+% e 228 G22 + S ++ 956 <a Ov a .Z << = ZA ft + ES >-2 SO > cue ¢ 29 ® 2S | — e832 a¥ 5 eh 2 “V8 — ” Qi sO = ry — 3 y; = “re vo = Zz ~ & w S{\D--—7Y 2 § § z ary a+ 9 + _ as rete) U << mA & c Z “Oo wl Ss < = =) ea) ge OF a = S — = ze 
S KE g3 3 5 Ss rn < Zz 5 =a z >— [se = 
(@) 1. << $ 2 ow < 
—_— s Zz 4 < a os lard O bal s < b : z yi = S 5 Zz Li] O = Q e Z 5 /. 2 < Pras a. EU < < oz x — faa) foed avs < Ww fan uu ec oY 2. 2\ : vv -vo‘ ke = CO < 7 ; a = So+ 3 c © GeO OU + sus "Ss ,tY '§ 2 < wi % » ar zD = ao. s = 3 — 3 Z w a S 0 2 Zz oD O 20 —! LL S Ww 
jas) oo 

--- [Page 432] ---
Im 
Con , = ecs 6s & _ =o : rw YZ [- E62 5 | sof 3 S826 = Sc <A g Sear . & | J oT LS < —£e = ~ a L Sek 5 x A 4 < rN 0 < iG: < re 2 Te < 7 5 xt G6 0UFTCUS < 2" S é Ss £8 2 : GB, Y) < = s <h 2 <8 us 8 any < <3 £25 E 9 8 oA < {03 Sui =, ~ o s UO o “rer SN EG S39 . Lo (ot fae) Con & 5 5 8 3 go mes SES wae wm °. < is Eo ; gE 2 = o 1 Lu) s c & ~< a ° 3 a3 3 e» €, * s ‘<3 O = < ar a 5 z ag ue ° — F—o— 3 ‘S < a 68 3 © +&£ E& = s— i “s we) & ) > bo > 2 58 " a w s — d 25 o ce wy >: ; O ZO an << Ww) Z Cm < § O Eo < Se 3F $8 ~~ bed in O 3 > » | 22 z A. < [a8 _ —_J Li _ a "e ze : = oa Zz =. < E5srF 168 3 2 Es 2 S_ = 5 oO > <n SF So <GB mae <8 3% Hs pas a of Rie q — _ N ia Zi a a er vw ra — fee DS BN To Zo a : : DN AY < rm oy <0 c Ze > = eel s2s so 8 5 a oe >Use $3 ‘Ss SE = Ze wo 2 02 c ~ of ~ Y e o > § f > il = : t a I| = z > <= - _ 5 s <& | II = "e 5 o — : E Efe 5 S Ey Ss o crc 4 <a ia & Ae ISDame rat o a a 62S >a — vv, = SES <c s — css <" =F & SEs 5 ia Zz 

--- [Page 433] ---
€ < ee 2 E & es © BY TO = c © o 3 Pad o c Zz vo Fen 1S : - = —_ 8 c a "S Zo Cc * oS £ ® <¢ a © ram tT Cc a € G Z =a E ow = 2 = a c E +— § ‘ZS OG raw > < 2 BS) c > = oS w > oS < a. oO D = ~ @ > 3 ss ig ss Z 5 z w 5 Py o x < co ‘ S £ = = a = = < is wt & x — Z "S "S Fb <2 Ps 2 Gus 29 2 P—* x © © } re 1s S ae) - U Bo %) a) E c a £ go eo Ww o er = wo <x > © ra ™ = © 2. © x Oo c . s bam lo [a0] < “ 8. ~ 6 o£ 3 o 5 ‘- = &  § = Se g < = 2 fe 5 . 8 E fa va E ] x Ze ‘c > Cc 2 Oo a © <O & © 7 <tr ~< fae = ee) ~ . & VN 2 ve foo SBMe : . - 5 ra | > ar Is : > 2) Cc c OD <i > = ~ a o © | =So € a. £ wo a — < 6-0 <s FE sf (£ J -|-- | z_l|acis — — > > — <Z he Q g oc ee >< ic Zz -~/ SB x g fe se) = <x = p77 ee] = > O § a= pa SH z <i = Oo 2 ~ 3 c oo <x | > aN > s @ a °¢ ro? = <o| = "S fe) 3 =. E c aN Ss | >= ® os 3 fe Ss £ Ke oQL ID < a UU co) <= os cr QO > Q) Y > © 5 E 2 ae) ue co Ff “ly No) T—— 5 wv > 3 fs Z Zz o <r ov © ~ © a > g oe G | > J 1 rant < 2 e 3 & =O W 2) 1d <n Z < > n 8 ° ec * 2 ssi{~- 1 E re 2 = # QO &£ 3 = x | = S$ ¢ io FZ 27 25 25 2 = ge mw ie 3 = > x 0 2h <x 5 > s €—€ €& iE a og] >! 2 '$ Za Fh ee = a4 6-56 = C a g A> | Zajrx = m <2 <t <i Zn A AD < Zp ovs < rane a < < Z re teh ° P = & > > N = Q o mM en ROX G I] ° © Wal 7D = wf ws a ~ E qanv <™ c pa re) i oD pe <= > 3 zo scist = & a § = 5 ¥pEo5 ZR $f S 3 Z- 4-2 c > é cE 2 2 <n 25 8 s | = 2 GQ & Ly £5 = “S n= SH SS % jt » £ 0 2 3 2 © © ed HO 9 ca ° ” BH < - 355 < 2. < a cy wD o) = x a =o iz "S . £>2 < | —> 5 >= > ; vy co igs) z A < = ‘eS Zz uv — Ss ™ = 00 > > = = = _— mey UO 3% c a Ke wa < 5 = ‘3 Os = * = s{= 7 x 2 iso Ze >_|d ~~ [ye] — ‘= -_ YW — c c Zo © <x N SN Zala << 9 x oe} <n . >a ~e gr <N/e w 2 co oc LO > Ve > TLS wi «OS 5 5S = = & vetices ibd (e} . — foe o w ~_ c > [oa QO Z g i * a, <S |'s a Z22 5g SS = Li S </> o > = O S £ ar >< 3] < se] I< zo Os <u 2 5 es 5 os os} E {2 <5-6 $ 7— = S Go € s re 5 5 ssa z ne co) S 6 x S g > w x Zz “ey =) > wr € 3S £ i > o & &xK 22 o << Law < a} = L Iss] © T GH > >o —™ c o & > x= wD = LN c f- > Cc x > fH > —~ fas) 2 Zz c 8—S£ $2 < E & <6 x x os c zo S c tls cu ‘5 ic ze 2 © >r > _ = ‘ay z uw x = os 5 ‘ <4 c “es a - ra 5. _ SH 4G >e 8| $8 Za a = 2 ss cE gis oe = 7 E >. SO 5 Zz o 6. G ‘é & a no) wo <os% cto < Zins x 2) 5 <@ > a % oo ze & eS s « c 3s .lUCU x 2s >3 If coe 29 S829 55 2 iS S$ e Ss ts ig = S| 2G@e ze <e 2 ae EJ] ss 2 3s b= O Oc <5 57354 Os © > WE Z © Z: lm Z° Zoz! 2 = & ics S 2 <e are ' — pe i) zh fon > 5 Rv; < $8 US=a2av ~ <x «s o. So Sf PY, a < < wy — _ aie = im IS pa aw “Zin; s _ 1d eer SS 2 O K<¢ ec Z ne <9 F—SF B co) <vT peat <x c vt egris & <S g O84 2 a~Ls as) 2 ££ Z~ it ~ Oo > ohn = AS) S, v = c « Cc > ran < co fas} re) "S <x _ © w 2 << v = 2 hee Z 5 < A E ~ < Ee end LZ n Ma = OL © < x w ~ m |e {2 ° -—® ‘| “3 m4 7 c i g >a] ts s 5 Zz a c <tr E i= ~ . o oe = < 3 5 Rand OT rn eS —_~ "3 ox = | Sx] s 8 7% E< ce Ss _ © Ics ZS Na <ofe 5h : o << c a4 o ZT > = 2 Ir ia] < he an © pS » [| O an 5 ew ra Ls ae} E Ce > > 0 w of 2 = > x ST.) [—x<x—'t IDe oO Y = = c 
Nn 4 

--- [Page 434] ---
