--- [Page 1] ---
273/twoﬀtaboldstyle/sevenﬀtaboldstyle/threeﬀtaboldstyle
19
YOGA AND MEDITATION 
TRADITIONS IN  INSULAR 
SOUTHEAST ASIA
Andrea  Acri
Introduction
The region of insular Southeast Asia, which for the scope of the present chapter largely coincides 
with the archipelagic state of the Republic of Indonesia,1 has been the theatre of the complex 
and long- lasting phenomenon of linguistic, cultural, and religious transfer called ‘Sanskritisation’, 
‘Indianisation’/ ’Indicisation’ or ‘Hinduisation’, from at least the ﬁrst half of the ﬁrst millennium 
of the current era up to 1500 CE and beyond. While the territories of Indonesia and Malaysia 
became gradually Islamised from the thirteenth– ﬁfteenth century onwards, Indic cultural and 
religious elements have continued to be embedded in the local (predominantly Islamic) cul-
tural and religious paradigms, especially in Java. The island of Bali has remained predominantly 
Hindu to this day, while small enclaves of Hindus and Buddhists (whether ‘indigenous’ or 
immigrated) are found in Java, Lombok, Sumatra and other islands. Christianity is the largest 
religious minority of Indonesia (about 10 per cent of the population). All the above- mentioned 
religious and cultural elements may be regarded as historical ‘layers’ resting on a ‘substratum’ of 
indigenous or Austronesian elements, which are often di ﬃcult to de ﬁne precisely (beyond the 
general label of ‘shamanism’ or ‘ancestor cults’), let  alone tease out.
An integral part of the phenomenon of Indicisation were the traditions of yoga that originated 
in the Indian subcontinent  –  understood here both in the narrow sense of speci ﬁc philosoph-
ical and soteriological traditions described in Sanskrit sources (for example, P ātañjala yoga or 
tantric ṣaḍaṅgayoga ) and in the wider sense of inner and outer psycho- physical techniques of 
self- cultivation, meditation, visualisation, ascesis ( tapas), etc. Y oga traditions were transmitted to 
the region by the seventh century at the latest and developed there well beyond the end of the 
Hindu– Buddhist period into the modern period in Islamic contexts, such as in the Javanese 
tradition of mysticism ( kejawen ), or in Hindu contexts, for instance in Bali.
The fact that local societies readily adopted these techniques, adapted them to their contexts 
and concerns, and further developed them suggests that they might already have had a propen-
sity for psycho- physical techniques even before the beginning of Indic in ﬂuences. In particular, 
one notes the resilience throughout history in local cultures of practices geared towards the 
obtainment of physical and spiritual power, supernatural faculties, control of and in ﬂuence 
over other people’s will, etc.2 Thus, Indic yoga traditions in Indonesia should not be studied as 
mere cultural transplants, but as phenomena involving an active Southeast Asian agency. Indeed,  
  
  
 
 

--- [Page 2] ---
274Andrea Acri/twoﬀtaboldstyle/sevenﬀtaboldstyle/fourﬀtaboldstyle
according to Wolters (1999:  9), the ‘localization’ of Indic culture may be regarded as a process 
that brought ‘persisting indigenous beliefs into sharper focus’; this may have been true in the 
case of ‘yogic’ psycho- physical techniques. Besides being a worthy object of study in their own 
right, yoga traditions in Indonesia also enlighten us about dynamics of cultural transfer within 
the wider transcultural context of the ‘Sanskrit Cosmopolis’ theorised by Pollock (2006), i.e. a 
wide cultural- geographical area that included both South and Southeast Asia. Last but not least, 
they provide an independent  –  yet parallel  –  source of data to better understand yoga traditions 
in South Asia itself.3
Our knowledge about yoga traditions in insular Southeast Asia mainly derives from textual 
documents in Sanskrit and premodern and modern vernacular languages of Java (Old Javanese, 
Modern Javanese), Bali (Old Javanese, Balinese) and Sumatra (Classical Malay), as well as from 
sparse art historical evidence and modern and contemporary practices. This chapter will survey 
this multifarious evidence, focusing mainly on the premodern period and Sanskrit– Old Javanese 
sources, and include discussions on how Indic traditions have evolved into (predominantly 
Islamic) modern Javanese and (predominantly Hindu) Balinese religious paradigms and medi-
tative practices. However, I  will not elaborate on the contemporary forms of transnational yoga, 
which are attracting a signi ﬁcant number of followers in Indonesia.
/T_he earliest literary evidence:  the old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa
Old Javanese was the translocal literary vernacular  (akin to Prakrit(s) in South Asia) used in 
Java from circa the eighth century to the sixteenth cen tury, and it is still attested in the manu -
script tradition and religious lore of Bali to the present day.4 Zoetmulder’s Old Javanese-  English 
Dictionary  (1982) lists more than two pages of occurrences in  Old Javanese literature of dozens 
of substantival, adjectival and verbal forms based on the root yoga. These include, among 
others, the Sanskrit technical compounds yogābhyāsa ( ‘ t h e  p r a c t i c e  o f  y o g a ’ ) ,  yogadhāraka 
(‘concentration of the mind’), yogajñāna (‘the mind (spirit) in yoga’), yogakrama  (‘method or 
practice of yoga’), yogaprav Яtti (‘the performance of yoga’),  yogaśāstra (‘the science of yoga’),  
yogasiddhi  (‘perfection or supernatural power of yoga’) and yogasmara ṇa (‘meditative yoga’).5 
Many instances of the word yoga and its derivatives are attested in what may be th e earliest 
Old Javanese transmitted text known to us, the poem Rāmāyaṇa kakavin  (c. ninth– early tenth 
century CE),6 where they occur both in the sense of ‘magical/  creative power’ (20.53) and as 
a psycho-  physical meditative technique associated with supernatural prowess and feats (3.38, 
20.54), asceticism (1.42, 4.9, 4.13) and release (4 .10), along with other technical terms, such 
as samādhi (4.10,  13),  japa (21.135),  citta and dhāraṇā (24.180). Designations of yogic agents 
such as yogin/ yogī, etc., are equally widespread, suggesting that yog a practitioners must have 
been familiar realities in the imaginaire  of the ancient Javanese courtly elites (that is, o utside of 
restricted religious circles), and perhaps even of the population at large.
An interesting aper çu on yoga practices and agents in their social contexts is found in the 
allegorical  chapters  24 and 25. Advancing a critique of various ascetic and religious groups 
mockingly depicted as animals,7 these chapters contain passages hinting at yoga postures that 
seem to have derived from Indian prototypes, for instance the observance of hanging upside- 
down (from trees), carried out by ﬂying foxes ( kalva ṅ, 24.119, 25.68). This practice seems to 
have been still in use in modern Java, under the name of tapa ngalong  or ‘the observance of the 
ﬂying- fox’.8 A similar practice is attested in South Asia already in the P āli canon, where it is 
associated with tapasvin s and Ājīvikas practicing the ‘“bat-penance” ( vagguli- vata ), which is gen-
erally assumed to mean suspending oneself upside down from a tree, thus inverting oneself in 
a fashion not dissimilar to the hathayogic viparītakara ṇī mudrā’ (Mallinson 2016: 21). It is also    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- [Page 3] ---
275Insular Southeast Asia/twoﬀtaboldstyle/sevenﬀtaboldstyle/fiveﬀtaboldstyle
mentioned in a number of later Sanskrit sources.9 According to Mallinson, these austerities 
may have been linked with techniques practised by celibate ascetics aiming at the preserva-
tion of semen, such as those described in early haṭhayoga  texts.10 The same chapter of the Old 
Javanese Rāmāyaṇa (25.34) mentions another observance that may have been linked to such 
techniques:  the asidhāravrata  or ‘knife’s edge penance’ (a form of coitus reservatus ), found in the 
ěÃkta text Brahmayāmala (Hatley 2016).
An allegorical reference to what might have been another austerity- oriented ( tapasyā) pre-
cursor of a later postural form of ( haṭha)yoga (i.e., [ ekapāda]bakāsana) is the description, in 24.116 
and 117cd (cf. 25.52– 60), of a cunning heron ( baka) standing on one leg and posing as an ascetic 
to take advantage of the small ﬁshes, which ﬁnds exact parallels in Old Javanese texts and temple 
reliefs, as well as Sanskrit prototypical sources such as the Pañcatantra  (Acri 2010:  494– 498).11 
A panel on the Buddhist monument Borobudur in Central Java (c. late eighth– early ninth 
century) depicts the bodhisattva Maitreya who is seemingly practising this kind of posture 
(Figure 19.1).12 Some reliefs depicting ascetics and deities in padmāsana are found at the ninth- 
century Śaiva sanctuary of Loro Jonggrang in Prambanan, Central Java (Figure  19.2). Still, just 
like in South Asian tantric milieus throughout the medieval period, postural yoga (intended 
here as including both āsana- based Pātañjala yoga and haṭhayoga ; see below) never represented 
the dominant paradigm in Java and Bali, as both the textual sources and living traditions display 
a clear predilection for internalised practices emphasising meditative processes.
Figure 19.1 Maitreya carrying out arduous practices; Borobudur, Central Java, c.  8th– 9th century.
Photo: Andrea Acri  
 
 
  
  
 

--- [Page 4] ---
276Andrea Acri/twoﬀtaboldstyle/sevenﬀtaboldstyle/sixﬀtaboldstyle
Old Javanese Śaiva sources on aṣṭāṅgayoga  and ṣaḍaṅgayoga
Both the P ātañjala yoga of eight auxiliaries or ancillaries ( aṣṭāṅgayoga ) and the tantric form of 
Śaiva yoga of six ancillaries ( ṣaḍaṅgayoga ) are represented in the Sanskrit– Old Javanese religious 
literature, mainly formed by the texts known as tuturs and tattvas. However, it is the latter trad-
ition that is by far the commonest form of yoga found there. This may be due to the fact that 
the majority of the scriptures from premodern Java and Bali that have survived to us are tantric 
in nature, and derive from prototypical Sanskrit canons of Śaiva and Buddhist scriptures from 
South Asia. It is this body of scripture that informed the mainstream religiosity of large parts of 
South and Southeast Asia from the seventh to the thirteenth centuries and beyond.
Some of the secondary literature published thus far on ṣaḍaṅgayoga  has mentioned textual 
evidence from Old Javanese sources:13 this includes, for example, a widespread verse listing the 
six aṅgas of the Śaiva (and, to a lesser extent, Buddhist) yoga, which features in VЯhaspatitattva  53, 
Jñānasiddhānta 15.1/ Ga ṇapatitattva  3 and Saṅ Hya ṅ Kamahāyānikan Śaiva p. 76, and has parallels 
in several Siddh āntatantras (see Table  19.1; cf. Vasudeva 2004:  376). Many of the Old Javanese 
sources appear to have inherited the system found in relatively early Saiddh āntika texts, such 
Figure 19.2 One of the directional manifestations of Śiva at Candi Śiva, Loro Jonggrang, Central Java, 
9th century.
Photo: Andrea Acri.
   
 
  

--- [Page 5] ---
277Insular Southeast Asia/twoﬀtaboldstyle/sevenﬀtaboldstyle/sevenﬀtaboldstyle
T able 19.1 Aṅgas (limbs) of yoga in selected Old Javanese sources
Maitrāyaṇīya 
Upani ṣadSaṅ Hya ṅ 
Kamahāyānikan 
(Śaiva)Dak ṣasm Яti;
T antrālokavivekaAm Яtanāda Upani ṣad; 
Rauravasūtrasa ṅgraha; 
Mata ṅgap Ãrame Ĝvara; 
Ga ṇapatitattva; 
Jñānasiddhānta, 
Tutur Kamok ṣan; 
VЯhaspatitattva; 
SutasomaGuhyasamāja
T antraMЯgendratantra T attvaj ñāna Dhyānabindu 
Upani ṣad;
Gorak ṣaĜataka; 
Skanda PurāṇaYogasūtra;
Liṅga 
Purāṇa;
Aji Sangkya;
Rsi Yadnya 
Sankhya dan 
YogaDharma
Pātañjala
yama yama
niyama niyama
āsana āsana āsana āsana
prāѐāyāma prāѐāyāma pr āѐāyāma pratyāhāra praty āhāra prā܋āyāma pr āѐāyāma prāѐasaьrodha pr āѐāyāma pratyāhāra
pratyāhāra praty āhāra dhy āna dhyāna dhy āna praty āhāra praty āhāra praty āhāra praty āhāra prā܋āyāma
dhyāna dh āraѐā pratyāhāra prā܋āyāma pr āѐāyāma dh āraѐā dhāraѐā dhāraѐā dhāraѐā dhāra܋ā
dhāraѐā dhyāna dh āraѐā dhāra܋ā dhāraѐā dhyāna dhy āna dhy āna dhy āna dhyāna
tarka tarka tarka tarka anusm њti anv īkѠaѐa tarka
japa
samādhi sam ādhi sam ādhi samādhi sam ādhi sam ādhi sam ādhi sam ādhi sam ādhi samādhi
yoganewgenrtpdf
 

--- [Page 6] ---
278Andrea Acri/twoﬀtaboldstyle/sevenﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle
as the Mata ṅgapārameśvara, the KÃlottara , the Kira ṇa, the Rauravasūtrasa ṅgraha and the Parākhya 
(ibid.: 377).14 This system re ﬂects the ṣaḍaṅgayoga  of the tarka- class (emphasising discrimin-
ation/ reﬂection), as opposed to the aṣtāṅgayoga  of the āsana- class (emphasising postures/ seats). 
Besides the omission of āsanas, yamas, and niyama s, which are considered preparatory practices 
but not ancillaries proper as they are in aṣṭāṅgayoga , ṣaḍaṅgayoga  adds tarka (or ūha, reasoning), 
and introduces an important element of theism. An interesting fact is the position of dhyāna 
in the two traditions:  it usually appears as second member in early Śaiva sources, whereas in 
Pātañjala yoga sources  –  or Śaiva sources in ﬂuenced by that system  –  it appears as the pen-
ultimate one (see Table  19.1). There are also hybrid lists of ancillaries attempting to bridge 
ṣaḍaṅga and aṣtāṅgayoga , such as the one by the T attvajñāna, including seven ancillaries  –  i.e. 
the six standard ancillaries plus āsana. This phenomenon re ﬂects an attempt to bridge Śaiva 
yoga with P ātañjala yoga, and appears to be especially signi ﬁcant in Sanskrit texts composed 
or (re)compiled at a relatively late date (i.e. after the ninth or tenth centuries).15 It may re ﬂect 
either the rising status of the yoga of Pata ñjali in the Indic world, or an intrinsically eclectic 
attitude by the Javanese authors, who adopted bits and pieces of what was available to them to 
perform an operation of textual and doctrinal bricolage.
Indeed, fragments of P ātañjala yoga doctrines interspersed within otherwise eminently Śaiva 
texts that uphold ṣaḍaṅgayoga  exist.  F or instance ,  a cluster of v erses in the Jñānasiddhānta (ch.  
19.5–  7), one of which is borrowed from the Śaiva Saiddh āntika scripture Kira ṇa,16 deﬁne the 
individual soul in the state of kevala  and ﬁnal release in a manner that echoes P ātañjala yoga ideas 
and terminology, which may be traced to the Pātañjalayogaśāstra (PYŚ, i.e. the Yogasūtra + Bhāṣya) 
1.24, 2.27 and 4.34 (Acri 2011a). Verse 7 declares that liberation  –  which amounts to becoming 
the Spotless Śiva –  is achieved via restraint ( saṃyama), a meditative technique employing ﬁxation 
(dhāraṇā), contemplation ( dhyāna) and concentration ( samādhi) mentioned in PY Ś 3.4, as well as 
lower dispassion ( vāhyavairāgya [a spelling variant of bāhyavairāgya]), higher dispassion ( paravairāgya) 
and ﬁxation on God ( īśvarapra ṇidhāna). The couplet vāhyavairāgya and paravairāgya correspond to 
apara-  and para- vairagya  in Yogasūtrabhāṣya 1.15–  16, while īśvarapra ṇidhāna occurs in Yogasūtra 2.45.
What is by far the most signi ﬁcant Old Javanese source for our knowledge of yoga (in both 
the tantric and P ātañjala varieties) in the Archipelago is the Dharma Pātañjala, a Śaiva scrip-
ture of uncertain date retrieved from a West Javanese palm- leaf codex unicus  last copied in 1467 
CE (Acri 2017). This scripture, arranged in the form of a dialogue between the Lord Śiva 
(bha ṭāra) and his son Kum āra, presents a detailed exposition of the doctrinal and philosophical 
tenets of the Javanese form of Śaiva Siddh ānta. Y et it devotes a long section (c. one- third of its 
length) –  which it calls yogapāda, in the manner of Sanskrit Siddh āntatantras –  to Pātañjala yoga, 
thereby providing a unique testimony for the knowledge of this system in premodern insular 
Southeast Asia. This section apparently follows the ﬁrst three chapters of the PY Ś, either inter-
weaving a few Sanskrit verses from an untraced versi ﬁed recension of the sūtras with an Old 
Javanese commentary, or directly rendering into Old Javanese what might have been a likewise 
unknown Sanskrit commentary. Although the prose section often bears a strong resemblance to 
the arrangement and formulation of the topics treated in the Yogasūtrabhāṣya, it diverges from 
that commentary in several respects, either presenting speci ﬁc doctrinal details that are found 
in other (sub- )commentaries, including the Arabic rendering of the sūtras- cum- commentary 
composed by al- B īrūnī before 1030 CE, or adding seemingly original elements that are as yet 
unattested elsewhere. A  fresh perspective on some problematic sūtras of the PY Ś is provided 
by the Old Javanese rendering and commentary on 1.10 (on sleep and dream), 1.21– 23 (on 
the categories of yogins) and 2.9 (on abhiniveśa, ‘obsession’) (Acri 2012). Being shaped by an 
eminently theistic agenda, and imbued with Śaiva (tantric) tenets, the Dharma Pātañjala aims at 
attuning P ātañjala yoga (and philosophy) to Śaiva yoga (and philosophy). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- [Page 7] ---
279Insular Southeast Asia/twoﬀtaboldstyle/sevenﬀtaboldstyle/nineﬀtaboldstyle
The topics of the sūtras are followed in their original sequence (cf. Acri 2017:  482, table 13), 
opportunely re- arranged and shaped, like the rest of the text, as a commentary in the form of 
questions and answers. The Sanskrit verses embedded in the text correspond to Yogasūtra 1.2 
(and Bhāṣya 1.28 commenting on it)  –  the famous de ﬁnition of yoga as cittav Яttinirodha17 –  1.3 
(on the isolated Self’s perception of its own nature), 1.24 (on the Lord as a special type of Self) 
and 1.30 (on the hindrances). The Old Javanese prose is by no means a direct translation of the 
PYŚ but a paraphrase alternating with more original exegetical passages. The author’s priority 
was apparently to present a synthetic account of the most important doctrinal points and prac-
tical techniques of P ātañjala yoga. The section of the Yogapāda from pp.  290.1– 306.10 gener-
ally follows the sequence of the topics treated in the PY Ś up to sūtra 1.30, thus covering more 
than a half of the ﬁfty- one sūtras making up the ﬁrst chapter, the ‘ Samādhipāda’. Motifs found 
in the Sanskrit text are occasionally omitted, presumably in order to avoid the repetition of 
topics already treated elsewhere in the text. For instance, the text follows the sequence of sūtras 
1.21– 28 characterising the Lord ( īśvara) while omitting sūtra 1.26, where the Lord is said to have 
been incarnated as a primal sage (Kapila)  –  the status of the Lord as an incarnated being (e.g. 
Pātañjala)18 and universal teacher having been treated already in section 276.2– 280.4. Similarly, 
the parts dealing with karma, latent impressions and cosmology are omitted.19 Intriguingly, the 
fourth pāda of the PY Ś (‘Kaivalyapāda’) is not re ﬂected in the Old Javanese text. It seems likely 
that the author did not include it as he was trying to make P ātañjala yoga –  an Indic system 
of yoga that seems to have been relatively marginal in Java  –  intelligible and useful to the local 
Śaiva theological milieu, which did not regard isolation ( kaivalya ) as the ﬁnal goal of yoga (see 
below). On the other hand, perhaps more tentatively, this omission may also be interpreted in 
the light of the ongoing debate on the origins and authorship of the PY Ś. That the Javanese 
author may not have been aware of the ‘ Kaivalyapāda’ due to the fact that the version of the 
PYŚ that was transmitted to Java did not (yet) include the fourth chapter is less likely but, at 
least in theory, not outside the realm of possibility. Indeed, according to Angot (2008: 27–28), 
the ‘Kaivalyapāda’ may be spurious, i.e. a later addition to the text, or in any event not written 
by the same hand who composed the ﬁrst three chapters of the PY Ś.20
As in the case of the Jñānasiddhānta, the Dharma Pātañjala makes an attempt to equate the 
kaivalya  state of the Self with the Śaiva summum bonum , intended as the manifestation of the 
divine powers of the Lord in the practitioner, who thereby becomes Śiva. For instance, in 
298.2– 4, the śloka- quarter ātmani cetana Б sthita Б [= sūtra 1.3: ‘Then the Seer is established in 
his own form’ tadā dra ṣṭuБ svarūpe ’vasthānam], deﬁning the state of samādhi and conﬂating it 
with kaivalya ,21 is glossed as the state where the mind is left behind by the Self and the yogin 
obtains the state of supernatural prowess, adhering closely to the Lord. A  polemic on the role 
of citta in yoga may be hinted at in 290.10– 11, where the Lord dispels an objection (possibly 
from the point of view of P ātañjala yoga) as to the identi ﬁcation of the mind with the Soul, 
remarking that since both have the same object of perception, what is experienced by the 
opponent (in the state of kaivalya ) is just the mind, not the Soul. The implication is that stillness 
or dispassion of the mind alone, belonging to the realm of cognitive absorption, is a necessary 
but not su ﬃcient condition for the attainment of the ﬁnal goal of yoga. Stillness of mind is 
thus a means and should not be confused with its end, as the opponent seems to do. Overall, 
such passages of the Dharma Pātañjala remind me of analogous (albeit more overtly polemic) 
reinterpretations of P ātañjala yoga by commentators in the Sanskrit tradition of Śaiva Siddh ānta, 
such as N ārāyaѐakaѐѤha (ﬂ. c. 900– 950?) in his commentary to MЯgendratantra  YP 2a, in which 
he deﬁnes yoga as union with Śiva, as well as R āmaka ѐѤha in his commentary to the Yogapāda 
of the Mata ṅgapārameśvara (1.1), which regards the teaching of that Tantra as superior to those 
of Patañjali.22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- [Page 8] ---
280Andrea Acri/twoﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle/zeroﬀtaboldstyle
Despite its partial adherence to P ātañjala yoga and the PY Ś, the Dharma Pātañjala shares 
the same stock of tantric yoga as the other texts from Indonesia. Āsanas, although included 
along with yama and niyama  among the preliminaries, just as in South Asian tantric sources, 
do not play an important role; indeed, their number re ﬂects the standard stock list of early 
Siddhāntatantras.23 On the other hand, samādhi appears to be the most important ancillary, 
rather than tarka, which is prominent in the Kashmirian non- dual Śaiva sources. A  section of 
the text (pp.  324.7– 326.5) describes in detail the practice of dhāraṇā to ‘conquer’ the elements 
(being equivalent to bhūtajaya  or ‘conquering of the ﬁve elements’, which is also featured in 
many South Asian tantric sources, such as the Mālinīvijaya; cf. Saṅ Hya ṅ Kamahāyānikan Śaiva 
28– 29). There is nothing speci ﬁcally Pātañjala in the description of prāṇāyāma (p. 316.11– 17), 
which does not follow the Yogaśāstra (2.49– 52) and is more tantric in character. It revolves 
around the practice of the breath exercises known in medieval (tantric and non- tantric) Sanskrit 
texts as pūraka ‘inhalation’, kumbhaka  ‘retention’, and recaka  ‘exhalation’. An important doctrinal 
feature of the Dharma Pātañjala, which is also re ﬂected in the majority of Old Javanese Śaiva 
texts (as well as South Asian P āśupata Śaiva texts and later haṭhayoga  and rājayoga  texts), is the 
view that liberation can be obtained through yoga and not initiation ( dīkṣā), as the ‘orthodox’ 
Saiddhāntika view would have it.24 This is indicative of the important role played by yoga in 
shaping esoteric and mainstream religious traditions of premodern Indonesia. It is, therefore, not 
surprising that the highest category of ( Śaiva) practitioner and epitome of spiritual aspirant is 
indicated in Old Javanese texts by the term yogīśvara, ‘leader among yogins’, in conformity with 
the prominence attributed to yoga as the main soteriological means.
Indeed, the majority of the texts of the tutur and tattva genre may be described as being 
primarily texts on yoga and, in a wider sense, (tantric) meditation techniques. The most repre-
sentative practices are visualisations ( dhyānas), ﬁxations ( dhāraṇās) and techniques that are rem-
iniscent of the forms of layayoga  found in Sanskrit texts from South Asia,25 aiming at dissolving 
the mind and identifying the practitioner with the supreme reality (see e.g. Bhuvanakośa  
ch. 5). The theistic aspect is prominent, involving visualisations of the Lord and his hypostases 
(e.g. as the  mantra- bodied Sad āśiva in the subtle centre of the heart; as Parama śiva, Rudra, 
Mahādeva, etc., cf. Ga ṇapatitattva  60– 61), or constant meditation on, and identi ﬁcation with, 
Him while eating, sleeping, walking, and standing still (cf. e.g. T attvajñāna 44) –  a practice called 
caturdhyāna, whose prototype is well- attested in Sanskrit sources across sectarian boundaries 
(Acri 2017:  379– 382). The idea of the coincidence of the normal state of consciousness with a 
higher state is re ﬂected in the doctrine, expounded in VЯhaspatitattva  47, of union of the waking 
state ( jāgra) with the ‘fourth state’ ( tūrya), which has Upani Ѡadic parallels and is also found in 
non- dual Śaivism of Kashmir. Equally widespread is the utilisation of mantras or akṣaras of the 
Sanskrit syllabary to be visualised and emplaced in di ﬀerent parts of the body of the yogin. 
When the whole syllabary is represented, this practice is called svaravyañjananyāsa (Acri 2016). 
The same interest in gross and subtle physiology that is found in Sanskrit tantric sources also 
characterises the tutur and tattva texts, which often include lists of breaths ( vāyus, prāṇas), vessels 
(nāḍīs) and subtle centres ( sthānas, padma s, cakras).
References to a practice called (as a Sanskrit tatpuru ṣa compound) prayogasandhi  ‘esoteric 
knowledge of the (right) means’ or (as two separate words) prayoga sandhi  ‘secret means’ are 
found throughout the corpus. In the Dharma Pātañjala (p. 288.10– 18), it denotes a form of 
samādhi through which the Lord is made manifest in a human being, like the ﬁre which exists 
within wood (as the e ﬀect in its cause), which comes out as a consequence of rubbing, and like 
butter in milk, which comes out as a consequence of churning it with a ‘tool’. The tool ( upāya) 
appears to be a metaphor referring to the six ancillaries of yoga (see p.  308.7– 11; T attvajñāna 44). 
The hymn of the Old Javanese poem Arjuvavihāha (c. early eleventh century) declares that the  
 
 
 
 

--- [Page 9] ---
281Insular Southeast Asia/twoﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle/oneﬀtaboldstyle
yogin achieves the visible form of the Lord when he carefully ‘churns’ the consciousness ( amut Ωr 
tutur pinahayu ). These ideas and practices are likely to be Javanese developments of South Asian 
Sanskrit prototypes:  Śvetāśvatara Upani ṣad 1.10– 12 equates the body to the slab and the syllable 
oṃ as the upper drill, while Am Яtabindu/ Brahmabindu Upani ṣad (ninth– twelfth century CE?) 20– 
21 declares that the realisation of Brahman amounts to the extraction of butter from milk and 
the production of ﬁre through a churning- stick. An analogous idea is found in the Saiddh āntika 
Śaiva scripture Trayodaśaśatikakālottara.  Some bodily and subtle techniques involving the use 
of mathana , ‘churning’ or ‘kindling’, are described in the Kubjikāmatatantra  (12.60– 65), which 
combines yogic techniques and visualisation in the cadre of a sexual intercourse metaphor, and 
in T antrāloka (5.22– 24), which describes a meditation on the ‘rubbing’ of Soma, S ūrya and Agni 
as the ‘kindling stick’ ( araṇi) in the cadre of an internalised ritual (Mallinson 2007:  27, 208). In 
other Old Javanese passages, such as Dharma Pātañjala p. 328.13– 22, prayogasandhi  is employed 
to separate the Soul from the enveloping power of the Unevolved Matter ( pradhāna) and to 
enter the body of another human being by cutting o ﬀ its karmic bonds (a practice akin to 
paraśarīrapraveśa in tantric texts as well as the PY Ś).26 In the Old Javanese Śaiva didactic poem 
Dharma Śūnya 9.2, the aim of sandhi upāya (= prayogasandhi ) is to hold back (or:  ‘concentrate 
upon’, rΩgΩp) the bad and good actions ( pāpa lavan supu ṇya) with the secret key of yoga ( kuñci 
rahasya yoga , seemingly connected with prāṇāyāma in Old Javanese texts).
A technique of Indian derivation that is prominently featured in Old Javanese texts is 
sadyotkrānti: ‘immediate ascent’ ≈ ‘immediate (forceful?) expulsion/ going out’ (of the breath, life- 
principle or Soul); also utkrānti = ‘dying’. This practice is attested in the Sanskrit Mantram ārga 
corpus, but it may have been derived from the earlier P āśupata/ Atim ārga tradition. In both 
Indian and Javanese– Balinese contexts, sadyotkrānti is a praxis enabling the yogin to precipitate 
death, which is achieved through the expulsion of the breath. The texts stress the importance of 
knowing the exact time of the all important moment of physical death, so as not to be unpre-
pared, and to have an empty mind or a mind focused on one’s supramundane aim. It is related 
to the practice of closing the nine bodily ori ﬁces with the esoteric/ secret key ( kuñci rahasya ) and 
expelling the breath from the fontanel (cf. Acri 2017:  522– 523; Vasudeva 2004:  395– 397 and 
402– 409). Often sadyotkrānti is not explicitly mentioned; rather, we ﬁnd prāṇāyāma (kumbhaka , 
pūraka, recaka ), and also ( pra)- yogasandhi  (or just sandhi ). While many passages describing this 
technique are studiously elliptic and esoteric, it must nonetheless have been widespread, as it 
constitutes a common literary trope even in the belles- lettres, where it is customarily described 
as the best way of dying and achieving liberation, such as in Smaradahana  8.23 (by K āma) and 
Sumanasāntaka 10.31– 33a (by the king father of the heroine Indumat ì).
Insights on this practice come from the modern Balinese tradition, which has appropriated 
and carried forward this technique from the Old Javanese textual heritage. In yogic practice 
during life, the adept should unify the syllables aṃ and aБ, representing ﬁre and water, Um ā and 
Śiva, pradhāna and puru ṣa, to obtain amЯta, the water of eternal life. At the time of death, the two 
should be kept separated ( rva bhineda ) and their position reversed, so that ﬁre unnaturally moves 
downward and water upwards (Stephen 2010:  431). The yogin must, therefore, lead the vital 
principle through the body and expel it through one of the centres, most often the fontanel 
(śivadvāra). Since, depending on the contents of the mind, the soul may go to di ﬀerent abodes, 
it is crucial to maintain an empty mind as well as a heightened awareness during the time of 
death. This is a very di ﬃcult practice to master, however, and the soul can be brought back and 
instructed in order to achieve a better goal (ibid.:  446). In the Balinese tradition, this occurs 
after death itself, during the funerary ritual. Stephen has interpreted the Balinese pitra yadnya  
(funerary ritual) as a ‘yogic art of dying’, that is, the ritual re- enactment of the resorption of the 
cosmic principles ( tattvas) into Parama śiva. Śaiva Saidd āntika funeral rites ( śrāddha) seem similar  
 
  
 

--- [Page 10] ---
282Andrea Acri/twoﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle/twoﬀtaboldstyle
in this regard, insofar that, by bringing the soul back into the corpse and then liberating it, they 
‘assist the deceased in a process through which he is gradually made to advance into higher 
levels of liberation, therewith completing the process that had been initiated by the D īkѠā ritual 
… bestowing union with Śiva’ (Mirnig 2013:  286). However, since, as we have seen above, it is 
not initiation ( dīkṣā) but yoga that is deemed to bestow liberation/ union with Śiva according 
to Old Javanese Śaiva texts, it would seem that the Balinese tradition elaborated a post- mortem 
ritualistic version of an originally yogic practice for the bene ﬁt of the lay people.
A genre of Old Javanese manuals on what may be labelled as ‘sexual yoga’ has been preserved 
in Bali within the context of the broader Śaiva tutur genre (see Creese and Bellow 2002). In 
these texts (e.g. Aṅgulipraveśa, Indrāṇīśāstra, etc.), sex is considered a religious practice in which 
sexual climax and pleasure are central. Some of these texts and ideas may go back to premodern 
Java, as the demonstrably early belletristic sources convey a widespread idea that the summum 
bonum  is attained via sexual union. The textual climax is often represented by the marriage of 
the hero and heroine and the enactment of ‘yoga of the bedchamber’, i.e. yogic copulation 
enjoining meditation and sex, which enables them to identify as the male– female embodiments 
of Śiva (Ardhan ārīśvara), or the human counterparts of K āma and Rati. That seems to have been 
understood as the main path of yoga for householders.
Old Javanese Buddhist sources on yoga
Forms of Buddhist devatāyoga existed in premodern Indonesia, where the predominant 
Buddhist paradigm from the seventh century onwards appears to have been a localised variety 
of Mantranaya/ Mah āyāna Buddhist tantra.27 While Buddhist and Śaiva tantric traditions  –  in 
Java and elsewhere  –  share a great deal of common concepts, terminology and techniques, a 
theoretical separation or distinction between the two appears to have existed in the domain of 
doctrine, ritual and clergy (Acri 2015). For instance, the fourteenth- century Buddhist poem 
Sutasoma  by Mpu Tantular describes a ‘yogic way of dying’ ( parātramārga, canto 38 and 39)  that 
is in many respects reminiscent of the Śaiva practice of utkrānti. Y et it clearly separates the Śaiva 
way of ṣaḍaṅgayoga  (canto 40), which leads to the acquisition of supernatural powers, from the 
Buddhist way of advayayoga  (canto 41), which leads to liberation (Ensink 1974). The latter yoga 
is also called advayajñāna, and is discussed in connection with the Buddhist deity Praj ñāpāramitā 
and the mantra aṃ aБ (otherwise known as rva bhineda  in the Balinese Śaiva tradition; see 
below). Similar passages are found in the Sanskrit– Old Javanese Buddhist manual Saṅ Hya ṅ 
Kamahāyānikan, which is most probably three or four centuries earlier than the Sutasoma . A syn-
cretic stance is attested in the Śaiva version of the Saṅ Hya ṅ Kamahāyānikan, which contains 
a variant of the widespread verse on ṣaḍaṅgayoga  and employs Śaiva rather than Buddhist ter-
minology (Kats 1910:  153– 156). The Buddhist version features samādhi focused on Vajrasattva, 
Lokeśvara, Jamb āla, Vairocana etc.; a technique called dhyānapāramitā; and a four- fold yoga taught 
by Ācārya Śrī Dignāgapāda: mūlayoga , madhyayoga , vasānayoga  and antayoga , consisting in the 
visualisation of a Buddhist deity.
Classical Malay literature from Sumatra
Evidence of the presence of Indic yoga practices in Sumatra in the sixteenth century  –  that 
is, well into the Islamic period  –  is suggested by some Malay works of Islamic scholars who 
polemically wrote against certain non- Islamic practices. These are, for instance, the in ﬂuen-
tial eighteenth- century South Sumatran scholar ‘Abd as- Samad al- Palimbani (Drewes 1976) 
and especially the Muslim mystic Hamzah Fansuri, who lived in North Sumatra between the  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- [Page 11] ---
283Insular Southeast Asia/twoﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle/threeﬀtaboldstyle
end of the sixteenth and the beginning of the seventeenth century. As shown by Brakel (1979, 
2004: 10– 11), in a poem Fansuri attacks surviving ‘yoga’ practices, contrasting ‘the jungles of the 
interior, where such practices frequently occur, with the sea and the Islamized coasts which are 
open to the world’. Fansuri’s critique of the ascetic practices carried out in seclusion by spiritual 
seekers contains clear echoes of yogic techniques known in the Javano– Balinese tradition; for 
instance, the statement ‘They draw their breath into the brain, Lest their ﬂuids get in commotion’ 
reminds us of the technique of retention of the breath ( prāṇāyāma), which is described in the 
Sanskrit– Old Javanese VЯhaspatitattva  precisely as the closing of the bodily apertures and the 
breaking through of the breath from the cranial vault.28 In a passage of his prose Asrār al- Āriﬁn 
(Brakel 1979:  74– 75), Hamzah admonishes his reader not to localise God in the fontanel ( ubun- 
ubun) or on the tip of the nose ( di pucuk hidu ṅ) or between the eyebrows ( di antara keni ṅ) or in 
the heart ( di dalam jantu ṅ), all of which correspond to the classical subtle centres of the human 
body described in yogic texts from both the Sanskrit and Javano– Balinese tradition, in which 
the practitioner should imagine Śiva to reside (e.g. śivadvāra = fontanel, nāsāgra = tip of the nose, 
lalāṭa = space between the eyebrows, hЯdaya = heart). Brakel (1979:  76) concluded that yogic 
techniques were still current in sixteenth- century Aceh. Braginsky (2004:  144– 145) ﬁne- tuned 
Brakel’s analysis and showed that Hamzah’s critique included elements of not only dhyāna and 
dhāraṇā but also acquisition of supernatural powers through yoga as well as sexo- yogic practices 
involving the manipulation of the semen. These techniques, of probably tantric derivation, were 
in fact described in a corpus of syncretic Su ﬁ- tantric mystical literature in Malay from Sumatra 
focusing on sexual yoga (Braginsky 2004; 2017; 2019). This body of texts represents a clear con-
tinuation of the pre- Islamic Indic heritage, owing as it does to hathayogic and tantric practices. 
As in the case of the Old Javanese and Balinese texts, it lays emphasis on the spiritual practice of 
married householders through sexual yoga, but reframes it in a thoroughly Islamised religious 
and sociocultural context.
Y oga in modern Bali
T oday, Bali is considered a mecca for yoga and yoga retreats; however, this phenomenon re ﬂects 
practices coming from outside (i.e. Indian or globalised/ modern postural yoga) and catering to 
(spiritual) tourists rather than locals. It is still largely centred around Ubud but is now rapidly 
extending to the main tourist locations across the island. This still- evolving phenomenon will 
not be dealt with here. Rather, I  shall brieﬂy outline the contours of the less- known phenom-
enon of Balinese yoga(s) and their historical roots.
As I anticipated above, the modern Balinese tradition of yoga may be regarded as a con-
tinuation and development of the Old Javanese paradigm, for instance in the case of such 
central practices as sadyotkrānti, the use of mantras and syllables and their imposition on the 
body, sexual yoga, etc. A  ubiquitous practice is the yoga making use of the daśākṣara or ten 
sacred syllables, including the Śaiva pañcabrahmamantra s (i.e. sa ba ta a i ) + na ma( Б) śi vā y a, 
which are then compressed to the three components of the O ы –  A, U, M – , then aṃ uṃ ma ṃ, 
aП aБ, and ﬁnally the meeting and dissolution of the two into nāda and Parama śiva (Stephen 
2014: 198). T exts such as the Aji Sarasvatī describe the placement of these syllables in the body 
and correspondences between these and colours, days, directions of the compass, deities, etc. 
This delineates a process of micro- macro- cosmic absorption within the body of the practitioner 
that reﬂects parallel external processes.
According to Stephen, this and other techniques have to be understood as recon ﬁgurations 
of South Asian ideas and practices. For instance, the last ﬁve ‘mental’ ancillaries of ṣaḍaṅgayoga  
may be linked to the ﬁve stages of resorption of the daśākṣaras. Further, the visualisation of    
 
 
 
 
 
   
 

--- [Page 12] ---
284Andrea Acri/twoﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle/fourﬀtaboldstyle
nectar ( amЯta) in a precious water vessel located in the brain as ﬂowing down and transforming 
into the reversed oṃkāra located in the upper part of the cranial vault, the tip of the nose, 
the end of the tongue and then the cavity at the base of the neck (the golden phial) appears 
to reﬂect the haṭhayoga  practice of khecarīmudrā (Mallinson 2007). This practice involves the 
turning backwards of the tongue until it enters the opening located in the back part of the soft 
palate to release the ﬂow of nectar stored in the head (Stephen 2014; cf. Dharma Pātañjala, Acri 
2017: 533). The practitioner should also imagine the burning up of the body to ashes and their 
washing away with nectar ﬂowing from the golden phial (Stephen 2014:  23). This calls to mind 
the tantric ritual of bhūtaśuddhi, in which the elements of the body are puri ﬁed by ﬁre and water 
in order to create a divinised body.
A recent series of popular books on yoga deals with the ﬁgures of the Kanda Mpat or ‘spir-
itual siblings’ accompanying human beings since their birth. This is a widespread and important 
theme among Balinese Hindu householders who, by building a mystical relationship with their 
siblings through yoga, aim at attaining not only healing and success in other mundane matters, 
but also access to the innermost part of their Self. Indeed, the Kanda Mpat frame the theory 
(and practice) of liberation:  the physical origin (birth) and end (death) of the individual ﬁnds 
a counterpart in the spiritual (re)incarnation into a human being and ﬁnal liberation from the 
cycle of rebirth, which is achieved through yoga leading to the realisation of the ultimate iden-
tity between the Self (represented by the ‘ ﬁfth’ sibling) and the Lord Śiva. This practice and 
ideology was once represented in Java too, and indeed ﬁnds its origin in the Indian tradition, 
more precisely in the Śaiva Pāśupata doctrine of the four disciples of the incarnation of Śiva and 
promulgator of P āśupata Śaivism known as Lakul īśa (Acri 2014).
One notes some sort of tension between the supra- ritualistic yogic attitude of certain cat-
egories of religious specialists and textual sources, and the ritualism of lay people and textual 
genres (mainly practical manuals). Indeed, the Pedanda Śiva, the highest brahmanical ritual 
specialists, may be regarded more as yogins than (mere) ritualists. Their main ritual practice, 
the sūrya sevana , may be considered a form of yoga aiming to turn, through prāṇāyāma, dhyāna 
and the uttering of mantras, the o ﬃciant into Śiva,29 who is then able to produce the holy 
water ( tīrtha). Stephen (2015:  96) regards this as a ‘daily yogic sādhanā of a tantric adept, rather 
than the recitation of a priestly liturgy or the worship of a deity’. Indeed, during sūrya sevana  
the practitioner assumes a seated yogic posture with his eyes closed, which is more indicative 
of a meditative rather than a ritual practice.30 Even lay worship in temples ( sembahyang ) is not 
characterised by devotion ( bhakti ) and the presentation of o ﬀerings to a deity, but rather by the 
enactment of yoga/ seated meditation, framed through the stages of āsana, prāṇāyāma, dhyāna etc., 
followed by ritualised gestures.
The recent histories of ṣaḍaṅga and aṣṭāṅga yoga in the religious discourse in modern Bali (and, 
to a lesser extent, Java) are characterised by both  continuities and changes with the precolonial 
tradition. In Bali, reformist groups have attempted to adopt (and adapt) the canon of neo-  
Hinduism as a constitutive part of modern Balinese Hinduism since the 1930s. The ideas of the 
prominent Hindu thinkers such as Vivek ānanda, Swami Śivānanda, etc., probably through the 
medium of Theosophy, which was popular among the po litical and intellectual elites in Java and 
Bali, contributed to shape the new paradigm. This i s evident from the mimeographed pamphlets 
and printed booklets in modern (Malay-  )Indonesian or Balinese published on Bali from the 
1940s, in which Balinese intellectuals and religiou s leaders were intent upon (re)creating a textual 
canon that, through the incorporation of elements o f Indian Hinduism, would have sanctioned 
recognition of Balinese religion as a fully ﬂedged, and pan-  Indonesian, world religion.
Many such texts, while more or less closely adhering to the doctrinal and yogic paradigm 
found in Old Javanese Śaiva texts, namely the ṣaḍaṅgayoga , reﬂect an allure for P ātañjala yoga.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- [Page 13] ---
285Insular Southeast Asia/twoﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle/fiveﬀtaboldstyle
For instance, the Aji Sangkya  by Ida Ketut Jelantik and Rsi Yadnya Sankya dan Yoga  by Shri Rsi 
Anandakusuma pay lip service to Pata ñjali by including the yoga of the eight ancillaries, but 
maintaining the fundamentally theistic and tantric character of the Old Javanese and Balinese 
traditions (Acri 2013). Interestingly, the knowledge of P ātañjala yoga by the Balinese authors 
was not only mediated through the works of the above- mentioned Indian intellectuals, but also 
through the Kitab Djoga Soetra Patandjali , a translation into Malay of a Javanese version ( Serat 
Yogasūtra Patañjali) of a Dutch translation of Manilal Nabhubhai Dvivedi’s English translation of 
Patañjali’s Yogasūtra in 1890, printed in Surakarta, Central Java (probably under the auspices of 
the local branch of the Theosophical society). The ascendance of Pata ñjali as the most authori-
tative voice in the domain of yoga is an ongoing phenomenon, as witnessed by the recent 
translation into Indonesian of the PY Ś by Balinese scholar Putu Suamba, and by the increasing 
presence of modern ‘Ashtanga’ practices in the contemporary Balinese yoga scene.
Modern Javanese mystical movements
The people of Java were prevalently Hindu and Buddhist until the late ﬁfteenth to early six-
teenth century; they have since shifted to Islam. The Islamisation of Java was a long and complex 
process, which included the  –  in origin Indic, or India- derived  –  Javanese psycho- physical yogic 
techniques. An early- sixteenth- century Portuguese visitor to the north coast of Java, T ome Pires, 
reported that there were still about 50,000 non- Muslim ascetics ( tapas) in Java, noting that ‘these 
men are also worshipped by the Moors, and they believe in them greatly; they give them alms; 
they rejoice when such men come to their houses’ (Ricklefs 2006:  11). Indeed, Indic religious 
elements were absorbed and recon ﬁgured in what is now termed ‘Javanism’ ( kejawen ), namely 
a syncretic form of mysticism characterised by a (Su ﬁ) Muslim and Hindu– Buddhist synthesis.
Javanese mysticism is characterised by a doctrinal focus on monism; a belief in karma, reincar-
nation and deliverance; a practical emphasis on meditative practices and/ or ascetic austerities 
carried out in rivers, cemeteries, caves and forests; periodic fasts; and the acquisition of spiritual 
and worldly powers. While monism may be ascribed to both Indic and Su ﬁ milieus, the latter 
seems to be responsible for the idea of total surrender to God (found in, for example, the mys-
tical movements and meditation traditions called Sumarah and Subud). Its various movements 
and organisations all include, to di ﬀerent degrees, descriptions  –  through an idiom that freely 
mixes Indic and Arabic words  –  of levels of consciousness and subtle centres of the body, repe-
tition of mantras (under the Su ﬁ garb of dhikr), initiation, etc., mainly aimed at reuniting the 
practitioner with the Divine. These aspects of Javanism could indeed be described as a form of 
yoga in Islamic garb.
As in the ancient Javanese tradition, ﬁnding a partner ( jodoh) and leading the life of a house-
holder (which perhaps implies the practice of sexual yoga) constitute central aspects of spir-
itual experience. The connubiality between yoga and martial arts that is sometimes found in 
India also characterises such traditions as the Pencak Silat and Kanuragan, which mix bodily 
and meditative practices (some of which are clearly connected to the kanda ampat ) within the 
context of a broader (nominally Islamic) spiritual dimension to increase spiritual authority and 
psycho- physical prowess (De Grave 2014). One notes the signs of a revival of mystical groups 
and a ‘nativist’ approach to the religious experience in contemporary Central and East Java, 
including groups identifying as the continuators of the Majapahit tradition of Hindu– Buddhist 
tantra (whether or not in an Islamic garb). The activities of these groups include rituals and 
meditation sessions in mountain sites centred around holy water springs and pre- Islamic vestiges 
(i.e. liṅgas, statues, megaliths or temples). Some of these sites have become the destinations of 
pilgrimages by Balinese Hindus.   
 
 

--- [Page 14] ---
286Andrea Acri/twoﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle/sixﬀtaboldstyle
All the above practices are in stark contrast with the rising in ﬂuence of radical, Wahhabi 
Islam in Indonesia over the past few decades. In spite of this, and in spite of a fatwa emanated 
by the inﬂuential Indonesian Ulamas Council in 2009 against the practice of yoga by Muslims 
(T edjasukmana 2009), Indic/ global contemporary yoga has become a mass phenomenon not 
only in Java but also in other predominantly Muslim regions of Indonesia. Y oga schools are 
ﬂourishing in the major urban centres of the country, catering to the middle classes across the 
boundaries of religious allegiances. Y et, in spite of this growing interest in modern postural yoga, 
Indonesian mainstream cultural and religious discourses still seem to be largely unaware of the 
premodern Javanese and Balinese yoga traditions, which makes the task of preserving this heri-
tage in the face of radical Islam and of the cultural onslaught of globalised yoga a particularly 
diﬃcult one.
Notes
 1 In this chapter I  use the term ‘Indonesia’ for the sake of convenience, bearing in mind that this political 
entity is a recent (i.e. colonial and postcolonial) phenomenon that is not co- extensive with any polity 
or culturally homogenous region in the premodern period.
 2 These concerns were prominently featured in the Indic socio- religious phenomenon we now call ‘tan-
trism’, which exerted a deep and long- lasting impact on the religious traditions of Indonesia.
 3 In spite of this fact, and notable exceptions notwithstanding (cf., e.g. Gr önbold 1983 and Vasudeva 
2004), indological research has often been unwilling to take into account material from Java and 
Bali. For example, the most recent, authoritative and comprehensive book on yoga in South Asia 
(including excursuses on Tibet, China and the Islamic world) by Mallinson and Singleton (2017) 
completely passes over in silence the existence of yoga traditions in Southeast Asia and their relevant 
textual sources. The same holds true in the case of the voluminous and wide- ranging collection Yoga 
in Transformation  (Baier, Maas and Preisendanz 2018).
 4 The majority of Old Javanese literature is known to us through the Indic tradition of Balinese palm- 
leaf manuscripts ( lontar). A limited oral use of Old Javanese is found, alongside modern Balinese, in elite 
religious and/ or intellectual milieus for mantras and ritualised textual recitation.
 5 Some of these Sanskrit terms (such as, for example, the last one) may be only attested in Old Javanese 
literature, or may have acquired a new meaning due to semantic shift.
 6 This is not a direct rendering of the famous Sanskrit epic attributed to V ālmīki, but the local retelling 
of a later version, the Rāvaṇavadha  (or Bha ṭṭikāvya) by Bha ѤѤi (seventh century CE).
 7 This is redolent of stories in the Sanskrit Pañcatantra,  in which some animals imitate the practices of 
ascetics for their own gain (see Acri 2010).
 8 See Baoesastra Djawa  (Poerwadarminta 1939), s.v. ngalong .
 9 See Mallinson 2016:  21 note 98, mentioning, among others, V aikhānasasmārtasūtra and Mahābhārata.
 10 The upside- down posture seemingly aimed (through the exploitation of gravity) at preventing the 
downward ﬂow and loss of the life force or amЯta (see Mallinson and Singleton 2017:  90). A technique 
to reabsorb the semen into the body is vajrolīmudrā (see Mallinson 2018).
 11 Similar practices involving standing on one leg are associated, with positive connotations, with ascetics 
in other Sanskrit texts, such as the Mahābhārata 3.185.4– 5:  see Mallinson 2016:  21 notes 98 and 107.
 12 Fontein (2012:  89) describes the panel as follows:  ‘Maitreya, standing on one leg in typical yoga 
fashion, illustrates the words:  “he saw how Maitreya carried out arduous practices”. This passage seems 
to occur only in Praj ña’s Chinese translation (T293, 832, 19)’.
 13 See Ensink (1974, 1978), Gr önbold (1983), Vasudeva (2004: 367– 436) and the notes by Goodall (2004: 
351– 353).
 14 However, Sanskrit verses and their Old Javanese exegeses have not been systematically studied, either 
individually or in comparison to similar passages from both Indonesia and India.
 15 See, for instance, the system of eight ancillaries expounded in MЯgendratantra  (yogapāda, verse 3), which 
includes the usual six of Śaiva yoga (with the variant anvīkṣana instead of tarka, and the same order of 
the four ﬁrst auxiliaries, from prāṇāyāma to dhyāna, as in aṣṭāṅgayoga  texts) plus japa (mantra repetition)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     

--- [Page 15] ---
287Insular Southeast Asia/twoﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle/sevenﬀtaboldstyle
and yoga as the ﬁnal one (Vasudeva 2004:  380); the intermediate system of the Sarvajñānottara,  teaching 
six ancillaries without tarka; the substitution of tarka with āsana in the Devak ōѤѤai edition of the 
Kira ṇatantra  (58.2c– 3); and the adherence to P ātañjalayoga in Suprabhedāgama (Y ogapāda 3.53– 56), 
ëśānaśiva’s ëśānaśivagurudevapaddhati  (ch. 2), Ajitāgama (2.29), Maku ṭāgama (11.1– 21) and the Kashmirian 
Netratantra  (8.9, 21) (see Vasudeva 2004:  370, note 5; Acri 2013:  94).
 16 Kira ṇatantra , Vidyāpāda 1.23 (Vivanti 1975:  8). Note, however, that only the half- line ‘ab’ is present in 
the Nepalese manuscripts and the commentary of R āmaka ѐѤкa, while it appears in later South Indian 
versions of the text, as well as in Tryambaka śambhu’s commentary (Goodall 1998:  221, note 188).
 17 This sūtra is also attested in the Sanskrit– Old Javanese moralistic- didactic text Sārasamuccaya  415.6: yoga 
ṅaranya cittav Яttinirodha, kah ΩrΩtani ṅ manah  (‘Y oga is cittav Яttinirodha , the restraining of the mind’).
 18 While the element Pātañjala in the title of the text may be a hint to Pata ñjali, the (legendary) author of 
the Yogaśāstra, it is more likely to refer to the last of the ﬁve pañcakuśikas or pañcarṣis, representing the 
incarnation of the Lord on earth. This is a recon ﬁgured Pāśupata Śaiva motif, derived from the legend 
of the Lord’s incarnation at K āyāvaroha ѐa as Lakul īśa (Pātañjala’s alter- ego), the teacher of the four 
disciples Ku śika, Kuru Ѡya, Gārgya, and Maitri (see Acri 2014).
 19 Namely, the references to the three kinds of pain as described in the Bhāṣya on sūtra 1.31 –  those having 
been already de ﬁned earlier, in pp.  256.10– 260.7; the de ﬁnition and justi ﬁcation of the mechanism of 
karma and latent impressions found in Bhāṣya 2.13, this having been treated in pp.  272.17– 274.18; the 
long and elaborate cosmographical excursus found in the Bhāṣya on 3.26 –  cosmography having been 
treated already in pp.  224.1– 226.11.
 20 I should like to mention here that the Dharma Pātañjala, although of uncertain date, appears to have 
preserved –  much like the other surviving Old Javanese texts of the tattva genre –  an archaic doctrinal 
status quo , which is detectable in pre- seventh- century Śaiva texts from the Indian Subcontinent, and 
which has hardly survived in the extant Sanskrit Śaiva Saiddh āntika canon (see Acri 2011b; 20172: 12– 
14). In this light, although the limited and circumstantial evidence at our disposal does not allow us to 
draw any conclusions, an analogous point could be made with respect to the form of the PY Ś reﬂected 
in the Old Javanese text.
 21 In the PY Ś, sūtras 1.2 and 1.3 are generally understood to de ﬁne samādhi and kaivalya , respectively, 
while in the Dharma Pātañjala, sūtra 1.3 is quoted in reply to a question by Kum āra about what the 
absorption of the yogin is like in order to become one with the Lord.
 22 This is a prominent theme among the Kashmirian non- dual Śaiva exegetes, too:  see, for example, 
Abhinavagupta’s dismissal of the auxiliaries of P ātañjala yoga, and prāṇāyāma in particular, in T antrāloka 
4.91a (early eleventh century).
 23 Cf. T attvajñāna 44 and Saṅ H y a ṅ Kamahāyānikan Śaiva pp. 75– 76, which enumerate only the few 
postures common to early Śaivatantras:  padmāsana, vajrāsana, parya ṅkāsana, svastikāsana, vidyāsana (i.e. 
vīrāsana or vīryāsana?), daṇḍāsana.
 24 A metaphor illustrating this point, found in the Dharma Pātañjala and other Old Javanese texts, is that 
of the ﬁre of yoga burning the impurity ( mala) sticking to the soul. This di ﬀers from the standard 
Saiddhāntika view that only ritual action (e.g. dīkṣā) can burn mala. In pp. 306.13– 308.12, observances 
are said to burn maculation (by way of the breath) just like ﬁre burns a piece of dry wood. VЯhaspatitattva  
61.14– 20 declares that latent karmic impressions ( karmavāsanā), as well as mala, are burnt by yogic ﬁre.
 25 These are post- twelfth- century haṭhayoga  texts, such as the Amaraughaprabodha , Yogabīja, etc., where 
layayoga  is explicitly mentioned (Mallinson and Singleton 2017:  328– 329), but also earlier tantric texts, 
such as the Vijñānabhairava  and Vāmanadatta’s Svabodhodayama ñjarī (T orella 2000).
 26 See White 2004:  622– 623, and Yogasūtra (3.38): ‘From loosening the fetters of bondage to the body 
and from awareness of the bodily processes, there is the entering of the mind into another’s body’; 
bandhakāraṇaśaithilyāt pracārasa ṃvedanāc ca cittasya para śarīrāveśaБ. Cf. also al- B īrūnī’s Kitāb Pātañjal (Pines 
and Gelblum 1983:  262).
 27 Hardly any traces of Therav āda Buddhism and the meditation techniques associated with it have come 
down to us from premodern Indonesia.
 28 VЯhaspatitattva , śloka 56 and Old Javanese commentary.
 29 This corresponds to the stage of śivīkara ṇa found in Śaiva Saiddh āntika ritual texts from South India.
 30 My conversations with several Balinese Pedanda Śiva have con ﬁrmed Stephen’s views, as most of them 
regard this daily procedure as having the same characteristics, and conferring the same bene ﬁts, of 
meditation and yoga. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

--- [Page 16] ---
288Andrea Acri/twoﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle
Bibliography
Primary sources from Java and Bali
Adji Sangkya , by Jelantik, Ida Ketoet. Banjar [no publisher], 1947.
Arjunavivāha: Arjunawiwāha; Trasformasi teks Jawa Kuno lewat tanggapan dan penciptaan di lingkungan sastra Jawa , 
ed. and trans Wiryamartana, I. K. Y ogyakarta:  Duta Wacana University Press, 1990.
Bhuvanakośa [1]  Roman transcript, with an Indonesian translation, by a team headed by I  Gusti Ngurah 
Rai Mirsha, printed by PusDok (1991) [2] Lontar MS, Balinese script, LOr 5022, 68 leaves.
Dharma Pātañjala: see Acri 2017.
Dharma Śūnya Kakavin : Dharma Śūnya; Memuja dan meneliti Śiwa, ed. and Indonesian trans. Dharma Palguna, 
Ida Bagus Made. Leiden, 1999 [PhD dissertation, Leiden University].
Ga ṇapatitattva : Ga ṇapati- tattwa , ed. and Hindi trans. Sudarshana Devi Singhal. New Delhi:  International 
Academy of Indian Culture, 1958.
Jñānasiddhānta: Secret Lore of the Balinese Śaiva Priest , ed. and trans. H. Soebadio. The Hague:  Nijhoﬀ, 1971.
Mahājñāna: T attwajñāna and Mahājñāna (Two kawi Philosophical Texts),  ed. and Hindi trans. Sudarshana Devi 
Singhal. Nagpur:  International Academy of Indian Culture, 1962.
Rāmāyaṇa Kakavin: Rāmāyaṇa Kakawin , ed. and trans. Santoso, S.  New Delhi:  International Academy of 
Indian Culture, 1980. [3 Vols.]
Rsi yadnya Sankya dan Yoga  by Anandakusuma, Sri Reshi. Singaraja:  T oko Buku Indra Jaya, 1973.
Saṅ Hya ṅ Kamahāyānikan: Sang Hyang Kamah āyānikan; Oud- Javaansche Tekst met Inleiding, Vertaling en 
Aanteekeningen , by J. Kats. ’s- Gravenhage:  Nijhoﬀ, 1910.
Saṅ Hya ṅ Kamahāyānikan (Śaiva) (= Kats Ms. C): “ Śaiva Version of Saṅ Hya ṅ Kamahāyānikan”, Lokesh 
Chandra (ed and trans) in Lokesh Chandra (ed.), Cultural Horizons of India , Volume V , 7– 101. New 
Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture/Aditya Prakashan, 1997.
Sārasamuccaya: Sāra- samuccaya (a Classical Indonesian Compendium of high ideals) , ed. and trans. Raghu Vira. 
New Delhi:  IAIC, 1962.
Smaradahana Kakavin  of Dharmaja:  Smaradahana; Oud- Javaansche tekst met vertaling , by Poerbatjaraka. 
Bandoeng:  A. C. Nix & Co., 1931.
Sumanasāntaka: Mpu Monagu ṇa’s Sumanasāntaka: An Old Javanese Epic Poem, its Indian Source and Balinese 
Illustrations , ed. and trans. Peter Worsley, S.  Supomo, Thomas Hunter and Margaret Fletcher. Leiden/ 
Boston: Brill, 2013.
Sutasoma Kakavin  of Mpu Tantular:  Sutasoma; A Study in Javanese Wajrayana , ed. and trans. S.  Santoso. New 
Delhi: IAIC, 1985.
T attvajñāna: T attwajñāna and Mahājñāna (Two kawi Philosophical Texts) , ed. and Hindi trans. Sudarshana Devi 
Singhal. Nagpur:  International Academy of Indian Culture, 1962.
VЯhaspatitattva : WЯhaspati- tattwa; An Old Javanese philosophical text , ed. and trans. Sudarshana Devi. 
Nagpur: International Academy of Indian Culture, 1957.
Secondary sources
Acri, A. 2010. ‘On Birds, Ascetics, and Kings in Central Java. Rāmāyaṇa Kakawin , 24.96– 126 and 25’. 
Bijdragen tot de T aal- , Land- , en Volkenkunde  /  Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia  
166: 475– 506.
Acri, A. 2011a. ‘Re- con ﬁguration of Divinity in Old Javanese Śaiva texts from the Indonesian Archipelago 
(with special reference to Jñānasiddhānta, Chapter 19)’. Travaux de Symposium International:  Le Livre. La 
Roumanie. L’Europe. Troisi ème édition, Tome III , 546– 65. Bucarest:  Éd. Biblioth èque de Bucarest.
Acri, A. 2011b. ‘Glimpses of early Śaiva Siddh ānta. Echoes of doctrines ascribed to B њhaspati in the Sanskrit- 
Old Javanese VЯhaspatitattva ’. Indo- Iranian Journal  54: 209– 229.
Acri, A. 2012. ‘ Yogasūtra 1.10, 1.21– 23, and 2.9 in the Light of the Indo- Javanese Dharma Pātañjala’. Journal 
of Indian Philosophy  40(3): 259– 276.
Acri, A. 2013. ‘Modern Hindu Intellectuals and Ancient T exts:  Reforming Śaiva Y oga in Bali’. Bijdragen tot 
de T aal- , Land- , en Volkenkunde /  Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia  169: 68– 103.
Acri, A. 2014. ‘Pa ñcakuśika and Kanda Mpat. From a P āśupata Śaiva Myth to Balinese Folklore’. Journal of 
Hindu Studies  7(2): 146– 178.
Acri, A. 2015. ‘Revisiting the Cult of “ Śiva-Buddha” in Java and Bali’, in Lammerts, C. (ed), Buddhist 
Dynamics in Premodern and Early Modern Southeast Asia , 261– 282. Singapore:  ISEAS Publishing.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- [Page 17] ---
289Insular Southeast Asia/twoﬀtaboldstyle/eightﬀtaboldstyle/nineﬀtaboldstyle
Acri, A. 2016. ‘Imposition of the Syllabary ( svaravyañjana- nyāsa) in the Javano- Balinese Tradition in the 
Light of South Asian Tantric Sources’, in Hornbacher, A. and Fox, R. (eds), Balinese Letters:  Materiality, 
Eﬃcacy and Scriptural Practices , 123– 165. Leiden/ Boston:  Brill.
Acri, A. 2017. Dharma Pātañjala: A Śaiva Scripture from Ancient Java Studied in the Light of Related Old Javanese 
and Sanskrit Texts.  2nd ed. New Delhi:  Aditya Prakashan. [1st ed.:  Gonda Indological Studies XVI, 
Groningen:  Egbert Forsten,  2011]
Angot, M. 2008. Pātañjalayogsūtram Vyāsabhāṣyasametam; Le Yoga- S ūtra de Patañjali; Le Yoga- Bh āṣya de Vyāsa; 
avec des extraits du Yoga- V ārttika de Vijñāna- Bhik ṣu. Édition, traduction et pr ésentation de Michel Angot . 
Paris: Les Belles Lettres.
Baier, K., Maas, P . A. and Preisendanz, K. (eds) 2018. Yoga in Transformation:  Historical and Contemporary 
Perspectives . Vienna: Vienna University Press.
Braginsky, V . 2004. ‘The Science of Women and the Jewel:  The Synthesis of Tantrism and Su ﬁsm in a 
Corpus of Mystical T exts from Aceh,’ Indonesia and the Malay World  32(93): 141– 175.
Braginsky, V . 2017. ‘The Manner of the Prophet  –  Concealed, Found and Regained’, Indonesia and the Malay 
World  45(132): 250– 291.
Braginsky, V . 2019. ‘Through the Optics of Imagination:  The Internal Vision of the Science of Women’. 
Indonesia and the Malay World 47(139): 373–405 .
Brakel, L. 1979. ‘Hamza Fansuri, Notes on Y oga Practice, Lahir Dan Zahir, the Taxallos, a Di ﬃcult Passage 
in the Kitab al- Muntahi, Hamza’s Likely Place of Birth and Hamza’s Imagery’. Journal of the Malaysian 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society  52(1): 73– 98.
Brakel, L. 2004. ‘Islam and Local Traditions:  Syncretic Ideas and Practices’. Indonesia and the Malay World  
32(92): 5– 20.
Creese, H., and Bellows, L. 2002. ‘Erotic Literature in Nineteenth- Century Bali’. Journal of Southeast Asian 
Studies  33(3): 385– 413.
Drewes, G. W .  J. 1976. ‘Further Data Concerning ’Abdas- Samad al- Palimbani’. Bijdragen tot de T aal- , Land-  
en Volkenkunde  132: 267– 292.
Ensink, J. 1974. ‘Sutasoma’s T eaching to Gajavaktra, the Snake and the Tigress (Tantular, Sutasoma  Kakavin 
38.1– 42.4)’. Bijdragen tot de T aal- , Land- , en Volkenkunde  130: 195– 226.
Ensink, J. 1978. ‘ Śiva- Buddhism in Java and Bali’, in Bechert, H. (ed), Buddhism in Ceylon and Studies on Religious 
Syncretism in Buddhist Countries. Report on a Symposium in G öttingen , 178– 198. G öttingen: Vandenhoeck 
und Ruprecht.
Fontein, J. 2012. Entering the Dharmadh ātu: A Study of the Gandavy ūha Reliefs of Borobudur.  Leiden and 
Boston: Brill.
Goodall, D. 1998. Bha ṭṭa Rāmaka ṇṭha’s Commentary on the Kira ṇatantra , Vol. 1. Pondichéry: Institut Fran çais 
de Pondich éry/École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Goodall, D. 2004. The Parākhyatantra; A  Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta; A Critical Edition and Annotated 
Translation . Pondichéry: Institut Fran çais de Pondich éry/École française d’Extrême-Orient.
de Grave, J.- M. 2014. ‘Javanese Kanuragan Ritual Initiation:  A Means to Socialize by Acquiring 
Invulnerability, Authority, and Spiritual Improvement’. Social Analysis:  The International Journal of Social 
and Cultural Practice  58(1): 47– 66.
Grönbold, G. 1983. ‘Materialen zur Geschichte des џaаaюga- Y oga I; Der џaаaюga- Y oga im Hinduismus’. 
Indo- Iranian Journal  25: 181– 190.
Hatley, S. 2016. ‘Erotic Asceticism:  The Razor’s Edge Observance ( asidhārāvrata) and the Early History of 
Tantric Coital Ritual’. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies  79(2): 329– 345.
Kats, J. 1910. Sang Hyang Kamah āyānikan; Oud- Javaansche Tekst met Inleiding, Vertaling en Aanteekeningen . 
’s- Gravenhage:  Nijhoﬀ.
Mallinson, J. 2007. The Khecarīvidyā of Ādinātha. A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation of an Early Text 
of Ha ṭhayoga . London:  Routledge.
Mallinson, J. 2016. ‘ Śāktism and Ha Ѥhayoga’, in Wernicke- Olesen, Bjarne (ed), Goddess Traditions in Tantric 
Hinduism:  History, Practice and Doctrine, 109– 140. London:  Routledge.
Mallinson, J. 2018. ‘Y oga and Sex:  What is the Purpose of Vajrol īmudrā?’, in Baier, K., Maas, P . A. and 
Preisendanz, K (eds), Yoga in Transformation:  Historical and Contemporary Perspectives , 183– 222. 
Vienna: Vienna University Press
Mallinson, J. and Singleton, M. 2017. Roots of Yoga:  Translated and Edited with an Introduction . London: 
Penguin Books.
Mirnig, N. 2013. ‘ Śaiva Siddh ānta Śrāddha: T owards an Evaluation of the Socio- religious Landscape 
Envisaged by pre- 12th Century Sources’, in Mirnig, N., Szanto, P . D. and Williams, M. (eds),  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- [Page 18] ---
290Andrea Acri/twoﬀtaboldstyle/nineﬀtaboldstyle/zeroﬀtaboldstyle
Puṣpikā: Tracing Ancient India Through Texts and Traditions:  Contributions to Current Research in Indology, 
Volume 1 , 283– 302. Oxford:  Oxbow Books.
Pines, S. and Gelblum, T. 1983. ‘Al- B īrūnī’s Arabic Version of Pata ñjali’s Yogasūtra: A Translation of the Third 
Chapter and a Comparison with Related Sanskrit T exts’. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies  46: 258– 304.
Poerwadarminta, W . J.  S. 1939. Baoesastra Djawa . Groningen:  J. B. Wolters.
Pollock, S. 2006. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men:  Sanskrit, Culture and Power in Premodern India . 
Berkeley, CA, USA:  University of California Press.
Ricklefs, M. C. 2006. Mystic Synthesis in Java:  A History of Islamization from the Fourteenth to the Early 
Nineteenth Centuries.  Norwalk:  EastBridge.
Stephen, M. 2010. ‘The Y ogic Art of Dying, Kundalin ī Y oga, and the Balinese pitra yadnya ’. Bijdragen tot de 
T aal- , Land-  en Volkenkunde  166(4): 426– 474.
Stephen, M. 2014. ‘The Dasaksara  and Y oga in Bali’. The Journal of Hindu Studies  7(1– 2): 179– 216.
Stephen, M. 2015. ‘ Sūrya Sevana : A Balinese Tantric Practice’. Archipel  89: 95– 124.
T edjasukmana, J. 2009. ‘Indonesia’s Fatwa Against Y oga’. Time, 29 January. http:// content.time.com/ time/ 
world/ article/ 0,8599,1874651,00.html. Accessed 20 February 2020.
T orella, R. 2000. ‘The Svabodhodayama ñjarī, or How to Suppress the Mind with no E ﬀort,’ in Tsuchida, 
R. and Wezler, A. (eds), Harānandalaharī: Volume in Honour of Professor Minoru Hara on His Seventieth 
Birthday , 387– 410. Reinbek:  Verlag für Orientalistische Fachpublikationen.
Vasudeva, S. 2004. The Yoga of the M ālinīvijayottaratantra . Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.
Vivanti, M. P . 1975. ‘ Il ‘Kira ṇāgama’. Testo e traduzione del  “Vidyāpāda” ’. Annali  35(3), fasc. 2.  Napoli: Istituto 
Universitario Orientale.
White, D. G. 2004. ‘Early Understandings of Y oga in the Light of Three Aphorisms from the Y oga S ūtras 
of Patañjali’, in Ciurtin, E. (ed), Du corps humain, au carrefour de plusieurs savoirs en Inde. M élanges oﬀerts 
à Arion Rosu par ses coll ègues et ses amis à l’occasion de son 80e anniversaire , Stvdia Asiatica  4– 5: 613– 629.
Wolters, O. W . 1999 [1982]. History, Culture, and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives.  Singapore:  Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies.
Zoetmulder, P . J.  1982. Old Javanese- English dictionary . With the collaboration of S.  O. Robson. 
Gravenhage:  Nijhoﬀf. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- [Page 19] ---
iii
ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK 
OF YOGA AND 
MEDITATION STUDIES
Edited by Suzanne Newcombe and Karen O’Brien- Kop  

--- [Page 20] ---
