--- [Page 1] ---
JIABS
Journal of the International
Association of Buddhist Studies
Volume 35    Number 1–2    2012 (2013)

--- [Page 2] ---
JIABS
Journal of the International
Association of Buddhist Studies
Volume 35 Number 1–2  2012 (2013)
  
Articles
Megan B RYSON
Mahākāla worship in the Dali kingdom (937–1253 ) – A study 
of the Dahei tianshen daochang yi   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .      3
Thomas C RUIJSEN , Arlo G RIFFITHS , Marijke J. K LOKKE
The cult of the Buddhist dh āraṇī  deity Mah āpratisar ā along 
the Maritime Silk Route: New epigraphical and iconographic 
 evidence from the Indonesian Archipelago   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    71
Roderick O RLINA
Epigraphical evidence for the cult of Mah āpratisar ā in the 
Philippines .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     159
Vincent E LTSCHINGER
Aĕvagho Ӹa and his canonical sources II – Ya ĕas, the K āĕyapa 
brothers and the Buddha’s arrival in R ājagha (Buddhacarita 
16.3–71 )   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     171
Paul K. N IETUPSKI
Atha niry āṇavṛttam: Re ﬂ ections on the ﬁ rst s ūtra and the 
opening passages of  Guṇaprabha ’ s Vinayas ūtra and Auto-
commentary – With reference to Indian and Tibetan 
commentaries   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     225
 Reiko O HNUMA
An elephant good to think –  The Buddha in P ārileyyaka for-
est   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     259

--- [Page 3] ---
Contents 2
 Jin Y. P ARK
A Huayanist reading of the Lotus S ūtra – The case of Li Tong-
xuan .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 295 
Barbara G ERKE
‘Treating the aged’ and ‘Maintaining health’ – Locating 
bcud len practices in the four Tibetan medical tantras  .  .  .  .  .  .  329
Eviatar S HULMAN
The A ԂԂhakavagga as Buddhist poetry .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   363
Chizuko Y OSHIMIZU
Reasoning-for-others in Candrak īrti’s Madhyamaka thought   .  .  .   413

Notes on the contributors   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 445

--- [Page 4] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī  deity 
 Mah āpratisar ā along the Maritime Silk Route: 
New epigraphical and iconographic  evidence 
from the Indonesian Archipelago
 Thomas Cruijsen, Arlo Griffiths,
Marijke J. Klokke*
1. Introduction
Consultation of standard works on the history of art of the Hindu-
Buddhist period in ancient Indonesia, or of scholarly catalogues of 
the sculpture of this period, or works on the iconography of these 
sculptures,1 or of Zoetmulder’ s Old Javanese  English -Dictionary , 
or again of authoritative general publications on the history of 
Buddhism in ancient Indonesia2 will yield not a single mention of 
the name of the protective Buddhist deity Mah āpratisar ā. She is 
the dei ﬁ cation of a dhāraṇī, a protective spell, and is one of the 
Pañcarak Ӹā ‘Five Protections’ that in the course of the history of 
In di an  B u d dhi s m  c am e  t o  f o rm  a  s tan dar d  gr o u p ,  uni t e d  in  o n e  
sacred Sanskrit text.3
 * Rolf Giebel, Kuo Liying, Nicolas Revire, Je ﬀ  Sundberg and Vincent 
Tournier have read previous versions of this paper and provide d many valu-
able suggestions which are gratefully incorporated here. We are likewise 
grateful to Gergely Hidas for all his support to our research.
 1 Krom 1923; Bernet Kempers 1959; Holt 1967; le Bonheur 1971; Lun-
singh Scheurleer & Klokke 1988; Fontein 1990; Tokyo National Museum 
1997; Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala Jawa Tengah 2009.
 2 There are not many such works. Two important publications are Damais 
1959 and Hooykaas 1973.
 3 Cf. Mevissen 1989 for bibliographical references concerning the 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies
Volume 35  Number 1–2  2012 (2013) pp. 71–157

--- [Page 5] ---
72 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
It is the merit of Lokesh Chandra to have identi ﬁ ed, in a short 
note published in 1983, a possible textual reference to this dei-
t y  i n  a n  O l d  J a v a n e s e  p o e t i c  w o r k  o f  B u d d h i s t  i n s p i r a t i o n ,  t h e  
Kuñjarakar ṇadharmakathana  (composed in the 14th or 15th cen-
tury CE). And several years later Max Nihom, in his monograph 
on Tantric Buddhism in Indonesia, saw the connection of a 
Balinese dhāraṇī entitled Stuti Saṅ Hyaṅ Pratisara  or Stava  Saṅ 
Hyaṅ Bhar ālī Pratis āra with the same.4 These materials are late 
and elusive, appearing to stand alone in the history of Buddhism 
in Indonesia. This, however, is certainly not the case. For Gerd 
Mevissen, specialist of Indian Hindu and Buddhist iconography, 
has shown, in an ingenious article published in the Journal  of 
Bengal  Art in 1999, that several Eastern Indian and Javanese sculp-
tures in stone and bronze, which depict a female  deity showing fair-
ly consistent iconographic features whose identi ﬁ cation was pre-
viously considered problematic, having been variously “identi ﬁ ed 
as Cund ā, Sitātapatr ā, Mah āpratya ṅgirā, Mah āpratisar ā, Ca ṇḍī 
or Durg ā” (Mevissen 1999: 99), can speci ﬁ cally be identi ﬁ ed as 
Mahāpratisar ā. The available iconographic (Sanskrit) texts, dating 
from the 11th century and later, tend to describe Mah āpratisar ā as 
eight-armed, and she is always described as multi-headed. In the 
absence of any textual description of Mah āpratisar ā as the eight-
armed and single-headed goddess that we see in these sculptures, 
all dating from the 8th to the 10th century, and in the apparent  ab-
sence of other non-iconographic evidence that might be relevant for 
the identi ﬁ cation of the Indian and Javanese sculptures in question, 
Mevissen’s argument invoked Central and East Asian images of 
a male  deity whose iconographic features, with the principal ex-
ception of his gender, agree with those of the Indian and Javanese 
Pañcarak Ӹā, and a thorough study of their iconography. Mah āpratisar ā is 
mentioned as one of the Pañcarak Ӹā in Hariani Santiko’s 1992 thesis on 
Durg ā in Indonesia (p. 163), but Mah āpratisar ā’s presence in Indonesia is not 
further explored there.
 4 Cf. Nihom 1994: 61f.: “L OKESH  CHANDRA  suggests that, at Kuñjarakar ṇa 
2.1a bhar āli pratis āra labdhe  samaya , the word pratis āra is to be regarded as 
a variant name for the Buddhist goddess Pratisar ā, one of the Pañcarak Ӹā.” 
The reference here is to Lokesh Chandra 1983. About the Balinese dhāraṇī, 
see Nihom 1994: 62, n. 149 and 94, n. 252.

--- [Page 6] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 73
female deity, and who is positively identi ﬁ able as Mah āpratisara 
(masculine!) due to the fact that he is depicted at the center  of the 
Sanskrit text of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī.
In this article, we will adduce positive epigraphical evidence to 
show that the cult of the dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā was known 
in ancient Indonesia not only in its sculptural but also in its textual 
manifestations, and centuries before the indirect textual evidence 
identi ﬁ ed by Lokesh Chandra and Nihom. W e will also adduce a 
ten-armed iconographic variant of the eight-armed type, which 
is the basis of Mevissen’s identi ﬁ cation. Although our focus is on 
Indonesian artefacts, we feel that these have some interest ing im-
plications for the pan-Asian history of Buddhism, and we will re-
turn to these at the end of this study. Before moving to a discus sion 
of the new Indonesian evidence, we will ﬁ rst provide a background 
sketch of the textual and archaeological corpus pertaining to the 
cult of Mah āpratisar ā.
2. The Mah āpratisar ā corpus – texts, amulets, images
Mahāpratisar ā is in a very material sense a textual deity. The text 
that she embodies stands in a long tradition of protective texts in 
Buddhist literature. In the earliest period, at least before the ﬁ rst 
century BCE,5 protective texts in the Buddhist tradition were mostly 
extracted from the body of canonical scriptures, texts such as those 
which are known in the Pali tradition as paritta s (cf. Sanskrit pari-
trā ‘to protect’). During the following centuries, these texts used for 
protectiv e purposes w ere subjected to considerable modi ﬁ cations 
and often came to be transmitted inside a narrative framework, in-
tended among other things to illustrate the e ࠳  cacy of these texts. 
In the course of time, entirely new protective texts came to be com-
posed, whose cores consisted not of canonical material, but rather 
of texts that are more commonly associated with certain strands 
of brahmanical literature, namely mantras and extended forms 
of incantation which within the Buddhist tradition are known as 
 5 See Skilling 1992 for an overview of protective texts in the Buddhist 
tradition and the archaeological evidence for their early existence.

--- [Page 7] ---
74 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
dhāraṇīs.6 As these newly composed protective texts rose to pop-
ularity throughout the Buddhist world, they similarly underwent 
processes of elaboration and reworking, both in narrative frame 
and in mantric content. During the second half of the ﬁ rst millen-
nium CE, a new soteriological path developed within the Buddhist 
tradi ti o n , c all ed Man trana y a ( ‘ M e th od o f Man tras ’ ) , tha t e m p ha -
sized the e ࠳  cacy of mantras and dhāraṇīs not just for protection 
or worldly bene ﬁ ts, but also for quick progress on the path towards 
Buddhahood.7 Concomitant with the rise of this movement, these 
dhāraṇīs came to hold a prominent, visual place in Buddhist prac-
t i c e ,  a s  m an y  o f  th e m  c am e  t o  be  p e r s o ni ﬁ ed and worshiped as 
gods, each acquiring a distinctive iconography of its own in the 
process.8
 6 We are aware that the meaning of the term dhāraṇī is problematic, 
that it is equally problematic to ﬁ nd a unifying characteristic behind all 
texts characterized in Buddhist tradition as dhāraṇī, and that the same 
holds for the distinction between the categories of mantra and dhāraṇī 
(cf. Davidson 2009). Our use here however does seem adequate for the 
mantras and dhāraṇīs to be discussed in this article. In the speci ﬁ c case of 
Mahāpratisar ā’s mantras and dhāraṇīs, we simply follow the nomenclature 
of the Mahāpratisar āmahāvidyārājñī (see below).
 7 We avoid the term Tantric Buddhism as this designation is used in 
various, sometimes inaccurate, ways in the scholarly literature. The term 
Mantranaya is used within the Mah āyāna Buddhist tradition during this pe-
riod – including in ancient Java (see de Jong 1974) – to distinguish the path 
of mantras from the longer path called P āramit ānaya, that requires continual 
cultivation of virtues over countless lives before reaching Buddhahood. The 
term Vajray āna is ﬁ rst attested toward the end of the 7th century (Williams & 
Tribe 2000: 196), and refers to the strand of Mantranayic Buddhism in which 
the symbol of the vajra  holds a prominent place, both in its literature as also 
in the ritual context. The term Mantray āna does not appear to have come into 
use before the 11th century (de Jong 1984: 92–93).
 8 It is de ﬁ nitely not the case that after the rise of the Mantranaya movement 
dhāraṇīs and mantras were only used in an esoteric, soteriological context 
involving ritualistic initiation and meditation practices. They continued to be 
used for a wide range of purposes, on a fully popular level, one might say, as 
will also be seen in the materials discussed in this article. See Schopen 1982: 
105–107 [2005: 310–311] for the emphatic remark that dhāraṇīs were not 
restricted to their tantric use alone, as is evident from their use as Dharma-
relics, put inside stūpas and equivalent in power to Buddha-relics.

--- [Page 8] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 75
It is to this genre of dhāraṇī literature that the textual corpus 
pertaining to Mah āpratisar ā belongs. The central and longest text 
in this co rp us is the S ans kri t te xt kn o wn as the Mahā prati sarā-
mahā vidyārājñī (MPMVR). This extensive text underwent con-
siderable elaboration during centuries of textual transmission, as 
can be seen from the variety of manuscripts that have survived of 
thi s  o n c e  hi ghl y  p o p ul ar  te x t .9 The majority of manuscripts that 
have come down to us belong to textual traditions from Nepal and 
Eastern India, where they are almost invariably part of a collection 
of ﬁ ve protective texts called Pañcarak Ӹā, the oldest exemplars dat-
ing to the 11th century. However, an earlier version of the MPMVR, 
independent from the other RakӸā texts, has been preserved in 
a number of fragmentary manuscripts found at Gilgit, Pakistan, 
whose terminus  ante quem  has been placed in the ﬁ rst half of the 
7th century.10 Apart from these Sanskrit versions, the MPMVR has 
also been transmitted in translation and we have at our disposal 
two versions in Chinese: one translated in 693 by the Indian monk 
Baosiwei 寶思惟 ,11 and one translated around the middle of the 8th 
century by the famous Vajray ānic master Amoghavajra. Slightly 
later is the Tibetan translation from around 800 by Jinamitra, 
Dānaĕīla and Ye ĕes sde.12 There is also a Mongolian translation 
 9 Throughout this article, but especially in the following paragraphs, we 
make grateful use of the recently published study and edition by Gergely 
Hidas (2012). See Hidas 2012: 7–10 for a full survey of the extant textual 
sources of the MPMVR.
 10 Cf. von Hinüber 2004: 88–90, followed by Hidas 2012: 7. The possi-
bility has to be kept in mind, however, that the Gilgit manuscripts belong 
to a strand of textual transmission that was simply at a remove from tex-
tual traditions elsewhere, such as those in Nepal and Eastern India, where a 
Pañcarak Ӹā collection might already have been in place. Hidas further men-
tions four fragmentary MPMVR-manuscripts from East Turkestan, Central 
Asia, also still from the ﬁ rst millennium CE, but these have not been pub-
lished or edited yet.
 11 His Indian name has been reconstructed as *Ratnacinta or *Ma ṇicintana. 
For more details on this ﬁ gure, see Orzech et al. 2011 and Forte 1984 (note 
the slight error *Manicintana).
 12 Apart from the version contained in the various printings of the Kangyur, 
which was revised in the 15th century, there are also three fragmentary manu-
scripts from Dunhuang that contain di ﬀ erent parts of the MPMVR, dating 

--- [Page 9] ---
76 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
from the 14th century, which is based on a 14th-century Tibetan ver-
sion and an Uigurian version which is itself lost.
Although these di ﬀ erent versions each bear their own marks of 
textual accretion and elaboration, thus belonging to distinct textual 
traditions,13 their overall textual structure is largely the same. The 
majority of versions consist of two parts ( kalpa s), both of which 
have a dhāraṇī at their centre.14 These two parts are bound together 
by a frame narrative in which Buddha Ĕākyamuni imparts a new 
teaching. After the introduction that states the occasion on which 
the exposition took place ( nidāna),15 the ﬁ rst part ﬁ gures the Buddha 
to about the 10th century (Hidas 2012: 8). Our summary inspection of the 
one that contains the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī has led us to believe that these 
manuscripts preserve an earlier, uncon ﬂ ated version of the Tibetan transla-
tion of the MPMVR. See note 155 below.
 13 Although not isolated ones, as shown by the high degree of textual con-
tamination revealed by the Sanskrit manuscripts. See Hidas 2012: 88–90 for 
a brief discussion of the complex textual interrelations of these sources.
 14 Hidas points out (2012: 14) that some versions, such as the ﬁ rst Chinese 
translation from 693 as also some Nepalese and Eastern Indian versions, 
consist of only the ﬁ rst part, which suggests that the MPMVR initially may 
only have comprised a single kalpa .
 15 It appears that at some point in the transmission of the text  this introduc-
tory part was given a Vajray ānic recasting: whereas the ﬁ rst Chinese transla-
tion from 693 CE and probably also the Gilgit version have the Buddha teach 
from G  dhrak ūԆa to an assembly of disciples ( ĕrāvaka s) upon the request of 
the god Brahm ā, all versions dating from the 8th century onwards elaborately 
recount, with extensive use of the keyword vajra -, how the Buddha began to 
expound the MPMVR of his own accord from Mount Vajrameru to a huge 
assembly of bodhisattvas, disciples, and deities (cf. Hidas 2012: 14–15). It is 
unclear when this recasting would have taken place; perhaps it was wrought 
by the editor(s) who compiled the Pañcarak Ӹā collection, whose terminus  
ante quem  is the 8th century (Hidas 2012: n. 16; cf. Hidas 2003: 271–274). We 
do not follow Hidas (2012: 90) in abstaining from the use of the terms ‘recen-
sion’ or ‘version’ in acknowledgement of the variegated and highly contami-
nated textual history of the MPMVR, since in our opinion the Vajray ānic 
reworking of the introduction clearly marks a watershed in the transmis-
sion of the text, giving it a di ﬀ erent kind of textual authority, as is perhaps 
shown by the fact that in several Pañcarak Ӹā manuscripts (though not all) the 
MPMVR came to be listed ﬁ rst among the other Pañcarak Ӹā texts, whose 
introductions, like that of the ﬁ rst recension of the MPMVR, follow canoni-

--- [Page 10] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 77
describing the bene ﬁ ts that may be obtained through the use of 
the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī, the common denominator of which 
is either protection from all bad things (e.g. diseases, demons, 
the results of bad karma) or the ful ﬁ llment of any worldly wish-
es (e.g. prosperity, good rebirth, obtaining a son).16 Subsequently, 
the Buddha gives the ﬁ rst dhāraṇī.17 By means of nine narratives 
he then demonstrates the various ways in which the dhāraṇī has 
proved to be e ࠳  cacious in the past. In between the seventh and the 
eighth narrative, four mantras are given that are considered to be 
the heart of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī and that are of the same 
e࠳  cacy.18 Following these narratives, there is the ritual instruc-
tion that concludes the ﬁ rst part of the MPMVR ( prathamakalpa ). 
Here, the Buddha lays down how one is to make an amulet with the 
Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī.
Although shorter, the second part of the MPMVR ( rakӸā vi dhā-
nakalpa ) roughly follows the same order: it begins with a descrip-
tion of the bene ﬁ ts of use of the second dhāraṇī, upon which its 
text is given; then, in the place of the narratives on its e ࠳  cacy seen 
cal conventions. It should also be pointed out that Hidas’ statement (2012: 21) 
that “it is perhaps not inappropriate to put an expanded Mah āyāna-Vajray āna 
label” on the MPMVR only fully applies to the second recension, even when, 
except for the extensive Vajray ānic introduction, it shares with the ﬁ rst recen-
sion most of its occurrences of the word vajra - (only about a dozen in the two 
dhāraṇīs and half a dozen in the narrative and ritual sections).
 16 Note that in this ﬁ rst part there is no mention of non-worldly aims, such 
as the attainment of Final Extinction ( mahāparinirv āṇa) ,  a s  s ta t e d  in  t h e  
second part of the MPMVR (and only in passing). If the MPMVR originally 
only consisted of the ﬁ rst part, this indicates that it was not conceived to 
serve any soteriological purpose.
 17 Which bears the long title: samantajv ālāmālāviĕuddhisphurita cintā ma-
ṇi   mahā mudr āh dayāparājitāmahādhāraṇī asyā mahā prati sarā ma hā vidyā-
rājñyāḥ “the Dhāraṇī of the Great Amulet, Great Queen of Spells, [called] 
The Invincible by Reason of the Essence of the Seal of the Wish granting 
Jewel that Glitters with the Purity of a Garland of Enveloping Flame” (Hidas 
2012: 213).
 18 These mantras are introduced as catvāry apar ājitāmahā mantra pada-
h dayāni “the four great mantra-essences of the Invincible” (Hidas 2012: 
228). As will be seen in our discussion of the Muara Jambi inscription below 
(§5), in a later period a ﬁ fth mantra was added.

--- [Page 11] ---
78 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
in the ﬁ rst part, the bene ﬁ ts of its use are simply described fur-
ther; and it ends with a ritual section in which a healing ritual is 
laid down, requiring the recitation of the second dhāraṇī. Since 
the Indonesian inscriptions discussed in this article only contain 
material pertaining to the ﬁ rst part of the MPMVR, we will below 
solely focus on that part of the text.
From the narrative and the ritual section, one can discern three 
ways in which the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī and/or the mantras given 
in the ﬁ rst part can be used. First, they can be employed through 
recitation, whether silently or in raised voice. Thus in the ﬁ rst nar-
rative it is related how Ya ĕodhar ā, while pregnant with R āhula, 
was saved during a ﬁ re ordeal when her unborn son recited the 
Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī, which had been imparted to him by prince 
Siddh ārtha before the latter’s departure from the royal palace 
(Hidas 2012: 213–215). Second, there is the use that is prescribed 
in the ritual instruction of the ﬁ rst part, namely creating an amu-
let with the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī by writing it down on a piece 
of cloth or other material, and wearing it on one’s neck or arm 
by means of a necklace or a bracelet. This use is demonstrated in 
several of the narratives, among which the sixth narrative, where a 
childless king has an amulet made for his queen, who by wearing it 
around her neck becomes pregnant of a son (Hidas 2012: 225–227). 
Third, there is mention of ﬁ xing such a Mah āpratisar ā amulet to 
the top of a ﬂ agpole and venerating it: in a passage preceding the 
sixth narrative, it is stated that the gods will ful ﬁ ll any wish if one 
worships the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī by wrapping it up – obviously 
in written form – in various cloths, mounting it on top of a ﬂ agpole 
on a caitya , and circumambulating it (Hidas 2012: 224–225).19
It may be noticed from the narratives we have chosen to illus-
trate the uses of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī that they deal with 
fertility and pregnancy, and begetting a child appears to be one 
 19 Note that caitya  is not always equivalent to stūpa, as is commonly as-
sumed, but that it refers to a larger category of sacred sites  or objects, such 
as shrines, images, or sacred trees (cf. Kern’s remarks as quoted in Schopen 
1975: 151 [2005: 28]). This passage therefore does not necessarily describe 
the use of a Mah āpratisar ā amulet in conjunction with a stūpa.

--- [Page 12] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 79
of the prime purposes mentioned for making an amulet with the 
Mahā pratisar ādhāraṇī, especially for women. In the section on the 
bene ﬁ ts this is stated explicitly: “The woman who wears this Great 
Amulet all the time will have all accomplishments and she will be 
pregnant with a son every time. Foetuses grow easily, and the ex-
pectant woman delivers the baby comfortably” (Hidas 2012: 208). 
A similar statement occurs in the narrative section to introduce 
the aforementioned sixth story about the childless king (Hidas 
2012: 225). Also the ritual section, which before laying down the 
instructions makes the statement “so that … women may conceive” 
(Hidas 2012: 234), has the instruction that one should draw a boy 
in the centre of the amulet if one desires a son, and Mah ākāla and 
Brahm ā if the woman is already pregnant (Hidas 2012: 235–236). 
It goes so far as to state that by the means of a Mah āpratisar ā amu-
let, even “the impotent and eunuchs will obtain a son” (Hidas  2012: 
239). We highlight this emphasis on childbearing in the MPMVR, 
as it will prove to be important in the interpretation of the Leiden 
inscription discussed below (§4).20
We may ask, then, whether any of the uses of the Mahāprati-
sarādhāraṇī described in the MPMVR are re ﬂ ected in the materi-
al record. Although one cannot expect to ﬁ nd any material traces 
of the ﬁ rst use, it is attested in the Chinese biographical accounts 
of two famous tantric masters active in China in the 8th century: 
Vajrabodhi recited the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī in order to appease 
a storm while travelling to China by sea (Chou 1945: 275, n. 19; 
Sundberg 2011: 139), and his disciple Amoghavajra did the same 
on his way from China to Sri Lanka in 742 CE (Chou 1945: 290). 
As pointed out by Hidas (2012: 222, n. 178 and 224, n. 184), the 
accounts of these events are similar to the ﬁ fth narrative in the 
MPMVR, in which a merchant called Vimala ĕaṅkha saves his ship 
from a seamonster-induced storm and more speci ﬁ cally from be-
 20 The use of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī for the speci ﬁ c purpose of 
childbearing is also pointed out by Hidas (2012: 26). As can be seen in 
our edition of the Leiden inscription below, several of the epithets in the 
Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī in fact explicitly refer to the fertilizing powers of 
the deity invoked, such as the ﬁ rst epithet vipulagarbhe  ‘ w h o s e  w o m b  i s  
abundant.’

--- [Page 13] ---
80 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
ing struck by lightning; the main di ﬀ erence is that the merchant 
writes down the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī and ﬁ xes the amulet to the 
top of a ﬂ agsta ﬀ , which corresponds to the third use that we have 
mentioned.
The populari ty o f the second use , o f pr od ucin g an am ul et b y 
writing the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī on cloth or any other material 
and wearing it on one’s neck or arm, is evidenced by the fair amount 
of handwritten and printed sheets with the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī 
(and often the four mantras) from Central and East Asia, the earliest 
of which date to the 8th century.21 In China, several of these sheets 
were found, folded up, inside metal bracelets and necklaces dis-
covered with human remains in burials and tombs, mainly around 
Xi’an.22 Al t h o u g h  o n e  c ann o t  kn o w  w h e t h e r  t h e y  w e r e  p r o v i d e d  
to the dead upon burial or whether they were already worn by th e 
deceased while alive, and left intact after death, it seems certain 
that the motive behind this practice was to ensure a good rebi rth. 
This purpose for the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī is well illustrated by 
the fourth narrative in the MPMVR, where a bad monk dies and 
descends to the Av īci hell, but paci ﬁ es all su ﬀ ering for all beings 
there because his corpse still has a Mah āpratisar ā necklace at-
tached to it: as a result of this he is reborn as a god in Tr āyastri ṃĕa 
heaven (Hidas 2012: 218–222).
Thirdly, the practice of ﬁ xing a Mah āpratisar ā amulet to the top 
of a ﬂ agpole is not attested in any archaeological contexts know n 
to us, most probably due to the fact that such ﬂ agpoles and the 
attached amulets were made of perishable materials such as w ood 
and cloth. It is not clear exactly how the Mah āpratisar ā amulet was 
to be attached; whether, for example, it was placed in a protecting 
container before being attached at the pinnacle of the ﬂ agpole, as 
 21 See Drège 1999–2000 and Tsiang 2010 for surveys of these amulets. 
Some of them are also discussed in terms of their design in Copp 2008. 
Cf. Hidas 2012: 7.
 22 See Tsiang 2010: 224–238. It is not clear whether the handwritten and 
printed sheets found in the Dunhuang caves were once worn inside bracelets 
or necklaces or at least meant to be used in that way . On some of  the pub-
lished sheets one does observe traces of the print having been folded up (see 
e.g. Tsiang 2010: 219).

--- [Page 14] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 81
suggested by Hidas on the basis of modern Tibetan practice (2012: 
25–26). Neither in the narrative about the merchant at sea nor in 
the following prescription about placing such a ﬂ agpole on top of 
a caitya  are any speci ﬁ c indications giv en, except that it is to be 
“wrapped up with various cloths” ( nānāvastrai ḥ parive ӸԂayitv ā; 
Hidas 2012: 144). In this connection, we may mention here that a 
painting at a Dunhuang cave has recently been identi ﬁ ed as depict-
ing the scene of a monk revering a dhāraṇī manuscript in palm-leaf 
format, placed on a kind of stand on top of a three-tiered para-
sol, though bare and not wrapped up in anything. In this case, it 
is di࠳  cult to determine whether in reality worship of a dhāraṇī 
would have occurred in such fashion at Dunhuang, or whether it is 
depicted in this manner for the sake of clarity. Moreover, it  might 
be that the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī, due to its primary use as an 
amulet, was not worshipped in the same way as other dhāraṇīs. 
In China, however, the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī certainly did come 
to be used for inscription on so-called ‘ dhāraṇī pillars’ in stone, a 
practice wide-spread in East Asia for which initially the UӸṇīӸa-
vija ya dhāraṇī appears to have been predominantly used, and which 
probably has its origin in the establishment of ﬂ agpoles made of 
perishable materials, as descri bed in the MPMVR, as w e ll as i n 
other dhāraṇīsūtras.23
There are, furthermore, two cases of Mah āpratisar ā amulets 
discovered in undeniable connection with stūpas: in Dali, Yunnan, 
China, four pieces of bricks inscribed with both dhāraṇīs as well 
as the four mantras, provisionally assigned to the period 9th–11th 
century, were found inside the wall of a pagoda (i.e. stūpa);24 
and in  Suzhou, East China, in a reliquary placed underneath 
the third ﬂ oor of a pagoda, a handwritten copy and a woodblock 
print of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī and the four mantras, dated 
to 1001 and 1005 CE, were found together with two copies of the 
 23 For the identi ﬁ cation of the Dunhuang painting (cave 156) and a discus-
sion of dhāraṇī pillars in China, see Kuo (forthc.). This author mentions the 
Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī inscribed on one of the four pillars erected in 1038 at 
Zhaozhou in Hebei province.
 24 See Liebenthal 1947: 25–29.

--- [Page 15] ---
82 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
Saddharmapu ṇḍarīkasūtra and various small stūpas and  statues.25 
There are no corresponding prescriptions in the extant Sanskrit 
versions of the MPMVR, but in the 8th-century Chinese translation 
o f the MP MVR b y Am o gh a v a j ra, i t i s p r e s cri bed, in li e u o f the 
aforementioned passage on using a ﬂ agpole on top of a caitya , to 
place a palm-leaf manuscript with the dhāraṇī wrapped in various 
cloths inside a tă (ౝ), which can translate either stūpa or caitya .26 
Thus this use of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī, clearly modeled on the 
use of other popular dhāraṇīs in Buddhist literature which are ex-
plicitly prescribed to be placed inside stūpas and images to serve as 
Dharma-relics and deemed to be as powerful as the Buddha’s cor -
poral relics,27 probably has its basis in Amoghavajra’s translation, 
 25 See Drège 1999–2000: 30–31 for further details. See Tsiang 2010: 207–
208 for a similar case of a printed dhāraṇī scroll inside the ﬂ oor of a pagoda.
 26 Taish ō 1153 621c15. We owe these observations to Kuo Liying.
 27 See Bentor 1995 for a helpful overview of the Indian evidence for this 
practice; also see Bentor 1996. Speci ﬁ c dhāraṇīs for this purpose are dis-
cussed in Schopen 1982; 1985; and Scherrer-Schaub 1994. It seems, in fact, 
that in the MPMVR the practice of wearing amulets is propagated by com-
paring its bene ﬁ ts to those of the stūpa cult, in accordance with a common 
rhetorical strategy in Mah āyāna literature (cf. Schopen 1975 and Drewes 
2007). In the narrative about the bad monk, when Yama, the King of Justice, 
is asked by his hell-servants about the reason why the monk’s appearance 
in hell has taken away all su ﬀ erings for all beings there, he explains: “This 
person has great supernatural power and his former body is great. Just as 
a stūpa radiates with the multitude of hundreds of relics of the T e acher, so 
too shines his body with the Amulet ﬁ xed around the neck;” when the hell-
servants subsequently go to see the dead body of the monk, they ﬁ nd that 
his burial mound is being worshipped from all sides by all sorts of deities 
(Hidas 2012: 220–221), much like a stūpa in fact. The comparison of a per-
son wearing a Mah āpratisar ā amulet to a stūpa containing Buddha-relics 
is made  full y e xp li ci t in the  in tr od ucto ry passag e  to  this f o urth narrati v e , 
where it is stated that “whoever wears this Great Amulet, Great Queen of 
Spells around his arm or neck having painted it according to the precept, 
should be considered to be empowered by all the Tath āgatas, to have a body 
of all the Tath āgatas, to have a vajra -body, to be the relic-receptacle of all 
the Tath āgatas ( sarvatath āgatadh ātugarbha )…” (Hidas 2012: 218). It is clear, 
then, that for those who believed in the authenticity of the MPMVR as having 
bee n  p r oc l aim ed  b y  th e  B u d dh a  ( buddhavacana ), a Mah āpratisar ā amulet 
was as powerful as the relics of the Buddha entombed in a stūpa.

--- [Page 16] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 83
even though these concrete cases known to us belong to a slightly 
later period.
The MPMVR lacks any instruction for the practice of copying 
of the entire text – as opposed to only the dhāraṇīs or the man-
tras – which is evidenced by the several manuscripts of the entire 
MPMVR both from South Asia (Gilgit, Nepal, Eastern India) and 
from Central Asia, where the names of the donors are inserted at 
the appropriate places in the given dhāraṇīs and the mantras. This 
is to be seen in light of the so-called ‘cult of the book,’ which led 
to the copying of entire Buddhist scriptures coming in vogue  as a 
meritorious activity in its own right.28 Since none of these manu-
scripts are known with certainty to have been found in the contexts 
in which they were actually meant to be used,29 the possibility can-
not be excluded that they were used in the ways described in th e 
MPMVR, with the necessary adjustments due to the bulkiness of 
such manuscripts.30
Another practice not mentioned in the MPMVR is that of mak-
ing statues of Mah āpratisar ā, attested by the several Javanese and 
Eastern Indian statues of Mah āpratisar ā identi ﬁ ed by Mevissen. 
Although there is reference to depicting ‘a divine form’ ( devar ūpa) 
in the ritual section,31 it is indicated by the associated prescriptions 
that the deity is to be chosen in accordance with the particular per -
son for whom the Mah āpratisar ā amulet is made. Thus, as men-
 28 Cf. Hidas 2012: 30–31. See Schopen 1975 on the Buddhist ‘cult of the 
book,’ and particularly Drewes 2007: 126–127 on its relative lateness.
 29 See Fussman 2004 and Schopen 2009 for the recent debate on the func-
tion of the building where the Gilgit manuscripts were found.
 30 That a book, i.e. a set of palm leaves or a birch bark scroll, could be used 
as an amulet is seen in a passage from the Ratnaketuparivarta  (39.11– 40.11): 
“If an anointed k Ӽatriya king when a battle is imminent would raise on the 
top of a [ ﬂ ag-]standard a book ( pustaka ) of this, that anointed k Ӽatriya king 
will defeat the opposing army” (translation from Schopen 1978: 363–364 as 
cited in Hidas 2012: 223, n. 183). The aforementioned Dunhuang painting, as 
identi ﬁ ed by Kuo Liying, might be a depiction of such a practice.
 31 Hidas almost consistently speaks of “painting” (cf. 2012: 217, n. 147), 
but the Sanskrit root in question is likh, and the Leiden plate presented in 
this article argues for a translation that is less speci ﬁ c with regard to the 
technique of depiction.

--- [Page 17] ---
84 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
ti oned a bo v e , a p re gnan t w o man is to ha v e imag es o f Mah ākāla 
and Brahm ā d e p i c t e d  i n  t h e  c e n t r e  o f  t h e  a m u l e t  ( H i d a s  2 0 1 2 :  
237). A little further in the ritual section (Hidas 2012: 238), it is 
stated rather elusively that if the amulet-wearer is a spell-master 
(vidyā dhara ) ,  o n e  s h o u l d  d e p i c t  V i d y ādevī, ‘goddess of spells,’ 
who might be thought to be the same goddess as Mah āpratisar ā, 
evoked in the title of the MPMVR as mahāvidyārājñī, ‘great queen 
of spells.’32 However, no further details are subsequently given, let 
alone any elaborate iconography. Hidas is therefore probably right 
when he states (2012: 238, n. 244) that this Vidy ādevī is unlikely 
to stand for Mah āpratisar ā, since at the time the MPMVR – or at 
least this section of it – was composed, the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī 
had not yet been personi ﬁ ed and dei ﬁ ed.33 I t is s i gni ﬁ cant, how-
ever, that throughout this ritual section there are instructions for 
depicting on the amulet various kinds of auspicious symbols and 
weapons, such as the lotus and the sword, that later came to be part 
of Mah āpratisar ā’s iconography as described in the 11th–12th cen-
tury visualization manuals Sādhanam ālā and NiӸpannayog āvalī 
and attested in the several Javanese and Eastern Indian statues of 
Mahāpratisar ā that have so far been identi ﬁ ed.34
It is to this corpus of Mah āpratisar ā artefacts and manuscripts that 
three newly identi ﬁ ed objects from the Indonesian Archipelago, to 
which we now turn, are to be added. They will show that textual tradi-
tions related to the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī were circulating in this part 
of the Buddhist world centuries earlier than could hitherto be assumed.
 32 Note that in one Eastern Indian manuscript (E), most closely related to 
the Gilgit tradition, this part of the title is simply vidyārāּ ñī (Hidas 2012: 
194). 
 33 It should be noted, however, that among the vocative epithet s used in the 
Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī we ﬁ nd mahāvidyādevi ‘great goddess of spells’ (see 
the table in the appendix, l. 17), already in the Gilgit version. It seems that 
the process of dei ﬁ cation of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī, and of dhāraṇī texts 
in general, requires further research before the validity o f Hidas’ argument 
can be wholeheartedly accepted. 
 34 Also the vocative epithets used in the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī itself seem 
to contribute to Mah āpratisar ā’s iconography. Note for instance the epithet 
khaḍgini ‘she with the sword’ (see the table in the appendix, l. 33). Cf. Hidas 
2012: 27, n. 11.

--- [Page 18] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 85
3. A ten-armed form of Mah āpratisar ā at Berlin35
In 1924, the Dutch scholar of Indonesian archaeology and epig-
raphy W. F. Stutterheim, who was at the time still a student and 
had not yet joined the Archaeological Service in the Netherlands-
Indies, visited several European museum collections holding Java-
n e s e  s c u l p t u r e s  i n  b r o n z e .  F r o m  h i s  r e p o rt  t h a t  a p p e a r e d  i n  t h e  
same year, we learn that he saw a small bronze sculpture of a ‘ten-
armed ĕakti’ in what was then the Museum für Völkerkunde in 
Berlin. He noted that it bore an inscription comprising some man-
tras and ending with the ‘creed’ oṃ ye te svāhā (Stutterheim 1924: 
292, with n. 2).
The same sculpture was mentioned again in an article contrib-
uted by the same scholar to the Archaeological  Report  (Oudheid-
kundig  Verslag , henceforward OV) for 1927, published in 1928. Here 
he pointed out that several of the Berlin pieces had been acquired 
from the notorious Dieduksman collection, but that the notoriety 
of the source should not, in the cases of the bronze sculptures at 
Berlin, give rise to suspicion about their authenticity. He subjoined 
a detailed description of the pieces he had seen and judged to be 
authentic, including the mentioned ten-armed sculpture, which he 
again identi ﬁ ed as a ‘ ĕakti-ﬁ gure,’ while describing the main icono-
graphical features as follows:36
akӸamālā | pustaka
ĕaṅkha | padma
para ĕu | cakra (?)
khaḍga | daṇḍa
dhyānimudr ā | dhyānimudr ā
in the bottom hands lies an open padma
 35 An earlier version of §3 appeared, in German, as Gri ࠳  ths 2011b.
 36 Stutterheim 1928: 190. The features identi ﬁ ed by Stutterheim are rear-
r an g e d  h e r e  fr o m  t o p  t o  b o tt o m .  S m all  p rin t in g  e rr o r s  h a v e  be e n  s il e n t l y  
corrected. The proper right hands ﬁ gure on the left of the diagram, and vice 
versa .

--- [Page 19] ---
86 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
Stutterheim here reports that the inscription, brie ﬂ y alluded to in 
his 1 924 arti c l e , is to be f ound on the back o f the scul pture . H e 
determines its script as ‘late central Javanese’ (which would chron-
ologically amount to the 9th or 10th century CE), and provides a deci-
pherment whose reliability, as in the case of the Leiden copperplate 
to be discussed below, is compromised by his unfamiliarity with 
the type of textual material in question. He concludes his descrip-
tion as follows:
This mantra, which, however short, is no less important for the Ĕaiva 
(?) cult practiced at Ca ṇḍi Lara Jonggrang, will be further analyzed 
in my discussion of similar Buddhist mantras found on Bali at Pejeng. 
The provenance of the statuette is said to be Ca ṇḍi Lara Jonggrang.37 
It came to Berlin in 1881 and was registered under nr. I c 10252. 
(Stutterheim 1928: 191)38
When the same scholar subsequently brought out his monograph 
on the Antiquities  of Bali in 1929, he indeed included, for compar-
ison with several Buddhist mantra inscriptions of the islan d, edi-
tions and discussions of precisely the two Javanese inscriptions that 
are our focus in this section and the next. He does not refer back to 
his contribution to OV 1927 on the Dieduksman collection, but it is 
clear that in the intervening years, his understanding of the Berlin 
statuette had evolved. For while his iconographic description of the 
image and decipherment of the inscription remain unchanged, he 
now proposes that although “the representation cannot be id entiﬁ ed 
with certainty , ” it is possible that we are “dealing with a Cu ndā” 
(Stutterheim 1929: 41). More generally, he observes:
It will be immediately clear that this statuette too may be called an 
important specimen, for the correction that it allows to our conception 
of Buddhist Central Java. No devout prayer, but an incantation of the 
type that we also ﬁ nd everywhere in Tibet, and which in the eyes of 
 37 Candi Lara Jonggrang is the famous Ĕaiva complex at Prambanan. There 
is every reason to be extremely skeptical of the reliability of this information 
about the provenance of this piece acquired from the collector Dieduksman. 
For our purposes, we assume the exact provenance of this statuette in Central 
Java to be unknown.
 38 In this article, citations from Dutch, French, German and Indonesian 
sources are presented in our own translations.

--- [Page 20] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 87
those who admire Buddhism lends the religion a degraded character 
there. (Stutterheim 1929: 42)
The statuette is still preserved in Berlin, where it is presently part 
of the collection of the Museum für Asiatische Kunst (inventory 
number II 196), and is included in the permanent exhibition of 
Javanese bronzes (pp. 149, 151, 152, ﬁ gs. 1, 3, 4).
After the ﬁ gure had been identi ﬁ ed as “Ten-armed Durg ā” in 
two earlier catalogs,39 the identi ﬁ cation as Cund ā took root from 
1985 onwards, and was retained in three further catalogues pub-
lished by the museum. Moeller was the ﬁ rst to publish a photo of 
the front of the statuette, but made no mention and published no 
photo of the inscription.40 Ghose (2000: 161–162, nr. 241) again 
published only a photo of the statuette, but mentioned the inscrip-
tion and readings done by J.G. de Casparis and Lokesh Chandra , 
without however providing any references for either one. We may 
safely presume that J.G. de Casparis has never published anything 
about this inscription, but that he had furnished a reading to a cu-
rator of the museum by letter or in person.41 Also Lokesh Chandra’s 
reading will have been available to Ghose in the form of an un-
published document, for this scholar’s reading was not published 
before the year 2001, in volume III of his monumental Dictionary  
of Buddhist  Iconography  (Lokesh Chandra 2001: 855–856). Under 
the entry Cund ā nr. 17, we also ﬁ nd there for the ﬁ rst time a publi-
cation of a photo of the back of the statuette showing the inscrip-
tion, and the reading is clearly improved vis-à-vis that published 
twice by Stutterheim. As regards the list of attributes published by 
the latter, Lokesh Chandra’s identi ﬁ cation is slightly di ﬀ erent. We 
 39 MIKB 1971: nr. 299 “inscribed on the back” (without photo); MIKB 
1976: 86, nr. 299 “inscribed on the back” (without photo).
 40 Moeller 1985: 36–38, ﬁ g. 13. See also MIKB 1986: 97, nr. 344 “Ten-
armed Cund ā … inscribed on the back” (without photo).
 41 This assumption is based not only on the general fact that J.G. de 
Casparis was frequently consulted by various museums, auction houses and 
collectors, but also on the availability of direct proof that this had happened 
in the speci ﬁ c case of the Berlin museum. Cf. Moeller 1985: 53, n. 1.

--- [Page 21] ---
88 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
indicate the di ﬀ erences here in bold face:42
akӸamālā | pustaka
ĕaṅkha | padma
goad  (i.e. aṅkuśa) | mirror
khaḍga | daṇḍa
dhyānamudr ā
in the main hands lies a bowl
Despite these di ﬀ erences in the identi ﬁ cation of the attributes, 
Stutterheim’s identi ﬁ cation of the statuette as Cund ā is still 
maintained. This makes the Berlin statuette the only ten-armed 
Cund ā among the many specimens of Cund ā surveyed in Lokesh 
Chandra’s volume. In this connection, it is important to realize 
that many of the eight-armed ‘Cund ās’ that immediately precede 
nr. 17 in the Dictionary  are among those which Gerd Mevissen, in 
his important 1999 article, has most persuasively re-identi ﬁ ed as 
Mahāpratisar ā.43
We now propose to identify the ten-armed Javanese statuette 
kept in Berlin as Mah āpratisar ā too. A ten-armed form of Mah ā-
pratisar ā is known at least in theory, i.e. in chapter 201 of the vis-
ualization manual Sādhanam ālā (see Mevissen 2010: 726). While 
our statuette has just one head, this ten-armed Mah āpratisar ā 
 42 Lokesh Chandra adds after the last item in his list, which is the ‘baton’ 
(daṇḍa): “as corrected by Pauline Scheurleer in her letter of 6 July 1988.” It 
is not clear to what the correction applies.
 43 Lokesh Chandra 2001, nr. 10 = Mevissen 1999, nr. 1; LC 11 = M 12; 
LC 12 = M 6; LC 13 = M 9; LC 14 = M 10; LC 15 = M 7; LC 16 = M 8. In a 
per sonal communication, Gerd Mevissen refers us further to an eight-armed 
‘Bud dhist goddess’ in the Rockefeller collection at the Asia Society, New 
York, whom he considers to be a Mah āpratisar ā. The sculpture was pub-
lished in the catalogs Leaves  from  the Bodhi  Tree (Huntington & Huntington 
1990: cat. 70, where it is said to be from Java) and in Trésors  des arts asi-
atiques  (Musée Cernuschi 2000: cat. 39, where it is said to be from Sumatra). 
The god dess can be viewed online through http://www.asiasocietymuseum.
org/region_object.asp?RegionID=3&CountryID=9&ChapterID=1 7&Ob-
jectID=589 , last visited 18-04-2013.

--- [Page 22] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 89
should have three heads according to the Sādhanam ālā. But this 
is also the case with the eight-armed forms prescribed in sādhana  
collections, which all signi ﬁ cantly postdate the Eastern Indian and 
Javanese icons that Mevissen has re-identi ﬁ ed as Mah āpratisar ā. 
Mevissen’s argument was partly based on the correspondence of 
attributes with those prescribed in sādhana s for the eight-armed 
three-headed female  form, and partly on the same correspond-
ence with those observed in Central and East Asian specimens of 
a male  Mah āpratisara. Now most of these same attributes are also 
observed in our ten-armed statuette. W e identify the attrib utes as 
follows (cf. p. 149, ﬁ g. 1):
akӸamālā (rosary) | pustaka  (book)
ĕaṅkha (conch) | padma  (lotus)
para ĕu (axe) or aṅkuĕa (goad) | cakra  (discus)
khaḍga (sword) | daṇḍa (staﬀ )
in the bottom hands, which are folded,
lies a cintāmaṇi (magic jewel)44 or a pātra (bowl)45 
seated in sattvaparya ṅkāsana
The identi ﬁ cation as Mah āpratisar ā may appear arbitrary on its 
own, but is rendered certain by the inscription. Its text is composed 
of mantras that are speci ﬁ cally dedicated to Mah āpratisar ā and are 
transmitted in the scripture of this goddess, the Mahāpratisar ā-
mahāvidyārājñī that we have discussed above in §2. It is now time 
to present our reading of the inscription (cf. p. 150, ﬁ g. 2):
 44 This is how Lunsingh Scheurleer & Klokke (1988: 72, 98) identify the 
same attribute in the case of other bronzes; it is also observed in  some of the 
stone sculptures from Bumiayu (Sumatra), one of which has been depicted in 
Brinkgreve & Sulistianingsih 2009: 77.
 45 Cf. n. 49  below.

--- [Page 23] ---
90 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
MIKB II 196 (back of statuette )
(1) // °o[ ṃ °a](m  )tava-
(2) re vara vara pravaravi ĕu-
(3) ddhe hu ṃ huṃ phaԆ· pha( Ԇ)· sva-
(4) hā °oṃ (°a)m  tavil(o)-
(5) kini garbhasa ṃrakӼaṇi
(6) °akarsa ṇi huṃ huṃ
(7) phaԆ· pha Ԇ· svah ā //
(8) °oṃ ye te svah ā //46Mahāpratisar āmahāvidyārājñī
oṃ am tavare
vara 2 pravaravi ĕuddhe
hūṃ 2 pha Ԇ 2 svāhā
oṃ am tavilokini
garbhasa ṃrakӼaṇi
ākarӼaṇi hūṃ 2
phaԆ 2 svāhā
(Hidas 2012: 151–152)
The inscription comprises three mantras in total, each initiated by 
oṃ and concluded with svahā (for expected svāhā). If we disregard 
some small orthographic irregularities, the ﬁ rst two are precisely 
the ﬁ rst two mantras of Mah āpratisar ā as they are found in the 
MPMVR. Moreover, in the MPMVR they are conjointly called 
apa rājitāh daya , ‘Spell of the Invicible One (i.e. Mah āpratisar ā),’ 
which indicates that they are meant to form a single unit.46
Although Lokesh Chandra’s reading47 is signi ﬁ cantly more re-
liable than Stutterheim’s, this scholar, who himself has published 
 46 We use the raised circle ° to mark independent ( akӸara) vowels and the 
median dot · to render virāmas. Lokesh Chandra ignores the usual opening 
sign (//, not very clear in this case, but perfectly clear in the Leiden copper-
plate, see n. 69 below), normalizes svāhā throughout, and reads sa[ṃ]karӸaṇi 
in line 6. The cases of phaԂ in l. 3 and 7 all show an akӸara which resem-
bles to varying degrees a p·, and this explains the reading of Stutterheim, 
who also misunderstood all the pha signs, so everywhere read dhap . But it 
still seems possible to read the Ԃ· that context proves we need. In Indonesian 
epigraphy, such mantra elements have often been misunderstood by previ-
ous generations of scholars, who mostly lacked indological training. We may 
limit ourselves here to mentioning the reading of Museum Nasional D140 
published by K.C. Crucq in OV 1929: 274. The text must clearly be read huṃ 
phat· °oṃ instead of Crucq’s hung bap ā oṃ.
 47 Leaving aside the di ﬀ erences caused by normalization, mentioned in 
the preceding footnote, the only signi ﬁ cant di ﬀ erence between his reading 
and ours is that we read akarsa ṇi, a small error for MPMVR ākarӸaṇi, in-
stead of Lokesh Chandra’s sa[ṃ]karӸaṇi.

--- [Page 24] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 91
manuscripts of the Mah āpratisar ā texts and also pointed out her 
presence in Indonesia,48 did not recognize the mantras as being tak-
en from the MPMVR. In his Dictionary , Lokesh Chandra propos-
es several interpretations of the ﬁ rst two mantras, and attempts to 
make it plausible that they would be pertinent to Cund ā. However, 
he contradicts his own interpretation by concluding his discussion 
with the casual remark that Cund ā’s “mantra in all the sources is 
Oṁ cale cule cunde  svāhā” (Lokesh Chandra 2001: 856). Since the 
mantras that we ﬁ nd in the inscription are a perfect match to the 
mantras of Mah āpratisar ā in all transmitted Sanskrit sources for 
that deity, and since the iconography corresponds closely, although 
not perfectly, with other contemporary images convincingly iden-
tiﬁ ed as Mah āpratisar ā, and with the later textual prescriptions for 
that icon, there can, in our opinion, hardly be any doubt about the 
identi ﬁ cation proposed here. It is likely that the common iconog-
raphy of Cund ā, with bowl ( pātra) in the lowest pair of her four 
or more arms, held folded in meditation,49 has here in ﬂ uenced the 
iconography of Mah āpratisar ā, but this does nothing to alter the 
identi ﬁ cation as the latter.
The third mantra, oṃ ye te svahā (read: svāhā), is found on a 
number of other artefacts recovered from Indonesia, always in 
clearly Buddhist context. Lokesh Chandra, apparently unaw are of 
this fact, proposes the unacceptable idea that ye would be “for the 
dative dev yai.” But Stutterheim had already cited the entirely con-
vincing idea, ﬁ rst proposed by Brandes (in Groeneveldt 1887: 228), 
t h a t  i t  i s  an  a b b r e v i a t i o n  o f  th e  w e ll - kn o w n  ye dharm āḥ formu-
la.50 Thi s  f o rm ul a,  w hi c h  i s  c all ed  th e  pratītyasamutp ādah daya  
 48 See Lokesh Chandra 1981 and 1983.
 49 Cf. de Mallmann (1975: 145), who writes about the images of Cund ā 
known to her, that “all have their proper hands in meditation, with the bowl.”
 50 W e  kn o w  this  a b bre vi a ti on  fr o m  a  B u ddhis t  s ta tue tte  fr o m  Ea s t  J a v a  
(Groeneveldt 1887: 193, nr. 657a). A stūpika from the Borobudur site, show-
ing only the akӸaras ye te svā, was ﬁ rst reproduced by Boechari et al. 1979 
(ﬁ g. 18), and recently included in Soekmono & Anom 2005: 153–155 ( ﬁ g. 
6.1.8.2). Further cases are to be found in a forthcoming publication by 
Titi Surti Nastiti (clay artefacts from Candi Gentong) and in Boechari & 
Wibowo 1985/86: 192–193, 196, 240 (gold plaques, Museum Nasional  inv. 

--- [Page 25] ---
92 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
or -gāthā i n  B u d d h i s t  l i t e r a t u r e ,  e n j o y e d  h u g e  p o p u l a r i t y  i n  t h e  
Buddhist world from the 6th century onwards, as it was inscribed 
on a large scale on small clay stūpas and clay tablets, to serve as 
relics inside stūpas.51 It was also used to consecrate images, its in-
scription being equivalent to the relics of the Buddha,52 and so to 
ﬁ nd it inscribed here, albeit in abbreviated form, should hardly be 
surprising.53 However, the fact that the formula in our inscription is 
styled as a mantra, with the circumposition of oṃ … svāhā, proba-
bly indicates a relatively late date in the history of Mah āyāna, as this 
use of the formula only seems to appear in medieval Indian texts.54 
That it is the concluding mantra in the inscription is in accordance 
with the general use of the ye dharm āḥ formula in Mah āyāna liter-
ature, where it is often cited at the end of a text, as is also the case 
nrs. 783a and 783b, 1, 1191 and 7994). But the following two cases included 
in Boechari & Wibowo 1985/86 are most important in this context, for they 
may be considered to constitute positive proof of the correctness of Brandes’ 
hypothesis, by joining the abbreviation to fuller forms of the formula: p. 217 
(gold plaque, inv. nr. 6255b: oṃ ye te svaha  ye dharmm ā hetuprabhav ā hetun  
teӸāṃ tathāgato ca yo nirodha  […]) and p. 222f. (gold plaque, inv. nr. 6522: 
oṃ ye te svah ā ye dharmm ā hetuprabhav ā oṃ). The abbreviated form of 
the ye dharm āḥ formula has also been found on moulded clay tablets from 
Suratthani and Satingpra in what is nowadays Southern Thailand, outside 
of Indonesia proper but still part of the same cultural zone (Boisselier 1968: 
159 – the reference to “un alphabet javanais” here is misleading, for the 
style of writing in question has been found also on Sumatra and Borneo). 
According to Peter Skilling (pers. comm.), the abbreviated form of the ye 
dharm āḥ formula is apparently unknown elsewhere in the Buddhist world. 
Keisho Tsukamoto’s monumental work A Comprehensive  Study  of the Indian  
Buddhist  Inscriptions  (1996–1998) contains no case of oṃ ye te svāhā.
 51 See Boucher 1991 for a brief survey and discussion of these materials.
 52 See Boucher 1991: 14–15 and Bentor 1995: 254.
 53 Perhaps the fact that in later tradition the ye dharm āḥ formula was 
deemed to be among the ﬁ ve dhāraṇīs that are to serve as ‘relics’ of the 
Dharma-body of the Buddha ( dharmak āyaĕarīra; cf. Boucher 1991: 25, 
n. 70; Bentor 1995: 254) inside stūpas is signi ﬁ cant with regard to our in-
scription: the image would not be considered to be fully consecrated until it 
was inscribed with this formula.
 54 Such as the Pratītyasamutp ādah dayavidhidh āraṇī. See Davidson 
2009: 107.

--- [Page 26] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 93
with several Eastern Indian and Nepalese MPMVR manuscripts.55 
So we should regard the mantras as giving an epitome, the ‘heart, ’ 
of the MPMVR, terminated by a mantra that fully consecrated the 
image.
4. A copperplate at Leiden
The starting point of our research, however, was not this Berlin 
statuette, but the artefact to which we now turn, a rather intensive-
ly published copperplate (p. 153, ﬁ g. 5), engraved with a female 
image at the centre of a text.56 The depiction of the female ﬁ gure 
has drawn more scholarly attention than the text. Stutterheim ﬁ rst 
devoted a separate article to this ﬁ gure in 1925. In his previous-
ly mentioned publication of 1929 this was followed by a presenta-
tion of the inscription, the inscribed text, and the textual evidence 
it appeared to provide for Stutterheim’s identi ﬁ cation of the ﬁ g-
ure as Dev ī Durg ā. These two publications about the copperplate 
were later amalgamated and republished in 1956, posthumously, in 
English translation. As will be detailed further below, the currently 
dominant interpretation is due to Lokesh Chandra. In a 1977 a rti-
cle, this scholar presented a new reading of the inscription (with 
some emendations based on Stutterheim’s reading) and argued 
against the identi ﬁ cation as Dev ī Durg ā, pointing out that the in-
scription bears the stamp of a Buddhist dhāraṇī. Lokesh Chandra 
proposed to identify the central image as H ārītī, the Buddhist pro-
tectress of children, with in her arms her youngest and dearest son, 
Priya ṅkara.
 55 See e.g. Hidas 2012: 85, n. 28 and 86, n. 32 for such occurrences in the 
oldest Eastern Indian and the oldest Nepalese manuscript of the MPMVR. 
See Scherrer-Schaub 1994: 711–713 for an example of the pra tī tya sam ut pā-
da h daya  standing at the end of a series of dhāraṇīs.
 56 When we were ﬁ nalizing this article for publication, we came across the 
article dedicated to the Leiden plate by Kayato Hardani (2009). This scholar 
is apparently unfamiliar with many of the relevant facts, co mparable arte-
facts and scholarly publications, and in particular is unaware of the identity 
of the Sanskrit text inscribed on the plate. We therefore hardly refer to this 
article in our discussion below.

--- [Page 27] ---
94 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
Our research focusing initially on the text rather than the image 
engraved on the copperplate has brought to light new evidence that 
r e q u i r e s  u s  t o  r e c o n s i d e r  t h i s  i d e n t i ﬁ cation. For after our re-ex-
amination of Stutterheim’s transliteration (on which also Lokesh 
Chandra’s edition is based), we became aware that the inscrip-
tion can be identi ﬁ ed as a p art o f the ﬁ rst dhāraṇī contained in 
the Mahāpratisar āmahāvidyārājñī, a text which is not related to 
Hārītī. We owe the identi ﬁ cation of the dhāraṇī as such to a com-
m uni c a t i o n  r e c e i v e d  in  2 00 8  b y  e m a il  fr o m  H a run a g a  I s aa c s o n ,  
specialist of Buddhist tantric literature whom we had calle d upon 
to elucidate the inscription after we had hit upon the limits of our 
knowledge, and were unable to advance after our ﬁ rst attempt at a 
fresh reading of the text engraved on the plate.
It was only after learning with which text we were dealing, that 
we re-read the inscription a second time, and were able make many 
signi ﬁ cant improvements in reading upon our own previous at-
tempt, and that of Stutterheim (and Lokesh Chandra). Indeed, one 
of the most important general observations that follow from our 
work with the epigraphic material presented in this study, i s that no 
appreciation of the historical signi ﬁ cance of such ‘citation inscrip-
tions ’ is possible without having access to the range of scri ptural 
texts that could be cited.57 Combined with our new and improved 
reading of this copperplate version of a signi ﬁ cant part of the ﬁ rst 
dhāraṇī, the availability of the recently published work by Gergely 
Hidas (2012) comprising a text-historical study of the various ma-
nu  script versions of the whole Mahāpratisar āmahāvidyārājñī that 
are known from South Asia, may allow us to narrow down the 
 57 We take the term ‘citation inscription’ from Skilling 1999 (see also 
Gri࠳  ths 2011a: 169–171). Virtually no work on citation inscriptions from 
Indonesia has been done by scholars with adequate buddhological compe-
tence. An admirable exception was J.G. de Casparis, whose great bud dho-
logical knowledge is displayed throughout his Prasasti  Indonesia  I & II. We 
dwell on this issue because of the profound disregard for what epigraphi-
cal texts actually say, and hence for the correct decipherment of how they 
say it, that is visible in many Indonesian publications of re cent decades. A 
particularly egregious example is the volume produced by Balai Pelestarian 
Peninggalan Purbakala Yogyakarta in 2007, which coincidentally bears th e 
OD photo 2194 of the Leiden copperplate on its cover.

--- [Page 28] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 95
position of our Indonesian specimen in the history of transmission 
of this Buddhist scripture in Asia. Let us ﬁ rst introduce the few 
facts known and hypotheses that are permissible with regard to 
provenance and date of the copperplate, before we present our new 
edition and text-historical observations, and ﬁ nally return to the 
issue of the identi ﬁ cation of the female ﬁ gure.
History of discovery and provenance
The Leiden plate is among a number of objects given on long-term 
loan by the Kern Institute to the National Museum of Ethnolog y , 
Leiden, where it bears the inventory number B79-1. We learn from 
documents pertaining to the plate held in this museum that the 
plate was donated to the Kern Institute by a Mrs. Dom in April 
1940. Mrs. Dom was presumably the widow of Mr. Dom, formerly 
residing at Cebongan in the vicinity of Yogyakarta, who owned 
the p l ate w hen i t came to the atten ti on o f N .J . Kr om as head o f 
the Archaeological Service ( Oudheidkundige  Dienst ). The museum 
also holds two letters, respectively of April and May 1914, from 
Krom to Dom, in connection wi th the f ormer ’ s request to be al-
lowed to borrow the plate (a request to which the latter consented), 
and the return of the plate to Dom in Cebongan. Krom reported on 
the matter in his archaeological report on the second quarter in OV 
1914: 60–61:
From Mr. G. Dom of Cebongan I received for examination a high-
ly curious copperplate, showing in the centre the representation of 
a female ﬁ gure carrying a child, the whole being surrounded by 36 
lines of Middle-Javanese kawi -writing. The inscription is of particu-
lar importance for our knowledge of Hindu-Javanese religious ide-
as, because it evidently contains several formulas in honour of Dew ī 
w h o  i s  a l s o  h o n o u r e d  b y  m an y  S an s kri t  e p i t h e ta .  ( tr an s l a t i o n  fr o m  
Stutterheim 1956: 147)
No information is preserved about how, when and where Mr. Dom 
acquired the plate. The mentioned Mr. Dom is no doubt Jan George 
Dom, born at Surakarta in 1861, and deceased in The Hague in 

--- [Page 29] ---
96 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
1937, one time administrator of the sugar factory at Cebongan.58 
And it is this Mr. Dom who reported the discovery of a Ĕaiva tem-
ple at Cebongan to the authorities, as cited in OV 1912: 5.59 We 
know therefore that he had an interest in archaeology and is liable 
to have visited sites in the area surrounding his place of residence. 
Now Cebongan falls under the desa Tlogoadi in kecamatan  Mlati 
of kabupaten  Sleman, provinsi  Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta, while 
a neighboring desa, that of Sendangadi, is home to the site Jongke, 
which has yielded numerous Buddhist artefacts (small clay stūpas 
and clay tablets) that probably pertained to some kind of buil ding.60 
We are tempted to speculate that the provenance of our plate is the 
nearby Buddhist site of Jongke. But it should be remembered t hat 
the Dom family, apparently well dispersed in colonial-period Java, 
also counted other members with an interest in archaeology, one 
of whom resided near Candi Sewu,61 so that it cannot be excluded 
that the plate reached G. Dom from further a ﬁ eld, through a fam-
ily connection. In any case, it does not seem advisable to follow 
Fontein 1990 (as well as Kayato Hardani 2009) in associating the 
 58 Information taken from a genealogical website: www.get-it.nl/stam-
boom/index.php.
 59 “According to the message from Mr. G. Dom at Tjebongan , mentioned 
in the previous report, foundations have become visible near the sugar fac-
tory of that name.” The reference to the preceding report is to Rapporten  
van de Oudheidkundige  Commissie  (ROC 1911: 30), where no other relevant 
details are mentioned.
 60 Cf. Bosch & Stutterheim 1938: 17: “Among the investigations under-
taken and ﬁ nds made in 1935 must be mentioned … the investigations in the 
desa Mulungan […] and those in the desa Jongke, where a great number of 
clay-st ūpas and votive tablets were found ( ﬁ g. 13–14).” Although the site is 
not mentioned in the inventory of Degroot (2010), the remains of foundations 
captured in OD photos 11792 and 11793 show that the site of Jongke was 
endowed not only with clay stūpas but also with monumental remains.
 61 Cf. ROC 1911: 74: “In the course of investigations of the antiquities in 
the Prambanan plain my attention was drawn by a very beautiful and remark-
able garuda-piece, that was kept in the garden of Mr. Dom, employee of 
the agricultural enterprise Tjandi Sewu, in front of the former residence of 
Mr. Kläring, where in his time such an important collection of statues had 
been assembled from surrounding ruins.” See also ROC 1911: 76. The ﬁ rst 
initial of this Mr. Dom is not known to us.

--- [Page 30] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 97
plate with Cebongan, because no Buddhist remains have ever been 
found there.62
Physical description
The copperplate, engraved on only one side, is of a slightly concave 
shape. The length of the plate is 36.6 cm; the width is 16.6 cm at 
the top end, 16 cm in the middle, and 16.9 cm at the bottom end. 
Besides displaying what appear to be marks of corrosion (black 
dots), the plate has undergone some damage at the upper right hand 
of the engraved side, where it even shows a small hole. The 36 
lines that make up the inscription almost cover the entire surface 
(about 36.3 × 16.5 cm). A feature unknown to us from any other 
Javanese copperplate inscription is the fact that the lines are paral-
lel to the short, rather than the long sides of the plate. The greater 
part of these lines, 28 in total, are interrupted by the depiction of 
the female ﬁ gure, mentioned several times above, along the center 
of the plate. There are some indications that the plate was cut to its 
present dimensions after the text and ﬁ gure had been engraved (see 
notes 91, 92 and 94 below).
Script and date
The plate is engraved not in a form of Siddham āt kā (i.e. Siddham) 
– which was certainly available for the engraving of a Buddhist 
dhāraṇī inscription in ancient Central Java, and which might have 
been expected given the importance of this script in the trans mis-
sion of this speci ﬁ c dhāraṇī from South Asia to China (see below, 
p. 128, n. 175) –, but in the variety of script which de Casparis has 
 62 On the problem of the provenance of the plate, in relation to Dom’s 
residence at Cebongan, Fontein (1990: 200) writes: “Not far away is Batang, 
where a cache of twenty- ﬁ ve Buddhist bronzes was discovered in 1914.” 
From the publications about this cache of bronzes (see the references in ROC 
1915: 14 = Inventaris  der Hindoe -oudheden , item 1210), which speak of a 
desa Batang, it is in fact impossible to determine the location of the  desa in 
question, and we know of no village of that name near Cebongan. The theo-
retical possibility that the Batang cache and the Leiden copperplate originate 
from the same site can neither be con ﬁ rmed nor excluded.

--- [Page 31] ---
98 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
discussed in chapter II, entitled “Early Kawi Script (c. 750–925),” 
of his handbook on Indonesian  Palaeography  (1975). The plate 
con tains n o date , s o w e ha v e to re l y p rimaril y on p al aeo grap h i c 
arguments for any statement about its possible date of manufac-
ture. The palaeographic method can at best allow an hypothesis 
with regard to a range during which an inscription may have been 
written, precision greater than a range of 50 years generally be-
ing considered unachievable. We intended to apply this method by 
selecting for comparison a number of copperplate inscriptions of 
the central Javanese period (732–928 CE) for which good repro-
ductions were at our disposal, and which would represent di ﬀ erent 
points of time within this range of nearly 200 years. Unfortunat ely, 
it was impossible to cover the whole Central Javanese period, be-
cause the earliest extant copperplate inscription is the Munduan 
inscription of 807 CE.63 The latest that we used is the Wintang Mas 
B inscription of 919 CE ( us in g photo O D 1 0027) .64 For the inter-
vening period we compared the Bulai C inscription (OD 11589) of 
860 CE,65 and the Pintang Mas inscription (OD 10017) of 878 CE.66 
The sample hence covers a period of only 112 years, and moreover 
all the selected inscriptions are charters, whereas our inscription 
contains a dhāraṇī. Even among these four selected charters, there 
are great di ﬀ e r e n c e s  o f  h an d wri tin g  th a t  c ann o t  be  a ttri b u ted  t o  
chronological development; especially the Pintang Mas inscription 
seems much more carelessly engraved than the others, including 
the Leiden plate, which are all more neatly written, and this dimin-
ishes its utility for palaeographic comparison. We have in fact not 
 63 We thank Dr. Ninie Susanti of Universitas Indonesia for giving us ac-
cess to photos of these plates made by her student Kunta. We accept the mil-
lésime  728 Ĕaka read and published by Nakada (1986).
 64 The text was ﬁ rst edited by Cohen Stuart (1875, nr. XX), which edition 
was reproduced by Sarkar (1971–72/II: 192–195). See Damais 1952: 54–55 
and 1955: 52 about the date.
 65 For this inscription, we dispose of independent readings by Damais 
(1955: 24–25) and de Casparis (1956: 330–337).
 66 The text was ﬁ rst edited by Poerbatjaraka (1926: 74–76), which edition 
was reproduced by Sarkar (1971–72/I: 202–207). See Damais 1952: 38–39 
and 1955: 173 about the date.

--- [Page 32] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 99
been able to detect any unequivocal trends from the earliest t o the 
latest inscription, along which we could position the Leiden plate.67 
Although we have the impression that its script agrees bette r with 
the later than with the earlier samples, we think it would be unwise 
t o  b as e  o ur s e l v e s  o n  s u c h  an  im p r e s s i o n  g ain ed  fr o m  a  p o s s i b l y  
unrepresentative sample, and therefore propose a rather wide date 
range, namely between 800 and 925 CE, i.e. roughly between the 
earliest and the latest dated examples of copperplate inscriptions 
from the Central Javanese period. If only for the reason that no 
positiv e e vidence whatsoe v er e xists f or the practice of eng ra ving 
texts on copperplate in Java before the Munduan plate of 807 CE, 
Stutterheim’s casual inclusion of the 8th century in his estimate of 
the date of manufacture of the plate seems to us unwarranted.68
Edition
Bold letters indicate improvements of previously published read-
ings. Other conventions used in our edition and critical notes are 
the following:
  (...) enclose graphic elements whose identi ﬁ cation is uncer-
tain;
  [...] enclose graphic elements which have been damaged and 
which have been conjecturally restored on the basis of the 
elements that are still visible;
  [[]] indicate an empty space on the plate;
  a comma stands for the lowest level punctuation mark ( ﬁ gu-
ring at x-height);
 67 This negative result thus con ﬁ rms the conclusion of J.G. de Casparis: 
“On the whole, the Early Kawi script shows a remarkable stability from the 
middle of the ninth century” (1975: 34). We have found in de Casparis’ hand-
book no discussion relevant to the occurrence of two rather strikingl y diﬀ er-
ent shapes of the akӸara va in our inscription (one a parallelepiped: e.g. lines 
2, 16; the other a circle: line 1), and the possible chronological pertinence of 
this di ﬀ erence.
 68 Stutterheim (1956: 149): “the time of its manufacture […], a time which 
we may tentatively establish on the basis of its script as the 8th or 9th century.”

--- [Page 33] ---
100 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
  the sigla S and LC refer respectively to the ﬁ rst edition 
by Stutterheim (where necessary S29 and S56 to distinguish 
Stutterheim’s original 1929 publication from the 1956 Eng-
lish translation) and the second edition by Lokesh Chandra 
(1977).
  the siglum Gilgit refers to Hidas’ edition of the Mahā prati-
sarā mahāvidyārājñī on the basis of manuscripts from Gilgit, 
northern Pakistan; the siglum EIN refers to Hidas’ separa-
te edition of the text which is based on a selection of ma-
nuscripts from eastern India and Nepal; we refer to the two re-
censions collectively as the South Asian versions. We refer to 
Amoghavajra’s transliterated version (Taish ō 1153) only when 
the Gilgit manuscripts, as the primary representatives of an 
early textual tradition of the Mahāpratisar āmahāvidyārājñī, 
are illegible.
(1) //69 tadyath ā °oṃ vipulagarbhe vipulabimale70 jayagarbhe va-
jrajvālaga-71
(2) rbhbhe72 gatigahane73 gaganavi ĕodhane74 sarbvap āpa viĕo-
 69 //: a punctuation sign which looks like a double daṇḍa with an inter -
secting ﬂ ourish (see ﬁ g. 2 on p. 150 and n. 46 above). Similar signs are 
very common in Javanese epigraphy. Its basic form (and presumable palaeo-
graphic antecedent), a double daṇḍa w i t h  h o r i z o n t a l  c r o s s - s t r o k e ,  i s  s e e n  
very clearly e.g. in the Bukateja inscription (OD 14323, edited in Gri ࠳  ths 
2013).
 70 vipulabimale : S; vipulavimale  LC (silent emendation).
 71 vajrajv āla°: vajrav āla° S; vajrab āla° LC (silent emendation). Our read-
ing is supported by Gilgit (EIN reads vajrajv ālā°).
 72 °rbhbhe : S; ° rbhe LC (silent emendation).
 73 gati°: S; gatī° LC. The plate is slightly worn here so it is di ࠳  cult to de-
termine whether the superscript circle that forms the vocalization i contains 
the small stroke that would make ī. The South Asian versions support S’s 
reading that we also adopt.
 74 °viĕodhane : °viĕobane  S LC; LC emends this to ° viĕodhane . In our 
opinion, one can simply read an akӸara dha here, written with a closed top, 
as is consistently the case further on in this inscription (cf. lines 27–28). The 

--- [Page 34] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 101
dha ne75 °oṃ gu-
(3) navat ī,76 gaganavic āriṇi77 giri giri, gamari gamari, gaha gaha, 
[[]]
(4) rbhbhari garbhbhari, gabhari gabhari78 gambhari gam bha ri, 
gati gati,79 ga
(5) [[]], nigamare80 gubha gubha,81 gūbhani gūbhani82 cule bi-
same word further on in this line, however, shows an akӸara with an open top 
and a small hook at the top right of the akӸara, which has been read by S and 
LC as dha. If a di ﬀ erence of akӸaras was intended, then the di ﬀ erence must 
be between one of the signs ḍ/ḍh/d/dh, which are hard to distinguish, if not 
indistinguishable, in certain varieties of Kawi script, rather than between ba 
and dha.
 75 sarbvap āpaviĕodhane : S; sarvap āpaviĕodhane  LC (silent emendation).
 76 gunavat ī: S; guṇavati  LC (two silent emendations). Though small and 
slightly o ﬀ -centre, the ī mark is certain.
 77 °vicāriṇi: LC; ° vicārini S.
 78 [[]]rbhbhari  garbhbhari , gabhari  gabhari : (ga)rbhbharigarbhbhari , ga-
bha rigabhari  S LC. S’s use of parentheses here means that he proposes to 
supply a ga in the empty space, and this is evidently necessary. The South 
Asian versions, unanimously reading garg āri garg āri / gagari  gagari , sug-
gest that the underlying text of our version is gargg āri gargg āri, gagari  gaga-
ri. Several other cases of confusion g/bh occur further on in this inscription 
(e.g. in l. 32).
 79 gati gati: S29; gatiga  S56 LC. The error in the 1956 English publication 
of S’s reading, omitting ti, recurs in LC’s edition. These mantric syllables 
are not attested in EIN, which instead record gahi gahi; Gilgit is illegible in 
this place, but would probably have read gati gati, as found in Amoghavajra’s 
version.
 80 ga [[]], nigamare : S; ga[ti], nigamare  LC. Comparison with the South 
Asian versions suggests that the akӸara ma has undergone transposition, and 
that the underlying text of our version is gamani , gare (with the ma restored 
to the space left open, and adjusted punctuation). 
 81 gubha  gubha : this reading is attested in Gilgit, whereas EIN reads guha  
guha . 
 82 gūbhani  gūbhani : ibhani  ibhani  S LC. Especially the second gū is quite 
clear. Compare the subscript ū with that of ° pūjite in line 25. The subscript ū 
of the ﬁ rst gū is less clear and appears to lack its bottom part. Gilgit has here 
the single word gubha ṇi. One of the manuscripts of EIN closest to the Gilgit 
tradition reads mumbhani  (E).

--- [Page 35] ---
102 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
male mu-
(6) cəle83 jaye vijaye,84 sarvabhayavigate 
(7) gambhasambhara ṇi siri siri, miri mi-
(8) ri, piri piri, ghiri ghiri85 samā-
(9) ntākamāṇi86 savisatraprama( tha)ni87
(10) rakӼa rak Ӽa mā(ṃ) sapariv āraṃ (sa)rvasatva ṃ-
(11) ĕ88 ca, viri viri, vi(v)idh āvaraṇavinā-
 83 cule bimale  mucəle: S; cule vimale  mucəle LC. Stutterheim (1956: 155) 
expressed his surprise at the use of the pepet  sign: “we would not have ex-
pected an Indonesian sound between all these Sanskrit sounds.” The reason-
ing is misguided, for there is nothing more natural than a dhāraṇī being 
pronounced according to local habits, as is also the case with Amoghavajra’s 
transliterated version into Chinese, which is accompanied by pronunciation 
instructions. Gilgit reads cale muci [le] followed by a lacuna, while several 
EIN versions read cale mucale , so we see a simple case of ca being pro-
nounced as /c ə/, and this fact being re ﬂ ected in spelling.
 84 jaye vijaye : S29; jaya vijaye  S56; jayavijaya  LC. Our reading is con ﬁ rmed 
by EIN.
 85 Both S and LC record a punctuation mark here. Although there is some 
damage to the plate, it does not to us appear to present a punctuation mark.
 86 °kamāṇi: S; ° kama ṇi LC. EIN reads samant ākarӸaṇi, and it is clear that 
this is also the underlying reading of our text, the mā being an easily made 
error for rӸa.
 87 savisatraprama (tha)ni: °pram (adha )ni S; °pram (atha)ni LC. In place of 
S’s emendation (1956: 155) sarvasatvapramathani , LC proposes to emend 
savisatraprama (tha)ni to sarva ĕatrupramathani .  T h i s  a g r e e s  w i t h  E I N .  
The tha is sloppily written (cf. the cases in l. 1, tadyath ā; 20 anāthān; 24 
°mathan ī, the last case also being somewhat sloppy), and the internal stroke 
barely visible, but this reading is de ﬁ nitely more plausible than S’s dha.
 88 mā(ṃ) sapariv āraṃ (sa)rvasatva ṃĕ: Ӹasaparivara  sarvvasatva ṃĕ S; Ӹa
sa pariv āra sarvasattv āṃĕ LC (silent emendation for the last word). Though 
the ﬁ rst akӸara is hard to read on the photographs, consultation of the plate  
proved to be decisive and revealed a mā, the presence of an anu svāra remain-
ing doubtful. But the second anusv āra, in (sa)pariv āraṃ, was clearly visible. 
Our reading is internally con ﬁ rmed by the occurrence of the same phrase, 
rakӸa rakӸa māṃ sapariv āraṃ, in lines 17–18 and 19–20. Hidas’ edition 
reads rakӸa rakӸa māṃ sarvasattv āṃĕ ca without intervening sa pari vāraṃ, 
yet there are several EIN versions that contain the latter element. This sup-
plicatory formula is entirely absent in Gilgit.

--- [Page 36] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 103
(12) ĕini muri muri, mili mili, ka-
(13) male vimale, jaye vi-
(14) jaye jay āvahe jayā-
(15) vati89 bhagavati ratnamaku-
(16) Ԇamal ādhari,90 bahuvidhavicitravemadh[ ā]-
(17) riṇi,91 bhagavati mah āvidyādevi rak Ӽa92
(18) rakӼa māṃ sapariv( ā)raṃ satva ĕ93 ca samant āt sarbap ā-
(19) pavisodhani94 huru huru, rak Ӽa rak Ӽa mā sa-
 89 jayāvahe  jayāvati: jahevatejahe  (or jayāvatejahe ) vati S; jahevatejahe-
vati (emended to jayavati  jayavati ) LC. The consonant that we read as h in 
jayāvahe  (jahevate  S LC) shows certain characteristics – a left stroke that 
slants inward at the top and a squarish bottom part – which are incompat-
ible with a t (cf. the h in vahu °, l. 16). The reading yā (2×) instead of he (2×) 
is equally indisputable. The parallels in Gilgit and EIN, reading jayāvahe  
jayavati , prove that LC’s emendation is not warranted.
 90 ratnamaku Ԃamal ādhari ,: S; ratnamaku Ԃamālādhari  LC (silent emenda-
tion). Both S and LC omit the following punctuation mark. Almost all EIN 
verions read ratnaku Ԃamālādhari , whereas Gilgit has ratnaku Ԃamālādhāriṇi. 
 91 bahuvidhavicitravemadh [ā]riṇi: bahuvidhavicitravemadhari ṇi S; bahu-
vidha vicitravemadh āriṇi LC (silent emendation). The ﬁ nal akӸara at the end 
of l. 16 may well have borne the stroke making the vocalization ā, which 
accidentally came to be removed when the plate was trimmed to its present 
shape, after the engraving of the text. Compare the missing upward stroke 
of kӸa at the end of the next line, and the missing downward stroke of the pā 
at the end of line 18. The concave shape of the plate may thus partly be ex-
plained by a slightly inattentive process of ﬁ nal trimming. The South Asian 
versions read bahuvividhavicitrave Ӹadhāriṇi, and this must be the underly-
ing reading of our version too (cf. another case of m for Ӹ, in l. 9).
 92 rakӸa: the upward stroke of the subscript Ӹa is missing, probably due to 
trimming of the plate. See the preceding note.
 93 māṃ sapariv (ā)raṃ satva ĕ: mā(ṃ) saparivara ṃ Ӹatvaĕ S; mā sapa ri vā-
raṃ sattv āṃĕ LC (silent emendation). See note   88 on ll. 10–11. Hidas’ edition 
is again di ﬀ erent here ( rakӸa rakӸa māṃ sarvasattv āṃĕ ca), though in this 
case too there are EIN versions where sapariv āraṃ is included. Gilgit ( rakӸa 
rakӸa mama  Dina ĕinasya ) does not contain the word. EIN suggests that LC’s 
emendation is not su ࠳  ciently far-reaching, and that the underlying reading is 
sar va sattv āṃĕ (as in l. 20).
 94 samant āt sarbap āpavisodhani : S; samant āt sarvap āpaviĕodhani  LC 
(silent emendations). Again, the downward stroke of the ﬁ nal akӸara of line 

--- [Page 37] ---
104 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
(20) pariv āraṃ95 sarvvasatva ĕ96 ca °an āthān atrāṇān97 apa-
(21) r āyaṇān98 aĕaraṇān· parimoca ya99 saba-
(22) duḥlebhya ḥ100 caṇḍi caṇḍi caṇḍini vegavat ī101 sarva-
(23) duӼԆanivāraṇī102 vijayav āhinī,103 huru huru mu-
18 (pā) appears to be missing. See notes 91 and 92. Comparison with Gilgit 
and EIN shows that our version has lost sarvatra  from an original sequence 
samant āt sarvatra  sarvap āpaviĕodhani , an evident case of eye-skip.
 95 mā sapariv āraṃ: S LC. It is probably necessary to restore māṃ (cf. l. 10 
and especially 18). Also in this case sapariv āraṃ is not attested in Gilgit and 
in some of the EIN versions.
 96 sarvvasatva ĕ: S; sarvasattv āṃĕ LC (silent emendation). Clearly, LC’s 
emendation, supported also by EIN, is to be adopted (cf. the emendation we 
have proposed in l. 18, in n. 93).
 97 atrāṇān: LC; atrāṇan S. Compared to the full- ﬂ edged cases of ṇā in 
apar āyaṇān aĕaraṇān (l. 21), the presence of a long ā vocalization is here 
indeed not evident (cf. S’s reading), but since ṇ normally does not show a 
headmark ( kuncir ), we presume that the appendix is indeed intended as ā.
 98 apar āyaṇān: apabhaya ṇān S; apabhaya ṇān LC (silent emendation). 
Our reading is supported by the South Asian versions.
 99 parimocaya : parimocala  S LC. LC emends to parimocaya , but it is not 
necessary to emend in order to arrive at this reading. The leftmost upward 
stroke of the roundish akӸara identi ﬁ ed as ya does not touch the top part of 
its middle stroke; a la can therefore be excluded. The South Asian versions 
support the reading we adopt here.
 100 sabadu ḥlebhya ḥ: sa(r)badu ḥlebhya ḥ S; sa(r)vadu ḥlebhya ḥ LC. The no-
tation ( r) in these readings denotes the addition of an r that is not written 
on the plate. S (1956: 156) proposes to read ° duḥkhebhya ḥ and, like LC, we 
adopt this emendation, to yield sarvadu ḥkhebhya ḥ as in the South Asian ver-
sions. The consonants l and kh are easily confused in Kawi script.
 101 caṇḍi caṇḍi caṇḍini vegavat ī: S29; caṇḍi caṇḍini vegavat ī S56; caṇḍi 
caṇḍini vegavati  LC (repetition of error from S56 and silent emendation of 
ﬁ nal ī). Except for the ﬁ nal ī, our version here agrees precisely with Gilgit, 
while EIN reads caṇḍi 2 caṇḍe 2 caṇḍini 2 vegavati  (with considerable varia-
tion in the mss., some, e.g., not containing caṇḍe 2 which is also absent in 
Gilgit and our version).
 102 sarvadu ӸԂanivāraṇī: sarvadu ӸԂaniĕāraṇī S LC. LC emends to ° niḥ sa-
ra ṇi. This emendation is unwarranted. The plate clearly reads vā and not ĕā, 
and the South Asian versions read ° nivāraṇi.
 103 vijayav āhinī: vijayav āhini S LC.

--- [Page 38] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 105
(24) ru muru, curu curu °ayump ālanī,104 suravaramathan ī105
(25) sabadevaga ṇapūjite106 ciri dhiri,107 samant āva-
(26) lokite pra re prabhe108 suprabhavi ĕuddhe ,109 sa-
(27) rbap āpavisodhani110 dhara dhara dharani
(28) dhare dhare111 musu musu, sumu sumu
 104 curu °ayump ālanī,: curu, ayump ālanī S; curu, ayump ālani LC (silent 
emendation). Both S and LC insert a punctuation mark before °ayump ālanī 
(where the plate shows none) and omit it after that word (where the plate clear-
ly shows one). In the South Asian versions, the manuscripts read āyupālani, 
āyuḥpālani or āyuӸpālani. The latter is probably also the underlying reading 
of our version, for we have noted other errors m for Ӹ in our version (above, 
l. 9 and 16).
 105 suravaramathan ī: S; suravaramathani  LC (silent emendation). 
Gilgit and one of the EIN manuscripts (N) similarly read suravarama-
tha ni, whereas all other EIN manuscripts read suravarapramathani  or 
su ra  vara ripupramathani .
 106 sabadevaga ṇapūjite: sa(r)badevaga ṇasvadite  S; sarvadevaga ṇasvadite  
LC (silent emendation). Though the photographs might have permitted the 
reading of S and LC, inspection of the plate clearly reveals ° pūjite, in accor-
dance with the South Asian versions.
 107 ciri dhiri : virivir ī S; viri viri LC. The consonants c and v are not consis-
tently distinguishable (cf. the sequences vidhavivici  in l. 16, and curu curu in 
l. 24). Since its bottom part is dented, the third akӸara in the sequence must 
be read as dhi. Our reading for the entire sequence ﬁ nds support in the South 
Asian versions: Gilgit reads dhiri  dhiri , which is also attested by two EIN 
manuscripts (N, L), and the majority of the EIN manuscripts have ciri ciri 
dhiri  dhiri . There is one EIN manuscript (E), however, which has viri viri, 
and two other, probably later, versions which have ciri ciri viri viri.
 108 prare  prabhe : pradhaprabhe  S LC; S (1956: 156) was already doubtful 
about this reading and LC emends to prabha -prabhe . The underlying reading 
is, however, certainly prabhe  prabhe , as in the South Asian versions. The top 
and right strokes of the consonant in the ﬁ rst akӸara bhe have been drawn 
too short, with the result that it must be read as re. The presence of the e-
vocalization ( taling ) is evident. There is certainly no dha here.
 109 Both S and LC omit this punctuation sign.
 110 sarbap āpavisodhani : S; sarvap āpaviĕodhani  LC (silent emendations).
 111 dharani  dhare  dhare : S; dhara ṇi dhare  dhare  LC (silent emendation). 
Gilgit reads dhara ṇivaradhare , and Hidas’ edition of the EIN versions has 
dhara ṇidhare . But among the EIN manuscripts there are several variations, 

--- [Page 39] ---
106 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
(29) pumu vumu, ruru ruru cale112
(30) cālaya du ӼԆān puyāĕāṃ113 ĕrīvapu-
(31) jayakamale114 kӼiṇi kӼiṇi vara-
(32) dāṅkuśe115 °oṃ padmavisuddhe116 bhara gara,117 giri giri,118 
such as dhara ṇi dhara ṇi dhare  / dhare  dhare  (N), so it is not necessary to 
conclude that our version is closer to Gilgit.
 112 musu  musu , sumu  sumu  pumu  vumu , ruru ruru cale: musumusu , sumu-
sumu  pumupumu , ruru ruru cale S LC. The akӸara pu can easily be an error 
for su, and Gilgit indeed reads sumu  sumu  sumu  / ruru cale, while EIN reads 
sumu  sumu  / sumuru  sumuru  / ruru cale. None of the South Asian versions 
thus includes a sequence pumu  pumu , and the second ostensible pu of S and 
LC can certainly not be read as such. Something seems to have gone askew 
here in our version, which possibly presupposes an underlying sequence 
sumu  sumu , sumuru  sumuru , ruru cale. 
 113 duӸԂān puyāĕāṃ : duӸԂaṃ Ӹuyāĕāṃ  S; duӸԂam suyāĕān LC (silent emen-
dations). The headmark of the n in npu is remarkably pronounced and is no 
doubt the result of a misinterpretation of an original ra after npu. Gilgit reads 
cālaya duӸԂān pūraya me āĕāṃ , and EIN cālaya sarvadu ӸԂān / pūraya āĕāṃ , 
so it is evident that our version has lost this syllable. It is noteworthy that 
three EIN manuscripts (I, L, N), like Gilgit, read only duӸԂān, without sarva , 
as in our version.
 114 ĕrīvapujayakamale : S LC. Comparison with the South Asian versions 
(Gilgit: ĕrīvapudhana ṃjayakamale ; EIN: ĕrīvapurdhare  jayakamale ) sug-
gests that two syllables have been lost before jayakamale .
 115 varad āṅkuĕe: varad āṅgaje S LC; S mentions in a note the alternative 
possibility of reading varad āṅguje. Our reading, unmistakable on the plate, 
is supported by the South Asian versions.
 116 padmavisuddhe : S; padmavi ĕuddhe  LC (silent emendation). The South 
Asian versions read ĕodhaya  ĕodhaya  ĕuddhe  after this (EIN with repetition 
of ĕuddhe ), and it is clear that this sequence has been lost in our version due 
to eye-skip.
 117 bhara  gara: garagara  S LC. The South Asian versions read bhara  bha-
ra. The consonants bh and g are notoriously hard to distinguish in Kawi 
script, and it is clear in this context that a whole row of underlying bh’s have 
been misread as g’s (and at a subsequent stage g’s as k’s) in the tradition 
preceding our version, but the slight nick in the top left corner of the akӸara 
that we read as bha seems to indicate that this akӸara at least was intended to 
contain a bh and not a g. See the following notes.

--- [Page 40] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 107
kuru118 kuru119 maṅgalavi ĕuddhe120
(33) pavitramu khi121 ladgani khadgani,122 lara khara,123 jvalita-
ĕilare124 samantapras ā-
(34) ritāvabh āsitasuddhe125 jvala jvala,126 sarbadevaganasam ākar-
paṇi127 satyabra-
(35) te128 tara tara t āraya sarbasatv ān nāgavilokite129 lahu lahu 
tuhu tuhu
 118 giri giri: S LC. The South Asian versions read bhiri  bhiri . See the pre-
ceding note.
 119 kuru kuru: S LC. The South Asian versions read bhuru  bhuru . See the 
preceding notes.
 120 maṅgalavi ĕuddhe : the presence of a stroke above the ﬁ nal akӸara is 
unmistakable. However, it is o ﬀ -centre and to the left of the akӸara, and 
therefore it is probably not intended as ṃ. It may be accidental or perhaps it 
represents a misplaced punctuation sign. 
 121 pavitramukhi : pavitramuli  S; pavitram ūli LC (silent emendation). Our 
reading, unmistakable on all photos, is also supported by EI N. Gilgit reads 
pavitramukhe .
 122 ladgani  khadgani : laṅgani laṅgani S LC. EIN reads khaḍgini khaḍgini 
(Gilgit: khagini  khagini ), and our plate turns out to present a close variant, 
clearly showing dg rather than ṅg. The plate further presents one case of the 
very simple confusion of la and kha (see the next notes).
 123 lara khara : laralara  S LC. The South Asian versions read khara  khara , 
and this is clearly the underlying text of our version too, despite the occur-
rence of another case of la for kha (see the preceding and following notes).
 124 jvalita ĕilare: jvalita ĕīlare S LC. Nothing on the plate requires reading 
a long ī. Rather, we have here another case of la for kha (cf. the preceding 
notes), for Gilgit reads jvālitaĕikhare  and EIN reads jvalita ĕikhare .
 125 samantapras āritāvabh āsitasuddhe : S; samantapras āritāvabh ā sita ĕud-
dhe LC (silent emendation). Adopting LC’s emendation, our version agrees 
with some of the EIN manuscripts (C, D, H, I, L). Gilgit reads samantapra-
sari tāvabh āsitaĕuddhe , which is also attested in some other EIN manuscripts 
(E, J, K, O). Several EIN manuscripts insert some words in front of this 
com pound.
 126 Both S and LC ignore the punctuation sign here.
 127 sarvadebaganasam ākarpa ṇi: sarbadevaganasam ākarpa ṇi (emended to 
°karӸaṇi) S; sarvadevaga ṇasam ākarӸaṇi LC (silent emendations). The South 
Asian versions support the emendations proposed by S and LC.
 128 satyabrate : S; satyavrate  LC (silent emendation).

--- [Page 41] ---
108 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
(36) turu1 2 9turu, ghiri ghiri ha ṇi haṇi, kӼaṇi kӼaṇi,130 sarbagraha-
rakӼiṇi131
Comparison of the text with other versions
The ﬁ rst thing that is striking is that the Leiden version ends 
abruptly, at about one third of the dhāraṇī as it occurs in the oth-
er versions.132 The fact that the dhāraṇī is incomplete raises the 
question whether the inscription stood on its own, or whether the 
inscription was part of a set of copperplates containing the entire 
dhāraṇī, and perhaps even the four mantras. It is clear that in the 
execution of the inscription, the image took primacy, as can be seen 
in the upright position of the copperplate – contrary to the manner 
in which copperplates are usually inscribed in Indonesia (and also 
in India) – and the aligned arrangement with the female ﬁ gure in 
the centre and the lines of the text interrupted by it.133 Nevertheless, 
 129 sarbasatv ān nāgavilokite : sarbasatv āntā(da)vilokite  S; sarvasattv ān-
tāvalokite LC (silent emendations). S’s parentheses seem here to denote that 
he proposes to expunge the syllable in question. But his text, which served 
as the basis for LC’s emendation, is far from what the plate actually reads. It 
is the reading adopted here which is supported by the South Asian versions. 
They show some mutual variants for these words and their context, and there 
is quite a bit of variation among the EIN manuscripts, but the support for 
nāgavilokite  is practically unanimous.
 130 lahu lahu tuhu tuhu turu turu, ghiri  ghiri  haṇi haṇi, kӸaṇi kӸaṇi: S LC. 
Gilgit is less extended and reads lahu lahu / hutu hutu / kӸiṇi kӸiṇi. The EIN 
manuscripts show substantial variation, and Hidas’ edition reads lahu lahu 
hulu hulu hutu hutu turu turu kiṇi kiṇi kӸiṇi kӸiṇi hani hani.
 131 sarbagraharak Ӹiṇi: S; sarva ° LC (silent emendation). Both S and LC 
record a punctuation mark after ° rakӸiṇi, where there is none on the plate. 
All South Asian manuscripts collated by Hidas read sarvagrahabhak Ӹaṇi, 
except one (I), which has the minor variant sarvagrahabhak Ӹiṇi. 
 132 It does not appear to end at a signi ﬁ cant juncture of the text, except 
that the ﬁ nal epithet is clearly to be taken with the preceding set of mantric 
imperatives, due to its alliterative kӸ and ṇi sounds; in most other versions 
the text continues with a reduplicated epithet, piṅgali 2, and a new string of 
mantric imperatives.
 133 Among the Central and East Asian specimens one ﬁ nds similar arrange-
ments, such as the Suzhou print mentioned on p. 81–82 (with n. 25), in 

--- [Page 42] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 109
it is hard to imagine that those who believed in the e ࠳  cacy of the 
Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī and made this inscription (or had it made) 
would have settled for an incomplete version of the invocation to 
the dhāraṇī deity. Also the fact that there is at least one other in-
s tance in B uddhis t ep i grap hi cal reco r ds o f a dhāraṇī inscription 
consisting of several pieces134 makes it probable that the Leiden 
plate is in fact the only surviving one of a set of inscribed copper-
plates.
Comparison of the part of the text that is preserved on this plat e 
with other extant versions of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī reveals 
that textual interrelations are rather complex. The Leiden version 
does not show direct kinship with any of the other extant versions. 
The textual tradition to which it belonged clearly was not relat-
ed to that of the Gilgit version, nor does it show particular a ࠳  ni-
ty with Amoghavajra ’ s version. At several places it appears  to be 
more elaborate than the latter, and it shares many of these variants 
with the later Nepalese and Eastern versions, especially with the 
Nepalese version from 1063 CE. Over and against these elabora-
tions and modi ﬁ cations, however, there are instances where it at-
tests to an earlier, less elaborate version of the dhāraṇī. Although 
we must keep in mind that di ﬀ erent versions, of varying degrees of 
elaboration, of a given text may have circulated in di ﬀ erent locali-
ties in the Buddhist world at the same  time, our textual comparison 
thus seems to place the Leiden version in between Amoghavajra’s 
8th-century version and the Nepalese and Eastern Indian versions 
dating to the 11th century and onwards. This is in agreement with 
the dating on palaeographical grounds; unfortunately, due to the 
lack of other witnesses belonging to this period, it is impossible 
to be more exact than stating that, textually, the Leiden version 
which the text also is arranged horizontally – not concentrically, as in most 
other Central and East Asian prints – with the image (of Buddha Tejaprabha) 
at the centre dividing the text.
 134 This is the dhāraṇī inscription containing the Sarvatath āgatā dhi-
ӸԂhā  nah daya  on six granite tablets (overlapping in some places), found at 
Abhayagiri, Sri Lanka, that was identi ﬁ ed and discussed in Schopen 1982. 
This dhāraṇī inscription was found inside a stūpa and thus certainly did not 
function as an amulet.

--- [Page 43] ---
110 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
belongs to the 9th–10th century.135
In order not to interrupt too heavily at this stage our presenta-
tion of the Leiden copperplate, we have relegated to an appen dix 
our detailed textual comparison of the edited text with other ver-
sions. We now turn here to the iconographic problem posed by the 
image of a female ﬁ gure depicted on the plate.
The identi ﬁ cation of the female ﬁ gure
Building on the observations by Krom cited above (OV 1914), 
Stutterheim devoted in 1925 a ﬁ rst study to the identi ﬁ cation of the 
female ﬁ gure (pp. 153–154, ﬁ gs. 5–6) as well as its signi ﬁ cance 
for the history of ‘Hindu-Javanese’ art. According to Stutterheim, 
the ﬁ gure was to be identi ﬁ ed as Dev ī Durg ā and the copperplate 
therefore had to belong to a Ĕaiva milieu. The essential element in 
this identi ﬁ cation as Dev ī Durg ā was the word devī, occurring in 
the text on the plate (Stutterheim 1925: 248, 1956: 148).136 As was 
mentioned above, in 1977 Lokesh Chandra convincingly showed 
that the text on the plate is, to the contrary, a Buddhist dhāraṇī. He 
therefore rejected the identi ﬁ cation as Dev ī Durg ā and suggested 
instead that the ﬁ gure is the Buddhist goddess H ārītī, who is a pro-
tectress of children and was known as such in Java.137 However, as 
we now know, the text is a part of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī and 
 135 Perhaps a comprehensive textual comparison with the Central and 
East Asian dhāraṇī prints, as well as the 10th-century Tibetan version from 
Dunhuang, would shed more light on the textual interrelations and allow for 
more precision in terms of dating.
 136 Kayato Hardani (2009) identi ﬁ es the ﬁ gures as Cidy ā Dew ī, which 
would be a local ‘fertility deity,’ and suggests that she played a role within 
a Vai Ӽṇava religious context. This suggestion is based on the wrong reading 
bhagavatimah  cidyā devi, which di ﬀ ers from other published readings, and 
our own: bhagavati  mahāvidyādevi.
 137 Lokesh Chandra’s article was unfortunately overlooked in the catalogue 
Divine  Bronze  (Lunsingh Scheurleer & Klokke 1988), where the plate was in-
cluded as item 64 (p. 116), and the description still relied only on Stutterheim 
1956. Two years later, in the catalogue The Sculpture  of Indonesia  (Fontein 
1990: 200, cat. no. 50, with a splendid photograph on the facing page), Jan 
Fontein unreservedly accepted Lokesh Chandra’s identi ﬁ cation.

--- [Page 44] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 111
the goddess of the text is Mah āpratisar ā. As a result, we presently 
have a third possibility, namely that the ﬁ gure depicted on the plate 
is Mah āpratisar ā and that she is shown in a composition similar 
to that of East Asian examples, where (a male) Mah āpratisara is 
depicted centrally and the Mahāpratisaradh āraṇī surrounds it (as 
in Mevissen 1999: ﬁ gs. 8.9 to 8.12). Let us review all these pos-
sibilities and adduce new evidence on the basis of a stylistic and 
iconographic analysis of the ﬁ gure.
It is certain that the devī in the text does not refer to Dev ī, the 
spouse of Ĕiva who is in certain contexts also known as Durg ā, 
but to the Buddhist Mah āpratisar ā. Moreover, the most signi ﬁ cant 
aspect of the iconography of the ﬁ gure is the baby held in a sling, 
and this is not a feature characterizing any brahmanical Dev ī, as 
Lokesh Chandra has already noted (1977: 466). Thus, neither the 
text nor the iconography of the ﬁ gure support the identi ﬁ cation of 
the female ﬁ gure on the Leiden copperplate as such a Dev ī.
The identi ﬁ cation as H ārītī would ﬁ t better, because in the 
Buddhist context, this is the goddess par excellence  who is associ-
ated with children, because H ārītī was known in insular Southeast 
Asia, as is evidenced by a number of sculptures from Java and Bali, 
and because these carry a child, in conformity with the general 
iconography of H ārītī and speci ﬁ cally with the iconography of the 
female ﬁ gure on the copperplate.
In Java and Bali two iconographic types of H ārītī can be distin-
guished. The ﬁ rst is a sitting type holding a child on the lap, as on 
Candi Mendut (Bernet Kempers 1959: pl. 56; 1976: 239) and also 
on Candi Banyunibo, both in Central Java dating to the late 8th or 
early 9th century, and in two sculptures from Bali, dating to the 10th 
and late 11th century.138 The second type is a standing ﬁ gure most 
clearly represented in a sculpture from Sikuning (Mount Arjuna, 
East Java) probably from the 13th century (Fontein 1990: 172–173), 
and in a terracotta from Trowulan (Agus Aris Munandar & Diding 
 138 One from Goa Gajah, presumably dating to the 10th century, and one 
from Pejeng with a date corresponding to 1091 CE (Stutterheim 1929–1930 I: 
76, 85, 130–131, 142; II: ﬁ gs. 25 and 38; 1935: pl. 9; Bernet Kempers 1978: 
124, 130).

--- [Page 45] ---
112 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
Fahrudin 2012: ﬁ g. 6). The sitting type can most convincingly be 
identi ﬁ ed as H ārītī: the Central Javanese examples are associat-
ed with a male companion, thus conforming to a common icono-
graphic type of H ārītī, and are found in an unmistakably Buddhist 
context, on Buddhist temples; one of the Balinese examples, that 
from Goa Gajah, is also found in association with Buddhist ma teri-
al remains. For the standing ﬁ gure from Sikuning the identi ﬁ cation 
is less certain, because little is known about its original context. 
However, the fact that this is clearly a deity – she is standing on a 
lotus pedestal, wears a crown and has a halo around the head – and 
that she holds another child besides the baby in the sling, might 
indeed point to H ārītī, who is often represented with more than 
one child. The same holds true for the terracotta from Trowulan. 
If, however, an image holding a child is not characterized as a de-
ity, the identi ﬁ cation as H ārītī becomes more doubtful, as in the 
case of the standing terracotta ﬁ gure from Sungai Mas (Malaysia), 
which Nik Hasan Shuhaimi identi ﬁ ed as H ārītī (1988: 28–29; see 
also Jacq-Hergoualc’h 1992: 243), and the terracotta sitting ﬁ gures 
from Trowulan, East Java, which Edi Triharyantoro identi ﬁ ed as 
Hārītī (see Fontein 1990: 172; Soemantri 1997: 131). Such ﬁ gures 
may also relate to an older local tradition of maternity ﬁ gures, as 
exempli ﬁ ed in the ‘bronze weaver,’ a late bronze-age image of a 
woman sitting in a weaving loom while holding a baby, which was 
found in Flores and has been dated to the 6th century (Maxwell 
2006; 2010: 71–72), a standing bronze maternity ﬁ gure from East 
Kalimantan presumably from the same period (Maxwell 2010: 
74–75), and more recent wooden maternity ﬁ gures from various 
places in insular Southeast Asia (Maxwell 2010: 75–77). Without 
any further evidence these Malaysian and East Javanese images 
cannot therefore be identi ﬁ ed as H ārītī.139
Returning to the ﬁ gure on the Leiden copperplate and its possi-
ble identi ﬁ cation as H ārītī, the question arises why one would depict 
Hārītī in association with a Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī. This could be 
 139  A bronze ﬁ gure from Java held in Vienna has also been identi ﬁ ed as 
Hārītī (Heine-Geldern 1925: 23, pl. 16) but without any iconographic fea-
tures arguing speci ﬁ cally for this identi ﬁ cation, not even a child. 

--- [Page 46] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 113
because one of the important aspects of the dhāraṇī is its supposed 
e࠳  cacy at the dangerous time of childbirth. Both Mah āpratisar ā 
and H ārītī are thus associated with fertility and childbearing, and 
may hence become associated with each other. Gerd Mevissen 
(2006) has drawn our attention to a 19th-century temple complex in 
Nepal where Mah āpratisar ā, as one of the Pañcarak Ӹā deities, was 
represented on a temple dedicated to H āratī/Hārītī, which demon-
strates that in any case in Nepal at some point this association was 
actually made and visualized. With respect to the female ﬁ gure on 
the copperplate, we may further wonder why she is not character-
ized as a deity, as Stutterheim already noted (1956: 156). The fe-
male ﬁ gure does not stand on a lotus pedestal, does not have a halo, 
and is sparsely adorned. She seems to wear a belt to hold her dress 
and maybe there is a simple necklace, which, however, may also be 
a piece of the baby sling. She does not wear a crown, earrings, arm-
lets or bracelets, all of which would belong to the normal attire of 
a goddess. One explanation might be, as suggested by Jan Fontein, 
that the ﬁ gure, unlike the usual iconography of H ārītī, shows the 
demonic origin of the goddess in that the hair is unkempt (Fontein 
1990: 200).140 But is this the case? And if so, would one not expect to 
ﬁ nd other demonic features as well: bulging eyes, thick curly hair, 
fangs protruding from the mouth? Thus, while both the Buddhist 
context, now beyond doubt, and the most signi ﬁ cant iconographical 
feature of the ﬁ gure (carrying a baby), may point to H ārītī, some 
doubts as to this identi ﬁ cation remain because the ﬁ gure does not 
conform to all aspects of H ārītī’s usual iconography.
Finally, as concerns the third possible identi ﬁ cation, as Mah ā-
prati sar ā, it has become clear from the research carried out by Gerd 
Mevissen that this deity has a clearly de ﬁ ned iconography. In texts 
she is described as a multi-armed and multi-headed goddess. In im-
ages from eastern India and Java, she is represented as an eight or 
ten-armed and single-headed deity (Mevissen 1999, and §1 above). 
The ﬁ gure on the Leiden copperplate does not conform to this ico-
nography. Thus, while the text might point to Mah āpratisar ā, the 
 140 Stutterheim notes demonic traits on the image from Goa Gajah, Bali, 
but these are not clear on the photograph (Stutterheim 1929–1930 I: 131).

--- [Page 47] ---
114 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
iconography of the ﬁ gure is clearly not that of Mah āpratisar ā.
So what should we conclude? That the most likely identi ﬁ cation 
is still that of H ārītī as suggested by Lokesh Chandra? Let us re-
consider the style and attributes of the ﬁ gure and see whether this 
can adduce some new information.
While Stutterheim suggested links with representations of 
women in murals at Ajanta, to us these are not very clear. Rather, 
the way in which the face of the baby was drawn and the style of 
the hairdo to us seem reminiscent of Chinese art. Since other ev-
idence exists for Chinese in ﬂ uence in Central Javanese art during 
the late 8th or early 9th century (see for instance Woodward 1977 
and Klokke 2008: 164–165) and since the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī 
and its deity also connect to China we have begun to search for 
more information in Chinese art. This has not, however, led to any 
clear results so far.141
We need to consider three further noteworthy features displayed 
by the ﬁ gure, besides the baby in the sling. One, already mentioned 
above, is that the ﬁ gure is not characterized as a deity. Another 
is that she wears a speci ﬁ c headdress. Although Stutterheim had 
already noted this feature, it was neglected in later publications. 
According to his description the female ﬁ gur e i s “ cr o wned wi th 
a decoration in eight parts which vaguely evokes a chrysanthe-
mum” (1956: 149); further on he describes her as “wearing on her 
head a strange-shaped crown of ‘chrysanthemum’ leaves bend-
ing inward” (1956: 156). Let us take a closer look at this peculiar 
headdress (p. 154, ﬁ g. 6). We see that what might at ﬁ rst sight 
seem to be strands of unkempt hair are in fact elements attach ed 
to a headband. Each of these elements has a line in the middle 
 141 Interestingly, in Chinese and Japanese art Guanyin and Kannon (Ava-
loki teĕvara) came to be represented in an iconographic form carryin g a child. 
However, we could not ﬁ nd any references to this form of Guanyin/Kannon 
in the 8th–9th century nor did we ﬁ nd any connections with the woman de-
picted on the Leiden plate. Moreover, the specialists of East Asian art whom 
we showed a photograph of the plate did not observe any clear links with 
East Asian art. Also, it occurred to us that carrying a child in a sling in this 
speci ﬁ c manner points to a Javanese rather than a Chinese context. 

--- [Page 48] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 115
that does not continue up to the top, which suggests that they  are 
feathers.142 This diadem seems to be a s i gni ﬁ cant element of the 
iconography of this ﬁ gure. It reminded us of one of the R āmāyaṇa 
reliefs on the Brahm ā temple of the Loro Jonggrang temple com-
plex in Prambanan, Central Java (p. 155, ﬁ g. 7), that shows S ītā 
who has just given birth to her son Lava, with a similar diadem 
consisting of a headband to which up w ard pointing elements a re 
attached.143 Bernet Kempers compares this diadem to the European 
wet nurse’s bonnet and accordingly identi ﬁ es the lady with the dia-
dem as the wet nurse (1976: 239). We think he was here misled by 
the European custom he is referring to and that the lady wearing 
the diadem and carrying the child is not the wet nurse but S ītā, 
who has just delivered, because her jewellery is the richest of all 
the ladies in the relief, because the two other ladies carry simi-
lar beehive-shaped headdresses, suggesting they are similar types 
(both birth attendants), and because the front one makes the abha-
ya mudr ā with her right hand, clearly to avert danger for the mother 
and child sitting in front of her. This seems to be supported by 
another relief, at Borobudur, that shows a mother just before and 
just after she has delivered (Krom & van Erp 1920–1931: relief II B 
21). On the left of this relief three female birth attendants are help-
ing a pregnant woman; in the next scene we see the woman with 
a child on her lap; the birth attendants sit in front and behind her 
with bowls, maybe to clean the child (p. 156, ﬁ g. 8). The mother 
now wears a similar diadem as S ītā in the Loro Jonggrang relief; 
in the ﬁ nal scene the three female birth attendants walk away; their 
job is ﬁ nished. A similar scene can also be observed on a gold 
pubic cover.144 Here the mother sits in the centre and caresses with 
her right hand the head of a baby that is lying on the lap of a birth 
attendant sitting on her right side; another birth attendant, on her 
 142 We are grateful to Sjoerd Didden, wigmaker and director of Atelier 
Sjoerd Didden (www.sjoerddidden.nl), who suggested this to us and helped 
us to analyse the hairdo and headdress of the ﬁ gure.
 143 Unfortunately the relief is a bit damaged so that it is not possible to see 
what these upward pointing elements represent.
 144 We are grateful to Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer for bringing this piece 
to our attention. 

--- [Page 49] ---
116 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
other side, holds a covered bowl. Although less clear, it seems that 
the mother in the centre is wearing a similar kind of headband 
as in the reliefs of Borobudur and Loro Jonggrang (Brinkgreve et 
al. 2010: 87).145 Besides the headband with attached elements, in 
the Loro Jonggrang relief we also clearly see that the mother, S ītā, 
wears a sling and that the child, who is not held in the sling but in 
the arms, is tucked up in cloth, and this is a third feature that we 
also observe on the Leiden copperplate and that seems to be a sig-
niﬁ cant iconographic detail. In no other relief do we see child ren 
wrapped up in this manner. Describing the Loro Jonggrang relief, 
Bernet Kempers notes that “the baby is tightly bound, as was done 
in Java to shape the arms in the elegant curve ‘of a bend-drawn 
bow’” (1976: 239). Unfortunately he does not mention the source 
of this information, but the relief does seem to point to a Javanese 
custom at that time to wrap up a newly born baby in cloth. Indeed 
tightly wrapping up babies in a so-called bedong  is still common 
practice in Indonesia today.
From the evidence of the reliefs, particularly those on Borobudur 
and the Brahm ā temple at Loro Jonggrang, it appears that a head-
band with attached elements and a baby wrapped up in cloth point 
to a moment immediately following child delivery, after the child 
has been cleaned, when all danger has been averted and it seems 
that the child will live. Thus, the iconography of the image em-
phasizes the moment of successful birth and shows that the female 
ﬁ gure on the Leiden plate is not a deity, but a human female just 
after she has safely delivered, holding her child bound in cloth in a 
baby sling and wearing the headdress associated with this speci ﬁ c 
moment. This would correspond to one of the important aspects 
of the dhāraṇī on the copperplate, namely that it was considered a 
powerful means to avert the dangers of childbirth. It may even be 
a direct interpretation of the instruction in the MPMVR that one 
should draw a boy in the middle of the amulet if one wants a boy 
(Hidas 2012: 235–236). In our case the boy (or girl) is depicted in 
 145 In all these cases the elements attached to the headband are shorter than 
the long extensions on the Leiden plate. However, this type of he ad ornament 
can be clearly distinguished from tiaras and crowns usually worn by noble 
females and it only appears in this particular context of giving birth.

--- [Page 50] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 117
the arms of his (or her) mother. Both the text and the image there-
fore strengthen the impression that the manufacture of the cop-
perplate was in some manner connected with childbirth. Maybe 
it functioned as an amulet to avert the many dangers surrounding 
childbirth and maybe the proactive mother even had herself de-
picted wi th her bab y to be born in line wi th the af orementi one d 
instruction in the MPMVR.
5. A Mah āpratisar ā mantra from Sumatra?146
We have thus presented two artefacts that are undeniable evidence 
to the spread of Mah āpratisar ā’s textual corpus – and not only her 
iconography (Mevissen 1999) – to ancient Java. Unmistakable evi-
dence that this spread was not limited, in ancient insular Southeast 
Asia, to Java comes from the Philippine Agusan amulet, which 
contains the ﬁ rst two mantras of the MPMVR and which is dis-
c u s s e d  s e p a r a t e l y  i n  R o d  O r l i n a ’ s  a r t i c l e .  L i k e l y  a d d i t i o n a l  e v i -
dence is available in the form of an inscribed plaque from Candi 
Gedong I, in the Muara Jambi complex on Sumatra. This unusual 
case of a plaque comprising two parts of very di ﬀ erent color (and 
presumably metallurgic composition) was found on 24 October 
1998, in bricklayer 4 of the north face of Candi Gedong I, a build-
ing whose function may have been that of stūpa, although the re-
mains do not allow an objective decision in this regard.147 It is now 
preserved at the Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala at Jambi, 
where we were kindly permitted to photograph it in August 201 0 
(p. 157, ﬁ g. 9 ). It consists of a half that appears to be in gold ( A) 
and a half that appears to be in silver ( B), each bearing one line of 
writing giving a very di ﬀ erent palaeographic impression. The nat-
ural suggestion of a very di ﬀ erent date may however be misleading, 
because the di ﬀ erence in the shape of the letters may be explained 
as due to the di ﬀ erence of writing techniques: the letters have been 
punched into the gold half, and scratched into the silver half. The 
form of superscript i (i.e. the sign called wulu  in Java) is the same 
 146 This §5 is an elaborated version of the provisional remarks published in 
Gri࠳  ths 2011a: 162–164.
 147 Personal communication, Véronique Degroot, May 2012.

--- [Page 51] ---
118 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
on both halves, and the text is continuous. What we recognize up to 
and including ma(hāpra)tiĕare (for mahāpratisare ) is the ﬁ fth man-
tra that is found in many Nepalese and Eastern Indian manuscripts 
of the MPMVR:
Muara Jambi amulet
(A) // °oṃ maṇidhāri bajr(i) ṇi
ma(h āpra)(B)tiĕare
tamy āĕyā ĕatam vadhi ṃ pariFifth mantra of the MPMVR
oṃ maṇidhari vajri ṇi
mahāpratisare
hūṃ hūṃ phaԆ phaԆ svāhā
(Hidas 2012: 152)
The second half of the inscription hardly corresponds to the ending 
of the ﬁ fth mantra as found in most of the Nepalese and Eastern 
Indian manuscripts, and we have not been able to make any sens e 
of it. It seems, however, that we may have to do here with a person -
alized version of the mantra, with the name of the wearer inserted 
after mahāpratisare , followed by an expression of the desired in-
tervention from the deity.  In the Mahāpratisar āvidyāvidhi , a ritu-
al manual of a later date related to the MPMVR, it is explicitly 
prescribed that such a supplicatory phrase is to be inserted  in this 
mantra after mahāpratisare : oṃ maṇidhari vajri ṇi mahāpratisare 
dhārakasya rak Ӹāṃ ĕāntipu ӸԂim kuru h ūṃ hūṃ pha Ԃ pha Ԃ svāhā 
(“Oṃ O Amulet-holder, O the One with a Vajra, O Great Amulet, 
provide protection, peace and prosperity for the holder hūṃ hūṃ 
phaԂ phaԂ svāhā!”).148 Also in the oldest Eastern Indian MPMVR 
manuscript, dated to the 11th century,149 this ﬁ fth mantra has a sup-
plicatory phrase containing the name of the donor: oṃ maṇidhari 
vajri ṇi mah āpratisare U ḍḍākāyā rakӸāṃ kuru sv āhā (Hidas 2012: 
152). In both these instances the name is given in the genitive case, 
followed by what is desired in the accusative case. Although we do 
not recognize the words in the second half of the Muara Jambi in-
 148 See Hidas 2010: 476 and 481 for text and translation. Perhaps among the 
several shorter, ancillary texts to the MPMVR listed by Hidas (2012: 11–12) 
there are other ritual manuals that might yield more examples.
 149 See p. 125–126 with n. 170.

--- [Page 52] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 119
scription, it seems clear that their case endings are the same as those 
in the personalized versions of the ﬁ fth mantra of the MPMVR: the 
tamy āĕyā, which would be a name, with its genitive case-ending 
(where - sy- should be read for - ĕy-; cf. ĕ in the preceding ma(hā-
pra )tiĕare), and ĕatam (‘a hundred’?) and  vadhi ṃ both in accusative 
case.150 The last word in the line, pari, then appears to be the pre-
verb of a missing imperative that in the other personalized versions 
is simply kuru. If our grammatical interpretation of this second 
line is correct, this would mean that the mantra in the inscription is 
incomplete – like the Leiden inscription, though perhaps for other 
reasons.151
The fact that the inscription bears witness to the ﬁ fth mantra 
has implications for its dating. In the majority of Nepalese and 
Eastern Indian versions of the MPMVR, including the oldest ex-
tant Eastern Indian version cited above (dating to the 11th century), 
the mantra is the last one in a set of ﬁ ve mantras given in the narra-
tive section (cf. Hidas 2012: 152). It is, however, absent in the Gilgit 
versions, as also in Amoghavajra’s 8th-century translation.152 It is 
therefore certain that the mantra came to be added to the MPMVR 
at some later point in its transmission. A short form of this mantra, 
oṃ maṇidhari h ūṃ phaԂ, is ﬁ rst attested in a Chinese translation 
of a dhāraṇīsūtra called the  Mahāmaṇivipulavim ānaviĕvasuprati-
ӸԂhita guhyaparamarahasyakalpar āja, that probably dates to the 6th 
century.153 A slightly later attestation of this shorter form without 
 150 Another interpretation might be not to take tamy āĕyā as the genitive 
form of a proper name, but rather as containing the personal pronouns tam 
yasya , ‘him who has [ ĕatam  vadhi ṃ].’
 151 Was there not enough space for the full mantra? Or else, was the mantra 
perhaps written out in full, but only partly engraved?
 152 Since Amoghavajra’s version already represents the second recension of 
the MPMVR, the insertion of the ﬁ fth mantra could not have occurred with 
the Vajray ānic redaction of the MPMVR, contrary to what Hidas tentatively 
suggested in 2007: 189–190, n. 21.
 153 Taish ō 1007 659b4. This text is said to have been translated during the 
Liang dynasty by an unknown author. Although Orzech and Sørensen indi-
cate that it may have been produced later than the Liang period, as it is ﬁ rst 
mentioned only in a catalogue dating to 730 CE, they state that it does not 
appear to postdate 600 CE. See Orzech et al. 2011: 77, n. 6. We thank Rolf 

--- [Page 53] ---
120 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
the important elements vajri ṇi and mahāpratisare  is found in a text 
that was translated into Chinese by the Indian monk Bodhiruci 
(?–727), and that is somehow related to the MPMVR.154 In the 
Tibetan translation of the MPMVR as preserved in a 10th centu-
ry Dunhuang manuscript,155 it appears for the ﬁ rst time added to 
the four mantras, and though expanded with vajri ṇi i t  d o e s  n o t  
yet contain the name of the deity: oṃ maṇidhari vajri ṇi hūṃ phaԂ 
svāhā. It is also in this form that it occurs in the oldest Nepalese 
version (dating  to the 11th century), but then at the end of the sec-
ond dhāraṇī, not after the four mantras (cf. Hidas 2012: 182). It 
appears in the full form in which it came to be incorporated in to 
the Eastern Indian and Nepalese versions of the MPMVR – in-
cluding the crucial word mahāpratisare  – in several late Buddhist 
texts, as pointed out by Hidas, the earliest among them being the 
11th/12th-century Sādhanam ālā and NiӸpannayog āvalī.156 In these 
texts it is the sole mantra related to Mah āpratisar ā and thus by this 
time appears to have been considered as the essence of the dhāraṇī 
goddess.157 Also in the mentioned Mahāpratisar āvidyāvidhi , the 
ritual manual whose witnesses are no earlier than the 12th century, 
Giebel for pointing out this early occurrence to us.
 154 Taish ō 920 13c4–5. Hidas (2012: 9) mentions this text as an auxiliar y 
text to the MPMVR. It has not been examined how this text, called Buddha  
Heart  Sūtra (Fóxīn jīng ֋心經 ), is related to the MPMVR, but it is signi ﬁ -
cant that it also contains a slightly modi ﬁ ed version of the fourth mantra of 
the MPMVR (Taish ō 920 3b4).
 155 IOL Tib J 397 33r. See Dalton & van Schaik 2006: 132 & 126. In order 
to consult this manuscript, we have made use of the website http://idp.bl.uk/ , 
an excellent resource for Dunhuang materials. This manuscript appears to  
preserve an older, unrevised version of the Tibetan translation as compared 
to the version contained in the Peking canon (Q. 179), whose dhāraṇī shows 
clear signs of editing and con ﬂ ation.
 156 See Hidas 2012: 228 and 2010: 481, n. 72, where he also notes its occur-
rence in the Ācāryakriy āsamuccaya  and the Ādikarmaprad īpa, as well as in 
the Hindu Tantras āra, where it is derived from Buddhist sources.
 157 Bühnemann in her article on the Tantras āra (2000: 34–35) mentions 
that in the Sādhanam ālā this mantra is even called mantrar āja, ‘the king of 
mantras,’ and in the NiӸpannayog āvalī it is identi ﬁ ed as the heart mantra of 
Mahāpratisar ā.

--- [Page 54] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 121
the ﬁ fth mantra is deemed the most important mantra related to 
Mahāpratisar ā, as it is listed ﬁ rst, with the instruction that it is to 
be written in the middle of the amulet (Hidas 2010: 481). It may 
therefore be concluded that the Muara Jambi inscription belongs 
to a period when the ﬁ fth mantra had risen to prominence as epit-
omising Mah āpratisar ā, certainly no earlier than the 10th century 
CE. Given the general dating of the Muara Jambi monuments, we 
tentatively assign this amulet to the 12th–13th century.158
6. Conclusions
In thi s arti c l e , w e ha v e s tu di ed thr ee inscri p ti o ns o n m e tal  arte-
facts, two of them known to previous scholarship, the other only 
recently discovered, and identi ﬁ ed them as pertaining to the cult 
of Mah āpratisar ā in ancient Indonesia. We have in the process re-
vealed the extent to which previous interpretations have tended to 
b e  h a m p e r e d  b y  t h e  l a c k  o f  f a m i l i a r i t y  o f  t h e  s c h o l a r s  i n v o l v e d  
with the genre of dhāraṇī texts in Buddhist Sanskrit literature. It 
seems to us that the Buddhist Studies approach to these artefacts, 
which we have tried to adopt here, is vital for a meaningful inter-
pretation of such documents.
These artefacts show that practices related to the Mahā prati-
sa rā dhāraṇī and its mantras were in place in the Indonesian 
Archipelago at least from the 9th century onwards, thereby linking 
this part of the medieval Buddhist world to many other parts where 
such practices were current during the same period. As the original 
provenance of two of our pieces of evidence is unknown, it is di ࠳-  
cult to determine whether these Indonesian artefacts bear witness 
to practices described in the MPMVR or attested in the material 
remains from Central and East Asia, or whether they are the rem-
nants of previously unattested uses of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī 
and its mantras. Thus the Muara Jambi gold-silver plaque, found 
inside the wall of a building of indeterminate nature, might have 
 158 As pointed out by Nihom (1994: 62, n. 149), the Stuti Saṅ Hyaṅ Pratisar ā 
preserved on Bali contains a mantra oṃ maṇivajro  h dayavajro  sarvam ā rān 
trāsaya … that is vaguely reminiscent of the ﬁ fth MPMVR mantra.

--- [Page 55] ---
122 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
had a similar function as the Mah āpratisar ā sheets found inside the 
ﬂ oor of the Suzhou pagoda and the inscribed bricks found inside 
the pagoda in Yunnan, namely as Dharma-relics, providing protec-
tion and bene ﬁ ts of all sorts (worldly and spiritual) to those who 
worship it.159 But it is unclear how the Berlin statuette of the god-
dess Mah āpratisar ā would have been used, whether it was meant 
for general worship for worldly bene ﬁ ts, perhaps being part of a 
range of statues inside a prayer hall, or whether it was used in a 
Mantranayic context for speci ﬁ c purposes of ritual and visuali-
zation – or both.160 As for the Leiden copperplate, a Mantranayic 
purpose can safely be excluded, as the image of the female ﬁ gure 
clearly indicates that it was used for fertility and childbearing pur-
poses. But the question remains whether it belonged to a pillar, 
shrine or a stūpa for general worship by women desiring proge-
ny (either inside the structure as Dharma-relic or somehow placed 
outside it, visible for the devotees), or whether it was produced for 
personal use, as an amulet, perhaps like the two Gilgit manuscripts 
that were written on behalf of two queens.161
 159 Although it might be di ࠳  cult to argue for such a use if the second half 
of the inscription indeed is to be interpreted as containing a donor name, in 
which case its primary use might have been that of an amulet. Compare how-
ever the gold-foil mantra inscription, found during the excavation of the re-
mains of a wall on the Ratu Baku plateau, Central Java, that apparently con-
tains the name of the late 8th-century Javanese king Panaraban (see Sundberg 
2003 and 2004: 116).
 160 A comparison of this statuette with the cache of Buddhist images in 
bronze, found in ﬁ elds to the east of Candi Plaosan, Central Java, might yield 
more insight as to its possible Mantranayic use (cf. Sundberg 2004: 117 and 
Gri࠳  ths, R e vire & S an y al 20 1 3 ) . I t is in terestin g to note that i n J apanese 
Buddhist cult based on the garbhadh ātuma ṇḍala, the male Bodhisattva 
Mahāpratisara is given a place in the entourage of Vairocana. See Mevissen 
1999: 112 for further references on this maṇḍala.
 161 The names of these queens are mentioned in the supplicatory passages 
of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī as contained in these manuscripts. For fur-
ther details on these manuscripts and the mentioned queens, see Hidas 2012: 
37–38 & 40–41. Note, however, that the supplicatory passages in the Leiden 
inscription do not contain any donor name.

--- [Page 56] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 123
F i n a l l y ,  i t  s h o u l d  b e  r e m a r k e d  t h a t  n o n e  o f  t h e s e  I n d o n e s i a n  
Mahā pra ti sarā artefacts appear to bear any direct connection with 
the in ﬂ uential 8th-century tantric master Amoghavajra or his line-
age. It was on Java in 717 CE that Amoghavajra, at the age of 14, met 
his master Vajrabodhi.162 The latter knew the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī 
then, as it is recounted in a biographical account that he subdued 
a sea-storm with it during his three-year journey from Sri Lanka 
to China. He probably taught the dhāraṇī to Amoghavajra at some 
point in his training, before he died in 741 CE,163 as Amoghavajra 
is said to have used it to appease hazards encountered at sea on his 
mission from China to Sri Lanka shortly thereafter, thus before 
he received further instruction on Sri Lanka and before he col-
lected new manuscripts there. Amoghavajra must have spent some 
time in the Indonesian Archipelago while passing through this re-
gion on his journey by sea from China to Sri Lanka in 742 CE and 
his return trip to China in 746 CE. And after his return to China, 
having attained a formidable position as state-protector at the 
Tang court, he exerted considerable in ﬂ uence on state-protecting 
practices in neighbouring countries, amongst which possibly the 
Central Javanese kingdom of the Ĕailendras that ﬂ ourished towards 
the end of the 8th century.164 In addition, it is recorded that one of 
Amoghavajra’s Chinese disciples, Huiguo (746–805 CE), initiated a 
certain Bianhong, a Javanese monk who had come to China in search 
of the esoteric teachings of Amoghavajra’s lineage.165 But none of 
the three inscriptions discussed in this article show any particular 
a࠳  nity with Amoghavajra’s version of the MPMVR as contained 
 162 According to one of Amoghavajra’s biographical accounts. Here we fol-
low the dates as given in Orzech et al. 2011: 351. See also note 173 below.
 163 According to what is probably the most reliable biography of Vajrabodhi, 
that by the 8th-century Chinese scholar Lü Xiang. See Sundberg 2011 for a 
translation and discussion of this biographical account.
 164 See Lokesh Chandra 1992 and 1995. For a recent study of Amoghavajra’s 
state-protecting practices and his political involvement in China, see Goble 
2012.
 165 See Chou 1945: 329; Iwamoto 1981: 85; and now Sundberg 2011: 130–
131. For a recent article on Bianhong’s possible connection with the con-
struction of Borobudur, see Woodward 2009.

--- [Page 57] ---
124 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
in the Chinese canon: the Muara Jambi inscription contains the 
ﬁ fth mantra that was not yet part of the MPMVR at Amoghavajra’s 
time, and the Leiden inscription is textually closer to the Nepalese 
and Eastern Indian versions of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī, as re-
vealed in detail by the textual comparison in the appendix. This 
conclusion accords well with the fact that the several Javanese 
bronzes of Mah āpratisar ā, dating to the 8th–10th centuries, to which 
the Berlin statuette can now be added, are iconographically and 
stylistically related to contemporary specimens from Eastern 
India (cf. Mevissen 1999: 117–118). Certainly, since these inscrip-
tions do not date earlier than the 9th century , it cannot be exclud-
ed that Am o gha v a j ra, o r e v en his mas te r V a j rabodhi , in tr od u ced 
the practice of using the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī and its mantras 
to the B uddhist communities on J a v a during so journs on J a v a i n 
the ﬁ rst half of the 8th, and that later generations came to acquire 
and use sources that had undergone modi ﬁ cation and elaboration 
in the meantime.166 In any event, it is clear that Buddhists in the 
Indonesian Archipelago were constantly in touch with the latest 
developments taking place in South Asia, apparently especially in 
Eastern India, with regard to the use of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī 
and its mantras at least from the 9th century onwards – apparently 
not without making adaptations of their own.167
 166 As was also the case in China during the Ming-dynasty period: in the 
Taish ō canon (T. 1153 632–634), the editors have added to Amoghavajra’s trans-
lation of the MPMVR a more elaborate version of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī 
that was current during this later period. Another kind of updating can be 
seen in the Tibetan version of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī as found in the 
Peking Kangyur, which shows marks of con ﬂ ation that are most probably 
to be attributed to the editorial activities that took place  in the 15th century. 
Cf. notes 12 and 155 above. 
 167 As this article was going to the press, Jan Fontein suggested to us 
that maybe the ten-armed ﬁ gure accompanied by women in one of the 
Gaṇḍavyūha reliefs of Borobudur (relief IV 39) could also be identi ﬁ ed as 
Mahāpratisar ā (cf. Fontein 2012: 184–185).

--- [Page 58] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 125
Appendix: comparison of the Leiden version with other ver-
sions of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī
Versions used for textual comparison
The ﬁ ve extant manuscripts of the MPMVR from Gilgit belong 
to a common textual tradition, as they do not show any signi ﬁ cant 
variants in relation to each other (Hidas 2012: 42). As to their d ate, 
on the basis of their script and the mention of royal donors in two 
of these manuscripts, they have been placed in the ﬁ rst half of the 
seventh century.168 For our textual comparison (see the table) we 
have based ourselves on the edition of the Gilgit manuscripts by 
Hidas (2012: 48–49). On the basis of estimations of the missing 
akӸaras provided in Hidas’ edition, we have taken the liberty to 
reconstruct the passages for most of these lacunae, using readings 
found in the Chinese versions and those found in the later EIN 
manuscripts whenever they were (virtually) unanimous. Wherever 
the reconstruction is nearly but not entirely certain we have kept 
the square brackets [] in place; in all other cases we have left out 
brackets for easier comparison with the other versions. The donor 
names inserted in two individual Gilgit versions are enclosed be-
tween round brackets.
From among the manuscripts originating in Nepal and Eastern 
In d i a ,  w h o s e  v e r s i o n s  v ary  s i gni ﬁ cantly and appear to represent 
diﬀ erent textual traditions,169 we have selected the two oldest manu-
scripts used by Hidas in his edition based on some ﬁ fteen Nepalese 
and Eastern Indian manuscripts. Both these manuscripts, one from 
Eastern India and one from Nepal, are dated and belong to the 
middle of the 11th century CE.170 The versions contained in these 
 168 See Hidas 2012: 37, n. 3 and the references there to von Hinüber’s ar-
ticles on the Gilgit manuscripts.
 169 Although showing a high degree of contamination, thus making for 
a complex textual history that cannot properly be disentangled. See Hidas 
2012: 88–90.
 170  In Hidas’ edition these manuscripts are given the sigla L and N respec-
tively. For references on the exact dating of these manuscripts see Hidas 
2012: 85, n. 26 and 86, n. 31. Hidas also makes mention (2012: 75, n. 2) of a 

--- [Page 59] ---
126 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
two manuscripts are textually close to the Gilgit tradition,171 al-
though there are some Eastern Indian and Nepalese manuscripts 
that, though of a later date, are closer. We have selected these two 
for our comparison as they already show some of the more pro-
nounced elaborations that the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī received at 
a later stage. The textual elements that do not occur in the Gilgit 
version we have marked in  bold , and we have indicated with < > 
(in bold) the places where these non-Gilgit versions omit textual 
elements found in the Gilgit version. We have used < > whenever 
these omissions appear to be particular to the version in question, 
rather than to the textual tradition as a whole.
As stated above in section 2, apart from the South Asian man-
uscripts, we also have specimens of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī at 
our disposal that were found in Central and East Asia. A thorough 
textual comparison of these amulet specimens, some of which are 
among the earliest printed texts from China, would be an inter-
esting study in its own right and lies outside the scope of this pa-
per.172 For our purpose, that is, to determine the place of the Leiden 
fragmentary manuscript of the MPMVR that has been discovered through 
the work of the NGMPP, and has been provisionally assigned to the 9th cen-
tury, thus possibly forming the earliest extant Pañcarak Ӹā manuscript, but he 
has informed us (personal correspondence, April 2012) that this fragmentary 
manuscript, which is actually more likely to date to the 12th century, does not 
contain the MPMVR, but the Mahāĕītavat ī, another Pañcarak Ӹā text. Note 
that he also mentions a Pañcarak Ӹā manuscript dated to 899 CE that should 
be in the collection of the University Library of Cambridge, but this has not 
been localized ye t (Hidas 2012: 8, n. 10).
 171 Hidas 2012: 88. In his discussion on the transmission of the MPMVR, 
Hidas (2012: 89) points out that the recension preserved in the Gilgit manu-
scripts may not represent the earliest form of the MPMVR, as there are vari-
ants in some of the Nepalese and Eastern Indian versions that are shorter 
than those in the Gilgit recension and there are even some cases where all 
Nepalese and Eastern Indian versions have shorter readings. Probably one 
has to assume that after the composition of the text (its ﬁ rst recension), it was 
taken either to Northwest India or to Eastern India and Nepal, depending on 
where the text was originally conceived, and that the textual traditions of 
these two regions then developed fairly independently.
 172 Several of these Mah āpratisar ā amulets have been published in Drège 
1999–2000 and Tsiang 2010, but most of the photographs are too small for 

--- [Page 60] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 127
version within the textual traditions on the basis of other versions 
t h a t  c a n  b e  m o r e  a c c u r a t e l y  d a t e d ,  w e  h a v e  d e c i d e d  t o  u s e  t h e  
version as contained in the Chinese translation of the MPMVR 
by Amoghavajra (704–774 CE) which, according to the details in 
Amoghavajra’s biography, was probably executed around the mid-
dle of the 8th century CE.173 This translation contains a version of the 
the Siddham texts to be read.
 173 No exact date on this translation is available from Amoghavajra’s bio-
graphical accounts or any of the Chinese catalogues. It cannot be determined 
whether he translated the MPMVR before or after his journey from China to 
Sri Lanka in 742 CE. He was already familiar with the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī 
before he set out for Sri Lanka, since it is recounted that on his oversea jour-
ney he recited it (and ‘performed its rites’) to appease a heavy storm, as well as 
a whale (Chou 1945: 290). He must have learnt this dhāraṇī from his master, 
Vajrabodhi, as in a biographical account of the latter it is recounted how he, 
while travelling from Sri Lanka to China during 717–721 CE, also appeased 
a sea-storm by reciting the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī (Chou 1945: 275, n. 19; 
Sundberg 2011: 139). It is clear, however, that the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī held 
a prominent place in Amoghavajra’s repertoire when he had acquired his po-
sition as state-protector at the court of Tang Emperor Suzong (r. 756–762), as 
it is stated that in 758 CE he presented a copy of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī 
to the Emperor Suzong for him to carry with him as an amulet (Chou 1945: 
322) and that once in 760–761 CE he successfully cured the emperor by recit-
ing the second dhāraṇī seven times (Chou 1945: 295). It might well be that 
somewhere between 746 CE, when he returned from Sri Lanka, and 758 CE, 
when he presented a Mah āpratisar ā amulet to the Tang emperor, he prepared 
his translation of the MPMVR on the basis of a manuscript collected during 
his mission to Sri Lanka. However, in a biographical account of Vajrabodhi 
it is stated that the latter during his translation activities at the Tang court 
“noticed that some passages and sentences were lacking in the old translation 
[executed by *Ratnacinta/Ma ṇicintana in 693 CE] of the text of the Pratisar ā 
and completed it by adding [the missing parts]” (translation adapted from 
Chou 1945: 282). Depending on whether one should interpret Pratisar ā as 
referring to the MPMVR as a whole or simply to the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī, 
it might be that Amoghavajra had access to the MPMVR before his journey 
to Sri Lanka through his master Vajrabodhi. Vajrabodhi’s version is unfor-
tunately not extant, and the fact that *Ratnacinta/Ma ṇicintana’s translation 
is both incomplete as a whole (lacking, e.g., the second kalpa ) and lacunose 
with regard to the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī, does not allow us to determine 
whether Vajrabodhi supplemented the entire translation (from a manuscript 
he had brought with him), or only the transliteration of the dhāraṇī (from his 
memory).

--- [Page 61] ---
128 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī that was transliterated into Chinese charac-
ters by Amoghavajra (from his memory or from what was probably 
an exemplar in Siddham āt kā script), and we base our statements 
about Amoghavajra’s text on this transliterated version, as  edited in 
the Taish ō edition of the Chinese Buddhist canon,174 determining 
its underlying readings with the help of the two Siddham āt kā ver-
sions of the Mahāpratisar ādhāraṇī that were collated and append-
ed to Amoghavajra’s translation by the Taish ō editors.175 As regards 
this ‘Chinese’ version, in our table the use of bold face and < > is 
the same as for the selected Nepalese and Eastern Indian versions.
To facilitate comparison, we have standardized the orthography 
of the Leiden version by distributing b/v according to standards 
of classical Sanskrit and simplifying all double consonants after r. 
Again, in bold we have marked the textual elements that do not oc -
cur in the Gilgit versions. However, we have not included elements 
 174 We have relied on the transliteration as supplied within the translation 
(Taish ō 1153 618b4), which is based on the Koryo edition of the Chinese 
canon, and not on that which was appended to the text by the Taish ō editors 
which is from the Ming-dynasty edition, since the latter clearly belongs to 
a later stage of textual transmission when the dhāraṇī had undergone many 
elaborations.
 175  Taish ō 1153 635b. These reproduced Siddham āt kā texts are accompa-
nied by a note stating that one of them is from the Reiunji edition of the Futsū 
shingonz ć, and that the other, whose variants are given in the apparatus, is 
from Takakusu Junjir ō’ s manuscript collection. No indication of their date 
is given, but Rolf Giebel (personal communication, September 2011) has in-
formed us that the Futsū shingonz ć is a collection of mantras and dhāraṇīs 
compiled by J ōgon, the founder of Reiunji, which was ﬁ rst published in 1680, 
and which is believed to be based on the Siddham āt kā manuscripts brought 
to Japan at the beginning of the 9th century by K ūkai, the famous Japanese 
tantric master who had studied with Huiguo. That there is some ground for 
this belief can be seen in the fact that this Siddham āt kā te xt  ( w hi c h  h as  
been faithfully reproduced in the T aish ō edition, judging from a handwrit-
ten copy from the Futsū shingonz ć available in Hase 1976), as also the one 
from Takakusu’s collection, are very close to Amoghavajra’s transliterated  
version, indicating that they belong to the same textual tradition dating  back 
to the 8th century. See Meisezahl 1962 and 1965 for another instance of a 
Siddham āt kā manuscript from the Reiunji collection of a relatively early 
date, preserving an old version of the Amoghap āĕah daya dhāraṇī.

--- [Page 62] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 129
that are clearly the result of copying errors or idiosyncracies of 
pronunciation; these are marked with underlining. We have put the 
line numbers of the Leiden inscription on the left hand of the table, 
for easy reference.
For the sake of convenience, in all ﬁ ve versions, whenever a 
word is repeated, this is indicated by 2, as became custom in the 
textual transmission of dhāraṇī texts at least from the beginning of 
the second millennium onwards.176
Results of textual comparison
When one looks at the text of the Leiden inscription, it is clear that 
in many cases where it di ﬀ ers from the other versions, this is to be 
attributed to textual change that is likely to have occurred  in the 
recent history of the text on Java, or even in the transposition itself 
from the underlying (Indian) text, in all likelihood in Sidd hamāt kā 
script, to the Kawi script text that we have. One can discern three 
kinds of aberrations, and we list them in the order in which they 
would have occurred in the process of copying the text.
First, there are cases of the underlying version having been mis-
read; obvious examples are vi (< rva) and mā (<  Ӹa) in line 9, and 
misreadings of original Ӹ in lines 16, 24 (> m), and line 34 (> p). 
Also the instances of bh instead of g in line 4, and g, k (l. 32), and r 
(ll. 26, 36) instead of bh probably belong to this category, as do the 
instances of eye-skip in lines 30 and 32.
Second, there are variants that arose during recitation, obvious-
ly due to local pronunciation habits. There are numerous variants 
involving vowels, the most striking one being the instance of the 
so-called pepet -sign ( ə) in line 6. There are several cases where 
shortening or lengthening occurs, such as i > ī in lines 3, 22, 23, 
and 24. Other examples are the dentalization of ṇ in line 34 and of ĕ 
in lines 19, 27, 32 and 34. As pointed out by Lokesh Chandra (1977: 
 176 This custom is already encountered in the Siddham āt kā print of the 
Ma hā pratisar ādhāraṇī discovered underneath the third ﬂ oor of a pagoda 
in Suzhou, in eastern China, that is dated 1005 CE. See Drège 1999–2000: 
30–31 and the print published in the same article ( ﬁ g. 6).

--- [Page 63] ---
130 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
467), this does not necessarily re ﬂ ect local pronunciation habits, 
since one also encounters the interchange of sibilants in India. 
Thirdly, there are instances of akӸaras which have been care-
lessly, and sometimes even wrongly written, as in the case of l in-
stead of kh in line 22. Often the akӸara is rendered, at least to us, 
ambiguous, making it di ࠳  cult to decide on its identity. The most 
common cases are those of b versus v, and we have read v unless 
there is a clear dent in the top horizontal bar.  It may be observed 
that b ﬁ gures only in speci ﬁ c words: bimala  (ll. 1, 5), brata  (l. 34), 
and some cases of sarb(v)a. This ambiguity of b/v, however,  is not 
peculiar to our inscription, as it is frequently met with in C entral 
J a v a n e s e  e p i g r a p h y ,  a n d  o f  c o u r s e  i t  i s  v e r y  c o m m o n  i n  I n d i a n  
manuscripts. The rarity of ba in our inscription, according to our 
reading, therefore might be explained as due to an underlying ver-
sion in an Indian script which does not distinguish between b and 
v, and here Siddham āt kā script seems to be a likely candidate, as 
also in the Siddham āt kā texts from Central and East Asia only v 
is used. Of a di ﬀ erent order is the garbled sequence of akӸaras in 
line 5, which however can easily be ﬁ xed if the ma akӸara is trans-
posed to the empty space at the beginning of the line. It is possi-
ble that we have to suppose another source of error here, namely 
that due to careless engraving : perhaps in the process of engraving 
the akӸaras that had been preliminarily written out on the plate, 
an akӸara could be overlooked. This might also explain the empty 
space at the end of line 3 where one would expect a ga; perhaps the 
engraver forgot to incise the akӸara written here.
It should be noted that in some of the above cases it remains 
di࠳  cult to determine whether the variant is particular to our text, 
or whether it was already present in the underlying (Indian) ver-
sion. In line 12, for example, the inscription reads muri 2 mili 2 , 
whereas in the Gilgit versions and Amoghavajra’s version we read 
suri 2 cili 2 , so it could be supposed that in the process of copy-
ing the scribe of our inscription misread su for mu, and ci for mi. 
However, if one looks at the Nepalese and Eastern Indian versions, 
one also encounters muri 2  in place of suri 2 , and in the Nepalese 
version one even ﬁ nds mili mili  in addition to cili cili , which prob-
ably indicates that these misreadings occurred in the transmission 

--- [Page 64] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 131
of the text prior to our inscription, at least in a textual tradition 
preserved in these Eastern Indian and Nepalese manuscripts, and 
that they consequently became integral to the text and were r epli-
cated as such. Another case worth mentioning is gubha 2 g ū bhani 
2 in line 5, which might be considered a misreading of an under-
lying guru 2 gurune , as attested in Amoghavajra’s version and the 
Eastern Indian version (whose reading is with retro ﬂ ex ṇ). The lat-
ter contains the sequence guha 2 guru ṇi 2 in addition, which by 
itself is also the reading in the Nepalese version, except for the 
reduplication of guru ṇi. However, the only witness from Gilgit for 
this passage reads gubha 2 gubha ṇi, and so it seems that early on in 
the strand of textual transmission to which Amoghavajra’s version 
and the Nepalese and Eastern Indian versions belong, bha had been 
misread for ru, while in the strand of textual transmission to which 
the Leiden version belongs, the earlier reading was preserved.177
This brings us to the signi ﬁ cant variants in our text, variants that 
were in all likelihood already present in the underlying version and 
proper to the textual tradition to which the Leiden version belongs. 
Although there is the aforementioned reading that it only shares, 
albeit in slightly modi ﬁ ed form, with the Gilgit versions, this is 
the sole instance where it shows a ࠳  nity with the textual tradition 
that was present in Gilgit. There are many instances where it dif-
fers from this earlier tradition preserved in the Gilgit manuscripts, 
showing forms of elaboration found in the later versions. Thus it 
shares with both Amoghavajra’s version as well as the Nepalese and 
Eastern Indian versions the extended epithet savisatrapramathani 
(l. 9), the slightly garbled form of sarva ĕatrupramathani , with the 
elements sarva - and pra- pre ﬁ xed. Like these non-Gilgit versions, 
it also has an additional supplicatory formula rakӸa 2 … (l. 10), an 
inserted epithet bhagavati  (l. 15), and the modi ﬁ ed epithet maṅga-
laviĕuddhe  (l. 33) where the Gilgit versions read maṅgalaĕabde .
 177 Though the reading of the Nepalese version, which probably re ﬂ ects an 
underlying gubha  2, is an indication of the complex textual transmission of 
the MPMVR, which, as noted by Hidas (2012: 88–90), is characterized by a 
high degree of contamination.

--- [Page 65] ---
132 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
The only variant that it seems to share exclusively with Amogha-
vajra’s version is found in line 6: if one boldly conjectures that vi-
male , inserted between cule and muc əle, actually re ﬂ ects an under-
lying acale , a variant only found in Amoghavajra’s version, with 
a misread for vi and ca misread for ma (or perhaps changed ac-
cordingly due to the occurrence of - vimale  at the beginning of the 
dhāraṇī), this might explain why vimale  is not found in any of the 
other extant versions.
However, it is with the Nepalese and Eastern Indian ver-
sions that the Leiden version shares most of its variants, not with 
Amoghavajra’s. The most prominent ones are the epithets gagana-
vi cāriṇi (l. 3), ratnamaku Ԃamālādhari (l. 16), sarvadevaga ṇapūjite 
(l. 25), and satyavrate (l. 35) against respectively gagari ṇi, ratna-
maku Ԃamal ādhāriṇi, sarvadevatap ūjite, and satyavate  in Amo-
gha vajra’s version and the Gilgit versions. The Leiden version also 
begins with tadyath ā, like almost all the Nepalese and Eastern 
Indian versions.178 It appears to be somewhat related to the selected 
Nepalese version, with which it shows a strong a ࠳  nity in the sup-
plicatory phrase in lines 18–19, as well as in the epithet vividh ā-
varaṇavināĕini (l. 11) in place of an omitted vigat āvaraṇe found in 
the other Nepalese and Eastern Indian versions. Still, the variants 
vijaye (l. 14) and aĕaraṇān (l. 21) are neither found in this Nepalese 
version nor in the selected Eastern Indian version; in fact, these 
inserted words are found in Nepalese and Eastern Indian versions 
that are further removed from the Gilgit tradition and show more 
elaborations. Also, although it shares some instances of mantric 
syllables with the selected Nepalese and Eastern Indian versions, 
 178 Only in the two versions of the MPMVR most closely related to the 
Gilgit version is it missing (Hidas 2012: 15; 115). It was the occurrence of this 
term that led Lokesh Chandra to identify the Leiden inscription as having a 
Buddhist background (Lokesh Chandra 1977: 466). In Buddhist literature, 
including the Pañcarak Ӹā tradition, tadyath ā is commonly used within the 
narrative of the text to introduce mantras and dhāraṇīs (see Skilling 1992: 
152). It is therefore quite strange to ﬁ nd that the Leiden version includes this 
term, since it is meant to be a marker (‘namely’) after which the dhāraṇī 
proper is given. However, we ﬁ nd similar cases of the term being included 
with the dhāraṇī in a Dunhuang manuscript with the UӸṇīӸavimaladh āraṇī 
(Scherrer-Schaub 1994: 712).

--- [Page 66] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 133
such as the sequences muri 2 mili 2 (l. 12), tuhu 2 turu 2 (l. 36), 
and haṇi 2 kӸaṇi 2 (l. 36), the inserted mantric syllables piri 2  (l. 8) 
occur in neither of the two, but are similarly found in other, more 
elaborate versions.179
In other passages with mantric syllables, the Leiden version 
seems to have undergone less elaboration than all the Nepalese and 
Eastern Indian versions, thus being closer to Amoghavajra’s ver-
sion and the Gilgit tradition, such as in the case of viri 2  (l. 11). It 
also contains the mantric syllables gati 2 (l. 5) where all Nepalese 
and Eastern Indian versions have gahi 2 , as well as the epithets gar-
bhasa ṃbhara ṇi (l. 7) and suravaramathani (l. 24) in their non-ex-
tended form, present in the earlier versions and preserved in the 
selected, oldest Nepalese version but not in the other Nepalese and 
Eastern Indian versions.
 179 One can easily see why it is in the passages with the mantric syllables 
that the various versions of the dhāraṇī diﬀ er most strongly , as it is these 
passages, due to their reduced semantic load, that are most prone to variation 
and elaboration: as one of the two repeated disyllabic mantric imperatives 
was misread by one scribe, resulting in two di ﬀ erent, single dissyllabic man-
tric imperatives, the following scribe would ‘restore’ these mantric impe ra-
tives to their expected reduplicated form by repeating each of these mantric 
imperatives (or, in the later textual traditions, by adding 2). Thus, for ex-
ample, the mentioned piri piri (l. 8) most certainly came about, at some point 
in the transmission of the text, through a misreading of the preceding miri 
miri to miri piri, consequently turned into miri miri piri piri. In this man-
ner these quasi-semantic mantric imperatives proved to be fertile ground for 
textual elaboration. For the view that these mantric syllables are often to be 
interpretated as imperatives, see also Meisezahl 1962: 269.

--- [Page 67] ---
134 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
Table: synopsis of ﬁ ve versions of the Mahāpratisar ā-dhāraṇī
Gilgit mss.
(ﬁ rst half 7th c. CE)Amoghavajra’s transliteration
(mid 8th c. CE)
1.
2.oṃ vipulagarbhe vipulavimale 
jayagarbhe vajrajv ālagarbhe 
gatigahane gaganavi ĕodhane 
sarvap āpaviĕodhaneoṃ vipulagarbhe vipulavimale
jayagarbhe vajrajv ālagarbhe 
gatigahane gaganavi ĕodhane 
sarvap āpaviĕodhane
3.
4.oṃ guṇavati 
gagari ṇi
giri 2 ga[mari 2 
gaha 2] garg āri 2 
gagari 2 gambha[ri 2 oṃ guṇavati 
gagari ṇi
giri 2 gamari 2 
gaha 2 garg āri 2
gagari 2 gambhari 2 
5.gati 2 gama]ni gare gati 2 gamani gare
gubha 2 gubha ṇig uru 2 gu rune
6.cale mucile cale acale  muc ale 
jaye vijaye sarvabhayavigate jaye vijaye sarvabhayavigate
7.
8.
9.garbhasa ṃbhara ṇi
siri 2 miri 2 ghiri 2
[samant ākarӼaṇi
sarva ĕa]trumathanigarbhasa ṃbhara ṇi
siri 2 miri 2 ghiri 2
samant ākarӼaṇi 
sarva ĕatrūpramathani
10.
11.rak ṣa 2 mama
sarvasattv ānāṃ ca
12.viri 2
vigat āvaraṇanāĕaniviri 2
vigat āvaraṇabhaya nāĕani
13. su[ri 2 cili 
kamale vimale]suri 2 cili
kamale vimale
14. jaye jay āvahe jayavati jaye jay āvahe jayavati

--- [Page 68] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 135
Leiden inscription
(9th/10th c. CE)Nepalese ms.
(1063 CE)Eastern Indian ms.
(ca. 1041 CE)
tadyath ā
oṃ vipulagarbhe vipulavi-
male
jayagarbhe vajrajv ālagarbhe 
gatigahane gaganavi ĕodhane 
sarvap āpaviĕodhanetadyath ā
oṃ vipulagarbhe vipulavi-
male vimalagarbhe vimale
jayagarbhe vajrajv ālāgarbhe 
gatigahane gaganavi ĕodhane 
sarvap āpaviĕodhanetadyath ā
oṃ vipulagarbhe vipulavi-
male vimalagarbhe  
jayagarbhe vajrajv ālāgarbhe 
gatirgahane < >vi ĕodhani 
sarvap āpaviĕodhane
oṃ guṇavatī gaganavic āriṇi
< >
giri 2 gamari 2
gaha 2 [[]]rbh ari garbh ari 
gabhari 2 gambhari 2oṃ guṇavati gaganavic āriṇi 
gagari ṇi 2
giri 2 gambhari 2  gamari 2 
gaha 2 garg āri 2 
gargari 2 gambhari 2oṃ guṇavati gaganavic āriṇi 
gaganavid āriṇi (...) 2
giri 2 gamari 2 
gaha 2 garg āri 2 gamari 2  
gagari 2 gambhari < > 
gaha 2
gati 2 [[]] nigamare ga hi 2 gamani gare 2 gahi 2 gabhi 2  gamani gare 
gubha 2 g ūbhani 2 guha 2 gu ruṇig uha 2 gu ruṇi 2 
guru 2  guru ṇe 2
cule vimale  muc ǝle cale mucale culu 2  cale 2 mucile
jaye vijaye sarvabhayavigate jaye vijaye sarvabhayavigate jaye vijaye sarv abhayavigate
garbhasa ṃbhara ṇi
siri 2 miri 2 piri 2  ghiri 2 
samant ākamāṇi 
savisatra prama(tha)nigarbhasa ṃbhara ṇi
siri 2 miri 2 giri 2 
samant ākarӼaṇi 
sarva ĕatrūpramathanisarva garbhasa ṃrakṣaṇi 
siri 2 miri 2 < >
sarvamant rākarӼaṇi
sarva ĕatrūpramathani
rak ṣa 2 m ā(ṃ) sapariv āraṃ 
(sa)rvasatva ṃś carak ṣa 2 mama 
sarvasattv āmś ca 
sarvabhayebhya ḥ 
sarvopadravebhya ḥ 
sarvavy ādhibhya ḥrak ṣa 2 bhagavati m āṃ 
sarva(...)
sarvabhayebhya ḥ 
sarvopadravebhya ḥ 
sarvavy ādhibhya ḥ
viri 2
vi(v)idh āvaraṇavināĕiniciri 2 dhiri 2 diri 2
vividh āvaraṇi vināĕaniciri 2 diri 2  viri 2
vigat āvaraṇe 
āvaraṇavināĕani
muri 2 mili 2 
kamale vimalemuru 2 muni 2  cili 2 kili 2 
mili 2 kamale vimale muri 2 muli 2  cili 2
kamale vimale
jaye vijaye jay āvahe jay āvati jaye jay āvahe < > jaye jay āvahe jayavati

--- [Page 69] ---
136 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
Gilgit mss.
(ﬁ rst half 7th c. CE)Amoghavajra’s transliteration
(mid 8th c. CE)
15.
16.
17.ratnamaku Ԇamālā[dhāriṇi]
bahuvividhavicitrave Ӽadhāriṇi
bhagavati mah āvidyādevibhagavati
ratnamaku Ԇamālādhāriṇi
bahuvividhavicitrave Ӽarūpadhā-
riṇi bhagavati mah āvidyādevi
18.
19.rakӼa 2 mama (Di ĕinasya) 
samant ā sarvatra
sarvap āpaviĕodhanirakӼa 2 mama
sarvasattv ānāṃ ca 
samant ā sarvatra 
sarvap āpaviĕodhani
huru 2 huru 2 nak ṣatram ālādhāriṇi
20.
21.rakӼa mama (Ma ṇikea[sya]) 
anāthasya atr āṇāparāyaṇasyarakӼa 2 m āṃ mama 
anāthasy ātrāṇaparāyaṇasya 
22.parimocaya me sarvadu ḥkhebhya ḥparimocaya me sarvadu ḥkhebhya ḥ
caṇḍi 2 ca ṇḍini ca ṇḍi 2 ca ṇḍini
23.
24.vegavati 
sarvadu ӼԆanivāraṇi
vijayav āhini 
huru 2 muru 2 curu 2vegavati 
sarvadu ӼԆanivāraṇi 
ĕatrupak ṣapramathani 
vijayav āhini
huru 2 muru 2 curu 2
25.āyupālani suravaramathani 
sarvadevatap ūjite 
dhiri 2 āyuḥpālani suravaramathani
sarvadevat āpūjite 
dhiri 2 
26.samant āvalokite prabhe 2 
suprabhavi ĕuddhesamant āvalokite prabhe 2 
suprabhavi ĕuddhe 

--- [Page 70] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 137
 Leiden inscription
(9th/10th c. CE)Nepalese ms.
(1063 CE)Eastern Indian ms.
(ca. 1041 CE)
bhagavati  
ratnamaku Ԇamal ādhari< > 
bahuvi< >dha vicitra vema-
dh[ā]riṇi
bhagavati mah āvidyādevibalā apar ājite vi śeṣavati  
bha ga vati 
ratnamaku Ԇamālādhari< > 
ba hu  vividhavicitrave Ӽa dhā-
ri ṇi bhagavati mah āvidyā-
devatībhagavati 
ratnamaku Ԇamālādhāraṇi
bahuvividhavicitra veӼa-
dhāriṇi 
bhagavati mah āvidyādevi
rakӼa 2 māṃ 
sapariv( ā)raṃ < >satva ĕ ca 
samant āt < >  
sarvap āpavisodhanirakӼa 2 mama 
sapariv āraṃ sarvasattv āṃś ca 
samant āt < >
sarvap āpaviĕodhanirakӼa 2 māṃ Uḍḍākāṃ 
samant āt sarvatra
sarvap āpaviĕodhani
huru 2 huru 2 muru 2 huru 2 curu 2 (?)
rakӼa 2 m ā 
sapariv āraṃ sarvasatva ĕ 
ca anāthān atrāṇān 
aparāyaṇān aśaraṇān rakӼa 2 mama 
sarvasattv āṃĕ 
cānāthān apar āyaṇān rakӼa 2 bhagavati  Uḍḍākāṃ
sapariv āraṃ sarvasattv āṃś 
cānāthān  apar āyaṇān 
parimocaya < > 
sabadu ḥlebhya ḥparimocaya < > 
sarvadu ḥkhebhya ḥparimocaya < > 
sarvadu ḥkhebhya ḥ
caṇḍi 2 ca ṇḍini svaṇḍi 2 caṇḍe 2 ca ṇḍini 2 ca ṇḍi 2 ca ṇḍini 2
vegavat ī 
sarvadu ӼԆanivāraṇī 
vijayav āhinī
huru 2 muru 2 curu 2vegavati bhagavati 
sarvadu ӼԆanivāraṇi 
vijayav āhini
huru 2 muru 2 curu 2 
muru 2vegavati 
sarvadu ӼԆanivāraṇi 
vijayav āhini
huru 2 muru 2 curu 2 
curu 2
oṃ hrīṃ trāṃ
ayumpālanī 
suravaramathan ī
sa< >vadeva gaṇapūjite 
ciri dhiri āyupālani 
suravaramathani
sarvadeva gaṇapūjite 
dhiri 2āyuṣpālani 
suravara pramathani 
sarvadeva gaṇapūjite
dhiri 2
samant āvalokite prare 
prabhe suprabhavi ĕuddhe samant āvalokite prabhe 2
suprabhe  suprabha vaviĕuddhesamant āvalokite prabhe 2  
suprabhavi ĕuddhe
sādhaya śuddhe

--- [Page 71] ---
138 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
Gilgit mss.
(ﬁ rst half 7th c. CE)Amoghavajra’s transliteration
(mid 8th c. CE)
27. sarvap āpaviĕodhani dhara 2 sarvap āpaviĕodhani  dhara 2
28. dhara ṇi vara dhare dhara ṇi dhara dhare 
29.sumu 2 sumu 
rurusumu 2 < > 
ruru
30. cale c ālaya du ӼԆān cale c ālaya du ӼԆān 
pūraya me āĕāṃ   
ĕrīvapudhana ṃpūraya me āĕāṃ  
ĕrīvapudhana ṃ 
31.
32.jayakamale k Ӽiṇi 2 
varad āṅkuĕejayakamale k Ӽiṇi 2 
varade  varad āṃkuĕe
oṃ padmavi ĕuddhe 
ĕodhaya 2 ĕuddheoṃ padmavi ĕuddhe 
ĕodhaya 2 ĕuddhe
33.bhara 2 bhiri 2 bhuru 2 
maṅgalaĕabde pavitramukhebhara 2 bhiri 2 bhuru 2 
maṅgalaviśuddhe  pavitramukh i
khagini 2 khara 2 kha dgiṇi 2 khara 2
34.jvālitaĕikhare 
samantaprasari tā va bhā sitaĕuddhe 
jvala 2jvalitaĕikhare 
samant ā pra saritāvabh āsitaĕuddhe 
jvala 2
35.sarvadevaga ṇasam ākarӼaṇi 
satyavate tara 2 
tāraya m āṃsarvadevaga ṇasam ākarӼaṇi 
 satyavate tara 2 
tāraya m āṃ
36. nāgavilokite lahu 2 hutu 2 n āgavilokite lahu 2 hutu 2
kӼiṇi 2 
sarvagrahabhak ӼaṇikӼiṇi 2 
sarvagrahabhak Ӽaṇi
……

--- [Page 72] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 139
Leiden inscription
(9th/10th c. CE)Nepalese ms.
(1063 CE)Eastern Indian ms.
(ca. 1041 CE)
sarvap āpavisodhani dhara 2 sarvap āpaviĕodhani dhara 2 sarvap āpaviĕodhani dhara 2
dharani dhare 2 dhara ṇi 2 dhare  dhare 2 dhara ṇi dhare < >
musu 2  sumu 2 
pumu  vumu  ruru 2sumu 2 sumu ru 2 
ruru 2sumu 2 sumu 2 
ruru
cale c ālaya du ӼԆān cale 2 c ālaya du ӼԆān cale cālaya du ӼԆān 
pu< >y< > āĕāṃ  
ĕrīvapu< >pūraya < > āĕām
ĕrīvapu rdhare pūraya < > āĕām
ĕrīvapudha re
jayakamale k Ӽiṇi 2 
varad āṅkuĕejayakamale k Ӽiṇi 2 kṣīṇa 
varad āṅkuĕejayakamale k Ӽiṇi 2 
varad āṅkuĕe
oṃ padmavisuddhe
< >oṃ padmavi ĕuddhe 
ĕodhaya < > vi ĕuddheoṃ padmavi ĕuddhe 
ĕodhaya 2 ĕuddhe 2
bhara gara giri 2 kuru 2 
maṅgalaviśuddhe  pavit-
ramukh ibhara 2 bhiri 2 bhuru 2 
maṅgalaviśuddhe  pavit-
ramukh ibhara 2 bhiri 2 bhuru 2 
maṅgalaviśuddhe  vicit-
ramukh i
ladgani kha dgani lara khara kha ḍgini 2  khara 2 kha ḍgini khara 2
jvalitaĕilare 
samantapras āri tā va bhāsita-
suddhe 
jvala 2jvalitaĕikhare 
samantapras āritāvabh āsi< > 
viĕuddhe
jvala 2jvalitaĕikhare 
samantapras āritāvabh ā si ta-
ĕuddhe
jvala 2
sarvadevaganasam ākarpa ṇi 
satyav rate tara 2 
tāraya sarvasatv ānsarvadevaga ṇasam ākarӼaṇi 
satyav rate tara 2 
sariya mama sarvattv āṃś 
casarvadevaga ṇasam ākarӼaṇi 
satyav rate tara 2 
tārayatu bhagavati 
Uḍḍākāṃ
nāgavilokite lahu 2 tuhu 2 
turu 2 ghiri 2nāgavilokite hulu 2 hulu 2 
hulu 2  hutu 2nāgavilokite lahu 2 hulu 2  
hutu 2 turu 2 tuhu 2
haṇi 2 kӼaṇi 2 
sarvagraharak ӼiṇikӼiṇi 2 kṣaṇi 2
sarvagrahabhak Ӽaṇikiṇi 2 kӼiṇi 2 hani 2  
sarvagrahabhak Ӽaṇi
< > … ...

--- [Page 73] ---
140 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
General abbreviations
MIKB  1971 – Museum fü r Indische Kunst Berlin . Katalog 1971 . Ausgestellte 
Werke . See Härtel et al. 1971.
MIKB  1976 – Museum fü r Indische Kunst Berlin . Katalog 1976 . Ausgestellte 
Werke . See Härtel et al. 1976.
MIKB  1986 – Museum fü r Indische Kunst  Berlin . Katalog 1986 . Ausgestellte 
Werke . See Härtel et al. 1986.
MPMVR  – Mahāpratisar āmahāvidyārājñī
OV – Oudheidkundig  Verslag
ROC – Rapporten  van de Oudheidkundige  Commissie
Bibliography
Agus Aris Munandar & Diding Fahrudin. 2012. “Variation and relative 
chronology of the artifacts found at Goa Made (Jombang, East Java, 
Indonesia) and surrounding regions,” in: C. Giardino, M. Vidale & G.L. 
Bonora (eds.), Goa Made : An Archaeological Discovery . Roma: L ’Erma 
di Bretschneider (Bibliotheca Archaeologica 49), 119–125.
Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala Jawa Tengah. 2009. Dewa -Dewi 
Masa Klasik Jawa Tengah . Prambanan, Klaten: BPPP Jawa Tengah.
Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala Yogyakarta. 2007. Pusaka Aksara 
Yogyakarta . A l i h  A k s a r a  d a n  A l i h  B a h a s a  P r a s a s t i  K o l e k s i  B a l a i  
Pelestarian Peninggalan Yogyakarta . Bogem, Kalasan, Yogyakarta: 
BPPP Yogyakarta.
Bentor, Yael. 1995. “On the Indian origins of the Tibetan practice of depos-
iting relics and dhāraṇīs in st ūpas and images,” Journal of the American 
Oriental  Society 115, 248–261.
____ 1996. C o n s e c r a t i o n  o f  I m a g e s  a n d  S t ūpas in Indo -Tibetan Tantric 
Buddhism . Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Bernet Kempers, A.J. 1959. Ancient Indonesian Art . Amsterdam: Van der 
Peet.
____ 1976. Ageless Borobudur : Buddhist Mystery in Stone ; Decay and Resto-
ration ; Mendut and Pawon ; Folklife in Ancient Java . Wassenaar: Servire.
____ 1978. Monumental Bali : Introduction to Balinese Archaeology ; Guide 
to the Monuments . Den Haag: Van Goor.
Boechari, Wiwin Djuwita & A.S. Wibowo. 1985/1986 Prasasti Koleksi 
Museum Nasional . Vol. 1 (all published). Jakarta: Proyek Pengembangan 
Museum Nasional.
Boechari, Wiwin Djuwita & Heriyanti Ongkodharma. 1979. “Report on 
clay votive st ūpas from the Borobudur site,” in: Pelita Borobudur Seri 

--- [Page 74] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 141
CC No . 8. Reports and Documents of the Consultative Committee for 
the Safeguarding of Borobudur  (8th meeting, April 1979), Proyek pelita 
pemugaran Candi Borobudur, Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, 
115–128.
Boisselier, Jean. 1968. “Aperçu historique sur les « saintes empreintes » de 
la Thaï lande,” in: Mélanges d’indianisme à la mémoire de Louis Renou , 
Paris: de Boccard, 153–160.
le Bonheur, Albert. 1971. La sculpture indonésienne au Musée Guimet : cat-
alogue et étude iconographique . Paris: Musée Guimet.
Bosch, F.D.K. & W.F. Stutterheim. 1938. “Verslag over 1935,” Uittre ksel 
uit de Oudheidkundige  Verslagen  over 1931-1935 . Batavia: Koninklijk 
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen, 17–19.
Boucher, Daniel. 1991. “The Pratītyasamutp ādagāthā and its role in the 
medieval cult of the relics, ” Journal of the International Association of 
Buddhist Studies  14, 1–27.
Brinkgreve, Francine & Retno Sulistianingsih (eds.). 2009. Sumatra : Cross-
roads of Cultures . Leiden: KITLV Press.
Brinkgreve, Francine, Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer & David Stuart-Fox 
(eds.). 2010. Kemegahan emas di Museum Nasional Indonesia = Golden 
splendour in the National Museum of Indonesia . Jakarta: Museum 
Nasional Indonesia.
Bühnemann, Gudrun. 2000. “Buddhist deities and mantras in the Hindu 
tantras: II. The Ĕrīvidyārṇavatantra  and the Tantras āra,” Indo-Iranian 
Journal 43, 27–48.
de Casparis, J.G. 1956. Selected Inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th Century 
A.D. [Prasasti Indonesia . Vol. II.] Bandung: Masa Baru.
____ 1975. Indonesian Palaeography . A History of Writing in Indonesia from 
the Beginnings to c . A.D. 1500 . Leiden/Köln: E.J. Brill.
Chou, Yi-liang. 1945. “Tantrism in China,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic 
Studies 8, 241–332.
Cohen Stuart, A.B. 1875. Kawi Oorkonden in Facsimile . Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Copp, Paul. 2008. “Altar, amulet, icon. Transformations in dhāraṇī amulet 
culture, 740–980,” Cahiers d ’Extrême -Asie 17, 239–264.
Dalton, Jacob & Sam van Schaik. 2006. Tibetan Tantric Manuscripts from 
Dunhuang . A Descriptive Catalogue of the Stein Collection at the British 
Library . Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1952. “Etudes d’épigraphie indonésienne. III. Liste 
des principales inscriptions datées de l’Indonésie,” BEFEO  46.1, 1–105.
____ 1955. “Etudes d’épigraphie indonésienne. IV . Discussion  de la date des 
inscriptions,” BEFEO  47.1, 7–290.
____ 1959. “Le bouddhisme en Indonésie,” in: René de Berval (ed. ), Pré-

--- [Page 75] ---
142 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
sence du Bouddhisme , special issue of France -Asie (vol. 16). Saigon: 
France-Asie, 813–824.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2009. “Studies in dh āraṇī literature I: Revisiting the 
meaning of the term dhāraṇī,” Journal of Indian Philosophy  37, 97–147.
Degroot, Véronique Myriam Yvonne, 2010. Candi, Space and Landscape: A 
Study on the Distribution, Orientation and Spatial Organization of Centr al 
Javanese Temple Remains . Leiden: Sidestone Press. (Mededelingen van 
het Rijksmuseum voor Volkenkunde 38)
Drège, Jean-Pierre. 1999–2000. “Les premières impressions des dhāraṇī de 
Mahāpratisar ā,” Cahiers d ’Extrême -Asie 11, 25– 44.
Drewes, David. 2007. “Revisiting the phrase ‘ sa p thivīprade ĕaĕ caityabh ūto 
bhavet ’ and the Mah āyāna cult of the book, ” Indo-Iranian Journal  50, 
101–143.
Fontein, Jan. 1990. The Sculpture of Indonesia . Washington, D.C.: The 
National Gallery of Art.
____ 2012 . Entering the Dharmadh ātu: A study of the Ga ṇḍavyūha Reliefs 
of Borobudur . Leiden: E.J. Brill. (Studies in Asian Art and Archaeology 
26)
Forte, Antonino. 1984. “The activities in China of the tantric master Mani-
cintana (Pao-ssu-wei ሞࢥҘ  : ?–721 A.D.) from Kashmir and of his 
Northern Indian collaborators,” East and West  34.1/3, 301–347.
Fussman, Gérard. 2004. “Dans quel type de bâtiment furent trouvés les man-
uscrits de Gilgit?”, Journal Asiatique 292.1–2, 101–150.
Ghose, Rajeshwari. 2000. “Zehnarmige tantrische Göttin (Chund ā?),” in: 
Marianne Yaldiz et al. (eds.), Magische Götterwelten : Werke aus dem 
Museum für Indische Kunst Berlin . Potsdam: Staatliche Museen zu Berlin 
– Preußischer Kulturbesitz, Unze, 161–162, nr. 241.
Goble, Geo ﬀ rey C. 2012. Chinese Esoteric Buddhism : Amoghavajra and the 
Ruling Elite . Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Indiana University.
Gri࠳  ths, Arlo. 2011a. “Inscriptions of Sumatra: Further data on the epi-
graphy of the Musi and Batang Hari River basins,” Archipel  81, 129–175.
____ 2011b. “Eine zehnarmige Mah āpratisar ā a u s  J a v a  i m  M u s e u m  f ü r  
Asiatische Kunst,” Indo-Asiatische Zeitschrift  15, 3–9.
____ 2013. “The inscription on an embossed image of Ĕiva in gold leaf 
from Central Java, Indonesia,” in: M.J. Klokke and V. Degroot (eds.), 
Materializing Southeast Asia ’s Past : Selected Papers  from the 12th 
International Conference of the European Association of Southeast As ian 
Archeologists , vol. II. Singapore: NUS Press, 119–121.
Gri࠳  ths, Arlo, Nicolas Revire & Rajat Sanyal. 2013. “An inscribed bronze 
sculpture of a Buddha in bhadr āsana  at Museum Ranggawarsita in Sema-
rang (Central Java, Indonesia),” Arts Asiatiques 68, 3–26.

--- [Page 76] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 143
Groeneveldt, W.P. 1887. Catalogus der Archaeologische Verzameling van 
het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen […] met 
aantee keningen omtrent de op verschillende voorwerpen voorkomende 
in scripties en een voorlopig inventaris der beschreven steenen . Batavia: 
Albrecht & Co.
Hariani Santiko. 1992.  Bha Ԃārī Durg ā. PhD dissertation Fakultas Sastra, 
Universitas Indonesia, Depok.
Härtel, Herbert, Volker Moeller & G. Bhattacharya. 1971.  Museum fü r Indi-
sche Kunst Berlin . Katalog 1971 . Ausgestellte Werke . Berlin: Staat liche 
Museen Preußischer Kulturbesitz.
____  1976.  Museum fü r Indische Kunst Berlin . Katalog 1976 . Ausgestellte 
Werke . Berlin: Staatliche Museen Preußischer Kulturbesitz.
Härtel, Herbert, M. Yaldiz, V. Moeller, W. Lobo & G. Bhattacharya. 1986. 
Museum fü r Indische Kunst  Berlin . Katalog 1986 . Ausgestellte Werke . 
Berlin: Staatliche Museen Preußischer Kulturbesitz.
Hase, H ōshū. 1976. Daishi go -shćrai bonji shingon sh ū. Tokyo: Kokusho 
Kank ōkai.
Heine-Geldern, Robert. 1925. Altjavanische Bronzen aus dem Besitze der 
ethno graphischen Sammlung des naturhistorischen Museums in Wien . 
Vien  na/Leipzig. (Artis Thesaurus, Band 1)
Hidas, Gergely. 2003. “Preliminary notes on the Mahāpratisar ā Mahāvidyā-
rājñī, a Buddhist protective text from the Pañcarak Ӹā-collection,” 
Berliner Indologische Studien  15/16/17, 263–284.
____ 2007. “Remarks on the use of the dhāraṇīs and mantras of the Mahā-
pratisar ā-Mahāvidyārājñī,” in: Cs. Dezs ő (ed.), Indian  Languages  and 
Texts  through  the Ages : Essays  in Honour  of Prof. Csaba  Töttössy . Delhi: 
Manohar, 185–207.
____ 2010. “ Mahāpratisar āvidyāvidhi . The spell-manual of the Great Amu-
let,” Acta Orientialia Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae  64.4, 473–484.
____ 2012. Mahāpratisar ā-Mahāvidyārājñī, The Great Amulet , Great Queen 
of Spells . Introduction , Critical Editions and Annotated Translation . New 
Delhi: Aditya Prakashan. ( Ĕata-Pi Ԇaka Series 636)
von Hinüber, Oskar. 2004. Die Palola ӷāhis: Ihre Steininschriften , Inschriften 
auf Bronze , Handschriftenkolophone und Schutzzauber . Materialen zur 
Geschichte von Gilgit und Chilas . Mainz: Philipp von Zabern. (Antiquities 
of Northern Pakistan 5)
Holt, Claire. 1967. Art in Indonesia : Continuities and Change . Ithaca, New 
York: Cornell University Press.
Hooykaas, C. 1973. Balinese Bauddha Brahmins . Amsterdam/London: North-
Holland Publishing Company. (Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Neder-
landse Akademie van Wetenschappen, afd. Letterkunde, nieuwe reeks, 80)

--- [Page 77] ---
144 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
Huntington, Susan L. & John C. Huntington. 1990. Leaves from the Bodhi 
Tree: The Art of P āla India (8th–12th Centuries ) and its international 
Legacy . Dayton, Ohio: The Dayton Art Institute; Seattle [etc.]: University 
of Washington Press.
Iwamoto, Yutaka. 1981. “The Ĕailendra dynasty and Chandi Borobudur,” 
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Chandi Borobudur . 
Tokyo: The Executive Committee for the International Symposium on 
Chandi Borobudur, 83–88.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel. 1992. La civilisation de po rts -entrepôts du Sud 
Kedah (Malaysia ) Ve–XIVe siècle . Paris: L ’Harmattan.
de Jong, Jan Willem. 1974. “Notes on the sources and the text of the Sang 
Hyang Kamah āyānan Mantranaya,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde  130, 465–482.
____ 1984. “ A new history of Tantric literature in India [review  of Matsunaga 
Yūkei, Mikky ć kyćten seiritsushi -ron (Kyoto, 1980)],” Indo Koten Kenky ū 
[Acta Indologica ] 6, 91–113.
Kayato Hardani. 2009. “Bhagawatimah Cidy ā Dewi: identi ﬁ kasi ﬁ gur wanita 
menggendong bayi dalam prasasti Candi Cebongan,” Berkala Arkeologi  
(Yogyakarta) 29.1, 27–45.
Klokke, Marijke J. 2008. “The Buddhist temples of the Ĕailendra dynasty in 
Central Java,” Arts Asiatiques  63, 154–167.
Krom, N.J. 1923. Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst . ’s-Gravenhage: 
M. Nijho ﬀ . (Second, revised edition)
Krom, N.J. & T. van Erp. 1920–1931. Beschrijving van Barabu ḍur. ’s-Graven-
hage: Nijho ﬀ . (Archaeologisch Onderzoek in Nederlandsch-Indië 3)
Kuo Liying. forthc. “ Dhāraṇī pillars in China: Functions and symbols,” in: 
Cultural Crossings : China and Beyond in the Early Medieval Period .
Liebenthal, Walter. 1947. “Sanskrit inscriptions from Yunnan I,” Monumenta 
Serica 12, 1–40.
Lokesh Chandra. 1977. “An Indonesian copper-plate Sanskrit inscription 
cum drawing of H ārīti,” Bijdragen tot de Taal -, Land - en Volkenkunde  
133, 466–471.
____ 1981. Pañca -RakӸā, Two Sanskrit Manuscripts from Nepal . New Delhi: 
Jayyed Press. ( Ĕata-Pi Ԇaka Series 267)
____ 1983. “Remarks on Kuñjarakar ṇa,” Bijdragen tot de Taal -, Land - en 
Volkenkunde 139, 363–365.
____ 1992. “Tantras and the defence of T’ang China,” in: Cultural Horizons 
of India . Vol. 2, New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and 
Aditya Prakashan, 257–266.
____ 1995. “The Ĕailendras of Java,” in: Cultural Horizons of India . Vol. 
4, New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya 

--- [Page 78] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 145
Prakashan, 205–241.
____ 2001. Dictionary of Buddhist Iconography , volume 3 ( Čayan Acala – 
Dhūpā). New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya 
Prakashan. ( Ĕata-Pi Ԇaka Series 603)
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline & Marijke J. Klokke. 1988. Divine Bronze . 
Ancient Indonesian bronzes from A .D. 600 to 1600 . Leiden: E.J. Brill.
de Mallmann, Marie-Thérèse. 1975. Introduction à l ’iconographie  du tân-
trisme bouddhique . Paris: Librairie Adrien-Maisonneuve. (Bibliothèque 
du Centre de Recherches sur l’Asie Centrale et la Haute Asie I)
Maxwell, Robyn. 2006. The Bronze Weaver : A Masterpiece of 6th-Century 
Indonesian Sculpture . Canberra: National Gallery of Australia.
____ 2010. Life, Death and Magic : 2000 Years of Southeast Asian Ancestral 
Art. Canberra: National Gallery of Australia.
Meisezahl, R.O. 1962. “The Amoghap āĕah daya-dh āraṇī. The early Sanskrit 
manuscript of the Reiunji critically edited and translated,” Monumenta 
Nipponica 17, 265–328.
____ 1965. “The Amoghap āĕah daya Manuscript formerly kept in the Reiunji 
temple and its collateral texts in Tibetan transliteration,” Mikky ćgaku 
Mikky ćshi Ronbunsh ū: Kćyasan Kais ć Senhyakugoj ūnen Kinen /Studies 
of Esoteric Buddhism and Tantrism : In Commemoration of the 1 ,150th 
Anniversary of the founding of Koyasan . Koyasan: Koyasan University, 
179–216.
Mevissen, Gerd. 1989. “Studies in Pañcarak Ӹā manuscript painting,” Berliner 
Indologische Studien  4/5, 339–374.
____ 1999. “Images of Mah āpratisar ā in Bengal: Their iconographic links 
with Javanese, Central Asian and East Asian images,” Journal of Bengal 
Art 4, 99–129.
____ 2006. “ A dated Pañcarak Ӹā toraṇa from the H āratī temple at Svayam-
bhūnāth, Nepal, and related matters,” in: G.J.R. Mevissen & K. Bruhn 
(eds.), Vanam ālā. Festschrift A.J. Gail, Berlin: Weidler, 138–149.
____ 2010. “ Mahāsahasrapramarddan ī pūrvvavad eva  – An ambiguous 
statement and its di ﬀ erent interpretations,” in: Eli Franco & Monica 
Zin (eds.), From Turfan to Ajanta : Festschrift for Dieter Schlinglo ﬀ  
on the Occasion of his Eightieth Birthday . Vol. II, Lumbini: Lumbini 
International Research Centre, 725–739.
Moeller, Volker. 1985. Javanische Bronzen . Berlin: Staatliche Museen Preus -
sischer Kulturbesitz, Museum für Indische Kunst. (Bilderhefte der Sta at-
lichen Museen Preußischer Kulturbesitz 51)
Musée Cernuschi. 2000. Trésors des art asiatiques : ﬂ orilège de la collection 
d e  M r  e t  M m e  J o h n  D . Rockefeller III , Asia Society , New York . Paris: 
Association Paris-Musées.

--- [Page 79] ---
146 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
Nakada, Kozo. 1986. “The Munduan copper-plate inscriptions found in 
Java,” Nantoh Shigaku  (Journal of Ryukyuan Studies) 28, 1–21.
Nihom, Max. 1994. Studies in Indian and Indo -Indonesian Tantrism : The 
Kuñ  jarakar ṇadharmakathana and the Yogatantra . Vienna: Institut für 
Indologie der Universität Wien.
Orzech, Charles D., Henrik H. Sørenson & Richard K. Payne. 2011. Esoteric 
Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia . Leiden: Brill.
Poerbatjaraka, R. Ng. 1926. Agastya in den Archipel . Proefschrift, Leiden: 
Brill.
Sarkar, Himansu Bhusan. 1971–72. Corpus of the Inscriptions of Java (up to 
928 A .D.). 2 vols. Calcutta: Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay.
Scherrer-Schaub, Cristina A. 1994. “Some dhāraṇī written on paper func-
tioning as dharmak āya relics. A tentative approach to PT 350,” in: Per 
Kvaerne (ed.), Tibetan Studies , Proceedings of the 6th Seminar of the 
International Association for  Tibetan Studies , Fagernes 1992 . Vol. II, 
Oslo: Institute for Comparative Research in Human Culture, 711–727.
Schopen, Gregory. 1975. “The phrase sa p thivīprade ĕaĕ caityabh ūto bhavet  
in the Vajracchedik ā: Notes on the cult of the book in Mah āyāna,” Indo-
Iranian Journal  17, 147–181. (= Schopen 2005: 25–62)
____ 1978. The Bhai Ӹajyaguru -sūtra and the Buddhism of Gilgit . Doctoral 
thesis. Australian National University, Canberra. Unpublished.
____ 1982. “The text on the ‘ dhāraṇī stones from Abhayagiriya’: A minor 
contribution to the study of Mah āyāna literature in Ceylon,” Journal of  
the International Association of Buddhist Studies 5, 100–108. (= Schopen 
2005: 306–313)
____ 1985. “The Bodhigarbh ālaṅkāralak Ӹa and Vimalo ӸṇīӸa Dh āraṇīs 
in Indian inscriptions: Two sources for the practice of Buddhism in 
Medieval India,” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 29, 119–149. 
(= Schopen 2005: 314–344)
____ 2005. Figments and Fragments of Mah āyāna Buddhism in India . More 
Collected Papers . Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
____ 2009. “On the absence of urtexts and otiose ācāryas: Buildings, books, 
and lay Buddhist ritual at Gilgit,” in: Gérard Colas & Gerdi Gerschheimer 
(eds.), Écrire et transmettre en Inde classique . Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient, 189–219.
Shuhaimi b. Nik Abd. Rahman, Nik Hasan. 1988. “Arca agama Buddha 
purba semenanjung Malaysia: penelitian ikonogra ﬁ  dan kronologi serta 
ertinya,” Jebat  16, 15–30.
Skilling, Peter. 1992. “The rakӸā literature of the Ĕrāvakay āna,” Journal of 
the Pali Text Society 16, 109–182.
____ 1999. “A Buddhist inscription from Go Xoai, southern Vietnam 

--- [Page 80] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 147
and notes towards a classi ﬁ cation of ye dharm ā inscriptions,” in: 80 
pī ĕāstrācāry dr . praḥsert ṇa nagara : ruam pada khvam vij ākāra dan 
charük lae ekas ārapor āṇa [80 Y ears: A collection of articles on epigra-
phy and ancient documents published on the occasion of the celebration 
of the 80th birthday of Prof. Dr. Prasert Na Nagara, Bangkok 21 March 
2542]. Bangkok, 171–187.
Soekmono, R. & I.G.N. Anom (eds.). 2005. The Restauration of Borobudur . 
Paris: Unesco Publishing.
Soemantri, Hilda. 1997. Majapahit Terracotta Art . Jakarta: Ceramic Society 
of Indonesia.
Stutterheim, W .F . 1924. “Oudjavaansche plastiek in Europe se musea, ” Bij-
dragen tot de Taal -, Land - en Volkenkunde 80, 287–301.
____ 1925. “Een belangrijke hindoe-javaansche teekening op ko per,” Djåwå  
5, 247–252.
____ 1928. “Nog eens de collectie Dieduksman,” Oudheidkundig Verslag 
1927, 189–193.
____ 1929–1930 I. Oudheden van Bali I : het oude rijk van Pedjeng . Tekst . 2 
vols. Singaradja: Kirtya Liefrinck-van der Tuuk.
____ 1935. Indian In ﬂ uences in Old-Balinese Art . London: India Society.
____ 1956. “ An important Hindu-Javanese drawing on copper,” in : Studies 
in Indonesian Archaeology . The Hague: Martinus Nijho ﬀ , 147–158.
Sundberg, Je ﬀ rey Roger. 2003. “A Buddhist mantra recovered from the Ratu 
Baka plateau; A preliminary study of its implications for Ĕailendra-era 
Java,” Bijdragen tot de Taal -, Land - en Volkenkunde 159, 163–88.
____ 2004. “The wilderness monks of the Abhayagirivihara and the origins 
of Sino-Javanese esoteric Buddhism,” Bijdragen tot de Taal -, Land - en 
Volkenkunde  160, 95–123.
____ 2011. “The life of the Tang court monk Vajrabodhi as chronic led by Lü 
Xiang (࿊޲ :)South Indian and Ĕ rī  Laṅ kā n antecedents to the arrival of 
the Buddhist Vajray ā na in eighth-century Java and China,” Paciﬁ c World 
(Third Series ) 13, 129–222.
Taish ć shinsh ū daiz ćkyć. 1924–1935. Edited and compiled by Takakusu Jun-
jirō, Kaigyoku Watanabe and Gemmy ō Ono. 100 vols. Tokyo: Taish ō is-
saiky ō kank ōkai.
Titi Surti Nastiti. forthc. “Miniature st ūpas and a Buddhist sealing from Candi 
Gentong, Trowulan, Mojokerto, East Java,” in: Christian Lammerts (ed.), 
Buddhist Dynamics in Premodern and Early Modern Southeast Asia . 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Tokyo National Museum. 1997. Treasures of Ancient Indonesian Kingdoms . 
Tokyo: Tokyo National Museum.

--- [Page 81] ---
148 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
Tsiang, Katherine R. 2010. “Buddhist printed images and texts of the 
eighth-tenth centuries: Typologies of replication and representation,” 
in: Matthew T. Kapstein & Sam van Schaik (eds.), Esoteric Buddhism at 
Dunhuang . Leiden: E.J. Brill, 201–252.
Tsukamoto, Keisho. 1996–1998. A Comprehensive Study of the Indian Bud-
dhist Inscriptions . 2 vols. Kyoto: Heirakuji-Shoten.
Williams, Paul & Anthony Tribe. 2000. Buddhist Thought . A complete intro-
duction to the Indian tradition . London: Routledge.
Woodward, Hiram W. 1977. “A Chinese silk depicted at Candi Sewu,” in: Karl 
L. Hutterer (ed.), Economic Exchange and Social Interaction in South-
east Asia : P erspectives from prehistory , history , and ethnography . Ann 
Arbor: Center for South and Southeast Asian Studies, The University of 
Michigan (Michigan Papers on South and Southeast Asia 13), 233–243.
____ 2009. “Bianhong, mastermind of Borobudur?,” Paciﬁ c World : Journal 
of the Institute of Buddhist Studies  11 (Third Series), 26–60.

--- [Page 82] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 149
  
 Figure 1. Ten-armed Mah āpratisar ā, Java ca. 9th–10th century. Berlin, 
Museum für Asiatische Kunst II 196. Photo: Jürgen Liepe, 2011.

--- [Page 83] ---
150 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
 
 Figure 2. Inscription on the back of the preceding. 
Photo:  Jürgen  Liepe,  2011.

--- [Page 84] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 151
 
 Figure 3. Lateral view of the preceding. Photo: Jürgen Liepe, 2011.

--- [Page 85] ---
152 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
 
 Figure 4. Lateral view of the preceding. Photo: Jürgen Liepe, 2011.

--- [Page 86] ---
 
 Figure 5. The Leiden copperplate. Photo: OD 2194 (see OV  1915: 73). 
Courtesy Kern Institute and University Library, Leiden

--- [Page 87] ---
154 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
 Figure 6. The Leiden copperplate, with a line drawing of the 
female ﬁ gure. Photo: OD 2195 (see OV  1915: 73). Courtesy Kern 
Institute and University Library, Leiden. Extra coloring of the 
headdress by Sjoerd Didden.

--- [Page 88] ---
The cult of the Buddhist dhāraṇī deity Mah āpratisar ā 155 Figure 7. Relief showing S ītā with Lava, Brahm ā temple, Loro Jonggrang complex, Prambanan. 
Photo:  OD 11353.  Courtesy Kern Institute and University Library, Leiden.


--- [Page 89] ---
156 Th. Cruijsen, A. Gri ࠳  ths, M. J. Klokke
 Figure 8. Borobudur, relief (II B 21) showing a woman who has  just delivered. 
Photo: Marijke J. Klokke, 2009.

--- [Page 90] ---
157
 Figure 9. Gold plaque from Candi Gedong I (Muara Jambi), Sumatra, ca. 12th–13th century. 
Photo:  Pierre-Yves  Manguin,  2010.