--- [Page 1] ---
1 Beyond the “Spice Routes”: 
Indic and Sinitic Religions across the Asian Maritime 
Realm  
Religions 
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/religions/special_issues/9P1M8049VT  
Special Issue Editors  
Guest Editor  
École Pratique des Hautes Études (EPHE, PSL University)  / Groupe de Recherches en Études Indiennes (GREI), 
Paris, France  
Interests:  Hindu and Buddhist tantric traditions; Maritime Buddhi sm; Intra -Asian religious networks  
Dr. Francesco Bianchini 
Guest Editor  
King’s College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1TN, UK  
Interests:  History of South Asian religions (pre -modern); cultural and religious “Silk Roads” before 1400CE  
Special Issue Intro duction 
As	it	is	increasingly	recognized	by	recent	scholarship,	the	maritime	realm,	rather	than	creating	a	barrier,	
favoured	short -	and	long-distance	mobility:	it	not	only	connected	individuals	and	societies	across	Asia, 	but	
also	played	a	role	in	shaping	the	imagi naries,	cosmologies,	and	ritual	practices	of	people	interacting	with	
the	sea.	The	exchange	of	Indic	ideas,	technologies,	and	artistic	styles	across 	coastal	and	archipelagic	
southeastern	rim	of	Asia —a	historically	highly	interconnected	and	entangled	region	 that	here	we	refer	to	
as	“Maritime	Asia” —that	led	to	the	dissemination	of	Hindu	and	Buddhist	art	and	architecture	along	wit h	
the	creation,	diffusion,	and	preservation	of	textual	archives	from	at	least	 the	early	centuries	of	the	Common	
Era	was	unprecedented 	on	the	global	stage	in	both	its	scale	and	impact.	At	the	same	time, 	Sinitic	religious	
systems—i.e.,	various	currents	of	Buddhism,	Confucianism,	and	Daoism —and	textual	canons	projected	
their	influence	to	the	eastern	rim	of	Asia	as	well	as	Tibet	and	coastal	mainland	Sout heast	Asia	(i.e.,	present	
Vietnam).	Thus,	the	constellation	of	Indic	and	Sinitic	normative	systems,	 philosophies,	cosmologies,	and	
mythologies 	that	intersected	across	Maritime	Asia	can	be	considered	among	the	most	powerf ul,	long-
lasting,	and	deep -penetrating	unifying	factors	in	the	history	of	this	region. 	
Emphasising	the	transmission	of	religious	knowledge,	practices,	and	mate rial	culture,	from	elite	esoteric	
texts	and	royal	icons	to	“folk”	cults	and	everyday	ritual	and	devotional	objects, 	or	again	from	mathematical	
and	astronomical	knowledge	to	textile	tec hnology,	the	body	of	work	presented	in	th is	Special	Issue	
challenges	traditional	accounts	based	on	the	primacy	of	trade	(for	instance,	of	commodit ies	such	as	silk	or	
spices,	which	have	resulted	in	such	expressions	as	“Silk	Roads”	or	“Spice	Routes”)	and	h ighlight	the	sea	as	
a	crossroad	and	catalyser	of	religious	transaction s.	In	doing	so,	it 	reveals	the	still	understudied	networks	
of	actors—such	as	ritual	specialists,	monks,	wonderworkers,	healer s,	pilgrims,	diplomats,	merchants,	
etc.—who	travelled	by	sea	to	secure	royal	sponsorship,	pros elityse,	search	for	manuscripts	and	oral	
teachings,	build	temple s	and	monastic	communities,	and	visit	sacred	sites.	Apart	from	 contributing	to	the	
transmission	and	multi -directional	circulation	of	Indic	and	Sinitic	religions	across	Maritime	Asia,	t hose	
actors	became	the	cultural	brokers	who	connected	far	awa y	lands	and 	cultures,	and	the	prime	vectors	of	
innovations	from	the	“centres”	to	the	“peripheries”	and —more	often	than	it	has	been	hitherto	admitted —
from	the	“peripheries”	to	the	”centres”. 	Prof. Andrea Acri 

--- [Page 2] ---
 
         
2 Taking	as	its	chronological	framework	the	medieval	period	and	stretching	to	the	early	modern	period, 	this	
Special	Issue	gather s	studies	from	both	macro -	and	micro -historical	perspectives	as	well	as	disciplines,	
including	religious	studies,	history,	art	history,	textual	studies, 	and	Area	Studies.	 On	the	one	hand,	t he	
contributions	 explore	the	cross -cultural	interactions	occurred	across	the	maritime	spaces	of	 the	Bay	of	
Bengal	and	the	South	China	Sea	and	their	surrounding	landmasses,	whi ch	played	a	pivotal	role	as	
crossroads	in	the	traffic	of	ideas,	religious	beliefs,	 ritual	practices ,	and	their	entanglement 	with	politic al	
power,	diplomacy,	and	trade;	on	the	other,	they 	are	anchored	in	local	contexts,	for	instance 	Eastern	India,	
Sri	Lanka,	Java,	Sumatra,	Cambodia,	 Southern	China,	Taiwan,	Japan,	 etc.	
The	Special	Issue	provide s	a	broad	platform	for	comparisons	with	the	transmission	of	 Buddhism,	 Hinduism,	
Chinese	religions	 (Confucianism, 	Daoism),	and	Indic/Sinitic	 “folk”	religions	across	Asia,	with	a	special	
attention	to	the	aspects	of	circulation	and	displacement,	maritime	 pilgrimage	and	migration,	cross -cultural	
exchanges,	cross -religious	interactions,	as	well	as	the	influence	of	the	sea	on	cosmopolitan	and 	local	
epistemologies. 	In	so	doing,	this	body	of	work	promote s	the	transcendance	of	the	artificial	spatial	
demarcations	of	nation -states	and	macro -regions	elaborated	within	the	Area	Studies	paradigm,	promote	a	
transregional	methodological	approach ,	and	encourage	a	disciplinary	cross -fertilization. 	
Keywords  
Indian	 Ocean	 Studies,	Maritime	History,	Hinduism,	Buddhism ,	Confucianis m,	Daoism,	folk	 religions ,	
Maritime	Asia ,	Maritime	Silk	Roads,	Monsoon	 Asia	
Funding Acknowledgem ents 
The	publication	of	9	articles	 was	funded	by	 the	French	National	Re search	(project	MANTRA—Maritime	
Asian	Networks	of	Bud dhist	Tantra ,	ANR-22-CE27-015 ).	Additional	funding 	and	institutional	support 	is	
specified	in	the	 Funding	section	at	the	end	of	each	article. 	
 
Article s (in chronolo gical order of publication)  [CC-BY] 
 
1.  This Ship Prays: The Southern Chinese Religious Seascape through the 
Handbook of a Maritime Ritual Master  …………………………………………………………….. . p. 6  
by Ilay Golan  
Religions  2024 , 15(9), 1096;  https://doi.org/10.3390/rel15091096  - 10 Sep 2024  (18pp)  
 
Abstract   
Long kept in the British Library, a liturgical manuscript from the port of Haicheng, Fujian, holds details  of the rich 
system of beliefs that Chinese sailors held. Originally untitled, the text by the shelfmark OR12693/18 is  usually 
referred to as “Libation Ritual (for Ship Safety)” ( [An Chua n] Zhuoxian K e [(安船)酌献科 ]). Formerly, it was given 
scholarly attention mostly due to its addended lists of maritime placenames, which follows Qing -era sea routes 
across China’s coasts and to the South China Sea. Further inquiry into the manuscript’s terminolo gy, deity names, 
and maritime knowledge conﬁrms its deep relation to sailors’ lore. By tracing this t ext into a wide range of sources, 
this paper demonstrates how manuscript OR12693/18 reﬂects a cohesive maritime system of belief s and 
knowledge. Manifested within the prayer are a hierarchical pantheon, ritual practices, and a perceived s acred 
seascape. Moreover, it is evident that the manuscript belonged to a tradition of sailing ritual masters who were 
regular members of the crew onboard junks. As such, this paper o ﬀers an analysis of a religious -professional 
tradition with trans -local aspects, shedding new light on seafaring in pre -modern Chin a. 
 
 
 
 

--- [Page 3] ---
 
         
3 2. Temple-Monasteries, Buddhist Monks, and Architectural Exchange Between 
India, Java, and Tibet in the Late 8th Century ………………………………………………… p. 24  
by Louis Copplestone  
Religions  2024 , 15(11), 1338;  https://doi.org/10.3390/rel15111338  - 1 Nov 2024  (32 pp.) 
 
Abstract   
The o nce-dominant view that architectural developments in mediaeval Southeast Asia closely followed Indian 
‘inﬂuence’ is now largely rejected. Recent scholarship has shifted its focus onto the agency of local artists and 
architects in driving architectural inn ovations across the region. However, speciﬁc cases of transregional 
exchanges in architectural ideas and practices remain underexplored. This study examines three geographically 
distant Buddhist sites —Paharpur in northern Bangladesh, Candi Sewu in Central  Java, Indonesia, and Samye 
Monastery in central Tibet —active in the late 8th century. I consider the signiﬁcance of speciﬁc similarities and 
their temporal correlations within a broader range of styles, materials, and technologies. I argue that  the acti vity 
at these sites reveals a shared architectural agenda transmitted over vast distances by religious exp erts, including 
Buddhist monks, in the last decades of the 8th century. Central to the network of three temple -monasteries 
proposed is the role that a  speciﬁc architectural type was understood to play in protecting the kingdom and 
extending a king’s sovereignty while manifesting his spiritual aspirations. By disti nguishing between architectural 
forms, architectural agendas, and modes of production, thi s study clariﬁes the complex nature of transregional 
architectural exchange in the premodern world . 
 
3. Temple Diplomacy, Sacred Rites, and Overseas Chinese During the Reign of 
Song Emperor Zhenzong (997–1022)  …………………………………………………………….. p. 56  
by Gregory Sattler  
Religions  2024 , 15(11), 1401;  https://doi.org/10.3390/rel15111401  - 18 Nov 2024  (27 pp.)  
 
Abstract   
Throughout most of Chinese history, leaders viewed the migration and movement of their subje cts beyond state 
borders as a symptom of poor governance. As a result, record keepers generally avoided addressing the topic of  
Chinese people traveling or residing  overseas. There is, however, an exceptional moment in Chinese history that 
provides valuable insight into the early establishment of Chinese communities abroad. Facing political pr essure 
after signing a humiliating peace treaty with foreign adversaries in  1005, the Song dynasty emperor Zhenzong 
(968–1022, r. 997 –1022) utilized unconventional forms of religious diplomacy and revived ancient rites to shore 
up support for his rule. The Feng and Shan rites were the highest level of sacriﬁce that  an emperor co uld 
undertake, and they were only carried out by several emperors prior to Zhenzong’s reign. One of the requirements 
of this complex ritual was for the sovereign to attract foreign peoples from afar by his vi rtuous character, and so 
Zhenzong’s reign witnes sed major initiatives to attract foreign envoys from states such as Srivijaya (Sumatra), Dai 
Viet (northern Vietnam), Japan, and India. Zhenzong’s reign also incorporated forms of diplomacy that originat ed 
in South and Southeast Asia, namely, the construction of temples in foreign states to enhance his spiritual 
authority. This essay will demonstrate that Emperor Zhenzong relied on Chinese merchants resi ding overseas to 
work with foreign leaders to coordinate the participation of foreign emissaries in such forms of temple diplomacy 
and in the Feng and Shan sacriﬁces. The signiﬁcance of these events brought the activities  of Chinese people 
trading and residing overseas to the attention of the Song court and its chroniclers, and as a result, we are left 
with the earliest indications of Chinese communities abroad in o ﬃcial Chinese histories . 
 
4. Roads to the Sky: Indic Ritual Elements in the Vietnam-China Borderlands 
and Their Maritime Transmission ……………………………………………………………………. p. 83  
by David Holm  
Religions  2024 , 15(12), 1551;  https://doi.org/10.3390/rel15121551  - 20 Dec 2024  (25 pp.)  
 
Abstract   
One of the basic features of shamanic rituals cross -culturally in East and Southeast Asia is that the ritual itself is 
structured as a journey up to the sky, climbing the world mountain or the world tree, or else a journey down to the 
bottom of the sea and  back again. The shamanic retinue is understood to make this journey in person, rather than, 
as in Daoist ritual, sending divine emissaries up to the highest heavens. The journey is conducted thr ough narrative 
song and dance, accompanied by strings of bells and lutes. The point of departure is the physical village or village 
household where the ritual is being conducted, and the journey progresses through a series of well -marked way 
stations via the temple of the earth god to the higher hills and ﬁnally to  the villages and markets in the sky, before 
crossing the heavenly seas and ascending the highest mountain. On the way, demons and other impediments are 
encountered. The route and way stations vary depending on the purpose of the ritual and the intended di vine 
recipient of o ﬀerings and submissions. The present article will explore the route up to the sky and the way stations 
in more detail, taking a single ritual type as performed by the P ụt and Then ritual practitioners as an example. The 
Pụt and Then are literate ritual specialists found among the Tày and Nùng peoples in northern Vietnam and 
southern China, near an area which is known to have been a centre of Brahmanical and Buddhist learning from 
very early times.   

--- [Page 4] ---
 
         
4  
5.  Bathing Practices as a Religious and Medical Encounter: Water, Climate and 
Health Across Monsoon Asia ………………………………………………………………………… p. 108  
by Francesco Bianchini  
Religions  2025 , 16(1), 2;  https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16010002  - 24 Dec 2024  (18 pp.)  
 
Abstract   
This study explores the intersection between religious and medical bathing practices across Mo nsoon Asia, with 
particularly reference to Āyurvedic and Buddhist traditions. While previous scholarship has emphasised the 
ritualistic and social dimensions of bathing in Brahmanical and Buddhist contexts, this article complements it  with 
discussions of its medicinal and healing functions, as outlined in classical texts and displayed in material  culture. 
The research highlights how bathing was considered essential for maintaining bodily balance —a concept 
analogous to humoral theory in Galenic medicine —across di ﬀerent climatic and environmental cond itions, 
particularly during the monsoon season. The article further examines the transregional circulation and localisatio n 
of these practices, considering how diverse Asian cultures adapted Indic bathing tradi tions to their unique climatic 
and cultural co ntexts. Notably, the study addresses the complex interplay between religious doctrines, health and 
environmental factors, drawing connections between Āyurvedic principles and Buddhist medical discourses. The 
ﬁndings suggest that while the notion of balance in bathing practices was widespread, its interpretation and 
implementation varied signiﬁcantly across regions, reﬂecting local environmental and cultur al inﬂuences. Through 
a comparative analysis of sources from South Asia, China and Southeast Asia, this article pro vides a nuanced 
understanding of how religio -medical bathing practices were shaped by and responded to the diverse climatic 
realities of  Monsoon Asia.   
 
6.  Vajravārāhī in Khara Khoto and Prajñāpāramitā in East Java: Connected by 
Pearl Ornaments …………………………………………………………………………………………….. p. 126  
by Lesley S Pullen  
Religions  2025 , 16(1), 84;  https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16010084  - 15 Jan 2025  (26 pp.)  
 
Abstract   
This re search, situated in the geographical and historical context of the Tangut and East Java, uncovers a 
signiﬁcant aspect of the evolution of Buddhist art styles. A thangka of the goddess Vajrav ārāhī found in Khara 
Khoto, dated to the late 12th century, shows  the bodhisattva decorated with a pearl -chain girdle and upper -arm 
bands. This form of pearl -chain jewellery, which appears on Vajrav ārāhī and other Sino -Tibetan -style 
bodhisattvas, also appears on three stone statues of the goddess Prajñ āpāramit ā in East Java, all of which depict 
a near identical use of this pearl -chain ornamentation, as well as on a statue of Prajñ āpāramit ā at the Muara Jambi 
Buddhist site in Sumatra. Maritime trade between the regions of China and Java was extensive. The commonality 
of such motifs in China and Java may highlight a convergence of cultural forces and perhaps shared styles 
originating from the maritime realm and traded via maritime rout es; however, a direct or indirect inﬂuence of Sino -
Tibetan styles on thangka paintings fe aturing this depiction of the jewellery perhaps occurred following dynamics 
of north –south exchange, highlighting the interrelated links along maritime and overland routes through the P āla 
Buddhist kingdom in eastern India. Thus, I propose that the connect ion between the Vajrav ārāhī and other Tibetan 
thangka paintings was inspired by Northeast Indian inﬂuence from the Hexi corridor, event ually reaching East 
Java. 
 
7.  A Network of Compassion: The Transmission and Development of the Cult 
and Iconography of Cakravarticintāmaṇi Avalokiteśvara Across the Maritime 
Silk Routes ……………………………………………………………………………………… ...………… ….  p. 152  
by Saran Suebsantiwongse  
Religions  2025 , 16(2), 178;  https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16020178  - 5 Feb 2025  (32 pp.)  
 
Abstract   
This article examines the cult surrounding an esoteric form of Avalokite śvara, known by di ﬀerent names across 
regions, such as Cakravarticint āmaṇi, Cint āmaṇicakra, Ruyilun Guanyin, and Nyoirin Kannon. Through an analysis 
of Sanskrit, Chinese, and Japanese textual sources, the study explores the complex transmission of t his cult from 
India to Southeast Asia and East Asia via the Maritime Silk Routes. As the cult spread, variations in i ts iconography 
emerged in di ﬀerent regions. The study highlights how, in  India, the bodhisattva was depicted with speciﬁc 
attributes, which were reinterpreted in Southeast Asia. In China and Japan, further  modiﬁcations appeared, with 
Chinese representations emphasising the six -armed form that later inﬂuenced and matured in Japanese 
iconography. Additionally, the texts reveal that Cint āmaṇicakra was introduced to royal courts as part of state 
rituals to ensure the acquisition and preservation of sovereignty. This association with kingship and state 
protection contributed to t he deity’s prominence across the region. The culmination of this transmission occurred 
in Japan, where Cint āmaṇicakra remains a revered deity to this day. The article concludes that from the 7th to 9th 
centuries, Buddhist monks were instrumental in spreading the cult of Cakravarticint āmaṇi. As a result, the 

--- [Page 5] ---
 
         
5 iconography evolved in response to regional artistic traditions, creating distinct yet interconnected fo rms of the 
bodhisattva across the Maritime Silk Rout e 
 
8. Maritime Links Between China, Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula, and Buddhist 
Monasteries in India (c. 11th–12th Centuries) in the Light of Two Fragmentary 
Inscribed Strips of Copper from Muara Jambi …………………………….…………… ..….  p. 184  
by Wahyu Rizky Andhifani , Hedwi Prihatmoko , Andrea Acri , Arlo Griffiths , Mathilde 
Mechling  and Gregory Sattler  
Religions  2025 , 16(6), 664;  https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16060664  - 23 May 2025  (35 pp.)  
 
Abstract   
This article explores the maritime connections relating to Buddhism and diplomacy bet ween polities in Sumatra, 
the Malay Peninsula, the Indian subcontinent, and China from the beginning of the 11th century up to the 12th 
century CE. It focuses on new epigraphic evidence from Muara Jambi in the form of two inscribed st rips of copper 
mentioning the C ūḍāmaṇivarmavih āra, a monastery funded by the king of Śrīvijaya in Nagapattinam (South India), 
and the B ālādityavih āra, probably located in N ālandā (Northeastern India). These new ﬁndings are compared to 
archaeological and textual materials from elsewhere in the Buddhist world that cast light on the web o f 
transregional connections between Nusantara, China, and India in the early centuries of the second millennium . 
 
9. An Ambitious Itinerary: Journey Across the Medieval Buddhist World in a 
Book, CUL Add.1643 (1015 CE)  ………………………………………………………………… ..….  p. 219  
by Jinah Kim  
Religions  2025 , 16(7), 900;  https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16070900  - 14 Jul 2025  (35 pp.)  
 
Abstract   
A Sanskrit manuscript of the  Prajñ āpāramit ā or Perfection of Wisdom in eight thousand verses, now in the 
Cambridge University Library, Add.1643, is one of the most  ambitiously designed South Asian manuscripts from 
the eleventh century, with the highest number of painted panels known among the dated manuscripts from 
medieval South Asia until 1400 CE. Thanks to the unique occurrence of a caption written next to each painted 
panel, it is possible to identify most images in this manuscript as representing those of famous pilgri mage sites 
or auspicious im ages of specific locales. The iconographic program transforms Add.1643 into a portable dev ice 
containing famous pilgrimage sites of the Buddhist world known to the makers and users of the m anuscript in 
eleventh -century Nepal. It is one compact colorful pac kage of a book, which can be opened and experienced in 
its unfolding three -dimensional space, like a virtual or imagined pilgrimage. Building on the recent research 
focusing on early medieval Buddhist sites across Monsoon Asia and analyzing the representational potentials and 
ontological values of painting, this essay demonstrates how this early eleventh -century Nepalese manuscript 
(Add.1643) and its visual program document and remember the knowledge of maritime travels and the 
transregional and intraregional activities of people and ideas moving across Monsoon Asia.  Despite being made 
in the Kathmandu Valley with a considerable physical distance from the actual sea routes, the sites remembered 
in the manuscript open a possibility to connect the dots of human movement beyond the known networks and 
routes of “world systems”.  
 
10. From Mountains and Forests to the Seas: The Maritime Spread of the 
Sanping Patriarch Belief ……………………………………………………………………………… .... p. 254  
by Shaosong Huang  
Religions  2025 , 16(9), 1194;  https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16091194  - 18 Sep 2025  (28 pp.)  
 
Abstract   
As a representative form of popular religion in southern Fu jian (Minnan  闽南), the Sanping Patriarch (Sanping Zushi 
三平祖師 ) belief exhibits distinct transregional and cross -cultural characteristics in its dissemination across Taiwan 
and Southeast Asia. Taking the ancestral temples in Fujian 福建 as a point of departure, this article systematically 
analyzes the transmission routes and localization strategies of this belief system in Tai wan and Southeast Asia. 
Drawing on detailed archival research, ﬁeldwork (including site visits), and interview s, the study reveals how the 
belief has continually revitalized itself in pluralistic societies through strategies of “orthodoxy p reservation” and 
“localized innovation.” The ﬁndings suggest that in Taiwan, the Sanping Patriarch belief primari ly relies on k inship 
networks to maintain traditional practices. At the same time, in Southeast Asia, it spreads across  ethnic 
boundaries through commercial and trade networks. Di ﬀerences are also evident in the realm of mythological 
symbols, core rituals, and social f unctions. This study pays special attention to often -overlooked mythological 
ﬁgures such as the “Serpent Attendant” and “Tiger Attendant,” shedding li ght on the multilayered structure of folk 
religious systems.   

--- [Page 6] ---
Citation: Golan, Ilay. 2024. This Ship
Prays: The Southern Chinese
Religious Seascape through the
Handbook of a Maritime Ritual
Master. Religions 15: 1096. https://
doi.org/10.3390/rel15091096
Academic Editor: Thomas Michael
Received: 3 July 2024
Revised: 28 August 2024
Accepted: 5 September 2024
Published: 10 September 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).religions
Article
This Ship Prays: The Southern Chinese Religious Seascape
through the Handbook of a Maritime Ritual Master
Ilay Golan
Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 9DA, UK;
ig411@cam.ac.uk
Abstract: Long kept in the British Library, a liturgical manuscript from the port of Haicheng, Fujian,
holds details of the rich system of beliefs that Chinese sailors held. Originally untitled, the text by
the shelfmark OR12693/18 is usually referred to as “Libation Ritual (for Ship Safety)” ([ An Chuan ]
Zhuoxian Ke [(安船 )酌献科 ]). Formerly, it was given scholarly attention mostly due to its addended
lists of maritime placenames, which follows Qing‑era sea routes across China’s coasts and to the
South China Sea. Further inquiry into the manuscript’s terminology, deity names, and maritime
knowledge confirms its deep relation to sailors’ lore. By tracing this text into a wide range of sources,
this paper demonstrates how manuscript OR12693/18 reflects a cohesive maritime system of beliefs
and knowledge. Manifested within the prayer are a hierarchical pantheon, ritual practices, and a
perceived sacred seascape. Moreover, it is evident that the manuscript belonged to a tradition of
sailing ritual masters who were regular members of the crew onboard junks. As such, this paper
offers an analysis of a religious‑professional tradition with trans‑local aspects, shedding new light
on seafaring in pre‑modern China.
Keywords: maritime religion; sacred seascape; sailors’ beliefs; Dao ist liturgy; trade networks; overseas
merchants; Mazu; South China Sea; coastal trade; ship safet y
1. Introduction
From their rise during the Southern Song (1127–1279) until the prosperous 18th cen‑
tury under the Qing dynasty (1644–1911), the seafaring population of China, which oper‑
ated the South China Sea junk commerce, developed elaborate traditions regarding their
trade. Sailors, especially from Southern Fujian, prayed to a diverse pantheon of deities.
They held rites at ports and out at sea and charted the seascape as a sacred geography,
mingling knowledge of oceanic navigation and shipbuilding with religious beliefs. Their
complex seaborne religious practice even required the management of a ritual master as a
permanent crewmember onboard the ships.
These sailors’ beliefs are laid out in a prayer for a ship’s safe voyage, which is part of a
collection of thirty‑five Daoist liturgical manuscripts from the Fujianese port of Haicheng
海澄 (also called “Moon Harbor”, Yue Gang 月港 ), stored at the British Library. The
manuscript carries no title; it is usually referred to by its shelfmark OR12693/18 or, accord‑
ing to its procession and purpose, “Libation Ritual (for Ship Safety)” ([ An Chuan ]Zhuox‑
ian Ke [安船 ]酌献科 , hereafter ACZK). The text carries no date; judging by the range of
dated documents in the same collection, it was copied between the late 17th to early 19th
centuries. As it displays elaborate elements of maritime lore on top of a Daoist religious
framework,1this specific liturgy reflects a broader repertoire of maritime religion that was
practiced among the seafaring population in the marine centers of Southern Fujian as well
as along their networks of trade.
Most of the background of ACZK has been deduced from its contents and by the
other, more detailed manuscripts within the same folio. The British Library only recorded
the year of acquisition, 1870, without any further notes. Though the entire folio has been
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096. https://doi.org/10.3390/rel15091096 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/religions

--- [Page 7] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 2 of 18
noticed in passing by early researchers such as Michael Saso (1970 , p. 90 fn. 18), serious
scholarly examination of the documents commenced only during the 1990s. Since then,
ACZK has gained attention largely for the placenames tracing trade routes that are ap‑
pended to it (Y. Wang 2018 , pp. 105–9; Yang 1998 , pp. 80–91). The entire collection was
cataloged by Hiroshi Maruyama (2012 ), and aspects of its Daoist legacy have been exam‑
ined by Hsieh (2014 ). In view of sailors’ religious practice, Qingxin Li(2019 ) has cited
ACZK as part of a broader work on maritime religion, and several others have wrote of
related mariners’ beliefs (T. Tsu 1996 ; Y.Tsu 2002 ;Li 2020 ;Clark 2006 ). However, even
though the above studies brush upon maritime religion or even delve into fine details of
specific practices, none have systematically examined this topic as a structured tradition.
This paper aims to delineate a broad outline of a maritime belief system based on the
content of ACZK. By examining the recurring terms, deity names, and toponyms in the
prayer, it will be shown that this liturgy binds together a vast range of maritime religious
practices which otherwise only appear anecdotally in scattered sources. Taken together,
the maritime components of the prayer will demonstrate how various long‑standing sailors’
traditions culminated in a structured religious system, deeply intertwined with seafaring
knowledge of ship operation, weather forecasting, and navigation. It will also be demon‑
strated that the prayer’s origin in the shipping entrepot of Haicheng along with its lists of
routes across the entire South China Sea accentuate its role as a religious mechanism be‑
longing to the Hokkien trading network rather than a single locality.2AsDean (2015 ) and
G.Wang (1990 ) stress, such mechanisms were an essential part of the Chinese overseas
networks. Thus, the represented religious tradition, in turn, can be viewed as a core ele‑
ment of the centuries‑old incline of southern Fujianese toward seafaring, or, what Chang
Pin‑tsun terms as the “maritime convention” of Minnan ( Chang 1998 , pp. 143–55).
2. The Seaborne Ritual Master
Before delving into the details of the ship protection ritual, we must first discuss the
settings in which it was performed and the personnel involved. ACZK belongs to a more
extensive library of ritual liturgies, which were copied in handwriting as part of the ini‑
tiation of ritual masters and later used as their handbook for conducting ceremonies or
other temple affairs. In this sense, the folio to which ACZK belongs is no different than
many other historical collections of Daoist liturgies. However, ACZK is distinct from its
accompanying manuscripts; it is particularly unique as a prayer for ship safety. I have only
been able to find a few other titles suggesting similar prayers, without access to the body of
these.3The rare example of ACZK has intimate connections to other ship‑related prayers
and religious descriptions of sailors’ practices, and thus, it is one of the best materials that
we have to explore the seafaring belief system existing beyond the written record.
Though this maritime religion manifests in a text from Haicheng County, its range
of practice spanned the entire South China Sea. The instructions and details within ACZK
imply that the ship’s blessing was not meant to be performed only at its home port but also
at various points along the voyage. This is evidenced in the abovementioned appendix of
placenames along sea routes; it is annotated with names of deities that are to be worshipped
in each location (Figure 1). The list is a religious‑geographical chart for the ritual master,
instructing him which divinity to pray to at main ports. Using the placenames on the list,
the ritual master could have followed the ship’s course and anticipated the places at which
to conduct a ritual and to whom ( Hsieh 2014 , p. 19).
An extensive range of sources confirms that a ritual master was an inherent part of
merchant junks’ crews. He was called either “Incense Master” ( xiang gong 香公 ) or “In‑
cense Manager” ( si xiang司香 ). As early as 1617, the compendium of maritime knowledge
Dongxi Yangkao mentions this role onboard junks in a description of the sailors’ religious
practice: “Sailing ships on their way forth and back, each has incense that burns nonstop
all day and night. One man is specially assigned as ‘Incense Manager’. No one other [than
him] handles these matters” (Xie Zhang [1617] 2000 , p. 186).

--- [Page 8] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 3 of 18all day and night. One man is specially assigned as ‘Incense Manager’. No one ot her [than 
him] handles these matters” (Zhang [1617] 2000 , p. 186).
 
Figure 1. End of the prayer in ACZK ( right ) and start of the western sea route list ( wang xiyang 往西
洋, left page, from OR12693/18 (n.d.) Zhuoxian Ke , p. 35).
Here, the Incense Master’s role does not seem complicated—keeping the incense 
burning. Qing-era sources shed a bit more light on the sailing priest’s role. Xu Baoguan g 
徐葆光  (1671–1723), an envoy to Ryukyu during the early 18th century, wrote this entry 
when listing a junk’s regular personnel:
Incense Master, one crewmember—[He] is in charge of the oil lamp in front of 
the Heavenly Concubine and all the water gods’ seats. While out at sea, in the 
morning and evening, [he] offers paper [sacrifice] at the tail hem of the main sai l. 
(Xu 1720, 1.8a)
A ship drawing from the same publication shows a shrine ( shen tang  神堂 ) below and 
behind the main sail (Figure 2), where the lower ropes were tied. From these sources, we 
learn that religious personnel were indeed required at sea, no less than any other role. Yet 
these brief descriptions of the Incense Master seem to emit the full scope of his d uties since 
incense burning and paper offerings are only parts of ritual processions.
Figure 1. End of the prayer in ACZK ( right ) and start of the western sea route list ( wang xiyang 往西洋 ,
leftpage, from OR12693/18 (n.d.)Zhuoxian Ke , p. 35).
Here, the Incense Master’s role does not seem complicated—keeping the incense burn‑
ing. Qing‑era sources shed a bit more light on the sailing priest’s role. Xu Baoguang 徐葆光
(1671–1723), an envoy to Ryukyu during the early 18th century, wrote this entry when list‑
ing a junk’s regular personnel:
Incense Master, one crewmember—[He] is in charge of the oil lamp in front of
the Heavenly Concubine and all the water gods’ seats. While out at sea, in the
morning and evening, [he] offers paper [sacrifice] at the tail hem of the main sail.
(Xu 1720 , 1.8a)
A ship drawing from the same publication shows a shrine ( shen tang 神堂 ) below and
behind the main sail (Figure 2), where the lower ropes were tied. From these sources, we
learn that religious personnel were indeed required at sea, no less than any other role. Yet
these brief descriptions of the Incense Master seem to emit the full scope of his duties since
incense burning and paper offerings are only parts of ritual processions.
During the past millennium of Chinese ocean sailing, ships’ crews performed a much
wider variety of rituals than joss burning and paper offerings (Y. Tsu 2002 , pp. 69–86).
One such shipborne rite was “launching a colorful ship” ( fang caichuan 放彩船 ). In this
ceremony, first mentioned in the Northern Song period (960–1127), sailors would carve
a ship out of wood or cane, attach a sail made of colorful paper, and release it out to sea
carrying food offerings. During the Ming, the ritual was practiced along several sea routes,
at points along the coasts of Vietnam, Luzon, and the Pearl Ri ver Delta ( Hsieh 2014 , pp. 18–19).
These rituals were practiced onboard the junk and involved the entire ship’s crew. They
were described by the Portuguese Mart ín de Rada, who witnessed such a ritual onboard a
Chinese junk in 1575:
they said that they had to give a send‑off to Nemoa [Niang‑ma] (i.e., the goddess
Mazu媽祖 ) who had accompanied us thus far in order to give us a prosperous
voyage. They made a ship‑model of cane with sails and a rudder, and they placed
a small grilled fish and a scrap of cooked rice inside it with many ceremonies,
and thus they launched it in the sea. And in order to expel the devil from the

--- [Page 9] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 4 of 18
ship, they all line the gunwales with a stave in each hand. Then come two men,
each with a large saucepan of cooked rice which they scatter over the ship’s side
into the sea, starting at the prow and ending at the poop. Behind them come
another two men, armed with scimiters and shields, who go along brandishing
their weapons and gesticulating, what time the ship’s company beat very nois‑
ily upon the gunwales with their staves, and doing many other foolish things.
(de Rada [1575] 2010 , p. 306)
Though the role of Incense Master is not mentioned in this specific instance, it is highly
probable that such an elaborate religious activity was presided over by a professional.
 
Figure 2. Stern side of a tribute ship ( feng chuan  封船 ), in a drawing from Baoguang Xu (1720, p. 
8.2a).
During the past millennium of Chinese ocean sailing, ships’ crews performed a muc h 
wider variety of rituals than joss burning and paper offerings ( Y. Tsu 2002 , pp. 69–86). One 
such shipborne rite was “launching a colorful ship” ( fang caichuan 放彩船 ). In this cere-
mony, first mentioned in the Northern Song period (960–1127), sailors wo uld carve a ship 
out of wood or cane, attach a sail made of colorful paper, and release it out to  sea carrying 
food offerings. During the Ming, the ritual was practiced along several sea routes, at points 
along the coasts of Vietnam, Luzon, and the Pearl River Delta (Hsieh 2014 , pp. 18–19). 
These rituals were practiced onboard the junk and involved the entire ship’s crew. They 
were described by the Portuguese Martín de Rada, who witnessed such a ritual onboard 
a Chinese junk in 1575:
they said that they had to give a send-off to Nemoa [Niang-ma] (i.e., the go ddess 
Mazu 媽祖 ) who had accompanied us thus far in order to give us a prosperous 
voyage. They made a ship-model of cane with sails and a rudder, and they 
placed a small grilled fish and a scrap of cooked rice inside it with many cere-
monies, and thus they launched it in the sea. And in order to expel the devil 
from the ship, they all line the gunwales with a stave in each hand. Then come 
two men, each with a large saucepan of cooked rice which they scatter over the 
ship’s side into the sea, starting at the prow and ending at the poop. Behind the m 
come another two men, armed with scimiters and shields, who go along bran-
dishing their weapons and gesticulating, what time the ship’s company beat 
Figure 2. Stern side of a tribute ship ( feng chuan 封船 ), in a drawing from Baoguang Xu(1720 , p. 8.2a).
The Qing period saw the practice of colorful ship rituals both at sea and on land. In the
Chinese closed quarters of Nagasaki, sojourning merchant sailors launched colorful ships
as a funerary rite dedicated to those who died at sea, an activity that required several ritual
masters, both Buddhist and Daoist (T. Tsu 1996 , pp. 43–47). Although performed on land,
this ritual was still held by Southern Fujianese sailors, the same ones who sent off ship
models while out at sea and took Incense Masters as part of their crew.
One 18th‑century example depicts a ship launching procession that was to be per‑
formed while en route to Jakarta, when the ship was just off the coasts of Vietnam at a
place called Big Buddha Mountain of Yantong (Yantong Da Fo Shan 煙筒大佛山 , also Cape
Veralla, or, in Vietnamese, M ũi Điện):

--- [Page 10] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 5 of 18
When the ship reaches this place, [the sailors] first weave a wooden plank with
bamboo, making a small ship with a sail made of assorted colorful paper. They
display meat offerings, joss sticks, and gold money as sacrifices. When the sac‑
rifice is over, they place the offerings in the small ship and then release them all
to the sea to satisfy it. As the small boat floats away and disappears in a twinkle,
they will cross this area safely and soundly. This is called ‘launching a colorful
ship’. ( Zhu 1763 , 6.7b)
Like the above examples, two texts from the same folio as ACZK, OR12693/15 (1769 )
and OR12693/12 (n.d.), are liturgies for another kind of colorful ship ritual. These are
plague‑expulsion rituals of the type still performed in present‑day Taiwan.4They involve
a model ship built just as a merchant junk, loaded with sacrifice, a symbolic crew, and
plague deities as passengers. Then, after an elaborate ritual, it is burned. The liturgies
for this ritual include evidence of maritime knowledge; both of them are appended with
lists of crewmembers’ roles—such as captain ( chuan zhu 船主 ), pilot ( huo zhang 火長 ), and
even Incense Master. Using these professional terms, as also the centerpiece of a large junk
model, 8 m long, shows that this tradition was formed and practiced in maritime realms.
This is unlike other land‑based plague‑expulsion rituals involving boats—the most promi‑
nent example being the Dragon Boat Festival (Duanwu Jie 端午節 ), which utilizes river
boats as vessels.
Besides the colorful ship ceremony, ocean‑going junks hosted numerous other on‑
board rituals for various purposes. Not all were necessarily conducted by the Incense
Master: special prayers were performed for the compass before consulting it for directions
(Xiang 2000 , pp. 23, 109); in case of emergency, the captain’s duty was to seek Mazu’s aid
or, in dire conditions, initiate an emergency ritual called “Rowing of the Water Immortals”
(hua shuixian 划水仙 , T.Li 2004 , pp. 274–80); there even were cases where passengers who
were state officials were asked to petition to Mazu on behalf of the emperor (Y. Tsu 2002 ,
pp. 75–76). A seafarer’s life was soaked with faith, and their faith was more organized than
had been assumed. The examples of an Incense Master and long‑standing rituals such as
the “colorful ship” demonstrate but a mere fraction of it. Delving into the text of ACZK
reveals further aspects still.
3. Gods of the Sea, Gods of the Ship
The opening pages of ACZK are typical of a Daoist ritual, with no hint of its primary
intention of ship blessing. They comprise a few short recitations and instructions, followed
by long lists invoking divinities by name. Each group of deities ends with an instruction
to light joss sticks before invoking the next batch. This long initial part is characteristic
of Daoist ceremonies, intending to notify every relevant god to the believers’ following
requests ( Lagerwey 1987 , pp. 54, 68–79). However, the last groups to be summoned are
solely related to the seafaring world—protectors of ships, weather and ocean gods, and
the divinities of the ship itself. A Daoist expert will find them difficult to recognize for the
most part, but these gods were already well established in maritime lore by the time of
ACZK’s writing.
The first few groups of invoked deities are arranged according to the Daoist pan‑
theon’s hierarchical system. The starting group is made of nine gods, such as the Celestial
Venerable of the Primordial Beginning (Yuanshi Tianzun 元始天尊 ) who is the supreme
divinity of the Lingbao sect; the second group lists nine deities of a lower rank, for exam‑
ple, the Celestial Lords of the Ten Positions (Shifang Tianzun 十方天尊 ); the third group
names ten stellar gods ( xing jun 星君 ); the deities in the fourth group are suffixed as zhen
jun真君 , an even lower rank in the hierarchy. The lists go on to more groups of gods
and spirits while gradually focusing on the rite’s specific field of interest—water‑related
divinities and the maritime sphere.
The sea‑going aspect of the prayer comes into play on page six, where the priest first
addresses his audience: “The ritual master unites the life‑stars and [heavenly] mansions
of all the ship’s personnel” ( 醮主合船各人宫本命星君 ).5From this point on, it is clear on

--- [Page 11] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 6 of 18
behalf of whom the ritual is performed—“ All the ship’s personnel” ( chuan geren 船各人 )—
and this form of address is repeated with variations, such as ben chuan 本船 , “our ship”, a
few times later.
Following this line, the text breaks away from the Daoist hierarchy, calling an assort‑
ment of divinities: Bodhisattvas, Confucius, mythical beasts, immortals, heavenly gen‑
erals, and Fujianese local deities. After a few pages listing well‑known deities such as
Zhenwu 真武 alongside many lesser deities, the invocations turn to deities of the water
department ( shuibu水部 ) and other water‑related beings—the Dragon Kings of the Four
Seas (Sihai Longwang 四海龍王 ) and the Lady Mother of the Dragon Kings (Longwang Mu
Furen龍王母夫人 ), for example. The general invocation finally ends with the local gods
of Haicheng County, among which Mazu is included under her official title of “Heavenly
Concubine” (Tianfei 天妃 ). Mazu opens the stage to the summoning of the rest of the mar‑
itime pantheon.
In the next part of the ceremony, after lighting more joss, the ritual master speaks
on behalf of the ship’s crew: “Our ship worships the proclaimed and conferred, state‑
protector, shield of the people, illuminating Lady Heavenl y Concubine” ( 本船奉祀宣封護囯
庇民明著天妃娘娘 , p. 15a, Figure 3). A list of subordinate ship‑protecting deities follows.
It starts with Mazu’s saintly family: her father, mother, brother, and two sisters; 20 deities
follow, many of which prove challenging to recognize in any other source.
 
Figure 3. Invocation of Mazu, the Heavenly Concubine ( Tianfei Niangniang 天妃娘娘 , second col-
umn from the right) followed by her family members (OR12693/18 (n.d.)  Zhuoxian Ke , p. 15).
Out of this list of Mazu’s subordinate deities, some stand out as well-known divi ni-
ties of the maritime sphere. On p. 16a, the fourth line mentions Maozhu the Water  Immor-
tal and the Five Venerable Kings (Maozhu Shuixian Wuwei Zunwang 茅竹水仙五位尊王
). These were a widespread group of five sailor-protecting deities worshipped as one. As 
early as the Yuan period (1279–1368), they were already mentioned as Mazu’s “right-hand 
men and hidden managers of a ship’s faith” ( 天妃股朧，潛舟司命也, J. Wang 1347 , p. 
33b). This same group of deities had temples at significant ports, from Songjiang (Shang-
hai) to Xiamen, and, judging by their frequent appearance in maritime writings, they were 
the most ubiquitous sailor protectors after Mazu. In ACZK, it is the same— they are men-
tioned several times more in the “three libations” section of the prayer, and th eir temple 
at Xiamen port, called Water Immortal’s Palace (Shuixian Gong 水仙宮 ), is noted in the 
appendix.
The other notable gods attached to Mazu are perhaps the goddess’s most well-known 
companions. Thousand-Mile Eye (Qian-Li Yan  千里眼 ) and Fair-Wind Ear (Shun-Feng Er  
順風耳 ) adorn most Mazu temples nowadays as door guardians before the goddess’ hall . 
Both deities are shown as characters in the famous novel Journey to the West  (Xiyou ji 西游
記), albeit as officers of the heavenly throne rather than Mazu ( A. Yu 2012 , pp. 102, 143). 
In ACZK, they appear on p. 17a, fourth and fifth lines. These two deities were closely 
associated with Mazu much earlier. The text which consecrates Mazu into the Daoist 
canon, titled “Taishang laojun shuo Tianfei jiuku lingyan jing”  太上老君 說天妃救苦靈驗
經 (Scripture of Lord Lao, the Most High, Speaking on the Numinous Efficacy o f the 
Heavenly Concubine in Relieving Distress), written between 1409–1413, already mention s 
them as part of the goddess’ troupe (Boltz 1986 , p. 226).
Following the group of Mazu subordinates, the prayer proceeds to call the deities of 
the ship itself. These begin with “our ship’s vat-master [ ben chuan caozhu  本船槽主 ], 
wooden dragon [ mulong  木龍 ], and water horse [ shuima 水馬 ], the three illuminators” (p. 
17). What comes next is a list of the professional gods of seafaring; 14 in total, they include 
the deities of the vessel’s vital parts, such as the stern’s Rudder Boy (Chuan Weiba Duo 
Tongzi  船尾把 [巴]舵童子 ) and the Needle-supervising Boy (i.e., the compass needle, 
Figure 3. Invocation of Mazu, the Heavenly Concubine ( Tianfei Niangniang 天妃娘娘 , second column
from the right) followed by her family members ( OR12693/18 (n.d.)Zhuoxian Ke , p. 15).
Out of this list of Mazu’s subordinate deities, some stand out as well‑known divini‑
ties of the maritime sphere. On p. 16a, the fourth line mentions Maozhu the Water Immor‑
tal and the Five Venerable Kings (Maozhu Shuixian Wuwei Zunwang 茅竹水仙五位尊王 ).
These were a widespread group of five sailor‑protecting deities worshipped as one. As
early as the Yuan period (1279–1368), they were already mentioned as Mazu’s “right‑hand
men and hidden managers of a ship’s faith” ( 天妃股朧，潛舟司命也 , J.Wang 1347 , p. 33b).
This same group of deities had temples at significant ports, from Songjiang (Shanghai)
to Xiamen, and, judging by their frequent appearance in maritime writings, they were the

--- [Page 12] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 7 of 18
most ubiquitous sailor protectors after Mazu. In ACZK, it is the same—they are mentioned
several times more in the “three libations” section of the prayer, and their temple at Xiamen
port, called Water Immortal’s Palace (Shuixian Gong 水仙宮 ), is noted in the appendix.
The other notable gods attached to Mazu are perhaps the goddess’s most well‑known
companions. Thousand‑Mile Eye (Qian‑Li Yan 千里眼 ) and Fair‑Wind Ear (Shun‑Feng Er
順風耳 ) adorn most Mazu temples nowadays as door guardians before the goddess’ hall.
Both deities are shown as characters in the famous novel Journey to the West (Xiyou ji西游記 ),
albeit as officers of the heavenly throne rather than Mazu (A. Yu 2012 , pp. 102, 143). In
ACZK, they appear on p. 17a, fourth and fifth lines. These two deities were closely asso‑
ciated with Mazu much earlier. The text which consecrates Mazu into the Daoist canon,
titled “Taishang laojun shuo Tianfei jiuku lingyan jing” 太上老君說天妃救苦靈驗經 (Scrip‑
ture of Lord Lao, the Most High, Speaking on the Numinous Efficacy of the Heavenly
Concubine in Relieving Distress), written between 1409–1413, already mentions them as
part of the goddess’ troupe ( Boltz 1986 , p. 226).
Following the group of Mazu subordinates, the prayer proceeds to call the deities
of the ship itself. These begin with “our ship’s vat‑master [ ben chuan caozhu 本船槽主 ],
wooden dragon [ mulong木龍 ], and water horse [ shuima水馬 ], the three illuminators” (p. 17).
What comes next is a list of the professional gods of seafaring; 14 in total, they include the
deities of the vessel’s vital parts, such as the stern’s Rudder Boy (Chuan Weiba Duo Tongzi
船尾把 [巴]舵童子 ) and the Needle‑supervising Boy (i.e., the compass needle, Jianzhen Tongzi
監針童子 ); other divinities that superintend critical procedures of sailing, like a god named
the Divine Lord who Indicates Moorings and Recognizes Islets (Zhi wan ren yu shenjun
指湾認㠘神君 ), or hold power over the environment, as The Divine Lord who Blows Wind
and Stirs the Waves (Fa feng dong lang shenjun 發風動浪神君 ). In addition, two names
were incorporated from outside the marine world—the god of the stove, who supervises
each household in Chinese tradition ( Chard 1995 , pp. 3–54), and Lu Ban 魯班 , the god of
carpentry, believed to preside over shipbuilding.
Though uncommon to find outside maritime lore, these ship deities, as also the previ‑
ous sailor‑protecting gods, are found in various other sailors’ prayers. For example, they
appear in several ship‑blessing and “launching of colorful ship” liturgical manuscripts
from Taiwanese ports, ranging from 1749 to the mid‑1800s.6Moreover, several examples
of specific prayers to the compass upon the ship’s deck invoke numerous deities respon‑
sible for each one of its parts. For instance, the compass prayer opening the maritime
routebook Shunfeng Xiangsong of the late 16th century calls for the following:
The twenty‑four venerated godly great generals, The Needle‑setting Son, The
Needle‑shifting Boy, the water‑bowl god, the water‑changing lord god, the mas‑
ter with the power of lowering the needle, the divine soldiers who move the
needle, the venerated god who guards the base of the directions on the compass
[…]. ( Xiang 2000 , p. 23)
As seen through these examples, sailors venerated each critical part of their equipment as
a separate divinity, from the needle of the compass, through the ship’s rudder, and to the
vessel as a whole.
In addition, the compass prayer also invokes most of the maritime pantheon as dis‑
played in ACZK—the wooden dragon, Lu Ban, the stove god, Maozhu the Water Immortal,
Thousand‑mile Eye, Fair‑wind Ear, and quite a few gods of oceanic weather and topog‑
raphy. Notably, this compass prayer dates to the Ming dynasty, c. 1593 (J. Chen 2013 ,
pp. 327–28), at least a century older than ACZK, if not more.
When it comes to the identity and functions of these maritime gods, some have names
more telling than others. The god called “Rudder Boy” has an obvious purpose, i.e., he
is either in charge of the rudder or the spirit within it. A “wooden dragon” is appar‑
ently essential; it is mentioned in the first line of the ship‑deities group, but the name
itself gives few clues to its function. The “wooden dragon” is mentioned a few times
more in the “three libations” part of the ritual, more than most other deities, and thus,
clearly, it has a significant role in protecting the ship. Furthermore, it even appears in the

--- [Page 13] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 8 of 18
title of another ship‑protecting liturgy from Quanzhou, called the “Lingbao‑sect maritime
lamp wooden dragon ritual of ship safety” (Lingbao hai jiao anchuan mulong deng ke
靈寶海醮安船木龍燈科 ,Dean 1988 , p. 219), and also in contemporaneous sailors’ prayers
from Taiwan (Figure 4).
 
Figure 4. “ Holy Places for Ship Rituals” (Chuan Jiao Sheng Wei  船醮聖位 ), appendix to the liturgical 
manuscript “Lingbao-sect Calamity Averting Ship Worship Ritual” (Lingba o Rangzai Ji Chuan Ke 
靈寶禳災祭船科 ), dated 1749. It presents a list of deities, some corresponding to the ship and others 
to sacred shrines along the coast. Notice on the bottom-right: “our ships’ w ooden dragon” ( ben chuan 
mulong 本船木龍 ). Photo by Prof. Hsieh Tsung-hui. See (Hsieh 2014, p. 43).
Despite its pronounced significance to sailors, the only historical source to have ex-
plained what is a “‘wooden dragon” is the late-17th-century account by the tra veler and 
scholar Yu Yonghe 郁永河  (b. 1645). After witnessing it during his passage to northern 
Taiwan in 1697, he mentioned this tradition and its significance in an a ppendix to his travel 
writings, as cited by Thompson (1968):
In every ocean-going junk there must be a snake [ she 蛇], called ‘wooden 
dragon’ [ mu-long  木龍 ]. From the day the ship is completed it has this [snake]. 
Ordinarily it cannot be seen nor is it known where it stays. If the wooden dragon 
is seen and the ship sails, she will be lost.
While Yu’s explanation is singular, the relationship between serpents and seafaring 
has deep roots in Southern Chinese culture. Snake worship and a strong boating traditi on 
were two prominent features in the cultures of Min 閩, Wu 吳, and Yue 越 from before 
the Han conquest of Jiangnan (Katz 1995, pp. 19–20; Wen 1948, pp. 221–43). As such, hid-
ing a “wooden dragon” on ships accords with a broader tradition of snake wors hip. The 
Min considered it an auspicious sign if a snake enters a household. They believe that if a 
snake was found within the house, it must not be harmed. However, in Quanzhou, the 
opposite is true—serpents within the home are bad omens. Still, it is considered taboo to 
kill them (Lin and Peng 1993 , pp. 55–56). In Zhejiang, fishermen commonly call their boats 
“wooden dragons” and paint eyes on their stern to this day, much like the old Fujia nese 
merchant junks (Gu and Xu 2019 , p. 71). Similarly, it might be that these “wooden drag-
ons” were believed to represent the ship in its entirety.
Lu Ban (c. 507–444 BC) is also worth further examination since he figures promi-
nently in the compass prayers and was worshipped extensively in ports, shipyards, and 
decks of junks. Also known as Lu Gongshu  魯公輸 , he was a mythic innovative carpenter 
of the Spring and Autumn period (770–476 BC) attested with many inv entions. Evidence 
of Lu Ban’s worship dates back to the Tang period, as testified by a construction  workers’ 
manuscript from Dunhuang ( Qiao Li 2013, p. 137). Later, carpenters formed a cult around 
the figure of Lu Ban as he became their professional patron, and during the first years of 
the Ming era, a religious scripture dedicated to Lu Ban came into circulation— “ Artisans’ 
Mirror—the Lu Ban Scripture“ ( Lu Ban Jing Jiangjia Jing  魯班經匠傢鏡 ). Finally, Shunfeng 
Figure 4. “Holy Places for Ship Rituals” (Chuan Jiao Sheng Wei 船醮聖位 ), appendix to the liturgical
manuscript “Lingbao‑sect Calamity Averting Ship Worship Ritual” (Lingbao Rangzai Ji Chuan Ke
靈寶禳災祭船科 ), dated 1749. It presents a list of deities, some corresponding to the ship and others
to sacred shrines along the coast. Notice on the bottom‑right: “our ships’ wooden dragon” ( ben chuan
mulong本船木龍 ). Photo by Prof. Hsieh Tsung‑hui. See ( Hsieh 2014 , p. 43).
Despite its pronounced significance to sailors, the only historical source to have ex‑
plained what is a “wooden dragon” is the late‑17th‑century account by the traveler and
scholar Yu Yonghe 郁永河 (b. 1645). After witnessing it during his passage to northern Tai‑
wan in 1697, he mentioned this tradition and its significance in an appendix to his travel
writings, as cited by Thompson (1968 ):
In every ocean‑going junk there must be a snake [ she蛇], called ‘wooden dragon’
[mu‑long木龍 ]. From the day the ship is completed it has this [snake]. Ordinarily
it cannot be seen nor is it known where it stays. If the wooden dragon is seen and
the ship sails, she will be lost.
While Yu’s explanation is singular, the relationship between serpents and seafaring
has deep roots in Southern Chinese culture. Snake worship and a strong boating tradition
were two prominent features in the cultures of Min 閩, Wu吳, and Yue 越from before the
Han conquest of Jiangnan ( Katz 1995 , pp. 19–20; Wen 1948 , pp. 221–43). As such, hiding
a “wooden dragon” on ships accords with a broader tradition of snake worship. The Min
considered it an auspicious sign if a snake enters a household. They believe that if a snake
was found within the house, it must not be harmed. However, in Quanzhou, the opposite
is true—serpents within the home are bad omens. Still, it is considered taboo to kill them
(Lin and Peng 1993 , pp. 55–56). In Zhejiang, fishermen commonly call their boats “wooden
dragons” and paint eyes on their stern to this day, much like the old Fujianese merchant
junks ( Gu and Xu 2019 , p. 71). Similarly, it might be that these “wooden dragons” were
believed to represent the ship in its entirety.
Lu Ban (c. 507–444 BC) is also worth further examination since he figures prominently
in the compass prayers and was worshipped extensively in ports, shipyards, and decks
of junks. Also known as Lu Gongshu 魯公輸 , he was a mythic innovative carpenter of

--- [Page 14] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 9 of 18
the Spring and Autumn period (770–476 BC) attested with many inventions. Evidence of
Lu Ban’s worship dates back to the Tang period, as testified by a construction workers’
manuscript from Dunhuang (Qiao Li 2013 , p. 137). Later, carpenters formed a cult around
the figure of Lu Ban as he became their professional patron, and during the first years of
the Ming era, a religious scripture dedicated to Lu Ban came into circulation— “ Artisans’
Mirror—the Lu Ban Scripture“ ( Lu Ban Jing Jiangjia Jing 魯班經匠傢鏡 ). Finally, Shunfeng
Xiangsong mentions “Oar‑builder Master Ban” (Jian Lu Ban Shifu 建櫓班師父 ), where the
surname Lu魯is added with the wood radical to form lu櫓, meaning scull or sweep (types
of oars), thus playing on the deity’s name as a double entendre ( Xiang 2000 , p. 23).
By the Qing period, the worship of Lu Ban spread across sectors of the shipping indus‑
try, both private and state‑operated. During the Qianlong reign, naval shipbuilders sent
to Taiwan established in Taizhong the Skillful Sage Immortal Master Temple (Qiao sheng
xianshi miao 巧聖仙師廟 ), which is the central point of worship to Lu Ban on the island
to this day (Qilin Li 2005 , pp. 89–90). Zhinan Zhengfa , a 17th‑century maritime routebook,
mentions Lu Ban’s name similarly to Shunfeng Xiangsong , albeit without the surname vari‑
ation ( Xiang 2000 , p. 109). Moreover, in some temples in Taiwan, Lu Ban is a part of
the divine group called Water Immortal Venerable Kings (Shuixian Zunwang 水仙尊王 ),
which are arguably new identities that were given to Maozhu the Water Immortal and the
Five Venerable Kings ( Cai 2013 , pp. 118–21). In this capacity, Lu Ban is worshipped as a
water deity to this day.
To summarize the invocation section of ACZK, its summoned deities can be roughly
divided into two main groups: one is the deities belonging to the Daoist framework, and
the other is derived from maritime lore. As a sub‑division within the marine gods, we can
distinguish between the protective deities, namely Mazu and her list of subordinates, the
ship’s spirits representing the vital parts of the junk, and other divinities of climatic and
topographic phenomena. The same division applies to other prayers from the maritime
sphere, namely, the prayers for the compass in historical maritime guides and ship‑safety
prayers from Taiwan. Many of the evoked deities also appear in these, demonstrating a
clear and consistent system of beliefs passed on among generations of sailors.
4. Sacred Geography of the Chinese Coast and Beyond
Though ACZK represents a tradition based in Haicheng, Fujian, it contains an ap‑
pendix that transcends the boundaries of locality, demonstrating a mobile tradition prac‑
ticed across the South China Sea. Pages 35b to 44b comprise only toponyms, some noted
with names of deities or religious instructions. Four titles divide the place names into
groups, each tracing maritime routes when read in order: “To the Western Ocean” ( wang
Xiyang往西洋 , p. 35b), “To the Eastern Ocean” ( wang Dongyang 往東洋 , p. 40a), “down
south” ( xia nan下南 , p. 41b), and “up north” ( shang bei 上北 , p. 42b). Each section starts
at Haicheng, which is referred to as “harbor of origin” ( ben gang’ao 本港澚 ), and then lists
waypoints along a trading line. Each route branches at several points; in these cases, the
list follows a single outlet until its destination, then returns to the junction and follows the
next one (Figure 5). In total, these routes lead all across the Chinese coast, from Tianjin to
Guangdong, and span the entire length of the South China Sea.
Despite its elaborate lists of places along the trading routes, this appendix does not
appear to have been used for navigation but rather for religious practice. Instead of provid‑
ing directions and distances between landmarks, the appendix of ACZK specifies places of
worship. Outside the Chinese mainland, it points out areas where “it is good to summon
the gods” ( shan zhao shen 善招神 ). Along the Chinese coasts, it notes names of relevant gods
or temples at the locality; in between the noted locations, it mentions landmarks, such as
small islets, where no worship is needed. Using this appendix, a sailing Incense Master
could have followed the ship’s location and know which are the nearest gods to pray to.

--- [Page 15] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 10 of 18
 
Figure 5 . ACZK, the continued route to the Western Ocean, showing places of worship, includin g 
Boshui 泊水  (in a red rectangle). The deity and temple names are written in half- sized characters. 
Luo’an Head (Luo’an Tou 羅鞍頭 , circled in red) is a junction; every time it repeats marks the start 
of a different route, out of nine total in the Xiyang (OR12693/18 (n.d.) Zhuoxian Ke , p. 36).
Despite its elaborate lists of places along the trading routes, this appendix does not 
appear to have been used for navigation but rather for religious practice. Instead of 
providing directions and distances between landmarks, the appendix of ACZK specifie s 
places of worship. Outside the Chinese mainland, it points out areas where “it is good  to 
summon the gods” ( shan zhao shen  善招神 ). Along the Chinese coasts, it notes names of 
relevant gods or temples at the locality; in between the noted locations, it mention s land-
marks, such as small islets, where no worship is needed. Using this appendix, a sailing 
Incense Master could have followed the ship’s location and know which are th e nearest 
gods to pray to.
4.1. The Overseas Routes
The Dongyang and Xiyang sections are especially intriguing because they trace their 
era’s international commercial routes. These terms, meaning “East Ocean” and “West 
Ocean ”, respectively, were already standard when ACZK was written, referring to a divi-
sion between travel zones in Nanyang 南洋 , known today as the South China Sea. The 
eastern division included routes going to the Philippines and then south to the Spice Is-
lands, and the western area covered continental Southeast Asia and most destin ation in 
mod ern-day Indonesia (Brook 2015, pp. 113–14; Ng 1983, p. 47). The appendix of ACZK 
records a total of nine routes to the western ocean, reaching the ports of Vietnam (J iaozhi 
交趾 ), Champa (Zhancheng 占城 ), Cambodia (Jianpuzhai 柬埔寨 ), Bantam (Xiagang 下
港), Timor (Chiwen 池汶), Palembang (Jiugang 舊港 ), Patani (Dani 大泥 ), Pahang 
Figure 5. ACZK, the continued route to the Western Ocean, showing places of worship, including
Boshui泊水 (in a red rectangle). The deity and temple names are written in half‑sized characters.
Luo’an Head (Luo’an Tou 羅鞍頭 , circled in red) is a junction; every time it repeats marks the start of
a different route, out of nine total in the Xiyang ( OR12693/18 (n.d.)Zhuoxian Ke , p. 36).
4.1. The Overseas Routes
The Dongyang and Xiyang sections are especially intriguing because they trace their
era’s international commercial routes. These terms, meaning “East Ocean” and “West
Ocean”, respectively, were already standard when ACZK was written, referring to a di‑
vision between travel zones in Nanyang 南洋 , known today as the South China Sea. The
eastern division included routes going to the Philippines and then south to the Spice Is‑
lands, and the western area covered continental Southeast Asia and most destination in
modern‑day Indonesia ( Brook 2015 , pp. 113–14; Ng 1983 , p. 47). The appendix of ACZK
records a total of nine routes to the western ocean, reaching the ports of Vietnam (Jiaozhi
交趾 ), Champa (Zhancheng 占城 ), Cambodia (Jianpuzhai 柬埔寨 ), Bantam (Xiagang 下港 ),
Timor (Chiwen 池汶 ), Palembang (Jiugang 舊港 ), Patani (Dani 大泥 ), Pahang (Pengheng
彭亨 ), Johore (Wuting 烏圢 ), Siam (Xianluo 暹羅 ), and Jambi (Zhanbei 占陂 );7the eastern
route branches to ports around Taiwan, Luzon (Lüsong 呂宋 ), Brunei (Wenlai 文萊 ), and
between Luzon to Brunei.
If one were to follow the West and East Ocean routes outside of China, they would
be taken on an extensive tour around insular and continental Southeast Asia, from the
Philippines in the east to Burma in the west and far south as Timor. The waypoints in
ACZK’s appendix cover most of the known primary routes, omitting only a few secondary
shortcuts and littoral destinations such as the southern Philippines. Japan, Korea, and
Ryukyu are also surprising absentees from this section. On the other hand, the western

--- [Page 16] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 11 of 18
route specifies ports in Taiwan, which was not a primary destination during the Ming.8
These details chart a route map which seems up‑to‑date with the known sailing habits of
its day. More specifically, they clearly represent the trading networks based in Haicheng
rather than each and every destination that Chinese sailors reached at that point of time.
In Taiwan and in ports of call outside Qing territory, the chart orders its reader to
“summon the deity” or “it is good for summoning”. These instructions can be interpreted
in two ways: either to summon a known deity to the ship’s deck or that the local tem‑
ples are suitable for prayer, albeit without specifying to whom. Both options might have
been practiced.
For instance, the placename list of the western route notes a deity called Dugong Lin‑
shi Zongguan 都功林使縂管 at a place called Boshui 泊水 , off the coast of Hainan Island
(Figure 5). This is a deity commonly known as Lord Du (Dugong 都公 ).9The routebook
Shunfeng Xiangsong instructs to worship him while passing the island of Wuzhu 烏豬 , lo‑
cated in the same vicinity near Hainan: “Wuzhu Island, the depth at mid‑sea is eighteen
tuo;10summon Lord Du to board the ship, and on the way back and forth launch a colorful
ship to send him off” ( Xiang 2000 , p. 33). In all examples, Lord Du is to be summoned
at around the same vicinity—the perilous passage around the south of Hainan, known as
the Qizhou Sea (Qizhou Yang 七洲洋 ). Known for centuries due to its treacherous waters,
sailors prayed on entering and leaving it (Qingxin Li 2019 ).
In another example, Dongxi Yangkao tells of the presence of protective deities onboard
in times of emergency:
During times of danger at every junk, the gods must manifest their efficacy to
warn the crew. The fire [in the oil lamp] would slightly increase brightness, and
the deity would fly upon the junk. The entire crew will kow‑tow until the light
increases yet more, fly behind the altar’s screen, and halt. This is a day when the
god protects the ship well. (Xie Zhang [1617] 2000 , p. 186)
As these examples clarify, various deities were perceived to board the ships as an ev‑
eryday practice and in emergencies. However, it is also clear that ACZK orders the sum‑
moning mostly in ports; therefore, some of the veneration could have been done on land.
While docking at port, ship crews might have preferred to disembark and pray at
local temples or use the shrines onboard their junk. As ACZK suggests, while abroad,
they would summon deities from afar rather than pray to specific local ones. Since many
of ACZK’s specified ports already had Chinese communities and local temples at the time
of writing, it is unclear why no deity is mentioned by name outside of Chinese territory and
in Taiwan, which was already under Qing control. In all other locations along the Chinese
coast, for this matter, the relevant deities’ names are mentioned, usually corresponding to
actual temples. Perhaps, it is an indication of a territorial aspect to the maritime pantheon
of gods, ascribing each deity to a territory on the mainland and at coastal islands.
Veneration outside of the ship was also a feasible option. Worshipping in local tem‑
ples on foreign soil was common for sailors long before the Qing. As early as 1124, Xu
Jing wrote of a place called Clam Cave, just off the coast of the kingdom of Koryŏ, “On
the mountain ridge there is a dragon shrine, and seafarers passing by without fail come
here to sacrifice to it” ( Xu [1124] 2016 , p. 232). During the Ming, official envoys to Ryukyu
who conventionally disdained sailors’ ‘superstitions’ did not avoid addressing local di‑
vinities, especially in times of danger (Y. Tsu 2002 , pp. 74–79, 85–86). Later sources from
Japan, written about the same time as ACZK and onwards, elaborate on many more in‑
stances in which Chinese sailors petitioned to worship at local temples on Japanese soil.11
The accumulating evidence tells us that worship on foreign soil was common and carried
out enthusiastically within local temples outside of Chinese communities. Bearing this in
mind, it seems natural for shipborne religious experts to chart foreign places that fit their
spiritual needs.

--- [Page 17] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 12 of 18
4.2. The Coastal Routes
The coastal routes in ACZK are charted right after the overseas ones. These lists of pla‑
cenames and deities represent the networks of coastal trade that departed from Haicheng
and the places of worship along the way. The southern route, t itled “down south” (Figure 6),
goes to Guangdong, and the northern one, “up north” (Figure 7), specifies a few branches,
with the furthest going to Tianjin. Nearly all the toponyms in these routes are noted with
a specific deity’s name, but none instruct the summoning of an unknown deity from afar.
Many of these gods correspond to historically existent temples in these harbors, as Wang
Yuanlin demonstrates regarding the southern route (Y. Wang 2018 , pp. 105–9). Of the men‑
tioned deity names, Mazu’s is the most popular by far, appearing more than all the others
combined (see chart 2 in Qingxin Li 2019 ). Numerous places of worship are noted along
the way, so much so that clearly, no ship would have stopped to pray at each one. It seems
likely that the crews prayed from afar when passing by at least some of these shrines or
that each of the noted places was only a potential stopover, in which the ship could call for
various reasons.
 
Figure 6 . Beginning of the “down south” route (left page). The Water Immortals Palace is circled in 
red. The half-sized letters underneath read “Water Immortal Kings ” (Shuixian Wang  水仙王 ). In 
OR12693/18 (n.d.) Zhuoxian Ke , p. 41.
One such reason is that some places of worship also had commercial value, as ships 
often docked to acquire goods and fill their stores before selling at the destination ( Antony 
2003 , p. 63). The “down south” route, for example, mentions a stop at Tongshan 銅山  
(today Dongshan 東山  Province, Fujian), which was a considerably large port town 
where merchants would gather (Y. Wang 2018, p. 109). However, most pla ces on the 
coastal routes are not of this kind; they are smaller islets used as landmarks for navi gation. 
These are much less likely to have been mentioned due to commercial reasons.
The smaller islets and coves along the way are recorded because they were safe ha-
vens for stopovers. Usually, ships would rather spend the night at anchor, shielded from 
the open sea and preferably from pirates (Antony 2003, p. 63). The island of Nanri 南日  
on the northern route was one such haven, as seen in old sailing charts instructing the way 
onto its harbor (Zheng 2018, pp. 191–92). According to ACZK, Mazu is to be worshipped 
on this island. At other times, ships would encounter severe weather that requ ired them 
to stop at the closest port or, more severely, blow them out of their course to unforeseen 
harbors. In some recorded cases, journeys that were supposed to take a few weeks ended 
in months, during which ships and their crews were forced to wait for good weath er at 
Figure 6. Beginning of the “down south” route (left page). The Water Immortals Palace is circled
in red. The half‑sized letters underneath read “Water Immortal Kings” (Shuixian Wang 水仙王 ). In
OR12693/18 (n.d.)Zhuoxian Ke , p. 41.

--- [Page 18] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 13 of 18
 
Figure 7. Last pages of the “up north” route, ending the entire text of ACZK (OR12 693/18 (n.d.) 
Zhuoxian Ke , 44).
As these examples demonstrate, the religious charting of the Chinese coasts was done 
according to an intimate acquaintance with the littoral trade and was also used as a  prac-
tical tool during the voyages. Thus, a closer examination of each mentioned place a nd its 
history might prove beneficial for studying the fine details of Qing-era maritime naviga -
tion. In addition, a closer look at the religious habits of these locations, the ha giographies 
of the less-common deities, and tracing the toponyms may reveal much more. These, ho w-
ever, are beyond the scope of this paper.
5. Conclusions
As the detailed manuscript of ACZK reveals, sailors’ religious practices were sophis-
ticated and structured. While most sources dealing with the maritime world mention frag-
mentary anecdotes, ACZK conflates terms and practices recorded in numerous writings 
into a single prayer. By far, it presents the most exhaustive set of maritime- religion com-
ponents in a single text. Exploring these maritime components demonstrates a belief sy s-
tem encompassing overseas and coastal trade networks, navigation methods, and seafar-
ing techniques. This system included a vast pantheon of deities led by Mazu as the para-
mount goddess, rituals for daily routine and emergency, a religious charting of the South 
China Sea, and specialized personnel . It is a unique tradition of the overseas sailors based 
in southern Fujian.
The seafaring religion in the Haicheng manuscripts indicates a larger sphere of prac-
tice than the region from which it originated. Besides invoking local deities, ACZK notes  
divinities from all across the Chinese coastline for whom to pray, making it ev ident that 
the ship blessing ritual was carried to diverse places. This trans-locality corresponds to 
Haicheng’s role as a maritime hub and the center of China’s overseas private commer cial 
activities for decades. Moreover, ACZK includes deities from various other places than 
Haicheng—most notably, the belief in Mazu originated in Putian, but additionally , 
Maozhu the Water Immortal and the Five Venerable Kings were originally local god s at 
Figure 7. Last pages of the “up north” route, ending the entire text of ACZK ( OR12693/18 (n.d.)
Zhuoxian Ke , p. 44.
One such reason is that some places of worship also had commercial value, as ships
often docked to acquire goods and fill their stores before selling at the destination ( Antony
2003 , p. 63). The “down south” route, for example, mentions a stop at Tongshan 銅山
(today Dongshan 東山 Province, Fujian), which was a considerably large port town where
merchants would gather (Y. Wang 2018 , p. 109). However, most places on the coastal
routes are not of this kind; they are smaller islets used as landmarks for navigation. These
are much less likely to have been mentioned due to commercial reasons.
The smaller islets and coves along the way are recorded because they were safe havens
for stopovers. Usually, ships would rather spend the night at anchor, shielded from the
open sea and preferably from pirates ( Antony 2003 , p. 63). The island of Nanri 南日 on the
northern route was one such haven, as seen in old sailing charts instructing the way onto its
harbor ( Zheng 2018 , pp. 191–92). According to ACZK, Mazu is to be worshipped on this
island. At other times, ships would encounter severe weather that required them to stop at
the closest port or, more severely, blow them out of their course to unforeseen harbors. In
some recorded cases, journeys that were supposed to take a few weeks ended in months,
during which ships and their crews were forced to wait for good weather at unplanned
locations.12Even the most minor natural harbors were attached with a protective deity as
life‑saving sanctuaries, as long as they could host a ship.
Some ports of call at further stops were used to resupply. While sailing the littoral,
Chinese vessels preferred to stop and replenish fresh food and water at points along the
way rather than to sail directly to their destination carrying huge provisions (K. Chen 2018 ,
p. 139). This habit is evident in a similar list to that of ACZK, found in notes of a Qing

--- [Page 19] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 14 of 18
navy commander. The assorted notes of Admiral Dou Zhenbiao 窦振彪 (1786–1850) con‑
tain a list titled “Respected Deities” ( Jing Shen 敬神 ), which instructs places of prayer and
replenishment along the northern coastal route. Spaces like Shanghai, Qitou 旗頭 near
the Zhoushan 舟山 archipelago, and Ci’ao 慈澳 in today’s Xiangshan 象山 County, Zhe‑
jiang, are noted by Dou with the words “a bowl of food” ( cai wan菜碗 ) in addition to their
relevant deities. At other places, he recorded a “blessing from the gods” (shen fu 神福 ,
F.Chen 2013 , p. 192). Dou’s list reaches Manchuria, even further than Tianjin, a journey
of ten days or more if departing from the Fujian vicinity ( Ng 2017 , p. 364). Thus, a stopover
around Zhejiang halfway through would make sense in favorable conditions.
Another kind of temple mentioned in ACZK’s route lists is those near the original port
of departure, Haicheng. Some of these are so close to home that it seems curious for ships to
have stopped there. The southern route specifies six stopovers while still sailing on the Jiu‑
long River, Haicheng’s short outlet to the sea. These nearby temples were vital since ships
used them to wait for favorable weather conditions before setting off for the open ocean.
Junk captains would not compromise optimal sailing conditions; thus, they preferred to
stay as long as needed before departing for open‑sea sailing, even if that meant stopping
along the short first leg. While waiting, the crews could pray for their journey’s success.
Yu Yonghe experienced this method to the fullest extent as he voyaged to Taiwan,
which should have taken only two days in optimal conditions. First, his ship was shaken
by waves for three whole days while at anchor in front of the Water Immortals Palace
(Shuixian Gong 水仙宮 ) at Xiamen, the fifth placename in the “down south” list in ACZK
(Figure 6). The temple accommodated the waiting crew, although Yu chose to stay at a dif‑
ferent place nearby (Y. Yu [1697] 2004 , p. 16). Then, Yu’s ship sailed for a full day, reaching
the island of Dadan 大擔 , only one short stop away, where ACZK mentions Mazu as the
venerated deity. A day later, the ship stopped nearby at Kinmen due to a lack of winds. At
that point, Yu concluded that “on the ocean, one is afraid of the wind but should be more
afraid of no wind” (Y. Yu [1697] 2004 , pp. 19–23). This firsthand account emphasizes that
ocean voyages, be they along the coast or overseas, were no simple endeavor right from
the start, and an intimate acquaintance with the safe stopovers was necessary throughout.
Moreover, temples played an extra role as roadhouses in the maritime sanctuaries.
Last, it should be noted that other than shelter and supplies, the places of worship
were noted for their perceived religious efficacy. This can be seen through another similar
list that is appended to a “launching of a colorful ship” liturgy from Gaoxioang, Taiwan,
dated 1749. The appendix is titled “Holy Places for Ship Rituals” (Chuan Jiao Sheng Wei
船醮聖位 , Figure 4). It presents a list of places related to Mazu in a structure much like the
northern route of ACZK and Dou Zhenbiao’s notes. Like in the other lists, the placenames
refer to actual locations along the coast, mainly from Fujian to Zhejiang. One such location
is Mazu’s ancestral temple on the island of Meizhou 湄洲 . Sailors would sometimes stop
there, especially to venerate the goddess; it is one of the few places mentioned in the above
three religious route lists and highlighted in coastal navigation charts (Xun Zhang 1980 ,
pp. 100–1). In other accounts, crews reported how they dropped anchor at Putuoshan
普陀山 just for worshipping Guanyin ( Ishii 1998 , p. 149).
As these examples demonstrate, the religious charting of the Chinese coasts was done
according to an intimate acquaintance with the littoral trade and was also used as a prac‑
tical tool during the voyages. Thus, a closer examination of each mentioned place and its
history might prove beneficial for studying the fine details of Qing‑era maritime naviga‑
tion. In addition, a closer look at the religious habits of these locations, the hagiographies
of the less‑common deities, and tracing the toponyms may reveal much more. These, how‑
ever, are beyond the scope of this paper.
5. Conclusions
As the detailed manuscript of ACZK reveals, sailors’ religious practices were sophis‑
ticated and structured. While most sources dealing with the maritime world mention frag‑
mentary anecdotes, ACZK conflates terms and practices recorded in numerous writings

--- [Page 20] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 15 of 18
into a single prayer. By far, it presents the most exhaustive set of maritime‑religion compo‑
nents in a single text. Exploring these maritime components demonstrates a belief system
encompassing overseas and coastal trade networks, navigation methods, and seafaring
techniques. This system included a vast pantheon of deities led by Mazu as the paramount
goddess, rituals for daily routine and emergency, a religious charting of the South China
Sea, and specialized personnel. It is a unique tradition of the overseas sailors based in
southern Fujian.
The seafaring religion in the Haicheng manuscripts indicates a larger sphere of prac‑
tice than the region from which it originated. Besides invoking local deities, ACZK notes
divinities from all across the Chinese coastline for whom to pray, making it evident that
the ship blessing ritual was carried to diverse places. This trans‑locality corresponds to
Haicheng’s role as a maritime hub and the center of China’s overseas private commer‑
cial activities for decades. Moreover, ACZK includes deities from various other places
than Haicheng—most notably, the belief in Mazu originated in Putian, but additionally,
Maozhu the Water Immortal and the Five Venerable Kings were originally local gods at
Yongjia永嘉 County, Zhejiang Province (J. Wang 1347 , pp. 33b–34a). Even the crowd
of sailor devotees was most likely diverse, as junks comprised motley crews from various
ports, common sailors who drifted between ports in search of jobs ( Ch’en 1994 , pp. 209–11;
Antony 2003 , pp. 74–75). As such, the tradition was influenced by localities along the net‑
work of places through which its adherents travelled back and forth.
The details of ACZK reveal that maritime religion was deeply embedded in profes‑
sional practice. Sailing the high seas involved harsh risks, reliance on equipment, and
unpredictable weather, which drove mariners to form a practical set of beliefs focused
on their safety and successful journeys. From the patron deity of shipbuilding, Lu Ban,
through the spirit of the ship manifested in the “wooden dragon“ and those of its vital
parts and to gods of oceanic weather and topography, sailors held beliefs regarding every
aspect of their trade. In doing so, they animated oceanic phenomenon and parts of the
ship itself, ascribing them to specific patron deities—a perception which deviates some‑
what from the more common Chinese tendency of worshipping anthropomorphic beings
or dragons.
The geographical features of ACZK’s appendix supplement a religious chart to mar‑
itime navigation, which demonstrate an outward world view, outside of China. Despite
being based in Fujian, the sailors operated all across the South China Sea, and thus, they
also perceived it in spiritual terms. As the appendix to ACZK shows, places along the
Chinese coasts were perceived as the domains of various deities, and overseas ports were
required with summoning protective deities from afar. In this sense, the sailors held a
trans‑local belief, focused on the “Mediterranean” of Southeast Asia ( Lombard 2007 ).
Because of the intimate relation between religion, geography, and professional con‑
duct, the maritime religious traditions changed along with the Chinese seascape; as the age
of sail gave way to steamships during the 19th century, so did the maritime belief system
gradually transform. With no more wind‑driven junks to operate, the traditional Chinese
way of seafaring was fundamentally altered, along with its assorted beliefs. Though many
maritime‑religious elements persevered among coastal communities and fisherman, there
are no more Incense Masters to be found, nor modern versions of grand maritime safety rit‑
uals upon merchant ships, at least to my own knowledge. Nonetheless, this tradition was
once one of the core foundations of the seafaring parts of Chinese society. It belonged to
sailors who operated a vast commerce network by all standards, and thus, it is a religious
tradition worthy of further discussion.
Funding: This work was supported by the Arts and Humanities Research Council through the Open‑
Oxford‑Cambridge DTP [ref. AH/R012709/1], by a fieldwork grant through the Faculty of Asian and
Middle Eastern Studies at the University of Cambridge, and by the French National Research Agency
(ref. ANR‑22‑CE27‑015).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

--- [Page 21] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 16 of 18
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Acknowledgments: I would like to thank Shih‑shan Susan Huang and John Donegan‑Cross who
provided me with valuable advice and support, as also to my supervisor Noga Ganany, and the
Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies at the University of Cambridge.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
Notes
1This same collection is mentioned by Kenneth Dean as an example to an entire category of Daoist cults, which had ‘less pro‑
nounced official connections’ and therefore only a small portion of their texts entered the Canon, whereas their liturgies could
‘still be found in the local manuscript collections of local Taoists’. See ( Dean 1995 , pp. 30–31). In this regard, my usage of the
term ‘Daoist’ in this paper refers to the popular form of Daoism, as practiced by non‑institutional followers and priests and often
mixed with other forms of religious traditions, such as in this case—a maritime belief system.
2Haicheng’s Moon Harbor became the most important smuggling port during the Ming ‘sea‑ban’ ( haijin海禁 ), and an important
hub for foreign trade after the lifting of the ban. It was replaced from this role by the adjacent port of Xiamen in 1727, though, as
seen through ACZK, seafaring and maritime culture remained an intrinsic part of daily life. See ( Lin 1984 , pp. 142–53; Ng 2017 ,
pp. 33–34, 162).
3Most similar is in ( Dean 1988 , pp. 219–21), titled QZ.16 靈寶海醮安船木龍燈科 [Lingbao‑sect maritime lamp wooden dragon
ritual of ship safety]. Two more items in the same catalog, PT.5 and PT.6, are also rituals for ship safety. See a comparison of
excerpts from ACZK to newer ship‑protecting prayers from Tainan in Maruyama 2012, pp. 9–12. However, all the above are
currently unavailable to view.
4Jiang provides an analysis of a modern plague‑ship ritual ( song wang jiao 送王醮 ) which includes a role call of the ship’s crew,
accroding to the crewmembers’ names in an old junk. See ( Jiang 2011 , pp. 24–42).
5The pages in the entire British Library Daoist collection OR12693 were not numbered originally, but were added with Arabic
numerals, probably at the British Museum where the text was first collected. This paper follows these.
6Many of the charted manuscripts in ( Hsieh 2014 , pp. 40–42), contain various mentions of ship deities of the same kind. I thank
Prof. Hsieh Conghui for introducing me to his collection of Taiwanese old manuscript photos, most of which are held at private
masters’ collections and inaccessible to the public.
7I thank the anonymous reviewer for his identification of Zhanbei as Jambi, which I was initially unable to identify.
8For example, the Ming‑era rutter Shunfeng Xiangsong does not specify any Taiwanese port along its route guide, while the later
Zhinan Zhengfa gives directions to the same ports in Taiwan mentioned in ACZK.
9Dongxi Yangkao describes Lord Du as a sailor who followed Admiral Zheng He in his voyages and later died at the entrance to
the Pearl River estuary. He was deified and worshipped there ever since. See (Xie Zhang [1617] 2000 , p. 186).
10Tuo托is an old Minnan‑dialect measure of water depth, measuring about 1.6–1.7 m.
11In some cases, the Chinese sailors’ enthusiasm to come ashore and worship was an excuse to get off their junk, as the Japanese
authorities confined them on deck. See (Y. Tsu 2002 , pp. 79–86).
12This chaotic nature of seafaring is most pronounced in the reports of Chinese junks to the Japanese authorities in Nagasaki, a
most valuable primary source on the actual voyages of overseas merchants. Some of these are translated in Ishii (1998 ). See for
example the statement by a Chinese crew who spent more than nine months trying to reach Nagasaki from Kelapa, were blown
off course multiple times to several random ports, and lost four crewmembers along the way, pp. 243–45.
References
Antony, Robert J. 2003. Like Froth Floating on the Sea: The World of Pirates and Seafarers in Late Imperial South China . Berkeley: Institute
of East Asian Studies.
Boltz, Judith Magee. 1986. In Homage to T’ien‑fei. Journal of the American Oriental Society 106: 211–32. [ CrossRef ]
Brook, Timothy. 2015. Mr. Selden’s Map of China: The Spice Trade, A Lost Chart, and the South China Sea . London: Profile Books Ltd.
Cai, Guoyao 蔡国耀 . 2013. Kaitai Mazu—Pu Xian yu Taiwan Guanxi shi 開台媽祖 —莆仙與台灣關係史 [The founding of Mazu—The Godess
of Putian’s Relations with Taiwan] . Fuzhou: Haifeng Chuban She.
Chang, Pin‑tsun. 1998. The Formation of a Maritime Convention in Minnan (Southern Fujian), c. 900–1200. In From the Mediterranean
to the China Sea . Edited by Claude Guillot, Denys Lombard and Roderick. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, pp. 143–55.
Chard, Robert L. 1995. Rituals and Scriptures of the Stove Cult. In Ritual and Scripture in Chinese Popular Religion: Five Studies . Edited
by David Johnson. Berkley: Chinese Popular Culture Project, pp. 3–54.
Ch’en, Kuo‑tong. 1994. Shipping and Trade of Chinese Junks in Southeast Asia, 1730–1830: A Survey’. Research in Maritime History
6: 203–14.

--- [Page 22] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 17 of 18
Chen, Feng 陳峰 , ed. 2013. Xiamen Haijiang Wenxian Ji Ju 廈門海疆文獻輯注 [Collected annotations of Xiamen maritime frontier documents] .
Xiamen: Xiamen Daxue Chuban She.
Chen, Jiarong 陳佳榮 . 2013. ’Shunfeng Xiangsong’ zuozhe ji wancheng niandai xin kao 《順風相送》 作者及完成年代新考 [A New
Examination of the Author and Completion Date of ‘Dispatched on Favourable Winds’]. In Duhai Fangcheng Ji Zhu 渡海方程輯注
[‘Mileage of Ocean Crossings’ edited and annotated] . Edited by Chen Jiarong 陳佳榮 and Zhu Jianqiu 朱鑒秋 . Shanghai: Zhong Xi
Shu Ju, pp. 307–35.
Chen, Kuo‑tong. 2018. Advantages of Chinese Navigators during the Fifteenth to Eighteenth Centuries. In Voyages, Migration, and the
Maritime World . Edited by Clara Wing‑chung Ho, Ricardo King Sang Mak and Tam Yue‑him. Berlin and Boston: De Gruyter
Oldenbourg, pp. 134–42.
Clark, Hugh. 2006. The Religious Culture of Southern Fujian, 750–1450: Preliminary Reflections on Contacts across a Maritime
Frontier. Asia Major 19: 211–40.
de Rada, Mart ín. 2010. The Relation of FR. Mart ín de Rada, O.E.S.A. In South China in the Sixteenth Century (1550–1575) . Translated
and Edited by C. R. Boxer. London: Routledge, pp. 243–310. First published 1575.
Dean, Kenneth. 1988. Manuscripts from Fujian. Cahiers d’Extr ême‑Asie 4: 217–26.
Dean, Kenneth. 1995. Taoist Ritual and Popular Cults of Southeast China . Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Dean, Kenneth. 2015. Ritual Revolutions: Temple and Trust Networks Linking Putian and Southeast Asia. Cultural Diversity in Asia
1: 8–26. [ CrossRef ]
Gu, Xijia 顾希佳 , and Buguang Xu 徐步光 , eds. 2019. Zhejiang fengsu gushi 浙江风俗故事 [Zhejiang Folk Tradition Stories] . Hangzhou:
Hangzhou Chuban She.
Hsieh, Tsung‑hui 謝聰輝 . 2014. Nan Taiwan hewen songchuan yishi de chuancheng yuqi Daofa qilun 南臺灣和瘟送船儀式的傳承與其
道法析論 [An analysis of the inheritance and Daoist practice of the plague pacification ship‑launching ceremony in southern
Taiwan]. Minsu Quyi 184: 9–57.
Ishii, Yoneo, ed. 1998. The Junk Trade from Southeast Asia: Translations from the T ôsen Fusetsu‑gaki, 1674–1723 . Singapore: Institute of
Southeast Asian Studies.
Jiang, Shoucheng 姜守誠 . 2011. Da chuan jiao—nan Taiwan Lingbao dao pai wang jiao keyi yanjiu 打船醮 —南台灣靈寶道派王醮科儀研
究[The ritual of consecrating the ship of plague—A study on the rituals of ‘Wangjiao’ of Lingbao school in Southern Districts
of Taiwan]. Shijie Zongjiao Xuekan 世界宗教學刊 18: 1–58.
Katz, Paul R. 1995. Demon Hordes and Burning Boats: The Cult of Marshal Wen in Late Imperial Chekiang . Albany: State University of New
York Press.
Lagerwey, John. 1987. Taoist Ritual in Chinese Society and History . New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.
Li, Qiao 李乔 . 2013. Hangyeshen chongbai: Zhongguo minzhongzao shenshi yanjiu 行业神崇拜：中国民众造神史研究 [The Worship of
Professional Deities: Research of Chinese Folk‑Deities’ History] . Beijing: Beijing Chuban She.
Li, Qilin 李其霖 . 2005. Qing dai Taiwan de jun gongjiang xinyang 清代台灣的軍工匠信仰 [Military craftsmen’s beliefs in Qing‑period
Taiwan]. Jinan Department of History 暨南史學 8: 81–122.
Li, Qingxin 李庆新 . 2019. Ming Qing shiqi hanghai zhenlu, genglubu zhong zhi haiyang xinyang 明清时期航海针路、更路簿中之海洋
信仰 [Maritime belief in Ming and Qing Era Sailing Compass Directions and Route Books]. In Haiyang shi yanjiu 15 海洋史研究
（第 15辑） [Studies of Maritime History vol. 15] . Edited by Qingxin Li. Beijing: Social Sciences Academic Press (China). Available
online: https://www.sohu.com/a/419684005_556522 (accessed on 20 June 2024).
Li, Taiha 李泰瀚 . 2004. Qing dai Taiwan shuixian zunwang xinyang zhi tantao 清代臺灣水仙尊王信仰之探討 [Inquiry into the Belief
in the Water Immortal Venerable Kings in Qing‑Period Taiwan]. Minsu Quyi 143: 271–303.
Li, Yiwen. 2020. Navigating Voyages in Real and Religious Life: The Big‑Dipper Belief and Shipbuilding in Premodern China. Reli‑
gions 11: 398. [ CrossRef ]
Lin, Guoping 林囯平 , and Wenyu Peng 彭文宇 . 1993. Fujian Minjian Xinyang 福建民間信仰 [Fujian’s Folk Beliefs] . Fuzhou: Fujian
Renmin Chubanshe.
Lin, Renchuan 林仁川 . 1984. Mingmo Qingchu siren haishang maoyi 明末清初私人海上貿易 [Private Maritime Trade of the Late Ming and
Early Qing] . Shanghai: Huadong Shifan Daxue Chuban She.
Lombard, Denys. 2007. Another ‘Mediterranean’ in Southeast Asia. Translated by Nola Cooke. The Asia‑Pacific Journal 5: 1–13.
Maruyama, Hiroshi 丸山宏 . 2012. Daying tushuguan suocang Fujian Zhangzhou Haicheng xian Daojiao keyi shouchao ben (or.12693)
chutan大英圖書館所藏福建漳州海澄縣道教科儀手抄本 (or.12693) 初探 [A Preliminary Study on The Taoist Ritual Manuscript
(or.12693) from Haicheng County, Zhangzhou, Fujian Province, collected by the British Library]. Paper presented at the Seminar
on ‘Zhengyi and Local Taoist Rituals’, Jinning, Taiwan, September 22–23.
Ng, Chin‑keong. 1983. Trade and Society: The Amoy Network on the China Coast 1683–1735 . Singapore: Singapore University Press.
Ng, Chin‑keong. 2017. Boundaries and Beyond: China’s Maritime Southeast in Late Imperial Times . Singapore: NUS Press.
OR12693/12. n.d. Gongsi Xianwang Da Jiao Keyi 恭祀仙王打醮科儀 . London: British Library.
OR12693/15. 1769, Song Chuan Keyi 送船科儀 . London: British Library.
OR12693/18. n.d. Zhuoxian Ke 酌獻科 . London: British Library.
Saso, Michael R. 1970. The Taoist Tradition in Taiwan. The China Quarterly 41: 83–102. [ CrossRef ]
Thompson, Laurence G. 1968. The Junk Passage Across the Taiwan Strait: Two Early Chinese Accounts. Harvard Journal of Asiatic
Studies 28: 170–94. [ CrossRef ]

--- [Page 23] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1096 18 of 18
Tsu, Timothy Y. 1996. All Souls Aboard! The Ritual Launch of Model Junks by the Chinese of Nagasaki in Tokugawa Japan. Journal
of Ritual Studies 10: 37–62.
Tsu, Yun Hui. 2002. Between Heaven and the Deep Sea. The Religious Practice of Chinese Seafarers from the Eleventh to the Mid–
nineteenth Century. East Asian History 23: 69–86.
Wang, Gungwu. 1990. Merchants without Empires: The Hokkien Sojourning Communities. In The Rise of Merchant Empires: Long‑
Distance Trade in the Early Modern World . Edited by James Tracy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 400–22.
Wang, Jingfang 王敬方 . 1347. Baofeng Shuixian ji 褒封水仙记 [Record of the Honorary Bestowal of the Water Immortals]. In Xu Wu
junzhi续吴郡志 [Continued Wu County Gazetteer]. In Shiyuan congshu 適園叢書 [Collection of the proper garden]. Compiled
by Junheng Zhang 張鈞衡 . Shanghai.
Wang, Yuanlin 王元林 . 2018. ‘(anchuan) zhuoxian ke’ yu ‘xianan’ hangxian min jing diming ji Mazu xinyang kaoshi 《（安船）酌献科》
与’下南 ’航线闽境地名及妈祖信仰考释 [discussion on ‘Libation Ritual (for the ship’s safety)’ with the Min area place‑names along
the southern route and the Mazu belief]. Nanhai Xueke 南海学刊 4: 104–12.
Wen, Yiduo 聞一多 . 1948. Duanwu kao 端午考 [An examination of Duanwu]. In Wen Yiduo Quanji 闻一多全集 . Shanghai: Kaiming
Shudian, pp. 221–43.
Xiang, Da 向達 , comp. and annot. 2000. Liang zhong haidao zhenjing 兩種海道針經 [Two Kinds of Sea‑Route Needle Scriptures] . Reprint
inZhongwai Jiaotong Shiji Congkan 1 中外交通史籍叢刊 1[Chinese‑Foreign Connections History Series 1 ]. Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju.
Xu, Baoguang 徐葆光 . 1720. Zhongshan chuanxin lu 中山伝信錄 [Records of Transmitted News from Zhongshan] . Nishihara: Iha Fuyu
Collection of the University of the Ryukyus Library 琉球大学附属図書館伊波普猷文庫 . [CrossRef ]
Xu, Jing徐兢 . 2016. Xuanhe fengshi gaoli tujing 宣和奉使高丽图经 . InA Chinese Traveler in Medieval Korea: Xu Jing’s Illustrated Account
of the Xuanhe Embassy to Koryŏ . Translated by Sem Vermeersch. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. First published 1124.
Yang, Guozhen 楊國楨 . 1998. Min Zai Haizhong: Zhuixun Fujian Haiyang Fazhan Shi 閩在海中：追尋福建海洋發展史 [Min at sea: Pus‑
ruing the History of Marine Development in Fujian] . Nanchang: Jiangxi Gaoxiao Chuban She.
Yu, Anthony C., trans. 2012. Journey to the West . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, vol. 1.
Yu, Yonghe 郁永河 . 2004. Small Sea Travel Diaries: Yu Yonghe’s Records of Taiwan . Translated by Macabe Keliher. Taipei: SMC Publish‑
ing. First published 1697.
Zhang, Xie 張燮 . 2000. Dongxi yang kao 東西洋考 [Investigations on the East and West Seas]. In Zhongwai jiaotong shijie congshu 5
中外交通史籍叢書 5 [Chinese–Foreign Connections History Series 5] . Annotated by Xie Fang 謝方 . Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju. First
published 1617.
Zhang, Xun 章巽 . 1980. Gu Hanghai Tu Kaoshi 古航海圖考釋 [Textual Research of an Old Maritime Map] . Beijing: Haiyang Chuban She.
Zheng, Yongchang 鄭永常 . 2018. Yelu Hanghai Tu Yanjiu 耶魯航海圖研究 [Yale University’s Old Chinese Maritime Map, a Study] . Taipei:
Yuanliu Chuban Gongsi.
Zhu, Shijie 朱仕玠 . 1763. Xiao Liuqiu man zhi 小琉球漫志 [Casual Gazetteer of Small Ryukyu ]. Fengshan.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual au‑
thor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

--- [Page 24] ---
Citation: Copplestone, Louis. 2024.
Temple-Monasteries, Buddhist Monks,
and Architectural Exchange Between
India, Java, and Tibet in the Late 8th
Century. Religions 15: 1338.
https://doi.org/10.3390/rel15111338
Academic Editor: Todd Lewis
Received: 5 August 2024
Revised: 18 October 2024
Accepted: 23 October 2024
Published: 1 November 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).religions
Article
Temple-Monasteries, Buddhist Monks, and Architectural
Exchange Between India, Java, and Tibet in the Late 8th Century
Louis Copplestone
Victoria & Albert Museum, London SW7 2RL, UK; l.copplestone@vam.ac.uk
Abstract: The once-dominant view that architectural developments in mediaeval Southeast Asia
closely followed Indian ‘inﬂuence’ is now largely rejected. Recent scholarship has shifted its focus
onto the agency of local artists and architects in driving architectural innovations across the region.
However, speciﬁc cases of transregional exchanges in architectural ideas and practices remain under-
explored. This study examines three geographically distant Buddhist sites—Paharpur in northern
Bangladesh, Candi Sewu in Central Java, Indonesia, and Samye Monastery in central Tibet—active
in the late 8th century. I consider the signiﬁcance of speciﬁc similarities and their temporal corre-
lations within a broader range of styles, materials, and technologies. I argue that the activity at
these sites reveals a shared architectural agenda transmitted over vast distances by religious experts,
including Buddhist monks, in the last decades of the 8th century. Central to the network of three
temple-monasteries proposed is the role that a speciﬁc architectural type was understood to play in
protecting the kingdom and extending a king’s sovereignty while manifesting his spiritual aspirations.
By distinguishing between architectural forms, architectural agendas, and modes of production, this
study clariﬁes the complex nature of transregional architectural exchange in the premodern world.
Keywords: Buddhism; architecture; maritime Asia; mediaeval architecture; Buddhist architecture
1. Introduction
Following the excavation of Paharpur in northern Bengal, the Indian archaeologist K.
N. Dikshit suggested that parallels for this Buddhist monastery and temple complex might
be found in ‘Further India, especially Burma, Java, and Cambodia’ (Dikshit 1938 , p. 7).
Speciﬁcally, he noted that ‘the nearest approximation to the plan and superstructure of
the Paharpur temple [ . . .] is afforded by the temples known as Chandi Loro Jongrang
and Chandi Sewu close to Prambanan in Central Java’ ( Dikshit 1931 , pp. 38–45). This
comparison between buildings separated by more than 4000 km across land, sea, and
several political and cultural boundaries reﬂects a sense of pan-Asian cultural geography
prevalent during Dikshit’s time. The ‘Further India’ he invoked aligns with the ‘Greater
India’ most closely associated with the historian Ramesh Chandra Majumdar. This idea
transplanted some of the characteristics and extent of European empires in Asia into the
ancient and mediaeval past. In brief, Majumdar argued that similarities in the culture,
religion, and society of mediaeval India and what is now Southeast Asia1were the legacy
of ancient colonisation: Indian kings, he proposed, had supplanted indigenous rulers
across the region centuries earlier, bringing with them new religions, languages, art, and
architecture ( Majumdar 1927 ,1937 ,1944 ).
The study of ‘Indianisation’, as this process became known, has centred on two
key questions: What inﬂuence did India exert on Southeast Asia in the past? And how
was this inﬂuence transmitted? When these questions are accepted (though often they
are not), responses generally focus on three main issues ( Ali 2011 ;Acri 2017 ). The ﬁrst
problem is one of agency—who was responsible for this cultural transfer? Three hypo-
thetical agents have been proposed to challenge Majumdar’s theory of large-scale coloni-
sation: small groups of adventuring warriors (the ks.atriya theory), religious experts (the
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338. https://doi.org/10.3390/rel15111338 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/religions

--- [Page 25] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 2 of 32
br¯ahma n.atheory), or merchants (the vai´ sya theory) have all been linked to this process
(Bosch 1961 , pp. 1–22; Cœd ès 1968 , pp. 15–16). Driving these potential carriers of cultural
knowledge and practices is the implicit allure of ‘legitimation.’ Drawing on Max Weber’s
ideas, scholars have suggested that the Indian mode of charismatic kingship, religion, and
social organisation appealed to Southeast Asian rulers who were looking for ways to extend
and consolidate their authority ( Wheatley 1982 ;Pollock 2006 , p. 516).
Some historians have questioned the scale and extent of this cultural transfer, however,
arguing that the inﬂuence of India on Southeast Asia has been overstated, while the creative
potential of localisation as a process has been overlooked ( Wolters 1982 ; deCasparis 1983 ).
Of particular interest to historians recently is the possibility of multi-directional transfer and
the effort to reframe a relationship in which India is often assumed to have been the creative
centre and Southeast Asia a passive recipient periphery ( Acri and Sharrock 2022 ). Hermann
Kulke has further argued that the dichotomy underpinning this discussion is misleading, if
not entirely false ( Kulke 1990 ,2014 ). He argues that the similarities and simultaneity in
cultural, religious, and social practices observed across mediaeval southern Asia reﬂect
such a high degree of near-constant interaction that it is more accurate to view these regions
as ‘converging’ in this period. Running parallel to these often-theoretical discussions
is the material issue of chronology. As Ian Mabbett has argued, the scholarly study of
Indianization has often ﬂattened periods of activity that, when considered diachronically,
reveal distinct and characterful differences ( Mabbett 1977a ,1977b ).
The study of architecture has been a constant feature of this scholarly discussion. R.
C. Majumdar, F. D. K. Bosch, and George Cœd ès all compared sacred buildings—mostly
temples—to support and articulate their arguments about the relationship between India
and Southeast Asia ( Bosch 1924 ;Majumdar 1937 , pp. 347–54; Cœd ès 1968 , pp. 31–32).
Architecture has been central to this discussion for several reasons: First, large-scale
architectural production in a pre-industrial society required substantial social and economic
resources, making it a valuable indicator of broader cultural trends. More importantly,
architecture—unlike most other forms of cultural production—does not move. Buildings
are typically ﬁxed in place, so the transmission of an architectural form or idea necessitates
a mediator: a text, a physical mode, or an expert. In this way, evidence of transregional
architectural exchange has provided a relatively stable peg on which to hang broader
hypotheses about cultural transfer.
In this context, I examine a speciﬁc moment in the exchange of architectural knowledge
between eastern India, the island of Java, and Tibet in the last decades of the 8th century CE.
By comparing three Buddhist monastery complexes—Paharpur in northern Bangladesh,
Candi Sewu in Central Java, Indonesia, and Samye Monastery in central Tibet—I consider
a set of shared architectural ideas that encompass both general and speciﬁc formal features
and reveal a broader ideological agenda of temple buildings that emerged within Buddhist
communities during this period.
2. Paharpur Naogaon District, Bangladesh
2.1. A Temple-Monastery in Northern Bengal
The complex at Paharpur comprises a large quadrangle with a perimeter of around
1 km enclosing a monumental central temple and numerous smaller structures of various
kinds (Figure 1). The quadrangle that encloses this complex will be familiar as a greatly
expanded four-sided monastic dormitory ( cat¯uh.´ s¯ala-vih ¯ara) of a type that became standard
among Buddhist communities in India around the middle of the ﬁrst millennium CE ( Cop-
plestone 2024 , pp. 24–18, 88–90). Almost all of the 200 ‘cells’ in this structure at Paharpur
contain large brick and stone pedestals, however; these once supported sculptures, perhaps
of brick and clay, or wood, if not metal—none of which survive in place (Figure 2).Further
clusters of three ‘shrine cells’ were discovered by excavators in the middle of three sides of
the quadrangle, where stone drains in the form of mythical leonine vy¯alasindicate that these
structures were used for the ritualised worship of images ( pratim ¯a-p¯uj¯a)(Figures 3and 4).
The presence of pedestals and drains here challenges the established typology of Buddhist

--- [Page 26] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 3 of 32
architecture, ruling out the possibility that this quadrangle was principally residential and
revealing that the vast quadrangle at Paharpur was a monumental multi-shrine temple in
its own right, as I have argued elsewhere (ibid., p. 91).ā
āūā
Figure 1. Architectural plan of Paharpur. (Source: Author).
The temple at the centre of the Paharpur complex continues to tower over the site
today. It is built on two terraces with a basement that projects in the cardinal directions
reﬂecting the orientation of the four shrines at its centre, producing a characteristic cru-
ciform conﬁguration (Figure 5). Several hundred earthenware plaques are ﬁxed in rows
around the outside of this temple between alternating bands of narrow bricks made in
moulds with geometric and vegetal patterns (Figure 6). These plaques depict an enigmatic
array of imagery suggesting a divine assembly around the temple, and a similarly obscure
programme is found in the irregular arrangement of sixty-three stone sculptures ﬁxed into
the basement of the temple, most of which are buried today ( Kozicz 2022 ;Copplestone
2024 , pp. 42–46). A low wall around the basement of the temple forms an enclosed cir-
cumambulatory path which once led past these stone sculptures and below several stone
drains that lead from the four inner shrines of the upper temple. A large stone sculpture of
the bodhisattva Avalokite´ svara found on the southern side of the temple with a brick-built
basin directly below it suggests that this image had priority in the ritual activity that took
place in this area.

--- [Page 27] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 4 of 32
 
Figure 2. Photograph of shrine cell at Paharpur. (Source: Author).
 
Figure 3. Photograph of a larger shrine cell on the eastern side of Paharpur. (Source: Author).
The wall around the central temple at Paharpur projects on the northern side to
create an inner courtyard between the temple’s staircase and the main entrance of the
surrounding quadrangle. None of the surely monumental sculptures that once occupied
the inner shrines of the central temple at Paharpur have survived, nor has anything of
the superstructure that once rose above them (Figure 7). At the very core of the structure,
however, excavators discovered a brick-lined chamber with two clay cups buried beneath
layers of brick dust, ash, and clay ( Dikshit 1938 , pp. 14–15). An important feature of
the architectural remains at Paharpur is its complicated physical history, which has been
gradually revealed over generations of excavation and analysis ( Sen et al. 2014 , Table 1;
Copplestone 2024 , pp. 47–48). And the stratigraphy of this site reveals that the complex
underwent several phases of renovation and reconstruction, notably in the construction of
pillared antechambers attached to each of the four shrines of the central temple (Figure 8)
(Dikshit 1938 , pp. 12–14; Alam 2004 , p. 52). I have dated this phase of architectural activity
at Paharpur to c. 850 based on inscriptions found on the pillars that were erected in this
period, several decades after the initial establishment of this temple-monastery complex
(Copplestone 2024 , pp. 112–13). And in another phase, the ground level of the entire
courtyard was raised, either in response to a ﬂood or to alter an existing hydrological
system ( Sen et al. 2014 , pp. 60–64).

--- [Page 28] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 5 of 32
 
tt
tt ś
Figure 4. Photograph of stone drain leading from larger shrine cell on the western side of Paharpur.
(Source: Author).
 
Figure 5. Photograph of the central temple at Paharpur. (Source: Author).
 
Figure 6. Photograph of plaques and ornamental bricks at Paharpur. (Source: Author).

--- [Page 29] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 6 of 32tt
 
Figure 7. Photograph of the inner shrine on the eastern side of the central temple at Paharpur.
(Source: Author).
ā
ā
ā ā
Figure 8. Architectural plan showing renovation of the central temple at Paharpur. (Source: Author).

--- [Page 30] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 7 of 32
2.2. The King Dharmap ¯ala Great Monastery at Somapura
The discovery of a large number of earthenware sealings and several stone inscrip-
tions during the excavation of Paharpur has identiﬁed this temple-monastery as the King
Dharmap ¯ala Great Monastery at Somapura and dated its establishment to the late 8th
century CE ( Dikshit 1938 , p. 91 and Pl. LIXh). This Great Monastery ( mah¯avih¯ara) was built
at the heart of the historical-cultural region of Varendra, a region that would be eulogised
several centuries later as the ‘fatherland’ ( janaka-bh ¯umi) of the P ¯ala dynasty ( Brocquet 2010 ,
pp. 185–86). Although this institution does not appear to have been suburban to any major
settlement besides an otherwise unknown ‘Somapura’, it is 40 km away from the historical
city at Mahasthangarh, near Bogra (Figure 9). The architectural remains at Paharpur are in
this way closely associated with the ruling P ¯ala dynasty (r. c. 750–1161) and particularly its
second king, Dharmap ¯ala (r. c. 775–807), with whom it had a ‘namesake’ relationship.ū ā
tt
ā
ā
 
ā
ā
āā
n ̣ā ā ā n ̣ā
tt
āā ā ā
tt
Figure 9. Map showing the location of Paharpur. (Source: Author).
Most of what is known about the social history of the King Dhar map ¯ala Great Monastery
has been derived from a copper plate charter at the Indian Mus eum in Kolkata, which has
been read and discussed at length by Ryosuke Furui ( Furui 2011 ). This charter was issued in
the 26th year in the reign of King Dharmap ¯ala (r. c. 775–807; i.e., c.801) and it may be under-
stood to have acted as something like the institution’s ‘fou nding document’. It principally
records a petition made to the king by a subordinate ( mah¯as¯amanta ) called Bhadra n.¯aga and
his queen ( r¯ajñik ¯a) San.h¯ayika so that they might grant land in favour of several monas tic
communities connected to the monastery at Somapura and in th eir own domain; this land
would then become exempt from the usual obligations ( Furui 2011 , p. 154).
As Annette Schmiedchen and Furui have observed, an important distinction in char-
ters such as this lies between the two participants in the establishment of a religious
institution: the founder (here, the king) and donors (here, a mah¯as¯amanta and a r¯ajñik ¯a) may
be understood to have performed consecutive pious acts, although only the latter is usually
recorded in charters ( Schmiedchen et al. 2023 ). The establishment of the monastery at
Somapura thus was underwritten by a system of composite or shared patronage reﬂecting
the emergent political structure of the P ¯ala realm—the relationship between this king
and his subordinates was built into the Great Monastery at Somapura as an institution.
The Indian Museum copper plate charter speciﬁcally connects both donors, Bhadra n.¯aga
and Sa n.h¯ayika, with particular buildings within the greater complex—an image shrine

--- [Page 31] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 8 of 32
(gan.d.hak¯ut.¯ı) and a small monastery [?] ( vih¯arik¯a) respectively—each of which appears to
have had a distinct monastic community ( sa.mgha ).2
The relationship between the P ¯ala King Dharmap ¯ala and the Great Monastery at Soma-
pura may have been more than nominal. The system of shared patronage that underwrote
the establishment of this institution implicates architectural activity in the power dynamics
of this early mediaeval polity, as Furui has discussed ( Furui 2017 ). It is also likely that the
connection between King Dharmap ¯ala reveals a public and spectacular effort to cultivate a
close and personal relationship with a speciﬁed Buddhist community. This is consistent
with other sources for the early P ¯ala kings, too, which tell us that King Dharmap ¯ala was
close with two named Buddhist monks: Haribhadra ( ﬂ. 775) and Buddhajñ ¯anap ¯ada ( ﬂ. 800)
(Sanderson 2009 , p. 90 and note 162). And according to the 16th-century Tibetan historian
Kunga Nyingpo (T ¯aran ¯atha), who was writing centuries after the fact, Dharmap ¯ala tasked
the monk Buddhajñ ¯anap ¯ada with performing a regular ﬁre sacriﬁce ( hom¯a) to ensure the
longevity of the P ¯ala dynasty ( Sanderson 2009 , p. 93 and note 172).
Although it is not made explicit in the Indian Museum copper plate charter, the
relationship between King Dharmap ¯ala and the monastery that bore his name at Somapura
may be understood in terms of the traditional role of the ‘monastery-owner’ ( vih¯ara-sv ¯amin )
(Furui 2011 , p. 151; Datta 2017a , p. 468). That is, the associated monastic community or
communities ( naiv¯asika-bhik s.u-sa ˙mgha ) may have understood themselves within an ongoing
and obligatory relationship with this king and vice versa. As Gregory Schopen has shown,
theM¯ulasarv ¯astiv ¯ada Vinaya —the monastic rule that was probably followed in eastern
India at this time—prescribes that monks recite verses for the monastery’s ‘owner’, who
was usually the head donor ( d¯anapati ) or founder, on a daily basis, even after their death
(Schopen 1996 ).
The Indian Museum charter is more explicit in associating the institutional and ar-
chitectural activity it records with the path to liberation ( apavarga-m ¯arga) traversed by
Bhadra n.¯aga and Sa n.h¯ayika, their parents ( m¯ata-pitro h.), all beings ( sakalasya ), and, indeed,
their king ( bhat.t.¯araka ) (Furui 2011 , p. 154). The transaction described here is a normative
feature of the bodhisattva path ( bodhisattvay ¯ana) and it was made in perpetuity—‘for as
long as the sun and the moon’ ( ¯acandra- ¯arka-k s.iti-samak ¯ala) (Furui 2011 , p. 154). It also
provides us with a glimpse of the intersection of worldly and supramundane aspirations at
which the architectural activity at Paharpur was undertaken at the end of the 8th century.
Paharpur was not the only temple-monastery of its kind built in eastern India. Al-
though unknown to K. N. Dikshit at the time of his excavation at Paharpur, Antichak
in eastern Bihar and at Mainamati in southeastern Bangladesh would later reveal vast
temple-monastery complexes that broadly conformed to the ‘Paharpur type’ architecturally
and in their close association with speciﬁc named kings ( Copplestone 2024 , pp. 84–133).
The remains at Antichak appear to date to the time of the P ¯ala King Devap ¯ala (r. c. 812–850),
about a generation after Paharpur ( Verma 2011 ). And it is likely, though not conﬁrmed, that
Antichak is the famous Vikrama´ s ¯ıla Great Monastery, which was named after its founder,
King Devap ¯ala (Copplestone 2024 , pp. 66–67).
As at Paharpur, the four shrines of the central temple at Antichak are empty, and it
is impossible to determine with certainty which sculptures were once worshipped there.
The situation at Mainamati is slightly different. Several temple-monastery complexes at
Mainamati, such as Shalban Vihara—the King Bhavadeva Great Monastery named for the
Early Deva king Bhavadeva (r. c. 750)—may have been built as much as a generation before
the King Dharmap ¯ala Great Monastery at Somapura.3Several copper-alloy sculptures
found during excavations at Mainamati, moreover, may indicate that the four shrines of
the central temple at Shalban Vihara once housed larger-than-life images of bodhisattvas.4
And the discovery of a small copper-alloy caitya during the excavation of this site presents
an iconographic arrangement of four bodhisattvas—Mañju´ sr ¯ı, Avalokite´ svara, Vajrasattva,
and Cu n.d.a—that may have corresponded to the lost sculptures of its central temple ( Haque
and Gail 2008 , p. 287).

--- [Page 32] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 9 of 32
3. Candi Sewu Central Java, Indonesia
3.1. A Buddhist Temple Complex
Candi Sewu is one of several Buddhist and ´Saiva temple complexes that were built
between the late 8th and late 9th centuries around the Opak Ri ver on the Kewu Plain (also
known as the Prambanan Plain) in what is today an eastern subu rb of Yogyakarta in Central
Java, Indonesia ( Williams 1981 , pp. 25–46; Dumarçay 1993 , p. 289; Klokke 2006 , p. 57). Indeed,
Candi Sewu might have been designed as part of a larger archit ectural zone comprising the
royal centre at Ratu Boko and several other sites such as Cand i Bubrah, Candi Gana, and
Candi Lumbung (Figure 10) (Degroot 2009 , pp. 65–70, 151–76; Sundberg 2003 , p. 163). Candi
Prambanan, which is only a kilometre away from Candi Sewu, is the largest temple on the
Kewu Plain and it remains the most popular with visitors toda y.tt
tt śī ś
tt n ̣ d ̣
Ś
ād ̣
ūṭ
ﬀ
ū
 
Figure 10. Map showing the location of Candi Sewu. (Source: Author).
The Candi Sewu complex comprises two hundred and fifty struc tures arranged in four
concentric quadrangles around a central temple (Figure 11). It was built using a jigsaw-like
system of interlocking blocks cut from fine-grained volcan ic stone, and this method of con-
struction has enabled archaeologists to reassemble many of the collapsed structures in the
Sewu complex, resulting in architectural remains that stan d in striking contrast to the crum-
bling brick excavations at Paharpur. The temple at the centr e of the Sewu complex comprises
a single east-facing shrine surrounded by four antechamber s on a platform that projects in
staircases in each of the cardinal directions, producing a b roadly cruciform configuration. The
four staircases lead onto a narrow passage around the centra l temple and provide access to its
single main shrine. The superstructure of this temple has be en reassembled from its collapsed
parts (Figure 12). And it relates to an architectural system that is often ass ociated with South
India: the ‘Dr ¯avid.a’ architectural ‘language’ within which a single unit (the aedicule ork¯ut.a) re-
peats at multiple scales and altitudes to create structural elevation and an ornamental surface,
affecting a sense of movement and expansion—in this case, th e repeated unit takes the form
of ast¯upa(see Hardy 2007 , pp. 206–10).
As at Paharpur, the principal image in the main shrine of the t emple at Candi Sewu does
not survive in place—although the throne-back that does sur vive indicates that this image was
monumental (Figure 13). During the reassembly of this temple in the 1980s, several deposits
were discovered in its foundations, including a small mould -made clay image of a stringed
instrument and a ceramic bowl made in the Pearl River delta of Guangdong Province in
southern China, which contained fragments of charcoal ( Dumarçay 1987 , p. 290; Dupoziat
2006 , pp. 105–6). Well-carved stone drains in the form of mythica l crocodilian makaras are
found at intervals around the basement of the central temple at Sewu, and these appear to have

--- [Page 33] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 10 of 32
carried water from the terrace or main shrine into the surrou nding enclosure (Figure 14). Several
more drains of the same type are found in the enclosure wall th at immediately surrounds this
temple, suggesting the possibility of a hydro-architectur al feature, as has been proposed at
Candi Prambanan ( Jordaan 1996 ;Sundberg 2022 ) (Figure 15).
Figure 11. Architectural plan of Candi Sewu (After Dumarçay 1981 , pl. 48). (Source: Sarah Welch,
Creative Commons CC0).
 
Figure 12. Photograph of the central temple at Candi Sewu. (Source: Author).

--- [Page 34] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 11 of 32
 
Figure 13. Photograph of the main shrine of the central temple at Candi Sewu. (Source: Author).
 
Figure 14. Photograph of stone drains in the basement of the central temple at Candi Sewu.
(Source: Author).

--- [Page 35] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 12 of 32
 
Figure 15. Photograph of stone drains in the enclosur e wall around the central temple 
Figure 15. Photograph of stone drains in the enclosure wall around the central temple at Candi Sewu.
(Source: Author).
Four concentrically arranged quadrangles of small shrines and six mid-sized shrines
surround the central temple at Candi Sewu in a regular and symmetrical arrangement.
Based on the recovery of large numbers of monolithic buddha images of a uniform size
in the complex, it has been suggested that each of these shrines contained an image
of a seated buddha making one of several gestures ( mudr ¯as)—bh¯umispar´ sa ,varada , and
dhy¯ana—although these do not appear to have been grouped iconographically ( Degroot
2009 , pp. 136–37). The exterior surfaces of the shrines and temples at Candi Sewu are carved
in deep relief with a regular pattern of imagery: k¯ırttimukhas and gav¯aks.asappear over
doorways, and bodhisattvas , ﬂoral patterns, and overﬂowing vessels ( p¯urn.agha t.a) provide
vertical planes of ornament. An animal-and-roundel pattern found on the exterior of
the central temple has been compared to a kind of textile that was produced in Sogdia
(today Uzbekistan) in the 8th century, as a comparison with a jacket at the Cleveland
Museum of Art reveals (Figures 16and 17) (Woodward 1978 ). The composition of the
architectural ornament at Candi Sewu does not correspond in a precise way to any known
textile fragment, however ( Sardjono 2017 , pp. 22–25).

--- [Page 36] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 13 of 32
ā ū ś
ā
tt ītt āṣ
tt tt ūṇ ṭ
tt
 
tt
Figure 16. Animal and roundel pattern on the surface of the central temple at Candi Sewu.
(Source: Author).
 
tt
tt ĕ
āṛā
Ś
tt śī
n ̇ā Ś
ś ṁś ī
Figure 17. Coat with ducks in roundels, Uzbekistan, 8th century (Source: Cleveland Museum of Art,
Creative Commons CC0).

--- [Page 37] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 14 of 32
Jacques Dumarçay found four distinct phases of architectural activity in the central
temple at Candi Sewu, including two major phases that, he argued, correspond to the two
inscriptions that I discuss below ( Dumarçay 1981 , pp. 23–24 and Figure 29). Based on
this, Dumarçay argued that the Candi Sewu complex was built initially in circa 782 CE
and then renovated a decade later when the gateways in the galleries were lowered and
narrowed, niches were added in ﬂanking walls of the subsidiary chambers, and new walls
were constructed to connect these chambers to the exterior wall of the main shrine. Marijke
Klokke has similarly found two phases in the central temple based on her stylistic analysis,
and she dates the renovation of the central temple to between 828 and 855, several decades
later than Dumarçay and closer in time to a similar renovation of the central temple at
Paharpur ( Klokke 2006 , p. 57).
3.2. A Royal Temple?
It is a measure of the little that is known about Candi Sewu that we do not know
what the monumental temple complex was called by those who built it. Candi Sewu is
conventionally associated with two stone inscriptions based on their ﬁnd-spots, content,
and dates relative to the architecture itself, however. And if the connection between this
Buddhist temple complex and these inscriptions is allowed, we learn a little more. The
K˘elurak Inscription was found 300 m south of Candi Sewu near Candi Lumbung and
consists of twenty verses in Sanskrit carved in a northern Indian Siddham ¯atr.k¯a script
(Krom 1923 , p. 272; Sarkar 1971 , pp. 41–47). This inscription is dated to the 7th month of
´Saka year 704 (782 CE) and it gloriﬁes the bodhisattva Mañju´ sr ¯ı while recording the deeds of
King Sa ˙ngr¯amadhanañjaya (r. c. 775–800), who describes it as an ‘ornament of the ´Sailendra
dynasty’ ( ´ sailendra-va ˙m´ sa-tilaka ) and a ‘destroyer of the best brave enemies’ ( vairi-vara-v ¯ıra-
mardana ). Speciﬁcally, it remembers the ´Sailendra king Sa ˙ngr¯amadhanañjaya’s victory over
the ‘kings of all quarters’ ( dikcakra-r ¯aja-vijaya-arjita-vikrame n.a) and his establishment of an
image of the bodhisattva Mañju´ sr ¯ı (mañju´ sr ¯ı-pratim ¯a-kr.tih.).
This image ( pratim ¯a) of the bodhisattva Mañju´ sr ¯ı was likely a sculpture, and the
inscription identiﬁed it as a ‘pillar of glory’ ( k¯ırtta-stambha )—an ‘unparalleled bridge of
religion’ ( atula-dharmma-setu h.). More speciﬁcally, it associates this image of Mañju´ sr ¯ı
with the protection of all beings ( raks.a-artha.msarva-satv ¯an¯a.m) and the country from its
enemies ( de´ sasya-tasya-para- ¯arks.¯a.m). Interestingly, the K ˘elurak Inscription also describes the
bodhisattva Mañju´ sr ¯ı (or Mañjuv ¯ac, ‘Gentle-Voiced’) as ‘possessing the glory of Brahm ¯a-
Vis.n.u-Mahe´ svara, the Lord containing all the gods’ ( ´ sr¯ım¯an brahm ¯a vis.n.urmmahe´ svara h.sarva-
deva-maya h.sv¯am¯ı). This may reﬂect the understanding that this bodhisattva is capable
of appropriating the teachings and capacities of these Brahmanical gods, as he does in
several passages of the circa 8th-century Buddhist text the Mañju´ sr ¯ıyam ¯ulakalpa (Granoff
2000 , pp. 404–12). It might also reveal a more particular conception of the bodhisattva
Mañju´ sr ¯ı that was developing in this period, as Mark Long has discussed in reference to
a tantric Buddhist text, the N ¯amasa ˙ng¯ıti (Long 2015 , pp. 7–9). The K ˘elurak Inscription
is perhaps most famous, however, for its reference to a preceptor ( guru ) from Bengal
(Gaud.¯ı-dv¯ıpa) called Kum ¯aragho s.a, who likely composed the inscription and is singled
out and eulogised for his role in the activities recorded in connection to the ´Sailendra
King Sa ˙ngr¯amadhanañjaya.
Another stone inscription was found during the clearance of the outer row of shrines
on the southwestern side of the Candi Sewu complex itself ( Dumarçay 1981 , p. 3; Grifﬁths
2020 ).5This is the so-called Mañju´ sr ¯ıgr.ha Inscription, composed in Old Malay, inscribed in
the Old Javanese script, and dated to the 8th month of ´Saka year 715 (792 CE)—a decade
after the K ˘elurak Inscription. The Mañju´ sr ¯ıgr.ha Inscription eulogises a temple ( pr¯as¯ada)
called the ‘House of Mañju´ sr ¯ı’ (mañju´ sr ¯ı-gr.ha) and identiﬁes the merit accrued through its
construction (?) with a bodhisattva vow ( pran.idh¯ana) to attain awakening ( Grifﬁths 2020 ,
pp. 230–36). It moreover associates this temple with a vision seen by a Javanese nobleman
(Jav. da˙n n¯ayaka ) called L ¯urava ˙n, who saw the House of Mañju´ sr ¯ı ‘while at the Vajr ¯asana’.
As Arlo Grifﬁths has discussed, much of this inscription remains unclear and this particular

--- [Page 38] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 15 of 32
passage may mean that L ¯urava ˙n visited the Vajr ¯asana (i.e., Bodhgaya) in India, that he saw
this place internally as a vision, or that he saw an image or a temple that he associated with
Vajr¯asana iconographically, or in some other way (ibid., p. 245, note 86).
Marijke Klokke is correct to observe that the relationship between these inscriptions
and Candi Sewu is not deﬁnite, not least because both inscriptions could have been moved
(Klokke 2006 , p. 57). I believe that the similar dates of these inscriptions, their proximity in
time to the activity at Candi Sewu, and their ﬁnd-spots support their value as sources for
this site ( van Lohuizen-de Leeuw 1981 , pp. 19–20). Depending on how one understands
the connection between these two inscriptions and Candi Sewu, one may learn that a
temple or shrine within the Candi Sewu complex was called the House of Mañju´ sr ¯ı and
that this structure was associated with a named Javanese nobleman and his vision of the
Vajr¯asana, perhaps in a patronage relationship. It may never be known whether the image
of Mañju´ sr ¯ı referred to in connection to King Sa ˙ngr¯amadhanañjaya and his eastern Indian
preceptor Kum ¯aragho s.a is the same as that in L ¯urava ˙n’s House of Mañju´ sr ¯ı. Even if no
direct connection between these two inscriptions and Candi Sewu is allowed, they still
provide a window into the social and religious situation on the Kewu Plain in the late 8th
century, where noblemen, kings, and their Buddhist preceptors used temples and images
to commemorate their worldly achievements and satisfy their spiritual aspirations.
4. Samye Monastery Central Tibet
4.1. The First Monastery in Tibet
Samye Monastery (Tib. Bsam yas mi ’gyur lhun grub gtsug lag khang ; ‘The Spontaneous
Unchanging Inconceivable Temple’) sits near the northern bank of the Yarlung Tsangpo
River in the Chimpu Valley, central Tibet (Figure 18). It is one of very few surviving
Buddhist institutions that are known to have been established in the Imperial Period
(c.618–848) during the ‘ﬁrst transmission’ of Buddhism to Tibet (Vitali 1990 , pp. 5–25).
Samye is perhaps most famous as the venue of the legendary debate between the Indian
monk ´S¯antarak s.ita (or his disciple Kamala´ s ¯ıla) and his Chinese counterpart, Heshan Mo-
heyan ( ﬂ. 8th century) held by King Khri Srong lde brtsan (r. c. 755–794) to determine
the direction of Buddhism in Tibet ( Dalton 2004 ). The architectural history of Samye
presents a signiﬁcant challenge, however. As it appears today, the Samye complex is the
product of several phases of destruction and reconstruction. We know, for example, that
the monastery was rebuilt at least partly on three occasions between the 17th and 19th
centuries, and again in the 1980s following damage sustained in the 1960s ( Lokesh Chan-
dra 1961 , pp. 10–11; Tenpa 2021 ). Nevertheless, the layout of this temple complex today
and several buildings within it appear broadly consistent with their appearance in earlier
photographs, paintings, and descriptions and can be discussed historically, if only in broad
terms ( Chayet 1988 , pp. 19–29; Mémet 1988 , pp. 30–32).
The Samye complex comprises numerous shrines and buildings of various kinds
arranged around a central temple (Tib. dbu rtse ) enclosed by a roughly circular wall
(Figure 19). Due to Samye’s history of reconstruction, we cannot determine with certainty
how the complex was originally built, but it was likely constructed by ﬁlling wooden
frames with sun-dried brick masonry and rammed earth, then coating the entire structure
with a thick layer of plaster, followed by white-washing and painting in broad planes of red
and black. While the central temple appears to be a single structure, it is made up of three
separate parts: an east-facing main shrine with a pillared assembly hall (Tib. du khang ) at the
centre is surrounded by two separate galleries, both of which project in the middle of each
side to give the outward impression of a cruciform structure. The main shrine building has
three storeys, and these are popularly thought to reﬂect different styles—Tibetan, Indian,
and Chinese—leading to its traditional name: the ‘[temple of] three kinds’ (Tib. rigs gsum ).
The low superstructure of the central temple today comprises several tiered roofs with
projecting eaves covered in gold, at the very middle of which are four small cupolas or turrets
surrounding a larger ﬁnial (Figure 20). The programme of the sculptures enshrined within
the central temple at Samye has inevitably changed over time (Tenpa 2021 , pp. 10–11).

--- [Page 39] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 16 of 32
And today, the three shrines on its three ﬂoors contain images corresponding to the ‘three
bodies’ of the Buddha ( trik¯aya; Tib. sku gsum ): an image of ´Sakyamuni on the ground
ﬂoor, Vairocana on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, and Sarvavid Vairocana on the upper ﬂoor. Several of
the smaller shrines in the surrounding complex appear to communicate with projections
in the plan of the central temple itself—four mid-sized shrines face towards the cardinal
projections and four coloured st¯upas (Tib. chod rten ) sit at intervals between them.Śā
ṣ śī
 
Figure 18. Map showing the location of Samye Monastery. (Source: Author).ﬀ
ā Ś
Figure 19. Architectural plan of Samye Monastery. (Source: Author).

--- [Page 40] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 17 of 32
ū
 
Figure 20. Photograph of the central temple at Samye Monastery. (Source: Gerd Eichmann, Creative
Commons BY-SA 4.0).
4.2. A State-Supporting Temple
The events surrounding the construction of Samye Monastery may be pieced together
from several inscriptions and historical accounts. Both the Samye Pillar Inscription, which
is found nearby at Drakmar, and the Samye Bell Inscription are understood to be con-
temporary to the establishment of Samye ( Walter and Beckwith 2010 , pp. 303–4). The
Pillar Inscription was likely composed during the reign of King Khri Srong lde brtsan
shortly after the establishment of the Samye Monastery, and it principally records a vow
(Tib. yi dam ) made by the king, his heirs, lords, and ministers that the monastery (Tib.
gtsug lag khang ) at Samye and those at Ra sa (Lhasa) and Drakmar would be supported in
perpetuity without reduction or diminishment (Tib. de las myi dbri myi ) over successive
generations of kings (Tib. bstan po yab sras ) (Richardson 1985 , pp. 26–31; van Schaik and
Iwao 2009 , pp. 11–12). This inscription also refers to an ‘explanatory edict’ (Tib. bka mchid )
that, as Lewis Doney has argued, further situates the construction of Samye Monastery
within a project to associate the propagation of Buddhism with the rule of the Tibetan
kings and cultivates the sense that King Khri Srong lde brtsan speciﬁcally was a dharma
king (Tib. chos rgyal ) on the path to awakening (Tib. byang chub )(Coblin 1990 , pp. 165–85;
Doney 2014 , p. 72). The shorter Samye Bell Inscription is found on a bronze bell commis-
sioned by Khri Srong lde brtsan’s queen, Rgyal mo brtsan, and son, and it is composed in
the manner of an ‘aspirational prayer’ (Tib. smon lam ); it supports the acquisition of merit
for the sake of the Three Jewels and the ten directions in favour of King Khri Srong lde
brtsan and his path to awakening ( Li and Coblin 1987 , pp. 332–39).
Both inscriptions tell us something about the social and ide ological context in which
the Samye Monastery was built, particularly the relationsh ip between the establishment of
this monastery and the wider project of its founding king, re vealing the intersection between
architectural activity and general worldly and spiritual a spirations. Doney has argued that
the establishment of Samye should be understood within a bro ader effort to present temple-
building as a traditional responsibility of a Buddhist king and, specifically, to legitimise the
reign of Khri Srong lde brstan; a feature that becomes more ap parent in epitaphs composed
after the death of this king identifying him as a mah¯abodhisattva (Tib. byang chub chen po )
(Doney 2011 , p. 109). A 9th-century prayer found at Dunhuang further cul tivates this idea
by situating this Tibetan king and his post-mortem awakenin g in relation to three historical
Indian kings: ‘Dharm ¯a´ soka, Kanis .k¯a, and ´S¯ıl¯aditya’ (ibid., p. 116).

--- [Page 41] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 18 of 32
Our understanding of Samye and its construction is signiﬁcantly improved by a
narrative account of the event contained in The Testament of Ba (Tib. dba’ bzhed ), a lengthy
chronicle of the aristocratic Ba Family ( Stein 1961 ;Wangdu and Diemberger 2000 ). The use
of this text as a historical source was for a long time disputed on the understanding that
it was composed many centuries after the events it describes (van der Kuijp 1984 , p. 180).
However, the recent discovery of fragments of this text in the British Library reveals that
signiﬁcant parts of this narrative were circulating widely by the 9th or 10th century ( van
Schaik and Iwao 2009 ;Doney 2011 , p. 34).6Among these early fragments are sections
narrating the arrival of the eastern Indian monk ´S¯antarak s.ita at the court of Khri Srong
lde brtsan immediately before the establishment of Samye Monastery ( Doney 2011 , p. 32).
And this section is crucial to my understanding of the transregional architectural history of
Samye. I summarise this narrative here based on a manuscript of The Testament of Ba dated
to the 14th century published by Pasang Wangdu and Hildegard Diemberger ( Wangdu and
Diemberger 2000 , p. 34).
The Tibetan aristocrat Ba Salnang travelled to eastern India in the reign of Khri Srong
lde brtsan, where he worshipped at the Mah ¯abodhi temple at Bodhgaya and visited the
Great Monastery at Nalanda before helping to persuade the renowned monk ´S¯antarak s.ita
to visit Tibet and support the transmission of Buddhism ( Wangdu and Diemberger 2000 ,
pp. 39–73). ´S¯antarak s.ita—who is referred to as Up¯adhy ¯aya Bodhisattva (Tib. mkhan po bo
dhi sa twa )—arrives in Tibet and declares that King Khri Srong lde brtsan had reached ‘the
right age to build a temple’, and he offers his services in its establishment. It is unclear how
closely to read this passage, but it would suggest that it was conventionally understood
that a Buddhist king was expected to build a temple at a particular stage in their life. The
Indian monk proceeds to survey the land for imperfections and identiﬁes the ideal place
for this new temple-monastery. The Indian monk then requests that the king send for the
tantric ritual ofﬁciant ( ¯ac¯arya) Padmasambhava, who lived in O d.d.iy¯ana (the Swat Valley
in Pakistan) and a mason (Tib. phywa mkhan ) from Nepal (Tib. bal yul ) (Wangdu and
Diemberger 2000 , note 141). Both Padmasambhava and the unnamed architect from Nepal
were presumably understood to have participated in the construction of Samye Monastery
according to their expertise: the legendary Padmasambhava performing k¯ıla(Tib. phur ba )
rituals to subdue the ground, and the architect guiding construction, perhaps by laying out
the complex.
The Testament of Ba dates the construction of Samye Monastery to four years between
the Hare Year (775 CE) and the Sheep Year (779 CE), when ´S¯antarak s.ita is said to have
performed the foundation ritual ( Wangdu and Diemberger 2000 , note 201). Interestingly,
this narrative identiﬁes speciﬁc shrines within the complex with named ministers of the
king, suggesting that the Tibetan polity was architecturally reﬂected in Samye Monastery
(Tucci 1956 , p. 280).7On completion, the monk ´S¯antarak s.ita is said to have smeared
earth onto the king’s forehead and pronounced that the construction was ‘excellently
accomplished’ (Tib. si ti pha la ) (Wangdu and Diemberger 2000 , p. 73). ´S¯antarak s.ita then
performed the ritual consecration (Tib. pra ti ), at which time a light issued from the top
of the central temple that he identiﬁed as ‘the light of Amit ¯abha’s coming’ and ordered a
shrine of Amit ¯abha be built on the upper storey (Tib. yang thog ) of the temple ( Wangdu and
Diemberger 2000 , pp. 64–65).
The narrative contained in the Testament of Ba points to several general and speciﬁc
ways in which Samye Monastery was understood. It identiﬁes the establishment of this
monastery with state support and the worldly ambitions and spiritual aspirations of its
founder king. It tells us that the boundary wall of the complex demarcated a sacred,
puriﬁed space regulated by the washing of hands and feet and a prohibition on animals
(Wangdu and Diemberger 2000 , p. 68). It also associates the spatial layout and structure of
the Samye Monastery complex to several ‘continents’ (Tib. gling ) and ‘subcontinents’ (Tib.
gling phan ), relating its architecture to ideas about geography and cosmology ( Vitali 1990 ,
pp. 256–57, note 374; Wangdu and Diemberger 2000 , p. 67; Huntington 2019 , p. 173). In one
version, this text also records ´S¯antarak s.ita’s decision to model Samye Monastery on the

--- [Page 42] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 19 of 32
Great Monastery of Udda n.d.apura, an institution that is more or less lost archaeologically
but is understood to have been established by the ﬁrst P ¯ala King Gop ¯ala(r. c. 750–775)—the
progenitor of the P ¯ala dynasty and father of Dharmap ¯ala ( Wangdu and Diemberger 2000 ,
note 213; Beglar 1878 , pp. 75–77). Some of these details may not date to the earliest
recension of this text, and it is beyond the scope of this study to interrogate this further.
But this discussion of the establishment of the Samye Monastery in the late 770s prompts
several points of comparison with the activity at Paharpur in eastern India and Candi Sewu
in central Java in the subsequent decades.
5. Comparison
5.1. Temple-Monasteries and Mandalas
When comparing the three Buddhist temple-monastery complexes mentioned above,
several similarities emerge, not only in their architectural features but also in the social and
ideological contexts surrounding their construction. I argue that these features reveal a
particular set of architectural ideas and practices that was carried between eastern India,
Tibet, and central Java at the end of the 8th century. Paharpur, Candi Sewu, and Samye
Monastery share a broad spatial arrangement: a central temple enclosed by a systematic
series of subsidiary structures and a clearly deﬁned boundary (Figure 21). While this may
seem too broad a comparison to be revealing, particularly when these built environments
differ in the materials and technology of construction and the style of their ornament, it is
important to note that this feature is distinctive; it is not found at most other major Buddhist
centres in this period.8ā
Śā ṣ
n ̣ d ̣
ā ā
ā ā
ﬀ
Figure 21. Comparison of the architectural plans of Paharpur, Candi Sewu, and Samye Monastery.
(Source: Author).
The layout of these temple-monasteries is indicative of their use as built environments
and is suggestive of their conceptual signiﬁcance within a cosmic and ritual imagination.
The arrangement of these temple-monasteries encourages movement along two axes. One
leads from the periphery to the centre—east to west at Candi Sewu and Samye, and north
to south at Paharpur. The other axis ﬂows centripetally, guiding movement around a series
of shrines towards the central temple. This latter axis of movement is, of course, ancient in
a Buddhist context: the circumambulation of a sacred structure with one’s right side facing
inwards ( pradak s.in.am) is an act of devotion and respect apparent in the ancient Buddhist
st¯upas and Brahmanical temples too.
The systematic and largely symmetrical arrangement of the three temple-monasteries
discussed above, and the hypothetical identiﬁcation of the lost sculpture within them, has
led scholars to independently identify each with either a generalised or speciﬁc tantric
Buddhist mandala, such as those described in the 8th-century Sarva-tath ¯agata-tattva-sa ˙ngraha .
Following this hypothesis, the iconographic arrangement of the images installed within the

--- [Page 43] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 20 of 32
central temple and surrounding shrines is understood to correspond to the assembly of
deities described in this text centred on the buddhas Vairocana, Ratnasambhava, Amit ¯abha,
and Amoghasiddhi (Figure 22).tt
ṣṇ
ū
ā tt
ṅ
ā
ā n ̣ d ̣ ā tt ṅ
Figure 22. Diagram of the Vajradh ¯atu-ma n.d.ala according to the Sarva-tath ¯agata-tattva-sa ˙ngraha .
(Source: Author).
The relationship between Candi Sewu and the Vajradh ¯atu-ma n.d.ala of the Sarva-
tath¯agata-tattva-sa ˙ngraha was ﬁrst suggested by F. D. K. Bosch, and this idea has been
developed by others more recently ( Bosch 1961 , pp. 124–30; Lokesh Chandra 1979 ;Long
2015 ). Jacques Dumarçay, for example, supported this identiﬁcation with the caveats that
Candi Sewu was built in two phases, and the association between this temple complex and
this mandala was only possible after the second phase ( Dumarçay 1981 , pp. 29–33). And,
secondly, he argued that the temple was dedicated to the bodhisattva Mañju´ sr ¯ı based on
his interpretation of the two inscriptions I have discussed above and could not, therefore,
correspond exactly with the Vajradh ¯atu-ma n.d.ala, which does not include this bodhisattva.
In response to Dumarçay, Mark Long has argued that Candi Sewu may be associated
with a particular variation of the Vajradh ¯atu-ma n.d.ala known to the 8th-century Indian
monk Vil ¯asavajra, with whom the ´Sailendra-guru Kum ¯aragho s.a might reasonably have
been familiar ( Long 2015 , pp. 7–8 and note 37). Vil ¯asavajra’s Vajradh ¯atu-ma n.d.ala includes
Vajrasattva as a sixth Buddha alongside the standard ﬁve Buddhas and, as Long has argued,
this mandala may be hypothetically associated with the number and position of shrines in
the central temple at Candi Sewu. In Vil ¯asavajra’s Vajradh ¯atu-ma n.d.ala, the central deity
Vajrasattva may be understood to have had a subtle and multivalent relationship with
Mañju´ sr ¯ı (Mañjughos .a) (ibid., pp. 13–17 and Table 4).
Although K. N. Dikshit did not associate the architecture at Paharpur with a tantric
Buddhist mandala, instead viewing it within a multi-religious history of temple-building, it
is increasingly common to interpret the vast complex in these terms ( Gail 1999 ;Samuel 2002 ;
Kozicz 2022 ). And the four empty shrines of Paharpur’s central temple have been identi-
ﬁed according to the Vajradh ¯atu-ma n.d.ala described in the Sarva-tath ¯agata-tattva-sa ˙ngraha :

--- [Page 44] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 21 of 32
Vairocana at the centre (or in the missing superstructure), surrounded by Ratnasambhava,
Amit ¯abha, and Amoghasiddhi in their respective directional shrines. However, the number
and placement of shrines in the central temple and in the surrounding complex do not
appear to support the close correspondence that has been proposed at Candi Sewu, most
recently by Mark Long.
Despite the little that survives of its original architecture and sculpture, textual sources
provide us with a signiﬁcant discourse about the historical conception of the Samye
Monastery. While it is not uncommon to read that Samye was designed as a representation
of the Vajradh ¯atu-ma n.d.ala in architectural form in scholarly literature (e.g., Kapstein 2001 ,
p. 43), the reality seems more complicated, Anne Chayet and Eric Huntington have both
observed ( Chayet 1988 , pp. 19–29; Huntington 2019 , pp. 172–75). The conception of
Samye Monastery appears to have transformed over time: while this temple-monastery
was initially related to a general Indic cosmology, increasingly explicit associations with
a taantric Buddhist mandala of deities emerged over time. The Testament of Ba describes
Samye Monastery in a way that is suggestive of Mount Sumeru surrounded by the four
continents—that is, as a representation of the Indic cosmos (Figure 23). In his History of
Buddhism in India and Tibet Butön Rinchen Drub (1290–1364) provides a similar cosmological
interpretation, as does Gö Lotsawa Zhönnu-pel (1392–1481) in the Blue Annals (Roerich
1949 , pp. 69–70; Obermiller 1986 , pp. 188–90).
ā n ̣ d ̣
ﬀ
tt
Figure 23. Diagram of Indic cosmology (modiﬁed after Huntington 2019 , Figure 1.9).
(Source: Author).
The relationship between these three late 8th-century temple-monasteries and a tantric
Buddhist mandala, such as the Vajradh ¯atu-ma n.d.ala, presents two problems requiring
different approaches. The ﬁrst problem relates to their physical history, which, in each case,
remains obscure: there is little material evidence to conﬁrm or refute the hypothesis that the
principal shrines in any of these complexes initially contained images corresponding to this
or any other mandala. The second problem concerns the relationship between architectural
production and tantric Buddhist mandalas described in texts generally. This is both a
problem of meaning and architectural form, and a question of mandalas in the history of

--- [Page 45] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 22 of 32
Buddhist art. While mandalas do appear in Sanskrit texts in the 8th century, if not before,
and they are made as drawings and paintings on cloth by Buddhists in East Asia, there
remains little and only ambiguous evidence for their widespread use among mainstream
Buddhist communities in Indian and Southeast Asian contexts at this time ( Luczanits 2022 ;
Linrothe 2022 ).
Without discounting the possibility that these three temple-monastery complexes
were designed to have a formal relationship with a tantric Buddhist mandala, it must be
remembered that the mandalas described in texts did not emerge from nothing; they have
historical and conceptual relationships to a range of other pre-existing ideas and practices
in rituals and visual cultures. In the Sarva-tath ¯agata-tattva-sa ˙ngraha itself, the Vajradh ¯atu-
man.d.ala is introduced through a narrative retelling of Buddhist awakening: the initial
antagonist, Sarv ¯arthasiddhi (here, not, Siddh ¯artha), is consecrated ( abhis.eka) and receives
thevajra -name ‘Vajradh ¯atu’ in an assembly of buddhas in Akani s.t.ha Heaven. He then
ascends to the peak of Mount Sumeru, where he is enthroned on a lion throne ( sim.h¯asana )
within a vajra-jewelled peaked temple ( vajra-ma n.i-ratna-´ sikhara-ku t.¯ag¯ara) in the presence
of the buddhas Ak s.obhya, Ratnasambhava, Loke´ svar ¯aja (Amit ¯abha), and Amoghasiddhi
forming the Vajradh ¯atu-man .d.ala (Lokesh Chandra 1987 , pp. 4–5).
This narrative and the image of a buddha enthroned in an assembly of buddhas on
the peak of Mount Sumeru interacts with a range of Buddhist and multi-religious ideas
about the heavens and the Indic cosmos. It also depends on architectural imagery: the
peaked temple ( k¯ut.¯ag¯ara) in this text was a recurrent feature both in tantric mandalas
and Buddhist texts over a longer period ( Bollée 1983 ;Copplestone 2024 , pp. 143–49).
The internal visualisation (and description) of this architecture constitutes the ‘cultivation
stage’ ( utpattikrama ) of mandalas described in Buddhist Tantras, in which a practitioner
imagines this temple atop Mount Sumeru, often with a four-part internal structure of
shrines. The broader relationship between architecture, real and imagined, and tantric
Buddhist mandalas is beyond the scope of this paper, as is the speciﬁc question of the
possible relationship between the design of the temple-monasteries at Paharpur, Candi
Sewu, and Samye Monastery and the tantric Buddhist mandala. I want to emphasise the
complexity, contingency, and ﬂuidity inherent to any such relationship between a building
and an abstruse textual prescription or ritual device.
The art and architecture of Buddhist monasteries in India and their framing in in-
scriptions have engaged with a range of cosmological ideas from at least the middle of
the ﬁrst millennium CE when this architectural tradition began to play with the difference
between mundane monastic dormitories and supramundane assemblies in heavenly realms
(Tournier 2020 , pp. 206–10). This development is consistent with ideas that were emerging
across the region and beyond Buddhist communities. As Phyllis Granoff has convincingly
argued with respect to temples dedicated to Hindu gods in mediaeval India, modern
scholars often attempt to connect architectural forms to speciﬁc and abstruse symbolic
systems when the texts closely associated with them tend to cultivate broader relationships
with a deity’s immanent presence in a heavenly palatial residence ( Granoff 1997 ).
Architecture rarely embodies singular meanings, and this is true of temples and
monasteries built across Buddhist contexts in mediaeval Asia. The design and construction
of the temple-monasteries at Paharpur, Candi Sewu, and Samye Monastery, I argue, should
be understood on a continuum of ideas without necessarily adhering to any single ﬁxed
meaning—for which, in any case, the arguments must remain hypothetical pending further
discoveries. What stands out in the history of Buddhist architecture is the scholarly distance
between monumental Buddhist temple projects and the ideas and practices linked to
royal temple-building across various religious communities towards the end of the ﬁrst
millennium CE.
5.2. Buddhism’s Imperial Temples
While it may be assumed that kings had always built Buddhist temples to protect the
polity, commemorate their achievements, and fulﬁl both spiritual and worldly ambitions, it

--- [Page 46] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 23 of 32
is only around the turn of the 9th century that these ideas began to be clearly expressed in
inscriptions and, I argue, reﬂected in the design of these Buddhist temple-monasteries. The
establishment of the King Dharmap ¯ala Great Monastery at Sompura, as I have previously
mentioned, is closely tied to the internal dynamics of the emerging P ¯ala polity. Similarly,
under King Khri Srong lde brtsan and with the guidance of the eastern Indian monk
´S¯antarak s.ita, the Samye Monastery was founded through a comparable system, whereby
the structures and institutions of this temple-monastery reﬂected the organisation of the
Tibetan Empire.
Inscriptions related to the establishment of Samye Monastery locate this architectural
project at the intersection of several worldly and supramundane aspirations: the project
to cultivate Khri Srong lde brtsan as a dharma king on the path to awakening, and to
support the longevity of his dynasty. As Christopher Beckwith has observed, the Samye
Monastery instantiated the king’s authority over the universe in new and distinctive ways
(Beckwith 1987 , pp. 173–96). The construction of the King Dharmap ¯ala Great Monastery,
mobilised signiﬁcant resources to similar objectives. Although no sources explicitly detail
King Dharmap ¯ala’s political project, many of the deﬁning features of P ¯ala rule, which
would persist for four centuries, began to take shape during his reign, such as the stan-
dardisation of the dynasty’s copper plate charters ( Datta 2017b ). The late 8th century also
marked a critical phase in the protracted conﬂict between the P ¯alas and their subcontinental
rivals—the R¯as.t.rak¯ut.as and the Gurjara-Pratih ¯aras—with the military victories of this pe-
riod remembered in copper plates issued by P ¯ala kings for centuries (Sircar 1985 , pp. 43–47;
Furui 2024 ).
The Mañju´ sr ¯ıgr.ha Inscription offers a glimpse into late 8th-century society on the Kewu
Plain, where artistic production, and possibly tantric ritual activity associated with the
bodhisattva Mañju´ sr ¯ı, were harnessed to support the ´Sailendra King Sa ˙ngr¯amadhanañjaya,
under the guidance of the eastern Indian monk Kum ¯aragho s.a. If this inscription is con-
sidered in relation to Candi Sewu, the temple-monastery may be identiﬁed as a temple
of Mañju´ sr ¯ı, established to commemorate the king’s martial and worldly achievements
while also serving to protect the polity. The K ˘elurak Inscription may further implicate this
temple-complex within a system of shared patronage reﬂecting the political organisation
of the ´Sailendra polity. In this context, one might ask whether the nobleman L ¯urava ˙n (Jav.
da˙n n¯ayaka ) established a shrine within the larger royal temple complex on the Kewu Plain
in the 790s, in a manner similar to his contemporaries Bhadra n.¯aga, Sa n.h¯ayikay ¯a, and the
ministers of Khri Srong lde brtsan, who did so in northern Bengal and central Tibet around
the same time.
In this respect, these three temple-monasteries may be understood as Buddhist in-
ﬂexions of the ‘Imperial Temple’ as deﬁned by Ronald Inden and Hermann Kulke ( Kulke
2001a ,2001b ;Inden 1985 ,2000 , p. 54). Both Inden and Kulke have proposed the concept of
the Imperial Temple as a category to explore the connections between architectural monu-
mentality, the act of temple-building, and the social, political, and cosmological aspirations
that emerged in early mediaeval India. Kulke deﬁnes the Imperial Temple in practical and
ritualistic terms, viewing it as the central institution of early mediaeval society through
which rulers consolidated their power and uniﬁed a diverse population under a singular
religious and political order. Inden, on the other hand, interprets the Imperial Temple as
fundamental to the ideology of kingship during this period, seeing it as the culminating
event in the narrative of royal cosmo-political supremacy, embodying the world system
established by the founding king and his chosen religious community.
According to Inden, the paradigmatic Imperial Temple is described in the
Vis.n.udharmottara-pur ¯an.a—an encyclopaedic treatise composed or compiled in a P ¯añcar ¯atra
Vais.n.ava context, likely at the Karko t.a court in Kashmir during the 8th century. Speciﬁcally,
Inden locates the paradigmatic Imperial Temple in the Sarvatobhadra Temple ( sarvatobhadra-
pr¯as¯ada) described as the ﬁnal temple in a list of 101 temples in this text. This temple is
familiar to art historians through Stella Kramrisch’s discussion in The Hindu Temple (1946),
which included a plan of the structure ( Kramrisch 1946 , p. 418). The Sarvatobhadra Temple

--- [Page 47] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 24 of 32
described in this text is, in fact, a complex. At its centre stands a temple consisting of a
four-sided platform with a staircase on each side, supporting four shrines, each housing
one of the four aspects of Vis .n.u (Figure 24) (Shah 1958 , pp. 243–48, vv. 87.1–63).āā
ṣn ̣
āā ṣn ̣ tt ūān ̣
ā
ṣn ̣
ṣṇ tt āṇ
tt ā ṣn ̣
Figure 24. Diagram of the Sarvatobhadrapr ¯as¯ada according to the Vis.n.udharmottara-pur ¯an.a.
(Source: Author).
The central temple described in this text is situated within a vast courtyard ﬁlled with
celestial waters and enclosed by a compound wall lined with ‘cave shrines’ ( garbhaguh ¯a),
which house additional images of Vi s.n.u. The description of the Sarvatobhadra Temple
in the Vis.n.udharmottara-pur ¯an.ais addressed to an unnamed king and spoken by the sage
Markandeya. It concludes by enumerating the various beneﬁts of the temple: the king for
whom it is built will be reborn as a universal ruler ( cakravartin ), erase his sins, be reborn in
heaven, and eventually attain union ( s¯ayujya ) with Vi s.n.u. Additionally, one who merely
sees the temple will be freed from sin and acquire merit ( pun.ya), and anyone who enters
the temple will be protected from disease, calamity, and unnatural death.
No temple complex in India has been found that corresponds in every detail to the
textual prescriptions of the Sarvatobhadra Temple described in the Vis.n.udharmottara-pur ¯an.a,
nor should we expect to ﬁnd one. This textual prescription has, however, been compared
to several mediaeval temple projects. For example, Michael Meister has argued that
the unﬁnished 8th-century rock-cut ´Saiva temple at Masrur in Himachal Pradesh, India,
corresponds to many of the ideas outlined in the text. While it may not precisely match
the Sarvatobhadra Temple, it reﬂects similar concepts to such an extent that this ´Saiva
temple can be understood in comparable cosmo-political terms ( Meister 2006 ). Speciﬁcally,
Meister has argued that the Masrur temple complex was an unﬁnished intervention in the
cosmo-political rivalry between two kings—Ya´ sovarman (r. c. 725–754) and Mukt ¯ap¯ıd.a
Lalit ¯aditya (r. c. 724–760).
Ronald Inden, S. K. Saraswati, and others have identiﬁed formal correspondences
between the Sarvatobhadra Temple described in the Vis.n.udharmottara-pur ¯an.aand the archi-

--- [Page 48] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 25 of 32
tecture of the King Dharmap ¯ala Great Monastery ( Inden 2000 , p. 54; Saraswati 1976 , p. 85).
This comparison requires careful historical and methodological framing, especially when
extended to the two other temple-monasteries discussed in this study. The relationship
between a temple complex described in a text of this nature and an actual built temple
complex is not absolute. The gap between a brief textual description and the realities of
architectural activity is considerable, and it is not useful to imagine that architects and
builders were directly referring to such texts on mediaeval building sites. Nor should the
explicitly Vai s.n.ava orientation of the Vis.n.udharmottara-pur ¯an.abe taken to imply that this
type of temple complex was inherently Vai s.n.ava or exclusive to any particular religious
community. Instead, the compelling similarities between this textual prescription and the
architectural features and ideologies I have outlined suggest, in my view, that those who
designed and built the three temple-monasteries at Paharpur, Candi Sewu, and Samye
Monastery engaged with a system of ideas about temple-building that circulated widely
across regions and religious communities during the second half of the 8th century.
5.3. Material and Technology
The formal similarities between Paharpur, Candi Sewu, and Samye, while compelling
at the level of layout and broad outward appearance, must be reconciled with the signiﬁcant
differences that emerge upon closer comparison. Architecture is profoundly inﬂuenced
by the material and topographical conditions of a site—whether a material is scarce or
abundant plays a crucial role in determining construction choices, and the availability of
clay for bricks, quality stone, or wood for construction, for example, varies widely across
and between regions. The materials and construction technologies used at each of these sites
are entirely distinct, and these differences are reﬂected in the buildings’ appearances and
speciﬁc features. Paharpur, situated in a clay-rich, stone-poor region on the eastern edge
of the Ganges River basin, was constructed primarily from ﬁred bricks made in moulds
and earthenware plaques. This relatively lightweight material facilitated the creation of
large-scale structures but was less suited for deep ornamentation or ﬁgural carving. As a
result, architectural decoration at Paharpur is largely conﬁned to bands of patterned bricks
and hundreds of small plaques featuring ﬁgural forms.
Candi Sewu, by contrast, was constructed from blocks of volcanic rock, abundant
in Central Java. Once assembled, these blocks allowed sculptors to carve deep reliefs
into the stone, creating an ornamental surface that ﬂows seamlessly across much of the
temple’s exterior. Seams between the blocks were concealed by a thin layer of white plaster
applied to the entire structure. In central Tibet during the 8th century, the materials and
technologies available to architects were different yet again. While the exact construction
methods remain uncertain, the absence of high-quality clay and fuel for kilns, and the
scarcity of abundant stone would have constrained efforts to achieve signiﬁcant verticality
or detail in architectural ornamentation, apart from the use of polychromy and roof ﬁxtures.
The scale of the differences between the architecture of Paharpur, Samye, and Candi
Sewu, when examined closely, might seem to challenge the historical connections between
these three building projects that I argue for in this paper. However, I contend that material
and stylistic variations of this kind are exactly what we should expect in certain forms
of transregional exchange in the premodern world. When an architectural mode—the
conceptual framework and purpose of a building—is transmitted across vast geographic
and cultural distances, it is reasonable to assume that materials, technologies, and styles
might not be transferred with it. These differences do not simply indicate partial transmis-
sion; rather, they offer valuable insights into the nature of architectural knowledge and the
individuals who carried it across mediaeval Asia.
6. Architectural Exchange
6.1. Type, Style, and Mode
It is a central premise of architectural history that the degree of formal similarity
between two buildings often reﬂects the depth of the historical relationship between them.

--- [Page 49] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 26 of 32
Such similarities may suggest that the buildings share an architect, are linked to the same
patron, or were constructed around the same time. However, exceptions exist: formal
similarities may sometimes not indicate direct historical relationships, while, conversely,
buildings that appear very different have signiﬁcant historical connections. The latter is
often the case when the transregional exchange of architectural ideas occurs, when forms
are transmitted in parts, transposed into different materials, translated into distinct styles,
or transformed with new or altered meanings and associations. As a result, in this case, the
historical relationships between two or more buildings may be easily overlooked.
The practice of formal comparison in architectural history is often organised around
three categories of analysis—type, style, and mode—which correspond to distinct agents in-
volved in the design and construction of buildings, as Tamara Sears has argued
(Sears 2015 ). Even in cases in which sources detailing the social history of temple-building
are absent, it can be assumed that architectural production in mediaeval Asia was a so-
cially complex process. Labourers, artisans, architects, patrons, and religious experts each
contributed to speciﬁc parts of a temple, operating within their own networks and guided
by their individual or communal agendas. Temples, when viewed as a whole, represent a
composite of these various interacting agents and the distinct dispensations they brought
to the process of construction.
As Sears has shown, this framework can be used to extrapolate a hypothetical social
history from formal analysis: the plan and elevation of a temple, which often determine its
type, may correspond to the expectations or aspirations of a patron; the ornamental surface,
which typically deﬁnes its style, may reﬂect the work of a particular group of artisans; and
the main ritual image and the iconography of the temple’s sculpture generally align with
the ritual agenda of its religious community or a particular religious expert. Architectural
mode, as a historical category, overlaps several of these aspects but is more likely shaped by
the collaboration between the patron and their religious expert, rather than by the artisan
or architect.
Analogies with translation are, I think, useful in understanding transcultural archi-
tectural exchange. Linguists recognise that the relationship between form and content
is inherently unstable, and that the two can be transmitted either together or separately.
Similarly, in architectural exchange, the underlying ideas or agenda (content) may travel
independently from the form it takes, resulting in transformations of various kinds: mate-
rial, technological, or ideological. Speciﬁc architectural ideas or forms, much like a word or
phrase translated into a new language, undergo a transformation in which both loss and
gain can occur ( Koehler and Saletnik 2018 , p. 3). When the temple-monastery—and indeed
the Buddhist ‘Imperial Temple’ as a mode that I have identiﬁed with Paharpur, Samye
Monastery, and Candi Sewu was exchanged, we may expect it to undergo both material
and conceptual transformation in this manner.
This understanding of transregional architectural production further highlights the
inadequacy of common cultural geography categories such as ‘Indian’, ‘Javanese’, ‘Tibetan’,
or the more general terms ‘local’ and ‘foreign’. When applied to cases of transregional
exchange in architectural ideas—where buildings or built environments are recognized
as composites, and where formal and conceptual translation occurs—these categories
cease to be useful. Although often applied heuristically, such categories not only fail to
accurately reﬂect mediaeval identities, as far as we understand them, but they also ﬂatten
the composite and historically contingent character of transregional architectural activity.
6.2. Mechanisms of Exchange
F. D. K. Bosch argued that architects from Java, rather than India, were responsi-
ble for determining the design of temples built in Central Java during the 8th and 9th
centuries ( Bosch 1924 , pp. 30–35). He based this argument on a comparison of archi-
tectural ornamentation across a corpus that included major temples in Central Java as
well as South and Northwest India, notably overlooking parallels in eastern India (see
Jordaan 1999 , p. 224). A generation later, Reginald le May conducted a similar study, ar-

--- [Page 50] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 27 of 32
riving at the same conclusions ( Le May 1954 , pp. 28–29). Most recently, Marijke Klokke
compared motifs in temple ornamentation between Central Java and South India, ﬁnding
a broader and less coherent ﬁeld of correspondence, along with a pronounced degree of
‘localization’ (Klokke 2008 , pp. 154–66). This suggests that the artisans who carved relief
ornament onto temple surfaces in Central Java and South India were not the same and
were likely unfamiliar with each other’s motifs and practices.
Short of artisans travelling across the seas from India to Central Java—a scenario
neither suggested by historical sources nor supported by formal analyses of architectural
ornament—how else might transregional exchange have occurred? Heather Grossman
and Alicia Walker have outlined several ways in which architectural ideas circulated in
the mediaeval world, emphasizing the particular roles played by plans and drawings;
texts; mediatory objects such as tools, furniture and textiles; and memories ( Grossman and
Walker 2013 ). They argue that each mechanism carries a particular kind of information and
circulates in its own distinct way, with none being mutually exclusive. The transregional
exchange of architectural knowledge might occur through one or more of these mechanisms,
each of which informs architectural production in its own way.
Nearly a century ago, Bosch argued that architectural knowledge was exchanged
between India and Central Java through architectural treatises—texts that were transported
by Javanese pilgrims and studied by Javanese architects ( Bosch 1924 , pp. 15–17). Roy
Jordaan associated this exchange with the ´Sailendra kings themselves, who, he argued, had
their origins in eastern India and were familiar with the cultural practices of that region
(Jordaan 1999 ,2003 ).
The complexity of the comparisons undertaken in this study, along with its ﬁndings,
reveals several distinct mechanisms of exchange. At this point, I might choose to trace the
trajectories of one or more of these mechanisms—such as the appearance of textile patterns
originating in Sogdia and ceramics from southern China at Candi Sewu, for example. I
am arguing that a particular type of temple-monastery, and more broadly a mode of the
Buddhist Imperial Temple, was transmitted between eastern India, Central Java, and Tibet
at the end of the 8th century. This is not to suggest that other networks of exchange, or
indeed local invention, were not also active at these sites during this period and across
these regions. However, my focus is on exploring how this particular set of ideas and
practices was transmitted.
The Testament of Ba , as introduced above, associates three key individuals with the
architectural activity at Samye Monastery in Tibet during the second half of the 770s:
´S¯antarak s.ita, a monk from eastern India; Padmasambhava, a ritual expert from the Swat
Valley in Pakistan; and an unnamed architect from Nepal. This text does not mention the
labourers—masons, diggers, hod carriers, and others—who were surely also involved in
the construction and likely came to the site from the local area. This division of labour
may apply more generally—trans-local or even cosmopolitan mobile experts such as the
´Sailendra-guru Kum ¯araghos .a working alongside less-mobile artisans and labourers.
It can be assumed that the role played by these monks in the architectural activity in
Tibet and Central Java principally concerned the religious, ideological, and ritual aspects of
the building process. Of course, they would have carried with them speciﬁc knowledge
related to ritual practices, but also the memory of the temples and monasteries in which
they had lived or practised in eastern India—such as the Udda n.d.apura Great Monastery,
which has been mentioned in connection with ´S¯antarak s.ita. Memory of this kind constitutes
a distinct and highly portable form of architectural knowledge, one that focuses on the
religious, political, and social signiﬁcance of a building rather than the technical aspects of
its fabrication ( Grossman 2012 ).
These three temple-monasteries, I argue, form part of a late 8th-century ‘architectural
network’ operating within the broader social phenomenon that Tansen Sen has referred
to as the ‘Buddhist Cosmopolis’ ( Sen 2018 , p. 346). ´S¯antarak s.ita, Padmasambhava, and
Kum ¯aragho s.a are each, moreover, associated with the ‘ﬁrst wave’ in the transmission of
Buddhist tantra proposed by Andrea Acri ( Acri 2016 , pp. 1–26, Map 1.1). The spatial and

--- [Page 51] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 28 of 32
chronological limits of this architectural network, as well as its relationship with other such
networks from the same period, remain to be explored. The copper plate charter issued in
the 35th year of Devap ¯ala’s reign ( c. 850 CE), found at Nalanda Monastery in Bihar, reveals
the existence of other kinds of architectural networks. In this context, it is possible that
the´Sailendra King Sa ˙ngr¯amadhanañjaya, mentioned in the K ˘elurak Inscription, may have
served as a patron for a monastery in eastern India ( Shastri 1924 ).9Not only does this reveal
a multi-directional exchange in itself, but the date of this charter also aligns with a pivotal
period in temple-building in Central Java, when the ‘new cultural impulse’ described by
Jacques Dumarçay took hold ( Klokke 2006 , p. 51). It was also around this time that the
central temples at Paharpur and Candi Sewu appear to have been renovated.
7. Conclusions
This study has examined a speciﬁc case of architectural exchange between India,
Java, and Tibet that, I argue, took place in the ﬁnal decades of the 8th century. It has
focused on three Buddhist temple-monastery complexes: Paharpur, Candi Sewu, and
Samye Monastery. While the architecture at each site differs signiﬁcantly in terms of
materials, construction technologies, and style, similarities in layout, and particularly in
the broader ideological context, suggest that an architectural mode—the Buddhist Imperial
Temple—was transmitted alongside a speciﬁc type of temple-monastery complex across
vast geographical and cultural distances during this period.
These Buddhist temple-monasteries share features that suggest an effort to align the
built environment with a conception of the Indic cosmos, and possibly more speciﬁcally
with emerging ideas related to tantric Buddhist mandalas, if not directly with the Va-
jradh ¯atu-ma n.d.ala described in the Sarva-tath ¯agata-tattva-sa ˙ngraha . I have argued that the
layout and spatial arrangement of these three Buddhist temple-monasteries also invites
comparisons with a broader set of architectural ideas that became current across India and
religious communities in the 8th century. The Imperial Temples, such as the Sarvatobhadra
Temple described in the Vis.n.udharmottara-pur ¯an.a, suggest a wider base of multi-religious ar-
chitectural concepts within which, I propose, these three temple-monasteries were designed
and built.
The material and stylistic differences between these three temple-monasteries offer
valuable insights into the nature of architectural exchange during this period. I have argued
that this exchange reﬂects a transmission of architectural knowledge facilitated by Buddhist
monks and other ritual experts, rather than artists or artisans, who appear to have been
sourced more locally. However, these artisans may have interacted along other networks of
artistic exchange in textiles, ceramics, and other media that are beyond the scope of this
study. The involvement of Buddhist monks and ritual experts—and the mode of Buddhist
temple-building they promoted—enabled kings across this architectural network to express
their sovereignty and spiritual ambitions in a manner that carried transregional legitimacy.
Scholarship has often divided southern Asia into distinct spheres of cultural exchange,
typically differentiating between networks across the Indian Ocean and those over the
Himalayas. This distinction, particularly between maritime and trans-Himalayan land
routes, is especially prominent in the historiography of Buddhism, where the movement of
art and ideas between India, Southeast Asia, and Tibet has rarely been considered together.
In this context, this study has identiﬁed an architectural network that reveals the rapid
exchange of architectural ideas between eastern India, the island of Java, and central Tibet
in the ﬁnal decades of the 8th century.
Funding: This research and its publication have been partly supported by the French National
Research Agency (ANR), project MANTRA—Maritime Asian Networks of Buddhist Tantra (ANR-22-
CE27-015), coordinated by Andrea Acri (EPHE, PSL University, Paris).
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in the study are included in the
article, further inquiries can be directed to the author.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

--- [Page 52] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 29 of 32
Notes
1This geographic region emerged after the Second World War, ﬁrst appearing in the Allies’ South East Asia Command (SEAC).
Today, it is widely recognized by national and international organisations, and educational and cultural institutions.
2The Indian Museum copper plate charter (ll. 63–64) refers to apparently distinct communities of monks connected to the buildings
patronised by Bhadran .¯aga and San .h¯ayikay ¯a (Furui 2011 , p. 151).
3This dating is suggested by sealings and copper plate charters found at the site, which indicate that the Early Deva kings
lived before their P ¯ala counterparts ( Khan 1963 , p. 9). I am grateful to Ryosuke Furui for clarifying this point in a personal
communication (September 2024).
4A large copper-alloy sculpture of Avalokite´ svara was recovered during an excavation of the Ananda Vihara in 2002 and a bronze
sculpture of Vajrasattva was discovered at Bhoja Vihara in 1995.
5The Mañju´ sr ¯ıgr.ha Inscription, discovered in 1960 during the reconstruction of subsidiary temple no. 202 on the western side, is
now held at the Cultural Heritage Conservation Ofﬁce for Java’s Tengah Province (inv. no. 0002/BP3/AND/08).
6British Library Or.8210/S.9498A and Or.8210/S.13683C.
7Of the outer shrines (Tib. phyi’i lha khang ), the Trailokyavijaya shrine (Tib. khams gsum ) is connected to Tshe spong za, the Main
Grove shrine (Tib. dbu tshal ) is connected to Pho yong za, and the ‘taming shrine’ (Tib. dge rgyas ) is connected to ‘Bro za; a minister
called Khri bzan yab lhag took care of the whole ( Wangdu and Diemberger 2000 , p. 68). Each of these may also be associated
with shrines and temples beyond Samye Monastery.
8This layout of a monastery can be compared with the parallel lines of temples and monasteries seen at Nalanda in Bihar and the
much more irregular arrangement at Sarnath in Uttar Pradesh.
9This charter records the grant of land exempt from the usual obligations in favour of a monastery built at Nalanda by King
B¯alaputradeva of Suvar n.adv¯ıpa (i.e., Sumatra/Malay Peninsula) The charter eulogises B ¯alaputradeva as the grandson of a king
of Java ( yava-bh ¯umi) who was an ‘ornament of the ´Sailendra dynasty’ ( ´ sailendra-va ˙m´ sa-tilaka ).
References
Acri, Andrea. 2016. Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along Maritime Silk Routes, 7th–13th Century AD. In Esoteric Buddhism
in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons . Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 1–25.
Acri, Andrea. 2017. “Local” vs. “Cosmopolitan” in the Study of Premodern Southeast Asia. Suvannabhumi 9: 7–52.
Acri, Andrea, and Peter D. Sharrock. 2022. Introduction. In The Creative South: Buddhist and Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime Asia .
Edited by Andrea Acri and Peter D. Sharrock. Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, vol. 1, pp. 1–6.
Alam, Shaﬁqul Md. 2004. Post-Liberation Excavations at Paharpur World Heritage Site. In Proceedings of the International Seminar on
Elaboration of an Archaeological Research Strategy for Paharpur World Heritage Site and Its Environment (Bangladesh) . Edited by Md.
Shaﬁqul Alam. Dhaka: Department of Archaeology and UNESCO, pp. 51–57.
Ali, Daud. 2011. The Early Inscriptions of Indonesia and the Problem of the Sanskrit Cosmopolis. In Early Interactions Between South
and Southeast Asia: Reﬂections on Cross-Cultural Exchange . Edited by Pierre-Yves Manguin, A. Mani and Geoff Wade. Singapore:
ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 277–98.
Beckwith, Christopher I. 1987. The Tibetan Empire in Central Asia . Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Beglar, Joseph David. 1878. Report of a Tour Through the Bengal Provinces of Patna, Mongir, and Bhagalpur; The Santal Parganas,
Manbhum, Singhbum, and Birbhum; Bankura, Raniganj, Bardwan, and Hughli in 1872–73 ; Calcutta: Ofﬁce of the Superintendent of
Government Printing.
Bollée, Willem. 1983. Le k ¯ut.¯ag¯ara ou de la maison des hommes au manoir dans l’inde orientale et l’Asie du Sud-Est. Association
française pour les études sanskrites Bulletin d’ études Indiennes 4: 189–214.
Bosch, Frederik David Kan. 1924. A Hypothesis as to the Origin of Indo-Javanese Art. Rupam 17: 6–41.
Bosch, Frederik David Kan. 1961. Selected Studies in Indonesian Archaeology . The Hague: Hijhoff.
Brocquet, Sylvain. 2010. La Geste de R ¯ama. Po èmeàdouble sens de Sandhy ¯akaranandin; introduction, texte, traduction, analyses . Pondicherry:
Institut Français De Pondich éry.
Casparis, Johannes Gijsbertus de. 1983. India and Maritime South East Asia: A Lasting Relationship . Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya.
Chayet, Anne. 1988. Le monast ère de bSam-yas: Sources architecturales. Ars Asiatique 43: 19–29. [ CrossRef ]
Coblin, Weldon South. 1990. A Reexamination of the Second Edict of Khri-srong-lde-btsan. In Reﬂections on Tibetan Culture: Essays in
Memory of Turrell V . Wylie . Edited by Lawrence Epstein and Richard Sherburne. Lampeter: Edwin Mellen, pp. 165–85.
Cœd ès, George. 1968. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia . Honolulu: East-West Center Press.
Copplestone, Louis. 2024. Monasteries, Mountains, and Ma n.d.alas: Buddhist Architecture and Imagination in Medieval Eastern India.
Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Dalton, Jacob P . 2004. Bsam Yas (Samye). In Encyclopedia of Buddhism . Edited by Robert E. Buswell, Jr. New York: Macmillan, pp. 68–69.
Datta, Sanjukta. 2017a. In the King’s Shadow: Petitioner-donors of Eighth–ninth Century P ¯ala Copper Plate Land Grant Charters. The
Indian Economic and Social History Review 54: 457–76. [ CrossRef ]
Datta, Sanjukta. 2017b. Issuance, Engravers, And Omissions: Aspects of Copper Plate Land Grant Charters of the P ¯ala Dynasty.
Proceedings of the Indian History Congress 78: 97–103.

--- [Page 53] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 30 of 32
Degroot, V éronique. 2009. Candi, Space and Landscape: A Study on the Distribution, Orientation and Spatial Organization of Central Javanese
Temple Remains . Leiden: Sidestone Press.
Dikshit, Kashinath Narayan. 1931. Bengal and Assam. In Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey of India 1927–28 , Edited by H.
Hargreaves. Calcutta: Government of India Central Publication Branch, pp. 38–45.
Dikshit, Ras Bahadur K. N. 1938. Excavations at Paharpur . Delhi: Manager of Publications.
Doney, Lewis. 2011. Transforming Kingship: The Portrayal of Khri Sring lde brtsan in the Early Buddhist Histories. Ph.D. dissertation,
SOAS University of London, London, UK.
Doney, Lewis. 2014. Emperor, Dharmaraja, Bodhisattva? Inscriptions from the Reign of Khri Srong lde brtsan. Journal of Research
Institute: Historical Development of the Tibetan Languages 51: 63–84.
Dumarçay, Jacques. 1981. Candi Sewu et l’architecture bouddhique du centre de Java . Paris: École française d’Extr ême-Orient.
Dumarçay, Jacques. 1987. Le d émontage du temple central du Candi Sewu. Bulletin de l’ École française d’Extr ême-Orient 76: 289–310.
[CrossRef ]
Dumarçay, Jacques. 1993. Histoire de l’architecture de Java . Paris: École française d’Extr ême-Orient.
Dupoziat, Marie-France. 2006. Chinese Ceramics and Related Wares Excavated in Some Sites of the Indonesian World. National Palace
Museum Bulletin 38: 103–22.
Furui, Ryosuke. 2011. Indian Museum Copper Plate Inscription of Dharmap ¯ala, Year 26: Tentative Reading and Study. South Asian
Studies 27: 145–56. [ CrossRef ]
Furui, Ryosuke. 2017. Subordinate Rulers Under the P ¯alas: Their Diverse Origins and Shifting Power Relation with the King. The
Indian Economic and Social History Review 54: 339–59. [ CrossRef ]
Furui, Ryosuke. 2024. Struggle Over Kannauj and Beyond: The P ¯alas, the Gurjara-Pratih ¯aras, and the R ¯as.t.rak¯ut.as. In Self-Representation
and Presentation of Others in Indic Epigraphical Writing . Edited by D ániel Balogh and Annette Schmiedchen. Wiesbaden: Harras-
sowitz Verlag, pp. 57–70.
Gail, Adalbert J. 1999. On the Mandalaic Structure of the Paharpur Temple. Journal of Bengal Art 4: 131–39.
Granoff, Phyllis. 1997. Heaven on Earth: Temples and Temple Cities of Medieval India. In India and Beyond; Aspects of Literature,
Meaning, Ritual and Thought, Essays in Honour of Frits Staal . Edited by Dick van der Meij. London: Kegan Paul International.
Granoff, Phyllis. 2000. Other People’s Rituals: Ritual Eclecticism in Early Medieval Indian Religions. Journal of Indian Philosophy
28: 399–424.
Grifﬁths, Arlo. 2020. The Old Malay Mañju´ sr ¯ıgr.ha Inscription from Candi Sewu (Java, Indonesia). In Archaeologies of the Written:
Indian, Tibetan, and Buddhist Studies in Honour of Cristina Scherrer-Schaub . Naples: Universit àdegli Studi di Napoli ‘L’Orientale’,
pp. 225–62.
Grossman, Heather E. 2012. Memory, Transmission and the Practice of Building in the Crusader Mediterranean. Medieval Encounters
18: 481–517. [ CrossRef ]
Grossman, Heather E., and Alicia Walker. 2013. Introduction. In Mechanisms of Exchange: Transmission in Medieval Art and Architecture of
the Mediterranean, ca. 1000–1500 . Leiden: Brill, pp. 299–314.
Haque, Enamul, and Adalbert J. Gail. 2008. Sculptures in Bangladesh: An Inventory of Select Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain Stone and Bronze
Images in Museums and Collections of Bangladesh (Up to the 13th Century) . Dhaka: International Centre for Study of Bengal Art.
Hardy, Adam. 2007. The Temple Architecture of India . Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Huntington, Eric. 2019. Creating the Universe: Depictions of the Cosmos in Himalayan Buddhism . Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Inden, Ronald. 1985. The Temple and the Hindu Chain of Being: The Sarvatobhadra Temple of Kashmir. Puru s.¯artha: Recherches de
Sciences Sociales Sur l’Asie Du Sud 8: 53–73.
Inden, Ronald. 2000. Imperial Pur ¯an.as: Kashmir as Vai s.n.ava Center of the World. In Querying the Medieval: Texts and the History of
Practices in South Asia . Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 29–98.
Jordaan, Roy E. 1996. Candi Prambanan: An Updated Introduction. In In Praise of Prambanan: Dutch Essays on the Loro Jonggrang Temple
Complex . Leiden: KITLV Press, pp. 3–115.
Jordaan, Roy E. 1999. The Sailendras, the Status of the K s.atriya Theory, and the Development of Hindu-Javanese Temple Architecture.
Bijdragen Tot de Taal-, Land- En Volkenkunde 155: 210–43. [ CrossRef ]
Jordaan, Roy E. 2003. Wanua Tengah III and the Problem of the Origin of the ´Sailendra Dynasty. Paper Presented at the International
Conference on Indonesian Art, New Delhi, India, March 4–6.
Kapstein, Matthew. 2001. The Tibetan Assimilation of Buddhism: Conversion, Contestation, and Memory . New York: Oxford University Press.
Khan, F. A. 1963. Mainamati: A Preliminary Report on the Recent Archaeological Excavations in East Pakistan . Karachi: Department of
Archaeology, Pakistan.
Klokke, Marijke. 2006. The History of Javanese Temple Architecture: Architecture and Sculptural Decoration and Complementary
Sources of Information. In Anamorphoses: Hommage àJacques Dumarçay . Edited by Henri Chambert-Loir and Bruno Dagens. Paris:
Indes Savantes, pp. 49–68.
Klokke, Marijke. 2008. The Buddhist Temples of the ´Sailendra Dynasty in Central Java. Arts Asiatiques 63: 154–67. [ CrossRef ]
Koehler, Karen, and Jeffrey Saletnik. 2018. Editorial. Art in Translation 10: 1–3. [ CrossRef ]
Kozicz, Gerald. 2022. ‘Nidhis, ´Sabaras and the Northern Passage’. In Connecting the Art, Literature, and Religion of South and Central Asia:
Studies in Honour of Monika Zin . Delhi: Dev Publishers & Distributors, pp. 199–208.
Kramrisch, Stella. 1946. The Hindu Temple . Calcutta: University of Calcutta, vol. 1.

--- [Page 54] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 31 of 32
Krom, Nicolaas Johannes. 1923. Inleiding Tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst . The Hague: Nijhoff, vol. 1.
Kulke, Hermann. 1990. Indian Colonies, Indianization, or Cultural Convergence? Reﬂections on the Changing Image of India’s Role in
South-East Asia. Semaian 3: 8–32.
Kulke, Hermann. 2001a. Imperial Temple Architecture and the Ideology of Kingship in Odisha. In The Routledge Handbook of the State in
Premodern India . Edited by Hermann Kulke and Bhairabi Prasad Sahu. London: Routledge, pp. 353–69.
Kulke, Hermann. 2001b. Royal Temple Policy and the Structure of Medieval Hindu Kingdoms. In Kings and Cults: State Formation and
Legitimation in India and Southeast Asia . Edited by Hermann Kulke. Delhi: Manohar Publishers, pp. 1–16.
Kulke, Hermann. 2014. The Concept of Cultural Convergence Revisited: Reﬂections on India’s Early Inﬂuence in Southeast Asia. In
Asian Encounters: Exploring Connected Histories . Edited by Parul Pandya Dhar and Upinder Singh. New Delhi: Oxford University
Press, pp. 3–19.
Le May, Reginald. 1954. The Culture of South-East Asia: The Heritage of India . London: Allen & Unwin.
Li, Fang Kuei, and Weldon South Coblin. 1987. A Study of the Old Tibetan Inscriptions . Taipei: Institute of History and Philology
Academia Sinica.
Linrothe, Robert N. 2022. Structure and Subject Matter at Dunhuang. Archives of Asian Art 72: 255–72. [ CrossRef ]
Lokesh Chandra. 1961. The Samye Monastery . New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture.
Lokesh Chandra. 1979. The Indonesian Sanctuary of Chandi Sewu as a Stereomorphic Vajradhatu Mandala. Indologica Taurinensia
7: 159–69.
Lokesh Chandra. 1987. Sarva Tath ¯agata Tattva Sa ˙ngraha . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Long, Mark. 2015. An Eighth-Century Commentary on the N ¯amasa ˙ng¯ıti and the Cluster of Temples on the Prambanan Plain in Central Java .
Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre Working Paper No. 20. Singapore: Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Luczanits, Christian. 2022. An Illustrated History of the Ma n.d.ala: From Its Genesis to the K ¯alacakratantra by Kimiaki Tanaka (Review).
Archives of Asian Art 72: 284–90. [ CrossRef ]
Mabbett, Ian W. 1977a. The Indianization of Southeast Asia: Reﬂections on the Historical Sources. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies
8: 143–61. [ CrossRef ]
Mabbett, Ian W. 1977b. The Indianization of Southeast Asia: Reﬂections on the Prehistoric Sources. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies
8: 1–14. [ CrossRef ]
Majumdar, Ramesh Chandra. 1927. Champa: Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far East . Lahore: The Punjab Sanskrit Book Depot.
Majumdar, Ramesh Chandra. 1937. Suvarnadvipa: Ancient Colonies in the Far East . Dacca: Ashutosh Press.
Majumdar, Ramesh Chandra. 1944. Kambuja Desa or an Ancient Hindu Colony in Cambodia . Madras: University of Madras.
Meister, Michael W. 2006. Mountain Temples and Temple-Mountains: Masrur. Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 65: 26–49.
[CrossRef ]
Mémet, S ébastien. 1988. Le monast ère de bSam-Yas: essai de restitution. Arts Asiatiques 43: 30–32. [ CrossRef ]
Obermiller, Eug ène. 1986. The History of Buddhism (Chos H .byung) by Bu-Ston . New Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.
Pollock, Sheldon I. 2006. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Power in Premodern India . Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Richardson, Hugh. 1985. A Corpus of Early Tibetan Inscriptions . London: Royal Asiatic Society.
Roerich, George. 1949. The Blue Annals . Calcutta: Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2002. Ritual Technologies and the State: The Mandala-Form Buddhist Temples of Bangladesh. Journal of Bengal Art
7: 39–56.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. The ´Saiva Age—The Rise and Dominance of ´Saivism during the Early Medieval Period. In Genesis and
Development of Tantrism . Tokyo: University of Tokyo, Institute of Oriental Culture, pp. 41–350.
Saraswati, Sarasi Kumar. 1976. Architecture of Bengal . Calcutta: G. Bharadwaj.
Sardjono, Sandra. 2017. Tracing Patterns of Textiles in Ancient Java (8th–15th Century) . Berkeley: University of California, Berkeley.
Sarkar, Himansu Bhusan. 1971. Corpus of the Inscriptions of Java (Up to 928 A.D.) . Calcutta: K. L. Mukhopadhyay, vol. 1.
Schmiedchen, Annette, Arlo Grifﬁths, and Ryosuke Furui. 2023. Introduction by the Guest Editors. Buddhism, Law & Society 7: xi–xxiii.
Schopen, Gregory. 1996. The Lay Ownership of Monasteries and the Role of the Monk in M ¯ulasarv ¯astiv ¯adin Monasticism. Journal of the
International Association of Buddhist Studies 19: 81–126.
Sears, Tamara I. 2015. Following River Routes and Artistic Transmissions in Medieval Central India. Ars Orientalis 45: 43–77. [ CrossRef ]
Sen, Swadhin, A. K. M. Rahman, and S. M. K. Ahsan. 2014. Crossing the Boundaries of the Archaeology of Somapura Mahavihara:
Alternative Approaches and Propositions. Pratnatattva 20: 49–79.
Sen, Tansen. 2018. Yijing and the Buddhist Cosmopolis of the Seventh Century. In Texts and Transformations: Essays in Honor of the 75th
Birthday of Victor H. Mair . Amherst: Cambria Press, pp. 345–68.
Shah, Priyabala. 1958. Vis.n.udharmottara-Pur ¯an.a. Baroda: Oriental Institute.
Shastri, Hirananda. 1924. The Nalanda Copper-Plate of Devapaladeva. Epigraphia Indica 17: 310–27.
Sircar, Dinesh Chandra. 1985. The K ¯anyakubja-Gaud .a Struggle, from the Sixth to the Twelfth Century A.D . Kolkata: Asiatic Society.
Stein, R. A. 1961. Une Chronique Ancienne de bSam-Yas: sBa-Bzed ( Édition Du Texte Tib étain et R ésuméFrançais) . Paris: Biblioth èque de
l’Institut des Hautes Études Chinoises.
Sundberg, Jeffrey. 2003. A Buddhist Mantra Recovered from the Ratu Baka Plateau: A Preliminary Study of Its Implications for
´Sailendra-Era Java. Bijdragen Tot de Taal-, Land- En Volkenkunde 159: 163–88. [ CrossRef ]

--- [Page 55] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1338 32 of 32
Sundberg, Jeffrey. 2022. Hydro-Architectonic Conceptualizations in Central Javanese, Khmer, and South Indian Religious Architecture:
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasrali ˙nga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water. In The Creative South: Buddhist and Hindu Art
in Mediaeval Maritime Asia . Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 167–208.
Tenpa, Lobsang. 2021. A Preliminary Note on the Successive Renovations of Samye Monastery. Etudes Mongoles et Sib ériennes 52: 1–17.
Tournier, Vincent. 2020. Stairway to Heaven and the Path to Buddhahood: Donors and Their Aspirations in Fifth- and Sixth-Century
Ajanta. In M¯arga: Paths to Liberation in South Asian Buddhist Traditions . Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, pp. 177–248.
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1956. The Symbolism of the Temples of bSam yas. East and West 6: 279–81.
van der Kuijp, Leonard W. J. 1984. Miscellanea to a Recent Contribution on/to the Bsam-Yas Debate. Kailash 9: 149–84.
van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, Johanna Engelberta. 1981. The dv ¯arap ¯ala of Barabu d.ur. In Barabu d.ur: History and Signiﬁcance of a Buddhist
Monument . Edited by Luis Gomez and Hiram W. Woodward, Jr. Berkeley: Asian Humanities, pp. 15–23.
van Schaik, Sam, and Kazushi Iwao. 2009. Fragments of the Testament of Ba from Dunhuang. Journal of the American Oriental Society
128: 477–87.
Verma, B. S. 2011. Antichak Excavations-2, 1971–1981 . New Delhi: Archaeological Survey of India.
Vitali, Roberto. 1990. Early Temples of Central Tibet . London: Serindia Publications.
Walter, Michael L., and Christopher I. Beckwith. 2010. The Dating and Interpretation of the Old Tibetan Inscriptions. Central Asiatic
Journal 54: 291–319.
Wangdu, Pasang, and Hildegard Diemberger. 2000. dBa’ Bzhed: The Royal Narrative Concerning the Bringing of the Buddha’s Doctrine to
Tibet . Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Wheatley, Paul. 1982. Presidential Address: India Beyond the Ganges—Desultory Reﬂections on the Origins of Civilization in Southeast
Asia. Journal of Asian Studies 42: 13–28. [ CrossRef ]
Williams, Joanna. 1981. The Date of Barabu d.ur in Relation to Other Central Javanese Monuments. In Barabu d.ur: History and Signiﬁcance
of a Buddhist Monument . Berkeley: University of California Press, pp. 25–46.
Wolters, Oliver W. 1982. History, Culture and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives . Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Woodward, Hiram W. 1978. A Chinese Silk Depicted at Ca n.d.i Sèwu. In Economic Exchange and Social Interaction in Southeast Asia:
Perspectives from Prehistory, History, and Ethnography . Ann Arbor: Center for South and Southeast Asian Studies, University of
Michigan, pp. 233–44.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

--- [Page 56] ---
Citation: Sattler, Gregory. 2024.
Temple Diplomacy, Sacred Rites, and
Overseas Chinese During the Reign
of Song Emperor Zhenzong
(997–1022). Religions 15: 1401.
https://doi.org/10.3390/rel15111401
Academic Editors: Jinhua Chen,
Andrea Acri and Francesco
Bianchini
Received: 6 August 2024
Revised: 21 September 2024
Accepted: 28 October 2024
Published: 18 November 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).Article
Temple Diplomacy, Sacred Rites, and Overseas Chinese During
the Reign of Song Emperor Zhenzong (997–1022)
Gregory Sattler
Department of History, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; gsattler@ucla.edu
Abstract: Throughout most of Chinese history, leaders viewed the migration and movement of their
subjects beyond state borders as a symptom of poor governance. As a result, record keepers generally
avoided addressing the topic of Chinese people traveling or residing overseas. There is, however, an
exceptional moment in Chinese history that provides valuable insight into the early establishment of
Chinese communities abroad. Facing political pressure after signing a humiliating peace treaty with
foreign adversaries in 1005, the Song dynasty emperor Zhenzong (968–1022, r. 997–1022) utilized
unconventional forms of religious diplomacy and revived ancient rites to shore up support for his
rule. The Feng and Shan rites were the highest level of sacrifice that an emperor could undertake,
and they were only carried out by several emperors prior to Zhenzong’s reign. One of the require‑
ments of this complex ritual was for the sovereign to attract foreign peoples from afar by his virtuous
character, and so Zhenzong’s reign witnessed major initiatives to attract foreign envoys from states
such as Srivijaya (Sumatra), Dai Viet (northern Vietnam), Japan, and India. Zhenzong’s reign also
incorporated forms of diplomacy that originated in South and Southeast Asia, namely, the construc‑
tion of temples in foreign states to enhance his spiritual authority. This essay will demonstrate that
Emperor Zhenzong relied on Chinese merchants residing overseas to work with foreign leaders to
coordinate the participation of foreign emissaries in such forms of temple diplomacy and in the Feng
and Shan sacrifices. The significance of these events brought the activities of Chinese people trading
and residing overseas to the attention of the Song court and its chroniclers, and as a result, we are
left with the earliest indications of Chinese communities abroad in official Chinese histories.
Keywords: temples; diplomacy; overseas Chinese; China; Southeast Asia; South Asia
1. Introduction
The reign of Emperor Zhenzong 宋真宗 (968–1022, r. 997–1022) of the Song dynasty
(960–1279) marks a period in which religious practices, diplomacy, and commerce con‑
verged to bring about significant trends that reverberated across China, Srivijaya (Suma‑
tra), Dai Viet (northern Vietnam), Japan, India, and other states and regions throughout
maritime Asia.1A wide geographical spread of religious, mercantile, and diaspora net‑
works becomes apparent in textual sources from this time, due, in a large part, to Emperor
Zhenzong’s efforts to assert a position of supreme spiritual authority at home and abroad
following a controversial truce with the Liao empire in 1005. Such a goal culminated in
the Feng and Shan sacrifices—the most sacred and rare rites that a Chinese emperor could
make.2By the time of the Song dynasty, these rites required the participation of foreign
peoples, though it was preferable to bring in foreign envoys who could be advised on the
intricacies of imperial Chinese ideology without the appearance that their sentiments and
actions were being manipulated by the Song court. Thus, sea merchants from China and
other coastal Asian states played an important role as middlemen in Zhenzong’s spiritual
and diplomatic initiatives, as well as in the initiatives of leaders throughout maritime Asia
who wished to obtain greater wealth and status.
References to the activities of secular Chinese people overseas also begin to appear in
Chinese texts that record the history of this period, though part of what might explain
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401. https://doi.org/10.3390/rel15111401 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/religions

--- [Page 57] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 2 of 27
the more visible presence of Chinese people during the early 11th century relates to a
steady increase in their involvement in overseas trade beginning in the last century of the
Tang dynasty (618–907) and continuing in the Five Dynasties period (907–979). Knowl‑
edge of the Chinese people who ventured overseas prior to Zhenzong’s reign is gained
mainly from documents produced outside of the purview of Chinese courts, such as from a
very large body of Japanese primary sources (including official histories, diaries of monks
and courtiers, and temple records), as well as from some references in Arabic‑language
sources.3Even during and after the reign of Emperor Zhenzong, mention of these individ‑
uals in Chinese dynastic histories is quite rare, and scholars must look instead to personal
notes, reference works, encyclopedias, and Buddhist histories if they wish to gain a broader
understanding of the topic from Chinese sources. The increased clarity regarding the activ‑
ities of Chinese people overseas at this time allows for an opportunity to better understand
the genesis and evolution of certain diaspora groups that exercised a monumental influ‑
ence across much of maritime Asia for centuries to come. As we shall see, the indications of
Chinese people traveling abroad during Zhenzong’s reign largely derived from his court’s
unique methods of diplomatic outreach, as well as its efforts to incorporate foreign peoples
into major religious ceremonies.4Beginning with the invocation of a historical precedent
to dedicate a temple overseas in Zhenzong’s honor, a range of similar instances of temple
diplomacy followed, which largely distinguished the emperor’s diplomatic policies from
those of his predecessors.
Three main series of events will be analyzed in this article so as to form a sense of how
the reign of Emperor Zhenzong ushered in new trends across the diplomatic and religious
landscape of maritime Asia. These events are:
(1) The participation of embassies in Zhenzong’s birthday and New Year festivities be‑
tween 1003 and 1004 (as well as several embassies that imitated those proceedings
afterward);
(2) The Feng sacrifices of 1008;
(3) The Earth sacrifices of 1011.
Analysis of these three events will be followed by an examination of how Zhenzong’s
initiatives influenced affairs in the states of Dai Viet, Cō ḻa, and Japan. Each of these case
studies indicate a Chinese presence behind what were some of the most successful em‑
bassies to China during Zhengzong’s reign, but they also raise questions about how Chi‑
nese people residing and trading overseas were alluded to in early Chinese‑language texts.
As such, this section will be followed by an analysis of historiographical issues present in
the study of Chinese emigration. In particular, I will assess Song and Yuan (1271–1386)‑
period historical works to form an understanding of how and why the activities of Chinese
people overseas were often insinuated, avoided, or ignored, rather than directly attested to
in such texts. Despite the elusive nature of this topic, much of the textual evidence in this
essay nevertheless relies upon Chinese‑language historical works, and in some instances, I
will include translations of these works to highlight certain points or provide awareness of
contemporary perspectives. This article will conclude with consideration of the influence
and legacy of Zhenzong’s major religious ceremonies. Although much of the religious ex‑
change at this time was conducted in accordance with Buddhist beliefs, we will see from
the perspective of Chinese record keepers that imperial ideology, Daoism, and regional be‑
liefs also factored into many of Emperor Zhenzong’s initiatives that involved the outside
world. We will also see that such trends evolved at times due to state initiatives, and at
other times against the will of state leaders.
2. Zhenzong, Taizong, and the Shanyuan Treaty
Zhenzong was the third Song emperor, and the first who was born and raised in‑
side the imperial palace. Unlike his uncle and father, Emperors Taizu 宋太祖 (927–976,
r. 960–976) and Taizong 宋太宗 (939–997, r. 976–997), respectively, he played no major
role in the conquests and expansion of the Song empire. Yet, by many accounts, he was an
effective civil leader who was deeply engaged in matters of state throughout much of his

--- [Page 58] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 3 of 27
reign. Despite his lack of military background, he is noted in the histories as having per‑
sonally led Song forces into battle against Liao forces during a war that threatened the very
existence of the Song dynasty ( Lau and Huang 2009 , pp. 264, 266), and his rule possibly
marked the apex of fiscal governance and economic prosperity for the Song state ( Olsson
1974 , p. 21; Hartman 2015 , p. 23). When war with the Liao empire to the north ended with
the signing of the Shanyuan Treaty in 1005, the prevailing sentiment at court was that a
successful resolution was achieved. The sources state that negotiations were initiated by
the Liao empire after its invading forces suffered a series of military defeats in Song terri‑
tory,5and the annual sum to pay off the more militarily powerful Liao state was merely a
tiny fraction of the Song empire’s total military and state expenditures.6Many Song intel‑
lectuals either commented positively on the Shanyuan Treaty or understood its practical
necessity, particularly because it ended warfare on the northern border and resulted in
approximately 120 years of peaceful relations with the Liao empire.7
However, the sources also state that the treaty was criticized by some of Zhenzong’s
advisors one year after it was signed, and that such criticism was initially motivated by‑
political opportunism. There were, likewise, those among later generations of literati who
viewed the treaty as a humiliation, particularly since it marked an end to the expansion
of the Song empire and its inability to annex the Sixteen Prefectures—a sizeable body of
land along the northern Song border that was once an integral part of the Tang empire.8
The signing of this treaty also resulted in the Liao empire taking a position of equal sta‑
tus to the Song state in matters of diplomacy, which, together with the annual payments
to the Liao court, were also viewed by detractors of the Shanyuan Treaty as matters of
great humiliation.
When the dust settled and Liao forces had withdrawn from Song territory, the his‑
tories tell us that the high official Wang Qinruo 王欽若 (962–1025) made the most of an
opportunity to depose his rival, grand councilor Kou Zhun 寇準 (961–1023), by convinc‑
ing Zhenzong that signing the Shanyuan Treaty was a mistake. Prior to this, the records
state that, at the climax of the war, when there was a very real possibility that the capital of
Kaifeng would come under attack, Wang Qinruo advocated that Zhenzong retreat from the
capital, whereas Kou Zhun advised Zhenzong to push on and personally lead troops on the
battlefield. In the end, Kou Zhun’s advice proved successful, and he was put in charge of
negotiating the Shanyuan Treaty. After the treaty was signed, part of the impetus to depose
Kou Zhun came from Wang Qinruo persuading Zhenzong that the treaty in fact brought
shame to Zhenzong’s rule in both the eyes of his subjects and of his foreign adversaries.
Zhenzong took this criticism to heart, and developed a keen sense of resentment against
the Liao empire and the arrangement that was negotiated between both states. Once con‑
vinced that the treaty would befoul his reputation, Zhenzong had Kou Zhun cashiered and
began to welcome the calls of several advisors to “overawe foreign peoples and impress
foreign states” ( Lau and Huang 2009 , p. 270; Deng 2021 , pp. 292, 374–76).
As dramatic as these events might seem, there is, in fact, a wide range of records that
support the idea that, for the remainder of his reign, Emperor Zhenzong’s concern for his
image at home and abroad went well beyond that of his predecessors. If a certain degree
of reassessment is warranted regarding the narrative of Zhenzong seeking to “overawe
foreign peoples”, it would be that such a concern also existed prior to the signing of the
Shanyuan Treaty. As we shall see, even in the years before the treaty was signed, Zhen‑
zong began to embrace religion as a means to induce reverence among foreign peoples
and promote an image of his virtuous rule abroad. Rather, the perceived loss of respect
after the treaty was signed appears to have inspired a much more ambitious approach to
claiming status and legitimacy. This culminated in Emperor Zhenzong and his advisors
undertaking the Feng and Shan sacrifices—grandiose rites that were conducted on only six
occasions in Chinese history, as they were only to be initiated at a time when the empire
had reached an exceptional state of peace and prosperity.
To understand the context for Zhenzong’s religious and diplomatic initiatives, we can
begin by looking at the reign of his predecessor and father, Taizong. Although the political

--- [Page 59] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 4 of 27
and diplomatic policies of both emperors were, in some ways, markedly different, Zhen‑
zong is known to have generally sought to emulate his father’s rule, and certain parallels
are discernable. For instance, Taizong had also wanted to conduct the Feng and Shan sacri‑
fices, and in 984, he made preliminary preparations to travel to Mount Tai ( Taishan泰山 , in
Shandong), the sacred site for the main sacrifice. Yet, when a fire demolished two halls in
the imperial palace, Taizong could no longer claim that a perfect slate of favorable omens
justified the rituals, and he was forced to abandon his plans ( Olsson 1974 , pp. 165–66).
Taizong, much like his son, was also intent on bringing foreign peoples to his empire.
In 987, his court dispatched eight eunuchs to lead four separate missions to the South Seas
(Nan Hai 南海 , a broadly defined term that could refer to all regions of the world to the
south and west of the port city Guangzhou).9The official histories indicate that these eu‑
nuch envoys engaged in tributary trade while abroad, though caution is warranted against
assuming that the overall goal of these missions was to establish long‑term tributary rela‑
tions. When we consider that there was actually a notable decline in visits from South‑
east Asian embassies after the eunuchs were dispatched in 987, we can consider motives
beyond bringing in a constant stream of tribute‑bearing envoys.10A more reasonable as‑
sumption is that tributary trade was conducted by the eunuchs during their voyages, and
that invitations were likewise extended to the states they visited to send trade ships to buy
and sell goods at China’s southern ports rather than at its capital. Taizong’s court had
very good reasons to encourage this form of trade. As scholars of tributary diplomacy in
East Asia are generally aware, states that received tribute repaid such gifts with gifts of
greater value than the gifts received. This was the price that the tribute‑receiving coun‑
try paid for tribute‑bearing embassies to acknowledge a political status above their own.
Indeed, close examination of the sources describing the 987 missions reveal that these mis‑
sions were transactional in nature; the eunuchs were instructed to exchange gold and silks
for goods that received the highest prices in Chinese markets—aromatics, medicines, and
pearls. When foreign merchants freely brought such goods to Chinese ports, levies were
issued on their import, which, for Song leaders, was an economically preferable option
to wining, dining, and housing envoys in the capital and purchasing their goods at a pre‑
mium. Although the Song empire was established in 960, it had only reached the peak of
its territorial integrity by 979, and control over its newly conquered lands was a gradual
process. In such a light, we can see that the 987 missions were intended to send a message
that the empire had reached a secure state of consolidation and was open for business.11
All of this is not to say that Taizong shunned South Seas diplomacy altogether. One
rather interesting moment during his reign occurred in 992, when a sea merchant from
Fujian named Mao Xu 毛旭 escorted a Javanese embassy to China.12This would appear to
be one of the earliest instances in which a Chinese sea merchant was mentioned by name
in Chinese dynastic histories. Also of interest is that that the sources state that envoys
attached to the mission provided their own tribute, which indicates that they were oper‑
ating with some degree of autonomy from the Javanese king. Over the next century, only
one or two embassies from Java are recorded as having arrived in the Song empire,13so we
should assume that, as with the 987 missions, the Java embassy was encouraged to conduct
trade in the future that would be either private or semi‑private (that is, with the involve‑
ment of state representatives, but not between states) after the mission. This position is
further supported by the archaeological record of large quantities of Chinese ceramics dat‑
ing to this time and slightly later that were found in various locations around Java ( Ridho
1994 , pp. 268–69). That such forms of trade between China and Java were fairly common
is attested to when Mao Xu himself was described as having traveled to Java on previous
occasions. As is evident in records covering Zhenzong’s reign in the following decades,
Mao Xu’s position as a Chinese merchant working closely with governments overseas was
not exceptional, but rather, he recognized an opportunity that other such merchants would
also embrace.

--- [Page 60] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 5 of 27
3. Temple Diplomacy and Its Past Precedents
Of the embassies that arrived in China during the early part of Zhenzong’s reign, one
group stands out among others. In 1003, embassies claiming to represent the kings of Sriv‑
ijaya ( Sanfoqi三佛齊 , a confederacy that encompassed the island of Sumatra and much of
the Malay peninsula), Dashi 大食 (commonly translated as “ Arabia” but broadly repre‑
sentative of the Persian Gulf region), and Butuan ( Puduan蒲端 , northeastern Mindanao,
Philippines) sent tribute to the Song court at approximately the same time. In the sixth
month, Dashi envoys were recorded as having given tribute at the Song court, and in the
ninth month, they were recorded as having given tribute once again, together with envoys
of Butuan ( SHY FY , 4; and SHY FY , 7). Also in the ninth month, only two days before the
Dashi–Butuan embassy paid tribute, envoys of Srivijaya gave tribute to the Song court.14
What sets these missions apart from others of this time is how favorably they were received
by Emperor Zhenzong. Several months after paying tribute, envoys representing the three
states were invited to the palace to celebrate Emperor Zhenzong’s birthday festival ( Cheng‑
tian jie承天節 ) (SHY FY , 4).15A banquet was held on this occasion, and ceremonial robes
were bestowed upon the envoys as gifts. Then, in the following month, the envoys were
invited to celebrate the Lantern Festival with Emperor Zhenzong to mark the arrival of the
new year. A banquet was once again held, and the envoys were all provided with gifts of
money ( SS, juan 490; WXTK , juan 339; and SHY FY , 4).
Of particular interest during these visits was an arrangement made between Emperor
Zhenzong and the envoys of Srivijaya. During their stay in Kaifeng, the envoys informed
Zhenzong that their king, Cū d ̣āma n ̣ivarman, had built a Buddhist temple in Srivijaya ded‑
icated to praying for the emperor’s longevity. As such, a request was made to the emperor
to provide both a signboard with a temple name, as well as a temple bell ( SS, juan 489;
and Salmon 2002 , pp. 62–63).16Zhenzong praised this idea and agreed to the requests,
declaring that the name for the temple was to be Chengtian wanshou 承天萬壽 (“Heaven‑
Bestowed Longevity”). The name chosen here carried much significance, as it was the
name of the emperor’s birthday festival, and it also implied his right to rule through the
Mandate of Heaven. Although the sources state that this interaction occurred in the ninth
month when the Srivijaya envoys first arrived at court to give tribute, it would seem more
likely that the name of the temple was provided during or shortly after Zhenzong’s birth‑
day festival several months later, in order to commemorate the participation of Srivijaya
envoys on that occasion.
Claudine Salmon and Hans Bielenstein have both proposed that the Chengtian wan‑
shou temple was constructed for a Chinese community in Srivijaya.17There are many rea‑
sons to believe this was indeed the case, especially when considering that Srivijaya was a
common destination for Chinese merchants. A particularly notable indication of a Chinese
presence in Srivijaya would be a passage from the Song shi宋史 , which states “Sanskrit is
used for writing in the state [of Srivijaya], and [Sanskrit] is on the ring that the king uses to
imprint his seal. They also have Chinese writing, which they use for presenting missives
to (the Chinese emperor)” ( SS, juan 489; and Salmon 2002 , p. 73). Here, we see an impli‑
cation that Chinese people were residing in the kingdom and advising its king on matters
of diplomacy. I have demonstrated elsewhere that high levels of literacy were common
among Chinese sea merchant groups beginning in the late Tang and continuing well into
the Song dynasty, as many of these individuals were members of locally prominent fami‑
lies with access to formal education, and some were even unsuccessful candidates for civil
service examinations ( Sattler 2025 ). Such individuals were able to use their education to
assist with matters of diplomacy and government in states such as Dai Viet 大越 and Koryŏ
高麗 (Korea). We may also draw a parallel here with the example of Mao Xu advising the
Java embassy to China one decade prior to Srivijaya’s embassy in 1003–1004.
A variety of Chinese sources produced slightly later and outside the purview of the
Song court also discuss the presence of Chinese merchants in Srivijaya. In these instances,
we see that many of the 12th‑century Chinese merchants who sailed to Srivijaya were from
the Quanzhou and Xinghua areas of Fujian province ( Salmon 2002 , pp. 75–76).18In addi‑

--- [Page 61] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 6 of 27
tion, the Pingzhou ketan 萍洲可談 states that “(When) Chinese people go to Dashi, (they first)
arrive at Srivijaya to repair their ships and trade goods. Merchants from afar congregate
there, and for that reason it is most prosperous” 華人詣大食，至三佛齊修船，轉易貨物。
遠賈輻湊，故號最盛。19The archeological record likewise provides ample evidence of
high volumes of trade between Sumatra and China. Huge quantities of Chinese ceramics—
many dating to the early 11th century—have been recovered in the areas of Palembang and
Jambi, with lesser amounts found in other locations throughout Sumatra ( Manguin 1993 ;
Ridho 1994 , pp. 268–69; Miksic 2009 ). Wrecks of trade ships dating from the ninth to thir‑
teenth centuries have also been discovered in the surrounding waters. These ships carried
cargoes ranging from tens to hundreds of thousands of Chinese ceramic items.20
It was previously believed that some of the envoys that Srivijaya sent to China during
the 10th and 11th century had Chinese names. A close inspection of the meanings of the
given names of these envoys, as well as a search in the China Biographical Database to ex‑
amine the commonality of their names among hundreds of thousands of Chinese names,
reveals that this was, in fact, not the case.21Most of the names of Srivijayan envoys ap‑
pear to be transcriptions of Arabic‑language names, while other names might be of people
native to Malay‑ or Javanese‑speaking regions within or near the greater dominion of the
Srivijaya polity. Nevertheless, we cannot dismiss the possibility that Chinese record keep‑
ers, in some instances, took liberties in transcribing Chinese names with characters that
connote foreign origins.
What initially stands out most from an examination of sea‑borne diplomatic missions
in this period is indeed the prevalence of individuals with Arabic names representing not
just Dashi, but also Southeast Asian states such as Srivijaya and Champa. For instance,
seven individuals with Arabic names represented five embassies from Srivijaya between
976 and 1017, and five embassies from Champa had representatives with Arabic names
between 960 and 1011 ( Chaffee 2018 , p. 125). From this information, it is evident that
such missions had persisted for some time prior to Zhenzong’s reign, and likely extend
as far back as the Five Dynasties period—an era for which there are fewer textual sources
that shed light on South Seas diplomacy and trade. Dashi seafarers cooperated with other
Southeast Asian states as well, such as the aforementioned joint embassy with Butuan in
1003–1004. On that occasion, both groups were connected to such a degree that Chinese
records have conflicting accounts on whether it was Dashi or Butuan that presented a par‑
rot as a special item of tribute ( XZTCB , juan 55; and SHY FY , 7).
As for the ethnicity of these Dashi visitors, an examination of Arabic‑language texts
of this period reveals that long‑distance sea merchants in West Asia were largely Persian.
Nevertheless, it is likely that some of the individuals described as “Dashi” people in Chi‑
nese sources were Arabs or Indians as well. One rather interesting Arabic‑language source
written at approximately the same time as when the 1003–1004 embassies took place de‑
scribes the crew of a ship with a Persian captain. The Aja’ib al‑Hind tells the story of a
merchant ship traveling from Siraf to China, stating that the captain took “a crowd of mer‑
chants with him from every country”. Some of the nationalities of the men aboard the ship
are indicated in the midst of a storm:
In a night that was so long, without hope of rescue, a prey to the violence of
the gale, in a sea that boiled, beaten about by frightening waves, on a ship that
leapt and plunged, shuddered and trembled, the passengers said farewell to one
another, and each of them prayed according to his religion, for there were men
from China, India, Persia, and the islands ( Aja’ib al‑Hind , pp. 13–14).
This source aligns with Chinese records for Zhenzong’s reign and earlier that reveal
a rather complex multi‑ethnic composition of embassies coming to pay tribute. Though
we cannot discount the possibility of a distinct separation between ethnically mixed mer‑
chant ships and ethnically mixed state embassies at this time, the close parallel between
Chinese and Arabic‑language sources suggests that a large portion of the Dashi and South‑
east Asian embassies were comprised of merchants. The fervor to engage in commerce
is certainly attested to toward the end of the 1003–1004 embassies, when Butuan envoys

--- [Page 62] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 7 of 27
were caught breaking rules prohibiting private trade, as they purchased a great deal of
Chinese wares, gold, and silver at city markets to bring back to their country ( SHY FY ,
4). Although not unheard of for foreign envoys to do so in the longue dur ée of Chinese
history, this was still a flagrant violation of protocol. In the end, Zhenzong ruled that the
envoys were to be treated with leniency under the rationale that such distant people were
unaware of China’s rules.
In many ways, the 1003–1004 embassies played a major role in imitating past prece‑
dents and in establishing new precedents. This is particularly revealing when considering
the request of Srivijaya envoys for a temple name and a temple bell. For instance, in 998,
just one year into Zhenzong’s reign, Dashi envoys were also recorded as having acquired
a large bell in China for use overseas ( SHY FY , 4). In this instance, the bell was acquired
in Guangzhou along with 1,300 strings of copper coins.22This was a violation of rules that
prohibited the outflow of precious metals and currency, though the adept way in which the
Dashi envoys handled the situation resulted in Zhenzong allowing for an exception in their
favor. These envoys made an appeal using terms and concepts rooted in imperial Chinese
ideology to claim that they had traveled a long distance across the sea to seek out the em‑
peror’s virtue, and that the purchase was intended to spread loyalty and sincerity rather
than for earning profit (for more on this ideology, see Sattler 2021 ). Clearly, the envoys
were being advised by those with a keen understanding of Chinese political conventions.
Beyond this example, we may see that the main model for Srivijaya’s 1003–1004 em‑
bassy was a diplomatic mission from the Pallava domains (South India) to the Tang empire
in 720. At that time, Central Asia was beset by fierce geopolitical competition, and Tang
leaders wished to diplomatically contain Tibet and fend off the expanding presence of
Muslim armies ( Jiu Tang shu , juan 198; and Sen 2003 , pp. 26–27). Pallava envoys visiting
the Tang court asked for and received Emperor Xuanzong’s 唐玄宗 (685–762, r. 712–756)
blessing to dispatch war elephants and cavalry against Muslim and Tibetan forces. When
the envoys asked Xuanzong (whom Zhenzong modeled his own reign after) to name this
army, the Tang emperor “was much in approval” of the request. He declared that the army
was to be named “the Army of Cherishing Virtue” ( Huaide jun 懷德軍 ). Very much like the
1003–1004 embassy, the envoys also informed Xuanzong that their king was building a
temple “for the state”, and they requested a temple signboard. Xuanzong decreed that the
temple was to be named “Submitting to Suzerainty” ( Guihua歸化 ). Here, we see the prece‑
dent that was invoked when Srivijaya envoys planned their 1003–1004 embassy to China.
Knowledge of such a precedent would have come from those with a Chinese education
who were well‑versed in historical texts. Yet, it was not just members of the Srivijaya em‑
bassy who were aware of such precedents. Zhenzong and his officials were also aware of
the historical connections that were being established, and their acknowledgement of the
precedent is evident when they granted military titles to the Srivijaya envoys in 1003. They
chose terms that harkened back to the 720 mission, such as the “General who Submits to
Virtue”, ( Guide jiangjun 歸德將軍 ) and the “General Transformed by Affection” ( Huaihua
jiangjun 懷化將軍 ), which used the same four characters that were used in the 720 titles
(huai懷,de德,gui歸, and hua化), although the characters were rearranged to form the
new titles ( SS, juan 489). As for the remnants of the “Guihua” temple mentioned in the
720 mission and its current location, although there is still no definitive identification from
archaeological surveys, it might possibly have had some connection to the Shore temple
complex in Tamil Nadu, which was constructed at approximately the same time.23
There is no indication that temple diplomacy, as we have seen thus far, was a cre‑
ation of the administrations of Xuanzong and Zhenzong, as such a form of diplomacy was
initiated by non‑Chinese states in both the 720 and 1003–1004 missions. It is more likely
that these practices originated in and around the Indian Ocean region and circulated with
the spread of Buddhism. This is attested to by examples of such forms of diplomacy be‑
ing practiced solely between non‑Chinese states. For instance, in around 860, the Srivijaya
king, Bālaputra, donated funds to build a monastery in the Nālandā area of the Pāla empire
(East India) for the use of pilgrims from Srivijaya. In turn, the Pāla king, Devapāla, donated

--- [Page 63] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 8 of 27
tax revenue and manpower from nearby villages for the monastery’s upkeep ( Cœdès 1975 ,
p. 109; Sen 2003 , p. 107; Acri 2016 , p. 18). There is also the example of Cū d ̣āma n ̣ivarman
(the Srivijaya king who built a temple in Zhenzong’s favor in 1003) and his son building a
temple in the Nākappaṭṭi n ̣am area of the Cō ḻa domains (South India) in 1005. This temple
was named after Cū d ̣āma n ̣ivarman, though the Cō ḻa king, Rājarāja, is recorded as having
donated the tax revenues from a village for its upkeep soon after it was constructed. Later,
in around 1090, a new charter was granted by a Cō ḻa king in support of the temple.24Inter‑
estingly, in 1018, the Cō ḻa king is recorded as having received large gifts of “Chinese gold”
from Srivijaya for a temple staffed by Brahmans ( Sen 2003 , p. 67; Kulke 2009 , p. 6). Con‑
sidering the dispersed and incomprehensive condition of written records from India and
Southeast Asia, such forms of diplomacy appear to have been fairly common in those areas.
One final aspect of earlier instances of temple construction abroad is a 10th‑century
report of “Chinese temples” ( Han si漢寺 ) in the Nālandā area of East India. The monk
Jiye繼業 , who departed for Nālandā in 964, reported five such temples in his travel diary,
including one called the “China West temple” ( Zhina xi si 支那西寺 ), which he described as
“ancient” ( gu古) (Jiye Xiyu xingcheng ; and Sen 2003 , pp. 106–07). Claims of state sponsor‑
ship for these temples do not appear to be extant, and it is not clear whether this is because
their construction was initiated solely by Buddhist monks and lay Buddhists or simply be‑
cause the historical record for the 10th century (and to a lesser degree, the Tang dynasty)
is greatly diminished.
We can also consider the precedents that the 1003–1004 embassies established. Only
one month after Zhenzong granted a temple bell and signboard to the Srivijaya envoys,
and in the same month that the envoys from Srivijaya, Dashi, and Butuan were enjoying
New Year celebrations in the emperor’s presence, an embassy from the Xiliangzhou 西涼州
(Wuwei, central Gansu) Tibetans arrived at the Song court to pay tribute. While in the cap‑
ital, word of the favorable treatment granted to the Srivijaya envoys had no doubt reached
the ears of the Xiliangzhou envoys, as they too came forth with a similar request for assis‑
tance regarding one of their temples. The record states:
In the 1st year and the 1st month of the Jingde reign (1004), the envoys Situowan
and petty officer Zheng Yanmei were sent to give tribute of three thousand for‑
eign horses from the Liugu tribe. They also sent war prisoners. Situowan is (their
leader) Pan Luozhi’s nephew. Pan Luozhi also stated that the Hongyuan temple
is in a poor state, and he asked for craftsmen and the bestowal of gold leaf and
resplendent silks to renovate it. (Emperor Zhenzong) decreed that it would be
arduous for the palace craftsmen to make such a long journey, (though) the re‑
maining requests would be granted ( SHY FH , 5).
景德元年正月。遣使厮拖完，押衙鄭延美，以六谷蕃馬三千疋，來貢。且獻捷。
厮拖完即潘羅支之甥也。潘羅支又言洪元寺壞，乞給工匠及賜金碧，絹綵，修繕
之。詔以尚方工匠難以遠去。餘從其請。
Then, only three months later, an embassy from the Sha‑Guazhou 沙瓜州 (Dunhuang,
west Gansu) Uighurs arrived at Zhenzong’s court with a similar request. Their visit is
recorded as follows:
In the 1st year and 4th month of the Jingde reign (1004), (the local leader Cao)
Zongshou sent envoys bearing gifts of fine quality jades and horses as tribute. In
addition, he also stated that a monk from his region by the name of Huicang was
requesting a title, as well as a sum of 100,000 pieces of gold leaf to repair statues
in the Longxing and Lingtu temples. It was requested that these be bestowed. In
addition, a request was made for artisans who could cast (temple) bells, and Han
Chinese who were skilled at inlaying pearls. On arrival to (the Uighur) domain,
they would transmit their skills. (The emperor) decreed that a title be bestowed
to Huicang and the gold leaf be apportioned. Everything else was refused ( SHY
FY, 5).

--- [Page 64] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 9 of 27
景德元年四月。宗壽遣使以良玉名馬來貢。且言本州僧惠藏乞賜師號，龍興, 靈圖
二寺修像，計金十萬箔。願賜之。又乞鑄鐘匠及漢人之善藏珠者，至當道傳授 其
術。詔賜惠藏師號量給金箔。餘不許。
Finally, in late 1007, the khan of the Ganzhou 甘州 (central Gansu) Uighurs sent a
monk and a nun to give horses as tribute. The monk “wished to build a Buddhist tem‑
ple in the capital to pray for the emperor’s long life, and requested a temple signboard”
欲於京城建佛寺祝聖壽，求賜名額。 The request was denied ( SS, juan 490; and Yu hai ,
juan 154).
We may see here that during and after the Srivijaya embassy of 1003–1004, envoys
from polities along China’s northwestern borders believed that hosting a population of
skilled Chinese subjects and seeking patronage for Buddhist temples were initiatives that
could elicit a favorable response from Emperor Zhenzong. However, requests by foreign
entities for Chinese subjects were quite unusual in the several centuries leading up to Zhen‑
zong’s reign, a fact Zhenzong was likely made aware of by his advisors. Zhenzong was
initially inclined to only offer support for temple projects, while refusing requests for Chi‑
nese subjects to leave his empire, though after several years, even a request for temple
patronage was denied.
4. The Feng and Shan Sacrifices
By 1008, Emperor Zhenzong and some of his top advisors were conceiving more am‑
bitious means to employ spiritual authority at home and abroad. Such plans are evident in
the rather infamous ordeal in which Zhenzong and several advisors claimed that holy texts
affirming Zhenzong’s mandate for universal rulership had descended from Heaven and
had come into their possession. Known to scholars both past and present as the “Heav‑
enly Texts” ( Tian shu 天書 ), these items were sporadically “discovered” throughout the
realm for the remainder of Zhenzong’s reign ( Lau and Huang 2009 , pp. 270–73; Cahill
2021 ;Deng 2021 , pp. 372–90). Many scholars today see these texts as obvious fabrica‑
tions by sycophants who were using the opportunity to further ingratiate themselves with
Zhenzong. It is also widely believed that the discovery of these texts and the subsequent
Feng and Shan sacrifices were efforts to regain respect abroad following the signing of the
Shanyuan Treaty.25These views were highlighted by Song‑ and Yuan‑period historians,
such as Sima Guang, who maintained that the Mandate of Heaven was invoked through
the texts with the intent of awing foreign peoples—initially the Liao empire—into submis‑
sion after Zhenzong began to develop misgivings regarding the treaty. Indeed, it was the
night before Liao ambassadors arrived at court to congratulate Zhenzong on his birthday
festival that the emperor claimed to have been visited during his sleep by an ancestral de‑
ity who foretold the discovery of the texts. Heavenly Texts were discovered in the palace
just over one month later, and two days after that, the Liao envoys were present in a cere‑
mony to offer libations to them ( Deng 2021 , p. 377). Extant sources recognize that at least
one court official remonstrated to Zhenzong in terms that strongly implied the texts were
fabricated for political ends. Nevertheless, the texts were used to justify the holding of
the Feng and Shan sacrifices shortly after they were first discovered, and veneration of the
texts continued until the time of Zhenzong’s death in 1022.
Deng Xiaonan marks 1008 as the beginning of a twelve‑year period in which Emperor
Zhenzong frequently deviated from established patterns of government in a marked ef‑
fort to direct a new course for his reign ( Deng 2021 , pp. 336, 372). She states that “The
Emperor’s ‘receiving in person the talismanic mandate’ became the starting point of and
the ‘free pass’ allowing the offerings of sacrifices to Heaven and Earth, the construction of
temples and shrines, and the enactments of lost rituals” ( Deng 2021 , p. 385). Patricia Ebrey
also recognizes a turning point that began with the discovery of Heavenly Texts in early
1008, and points out that Zhenzong used this discovery to issue an edict for establishing
a network of Daoist temples named Tianqing guan 天慶觀 in every prefecture in the em‑
pire ( Ebrey 1997 , pp. 52–53). As significant as this turning point was, it was also guided
by past precedent. We might observe here that Zhenzong’s actions once more paralleled

--- [Page 65] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 10 of 27
those of Tang Emperor Xuanzong, who not only set the precedent for engaging in temple
diplomacy with Indian envoys in 720, but also established his own empire‑wide network
of Kaiyuan temples ( Kaiyuan si 開元寺 ) in 738 ( Ebrey 1997 , pp. 49, 52–54).26Perhaps more
significantly, Xuanzong was the last emperor to conduct the Feng and Shan sacrifices prior
to Zhenzong, having performed them in 725. On that occasion, it was Turkish tribes along
the northern border who posed the greatest military threat, though Xuanzong was able
to elicit their participation in the Feng and Shan sacrifices, as well as that of other foreign
peoples ( Twitchett 1979 , pp. 387–88). So closely did Zhenzong model his rulership after
that of Xuanzong that one official even remonstrated against using the Tang emperor as a
guiding example, as the end of Xuanzong’s rule gave way to the extremely destructive An
Lushan rebellion ( Cahill 2021 , pp. 17, 19–20).
The Feng and Shan sacrifices were the most grandiose and spiritually significant rites
that an emperor could perform in the Chinese political realm. Only an emperor whose
reign was marked by peace, prosperity, and favorable omens could undertake these rites,
and as such, only six emperors are recorded as having conducted them.27The purpose of
these rites was for the ruler to announce to Heaven and Earth that his empire was unified
and at peace, and that he had fulfilled the Mandate of Heaven. The sacrifices were, ac‑
cordingly, an extremely expensive undertaking, with the court, its many attendants, and
multiple foreign embassies traveling long distances to accompany the emperor as he sac‑
rificed to Heaven on Mount Tai, and later to Earth in Fenyin 汾陰 (Shanxi). The total costs
amounted to several times the annual salaries of Song government officials ( Golas 2015 ,
p. 148, citation no. 19), with the main expense being the giving of gifts to both foreign and
native participants. Compared to other sacrifices, the gifts bestowed during the Feng and
Shan sacrifices were particularly lavish ( Golas 2015 , p. 193).
Nearly all of the embassies that participated in the Feng sacrifices in the tenth month
of 1008 represented states already familiar to us thus far. For instance, Srivijaya envoys
were granted a position of privilege near Emperor Zhenzong and the sacrificial altar dur‑
ing the proceedings. The record states that gifts were “very generously” bestowed on them
afterward ( SS, juan 489; and Salmon 2002 , p. 64). Dashi envoys were also present, though
this time as part of a joint embassy with Champa ( SS, juan 490). The most prominent of the
envoys were two Dashi ship captains, one of whom presented a jade tablet to Zhenzong,
with a claim that it was obtained in Western India ( Xitian西天 ) by an ancestor five gener‑
ations removed. The ship captain also claimed that he was instructed to “guard this with
care, wait for a sage emperor in China to perform the Feng and Shan rites, and then present
it as tribute” ( XZTCB , juan 70; and Chaffee 2018 , p. 132). Here, the links between Dashi,
Champa, India, and those with knowledge of Chinese political conventions are again rem‑
iniscent of the Aja’ib al‑Hind ’s description of people from China, India, the Persian Gulf,
and maritime Southeast Asia working together on merchant ships. The captain was re‑
warded with a large range of export goods and luxury items, and a banquet was held for
the Dashi and Champa envoys upon returning to the capital ( SS, juan 490; and SHY L , 45).
Also present for the sacrifices were envoys of the Xiliangzhou Tibetans and the Ganzhou
Uighurs. Both groups, we may recall, had previously engaged in temple diplomacy with
Zhenzong, with mixed results ( SS, juan 7).28
Preparation for the sacrifices, commonly referred to as the “Earth” or “Fenyin” sac‑
rifices, began in 1010, and the ceremonies took place early in the following year.29These
were the second of the two major ceremonies that comprised the Feng and Shan sacrifices.
For these rites, the emperor offered sacrifices to the Earth deity Houtu 後土 in Fenyin, and
continued his claim of bringing his empire to a state of total pacification. The Ganzhou
Uighurs and Xiliangzhou Tibetans once more participated in the rites, as well as envoys
from Dashi. A Dashi ambassador with the title Guide jiangjun 歸德將軍 was granted a privi‑
leged position next to Zhenzong during the proceedings ( SS, juan 8; SS, juan 490).30Butuan
envoys, who we may recall were present with Zhenzong for his birthday and New Year
celebrations in 1003–1004, also participated in the Earth sacrifices, and their ambassador
received a gift of armor and banners, as well as the title Huaihua jiangjun 懷化將軍 (SHY

--- [Page 66] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 11 of 27
FY, 4). Newcomers to this celebration included the Qinzhou 秦州 (east Gansu) Uighurs,
the Xixia 西夏 (Tanguts), and envoys from Wuxun 勿巡 (Oman), Sanmalan 三麻蘭 , and
Pupo蒲婆 (SS, juan 8; SHY FY , 4). It is not clear where these last two areas were located,
though throughout the duration of the Song dynasty, they only ever sent envoys on this
one occasion.
5. Embassies from Dai Viet, Cō ḻa, and Japan
5.1. Dai Viet
One additional state that sent envoys for the Earth sacrifices was Dai Viet. This polity
was undergoing significant political unrest in the years leading up to the sacrifices, which
ultimately resulted in the captain of the palace guards seizing control of the state in a
coup d’état and establishing the Ly Dynasty (1010–1225). This man, Ly Cong Uan (Ch.
Li Gongyun) 李公蘊 , is described in early accounts as being a Fujian person ( Min ren閩人 ),
and in later accounts as being from Vietnam.31Scholars have long debated Ly Cong Uan’s
origins, though my own position is that these sources are not necessarily contradictory.
The most plausible explanation is that he was a person with Fujianese ancestry who was
born and raised in Vietnam. This case can be made based on accounts of his early life
which state that he was born and raised in the heartland of Giao, an area inhabited by a
large Chinese population ( Taylor 2013 , pp. 52–53, 59–60). Such accounts also state that
he received both a Buddhist and secular Chinese education.32If there is one problematic
aspect of Ly Cong Uan’s stated origins, it would be from the later accounts that empha‑
size his upbringing by Buddhist monks rather than his supposedly adoptive family. Al‑
though monks might have played a major role in the early education and upbringing of
Ly Cong Uan, Keith Taylor has highlighted that the Ly family was very influential even
before Ly Cong Uan assumed power, and the sovereign gave ranks to his father, mother,
uncle, brothers, and other family members upon taking the throne ( Taylor 1986 , p. 162,
2013 , p. 62). This suggests that Ly’s family was actively involved in his life and assisted in
putting him into positions of power. The emphasis on the Buddhist establishment in his life
appears to reflect a bias of later record keepers, especially when we consider hagiographic
narratives of Ly Cong Uan being conceived from intercourse between a divine being and
his mother inside a temple, then being given up for adoption at the age of 3 ( Taylor 2013 ,
p. 60). Rather, Chinese factions had remained involved in Vietnamese politics since the
Tang empire lost effective control over the region in the late 9th century. Since Mengxi bitan
states that “fellow countrymen set up the Min (Fujian) person Ly Cong Uan as sovereign”
國人共立閩人李公蘊為主 , we have strong indications that such factions were responsible
for his rise to power ( Mengxi bitan , juan 25).33Indeed, when Ly Cong Uan’s new govern‑
ment was formed, it was staffed by educated sojourners from Fujian with knowledge of
statecraft—many of whom appear to have been sea merchants ( WXTK , juan 330).34
Ly Cong Uan sent envoys to the Song empire in 1010 immediately after having taken
the throne. This was enacted with the implicit understanding that Song leaders might use
the coup d’ état as a pretext to invade the country. Indeed, some Song officials called for
such a move, though Zhenzong was not inclined to have his armies devastated by malaria
and diverted from the northern border ( Taylor 2013 , p. 61; and XZTCB , juan 73). The Earth
sacrifices at Fenyin offered the perfect opportunity to foster friendly relations between both
states, not only to avert war at a sensitive time, but also to boost the political legitimacy
of both leaders and engage in trade. Initially some of Zhenzong’s officials were critical of
establishing a relationship with Ly Cong Uan after he had betrayed the royal family that
he was sworn to protect. Zhenzong countered by stating that Ly Cong Uan was merely fol‑
lowing in the footsteps of the former king, who had come to power under similar circum‑
stances ( XZTCB , juan 73). As the ceremonies unfolded, Zhenzong proceeded to bestow all
of the former Dai Viet king’s titles on Ly Cong Uan “so that sacrifices could be made at
Fenyin and tribute paid” 以祀汾陰修貢 . In turn, the Dai Viet envoys were sent back with
gifts of robes, gold vessels, and silver ( Yu hai , juan 154; and An‑nan chi luoc , juan 12).

--- [Page 67] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 12 of 27
We may see some interesting indications revealing that the Earth sacrifices made a pro‑
nounced impact on Ly Cong Uan’s envoys, and that details of the ceremony were passed
along to the Dai Viet king. Five years after Zhenzong’s Earth sacrifices were completed, Ly
Cong Uan conducted his own version of the Earth sacrifices, which exhibited ritual prac‑
tices quite similar to those described in Chinese accounts.35Moreover, on the night that
these sacrifices were made, Ly Cong Uan claimed to have been visited in a dream by a
powerful historical figure who shared his surname, much like Zhenzong was visited by
an ancestral deity prior to the appearance of the Heavenly Texts. Also like Zhenzong, Ly
Cong Uan had images of this figure installed in shrines and worshipped in every province
of his state ( Taylor 1986 , p. 165; and Dai Viet su ky toan thu ,ban ky本紀 2).
5.2. Cō ḻa
Beyond the case of Dai Viet, there is an additional example which demonstrates that
Zhenzong’s grand sacrifices left a lasting impression among participants and that word of
these rites traveled far and wide. Word of such sacrifices spreading abroad is evident in
the records of an embassy from Cō ḻa (South India) that arrived in the Song capital in 1015.
This was the first of several embassies that Cō ḻa sent to China during the Song dynasty,
and, thus, there was much political value in Zhenzong receiving tribute from a distant
state that had not previously recognized the heavenly mandate of Song emperors. This
embassy arrived at court in the ninth month, and presented a missive from their sovereign
Rājarāja to Zhenzong, as well as tributary gifts of pearls and green glassware ( SS, juan 489;
see also Sattler 2025 ). This missive, written with an expert grasp of formal Chinese, spoke
of an unnamed sea merchant who had arrived to the Cō ḻa court to tell its king:
The realm under Heaven belongs to the Great Song. The two emperors [Taizu
and Taizong] established the (dynasty’s) foundation, (then) a sage [Zhenzong] in‑
herited the throne. (He) ascended the great mountain to hold the Feng sacrifices,
conducted the rites and sacrifices at Fenyin, petitioned to the supremely virtuous,
and was entrusted with a mandate from the Lord of Heaven. As such, (the em‑
peror’s) subjects now enjoy an era of peace and prosperity, in which auspicious
words are happily heard.
鉅宋之有天下也。二帝開基，聖人繼統，登封太岳，禮祀汾陰，至德升聞，上穹
眷命。臣昌期斯遇，吉語幸聞。
The record goes on to say that, when Rājarāja heard the words of the sea merchant, he
replied that there had been no tempests at sea for ten years, and that, according to their
traditions, this meant that there was a sage in China. Such was the reason that Rājarāja
dispatched his embassy.
We may make some interesting observations from this. First, the “ten years” men‑
tioned in the letter mark the exact span of time that had transpired since the signing of
the Shanyuan Treaty between the Song and Liao empires. We may also recall that peace
throughout the realm was a prerequisite for conducting the Feng and Shan sacrifices. Sec‑
ond, we may observe that the traditions which the letter referred to were once again prece‑
dents that were recorded in Chinese history books. The historic parallel in this instance
was an account in the Nan shi南史 , which described diplomatic missions sent by the king
of the Sumatran state of Gantuoli 幹陀利 to the southern Chinese Liang empire at the be‑
ginning of the 6th century ( Nan shi , juan 78; and Dong Xiyang kao , juan 3). The account
states that the king was visited by a monk in a dream who told him that:
China presently has a sagely monarch. After ten years, (there will be a period of)
great Buddhist efflorescence. If you send envoys to give tribute and practice the
rites in veneration, then (your) land will be bountiful, (your people) happy, and
the (arrivals of) traveling merchants will multiply a hundredfold.
中國今有聖主，十年之後，佛法大興。汝若遣使貢奉禮敬，則土地豐樂，商旅
百倍。

--- [Page 68] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 13 of 27
In addition to highlighting parallels of ten‑year waiting periods and premonitions of
sage rulers in China, this example also demonstrates that the Indian missive used a prece‑
dent from a kingdom formerly in the Srivijaya area. This was a reversal of the Srivijaya
envoys earlier in Zhenzong’s reign using the precedent of Indian envoys initiating tem‑
ple diplomacy with Tang China. Furthermore, we may recall the Feng sacrifices in 1008,
in which a Dashi ship captain offered as tribute a jade tablet from West India in accor‑
dance with instructions that foretold the coming of a sage emperor in China. In addition
to being told of a sage ruler in China, the Gantuoli king’s gift of tribute was a jade plate.
The two 11th‑century parallels with this early precedent provide yet another example of
embassies during Zhenzong’s reign being advised by those with knowledge of Chinese
histories, while also alluding to cultural norms and religious practices native to Southeast
and South Asia.
Ultimately, the Cō ḻa embassy received great favor from Emperor Zhenzong. During
Zhenzong’s birthday festival, the Cō ḻa ambassador requested that his group gather with
the monks of the Qisheng 啟聖 Chan temple to pray for the emperor’s long life, similar
to how Srivijaya envoys proclaimed that they had constructed a temple to pray for Zhen‑
zong’s long life eleven years earlier. The records state that when the embassy departed,
“gifts were generously bestowed” 賜物甚厚 .
5.3. Japan
In addition to the Cō ḻa envoys’ visit to the Qisheng temple, there are more indications
that efforts to conduct the Feng and Shan sacrifices did not mark the end of temple diplo‑
macy during the later part of Zhenzong’s reign. In 1012, an embassy arrived from Japan
to the great surprise of Zhenzong’s court ( Shishi leiyuan , juan 63; and Fozu tongji , juan 44).
Until this time, Japanese leaders had showed no interest in conducting formal diplomacy
with the Song empire, and had only cautiously maintained diplomatic relations with the
state of Wu‑Yue during the tenth century ( Sattler 2024 ). Upon arrival at Zhenzong’s court,
the envoys spoke of an auspicious aura that had appeared in the eastern part of Japan, and
that traditions held that such an omen signified the emergence of a sage emperor in the
Central Plains (China). Zhenzong was delighted to hear of the favorable omen, and de‑
creed that a temple should be built in Japan. The name of the temple was to be Shen’guang
神光 (Divine Light).36
Scholars of Japan will immediately (and correctly) recognize that this is a problematic
account. Japanese primary sources make no such description of an embassy sent to the
Song empire at this time, nor any desire to send one. In fact, this was a time when the Heian
court was disengaging from public duties, all the while courtiers and religious institutions
increasingly took private control over tax revenues and regional administration. Not only
was there no will to send an embassy to China, but the means for sending the grandiose
embassies of past centuries most likely no longer existed. Needless to say, there is much
of interest that can be gained from analyzing such an account.
To begin, the sources that provide this account are not official histories. One of the
sources, the Shishi leiyuan 事實類苑 , is a 12th‑century book of anecdotes, and the sole reason
that the embassy is mentioned is to tell of an embarrassing ordeal that occurred during the
closing ceremonies of the embassy’s visit.37The other source is the 13th‑century Buddhist
history work Fozu tongji 佛祖統紀 , which is a valuable source of information pertaining to
overseas exchange that does not appear in official histories. Although less detailed, this
account does provide information not included in the Shishi leiyuan , such as a specific date
for when the embassy arrived, which suggests that both accounts were based on earlier
records. There is a good reason for why such records were never referenced in official
histories. I would propose that sometime after the occurrence of these events, it became
clear to Chinese record keepers that this embassy was not an official delegation, and that
the Japanese state had no intent to send one to China. This begs the question of why an
embassy was sent, and who exactly were its envoys. False claims of state representation for
the sake of tributary trade are not uncommon in the long dur ée of diplomatic history in East

--- [Page 69] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 14 of 27
Asia. In fact, only fourteen years after these events, another embassy was sent from Japan
to the Song empire ( Enomoto 2007 , p. 82; and SHY ZG , 44). In 1026, an embassy arrived in
Mingzhou (Ningbo), with its chief envoy claiming that he had come to bring tribute on the
orders of the governor of Dazaifu 太宰府 (the government office responsible for overseeing
the administration of the island of Kyushu, as well as maritime customs). However, a close
examination by Song officials revealed that this man lacked the documentation necessary
to conduct diplomacy on behalf of his country, and it was deemed inappropriate that he
proceed to the Song capital. The Song court decreed that should the envoy wish to sell his
tributary goods, they would be purchased in Mingzhou at the going rate.38
This envoy, Zhou Liangshi 周良史 (986–?), was the son of a Chinese father from Taizhou
台州 and a Japanese mother.39Although Zhou Liangshi and his family were connected to
political figures in both Japan and China, extant records reveal that he was a sea merchant
by occupation. That he was denied his attempt to pay tribute at court is likely because
the court understood this, and did not think that he actually represented the Japanese gov‑
ernment. We may also note that this event occurred during the regency of Empress Liu
(Liu Huanghou 劉皇后 , 969–1033, r. 1022–1033), several years after Emperor Zhenzong had
passed away.40The difference in outcomes between both embassies would seem to be that
Zhenzong was more inclined to accept such claims. Indeed, there are indications that the
Japanese embassy of 1012 was organized by some of the same people who organized the
1026 embassy. For instance, Japanese sources record that Zhou Liangshi’s father, Zhou
Wenyi周文裔 (962–?), arrived in Japan in the ninth month of 1012, which would align tem‑
porally with the return of the Japanese “embassy” from the Song empire ( Taigai Kankeishi
Sōgō Nenpyō Henshū Iinkai 1999 , p. 118). Zhou Wenyi also appears to have been on Zhou
Liangshi’s ship to China in 1026, as he departed Japan in approximately the same month
as Zhou Liangshi.41
In addition to demonstrating the continued spread of temple diplomacy and Emperor
Zhenzong’s lenient conduct toward foreign visitors, this event also carries implications
for how we are to consider the presence of Chinese and mixed‑Chinese people residing
in Japan. The most significant of such communities was located in Hakata (present‑day
Fukuoka). Although many textual sources discuss Chinese people living or traveling there,
and evidence of a burgeoning Chinese community is likewise supported by the archaeolog‑
ical record, the earliest direct reference to such a community dates to the late 11th century.
Yamazaki Satoshi has argued that Zhou Liangshi and Zhou Wenyi were among an early
wave of Chinese people who formed a diaspora community in Hakata, and the accounts of
their embassy in 1012 lend further support to this position. The construction of a Buddhist
temple would have strengthened a nascent Chinese community in their area of residence.
Indeed, a study of early settlement in Fujian revealed that temples played a significant
role in forming Chinese communities in regions that Chinese people did not previously in‑
habit ( Clark 1990 , p. 38). Similarly, temples often formed the symbolic and organizational
centers of overseas Chinese communities across maritime Asia—as they still do today. As
other scholars have demonstrated, a wide range of evidence reveals that temples in Hakata
likewise held fundamental roles for the city’s overseas Chinese communities.42
6. Analyzing Emigration in Chinese Texts
A thorough understanding of either religious diplomacy or overseas migration dur‑
ing Zhenzong’s reign requires detailed knowledge of both topics due to their close relation.
Consideration of the nature of extant sources for this period does allow for additional in‑
sights, particularly those that pertain to the individuals who advised embassies on the
ideological and religious values that guided Zhenzong’s court. Thus far, we have seen
a range of indications that Chinese people were present in or advised many of the em‑
bassies examined, yet, despite their valuable roles in the diplomatic processes of this time,
the sources do not make any comment on whether individuals in these embassies could
speak or write Chinese, were once subjects of the Song empire, or could trace their ancestral
homeland to territory within either the Tang or Song empires. This leads to the distinct im‑

--- [Page 70] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 15 of 27
pression that Chinese record keepers—particularly those who were producing documents
for government use—did not wish to explicitly acknowledge that Chinese people were em‑
igrating to foreign countries. There were, of course, tactful ways of making insinuations,
such as stating that Chinese writing existed in Srivijaya or leaving unnamed the merchant
who explained to the Cō ḻa king that all under Heaven belonged to the Song empire. One
suspects that the most common course of action was to simply not address the matter in
any way. For instance the Xu zizhi tongjian changbian 續資治通鑑長編 talks of the tribute
of horses that the Xiliangzhou Tibetans paid to the Song court in 1004 and states that an
edict declared that they be compensated for their value, but the source makes no mention
of the Tibetans’ request to renovate a temple and receive Chinese artisans ( XZTCB , juan
56). A more glaring omission is the Japanese embassy of 1012, which appears to have been
purged from official histories.
Outright denial was also a valid course of action. In a remarkably rapid turn of events,
the Dai Viet leader Ly Cong Uan’s status at the Song court transitioned from that of a
usurper to a sovereign, with all of the titles of the previous king being bestowed upon
him. Zhenzong dismissed concerns among advisors about recognizing Ly Cong Uan as a
legitimate ruler, and only one year after taking the throne, Ly Cong Uan’s envoys partic‑
ipated in the Earth sacrifices at Fenyin. Yet, when these concerns were initially brought
to Zhenzong’s attention, he reportedly stated that the Vietnamese leader was a “southern
barbarian not worthy of reprimand” 蠻夷不足責 (XZTCB , juan 73). Although the Song
court was cognizant of the Dai Viet state’s complex demographics and political intricacies
(such as the existence of Chinese factions within their ruling class), it was more expedient
for Emperor Zhenzong to dismiss Ly Cong Uan’s actions as those of someone unaware of
Chinese moral conventions in order to receive Dai Viet envoys for a ceremony that was of
great personal significance.
Even when we examine the sources that remark on Ly Cong Uan’s Fujianese heritage,
it is evident that such observations did not derive from a sense of pride among Chinese writ‑
ers. Rather, these observations were made merely in the context of describing the political
apparatus of the Dai Viet state, and they were generally made with negative connotations.
For instance, one of the descriptions of Ly Cong Uan’s heritage was made in the context of
discussing an official from Guangxi who had attempted to betray the Song empire. This
man believed that he could do so by appealing to sympathetic officials in Vietnam with
Fujianese ancestry, knowing also that the Ly dynastic line was from that region of China
(XZTCB , juan 273).
Analysis of the names of foreign envoys also yields some interesting observations.
Usually only the names of one or two ambassadors or envoys were recorded in descriptions
of embassies, though in several instances, we see Chinese names listed for figures who
were minor embassy officials. One example would be the petty officer ( yaya押衙 ) Zheng
Yanmei鄭延美 , who accompanied the Xiliangzhou embassy to China in 1004 ( SHY FH ,
5). Another is of a certain administrative assistant ( panguan 判官 ) named Chen Yi 陳義 ,
who was listed along with two ambassadors with Arabic names for the Champa embassy
to China in 1011 ( SHY FY , 4). An earlier Champa embassy for the year 999 was led by a
certain Chen Yao 陳堯 according to the Song hui yao jigao 宋會要輯稿 , though in the Song
shi, this name is listed as Zhu Chenyao 朱陳堯 (SHY FY , 7; and SS, juan 489). It is quite
unusual under any circumstance to see two surnames followed by a given name, and one
wonders how this discrepancy occurred. In the 998 Dashi mission to Song China, there
is another administrative assistant recorded with the Chinese name Wen Mao 文茂 (or
alternatively, the Chinese given name Wenmao), though elsewhere, he is recorded with the
more seemingly foreign names of Wenshu 文戍 and Wenwu 文戊 (SHY FY , 4;WXTK , juan
339; and SS, juan 490, respectively). Clear‑cut examples of ranking envoys with Chinese
names would be those of the Kucha ambassador Li Yanfu 李延福 who gave tribute in 1010
and of the Champa vice ambassador Liu Gongzuo 劉公佐 who gave tribute in 1015 ( SS,
juan 490; and SHY FY , 7). The prevalence of Chinese and Arabic names among Champa

--- [Page 71] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 16 of 27
envoys is addressed in a comment made regarding the 1011 Champa embassy that the
administrative assistant Chen Yi belonged to. Here, the record states:
(The Champa) king stated that since the land does not yield much in the way of
produce or rice, he often wants rare and unusual goods. And so he often desires
that pearls of high value be submitted (to him), and uses them for paying tribute.
It is for this reason that he deals with special envoys. These envoys visit every
nearby foreign state ( SHY FY , juan 4).43
其王又言本國地毛不壯，土產無精，常思奇異，而供王每欲殊珍，而作貢。所以
特遣使。使遍詣鄰蕃。
There is no explanation for why these envoys were considered “special”, though the
implication is evident to those who recognize that a minor official in the embassy under
discussion held a Chinese name. Finally, as one would expect, Chinese names were also
relatively common among Vietnamese embassies. However, considering the long history
of Chinese states governing the area, this does not allow us to distinguish between native
or assimilated peoples and those who belonged to Chinese diaspora communities. In all of
the above examples, the only inference we have that these people were ethnically Chinese
or claimed Chinese ancestry is that they had Chinese names. The record keepers were
reluctant to provide any additional details.
Thus, there exists a contradiction that must be resolved. By all appearances, Zhen‑
zong was not only willing to accept state embassies that were, in some capacity, supported
by Chinese people living or trading abroad, but all indications suggest that such embassies
in fact received preferential treatment. Yet, Chinese record keepers went to great lengths
to avoid addressing the topic of Chinese people living abroad. Even when asked to allow
Chinese artisans to migrate to other states, we see the rare instances that Zhenzong refused
requests from foreign envoys. Although the court regarded such people as a precious re‑
sourse, material value was never a deterrence in Zhenzong’s diplomatic exchanges. Rather,
we must consider other factors that prohibited the migration of subjects outside of the Song
realm, particularly the extent to which imperial Chinese ideology valorized the notion of
virtuous rulers attracting distant peoples. In addition to making the claim of a sovereign
ruling all under Heaven, the political value of demonstrating moral preeminence was what
incentivized Zhenzong to bring foreign envoys to his birthday and New Year celebrations,
as well as to his grand sacrifices. Moreover, just as righteous rulers were meant to attract
subjects from afar, instances of an emperor’s subjects leaving the realm under his direct
governance in search of profit or a better life demonstrated an ideological failure on the
part of the emperor and his advisors. It also served as a moral threat to record keepers and
historians concerned with how precedents might be established, especially when the out‑
ward migration of imperial subjects could be looked upon in a positive light or as receiving
implicit or explicit approval from an emperor.
The value of attracting foreign peoples from afar is commonly highlighted in records
throughout most of imperial Chinese history, and Zhenzong’s reign was no exception. In
defense of the Dashi embassy of 998 breaking regulations, the emperor stated that, after
traveling across the sea to pay tribute, they had “proclaimed their captivation and admi‑
ration (of him) from afar” 傾心遠慕於聲明 (SHY FY , 4). In the case of the Cō ḻa embassy
of 1015, the envoys greatly exaggerated the travel time it took them to reach China from
South India, stating that they traveled for approximately three years ( SS, juan 489). Indeed,
the envoys stated that they “wish to declare the sincere admiration of distant peoples”
願以表遠人慕化之誠 . Zhenzong’s advisors were well‑versed in the history of diplomacy
between Chinese empires and South Asian states, yet no comments were made on this dis‑
crepancy. Likewise, the journey of the Japanese “embassy” of 1012 was described with a
metaphor for long and arduous travel ( tihang梯航 ). Such trips could indeed prove dan‑
gerous, though the sea crossing between Japanese and Chinese ports was usually accom‑
plished in less than one week ( Shishi leiyuan , juan 63). These statements were grounded
in rhetoric that was intended to resonate with the Song court, though they nevertheless

--- [Page 72] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 17 of 27
offer some insight into the importance of space and moral forces in imperial ideology. In
sum, record keepers and historians were largely motivated to emphasize the distant jour‑
neys of foreign peoples to the Song domain and to minimize discussion of the movement
of Song subjects abroad, especially when they were in the service of foreign states. This
maintained an image that the Song state functioned in accordance with the moral stan‑
dards set by previous dynasties.44Zhenzong likewise had to rule within this ideological
framework, though he made extensive use of Chinese middlemen whose roles facilitating
diplomatic exchange were often either thinly veiled or entirely unconcealed.
It was also a sensitive point of fact that Chinese people were living in inland regions
near the northern and northwestern borders of the Song empire. Nevertheless, their exis‑
tence could be openly addressed under the assumption that such populations remained in
place after the fall of the Tang dynasty—as opposed to those peoples migrating there dur‑
ing the reign of Song emperors. Keeping in mind that polities near the northwestern border
of the Song empire were quite successful in their diplomatic initiatives and were present
at Zhenzong’s major ceremonies, we should also consider the possibility that members of
Chinese communities in those areas played a role in advising their diplomatic missions.
Indeed, the Song–Yuan historian Ma Duanlin 馬端臨 (1245–1322) did point out that there
were large Chinese populations residing in the northwestern area ( WXTK , juan 337), and
we have already seen that some envoys from the region had Chinese names. Yet, if Zhen‑
zong was indeed willing to take advantage of members of Chinese communities advising
embassies from polities to the northwest, he was most certainly against encouraging any
sort of migration from the Song empire to those areas. As we have also seen, Zhenzong
and his advisors were more willing to part with a hundred thousand pieces of gold foil
than they were with Chinese subjects.
This is, perhaps, best understood by comparing inland Chinese communities located
outside of the Song empire with overseas Chinese communities. One such distinction was
that the Chinese people who traveled overseas at this time and in later periods were mainly
from the southeastern areas of present‑day Fujian and Guangdong, whereas many of the
Chinese residing in areas beyond the north and northwestern borders were native to the re‑
gions where they lived. Northern Chinese held different customs from those in the south‑
east to begin with, and the leaders of the states they lived in each had various policies
for governing and assimilating populations of those who viewed themselves as Chinese.
Those leaders also understood that, at any given time, there were officials in the Song court
who held designs of ruling over Chinese populations beyond Song borders ( Levine 2009 ,
pp. 505–8; Tackett 2017 ). In contrast, a vastly greater quantity of export wares were shipped
by sea rather than by land, so the economic benefits of hosting sea merchant diaspora com‑
munities in coastal polities resulted in a common dynamic throughout maritime Asia in
which native leaders did their utmost to attract foreign merchants. With such opportuni‑
ties, there were more incentives for Chinese people to travel overseas.
Another distinction is that the Song empire had particular reasons to be apprehensive
about Chinese people living in the northern regions. States like Liao and Xi Xia 西夏 were
known to prize knowledge of Chinese customs, statecraft, and military strategy, and as
such, made extensive use of ethnic Chinese people from within their territories to staff their
governments.45While the Song government during Zhenzong’s reign appeared to oppose
all forms of Chinese migration abroad, migration beyond the northern borders in particular
posed a potentially existential threat. Not only did South Seas states pose no such military
threat (border skirmishes with Dai Viet nonwithstanding), but their geographic location
and dependence on Chinese trade meant that there was no risk that these states would
become vassals of the Liao empire. Although Zhenzong’s successors perhaps more pru‑
dently prioritized diplomacy with northern states due to the military threat of the Liao and
Xi Xia states, in encouraging tributary relations with South Seas states, Zhenzong was able
to amass political capital and legitimacy to offset a loss of standing in the northern regions.
Thus, positive relations were maintained with coastal states hosting overseas Chinese di‑
aspora communities, and we do not see any attempt to curtail or dissuade migration to

--- [Page 73] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 18 of 27
those areas, even though such migration violated long‑held ideological conventions. This
preference for sea connections is likewise evident in an instance when the Dai Viet king
asked to establish border markets in 1009, but Zhenzong declined in favor of continuing a
monopoly of sea trade via port cities ( XZTCB , juan 72).
From the analysis thus far, it is apparent that indications of Chinese people staffing
or advising embassies follow a pattern that aligns with the main sea routes of this time.
Dai Viet, Champa, Srivijaya, India, and Arabia (Dashi) were the states or regions situated
along a trade route that connected the Persian Gulf to China. Since the middle of the Tang
dynasty, if not earlier, this was the most significant trade route throughout maritime Asia.
Other major trade routes included those between China and Korea, as well as between
China and Japan. Not only were Chinese merchants trading in those two areas during the
11th century, they were also establishing trade diasporas there. Although textual sources
from Srivijaya, Java, and India for this period are much less extensive than those of East
Asian states, there is still much promise in analyzing and comparing descriptions of diverse
entrepôt communities in recovered inscriptions from those areas. Arabic‑language books
also hold much potential.
7. The Legacy of Zhenzong’s Initiatives
The degree of leniency, expediency, and generosity that was extended to tributary
embassies which demonstrated a keen understanding of Zhenzong’s desired spiritual, ide‑
ological, and geopolitical order, was by no means typical of Chinese rulers. Following
Zhenzong’s death, the regency of Empress Liu initiated a change in policy that marked a
return to the traditional expectations of diplomatic relationships. In particular, embassies
that could offer little more than compliance during major ceremonies or melodramatic
approbation quickly dwindled in number. For instance, Butuan is only ever recorded as
sending three embassies throughout the Song dynasty, and all arrived during Zhenzong’s
reign. Although Dashi is recorded as having frequently sent embassies from early in the
Song dynasty—and ten embassies specifically during Zhenzong’s reign—it does not ap‑
pear that they sent embassies from the time of Zhenzong’s death in 1022 until the year
1055. Srivijaya did send an embassy during Empress Liu’s regency in 1028, though follow‑
ing this, it did not send any other embassies until 1079. Likewise, Champa, which sent
approximately eleven embassies during Zhenzong’s reign, sent one embassy during Em‑
press Liu’s regency in 1029 and did not send any others until 1050. Dashi, Srivijaya, and
Champa were three of the four states that sent the most embassies to China during the early
Song dynasty (the other being Dai Viet), so their sudden decline in tributary missions is a
testament to the significant change in policy that occurred during the regency of Empress
Liu. John Chaffee also noticed this trend, and related it to a very interesting memorial from
the prefect of Guangzhou in 1016:
The embassies with their envoys, vice‑envoys, subordinate officials, and assist‑
ing officials should be limited to 20 [representatives] for Arabia [Dashi], Cō ḻa,
Srivijaya, and Java, and 10 for Champa, Tambralinga (Danliumei 丹流眉 ), Bor‑
neo, Guluo 古邏 [Kalah, present‑day Kedah], and the Philippines (Moyi 摩逸 ),
and they should be given documents for their travel. Guangzhou foreign guests
who falsely substitute for them should be found guilty ( Chaffee 2018 , p. 131).46
This translation allows for two points. First, near the end of Zhenzong’s reign, there
was already a desire among officials to curtail the extravagant receptions offered to foreign
embassies. Second, we see that officials were aware that some of the individuals claiming
to be envoys were actually residents of diaspora communities within China. Nevertheless,
there does not appear to be any significant change in policy until after Zhenzong’s death.
When recalling that Empress Liu and her court refused to recognize Zhou Liangshi’s at‑
tempt at diplomacy on behalf of Japan, we know that she was not inclined to deal with
merchants misrepresenting their status. Considering that Zhou Liangshi was directed to
conduct trade at one of China’s commercial ports, we can also assume that merchants rep‑
resenting Dashi, Srivijaya, Champa, and other South Seas states were resigned to doing the

--- [Page 74] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 19 of 27
same. Only in the case of Dai Viet do we see a continued reception of embassies, though
this can be attributed to the Song court’s intent to maintain cordial relations with a state
that it shared an oft‑contended land border with.
All of this is not to say that Empress Liu sought a complete reversal of her late hus‑
band’s policies. Jinah Kim’s enlightening work on Chinese iconographies in India reveals
that, toward the end of her life, the empress regent dispatched a Buddhist embassy to the
state of Magadha (East India). The purpose of this embassy was to construct a pagoda in
Bodhgaya, in honor of Zhenzong’s father Taizong ( Kim 2022 , pp. 195–97. See also Gongkat‑
sang and Willis 2013 , pp. 434, 437–38). The stele to commemorate this pagoda is still extant,
and has an inscribed date of 1033. Its inscription tells of a certain monk named Huaiwen
懷問 who was in charge of overseeing the pagoda’s construction. Although apparently not
mentioned in official Chinese histories, the Fozu tongji discusses this voyage, as well other
voyages undertaken by the monk Huaiwen 懷問 . In a passage for the year 1031, it states:
The monk Huaiwen has previously visited India. He built a pagoda for Emperor
Zhenzong at the side of the Buddha’s Diamond Throne (in Bodhgaya). Today
he wishes to go there once more on behalf of the empress dowager and present
emperor (Renzong 宋仁宗 , 1010–1063, r. 1033–1063) to build a second pagoda
(Fozu tongji , juan 45).47
沙門懷問嘗往天竺。為真宗皇帝建塔於佛金剛座之側。今欲再往為皇太后今上更
建二塔。
This passage goes on to state that an inscribed stele would be placed at the bottom of the
pagoda and that Huaiwen’s request was approved. Thus, this passage tells us that not
only had Zhenzong previously sent his own Buddhist embassy to India to build a pagoda
there, but that Empress Liu was in favor of continuing this initiative and permitted the
construction of a second pagoda. This supports Kim’s position that the empress dowager
was personally motivated to construct the pagoda for the sake of honoring Zhenzong’s fa‑
ther and securing his passage to the heavenly realm. Moreover, such a project is consistent
with Empress Liu’s extensive efforts to expand a cult of statues of imperial ancestors in the
Song empire, to initiate the construction of temples dedicated to Zhenzong, and to place
images of Zhenzong in existing temples ( Ebrey 1997 , pp. 51–58).
Chinese temple building projects in India continued into later generations, though
there do not appear to be indications of any such initiatives being conducted at the behest
of the Chinese state. The Daoyi zhilue 島夷誌略 talks of a wood and brick pagoda built
in Nākappaṭṭi n ̣am (South India) by Chinese people. It had a Chinese inscription which
dated its construction to 1267, but made no mention of who constructed it.48There is much
evidence to suggest that this was the same brick pagoda that was dismantled by Jesuits
in 1867.
In the case of Srivijaya, although trade was limited to China’s southern ports after
Zhenzong’s reign, there was an instance of Srivijayans receiving permission from the Song
court to restore a Daoist temple in Guangzhou in 1070 ( Salmon 2002 , pp. 66–69). Similar
to the monastery that the Srivijaya king, Bālaputra, established in Nālandā during the 9th
century, the Srivijayans purchased land in the region to support the temple complex. The
complex was also provided with a library, a fasting hall, and a pavilion for a large bell.
The inscribed stele from which this information is obtained states that, due to these chari‑
table works, ships from Srivijaya “were now able to reach their destination points without
incident”. The restoration was completed in 1079, which also marked the first year that
Srivijaya envoys paid tribute at the Song court since the single attempt to do so during
Empress Liu’s regency ( XZTCB , juan 299).49Of particular significance is that the temple
which the envoys chose to restore was one of the Tianqing temples that Emperor Zhenzong
had established during his reign.
The Chengtian wanshou temple that Srivijaya envoys brought to the attention of the
Song court in 1004 was built in homage to emperor Zhenzong. The name was originally
derived from Zhenzong’s birthday festival ( Chengtian jie 承天節 ), which was an occasion

--- [Page 75] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 20 of 27
during which he frequently chose to receive foreign embassies. Moreover, the meaning
ofChengtian (“entrusted by Heaven”) obviously held much personal significance to Zhen‑
zong, as we have seen that, throughout much of his reign, he was concerned with asserting
the legitimacy of his position as the Son of Heaven. It may come as no surprise then that
the Chengtian wanshou temple was not the only temple with such a name constructed
in a major maritime entrep ôt. In 1007, only four years after the Srivijaya temple was con‑
structed, a Chengtian temple ( Chengtian si 承天寺 ) was established in the Fujian port city of
Quanzhou ( Ba Min tongzhi , juan 77), which was fast becoming one of the most important
hubs (along with Guangzhou) for the South Seas trade.50This happened to be the same
year that a spirit medium, who was previously a merchant from southwest Fujian, took up
residence in the imperial city and began transmitting revelations and predictions from the
ancestral deity to Emperor Zhenzong.51Only two to three years later, a mosque was built
in Quanzhou, which, taken together with the naming of the Chengtian temple, presents an‑
other strong indication of interconnections and cooperation between Chinese, Dashi, and
Southeast Asian peoples at this time.52
Also worth noting is that the same temple name (Ch. Chengtian si , Jp. Jōtenji承天寺 )
was given to one of the temples in the major Japanese trade hub of Hakata, which was host
to a large Chinese diaspora. Jōtenji was established in 1242 by the Chan/Zen monk Enni
圓爾 (1202–1280) after returning from his studies in China, and from its very inception, it
was deeply integrated in trade between China and Japan.53Considering its construction
over two centuries after the passing of Zhenzong, the temple was most likely named af‑
ter its counterpart in Quanzhou, which is suggested by the fact that the other temple that
Enni was involved in establishing in Hakata, Sōfokuji 崇福寺 , also shared the name of a
Quanzhou temple.54Nevertheless, we should not dismiss the possibility that Chinese sea
merchants provided the names for these temples, especially since they financed the con‑
struction of Jōtenji, and possibly Sōfokuji as well. As for the Chengtian wanshou temple
in Srivijaya, there does not appear to be much information on this complex following the
1003–1004 mission. We do know that Palembang, generally thought to be the center of
power in Srivijaya at that time, hosted a community of thousands of Chinese inhabitants
by the early Ming dynasty ( Dong Xiyang kao , juan 3). It would seem that the only subse‑
quent information about this temple comes from an early 17th century history, in which
the author states simply that “The signboard was bestowed during the Song. Today (the
temple) is in ruins” 宋時賜額。今廢。 (Dong Xiyang kao , juan 3). Archaeologist Edmund
Edwards McKinnon wrote that there was once a temple located along the Musi River in
the Palembang area known as the Negeri Pangkalan Cina (“Port of China”) ( Edwards McK‑
innon 1985 , p. 21). After inquiring with local scholars, I was told that there are no longer
any traces of this temple.
8. Conclusion
When we consider the grandiose rites that Emperor Zhenzong conducted, as well as
the temples in major entrep o ̂ts across maritime Asia that were named in his honor, received
his patronage, or were built in continuation of his policies, it becomes apparent that Zhen‑
zong established a legacy in overseas exchange that was only superseded during the reigns
of early Ming emperors. Yet, this was a complex relationship with the outside world that
employed both an extensive use of historic precedent and strategies that were atypical of
past dynasties. For example, the Song court was willing to make use of Chinese people
living abroad for their own foreign policy goals, but they were unwilling to acknowledge
this, and in some instances, they were steadfast in not allowing or openly supporting the
migration of Chinese people abroad. Such circumstances during Zhenzong’s reign pro‑
vide rare insight into the activities of Chinese people overseas, particularly in the capacity
of advising and assisting rulers across maritime Asia in matters that pertained to lucra‑
tive tributary trade with China. Chinese sea merchants also assisted Emperor Zhenzong
in bringing foreign embassies to China in ways that supported the image that he wished
to cultivate at home and overseas. This diplomatic activity involved the establishment of

--- [Page 76] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 21 of 27
temples across various regions in Asia in order to foster strong relationships between Zhen‑
zong’s court and both the envoys of foreign rulers and the merchant groups that claimed
to represent foreign rulers. Such methods were atypical in Chinese history until this time,
and it appears that they were mainly employed during Zhenzong’s reign and in instances
that invoked his legacy after his passing. Yet, underlying the rituals and rhetoric was a
fundamentally transactional system of relationships. Influence, legitimacy, and reputation
were being purchased to support domestic, geopolitical, and religious goals. Ultimately,
Zhenzong understood that his rivals could claim a comparable status in terms of political
or military strength, and so he used every means at his disposal to ensure that his spiritual
position on Earth was rivaled by none.
Funding: This research and its publication have been partly supported by the French National Re‑
search Agency (ANR), project MANTRA—Maritime Asian Networks of Buddhist Tantra (ANR‑22‑
CE27‑015), coordinated by Andrea Acri (EPHE, PSL University, Paris).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Acknowledgments: This article is based on two conference papers. The first paper was given at the
“Beyond the Spice Route” symposium at King’s College, University of Cambridge on 7 November
2023, part of the King’s College “Silk Roads Programme” co‑funded by the French EPHE, GREI and
ANR. The second paper was given at the “3rd Biennial Indian Ocean Studies Conference” at the
Sheridan Institute of Higher Education on 18 November 2023. I would like to thank Andrea Acri
and Francesco Bianchini for their editorial assistance, as well as Richard von Glahn and the two
anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflicts of interest.
Abbreviations
SHY FY Song hui yao jigao: Fanyi 蕃夷
SHY L Song hui yao jigao: Li 禮
SHY ZG Song hui yao jigao: Zhiguan 職官
SS Song shi
WXTK Wenxian tongkao
XZTCB Xu zizhi tongjian changbian
Notes
1On the term “maritime Asia” and its varied usage in academic circles, see Acri (2019 ).
2On these rites in Chinese history, (see Olsson 1974 , pp. 165–75; Loewe 1978a , p. 172; Loewe 1978b , pp. 664–65; Bodde 1978 , pp. 68,
73;Weschler 1985 , pp. 154, 170–95; Ge 1995 , pp. 68–69; Lewis 1999 ;He 2005 ;Wyatt 2008 , pp. 87–89, 102–03 (and citation no. 30);
Choi 2017 , pp. 15–37; Cahill 2021 , pp. 12–16).
3For English‑language scholarship on the presence of Chinese people overseas, Wang Gungwu initiated discussion on the early
activities of Chinese sea merchants in his pivotal work, recently published as Wang (1998 ). Geoff Wade has shed a great deal of
light on maritime exchange in Wade (2009 ), while also recognizing the presence of Chinese merchants in maritime Asian trade at
this time. Other valuable contributions include Salmon (2002 ), and Chin (2011 ). As a result of the abundance of Japanese primary
sources discussing Chinese merchants, scholarship on this topic in Japan is more plentiful. Notable works include ( Mori 1975 ;
Yamauchi 2003 ;Enomoto 2007 ;Yamazaki 2010 ;Watanabe 2012 ;Tanaka 2012 ). English works that discuss Chinese merchants
and Chinese communities in Japan include ( Kawazoe 1990 ;Batten 2006 ;von Verschuer 2006 ;von Glahn 2014 ;Y. Li 2023 ;Sattler
2024 ).
4In contrast to the increasing visibility of secular Chinese abroad, the overseas activities of Buddhist monks and non‑Chinese
merchants at this time have been fleshed out in much greater detail. See, for instance, the recent contributions of Acri (2016 ),
and Chaffee (2018 ).

--- [Page 77] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 22 of 27
5Lau and Huang (2009 , pp. 264, 266), and Deng (2021 , pp. 372–76). On the treaty, see Tillman (2005 ), and Lau and Huang (2009 ,
pp. 262–70). For the Liao dynasty and the history of Song–Liao relations, see ( Ang 1983 ;Wang 1983 ;Twitchett and Tietze 1994 ;
Tackett 2017 ).
6Lau and Huang (2009 , p. 268) state “It was estimated that the annual payments amounted to only 1 or 2 percent of the Sung
military expenditures required during war times, and to merely 0.3 to 0.5 percent of the total state expenditures. Moreover,
these payments were easily offset by the surpluses acquired from the seven new border markets that were established”.
7Tillman (2005 , p. 144). A large part of the success of the treaty derived from the leadership of Song minister Wang Dan and his
efforts to maintain peaceful relations. See Wyatt (2008 ).
8Among such critics were Fan Zhongyan 范仲淹 (Lau and Huang 2009 , p. 267) and Su Shi 蘇軾 (Tillman 2005 , p. 145).
9SS, juan 186; and SHY ZG , juan 44. See also ( Wheatley 1959 , p. 24; Wolters 1986 , pp. 36–37; Wade 2009 , p. 225). Wheatley inter‑
prets the Song shi text as intending “to induce ‘foreign traders of the South Sea and those who went to foreign lands beyond the sea
to trade’ to come to South Chinese ports on promise of special import licenses”. This would seem to be an inaccurate translation.
The text reads: 雍熙中，遣內侍八人齎敕書金帛，分四路招致海南諸蕃。商人出海外蕃國販易者，令並詣兩浙司市舶司請給官券，
違者沒入其寶貨。 My translation of this text is “During the Yongxi period (984–987), eight palace attendants were dispatched to
give imperial missives (as well as) gold and silks. (These groups) were allotted four routes, (with the purpose of) eliciting (trib‑
ute) from the various foreigners of the South Seas. Merchants who departed to trade in foreign countries overseas were ordered
to visit the Liangzhe Maritime Trade Superintendency offices to request permits to do so. Violators were to have their goods
confiscated”. I believe that the last two sentences of this translation refer to an entirely different issue, which was that merchants
from the Liangzhe region who were trading in Japan at this time were evading taxes and levies issued by the Song government.
The entry in the Song hui yao jigao does not discuss merchants or the Liangzhe offices, which further suggests that these were two
separate issues. On these merchants from the Liangzhe region and their deteriorating relations with the Song government, see
(Sattler 2024 ). Regarding the term “Nan Hai”, its precise definition varied in usage. The monk Yijing 義淨 (635–713) considered
the area of Nan Hai to encompass what we now regard as the archipelagic and coastal regions of Southeast Asia up to (but not
including) India. See Nan Hai jigui neifa zhuan 南海寄歸內法傳 . The term used in the text describing the eunuchs was actually
“Hai Nan” 海南 , which I believe is synonymous with “Nan Hai” in this instance, though later the term came to more commonly
refer to the island of Hainan to the south of Guangdong province.
10By my count, there were approximately 22 embassies from maritime Southeast Asia that arrived from the beginning of Taizong’s
reign in 976 to the eunuch missions in 987. From 987 to the end of Taizong’s reign in 997, there were 12 missions. See Hartwell
(1983 ).
11On state revenue derived from sea trade at this time, see Wheatley (1959 , p. 24).
12On the 992 embassy, see Yu hai , juan 154; WXTK , juan 332; and SHY FY , p. 4. This mission is also discussed in ( Clark 1991 ,
pp. 123–24; Salmon 2002 ;Wade 2009 ;Chin 2011 ;Sattler 2024 ). My examination of primary sources for this essay was greatly
facilitated by the near‑comprehensive lists of diplomatic embassies sent to China compiled in Hartwell (1983 ), and Bielenstein
(2005 ).
13Hartwell (1983 , p. 182) lists only an embassy that arrived in the period between 1068 and 1077, whereas Bielenstein (2005 , p. 66)
states that “(a 1014) edict referred to the arrival of envoys from She‑p’o (Java)”.
14For more on this and other Srivijaya embassies, see Claudine Salmon’s excellent essay, Salmon (2002 ). For the primary sources
which detail this embassy, see SHY FY , 4;SHY FY , 7;XZTCB , juan 55; SS, juan 489; SS, juan 490; and WXTK , juan 339.
15This was celebrated on the second day of the twelfth month.
16These signboards were displayed on the front of the main hall of a temple complex, as is still common for Chinese and East
Asian temples today.
17Salmon (2002 , pp. 62–63), and Bielenstein (2005 , p. 75). Salmon thinks it could have been either for the sole use of a Chinese
community, or for the use of a Chinese community as well as the greater public.
18People with ancestral or linguistic links to these areas are commonly referred to as “Hokkien”.
19Pingzhou ketan , juan 2. This personal account dates to around 1119, but contains information that was collected around two
decades earlier. See also Wolters (1983 , p. 55).
20See ( Flecker 2002 ;Krahl et al. 2011 ;Kwa 2012 ;Liebner 2014 ;Chong and Murphy 2017 ).
21China Biographical Database. Harvard University, Academia Sinica, and Peking University. https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/
cbdb/home (last modified April, 2024).
22One string contained 1000 or slightly less than 1000 coins.
23I am grateful to Louis Copplestone, who brought the existence of this temple complex to my attention in a personal communi‑
cation.
24See ( Cœdès 1975 , pp. 141–42, 158; Chattopadhyaya 1965 , pp. 90–91; Kulke 2009 , p. 6; Seshadri 2009 , p. 127).
25Olsson (1974 , pp. 161, 164, 171–72); Q. Li (2008 , pp. 82–100); Choi (2017 , pp. 18–19, 31–32); and Deng (2021 , p. 376). One outlier is
Cahill, who is not inclined to view the emergence of the Heavenly Texts primarily as a reaction to the increasing power and status

--- [Page 78] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 23 of 27
of the Liao state, but rather argues that Zhenzong was driven by his religious convictions. She believes that such a narrative was
concocted by orthodox historians to slander the Daoist initiatives of Zhenzong and his advisors. See Cahill (2021 ).
26As Ebrey points out, a key difference was that the Kaiyuan si were ecumenical institutions which, unlike the Tianqing guan , were
not intended to portray the emperor or the ancestors as deities.
27For the 1008 Feng sacrifices, see ( Olsson 1974 , pp. 165–75; Weschler 1985 , pp. 170–95; Ge 1995 ;He 2005 ;Wyatt 2008 , pp. 87–89;
Choi 2017 , pp. 15–37; Cahill 2021 , pp. 12–16). For the earlier instances in which the rites took place, see ( Bodde 1978 , pp. 68, 73;
Loewe 1978a , p. 172; Loewe 1978b , pp. 664–65; Weschler 1985 , pp. 170–95; Ge 1995 , pp. 68–69; Lewis 1999 ). For debates on their
Zhou dynasty origins, see ( Weschler 1985 , pp. 154, 171–72; Lewis 1999 , pp. 53–55, 58; Wyatt 2008 , pp. 87, 102–3 (citation no. 30)).
The participation of foreign peoples in these rites can be dated at least as far back as Tang Gaozong’s 唐高宗 (628–683, r. 649–683)
sacrifices in 666, which included embassies of “the Turks, the kingdoms of Khotan, Persia, India, and Japan, and the Korean
states of Silla, Paekche, and even Koguryo”. See Weschler (1985 , p. 186). Going back as far as the time of Confucius, there were
those who conducted the Feng and Shan or similar sacrifices but were ridiculed or regarded as illegitimate due to merely ruling
petty domains or not even ruling as actual sovereigns.
28Either the Ganzhou embassy of 1007 was requested to remain in China until the Feng sacrifices were held, or an embassy was
sent not long after the previous embassy was dispatched.
29For these sacrifices, see ( Olsson 1974 , pp. 169–70; Wyatt 2008 , pp. 87–88; Cahill 2021 , p. 17).
30This ambassador was probably the ship captain Tuopoli 陁婆離 , who was present in the Feng sacrifices, though here the name
that is recorded is Tuoluoli 陁羅離 .
31For early descriptions of Ly Cong Uan as a Fujianese person, see Mengxi bitan , juan 25; XZTCB , juan 273; and WXTK , juan 330.
For the later assertion that he was from Vietnam, see An‑nan chi luoc , 12. I am inclined to support James Chin’s argument that
theMengxi bitan description is more reliable than the An‑nan chi luoc description, because the former is only 58 years removed
from the life of Ly Cong Uan, whereas the latter is several centuries removed. See Chin (2011 , p. 162, citation no. 10).
32Taylor (1992 , pp. 139–40), and Taylor (2013 , pp. 59–60). See additional discourse on Ly’s life in Taylor (1986 ).
33Ly Cong Uan’s predecessor was likewise put on the throne by a faction from the Giao area. See Taylor (2013 , pp. 52–54).
34One 1076 account also states “Fujian and Guangnan (Guangdong) people are going to Jiaozhi (Dai Viet) to conduct commerce,
and it has been said that some remain there to hold government positions” 福建、廣南人因商賈至交趾，或聞有留於彼用事者 .
SeeXZTCB , juan 273, and ( Clark 1991 , p. 124). See also ( Sattler 2025 ).
35The details of Ly Cong Uan’s Earth sacrifices are provided in Taylor 1986, p. 165. The earth deity Houtu was also worshipped
in Vietnam at this time, which is discussed in ibid., p. 160.
36This name is a clever allusion to a verse of the late Tang poet Han Wo 韓偓 . His poem of the Shen’guang temple pagoda in
Fuzhou, where he was living in exile, contains the line “ Auspicious vapors by the Sun Palace give rise to a royal crown; (my)
degrading eyes open in attempt to view Fusang (Japan)” 日宮紫氣生冠冕，試望扶桑病眼開 . This poem was, in turn, inspired by
a poem of a certain late Tang poet named Zhou Pu 周朴 , which describes the seawater near the Shen’guang temple: “Sea water
flows out to the frontiers of Wa (Japan); the patterns of the sky crown the city of Fuzhou” 海水旋流倭國野 ,天文方戴福州城 . Both
poems are preserved in Quan Tang shi 全唐詩 , in juans 680 and 673, respectively. This example shows that those who planned
the embassy were familiar with the historic precedents of omens portending a sage ruler, as well as with Tang poetry.
37Shishi leiyuan , juan 63 states: “Court affairs were put on hold for the day so that the emperor could personally send (the Japan en‑
voys) off. The foreign envoys (thereupon) pleaded with him to order a literatus to write the inscription for the temple signboard.
At the time, even though there was by chance a literatus present who finished first in the imperial examinations, his understand‑
ing of characters was not very strong and (rather) ordinary at best. The scholar Zhang Junfang was sought as a replacement,
as he was a talented student of the ancient ways. The emperor summoned him to promptly compose the temple signboard.
(However), at the time Zhang was still a junior official, and was drunk at the Fanlou Restaurant. People were dispatched all over
the capital to find him but were unable to do so. All the while, the foreigners waited with eager anticipation at the palace gate”.
朝辭日，上親臨遣，夷使面乞令辭臣撰一寺記，當時直者雖偶中魁選，詞學不甚優，居常止以張學士君房代之，蓋假其稽古才
雅也。既傳宣，令急撰寺記。時張尚為小官，醉飲於樊樓，遣人遍京城尋之不得，而夷人在閤門翹足而待。 The account goes on
to state that following the event, running jokes were made at court at Zhang Junfang’s expense.
38At this time, Mingzhou was one of the most significant ports in China. Nevertheless, the reigns of Taizong and Zhenzong
corresponded with a precipitous decline for sea merchants and export ceramics producers in the region, as the establishment of
Maritime Trade Superintendency ( Shibosi市舶司 ) offices in Mingzhou and Hangzhou at the end of the tenth century resulted
in an upsurge of activity from merchants and producers from other parts of southeast China, particularly those from southern
Zhejiang and Fujian. See Sattler (2024 ).
39For more on Zhou Liangshi and his family, see Yamazaki (2011 ), and Sattler (2021 ).
40For the regency of Empress Liu, see Chaffee (2001 ).
41Taigai Kankeishi Sōgō Nenpyō Henshū Iinkai (1999 , pp. 122–23). Japanese records do not discuss both men together, though
they usually only record the names of one or several merchant leaders for any given trade ship.

--- [Page 79] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 24 of 27
42(Kawazoe 1990 , pp. 402–4; Batten 2006 , pp. 128–30; von Glahn 2014 , pp. 276–79; Y. Li 2023 , pp. 121–26). In addition to being
centers of worship, such temples were locations to plan and coordinate social functions, and they often took key roles in major
financial transactions.
43The entry goes on to state that these “special envoys” acquired a Dashi lion in Srivijaya by way of India, which they gave as
tribute to the Song court.
44For the influence of contemporary politics on Song‑ and Yuan‑period historians, see Hartman (2021 ).
45For the Xi Xia, see Dunnel (1994 , p. 170). For the Liao, see Tackett (2017 , pp. 18–19, 171–72).
46It is interesting to note that there do not appear to be records of Danliumei, Borneo, Guluo, and Moyi giving tribute until this
time, and Java is not recorded as having sent tribute since 992.
47A third embassy that included Huaiwen and a group of other monks was dispatched in 1039. For this, see Fozu tongji , juan 45.
48Daoyi zhilue juan 1 (Sen 1995 , p. 34; Kulke 2009 , p. 13; Seshadri 2009 ). A drawing of the pagoda, made in 1846, is included on
ibid., p. 116.
49Note that the embassy was recorded as having come to China together with an embassy from Jambi, whereas previous missions
were simply recorded as coming from Srivijaya.
50This was done by changing the temple’s previous name Nanchan si 南禪寺 . The temple remains there in the present day. On
the efflorescence of Quanzhou, see Clark (1981 ,1991 ).
51Songchao shishi , juan 7; Davis (2001 , p. 68), and Hymes (2015 , p. 605). This was the deity who later that year visited Zhenzong
during his sleep to foretell of the Heavenly Texts.
52Clark (1981 , pp. 216–17, 1991 , pp. 122–23, 139). Clark demonstrates that although a mosque was built in Quanzhou in the middle
of the 8th century, it no longer existed and was forgotten by the early 11th century. The mosque built between 1009 and 1010
was considered to be the first of several built in Quanzhou during the 11th and 12th centuries.
53On the establishment of Jōtenji, see ( Kawazoe 1990 , pp. 402–4; Batten 2006 , pp. 129–30; von Glahn 2014 , pp. 275–76; Y. Li 2023 ,
pp. 105, 107). This temple also still exists today.
54Chengtian si and Chongfu si (Jp. Sōfukuji 崇福寺 ) were, along with the Kaiyuan si 開元寺 , among the oldest and most distin‑
guished temples in Quanzhou. In the mid 960s the city wall was even extended to include Chongfu si within its confines. See
Clark (1981 , p. 144).
References
Primary Source
Aja’ib al‑Hind . Buzurg. The Book of the Wonders of India, Mainland, Sea and Islands . Trans. G.S.P. Freeman‑Grenville. London: East‑West
Publications.
An‑nan chi luoc 安南志畧 . Le Tac黎崱 . 1884. 26 juan. Hankou: Leshan tang.
Ba Min tongzhi 八閩通志 . Chen Dao 陳道 and Huang Zhongzhao 黃仲昭 . 2009. 87 juan. Beijing: Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu
zhongxin.
Dai Viet su ky toan thu 大越史記全書 . Ngo Si Lien 吳士連 . 15 juan. https://zh.wikisource.org/wiki/ 大越史記全書 (last modified 9 July
2023).
Daoyi zhilue 島夷誌略 . Wang Dayuan 汪大淵 . 1892. 1 juan. Shunde: Zhifuzhai congshu.
Dong Xiyang kao 東西洋考 . Zhang Xie 張燮 . 1618. 12 juan. Wang Qizong.
Fozu tongji 佛祖統紀 . Zhipan 志磐 . 2002. 54 juan. CBETA, digital edition.
Jiye Xiyu xingcheng 繼業西域行程 . Jiye繼業 . 1 juan. http://www.kanji.zinbun.kyoto‑u.ac.jp/~saiiki/data/Keigyo.txt .
Jiu Tang shu 舊唐書 . Liu Xu 劉昫 . 1739. 200 juan. Beijing: Wuying dian.
Mengxi bitan 夢溪筆談 . Shen Kuo 沈括 . 1805. 26 juan. Qinchuan: Zhaokuang ge.
Nan Hai jigui neifa zhuan 南海寄歸內法傳 . Yijing. Buddhist Monastic Traditions of Southern Asia: A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from
the South Seas . Trans. Li Rongxi. 2000. Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research.
Nan shi南史 . Li Yanshou 李延壽 . 2009. 80 juan. Beijing: Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin.
Pingzhou ketan 萍洲可談 . Zhu Yu 朱彧 . 2009. 3 juan. Beijing: Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin.
Quan Tang shi 全唐詩 . Cao Xueqin 曹雪芹 . 1707. 900 juan. Yangzhou: Yangzhou shiju.
Shishi leiyuan 事實類苑 . Jiang Shaoyu 江少虞 . 2009. 68 juan. Beijing: Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin.
Songchao shishi 宋朝事實 . Li You李攸 . 1776. 20 juan. Beijing: Wuying dian.
Song hui yao jigao 宋會要輯稿 . Xu Song 徐松 . 1936. 500 juan. Beijing: Guoli Beiping tushuguan.
Song shi宋史 . Tuo Tuo 脫脫 . 1977. 496 juan. Beijing: Zhonghua shuju.
Wenxian tongkao 文獻通考 . 1747. 438 juan. Beijing: Wuying dian.
Xu zizhi tongjian changbian 續資治通鑑長編 . Li Tao李焘 . 1881. 980 juan. Hangzhou: Zhejiang shuju.
Yu hai玉海 . Wang Yinglin 王應麟 . 2009. 200 juan. Beijing: Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin.

--- [Page 80] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 25 of 27
Secondary Source
Acri, Andrea. 2016. Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval
Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 1–25.
Acri, Andrea. 2019. Imagining Maritime Asia. In Imagining Asia(s): Networks, Actors, Sites . Edited by Andrea Acri, Kashshaf Ghani,
Murari K. Jha and Sraman Mukherjee. Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 36–59.
Ang, Melvin Thlick‑Len. 1983. Sung‑Liao Diplomacy in Eleventh‑ and Twelfth‑Century China: A Study of the Social and Political
Determinants of Foreign Policy. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Batten, Bruce L. 2006. Gateway to Japan . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Bielenstein, Hans. 2005. Diplomacy and Trade in the Chinese World, 589–1276 . Leiden: Brill.
Bodde, Derk. 1978. The State and Empire of Ch’in. In The Cambridge History of China Volume I: The Ch’in and Han Empires, 221 B.C.‑A.D.
220. Edited by Denis Twitchett and John K. Fairbank. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 20–102.
Cahill, Suzanne E. 2021. Taoism at the Sung Court: The Heavenly Text Affair of 1008. Journal of Song‑Yuan Studies 50: 9–31. [ CrossRef ]
Chaffee, John. 2001. The Rise and Regency of Empress Liu (969–1033). Journal of Song‑Yuan Studies 31: 1–25.
Chaffee, John W. 2018. The Muslim Merchants of Pre‑Modern China: The History of a Maritime Asian Trade Diaspora, 750–1400 . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, Digital edition.
Chattopadhyaya, Alaka. 1965. Atīśa and Tibet: Life and Works of Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna in relation to the History and Religion of Tibet, With
Tibetan Sources translated under Professor Lama Chimpa . Calcutta: Indian Studies Past & Present.
Chin, James K. 2011. Junk Trade, Business Networks, and Sojourning Communities: Hokkien Merchants in Early Maritime Asia.
Journal of Chinese Overseas 6: 157–215. [ CrossRef ]
Choi, Mihwa. 2017. Death Rituals and Politics in Northern Song China . New York: Oxford University Press.
Chong, Alan, and Stephen A. Murphy, eds. 2017. The Tang Shipwreck: Art and Exchange in the 9th Century . Singapore: Asian Civilisa‑
tions Museum.
Clark, Hugh R. 1981. Consolidation on the South China Frontier: The Development of Chüan‑chou, 699–1126. Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Clark, Hugh R. 1990. Settlement, Trade and Economy in Fu‑chien to the Thirteenth Century. In Development and Decline of Fukien
Province in the 17th and 18th Centuries . Edited by E. B. Vermeer. Leiden: E.J. Brill, pp. 35–61.
Clark, Hugh R. 1991. Community, Trade, and Networks: Southern Fujian Province from the Third to the Thirteenth Century . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Cœdès, George. 1975. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia . Edited by Walter F. Vella. Translated by Susan Brown Cowing. Canberra:
Australian National University Press.
Davis, Edward L. 2001. Society and the Supernatural in Song China . Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Deng, Xiaonan. 2021. The Ancestors’ Instructions Must Not Change: Political Discourse and Practice in the Song Period . Translated by Wee
Kek Koon. Leiden: Brill.
Dunnel, Ruth. 1994. The His Hsia. In The Cambridge History of China, Volume 6: Alien Regimes and Border States, 907–1368 . Edited by
Herbert Franke and Denis Twitchett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 154–214.
Ebrey, Patricia. 1997. Portrait Sculptures in Imperial Ancestral Rites in Song China. T’oung Pao 83: 42–92. [ CrossRef ]
Edwards McKinnon, Edmund. 1985. Early Polities in Southern Sumatra: Some Preliminary Observations Based on Archaeological
Evidence. Indonesia 40: 1–36. [ CrossRef ]
Enomoto, Wataru. 2007. Higashi Ajia kaiiki to Nihon kōryū: Kyū–jūyon seiki 東アジア海域と日中交流 :九～一四世紀 . Tokyo: Yoshikawa
kōbunkan.
Flecker, Michael. 2002. The Archaeological Excavation of the 10th Century Intan Shipwreck . Oxford: BAR Publishing.
Ge, Jianxiong 葛剑雄 . 1995. Shiyi shiji chu de Tianshu Fengshan yundong 十一世纪初的天书封禅运动 .Yuedu 11: 68–78.
Golas, Peter J. 2015. The Sung Fiscal Administration. In The Cambridge History of China, Vol. 5, Part Two: Sung China, 960–1279 . Edited
by John W. Chaffee and Denis Twitchett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 139–213.
Gongkatsang, Tsering, and Michael Willis. 2013. Tibetan, Burmese and Chinese Inscriptions from Bodhgayā in the British Museum.
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 23: 429–39. [ CrossRef ]
Hartman, Charles. 2015. Sung Government and Politics. In The Cambridge History of China, Vol. 5, Part Two: Sung China, 960–1279 .
Edited by John W. Chaffee and Denis Twitchett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 19–138.
Hartman, Charles. 2021. The Making of Song Dynasty History Sources and Narratives, 960–1279 CE . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Hartwell, Robert M. 1983. Tribute Missions to China, 960–1126 . Philadelphia: Robert M. Hartwell.
He, Pingli 何平立 . 2005. Song Zhenzong “Dongfeng Xisi” lüelun 宋真宗 “东封西祀 ”略论 .Xueshu yuekan 2: 89–95.
Hymes, Robert. 2015. Song Society and Social Change. In The Cambridge History of China, Vol. 5, Part Two: Sung China, 960–1279 .
Edited by John W. Chaffee and Denis Twitchett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 526–664.
Kawazoe, Shōji. 1990. Japan and East Asia. In The Cambridge History of Japan, Volume 3: Medieval Japan . Edited by Kozo Yamamura.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 396–446.
Kim, Jinah. 2022. China in Medieval Indian Imagination: “China”‑Inspired Images in Medieval South Asia. International Journal of
Asian Studies 19: 187–214. [ CrossRef ]

--- [Page 81] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 26 of 27
Krahl, Regina, John Guy, J. Keith Wilson, and Julian Raby, eds. 2011. Shipwrecked: Tang Treasures and Monsoon Winds . Washington,
DC: Arthur M. Sackler Gallery.
Kulke, Hermann. 2009. The Naval Expeditions of the Cholas in the Context of Asian History. In Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflec‑
tions on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia . Edited by Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore:
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 1–19.
Kwa, Chong Guan. 2012. Locating Singapore on the Maritime Silk Road: Evidence from Maritime Archaeology, Ninth to Early
Nineteenth Centuries. Nalanda‑Sriwijaya Centre Working Paper Series 10: 1–46.
Lau, Nap‑Yin, and K’uan‑chung Huang. 2009. Founding and Consolidation of the Sung Dynasty under T’ai‑tsu (960–976), T’ai‑tsung
(976–997), and Chen‑tsung (997–1022). In The Cambridge History of China, Vol. 5, Part One: The Sung Dynasty and Its Precursors,
907–1279 . Edited by Denis Twitchett and Paul Jakov Smith. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 206–78.
Levine, Ari Daniel. 2009. Che‑tsung’s Reign (1085–1100) and the Age of Faction. In The Cambridge History of China, Vol. 5, Part One: The
Sung Dynasty and Its Precursors, 907–1279 . Edited by Denis Twitchett and Paul Jakov Smith. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 484–555.
Lewis, Mark Edward. 1999. The Feng and Shan Sacrifices of Emperor Wu of the Han. In State and Court Ritual in China . Edited by
Joseph P. McDermott. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 50–80.
Li, Qiang 李强 . 2008. Song Zhenzong de 1008 宋真宗的 1008. Ji’nan: Shandong Huabao Chubanshe.
Li, Yiwen. 2023. Networks of Faith and Profit: Monks, Merchants, and Exchanges between China and Japan, 839–1403 CE . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Liebner, Horst H. 2014. The Siren of Cirebon: A Tenth‑Century Trading Vessel Lost in the Java Sea. Ph.D. dissertation, The University
of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
Loewe, Michael. 1978a. The Former Han Dynasty. In The Cambridge History of China Volume I: The Ch’in and Han Empires, 221 B.C.‑A.D.
220. Edited by Denis Twitchett and John K. Fairbank. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 103–222.
Loewe, Michael. 1978b. The Religious and Intellectual Background. In The Cambridge History of China Volume I: The Ch’in and Han
Empires, 221 B.C.‑A.D. 220 . Edited by Denis Twitchett and John K. Fairbank. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 649–
725.
Manguin, Pierre‑Yves. 1993. Palembang and Srivijaya: An Early Malay Harbour‑City Rediscovered. Journal of the Malaysian Branch of
the Royal Asiatic Society 66: 23–46.
Miksic, John N. 2009. Research on Ceramic Trade, within Southeast Asia and between Southeast Asia and China. In Southeast Asian
Ceramics: New Light on Old Pottery . Edited by John N. Miksic. Singapore: Didier Millet, pp. 70–99.
Mori, Katsumi 森克己 . 1975. Nissō bōeki no kenkyū 日宋貿易の研究 . Tokyo: Shinteiban.
Olsson, Karl F. 1974. The Structure of Power under the Third Emperor of Sung China: The Shifting Balance after the Peace of Shan‑
yüan. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
Ridho, Abu. 1994. Zhejiang Green Glazed Wares Found in Indonesia. In New Light on Chinese Yue and Longquan Wares: Archaeological
Ceramics Found in Eastern and Southern Asia, A.D. 800–1400 . Edited by Chuimei Ho. Hong Kong: University of Hong Kong,
pp. 265–72.
Salmon, Claudine. 2002. Srivijaya, la Chine et les Marchands Chinois (Xe‑XIIe s.): Quelques R éflexions sur la Soci étéde l’empire
Sumatranais. Archipel 63: 57–78. [ CrossRef ]
Sattler, Gregory. 2021. The Ideological Underpinnings of Private Trade in East Asia, ca. 800–1127. Journal of Asian Humanities at
Kyushu University 6: 41–60. [ CrossRef ]
Sattler, Gregory. 2024. Zhedong Sea Merchants and the China‑Japan Trade, ca. 800–1000. Journal of Song‑Yuan Studies 53.Forthcoming .
Sattler, Gregory. 2025. Literate Merchants in Southeast China and Overseas, c. 800–1100. T’oung Pao 111. Forthcoming .
Sen, Tansen. 1995. Maritime Contacts between China and the Cola Kingdom of South India: 850–1279. In Mariners, Merchants and
Oceans: Studies in Maritime History . Edited by K. S. Mathew. New Delhi: Manohar, pp. 25–42.
Sen, Tansen. 2003. Buddhism, Diplomacy and Trade: The Realignment of Sino‑Indian Relations, 600–1400 . Honolulu: University of Hawaii
Press.
Seshadri, Gokul. 2009. New Perspectives on Nagapattinam: The Medieval Port City in the Context of Political, Religious, and Com‑
mercial Exchanges between South India, Southeast Asia and China. In Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval
Expeditions to Southeast Asia . Edited by Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore: Institute of Southeast
Asian Studies, pp. 102–34.
Tackett, Nicolas. 2017. The Origins of the Chinese Nation: Song China and the Forging of an East Asian World Order . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Taigai Kankeishi Sōgō Nenpyō Henshū Iinkai, ed. 対外関係史総合年表編集委員会 . 1999. Taigaikankeishi sōgō nenpyō 対外関係史総合
年表 . Tokyo: Yoshikawa kōbunkan.
Tanaka, Fumio 田中史生 . 2012. Kokusai kōeki to kodai Nihon 国際交易と古代日本 . Tokyo: Yoshikawa kōbunkan.
Taylor, Keith W. 1986. Authority and Legitimacy in 11th Century Vietnam. In Southeast Asia in the 9th to 14th Centuries . Edited by
David G. Marr and A. C. Milner. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 139–76.
Taylor, Keith W. 1992. The Early Kingdoms. In The Cambridge history of Southeast Asia, Volume One: From Early Times to c. 1800 . Edited
by Nicholas Tarling. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 137–82.
Taylor, Keith W. 2013. A History of the Vietnamese . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

--- [Page 82] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1401 27 of 27
Tillman, Hoyt. 2005. The Treaty of Shanyuan from the Perspectives of Western Scholars. Sungkyun Journal of East Asian Studies 5: 135–
55.
Twitchett, Denis. 1979. Hsüan‑tsung (reign 712–56). In The Cambridge History of China, Volume 3: Sui and T’ang China, 589–906, Part I .
Edited by Denis Twitchett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 333–463.
Twitchett, Denis, and Klaus‑Peter Tietze. 1994. The Liao. In The Cambridge History of China, Volume 6: Alien Regimes and Border States,
907–1368 . Edited by Herbert Franke and Denis Twitchett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 43–153.
von Glahn, Richard. 2014. The Ningbo‑Hakata Merchant Network and the Reorientation of East Asian Maritime Trade, 1150–1350.
Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 74: 249–79. [ CrossRef ]
von Verschuer, Charlotte. 2006. Across the Perilous Sea . Ithaca: Cornell East Asia Series.
Wade, Geoff. 2009. An Early Age of Commerce in Southeast Asia, 900–1300 CE. Journal of South East Asian Studies 40: 221–65. [ CrossRef ]
Wang, Gungwu. 1983. The Rhetoric of a Lesser Empire: Early Sung Relations with Its Neighbors. In China among Equals: The Middle
Kingdom and Its Neighbors, 10th–14th Centuries . Edited by Morris Rossabi. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press, pp. 47–65.
Wang, Gungwu. 1998. The Nanhai Trade: The Early History of Chinese Trade in the South China Sea . Singapore: Times Academic Press.
Watanabe, Makoto 渡邉誠 . 2012. Heian jidai bōeki kanri seidoshi no kenkyū 平安時代貿易管理制度史の研究 . Kyoto: Shibunkaku shup‑
pan.
Weschler, Howard J. 1985. Offerings of Jade and Silk: Ritual and Symbol in the Legitimation of the T’ ang Dynasty . New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Wheatley, Paul. 1959. Geographical Notes on some Commodities involved in Sung Maritime Trade. Journal of the Malayan Branch of
the Royal Asiatic Society 32: 4–139.
Wolters, Oliver W. 1983. A Few and Miscellaneous Pi‑Chi Jottings on Early Indonesia. Indonesia 36: 49–65. [ CrossRef ]
Wolters, Oliver W. 1986. Restudying Some Chinese Writings on Sriwijaya. Indonesia 42: 1–41. [ CrossRef ]
Wyatt, Don J. 2008. In Pursuit of the Great Peace: Wang Dan and the Early Song Evasion of the “Just War” Doctrine. In Battlefronts
Real and Imagined: War, Border, and Identity in the Chinese Middle Period . Edited by Don J. Wyatt. New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
pp. 75–109.
Yamauchi, Shinji 山内晋次 . 2003. Nara Heian ki no Nihon to Ajia 奈良平安期の日本とアジア . Tokyo: Yoshikawa kōbunkan.
Yamazaki, Satoshi 山崎覚士 . 2010. Chūgoku godai kokka ron 中国五代国家論 . Kyoto: Bukkyō Daigaku.
Yamazaki, Satoshi. 2011. Kaishō to sono tsuma: Jūichi seiki Chūgoku no enkai chiiki to Higashi Ajia kaiiki kōeki 海商とその妻 :
十一世紀中国の沿海地域と東アジア海域交易 .Rekishi gakubu ronshū 2011: 87–99.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual au‑
thor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

--- [Page 83] ---
Citation: Holm, David. 2024. Roads
to the Sky: Indic Ritual Elements in
the Vietnam‑China Borderlands and
Their Maritime Transmission.
Religions 15: 1551. https://doi.org/
10.3390/rel15121551
Academic Editor: Todd Lewis
Received: 25 September 2024
Revised: 21 October 2024
Accepted: 19 November 2024
Published: 20 December 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).Article
Roads to the Sky: Indic Ritual Elements in the Vietnam‑China
Borderlands and Their Maritime Transmission
David Holm
Department of Ethnology, National Chengchi University, Taipei 11605, Taiwan; dholm@nccu.edu.tw
Abstract: One of the basic features of shamanic rituals cross‑culturally in East and Southeast Asia
is that the ritual itself is structured as a journey up to the sky, climbing the world mountain or the
world tree, or else a journey down to the bottom of the sea and back again. The shamanic retinue is
understood to make this journey in person, rather than, as in Daoist ritual, sending divine emissaries
up to the highest heavens. The journey is conducted through narrative song and dance, accompanied
by strings of bells and lutes. The point of departure is the physical village or village household
where the ritual is being conducted, and the journey progresses through a series of well‑marked way
stations via the temple of the earth god to the higher hills and finally to the villages and markets in
the sky, before crossing the heavenly seas and ascending the highest mountain. On the way, demons
and other impediments are encountered. The route and way stations vary depending on the purpose
of the ritual and the intended divine recipient of offerings and submissions. The present article will
explore the route up to the sky and the way stations in more detail, taking a single ritual type as
performed by the Pụt and Then ritual practitioners as an example. The Pụt and Then are literate
ritual specialists found among the Tày and Nùng peoples in northern Vietnam and southern China,
near an area which is known to have been a centre of Brahmanical and Buddhist learning from very
early times.
Keywords: shamanism; shamanic journey; Tày; ritual performance; Vietnam; Guangxi; maritime
transmission
1. Introduction: Reflections on Shamanism
Rituals of the Tai‑speaking ritual specialists called Pụt and Then in northern Vietnam
and the southwestern corner of Guangxi in southern China are shamanic in nature, with a
basic structure that is South Asian in origin and came to the Red River Valley area via the
maritime routes from the Indian subcontinent, probably in the late centuries BCE or very
early CE (see Holm 2018 ,2019 ). I define shamanic rituals as rituals which are structured
as journeys up to the sky or down to the bottom of the sea, with shamanic practitioners
and their retinue making the journey themselves, with songs and dances marking or rather
instantiating the stages in the journey. Typically, the retinue includes soldiers and horses,
but also porters to carry the offerings and rowers to row the boats across the celestial seas.
The present article will review those earlier findings, provide additional information on
key points, and then explore the stages in the road to the sky in more detail. It can be
shown that many stages in this journey are indigenised and covered over with a layer of
place names and names of deities which are either Chinese or local Tai, but that others,
including the basic cosmological framework, remain unmistakably Indian.
I would argue that these rituals are fundamentally different from those conducted in
the same region by spirit mediums, which involve calling dei ties or departed ancestors down
into the body of the practitioner, followed by the practitio ner being taken over psychically
by the deities or ancestors and speaking and acting as their m outhpiece. Such rituals are
common among the ethnic Vietnamese communities in northern Vietnam, where they are
known as lên đồng ‘ascending a child‑medium’.1Similar practices are also widespread in the
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551. https://doi.org/10.3390/rel15121551 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/religions

--- [Page 84] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 2 of 25
southern part of China (see e.g., Davis 2001 , pp. 87–199). The direction of movement in
these rituals is exactly the opposite of shamanic journeys, with gods and spirits descending
into the body of the medium. Also fundamentally different is the degree of control the
practitioner has over the interactions with spirit entities: with spirit mediums the spirits
are in control, while in shamanic ritual the shaman has a considerable degree of control
over interactions with spirit entities.2
As is well known, I.M. Lewis in his Ecstatic Religion argued that the Tungusic evidence
from northeast Asia made nonsense of the idea that there was a distinction between spirit
mediumship and shamanism, ‘belonging necessarily to two different cosmological systems
and to separate stages of historical development’ ( Lewis 1971 , p. 56). It is worth pointing
out here that more recently Edward Davis has roundly refuted that argument ( Davis 2001 ,
pp. 2–3).
Michel Strickmann in his posthumous book Chinese Magical Medicine (Strickmann 2002 )
noted some of the confusions caused by referring to spirit me dium and Tantric Buddhist‑
derived ritual elements as ‘shamanism’. He points out that Carmen Blacker’s study of ‘fox
families’ in Japan ( Blacker 1975 ) was actually a study of Tantric‑derived ritual practices
(p. 271), and comments that her use of ‘shamanistic’ in the subtitle ‘seems both to weaken
the potential usefulness of the term “shamanism” and to blunt or even efface the histor‑
ical significance of the Buddhist contribution’. Further on (p. 279), referencing Eliade’s
work and ‘archaic techniques of ecstasy’, he quite rightly points out that ‘the historian is
obliged to note the presence of elements derived from the dominant ritual patterns of or‑
ganized “higher” religions’, and goes on to say, ‘For some twelve centuries, the dominant
ritual patterns in much of East Asia have been those of Tantric Buddhism and Taoism. The
term “shamanism” is convenient, to be sure, but perhaps too convenient. It is certainly too
slippery and imprecise to be used without qualification in complex societies like those of
China and Japan’.
When applied to Tantric‑based practices of spirit possession, of course, Strickmann’s
argument has considerable point. But the comment about the term ‘shamanism’ being ‘too
slippery and imprecise’ is based on a narrow focus on Tantric Buddhism and Taoism, either
ignoring or remaining ignorant about the ritual practices of pre‑Tantric Buddhist ritual, in
the form that it was first introduced to East and Southeast Asia. What we will be inves‑
tigating in this article is a form of ritual practice that arguably predates the development
of Tantric or esoteric Buddhism in India and its subsequent transmission to East Asia by
some centuries.3
There is one point raised by Strickmann that is interesting and potentially useful, how‑
ever. In both books he points out that the first authors to describe North Asian shamanism
proposed that the term “shaman” derived from the Sanskrit term śramaṇa , meaning ‘Bud‑
dhist priest’, and comments that this hypothesis was one that had never been categorically
refuted.4Actually, the Chinese term 沙門 shamen appears in the very earliest Buddhist
scripture in Chinese, the ( Fo shuo sishi’er zhang jing )佛説四十二章經 , which is reckoned
to date from the 1st century CE.5Even more intriguingly, Zheng‑Zhang Shangfang’s Old
Chinese reconstruction of these two characters 沙‘sand’ and 門‘gate’ is OC *sraal and OC
*mWWn (Zhengzhang 2003 , pp. 454, 418), which gives us a strikingly close match with the
Sanskrit śramaṇa . This may be fortuitous, of course.
There are other, broader issues which would merit further clarification. Journeys to
the sky are based on the Vedic ritual vājapeya , the rite of ascension. Eliade discusses this
ritual in several places in his text,6and this can be seen as one of the sources of rituals struc‑
tured as journeys to the sky ( Holm 2018 , p. 30). Indeed, a good many of the examples in
Eliade’s classic work on shamanism are shamanic rituals of this type.7However, there are
two points in his overall framework which need to be challenged. The first is his identifica‑
tion of trance as the defining feature of shamanism. There are other scholars, some of them
quite eminent, who have challenged this identification.8As I have noted in a previous pa‑
per, trance is a phenomenon found in rituals throughout the world: in North America, in
South America, in Africa, and so on, places with no plausible connection historically with

--- [Page 85] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 3 of 25
religious practices in East or Southeast Asia ( Holm 2018 , p. 4). Its appearance in what we
might call primordial religious practices would seem to be almost universal.
Admittedly, the use of trance is not entirely absent from the rituals of the Then and
Pụt in northern Vietnam: there is a ritual segment involving collective trance that has been
documented for their ordination ritual, but it plays a minor part ( Nguyễn Thị Yên 2010 ,
pp. 94–95; cited in Holm 2019 , p. 8). The primary mechanism for travel to the sky, how‑
ever, is Brahmanical‑style recitation of the words of the ritual text, which have the power
to make real the events and places referred to. The psychic concomitants of this spiritual
journey in the minds of practitioners have yet to be thoroughly investigated, but as we shall
see, at least it is clear from their recitations that both the Then and Pụt are accompanied on
this journey by the spirits of their ancestral masters. Elsewhere along the China‑Vietnam
border, it is not unknown for some Tai‑speaking ritual specialists to combine shamanic
journeying and spirit medium‑based practices within the same ritual, though again the
journey and the direct communication from ancestral and other spirits are found in sepa‑
rate ritual segments, clearly demarcated ( Kao Ya‑Ning 2009 , pp. 207–22).
In Eliade’s classic study, the choice to identify trance as t he defining feature of shamanic
ritual allows him to include also the practices of spirit mediums and ritual specialists world‑
wide. This is unhelpful and is one of the things that have led to the confusions noted above.
Of course, Eliade was writing at a time when there was less information about the timing
of the Indian incursions into the Red River Valley and elsewhere in Southeast Asia, about
the presence of a strong Vedic and Brahmanical component in these early ritual practices
along with Buddhism, and about the relatively late development and introduction of rit‑
ual practices based on Tantric Buddhism some centuries later. In a number of places in
his classic work, he notes definite signs of influence from more complex societies on the
rituals of Southeast Asia but declines to provide an historical narrative to account for the
facts on the ground.9On this point he was being over‑cautious: he draws the bow with‑
out releasing the arrow. All the evidence he marshals indicates that rituals structured as
journeys to the sky or down into the underworld came from the Indian subcontinent and
were part and parcel of the assemblage of Brahmanical ritual templates introduced into
this part of the world in the early centuries of the common era. Of course, providing such
an ‘historico‑cultural’ explanation would have put paid to the idea that shamanism was a
human universal with trance as its defining feature.
The discussion here needs to be set against a background in which the term “shaman‑
ism” has been given a very wide range of meanings in international scholarship. Earlier
generations of scholars like Piet van der Loon used the term ‘shamanic substratum’ to re‑
fer to the non‑ or pre‑Confucian bedrock of Chinese culture and society ( van der Loon
1977 ). In the study of Chinese religion, “shamanism” has also sometimes been used to
refer to any local practices that lie outside the orthodox traditions of Buddhism, Daoism,
and Confucianism, or as a vague term corresponding to Chinese wu巫(Lagerwey and
Marsonne 2015 , p. 15, fn. 13). Elsewhere, shamanism has been used as a term to refer to
the indigenous religious practices among a wide range of first peoples in the Americas as
well as in Africa and other places. One might note that used in this sense, the term still
has some connection with Eliade’s definition, and at least is not pejorative in the way that
terms like ‘witch‑doctor’ or ‘ghost‑woman’ are. Of course, used like this, it may also be
thought to be a way to incite readers’ interest in primordial wisdom. My own preference
would be to use terminology which distinguishes clearly between all these different forms
of ritual practice.
2. Tày and Nùng
The Tày and Nùng are Tai‑speaking peoples living on both sides of the China–Vietnam
border. Both groups practice wet‑rice agriculture in flat‑bottomed mountain valleys. Their
habitat is distinct from that of hill‑dwelling peoples such as the Miao (Hmong) and Yao. In
Vietnam the Tày are the minority group with the largest population nationally, number‑
ing some 1,626,392 people in 2009.10The Tày are now concentrated mainly in the northern

--- [Page 86] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 4 of 25
provinces of Cao Bằng, Lạng Sơn, Bắc Kạn, Thái Nguyên, Quảng Ninh, and Bắc Giang,
where they have lived for several millennia.11In Vietnam the Tày are officially classified
separately from the Nùng, who are also Tai‑speaking but are descendants of relatively
recent migrants from China. In Guangxi, however, the Nùng ( bouxnungz ) are classified
together with the Zhuang, as are the Tày, although the Tày there refer to themselves as
Bu‑Dai布傣 , a transliteration of the native term.
In Vietnam there are a good many Nùng groups, who are said to be distinct from one
another in language and customs. They are usually referred to by their places of origin
in China, which are likewise different. Thus Diguet, in his treatise on mountain peoples
of the borderlands, gives the following list of 12 different groups for the province of Cao
Bằng ( Diguet 1908 , p. 68):
1 Nung Hin, speaking an idiom resembling that of the Thô group. Their origin
is the châu of Lung Hin, northwest of Tai Ping Fou.
2 Nung Han, whose dialect and customs are quite distinct from those of the other
groups. They came from the châu of Lung Han.
3 Nung Loi, who resemble the Nung Hin and have arrived recently from Tonkin.
4 Nung Châu, whose language closely resembles that of Thô and who originate
from Long Châu.
5 Nung Kenh Lai, whose language and customs are similar to those of the afore‑
mentioned groups.
No information about place of origin is given about the other groups (6–12), which
include the Nung Phan Sênh, the Piang, the Giang, the Nung An, the Min, the Ngan, and
the Gioi.
Most of the places of origin mentioned above are located in the southwestern part
of Guangxi, an area in which predominantly Southern Zhuang (Central Tai) languages
are spoken.12
3. Pụt and Then
Among the Tày and Nùng in Vietnam and the southwestern borderland of China there
is a variety of different kinds of religious practitioners performing different functions for
communities. The Pụt and Then concentrate on rituals for the benefit of the living, and
recite texts in the Tày or Nùng language along with ritual songs of offering.13Both the Pụt
and the Then perform rituals which involve shamanic journeys into the sky. It is significant
that the names Pụt and Then are both usually written with the same character in their
texts:仸, which is a vernacular variant for 佛fo‘buddha’.14With the designation “Then”,
the character 仸has been re‑interpreted, so that 天tian ‘heaven’ on the right‑hand side
is understood as indicating the pronunciation. But it is more complicated than this, for
‘Then’ is also the general designation in the Tai‑Thai languages in Southeast Asia for sky
gods. And sky gods, in turn, represent a particularly well‑developed and powerful sector
of the Tai pantheon, being closely connected not only with harvests and general prosperity
but also with political power and chieftaincy in the Tai domains (see Archaimbault 1991 ).
There are differences in performance style between the Pụt and Then, which Bế Viết
Đằng discusses in some detail ( Bế Viết Đằng and Lục Văn Pảo 1992 , p. 167). Overall,
Then lyrics are often based partly on older Pụt material, but the Then represent a form of
performance which is artistically more developed. There is, however, quite a lot of overlap
in the content of their ritual manuscripts, and the Then tend to be referred to in quite a
number of localities as ‘Pụt’.15They share much of the same repertoire.
Both Then and Pụt have both male and female practitioners, who often perform to‑
gether during rituals. This is significant in itself, and quite unlike the situation in most
of Guangxi, where male and female specialists may collaborate and take part in the same
rituals, but have quite different ritual traditions, often even in different languages.16

--- [Page 87] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 5 of 25
4. Literature Review
Rituals of the Tày and Nùng Then and Pụt are copiously documented in Vietnamese
scholarship, and there has been some translation of this material into French and, more
rarely, English. There are bilingual editions of the texts of almost all the major rituals
conducted by the Then. These editions include a transcription of the manuscript reading
in romanised Tày, a Vietnamese translation of the Tày text, ethnographic and textual notes,
and often a photo‑reproduction of a Tày manuscript or a transcribed version of one in
vernacular character script.17Such publications are available for the following Then rituals:
1. The Ordination Ritual (Lễ Cấp Sắc) (e.g., Nguyễn Thị Yên 2007 )
2. Ritual of Praying for a Harvest (Lễ Cầu Muà, Lễ Hội Lồng Thồng)
3. Praying for Peace (Lễ Kỳ Yên) (e.g., Tống tập truyện thơ nôm các dân tộc thiếu số Việt
Nam 2013 )
4. Praying for Progeny (Lễ Cầu Tự)
5. Removing Astral Impediments (Giải Hạn) (e.g., Tống tập truyện thơ nôm các dân tộc
thiếu số Việt Nam 2012 )
6. Celebrating Longevity (Lễ Cầu Trường Thọ, Then Chúc Thọ)
7. Visiting the Goddess in the Moon (Lễ Hội Hằng Nga)
8. Playing with the Swallows (Then Hỉn Ên)
In addition, an entire ritual by the Tày Pụt and accompanying photo‑reproduction of
manuscript pages has been published in a trilingual Tày–Vietnamese–French edition, with
relatively copious notes and a lengthy introduction by Tày scholars. The manuscript itself,
written in the Tày vernacular character script, was in the possession of a man called Hoàng
Quang Ngọc in the commune of Đông Phục in the southern part of Ba Bể district, which was
then part of Cao Bằng province. This text included 2832 lines of the 3030 lines included
in the published volume; the material added came from a manuscript in the possession
of Nông Văn Phia of Cao Thượng commune, also in Ba Bể district, and four passages of
missing material which another Pụt in the region, La Đinh Sôi of Phương Viên commune
in nearby Chợ Đồn district, was able to recite by heart.18
Some of the above ritual categories are communal rituals, performed on behalf of
a community with the participation of as many as a dozen practitioners, and others are
household rituals performed for families or for individuals, with often just one priest con‑
ducting the ceremony. Household rituals are conducted in the main hall of the family
house, in front of the spirit shelf where the ancestral spirits are located, while communal
rituals are conducted in an open space outside in the village.19Most of these ritual texts are
of very considerable length: the ‘Celebrating Longevity’ text is 5775 lines long; the ‘Pray‑
ing for Peace’ ritual takes an entire night to perform. They are divided into a number of
songs or sections, often labelled as such with subtitles in the manuscripts.
My analysis of this vast corpus of Tày shamanic songs and texts is at a very early
stage. What I have done thus far is to prepare interlinear editions with word glosses and
Tày‑English glossaries for two versions of the ‘Crossing the Seas’ segment; interlinear tran‑
scriptions for ‘Praying for a Harvest’ and ‘Removing Astral Impediments’ manuscripts;
surveyed the ways in which a list of 60 common words were written for some 10 Tày and
Nùng manuscripts in different locations; and written two articles on reflections of voiced
initials in the vernacular Tày script, using the ‘Crossing the Seas’ text as an example.20
In Vietnam, scholarly investigation of the Then got off to a very early start, during the
final stages of the war with the US. This was well before Đổi Mới the Vietnamese reform
period beginning in 1986. The survey and investigation process is described in admirable
detail in a conference volume ‘Some Questions on the Then of Northern Vietnam’ (Mấy vấn
đề về Then Việt Bắc), published in 1978.21Surveys and documentation on the Then were
motivated in the first instance by the important role Then songs and Then practitioners
had played in the war effort and in popular education drives among the general populace
in what was then the North Vietnam Autonomous Region, a region that comprised five
provinces in the northern area that had majority Tày and Nùng populations. Traditional

--- [Page 88] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 6 of 25
Then songs were fitted with new lyrics in Tày as part of party and government propaganda
efforts. Papers in the conference volume conceded that Then rituals contained ‘feudal su‑
perstition’, but nevertheless described traditional Then rituals in meticulous detail and on
their own terms.
One of the papers included in the 1978 conference volume was a report from what
was then Bắc Thái province, where the Then are described as having 17 ‘songs’, or stages
in their ritual:22
1. Presentation of Offerings at the Beginning of Spring
2. Choosing Horses for the Voyage
3. Presentation to the Ancestors
4. Severe Prohibitions
5. Planting Out the Rice
6. Recruitment of People for Corvée
7. Presentation to the God of the Locality
8. The Hunt for Deer and Sambar Deer
9. The Ogress Da Dun
10. Putting the Rice into Storage
11. Crossing the Sea
12. The Market of the Three Luminaries
13. The Gate of Flowers
14. The Gate of the Master’s Ghost
15. Invitation to the Generals and Inspection of the Offerings
16. Call to the Spirits of the Terrestrial World
17. Feast for the Soldiers
Many similar stages are found in the Pụt Tày ritual from Ba Bể district in Bắc Kạn,
which has a total length of 3030 lines:
1. Invitations to the Master‑Pụt lines 1–61 (61 lines)
2. Inspection of the Offerings lines 62–80 (19 lines)
3. Invitations to the Ancestors lines 81–259 (179 lines)
4. Presenting Offerings to the God of the Locality lines 260–469 (199 lines)
5. Passing through the Gate of the Mandarin‑Genie lines 470–492 (23 lines)
6. The Field of Ghosts of Undeserved Death lines 493–537 (45 lines)
7. The Young People Choose their Company lines 538–704 (167 lines)
8. Fight with the Lady Da Dun lines 705–1047 (343 lines)
9. The Hunt for Deer and Sambar Deer lines 1048–1132 (85 lines)
10. The Ape’s Mother and the Field of Cicadas lines 1133–1165 (33 lines)
11. The Ba Soi Leaf and Field of Graves lines 1166–1261 (96 lines)
12. Giving the Orders lines1262–1368 (107 lines)
13. The Banyan and the Beauty in the Moon lines 1369–1412 (42 lines)
14. The Place of Vinh lines 1413–1577 (165 lines)
15. Entering the Gate of the Paternal Ancestors lines 1578–1642 (65 lines)
16. Entering the Gate of the Paternal Ancestor lines 1643–1780 (138 lines)
17. The Market of the Three Luminaries lines 1781–1980 (200 lines)
18. Passing by the Gate of Lucine lines 1981–2000 (20 lines)
19. The Field of the Immortal lines 2001–2027 (27 lines)
20. The Field Where One Chooses Flowers lines 2028–2050 (23 lines)
21. Crossing the Seas lines 2051–2714 (664 lines)
22. The Country of the Sky lines 2715–2831 (115 lines)
23. The House of the Master‑Sorcerer lines 2832–3030 (199 lines)
Overall, these stages are all part of a journey, starting in the place where the ritual is
being held, whether in the main hall of a domestic dwelling or outside in the village, and
leading up to the palaces of the highest deities in the heavenly realms. The words sung or
chanted by the Then and Pụt take the form of what seems to be a narrative, describing the

--- [Page 89] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 7 of 25
places visited along the way, the necessary ritual actions, and the immortals, genies, and
demons met at each stage in the journey. Unlike narrative in stories and novels in verse,
where the action is conventionally understood as taking place in the past, the process of
the journey in these rituals is understood as taking place in the present, and with the action
ongoing as it is sung. Moreover, in true Vedic‑Brahmanical fashion, the words are under‑
stood as bringing about the reality of what they describe (on which see further below).
5. Stages on the Road
In what follows, I will describe the stages in the journey to the sky, using the Pụt Tày
text as an example.23Internal evidence indicates that the purpose of this particular ritual
was searching for the lost vital spirits of a sick person, making appropriate offerings to
all relevant deities, and bringing the vital spirits back and reinstalling them in the human
body. In this section, the passages quoted have been chosen, first of all, to demonstrate
that the ritual text is in fact structured as a journey to the sky; and secondly, to show some
of the ways in which the journey has been indigenised; and finally, to give some coverage
to other parts of the text that are either ‘extraneous’ interludes or serve as invocations.
The first two of the above stages involve actions that are necessary before the shamanic
retinue sets out and thus are preparatory in nature. In the first section, the Pụt briefly
rehearses his own personal history as a Pụt, then issues an invitation to his living and
departed masters to accompany him on the journey in order to protect him from demons.
He also requests iron wire to use for punishing evil creatures and declares that he will be
able to find the vital energies of the sick person and thus accomplish the aim of the ritual.
In the second song, the Pụt lists the offerings and other things that have been prepared.
These include handfuls of paddy rice, two cockerels to call to the lost vital spirits, a seal, a
bell, a chair and a table made of special wood, two bundles of betel nut, two bundles of fruit,
silver money in a packet, rice for the horses, a bowl of uncooked rice to hold the incense
sticks, and a bowl of rice and an egg to serve as a vehicle for the vital spirits once they
have been located. Finally, there is a bag containing clothes belonging to all the family
members. All these things need to be mentioned in order to record their existence and
make them transferable to the spirit realm.
In the third section, the invitation to the ancestors of the house takes but a couple of
lines, and then the ancestors are invited to show the retinue of the Pụt the door of the house.
Then follows a description of the house ladder down which the retinue must descend, and
other things seen in the immediate environs of the house:
The king of the household with the helmet embroidered with flowers 115
 can guide you,
The king of the household with a cast‑iron helmet can show you the path.
He wakes up to show the path to the sorcerer’s masters,
He wakes up to guide us.
While moving toward the exterior door, with his hand he draws some
 talismans,
Once he reaches the window, he draws with his hand a phoenix, 120
Go to the stair with a black pine cone in order to wash the feet,
Go down the wooden staircase of nghien wood.24
If a stair is going to break, it can be propped up with the wood of
 the nghien ,
If the staircase is going to break, it can be replaced with a tree trunk.
It takes three days to make the staircase, 125
It takes seven days to repair it.
The track where one can go up and down,
Transit from where companions of the same age as the patron
 enter and exit has thus been accomplished.
We go until the end of the village of the young girl,
Until the end of the path of the beauty. 130

--- [Page 90] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 8 of 25
The Pụt retinue then continues to the edge of the village:
The low fence halts the pink hen,
The high fence halts the purple hen. 155
The cockerel strikes his wings three times, heaven’s doors open up,
He strikes his legs three times, the sky lights up.
The group arrives at the garden of flowers in front of the yamen,
At the garden of flowers in front of the village.
He arrives at the plum tree to pick up the donkey, 160
He arrives at the fig tree to pick up the horse.
Children, release the boat, mount the boat to go to the sky.
Children, release the horse, climb on the horse, put yourselves on
 the way,
Release the phoenix, climb onto the phoenix to continue on the path.
Each of you jump on your horse, quickly like a cat. 165
The masters jump on the horse, just like the swallows.
By riding on horses you are going to become mandarins.
We go along the path thanks to supernatural power,
Thanks to the talisman our horses run with a light step.
The army and horses pass by the banana gardens on their way uphill to the temple of the
god of the locality:
The army of heaven immediately rows the boats 225
 and gets on the horses.
So get up, those who bring the incense,
The servants, the porters!
Servants, carry the burden on your neck,
Carry the yoke on your shoulders.
Go quickly on the path to heaven. 230
Go joyfully, in front of me, the Pụt, leading the way!
The army crosses by the plum tree near the pond,
It arrives at the banyan tree at the entrance of the village,
The fourth stage in the journey to the sky is the visit to the temple of the god of the local‑
ity, a temple usually located on the outskirts of the village or some distance away up a
hill. Here the retinue halts, the porters put down their loads, and offerings are made to
the temple god, along with an announcement that the assembled party is on its way up
to make offerings to heavenly deities. The primary offering here is 100 betel quids, con‑
sumption of which by the temple god opens the border gates wider and wider. In Tày
culture this chthonic god is responsible for opening the road to the sky, and this function
is actually articulated in the words of the song. This done, the entourage sets out again on
the upward journey:
Come back, assistants in charge of the incense,
Get up, servants and bearers.
Bearers, put the burden near on your neck, 345
Carry the yoke over your shoulder,
Carry it quickly to the kingdom of heaven,
Rise up, virgins in charge of the incense,
Come back, virgins responsible for the lamps. 350
Disciples with ten years of service, masters with nine years of service,
We are going to leave all, disciples since ten years,
 masters since nine years.
Get up, all of you, the two horses with three saddles,
The twelve phoenixes belonging to the heads of the army.

--- [Page 91] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 9 of 25
After drinking some wine, we saddle the horses, 355
After the lunch break, the masters get on the horses.
In the front are pitched the red and black flags,
In the back are pitched the green and pink flags.
From both sides, the rifles are ready, we go.
Soldiers aligned two by two are advancing.
While waving the flags we move toward the front door, 360
And the order is given to the horses to start up.
We arrive at the foot of the plum tree with speckled leaves,
At the top of the plum tree with curved leaves.
Its foot will be used as a gutter which directs the water
 to the square metre of land in order to produce the rice crop,
Its trunk will be used to make a sheath for the sword drawn by 365
 the dragon.
Its leaves will be used to manufacture the veil
 for reaching the country of the Hác.25
We rush the horses to follow the small stone path,
Up to the spring where mortals draw water for the food supply,
Up to the trough of water where one can bathe.
Arriving at the spring, the group dives into the water and makes a subterranean detour
via underground watercourses, riding fishes and dragons down to the realm of the king of
the underworld. Then, having imprisoned a giant turtle, the army travels back upstream
and returns to the higher hills at the edge of human habitation:
The army arrives at the foot of the kham26tree to take some rest,
To the place where the grass can hurt the feet,
Where the straw can cut the feet, 430
Where the mountains’ stone can hurt the knees.
The horses reach the clumped field that no one harrows,
To the wetfield Na Bua that no one transplants,
To the place where on three sides are slash‑and‑burn fields,
To the rice paddy with three locations to let water flow out 435
At the three slash‑and‑burn fields sowed with cotton plants,
To the three locations sowed with mulberry trees,
The fifth stage involves passing through the field of the dead grasshopper, itself the child
of a high‑level mandarin, where the entourage are enjoined to avoid spitting or blowing
their noses out of respect for the dead insect.
The sixth stage involves the entourage passing through three fields inhabited by the
ghosts of those who died unnatural deaths, by accident or violence, and then arriving at a
crossroads where a young girl is weaving cloth. They move on past married couples who
are blind, near‑sighted, deaf, or injured.
The seventh stage begins with the horses negotiating stones and trees, and then on to
the place where marriages turn out to be unfortunate. There is a digression on men and
women choosing spouses and lovers. A contrast is drawn between the behaviour of wives
and lovers after a man dies, where the wife observes the conventional fasting after death,
and the lover abstains from meat for only one meal. There follows a disquisition on lazy
women and intelligent women, comparing the kinds of cloth that each is able to weave and
the ways they treat their husbands. Another one follows on about foolish boys.
For the eighth stage the entourage goes up to the cavern where the ogress Da Dun is
taking a nap. Da Dun is a dangerous and malevolent creature, described as follows:

--- [Page 92] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 10 of 25
Da Dun sitting, in a majestic way, on the edge of the pond,
Her two knees are beyond her ears,
The moldy skin is like that of a snake,
Small mushrooms grow on her forehead, 940
Her broken nose is like that of a monkey on a tree,
Her large teeth are like bananas, full of food traces,
Her nostrils full of hairs,
Her skinny face, the long tongue pendant,
Her hair not brushed and combed, simply horrible. 945
Her two protruding eyes, black in color, frightening,
Her withdrawn upper lip shows the teeth,
Her red tongue goes down below the chin.
Anyone who sees her, starts shivering in fear.
The food residues stick on her lips, 950
The young Pụt starts moving forward in order to engage in a fight.
The Pụt must engage in a battle of magic with Da Dun and vanquish her, in order to make
her hand over her magic baton, which is needed for clearing all supernatural obstacles
on the road to the sky. He tells her he plans to give it back to her once the mission is
accomplished and the lost vital spirits have been retrieved. The struggle goes through a
number of stages before Da Dun finally admits defeat. Da Dun gives the Pụt the baton and
the entourage continues on its journey, flags flying.
The ninth stage in the journey is one in which the Pụt needs to hunt in the forest for
deer and sambar deer, in order to supplement the existing sacrificial offerings, ‘a hundred
species for the sacrifice’. The hunting party’s departure is described:
Immediately the great prince transmits the order given.
The prince gives orders to the skilled and strong soldiers to advance, 1055
The best‑chosen soldiers with three hundred guns.27
They hold in their hands some gun locks, some bows, and crossbows.
Recruiting the skilled boys who can use the gun,
Seven thousand guns set out, shaking the path.
The army follows them in large number, 1060
The heroic chiefs are both talented and skilled,
The traps are put in place as they march,
Surrounding the forest paths.
Here they employ three hundred good dogs,
Eighty male dogs with white fur. 1065
There follows a passage in which a mother deer hears the approaching hunters and gives
instructions to her children, warning them against the danger of eating rice and other crops
that belong to human beings. As the hunting party draws near, the animals flee:
They climb up and hide inside the Stone Mountain.
The noise of the smashed trees, the broken ivy frighten them, 1105
The rotten trees are cracking, the branches are breaking.
One can encounter some roe deer, some stags, some monkeys,
 some gibbons, some wild boars,
Some foxes, some wild cats, some birds, some rats. All of them crying:
Which way to take in order to run away to safety?
Finally, with some animals wounded by bullets and others caught in the traps, includ‑
ing tigers with wounded feet, the porters shoulder the new burdens and the party sets
out again.
The 10th stage involves the entourage moving through the fields at the foot of the
highest mountains, where there are fireflies, cicadas, and monkeys carrying their babies.
The cicadas are significant because the spirits of young boys and girls are attracted by their
singing, and hence may be found lurking nearby.

--- [Page 93] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 11 of 25
In the next stage, the 11th, the army moves up to the top of the mountain, to a place
where ghosts and demons lurk:
During this existence one has to suffer next to the souls of dead children.
The group arrives at the place of the young ghosts,
At the place of the old ghosts that have become demons. 1195
The young ghosts are sitting down in the middle of the procession.
The demons are sitting down on the edge of the forest.
Their beards are thick like the grass in the middle of the abyss,
The hairs of their nostrils are as thick as ropes.
I am not afraid of the appearance of devils, 1200
Nor the appearance of the ghosts of young people.
Flee far away, avoid my presence,
Take yourselves off, put yourselves at a distance.
Then follows a description of the fates of those who died unnatural deaths, including new‑
born infants, women who died in childbirth, those who died of prolonged illness, and
those whose fate ordained that they remained childless. The entourage then arrives at the
foot of the ladder up to the sky:
Just now examine the presents to be offered to the sky.
Examine the propriety of the men who carry them on the voyage, 1345
Before arriving at the ladder with its three rungs for mounting to the sky.
After five rungs one mounts to the sky so blue,
This rung I take hold of in order to dance,
For coming and for going.
I will go to the seven‑gated earthly world to give place to a sunny day, 1350
With eight gates for giving place to a rainy day.
At the thirteenth stage the entourage arrives at the gates of the sky:
We pass by the fields to raise the line of silk, 1380
Before arriving at the place of the beauty of the moon.
At midnight we arrive at the gates of the sky,
At dawn we see the gates of the sky so high as to be lost to view.
They are of the yellow colour of ivory.
The floor of the sky has the colour of copper. 1385
We find the altar of the sky amidst the sound of gongs and drums.
The hens of the sky have no feathers,28
The cockerels of the celestial realm have no claws.
The cockerel of the sky crows at the hour of the rat,
The cockerel of the human world sings at the hour of the tiger. 1390
The entourage moves on to Yangzhou and Longzhou, which are described as idyllic places:
The young girls come here to draw the water.
They return with a bucket of water and a bucket of fish.
Men come here to gather the thatch, 1405
They come back with a load of flowers and a load of thatch.
In this ricefield the rice is white without being pounded,
The vegetables are clean without being washed.
The water flows through the ricefield without being irrigated.
The fish leap up to look for the men. 1410
The fertile earth is favourable for raising buffalo cows that will
 give birth to lots of buffalo calves.
The pigs grow rapidly.
The next stage in the journey is the place of Vinh. This is a long segment recounting a Tai
version of the story of Dong Yong 董永 , one of the 24 exemplars of filial piety in China.
The narrative here is devoted to describing the filial devotion of Dong Yong toward his

--- [Page 94] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 12 of 25
mother, with a storyline that is similar to the Zhuang and Bouyei versions of this tale that
are found widespread in Guangxi and Guizhou.29Its location here, in the middle reaches
of a shamanic journey to the sky, may be related to the concern, mentioned previously in
these lyrics, that the people worthy of presenting offerings to the highest deities should
themselves be ‘proper people’, conforming to the expectations of their society, considerate
of others, and respectful of their own parents.
The 15th stage describes a place in the sky where the mansion of the ancestors is lo‑
cated. Here are a few lines from the description:
My children, have a look,
Here is the house of the sky.
We see the faces of our ancestors,
The house of the mandarin in charge of our ancestors. 1585
Doves whiten the roof of the house,
White cranes whiten the roof of tiles.
They come to perch there to see the house of the mandarin
 in charge of our ancestors.
His two or three houses are covered with tiles,
His four or five houses are covered in bronze. 1590
The roof resembles the scales of a pangolin,
Green moss pushes the four sides, the solemn columns are
 painted red,
The ends of the cornices are multi‑coloured like a snake with white
 bands.
The roof is curved like a pair of horns, 1595
The partition walls are speckled like the wings of an eagle.
And then:
The army passes in front of the gate, in front of the house.
Going up, one sees the ducks preening their feathers with their beaks.
And then there are difficulties finding the road forward:
We arrive at the place of the princess. 1615
The princess opens a fan decorated with flowers,
The guardian of the sky opens a fan of rattan.
Their sleeves sweep up the sun,
The fan of silver goes out in front,
He sweeps up the clouds which dissipate, 1620
He sweeps up the dew which flows.
When I part, the clouds dissipate,
When I traverse, the dew evaporates.
Here one finds the black night which blocks the way,
Here, one finds the black coat which conceals, 1625
I am not able to find the road.
The ancestors light the lamps to help me find the road,
The masters light the big lamps to to indicate the way to me.
And then on to an enlivened landscape:
I arrive at the place where the karst peaks come to salute,
Where the grand mountains encircle me. 1630
I arrive at the mountain where nine gorges prostrate themselves.
I arrive at the flat rock,
At the elevated outcrop.

--- [Page 95] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 13 of 25
I ascend, and the mountain leads me up.
I arrive at the golden rice with its broken leaves, 1635
The buffaloes of gold and silver eat these leaves.
I arrive at the place of waterfalls of noisy water,
At the place of Kwan Yin and of old sorcerers.
I arrive at the place of the founder of the sorcerers.
The 16th stage is one with vast open wetfields with no rice planted in them. Crossing over
a copper bridge, the army and horses then arrive at the street of the Tam Quang market.
Then we go up to the source of the golden water of the sky.
We traverse the source of the silver water in the sky, 1675
To arrive at the foot of the pine tree with its pendant leaves.
And then on further upwards:
I come to the place at the foot of the areca palms,
And I arrive at the road where the dead and the newly‑born are
 registered.
The god of the North Star is seated on the right,
The god of the Southern Cross is seated on the left.
Each day three thousand people descend to the earth, 1695
Five hundred return to the sky.
and upwards (lines 1701 ff.):
This night I ascend to the gate of the sky,
Tomorrow morning I will ascend to the gate of thunder.
The thunder strikes the tree in the middle of the bush,
It splits the trees in the middle of the forest.
And then the retinue approaches the sea up in the sky and arriv es at the place of the widows.
The next stage is the market of the Tam Quang, the Three Luminaries. The Three
Luminaries (Ch. Sanguang 三光 ) are identified as the Sun, Moon, and Stars. The name
indicates that at this stage in their journey, the Pụt retinue are already up in the sky. Pigs
need to be purchased here in order to ensure that the offerings to the highest deities are
complete in every respect. The Pụt delegates two young acolytes to go into the market, find
someone there who sells pigs, buy them, and bring them back. At the same time, other boys
are sent to the market to purchase bowls and platters. On their way into the market the boys
encounter two girls, who tell them that their father sells pigs, and they invite the boys to
follow them back to their father’s house. Catching sight of them, their father immediately
assumes that the boys have come to seek his daughters’ hands in marriage. Disabused
of this impression, their father agrees to sell the pigs, and the transaction, including the
weighing of the pigs and haggling over the price, is eventually successful.
The Sanguang are a prominent feature of the Daoist school of T ianxin zhengfa 天心正法 ,
‘Orthodox Methods of the Heart of Heaven’, one of the Daoist schools that emerged during
the Song dynasty (960–1279 CE) (see Li 2011 ). Here, however, the focus is exclusively on
the market transaction.
Setting out from there, the entourage arrives at the great crossroads in the sky:
I go across three hundred great crossroads,
Nine hundred little crossroads,
From which the roads of the world set out.
One route goes to the country of the Nông who work in the rice‑fields.

--- [Page 96] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 14 of 25
Another goes to the country of the Hác who work in the dry‑fields, 1965
One road goes to the country where Chiêu Quân was sent,
One road for going on a tribute mission to the country of the Ngô.
One road conducts one to the God of Jade,
Another to the terrestrial world to become a master‑sorcerer.
Another to the watery world of the Dragon King, 1970
One route for going on a tribute mission to the market of the
 golden buffalo.
One route goes to the country of the Lucine,
One route goes as far as the country of the sky,
One route goes to the tribunal in the sky.
I have found three hundred great crossroads, 1975
I have gone through three hundred great crossroads,
Nine hundred little crossroads,
The routes meet in three hundred and twenty places.
I am the road to the immortal lady,
I choose the road for presenting the offerings to the Mother.
The Nông and Hác are mentioned frequently in these lyrics, and refer respectively to the
Nùng people and Han Chinese immigrants (the name Hác means ‘guest’ 客ke).30Chiêu
Quân in line 1966 refers to Zhaojun 昭君 , and Ngô is the Vietnamese transliteration for
Wu吳, the name of a kingdom in the south of China in the third century during the Three
Kingdoms period.
The 18th stage contains mainly the lyrics of a song singing of the activities proper to
each month in the year, including the cultivation and harvesting of rice. The significance of
this song is connected with the importance of rice, and especially uncooked rice in a bowl
along with an egg, which serves as the vehicle by which the vital spirits, once found and
rescued, can be transported back down to earth.
The 19th stage, the field of the immortal lady, indicates another form of lurking dan‑
ger. The immortal beauties in the sky are all eagerly looking for husbands, and the Pụt, in
order to accomplish the goal of the mission and return safely, must spurn their advances.
This place has no officials, 2005
The immortal lady has no husband.
Each day she goes forward along the road to marry herself to an official.
Each day she goes forward along the road to find a husband.
She keeps on rolling up leaves of betel to chew,
To cut the areca nuts. 2010
The betel quids are carried in her mouth,
The cut‑up areca nuts fill the little plates,
But as a Pụt, I have my own quids of betel,
I have brought along my own areca nuts.
They are always in my pocket, 2015
While marching along I eat them,
When marching along I chew them.
My quids of betel are not lacking for anything,
I have no need to look for any others.
And further:
Yesterday my wife received me at the house, 2020
She had returned the day before.
Her skin is of a tender whiteness,
She is more beautiful than you.
Ah well! Take yourself out of my road,
Leave the road free and wide. 2025
My soldiers occupy the route,
I am going to look for the souls, the vital spirits.

--- [Page 97] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 15 of 25
The next stage, the 20th, is the garden of flowers. The garden of flowers is connected with
the conception and birth of children, superintended by the Goddess of Flowers whose cult
is widespread in southern China and northern Vietnam (see Cauquelin 1996 ). Each child
has a floral counterpart in the garden in the sky, with golden flowers for boys and silver
flowers for girls. Here the lyrics draw upon those of a well‑known song, asking which
flower blooms in which month, and then answering this question for the 12 months of the
year. This theme also is related to ensuring that the lost vital spirits are alerted and allow
themselves to be located and taken back down to earth.
The next stage is Crossing the Seas, and the Pụt’s retinue must take to the boats, pro‑
pelled across the Milky Way by the rowers:
They chew the betel and spit out the quids chewed up all red. 2075
The Pụt in the army make arrangements
To write the orders to the Milky Way.
The order is to row across the sea:
It is a matter of rowing to the South in order to cross the Milky Way.
The fleet is of considerable size:
Fifty golden boats descend, 2150
Fifty silver boats arrive.
and:
The boats and rafts should be complete and ready.
Here is the golden boat to transport the treasure,
The precious objects that belong to the king in the sky.
Here are the boats full of dignitaries and beautiful women.
Here are the boats carrying young ladies who are also mandarins. 2165
The boats come down and fill up the crossroads.
One boat transports the flowers from foreign lands,
One boat transports the grilled rice, incense and flowers.
One boat holds beautiful objects made of agate.
One boat holds the rice and the wet‑rice of the household. 2170
One boat holds all the beautiful women.
One boat holds the swallows and golden orioles,
One boat for the incense and the flowers,
One boat for the swords, the spears, the shields,
One boat for the carriages, the donkeys, the horses, 2175
One boat for the draperies with their phoenix patterns,
One boat for the young immortal maidens,
One boat for the boys and youth,
One boat for the queen and the royal concubines,
One boat full of objects belonging to the great Buddha, 2180
One boat for the incense and the flowers for the old Buddha,
One boat for the ancestral mothers of the land,
One boat for the Buddha with elevated powers, which comes and goes,
One boat for the adopted children of the Pụt.
One boat for the adoptive children of the ladies. 2185
One boat for the soldiers,
One boat for the generals, the sons‑in‑law of the king.
Everywhere the soldiers prepare the boats,
Then come the kings who share out the horses.
The itinerary takes the entourage, propelled by the rowers, across the Milky Way to the
continent in the sky where the world’s highest mountain is located. The actual journey in
the Then narrative is described in terms of upstream and downstream movement, along
the lines of other migration narratives of Tai‑speaking peoples (see Holm 2009 ), rather than
a journey from asterism to asterism. So the boats are described as going upstream and then

--- [Page 98] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 16 of 25
downstream through a series of rapids. These are numbered but not named. The end point
of the journey, however, is clearly stated as Mount Sumeru (phya Su Mi).
Once on the other side of the celestial seas, the Pụt entourage arrives at the next stage,
the Country in the Sky. Here the narrative turns to recounting the old cosmogonic myth,
widespread in southern China and Southeast Asia, of how the sky in primaeval times was
very low, and of how there were then 10 suns, which caused years of drought and famine
until they were dispatched; then of how the Thunder God sent incessant rain, leading to
worldwide flooding; and of how a brother and sister pair took refuge in a gourd and be‑
came the last survivors of the human race; and of how they subsequently became man and
wife and gave birth to a monstrosity, which they then hacked to pieces and threw into the
forest; and finally, how the pieces came to life and became the forbears of various ethnic
groups. The narrative then goes on to recount the origin of family quarrels over inheritance
and other things, leading to generations of enmity.
The entourage of the Pụt then moves onward for the final stage in the journey, through
a series of fortified gates leading to the palace of the highest celestial gods, where they will
be received in audience:
The sound of the bell goes from the sky to the world of the humans.
People fetch water for washing their feet.
The sky has the multi‑coloured aspect of a nest of bees. 2845
The clouds wind up like a nest of bees.
The Pụt are seated on the hard spines in serried ranks.
It is indeed rare that one can see the whole celestial country.
It is indeed rare that one can look out on the whole country of
 the immortals.
The news has arrived at the first gates. 2850
And:
One calls to the master to open the gate of the sky,
One demands of the master to open the great gates wide.
One opens the gates with their pointed nails, 2855
The gates of gold and silver are open in great numbers.
The news has arrived at the second gates.
One enters the garden of mulberries,
On hangs up the threads of silk mixed with grains of paddy.
One arrives at the owls who guard the gates, 2860
The beauty who guards the incense demands that the sky
Make the announcement to the third gate.
The great gates are covered with cast iron,
The public gates carry the imprint of seals.
The gates of the generals are protected, 2865
The gates of the master are protected by the Buddhist divinities.
And then finally, a description of the celestial audience:
Girls and boys stand upright, solemn on both sides. 2945
I walk, imposing in the middle.
The Pụt gather together in front of the table,
Under the parasols and the umbrellas like mandarins of the state.
Watching the Pụt come out together.
The beauties are standing together upright, 2950
The young girls and young boys, in serried ranks
Inviting the Pụt and the mandarins to take their seats.
I the Pụt am present, the tall hat on my head,
The robe embroidered with dragons in my hand.
One puts the hat on the head of the great mandarin who governs 2955
 the land,

--- [Page 99] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 17 of 25
One awards a certificate to the great mandarin who administers
 the villages,
The Pụt of the sky allow me to enjoy the goods in perpetuity.
All the world knows our teachings.
In this edition the actual petition, the presentation of offerings, the securing of the vital
spirits of the sick, and the return journey are not included. In other texts they certainly are,
along with descriptions of the celebratory feasting for the mandarins, porters, rowers, sol‑
diers, and horses once the entourage has arrived back on earth. Giving appropriate thanks
to all members of the party are particularly necessary: the lyrics of the rowers crossing the
seas make mention of the hardships endured by the rowers’ wives and children while they
are absent on their assigned duty in the sky.31
This overview of the stages in the journey to the sky, and the selected passages quoted,
demonstrate clearly that this Pụt ritual is an archetypical shamanic ritual. The Pụt and ac‑
companying entourage make their way up to the sky in person, rather than sending spirit
emissaries, encountering any number of different obstacles, crossing the celestial seas, and
finally reaching their destination and presenting all the offerings necessary for the success‑
ful accomplishment of their mission. Like the native chieftain in the native chieftaincies
of the China–Vietnam borderlands, who leads his or her troops into battle personally on
military campaigns, rather than assigning the task to a subordinate, the Pụt or Then leads
his or her entourage in person ( Holm and Meng 2021 , p. 33). The entourage itself is vari‑
ously described at different stages in the journey, and consists of soldiers, horses, generals,
porters, servant girls, rowers, all accompanied and protected by the spirits of the Pụt’s
master‑teachers living and dead, and bearing gifts including an array of sacrificial animals
as stipulated by custom. A relatively full list of members of this travelling party is given
when describing the loading of the boats prior to crossing the seas (as quoted above). It
might be thought on one level that there is an element of hyperbole in these descriptions,
but what is actually operative is a kind of Brahmanical power of words, whereby saying
something has the effect of making it real.
The entourage is also likened to a tribute mission, led by the Pụt as ambassador to
the celestial court in the sky. Tribute missions to the Chinese imperial court, bearing a
variety of gifts including local specialities, were a salient and essential part of international
relations for the Vietnamese court right up until the end of the imperial period (see Nguyễn
Thị Kiếu Trang 2016 ). There are in fact other Pụt and Then texts called Pây sử ‘Going on a
Tribute Mission’, so this parallel is one that is overtly recognised (see e.g., Tống tập truyện
thơ nôm các dân tộc thiếu số Việt Nam 2015 ). For that matter, it was reported at the 1975
conference on Then that everybody in Tày and Nùng communities was aware that Then
rituals were journeys up into the sky ( Mấy vấn đề về Then Việt Bắc 1978 , p. 94). Moreover,
at the same conference it was reported that some of the songs sung in Then rituals were
modelled on the songs that had been sung by tribute missions sent by the Mạc court in Cao
Bằng to the Chinese capital ( Mấy vấn đề về Then Việt Bắc 1978 , pp. 144, 146).
The shamanic journey up to the sky is based on Vedic rites of ascension ( vājapeya ),
which are mentioned in the Vedas.32Detailed instructions for this ritual are given in the
Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa , including instructions for felling the tree out of which the required
sacrificial post is made.33This rite of ascension is widespread in many areas of south‑
west China and mainland Southeast Asia, as well as in Central Asia, where the ability of
shamanic practitioners to ascend to the sky frequently takes the form of climbing a ladder
of swords.34The ability to climb a ladder of swords without injuring oneself is listed as
one of the attributes of the Buddha in the earliest Buddhist treatise in Chinese, the Mouzi
牟子 , a text which dates from the late second or early third century CE and has links with
early Buddhist centres of learning in the Red River Valley ( Holm 2018 , pp. 21–22; citing
L’Haridon 2017 , pp. 11–12).

--- [Page 100] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 18 of 25
6. Indigenised and Indic Elements
As previously indicated, there are many stages on this journey to the sky which now
relate to local or indigenous customs, and others which reflect Chinese cultural elements.
Thus, for example, in the imperial palace in the highest heavens we find the Jade Emperor
Ngọc Hoàng (Ch. Yuhuang dadi 玉皇大帝 ). Many of the other figures mentioned are Chi‑
nese, such as the exemplar of filial piety Dong Yong. But the Jade Emperor is often men‑
tioned in parallel with other figures such as the Big Buddha, the Old Buddha, or Mother
Buddha. This last also appears in these Tày texts as Mẻ Tsik‑ka ‘Mother Śākyamuni’, with
the name ‘Śākyamuni’ represented by the transcription of just its first two syllables; the
first syllable of this designation, Mẻ, is the Tày word for ‘mother’ but also a noun head
for the names of mature‑age women. These figures are mentioned along with the Jade
Emperor as recipients of offerings in the highest heavens.
There are two elements, however, which point unmistakably to an underlying Indic
framework. These are the name of the highest mountain in the sky, Sumeru, and the oceans
in the sky which the shamanic retinue must cross in order to reach their destination. We
will look at these next.
7. Sumeru and the Heavenly Seas
In the ordination ritual of the Then, the world mountain, phya Rú Mi in Tày transcrip‑
tion, is mentioned frequently, as well as serving as the destination of the celestial journey
(Nguyễn Thị Yên 2007 , pp. 374, 381, 394, 395, 448, 459, 465, and 525). In the ‘Ritual to Re‑
move Astral Obstructions’ (Giải Hạn) text, there is an entire section devoted to the Then
retinue’s ascent of this mountain.35
Sumeru as the highest mountain in the world and the abode of heavenly deities is first
mentioned in the epic Mahābhārata , and belongs to a wider Indian worldview, rather than
being confined to Buddhism.36Still, in canonical sources on Buddhist cosmology Sumeru
is the central world mountain, and is described as surrounded by concentric seas and
mountain ranges, which separate Sumeru itself from the continent inhabited by human
beings, Jambudvīpa. There were altogether seven mountain ranges surrounding Sumeru,
with seas separating each of these mountain ranges, and finally the four continents includ‑
ing Jambudvīpa ranged around the outside.37Thus, in order to reach the base of Mount
Sumeru and begin the ascent to the realm of the higher gods, our shamanic retinue from the
world of mortals would have to cross not one, but eight seas, as shown diagrammatically
in Figure 1below.ọ 玉皇大帝
ẻ
Śā Śā
ẻ
ễ ị
ả ạ
āā
ī
ī
 
Īṣāā ś
ś ṇ āḍ
ụ
Figure 1. Sizes of Mount Sumeru and Surrounding Mountains and Seas. (Source: Sadakata Akira
1997 , Fig. 7) (1) Yugandhara (40,000); (2) Īṣādhāra (20,000); (3) Khadiraka (10,000); (4) Sudarśana
(5000); (5) Aśvakarṇa (2500); (6) Vinataka (1250); (7) Nimindhara (625); (8) Cakravāḍa (312.5). (Di‑
mensions given in yojanas .).
It is this circumstance that explains the ubiquitous presence of “Crossing the Sea”
segments in the rituals of the Then and Pụt in northern Vietnam. Moreover, it seems that

--- [Page 101] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 19 of 25
specific episodes in the narrative of crossing the seas in these ritual texts correspond to
specific features of the canonical description in the Abhidarmakośa : the encounter with the
circle of wind, the colors of the waters, and the description of Sumeru itself.38
The Abhidarmakośa , a voluminous treatise with commentaries, was first brought to
China and translated by the Indian monk Paramārtha (Zhendi 真諦 ) sometime in the first
half of the sixth century CE, with the title Apidamo jushe lun 阿毗達磨俱舍論 . Knowledge
of its contents may have circulated earlier, but the point is that it was available in Chinese
from a relatively early date. For Sumeru, the transcription Su‑mi‑lu 蘇迷盧 is found in this
Chinese translation (see Yiqie jing yinyi 2010 , ch. 70). The name of this mountain in the
texts of the Then and Pụt is 首眉 (Ch. Sh ˇou Méi), transcribed variously in Tày as Xu Mi,
Su Mi, or R úMi. We can be confident in identifying this mountain as Mount Sumeru. In
Chinese Buddhist texts Sumeru is given various renderings, the earliest being 須彌 (Xu‑
mi), but 須彌樓 (Xu‑mi‑lou), 修迷樓 (Xiu‑mi‑lou), and 修迷留 (Xiu‑mi‑liu) are also found,
as well as 蘇迷盧 (Su‑mi‑lu). The existence of two‑syllable renderings in Chinese such as
須彌 gives us a close counterpart to the rendering in Tày.
Further afield, various forms of this name are found over a very wide area of southern
China among Tai‑speaking communities and indigenous ritual practitioners, often heavily
indigenised and not recognised locally as part of an Indic substratum. In the Zhuang‑
speaking Tianyang area of central‑western Guangxi, the name Couhmiz 州眉 is mentioned
in connection with a narrative about the primordial flood, and Couhmiz is understood to be
the name of a high mountain. In a Bouyei version of the flood myth from Wangmo county
in southern Guizhou, the name Cojmiz (written 索密 ) is explained as the name of an old
man who lives on the top of Bolangshan 播朗山 , the only peak high enough to protrude
above the floodwaters during the great flood. Even further north, in Zhenning in west‑
central Guizhou, a near‑homophonous name ( 站走煤 , tCiaŋ24ìeu53mei11) is mentioned in
funeral texts as the primordial homeland of the Bouyei people. In these cases, the name in
disguised form has been reattached to versions of the flood myth, as the name of a place
protruding above the floodwaters. What this indicates, however, is that the under‑layer of
Buddhist‑Brahmanical elements was very pervasive in the south of China, as elsewhere.39
8. Brahmanism and Ritual Templates
All these Indic ritual elements are connected historically with the development of the
early Buddhist centre of Luy Lâu, in the Red River Valley. Located to the east of present‑
day Hanoi, Luy Lâu was the seat of government of the Chinese‑ruled commandery of
Jiaozhi交趾 during the Han dynasty (see Trần V ˇan Giáp 1932 , p. 209). Inland waterways
connected it with the mouth of the Red River and the open sea. By the early centuries
CE, it came to rival the northern Chinese capital Luoyang as a centre of Buddhist activity
in size, including the number of its temples and the number of monks. As a port of call
for Buddhists and other priests from India, it also developed into an important centre for
the translation of Buddhist texts into Chinese. Historical records indicate that there were
many monks from India resident there, and over time it also became an important point
of departure for Chinese Buddhists travelling to India.
Contemporaneous descriptions indicate that the variety of Buddhism introduced in
those early days was not of the rarified kind that later developed into Chinese gentry Bud‑
dhism, but rather an amalgam that encompassed many popular elements drawn from dis‑
parate Indian traditions. Thus, the ‘Treatise on the Resolution of Doubts’ ( Li huo lun 理惑論 )
of Mouzi 牟子 , a text which can now be accepted as early and genuine ( L’Haridon 2017 ;
cited in Holm 2018 , pp. 21–22), describes the Buddha as the enlightened one who can
change shape at will, can climb a ladder of swords without being cut, and can walk on fire
without getting burnt.40
Climbing a ladder of swords and walking on fire are just two of the South Asian rit‑
ual segments that are practiced widely throughout East Asia, Southeast Asia, and indeed
also Central Asia, a region that was also subject to Indian influence. The specific protocols
attached to these ritual procedures are remarkably uniform throughout this wide area.41

--- [Page 102] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 20 of 25
They have been incorporated into the rituals of religious practitioners who are not them‑
selves Buddhist: they form part of Daoist initiations in Fujian province and elsewhere in
China, and they are an essential element in shamanic induction ceremonies among the
Tungusic‑speaking Xibo people in Chinese Central Asia (present‑day Xinjiang). There are
other South Asian rituals and ritual segments that are similarly widespread: buffalo sacri‑
fice, horse sacrifice, voyages by boat, and so on, with ritual procedures that are also remark‑
ably similar, even though in most cases they are no longer recognised locally as coming
from India.
The protocols, and detailed instructions for the performance of such rituals, are to be
found in the Brāhmaṇas, written ritual compendia going back to the early post‑Vedic stage
of Sanskrit literature.42The Brāhmaṇas not only provided explicit instructions for the per‑
formance of rituals, but also provided detailed explanations for why the requisite ritual
actions were prescribed in such a way. They tended then to be quite voluminous, leaving
nothing important out of the account. Not only this, but they came along with a fundamen‑
tal assumption that it was the words of the ritual, as performed correctly by Brahmanical
priests, that produced the real results in the external world. It was the Brahmans’ ritual
performance that made the sun rise in the morning.43
Evidence indicates that Brahmans as well as Buddhists were among the earliest vis‑
itors to the Red River valley.44Their presence elsewhere in maritime Southeast Asia and
mainland Southeast Asia, often in very considerable numbers, is well documented.45
9. Maritime Transmission
Buddhism and Brahmanism in the Red River valley, in Luy Lâu and other places,
came via the maritime route, and not via Central Asia as has sometimes been suggested. A
maritime connection between South Asia and the East Asian region, either direct or indi‑
rect, was already established by the beginning of the CE era.46The dynastic history of the
Han dynasty mentions the ‘barbarian ships’ that were docking in Nanhai 南海 (present‑day
Guangzhou). The beginnings of sea voyaging and maritime commerce are now reasonably
well known and began some centuries before the CE era with products and people carried
in Austronesian ships. Later on, the Indians developed the technology for building their
own oceangoing ships, basing their designs at first on Austronesian models. By contrast, it
was only some centuries later that the Chinese developed the capacity for ocean voyages.47
10. Shamans and Spirit Mediums
Rituals structured as journeys to the sky are widespread in maritime Southeast Asia
and mainland Southeast Asia, as well as in archetypically shamanic regions in Central
Asia. This is well‑established. One of the best‑documented examples of a shamanic ritual
in maritime Southeast Asia is to be found in Clifford Sather’s Seeds of Play, Words of Power ,
which includes an interlinear text and translation of a ritual to locate and bring back the
lost souls of a sick family member, along with copious ethnographic notes ( Sather 2001 ).48
Like the case discussed in the present article, the ritual is structured as a journey, and in‑
volves the shaman ( manang ) in singing or chanting through ‘an ordered sequence of named
places’ ( ibid., p. 173), from a starting point in the Iban longhouse, and then returning to the
longhouse at the end of the ritual.
Given the postulated prehistoric connection between the Austronesian peoples and
Tai‑Kadai speakers, it should not be surprising that one can discern many common points
of detail in these rituals, such as the use of chickens to locate the lost spirit entities, the per‑
vasive use of semantic parallelism in liturgical song verses, the botanical metaphors used
to refer to kinship relations, and so on. Similarly, there is much evidence of indigenisa‑
tion of cultural categories in the Iban text: the highest mountain has been re‑identified as
Mount Rabung, a sacred mountain in the invisible world but also the name of the highest
mountain in the Iban world, located in the Sri Aman Division in Kalimantan Barat. ( ibid.,
pp. 116–17; for chickens, see p. 195).

--- [Page 103] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 21 of 25
11. Conclusions
The stages on the road to the sky, as performed by the Pụt and Then, are as we have
seen indigenised to a considerable degree. However, the ritual framework itself, based on
a Vedic rite of ascension, and certain stages in this journey, notably the crossing of the celes‑
tial seas and the designation of Sumeru as the central world mountain and final destination,
are definitely Indic, even though they may not be recognised as such by local people. Di‑
rect Indian influence in East Asia seems to have declined by the end of the Tang dynasty
(618–907 CE) in China, in other words around the end of the ninth century, and many of
the ritual elements would subsequently have been overlain with layers of indigenised and
locally appropriate interpretation, even if the ritual procedures themselves were preserved
more or less intact. This process of localisation is very common throughout the East Asian
region and can be seen as part of a process of recentering, whereby local communities lay
claim to their important part in the history of civilisation. Within Buddhist institutions, of
course, the dynamic would have been different, and memory of South Asian origins would
have to have been preserved.
One of the main contributions of the present article is to present more detailed ev‑
idence of the actual song lyrics which carry the entourage of the Pụt or Then upwards
through the various stages in their journey to the sky. These provide additional confirma‑
tion that these rituals are archetypically shamanic in nature and are structured as journeys
up to the sky. As we have seen, these lyrics vary in their internal coherence as ongoing
narrative, with digressions and insertions of extraneous material that need to be under‑
stood in terms of their underlying and unspoken ritual function. At times they are quite
clear and uncannily beautiful. Many seeming digressions can also be understood as invo‑
cations, whereby mentioning things, people, or ideas has the effect of calling them up and
facilitating their transfer to the spiritual domain and the shamanic entourage.
The task of explicating all these complexities has only just begun.
Funding: Research on which this chapter was based was supported by an Australian Research
Council‑funded large grant project on The Old Zhuang Script, 1996–1999. Subsequent support came
from a research grant from the Science Council of Taiwan (MOST) from 2011–2017, project title ‘Ver‑
nacular Character Writing Systems among the Tai‑speaking Peoples of Southwest China and North‑
ern Vietnam’ (grant nos. 102‑2410‑H‑004‑055 −, 102‑2410‑H‑004‑111 −, and 104‑2410‑H‑004‑162 −),
and the National Science and Technology Council from 2024 to 2026, project title ‘Mapping the Ver‑
nacular Tay Script’ (grant no. NSTC 113 ‑ 2410 ‑ H ‑ 004 ‑ 093 ‑ MY2). The publication of the special
issue in which this article is included has been partly supported by the French National Research
Agency (ANR), project MANTRA—Maritime Asian Networks of Buddhist Tantra (ANR‑22‑CE27‑
015), coordinated by Andrea Acri (EPHE, PSL University, Paris).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the re‑
search on which this article is based.
Data Availability Statement: Evidence on which this article was based is available in the form of pub‑
lished works. See especially Bế Viết Đằng and Lục Văn Pảo (1992 ), listed in the References section.
Acknowledgments: This manuscript was published in the special issue “Beyond the ‘Spice Routes’:
Indic and Sinitic Religions across the Asian Maritime Realm ,” with Dr. Andrea Acri and Dr. Francesco
Bianchini serving as guest editors.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
Notes
1For a classic study see Durand (1959 ).
2Scholars writing about these rituals do not always make this distinction clear enough, referring for instance to Tày Then and Pụt
as ‘spirit mediums’ (see e.g., Đoan Thi Tuyen 2012 ). All too often spirit medium practices as well are referred to as ‘shamanic’.
On such confusions see further below.

--- [Page 104] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 22 of 25
3Tantric or Vajrayāna Buddhist practices developed in mediaeval India from the 5th–6th century CE and in China from the first
half of the 7th century onwards. See Orzech (2011 ). On Tantrism see also Acri (2017 ).
4SeeStrickmann (1996 , p. 425). He was referring primarily to Shirokogoroff (1935 , p. 269). For a more recent and meticulous
discussion of this issue, see Slouber (2023 , pp. 61–64).
5The text is said to have been translated in the 1st century CE. On which see Zürcher (2007 , pp. 29–30). Zürcher notes (p. 29)
that the term śramaṇa appears in the ‘Xijing fu’ 西京賦 ‘Poetical description of the Western Capital’ of Zhang Heng 張衡 , a work
completed at the turn of the century 100 CE, and that this indicates that the term was probably already familiar to the ‘general
cultured public’ at the capital. For an example in the text see Fo shuo 2a.
6SeeEliade (1964 , pp. 442, 442–44, 455). See also p. 269, on the shaman climbing the Cosmic Mountain at the Center of the World:
“It is only the shaman and the heroes who actually scale the Cosmic Mountain, just as it is primarily the shaman who, climbing
his ritual tree, is really climbing a World Tree and thus reaches the summit of the universe, in the highest sky.” (italics in the
original).
7On Celestial Ascents in Central and Northern Asia, see Eliade (1964 , 181 ff); on the World Mountain, also called the Cosmic
Mountain, pp. 266–69.
8Including folklorists Lauri Honko and Å. Hultkranz, mentioned in Holm (2018 , p. 4).
9Referring to southern China, mainland and maritime Southeast Asia, and Central and North Asia, he noted “both [regions] have
seen their religious traditions definitely modified by the radiation of higher cultures” ( Eliade 1964 , p. 279). He declined, however,
to give an “historico‑cultural” explanation (same page). Cited in Holm (2018 , p. 44).
10‘The 2009 Vietnam Population and Housing Census: Completed Results’, General Statistics Office of Vietnam: Central Popula‑
tion and Housing Census Steering Committee, June 2010, p. 134.
11A substantial proportion of the Tày population in the north dates back very nearly to the time of the earliest human habitation
in this area (see Các Dân tộc ở Bắc Kạn 2003 , pp. 77–78). This judgment is based on archaeological evidence but is also in line with
DNA evidence, on which see Li(2002 ).
12Lung Hin in Taiping fu 太平府 is located in present‑day Tiandeng 天等 county, Long Châu is present‑day Longzhou 龙州 .
13SeeBế Viết Đằng and Lục Văn Pảo (1992 , pp. 166–67). Daoist priests are also found in northern Vietnam. It is significant that the
Tạo ( daogong ) recite their texts in Southwestern Mandarin, even well to the south of the China‑Vietnam border (Holm fieldwork,
Chợ Đôn district, Bắc Kạn province, August 2015; Lạng Sơn province, August 2017).
14The designation Pụt comes from an older pronunciation of the word 佛fó‘Buddha’, the Late Han and Middle Chinese pronun‑
ciation of which was /but/.
15D. Holm, fieldwork, Jinlongdong, February 2016.
16In ‘Literate Shamanism’ I go on to comment that the performance style of men and women is nevertheless quite different. During
actual performance men can be seen reading from their copies of the liturgical manuscript, whereas the women recite the words
of the same lyrics from memory. See Holm (2019 , p. 6).
17The texts are not presented in interlinear format and do not come complete with word glosses for the Tày words. For Tày scholars
this may not present any difficulty, but the task of morpheme identification is required for international purposes.
18SeeBế Viết Đằng and Lục Văn Pảo (1992 , p. 171). Differences in handwriting are clearly visible in the photo‑reproduction of the
manuscript pages at the back of the volume, making it fairly easy to disentangle the various manuscript sources.
19Typically these days the grounds of a school in the village.
20For Tày and Nùng comparisons see Holm (2020b ); for voiced initials see Holm (2023 ) and Holm (2024b ). I have also written a
book chapter on Then performance as an Intangible Cultural Heritage item in Guangxi ( Holm 2020a ), and prepared material for
a critical edition of the Cao Bằng Wedding Songs collected by Nguyễn‑v ˇan‑Huyền (1941 ); see Holm (2024a ).
21The stages and results in this very early survey of Then practitioners in northern provinces are discussed in Nông Văn Hoàn ’s
(1978 ) introduction to the conference volume, ‘Bước đầu nghiên cứu về then Việt Bắc’, pp. 7–14.
22SeeTriệu Đường (1978 , p. 62). The province of Bắc Thái is now divided into two provinces, Bắc Kạn and Thái Nguyên.
23InBế Viết Đằng and Lục Văn Pảo (1992 ),passim . Each of the stages in the Pụt Tày text contains a certain amount of what seems
at first to be adventitious material. A full analysis would require comparison with similar texts from the same locality and other
texts from elsewhere.
24Original editor’s note: A type of very hard wood usually used to make the handles of cleavers.
25Editor’s note: Probably this term refers to China. This word derives from Khách to define the Chinese. It is used as a general
term referring to the land or country extending beyond the borders.
26Editor’s note: This tree has leaves that are used to dye the fabric used for religious rituals yellow.
27On the matchlock guns used in pre‑modern armies see Holm and Meng (2021 , pp. 33–35).
28This refers to the flowers of the banana.
29On which see Holm (2004 ).
30The Nùng are frequently referred to as working as hired hands in fields owned by the Tày. See Holm (2019 ).

--- [Page 105] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 23 of 25
31The duty of reporting for such service is similar to the corvée duties of villagers and commoners under the rule of the chiefly
domains or imperial rule. For a description of this system see Holm and Meng (2021 , pp. 8–9, 18, 32–33); Took (2006 , pp. 107–9,
201–6).
32SeeEliade (1964 , p. 404); Rg‑Veda III, 8, 5, tr. R. T. H. Griffith, II: 4. See also Holm (2018 , p. 30).
33SeeEliade (1964 , pp. 442–44; Eggeling 1882–1900 , V: 2, 1, 10); see also Torcinovich (1999 , pp. 237–49).
34This ritual is found as an initiatory rite among the Manchu‑speaking Xibo people in Xinjiang, among the Bouyei and other Tai‑
speakers in Guizhou, among the Jingpo, Yi and Lisu peoples in western Yunnan, among the Karen in Burma and the Black Thai
in Laos, and in various forms of vernacular Taoist initiation. See Holm (2018 , pp. 29–30). In scholarship on Chinese religion the
Indic origins of this rite are seldom recognised.
35Transcribed and translated in Holm (2018 , Appendix pp. 56–61).
36This was an epic compiled in the period between the fourth century BCE and the fourth century CE. See Sadakata Akira (1997 ,
p. 26); Holm (2018 , p. 39).
37The exact dimensions of this world, including the breadth and depth of the seas, are set out in considerable detail in the Abhidar‑
makośa . See Pruden (1989 , 2: 464 ff). Discussed also in Holm (2018 , pp. 38–41).
38This is of course a matter that requires further exposition. Meanwhile, for the circle of wind, see lines 215–222 in the Trùng
Khánh version of the Khảm Hải, pp. 40–42 in Hoàng Triều Ân’s edited version ( Tống tập truyện thơ nôm các dân tộc thiếu số Việt
Nam 2011 , vol. 11).
39Michel Strickmann in his study on Tantric Buddhism in China (1996, p. 425) cites a range of studies documenting the underlayer
of ancient elements in religious practices ‘supposé indig ènes et primitifs’ among the Batak in Sumatra and the Cham and Bahnar
in central and southern Vietnam.
40SeeHolm (2018 , p. 22) for the original text and a translation of the relevant passage.
41Discussed in detail in Holm (2018 , pp. 28–38).
42Holm (2018 , p. 25), citing Mus (1975 , p. 24) to the effect that the Brāhmaṇas dated “from no earlier than the 7th century BC.” This
means that they were already well‑established as part of the Vedic‑Brahmanic tool‑kit by the date of the earliest voyages from
India to the east, and started to reach a critical mass by the early centuries of the Common Era. Mus (1975 ) is an English‑language
translation of Mus (1933 ).
43Holm (2018 , pp. 25–26). This phenomenon is what Paul Mus referred to as an ‘extreme ritualistic ontology’.
44Holm (2018 , pp. 23–25). This is corroborated by a recent article by Taylor (2018 ), in which he adduces abundant evidence to
show that much of the earliest infusion of Buddhism in the Jiaozhi area was in fact Brahmanical.
45Wheatley (1983 , pp. 286–310) cited in Holm (2018 , p. 25).
46Discussed in more detail in Holm (2018 , pp. 17–21).
47On the pre‑Austronesian origins of seafaring in this region see Mahdi (2017 ).
48Sather (2001 ). The group Sather investigated were the Saribas Iban in Borneo (p. 5), an Austronesian‑speaking people. The
interlinear text is found on pp. 203–683.
References
Acri, Andrea. 2017. Tantrism “Seen from the East”. In Spirits and Ships: Cultural Transfers in Early Monsoon Asia . Edited by Andrea
Acri, Roger Blench and Alexandra Landmann. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing, pp. 71–144.
Archaimbault, Charles. 1991. Le sacrifice du buffle àS’ieng Khwang (Laos) . Paris: École Française d’Extrême‑Orient.
Bế Viết Đằng, and Lục V ăn Pảo. 1992. Pụt Tày: Chant Cultuel de l’Ethnie Tày du Việt Nam . Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Khoa học Xã hội.
Blacker, Carmen. 1975. The Catalpa Bow: A Study of Shamanistic Practices in Japan . London: Allen and Unwin.
Cauquelin, Josiane. 1996. The Flower‑Soul in Nung Shamanism (Guangxi Province, China). Shaman 4: 1–2, 27–44.
Các Dân tộc ở Bắc Kạn [The Ethnic Groups of Bắc Kạn]. 2003. Tỉnh ủy và Ủy bản Nhân dân Tỉnh Bắc Kạn [Provincial Party Committee
and People’s Committee of the Province of Bắc Kạn], ed. Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Thế giời.
Davis, Edward L. 2001. Society and the Supernatural in Song China . Honolulu: Hawai’i University Press.
Diguet, Colonel E. 1908 Les montagnards du Tonkin . Paris: Auguste Challamel, Repr. New York: AMS Press, reprint: 1981.
Durand, Maurice. 1959. Technique et Panthéon des Médiums Viêtnamiens (dồng) . Paris: École Française d’Extrême‑Orient.
Đoan Thi Tuyen. 2012. Journeys to a Given Destination: An Insider’s View on Becoming a Spirit Medium (Then) in Van Quan district,
Lang Son province in Northern Vietnam . Chiangmai: Chiang Mai University Regional Center for Social Science and Sustainable
Development.
Eggeling, Julius, trans. 1882–1900. The Śatapatha‑Brāhmaṇa: According to the Text of the Mādhyandina School . New Delhi: Motilal Bar‑
nasidass, Repr. London: Routledge Curzon, Sacred Books of the East vols. 12, 26, 41, 43, 44.
Eliade, Mircea. 1964. Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy . Translated by Willard R. Trask. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
First Published in English Translation in 1964.
Fo shuo sishi’er zhang jing 佛説四十二章經 [Sayings of the Buddha in Forty‑Two Sections]. Repr. Beijing: Zhonghua shuju, n.d.

--- [Page 106] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 24 of 25
Holm, David. 2004. The Exemplar of Filial Piety and the End of the Ape‑Men: Dong Yong in Guangxi and Guizhou Ritual Performance.
T’oung‑Pao XC: 32–64. [ CrossRef ]
Holm, David. 2009. Mobility among the Tai Peoples of South China. In Kongjian yu wenhua changyu: kongjian zhi yixiang, shijian yu
shehui de shengchan 空間與文化場域 :空間之意象 ,實踐與社會的生產 Space and Cultural Fields: Spatial Images, Practices and Social
Production . Huang Ying‑kuei 黃應貴 , ed.‑in‑chief. Taipei: Center for Chinese Studies, pp. 11–59.
Holm, David. 2018. “Crossing the Seas”: The Shamanic Substratum Reconsidered. Sino‑Platonic Papers . 281. Available online: https:
//sino‑platonic.org/complete/spp281_crossing_the_seas.pdf (accessed on 11 November 2024).
Holm, David. 2019. Literate Shamanism: The Priests Called Then among the Tày in Guangxi and Northern Vietnam. Religions 10: 64.
[CrossRef ]
Holm, David. 2020a. The Lute of Heaven of Golden Dragon Valley: Transcending Shamanism. In Heritage and Religion in East Asia .
Edited by Shu‑Li Wang, Michael Rowlands and Yujie Zhu. London: Routledge, pp. 148–64.
Holm, David. 2020b. The Tày and Zhuang Vernacular Scripts: Preliminary Comparisons. Special Issue on the Sinitic Scripts of
Vietnam. Journal of Chinese Writing Systems 4: 197–213. [ CrossRef ]
Holm, David. 2023. (He Dawei 贺大卫 ). Daiyu tusu wenben zhong de zhuo shengmu duiying 岱语土俗文本中的浊声母对应 [Corre‑
spondences of Voiced Initials in Tày Vernacular Texts]. Cishu yanjiu 辞书研究 Lexicographical Studies 6: 1–18.
Holm, David. 2024a. Reflections of Voiced Initials in the Vernacular Character Text of the Tày Wedding Songs of Cao Bằng: Han
Loanwords. Paper presented at the 33rd Conference of the Southeast Asian Languages Society, Taipei, Taiwan, June 15–18.
Estimated Date of Publication 2024.
Holm, David. 2024b. Telltale Signs: Reflections of Voiced Initials in the Vernacular Tày Script. In Studies in Vietnamese historical
linguistics: Southeast and East Asian Contexts . Edited by Trang Phan, Tuan‑Cuong Nguyen and Masaaki Shimizu. Singapore:
Springer, pp. 83–97.
Holm, David, and Meng Yuanyao. 2021. The Brigands’ Song: Serving in the Army of a Native Chieftain, A Traditional Song Text from
Guangxi in Southern China . Zhuang Traditional Texts Series No.2; Leiden: Brill.
Kao Ya‑Ning. 2009. Singing a Hero in Ritual: Nong Zhigao and His Representation among the Zhuang People in China. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Melbourne.
Lagerwey, John, and Pierre Marsonne, eds. 2015. Modern Chinese Religion I Song‑Liao‑Jin‑Yuan (960‑1368 AD) . Leiden: Brill, vol. I.
Lewis, Ioan M. 1971. Ecstatic Religion: An Anthropological Study of Spirit Possession and Shamanism . Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
L’Haridon, Béatrice. 2017. Meou‑tseu: Dialogues pour dissiper la confusion . Paris: Les Belles Lettres.
Li Hui李輝 . 2002. Bai Yue yichuan jiegou de yi yuan er fen jixiang 百越遺傳結構的一元二分跡象 [Traces of unitary origin and bifur‑
cation in the genetic structure of the Hundred Yue]. Guangxi minzu yanjiu 廣西民族研究 4: 26–31.
Li Zhihong 李志鴻 . 2011. Daojiao Tianxin zhengfa yanjiu 道教天心正法研究 [Research on the Orthodox Method of the Heavenly Heart
Tradition in Daoism]. Beijing: Shehui kexue chubanshe.
Mahdi, Waruno. 2017. Pre‑Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast Asia. In Spirits and Ships: Cultural Transfers in Early
Monsoon Asia . Edited by Andrea Acri, Roger Blench and Alexandra Landmann. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing, pp. 325–74.
Mấy vấn đề về Then Việt Bắc [Some Questions on the Then of Northern Vietnam]. 1978. Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Văn hóa Dân tộc.
Mus, Paul. 1933. Cultes indiens et indigènes au Champa. Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême‑Orient 33: 367–410.
Mus, Paul. 1975. India Seen from the East: Indian and Indigenous Cults in Champa . Translated by I. W. Mabbett, and D. P. Chandler.
Translation of Mus 1933. Melbourne: Monash Papers on Southeast Asia.
Nguyễn Thị Kiếu Trang. 2016. Về Quan hệ Sách phong, Triều cống Minh—Đại Việt [On Relations of Title Bestowal and Tribute Missions
Between the Ming Dynasty and Vietnam]. Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Chính trị Quốc gia Sự thật.
Nguyễn Thị Yên. 2007. Then Tày . Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Văn hóa Dân tộc.
Nguyễn Thị Yên. 2010. Đời sống tín ngưỡng của người Tày ven Biên giới Hạ Lang, Cao Bằng [The Religious Life of the Tày People Along
the Border of Hạ Lang District, Cao Bằng]. Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Đại học Quốc gia Hà Nội.
Nguyễn‑v ˇan‑Huyền. 1941. Recueil des Chantes de Mariage Thổ de Lạng‑sơn et Cao Bằng . Hanoi: Imprimérie d’Extrême‑Orient, École
Française d’Extrême‑Orient.
Nông Văn Hoàn. 1978. ‘Bước đầu nghiên cứu về Then Việt Bắc’ [First steps in research on the Then of Northern Vietnam]. In Mấy
vấn đề về Then Việt Bắc [Some Questions on the Then of Northern Vietnam]. Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Văn hóa Dân tộc, pp. 7–41.
Orzech, Charles D., ed. 2011. Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia . Leiden: Brill.
Pruden, Leo M., trans. 1989. Abhidarmakośabhāṣyam by Louis de la Vallée Poussin . Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
Sadakata Akira. 1997. Buddhist Cosmology: Philosophy and Origins . Tokyo: Kosai Publishing Company.
Sather, Clifford. 2001. Seeds of Play, Words of Power: An Ethnographic Study of Iban Shamanic Chants . 2 vols. Kuala Lumpur: The Tun
Jugah Foundation.
Shirokogoroff, S. M. 1935. Psychomental complex of the Tungus . London: Kegan Paul, Trench, and Trubner.
Slouber, Michael. 2023. Shamans and Bhūta Tāntrikas: A shared genealogy? In Tantra, Magic, and Vernacular Religions in Monsoon Asia:
Texts, Practices, and Practitioners from the Margins . Edited by Andrea Acri and Paolo E. Rosati. London and New York: Routledge,
pp. 60–77.
Strickmann, Michel. 1996. Mantras et mandarins: Le bouddhisme tantrique en Chine . Paris: Éditions Gallimard.
Strickmann, Michel. 2002. Chinese Magical Medicine . Edited by Bernard Faure. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Taylor, K. W. 2018. What Lies behind the Earliest Story of Buddhism in Ancient Vietnam? Journal of Asian Studies 77: 107–22. [ CrossRef ]

--- [Page 107] ---
Religions 2024 ,15, 1551 25 of 25
Took, Jennifer. 2006. A Native Chieftaincy in Southwest China: Franchising a Tai Chieftaincy under the Tusi System of Late Imperial China .
Leiden: Brill.
Torcinovich, Giovanni. 1999. The Horse and the Journey to Heaven of the Shaman and of the Vedic Sacrificer. In Shamanic Cosmos:
From India to the North Pole Star . Edited by Romano Mastromattei and Antonio Rigopoulos. Venice and New Delhi: Venetian
Academy of Indian Studies and D.K. Printworld, pp. 237–49.
Tống tập truyện thơ nôm các dân tộc thiếu số Việt Nam . 2011. Viện Khoa học Xã hội Việt Nam Viện Nghiên cứu Hán Nôm, ed. Tập 11
Then: Khảm hải‑Lễ hội Hàng nga‑Pác va‑Xéc Put‑Cèo lừa. Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Khoa học Xã hội.
Tống tập truyện thơ nôm các dân tộc thiếu số Việt Nam . 2012. Viện Khoa học Xã hội Việt Nam Viện Nghiên cứu Hán Nôm, ed. Tập 12
Then Tày Giải Hạn. Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Khoa học Xã hội.
Tống tập truyện thơ nôm các dân tộc thiếu số Việt Nam . 2013. Viện Khoa học Xã hội Việt Nam Viện Nghiên cứu Hán Nôm, ed. Tập 17
Then Tày‑Lẽ Kỳ Yên‑Đính Quân. Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Khoa học Xã hội.
Tống tập truyện thơ nôm các dân tộc thiếu số Việt Nam . 2015. Viện Khoa học Xã hội Việt Nam Viện Nghiên cứu Hán Nôm, ed. Tập 18
Pây Sử‑Qu岱语土俗文本中的浊声母对应
辞书研究
Cultes indiens et indig E8nes au Champa. \emph{Bulletin de l 2019; C9;cole 
française d 2019;Extr EA;me-Orient} 33: 367--410. 
a͗a͗  a͗  y Binh Ca. Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Khoa học Xã hội.
Trần V ˇan Giáp. 1932. Le bouddhisme en Annam des origines au XIIe siècle. Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême‑Orient 32: 191–247.
Triệu Đường. 1978. Then kỳ yên cáp hết khoăn [The Then Praying for Peace and retrieving the vital spirits]. In Mấy vấn đề về Then
Việt Bắc [Some Questions on the Then of Northern Vietnam]. Hanoi: Nhà xuất bản Văn hóa Dân tộc, pp. 62–92.
van der Loon, Piet. 1977. Les origines rituelles du théâtre chinois. Journal Asiatique 265: 141–68.
Wheatley, Paul. 1983. Nāgara and Commandery: Origins of the Southeast Asian Urban Traditions . Chicago: The University of Chicago
Department of Geography, Research Paper, Nos. 207–8.
Yiqie jing yinyi: Sanzhong jiaoben hekan suoyin 一切經音義 :三穜校本合刊索引 [Sound and Meaning of All the Sutras: Combined Index
to Three Editions]. 2010. Comp. Wang Huaquan 王華權 and Liu Jingyun 劉景雲 , Redact. Xu Shiyi 徐時儀 . Shanghai: Shanghai
guji chubanshe.
Zhengzhang Shangfang 郑张尚芳 . 2003. Shanggu yinxi 上古音系 Old Chinese Phonology . Shanghai: Shanghai jiaoyu chubanshe.
Zürcher, Eric. 2007. The Buddhist Conquest of China: The Spread and Adaptation of Buddhism in Early Medieval China , 3rd ed. Leiden:
E.J. Brill.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual au‑
thor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

--- [Page 108] ---
Academic Editor: Jeffery D. Long
Received: 23 September 2024
Revised: 5 November 2024
Accepted: 21 November 2024
Published: 24 December 2024
Citation: Bianchini, Francesco. 2025.
Bathing Practices as a Religious and
Medical Encounter: Water, Climate
and Health Across Monsoon Asia.
Religions 16: 2. https://doi.org/
10.3390/rel16010002
Copyright: © 2024 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).Article
Bathing Practices as a Religious and Medical Encounter: Water,
Climate and Health Across Monsoon Asia
Francesco Bianchini
King’s College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1ST, UK; fb584@cam.ac.uk
Abstract: This study explores the intersection between religious and medical bathing prac-
tices across Monsoon Asia, with particularly reference to ¯ayurvedic and Buddhist traditions.
While previous scholarship has emphasised the ritualistic and social dimensions of bathing
in Brahmanical and Buddhist contexts, this article complements it with discussions of its
medicinal and healing functions, as outlined in classical texts and displayed in material
culture. The research highlights how bathing was considered essential for maintaining bod-
ily balance—a concept analogous to humoral theory in Galenic medicine—across different
climatic and environmental conditions, particularly during the monsoon season. The article
further examines the transregional circulation and localisation of these practices, consider-
ing how diverse Asian cultures adapted Indic bathing traditions to their unique climatic
and cultural contexts. Notably, the study addresses the complex interplay between reli-
gious doctrines, health and environmental factors, drawing connections between ¯ayurvedic
principles and Buddhist medical discourses. The ﬁndings suggest that while the notion of
balance in bathing practices was widespread, its interpretation and implementation varied
signiﬁcantly across regions, reﬂecting local environmental and cultural inﬂuences. Through
a comparative analysis of sources from South Asia, China and Southeast Asia, this article
provides a nuanced understanding of how religio-medical bathing practices were shaped
by and responded to the diverse climatic realities of Monsoon Asia.
Keywords: water; health; Buddhism; Asia
1. Introduction: Bathing in Classical ¯Ayurvedic Texts and the Question of
Monsoon Asia
Scholars of Indic religions have traditionally approached bathing practices from a
ritualistic point of view. Brahmanical texts on ablutions set out complex and lengthy
procedures that involve various body postures, hand gestures, mantra utterances and
offerings.1Further ritualistic elements associated with bathing include mindfulness of
cardinal directions, astrological alignments and the lunar calendar, as well as the symbolic
re-enactment of social and cosmic hierarchies. Similarly, Buddhist texts on bathing show
considerable concern with standardised practices, which besides ritual elements also focus
on decorum and securing the approval of the laity ( Heirman and Torck 2012 ). Thus,
avoiding unpleasant smells and wearing clean robes projected an aura of respectability that
was conducive to harmonic social interactions both within and outside the Sa ˙ngha. Equally
important to religious authors was the avoidance of improper behaviour that may occur
while bathing, as the exposure of ﬂesh and the possibility of intimacy may encourage the
temporary forsaking of monastic vows. Thus, in both Brahmanism and Buddhism, complex
rules and regulations are required to shape and facilitate the experience of bathing. In this
article, my aim is to complement this approach by placing more emphasis on the medical
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16010002

--- [Page 109] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 2 of 18
and healing aspects of bathing. But there are some aspects of ritual that cannot be entirely
left out. The ritualistic approach to bathing culminates in the concept of ritual puriﬁcation,
a holistic notion that encompasses both spiritual and bodily wellbeing. This partially
overlaps with the medical narratives we are setting out to collect here. Concurrently,
the objective is to see to what extent views about bathing and health can be discussed
transregionally, following the circulation of Brahmanism and Buddhism across Asia in
the premodern period (for a discussion of the chronology, see below). This is particularly
important for Southeast Asia, which has traditionally been neglected due to the relative
paucity of surviving textual sources. Let us clarify both objectives before moving on to a
survey of primary sources connecting various regions.
Recently, a study of water in classical ¯ayurvedic texts2has shed more light on the
multiscalar dimensions of bathing, including its healing aspects, in premodern South Asia
(Angermeier 2020 ).3The study highlights how bathing was intimately connected with the
notion of balance. This is to be expected, as ¯ayurvedic aetiology is akin to the humoral
approach of Galenic medicine: disease results from an imbalance in one of the three dos.as
(Zysk 2021 ). While diet was seen as the key instrument in facilitating this balance, bathing
too could serve such a purpose. But the study also highlights how the notion of balance is
in fact multiscalar and involves other realms beyond that of the body and its constituents,
including environments and topographies as well as wider climatic and cosmological
settings. For example, different kinds of water bodies are said to have different medical
properties depending on the seasons, especially the monsoons and the winter months.4
As in mediaeval European medicine, the approach taken is a holistic one, inasmuch as
the human is seen in connection with their context and as subject to a dynamic ﬂux of
forces. In classical ¯ayurvedic texts, some of the main medical beneﬁts of bathing are listed
as energising the body and mind, removing sweat, removing dirt, awakening of the senses,
improving one’s mood, enhancing manliness, puriﬁcation of the blood, and paciﬁcation
of the digestive ﬁre.5There are similar lists of beneﬁts in Buddhist texts, which will be
presented below.
In line with the objective of the present special issue, the main question here is whether
and to what extent views about bathing as a health practice can be discussed from a
transregional perspective. We are of course mindful to avoid a diffusionist model that takes
India as the source of cultural practices, and Southeast Asia or East Asia as the recipients.
Nevertheless, we take Indic practices as a starting point in order to show how multiple
cultural “centres” and actors across Asia selected and adapted some of these materials to
ﬁt their own needs and agendas.6
Given that ¯ayurvedic sources on bathing place emphasis on climate and the envi-
ronment, one wonders if this could be the starting point for building a transregional
framework, along with the traditional focus on the physical “humours”. It goes without
saying that there is one major weather event that characterises the macroregion including
India, Southeast Asia and parts of East Asia: monsoon rains and the cyclical environmental
changes associated with them. The term Monsoon Asia has a longstanding, and perhaps
controversial, historiographical pedigree, which after decades of neglect has recently made
a comeback. The improved and more nuanced theoretical backdrop avoids the dangers of
reducing highly diverse regions to a homogeneous and unrealistic whole.7Rather, diversity
is emphasised at the same time as a complex web of encounters, facilitated by monsoon
and maritime connectivity. The high point of such connectivity networks is represented by
the circulation of Indic religions roughly between 600 and 1300 CE.8
While it does make sense intuitively that bathing practices across Monsoon Asia
would be somehow linked to each other, the ways in which they are linked deﬁes initial
assumptions. We would assume that the climates of India, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Java and

--- [Page 110] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 3 of 18
perhaps coastal China and even Southern Japan would expose people to similar sets of
problems and pathogens related to water and bathing. My initial expectation was to ﬁnd
similar diseases linked to monsoon rain treated with similar emphasis in the available
texts across these regions. For example, fungal infections or other skin conditions could
be expected to ﬁgure prominently. However, as I progressed, I found that the texts were
reluctant to offer straightforward accounts of aetiology, especially when it came to tallying
directly with contemporary biomedical concepts of infection and disease. Also, I found
that notions of humoral and elemental disharmony were far less homogenous than one
might expect. A key issue here is the uneven distribution and typology of textual sources,
which makes it difﬁcult to compare practices, for example those in ancient Angkor with
those of Hangzhou or Polonnaruwa. Nevertheless, I believe the evidence collected here
allows for a ﬁrst discussion of the health beneﬁts of bathing in a transregional perspective.
In this context, religious agents, texts and ideas played a key role in facilitating circulation,
alignment as well as localisation (i.e., non-alignment) of practices. Generally speaking, I
argue that the very notion of “balance” can be used as a starting point for a transregional
discussion of bathing practices, and that environmental and climatic contexts formed an
essential part of how this notion was locally interpreted. However, such a notion of balance
cannot be seen as entirely detached from ritualistic puriﬁcation. Separating the two would
be artiﬁcial and anachronistic, given the holistic character of premodern healing traditions.
This is particularly important for Southeast Asia, where the relative lack of medicalised
narratives could result in the neglect of entire regions which have much to offer to the
study of premodern bathing practices. If we are to build more compelling transregional
studies in the future, an understanding of the multiscalar dimension of bathing will surely
be a requirement.
2. Chinese Buddhist Sources on Bathing and Climatic/Seasonal
Variations
Most of the available research on the transregional dimensions of bathing predictably
focuses on Buddhist discourses and their reception in China up to and including the
Song period, particularly in the context of monastic regulations ( Vinaya ) (see Kieschnick
2013 ). Crucially, such discourses have also found a material dimension in the Buddhist
“bathhouse” or jant¯aghara . Archaeological remains of this important part of a Buddhist
monastic complex can be found in South Asia and Sri Lanka.9In China, in addition to the
limited archaeological evidence, we have detailed descriptions of such bathhouses and
even depictions in drawings of idealised monasteries.10The most well-known drawings
are those related to Daoxuan, in which the bathhouse is depicted as an annex building in
the lower-right margin.11As the extant buildings from South Asia illustrate, the bathhouse
primarily functioned as a steam house, with water levels reaching just above the ankle and
with water heating facilities to generate the desired temperature. As mentioned above,
Buddhist texts were concerned with the social aspects of bathing and the avoidance of
impropriety both within the order and in its relation with the laity.12Apart from social
concerns, Buddhist texts were also adamant that the hedonistic aspects of bathing, including
the pursuit of cleanliness and beauty, should not constitute the main reason for bathing.
In this context characterised by injunctions and prescriptions, one aspect that regulators
could encourage was to seek baths for health purposes. In particular, the descriptions
in Buddhist monastic codes ( Vinaya ) emphasise the usefulness of bathing against wind
illnesses, which are associated with cold symptoms that can be alleviated through steam.13
This is parallel to the ¯ayurvedic ideal of using water at different temperatures as a means
of balancing the dos.as. However, in the context of Buddhist cross-cultural translations—of
S¯utras as well as Vinaya —one typically discovers contrasting frameworks that can be hard

--- [Page 111] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 4 of 18
to reconcile. For example, the S¯utra on Bathing the Sa ˙ngha in the Bathhouse14lists various
health beneﬁts of bathing, such as bringing the four elements into equilibrium, curing wind
illnesses, removing cold and replenishing feverish “ Qi”.15It is clear that the mention of
balancing of “the four elements” rather than “the three dos.as” or indeed of “ Qi” cannot be
just simplistically traced back to Indic medical theories. In cases like this, one can either
posit that Buddhist medical discourses recognised both a system of humours and one of
elemental balance, or one may talk about Chinese reformulations of aetiology in accordance
with local medicine. A recent study considers the Fo yi jing (T793) and tangentially discusses
such complex matters ( Lin and Radich 2023 , pp. 886–87). Be that as it may, these examples
illustrate two points: (1) that medical concerns are quite central in Buddhist discourses on
bathing (indeed, the Vinaya commentary Pinimu Jing, possibly translated towards the end
of the fourth century, goes as far as stating that “bathing is for no other purpose than to rid
the body of illnesses caused by wind and cold)16and (2) that the transregional dimension
of these discourses is often one of divergence and localisation, rather than homogenisation.
The next question is whether it is possible to link such cross-cultural exchanges to
climate and the environment. Once again, we are not attempting to reduce “Monsoon Asia”
to a homogeneous region. Discussions about differences and contrasts in environments
may prove more enlightening. References to climate-related disease do occur in Buddhist
sources. First of all, the mention of wind illness could suggest a link with cold temperatures
or sudden temperature drops.17Furthermore, seasonal change ( r.tupari n.¯ama) is explicitly
listed in the texts among the possible causes of disease, along with seven other factors
recognised in canonical sources.18Some widely circulating Mah ¯ay¯ana texts—such as the
one devoted to the adventures of Sudhana and also depicted in murals in Central Java19—
offer insights into the climate-related aspects of illness. Speciﬁcally, a key section lists which
dos.asincrease or decrease according to the seasons, linking the monsoon season with an
increase in v¯ataor wind-related ailments.20The monsoon season is particularly critical to
health due to sudden changes from cooler moments following rainfall to moments of heat
and very high humidity. This is in stark contrast to the summer months preceding the rain,
in which temperatures are very high but are easier to cope with due to lower humidity.
A passage in the Chinese rendering of the Sam.yukt ¯agama clearly deﬁnes this period of
monsoon rain as both “hot and cold” ( Sik 2016 , p. 123 [T99.252c]) when discussing harm
due to seasonal change.
While collecting passages on awareness of climatic impact on the body’s balance is
rather straightforward, the task becomes more challenging when looking for texts that
directly link seasonal health imbalances with the practice of bathing. Scholars working
primarily on Chinese sources have identiﬁed a number of relevant passages, including non-
scriptural sources. A Song inscription has been interpreted as referring to excessive sweat
during hot months and the necessity of bathing in order to avoid falling ill ( Kieschnick
2013 , p. 25). This is mirrored by younger Vinaya passages that clearly stress the need for
bathing in order to counteract the summer heat.21Various discussions by Chinese and
Japanese authors go into further detail regarding the frequency of bathing across different
seasons. For example, one author encourages daily bathing in the summer and bathing
every ﬁve days in the winter ( Heirman and Torck 2012 , p. 44). Another source speaks of a
ten-day gap during the winter ( Heirman and Torck 2012 , p. 36).
In this context, there is one author whose works perfectly illustrate how such discus-
sions took place on a transregional platform. Clearly, the different weather systems of India
and China would represent a thorny issue for monks concerned with following monastic
rules around bathing. So, it is not surprising that as early as the seventh century, the
Buddhist pilgrim and traveller Yijing, who took the maritime route towards India, devoted
ample space to this particular topic. Contrary to most discussions of Vinaya and cleanliness,

--- [Page 112] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 5 of 18
which focus on decorum and ritual, Yijing stresses the medical and health beneﬁts of
bathing, with a remarkable attention to climatic differences across regions. His discussions
are made all the more fascinating by a considerable acquaintance with both ¯ayurvedic and
Chinese systems of medicine. For example, we read: “The customs regarding taking baths
in India are different from those in China. In India the climate is temperate with slight
variations in different regions. There are ﬂowers and fruits throughout the year, even in the
twelfth month. Snow and ice are unknown, except for a thin layer of frost. Although the
weather is hot at most times, the heat is never unbearable. Even in hot weather, people do
not suffer from prickly heat, and in the cold season, their feet are not chapped. Because of
this [moderate climate], the people take baths frequently and set store by bodily cleanliness.
Every day they do not eat before having washed themselves. There are ponds full of water
in all places, and the people consider it a meritorious deed to dig ponds [ . . .] At Nalanda
Monastery there are more than ten large bathing pools, and every morning an instrument
is sounded to call the monks to take baths”.22When discussing the method of making a
bathhouse, Yijing also explicitly states that “the heat of the stove should be adjusted to the
season” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 109).
These known examples from transregional discussions of Buddhist bathing practices
speak to an awareness of the interaction between health and climatic factors, including
of differences across the macroregion we may call “Monsoon Asia”. However, the search
for evidence becomes more challenging once we move out of the relatively abundant and
well-researched Chinese sources. Can one integrate regions like Sri Lanka, Cambodia and
Java within the tapestry of bathing narratives across Monsoon Asia?
3. Sri Lanka: From Monastic to Royal Dimensions of Bathing Practices
As we turn to evidence from Sri Lanka, it is useful to distinguish two major themes
within discourses about bathing. One is the now-familiar theme of Buddhist monastic
practices. The second major theme is a discussion of royal interventions and narratives,
which are often informed by religious ideals. For example, there is evidence of royal
patronage in the construction of bathing facilities in Lanka, acts which are also described in
eulogistic passages in local chronicles. As can be expected, the amount and detail of the
primary sources are less abundant than in the case of Chinese Buddhist discussions. Even
more challenging is the detection of direct references to climatic and environmental factors.
Some passages can however be readily identiﬁed and are referred to in this section. Another
issue is the degree and character of the transregional dimension of these narratives. While
in the case of Vinaya discussions or Yijing’s travelogues, that dimension was prominent,
here it is less explicit. However, it can be teased out through comparison with allied
materials from neighbouring regions. With these preliminary remarks in mind, we may
now turn to presenting an overview of the available evidence.
First of all, evidence from Sri Lanka can be easily integrated within discussions about
bathing and Buddhist monastic regulations. Surprisingly, due to the highly specialised na-
ture of contemporary academic practices, it is generally rare for scholars of Chinese Vinayas
to incorporate these sources.23As we have already seen, one of Sri Lanka’s contributions to
these discussions starts with material culture. Here we ﬁnd actual evidence of mediaeval
“saunas” known as jant¯agharas , an integral part of Buddhist cleanliness practices. Further-
more, monastic architectural remains testify to sanitation facilities and septic tanks.24It is
very challenging to identify similar and co-eval structures on either the Indian subcontinent
or indeed in Southeast Asia. Rather unique pieces of material evidence can be found in
the so-called “sarcophagi” that can be found within some Ceylonese monastic complexes.
These appear to date back to the ninth century. According to some scholars, the internal
carvings of these structures, shaped in order to accommodate a person lying horizontally,

--- [Page 113] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 6 of 18
could have been used for medicinal immersions. Some attempts have been made to identify
descriptions of similar immersion pods within classic ¯ayurvedic texts such as Caraka or
Su´ sruta , as well as within Buddhist texts ( Mueller-Dietz 1996 , p. 50). To the best of my
knowledge, the current consensus is this: while no speciﬁc description of these sarcophagi
has been found, various textual passages referring to immersion therapy and the use of
various unguents and herbs for healing purposes allow us to have some conﬁdence that
these pods were used for healing immersions. Unfortunately, the main Buddhist medicinal
manual for this region, the 13th-century (?) Bhesajjamanjusa , does not seem to describe the
structures ( Liyanaratne 2002 ). I have so far only been able to identify passing references
to bathing as a way to heal various ailments. But I have not encountered any detailed
descriptions that also relate to seasonal or climatic variations. Once again, the P ¯aliVinaya
represents the main textual source here, as exempliﬁed in particular by the Bhesajjakhandaka
section ( Sik 2016 ).
I think the most fascinating materials from the island come not from Buddhist sources
but from sources related to the exercise of royal power. Such exercise was of course regularly
expressed with the help of religious themes and notions.
Starting from material evidence, it is easy to notice that parts of the island are criss-
crossed with a system of gutters, channels and tanks. Much of this infrastructure predates
the ﬁfteenth century ( Abeywardana et al. 2023 ). Such a remarkable system of irrigation
and water management is of course linked to the need to distribute and retain water in
one of the regions which is hit most strongly by monsoon rainfall (even if the island can be
divided into various subregions, some of which receive less rain). Tanks and ponds that
may have been used for bathing also constitute part of this network. While it is always
difﬁcult to comment on the public dimension of bathing structures, some pools were clearly
created as bathing facilities for royals or aristocrats. Like the ankle-height water level of the
jantagh ¯ara, some of the identiﬁed structures present stone seats. Others may also allow for
a full immersion of the body.25One set of written sources that can potentially throw light
on the construction and maintenance of these pools is epigraphic documents. Indeed, it
is possible to ﬁnd reference to “baths” in the published volumes of Inscriptions of Ceylon
for the period under review. But these passages are mainly concerned with regulating
access to the baths and have little to say about their therapeutic use, let alone in accordance
with seasonal change. One inscription states that “no tenants shall be allowed in any bath”
attached to what could be a monastic inﬁrmary.26
For more explicit passages, one needs to turn to royal chronicles such as the C¯ulava m.sa
and the Mah ¯avam.sa.27These outline the alleged reasons for the construction of bathing facil-
ities, with the intention of highlighting a ruler’s concern for the welfare of monastics. Most
passages limit themselves to praising the generosity of the ruler, or listing the buildings and
structures, either new or repaired. However, some can be more informative. One passage
speaks of a ruler sponsoring “a ﬁne bathing-house wholly of stone, a boundary wall and a
garden which belonged to the bhikku community” ( Geiger 1996 , [reprint], section 78.83).
This probably refers to a jantagh ¯ara-style building. Another passage directly mentions
seasonality and health: “For the bathing of the bhikkhus in the hot season, he had two
charming ponds made there beneath hollow rocks” ( Geiger 1996 , section 79.5). This remark
is in line with the ¯ayurvedic and Vinaya injunctions presented above, namely to bathe more
often during the hot months.
Another passage says: “in order to cleanse the outward impurity, that one might be
able to bathe in great heat he had eight bath-houses of stone erected [ . . .], adorned with
pillars, staircases and railings” ( Geiger 1996 , section 78.45). Once again, remarkable acts of
patronage are justiﬁed by the wish to help the monastic community maintain health during
the hot months.

--- [Page 114] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 7 of 18
Putting aside these rare instances addressing health concerns directly, a number of
passages attest to the role of myth and poetical constructions of nature in relation to ideal
rulership. While such themes are not the primary objective of the current investigation,
these can be helpful where direct references to medicine are lacking. On the one hand, the
chronicles are replete with anecdotes that involve bathing ponds within an idealised and
idyllic natural environment. Royal power is thus constructed as a way to bring balance to
nature, partly through the management of bathing facilities. In this balanced and benevolent
natural “garden” ( Shaw 2022 ), people are free from fear and danger.28On the other hand,
we ﬁnd constructions of nature as dangerous and unpredictable. This is exempliﬁed in
the ﬁgure of the N ¯agas, the powerful serpentine creatures that are traditionally associated
with water bodies and the weather. While a number of sources construct royal power
as well as ritual and religious means as capable of taming these creatures, it is harder to
ﬁnd direct references to bathing and health in this context. Some pools and tanks in Sri
Lanka occasionally bear carvings of N ¯agas.29And Sanskrit manuals that deal speciﬁcally
with taming the N ¯agas do mention bathing, but this is usually addressed in the context of
preparatory ritual puriﬁcations before engagement with the powerful creatures can begin.
The only example I have been able to ﬁnd comes from the R¯ajatara ˙ngin¯ı, a Sanskrit chronicle
of the kings of Kashmir. One passage speaks of a N ¯aga king helping to cure the Queen’s
eye illness. Water and immersions are included within the narrative as a way to access the
N¯agas’ underwater realm ( Hidas 2019 , p. 28). While such narratives are not as pertinent as
¯ayurvedic or Vinaya materials, they did circulate widely and may prove useful in regions
where there is a paucity of extant literary sources. For example, the N ¯agas are also part of
the Indic myth of the churning of the ocean with Mount Meru. A result of this churning
includes the distilling of amr.taor “nectar of immortality”. It is easy to see why discussions
about amr.tacould be relevant to the interpretation of bathing sites, for example involving
the use of springs as healing waters. As we move our survey to mainland and insular
Southeast Asia, it will be helpful to keep this in mind. However, in most cases, I have been
able to identify at least a few textual passages that speak more directly to medical concerns.
4. Angkorian Step-Pools and Hilltop Springs
There is a remarkably extensive literature on water management and pool-like struc-
tures of the Khmer Empire (ca. the 9th century to the late 14th century) ( Lustig et al. 2018 ).
However, most archaeological studies—and indeed most epigraphic references—address
ﬁrst and foremost the preoccupation with agriculture and societal sustainability through-
out the monsoon cycle. While bathing facilities are integrated within this wider water
management network, one needs to look further to unveil the medicinal and therapeutic
aspects of bathing. Where such aspects cannot be found, or remain otherwise implicit, one
needs to explain why.
As expected, the vast majority of available structures—including art historical pieces
and epigraphic references—address ritualistic concerns. Although it is possible to explore
health-related themes on the basis of ritual, that should be done with considerable care.
For example, an inscription mentions the bathing of images of Buddhist deities ( Green
2014 , p. 41). The sanctiﬁed water is then used to irrigate the surrounding ﬁelds. In this
sense, one sees how a ritualised form of bathing is integrated within communal concerns
with sustenance, balance and possibly wellbeing. The same notion is further stressed
by epigraphic passages that enjoin the bathing of Buddha statues at times of danger or
inauspicious astrological events ( Green 2014 , p. 83). Here too, one can at least identify a
concern with communal wellbeing and the protection of the people. Where human bathing
is addressed, this is often from the perspective of ritualistic puriﬁcation, with various

--- [Page 115] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 8 of 18
procedures accompanying the ablutions, from the uttering of mantras to the pouring of
water, from facing certain directions to the use of ashes ( Green 2014 , p. 215ff.).
There is also some evidence that constructing and administering different bathing
structures could have signiﬁcant social implications. For example, the Bat Chum inscrip-
tions distinguish between the so-called tat.¯aka(reservoir) and the parikh ¯a(canal) structures,
possibly indicating that the structures would be available to either Buddhist or Brahmanical
ofﬁcials. However, I failed to identify any clearly expressed healing or cathartic concerns
in the inscriptions ( Mertens 2005 ). As mentioned above, ¯ayurvedic texts mention the
speciﬁc medical characteristics of different water bodies, natural or constructed. Even if
such connotations are typically related to drinking water, rather than for immersion, the
discussions include the same kinds of canals and reservoirs mentioned in the inscriptions.
Perhaps some ritual ofﬁciants would have been aware of such medical connotations, but
these concerns are rarely addressed directly in Angkorian epigraphic texts. There is ﬁrm
but limited evidence that ¯ayurvedic medicine was known in Cambodia, since at least two
inscriptions mention the classic Su´ srutasam .hit¯a.30
To narrow our search down, we can identify at least two places that stand out for
their connection to bathing and ritual and may possibly be construed as having a healing
dimension too. One is Neak Pean, within the Angkorian archaeological park. The other is
Phnom Kulen, in the hills to the northwest of the Angkor Thom citadel. Neak Pean has
long been linked to healing baths in popular culture and archaeo-tourism. Unfortunately,
there appears to be little hard evidence to back up these intuitively appealing speculations.
That is leaving aside the common identiﬁcation of barays with the mythological “oceans
of milk”, the distilling of the elixir of eternal life ( amr.ta) or indeed the presence of N ¯aga
sculptures.
More speciﬁcally, the artistic symbolism of Neak Pean has been linked by scholars to
the mythological lake Anavatapta, typically found in Buddhist cosmological narratives
involving Mount Meru. Such narratives typically stress the association between the lake
and the elixir of eternal life ( amr.ta). As Indic cosmologies travelled across Asia, we ﬁnd
depictions as well as descriptions of this lake as far away as China and Japan.31There is
some textual evidence that links the Anavatapta lake with medicinal concerns and healing.
For example, a Chinese text on meditation sickness states that even remembering this lake
can help recovery from disease.32Other aspects of the artistic programme of the lake are
images of Avalokite´ svara, who is known for his compassion and help towards devotees
and is also like many other Buddhist ﬁgures linked to various health practices. Some
scholars have also associated the four ﬁgures carved around the pond—an elephant, a lion,
a man and a horse—with the four bodily elements ( Stark 2022 , p. 391). This is taken as
potential evidence for a Khmer humoral system and for an architectural example of bathing
as seeking balance among the bodily constituents. Although somewhat speculative, this
suggestion deserves more attention in future studies. Unfortunately, inscriptions associated
with the site fail to mention speciﬁcally medical themes or concerns. Stanza 170 of the
Preah Khan inscription states that “Far out in [the lake] is an island whose charm lies in its
artiﬁcial pond ﬁlled with a single body of water from sacred bathing-places. [The island]
washes away the mud of sin from those who make contact with it; it is a boat for crossing
beyond the ocean of worldly existences”.33We do ﬁnd here a mention of bathing linked
with ritualistic puriﬁcation, as is usual in this context, but no explicit medical terminology.
The situation is similar with Phnom Kulen (or Mahendraparvata), the forested hill to
the Northwest of Angkor Thom. While most of the literature emphasises the role of the
associated river in terms of water management and agriculture, it is clear that water on
Phnom Kulen was invested with ritualistic and symbolic signiﬁcance. If we read a con-
temporary ﬁeldwork report, we immediately ﬁnd observations of contemporary pilgrims

--- [Page 116] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 9 of 18
involved in ritual bathing and puriﬁcation. A local guide is reported as having explained
that some of the pilgrims were likely showing their gratitude to the gods after recovering
from an illness ( Lefferts and Cort 2008 , p. 291). Reports like this, or anthropological studies
on spirit mediums ( kru boramei ) and their use of water for healing, are easy to ﬁnd. Today,
it is also common to ﬁnd stalls selling herbal and animal-derived remedies in the vicinity
of waterfalls. And there is at least one spring near the linga-decorated river which is
considered sacred. To the best of my knowledge, the water from the spring is drunk and
is not used for ablutions or immersions. Further into the mountain, we ﬁnd a series of
rock-cut shelters near the famous reclining Buddha statue. Some of these rock-cut shelters
have tanks for the collection of water, and pilgrims have been known to drink this water as
a blessing, as it is considered sacred. Unfortunately, mediaeval sources are quite silent on
bathing practices on Phnom Kulen, with occasional discourses framed in purely ritualistic
and religious terms.34
There is however one set of inscriptions issued under Jayavarman VII (ca. 1182–1281)
that are more explicit on medical matters. These steles record the foundations of “houses of
health” ( ¯arogya´ s ¯alas) and explicitly mention ¯ayurveda as a branch of knowledge, as well
as the provision of medicines and the employment of physicians.35A number of relevant
structures have been identiﬁed around the Angkorian citadel (usually counted as four
sites) and in the provinces of the former Khmer Empire, in what is now Northeastern
Thailand (over twenty sites). It has been suggested that if any actual hospice facilities did
exist, these could have been wooden structures. What currently remains are an enclosing
wall, a central chapel (thought to house the Buddha of Healing) and an annexed building
within the otherwise empty courtyards. Yet there is one more feature of these still largely
mysterious “houses of health” that is relevant here: the step-pools regularly found on the
outside of the wall perimeter, towards the northwest. These pools are a stable feature of
Jayavarman’s “houses of health”.36Given the explicit medicinal dimension of these sites (at
least according to the inscriptions), one may at least assume that the pools would have been
used for healing purposes. However, to what extent bathing was enjoined as a therapeutic
practice is debatable. First of all, the inscriptions do not go into any detail on the uses of
the pools. Secondly, allied Indic descriptions of “houses of health” from ¯ayurvedic texts in
Sanskrit do speak of the need for nearby water bodies, but mainly as a way of securing a
stable provision of water ( Wujastyk 2022 , p. 12).
This leaves us with one ﬁnal piece of evidence in terms of sources dating back to
the Angkorian period: the notes and descriptions by Chinese diplomat Zhou Daguan
(ca. mid-13th–mid-14th century). The visitor does devote various sections to health and
medicine, including one on childbirth and one on illnesses. As the latter addresses bathing
directly, it is worth quoting it here in its entirety:
“The people of this country are frequently ill, and can often cure themselves by
immersing themselves in water and repeatedly washing their head. At the same
time there are a lot of lepers—they are everywhere on the roads—and local people
think nothing of sleeping and eating in their company. They sometimes say that
disease occurs because of particular local conditions. It is also said that the king
once contracted the disease so people are not troubled by it. In my humble
opinion people contracted disease because they so often go into the water and
bathe after making love. I have heard that local people always go and bathe as
soon as their lovemaking is over. Out of every 10 people that contract dysentery,
eight or nine die. They have people who sell medicines in the markets, as with
us, but the medicines are not the same as the ones in China and they do not know
what they are made of. There are also witchdoctors of some kind that give people
their help”.37

--- [Page 117] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 10 of 18
Here, we encounter the kind of medicalised description we intended to emphasise.
However, there are a number of issues. First of all, while there is a reference to bathing
as a therapy, there is no mention of either Indic or Sinitic aetiology involving humours or
elements. That would have made it easier to link this passage to transregional concerns.
Whether or not “leprosy” is the right translation for the underlying Chinese is debatable,
but there appears to be at the very least a reference to a condition that affects the skin. Skin
issues are a common problem in tropical climates, which makes the topic relevant to a
discussion of Monsoon Asia. The fact that Zhou Daguan acknowledges the unfamiliarity
of Khmer medicines, and thus possibly the uniquely local materia medica , reminds one to
view Monsoon Asia as a highly diverse zone, even if tightly interconnected. As for the
mention of love making in the context of bathing, Caraka mentions it in ´Sar¯ırasth ¯ana 8
(bathing before coitus and sprinkling the woman with cold water afterwards). Generally,
there is an acknowledgement that water, especially perhaps in a tropical climate, could
be the source of disease. Overall, this passage does prove valuable in linking Angkorian
bathing practices to health and the wider tapestry of Monsoon Asian climates.
To sum up, in the case of Angkor, the few medicalised sources on bathing exhibit
a localised character rather than a cosmopolitan one. Most of these sources address the
importance of ritual puriﬁcation. Why is this the case? First of all, one needs to address the
issue of source typology. While South Asia has preserved a plethora of ¯ayurvedic treatises,
only epigraphic sources survive from pre-1400 CE Cambodia. These may refer to medical
texts, but their main purpose is to record royal donations and generous acts of patronage.
The ﬁrst half of the inscriptions typically offers a poetic eulogy of the ruler and his lineage,
while the second half lays out administrative details including boundaries, taxation and
access regulations. There is little scope here to bring out medicalised discourses. On the
other hand, religious narratives about puriﬁcation ﬁt very well, for they serve to legitimise
the ruler’s power or praise the piety of religious ﬁgures. The Khmer evidence also poses the
following question: what does “medicalised” mean in the context of the premodern world?
¯Ayurvedic texts and Buddhist Vinayas express very speciﬁc and technical aspects of the
effects of bathing on the human body, but these should not be seen in opposition to religious
or ritual beneﬁts. Within the holistic stance of premodern medicine, ritualistic puriﬁcation
and medical balance overlap, as exempliﬁed at Neak Pean and other bathing sites.
5. Springs in East Java
The situation is somewhat similar in Nusantara (maritime Southeast Asia), where
we ﬁnd an overwhelming majority of references to ritualistic puriﬁcation and fewer to
medicalised discourses. There have been some attempts at linking water management
infrastructure with the history of tropical diseases, particularly with regard to Majapahit’s
capital (e.g., Miksic 1999 ). However, these attempts are still speculative, and there is a lack
of consensus on the very form or extent of water management in ancient cities such as
Trowulan. A more solid starting point in terms of material evidence is the sacred bathing
facilities known as petirtaans , of which Jolotundo in Eastern Java is a key example. There
are of course various bathing spots in Central Java as well, including Ratu Boko or Cabean
Kunti.38Some include hot springs like Candi Umbul or Candi Ngampon. Other places
of interest for sacred bathing are Candi Gembirowati and Sengang Beji.39However, the
studies on the symbolism of eastern sites are possibly more advanced at the present stage.
Jolotundo was constructed near a natural spring on the sides of a mountain, intended as
a holy bathing site and closely connected with political discourses as well as agricultural
needs. In order to understand any possible connections with health, one can turn to the
carvings and decorations on its walls and the spring itself. Some of these architectural
elements are now housed in museums but have been documented by scholars. As pointed

--- [Page 118] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 11 of 18
out by a number of specialists, it appears that the main cosmogonic notion associated with
the site is that of Mount Meru, which is symbolised both by the mountain itself and by
sculpted heads around the spring, adorned with N ¯agas. This is an indication that the
waters of Jolotundo were linked to the concept of amr.ta, nectar or the elixir of eternal life.40
There is little else at the site or in associated epigraphic material that could offer further
insights into healing practices. The concept of amr.tadoes have medical connotations, but as
usual, these are conceived as a side dimension to the more central idea of ritual puriﬁcation,
a religiously constructed concept in which physical health is subsumed within a holistic
paradigm. But these early Javanese “SPAs”, with their cosmopolitan natural symbolism
linked to Mount Meru, are not the only source of evidence.41
To gain further information, one needs to look at the relatively extensive literary
works in Old Javanese, most notably kakawin poetry, as well as tutur religious literature.
While there are indeed references to bathing, the overwhelming majority of these deal with
idealised depictions of nature or with erotic scenes. Other passages refer to how bathing and
cleanliness reﬂect a sense of decorum, respectability or even royalty. It is possible however
to identify a common theme of bathing in order to restore one’s energy and feel refreshed
after a fatiguing journey.42Unsurprisingly, similar beneﬁts are listed in both ¯ayurvedic and
Buddhist texts. Another theme potentially more relevant to medicine is that of toiletry and
personal care. Some kakawin descriptions of washing either the body or one’s hair refer to
powders, oils and ointments. One description identiﬁes a particular kind of medicinal leaf
and refers to powders and unguents in the context of a beautifying bath.43More relevant to
the present line of enquiry, a passage describes the collection of holy waters from various
bathing places and links it with alchemical efﬁcacy and methods, in a hyperbolic depiction
of its power.44The term used for alchemy is the Sanskritic term ras ¯ayana, which thus
carries a cosmopolitan connotation, at least on the surface. Its occurrence in a context that
directly addresses bathing is suggestive of underlying notions of bathing as a process that
affects the body in transformative ways. However, presently, I am unaware of any passage
linking bathing to balancing either the humours or bodily elements. It is likely that more
relevant material will be brought to light by scholars of Old Javanese in the future.45
This leaves us with religious sources. A later text directly refers to bathing as a way
of removing sweat and dirt, which parallels ¯ayurvedic and Buddhist discourses but has
little medicinal value, inasmuch as the connection between hygiene and illness was not as
clear in the premodern world as it is today.46The religious hymns preserved in Bali are
mainly concerned with religious and spiritual puriﬁcation but occasionally include some
information on holy water too.47For example, one hymn concerned with bathing with
ashes could be construed as implying that normal bathing with water might be beneﬁcial
for skin conditions ( Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971 , p. 83). However, the reference to “skin”
is reliant on a certain reading which is not uniform across the manuscripts. In cases like
this, the risk of overreading is considerable.
A ﬁnal source of information is anthropological studies on bathing in Javanese culture.
To the best of my knowledge, the most relevant studies point to ritual bathing in connection
to stage of life, such as a girl’s ﬁrst menstruation or marriage. In this context, various
unguents or substances may be involved in the ritual washing. Modern bathing practices
in Bali are also linked with the pursuit of mental health.48Even in cases where a medical
dimension is more clearly detectable, it remains challenging to ﬁnd allied materials in
extant, pre-1400 CE literary sources. This remains, however, a promising ﬁeld for further
research.
In general, the narratives and bathing sites of Java offer close parallels with the Khmer
ones. One point of divergence is the large body of ornate literature ( k¯avya ) preserved

--- [Page 119] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 12 of 18
in Old Javanese. These sources primarily address the erotic aspects of bathing and only
secondarily touch upon medical and ritual themes around puriﬁcation and health.
6. Conclusions
In this transregional overview of sources on the therapeutic aspects of bathing, we
began by noticing common threads linking distant literary cultures. Buddhist texts and
agents offer insights into the circulation of Indic ideas spelled out in parallel ¯ayurvedic
sources. Buddhist monastic texts are particularly keen on medicalised discourses as a
way to emphasise that bathing is more than self-indulgence and sensuality. Thus, we
could highlight (1) the view of bathing as helping balance the humours, especially wind,
as well as helping with digestion and skin conditions, and (2) the concern with seasonal
adjustments, mirrored by changes in the frequency and style of bathing. With the circulation
of Buddhism, these views were debated by Chinese scholars and adapted to the local
cultural and climatic contexts. Therefore, these materials are essential to complement the
more common scholarly focus on the ritualistic and social aspects of bathing.
The next question was whether cultural zones that have preserved fewer or different
literary sources could be included within this discussion. In the case of both mainland
and insular Southeast Asia, we showed that bathing practices can be ﬁrst approached
under the rubric of “ritual puriﬁcation”. The symbolism of amr.tathen opens the door for
discussion about bodily health. Both in the case of Angkorian and Old Javanese sources,
we were also able to identify a few examples that speak more directly to the medicinal
and therapeutic aspects of water use. These examples were usually of a localised character.
This is due primarily to the uneven typology of the primary sources and to the speciﬁc
political and literary purposes they serve. Of course, it is also possible that medicalised
bathing took place in contexts for which we currently have no evidence. We should also be
careful not to overemphasise the importance of bathing within medical regimens, as diet
and other forms of therapy would have usually taken precedence. Although preliminary,
the incorporation of these ﬁndings opens the door for further study, especially in the case
of Old Javanese kakawin and tutur literature, which has hardly been studied from the
perspective of the history of medicine. Although we could not identify clear references
to monsoon climatology in the presented Southeast Asian texts, the symbolism of Mount
Meru and its sacred lakes offers at least some insight into how climate and environments
were integrated with discourses on water use and health beneﬁts.
Ultimately, this study proposes looking beyond the ﬁelds of ¯ayurvedic studies, Bud-
dhist studies and Southeast Asian studies, suggesting ways in which different typologies
of sources could be brought together to form coherent research agendas. This approach
has hardly been attempted so far, despite considerable advances in all of these separate
ﬁelds. In the future, along with further research on textual sources, we hope to include
more archaeological and archaeo-medical materials to further enrich this dynamic picture.
Funding: This publication has been supported by the French National Research Agency (ANR),
project MANTRA—Maritime Asian Networks of Buddhist Tantra (ANR-22-CE27-015), coordinated
by Andrea Acri (EPHE, PSL University, Paris).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Acknowledgments: This manuscript was published in the special issue “Beyond the ‘Spice Routes’:
Indic and Sinitic Religions across the Asian Maritime Realm,” with Dr. Andrea Acri and Dr. Francesco

--- [Page 120] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 13 of 18
Bianchini serving as guest editors. The paper was presented at the “Beyond the Spice Route”
symposium at King’s College, University of Cambridge on 7 November 2023, part of the King’s
College “Silk Roads Programme”. The event was co-funded by the French EPHE, GREI and ANR.
The paper was also presented at the Summer Programme co-organised by the SOAS-Alphawood
Group (SAG), EPHE, and NMAA, which took place in Siem Reap from 12–24 July 2024.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
CBETA Chinese Buddhist Electronic Text Association, http://www.cbeta.org .
Notes
1For a recent overview on the Brahmanical sn¯ana, see Paul (2021 ).
2I follow Angermeier (2020 , p. 2) in deﬁning the “classical period” of ¯ayurveda as 300 BCE to 550 CE. The Caraka and Su´ sruta
compendia were developed within this range. This is also the same time span for the core development of most Buddhist Vinayas.
3On the related topic of seasons in ¯ayurvedic medicinal texts see Angermeier (2022 ).
4See the discussion and references in Angermeier (2020 , pp. 221–22): Su´ sruta 6.64.025ab (bathing in a hot room), Bhel¯a3.06.014
(bathing in hot water), As.t.¯a˙ngasam .graha 1.04.017 (lukewarm water), Caraka 1.06.024, Su´ sruta 6.64.036 and 038–039a (on spring).
5The following two passages are discussed in Angermeier (2020 , pp. 220–21 and pp. 216–17), respectively. d¯ıpana m.vr.s.yam ¯ayus.yam.
sn¯anam ¯urj¯abalapradam (67) / ka n.d.¯umala´ sramasvedatandr ¯atr.˙nd¯ahap ¯apmajit / u s.n.¯ambun ¯adha h.k¯ayasya pari s.eko bal ¯avaha h.(68) / tenaiva
t¯uttam ¯a˙ngasya balah r.t ke´ sacak s.us.¯am / n ¯an¯aplutya ´ sira h.sn¯ay¯an na jale ’lpe na ´ s ¯ıtale (69) /sn¯anodak ¯avatara n.asvapn ¯annagnonac ¯acaret /
pañcapin .d.¯an anuddhr .tya na sn ¯ay¯at parav ¯arin.i (70)
(As.t.¯a˙ngasam.graha 1.03.067cd–070). “Bathing helps digestion, virility, long life, and gives strength; it is effective against issues
such as itch, dirt, lack of energy, sleepiness, sweat, thirst and burning. The pouring of water on the lower part of the body brings
energy; on the upper part it beneﬁts hair and the sense of sight. One should not bathe without immersing the head, not in too little
water, not in too cold water [ . . .]”. See also the following passage: nidr¯ad¯aha´ sramahara m., svedaka n.d.¯utr.s.¯apaham / h r.dyam., malahara m.
´ sres.t.ham., sarvendriyavibodhanam (57) / tandr ¯ap¯apmopa´ samana m., tus.t.idam., pum.stvavardhanam / raktapras ¯adana m.c¯api sn ¯anam agne´ s
ca d¯ıpanam (58) / u s.n.ena ´ sirasa h.sn¯anam ahita m.caks.us.ah.sad¯a / ´ s¯ıtena ´ sirasa h.sn¯anam.caks.us.yam iti nirdi´ set (59) / ´ sle s.mam ¯arutakope tu
jñ¯atv¯a vy¯adhibal ¯abalam / k ¯amam u s.n.am.´ sirah.sn¯anam.bhais.ajy¯artha m.sam¯acaret (60) / ati´ s ¯ıt¯ambu ´ s ¯ıte ca ´ sle s.mam ¯arutakopanam / atyu s.n.am
us.n.ak¯ale ca pitta´ so n.itakopanam (61) / tac c ¯atis¯arajvaritakar n.a´ s¯ul¯anil¯artis.u /¯adhm ¯an¯arocak ¯aj¯ırn.abhuktavatsu ca garhitam (62) ( Su´ sruta
4.24.057–062). “Bathing (1) reduces sleepiness, burning and tiredness; (2) gets rid of sweat, itch and thirst; (3) is beneﬁcial to the
heart; (4) removes dirt; (5) increases virility; (6) awakens the senses; (7) removes apathy; (8) gives contentment; (9) clariﬁes the
blood; (10) helps the digestive ﬁre. [ . . .] When Phlegm or Wind are out of balance one should resort to washing the head with
warm water depending on the severity of the condition [ . . .] too cold water in Winter causes an imbalance in Phlegm and Wind,
and too hot water in Summer causes imbalances in Bile and Blood. [ . . .] Bathing can be helpful in cases of Fever, Wind diseases,
lack of appetite and digestive problems [. . .]”.
6For further considerations and examples of this methodology in relation to Buddhist cults, see Bianchini (2024 ).
7See the overview and critical remarks on “Monsoon Asia” in Acri (2023 , p. 64), who regards this region not as “a static and reiﬁed
geographical expression”, but rather as “a metaphor spatializing dynamic social networks that may help us to make sense of
complex historical processes [ . . .] a geographical arena with a shared history of human migration, long-distance trade, linguistic
contact and dispersal, and cultural transfer”.
8The sources quoted in this article, although very diverse, are all relevant to the study of this period. In the case of Sanskrit text,
these are notoriously difﬁcult to date and may have formed over centuries. Some texts, like ¯ayurvedic classics or the Vinayas,
may have formed earlier than 600 CE, but they continued to exercise inﬂuence during the period in question. Other texts, like
some chronicles from Sri Lanka, may have been composed later but address this same period, possibly by reworking earlier
sources and materials. Due to the longue dur ée approach of the present article, we offer date estimates only where deemed
particularly important.
9While dating these diverse structures precisely can be challenging, at least some of the Sri Lankan examples can be traced back to
what Davis (2013 , pp. 77–94) calls the “Early Mediaeval” period (600–1200 CE). They are associated with monastic complexes of
the Pavvata Vihara and Padhanaghara Parivena types. For further information on the extant structures, see Kulatunge (2019 ).
10Kieschnick (2013 ) and Heirman and Torck (2012 ) represent valuable introductions to this subject.
11The bathhouse is the second building from the bottom in the depiction presented in Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 39).

--- [Page 121] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 14 of 18
12See for example the following remarks: “When advocating bathing, Indian monastic texts tend to stress its importance in relation
to health, hygiene, cleanliness, decorum, seniority and the danger of sexual attraction. However, these various motives for
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two beneﬁts of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷28⟨36聽法品⟩1：「「爾時Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.世尊告諸比丘1：「「造作浴室有五功德Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.云何為五？一者除風Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.二者
[1]病得差Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.三者除去塵垢Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.四者身體輕便Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.五者得肥白Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.是謂Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.比丘！造作浴室有此五功德Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.是故Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.當求方便Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.造立浴室Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.如是Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.諸比丘！當作是學Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3-8) “Five virtues accrue
from making bathhouses. What are these ﬁve? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness; third,
they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; ﬁfth, they make one soft and white. These, bhikkhus,
are the ﬁve virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns, laymen and
laywomen] wish to obtain these ﬁve virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This, bhikkhus, is
what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a ﬁrst composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.)佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》1：「「「佛告耆域1：「『澡浴之法Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.當用七物Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.除去七病Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.得七福報Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.何謂七
物？一者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.然火；七二者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.淨水；七三者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.澡豆；七四者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.[1]蘇膏；七五者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.淳灰；七六者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.楊枝；七七者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.內衣Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.此是澡浴之法Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.何謂除[2]去七
病？一者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.四大安隱；七二者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.除風病；七三者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.除濕痺；七四者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.除寒氷；七五者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.除熱氣；七六者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.除垢穢；七七者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.身體輕便Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.眼目精明Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.是
為除[＊]去眾僧七病Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.」(CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[ . . .] Such is the method of bathing. And what are
the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed. 3. Damp
Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body [becomes]
light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making such a
donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.此澡浴者不為餘緣Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.但欲令除身中風冷病Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.得安隱行道故洗Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.是名浴室中上座所作法用Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.」(CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15-b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123).或從風起苦Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.眾生覺知Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或從痰起Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或從唌唾起Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或等分起Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或自害Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或他害Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或因節氣Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.彼自害者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或拔
髮Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或拔鬚Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或常立舉手Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或蹲地Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或臥灰土中Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或臥棘刺上Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或臥杵上Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或板上Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或牛屎塗地而臥其上Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或臥水中Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或日三洗
浴Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或一足而立Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.身隨日轉Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.如是眾苦精勤有行Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.尸婆！是名自害Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.他害者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或為他手石Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.刀Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.杖等Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.種種害身Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.是名他害Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.尸
婆！若復時節所害Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.冬則大寒Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.春則大熱Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.夏寒暑俱Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.是名節氣所害Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.(CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22-253a2). “[ . . .] it is very cold in
winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For more
passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñ ¯a’s version of the Gan.d.avy¯uha(T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracar ¯ıpranidh ¯an.asection.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疿) as a
result of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty-ﬁve days of spring and the ﬁrst month of summer)”. On
this, see the following source: 《四分律》卷161：「「爾時諸比丘Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.盛熱時身體[31]疱[32]疿出Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.[33]污垢臭穢Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.畏慎不敢洗浴Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.恐犯
過半月洗浴Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.諸比丘白佛Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.佛言1：「「聽諸[34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.自今已去應如是說戒1：「若比丘半月應洗浴Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.除餘時Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.若過Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.波
逸提Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.餘時者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.熱時Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.」如是世尊與比丘結戒Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.」(CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5-11).
22夫論洗浴之法Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.西國乃與東夏不同Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.但以時節調和稍異餘處Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.於十二月花果恒有Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.不識氷雪薄有微霜Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.雖復多暑亦非苦熱Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.熱則
身無[13]疿子Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.寒乃足無皴裂Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.為此人多洗沐體尚清淨Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.每於日日之中不洗不食Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.又復所在之處極饒池水Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.時人皆以穿池為福Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.若
行一驛Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.則望見三二十所Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或寬一畝五畝Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.於其四邊種多羅樹Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.高四五十尺Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.池乃皆承雨水Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.湛若清江Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.[. . .]那爛陀寺有十餘所大
池Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.每至晨時寺嗚[14]健稚令僧徒洗浴Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.人皆自持浴裙Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或千或百俱出寺外Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.散向諸池各為澡浴Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.(CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no. 2125,
pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷31：「「又洗浴者並須飢時Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.浴已方食Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.有
其二益1：「一則身體清虛無諸垢穢Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.二則痰癊消散能飡飲食Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.飽[1]方洗浴Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.醫明所諱Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.故知飢沐飽浴之言Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.未是通方之論Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.」(CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷31：「「若著三尺浴衣Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.褊小形露；七或元不著Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.赤體而浴者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.深乖教理也Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.應用四幅洗裙Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.遮身可愛Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.非直奉
遵聖教Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.亦乃不愧人神Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.餘之可不Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.智者當悉Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.夜浴尚不改容Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.對人寧無掩蔽耳Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.」(CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2-6)
“Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two beneﬁts derived from eating food after taking a bath. First,
the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depression are
dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may know that

--- [Page 122] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 15 of 18
the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of an all-round
scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.
24See the photographic documentation here: https://ccdl.claremont.edu/digital/collection/p15831coll15/id/672/rec/40 (accessed
on 1 August 2024).
25For online photographic resources on architectural ﬁnds, see https://ccdl.claremont.edu/digital/collection/p15831coll15/id/75
0/rec/49 (accessed on 1st August 2024).
26Paranavitana (Paranavitana 1970–2015 , V .3, p. 39).
27The complexities of dating cannot be tackled here. For a summary, see Abeywardana et al. (2018 , p. 7). This work also discusses
pre-1400 water management structures on the island and includes a section on epigraphic sources.
28See also k¯avya works from Sri Lanka presented in Biedermann and Strathern (2017 ).
29E.g., the Naga Pokuna of Mihintale.
30Inscriptions K323 and K528 are quoted in Lustig and Lustig (2015 , p. 28).
31On the transregional mythology of Anavatapta lake, see Gao (2020 ).
32《治禪病祕要法》卷11：「「「治之法者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.先服肥膩世間[A3]Religions 2024 ,15, 0 14 of 17
24See the photographic documentation here: https://ccdl.claremont.edu/digital/collection/p15831coll15/id/672/rec/40 (accessed on
1 August 2024).
25For online photographic resources on architectural finds, see https://ccdl.claremont.edu/digital/collection/p15831coll15/id/750/
rec/49 (accessed on 1st August 2024).
26Paranavitana (Paranavitana 1970–2015 , V.3, p. 39).
27The complexities of dating cannot be tackled here. For a summary, see Abeywardana et al. (2018 , p. 7). This work also discusses
pre‑1400 water management structures on the island and includes a section on epigraphic sources.
28See also kāvya works from Sri Lanka presented in Biedermann and Strathern (2017 ).
29E.g., the Naga Pokuna of Mihintale.
30Inscriptions K323 and K528 are quoted in Lustig and Lustig (2015 , p. 28).
31On the transregional mythology of Anavatapta lake, see Gao (2020 ).
32《治禪病祕要法》卷 1：「「治之法者，先服肥膩世間 [A3]羙藥，然後仰眠，數息令定，想阿耨達池其水盈滿，滿一由旬， 底有
金沙、四寶、金輪，生黃金華大如車輪。花中有四寶 ——獸頭象鼻出水、師子口出水、馬口出水、牛口出水 ——繞池七匝，阿耨
達龍王七寶宮殿在四獸頭間。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T15, no. 620, p. 335b2‑7) [A3] 羙【 CB】【麗 ‑CB】，美【大】 (cf. K19n0744_p0
689b04)
“[1.6] [The Method for Curing Blockage] [1.6.1] [The Arising of Blockage] Further, Śāriputra, if a forest‑dwelling monk employs
his mind [in meditation] with too much tension, is too rough with his breathing, or sleeps in too Spartan conditions, he will,
owing to external winds, become afflicted by cold. As a result, his stomach tube and spleen and kidney channels will become
agitated, and wind will stir within his tendons. A reverse qi ( 逆氣 ) will stagnate in his chest. All his joints will leak water, which
will accumulate in his chest. His blood will roil ( 激血 ), his qi will erupt ( 氣發 ), his head will ache, his back will swell ( 背滿 ), and
all his tendons will seize up. This must be treated quickly.
[1.6.2] [The Waters of Anavatapta] The method for curing it is as follows. First, the practitioner must take excellent, nourishing
worldly medicine. He should then lie down on his back, count his breaths, and settle himself. He should then imagine Lake
Anavatapta […]”.
Translation taken from Greene (2021 , p. 261). Chinese text reported here only for paragraph [1.6.2].
33Maxwell (2007 , [ed.]):
Stanza 170
yasyāntare tīrthajalaikarāśi‑/
khātābhirāmaṃ pulinaṃ parārddham//
saṃsparśināṃ kṣalitapāpapa kaṃ/vahitrabhūtan taraṇaṃ bhavāvdheḥ//
34On Phnom Kulen in general, see for example Jean‑Baptiste Cheavance et al. (2019 ).
35See the digitised epigraph at https://siddham.network/inscription/k368/ (accessed on 1 August 2024).
36For plans of these structures, see Dagens (1991 ).
37Harris (2007 , p. 66)国人寻常有病，多是入水浸浴及频频洗头，便自痊可。然多病癞者，比比道途间。土人虽与之同卧同食亦不
校。或谓彼中风土有此疾，曾有国主患此疾，故人不之嫌。以愚意观之，往往好色之馀，便入水澡洗，故成此疾。闻土人色欲才
毕，皆入水澡洗。其患痢者十死八九，亦有货药于市者，与中国不类，不知其为何物。更有一等师巫之属，与人行持，尤可笑 .
38SeeDegroot (2008 ) for a short survey of bathing places. On water symbolism see also Patt (1979 ).
39I thank Marijke Klokke and Eko Bastiawan for suggesting various places of interest. See also the 1979 Dissertation by Ann Patt
on the symbolism of water in ancient Indonesian art and architecture.
40Robson and Sidomulyo (2021 , pp. 94–95), Kieven (2013 , p. 115).
41I should also point out the existence of a twelfth‑century bathtub or sarcophagus kept in the Kediri Museum of Eastern Java
(Acri 2024 , p. 3 [with photograph]). It is unclear what purpose it actually served, but ritual ablutions or consecrations with
water cannot be excluded. Although the medicinal aspect is not explicit, they may be compared to the structures from Sri Lanka
mentioned above. Other such bathtubs can be found in East Java and at the National Museum in Jakarta.
42Śiwarātrikalpa ,Teeuw and Tanakung (1969 , p. 79). In spelling Old Javanese words, I retain the w of the traditional spelling, also
opting for ĕ over ә and for ng over .
43Worsley et al. (2013 , p. 227). narendramahiṣī lawan sang Aja madyus akaramas aśokapādapapaḍ ñjuh akase wĕrĕh harĕp ing endah araras
awĕḍak‑wĕḍak lumut
“The queen and King Aja bathed and washed their hair with aśoka leaves. Excitedly they used the foam as unguent
and the moss as powder, desiring to make themselves lovely”.
(Sumanasāntaka 164.4.)
44Robson (2008 , p. 127).
bañu ning śatatīrtha pinupulakĕn ing ghata hīra pitu
rasapinda rasāyana sakalawajadrawa sapta ghata藥Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.然後仰眠Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.數息令定Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.想阿耨達池其水盈滿Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.滿一由旬Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.底有金
沙Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.四寶Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.金輪Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.生黃金華大如車輪Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.花中有四寶——獸頭象鼻出水Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.師子口出水Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.馬口出水Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.牛口出水——繞池七匝Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.阿耨達
龍王七寶宮殿在四獸頭間Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.」(CBETA 2024.R1, T15, no. 620, p. 335b2-7) [A3]Religions 2024 ,15, 0 14 of 17
24See the photographic documentation here: https://ccdl.claremont.edu/digital/collection/p15831coll15/id/672/rec/40 (accessed on
1 August 2024).
25For online photographic resources on architectural finds, see https://ccdl.claremont.edu/digital/collection/p15831coll15/id/750/
rec/49 (accessed on 1st August 2024).
26Paranavitana (Paranavitana 1970–2015 , V.3, p. 39).
27The complexities of dating cannot be tackled here. For a summary, see Abeywardana et al. (2018 , p. 7). This work also discusses
pre‑1400 water management structures on the island and includes a section on epigraphic sources.
28See also kāvya works from Sri Lanka presented in Biedermann and Strathern (2017 ).
29E.g., the Naga Pokuna of Mihintale.
30Inscriptions K323 and K528 are quoted in Lustig and Lustig (2015 , p. 28).
31On the transregional mythology of Anavatapta lake, see Gao (2020 ).
32《治禪病祕要法》卷 1：「「治之法者，先服肥膩世間 [A3]羙藥，然後仰眠，數息令定，想阿耨達池其水盈滿，滿一由旬， 底有
金沙、四寶、金輪，生黃金華大如車輪。花中有四寶 ——獸頭象鼻出水、師子口出水、馬口出水、牛口出水 ——繞池七匝，阿耨
達龍王七寶宮殿在四獸頭間。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T15, no. 620, p. 335b2‑7) [A3] 羙【 CB】【麗 ‑CB】，美【大】 (cf. K19n0744_p0
689b04)
“[1.6] [The Method for Curing Blockage] [1.6.1] [The Arising of Blockage] Further, Śāriputra, if a forest‑dwelling monk employs
his mind [in meditation] with too much tension, is too rough with his breathing, or sleeps in too Spartan conditions, he will,
owing to external winds, become afflicted by cold. As a result, his stomach tube and spleen and kidney channels will become
agitated, and wind will stir within his tendons. A reverse qi ( 逆氣 ) will stagnate in his chest. All his joints will leak water, which
will accumulate in his chest. His blood will roil ( 激血 ), his qi will erupt ( 氣發 ), his head will ache, his back will swell ( 背滿 ), and
all his tendons will seize up. This must be treated quickly.
[1.6.2] [The Waters of Anavatapta] The method for curing it is as follows. First, the practitioner must take excellent, nourishing
worldly medicine. He should then lie down on his back, count his breaths, and settle himself. He should then imagine Lake
Anavatapta […]”.
Translation taken from Greene (2021 , p. 261). Chinese text reported here only for paragraph [1.6.2].
33Maxwell (2007 , [ed.]):
Stanza 170
yasyāntare tīrthajalaikarāśi‑/
khātābhirāmaṃ pulinaṃ parārddham//
saṃsparśināṃ kṣalitapāpapa kaṃ/vahitrabhūtan taraṇaṃ bhavāvdheḥ//
34On Phnom Kulen in general, see for example Jean‑Baptiste Cheavance et al. (2019 ).
35See the digitised epigraph at https://siddham.network/inscription/k368/ (accessed on 1 August 2024).
36For plans of these structures, see Dagens (1991 ).
37Harris (2007 , p. 66)国人寻常有病，多是入水浸浴及频频洗头，便自痊可。然多病癞者，比比道途间。土人虽与之同卧同食亦不
校。或谓彼中风土有此疾，曾有国主患此疾，故人不之嫌。以愚意观之，往往好色之馀，便入水澡洗，故成此疾。闻土人色欲才
毕，皆入水澡洗。其患痢者十死八九，亦有货药于市者，与中国不类，不知其为何物。更有一等师巫之属，与人行持，尤可笑 .
38SeeDegroot (2008 ) for a short survey of bathing places. On water symbolism see also Patt (1979 ).
39I thank Marijke Klokke and Eko Bastiawan for suggesting various places of interest. See also the 1979 Dissertation by Ann Patt
on the symbolism of water in ancient Indonesian art and architecture.
40Robson and Sidomulyo (2021 , pp. 94–95), Kieven (2013 , p. 115).
41I should also point out the existence of a twelfth‑century bathtub or sarcophagus kept in the Kediri Museum of Eastern Java
(Acri 2024 , p. 3 [with photograph]). It is unclear what purpose it actually served, but ritual ablutions or consecrations with
water cannot be excluded. Although the medicinal aspect is not explicit, they may be compared to the structures from Sri Lanka
mentioned above. Other such bathtubs can be found in East Java and at the National Museum in Jakarta.
42Śiwarātrikalpa ,Teeuw and Tanakung (1969 , p. 79). In spelling Old Javanese words, I retain the w of the traditional spelling, also
opting for ĕ over ә and for ng over .
43Worsley et al. (2013 , p. 227). narendramahiṣī lawan sang Aja madyus akaramas aśokapādapapaḍ ñjuh akase wĕrĕh harĕp ing endah araras
awĕḍak‑wĕḍak lumut
“The queen and King Aja bathed and washed their hair with aśoka leaves. Excitedly they used the foam as unguent
and the moss as powder, desiring to make themselves lovely”.
(Sumanasāntaka 164.4.)
44Robson (2008 , p. 127).
bañu ning śatatīrtha pinupulakĕn ing ghata hīra pitu
rasapinda rasāyana sakalawajadrawa sapta ghata【CB】【麗-CB】Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.美【大】(cf. K19n0744_p0
689b04)
“[1.6] [The Method for Curing Blockage] [1.6.1] [The Arising of Blockage] Further, ´S¯ariputra, if a forest-dwelling monk employs
his mind [in meditation] with too much tension, is too rough with his breathing, or sleeps in too Spartan conditions, he will,
owing to external winds, become afﬂicted by cold. As a result, his stomach tube and spleen and kidney channels will become
agitated, and wind will stir within his tendons. A reverse qi ( 逆氣) will stagnate in his chest. All his joints will leak water, which
will accumulate in his chest. His blood will roil ( 激血), his qi will erupt ( 氣發), his head will ache, his back will swell ( 背滿), and
all his tendons will seize up. This must be treated quickly.
[1.6.2] [The Waters of Anavatapta] The method for curing it is as follows. First, the practitioner must take excellent, nourishing
worldly medicine. He should then lie down on his back, count his breaths, and settle himself. He should then imagine Lake
Anavatapta [. . .]”. Translated in Greene (2021 , p. 261). Chinese text reported here only for paragraph [1.6.2].
33Maxwell (2007 , [ed.]), Stanza 170:
yasy ¯antare t ¯ırthajalaikar ¯a´ si- /
kh¯at¯abhir ¯amam .pulinam .par¯arddham //
sam.spar´ sin ¯am.ks.alitap ¯apapa ˙nkam./
vahitrabh ¯utan taran .am.bhav ¯avdheh .//
34On Phnom Kulen in general, see for example Jean-Baptiste Cheavance et al. (2019 ).
35See the digitised epigraph at https://siddham.network/inscription/k368/ (accessed on 1 August 2024).
36For plans of these structures, see Dagens (1991 ).
37Harris (2007 , p. 66)国人常有病Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.多是入水浸浴及频频洗头Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.便自痊可Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.然多病癞者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.比比道途间Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.土人虽与之同卧同食亦不
校Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.或谓彼中风土有此疾Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.曾有国主患此疾Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.故人不之嫌Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.以愚意观之Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.往往好色之馀Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.便入水澡洗Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.故成此疾Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.闻土人色欲才
毕Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.皆入水澡洗Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.其患痢者十死八九Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.亦有货药于市者Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.与中国不类Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.不知其为何物Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.更有一等师巫之属Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.与人行持Religions 2024 ,15, 0 13 of 17
washing are discrete and not necessarily linked to one another. For instance, bathing is said to aid in the treatment of health
problems resulting from such factors as summer heat and overeating, and it is strongly recommended as a means to remove
dirt and sweat. But these two benefits of bathing are not causally connected. Dirt is rarely viewed as an unhygienic substance.
Instead, it is usually abhorred because it contributes to a loss of dignity. The texts advise that nakedness and any kind of shame
should be avoided for a similar reason”, Heirman and Torck (2012 , p. 46).
13(Kieschnick 2013 ).增壹阿含經》卷 2836聽法品：「爾時，世尊告諸比丘：「造作浴室有五功德。云何為五？一者除風，二者
[1]病得差，三者除去塵垢，四者身體輕便，五者得肥白。是謂，比丘！造作浴室有此五功德。是故，諸比丘！若有四部之眾欲求
此五功德者，當求方便，造立浴室。如是，諸比丘！當作是學。」」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T02, no. 125, p. 703a3‑8) “Five virtues ac‑
crue from making bathhouses. What are these five? First, bathhouses allow one to extirpate “wind”; second, they cure illness;
third, they remove dust and grime; fourth, they make the body feel light and easy; fifth, they make one soft and white. These,
bhikkhus, are the five virtues of the bathhouse. For these reasons, bhikkhus, if any among the four assemblies [monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen] wish to obtain these five virtues, they should take the necessary measures and build bathhouses. This,
bhikkhus, is what you should do” ( Kieschnick 2013 , p. 151).
14The traditional ascription to An Shigao should probably be revised. The third and fourth century CE appear more likely estimates
of a first composition of this text.
15SeeSalguero (2017 , p. 84ff.) 佛說溫室洗浴眾僧經》：「「佛告耆域：『澡浴之法，當用七物，除去七病，得七福報。何謂七物？
一者、然火；二者、淨水；三者、澡豆；四者、 [1]蘇膏；五者、淳灰；六者、楊枝；七者、內衣。此是澡浴之法。何謂除 [2]去
七病？一者、四大安隱；二者、除風病；三者、除濕痺；四者、除寒氷；五者、除熱氣；六者、除垢穢；七者、身體輕便，眼目
精明。是為除 [＊]去眾僧七病。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T16, no. 701, pp. 802c28–803a6) “[…] Such is the method of bathing. And
what are the seven illnesses that are removed? 1. The Four Great Elements will be in equilibrium. 2. Wind Disease is removed.
3. Damp Paralysis is removed. 4. Piercing Cold is removed. 5. Feverish Qi is removed. 6. Impurities are removed. 7. The body
[becomes] light and at ease, and the eyes sharp and bright. Such is the removal of the Sangha’s seven illnesses. From making
such a donation, you will accrue seven merits”.
16復更為說，此澡浴者不為餘緣，但欲令除身中風冷病，得安隱行道故洗。是名浴室中上座所作法用。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T24, no.
1463, p. 835a15‑b11), translated in Kieschnick (2013 ).
17Wind illness can also be caused by many other factors, including diet.
18(Sik 2016 , p. 123). 或從風起苦，眾生覺知，或從痰起，或從唌唾起，或等分起，或自害， 或他害，或因節氣。彼自害者，或拔
髮、或拔鬚，或常立舉手，或蹲地，或臥灰土中，或臥棘刺上，或臥杵上、或板上，或牛屎塗地而臥其上，或臥水中，或日三洗
浴，或一足而立，身隨日轉。如是眾苦精勤有行，尸婆！是名自害。他害者，或為他手石、刀、杖等， 種種害身，是名他害。
尸婆！若復時節所害，冬則大寒，春則大熱，夏寒暑俱，是名節氣 所害。 (CBETA 2024. T 99.252c22‑253a2). “[…] it is very cold
in winter, very hot in spring, [and] both cold as well as hot in summer—this is called being harmed by seasonal change”. For
more passages mentioning the eight causes, see Vetter (1988 , p. 91) and Zysk ([1991] 2010 , p. 30).
19I am referring to Prajñā’s version of the Gaṇḍavyūha (T293), who was active during the Tang dynasty. The Borobudur panels
relate to the Bhadhracarīpranidhāna section.
20Salguero (2017 , p. 98). The passage in question is translated by William Giddings.
21Heirman and Torck (2012 , pp. 28–29) “The vinaya further warns that people become ill and develop blisters (pao fei 疱疿 ) as a re‑
sult of prickly heat during the hottest time of the year (the last forty‑five days of spring and the first month of summer)”. On this,
see the following source: 《四分律》卷 16：「爾時諸比丘，盛熱時身體 [31]疱[32]疿出， [33]污垢臭穢，畏慎不敢洗浴，恐犯過半
月洗浴。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽諸 [34]病比丘熱時數數洗浴。自今已去應如是說戒：若比丘半月應洗浴，除餘時，若過，波逸
提。餘時者，熱時。」如是世尊與比丘結戒。」 (CBETA 2024.R1, T22, no. 1428, p. 674c5‑11).
22夫論洗浴之法，西國乃與東夏不同，但以時節調和稍異餘處。於十二月花果恒有，不識氷雪薄有微霜，雖復多暑亦非苦熱。熱則
身無 [13]疿子，寒乃足無皴裂，為此人多洗沐體尚清淨，每於日日之中不洗不食。又復所在之處極饒池水，時人皆以穿池為福。
若行一驛，則望見三二十所，或寬一畝五畝。於其四邊種多羅樹，高四五十尺。池乃皆承雨水，湛若清江。 […]那爛陀寺有十餘
所大池，每至晨時寺嗚 [14]健稚令僧徒洗浴，人皆自持浴裙，或千或百俱出寺外，散向諸池各為澡浴。 (CBETA 2024.R1, T54, no.
2125, pp. 220c04–221a6), translation by Rongxi Li(2000 , pp. 102–3).
See also the following passage by Yijing on the topic of bathing. 《南海寄歸內法傳》卷 3：「又洗浴者並須飢時。浴已方食，有其
二益：一則身體清虛無諸垢穢，二則痰癊消散能飡飲食。飽 [1] 方洗浴，醫明所諱。故知飢沐飽浴之言，未是通方之論。」 (CB
ETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, pp. 220c28–221a2)
《南海寄歸內法傳》卷3：「若著三尺浴衣，褊小形露；或元不著，赤體而浴者，深乖教理也。應用四幅洗裙，遮身可愛，非直
奉遵聖教，亦乃不愧人神。餘之可不，智者當悉。夜浴尚不改容，對人寧無掩蔽耳。」 (CBETA 2023.Q1, T54, no. 2125, p. 221a2‑
6) “Furthermore, one should take a bath before eating food. There are two benefits derived from eating food after taking a bath.
First, the body is pure and empty, without any dirt. Second, one will have a good appetite, as one’s phlegm and mental depres‑
sion are dissolved after taking a bath. Bathing after taking a square meal is forbidden by the science of medicine. Thus we may
know that the saying about “washing one’s hair when one is hungry and taking a bath with a full stomach is not the opinion of
an all‑round scholar”, Rongxi Li(2000 , p. 104).
23Salguero (2017 ,2022 ) represents a welcome exception.尤可笑.
38SeeDegroot (2008 ) for a short survey of bathing places. On water symbolism see also Patt (1979 ).
39I thank Marijke Klokke and Eko Bastiawan for suggesting various places of interest.
40Robson and Sidomulyo (2021 , pp. 94–95), Kieven (2013 , p. 115).
41I should also point out the existence of a twelfth-century bathtub or sarcophagus kept in the Kediri Museum of Eastern Java
(Acri 2024 , p. 3 [with photograph]). It is unclear what purpose it actually served, but ritual ablutions or consecrations with
water cannot be excluded. Although the medicinal aspect is not explicit, they may be compared to the structures from Sri Lanka
mentioned above. Other such bathtubs can be found in East Java and at the National Museum in Jakarta.
42 ´Siwar ¯atrikalpa ,Teeuw et al. (1969 , p. 79). In transliterating Old Javanese words, I retain the w of the original transliteration system,
also opting for ˘e over @and for ng over ˙n.
43Worsley et al. (2013 , p. 227):
narendramahis .¯ı lawan sang Aja madyus akaramas a´ sokap ¯adapa
pad.êñjuh akase w ˘er˘eh har ˘ep ing endah araras aw ˘ed.ak-w ˘ed.ak lumut
“The queen and King Aja bathed and washed their hair with a´ soka leaves. Excitedly they used the foam as unguent
and the moss as powder, desiring to make themselves lovely”.
(Sumanas ¯antaka 164.4.)
44Robson (2008 , p. 127):

--- [Page 123] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 16 of 18
bañu ning ´ satat ¯ırtha pinupulak ˘en ing ghata h ¯ıra pitu
rasapinda ras ¯ayana sakalawajadrawa sapta ghata
amrt ântuk ing anglwangi ´ sa´ sadhara p ¯urna pitung kala´ sa
salikur manikumbha saha widhi sam ¯ahita pangdyus ira
“The water of a hundred holy bathing-places collected in seven diamond pots,
Seven pots of rasapinda, ras ¯ayana and every kind of wajadrawa,
Seven jars of nectar obtained by distilling the full moon,
And twenty-one jewelled pitchers with the prescribed rites were assembled to bathe him”. ( Arjunawiw ¯aha29.6.)
45Dr. Jiˇ r íJákl has informed me that dos.as were known in Java, even if their conception was highly localised (personal communication
June 2024). I would also like to alert the reader to a forthcoming publication co-edited by Andrea Acri, Francesco Bianchini and
Jiˇ ríJákl on the topic of medicine and healing in pre-1400 CE Java and Bali. The chapter is due to appear in a volume published
by Brill.
46West (2021 , 161). The text is the ﬁfteenth-century Bujangga Manik .
47Apsu deva-pavitr ¯an.i, Ga ˙ng¯a-devi namo ‘stu te
sarva-kle´ sa-vin ¯a´ sanam ., toyena pari´ sudhyate /
Sarva-p ¯apa-vin ¯a´ sini, sarva-roga-vimocane
sarva-kle´ sa-vin ¯a´ sanam ., sarva-bhogam av ¯apnuy ¯at //
“Goddess Ga ˙ng¯a, honour be to Thee; [by Thee] destruction of all stains, one is completely cleansed by [Thy] water. O
Thou Who destroyest all evil. Who redeemest from all disease; [by Thee] destruction of all stains, one obtains all kinds
of enjoyment”. Goudriaan and Hooykaas (1971 , Ganga Hymn)
48See the anthropological documentary Breaking the Chains directed by Erminia Colucci (Royal Anthropological Films).
References
Abeywardana, Nuwan, Marija Susarina, and Brigitta Schütt. 2023. Domestication of water: Management of water resources in the dry
zone of Sri Lanka as living cultural heritage. WIREs Water 10: e1642. [ CrossRef ]
Abeywardana, Nuwan, Wiebke Bebermeier, and Brigitta Schütt. 2018. Ancient water management and governance in the dry zone of
Sri Lanka until abandonment, and the inﬂuence of colonial politics during reclamation. Water 10: 1746. [ CrossRef ]
Acri, Andrea. 2023. Revisiting the Monsoon Asia Idea: Old Problems and New Directions. In Monsoon Asia: A Reader on South and
Southeast Asia . Edited by Nira Wickramasinghe and David Henley. Leiden: Leiden University Press, pp. 63–96. Available online:
https://muse.jhu.edu/book/111231 (accessed on 1 August 2024).
Acri, Andrea. 2024. ‘Hard-Core’ Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava in Java. In The Oxford Handbook of Tantric Studies . Edited by
Richard Payne and Hayes Glen. Oxford: Oxford Academic, pp. 427–52. [ CrossRef ]
Angermeier, Vitus. 2020. Regenzeiten, Feuchtgebiete, Körpersäfte. Das Wasser in der klassischen indischen Medizin . Wien: Verlag der
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Angermeier, Vitus. 2022. The Seasons in Ancient Indian Medicine: Long Winters or Extensive Rains? History of Science in South Asia 10:
247–71. [ CrossRef ]
Bianchini, Francesco. 2024. Invoking the Goddess along the Southern Silk Roads: A transregional survey of Prajñ ¯ap¯aramit ¯a protective
texts. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 34: 855–69. [ CrossRef ]
Biedermann, Zolt án, and Alan Strathern. 2017. Sri Lanka at the Crossroads of History . London: University College London, Project MUSE.
Available online: https://muse.jhu.edu/book/81949 (accessed on 1 August 2024).
Cheavance, Jean-Baptiste, Damian Evans, Nina Hofer, and Sakada Sakhoeunl. 2019. Mahendraparvata: An early Angkor-period capital
deﬁned through airborne laser scanning at Phnom Kulen. Antiquity 93: 1303–21. [ CrossRef ]
Dagens, Bruno. 1991. Centralisme et architecture: Les h ôpitaux de Jayavarman VII en Thaïlande. In Deuxi ème Symposium Franco-thaï:
Récentes Recherches en Arch éologie en Thaïlande . Bangkok: Silpakorn University, pp. 24–35.
Davis, Christopher E. 2013. Early Buddhist Monasteries in Sri Lanka: A Landscape Approach. Ph.D. thesis, Durham University,
Durham, UK.
Degroot, V éronique. 2008. Ancient Bathing Places of Central Java A Short Survey. Aziatische Kunst 38: 62–68. [ CrossRef ]
Gao, Yang. 2020. The Idea of the Anavatapta Lake in India and Its Adoption in East Asia. Religions 11: 134. [ CrossRef ]
Geiger, Wilhelm. 1996. Culavamsa (Being the More Recent Part of the Mahavamsa) . Translated by Christian Mabel Rickmer. Reprint. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.
Goudriaan, Teun, and Christiaan Hooykaas. 1971. Stuti and Stava (Bauddha, ´Saiva and Vai s.n.ava) of Balinese Brahman Priests . Amsterdam
and London: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Green, Phillip S. E. 2014. The Vat Sithor Inscription: Translation, Commentary, and Reﬂections on Buddhist Traditions in Tenth-Century
Cambodia. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

--- [Page 124] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 17 of 18
Greene, Eric. 2021. The Secrets of Buddhist Meditation: Visionary Meditation Texts from Early Medieval China . Honolulu: University of
Hawai’i Press.
Harris, Peter. 2007. A Record of Cambodia: The Land and Its People . Translated with an introduction and notes by Peter Harris. Foreword
by David Chandler. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Heirman, Ann, and Mathieu Torck. 2012. A Pure Mind in a Clean Body: Bodily Care in the Buddhist Monasteries of Ancient India and China .
Gent: Academia Press.
Hidas, Gergely. 2019. A Buddhist Ritual Manual on Agriculture: Vajratu n.d.asamayakalpar ¯aja—Critical Edition . Berlin and Boston: De
Gruyter. [ CrossRef ]
Inscriptions of Ceylon . 1970–2015. Paranavitana, Senarat, et al., eds. 9 vols, Colombo: Department of Archaeology.
Kieschnick, John. 2013. A History of the Bathhouse in Chinese Buddhist Monasteries. In Belief, Practice and Cultural Adaptation: Papers
from the Religious Section of the International Conference on Sinology . Edited by Paul Katz and Liu Shufen 劉淑芬. Taipei: Academia
Sinica, vol. 1, pp. 107–38.
Kieven, Lydia. 2013. Following the Cap-Figure in Majapahit Temple Reliefs . Leiden: Brill. [ CrossRef ]
Kulatunge, T. G. 2019. “Janth ¯aghara” within Ancient Buddhist Monasteries. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Sri Lanka 64: 47–65.
Available online: http://www.jstor.org/stable/45433989 (accessed on 1 August 2024).
Lefferts, Leedom, and Louise Allison Cort. 2008. Water and Fire—Farming and Ceramics—On Phnom Kulen: Putting People into
Angkor. In Interpreting Southeast Asia’s Past: Monument, Image and Text . Edited by Elizabeth A. Bacus, Ian C. Glover and Peter
Sharrock. Singapore: NUS Press, pp. 286–95.
Li, Rongxi. 2000. Buddhist Monastic Traditions of Southern Asia: A Record of the Inner Law Sent Home from the South Seas by ´Srama n.a Yijing .
Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research.
Lin, Qian, and Michael Radich. 2023. Notes on the Fo yi jing 佛醫經T793. Journal of the American Oriental Society 143: 881–902.
[CrossRef ]
Liyanaratne, Jinadasa. 2002. The Casket of Medicine (Bhesajjamanjusa Chapters 1–18) . Translation. Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Lustig, Terry L., and Eileen J. Lustig. 2015. Following The Non-Money Trail: Reconciling Some Angkorian Temple Accounts. Journal of
Indo-Paciﬁc Archaeology 39: 26–37. [ CrossRef ]
Lustig, Terry, Sarah Klassen, Damian Evans, Robert French, and Ian Moffat. 2018. Evidence for the breakdown of an Angkorian
hydraulic system, and its historical implications for understanding the Khmer Empire. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 17:
195–211. [ CrossRef ]
Maxwell, Thomas. 2007. The stele inscription of Preah Khan, Angkor: Text with translation and commentary. UDAYA, Journal of Khmer
Studies 8: 1–114.
Mertens, Jochens. 2005. Die Sanskrit-Inschriften von Bat Chum (Kambodscha). Text mit Übersetzung und Kommentar und stilistischer Analyse .
Norderstedt: Münster.
Miksic, John. 1999. Water, Urbanization, and Disease in Ancient Indonesia. Archeological Papers of the American Anthropological Association
9: 167–84. [ CrossRef ]
Mueller-Dietz, Heinz. 1996. Stone ‘sarcophagi’ and Ancient Hospitals in Sri Lanka. Medizinhistorisches Journal 31: 49–65. [ PubMed ]
Patt, Ann J. 1979. The Use and Symbolism of Water in Ancient Indonesian Art and Architecture. Ph.D. dissertation, University of
California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
Paul, Sanchita. 2021. Sn ¯ana in Early India: A Socio-religious Perspective. Journal of Dharma Studies 4: 261–79. [ CrossRef ]
Robson, Stuart. 2008. Arjunawiw ¯aha. The Marriage of Arjuna of Mpu Kanwa , 1st ed. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Robson, Stuart, and Hadi Sidomulyo. 2021. Threads of the Unfolding Web: The Old Javanese Tantu Pangg ˘elaran . Translated by Stuart
Robson. Commented by Hadi Sidomulyo. Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute.
Salguero, Pierce. 2017. Buddhism and Medicine: An Anthology of Premodern Sources . New York and Chichester: Columbia University
Press. [ CrossRef ]
Salguero, Pierce. 2022. A Global History of Buddhism and Medicine . New York and Chichester: Columbia University Press. [ CrossRef ]
Shaw, Julia. 2022. Buddhism and the ‘Natural’ Environment. In Oxford Handbook of Buddhist Practice . Edited by Kevin Trainor and
Paula Arai. Oxford: Oxford University Press Handbook Series.
Sik, Hin Tak. 2016. Ancient Indian Medicine in Early Buddhist Literature: A Study Based on the Bhesajjakkhandhaka and the Parallels
in Other Vinaya Canons. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
Stark, Miriam T. 2022. From the Mekong to the Tonle Sap: Water Management and Cosmology in Cambodia’s Ancient States. In
Irrigation in Early States: New Directions . Edited by Stephanie Rost. Chicago: The Oriental Institute, pp. 369–96.
Teeuw, Andries, T. P . Galestin, Stuart O. Robson, Peter J. Worsley, and Petrus J. Zoetmulder. 1969. ´Siwar ¯atrikalpa of Mpu Tanaku ˙n. An
Old Javanese Poem, Its Indian Source and Balinese Illustrations . Bibliotheca Indonesica 3. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Vetter, Tilmann. 1988. The Ideas and Meditative Practices of Early Buddhism . Leiden: Brill.
West, Alex. 2021. Bujangga Manik or, Java in the Fifteenth Century: An Edition and Study of Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS jav. b. 3. (R).
Ph.D. dissertation, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.

--- [Page 125] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 2 18 of 18
Worsley, Peter, Suryo Supomo, Thomas Hunter, and Margaret Fletcher. 2013. Mpu Monagu n.a’s Sumanas ¯antaka . Bibliotheca Indonesica
36. Leiden: Brill. [ CrossRef ]
Wujastyk, Dominik. 2022. The Evidence for Hospitals in Early India. History of Science in South Asia 10: 1–43. [ CrossRef ]
Zysk, Kenneth G. 2010. Asceticism and Healing in Ancient India , 2nd ed. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. First published 1991.
Zysk, Kenneth G. 2021. Do s.as by the Numbers: Buddhist Contributions to the Origins of the Trido s.a-theory in Early Indian Medical
Literature with Comparisons to Early Greek Theories of the Humours. History of Science in South Asia 9: 1–29. [ CrossRef ]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

--- [Page 126] ---
Academic Editor: Todd Lewis
Received: 13 November 2024
Revised: 16 December 2024
Accepted: 2 January 2025
Published: 15 January 2025
Citation: Pullen, Lesley S. 2025.
Vajravārāhī in Khara Khoto and
Prajñāpāramitā in East Java:
Connected by Pearl Ornaments.
Religions 16: 84. https://doi.org/
10.3390/rel16010084
Copyright: © 2025 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).Article
Vajravārāhī in Khara Khoto and Prajñāpāramitā in East Java:
Connected by Pearl Ornaments
Lesley S Pullen
Department of History of Art and Archaeology, SOAS University of London, London WC1H 0XG, UK;
pullen.london@btinternet.com
Abstract: This research, situated in the geographical and historical context of the Tangut
and East Java, uncovers a significant aspect of the evolution of Buddhist art styles. A
thangka of the goddess Vajravārāhī found in Khara Khoto, dated to the late 12th century,
shows the bodhisattva decorated with a pearl‑chain girdle and upper‑arm bands. This
form of pearl‑chain jewellery, which appears on Vajravārāhī and other Sino‑Tibetan‑style
bodhisattvas, also appears on three stone statues of the goddess Prajñāpāramitā in East
Java, all of which depict a near identical use of this pearl‑chain ornamentation, as well as
on a statue of Prajñāpāramitā at the Muara Jambi Buddhist site in Sumatra. Maritime trade
between the regions of China and Java was extensive. The commonality of such motifs in
China and Java may highlight a convergence of cultural forces and perhaps shared styles
originating from the maritime realm and traded via maritime routes; however, a direct or
indirect influence of Sino‑Tibetan styles on thangka paintings featuring this depiction of
the jewellery perhaps occurred following dynamics of north–south exchange, highlight‑
ing the interrelated links along maritime and overland routes through the Pāla Buddhist
kingdom in eastern India. Thus, I propose that the connection between the Vajravārāhī
and other Tibetan thangka paintings was inspired by Northeast Indian influence from the
Hexi corridor, eventually reaching East Java.
Keywords: Buddhism; Tibet; Khara Khoto; East Java; paintings; sculpt ure; pearl ornaments;
Pāla; Prajñāpāramitā; Vajravārāhī
1. Introduction
Close analysis of the Buddhist statues and paintings discussed in this article suggests
that a unique Pāla and Sena dynasty‑inspired art style developed from the early 12th to the
early 13th centuries in Central Asia1—more specifically, the Tangut empire, also known as
Western Xia or Xixia (1038–1227)2—and parallels the Nepalese and Indian traditions in the
form of pearl ornaments. The body’s physique exhibits a svelte smooth torso, with a slight
sway to the hips and a naturalistic body casting. The facial features exhibit high arched
brows, a long sharp nose, and a full lower lip. The body is generally shown with a short
hip wrapper or dhoti , often depicted with one edge longer than the other, over which many
metal girdles and belts are draped. The torso is draped with the upavīta , frequently shown
as a long metal chain; a fabric sash is also depicted across the body from the left shoulder.
This description applies to the early Pāla period, from the 8th to the 9th centuries; by the
12th to 13th centuries, the number of ornamentations increased, and the body was often
adorned with a heavy neckplate and upright triangular‑shaped upper‑arm bands.
This article suggests that the lithe form of the torso and the facial features, which re‑
flect the Pāla Sena characteristics, are evident in a late 12th‑century Khara Khoto thangka
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16010084

--- [Page 127] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 2 of 26
painting and again in a corpus of ca. 13th‑century sculptures from East Java and Sumatra;
however, the addition of the pearl‑beaded ornaments in both of these regions under dis‑
cussion is not evident in the Pāla sculpture, which perhaps highlights a shared heritage
that developed thanks to the contacts between the regions connected via maritime routes.
Empirical research and analysis, along with stylistic interpretations, may be the only
available means of understanding connections, as the extant relevant premodern texts do
not inform us that a particular art style was transferred and reinterpreted in another re‑
gion, sometimes hundred years later. Making use of this methodology, this article dis‑
cusses pearl ornaments depicted in a painting of the tantric Buddhist deity Vajravārāhī
from Xixia in comparison with similar motifs—a particular style of pearl armbands and
chains—found in a corpus of three statues of Prajñāpāramitā and an unknown Buddhist
goddess from the Si ˙nhasāri period in East Java and Sumatra ( Pullen 2021a , p. 237), along
with a Durgā statue from the Central Javanese period.
These fine examples of this rare style, along with some of the other paintings and stone
statues, provide us with a case study of the intra‑Asian maritime networks of Buddhism,
and highlight the religious and diplomatic networks in the East Asian sphere. Indeed,
while the reappearance of pearl jewellery ornaments on Prajñāpāramitā and other 13th‑ to
14th‑century East Javanese Buddhist sculptures, which closely resemble those depicted on
the Vajravārāhī in Khara Khoto, may suggest a broad commonality of the way that pearl
ornaments were represented in disparate regions of the Pan‑Asian Buddhist world, I argue
that the connection between the Vajravārāhī and the other Tibetan thangka paintings may
have been actually inspired by Northeast Indian influence from the Hexi corridor, and
eventually reached East Java and Sumatra. In order to strengthen my hypothesis, I will
explore the maritime trade network and discuss the north–south exchange as well as the
interrelated links between those regions and the Pāla kingdom in eastern India.3
In a recent study looking at new and old sources of the Southeast Asian mainland in
the c. 1000–1500 period, Kenneth Hall states that, during this period, “there was contact
with and influence by the inclusive communication and commodity networks of the ex‑
tended Eastern Indian Ocean maritime realm that stretched by land and sea from the Bay
of Bengal to the South China Sea” ( Hall 2019 , p. 267). This quote highlights the aims of
this research, namely to suggest that these three locations between the 11th and mid‑13th
centuries probably owe their overwhelmingly stylistic merits to Pāla art styles.
2. Bodhisattvas with Pearl Ornaments
For centuries, pearls were traded across Asian maritime routes. The Cōl a domin‑
ions saw trade with China—pearls, amongst many luxury goods, were part of this trade.
The Chinese Supervisor of Maritime Trade, Zhao Rukuo 趙汝适 , compiled the Zhufan zhi
諸蕃志 (12th to 13th centuries), with several descriptions of the pearl trade. During the
Yuan dynasty, they derived significant revenue from the duties on all imported merchan‑
dise, including precious gems and pearls.4At this time, the southern sea trade was firmly
in the hands of the Arabs (Dashi 大食 ) and other foreigners, namely from Java (Shepo
闍婆 ) and Palembang (Sanfoqi 三佛齊 ) (Hirth and Rockhill 1966 ). The pearls were traded
in from Jambi in South Sumatra, the second base of the Śrīvijaya, which was destroyed by
the Javanese in 1275.5The primary sources of pearls were Sulu in the southern Philippines,
Kampar near Jambi, and Java. The Chinese used pearls as head ornaments; due to the high
price of pearls, traders smuggled them into China to avoid taxes ( Miksic 2013 , p. 131).6
For thousands of years, people have coveted pearls as symbols of wealth and status.
Dakin’s small book on pearls ( Dakin 1913 ) records a complete and comprehensive history
of pearl knowledge. In short, pearls have been known since the 2nd–3rd century BC, when
the first Chinese records were written, as freshwater molluscs. In the Indian Ocean region,

--- [Page 128] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 3 of 26
pearls were known for centuries before the Common Era, perhaps collected as curiosities;
in the New Testament, on the other hand, there are constant references to pearls. Pliny
referenced that fishing off Ceylon was the most productive part of the world—records
show that gifts of pearls were sent from the King of Ceylon to this Indian relative in about
540–550 BC. Dakin states that pearls were almost certainly known to the Persians seven
centuries before the Common Era. The Romans had a strange fetish with pearls and for‑
bade the wearing of pearls by people who had not obtained a certain rank; however, it was
not until the 12th century that pearls were used in England, although through the 13th and
14th centuries, pearls became extremely fashionable throughout Europe (ibid., pp. 1–7).
Pearls were symbols of society, high rank, beauty, and fertility, as well as adornments
for royalty, emperors, and religious figures. In Buddhism, the pearl ( man
˙iSkt., nor bu Tib.)
is considered the jewel or ratna in the lotus that grants all desires, the divine pearl—a belief
adhered to by Buddhists throughout Asia ( von Schroeder 2008 , Glossary 179). The pearl is
also a symbol of spiritual wealth; its luminosity brings all the treasures and teachings of the
Buddha and represents virtues, wisdom, and compassion. In the Metropolitan Museum,
New York, is an Avalokiteśvara (Guanyin) ascribed to the 6th century (Figure 1).ṇ
 
ū
Figure 1. Boddhisattva, (Guanyin) Northern Qi dynasty 550–560, The Sackler Collections, Purchase,
The Sackler Fund, 1965. The Met Museum of Art, NY, accession no 65.29.4.
The description reads, “the astonishing jewelled harness adorning this bodhisattva is
made up of two long strands of pearl‑like clusters and multifaceted beads”. The jewels
perhaps refer to a passage in the Lotus Sūtra where the historical Buddha Shakyamuni
extols the great compassion of Avalokiteśvara and presents him with a pearl necklace as
a symbol of benevolence. These aspects perhaps explain why the adornments of many
bodhisattvas found in thangka paintings and Javanese sculptures feature pearls.7

--- [Page 129] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 4 of 26
3. Early Representations of Pearl Ornaments at Ajanta, Sigiriya, and
Central Java
Some of the figures in the Buddhist paintings in the Sigiriya frescoes (5th century) and
the rock‑cut temple paintings (ca. 5th–7th century) at Ajanta, in Sri Lanka and Western
India, respectively, highlight the use of pearl jewellery. The paintings at Sigiriya show
women and celestial beings adorned with gold jewellery and gemstones, along with strings
of twisted pearl ornaments as necklaces and upper‑arm bands; however, the style is less
sophisticated and detailed and does not resemble that displayed by the Vajravārāhī and
Prajñāpāramitā under discussion (Figure 2).āāī
āā ā
 
āṇ
Figure 2. Detail, Sigiriya fresco, 5th century, Sri Lanka, Photo: author.
This is corroborated by similar depictions of mural paintings in the Ajanta Caves of the
Gupta period in Maharashtra, India. A mural painting in Cave 1 shows the bodhisattva
Padmapān
˙i wearing a pearl necklace (Figure 3), while an analogous painting in Cave 2
shows him adorned with multiple pearl necklaces and pearl upper‑arm bands. This, of
course, highlights that this type of ornamentation also precedes that found in statues and
paintings from the two Buddhist regions discussed in this paper ( Okada 1995 , p. 123).
Another relatively early—for the chronology of Hindu–Budd hist Javanese art—example
of pearl ornamentation is a fine Durgā statue from Candi Śiva a t Loro Jonggrang in Prambanan
(Figure 4), Central Java. In the statue, datable to the ca. 9th century , Durgā is depicted as
standing and holding a buffalo’s tail in one hand and a demon in the other. She is adorned
with multiple necklaces, belts, sashes, and armbands. The n eckplate and upper‑arm plaques
depict a gold ornament with trailing pearl beads. These pear ls are also apparent on the lower
two girdles around the hips. Despite the neckband and arm pla ques being somewhat Pāla in
style, the remainder of the ornaments are Central Javanese i n inspiration (Figure 4).

--- [Page 130] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 5 of 26
 
āṇ
ā Ś
ā
ā
Figure 3. Bodhisattva Padmapān
˙i, Cave 1, Ajanta. Image Wikimedia Commons.āṇ
ā Ś
ā
ā
 
Figure 4. Durga, Candi Siwa, Loro Jonggrang, Prambanan, Central Java, 9th CE, Documentation
Centre for Ancient Indonesian Art, J. Polak.
Although this statue of Durgā is not directly relevant to the main argument of this arti‑
cle, it is still useful to contrast it with the later material discussed here, also because hardly
any statuary exists—especially in Indian style—between the end of the Central Javanese
period (ca. early 10th century) and the mature East Javanese period (13th–15th centuries).
We can surmise that the statue suggests direct links between Java and the Pāla domains,
which were undoubtedly present in the Buddhist inscriptions and statuary of the 8th–9th
centuries. The jewellery style of both neck and triangular upper‑arm bands along with a

--- [Page 131] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 6 of 26
long chain ( upavīta ) reflect a so‑called “Pāla style”, as well as the physiognomy and the or‑
namentation in a Maitreya statue of the 9th to 10th centuries (Figure 5, left). It is intriguing
to note that this style seems to be already present in Central Java perhaps a hundred or so
years earlier than any statues appear in eastern India, as we see in the seated Śiva8in the
Indian Museum, Kolkata (Figure 5, right).ā
ā
ī ā
Ś
 
(a) ( b) 
ā
Ś
āāī āā ā
āāī
āāī
ṁ
ā āāī
Figure 5. (a) Maitreya, Pāla period, 9th to 10th century, Archaeological Museum Bodhgaya. Photo:
author. ( b) Śiva, Central Java, 8th century, Indian Museum, Kolkata. Photo: author.
Between the 8th and 11th centuries in both eastern India and within Java, there are
numerous statues depicted with the triangular‑shaped upper‑arm bands and the necklace
depicted as a solid plaque, both ornaments probably representing gold made with the
repoussé technique. Therefore, we can see a progression in style from the 11th century
in both the Vajravārāhī and the Prajñāpāramitā, where jewellery styles have evolved and
gained the addition of pearl swags.
4. Vajravārāhī from Khara Khoto
Vajravārāhī belongs to a cycle of deities associated with tantras such as the Heva‑
jratantra and the Cakrasa ˙mvaratantra , such as in the case of the Khara Khoto image, of Va‑
jrayāna or esoteric Buddhism.9This painting of Vajravārāhī, dated to after 1189 but before
1200,10was found in Khara Khoto, in what is now China (Figure 6). The artwork is now
in room 363, Inv. no. XX‑2393, in the State Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg. In Tangut
icons, Vajravārāhī is depicted alone, as in this case, or as the consort of the deity Sa ˙mvara,
one of the hypostases of the male esoteric Buddhist deity Hevajra.

--- [Page 132] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 7 of 26 āāī ṁ
 
āāī
ā
āāī
āāī
ṇṭ
Figure 6. Vajravārāhī, Khara Khoto, late 12th century, the Hermitage Museum, Inv. No. XX‑2393.
Photo: author.
This painting belongs to a corpus of hundreds of Buddhist artefacts showing both
Chinese and Tibetan styles, and also reflecting the Indian Pāla style of works associated
with Tibetan Buddhism. Artworks recovered from Khara Khoto11and other sites provide
compelling examples of the achievements of the Xixia people ( Khokhlov 2016 , p. 1). We
presume that the paintings under discussion here were buried in the sands of Mongolia
even after the city was taken in 1227, when it was destroyed in a campaign against Genghis
Khan, and the Russians rediscovered them in the early 20th century.
In this painting, the description given by the State Hermitage Museum mentions Va‑
jravārāhī as being depicted standing on her left leg, trampling a prostrate figure represent‑
ing opponents of the teaching. She holds attributes that are in keeping with her iconog‑
raphy, and she has a necklace made of the severed heads of those who antagonise the
teachings of the Hevajratantra . Around the goddess are six of her hypostases, denoting
the six syllables in the incantation pronounced in honour of Vajravārāhī. The background
depicts eight cemeteries—sacred cremation sites in the Indian subcontinent.
Despite the wrathful nature of this figure, her upper‑arm ornament depicts a fine
jewelled band with strings of small spherical white objects representing pearls flying up
the arm and falling to the elbow. The upper armlets ( rucaka ), fine girdles ( mekhala ) with
double strands of swags alternating with short tassels around the hips, and neck ornaments
(kan
˙t
˙hi) are all executed to depict tiny fine pearls; alternatively, they can be described as
parures of beaded white jewellery. I deduce this from the small white dots on the red
ground; however, Kossak (2007 , p. 86) has described this ornament differently, proposing
that these presumably represent human bone beads.
In his thought‑provoking chapter on the role of jewellery in early Tibetan thangkas,
Kossak describes at length the possible role pieces of jewellery can play in sculpture and

--- [Page 133] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 8 of 26
paintings in dating‑related objects. Kossak states there are “several possible explanations
for the similarities in the ornaments won by benevolent and wrathful deities” (ibid., p. 85).
Wrathful deities are defined as a class of esoteric divinities associated with the Yoginī
Tantras—in the Indian subcontinent and the Himalayas they only became prominent in
the 11th century (ibid., p. 85). He states that
the jewellery that ultimately became associated with wrathful deities was made
solely of human bone rather than traditional precious metals […] beginning
around 1300 in Tibet, the prominence of a variety of wrathful deities as objects of
veneration corresponds with their jewellery being depicted as bone rather than
metal. (ibid., p. 86)
Kossak argues that all the wrathful deities, such as Vajravārāhī, in the period from the
11th through the 13th centuries were adorned with a mekhala (girdle) consisting of broken
pieces of human bone; however, a review of early painting shows that artists were un‑
doubtedly showing belts and girdles made of gold (ibid., p. 86). Furthermore, by the late
13th century—which, nota bene, is coeval with the East Javanese Prajñāpāramitās, who
are not wrathful deities—the ornaments are described as Nepalese‑inspired rather than
Pāla‑inspired, with necklaces of “oval jewels strung between beads” (ibid., p. 95; what the
“beads” might be is not specified).
Kossak’s argument, based on references to the colours used by painters of thangka
paintings, suggests that the colours used reflect the materials of the jewels and that a white
girdle (as we see on the Vajravārāhī) might be made of ivory or bone. He argues that
tantric practitioners were instructed to wear human bones as ornaments and to substitute
gold and jewels with human bones (ibid., p. 86). Oppi Untracht, in his important book
on Indian traditional jewellery, argues that organic materials used for the rosaries of high
Lamas and the wealthy were made from beads consisting of pearls, coral, amber, conch
shells, ivory, and animal as well as human bone; however, a highly prized type of bead
used by Tantric Buddhists was a flat disc of a uniform diameter made from human bone
(Untracht 1997 , p. 73).
These two arguments serve as a counterpoint to the argument p ut forward in this arti‑
cle, that the Vajravārāhī and Prajñāpāramitā are both adorn ed with pearl ornaments—this is
based on the spherical shape of the depicted beads, the colou r used in the paintings, and the
deities wearing entire parures (set of jewels) of white bead ing that would appear to be far
more indicative of pearls with their lustre and circular for m than a bone bead in the dull form
of a flat disc.12
According to my own reading of this image, the facial features of the Khara Khoto
Vajravārāhī, the aquiline nose, the hairstyle and abundant jewellery, and the treatment of
the hands reflect Indo‑Himalayan imagery in 12th‑century China.13The countenance of
Vajravārāhī is more in keeping with the Indo‑Himalayan style discussed earlier than in a
more typical Chinese art style; however, the ornaments appear to be the defining feature of
this period in Khara Khoto in the 12th century. The Indo‑Himalayan imagery and Nepal‑
based artistic traditions are reflected in the Sino‑Tibetan paintings, such as this Vajravārāhī
ascribed to the style of the Indian Pāla dynasty and the art of the Xixia Empire.
The paintings recovered from Khara Khoto and other sites by Peter K. Koslov
(1863–1935) in 1908/9 attest to a melting pot where artists worked in different styles, for
instance, Northern Song styles associated with Chinese Buddhism or Indian Pāla styles
associated with Tibetan Buddhism. This co‑existence of themes and styles is characteristic
of Xixia culture, which continued under the Mongols and became part of Yuan art; how‑
ever, works related to Tibetan Buddhism are primarily based on Pāla art styles but possess
distinctive Xixia features and can be distinguished from the Pāla style made in Tibet.14
This fact led scholars to surmise that Xixia was receiving artistic input directly from India

--- [Page 134] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 9 of 26
and not only from Tibet ( Khokhlov 2022 , p. 112). What is important to highlight for the
purpose of this article is that the interpretation of the pearl ornamentation found on Bud‑
dhist deities is the definitive feature that distinguishes the Xixia style from a typical Pāla
style,15a style where pearl ornamentation is not apparent, as the depiction of upper‑arm
ornamentation is quite different and can be best described as a triangular‑shaped plaque
(Figure 7).ā
ā
 
ś ā
āā ā
āāī
āā ā
Figure 7. Lokeśvara Avalokita Lokanātha. c.1000–1099 © 2024 Himalayan Art Resources Inc. (item
no. 16001).
5. Prajñāpāramitā from Candi Singosari, East Java
The depiction of the upper‑arm ornaments of the Khara Khoto Vajravārāhī, appearing
as a band with hanging pearl swags, is very similar to upper‑arm ornaments16of a 13th‑
century Prajñāpāramitā stone statue from East Java, now housed in the Museum Nasional
in Jakarta (Figure 8). In this particular instance, the goddess is adorned with triangular‑
shaped arm plaques with pearl swags.
The Prajñāpāramitā was found in a subsidiary Candi E at the Singosari complex near
Malang and dated ca. 1280.17The statue is carved from smooth andesite stone, which ap‑
pears as a good material for the carving of detailed ornaments and textile patterns. Of all
the East Javanese sculptures, the execution of Prajñāpāramitā is the most perfect, with only
slight damage to her fingers. She is seated in the lotus position ( padmāsana ) on a double lo‑
tus cushion placed on top of a square pedestal carved with a frieze of small rosettes around
the pedestal, probably representing lotus flowers. Her textile pattern resembles the High
Tang rosette flower, a lotus outlined with palmettes, described as karahana (Raspopova
2006 , p. 67; Pullen 2021a , p. 181).18

--- [Page 135] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 10 of 26
 
āā ā
āā ā
āā ā
ā
ā
āāī āā ā
āāī
āā ā
Figure 8. Prajñāpāramitā, Candi Singosari, East Java, Museum Nasional Indonesia, Jakarta. © Pat‑
terned Splendour 2021 ( Pullen 2021a ).
The goddess’ diadem is secured by floral bands that fall over her shoulders and are
trailed by pearl strings. Across her forehead is a band with looped trails of pearls. Around
her neck appear two bands, one of a gold plaque in the repoussé technique and the other
with looped stands of pearl beads. The serene, inward‑looking pose belies the unmistak‑
able royal exterior of her ornaments and dress style. The udharabhanda (stomach band)
and the triangular upper‑arm band represent a similar type of ornament as her neckband,
adorned with pearl‑chain swags that fall from the lower edge and appear to fly up her arm.
This form of triangular neckband and upper‑arm bands is only apparent in a brief period,
described by Kossak as Pāla‑style ornaments sometimes supplemented by auxiliary bead‑
ing, or “swags of beading often hang from the band” ( Kossak 2007 , p. 89). Evidence of
pearl armbands join the two statues of Vajravārāhī and Prajñāpāramitā, yet the style of
attaching them to the arm differs: the Vajravārāhī wears a cloth band to which the swags
of beads are attached, whereas the Prajñāpāramitā wears a triangular plaque, probably in
gold, from which the swags or trails of pearl beads fall (Figure 9).
There are two other statues from East Java, viz. a Prajñāpāramitā as well as an un‑
known goddess, which portray an “artistic mode”19in the style and design of their pearl
arm ornaments that is also reflected in the Vajravārāhī from Khara Khoto. These two stat‑
ues will be discussed below.

--- [Page 136] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 11 of 26
 
āā ā
āā ā
āāī
āā ā
āā ā
ā
ā
śā ū
āā ā
Figure 9. Detail of Prajñāpāramitā ornaments. Photo: author.
6. Unknown Goddess and Headless Prajñāpāramitā from Candi Si ngosari,
East Java
The first statue is a headless Prajñāpāramitā at the Candi Singosari site in East Java.
Since it is still in situ, the damage to the statues is extensive. The identity of the goddess is
suggested by the mudrā of her hands and the thick stem of the lotus plant around her left
arm. Of note here is the carving of the stone backplate reflecting a Pāla art style with the
crossbar behind her shoulders and two śārdūlas , rampant winged leonine creatures placed
atop a small elephant, carved on either side of the torso ( Pullen 2019 , p. 2). Her ornaments
reflect the other two Prajñāpāramitā from East Java, with the large repoussé gold neckplate
and triangular upper‑arm bands both showing strands of swags of pearl beads, with the
chains flying both up the arm and falling below the gold ornament (Figure 10).
 
āā ā
āāī
Figure 10. Headless Prajñāpāramitā, Candi Singosari, East Java. Photo: author.

--- [Page 137] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 12 of 26
The second statue, representing an unknown goddess, is dateable to c. 1300, and has
been published by Pullen to highlight the current use of carved textile patterns in East Ja‑
vanese sculptures ( Pullen 2021a , p. 191, Figure 139). It is discussed here to highlight the
ongoing discussion on the evidence of pearl upper‑arm bands. The statue, albeit badly
eroded, probably represents a royal figure, and shows many similarities in the use of pearl
arm ornamentation with the Vajravārāhī from Tangut. On careful close research and with
knowledge of the Singosari pearl decoration of Buddhist statues, there is still faint evi‑
dence that she was richly adorned with ornaments and a carved textile pattern. The swags
of pearl chains are apparent on her right arm, even though the stone’s surface is very ex‑
foliated; both of these statues are decorated with a sacred pearl thread in a similar style,
which falls to the lotus cushion ( Pullen 2019 , pp. 19–22) (Figure 11).āā ā
āāī
 
Figure 11. Unknown goddess, Candi Singosari. Photo: author.
7. Prajñāpāramitā from Muara Jambi, Sumatra
Another headless statue of Prajñāpāramitā, dating to the mid‑13th century, is kept
in a museum20at the Buddhist site of Muara Jambi.21She is decorated as a royal figure
with profuse ornamentation, with the upavīta hanging down over both shoulders onto the
cushion in the front of the body; the upavīta represents a five‑strand twisted chain of pearls
joined with a clasp resembling gold work depicted at her left breast. Every ten to fifteen
centimetres along the chain are spacer ornaments—possibly representing gold work. Her
large neckplate plate and triangular upper‑arm bands are probably made of gold in the
repoussé technique; falling from the lower edges of both ornaments are strands of pearl
swags (Figure 12).
A worn but decorated seléndang (shawl) is depicted as falling between the breast and
beneath the right arm; on the rear of the body, it is visible across the back, finishing with a
pleated end over her left shoulder. Closely examining the textile pattern on the goddess’s
sashes could represent an embroidery technique. Embroidery has been popular in China,
used to create the intricate details needed for Buddhist textiles or kesi22tapestry weaves or
incised silk, an example of which being a monk’s garment.

--- [Page 138] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 13 of 26āā ā
āā ā
ī
ī
 
āā ā
ā
Ś
ī
Figure 12. Prajñāpāramitā, probably originally from Candi Gumpung, Muara Jambi Buddhist Com‑
plex, Sumatra. Photo: author.
8. Later East Javanese Statues
If we are to survey Central and East Javanese sculptures for e vidence of this pearl arm
decoration, it is unlikely that we will find any further statu es; however, besides the 9th‑century
Durgā from Central Java (see Figure 4), examples of pearl decoration as part of statues’ general
ornamentation are found in a few late East Javanese period st atues, viz. the statue of a seated
“royal couple”, the statue of a queen or goddess from the 14th to 15th centuries, and a deified
ancestor figure in the guise of Śiva from the same period. In al l these examples, on close
analysis, it is possible to see the use of pearl beaded swags h anging from the lower edge of the
upper‑arm band, from the gold neck plate, beneath the stomac h band, and the girdle around
the hips. The Majapahit examples of the 14th and 15th centuri es also depict a long upavīta
consisting of four‑ and five‑strand pearl beads ( Pullen 2021a ;Polak 2024 ) (Figure 13).
  
(a) ( b) 
ā ī
āā ā
āāī
āā ā āā ā
ṛ
āā ā
ṅ ā
āā ā
ṛ
ṛ
Figure 13. (a) Divine or royal couple; ( b) Pārvatī as a queen, later 14th or early 15th century, Museum
Nasional Indonesia. Photos: author.

--- [Page 139] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 14 of 26
9. The East Javanese and Sumatran Prajñāpāramitā Statues in a
Transregional Perspective
To describe the transregional geoenvironmental area of “Maritime Asia” in the me‑
diaeval period,23Acri highlights the circulation via the southern maritime routes of Bud‑
dhist monastic and lay agents—traders, artists, pilgrims, etc.—along with cosmologies,
texts, and ritual as well as devotional practices, all of which contributed to the shaping
of the Buddhist cosmopolitan continuum articulated in Sanskrit and literary vernacular
languages across much of Asia ( Acri 2019 , p. 50). Keeping in mind this picture of transre‑
gional and transcultural connectivity that linked faraway regions of Asia, we may ask the
following question: how did the design of the ornaments worn by the Vajravārāhī in Khara
Khoto and found in East Java about a hundred years later come about? Perhaps there is no
answer except that pearl ornaments represent a commonality of styles during this period,
which were transmitted by the agents plying the maritime routes, indeed highlighting the
transregional artistic connections in making divine images.24
On an archipelagic interregional scale, stylistic similarities between the Muara Jambi
Prajñāpāramitā and the other Prajñāpāramitā from East Java highlight close political, reli‑
gious, and artistic connections between the two regions during Kr
˙tanagara’s reign. On a
wider intra‑Asian scale, as no stone images of Prajñāpāramitā appear in the earlier Central
Javanese period, the creation of these statues in the Si ˙nhasāri period points to an influx of
new religious and political ideas25, as well as artistic styles.
While the stylistic similarities are apparent, considering the lack of supporting di‑
rect evidence, I prefer to work on the premise that the Prajñāpāramitā from Java and
Sumatra were made in different workshops. The suggestion has also been made that
Kr
˙tanagara sent from East Java to Sumatra either the statue or the artisans, who then pro‑
duced a similar statue for the annexed kingdom in Jambi. Acri and Wenta propose that
“Kr
˙tanagara is known to have commissioned replicas of icons he deemed significant and
dispersed them across his realm, including East Java and Sumatra” ( Acri and Wenta 2022 ,
par. 26). Although an inscription on the Amoghapāśa statue from Padang Roco states that
Kr
˙tanagara sent it to Sumatra, the same circumstance cannot be proven with respect to the
Prajñāpāramitā statue as no inscription or text mentions it.
Late Śrīvijaya was a significant player in the international relations of the region until
1025 and the invasion of the Cōl as—however, there is no evidence that the Cōl as had a fleet
of ships; it is more likely that there were South Indian merchant guilds who were power‑
ful enough to carry out sea raids and to improve their commercial activities ( Miksic and
Goh 2016 , p. 360). Another theory is described by Wade and Tana: “limited numbers of
Indian and Muslim merchants continued to come from the west, but the Chola invasions
from India, for example, were not sustained” ( Wade and Tana 2012 , p. 74).26Śrīvijaya
targeted South Indian ships and controlled the supply of products from the Indian sub‑
continent, with goods such as elephant tusks, gharu ‑wood/hardwood, pearls, aromatics,
and medicines, amongst other luxury goods, and subsequently traded with the Chinese
traders in the Strait of Melaka ( Mukherjee 2019 , p. 187). Research into this area shows far
more archaeological remains in the Batang Hari River region around Muara Jambi than
in Palembang.
The analysis of sculptures in the Pallava and Cōl a regions of South India does not
reveal any examples of statues depicting pearl ornaments—even though, within “Indian”
culture, pearls were used as a form of adornment as seen in the murals of the Buddhist
Ajanta caves in an earlier period. Within the Hindu traditions of South India, the use of
pearls did not appear to be significant.

--- [Page 140] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 15 of 26
10. Mañjuśrī Arapacana in East Java
Khubilai Khan saw himself as “a wrathful ‘imperial’ incarnation of Mañjuśrī as
Mahākāla” ( Acri and Wenta 2022 , par. 56). Acri and Wenta propose that as this form
of Mañjuśrī as Mahākāla may have been practiced at both Yuan and Si ˙nhasāri courts, as a
likely result of a simultaneous wave of Indian and Tibetan masters, the consequence was
that both sovereigns were initiated into tantric systems (ibid., par. 31). In the same period,
there appears to have been a latent resurgence of art styles from Bengal, as seen in this
statue of Arapacana (ibid., par. 61–67). Dhingra and other scholars argue that the relation‑
ship between the images from Bihar and Bengal in the Pāla period after the 10th century
and those seen in Java has become weaker ( Dhingra 2022 , p. 8); however, by the mid‑13th
century, the iconography from the Indian subcontinent27is repeated on this Mañjuśrī, and
a local indigenous style was created (Figure 14).
 
śī
śī
śī
Figure 14. Mañjuśrī Arapacana, Candi Jago, State Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg © Patterned
Splendour ( Pullen 2021a ).
This stone statue is the only example of Mañjuśrī Arapacana in East Java; however,
several statues of Mañjuśrī were found during the Central Javanese period in bronze and
stone. The sinjang (long cloth) worn by the Javanese statue is carved with a complex pattern
of concentric circles made up of four different designs, which alternate and repeat across
the cloth. The carving of the patterns is very clear and precise and appears to reflect several
other influences, for example, the senmurv (or simurgh) bird, which is often depicted on
Sasanian textiles ( Hakobyan and Mikayelyan 2018 ). This example may suggest that textile
patterns were transmitted to Java from overseas following long‑distance trade, for instance,
from the royal courts in Yuan China to the Javanese court. It seems reasonable to suggest

--- [Page 141] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 16 of 26
that such kinds of textiles could have reached Java as part of a Chinese gift exchange or
through Arab traders from Persia. This sculpture is the only evidence of the existence in
Java of this textile pattern attributable to Persia. Amy Heller describes the movement of
designs: “From Persia to China, medallions of single or confronting animals with a pearl
roundel were among the most popular designs of the period. The creatures were frequently
imaginary or hybrid birds or animals” ( Heller 2006 , pp. 175–88; Pullen 2021b , pp. 157–68)
(Figure 15).
 
śī
āā
āā ā
Figure 15. Textile pattern on Mañjuśrī, drawing by Yiran Huang © Patterne d Splendour ( Pullen 2021a ).
11. Icons Featuring Pearl Ornaments from the Himalayan Region and Tibet
From the trading port of Tamralipti on the Bay of Bengal, through Bangladesh, Nepal,
to Leh in Ladakh, Kashmir, through the Sogdian region to Dunhuang and Yulin and into
the Hexi corridor and Khara Khoto, a similar artistic mode in terms of the depiction of pearl
ornaments on Buddhist icons is seen. A relevant example of iconography involving pearl
decoration located on the Buddhist trail at Alchi28is that of a Green Tārā (appearing as
Prajñāpāramitā) mural painting dated to the third quarter of the 11th century (Figure 16).
Although this Tārā is dated to 150 years earlier than the Prajñāpāramitā at Muara
Jambi and the Prajñāpāramitā from East Java, we see long strings of pearls in four strands
on one image and as a rope on the other. We can also see the pearls on her upper‑arm bands
(whereas the Muara Jambi Prajñāpāramitā has the pearls hanging from her triangular gold
arm plaque).
Other relevant examples are two—no longer extant—clay sculptures, one of Vairo‑
cana and one of Amoghasiddhi, from the Rkyang bu temple in Central Tibet, which was
established shortly before 1037.29Both statues exhibit pearl upper‑arm ornamentation, sim‑
ilar to the Vajravārāhī of the late 12th century. They are depicted as wearing long swags of
pearl ornaments around the neck and flying up from the upper‑arm bands, in a very sim‑
ilar style to the Prajñāpāramitā from East Java, now in the Museum Nasional in Jakarta.
The pattern on the sash draped across the upper body appears as the upavīta and is carved
with a pattern of roundels, which we also see on the jacket of Mahākāla from East Java.30
In the book Tibet in Pictures by Govinda, Li Gotami ( Govinda 1979 ), the figures on pages
40–42, of the 13th or 14th century and probably representing Vairocana, Amoghasiddhi,
and Amitabha, appear in the same posture with the same ornaments and patterned textile
with roundels. These three statues are described as showing “a strong Indian Influence”,
all dressed in rich garments. The continuation of pearl ornamentation and the patterns of
roundels on the textiles appear again in East Java, highlighting the continuity of this ubiq‑

--- [Page 142] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 17 of 26
uitous pattern and jewellery design. Of particular note in these images is the depiction of
the crossbar in the backplate, the use of the śārdūla, and the elephant, all of which we see
appearing again in East Java in the headless Prajñāpāramitā (see Figure 10).
 
āā ā
āā āā ā
āā ā
āā ā
āāī
āā ā
ī
āā
śā ū
āā ā
Figure 16. Green Tara as Prajñāpāramitā, Alchi.|Alamy public domain image, ID_2BC2BPM.
Khokhlov describes the clay Vairocana and Amoghasiddhi scu lptures from the Rkyang
bu temple as “decorated with spiked armbands and swagged nec klaces, which are character‑
istic of the Southern Indian mode in Hexi art” ( Khokhlov 2022 , p. 113).
The connections between Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent and insular South‑
east Asia were strong from the early 7th century through the 13th century; however, in
the case of Tibet, the elites converted to Buddhism relatively later, after Buddhism had
gained a foothold in China ( Schoterman 2016 , p. 114). As suggested, the Buddhist art
produced in the Xixia region includes an Indo‑Himalayan style and local contemporary
Chinese traditions—the painted images from Khara Khoto attested to the melting pot of
artists who worked in many different styles.31Indo‑Himalayan imagery in 12th‑century
China reflects the previous Pāla aesthetic ( Watt 2010 , pp. 102–3). In 1260, Khubilai Khan
was named ruler of the Mongol Empire, where the customs earlier established by the Xixia
were eventually followed. There is a distinct blending of styles in these thangka examples
of Indo‑Himalayan and Chinese imagery; we see the facial features lean more to the Pāla
aesthetic, but the elaborate ornamentation of the multiple strands of pearl jewellery reflects
the Xixia elegance (ibid., pp. 102–8) (Figure 16).
A thangka painting of the Four Heavenly Kings from Xixia mani fests the syncretic
and multifaceted nature of Xixia Buddhism—which brings tog ether Chinese Mahāyāna
Buddhist traditions and Himalayan Tantric traditions—wit h a shift in focus more towards
Tibetan Buddhism from the middle of the 12th century onwards . Therefore, we see two

--- [Page 143] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 18 of 26
types of artistic style, the Chinese and the Tibetan, both of which were influenced by Pāla art
(Zhu 2023 , p. 3). In this painting, the headdress, the bare torso, and a dhotī for the lower part
of the body all appear Indian in style (ibid., p. 5). Zhu expla ins that “what was absorbed
into the Buddhist art of the Yuan was a largely Pāla Indian Sty le as it filtered through the
Xixia people” (ibid., p. 18). This statement highlights the continuous use of the terms Pāla
and Indian style in relationship to Xixia thangka paintings .
Despite the general commonalities between Pāla, Tibetan, and Chinese styles in the
Buddhist art of Xixia, if we limit ourselves to the study of arm ornamentation, specifically
the strings of tiny pearl‑beaded swags that appear to fly up the arms, we see that this
precise motif appears only in one instance in Central Java and a handful in East Java, and on
a few sculptures in Khara Khoto. This fact may suggest that the commonality of Buddhist
ornamentation and shared style originated from trade across the maritime (and overland)
routes going beyond the Indian subcontinent–Tibet–China region to Southeast Asia.
12. Pāla and “Related Art Styles” Between India, Central Asia, and Java
(c. 750–1200)
The Buddhist art of eastern India from the 8th to the 12th centuries had been recog‑
nised as a significant source of inspiration for the cultural arts of Tibet and Southeast
Asia.32From the 11th to the 12th centuries, the Bengal region held a strategic location at
a crossroads of the Indian subcontinent and mainland as well as island Southeast Asia.
Buddhists excelled in producing images of material nature and power, and those images
became active when brought to life through regularly performed rituals ( Bautze‑Picron
2016 , pp. 163–64). Images were carried from place to place, from Bengal, where merchants
and monks travelled to the Himalayans in the 11th to 12th centuries. Monks from various
countries converged at Bodh Gayā. In Pagan, for example, pilgrims who travelled across
from Bengal left artistic evidence in the forms of relief temple paintings, cloth paintings,33
and bronzes, which were cast in Bengal and left at Pagan.
Stone images of the seated Buddha in Bengal follow an iconographic programme
also found in the Pagan seated Buddha images and murals of the 11th to 12th centuries
(Figure 17); however, by the 13th century, ideas from Bengal found their way to East Java34
and became heir to iconographic subjects (ibid. 2016, pp. 165–66), such as the Mañjuśrī Ara‑
pacana. Newar artists were likely situated in East Java, which would attest to the style of
the Mañjuśrī and might explain how the unusual textile patterns on the kain of the Mañjuśrī
reached the region ( Pullen 2021a , p. 207) (Figure 15).
Between the 10th and 12th centuries, during the Pāla dynasty (760–1161), Buddhist ex‑
pansion in Northeast India was seen, with ideas and practices travelling to the Himalayas
via Nepal and onto Central Asia. The new Indic traditions had roots in esoteric practices—
some of the earliest evidence of these practices is found in central Tibet in the 12th and
13th centuries and the art of the Xixia dynasty in northwest China ( Watt 2010 , p. 99). The
knowledge transfer depended on the work of Indian scholars in Tibet and the many Bud‑
dhist centres across various kingdoms. Because of this sharing of ideas and practices, Tibet
became the recipient of many Indian Buddhist texts and paintings. Therefore, the various
missionaries who travelled throughout the Mahāyāna Buddhist world played a part in the
diffusion of Pāla art styles, including the Himalayas and Tibet.35Bautze‑Picron argues that
the iconography, be it literary or plastic, was extremely rich and was later inherited by Ti‑
betan and Nepalese monks. Additionally, there is ample artistic evidence from Southeast
Asia to prove that intensive contacts were developed between different states of this part
of the world and Northeast India ( Bautze‑Picron 1993 , p. 277).

--- [Page 144] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 19 of 26 śī
śī
  
(a) ( b) 
ā
āā
ā
Figure 17. (a) Seated Buddha Kurkihar, 10th century. Indian Museum, Kolkata. Photo: author.
(b) Seated Buddha, Pagan, 12th century. Photo: author.
One should not forget to stress that trade routes across Central Asia were important
vectors of connectivity, as they were where most indirect trade occurred and most of the
contact between India and China transpired. The indirect transmission of ideas and objects,
especially of Buddhism and its associated forms, flourished in the fertile grounds of Central
Asia ( Murphey 1999 , p. 184).
The Mongolian city of Khara Khoto is known as the Black or Dead City, a fortified
town on the southern Gobi Desert of the Tangut State (1038–1227), built in 1032. In the early
13th century, during Khubilai Khan’s reign, the city was considered a garrison town in the
north of Xixia territory ( Takeuchi and Iuchi 2016 , p. 1; Watt 2010 , p. 24). It became an active
artistic centre that shared Buddhist art styles compared to those in Tibet, Northern Song,
and Buddhist art produced in the Xixia region, including works in the Indo‑Himalayan
style and styles from contemporary Chinese traditions ( Watt 2010 , p. 102). Buddhism
provided a link between Tibet and the Tangut empire. Xixia fell to the Mongols in 1227,
and the capital was largely destroyed. Russian scholars have suggested that Xixia Buddhist
culture profoundly influenced the Mongols and played a crucial role in their adoption of
Buddhism. Khubilai Khan became the Great Khan in 1260 and 1271, proclaiming the new
Yuan dynasty ( Khokhlov 2016 ).
Given the status of the Xixia region as a centre of Buddhism and a nexus of connec‑
tivity across Tibet, Central Asia, and China, it is possible that some Buddhist “art styles”
were transmitted from that landlocked region and eventually ended up in East Java. But
how did these Buddhist ideas and art styles reach Java?
The Mongols commissioned hundreds of Chinese ships built in the newly established
southern Fujian province ( Watt 2010 , pp. 160–61), which enabled them to sail within the
region from these southern Chinese ports. China held tribute relations with Śrīvijaya and
Malayu/Jambi between the 11th and 13th centuries. The growth of trade with India and
China during this period brought coastal people in the maritime region of Southeast Asia
into contact with Buddhism and the Sanskrit language and art styles. Many pilgrims who
visited the Pāla monasteries of Nālandā and Vikramaśīla, mainly for religious and educa‑
tional purposes, often returned with examples of Pāla Buddhist artwork. Namely, small

--- [Page 145] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 20 of 26
portable bronze icons that arrived in Java and frequently became templates for Javanese ex‑
amples, especially in the 9th century. The text within the Zhufanzhi clearly states that ships
were travelling from southern Chinese ports, trading in Java and Sanfoqi/Palembang, and
continuing to various ports in India.
As some scholars suggest, in spite of (or perhaps thanks to) t he unfriendly relationship
between the Mongols and the Javanese during the late period o f the reign of Kr
˙tanagara, it is
likely that East Java witnessed a new influx of Buddhist ideas , iconographies, and scripts as
a result of maritime relations precisely in that period ( Acri and Wenta 2022 ;Acri 2016 ,2024 ).
As for Śrīvijaya, by the end of the 13th century it had become historically irrelevant.
In 1288, it was absorbed into the Si ˙nhasāri domain and attacked again by its successor, the
Majapahit kingdom in 1293. Yuan notices list that the Ma’bar coast, which had been the
Cōla coast earlier, strikingly omitted ports in the Strait of Melaka ( Mukherjee 2019 , p. 191).
At this time, the connections in the South China Sea enabled numerous diffusion centres
and the circulation of goods and religious art styles, supporting the paradigm of these
ideas (Figure 18).
 
ā
ā
ṛ
ṛ
ṛ
ṛ
ṛ
ā ā
āā ā ā
āāī
ā
ā
Figure 18. Map of maritime Asian trade routes, 8th to 15th centuries © Patterned Splendour
(Pullen 2021a ).
13. Conclusion
This study has focused on the implementation of pearl ornaments in a particularly
unique style, which only appears in these three locations in the brief period between
the 11th and mid‑13th centuries. All the relevant artworks discussed here owe their
overwhelmingly stylistic merits to Pāla and “related art styles”. My analysis has high‑
lighted a convergence of cultural forces and ideas in the vast region spanning South
through Central, Southeast, and East Asia,36with the Pāla links across the Chinese,
Mongolian, and Southeast Asian regions where the Pāla and “related art styles” are ev‑
ident. While the links between Kr
˙tanagara and Khubilai Khan may appear unsound
and indirect, this is not the case as Khubilai and Kr
˙tanagara were engaged in a diplo‑
matic and then military confrontation. Kr
˙tanagara’s adoption of Tantric Buddhism

--- [Page 146] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 21 of 26
was in imitation of a response to Khubilai’s initiation that requires the assumption
that Tantric Buddhism offered effective power, spiritual, political, and military power
(Bade 2016 , p. 153). Acri and Wenta proposed that “accepting the widespread scholarly
view that Kr
˙tanagara, in the final period of his reign, imitated Kublai’s tantric initiations
and adopted tantric technologies practiced at the coeval Yuan court to protect his king‑
dom from external aggression and consolidate his regional power” ( Acri and Wenta 2022 ,
par. 68). Despite the plausible historical scenario suggested by these views and the circum‑
stantial evidence supporting them, what I am suggesting here is the possibility that the art
styles of the two regions under discussion were not the result of any direct connections
between Khubilai or Kr
˙tanagara and the trade between China and Java during the mid‑to
the late 13th century, but rather the result of a shared common (Pāla, or Pāla‑influenced)
source and shared styles of pearl ornamentation, that influenced various regions of the
Buddhist world.
I argue that the East Java Prajñāpāramitā in the 13th century and the Tibetan Pāla‑
inspired thangka paintings often show a convergence of cultural forces and a commonal‑
ity of style originating from the maritime realm and traded via maritime routes, both by
sea and overland. Thus, I propose that the connection between the Vajravārāhī and the
other Tibetan thangka paintings was all inspired by Northeast Indian influence from the
Hexi corridor, eventually reaching East Java. As Pal suggested, these Pāla‑period paint‑
ings were made in Tibet by masters hailing from the Indian subcontinent, and I propose
that Javanese artisans made the stone statues using them as models. It is without a doubt
that the textile patterns and the ornament of Pāla‑style metal jewellery, with the extensive
use of pearls, in the triangular armbands and the upavīta , are of a Pāla style originating
from Tibet reinterpreted with an indigenous Javanese aesthetic ( Pullen 2021a ).
What we see here are over 200 years of parallels in Mahāyāna Buddhist art styles
from the Vajravārāhī in Xixia style, which reflects Pāla art styles, Pagan mural paintings,
and the Buddhist sculpture in East Java and Sumatra.37It is apparent that Buddhist “art
styles” travelled from Central Java and eventually arrived in Tibet in the form of textile
patterns ( Pullen 2021a , p. 21). However, regarding the 13th‑century East Java Buddhist
statues, which present clear examples of pearl ornaments, we can surmise that these ideas
were transmitted by pilgrims and artisans with an internalised knowledge of Buddhist “art
styles”, reflecting the Pāla idiom.
Studies of iconography rely on textual sources; however, some visual features are not
featured in the texts. The production of images is a creative process, not always following
strict religious guidelines and generally meeting each region’s spiritual needs. Monks in‑
teracted with foreigners and were open to new ideas, which travelled both ways to and
from the Indian subcontinent. Therefore, the images exported by monks reflected the con‑
cepts from eastern India, but they merged and reappeared with the local Javanese aesthetic
(Bautze‑Picron 2016 , p. 175), hence the commonality of styles.
Funding: The publication of this article has been partly supported by the French National Research
Agency (ANR), project MANTRA—Maritime Asian Networks of Buddhist Tantra (ANR‑22‑CE27‑
015), coordinated by Andrea Acri (EPHE, PSL University, Paris).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Acknowledgments: This manuscript was published in the Special Issue “Beyond the ‘Spice Routes’:
Indic and Sinitic Religions across the Asian Maritime Realm”, with Andrea Acri and Francesco Bian‑

--- [Page 147] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 22 of 26
chini serving as Guest Editors. I wish to thank Andrea Acri for inviting me to participate in this
Special Issue and be part of a panel on “Religion and the Asian Maritime Realm” at the ICAS confer‑
ence in Surabaya in July 2024. He has given me continued support with my article and encouraged
me to look in directions I had not previously considered, for which I am truly grateful.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflicts of interest.
Notes
1SeeKhokhlov (2018 , p. 1): “a great number of Sanskrit illuminated manuscripts and portable images were brought to China
through the Hexi corridor, these images and texts became the earliest sources of the Pāla style in the region”. Khokhlov also
suggests that “Xixia figures are modelled in the Indian Pāla style, but the interpretation of this style is significantly different
from that found in the art of Central Tibet. The bodies of the Xixia figures look soft and relaxed, their shoulders sloped, their
gestures effortless” ( Khokhlov 2016 , p. 20). Pullen suggests that “during the Pāla period in northeast India, between 9th and
12th centuries, numerous sculptures were created with a particular style and iconography that had an enduring effect on the
Hindu and Buddhist art of Java” ( Pullen 2021a , p. 9). Bautze‑Picron reminds us that what was inherited by a large region of the
world was not a style but a religion with its own visual expression. She suggests we cannot isolate style from iconography as
both influence each other ( Bautze‑Picron 1993 , p. 285).
2The Tangut Empire was a prototypical Inner Asian empire from which later empires of China and Inner Asia arose, such as the
Mongol Yuan (1271–1368) and Manchu Qing (1636–1911). The Buddhist culture of the Xixia empire profoundly influenced the
Mongols. After the conquest of Mongolia in 1227, Xixia artisans were deported to Mongolia, and a new art style arose. Xixia
was at the crossroads of Central Asian, Tibetan, and Chinese cultures and languages in Eastern Central Asia ( Meinert 2021 ,
pp. 441–48).
3The trading thalassocracy of Śrīvijaya (8th to 13th centuries) “controlled some of the most lucrative maritime routes of Asia,
linking China, Southeast Asia, India” ( Huntington and Huntington 1990 , p. 210).
4However, one might ask, where did the pearls originate in the landlocked regions of Central Asia and China? Allsen informs us
that goods were retrieved from the fall of the Abbasid capital Baghdad in 1258; the goods were so great that the Mongols and
their Georgian allies sank under the weight of gold, silver, gems, pearls, textiles, and precious garments amongst other luxury
goods. The jewels, pearls, and textiles were the most important ( Allsen 1997 , p. 28). Despite the fact that these events are later
than the thangka under discussion, pearl trading was widely known during this period in Southeast Asia and Central Asia.
5A sizeable Buddhist complex now called Muara Jambi, the 11th‑century capital of Jambi, was built as the second political centre
of Śrīvijaya, 70 kilometres inland on the Batang Hari River ( Miksic and Goh 2016 , p. 305). Miksic and Goh have proposed that
nobles and the rulers would not choose to live at the river mouth due to the marshy land, floods, and tidal flows, let alone
being susceptible to seaborne attack, which leaves the centre of Muara Jambi somewhat isolated from international influences.
However, the Śrīvijaya and Muara Jambi centres were probably connected by overland routes (ibid., p. 306).
6Michael Flecker wrote in his report of the Intan shipwreck that “pearls deteriorate after long periods of immersion in seawater”
(Flecker 2002 , p. 73, n. 28). Even though gold rings were found in the shipwreck with a protruding central wire, pearls were not
found. One degraded pearl was found on one setting in the remnants of a 1638 wreck (personal communication with Michael
Flecker, August 2024).
7https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/42718 (accessed on 1 January 2025). Northern Qi dynasty (550–577), The
Sackler Collections, Purchase, The Sackler Fund, 1965, Accession Number 65.29.4.
8We can deduce that this image represents the god Śiva due to the iconographical features, like the snake upavīta, fly whisk, or
cāmara on his left and the skull in his jat
˙āmukut
˙a.
9Esoteric Buddhism expanded into the Tangut State, which existed between China and Tibet within a bend of the Huanghe or
Yellow River and adjoining areas from the 10th to 13th centuries. The scholar Zhouyang Ma, in his dissertation defended at
Harvard University, states that “Tibetan Buddhism was introduced into the Tangut State as it was well‑suited for the framework
of Tangut State Buddhism. This is evident in the first set of scriptures translated from Tibetan into Tangut in roughly 1140’s”
(Ma 2023 , pp. 256–57). On the transmission of the Cakrasa ˙mvaratantra in the Xixia Period, see Haoran (2017 ).
10Date provided by catalogue on Vajravārāhī at the State Hermitage Museum.
11In 1908, Kozlov, a Russian geographer and pioneer explorer of Central Asia, found an extraordinary cache of archaeological
treasures on the outskirts of the ruined walls, consisting of hundreds of Buddhist images, paintings, bodhisattvas, meditation
mandalas, and piles of woodblock prints and manuscripts testify to the significance of Buddhism. Koslov sent ten chests of
manuscripts and Buddhist objects back to St Petersburg, and more were sent on a return journey in 1909. They remain in the
Kozlov Collection in the Russian Academy of Sciences. Some paintings and other objects, numbering 3500, remain in the State
Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg, reflecting the cultural richness of the Xixia State.

--- [Page 148] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 23 of 26
12Even though one can find countless modern visual examples of bone beads, I still argue that the bodhisattvas are adorned with
pearl ornaments, certainly in the case of the sculptures in both Java and Sumatra, there is no recorded or visual evidence of the
use of bone beads.
13A distinct type of Indo‑Himalayan imagery was found in Nepal and the central regions of Tibet, which was introduced to China
during the Yuan dynasty.
14The Hexi corridor was a transmission passage and, as Khokhlov proposes, where Northeast Indian teachings and Pāla aesthetics
were initially introduced to Tibet ( Khokhlov 2022 , p. 117, n. 255). Von Schroeder proposes that the formulation of different
Tibetan art styles not only influenced foreign art styles but also fragmented them due to the greater distances in Tibet. The
impact of Northeast Indian traditions, Newar artists, and influences from China all impacted the styles we see in artists from the
Tibetan/Chinese region ( von Schroeder 2008 , p. 16). According to O’Brien (2016 , p. 317), referring to Tucci, “ Aniko was only the
first in a long line of Newar artists whose works are praised in the eulogies and chronicles of numerous monasteries, attesting
to an ‘uninterrupted flow into Tibet of Nepalese artists and craftsmen’”. Historical sources suggest that Newar artists were in
high demand in Central Asia and at the Yuan court, where there was also a preference for Newar artists (ibid.).
15Khokhlov suggests that “it is generally believed that the Pāla style in Hexi is associated with Tibetans and Tibetan Buddhist
tradition” ( Khokhlov 2018 , p. 1). He also proposes that the Bihar–Bengal region was a prime destination for Chinese monks,
and that a great number of illuminated Buddhist manuscripts and portable bronze images from India were brought to China.
These texts and images were most likely the earliest sources of Pāla style in the region, as a result of which the Pāla style appeared
at almost all the major Buddhist sites in the Hexi Corridor ( Khokhlov 2018 ).
16However, what does the term “ornament” mean? Ornament is not simply the transfer of a two‑dimensional pattern to the surface
of a material artefact but is itself part of the artefact’s three‑dimensional logic. The terms jewellery, decoration, and ornament
are often used interchangeably.
17The statue was noted by the Assistant Resident of Malang in East Java, D. Monnereau. In 1820, it was handed over to C. G.
C. Reinwardt, who transported it to the Netherlands in 1822, where it became a prized possession of the National Museum
of Antiquities in Leiden in 1823. For more than 158 years the statue resided in Leiden, the Netherlands. In January 1978, the
Government of the Netherlands returned the statue to the Republic of Indonesia when Queen Juliana of the Netherlands visited
the former Dutch colony ( Lunsingh Scheurleer 2007 , p. 83). Our further knowledge of this statue is hampered by the destruction
and loss of the original temple sites ( Reichle 2007 , p. 5).
18Heller has described similar variations as the Sasanian‑derived “motif of four palmette petals that form a fleur‑de‑lis” ( Heller
2006 , p. 179, Figure 123), which appears on the base of the rug section of Buddha’s throne. The continued use of this type of
pattern lends the idea that this motif can transgress over different mediums and religious as well as royal affiliations. Raspopova
describes the use of the rosette motif on items such as cushions depicted on a royal throne and saddle cloths rather than garments,
seen at Penjikent in the first quarter of the 8th century ( Raspopova 2006 , pp. 67–68).
19On this expression, see Khokhlov (2022 , p. 49, n. 2): “The term ‘artistic mode’ is used as a broader category than artistic style
and refers to a general way of representation. Additionally, ‘imagery in an Indian artistic mode’ refers to Indianized images that
were made to look as if they were Indian as opposed to images in a traditional artistic mode”. The “traditional artistic mode” in
this article would be the Javanese.
20The National Cultural Heritage (KCBN) Murajambi Area, site museum. The construction of the new museum is part of
the KCBN Muara Jambi revitalisation project. https://www.kompas.id/baca/english/2024/06/04/en‑membangun‑museum‑kcbn‑
muarajambi‑sebagai‑jendela‑budaya (accessed on 1 January 2025).
21This Prajñāpāramitā statue was found along the banks of the Batang Hari River in Muara Jambi, Southeast Sumatra. The statue
was thought to have been placed on the top of Candi Gumpung, as suggested, they were terrace pavilions and not regular
temples dated to the late 13th century. Reichle suggests the statue would have been placed under a bamboo pavilion on the top
of the temple ( Reichle 2007 , pp. 64–65); however, this is highly unlikely as the statue is carved in the round and would most
likely have been placed on a platform at the front of the temple ( Pullen 2020 ,2021a ). She is one of four Prajñāpāramitā found in
Sumatra and East Java.
22Kesi denotes incised silk, “cut or carved silk”. It was adapted for Chinese silks in the Tang Dynasty and became popular in the
Song Dynasty ( Kuhn 2012 , Glossary 524).
23Acri and Sharrock (2022 ) refer extensively to the expression “Maritime Asia” in their Introduction, as in the following passage:
“in the later phase of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent, kingdoms in various regions of Southeast Asia (like Java, Sumatra and
the Khmer domains) attracted important religious personalities and granted support to artists and artisans hailing from Bengal
and the Himalayan region, thereby becoming the last bastions of Sanskritic Buddhism in Maritime Asia” ( Acri and Sharrock
2022 , p. 3).
24We have no written evidence of actual pearl or gold ornaments being traded in their “raw unadulterated” form or in the com‑
pleted object; however, shipwrecks in the Java Sea, such as the Intan wreck, suggest that gold jewellery and other luxury trade
items were carried from one country to another, usually as tribute or trade goods ( Flecker 2002 , pp. iv, 29; Hall 2010 , p. 20), which

--- [Page 149] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 24 of 26
helps us to understand how the ornaments depicted on these bodhisattvas perhaps came to be replicated. I would also argue
that despite the proposal of Vajravārāhī and East Javanese images evidencing transregional artistic connections, they perhaps
also reflect independent inspirations from pieces of jewellery using gold and pearls that were widely traded (or sent through
embassies) and fashionable in several regions of Asia during the 11th to the 13th centuries.
25The extant evidence of four statues of Prajñāpāramitā from East Java and Sumatra in the late 13th to early 14th century has led
scholars to conjecture that they represented not only a Buddhist goddess but also a portrayed a historical figure ( Reichle 2007 ,
pp. 52–53). Compare the view that the giant Mahākāla of Padang Roco in Sumatra may have been sponsored by Kr
˙tanagara to
represent the king in divine form, whether posthumously or during his life ( Acri and Wenta 2022 , par. 21).
26See also Wisseman Christie (1999 , p. 224), suggesting that “although the Tamil‑speaking trading enclaves on the coast of the
Sumatra and the peninsula may have been of local importance at the time, their importance pales in comparison to the broader
impact of Indian trade on maritime Southeast Asia”.
27Where we see examples of Mañjuśrī Arapacana and Mañjuvajra, both from the 11th century. The Indian examples are seated in
the same posture; however, in the Indian examples, they both have four arms. The general aesthetic in the Javanese statues is
taken from the earlier statues from the Pāla domains.
28Alchi is a small hamlet near the Leh district of Ladakh in the Indian Himalayas, along the border with Tibet. This monastic
complex of temples still contains some of the best‑preserved examples of Buddhist art.
29Khokhlov vividly portrays these sculptures, part of the Vajradhātu‑man
˙d
˙ala, as rare and truly precious. Regrettably, most of
these statues were lost during the Cultural Revolution, adding a layer of intrigue and a sense of loss to their story; however, their
images can still be glimpsed in pre‑1950 photographs taken by Li Gotami Govinda and Giuseppe Tucci’s expedition ( Khokhlov
2022 , p. 113).
30Mahākāla is one of the two guardian figures at King Kr
˙tanagara’s temple, Candi Singosari ( Pullen 2021a , p. 160, Figure 106).
31Tibetan Buddhism continued to be practiced in some areas of Hexi even when it went under the Tangut rule. The multiethnic
population of Xixia included the Tangut, Chinese, and Uighur people. The Tangut State actively supported Buddhism and emu‑
lated the Chinese model. It also controlled the trade routes through the Hexi corridor. By the end of the 12th century, the Tanguts
had created the so‑called Xixia or Hexi Buddhist Canon, consisting of rolls of Sinitic teachings and Tibetan tantric material.
32Huntington explores the so‑called Pāla international style and “raises questions about cultural diffusion and influence in the
transmission of artistic modes … although some unsolicited or unconscious influence occurred through trade and missionary
contacts, on the whole, those who looked to India for inspiration during the Pāla period were not passive recipients of India’s
cultural charisma, rather aggressive seekers” ( Huntington and Huntington 1990 , p. 70).
33Bautze‑Picron describes similar treatments on cloth paintings from Khara Khoto, where it adorns a cloth apparently hanging
behind the image of the god or goddess—a motif of Chinese origin ( Bautze‑Picron 2015 , p. 115). Floral motifs found in Buddhist
cloth paintings are also encountered on paintings or tapestries at Khara Khoto, where different foreign styles—Nepalese, Chinese,
and Tibetan—are in evidence; this of course reflects the international culture of the Buddhist community across the region
(Bautze‑Picron 2014 , p. 3).
34Huntington states that “stylistic connections between the art of Java and eastern Bengal are also notable, although inscriptional
records do not document this latter association” ( Huntington and Huntington 1990 , p. 119, n. 72).
35Von Schroeder suggests that one should preferably use the ex pression “Pāla and related styles” in the period from the 8th to 12th
century. This proposal is made regarding the artistic remai ns of the Northeast Indian territories of Bihar and Bengal, g enerally referred
to as featuring a “Pāla Style” is to be preferred. Given the re gion’s fluid cultural and political shifts during this perio d, surviving
evidence suggests that the more inclusive term “Pāla and rel ated styles” is to be preferred ( von Schroeder 2008 , pp. 70–71).
36This region has been referred to by some scholars as “Maritime Asia”: see Acri (2019 ).
37Huntington describes that in some instances, such as Myanmar and Java, “the influence of Pāla culture was strongly felt, and
the Pāla‑derived artistic styles that flourished in these regions comprise an important chapter in the story of the Pāla influence
in Southeast Asia” ( Huntington and Huntington 1990 , p. 198).
References
Acri, Andrea. 2016. Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist‑Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 7th–13th Century AD. In Esoteric
Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia, Networks of Masters, Texts and Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing,
pp. 1–29.
Acri, Andrea. 2019. Imagining Maritime Asia. In Imagining Asia(s): Networks, Agents, Sites . Edited by Andrea Acri, Murari K. Jha,
Sraman Mukherjee and Kashshaf Ghani. Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 36–59.
Acri, Andrea. 2024. Sanskrit Inscriptions in Northeastern Indian Scripts in Premodern Java and the Maritime Asian Networks of
Mahāyāna Buddhist Tantra. Acta Via Serica 9: 91–138. [ CrossRef ]

--- [Page 150] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 25 of 26
Acri, Andrea, and Aleksandra Wenta. 2022. A Buddhist Bhairava? Krtanagara’s Tantric Buddhism in Transregional Perspective.
Entangled Religions 13. [ CrossRef ]
Acri, Andrea, and Peter D. Sharrock, eds. 2022. The Creative South: Buddhist and Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime Asia . vol. 1. Available
online: https://muse.jhu.edu/book/101445/ (accessed on 1 January 2025).
Allsen, Thomas. T. 1997. Commodity and Exchange in the Mongol Empire: A cultural history of Islamic Textiles . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bade, David. 2016. (Spi)ritual Warfare in 13‑th Century Asia? International Relations, the Balance of Powers, and the Tantric Bud‑
dhism of Krtanagara and Khubiai Khan. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore:
ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 141–63.
Bautze‑Picron, Claudine. 1993. Crying Leaves: Some Remarks on ‘The Art of Pala India (8th–12th Centuries) and Its International
Legacy’. East and West 43: 277–94. Available online: https://www.jstor.org/stable/29757097 (accessed on 1 January 2025).
Bautze‑Picron, Claudine. 2014. Bagan Murals and The Sino‑Tibetan World. Available online: https://hal.archives‑ouvertes.fr/hal‑01
099967 (accessed on 1 January 2025).
Bautze‑Picron, Claudine. 2015. Between India and China, the Murals of Bagan. The Journal of Bengal Art 20: 101–22. Available online:
https://halshs.archives‑ouvertes.fr/halshs‑01079874 (accessed on 1 January 2025).
Bautze‑Picron, Claudine. 2016. Images of devotion and power in South & Southeast Bengal. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime
Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 163–91.
Dakin, William J. 1913. Pearls . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dhingra, Sonali. 2022. Saviour “at the Time of Death”: Amoghapasa Cultic Role in Late First Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites. In
The Creative South: Buddhist and Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime Asia . Edited by Andrea Acri and Peter D. Sharrock. Singapore:
ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, vol. 2, pp. 7–27.
Flecker, Michael. 2002. The Archaeological Excavation of the 10th Century Intan Shipwreck . Oxford: Archaeopress.
Govinda, Li Gotami. 1979. Tibet in Pictures: Text and Photos . Berkeley: Dharma Pub.
Hakobyan, Zaruhi, and Lilit Mikayelyan. 2018. The senmurv and Other Mythical Creatures with Sasanian Iconography in the Me‑
dieval Art of Armenia and Transcaucasia. In Fabulous Creatures and Spirits in Ancient Iranian Culture . Edited by Matteo Compareti.
Bologna: Paolo Emilio Bersani, pp. 39–76.
Hall, Kenneth R. 2010. Indonesia’s Evolving International Relationships in the Ninth to Early Eleventh Centuries: Evidence from Con‑
temporary Shipwrecks and Epigraphy. Indonesia 90: 15–45. Available online: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20798231 (accessed
on 1 January 2025).
Hall, Kenneth R. 2019. Revisionist Study of Mainland South‑East Asia’s Maritime Connections, c.100‑1500. In Cross‑Cultural Network‑
ing in the Eastern Indian Ocean Realm c.100–1800 . Edited by Kenneth R. Hall, Suchandra Ghosh, Kaushik Gangopadhyay and Rila
Mukherjee. New Delhi: Primus Books, pp. 267–96.
Haoran, Hou. 2017. Notes on the Translation and Transmission of the Sam
˙put
˙a and Cakrasam
˙vara Tantras in the Xixia Period (1038–
1227). In Chinese and Tibetan Esoteric Buddhism . Edited by Yael S. Bentor and Meir Shahar. Leiden: Brill, pp. 355–76.
Heller, Amy. 2006. Recent Findings on Textiles from the Tibetan Empire. In Central Asian Textiles and Their Contexts in the Early Middle
Ages . Edited by Regula Schorta. Riggisberg: Abegg‑Stiftung, vol. 9, pp. 175–88.
Hirth, Friederich, and William W. Rockhill. 1966. Chao Ju‑Kua: His Work on the Chinese and Arab Trade in the Twelfth and Thirteenth
Centuries, Entitled ‘Chu‑Fan‑Chi’ . St. Petersburg: Paragon Reprint.
Huntington, Susan L., and John C. Huntington. 1990. Leaves From the Bodhi Tree: The Art of Pala India (8th–12th Centuries) and Its
International Legacy . Seattle and London: Dayton Art Institute.
Khokhlov, Yury. 2016. The Xi Xia Legacy in Sino‑Tibetan Art of the Yuan Dynasty. Asian Art . Available online: https://www.asianart.
com/articles/xi‑xia (accessed on 1 January 2025).
Khokhlov, Yury. 2018. From India to the Doorstep of China Indian Pala Style in the Hexi Corridor. Paper presented at the Workshop
The Silk Road and the Art of the Tibetan Plateau Forum—Pāla Art and its Influence in China, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China, May 26–27.
Khokhlov, Yury. 2022. In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774): Southern Indian Artistic Mode in Tang China and its Transmission
to Tibet. In The Creative South: Buddhist and Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime Asia . Edited by Andrea Acri and Peter D. Sharrock.
Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, vol. 1, pp. 64–126.
Kossak, Steven M. 2007. Do Jewelleries Provide Chronological Clues: A Preliminary Study of Wrathful Deities in Early Tibetan
Tangkas. In Buddhist Art: Form & Meaning . Edited by P. Pal. New Delhi: Marg, pp. 84–102.
Kuhn, Dieter, ed. 2012. Chinese Silks . New Haven and London: Yale University Press. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline. 2007. Collecting Javanese Antiquities, The appropriation of a newly discovered Hindu‑Buddhist civil‑
isation. In Colonial Collections Revisited . Edited by Peter Ter Keurs. Leiden: CNWS Publications, pp. 71–115.
Ma, Zhouyang. 2023. An Inner Asia Buddhist Revolution: The Rise of Tibetan Buddhism in the Tangut Xia State. Ph.D. dissertation,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.

--- [Page 151] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 84 26 of 26
Meinert, Carmen. 2021. Production of Tantric Buddhist Texts in the Tangut Empire (11th to 13th c.): Insights from Reading Kharakhoto
Manuscript ϕ249 +ϕ327 Jingang haimu xiuxi yi [The Ritual of the Yogic Practice of Vajravārāhī] in Comparison with Other
Tantric Ritual Texts. Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 44: 441–84.
Miksic, John. 2013. Singapore and the Silk Road of the Sea 1300–1800 . Singapore: NUS Press.
Miksic, John, and Geok Yuan Goh. 2016. Ancient Southeast Asia . London: Routledge.
Mukherjee, Rila. 2019. The Indian Ocean World of Srivijaya. In Cross‑Cultural Networking in the Eastern Indian Ocean Realm, c. 100–
1800 . Edited by Kenneth R. Hall, Suchandra Ghosh, Kaushik Gangopadhyay and Rila Mukherjee. New Delhi: Primus Books,
pp. 170–98.
Murphey, Rhoads. 1999. A History of Asia . London: Longman.
O’Brien, Kate. 2016. The Tale of Sudhana and Manohara on Candi Jago: An Interpretation of a Series of Narrative Bas‑Reliefs on
a 13th‑century East Javanese Monument. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia, Networks of Masters, Texts and Icons .
Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing, pp. 275–323.
Okada, Amina. 1995. Ajanta . New Delhi: Brijbasi.
Polak, Jaap. 2024. Ancient Indonesian Gold: Of the Central and East Javanese Periods 750–1550 . Leiden: C, Zwartenkot Art Books.
Pullen, Lesley S. 2019. Worn Textiles of Singhasari. Aziatische Kunst 49: 18–27.
Pullen, Lesley S. 2020. Prajnaparamita in the thirteenth century Java and Sumatra: Two sculptures disconnected by textile designs.
Paper presented at the EurASEAA14, Dublin, Ireland, September 18–21.
Pullen, Lesley S. 2021a. Patterned Splendour: Textiles Presented on Javanese Metal and Stone Sculptures Eight to the Fifteenth Century . Sin‑
gapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Pullen, Lesley S. 2021b. Re‑Interpretation of Manjusri in Central and East Java. Humaniora 33: 157–68. [ CrossRef ]
Raspopova, Valentiina I. 2006. Textile Representation in Sogdia Murals. In Central Asian Textiles and Their Contexts in the Early Middle
Ages . Edited by Regula Schorta. Riggisberg: Abbeg‑Stiftung, pp. 61–75.
Reichle, Natasha. 2007. Violence and Serenity, late Buddhist Sculpture from Indonesia . Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press.
Schoterman, Jan. A. 2016. Traces of Indonesian Influences in Tibet. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Network of Masters,
Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 113–23.
Takeuchi, Tsuguhito, and Maho Iuchi. 2016. Varieties of Tibetan Texts from Khara‑khoto and Etsin‑gol: An Introductory Remark.
InTibetan Manuscript and Xylograph Traditions: The Written Word and Its Media within the Tibetan Culture Sphere . Edited by Orna
Almogi. Hamburg: Department of Indian and Tibetan Studies, Universität Hamburg, pp. 321–46.
Untracht, Opi. 1997. Traditional Jewellery of India . London: Thames and Hudson.
von Schroeder, Ulrich. 2008. 108 Buddhist Statues in Tibet: Evolution of Tibetan Sculptures . Chichago: Serindia Publications.
Wade, Geoff, and Li Tana, eds. 2012. Anthony Reid and The Study of the Southeast Asian Past . Singapore: ISEAS.
Watt, James C., ed. 2010. The World of Khubilai Khan: Chinese Art in the Yuan Dynasty . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Wisseman Christie, Jan. 1999. Asian Sea Trade between the Tenth and Thirteenth Centuries and its Impact on the States of Java
and Bali. In Archaeology of Seafaring, The Indian Ocean in the Ancient Period . Edited by Himanshu Prabha Ray. Delhi: Pragati
Publications, pp. 221–69.
Zhu, Tianshu. 2023. Lute, Sword, Snake, and Parasol—The Formation of the Standard Iconography of the Four Heavenly Kings in Chi‑
nese Buddhist Art. Religions 14: 798. Available online: https://www.mdpi.com/2077‑1444/14/6/798 (accessed on 1 January 2025).
[CrossRef ]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual au‑
thor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

--- [Page 152] ---
Academic Editor: Todd Lewis
Received: 4 November 2024
Revised: 10 January 2025
Accepted: 13 January 2025
Published: 5 February 2025
Citation: Suebsantiwongse, Saran.
2025. A Network of Compassion: The
Transmission and Development of the
Cult and Iconography of
Cakravarticintāman
˙i Avalokiteśvara
Across the Maritime Silk Routes.
Religions 16: 178. https://doi.org/
10.3390/rel16020178
Copyright: © 2025 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).Article
A Network of Compassion: The Transmission and
Development of the Cult and Iconography of
Cakravarticintāman˙i Avalokiteśvara Across the
Maritime Silk Routes
Saran Suebsantiwongse
Leiden Institute for Area Studies, Leiden University, 2311 EZ Leiden, The Netherlands;
s.suebsantiwongse@leidenuniv.nl or parlinito@hotmail.com
Abstract: This article examines the cult surrounding an esoteric form of Avalokiteśvara,
known by different names across regions, such as Cakravarticintāman
˙i, Cintāman
˙icakra,
Ruyilun Guanyin, and Nyoirin Kannon. Through an analysis of Sanskrit, Chinese, and
Japanese textual sources, the study explores the complex transmission of this cult from
India to Southeast Asia and East Asia via the Maritime Silk Routes. As the cult spread,
variations in its iconography emerged in different regions. The study highlights how, in
India, the bodhisattva was depicted with specific attributes, which were reinterpreted in
Southeast Asia. In China and Japan, further modifications appeared, with Chinese repre‑
sentations emphasising the six‑armed form that later influenced and matured in Japanese
iconography. Additionally, the texts reveal that Cintāman
˙icakra was introduced to royal
courts as part of state rituals to ensure the acquisition and preservation of sovereignty. This
association with kingship and state protection contributed to the deity’s prominence across
the region. The culmination of this transmission occurred in Japan, where Cintāman
˙icakra
remains a revered deity to this day. The article concludes that from the 7th to 9th centuries,
Buddhist monks were instrumental in spreading the cult of Cakravarticintāman
˙i. As a re‑
sult, the iconography evolved in response to regional artistic traditions, creating distinct
yet interconnected forms of the bodhisattva across the Maritime Silk Routes.
Keywords: Avalokiteśvara; Cakravarticintāman
˙i; Cintāman
˙icakra; Ruyilun Guanyin;
Nyoirin Kannon; Buddhist art; Maritime Silk Routes
1. Introduction
My first encounter with Cakravarticintāman
˙i Avalokiteśvara occurred during a re‑
search trip to Candi Mendut in Java, where a group of philologists and art historians de‑
bated the identity of a two‑armed stone statue of Avalokiteśvara Padmapān
˙i, seated to
the right of Mahāvairocana at the centre. Some speculated that this figure could repre‑
sent Cakravarticintāman
˙i Avalokiteśvara, based on the biography of Bianhong (ca. late
8th century), a Javanese monk and the author of a coronation manual with a possible link
to Candi Mendut and who, after travelling to China for a series of spiritual empowerments,
was said to have attained the supernatural powers of Cakravarticintāman
˙i. However, the
art historians in the group were sceptical, pointing out that the statue lacked key icono‑
graphic features: if the figure was indeed Cakravarticintāman
˙i, where was the cintāman
˙i?
The bodhisattva’s left hand held a lotus, and the open right palm was empty. This led me
to explore further examples of Avalokiteśvara imagery, scrutinising bronzes and paintings
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16020178

--- [Page 153] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 2 of 32
where the cintāman
˙iwas present. However, I found that very few representations were con‑
clusively identified as Cakravarticintāman
˙i. While several figures held the cintāman
˙i, few
also held the cakra , leaving art historians hesitant to attribute them to this specific form of
Avalokiteśvara without these defining attributes. The notable exception is Japan, where
the deity is known as Cintāman
˙icakra and often possesses both attributes.
Additionally, I have observed that studies of esoteric forms of Avalokiteśvaras
have often been divided by discipline and region, and research tends to focus on iso‑
lated geographical areas, seldom exploring the transmission of rituals and iconogra‑
phy across regions. My aim, therefore, is to bridge this gap by tracing the journey of
Cakravarticintāman
˙i from India through Southeast Asia, China, and Japan via the Mar‑
itime Silk Routes,1offering a comprehensive view of the deity’s spread and development
across these cultural landscapes.
Although rooted in art historical analysis, this study extends beyond surveying artis‑
tic styles. It seeks to highlight the dynamic relationship between images and texts, em‑
phasising regional variations in attributes, the number of arms, gestures, and other icono‑
graphic features as these traditions migrated and evolved across different regions. Further‑
more, it underscores the necessity of adopting a multidisciplinary approach—integrating
textual, ritual, and art historical studies—to fully understand the esoteric and complex
imagery of figures such as this bodhisattva.
By examining the material culture and textual evidence connected to various monks
such as Bodhiruci (ca. 6th century CE), Vajrabodhi (671–741 CE), Amoghavajra (705–744
CE), Huiguo (746–805 CE), Bianhong, and Kūkai (774–835 CE), it becomes evident that be‑
tween the 8th and 9th centuries, a cult of an esoteric form of a bodhisattva bearing a wish‑
fulfilling gem, known in Sanskrit as the cintāman
˙i, emerged roughly around the same time
in the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia, and East Asia. In these regions, this form of
Avalokiteśvara is referred to by different names: Cakravarticintāman
˙i in India and South‑
east Asia, Cintāman
˙icakra in both China and Japan, Ruyilun Guanyin in China, and Ny‑
oirin Kannon in Japan. As evident in other patterns of Buddhist transmission across Asia,
the dissemination of the texts and iconography of Cakravarticintāman
˙i occurred via both
the overland Silk Roads and the Maritime Silk Routes. However, this study focuses on
the transmission along the Maritime Silk Routes, which were likely the primary pathways
travelled by some of the aforementioned monks. Historical records reveal that these monks
journeyed from India to Southeast Asia, then onward to China, and ultimately to Japan.
As the cult of Cakaravarticintāman
˙i spread, its iconography (see below, Section 3)
underwent regional adaptations. In India, the bodhisattva was depicted with specific at‑
tributes, which were later modified in Southeast Asia, especially in the Malay Archipelago.
By the time the cult reached China, the six‑armed form of Avalokiteśvara had become
prominent, influencing the depiction of the deity, which gradually spread and matured
in Japan ( Chutiwongs 2002 , p. 301). Building on this observation, this study traces the evo‑
lution of the bodhisattva’s iconography across regions, beginning in India and progress‑
ing through Southeast Asia to China, and finally to Japan. It explores how region‑specific
forms emerged, how the iconography transformed as it was transmitted across cultures,
and how these forms are interconnected between regions, drawing cross‑references to high‑
light their relationships. This study further reveals that the Cintāman
˙icakra form of Aval‑
okiteśvara held a significant role in state rituals, particularly in royal courts, where it was
believed to secure sovereignty and ensure state protection. This association enhanced the
Cakravarticintāman
˙i’s importance in royal ceremonies across Asia, culminating in Japan,
where Cintāman
˙icakra remains a venerated deity today, particularly within the Mikkyō
密教 tradition of the Shingon sect, which incorporates the “Three Mysteries” ( sanmi ,三密 )—
mudrā , mantra, and man
˙d
˙ala—in its practice.

--- [Page 154] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 3 of 32
2. Textual Sources on Cakravarticintāman˙i
The cult and worship of Cakravarticintāman
˙i has been corroborated by the circu‑
lation of various Esoteric2Buddhist texts, originally composed in Sanskrit and spread
across Southeast and East Asia. Based on evidence that the aforesaid monks first trav‑
elled to Southeast Asia before reaching China, texts attributed to or associated with them
were likely transmitted to Southeast Asia and then to China during the Tang dynasty by
these monks and their disciples, eventually making their way to Japan. However, other
sets of texts might have travelled the opposite route: from India via the overland Silk
Roads to China, Korea, and Japan. Among these texts, the Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra —
translated into Chinese as Guanzizai ruyilun pusa yujia fayao 觀自在如意輪菩薩瑜伽法要 (T.
1087) and was brought to Japan by Kūkai and became known as Kanjizai nyoirin bosatsu yuga
hōyō觀自在如意輪菩薩瑜伽法 , which substantiates the iconographical connection between
India and Southeast Asia’s Cakravarticintāman
˙i, China’s Ruyilun Guanyin, and Japan’s
Cintāman
˙icakra and Nyoirin Kannon as manifestations of the same deity.3
Almost nothing is known about the worship and practices of Cakaravarticintāman
˙i
in India due to the lack of textual and inscriptional evidence. In fact, most of the texts in
the original Sanskrit have been lost and only their translations in Chinese, which were also
brought to Japan survive. Claudine Bautze‑Picron (2004 , p. 238) argues that the earliest
textual source on Cakravarticintāman
˙i/Cintāman
˙icakra is a sūtra translated by the Indian
monk Nan‑ti in 420 CE, which describes the bodhisattva as possessing the ability to liber‑
ate beings from suffering in the six realms of Devas, humans, animals, Asuras, and Pretas.
Similarly, the Amitāyurdhyāna sūtra, translated by Kālayaśas (383–442 CE), another Indian
(or Central Asian) monk who was one of the earlier translators of texts into Chinese, high‑
lights how the bodhisattva emits light from his body to bless beings across the six realms. In
Southeast Asia, the only textual information on Cakravarticintāman
˙i can be gleaned from
the biography of Bianhong, a Javanese monk4who travelled to China to be initiated into
the Tantric system of Vairocanābhisambhodi under Huiguo ( Sinclair 2016 , p. 33). Written
by Kūkai (also known by his Japanese name Kōbō‑daishi), another well‑known disciple of
Huiguo and the founder of the Shingon sect, the biography reveals that Bianhong attained
yogic powers through the worship ( sādhana ) of Cakravarticintāman
˙i before his journey to
China (ibid., p. 31; Sundberg and Giebel 2011 , p. 3).
In China, based on a substantial corpus of texts, the cult of Cakravarticintāman
˙i
appears to have been more widespread. The principal text concerning the worship of
Cakravarticintāman
˙i is the Padmacintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra , which exists in several translations.
This repertoire of texts forms part of the Taishō Tripit
˙aka大正新脩大藏經 , or the Taishō
Canon , which contains several texts that provide detailed instructions for the worship of
the deity. The translations, which date back to the late 7th and early 8th centuries, are
attributed to Bodhiruci, Vajrabodhi, and Amoghavajra ( Fremerman 2008 , p. 10), confirm‑
ing that worship of Cakravarticintāman
˙i was practised during this time. Volume 20 of
theTaishō lists twelve texts [no. 1080–1091] that describe homa rituals, talismans, and vi‑
sualisations of the deity, depicted either with two or six arms. For example, the Guanzizai
ruyilun pusa yujia fayao (Skt. Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra , T. 20, 1087, attributed to Vajra‑
bodhi) presents the six‑armed form of the deity. Additionally, the Guanshiyin pusa Ruyilun
tuoluoni [jing] bing biexing fa 觀世音菩薩如意輪陀羅尼 [經]並別行法 [Avalokiteśvara Bod‑
hisattva Cintāman
˙icakra Dhāran
˙ī with Alternative Methods of Cultivation; T. 20, 1080, at‑
tributed to Dharmagūpta] outlines instructions on creating talismans and performing var‑
ious homa rituals, along with their associated benefits. The Guanzizai pusa ruyilun zhou kefa
觀自在菩薩如意輪咒課法 [Method of Using the Spell of Cintāman
˙icakra‑Avalokiteśvara; T.
46, author unknown] further elaborates on the usage of Cakravarticintāman
˙i’s spell, while
theFoshuo dalun jin’gang zongchi tuoluoni fa 佛說大輪金剛摠持陀羅尼法 [Buddha Preaches

--- [Page 155] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 4 of 32
the Method of the Great Wheel Vajra Practice of Dhāran
˙īs], subtitled Guanshiyin ruyilun
wang Monibatuo biexing fa 觀世音如意輪王摩尼跋陀別行法 [Different Method of the Aval‑
okiteśvara Cintāman
˙icakra King Man
˙ibhadra], attributed to Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra,
is partly based on T. 1230 and details the use of spells and talismans of Cakravarticintāman
˙i
(Sørensen 2011 , pp. 41, 58–59). Finally, the Qixing Ruyilun mimi yao jing 七星如意輪祕密
要經 [Scripture on the Secret Essentials of Cintāman
˙icakra and the Great Dipper] (T. 20,
1091, attributed to Amoghavajra) also prescribes the methods of making three talismans.5
It appears that the cult of Cakravarticintāman
˙i in China is particularly associated with
the use of talismans, which became popular during the Tang Dynasty and is closely asso‑
ciated with Amoghavajra. Several Dunhuang manuscripts also support this evidence, such
as the Guanshiyin Ruyilun tuoluoni huaxiang fa bing biexing wen 觀世音如意輪陀羅尼化相法並
別行文 [Method of Avalokiteśvara Cintāman
˙icakra Dhāran
˙ī for Transforming Forms with
the Text of Alternative Practice; P. 2153], which also contains descriptions on talismans
(Sørensen 2011 , p. 192).
Additionally, given the elaborate and expensive nature of these rituals, it is likely
that they were performed by or for bureaucrats and members of the royal family, in line
with the religiopolitical context of the Tang state ( Goble 2016 , p. 127). The association
of Cakravarticintāman
˙i with the coronation ceremonies ( rājyābhis
˙eka) suggests that the de‑
ity’s name, meaning “the Emperor of the Wish‑Fulfilling Gem”, was symbolically linked
to kingship.6
In Japan, the cult of Cintāman
˙icakra reached its zenith of popularity. One of the
earliest texts on this deity, the Cintāman
˙icakradhāran
˙īsūtra , translated from Sanskrit into
Chinese by Bodhiruci in 709 CE, is known in Japanese as the Nyoirin daranikyō (Fowler
2005 , p. 121; Pal 2021 ). Two more texts that specifically outline the visualisation and
rituals of Cakravarticintāman
˙i are the Daihōkō Hakurokukaku Zenjū Himitsu Darani Kyō
大寶廣博樓閣善住祕密陀羅尼經 [Sūtra of the Secret Dhāran
˙ī That Resides Well in the Great
Jewel Pavilion] and the Ichiji Bucchō Rin’oh Kyō 一字佛頂輪王經 [One‑Syllable Buddhos
˙n
˙īs
˙a
Cakravartin‑sūtra], both attributed to Amoghavajra, and are very close in content to the
Cintāman
˙icakradhāran
˙īsūtra .Shinohara (2014 , p. 170) remarks that the former sūtra is cat‑
egorised as a “recitation manual”, used for the general abhis
˙eka(initiation) and the latter
as a “yoga manual”, used as a specific manual of the abhis
˙ekaof a specific deity and many
mantras are taken from the Vajraśekharasūtra . Both manuals outline the visualisation of
Cintāman
˙icakra with six arms with other common attributes. Later, Kūkai brought back
more texts, collectively known as the Gō shorai mokuroku 御請來目錄 , which included the
Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra/Guanzizai ruyilun pusa yuqie fayao and other texts that pre‑
scribe the rituals and mantras of Cintāman
˙icakra7(Fremerman 2008 , p. 16).
The bodhisattva often appears androgynous or understood more widely as male in
China; in Japan, however, Cintāman
˙icakra is commonly referred to as the “jewel woman”
(yunü ;gyokujo玉女 ).8This is attributed to several monks who reported having dreams
of a goddess promising salvation through love. It is believed that the feminisation of
Cintāman
˙icakra in Japan occurred around the mid‑9th century ( Aptilon 2010 , p. 895). This
interpretation is also reflected in the Kakuzen‑shō 覺禪鈔 , a Shingon ritual compendium
written by the monk Kakuzen (1143–ca. 1213 CE), dated to 1182 CE, which describes
Cintāman
˙icakra as a female deity who grants both liberation and worldly pleasures, as
seen in the following passage:
“The mind of wrong views arises, and one is overcome by lustful desires, [so that
one] must fall and descend into [this] world. Nyoirin herself becomes the jewel
woman of sovereign. [She] becomes his beloved wife or concubine, and they
fall in love. For a lifetime [she] adores [him] with blessings and honour, and
causes boundless good things to be accomplished. [She] causes him to attain

--- [Page 156] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 5 of 32
Buddhahood in the Western Pure Land paradise”. (DNBZ 47, 181b–182a; See
Fremerman 2008 , p. 2)
In addition to such benefits, the Kakuzen‑shō also provides instructions on how to con‑
ceive a child and alleviate difficulties during childbirth. This suggests that in Japan, the
cult of Cintāman
˙icakra was practised not only by male elites but also by women who had
access to and were able to read the manuals, or were guided by monks. Similar to China
during the Tang Dynasty (618–907 CE), where the bodhisattva is also considered an astral
deity along with Mañjuśrī and Maming ( Sørensen 2011 , p. 234), the worship in Japan is also
linked to the veneration of the stars, specifically the Seven Stars of Ursa Major or the North‑
ern Dipper. Legend holds that these stars guided Kūkai into the mountains, where an
image of Nyoirin was to be enshrined at Kanshinji. This aligns with the content of the Qix‑
ing ruyilun mimi yao jing (T. 20, 1091), which prescribes rituals to enshrine Cintāman
˙icakra
alongside the stars as the main deities ( Fremerman 2008 , p. 103–4).
3. The Iconography of Cakravarticintāman˙i
Various esoteric forms of Avalokiteśvara, including Ārya, Sahasrabhuja‑Sahasranetra,
Ekādaśamukha, Hayagrīva, Cun
˙d
˙ī, Amoghapāśa, and Cakravarticintāman
˙i, originated in
India. These forms spread from India via sea routes to Southeast Asia, as well as overland
routes through the Himalayan regions to China, gaining popularity during the Tang Dy‑
nasty. They are attested in Japan from the 8th century onward ( Gethin 1998 , pp. 268–69).
Only a handful of images of Cakravarticintāman
˙i have been identified in the Indian
subcontinent. While only a few have been identified in Southeast Asia and several more in
China, the largest concentration has been discovered in Japan, where the bodhisattva’s cult
remains active today. However, the identification of certain esoteric forms of Avalokiteś‑
vara, including Cakravarticintāman
˙i, presents significant challenges. One key issue is the
absence of detailed iconography for this form in major Esoteric Buddhist texts, such as the
Sādhanamālā and Nis
˙pan
˙n
˙ayogāvalī , which typically prescribe the forms of deities ( Pal 2021 ;
Bautze‑Picron 2004 , p. 242). Furthermore, as Chandra (1988 , p. 11) points out, the exten‑
sive corpus of textual variants and translations within Esoteric Buddhism further compli‑
cates the identification of the deity’s various forms and modes of worship. Moreover, the
conflation of several Hindu and Buddhist deities under names like Avalokiteśvara, Lokeś‑
vara, or Lokanātha adds another layer of complexity. As a result, Avalokiteśvara is of‑
ten identified by generic descriptions, such as “two‑armed Avalokiteśvara”, “four‑armed
Avalokiteśvara”, or “seated Avalokiteśvara”. A notable exception is the twelve‑armed
Amoghapāśa found in East Java, which can be distinctly identified owing to inscriptions
specifying its name.
Before examining the forms and stylistic representations of Cakravarticintāman
˙i
across various regions, it is essential to first highlight the distinctive features commonly
observed in many of these examples. While the images included in this study exhibit sig‑
nificant variations in the number of arms, mudrā s, and attributes, this article will primarily
focus on the key attributes and defining characteristics of the Cintāman
˙icakra iconogra‑
phy as it developed in Japan, where this form reached its most mature and widespread
expression. These include the mahārājalīlāsana pose, the pensive or contemplative gesture,
where the bodhisattva’s head is slightly tilted usually to the right as if gazing downwards
and seems to rest on one hand, and most importantly, the central attribute—the cintāman
˙i.
Other attributes, however, may vary and will be discussed and compared as needed to pro‑
vide a comprehensive understanding of regional variations and their interconnectedness.
The mahārājalīlāsana , or “royal ease” pose, where the left leg is pendent horizontally
to the body and the right leg is bent vertically, is a variant of the lalitāsana pose (with
the right leg pendent and the left leg bent horizontally) and represents meditative repose,

--- [Page 157] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 6 of 32
equanimity, and aristocracy. In Buddhist art, this posture is mostly seen in the iconogra‑
phy of Avalokiteśvara and Mañjuśrī. It may have been modelled after imported sealings,
plaques, bronzes, and paintings, possibly carried by travelling Buddhist monks and pil‑
grims from South Asia and Southeast Asia, where such āsana is common in the portrayal
of these deities, as seen in India, Sri Lanka, and the Malay Archipelago ( Huang 2022 , p. 8).
According to Pratapaditya Pal(2021 ), the pensive gesture, which he quotes from a
translation of a sūtra by Vajrabodhi (though the specific sūtra is not named),9suggests
that the bodhisattva is contemplating the causes of all suffering. The gesture may derive
from the Sanskrit word cintā , meaning ‘thought’, and therefore, the cintāman
˙iis sometimes
referred as the “thought‑jewel/gem” in art history. This gesture is commonly found in
Gandhāran representations of the Buddha and bodhisattvas from the Swat Valley, partic‑
ularly Maitreya and other figures appearing in the scene of the Great Miracle of Śrāvastī.
The cintāman
˙i—the central attribute of Cakravarticintāman
˙i—usually depicted as an
orb or a pear‑shaped gem, is a symbol of profound significance in many Hindu and Bud‑
dhist myths and philosophies. Generally, it denotes a magical gem capable of fulfilling
any desire for whoever possesses it. In Hinduism, the cintāman
˙iis sometimes linked with
thekaustubha , the celestial gem of Vis
˙n
˙u and a symbol of royal authority, produced during
the churning of the ocean as mentioned in the Mahābhārata and various Purān
˙as (McHugh
2018 ). In Buddhism, besides being a divine object as part of the as
˙t
˙amaFOR PEER REVIEW
The text also prescribes the numbers of recitation of the dhāra ṇī of diﬀerent classes of people: a king should recite 1080 times , 
kṣatriya vaiśya
śūdra
Cintāma ṇ by all members of the society. See Yu (2001, pp. 70
In fact, the etymologies of the deity’s two foremost attributes, the cintāma ṇ cakra cintāma ṇ
aṣṭamaṅgala cakra
important weapon of Vi ṣ ṇ
saptaratna
cakravartin Dīrghāgamasūtra is more speciﬁc, listing a wheel, chariot, precious stones, cons ort, horses, and 
I suspect the sūtra to be the Japanese Cakravarticintāma ṇidhāra ṇīsūtra
Sinclar’s translation quoted in this article, and also because Pal  included some Japanese terminology in his article.
cintāma ṇ ṣitigarbha’s principal attributes, alongside the khakkhara (monastic staﬀ), which, among other 
The Dunhuang manuscript P. 4518 (10), dated to the 10th century,  contains two manuscript paintings featuring a ﬂaming 
cintāma ṇ , ﬂanked by the Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī
the scene in which Mañjuśrī requests the Buddha to preach the par able of the cintāma ṇ
Āryasarvabuddhavi ṣayāvatārajñanālokāla ṅkāranāmamahāyānasūtra Jñanālokāla ṅkārasūtra ). See Chen (2020, 
ed by Yōgen (1075-1159 CE). See Lokesh Chandra (1999), 
scholars propose that Candi Mendut may have functioned as a corona tion temple due to its potential link to Bianhong 
ﬂower garland. Alternatively, these objects could be interpreted as oﬀerings or attributes associated with the celes-
tial beings. Another perspective identiﬁes them as representations of th e Lokapālas, or directional deities, depicted in a 
-
detail, a limitation that became apparent with the advent of photogra phy. Additionally, these drawings may reﬂect the person
ctions of naked deities were often modiﬁed by adding loincloths 
Raﬄes’sketch as a source. While acknowledging the potential inac curacies, this article argues that sketches, 
even with interpretive elements, should not be dismissed entirel y. When key attributes are present, such as those identifying
ﬁgure as a bodh isattva, the depiction provides valuable material for scholarly inve stigation.
katakamudrā
iconography of deities in Japanese and Chinese Buddhism. See Bun ce (2005, p. 108).
mudrā denotes “the king of Dharma” and is formed by open, slightly  cupped palms facing forward, with ﬁngers and 
‘Dabei’ means mercy and refers to Sahasrabhuja Avalokiteśvara, a lso known in Chinese as ‘Dabei Pusa’. See Hamada (2021, p. 
Dabei qinqing Dabeixin Dhāra ṇī
of the attendant deities of Sahasrabhuja. See Hamada (2021, p. 167).
Qianshou jing Taishō
Cintāma ṇicakra and Amoghapāśa are members of the retinue. For example , the annotation of a mantra in line 5 of P.3912, which 
nan wu li ye na ma ā rya ), Amoghavajra identiﬁes this as Cintāma ṇ
bo dhi sa tvā ya suo suo pu sa , indicating Amoghapāśa. Hamada (2021, p. 
Debeixin Dhāra ṇī Qianshou gala and the sap‑
taratna (see notes 2 and 4), the cintāman
˙iis a common attribute in images of bodhisattvas,
especially Avalokiteśvara. The Kāran
˙d
˙avyūhasūtra , a ca. 5th‑century text that praises the
virtues of Avalokiteśvara, describes him as wearing a crown adorned with the cintāman
˙i
in the middle of his matted locks ( jat
˙ārdhamadhye cintāman
˙i mukut
˙adharya ) (Bautze‑Picron
2004 , p. 235). In early Indian art, this concept is visually represented as a round protu‑
berance like a cockade prominently featured in the headdresses of Avalokiteśvara images
from Mathura and Gandhāra, dated from the 3rd or 4th century CE (ibid., p. 235).
In China, the cintāman
˙ialso came to symbolise the Dharma and Dharmakāya (unmani‑
fested body of buddhas and bodhisattvas) during the Tang Dynasty ( Chen 2020 , p. 233) and
the bodhisattva’s limitless blessings and unfailing answer to prayers ( Yu 2001 , p. 12). Be‑
sides images of Avalokiteśvara possessing the cintāman
˙i, depictions of other bodhisattvas
such as Mañjuśrī and Ks
˙itigarbha,10as well as other forms of material culture from the
Tang period, such as paintings of arhats11and religious or state banners, also feature the
cintāman
˙imotif, suggesting that the cult of cintāman
˙iwas widespread. Texts such as the
Bodhisattvagocaropāyavis
˙ayavikurvan
˙anirdeśa and the Daśacakraks
˙itigarbhasūtra , translated by
Bodhiruci and Xuanzang (602–664 CE), respectively, outline that the cintāman
˙ihas eight
virtues: relieving the suffering of sentient beings, curing sickness, preventing harm from
beasts, releasing one from prison, and providing riches, wealth, and other material com‑
forts ( Chen 2020 , p. 235).
In Japan, the cintāman
˙iusually takes the form of a pearl, which can be spherical, oval,
round, or heart‑shaped, and is believed to grant all desires ( Saunders 2018 , p. 154). In
some contexts, the motif represents the Triratna —the Buddha, Dharma, and SaFOR PEER REVIEW
and seems to rest on one hand, and most importantly, the centr al attribute cintāma ṇ
Other attributes
provide a comprehensive understanding of regional variations and their interconnected-
mahārājalīlāsana
lalitāsana
equanimity, and aristocracy. In Buddhist art, this posture i s mostly seen in the iconogra-
phy of Avalokiteśvara and Mañjuśrī. It may have bee n 
uddhist monks and pil-
āsana
According to Pratapaditya Pal (2021), the pensive gesture, wh ich he quotes from a 
translation of a sūtra by Vajrabodhi (though the speciﬁc sūtra  is not named),
that the bodhisattva is contemplating the causes of all suﬀering. The gesture may derive 
cintā cintāma ṇ
-
Gandhāran representations of the Buddha and bodhisattvas from the Swat Valley, partic-
ularly Maitreya and other ﬁgures appearing in the scene of the G reat M iracle of Śrāvastī.
cintāma ṇthe central attribute of Cakravarticintāma ṇ
-shaped gem, is a symbol of profound signiﬁcance in many Hin du and Bud-
dhist myths and philosophies. Generally, it denotes a mag ical gem capable of fulﬁlling 
cintāma ṇ
kaustubha , the celestial gem of Vi ṣ ṇ
Mahābhārata and various Purā ṇ
aṣṭamaṅgala
saptaratna cintāma ṇis a common attribute in images of bodhisatt-
vas, especially Avalokiteśvara. The Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra -
the virtues of Avalokiteśvara, describes him as wearing a crow n adorned with the 
cintāma ṇin the middle of his matted locks ( jaṭārdhamadhye cintāma ṇi muku ṭadharya ) (Bau-
tze-Picron 2004, p. 235). In early Indian art, this concept is v isually represented as a round 
nently featured in the headdresses of Avalokiteśvara 
images from Mathura and Gandhāra, dated from the 3rd or 4th cen tury CE (
In China, the cintāma ṇ the Dharma and Dharmakāya (un-
manifested body of buddhas and bodhisattvas) during the Tan g Dynasty (Chen 2020, p. 
233) and the bodhisattva’s limitless blessings and unfa iling answer to prayers (Yu 2001, p. 
12). Besides images of Avalokiteśvara possessing t cintāma ṇ, depictions of other bodhi-
sattvas such as Mañjuśrī and K ṣ
cintāma ṇ cintāma ṇ
Bodhisattvagocaropāyavi ṣayavikurva ṇanirdeśa Daśacakrak ṣitigarbhasūtra
664 CE), respectively, outline that the cintāma ṇ
beasts, releasing one from prison, and providing riches, wea lth, and other material com-
forts (Chen 2020, p. 235).
cintāma ṇ
-
Triratna  Saṅg and in es-
cintāma ṇ manas
cintāma ṇgha—and
in esoteric doctrine, the cintāman
˙isymbolises the manas , or the sixth sense (ibid, p. 155),
which could correspond to the six arms of the bodhisattva. Moreover, the cintāman
˙imo‑
tif played a pivotal role in the deity’s iconographical transformations, sparking a chain of
new connections with both local and imported Indian deities. This process, which Faure
(1999 ) calls ‘metonymic drift’, eventually linked the cintāman
˙iwith relics of the Buddha.
Kūkai is said to have received the cintāman
˙ifrom a Nāga King and given it to the Japanese
court, where it eventually became a regalia of the legitimation of imperial power ( Faure
1999 , p. 16; 2015 , p. 235; Chen 2020 , p. 236). The possession of the cintāman
˙ior relic
as a sacred, physical object became crucial to legitimising royal authority, beginning with

--- [Page 158] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 7 of 32
the Shirakawa feudal domain (r. 1072–1086). Ono Shingon rituals played a key role in
supporting this legitimacy through a ritual system centred on the deity and the cintāman
˙i.
For example, the Ono monks performed the worship of Cintāman
˙icakra and the object
cintāman
˙inear the ruler’s chamber in the imperial palace for the protection of the nation
(Aptilon 2010 , p. 897). Furthermore, Cintāman
˙icakra assimilated or became associated
with local deities who also possess the cintāman
˙i, such as Seiryō Gongen (the female Nāga
and dragon deities), Benzaiten (Sarasvatī), Kichijōten (Laks
˙mī), and Dakiniten (Ḍākin
˙ī),
the flesh‑eating deity who became central to Shingon imperial ordination ceremonies ( Fre‑
merman 2008 , p. 14 and Aptilon 2010 , p. 895).
The cakra is another significant attribute that occasionally appears in depictions of
Cakravarticintāman
˙i, though, as this study illustrates, it is not always included. The cakra ,
a prominent symbol of authority, epitomises the ideal king or Cakravartin in both Hin‑
duism and Buddhism. It also symbolises the wheel and, by extension, the solar disc. In
Buddhist tradition, the cakra represents the Buddha, who is revered as a descendant of the
solar dynasty and embodies the universal emperor. The Buddha, as the Cakravartin, sets
the wheel of dharma into motion, radiating in all directions. Furthermore, the cakra serves
as an abstract symbol in early Buddhism, signifying the teachings of the Buddha, as evi‑
denced at Bhārhut and Amarāvatī. Saunders (2018 ) notes that the cakra shares an affinity
with the lotus: just as the sun causes the lotus to rise above the water and bloom, the eight
spokes of the cakra correspond to the lotus’s eight petals. These spokes symbolise the eight
cardinal directions, the Noble Eightfold Path, and other related concepts.
Regarding the iconography of the deity as a whole, in the Dictionary of Buddhist Iconog‑
raphy (Chandra 1999 , p. 809), Lokesh Chandra provides a table detailing various forms
of Cakravarticintāman
˙i/Cintāman
˙icakra/Nyoirin Kannon from various countries, mostly
from China and Japan, with two, four, eight, ten, eight, and twelve arms, each associated
with different combinations of attributes. A table (See Chandra 1999 , p. 809) highlighting
different attributes of the deity demonstrates that the cintāman
˙iis not always a required fea‑
ture. For instance, the second example of the two‑armed form depicted in the Zuzō‑shō ,12
only shows the abhayamudrā and varadamudrā , without any additional attributes.
Nevertheless, the most commonly observed form of this bodhisattva today features
six arms, seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose, displaying a pensive gesture, and holding
acakra and a cintāman
˙i, along with the other attributes previously mentioned. This fully
developed form is prominently seen in Japan. The significance of the six arms may sym‑
bolise the six perfections ( s
˙at
˙pāramitānirdeśanakarāya ) (Bautze‑Picron 2004 , p. 235) and the
six realms of existence, as represented in the s
˙ad
˙āks
˙arī‑mahāvidyā mantra: om
˙man
˙i padme
hūm—the principal mantra ( mūlamantra ) of Avalokiteśvara, introduced to China by the
monk Zhiyi (538–592 CE) in the 6th century CE (ibid., p. 238).
4. Indian Subcontinent
Very few depictions of Avalokiteśvara in India have been identified as Cakravarticintā‑
man
˙i, and those that have are still subject to debate. As mentioned earlier, this uncertainty
likely stems from the scarcity of textual and inscriptional evidence. Hence, only a hand‑
ful of Cakravarticintāman
˙i images have been recognised within the Indian subcontinent.
Chandra (1999 , p. 819) lists three examples from India:
1. A terracotta sealing from Nālandā, housed in the Ashutosh Museum of Indian
Art, Calcutta University, and described by Pratapaditya Pal (JISOA 2/1967–1968,
pp. 39–48, pl. XIII). (Figure 1).
2. A Nālandā sealing in the Bharat Kala Bhavan, Benares Hindu University (acc. no.
5250), described by T. K. Biswas in Certain Rare Aspects of Avalokiteśvara in Bharat Kala
Bhavan . (Biswas 1989 , pp. 175–80). (Figure 2).

--- [Page 159] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 8 of 32
3. A stone panel from Kot
˙ilā‑murā in Mainamati (also known as Pat
˙t
˙ikera, now in
Bangladesh), dating to the 10th or 11th century, described by Frederic M. Asher in
The Art of Eastern India (Asher 1980 , p. 112). (Figure 3). tt ā ā
tt
 ā ā
ś
 ṭā ā ṭṭ
 
ā n ̣ ā ā
ā ā
ā n ̣ tt āāīā
ṭā ṭ
ṣ āā
ā āṇ
āṇ āṇīū
tt ā ā
Figure 1. Clay sealing depicting Cakravarticintāman
˙i, Nālandā. Prapatditya Pal(2021 ).
 
ā n ̣ ā ā
ā n ̣
tt
ū ṭā ā
ś āāīā
āāīā
Figure 2. Clay sealing depicting Cakravarticintāman
˙i, Nālandā. T. K. Biswas (1989 ).

--- [Page 160] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 9 of 32
ā n ̣ ā ā
 
ā n ̣
tt
ū ṭā ā
ś āāīā
āāīā
Figure 3. Stone panel depicting four‑armed Cakravarticintāman
˙i, Kotila‑mura, Mainamati. Photog‑
raphy: Abira Bhattacharya.
Figures 1and 2are identical sealings from Nālandā, probably made from the same
mould, identified by Chandra (1999 ) and T. K. Biswas (1989 ) as Cakravarticintāman
˙i. The
six‑armed bodhisattva is seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose on a lotus. His hair is fashioned
in the jat
˙āmakut
˙astyle and he wears only a necklace on his bare torso. His head tilts to
the right side of the body, resting on the upper right hand. The second right hand holds
theaks
˙amālā (rosary), while the third rests on his right knee in the varadamudrā gesture,
possibly holding the cintāman
˙i. Of the three left hands, only one is visible, resting on the
lotus seat, while the other two are either damaged or not clearly formed due to defects
in the mould. Below the lotus, there is an unreadable two‑line inscription. Based on the
style, Pratapaditya Pal(2021 ) suggests that the plaque dates to the 9th century. It is also
noteworthy that Vajrabodhi, to whom the Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra is attributed, was
trained and taught in Nālandā before he travelled to China ( Pal 2021 ).
Figure 3shows a panel carved of soft stone from the stūpa at Kot
˙ilā‑murā in Maina‑
mati (in present day Bangladesh) (See Asher 1980 , p. 63), depicting a profile of a four‑
armed Avalokiteśvara with the left leg bent in the mahārājalīlāsana pose and the right leg
extended, suggesting a variation of the mahārājalīlāsana pose. The deity’s hairdo is in the
jat
˙āmakut
˙astyle, but no image of Amitābha is visible in the hair. The figure’s head tilts to
the left, supported by the raised left hand in the pensive gesture, while the right hand is
held at chest level, possibly holding the cintāman
˙i. Due to the panel’s age, the object and
other attributes in the remaining hands are not discernible, making confirmation difficult.
Figure 4shows an unstudied terracotta sealing at the Santa Barbara Museum of Art.
It is a terracotta, lamp‑shaped sealing dated to the 9th century, depicting a two‑armed
bodhisattva with the jat
˙āmakut
˙ahairstyle, seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose. The right
hand stretches out with an open palm, possibly holding the cintāman
˙i, but it is unclear due
to wear. The ambiguity of this object may lead some to interpret the gesture as varadamudrā .

--- [Page 161] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 10 of 32
The left arm is bent, resting on the head of either a human or an anthropomorphic figure.
The background of the piece shows a foliage motif, likely a lotus, the bodhisattva’s primary
attribute. The museum identifies the figure as Avalokiteśvara. However, this image is
very similar to the Nālandā sealing (Figure 1), dated to the same period and identified by
Pratapaditya Pal(2021 ) and Lokesh Chandra (1999 ) as Cakravarticintāman
˙i. Both figures
are seated in identical poses, with their right hands extending forward in the same manner.
The key difference between the two images is the number of arms.ṭā ṭ ā
āṇ
tt ﬃ
tt
tt
tt ṭā ṭ āāīā
āṇ
ā
tt tt ś
ā ā
ā n ̣
ﬀ
 
tt ś
tz ś
ā
ā n ̣ āṇ
tz
tt ṭā ṭ ā
āāīā
Figure 4. Terracotta sealing showing a two‑armed Avalokiteśvara, 9th century, Santa Barbara Mu‑
seum of Art.
Claudine Bautze‑Picron (2000 ) published an image of a two‑armed Avalokiteśvara
from the Pāla period (Figure 5), which she identifies as possibly representing Cintāman
˙ica‑
kra. This identification is based on the cintāman
˙iheld in the right hand placed on the right
thigh and the cakra depicted in the tree in the background, among other objects, which
Bautze‑Picron interprets as the saptaratna s (seven treasures of the Cakravartin). The bod‑
hisattva, also characterised by a tall jat
˙āmakut
˙ahairstyle with Amitābha at the centre, is
seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose and displays a pensive gesture, touching his left cheek
with the index finger of his left hand. Other significant attributes of the bodhisattva in this
composition include the lotus stem stretching beside the left arm and extending above the
left shoulder, as well as the kaman
˙d
˙aluplaced beside his right knee. Two figures are seen on
the left side of the bodhisattva; these could either be human devotees or the bodhisattva’s
attendants, Hayagrīva and Sudhanakumāra. Gouriswar Bhattacharya (2002 ) suggests that
this image originates from Bodhgayā in Bihar and represents Man
˙ipadmā Avalokiteśvara,
a feminine interpretation of the male bodhisattva, depicted holding the cintāman
˙i.

--- [Page 162] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 11 of 32tt
tt
ṇḍ
tt
tt tt ī ā tt
ā
n ̣ ā ś tt
āṇ
 
tt ś ā
tz
ś
ā n ̣ ś
ā ā ā
ā n ̣
ṇḍ
ṣṇīṣ
āṇ
ś āṇ
Figure 5. Grey stone relief of Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara from Bihar, Pāla Period c. 9th century CE,
Neumann Collection, Switzerland.
5. Southeast Asia
In Java, many images of Avalokiteśvara exist, but they are seldom identified by their
specific forms, and no stone and very few bronze sculptures have been definitively recog‑
nised as Cakravarticintāman
˙i. Presently, the colossal statue of Avalokiteśvara seated in
lalitāsana (Figure 6), located to the right of Mahāvairocana, seated in the bhadrāsana pose
at the centre of Candi Mendut, is the only stone sculpture tentatively associated with
Cakravarticintāman
˙i. This link is primarily due to Candi Mendut’s association with Bian‑
hong, a Javanese monk whose work, Ritual Manual for Initiation into the Great Man
˙d
˙ala of the
Us
˙n
˙īs
˙a‑Cakravartin (T. 959) (See Sinclair 2016 , p. 2), may have been connected to the temple,
which was potentially used for state coronation ceremonies.13The identification is further
supported by a faintly visible orb in the right hand, which could represent the cintāman
˙i.
However, there remains scholarly debate over whether the protrusion in Avalokiteśvara’s
right palm is a cintāman
˙ior simply part of the figure’s anatomy.
The Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra (Ch. Guanzizai ruyilun pusa yujia fayao ), which de‑
tails the iconography of Cakravarticintāman
˙i in its visualisation verses, somewhat corre‑
sponds with Raffles’ sketch14(Figure 7) and has been identified as Cakravarticintāman
˙i in
Sinclair’s research ( Sinclair 2016 ). This text may provide crucial insights in clarifying the
identities of these images. The relevant passage is as follows:

--- [Page 163] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 12 of 32
 
ś
āṇ āṇīū
ā n ̣
ﬄ ā n ̣
ﬀ
Figure 6. The stone sculpture of the two‑armed Avalokiteśvara, early 9th century, Candi Mendut.
̄ ̣ tt
ﬄ
ﬄ
tt ﬀ
tt ﬀ
āś
tt ṇḍ tt
āṇ āṇīū
tt ﬀ
ś
ś
ś
āāīā tt
ṭā ṭ ṣ āā
āṇ
Figure 7. Six‑armed Cakravarticintāman
˙i, metal statuette, 7th–9th century, current location un‑
known; drawing in Raffles (1817 , II, pp. 56–57, third page of plates).

--- [Page 164] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 13 of 32
“The first [right] hand is pensive due to [his] sympathising [with] beings. The
second holds a wishing gem, which can fulfil desires. The third holds a rosary,
as though lifting out from the suffering of rebirth. The left [hand] holds down
the radiant mountain, succeeding in not upturning [it]. The second holds a lotus,
which can purify sinful dharmas. The third holds a wheel, which can circulate
the unsurpassed dharma” (T. 20, 1087.213b17, 20–25). (See Sinclair 2016 , p. 32).
However, the passage above and Raffles’ sketch do not align perfectly, as the cakra
is missing from the sketch, and other attributes differ from those described in the text. It
is possible that the cakra was originally depicted above the index finger of the upper left
hand, as seen in the bronze image from the Ashmolean Museum (listed next, Figure 8)
and Japanese depictions of the bodhisattva (listed later), but it has since been broken off.
Alternatively, the cakra may have been present in the lower right hand, similar to its depic‑
tion in a silk painting from Dunhuang held at the Biblioth èque Nationale de France (listed
in the next section). Notably, the sketch already shows an object in the lower right hand,
resembling a pāśa (noose).
 
ā n ̣
ś
ā n ̣
ā n ̣
ā n ̣ ś tt
āāīā ṭā ṭ
ā tt āṇ ﬃ
tt tt tt
āṇ āṇ
tt ś
āṇ
ā
Figure 8. Gilt bronze figure of the six‑armed Cintāman
˙icakra, late 9th‑early 10th century. Ashmolean
Museum, EA2013.80.
Conversely, one attribute—the kaman
˙d
˙alu(water pot) held in the bodhisattva’s lower
left hand—is not described in the passage from the Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra quoted
above. Furthermore, the lotus mentioned in the text is also absent. It is plausible that the
lotus was originally present in the upper left hand, as a long, foliage‑like form is visible
flowing down the upper left arm and extending all the way to the base of the statue. How‑
ever, it is unlikely that the lotus and the cakra would have both appeared together in the
same hand, as the attributes are typically distributed across different hands in such iconog‑
raphy. It is also plausible the cakra may not have been depicted at all from the beginning.
Sofia Sundström ’s (2020 ) thesis on the iconography of Avalokiteśvara includes a chap‑
ter and extensive catalogue on “The Sorrowful Avalokiteśvara” (Catalogue Nos. 85–119).
All thirty‑four bronze depictions of Avalokiteśvara, despite having two, four, or six arms,

--- [Page 165] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 14 of 32
are mostly shown seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose and share key attributes such as the
jat
˙āmakut
˙a,padma (lotus), aks
˙amālā (rosary), pustaka (book), and notably, the cintāman
˙iin
most cases. The overall characteristics of these representations correspond to either In‑
dian or Central Javanese style and align with certain iconographic details found in the
Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra and Raffles’ sketch, which is also featured in Sundström’s
catalogue (Cat. No. 113). However, only two of these images (Cat. Nos. 114 and 115)
portray Avalokiteśvara with six arms.
Sundström’s catalogue includes five bronze examples of two‑armed Avalokiteśvara
(Cat. Nos. 85–89), seated in either lalitāsana ormahārājalīlāsana . In all but one of these im‑
ages, the head rests on the right hand in the pensive pose, and the cintāman
˙iis clearly visi‑
ble in the left hand, either stretched out or held at chest level. For the four‑armed bronzes,
there are twenty‑three examples (Cat. Nos. 90–112), all seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose
on a lotus base. Many of these also feature a prabhāman
˙d
˙ala(mandorla) and a chatra (para‑
sol) (some of which are broken) behind the figure (Cat. Nos. 90, 96–106, 109–110). Most
significantly, each of these examples holds a cintāman
˙iin either the right or left hand at
chest level, with the head resting contemplatively on one hand, usually the right. Other
key attributes include the jat
˙āmakut
˙a(with Amitābha visible in some examples), yajñopavīta ,
and in some cases, a pustaka . These figures are also richly adorned with jewellery such as
bracelets, armlets, anklets, necklaces, and diadems.
There are three bronze images of six‑armed Avalokiteśvara, including the Raffles
sketch, all seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose. The Cat. No. 114 image has three damaged
arms, making it difficult to identify their attributes, but the head is still seen resting on the
upper right hand in the pensive pose. The gilt bronze statue from the Ashmolean Museum
(Cat. No. 115; Figure 8) is the only image Sundström refers to as “Cintāman
˙icakra Aval‑
okiteśvara”, likely due to the clear depiction of both the cintāman
˙iand the cakra held by
the upper left hand. Some features of this image resemble Raffles’ sketch (Cat. No. 113),
apart from the missing cakra , and it is nearly identical to the description of Avalokiteś‑
vara’s iconography in the Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra , except for the kaman
˙d
˙aluheld by
the middle left hand in Raffles’ sketch. Furthermore, the bodhisattva’s outstretched lower
hand holding the cintāman
˙iresonates with the six‑armed images on the clay plaques from
India (Figures 1and 2), where the cintāman
˙iis also held in the outstretched lower right
hand. The differences lie in the representations of the cakra . In the Indian examples, the
cakra is not depicted and the lower left hand is placed on the ground, supporting the body.
At the same time, the Ashmolean bronze shows the bodhisattva holding an undeterminable
object that could represent other important attributes, such as the aks
˙amālā or the padma , as
described in the Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra .
In the same section of the catalogue, Sundström further lists four baked‑clay sealings
depicting Avalokiteśvara: two examples with two arms and another two examples with
four arms (Cat. 116–119). These originate from Southern Thailand, Bali, and Myanmar.
All four sealings depict the bodhisattva seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose. The first exam‑
ple features two arms—the right hand touching the head with the pensive gesture, and the
left hand supporting the body on the floor. The remaining examples, with four arms, dis‑
play varied hand positions similar to the bronze figures mentioned earlier. The cintāman
˙i
is not clearly visible due to the nature of the clay objects, but it is either resting on an out‑
stretched palm or held at chest level. These sealings closely resemble those from India,
with the outstretched lower left hand possibly holding the cintāman
˙i, suggesting a shared
iconographic tradition and the transmission of Avalokiteśvara’s imagery across regions,
facilitated by the portability of such artefacts.

--- [Page 166] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 15 of 32
6. China
In China, countless images of Avalokiteśvara exist, both standing and seated, yet in
museums and digital resources, few are identified as Cintāman
˙icakra, or by the Chinese
name, Ruyilun Guanyin. It is said that the caves at Dunhuang contain thirty‑nine images
of Cintāman
˙icakra in total, second only to images of Sahasrabhuja, which are forty in num‑
ber ( Yu 2001 , p. 84). The earliest known image from Dunhuang may be the clay figures
from niches in Mogao Caves 148 and 384, dated to 776 CE, but unfortunately, many of
these images are now missing. Closest to these examples is probably the silk painting from
Dunhuang housed in the British Museum, dated to the 9th century CE (Figure 9), labelled
“Cintāman
˙icakra Avalokiteśvara”. This painting depicts a six‑armed bodhisattva seated in
themahārājalīlāsana pose with hair styled in a jat
˙āmakut
˙awith an image of Amitābha, along‑
side other significant attributes such as the cintāman
˙iand cakra , affirming the bodhisattva’s
identity. Although the six‑armed bodhisattva’s attributes are challenging to discern due
to its age, it is obvious that the left hand, held at chest level, is supporting an object. In the
light of the analysis of the bronzes from Java discussed above as well as the bronze statue
from Sotheby’s (listed next, Figure 10), this object is most likely the cintāman
˙i. Among
various possible reasons, one compelling argument is that the cintāman
˙iis the most com‑
mon attribute of Avalokiteśvara, typically held at chest level. The placement of the cakra
is not easily identifiable in the image from the British Museum. However, by comparing
the British Museum image with another silk painting from Dunhuang, housed in the Bib‑
liothèque Nationale de France (Figure 10) and dated to the same period, we observe that
the flaming cintāman
˙iis held in the right hand at chest level, while the cakra is positioned in
the lower right hand. This suggests that in the statue from Sotheby’s, the cakra was possibly
held in the lower right hand, which is depicted in katakamudrā ,15a gesture indicating the
act of holding an object. Notably, in the Dunhuang painting, the cakra in the lower right
hand is rendered with a transparent quality, emphasising its celestial divine nature.
 
ā n ̣
ś
tt
āāīā
tt ṭā ṭ ā
āṇ
ﬀ
ﬄ
ā ā
āṇ tt ﬄ
ﬀ
ṣ āā ṇḍ
tt
ō
Figure 9. Silk painting of the six‑armed Cintāman
˙icakra from Dunhuang, 9th century, British Mu‑
seum, 1919.0101.0.10.

--- [Page 167] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 16 of 32
 
ā n ̣
ā n ̣
Figure 10. Silk painting of the six‑armed Cintāman
˙icakra from Dunhuang, 9th century, Biblioth èque
Nationale de France.
Sotheby’s listed a gilt‑bronze image of a six‑armed Avalokiteśvara (Figure 11), dated
to the late Tang dynasty, which was sold in 2019. In this piece, the bodhisattva, with
clear Chinese facial and costume features, is seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose on a lotus
pedestal, displaying typical attributes, such as the jat
˙āmakut
˙ahairstyle with Amitābha at
the centre. The head rests on the upper right hand in the pensive gesture, and the cintāman
˙i
is visibly held in the right hand near the chest. However, the cakra , which was probably
held in one of the hands, has been broken off. At first glance, the overall iconography of
this bronze closely resembles Raffles’ sketch and the Javanese bronze in the Ashmolean
Museum, particularly in the āsana , with the number of arms, the mudrās , and the presence
of the cintāman
˙i. However, upon closer examination, certain attributes depicted in Raf‑
fles’ sketch are either arranged in different hands or are absent altogether—namely, the
aks
˙amālā in the upper right hand and the kaman
˙d
˙aluin the lower left hand. Moreover, the
bodhisattva holds a lotus stalk in the middle left hand, which resembles the Japanese im‑
ages from the Murōji Temple and Kanshinji Temple (listed in the next section), suggesting
a possible connection.
Another depiction is a wall painting (tempera on clay) at the Nelson‑Atkins Museum
of Art (Figure 12), titled “Ruyilun Guanyin (Cintāman
˙icakra) Bodhisattva Seated on the
Lotus Throne”, dated between 951 and 953 CE from the Cisheng Monastery in Henan
Province. The two‑armed bodhisattva is depicted in the padmāsana pose on a lotus. The hair
is tied in the jat
˙āmakut
˙astyle with Amitābha at the centre. Although some damage obscures
the attributes in the hands, they appear to be positioned together in either the dharmacakra‑
mudrā or its variation, the dharmarājamudrā16, without any visible attributes. Instead, the
cakra , one of the main attributes, may be symbolically represented by the dharmacakramudrā
itself, which signifies the Buddha’s preaching and the setting of the wheel of dharma into
motion ( Bunce 2005 , p. 58). Furthermore, the cintāman
˙ican be interpreted as embodying
the Dharmakāya body of the bodhisattva, as discussed earlier in the previous section.

--- [Page 168] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 17 of 32ā n ̣
ā n ̣
Figure 11. Gilt bronze figure of the six‑armed Cintāman
˙icakra, late 9th–early 10th century. Sotheby’s
auction, sold in 2019.
 
ā n ̣
ā n ̣ tt
tt ā
ṭā ṭ ā
tt
ā ā ā tt
tt
ā tt
āṇ
ā tt
ā n ̣
ān ̣ī
聖觀自在菩薩千轉滅罪陀羅尼 āṇī tt
ś
tt
īāṣ tt ā ī
ān ̣ī ﬀ
tt 救產難陀羅尼
ān ̣ī
āṇ tt
Figure 12. Painting of the two‑armed Ruyilun/Cintāman
˙icakra, ca. late 9th–early 10th century,
Nelson‑Atkins Museum of Art, 52‑6.
A similar image to the Nelson‑Atkins’ two‑armed Cintāman
˙icakra is found in printed
dhāran
˙īs from Dunhuang (Figure 13), called Shengguan zizai pusa qianzuan miezui tuoluoni
聖觀自在菩薩千轉滅罪陀羅尼 (Dhāran
˙ī of a Thousand Turns of the Saintly Bodhisattva Aval‑

--- [Page 169] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 18 of 32
okiteśvara Who Expiates all Crimes ), which were used as talismans. There are thirty copies of
these, measuring 14 ×17 centimetres, printed on a single sheet of paper. The two‑armed
bodhisattva is depicted at the centre with the hands together in the same manner as in the
Nelson‑Atkins painting. The figure is surrounded by Sanskrit mantras, including bījāks
˙aras
(seed syllables) written in Nāgarī script. There is also a Chinese explanation to the left of
the dhāran
˙ī, which states that for the talisman to be effective, it should be cut (into sepa‑
rate sheets), rolled up, and carried on the body ( Li and Ma 2017 , p. 340). Additionally, a
handwritten Chinese title at the top reads Jiuchannan tuoluoni 救產難陀羅尼 [Dhāran
˙ī for
Delivery from Childbirth Obstacles], confirming that it is a talisman for the safe delivery of
children. Although Li and Ma (2017 ) do not identify the talisman image as Cintāman
˙icakra ,
the widespread cult of this bodhisattva during the Tang period, as described by Yu(2001 ),
underscores its significance. Yu notes that Cintāman
˙icakra was the second most‑frequently
depicted form of Avalokiteśvara in the material culture of Dunhuang. Furthermore, evi‑
dence suggests that Cintāman
˙icakra was widely worshipped in China and Japan as a deity
associated with safe childbirth. The Nelson‑Atkins painting has also been proposed to
depict Cintāman
˙icakra . Thus, it is plausible to suggest that the bodhisattva images on the
Dunhuang talisman may represent the same bodhisattva or are closely related to the two‑
armed form of Cintāman
˙icakra found in Japan, such as the example discussed in the next
section. This Japanese form is also depicted seated on a similar lotus pedestal and appears
to display the dharmacakramudrā at chest level.āṇ
ś
āṇ
āṇ
tt tt
āṇ
ā
ā n ̣
ā ā
ā ā tt
ān ̣ī ā ā ā āāī
ān ̣ī
ā āā
ṣ ā ī ā ā ā āāī
ā ā
ā n ̣ ān ̣ī
tt ān ̣ī ā n ̣
 
āṇī tt ś
ś
ā n ̣
tt
ś
tt āāīā āṇ
Figure 13. Printed Dhāran
˙ī of a Thousand Turns of the Saintly Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara Who Expiates
all Crimes from Dunhuang depicting two‑armed Avalokiteśvara, ca. late 9th–early 10th century, Bib‑
liothèque Nationale de France.
The production of talismanic devices for various purposes, particularly for protec‑
tion during pregnancy, as exemplified by the Dunhuang Cintāman
˙icakra talismans, was
also significant in the cult of Mahāpratisarā in Java. Cruijsen et al. (2014 ) identify
Mahāpratisarā as a “textual deity”, with her mantras and attributes—such as protection
and blessings—elaborated in the Sanskrit dhāran
˙īMahāpratisarāmahāvidyārājñī , dated to
the first half of the 7th century CE. While this dhāran
˙ī provides instructions for crafting
amulets adorned with specific symbols, it does not detail her iconography. Over time,

--- [Page 170] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 19 of 32
these symbols became central to her depiction, as outlined in texts such as the Sādhanamālā
and Nis
˙pannayogāvalī . A mantra from the Mahāpratisarāmahāvidyārājñī is inscribed on the
back of a bronze statue from Java, now preserved in the Museum für Asiatische Kunst,
confirming its association with Mahāpratisarā. This suggests that the statue’s creation
likely relied on at least two textual sources. Similarly, this evidence raises the possibility
that Cintāman
˙icakra may have also originated as a dhāran
˙ī deity, as descriptions of bod‑
hisattvas are frequently recorded in dhāran
˙īs as previously described. Cintāman
˙icakra’s
visual representations, too, were also likely drawn upon diverse textual traditions.
In her 2021 study, Tamami Hamada identified Cintāman
˙icakra in two paintings from
Dunhuang among the retinue of deities attending Sahasrabhuja‑Sahasranetra (Thousand‑
armed) Avalokiteśvara. These paintings, from Mogao Cave 17 and dated to the Tang dy‑
nasty, show the bodhisattva in the mahārājalīlāsana pose with four arms: the cintāman
˙iheld
at the chest in the lower left hand and the cakra suspended on the index finger of the upper
left hand. Another image of Cakravarticintāman
˙i appears in the same type of painting in
theDunhuang manuscript P. 3352, now at the Musée Guimet and dated to the 10th century
CE. Though the image is not currently accessible, Hamada states that the bodhisattva is
similarly positioned to the upper left of Sahasrabhuja. The same depiction can be found
on the north wall of the main enclosure of Yulin Cave 36 and in a banner painting (MG
17659; Figure 14) featuring a donor at the bottom, recovered from Mogao Cave 17. It is sig‑
nificant that Cakravarticintāman
˙i appears on the opposite side of Amoghapāśa, suggesting
that both are the attendant bodhisattvas of Sahasrabhuja Avalokiteśvara.ā n ̣
tt
tt
ā n ̣ āś
tt tt ś
ś
ś
āṇī
千手千眼觀世音菩薩廣大圓満無礙大悲心
陀羅尼經
īṇṭ ū
ś
tt
ﬀ
āṇī
ā ā h ̣
āṇī
ā n ̣ āś
Figure 14. A silk painting of Thousand‑Armed Avalokiteśvara (Sahasrabhuja) of the ‘Dabei Gather‑
ing’ from Dunhuang, ca. 10th century CE, MG 17659.
The depiction of Sahasrabhuja Avalokiteśvara, along with the retinue of deities, has its
source in the Dabeixin Dhāran
˙ī, which is a portion of the Qianshou Qianyan Guanshiyin Pusa
guangda yuanman wuai dabeixin tuoloni jing 千手千眼觀世音菩薩廣大圓満無礙大悲心陀羅尼
經(hereafter Qianshou jing ), a part of the Dunhuang manuscripts P. 3352,17and also the
Nīlakan
˙t
˙hasūtra .18The chanting of this scripture in praise of Sahasrabhuja Avalokiteśvara

--- [Page 171] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 20 of 32
occurs during a gathering called the ‘Dabei Gathering’.19Notably, the painting at the
Guimet contains inscriptions at the back, listing the names of the attendant deities sum‑
moned to offer protection and assistance. Many of these deities are also referenced in the
aforesaid dhāran
˙ī, which recounts how Sahasrabhuja sends ‘benevolent spirits, the Nāga
Kings and Guhyapāda Vajrah
˙’ and a plethora of other deities to safeguard those who
gather for the chant of the Dabeixin Dhāran
˙ī, which was preceded by a litany invoking
these deities.20However, Cintāman
˙icakra and Amoghapāśa are not mentioned in the list
(Hamada 2021 , p. 164).21
7. Japan
The cult of Cakravarticintāman
˙i, known in Japan as Cintāman
˙icakra and Nyoirin Kan‑
non, remains both prevalent and thriving today. He is one of the most popular deities in a
group of six Kannons worshipped in Japan. It is generally believed that Kūkai, the founder
of the Shingon sect, who went to China in 804 CE to study with Huiguo in Chang’an, was
instrumental in popularising the deity’s cult by circulating additional texts and establish‑
ing images. Thus, most scholars, including Dorothy Wong (2008 ), propose that the cult of
Cintāman
˙icakra arrived in Japan only in the 9th century CE. However, as noted earlier, tex‑
tual evidence suggests that the cult might have existed in Japan prior to Kūkai’s return. It
is also believed that Kūkai, upon his return, brought back many artefacts, including paint‑
ings and sūtras, some of which are now national treasures of Japan, preserved at the Tōji
Temple in Kyoto ( Pal 2021 ). Consequently, the worship and images of Cintāman
˙icakra are
closely associated with Shingon‑affiliated temples, particularly the Sanbō‑in, Kajūji, and
Saidaiji branches ( Faure 2015 , p. 235).
Images of Cintāman
˙icakra in Japan are widespread and come in various sizes and
materials, such as bronze, wood, and paintings. The iconography often includes both the
cintāman
˙i(wish‑fulfilling jewel) and the cakra (wheel). During the Kamakura period (1185–
1333 CE), at least six variations of Cintāman
˙icakra were documented, namely Shō Kannon
(Ārya Avalokiteśvara), Senu Kannon (Sahasrabhuja Avalokiteśvara), Batō Kannon (Haya‑
grīva Avalokiteśvara), Jūchimen Kannon (Ekādaśamukha Avalokiteśvara), Juntei Kannon
(Cun
˙d
˙ī Avalokiteśvara), Fukūkenjaku Kannon (Amoghapāśa Avalokiteśvara), and Nyoirin
Kannon (Cintāman
˙icakra Avalokiteśvara) ( Fowler 2016 , pp. 17–28). These include depic‑
tions of the deity seated in mahārājalīlāsana ,lalitāsana , and padmāsana poses, or standing on
a lotus pedestal or the back of a dwarfish figure. The deity is shown with two, six, eight,
or twelve arms and depicted either alone or with other deities in man
˙d
˙alas ( Pal 2021 ).
The Ishiyamadera Temple arguably houses some of the oldest wooden statues of
Cintāman
˙icakra in Japan, as records show that the worship of the deity, referred to ex‑
clusively as Nyoirin Kannon, has been practised there since the 8th century CE. Most of
these images, dated to the 9th century CE, have two arms and represent the earlier form of
the bodhisattva ( Fowler 2005 , p. 122; 2016 , p. 28). Similarly, Pal(2021 ) observes that most
restored images at Ishiyamadera, which was destroyed by fire in 1048 CE, also possess
two arms: the left hand holds a lotus, while the right hand displays the vyākhyān
˙amudrā
(also known as vitarkamudrā or the “teaching gesture”). These images likely predate the ar‑
rival of the Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra or its Chinese translation, the Guanzizai ruyilun
pusa yujia fayao , which was later translated into Japanese, as previously mentioned. The
main image of the bodhisattva enshrined at Ishiyamadera is said to have replaced the orig‑
inal, which was also destroyed in the fire. This new image is a secret image ( hibutsu秘仏 ),
usually displayed to the public only once every thirty‑three years ( Fowler 2005 , p. 122).
The Metropolitan Museum of Art has a two‑armed wooden image labelled as “Ny‑
oirin Kannon/Cintāman
˙icakra” (Figure 15) in its collection, which may be one of the re‑
stored images mentioned by Pal(2021 ). The bodhisattva is seated in the lalitāsana pose

--- [Page 172] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 21 of 32
on Mount Potalaka, surrounded by a mandorla, with the right hand showing the ab‑
hayamudrā and the left hand showing the varadamudrā . The hairstyle does not feature
the typical jat
˙āmakut
˙awith an image of Amitābha at the centre, as seen in most exam‑
ples from India, Southeast Asia, and China. Instead, it appears that the bodhisattva
is wearing a kirītamakut
˙a, a canonical headdress typically associated with Vis
˙n
˙u. Since
the two‑armed form is an earlier representation of the bodhisattva, it is plausible that
this iconography follows the description in the Nyoirin daranikyō 如意輪陀羅尼経 (Skt.
Cintāman
˙icakradhāran
˙īsūtra ), one of the earliest texts describing the deity as emitting a great
light and sitting on a lotus. The “great light” could symbolise the Dharmakāya or the
cintāman
˙iitself.
 
ā n ̣
n ̣ d ̣ ō
ś
n ̣ d ̣
ā
tt
n ̣ d ̣
ā n ̣ Ā ś如意輪聖観音 tt
n ̣ d ̣
ō n ̣ d ̣
ō ō図像抄 ō ō如意輪観音
tt
tt ā
ā ā ā
tt
n ̣ d ̣ tt
ā
如
意輪観音 ā n ̣
ā n ̣
ān ̣ī
ā ā
Figure 15. Wooden sculpture of the two‑armed Cintāman
˙icakra, originally at the Ishiyamadera Tem‑
ple, 10th century, Metropolitan Museum of Art. SL.7.2019.19.2a–f.
Furthermore, a sketch of a man
˙d
˙ala from the Kakuzen‑shō (Figure 16) depicts a two‑
armed Avalokiteśvara at the bindu , suggesting that the deity occupies a central position
within the man
˙d
˙ala. He is seated on a lotus pedestal with a lotus stalk rising above his
left shoulder, and his hands are positioned at chest level. However, the exact mudrā be‑
ing displayed is unclear. The identity of this bodhisattva becomes apparent in another
sketch (Figure 17), which serves as a transcription of the same man
˙d
˙ala, where the name
“Cintāman
˙icakra Ārya Avalokiteśvara” 如意輪聖観音 , is written in Kanji at the centre. This
transcription sketch is part of a man
˙d
˙ala collection (TZ. 99.17‑18) compiled by the Shin‑
gon monk Genshō (1146–1222 CE). Additionally, several other similar man
˙d
˙ala sketches
found in the Zuzō‑shō 図像抄 (TZ.86.67) and Shika‑shō‑zuzō 如意輪観音 (TZ.89.59‑61) also
portray a two‑armed bodhisattva. (See Chandra 1999 , pp. 810–11). These depictions show
the bodhisattva performing a mudrā that closely resembles the dharmacakramudrā or a vari‑
ation thereof, such as the dharmarājamudrā with both hands. Another sketch (TZ.319.40;
Figure 18) depicts a two‑armed bodhisattva seated independently on a lotus pedestal, and
not in a man
˙d
˙ala. The bodhisattva is accompanied by a lotus stalk, and a flaming lotus

--- [Page 173] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 22 of 32
flower with three orb‑like buds is positioned above the left shoulder. The two hands are
depicted possibly performing the dharmacakramudrā . A Kanji inscription accompanying
the image identifies the figure as “Nyoirin Kannon” 如意輪観音 , further confirming the
deity’s identity as Cintāman
˙icakra.ō
āṇ
tt tt
ān ̣ī ʹ
āṇʹ ā n ̣icakra n ̣ d ̣
ō ﬃ tt
tt
 
n ̣ d ̣ ā n ̣ ō
 Figure 16. Man
˙d
˙ala of Two‑Armed Cintāman
˙icakra in the Kakuzen‑shō (TZ. 102.169), 12th century,
from Dictionary of Buddhist Iconography Volume 3 byChandra (1999 , p. 810).
 
ā n ̣ n ̣ d ̣ n ̣ d ̣ ō
ā n ̣ ō ō
ā n ̣
tt
ﬀ
ō
ū
tt
ō
ōō
Figure 17. Transcription of Cintāman
˙icakra Man
˙d
˙ala in Collection of Man
˙d
˙alas by Genshō
(TZ.99.17‑18), 12th century, from Dictionary of Buddhist Iconography Volume 3 byChandra (1999 ,
p. 810).

--- [Page 174] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 23 of 32ā n ̣ n ̣ d ̣ n ̣ d ̣ ō
 
ā n ̣ ō ō
ā n ̣
tt
ﬀ
ō
ū
tt
ō
ōō
Figure 18. Sketch of the Two‑Armed Cintāman
˙icakra in Zuzō‑shō (TZ.319.40), 12th century, from
Dictionary of Buddhist Iconography Volume 3 byChandra (1999 , p. 811).
It is worth noting that the two‑armed images in these sketches somewhat resemble
the two‑armed depiction of Cintāman
˙icakra from China, housed in the Nelson‑Atkins Mu‑
seum and the printed dhāran
˙ī from Dunhuang. As seen in the Nelson‑Atkins image, the
dharmacakramudrā may signify the cakra itself. Saunders (2018 ) observes that this mudrā
known in Japanese as tembōrin‑in embodies the symbol of the Dharmacakra —the Wheel of
Law—which the Buddha set in motion during his first sermon at the Deer Park. More‑
over, the circular bulbs, which resemble flaming lotus buds, could also be interpreted as a
cintāman
˙i, as it is common, especially in Himalayan art and Javanese art, for the primary
attribute of a bodhisattva or deity to be placed on a lotus flower with a stem extending
above the left shoulder. However, this feature is absent in both the Nelson‑Atkins im‑
age and the printed dhāran
˙ī/talisman from Dunhuang. It is also worth noting that the
‘flaming cintāman
˙i’ motifs appear at the periphery of the sketches of the Cintāman
˙icakra
Man
˙d
˙ala (three at the top) and in its transcription (eight at the cardinal directions) from
theKakuzen‑shō described above, further reaffirming their significance as a major attribute
of the bodhisattva.
However, the most common iconography of Cintāman
˙icakra in Japan is the six‑armed
form. These representations are nearly identical to the Chinese six‑armed images, such as
the Sotheby’s bronze, with minor variations in the placement of attributes, sometimes held
in different hands. Two of the oldest six‑armed images in Japan are believed to be located at
Murōji Temple and Kanshinji Temple, both of which are thought to have been consecrated
by Kūkai.22These examples likely served as prototypes for other six‑armed depictions
of the bodhisattva in sculpture and painting. Notably, the iconography of the images at
Murōji (Figure 19) and Kanshinji (Figure 20) aligns with the descriptions in the Kanjizai
nyoirin bosatsu yuga hōyō and the Guanzizai ruyilun pusa yujia fayao , the Japanese and Chinese
translations of the Sanskrit Cakravarticintāmanidhāran
˙īsūtra . The English translations by
Fowler (2005 , p. 121) and Sinclair (2016 , p. 32) are also nearly identical, confirming that the
six‑armed Cintāman
˙icakra images in Japan and the six‑armed Cakravarticintāman
˙i images
in Java, such as Raffles’ sketch and the bronze in the Ashmolean Museum, share the same
textual source. However, these images stem from different translations, also with some
variations in the attributes, sometimes held in different hands.

--- [Page 175] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 24 of 32ā āṇīū
ā n ̣ ā n ̣
ﬄ
ﬀ
tt ﬀ
 
ā n ̣ ō
 Figure 19. Wooden statue of the six‑armed Cintāman
˙icakra at the Murōji Temple, 9th century CE.ā āṇīū
ā n ̣ ā n ̣
ﬄ
ﬀ
tt ﬀ
ā n ̣ ō
 
Figure 20. Wooden statue of the six‑armed Cintāman
˙icakra at the Kanshinji Temple, 9th century CE.
The six‑armed Cintāman
˙icakra, seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose, is also depicted
among the deities in the visual representation of the Mahākarun
˙āgarbhadhātuman
˙d
˙ala(Womb
Man
˙d
˙ala; Figure 21). Cintāman
˙icakra is part of the group of twenty‑one bodhisattvas
(fourth down from the second line) of the Padmakula (Lotus Family), positioned to the

--- [Page 176] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 25 of 32
right of Mahāvairocana at the centre, who is surrounded by the eight Tathāgatas. On the
opposite side, the twenty‑one bodhisattvas of the Vajra family are positioned.
ā n ̣ā ā n ̣ d ̣ ō
ō
ā n ̣
Figure 21. Silk painting of the Mahākarun
˙āgarbhadhātu (Womb) Man
˙d
˙ala, 9th century, Tō‑ji, Kyōto.
The Daihōkō hakurokukaku zenjū himitsu darani kyō 広大宝楼閣善住秘密陀羅尼経 (T.
1005A and 1006) and the Ichiji bucchō rin’oh nenju giki 一字頂輪王念誦儀軌 (T. 954A and B)
also provide visualisations of Cintāman
˙icakra with six arms and other common attributes.
The latter, however, specifies a unique visualisation where bodhisattvas emerge from a
man
˙i, and their teachings culminate in the cakra . As the visualisation progresses, the sād‑
haka (practitioner) is instructed to imagine the man
˙igradually transforming into the six‑
armed form of Cintāman
˙icakra, which is visualised as being within the body of the sādhaka
(Shinohara 2014 , p. 183). This visualisation, therefore, affirms that the cintāman
˙imotif is
synonymous with the physical form of the deity, in other words, representing the subtle
body and the gross body.
In summary, the six‑armed images of Cintāman
˙icakra in Japan uniformly follow the
following iconographical programme:
• Mahārājalīlāsana pose;
• The upper right hand is relaxed beside the body and holds a rosary;
• The middle right hand displays a pensive gesture, touching the right cheek;
• The lower right hand holds the cintāman
˙i at chest level;
• The upper left arm rests on the side of the body, supporting its weight;
• The middle left hand holds the cakra ;
• The lower left hand holds the lotus stem with the vitarkamudrā ;
• Wearing a crown, seated on a multi‑layered lotus base, and surrounded with a double
mandorla with the flame motif.23

--- [Page 177] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 26 of 32
Furthermore, as mentioned earlier, the feminisation of Cintāman
˙icakra in Japan be‑
gan around the mid‑9th century CE, as suggested by the Kakuzen‑shō , which describes the
deity as female. However, 9th‑century figures remain androgynous, resembling Chinese
depictions. This is likely because these sculptures were created before the Kakuzen‑shō be‑
came influential, replacing earlier interpretations. As time progressed, representations of
the bodhisattva, especially the six‑armed images, gradually became more feminine or an‑
drogynous, displaying greater grace and poise compared to the earlier two‑armed images
in Japan, and even more so than those from the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia.
Nevertheless, later paintings reveal that while the overall characteristics of the bodhisattva
became more feminine, traces of male characteristics persisted in some examples. For in‑
stance, the bodhisattva’s chest is often partially covered, and sometimes a moustache is
depicted on the face, as seen in a painting from the Nara National Museum dated to the
12th century CE (Figure 22).ā n ̣ā ā n ̣ d ̣ ō
ō
 
ā n ̣
 Figure 22. Silk painting of Cintāman
˙icakra, Kamakura Period, Nara National Museum.
In addition to the two‑, four‑, and six‑armed forms, the Zuzō‑shō collection contains
sketches of an eight‑ (TZ.86.62) and twelve‑armed (TZ.86.64) Cintāman
˙icakra. These forms
are unique because the bodhisattva has two of the upper hands joined together in the añjalī‑
mudrā above the head, while the two lower arms are sometimes together, either performing
thecintāman
˙imudrā or holding other attributes ( Chandra 1999 , pp. 827–28). Nevertheless,
thecintāman
˙imotif is present in all of the images. Since there is no evidence of the eight‑
and twelve‑armed forms found in other regions, the form may have developed and been
exclusively worshipped in Japan, potentially following different textual sources not men‑
tioned in this study. Finally, the Kōmyō shingon 光明真言 , or “Mantra of Light”, one of the
most significant mantras in the Shingon School, originated in India and was transmitted
to China by Bodhiruci and Amoghavajra, eventually spreading to Korea and Japan. This
mantra is closely associated with Cintāman
˙icakra and is used for healing, purification, and
the expiation of sins for both the dying and the deceased ( Unno 2011 , p. 863). The mantra

--- [Page 178] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 27 of 32
reads as follows: ‘Praise be to the flawless, all‑pervasive illumination of the great mudrā
(the Seal of the Buddha), turn over and set in motion the jewel, lotus, and radiant light’
(translation by Unno 2011 , p. 863).
The phrase ‘turn over and set in motion’ can be understood as symbolising the move‑
ment of the cakra , while the ‘jewel, lotus, and radiant light’ may represent the cintāman
˙iit‑
self. A common ritual involves charging sand with the power of this mantra and sprinkling
it on corpses or in charnel grounds to help the spirits of the deceased attain higher rebirths.
This practice is in line with the contemporary custom of erecting images of Cintāman
˙icakra
in cemeteries.24Thus, Cintāman
˙icakra becomes synonymous with the formless, radiant
light of Mahāvairocana, represented by the cintāman
˙imotif seen in the material culture.
8. Iconographical Discussion
To address the issue of iconography, we can draw upon the well‑established depic‑
tions of Cakravarticintāman
˙i in the regions highlighted in this study. In Java, this is found
in Raffles’ sketch of a lost bronze statue and the bronze housed at the Ashmolean Mu‑
seum, both of which largely correspond to the iconographic descriptions outlined in the
Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra . Similarly, images of Cintāman
˙icakra in China and Japan
align with textual evidence from translations, as well as contemporary worship practices.
In these depictions, the bodhisattva typically appears with six arms, holding a cintāman
˙i
and a cakra , seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose, and displaying the pensive gesture, al‑
though there are some variations in other attributes.
Based on these features, I propose that the two‑, four‑, and six‑armed forms found in
Southeast Asia, seated in the mahārājalīlāsana pose, displaying the pensive gesture and with
one hand at the chest and holding a cintāman
˙iin that hand or another outstretched hand,
and either seen with or without a cakra , likely represent the same bodhisattva. Additionally,
textual evidence regarding Bianhong’s attainment of the siddhi s of Cakravarticintāman
˙i
suggests the prevalence of this bodhisattva’s cult in the region.
It is plausible that the iconography of Cakravarticintāman
˙i in India and Southeast
Asia during this period initially only has the cintāman
˙i, symbolising the wish‑fulfilling and
the boundless blessings aspect, as the primary attribute. Over time, the cakra , represent‑
ing the concept of ‘turning’ or movement and sovereignty, likely became an additional
attribute. This evolution may have been influenced by the concept of the cakravartin (“uni‑
versal ruler”), who is often depicted with a cakra . Consequently, the cakra became another
significant symbol associated with the bodhisattva, reinforcing his role as the protector
of kingship.
The differences in the variations of attributes and the number of arms in the bod‑
hisattva’s iconography may suggest that the Cakravarticintāman
˙i was initially conceptu‑
alised as a dhāran
˙ī deity, as demonstrated by Cruijsen et al. (2014 ) in the case of Mahāprati‑
sarā. Similarly, this further implies that the bodhisattva’s iconography likely drew upon
multiple textual sources for the development of its visual representation.
Furthermore, as Robert L. Brown (1995 ) notes, the development of Indian deities in
Southeast Asia differs from their evolution in India, as Southeast Asian artists often rein‑
terpreted Indian art in ways that reflected their indigenous beliefs and local traditions.
Moreover, the language, translations, and interpretation of texts, along with their regional
variants, played a significant role in producing iconographical variations across different
regions and ateliers.
This research also corroborates the presence of two‑armed Cintāman
˙icakra forms,
holding neither a cintāman
˙inor a cakra , and possibly performing the dharmacakramudrā in
textual sources, particularly in the Cintāman
˙icakradhāran
˙īsūtra (Jp. Nyoirin daranikyō ), as
well as in sketches found in the Kākuzen‑shō and in the Zuzō‑shō ,Shika‑shō‑zuzō , and the

--- [Page 179] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 28 of 32
man
˙d
˙ala collections by Genshō. The dharmacakramudrā may be interpreted to symbolise
thecakra itself, and the whole ethereal body of the bodhisattva represents the cintāman
˙i.
Regarding the two‑armed Avalokiteśvara at Candi Mendut, it is at present impossi‑
ble to positively identify the statue as Cakravarticintāman
˙i. However, if we consider Chan‑
dra(1980 )’s proposal that Candi Mendut represents the Mahākarun
˙āgarbhadhātuman
˙d
˙ala,
then the stone image in question—certainly a bodhisattva of the Padmakula—could repre‑
sent all twenty‑one forms of Avalokiteśvara, including Cakravarticintāman
˙i, whose pres‑
ence is confirmed in depictions of the same man
˙d
˙ala.
Finally, it must be understood that the cintāman
˙iis essentially a concept involving an
esoteric process, in which an orb of light symbolising the Dharmakāya—the unmanifested
form of the deity—serves as the focal point of visualisation. From this initial point, deities
can be visualised and manifested internally by the practitioner. Unlike Hindu texts on the
Śilpaśāstra , which provide specific guidelines for crafting images of worship, the dhāran
˙īs
instruct the sādhaka (practitioner) on how to visualise and meditate, sometimes leaving
the details, such as the positioning of attributes and other nuances, to the practitioner’s
imagination. This creative freedom directly influences artistic representations, often lead‑
ing to the establishment of new iconographic standards or traditions. The artist’s own
imagination and experience also play a significant role, leading to variations in attributes,
postures, expressions, and other subtle elements. Therefore, the context in which iconog‑
raphy is produced must be fully considered, rather than relying solely on art historical
classifications alone.
9. Conclusions
The emergence and spread of the Cakravarticintāman
˙i cult along the Maritime Silk
Routes during the 8th and 9th centuries underscore the interconnectedness of religious
practices and visual culture across India, Southeast Asia, and East Asia. Variations in these
representations arose from diverse textual traditions among different Buddhist schools
and sects, the influence of local customs, and the artistic freedom exercised in creating
such images. Known by different names in various regions, the bodhisattva’s form un‑
derwent significant iconographic and ritualistic adaptations as it crossed cultural and
geographical boundaries. Originating in India as Cakravarticintāman
˙i, the deity’s form
evolved in Southeast Asian and further developed in China and reached its apex in Japan
as Cintāman
˙icakra. Each region developed its own distinct style, with variations in the
number of hands, attributes, postures and gestures. Incorporating this esoteric Aval‑
okiteśvara into royal and state ceremonies highlights its political and spiritual signifi‑
cance, particularly in ensuring divine protection and sovereignty. The enduring legacy
of Cintāman
˙icakra as a revered deity in Japan exemplifies the lasting impact of early trans‑
regional exchanges and the adaptability of Buddhist iconography to local contexts.
In the course of this study, it became evident that the transmission of the Cakravarticin‑
tāman
˙i is remarkably expansive, with the cintāman
˙imotif playing a significant role imbued
with profound philosophical, spiritual, and political symbolism. Besides the Maritime Silk
Routes, the dissemination of texts and iconography associated with this bodhisattva tra‑
versed the overland Silk Roads, too. Further research focusing on the material culture
along these routes, particularly from India to the Himalayas, Nepal, and Tibet, as well
as overland connections to Turfan and Dunhuang and further into Mongolia, could illumi‑
nate its spread and influence. Similarly, the cintāman
˙imotif, in association with the iconog‑
raphy of bodhisattvas and buddhas, is evident in Khmer and Cham art and, as observed
in clay plaques, extended as far as Bali. Future investigations in this area will further re‑
veal the extent of the mediaeval Buddhist network through the study of this form of the
bodhisattva and his wish‑fulfilling gem.

--- [Page 180] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 29 of 32
Funding: This research and its publication have been partly supported by the French National Re‑
search Agency (ANR), project MANTRA—Maritime Asian Networks of Buddhist Tantra (ANR‑22‑
CE27‑015), coordinated by Andrea Acri (EPHE, PSL University, Paris) from 2023 to 2024.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Acknowledgments: I extend my gratitude to the guest editors, Andrea Acri and Francesco Bianchini,
for their support throughout this research. I am also deeply thankful to Nobuyuki (Shinko) Suzuki,
a Buddhist priest ordained in the Koyasan Shingon tradition of Japanese Buddhism, for sharing his
invaluable insights into the practice of Cintāman
˙icakra in Japan and its textual sources within the
Japanese context.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
Notes
1The expressions “Silk Roads” or “Silk Routes” have been the subject of considerable scholarly debate. Firstly, silk was not the
sole commodity traded along these networks; consequently, some researchers have opted for alternative terms such as “Spice
Routes”. Moreover, as Khodadad Rezakhani (2010 ) argues, the notion of the “Silk Roads” represents a constructed, continuous
concept that may not accurately reflect the actual historical trade networks. Rezakhani further suggests that the term was coined
by Europeans, reflecting a romanticised, Eurocentric perspective rather than the realities of these routes. Despite these critiques,
the term “Silk Roads” remains widely used, as no academically accepted alternative has emerged to encapsulate the extensive
movements of people, goods, and ideas across land and sea between the continents. Therefore, this study employs the term for
clarity, while encouraging readers to approach it as a conceptual framework rather than a literal designation of specific routes
connecting distinct points.
2The term “esoteric teaching” has often been used to denote what a particular writer regards as superior within the tradition.
However, it was only in the 10th century that the term emerged as an exegetical category explicitly contrasting “esoteric teaching”
with “exoteric teaching” to define a specific lineage, school, or tradition—comparable to the Shingon tradition in Japan or the
Vajrayāna sects in Tibet ( Orzech 2006 , p. 44). Proffitt (2023 ) further argues that “Esoteric Buddhism” can be taken as a synonym
for Mahayana Buddhism itself in particular contexts, where it takes a polemical rather than descriptive function.
3Although the original Sanskrit text is no longer extant, the term Cakravarticintāman
˙ihas been identified as the original Sanskrit
name based on reconstructions from Chinese translations of various sūtras associated with this form of the bodhisattva. This
term corresponds to the Chinese name “Ruyilun” and, as noted by Sinclair (2016 , pp. 31–2; see note 11), supersedes the use of
Cintāman
˙icakra in Japan.
4Bianhong’s homeland is said to be Helin or equivalent to KaliFOR PEER REVIEW
and seems to rest on one hand, and most importantly, the centr al attribute cintāma ṇ
Other attributes
provide a comprehensive understanding of regional variations and their interconnected-
mahārājalīlāsana
lalitāsana
equanimity, and aristocracy. In Buddhist art, this posture i s mostly seen in the iconogra-
phy of Avalokiteśvara and Mañjuśrī. It may have bee n 
uddhist monks and pil-
āsana
According to Pratapaditya Pal (2021), the pensive gesture, wh ich he quotes from a 
translation of a sūtra by Vajrabodhi (though the speciﬁc sūtra  is not named),
that the bodhisattva is contemplating the causes of all suﬀering. The gesture may derive 
cintā cintāma ṇ
-
Gandhāran representations of the Buddha and bodhisattvas from the Swat Valley, partic-
ularly Maitreya and other ﬁgures appearing in the scene of the G reat M iracle of Śrāvastī.
cintāma ṇthe central attribute of Cakravarticintāma ṇ
-shaped gem, is a symbol of profound signiﬁcance in many Hin du and Bud-
dhist myths and philosophies. Generally, it denotes a mag ical gem capable of fulﬁlling 
cintāma ṇ
kaustubha , the celestial gem of Vi ṣ ṇ
Mahābhārata and various Purā ṇ
aṣṭamaṅgala
saptaratna cintāma ṇis a common attribute in images of bodhisatt-
vas, especially Avalokiteśvara. The Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra -
the virtues of Avalokiteśvara, describes him as wearing a crow n adorned with the 
cintāma ṇin the middle of his matted locks ( jaṭārdhamadhye cintāma ṇi muku ṭadharya ) (Bau-
tze-Picron 2004, p. 235). In early Indian art, this concept is v isually represented as a round 
nently featured in the headdresses of Avalokiteśvara 
images from Mathura and Gandhāra, dated from the 3rd or 4th cen tury CE (
In China, the cintāma ṇ the Dharma and Dharmakāya (un-
manifested body of buddhas and bodhisattvas) during the Tan g Dynasty (Chen 2020, p. 
233) and the bodhisattva’s limitless blessings and unfa iling answer to prayers (Yu 2001, p. 
12). Besides images of Avalokiteśvara possessing t cintāma ṇ, depictions of other bodhi-
sattvas such as Mañjuśrī and K ṣ
cintāma ṇ cintāma ṇ
Bodhisattvagocaropāyavi ṣayavikurva ṇanirdeśa Daśacakrak ṣitigarbhasūtra
664 CE), respectively, outline that the cintāma ṇ
beasts, releasing one from prison, and providing riches, wea lth, and other material com-
forts (Chen 2020, p. 235).
cintāma ṇ
-
Triratna  Saṅg and in es-
cintāma ṇ manas
cintāma ṇga in Sanskrit, which is identified to be an island in the Malay
Archipelago, probably Java. See Sinclair (2016 , p. 31).
5The text also prescribes the numbers of recitation of the dhāran
˙ī of different classes of people: a king should recite 1080 times,
a queen or a royal concubine, 900; a prince, 800; a princess, 700; a minister, 600; a Brahmin, 500; a ks
˙atriya , 400; a vaiśya , 300;
aśūdra , 200; a monk, 108; a layman, 106; a laywoman, 103; a boy, 100; and a girl, 90. This demonstrates that the worship of
Cintāman
˙icakra was practised by all members of the society. See Yu(2001 , pp. 70–1).
6In fact, the etymologies of the deity’s two foremost attributes, the cintāman
˙iand cakra , are often linked to kingship. The cintāman
˙i
originates from the as
˙t
˙amaFOR PEER REVIEW
and seems to rest on one hand, and most importantly, the centr al attribute cintāma ṇ
Other attributes
provide a comprehensive understanding of regional variations and their interconnected-
mahārājalīlāsana
lalitāsana
equanimity, and aristocracy. In Buddhist art, this posture i s mostly seen in the iconogra-
phy of Avalokiteśvara and Mañjuśrī. It may have bee n 
uddhist monks and pil-
āsana
According to Pratapaditya Pal (2021), the pensive gesture, wh ich he quotes from a 
translation of a sūtra by Vajrabodhi (though the speciﬁc sūtra  is not named),
that the bodhisattva is contemplating the causes of all suﬀering. The gesture may derive 
cintā cintāma ṇ
-
Gandhāran representations of the Buddha and bodhisattvas from the Swat Valley, partic-
ularly Maitreya and other ﬁgures appearing in the scene of the G reat M iracle of Śrāvastī.
cintāma ṇthe central attribute of Cakravarticintāma ṇ
-shaped gem, is a symbol of profound signiﬁcance in many Hin du and Bud-
dhist myths and philosophies. Generally, it denotes a mag ical gem capable of fulﬁlling 
cintāma ṇ
kaustubha , the celestial gem of Vi ṣ ṇ
Mahābhārata and various Purā ṇ
aṣṭamaṅgala
saptaratna cintāma ṇis a common attribute in images of bodhisatt-
vas, especially Avalokiteśvara. The Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra -
the virtues of Avalokiteśvara, describes him as wearing a crow n adorned with the 
cintāma ṇin the middle of his matted locks ( jaṭārdhamadhye cintāma ṇi muku ṭadharya ) (Bau-
tze-Picron 2004, p. 235). In early Indian art, this concept is v isually represented as a round 
nently featured in the headdresses of Avalokiteśvara 
images from Mathura and Gandhāra, dated from the 3rd or 4th cen tury CE (
In China, the cintāma ṇ the Dharma and Dharmakāya (un-
manifested body of buddhas and bodhisattvas) during the Tan g Dynasty (Chen 2020, p. 
233) and the bodhisattva’s limitless blessings and unfa iling answer to prayers (Yu 2001, p. 
12). Besides images of Avalokiteśvara possessing t cintāma ṇ, depictions of other bodhi-
sattvas such as Mañjuśrī and K ṣ
cintāma ṇ cintāma ṇ
Bodhisattvagocaropāyavi ṣayavikurva ṇanirdeśa Daśacakrak ṣitigarbhasūtra
664 CE), respectively, outline that the cintāma ṇ
beasts, releasing one from prison, and providing riches, wea lth, and other material com-
forts (Chen 2020, p. 235).
cintāma ṇ
-
Triratna  Saṅg and in es-
cintāma ṇ manas
cintāma ṇgala, or the eight auspicious objects in both Hinduism and Buddhism, while the cakra , the most
important weapon of Vis
˙n
˙u and a symbol of royal authority, became a representation of the teachings and the spread of the
Dharma in Buddhism.
7SeeGiebel (2012 ), for the complete list of texts.
8It is noteworthy that in many Sanskrit texts on kingship, the “jewel woman” is one of the seven jewels ( saptaratna ) that the
cakravartin should possess. The Dīrghāgamasūtra is more specific, listing a wheel, chariot, precious stones, consort, horses, and
elephants. It details the golden wheel, white elephant, dark blue horse, celestial jewel, jewel woman, merchant–artisan, and
military commander. See Ruppert (2000 , p. 206).
9I suspect the sūtra to be the Japanese version of the Cakravarticintāman
˙idhāran
˙īsūtra because the translation closely resembles
Sinclar’s translation quoted in this article, and also because Pal included some Japanese terminology in his article.
10The cintāman
˙iis also one of Ks
˙itigarbha’s principal attributes, alongside the khakkhara (monastic staff), which, among other pur‑
poses, serves to guide the spirits of unborn children to higher realms.

--- [Page 181] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 30 of 32
11The Dunhuang manuscript P. 4518 (10), dated to the 10th century, contains two manuscript paintings featuring a flaming
cintāman
˙iat the centre, flanked by the Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī and the Buddha on the left and two arhats on the right. This
depicts the scene in which Mañjuśrī requests the Buddha to preach the parable of the cintāman
˙ito the arhats, as described in the
Āryasarvabuddhavis
˙ayāvatārajñanālokālaFOR PEER REVIEW
The text also prescribes the numbers of recitation of the dhāra ṇī of diﬀerent classes of people: a king should recite 1080 times , 
kṣatriya vaiśya
śūdra
Cintāma ṇ by all members of the society. See Yu (2001, pp. 70
In fact, the etymologies of the deity’s two foremost attributes, the cintāma ṇ cakra cintāma ṇ
aṣṭamaṅgala cakra
important weapon of Vi ṣ ṇ
saptaratna
cakravartin Dīrghāgamasūtra is more speciﬁc, listing a wheel, chariot, precious stones, cons ort, horses, and 
I suspect the sūtra to be the Japanese Cakravarticintāma ṇidhāra ṇīsūtra
Sinclar’s translation quoted in this article, and also because Pal  included some Japanese terminology in his article.
cintāma ṇ ṣitigarbha’s principal attributes, alongside the khakkhara (monastic staﬀ), which, among other 
The Dunhuang manuscript P. 4518 (10), dated to the 10th century,  contains two manuscript paintings featuring a ﬂaming 
cintāma ṇ , ﬂanked by the Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī
the scene in which Mañjuśrī requests the Buddha to preach the par able of the cintāma ṇ
Āryasarvabuddhavi ṣayāvatārajñanālokāla ṅkāranāmamahāyānasūtra Jñanālokāla ṅkārasūtra ). See Chen (2020, 
ed by Yōgen (1075-1159 CE). See Lokesh Chandra (1999), 
scholars propose that Candi Mendut may have functioned as a corona tion temple due to its potential link to Bianhong 
ﬂower garland. Alternatively, these objects could be interpreted as oﬀerings or attributes associated with the celes-
tial beings. Another perspective identiﬁes them as representations of th e Lokapālas, or directional deities, depicted in a 
-
detail, a limitation that became apparent with the advent of photogra phy. Additionally, these drawings may reﬂect the person
ctions of naked deities were often modiﬁed by adding loincloths 
Raﬄes’sketch as a source. While acknowledging the potential inac curacies, this article argues that sketches, 
even with interpretive elements, should not be dismissed entirel y. When key attributes are present, such as those identifying
ﬁgure as a bodh isattva, the depiction provides valuable material for scholarly inve stigation.
katakamudrā
iconography of deities in Japanese and Chinese Buddhism. See Bun ce (2005, p. 108).
mudrā denotes “the king of Dharma” and is formed by open, slightly  cupped palms facing forward, with ﬁngers and 
‘Dabei’ means mercy and refers to Sahasrabhuja Avalokiteśvara, a lso known in Chinese as ‘Dabei Pusa’. See Hamada (2021, p. 
Dabei qinqing Dabeixin Dhāra ṇī
of the attendant deities of Sahasrabhuja. See Hamada (2021, p. 167).
Qianshou jing Taishō
Cintāma ṇicakra and Amoghapāśa are members of the retinue. For example , the annotation of a mantra in line 5 of P.3912, which 
nan wu li ye na ma ā rya ), Amoghavajra identiﬁes this as Cintāma ṇ
bo dhi sa tvā ya suo suo pu sa , indicating Amoghapāśa. Hamada (2021, p. 
Debeixin Dhāra ṇī Qianshou kāranāmamahāyānasūtra (commonly known as the JñanālokālaFOR PEER REVIEW
The text also prescribes the numbers of recitation of the dhāra ṇī of diﬀerent classes of people: a king should recite 1080 times , 
kṣatriya vaiśya
śūdra
Cintāma ṇ by all members of the society. See Yu (2001, pp. 70
In fact, the etymologies of the deity’s two foremost attributes, the cintāma ṇ cakra cintāma ṇ
aṣṭamaṅgala cakra
important weapon of Vi ṣ ṇ
saptaratna
cakravartin Dīrghāgamasūtra is more speciﬁc, listing a wheel, chariot, precious stones, cons ort, horses, and 
I suspect the sūtra to be the Japanese Cakravarticintāma ṇidhāra ṇīsūtra
Sinclar’s translation quoted in this article, and also because Pal  included some Japanese terminology in his article.
cintāma ṇ ṣitigarbha’s principal attributes, alongside the khakkhara (monastic staﬀ), which, among other 
The Dunhuang manuscript P. 4518 (10), dated to the 10th century,  contains two manuscript paintings featuring a ﬂaming 
cintāma ṇ , ﬂanked by the Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī
the scene in which Mañjuśrī requests the Buddha to preach the par able of the cintāma ṇ
Āryasarvabuddhavi ṣayāvatārajñanālokāla ṅkāranāmamahāyānasūtra Jñanālokāla ṅkārasūtra ). See Chen (2020, 
ed by Yōgen (1075-1159 CE). See Lokesh Chandra (1999), 
scholars propose that Candi Mendut may have functioned as a corona tion temple due to its potential link to Bianhong 
ﬂower garland. Alternatively, these objects could be interpreted as oﬀerings or attributes associated with the celes-
tial beings. Another perspective identiﬁes them as representations of th e Lokapālas, or directional deities, depicted in a 
-
detail, a limitation that became apparent with the advent of photogra phy. Additionally, these drawings may reﬂect the person
ctions of naked deities were often modiﬁed by adding loincloths 
Raﬄes’sketch as a source. While acknowledging the potential inac curacies, this article argues that sketches, 
even with interpretive elements, should not be dismissed entirel y. When key attributes are present, such as those identifying
ﬁgure as a bodh isattva, the depiction provides valuable material for scholarly inve stigation.
katakamudrā
iconography of deities in Japanese and Chinese Buddhism. See Bun ce (2005, p. 108).
mudrā denotes “the king of Dharma” and is formed by open, slightly  cupped palms facing forward, with ﬁngers and 
‘Dabei’ means mercy and refers to Sahasrabhuja Avalokiteśvara, a lso known in Chinese as ‘Dabei Pusa’. See Hamada (2021, p. 
Dabei qinqing Dabeixin Dhāra ṇī
of the attendant deities of Sahasrabhuja. See Hamada (2021, p. 167).
Qianshou jing Taishō
Cintāma ṇicakra and Amoghapāśa are members of the retinue. For example , the annotation of a mantra in line 5 of P.3912, which 
nan wu li ye na ma ā rya ), Amoghavajra identiﬁes this as Cintāma ṇ
bo dhi sa tvā ya suo suo pu sa , indicating Amoghapāśa. Hamada (2021, p. 
Debeixin Dhāra ṇī Qianshou kārasūtra ). See Chen (2020 ,
p. 230).
12A book containing sketches of Buddhist iconographies in Japan compiled by Yōgen (1075‑1159 CE). See Chandra (1999 , p. 811).
13Some scholars propose that Candi Mendut may have functioned as a coronation temple due to its potential link to Bianhong and
a stone frieze at its entrance. This frieze portrays four celestial beings carrying royal regalia—a weapon, a book, a lotus stalk, and
a flower garland. Alternatively, these objects could be interpreted as offerings or attributes associated with the celestial beings.
Another perspective identifies them as representations of the Lokapālas, or directional deities, depicted in a localised Javanese
iconographic tradition.
14Annabel Teh Gallop (1995 ) argues that 19th‑century archaeological drawings are not always precise in terms of proportion or
detail, a limitation that became apparent with the advent of photography. Additionally, these drawings may reflect the personal
interpretations or cultural biases of the artists. For instance, depictions of naked deities were often modified by adding loincloths
or other coverings to conform to prevailing moral sensibilities. This study builds on prior research, such as Ian Sinclair ’s (2016 )
work, which utilised Raffles’sketch as a source. While acknowledging the potential inaccuracies, this article argues that sketches,
even with interpretive elements, should not be dismissed entirely. When key attributes are present, such as those identifying a
figure as a bodhisattva, the depiction provides valuable material for scholarly investigation.
15In addition to being a gesture for holding an object in Hindu iconography, the katakamudrā is commonly found in the tantric
iconography of deities in Japanese and Chinese Buddhism. See Bunce (2005 , p. 108).
16This mudrā denotes “the king of Dharma” and is formed by open, slightly cupped palms facing forward, with fingers and thumbs
extended and pointing upwards but not touching. See Bunce (2005 , p. 60).
17Now preserved at the Biblioth èque Nationale de France.
18T. 1060.20, T. 1056.20, T. 1061.20, and its associated liturgical texts. See Sørensen (2020 , p. 95).
19‘Dabei’ means mercy and refers to Sahasrabhuja Avalokiteśvara, also known in Chinese as ‘Dabei Pusa’. See Hamada (2021 ,
p. 166).
20This evidence is based on a series of transcriptions called Dabei qinqing , which precedes the Dabeixin Dhāran
˙īand lists the names
of the attendant deities of Sahasrabhuja. See Hamada (2021 , p. 167).
21Amoghavajra’s translation of the Qianshou jing (also part of the Taishō canon), along with his commentaries, reveals that
Cintāman
˙icakra and Amoghapāśa are members of the retinue. For example, the annotation of a mantra in line 5 of P.3912, which
reads nan wu li ye (Sanskrit: na ma ā rya ), Amoghavajra identifies this as “Cintāman
˙icakra himself”. Similarly, the mantra in lines
7 and 8, “pu ti sa duo po ye” (Sanskrit: bo dhi sa tvā ya ), is annotated as suo suo pu sa , indicating Amoghapāśa. Hamada (2021 ,
p. 169) notes that the Debeixin Dhāran
˙īmay have been extracted and circulated independently, separated from the larger Qian‑
shou jing . Furthermore, the Chinese translations of the original Sanskrit texts could have been problematic, as not all meanings
and contexts in Sanskrit were fully understood in Chinese at the time. The Indian tantric practice of assigning deities to words
in the texts could also have posed difficulties during translation. In conclusion, this evidence suggests that Cintāman
˙icakra
and Amoghapāśa are attendant bodhisattvas of Sahasrabhuja Avalokiteśvara, forming a triad ( triratna ). Their appearance in the
mantra of Sahasrabhuja, as annotated by Amoghavajra, may indicate that Cintāman
˙icakra and Amoghapāśa are emanations of
Sahasrabhuja, and ultimately, they may be seen as one and the same. Similarly, another banner painting of the Amoghapāśa
man
˙d
˙ala (MG 3579, see Sørensen 2020 , p. 106) from Dunhuang, where the image of Amoghapāśa is at the centre, also shows
Cintāman
˙icakra and Sahasrabhuja placed opposite each other at the top portion of the painting, along with other esoteric forms
of deities such as Hayagrīva, Tārā, Bhr
˙kut
˙ī and so on, thus further confirming the relationship between these three forms of
bodhisattvas.
22Kūkai is said to have brought back examples of the “Twinned Man
˙d
˙alas”, namely the Vajradhātuman
˙d
˙ala and the Mahākarun
˙āga‑
rbhadhātuman
˙d
˙ala; the latter features Cintāman
˙icakra as one of the deities ( Chapin 1932 , p. 43), surrounding Mahāvairocana at
the centre. If it can be corroborated that Candi Mendut is modelled after the Mahākarun
˙āgarbhadhātuman
˙d
˙ala as some scholars
have speculated, then there could be sufficient grounds, amongst other evidence, to identify the two‑armed bodhisattva seated
to the right of Mahāvairocana as Cakravarticintāman
˙i.
23The flaming mandorla is unique to Japanese iconography. Although flames are not mentioned in the passage describing the
iconography of Cintāman
˙icakra, they appear in two mantras of the bodhisattva from the Cintāman
˙icakradhāran
˙īsūtra , indicating
that he is engulfed in flames:
namo ratnatrayāya namah
˙āryāvalokiteśvarāya bodhisattvāya mahāsattvāya mahākārun
˙ikāya |tadyathā om
˙cakravarticintāman
˙i
mahāpadme ru ru tis
˙t
˙hat jvala ākars
˙āya hūm
˙phat
˙svāhā |om
˙padma cintāman
˙i jvala hūm
˙om
˙varada padme hūm
˙|
24Nobuyuki Suzuki, personal communication with author, 15 October 2024.

--- [Page 182] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 31 of 32
References
Aptilon, Sarah Fremerman. 2010. Goddess Genealogy: Nyoirin Kannon in the Ono Shingon Tradition. In Esoteric Buddhism and the
Tantras in East Asia . Boston: Brill, vol. 24, pp. 893–903.
Asher, Frederick M. 1980. The Art of Eastern India, 300–800 . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Bautze‑Picron, Claudine. 2000. The Los Angeles manuscript covers: Uncovering and explaining their iconography. Journal of Bengal
Art5: 95–128.
Bautze‑Picron, Claudine. 2004. The universal compassionate Bodhisattva, Miscellaneous Aspects of Avalokitasvara/Avalokiteshvara
in India. In Silk Road Art and Archaeology . Kamakura: The Institute of Silk Road Studies, vol. 10, pp. 225–90.
Bhattacharya, Gouriswar. 2002. The “Pensive” Bodhisattva from Ud
˙d
˙iyāna (Swat Valley) to Pat
˙t
˙ikera (Mainamati)—A Unique Exam‑
ple from Magadha (South Bihar). Journal of Bengal Art 7: 125–38.
Biswas, T. K. 1989. Certain Rare Aspects of Avalokiteśvara in Bharat Kala Bhavan. Buddhist Iconography , 175–80.
Brown, Robert L. 1995. ‘Rules’ for Change in the Transfer of Indian Art to Southeast Asia. In Ancient Indonesian Sculpture . Edited by
Marijke Klokke and Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer. Leiden: Brill, pp. 10–32.
Bunce, Fredrick W. 2005. Mudrās in Buddhist and Hindu Practices: An Iconographic Consideration . New Delhi: D.K. Printworld.
Chandra, Lokesh. 1980. Chandi Mendut and Pawon: A New Interpretation. Bijdragen Tot de Taal‑, Land‑ En Volkenkunde 136: 313–20.
[CrossRef ]
Chandra, Lokesh. 1988. The Thousand‑Armed Avalokiteśvara . New Delhi: IGNCA/Abhinav.
Chandra, Lokesh. 1999. Dictionary of Buddhist Iconography . New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya
Prakashan.
Chapin, Helen B. 1932. A study in Buddhist iconography: The six‑armed form of Cintāman
˙icakra Avalokiteśvara. Ostasiatische
Zeitschrift 8: 23–43, 111–29.
Chen, Huaiyu. 2020. The Cult of the Cintāman
˙i: The Nature and Context of the Dunhuang Manuscript P. 4518 (10). Chinese Studies in
History 53: 227–41. [ CrossRef ]
Chutiwongs, Nandana. 2002. The Iconography of Avalokiteśvara in Mainland South East Asia . New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre
for the Arts.
Cruijsen, Thomas, Arlo Griffiths, and Marijke J. Klokke. 2014. The Cult of the Buddhist Dhāran
˙ī Deity Mahāpratisarā along the
Maritime Silk Route: New Epigraphic and Iconographic Evidence from the Indonesian Archipelago. Journal of the International
Association of Buddhist Studies 35: 71–157.
Faure, Bernard. 1999. Relics, Regalia, and the Dynamics of Secrecy in Japanese Buddhism. In Rending the Veil: Concealment and Secrecy
in the History of Religions . Edited by Elliot Wolfson. New York: Seven Bridges Press, pp. 271–87.
Faure, Bernard. 2015. The Fluid Pantheon: Gods of Medieval Japan, Volume 1 . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. [ CrossRef ]
Fowler, Sherry D. 2005. Murōji: Rearranging Art and History at a Japanese Buddhist Temple . Honolulu: University of Hawaii.
Fowler, Sherry D. 2016. Accounts and Images of Six Kannon in Japan . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. [ CrossRef ]
Fremerman, Sarah A. 2008. Divine Impersonations: Nyoirin Kannon in Medieval Japan. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, USA.
Gallop, Annabel Teh. 1995. Early Views of Indonesia: Drawings from the British Library = Pemandangan Indonesia Di Masa Lampau: Seni
Gambar Dari British Library . London: The British Library.
Gethin, Rupert. 1998. The Foundations of Buddhism , 1st ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Giebel, Rolf W. 2012. Notes on Some Sanskrit Texts Brought Back to Japan by Kūkai. Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist
Studies 13: 187–230.
Goble, Geoffrey. 2016. The Politics of Esoteric Buddhism: Amoghavajra and the Tang State. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime
Asia. Singapore: ISEAS—Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 123–40. [ CrossRef ]
Hamada, Tamami. 2021. Images of Thousand‑Armed and Thousand‑Eyed Avalokiteśvara with Cintāman
˙icakra and Amoghapāśa as
Attendants: References to the Chanting of the ‘Dabeixin Dhāran
˙ī’大悲心陀羅尼 .Studies in Chinese Religions 7: 159–72. [ CrossRef ]
Huang, Bing. 2022. The Posture of Lalitāsana: Buddhist Posing Hierarchy in a Tang‑Dynasty Chinese Bronze Sculpture. Religions 13:
740. [ CrossRef ]
Li, Ling, and De Ma. 2017. Avalokiteśvara and the Dunhuang Dhāran
˙ī Spells of Salvation in Childbirth. Chinese and Tibetan Esoteric
Buddhism 1: 338–52. [ CrossRef ]
McHugh, James. 2018. Gemstones. In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism Online . Leiden: Brill. [ CrossRef ]
Orzech, Charles D. 2006. The ‘Great Teaching of Yoga,’ the Chinese Appropriation of the Tantras, and the Question of Esoteric Bud‑
dhism. Journal of Chinese Religions 34: 29–78. [ CrossRef ]
Pal, Pratapaditya. 2021. The Thoughtgem and Wheel Avalokiteśvara and Lokeśvara of Wish‑Fulfilling Gems Revisited. Available
online: https://www.asianart.com/articles/cintamani/index.html (accessed on 20 September 2021).
Proffitt, Aaron P. 2023. Esoteric Pure Land Buddhism . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. [ CrossRef ]
Raffles, Thomas S. 1817. The History of Java . Utrecht: Universiteitbibliotheek.

--- [Page 183] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 178 32 of 32
Rezakhani, Khodadad. 2010. The Road That Never Was: The Silk Road and Trans‑Eurasian Exchange. Comparative Studies of South
Asia, Africa, and the Middle East 30: 420–33. [ CrossRef ]
Ruppert, Brian D. 2000. Jewel in the Ashes: Buddha Relics and Power in Early Medieval Japan . Boston: Harvard University Asia Center.
Saunders, Ernest Dale. 2018. Bollingen Foundation Collection, Bollingen Foundation Collection, and Ernest Dale Saunders. In Mudrā:
A Study of Symbolic Gestures in Japanese Buddhist Sculpture . Princeton: Princeton University Press. [ CrossRef ]
Shinohara, Koichi. 2014. Spells, Images, and Mandalas: Tracing the Evolution of Esoteric Buddhist Rituals . New York: Columbia University
Press. [ CrossRef ]
Sinclair, Iain. 2016. Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China: Bianhong’s Manual on the abhis
˙eka of a
cakravartin. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore:
ISEAS Publishing, pp. 29–66.
Sørensen, Henrik. 2011. Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia. In Handbook of Oriental Studies . Leiden: Brill, vol. 24.
Sørensen, Henrik. 2020. Donors and Esoteric Buddhism in Dunhuang during the Reign of the Guiyijun. In Buddhism in Central Asia I .
Leiden: Brill, vol. 91, pp. 91–122. [ CrossRef ]
Sundberg, Jeffrey, and Rolf Giebel. 2011. The life of the Tang court monk Vajrabodhi as chronicled by Lü Xiang 呂向 : South Indian
and Śrī LaFOR PEER REVIEW
and seems to rest on one hand, and most importantly, the centr al attribute cintāma ṇ
Other attributes
provide a comprehensive understanding of regional variations and their interconnected-
mahārājalīlāsana
lalitāsana
equanimity, and aristocracy. In Buddhist art, this posture i s mostly seen in the iconogra-
phy of Avalokiteśvara and Mañjuśrī. It may have bee n 
uddhist monks and pil-
āsana
According to Pratapaditya Pal (2021), the pensive gesture, wh ich he quotes from a 
translation of a sūtra by Vajrabodhi (though the speciﬁc sūtra  is not named),
that the bodhisattva is contemplating the causes of all suﬀering. The gesture may derive 
cintā cintāma ṇ
-
Gandhāran representations of the Buddha and bodhisattvas from the Swat Valley, partic-
ularly Maitreya and other ﬁgures appearing in the scene of the G reat M iracle of Śrāvastī.
cintāma ṇthe central attribute of Cakravarticintāma ṇ
-shaped gem, is a symbol of profound signiﬁcance in many Hin du and Bud-
dhist myths and philosophies. Generally, it denotes a mag ical gem capable of fulﬁlling 
cintāma ṇ
kaustubha , the celestial gem of Vi ṣ ṇ
Mahābhārata and various Purā ṇ
aṣṭamaṅgala
saptaratna cintāma ṇis a common attribute in images of bodhisatt-
vas, especially Avalokiteśvara. The Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra -
the virtues of Avalokiteśvara, describes him as wearing a crow n adorned with the 
cintāma ṇin the middle of his matted locks ( jaṭārdhamadhye cintāma ṇi muku ṭadharya ) (Bau-
tze-Picron 2004, p. 235). In early Indian art, this concept is v isually represented as a round 
nently featured in the headdresses of Avalokiteśvara 
images from Mathura and Gandhāra, dated from the 3rd or 4th cen tury CE (
In China, the cintāma ṇ the Dharma and Dharmakāya (un-
manifested body of buddhas and bodhisattvas) during the Tan g Dynasty (Chen 2020, p. 
233) and the bodhisattva’s limitless blessings and unfa iling answer to prayers (Yu 2001, p. 
12). Besides images of Avalokiteśvara possessing t cintāma ṇ, depictions of other bodhi-
sattvas such as Mañjuśrī and K ṣ
cintāma ṇ cintāma ṇ
Bodhisattvagocaropāyavi ṣayavikurva ṇanirdeśa Daśacakrak ṣitigarbhasūtra
664 CE), respectively, outline that the cintāma ṇ
beasts, releasing one from prison, and providing riches, wea lth, and other material com-
forts (Chen 2020, p. 235).
cintāma ṇ
-
Triratna  Saṅg and in es-
cintāma ṇ manas
cintāma ṇkān antecedents to the arrival of the Buddhist Vajrayāna in 8th century Java and China. Pacific World: Journal of the
Institute of Buddhist Studies 13: 129–222.
Sundström, I. Sofia. 2020. The Iconography of Avalokiteśvara in Java. Ph.D. thesis, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Unno, Mark. 2011. Kōmyō Shingon. Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia 24: 863–75. [ CrossRef ]
Wong, Dorothy. 2008. Early Transmission of Esoteric Images from China to Japan in the Seventh and Eighth. Huaxu 9: 1697–719.
Yu, Chun‑fang. 2001. Kuan‑Yin: The Chinese Transformation of Avalokiteśvara , 1st ed. New York: Columbia University Press.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual au‑
thor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

--- [Page 184] ---
Academic Editor: Jeffery D. Long
Received: 28 February 2025
Revised: 1 May 2025
Accepted: 9 May 2025
Published: 23 May 2025
Citation: Andhifani, Wahyu Rizky,
Hedwi Prihatmoko, Andrea Acri,
Arlo Griffiths, Mathilde Mechling,
and Gregory Sattler. 2025. Maritime
Links Between China, Sumatra, the
Malay Peninsula, and Buddhist
Monasteries in India (c. 11th–12th
Centuries) in the Light of Two
Fragmentary Inscribed Strips of
Copper from Muara Jambi. Religions
16: 664. https://doi.org/10.3390/
rel16060664
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).Article
Maritime Links Between China, Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula,
and Buddhist Monasteries in India (c. 11th–12th Centuries) in
the Light of Two Fragmentary Inscribed Strips of Copper from
Muara Jambi
Wahyu Rizky Andhifani1, Hedwi Prihatmoko1, Andrea Acri2,3,*, Arlo Griffiths4,5, Mathilde Mechling2,3
and Gregory Sattler6
1National Research and Innovation Agency (BRIN), University of Indonesia, Jakarta 10340, Indonesia;
wrandhifani.1981@gmail.com (W.R.A.); hedwi.prihatmoko@gmail.com (H.P.)
2École Pratique des Hautes Études, PSL University (EPHE, PSL), 75014 Paris, France;
mathilde.mechling@ephe.psl.eu
3Groupe de Recherches en Études Indiennes (GREI), 93322 Aubervilliers, France
4École Française d’Extr ême‑Orient, 75116 Paris, France; arlo.griffiths@efeo.net
5Centre Asie du Sud‑Est (CASE), 93322 Aubervilliers, France
6History Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; gsattler@ucla.edu
*Correspondence: andrea.acri@ephe.psl.eu
Abstract: This article explores the maritime connections relating to Buddhism and diplo‑
macy between polities in Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula, the Indian subcontinent, and
China from the beginning of the 11th century up to the 12th century CE. It focuses on new
epigraphic evidence from Muara Jambi in the form of two inscribed strips of copper men‑
tioning the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra, a monastery funded by the king of Śrīvijaya in Naga‑
pattinam (South India), and the Bālādityavihāra, probably located in Nālandā (Northeast‑
ern India). These new findings are compared to archaeological and textual materials from
elsewhere in the Buddhist world that cast light on the web of transregional connections
between Nusantara, China, and India in the early centuries of the second millennium.
Keywords: temples; diplomacy; South Asia; Southeast Asia; China; Sumatra; Muara
Jambi; Nagapattinam; Nālandā; Old Malay
1. Introduction
Maritime connections relating to Buddhism—or, more generally, “temple diplo‑
macy”1—between polities in Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula, South India, and China
from the beginning of the 11th century up to the 12th century CE have been discussed by
scholars since the early 20th century, mainly on the basis of epigraphic and textual sources
in Sanskrit, Tamil, Tibetan, Chinese, and Arabic. Given the dearth of primary sources from
the Buddhist site of Muara Jambi (Sumatra, Indonesia) and the Malay Peninsula in the pe‑
riod under discussion,2any new local sources are welcome, all the more so if they mention
the names of persons or institutions known so far only from non‑local sources. This article
focuses on one such new source, namely a pair of fragmentary inscriptions from Muara
Jambi, which are here translated for the first time and interpreted as two complementary
fragments of distinct copies of a single text. Our discussion presents this new source in
the light of contemporary ones from other parts of the Buddhist world with which Muara
Jambi had close connections.
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16060664

--- [Page 185] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 2 of 35
The two inscription fragments take the form of small strips of copper and were re‑
portedly recovered from the bed of the Batanghari River near the Muara Jambi temple com‑
plex. They are now kept, respectively, at the Culture Conservation Bureau3and at Yayasan
Rumah Menapo,4both in the provincial capital of Jambi. Both artifacts have been curso‑
rily described and photographically reproduced for the first time in a catalogue dealing
mainly with inscribed tin foils from Sumatra by Tejowasono et al. (2019 , pp. 13, 49), while
the lines of the Old Malay text engraved on them have been transliterated in a publication
on inscriptions from the Śrīvijaya polity ( Andhifani and Tedjowasono 2021 ).5If these lines
of text are confirmed to be genuine, then they will constitute a new piece of historical evi‑
dence on the late‑10th–early 11th‑century Śailendra King Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman, who is known
from inscriptions from the Cōl a domains in South India mentioning him as father of King
Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman (as well as in Tibetan and Chinese sources), and two Buddhist
monasteries, which are situated, respectively, at Nagapattinam (Nākappat
˙t
˙inam) in South
India and Nālandā in Northeast India, namely the eponymous Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra and
the Bālādityavihāra, named after Gupta King Bālāditya.
Since past historiography has tended to associate Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman with either
Kedah in the Malay Peninsula (present‑day Malaysia) or Palembang (present‑day Indone‑
sia), him being mentioned in source material recovered from Jambi not only adds to the
scant epigraphical evidence of this king, but it also throws new light on the historical and
geographical context of the polity in those areas (which have been labeled as “Śrīvijaya”
by previous scholarship as well as non‑indigenous sources, though we still lack any local
source using that name in this period) and its links with South India in the framework of
temple diplomacy. This complements the evidence available so far of (Buddhist) transre‑
gional diplomatic networks linking South India, polities in the Malay Peninsula and Suma‑
tra, and China. However, since the new source material was not derived from scientific
excavations and there is no information other than hearsay about the circumstances of its
recovery, concerns about authenticity must be raised. This topic is revisited in the conclu‑
sion, where relevant parallels with pointillistic cold‑working and the possibility of forgery
are explored further. On the basis of the palaeographic and linguistic features of the two
inscription fragments, as well as of our visual inspection of the artifacts, we conclude that
the documents must be authentic.
2. Description of the Artifacts
On 10 and 11 June 2024, a team constituted by Andrea Acri, Hedwi Prihatmoko,
Mathilde Mechling, Gregory Sattler, and Wahyu Rizky Andhifani visually inspected the
two inscription fragments (Figures 1and2), kept respectively at the BPK V (A) and Yayasan
Rumah Menopo (B) in Jambi, and took full photographic documentation. In the follow‑
ing subsections we describe the results of our examination of the physical objects bearing
the inscriptions.6
2.1. Strip Kept at BPK V Jambi
The first strip (A) is catalogued as “010, 01/BPCBJB/Cu/VIII/2019” in Tejowasono et al.
(2019 , p. 13). It is reproduced in recto and verso and described as being written in Old
Malay language and Old Sumatran script, and has having been recovered from the Batang‑
hari River. No classification of its contents is given the catalogue, and no portions of the
text are transcribed. No information on the archaeological context and circumstances of its
discovery are given either, probably because it was not recovered during an official archae‑
ological excavation but was purchased from a private individual. The artifact, most likely
made of fairly pure copper, as is the second artifact (B) presented below,7is a rectangular,
narrow‑shape strip (measuring 10.8 cm in length ×2.3 cm in height ×an estimated thick‑

--- [Page 186] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 3 of 35
ness of 0.1 cm)8with its left end narrower and pierced with a round hole. This may have
served for attaching the strip to another artifact. The right end of the strip shows traces
of tear and has visibly been cut off. Given the thinness of the strip, this could have been
achieved by repeatedly folding the artifact in half one way and then the other, possibly
after its discovery, as there would have been no reason for the strip to be folded during its
time of use.9The inscription it bears is incomplete due to the loss of a part of the support.
While the length of the original artifact is unknown, it seems likely that it would have been
roughly twice its current dimensions.
(a) 
 
(b) 
tt
tt
Figure 1. Recto (top, ( a)) and verso (bottom, ( b)) of strip A (Photos: Wahyu Rizky Andhifani).
The recto of the strip displays two lines of engraved text, the first one of which opens
with a spiral symbol (Figure 1, top). Instead of forming a continuous engraved line, as
is most common for inscriptions on metal in Southeast Asia, the characters ( aks
˙aras) have
been traced by small dots. Upon closer inspection with a magnifying glass, the “dots” were
observed to be V‑shaped. The “V” shape of the tool marks corresponds to the shape of a
burin, which left slightly raised edges along the engraved marks (Figure 3). The deep and
sharp V‑shaped tool marks suggest cold working in the metal after the manufacturing of
the strip. The engraved lines are straight, with regular intervals between the characters
(Figure 4). The tool marks have a consistent shape and depth.

--- [Page 187] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 4 of 35
tt
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
tt
 Figure 2. Recto (top, ( a)) and verso (bottom, ( b)) of strip B (Photos: Hedwi Prihatmoko).tt
ﬃ
tt
ﬀ
ṣ
 
Figure 3. Details of the recto of fragment A showing the V‑shape of the tool marks and their regularity
in space and depth (Photo: Wahyu Rizky Andhifani).tt
ﬃ
tt
ﬀ
ṣ
 
Figure 4. Details of the recto of fragment A showing the regularity of the V‑shaped tool marks and
characters (Photo: Hedwi Prihatmoko).

--- [Page 188] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 5 of 35
The single line engraved on the verso contrasts remarkably with the two lines on the
recto. The tool marks are irregular, the characters are not regularly spaced, and the in‑
scribed line is not straight (Figure 5). Some tool marks are very deep, while others are not
(Figures 5and6). The surface on this face is not smooth, presenting a great number of small
marks and scratches. The central part displays ripples—a feature that none of our photos
captures clearly—which might suggest that the artifact was cast, perhaps in an open, flat
mold (the ripples could be traces of the liquid metal as it cooled down and solidified).
However, it is also interesting that the recto surface is very smooth, with rounded edges
(Figures 3and 4), while the verso surface is rougher, and the edges are raised (Figure 5).
The verso also displays a line incised along the edge, but it does not seem to have been
engraved like the characters. The curled edge and the line running parallel to it are char‑
acteristics observed in hammered gold sheets cut to the desired shape with scissors or fine
shears ( Craddock 2009 , p. 375). Our copper strip was probably cut to the desired shape
using a similar technique, perhaps after hammering the copper into a thin sheet.
 
tt
tt
ṣ ṁ
ṅ
Figure 5. Details of the verso of fragment A with raised edges and an incised line particularly visible
along the bottom edge (Photo: Wahyu Rizky Andhifani). tt
 
tt
ṣ ṁ
ṅ
Figure 6. Details of Figure 5: the V‑shaped tool marks on the verso of inscription A are very light for
the first character, deeper for the following ones, and vary from being widely spaced to being more
closely set. Their length also varies; some are long, others are short.
2.2. Strip Kept at Yayasan Rumah Menapo, Jambi
The second strip (B) is catalogued as “045; 02/PADMA/Cu/VIII/2019” in Tejowasono
et al. (2019 , p. 49). It is reproduced in recto and verso and described as being made of
copper,10written in Old Malay language and Old Sumatran script, and recovered from the
Batanghari River. The measurements of this artifact are in the same order of magnitude
as the first (11 cm in length ×2.2 cm in height ×an estimated thickness of 1 mm). The
content is described as “mantra”, and the following transcription is given of the first few
and last characters:
… nmu ga saks
˙a da mcu o ˙m ra …
… ddhan m kara ( ˙na) la …

--- [Page 189] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 6 of 35
As with the first strip, no record about the archaeological context of its finding exists
for this one either. However, while in the village of Muara Jambi, we were able to speak
to the person—his identity remained undisclosed—who claims (accidentally) to have re‑
covered this inscription from the bed of the Batanghari River, right in front of the main
settlement, while extracting sand. According to him, it was found in an earthenware jar
with various objects in tin and copper, including ancient coins. This is in harmony with
the green corrosion marks described below, which could be the result of corrosion due to
contact between the strip and such objects.
The recto of the strip displays two lines of text, whose characters have been traced by
means of small, engraved dots (Figure 2). These dots are V‑shaped and have visibly been
made by means of a burin, as is also the case for strip A. Both inscribed lines on this face are
irregular. The characters are not set with regular spaces in between each (Figure 7). The
tool marks do not appear to be regular either, but it must be noted that observations on
this artifact were more difficult for several reasons. The surface displays deep horizontal
marks, which suggest that the strip has undergone treatment of corrosion with an abrasive
tool. Furthermore, dust remains encrusted in the tool marks, and chalk powder had previ‑
ously been rubbed on the surface to facilitate reading of the inscription. We removed the
chalk with a soft, non‑abrasive cotton cloth, as well as by blowing on the surface, but we
could not remove all chalk and dust with this method. Although this prevents a precise ex‑
amination of the engraving, our general impression is one of less regularity than the recto
of inscription A (Figure 1).tt
ﬃ
tt
 
ﬀ ﬀ
Figure 7. Detail of the recto of fragment B (Photo: Mathilde Mechling).
On the verso, there is one line of text that ends with a spiral symbol, probably mark‑
ing the end of the text in the same way that this symbol marks the opening of the text
on fragment A (Figure 8). However, near the broken lower left side there are also three
dots/tool marks, which could suggest the presence of a second line of text in the missing
portion of the strip. The surface on the verso is not smooth and shows slightly regular
bumps that could suggest that this artifact was shaped through the hammering technique.
This remains uncertain, as the surface is patinated, shows spots of green corrosion (likely
where the artifact touched another metal object), and shows scratches resulting from clean‑
ing with an abrasive tool. However, similarly to fragment A, but this time on the recto,
fragment B displays curled edges and a line running parallel to the edges, indicating that
it was cut to shape with scissors or shears, likely after being hammered (Figure 2, recto).
The left edge is also noteworthy, as it shows traces of tear where the artifact has broken
off, perhaps by being folded, while the lower left corner is cleanly cut off at an angle, in a
straight line, as if cut with a sharp tool.

--- [Page 190] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 7 of 35
 
ﬀ
ān ̇ś n ̣ ฀ ̣ ā
ū āśīāā ā n ̣ ฀ ̣ ā ā
śīāā ā n ̇ ā
ū฀ ̣ā n ̣ ā ā
ā ā
śīāā śīāā
ā ā
ﬀ
ﬀ
Figure 8. Details of the verso of fragment B (Photo: Mathilde Mechling).
3. Text and Provisional Translation
Below, we offer a diplomatic transliteration of the text engraved on the two strips,
with the one facing the other. This transliteration is virtually identical to the one published
by Wahyu Rizki Andhifani and Hedwi Prihatmoko in Andhifani and Tedjowasono (2021 ,
pp. 64–66), except for the division of a few words. The + marks correspond to the spiral‑
shaped opening/closing symbols found at the start of the text on A and at its end on B.
A Bﬀ
 
ān ̇ś n ̣ ฀ ̣ ā
ū āśīāā ā n ̣ ฀ ̣ ā ā
śīāā ā n ̇ ā
ū฀ ̣ā n ̣ ā ā
ā ā
śīāā śīāā
ā ā
ﬀ
ﬀ
ﬀ
 
ān ̇ś n ̣ ฀ ̣ ā
ū āśīāā ā n ̣ ฀ ̣ ā ā
śīāā ā n ̇ ā
ū฀ ̣ā n ̣ ā ā
ā ā
śīāā śīāā
ā ā
ﬀ
ﬀ
Ar1. + kathora kā ˙nśa kan
˙d
˙a 1 | barisi
valānda …
Ar2. ndenan ·barkna pamūja ka bharāla
śrībā...Br1.…(lā)nda tāsak ·damcu khan
˙d
˙a 5
brātña kā 5 su 1
Br2. … (śrī)bālādityabihāra | d ˙nan·ka
bharālaﬀ
ān ̇ś n ̣ ฀ ̣ ā
ū āśīāā ā n ̣ ฀ ̣ ā ā
śīāā ā n ̇ ā
 
ū฀ ̣ā n ̣ ā ā
ā ā
śīāā śīāā
ā ā
ﬀ
ﬀ
ﬀ
ān ̇ś n ̣ ฀ ̣ ā
ū āśīāā ā n ̣ ฀ ̣ ā ā
śīāā ā n ̇ ā
 
ū฀ ̣ā n ̣ ā ā
ā ā
śīāā śīāā
ā ā
ﬀ
ﬀ
Av1.…lendracūd
˙āman
˙ivarmmabihāra … Bv1.… (bi)hāra +
The parallel arrangement above allows us to note that the last words preserved on
each of the three lines on strip A can be matched with the initial words on the correspond‑
ing lines of strip B, so much so that words preserved incompletely on the one can be con‑
fidently reconstructed by means of the other, as follows:
valānda—[valā]nda
śrī‑bā[lāditya]—śrī‑bālāditya
bihāra—(bi)hāra
The two strips seem to have slightly different dimensions and bear slightly overlap‑
ping texts. In combination with the technical differences observed above, these observa‑

--- [Page 191] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 8 of 35
tions prove that we are not dealing with two halves of one original strip. Initially, we sus‑
pected that either of the two strips could be a forgery that was created to match a genuine
one. However, the most plausible interpretation seems to be that we are dealing respec‑
tively with authentic artifacts, one being the left and the other the right half of two distinct
copper strips of similar size that bear a similar text. While it would be possible to imagine
a scenario whereby the two strips bore related but not identical texts, nothing stands in
the way of assuming that both strips originally contained exactly the same text. Although
it is admittedly a surprising coincidence that two complementary halves of distinct strips
engraved with an identical text would have been recovered in entirely uncontrolled ar‑
chaeological circumstances, this is the hypothesis that underlies the reconstructed textual
layout for both copies of the text that we now present in the Noto Sans Kawi font that
closely resembles the original script:tt
ṣ
āṅśṇḍ ā ā ṇḍ ā ā ā
ū ā śīāā ā ṅ ā śīś
ūḍāṇ ā
ṅś ā āṭ ṇ
Śīāā
ŚīŚ ū฀ ̣ā n ̣
ﬃ
ﬃ ā
ﬃ
ﬃ
The characters printed in red color are entirely lost only in the respective copy, and
those printed in blue are lost in both copies, meaning that we assume the two parts not to be
fully complementary, because we need to restore two aks
˙aras at the line transitions Ar1/Ar2,
Ar2/Av1, Br1/Br2, and Br2/Bv1. These restored characters are represented in square brack‑
ets in the conventional epigraphic edition of the combined texts that now follows, along
with a translation, while still leaving some problematic and untranslatable terms in italics.
Reconstruction
kathora kā ˙nśa kan
˙d
˙a 1 | barisi valānda tāsak ·damcu khan
˙d
˙a 5 brātña kā 5 su 1
[valā]ndenan ·barkna pamūja ka bharāla śrī‑bālāditya‑bihāra | d ˙nan·ka bharāla [śrī‑
śai]lendra‑cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmma‑bihāra.
Provisional Translation
1kathora ofka˙nśa, filled with 5 valanda tāsak damcu , weighing 5 kāt
˙i, 1suvarn
˙a.
These valanda are for worship to the Lord of the Śrī‑Bālāditya monastery and to
the Lord of the Śrī‑Śailendra‑Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman monastery.
4. Linguistic and Philological Commentary
Even a cursory glance at our edition of the text is sufficient to confirm the provisional
identification of the language by Tejowasono et al. (2019 ) as Old Malay (OM). Affixed
forms like bar‑isi and brāt‑ña are distinctive among the epigraphically attested early lan‑
guages of the Indonesian archipelago. On the corpus of OM documents known so far
(consisting of about 35 inscriptions and one manuscript), we refer to Griffiths (2018 ); for
further discussion, as well as a map showing the distribution of the other OM inscriptions
known so far, we refer to Clavé and Griffiths (2022 ). For studies of the linguistic features

--- [Page 192] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 9 of 35
of the forms of Malay found in this small corpus, we refer to the same publications, as well
asMahdi (2005 ,2015 ).
OM documents from diverse parts of the Malay world, covering a period from the
7th through the 14th centuries, reveal an orthographic pattern whereby vowels spelled
long are assumed to reflect stress on penultimate vowels in pronunciation (because vowel
length as such was not a phonemic feature of the language). This is observed in the present
text in the immediately transparent word brāt‑ña (Modern Malay berat‑nya ) “its/their
weight” and in the more challenging keyword valānda . The latter figures once before the
demonstrative inan to which it is joined in sandhi so that it appears as valāndenan .11An in‑
stance of sandhi that also touches on word formation is the form tāsak , which is not imme‑
diately recognizable from the perspective of Classical or Modern Malay (C/MM), that we
interpret as ta‑asak with a variant of the coincidental tar‑ prefix that normally corresponds
to C/MM ter‑.12
After those general remarks on spelling and grammar, we turn to a discussion of the
new lexical material roughly in the order of the words’ or word combinations’ appearance
in the text.
kathora kā ˙nśa—The second word, the precursor of both gangsa and kangsa in C/MM
and of Indian origin,13is also attested in the Tanjung Tanah manuscript where we read
(p. 22, lines 4–5): jaka bahu:ta ˙m mas·pirak·riti ra:ncu ˙m ka ˙mśa tambaga .Kozok (2015 , p. 77)
translates the whole passage as “if one owes a debt of gold, silver, brass, rancung , bronze,
copper”, interpreting ka˙mśa to mean bronze. By contrast, Mahdi (2015 , p. 203) translates
the list as “gold, silver, bronze, brass, copper”, taking riti‑rancung as a single expression
meaning bronze and assuming ka˙mśa to mean brass. The fact that this list of terms is
translated differently on different pages of the same book dedicated to the manuscript
illustrates the uncertainty inherent in interpreting premodern terms designating metals
and alloys. The problem of which Malay term corresponds to which copper‑based alloy
has been analyzed in Manguin (1976 , pp. 251–53), and he considers that C/MM kangsa
means “bronze”.14This has been observed likewise for the use of ka˙msain Cambodian in‑
scriptions of the same general period as our inscription.15Although dictionaries of Malay
tend to gloss gangsa and kangsa as “bell‑metal”, we interpret kā˙nśain our inscription to
mean “bronze”.
The word kathora , though apparently likewise of Indian origin,16is not known to us
in this precise form in any Indian source, but it is found in an Old Khmer inscription of
924 Śaka (1002/3 CE) to denote an object of value offered to a deity, though little more can be
inferred from the passage.17The corresponding entry in Jenner (2009 ) cites related words in
Modern Khmer and in Thai—where the meaning is “spittoon, chamber pot, bedpan”—and
glosses the Old Khmer word as “ A vessel of unidentified form and function, perhaps a cus‑
pidor”. A word that expresses an apparently similar meaning and has the closely similar
form kan
˙t
˙orais found in only one Old Javanese (OJ) text, namely the Tantu Pa ˙ngәlaran , on
which basis the corresponding entry in Zoetmulder (1982 ) is formulated as “(Skt kat
˙ora) a
kind of cup or vessel”, although the textual evidence here suggests a vessel significantly
larger than a cup.18A rare epigraphic occurrence of the Sanskrit word cited by Zoetmul‑
der, or more precisely the diminutive form kat
˙orikā , is found in a 6th‑century inscription
from East Bengal, in a list of utensils donated to a community of ascetics; the context allows
the translation “small cup”.19In our context, the meaning of kathora seems to be related to
the meaning of kan
˙t
˙orain the Tantu Pa ˙ngәlaran ; whatever the exact type of container desig‑
nated by kathora , it must have been large enough to contain five smaller containers and, if
our interpretation of damcu is correct, nearly 4 kg of cinnabar.
Although other scenarios cannot be excluded, we are inclined to suppose that the con‑
text is one of transshipment of goods from China to India. Metalwares were commonly

--- [Page 193] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 10 of 35
exported from China to the Indian Ocean region beginning as late as the 9th century and
continuing until recent times; thus, the appearance of such a sizable bronze vessel in our
text corresponds with much of the textual and material record. Such items were perhaps
the most valuable type of commodity on board ships departing from China beginning in
the 11th century.20In terms of large metal vessels, we find examples in the form of caul‑
drons recovered from several shipwrecks. For instance, a variety of cast iron cauldrons
were recovered from the early 9th‑century Belitung wreck, as well as two copper alloy
handles that were once riveted to a large cauldron ( Flecker 2017 , pp. 30–31). Thirty‑two
cauldron handles were also recovered from the early to mid 10th‑century Intan wreck, with
some of those vessels believed to have been made of copper alloy ( Flecker 2002 , p. 98).
Iron cauldrons were also discovered at the sites of the late 10th‑century Cirebon wreck
(Liebner 2014 , p. 206) and the 12th–13th‑century Java Sea wreck ( Flecker 2002 , pp. 26, 87,
98, 138), while the export of such items to Java and the Philippines is likewise attested to in
Song‑period texts ( Wheatley 1959 , p. 117). Most or all of these items found in shipwrecks
would appear to have been Chinese manufactures. Perhaps the best example of a large
bronze vessel would be a fully preserved bronze cauldron that Claudine Salmon describes
as “a straight‑handled deep belly cauldron that was recovered in 1994 near Candi Keda‑
ton (in Muara Jambi)” ( Salmon 2003 , p. 94). Scholars believe that this item was likewise
imported from China. These examples suggest to us that the kathora in question was a sim‑
ilar commodity of high value that additionally functioned as a storage container as it was
shipped overseas.
khan
˙d
˙a—Our text uses first kan
˙d
˙a, then khan
˙d
˙a, as a numeral classifier, a usage attested
neither in C/MM nor in any OM document. The latter spelling seems to be the original one,
allowing us to link this usage to Sanskrit khan
˙d
˙a“portion”. The same tatsama word is used
as a numeral classifier in the new Indo‑Aryan language Oriya ( Neukom and Patnaik 2003 ,
sct. 3.4.3), while the corresponding tadbhava form khān is used in Bengali ( Rácová 2007 ). On
the use of vatu “stone” as a numeral classifier in an OM inscription from Java, see Griffiths
(2018 , p. 279). On the use of numeral classifiers in the Tanjung Tanah manuscript, see
Mahdi (2015 , pp. 207–8).
valānda —This term, with a long āon the penultimate syllable in accordance with the
OM spelling habits outlined above, is found in the exact same spelling also in the Laguna
copper‑plate inscription from Luzon, the Philippines (see below), and corresponds to va‑
landa orvalan
˙d
˙ain some sources written in OJ, both from Java itself and from Bali. All
these terms may be antecedents of belanja in C/MM and blanja Modern Javanese (see our
n. 22 for the meanings of these words), although the correspondence of /d/ in OM and
OJ to /j/ in C/MM and Modern Javanese is linguistically irregular and, hence, requires an
ad hoc explanation. In a recent publication ( Clavé and Griffiths 2022 , p. 193), one of the
present authors argued against this idea, as it had been proposed by Antoon Postma (1991 ,
p. 170).21The main argument against it was the theory that belanja is a loanword from
Sinhalese‑Pali valañja ,22because “there would be no reason for the OM loan to show ndif
valānda too were based on the same Sinhalese‑Pali word with its ñj, i.e., /n Ã/”. The con‑
nection with C/MM belanja thus having been rejected, it was argued that valānda “must
be analyzed as vala + nda , with typical OM marking of vowel length on the penultimate
vowel”. Arlo Griffiths now wishes to withdraw this argument because it failed to give ac‑
count of the complexity inherent in the argument relating C/MM belanja to a Sinhalese‑Pali
term and of the occurrence of valan
˙d
˙a/valanda in OJ sources.
As for the hypothesis connecting Malay belanja to a Sinhalese/Pali term, the complex‑
ity is manifold. First, the early (epigraphic) Sinhalese form of the word in fact has an
/nd/ cluster, and there is reason to believe that the Pali word valañja with an /nj/ cluster
is historically derived from the vernacular word with /nd/.23Second, the semantics are

--- [Page 194] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 11 of 35
also complicated in the Sinhalese data, with the Modern Sinhalese valaňda (singular direct
case form of valan , which is simultaneously stem and plural form) not only meaning “sign,
mark” but also “earthenware vessel, pot” and the verb valaňdanavā “to use, to eat, to enjoy”
apparently being derived from the latter sense of the noun.24Geiger (1941 , p. 158, nos.
2356 and 2357) mentions both noun and verb, though without citing the meaning “vessel,
pot” for the former, and indicates that the historical spelling, attested in inscriptions as old
as the 10th century, was with l
˙instead of l.25In the Dictionary of Sinhala Epigraphical Words
(Ranawella 2007 ), one finds val
˙anto mean “pot, vessel” and numerous related entries all
with /nd/ and meanings derived from the notions of “enjoying, using”. In short, whether
or not Malay belanja is ultimately connected with them, these Sinhalese data are potentially
relevant to the interpretation of valānda in OM and valanda/valan
˙d
˙ain OJ. Let us now first
present the OJ data.
In redacting the entry for his Old Javanese–English Dictionary ,Zoetmulder (1982 ) was
aware only of literary, and not of any epigraphic, data, and he was unable to draw a clear
conclusion as to the word’s basic meaning; however, for the two derived forms amalandani
and pamalandan he proposed the meanings “to place or keep st. in a container” and “that
in which st. (valuable) is kept or offered?” These forms are exceedingly rare, with each
being citable only from a single text, but the texts in question are relatively old (ca. 12th c.
CE), and the contexts leave little doubt about the involvement of some kind of container,
though not necessarily a “box”, as published translations presume.26
Turning to epigraphic evidence, there is only one occurrence in an inscription from
Java proper, viz. in the Telang I charter (825 Śaka, 904 CE), line 1v13: vineh pirak dhā 1
vd
˙ihan yu 1, valandaniran ulih pirak mā 8 sova ˙m“they were given 1 dhāran
˙aof silver, 1 pair of
vd
˙ihan (cloth); their valanda when going home was 8 mās
˙aof silver per person”. The word
valanda here could mean “payment, remuneration”, although we cannot exclude that it
designates a container for valuables. There are several occurrences in OJ inscriptions from
Bali, dating to the 11th and 12th centuries, where the word valanda also appears in the in‑
significantly variant spelling valan
˙d
˙a.27In the Campetan charter (no. 556b, 1071 Śaka, 1149
CE), line 3r2, we read: maśraha ya valan
˙d
˙a mā 4 saput thāyu i hya ˙n bapa “they should deliver 4
mās
˙as ofvalan
˙d
˙aeach to God Bapa”. In this context, “payment” or “tribute” might be a suit‑
able meaning, though again we cannot exclude a kind of container. Otherwise, we have
in the epigraphic corpus of Bali three inscriptions containing one or multiple instances of
the phrase ta˙ngapana ri ˙n pirak lumaku valanda or its equivalent ta˙ngapana ri ˙n pirak lumari va‑
landa with lumari taking the place of lumaku . There are also some cases where the words
manahurānusuna “will repay [and] pile up” or tahilakna “will pay as tribute” take the place
oflumaku/lumari , and there is a number of cases where valantәn —apparently a krama ‑like
derivation, cf. Griffiths (2020 , pp. 124–25)—takes the place of valanda/valan
˙d
˙a.28Very few
specialists of Balinese epigraphy have so far attempted to translate any of these variant
phrases.29For our part, we have the impression that the one with ta˙ngapana means some‑
thing like “they should be hired with silver currency (if lumaku/lumari , literally ‘moving’,
can have this meaning) as valanda ”.
In all these epigraphic passages, the earliest dating to 904 CE, it is evident that
valanda/valan
˙d
˙a(orvalantәn ) appears in contexts where payments are being made and val‑
ues are expressed with the weight measure mās
˙a(abbreviated mā), which represented one‑
sixteenth of the unit suvarn
˙a(abbr. su) that we see in our text as well as in the OM Laguna
copperplate inscription, dating to 900 CE, line 5: anu diparlappas ·huta ˙mda valānda kā 1 su 8 .30
In this context, valānda was interpreted by Clavé and Griffiths (2022 ) as related to the San‑
skrit word bala “(military) force)”, so that the phrase in question was translated to “what
was resolved was his military debt (amounting to) 1 kāt
˙iand 8 suvarn
˙a”. We would now

--- [Page 195] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 12 of 35
rather interpret the phrase as meaning either “what was resolved was his valānda debt of
1kāt
˙iand 8 suvarn
˙a” or “what was resolved was his debt, a valānda of 1kāt
˙iand 8 suvarn
˙a”.
Perhaps we may reconcile the usage related to payments in the epigraphic contexts
with that related to the storage of valuables observed in the two OJ literary texts referred
to above by assuming that the term was able to express not only such senses as “outlay;
disbursement; expenditure; budget” but also the container in which accumulated wealth
was stored, much like the English words “treasury” or “bursary” (and French “bourse”).
It is curious that our text furnishes the only epigraphic occurrence of valanda that clearly
designates a container rather than a payment.31Given the fact that five of these containers
need to fit together into one bronze vessel, we are inclined to think that these valānda s may
have been pliable containers like bags rather than boxes.
In conclusion, we have the impression that the OM and OJ evidence presented above
is not incompatible with the hypothesis that C/MM belanja and Modern Javanese blanja de‑
rive from valānda /valanda , although the modern terms can no longer be used to designate
a container. It also seems possible that the premodern words are ultimately connected
with the Sinhalese word valaňda , although there are aspects of this question that we lack
the competence to judge. Regarding the irregular sound correspondence between C/MM
belanja and OM valānda , we have suggested above that an ad hoc solution is necessary, and
we are inclined to seek it in the phenomenon of krama ‑forms already observed above in the
local Balinese usage of valantәn besides valanda . While the creation of polite‑register ( krama )
words besides inherited vocabulary is generally considered to be characteristic of Javanese,
the phenomenon is known to have impacted Malay as well.32It is therefore imaginable that
belanja is in origin a krama ‑transformation based on valānda . We can cite no precisely anal‑
ogous case of a krama form, but we can point out the existence of some other unexplained
cases of correspondence of /d/ to /j/ in the languages of Indonesia.33
tāsak —We have considered identifying this as C/MM tasik/tasek “sea, lake” or as Old
Javanese tasak “ripe, cooked” (cf. C/MM masak ), but neither option seems particularly suit‑
able. Hence, we tentatively interpret the form as ta‑asak derived from asak “to pack, to fill,
to stuff” (cf. C/MM sesak , originally sa‑asak ). Cf. Mahdi (2015 , pp. 194–95) on ta‑ =ter‑ in
the Tanjung Tanah ms., with examples like taamit and taulih from the Tanjung Tanah ms.
We only need to assume that sandhi has taken place to obtain tāsak .
damcu —To interpret this word, which can be matched neither with any word known
to us from Malay or related languages nor with Sanskrit, we are forced to explore the
possibility of borrowing from other languages. We have considered but rejected the possi‑
bility of borrowing from Tamil த௘ா  tamicu “East Indian kino” (which would have been
perceived by a Malay speaker as something like /tamisu/). From Chinese, we have consid‑
ered淡酒 (Mandarin danjiu , Hokkien tamchiu ) “light wine”, whose Hokkien pronunciation
would have been perceived in terms of Malay phonology as /tamciu/, and 銅子 “copper
coin” (Mandarin tongzi , Hokkien tangchi ortangchu ), probably perceived in Malay phonol‑
ogy as /tangci/ or /tangcu/, but we have rejected these too as likely sources of damcu for
semantic and phonological reasons and, in the second case, also because of the low likeli‑
hood of the term having been in use in the 11th and 12th centuries.34Although the phono‑
logical match with any Chinese pronunciations likely to have been in use in Southeast Asia
in the 11th and 12th centuries is also not perfect, we believe the best combination of plausi‑
ble sense and similar sound is with the Chinese term for cinnabar, written 丹朱 (Mandarin
danzhu , Hokkien tanchu ) and pronounced in Hokkien in such a way that a Malay speaker
might have perceived it as /tancu/ or /dancu/.35Why it was actually spelled damcu , reflect‑
ing perception of the Malay sound and /m/, is a problem, though one that we deem to be
relatively small, since the range of spellings that might have been adopted for transcribing
丹朱 in OM is broad, given how many relevant variables are unknown to us.

--- [Page 196] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 13 of 35
Cinnabar was a commodity commonly imported to and exported from China. Con‑
sidering that it was shipped from China to markets across much of East and Southeast
Asia, it fits well into the historical context of our inscribed strips. It was used in the pro‑
duction of medicine, handicrafts, cosmetics, paint (for structures, paintings, and statues),
and in funerary rites across much of the world ( Gliozzo 2021 ). The two essential compo‑
nents that derived from cinnabar were vermilion, which was used as a coloring agent, and
mercury, which was used to make medicine and in the gilding of metals. China has al‑
ways possessed large cinnabar deposits, as has Vietnam ( Schafer 1967 , p. 157; Zhu fan zhi,
juan 1, Jiaozhi section, ed. R. Zhao n.d. ). During the Tang dynasty (618–907), cinnabar
was shipped out of ports in the Zhedong region (present‑day Zhejiang province) ( Schafer
1963 , p. 153) and from Guangzhou. In the latter port city, it was freely used as a common
medium of exchange along with gold and silver ( Schafer 1967 , p. 153), which is notewor‑
thy because Guangzhou was the main port for overseas trade with states in Southeast Asia
and the Persian Gulf in that period.
In addition to its varied uses, the popularity of cinnabar as a trade commodity can be
attributed to the fact that sizable deposits of the mineral did not exist or were not known
to exist in many areas that actively participated in long‑distance sea trade. Such areas in‑
cluded Japan, Java, India, and possibly Sumatra ( Gliozzo 2021 , p. 7).36The import of Chi‑
nese cinnabar in Japan is well‑documented, as it appears on a list of 60 drugs presented to
the Tōdaiji Buddhist temple in 756 ( Schafer 1963 , p. 180), in a record of gifts given from
a Chinese merchant to a Japanese courtier in 1028 ( von Verschuer 1999 , p. 6), and on a
list of “Chinese goods” dated to 1052 ( Batten 2006 , p. 115).37Cinnabar is also listed as an
item of export from China to Java in the early 13th‑century work Zhu fan zhi (juan 1, Shepo
section). This text further records that, in one of Java’s vassal states, the women used ver‑
milion for makeup, nail polish, and to dye their clothes and that the product was in high
demand ( Wheatley 1959 , p. 91; Zhu fan zhi, juan 1, Sujidan section). In India, around the
time of the Song dynasty, minium, a lead‑based substance very similar to cinnabar (and
often mistaken for it), was known as cīnapis
˙t
˙a, or “China flour” ( Schafer 1956 , p. 425). This
is a strong indication that such substances were commonly imported there from China.
The use of mercury compounds is also prevalent in Indian medicinal texts ( Gliozzo 2021 ,
p. 8). As for archaeological evidence, cinnabar was discovered on the Quanzhou ship‑
wreck, which sank after returning to China from Southeast Asia in the late 13th century
(Museum of Overseas Communications History 1997 , p. 49). Although most of the cargo
consisted of commodities purchased in Southeast Asia, a certain portion also consisted of
unsold Chinese wares, and cinnabar might have belonged in that category. Another ex‑
ample is the Nanhai wreck, which sank around 1183 on its way to Southeast Asia after
departing from Guangzhou. Cinnabar was among a wide range of items discovered in the
ship’s hold, along with precious metals and ceramics ( Zhang et al. 2024 , p. 267).
Looking beyond the historical context of cinnabar as a commodity and toward its re‑
ligious significance, we may point to the lump of cinnabar discovered among precious
stones, minerals, gold objects, a ritual deposit box, and other goods in a shaft underneath
temple ruins at the Santubong site in Sarawak, North Borneo ( Harrisson and O’Connor
1967 , p. 213). It is believed that these items were used in a Tantric Buddhist ritual, much
like a similar collection of goods—some containing traces of mercury on them—that were
found at a temple site in the Bujang Valley area of Kedah ( Treloar 1967 ;Treloar 1968 ). What
is certain is that vermilion was widely used across much of the world to paint religious
structures, statues, and paintings. Mercury, extracted from cinnabar, was also commonly
used as a component in the gilding of copper‑alloy Buddhist statues, one likely example
being the gilt bronze sculpture kept in the Victoria and Albert Museum (London), repre‑
sentative of the Nagapattinam style.38

--- [Page 197] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 14 of 35
Furthermore, the usage in Old Javanese literary contexts of the term valanda to indi‑
cate the storage of wealth in the form of precious metals and jewelry likewise parallels
the known instances of cinnabar being included along with gold and silver as precious
commodities transported by sea across long distances, and of it being used as a means of
exchange along with gold and silver in port cities. Cinnabar is commonly discovered in the
geological deposits of gold and silver, which possibly strengthened such an association be‑
tween the mineral and precious metals in common perceptions ( Gliozzo 2021 , p. 7). Finally,
as Old Khmer ( Vincent 2012 , pp. 182, 184, 185) and Old Malay do not have any known na‑
tive terms for cinnabar or vermilion, the use of a foreign loanword adopted from a region
with longstanding connections with those cultures would render 丹朱 a strong candidate
for the original term from which damcu derived. A notable comparison would be the In‑
donesian term for vermilion and lipstick, gincu , which derives from a Hokkien term for
vermilion, ginchu銀朱 (Mandarin yinzhu , literally ‘silver vermilion’ or ‘silver cinnabar’).39
brat —The word, spelled here with a long āpresumably because, before suffix ‑ ña, it
stands in penultimate position, obviously corresponds to berat in C/MM. While no occur‑
rence of the word is found among OM documents known so far, there are quite a few OJ
inscriptions where brat (orvrat) occurs in similar contexts. See Darmosoetopo (1993 ) and
Wisseman Christie (2015 ) for several examples. As in these OJ instances, and as in the OM
Laguna copper‑plate inscription ( Clavé and Griffiths 2022 , pp. 199–200), the weight is ex‑
pressed using units from a system that seems to have been in use throughout maritime
Southeast Asia. In this system, a consistent set of abbreviations is used to express units, kā
(for kāt
˙i) and su(for suvarn
˙a) being among them. According to Wisseman Christie (2004 ,
pp. 92–93), 1 kāt
˙i= ca. 760 g, while 1 suvarn
˙a= 1/20th of that (38 g), so that the total weight
indicated here is 3838 g. In OJ inscriptions, the unit dhāran
˙a(abbreviated dhā) is used as
an equivalent for suvarn
˙a, specifically for weights in silver, and the next lower unit was
mās
˙a(1/16th of a suvarn
˙a/dhāran
˙a). To illustrate these comparisons, we include in the next
section (5) a photograph of such an Old Javanese inscription on a silver plate.
barkna —This form has not so far been encountered in OM, although ma˙nәnakan , an‑
other form derived from the same base kәna, is attested in the Tanjung Tanah manuscript.
The C/MM morphological equivalent to OM barkna would have to be ber‑kena , but this
form does not exist (while ber‑kena‑an , with a further ‑ ansuffix, does exist and means “con‑
nected, applicable”). From the context, it is clear that barkna must mean “is for” (a meaning
that could be expressed in C/MM with bagi,buat,guna , oruntuk , not one of which seems
to be inherited from Old Malay) or “has the purpose of”. Although there is not a precise
morphological match, it seems that this OM usage must be connected somehow with the
existence in OJ of pakәna “function, purpose” and the derived form mapakәna “to be of use
for, intended for, proper to serve as”.
bharāla —This is at present the oldest known attestation in OM of the ancestor of
C/MM berhala , which is ultimately related to the Indic word bha(t
˙)t
˙ārathat was widely
used as such both in Sanskrit and in vernacular sources in various parts of Southeast Asia,
including the Malay and Javanese spheres.40For discussion of the linguistic background,
seeGriffiths (2014 , pp. 228, 242–43) and Hoogervorst (2017 , pp. 388–89). For examples of
bhat
˙ārain OM and OJ contexts, see the inscriptional comparisons given below (Section 5).
d˙nan—This word, the ancestor of both dan“and” and dengan “with” in C/MM, ex‑
pressed both meanings in OM. See Mahdi (2005 , p. 192).
5. Final Translation and Comparisons
Although the reconstruction proposed in Section 3assumes complete identity be‑
tween the two texts of which fragments have been found, nothing stands in the way of
small differences, notably for the quantities, expressions, and weights. Keeping this inher‑

--- [Page 198] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 15 of 35
ent uncertainty in mind, and with reference to the commentary on the vocabulary items
offered in the previous section, we can at last propose the following interpretation of the
text’s meaning:
1 bronze cauldron ( kathora ), filled with 5 bags ( valānda ) stuffed with cinnabar
(damcu ), weighing 5 kāt
˙i, 1suvarn
˙a(i.e., about 3838 g). These bags are for worship
to the Lord of the Śrī‑Bālāditya monastery and to the Lord of the Śrī‑Śailendra‑
Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman monastery.
It now seems useful to situate the inscription in the broader cultural context of In‑
donesian epigraphy from the point of view of its textual contents and its palaeography.
Above, we mentioned that the report by Tejowasono et al. (2019 ) identifies the script as
“Old Sumatran”. We do not necessarily object to this term, but we wish to emphasize that
its pertinence is a question of definition. Depending on the definition used, it would be
equally correct to assign a label that is not island‑specific, the fundamental problem being
that we have no information about script names that were in use in ancient Sumatra41, nor
do we have any certainty that the two copper strips were manufactured in Sumatra at all.
Not only in language, but also in its palaeographic aspect, we find our text quite similar
to the Laguna Copper‑plate Inscription (900 CE), manufactured thousands of kilometers
away from Sumatra in Northern Luzon, but an equally pertinent comparison can be made
with the inscription on the back of the base of a bronze sculpture of the Buddhist deity
Lokanātha from Gunung Tua in Northern Sumatra (Figure 9).42Śīāā ŚīŚ
ū฀ ̣ā n ̣
ā
 
ā
 ⚬ ś ṣāī ā ś ā ā ā⌈
 n ̣ ฀ ̣ ṭā ā ⚬ ā ś ān ̣
ā ān ̣m ̇ ̥
 ā ttāām ̇ ā ⚬
Ś
ū ṭā
ā
ṭā
ā ṭā ā
ā ā
Figure 9. Inscription on the back of the Lokanātha statue from Gunung Tua, Northern Sumatra
National Museum of Indonesia, inv. no. 4839 or B 626 d (Photo: Garin Dwiyanto Pharmasetiawan).
(1)◦svasti śaka‑vars
˙ātīta 961 caitra‑māsa, tithi tritiya sukla, śukra‑vāra, tatkāla juru pā ⌈‑
(2) n
˙d
˙ai suryya barbvat ·bhat
˙āra lokanātha ◦Imāni kuśala‑mulān
˙i sarbvasatva‑sādharān
˙a˙m
kr
˚‑
(3) tvā Anuttarāyā ˙m samyaksambodhau parināmayami ( ◦)
Prosperity! Elapsed Śaka year 961, third tithi of the waxing (fortnight) of the month
of Caitra, a Friday. At that time, the master smith Sūrya manufactured Lord ( bhat
˙āra)
Lokanātha. [He expressed his intention by citing scripture:] “These roots of what is good
do I share with all beings and turn over to the unsurpassed, perfect enlightenment!”.
The date of this inscription, which consists of an Old Malay sentence and a dedicatory
sentence in Sanskrit, corresponds to 1039 CE.43The palaeographic aspect of this Sumatran
inscription is perhaps even more similar to our copper strips than the Laguna Copper‑plate
Inscription, so that this comparison would support dating our copper strips to the 11th
century CE. As we see below, their date of manufacture cannot have been before 1005/6 CE.
We see how the Buddhist deity in the Gunung Tua inscription is called bhat
˙āra
Lokanātha, using the term bhat
˙ārafrom which we have indicated that the term bharāla ,
in our strips, is derived. An example of use of the same term in an inscription on a metal
artifact from Java is given in the next comparison, which also illustrates the use of the word
brat and abbreviations dhā,su, and māfor expressing units of weight in silver or in gold
(Figure 10).44

--- [Page 199] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 16 of 35
(a) 
 
(b) 
ﬃ tt
ﬃ
 ￮ ṭā īn ̇ ā m ̇ ā ā
ṭā āṇ
ṇ āṣ
ṭā āṇ
Figure 10. Top ( a): back of a silver plate from Muteran, East Java, National Museum of Indonesia,
inv. no. 1738 (Photo: Arlo Griffiths). Bottom ( b): close‑up of the inscription engraved on the back
of a silver plate from Muteran, East Java, National Museum of Indonesia, inv. no. 1738 (Photo:
Arlo Griffiths).
(1)◦bhat
˙āra kakī ˙n abhaya brat ·dhā 11 (2) bratni ˙m mās ya su 1 mā 15
The deity ( bhat
˙āra) at Abhaya: weight 11 dhāran
˙as [in silver]. The weight of the gold,
it is 1 suvarn
˙a, 15mās
˙as.
Apparently, one has to understand that the silver plate was the property of the bhat
˙āra
at Abhaya and that it weighed 11 dhāran
˙as in silver, while allusion is also made to a quantity

--- [Page 200] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 17 of 35
of gold that would perhaps have been placed on the plate. A similar inscription on another
silver artifact from Java furnishes further parallels to the text on our two strips (Figure 11).45
  
(a) ( b) 
 ￮ ṭā ฀ ̣ m ̇ ā ￮
ṭā āṭ
āṅś
ā ā
ﬀ
tt
ﬀ
ﬀ ﬀ
ﬀ
Figure 11. (a) (left) and ( b) (right): Neck of a damaged silver vase from Banjarnegara, Central Java
National Museum of Indonesia, inv. no. 5824 (Photos: Garin Dwiyanto Pharmasetiawan).
(1) //◦// gavayan ·bhat
˙āra I d
˙i(hya)[ ˙m dyun pirak ·brat·k]ā 4 rambutnya lpas ·//◦//
Work belonging to the deity ( bhat
˙āra) of Dieng: silver vase weighing 4 kāt
˙i. Its hairs
are loose.
The use of the expression dyun pirak “silver vase” here, combining the name of an
artifact type and the metal from which it is manufactured, to label the very artifact on
which the text is engraved is exactly analogous to kathora kā ˙nśa“bronze cauldron” in our
strips. We also find the abbreviation kāhere, instead of its equivalent dhā, to express the
weight in silver. The final phrase, “Its hairs are loose”, is rather mysterious but clearly
again aims to add some further detail about the vase in question.
Several of the aspects of the texts engraved on these two pieces of Javanese silver‑
ware are analogous to the inscription on our two copper strips, with the notable difference
that the Javanese items themselves bear their labeling text, whereas our strips must have
served to label other artifacts. Comparable labels attached to cargo found in shipwrecks
elsewhere have been found to denote the ownership or intended recipient of certain items
and, in some instances, also contained details about the volume of goods and their names.
Their purpose was to demarcate commodities and sections of cargo on board a trade ship.
See, for instance, the hundreds of wooden strips found in the Sinan and Quanzhou wrecks
(Y. Li 2023 , pp. 137–43, and Figure 12below). An explanation for the similarities appar‑
ent in both copper plate inscriptions could be that those inscriptions held the same or a
similar function of distinguishing cargo on board a ship and that both inscriptions each
originally denoted distinct items and quantities of cargo but for the same intended recip‑
ient. It should be noted that, in the case of the Sinan wreck, much of the cargo on board
was also intended for Buddhist temples, as such temples often held major roles in finance
and trade. Additionally, the general shape of the copper strips might also be indicative of
a similar function as labels for cargo. Their complete shape, narrower on one end with a
pierced hole and pointed on the other end, can be deduced from the shape of each frag‑
mentary strip. Their similarity in shape and textual contents with cargo labels made of
wood found in the Sinan and Quanzhou wrecks cannot be a coincidence, as textually quite
different land grants inscribed on copper plates from Nusantara are usually also quite dif‑
ferent in shape, with significantly larger dimensions. One important difference between
the Muara Jambi strips and the Sinan and Quanzhou wrecks strips, however, is their ma‑
terial, a difference about which we prefer not to speculate here.

--- [Page 201] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 18 of 35
 
ﬀ ā
Ś ū฀ ̣ā n ̣ ā āā ā
āā ōḻ
ō̱ ā
ﬀ
ﬀ tt
ś
ā Ś ū฀ ̣ā n ̣ ā
āītt ā ṭṭn ̱ tt
ā ttn ̇ Ś Śī ṭā
ū฀ ̣ā n ̣
āā Āṉ n ̇
ā ōḻ ōḻ
Figure 12. Wooden tablets from the Sinan wreck. National Museum of Korea (Photo: Lee 2011 ).
6. The Inscribed Text in the Context of Transregional Buddhist
Networks (c. 11th–12th Centuries)
On the basis of the text preserved on the extant fragments, the reconstructed text
lists offerings for the worship to the Lords ( bharāla ), i.e., deities, of the monasteries called
Śailendra‑Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarma‑vihāra and Bālāditya‑vihāra. The first name occurs in virtu‑
ally the same form in the Sanskrit and Tamil Larger Leiden Copper‑plate Inscription of
Rājarāja Cōl a I (r. 985–1014), as well as other nearly contemporary Tamil inscriptions.46
These inscriptions have been discussed in a large number of secondary sources to recon‑
struct the historical background of diplomatic, religious, and commercial links existing
between Sumatra, South India, the Malay peninsula, and China in the period immediately
preceding the Cōl a raids of around 1025 CE, when Rājendra sent a fleet of warships to
raid and destroy important ports in Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula, but also in the pe‑
riod following them (see, e.g., Vogel 1919 ;Krom 1931 , pp. 236ff.; Majumdar 1933–1934 ;
Cœdès 1968 , pp. 141ff.; Chattopadhyaya 1981 , p. 88; Skilling 1997 ,2007 ;Seshadri 2009 ;
Schoterman 2016 ;Gornall 2014 , p. 520, 2020 , pp. 59 n. 91, 69–70, etc.).
As related by the charter, whose praśasti portion was added posthumously in 1019,
early in the reign of Rājendra I (r. 1014–1032), the Śailendra‑Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra was
built at Nāgīpattane (Sanskrit)/Nākappat
˙t
˙inam (Tamil), i.e., Nagapattinam, at the request
of Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman, born in the Śailendra family, lord of Śrīvijaya, king of Kat
˙āha
(Kedah in the Malay Peninsula),47who brought to completion—and claimed as his own
pious foundation48—the work started by his father Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman, in whose name the
monastery was built.49This undertaking, which probably took place in the 21st regnal year
of Rājarāja I (1005/6), who had granted the village of Ān aima ˙ngalam for the monastery’s
maintenance, was supported by his son and successor Rājendra Cōl a I. A subsequent Cōl a

--- [Page 202] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 19 of 35
king, viz. Kulōttu ˙nga I (r. 1070–1120), continued to support this monastery with endow‑
ments ( Jacq‑Hergoualc’h 2002 , p. 275). What is clear is that the Cōl a dynasty—many of
whose kings, like Rājarāja and Rājendra, were staunchly Śaiva—maintained good relations
with the rulers of Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula up to the first quarter of the 11th cen‑
tury, and they then challenged them for the control of the commercial maritime routes.
However, since Kulōttu ˙nga I’s charter explicitly records its issue at the request of two am‑
bassadors from the king of kid
˙āra(i.e., Kat
˙āha), it appears that the relationship between the
Cōlas and Śrīvijaya improved again after the Cōl a raids.50
The grant by Kulōttu ˙nga I states that King Rājarāja gave the village “to the Buddha
(buddhāya ) residing in the surpassingly beautiful Cūl
˙āman
˙ivarma‑vihārā of [such] high
loftiness [as had] belittled the Kanakagiri (that is, Meru)” ( Aiyar 1933–1934b , p. 257;
Karashima and Subbarayalu 2009 , p. 273). It is striking is that the mention of the Bud‑
dha in the monastery, to which the village was gifted, mirrors the mention of the Lord
(bharāla ) of the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman monastery to whom ( ka) the goods listed in the Muara
Jambi strips were to be offered in part. Even more striking is the mention of a Bālāditya‑
vihāra next to the Śailendra‑Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra in the Muara Jambi strips, as both are
found to co‑occur also in two roughly contemporary historical documents from southern
India and Sri Lanka. The first document is the closing verse in the Pali grammatical trea‑
tiseRūpasiddhi by scholar–monk Buddhappiya (fl. between ca. 1008 and 1165 CE) ( Gornall
2020 , p. 54). This monk, also known as Col
˙iya Dīpa ˙nkara, was originally from South In‑
dia but was active in Sri Lanka. In the aforementioned colophon, he claims that he was
a disciple of Ānanda, like a standard for Tambapan
˙n
˙i (La ˙nkā), and that he himself was
renowned like a lamp in the Damil
˙a (i.e., the Tamil) Country, glossed as coladeśaya and
sol
˙īrat
˙ain a Sinhalese commentary to the text (see below) ( Malalasekera 1928 , pp. 211, 220;
Gornall 2014 , p. 520). Indeed, Buddhappiya says that he resided in two (monastic) estab‑
lishments ( vāsa),51one of which was the Bālāditya.52The second (slightly later) document
is a version of the Rūpasiddhi with interlinear commentary in Sinhalese, which provides
the name of the other monastery as cūd
˙āman
˙ikarmavihāraya —obviously a scribal mistake
forcūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāraya (Paranavitana 1944 , p. 20, endorsed by Gornall 2014 , p. 520). It
is generally assumed that the Bālādityavihāra was situated in South India too ( Gornall 2014 ,
p. 520), but there is no direct evidence to prove this, as Paranavitana noted.53Paranavitana
(1944 , p. 21) also argued the following:
the Bālādityavihāra was evidently the more important of the two establishments,
for Buddhappiya made special mention of it while he left the identity of the other
to be explained by his exegetist. Like the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarma Vihāra and Dhammā‑
soka Vihāra of Negapatam, Bālādicca Vihāra, too, appears to have been named
after an important personage. The most famous Bālāditya of Buddhist history
was the king of Magadha who, according to Hieun Tsiang [i.e., Xuanzang], was
the founder of the celebrated vihāra of Nalanda but we cannot assert that a monas‑
tic establishment in the Col
˙a country was named after him.
There being, indeed, no direct evidence that the Bālāditya establishment mentioned in
the documents discussed above was located at Nagapattinam, for instance, as an affiliated
namesake of the famous Bālādityavihāra at Nālandā,54our best candidate for it is still the
original foundation in Bihar; however, it cannot at present be positively identified with any
of the remaining structures.55Bālāditya developed various construction activities outside
of the monastery complex and built a large temple for an image of Śākyamuni Buddha.56
The importance of this (c. 6th century?) Gupta king is highlighted by inscriptional evi‑
dence as well as later Buddhist accounts, including Xuanzang’s 玄奘 (c. 602–664) Datang
Xiyu ji大唐西域記 [Record of the Western Regions from the Great Tang (Dynasty)], the Chi‑
nese biography of Vasubandhu ( Posoupandou fashi zhuan 婆藪槃豆法師傳 ), and the Sanskrit

--- [Page 203] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 20 of 35
Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa .57It is, therefore, not surprising that Buddhappiya only mentioned
that monastery, and that the Sinhalese commentary only glossed the lesser known of the
two. That he resided in those two monasteries far removed from each other is not surpris‑
ing either, as they may have been well‑connected in the network of Buddhist pilgrimage
of the time. More surprising is the curious synchronicity between the Rūpasiddhi commen‑
tary and our inscribed strips, which mention both monasteries. To this, the implication
of our interpretation must be added, namely that the cargo mentioned in the strips from
Muara Jambi was destined for two monasteries at ca. 1800 km distance from each other
as the crow flies. This must have posed logistical challenges, but it was not impossible to
achieve, especially because the greatest part of the journey would have been by sea, just
like the one needed to cover the ca. 2800 km separating Muara Jambi from Nagapattinam.
Contemporary evidence suggests that Buddhappiya’s monastic and scholarly career
was cosmopolitan, and that it transcended the borders of the Tamil country and Sri Lanka,
indeed. Buddhappiya is acknowledged by other sources from Sri Lanka as a famous Bud‑
dhist personality of his time; the Gandhava ˙nsaincludes him in the list of Sri Lankan masters
(la˙nkādīpakācariya ).58Buddhappiya had close ties with the Cōl a court, which, according
toGornall (2020 , p. 70), “may have contributed to the split that took place between the
monastic orders in South India and Sri Lanka”. An inscription issued by the queen of the
Sri Lankan King Vikramabāhu I (1111–1132) found at Polonnaruwa describes Buddhap‑
piya’s teacher Ānanda in similar terms as those found in the colophon of the Rūpasiddhi ,
and it states that the master had contacts (and possibly spent some time) with the Bud‑
dhist community of Tambarat
˙t
˙ha,59which Paranavitana has identified with Tāmbrali ˙nga,
the country around Ligor (Nakhon Si Thammarat, or Nagara Śrī Dharmarāja) in the Malay
Peninsula (see Wolters 1958 , p. 588). This area was also under the authority of Śailendra
kings Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman and Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman. Paranavitana goes against another
view identifying Tambarat
˙t
˙ha with a district in South India, and the matter does not seem
to have been settled yet.60Whatever the case may be, it is likely that Buddhappiya followed
in the foot‑steps of the propagation of Buddhism in the Cōl a country ( Paranavitana 1944 ,
p. 25). The possible presence of Buddhappiya’s teacher Ānanda in the Śailendra domains
of the Malay Peninsula just prior to the foundation of the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra in Na‑
gapattinam further supports the existence of close Buddhist linkages between that region
(with Sumatra) and South India, which go beyond the political and diplomatic aspect of
the donation of the monastery itself.
Other sources that are often used to reconstruct the aforementioned historical back‑
ground are Chinese accounts of diplomatic missions and Buddhist texts in the Tibetan
canon. The former sources describe the arrangement made between Emperor Zhenzong
(968–1022, r. 997–1022) of the Song dynasty (960–1279) and envoys of Śrīvijaya. During
their stay in the Song capital of Kaifeng in 1003—just a couple of years before the building
of the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra in Nagapattinam—the envoys informed the emperor that
their King Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman had built a Buddhist temple in Śrīvijaya dedicated to praying
for Zhenzong’s longevity, and they requested that the emperor provide both a signboard
with a temple name, as well as a bell.61The request was met by Zhenzong, who named
the temple Chengtian wanshou 承天萬壽 (“Heaven‑Bestowed Longevity”). According to
Claudine Salmon and Hans Bielenstein, the Chengtian wanshou temple may have actually
been constructed for a Chinese merchant community in Śrīvijaya.62These merchants may
have also advised the Śrīvijaya king on matters of diplomacy, as had happened in Java too,
with the merchant Mao Xu advising the Javanese embassy to China one decade prior to
Śrīvijaya’s embassy in 1003–1004 ( Sattler 2024a , p. 5). Some sources suggest that the Śrīvi‑
jayan envoys downplayed the importance of the Cōl as and even claimed they were under
their dominion, which caused a diplomatic reaction by the South Indian dynasty through

--- [Page 204] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 21 of 35
an embassy to the Chinese Emperor carrying lavish gifts ( Sen 2003 , pp. 229–34; 2009 , p. 62).
Later, a Śaiva temple in Cōl a style was erected in Quanzhou ( Guy 1994 ,2011 , pp. 253–59),
and in 1018, the Cōl a king is recorded as having received large gifts of “Chinese gold” from
Śrīvijaya for a temple staffed by Brahmans ( Sattler 2024b ;Sen 2003 , p. 67; Kulke 2009 , p. 6).
These examples highlight the phenomenon of “temple diplomacy” via maritime links in
the region, which might have “originated in and around the Indian Ocean region and cir‑
culated with the spread of Buddhism”.63
As for the Tibetan sources, they provide data for reconstructing the history, and trans‑
fer, of Buddhism in the region. In particular, they provide some historical details on cele‑
brated masters like Atiśa (a native of northeastern India) and Dharmakīrti of Suvarn
˙advīpa
(Dharmakīrti II) and their whereabouts in the early‑ to mid‑11th century (see in particular
Sinclair 2021 ;Schoterman 2016 ;Skilling 1997 ,2007 ). The latter is believed to have lived dur‑
ing Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman’s reign, as the colophon of one of the Tibetan Kanjur block prints
preserving his works, the Durbodhāloka , says that the original text was composed at the re‑
quest, and during the 10th year of the reign (ca. 1005–8 CE?), of King *Śrī‑Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarma‑
deva ( Lha dpal gtsug gi nor bu’i go cha’ )64of *Suvarn
˙advīpa ( Gser gling ), and its place of
composition was *Śrīvijayapura ( Dpal rnam par rgyal ba’i grong ) (see Sinclair 2021 , p. 7;
Skilling 1997 , pp. 188, 194 n. 12). Atiśa traveled to Suvarn
˙advīpa to learn from this Bud‑
dhist master, who ranked among the most respected and learned personalities of the time.
While these Tibetan sources highlight the cosmopolitan nature of the South and Southeast
Asian Buddhist world of the time, they are often imprecise; the geographical locations of
these political and religious personalities are still problematic. Sinclair (2021 , pp. 7–9) and
Skilling (1997 ) identify Suvarn
˙advīpa (=Suvarn
˙abhūmi) with Kedah in the Malay Penin‑
sula. The latter scholar in particular uses information contained in the Tibetan account
of Atiśa’s maritime journey to argue that the landing point of the ship on which he was
traveling was none other than Kedah. Skilling’s argument that Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman and his
son and successor Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman reigned in Kedah is derived from his analy‑
sis of the Sanskrit and Tamil inscriptions known as the “Leiden Plates”, which state that
Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman was both “lord of Śrīvis
˙aya” (only in the Sanskrit section) and
“lord of Kat
˙āha” (in both Sanskrit and Tamil sections). On the other hand, Miksic (2016 ,
p. 262) argues that “for the people coming from the Indian Ocean, the ruler of Kedah was
seen as more important than that of Palembang”, which is due almost certainly to Kedah
being the first major port that many ships traveled to before entering the Strait of Malacca.
This might also explain why the Leiden Plates were mainly concerned with the ruler of
Kedah. Miksic does not believe that “references to the ‘Lord of Śrīvijaya’ denote the ruler
of Kedah” since “Rulership of Kad
˙āra, Kid
˙āra, Kataha, Kad
˙āram, etc., was probably a glo‑
rious title in itself”. To him, the epigraphic and archaeological evidence rather suggests
that Śrīvijaya meant Palembang. Still, he thinks that “Malayu was the most important
Buddhist center in the Strait of Melaka between 1025 and 1200”, and that “ Atīśa may have
spent his time in Malayu/Jambi rather than in Kedah” ( Miksic 2016 , p. 263) for, according
to him, the only viable candidate for the location of Buddhist institutions of higher learning
as well as royal power that could support the scholarship of Dharmakīrti II and his circle
from an archaeological point of view is Muara Jambi. However, the fact that much is still
unknown about other sites that could be potential candidates for this royal and religious
center, including Kedah itself, makes it difficult to pin so much on Muara Jambi.
While we can only estimate the date of manufacture of the two inscribed strips of
this study, we likewise have no certainty as to the location from which the strips were
created for use as labels of religious donations. However, an examination of the Chinese
textual sources reveals important information that scholars, to date, have overlooked. This
information might provide clues to understand the political dynamics in play when the in‑

--- [Page 205] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 22 of 35
scribed strips were made. Many scholars have accepted the theory that Palembang served
as the capital of Śrīvijaya until sometime after the Cōl a raids of 1025, and by 1079, the
capital was moved to Jambi. This argument is primarily based on O.W. Wolters’ position
that the arrival of a tributary embassy from Jambi to the Song capital in 1079 signified that
the rulership of Śrīvijaya had shifted from Palembang to Jambi ( Wolters 1966 ; Xu zizhi
tongjian changbian, juan 299, ed. T. Li 1881 ). Following this event, two letters were sent
by Jambi leaders to a local Chinese administrator in 1082, though this is the last mention
that is made of Jambi in history until later dynasties ( Xu zizhi tongjian changbian , juan 330).
Wolters believed that, following this period, the frequent references of Śrīvijaya in Chinese
sources were, in fact, all references to a Śrīvijaya state with its capital in Jambi, and such
a view remains influential to this day. However, there is no additional textual evidence
to suggest that this might have been the case at any time prior to the collapse of Śrīvijaya,
which Chinese sources situate in the 13th or 14th century. A close examination of the 1082
entry in fact reveals that the Song court considered the leader of Jambi to be a “sovereign”
(guozhu國主 ), whereas each generation of Śrīvijaya leader was distinguished with a po‑
sition higher than this as “king” ( guowang 國王 ).65This was not an arbitrary distinction
but rather one that denoted clear positions among the Song court’s diplomatic partners,
and a higher title generally entailed greater status and rewards in diplomatic trade. A
more nuanced reading of the sources also demonstrates that the Jambi embassy was re‑
ferred to by Chinese record keepers as “the Śrīvijayan country of Jambi” ( Sanfoqi‑Zhanbei
guo三佛齊詹卑國 ), which implies that there were other states within the broader confines
of what appears to have been a Śrīvijaya confederacy. This comes as no surprise to scholars
who have noted that the Chinese translation of Śrīvijaya ( Sanfoqi三佛齊 ) directly translates
to “Three Vijayas”. Indeed, a range of Chinese sources makes distinctions between Śrīvi‑
jaya and Kedah, which is perhaps better interpreted as a distinction between Palembang
and Kedah rather than Kedah falling outside the confines of a greater Śrīvijaya confeder‑
ation.66In either case, Skilling’s view that Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman ruled from Kedah is
not supported in any way by Chinese sources. Additional distinctions were also made
between “Śrīvijaya” and “Jambi”,67which suggests that “Śrīvijaya” only ever referred to
either Palembang or to a large and loosely aligned political entity, in which Palembang
was originally the symbolic center.
If there continued to be a primary political center of Śrīvijaya following the Cōl a raids
of 1025, such a location might plausibly have remained in Palembang. Archaeological
evidence suggests a very gradual transition in economic prominence from Palembang to
Jambi rather than a sudden one, with much overlap in the 11th century ( Manguin 1987 ). It
is also understood that trade ships would stop at both Jambi and Palembang in the midst of
voyages between China and West or South Asia ( Wolters 1967 , pp. 207–10). Considering
that the copper strips were discovered in or near a riverway used by sea ships that traveled
across great distances, the discovery of the strips in the region of Jambi does not guarantee
that Jambi was the port where they originated from. Thus, both Palembang and Jambi
remain the primary candidates for where the strips were produced until more information
is forthcoming.
7. Conclusions
As mentioned at the beginning of the article, the two artifacts discussed here were not
recovered from a scientific excavation, but were rather purchased from private individuals,
and no written documentation exists about their exact findspots. In the light of these facts,
we feel compelled to exert due diligence and weigh the arguments both against and in
favor of their authenticity.

--- [Page 206] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 23 of 35
As for the arguments in favor of inauthenticity, one may point at some surprising
physical features of the strips, the slightly yet noticeably different engraving technique in
the verso side of A with respect to the recto side, with more irregularities and a different
depth, as well as the rarity of inscriptions engraved by means of a “pointilistic” technique
in Nusantara and the wider Indic world.68It is also important to note the cut in the mid‑
dle section of the strips, which could be an attempt to disguise inauthentic artifacts into
fragmentary antiquities; however, it cannot be excluded that it was deliberately done to
have more portions of authentic artifacts for sale. Further, the mention of the [ śrī‑śail]endra ‑
cūd
˙āman
˙ivarma‑vihāra in strip A and śrī‑bālāditya‑vihāra in strip B, both of which are referred
to in a Singhalese interlinear commentary to the Pali treatise Rūpasiddhi by Buddhappiya
(as already discussed in Paranavitana 1944 ), as well as the reference to the donations being
for the Lord or idol ( bharāla ) of the former monastery, which mirrors the same reference in
the Greater Leiden Copper‑plate inscription by Rājarāja I, looks like a “too good to be true”
scenario. Indeed, this scenario might have been brought to the fore by a putative forger
in order to concoct the narrative of Muara Jambi as the seat of the political power that
supported the funding of the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman monastery in Nagapattinam, as well as
the donation to the Bālāditya monastery in Nālandā associated with Buddhappiya—a sce‑
nario that is reminiscent of the donations made by the Sumatran sovereign Bālaputradeva
to build a monastery in Nālandā during Devapāladeva’s reign around 860 CE.69
In spite of this, we believe that their cumulative palaeographic, linguistic, and ma‑
terial features speak against their inauthenticity. Two arguments in particular could be
advanced. First, the forger would need to have had a deep and nuanced knowledge of not
only the script, but also a level of active command of the OM language that is present not
even among the very few scholars involved in this tiny field of study, to have generated
unattested but plausible OM forms like tāsak ,brātña , and barkna , imagining the use of the
loanword khan
˙d
˙aas a numeral classifier, while creating new instances of the challenging
word valānda that no previous scholar has adequately understood, deftly inserting it into
a context analogous to but not identical with its usage in other early Nusantaran sources,
and finally deciding to invent a word that cannot be Indic or Nusantaran, namely damcu .
Second, known forgeries tend to be made of gold, be furnished with decoration, reproduce
known texts, or if they do not, they tend to be long documents intended to buttress elabo‑
rate historical claims.70This is not the case of our strips. The fact that fragment B, which has
been analyzed by XRF (see n. 10), is mainly made of copper, and does not contain any zinc,
is also an indicator of its antiquity. More recent metalworks indeed tend to include zinc in
the alloy or be of brass (a copper–zinc alloy), but brass was not used on a deliberate basis
in South and Southeast Asia before the 16th–17th century ( Craddock 2009 , pp. 145, 151).
Further, at least one of the aforementioned surprising physical features could be inter‑
preted as not being particularly problematic. For instance, it seems relevant to point out
that an inscription (in Chinese) using the pointilistic technique is also found on another
metal item also recovered in the Jambi area, namely the bronze gong discussed by Salmon
(2003 ). This technique was known in China as early as the Han dynasty (202 BC–220 AD)
(Salmon 2003 , p. 108). By the 11th–12th century, at around the time the copper inscriptions
were produced, there are records of Chinese merchants learning Southeast Asian writing
systems. Thus, one could propose that such writing came from nearby workshops staffed
with individuals of different backgrounds, or that the writing could be produced by some‑
one of mixed ethnic heritage or by an Indian or Malay who spent much time in southern
China. This could also explain the unusual shape of the strips—narrow on one end with
a hole and pointed on the other end—resembling that of artifacts also used as labels for
cargo in China, but extant in wood (Figure 12).

--- [Page 207] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 24 of 35
Thus, we conclude that the two strips discussed in this article constitute
authentic—and exceptional—evidence agreeing with, and supporting, the historical sce‑
nario of the existence of two monasteries in South and Northeast India that were linked
economically (and otherwise) to Sumatra and China. The strips seem to have been labels
recording donations meant for both monasteries to be dispatched to India by ship. One
could only speculate about the reasons why the inscriptions never made it to their final
destination—for instance, that the boat in which they were transported in was shipwrecked
in the Batanghari River, or that part of the cargo fell into the river during its loading onto the
ship. Since a great quantity of ancient artifacts, including inscribed tin foils, small bronze
statues, coins, and pottery, have been reportedly recovered from the riverbed, either by
workers extracting sand or by antique‑hunters, this is a scenario that seems to be within
the realm of possibility (although, of course, alternative explanations exist, like for instance
the fact that the river may have shifted its course and what now lays underwater was once
on land). A fragment of a copper plate inscribed in substantially the same script type was
also discovered in the tenth‑century Intan shipwreck ( Flecker 2002 , pp. 89–90). Although,
in that instance, too little is preserved of the original plate to determine the size/shape, and
too few characters are preserved on it to determine the type of text inscribed, at least this
discovery shows that the existence of such items on board ships was not without precedent.
Thus, an explanation for the existence of the two entirely or nearly identical inscriptions
of which the respective remaining fragments have been studied here could be that both
inscriptions each originally denoted distinct items of cargo, i.e., bronze containers filled
with the same (or a similar) quantity of valuable objects, intended for the same recipients.
Author Contributions: All authors contribute equally to the manuscript. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This publication and the research leading to it have been supported, from April to August
2024 by the French National Research Agency project MANTRA—Maritime Asian Networks of Bud‑
dhist Tantra (ANR‑22‑CE27‑015, coordinated by Andrea Acri) and from September 2024 to March
2025 by the European Research Council project MANTRATANTRAM—Monsoon Asia as the Nexus
for the TRAnsfer of TANTRA along the Maritime routes (ERC Consolidator Grant no. 101124214,
led by Andrea Acri as Principal Investigator). The contribution by Arlo Griffiths was made as part
of the project DHARMA—The Domestication of “Hindu” Asceticism and the Religious Making of
South and Southeast Asia (ERC Synergy Grant no. 809094). Views and opinions expressed are those
of the authors only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Re‑
search Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be
held responsible for them.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in this study are included in the
article. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author(s).
Acknowledgments: This manuscript was published in the special issue “Beyond the ‘Spice Routes’:
Indic and Sinitic Religions across the Asian Maritime Realm,” with Andrea Acri and Francesco Bian‑
chini serving as guest editors. The authors of this article would like to acknowledge the partnership
and logistic support of the National Research and Innovation Agency of the Indonesian Republic
(BRIN, Jakarta), and especially the Head of the Research Center for Archaeometry, Dr Sofwan No‑
erwidi, as well as the invaluable support offered by the staff of the Balai Pelestarian Kebudayaan
Wilayah V Jambi dan Bangka‑Belitung, Yayasan Rumah Menapo (Roy and Borju), and the Museum
Nasional Republik Indonesia to access their collections. They also extend their thanks to Raghu‑
nath Akarsh, Catherine Churchman, Max Deeg, Véronique Degroot, Aruna‑Keerthi Gamage, Alas‑

--- [Page 208] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 25 of 35
tair Gornall, Tom Hoogervorst, Petra Kieffer‑Pülz, Henning Klöter, Phua Chiew Pheng, Sim Tze Wei
and Brice Vincent for their comments and feedback.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used:
BPK Balai Pelestarian Kebudayaan
CM Classical Malay
MM Modern Malay
OJ Old Javanese
OM Old Malay
V&AM Victoria and Albert Museum
Notes
1On “temple diplomacy”, see Sattler (2024a ).
2See, for instance, the remark by Griffiths (2011 , p. 139): “Compared to the wealth of epigraphical material using Indic systems
of writing that has been preserved from Java, Bali or from other parts of Southeast Asia, the epigraphical record of the great
island of Sumatra is very limited indeed”. For editions, translations, and discussions of short inscriptions from the Muara Jambi
temple complex, see Griffiths (2011 , pp. 159–65; 2012 , pp. 201–7). There is also a wealth of inscribed amulets ( Tejowasono et al.
2019 ;Meyanti and Andhifani 2021 ). However, none of the published items from Muara Jambi (which can be easily found via
idenk.net , accessed on 13 May 2025) contain any historical information of the type that we will discuss in this article.
3This was formerly the Balai Pelestarian Cagar Budaya (Cultural Heritage Conservation Bureau) in charge of the four provinces of
Jambi, Sumatera Selatan, Bengkulu, and Kepulauan Bangka Belitung ( https://kebudayaan.kemdikbud.go.id/bpcbjambi/tentang‑
kami‑balai‑pelestarian‑cagar‑budaya‑jambi , accessed on 13 May 2025). At the time of our field research, it had become the
Balai Pelestarian Kebudayaan with a smaller coverage area numbered “V”. At the time of this writing, the webpage for BPK
V is not working and the creation of a separate Ministry of Culture presages further changes in the organization of heritage
conservation agencies.
4Formerly Yayasan Padmasana, an NGO devoted to the preservation, study, and dissemination of the (pre‑Islamic) heritage of
Muara Jambi.
5The aforementioned publication paraphrases the information contained in the 2019 catalogue, adding a new transliteration
attributed to Wahyu Rizki Andhifani and Hedwi Prihatmoko, but including no translation, palaeographic and linguistic com‑
mentary, or discussion of the historical context and implications of the inscription, which we offer here for the first time.
6Examination with an optical microscope was not possible. We used a handheld jeweler’s magnifying glass (10 ×magnification,
21 mm viewing field, triplet lens). It was also not possible to bring the two artefacts together for direct comparison.
7Although it has not been possible to carry out an analysis of the metal, the aforementioned catalogue classifies the strip as a
copper inscription (Cu). The orange–red color we observed in areas that are not covered with oxidation—characteristic of fairly
pure copper (in contrast with the yellow–brown color of brass for example)—tends to confirm this assessment. Comparison
with artefact B, of a similar color and the main metal of which is copper according to XRF analysis (see note 10 below), makes
this possibility even more likely. Besides our two inscription fragments, only one example of an artefact not manufactured in
tin is given in the catalogue by Tejowasono et al. (2019 , p. 16), namely “013, 04/BPCBJB/Cu/VIII/2019”, a fragmentary and as
yet undeciphered inscription consisting of a few characters on the two sides of a broken plate of irregular shape measuring
3.8×3.4 cm.
8We did not have a tool, such as a caliper, to measure the thickness of both strips.
9While inscribed silver and gold foils were commonly rolled up to be inserted inside bronze statues as part of consecration
deposits (see Mechling et al. 2018 , p. 99–101, figs. 46–47), the copper strips under discussion had a different function, as we will
explain below. In Sumatra, it seems common practice to cut inscribed strips in half to multiply the number of artefacts that can
be sold after their discovery.
10The catalogue reports that the artifact’s copper content is 88.79%. However, screenshots of the two XRF scans carried out on
two sampling spots of the artifact by the research team in charge of the compilation of the catalogue on 18/06/2019, which were
kindly made available by Wahyu Rizki Andhifani, indicate readings of, respectively, 96.59% and 96.20% Cu, with a margin of
error of +/ −0.05%. The other values of the two readings are as follows: for reading one, 1.53% Si, 1.07% Al, 0.670% S, 0.072% Fe,
0.048% P, and 0.021% Pb; and for reading two, 1.68% Si, 1.03% Al, 0.774% S, 0.21% Fe, 0.081 P, and 0.025% Pb.
11On sandhi in Old Malay, see Clavé and Griffiths (2022 , p. 181).

--- [Page 209] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 26 of 35
12Cf.Mahdi (2015 , pp. 194–95) on ta‑ =ter‑ in the Tanjung Tanah ms., with examples like taamit and taulih from the Tanjung Tanah
ms. While these examples explicitly show hiatus after the prefix, we need to assume that tāsak represents a pronunciation without
hiatus or conceals the hiatus in favor of Sanskrit spelling norms. By way of comparison, we may point out that, in the closely
related Old Javanese writing tradition, it is very common for spelled vowels āto represent what was probably pronounced as a
/aPa/ with hiatus (e.g., kamatān =ka‑mata‑an ‘seen’), although this spelling tendency tends to become less pronounced over the
course of the centuries and is not clearly represented in Zoetmulder (1982 ).
13Turner (1962–1966 ), entries 2576 ka˙msá¹and 2987 kā́˙msya .
14It may be helpful to recall that bronze is a copper alloy with a low tin content; bell metal is a copper alloy with a higher tin
content; and brass is an alloy of copper with zinc.
15Vincent (2012 , p. 167): “Dans le cas des inscriptions sanskrites du Cambodge, ka˙msaqualifie donc plus spécifiquement le bronze,
ce que confirme le plus souvent le contexte dans lequel est employé ce terme.”
16SeeTurner (1962–1966 ), entries 2648 * kat
˙t
˙ōra“cup” and 2651 kát
˙hōra “hard, solid, stiff”. There is some indication in Sanskrit
lexicographic texts that the latter word could also cover other meanings, e.g., Hemacandra’s Anekārthasa ˙ngraha (ed. Hoshing
1929 ) 3.570cd kat
˙horau pūrn
˙akat
˙hinau indicated that it could mean both “full” and “hard”.
17Stela from Prasat Preah Nan (K. 89), https://dharmalekha.info/texts/DHARMA_INSCIK00089 (accessed on 13 May 2025),
lines 4–7: bhūmi man jauv nu padigaḥ jya ˙n 5 bhājana jya ˙n 5 mvāy śata vroḥh prāk 6 nu duk li ˙ngaśodhana bhājana nu dut mvāy, prāk
nu duk kruc mārgga I svok I kathor I, neḥ kalpanā āy kamrate ˙n añ li ˙ngapura “Land which he bought with [one] spittoon of 5 jya˙n;
one platter of 5 jya˙n; 100 vroḥ, 6 (unspecified units of) silver to be devoted to the li˙ngapurification; one platter to be devoted to
[it]; 1 (unspecified unit of) silver to be devoted to kruc mārgga ; 1 plateau; 1 kathora . These are the offerings to My High Lord of
Li˙ngapura”. No more can be learned from a single other occurrence in Khmer epigraphy (K 470).
18Ed. Pigeaud (1924 , p. 105, lines 12–13): kapālani ˙n vva ˙n pinakatahapanira, lavan kan
˙t
˙ora lima kvehnya, ya ta makavad
˙ahnirā ˙nayәm
śavani ˙n vva ˙n. This was translated by Stuart Robson (in Robson and Sidomulyo 2021 , p. 47) “The skull of people they used as
drinking cup, and bowls five in number, these served as their containers for keeping the corpses cool and damp.” A passage
resuming essentially the same words figures a few lines further down in Pigeaud’s edition.
19Furui (2016 , p. 669): “The donated movables listed in the grant include vessels and utensils (brass cooking vessels, brass/copper
water jars, three vessels for bali, kalantakas, brass tas
˙t
˙hakas, small cups), furniture (ivory stools), palanquins, musical instruments
(brass trumpets), parasols and instruments of labour (whetstones, adzes, spades, axes, gleaning baskets, digging instruments,
saws, daggers) (ll. 43–46). The utensils, furniture and palanquins seem to be meant for Ājīvika ascetics, while brass trumpets may
be used for the religious practice of song and dance. Instruments of labour, on the other hand, suggest their use in productive
labour and household duties by some service groups, although their assignment to the use by ascetics cannot be ruled out.”
20Such is the argument in Zhang et al. (2024 ), though the wholesale price of export ceramics abroad does not factor into
their estimations.
21We have since learned that the same idea had already been formulated a few years prior to Postma, with reference to the Old
Javanese equivalent of valānda , by Balinese scholars I Gusti Putu Ekawana and I Made Jaya, as cited below in our note on Balinese
scholarship (note 29).
22Gonda (1973 , pp. 31–32): “There are also some traces of Singhalese influence. The Malay word bĕlanja ‘outlay, expenditure’ and
in polite speech ‘salary’ (regarded as a reimbursement and not as a wage), also euphemistically for ‘a gift’, in modern Indonesia,
besides ‘housekeeping money’ also ‘(public) expenditure’ has long been regarded as the only unaltered Pāli word: valañja which
not only means ‘trace,’ or ‘use, design’, but also ‘that which is spent or secreted’ i.e., ‘outflow, excrement (in sarīravalañja ‘faeces’).
The verb valañjeti , at the root of which [the compilers of the Pali Dictionary used by Gonda] have supposed a Singhalese word,
can also express the idea of ‘spending’. This word, which in Indonesia no doubt always belonged to the ‘economical’ sphere,
seems to have been a commercial loan rather than a direct borrowing from Pāli texts, the more so as it seems to be wanting
in Old‑Javanese (in Balinese where it is also used as a root for ‘going shopping’ it may be considered as a Javanese or Malay
loan).” Before Gonda, we find the idea of a connection with Pali valañja already in the second edition of Gericke and Roorda’s
dictionary of Javanese, revised and enlarged by Vreede and Gunning ( Gericke and Roorda 1901 ), under the entry “ blănja : of
bêlănja , (Pâliwalañja , uitgaven PK.)” where “PK” stands for a personal communication received by the authors from Professor
(Hendrik) Kern.
23Because Pali is a Middle Indo‑Aryan language while Sinhalese is a New Indo‑Aryan one, and the former has status as a language
of scripture while the latter does not, both historical linguistic and cultural attitudes with regard to these languages tend to
predispose scholars to the assumption of Pali priority. Nevertheless, under the entry for the verb form valañjeti that exists beside
the noun valañja ,Rhys Davids and Stede (1925 , p. 603) argued for the opposite relationship in this case: “But the root & its
derivations are only found in lexicographical and grammatical works, therefore it is doubtful whether it is genuine. [...] There
seems to be a Singhalese word at the root of it, as it is certainly dialectical.”

--- [Page 210] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 27 of 35
24Clough (1892 , p. 575): “16. ṭṭō ṭō ﬀ  
tt ā ṅ  
ṭ ūṇṭ
17. tt  
ū ḥ ṅ ā ṅ āś ḥ ā ṅ ś ā ā ā  
ā ḥ āā ṅ ṅ tt ṅ
tt ṅ ḥ ṅ tt
 ā ﬀ  
ṅ 
18. āṅ ṅ ṇṭ ḍ āṅ ə 
ś ṅ ṅ  
 
19.
 ṣṭ  
 
Āī
 
 
20.  
21.  
ā  
22. ĕ  
ā
ī  
 
 ā
 
ă ă  
 
23.  
tt tt  
 
 
24. 575): “වලඳ  ̱ වලဒ ̱  
වලඳනවා
 ̆
25.  வளந்ௌ  ḷ ﬀ  
26. ā
ī
ṅ ə ̄ ṅ ṅ,Walan da, s. sign, mark, spot, token; pot, pan, earthen cooking vessel: pl. ṭṭō ṭō ﬀ
tt ā ṅ
ṭ ūṇṭ
 tt
ū ḥ ṅ ā ṅ āś ḥ ā ṅ ś ā ā ā
ā ḥ āā ṅ ṅ tt ṅ tt
ṅ ḥ ṅ tt
ā ﬀ
n ̇
 āṅ ṅ ṇṭ ḍ āṅ ə
ś ṅ ṅ
 
ṣṭ
Āī
 
 
ā
 ĕ
ā
ī
ā
ă ă
 
tt tt
 වලඳ ̱  pl. වලဒ  valan ̱
වලඳනවා
̆
  வளந்ௌ  ḷ ﬀ
 ā
ī
ṅ ə ̄ ṅ ṅvalan .Walan danavá ,16. ṭṭō ṭō ﬀ  
tt ā ṅ  
ṭ ūṇṭ
17. tt  
ū ḥ ṅ ā ṅ āś ḥ ā ṅ ś ā ā ā  
ā ḥ āā ṅ ṅ tt ṅ
tt ṅ ḥ ṅ tt
 ā ﬀ  
ṅ 
18. āṅ ṅ ṇṭ ḍ āṅ ə 
ś ṅ ṅ  
 
19.
 ṣṭ  
 
Āī
 
 
20.  
21.  
ā  
22. ĕ  
ā
ī  
 
 ā
 
ă ă  
 
23.  
tt tt  
 
 
24. වලඳ ̱ වලဒ ̱  
වලඳනවා  v  
̆
25.  வளந்ௌ  ḷ ﬀ  
26. ā
ī
ṅ ə ̄ ṅ ṅ,v. to eat, used only of priests or men of rank; also, to enjoy”. For the phonological history of the “half nasal” translit‑
erated as ňand on the declension of inanimate nouns in Sinhalese, see Geiger (1938 , sct. 23.1d, 64.2, 107.1, 108.1).
25It seems likely that the Tamil word ṭṭō ṭō ﬀ
tt ā ṅ
ṭ ūṇṭ
 tt
ū ḥ ṅ ā ṅ āś ḥ ā ṅ ś ā ā ā
ā ḥ āā ṅ ṅ tt ṅ tt
ṅ ḥ ṅ tt
ā ﬀ
n ̇
 āṅ ṅ ṇṭ ḍ āṅ ə
ś ṅ ṅ
 
ṣṭ
Āī
 
 
ā
 ĕ
ā
ī
ā
ă ă
 
tt tt
 වලඳ ̱ වලဒ ̱
වලඳනවා
̆
  word  வளந்ௌ  vaḷ ﬀ
 ā
ī
ṅ ə ̄ ṅ ṅval
˙antu , meaning “Big pot or vessel” and recorded only for the Jaffna dialect, is a
loanword from Sinhalese.
26–Sumanasāntaka 142.14, edition and translation by Worsley et al. (2013 ):
embuh tangis ri patangis‑tangisan suputrī
deni ˙n svavandhunira sә‑h atulu ˙n bvat i ˙n luh
prāptāmalandani pirak man
˙i vastu mūlya
len ta ˙n sәrәh kinaja ˙nan saha modakādi
The more the princess wept the more they wept. Her own relatives rushed to her aid because of the force of her tears.
They came and put silver and jewels of great value in a box , while betel, sweetmeats and other offerings were placed on
a cushion.
–Bhomāntaka 3.19, edition and translation Teeuw and Robson (2005 ):
akveh ta ˙n paricārikāmәkulakәn lulut ika ri nareśvarātmaja
tu˙ntu˙nni˙n turidanya rakva ri ˙n avaknya sinahaja vini ˙nkis i ˙n la˙nә‑
len ki ˙nki˙n lara kū ˙n ma ˙nәn‑ha ˙nәn ika ˙n rәn
˙a pamavan unә ˙n raras hati
rәs rūm‑rūm i liri ˙nnya hars
˙a pamalandanika vinavanāmatan‑matan
Many were the servant girls who stretched out their arms to offer the prince their love: The tip of their passion was of course
to be found in their bodies, naturally wrapped in their beauty. Others languished in painful heartache, picturing the pleasure
of being the vessel of his yearning. The awe and sweetness of their joyful glances were the box for storing it, set with jewels
like “eyes”.
27For these items we cite the numbering in the Epigraphica Balica system designed by Goris (1954 ).
28The inscriptions with valanda/valan
˙d
˙aare Kayubihi (no. 446, 999 Śaka/1077 CE, 2v4 and 3r5); Depeha/Bet Ngandang A (no. 555,
mid‑12th century CE, 3v2, 3r5, 3v2 and 4r2); and Kintamani F (no. 704, 1122 Śaka/1200 CE, 4r4–5, 4v2, 4r4–5, 5r2). Those with
valantәn are Dawan (no. 404a, 975 Śaka/1053 CE, 4r2–3, 5v3); Serai AIII (410, 989 Śaka/1067 CE, 6r4, 6v1, 6v2); Pandak Badung
(no. 436, 993 Śaka/1071 CE, 3r2); Bila II (no. 441, 995 Śaka/1072 Śaka, 5r4); Museum Mpu Tantular A (no. 509, 12th c. CE, 3v6);
and Lukluk + Ubung B + Pamecutan B (no. 560, 12th c. CE, 4v2).
29Unfortunately, none of the occurrences fall in the timeframe covered by Goris (1954 ) so that no form of the word valanda figures
in his glossary. In a note to their translation of the Kayubihi inscription, Ekawana and Jaya (1987 , p. 42) suggested that valanda
can express the meaning of belanja in Indonesian (i.e., in C/MM), but it has nothing to do with belanda , contrary to the assumption
previously expressed by Poeger (1964 , p. 12). The relevant passage is 2v3–4 (ed. and translation by Ekawana and Jaya, with
some corrections on the reading): pacaks
˙u ku 1 kabehananya, ri ˙m pirak·lumari valanda, tahilakna I jro paryya ˙nan·ri˙m cetra śukla
tithī saptamī “pacaks
˙ubesarnya 1 kupa ˙n, terhadap perak murni (asli) walanda supaya dibayarkan (disetor) di dalam parhya ˙nan
(bangunan suci) pada bulan Cetra, paro terang, tanggal 7 [the amount of] pacaks
˙uis 1kupa ˙n, against pure silver let a valanda be
paid to the parhya ˙nan(religious establishment) in the month of Cetra, on the seventh day of the waxing fortnight”.
Translations of the Dawan and Pandak Bandung inscriptions are available by Santosa (1965 ) and Ardika and Beratha (1998 ).
In his translation of Dawan and Pandak Bandung, Ida Bagus Santosa did not translate the word valantәn (pp. 62, 92). I Ardika
and Beratha offered different translations of valantәn from one inscription to the other. In the Dawan inscription, they translated
it as “tradition” (pp. 144–45), but in the Pandak Bandung inscription, they translated it as “offering” (pp. 315–16). It is possible
that they believed the word valantәn to have the same meaning as bantәn . Anyhow, they provided no justification for either one
of their translations. These are the relevant passages with Ardika and Beratha’s translations:
–Dawan 4r2–3 amnera ri ˙n pirak lumaku valantәn
“selanjutnya bayaran berupa perak berjalan sesuai dengan tradisi semula”
[furthermore the fee in the form of silver moves in accordance to the original tradition]
–Pandak Bandung 3r2–3 tan panusuna ri ˙n pirak lumaku valantәn
“tidak dikenakan panusuna terhadap biaya pembuatan sesaji”
[not levied by panusuna regarding the payment for making the offering]
30On the weight units, see the references furnished below in our entry brat.
31For the record, we mention here that some OJ inscriptions also use the derived noun pavalanda that seems to denote a tax or levy
related to valanda . The relevant passages do not seem to help in determining the meaning of the base word.

--- [Page 211] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 28 of 35
32Wilkinson (1959 ) indicates certain words as “courtly” synonyms of others and mentions such pairs as antan (alu),bangsal (balai ),
angan (hati),intan (hira),jantan (jalu),jintan (jahe),kacang (kara),negeri (negara ), and santan (sari). Several of these pairs may involve
borrowing from Javanese. As potential additions to Wilkinson’s examples, we would like to mention kencing (kemih ) as well as
kantung (and Javanese kanthong , both presumably related to kan
˙d
˙i‘pouch’ in OJ). Alas, we have not found any example, in Malay
or Javanese, of the derivation of a krama form by changing /d/ to /j/.
33We are aware of a 14th‑century OJ inscription using rujira instead of expected rudira (from Sanskrit rudhira ), and Sanskrit doli
has become joliin OJ.
34The term 銅子 is not prevalent in early Chinese sources. In contrast, we find dozens of occurrences of the term 銅錢 (Mandarin
tongqian , Hokkien tangchiⁿ ) where it definitely means “copper coin” in Song sources alone. The oldest use of 銅子 in the dic‑
tionaries we examined was in three literary works dating to the first half of the 20th century. We use Hokkien to determine
the pronunciation of these terms based on the historical prevalence of southern Fujianese people in Southeast Asia beginning
around the time of the Song dynasty. Middle Chinese would serve as a useful comparison for reconstructing most other Chinese
languages at this time, though Fujian languages would be an exception as they evolved from Old Chinese. See Pulleyblank (1984 ,
p. 3).
35Seehttps://sutian.moe.edu.tw/zh‑hant/tshiau/?lui=tai_su&tsha=%E4%B8%B9 (accessed on 13 May 2025) for modern Hokkien
pronunciations of the first character. The onset of 丹in these recordings sounds like /t/ in Malay, but it is quite possible that a
dialect with a sound more like Malay /d/ was the source ( https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/%E4%B8%B9 , accessed on 13 May 2025).
Regarding the second character, recordings of its modern Hokkien pronunciation are available at https://sutian.moe.edu.tw/zh‑
hant/tshiau/?lui=tai_su&tsha=%E6%9C%B1 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
36Although deposits are now known to exist in Japan, and it is also recorded as an exporter of mercury, Japan was importing
cinnabar at the time that our inscribed artifacts were produced. It is not clear when deposits in central Sumatra were first
discovered, though it is believed that the mineral was being mined in western Jambi at some point prior to European occupation
(Miksic 1985 , p. 69, citation no. 1). The Xin Tang shu does state that Śrīvijaya was a source of gold, cinnabar, and ambergris (Xin
Tang shu, juan 222, Shilifoshi section, ed. Ouyang 1936 ). Although Śrīvijaya’s reputation as a source of gold was widely known,
ambergris was a commodity brought to China from East Africa and West Asia, so it is not clear in this passage if cinnabar was
transshipped to China from Śrīvijaya or if it was mined there.
37It should be noted that this refers to goods brought to Japan by Chinese merchants, as some of the items on the list originated
from Southeast Asia and Korea.
38Inventory no. IPN.2639. See https://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O24788/standing‑buddha‑sculpture‑unknown/ (accessed on 13
May 2025) and Guy (2000 , p. 107, fig. 6). While no scientific analysis has been carried out on this statue, to our knowledge,
gilding through mercury amalgam has been scientifically demonstrated for Buddhist copper–alloy statues from several regions
through surface analyses. One of them is from South India, possibly from the same tradition or even the same workshop as
the V&AM statue ( Gänsicke 2016 , p. 17, fig. 2, ca. 9th century). Other examples come from Java ( Fontein 1990 , p. 183, no. 38,
ca. 8th–9th century), Cambodia ( Bourgarit et al. 2003 , pp. 115–16, Table 5, ca. 7th–9th century and 12th–early 13th century;
Gerschheimer and Vincent 2010 , pp. 117–18), Central Myanmar ( Guy 2014 , p. 89, cat. 37 and 38, ca. 8th century), and China ( Jett
1993 ). The current assumption is that mercury gilding was introduced to South and Southeast Asia perhaps through contact
with China, where the technique was used as early as the second century for the earliest Buddhist images ( Becker et al. 2014 ,
p. 270). However, the development of mercury gilding and the extent to which this technique was used in South and Southeast
Asia deserves more investigation, as systematic research has not yet been done on gilded copper–alloy statues in these regions.
39We thank Tom Hoogervorst for drawing our attention to gincu .
40SeeTurner (1962–1966 ), entry 9402 bhartŕ
˚‑,acc. bhártāram m. “husband”, bhartŕ
˚‑ m. ‘bearer’ RV.: > MIA. bhat
˙t
˙āra‑ m. “noble lord”
lex., [...]; NiDoc. bhat
˙ara,◦aǵa“master”, [...].
41On this issue, see Griffiths (2014 , p. 213).
42SeeGriffiths (2014 , pp. 217–19) for edition, translation, and commentary, as well as further bibliographic references on this
inscription. A digital edition is accessible at https://dharmalekha.info/texts/INSIDENK00059 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
43SeeDamais (1955 , pp. 207–8). This author also points out that the eye‑copy which we reproduce here is unreliable. We use
it nevertheless, for want of a better reproduction and because we deem that it gives an adequate overall impression of the
palaeographic aspect of this inscription.
44For this inscription, see the reading by J. L. A. Brandes in Groeneveldt (1887 , p. 325, note 1). A digital edition is accessible
athttps://dharmalekha.info/texts/INSIDENK00368 (accessed on 13 May 2025). A possibly related inscription, engraved on an
artifact whose whereabouts are alas unknown, is the one edited at https://dharmalekha.info/texts/INSIDENK00396 (accessed on
13 May 2025).
45A reading by F. D. K. Bosch was published without attribution in the Notulen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap (1924 , pp. 334,
657 no. 5824). A digital edition is accessible at https://dharmalekha.info/texts/INSIDENK00388 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
46For the editions and translations, see Aiyar (1933–1934a ,1933–1934b );Karashima and Subbarayalu (2009 , pp. 272–73).

--- [Page 212] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 29 of 35
47The inscription actually uses the designation Śrīvis
˙aya ( Karashima and Subbarayalu 2009 , pp. 272–73). The governance of both
Śrīvis
˙aya and Kat
˙āha is expressed as overlordship ( adhipati ,ādhipatya ). While the identification of the territory called Kat
˙āha in
Sanskrit and Kad
˙āram/Kid
˙āram in Tamil seems fairly secure, the territorial scope of Śrīvi(s
˙/j)aya is a matter of debate. According
toJacq‑Hergoualc’h (2002 , p. 357), the term Kad
˙āram/Kat
˙āha “designates Śrīvijaya as well as its supposed possessions in the
Malay Peninsula, or more precisely, in certain cases, in South Kedah itself”. See also the elaborate commentary in Cœdès(1918 ).
48“This lord of Kat
˙āha of great valour, the abode of virtues, thus prays to all future kings: ‘Protect (ye) for ever this my charity’”
(Karashima and Subbarayalu 2009 , p. 274).
49According to Schoterman (2016 , referring to Vogel 1919 ), the ruins of the sanctuary were located ca. two miles north of Nagapat‑
tinam and were still extant in 1867, before they were destroyed by the Jesuits (for the same view, see Ramachandran 1954 , p. 14).
However, this actually refers to the so‑called “Chinese pagoda” built in 1267 CE; see Guy (2011 , p. 254) and Kulke (2009 , p. 13).
50Kulke (2016 , p. 70). Gregory Sattler has argued that a decline in diplomacy between Song China and maritime states can be
attributed to a shift in attention by the Song court toward militarily powerful states along its northern border after the death of
Emperor Zhenzong in 1022. Any impact of the raids on non‑diplomatic trade with China would be difficult to assess, as such
trade was not systematically recorded in Chinese histories. See Sattler (2024a ). For a detailed list of Śrīvijaya embassies to the
Song empire, see Hartwell (1983 , pp. 172–81).
51According to Gornall, whom we have consulted on this matter (email dated 15 January 2025), the word vāsa (“residence”) was
used here for metrical purposes instead of vihāra , but it must have meant a monastic establishment, and this is indeed the
interpretation of the Sinhalese commentary.
52“[T]his correct Rūpasiddhi was composed by a monk named Buddhappiya, also known as Dīpa ˙nkara—a student of the excel‑
lent teacher Ānanda thera , who was like a standard for Tambapan
˙n
˙i (La ˙nkā)—he (Dīpa ˙nkara) was renowned like a lamp in the
Damil
˙a country, and being the chief incumbent of two monasteries including Bālādicca, caused the religion to shine forth”,
vikhyātānandatheravhayavaraguruna ˙m tambapan
˙n
˙iddhajāna ˙m, sisso dīpa ˙nkarākhyaddamil
˙avasumatīdīpaladdhappakāso; bālādiccādivāsa‑
dvitayam adhivasa ˙m sāsana ˙m jotayī yo, so ’ya ˙m buddhappiyavho yati imam ujuka ˙m rūpasiddhi ˙m akāsi . Trans. adapted by Gornall (2014 ,
p. 520) from Liyanagamage (1978 , p. 115). In an email dated 15 January 2025, Gornall suggests to amend the translation of the
participle adhivasa ˙mfrom “chief incumbent” (or “resident superior”, as in Liyanagamage) to “was a resident”.
53SeeParanavitana (1944 , p. 221): “Neither the Rūpasiddhi nor its Sinhalese gloss has any reference to Negapatam, and we are
therefore not in a position to say whether the other convent, named Baladitya, was situated at that place”. Lokesh Chandra
(1993 , p. 504) states that “Dīpa ˙nkara Thera (1100 A. D.) became the head of the Bālādicca Vihāra at Kancipura” (this Dīpa ˙nkara
is the same as Buddhappiya as their chronologies overlap: Lokesh Chandra calls him “Dīpa ˙nkara alias Buddhapriya”), without
providing any evidence in support of this statement, and that the Gandhava ˙nsa“also refers to twenty other Theravāda teachers
who wrote in Pāli at Kancipura”; however, Buddhappiya‑Dīpa ˙nkara is only mentioned in the list of Sri Lankan masters.
54An emblematic case of affiliated monasteries located at a great distance from each other is that of the Abhayagirivihāra in Anu‑
radhapura in Sri Lanka and its namesake on the Ratu Boko prominence in Central Java, documented by a Sanskrit inscription in
Siddhamātr
˚kā script recovered in the latter Buddhist complex. For a summary and references to previous secondary literature,
seeAcri (2016 , p. 17).
55According to Max Deeg (email dated 10 January 2025), Xuanzang’s description significantly deviates from the line‑up of the
monastic courtyards at Nālandā; hence, the map in Cunningham (1871 , plate XVI) is the fruit of imagination rather than fac‑
tual data.
56Deeg (2020 , pp. 239–40), on the basis of the inscription from the reign of King Yaśovarmadeva found at Nālandā ( Sastri 1942 ,
p. 79, lines 8–9), a seal from Nālandā referring to a Bālāditya‑gandhakud
˙ī (ibid., pp. 38–39), as well as Taishō shinshū daizōkyō no.
2087: 924a.29ff. and no. 2053: 238b.23ff (ed. Takakusu and Watanabe 1924–1932 ).
57See Deeg (2020 , pp. 238, 248–50), who notes that these sources seem to present the king as an amalgamation of different
Gupta rulers.
58Gandhava ˙nsa, ed. Minayeff (1886 , p. 67). See also Malalasekera (1928 , p. 220); Gornall (2020 , p. 69).
59O’Connor (1972 , p. 22), referring to Paranavitana, speculates that Buddhappiya may have been either a native of Tambarat
˙t
˙ha
(=Ligor) or spent some time there, apparently confusing Buddhappiya with his teacher Ānanda.
60SeeParanavitana (1943 , pp. 69–71). Jacq‑Hergoualc’h (2002 , p. 401) seems to support this theory, as he writes that “the term
could also—with less pertinence, however—be applied to a region of the Col
˙a kingdom near Tanjavur (since the sa˙ngha of Col
˙a
country is also described in the inscription as having ties with the same Ānanda)”.
61Song shi , juan 489 (ed. Tuo Tuo 1977 ); see Sattler (2024a , p. 5) and Salmon (2002 , pp. 62–63).
62Salmon (2002 , pp. 62–63); Bielenstein (2005 , p. 75). The archaeological record provides ample evidence of high volumes of trade
between Sumatra and China, for instance, large quantities of Chinese ceramics, many dating to the early 11th century, recovered
in the areas of Palembang and Jambi, with lesser amounts found in other locations throughout Sumatra, as well as in wrecks of
trading ships dating from the 9th to 13th centuries from the waters surrounding Java and Sumatra. For references to the relevant
secondary literature, see Sattler (2024a , p. 6).

--- [Page 213] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 30 of 35
63Sattler (2024a , p. 7). An early example is that of the donation of funds to build a monastery in Nālandā in the Pāla domains
(eastern India) by Sumatran King Bālaputra around 860. In turn, the Pāla King Devapāla granted tax revenue and manpower
from nearby villages for the upkeep of the same monastery ( Sen 2003 , p. 107; Acri 2016 , p. 18).
64Note the interesting overlap with the Chinese rendition of this name, Sili Zhuluowunifomadiaohua 思離咮囉無尼佛麻調華 , at‑
tested in Chinese historical sources, like the Song shi , juan 489.
65Later histories used the term guowang for this event, though this is due to those compilers’ mistaken assumption that the leader
who dispatched the embassy was the king of Śrīvijaya. Such histories make no mention of Jambi. Xu zizhi tongjian changbian
續資治通鑑長編 (juan 299) is aware of the distinction between both Śrīvijaya and Jambi entities and makes note of this to resolve
confusion among contemporary record keepers.
66See for instance an entry for the year 971 in Song shi (juan 198); an entry for the year 983 in Song shi , which also interestingly
draws a distinction between the Śrīvijaya “king” and Kedah “sovereign”, each with different names (juan 490); an entry for the
Xianping 咸平 reign period (998–1003) in Song hui yao jigao (Zhiguan 職官 44, ed. Xu 1936 ); an entry for the year 1015 in the
Zhulian section of the Song shi (juan 489); and an entry for the year 1016 in Xu zizhi tongjian changbian (juan 87), which also
denotes a lower diplomatic status of Kedah compared to Śrīvijaya. This is not to say that, over the span of several centuries,
Kedah’s status did not fluctuate between moments of greater and lesser independence.
67See the collection of writings Yunlu manchao , juan 5 ( Y. Zhao 2009 ), compiled in around 1206. The Zhu fan zhi , com‑
piled in 1225, lists Jambi among the dependencies of Śrīvijaya (juan 1, Sanfoqi section), although it also lists “Palembang”
as well. Elsewhere it states “Previously (Jambi) belonged to Srivijaya, though after a war (its leader) made himself king”
舊屬三佛齊，後因爭戰，遂自立為王 (juan 1, Jianbi section). The text does not describe any conquest of Śrīvijaya or neighboring
polities. One can also note Wolters’ statement that the Tanjore inscription detailing the Cōl a raids of 1025 “implies a distinction
between Śrīvijaya and Malaiyūr which would correspond to Palembang and Jambi” ( Wolters 1966 , p. 227).
68SeeSalomon (1998 , p. 66): “Some early inscriptions, mostly Kharos
˙t
˙hī relic dedications on metal plates, are written with a series
of dots (e.g., the Taxila silver scroll, ClI 2.1, 70–77)”. Sircar (1965 , pp. 76, 86) further mentions the Kalwan plate—also from the
Taxila region—of the 1st c. CE ( see Konow 1931 , p. 259).
69In recent years, there have been attempts to re‑link Muara Jambi to the monastic centers in northeastern India such as Nālandā
and Vikramaśīla, especially by means of the travel of Atiśa to Sumatra ( Inandiak 2013 ;Inandiak et al. 2018 ). This has favored the
awareness of local communities about the pre‑Islamic/Buddhist heritage of the region and stimulated interreligious dialogue.
70For a general discussion of non‑tangible interests involved in the production of fake epigraphic documents, see Gippert (2020 ,
p. 273). Moving to the realm of the transmitted literature from Java, a paradigmatic example of the faking of an elaborate chronicle
claiming to be from the early 17th century, but established to be a forgery using historical data mainly found in Western and
Indonesian scholarship, are the so‑called Pangeran Wangsakerta manuscripts; see Ekadjati (2017 ).
References
Acri, Andrea. 2016. Chapter 1: Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes, 7th–13th Centuries CE.
InEsoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia; Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS
Publishing, pp. 1–25. [ CrossRef ]
Aiyar, K. V. Subrahmanya. 1933–1934a. The Larger Leiden Plates (of Rajaraja I). Epigraphia Indica 22: 213–67.
Aiyar, K. V. Subrahmanya. 1933–1934b. The Smaller Leiden Plates of Kulottunga I. Epigraphia Indica 22: 267–81.
Andhifani, Wahyu Rizki, and Ninie Susanti Tedjowasono. 2021. Prasasti Prasasti Kedatuan Sriwijaya . Palembang: Museum Sriwi‑
jaya/Aksara Pena.
Ardika, I Wayan, and Ni Luh Sutjiati Beratha. 1998. Perajin pada masa Bali kuno . Denpasar: Udayana University Press.
Batten, Bruce L. 2006. Gateway to Japan: Hakata in War and Peace, 500–1300 . Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Becker, Lawrence, Donna Strahan, and Ariel O’Connor. 2014. Technical Observations on Casting Technology in First‑Millenium
Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam. In Lost Kingdoms: Hindu‑Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia . Edited by John Guy. New
York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, pp. 267–70.
Bielenstein, Hans. 2005. Diplomacy and Trade in the Chinese World, 589–1276 . Leiden: Brill.
Bourgarit, David, Benoit Mille, Thierry Borel, Pierre Baptiste, and Thierry Zéphir. 2003. A Millenium of Khmer Bronze Metallurgy:
Analytical Studies of Bronze Artifacts from the Musée Guimet and the Phnom Penh National Museum. In Scientific Research in the
Field of Asian Art: Proceedings of the First Forbes Symposium at the Freer Gallery of Art . Edited by Paul Jett, Janet G. Douglas, Blythe
McCarthy and John Winter. Washington, DC: Smithsonian, Freer Gallery of Art, London: Archetype Publications, pp. 103–26.
Chattopadhyaya, Alaka. 1981. Atīśa and Tibet: Life and Works of Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna in Relation to the History and Religion of Tibet,
with Tibetan Sources Translated Under Professor Lama Chimpa . Delhi, Varanasi and Patna: Motilal Banarsidass, [Reprint of first
edition, 1967].

--- [Page 214] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 31 of 35
Christie, Jan Wisseman. 2004. Weight and Values in the Javanese States of the Ninth to Thirteenth Centuries A. D. In Poids et mesures
en Asie du Sud‑Est: Syst èmes métrologiques et sociétés, 1: L’Asie du Sud‑Est austronésienne et ses marchés . Edited by Pierre Le Roux,
Bernard Sellato and Jacques Ivanoff. Études Thématiques 13. Paris: École Française d’Extr ême‑Orient, Institut de Recherche sur
le Sud‑Est Asiatique, pp. 89–96.
Christie, Jan Wisseman. 2015. Gold and Early Javanese Inscriptions. In Gold in Early Southeast Asia: Selected Papers from the Symposium
Gold in Southeast Asia, Yale University Art Gallery, 13–14 May 2011 . Edited by Ruth Barnes, Emma Natalya Stein and Benjamin
Diebold. Yale Southeast Asia Studies, Monograph 64. New Haven: Yale University Council on Southeast Asia Studies, pp. 75–88.
Clavé, Elsa, and Arlo Griffiths. 2022. The Laguna Copperplate Inscription: Tenth‑Century Luzon, Java, and the Malay World. Philip‑
pine Studies: Historical and Ethnographic Viewpoints 70: 167–242. Available online: https://philippinestudies.net/ojs/index.php/ps/
article/view/5135 (accessed on 13 May 2025). [ CrossRef ]
Clough, Benjamin. 1892. A Sinhalese‑English Dictionary , New and Enlarged ed. Colombo: Wesleyan Mission Press. Available online:
http://archive.org/details/sinhaleseenglish00clourich (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Cœdès, George. 1918. Le royaume de Çrīvijaya. Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extr ême‑Orient 18: 1–36. [ CrossRef ]
Cœdès, George. 1968. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia . Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Craddock, Paul. 2009. Scientific Investigation of Copies, Fakes and Forgeries . Oxford: Butterworth‑Heinemann.
Cunningham, Alexander. 1871. Four Reports Made during the Years 1862‑63‑64‑65, Volume I . Calcutta: Superintendent of Govern‑
ment Printing.
Damais, Louis‑Charles. 1955. Études d’épigraphie indonésienne, IV: Discussion de la date des inscriptions. Bulletin de l’École Française
d’Extrême‑Orient 47: 7–290. [ CrossRef ]
Darmosoetopo, Riboet. 1993. Beberapa benda purbakala berprasasti pendek temuan dari Wonoboyo. Berkala Arkeologi (Yogyakarta)
Khusus 13: 37–47. [ CrossRef ]
Deeg, Max. 2020. How to Create a Great Monastery: Xuanzang’s Foundation Legend of Nālandā in Its Indian Context. Hualin
International Journal of Buddhist Studies 3: 225–55. [ CrossRef ]
Ekadjati, Edi S., ed. 2017. Polemik Naskah Pangeran Wangsakerta , 2nd ed. Bandung: Pustaka Jaya.
Ekawana, I Gusti Putu, and I Made Jaya. 1987. Prasasti Pura Penataran Pucangan Desa Kayubihi Kecamatan Bangli Kabupaten Bangli .
Laporan Penelitian Arkeologi. Denpasar: Balai Arkeologi Denpasar.
Flecker, Michael. 2002. The Archaeological Excavation of the 10th Century Intan Shipwreck . Oxford: BAR Publishing.
Flecker, Michael. 2017. The origin of the Tang Shipwreck: A look at its archaeology and history. In The Tang Shipwreck: Art and
Exchange in the 9th Century . Edited by Alan Chong and Stephen A. Murphy. Singapore: Asian Civilisations Museum, pp. 22–39.
Fontein, Jan, ed. 1990. The Sculpture of Indonesia . Washington, DC: National Gallery of Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Furui, Ryosuke. 2016. Ājīvikas, Man
˙ibhadra and Early History of Eastern Bengal: A New Copperplate Inscription of Vainyagupta
and Its Implications. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 26: 657–81. [ CrossRef ]
Gänsicke, Susanne. 2016. Bodies in bronze: Four South Indian temple bronzes in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. In Metal 2016:
Proceedings of the Interim Meeting of the ICOM‑CC Metals Working Group, 26–30 September 2016, New Delhi, India . Edited by Raghu
Menon, Claudia Chemello and Achal Pandya. New Delhi: International Council of Museums, pp. 14–21.
Geiger, Wilhelm. 1938. A Grammar of the Sinhalese Language . Colombo: Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon Branch. Available online:
http://archive.org/details/geiger‑sinhala_grammar (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Geiger, Wilhelm. 1941. An Etymological Glossary of the Sinhalese Language . Colombo: Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon Branch.
Gericke, Johann F. C., and Taco Roorda. 1901. Javaansch‑Nederlandsch handwoordenboek, vermeerderd en verbeterd door Dr. A. C. Vreede
[...] met medewerking van Dr. J. G. H. Gunning [...] . Amsterdam: Müller.
Gerschheimer, Gerdi, and Brice Vincent. 2010. L’épée inscrite de Boston (K. 1048, 1040‑41 de notre ère). Arts Asiatiques 65: 109–20.
[CrossRef ]
Gippert, Jost. 2020. Identifying Fakes: Three Case Studies with Examples from Different Types of Written Artefacts. In Fakes and
Forgeries of Written Artefacts from Ancient Mesopotamia to Modern China . Edited by Cécile Michel and Michael Friedrich. Berlin
and Boston: De Gruyter, pp. 263–80. [ CrossRef ]
Gliozzo, Elisabetta. 2021. Pigments—Mercury‑based red (cinnabar‑vermilion) and white (calomel) and their degradation products.
Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences 13: 1–53. [ CrossRef ]
Gonda, Jan. 1973. Sanskrit in Indonesia , 2nd ed. Śata‑Pit
˙aka Series 99; New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture.
Goris, Roelof. 1954. Inscripties voor Anak Wungçu . Prasasti Bali diterbitkan oleh Lembaga Bahasa dan Budaja (Fakultet Sastra dan
Filsafat) Universitet Indonesia. 2 vols. Bandung: Masa Baru.
Gornall, Alastair. 2014. How Many Sounds are in Pāli? Schism, Identity and Ritual in the Theravāda sa ˙ngha. Journal of Indian
Philosophy 42: 511–50. [ CrossRef ]
Gornall, Alastair. 2020. Rewriting Buddhism: Pali Literature and Monastic Reform in Sri Lanka, 1157–1270 . London: UCL Press.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2011. Inscriptions of Sumatra: Further Data on the Epigraphy of the Musi and Batang Hari Rivers Basins. Archipel 81:
139–75. [ CrossRef ]

--- [Page 215] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 32 of 35
Griffiths, Arlo. 2012. Inscriptions of Sumatra, II: Short Epigraphs in Old Javanese. Wacana: Jurnal Ilmu Pengetahuan Budaya 14: 197–214.
[CrossRef ]
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014. Inscriptions of Sumatra, III: The Padang Lawas Corpus Studied along with Inscriptions from Sorik Mer‑
api (North Sumatra) and from Muara Takus (Riau). In History of Padang Lawas, North Sumatra, II: Societies of Padang Lawas
(Mid‑Ninth—Thirteenth Century CE) . Edited by Daniel Perret. Cahier d’Archipel 43. Paris: Association Archipel, pp. 211–53.
Available online: https://shs.hal.science/halshs‑01958932 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Griffiths, Arlo. 2018. The Corpus of Inscriptions in the Old Malay Language. In Writing for Eternity: A Survey of Epigraphy in Southeast
Asia. Edited by Daniel Perret. Études Thématiques 30. Paris: École française d’Extr ême‑Orient, pp. 275–83. Available online:
https://hal.archives‑ouvertes.fr/hal‑01920769 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Griffiths, Arlo. 2020. Rediscovering an Old Javanese Inscription: Mpu Mano’s Donation in Favor of a Buddhist Dignitary in 888 Śaka.
Archipel: Études Interdisciplinaires sur le Monde Insulindien 99: 107–41. [ CrossRef ]
Groeneveldt, Willem Pieter. 1887. Catalogus der Archaeologische Verzameling van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschap‑
pen. Batavia: Albrecht & Co.
Guy, John. 1994. The Lost Temples of Nagapattinam and Quanzhou: A Study in Sino‑Indian Relations. Silk Road Archaeology 3:
291–310.
Guy, John. 2000. Buddhist Bronzes of Southern India: Rediscovering a Lost History. Arts of Asia 30: 103–10.
Guy, John. 2011. Tamil Merchants and the Hindu‑Buddhist Diaspora in Early Southeast Asia. In Early Interactions Between South and
Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross‑Cultural Exchange . Edited by Pierre‑Yves Manguin, A. Mani and Geoff Wade. Singapore and
New Delhi: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies; Manohar India, pp. 243–62.
Guy, John. 2014. Lost Kingdoms: Hindu‑Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Harrisson, Tom, and Stanley J. O’Connor. 1967. The ‘Tantric Shrine’ Excavated at Santubong. Sarawak Museum Journal 15: 201–22.
Hartwell, Robert M. 1983. Tribute Missions to China, 960–1126 . Philadelphia: Robert M. Hartwell.
Hoogervorst, Tom. 2017. The Role of ‘Prakrit’ in Maritime Southeast Asia through 101 Etymologies. In Spirits and Ships: Cultural
Transfers in Early Monsoon Asia . Edited by Andrea Acri, Roger Blench and Alexandra Landmann. Singapore: ISEAS‑Yusof Ishak
Institute, pp. 375–440.
Hoshing, Jagannath Sastri. 1929. The Anekārtha Sa ˙ngraha of Āchārya Hema‑Chandra . Kashi Sanskrit Series (Haridas Sanskrit
Granthamālā) 68; Benares: The Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office. Available online: http://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.
2015.281051 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Inandiak, Elizabeth D. 2013. Atiśa: Voice of the Ashes. In Atiśa Śrī‑Dīpa ˙nkara‑jñāna and Cultural Renaissance. Proceedings of the In‑
ternational Conference 16th–23rd January 2013 . Edited by Shashibala. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for The Arts,
pp. 109–22.
Inandiak, Elizabeth D., Marie‑Louise Broch, and Alex Dea. 2018. Dreams from the Golden Island . Yogyakarta: Cahaya Timur.
Jacq‑Hergoualc’h, Michel. 2002. The Malay Peninsula: Crossroads of the Maritime Silk Road (100 BC–1300 AD) . Leiden: Brill.
Jenner, Philip N. 2009. A Dictionary of Angkorian Khmer . Pacific Linguistics 598. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, Research School of
Pacific and Asian Studies, The Australian National University. Available online: http://hdl.handle.net/1885/146750 (accessed on
13 May 2025).
Jett, Paul. 1993. A study of the gilding of Chinese Buddhist bronzes. In Metal Plating and Patination: Cultural, Technical and Historical
Developments . Edited by Susan La Niece and Paul Craddock. Oxford: Butterworth‑Heinemann, pp. 193–200.
Karashima, Noboru, and Y. Subbarayalu. 2009. Ancient and Medieval Tamil and Sanskrit Inscriptions Relating to Southeast Asia and
China. In Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia . Edited by Hermann Kulke, K.
Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 271–91.
Konow, Sten. 1931. Kalawan Copper‑Plate Inscription of the Year 134. Epigraphia Indica 21: 251–59. [ CrossRef ]
Kozok, Uli. 2015. Tanjung Tanah Manuscript TK 214. In A 14th Century Malay Code of Laws: The Nītisārasamuccaya . Edited by Uli
Kozok. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 50–161.
Krom, Nicolaas Johannes. 1931. Hindoe‑Javaansche Geschiedenis . The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Kulke, Hermann. 2009. The Naval Expeditions of the Cholas in the Context of Asian History. In Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflec‑
tions on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia . Edited by Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore:
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 1–19.
Kulke, Hermann. 2016. Śrīvijaya Revisited: Reflections on State Formation of a Southeast Asian Thalassocracy. Bulletin de l’École
Française d’Extr ême‑Orient 102: 45–95. [ CrossRef ]
Lee, Taehee. 2011. Sinan Shipwreck Collection at the National Museum of Korea. Journal of Korean Art & Archaeology 5: 105–16.
Li, Tao李焘 . 1881. Xu Zizhi Tongjian Changbian 續資治通鑑長編 . 980 Juan. Hangzhou: Zhejiang shuju.
Li, Yiwen. 2023. Networks of Faith and Profit: Monks, Merchants, and Exchanges between China and Japan, 839–1403 CE . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

--- [Page 216] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 33 of 35
Liebner, Horst Hubertus. 2014. The Siren of Cirebon: A Tenth‑Century Trading Vessel Lost in the Java Sea. Ph.D. dissertation, The
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
Liyanagamage, Amaradasa. 1978. A forgotten aspect of the relations between the Sinhalese and the Tamils: The Upasakajanalankara:
A re‑examination of its date and authorship and its significance in the history of South India and Ceylon. The Ceylon Historical
Journal 25: 95–142.
Lokesh Chandra. 1993. Od
˙d
˙iyāna: A New Interpretation. In Ludwig Sternbach Felicitation Volume . Edited by G. C. Sinha. Lucknow:
Akhila Bharatiya Sanskrit Parishad, vol. 1, pp. 491–514.
Mahdi, Waruno. 2005. Old Malay. In The Austronesian Languages of Asia and Madagascar . Edited by Alexander Adelaar and Nikolaus
P. Himmelmann. London and New York: Routledge, pp. 182–201.
Mahdi, Waruno. 2015. Script and Language of the Tanjung Tanah Manuscript. In A 14th Century Malay Code of Laws: The Nītisārasamuc‑
caya. Edited by Uli Kozok. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 162–220.
Majumdar, Ramesh C. 1933–1934. Note on the Sailendra Kings mentioned in the Leiden Plates. Epigraphia Indica 22: 281–84.
Malalasekera, George Pieris. 1928. The Pāli Literature of Ceylon . London: The Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Manguin, Pierre‑Yves. 1976. L’artillerie lég ère nousantarienne. A propos de six canons conservés dans des collections portugaises.
Arts Asiatiques 32: 233–68. [ CrossRef ]
Manguin, Pierre‑Yves. 1987. Études sumatranaises I. Palembang et Sriwijaya: Anciennes Hypoth èses, Recherches Nouvelles (Palem‑
bang Ouest). Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extr ême‑Orient 76: 337–402. [ CrossRef ]
Mechling, Mathilde, Brice Vincent, Pierre Baptiste, and David Bourgarit. 2018. Technical Investigations on Thirty‑Nine Indonesian
Bronze Statues (7th–11th c.) from the Musée National des Arts Asiatiques–Guimet, Paris. Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extr ême‑
Orient 104: 63–139. [ CrossRef ]
Meyanti, Lisda, and Wahyu Rizky Andhifani. 2021. Tradisi rajah di Sumatera: Sebuah kajian terhadap prasasti timah koleksi Yayasan
Padmasana Jambi. Siddhayātra 26: 1–12. [ CrossRef ]
Miksic, John N. 1985. Archaeological Research on the “Forbidden Hill” of Singapore: Excavations at Fort Canning, 1984 . Singapore: National
Museum of Singapore.
Miksic, John. 2016. Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra, 7th to 13th Century. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval
Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing, pp. 253–74. [ CrossRef ]
Minayeff, J. P. 1886. Gandha‑Vaṃsa. Journal of the Pali Text Society 1886: 54–80.
Museum of Overseas Communications History. 1997. Chapter 5: The excavated artefacts from the compartments. In Maritime Ar‑
chaeology in the People’s Republic of China . Edited by Jeremy Green. Perth: Australian National Centre of Excellence for Maritime
Archaeology, p. 49.
Neukom, Lukas, and Manideepa Patnaik. 2003. A Grammar of Oriya . Zürich: Seminar für Allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft der Univer‑
sität Zürich. Available online: http://archive.org/details/A‑grammar‑of‑oriya‑neukom‑patnaik‑2003 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Notulen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap. 1924. Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal‑, Land‑ en Volkenkunde Uitgegeven Door het Koninklijk
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen: Deel LXIV . Batavia and Den Haag: Albrecht & Co; M. Nijhoff, pp. 334, 657
(no. 5824).
O’Connor, Stanley, Jr. 1972. Hindu Gods of Peninsular Siam . Ascona: Artibus Asiae Publishers.
Ouyang, Xiu 歐陽修 . 1936. Xin Tang Shu 新唐書 . 225 Juan. Shanghai: Shangwu yinshuguan.
Paranavitana, Senarat. 1943. No. 9. Polonnaruva: Fragmentary Slab‑Inscription of Sundara‑Mahadevi. Epigraphia Zeylanica IV.2 . London:
Oxford University Press, pp. 67–72.
Paranavitana, Senarat. 1944. Negapatam and Theravada Buddhism in South India. Journal of the Greater India Society 11: 17–25.
Pigeaud, Theodoor G. Th. 1924. De Tantu Panggĕlaran: Een oud‑Javaansch Prozageschrift, Uitgegeven, Vertaald en Toegelicht. Ph.D.
dissertation, ’s‑Gravenhage, Smits, Gravenhage, The Netherlands.
Poeger, Njoman. 1964. Raja Jayaçakti di Bali . Bachelor’s thesis, Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana, Denpasar, Indonesia.
Postma, Antoon. 1991. The Laguna Copper‑Plate Inscription: A Valuable Philippine Document. Bulletin of the Indo‑Pacific Prehistory
Association 11: 160–71. [ CrossRef ]
Pulleyblank, Edwin G. 1984. Middle Chinese: A Study in Historical Phonology . Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.
Rácová, Anna. 2007. Classifiers in Bengali. Asian and African Studies 16: 125–37. Available online: https://www.sav.sk/journals/
uploads/102313111_R%C3%A1cov%C3%A1.pdf (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Ramachandran, T. N. 1954. The Nāgapattinam and Other Buddhist Bronzes in the Madras Museum. Bulletin of the Madras Government
Museum 7: 1–150.
Ranawella, Sirimal. 2007. Dictionary of Sinhala Epigraphical Words , 1st ed. Colombo: Deptartment of Archaeology.
Rhys Davids, Thomas William, and William Stede, eds. 1925. The Pali Text Society’s Pali‑English Dictionary . London: The Pali
Text Society.
Robson, Stuart O., and Hadi Sidomulyo. 2021. Threads of the Unfolding Web: The Old Javanese Tantu Panggĕlaran . Singapore: ISEAS–
Yusof Ishak Institute.

--- [Page 217] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 34 of 35
Salmon, Claudine. 2002. Srivijaya, la Chine et les marchands chinois (Xe‑XIIes.): Quelques réflexions sur la société de l’empire
sumatranais. Archipel 63: 57–78. [ CrossRef ]
Salmon, Claudine. 2003. A Tentative Interpretation of the Chinese Inscription (1231) Engraved on a Bronze Gong Recovered in Muara
Jambi (Central Sumatra). Archipel 66: 91–112. [ CrossRef ]
Salomon, Richard. 1998. Indian Epigraphy: A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the Other Indo‑Aryan Languages .
New York: Oxford University Press.
Santosa, Ida Bagus. 1965. Prasasti‑Prasasti Radja Anak Wungçu . Undergraduate thesis, Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana, Den‑
pasar, Indonesia.
Sastri, Hirananda. 1942. Nalanda and its Epigraphic Material . Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India No. 66. New Delhi:
Archaeological Survey of India.
Sattler, Gregory. 2024a. Temple Diplomacy, Sacred Rites, and Overseas Chinese During the Reign of Song Emperor Zhenzong
(997–1022). Religions 15: 1401. [ CrossRef ]
Sattler, Gregory. 2024b. Zhedong Sea Merchants and the China‑Japan Trade, ca. 800–1000. Journal of Song‑Yuan Studies 53: 59–92.
[CrossRef ]
Schafer, Edward H. 1956. The Early History of Lead Pigments and Cosmetics in China. T’oung Pao 44: 413–38. [ CrossRef ]
Schafer, Edward H. 1963. The Golden Peaches of Samarkand: A Study of T’ang Exotics . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Califor‑
nia Press.
Schafer, Edward H. 1967. The Vermilion Bird: T’ang Images of the South . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Schoterman, Jan A. 2016. Traces of Indonesian Influences in Tibet. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia. Networks of Masters,
Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Translated by Roy Jordaan, and Mark E. Long. [Originally published as Indonesische Sporen
in Tibet . Leiden: Brill, 1986]. Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 113–21. [ CrossRef ]
Sen, Tansen. 2003. Buddhism, Diplomacy and Trade: The Realignment of Sino‑Indian Relations, 600–1400 . Honolulu: University of
Hawai’i Press.
Sen, Tansen. 2009. The Military Campaigns of Rajendra Chola and the Chola‑Srivijaya‑China Triangle. In Nagapattinam to Suvarnad‑
wipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia . Edited by Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja.
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 61–75.
Seshadri, Gokul. 2009. New Perspectives on Nagapattinam: The Medieval Port City in the Context of Political, Religious, and Com‑
mercial Exchanges between South India, Southeast Asia and China. In Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval
Expeditions to Southeast Asia . Edited by Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore: Institute of Southeast
Asian Studies, pp. 102–34.
Sinclair, Iain. 2021. Dharmakīrti of Kedah: His Life, Work and Troubled Times. Temasek Working Papers Series 2: 1–35.
Sircar, Dinesh Chandra. 1965. Indian Epigraphy . Delhi, Varanasi and Patna: Motilal Banarsidass.
Skilling, Peter. 1997. Dharmakīrti’s Durbodhāloka and the Literature of Śrīvijaya. Journal of the Siam Society 85: 187–94.
Skilling, Peter. 2007. Geographies of Intertextuality: Buddhist Literature in pre‑modern Siam. Aséanie: Sciences Humaines en Asie du
Sud‑Est 19: 91–112. [ CrossRef ]
Takakusu, Junjirō 高楠順次郎 , and Kaigyoku Watanabe 渡邊海旭 , eds. 1924–1932. Taishō shinshū daizōkyō 大正新脩大藏經 . [Buddhist
Canon compiled under the Taishō Era, 1912–1926.]. 100 vols. Tokyo: Taishō issaikyō kankōkai 大正一切經刊行會 .
Teeuw, Andries, and Stuart O. Robson. 2005. Bhomāntaka: The Death of Bhoma . Bibliotheca Indonesica 32. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Tejowasono, Ninny Susanti, Ni Ketut Puji Astiti Laksmi, Wahyu Rizky Andhifani, Hedwi Prihatmoko, Lisda Meyanti, Churmatin
Nasoichah, Dodi Chandra, and Dara Minanda. 2019. Katalog Prasasti Timah di Sumatra. Prasasti Timah di Indonesia . Jakarta: Pusat
Penelitian Arkeologi Nasional. Available online: https://arkenas.kemdikbud.go.id/Katalog_Prasasti_Timah_22.pdf (accessed on
13 May 2025).
Treloar, Francis E. 1967. Ritual Objects Illustrating Indian Alchemy and Tantric Religious Practice. Isis58: 396–97. [ CrossRef ]
Treloar, Francis E. 1968. Chemical analysis of some metal objects from Chandi Bukit Batu Pahat, Kedah: Suggested origin and date.
Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 41: 193–98.
Tuo Tuo 脫脫 . 1977. Song shi宋史 . 496 Juan. Beijing: Zhonghua shuju.
Turner, Ralph Lilley. 1962–1966. A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo‑Aryan Languages . London: Oxford University Press.
Vincent, Brice. 2012. Saṃrit : Étude de la métallurgie du bronze dans le Cambodge angkorien (fin du xie—début du xiiiesiècle). Ph.D.
dissertation, Université Sorbonne Nouvelle, Paris, France.
Vogel, Jean Philippe. 1919. Het koninkrijk Çrîvijaya. Bijdragen tot de Taal‑, Land‑ en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch‑Indië 75: 626–37.
[CrossRef ]
von Verschuer, Charlotte. 1999. Japan’s Foreign Relations 600 to 1200 A.D.: A Translation from Zenrin Kokuhōki. Monumenta Nip‑
ponica 54: 1–39. [ CrossRef ]
Wheatley, Paul. 1959. Geographical Notes on some Commodities involved in Sung Maritime Trade. Journal of the Malayan Branch of
the Royal Asiatic Society 32: 4–140.

--- [Page 218] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 35 of 35
Wilkinson, Richard J. 1959. A Malay‑English Dictionary (Romanised) . London and New York: MacMillan & Co; St Martin’s.
Wolters, Oliver W. 1958. Tāmbrali ˙nga. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 21: 587–607. Available online: https://www.
jstor.org/stable/610619 (accessed on 13 May 2025). [ CrossRef ]
Wolters, Oliver W. 1966. A Note on the Capital of Śrīvijaya during the Eleventh Century. Artibus Asiae. Supplementum 23: 225–39.
[CrossRef ]
Wolters, Oliver W. 1967. Early Indonesian Commerce: A Study of the Origins of Srivijaya . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Worsley, Peter, Supomo Suryohudoyo, Thomas M. Hunter, and Margaret Fletcher. 2013. Mpu Monagun
˙a’s Sumanasāntaka: An Old
Javanese Epic Poem, Its Indian Source and Balinese Illustrations . Bibliotheca Indonesica 36. Leiden: Brill.
Xu, Song 徐松 . 1936. Song Hui Yao Jigao 宋會要輯稿 . 500 Juan. Beijing: Guoli Beiping tushuguan.
Zhang, Yekun, Meizi Xie, and Yuanlin Wang. 2024. Metal Trade and Contraband: Archaeological Discoveries and Insights from the
Nanhai No.1 Merchant Shipwreck. Journal of Maritime Archaeology 19: 265–89. [ CrossRef ]
Zhao, Rugua 趙汝适 . n.d. Zhu Fan Zhi 諸蕃志 . 2 Juan. Beijing: Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin.
Zhao, Yanwei 趙彥衛 . 2009. Yunlu Manchao 雲麓漫鈔 . 15 Juan. Beijing: Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin.
Zoetmulder, Petrus J. 1982. Old Javanese‑English Dictionary . 2 vols. Gravenhage: Nijhoff.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual au‑
thor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

--- [Page 219] ---
Academic Editor: David Peter
Lawrence
Received: 3 February 2025
Revised: 27 March 2025
Accepted: 15 April 2025
Published: 14 July 2025
Citation: Kim, Jinah. 2025. An
Ambitious Itinerary: Journey Across
the Medieval Buddhist World in a
Book, CUL Add.1643 (1015 CE).
Religions 16: 900. https://doi.org/
10.3390/rel16070900
Copyright: © 2025 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).Article
An Ambitious Itinerary: Journey Across the Medieval Buddhist
World in a Book, CUL Add.1643 (1015 CE)
Jinah Kim
Department of History of Art & Architecture, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA;
jinahkim@fas.harvard.edu
Abstract
A Sanskrit manuscript of the Prajñāpāramitā or Perfection of Wisdom in eight thousand
verses, now in the Cambridge University Library, Add.1643, is one of the most ambitiously
designed South Asian manuscripts from the eleventh century, with the highest number
of painted panels known among the dated manuscripts from medieval South Asia until
1400 CE. Thanks to the unique occurrence of a caption written next to each painted panel,
it is possible to identify most images in this manuscript as representing those of famous
pilgrimage sites or auspicious images of specific locales. The iconographic program trans‑
forms Add.1643 into a portable device containing famous pilgrimage sites of the Buddhist
world known to the makers and users of the manuscript in eleventh‑century Nepal. It is
one compact colorful package of a book, which can be opened and experienced in its un‑
folding three‑dimensional space, like a virtual or imagined pilgrimage. Building on the
recent research focusing on early medieval Buddhist sites across Monsoon Asia and ana‑
lyzing the representational potentials and ontological values of painting, this essay demon‑
strates how this early eleventh‑century Nepalese manuscript (Add.1643) and its visual pro‑
gram document and remember the knowledge of maritime travels and the transregional
and intraregional activities of people and ideas moving across Monsoon Asia. Despite be‑
ing made in the Kathmandu Valley with a considerable physical distance from the actual
sea routes, the sites remembered in the manuscript open a possibility to connect the dots
of human movement beyond the known networks and routes of “world systems”.
Keywords: Monsoon Asia; Maritime Asia; Buddhist manuscript painting; palm‑leaf
manuscript; mapping medieval Buddhist world; digital humanities
1. Introduction
Early medieval travelogues provide useful information about transregional journeys
taken by traders, diplomats, spiritual masters, and pilgrims across Asia. Based on the in‑
formation they provide about each place of their sojourn during their multi‑year journeys
between India and China, which are often couched as eye‑witness accounts, the routes
Chinese Buddhist monks like Faxian (journey date: 399–414 CE), Xuanzang (602–664 CE),
and Yijing (635–713 CE) took have been mapped.1While Xuanzang took land routes exclu‑
sively for both directions, Faxian traveled by sea on his return journey from India during
which he was almost cast away on an island ( Sen 2014a , pp. 42–43; Acri 2019b , p. 57), and
Yijing took sea routes in both directions, spending a substantial time in the political center
coinciding with the modern city of Palembang in Sumatra, which he emphasized as a must
stopover for any Chinese monk traveling to India “to listen and read Buddhist laws… to
learn how to behave properly” before heading to India ( Sen 2014a , p. 50).
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16070900

--- [Page 220] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 2 of 35
Numerous recent studies have emphasized the importance of sea routes and the
framework of “Maritime Asia” in understanding pre‑modern transcultural activities across
Asia ( Acri 2016 ,2019a ;Acri et al. 2017 ;Sen 2014a ,2014b ,2019 ,2023 ;Ray 2019 ,2021 ;Lee
2021 ). Along with travelogues, hagiographic accounts of medieval Esoteric Buddhist mas‑
ters like the Javanese monk Bianhong (Ājñāgarbha) and Dharmakīrti of the Golden Isles
have been successfully mined to reveal their hitherto little‑acknowledged contributions
to transregional and transcultural connectivity across the seas ( Sinclair 2019 ,2021a ;Acri
2019b ). In addition to the travelogues and hagiographic accounts of Buddhist masters’
transregional travels, archaeological discoveries of coastal sites and shipwrecks along the
coasts of the areas once known as Nusantara also help map these frequently traveled routes
that can define the contours of Maritime Asia ( Acri 2016 , map; Chakravarti 2021 ;De Saxcé
2022 ;Guy 2019a ,2019b ;Ray 2018 ). As Ray (2021 , p. 5) suggests, it is likely that “coastal
architecture provided orientation to sailing ships” when they lacked navigational tools
like maps and nautical charts. One could imagine the early eighth‑century Shore temple
of Mamallapuram (Mahabalipuram) in Tamil Nadu being a great waypoint to set one’s
sight on from the sea just as the Nagore Dargah’s soaring minaret towers have provided
an important beacon of a haven for seafarers at least since the seventeenth century when
the first towering minaret was built.2Aided by modern technologies, we can map these
routes ever more precisely based on architectural and archaeological findings along with
textual sources.
How did pre‑modern travelers, especially those traveling across Monsoon Asia3be‑
fore 1200 CE, develop their itineraries? They certainly did not have a global positioning
system. How did the knowledge about these landmarks and places to visit on a long tran‑
sregional sea journey spread? Could the knowledge of long‑distance routes be encoded in
Buddhist iconography that circulated across the seas? It would be impossible to retrieve
the conversations about and the stories of destinations that must have circulated among
the seafarers and travelers of medieval Monsoon Asia. In addition to written and archaeo‑
logical data, this study advocates for the consideration of Buddhist imagery as a significant
source of information. As suggested in recent studies ( Kim 2021 ;Bopearachchi 2022 ), Bud‑
dhist iconography can be parsed for more nuanced historical analysis.4Here, I argue that
we must recognize the power of the images as part of what Ronit Ricci (2011 , p. 2) character‑
izes as “non‑inscribed aspects” in “cultural or religious transmission in South and South‑
east Asia” to tell us stories of transregional and transcultural travels that are not recorded
anywhere else. A painted Buddhist manuscript completed in 1015 CE in the Kathmandu
Valley, Nepal, contains Buddhist images that we can interpret as recording people’s memo‑
ries of certain pilgrimage sites and cultic images known at the turn of the eleventh century.
By analyzing these images comprehensively, we gain a new window into discerning the
contours of these long‑lost stories of medieval travels across Monsoon Asia.
Since the seminal publication by the French Indologist, Alfred Foucher (1865–1952)
in 1900, the Nepalese manuscript now in the Cambridge University Library, Add.1643,
has appeared in several studies, often as an iconographic reference book (i.e., Foucher
1900–1905 ;Saraswati 1977 ). Images from this manuscript are frequently cited as exam‑
ples of a certain Buddhist iconography thanks to the presence of captions accompanying
the images, often indicating specific localities, which is rare in the corpus of surviving pre‑
modern South Asian art. More recent studies have suggested the possibility of reading
the manuscript’s overall iconographic program as representing a virtual pilgrimage, with
certain choices of images reflecting Nepalese manuscript makers and patrons’ historical
awareness of political situations in the South Asian subcontinent ( Kim 2013 ,2014 ). Thanks
to the Cambridge University Library’s forward‑thinking decision to digitize its precious
collections, including that of Sanskrit manuscripts, and make them “freely available for use

--- [Page 221] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 3 of 35
within teaching and research”, which started in 2010, the entire manuscript of Add.1643 in‑
cluding its wooden book covers and all surviving folios are now available for viewing and
download on the Cambridge Digital Library’s website.5By embracing new methodological
possibilities of digital humanities and recent and ongoing research on transcultural activ‑
ities across medieval Monsoon Asia, I propose to use the Add.1643 manuscript’s image
program as a guide for mapping an itinerary of transcultural activities that expands our
understanding of the connected networks of Monsoon Asia traveled by Esoteric Buddhist
masters and pilgrims.
The Buddhist sites that appear in Add.1643 are different from those in earlier travel‑
ogues, like Chinese pilgrims’ records: if the British exploration of Buddhism in India had
this manuscript as its guide instead of, or in addition to, Chinese pilgrim’s travelogues,
we would have had a lot more Buddhist sites excavated in Bengal (West Bengal, India,
and Bangladesh) and elsewhere in India.6We cannot identify every site mentioned in the
manuscript with certainty, and the degree of geographic specificity varies considerably
(from a shrine to a district, to a mountain, to an island, and to a “country”). However, the
map that emerges from the Add.1643 manuscript’s iconographic program can still capture
the overall movement of people and ideas across the Buddhist world at the turn of the first
millennium (see Appendix A). In fact, the map of the sites that have already been identified
in Add.1643 expands the insightful map of the paths traveled by the monks of the seventh
and the ninth centuries, connecting various Esoteric circles across Monsoon Asia that Swati
Chemburkar and Andrea Acri prepared ( Acri 2016 , p. 16) geographically and temporally
(see Map). It connects the areas missing in the earlier map, namely the Himalayan region,
including Nepal, and the sites on the western coast of the subcontinent (Konkan and Gu‑
jarat in particular) and further northwest (today’s Pakistan and Afghanistan).7Once the
sites represented in the Add.1643 manuscript are identified fully and geotagged on a digi‑
tal map, such a map will help define the Second Wave of Esoteric Buddhism’s movement
across Asia , which corresponds with the period of phyi‑dar , the second or later transmis‑
sion of Buddhism to Tibet (late tenth through the thirteenth centuries) that certainly in‑
spired many transregional travels by Esoteric Buddhist masters and their disciples and
catalyzed numerous translation activities.8ﬀ
tt
Map: Left: map of the sites represented in Add.1643 (centroids of four certainty levels), Google My
Maps ( https://tinyurl.com/MappingADD1643 ); right: path traveled by the monks (7–9th century)
between India, mainland and insular Southeast Asia, China, Japan, and Korea. Map by Swati Chem‑
burkar and Andrea Acri. ( Acri 2016 ).

--- [Page 222] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 4 of 35
As one of the first steps towards this goal of using the Add.1643 manuscript as our
guide for mapping the visual and material culture of medieval Monsoon Asia, this essay
underscores the manuscript’s historical importance, which equally challenges the widely
held notions of Nepal’s insularity, peripherality, and even liminality (i.e., being in‑between
India and Tibet), and presents a few case studies that explore the potential connections
between painted images of famous monuments and deities and surviving historical sites.
Let us first consider the central object of our query, Add.1643. Despite many previous
studies on the manuscript, it is worth spending some moments to learn about its codico‑
logical features, overall material and textual structure, and the historical context behind
its production.
2. The Manuscript
Hailing from the Kathmandu Valley, CUL Add.1643 is a pothi ‑format palm‑leaf
manuscript typical of medieval South Asia. The manuscript is made with seasoned palm
leaflets cut to a uniform size and held together with a cord or metal sticks (Figure 1). Due
to the oblong shape of palm leaflets, palm‑leaf manuscripts (and all pothi format books)
tend to be horizontally long: this manuscript’s folios measure about 55 cm by 5.5 cm each.
There are 223 numbered folios, with 222 palm‑leaf folios and one yellow paper folio (folio
1 which is a later replacement). Each folio bears two sets of page numbers on the verso:
on the right‑hand side are numerals and on the left‑hand side are letter numerals.9These
folios are protected by two wooden covers and their exteriors bear signs of being wor‑
shipped in the context of pustaka pūjā (worship of book) in Nepal ( Kim 2013 ;Kim 2015 ).10
It is the manuscript of the As
˙t
˙asāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā [the Perfection of Wisdom in eight
thousand verses, henceforth the AsP]. Like many AsP manuscripts of a similar age, the
manuscript starts with a hymn to the Prajñāpāramitā, known as the Prajñāpāramitāstotra of
Rāhulabhadra (folios 1v‑2r line 1).11The main text of the AsP ends on folio 222v, with the
end of chapter 32 on folio 222r followed by the customary dharma relic beginning with the
“ye dharmā …”, which is the verse epitome of the Buddhist teaching, the Pratītyasamutpāda
or dependent origination ( Boucher 1991 ;Kim 2013 ,2014 ). The colophon tells us that the
manuscript was completed on Thursday, March 3rd, 1015 CE (Nepala Samvat/N.S. 135) in
a monastery named Śrī Lham and it was prepared by Sujātabhadra. The monastery’s name
has been published as Śrī Hlam repeatedly since Bendall (1883 ) and Foucher (1900–1905 ),
but the consonant cluster clearly reads “lha” rather than “hla”. While “lha” may not
be used in Sanskrit, this is possible in Newari, the language of the Newar people, who
are the original inhabitants of the Kathmandu Valley to which our manuscript belonged
(Kim 2022 ).12tt
ūā
ṣṭ ā ā āā ā
āā ā āā ā
ā
̄ ī
ā
Śī ā
Śī
 
ā ā āā ā
Śī ā
ā
āā ā
Śī ā
Śī ā
Figure 1. Apothi manuscript of the As
˙t
˙asāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā (AsP), Add.1643, on display at the
Cambridge University Library, 29 July 2016. Pigments and ink on palm leaf, 5.5 cm ×55 cm. Photo
by author.

--- [Page 223] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 5 of 35
According to the colophon, Śrī Lham monastery (“ vihāra ”) was “the great self‑
ornament of Nepal [Kathmandu Valley], delight of every being, where the speech of the
Buddha shines eternally”.13We are yet to identify where this vihāra was located in the Val‑
ley (possibly in the area near Thamel, Kathmandu) since it is not one of the surviving Bud‑
dhist bāhās (Newar Buddhist monastic community‑ vihāra ), some of which claim its illustri‑
ous history back to the early medieval period. But this grand statement about its lofty sta‑
tus as a treasure house of Buddhist teaching can be borne out by other known manuscripts
prepared in Śrī Lham vihāra .14One of the earliest known dated Nepalese manuscripts
of the AsP (dated 1008 CE), which is also housed in the Cambridge University Library
(Add.866), bears the colophon that identifies Śrī Lham vihāra as the site of production (fol.
202v, line 1). Although this is not a fully painted manuscript like Add.1643, it is a precursor
to the painted manuscripts like Add.1643 prepared in the same monastery within seven
years: there are three large ornamental circles on the recto of the last folio (Figure 2). The
designs within these circles vary, but all three are variations on a stylized rendering of a
lotus drawn in black ink with strategic application of a red colorant (most likely organic
red). They look similar to the lotus‑based roundels that appear in ceiling designs of me‑
dieval temple architecture (Figure 3).15A tiny hole in the center of these circles suggests
that they were prepared using a tool, most likely a rudimentary compass ( Bhattarai 2019 ,
p. 297). An early thirteenth‑century manuscript with stunningly painted wooden covers
now in the Pritzker collection completed during the reign of Ārimalla I (1200–1216 CE)
was also prepared in Śrī Lham, and was identified in the colophon as a Great Monastery,
or “Mahāvihāra” ( śrī lham śrīmatmahāpratima‑mahāvihāre , lit. in the great monastery of an
auspicious great image, Śrī Lham) instead of “ vihāra ” of the eleventh‑century colophons,
for a monk, Pus
˙pasena. This suggests that the monastery was a thriving monastic center
into the thirteenth century and that the art of painting along with calligraphic skills were
deeply cultivated there.16tt
tz Ā
Śī
ā ā śī śī ā ā ā
Śī ̄
ṣ
 
Śī
tt
Śī
̣
āā ā
Figure 2. Folio 202 with a three roundel design, the AsP manuscript, dated N.S. 128 (1008 CE),
Śrī Lham monastery, Kathmandu, Nepal. Cambridge University Library Add.866. Image: https:
//cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS‑ADD‑00866/405 . Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of
Cambridge University Library.tt
tz Ā
Śī
ā ā śī śī ā ā ā
Śī ̄
ṣ
Śī
tt
   
Śī
̣
āā ā
Figure 3. Examples of lotus‑based roundel‑like designs in medieval temple architecture in entrance
hall ceiling designs. ( left): Khandariya Mahadeva Temple, Khajuraho, c. 1004–35 CE; ( center ): Lak‑
shmana temple Khajuraho, c. 954 CE; and ( right ): Medieval Buddhist temple (temple 45) at Sanchi,
c. 9th century. Photos by author.
When Foucher first published the Add.1643 manuscript in 1900, he speculated that
Śrī Lham must have been a thriving scriptorium to produce multiple copies of a profusely

--- [Page 224] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 6 of 35
illustrated manuscript based on the internal evidence within the manuscript: there are two
folios with identical pagination, folio 120a and folio 120b, and folio120a was later re‑paged
as folio 109. Folio 109 should bear the end of chapter 11 and relevant painted panels, but
instead, this extra folio 120 (120a) is appropriated as folio 109.17The two folios, 120(a) and
120(b) bear identical text to the extent that folio 120(b) has the last one‑third of the sixth line
filled with space fillers. Foucher suggested that folio 120(a) may belong to an archetype
or “ur” manuscript that others copied. As discussed below, the painting on folio 120(a) is
simpler than that of folio 120(b), although two panels in each folio depict identical sites
according to the accompanying captions. The physical condition of folio 120(a) is also
poorer and unusual in comparison to every other folio of Add.1643 with strips of paper
wrapped around the two pseudo columns around the two binding holes.18It is not clear
if 120(a) belonged to an “ur” manuscript but there seems to have been at least one more
deluxe copy of the AsP nearly identical to Add.1643, which is now in Tibet (TAR), that
awaits further research.19We will come back to the importance of these two folios.
Another important observation by Foucher is the fact that Add.1643 is a palimpsest
because there is a second colophon added in 1139 CE immediately after the first colophon
on folio 222v, and the author of the second colophon, scribe Karun
˙apurva Vajra, erased
the original text that was on folio 223r and wrote his dedication to the Prajñāpāramitā
over it ( Foucher 1900–1905 , p. 20).20As Foucher observes, the first two stanzas of the
Vajradhvajaparin
˙āmanā (a popular hymn in Tibet) are recopied and squeezed onto the bot‑
tom two and a half rows of folio 223r (Figure 4). This text is written in the hand of the
second colophon while the remainder of the Vajradhvajaparin
˙āmanā appears on folio 223v
in the script of the main text.21While it is possible that folio 223r originally contained more
than the first two stanzas of Vajradhvajaparin
˙āmanā , the limited writing space due to the five
painted panels on this page—unique to this page in the entire manuscript—suggests that
only these verses were initially intended for this folio. Having written his devotional fer‑
vor to the Prajñāpāramitā over these stanzas, thus rendering this page a true palimpsest,
Karun
˙āpūrva Vajra faithfully reproduced them by utilizing the entire available space at
the bottom of the page, in a way showing respect for the original scribe, Sujātabhadra.22ṇā ā tt
tt
ṇā ā
ṇā ̣ā
tt
āā ā
n ̣āū
tt ā
Ś̄
n ̣āū ̣ ̄ ̄
tt tt
Śī
m ̇ś ﬀ
śāī ā
ān ̣
tt āā ā
Figure 4. Folios 222v‑223r, AsP, 1015 CE (N.S. 135), Śrī Lham monastery, Kathmandu, Nepal. Cam‑
bridge University Library. Pigments and ink on palm leaf, 5.5 cm ×55 cm. Post‑colophon by
Karun
˙āpūrva‑Vajra in 1139 CE followed by the Vajradhvajaparin
˙āmanā . Image: https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.
uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/446 and https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/447 . Reproduced
by kind permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.
3. The Program
Śrī Lham was certainly a leader in painted manuscript production with innovative
artists, skillful scribes, and aspiring monastic and lay communities. As noted in previous
studies ( Kim 2013 ,2014 ,2021 ), Add.1643 is the most ambitiously designed manuscript of
the eleventh century South Asia, with the highest number of painted panels known among
the dated manuscripts: eighty‑five painted panels are strewn throughout the manuscript
on forty‑one painted folios (originally forty‑two) out of a total of two‑hundred and twenty‑

--- [Page 225] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 7 of 35
three folios.23Six folios have a single panel placed in the middle of one page (folios 2r,
5v, 8v, 11v, 13v, and 14v, all in chapter 1), thirty‑one folios have two panels placed on
the right and the left, two folios have three panels (folios 120(b)r, 127r), and two last fo‑
lios have the most number of painted panels: folio 222 with three panels on each side for
a total of six and folio 223r with five painted panels. Each painted folio marks the end
and the beginning of each of thirty‑two chapters, and the first chapter of the book has
six (originally seven) painted folios, all with a single painted panel in the center, and the
penultimate chapter (chapter 31) is marked by four painted folios with two painted pan‑
els each, placed left and right (folios 216v, 218v, 220v, and 221r). The end of the book
and the colophon on folios 222v and 223r are marked by a set of eight major scenes of
the Buddha’s biography: three scenes (Birth—Descent from Trayatri ˙mśa—Monkey’s of‑
fering of honey at Vaiśālī) on 222v and five scenes (Taming of a mad elephant—Miracle—
Māravijaya—First Sermon—Parinirvān
˙a) on folio 223r (see Figure 4). The manuscript’s
eighty‑five painted panels serve as waypoints in the sea of letters of the Prajñāpāramitā
text, giving both an overall physical/visual structure and handy reference points during
recitation (see Appendix Afor the structure).24
In addition to being profusely garlanded with painted panels, the manuscript pro‑
vides a rare compendium of specific, localized pictorial representations of existing sites of
cultic importance whose specificities are identified in accompanying captions. Visual and
textual references to existing places made in the pictorial program of this manuscript are
exceptional in the history of South Asian painting, especially for its early date of 1015 CE.
Out of eighty‑five painted panels, seventy‑six panels have captions identifying the painting
and almost all captions except for five give location information of the site or image rep‑
resented in the accompanying painting. Identifying and mapping every site mentioned in
the manuscript is part of an ongoing collaborative research project and is beyond the scope
of this study.25Here, I offer some general observations about the quality of the geographic
information for future research and the relationship between the text and the image that
underscores the painted images’ potential to tell untold stories.
Let us first consider the quality of the location information in these captions from the
perspective of using it as geo‑data for mapping these sites on a cartographic map. We can
identify at least five levels of specificity in geographic information in the image captions
(see Appendix A): (A) exact site location with geo‑coordinates possible (i.e., painting can be
mapped onto a known archaeological site or pilgrimage site, like the Shahji‑ki‑dheri site of
Kanis
˙ka stūpa near Peshawar, Pakistan) [colored green]; (B) town/city‑level identification
possible (i.e., painting can be mapped onto a city/town‑level centroid, mathematical center
of an area, like Tārā of Candradvīpa, near Barisal district, Bangladesh, and Vasudhārā in
Kanci in Tamil Nadu) [colored blue]; (C) town/city‑level information is available but cannot
be mapped beyond region/state level due to the current state of knowledge about ancient
toponyms (i.e., Kurukulā on Kurukulā peak in the ancient region of Lat
˙a‑southern Gujarat)
[colored orange]; (D) region/state level identification possible (i.e., painting can be mapped
with a centroid at the level of a state or an ancient region such as Magadha, Samat
˙ata,
Varendra, and Ko ˙nkan) [colored yellow]; and (E) cosmological locations (excluded from
mapping) [colored purple].26These characteristics are color‑coded in Appendix A, which
charts the iconographic program with the readings of captions in parentheses and sug‑
gests identification of the sites whenever possible with the current state of knowledge on
toponyms (also see this map https://tinyurl.com/MappingADD1643 ).27As seen in Table 1,
a total of sixty‑six entries are locatable at the state/ancient region level (a combination of
A–B–C–D). As expected, almost half (28 entries) are in eastern India (Bihar, Odisha, West
Bengal, and Bangladesh) (see Table 2).28Fifteen out of the seventy‑six captioned images
may be identified somewhat reasonably with known archaeological and pilgrimage sites

--- [Page 226] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 8 of 35
[colored green] ( Furui 2023 ). These images offer a fascinating lens through which we can
explore the complex relationship between the paintings and their purported real‑world
counterparts. Just as the captions exhibit varying degrees of geographic specificity, so do
the painted images, but they do not always correspond; highly detailed captions may ac‑
company less specific images or vice versa, suggesting differing levels of familiarity with
and knowledge about the sites.
Table 1. Add.1643 Geodata specificity level.
Geo Data Level Color Level SpecificityNumber
of Panels
A Greena known site, identifiable with matching
geo coordinates15
B Blue town/city level centroid geo coordinates 9
C Orangetown/city level info given but
unidentified; state/region level centroid14
D Yellowregion/state level centroid geo
coordinates28
Locatable subtotal 66
E Purple cosmological, no geo data 3
Unknown White 7
Captioned Total 76
No Caption White 1
Life Scenes Grey 8
Painted panels Total 85
Table 2. Geographic distribution outside Eastern India (Bihar, West Bengal, Odisha, India;
Bangladesh) in Add.1643 geo information.
Location Folio/Placement Number
Java Fol.2v/center 1
Sri Lanka Fol.8v/center, fol. 80v/right, fol.86r/right 3
Sumatra Fol.99v/left 1
Kedah, Malaysia Fol.120(a)v/left, fol.120(b)r/center 2
Great Ocean (Maldives?) Fol.20v/left 1
China Fol.123v/left, fol.127/right, fol.202v/right 3
Outside subcontinent 11
Pakistan/AfghanistanFol.89r left, fol.89r, right, fol.120(b)r left, fol.123 left,
fol.200v right5
Konkan (Coastal Maharasthra,
Karnataka)Fol147r/right, fol.151r/left, fol.193r/right,
fol.214v/right, fol.218v/left, fol.220v/left6
Lata (Southern Gujarat)Fol.99v/right, fol.169v/right, fol.179v/left,
fol.188r/right4
South India (Andhra, Tamil Nadu)Fol.120(a)v/left, fol.120(b)r, left, fol.200v/left, [Tamil
Nadu] fol.218v/right, [Andhra] fol.221r/left,
fol.221r/right, fol.74v/right [Potalaka]7 (includes Mt.
Potalaka)
Outside Eastern India Total 33

--- [Page 227] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 9 of 35
The question of why Sujātabhadra and his colleagues in Nepal decided to portray
these famous Buddhist sites and powerful devotional images of the Buddhist world known
to them in a manuscript of the AsP has been explored in previous studies ( Kim 2013 ,2014 ;
Granoff 2018 ). As Kim (2014 , pp. 46–47) suggests, the choice of “including numerous re‑
gional sites and cult images of specific localities” should be “understood in the context
of the pan‑Indic phenomenon of regional cult sites becoming transregionally meaning‑
ful…the Cambridge manuscript [Add.1643] may represent a pilgrimage cycle of a local
Newari Buddhist tradition, which may have developed in response to this larger historical
trend of mapping the local sites and making them transregionally meaningful” in medieval
South Asia.29What concerns us here is how they did this, that is, how they managed to
represent all of these sites and images pictorially. This gets to the central questions of the
essay: how did Sujātabhadra and his colleagues at Śrī Lham monastery in the Kathmandu
Valley know about the faraway sites, especially as far as the Malay peninsula, Sumatra,
Java, and China; further, how did they know what they looked like?
4. Transporting Visions
One of the main arguments in Kim (2021 ) is that the art of the book in medieval South
Asia developed to serve the changing needs of medieval Indic religious communities like
Buddhists and Jains. For Buddhists, the need to transmit and circulate images capturing
visions of Esoteric Buddhist practices securely and transregionally was met by the techno‑
logical and artistic breakthroughs in painted palm‑leaf manuscripts: a pothi manuscript
with painted panels systematically embedded in them, much like Add.1643, was a mo‑
bile information device that can carry visual information in a compact, portable, discrete
package ( Kim 2021 , pp. 116–17). Even among the painted manuscripts of medieval In‑
dic Buddhism, Add.1643 is exceptional in that this is the earliest surviving example of its
kind and that most images represent not Esoteric Buddhist vision practices but existing
pilgrimage sites and exoteric cultic images. Outside South Asia, a pictorial compilation
of famous Buddhist images survives from about the eighth century in the context of the
transregional and trans‑cultural movement of Buddhism across Asia: the paintings of Ruix‑
iang or auspicious images on silk found in Dunhuang’s Library Cave 17, which are now
dispersed between New Delhi and London is a great example (Figure 5). The impulse to
record the auspicious power sites visually may have been percolating in medieval South
Asia ( Granoff 2018 ), but most known examples date after Add.1643.30Luckily, the internal
evidence of Add.1643, the accidental duplicate folios of 120(a) (now appropriated as 109)
and 120(b) helps us consider how Sujātabhadra and his colleagues at Śrī Lham may have
approached this mighty task.
As mentioned above, both folios 120(a)/109 and 120(b) bear identical text. The lay‑
out of the two folios differs as folio 120(a) has two painted panels placed on the left and
right, whereas folio 120(b) has three panels (Figure 6).31The caption for the left panel of
folio 120(a) is partly missing due to the damage to the folio but we can reconstruct the
missing parts of the text based on the caption of the left panel of folio 120(b): daks
˙in
˙āpathe
mūlavāsa lokanāthah
˙, meaning Mūlavāsa Avalokiteśvara in South India.32The use of more
general “ daks
˙in
˙āpatha ” or the southern region and the non‑specificity of the image in both
cases—both depict a four‑armed standing Avalokiteśvara, with green Tārā holding an ut‑
pāla and four‑armed yellow Br
˙kut
˙ī against a red backdrop—suggest that the team’s knowl‑
edge of this place and the image was generic (Figures 7and 8). If anything, the painter of
folio 120(a) was a bit more specific about the main deity’s iconography: Avalokiteśvara’s
crown is marked with red Amitābha Buddha and his raised right hand holds a rosary,
whereas the painter of folio 120(b) omitted these details. Another main difference is the
color of Avalokiteśvara’s dhoti where Folio 120(a) shows a translucent and patterned gar‑

--- [Page 228] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 10 of 35
ment (leaving it mostly white) with an orange sash, whereas folio 120(b)’s artist chose
blue for the same dhoti.33The second panel of each folio, right on folio 120(a) and center
on folio 120(b), bears identical captions which read “ kaht
˙āhadvīpevalavatīparvatalokanāthah
˙(lit. Lokanātha [Avalokiteśvara] of Valavatī Mountain in Kaht
˙āhadvīpa”).34Both paintings
depict the same subject, Avalokiteśvara standing in the center holding his right hand low‑
ered in varadā with a Sūcīmukha (lit. needle‑faced, hungry ghost) at his right foot receiving
direct blessing/nectar from the bodhisattva and accompanied by three other figures: one
female and two male (Figures 9and 10). But how the two artists (let us call them, NAA,
Newar Artist A, and NAB, Newar Artist B) executed the scene, even the mood among the
figures, and their treatment of the setting/backdrop, differ completely.ā Śī
tt
ﬀ
ṣṇā ū ā
āḥ ū ā ś
ṣṇā
ś āā ā
ṛṭī
ś
̄
tt ﬀ
ś tt
ṭā ī ī āḥ
ā ś ī ṭā ī
ś
ā ūī
tt
Figure 5. Famous auspicious images (Ruixiang): fragmented details from silk paintings from Dun‑
huang’s Library Cave 17, Tang dynasty, ca. 8th century. British Museum 1919,0101,0.51.1–7, detail
on the right: 1919,0101,0.51.4. © The Trustees of the British Museum Shared under a Creative Com‑
mons Attribution‑Non‑Commercial‑ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY‑NC‑SA 4.0) license.tt ﬀ
 
Śī
tt
tt
ū ā ś
ū ā ś
tt
Figure 6. Folios 120(a)/109 and 120(b), AsP, 1015 CE (N.S. 135), ŚrīLham monastery, Kath‑
mandu, Nepal. Cambridge University Library, Add.1643. Pigments and ink on palm leaf,
5.5 cm×55 cm. Image: https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/220 and https://cudl.lib.
cam.ac.uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/241 . Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of Cambridge
University Library.

--- [Page 229] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 11 of 35tt ﬀ
Śī
tt
tt
 
ū ā ś
ū ā ś
tt
Figure 7. “Mūlavāsa Avalokiteśvara in South India” fol. 120(a)/109, left panel, Add.1643. Detail of
Figure 6top. Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.tt ﬀ
Śī
tt
tt
ū ā ś
 
ū ā ś
tt
Figure 8. “Mūlavāsa Avalokiteśvara in South India” fol. 120(b), right panel, Add.1643. Detail of
Figure 6bottom. Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.
 
ś ̄ ṭā ī
ś ̄ ṭā ī
tt
ś
tt
ś
Figure 9. “ Avalokiteśvara of Valavatī Mountain in Kaht
˙āhadvīpa (Kedah)”, fol. 120(a)/109, right
panel, Add.1643. Detail of Figure 6top. Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of Cambridge
University Library.

--- [Page 230] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 12 of 35ś ̄ ṭā ī
 
ś ̄ ṭā ī
tt
ś
tt
ś
Figure 10. “ Avalokiteśvara of Valavatī Mountain in Kaht
˙āhadvīpa (Kedah)”, fol. 120(b), center panel,
Add.1643. Detail of Figure 6bottom. Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of Cambridge
University Library.
NAA sets the pentad against a large green mandorla strewn with a triple‑peaked mo‑
tif (often used to indicate emission of light or heat around a deity) with an orange back‑
drop where flowers float, mirroring the panel on the left, where Avalokiteśvara’s triad
stands against a large red mandorla with a blue backdrop with floating flowers. NAB sets
the pentad against a colorful tapestry of geometric patterns that conventionally represent
mountainous landscapes, especially rocky mountains, in South Asian art.35It seems as if
Avalokiteśvara emerges out of a natural concave in between the rocky, mountainous land‑
scape: his immediate background and contour are colored deep blue where small flowers
float. Matching this dynamic backdrop, the characters’ expressions are more animated
and their mood is more joyful in NAB’s version on folio 120(b): Avalokiteśvara’s smile is
expressive (with the deep curve of the mouth almost forming a U) and his upper body’s
sway to the left is more pronounced than NAA’s version; Hayagrīva, who holds his right
hand above his head in the gesture of greeting, looks up to the bodhisattva happily, and his
protruding horse head also looks intently at the bodhisattva, in contrast to NAA’s Haya‑
grīva, who looks rather serious and intense with his gaze directed towards the kneeling
Sūcīmukha. The treatment of eyebrows in particular marks the difference: NAA added an
extra squiggly line on Hayagrīva’s forehead, making his eyebrows also more zigzagged
and upwards, which is typical of the krodha or wrathful deities; the short male figure who
folds his hands reverently together in añjalī mudrā (perhaps Sudhanakumāra) also look
upwards with a smile; even the hungry ghost is more congenially rendered with a wide
eye and a sinuous eyebrow on his profile. The standing female figure holding a water lily
depicts Tārā but NAB departed from the convention of painting Tārā green, which NAA
followed, and chose yellow instead, enhancing her human‑like appearance. While NAA
depicted Tārā’s right hand as holding a vitarka mudrā , NAB chose a simpler abhaya mudrā .
Why such different approaches to representing the same site and images?
We should not expect these medieval Newar paintings to represent existing sites
verisimilarly. But as a thought experiment, let us ask which one is closer to “reality”, not
in our modern sense but in the sense of capturing the essence of a place.36You will agree
that NAB (folio 120b) does a better job of capturing the essence of the site, according to the
caption, on a mountain on a faraway island. What happened between the two renditions?
It seems that they were immediate contemporaries of each other. Yet NAB seems to have
had access to more information about the place, which may be identified with Gunung

--- [Page 231] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 13 of 35
Jerai (Mountain Jerai) in Kedah, Malaysia ( Sinclair 2021a ;Murphy 2018 ). Is it possible that
someone who came back from a long‑distance trip to the Malacca strait told what they had
seen as NAB prepared to work on his folio? Or did NAB decide to give it a try where
NAA stayed more conservative about this distant place? The ancient region of Nusantara
(the Malay peninsula and Indonesian archipelago) where the Śrīvijaya dynasty was pow‑
erful until their defeat by the Cōl a King Rājendra in 1025 CE may seem too far from Nepal
geographically to claim any direct interconnectivity. Yet recent studies suggest that this
land‑locked region of Nepal man
˙d
˙ala (the Kathmandu Valley) was very much plugged
into the web of transregional travels by seafaring Esoteric Buddhist masters ( Sinclair 2018 ,
2021a ,2021b ).
When the famed Indian Buddhist master Atīśa Dīpa ˙nkaraśrījñāna (986–1054) set out
on a sea journey to study with an exceptional Buddhist teacher of the time, Dharmakīrti
of the Golden Isles or Suvarn
˙advīpa (traditionally believed to be Sumatra), he sailed on a
“Nepalese ship”, which elsewhere is identified as a merchant’s ship according to a Tibetan
biography of Atīśa recounted in first person ( Decleer 1995 ). Sinclair suggests that this jour‑
ney to “the Srivijaya and Kedah region” was completed “shortly before Sujātabhadra’s
manuscript was completed” ( Sinclair 2021a , p. 8). For our purpose, whether Sujātabhadra
and his colleagues had access to the first‑hand report of this “Valavatī mountain” from
Atīśa’s team or not does not matter as much. The point of this exercise is to recognize that
such stories of transregional travels circulating orally must have informed the manuscript
makers about what these sites and places that they knew only as names in a list of places
looked like.37
In certain cases, the captions seem to provide a seed for a recall, and the artists
knew much more about the places. For instance, the “Dharmarājikacaitya of Rādya” men‑
tioned in the caption of folio 147r (right panel) could have been illustrated through a
single stūpa in the center like the Kanakacaitya in Purus
˙apūra man
˙d
˙ala (Shahjiki‑dheri,
Kanis
˙kastūpa near Peshawar, Pakistan) or any other caityas that appear in the manuscript
(Figures 11and 12). Instead, the painting allocates only about 1/3 of the space to an ornate
white stūpa with an adjacent pillar (like an Aśokan pillar) topped by a Garud
˙a or kinnara
capital. More than half of the space is allocated to a flat‑roofed one‑story building with a
roofed balcony where a monk is seated with his hands in añjalī mudrā facing towards the
interior of the building, suggesting a lecture hall or a Buddha hall (Figure 13).38It seems
that the painters knew about the site as a stupa site with an Aśokan pillar and a monastery
that surrounds it.ś
 
̣̄ ̣̣
tt
̄ ̄
Ś̄ ̄ tt
tt
tt
Figure 11. Kanaka caitya in Purus
˙apūra man
˙d
˙ala (Kanishka stūpa , Peshawar), fol. 123v, left,
Add.1643. Image: https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/248 . Reproduced by kind per‑
mission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.

--- [Page 232] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 14 of 35ś
̣̄ ̣̣
tt
  
̄ ̄
Ś̄ ̄ tt
tt
tt
Figure 12. Stūpa sites in Add.1643. Left: fol. 202r, left panel, Kurma stūpa in Odisha; right: fol.
218v, right panel, Śrī‑Dhānya caitya in Ambu (Amaravati?). Image: https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/
MS‑ADD‑01643/406 and https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/438 . Reproduced by kind
permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.ś
̣̄ ̣̣
tt
̄ ̄
Ś̄ ̄ tt
tt
 
tt
Figure 13. Dharmarajika caitya in Radya, Bihar, fol. 127r, right panel, Add.1643. Image: https:
//cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/255 . Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of
Cambridge University Library.
Another monastery, in fact, the sole “ vihāra ” named among captioned entries, “Can‑
drana ( sic)vihāra ” in “Supācanagara”, on folio 216v is believed to represent the site of
the famed sandalwood monastery in Sopara in coastal Maharashtra where Aśokan pil‑
lar and archaeological remains of a Buddhist monastic center are found ( Foucher 1900–
1905 ;Brancaccio 2023a ). Recent studies by Brancaccio (2023a ,2023b ) demonstrate that
Sopara was an important port during the first millennium, and the far‑reaching fame of
this “Candana vihāra ” is attested in a seventh‑century inscription discovered at the famous
site of OC Eo in Southern Vietnam ( Chhom et al. 2025 ).39The painting shows an impressive
two‑storied building with lattice windows, which occupies almost two‑thirds of the panel
(Figure 14). Again, there is a monk on the covered balcony looking into the building with
his right hand raised in the gesture of greeting. There is a simple stūpa to the right of the
page next to which is an Aśokan pillar. Again, this is most likely a pictorial interpretation
of what they have heard about this wealthy monastery rather than what it looked like at
the turn of the eleventh century; it is probably based on the general understanding of what
a Buddhist monastery in the Gangetic plain looked like, i.e., flat‑roofed with short eaves
and latticed windows, given the frequent travels by pilgrims, traders, and Buddhist teach‑

--- [Page 233] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 15 of 35
ers between the Kathmandu Valley and the Buddhist sites in the Gangetic plain. Between
thestūpa and the monastery, two monastic figures float in mid‑air; their lively interaction
is whimsically observed by the elephant on top of the Ashokan pillar—a scene that may
reference a particular story about the Candana vihāra .40̄
ā ā
ś
ā tt
tt
ū
ś
tt
ū
ā
 
ā
tt
̄
ū
ū
Figure 14. Candana (candrana) vihāra in Sopara (supācanagara), Maharashtra, fol. 216v, right panel,
Add.1643. Image: https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/434 . Reproduced by kind permis‑
sion of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.
Some paintings of unidentified sites in Add.1643 may hold keys to telling untold sto‑
ries about now‑lost Buddhist or even non‑Buddhist sites. The strange representation of
a floating chatra (umbrella) above a bejeweled stūpa on folio 169r (left panel) may be a
literal translation of the name given in the caption, alaga cchatra caitya or “stūpa of a sepa‑
rate umbrella” in Odisha (Figure 15).41The semi‑curved shape of the space within which
this stūpa sits with a monk paying homage to it is reminiscent of sectional views of rock‑
cutcaitya halls, like those at Ajanta in Maharashtra. We also recall a story reported by
Xuanzang about a Buddha image at Ajanta on top of which stone canopies marvelously
hovered over it without any support. I am not suggesting that this image represents one
of Ajanta’s caitya halls (Figure 16). Rather, I would like to entertain the possibility that this
image carries a vestige of distant memories of marvelous places translated into a painting
of a single Buddhist site in Odisha. These memories could include the story of floating
canopies of Ajanta reported by Xuanzang; it could also (mis)remember and translate a
story about an impressive Hindu temple with a levitating idol or pillar in Odisha.42My
speculations about lost stories are thought experiments but they demonstrate how taking
the images seriously in their own historical context and imagining the process of making
and their potential inspirations can provide clues about what to look for in surviving—and
yet‑to‑be‑discovered historical—records.43

--- [Page 234] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 16 of 35
 
tt
Figure 15. Alagachatra [detached canopy/umbrella] caitya in Odisha, fol. 169r, left panel, Add.1643.
Image: https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/339 . Reproduced by kind permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library.tt
 
Figure 16. View of the stūpa with a Buddhist monk in a caitya hall, Cave 19, Ajanta, Maharashtra, c.
fifth‑century CE. 8 March 2024. Photo by author.
5. Buddha in the Great Ocean
In the context of maritime travel and connectivity across Monsoon Asia, the left panel
on folio 20v in Add.1643 presents the most captivating and pertinent image (Figure 17).

--- [Page 235] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 17 of 35
The painting depicts a standing Buddha holding his right hand in abhaya (fear‑not; reas‑
surance) mudrā , floating in the middle of the ocean. Two small boats that look rather unfit
for an ocean‑going voyage float on either side with each oarsman busy anchoring their boat.
Undulating white lines in circular repetitions against deep blue represent a turbulent sea.
Sea creatures, fish, sea snails, a makara (mythical aquatic animal associated with controlling
water), and an unusual combination of a golden turtle above a red horse above another
makara‑like creature, add to the dynamism of the scene through their curved shapes and
fluid lines. The antagonist, or in this case, the subdued, is the red demonic figure on the
bottom right, which is only visible from the shoulder up with his hands cupped right un‑
der the chin in a gesture described as ādhāra mudrā (holding water gesture) ( Markel 1990 ,
p. 11). This figure is Rāhu, the eighth of the nine planetary deities or Navagraha known as
the demon causing eclipses. The sky looks largely clear of the storm and the garlands hang‑
ing from two dark clouds celebrate the miracle of quelling the raging sea that the Buddha
performs. The caption of the image reads Abhayapān
˙i (lit. the one with the abhaya gesture)
quelling Rāhu in the Great Ocean ( mahāsamudre rāhukr
˙ta abhayapān
˙i).ā
tt
āā ā
ā
ạ̄
ā ā āṛ
āṇ
 
āṇ ā
tt
ﬀ
tt ā ā
tt ū tt
ā
ﬀ
ā ā Śī
̄ ﬀ ﬀ
Figure 17. Buddha (Abhayapān
˙i) subduing Rāhu in the Great Ocean, fol. 20v, left panel. Add.1643.
Image: https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/42 . Reproduced by kind permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library.
Granoff (2018 , pp. 22–23) suggested that this scene may depict the stories known from
theSamyutta nikāya about Rāhu going after the sun and moon out of jealousy and the Bud‑
dha subduing him. According to the Candimasutta and Sūryasutta , “the gods of the sun and
moon palace call upon the Buddha for help and the Buddha orders Rāhu to release them
on pain of death” ( Granoff 2018 , p. 23). It is possible that these old stories about Rāhu were
known to Sujātabhadra and his colleagues at Śrī Lham. The two small boats that look more
like coastal pleasure boats rather than ocean‑going ships may represent the “lunar and so‑
lar palaces, or vimānas ” as Granoff suggests ( Granoff 2018 , p. 22). Although plausible, this
old story’s relevance for the Newar Buddhist community of the early eleventh century is
yet to be established. Relying only on textual sources also misses the opportunity to see the
historical significance of this scene and the manuscript at large. If we listen to the painting

--- [Page 236] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 18 of 35
more closely and consider other contemporary and near‑contemporary historical and art
historical evidence, there are more immediate stories that the painting likely recalls.
First, it is important to remember that Add.1643 inspired what I would call mediated
replicas akin to two‑ or three‑generation‑removed kin, as noted in Kim (2014 ). One of them
is the AsP manuscript in the Asiatic Society, Kolkata, A.15, which was discussed together
with Add.1643 by Foucher (1900–1905 ). This manuscript, prepared in 1071 CE (N.S. 191),
is more streamlined in its design and has only thirty‑six painted panels. The same scene
of subduing Rāhu appears with the exact same caption, this time on folio 34r marking the
end of chapter 3 (Figure 18). Here, the ocean is lighter blue with swirly undulating lines in
thin wiry strokes. The scene is more simplified than in Add.1643 as the standing Buddha
occupies the whole height of the panel dominating the scene and there are only two fish
as token aquatic creatures. Instead of two small pleasure boats, we see one yellow boat on
the upper right and a pavilion on the lower left. That the boat was under disturbance is
indicated by wiry black lines of waves that intrude onto the boat’s port‑side hull. Under
the boat is again the sea demon figure, rising out of the swirling wavy patterns drawn in
red. This time, he pays homage to the Buddha with his hands folded in front of him instead
of in the ādhāra mudrā typical of Rāhu. If the two small pleasure boats in Add.1643 may
have invoked a vimāna in shape, here there is no question about it being a merchant’s boat:
the giant red jar being transported on the boat in the upper right is expected in the yellow
pavilion in the lower left, where a man sits in front of another two giant red jars.ā
tt
āā ā ā
ā
 
āṇ ā
īś
īś ā
̄ś
̣ īś
ā ̄ ̄
ā
ā
Figure 18. Buddha (Abhayapān
˙i) subduing Rāhu in the Great Ocean, fol. 34r, center. AsP, 1071 CE
(N.S. 191), Kathmandu, Nepal. Asiatic Society, Kolkata, A.15. Photo by author.
Buddha protecting merchants is an expected condition of Buddhism’s spread across
Monsoon Asia. Newar merchants of the Kathmandu Valley have played a prominent
role in transregional trade, especially in the “trans‑Himalayan Buddhist trade network”.
(Lewis 1993 , p. 145; 2023 ). Although imagining an ocean‑going merchant group from this
land‑locked region seems like a challenge, Atīśa’s Tibetan biographers clearly mention that
he was on a Newar mercantile ship.44In a way, the rendition of a merchant’s boat in A.15
enhances our understanding of the context of the scene in Add.1643 and its connection to
Atīśa’s sea voyage. The scene of the Buddha quelling Rāhu in the Great Ocean in Add.1643
recalls the torrential storm and obstruction of the passage by the “great makara sea mon‑
ster” that Atīśa faced on his way to the Golden Island to meet his teacher ( Decleer 1995 ,
p. 412).
A host of protective deities are called upon to deal with the treacherous situation. In re‑
sponse to the plea of his disciple, Ks
˙itigarbha, Atīśa himself takes the form of Raktayamāri,
or Red Slayer of Death: “Then I [turned into] the Bhagavān Slayer of Death [Yamāri], [my]
body red, with a fat belly, dark brown hair waving upward, with reddish eyes wide open
looking into the ten directions” ( Decleer 1995 , p. 414). Raktayamāri’s form described here is
a common type of krodha or wrathful deity ( lambodāra or pot‑bellied type) ( Linrothe 1999 ).45
This description can also apply to the image of Rāhu in Add.1643 who is red with yellow

--- [Page 237] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 19 of 35
hair waving upward. It is hard to speculate about the color of Rāhu as understood by
people in medieval South Asia because most known Rāhu images from medieval South
Asia are in sculptures. A detail from a Jain victory yantra (Jayatra yantra ) dated 1447 CE
shows Rāhu in dark blue color, which goes well with the understanding of Rāhu as an
eclipse demon (Figure 19). Given this discrepancy, is it possible that the Atīśa story about
Raktayamāri in the ocean was already circulating in the Kathmandu Valley when Sujāta‑
bhadra took on this project? Rāhu is not colored red in A.15, but the demon appears out
of swirly patterns composed in red. Even in the most simplified, concise version of the
same scene, appearing in the early twelfth‑century manuscript of the Prajñāpāramitā from
southern Bengal, another distant kin of Add.1643 as discussed in Kim (2014 ), the painter
also uses red color for Rāhu (Figure 20).ā
ā
ā
ā ā
īś
ā
ā ā
tt
āā ā
ā
 
ā
tt
ā
Figure 19. Detail of Rāhu (colored blue) and Ketu of the Navagrahas in Jayatra yantra, c. 1447 (V.S.
1504), Gujarat. Pigments on cloth. V&A IM 89–1936. © Victoria and Albert Museum, London https:
//collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O17102/victory‑banner‑unknown/?carousel‑image=2013GM4572 .ā
ā
ā
ā ā
īś
ā
ā ā
tt
āā ā
ā
ā
tt
 
ā
Figure 20. Buddha subduing Rāhu in the Great Ocean, fol. 402v, PvP Ms, c. 1100 CE (Harivarman 8th
year), southeastern Bengal. Pigments and ink on palm leaf. Painted panel: 5.6 cm ×5.8 cm, folio size:
56.6 cm×5.8 cm. Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 52.93.1. Image: www.metmuseum.org ,
Open Access Public Domain.

--- [Page 238] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 20 of 35
In fact, this painting in the dispersed manuscript from southern Bengal helps us see
something else: the colossal scale of the Buddha appearing in the middle of the sea. In
comparison to the same scenes we examined in Add.1643 and A.15, the painting is notable
for its visual economy and efficiency. The Buddha’s body is outlined with single reddish‑
brown lines so light and rhythmic that one can discern where the artist halted his tiny brush.
Black ink is economically used to draw eyes, hair, floating clouds, and undulating lines of
ocean water. The cursory and casual nature of these black lines adds to the liveliness of
the scene. Some lines appear almost clumsy, and abbreviation and swift execution seem to
have been the artist(s)’s forte. The lack of draftsmanship, however, did not compromise the
iconographic clarity or the power of the Buddha subduing “Rāhu” in the Great Ocean. The
sky, again depicted in red as in Add.1643, is given more than three‑quarters of the space
against which the Buddha’s standing body glows. The two ceremonial boats in Add.1643
are changed to a single plain paneled wooden boat, probably the kind of boat used in
the coastal region of Bengal. Two figures simply dressed in white (not the devas of solar
and lunar palaces) stand in the boat. They look up and pay homage to the Buddha for
his safely delivering them from a raging storm. Aquatic creatures are simplified to three
fish popping in between the waves. Despite its simplicity, certain details help tell a more
exuberant story, like the celestial beings that are coming out of the clouds and about to
offer flowers to the Buddha. Their prominent position and the compositional scale change,
i.e., the Buddha’s dominance in the open red sky tell the story of a marvelous happening
at sea: a raging storm suddenly calms, and the sun breaks through the clouds. We see
the sense of relief and gratitude of the people in the boat as soothing winds that feel like
celestial music replace the storm’s roar and as the dark clouds make the sun’s radiance
even more striking, all of which is conveyed here by these celestial beings. Here, if we
look back at the panel in Add.1643 with this later version in mind, the dark clouds with
hanging garlands and the flower‑strewn red sky now make a more dramatic impression
of the story.
Tumultuous storms in the middle of the ocean feature frequently in Buddhist narra‑
tives from early on (i.e., Mahājānaka jātaka , Si˙mhala avadāna ). The perils at sea are a common
ingredient in the biographies of Buddhist masters traveling across the “maritime trading
channels” across Monsoon Asia ( Acri 2019b ). Acri observes that this trend is not just based
on an imaginary scene but also on actual experience, which “testifies to the increasing pop‑
ularity of maritime travel in Buddhist communities from the sixth century onwards”. This
is also seen in the “concurrent development in the same locales of ‘saviour cults’ focus‑
ing on the Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara, Tārā (especially in her as
˙t
˙mahābhaya aspect) and
Mahāpratisarā as protectors of travellers, and of sailors in particular” ( Acri 2019b , p. 53).
Interestingly, however, none of the known maritime travel accounts of Buddhist masters
feature the Buddha himself appearing at sea as the savior. Atīśa’s travelogue expands the
pantheon of wayfaring guardians to include the deities of the so‑called “higher” Tantras,
like Raktayamāri, Yamāntaka, and Krodharāja Acala, but the Buddha does not appear as
the action hero. This is where it is important to consider the context of the manuscript’s
program as recording an ambitious itinerary traversing the vast Buddhist world known to
those in the Śrī Lham monastery in Nepal at the turn of the eleventh century.
Let us consider another hypothetical scenario. What if the iconography of the Buddha
subduing Rāhu in the Great Ocean remembers a story of a monumental rock‑cut Buddha
on an island serving as a beacon for seafarers? Brancaccio (2020 , p. 178) draws our at‑
tention to one such story about a colossal Buddha image with miraculous powers in the
Indian Ocean. According to Xuanzang, “Crossing the sea westward from this island [Sri
Lanka] several thousands of li, on the eastern cliff of a solitary island is a stone figure of
Buddha more than 100 feet high. It is sitting facing the east” ( Beal 1906 , p. 252). This

--- [Page 239] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 21 of 35
colossal Buddha hewn out of rock saved a group of merchants stranded after a storm by
providing fresh water from the gem fixed us
˙n
˙īs
˙a. We may not be able to identify the exact
monumental rock‑cut Buddha on an island as described by Xuanzang although Samuel
Beal’s suggestion of the Maldives may be possible ( Beal 1906 , p. 252, fn. 26). No substan‑
tial art historical or in‑depth archaeological scholarship exists on the Buddhist past of the
Maldives, but it is clear from existing studies ( Gippert 2004 ,2013 ) that Buddhism was ac‑
tive in these islands until the turn of 1100 CE, thus making cultic sites in the Maldives
coeval with our manuscripts. Gippert (2004 ,2013 ) provides a comprehensive analysis of
epigraphic evidence in Prakrit and Sanskrit written in Southern Brāhmī/Grantha‑based
script found in the Maldives. Gippert (2013 ) identified the Yamāntaka mantra inscribed di‑
rectly on two coral stone sculptures, each with six wrathful faces carved all around, bearing
“clear witness to Tantric Buddhism prevailing on the Maldives before the introduction of
Islamic faith” in the twelfth century (p. 134). The type of the texts identified by Gippert
(i.e., Sitātapatrā dhāran
˙īand Yamāntaka mantra) suggests the largely talismanic role of these
inscriptions associated with averting perils, which must have been particularly important
for seafarers seeking landfall: this island archipelago was a divine harbor refuge five hun‑
dred miles west from India and Sri Lanka in the Indian Ocean.46
With little surviving evidence, it is difficult to know what such a colossal sculpture
of the Buddha may have looked like if a colossal rock‑cut sculpture ever existed on one of
the islands in the Maldives.47Brancaccio’s insightful study of colossal rock‑cut Buddhas of
Sri Lanka helps us imagine what the Buddha remembered in the iconography of the Bud‑
dha offering protection in the Great Ocean would have looked like: in the landscape, with
seasonal flows of water around the Buddha, “visually evoking the miraculous scenario”
(Brancaccio 2020 , p. 179). Coincidentally, all the monumental rock‑cut Buddha sculptures
of Sri Lanka have the right hand raised in abhaya mudrā or its variation (hand‑held side‑
ways) and hold the end of the garments in raised left hand as we see in Add.1643.48Colos‑
sal Buddha statues stand as landmarks across the Silk Road, on both maritime and land
routes ( Brancaccio 2020 ;Wong and Heldt 2014 ). They are located often near a body of wa‑
ter, as observed in Sri Lanka ( Brancaccio 2020 ) and elsewhere, suggesting their function
in offering protection.49Thus, despite their absence in Buddhist travelogues, in practice,
the colossal Buddha statues must have remained important reference points in discussing
itineraries for maritime journeys. At least for the manuscript makers in Nepal, standing
Buddhas offering protection, i.e., holding abhaya mudrā , and on islands, were important in
charting the ocean‑crossing itinerary, as seen in the images of Dīpa ˙nkara Buddhas, one in
the island of Java (fol. 2r) and another one in Sri Lanka (fol. 8v) in Add.1643.50
Finally, the centrality of this Great Ocean Buddha scene in the manuscript’s design is
also confirmed in its strategic placement in the overall layout of Add.1643. The layout of
each painted page changes from one painted panel per folio to two per folio from this page.
The previously painted folio in the program, folio 14r, features a single painted panel: a
painting of Avalokiteśvara of the uniquely Nepalese site, “Svayambhū” ( nepāle svayambhū
lokanātha ), which is paired with the panel depicting the goddess Prajñāpāramitā on the
Vulture Peak ( gr
˙d
˙hrakūt
˙aparvate prajñāpāramitā ) on folio 13v. It is as if the Great Ocean Bud‑
dha panel announces the long‑distance journey that unfolds in the manuscript over which
the Buddha provides protection. This sense of marking the beginning of a sequence in the
manuscript’s design is amplified in A.15, where every painted folio has a single painted
panel and marks the end of a chapter (and the beginning and the end of the manuscript).
The streamlined program makes it easier to identify a pattern in the overarching program.
In A.15, our scene appears at the end of chapter 3 on folio 34r and the sites before this point
in the program either relate directly to the text (fols.1v, 2r, 12r) or a site in Nepal (fol. 18r).
The sequence of Prajñāpāramitā (fol. 12r) and the uniquely Nepalese Avalokiteśvara, this

--- [Page 240] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 22 of 35
time identified as “Bu ˙ngama Lokeśvara in Nepal” (fol. 18r), is the same as in Add.1643,
except that now each marks a chapter ending instead of facing each other at the end of one
chapter.51In addition, A.15 relegates the two Dipa ˙nkara Buddhas, one in Sri Lanka and
one in Java, much later than the Great Ocean scene, on folio 72r and fol. 83r, respectively.
This placement ensures all transregional locations appear in the manuscript after the Great
Ocean scene.
6. Epilogue
Mapping all the sites associated with Add.1643 with geo‑coordinates is an impossi‑
ble task with our current state of knowledge on pre‑modern toponyms. Yet as we have
seen, concerted efforts to unpack potentially embedded stories from the painted images
can present a promising path to look for more clues and lesser‑explored historical records.
We discussed some images that relate to maritime travels in Add.1643 but there are many
more: in Sri Lanka, for instance, we find Jambhala in the rocky setting (fol. 80v right)
and healing hall Avalokiteśvara (fol. 86r right) in addition to Dīpa ˙nkara. All three are
located in “ si˙mhaladvīpa ” according to the captions, which may be mapped at level D,
with a centroid for Sri Lanka (7◦52′37.5″ N 80◦41′52.5″ E). Identifying specific sites will
require further research in each region. The painting of Jambhala appears more specific
with a rocky and jewel‑like landscape as the backdrop while the “healing hall” Aval‑
okiteśvara ( ārogaśālālokanātha ) appears rather generic despite the specificity in the name
(Figures 21and 22). The bodhisattva’s epithet “healing hall” in fact recalls a story of a Bud‑
dhist master, Candragomin, who traveled to Sri Lanka and eliminated leprosy by building
a temple to Avalokiteśvara according to the sixteenth‑century author Tāranātha’s History of
Indian Buddhism (Chimpa and Chattopadhyaya 1970 , p. 202). This account is preceded by
the origin story of Candradvīpa: an island magically appeared at the mouth of the Ga ˙ngā
river where it meets the sea in response to Candragomin’s prayer to Tārā when he was
thrown into the water. Candragomin builds a shrine to Tārā and Avalokiteśvara on this
island from where in the biography he seems to have proceeded to Sri Lanka. Is it a pure
coincidence that the painted panel depicting Tārā in Candradvīpa is placed on the same
page as the Jambhala (in Sri Lanka) panel (both on folio 80v, left and right, respectively) as
if recalling the itinerary of Candragomin?ﬀ
tt
ś īn ̇
ṁ ī
′ ″ ′ ″
ś
ā āā ā
tt
ś ā ā
tt
ī n ̇ā
āā
āā ś
āā ī
 
tt
ś
tt
Figure 21. Jambhala in Sri Lanka, fol. 80v, right panel, Add.1643. Image: https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.
uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/162 . Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of Cambridge Univer‑
sity Library.
This painting of Tārā of Candradvīpa also happens to be a unique example of evolv‑
ing pictorial strategies that cleverly indicated that Tārā is on an island at the confluence
of rivers and the ocean (Figure 23). Green Tārā sits in the middle with one leg pendant
and showing the varadā mudrā in the right hand and a utpala in the left. This is set within
a grid like a triptych, and eight squares distributed evenly on either side contain eight

--- [Page 241] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 23 of 35
miniature images of herself, representing the iconography of As
˙t
˙amahābhaya Tārā, the
goddess Tārā as the savioress from eight great perils.52This form of Tārā holds paramount
importance and widespread appeal among seafarers. Perhaps acknowledging this super‑
power of Tārā, the artists framed this “triptych” of Tārā with a wide blue border strewn
with floating flowers, which may cleverly represent the water on all four sides of the is‑
land located at the oceanic entrance, a suitable launch place for transregional sea journeys
like the one taken by Candragomin remembered by Tāranātha. How many more stories
like this one we will be able to unpack in Add.1643 remains to be seen. This Nepalese
manuscript, Add.1643, in fact, holds many ambitious itineraries, each awaiting meticulous
exploration and interpretation. While this essay offers a small glimpse, it serves as an invi‑
tation to further scholarly inquiry. Further research will help illuminate vast networks
of cultural exchange across medieval Monsoon Asia, enhancing our understanding of
historical interconnectivity.ﬀ
tt
ś īn ̇
ṁ ī
′ ″ ′ ″
ś
ā āā ā
tt
ś ā ā
tt
ī n ̇ā
āā
āā ś
āā ī
tt
 
ś
tt
Figure 22. Healing Hall Avalokiteśvara in Sri Lanka, fol. 86r, right panel, Add.1643. Image: https:
//cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS‑ADD‑01643/173 . Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of
Cambridge University Library.āā ī
āā
āā
ā ā
ṣṭ ā āā
āā āā
āā āā
ā ā
ﬀ
 
̄̄ ̄
tt
Figure 23. Tārā of Candradvīpa, fol. 80v, right panel, Add.1643. Image: https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/
view/MS‑ADD‑01643/162 . Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of Cambridge Univer‑
sity Library.

--- [Page 242] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 24 of 35
Funding: This publication has been partly supported by the French National Research Agency
(ANR), project MANTRA—Maritime Asian Networks of Buddhist Tantra (ANR‑22‑CE27‑015), coordi‑
nated by Andrea Acri (EPHE, PSL University, Paris).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in this study are included in the
article. Further inquiries can be directed to the author.
Acknowledgments: This manuscript was published in the special issue “Beyond the ‘Spice Routes’:
Indic and Sinitic Religions across the Asian Maritime Realm”, with Andrea Acri and Francesco Bian‑
chini serving as guest editors. It is based on a conference paper given at the “Beyond the Spice Route”
symposium at King’s College, University of Cambridge, on 7 November 2023, part of the King’s Col‑
lege “Silk Roads Programme” co‑funded by the French EPHE, GREI, and ANR. I would like to thank
Andrea Acri for sharing the reference to Bandaranayake, 2012, and other works on Monsoon Asia.
I thank Todd T. Lewis for reading an early draft of the article and providing references on Newar
Buddhism. The presentation of mapping data and research for geo‑coordinates was supported by
Tracy Stuber (Digital Humanities Specialist, Arts & Humanities Computing at Harvard) and John
Weaver (Harvard College 2026). The core idea for this article was developed as part of the author’s
Harvard College undergraduate lecture course, HAA81 Art of Monsoon Asia: Interconnected His‑
tories, offered in Fall 2021 and 2023. I thank the students of HAA81 for their insightful questions
and enthusiasm.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
Appendix A
Table A1. Iconographic structure color‑coded for geo‑data specificity level. CUL Add.1643, dated
1015 CE53.
Fol. No. Painted Panel(s) Placement [Left‑Center‑Right]Specificity
Level
Fol.1v Yellow Paper Replacement
Fol.2rDīpa ˙nkara in Java
island [Java] ( yavadvīpe
dīpa˙nkara )D
Fol.5vVajrasattva on Mt.
Meru
(sumerovajrasatvah
˙)E
Fol.8vDīpa ˙nkara in Sinhala
island [Sri Lanka]
(sinhaladvīpe dīpa ˙nkara )D
Fol.11vLokanātha on Mt.
Kapota in Magadha
[Bihar] ( magadhe
kāpotaparvate lokanāthah
˙)C
Fol.13vPrajñāpāramitā on
vulture peak [Rajgir,
Bihar]
(gr
˙dhrakūt
˙aparvate
prajñāpāramitā )A
Fol.14r
(Ch.1 ends)Svayambhū‑Lokanātha,
Nepal [Nepal,
Kathmandu valley,
Bunga‑dyah] ( nepāle
svaya ˙mbhūlokanāthah
˙)A

--- [Page 243] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 25 of 35
Table A1. Cont.
Fol. No. Painted Panel(s) Placement [Left‑Center‑Right]Specificity
Level
Fol.20v
(Ch.2 ends)Rāhukr
˙ta‑Abhayapān
˙i in
Great ocean
(mahāsamudre
rāhukr
˙ta‑abhayapān
˙i),
Maldives?Preaching Buddha in
Pund
˙avardhana [
Mahasthangarh, Bangladesh]
(pun
˙d
˙avarddhane
triśaran
˙a‑buddhabhat
˙t
˙ārakah
˙)D‑B
Fol.40v
(Ch.3 ends)Macchītivahti‑Lokanātha
in Magadha [Bihar]
(magadhe
macchītivahti‑lokanāthah
˙)Maitreya in Tus
˙ita heaven
(tus
˙itabhavane maitreya )D‑E
Fol.44r
(Ch.4 ends)Buddha of Gandhavati [lit.
fragrant lord],
Kalas
˙avarapura
(kalas
˙avarapure
gandhavatyā bhagavān )Buddha in Trāyatrim
˙śa heaven
(trāyatri ˙mśe bhagavān )?‑E
Fol.59r
(Ch.5 ends)Vardhamāna stūpa of
Tulaks
˙etra [Śrīksetra in
Burma? But later it has
Varendra attached to
Tulāks
˙etra on folio 174]
(tulāks
˙etra‑varddhamāna‑
stūpah
˙)Tārā (of forest) in Vārendra
[Northern
Bangladesh/northeastern W.
Bengal] ( vārendrā‑vān
˙ā‑icchā‑
mahāttarāyī )D‑D
Fol.74v
(Ch.6 ends)Preaching Buddha in
Yānavyūha [Sarnath?]
(yānavyūha‑bhagavan )Tārā in Potalaka ( potalake
bhagavī‑tārā )?‑B
Fol.80v
(Ch.7 ends)Tārā in Candradvīpa [SE
Bengal] ( candradvīpe
bhagavatī‑tārā )Jambhala in Sinhala Island [Sri
Lanka] ( sinhaladvīpe jambalah
˙)B‑D
Fol. 86r
(Ch.8 ends)Campitalā‑Lokanātha in
Samatat
˙a [SE Bengal]
(campitalā‑lokanāthah
˙samātat
˙e)Ārogyaśālā‑Lokanātha in
Sinhala island [Sri Lanka]
(sinhaladvīpe
ārogaśālā‑lokanāthah
˙)D‑D
Fol.89r
(Ch.9 ends)Lokanātha in Mt. Kut
˙a in
Gandhara [NW Pakistan]
(gandhāraman
˙d
˙ale
kūt
˙aparvate lokanāthah
˙)Ma˙ngakos
˙t
˙a‑Vajrapāni in
Oddiyana [Swat Valley,
Pakistan]
(ottiyāna‑ma ˙ngakos
˙t
˙a‑vajrapān
˙i)C‑C
Fol.99v
(Ch.10 ends)Lokanātha in
Śrīvijayapura in
Suvarn
˙n
˙apura
[Palembang, Sumatra?]
(suvarn
˙n
˙apure śrīvijayapure
lokanātha )Tārā in Tārapur, Lat
˙adeśa
[Broach, S. Gujarat] ( lahtadīse
tārapure tārā )B‑C
Fol.120(a)r
[109]
(Ch.12 ends)Lokanātha [South India?]
([daks
˙in
˙āpathe mūl ..?]
lavāsa‑lokanāthah
˙)Lokanātha in Mt. Valavatī in
Kaht
˙āhadvīpa [modern day
Kedah near Penang, Malaysia]
kahtāhadvīpe valavatīparvate
lokanāthah
˙]D‑A
Fol.120(b)r
(Ch.12 ends)Mūlavāsa‑Lokanātha in
South India ( daks
˙in
˙āpathe
mūlavāsalokanāthah
˙)Lokanātha of Mt.
Valavatī, Kat
˙āhadvīpa
[Kedah near Penang,
Malaysia] ( kahtāhadvīpe
valavatīparvata‑
lokanātha )Tārā in Kambojadeśa
[Afghanistan] ( kambojadeśe
tārā[h
˙])D – A‑D

--- [Page 244] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 26 of 35
Table A1. Cont.
Fol. No. Painted Panel(s) Placement [Left‑Center‑Right]Specificity
Level
Fol.123v
(Ch.13 ends)Śrī Kanakacaitya in
Peshawar, in the northern
country [Shaji‑ki‑dheri
stūpa ?, Peshawar,
Pakistan] ( uttarāpathe
purus
˙apuraman
˙d
˙ale
śrīkanakacaityah
˙)Buddharūpaka‑Lokanātha in
Mahācīna [Lokanātha in the
form of Buddha in
China—Dizang] ( mahācine
buddharūpaka‑lokanāthah
˙)A‑A
Fol.127r
(Ch.14 ends)Samantabhadra in China
(mahacīne samantabhadrah
˙)Kanyārāma‑Lokanātha
in Radya [Radhiya,
Bihar] ( rādyakanyārāma‑
lokanāthah
˙)Dharmarājikā‑caitya in Radya
[Rādhiya, Bihar]
(rādyadharmarājikā‑caityah
˙)A‑B‑A
Fol.133r
(Ch.15 ends)Rāmājat
˙a‑Lokanātha in
Rādya [Radhiya, Bihar]
(rādyarāmājāhta‑
lokanāthah
˙)Lokanātha of Yajñapin
˙d
˙ī in
Dan
˙d
˙abhuktī [N.Odisha]
(dan
˙d
˙abhuktau
yajñapin
˙d
˙ī‑lokanāthah
˙)B‑D
Fol.139r
(Ch.16 ends)Vajrāsana Buddha, Lūtū,
Rād
˙ha [W.Bengal]
(rād
˙halūtū‑vajrāsanah
˙)Vattavanā‑Lokanātha in Rād
˙ha
[W. Bengal]
(rād
˙havattavanā‑lokanāthah
˙)D‑D
Fol.147r
(Ch.17 ends)Bhat
˙t
˙āraka‑Valiya
Lokanātha ( bhat
˙t
˙āraka‑
valiya‑lokanāthah
˙)Thousand‑armed Lokanātha in
Śivapura, Ko ˙nkan [Shivpur?,
Coastal Maharashtra] ( ko˙nkane
śivapure
sahasrabhujā‑lokanāthah
˙)?‑C
Fol.151r
(Ch.18 ends)Lokanātha in
Śrī‑Khairavan
˙a, Ko ˙nkan
[Coastal Maharashtra]
(candrat
˙ura‑ko ˙nkan
˙e
śrīkhairavan
˙e lokanāthah
˙)Lokanātha in Jāruha, Magadha
[Bihar] ( magadhe jāruhe
punnavā‑lokanāthah
˙)C‑C
Fol.157v
(Ch.19 ends)Tārā of Vaiśāli, Tirabhukti
[Vaishali, Mithila,
Northern Bihar]
(tirabhuktau vaiśālī‑tārā )Lokanātha of Candragomin in
Nālandā [Nalanda, Bihar]
(śrīnālendrāyā ˙m
candragomin
˙a‑lokanāthah
˙)A‑A
Fol.164v
(Ch.20 ends)Vandikot
˙o Lokanātha
(vandikot
˙o‑lokanāthah
˙)Khadiravan
˙i‑Tārā in
Ko˙ngoman
˙d
˙ala [Odisha]
(ko˙ngoman
˙d
˙ale khadiravan
˙i‑tārā )?‑C
Fol.169v
(Ch.21 ends)Alagacchattra‑Caitya in
Odisha ( od
˙d
˙adese
alagacchattra‑caityah
˙)Tārā in Tārapura, Lat
˙a [Broach
district, S. Gujarat] ( lāhtadese
tārapure tārāh
˙)D‑C
Fol.174v
(Ch.22 ends)Alagataru‑Tārā in Odisha
(od
˙radese alagataru‑tārā )Lokanātha of Tulāks
˙etra,
Vārendra
(vārendrā‑tulāks
˙etra‑lokanāthah
˙)D‑D
Fol.176v
(Ch.23 ends)Cundā in
Cundāvarabhavan in
Pat
˙t
˙ikera [Comila district,
Bangladesh] ( pat
˙t
˙ikere
cundāvarabhavane cundā )Stūpa of Mr
˙gasthāpana, in
Vārendrā
(vārendrā‑mr
˙gasthāpana‑stūpah
˙)C‑C
Fol.179v
(Ch.24 ends)Kurukulā on Kurukulā
peak, in Lat
˙adeśa [Broach,
S. Gujarat] ( lāhtadese
kurukulāśikhare kurukulā )Vedakot
˙o‑Lokanātha, Koratra
(koratre vedakot
˙o‑lokanāthah
˙)C‑?

--- [Page 245] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 27 of 35
Table A1. Cont.
Fol. No. Painted Panel(s) Placement [Left‑Center‑Right]Specificity
Level
Fol.184r
(Ch.25 ends)Stone Lokanātha in
Harikella [SE Bangladesh]
(harikelladese
śila‑lokanāthah
˙)Tārā, Varendra
(varendrā‑mahattarāyī‑tārā )D‑D
Fol.188r
(Ch.26 ends)Lokanātha of Dedapura,
Varendra ( varendrā‑
dedapura‑lokanātha )Cundā in Vu ˙nkarānagara, Lat
˙a
[Broach, S. Gujarat] ( lāhtadese
vu˙mkarānagare cundā )C‑C
Fol.193r
(Ch.27 ends)Jayatu ˙nga‑Lokanātha in
Samatat
˙a [SE Bengal]
(samatat
˙e
jayatu ˙nga‑lokanātha )Mahāviśva‑Lokanātha in
Ko˙nkan [Coastal Maharashtra]
(ko˙nkane mahāviśva‑lokanātha )D‑D
Fol.200v
(Ch. 28
ends)Vasudhārā in Kanci in
South India [Kancipuram,
Tamil Nadu] ( daks
˙in
˙āpathe
ka˙mcīnagare vasudhārāh
˙)Od
˙d
˙iyana‑Mārīcī
(ottiyana‑mārīcī )
[Swat Valley, Pakistan]B‑D
Fol.202v
(Ch. 29
ends)Kurma‑ stūpa in Odisha
(od
˙radese kurmmastūpah
˙)Mañjughos
˙a in China
(mahācīne ma ˙mjughos
˙ah
˙)D‑A
Fol.214v
(Ch. 30
ends)Vainakā‑syama‑Caitya,
Tirabhukti [Mithila, N.
Bihar] ( tirabhutau
vainakā‑syamacaityah
˙)Khad
˙ga‑caitya in Kanheri,
Ko˙nkan [Coastal Maharashtra]
(ko˙nkane kr
˙s
˙n
˙agirau
khad
˙gacaitya )D‑A
Fol.216vHaladī‑Lokanātha in
Varendra ( varendrā‑haladī‑
lokanāthah
˙)Candranavihāra (by
Vulbhukavītarāga) in
Supacanagara [Sopara
Monastery] ( supācanagare
vulbhukavītarāgakr
˙ta‑
candranavihārah
˙)D‑A
Fol.218vMarn
˙n
˙ava‑
Lokanātha‑Caitya in
Konkan [Coastal
Maharashtra]
(valiva ˙nkān
˙a‑ko˙nkan
˙e
marn
˙n
˙ava‑lokanātha‑
caityah
˙)Śrī‑Dhānya caitya in Ambu
[Amaravati?]( ambuvis
˙aye
śrīśrīdhanyacaityah
˙)D‑A
Fol.220vCaitya of Pratyekabuddha
peak, Kanheri, Ko ˙nkan
[Coastal Maharashtra]
(ko˙nkan
˙e kr
˙s
˙n
˙agirau
pratyekabuddha‑śikhara‑
caityah
˙)Tātīhā‑Tārā in Rādha
[W.Bengal] ( rād
˙he tātīhā‑tārāh
˙)A‑D
Fol.221r
(Ch.31 ends)Lokanātha in Potalaka
(śrīpotalake lokanāthah
˙)Bhr
˙kut
˙ī‑Tārā in Potalaka
(śrīpotalake bhr
˙kut
˙ī‑tārāh
˙)B‑B
Fol.222r
(Ch.32 ends)Two‑armed Mārīcī‑caitya
(dvibhujamārīcī‑caityah
˙)Jeweled lotus flower
(no caption)Disease dispelling
Bhais
˙ajya‑bhat
˙t
˙āraka Vajrāsana
Buddha ( ārogasālībhais
˙ajya‑
bhat
˙t
˙āraka‑vajrāsanah
˙)?‑?

--- [Page 246] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 28 of 35
Table A1. Cont.
Fol. No. Painted Panel(s) Placement [Left‑Center‑Right]Specificity
Level
Fol.222v
(Colophon
page)Buddha’s birth at
Lumbini (no caption)Descent from the
Trayatri ˙mśa heaven at
Sa˙mkasya (no caption)Monkey’s offering of honey at
Vaiśāli (no caption)
Fol.223r
(Post
Colophon
continues)Taming of a
mad
elephant at
Rājagr
˙ha
(no
caption)Miracle at
Śravāsti (no
caption)Māravijaya,
Enlightenment at
Bodhgaya (no caption)First sermon
at Sarnāth (no
caption)Parinirvān
˙a at
Kuśinagara
(no caption)
Color coding system for geo‑data specificity level.
Green: A Level (a known site identifiable with matching geo coordinates), 15.
Blue: B Level (town/city level centroid geo coordinates), 9.
Orange: C level (town/city level info given but unidentified; state/region level centroid), 14.
Yellow: D level (region/state level centroid geo coordinates), 28.
Purple: E level (cosmological, no geo data), 3.
White: unidentified, 7.
White: no caption, 1.
Grey: last two folios with Buddha’s life scenes and no captions [could be A level], 8.
Notes
1For example, see the maps in ( Sen 2006 ,2014a ,2014b ;Schwartzberg and Bajpai 1992 , p. 28).
2Despite being an early modern site, it is worth remembering the trans‑sectarian and transregional importance of the Nagore Dar‑
gah in Tamil Nadu given the importance of Nagapattinam as a port city in the context of early medieval maritime connectivity
across Monsoon Asia and Buddhist presence until the Cōl a period ( Akarsh 2019 ;Seshadri 2009 ;Kulke et al. 2009 ;Ray 2018 ). As
the final resting place and shrine of the sixteenth‑century Sufi pir (saint) Shahul Hamid of Nagaur [Nagore] (c. 1513–1579), it
attracts both Muslim and non‑Muslim (mainly Hindu) devotees as observed and discussed by Vasuda Narayan (2006 ). Unlike
other Sufi dargahs as a resting place of a Sufi saint, Shahul Hamid Nagori’s dargah is replicated in two other locations in South‑
east Asia, one in Georgetown, Penang, Malaysia, and another in Singapore ( Asher 2009 ). The miracle‑working Sufi Saints whose
stories/hagiographic accounts are filled with water‑themed miracles—Sevea calls them “wave‑surfing saints”— connected dis‑
parate communities across the sea through their shrines ( Asher 2009 ;Sevea 2022 ). Asher notes how even today Muslim men
going on a journey over water invoke Shahul Hamid in their prayers before, during, and after a water‑bound journey ( Asher
2009 , p. 248).
3“Monsoon Asia” is used here to emphasize the interconnectivity across South and Southeast Asia through sea routes; monsoon
winds connected many shores of South and Southeast Asia and further to the east (to China and beyond). The concept of Mon‑
soon Asia as a geo‑cultural category is helpfully articulated by Sri Lankan archaeologist Senake Bandaranayake ( Bandaranayake
2012 , pp. 24–25), and further elaborated by Acri (2023 ).
4Bopearachchi suggests reading Buddhist iconography at a more meta level along with Buddhist narratives and known historical
evidence on trade whereas Kim (2021 ) suggests reading Buddhist iconography at a micro level to consider the processes and
stories of their composition and making.
5This is a huge change from when I first examined the manuscript at the library in 2002. There was limited access to the
manuscript’s images as the only reproductions of the folios available after the on‑site research were published studies, which
had limited color images, and microfilms and color slides that I ordered from the library for a fee. The Cambridge digi‑
tal library has revolutionized the way we access and study millennia‑old palm‑leaf manuscripts and will open a new era of
manuscript culture studies. The library’s blog post celebrates the availability of this manuscript in its post from 9 May 2015. See
https://www.cam.ac.uk/research/features/the‑1000‑year‑old‑manuscript‑and‑the‑stories‑it‑tells (accessed 23 January 2025).
6Beal’s translation of Buddhist records was published in 1884, and Foucher published his detailed study of this manuscript and the
Asiatic Society manuscript of the same text A.15 in 1900. Despite its early publication, the eleventh‑century date of the manuscript
probably diminished its value for colonial researchers obsessed with the idea of original Buddhism and associated sites.
7The prominence of the Konkan sites in this eleventh‑century manuscript may also support the substantial presence of Esoteric
Buddhist activities until this period as suggested by Mallinson ’s (2019 ) recent study of the Konkan site of Kadri.
8If the first wave of Esoteric Buddhism’s movement across Asia (documented by Chemburkar and Acri in their map) brought
about the spread of what the Tibetan classification system calls the Yoga Tantra and the centrality of Vairocana (i.e., Mahā‑
vairocana of the Vairocanābhisambodhi sūtra ), the second wave may be characterized by the rise of the transgressive tantras (the

--- [Page 247] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 29 of 35
Mahāyoga/yoginī tantras, also known as the Anuttarayoga Tantra in the Tibetan classification system of Buton Rinchen Drup
[bu ton rin chen ‘grub 1290–1364]) with the centrality of Aks
˙obhya.
9In the pothi ‑format manuscript tradition, a pagination system is developed from early on partly because the folios are not bound
like a codex. For a helpful table of numerals and letter numerals in medieval Sanskrit manuscripts, see ( Bendall 1883 ).
10These two wooden covers are most likely supplied with the manuscript later: both are painted beautifully on the interior, but
they are stylistically different from each other. Both covers’ paintings are also stylistically later than the painting inside the
manuscript on palm‑leaf folios. It is possible that the manuscript was given a fresh makeover when it was “rescued” in 1139
(Nepala Samvat 259) with a new painting on the book covers. One of the covers perhaps got mixed up with another manuscript’s
cover by accident or it could have been damaged and was refurbished with a comparable book cover from another manuscript.
11For an assessment of the circulation of Prajñāpāramitā textual sources across the Asian maritime realm (especially the hymns and
spells associated with this tradition) see Bianchini (2024 ).
12Thus, one can easily find words that begin with “lh‑” in a classical Newari dictionary. According to Alexander von Rospatt,
lha˙mmakes more sense in Newar phonology, and he suggests that it may mean “stone” or “rock”, which is lvaha ˙morlhva ˙min
modern Newari. Alexander von Rospatt personal communication, 5 July 2021.
13“nepālaman
˙d
˙alasvala ˙mkāran
˙āyasamyak śrīlhamvihāra iti sarvajanānurāgo yasmin vibhāti vacana ˙msugatasya sasvat [śaśvat ]” Add.1643,
folio 222 verso, line 5.
14Locke (1985 , p. 421) raised the possibility of the now defunct Lam bahal or Rāma bāhāh
˙in Kathmandu (near Thamel by
Paknajole). Locke reports “… several of the sa˙mghas of Kathmandu, who worship ‘Vajrayogini’ of Sankhu as their lineage
deity, worship here… KTMV gives the Newari name of this shrine as Rām Bāhā, but the people who live in the area and
the people who worship their lineage deity here say Lām bāhā…” If we take Alexander von Rospatt’s suggestion mentioned
in footnote 12 of “Lham” being “lvaham”, meaning stone or rock in modern Newari and look for a location associated with
Buddhist communities in and around the Kathmandu Valley on the DANAM Nepal heritage documentation project website
(https://danam.cats.uni‑heidelberg.de/danam/ ) accessed on 24 January 2025, we find Lvaham hiti in the vicinity of the Vajrayo‑
gini temple complex in Sankhu, which is mentioned by Locke as having a tie to the communities that worship their lineage
deity in Lam bahal. See https://danam.cats.uni‑heidelberg.de/report/11a9fb53‑37b3‑4bf7‑8422‑5559a2cd7a40 , accessed 24 Jan‑
uary 2025. Notably, the Vajrayogini temple and its neighbor Jogeśvara temple at Sankhu are both believed to have been built
on a single rock. Vajrayogini is worshiped as the lineage deity by many different Newar communities, and this may be a com‑
pletely serendipitous coincidence, but with the hope of further research into a longue durée history of these communities, I
mention this observation here. The Danam heritage database is an incredible resource but given the impressive scale, some
minor mistakes are expected: the description of the Rāma bāhāh
˙(Lam Bahal) mentions “Lhām·vihāra” in two manuscripts of
theAsP (CUL Add.1643 and Add.866) based on Petech (1984 , pp. 36–37), but the monastery’s name is written “ śrī lham vihāra ”
in both manuscripts.
15Three almost rectangular blank spaces demarcated for these roundels also anticipate the design principle of painted Indic Bud‑
dhist manuscripts: triple blank spaces for painting are occasionally reserved on the first and last two pages of the manuscript. The
choice of these roundels and lotus motifs also supports the suggestion that the design principle of Indic Buddhist manuscripts
that were prepared as sacred, cultic objects followed that of temples serving Indic religious communities ( Kim 2015 ).
16I have not examined this manuscript in person, but the manuscript’s painted book covers and a folio that happens to bear the
colophon are published in Pal(2003 , pp. 52–53). Although we do not know what is the referent of śrīmat‑mahāpratima , it most
likely refers to a famous cultic image known at the time that was associated with Śrī Lham. Further research into the thirteenth‑
century history of the Valley is necessary to understand the referent.
17In other words, in Add.1643, the text of folio 109 is missing, which includes the last bit of chapter 11 and the chapter 11 end‑
ing rubric, and parts of chapter 12: “‑ myaksa ˙mbuddha udyogamāpatsyate ’nuparigrahāyeti āryās
˙t
˙asāhasrikāyā ˙mprajñāpāramitāyā ˙m
mārakarmaparivarto nāmaikādaśah
˙[Vaidya 125]” until “… samyaksa ˙mbuddhānāmasya” of Vaidya 126. The transcription here is
cited from the GRETIL edition: https://gretil.sub.uni‑goettingen.de/gretil/corpustei/transformations/html/sa_aSTasAhasrikA‑
prajJApAramitA.htm , accessed on 23 January 2025.
18It is important to ascertain the date of this repair work. The use of indigenous paper to repair old palm‑leaf manuscripts is
commonly witnessed in medieval manuscripts that remained in use (i.e., in worship) among Buddhist communities in Nepal.
For instance, the AsP manuscript now in the Detroit Institute of Art was made in eastern India and survived in Nepal, and bears
evidence of seventeenth‑century Nepalese conservation efforts using paper ( Bisulca and Foster 2018 ). Also, see the discussion
of indigenous conservation practice in chapter 5 of Kim (2006 ).
19The existence of this manuscript came to my attention in 2013 when a colleague forwarded the announcement of the opening of
the “Pattra‑leaf Sūtra Preservation institute” (Ta la’i lo ma’i dpe cha zhib ‘jug khang 贝叶经研究所 ) in the CCTV news report of
30 December 2013. The news report shared the video of the exhibition of palm‑leaf manuscripts as part of this research institute
opening in the Tibetan Autonomous Region (TAR), which included a display of a manuscript nearly identical to Add.1643
from paleography to painting style to its iconographic layout. Unlike the manuscript in the Cambridge University Library,

--- [Page 248] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 30 of 35
which remained in Nepal until it came out to England at the end of the nineteenth century, the copy in Tibet was most likely
transported there soon after its completion in Nepal, given profuse marginalia in Tibetan writings. It is unclear from the news
report whether the manuscripts shown in the report are physically located in this institute. The label accompanying the folios
shown in the CCTN news video identifies the ninth century as the manuscript’s date, but this is unlikely. This news is also
shared by the Institute of Archaeology Chinese Academy of Social Sciences with the image of the sister manuscript on http:
//kaogu.cssn.cn/ywb/news/academic_activities/201312/t20131230_3928081.shtml .
20His name is published as Karun
˙āvajra, but the colophon actually reads karun
˙āpūrven
˙a vajren
˙a.
21According to Formigatti (2014 , p. 14), this is the only surviving witness of the Sanskrit original of the Vajradhvajaparin
˙āmanā .
22He eliminated margins and extended the text to the very edges of the writing area, maximizing the use of the limited space.
While writing over existing text is less common, adding a post‑colophon was regularly practiced in Nepal. These later hands
sometimes appear in the main body of the text as editorial hands identifying and correcting errors and missing letters or even
entire phrases—a common occurrence in the AsP due to the repetition of similar iterations of the same turn of phrase. These
later hands bear witness to how these manuscripts were treated and used over many centuries within a changing community.
See the discussion in Kim (2006 ,2013 ).
23The original total number would have been forty‑three painted folios since the first folio was replaced much later, probably in
the nineteenth century, and this may coincide with the addition of the pagination in Nāgarī‑based numerals on the right‑hand
side of each page’s verso.
24On the intricate and varied relationships between the Prajñāpāramitā text and images included in painted manuscripts of the
AsP, see the discussions in Kim (2013 ,2014 ,2015 ,2021 ).
25Many location identifications proposed by Foucher (1900–1905 ) are still the best possible suggestions. More direct revision and
refinement of location information based on research to date will be documented in this ongoing project.
26Three cosmological locations include Mountain Meru where primordial Vajrasattva sits (here Sumeru, folio 5v), Tus
˙ita heaven
where the future Buddha Maitreya awaits his turn (folio 40v), and Trayatri ˙mśa heaven where the Buddha went to preach to his
late mother (folio 44r).
27Although the iconographic program and readings of captions are available in published studies ( Foucher 1900–1905 ;Kim 2013 ,
2014 ), there are errors in readings and identification of sites, thus I present here an updated version. For instance, Kim (2013 ,
2014 ) identified six sites in the ancient region of Rād
˙ha in West Bengal despite reading two different spellings in the text, rādya
(folio 127r center and right panels; folio 133r left panel) and rād
˙ha(folio 139r left and right panels; folio 220v right panel). As
Foucher (1900–1905 ) suggested, the sites in rādya should be identified with the locations in today’s Radhya in East Champaran
district in Northern Bihar; the table has been updated accordingly. Furui (2022 ,2023 ) helps refine the location information for
sites in medieval Bengal.
28The prevalence of locations in ancient regions of undivided Bengal (thirteen entries) is noticeable, especially for the specificity of
each sub‑region identified in the captions (Samatata, Pundavardhana, Varendra, Candradvipa, Pattikera, and Harikella), which
supports the close connection between Bengal (undivided, cultural region) and Nepal (specifically the Kathmandu Valley, known
asnepāla man
˙d
˙alaor Nepal Mandala) during the medieval period suggested by others ( Huntington and Bangdel 2001 ;Losty 1989 )
and observed until this date ( Lewis 2023 ). Further analysis of these interregional and transregional relationships as gleaned from
the location data will be published in a subsequent study. Sircar (1960 ,1967 ) remains an important guide to study the toponyms
in ancient and medieval epigraphic records and identify their geographical reference points.
29Granoff (2018 ) attempted to demonstrate the relationship between the text and the images in Add.1643 with the assumption that
previous studies did not read the immediate text next to the images. Despite her careful reading of the text, she finds that there
is no direct relationship between the text and the images in Add.1643. Instead, she locates Add.1643’s choice of famous temples
and images in the context of “a rich artistic tradition of depicting famous temples and images and mapping the cosmos”. Her
attempt to locate this programmatic impulse in the larger cultural context of Indic religious communities includes Jain examples
of depiction of pilgrimage sites and an earlier Buddhist practice of embodying the cosmos on the body of the Buddha from
Central Asia and China. This method is admirable, but the Jain examples she cites all date later than Add.1643 and its kin (i.e.,
of the thirteenth century or later as opposed to the eleventh and the twelfth centuries) and the Cosmic Buddha iconography’s
connection to the world of Add.1643’s makers is tangential and ahistorical given their early dates (sixth and seventh centuries).
By relegating Add.1643’s innovative artistic program to a very broad, sweeping historical trend (her examples span almost a
thousand years covered), this approach misses an opportunity to appreciate the genuine contributions of the Newar Buddhist
manuscript makers (scribes, painters, and knowledge experts) and their community patrons. Here, we have a specific South
Asian Buddhist community that made such novel choices to record a broad sacred geography of pilgrimage sites and cult images
pictorially and textually at the turn of the millennium in the Kathmandu Valley. It seems Granoff (2018 ) was not aware of
Kim (2014 ).
30AsGranoff (2018 ) mentions, the painted dhoti of Avalokiteśvara at Alchi’s Sumtsek is a great example that shows this impulse,
featuring famous sites of Kashmir. Although Granoff assumes the date of this mural to be the eleventh century based on the

--- [Page 249] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 31 of 35
date from Peter van Ham’s recent publication (2017), the date of this shrine and its paintings is not settled. Christian Luczanits’
and Roger Goepper’s conservative dating of the early thirteenth century (ca. 1220 CE) based on inscriptions on‑site and other
historical records still holds strong ( Goepper and Luczanits 2023 ). See ( Quill 2023 ) for a helpful introduction to Alchi Sumtsek
with references to the most recent scholarship.
31A structural emphasis on the middle of the book, with an additional number of painted panels in the middle of the manuscript,
which often falls around chapter 11 or chapter 12, is common in medieval Indic Buddhist manuscript design.
32The caption on folio 120(a) has āris
˙asthāna after lokanāthah
˙,a phrase that disappears from the caption after this point in the
manuscript. Foucher proposed to read this text as ālikha‑sthāna, i.e., a place for an image. Parts of some letters are still visible
on the caption of folio 120(a): it does seem to have “ daks
˙in
˙āpathe ‑XX ya˙mvāsa lokanātha ”; the missing letters may be mūla and it
has the additional letter yaoryam in front of vāsa. What “Mūlavāsa” or “ mūlaya[ ˙m]vāsa ” refers to requires further research. The
designation of “ daks
˙in
˙āpatha or the southern region” and the non‑specificity of the image in both cases—both depict a four‑armed
standing Avalokiteśvara, with green Tārā holding a utpala and four‑armed yellow Br
˙kut
˙ī against the red backdrop—suggest the
second‑hand nature of the information.
33The jewelry is also depicted differently with folio 120(b) showing simpler ornaments and a single strand of necklace against
double stands of necklace in folio 120(a), suggesting these details were mostly left to artists’ discretion.
34Again, the caption of folio 120(a) is followed by dvādasaparivartta ‑āris
˙a×X×[sthāna ], i.e., “chapter 12, image (?) placement”.
35This geometric pattern that often includes three‑dimensional beams stacked together is already seen in the fifth‑century murals
at Ajanta.
36For instance, in verse 49 of chapter 42 of the citrasūtra section of the Vis
˙n
˙udharmottara purān
˙a, a text datable to sometime between
450 and 650 CE, we find sādr
˙śyakarn
˙am(i.e., painting as seen) as the ideal to pursue in painting ( Mukherji 2001 , pp. 202–3), but
this “verisimilitude” is iconographic rather than stylistic, and capturing the essence of what is seen is the ideal. For example,
verse 50 of Adhyāya 42 reads “… men in every land should be painted just as they are, after understanding [their] appearance,
the way they dress and [their] colour”. The whole chapter describes various types of people and how they are supposed to be
depicted, and the language of description is either metaphoric or iconographic, for example, with an explanation of attributes,
types of clothes, headgear, and skin colors.
37It is possible that now unnamed artists had seen some of these sites in person, but this possibility does not change the suggestion
that what it looked like would have relied on one’s memory, which would have been activated through verbal cues of storytelling.
38Foucher identified this site with the site of Lauriya Areraj in east Champaran district, near the city of Radhiya, northern Bihar.
39I thank Arlo Griffiths for sharing the details of the reading of this inscription by him and his colleagues before publication.
40In fact, the seventh‑century inscription from Oc Eo records a grant made by King Jayavarman I to a monastery called Candana
(śrī‑candana‑vihāra ) for “the annual procession of the image of the Buddha on the full moon day of the month of Vaiśākha (April–
May)” ( Chhom et al. 2025 , p. 148) Although almost four centuries later, is it possible that this painting remembers this practice
of this annual procession of the image of the Buddha, represented by the floating standing monastic figure/Buddha (the top is
damaged and it is difficult to determine the presence of us
˙n
˙īs
˙a)? If so, it would be striking evidence of the longevity of the grant
made by Jayavarman I and the Candana vihāra ’s continued connection with Southeast Asia for subsequent centuries since the
initial grant.
41Foucher suggests alaga should be read as alagna , i.e., not joined, detached. The word “ alag” in Hindi, Odiya, and several other
North Indian languages means “separate”. I believe the choice of alaga is not necessarily a scribal mistake but rather a vernacular
impulse coming through in this para‑textual space in a canonical Sanskrit text.
42An example of such a story from Odisha that I know of relates to the levitating idol of the Sun Temple at Konarak, a monumental
building that served as a beacon for sailors for centuries and dates about two centuries later than Add.1643.
43In this vein, Kim (2022 ) finds the puzzling image of “Lokanātha in the form of Buddha in China” as a Newar take on Dizang
(Ks
˙it
˙igarbha), one of the four great bodhisattvas of China who is largely unknown in Nepal.
44Atīśa may have chosen to go with the Newar merchants in the first place for their shared Buddhist connection.
45For examples of painted images of Raktayamāri, see the images in the Himalayan Art database: https://www.himalayanart.org/
search/set.cfm?setID=2698/ .
46Granoff (2018 , p. 23) suggests that the choice of mahāsamudra as the site of Buddhist protection may relate to Rāhu’s palace in
the ocean known “from other Buddhist texts”, but one wonders if the “Great Ocean or Mahāsamudra” in the caption refers to
the Indian Ocean in the context of eleventh century Nepal.
47As mentioned by Gippert (2013 ), the destruction of nearly all Buddhist artifacts in the National Museum of Male by extremists
on 7 February 2012 jeopardized future research on the Buddhist heritage of the Maldives. One skepticism over the Maldives
identification would be the country’s geological condition: at least today, the Maldives is the lowest‑lying country on Earth.
48For example, see Avukana Buddha ( https://images.app.goo.gl/D2B7k1QNKVGajySx6 ) and Reswehera (Sasseruwa) Buddha
(https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:RESWEHERA_BUDDA_STATUE.jpg ).

--- [Page 250] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 32 of 35
49For instance, the Leishan Giant Buddha in Sichuan, China, is a monumental rock‑cut sculpture at 233 feet (71 m) in height, and
this statue is strategically located at the dangerous confluence of rivers with expressed wishes to offer protection, both spiritual
and worldly, i.e., averting perils in raging rivers. I thank Huirong Ye, a student in HAA81 in Fall 2023 for sharing her insightful
analysis of the Leishan Giant Buddha’s ecological and cartographic significance.
50The popularity of Dīpa ˙nkara Buddha witnessed in these eleventh‑century Nepalese manuscripts may also be connected with the
famed Indian Buddhist master, Atīśa, whose full name is Dīpa ˙nkaraśrījñāna. In today’s Kathmandu, the festival of Dīpa ˙nkara
during the Newar month of Gunla includes a procession of huge, masked effigies of Dīpa ˙nkara. Atīśa is supposed to have
stayed at Bhagavan Baha in Thamel, and more research into the early history of Dīpa ˙nkara in Nepal is necessary to uncover this
link. I thank Todd Lewis for sharing his observation about Dīpa ˙nkara’s potential connection to Atīśa. See Brown (2014 ), for the
importance of Dīpa ˙nkara rituals in today’s Newar Buddhism.
51On Bu ˙ngama Lokeśvara, also known as Bu ˙ngadya or Rāto Matsyendranāth, see Dhingra (2019 ) and Tuladhar‑Douglas (2006 ),
chapter 5. Given the name of Bu ˙ngama given to the red Avalokiteśvara in A.15, one wonders if the epithet of svayambhū for a red
Avalokiteśvara on fol. 14r of Add.1643 may mean the nature of this image, i.e., self‑risen, rather than the place, the Svayambhū
caitya as suggested above.
52We can compare this iconography with the famous Reting Tārā in the Walters Art Museum (John and Berthe Ford collection):
https://art.thewalters.org/object/F.112/ .
53My reading of captions is mostly the same as that of Foucher published in 1900, except for a few examples.
References
Acri, Andrea. 2016. Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks Along the Maritime Silk Routes. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval
Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing, pp. 1–25. [ CrossRef ]
Acri, Andrea. 2019a. Imagining Maritime Asia. In Imagining Asia(s): Networks, Agents, Sites . Edited by Andrea Acri, Murari K. Jha,
Sraman Mukherjee and Kashshaf Ghani. Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 36–59.
Acri, Andrea. 2019b. Navigating the ‘Southern Seas’, Miraculously: Avoidance of Shipwreck in Buddhist Narratives of Maritime
Crossings. In Moving Spaces: Creolisation and Mobility in Africa, the Atlantic and Indian Ocean . Edited by Marina Berthet, Fernando
Rosa and Shaun Viljoen. Leiden and Boston: Brill, pp. 50–77.
Acri, Andrea. 2023. Revisiting the Monsoon Asia Idea: Old Problems and New Directions. In Monsoon Asia: A Reader on South and
Southeast Asia . Edited by David Henley and Nira Wickramasinghe. Leiden: Leiden University Press, pp. 63–96.
Acri, Andrea, Roger Blench, and Alexandra Landmann. 2017. Introduction: Re‑Connecting Histories across the Indo‑Pacific. In Spirits
and Ships: Cultural Transfers in Early Monsoon Asia . Singapore: ISEAS Publishing, pp. 1–37.
Akarsh, Raghunath. 2019. The Tamil Buddha Art, Epigraphs and Religious Networks of Buddhism in Tamilakam (c.6th to 13th
centuries CE). Master’s dissertation, Buddhist Art: History and Conservation, Cortauld Institute of Art, London, UK.
Asher, Catherine B. 2009. The Sufi Shrines of Shahul Hamid in India and Southeast Asia. Artibus Asiae 69: 247–58. Available online:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/20801622 (accessed on 16 January 2025). [ CrossRef ]
Bandaranayake, Senake. 2012. Sri Lanka and Monsoon Asia: Hypotheses on the Unity and Differentiation of Cultures. In Continuities
and Transformations: Studies in Sri Lankan Archaeology and History . Edited by Senake Bandaranayake. Colombo: Social Scientists’
Association, pp. 22–55.
Beal, Samuel. 1906. Si‑yu‑ki. Buddhist Records of the Western World. Translated from the Chinese of Hiuen Tsiang (A.D.629) . London: K.
Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., vol. 2.
Bendall, Cecil. 1883. Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Library, Cambridge, with Introductory Notices and
Illustrations of the Palæography and Chronology of Nepal and Bengal . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bhattarai, Bidur. 2019. Dividing Texts: Conventions of Visual Text‑Organisation in Nepalese and North Indian Manuscripts , 1st ed. Berlin:
De Gruyter, vol. 10. [ CrossRef ]
Bianchini, Francesco. 2024. Invoking the Goddess along the Southern Silk Roads: A transregional survey of Prajñāpāramitā protective
texts. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 34: 855–69. [ CrossRef ]
Bisulca, Christina, and Christopher Foster. 2018. Perfection of Wisdom—A Spectroscopic and Microscopic Analysis of a Twelfth‑
Century Buddhist Sūtra. Bulletin of the Detroit Institute of Arts 92: 68–79. [ CrossRef ]
Bopearachchi, Osmund. 2022. Indian Ocean Trade through Buddhist Iconographies. In The Maritime Silk Road: Global Connectivities,
Regional Nodes, Localities . Edited by Franck Billé, Sanjyot Mehendale and James W. Lankton. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University
Press, pp. 243–66.
Boucher, Daniel. 1991. The Pratītyasamutpādagāthā and Its Role in the Medieval Cult of the Relics. The Journal of the International
Association of Buddhist Studies 14: 1–27.
Brancaccio, Pia. 2020. Monumental Rock‑Cut Image from Sri Lanka: New Perspectives. In Bridging Heven and Earth: Art and Ar‑
chitecture in South Asia, 3rd Century Bce‑21st Century Ce . Edited by Laxshmi Rose Greaves and Adam Hardy. New Delhi: Dev
Publishers & Distributors, pp. 175–83.

--- [Page 251] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 33 of 35
Brancaccio, Pia. 2023a. Indo‑Mediterranean Trade and the Western Deccan Ports. BYRSA: Scritti sull’Antico Oriente Mediterraneo 43–44:
3–16.
Brancaccio, Pia. 2023b. Sopara, Kanheri, and the Early Buddhist Landscape on the West Coast of India. Paper presented at the
Symposium Tree & Serpent: Early Buddhist Art in India and Its Global Reach, Metropolitan Museum, New York, NY, USA,
September 29–30.
Brown, Kerry Lucinda. 2014. Dīpa ˙nkara Buddha and the Patan Samyak Mahādāna in Nepal: Performing the Sacred in Newar Bud‑
dhist Art. Ph.D. dissertation, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
Chakravarti, Ranabir. 2021. An Enchanting Seascape: Through Epigraphic Lens. In Trade and Traders in Early Indian Society . London:
Routledge, pp. 263–76.
Chhom, Kunthea, Dominic Goodall, and Arlo Griffiths. 2025. A Buddhist Procession Inaugurated in a 7th‑century inscription from
Oc Eo (K. 1426) and the ancient toponym Tamandarapura. Journal of the Siam Society 113: 141–64. [ CrossRef ]
Chimpa, Alaka Chattopadhyaya, and Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya, eds. 1970. Tāranātha’s History of Buddhism in India . Shimla: Indian
Institute of Advanced Study.
Decleer, Hubert. 1995. Atiśa’s Journey to Sumatra. In Buddhism in Practice . Edited by Donald Lopez Jr. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, pp. 409–18.
De Saxcé, Ariane. 2022. Networks and Cultural Mapping of South Asian Maritime Trade. In The Maritime Silk Road: Global Connec‑
tivities, Regional Nodes, Localities . Edited by Franck Billé, Sanjyot Mehendale and James W. Lankton. Amsterdam: Amsterdam
University Press, pp. 129–47.
Dhingra, Sonali. 2019. Hindu‑Buddhist Intersections in the Art of Nepal: Images of Avalokiteśvara. In Dharma and Pun
˙ya: Buddhist
Ritual Art of Nepal . Edited by Jinah Kim and Todd Lewis. Leiden and Boston: Hotei Publishing, pp. 128–41.
Formigatti, Camillo A. 2014. The Illuminated Perfection of Wisdom. In Buddha’s Word: The Life of Books in Tibet and Beyond . Edited by
Mark Elliott, Hildegard Diemberger and Michela Clemente. Cambridge: Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, University
of Cambridge, pp. 12–14.
Foucher, A. 1900–1905. Étude sur l’iconographie Bouddhique de l’Inde, d’apr ès des Documents Nouveaux . Paris: A. Leroux.
Furui, Ryosuke. 2022. Early Medieval Bengal. In Oxford Encyclopedia of Asian History (Online) . Oxford: Oxford University
Press. Available online: https://oxfordre.com/asianhistory/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190277727.001.0001/acrefore‑9780190277
727‑e‑658 (accessed on 21 January 2025).
Furui, Ryosuke. 2023. Buddhist Vihāras in Early Medieval Bengal:Organizational Development and Historical Context. Buddhism,
Law and Society 7: 99–142. Available online: https://hal.science/hal‑04100180 (accessed on 21 January 2025).
Gippert, Jost. 2004. A Glimpse into the Buddhist Past of the Maldives I. An Early Prakrit Inscription. Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde
Südasiens und Archiv für indische Philosophie 48: 81–109. [ CrossRef ]
Gippert, Jost. 2013. A Glimpse into the Buddhist Past of the Maldives: II. Two Sanskrit Inscriptions. Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde
Südasiens und Archiv für indische Philosophie 55: 111–44. [ CrossRef ]
Goepper, Roger, and Christian Luczanits. 2023. Alchi: Ladakh’s Hidden Buddhist Sanctuary . Chicago: Serindia Publications, vol. 2.
Granoff, Phyllis. 2018. Reading Medieval Buddhist Manuscripts: Thoughts on Text and Image. Hualin International Journal of Buddhist
Studies 1: 14–69. [ CrossRef ]
Guy, John. 2019a. Long Distance Arab Shipping in the 9th Century Indian Ocean: Recent Shipwreck Evidence from Southeast Asia.
Current Science 117: 1647–53. [ CrossRef ]
Guy, John. 2019b. Shipwrecks in Late First Millennium Southeast Asia: Southern China’s Maritime Trade and the Emerging Role
of Arab Merchants in Indian Ocean Exchange. In Early Global Interconnectivity Across the Indian Ocean World . Edited by Angela
Schottenhammer. Cham: Palgrve Macmillan, pp. 121–63.
Huntington, John C., and Dina Bangdel. 2001. A Case Study in Religious Continuity: The Nepal‑Bengal Connection. Orientations 32:
63–70.
Kim, Jinah. 2006. Unorthodox Practice: Rethinking the Cult of Illustrated Buddhist Books in South Asia. Ph.D. dissertation, University
of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
Kim, Jinah. 2013. Receptacle of the Sacred: Illustrated Manuscripts and the Buddhist Book Cult in South Asia . Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Kim, Jinah. 2014. Local Visions, Transcendental Practices: Iconographic Innovations of Indian Esoteric Buddhism. History of Religions
54: 34–68. [ CrossRef ]
Kim, Jinah. 2015. Painted Palm‑Leaf Manuscripts and the Art of the Book in Medieval South Asia. Archives of Asian Art 65: 57–86.
[CrossRef ]
Kim, Jinah. 2021. Garland of Visions: Color, Tantra, and a Material History of Indian Painting . Oakland: University of California Press.
Kim, Jinah. 2022. China in Medieval Indian Imagination: “China”‑inspired images in medieval South Asia. International Journal of
Asian Studies 19: 187–214. [ CrossRef ]

--- [Page 252] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 34 of 35
Kulke, Hermann, Krishnasamy Kesavapany, and Vijay Sakhuja. 2009. Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval
Expeditions to Southeast Asia , 1st ed. Edited by Hermann Kulke, Krishnasamy Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore: Institue
of Southeast Asian Studies.
Lee, Seunghye. 2021. What Was in the “Precious Casket Seal”?: Material Culture of the Karan
˙d
˙amudrā Dhāran
˙ī Throughout Medieval
Maritime Asia. Religions 12: 13. [ CrossRef ]
Lewis, Todd T. 1993. Newar‑Tibetan Trade and the Domestication of “Sim·halasārthabāhu Avadāna”. History of Religions 33: 135–60.
[CrossRef ]
Lewis, Todd T. 2023. Newar Merchants in Tibet: Observations on Frontiers of Trade and Buddhist Culture. In Histories of Tibet: Essays
in Honor of Leonard W. J. Van Der Kuijp . Edited by Kurtis R. Schaeffer, Jue Liang and William A. McGrath. New York: Wisdom
Publications.
Linrothe, Robert N. 1999. Ruthless Compassion: Wrathful Deities in Early Indo‑Tibetan Esoteric Buddhist Art . Boston and New York:
Shambhala.
Locke, John K. 1985. Buddhist Monasteries of Nepal: A Survey of the Bāhās and Bahīs of the Kathmandu Valley . Kathmandu: Sahayogi Press.
Losty, J. P. 1989. Bengal, Bihar, Nepal? Problems of Provenance in 12th Century Illuminated Manuscripts, Part 2. Oriental Art 35:
140–49.
Mallinson, James. 2019. Kālavañcana in the Konkan: How a Vajrayāna Hat
˙hayoga Tradition Cheated Buddhism’s Death in India.
Religions 10: 273. [ CrossRef ]
Markel, Stephen. 1990. The Imagery and Iconographic Development of the Indian Planetary Deities Rāhu and Ketu. South Asian
studies (Society for South Asian Studies) 6: 9–26. [ CrossRef ]
Mukherji, Parul Dave. 2001. The Citrasūtra of the Vis
˙n
˙udharmottara Purān
˙a = Vis
˙n
˙udharmottarapurān
˙īyam·Citrasūtram . New Delhi: Indira
Gandhi National Centre for the Arts and Motilal Banarsidass Publishers.
Murphy, Stephen A. 2018. Revisiting the Bujang Valley: A Southeast Asian Entrep ôt Complex on the Maritime Trade Route. Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society 28: 355–89. [ CrossRef ]
Narayan, Vasudha. 2006. Tolerant Hinduism: Shared Ritual Spaces‑ Hindus and Muslims at the Shrine of Shahul Hamid. In Life of
Hinduism . Edited by John Stratton Hawley and Vasudha Narayan. Berkeley: University of California Press, pp. 266–70.
Pal, Pradapaditya. 2003. Himalayas: An Aesthetic Adventure . Chicago: Art Institute of Chicago in association with University of
California Press and Mapin Pub.
Petech, Luciano. 1984. Mediaeval History of Nepal (c. 750–1482) , 2nd ed. Rome: Istituto italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
Quill, Jordan. 2023. An Interwoven World: Sensory Experiences of Textiles in the Sumtsek at Alchi, Ladakh. Immediations 23. Available
online: https://courtauld.ac.uk/research/research‑resources/publications/immeditations‑postgraduate‑journal/immediations‑
online/immediations‑no‑20‑2023/an‑interwoven‑world‑sensory‑experiences‑of‑textiles‑in‑the‑sumtsek‑at‑alchi‑ladakh/ (ac‑
cessed on 23 January 2025).
Ray, Himanshu Prabha. 2018. Trans‑Locality and Mobility across the Bay of Bengal: Nagapattinam in Context. In Cultural and
Civilisational Links between India and Southeast Asia . Edited by Shyam Saran. Singapore: Springer, pp. 31–50.
Ray, Himanshu Prabha. 2019. Buddhist Monuments across the Bay of Bengal: Cultural Routes and Maritime Networks. Trans‑Regional
and ‑National Studies of Southeast Asia 7: 159–80. [ CrossRef ]
Ray, Himanshu Prabha. 2021. Coastal Shrines and Transnational Maritime Networks across India and Southeast Asia . Abingdon and New
York: Routledge.
Ricci, Ronit. 2011. Islam Translated: Literature, Conversion, and the Arabic Cosmopolis of South and Southeast Asia . Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Saraswati, Sarasi Kumar. 1977. Tantrayāna Art: An Album . Calcutta: Asiatic Society.
Schwartzberg, Joseph E., and Shiva G. Bajpai. 1992. A Historical Atlas of South Asia , 2nd ed. New York and Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Sen, Tansen. 2006. The Travel Records of Chinese Pilgrims Faxian, Xuanzang, and Yijing: Sources for Cross‑Cultural Encounters
between Ancient China and Ancient India. Education About Asia 11: 24–33.
Sen, Tansen. 2014a. Buddhism and the Maritime Crossings. In China and Beyond in Mediaeval Period: Cultural Crossings and Inter‑
Regional Connections . Edited by Dorothy C. Wong and Gustav Heldt. Amherst: Cambria Press, Delhi: Manohar, pp. 39–62.
Sen, Tansen. 2014b. Maritime Southeast Asia between South Asia and China to the Sixteenth Century. TRaNS: Trans‑Regional and
‑National Studies of Southeast Asia 2: 31–59. [ CrossRef ]
Sen, Tansen. 2019. Buddhism and the Maritime Crossings. In Early Global Interconnectivity Across the Indian Ocean World . Edited by
Angela Schottenhammer. Cham: Palgrve Macmillan, pp. 17–50.
Sen, Tansen. 2023. Inventing the ‘Maritime Silk Road’. Modern Asian Studies 57: 1059–104. [ CrossRef ]
Seshadri, Gokul. 2009. New Perspectives on Nagapattinam: The Medieval Port City in the Context of Political, Religious, and Commercial
Exchanges between South India, Southeast Asia and China . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sevea, Teren. 2022. Indian Ocean studies and saintly materials from the Islamic East. History Compass 20: e12744. [ CrossRef ]

--- [Page 253] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 900 35 of 35
Sinclair, Iain. 2018. New Light on the Karimun Besar Inscription (Prasasti Pasir Panjang) and the Learned Man from Gaur. NSC
Highlights 11: 16–17.
Sinclair, Iain. 2019. Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China: Bianhong’s Manual on the abhis
˙eka of a
cakravartin. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore:
ISEAS‑Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 29–66.
Sinclair, Iain. 2021a. Dharmakīrti of Kedah: His Life, Work and Troubled Times . Temasekm Working Paper Series 2. Singapore: Temasek
History Research Centre, ISEAS‑Yusof Ishak Institute.
Sinclair, Iain. 2021b. The Last Pāla–Sena pan
˙d
˙ita, Gautamaśrībhadra, at the Ends of the Buddhist Earth . Public Lecture. Berkeley: The
Center for Buddhist Studies, University of California, April 8.
Sircar, Dineshchandra. 1960. Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medieval India . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Sircar, Dineshchandra. 1967. Cosmography and Geography in Early Indian Literature . Calcutta: Indian Studies, Past & Present.
Tuladhar‑Douglas, Will. 2006. Remaking Buddhism for Medieval Nepal: The Fifteenth‑Century Reformation of Newar Buddhism . London
and New York: Routledge.
Wong, Dorothy C., and Gustav Heldt. 2014. China and Beyond in the Mediaeval Period: Cultural Crossings and Inter‑Regional Connections .
Amherst and New York: Cambria Press. Delhi: Manohar.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual au‑
thor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

--- [Page 254] ---
Academic Editor: Jeffery D. Long
Received: 26 January 2025
Revised: 19 August 2025
Accepted: 11 September 2025
Published: 18 September 2025
Citation: Huang, Shaosong. 2025.
From Mountains and Forests to the
Seas: The Maritime Spread of the
Sanping Patriarch Belief. Religions 16:
1194. https://doi.org/10.3390/
rel16091194
Copyright: © 2025 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).Article
From Mountains and Forests to the Seas: The Maritime Spread
of the Sanping Patriarch Belief
Shaosong Huang
School of Philosophy, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China; san8384@163.com
Abstract
As a representative form of popular religion in southern Fujian (Minnan 闽南 ), the San‑
ping Patriarch (Sanping Zushi 三平祖師 ) belief exhibits distinct transregional and cross‑
cultural characteristics in its dissemination across Taiwan and Southeast Asia. Taking the
ancestral temples in Fujian 福建 as a point of departure, this article systematically ana‑
lyzes the transmission routes and localization strategies of this belief system in Taiwan
and Southeast Asia. Drawing on detailed archival research, fieldwork (including site vis‑
its), and interviews, the study reveals how the belief has continually revitalized itself in
pluralistic societies through strategies of “orthodoxy preservation” and “localized innova‑
tion.” The findings suggest that in Taiwan, the Sanping Patriarch belief primarily relies on
kinship networks to maintain traditional practices. At the same time, in Southeast Asia, it
spreads across ethnic boundaries through commercial and trade networks. Differences are
also evident in the realm of mythological symbols, core rituals, and social functions. This
study pays special attention to often‑overlooked mythological figures such as the “Ser‑
pent Attendant” and “Tiger Attendant,” shedding light on the multilayered structure of
folk religious systems.
Keywords: Sanping Patriarch belief; maritime diffusion; Chinese folk religions; orthodoxy
preservation; localized innovation; Taiwan; Southeast Asia
1. Introduction
Sanping Patriarch (Chan Master Yizhong, 781–872) was a highly esteemed monk of the
Tang dynasty (618–907), renowned for his mastery of Chan Buddhist teachings. He played
a pivotal role in spreading Buddhism throughout the Zhangzhou 漳州 region of Fujian
福建 and personally founded Sanping Temple (Sanping Si 三平寺 ) to promote the Dharma.
Not only did he lead by example, working alongside the people in the fields, but he also
generously imparted farming techniques, astronomical knowledge, and medical wisdom,
demonstrating the compassion inherent in Buddhism. His contributions earned him the
deep respect of both the local populace and officials, and he was granted the honorary title
of “Guangji Chan Master” (Guangji Chanshi 廣濟禪師 ) by Emperor Xuanzong 宣宗 of Tang
in recognition of his service to society.
After his passing, the influence of the Sanping Patriarch continued to expand. By the
Song dynasty 宋代 (960–1279), the process of deification had gradually taken shape, and
he came to be venerated as a deity embodying both a Buddhist saint and a local protec‑
tive deity. A priestly system centered on “Sanping” also emerged, characterized by three
primary functions: pingding 平定 (pacification of) the local area, mediating conflicts, and
educating and uplifting local communities; pingyi 平疫 (epidemic relief), associated with
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16091194

--- [Page 255] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 2 of 28
healing powers, medical legends, and the practice of drawing medicinal lots; and ping’an
平安 (safeguarding), offering protection together with his Serpent and Tiger Attendants.
Although this interpretation is not found in early textual sources, it aligns with the tradi‑
tional Chinese religious logic of “honoring those with merit”1(Hu and Zhang 2017 , p. 891)
and reflects the pragmatic emphasis on “disaster‑aversion and protection” that typifies
popular belief systems ( Hansen 1990 , p. 38).
The name “Sanping” originates from the terrain of Sanping Mountain in Zhangzhou,
described as “three precipitous and three level areas” (san xian san ping 三險三平 ). As the
Sanping Patriarch belief spread beyond its place of origin, “Sanping” not only became the
basis for temple names but also evolved into a cultural symbol representing ritual ortho‑
doxy and ancestral legitimacy.
Although recent scholarship has increasingly paid attention to the formation and dis‑
semination of the Sanping Patriarch belief, a comprehensive and cross‑regional analysis
remains lacking. Sun (2012 ) examined the formation, spread, and flourishing of the belief
but did not delve into its transnational diffusion. Chia (2022 ) focused on how local gov‑
ernments in post‑Mao China promoted the Sanping Patriarch belief as part of cultural and
religious policy initiatives. In addition, scholars such as Dong Ligong ( 董立功 )2, Yu‑mei
Hsieh (謝玉美 )3, Chi‑Shiang Chang ( 張志相 )4, Yan Yayu ( 顏亞玉 )5, and Kuei‑wen Hsieh
(謝貴文 )6have conducted studies on the Sanping Patriarch belief in Taiwan. Case stud‑
ies by Song Yanpeng ( 宋燕鵬 )7, Tan Ai Boay ( 陳愛梅 )8, and Zheng Laifa ( 鄭來發 )9have
examined the worship of the Sanping Patriarch belief in Malaysia.
However, existing research has yet to systematically explore how the belief has tra‑
versed geographic and cultural boundaries through migrant networks and commercial
routes to reach Taiwan and Southeast Asia. Furthermore, it lacks a thorough analysis
of how the belief has negotiated “orthodoxy preservation” and “localized innovation”
within pluralistic societies. A cross‑regional comparative perspective linking the ances‑
tral temple in Fujian, its dissemination in Taiwan, and its adaptation in Southeast Asia
remains underdeveloped.
This study seeks to fill the above‑mentioned research gap by systematically examining
the mechanisms of transmission and localization strategies of the Sanping Patriarch belief
in Taiwan and Southeast Asia. It focuses on how the belief has achieved new developments
in cross‑cultural contexts through the continuation of ancestral legitimacy as a symbol of
orthodoxy and through innovative practices of localization.
Based on the research findings of previous scholars, this study adopts a multi‑method
approach that integrates inscriptional analysis, local gazetteer studies, fieldwork (con‑
ducted at Sanping Monastery in Pinghe County 平和縣 , Fujian Province 福建省 , between
2023 and 2025), and interview data (including a 2025 interview with Mr. Lui Poh Kwan,
archivist of Poh Onn Kong Temple in Malacca). It investigates the shared features and di‑
vergences among the ancestral temple in Fujian and its affiliated temples in Taiwan and
Southeast Asia in terms of transmission mechanisms, ritual practices, and social functions.
Through this comparative lens, the study reveals how the Sanping Patriarch belief has been
adapted and reconfigured in various sociocultural contexts.
The study finds that the sustained development of the Sanping Patriarch belief relies
on two key pathways. On the one hand, it maintains ancestral orthodoxy through a sym‑
bolic system centered on the name “Sanping 三平 ” and mythological attendants such as
the Serpent Attendant 蛇侍者10(Figure 1) and Tiger Attendant 虎侍者11(Figure 2), thereby
reinforcing the legitimacy link between branch temples and the ancestral temple. On the
other hand, it actively adapts to pluralistic societies through localized innovations, includ‑
ing ritual creativity (e.g., the Techno Prince Parade dance 電音三太子 in Taiwan), pantheon
fusion (e.g., shared worship of Datuk Gong at Chong Ann Teng Temple in Malacca), trans‑

--- [Page 256] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 3 of 28
formation into charitable practices (e.g., the “Blessing Turtle” ritual at Poh Onn Kong Tem‑
ple in Malacca), and digital dissemination via platforms such as TikTok and YouTube.
 
Figure 1. Serpent Attendant, photograph by the author.

--- [Page 257] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 4 of 28
 
Figure 2. Tiger Attendant, photograph by the author.

--- [Page 258] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 5 of 28
Through a regional comparative approach, this study systematically reveals how the
Sanping Patriarch belief negotiates between “orthodoxy preservation” and “localized in‑
novation” in diverse sociocultural contexts. The findings of this research may offer a
preliminary foundation for further investigations into the global spread of the Sanping
Patriarch belief.
2. The Origins and Early Development of the Sanping Patriarch Belief
Sanping Patriarch was born in the second year of the Jianzhong 建中 reign (781) in
present‑day Fuqing 福清 , Fujian. He became a monk in the tenth year of the Zhenyuan
貞元 reign (794) under the guidance of Master Xuan Yong 玄用律師 . In the first year of
the Tang Bao Li 寶曆 reign (825), he traveled from Chaozhou 潮州 to Zhangzhou to spread
the teachings of Buddhism. At that time, Buddhism in the region was experiencing steady
growth. According to Wang (1997 , p. 50), 45 new Buddhist temples were constructed in
Fujian during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang dynasty, and this expansion
continued into the late Tang period (820–907).
Against this backdrop, Sanping Patriarch propagated the Dharma in the mountain‑
ous and miasmic regions of Zhangzhou, earning wide acclaim from the populace through
practices that blended Confucianism, Buddhism, and Daoism. Following the Huichang
會昌 Persecution of Buddhism in 845, state suppression of Buddhism intensified, and
widespread reliance on localized Chan masters grew significantly. In this context, lo‑
cal officials invited the Sanping Patriarch to preside over the Kaiyuan Temple 開元寺 in
Zhangzhou as a means to stabilize local religious life ( Wang 1986 ). This unique historical
moment not only deepened his influence among the people but also laid the groundwork
for his eventual imperial recognition and deification.
When the Sanping Patriarch set about establishing Sanping Temple, he faced numer‑
ous challenges, including frequent natural disasters and suspicion and distrust from the
local mountain people. Through his practical efforts, teaching agricultural techniques, im‑
parting astronomical knowledge, and offering medical assistance, he not only resolved
local tensions but also demonstrated an extraordinary ability to address real‑world prob‑
lems. As a result, he was gradually attributed with supernatural powers, and his image
underwent a process of sacralization.
The Sanping Patriarch passed away at Sanping Temple on the sixth day of the eleventh
lunar month in the thirteenth year of the Xiantong 咸通 reign (872). After his death, ac‑
counts of his miraculous deeds—such as summoning rain, dispelling disasters, healing
epidemics, and subduing demons and dangerous animals—spread widely. According to
Chang (2010 , p. 37), he came to be regarded by the populace as possessing esoteric pow‑
ers (mifa shentong 密法神通 ). This mythologization reflects the widespread psychological
reliance on supernatural forces. As remarked by Wu (1995 , p. 7), “when faced with dis‑
asters that are beyond human control or natural calamities, people will burn incense, bow
their heads, and offer sacrifices to gods and spirits, praying to supernatural forces for help.
They offer gifts to the deities who protect them, and even seek favor from foreign deities,
pleading for blessings, disaster relief, and healing.”
Ultimately, the Sanping Patriarch was transformed from a historical monk into a local
protective deity, and Sanping Temple emerged as a regional center of religious worship.
The veneration of the Sanping Patriarch began to take form during the Song dynasty ( Sun
2012 , p. 95).
The name Sanping originates from Sanping Mountain in Zhangzhou. According to
the General Gazetteer of the Eight Min (Bamin Tongzhi 八閩通志 ;Huang 2006 , p. 210),
compiled in the Ming dynasty (1368–1644), the mountain was named for its distinctive
topography, which features “three precipitous and three level areas” (san xian san ping).

--- [Page 259] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 6 of 28
The temple established by Sanping Patriarch on this mountain was thus named Sanping
Temple, making “Sanping” in this context a geographical designation.
During his lifetime, Sanping Patriarch was credited with subduing local indigenous
forces, warding off epidemics, and protecting the community—deeds that earned him
widespread acclaim. After his death, these actions became mythologized, and he came
to be endowed with a tripartite divine power: pingding (pacification), pingyi (epidemic
relief), and ping’an (safeguarding). He gradually became a spiritual protector for the peo‑
ple of southern Fujian.
The formation of the Sanping Patriarch belief was a long‑term process shaped by the
interaction of three key forces. First, the psychological needs of the believers formed the
foundation for its ongoing development. Sanping Patriarch became a symbolic figure for
disaster aversion and spiritual protection. Monastics at Sanping Temple reinforced this
belief system through temple construction, enshrinement of the Patriarch’s image, and the
oral transmission of stories (such as his subjugation of mountain spirits).
Second, support from the local gentry class enhanced the belief’s legitimacy. During
the Song dynasty, notable officials such as Yan Shilu 顏師魯 and his grandson Yan Yizhong
顏頤仲 made substantial donations for temple reconstruction. According to local accounts,
when a miraculous serpent—believed to be an incarnation of the Dharma protector of San‑
ping Temple—appeared in Yan Yizhong’s household, the gentry immediately raised funds
to restore the temple ( Wang and Chang 2000 , p. 249). These acts not only signaled the in‑
fluence of their lineage but also conferred orthodox status on the belief by associating it
with elite sponsorship. As some scholars have argued, they enriched and advanced the
Sanping Patriarch belief through their own official experiences and existential needs ( Hu
2011 , p. 76), thereby enabling the belief to transcend folk religion and gain broader societal
recognition.
Third, it benefited from the catalytic role of mythological narratives. Among them, the
legend of Sanping Patriarch subduing venomous serpents and ferocious tigers—and turn‑
ing them into divine attendants—played a central role. As remarked by Su(2025 , p. 203),
“the serpent’s inhuman form is transformed into a human‑like being through the power of
Sanping Patriarch.” It is further endowed with divinity and becomes an object of worship
(Guo 2013 , p. 17). However, this process of deification was not without difficulty—the tale
of the Patriarch subduing mountain demons metaphorically represents the hardships he
faced in establishing a Buddhist temple in this remote region ( Shi 2004 , p. 138).
The Serpent Attendant not only functions as the Patriarch’s intermediary but is also
believed to possess healing powers, forming a complementary relationship with the deity.
For example, in temples explicitly dedicated to the attendants (shizhe gong miao 侍者公廟 ),
devotees often seek ashes from the incense burner to take home and consume in times of
illness ( Weng 1935 , p. 101). This practice further reinforces the practical and therapeutic
role of the Serpent Attendant in local belief systems. The transformation from “serpent”
to “human” to “deity” enriches the narrative structure of the belief and reflects the har‑
monious integration of diverse religious and cultural traditions within Fujian society ( Wu
2001 , p. 40).
In addition to the legend of the Serpent Attendant, the “Bamin Tongzhi” 八閩通志
(Huang 2006 , p. 210) provides a detailed record of the “Tiger Climbing Spring” (Hu Pa
Quan虎爬泉 )12on Sanping Mountain. This record corroborates oral legends about the
Patriarch’s subjugation of a thousand‑year‑old tiger demon and the tale of a tiger listening
to his Buddha’s teachings. These narratives not only enhance the mythological richness
of the belief but also highlight the Patriarch’s supernatural power and boundless com‑
passion. Together, they imbue the Sanping Patriarch belief system with deeper symbolic

--- [Page 260] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 7 of 28
meaning—namely, the subjugation of malevolent forces and the safeguarding of peace and
well‑being.
It is noteworthy that the Serpent and Tiger Attendants, as Dharma protectors of the
Sanping Patriarch, function in roles analogous to imperial bodyguards, thus reflecting the
mutual borrowing between religious and political authority in the maintenance of tradi‑
tional social order. These legends, while appealing to the popular imagination through
their narrative intimacy and visual symbolism, also resonate with deeper allegorical mean‑
ings that align with state ideology. As such, they serve not only to attract lay devotees but
also to garner official recognition and support, thereby becoming crucial vehicles for the
transmission and legitimization of the belief.
Local officials played a key role in legitimizing the Sanping Patriarch belief by record‑
ing miraculous events, such as prayers for rain being answered13(Yao and Li 2000 , p. 401),
successful petitions for offspring14(Wang 2018 , p. 1507), and dispelling epidemics15(Lu
2010 , p. 79)—in official gazetteers. They also took the lead in temple renovations and pub‑
lic rituals. These actions not only deepened the piety of local believers but also granted the
belief a measure of official recognition and institutional legitimacy. Through this process,
the Sanping Patriarch belief expanded from a localized mountain worship in Zhangzhou
into a broader regional belief system across southern Fujian.
During this period, temples dedicated to the Sanping Patriarch began to proliferate,
such as the Sanping Patriarch Temple in Shancheng 山城 , Nanjing 南靖 County, Daifang
An岱房庵 , and the Handegong 翰德宮 in Mapu 馬鋪 Township, Yunxiao 雲霄 County.
This expansion was not merely a geographical diffusion; it was accompanied by a deep
cultural integration with the local southern Fujian context. As remarked by Xiang (2025 ,
p. 167), “the Sanping Patriarch belief developed through historical processes; it is the result
of southern Fujian’s geographical features and popular aspirations being projected onto
the divine.”
Notably, the belief system also incorporated core elements from Confucianism, Bud‑
dhism, and Daoism, gradually evolving into an integral component of southern Fujian
cultural identity. Based on this regional consolidation, the belief laid a foundation for its
subsequent maritime dissemination and transregional influence.
3. The Sanping Patriarch Belief in Taiwan
During the Ming and Qing (1616–1912) dynasties, a large number of people from the
Minnan region (southern Fujian) migrated to Taiwan. Many local deities, including San‑
ping Patriarch, Qing Shui Patriarch, Bao Sheng Da Di, and Mazu, accompanied the Fu‑
jianese immigrants to Taiwan. Once these deities took root in Taiwan, they became local
guardian deities and were endowed with additional functions. Over time, these deities
experienced varying degrees of development, adapting to the evolving historical context.
The Sanping Patriarch belief in Taiwan has developed a distinct localized lineage, markedly
different from that of the ancestral temple, through the reconstruction of religious roles,
variations in ritual practices, and the expansion of its social functions.
3.1. Transmission Routes and Major Branch Temples in Taiwan
The transmission of the Sanping Patriarch belief into Taiwan primarily relied on the
clan‑based networks of immigrants from Zhangzhou and Quanzhou. Its earliest presence
can be traced back to the Qing dynasty.16According to incomplete statistics, there are
currently 15 temples in Taiwan that primarily venerate the Sanping Patriarch (Table 1), with
a concentrated distribution in areas such as Tainan and Kaohsiung, where Zhangzhou and
Quanzhou 泉州 immigrants historically settled (Figure 3). This spatial pattern reflects the
close relationship between the spread of the belief and the migratory routes of southern

--- [Page 261] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 8 of 28
Fujian settlers. It is thus evident that the Sanping Patriarch belief is more prevalent in
southern Taiwan, mainly because many Zhangzhou immigrants landed and settled in this
region ( Dong 2013 , p. 31).
Table 1. Temples in Taiwan with Sanping Patriarch as the principal deity.
No. Temple Name Establishment Time Location
1 Yanchao Sanping Temple pre‑1753 Yanchao Dist., Kaohsiung
2 Zhushan Sanping Temple 1789 Nantou County, Taichung
3 Hua’an Temple (Guangji Palace) 1797 Baihe Dist., Tainan
4 Sanping Patriarch Temple, Talu 1810 Ligang Township, Pingtung
5 Jixin Yongan Temple 1861 Wujie Township, Yilan
6 Qianzhen Sanlong Temple Guangxu era (1875–1908) Qianzhen Dist., Kaohsiung
7 Danei Feian Temple 1883 Danei Dist., Tainan
8 Nanchang Guangzhou Temple 1951 West Central Dist., Tainan
9 Xinguang Sanlong Temple 1964 Qishan Dist., Kaohsiung
10 Xikou Zushigong Temple 1966 Xikou Township, Chiayi County
11 Tianzhong Sanping Temple 1977 Guanmiao Dist., Tainan
12 Guangji Leiyin Temple 1986 Yongkang Dist., Tainan
13 Sanping Guangji Temple 1988 Anping Dist., Tainan
14 Yongan Bici Temple 1999 Yong’an Dist., Kaohsiung
15 Guidong Sanping Temple 2013 Guanmiao Dist., Tainan
Source: Data compiled from Chang (2020 ),Hsieh (2025 ), and Lu(2025 ).
Figure 3. Distribution of temples in Taiwan where the Sanping Patriarch is the principal deity. Map
created by the author. Data based on Chang (2020 ),Hsieh (2025 ), and Lu(2025 ).
Today, the sources of incense offerings to the Sanping Patriarch in Taiwan come
from places such as Sanping Temple in Pinghe County (e.g., Zhushan Sanping Temple
竹山三坪院 ) and the Quanzhou or Chaozhou 潮州 ‑Shantou 汕頭 regions (e.g., Yanchao San‑
ping Temple 燕巢三坪宫 ), as well as some local incense offerings from within Taiwan itself
(e.g., Xinguang Sanlong Temple 新光三龍寺 ). At its core, this belief system centers on the
Sanping Monastery in Pinghe County, Zhangzhou. The spread of the belief in Taiwan fol‑
lowed two primary transmission routes, primarily facilitated by the clan‑based networks

--- [Page 262] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 9 of 28
of Zhangzhou and Quanzhou migrants during the Ming and Qing dynasties. On the one
hand, ancestral traditions were maintained in Taiwan through lineage networks; on the
other hand, geographic adaptation enabled the integration of diverse local communities.
These two pathways complemented each other and together promoted the dissemination
of the Sanping Patriarch belief in Taiwan.
The first transmission pathway is kinship‑based, relying on clan lineage to maintain
the continuity of incense offerings. For example, the Sanping Temple (Sanping Gong
三坪宮 ) in Xiyan 西燕 Village, Yan Chao 燕巢 District, Kaohsiung City, founded before
1753, features a stele dated to the thirteenth year of the Daoguang 道光 reign (1833), titled
“Sanping Temple Deity’s Birthday Performance and Donation Stele” (Sanping Gong Shen‑
dan Yanxi Juanti Beiji 三坪宮神誕演戲捐題碑記 ) (National Central Library, Taiwan Branch
1833 ), which details the financial contributions made by the temple’s followers from the
Yuanjiao Zhongzhuang area for land, rent, and donations to fund performances for the de‑
ity. Almost all donors bore the surname Lin 林, reflecting a dominant participation of the
Lin clan among local devotees. Local accounts note that the Lin clan once organized the
“Twenty‑Four Lin Associations” as ritual groups dedicated to worship ( Chang 2020 , p. 46).
Local folklore tells of mysterious legends involving the appearance of a sacred serpent.
The temple celebrates the birthday of the Sanping Patriarch on the sixth of November,
in accordance with the tradition of worshiping the attendant deities and holding theatrical
performances to honor the deity, which aligns with the customs of the original Sanping
Patriarch belief in Fujian, showing a clear continuity of the tradition.
Another case is the Sanlong Temple (Sanlong Si 三龍寺 ) in Xinguang 新光 Village,
Qishan旗山 District, Kaohsiung, which originally housed deities for private worship. In
1961, local elders proposed the idea of building a temple to enshrine the Sanping Patri‑
arch. Most of the residents’ ancestors come from Pinghe, Zhangzhou, and more than half
of them have the surname Chen 陳. The Sanping Patriarch is particularly revered for his
miraculous powers in healing diseases, and followers use the base of his statue as a medic‑
inal talisman ( Hsieh 2017 , p. 121). Through the clustering of same‑lineage groups and the
continuation of ancestral traditions from the homeland, this practice not only reinforced
religious cohesion but also sustained cultural identity among migrants.
The second transmission model is community integration based on geographic prox‑
imity. This model, actively promoted by local communities, constructs cross‑ethnic beliefs
through joint worship of multiple deities. For example, Yong’an 永安 Temple in Jixin 季新
Village, Wujie 五結 Township, Yilan 宜蘭 County, enshrines the golden statue of the San‑
ping Patriarch, which was brought from Fujian by a merchant named Lin Gua 林瓜 in the
twenty‑fourth year of the Jiaqing 嘉慶 reign (1819). Initially placed in his home, as mirac‑
ulous efficacy became widely recognized, the temple gradually attracted immigrants for
worship. Lin Gua simultaneously invited the statues of the Sanping Patriarch and the
Qingshui Patriarch, and through their joint enshrinement actively mediated the religious
differences between Zhangzhou and Quanzhou immigrants.
The Sanping Patriarch repeatedly manifested divine powers, not only healing dis‑
eases and repelling pests but also protecting fishermen at sea. Thus, his role expanded
from a local healing deity to a maritime guardian, embodying the symbolic meanings of
“epidemic relief” and “safeguarding,” while addressing the survival needs of fishermen
from diverse ancestral origins. According to temple inscriptions, Lin Damu 林大目 served
as manager in 1928, Qiu Yongjin 邱永金 in 1946, and Zhang Bailang 張栢郎 as chairman
in 1972, showing that the worshippers became increasingly heterogeneous, yet remained
united in their dedication to the temple’s construction and development. The temple ven‑
erates multiple deities, including the Sanping Patriarch, Qingshui Patriarch, Bodhidharma,
and attendant deities, with an incense lineage rooted in Quanzhou immigrant beliefs. The

--- [Page 263] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 10 of 28
temple also retains the traditional practice of distributing medicinal prayer slips. Addition‑
ally, it holds the traditional celebration of the Sanping Patriarch’s birthday, specifically the
“Three Sixes Event”17, a key ritual of the temple. Through festival celebrations and cooper‑
ation in daily temple affairs, differences among groups were gradually dissolved, marking
the lived process of community integration.
Another example is Feian Temple (Feian Gong 飛安宮 ) in Huanhu 環湖 Village, Danei
大內 District, Tainan 台南 City. The temple’s origin dates back to the ninth year of the
Guangxu 光緒 reign (1883), when a plague broke out in the area. The local people built
the temple to pray for the Sanping Patriarch’s intervention to end the epidemic ( Chang
2020 , p. 54). This act highlights the “epidemic relief” aspect of the Sanping Patriarch’s
divine functions. In 1959, a preparatory committee was established for the temple’s recon‑
struction18, comprising eleven members of different surnames, including Zheng Shuishen
鄭水深 , Xu Sanjiang 許三江 , and Ye Qingshun 葉清順 , who were publicly elected to fund
and manage the temple jointly, thereby better balancing the interests of diverse community
groups. Today, the temple enshrines not only the Sanping Patriarch but also the Cankui Pa‑
triarch慚愧祖師 , the Qing Shui Patriarch 清水祖師 , Guanyin Buddha 觀音菩薩 , and other
deities. This reflects the polytheistic religious needs of immigrants from southern Fujian
and Guangdong. The birthday of the Patriarch celebrated at this temple falls on the eighth
day of the fourth lunar month.
Additionally, within Taiwanese folk religion, there exists a phenomenon of conflation
or mutual substitution among Patriarch deities. For instance, the Hua’an Temple (Guangji
Palace)廣濟宮化安寺 in Tainan originally enshrined the Sanping Patriarch as its primary
deity. However, with the rise of Qingshui Patriarch devotion and resulting divine iden‑
tity blending, the temple gradually shifted its primary veneration to Qingshui Patriarch.
Nonetheless, the temple still preserves the Inscription of Guangji Patriarch Temple Prop‑
erty (Guang Ji Zu Shi Miao Chan Bei Ji 廣濟祖師廟產碑記 ) (National Central Library, Tai‑
wan Branch 1835 ) dated to the fifteenth year of the Daoguang 道光 reign (1835), which
attests to the historical presence of Sanping Patriarch worship. The stele records mention
eleven surnames, indicating the presence of worshippers from different lineages in the
area. In addition, Tianzhong Sanping Temple, originally named “Wanfu Hall 萬福堂 ” and
principally dedicated to the Qingshui Patriarch, underwent a shift after the temple’s stat‑
ues were stolen. In response to the community’s anxiety, the Sanping Patriarch, through
spirit‑writing divination, bestowed the new temple name “Sanping Temple” and became
the principal deity. Nevertheless, many devotees today continue to regard the Qingshui
Patriarch as the principal deity. This strategy of integrating deities from multiple ances‑
tral homelands to construct cross‑ethnic religious identities not only helps preserve origi‑
nal homeland memories but also facilitates the transmission and localization of the belief
within Taiwanese society.
Worshippers of the same lineage in different settlements could conveniently achieve
deeper geographic integration through devotion to the deities of major temples, while
within a single settlement, even members of different surnames could still be united
through shared religious belief ( Lin 2000 , pp. 78–79). Therefore, the survival and devel‑
opment of the Sanping Patriarch belief in Taiwan relied not only on lineage networks and
community integration but also on these two complementary pathways—simultaneously
satisfying the religious needs of diverse groups and promoting the localization and sus‑
tained flourishing of the belief.
3.2. Localization of the Belief in Taiwan
The Sanping Patriarch belief was introduced to Taiwan during the Qing dynasty. It re‑
tained ritual practices consistent with those of the ancestral Sanping Monastery in Pinghe

--- [Page 264] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 11 of 28
County, including the worship of attendant deities, theatrical performances for the Patri‑
arch’s birthday celebrations, and the use of medicinal prayer slips. These shared practices
indicate a clear lineage and continuity between the two regions. However, the develop‑
ment of the Sanping Patriarch belief in Taiwan goes beyond mere preservation of homeland
traditions; it reflects a dynamic process of localization shaped by interactions with local re‑
ligious cultures and social environments. This dynamic evolution is primarily reflected in
the expansion of divine functions, the innovation of ritual practices, and the reconstruction
of religious symbols.
The original roles of the Sanping Patriarch as a healing and rain prayer deity have been
expanded in Taiwan to include new functions such as maritime protector—exemplified by
Jixin Yong’an Temple 季新永安寺 , Yilan—and community guardian, thereby addressing
the needs of residents and consolidating the belief’s social standing. At the same time,
some Sanping Patriarch temples have taken on greater social engagement, serving as com‑
munity centers and donation sites. The Yanchao Sanping Temple 燕巢三坪宮 , for example,
illustrates this transformation of religious spaces into venues for public service.
Ritual practices also demonstrate a combination of continuity and innovation. Branch
temples in Taiwan uphold traditional rituals for the Patriarch’s birthday, such as theatrical
performances and procession prayers for blessings, but they also incorporate modern ele‑
ments to engage younger generations. At Zhushan Sanping Temple 竹山三坪院 in Nantou
南投 , besides traditional operatic performances, contemporary music and dance evenings
are hosted, alongside modernized celebrations such as the “Techno Prince Parade dance
電音三太子 ,” reflecting an entertainment‑driven adaptation of traditional rituals. Comple‑
menting this trend, Yanchao Sanping Temple has integrated the Taoist ritual of “Cross‑
ing the Seven‑Star Safety Bridge 過平安七星橋 ” into the Patriarch’s birthday celebrations,
thereby enriching the event’s religious significance and enhancing devotees’ participatory
experience through diversified ritual forms. Furthermore, the adaptation of the Sanping
Patriarch belief in Taiwan is also evident in the use of digital media. Most temples have
established Facebook pages and disseminate event videos via platforms such as YouTube,
thereby constructing virtual belief communities. This strategy not only broadens the par‑
ticipant base and enhances the efficiency of transmission but also resonates with dissemi‑
nation patterns observed in Southeast Asia.
Finally, there is a reconstruction and reinterpretation of religious symbols. The San‑
ping Patriarch belief in Taiwan exhibits a marked tendency toward syncretism in divine
identities, often overlapping with the Qingshui Patriarch, the Three Generations Patri‑
archs三代祖师 , and others. For instance, temples such as Hua’an Temple (Guangji Palace)
廣濟宮化安寺 in Tainan, Tianzhong Sanping Temple 田中三平宮 in Tainan, and Sanlong
Temple三龍宮 in Qianzhen 前鎮 (Kaohsiung) have experienced shifts in their principal
deity worship. Moreover, at Nanchang Guangzhou Temple 南廠廣州宮 in Tainan, a spirit
medium narrative emerged portraying Yang Wulang 楊五郎 as an incarnation of the San‑
ping Patriarch. This localized innovation in religious symbols stems primarily from two in‑
terrelated historical and social dimensions. On the socio‑cultural level, the survival needs
of settler communities drove the integration of Zhangzhou and Quanzhou folk beliefs as
mutual recognition became essential for collective development ( Yan 2001 , p. 118). Simul‑
taneously, at the ethnic‑identity level, the intermingling of southern Fujian and Cantonese
populations, which was facilitated by flexible attitudes toward divine genealogies, fostered
the emergence of a hybrid “Patriarch” identity ( Hsieh 2025 , p. 22).
3.3. Interaction with the Ancestral Temple in Taiwan
The Sanping Patriarch branch temples in Taiwan maintain close ties with the ances‑
tral temple in Pinghe County, Fujian, based on geographic, kinship, and spiritual connec‑

--- [Page 265] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 12 of 28
tions. Most Taiwanese branch temples bear the name “Sanping”, which not only reflects
the cultural heritage of the ancestral temple but also serves to uphold its legitimacy and
orthodoxy. Moreover, these branch temples enshrine the attendant deities, the Serpent At‑
tendant and Tiger Attendant, preserving the mythological narratives associated with the
Sanping Patriarch and his Serpent Attendant, as well as retaining practices such as the use
of medicinal prayer slips—for example, Zhushan Sanping Temple 竹山三坪院 , established
in the 54th year of the Qianlong 乾隆 reign (1789). Although the Sanping Patriarch belief
in Taiwan has undergone localization and development, these deep‑rooted connections
have ensured continued close interaction between temples across the two regions. This
interaction primarily manifests in the following aspects:
1. Pilgrimage to the ancestral temple. Numerous Sanping Patriarch branch temples in
Taiwan regularly or irregularly organize pilgrimages for devotees to the ancestral
temple. For example, the Sanping Guangji Temple 三平廣濟宮 in Tainan City has
made multiple pilgrimages to the Pinghe ancestral temple. In 1988, devotees at this
temple witnessed the Serpent Attendant and Tiger Attendant at the ancestral temple.
Upon returning to Taiwan, they crafted statues of the attendants based on photos
from the ancestral temple for enshrinement and worship.19This process not only per‑
petuated the ancestral belief but also deepened cultural ties across the Taiwan Strait.
2. Exchange and interaction. Beyond pilgrimages from Taiwanese branch temples to
the ancestral temple, the ancestral temple organized cultural exchange delegations
to Taiwan in 2009 and 2013. Additionally, in 2009, the “Cross‑Strait (Pinghe) Sanping
Patriarch Cultural Association” was established to promote exchanges and coopera‑
tion between the two sides. Taiwanese branch temples actively participate in various
celebratory events hosted by the ancestral temple, such as Sanping Patriarch cultural
folk (intangible cultural heritage) activities. This bidirectional interaction not only re‑
constructs the close relationship between the main temple and its branches but also
strengthens Taiwanese devotees’ cultural identification with their ancestral homeland
through the belief network.
The Sanping Patriarch belief in Taiwan is not a mere replication of the ancestral temple
model but rather demonstrates both continuity and adaptability within the local context.
While preserving core deities (the Sanping Patriarch and the Attendant Deities), major fes‑
tivals, and traditional rituals to maintain the lineage connection with the Fujian ancestral
temple, the belief also actively integrates and absorbs deities and cultural elements from
diverse ethnic groups. It engages in symbolic reconstruction and localization, facilitating
its development within Taiwan’s pluralistic religious landscape. This localization strategy
enables the Sanping Patriarch belief to become a distinctive regional religious form. The
similarities and differences between this Taiwanese localization model and the develop‑
ments in Southeast Asia will be the focus of subsequent discussion.
4. The Sanping Patriarch Belief in Southeast Asia
Since the Tang dynasty, the Fujian region has witnessed patterns of overseas migra‑
tion closely tied to maritime trade. As previous studies have noted, “by the Tang Dynasty,
some people from Fujian had already arrived at ports in Southeast Asia and Japan, engag‑
ing in commercial or handicraft activities” ( Lin and Qiu 2005 , p. 214). With the expan‑
sion of transregional trade networks, the scale of emigration also gradually increased. In
the late tenth and early eleventh centuries, Chinese seafaring merchants from the Fujian
province were frequenting markets in Japan and Korea ( Sen 2011 , p. 53). Southeast Asia
likewise emerged as a significant destination for both trade and migration. The people of
southern Fujian were verifiably venturing abroad in large numbers by the eleventh century,
with Champa as a significant destination ( Wade 2009 , p. 230).

--- [Page 266] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 13 of 28
During the Song and Yuan (1271–1368) dynasties, the number of immigrants to South‑
east Asia gradually increased. As Fukami (2004 , p. 56) notes, “by the Southern Song dy‑
nasty南宋 (1127–1276), a significant number of Chinese had already settled in Southeast
Asia, and the Malay Peninsula had developed into a mature Chinese settlement area”.
These immigrants mostly settled in areas with convenient transportation and thriving
trade, such as present‑day Sumatra, Java, the Malay Peninsula, and the Philippines.
It is noteworthy that this wave of migration was closely tied to the development of
maritime trade. As Sen(2011 , p. 72) emphasizes, “in fact, members of Chinese diasporic
communities may have found it easier and more profitable to operate from Java, Malacca,
or other ports in Southeast Asia,” since these ports not only connected the trade networks
between China and India but also provided convenient routes for merchants to circumvent
the Ming dynasty’s maritime prohibition policies. These prohibitions, in effect, gave rise
to the smuggling trade at Yuegang 月港 in Zhangzhou. As Chang (2019 , p. 229) points
out, “after the Ming government opened Yuegang in Zhangzhou in 1567, although the
port flourished rapidly, smuggling remained active.”
With the flourishing trade at Yuegang in Zhangzhou, local industries—especially
porcelain manufacturing—also experienced significant development. As Wang (2019 ,
p. 104) notes “during this period, the porcelain exported via Yuegang was primarily pro‑
duced in Pinghe County, Zhangzhou—the core region of the Sanping Patriarch belief.
These Zhangzhou ceramics were exported to Southeast Asian markets and other regions
along maritime trade routes.” Through the circulation of commodities such as porcelain,
Zhangzhou merchants established stable trade networks with ports across Southeast Asia,
which in turn facilitated population movements and cultural transmission. The expansion
of maritime commerce not only promoted the flow of goods but also created favorable
conditions for the southern Fujian migration wave and the dissemination of the Sanping
Patriarch belief in Southeast Asia.
4.1. Transmission Routes and Major Branch Temples in Southeast Asia
These immigrants, facing the dangers of maritime routes and the uncertainties of their
future, would not only pray to local deities before embarking on their journeys but also
carry with them the deities’ statues or incense ash to take along on their travels to Southeast
Asia. As Amrith (2013 , p. 88) points out, “every migrant in a new place seeks to recreate
some trace of home; arrival becomes a kind of return. Building replicas of shrines they had
known, migrants made new landscapes familiar. Sharing rituals, they made intimates of
strangers. Seeing their journeys in the footsteps of holy men, they overcame their fears of
the unknown.”
Within the religious belief systems of these immigrant communities, the Sanping Pa‑
triarch belief constitutes a significant component. Its transnational dissemination has been
strongly driven by geographical proximity and kinship networks, consistently following
the migration routes of southern Fujian emigrants. Upon arriving in new settlements, Chi‑
nese migrants often organized native‑place associations and clan‑based societies based on
shared geographic origins and lineage ties. They also actively participated in rituals held
by temples and public cemeteries (Yishan 義山 ), all of which provided a vital social foun‑
dation for the propagation of the Sanping Patriarch belief abroad ( Song 2025 , p. 9).
According to incomplete statistics, there are a total of eleven temples or clan associ‑
ations in Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia that venerate the Sanping Patriarch as their
deity (Figure 4).

--- [Page 267] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 14 of 28
 
Figure 4. Spatial distribution of Sanping Patriarch temples in Southeast Asia. Sources: Compiled by
the author based on data from AngKongKeng.com and New Gazetteer of Sanping Temple ( Lu 2025 ).
Malaysia is a major destination for Chinese immigrants moving southward, mainly
due to its convenient maritime transportation. According to current data, there are four
temples or associations in Malaysia where Sanping Patriarch is enshrined as the princi‑
pal deity and an additional three temples where he is worshipped as a subsidiary deity
(Table 2).
Table 2. Temples and clan associations honoring Sanping Patriarch in Malaysia.
No. Temple Location Founding Year Principal Deity Subsidiary and Attendant Deities
1Poh Onn Kong
TempleMalacca 1781Sanping
PatriarchQingshui Patriarch, Mazu, the Serpent
Attendant, the Tiger Attendant, and others
2Chiang Chew
AssociationMalacca 1936Sanping
PatriarchShakyamuni Buddha, Qingshui Patriarch,
Guanyin, and others
3Chong Ann Teng
TempleMalacca 1970Sanping
PatriarchQingshui Patriarch, Guanyin, Mazu,
Datuk Gong, and others
4Nan Tian Temple
(Zu Shi Gong
Temple)Tanjung
Sepat,
Selangor1913Sanping
Patriarchthe Serpent Attendant, the Tiger
Attendant, Guanyin, and others
5Matang Hock
Chuan Keong
TempleTaiping,
Perak1895Three Loyal
Princes of the
SongSanping Patriarch, Qingshui Patriarch,
PuAn Patriarch, and others
6Aulong Hock Lok
Keng TempleTaiping,
Perak1929Qingshui
PatriarchSanping Patriarch, GuanDi, Datuk Gong,
and others
7Aulong Qing Yun
Tan TempleTaiping,
Perak1986Qingshui
PatriarchSanping Patriarch, SanDai Patriarch,
Datuk Gong, and others
Sources: Compiled by the author based on data from AngKongKeng.com and New Gazetteer of Sanping Temple
(Lu 2025 ).

--- [Page 268] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 15 of 28
Malacca, as a key port on the Malay Peninsula, holds significant geographical value in
connecting Eastern and Western trade routes. It also served as a significant settlement area
for Fujianese immigrants to Southeast Asia, becoming a crucial site for the establishment
and development of the Sanping Patriarch belief in the region. The Poh Onn Kong Tem‑
ple in Malacca epitomizes the transmission routes and early characteristics of the Sanping
Patriarch belief in Southeast Asia.
The Poh Onn Kong Temple in Malacca, established during the Qing Dynasty’s Qian‑
long period (1735–1796), is the earliest in the region dedicated to the Sanping Patriarch.
In the Qianlong reign, the father of Seow Kian Huat ( 蕭建發 ), from the Zhangzhou area,
brought the incense from Pinghe County’s Sanping Temple southward and installed it
in Malacca.
Centuries ago, the temple was situated by the bustling Malacca River, a vital passage
for merchants and travelers. It was not only a crossing point via a small suspension bridge
for residents on both sides of the river but also a settlement area for the Chinese commu‑
nity. The name “Poh Onn Kong Temple,” meaning “safeguarding,” reflects the devotees’
prayers for the Patriarch’s blessings of peace, epidemic protection, and safety. As such, the
temple became a spiritual center for early immigrant communities and, to a certain extent,
facilitated interaction and integration among different ethnic groups in the area.
According to the analysis of the 1841 stele inscription titled “Xiaodiaoqiao Zhongyuan
Pudu Re‑donation Commemorative Text” (Xiao Diao Qiao Zhong Yuan Pu Du Zai Juan
Yuan Xu Wen Mu Ban 小吊橋中元普渡再捐緣序文木板 ), all 84 donors were members of
southern Fujian communities from Zhangzhou and Quanzhou. Among them, the most sig‑
nificant contributor was Tan Kim Seng 陳金聲 —the third Tengzhu ( 亭主 ) of Cheng Hoon
Teng Temple 青雲亭 in Malacca and a native of Yongchun 永春 —followed by Chee Yam
Chuan徐炎泉 , the chairman ( 館主 ) of Malacca’s Hokkien Huay Kuan ( 福建會館 ), origi‑
nally from Longxi 龍溪 County ( Franke and Chen 1982 , p. 285). This situation indicates
that the community involved with the Poh Onn Kong Temple extended beyond solely
Zhangzhou natives and reflects the widespread influence of the Sanping Patriarch belief
within the Chinese community in Malacca, where it had already developed into a shared
and public form of Chinese religious belief.
The main deity worshipped in this temple is the Sanping Patriarch, with the Qing Shui
Patriarch and the Three Generations Patriarch (Sandai Patriarch 三代祖師 ) enshrined on
either side. Additionally, the temple also venerates several other deities, including Pu’an
Patriarch ( 普庵祖師 ) and Guangze Zun Wang ( 廣澤尊王 ). This diversity reflects, from an‑
other perspective, the openness and adaptability of immigrant communities in reshaping
their pantheon to accommodate the pluralistic religious and cultural environment of South‑
east Asia.
In Pinghe County’s Sanping Temple, a plaque with the inscription “Zhanghua Xian‑
rui” (樟花獻瑞 ) hangs in the Patriarch’s Hall, and a similar plaque can also be found in
the Poh Onn Kong Temple in Malacca, which additionally preserves a Talisman Stamp
dedicated to the Sanping Patriarch from the Guangxu reign (Figure 5). The inscriptions
cited here, based on a restored print from this block (Figure 6), further indicates a strong
historical connection between the two temples.
The Talisman Stamp is carved with images of the Serpent Attendant and the Tiger At‑
tendant, demonstrating that the belief in these two attendants was transmitted to Malacca
along with the worship of the Sanping Patriarch. In 2017, Poh Onn Kong Temple ceremo‑
nially invited the statues of the two attendants from Sanping Temple in Pinghe back to
the temple for enshrinement. On the one hand, this act signifies that the veneration of the
attendants had previously been interrupted in Poh Onn Kong Temple; on the other hand,
it reflects the temple’s strong desire to restore and complete the religious system surround‑

--- [Page 269] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 16 of 28
ing Sanping Patriarch. Emotionally, the act of restoring the statues of the attendants can
be seen as akin to an overseas child yearning for a family reunion, filled with deep longing
for a complete and unified belief.
Figure 5. Sanping Patriarch Talisman Stamp of Poh Onn Kong Temple20. Photograph courtesy of
Lui Poh Kwan.
The worship of the Sanping Patriarch spread to Indonesia along with trade and Chi‑
nese migration. The main centers include the Vihara Dharma Loka Temple in Makassar,
South Sulawesi; the Vihara Khema Tjouw Soe Kong Temple in Jakarta; and the See Hin
Kiong Temple in Padang, West Sumatra.
The Vihara Dharma Loka Temple was founded in 1655 by Yang Lai Mai 楊來邁 , a
native of Nanjing 南靖 , Zhangzhou. It is the earliest overseas branch of Sanping Temple
(Lu 2010 , p. 259). Its establishment marked the beginning of the transnational spread of
the belief, providing Zhangzhou immigrants with a cultural and emotional link to their
ancestral homeland.

--- [Page 270] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 17 of 28
 
Figure 6. A printed talisman from the ritual stamp21. Note: The stamp itself has been restored prior
to this printing. Photograph by the author.
The Vihara Khema Tjouw Soe Kong Temple22in Jakarta was founded in the late Qing
period (1840–1912), located in Indonesia’s capital city and near the coast. It not only serves
as a religious center for the local Chinese community but also reflects cross‑ethnic inter‑
action. Susilo ’s (2024 , p. 7) field research notes that “in addition to the incense burners
essential for Chinese worship, the temple’s altar also features traditional Indonesian in‑
cense burners (kemenyan), allowing people to choose their mode of worship according to
their customs”. Moreover, the temple sustains its daily operations by utilizing its spare
spaces for business and economic purposes ( Susilo 2015 , p. 12).
Both of these temples enshrine the Sanping Patriarch as their principal deity. Addi‑
tionally, the See Hin Kiong Temple in Padang, West Sumatra, Indonesia, venerates San‑
ping Patriarch as a subsidiary deity. The founding histories of these temples, the routes
through which Sanping Patriarch belief was transmitted locally, and their influence on
both the Chinese communities and interethnic relations in their respective regions all merit
further research.
In summary, the early dissemination and rooting of the Sanping Patriarch belief in
Southeast Asia primarily relied on overseas Chinese immigrant communities and com‑

--- [Page 271] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 18 of 28
mercial networks. Its vitality lies not only in the continued transmission from the ancestral
temple but also in its capacity to adapt and innovate within a multicultural environment.
The following section will further analyze the distinctive localization characteristics that
have emerged in Southeast Asia, including the integration of deity lineages, functional
expansion, and innovations in religious practices.
4.2. Localization of Belief in Southeast Asia
The localization process of the Sanping Patriarch belief in Southeast Asia is the result
of its interaction with the region’s diverse social environment. As such, it manifests dis‑
tinctive features. One important aspect lies in the integration of pantheons. In Southeast
Asian countries, the Sanping Patriarch is worshipped alongside both the original southern
Fujian and traditional Chinese deities, as well as local deities such as Malaysia’s “Datuk
Gong.” Datuk Gong’s belief is Chinese in origin but also distinctly Malaysian, reflecting
the dual identity of the Chinese community in Malaysia as both ethnically Chinese and na‑
tionally Malaysian ( Tan 2020 , p. 70). Early Sanping temples in Malacca mainly enshrined
southern Fujian and Chinese deities, whereas later temples such as Chong Ann Teng Tem‑
ple (established 1970) incorporated Datuk Gong, Tan and Toh (2021 , pp. 621–28) state:
“The Chinese adoption of Datuk Gong worship, beginning in the mid‑nineteenth century,
reflects a blend of cultural adaptation and reverence for local traditions”. The inclusion of
Datuk Gong increased participation from non‑Chinese residents. For example, in Malacca,
the Machap Baru’s 1960s Datuk Gong birthday eve united Chinese, Malay, and Indian
devotees through film screenings and ronggeng dances. On the birthday itself, regardless
of the distance between their home and Machap, all the devotees invariably gathered at the
Datuk Gong temple, halal‑compliant offerings were prepared, and incense prayers were
conducted ( Wang et al. 2020 , p. 218).
Similar strategies appear in Indonesia; for instance, the Vihara Khema Tjouw Soe
Kong Temple in Jakarta incorporates indigenous spirits such as Ibu Eneng and Embah
Said Areli Dato Kembang (perhaps a Muslim Chinese of the entourage of Admiral Cheng
Ho—and his wife Ibu Eneng; Heuken 1989 , p. 137), who were Indonesians. Several other
temples in Java also worship these deities. Their altars contain no statues, as Indonesians
traditionally worship them while believing they are Muslims ( Susilo 2024 , p. 7). This in‑
corporation of local Muslim saints into Chinese temples essentially represents a survival
strategy for the belief system within a multicultural context. As Setiawan (2024 , p. 13)
observes, “such phenomena reflect the visiting Chinese community’s expectation for mul‑
ticultural coexistence,” while further expanding the belief’s cross‑ethnic influence through
localization.
Equally significant is the functional expansion of the belief within Chinese diasporic
communities. The Sanping Patriarch is not only regarded as a religious refuge but also
plays a role in uniting the Chinese diaspora and preserving Chinese cultural heritage.
Against the backdrop of a declining proportion of ethnic Chinese in Malaysia, temples
are regarded as cultural symbols that bear the responsibility of safeguarding Chinese tra‑
ditions ( Tan 2025 , p. 25). This symbolic role is reinforced through public welfare and
charitable activities.
For example, the Sanping Patriarch’s birthday celebration at Poh Onn Kong Temple
occurs on the sixth day of the sixth lunar month. On the day of the Patriarch’s birthday,
the temple hosts a ritual to pray for blessings by touching a turtle23(Figure 7), which is
believed to bring good luck to the person and their family. After the completion of the
Blessing Turtle Ceremony at the Poh Onn Kong Temple in Malacca, part of the rice collected
during the event is distributed to worshippers for their safety and blessings. At the same

--- [Page 272] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 19 of 28
time, the remainder is generously donated to elderly care homes, orphanages, and refugee
groups regardless of ethnicity.
The temple also engages in disaster relief, elder care, educational support, and other
charitable activities, embodying the spirit of Sanping Patriarch’s “compassion and broad
charity” (Cibei Weihuai, Guangshi Jikun 慈悲為懷，廣施濟困 ). Such initiatives not only
expand the religious space but also help the Chinese community build a positive image
within multicultural societies, facilitating integration into mainstream society. Organiza‑
tions such as the Chiang Chew Association in Malacca likewise offer scholarships to mem‑
bers’ children, further strengthening community cohesion.
 
Figure 7. The “Begging Turtle” (Qigui 乞龜 ) ritual at Poh Onn Kong Temple, Malacca. The ritual is
conducted in the central square of the temple complex. The main gate, visible in the background of
this photograph, features a Chinese couplet on its pillars. The partially visible characters “ 國” (guo,
state) and “ 民” (min, people) form part of this couplet, which in full reads “ 保國安民 ” (bao guo an
min)—a principle expressing the ideal of “protecting the state and bringing peace to the people.”
Photograph courtesy of Lui Poh Kwan.
In addition to pantheon integration and functional expansion, localization is also
reflected in innovation in religious practices. The Poh Onn Kong Temple in Malacca
actively utilizes multiple digital platforms—Facebook, YouTube, TikTok, and its official
website—to broadcast pilgrimage events and promote various activities. In 2023, the tem‑
ple hosted a “Guangji”‑themed short video competition, receiving over 20 submissions;
the winning entries were used as promotional videos for the temple. Moreover, in June
2025, it organized a children’s coloring contest titled “Little Helpers of the Deities, Big
Love Giveaway,” aiming to convey the Sanping Patriarch’s compassionate spirit through
creative works and attract younger generations of devotees.
At the same time, the temple has established a “History Corridor” integrating mod‑
ern technology, where visitors can scan QR codes to access information about the temple’s
history and deities. It has digitized its artifacts and archival materials, extending the dis‑
semination of belief from traditional community networks into the digital cultural space.
Additionally, the temple hosts thematic lectures on “The Folk Culture of the Turtle,” offers
workshops for handcrafting incense, and publishes cultural books such as Ageless Benev‑
olence: A Temple’s Heritage. This blend of traditional and digital approaches not only
deepens the public’s understanding and recognition of the culture of Sanping Patriarch but
also effectively promotes the inheritance and development of traditional Chinese culture.

--- [Page 273] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 20 of 28
4.3. Interaction with the Ancestral Temple in Southeast Asia
Branch temples of the Sanping Patriarch in Southeast Asia maintain rich relations with
the ancestral temple in Fujian. These overseas branch temples actively undertake pilgrim‑
ages to Fujian to trace their roots and enthusiastically participate in various celebrations
hosted by the ancestral temple. This transmission and interaction are sustained through
ancestral incense‑offering rituals and migrant networks, which not only preserve the pu‑
rity of the original homeland belief but also foster unique cultural integration within the
branch temple spaces.
For example, in 2017 and 2024, members of the Poh Onn Kong Temple council re‑
turned to Sanping Temple in Pinghe County to respectfully receive the incense and statues
of the two guardian deities—the Serpent Attendant and the Tiger Attendant. Such cross‑
border ritual activities reinforce transnational belief networks and strengthen the cultural
ties between migrant communities and their homeland.
In recent years, the Poh Onn Kong Temple in Malacca has actively promoted the host‑
ing of the Sanping Patriarch Cultural Festival in Malacca, aiming to enhance information
exchange and experience sharing between the ancestral temple and branch temples world‑
wide, thereby jointly advancing the sustainable development of Sanping Patriarch belief
both domestically and abroad.
Through an analysis of the various Sanping Patriarch temples in Southeast Asia, it
is evident that there exists a profound and enduring link of inheritance between these
temples and the ancestral temple in Pinghe County. While preserving traditional customs
from their homeland, the branch temples also integrate local cultural elements, such as the
worship of Datuk Gong.
The worshippers also represent a diverse demographic, not limited to Fujianese Chi‑
nese but also encompassing people of other ethnicities and linguistic backgrounds. For ex‑
ample, the Poh Onn Kong Temple in Malacca includes a small number of Indian devotees.
These branch temples are also actively engaged in charitable and public welfare activities
and sustain the vitality of the Sanping Patriarch belief through cultural innovation.
5. Discussion
Based on the study in the preceding chapters, this section provides a comparative
analysis of the transmission patterns, localization characteristics, and social functions of the
Sanping Patriarch belief across three regions: the ancestral temple in Fujian, Taiwan, and
Southeast Asia. It aims to reveal the commonalities, differences, and underlying causes
behind these regional variations.
5.1. Commonalities
The Sanping Patriarch belief has consistently preserved its core “Sanping” spirit—
pacifying rebellion, warding off epidemics, and ensuring peace—across the ancestral tem‑
ple, Taiwan, and Southeast Asia. Devotees in all three regions share an intense devotion
to the Patriarch’s compassionate mission of universal salvation and his protective role
in averting disasters and invoking blessings. As the spiritual “root” for branch temples
around the world, the ancestral temple symbolizes the orthodoxy and legitimacy of the
belief tradition. At the same time, the Sanping Patriarch belief functions as a crucial cul‑
tural bond—maintaining kinship ties, reinforcing cultural identity, and transmitting Chi‑
nese heritage. While the emphasis on the Serpent and Tiger Attendants varies by region,
these guardian figures are widely venerated in both Fujian and Taiwan. In Southeast Asia,
however, due to historical discontinuities, they exist primarily as symbolic representations,
reflecting a fundamental continuity of core mythological elements. This demonstrates that

--- [Page 274] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 21 of 28
although local practices may vary, the presence of shared elements ensures the continuity
of a core religious identity across time and space.
5.2. Differences
The Sanping Patriarch belief demonstrates remarkable adaptability in the process of
cross‑cultural transmission. Due to regional differences in historical, political, economic,
and cultural contexts, it exhibits distinct variations across six dimensions: (1) transmis‑
sion mechanisms, (2) sources of devotees, (3) mythological symbols, (4) divine roles and
functions of the Patriarch, (5) core ritual practices, and (6) social functions. Through an
examination of these dimensions, we gain a clearer understanding of how this belief has
sustained its influence across different societies.
1. Differences in transmission mechanisms. In Fujian, the propagation of the Sanping
Patriarch belief has been driven mainly by local government initiatives, including her‑
itage branding, scenic site management, and festival‑based cultural promotion. As
Chia (2022 , p. 88) has noted, “the Sanping Patriarch belief became an invented tra‑
dition during this period for expanded religious tourism in Pinghe County.” In Tai‑
wan, the transmission is centered on clan networks and community integration, with
the belief serving as an essential bond that sustains internal cohesion within kinship
groups and facilitates external social relations. In Southeast Asia, dissemination has
depended on commercial networks and migrant communities, where the belief has
transcended ethnic boundaries through cultural adaptation in multi‑ethnic societies.
Such variations illustrate how social structures and contextual conditions shape the
pathways of religious transmission.
2. Differences in the sources of devotees. At the ancestral temple, devotees are primar‑
ily concentrated in traditional centers of belief such as Zhangzhou, Quanzhou, and
Chaozhou in Guangdong. In Taiwan, the followers primarily consist of descendants
of Zhangzhou and Quanzhou immigrants, continuing a strong sense of ancestral‑
place identity. In Southeast Asia, however, due to the region’s multi‑ethnic social
structure, the multi‑ethnic outreach extends beyond the Chinese diaspora. For exam‑
ple, Indian visitors at Poh Onn Kong Temple in Malacca participate in the Patriarch’s
birthday celebrations and engage in practices such as incense offerings and divina‑
tion. In Jakarta, the Vihara Khema Tjouw Soe Kong Temple attracts non‑Chinese
communities—including Muslims—by incorporating local deities such as Ibu Eneng,
blending cultural elements to foster broader appeal. Thus, the sources of devotees
not only reflect historical migration patterns but also shape the strategies of religious
dissemination.
3. Differences in the interpretation of mythological symbols. Both Fujian and Taiwan
continue the tradition of venerating the Serpent and Tiger Attendants as guardian
figures of the Patriarch, primarily tasked with protecting devotees by patrolling ter‑
ritories, warding off evil, and ensuring safety. In Taiwan, these figures have further
evolved through localized myth‑making, such as incorporating the historical figure
Yang Wulang into the Patriarch’s narrative. In Southeast Asia, however, due to a
rupture in the transmission of the attendant deities and the absence of supporting
mythological narratives, these figures are retained more as symbolic representations
of ancestral temple culture rather than active components of local religious imagi‑
nation. This comparison highlights the profound influence of local history on the
depiction and functions of mythological figures.
4. Differences in divine roles and functions of the Patriarch. In the ancestral temple in
Fujian, the Sanping Patriarch is worshipped primarily as both a rain deity and a heal‑
ing deity, retaining a distinct divine identity. In Taiwan, however, joint worship with

--- [Page 275] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 22 of 28
other Patriarchs—such as Qingshui Patriarch—has led to a blurring of his original
divine roles. Additionally, historical migration has endowed him with a unique func‑
tion as a maritime protector. In Southeast Asia, the Patriarch is worshipped alongside
local deities such as Datuk Gong and Embah Said Areli Dato Kembang but still main‑
tains his independent divine status. These differences reveal the dynamic nature of
divine attributes, which continuously evolve through regional interactions and mul‑
ticultural exchanges.
5. Differences in core ritual practices. The ancestral temple in Fujian strictly adheres
to the traditional “Three Sixes” ritual calendar in commemorating the Patriarch. In
contrast, some branch temples in Taiwan do not follow the birthday date of the Pa‑
triarch as set by the ancestral temple. For instance, Fei’an Temple in Danei celebrates
the deity’s birthday on the eighth day of the fourth lunar month. Such adjustments
reflect both the need to accommodate local circumstances and the incorporation of
innovative elements. For example, Sanping Temple in Zhushan Township has intro‑
duced modern performances—such as the Techno Prince Parade dance and contem‑
porary song‑and‑dance shows—into its birthday celebrations, successfully attracting
younger generations. Temples in Southeast Asia, on the other hand, continue to ob‑
serve the original date of the sixth day of the sixth lunar month. At the same time,
they adapt traditions through ritual reinvention—for instance, combining the turtle
petitioning ritual with charitable activities. While both Taiwan and Southeast Asia
sustain the vitality of belief through innovation, the former emphasizes cultural con‑
tinuity, whereas the latter prioritizes the expansion of social functions. This compari‑
son indicates that ritual practices mediate the tension between traditional continuity
and contemporary needs.
6. Differences in the transformation of social functions. In Fujian, the modernization of
the Sanping Patriarch belief has been led by local government efforts, incorporating
it into the intangible cultural heritage system and promoting the conversion of reli‑
gious resources into economic capital. At the same time, the core “Sanping” spirit
has been reinterpreted with modern values—such as “peace of mind, equality for all
beings, and a lifetime of safety” ( Zhou 2025 , p. 99)—to align with contemporary so‑
cial governance objectives. With administrative support and financial resources, the
influence of the belief has been significantly expanded. In Taiwan, branch temples
rely on clan‑based networks and operate under community self‑governance models
that strengthen local identity. While this model limits broader influence, it main‑
tains intense grassroots penetration through close‑knit community ties. In Southeast
Asia, the belief has evolved into a public religion by promoting interethnic integration
through charitable and community service activities. Despite the absence of official
funding, its vitality is sustained through flexible practices—such as spreading belief
content via short videos on TikTok and organizing mutual aid programs—ensuring
the continued relevance of the Sanping Patriarch belief within multicultural societies.
The social functions of this belief show that religious institutions adapt strategically
while preserving their cultural core.
The above differences are not accidental but stem from the distinct historical back‑
grounds and social conditions of the three regions. The first factor is migration history
and origins: Taiwan’s population mainly descends from Zhangzhou and Quanzhou immi‑
grants, whereas the Chinese communities in Southeast Asia often exist as ethnic minorities,
leading to divergent transmission paths and adaptation strategies. The second factor is re‑
ligious policy: Taiwan’s relatively relaxed religious regulations combined with its strong
Chinese cultural traditions provide fertile ground for the belief, while in Southeast Asia,
the belief must navigate a competitive multi‑religious environment to secure its survival

--- [Page 276] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 23 of 28
space. The third factor is cultural interaction: the varying degrees of cultural inclusiveness
and interaction across regions also shape the depth and scope of the belief’s integration.
Together, these underlying factors reveal the intrinsic logic behind the Sanping Patriarch
belief’s cross‑regional diversification.
Through comparative study, it is evident that the cross‑regional persistence and de‑
velopment of the Sanping Patriarch belief depend on a dynamic balance between “mainte‑
nance of orthodoxy” and “local innovation.” This dialectical relationship is not a passive
compromise but a creative transformation realized through interactive processes. On one
hand, the belief in identity is upheld by mechanisms such as the branch incense system
and fixed birthday dates; on the other, local elements are actively incorporated to enhance
contemporary adaptability—such as the Techno Prince Parade dance in Taiwan and char‑
itable activities in Southeast Asia. It is precisely this cultural resilience and capacity for
innovation that have sustained the continuous development of the belief system.
6. Conclusions
This study reveals the intrinsic mechanisms of the cross‑regional transmission of Chi‑
nese folk religion by comparatively analyzing the dissemination and localization prac‑
tices of the Sanping Patriarch belief in the ancestral temples of Fujian, Taiwan, and South‑
east Asia.
The vitality of this belief lies in the integration of the core “Sanping spirit” (pacifica‑
tion, epidemic relief, and safeguarding) with pragmatic social functions, forming a stable
foundation for its transmission. This dual sacred and secular nature enables the belief to
adapt flexibly to diverse social needs. At the same time, divergent transmission paths have
emerged as a result of geopolitical, economic, and cultural conditions: the revival in Fujian
relies primarily on administrative resources; the Taiwanese communities mentioned above
depend on clan and kinship networks; and the continuation of the belief in Southeast Asia
draws on commercial networks and migrant communities. Together, these factors have
shaped the distinctive trajectories of the Sanping Patriarch belief.
Equally important is the dynamic interplay between “orthodoxy preservation” and
“localized innovation”. Practices such as incense pilgrimage to the ancestral temple and
fixed commemorative dates ensure continuity with tradition, while local adaptations—
including electronic parade troupes or joint worship with Datuk Gong—inject vitality into
the belief system. The transformation from material carriers, such as talisman boards, to
digital platforms such as YouTube further transcends temporal and spatial boundaries, re‑
shaping the modes of believer participation.
Finally, the cross‑cultural transmission of folk religion involves a process of cultural
reconstruction that blends local narratives with universal values. In the case of the San‑
ping Patriarch belief, stories of Serpent and Tiger Attendants are integrated with ideals
of compassion and widespread salvation, creating a multilayered religious structure. The
catalytic role of such mythological figures in sustaining and disseminating the belief, al‑
though often overlooked, deserves closer scholarly attention.
By comparatively examining the ancestral temple in Fujian, Taiwan, and Southeast
Asia, this research broadens the regional perspective of Sanping Patriarch belief studies. It
highlights the dialectic between “orthodoxy preservation” and “localized innovation” as
a key mechanism in the cross‑cultural transmission of Chinese folk religion.
This study is based on a literature review and preliminary fieldwork. Future research
will intensify field investigations in Southeast Asia to collect more firsthand data and fur‑
ther uncover the mechanisms of the Sanping Patriarch belief’s cross‑cultural adaptation in
diverse religious contexts.

--- [Page 277] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 24 of 28
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: I extend my sincere gratitude to Lui Poh Kwan of Poh Onn Kong Temple,
Malacca, Malaysia, for his valuable assistance in facilitating the interviews and data collection. This
manuscript was published in the special issue “Beyond the ‘Spice Routes’: Indic and Sinitic Re‑
ligions across the Asian Maritime Realm”, with Andrea Acri and Francesco Bianchini serving as
guest editors.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflicts of interest.
Notes
1As encapsulated in the principle yougong ze si (有功則祀 , those with merit shall be worshipped), the Liji (Book of Rites) prescribes
sacrificial honors for five categories of merit: “ 法施于民則祀之 (lawgivers), 以死勤事則祀之 (diligent martyrs), 以勞定國則祀之
(state stabilizers), 能禦大災則祀之 (calamity averters), 能捍大患則祀之 (disaster resisters)” Liji·Jifa(《礼记·祭法》 ).
2Dong Ligong identified three characteristics of the belief in the Sanping Patriarch in Taiwan: First, followers of Confucianism,
Buddhism, and Taoism all worship the Sanping Patriarch, and they even mix their respective deities with him in joint rituals.
Second, while the establishment of Sanping Patriarch temples in Taiwan began early, their development was slow. Third, the
belief in the Sanping Patriarch is more widespread in southern Taiwan than in the north and central regions, which is closely
related to the migration routes of Zhangzhou immigrants to Taiwan. The author did not further analyze the reasons for the slow
development of Sanping Patriarch temples in Taiwan ( Dong 2013 , pp. 29–32).
3Hsieh analyzed the origins of the belief in the Sanping Patriarch in Taiwan and the types of rituals associated with his worship
in Taiwan. However, the study did not compare the belief and worship of the Sanping Patriarch in Taiwan with that in Fujian
(Hsieh 2017 ).
4Chang introduced several Sanping Patriarch temples in Taiwan and analyzed the differences between the Sanping Patriarch
temples in Taiwan and those in Fujian. The differences highlighted include the following: first, not all Sanping Patriarch temples
in Taiwan enshrine the attendants; second, the depictions of Sanping Patriarch and the attendants differ from those in Fujian
temples; and third, the celebration dates of the Patriarch’s birthday vary. However, the author did not elaborate on the reasons
for these differences ( Chang 2020 ).
5Yan analyzes the formation, development, and influencing factors of the Sanping Patriarch belief. She outlines its dissemination
path and explores its modern transformation in connection with the tourism industry. Her research adopts a linear historical
narrative, whereas my study moves beyond this linear approach by introducing the analytical tools of “orthodoxy preservation”
and “localized innovation” to conduct a comparative regional analysis ( Yan 2001 , pp. 114–20).
6Hsieh’s research provides a systematic examination of the development of the Sanping Patriarch belief. He begins by analyzing
the formation, evolution, and dissemination of the belief. Then he focuses on the Taiwanese context by tracing the historical
lineages of local temples to clarify the trajectory of its development. Finally, by comparing the ancestral temple in mainland
China with its branch temples in Taiwan—particularly in terms of incense transmission, pantheon composition, temple naming
practices, and birthday celebrations—Hsieh identifies the unique features of the Sanping Patriarch belief in Taiwan and offers
an in‑depth analysis of the factors contributing to its localized formation ( Hsieh 2025 ).
7Song’s research provides a historical account of Poh Onn Kong Temple, Chong Ann Teng Temple, and the Chiang Chew As‑
sociation in Malacca. By examining the origins of the deities worshipped at Chong Ann Teng Temple and the native places of
temple staff, he infers that the majority of devotees likely came from the southern Fujian region, particularly from Zhangzhou
and Quanzhou ( Song 2025 ).
8Tan’s study constructs the pantheon position of the Sanping Patriarch. It offers a historical overview of Poh Onn Kong Temple,
the Chiang Chew Association, and Chong Ann Teng Temple in Malacca, along with the deities worshipped in these institu‑
tions. Notably, she provides a detailed discussion of the Tudi Gong (Earth Deity) venerated at these sites. Tan argues that
traditional Chinese religious beliefs continue to constitute the dominant belief system within Malaysian Chinese communities
today ( Tan 2025 ).
9Zheng Laifa provides a historical account of Poh Onn Kong Temple and analyzes its ritual network and historical transformations
through the use of inscriptional evidence from the temple’s renovation steles ( Zheng 2025 ).
10Serpent Attendant: In the main hall and pagoda hall of Sanping Temple in Pinghe County, two standing attendants are placed
beside the deity of Sanping Patriarch. The Serpent Attendant has both hands in a prayer position, glaring fiercely, exuding an
aura of dignity and power; the Tiger Attendant bares its fangs, with a fierce expression, holding a magical staff and watching
menacingly. According to legend, when Sanping Patriarch first arrived at Sanping Mountain, while working in the vegetable
garden, a serpent would often circle him and refuse to leave. One day, the Patriarch asked the serpent, “ Are you a spirit snake?
If so, nod your head.” The serpent nodded three times, and the Patriarch took it back to the temple to tame it. Later, the spirit

--- [Page 278] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 25 of 28
not only caught rats but also protected the villagers. The local people grew fond of the spirit and carved the statue of the Serpent
Attendant to be placed beside the statue of Sanping Patriarch for worship ( Lu 2008 , p. 117).
11Tiger Attendant: According to legend, a colorful, thousand‑year‑old tiger monster appeared in the Sanping Tiger Forest. Due to
its failed cultivation, it often came out to harm humans and livestock. When Sanping Patriarch captured it, it suddenly begged
for mercy. Sanping Patriarch took it back to the temple, tamed it, and made it his attendant. From then on, the Tiger Attendant
protected the peace of the surrounding areas. Grateful for its contributions, the people carved a statue of the Tiger Attendant
and placed it beside the statue of Sanping Patriarch for veneration ( Lu 2008 , p. 119).
12The Bamin Tongzhi (General Gazetteer of the Eight Min), under the section on “Mountains and Rivers”, describes: “Sanping
Mountain is characterized by deep and rugged valleys. Those who ascend must pass through three dangerous areas before
reaching the summit, which is why it is named Sanping. The Tang monk Yizhong built the Sanping Temple. At the top, there are
the Turtle and Serpent Peaks (Guishe Feng 龜蛇峰 ), Immortal Pavilion (Xianren Ting 仙人亭 ), Monk’s Pool (Heshang Tan 和尚潭 ),
Nine‑Layer Rock (Jiuceng Yan 九層岩 ), Twin Horn Mountain (Shuangji Shan 雙髻山 ), Gao Ke Ridge (Gaoke Ling 高柯嶺 ), Tea
Boiling Hollow (Jiancha Wu 煎茶塢 ), Minister’s Pavilion (Shilang Ting 侍郎亭 ), Tiger Claw Spring (Hupa Quan 虎爬泉 ), Staff
Tree (Xizhang Shu 錫杖樹 ), and Great Uncle Mountain (Dabo Shan 大伯山 ), making a total of eleven wonders” ( Huang 2006 ,
p. 210).
13During the Ming Xuande 宣德 reign, in order to pray for rain, the statue of Sanping Patriarch was brought by the villagers,
and when passing through Fushan Zongdapingshe, they stopped and did not continue. Later, the villagers built a tem‑
ple to enshrine the statue of the ancestor. In times of drought, they would pray for rain in front of the statue. If they re‑
ceived permission, they would carry the statue around the surrounding area, and rain would come every time, without fail.
明宣德間因迎師像祈雨，過浮山總大坪社，遂止不去，鄉人築寺祀之。遇旱向像前乞茭可，則擁像繞境，呼雨無不應者 (Yao and
Li 2000 , p. 401).
14In the Wanli 萬曆 reign, Wang Zhidao 王志道 also visited Sanping Temple to pray for a child, and he received a miraculous result.
It is found in his 1607 colophon appended to the stele. See Wang Feng, Stele of the Reconstruction Records of Master Guangji of
Sanping, in Zheng and Dean, eds., Compilation of Religious Inscriptions from Fujian (Zhangzhou Prefecture Volume), 1507.
15In the tenth year of the Ming Xuande 宣德 reign (1435), a plague ravaged Shancheng 山城 . The residents respectfully invited the
Guangji Patriarch from Pinghe Sanping Temple to arrive, where he provided medical treatment and dispensed medicine, saving
countless lives. In the second year of the Ming Zhengtong 正統 reign (1437), a temple was built in the middle section of Mai Zai
Street麥仔街 in the city to enshrine and worship the deity of Sanping Patriarch.
16According to the Stele Inscription of Li Muqing’s Donation of Paddy Rent for the Lamp Offerings to Zushi Gong and Marshal
Temple ( Li Muqing Xishe Tianzu Fengwei Zushigong Yuanshuaige Xiangdeng Beiji ) dated to the 18th year of the Qianlong reign
(1753), Li Muqing donated land to support lamp offerings at the Anjiao Zhongzhuang Zushigong Temple (present‑day Sanping
Temple in Xiyan Village, Yanchao District, Kaohsiung) and the Marshal Temple. This indicates that the Sanping Zushigong
Temple already existed before the stele’s erection. The inscription thus stands as the earliest known documentary evidence of a
Sanping Patriarch temple in Taiwan ( National Central Library, Taiwan Branch 1784 ).
17The “Three Sixes” refer to the three commemorative dates of Sanping Patriarch, which are: the sixth day of the first lunar month,
marking his birth anniversary; the sixth day of the sixth lunar month, commemorating his ordination; and the sixth day of the
eleventh lunar month, marking the anniversary of his liberation from wordly existence.
18In 1959, the temple construction committee raised a total of 40,000 yuan, and the temple was completed that same year. See
http://www.nanchens.com/qszs/qzsz03/qzsz03034.htm . (accessed on 31 October 2024).
19Interview with Mr. Lin, Sanping Guangji Temple, Tainan City, via WeChat, 20 June 2025.
20Figure 5shows the carved wooden block, which bears reversed (mirror‑image) Chinese characters, as is typical of the wood‑
block printing process. For ease of reading, the characters can be seen in their correct orientation on the printed talisman paper
produced from this block (Figure 6).
21The following description proceeds from the top downward and from the center outward. (1) Main Plaque and Deity. The central
vertical plaque reads “Imperially Bestowed Title: Guangji Patriarch” ( 勅封廣濟祖師 ), a Tang‑dynasty honorific that identifies
the principal deity as the Sanping Patriarch. (2) Upper Couplets. Right couplet: “The Dharma Is Boundless” ( 佛法無邊 ). Left
couplet: “Universally Delivering All Beings” ( 普救萬民 ). These lines extol the infinite scope of the Buddha’s teaching and its
universal salvific power. (3) Side Inscriptions of Blessing. Upper right: “Protecting the Household” ( 鎮宅 ), expressing a wish
for domestic safety. Upper left: “Radiant Light” ( 光明 ), invoking purity and auspicious illumination. (4) Architectural Details.
The roof plaques bear the local place‑names “Gapo” ( 呷坡 ) and “Podi” ( 坡底 ), indicating the Malacca location of the Poh Onn
Kong Temple ( 保安宫 ). The central horizontal plaque reads “Fragrant Camphor Offers Auspiciousness” ( 樟花獻瑞 ), a phrase
also found in the Fujian ancestral temple, highlighting the close link between the two sites. Lanterns on either side read “The
Sanping Patriarch of Poh Onn Kong Temple” ( 保安宮三坪祖師 ), confirming the deity venerated. (5) Couplet beside the Patriarch.
Right: “The Pagoda Is Pure Not Because It Is Swept” ( 塔淨因非掃 ). Left: “The Bell Hangs Though Not Yet Struck” ( 鐘懸聽未敲 ).
This expresses Chan (Zen) thought: true purity arises from the mind itself, yet realization still calls for deliberate practice. (6)

--- [Page 279] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 26 of 28
Incense Burner Inscription. The front bears “Majestic and Manifest Spirit Power” ( 威靈顯赫 ), signifying the deity’s potent and
evident divine authority. Overall, this talisman embodies the fusion of Buddhist and local folk traditions, conveying prayers for
household safety, spiritual clarity, and the protective presence of the Sanping Patriarch.
22While Susilo (2024 ) links the temple’s location to health, feng shui, and Quanzhou patrons and identifies Qingshui Patriarch as its
main deity, earlier research by Setiawan and Hay (1990 , p. 282) confirms that the deity is Guangji Patriarch (Sanping Patriarch).
23The “Begging Turtle” ( 乞龜 ) is a life‑like turtle shape constructed from bags of white rice, each with a fixed weight. The structure
is carefully arranged with a Seven Stars Formation on both sides of the turtle and in front of the temple gates. After the consecra‑
tion ceremony, the directors and devout believers begin to touch the turtle to pray for blessings. The ritual requires participants
to follow a clockwise direction, starting at the turtle’s head, and circling to touch its entire body. Touching the head symbolizes
the beginning of prosperity, touching the legs represents rising in status, caressing the shell signifies longevity, and touching
the tail signifies abundant wealth. At the end of the ceremony, the devotees cleanse their hands in the Seven Stars Formation’s
well, a gesture symbolizing prosperity and the successful completion of their wishes.
References
Amrith, Sunil S. 2013. Crossing the Bay of Bengal: The Furies of Nature and the Fortunes of Migrants . Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Chang, Chi‑Shiang 張志相 . 2010. Taiwan Sanping Zushi Xinyang Qiyuan Wenti Xintan—Sanping Yizhong Yu Sanpingsi
臺灣三平祖師信仰起源問題新探 —三平義中與三平寺 [New Findings on the Origin of Belief in the San Ping Master in Taiwan].
Shumin Wenhua Yanjiu 庶民文化研究 Journal for Studies of Everyday Life 2: 37–76.
Chang, Chi‑Shiang 張志相 . 2020. Taiwan Minjian Xinyang De Fojiao Yinyuan—Sanping Yu Cankui Zushi Yanjiu 臺灣民間信仰的佛教因緣
—三坪與慚愧祖師研究 [Buddhist Affinities in Taiwanese Folk Beliefs: A Study of Sanping and the Cankui Patriarch]. Taichung:
Fengrao Cultural Publishing.
Chang, Pin‑Tsun. 2019. The rise of Chinese mercantile power in maritime Southeast Asia, c. 1400–1700. In China and Southeast Asia:
Historical Interactions . Edited by Geoff Wade and James k. Chin. London: Routledge, pp. 221–40.
Chia, Jack Meng‑Tat. 2022. The Making of a Local Deity: The Patriarch of Sanping’s Cult in Post‑Mao China, 1979–2015. Critical Asian
Studies 54: 86–104.
Dong, Ligong 董立功 . 2013. Taiwan Sanping Zushi Xinyang Chutan 臺灣三平祖師信仰初探 [An initial exploration of the belief in
Sanping Patriarch in Taiwan]. Fujian Shizhi 福建史志 Fujian Historical Gazetteer 1: 29–32.
Franke, Wolfgang, and Tieh Fan Chen, eds. 1982. Chinese Epigraphic Materials in Malaysia 馬來西亞華文銘刻彙編 . Kuala Lumpur:
University of Malaya Press.
Fukami, Sumio. 2004. The long 13th century of Tambralinga: From Javaka to Siam. Memoirs of the Research Department of the Toyo
Bunko 62: 45–79.
Guo, Zhichao 郭志超 . 2013. Sanping Zushi Jiansi Yu Sanping Chongshe Xintan 三平祖師建寺與三坪崇蛇新探 [The Construction of
Temples by Sanping Patriarch and a New Exploration of the Sanping Serpent Worship]. Mintai Wenhua Yanjiu 閩台文化研究
Fujian‑Taiwan Cultural Research 3: 12–19.
Hansen, Valerie. 1990. Changing Gods in Medieval China, 1127–1276 . Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Heuken, Adolf. 1989. Historical Sights of Jakarta , 3rd ed. Petaling Jaya: Times Books International.
Hsieh, Kuei‑wen 謝貴文 . 2025. Sanping Zushi Xinyang Zai Taiwan De Fazhan Yu Tese 三平祖師信仰在臺灣的發展與特色 [Sanping
Patriarch belief in Taiwan: Development and characteristics]. In Sanping Zushi Wenhua Yanjiu 三平祖師文化研究 [Studies on
Sanping Patriarch Culture]. Edited by Yun Liu and Wenshen Lu. Hong Kong: Chinese Review Academic Press.
Hsieh, Yu‑mei 謝玉美 . 2017. Sanping Zushi Xinyang Jiqi Zai Taiwan De Fazhan 三平祖師信仰及其在臺灣的發展 [The Worship of
San‑ping Zushi and Its Later Development in Taiwan]. Master’s thesis, Hsuan Chuang University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, China.
Hu, Jinwang 胡金望 . 2011. Sanpingsi Wenhua Jiedu 三平寺文化解讀 [An Interpretation of Sanping Temple Culture]. Zhangzhou Shifan
Xueyuan Xuebao(Zhexue Shehui Kexue Ban) 漳州師範學院學報 (哲學社會科學版 )Journal of Zhangzhou Normal University (Philosophy
and Social Sciences Edition) 25: 74–77.
Hu, Pingsheng 胡平生 , and Meng Zhang 張萌 , trans. 2017. Liji禮記 [The Book of Rites]. Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company.
Huang, Zhongzhao 黃仲昭 . 2006. Bamin Tongzhi 八閩通志 [General Gazetteer of the Eight Min]. Fuzhou: Fujian People’s Publishing
House.
Lin, Guoping 林國平 , and Jiduan Qiu 邱季端 , eds. 2005. Fujian Yimin Shi 福建移民史 [History of Fujian Immigration]. Beijing: Fangzhi
Publishing House.
Lin, Meirong 林美容 . 2000. Xiangtushi Yu Cunzhuangshi: Renlei Xuezhe Kan Difang 鄉土史與村莊史：人類學者看地方 [Local and Village
History: Anthropologists on Localities]. Taipei: Taiwan Yuan Publishing.
Lu, Wenshen 盧文深 , ed. 2025. Xinbian Sanping Sizhi 新編三平寺志 [New Gazetteer of Sanping Temple]. Hong Kong: China Review
Academic Publishers.

--- [Page 280] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 27 of 28
Lu, Zhenhai 盧振海 , ed. 2008. Sanping Sizhi 三平寺志 [Sanping Temple Gazetteer]. Zhangzhou: Sanping Scenic Area Management
Committee of Pinghe County, Fujian.
Lu, Zhenhai 盧振海 , ed. 2010. Sanping Zushi Fenling Lu 三平祖師分靈錄 [The Record of the Distribution of the Sanping Patriarch’s
Spirit Tablets]. Zhangzhou: Pinghe County Sanping Scenic Area Management Committee.
National Central Library, Taiwan Branch. 1784. Limuqing Xishe Tianzu Fengwei Zushigong Yuanshuaiye Xiangdeng Beiji
李穆清喜捨田租奉為組師西元帥爺香燈碑記 [Li Muqing’s donation of land rent for the Patriarch and Marshal’s lamp worship:
A stele inscription]. In Taiwan Memory Digital Archives . Taipei: National Central Library. Available online: https://tm.ncl.edu.tw/
article?u=014_001_0000000517 (accessed on 17 July 2025).
National Central Library, Taiwan Branch. 1833. Sanpinggong Shendan Yanxi Juanti Beiji 三坪宮神誕演戲捐題碑記 [Sanping Temple
deity’s birthday performance and donation stele]. In Taiwan Memory Digital Archives . Taipei: National Central Library. Available
online: https://tm.ncl.edu.tw/article?u=014_001_0000000518 (accessed on 20 May 2024).
National Central Library, Taiwan Branch. 1835. Guangji Zushi Miaochan Beiji 廣濟祖師廟產碑記 [Inscription of Guangji Patriarch
Temple property]. In Taiwan Memory Digital Archives . Taipei: National Central Library. Available online: https://tm.ncl.edu.tw/
article?u=014_001_0000006822 (accessed on 21 July 2025).
Sen, Tansen. 2011. Maritime interactions between China and India: Coastal India and the ascendancy of Chinese maritime power in
the Indian Ocean. Journal of Central Eurasian Studies 2: 41–82.
Setiawan, Deddy. 2024. Multikulturalisme: Tinjauan penggolongan dewa pengharapan di Kelenteng Toasebio Jakarta [Multicultur‑
alism: Classification review of hope deities in Toasebio Temple, Jakarta]. Archaeology Nexus: Journal of Conservation and Culture
1: 1–15.
Setiawan, E., and Kwa Thong Hay. 1990. Dewa‑Dewi Kelenteng [Temple Deities] . Semarang: Yayasan Kelenteng Ampookong.
Shi, Yilong 石奕龍 . 2004. Sanping Zushi Xiang Zhongsui De Chuanshuo Jiqi Xiangzheng Yiyi 三平祖師降 ”眾祟 ”的傳說及其象徵意義
[The Legend of Sanping Patriarch Subduing “Evil Spirits” and Its Symbolic Meaning]. Taiwan Yuanliu 臺灣源流 Taiwan Heritages
29: 136–39.
Song, Yanpeng 宋燕鵬 . 2025. Sanping Zushi Xinyang Zai Malai Xiya De Fazhan Yu Liuchuan 三坪祖師信仰在馬來西亞的發展與流傳
[The development and transmission of Sanping Patriarch belief in Malaysia]. In Sanping Zushi Wenhua Yanjiu 三平祖師文化研究
[Studies on Sanping Patriarch Culture]. Edited by Yun Liu and Wenshen Lu. Hong Kong: Chinese Review Academic Press.
Su, Dan蘇丹 . 2025. Huashe Chengshen:Sanping Zushi Xinyang Zhong She Shizhe Xingxiang Yanjiu 化蛇成神：三平祖師信仰中蛇侍者
形象研究 [From serpent to deity: A study on the serpent attendant in the belief of Sanping Patriarch]. In Sanping Zushi Wenhua
Yanjiu三平祖師文化研究 [Studies on Sanping Patriarch Culture]. Edited by Yun Liu and Wenshen Lu. Hong Kong: Chinese
Review Academic Press.
Sun, Yuanzhi 孫源智 . 2012. Luelun Sanping Zushi Xinyang De Chuanbo Yu Kuosan 略論三平祖師信仰的傳播與擴散 [A Brief Discus‑
sion on the Spread and Diffusion of Sanping Patriarch’s Worship]. Mintai Wenhua Jiaoliu 閩台文化交流 Min‑Tai Cultural Exchange
3: 85–96.
Susilo, Greysia. 2015. Jakarta’s Chinese temples until 1949: Socio cultural sites. Paper presented at the 2nd International Conference
on Chinese Indonesian Studies, Universitas Kristen Maranatha, Bandung, Indonesia, February 5–6.
Susilo, Greysia. 2024. Deity without culture: Inclusivity practice of Chinese religion in DKI Jakarta. Paper presented at the Inter‑
national Forum on Spice Route 2024, National Research and Innovation Agency (BRIN), Jakarta, Indonesia, September 23–26;
Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/385812592 (accessed on 3 July 2025).
Tan, Ai Boay 陳愛梅 . 2025. Sanping Zushi Zai Malai Xiya Huaren Chuantong Xinyang Zhong De Shenpu Weizhi
三坪祖師在馬來西亞華人傳統信仰中的神譜位置 [The Pantheon Position of Sanping Patriarch in the traditional beliefs of
Malaysian Chinese]. In Sanping Zushi Wenhua Yanjiu 三平祖師文化研究 [Studies on Sanping Patriarch Culture]. Edited by Yun
Liu and Wenshen Lu. Hong Kong: Chinese Review Academic Press.
Tan, Ai Boay 陳愛梅 , and Teong Chuan Toh 杜忠全 . 2021. Fanshen Tanghua—Malai Xiya Nadu Gong Xinyang 番神唐化 —
馬來西亞拿督公信仰 [Sinicization of Foreign God—The Study of Datuk Kong Belief in Malaysia]. Taibei Daxue Zhongwen Xuebao
臺北大學中文學報 Journal of Chinese Language and Literature of National Taipei University 30: 601–33.
Tan, Chee‑Beng. 2020. Chinese Religion in Malaysia: Temples and Communities . Leiden: Brill, vol. 12, p. 70.
Wade, Geoff. 2009. An early age of commerce in Southeast Asia, 900–1300 CE. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 40: 221–65. [ CrossRef ]
Wang, Feng 王諷 . 1986. Zhangzhou Sanping Dashi Beiming Bingxu 漳州三平大師碑銘並序 [Epitaph and preface for Master Sanping
of Zhangzhou]. In Tang Wen Cui 唐文粹 [Selected Tang Essays]. Edited by Yao Xuan 姚鉉 and Zeng Xu 許增 . Hangzhou: Zhejiang
People’s Publishing House, vol. 64.
Wang, Feng 王諷 . 2018. Stele of the Reconstruction Records of Master Guangji of Sanping 重建三平廣濟大師行錄碑 [Erected in 1607,
Wanli 35th year of Ming Dynasty]. In Compilation of Religious Inscriptions from Fujian (Zhangzhou Prefecture Volume) . Edited by
Zhenman Zheng and Kenneth Dean [Ding Hesheng]. Fuzhou: Fujian People’s Publishing House.

--- [Page 281] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 1194 28 of 28
Wang, Guanyu. 2019. Chinese porcelain in the Manila galleon trade. In Archaeology of Manila Galleon Seaports and Early Maritime Glob‑
alization. The Archaeology of Asia‑Pacific Navigation 2 . Edited by Chunming Wu, Roberto Junco Sanchez and Miao Liu. Singapore:
Springer, pp. 93–113.
Wang, Rongguo 王榮國 . 1997. Fujian Fojiao Shi 福建佛教史 [A History of Buddhism in Fujian]. Xiamen: Xiamen University Press.
Wang, Xiang 王相 , and Tianjin Chang 昌天錦 , eds. 2000. Kangxi Pinghe xianzhi 康熙平和縣誌 [Kangxi Pinghe county gazetteer]. In
Zhongguo Difangzhi Jicheng (Fujianfu Xianzhi Ji) 中國地方誌集成 (福建府縣誌輯 ) [Collection of Chinese Local Gazetteers (Fujian
Prefecture and County Gazetteers Volume)]. Shanghai: Shanghai Bookstore Publishing House.
Wang, Zhaoyuan, Danny Wong Tze Ken, and Welyne Jeffrey Jehom. 2020. The Alien Communal Patron Deity: A Comparative Study
of the Datuk Gong Worship among Chinese Communities in Malaysia. Indonesia and the Malay World 48: 206–24.
Weng, Guoliang 翁國梁 . 1935. Zhangzhou Shiji 漳州史跡 [Historical Sites of Zhangzhou]. Fuzhou: Fujian Xiehe University Press.
Wu, Bing’an 烏丙安 . 1995. Zhongguo Minjian Xinyang 中國民間信仰 [Chinese Folk Religion]. Shanghai: Shanghai People’s Publish‑
ing House.
Wu, Jifei 吳季霏 . 2001. Songyuan Yiqian Fujian Minjian Xinyang Zhong Zaoshen Yu Chuanshuo De Guanxi—Yi Dingguang Gufo, San‑
ping Zushi, Qingshui Zushi Wei Hexin 宋元以前福建民間信仰中造神與傳說的關係 —以定光古佛、三平祖師、清水祖師為核心
[The relationship between deity‑making and legends in Fujian folk beliefs before the Song‑Yuan period: Focusing on Ding‑
guang Buddha, Sanping Patriarch, and Qingshui Patriarch]. Zhongguo Senhua Yuekan 中國文化月刊 [Chinese Culture Monthly]
250: 24–45.
Xiang, Yiqiu 向憶秋 . 2025. Shengehua, Yingxionghua, Shisuhua: Qianlun Minnan De Simiao Yu Shenming Chuanshuo
神格化、英雄化、世俗化：淺論閩南的寺廟與神明傳說 [Deification, heroization, and secularization: A brief discussion on
temples and deity legends in Southern Fujian]. In Sanping Zushi Wenhua Yanjiu 三平祖師文化研究 [Studies on Sanping Patriarch
Culture]. Edited by Yun Liu and Wenshen Lu. Hong Kong: Chinese Review Academic Press.
Yan, Yayu 顏亞玉 . 2001. Minnan Sanping Zushi Xinyang De Xingcheng Yu Fazhan Yanbian 閩南三平祖師信仰的形成與發展演變 [The
Formation and Development of the Sanping Patriarch’s Belief in Southern Fujian]. Shijie Zongjiao Yanjiu 世界宗教研究 Studies in
World Religions 3: 114–20.
Yao, Xunyi 姚循義 , and Zhengyao Li 李正曜 , eds. 2000. Qianlong Nanjing Xianzhi 乾隆南靖縣誌 [Qianlong Nanjing County gazetteer].
InZhongguo Difang Zhi Jicheng (Fujianfu Xianzhi Ji) 中國地方誌集成（福建府縣誌輯） [In Collection of Chinese local Gazetteers
(Fujian Prefecture and County Gazetteers Volume)]. Shanghai: Shanghai Bookstore Publishing House.
Zheng, Laifa 鄭來發 . 2025. Maliujia Baoangong Yu Zhangzhou Sanpingsi 馬六甲保安宮與漳州三平寺 [Poh Onn Kong Temple in
Malacca and Zhangzhou Sanping Temple]. In Sanping Zushi Wenhua Yanjiu 三平祖師文化研究 [Studies on Sanping Patriarch
Culture]. Edited by Yun Liu and Wenshen Lu. Hong Kong: Chinese Review Academic Press.
Zhou, Guolin 周國林 . 2025. Qiannian Gucha Sanpingsi Cong “Chanzong Daochang” Dao “Minnan Shendian” De Yanhua
千年古刹三平寺從 “禪宗道場 ”到“閩南神殿 ”的演化 [The Evolution of the Ancient Sanping Temple from “Zen Buddhist Site” to
“Southern Fujian Deity Shrine”]. In Sanping Zushi Wenhua Yanjiu 三平祖師文化研究 [Studies on Sanping Patriarch Culture].
Edited by Yun Liu and Wenshen Lu. Hong Kong: Chinese Review Academic Press.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual au‑
thor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.