--- [Page 1] ---
Chapter 13
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’:
Magic, Realpolitik, and Bauddha-Śaiva Dynamics 
in Ancient Nusantara 
andrea acri
In his groundbreaking article ‘A Buddhist 
mantra recovered from the Ratu Boko plateau: 
A preliminary study of its implications for 
Śailendra-era Java’, Jefrey Sundberg (2003) high -
lighted an important gold artefact recovered from 
the Ratu Boko hillock near Prambanan in Central 
Java.1 he artefact, an inscribed gold foil consisting 
of two connected diamond-shaped leaves recalling 
a vajra , bears the Sanskrit mantra oṁ ṭakī hūṁ 
jaḥ svāhā  repeated on each of its four sides.2 A 
unique, and intriguing, feature of the inscription 
is the engraving of the words panarabvan  and kha-
nipas  within an exaggerated circular bubble in the 
two cases of the grapheme ī in the sequence ṭakī. 
his feature led Sundberg to advance the hypothesis 
that the artefact, and the mantra(s) inscribed on it, 
was connected to King Rakai Panaraban (r. ad 784–
803),3 who is known to us through the inscription 
1. I wish to thank Rolf Giebel, Arlo Griiths, Roy Jordaan, 
Iain Sinclair, and Jefrey Sundberg for having read and 
commented on various drats of this chapter. Any mistakes 
are, of course, mine alone. I am particularly grateful to 
Iain Sinclair who, besides providing me with references 
to relevant passages of Tantric Buddhist manuals, has 
kindly shared with me many e-texts and rare editions of 
Buddhist sources that otherwise would have remained 
inaccessible to me. 
2.  Regrettably, the present whereabouts of the gold foil are 
unknown; what remains is a hand-drawn facsimile made 
by Suhamir ( Oudheidkundig Verslag  1950: 36), reproduced 
in Sundberg 2003: 165 and again here as Fig. 13.1.
3. In fact the identiication of panarabvan  with Rakai 
Panaraban was already proposed by the late Indonesian 
archaeologist Kusen (1994), whose work is acknowledged by 
Sundberg. While I am entirely persuaded by the phonetic 
and orthographic arguments adduced by Sundberg (2003: 
176–77) in support of the identiication of the panarabvan  
inscribed on the plate with the historical king Rakai Pana -
raban known from Old Javanese inscriptions, most notably of Wanua Tengah III recovered from Central Java, 
as well as from the 16th-century Old Sundanese 
historical chronicle Carita Parahyaṅan (Sundberg 
2011). Sundberg (2003) discovered instances of very 
similar mantras (i.e., takki hūṁ jaḥ, ṭakkijjaḥ 
huṁ )4 in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Sino-Japanese 
Tantric Buddhist texts, and pointed out that in the 
Sanskrit Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha (STTS )—a 
7th-century mūlatantra  consolidated over time 
into the Yogatantra tradition (Weinberger 2003: 
4)—the mantra occurs in the context of the Bud -
dhist Trailokyavijaya myth or the ‘Subjugation of 
Maheśvara’ by the Bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi, while in 
Sino-Japanese sources it is associated with Aizen’s 
subjugation of Īśvara and Nārāyaṇa. In view of 
these interesting facts, Sundberg concluded that 
the epigraphic document was Vajrayāna in nature, 
thus opening the grounds ‘to ind expressions of 
these tantric convictions in the stone temples of 
Java’ (ibid.: 181); that it might have had an anti-Śaiva 
character (and purpose)—being a repudiation in 
strong terms of the religion of Panaraban’s ances -
tor Sañjaya (ibid.: 183); and that it was devised by 
Panaraban, in order to ‘link himself to the mantra 
or the cosmic being it points to’ (ibid.). In the 
conclusion to his essay, Sundberg anticipated that 
the study of this mantra ‘has hopefully only just 
Wanua Tengah III, I must leave aside the discussion of his 
proposed identiication of this igure with the Śailendra 
king Samaratuṅga, which goes beyond the scope of this 
contribution (for a critical appraisal of his hypothesis, see 
Jordaan and Colless 2004: 58–59).
4. I consider the doubling of consonants in the versions of 
the mantra attested in Sanskrit and Tibetan sources on the 
one hand and Archipelagic sources on the other (e.g., ṭakki  
vs ṭaki) a trivial matter, which relects minor orthographic 
variation rather than linguistic variation.
Acri mockup.indd   323 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 2] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 324
begun’ (ibid.), and invited scholars with the neces -
sary philological skills to search for attestations of 
this mantra in textual sources from South, Central, 
Southeast, and East Asia; to explore the meaning 
of the obscure Old Javanese (?) word khanipas ; and 
to pay archaeological attention to the Ratu Boko 
Buddhist site.
Sundberg’s appeal was promptly taken up 
by Roy Jordaan and Brian Colless, who in 2004 
published the short study ‘he Ratu Boko mantra 
and the Śailendras’. Jordaan and Colless (2004: 58) 
wrestled with Sundberg’s proposed identiication 
of Panaraban as Samaratuṅga, the Śailendra ruler 
under whose auspices the 792 Buddhist inscription 
of Abhayagirivihāra was composed, as well as his 
adherence to Buddhism. hey assume that he was 
in fact a Śaiva and that, given the association of the 
mantra with the Trailokyavijaya myth, its ‘intention 
could have been the mantrical subjugation and 
conversion of Panaraban’ (ibid.: 61).5
Recently, Arlo Griiths (2014a) has returned to 
the ‘Ratu Boko mantra’ in section 7 (pp. 177–80) of 
his ine study entitled ‘Written Traces of the Bud -
dhist Past: Mantras and Dhāraṇ̄s in Indonesian 
Inscriptions’. Griiths, crediting Sundberg with 
having done much to throw light on this unique 
gold artefact, has drawn attention to attestations of 
precise matches to the mantric sequence  oṁ ṭa(k)
kī/i hūṁ jaḥ in the Guhyasamājatantra  (14.22) 
and in the Tibetan version of the pre-9th century 
Sarvavajrodaya , a ritual manual by ̄nandagarbha 
based on the system of the STTS . Having fulilled 
Sundberg’s desideratum to ind exact attestations 
of the mantra in early Tantric Buddhist sources, 
Griiths pointed out that the same mantra ṭaki 
5. A succinct ‘rejoinder’ to the critiques and alternative 
hypotheses advanced by Jordaan and Colless may be found 
in Sundberg 2006: 112–13, n. 25; for his 2014 comments 
amending his 2006 rebuttal, see Sundberg, this volume, 
Annex to Chapter 14.hūṁ jaḥ  is also attested in three short Old Java -
nese stone pillar inscriptions that previous schol -
ars, followed by Sundberg, read as paki hūṁ jaḥ ; 
furthermore , he pinpointed a very similar mantric 
sequence attested on a fourth Old Javanese inscrip -
tion, whose whereabouts and context are presently 
unknown, as well as on a lead-bronze inscription 
from Borobudur, which contains a dhāraṇī  devoted 
to a wrathful form of Vajrapāṇi (Griiths 2014a).
Building on the work of my predecessors, I will 
enter this fascinating discussion by identifying two 
other attestations—in a slightly modiied form—
of the ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ mantra: one in a Sanskrit 
Buddhist hymn ( stuti ) from Bali, and the other in 
the Gaṇapatitattva , a Sanskrit-Old Javanese tutur  
text of Śaiva persuasion. he latter—admittedly 
unusual—attestation of a Buddhist mantra in a 
Śaiva text named ater Gaṇapati will give me the 
opportunity to elaborate on the links between the 
mantra and the igure of the elephant-headed god. 
Further, given the commonality of themes—that 
is, Tantric magic—shared by the section of the 
tutur  attesting the  ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ mantra and the 
Ratu Boko gold foil, I will try to throw new light 
on the context and the function of the latter. By 
analysing relevant textual evidence from Java and 
the Indian Subcontinent, I will then discuss the 
religious and socio-political scenarios opened up 
by it.6 he documents, I will argue, bear witness 
to dynamics of interaction and appropriation of 
mantric technology across the Śaiva and Bauddha 
divide in Central Java, Bali, and much of the pre -
modern Indic cosmopolitan world. 
6. Given the uncertainty about the exact spot where the 
artefact was found, and other basic archaeological facts 
about the Ratu Boko complex, I will leave aside such ques -
tions as whether the gold foil was part of a foundation 
deposit related to the construction of the great western 
entrance-gate of the complex, or rather was meant to ac -
company the consecration of the statue of a tutelary deity, 
as speculated by Sundberg.Fig. 12.1: Drawing of the Ratu Boko gold foil by Soehamir. (Adapted from Oudheidkundig Verslag  1948 [1950: 36])
Acri mockup.indd   324 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 3] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 325
the mantra jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ huṁ phaṭ  
in the pañcakāṇḍastava
he Pañcakāṇḍastava  was edited and translated by 
Goudriaan and Hooykaas (1971: 241–43) as stuti  no. 
375, ‘Hymn to the Five Constituents’.7 he authors 
called this an ‘interesting hymn … nearly con -
ined to Buddhist sources’, which they found in its 
entirety on at least twelve Buddhist manuscripts 
on daily ritual and death ritual, while its irst two 
śloka s—precisely those attesting our mantra—they 
found also in three Śaiva sources (mss. 1590/I3a, 
5160/33b, 2335). According to their Śaiva informant, 
this hymn is not used by the Śaiva priests (ibid.: 
242). Below I reproduce Goudriaan and Hooykaas’ 
edition, critical apparatus (converted from their 
footnotes 1–7), and English translation of this stuti  
and its ‘sprinkling formula’.
jaḥ-kāraḥ parvato jñeyaḥ   
taḥ-kāro jaladhis tathā / 
kiḥ-kāraś ca mahātejo  
huṁ -kāro vāyur eva ca  // 1
phaṭ -kāraś ca mahākāśaḥ  
sarvavighnavināśanam /
etāni sarvabhūtāni  
tad eva satataṁ punaḥ  // 2
devapūjāṁ kariṣye naḥ   
sarvakleśavināśanam /
dīrghāyuṣyam avāpnoti   
bhuktilābham avāpnuyāt  // 3
ādityasya parāyaṇam  
sarvarogavināśanam /
toyavahaṁ jagatpuṇyam   
pavitraṁ  pāpasakalam  // 4
Sprinkling formula (PVTg18; PPKA29):
oṁ oṁ  Śrī Śrī ambhavana  
Sarvarogavināśanam, sarvapāpavināśāya  
Sarvakleśavināśanaṁ, sarvaduḥkhavināśāya, 
Namaḥ svāhā
2b sarvavighna° ] 7× vighna; 7× roga   2c etāni sarvabhū-  
tāni ] thus two mss.; others etānām sarvabhūtānām  2d 
tad eva ] 8× sadeva  2d punaḥ ] 6× udaḥ; others pudaḥ  3c 
avāpnoti ] 5× apaśyataḥ  3d bhuktilābham āvāpnuyāt ] ive 
mss. saṁgrāme vijaȳ bhavet  4d °sakalam ] mss. sakatam
7. An alternative, more faithful, translation may be ‘he 
ive-constituents mantra’ (where ‘constituents’ stands for 
‘portions’ or ‘divisions’ rather than ‘constitutive element s’).he syllable jaḥ is to be known as the moun -
tain, and the syllable taḥ as the ocean;8 and 
the syllable kiḥ as the ire, and the syllable 
huṁ9 as the air. (1)
And the syllable phaṭ  is space; destruction of 
all hindrances; all these elements are always 
that…10 (2)
I will perform the worship of the gods … which 
means destruction of all stains; [the worship -
per] obtains the condition of a long life and will 
obtain enjoyment. (3)
he refuge given by the Sun; destruction of 
all disease; a stream of water, blessing to the 
world; a puriier destroying all evil. (4)
Sprinkling formula:
oṁ oṁ  …;
Destruction of all disease; towards destruction 
of all evil;
destruction of all stains; towards destruction 
of all sorrow, honour, hail.
Goudriaan and Hooykaas (1971: 242) comment -
ed that ‘the language is good-looking, although 
the second part of [ śloka ] 2 is somewhat puzzling. 
Perhaps the sentence has been broken of’. Further, 
they noted the similarity between śloka s 1 and 2 
and those found in the edited Gaṇapatitattva  as 
śloka s 54 and 55, but conirmed Sudarshana Devi’s 
(1958: 117) view that ‘the bījas mentioned in these 
verses do not seem to be found elsewhere’. In a 
rather speculative attempt to make sense of them, 
they proposed that 
they originally constituted the mantra Jā-na-kī 
Huṁ Phaṭ. Jānak̄, (=  S̄tā) is indeed oten wor -
shipped as the Great Mother of existence and 
might on this function very well be considered 
as a personiication of the Five Great Elements 
which constitute Prak ṛti (Nature).
8. Goudriaan and Hooykaas (1971: 242–43, nn. 1 and 2) 
pointed out that here ‘mountain’ and ‘ocean’ represent 
‘earth’ and ‘water’ respectively, corresponding to pṛthivī  
and āpaḥ  of the Gaṇapatitattva ; see below.
9. Huṁ  here could be restored to hūṁ . 
10. he reading sadeva  attested on 8 mss. could be sadaiva  
(i.e., sadā  + eva), ‘at all times/eternally’, which is however 
redundant in a verse-quarter featuring satatam  and punar .
Acri mockup.indd   325 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 4] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 326
In view of the attestation of the parallel mantra 
ṭa(k)kī/i jaḥ hūṁ in Buddhist texts, this hypoth -
esis is no longer tenable. Furthermore, apart from 
the intriguing occurrence of the originally Bud -
dhist mantra found in śloka s 1–2 in three Śaiva 
ritual sources, it should be noted that both śloka s 
3–4 of the stuti  and the sprinkling formula present 
thematic analogies with the śloka s and Old Javanese 
commentary of relevant portions of the Gaṇapa-
titattva , which I will present and discuss in the 
next section.
the mantra jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ in 
gaṇapatitattva  59–60 (54–55)
he Gaṇapatitattva  is a Śaiva scripture belonging 
to the Javano-Balinese tutur  genre;11 arranged 
as a dialogue between the Lord Śiva and his son 
Gaṇapati, it consists of sixty Sanskrit śloka s provid -
ed with Old Javanese prose glosses, introduced by 
an extensive Old Javanese prose section. he text, 
which has come down to us only through palm-
leaf manuscripts from Bali, is of uncertain date. 
While the prose section appended to śloka s 51–53 
reveals various Balinisms and (Middle-)Javanisms, 
thereby suggesting a late date of composition (16th 
century onwards), its earliest textual stratum, and 
in particular its śloka s, may be several centuries 
older, and perhaps even date back to the Central 
Javanese period.12 
11. On this genre of Śaiva literature, see Acri 2006. 
12. A small number of verses of the Gaṇapatitattva /
Tutur Kamokṣan /Jñānasiddhānta  have parallels in pre-9th 
century Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras from the Indian Sub -
continent (Acri 2006), while verses 57–59 have a parallel 
in a Sanskrit stuti  from Bali ( Praṇavajñāna , no. 890.1–3, 
Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971: 524); compare also verses 
1–2 and 3cd of the Pañcakāṇḍa  with Gaṇapatitattva  54–55 
and 56cd. Recent research has shown that many Balinese 
stuti s have preserved material stemming from the Central 
Javanese period: see, e.g., Kandahjaya (2009) and Grii -
ths (2014b) on the Navakampa (no. 510, Goudriaan and 
Hooykaas 1971: 314–15), and Acri and Jordaan (2012) on 
stuti s that, together with the Śaiva Sanskrit-Old Javanese 
tutur  Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa (also handed down uniquely on 
Bali), arguably informed the masterplan of 9th-century 
Candi Śiva at Loro Jonggrang. See also stuti  no. 450 (Gou -
driaan and Hooykaas 1971: 274–77), attesting a fragment 
from the pre-8th century Vīṇāśikhatantra  (cf. Acri 2006: 
118–19).As Hooykaas (1962, especially pp. 314–18) 
painstakingly showed, the printed edition of the 
Gaṇapatitattva  (ed. Sudarshana Devi Singhal 1958), 
produced on the basis of a single palm-leaf manu -
script, turned out to be just one version among the 
many that were circulating on Bali under diferent 
titles. he edited version corresponds to Īśvara 
Uvāca Gaṇapati Matakvan  (‘Īśvara Spoke, Gaṇapati 
Asked’, Gedong Kirtya manuscript K2411), which 
appears to be the most ‘mature’ one as it betrays a 
complex process of compilation. It was carved out 
of a core of sixty śloka s (four of which are lacking 
in Sudarshana Devi’s edition), supplemented with 
extra material related to Gaṇapati at its beginning 
and end, namely: an opening maṅgala  verse to 
Gaṇapati followed by an Old Javanese prose portion 
containing ten questions-and-answers between 
Gaṇapati and Śiva; a concluding series of śloka s 
(59–61) with appended Old Javanese paragraphs; a 
prose paṅlukatan gaṇapati  or ‘exorcism (by means) 
of Gaṇapati’; and three eulogizing śloka s (62–64) 
and short Sanskrit and Old Javanese invocations 
(65) to the same god.13 Judging from the number of 
Balinese manuscripts preserving various redactions 
of this text it may be argued that the Gaṇapatitattva  
enjoyed certain popularity on the island.
he section that primarily concerns us here con -
sists of the two śloka s 59–60 (54–55 in the printed 
edition) plus an Old Javanese prose appendix of 
three paragraphs. he Sanskrit-Old Javanese dyad 
follows an (apparently unrelated) long prose section, 
stretching over nineteen paragraphs, appended to 
śloka s 57–59 (51–53 in the printed edition);14 this 
13. he ‘core text’ out of which further versions of the 
Gaṇapatitattva  were carved is the Tutur Kamokṣan , which 
in its turn forms a part (with some sections rearranged in 
diferent order) of the Tutur Ādhyātmika (an expanded 
version of the latter text was edited as Jñānasiddhānta : 
see Soebadio 1971: 4–7). An ‘intermediate’ version of the 
Gaṇapatitattva  is the Tatva Gaṇapati  (romanized tran -
scription by Ketut Sudarsana, PusDok, 1993), which inclu -
des the ten questions-and-answers but lacks the maṅgala , 
and the concluding material ater śloka  61.
14. he three  śloka s and long prose section are also found 
in the Tutur Kamokṣan , but not in Tutur Ādhyātmika/
Jñānasiddhānta —the three  śloka s alone, i.e. without the 
long Old Javanese prose appendage, being attested in 
Jñānasiddhānta  3.1–3, 17.4, and 18.12; cf. also stuti  809.1–3 
(Praṇavajñāna ). he relation, admittedly supericial, that 
Acri mockup.indd   326 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 5] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 327
is followed by an (arguably related) śloka  on the 
mṛtyuñjaya  mantra (61), the paṅlukatan gaṇapati , 
and the concluding Sanskrit and Old Javanese in -
vocations. he two śloka s and the irst paragraph 
of the Old Javanese commentary run as follows:15 
jaḥkāre pṛthivī jñeyaḥ 
ṭaḥkāre āpa-saṁsthitaḥ / 
kiḥkāraś ca mahātejaḥ  
hūṁkāre bāyu-saṁnyaset // 59  
phaṭkārākāśa-saṁyuktaḥ  
mahāpātakanāśāya / 
pañcāṅgaṁ japayed vidvān  
śivalokam avāpnuyāt // 60 
ndya ta ya / jah / ṭah / kih / hūṁ  / phaṭ  //16 iti 
saṅ hyaṅ pañcāṅga17 / japākna  śivadhyāna / 
mahāpātaka vināśa denya // 0 // 
59a jaḥkāre ] GaṇEd, TGaṇ, GaṇUd; jaḥkare PDok; ja -
ḥkarai GaṇL; pṛthv̄ ] corr.; prathivi TGaṇ, GaṇUd; pra -
vivi PDok; praviviṁ GaṇL; jñeyaḥ ] PDok, GaṇL, TGaṇ, 
GaṇUd (m. aḥ for f. ā); jñeyā GaṇEd;   59b ṭaḥkāre ] corr. 
(°e ā° for °a ā°); taḥkāra GaṇEd; taḥkārai GaṇL; thaḥkare 
PDok (as 59c); ṭāḥkāre GaṇUn.; āpa-saṁsthitaḥ ] corr. 
(nom. sing. for f. plur., °a-s° for °ḥ s° or °s s°, m.c.); 
āpaḥ saṁsthitāḥ GaṇEd; apa saṁstitaḥ GaṇL; hapa 
saṁsthitaḥ PDok; apa saṁsthitaḥ TGaṇ, GaṇUd   59c 
kiḥkāraś ca ] corr.; kiḥkaraś ca, GaṇL, TGaṇ, GaṇUd, 
PDok (as 59b); kiḥkāre GaṇEd (em.); mahātejaḥ ] corr.; 
mahatejaḥ TGaṇ, GaṇUd; mahāteja GaṇEd (GaṇL); 
hūṁkāre ] em.; hūṁkare TGaṇ, GaṇUd; uṁkāre 
GaṇEd; uṁkarai GaṇL; uṅkare PDok;   59d bāyu ] em. 
(m. sing. acc. ending °ṁ dropped m.c.); vāyuṁ GaṇEd; 
bayu GaṇL, GaṇUd, PDok; saṁnyaset ] GaṇEd; sanya -
set PDok; śanyaṣet GaṇL; śanyaset GaṇUd; śūnyayet 
TGaṇ   60a phaṭkārākāśa-saṁyuktaḥ] em. (°rā° for °ra 
ā° [°e + ā° ] (double sandhi ), and °a-s° for °aḥ s°, m.c.); 
phaṭkārākāśasaṁyukto GaṇEd; phaṭkarakāśasaṁyuktaḥ 
this part bears to the two śloka s following thereupon seems 
to be limited to the statement, found in the end of para -
graph 19, that the obtainment of release ( kapadamokṣan ) 
corresponds to śivapada , which may be linked to śloka  61d, 
which speaks about the obtainment of śivaloka . 
15. he passage has been collated from ive diferent wit -
nesses, namely the edited text and the single manuscript it 
stems from (=  Īśvara Uvāca Gaṇapati Matakvan , K2411 ≈ 
LOr 11461), and three versions of the Gaṇapatitattva  proper 
(for the sigla used in the apparatus, see the primary sources 
section at the end of this chapter).
16. jaḥ / ṭaḥ / kiḥ / hūṁ / phat] em.; / jah / ṭah / kih / uṁ / 
phaṭ GaṇEd; jaḥ / ṭaḥ / kiḥ / hūm / phaṭ GaṇL (?); jah / tah 
/ kih / uṁ / phat PDok; jaḥ / ṭaḥ / kiḥ / hūṁ / phat GaṇUd
17. pañcāṅga ] em.; pañcaṇdha GaṇUd, pañcandha PDok; 
pañcakāṇḍa GaṇEd, pañcakāṇdha GanL.GaṇL; phatkārakāśasaṁyuktaḥ TGaṇ, GaṇUd; phan -
kare kasa saṁyuktaḥ PDok   60b mahāpātakanāśāya ] 
em. GaṇEd (°śā° unmetrical); mahāpaṭakanaśāya 
GaṇL; mahāpaṭakanasaya GaṇUd; mahāpatakanasaya 
TGaṇ, PDok   60c pañcāṅgaṁ japayed vidvān ] conj.; 
pañcāṇḍaṁ japed yo vidvān GaṇEd (em.);  pañcāṇḍhaṁ 
japayet vidvan GaṇUd; pañcaṇḍhaṁ japayaid vidvān 
GaṇL; pañcaṇdhaṁ japayet vidvaṁ TGaṇ; pañcāndhaṁ 
japayet vidvān PDok   60d avāpnuyāt] corr. GaṇEd; ava -
snuyat GaṇL, GaṇUd, TGaṇ, PDok
In the jaḥ the earth is known [to reside]; in the 
ṭaḥ is placed the water. he kiḥ is full of ire; 
[one] should place the wind in the hūṁ . (59)
he phaṭ  is ixed in the space. For the annihi -
lation of great sins, the wise should mutter the 
[mantra of] Five Units, so that he may reach 
the world of Śiva. (60)
Jaḥ, ṭaḥ, kiḥ, hūṁ, phaṭ : hus is the sacred 
[mantra] of Five Units. he visualization of 
Śiva should be muttered. Great sins are annihi -
lated by means of it. 
he two  śloka s, composed in a typically ‘Tantric 
register’ of Sanskrit, attest virtually the same re -
conigured version of the mantric sequence  ṭaki 
jaḥ hūṁ  found in the  Pañcakāṇḍastava . In both 
the Sanskrit verses and the Old Javanese gloss, the 
sequence ṭaki  is divided into its constituents ṭa 
and ki, each of which is provided with a visarga .18 
he mantra phaṭ  occurs in place of the svāhā  
attested in the Ratu Boko gold foil.19 he ivefold  
mantric sequence  jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ  is called 
pañcāṅga  (my emendation from pañcāṇḍa ) in both  
the śloka  and  the Old Javanese gloss, meaning the 
‘(Mantra of) Five Units’;  but one manuscript attests 
the reading  pañcakāṇḍa in the gloss, which mirrors 
18. he visarga  in the syllables jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ might have been 
part of the irst person singular nominative declension, but 
appears to have been understood by the compiler of the 
śloka  as an integral part of the single mantric units (for 
he wrote jaḥkāra  and not jakāra , etc.). his form has been 
retained in the Old Javanese commentary.
19. A similar form of the mantra is attested in a book 
of yantra  etc. drawn up by Newar artisans in the Ming 
dynasty, where it is given as oṁ ṭakkirāja hūṁ phaṭ 
(i.e., the signature mantra of ̣akki). In fact, what may be 
the earliest attestations of the mantra ṭṭakki huṁ phaṭ 
is in the STTS  (ed. 200, lines 12–14), where it is connected 
with magical ‘killing with a glance’ ( vajraṛṣṭayā nirīkṣed  
 … maraṇam āpnuyāt ). I thank Iain Sinclair for these refer -
ences (email dated 30 August 2014; cf. Sinclair 2013).
Acri mockup.indd   327 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 6] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 328
the title of the Balinese stuti .20 In the  śloka s these 
units are linked to the ive elementals, whereas in 
the Old Javanese gloss they are declared to constitu -
te the visualization of Śiva ( śivadhyāna ). A notable 
feature, attested in both the Gaṇapatitattva  and the 
Balinese stuti , is the transformation of the original 
sequence ṭaki jaḥ  into jaḥ taḥ kiḥ, which may 
represent an instance of purposeful ‘inversion’.21 
he continuation of the irst paragraph of the 
Old Javanese gloss seems to be an addition, and 
yet is apparently related to śloka s 60–61. So is the 
second paragraph, as well as the four śloka s and 
eulogy that bring the text to its end. he irst pa -
ragraph elaborates on śivadhyāna , prescribing the 
muttering ( japa) of aṁ-aḥ  sixteen times, the fruit 
of which is purity ( nirmala ).22 he remaining part of 
the irst paragraph describes a ivefold visualization 
technique ( dhyāna ) aimed at obtaining speciic 
20. Aṅga  is a common technical term for the constituents 
of a mantra, whereas aṇḍa  (‘egg’) does not make sense here. 
he reading pañcakāṇḍaṁ  supported by GaṇL may represent 
a ‘contamination’, in the light of the attestation of the form in 
several mss. of the Balinese stuti  Pañcakāṇḍa , and perhaps 
also because of semantic overlap ( kāṇḍa  = ‘part, unit, portion, 
division, constituent’; compare khaṇḍa  ‘piece, part, fragment, 
portion, section’, and skandha  ‘part, division, section’; pañ-
caskandha  is a well-attested unit in Buddhist literature, e.g. 
in the Guhyasamāja  exegesis, where it represents the the ive 
constituent elements of being). he causative form japayed  
attested in all mss. may be the outcome of the insertion of 
one extra syllable as required by the metre, or may represent 
a corruption of japed yo vidvān ). 
21. Compare the mantra ‘ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ jaḥ hūṁ kiṭa 
h(ū)[ṁ] ṭaki  (dhuṁ ) kiṭa dhu (ṁ)…’ engraved on a lead-
bronze foil from Borobudur, where the sequences jaḥ hūṁ 
kiṭa and kiṭa dhu(ṁ) may represent inversions of ṭaki 
hūṁ jaḥ  and ṭaki dhu(ṁ)  respectively; Griiths (2014b: 
25) notes the inversion with respect to the element kiṭa .
22. Perhaps here the Sanskrit (and Old Javanese) nirmala  
should be understood as being equivalent to the Sanskrit 
abstract noun nirmalatva (‘purity’).faculties. his is hierarchically ordered from the 
highest to the lowest attainment, as corresponding 
to the highest and lowest mainifestations of Śiva. 
Although there is no explicit indication in the Old 
Javanese commentary that the ive forms of visual -
ization following thereupon are connected to each 
one of the ive mantric units detailed in the śloka , 
the redactor might have implied thus, in order to 
obtain the list of correspondences illustrated in 
Table 13.1.23
he progression is from the foremost visuali -
zation of Paramaśiva, connected with the subtlest 
element of space or ether ( ākāśa ),24 the mantra phaṭ , 
23. he redactions of the text corresponding to the 
ms. titled Tatva Gaṇapati  (TGaṇ ≈ LOr 14982) add yan 
sadāśivadhyāna dīrghāyuṣa phalanya (spelling standard -
ized) between Śivadhyāna and Rudradhyāna, against the 
redactions corresponding to the edited version of the 
Gaṇapatitattva  and ms. titled Īśvara Uvāca Gaṇapati 
Matakvan . his sentence may be an addition as it disrupts 
the ivefold arrangement and the correspondence with the 
elements of the mantra in the śloka . As far as the ivefold 
hierarchical arrangement is concerned, it is tempting to 
detect a spatial arrangement as well, where the four main 
points of the compass plus the centre are linked to the 
ive deities presiding over/associated with the respective 
direction. If one links the names of the manifestations of 
Śiva mentioned in the passage to the corresponding deities 
known from the navasaṅa  arrangement that has survived 
down to modern Bali, the resulting arrangement, starting 
from the east and proceeding in counterclockwise direc -
tion, would be as follows: Īśvara in the east (like Indra, he 
rides an elephant in Balinese iconography), Śaṅkara in the 
northwest, Mahādeva in the west, Rudra in the southwest, 
and Paramaśiva in the centre.
24. his is in harmony with the widespread homologiza -
tion of the highest form of godhead (or paramount meta -
physical entity, such as the Self, or even a yogic attainment, 
such as tarka ) to space ( ākāśa )—and, at the same time, 
‘emptiness’ ( śūnya [tā])—attested in several texts of both 
Śaiva and Buddhist persuasion from the Indonesian Archi -phaṭ space Paramaśivadhyāna inal release ( mokṣa )
hūṁ wind Rudradhyāna destruction of enemies ( ripusaṁhāra )
kiḥ ire Mahādevadhyāna success in the world ( kasvasthan iṅ rāt )*
ṭaḥ water Śaṅkaradhyāna accomplishment of all actions ( sakārya siddha )**
jaḥ earth Īśvaradhyāna afection of somebody ( kasihana deniṅ janma )Table 13.1: Correspondences between mantric units and visualizati ons in OJ commentary, GNP  60–61
* Here I follow GaṇL ( kasvastan ) and Gaṇ Ud ( kaśvastan ), agains t GaṇEd ( kasvastyan ).
** Here I follow PDok and GaṇUd against GaṇEd ( sakāryanta  siddha) and GaṇL ( sakāryyantā ).
Acri mockup.indd   328 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 7] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 329
and the attainment of liberation, to the lowest vis -
ualization of Īśvara, connected with the coarsest 
element earth ( pṛthvī ), the mantra jaḥ, and the 
securement of the afection of somebody.25
he paragraph ends with a characterization of 
the mantras aṁ-aḥ —the former is ‘the seed-syl -
lable of the Soul’ ( ātmabījākṣara ), the latter ‘the 
seed of emptiness’ ( śūnyatābīja ); together, they 
are called ‘the great union’ ( mahāsaṁyoga ). hey 
should be used with restraint. he section ends 
with a caption iti saṅ hyaṅ mahājapa  ‘[here ends] 
the sacred Great Muttering [formula]’, which is a 
paramount secret ( paramarahasya ). 
he second paragraph links the Sanskrit word 
khaḍgarāvaṇa  (see below) to the mantric sequence 
oṁ ha ka śa ma la va ra yaṁ uṁ ,26 which should 
be visualized ( kahiḍәpanya ) as Ardhanār̄śvara 
(a half-male, half-female form of Śiva). he ten 
syllables should be placed in the body following a 
clockwise direction ( pradakṣiṇakrama ); this results 
in the obtainment of impenetrabilty from any kind 
of weapons ( tan kataman iṅ sarvvasañjāta ) and 
being free from all hindrances ( luput iṅ sarvvavi -
ghna ). hen the concentration ( anuṣṭhāna ) of the 
mṛtyuñjaya  should be performed, as follows: oṁ 
in the fontanelle, aṁ in the mouth, kaṁ  in the 
throat, aḥ in the cavity of the earth, aṁ from the 
navel down to the feet; these go together with the 
ten-syllable mantra ( daśākṣaramantra ) from the 
crest to the feet, and also with the mantra maṁ 
(i.e., jūṁ?) saḥ vauṣaṭ m tyuñjayāya namaḥ 
svāhā vaṣat (see below, n. 43). 
Śloka 61 elaborates on the  mṛtyuñjayamantr a, 
granting long life ( dīrghāyuṣa ) and victory in battle 
(saṅgramavijaya ).27 he Old Javanese gloss simply 
pelago (see, e.g., Gonda 1971; Acri 2011a: 347, 589); also note 
that a Chinese Buddhist text attributed to Śubhākarasiṁha 
links Mahāvairocana—the highest Tathāgata—with space 
and the centre (see Damais 1969: 85–86). 
25. his amounts to a form of vaśīkaraṇa : cf. below. 
26. This mantra, which still plays an important role in the 
theology and yogic praxis of present-day Balinese Hindu -
ism, is indeed a variant of the old, in origin Saiddhāntika, 
Śaiva mantra nāvātman , most oten represented by the 
sequence rhrkṣmlvyūṁ  (see Padoux 2011: 58–60).
27. Compare Pañcakāṇḍastava  3cd, 5 manuscripts of 
which read: dīrghāyuṣyam avāpnoti, saṁgrāme vijayī 
bhavet , and Gaṇapatitattva  61cd (ed. 56cd): dīrghāyuṣam 
avāpnoti saṅgramavijayī bhavet.states that it is not to be used or revealed indiscri -
minately, and that its aim is to keep death far away 
(hayva cāvuh, madoh maraṇa donira tәlas ).28 he 
word tәlas  (‘inished’, ‘the end’) suggests that the 
original text ended here.29  he ‘exorcism (by means 
of) Gaṇapati’ that follows—attested only in the 
edited Gaṇapatitattva  (= Īśvara Uvāca Gaṇapati 
Matakvan )—starts with an Old Javanese passage 
containing instructions for a pūjā  to invoke the 
intervention of the elephant-headed god against 
the damage caused by ield-mice.30 he three śloka s, 
constituting the mantra to be employed in the pūjā , 
eulogize Gaṇapati as the son of Śiva who destroys 
all poisons ( sarvaviṣavināśana ) and calamities 
(roga ), and bestows success ( siddhārthada ). he 
text ends with a short auspicious formula in honour 
of Gaṇapati and Sarasvat̄, by which one obtains 
long life and prosperity.31 
28. his is the correct reading, as shown by Hooykaas 
(1962: 315), versus the hayva cāvuh, adomraṇa denira tәlas  
of the edition (however, the variant denira , ‘by means 
of it’, is permissible and attested in some manuscripts). 
I do not agree with Hooykaas’ translation of maraṇa  
(māraṇa ) as ‘ield-mice’, but take it in its most evident 
meaning of ‘death, killing’, which is consonant with the 
content of the śloka devoted to the Mṛtyuñjaya mantra. 
It is evident that Hooykaas was misled by the contents of 
the paṅlukatan gaṇapati  that follows thereupon, which 
deals with ‘agricultural exorcism’; it is entirely possible 
that the compiler of the ‘mature’ redaction of the Gaṇa-
patitattva  took maraṇa  to mean ‘ield-mice’, but the same 
reasoning cannot be applied retrospectively to the Old 
Javanese gloss of śloka  61.
29. he ‘intermediate’ version of the Gaṇapatitattva  from 
ms. PDok, as well as the Tutur Kamokṣan , end here indeed.
30. Hooykaas (1962: 315–16) described this as ‘an addi -
tional note for peasants … only a rustic and picturesque 
accretion to our philosophical/metaphysical text’. he 
practitioner is prompted to ‘make a circuit ( scilicet : of his 
rice-ield), using an ‘‘ivory bamboo’’ ( scilicet : adorned with) 
a drawing of Gaṇapati, with a disc [ cakra ] in His let hand 
and a cudgel [ gadā ] in His right’ (ibid.: 315). his kind 
of ‘agricultural magic’ does not represent an ‘indigenous’ 
Balinese invention, but has clear parallels in South Asia. In 
current Indian harvest festivals, and also in folk literature, 
Gaṇapati is worshipped as a ‘harvest hero’, and especially 
as a destroyer of mice (he is oten portrayed as riding a rat, 
his vehicle): see Michael 1983.
31. Oṁ ghmuṁ gaṇapataye namaḥ / oṁ sarasvatyai 
namaḥ / oṁ siddhir astu / tad astu / astu // oṁ dīrghāyuṣaṁ 
sukhaśriyā / darśanāt tava vṛddhiśriyā  //.
Acri mockup.indd   329 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 8] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 330
a kind of magic? the ratu boko gold 
foil as a yantra
he mantra jaḥ-ṭaḥ-kiḥ-hūṁ-phaṭ  is apparently 
associated in the Gaṇapatitattva  with puriication, 
averting of calamity, and bestowal of supernatural 
goals. Both the śloka s and the Old Javanese gloss 
declare that the use of the ive-unit mantra is ‘for 
the annihilation of great sins’ ( mahāpātakanāśa ), 
which results in the attainment of śivaloka . he Old 
Javanese gloss implies that the murmuring of the 
ive units amounts to śivadhyāna , which is connect -
ed to the mantra aṁ aḥ (the so-called rva bhineda  
formula that is widespread in Javano-Balinese lore). 
A similar stress on puriication, averting of calam -
ity and sins, and bestowal of supernatural goals is 
found in śloka s 61–64 (56–59 ed.) on mṛtyuñjaya  
and Gaṇapati-related mantras, as well as in the 
Pañcakāṇḍastava .32
hree of the goals listed in the Old Javanese gloss 
to Gaṇapatitattva  59–60, namely the destruction 
of enemies (aptly homologized with Rudra, the 
destructive form of Śiva), worldly success, and 
attracting the afection of somebody, apparently 
correspond to the operations of māraṇa , puṣṭi  and 
vaśīkaraṇa  respectively, which we ind in the ‘six 
acts/practices’ or ‘six rites of magic’ ( ṣaṭkarmāṇi ). 
Sanskrit literature, from the Atharvaveda  to Tantric 
texts of Śaiva, Buddhist, and even Jaina and Vaiṣṇa -
va persuasion, deines ritual practices connected 
with protection, paciication, exorcism, incanta -
tion, and the acquisition or cultivation of prosper -
ity, according to diferent systematizations. he 
standard, ‘mature’ list as deined in many Tantric 
works is the one adopted by the early 16th-century 
Śaiva author Mah̄dhara in his manual Mantrama -
32. Compare the stuti ’s sarvavighnavināśanam , sarva-
kleśavināśanam , bhuktilābham , sarvarogavināśanam , 
pavitraṁ pāpasakalam , and sarvapāpavināśāya  with 
Gaṇapatitattva ’s sarvaviṣavināśanam , parāṇi rogāṇi mūrch -
hantam , siddhārthadam  (62–64 = ed. 57–59), and  mahāpā -
takanāśāya/mahāpātakavināśa (śloka s and commentary 
59–60 = ed. 54–55). In particular, note that Gaṇapatitattva  
61cd (ed. 56cd) is the same as Pañcakāṇḍastava  3cd (see 
my n.  27 above); the whole śloka  3 of the latter source is 
also attested in the Balinese ritual text Pūjā Kṣatriya  
(ms. PKTb, as stanza 3 of the Śaiva stuti  no. 13): cf. below, 
n. 43 and 46.hodadhi,33 which  comprises appeasement (śānti), 
subjugation ( vaśya, vaśīkaraṇa ), immobilization 
(stambha, stambhana ), enmity ( dveṣa, vidveṣa ), 
eradication ( uccāṭana ), and liquidation ( māraṇa ); 
but other sources also attest lists of four or fewer 
elements,34 while sources listing nine elements—the 
aforementioned six plus delusion ( mohana ), attrac -
tion ( ākarṣaṇa ),35 and acquisition ( puṣṭi )—are also 
known. In fact ākarṣaṇa (i.e., bringing a person 
under the practitioner’s control), even if it is not 
included in the ‘standard’ list of six acts, is ‘one of 
the best known and most widely performed acts of 
magic’ (Goudriaan 1978: 294), and as such it plays 
an important role in many of the documents dis -
cussed here. As I have mentioned above, the ṭaki 
jaḥ hūṁ mantra has been linked to a context of 
mantric subjugation; and since the version of the 
mantra attested on the Ratu Boko gold foil and 
the version in the Gaṇapatitattva  seem to have 
been used in a context of magic, an investigation 
of selected key sources related to magical practices 
in Buddhist and Śaiva contexts may throw light on 
the contexts and purposes of the mantra. 
Let us turn to Chapter 25 of the Mantramahoda -
dhi. In verses 30–32ab Mah̄dhara declares that in 
the six rites the seed syllables of a yantra— a ‘coer -
cive diagram’ (Brunner 2003: 164–65)36—consist of 
33. Being a systematic manual compiled on the basis of 
several earlier authoritative texts, the Mantramahodadhi  
remains a valuable source on the ṣaṭkarmāṇi  in spite of 
its relatively late date of composition. A translation and 
analysis of Chapter 25 of this text, which I will draw from 
in my discussion, may be found in Bühnemann 2000. 
34. In fact Vedic sources already subdivide all karman  (in 
the sense of ritual) into three kinds, namely śānti  (paciica -
tion), puṣṭi  (welfare or acquisition), and abhicāra  (harming 
others) (Goudriaan 1978: 252).
35. In some other lists, ākarṣaṇa —which is relevant to 
our discussion—replaces śānti , especially in (con)texts 
where the rite assumes a more cruel appearance (Goudriaan 
1978: 260–61).
36. Cf. Sanderson’s (2004: 290) deinition of yantra  as ‘a 
Mantra-inscribed diagram written in various colours and 
with various inks on cloth, birchbark, the hides of various 
animals and the like, wrapped up and then employed in 
various ways (by being worn as an amulet, by being buried 
in a cremation ground, and so on) for purposes such as 
warding of ills, harming an enemy, or forcing a person 
to submit to the user’s will’. Iain Sinclair (email dated 30 
December 2014) pointed out to me that many Nepalese 
Acri mockup.indd   330 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 9] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 331
the letters of the moon, water, earth, ether, wind, 
and ire (Bühnemann 2000: 457). One may wonder 
whether the correlation between the ive syllables 
jaḥ-ṭaḥ-kiḥ-ḥu(/ū)ṁ-phaṭ  and the ive elements 
in the Pañcakāṇḍastava , as also between the last 
two series and the ive manifestations of Śiva in the 
Gaṇapatitattva,  relect an analogous systematization, 
as well as the widespread idea that, by connecting 
(on a subtle level) syllables or mantras to elements, 
the latter are puriied. Correlations between ive 
mantras, the ive elements, and ive Tathāgatas, are 
oten found in Tantric Buddhist maṇḍala s (see e.g., 
Kandahjaya 2009, table 4, and my n. 23 above), so 
this idea need not be distinctively Śaiva.
he Mantramahodadhi  (verses 17cd–23ab, see 
Bühnemann 2000: 449 and table 26.5) describes 
six arrangements for connecting the mantra to be 
uttered in each rite with the letters of the name of 
the victim of the magical act; such methods may 
include the insertion of the victim’s name at the end, 
or the insertion of letters between its syllables, and 
so on. Padoux (2011: 96–97), describing in detail 
analogous practices on the basis of Netratantra  Ch. 
18 and Kṣemarāja’s commentary, characterizes the 
technique called saṁpuṭa  as the symbolic ‘encasing’ 
of a mantra ‘(or any part thereof, or any element 
with which it is associated) inside a space or casket, 
covered as with a lid or within two covers’. He adds 
that in his commentary on Netratantra  6.18 Kṣema -
rāja describes a written procedure: mantram ādau 
likhet ;37 similarly , in Agnipurāṇa Ch. 138, ‘where 
saṃpuṭa is prescribed for the magical action of 
vaśīkaraṇa and ākarṣaṇa , it is described as the 
placing of the mantra around the sādhya— above, 
under and to its right and let: a spatial pattern, not 
an oral operation’.38 his practice, which is signii -
Buddhist mantra manuscripts attest a placeholder for the 
name of the ‘target’, usually ‘Devadatta’, and that while 
Buddhists classically used terms such as rakṣācakra , con -
temporary Newar Vajrācāryas talk about yantra  (jantra ). 
On examples of yantra s found in early Śaiva Tantras, see 
Kiss 2014.
37. Sanderson (2004: 290) draws attention to Kṣemarā -
ja’s deinition ( ad Netratantra  20.59c) of a yantracakram  
as ‘a series of Mantras written in a particular spatial ar -
rangement … yantracakraṁ viśiṣṭasaṃniveśalikhito man -
trasamūhaḥ ’.
38. Compare also Padoux’s (2011: 97–98) description of 
techniques that appear to be related to saṁpuṭa , namely: cantly associated with vaśīkaraṇa and ākarṣaṇa , 
resonates with the encasing of the personal raka  
title ‘Panaraban’ (and ‘Khanipas’) on the Ratu Boko 
gold foil within the circular ̄ of the mantra ṭakī. It 
is therefore not too far-fetched to assume, as was 
done by Sundberg (2003: 177), that the inscription 
of Panaraban’s personal title within a grapheme 
was intended to inix it ‘as a vital component of 
the sacred mantra’. Whatever the actual intended 
procedure might have been, the practices described 
in the Sanskrit documents presented above would 
seem to support the link with practices of adduc -
tion and subjugation hypothesized by Sundberg as 
well as Jordaan and Colless, and lead us to regard 
the Ratu Boko gold foil as a yantra  of coercive magic.
Exploring further the hypothesis that the 
Ratu Boko artefact indeed might have constituted 
a yantra , I turn again to the Mantramahodadhi , 
which in verses 23cd–26ab (Bühnemann 2000: 
455–56, and table 26) describes the symbolic shapes 
of the elements that have to be drawn in such 
yantra s: for subjugation this is a triangle endowed 
with svastika s, for immobilization it is a square 
connected with thunderbolts ( vajra ), and for enmity 
it is a circle. Other sources give diferent combi -
nations, namely vajra  and liquidation, square and 
paciication, circle and paciication, subjugation, 
eradication, or acquisition (see Goudriaan 1978: 
292). An early Śaiva Tantra, the Brahmayāma -
la, declares that the practitioner ‘should draw a 
square and write [the target’s] name in its centre’ 
(5.78cd–79ab, Kiss 2014: 212). We may connect these 
ideas to the shape of the Ratu Boko artefact and 
see in the vaguely vajra -shaped double quadrangle 
a counterpart of the ‘square connected with thun -
derbolts’ associated with subjugation; on the other 
grasta  (‘swallowed or eclipsed, but also surrounded’), which 
is in fact what Agnipurāṇa  Ch. 138 calls saṁpuṭīkaraṇa ; 
ākrānta  (‘seized or invaded’—applying to the name of the 
victim, which Kṣemarāja characterizes as ‘when the mantra 
is placed so as to surround the name which is in the centre’; 
Padoux sees this as a variant of what is called grasta  by 
the Netratantra  and saṁpuṭīkaraṇa  by the Agnipurāṇa ); 
garbhastha : this corresponds to the Agnipurāṇa ’s deini -
tion of saṁpuṭa , except that Kṣemarāja on Netratantra  
‘mentions the four directions of space instead of the four 
sides of the written mantra. It is also the reversal of what 
is deined as grasta . Like the AgP’s saṁpuṭa , this can be 
done only in writing’.
Acri mockup.indd   331 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 10] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 332
hand, the engraving of the raka  title panarabvan  
(and, perhaps, the personal name khanipas ) within 
the circle of two of the the ̄ signs may correspond 
to ‘enmity’, as per Mah̄dhara, or again subjuga -
tion, according to an alternative list. Although no 
deinitive conclusion can be drawn, it seems safe 
to assume that the choice of these shapes was not 
entirely arbitrary but relected systematizations 
described in manuals of yantra -magic. 
Further, Mah̄dhara associates six closing words 
of mantras with the respective acts, namely namaḥ  
and paciication , svāhā  and subjugation, vaṣaṭ  
and immobilization,  vauṣaṭ  and enmity,  hūṁ  and 
eradication, phaṭ  and liquidation  (verses 32cd–
33ab, Bühnemann 2000: 457). According to this 
categorization, the closing svāhā  in the ‘Ratu Boko 
version’ of the mantra would neatly correspond to 
subjugation;39 on the other hand, the closing phaṭ  
in the series attested in the Pañcakāṇḍastava  and 
Gaṇapatitattva  may be linked to liquidation.40 But, 
also in this case, diferent systematizations exist, 
and it is therefore diicult to establish with certain -
ty which one was used as a prototype by the authors 
of these documents;41 we may just conclude that 
although the details difer widely, the principles 
underlying the application were probably the same. 
I should also like to point out that such formulas 
as namaḥ , svāhā  and phaṭ , together with the be -
ginning oṁ, constitute very general mantric units 
39. he Hevajratantra  (II, ix.21) describes a mantra of 
attraction ( ākarṣaṇa )—which is in fact related to subju -
gation ( vaśīkaraṇa ) in that text—made up by the syllables 
oṁ, hūṁ, and the closing svāhā  (in connection with the 
names of celestial nymphs to be attracted): see Nihom 1995: 
524–25. On the other hand, Sundberg (2003: 178) envisaged 
an element of ‘auspiciousness’ in it, for svāhā  is admittedly 
an exclamation of blessing used in benign contexts, be they 
mantric, ritual, or otherwise. Contrast my remark about 
the sequence oṁ … svāhā below, as well as  my nn. 42, 44. 
40. his would be in harmony with the goal of inal li -
beration ( mokṣa ): besides noting the mention of māraṇa , I 
refer to Goudriaan’s (1978: 74) deinition of phaṭ  as a word 
‘loaded with magic’, a ‘sonic explosion’ used for piercing. 
41. he Vaiṣṇava Pāñcarātra Jayākhyasaṁhitā  prescribes 
svāhā  for homa , svadhā  for ancestor worship, phaṭ  for 
destructive activities, hūṁ  for creating hatred, and namaḥ  
for release (Goudriaan 1978: 74); other combinations are 
found in diferent texts, namely phaṭ  with vidveṣana , uc-
cāṭana  and māraṇa ; svāhā  with śānti , ākarṣaṇa  and puṣṭi ; 
hūṁ  with vidveṣana  and māraṇa  (ibid.: 75, 288). that enclose bījamantra s to form efective mantric 
sequences, and therefore need not necessarily be 
connected with a particular function.42
Let us turn to the Gaṇapatitattva  again. he 
mention of Khaḍgarāvaṇa, the ten syllables, and 
the mṛtyuñjaya mantra43 in the second paragraph 
of the Old Javanese commentary to śloka s 59–60 
ofers a hint to the fact that the mantra jaḥ-ṭaḥ-
kiḥ-hūṁ-phaṭ  was meant to be employed—as, it 
appears, also in the Pañcakāṇḍa —in a context of 
Tantric magic. Khaḍgarāvaṇa is the chief deity of 
the Bhūtatantras of the exorcistic Paścimasrotas di -
vision of the Mantramārga (Sanderson 2003–4: 374),  
a Rudra possessing the demonic identity of both 
Rāvaṇa and Bhairava, who presides over evil beings 
and is invoked in his capacity as lord of the bhūta s 
(bhūtanātha ) to chase them away.44 he mṛtyuñ -
jaya (‘Conqueror of Death’) is both a mantra and 
a god—the Old Javanese commentary indeed calls 
it a deva —i.e., a mantric representation of the form 
of Śiva called Mṛtyuñjaya, Mṛtyujit or Amṛteśa (see 
White 2012; Padoux 2011: 95); besides granting, as 
the śloka  and the Old Javanese commentary puts 
it, impenetrability from all weapons, long life, and 
victory in battle,45 it also ensures ‘freedom from 
42. Griiths (2014a: 177, n. 125) notes that the absence 
of svāhā  in the sequence [oṁ] ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ attested in 
some Sanskrit, Tibetan and Old Javanese documents ‘can 
be considered a trivial diference’.
43. he mantra oṁ maṁ saḥ  in the sequence  oṁ maṁ 
saḥ vauṣaṭ / mtyuñjayāya namaḥ svāhā vaṣaṭ should 
probably be emended to oṁ juṁ saḥ  on the basis of the 
reading oṁ mjuṅ saḥ in GaṇUd and in the prose part of 
Stuti 453, Mṛtyuñjaya  (which is found, interestingly, only 
in the Pūjā Kṣatriya : cf. n. 46). Oṁ jūṁ saḥ is indeed 
the base-mantra ( mūlamantra ) of Amṛteśvara/Mṛtyujit/
Mṛtyuñjaya (see Sanderson 2004: 260; Padoux 2011: 95). In 
Kriyākālaguṇottara  9.45, the sequence oṁ jūṁ saḥ svāhā  
is invoked as the armour ( kavaca ) of the mūlamantra  of 
Khaḍgarāvaṇa (see Slouber 2007: 73). 
44. Chapter 9 of the Kriyākālaguṇottara  (verses 39–44, 
ed. Slouber 2007) relates that by chanting the heart mantra, 
oṁ bhūtapati svāhā, one is able to subjugate ( vaśam ) and 
drive of spirits, subjugate even the gods, and perform the 
six acts by thought alone. Khaḍgarāvaṇa is also mentioned 
in the Balinese ritual for the preparation of consecrated 
water (Hooykaas 1974: 54). 
45. Besides in the Netratantra  (see Padoux 2011: 95–96), 
the mṛtyuñjaya  is featured in the context of ṣaṭkarmāṇi  
in the Sanskrit Siddhayogeśvarīmata , a text of the Kaula 
Acri mockup.indd   332 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 11] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 333
hindrances’ ( luput iṅ sarvvavighna), which may 
be linked to another function of  this all-powerful 
mantra, namely controlling, routing, and destroy -
ing demons ‘with total eicacy’ (White 2012: 145). 
In fact the mṛtyuñjaya  mantric lore has a royal 
dimension to it, converging with the exorcistic 
aspect.46 his is apparent, for instance, in Chapter 19 
of the Netratantra —a pre-9th century Kashmirian 
text devoted to the cult of Mṛtyujit/Amṛteśa. As 
pointed out by Sanderson (2004: 246), this chapter 
‘details procedures for countering possession by 
various classes of being. Here the Guru’s role is 
portrayed almost exclusively as that of priest to 
the royal family’.47
stream of Śaivism. It considers the objectives of the six 
rites as siddhi s, divided into the categories of sāttvika , 
rājasa  and tāmasa  (Törzsök 2000: 138–39). he sāttvika  
include, e.g., well-being ( puṣṭi ), expiation or paciication 
(śānti ), conquering death ( mṛtyuñjaya ), and inal release 
(mokṣa); the rājasa include, e.g ., subjugating people to 
one’s will ( vaśya) and attracting people ( ākarṣaṇa); the 
tāmasa include, e.g ., murder ( māraṇa ) and annihilation 
(jambhana )—compare the analogous goals of inal release , 
destruction of enemies, success in the world, and attracting 
the afection of somebody in the irst paragraph of the Old 
Javanese commentary to śloka s 59–60, and long life and 
victory in battle in śloka  61.
46. his royal dimension is also suggested by the fact 
that the half- śloka  dīrghāyuṣam … saṅgrāmavijāyī bhavet  
attested in (some manuscripts of) the apotropaic Pañ-
cakāṇḍa  3cd and in the mṛtyuñjaya -focused śloka  61cd of 
the Gaṇapatitattva  has a parallel in the Pūjā Kṣatriya , a 
ritual compilation with Vaiṣṇava overtones that apparently 
contains materials geared towards the protection of royal 
committers (see Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971: 281).
47. Sanderson (2004) has made a number of points that 
are directly relevant to the themes I am treating here. When 
discussing the nineteenth chapter of the Netratantra in 
connection with the rites performed by Śaiva and Buddhist 
royal chaplains for the protection of the kingdoms of their 
patrons, he (2004: 233) notes that the ‘protective, thera -
peutic, and aggressive rites for the beneit of the monarch 
and the kingdom’ performed by rājaguru s were grounded 
in the Tantras of the Śaiva Mantramārga. On the basis of 
Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa  3.1.10, Sanderson (ibid.: 239) describes 
‘(1) rituals to ward of dangers and ills of every kind from 
the king and his kingdom ( śāntikaṃ karm a), some of them 
simple rites to protect the king’s person to be performed at 
various times every day, others much more elaborate cere -
monies to be performed periodically, (2) rituals to restore 
his health and vigour ( pauṣṭikaṃ karma ), (3) rituals to 
harm his enemies ( ābhicārikaṃ karma ), (4) the regular and the ‘ratu boko mantra’ and  
gaṇapati: on taming demons…
Several elements in both the Pañcakāṇḍa  hymn and 
the closing section of the Gaṇapatitattva  conjure 
up a context of magic and exorcism, i.e. dispelling 
or pacifying ‘demonic agents, hostile to well-being’ 
(Linrothe 1999: 24), or  ‘beings that cause injury’ 
(hiṁsaka ; see White 2012: 148). he crescendo of 
apotropaic magic culminates in the ‘agricultural 
exorcism’ of the paṅlukatan gaṇapati, which at 
some point was inserted into the textual transmis -
sion. he insertion of this material as a conclusion 
to a text dominated by the igure of Gaṇapati is 
appropriate, for Gaṇapati, beside being the remover 
of obstacles ( vighnāntakṛt ) par excellence, is also 
the ‘Lord ( pati) of Demonic Hosts ( gaṇa )’. As White 
(2012: 149) puts it, such beings as yakṣa s, rākṣasa s, 
graha s, vināyaka s, and so forth
can only be controlled by placating the mas -
ters of their respective hosts: that is, one of the 
Seven Mothers, or gods like Bhairava, Gaṇapa -
ti, V̄rabhadra, or Hanumān. hese multiple 
Spirit Lords ( bhūteśvara s, bhūtanātha s)—ge -
neric terms already attested in the ̄yurvedic 
literature … and that continue to be employed 
throughout modern-day South Asia—constitut -
ed the original pantheons of the ‘Bhūta Tantras’. 
White (2012: 150) notes that the Netratantra  
itself, and texts of later Tantric traditions, came 
to subsume the bhūtanātha s beneath a principal 
deity (e.g., Amṛteśa), and relegated them to
the maṇḍala’s dark fringe … where the bhūta-
nātha s, now reduced to the status of guardians 
at the gates, were mobilised to wall out the 
demonic horde that would have liked noth -
ing better than to break through and devour 
everyone in sight.
he role of ‘guardian of the gate’ its the proile 
of Gaṇapati, who is invoked as remover of obstacles 
prior to undertaking any activity, and portrayed at 
occasional rituals ( nityaṃ karma  and naimittikaṃ karma ) 
required of the king, (5) reparatory rites ( prāyaścittīyaṃ 
karma ), and (6) postmortuary rites ( aurdhvadehikaṃ 
karma )’. See my discussion of the Khmer materials pre -
sented by Sanderson below,  p. 346.
Acri mockup.indd   333 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 12] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 334
the boundaries of Hindu and Buddhist temples. It 
is therefore not surprising that the closing section 
of the Gaṇapatitattva  mentions the mantra jaḥ 
ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ side by side with a series of 
Bhūtanāthas: Khaḍgarāvaṇa, Mṛtyuñjaya (or Mṛ -
tyujit/Amrteśabhairava), and Gaṇapati, for all these 
deities (and the mantras they personify) play a role 
in dispelling hindrances and malevolent inluences. 
he dictum luput iṅ sarvvavighna  (‘free from 
all hindrances’), speciically attributed by the 
Old Javanese commentary to  śloka s 59–60 to the 
mṛtyuñjaya  mantra, exactly corresponds to the 
outcome of the familiar opening benedictory 
formula oṁ avighnam astu,  ‘let there be no hin -
drances’. his formula occurs at the beginning of 
Javanese and Balinese manuscripts, and notably 
also, as pointed out by Griiths (2014a: 178), in 
Old Javanese inscriptions from the 9th century 
onwards. One of these—the Guluṅ Guluṅ inscrip -
tion of Śaka 851—starts with oṁ avighnam astu 
gaṇapataye namaḥ  (Oṁ, let there be no obstacles! 
Homage to Gaṇapati!), thereby making the con -
nection with Gaṇapati—the god who removes ob -
stacles—explicit. Griiths (2014a: 177–78) points 
out that three brief inscriptions on stone boundary 
markers from Central Java substitute this common 
opening with the formula ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ, which 
obviously served the purpose of removing obstacles. 
Interestingly, two out of three of these inscriptions 
seem to have been recovered from seemingly Śaiva 
contexts, and both date back to the second half of 
the 9th century.48 
Griiths corroborates the association of the 
mantra ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ with removal of obstacles 
on the one hand, and with ākarṣaṇa  on the other, 
by citing an important parallel from the Tantric 
Buddhist text Sarvavajrodaya , section 56:
He who wishes to efect complete freedom 
from obstacles should cover them (i.e. the ei -
gies of the directional deities who might cause 
trouble, pinned down in section 55) with mud. 
If in this condition ( evam ) they [still] make 
48. he three short inscriptions are: a cylindrical stone 
carved in the  Śaiva cave-shrine of Abang, dated 872 (Stut -
terheim 1932: 293; Damais 1955: 29–30); an (undated) stone 
post from the Śaiva Candi Bongkol (Stutterheim 1932: 294); 
a stone post, mentioning a (Buddhist?) vihāra,  dated 874 
(Stutterheim 19З2: 296; Damais 1955: 236).trouble, he should immerse himself in [the de -
ity] Vajrahūṁkāra and adduct them with the 
̣akkirāja; should also adduct them with the 
Vajra-goads etc.; should bind the [seal of] Va -
jrahūṁkāra; and should step on the eigy of 
the obstacle with his let foot. Ater the practice 
of [self-]expansion with hūṁ vaṁ hūṁ etc., he 
should stand in pratyālīḍha  stance… (trans. 
Griiths 2014a: 178)
To Griiths, ‘it seems that ṭakkirājenākṛṣya  can 
be interpreted as ‘‘having adducted by reciting the 
mantra named ̣akkirāja’’, and that the intended 
mantra is the one that concerns us here’. In fact 
the Sarvavajrodaya  seems to break up the discrete 
constituents of a longer mantra. By mentioning, 
besides ̣akkirāja, ‘also the actions of adduction etc. 
by means of the vajra -goad etc.’ ( vajrāṅkuśādibhir 
apy ākarṣaṇādikaṁ kṛtvā ), as well as mentioning 
the binding of Vajrahūṁkāra, the text is appar -
ently referring to the fourfold sequence of actions, 
instruments, deities, and mantras hinted at in 
the sequence vajrāṅkuśādibhir ākṛṣya praveśya 
baddhvā vaśīkṛtya  ‘having adducted, drawn in, 
bound, brought under control’ in section 55.49 hose 
actions correspond to those detailed in a passage 
of the Trailokyavijayamahāmaṇḍala section of 
the STTS . Snellgrove (1987: 222–23), pointing to 
a passage describing a fourfold process by which 
‘all the Great beings, the Buddhas and the others, 
are summoned, drawn in, bound, so entering his 
power’, notes that 
the four door guardians represent the four stag -
es of introducing the divinities into the maṇḍa -
la, which are efected by the mantra Jaḥ Hūṁ 
Va ṁ Hoḥ ! Vajrāṅkuśa (Vajra-Hook) summons 
them; Vajrapāśa (Vajra-Noose) draws them in; 
Vajrasphoṭa (Vajra-Fetter) binds them and Va-
jrāveśa (Vajra-Penetration) alias Vajraghaṇṭā 
(Vajra-Bell) completes the pervasion of the 
maṇḍala  by wisdom…. his fourfold function 
of the door guardians fully explains their names, 
which might otherwise appear quite arbitrary.
A similar arrangement, with minor variants, is 
found in the Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra , in the 
section where the master introduces his pupil into 
the maṇḍala  (ed. Skorupski, p. 103 and 290), in the 
49.  Cf. also sections 13 and 40.
Acri mockup.indd   334 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 13] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 335
Vajraśekhara  (one of the explanatory Tantras of the 
STTS ), and several other Esoteric Buddhist texts.50 
he set of correspondences (from below upwards) 
may be schematized as follows: 
hoḥ North Vajraghaṇṭā/ 
Vajrāveśavajra -bell/ 
vajra -pene-
trationto penetrate/
draw within 
one’s power
vaṁ West Vajraśṛṅkhala/  
Vajrasphoṭavajra -fetter/  
vajra -chainto bind
hūṁ South Vajrapāśa vajra - 
nooseto draw
jaḥ East Vajrāṅkuśa vajra -goad to adduct
Having noted that the set of names and mantric 
acts found in Sarvavajrodaya  55–56 correspond to 
those connected to the male gate-guardians of the 
Vajradhātumaṇḍala of the STTS  and other Buddhist 
sources, I should like to make the following points: 
(1) he four guardians are personiications of 
their hand-attributes, namely the hook, noose, 
chain, and bell, and of the activities and mantric 
50. On the STTS  (194.4–14, ed. Lokesh Chandra) and 
Vajraśekhara  (49b6/8.17), see Nihom 1998a: 248 and 253, 
notes 16–17 ( STTS : vajrāṅkuśa + ākarṣa + hūṁ jjah ; va-
jrapāśa +praveśa +  huṁ hūṁ ; vajrasphoṭa + bandha + huṁ 
vaṁ;  vajrāveśa + āveśa + hum aḥ ; VŚ: aṅkuśa + ākarṣa + 
hūṁ jaḥ ; vajrapāśa + praveśa +  hūṁ hūṁ ; vajrasphoṭa  + 
bandha +  hūṁ baṁ ; vajrāveśa  + āveśa + hūṁ phaṭ ho ). 
Nihom (ibid.: 248) notes that the bījas for Vajrāṅkuśa ( jaḥ) 
and Vajrapāśa ( hūṁ ) correspond to those given in the 
mantras inscribed on the gold foils recovered from Candi 
Gumpung in Sumatra, which he regards as relecting a 
form of the Garbhadhātumaṇḍala; I cannot however agree 
with his statement that ‘the bījas for Vajrasphoṭa, oṃ in the 
Candi Gumpung evidence and vaṃ , or baṃ , in these two 
tantras, are diferent and can not be reconciled’, for o is a 
common spelling variant of va in documents from ancient 
Indonesia (therefore oṁ = vaṁ = baṁ); on the other hand, 
the Candi Gumpung text has oṁ vajramuṣṭi baṁ. he 
item relecting Vajrāveśa is absent. Sādhanamālā  no. 251 
lists the sequence jaḥ (ānīya , adduction), hūṁ  (praveśa , 
penetration), vaṁ  (bandhana , binding), hoḥ  (toṣaṇa , 
satisfaction); no. 97 ( samayamaṇḍala ) gives the feminine 
names of goddesses (e.g., vajrāṅkuśī , -pāśī, -sphoṭā , -ghaṇṭā , 
associated with the activities of ākarṣa  and the syllable 
jaḥ, praveśa  and huṁ , bandha  and vaṁ , vaśīkaraṇa  and 
hoḥ  (Goudriaan 1978: 271). An analogous account of fem -
ininized deities is found in the Tibetan translation of the 
Herukasādhana  of Huṅkāravajra, f. 204r5–7 (see Sanderson 
2009: 153, n. 349). See also Sinclair, this volume, p. 50; S no-
dgrass 1988: 629–33; and ig. 1 in Sharma 2011: 211.operations they imply, and as such they are included 
in the sets of attributes of many wrathful ( krodha ) 
Buddhist deities, such as (Caṇḍa)Vajrapāṇi/Trai-
lokyavijaya, Yamāntaka, Hevajra, etc., whose func -
tion is to tame demonic forms of Śiva.51 he obvious 
implication is that in the Sarvavajrodaya  passage 
the practitioner is imagined to embody the deity: 
he is explicitly invited to identify himself with, or 
connect to, Vajrahūṁkāra ( vajrahūṁkārayogaṁ 
kṛtvā ), perform the four actions with the four at -
tributes, bind his ‘seal’ or mudrā  (vajrahūṁkāraṁ 
baddhvā ), and assume the pratyālīḍha  pose.52  
(2) ‘̣akkirāja’ denotes the mantra ṭakki , and 
at the same time a wrathful deity of Esoteric Bud -
dhism linked to Trailokyavijaya, whose function 
is to eliminate disasters and subdue demons and 
ghosts; his attributes are the hook and the noose. 
Similarly, a deity called Vajrarāja, inhabiting the 
Vajradhātumaṇḍala and associated with Akṣobhya, 
represents the unit jaḥ and the aṅkuśa  (as such it 
is also attested in the Candi Gumpung gold foil: 
oṁ vajrarāja jaḥ ).
51. See Griiths (2014b) on the Borobudur inscribed foil 
attesting a hṛdaya  invoking Caṇḍavajrapāṇi, where that 
wrathful deity is characterized as bearing a sword, club, axe , 
snare, cudgel ( vajra ) and laming ire, and putting his let 
and right foot respectively on the breasts of Pārvat̄ and the  
locks of Paśupati (Śiva). Griiths (2014a: 178) notes that in 
Guhyasamājatantra  14.22 the mantra oṁ ṭakki hūṁ jaḥ  
is explicitly called sarvatathāgataṭakkirājamahākrodha ; 
the Tattvasaṅgraha  and Vajraśekhara  characterize the four 
weapons associated to the guardians of the maṇḍala  with 
the epithet mahākrodha . he STTS  relates that Vajrapāṇi 
issued forth from the hearts of all the assembled Tathāgatas,  
gathering together to create the body of Mahāvajrakrodha; 
then Vairocana uttered the mantra oṁ ṭakki jjaḥ , which 
is the disciplinary  aṅkuśa of all the Tathāgatas (Davidson 
1991: 200) .
52. Cf. Griiths 2014a: 178, n. 130. Goudriaan (1978: 217) 
quotes a verse of the Sādhanamālā  (71, p. 144) declaring that, 
when performing subjugation, a practitioner should master 
attributes such as ‘ vajra , disc, trident, arrow, hammer, 
noose, elephant hook, ointment, paste to be smeared on 
the feet, and painted spot on the forehead’; he argues that 
the implication from this and similar passages is that 
the practitioner should meditate on himself as bearing 
one or more of these attributes. An instance, found in a 
Dunhuang Tibetan manuscript, of ritual puriication of 
the practitioner and his imaginative transformation of 
himself into the wrathful Buddha ̣akkirāja is described 
by Dalton (2011: 87).
Acri mockup.indd   335 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 14] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 336
(3) he ‘extended’ mantric sequence given by 
Sarvavajrodaya  56 could be  ṭakki jaḥ hūṁ vaṁ 
hoḥ .53 he text is not the only one to add the unit 
ṭakki  (ṭakkirāja ) to the other four: signiicantly 
enough, a similar sequence is attested in the fourth 
Old Javanese stone inscription (9th century) men -
tioned by Griiths (2014a: 179), bearing twice the 
sequence ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ jaḥ hūṁ vaṁ hoḥ —an 
extended variant of the ṭakki jaḥ hūṁ  mantra.54
(4) he mantras ṭaki  (̣akkirāja) and jaḥ 
(Vajrāṅkuśa) in the Sarvavajrodaya  are both as -
sociated with attraction ( ākarṣaṇa , goad),55 while 
hūṁ  is associated with drawing to oneself ( praveśa , 
snare)—which ultimately corresponds to a form of 
vaśīkaraṇa .56 hus, the sequence ṭakki jaḥ hūṁ 
implies both attraction ( ākarṣaṇa ) and drawing to 
oneself ( vaśīkaraṇa ).57 In fact the sources display 
53. his is given in the devatāyoga  section of Kuladatta’s 
Kriyāsasaṅgraha  (ed. Inui, Part 2): oṁ ṭakki hūṁ jaḥ  / iti 
paṭhan trir vajram ullālayet  / oṁ ṭakki jaḥ hūṁ vaṁ hoḥ  
// hṛdy utkarṣaṇam  (I thank Iain Sinclair for pointing out 
this reference in an email dated 30 August 2014).
54. his reading is reconstituted by Griiths on the basis 
of Damais’ transcription paki hūṁ jaḥ jaḥ hūṁ vaho  
(2x); the original artefact is regrettably no longer available, 
and the context and function of the inscription remain 
obscure. Griiths (2014a: 179) traces this sequence to a 
virtually identical one in a section on the consecration 
of the Tantric master in the Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā  (6.2.9), 
namely oṁ ṭakki jaḥ hūṁ vaṁ hoḥ.
55. What Sundberg (2003: 173) calls ‘the hṛdaya  of 
aṅkuśa  used in the text as both the elephant-goad means 
of summoning the gods to Sumeru’ is actually (oṁ) ṭakki 
jaḥ and not hūṁ ṭakki jaḥ. His claim that this is also 
the personal hṛdaya or quintessence of Vajrapāṇi is in -
correct, for in the STTS  and related Buddhist literature 
the personal mantra of Vajrapāṇi—and of his alter-egos 
Vajrasattva, Vajradhara, Vajrahūṁkāra, and Trailok -
yavijaya—is hūṁ  (see Linrothe 1999: 156). One may also 
argue that the syllable jaḥ alone is the element that efects 
summoning. 
56. Mantramahodadhi  25.26f links the snare-seal ( pāśa-
mudrā ) with vaśīkaraṇa  (Goudriaan 1978: 289). 
57. See, e.g., Guhyasamāja  14.27–30, where ākarṣaṇa  is 
carried out by means of both vajrāṅkuśa  and vajrapāśa ; 
see Nihom 1995: 525 on the identiication of ākarṣaṇa  and 
vaśīkaraṇa  in Esoteric Buddhist manuals. An illuminating 
discussion on the relationship between the attributes (and 
especially the hook and snare) of Esoteric Buddhist deities 
and the magical acts of  ākarṣaṇa and vaśīkaraṇa may be 
found in Goudriaan 1978: 316–17. a tendency to consider both goad and snare as 
characteristic of attraction, which constitutes 
a ‘relection of the tendency to make attraction 
a facultative introductory stage to subjugation’ 
(Goudriaan 1978: 317). As Sundberg (2003: 173) 
notes, the basic idea of the mantra ṭakki (j)jaḥ , 
as found in the STTS ,
is that it is the mantra of a ‘hook’, ‘goad’ or a 
‘prod’ for summoning, for compulsion, for con -
vocation, the utterance of which has compelled 
Mahādeva to Sumeru. Iyanaga (1985: 669, note 
47) notes that the Japanese commentary pro -
vides some control over the meaning of the 
Sanskrit mantra, which could also be consid -
ered as ākarṣaṇa  (magic to draw to oneself) or 
by vaśīkarana (magic to draw someone to your 
will). Davidson (1991: 200) ofers ‘dragged’ as a 
term suitable to connote what happened to the 
gods ater Vairocana intoned the mantra.
At the same time Sundberg (2003: 173) refers 
to Snellgrove’s (1987: 222–23, quoted above) more 
articulated reading of the relevant passage of the 
STTS , which ‘serves very well to diferentiate the 
use of the aṅkuśa from other Tantric implements’. 
he four actions of attracting, drawing to oneself, 
snaring and ‘penetrating’ are those narrated in the 
main episode in the Trailokyavijaya cycle of the 
taming of Maheśvara, the lord of demonic hosts. 
In fact taming or paciication ( śānti ) involves a 
more elaborate procedure than just the mantric 
abduction/attraction ( [ṭakki] jaḥ ) and binding 
(hūṁ ) of the victim, for it also implies mantric over -
powering (= vaṁ ) and resurrection (= hoḥ ), ater 
which ‘conversion’ occurs. In view of that fact, one 
may connect the mantric units vaṁ  with fettering 
or immobilization ( bandhana  or stambhana , chain), 
and hoḥ  with ‘penetration’ or ‘possession’ ( āveśa , 
bell). he latter may be regarded as a violent act, as 
penetration implies ‘stabbing’ (with bell, perhaps 
iguratively indicating a ‘mantric penetration’ via 
the medium of sound).58
58. Perhaps because according to Sanskritic ontology 
sound pervades (i.e., ‘penetrates’) space ( ākāśa )—compare 
the association of phaṭ  with ākāśa  in the Gaṇapatitat -
tva and mahākāśa  in the Pañcakāṇḍa.  Also note that 
the word kīlayet  (‘he should pierce’ [with a kīla/kīlaya ]) 
appears ater the sequence vajrāṅkuśādibhir ākṛṣya 
praveśya baddhvā vaśīkṛtya in Sarvavajrodaya  55. he 
Acri mockup.indd   336 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 15] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 337
(5) he invocation of these mantra-deities 
during the preliminary stage of the practice for the 
purpose of removing obstacles may correspond 
to the invocation of Gaṇapati as gate-guardian 
and remover of obstacles at the beginning of any 
undertaking; this trans-sectarian aspect mirrors 
the use of the opening formula ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ  
in the three short Old Javanese inscriptions in a 
manner that is co-functional with the use of the 
formula oṁ avighnam astu [gaṇapataye namaḥ ] 
in inscriptions and manuscripts. hus, the aim 
seems to have been apotropaic, i.e. to exorcise the 
potentially dangerous beings and transform them 
into benign guardians of the gates or points of the 
compass.59 his process is symbolically enacted 
through the summoning, drawing, overpowering, 
and reviving of the deity, who is thereby trans -
formed. At the same time, it cannot be exclud -
ed that the formula presupposes an element of 
anti-Śaiva polemic, alluding to the taming, con -
version, and transformation of Gaṇapati into an 
auspicious Buddhist deity. 
(6) he mention of ‘the refuge given by the 
Sun’ ( ādityasya parāyaṇam ) in śloka  4 of the Pañ-
cakāṇḍa —which does not explicitly refer to the 
deity it is devoted to—in association with purii -
cation and destruction of disease and evil could be 
a reference to Amṛtakuṇḍali(n), a Buddhist vigh-
nāntaka  deity not unrelated to Vināyaka-Gaṇapati, 
STTS  makes clear that Mahādeva, having been rendered 
powerless and lying prostrate under the feet of Vajrapāṇi, 
literally becomes possessed as a result of the mantra oṁ 
vajrāviśa hanaya traṁ traṭ uttered by the latter. he 
‘sufering of Mahādeva’s possession’ only ceases ater Va -
jrapāṇi intones the essential phrase of loving kindness of 
all the Buddhas: oṁ buddha maitrī vajra rakṣa haṁ 
(Davidson 1995c: 555). 
59. For a representative example of apotropaic and pro -
tective use of the ṭakkirāja- mantra in a Sanskrit source, 
see Vajrasattvaniṣpādana  of pseudo-Candrak̄rti (ed. 
Luo and Tomabechi 2009), 2.4.4, where a protective fence 
(prākāra ) and canopy ( vajrapañjara ) is meditatively visu -
alized: tataṣ ṭakkirājamantreṇa lohajalāgnivāyuprākāra -
catuṣṭayaṁ yathākramaṁ bāhyato vicintayet  / tatrāyaṁ 
mantraḥ—ṭakki hūṁ jaḥ ; similarly, in the Vajraśekhara /
Vajraśikhara , the mantra ṭakki ja  is used to clean out 
kleśa s (Taid̄ Kitamura 2012: 341, sec. 597), while in the 
Trailokyavijayamahākalparāja , ṭakki hụ̄ ja is used as 
a kavacamantra  (Taid̄ Kitamura 2014: 34). I thank Iain 
Sinclair for these references.who also resides, as the latter, in the northern sector 
of the maṇḍala .60 In connection with point (5) 
above, I wonder whether the use of the mantra  
jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ in the Gaṇapatitattva  
and the Old Javanese inscriptions relects an 
attempt to ‘bridge’ the Buddhist Amṛtakuṇḍalin 
and the Śaiva Gaṇapati, which would amount to 
a Śaiva appropriation of a largely co-function -
al Buddhist apotropaic deity. Given that in the 
Amṛtakuṇḍalivināyakaban dha dhāraṇī  (cf. Giebel 
2010: 191) Amṛtakuṇḍalin is described as ‘having 
put an end to the life of Mahāgaṇapati’ ( mahāg -
aṇapatijīvitāntakarāya ), implying a fundamental 
enmity between the two vināyaka /vighnāntaka  
deities, this appropriation would carry an element 
of anti-Buddhist polemic.
...and on taming elephants 
he mantric unit jaḥ is well represented in Buddhist 
Tantras as the mantric expedient used to adduct or 
invoke the victim or deity in the preliminary part 
60. Indeed the Shibahui zhigui  (Giebel 1995: 143) places 
the Sun ( sūrya ) among the apotropaic, originally Hindu 
deities of Maheśvara’s retinue (which includes Gaṇapa -
ti-Vināyaka), who are conined to the outer space of the 
maṇḍala ; the STTS  instead of Sūrya has Amṛtakuṇḍalin, 
‘for which the Tibetan sDe-dge and sNar-thang editions 
have ‘‘Nyi-Ma’’, viz. Sūrya/̄ditya, while ̄nandagarbha 
also identiies Amṛtakuṇḍali with Sūrya/̄ditya’ (ibid.: 145, 
n. 62). Griiths (2014c) has detected a variant of the mantra 
of Amṛtakundalin, which is known from various ritual 
manuals in Sanskrit, in a prob. 11th- to 13th-century stone 
inscription from Muara Takus in Sumatra; what might be 
another instance of a mantra related to Amṛtakuṇḍalin 
is that of the lead-bronze foil unearthed near Borobudur 
(cf. Griiths 2014b), which shares the invocation namo 
ratnatrayāya  / namaḥś caṇḍavajrapāṇaye  / mahāyak -
ṣasenāpataye (with slight variants) with the opening part 
of the Amṛtakuṇḍalin mantra found in T 953.302c12–13, 
303a3–5 (cf. Sinclair, this volume), the Amṛtakuṇḍalivinā-
yakabandhadhāraṇī  (cf. Giebel 2010: 190, and 192 for a 
discussion of parallels in the Susiddhikarasūtra  etc.). 
On the other hand, the connection between *Tāra-
Sūrya (Sgro ma nyi ma) or *Tāraka-Sūrya (Sgrol ba nyi 
ma) and ̣akkirāja discussed by Dalton (2011: 239, n. 43) 
may be worth exploring. Tāraka features in a Śaiva myth 
as a demon oppressing Hindu gods, who is defeated by Śiva. 
Note also that on his vāhana  (the rat), ‘Gaṇapati symbolized 
a sun god covering the animal, which in ancient mythology 
is a symbol of the night’ (see Michael 1983: 95–96).
Acri mockup.indd   337 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 16] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 338
of the ritual or visualization.61 Being called ‘hook’ 
or ‘elephant-goad’ ( aṅkuśa ), it bears a strong asso -
ciation with elephants in the Indic imaginaire . he 
reason why jaḥ represents a hook or elephant-goad 
is obvious: in North and Eastern Indian scripts, 
such as Devanāgar̄ and Siddhamātṛkā, this graphe -
me closely resembles such instruments ( ज D.;     and 
 S.).62 Furthermore, elephants represent the pre -
ferred victims of rituals of subjugation—especially 
in Buddhist texts; as noted by Goudriaan (1978: 332), 
‘when there is a question of animals to be tamed and 
brought under power, the elephant will be the most 
impressive object on which a performer’s abilities 
can manifest themselves’. 
A version of the ‘taming of Maheśvara’ myth 
featuring a demonic form of Gaṇapati is found in 
the 14th-century Old Javanese Buddhist kakavin 
Sutasoma . here Prince Sutasoma, a manifesta -
tion of the Bodhisattva Vairocana, ‘tames’ (i.e., 
converts to Buddhism) a nāga , a tigress, and the 
elephant-headed giant Gajavaktra—all explicitly  
portrayed as followers of the demonic form of Śiva 
known as Mahākāla, the counterpart of the Ma -
heśvara of the Trailokyavijaya cycle. he text cli -
maxes in the inal confrontation between Sutasoma 
and Mahākāla, which also results in the taming 
and conversion of the latter to Buddhism. 
Insofar that it portrays the transformation of 
violent, unrestrained, and subversive demonic char -
61. See, e.g., GST  p. 55, 1f (Goudriaan 1978: 297), Heva -
jratantra  Ch. 4 (ibid.: 298); Sādhanamālā  no. 59 (ibid.: 
303). For occurrences of variants of the mantra ‘Aṅkuśa’ 
in Amoghapāśa-related ritual texts in the Taish̄ canon, 
see Shinohara 2014: 135.
62. hese associations are by no means uncommon in the 
Sanskritic tradition. Jayabhadra, the 9th-century Sinha -
lese vajrācārya  of Vikramaś̄la, in his commentary to the 
Cakrasaṁvaratantra  homologizes the letters ra and ha of 
the Sanskrit syllabary (as written in northeastern India in 
that period) with the male and female genitals by virtue 
of their similarity in shape (Gray 2005: 440); in a similar 
fashion, the grapheme e (as written in Śāradā, as well as 
Devanāgar̄ script) was called trikoṇa  (‘triangle’) and as -
sociated with the female organ by non-dual Śaiva authors 
Abhinavagupta and Jayaratha (Padoux 1990: 263–65). An 
association between ākarṣaṇa  and a ‘hook’ may be found 
in the Ṣaṭkarmadīpikā  (p. 188 st. 52), which declares that the 
victim of ākarṣaṇa  should be thought of as being ‘caught 
and dragged along like a ish by a ish hook’ (Goudriaan 
1978 : 291). acters—Mahākāla and his retinue—into ‘demon 
devotees’ of the Buddha, the narrative cycle of the 
Sutasoma  recalls that of the ‘taming of Maheśvara/
Rudra’ in the Trailokyavijaya cycle. Canto 32–33 
of the Sutasoma  is devoted to the conversion of 
the degraded demonic form of Gaṇapati (Gaja -
vaktra, Gajendramukha)63 from (Śaiva) demon to 
(Buddhist) Lord of demons, and hence protector of 
the outer space of the maṇḍala . If O’Brien’s (2008) 
view that the Sutasoma  narrative is a representa -
tion of a maṇḍala  is correct, then the Gajavaktra 
episode, which occurs at an early stage of Sutaso -
ma’s journey, would (ittingly) represent its outer 
section.64 Amoghavajra’s Shibahui zhigui (‘Indi -
cations of the Goals of the Eighteen Assemblies’), 
describing the section of the Vajraśekharasūtra  
on the Trailokyavijayamaṇḍala (which, being in 
the section of the First Assembly, corresponds to 
the STTS ), mentions twenty Protectors residing 
in the outer space of the maṇḍala , who were con -
verted by Vajrapāṇi, like their ‘head’ Maheśvara 
(Snodgrass 1988: 559–63, 637).65 From this evidence 
one may infer that a cycle on the conversion of 
Gaṇapati—intended as a member of Maheśvara/
63. Gajavaktra is declared to be a grossly evil being that 
is diferent from the god Gaṇarāja, son of Śiva, who is de -
picted in positive terms as the victor over the Great Lord 
of Demons. Gajavaktra belongs to a set of eight ‘pre-con -
version’ vināyaka s in some Chinese Buddhist texts; this 
set probably derives from an earlier Purāṇic set (cf. Agni -
purāṇa  III.3.4 and Garuḍapurāṇa  I.129.26 [as Hastimukha], 
referred to in Sinclair, this volume, p. 47, n. 88). As reported 
by Iain Sinclair (email dated 4 April 2014), Gajavaktra is 
a synonym of Gaṇeśa in some Newāri Buddhist works.
64. O’Brien (ibid.: 179) places the episode in the northern 
sector, which is in agreement with the description of a 
form of Vināyaka in the northern sector of the maṇḍala  by 
Amoghavajra. As the bo dhyagrī-mudrā  used by Sutasoma to 
overcome Gajavaktra (see below, n. 67) is usually associated 
with Mahāvairocana and the vajra , O’Brien sees a contra -
diction between this and the fact that the Jinabuddha of the 
northern quadrant is Amoghasiddhi, which is normally 
associated with the dhyāna-mudrā . However, the reference 
to Mahāvairocana’s bodhyagrī-mudrā would seem to be 
appropriate in the Gajavaktra episode—cf. above, n.  51 on 
Vairocana’s connection with the ṭakki hūṁ jaḥ  mantra, 
ākarṣaṇa , and the conversion of Maheśvara in the STTS .
65. Snodgrass uses the Japanese form, Jūhachie shiki  (‘Syn -
opsis of the Eighteen Assemblies’), i.e. the Kongōchōkyō-
yuga-jūhatte-shiki  (T 869); an annotated translation is 
provided by Giebel (1995: see esp. 142–46, and 150–51, n. 92).
Acri mockup.indd   338 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 17] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 339
Mahākāla’s retinue—must have existed by the time 
of Amoghavajra, and that the Gajavaktra episode of 
the Old Javanese Sutasoma  might have been based 
on such a cycle.66
he subjugation of Gajavaktra in the Sutasoma  
is efected through a mantric thunderbolt-weapon 
(bodhyagrī-mudrā ) generated from the ‘knowledge 
that is a means of destroying violence’.67 his 
66. he STTS  (ed. Horiuchi, vol. 1, p. 520), in a section 
dealing with the outer space of the maṇḍala , details a 
series of mantras and invocations to Vajrapāṇi for the 
harming and warding of of Gaṇapati, Mahāgaṇapati, 
and Vināyaka; in section 1245 the process involves the six 
acts of ākarṣaṇa , praveśa , āveśa , bandhana , vaśīkaraṇa , 
and māraṇa  (oṁ vajramālagaṇapate mālayākarṣaya 
praveśayāveśaya bandhaya vaśīkuru māraya huṁ phaṭ ). 
It would be worthwhile to investigate the sādhana- text 
pertaining to Krodhagaṇapati (Tibetan Canon no. 4994) 
attributed to At̄śa’s guru from Suvarṇadv̄pa  (see Schoter -
man, this volume), as well as Chinese Tantric Buddhist 
materials, such as those described by Duquenne (1988) and 
Lancaster (1991), which ‘present a wealth of references to 
Vināyaka along with the spells, dhāraṇ̄, mudra, and other 
rituals that could keep this malevolent spirit under control’ 
(ibid.: 279). As related by Lancaster (ibid.: 282), a text ( T 
849) devoted, like the Sutasoma , to the Buddha Vairocana, 
informs us that the Vināyakas and all the evil yakṣa s will 
be seized with fear and run away when they hear the spell 
being recited. Duquenne (1988: 323) mentions a Japanese 
Daijizaiten-hōsoku-giki  (Maheśvara-vidhi-kalpa ?), which 
is in fact a slightly enlarged version of the Shijuhō-kyō  (i.e., 
Shizhoufa jing , T 1267) attributed to Bodhiruci, which is 
dedicated to Vināyaka rituals and spells. he former text 
points to a Śaiva (or perhaps Trailokyavijaya cycle-related) 
context in its title.
67. Sutasoma hits Gajavaktra in the chest, and the demon 
is ‘rendered completely powerless; exhausted, he lay pros -
trate, unable to budge the heavy thunderbolt-weapon 
weighing down on him’ (O’Brien 2008: 45). Gajavaktra is 
thus ‘exorcised’ and the Gaṇa who had taken hold of him 
departs from the elephant-faced being, who regains control 
of his passions. he bodhyagrī-mudrā  is characterized in 
Canto 33.9c as jñānāveśa minuṣṭi , perhaps ‘penetration 
by Gnosis embodied in a ist’. his characterization calls 
to mind the mudrā  (and weapon) of the central divinity 
of the STTS  (i.e., either Vajrasattva or Vairocana), jñāna-
muṣṭi-mudrā  ‘ist of knowledge’ (Lokesh Chandra 1987: 
46), which is indeed a synonym of bodhyagrī-mudrā  (or 
bodhāgrī mudra , as described in STTS , ed. Horiuchi vol. 
1, p. 185, section 285; Sarvavajrodaya , suppl., ed. Takahashi 
1990: 78): cf. de Mallman (1986: 33, 34, 62, 130, 242, 331, 386, 
392, 393), B.T. Bhattacharya (1949: 66–68), and Bautze-Pi -
cron (2010a: 59–60). Snodgrass (1988: 316–17) describes a knowledge is, appropriately enough, suggested 
to Sutasoma by the god Indra (Canto 31.10), the 
arch-enemy—and tamer—of elephants, who rides 
the white Airāvata elephant and bears a vajra , an 
elephant-goad, and a net as his attributes. he 
mention of Indra is signiicant: as argued by Bosch 
(1947), Vajrapāṇi (and later, Vajrasattva) represents 
a Buddhist development of the Brahmanical god 
Indra; the former retains the attributes of the latter, 
and his hostility to (or mastership over) elephants; 
both reside in the eastern point of the compass.68 
As we have seen, (a ierce form of) Vajrapāṇi is 
the main Bodhisattva in the Trailokyavijaya cycle. 
hat this cycle was known in Central Java 
around the 9th century may be inferred, apart 
from the mantra inscribed on the Ratu Boko gold 
foil, from a dhāraṇī  inscribed on a lead-bronze 
foil unearthed near Borobudur, which could be 
dated to between the 8th and early 10th century 
Vajramuṣṭi Bodhisattva (himself representing Mahāvairo -
cana’s inner realization), whose vajramuṣṭi -mudrā  ‘strikes 
and destroys doubt, karma and other hindrances’. One 
may connect the bodhyagrī-mudrā and Vajrahūṁkāra, 
both of which are associated with penetration ( āveśa ). A 
vajrahūṁkāra-mudrā  associated with the krodha -deities 
Saṁvara and Hevajra is described by Linrothe (1999: 283, 
286–87, 290, 298, 334); this is also the mudrā  that the prac -
titioner should assume (in meditation) in Sarvavajrodaya  
56. Scriptural evidence linking the vajrahūṁkāra-mudrā  
to the vajramuṣṭi  is found in the Sarvadurgatipariśodhana  
(ed. Skorupski p. 136, trans. p. 13): ‘he inner enclosure is 
made by means of Vajrahuṁkāra , saying: huṁ . He binds 
the vajra -ists [ vajramuṣṭidvaya ] and forms a vajra  with his 
arms; the little ingers he makes into hooks [ aṅkuśa ] and 
raises the foreingers into a point known as Trilokyavijaya 
(Victor over the hreefold World). his is the gesture of 
Vajrahuṁkāra ’. 
68. In fact, an association between Indra and Gaṇapati 
is already found in the early Vedic corpus (see Michael 
1983: 103–6). We also ind an association between hūṁ , 
wind, Rudra and Vajrapāṇi/Vajrasattva/Indra: all these 
deities embody, to varying degrees, the terrible aspect of 
such ierce atmospheric phenomena as storm and thunder. 
In the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Buddhist manual Saṅ Hyaṅ 
Kamahāyānikan , Vajrasattva is placed in the east, asso -
ciated with the mantra hūṁ , and attributed an elephant 
as vehicle (the last association is found in ms. B only; see 
Damais 1969: 89). In Gaṇapatitattva  59–60, the mantra 
hūṁ  is linked to the element wind (the same is found in 
a Chinese text by Śubhākarasiṁha: see Damais 1969: 86), 
and associated with the visualization of Rudra.
Acri mockup.indd   339 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 18] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 340
(Kandahjaya 2009; Lokesh Chandra 2013; Griiths 
2014a, whose reconstituted text and translation I 
am quoting here). In the Mahāraudranāmahṛdaya , 
a ierce form of Vajrapāṇi (Caṇḍavajrapāṇi as 
Mahāyakṣasenāpati)—and his ‘greatly ferocious 
mantra’—is invoked to cause ‘the destruction of all 
of (Śiva’s) bhūta s and Gaṇas, that causes terror, fear 
and conlict, that causes the success of all rituals!’ 
(sarvvabhūtagaṇavināśakaraṁ raudrākāraṁ trās -
abhayavivādakaraṁ sarvvakarmmasiddhikaraṁ ). 
his mantra is declared to destroy all enemies ( sar-
vaśatru ), obstacles ( sarvavighna ), diseases ( sarva -
vyādhi ), illnesses ( sarvaroga ), and all Vināyakas 
(sarvavināyaka ). he let foot of Vajrapāṇi is placed 
on the pair of breasts of Pārvat̄.69 he inscription 
closes with a second text, a mantra composed in 
standard Sanskrit, which also opens with the same 
invocation to Caṇḍavajrapāṇi, and ends with the 
sequence  ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ jaḥ hūṁ kiṭa hūṁ ṭaki 
dhuṁ kiṭa dhuṁ iya ija i_ḥ svāhā—a variant 
of the ‘Ratu Boko mantra’. As noted by Griiths, 
it seems that these two texts were not originally 
composed together, yet they clearly display a com -
monality of context and function.70 
It is signiicant that besides the destruction of 
enemies ( sarvaśatru ) and obstacles ( sarvavighna ), 
the mahāraudranāmahṛdaya  explicitly mentions 
the destruction of all Vināyakas, namely the 
demonic forms of the elephant-headed god Gaṇapa -
ti. As we have seen above, the mantra ṭakki jaḥ 
hūṁ represents the (Elephant-)goad hostile to 
69. Compare the above-quoted passage of the Sarva -
vajrodaya , where the practitioner (embodying the deity 
Vajrahūṁkāra) is invited to assume the pratyālīḍha  stance 
and step on the eigy of the obstacle ( vighnaprakṛti , the 
tamed Śaiva deity?) with his let foot. his image re-enacts 
the events described in the Trailokyavijaya myth, when 
‘Maheśvara and his consort Umā were dragged nude and 
feet up before Vajrapāṇi, who stepped on Maheśvara with 
his let foot and on Umā’s breasts with his right’ (Sund -
berg 2003: 169). Griiths (2014b) discusses the problem 
posed by the iconography transmitted by the dhāraṇī  and 
the known sculptural corpus all over the Buddhist world, 
which shows representations of Trailokyavijaya/Vajrapāṇi 
with an opposite position of the feet (i.e., let foot on Śiva, 
right foot on Pārvat̄).
70. As discovered by Kandahjaya (2009), the irst text 
has a parallel in the Navakampa , a Sanskrit stuti  recovered 
from Balinese manuscripts (see above, n. 12). Gaṇapati, and is also connected with puriication 
and removal of obstacles. Either of these facts, or 
perhaps both, could explain the occurrence of the 
sequence oṁ ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ as a calque of oṁ avi -
ghnam astu (oṁ gaṇapataye namaḥ) in Old 
Javanese inscriptions and manuscripts. he same 
concern with the removal of obstacles, puriication, 
and subjugation/destruction of enemies is found 
in the Pañcakāṇḍa ; even more so, it features in 
the closing section of the Gaṇapatitattva , where a 
pot-pourri of mantras and visualization techniques 
with both harmful and protective purposes, and to 
grant (ritual) success and destroy obstacles, were 
compiled one ater the other.71
Represented in Esoteric Buddhist texts and 
visual documents as a quintessentially Śaiva d e
mon ic deity being tamed (i.e., trampled upon) 
by krodha-vighnāntaka  deities such as Acala, 
Vighnān taka, and Heruka/Saṁvara,72 Gaṇapati 
was absorbed as a minor deity ( vināyaka ) with the 
71. A series of goals that calls to mind those described 
in the Mahāraudranāmahṛdaya  and the closing section 
of the Gaṇapatitattva  is listed in connection with the 
mahāhṛdayadhāraṇī  bestowed by the ferocious goddess 
Vidyutkarāl̄ to Sutasoma at the beginning of his journey 
(Sutasoma  12.1), namely (the destruction of) hindrances 
(vighna ), impurity ( mala ), all enemies ( sarvaśatru ), diseases 
(roga ) and misfortunes ( upadrava ), as well as the highest 
supernatural prowess ( siddhyottama ).
72. A useful treatment of the historical development of 
the apotropaic Krodha-Vighnāntaka deities vis-à-vis the 
Dharmapāla and Guardian deities ( dikpāla ) is ofered by 
Linrothe (1999: 19–28). Having noted that ‘the essential 
metaphor behind the krodha-vighnāntaka  is that of the 
dompteur-dompt́  relationship’, Linrothe (1999: 214) draws 
attention to the pair Acala and Vighnāntaka, ‘who are both 
depicted dominating ‘‘obstruction’’ itself, in the form of 
Gaṇeśa or Vināyaka’. As for Heruka Saṁvara, Linrothe (ibid.: 
277) notes that this deity ‘appears just as Trailokyavijaya 
disappears, and he has so much in common with Trailok -
yavijaya that Saṁvara may be considered the Phase hree 
reincarnation of Trailokyavijaya’. A standard element of the 
iconography of Saṁvara is the elephant skin (representing 
illusion, which is destroyed by Saṁvara); a Saṁvara dancing  
on the head of an elephant (prob. 11th or 12th century) is 
depicted in the Khmer sanctuary of Phimai in modern hai -
land (see Conti 2014: 388). Another Phase hree Tantric Bud -
dhist example of subjugation of Gaṇeśa/Vināyaka is the rep -
resentation of the latter as prostrated at the bottom of stelae 
depicting the healing goddess Parṇaśavar̄/Parṇaśabar̄, an 
emanation of Amoghasiddhi (Verardi 2011: 373).
Acri mockup.indd   340 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 19] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 341
function of protecting, overcoming obstacles, and 
guarding boundaries. In fact Gaṇapati/Vināyaka 
occupies an ambivalent position in both the Bud -
dhist and Śaiva pantheons:
As one whose demon ancestry is manifest … 
Gaṇeśa is superbly qualiied to be lord over 
Śiva’s gaṇa s, themselves a generally unruly 
bunch. As one of the demons brought over 
into the family of the great lord Śiva, Gaṇeśa 
mediates between the oppositional forces of 
the divine and the demonic. He understands 
the demons; he knows their ways and does 
not fear their powers. Like his father [Śiva] … 
Gaṇeśa stands both outside and inside the di -
vine worlds as he dwells at the threshold…. He 
both places and removes obstacles and facili -
tates and thwarts undertakings. (Courtright 
1985: 136)
[Vināyaka] is at once the creator and remover 
of hindrances. He is maleicent unless con -
trolled, and many Buddhist rituals commence 
with formulae to prevent Vināyaka from ob -
structing the eicacious performance of the 
ritual and to rechannel his energies in guard -
ing the mandala from disrupting inluences. 
he dual character of Vināyaka is like that of 
an elephant, powerfully destructive and terri -
fying when uncontrolled, but obediently using 
his immense strength to serve those who nur -
ture and control him. (Snodgrass 1988: 642)
Gaṇapati’s ambiguous status secured him a 
liminal position at the boundary between the Śai -
va-Buddhist divide, resulting in a trans-sectarian 
cult where the god maintained a co-functional role 
in both religions. 
A series of Buddhist and Śaiva embodiments of 
Gaṇapati intended as vighnāntakṛt , i.e. destroyers 
of obstacles, are attested in texts and visual do -
cuments as wrathful deities that display demonic 
features, and whose main function was to dispel 
demons and remove hindrances. Linrothe (1999: 
25) reminds us that ‘the primary activity of the 
krodha -vighnāntaka  deities … is not merely to 
protect sacred territory or the aspirant, but to 
destroy obstacles, both outer and inner, mundane 
and transcendental’. Forms of Vināyaka appear 
in the list of twenty outer Guardian or Protector 
gods of each of the four gates of the Perfected Body maṇḍala  in Sino-Japanese Tantric Buddhist texts; 
a separate Vināyaka is also placed in the northern 
sector.73
As a ‘tamed demon’ and at the same time a tamer 
of demons, creator of obstacles ( vināyaka ) and 
destroyer of obstacles ( vighnāntakṛt ), Vināyaka/
Gaṇapati represents the outcome of the Buddhist 
(and Śaiva) narrative of transformation from bhūta  
to bhūtarāja , or from criminal to protector of the  
religion. According to Mayer (1998: 274) this nar -
rative, most efectively portrayed in the Trailokya -
vijaya cycle, repeats 
a widespread pattern found in Indian religions 
in which deities transform hostile demons 
into their loyal devotees (oten giving them 
the speciic function of guardian or protector) 
through the medium of irst slaying them, and 
then bring ing them back to life. 
(inter-)religious implications  
of the ratu boko yantra
he materials presented above share a constella -
tion of common themes in the domain of mantric 
technology, which is mainly used to avert illnesses, 
acquire mundane and supramundane goals, inlu -
ence other people, and purify or ‘convert’ hostile 
beings. Having advanced the hypothesis that the 
Ratu Boko gold foil and its engraved mantra con -
stitute a yantra  of Tantric magic, and having elab -
orated on the connections between the mantra and 
Gaṇapati, I now proceed to discuss its implications 
for the contemporary Central Javanese religious 
and socio-political situation. 
Continuing the train of thought started by 
Sundberg and Jordaan and Colless, a fruitful line 
of enquiry seems to be the analysis of the yantra , 
and the mantra ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ in general, in the 
context of the Bauddha-Śaiva polemic. An evident 
anti-Śaiva stance is relected in the use of the ṭaki 
jaḥ hūṁ  mantra in the context of the taming of 
Maheśvara by Vajrapāṇi in the Trailokyavijaya 
cycle narrated in the STTS  and related Buddhist 
sources in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese, as well 
73. See, e.g., Śākyamitra’s commentary to the Vajraśekha -
rasūtra  and Amoghavajra’s Shibahui zhigui (Japanese 
Jūhachieshiki ), discussed in Snodgrass 1988: 588–89, 640–42.
Acri mockup.indd   341 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 20] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 342
as, more generally, in the context of annihilation of 
obstacles by krodha-vighnāntaka  deities. A similar 
anti-Śaiva attitude is found in some documents 
from premodern Java, namely the Borobudur 
dhāraṇī  devoted to Caṇḍavajrapāṇi, which destroys 
all Vināyakas, and the Sutasoma kakavin , which 
narrates a version of the taming of Śiva/Mahākāla 
that also features the taming of his retinue (Gaja -
vaktra, a nāga , and a tigress). On the other hand, 
the association of the mantra with Gaṇapati, as 
witnessed by its occurrence as the incipit of two 
Old Javanese inscriptions recovered from Śaiva 
sites (where oṁ ṭakkijaḥ  represents a calque of 
oṁ avighnam astu  [gaṇapataye namaḥ ]), and in 
the closing section of the (Śaiva) Gaṇapatitattva , 
suggests that dynamics of trans-sectarian appro -
priation were at play from the second half of the 
9th century in Central Java. he homologization 
of the ive units of the mantra jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ 
phaṭ,  already attested as such in the (Buddhist)  
Pañcakāṇḍa,  with a pentad of manifestations of 
Śiva may constitute a Śaiva ‘signature’ implying the 
‘rebranding’ of what was perceived as an eminently 
Buddhist mantra.74 
One may wonder whether the Śaiva appropria -
tion of a Buddhist mantra implied a statement of su -
periority of the former religion over the latter, and 
whether this appropriation represented a (subtle, or 
implied) Śaiva ‘retaliation’ towards what was felt 
to be a mantra hostile to Śaivism in general, and 
Gaṇapati in particular, because of the connections 
with the acts of ākarṣaṇa  and vaśīkaraṇa , their 
instruments (elephant-goad and the snare), and 
the deity Vajrapāṇi in the Trailokyavijaya cycle.75  
74. I wonder whether the inversion of the element jaḥ in 
the mantric sequence given in both the Pañcakāṇḍa  and 
the Gaṇapatitattva , i.e. its shit to before ṭaki (oṁ ṭaki 
jaḥ hūṁ svāhā > jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ), may be seen 
as a sign of purposeful ‘rebranding’; however, this would 
be at odds with the fact that the Pañcakāṇḍa  seems to 
be predominantly Buddhist, and indeed still not used by 
modern Balinese Śaiva priests.
75. Snellgrove (2004: 141–42, n. 50) argues that the element 
niśumbha  in the spell oṁ niśumbhavajra hūṁ phaṭ  
uttered by Vajrapāṇi just before the spell oṁ ṭakki jaḥ  
in the STTS  means ‘slaughter’, and ‘thus it may have come 
into use as a destructive spell with Śaivite associations’ 
(on the association of ṭakki  with phaṭ  and māraṇa , cf. 
my n. 19 above); with respect to ṭakki jaḥ , he notes that Mayer (1998: 274) seems to portray a less clear-cut 
situation when he says that the ‘taming of Ma -
heśvara/Rudra narrative’
can be seen to document the process described 
by Levi-Strauss as ‘bricolage’, in which persisting 
cultural materials are re-worked to create new 
cultural reconstructions.76
In fact, one may also suppose that dynamics 
of mantric and ritual technology might have been 
at play here: ritual, and especially magic, was a 
‘grey zone’—or ‘penumbra’, as Orzech, Payne and 
Sørensen (2011: 12) put it—that favoured inclusion 
and eclecticism in view of the co-functionality of 
the practices from the point of view of practitioners, 
ritual specialists, and patrons alike. All the more 
so in Java where, as noted long ago by Stutterhem 
(1989 [1925]: 242), ‘the main point was always the 
mantras themselves, in short the magic practices. 
Śivaite or Buddhistic are here no more than [a] 
diference of system[s] of magic’.
‘̣akka seems to have been applied to certain aborigines, 
hence the meaning of ‘‘wild’’. ̣akkijjaḥ would thus mean 
‘‘savage-born’’. ̣akkara is an epithet of Śiva’ (indeed, ̣akk̄ 
in some Prakrit grammatical works is regarded as an un -
reined dialect of Apabrahṁśa, spoken by semi-educated 
people, and is sometimes associated with Drāviḍ̄: see 
Nitti-Dolci 1938: 101, 127–29). On the other hand, Dalton 
(2011: 239, n. 43) associates ̣akki with the root tāraka  and 
the name of the demon Tāraka, which features in a Śaiva 
cycle (cf. above, n. 60). Dalton argues that Tāraka may be 
‘a pseudonym for Takkirāja or a case of creative etymology 
on the part of Indians or Tibetans (or both)’, and draws 
attention to the toponym ̣akki in northern Punjab, which 
according to Tucci was the place of origin of a ‘local deity’ 
called ̣akkirāja. Given the lack of evidence in Śaiva litera -
ture, it would be speculative to maintain that the ṭaki jaḥ 
mantra was originally Śaiva, and only later borrowed—and 
preserved—by the Buddhists; however, given the evidence 
of widespread borrowing of originally Śaiva materials in 
Buddhist texts documented by Sanderson (2009: 124–240), 
this possibility must be kept in mind. 
76. Mayer (1998: 274) also sees the Trailokyavijaya cycle as 
constituting ‘the charter myth (more or less in a Malinows -
kian sense) of the Vajrayāna in its speciically kāpālika 
forms, in other words as the myth by which the Buddhists 
explained and justiied to themselves and to the world 
their co-option of so much of the religion of their Śaiva 
rivals’. his implies that the ‘anti-Śaiva’ sentiment could 
have been triggered by the realization that Śaiva elements 
indeed permeated Tantric Buddhism. 
Acri mockup.indd   342 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 21] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 343
On account of the association between the 
mantra on the Ratu Boko artefact and the taming 
of Maheśvara by Vajrapāṇi, Sundberg (2003: 182–83) 
argued that 
implicit in the choice of mantra used by Pa -
narabwan is a story of some degree of tension 
between the Buddhist yoga tantrists and the 
Śaivites whose god was mythically subdued, 
murdered, resurrected, and converted.… In 
adopting his Buddhism, and more importantly 
in scribing his name to a plaque of anti-Śaivite 
character, Panarabwan seemingly repudiated 
in strong terms the religion of his probable an -
cestor Sañjaya.
While I agree with Sundberg’s interpretation of 
the mantra as fundamentally anti-Śaiva in nature 
and purpose, I do not share his opinion that the 
yantra  would have been crated by Panaraban him -
self.77 In a somewhat contradictory manner (see 
Jordaan and Colless 2004: 62), Sundberg (2003: 
179; 2006: 112, n. 25) suggests that the mantra 
might have had a benedictory nature on account 
of its being enclosed within the mantric units oṁ 
… svāhā, and its having been recovered beneath 
the west rather than east gate of the Ratu Boko 
complex—the east being the direction of the irst 
summoning ( ākarṣaṇa ) rite according to the STTS . 
he former argument can be easily dispelled by 
noting, as I have done above, that svāhā  does not 
77. Sundberg (2003: 177) speculates that Panaraban ‘by 
inscribing his name within the dot of the ‘‘i’’, has inixed 
his name as a vital component of the sacred mantra. In 
this way, he is operating within the circumference of the 
mystic vowel itself, and clearly intends to link himself to the 
mantra or the cosmic being it points to, albeit in a manner 
we cannot understand’; see also Sundberg 2006: 112, n. 25: 
‘What is more, the essence of the conceptual innovation 
which deined the yoga stage of the tantras was the yogic 
identiication of the practitioner with the deity—it is en -
tirely expected within this system that Panarabwan actively 
seek the binding of his preferred deity to himself’. he latte r 
argument is a valid one, as we have seen that some of the 
usages of the mantra ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ (vaṁ hoḥ) involved 
an element of (self-)visualization as the krodha  deity de -
stroying or taming the opponents; however, this element of 
visualization cannot be applied to the Ratu Boko artefact, 
which evidently represents a yantra , and which only attests 
the name(s) of the victim(s) without mentioning any deity. 
In fact, Tantric manuals oten prescribe visualization by 
the attacker of the victim  of the spell.necessarily entail a benedictory nuance—in fact, 
it is connected with ākarṣaṇa  and vaśīkaraṇa  in 
some Tantric texts on yantra s (cf. above, p. 332). 
Similarly, to counter the latter argument I may 
point out that the west is connected with snaring, 
and deities bearing the snare ( pāśa ) as attribute 
in both Buddhist and Śaiva sources;78 the pāśa  is 
in turn connected with vaśīkaraṇa , and therefore 
does not necessarily imply an ‘inversion’ resulting 
in a beneicient rather than maleicient procedure. 
Given that the mantra ṭakki hūṁ jaḥ  was used 
in the context of the ‘mantric battle’ narrated in the 
various myths of the subjugation of Maheśvara, it 
is logical to assume that it was used as a means to 
subjugate or ‘spellbind’ the ruling king. he idea 
that the artefact would represent the re-enactment 
of a similar battle in the real world, which implies 
conversion of a king from Śaivism to Buddhism, 
was advanced by Jordaan and Colless (2004: 61). 
hey argued that, there being no evidence that the 
mantra was composed at Panaraban’s instigation, 
the engraving of the personal raka  title of Pana -
raban within the inlated ī of ṭakī  conveyed ‘the 
idea of his being caught and tied up with ropes and 
rendered powerless’ (p. 62), and its main intention 
‘could have been the mantrical subjugation and con -
version of Panaraban’ from Śaivism to Buddhism 
(ibid.: 61). Even the Javanese geographical setting, 
i.e. the Ratu Boko hillock, would correspond to 
Mount Sumeru, when the Trailokyavijaya story is 
set. To Jordaan and Colless (ibid.: 61–62), the ar -
tefact could have been crated by the monks of the 
Buddhist establishments (maybe the Abhayagiri -
vihāra?) on the Ratu Boko hillock, who ‘by inixing 
Panarabwan’s name into the same mantra that was 
used to subjugate Śiva in the myth of Trailokya -
vijaya … sought to establish a similar coercive 
hold over Panarabwan’. While we know virtually 
nothing about the historical igure of Panaraban 
and the events that occurred during his reign, in 
the Carita Parahyaṅan  we ind a reference to a di -
alogue between this king and his (alleged) father 
Rahyaṅ Sañjaya, who addresses him as follows: ‘O 
child, change (from) my religion, because it scares 
78. he association of the western side of Buddhist 
maṇḍala s with the fetter is noted by Sundberg too (2003: 
179).
Acri mockup.indd   343 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 22] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 344
people’ ( hayva dek nurutan agama aiṅ, kena aiṅ 
mrәtakutna uraṅ ryea ). his intriguing detail leads 
us to speculate that the Old Sundanese text might 
have preserved a vague memory of a dramatic and 
far-reaching religious conversion, or even of a re -
ligious conlict, linked to this king and his reign, 
which predates the Carita Parahyaṅan  by perhaps 
six or seven centuries.79
Examples of (Buddhist) narratives being used 
as a commentary on real-world scenarios of re -
ligious (i.e., Śaiva-Bauddha) frictions abound in 
the Sanskrit and Tibetan traditions. For instance, 
Mayer (1998: 273) has described Esoteric Buddhist 
discourses on the ‘all-powerful malignance of 
Śiva and his entourage, speciically in their more 
radically transgressive or kāpālika tantric forms’, 
which were criticized for seducing many devotees 
into demonic religious practices, thereby posing 
a threat to the Buddhist religion. To Mayer (ibid.: 
274), the ‘taming of Maheśvara/Rudra narrative’ 
may be seen as ‘giving a Buddhist commentary (in 
the Geertzian sense) upon Śaiva-Buddhist relations’. 
According to Dalton (2011: 36),
the Rudra-taming myth relects these bur -
geoning sectarian rivalries … by destroying 
Śiva and binding all the Brahmanical gods into 
service, the buddhas were not only providing 
a model for subsequent ritual of demon-tam -
ing; they were also demonstrating Buddhism’s 
superiority over Brahmanism, and Śaivism in 
particular.
Davidson (2002: 197), when discussing the 
vajra , i.e. the symbol of Vajrayāna par excellence, 
introduces an element of realpolitik, arguing that 
the vajra  represented the king’s right to force—
the metaphorical legal ‘staf’ ( daṇḍa ), which 
legal literature claimed as the essence of kin -
gship—and therefore the symbol of the Bud -
dha’s Law (Dharma). he enforcement of the 
law was let to Vajrapāṇi (Vajra in Hand), who 
ensures that the criminal elements (mythically 
represented by either Māra or [Śiva] Maheśvara 
79. A discussion of the passage in question and, in general, 
of the Carita Parahyaṅan  and other textual sources that 
may help us to reconstruct the socio-political and religious 
landscape of the early Mataram kingdom of Central Java 
may be found in Sundberg 2011.in the esoteric system) would not overwhelm 
the monasteries. he Maheśvaras of the world 
were stubborn, and Vajrapāṇi was represented 
as the ‘best of those subduing the diicult to 
tame’ ( durdāntadamakaḥ paraḥ ).
To Davidson, the worlds of feudal politics, un -
stable social realities and sectarian competition 
largely coincided during the ‘Tantric turn’ that 
dominated the early Mediaeval Indic world.
socio-political implications  
of the ratu boko yantra
hat the relationship between certain Buddhist and 
Śaiva factions may have been less than idyllic was 
suggested by Jordaan (1999b: 70), who did not rule 
out the possibility that ‘Central Javanese society 
was riddled by social tensions in which religious 
ailiations came to play an ever important part’. 
On the other hand, Jordaan (1999b: 47–54, 2006: 
6, 10) also argued against the oten too simplis -
tic view of relationships between Śaivism and 
Buddhism in early Central Java propounded by 
scholars, pointing out that the two religions may 
have peacefully cohabited and any anti-Buddhist 
sentiment may be attributable to political reasons, 
namely the conlict between the Sañjaya and the 
Śailendra lines of kings. What the archaeological 
remains—and, with an element of ambiguity, the 
literary sources—tell us is that by the middle of the 
9th century Buddhism continues to coexist along 
with Śaivism, yet it ceases to be the ‘state religion’, 
and from that period onwards the architecture of 
Central Java becomes predominantly Hindu (i.e., 
Śaiva). his is witnessed, for instance, by the ‘oc -
cupation’ of the Ratu Boko promontory (formerly 
colonised by Buddhist foundations, such as the 
Abhayagirivihāra) by Śaiva religious foundations 
(Sundberg, this volume; Degroot 2006: 71), the pro -
liferation of inscriptions of Śaiva character (some 
of which were associated with Vināyaka),80 and the 
construction of the Loro Jonggrang temple in the 
80. he Pereng and Dawangsari inscriptions share a close 
association with the cult of Vināyaka, and were formerly 
placed in the vicinity of a colossal Gaṇeśa image on the 
Ratu Boko hillock, which is indeed referred to in the latter 
(Griiths 2011: 137–39). Both inscriptions, and seemingly 
also the contemporary statue, are associated with the igure 
Acri mockup.indd   344 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 23] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 345
Śaiva complex of Prambanan. his phase has been 
rightfully regarded as coinciding with the end of 
the Śailendra rule (or inluence) in Java (Jordaan 
1999b: 66–67; 2006: 6, n. 8).
Even if we leave aside the anti-Śaiva implica -
tions, we may still see in the Ratu Boko yantra  an 
element of attraction and subjugation, i.e. a magical 
operation directed towards the person of Panara -
ban—perhaps by a political rival, with the com -
plicity of Esoteric Buddhist monks. his scenario 
is supported by evidence drawn from manuals of 
Tantric magic for the drawing of yantra s that I have 
presented above,  which connect symbolic shapes 
such as square, vajra  and circle—all present in the 
Ratu Boko artefact—to various harmful actions, i.e. 
subjugation, immobilization, or enmity. 
Resorting to magical practices to fulill aims of 
realpolitik is a cliché in many Śaiva and Bauddha 
Tantras, and even in Brahmanical Sanskrit nor -
mative texts, such as the Arthaśāstra  and the 
Manusm ṛti; these manuals also invoke the use of 
iniltrated agents posing as  siddha s, i.e. power -
ful wizards bearing the insignia of such antino -
mian Śaiva groups as the Kāpālikas (Davidson 
2002: 174–75). Analogous ideas are found in the 
Rāmāyaṇa kakavin , the arguably contemporary 
Śivag ṛha inscription of ad 856, and narrative reliefs 
of Central Javanese temples. hese documents 
allegorically allude to the deceitful activities of 
sham ascetics and sorcerers associated with covert 
political manoeuvring during the dynastic struggle 
that opposed Bālaputra of the Śailendra line and 
Rakai Pikatan in the middle of the 9th century, 
which seems to have had its inal resolution preci -
sely on the Ratu Boko hillock (see Acri 2010, 2011). 
Jakl (2013: 11–12), on the basis of his reading of the 
Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa  and other kakavin s, has 
concluded that malicious ‘black magic’ practices 
of ritual destruction, aimed at securing victory 
in war, were conceptualized in premodern Java 
as a part of vicious practices of Tantric wizards 
of the siddha  type, portrayed as ‘demon-ascetics’ 
(viku rākṣasa ); to him (ibid.), ‘these practices of 
subjugation, immobilization and annihilation, cen -
sured as aji śāstra w̆gig in kakawin Rāmāyaṇa 
of Kumbhayoni, whose anti-Bauddha activities on the Ratu 
Boko hillock are discussed by Sundberg (this volume).8.31, are to be best understood as acts of Tantric 
sorcery ( ṣaṭkarmāṇi )’.81 Hunter (2007: 35–36) has 
discussed 13th-century East Javanese inscription -
al evidence of practices, stemming from a Śaiva 
Tantric ( bhairavika ) antinomian milieu, aimed 
at granting King K ṛtanagara invulnerability and 
victory in battle; Santiko (1997: 217–18) discusses a 
statuary group consisting of images of Cāmuṇḍā, 
Bhairava and Gaṇeśa, which she connects with a 
vaśīkaraṇa  ritual aimed at defeating K ṛtanagara’s 
enemies. Similar, and contemporary, instances 
of royal-sponsored ‘war magic’ centred on such 
demonic Tantric deities as Mahākāla, Heruka, and 
Hevajra, are well documented among the Mongols, 
Tibetans, and Chinese.82
Vaśīkaraṇa  is mentioned in the long Old Malay 
‘Śr̄vijayan’ inscription of Telaga Batu (Sabokin -
gking, near Palembang in Sumatra) from the 
late 7th century. he text contains imprecations 
against the enemies of the state and the king; it 
mentions an oath of loyalty to the king taken by 
his entourage, which, if broken, will result in the 
culprits being killed by spells. In line 13, ‘the curse 
is directed against the king’s servants, should they 
be in contact with various sorts of people well-ver -
sed in the use of magical practices’ (de Casparis 
1956: 23–24). Lines 12–14 allude to conspirators who 
would make use of Tantric rituals, philtres, and 
magical artefacts—most notably a śrīyantra —to 
cause madness in other people. Referring to this 
inscription, Goudriaan (1978: 323) concludes:
here is no question here of an abstract use 
of these expressions but of real magical cere -
monies is proved by a reference made by the 
king to certain methods used by the rebels 
such as designing or painting an image of him 
(rūpinaṅku ) and application of ahses ( bhasma ), 
wizards … and spells ( mantra ).
Goudriaan (ibid.: 324) maintains that ‘[a]s with 
the act of ākarṣaṇa , it is a matter of probability 
that persons of high status and wealth such as 
kings have oten igured as the victims of rites of 
81. Jakl (ibid.: 12) has also drawn attention to a passage 
of the Bhomāntaka (82.3) mentioning the application of 
mantras in order to harm an enemy. 
82. See Bade, this volume; Dalton 2011: 137; Sinclair 2014.
Acri mockup.indd   345 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 24] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 346
subjugation’.83 A Buddhist instance of these practi -
ces is found in the Vidyottamātantra , a so-called 
Caryātantra or Kriyātantra now available only in 
Tibetan; sections 1–3 of this text describe a ritual 
for the subjugation ( vaśīkaraṇa ) of kings ‘in the 
presence of Vajrapāṇi’ ( vajrapāṇisya /vajrapāṇer 
agrataḥ );84 similarly, the Susiddhikārasūtra  states 
that ‘the mantra s of the Vajra [Family] are for ābhi-
cāruka (subjugation) [rites]’ (Chinese trans. of ad 
726, Giebel 2001: 130–31, 133). he Vīṇāśikhatantra , 
a Śaiva scripture of the Vāmasrotas mainly devoted 
to magic, describes rituals for the subjugation of 
kings and queens (pp. 174–77), and of the entire 
threefold world ( trailokya , pp. 163–64, 270–74, see 
Einoo 2009: 33). Describing one such rituals for 
rulers, this text declares that, at the end of a sacriice 
making use of human lesh, the practitioner ‘should 
imagine the victim as being out of his mind and 
benumbed, struck on his head by the Elephant-goad 
(aṅkuśa ) and bound by the Māyic noose; even a 
king or queen he will subjugate within a week’ (pp. 
160–61). he Vīṇāśikhatantra  igures (as Vināśikha ) 
in the ad 1052 Sdok Kak hom Sanskrit-Old Khmer 
inscription hinting at Tantric rituals performed by 
the Brahmin Hiraṇyadāman for the ‘liberation’ of 
the Khmer domains from the subjugation of Javā,85 
by means of which King Jayavarman II founded the 
Khmer Empire in the early 9th century and became 
a Cakravartin (Goudriaan 1985: 24–26; Brown 2003; 
Sanderson 2003–4: 357, 2004: 235). Sanderson (2004: 
238) also discusses the Sanskrit inscription K.111 of 
the reign of Jayavarman V (ca. 968–1000/1) that 
tells us that K̄rtipaṇḍita, a Buddhist master fol -
lowing the Yogatantras, ‘had been adopted by the 
royal family as their Guru, [and] was frequently 
engaged by the king to perform apotropaic, restor -
ative and aggressive Mantra rituals within the royal 
palace for the protection of his kingdom’—namely, 
‘rituals for the quelling of dangers, the restoration 
of health and the rest’ (to Sanderson, ‘the rest’ 
presupposes abhicāra ). As I have argued above, 
83. A discussion of Sanskrit texts that describe rituals 
of subjugation targeting rulers and their ministers and 
subjects may be found in Goudriaan 1978: 322–26.
84. See Ito Gyokan (ed.) 2005: 264–65 (I thank Iain Sin -
clair for this reference, email dated 30 August 2014).
85. On the identiication of this Javā with Yavadv̄pa (i.e., 
Java), see Griiths 2013.both the Pañcakāṇḍa  and the section closing the 
Gaṇapatitattva  share a commonality of themes and 
mantric technology with scriptures—such as the 
Netratantra , the Vīṇāśikhatantra , and the Bhūtat -
antras—devoted to the rituals of Tantric magic 
devised for the beneit of royal sponsors.
In view of the above facts, one may assume that 
the word khanipas  inscribed on the lower part of 
the bubble where the raka  title of Panaraban is 
also inscribed represents a personal name, perhaps 
that of the king himself, or of one of his associ -
ates—a general, minister, his royal chaplain, or 
a close family member, e.g. his queen.86 I ind it 
more plausible that Khanipas would be a victim 
of the subjugation spell together with Panaraban, 
but one may also speculate that Khanipas would 
be the individual who wanted to ‘bind’ Panaraban 
to himself, or inluence him.
conclusion
Two śloka s of the Pañcakāṇḍa , a Sanskrit Bud -
dhist stuti  from Bali, and the Sanskrit-Old Javanese 
Gaṇapatitattva , a Śaiva tutur  text that has come 
down to us in many Balinese redactions to varying 
degrees dominated by the igure of Gaṇapati, attest 
the mantra jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ . his  is a re-
86. he possibility that Khanipas might have been Pana -
raban’s queen was already voiced by Sundberg (2003: 177).  
Degroot (2006: 66) reports a personal communication 
by Klokke (2004) casting doubt on Sundberg’s identiica -
tion of Panarabvan with King Panaraban, on the ground 
that ‘the absence of any title is suspicious given the fact 
that Panaraban is a rake  title, not a personal name’. his 
objection is not very compelling, for the epigraphical ev -
idence has only yielded attestations of the rake  title and 
consecration names of kings; similarly, in the allegori -
cal passages of the kakavin  Rāmāyaṇa , we ind allusions 
to kings such as Rakai Pikatan (as pikatan, 24.115, 25.13 
[pikatan  = decoy bird]) and Rakai Kayuvaṅi (as caṇḍana , 
‘sandalwood’, 21.94; kyātīnaran arūm,  ‘known as fragrant’, 
and taru kanakā, ‘sandalwood tree’, 24.126  [kayuvaṅi = 
‘fragrant tree/wood’, i.e. sandalwood]) that refer to these 
titles (without the honoriic particle rakai ) rather than the 
personal names, thereby implying that the former were 
the appellations under which these kings were popularly 
known at the time. Even if Klokke is right, then one may 
speculate that Khanipas is the personal name of Rakai 
Panaraban, and that as such both appellations were in -
scribed on the yantra .
Acri mockup.indd   346 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 25] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’ 347
conigured version of the  ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ  mantra—a 
quintessentially Buddhist mantra attested in the 
context of the Trailokyavijaya cycle in a number of 
Vajrayāna texts in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese. 
he instance of the ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ  mantra found 
in the Pañcakāṇḍa  and Gaṇapatitattva —the latter 
being the only one thus far documented in a thor -
oughly Śaiva religious text—adds to the series 
of rare attestations of this sequence recovered 
from Central Javanese inscriptions, namely the 
Ratu Boko gold foil, two boundary-stones dating 
back to the second half of the 9th century (from 
a Śaiva context), an undated stone mentioning a 
vihāra , and a Buddhist lead-bronze inscription 
from Borobudur (prob. 9th or 10th century). All 
these documents bear some implications for our 
understanding of the purpose of the Ratu Boko 
inscribed gold foil, as well as of the religious and 
socio-political context in which it was produced.
Having argued that the attestation of the mantra 
in both the Pañcakāṇḍa and the Gaṇapatitattva  
occurs in a context of apotropaic, siddhi -oriented, 
and coercive magic characterizing Tantric litera -
ture of various sectarian persuasions across the 
mediaeval Indic world, I have concluded that the 
Ratu Boko artefact was most likely intended as 
a magical yantra.  Given that, as noted by Sund -
berg, the mantra involves an element of anti-Śai -
va polemic, I further elaborated on Jordaan and 
Colless’s hypothesis that the mantra was meant to 
inluence, i.e. ‘spellbind’, the late 8th-century Java -
nese King Panaraban, either for religious purposes 
(i.e., to convert him to Buddhism) or for aims of 
realpolitik. his picture its well in the context of 
political and religious transition that Central Java 
seems to have witnessed during the 9th century, 
namely the shit from a (Śailendra-dominated) 
Buddhist paradigm to a new Śaiva course.
Building on the work of Sundberg and Griiths, 
who have shown the association of the (various ver -
sions of the) ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ  mantra with removal of 
obstacles and magical operations of ākarṣaṇa  and 
vaśīkaraṇa  in Indic Buddhist sources, I have ex -
plored the links between this mantra and the igure 
of the elephant-headed god Gaṇapati/Vināyaka, 
which had a place in both Śaiva and Buddhist 
pantheons as a remover of obstacles. Gaṇapati, 
as a demonic member of Maheśvara’s entourage, constitutes the victim par excellence of subjugation 
through the mantric elephant-goad ( jaḥ) and snare 
(hūṁ ) of Vajrapāṇi, which the Bodhisattva used 
to tame Maheśvara in the Trailokyavijaya cycle.
he transmogriication of the  ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ 
mantra in the Gaṇapatitattva , in a context of Tantric 
magic, suggests that the compiler of the text carried 
out an operation of ‘textual bricolage’ that involved 
the trans-sectarian appropriation of (co-functional) 
Buddhist mantric technology and its translation 
into Śaiva terms. his appropriation may have 
involved a direct borrowing from (a version of) 
the Pañcakāṇḍa , as suggested by the association 
between Gaṇapati/Vināyaka and Am ṛtakuṇḍalin, 
a Buddhist apotropaic, outer- maṇḍala  deity that 
might have been invoked through the epithet ‘Sun’ 
(āditya ) in the Pañcakāṇḍa .
In the luid context of Tantric magic, where 
borrowing commonly occurs, and many ritual (and 
sectarian) distinctions become blurred, the produc -
tion of counter-narratives (and counter-mantras) 
may not necessarily entail an implied element 
of trans-sectarian polemic. However, given the 
climate of ierce religious competition for royal 
patronage across the Indic world (Java included) 
in the Mediaeval period, the possibility that ‘as the 
tantric ritual technologies were widely adopted, 
the new ritual resemblances that resulted can only 
have heightened sectarian anxieties’ (Dalton 2011: 
36) should be kept open.
Primary Sources
Old Javanese titles
Gaṇapatitattva
(1) [GaṇEd:]  Gaṇapati-tattwa . Ed. and (Hindi)  
 trans. Sudarshana Devi-Singhal. New  
 Delhi: International Academy of Indian  
 Culture, 1958.
(2)  [GaṇL:] Lontar Gaṇapatitattva , collection  
  of the International Academy of Indian  
 Culture.
(3) [TGaṇ:] Tatwa Gaṇapati , romanization  
  by Ketut Sudarsana, Kantor Dokum-  
 entasi Budaya Bali, Denpasar, 1993.
(4) [PDok:] Lontar ms. XX 4, Pusat Doku-  
 mentasi Budaya Bali, Denpasar.
Acri mockup.indd   347 31/10/16   9:31 pm

--- [Page 26] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 348
(5) [GaṇUd:] Lontar ms. Rt 6, Universitas  
 Udayana.
Sutasoma kakavin , see O’Brien 2008.
Sanskrit titles 
Agnipurāṇa : ed. Mitra. Calcutta: Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, 1879. 
Hevajratantra : see D. Snellgrove (ed.) 1959a.
Kriyāsasaṅgrahapañjikā (Ch. 6) by Kuladatta: ed. 
Inui, Hitoshi, ‘Kriyāsaṁgraha no honzon yuga: 
bonbun tekisuto chū [‘On deity yoga in the 
Kriyāsaṁgraha: Sanskrit text, Part 2’]’, Mikkyō 
Bunka Kenkyūjo Kiyō  5: 160–33, 1992.
Netratantra: he Netra Tantram with Commentary 
by Kṣemarāja, vol. 1 , ed. Pandit Madhusudan 
Kaul Shāstr̄, Kashmir Series of Texts and 
Studies No. XLVI. Bombay: Tatva Vivechaka 
Press, 1926.
Pañcakāṇḍa : see Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971, 
stuti  no. 375.Sādhanamālā : ed. Benoytosh Bhattacharya.  2 vols. 
Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1928.
Sarvadurgatipariśodhana: he Sarvadurgatipari-
śodhana Tantra. Elimination of All Evil Desti -
nies. Sanskrit and Tibetan texts with Introduction, 
Translation and Notes , ed. and trans. Tadeusz. 
Skorupski. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983.
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha: see Lokesh Chandra 
ed., with D. Snellgrove) 1981.
Sarvavajrodaya by ̄nandagarbha: e-text by 
Ryugen Tanemura , based on  Vajradhātuma-
hāmaṇḍalopāyikā-sarvavajrodaya  by ̄n an-
dagarbha, ed. Mikkȳ Seiten Kenkyūkai in 
Taisho daigaku sougou-bukkyou-kenkyūjo kiyou 
8: 228–56 (1986), 9: 216–22 (1987).
Susiddhikārasūtra (Chinese trans.): see Giebel 2001.
Vajrasattvaniṣpādana of pseudo-Candrak̄rti (San-
s krit and Tibetan) : see Luo and Tomabechi 
(eds.) 2009.
Vidyottamātantra: see Ito Gyokan (ed.) 2005.
Vīṇāśikhatantra: see Goudriaan 1985.
Acri mockup.indd   348 31/10/16   9:31 pm