--- [Page 1] ---
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 24 (2007) 1-46Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths 
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas
(Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa 36)*
Introduction
In our recent study of the Pāśupata Observance ( Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa  40), 
we expressed the intention to bring out further studies of texts from the cor-
pus of Pariśiṣṭas of the Atharvaveda, especially such as throw light on the 
cult of Rudra-Śiva. The Pāśupatavrata  showed interesting interconnections 
between Atharvavedic ritualism and the Śaiva Atimārga. In the present study, 
we focus on the so-called Ucchuṣmakalpa , transmitted as the thirty-sixth 
Pariśiṣṭa of the corpus, a text which takes us squarely onto the path of Tantric 
practices. We intend to continue our studies in the Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa s 
with articles to appear over the coming years, one of which is likely to be 
devoted to the Koṭihoma, as previously announced. 
∗ Shingo Einoo and Harunaga Isaacson have read an earlier draft of this article, and provided 
important suggestions for its improvement. We are grateful for their willingness to help us 
once again.
 B ISScHOP  & G RIffITHS  00. In the introduction to that study , we presented all the epigraphi-
cal evidence known to us at the time which might help to explain the transmission among 
Atharvavedic brahmins of a text strongly inluenced by the Pāśupatas and their literature. 
None of this evidence did more than suggest tolerably close geographical proximity in Gu-
jarat, in early medieval times, of Atharvavedic and Pāśupata tradition. Since then, we have 
noticed a further inscription which demonstrates that adherents of both traditions actually 
inhabited the same city . An inscription dated to Vikrama Saṃvat  mentions a Pāśupata 
teacher called Megharāśi, pupil of B̥haspatirāśi, himself the pupil of Viśuddharāśi. This 
Megharāśi lived in Aṇahilapātaka and had a Maṭha in Sedhagrāma (see B HOjAKA  997–98; 
the plates accompanying the edition are not those of the edited inscription, although they do 
seem related to it). S ANKAlIA  949: 85f. (see also the map for p. 4, found on p. 7, top left), 
makes clear that Aṇahilapātaka is another name for a town called Aṇahillapurapattana, the 
place of origin of many of the mss. of the primary and ancillary texts of the Śaunaka Athar-
vaveda: see e.g. V ISHVA  BANdHu  960/I: xiii, xviii, xxii, xxiii, and B OllING  & VON NEGElEIN , 
p. XIV, where we ind quoted the colophon of their source “Roth”, which refers to the same 
city , and mentions a date in Saṃvat 488 (cf. on this date B ISScHOP  & G RIffITHS  00: 4, 
n. 4), just a few centuries posterior to Megharāśi. On the localization of Atharvaveda tradi-
tion in medieval Gujarat, see now also M EulENBEld  00–04, especially pp. 9 (n. 8) and 
94 (n. ).
 for basic information concerning translations/studies of parts of the corpus, we refer to 
pages 5–7 of our mentioned article.
 This text is not as much devoted to Rudra-Śiva as we thought previously , only the framestory 

--- [Page 2] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
The name Ucchuṣma
The name ucchuṣma occurs in a number of texts of diferent religi-
ous ailiation, both Śaiva and Buddhist. An article by P AdOuX  in the 
Tāntrikābhidhānakośa , vol. I (pp. 5f.), provides the following informa-
tion: ucchuṣma heads a series of ten Rudras, ucchuṣma, Śavara, caṇḍa, 
Mataṅga, Ghora, Yama, ugra, Halahala, Krodhin and Huluhulu, who acted 
as teachers ( gurutvena ) in the past: see TĀ 8.90cd–9 (quoting the 
Devyāyāmalatantra ). from jayaratha’s commentary ad loc. , it appears that 
teachers in general can be subdivided into ten classes according to their cha-
racteristics, which derive from the aforementioned Rudras. The same article 
of the Tāntrikābhidhānakośa  also mentions () that ucchuṣma is a form of 
Śiva which has a Vedic origin, () that ucchuṣma/ā or Mahocchuṣma/ā can 
refer to a śakti or to a pīṭha , () that there once existed an Ucchuṣmatantra  
or Ucchuṣmaśāstra , and (4) that ucchuṣma is considered an emanation of 
Akṣobhya. We now propose to take up these four points one by one. 
() As to the Vedic origin of the name ucchuṣma, in  the light of the fact that 
our text (6..) calls the ucchuṣmarudras atharvavedodbhava , it is remarkable 
that the exact words uc chuṣmāḥ  occur (exclusively) in three diferent Athar-
vavedic mantra passages (only one of which has a pa rallel elsewhere in Vedic 
literature), namely AV(P) 4.5. ud uṣā ud u sūrya uc chuṣmā oṣadhīnām  ǀ ud ejati 
prajāpatir v̥ṣā śuṣmeṇa vājinā  ǁ ‘up [stirs] the dawn, up also the Sun, up [stir] 
the energies of the plants, up stirs the bull Prajā pati with prize-winning energy’; 
.6.8 (= ̥V 0.97.8) uc chuṣmā oṣadhīnāṃ gāvo goṣṭhād iverate dhanaṃ 
saniṣyantīnām ātmānaṃ tava *pūruṣa ǁ ‘up do the energies of the plants move, 
like cows from a stall, about to win wealth, and a body for you, O man’; AV(Ś) 
4.4.4 úc chúṣmáuṣadhīnāṃ [read úc chúṣmā ó ̊ ] srā ̥ṣabhṇām  ǀ sáṃ puṃsm 
indra v́ṣṇyam asmín dhehi tanūvaśin  ǁ ‘up [move] the energies of the plants, 
[up] the powers of the bulls. O Indra, self-ruler, place the manly power of men 
in him here’.
The compound ucchuṣma , however, is not known from any Atharvavedic 
Śruti text, but is found at TS .6.. úcchuṣmo agne yájamānāyaidhi níśuṣmo 
abhidsate  ‘Keep your energy up, O Agni, for the yajamāna, keep it low for 
the one who assaults him’.4
appealing to that deity’ s role in divulsion of the knowledge of the koṭihoma . 
4 At KauśS 40.4, c AlANd  (900) interprets ucchuṣmāparivyādhāv āyasena khanati as “gräbt 
er vermittelst eines eisernen (Schaufels, nach dem .6− mitgetheilten Ritual) eine Mu-
cuna pruritus ( ucchuṣmā oder kapikacchu ) und einem calamus fascilatus ( parivyādha  oder 
suravālaka ) aus”, after dārila (who in fact reads sūkaravālaka , 5:). It does not seem 
that our text anywhere has this plant ucchuṣmā  in mind.
  It is also noteworthy that the Atharvavedic Nakṣatrakalpa  (A VPariś .7.0) contains 
another derivative, ucchuṣman : kāmbojāḥ kālam̥ṣāś ca krandā ucchuṣmāṇaḥ śvānaś 

--- [Page 3] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
 () A goddess ucchuṣmā or Mahocchuṣmā5 igures in several Śaiva 
Tantras. She is included among diferent sets of female deities. In one such 
set she is listed together with three other female deities called Raktā, Karālā/ī 
and caṇḍākṣī. cf. H EIlIjGERS -SEElEN  (994: 9–9), who observes that in the 
KubjMT .4f., these four goddesses are installed as the main deities at the 
four Pīṭhas: Raktā in Oḍḍiyāna, Karālī in jālandhara, caṇḍākṣī in Pūrṇādri 
and ucchuṣmā in Kāmarūpa. They also play an important role in the system 
of the Brahmayāmala  or Picumata , where they are the principal Śaktis of the 
Bhairava Kapālīśa (cf. G OudRIAAN  & G uPTA 98: 4).6 It is possible that our 
text contains a reference to this same set of goddesses in a corrupt passage 
at the beginning (6..).
The name ucchuṣma is found as an element in three toponyms in the 
Ṣaṭsāhasrasaṃhitā  and Kubjikāmatatantra . cf. S cHOTERMAN  (98: 54), 
who mentions a forest (ucchuṣmavana), a river (ucchuṣmā) and a pond 
(Mahocchuṣmahrada).
() G OudRIAAN  & G uPTA (98: 4, n. 4) mention a lost Ucchuṣmatantra , 
referred to in the main text and some of the colophons of the Brahmayāmala  
or Picumata . S ANdERSON  (986: 84, n. 76) writes that “[t]he PM-BY 
calls itself Ucchuṣmatantra  frequently”. According to the information 
provided by d YczKOWSKI  988: 0, the Jayadrathayāmala  reckons the 
Ucchuṣmatantra  among the eight root Tantras of the Mata, among which 
the Picumata  takes pride of place.7 Quotations from or references to an 
Ucchuṣma (bhairava )tantra  or Ucchuṣmaśāstra  occur in the writings of the 
Śaiva scholars from medieval Kashmir, and in some texts of esoteric Bud-
dhism. These quotations and references often concern rules for the use of 
particular sounds and words in mantras to accompany magical ritual activi-
ties. Thus, e.g., the Ucchuṣmatantra  quoted by Kṣemarāja ad NeT 6.–4 
(NeTu vol. II, pp. 6f.): ākāraś chedane prokta ̥kāras tāḍane  ‘the sound ā 
is prescribed during cutting, the sound R̥ during Striking’. In the same vein 
are the following verses quoted from the Ucchuṣmatantra  by Kṣemarāja 
in his commentary on the nine constituents of mantravāda  listed in NeT 
8.6–8 (NeTu vol. II, pp. 7–76): dīpane tu mahābhāga  [read mahābhāge ]8 
cāvadhūmamarkaṭāś ca pūrvāṣāḍhā upayanti bhaktyā tatra  ǁ ‘The time-biding (?) Kāmbojas, 
and the roaring, up-energetic ( ucchuṣman ) dogs, as well as the down-vapored monkeys, 
make a reverent approach there during (?) the Pūrvāṣāḍhas, with devotion’.
5 See also the mention of an ucchuṣmikā in the Tantrasadbhāva  verses quoted below , p. 5.
6 In addition to the sources discussed by heilijGers -seelen , we can refer to Niśisaṃcāra  
f. 9r–9v (names of the four goddesses installed at dakṣapīṭha, identiied with uḍḍiyāna 
by sanderson  *00: 6–7; their consort is the Bhairava Kapālīśa) and liP .7.88ab 
(included among a list of sixteen Śaktis).
7 On the doctrine of the Mata, see sanderson  986: 8–85 and 988: 68–68.
8 As is usually the case in Tantric literature, we assume that it is the Goddess who is instruct-

--- [Page 4] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
praṇavobhayayojanam  ǀ bodhane tu namaskāraḥ svāhākāro ’male tathā  ǀ 
vauṣaḍantargataṃ mantram abhiṣeke niyojayet  ǀ phaṭkārobhayasaṃyuktaṃ 
tāḍane viniyojayet  ǀ ādyantaṃ caiva huṃkāram indhane viniyojayet  ǀ ‘during 
lighting, O illustrious woman, the sound o Ṃ is used at both [beginning and 
end]; during Awaking the expressions NAMA ḥ and SVāhā [are to be used], O 
stainless woman; he should employ a mantra interspersed with Vauṣa Ṭ during 
consecration; during Striking he should employ the sound pha Ṭ at both [be-
ginning and end]; during Kindling he should employ the sound huṂ at begin-
ning and end’.9
A verse quoted from the Ucchuṣmabhairava  by Kṣemarāja ad SvacchT 
7.49 (vol. III, p. 5), 0.97 (vol. VB, p. 8), and in his Śivasūtravimarśinī  
(ŚiSūVi p. 8, ll. –4) deals with the absence of impurity and suggests 
a Kaula environment: yāvan na vedakā ete tāvad vedyāḥ kathaṃ priye  ǀ 
vedakaṃ vedyam  (/vedyavedakam ) ekaṃ tu tattvaṃ nāsty aśuci  (/aśucis ) tataḥ  
ǁ ‘So long as these knowers do not exist, how can there be objects of know-
ing, my dear? But the knower and the object of knowing are one. Therefore 
there is no [such thing as an] impure substance’. The same verse is quoted 
without attribution by jayaratha ad TĀ 0.66 (TĀVi vol. 7: 5, ll. 4–5) 
and 9.9 (TĀVi vol. 9: 7, ll. 0–), while the irst half is also quoted in 
the commentary ( Parimala ) on Mahārthamañjarī  6 (MMP, p. 0). A Kaula 
background of the lost Ucchuṣmatantra  is likewise indicated by a verse at-
tributed to it in Advayavajra’s Sekanirṇaya /-nirdeśa  (nr. 7, pp. 48–66, in 
Mikkyō  99: 50, vs. 0): śivaśaktisamāyogāt satsukhaṃ paramādvayam  ǀ na 
śivo nāpi śaktiś ca ratnāntargatasaṃsthitam  ǁ ‘Because of the union of Śiva 
and Śakti, true pleasure, supreme non-duality, is established within the jewel 
[of the penis]: there is no Śiva and also no Śakti’.0
The Netratantroddyota  quotations seem most important in our context, 
because they show how, around Kṣemarāja’s time (th c.), a Tantra associ-
ated with ucchuṣma was known to contain instructions on similar kinds of 
magical rituals as the ones our Pariśiṣṭa deals with. The same commen-
ed also here. The small emendation is supported by the presence of the vocative amale  in 
the next line.
9 In what follows on pp. 75–79 of the edition, further stanzas on the same theme from the 
Netratantra  are elucidated with several quotations. The source of none of these quotations 
is identiied more precisely than with yad uktam . It is likely they all come from the same 
Ucchuṣmatantra  that was mentioned explicitly on p. 75. In the commentary on 8., then, a 
new explicit attribution is found, this time to the Svacchandatantra .
0 Harunaga Isaacson suggests to us that the expression ratnāntargatasaṃsthitam , which to 
him sounds more (Tantric) Buddhist than Śaiva, indicates that this may not be a literal quote 
but rather a paraphrase.
 We are grateful to Alexis Sanderson for sharing with us his list of references to the Ucchuṣ-
ma(bhairava )tantra , on which the preceding discussion was based.

--- [Page 5] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
tary also quotes an interesting description of a female demon ucchuṣmikā 
from the Tantrasadbhāva  (NeTu ad 9.55, vol. II, p. 45): rātrau bhūtvā 
vivastrā yā mūtrayitvā pradakṣiṇam  ǀ k̥tvā tu prāśayed raktaṃ  [d: prāśayate 
nityaṃ ] muktakeśī tu karṣayet  [d: tv ākarṣayet  (unmetr.)]  ǁ ucchuṣmikā tu 
sā jñeyā sādhakair vīranāyikā  [d: vīravatsalā ] ǀ ‘She who, going about at 
night without clothes, urinating in a circle, feeds blood and, with dishevelled 
hair, causes pain, should be recognized by the adepts as ucchuṣmikā, the 
mistress of heroes’. According to the same text ( Tantrasadbhāva  quoted in 
NeTu ad 9.55, vol. II, p. 46), ucchuṣmā is a portion of the mother god-
dess Vārāhī: vārāhyaṃśā tathocchuṣmā kathitā vīravandite .4 
But there is also other evidence on the nature of ucchuṣma  deities. 
(4) Several references are found to an ‘ucchuṣma form’ of the Buddhist 
counterpart of Kubera, viz. jambhala, in the Sādhanamālā , a collection of 
short Buddhist tantric-magical tracts.5 cf. Sādhanas 9–95 in the edition 
of B HATTAcHARYYA  (95–8, vol. II, pp. 569f.). This material, in the con-
text of our discussion, does not help to conirm much more about the name 
ucchuṣma  than that it could be applied as an adjective to wrathful forms 
of various deities, from which much was expected in magical ceremonies. 
In his introduction (p. cxxvi), B HATTAcHARYYA  quotes a typical verse: dāri-
dryaduḥkhāhatamānasānāṃ kā cittav̥ttiḥ sugatasya k̥tteḥ  ǀ ataś ca kopād 
iva jambhalo ’sau ucchuṣmarūpaṃ bhayadaṃ cakāra  (Sādhanamālā  9, 
p. 570), which he translates: “People who are stricken down with the misery 
of poverty[,] what desire can they have for the rites laid down by Sugata [the 
Buddha]? It is for this reason it seems that jambhala in his anger assumed the 
terriic form of ucchuṣma” (cf. 6..6 below, and the Tantrasadbhāva  verse 
quoted just above). The Ucchuṣmajambhalasādhana s, deriving from various 
authors, paint a fairly consistent picture of this igure’s iconography: in our 
context, it is only relevant to note that he is piṅgorddhvakeśa , vāmanākāra  
 Readings between brackets are taken from d YczKOWSKI ’ s provisional edition of the 
Tantrasadbhāva , made available on http://www .muktabodhalib.org. The present quotation is 
Tantrasadbhāva  6.87–88ab in that edition. The reading prāśayate nityaṃ  lacks an object 
of prāśayate .
 dYczKOWSKI  adopts vīravatsalā , but the reading of the Netratantroddyota  is attested in two of 
his three Nepalese manuscripts.
4 Tantrasadbhāva  6.8ab, reading tatocchuṣmā  (typo?).
5 Since no source is given for the reference to ucchuṣma as emanation of Akṣobhya in the 
TAK lemma quoted above (p. ), we surmise that what P AdOuX  had in mind was Buddhist 
material of the kind we discuss here. That ucchuṣma may be regarded as an emanation of 
Akṣobhya seems to follow from passages such as Sādhanamālā  95, p. 577 , where ucchuṣma 
is described as bhūsparśamudranīlākṣobhyamunimudritamastakam  ‘with head marked by 
the Buddha ( muni ) Akṣobhya, who is dark-blue and shows the Earth-touch mudrā’, and 
Sādhanamālā  86, p. 564, where jambhala — though not explicitly ucchuṣmajambhala 
— is said to be akṣobhyajaṭāmukuṭinam  ῾whose matted hair-diadem is Akṣobhya ’.

--- [Page 6] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
and daṃṣṭrāvant  (vol. II, p. 569), ghoradaṃṣṭrākarāla  (p. 570) — attributes 
echoed especially in 6.9., 4, 5 below.6
ucchuṣma-jambhala is also notorious for his connect ion with impurities.7 
He igures in several early eighth-century texts fro m the Turfan region in chi-
nese central Asia, where he is called the ‘Vajra-be ing of Impure Traces’ (Hui-
chi chin-kang).8 His cult became particularly popular in thirteenth  century 
chinese Buddhism and daoism, in which he played a c entral role in exorcistic 
rites involving child-mediums.9 In addition to ucchuṣma-jambhala, Buddhist 
sources also know of a female demon ucchuṣmā.0 All of this takes us far away 
from our text, and in view of the Vedic material qu oted above, the association 
with impurities is not likely to be original, but t he link between ucchuṣma and 
sorcery remains constant in the post-Vedic sources. 
General remarks on the Ucchuṣmakalpa
The editors describe the contents of this Pariśiṣṭa as “[t]he ritual of cere-
monies to obtain various wishes from certain forms of Rudra-Śiva known 
as the ucchuṣma-rudras  or ucchuṣmas ” (p. ). The text has further been 
characterised by G OudRIAAN  (978: 7) in the following terms: 
6 Similar characteristics are repeated also on the following pages of B HATTAcHARYYA ’ s edition. 
Elsewhere in the Sādhanamālā , there is one more, unfortunately rather unclear, occurrence 
of ucchuṣma , without connection with jambhala. cf. the two verses at the top of vol. II, 
p. 40: jvare gare tathā roge saṃgrāme ca tathaiva ca ǀ ḍākinī[sa]bhūtocchuṣmanadīśatru-
prapīḍite  ǁ aśanividyunmeghānāṃ parvvate vanamārgayoḥ ǀ tasmān mantraṃ smaren nityaṃ 
sarvvaśaṅkānisūdanam  ‘In the case of fever, of disease, of illness, and of war; and in the 
case of trouble from Ḍākinīs, from ucchuṣmas together with Bhūtas, from rivers and from 
enemies; on a mountain of (i.e. shrouded in?) clouds with thunderbolts and lightning; in 
the forest and on the road, he should therefore always mutter the mantra, which dispells all 
apprehension’ (it is not clear what the editor means to convey with his placing sa in square 
brackets — possibly that his manuscripts contained a hypometrical reading).
7 lINROTHE  (999: 0) claims that ucchusma ’ s [ sic] name means “he who burns up impuri-
ties”, referring in his n. 5 (p. 9) to B IScHOff , Mahābala, 9 , and to Mochizuki Shinkō and 
Tsukamoto zenryū, Bukkyō daijiten, rd ed. (Tokyo, 958–96), .
8 On these texts, ascribed to Ajitasena, see S TRIcKMANN  00: 56–70.
9 On this later development in china, see d AVIS 00: 6–5.
0 See the edition and translation of an Ucchuṣmānāmasādhana  by B IScHOff  (96), who re-
marks that “[v]on befreundeter lamaistischer Seite wurde mir in der Mongolei gesagt, es 
gäbe insgesamt 7 kanonische Texte, welche mit dem Ucchuṣmā-nāma-sādhana  zusam-
menhängen; ucchuṣmā werde im populären lamaismus als Bu rji (wohl für rjis) lha mo, 
als “Göttin Kindsfrau” verehrt, und ihr Sādhana zum Kinderkriegen verwendet” (B IScHOff  
96: 07).

--- [Page 7] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
 The description of the rites themselves (in 6, f .) includes some 
picturesque ceremonies which should not be missing from a histo-
ry of magical practices. The aims expressed there a re of the fami-
liar kind: subjugation of people of the four grades , winning a lady, 
causing disease, separating a victim from his famil y or destroying 
that family …
Some of the rites described in the text are included among the so called 
ṣaṭkarmāṇi , ‘Six Rites of Magic’, known from various, mainly Tantric 
sources. The text itself, however, does not contain any direct reference 
to this systematization. The seemingly unparalleled set of only four of the 
so-called aṅgamantra s (if the relevant passage [6..–6..5] has been 
transmitted without lacuna) would also seem to suggest that this text devi-
ates somewhat from the Tantric norm. That there exists an intimate connec-
tion between ucchuṣma and magical practices is borne out by the Śaiva and 
Buddhist material presented above. 
The structure of the text
The Ucchuṣmakalpa  irst presents mantras and general rules; then, from 
6.9. to 6.9.4, speciic mantras to be applied in rituals described in the rest 
of the text (cf. 6.0.). There is much unclarity about which mantras belong 
with which rituals, but occasionally we have the impression that connections 
can be established: if khanakhanāyeti mantraḥ  (6.4.) covers the mantras 
6.9.7–9 (starting with the mantra khanakhanāya namaḥ svāhā ), then the 
following mantra 6.9.0 (where we ind the epithet Alepa) may belong with 
6.5. upalepayet ; in the same way, one might see a connection between 
the word mukha  in 6.., and the epithets Mahāvaktra and Piṅgalanetra in 
6.9.6. Note also the topic paśu in 6.7. in connection with the mantras 
6.9.–. Other possible connections may be seen between the epithet 
Triv̥t in the mantras 6.9.– and the element trivarṇa sarṣapa  in 6.., bet-
ween the epithet Anivarta in the mantra 6.9.8 and the warding of ( nivartana ) 
of an enemy in 6.., between the epithet Tīkṣṇa in the mantra 6.9.5 and 
the reference to tīkṣṇa taila  in 6.6., and between the epithet Suvarṇacūḍa 
in the mantra 6.9. and the obtainment of gold ( rukmabhāk ) in 6... On 
the other hand, if the latter four mantras and ritu als are indeed connected, this 
 On the ṣaṭkarmāṇi , see G OudRIAAN  978: 5–4, T üRSTIG  985: 0–08, and B üHNE -
MANN  000.

--- [Page 8] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
would contradict the announcement (in 6.0.) that  the actions to be perfor-
med with the quoted mantras are explained in due order ( krameṇa ). 
Embedding in the corpus
Important elements must have been borrowed from other (i.e. non-Athar-
vavedic) sources, and despite the fact we have found no exact correspond-
ences between the Ucchuṣmakalpa  and any of the extant quotations from the 
lost ucchuṣma literature, it seems likely that our text gives a fairly faithful 
impression of what such lost texts as the Ucchuṣmatantra  may have con-
tained. But as was true of the Pāśupatavrata , this Pariśiṣṭa also does not fail 
to show clear marks of its solid embedding in its own corpus: the Atharvave-
da is explicitly referred to as such only in 6.., but (technical) terminol-
ogy and plant names known only from the Atharvavedic ritual tradition are 
noticed throughout ( śāntāḥ  [v̥kṣāḥ ], kukusa , tumburu ). furthermore, it may 
be observed that another text included among the Atharvavedapariśiṣṭas, the 
Brahmayāga  (AVPariś 9b), prescribes the use of the ucchuṣma mantras 
taught here (see n. 8 below). 
Newly used manuscripts
The state of the Ucchuṣmakalpa  as edited by B OllING  & VON NEGElEIN  is just 
as deplorable as that of AVPariś 40. While our attempts to solve the textual 
problems in the Pāśupatavrata  were made without the help of any (new) 
mss., since completion of that work Bisschop was able to obtain the two 
following mss. not used by the editors, during a visit to the Oriental Institute, 
Vadodara, in November 00. 
B  incomplete ms. ending with AVPariś 6 (Oriental Institute, 
Baroda/Vadodara, Acc. No. 7604 [ ŚiroMaṇi  94: , Serial 
No. 5]); the text begins at folio 56v l. , and ends on the last 
folio, 60r. 
B  complete ms. (Oriental Institute, Baroda/Vadodara, Acc. 
No. 78 [ ŚiroMaṇi  94: , Serial No. 4]), with AVPariś 6 
between folio 49v l. 4 and 5r l. . 
 On this text, see the observations by sanderson  00–04: 86, with a list of emendations in 
n. .

--- [Page 9] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
Griiths collected another set of two mss. at the Bhandarkar Oriental Re-
search Institute in May 005. 
P  complete ms. (BORI, Pune, No. 46 [N AVARATHE  994: –
4; = BORI 44 of 884–87]), with AVPariś 6 between folio 
05v l.  and r l. 5. After collation, this ms. turned out 
to be identical to the editors’ T (B OllING  & VON NEGElEIN , 
p. XII), and so we have refrained from reporting variant 
readings of this manuscript in our notes. 
P  complete ms. (BORI, Pune, No. 46 [N AVARATHE  994: 4–5; 
= BORI 5 of 879–80]), with AVPariś 6 between folio 
94v l. 7 and 00r l. 7 (there is no folio numbered 95 between 
94 and 96, but this is due to a numbering lapse of the copyist 
— the text of this Pariśiṣṭa is complete). 
consultation of these four mss. leads to the conclusion that the B OllING  & 
VON NEGElEIN  edition does justice to the manuscript evidence, and entirely 
conirms the editors’ conclusion (p. XVII) that all mss. “are derived from 
a single archetype”. Our three new mss. (BBP) give hardly any readings 
not reported for any of their mss. in their apparatus, but consulting them has 
helped us in decoding the often rather cryptic information in that (negative) 
apparatus, and has enabled us to identify several problematic readings in the 
edition as misprints. We may note that a number of variants reported for the 
editors’ T are shared with our B and P. In the case of the 6th Pariśiṣṭa, B 
frequently shows agreement of reading with the editors’ B, a ms. which “[i]n 
some portions of the work … shows a remarkable independence” (p. XVIII). 
In several cases, readings reported for this B (often found also in our B) pro-
vided us a clue in improving the text.4 In many others, we have been forced 
to go beyond the manuscript evidence and resort to conjectural emendation 
to make sense of the practice under study here. 
 cf. e.g. our n. 0 ad 6.9., n. 8 ad 6.0., and n. 6 ad 6.7. below .
4 The conclusion reached on the basis of this Pariśiṣṭa might seem to disagree with our im-
pression voiced in 00 (p. 5), although for A VPariś 40, the editors’ B ms. was only very 
partially available. Note however the editors’ remark (p. XVII): “the nature of the work 
renders it probable that the relationship [between the mss.] should vary in various Pariśiṣṭas, 
and to some extent this expectation is veriied”.

--- [Page 10] ---
10  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
TEXT AND TRANSLATION 
. oṃ nama ucchuṣmebhyaḥ  
 Om. Homage to the ucchuṣmas! 
. ucchuṣmāṇāṃ5 śikhāṃ devīṃ prapadye śaṃkarāyaṇīm  ǀ 
 sarvārthasādhanīṃ vibhvīṃ sarveśīṃ brahmacāriṇīm  ǁ 
 I resort to the crest of the ucchuṣmas, the Goddess 
Śaṃkarāyaṇī,6 who fulills all aims, the chaste mistress 
who rules over all. 
. te iṣṭakākārakarālam aticaturmukham  ǁ caturvidhais tu 
rūpaṃ dhyānam ǁ … 7 
.4 śive jaṭile brahmacāriṇi stambhani jambhani mohani huṃ 
phaṭ namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 O gracious one, O hairy one, O chaste one, O paralyzer, O 
crusher, O deluder!8 Hum! Phaṭ! Homage! Hail! 
.5 ātmarakṣā  ǁ 
 [Thus]9 the self-protection. 
5 The irst four syllables are lost, and consequently the edition is metrically deicient. We con-
jecture ucchuṣmāṇāṃ , the loss of which can be explained by eye-skip: ucchuṣmebhyaḥ ← 
ucchuṣmāṇāṃ. Although  one might also take  ucchuṣmāṇām as fem. pl., in our reconstruc-
tion, the goddess referred to in pāda a is in fact a mantra, viz. the  (ucchuṣma )śikhā, so we 
understand ucchuṣmāṇām [mantrāṇām ]. This Śikhāmantra is given in 6..4 (cf. our note 4 
ad 6..). Another option would be to emend to  tām ucchuṣmaśikhāṃ devīṃ , but in that 
case the eye-skip is more diicult to explain.
6 We know of no other occurence of this name. If its formation, with the āyana  suix, is taken 
at face value, we must understand something like ‘she, of Śaṅkara ’ s lineage’. Absence of 
v̥ddhi in the irst syllable is rare, but may be compared with Piṅgalāyanī, found in Buddhist 
Sanskrit.
7 The text is evidently corrupt. Some words ( iṣṭakā  and karāla ) recur in 6.9.–4 below . The 
text seems to refer to four ( caturvidha ) forms of the deity , and considering the occurrence of 
the word karāla , we may speculate that this passage originally contained a reference to the 
four female deities Raktā, Karālā, caṇḍākṣī and ucchuṣmā: see p.  above (it is noteworthy 
that these four deities play an important role in the system of the Picumata , a text which 
calls itself Ucchuṣmatantra , apparently identifying itself as a recension of or supplement to 
it, cf. G OudRIAAN  98: 4–4).
8 concerning the names in this mantra, particularly Stambhanī, jambhanī and Mohanī, see 
GOudRIAAN  978: 7, “Goddesses of fearsome igure which symbolize magical actions”.
9 That 6..5 concludes the preceding passage and does not point forward follows from our 
interpretation of 6...

--- [Page 11] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  11
.6 prācyāṃ diśīndro rājā devānām ādhipatyaṃ kurute  ǀ taṃ 
devaṃ bhagavantaṃ sagaṇaṃ sānucaraṃ saparivāraṃ 
saśirāḥ praṇipatya vijñāpayati  ǀ vajreṇa praharaṇenemāṃ 
diśaṃ vidiśaṃ ca sarvakalikaluṣam aśubhaṃ praśamayoṃ 
namaḥ svāhā  ǁ0 
 In the eastern direction King Indra establishes his sove -
reignty over the gods. That lord-God together with his at-
tendants, servants and followers, he requests, by prostrating 
with his head to him: ‘Throughout this direction and the 
intermediate direction, pacify all inauspicious foulness of 
the Kali [age], by striking with your cudgel. Om. Homage! 
Hail!’. 
.7 dakṣiṇasyāṃ diśi yamo rājā pretānām ādhipatyam iti  ǀ 
daṇḍeṇa praharaṇeneti  ǁ 
 In the southern direction King Yama [establishes his] sove -
reignty over the deceased: ‘[…] by striking with your staf 
[…]’. 
.8 pratīcyāṃ diśi varuṇo rājāpām ādhipatyam iti  ǀ pāśena 
praharaṇeneti  ǁ 
 In the western direction King Varuṇa [establishes his] sove -
reignty over the waters: ‘[…] by striking with your noose 
[…]’. 
.9 udīcyāṃ diśi kubero rājā yakṣāṇām ādhipatyam iti  ǀ gadayā 
praharaṇeneti  ǁ 
 In the northern direction King Kubera [establishes his] so -
vereignty over the Yakṣas: ‘[…] by striking with your club 
[…]’. 
.0 dhruvāyāṃ diśi vāsukī rājā nāgānām ādhipatyam iti  ǀ 
daṃṣṭrayā praharaṇeneti  ǁ 
 In the ixed/lower direction King Vāsuki [establishes his] 
sovereignty over the Nāgas: ‘[…] by striking with your fang 
[…]’. 
. ūrdhvāyāṃ diśi somo rājā nakṣatrāṇām ādhipatyaṃ ku rute ǀ 
taṃ devaṃ bhagavantaṃ sagaṇaṃ sānucaraṃ saparivāraṃ 
0 Now begins the digbandha , see our n. 4 ad 6.. below .

--- [Page 12] ---
1  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
saśirāḥ praṇipatya vijñāpayati  ǀ tejasā praharaṇenemāṃ 
diśaṃ vidiśaṃ ca sarvakalikaluṣam aśubhaṃ praśamayoṃ 
namaḥ svāhā  ǁ
 In the upper direction King Soma establishes his sovereign -
ty over the asterisms. That lord-God together with his at-
tendants, servants and followers, he requests, by prostrating 
with his head to him: ‘Throughout this direction and the in-
termediate direction, pacify all inauspicious foulness of the 
Kali [age], by striking with your splendor. Om. Homage! 
Hail!’. 
. athocchuṣmah̥dayam  ǁ dyuru dyuru dara dara vidāraya 
vidāraya mili mili namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 Now the heart of the ucchuṣmas: ‘ dyuru dyuru dara dara 
vidāraya vidāraya mili mili . Homage! Hail!’. 
. ucchuṣmaśikhā  ǁ śive jaṭila iti4 ǁ 
 Presumably this refers to the light of the moon. About the association between the six direc-
tions and six diferent regents in 6..6−, in the context of digbandha (see our n. 4 ad 
6..), cf. G OudRIAAN  978: 70. We have found no exact parallel for the sixfold pairing:
East South West North Nadir zenith 
Indra Yama V aruṇa Kubera Vāsuki Soma 
 On the whole, it makes a considerably more orthodox (un-Śaiva, un-Tantric) impression 
than the classiications referred to by G OudRIAAN . EINOO’ s recent article is based on a large 
number of such lists of dikpālas: he knows our present list (005: 8, n. 9), but has seem-
ingly found no exact parallel either. The irst four members of our list agree with the mem-
bers of the last fourfold list taken by E INOO (p. ) from Hopkins’ Epic Mythology  (p. 5). 
See E INOO’ s n. 6 for references to further literature, to which we add B OdEWITz  000, and 
WESSElS -MEVISSEN  00. The latter work, with its clear tables and elaborate references, 
demonstrates how Vāsuki/Ananta intrudes in the Nadir position (see table VI, and the ac-
companying text on p. ) in pseudo-Vedic texts of the same type as the Atharvavedic 
Pariśiṣṭas, while Soma ’ s positioning in the zenith seems to be unknown elsewhere.
 The passage 6..–5 mentions four mantras whose names are identical with four of the 
ive or six ‘limb-mantras’ ( aṅgamantra s) of Tantric Śaivism: H̥daya, Śikhā, Kavaca, Astra, 
Śiras and (in some sources) Netra; cf. TAK I, s.v . aṅga  and aṅgamantra , and G OOdAll  004: 
, n. 88. These mantras may include a bīja (formed with the long vowels ā, ī, ū, ai, au), 
but there are also other ways of forming them (cf. B RuNNER  986 and G OudRIAAN  978: 
7–7). However, the form found here (ending with the element namaḥ svāhā  that is applied 
to all mantras in this text), does not seem to be attested elsewhere (but cf. the application 
of these exclamations in bodhana  as enjoined by the Ucchuṣmatantra , in the quotation from 
that text discussed above, p. 4).
 Elements of this mantra are attested elsewhere (e.g. in the Agni- and Garuḍapurāṇa ), but we 
ind no parallel for this precise sequence of words/sounds.
4 The words śive jaṭila iti  are a pratīka for the Śikhāmantra given in 6..4 above. The edi-

--- [Page 13] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  1
 The crest of the ucchuṣmas: ‘O gracious one, O you with 
matted hair!’. 
.4 prathama prathama5 kuru kuru muru muru mahā muñca 
mahā muñca vidu vidu namaḥ svāhā  ǁ iti kavacam  ǁ 
 ‘ prathama prathama kuru kuru muru muru mahā muñca 
mahā muñca vidu vidu . Homage! Hail!’. This is the cuirass. 
.5 oṃ namo mahāpiṅgalāya6 siṃhanādanādine namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
ity astramantraḥ  ǁ 
 ‘Om. Homage to the great yellow one, who roars the lion’s 
roar! Homage! Hail!’. This is the weapon mantra. 
. eṣām ucchuṣmarudrāṇām ataḥ kalpo nigadyate  ǀ 
 atharvavedodbhavānāṃ tithi̥kṣādyayogataḥ7 ǁ 
tion adds prathamaḥ  ǁ after this iti, which makes no sense. We have omitted the word here, 
because we consider it to be a corruption of the beginning of the following mantra.
5 As noted just above, the edition reads  prathamaḥ after the  iti of the preceding mantra; it 
starts .4 with  kuru kuru , but there can be no doubt that the text originally intended  kuru 
kuru to be preceded by  prathama prathama, which was written as  ‘prathama ’ (cf. the 
editors’ apparatus to khaṇḍikā 9 , p. ), and that the ‘’ was lost during the transmission, 
with the visarga  added afterwards, or that the ‘’ was misread as visarga . This hypothesis 
is strengthened by the readings of AcdE which drop the  visarga. for prathama prathama 
we can adduce a few instances from the  Niśvāsaguhya , which indeed writes  ‘prathama 2 ’ 
(f. 76r ll. 5–6; f. 8r ll. –4; f. 86v l. ). Shingo Einoo has suggested to us the possibility (sup-
ported by a few other Tantric texts) of emending  prathama prathama to pramatha pramatha, 
assuming metaphysis of ma and tha. However, because of the  Niśvāsaguhya passages we 
consider it likely that  prathama prathama is intended here . We may note that our ms. B 
reads  praśamaṃ instead of  prathamaḥ, which is also interpretable, but certainly secondary .
6 cf. 6.9. below . Regarding the Rudra-epithet Piṅgala, cf. B ISScHOP  & G RIffITHS  00: 6 
n. . In his annotation on  Parākhyatantra .74–75, G OOdAll  (004: f. n. 88) dis-
cusses a set of names referring to the  aṅgamantra s, diferent from the more common names 
Śikhā etc.: Sarvātman, Suśiva, jvālinī, Piṅgala and Ghorāstra. These Mantra-names are ex-
plicitly identiied with the names of the  aṅgamantra s in MatPĀ vidyāpāda 7.7–8b, where 
Piṅgala is identiied with the Kavaca:  kavacaṃ piṅgalaṃ mahat. The name Mahādīpta, on 
the other hand, is there considered to refer to the Astra-mantra ( śivāstraṃ ca mahādīptam ), 
so it is hard to establish a connection with the name Mahāpiṅgala occurring in the present 
Astra-mantra.
7 We adopt the reading of BBP. The edition reads  ̥̊ksādyayogataḥ  which is certainly just a 
misprint.

--- [Page 14] ---
1  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
 Now the practice involving these ucchuṣmarudras,8 who 
spring from the Atharvaveda,9 is recited, regardless of 
whether lunar day and Pleiades etc. are appropriate.40 
. grāme vāthāpy araṇye vā pracareta yathāvidhi  ǀ 
 sadyaḥsiddhikarā hy ete ucchuṣmāḥ parikīrtitāḥ  ǁ 
8 We presume these Rudras to be the aṅgamantra s just mentioned in the preceding passage, 
but it is also possible that they are the mantras given in khaṇḍikā 9 (cf. 0.). On the fact 
that the ucchuṣmas represent a standard group of mantras, cf. A VPariś 9b.4. homayet 
kutsasūktena ucchuṣmaiś ca yathāvidhi ǀ japen mantrān tathāyuṣyān maṅgalyāṃś cāpi 
yatnataḥ  ‘He should ofer with the Kutsa-hymn and with the ucchuṣmas, according to the 
precept. He should also mutter the Āyuṣya- and the Maṅgalya-mantras with efort’. The 
kutsasūkta  might (as suggested in B OllING  & VON NEGElEIN ’ s Index b, p. 559) be identi-
cal to the kautsa  (hymn), whose use is enjoined at 4..0 among adhyātma  hymns in the 
Snānavidhi. At ManuSm .50 ( kautsaṃ japtvāpa ity etad ), the pratīka indicates that ̥V 
.97 is intended (see also B üHlER  886: 480, with footnote). The A V parallel of that hymn, 
A V(Ś) 4., however, is attributed by the A VBSA to Brahmā as ̥ṣi and is in the KauśS 
(6., 4., 8.4) technically referred to as apāgham . The A VBSA attributes A V(Ś) 0.8, 
a mystical hymn, to the seer Kutsa. It seems slightly more likely that the kutsasūkta  in-
tended here is the same as the KauśS’ s apāgha . — The Āyuṣyas are listed at A VPariś .9 , 
but which mantras were intended with maṅgalya s is not clear to us.
9 As to the qualiication atharvavedodbhava , we could on the one hand imagine this is a mere 
attempt to incorporate these Rudras into the Atharvavedic tradition and hence to claim au-
thority for this tradition in dealing with them. On the other hand, we must note the existence 
of a class called atharvarudra s in NiGu f. 55r l. 4, where they are said to be living in the town 
Ratnavatī in the sixth Pātāla. We do not know these atharvarudra s from any other source. 
The same chapter 5 of the Niśvāsaguhyasūtra , which contains a list of the seven Pātālas with 
their towns and regents, locates two ucchuṣmarudras (or ucchuṣma and Rudra?) in the town 
ucchuṣmā in the irst Pātāla (NiGu f. 54v l. 6 through f. 55r l. ): āyasī prathamā bhūmi [ḥ] 
purī bhasma [vatī …] ǀ [(dhanaṃ )ja]yasya nāgasya tathā ucchuṣmarudrayoḥ ǀ ucchuṣmeti 
purī khyātā āyasī harma (read harmya )mālinī  ǀ ‘The irst world is made of metal. The city 
Bhasmavatī [there] belongs to the serpent dhanaṃjaya. And the two ucchuṣmarudras / 
ucchuṣma and Rudra have the city of metal called ucchuṣmā, garlanded with palaces’ (the 
readings between brackets are supplemented from the Kathmandu apograph). See, inally , 
also our discussion of the, in a sense, ‘ Atharvavedic’ origin of the name ucchuṣma (p. ).
40 On this type of indication dealing with the proper time for the execution of magical 
acts, cf. G OudRIAAN  978: 77. We owe our interpretation of ayogatas  to Alexis Sander-
son, who clariies that this statement means that the practice is so powerful that its suc-
cess is not dependent on any of the conditions that normally apply . A similar statement 
occurs in the preface of the preceding Pariśiṣṭa, the Āsurīkalpa  (A VPariś 5..4): athāta 
āsurīkalpam upadeśād atharvaṇaḥ ǀ nāsyās tithir na nakṣatraṃ nopavāso vidhīyate ǁ ‘Now 
then the Āsurīkalpa  following the teaching of Atharvan: for this [Āsurī], no [speciic] lu-
nar day , no [speciic] constellation, no fasting is enjoined’. There are many parallels for 
such statements. cf., e.g., A VPariś .5.5 na tithir na ca nakṣatraṃ na graho na ca candramāḥ 
ǀ atharvamantrasaṃprāptyā sarvasiddhir bhaviṣyati  ǁ and Tantrāloka 9.65 na tithir na ca 
nakṣatraṃ nopavāso vidhīyate ǀ grāmyadharmarataḥ siddhyet sarvadā smaraṇena hi  ǁ.

--- [Page 15] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  1
 He should perform it in the village or also in the wilderness, 
in accordance with the rules: these ucchuṣmas are renow-
ned for bringing immediate success. 
. ātmarakṣāṃ diśāṃ bandhaṃ śikhābandhaṃ ca sarvadā  ǀ 
 etair eva yathāyogam ādau kuryād vicakṣaṇaḥ  ǁ 
 At the beginning the wise should always conduct the self-
protection, the tying up of the directions and the tying up of 
the crest4 with these [ucchuṣmas], as is appropriate. 
.4 khadirasyodumbarasya tathā bilvapalāśayoḥ  ǀ 
 dadhisarpirmadhuyujāṃ śāntānāṃ vāpi bilvataḥ  ǁ 
 Of Khadira, of udumbara and of Bilva and Palāśa, or of the 
auspicious kinds of wood [which come] after Bilva4 [if they 
are] joined with curd, butter and honey, 
.5 samitsahasratritayaṃ hutvā śāntir gavāṃ bhavet  ǀ 
 tīkṣṇās̥gviṣayuktānāṃ phaṭkāraś ca vināśane  ǁ 
 he should ofer three thousand pieces of fuel, and the paci -
ication of cattle will result. In [a rite of] destruction [he 
should ofer the same amount of those kinds of wood] joined 
4 The three items listed seem to refer to the contents respectively of 6..–4 ( ātmarakṣā ), 
6..5– ( digbandha ) and 6..–5 (four aṅgamantra s, one of which is the Śikhā, 
i.e. śikhābandha ?). for ātmarakṣā , cf. NiGu f. 84r l.  (to drive away evils), f. v l. 5 
(cf. also n. 48 ad 6.. below), and AgnP .9cd. for digbandha , cf. NiGu f. 97r l. 5 
loṣṭubhiḥ diśābandhaṃ karoti ; f. 0r l. ; r l. 5; AgnP .d; VīṇT 68–69 (for puriica-
tion). On the rite of digbandha  in a Balinese context, see G OudRIAAN  & H OOYKAAS  97: 579 , 
s.v . digbandha . for śikhābandha , tying up of the knot accompanied by the recitation of the 
(śikhā ) mantra, cf. e.g. AgnP .5ab ( anenaiva tu mantreṇa śikhābandhādik̥j jaye ); AgnP 
58.0cd; SvacchT .04b; VdhP .4.5ab; Hc p. 50, l. 5–6 kusumaśekharasañcāribhiḥ 
kriyamāṇamantraśikhābandhā iva guñjadbhiḥ ṣaṭcaraṇaiḥ  ‘whose tying up of the crests was 
performed with mantras as it were by the humming bees, roaming around the crowns of 
lowers [on top of their heads]’.
4 Our interpretation is based on the assumption that the verse presupposes knowledge of 
the list of ‘ auspicious’ ( śānta ) trees given at KauśS 8.5: palāśa-udumbara-jambu-kāmpīla-
srag-vaṅgha-śirīṣa-sraktya-varaṇa-bilva-jaṅgiḍa-kuṭ aka-garhya-galāvala-vetasa-śimbala-
sipuna-syandana-araṇikā-aśmayokta-tunyu-pūtudāravaḥ śāntāḥ . We do not ind khadira  in 
this list, but its use as fuel is enjoined with protective/paciicatory force at KauśS 6.4 and 
5. — twice as part of diferent lists showing no overlap with each other, with the list at 
KauśS 8.5, or with our present list, besides containing khadira , but the list at 5. does 
immediately follow employment of the same śāntāḥ  in 5.0.

--- [Page 16] ---
1  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
with mustard,4 blood and poison, and [make] the sound 
‘Phaṭ’.44 
.6 prayogād apy asiddhiś cet tat45 karmedaṃ samārabhet  ǀ 
 ucchuṣmarūpī bhakṣayaṃs tīkṣṇasaktūdakāni46 tu ǁ 
 And if there is no success resulting even from the perform -
ance/application [of this rite], then he should take up this act 
[again]:47 he [should become one who] has the form of an 
ucchuṣma,48 consuming mustard- and barley-water.49 
4 We adopt this interpretation of tīkṣṇa  here on the basis of our interpretation of this word in 
the compound tīkṣṇataila  at 6.6., as explained below in n. . Taking tīkṣṇa  here as irst 
member of a dvandva compound, and as denoting mustard, is supported by certain parallels 
pointed out to us by Harunaga Isaacson: VdhP .5.cd samidbhis tu rājikās̥gviṣais , 
and VīṇT 55c rājikāviṣaraktāktaṃ … homam . cf. M AGOuN  889: 7 on the identiication of 
rājikā  as black mustard.
44 cf. A VPariś 40..8, B ISScHOP  & G RIffITHS  00:  (with n. 84). cf. G OudRIAAN  978: 7f. 
on the exclamatory phaṭ. for the element as̥gviṣayukta , cf. AgnP . kajjalaṃ nimbani-
ryyāsamajjās̥gviṣasaṃyutam ǀ kākapakṣasya lekhanyā śmaśāne vā catuṣpathe ǁ ‘[He should 
use] ink mixed with the juice/resin of the Neem tree, with marrow , with blood and with 
poison, using a plume from the wing of a crow , at a cremation ground or at a cross-roads’.
45 The editors take tat together with  karmedaṃ, but sequences  cet tat are very common in 
the meaning ‘if … then’, and it is hard to make sense out of a compound  tatkarman in this 
context .
46 The edition reads  tīkṣṇaḥ saktūdakāni (thus also our mss.), but we emend after the model of  
tīkṣṇās̥gviṣa- in the preceding verse.
47 It seems that karmedaṃ  announces the rite described in khaṇḍikā , while presumably the 
ritual described in 6..– is another means of assuring success. Note the connection be-
tween releasing impure excreta (6..) and the ‘form of an ucchuṣma ’ in this ritual, a con-
nection also evident in Buddhist sources on the nature of ucchuṣma(s). See above, pp. 5f.
48 cf. pp. 5f. above, on what the ‘form of an ucchuṣma ’ may have been.
49 The compound saktūdaka  is only very rarely attested elsewhere, and we are not sure pre-
cisely what kind of water it denotes. That this kind of water was surrounded with spe-
ciic taboos is clear, however, from VādhŚS 4..–5 (rules for the Yajamāna during the 
Agniṣṭoma): tayā sarpiryūṣayāśnīyān, na saktūdakaṃ pibed, udaśvid dhaiva pibet, saktūn 
vādhvasyanna  (read vādhyasyan na ) śalākābhyām mantham upamathya pibet  ‘He should eat 
with that […] boiled in butter, he should not drink barley-water, he should only drink [pure] 
water-and-buttermilk ( udaśvit ), or [drink it] while sprinkling [coarsely ground and roasted] 
barley grains on top. But he should not drink it after stirring it up into a mixed-bever-
age ( mantha )’. This is to be compared with Keśava ’ s Kauśikapaddhati , p.  (on KauśS 7.7 
manthaudanaṃ prayacchati ): saktūdakaṃ dviśalākayā samidhā mathitaṃ mantha ity ucy-
ate (cf. also p. 4 on KauśS 7.9–, to cure someone of thirst; p.  on KauśS 4.0, 
kravyācchamanavidhāna ). NiGu f. 99v l. 4, prescribes consumption of the same water in a 
ritual to obtain almighty power: udakasaktavāhāraḥ śatasahasraṃ japet mahad aiśvaryaṃ 
bhavati  ‘consuming barley-water, he should mutter [the mantra] a hundred thousand times: 
great sovereignty arises’. Although udakasaktavāhāraḥ  might seem to be in need of re-
pair, it is probably to be taken as an Aiśa compound, as is suggested by its recurrence in 
NiGu f. 00r l. 5: udakasaktavāhāraḥ śatasahasraṃ japet, sāmantarājyaṃ prayacchyati . We 

--- [Page 17] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  1
. abhīṣṭāṃ vā striyaṃ gatvā dhyātvā vā retam50 uts̥jet  ǀ 
 mūtraṃ purīṣaṃ cots̥jya gokaṅkālādhirohaṇam  ǁ 
 Either having gone to a desired woman, or having thought 
[of her], he should emit semen. After [also] emiting urine 
and faeces, he should perform5 the mounting of a cow’s 
skeleton,5 
. k̥tvā mantraṃ niśi japed yāvad goś̥ṅgataś caret  ǀ 
 jvālābhaṅgaṃ tatas tasya karmasiddhiṃ samādiśet  ǁ 
 he should mutter the mantra5 at night, and he should walk 
up to the cow’s horn. The curve of the lame54 will then an-
nounce to him the success of the ritual.55 
. dadhimadhugh̥tāktānām iti śeṣaḥ  ǁ56
assume that prayacchyati  here is an Aiśa passive form: ‘ complete sovereignty is given in 
return’. cf. inally the consumption of udakasaktu  to obtain the power of magical disap-
pearance ( kṣipram antardhīyate ) at BaudhdhS .7.9 / jaimGS .8.
50 The edition has reta, a reading supported by only one of the editors’ manuscripts (V). We 
adopt the Aiśa a-stem (or hiatus-breaking m), found in AcdETu (B has retum ) and in our 
manuscripts BBP.
5 We take 6.. and 6.. together, and hence construe gokaṅkālādhirohaṇam  with k̥tvā . 
Many parallels can be adduced for the pairing of a speciic ritual ( … k̥tvā ) with the in-
struction to mutter a mantra: to mention just one example, NiGu f. 95r l. 5 devasya mahatīṃ 
pūjāṃ k̥tvā mantrasyāṣṭasahasraṃ japet tataḥ siddho bhavati  ‘ After performing the great 
worship of God, he should mutter the Mantra a thousand-and-eight times; he then becomes 
successful’.
5 The compound gokaṅkāla  seems to be a hapax.
5 We are not sure which mantra is intended here, and do not know why M OdAK  (as quoted in 
n. 54) suggests 6...
54 for ābhaṅga  in this sense, cf. e.g. Abhijñānaśākuntala  .7 , grīvābhaṅgābhirāmaṃ  ‘ gracefully 
bending its neck’. See also A PTE s.v . ābhaṅgam . One might consider dividing the compound 
as jvālā/jvāla-abhaṅga  ‘the non-extinction of the lame’. M OdAK  (99: 0) interprets still 
diferently: “One should recite the spell (6..) at night, having stepped over the skeleton 
of a cow and should move up to the horns. The breaking out of lames would then indicate 
success in the task”. We consider it more likely that the practitioner actually carries a lame 
in his hand — it is night after all — while he is performing the ritual, and that the curve of 
the lame produced during this act indicates his success. Or, alternatively , that some kind 
of ire was still in use during this particular nightly rite, and that a ‘ curve’ in its lames 
is intended. cf. e.g. A VPariś 70c.5.5, where the lame of a sacriicial ire moving around 
clockwise ( pradakṣiṇagatiḥ śrīmān agniḥ ) indicates a king ’ s victory .
55 M OdAK  (99: 0) interprets the preceding as a ritual “to win over the heart of a woman”, 
which seems unlikely to be correct.
56 Thus also BBP. The apparatus states (p. 0): “ A variant to .c”, but the words iti śeṣaḥ 
(as opposed to iti pāṭhaḥ ) rather suggest we have to do with a marginal annotation that has 
crept into the text. It may have been intended to explain that the lame referred to in 6..c 

--- [Page 18] ---
1  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
4. saptakṣīrāñjaligrāsaḥ sruvo hy asmin praśasyate  ǀ 
 kṣīraṃ tenātha juhuyād dhanakāmasya nityaśaḥ  ǁ 
 [The use] during this [practice],57 [of] a spoon containing 
seven handfuls of milk is praised. And he should always 
ofer milk with it for one who desires wealth. 
4. gh̥tena tejaskāmasya āyuḥkāmasya dūrvayā  ǀ 
 kukusaṃ tumburuṃ58 vāpi vidyād uccāṭakarmaṇi  ǁ 
 [He should ofer] with ghee for one who desires energy, 
with dūrvā grass for one who desires a [full] life-span, and 
in the rite of eradication,59 he should know [that] Kukusa60 
or Tumburu [is to be used].6 
5. brāhmaṇaṃ tu vaśīkartuṃ śālipiṣṭamayīṃ tanum  ǀ 
 k̥tvā catuṣpathaṃ gatvā g̥hītvā śastram uttamam  ǁ 
 But to subjugate a brahmin, he should make a body6 out of 
rice-lour, go to a crossroads, take an excellent sword, 
(jvālābhaṅgam ) should be ‘ of [irewood] smeared with curd, honey and ghee’. 
57 We assume this still refers to the kalpa  introduced in 6.., presumably the same 
Ucchuṣmakalpa  under which name the entire text has been transmitted.
58 We emend  tumburuṃ for transmitted  tuṃbaraṃ  (thus also BBP). On our reasons for as-
suming that  tuṃbaraṃ is an error which has crept into the transmission of the A VPariś 
probably under the inluence of one KauśS passage (where nearly all mss. show the same 
mistake), see G RIffITHS  004–05: 56 n. 9.
59 for a discussion of this rite, cf. G OudRIAAN  978: 5–64.
60 There are small variants for this name in the mss. (B [crit. app. under 6.5.], B kukkusaṃ ; 
cTuV kukrusaṃ  [also P]). We don’t know any other attestations of the plant name kukusa  
than the one in dārila ’ s Kauśikabhāṣya  (9:9 on 4.0, wrongly emended to kukūla  by the 
editors, d IWEKAR  et al. — see also their note on p. 40 of Appendix A) and the two in Keśava ’ s 
Kauśikapaddhati  (lIMAYE  et al., pp. , 6 [ times]).
6 The verse partly agrees with A VPariś 6.5.–4: kakubhaṃ kaṭabhaṃ v̥kṣaṃ kauvirālaṃ tu 
kauhakam  ǀ vaṃśaṃ vibhītakaṃ śigruṃ vidyād uccāṭane hitān  ǀǀ stambhane sarvasainyānāṃ 
vijayārthe jayaṃ diśet  ǀ apāmārgeṇa saubhāgyam āyuṣkāmo hi dūrvayā  ǀǀ ‘One should know 
that the kakubha , the kaṭabha , the kauvirāla , and also the kauhaka  tree, (further) the bam-
boo-cane ( vaṃśa ), the vibhītaka  and the śigru  tree, are suitable (in a ceremony) for ruining 
an adversary ( uccāṭana ). In a ceremony which aims to paralyse ( stambhana ) the whole 
army one should designate the jaya plant for the sake of victory ( vijaya ); by means of the 
apāmārga  plant one gets wellfare ( saubhāgya ) and he who is desirous of a full length of life 
(āyuṣkāma ), (will get it) by means of dūrva  [sic] grass’ (transl. VAN dEN BOScH).
6 On the use of images in the context of vaśīkaraṇa  and rules for the use of diferent materials 
in accordance with the grade of society the victim in question belongs to, cf. SVidhB .5, 
referred to in G OudRIAAN  978: 9. As is the case here, the Sāmavidhānabrāhmaṇa  ritual 
involves cutting the image of the victim into pieces (G OudRIAAN  978: , 4–5).

--- [Page 19] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  1
5. aṣṭottarasahasreṇa k̥tvā tad abhimantritam6 ǀ 
 aṣṭāṅgaṃ tena tāṃ chittvā mantrato vaśam ānayet  ǁ 
 perform its incantation with a thousand and eight mantras, 
cut that [body] into eight parts with that [sword], and lead 
him to subjugation from the mantra. 
5. aṣṭottarasahasraṃ vā āk̥ter64 juhuyād budhaḥ ǀ 
 brāhmaṇīṃ tu vaśīkartuṃ kuryān māṣamayīṃ tanum  ǁ 
 Or the wise man may ofer a thousand and eight [oblations] 
of the image. And to gain power over a female brahmin he 
should make the body of beans.
6. sarpirdadhimadhvaktānāṃ65 lājānāṃ āhutīḥ śubhāḥ  ǀ 
6 The editors emend to a compound  tadabhimantraṇam , which is unnecessary . All the manu-
scripts either read exactly , or support the reading  tadabhimantritam.
64 The edition reads prak̥te , which can hardly be correct. B OllING  & VON NEGElEIN  report 
prak̥ter  for their mss. ABE, which is also the reading of our B (B and P read prak̥te ). 
A corruption āk̥ter  → prak̥ter  is easily explained graphically , and was here possibly in-
duced by the absence of sandhi over the pāda boundary . Our conjecture is supported by 
a similar passage in A VPariś 5..6–7 , where we ind: hantukāmo hi śatrūñ ca vaśīkurvan 
ca bhūpatīn   ǀ āsurīślakṣṇapiṣṭājyaṃ juhuyād āk̥tiṃ budhaḥ  ǀǀ arkendhanāgniṃ prajvālya 
chittvāstreṇāk̥tiṃ tu tām   ǀ pādāgrato ’ṣṭasahasraṃ juhuyād yasya vaśy asau   ǀǀ ‘The wise 
man, desiring indeed to kill [his] enemies and to subjugate kings, may ofer an image made 
of [a mixture of] black mustard, ine lour and ghee. Having stoked up a ire kindled with 
wood of the Arka-plant (cf. also 6.. below , with n. 46), he should cut that image with 
a sword and ofer [the image that he has cut up, starting] from the tips of its feet a thousand-
and-eight times. He becomes the master of the one whose [image has been treated thus]’ (the 
reading °piṣṭājyaṃ  is problematic, and the editors (p. 8) suggest °piṣṭīyāṃ  or °piṣṭasya , 
while it seems to us that °piṣṭājyāṃ  would also be a possibility). There are parallels for 
similar rituals involving oblations from an image cut into pieces. G OudRIAAN  978: 4 
refers to AgnP 60.8: sarvavrīhimayīṃ k̥tvā rājñaḥ pratik̥tiṃ dvija  ǀ sahasraśas tu juhuyād 
rājā vaśagato bhavet   ǀǀ ‘One should make an image of the king consisting completely of rice 
grains and make an oblation of it by means of a thousand pieces; and the king will come un-
der one’ s power’ (transl. G OudRIAAN ). Quite a few instances of such a practice of vaśīkaraṇa  
are recorded in the 4th chapter of the Niśvāsaguhya : e.g. f. 96r ll. 4–5, atha lavaṇamayīṃ 
pratik̥tiṃ k̥tvā *rudhireṇābhyajya  (em.; rudhire [ ]bhyajya  ms.) tīkṣṇaśastreṇotk̥tya pādau 
prabh̥ti sthitvāṣṭasahasraṃ *juhuyāt striyāḥ  (em.; juhuyā striyā  ms.) puruṣasya vā sa vaśyo 
bhavati  ‘Then he should make an image of salt, anoint it with blood, cut up [the image] with 
a sharp sword, starting with the feet, and ofer a thousand-and-eight oblations, standing still. 
He becomes the master of a man or a woman’.
65 In spite of the fact that this pāda is metrically poor (a bad  ma-vipulā ), we accept the emen-
dation of the editors. It is supported by their ms. B ( sarpirdadhirmadhvaktānāṃ ). The read-
ing of all their other mss. (AcdETuV :  sarpirdadhimadhūktānāṃ ; thus also our B; sarppir°  
B; sarpirmardadhi° P) makes no sense and may have arisen precisely because the irregu-
lar metre was felt to be problematic (cf. also our n. 67 below). for the expression  sarpirda-
dhimadhvakta , cf. A VPariś 5..5c  sarpirdadhimadhvaktapattrāṇāṃ (hypermetrical),  where 
the editors in a note likewise suggest reading sarpirdadhimadhvaktānāṃ.

--- [Page 20] ---
0  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
 kanyākāmo ’ṣṭasahasraṃ hutvā kanyām avāpnuyāt  ǁ 
 One who desires a girl should ofer a thousand and eight66 
auspicious oblations of parched grains anointed with butter, 
curd and honey, and he will obtain the girl. 
6. api vā juhuyāt piṣṭamayyāḥ prāksaṃkhyayāhutīḥ ǀ67 
 darbheṣīkāṃ vābhimantrya68 tadg̥he niścalāṃ nyaset  ǁ 
 Or else69 he should ofer oblations of the [body] made of 
lour, in accordance with the previous number. Or he should 
perform the incantation over a stalk of darbha, and put it 
down motionless in her70 house. 
6. tāvad udvejayet sā tu vajrabhūtā hi tadg̥ham  ǀ 
 kanyāyāḥ sādhanīyāyā7 yāval lābhas tato bhavet  ǁ 
 So long that [stalk], as a veritable cudgel, should cause her 
house to shake,7 until thereupon the attainment of the girl 
who is to be won over takes place. 
7. pradhānam anyaṃ vā kaṃ cid7 vaśīkartuṃ narottamam74 ǀ 
66 cf. our notes on 6.0..
67 We follow the reading of all mss. (including our BBP). The edition reads  api vā 
piṣṭamayyāḥ prāg juhuyāt saṃdhyayāhutīḥ. The editors felt compelled to correct the trans-
mitted reading caesurae causa (p. 0), and apparently (consequently?) also saw reason to 
emend  saṃkhyayā to saṃdhyayā. We agree with neither alteration.  The metrical infelicity of 
the transmitted reading is not greater than what we ind also elsewhere in the corpus of A V 
Pariśiṣṭas (in the present text, e.g. 8.a, 0.c [=.c], 6.ab, 8.ab [plus perhaps 7.a, 
9.a] — see also K EITH 9: 757−77, esp. 76 and 769 , M OdAK  99: 486−470).
68 Should we emend to cābhimantrya ?
69 On the semantic nuances which the turn of phrase api vā  sometimes expresses in Vedic 
sūtra literature, see S PROcKHOff  999. We do not assume the author of our text chose specii-
cally these words for more than metrical considerations.
70 Probably this is what is meant, cf. the next verse.
7 The editors print sādhan 〈īy〉āyās [tu]. They presumably mean to indicate that they add īy 
and propose to omit tu. This conjecture receives some support from B sādhanīyo stu , while 
B and P read sādhanāyās tu , which is probably also the reading of the manuscripts to 
which the editors had access. However, the editors’ conjecture leaves unsolved the problem 
that -s before y- is impossible, so we are forced to take it one step further, by omitting not 
only tu but stu. A more far-reaching alternative would be to read sādhanīyāyās tāval  here, 
and yāvad  at the beginning of the verse.
7 GOudRIAAN  (978: 57) speaks of “causing upheaval” and refers to this passage, seemingly 
taking the girl as object of udvejayet .
7 kaṃ cid : em. The edition and our three additional mss. read  kiṃ cid.
74 According to the apparatus, only V has this reading, but we also ind it in our B and B. The 
reported variants are:  nacottamaṃ AcdETu (also our P), narottamāḥ B.

--- [Page 21] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  1
 samidhaḥ khadirādīnām audumbaryaś ca homayet  ǁ 
 To subjugate a minister or another kind of high person, he 
should ofer fuel of Khadira etc., as well as [fuel-sticks] of 
udumbara.75 
7. śmaśānakhaṭvāṅgamayīṃ homayen mantrasādhane  ǀ 
 palāṇḍulaśunaprasthaṃ hutvā mastaṃ na saṃśayaḥ  ǁ 
 during the mastering of mantras,76 he should certainly ofer 
[fuel] made of a skull-staf [prepared/found at?] a cremation 
ground, after [irst] ofering a measured prastha77 of onion 
and garlic.78
 7. śirīṣāṅgamayīṃ rājño balis trimadhureṇa tu  ǀ 
 brāhmaṇe pāyasamayīṃ kṣatriyasya viṣāṇikām  ǁ 
 for a king [he should use fuel] made of pieces of Śirīṣa.79 
The oblation is with the three sweets.80 In the case of a brah-
75 On the use of Khadira and udumbara wood for magical purposes, cf. respectively KauśS 
6.4 (see also n. 4 above) and 4.0 (G OudRIAAN  978: 4).
76 On the meaning of mantrasādhana , a term very common in Tantric literature, cf. e.g. ŚiP 
Vāyavīyasaṃhitā 9.9ab, where it is identiied with another technical term, puraścaraṇa : 
sādhanaṃ mūlamantrasya puraścaraṇam ucyate .
77 A particular weight or measure: cf. AK .8.89a. PW s.v . records several ways of measur-
ing a prastha , among which “ein Prastha ist die höchste Quantität von Blut, welche einem 
kräftigen Menschen entzogen werden darf” (cf. i.a. SuS, Śārīrasthāna 8.4). The editors 
record a number of variants for the end of this pāda: mastan na saṃśayaḥ  (cuV); mastun na 
saṃśayaḥ  (T); masāv asaṃśayaḥ  (B). B presents the reading adopted here; the reading of 
cuV is also found in our B; that of T in our P. This last reading seems to point to mastu , 
in which case perhaps we should understand: ‘ after [irst] ofering a prastha  of onion and 
garlic, [along with] sour cream ’.
78 for the juxtaposition of palāṇḍu  and laśuna , cf. e.g. MBh .9.8d and BrP 0.74b 
(among substances to be avoided during śrāddha  rites), and GarP 96.7a (both substances 
to be consumed when observing a cāndrāyaṇa ). The following additional references were 
traced by Somdev V asudeva: ManuSm 5.5 (among substances banned for brahmins), TĀVi 
ad 9.7 (in a list of twelve substances used in Kaula ritual).
79 cf. KauśS 8.5, cited above in n. 4.
80 The dictionaries and K ANE’ s History of Dharmaśāstra  (V/, p. 09) deine trimadhura  as 
‘sugar, honey , ghee’. It seems more likely that the author of our text had in mind curd in the 
place of sugar (cf. 6..4, 6.. etc.) — it is especially the parallelism between 6.. and 
6.8. which supports the assumption that he understood trimadhura  as ‘ curd, honey , ghee’. 
Anyhow , his redeinition of trimadhura  at 6.0. is in itself suicient to prove that the gloss 
given by our reference works holds no universal validity . The present rule probably applies 
to all (ive) cases listed in this and the following verse. for bali-ofering of the trimadhura , 
cf. e.g. A VPariś 6.5.e, VdhP .0.4b and VdhP .0.4a. Harunaga Isaacson suggests 
to us that the recipients of the oblation may be the ucchuṣmas, or perhaps Sarvabhūtāni as 
at VdhP .0.4–44.

--- [Page 22] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
min [fuel] made of Pāyasa.8 for a kṣatriya [fuel] made of 
Viṣāṇī (?).8 
7.4 vaiśyasya sādhane homyāś cūrṇaiḥ surabhisaṃsk̥tāḥ8 ǀ 
 catuṣpathe tu śūdrasya padminyutkaraṇena tu  ǁ 
 In the case of the performance aiming at a vaiśya, [obla-
tions] are to be ofered that are given aroma by means of 
spices/powders. [In the case of a performance] aiming at 
a śūdra, [one should ofer] at a crossroads, with a heap of 
lotuses. 
8. likhitvā nāma saṃg̥hya karāgrāṅgulipīḍitām  ǀ 
 śiraḥpīḍā jvaraḥ śūlaṃ vimatiḥ svastyasaṃgatiḥ  ǁ 
 Having written the name,84 having seized [the body]85 and 
squeezed [it] with the hand’s inger-tips,86 [the result will 
be] head-ache, fever, pain, aversion, hard times. 
8. balyādyā vā87 prayoktavyā brāhmaṇādicatuṣṭaye88 ǀ 
 evaṃ saty abhicāraś ca89 caturṇām api darśitaḥ  ǁ 
8 PW, with reference to AK .5.4d–5ab, gives the meaning “das Harz der Pinus longi-
folia”, which, in the light of the other substances prescribed, may be what is intended here, 
rather than ‘something prepared with milk’.
8 We are not sure how to interpret the last material: in view of the element -maya  aixed to 
the other materials in this list, we assume here a -ka derivation in the sense of - maya  from 
viṣāṇī  (PW s.v . viṣāṇa , -ī), but if we accept a rather clumsy construction, it is also possible 
that viṣāṇikā  is intended.
8 We adopt the emendation of the editors. Our BBP all read  surabhisaṃsk̥taṃ , the reading 
also reported for AcdETuV in the edition.
84 for another description of a black-magic ritual which also involves causing fever by writing 
the name of the enemy , cf. KubjMT 7.0cd–0. Presumably the name is to be written on 
the body .
85 It seems that this is the feminine word to be supplied here, as also in 6.8.. cf. 6.5.–.
86 The compound strikes us as somewhat redundant, but it is not without parallels: cf. TĀ 
.45b hastāgrāṅguli- .
87 for  balyādyā vā , BP read balādyā vā and B balyādyāvat.  The latter is the reading of the 
mss. AdE (= “X”, cf. p. XVII) used by the editors; their B is reported to have  balyadyā vā.
88 The edition reads ° catuṣṭhaye , without any indication of variant readings, so this must be a 
misprint (BBP read  °catuṣṭaye ).
89 Our ms. B agrees with the reading  abhicārasya reported for B in the edition (our other 
mss. agree with the text as edited).

--- [Page 23] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
 Or the oblation etc. are to be employed in the case of the 
fourfold group,90 beginning with brahmins. And thus sor-
cery against all four [classes] has been taught.9 
8. liṅgaṃ vā rājasarṣapaiḥ9 samālikhyātha dhūpayet  ǀ 
 gaurair arghaṃ tathā dadyān mriyate sāpy asaṃśayam  ǁ 
 Or he should draw a sign with black mustard seeds9 and 
incense it. With white [mustard seeds] he should ofer the 
reception: and [the body]94 certainly dies. 
8.4 abhakṣyabhakṣo95 hy asvāsthyaṃ sarvarogaprakopanam  ǀ 
 niḥsaṃjñatā piṇḍapāto japāv̥ttyā bhavanti hi  ǁ 
 Eating what is not to be eaten, unwellness, attack of every 
disease, unconsciousness, death,96 indeed97 occur by the rep-
etition of muttering [the mantras to be quoted below]. 
8.5 ekādaśaṃ na japtavyaṃ kulotsādas tato bhavet  ǁ  
 He should not mutter eleven times: the ruin of his [own] 
family98 would result from it. 
9. oṃ namo mahāpiṅgalāya triv̥te triv̥te namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 Om. Homage to the great yellow one, to the threefold, to the 
threefold!99 Homage! Hail! 
90 While 6.7. only mentioned a bali for the case of the king (as distinct from other Kṣatriyas), 
this is now prescribed for the four social classes.
9 Presumably this refers to the section starting with 6.7.cd.
9 As an uneven pāda this pāda is metrically bad (cf. n. 67).
9 Thus B üHlER  in his translation of ManuSm 8. trasareṇavo ’ṣṭau vijñeyā likṣaikā 
parimāṇataḥ ǀ tā rājasarṣapas tisras te trayo gaurasarṣapaḥ ǀǀ ‘Know (that) eight trasare nus 
(are equal) in bulk (to) a likshâ (the egg of a louse), three of those to one grain of black 
mustard (râ gasarshapa), and three of the latter to a white mustard-seed’.
94 And consequently the person represented by this body . Or emend so ’py ?
95 abhakṣyabhakṣo : P. The edition has  abhakṣabhakṣo , with the variants  abhakṣabhakṣoś 
(found in the part of the text which the editors’ ms. B gives twice, denoted by them as b, 
p. 0) and  abhakṣabhakṣyo (cu). B has abhakṣabhakṣe , while B has the reading adopted 
by the editors.
96 for other instances of this usage of piṇḍapāta  in the sense of dehapāta , see e.g. TĀ .5b = 
4.44d (quoting the Niśāṭana  / Niśi(saṃ)cāra ) piṇḍapātāc chivaṃ vrajet  ‘ after death he will 
proceed to Śiva ’, and TĀ 4.8a piṇḍapātād ayaṃ muktaḥ  ‘he is released from death ’.
97 The irst hi (pāda a) is probably a mere hiatus-breaker, the present hi seems not to have more 
than an emphatic meaning.
98 for kulotsāda , cf. AgnP 8.b and G OudRIAAN  978: 55.
99 We do not understand why the word triv̥te  is repeated here and in the next dedication, nor 

--- [Page 24] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
9. namaḥ †sarāntitevatevasu †00 triv̥te triv̥te triparvaṇe 
triśīrṣāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 Homage to …, to the threefold, to the threefold, to the tri -
partite, to the three-headed! Homage! Hail! 
9. namaḥ kaṭavikaṭakaṇṭemāṭe pāṭale vikale asauryāsau 
asauryāsau0 p̥thivīṣṭakā †iṣṭakājinātyūnyo † ’sau0 
galuṃtigaluṃte kaṭam asi0 kaṭaprav̥te pradviṣa rudra04 
raudreṇāveśayāveśaya hana hana daha daha paca paca ma-
tha matha vidhvaṃsaya vidhvaṃsaya viśveśvara yogeśvara 
maheśvara05 namas te ’stu mā mā hiṃsīḥ huṃ phaṭ namaḥ 
svāhā  ǁ 
 Homage kaṭavikaṭakaṇṭemāṭe , O pallid one, O cripple, 
asauryāsau asauryāsau , earthen bricks, that iṣṭakājinātyūnyo , 
O Galunti of Galunti,06 you are kaṭa, O you who are chosen 
by07 kaṭa, be inimical (?), O Rudra, cause possession with 
the Raudra[-gaṇa],08 cause to be possessed, strike, strike, 
do we understand what three-fold item is intended.
00 The sequence  sarāntitevatevasu remains utterly obscure. Our mss. BBP share this reading; 
the editors in their apparatus report a sole variant  kāṭaśarāṃtitevastraṃ in their B, which 
does not help either.
0 Our B agrees with the text as edited ( asauryāsau 2 ); B, however, reads  asau paryāsau ra, 
where the  ra, as is clear from its recurrence after single āveśaya further on in the mantra, 
is a mistake for  2 (P has the same reading but omits the 2 altogether). This reading agrees 
with that of T , recorded by the editors, who make it the basis for a bold reconstruction of 
the mantra ’ s shape (p. ):  “asau paryāso ’ sau paryāsaḥ pṛthivīṣṭakājinanyūno 〈‘this is the 
refrain without the words  pṛthivī &c.’〉.”
0 The editors take  sau (without avagraha ) with  galuṃtigaluṃte.
0 The editors do not separate  kaṭam asi from  each other nor from what precedes. Our separa-
tion of these words is a mere guess.
04 Or a compound  rudraraudreṇa ? cf. A VPariś 8c..  rudraraudrābhyām ājyaṃ juhuyāt ; 
..9  tasya ha vā etasya gh̥takambalasya … rudraraudrau cakṣuṣī ; .6.  rudrarau-
draparair mantrair ājyahomo vidhīyate.
05 This last  word is not found in our BBP, as in the mss. AcdETuV reported by the editors 
(p. ). Thus it only occurs in their ms. B.
06 It is impossible to gauge whether there is any connection between this obscure name and 
the equally obscure word galuntás  at A V(Ś) 6.8.cd gláur itáḥ prá patiṣyati sá galuntó 
naśiṣyati (≈A V(P) ..4cd galanto ). W HITNEY  translates ‘the boil shall ly forth from here; it 
shall disappear from the neck’ (905), but adds in his note: “The translation here given of 
galuntás  is the purest conjecture, as if the word were a corruption of some form of gala (our 
[mss.] W .O.d. read galantás ), with ablative-suix tas.”
07 A possible emendation for ° prav̥te  (thus our B) would seem to be ° prav̥tte  ‘ arisen from 
…’. Our BP (and the editors’ BcV) have kaṭaprāv̥te , i.e. ‘ covered in/by …’, which is also 
possible.
08 cf. A VPariś 9b..4 k̥tvājyabhāgaparyantaṃ tataḥ śāntyudakaṃ punaḥ ǀ brahmajajñāna sūk-

--- [Page 25] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
burn, burn, boil, boil, destroy, destroy, crush, crush, O uni-
versal lord, O lord of Yoga, O Great lord, homage be to 
you, do not hurt me, Hum! Phaṭ! Homage! Hail! 
9.4 kālāya karālāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To time, to the dreadful!09 Homage! Hail! 
9.5 k̥tāntāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To fate! Homage! Hail! 
9.6 amoghāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To the unerring! Homage! Hail! 
9.7 aghorāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To the non-terrible! Homage! Hail! 
9.8 anivartāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To the one who does not turn back! Homage! Hail! 
9.9 bhagāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To the dispenser! Homage! Hail! 
9.0 bhagapramathanāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To the destroyer of Bhaga!0 Homage! Hail!
 
9. v̥ṣabhāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To the bull! Homage! Hail! 
tena kuryāc caivātra pūjanam ǀ tathaiva raudramantraiś ca abhiṣekāya kalpayet ǀǀ ‘Having 
performed the [rite of] sacred water, up to the but ter-portion, he should then perform wor-
ship here with the brahmajajñāna -hymn (A V[Ś] 4. ). In the same way he should prepar e [the 
…] for consecration with the mantras dedicated to R udra ’, and 9b.4.4 cārucāmarahastābhiś 
citradaṇḍaiḥ sadarpaṇaiḥ ǀ snāpayed brahmasūktena raudreṇāpi tathārcayet ǀǀ ‘He should have 
[Brahmā] be washed by women holding beautiful ly-wh isks, by men holding conspicuous 
sticks (?, or: with cotton-bulbs?) together with mi rrors, and worship [him] in that way with the 
Brahma-hymn and the Raudra[-gaṇa]’. On these mantra s forming a gaṇa dedicated to Rudra, 
see A VPariś . 7.
09 cf. 6.. above, and our references from the Sādhanamālā , p. 6.
0 cf. liP ..64d = VāP 4.4b.

--- [Page 26] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
9. indranetrāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To the eye of Indra! Homage! Hail! 
9.. suvarṇacūḍāya namaḥ svāhā  
 To the golden crested! Homage! Hail! 
9.4 hāhā hīhī namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 hāhā hīhī . Homage! Hail! 
9.5 namas tīkṣṇāya tīkṣṇadaṃṣṭrāya bhīṣaṇāya sahasrapādāyān-
antaśīrṣāya vāmanāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ
 Homage to the sharp, to the sharp-fanged, to the terrify-
ing, to the thousand-footed, to the endless-headed, to the 
dwarf! Homage! Hail! 
9.6 mahāvaktrāya piṅgaline4 namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To the great-mouthed! To the yellowish one! Homage! 
Hail! 
9.7 khanakhanāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To Khanakhana! Homage! Hail! 
9.8 ghanaghanāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To Ghanaghana! Homage! Hail! 
9.9 ghusughusāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To Ghusughusa! Homage! Hail! 
9.0 alepāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 We know  of no parallel for this name. B OllING  & VON NEGElEIN  report the reading  
rudranetrāya from mss. AdE, and we also ind it in our B (cf. liP .48.9 , where it is a 
name of V ahni); our mss. B and P have  iṃdranetrāya.
 cf. MBh 4.8.ab, where we ind tīkṣṇadaṃṣṭrāya tīkṣṇāya  used to praise Rudra. The con-
text there contains several other parallels to ours.
 cf. the passages from the Sādhanamālā  referred to in our introduction, p. 6.
4 The edition reads  piṅgalanetrāya , which is an emendation by the editors; the mss., includ-
ing our BP, have piṃgaline (miswritten as  piṃgalane in our B), with the exception of the 
edition’ s B, which has  prāyapiṃgalanetra. Piṅgalin may be uncommon but it is not without 
parallel: a masculine nominative  piṅgalī occurs as the name of one of eleven Rudras in 
ŚiP Śatarudrasaṃhitā8.6a. It may be compared with common attributes of the Buddhist 
ucchuṣmajambhala, such as  piṅgorddhvakeśa , quoted above (p. 6).

--- [Page 27] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
 To the stainless one!5 Homage! Hail! 
9. paśave namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To the animal! Homage! Hai!l 
9. mahāpaśupataye namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To the Great Animal lord! Homage! Hail! 
9. ucchuṣmāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To ucchuṣma! Homage! Hail! 
9.4 ucchuṣmarudrāya namaḥ svāhā  ǁ 
 To ucchuṣmarudra! Homage! Hail! 
0. eṣāṃ krameṇa k̥tyāni vakṣyamāṇāni yojayet  ǀ 
 aṣṭasahasrābhijaptam6 anyad dravyaṃ tu homataḥ  ǁ 
 He should perform the actions that will [now] be taught, in 
due order, involving these [mantras/ucchuṣmarudras (.)]. 
But [in each case] a diferent substance [is used], muttered 
over a thousand and eight times,7 during the oblation. 
0. śatror nāmnā lavaṇasya sahasram aṣṭakādhikam  ǀ 
 hutvā dhanāyuṣor hānir jvareṇa sa ca śuṣyati  ǁ 
 Having ofered a thousand and eight [oferings] of salt, ac -
companied by the name of the enemy, the loss of wealth and 
life-span [will be efected by him], and he (the enemy) dries 
up with fever. 
0. kṣipraṃ śāntir bhavet tasya kṣīrahomāt tu tāvataḥ ǁ8 
5 The epithet Alepa here, right before some clear allusions to Rudra as Paśupati, suggests a 
connection with the Alepakas, whose doctrines are mentioned side by side with those of 
the Śaivas and the Pāśupatas in Old javanese sources, and who are seemingly identiiable 
with the V aimalas known as a sect from rare references in early Indian sources: see A cRI 
*006, and, for the time being, z IESENISS  958: 5–0. The use of alepa  in an invocation to 
ucchuṣma is in any case noteworthy in the light of ucchuṣma ’ s connection with impurities 
in esoteric Buddhism (on which, see our introduction, p. 6).
6 This  ra-vipulā , which is identical with 6..c below , contains two metrical faults: it has 
light syllables in positions two and three and no caesura after the fourth syllable. cf. our 
n. 67 above.
7 We assume this number (and not eight thousand) is meant, because of the explicit statement 
in the following verse; cf. 6.5.–, and 6.6.. This line gives a general rule for the indi-
vidual cases that follow . See our discussion above, pp. 7–8 .
8 Our mss. B and P number this section as ‘9’, and continue with this numbering till the end 
of the text. cf. also the editors’ ms. T .

--- [Page 28] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
 But paciication will quickly arise for him (i.e. for the en-
emy), from a milk-oblation of the same proportions.9 
. kaṇaiḥ puttalikāṃ k̥tvā goś̥ṅgenārghadhūpane  ǀ 
 aṣṭasahasrābhijaptaṃ0 madanasya tu kaṇṭakam  ǀ 
 tenāṣṭādaśavedhāt tu mūlakṣīrān nivartanam  ǁ 
 Having made an image with grains, [and having performed] 
the reception and the incensing with a cow’s horn, [he 
takes] a thorn of Madana muttered [over] a thousand and 
eight times, but by piercing eighteen times with that, ward-
ing of [the enemy] from the root-milk (?)4 [results]. 
. dadhnā ca madhusarpirbhyāṃ5 trivarṇaiḥ sarṣapair hutaiḥ  
gaurair aṣṭasahasreṇa japtair āveśayed ripūn  ǁ 
9 for kṣīrahoma , cf. NiGu f. 8v l. 5 ( kṣīrahomena pra [sāda]nam: the reading prasādanam  is 
suggested by the Kathmandu apograph, but praśamanam  would also seem to be a plausible 
restoration) and KubjMT 8.44b = liP .49.b ( kṣīrahomena śāntikam ). cf. also 6.6. 
below .
0 cf. our n. 6 above, under 6.0..
 In pāda e, B and BP read, respectively , teneṣṭām ° and teneṣṭā °. The latter reading is also 
reported for AdETuV in the apparatus, while c reads toneṣṭā °. Apparently only B has the 
adopted reading.
 for the compound arghadhūpana , cf. arghadhūpa  at NīP 786c. The two elements occur also 
in 6.8. above, which likewise deals with a sorcery ritual involving an image.
 This name is applied to a variety of botanical species (for an overview , see M EulENBEld  
974: 586). Among thorny candidates, we may mention Randia spinosa  Poir. syn. ( The 
W ealth of India: Raw Materials , vol. VIII [New delhi 969], pp. 60f.) or, perhaps more 
likely in our context, a species of the Datura  genus ( The W ealth of India: Raw Materials , 
vol. III [New delhi 95], p. 4: “ A genus of poisonous herbs, shrubs or small trees”) such 
as the thorn-apple, Datura stramonium  linn. syn.
4 Our B and P actually read mūlakṣīrān , the emendation proposed by the editors (all their 
mss. and our B mūlakṣīrā , except B mūlakṣīrāṃ ). We are at a loss to explain this ‘root-
milk’. The text is perhaps corrupt. There seems to be a connection between the instrument 
used (cow’ s horn) and the object of the act (something to do with milk, also a product of 
the cow). Some parallelism with 6.0. may underlie the text, but this is irrecoverable in 
its current, seemingly corrupt (incomplete?) state. The presence of the particle tu could 
indicate that a method of paciication ( śānti ) is described: note that milk is prescribed in 
paciication rituals also elsewhere (e.g. in 6.0. above and 6.6. below). In that case the 
intention of the text may rather be that one can avert ( nivartanam ) the efect of the ritual 
with milk ( kṣīrāt ).
5 This is an emendation by the editors; all the mss. read  madhusarpibhyāṃ. It is conceivable 
that the Aiśa i-stem is original, but note that the stem  sarpis is attested in the manuscripts in 
6..4 and 6.6. above.

--- [Page 29] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
 And with curd and honey and ghee,6 with oferings of tri-
color mustard seeds7 [or] with white ones8 muttered over 
a thousand and eight times, he should cause the enemies to 
become possessed. 
. dadhyādyabhyaktalājānāṃ homād aṣṭasahasrataḥ  ǀ 
 nāśayet satatajvaraṃ dvitīyādiṃ ca dūrataḥ  ǁ 
 With a thousand-and-eight-fold ofering of parched grains 
anointed with curd etc.,9 he will destroy constant fever, 
and from afar [inimical] fellows and the like. 
4.. parijapya darbheṣīkāṃ kumbhakārādiveśmasu  ǀ 
 nyastvā pākaṃ surāpānaṃ kaivartādiṃ vināśayet  ǁ0
 Having muttered around the stalk of darbha, and hav-
ing placed [it] in the houses of potters and the like, he will 
destroy the imbecile, the alcoholic, the isherman and the 
like. 
5. akṣatais taṇḍulaiḥ k̥tvā pratidehaṃ suśobhanam  ǀ 
 saṃsthāpya dhānyarāśau taṃ candanāguru dāhayet  ǀ 
 baliṃ trimadhuraṃ dattvā syāt sa rāśiś caturguṇaḥ  ǁ 
 Having made a beautiful eigy with unhusked rice grains, 
and having placed it in the grain heap, he should kindle san-
dal and aloe wood. Having given an oblation of the three 
sweets, that heap will become fourfold. 
6. khādiraṃ kīlakaṃ tīkṣṇatailāktaṃ dvādaśāṅgulam  ǀ 
6 cf. our n. 80 above, under 6.7.. See also 6.8.–.
7 cf. 6.8. below , and, e.g., VdhP .0.0d, where sarṣapatrayam , presumably also denot-
ing mustard seeds of three colors, is prescribed for śatrunāśa .
8 cf. 6.8. above. We ind the juxtaposition of the instruction to use tricolor mustard seeds 
with that to use white ones rather diicult to make sense of (and to construe syntactically).
9 See the preceding verse, and also n. 80 above, under 6.7..
0 We have made two small emendations. The edition reads surāpākaṃ kaivartādi  (also the 
reading of our additional mss.).
 cf. 6.6. above.
 Our interpretation of this verse is problematic. It remains baling that pāda b speaks of pot-
ters and the like, while these potters do not recur as victims in the second half-verse, unless 
all potters are imbeciles or drunkards.
 Thus our emendation for ed.,  mss. tīkṣṇaṃ tailāktaṃ. cf. 6.0. below , and, e.g., NiGu f. 98v 
ll. , 5, 6 etc. for the use of mustard oil to anoint ( tīkṣṇatailenābhyajya ) a kīlaka to be dug 
(nikhānayet ) in the ground for magical purposes. The metrical incongruity of a compound 

--- [Page 30] ---
0  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
 parijaptaṃ grāmamadhye nikhanet sadya udvaset4 ǁ 
 He should erect in the middle of the village a pole of Kha -
dira wood of twelve aṅgula s’ [height]5 smeared over with 
mustard oil, and muttered around — he should take of im-
mediately. 
6. mahāpātakadoṣeṇa grāmī nirdhanatāṃ vrajet  ǀ 
 kṣīreṇa kīlakasnānāt kuryāt tuṣṭas tu śāntikam  ǁ 
 The villager will become stripped of wealth because of the 
fault of a great crime.6 When he (the performer) is satis-
ied [by the attainment of his aim], he should perform the 
paciicatory [rite]7 by bathing the pole with milk. 
6. kṣīrasyāṣṭasahasraṃ ca juhuyāt tadanantaram  ǁ 
 And he should ofer with a thousand and eight [oferings] of 
milk immediately thereafter. 
7. kalāyamātrāṃ8 guṭikāṃ tannāmnā gavyamāṃsataḥ  ǀ 
 mahāpātakasambandhāj jāyate ’sya dhanakṣayaḥ  ǁ  
 [He should make] from cow’s lesh a pea-sized pill accom -
panied by [intoning] his (the enemy’s) name. Because of his 
straddling the pāda-boundary is no impediment (cf. our n. 67 to 6.6.). for our interpreta-
tion of tīkṣṇataila as ‘mustard oil’ we are indebted to Shingo Einoo, who drew our atten-
tion to a number of passages from ritual literature where we ind sarṣapataila (or sārṣapa 
taila) in black magic contexts similar to the present one, which suggests that  tīkṣṇataila is 
synonymous with  sarṣapataila. cf. e.g. ̥Vidh .[8.]9cd, and especially  .[9.]0–0  
tena pratik̥tiṃ kuryāt tāṃ dhyātvā manasā striyam ǀ aktāṃ sarṣapatailena juhuyād aṅgaśaś 
ca tām ǀǀ ‘With that [substance] one must prepare an image after visualising that woman in 
one’ s mind and ofer, member by member, that [image] anointed with mustard-oil’ (transl. 
BHAT).
4 Thus also our BP; B reads sarvamudvaset , cf. T sarva udvaset ; no other variants are re-
ported in the apparatus.
5 cf. M IcHAElS  978: 56f. on the technical meaning of aṅgula .
6 Alternative translation: ‘… as if because of having committed a great crime’.
7 Note use of milk for paciication also in 6.0.. cf. our note 9 ad loc .
8 The edition reads  kalāpa °, while variants  kalāva °(AcTuV) and kalāca °(B) are relegated 
to the apparatus; our BP also read  kalāva °; B kalāva °corrected to  kalāpa °. None  of these 
possibilities seems to yield any good sense. In the Suśrutasaṃhitā  (cikitsāsthāna 5., 5.5, 
40., and uttarasthāna 44.4), we ind the compound  kalāyamātra , and on this basis we 
emend our text. In the prose passage (?) following Tantrasadbhāva  .55 in d YczKOWSKI ’ s 
edition (see n. ), we do ind kalāpamātra , but we assume this to be in need of correction 
as well.

--- [Page 31] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  1
connection with [this] great sin,9 his (the enemy’s) loss of 
wealth is brought about. 
8. trivarṇasarṣapair homāt saha trimadhureṇa tu  ǀ 
 sampadyate sutas tasya medhāvī śrutadhārakaḥ  ǀ 
 taddhomāt ke cid icchanti unmattatvaṃ na saṃśayaḥ  ǁ 
 Because of the ofering with tricolor mustard seeds together 
with the three sweets,40 a son is born to him, intelligent 
and with sound memory. Some, no doubt, seek [to induce] 
insanity from the ofering of those [substances]. 
9. tilā dūrvā trimadhuraṃ homato vyādhinigraham  ǀ 
 taṇḍulaprakṣepaś ca4 ǁ 
 Sesame seeds, dūrvā-stalks and the three sweets [when 
used] for an ofering, as also the scattering of rice grains, 
[bring about] the suppression of disease. 
0. tryaktodumbarasamidho dogdhrīdhenvaṣṭakapradāḥ4 ǀ 
 ekāhaṃ bhaikṣabhug bhūtvā māsāṣṭakayutasya vā  ǁ  
 fuel-sticks of udumbara [wood] anointed with the three 
[sweets] yield a group of eight milk-giving cows, if he has 
lived on alms for one day, or if he has been banished (?) for 
eight months.4 
. † prāde † śāntaṃ44 bilvav̥kṣaṃ mūlaśākhāsamanvitam  ǀ 
 k̥ṣṇāṣṭamyāṃ caturdaśyāṃ sāyaṃ hutvā tu rukmabhāk  ǁ 
 But having ofered … the auspicious Bilva tree with roots 
and branches on the evening of the eighth of the dark half 
9 The great sin apparently is the use of a cow’ s lesh.
40 cf. 6...
4 The last pāda of this incomplete (?) verse is hypometrical.
4As is clear from their remark on p.  that “[t]he text is mutilated”, the editors have not 
understood the verse. We do not claim to have done so with any certainty , but printing the 
words which make up pāda b as one compound, rather than the separate words which the 
edition gives, does seem to allow interpretation.
4The editors observe (p. ) that “[t]here is probably a lacuna after this khaṇḍikā”. 
In any case, the text as it stands seems highly doubtful. We have considered emending 
māsāṣṭakayutaś ca vā .
44In the light of 6..4 above (with our note 4), we consider it most likely that the editors’  
prādeśāntaṃ contains rather an as yet obscure (corrupt?)  prāde, and the adjective  śāntam . 
Possible emendations:  prānte ; prātar ; proktaṃ ; prāñcaṃ ; prāptaṃ ; ādau (cf. our emenda-
tion in 6.5., and  ādau in 6..).

--- [Page 32] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
[of a lunar month] [or] on the fourteenth, he [becomes] en-
joyer of gold.45 
. samidhāṃ vaitasīnāṃ tu agnāv arkendhanāhute  ǀ 
 ahorātrikahomāt syāt parjanyo bahuvarṣadaḥ  ǀ 
 lakṣatrayaṃ bhaikṣāhāro japtvā karmaitad ārabhet  ǁ46 
 When in a ire kindled with wood of the Arka-plant an of -
fering has been made [with oblations] of fuel-sticks of the 
Vetasa-reed, there will, from daily and nocturnal ofering, 
result a rainfall giving plentiful precipitation. Eating [only] 
alms, he should mutter [the mantra?] three lakh-fold, and 
commence this ritual.47 
. dugdhāktān sarṣapān hutvā tasmād bhasma mukhe kṣipet  ǀ 
 sarveṣu vyavahāreṣu sa bhavaty aparājitaḥ  ǁ  
 Having ofered milk-anointed mustard seeds, he should 
place the ash from that in the mouth:48 in all afairs he be-
comes undefeated. 
45for the use of Bilva to obtain gold, cf. e.g. A VPariś .6.4d bilvaiḥ prāpnoti kāñcanam .
46All mss. here support the editors’ reading arkendhanāddhute . However, this verse re-occurs 
further on in the same corpus, as A VPariś 65.. (although not in the mss. BcTRoth, see 
p. 47 of the edition), where the mss. point to the superior reading arkendhanāhute  (dou-
ble sandhi for arkendhana āhute ) we also adopt here. On the expression arkendhana , see 
A VPariś 5..7 arkendhanāgniṃ prajvālya  quoted in n. 64: the commentary on that passage 
quoted by M AGOuN  889: 5 ( ravikāṣṭhena prajvālya ) agrees with the one by Rāghavabhaṭṭa 
on ŚārTT 8.4d ( arkāgnāv arkakāṣṭhasamiddhe ’gnāv ity arthaḥ ), to which Harunaga Isaa-
cson kindly referred us. cf. on the rest of the verse ̥Vidh .[7.]9 nirāhāraḥ khinnavāsā 
acireṇa pravarṣati ǀ hutvāyutaṃ vaitasīnāṃ kṣīrāktānāṃ hutāśane ǀǀ ‘[A person who is desir-
ous of rain should employ the hymn beginning with Acchā vada  [RV. 5.8]—]while he fasts 
and wears wet cloths. It will soon rain. Having ofered ten thousand fuel-sticks of rattan 
smeared with milk into the ire, [one obtains ample rain …]’ (transl. B HAT).
47 Although the ̥Vidh passage just quoted does make a connection between rain-magic and 
fasting, the link between pādas a–d on the one hand, and e–f on the other, seems question-
able. Ought the last line, which announces a ritual, to be joined with . (against the indica-
tions of the mss.)? Or is some portion of text missing?
48 cf. NiGu f. 80v l.  and v l. 5, where śvetasarṣapabhasman  is used respectively in rites of 
utsāraṇa  and ātmarakṣā . In the latter case one is said to become unobstructed ([ a]pratihata ). 
We assume that the practitioner here should place the ash in his own mouth, because mukhe  
+ √kṣip normally seems to have this sense: cf. e.g. the prose passage after Tantrasadbhāva  
0.59 (ed. d YczKOWSKI , see n. ) … guḍikāṃ kārayet ǀ sahasrābhimantritāṃ mukhe 
kṣipyādreśyo bhavati ǀ ‘He should make (or cause to make?) a … pill. After reciting over 
it a thousand times, and placing it in his mouth, he becomes invisible’ (a passage to be 
compared with Tantrasadbhāva  .75 mukhe prakṣipate yāvat tāvad adreśyatāṃ vrajet ǀ 
janapriyaś ca bhavate vyomacārī mahābalaḥ ǀǀ, which makes very clear that no enemy’ s 
mouth is involved).

--- [Page 33] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
4. śastraṃ japtam upādāya raṇe grasto na jīyate  ǀ 
 khanakhanāyeti mantraḥ pūrvasevārtha ucyate ǁ  
 Having taken up a sword [over] which [a mantra] has been 
muttered, he is not conquered when engaged in battle. The 
mantra ‘ khanakhanāya ’49 is taught for the purpose of pre-
liminary service.50 
4. uttarasyā viśeṣād vā cedānīm ata uttaram  ǀ 
 khādiratryaktasamidhāṃ pūrvasevā sahasrataḥ  ǀ 
 atasīsamidhām evaṃ medhāvī viduṣāṃ prabhuḥ  ǁ  
 Or,5 by contrast with the subsequent [service?],5 now 
from here on further, the preliminary service is [to be under-
stood as] thousand-fold [use] of Khadira fuel-sticks which 
have been anointed with the three [sweets]. Thus, [through 
the use] of lax fuel-sticks [he becomes] an intelligent lord 
of sages. 
5. gocarmamātraṃ sthaṇḍilaṃ gomayenopalepayet  ǀ 
 tatrāgniṃ trikapāleṣu jvālayitvā praṇamya ca  ǁ  
 He should smear a piece of ground of the size of a cow’s 
hide5 with cow-dung, stoke ire there on three sherds/
skulls54 and pay reverence. 
5. śirasā vānareṇātha mukhavādyaṃ tu kārayet  ǀ 
 yatra tac chrūyate tatra āgacchanti varastriyaḥ  ǁ  
49 The mantra referred to was given above, as 6.9.7. cf. our introduction, p. 7.
50 for pūrvasevā  (= puraścaraṇa ), a preliminary rite during which a mantra is recited a great 
number of times to ensure the ritual’ s success, cf. G OudRIAAN  978: 84 and S ANdERSON  00: 
, n. .
5 We agree with the editors’ suggestion (p. ) that the particle ca has been inserted here 
rather for metrical purposes (as hiatus-breaker, cf. T öRzSöK  999: xxxiv), than to efect 
coordination.
5 Our interpretation of this part of the verse is no more than a guess. One might specu-
late that the typically Atharvavedic ritual structure with a pūrvatantra  and an uttaratantra  
(cf. c AlANd  900: VI–VII) has resulted in the concept of an uttarasevā , next to the well-
established pūrvasevā .
5 The irst half of this verse is a variant of the beginning of A VPariś 40.. ( gocarmamātraṃ 
sthaṇḍilam upalipya gomayenollikhyābhyukṣyāgne prehīty agniṃ praṇīya ), for which we re-
fer to our notes in B ISScHOP  & G RIffITHS  00: 8f.
54 We know of no parallel for the stoking of ire in three kapāla s.

--- [Page 34] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
 Then he should make the mouth-music55 with his monkey-
like face.56 Where that is heard, there choice women ar-
rive, 
5. daṃṣṭrāghaṇṭāninādās tu jvālāmukhabhayānakāḥ  ǀ 
 yat tvaṃ kāmayase putra tat sarvaṃ dadmahe vayam  ǁ  
 with roars coming from their bell-like fangs, inspiring fear 
with their laming mouths. “We give all that you desire, O 
son”, 
5.4 iti bruvatyaḥ sarvās tā yatra homaḥ k̥to bhavet  ǀ 
 tadbhasmanā tu saṃsp̥ṣṭo māṅgalyaṃ sa prayāsyati ǁ57
 is what they all say, when an ofering is performed. Smeared 
with the ash of that [ofering], he proceeds to prosperity. 
55 The ‘mouth-music’ is included among such acts of worship as huḍukkāra , dance, song 
and aṭṭahāsa  — reminiscent of Pāśupatasūtra  .8 — in NiMu f. 5v l. 4 k̥tvāsau gaṇatāṃ 
yāti tantrīvādyasya vādakaḥ ǀ huḍukkārasya n̥tyasya mukhavādyāṭṭahāsayoḥ ǀǀ ‘Having 
performed [this …], that performer of lute music, of the sound HuḌuk, of the dance, of 
the mouth-music and loud laughter, proceeds to the status of Gaṇa ’. cf. also TVK p. 64, 
ll. – gandhadhūpanamaskārair mukhavādyaiś ca sarvaśaḥ ǀ yo mām arcayate tatra tasya 
tuṣyāmy ahaṃ sadā ǀǀ ‘He who totally worships me there with fragrances, with incense, with 
obeisance, and with mouth-music, always makes me satisied’ and TVK p. 8, ll. 5–8 
kṣīreṇa madhunā caiva toyena saha sarpiṣā ǀ tarpayanti paraṃ liṅgam arcayanti devaṃ 
śubham ǀǀ huḍuṁkāranamaskārair  (read huḍukkāra °) n̥tyagītais tathaiva ca ǀ mukhavādyair 
anekaiś ca stotramantrais tathaiva ca ǀǀ ‘With milk and with honey , with water and butter 
they satiate the supreme liṅga; they worship the auspicious god with the huḌuk sound and 
with obeisance, as well as with dances and songs, with much mouth-music, as well as with 
laudatory mantras’. In Carakasaṃhitā , cikitsāsthāna 9.0 mukhavādya  is included among 
the characteristics of one who is possessed by a Gandharva. It remains unclear what kind 
of music precisely is intended, but cf. Kṣemarāja ’ s description ( ad SvacchT .8) of the 
process leading to the production of the mukhavādya : bhaktivaivaśyonmiṣannādāmarśamayo 
dhvanir mukhavādyāparaparyāyo huḍḍuṅkāraḥ  (read huḍḍukkāraḥ ) ‘The huḌḌuk-sound, 
which is also called ‘mouth-music’, is the sound, consisting of the representation of subtle 
sound originating from lack of self-control due to devotion’.
56 Without, unfortunately , being able to draw any certain conclusions, we compared this stanza 
with the partly incomprehensible passage A VPariś 40..4 vānaraṃ te mukhaṃ raudram 
anindyaṃ śubhaṃ paśum evājananevājanakaṃ ghoraṃ jīvaṃ jātyam eva rukmaṃ dadāmīty 
ekavāsā vivāsā vā virāgāṇi vastrāṇi dadīta ǀǀ, in our study of the Pāśupatavrata  (Bisschop  & 
Griffiths  00: 8 n. 66).
57 The edition reads saṃsp̥ṣṭāś chāgalyaḥ suprabhāvataḥ . This contains a small emendation, 
for the reading saṃsp̥ṣṭaḥ  found in ABcdTuV (thus also our BP); E reads saṃtuṣṭaḥ ; 
our B saṃsp̥ṣṭa . Note the wrong sandhi with visarga before ch. Moreover, we cannot make 
sense of any ‘she-goats’ ( chāgalyaḥ ) in this context. We present our bold conjecture with all 
due reservations, but point out that the reading suprabhāvataḥ  may have arisen under the 
inluence of suprabhātaṃ  in 6.6.d.

--- [Page 35] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
6. lakṣajāpottaraṃ gatvā nadīm udadhigāminīm  ǀ 
 vālukāsthaṇḍile liṅgaṃ tanmayaṃ tajjasadmani  ǁ 
 After a lakh-fold muttering, he goes to a river draining in 
the ocean, [and erects] a liṅga on a sandy piece of ground, 
made of that [sand] in a seat produced out of that. 
6. padmāṣṭaśatam āh̥tya pūjayitvā vidhānataḥ  ǀ 
 udake nābhimātre ca suprabhātaṃ punar japet  ǁ  
 Having procured a hundred and eight lotuses, and having 
performed worship according to the rules, in water reach-
ing up to the navel, he should mutter once again [over the 
lotuses] beautifully illuminated by the dawn. 
6. tato māṇḍaliko58 rājā dīnārāṇāṃ59 gavāṃ śatam ǀ
 praṇamya śraddhayā tasmai dadyād uddhara mām iti ǁ 
 Then, the local king will pay reverence and give him a hun -
dred dinars and cattle, [saying] devotedly: “Save me!”.60 
7. lakṣajāpād6 abādhyas tu paśūnāṃ damṣṭriś̥ṅgiṇām ǀ
 itareṣāṃ paśūnāṃ tu lakṣatritayavardhanam6 ǁ  
58 The editors’  emendation  māṇḍaliko is found as such in our P. Their mss. read  maṃḍaliko 
(BcETuV, thus also our BB) and  maṃḍalako (Ad).
59 The occurrence of the loan-word dīnāra  in this Pariśiṣṭa has been considered relevant for 
the dating of this text, and, by extension, of the entire corpus (see M OdAK  99: 47), but 
the problem was always how a text corpus presumed to be ‘Vedic’ could be so late as the 
second century Ad (believed by some early scholars to have been the period of the introduc-
tion of this coinage into India), while we have no qualms in dating this Pariśiṣṭa perhaps as 
much as a millennium later. With our wording (B ISScHOP  & G RIffITHS  00: ), we have 
misrepresented M OdAK ’ s arguments, and our reference to dīnāra  as “late word” might have 
to be rectiied (see K EITH 907 and 95). But neither M OdAK ’ s reference to Mahābhāṣya  
4..9 nor the one to Āpastambaśrautasūtra  .. can be veriied, in the available editions, 
as old attestations. In his review of the B OllING  & VON NEGElEIN  edition, K EITH (9: 769 , 
n. ) suggests that the term māṇḍalika  is relevant as well: “It is noteworthy that in xxxvi, 
6. , the term māṇḍaliko rājā  is found, a clear sign of lateness; māṇḍalika  occurs also in 
lxxi c, . 4.” We cannot follow him in this matter: the term is already attested at, e.g., Mbh 
9..9b and B̥hatS 4.5c, 46.d, 48.47c, 68.a. Again, this is not to say that our Pariśiṣṭa 
must be as old as the Mahābhārata  or B̥hatsaṃhitā .
60 The editors (p. ) characterize the ritual described in this section as aiming “[t]o force a 
neighboring king to seek the priestly services of the performer.” cf. also G OudRIAAN  978: 
06f.
6 We adopt this emendation suggested by Harunaga Isaacson. The edition’ s reading lakṣajapād  
(found in all mss.) contains a serious metrical fault: two short syllables in the second and 
third position (cf., however, n. 67). cf. lakṣajāpa  also in 6..
6 Thus  the reading of the edition (and our B). However, the editors’ B reads  lakṣatritayavarttanāt , 
while our B/P read ° varttanaṃ/ °vartanaṃ, and agree in this with the editors’ TV . The B 

--- [Page 36] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
 from the lakh-fold muttering [of the mantras 9.– (?)] 
he [becomes] one who cannot be pained by animals with 
fangs or horns. But of other animals an increase by three 
lakhs [results]. 
8. saṃjaptaśivanirmālyadānād unmattatāṃ vrajet ǀ 
 śamāya candanaṃ dadyāt triḥ śvetaṃ6mantrasaṃsk̥tam  ǁ
 By the gift of a garland that has been worn by Śiva and has 
been muttered over, [his enemy] will become insane. for 
paciication he should give white sandal-wood which has 
been thrice (?) prepared with the mantra [9. (?)]
9. samādhinānumantritaṃ64 goś̥ṅgam arimandire ǀ 
 nikhātaṃ sadya evainaṃ mandiraṃ paridīpayet ǁ  
 The cow’s horn which has been consecrated in meditation 
and deposited in the enemy’s palace will immediately cause 
conlagration of that palace. 
0. tīkṣṇatailaṃ kaṭu proktaṃ darvī grāmasruvas tathā ǀ 
 trimadhuraṃ tv atra vijñeyaṃ65 madhusarpistilātmakam66 ǁ 
 [use of] strong scented mustard oil67 is advised, as also 
[of] a ladle and a common spoon; but here the three sweets 
reading could be translated as follows: ‘but from the performance of three lakhs [he be-
comes one who cannot be pained] by other animals [either]’.
6 The edition reads  triṣv etaṃ , with all mss. (including our BB) except B  triṣvetan and our 
P tiṣvetaṃ, and the editors’ remark (p. ) seems to mean they suggest that “possibly 
triśvetaṃ” is to be read. While the compound triśveta  is well known from various kinds 
of texts to denote a spike of the porcupine, this does  not seem to yield any sense here. 
‘White’ ( śveta ) sandal-wood is attested, e.g., at NiGu f. 85v l. 6; 00r l.  and Bh̥gusaṃhitā , 
Prakīrṇādhikāra 8.48d. The latter text also contains the turn of phrase trissaṃsk̥to laukikō 
gnir mathitāgnisamō bhavēt ‘Having been prepared triply , the common ire will become 
equal to the churned ire’: with some reservations, we introduce  triḥ into our text.
64 The pāda, as it stands, is entirely iambic; this infringement upon metrical rules adds to our 
impression that the text may be corrupt. Or does the word samādhi  have a diferent meaning 
here?
65 Note that this pāda, as edited, is hypermetrical. Omitting vi and reading jñeyaṃ  does not 
solve the problem: the ifth syllable is long as well. Perhaps one ought to read trimadhuraṃ  
tu vijñeyaṃ ?
66 As in 6.. above, one could consider adopting the i-stem sarpi ; it is found in all mss. 
(including our BBP) except the edition’ s B. cf. however our n. 5 on that verse.
67 cf. 6.6. above, and KubjMT 5.8b kaṭutailaṃ tu tīkṣṇakam .

--- [Page 37] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
should be understood to consist in honey, ghee and sesa-
me.68 
0. saṃmukhaṃ mānasaṃ dhyāyañ chubhaṃ karma prayojayet  ǀ 
 vimukhaṃ bhañjanādau tu naraḥ karmaṇi siddhibhāk ǁ
 concentrating in his mind, he should perform an auspi -
cious rite facing straight at [the object], but in a rite such 
as routing [the enemy], a man obtains success with his head 
averted [away from it].69 
0. aṣṭottaras trisāhasro homo hāsya prakīrtitaḥ ǀ 
 kīlakāstrādi yac cānyat tat sahasrābhimantritam  ǁ 
 for him an ofering with three thousand and eight [mantras/
oblations?] is praised, and whatever other [material] such 
as pole or weapon [is used], over that he should perform the 
incantation a thousand times. 
68 This verse gives a redeinition of the ‘three sweets’, cf. n. 80 under 6.7. above. According 
to a suggestion of Shingo Einoo, this whole verse would consist of deinitions, which would 
mean it has to be translated as follows: ‘With tīkṣṇataila , the strong scented one (i.e. mus-
tard oil) is intended, and the darvī  is the common spoon, while the three sweet should here 
be understood …’. This seems convincing, i.a. because kaṭutaila  is used in the same corpus 
(at A VPariś 6.4., 5..0), and presumably in the same meaning. But the problem remains 
that no darvī  has in fact been mentioned in the preceding instructions, and that trimadhura  
quite clearly seemed to be diferently deined in its earlier occurrences. 
69 GOudRIAAN  (978: 7) interprets this verse as prescribing “that during an abhicāra rite one 
should meditate, contrary to the usual ritual practice, on the deity as turning his back to the 
performer.” We do not have the impression that any deity comes into play here.

--- [Page 38] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
ABBREVIATIONS 
AbhŚ  Abhijñānaśākuntala , ed. āchārya  958 
AgnP  Agnipurāṇa , ed. upādhyāya  966 
AK  Amarakoṣa , ed. raManathan  978 
A V(P) Atharvavedasaṃhitā  (Paippalāda), ed. Bhattacharya  997
A V(Ś) Atharvavedasaṃhitā  (Śaunaka), ed. VishVa  Bandhu  960
A VBSA Atharvavedīyab̥hatsarvānukramaṇikā , ed. VishVa  Bandhu  966 
A VPariś  Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa , ed. BollinG  & Von neGelein  9090 
BaudhdhS Baudhāyanadharmasūtra , ed. oliVelle  000 
B̥hatS  B̥hatsaṃhitā , ed. kern 865 
BrP   Brahmapurāṇa , ed. schreiner  & söhnen  98789 
GḍP  Garuḍapurāṇa , ed. Bhattacharya  964 
Hc  Harṣacarita , ed. kane 965 
jaimGS  Jaiminīyag̥hyasūtra , ed. caland  9 
KauśS  Kauśikasūtra , ed. BlooMfield  890 
KubjMT  Kubjikāmatatantra , ed. Goudriaan  & schoterMan  988 
liP   Liṅgapurāṇa , ed. shastri  980 
ManuSm  Manusm̥ti , ed. oliVelle  005 
MatPĀ  Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama , ed. Bhatt 977 
MBh   Mahābhārata , ed. sukthankar  et. al. 9759 
MMP   Mahārthamañjarīparimala , ed. dViVeda  97 
NeT(u)  Netratantra (-Uddyota ), ed. shāstrī  999 
NiGu  Niśvāsaguhya , ed. Goodall  *005 
NiMu  Niśvāsamukha , ed. Goodall  *005 
PW  Petersburger Wörterbuch, BöhtlinGk  & roth 85575 
̥V  ̥gveda , ed. aufrecht  877 
̥Vidh  ̥gvidhāna , ed. (& transl.) Bhat 987 
ŚārTT  Śāradātilakatantra , ed. aValon  9 
ŚiP  Śivapurāṇa , ed. kr̥ṣṇadāsa  954 
ŚiSūVi  Śivasūtravimarśinī , ed. chatterji  9 
SPY  Skandapurāṇa  4.6; 5559; 6.6; 664; 6669 , ed. 
 yokochi  004 
SuS  Suśrutasaṃhitā , ed. jiBanandaVidyasaGara  889 
SvacchT(u) Svacchandatantra (-Uddyota ), ed. shāstrī  95 
SvSūS  Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṃgraha , ed. Śāstrī  97 
SVidhB  Sāmavidhānabrāhmaṇa , ed. Burnell  87 
TAK   Tāntrikābhidhānakośa , see Brunner , oBerhaMMer  & padoux  
TĀVi  Tantrālokaviveka , ed. shāstrī  988 
TS  Taittirīyasaṃhitā , ed. weBer 877 

--- [Page 39] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
TSā  Tantrasāra , ed. S hāstrī  98 
TVK   Tīrthavivecanakāṇḍa  of the K̥tyakalpataru , ed. aiyanGar  94 
VādhŚS  Vādhūlaśrautasūtra , ed. chauBey  99 
VāP  Vāyupurāṇa , ed. kr̥ṣṆadāsa  98 
VdhP  Viṣṇudharmottarapurāṇa , ed. kr̥ṣṆadāsa  9 
VīṇT  Vīṇāśikhatantra , ed. Goudriaan  985
REFERENCES
āchārya , n. r.  
958  The Abijñāna-Śākuntala of Kālidāsa. With the Commentary 
(Arthadyotanikā) of Rāghava Bhaṭṭa . Twelfth edition. Bombay 
958. 
acri, A. 
006* The V aimala Sect of the Pāśupatas: New data from Old javane-
se Sources.  F orthcoming . 
aiyanGar , K. V . 
94   Bhaṭṭaśrīlakṣmīdharaviracite K̥tyakalpatarau Aṣṭamo bhāgaḥ. 
Tīrthavivecanakāṇḍam . Baroda 94.
apte, V . s.
95759 The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary. 3 vols . Revised and 
enlarged edition [by] P.K. Gode & c.G. Karve. Poona. 
aufrecht , T .
877  Die Hymnen des ̥gveda . 2 Parts . Bonn 877.
aValon , A.
9  Śāradātilakatantram . Text with Introduction. Reprint delhi 
996. 
Bhat, M. S. 
987  V edic Tantrism. A Study of Ṛgvidhāna of Śaunaka with Text and 
Translation . delhi 987. 
Bhatt, N. R.
977  Mataṅgaparameśvarāgama Vidyāpāda, avec le commentaire de 
Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha (Publications de l ᾿Institut F rançais d ᾿Indo-
logie  56), Pondichéry 977.
Bhattacharyya , B.
95–8  Sādhanamālā . 2 vols . (GOS  6, 4). Oriental Institute, Baroda 
95–8. 
964 Garuḍapurāṇam (Kashi Sanskrit Series 65).  V aranasi 964. 

--- [Page 40] ---
0  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
BHOjAKA , l. 
997–98 Pāśupatācārya Megharāśinuṃ Tāmrapatra.  Sambodhi  
(997 98) 0–04.
Bh̥gusaṃhitā  
99 Prakīrṇādhikāra Bhagavadbh̥gumaharṣiproktāsu Saṃhitāsu 
Prakīrṇādhikāraḥ (Kriyāpādaḥ Prathamādisaptatriṃśapaṭa-
lāntaḥ) . Madras. 99.
BISScHOP , P. & G RIffITHS , A.
00  The Pāśupata Observance ( Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa  40).  IIJ 46 
(00) 5–48. 
BIScHOff , f . A. 
96 der zauberritus der ucchuṣmā.  Tibetisch und Mongolisch 
(Tanǰur-Text). Central Asiatic Journal  7 (96) 05–. 
BOdEWITz , H. W . 
000 classiications and Y onder World in the Veda.  WZKS 44 (000) 
9–59. 
BöHTlINGK , O. & R OTH, R.
855–75 Sanskrit-Wörterbuch. 7 parts . St. Petersburg 855–75.
BOllING , G. M. & VON NEGElEIN , j.
909–0 The Pariśiṣṭas of the Atharvaveda. V olume 1: Text and Critical 
Apparatus, in 2 Parts . leipzig 909–90. 
VAN dEN BOScH, l. P. 
978  Atharvaveda-pariśiṣṭa Chapters 21–29. Introduction, Translati-
on and Notes . Groningen 978.
BRuNNER , H.
969  de la consommation du nirmālya de Śiva.  JA 57 (969) –
65. 
986  les Membres de Śiva. ASt/ÉA  40 (986)  89–. 
BRuNNER , H. & O BERHAMMER , G. & P AdOuX , A. 
000  Tāntrikābhidhānakośa I. Dictionnaire des termes techniques de 
la littérature hindoue tantrique . Wien 000. 
BüHlER , G. 
886  The Laws of Manu. Translated with extracts from seven commen-
taries. Oxford 886.
BüHNEMANN , G. 
000 The Six Rites of Magic.  Tantra in Practice  (ed. by d AVId GOR-
dON WHITE) Princeton 000, 447–46. 
BuRNEll , A. c. 
87  The Sâmavidhânabrâhmaṇa (being the third Brâhmaṇa) of the 
Sâmaveda. V ol. I. Text and Commentary, with Introduction. lon-
don 87. 

--- [Page 41] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  1
cAlANd , W . 
900 Altindisches Zauberritual. Probe einer Übersetzung der wich-
tigsten Theile des Kauśika Sūtra. Amsterdam 900.
Caraka Saṃhitā  
 The Caraka Saṃhitā. Expounded by the worshipful Ātreya Pu-
narvasu, compiled by the great sage Agniveśa and redacted by 
Caraka & Dṛḍhabala.  Edited and published in six volumes with 
translations in Hindi, Gujarati and English by Shree Gulabkun-
verba Ayurvedic Society . jamnagar 949. 
cHATTERjI , j. c. 
9 The Shiva Sūtra Vimarśinī being the Sūtras of V asu Gupta with 
the Commentary called Vimarshinī by Kshemarāja . Bombay 
and Srinagar ( KSTS  ) 9. 
cHAuBEY , B. B. 
99 Vādhūla-śrautasūtram. Critically edited with Introduction and 
Indices . Hoshiarpur 99.
dAVIS, E. 
00  Society and the Supernatural in Song China . Honolulu 00. 
dIWEKAR , H. R. et al.
97  Kauśikasūtra-Dārilabhāṣya . Poona 97. 
dVIVEdA , A.
97  Mahārthamañjarī of Maheśvarānanda with the Auto-Commen-
tary Parimala. V aranaseya Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya (Yogatan-
tra Granthamālā V). V aranasi 97.
dYczKOWSKI , M. S. G. 
988 The Canon of the Śaivāgama and the Kubjikā Tantras of the 
W estern Kaula Tradition. Albany 988.
EINOO, S.
005  Ritual calendar. change in the conceptions of Time and Space. 
JA 9 (005) 994. 
GOOdAll , d. 
004  The Parākhyatantra. A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta. A cri-
tical edition and annotated translation.  Pondichéry ( Collection 
Indologie  98) 004.
005*  Transcription of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, from the Nepale-
se palm-leaf MS No.  7 , NGMPP A 4/4 supplemented 
with readings from its Kathmandu  apograph MS No.5-406, 
NGMPP A 59/8. [Includes the Niśvāsamukha, Niśvāsamūla, 
Niśvāsottara, Niśvāsanaya and Niśvāsaguhya]. 

--- [Page 42] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
GOudRIAAN , T
978  Māyā Divine and Human. A study of magic and its religious 
foundations in Sanskrit texts, with particular attention to a frag-
ment on Viṣṇu ᾿s Māyā preserved in Bali. delhi 978.
985  The Vīṇāśikhatantra. A Śaiva Tantra of the Left Current. Edited 
with an Introduction and a Translation.  delhi 985.
GOudRIAAN , T . & G uPTA, S. 
98  Hindu Tantric and Śākta Literature . Wiesbaden 98.
GOudRIAAN , T . & H OOYKAAS , c. 
97 Stuti and Stava (Bauddha, Śaiva and V aiṣṇava) of Balinese Brah-
man priests . Amsterdam 97.
GOudRIAAN , T . & S cHOTERMAN , j. A. 
988  The Kubjikāmatatantra. Kulālikāmnāya V ersion . leiden 988.
GRIffITHS , A. 
004–05  Tumburu: A deiied Tree.  Bulletin dʼÉtudes Indiennes – 
(004–05) 49–64.
HEIlIjGERS -SEElEN , d.
994 The System of the Five Cakras in the Kubjikāmatatantra 1416. 
Groningen 994 .
jIBANANdAVIdYASAGARA  
889  The Susruta or System of Medicine, taught by Dhanwantari, and 
composed by his pupil Susruta. Third edition.  calcutta 889. 
KANE, P. V . 
90 6  History of Dharmaśāstra (Ancient and Mediӕval Religious and 
Civil Law in India) . 5 vols . Poona 90–6. 
965 The Harshacarita of Bāṇabhaṭṭa. Text of Ucchvāsas I–VIII . del-
hi [nd ed.; st ed. 98.]  965.
KEITH, A. B.
907  denarius and the date of the Harivaṃśa.  JRAS (907) 68–
68. 
9  [Review of] The Pariśiṣṭas of the Atharvaveda. Ed. by George 
Melville B OllING  and julius VON NEGElEIN . V ol. I, in three parts: 
Text and critical Apparatus. leipzig, 909–0. JRAS  (9)  
755–776. 
95  The denarius as a Proof of date.  JRAS (95) 504–505. 
KERN, H. 
865  The Bṛhat Sañhitá of V aráha-Mihira . calcutta 865.
KR̥ṣṆdāsa , K. 
9  Viṣṇudharmottarapurāṇa . Bombay V .S. 969 [= 9 Ad]. 
954  Śivamahāpurāṇam . Bombay V .S. 0 [= 954 Ad]. 

--- [Page 43] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
98  Vāyumahāpurāṇam . delhi 98 [reprint of Veṅkateśvara editi-
on of Ad 895]. 
lIMAYE , V . P. et al.
98 Keśavaʼs Kauśikapaddhati on the Kauśikasūtra of the Atharva-
veda. Pune 98.
lINROTHE , R. 
999  Ruthless Compassion. Wrathful Deities in Early Indo-Tibetan 
Esoteric Buddhist Art.  london 999.
MAGOuN , H. W . 
899  The Āsurī-Kalpa: A Witchcraft Practice of the Atharva-V eda. 
With an Introduction, Translation, and Commentary. Thesis Bal-
timore (johns Hopkins univ .) [= AjPh 0 (899) 65-97]. 
MEulENBEld , G. j.
974  The Mādhavanidāna and its Chief Commentary. Chapters 1–10. 
Introduction, Translation and Notes.  leiden 974.
00–04  Āyurveda and Atharvaveda: their interrelationship in the com-
mentaries on the Kauśikasūtra.  In:  Du corps humain, au carre-
four de plusieurs savoirs en Inde . Mélanges oferts à Arian Roşu 
= Studia Asiatica 4–5. université de Bucharest: 89–. 
MIcHAElS , A. 
978  Beweisverfahren in der vedischen Sakralgeometrie. Ein Beitrag 
zur Entstehungsgeschichte von Wissenschaft . Wiesbaden 978. 
Mikkyō , S, K. 
99  Advayavajra chosakusha – Bonbun tekisuto – wayaku (4) 
[Advayavajrasaṃgraha – New critical Edition with japane-
se Translation (4)].  In: Taishō daigaku sōgō bukkyō kenkyūjō 
nenpō   (99) 9(46)–4(95). 
Modak , B. R. 
99  The Ancillary Literature of the Atharva-V eda. A Study with spe-
cial reference to The Pariśiṣṭas.  New delhi 99.
naVarathe , P. d. 
994  Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Government Ma-
nuscripts Library deposited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Re-
search Institute. Serial No.  34. V ol. IV, Part II. Kalpasūtras: B. 
Gṛhya and Other Works. Poona 994.
Niśisaṃcāra   
 Palm-leaf manuscript NGMPP B6/5.
oliVelle , j. P. 
000 Dharmasūtras. The Law Codes of Āpastamba, Gautama, 
Baudhāyana, and V asiṣṭha. Annotated Text and Translation. del-
hi 000. 

--- [Page 44] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
005  Manu᾽s Code of Law . A Critical Edition and Translation of the 
Mānava-Dharmásāstra [sic]. New Y ork 005. 
RAMANATHAN , A. A. 
97 Amarakośa with the Unpublished South Indian Commentaries 
Amarapadaviv̥ti of Liṅgayasūrin and the Amarapadapārijāta of 
Mallinātha. 3 vols. (Adyar Library Series  0). Madras 97.
SANdERSON , A. 
986  Maṇḍala and Āgamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir.  Mantras 
et diagrammes rituels dans l ᾿Hindouisme (ed. by A. P AdOuX ) Pa-
ris (986) 69–07.
988  Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions.  The World ᾿s Religions ( ed. 
by  S. S uTHERlANd  et. al.), london 988, 660–704. 
00*  Topography . unpublished draft: december , 00. 
00  History through Textual criticism in the study of Śaivism, the 
Pañcarātra and the Buddhist Y oginītantras.  In: Les Sources et le 
Temps. Sources and Time A Colloquium.  Pondicherry 11–13 Ja-
nuary 1997  (ed. by f RANçOIS  GRIMAl ). Pondicherry (00) –
47.
0004  The Śaiva Religion among the Khmers, Part I. BEFEO  90–9 
(00–04) 49–46. 
SANKAlIA , H. d. 
949  Studies in the Historical and Cultural Geography and Ethnogra-
phy of Gujarat. (Places and P eoples in Inscriptions of Gujarat: 
300 B.C. – 1300 A.D.) . Reprint 997 (st edition Pune 949).
Śāstrī , V . S.
97  Svāyaṃbhuvasūtrasaṃgraha. Mysore 97.
schreiner , P. & söhnen , R. 
987–89 Sanskrit Indices and Text of the Brahmapurāṇa; Brahmapurāṇa, 
Summary of Contents, with Index of Names and Motifs. 2 vols.  
(Purāṇa Research Publications Tübingen  & ). Wiesbaden 
987–89.
shastri , j. l.
 980  Liṅgapurāṇa of Sage Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa. With Sanskrit 
Commentary Śivatoṣiṇī of Gaṇeśa Nātu.  delhi 980.
shāstrī , M. K.
98–8  Tantrāloka of Abhinava-Gupta with Commentary [Tantrāloka-
viveka] by Rājānaka Jayaratha. (KSTS : 8–0, 5–6, 4, 47 , 
5, 57–59). Bombay 98–8.
9 5  The Svacchandra-Tantram (/Swa°) with the commentary [-Uddy-
ota] by Kshemarāja. 6 vols., vol. V in two parts.  (KSTS  , 8, 
44, 48, 5, 5, 56). Bombay 9-5.

--- [Page 45] ---
The Practice involving the Ucchuṣmas  |  
969  The Netra Tantram with commentary [-Uddyota] by Kshemarāja. 
 vols. ( KSTS  46, 6). Bombay 96-9.
Shāstrī , M. R. 
98  The Tantrasāra of Abhinava Gupta. (KSTS 7). Bombay 98.
ŚiroMa Ṇi, R. N. 
94 An Alphabetical List of Manuscripts in the Oriental Institute, 
Baroda. V ol. I  (GOS  97). 
sprockho ﬀ, j. f . 
999 api vā  „oder auch / or also‘ ‘oder was? V om fehlgrif bei der 
Wahl in einer Alternative: erster Versuch (Studien zu den ritu-
ellen Sūtras III).  IIJ 4 (999) 4–56. 
strickMann , M. 
00 Chinese Magical Medicine  (ed. by  Bernard  faure ). Stanford 
00.
törzsök , j. 
999* The Doctrine of Magic F emale Spirits. A critical edition of se-
lected chapters of the Siddhayogeśvarīmatatantra with anno-
tated translation and analysis . d. Phil. thesis, Merton college, 
Oxford 999. 
upādhyāya ,B 
966  Agnipurāṇa of Maharṣi V edavyāsa (Kashi Sanskrit Series 74). 
V aranasi 966.
türstiG , H. G. 
985  The Indian Sorcery called Abhicāra.  WZKS 9 (985) 69–7. 
VishVa  Bandhu  
960 Atharvaveda (Śaunaka) with the Pada-pāṭha and Sāyaṇācāryaʼs 
Commentary. 4 parts. Hoshiarpur 960 [nd edition: 990]. 
966  Atharvavedīya-b̥hat-sarvānukramaṇikā . Hoshiarpur 966. 
weBer, A.
87–7 Die Taittirîya-Saṁhitâ. 2 vols . Indische Studien   (87) &  
(87). Berlin 87–7.
wessels -MeVissen , c.
00 The Gods of the Directions in Ancient India. Origin and Early 
Development in Art and Literature (until c. 1000 A.D. ). Berlin 
00. 
whitney , W . d. 
905 Atharva-V eda Saṃhitā: translated with a critical and exegeti-
cal Commentary. Revised and brought nearer to completion and 
edited by Charles Rockwell Lanman.   vols. cambridge (Mass.) 
905. 

--- [Page 46] ---
  |  Peter Bisschop & Arlo Griffiths
YOKOcHI , Y.
004* The Rise of the Warrior Goddess in Ancient India. A Study of the 
Myth Cycle of Kauśikī-Vindhyavāsinī in the Skandapurāṇa. The-
sis university of Groningen 004. 
zIESENISS , A. 
958 Studien zur Geschichte des Śivaismus II.  Die Śaiva-Systema-
tik des Vṛhaspatitattva (Śata-Piṭaka, Indo-Asian Literatures 7). 
New delhi 958.
dr. Peter Bisschop
lecturer in Sanskrit
Asian Studies
university of Edinburgh
7/8 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh EH8 9lW
Scotland, u.K.
e-mail: Peter.Bisschop@ed.ac.uk
Prof. dr. Arlo Griiths
Instituut Kern, universiteit leiden
Postbus 955
00 RA leiden, the Netherlands
e-mail: arlo.griiths@ let.leidenuniv .nl