--- [Page 1] ---
medieval worlds • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240This article discusses the dynamics of translation and exegesis documented in the body of 
Sanskrit-Old Javanese Śaiva and Buddhist technical literature of the tutur /tattva genre, 
composed in Java and Bali in the period from c. the ninth to the sixteenth century. The texts 
belonging to this genre, mainly preserved on palm-leaf manuscripts from Bali, are concerned 
with the reconfiguration of Indic metaphysics, philosophy, and soteriology along localized 
lines. Here we focus on the texts that are built in the form of Sanskrit verses provided with 
Old Javanese prose exegesis – each unit forming a »translation dyad«. The Old Javanese 
prose parts document cases of linguistic and cultural »localization« that could be regarded 
as broadly corresponding to the Western categories of translation, paraphrase, and commen -
tary, but which often do not fit neatly into any one category.
Having introduced the » vyākhyā -style« form of commentary through examples drawn from 
the early inscriptional and didactic literature in Old Javanese, we present key instances of 
»cultural translations« as attested in texts composed at different times and in different geo -
graphical and religio-cultural milieus, and describe their formal features. Our aim is to do -
cument how local agents (re-)interpreted, fractured, and restated the messages conveyed by 
the Sanskrit verses in the light of their contingent contexts, agendas, and prevalent exegeti -
cal practices. Our hypothesis is that local milieus of textual production underwent a pro -
gressive »drift« from the Indic-derived scholastic traditions that inspired – and entered into 
a conversation with – the earliest sources, composed in Central Java in the early medieval 
period, and progressively shifted towards a more embedded mode of production in East Java 
and Bali from the eleventh to the sixteenth century and beyond.
Keywords: Old Javanese; Sanskrit; tutur ; tattva ; commentarial literature; Śaivism; BuddhismTranslation as Commentary 
in the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Didactic 
and Religious Literature 
from Java and Bali
Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter*
* Correspondence details:  Andrea Acri, Section des Sciences religieuses, École Pratique des Hautes Études (EPHE, 
PSL University), Les Patios Saint-Jacques, 4-14 rue Ferrus, 75014 Paris, France; email: andrea.acri@ephe.psl.eu. 
Thomas M. Hunter, Department of Asian Studies, The University of British Columbia, 607-1871 West Mall, Van -
couver, BC, Canada V6T 0C2; email: thomas.hunter@ubc.ca. 
eISSN-Nr. 2412-3196
DOI 10.1553/medievalworlds_no11_2020s213

--- [Page 2] ---
214
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240214
Introduction
A significant body of literature in Old Javanese, composed mainly in the period from c. the 
ninth to the fifteenth century, has come down to us from Java, Bali, and the nearby island of 
Lombok through palm-leaf manuscripts. This body of literature may be regarded as a relic 
of the region’s Indic past, testifying to the process of appropriation and hybridization by 
local milieus of linguistic, cultural, and religious material derived from the Sanskritic world 
that mainly unfolded during the »post-Gupta« South Asian medieval period – a process that 
largely coincides with the global Middle Ages, of which Indonesia was an integral part.1 Dur -
ing that period, the pedagogical institutions of urban centres and religious complexes of the 
Malay-Indonesian archipelago were part of the translocal culture first described by Pollock2 
under the terms »Sanskrit cosmopolis« and »Sanskrit ecumene«. Indic forms of writing and 
textual organization had arrived in the archipelago along with the Buddhist monks, Śaiva 
masters, and other religious wanderers who depended on textual means to preserve the con -
tinuity of religious doctrine.
In what follows we review the history of didactic and prose composition in the Old Java -
nese language as reflecting a tradition of translation that adheres to the norms of standard 
Indian Sanskritic models of the commentary, but uses Old Javanese rather than Sanskrit as 
the language of exegesis. The resulting form of text-building in Old Javanese has had a long 
life in the archipelago, extending from its original domain in theological and didactic works 
into prose works like the parva  literature translating several books of the Mahābhārata and 
later prose works like the Tantri Kāmandaka – a collection of animal tales embedded in a 
Scheherazade-like framing tale – as well as the numerically significant genre of Śaiva (and, 
to a much lesser extent, Buddhist) technical texts called tutur  or tattva concerned with the 
reconfiguration of Sanskrit-derived metaphysics, philosophy, and soteriology along local -
ized lines.3 In this article we will focus on this body of Sanskrit-Old Javanese didactic liter -
ature, many important specimens of which are arranged in the form of a Sanskrit verse or a 
series of verses (whether quoted in their entirety or separated into their discrete units/ pāda ) 
provided with an Old Javanese prose translation and/or exegesis – each unit forming a so-
called »translation dyad«.
1 One of the unifying factors of the Middle Ages across Maritime Asia was the multi-centric spread and circulation 
of (Sanskritic) Buddhism as well as Śaivism; on the former, see Acri, Esoteric Buddhism .
2 Pollock, Sanskrit cosmopolis.
3 In fact, this tradition would appear to have continued beyond the premodern »Hindu-Buddhist« period, for con -
temporary evidence for the continuing effects of a » śāstra  model« of composition may be found in the »Yellow 
Books« explicating passages of the Qur’an or Hadith into Indonesian or Javanese and in the practice of the sekaha 
mabasan  clubs of modern Bali. These clubs are characterized by »extemporaneous glossing« using hermeneutical 
strategies that do not (primarily) involve analytical means, drawn from a systematic knowledge of morphology 
and grammar, or try to establish historical derivations and etymologies; they are mainly based on contemporary/
popular lexical know-how, »folk etymology«, and associative thinking effected through homology, metaphor, and 
assonance. These techniques are akin to the Sanskrit nirvacana , which unpack meanings from words rather than 
reduce them to their bare essentials.Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 3] ---
215
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240215
Earlier work by Hunter4 traced some of the defining features of this literature in a study 
of the question of »translation« into Old Malay and Old Javanese. He suggested that for 
premodern insular Southeast Asia processes of translation are best understood in terms of 
a »culture of diglossia« that has its roots in the parallelism of Sanskrit and Prakrit in the 
inscriptions and dramatic forms of South Asia, and that features of textual diglossia – which 
are most prominent in the Old Javanese didactic tradition – must certainly be linked to ped -
agogical institutions. In these institutions the transmission of theological and philosophical 
ideas, and the formulation of literary practices, depended on an ongoing practice of transla -
tion that we find embodied in a number of characteristic modes of textual organization. The 
Old Javanese prose parts reflect dynamics of linguistic and cultural »localization« that could 
be regarded as broadly corresponding to the Western categories of translation, paraphrase, 
and commentary, but which often do not fit neatly into any one category, for they include 
multiple intents and agendas at once. Indeed, we could regard the kind of intellectual op -
eration carried out by ancient Javanese and Balinese authors as a »translation as commen -
tary« involving multiple processes simultaneously: first, the translation from an Indo-Eu -
ropean language into a Western Malayo-Polynesian (WMP) idiom, and second, the exegesis 
(or reconfiguration) of Indic material and its refitting into a familiar/known cultural con -
text, within the »horizon of expectations« of both the producers and consumers of literature.
In this article we present key instances of such »cultural translations« as attested in texts 
composed at different times and in different geographical and religio-cultural milieus, and 
try to sketch a preliminary taxonomy of their formal features. Our aim is to document how 
local agents (re-)interpreted, fractured, and re-stated the message conveyed by the Sanskrit 
verses in the light of their contingent socio-cultural contexts, agendas, horizons of expecta -
tions, and prevalent exegetical practices. Our underlying hypothesis is that local milieus of 
textual production underwent a progressive »drift« from the Indic-derived scholastic tradi -
tions that inspired – and entered into a conversation with – the earliest sources, composed 
in Central Java in the Early Medieval period, and progressively shifted towards a more em -
bedded mode of production in East Java and Bali from the eleventh to the fifteenth century 
and beyond.5 While these two poles in the discourse can be situated within the theoretical 
and chronological parameters of the socio-linguistic phenomena of the »Sanskrit Cosmo-
polis« and »Vernacular Millennium« formulated by Pollock,6 some fine-tuning is needed to 
do full justice to the dynamics of cultural-religious and linguistic transfer at play, in particu -
lar by engaging with the textual genre of tutur /tattva , which was completely passed over in 
silence by Pollock, and which has received remarkably little scholarly attention thus far.7
4 Hunter, Impact of Indian Forms.
5 In the later tutur s, and even more so in the parva s, one often has the impression that the Sanskrit text is a mere 
»pretext« to authorize statements that are local in character, i.e. can be situated within a local context of under -
standing and practice.
6 Pollock, Language of the Gods.
7 On this class of texts, see Acri, Sanskrit-Old Javanese tutur  literature, and Dharma Pātañjala.Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 4] ---
216
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240216
Old Malay and Old Javanese in a Comparative Perspective: 
From »Connecting« to »Zone-shaping« Forms of Literature
During the medieval period, the Malay-Indonesian archipelago was an active player among 
the transcultural societies of the Sanskrit Cosmopolis. One of the first visible products of the 
interaction of South Asian and indigenous linguistic and cultural practices is the languages 
of inscriptions that were developed through combining Sanskrit figures, tropes, metres and 
vocabulary with an underlying base in a language of the WMP group. Three of these – Old 
Malay, Old Javanese, and Old Balinese – left a significant inscriptional record and one – Old 
Javanese – developed very early into a literary language active for over a millennium that 
even today has its practitioners among Balinese students of the language they call Kawi,  the 
language of poets. 
The inscriptional record and premodern literature in Old Javanese show us that we must 
always take into account the language order of the premodern archipelago in our assess -
ments of textual and inscriptional evidence. This means observing the formal differences in 
structure and diction between texts of the theological, didactic and prose traditions on the 
one hand, and the poetic traditions of the  kakavin  and kiduṅ  literatures on the other.8 
In the prose traditions we will find an approach to text-building that harks back to San -
skrit models of the commentary, but adapted to the needs of translation within a pedagogy 
that in its first phase of development depended on bilingual preceptors capable of translation 
from Sanskrit into a local idiom in the process of development as a literary idiom, a Prakrit 
to the Sanskrit sources. At this stage Old Javanese served as the idiom of what Braginsky9 
has called a »connecting literature,« a literature couched in a local idiom that provides a link 
to an authoritative source located elsewhere. Both Old Malay and Old Javanese were ideally 
suited to formulation as higher-order Prakrit languages, since both make use of similar mor -
phology and morpho-syntactic processes that allow for the easy incorporation of »foreign« 
lexical elements into their WMP-based structures of meaning. As Braginsky has proposed for 
an »invisible« early literature in Malay, it may be that we should look to the religious institu -
tions of the Sumatran/Śrīvijayan branch of the Śailendra dynasty as the crucible for a »con -
necting literature« centred on the canon of Sanskrit or Sanskrit-inspired Buddhist works. 
In this view what we see as a characteristic form of structuring texts in the Old Javanese 
theological literature was first developed in the Buddhist religious institutions of Sumatra 
and the Thai-Malay peninsula as a literature that connected the emerging literary awareness 
of the archipelago with distant centres of cultural production.
8 See further in Hunter, Translation, for the claim of a basic distinction in Old Javanese letters between »poetic« and 
»commentarial« forms of translation. The term »poetic« might be better understood as »transcreational«. 
9 Braginsky, System .Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 5] ---
217
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240217
By contrast, in the belletristic ( kakavin ) tradition in Old Javanese there appears to be no 
clear trace of the influence of Sanskrit models of the commentary. We find rather a conscious -
ly fashioned literary language, an Old Javanese Prakrit if you will, that was developed to suit 
the needs of what Braginsky10 has termed a »zone-shaping literature«, a fully self-conscious 
literature produced as an integral part of a major cultural formation. The earliest phase of the 
development of Old Javanese as a language of literature is represented by the Old Javanese 
Rāmāyaṇa  and by the kakavin verses of the Śivagr̥ha inscription of 856 CE, which Aichele11 
has shown was very likely produced »in the same workshop« as the Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa .12 
In what follows we will be examining several case studies from the early theological and 
philosophical literature of Java that share a text-building strategy based on Indian models of 
the commentary. These strategies are used both to structure the text, and to link the text at 
hand to authoritative originals in the Indian tradition. They are thus kept in view throughout 
the process of composition. The creative enterprise of kakavin  composition, on the other 
hand, follows Sanskrit standards of creativity that put a high value on innovative language, 
figures and tropes. The traces to Sanskrit originals are thus largely effaced, even when an Old 
Javanese work takes one of them as a model.
Morphological Incorporation in the Inscriptional Languages
The three languages of insular Southeast Asia known for their early inscriptions – Old 
Balinese, Old Malay and Old Javanese – all share similar morphosyntactic features that al -
low for the easy incorporation of new, non-native terms into a WMP base. This is still the 
case in modern Indonesian, where a quick check on the translation of »socialize« yields 
men-sosialisasi- kan , a perfect illustration of the process of morphological incorporation that 
makes a stronger bond between loan words and the local base than is ordinarily the case, 
something closer to the interweaving of Sanskrit and local elements developed in the »jewel 
and coral« ( maṇipravalam ) languages of Kerala and Tamilnadu. 
As the case studies in this chapter will show, processes of morphological incorporation 
and juxtaposition of imported and local lexemes prominent in the inscriptional languages 
are also basic to the mode of composition found in the early theological literature in Old 
Javanese. It will thus be useful to review two examples of the intermingling of Sanskrit and 
local elements as found in an Old Javanese inscription dated 860 CE.13 This will serve as a 
prelude to the first level of analysis of the case studies from the Old Javanese doctrinal and 
soteriological literature.
Ya ta susukәn dharmasīma  lәpas denira pāduka mpuṅku iṅ Bodhimimba  sīma kalil -
iranani vkanira Dyaḥ Imbaṅi Dyaḥ Anārgha sambandha  sira pāduka mpuṅku iṅ 
Boddhimimba mahāpuruṣa kṣatriyakula boddhalakṣaṇa prasiddha Vairocanātmaka 
guru paṅajyannira pāduka Śri Mahārāja  sira [...] sira pāduka mpuṅku i Bodhimimba 
sarisaryy akāyakāya makarahinaṅvṅi a yoga amūjāsamādhi  ajapāmrārthana kәn ri ka -
jayaśatrv an Śri Mahārāja.  
10 Braginsky, System .
11 Aichele, Vergessene Metaphoren.
12 See also Acri, On birds.
13 Copper plates of Kañcana, dated 782 Śaka (860 CE). From the plates of 1295 Śaka (1367 CE) republishing two 
earlier charters. See Sarkar, Corpus  1, 133 for an alternative date of the original as 794 Śaka (872 CE). Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 6] ---
218
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240218
These (rice-lands) then should be marked out as a free dharma-freehold  by the reverend 
gentleman of Bodhimimba. The freehold is to be inherited by his children Dyaḥ Imbaṅi 
and Dyaḥ Anārgha  the occasion  being that the reverend gentleman of Bodhimimba is 
a great soul, born of a noble lineage, having the characteristics of a follower of Bud -
dha, successful  [in attaining] self-identification with Vairocana , and the teacher of holy 
knowledge to his majesty the king . He, the reverend gentleman of Bodhimimba each 
day makes every effort, day and night, to perform yoga , to make offering-prayers , to 
engage in spiritual concentration , to recite mantras  [and] to pray earnestly for the 
victory  of his majesty the king over his enemies.
This text has clearly been drafted by a learned hand, moreover one who is Buddhist and 
very likely a follower of an esoteric school based on the mandala of the transcendental Bud -
dha Vairocana. In this excerpt, as is the case throughout the later history of Old Javanese, 
cases of incorporation into the Old Javanese morphosyntactic base are not uncommon. The 
most prominent examples are the verbal derivation amrārthanakәn , »to pray for«, based on 
Sanskrit prārthana , »prayer, supplication« with the addition of Old Javanese verbal affixes 
aN- and -akәn  and the following nominal derivation ka- jaya-śatrv -an, »the state of victory 
over enemies« based on Sanskrit jaya-śatru , victorious over enemies. 
Here we see a common pattern of accommodation across two linguistic systems, one 
contributing new lexical material and meanings drawn from a higher-status, cosmopolitan 
language, the other an indigenous linguistic base that provides a matrix for the development 
of what are essentially new, literized languages with a special role to play in the religious and 
political life of their speech communities. 
Vyākhyā:  Methodology and Aims
In this section we begin to examine representative texts from the didactic and narrative 
traditions of Old Javanese from the point of view of their possible relationship with »forms 
of the commentary« as known from Indian sources. This is not to suggest that Old Javanese 
sources are simply translations or mirror images of South Asian textual sources, or to imply 
that Old Javanese materials might stand in a secondary relationship to Sanskrit sources. It 
is rather to suggest that there may be formal correspondences between the structuring of 
didactic and narrative materials in the Old Javanese and Sanskrit traditions, and, if this is the 
case, similar correspondences may be found in the sphere of pedagogy and the organization 
of curricula in the religious institutions central to cultures with a long exposure to Indian 
religious ideas and practices.
Noting some initial similarities between works of the Old Javanese didactic tradition and 
commentaries like those of Jayamaṅgala and Mallinātha, we propose that the term  vyākhyā , 
»exposition, commentary«, might be adopted as a device for measuring the degree to which 
Old Javanese textual sources recapitulate the form taken by Indian commentaries in the 
transmission of knowledge and organization of a pedagogy. Here, vyākhyā  is used as a term 
to mean an expository reading of a parent text that takes the form of a phrase-by-phrase 
glossing of the text, with the addition, where needed, of grammatical materials based on 
Pāṇinian analysis.Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 7] ---
219
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240219
An Old Javanese Commentary on the Jānakīharaṇa  of Kumāradāsa 
When initiating a study of the role of Indian forms of the commentary in the Old Javanese 
tradition we are faced immediately with many difficulties. The first is that precious few doc -
uments have been preserved that bear traces of a tradition of teaching Sanskrit in the con -
text of a guru-śiṣya  transmission and with the use of a commentary. Fortunately, at least 
one fragmentary text has surfaced that has provided material evidence for just this mode of 
transmission. This is a fragment of what appears to be a student’s »class notes« on a rendi -
tion of Kumāradāsa’s classic Jānakīharaṇa .14 This fragment shows Old Javanese being used 
to provide a phrase-by-phrase gloss of the original, with at least one point where a lexeme 
from a commentary on the Jānakīharaṇa  has been included in the text, thus suggesting that 
the Sanskrit original was taught along with expository materials in both Sanskrit and Old Ja -
vanese. In the Old Javanese gloss on Jānakīharaṇa I.2c we can observe the process of »class -
room study« that is recorded in the textual artefact:15
akhaṇḍamāno manujeśvarāṇāṁ mānyo manojñaiḥ guṇajaiḥ guṇajñaḥakhaṇḍa  ṅa. 
tan apiyak māno  ṅa. kāhāṅkāranira manujeśvarāṇāṁ  ṅa. saṅ ratu mānyo  ṅa. pinū -
janira manojñaiḥ ṅa. konaṅunaṅ guṇajaiḥ ṅa. kaśaktyan, guṇajñaḥ ṅa. vruh iṅ guṇa . 
sambah- niṅ hulun maṅgalani majarakna mahāmaramālā prākr̥ta // 1.1
akhaṇḍa  means »not taking sides, not split«, māno means »his sense of self«, manu -
jeśvarāṇāṁ means »the lord king«, mānyo means »his being praised«, manojñaiḥ 
means »to be longed for«, guṇajaiḥ  means »the state of being powerful«, guṇajñaḥ 
means »he understands good qualities.«
Fragmentary though it may be, the text recording lessons in the Jānakīharaṇa  with Old 
Javanese glosses gives us positive evidence for a pedagogy based on transmission of root 
texts along with a commentary and the phrase-by-phrase glossing of the original typical of 
the Indian vyākhyā . 
14 See Lokesh Chandra, Sanskrit studies, 1-9.
15 Lokesh Chandra (Sanskrit studies, 1) notes a verse from the Jānakīharaṇa  that is found in the »eclectic [Old Javane -
se] collection« Svarasaṁhitā . This led to his search of Kr̥tabhāṣā lontar s, which resulted in finding that manuscript 
Leiden Cod. Or. 5089 in that collection contains what can best be described as classroom notes for the study of 
the Jānakīharaṇa , a kāvya  of the sixth-century poet Kumāradāsa. Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 8] ---
220
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240220
Case Study I: The Old Javanese Lexicographical Work Amaramālā 
We begin the review of case studies in this article with the Old Javanese lexicographical work 
Amaramālā .16 There are several reasons for choosing this as the first work to be examined. 
First, if Krom17 is correct in assigning this work to the mid-eighth century CE based on its 
dedication to the Śailendra monarch named Jitendra, then it is among the first works that 
give evidence of literary activity in Old Javanese. Indeed, since the Sukabumi inscription of 
Śaka 726 (804 CE) has to date been considered the oldest evidence for the existence of Old 
Javanese, it could predate even that inscription.18 
In making an assessment of the nature of the Amaramālā  we should clearly not discount 
its opening verses, which are quite explicit in referring to Jitendra as »the bull of the Śailen -
dra dynasty« ( śailendrānvayapuṅgava ). While the question of whether or not the Śailendras 
were of Malay origin is still controversial, there are many reasons to suppose that at the very 
least the Buddhist »preceptors of the Śailendra kings« ( śailendrarājagurubhiḥ ) noted in the 
Kalasan inscription can be understood in terms of a close relationship between Buddhist 
institutions of Sumatra and Central Java during the period c. 700-850 CE.19 
The Old Javanese Amaramālā is characterized in its opening passages as a »Prakritiza -
tion« of a Sanskrit work, which we can surmise must have been a lexicographical work like 
the Amarakośa  of Amarasiṁha. Such works were intended to serve as tools in the composi -
tion of kāvya , and by the time of Amarasiṁha (c. 600 CE) had become an indispensable part 
of a writer’s toolkit.20 The opening line of the Amaramālā  thus stands at the beginning of a 
long tradition of referring to works in Old Javanese literary form with the term prākr̥ta , in 
this referring to works composed in a literary language fashioned on the order of Sanskrit: 
sambahniṅ hulun maṅgalani majarakna mahāmaramālā prākr̥ta  // 1.1 //
»My offering with a bow of homage is an auspicious benediction for making an expo -
sition of the great Amaramālā in Prakrit form.«21
16 The Amaramālā is part of the larger and composite text entitled Candrakiraṇa , edited as Chandakaraṇa by Lokesh 
Chandra (Chanda-Karaṇa). Here we have followed the text reconstructed by Lokesh Chandra in his edition, with-
out systematically reporting deviations (whether in the main text or in the apparatus) from the original West Java -
nese gebang  manuscript L631, except when we have proposed new emendations on the basis of the actual readings 
of the manuscript.
17 Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis , 145-146.
18 See Zoetmulder ( Kalangwan , 3) on the Sukabumi inscription.
19 See Sarkar ( Corpus , 36-40) for a text and translation of the Kalasan inscription. See Jordaan and Colless, Mahārājas , 
for a recent review of the long controversy surrounding the origins and nature of the Śailendra dynasty. Nihom’s 
noting ( Studies , 114) the verifiable presence of the mandala systems of the Jagadvinaya , Trailokyavijaya and Sarva -
durgatipariśodhana in Old Javanese textual sources supports a close relationship of Śrīvijaya and the Śailendras of 
Java. As he points out, the presence of these mandala systems suggests that »the initial importation of yogatantra 
systems into the Archipelago most likely took place no later than the end of the seventh century [...] This would 
seem to put us in Śrī Vijaya.« Since the Sumatran branch of the Śailendra line of kings is believed to have »re treated« 
from Java by c. 856 CE, this would give us a terminus pro quem for at least the core sections of the Amaramālā.
20 Lokesh Chandra (Chanda-Karaṇa, 144) surmises that the Old Javanese Amaramālā is based on a section of a now-
lost Indian work by that name, supporting his claim by citing references to a text by that name in Kșīrasvāmin’s 
commentary on the Amarakośa  and Hemacandra’s commentary on another lexicographical work, the Abhidāna -
cintāmaņi . See Raj Pant, Jațarūpa’s Commentary , for an authoritative work on the Amarakośa that focuses on 
Jațarūpa’s commentary, the Amarakośatilaka , likely composed in the second half of the tenth century CE. 
21 »My offering with a bow of homage«: it was a common trope in Old Javanese to refer metonymously to what one 
offers up to a superior as one’s sәmbah , or »bow of respect«.Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 9] ---
221
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240221
We turn now to the form taken by the opening passage of the Amaramālā . This section of 
the text is crucial to this study in that it may represent the earliest stage of a »translational« 
form of composition and pedagogy for which we have written records, and because it bears the 
unmistakable imprint of a commentarial form of rhetorical organization. The development of 
Old Javanese into a literary language during the eighth and ninth centuries CE follows upon 
similar processes that are observable for Old Malay in five inscriptions of seventh-century 
Sumatra issued by Śrī Jayanāśa/Jayanāga. In the Amaramālā  we begin to see evidence for a 
»commentarial« form of composition that appears to be the textual record of pedagogical 
practices that were initiated in the Buddhist institutions of the western Malay-Indonesian 
archipelago and made their way to Java by way of a close relationship of the »Javanese branch« 
of the Śailendra dynasty with a Buddhist polity of the western archipelago known to history 
as Śrīvijaya. From this perspective the precise political form that may have been taken by this 
relationship may not be as important as the question of the emergence of a commentarial form 
of text-building that from the time of the Amaramālā onward was developed in parallel fashion 
in both Hindu and Buddhist streams of Javano-Balinese relig ious and philosophical literature. 
The evidence of the Amaramālā is critical to this study because it introduces two modes 
of text-building that have had a lasting impact on the prose traditions of Java and Bali. The 
first of these is a »dyadic technique.« In this form of composition the text is built up in paired 
Sanskrit verses and their Old Javanese exegeses, with the logic of the didactic narrative fol -
lowing the order of verses in the Sanskrit original, but with a great deal of flexibility in terms 
of the content of the exegeses. The initial dedicatory stanza of the Amaramālā is a good ex -
ample of this type of composition:
Sanskrit śloka :
śivaṁ sarvagataṁ śāntaṁ / sarvajñaṁ sarvadaṁ gurum22 /
praṇamyāmaramāleyaṁ / nāmaliṅgaṁ nigadyate  //
»Having bowed down to Śiva – the all-pervading, peaceful, omniscient, all-bestowing 
teacher – I will recite the Amaramālā , [and expound] nouns and [their] genders.«
Old Javanese glosses:
bhaṭāreśvara sira sambahiṅ hulun / lvirnira:23
»My bow of homage is to the god Īśvara. His form is:«
sarvagataṁ  vyāpaka riṅ bha / śāntaṁ jitendriya ta sira / riṅ sarvajña24 amratyakṣākәn 
ta sirātītānāgatavartamāna mvaṅ sūkṣma [h]atisūkṣma /  sarvadaṁ25 aveh anugraha ri 
bhakti ri sira / sira guru niṅ sarvadevatā /
22 Em.; sarvvatigurum  ms.; sarvādhigurum ed.
23 While this phrase occurs without overt reference to a Sanskrit lexeme in the original, there is no doubt that it 
responds to śivaṁ in the Sanskrit śloka .
24 Em.; sarvajñana  ms.; sarvajñāna ed.
25 Em.; sarvādi  ed.; sarvāddhi / ms. Our proposed reconstruction is supported by the fact that most of the forms 
ending in - aṁ in the verse have been restored from - i (these endings, as well as - әṁ, are often confused in the 
Sanskrit portions found in Javanese manuscripts), as well as the Old Javanese gloss. Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 10] ---
222
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240222
»sarvagataṁ  [means] pervading space; śāntaṁ [means] he has mastered the senses; 
in regard to sarvajña , he sees clearly the past, future and present and the subtlety of 
the most subtle; sarvadaṁ  [means] that he gives favour to all those who are devoted to 
him; he is the guru of all the gods.«
uvus pva ṅhulun sumambah ri sira  / ajaraknaniṅ hulun tikiṅ mahāmaramālā26 pinto -
naknaṅ abhidhāna mvaṅ liṅga //
»Having completed my homage to Him, I will expound this Mahāmaramālā , [and] 
demonstrate the nouns and their genders.«
In the Old Javanese glosses there is a shifting back and forth here between Sanskrit lex -
emes or phrases and their glosses that follows the classical vyākhyā  form to the letter, ex -
cept that the explanatory phrases are given in Old Javanese, which is often enriched with 
Sanskrit lexemes. And it is clear that the composer of the Amaramālā  has made an effort to 
account for the full content of the original, for example explaining the Sanskrit passive form 
nigadyate  with the Old Javanese ajaraknaniṅ huluṅ , and nāmaliṅgaṁ , »nouns and their gen -
ders,« with Old Javanese pintonakәnaṅ abhidhāna mvaṅ liṅga , »apellations (i.e., nouns) and 
their genders will be demonstrated«, thereby supplying another Old Javanese passive verbal 
form for the sake of clarity.27
In a longer section following the introductory verse we find a panegyric to the royal pa -
tron of the work that is composed in the fashion of a commentary in  vyākhyā  form, with a se -
ries of Sanskrit phrases introduced that are followed by Old Javanese glosses. These passages 
need not expand on a particular verse in the work but can introduce new material directly. 
hana sira ratu pinaka cūḍāmaṇi  deniṅ  sāmantajagatpālaka28 /
»There is a king taken as the crest-jewel of all the guardians of the world.«
suragaṇair  iṣṭaḥ  prajārakṣaṇe29  inarәmbha  deniṅ  vatәk  devatā  /  rumakṣa  pra-
jāmaṇḍala /
»suragaṇair iṣṭaḥ prajārakṣaṇe : prepared by the company of gods to protect the realm 
and its subjects,«
26 Em.; mamaramālā  ms.; amaramālā ed.
27 It should be mentioned here that another title under which Amarasiṁha’s Amarakośa  – a Sanskrit lexicon probably 
related to the Amaramālā  – was known is Nāmaliṅgānuśāsana , »The teaching about the gender of nouns«. 
28 Lokesh Chandra emends samantajagatphalaka  into sāmantajagatpālakaḥ, but we find the insertion of the visarga 
of the Sanskrit nominative unnecessary here as the compound has been embedded directly into the Old Javanese 
(prefixed by deniṅ , which would render the Sanskrit instrumental case) and does not represent, strictly speaking, 
a direct quotation. Cf. the analogous case in fn. 30 below (and contrast the other Sanskrit forms in the passage, 
such as vidyāvadātottamaḥ , sādhujanapriyaḥ , kulasyāntakaḥ,  etc., which do have visargas  in the original and are 
enclosed between punctuation marks).
29 The ms. actually reads prajārakṣaṇeḥ , therefore prajārakṣaṇe in the edition represents an emendation by Lokesh 
Chandra. Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 11] ---
223
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240223
apayan  yogadhyānasamādhikarmakuśala30 sira / vidagdha ri kagavayaniṅ  yoga dhyāna 
samādhi  /
»For yogadhyānasamādhikarmakuśala:  he is wise in the performance of  yoga , dhyā -
na and samādhi .«
vidyāvadātottamaḥ  / sira ta viśeṣaniṅ mahāpuruṣa śāstrajña / niṣṭhāniran samaṅka -
na kottamanira / ndan tah upaśama ta sira /
 
»vidyāvadātottamaḥ : He is exceptional among the great men who are knowers of the 
Śāstras. His lowest ebb is at once his highest, and yet he is self-controlled.« 
sādhujanapriyaḥ  / anurāga ta sira / ri sakveh saṅ sādhujana /
»sādhujanapriyaḥ : He is beloved by all good men.«
śatrūṇāṁ kulasyāntakaḥ  / maṅkana sakvehnikaṅ śatru bāhyābhyantara / sampun in -
ariṣṭakәnira /
»śatrūṇāṁ kulasyāntakaḥ : Likewise, all of his enemies, whether internal or external, 
have been completely annihilated by him.«31
śailendrānvayapuṅgavaḥ  / sira ta pinakatuṅganiṅ śailendravaṁśa /
»śailendrānvayapuṅgavaḥ : He is regarded as the bull of the Śailendra dynasty.«
jayati  [h]amnәṅ ta sira / 
»jayati: He is victorious.«
śrīmahārāja samaṅkanātiśayanira / sira ta śrī mahārāja jitendra saṁjñanira // 1
 
»His being an illustrious Mahārāja is the reason for his present renown. He is the great 
King Jitendra by name.«
In the Amaramālā  we find a good illustration of the appropriation of the vyākhyā  form 
of Indian commentaries for the needs of translation in a pedagogy and connecting literature 
that linked Śailendra Buddhist institutions to the wider Asian Buddhist world through the 
trading, diplomatic, and religious networks of the western Malay-Indonesian archipelago. 
As we will see in examples from the early theological literature, the textual use of the vyākhyā  
technique appears to reflect a pedagogical practice that was further refined in the textual 
tradition following the Amaramālā . 
30 Lokesh Chandra emends ° kuśala  into ° kuśalaḥ .
31 There has been an interesting shift in meaning here: Sanskrit śatrūṇāṁ  kulasyāntakaḥ   means »he who is the 
destroyer of the families of his enemies.« But the Old Javanese gloss turns its attention to beliefs well known in 
the Javano-Balinese tradition that conquering one’s »internal enemies« is the key to success in the struggle for 
political survival. Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 12] ---
224
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240224
Case Study II: The  Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Mantranaya 
If we look now at an early work from the Mahāyāna Buddhist literature, the Mantra System 
of the Great Mahāyāna Path (Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Mantranaya , henceforth SHKM), we 
find the same use of the vyākhyā  form of glossing that is prominent in the Amaramālā . And 
we find the same use of a dyadic technique based on the juxtaposition of Sanskrit verses with 
blocks of Old Javanese glosses. The difference is that the dyadic form of composition was 
only occasionally used in the Amaramālā , but has become standard practice in the SHKM. 
There has been some debate about the dating of this work. Goris32 proposed that it be dat -
ed to the tenth century, for Version »C« of the text, as per Kats’ identification, contains a col -
ophon mentioning the name Mpu Siṇḍok of the Īśāna dynasty (r. 929-947 CE). However, this 
is apparently a Śaivized text that might have been composed later than the other two purely 
Buddhist texts in the same manuscript. In 1974 de Jong summarized the findings of the Japa -
nese scholars Wogihara Unrai and Sakai Shiro, who had shown that the Sanskrit portions of 
the SHKM can be traced to the Chinese version of the Mahāvairocanasūtra  and to Chinese and 
Tibetan versions of the Adhyardhaśatikāprajñāpāramitāsūtra .33 More recent scholarly work 
has also identified such Sanskrit sources as the commentarial literature on the Guhyasamāja ,34 
as well as other esoteric manuals such as the Sarvavajrodaya .35 These considerations suggest 
that the doctrinal basis of the SHKM was well known in Java by at least the ninth century, and 
that the composition of the text could easily have taken place in that period or not long afterward. 
In an example of this form of dyadic composition, SHKM verse 31, we are witness to an 
exposition of a practical perspective on the practice of austerities that suggests a long history 
of initiatory practices in both Hindu and Buddhist circles in the archipelago:
32 Goris, Bijdragen , 151.
33 Two versions of the Mahāvairocanasūtra  were brought to China by Wu-hsing and Śubhakara and translated into 
Chinese between 724-725 C.E. by Śubhakara and Yijing (de Jong, Notes, 633-635). Archaeologist John Miksic 
(Borobudur , 23) in turn notes that the Mahāvairocanasūtra »was probably found in most monastic libraries in Java 
and Sumatra during the ninth century«.
34 Kandahjaya, Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan , 70, 72.
35 Ishii, Correlation, Table 2.Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 13] ---
225
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240225
svam ātmānaṁ parityajya tapobhir na ca pīḍayet36 /
yathāsukhaṁ sukhaṁ dhāryaṁ37 sambuddho38 ’yam anāgataḥ // 31
ka: / pativar ikāvakta39 / svakāyanirapekṣatah kita hayva tr̥ṣṇa riṅ avak / tapobhir na 
ca pīḍayet40 / hayva pinirsakitan41 riṅ tapa / hayva vineh gumavayakәn kavәnaṅnya / 
yathāsukhaṁ sukhaṁ dhāryaṁ  / yathāsukhātah42 lvirantat gavayaknaṅ bodhimārga / 
sambuddho ’yam anāgataḥ  / hayva gyā hyaṅ buddha kita dlāha /
Having given up one’s own Self, one should not oppress [oneself] with acts of penance. 
One should follow pleasure, comfortably, for he is a future Awakened one.
»The meaning is: you should abandon your body to its fate; you are svakāyanirapekṣa , 
you should have no attachment to the body; tapobhir na ca pīḍayet : don’t torture 
it with austerities; don’t allow them to take power over you; yathāsukhaṁ sukhaṁ 
dhāryaṁ : as you carry forward the way to enlightenment the path you take should be 
one of ease; sambuddho’yam anāgataḥ : don’t rush; you [will become] the Lord Buddha 
in the future.«43
An analysis of the Old Javanese passage shows that, in common with the initial stanzas of the 
Amaramālā , the vyākhyā  form of commentary has had a shaping effect on how »translation« 
was conceived of in the production of the SHKM. The Old Javanese commentary does not di -
rectly render the Sanskrit into Old Javanese following the vyākhyā  form, but instead repeats 
each of the four Sanskrit pādas  and glosses them into Old Javanese.
First, the Old Javanese phrases that translate pāda  (a) of SHKM verse 37 begin with an 
imperative form ( pativar ikāvakta , »abandon your body to its fate«). This suggests that the 
text was used as an active guide for imparting the particular steps of an initiation, a fact 
that is not always brought out explicitly in the Sanskrit verses of the SHKM.44 The trans -
lation then moves on to a paired Sanskrit-Old Javanese phrase that expands on this theme 
by introducing a Sanskrit synonym and its gloss. Here the Sanskrit synonym introduced by 
the composer of the Old Javanese commentary ( svakāyanirapekṣa , »one who takes no no -
tice of one’s own body«) suggests an easy familiarity with the essentials of the technique of 
36 Em.; ṇnaḥ tha pīḍayet ms., nātipīḍayet em. Kats, Wulff. The text has been reconstructed on the basis of the nu -
merous Sanskrit parallels (viz. Dīpaṅkarabhadra, Guhyasamājamaṇḍalavidhi , ed. Klein-Schwind, 384b; Hevajra -
sekaprakriyā, ed. Finot, 27; Sarvabuddhasamāyoga , ed. Negī, 6.64b, Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā , ed. Tanemura, 6-6-6-2, 
verse 22, etc.).
37 Em. Kats (silent); dhāryya  ms.
38 sambuddho ’yam  ms., Speyer, sambuddheyam  Kats.
39 Thus the ms.; prativārikāvakta em. Kats, paṭavarikāvakta em. Wulff.
40 Cf. above, fn. 36.
41 Pini[r]sakitan  Kats, pinrisakitan em. Wulff.
42 yathāsukhātah  em., yathāsukatāh Kats.
43 This excerpt from the SHKM has previously been published as an example of a passage on the practice of yoga in 
a short study of the Old Javanese Bhīṣmaparva  by Hunter, Bhagavad-Gītā sections, 192-193. 
44 Based on his study of Sakai’s work, de Jong (Notes, 621-622) proposed that the textual antecedents of the SHKM 
related to »four kinds of consecration ( abhiṣeka ) associated with the anuttarayoga texts«, thus underlining the 
initiatory aspect of works like the SHKM and Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan .Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 14] ---
226
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240226
creating well-formed Sanskrit nominal compounds ( samāsa ).45 Second, the introduction of 
certain explanatory phrases in the SHKM suggests the development of an indigenous school 
of thought that has been brought to bear in glossing Sanskrit originals. 
In the second pāda , it may not be accidental that an Old Javanese verb phrase ( pinirsak -
itan »be made to be in pain«) has been chosen in that its morphosyntactic form to some 
degree mirrors the complexity of the Sanskrit optative pīḍayet . 
In vyākhyā  form, the third pāda  of the Sanskrit śloka is repeated, along with an Old Java -
nese gloss that to our mind is more clearly worded than the somewhat elusive phrasing of the 
Sanskrit. The syntax of the Old Javanese is quite alien to Indo-European forms of construc -
tion: lvir-a-nta , »your form should be« is an irrealis form based on a nominal root, with the 
addition of a second person pronominal clitic ( -nta), while t’gavayakna is an irrealis form, 
here with optative force.46
Once we consider the details of Old Javanese syntax, the phrasing of the gloss reads with 
a precision that suggests principles of brevity and clarity well known from the South Asian 
śāstrīya  tradition, and may indicate an inclination among Javanese composers to seek a sim -
ilar form of precision in their own idiom. It is clear that in formal terms there is a great deal 
of similarity with the » vyākhyā  style« of the Amaramālā : for instance, we can see a simi -
lar tendency to combine the Sanskrit-Old Javanese vyākhyā  style with direct translation of 
parts of the śloka , either in mixed Sanskrit-Old Javanese or in Old Javanese. Note that the 
SHKM pattern follows that of the Amaramālā , but is, if anything, more conservative in that 
it retains the Sanskrit-Old Javanese vyākhyā  format for all of the four pādas  (b-d), where 
the Amaramālā  switches to direct translation in (c-d). In conclusion, it can be said that the 
SHKM takes up the commentarial style of Prakritization proposed in the Amaramālā , and 
carries it forward in the service of the didactic needs of the Buddhist institutions of ancient 
Java, apparently in terms of practices of initiation. 
Case Study III: The Vr̥haspatitattva
Like many other works from the Old Javanese didactic tradition, the Śaiva speculative and 
soteriological text Vr̥haspatitattva  provides us with no firm internal evidence that could be 
used to establish its date of composition. In cases like these we have to rely on the more cir -
cumstantial evidence of the contents of the text, their possible relationship with other texts 
in the corpus, and with antecedent textual materials from South Asia – namely, the body of 
early Śaiva Siddhāntatantras, alongside Sāṅkhya and Pāśupata sources. A number of scholars 
have previously sketched some of the doctrinal characteristics of the Vr̥haspatitattva , and 
argued that this text, along with a handful of other texts of the tattva  genre, may be regarded 
as precursors of the (mature) Sanskrit Śaiva Saiddhāntika scriptures, which started to devel -
op in India from the sixth century onwards.47 Acri48 has advanced a solution to the problem 
of the identification of the term Alepaka  found among three terms referring to sectarian 
orientations in Vr̥haspatitattva  2.3-4 and 3.37, viz. Śaiva , Pāśupata , Alepaka . This reference 
45 A recent contribution by Radicchi (More on the Kārakasaṁgraha ) has demonstrated the emphasis found in the 
Javano-Balinese tradition on the correct formation of samāsa . Important passages on this subject can be found in 
Old Javanese works like the Kārakasaṁkṣepa  and the Kārakasaṁgraha . 
46 See Oglobin, Irrealis , 3 for a brief review of the use of the second person proclitic form t’ in the formation of one 
type of imperative construction. See also Hunter, Yati, 11.
47 Zieseniss, Studien , 4. 
48 Acri, Vaimala sect.Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 15] ---
227
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240227
had previously been assumed to parallel later references to the three major religious sects of 
East Java, the well-known Śaiva-Sogata-�ṣi . While the Vr̥haspatitattva term Pāśupata can 
be linked to the term �ṣi, efforts to link the Alepaka  with some form of Buddhism have fallen 
far short of being satisfactory. Drawing on Sanskrit sources, Acri has noted that the term 
Alepaka  is synonymous with Vaimala, an early Atimārga sect within Śaivism, which may have 
broken off from the Pāśupatas at an early date.
The reference to the Alepaka  sect represents a crucial point in the history of religion 
in premodern Java. The triad Śaiva-Pāśupata-Alepaka suggests that the Vr̥haspatitattva 
may have been composed at a time when Buddhist institutions of East Java had yet to gain 
enough importance to be accepted as a major sectarian division within the larger grouping 
of religious institutions. We know that Buddhist institutions were supported by the Kaḍiri 
kings beginning with Airlaṅga and gained greater prominence during the Singhasari dynasty 
(1222-1293 CE). Their presence as a major element in the configuration of religious domains 
was formalized, and listed with precise detail, in fourteenth century works of the Majapahit 
dynasty like the Deśavarṇana . But the evidence of the Vr̥haspatitattva suggests that at the 
time of its composition the author(s) recognized two currents representing the Atimārga 
forms of Śaivism, as opposed to a third – and possibly predominant current – representing a 
Javanese mainstream form of Mantramārga Śaivism akin to the Indian Śaivasiddhānta. 
When we look closely at the  Vr̥haspatitattva  we find that the dyadic presentation of San -
skrit verses and Old Javanese glosses is very much in evidence. However, among the glosses 
we find both simpler exegeses that follow the phrase-by-phrase presentation of the vyākhyā  
model, and more complex cases that often represent fully developed doctrinal presentations:
bhagavan deva devānām anādiparameśvara / 
samākhyāhi tattvaṁ sarvaṁ ramayan49 sacarācaram // 2 
sājñā bhaṭāra / kasihana rānak bhaṭāra / varahәn ika saṅ hyaṅ aji kabeh / mataṅnyan 
akveh prabhedanira de bhaṭāra / an pavarah ri saṅ vatәk devatā kabeh / hana Śaiva 
ṅaranya / hana Pāśupata ṅaranya / hana Alepaka ṅaranya / ika ta kabeh / kapva dudū 
/ pavarah bhaṭāra sovaṅsovaṅ / lavan ikaṅ śāstra vih akveh ata prakāranya / ndya 
ta kaliṅanika / mataṅnyan vineh makveha / ikanaṅ mārga kalavan aji de bhaṭāra / 
maṅkana liṅ bhagavān Vṛhaspati // 
Oh Lord, God of Gods, Supreme Lord without beginning, may you relate to me (the 
truth about) all the elements of existence, both moving and unmoving. 
»O Lord, please be kind to your son, teach me the reverend sacred lore in its entirety, 
[and] the reason why there are many different forms of it, as it is taught to the assem -
bly of the gods. There is what is called Śaiva, there is what is called Pāśupata, there 
is what is called Alepaka. All of them, they are equally different teachings of the Lord, 
one by one. And also, there are many classes of scriptures. What is the meaning of this, 
[and] the reason why so many religious paths and scriptures have been allowed by the 
Lord?«
49 Sudarshana Devi ( Wṛhaspati-tattwa  »Text with notes« section, 11) has noted the difficulties of the reading of the 
fourth hemistich from the various mss. and that her emendation to ramayan may not be entirely apposite.Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 16] ---
228
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240228
The analysis of the Old Javanese passage reveals a text-building strategy that does not de -
pend on a vyākhyā form of composition, but rather represents the »pure dyadic« form. The 
passage forms a loosely structured unit with the opening śloka , but in terms of meaning does 
not necessarily relate to it on a one-to-one basis. 
In the opening clause ( sājñā bhaṭāra / kasihana rānak bhaṭāra ), the phrasing corre -
sponds roughly to the string of vocatives filling the first two hemistiches of the Sanskrit verse 
(bhagavan deva devānām anādiparameśvara ), but does not represent so much a translation 
or gloss on the Sanskrit as a paralleling of the Sanskrit vocatives with phrasing that is well-
known from the entire tradition of prose works in Old Javanese, and is, indeed, retained in 
the special Old Javanese-derived language of the Balinese shadow theatre ( wayang ).
The clause varahәn ika saṅ hyaṅ aji kabeh  glosses the Sanskrit samākhyāhi tattvaṁ sar -
vam, but replaces the tattva »principles of reality« of the Sanskrit passage with the Old Java -
nese phrase saṅ hyaṅ aji kabeh , »the reverend sacred lore in its entirety.« This could be due 
to the fact that tattva in Old Javanese could signify a »sacred text on metaphysics«.
In the lines that follow thereupon, there is still some link with the Sanskrit  śloka in that 
the phrase akveh prabhedanira , »there are many different forms of them«, can be said to be 
related to the element of contrastive plurality in the phrase sacarācaram,  »those that are 
ambulatory, and those that are not« (i.e., animate and inanimate entities); the Old Javanese 
cannot be considered a direct gloss on the Sanskrit, but rather continues the line of devel -
opment that was initiated in verse 2. In the clause starting with  hana śaiva  […], there is no 
longer any direct connection between the śloka and the Old Javanese. Instead the composer 
has introduced a discussion of three sectarian divisions within Śaivism that appear to be 
an entirely Śaivite form of the »three denominations« ( tripakṣa ) known from East Javanese 
textual sources from as early as the composition of the kakavin Bhāratayuddha (c. 1135-1157 
CE). The discussion is continued, with a final appeal to the deity that recalls the imperative 
phrase of the Sanskrit ( samākhyāhi tattvaṁ sarvam ). The closing statement, maṅkana liṅ 
bhagavān V�haspati , has no parallel in the Sanskrit. The śloka and its »dyadic« counterpart 
in the Old Javanese are thus set into the framework of a tantra - or purāṇa -like narrative that 
reproduces a doctrinal discussion in the form of a conversation between a sage and the deity. 
Verse 15 of the Vr̥haspatitattva gives us a good example of the continuing use of the vy-
ākhyā form of glossing in this early work of Javanese Śaivism:
laghu prakāśakaṁ sattvaṁ cañcalaṁ tu rajaḥ sthitam /
tamo guru varaṇakam ity etac cittalakṣaṇam // 15 //
ikaṅ citta mahaṅan māva / yeka sattva ṅaranya / ikaṅ madәrәs molah / yeka rajah  
ṅaranya / ikaṅ abvat pәtәṅ / yeka tamah ṅaranya //
Sattva is light and brilliant, while  rajas is dynamic . Tamas is heavy and concealing. 
Such are the characteristics of the intellect.
»The intellect that is light and brightly shining, that is called sattva.  That which moves 
in a rushing flow, that is called rajah. That which is heavy and dark, that is called 
tamah «. 
The Vr̥haspatitattva thus documents two exegetical strategies, both in a Sanskrit-Old 
Javanese dyadic form: one that considerably expands on the themes of the Sanskrit verses 
(such as verse 35), and one that follows more closely the vyākhyā  style encountered in the 
Amaramālā and SHKM. Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 17] ---
229
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240229
Case Study IV: The  Jñānasiddhānta
The Jñānasiddhānta  is a tutur  organized in the form of Sanskrit-Old Javanese translation dy -
ads, consisting in a core – also preserved independently as Tutur Kamokṣan  – complemented 
by Old Javanese prose opening chapters. This text, of a composite and heterogeneous nature, 
reveals a later period of compilation and an East Javanese Majapahit milieu and/or its con -
tinuation in Bali from the late fifteenth century.50 In this context, older material coming from 
(possibly Central and/or East) Java was assembled and redacted so as to meet the demands 
of the local audiences.
Jñānasiddhānta  chapter 19, bearing the caption Saṅ Hyaṅ Bhedajñāna »The Holy Gno -
sis of Difference«, is made up of seven Sanskrit ślokas  followed by an Old Javanese par -
aphrase and/or exegesis. This short chapter is a telling example of the reconfiguration of 
Indic elements into a local context of doctrine and yogic praxis. Its doctrinal background is 
thoroughly Śaiva, yet a few passages (either Sanskrit ślokas  or their Old Javanese exegesis) 
contain echoes of Sāṅkhya-Yoga views that may be traced to the Sanskrit Yogasūtras  and its 
annexed commentary Yogasūtrabhāṣya (Pātañjalayogaśāstra ). The presence of certain tech -
nical terms indeed points at a different philosophical and yogic tradition than the Śaiva yoga 
of the six ancillaries ( ṣaḍaṅgayoga ) commonly encountered in the tutur /tattva  corpus, and 
reflects an attempt to reconcile Śaiva theistic yoga with Pātañjala yoga. 
A dyadic style featuring a word-by-word commentary – much like those in the Sanskrit 
tradition – that elaborates on the text in an original way is epitomized in dyad 5. Having 
been introduced at the end of the Old Javanese exegesis to Sanskrit verse 4 as providing a 
definition of the gnosis labelled Saṅ Hyaṅ Bhedajñāna, this dyad describes the Lord Śiva, the 
individual soul, and the state of liberation:
sakalaḥ kevalaḥ śuddhaḥ tryavasthaḥ puruṣaḥ smr̥taḥ /
malinatvacittamokṣaḥ kalpyate nirmalaḥ śivaḥ // 5 //
Tiga avasthā  ya saṅ puruṣa riṅ kalәpasan: hanān sakala , hanān kevala , hanān śuddha . 
Katuturakәna sirān maṅkana: sakala  ṅaranya makāvak triguṇa sira. Kevala  ṅaranya 
atiṅgal pamukti sira. Malinatva ṅaranya papāśanira51 mvaṅ triguṇa. Manovijñānāvak -
nira. Śuddha  ṅaranya patiniṅ manovijñāna. Sakeṅ sira māri mamikalpa, śūnyākāra, 
kaivalya, tan hana gәlәhgәlәhnirān pamukti. Sira sinaṅguh nirmalaśiva.
The soul is taught to have three conditions: the one visible in material form, the isolated, 
and the pure; the freedom of the mind from the condition of impurity is conceived to be 
the Spotless Śiva.
50 Hooykaas, Śaiva Siddhānta, has discussed in detail the textual relationship between the Tutur Ādhyātmika  (edited by 
Soebadio as Jñānasiddhānta ), the Tutur Kamokṣan , and the Gaṇapatitattva . This chapter is found, with only slight varia -
tions, in Tutur Kamokṣan and Gaṇapatitattva (40-45). Some of its ślokas have parallels in chapter 5 of the Bhuvanakośa.
51 The reading papasah , from the base sah »depart, be separated, come loose« ( papasah = to be separated, split, be 
broken; see OJED, 1592), makes no sense in this context, and requires emendation. What the text implies here is 
clearly that the stained soul is ensnared by the three guṇas . Soebadio ( Jñānasiddhānta , 211) translated the clause 
papasahnira mvaṅ triguṇa as »its connection with the three constituents«, yet she did not justify her translation. 
Thus, the reading papasah may be a corruption of either papāśa or mapāśa , from the Sanskrit pāśa (»fetter«), 
which would fit well into the Śaiva doctrinal context, but have the disadvantage of not being attested in Old Ja -
vanese texts (on the other hand, we would expect the attested forms kapāśa and kapāśan to be followed by deniṅ 
rather than mvaṅ : see OJED, 1309).Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 18] ---
230
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240230
Three are the conditions of the soul in the state of liberation: there is the one in which 
he is visible in material form; there is the one in which he is isolated; there is the one in 
which he is pure. That [souls] being in such [conditions] will [now] be taught: Visible in 
material form  means that it assumes the form of the three constituents. Isolated  means 
that it has left behind the [condition of] enjoyer. The condition of impurity means that 
it is fettered by the three constituents. Its body is mental knowledge ( manovijñāna ). 
Pure means the end of mental knowledge. Because of that it ceases to produce dual -
izing thought, [its] appearance is void, [it is] isolated; it has no stain when it is in the 
state of liberation. It is called the Spotless Śiva .
As Acri has pointed out elsewhere,52 śloka 5 has a parallel in the Sanskrit Kiraṇatantra (Vi-
dyāpāda 1.23ab),53 an early scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta:
kevalaḥ sakalaḥ śuddhas tryavasthaḥ puruṣaḥ smr̥taḥ / 
malinatvāc citer mokṣaḥ prāpyate nirmalāc chivāt // 
The soul is taught to have three conditions; [that of] the one without [at least one of 
the bonds] ( kevala ), the one with [all three bonds] ( sakala ), and the pure soul ( śud-
dha).54 The liberation of the mind from stain is obtained because of [the will of] the 
spotless Śiva.
The version of the śloka  preserved in the Jñānasiddhānta , as well as the parallels found in 
other tutur s, all read kalpyate »is conceived« instead of prāpyate »is obtained«.55 Further -
more, all the ablative endings found in the Kiraṇa version are missing in the versions docu -
mented in the Archipelago texts, the third quarter being formed by a single compound and 
the last one substituting the ablative endings ( nirmalāc chivāt ) with nominatives. The mean -
ing conveyed in the two versions of the śloka is at variance insofar as the Javano-Balinese one 
equates the mind freed from stain to the Spotless Śiva, whereas the South Asian one implies 
that liberation of the mind from stain is obtained because of the Spotless Śiva – thus allud -
ing to the idea of divine grace that played a role in the process of liberation according to the 
early Śaivasiddhānta, and which was of even greater importance to the theologians of the of 
non-dualist Tamil Śaivasiddhānta.56
The Sanskrit verse appears to hint at a fundamental doctrinal tenet of the Śaiva Siddhānta, 
according to which the three conditions of the soul (viz. sakala, kevala, śuddha ) depend on 
the kind of stain it is affected by, e.g. māyā , karma , and āṇava . With regard to this matter 
there are different views within the Siddhānta, as different scriptures and commentaries 
52 Acri, Sanskrit-Old Javanese tutur  literature, 119-120.
53 Intriguingly, the second hemistich is not found in all the ancient Nepalese manuscripts nor in Rāmakaṇṭha’s 
commentary (see Goodall, Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary , 221, n. 188), but it appears in the later South Indian 
redactions, such as the Devakoṭṭai edition, and in the version commented upon by Tryambakaśambhu (who places 
it after 1.23d, see Goodall, Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary , 29). Since some of these redactions may have been 
compiled even after the twelfth century, we may assume that this verse was borrowed in that form either from a 
South Indian recension of the Kiraṇa  or from another version posterior, or in any event unknown to, Rāmakaṇṭha. 
54 The translation of this hemistich is by Goodall, Hindu Scriptures , 345.
55 But some (apparently corrupt) Indian mss. read procyate »is declared« (see Goodall, Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Com -
mentary,  29).
56 For a discussion of the doctrinal contents of this śloka  in the Kiraṇa , see Brunner, Analyse du Kiraṇāgama , 313.Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 19] ---
231
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240231
present distinct systematizations.57 However, the Old Javanese commentary does not refer to 
any of these systematizations, and does not mention the different kinds of stain or the cate -
gories of beings known as  pralayakevala , vijñānakevala , etc., either.58 On the other hand, the 
sakala state is defined as the embodiment of the soul in the three constituents ( guṇa ). The 
condition of impurity means that the soul is not separated from the three guṇas . This view -
point may reflect an either archaic or »local« doctrinal status quo, in which the Saiddhāntika 
ideas around stain ( mala ) had not yet been codified, and a Sāṅkhya-Yoga doctrinal matrix 
was predominant.
The Old Javanese form pamukti , deriving from the Sanskrit base bhukti (see OJED, p. 
269), refers to the condition of enjoyer – in the sense of »experiencer« – of the fruits of ac -
tions. According to the Śaivasiddhānta, liberation consists in the freedom of the soul from 
the condition, caused by stain, of bhoktr̥tva  – i.e. of being the experiencer of karma  and 
its fruits. The concepts of bhoktr̥tva and kevalatva also feature prominently in the seminal 
scriptures of Pātañjala Yoga. The afflictions, being present in the mind ( manas ), are ascribed 
to the soul ( puruṣa ), because it is the enjoyer ( bhoktr ̥) of their fruits. Yogasūtrabhāṣya  2.27 
and 4.34 define the puruṣa as being in the kevala  state when it transcends the three guṇas 
through the buddhi . The condition in which the mind is freed is called cittavimukti . Accord -
ing to Sāṅkhya-Yoga philosophy, śuddha is the state of the puruṣa when it does not assume 
the form of mind ( citta ), although it knows the mind. This view seems to be echoed in the 
Old Javanese commentary to śloka 5, which explains the word śuddha as a psychological con -
dition involving the end of dualizing thought intended as mental knowledge ( manovijñāna ). 
This results in the isolation of the mind. The appearance of manovijñāna in this context is 
quite intriguing, for it is typically found as a technical term in Buddhist sources, meaning 
»mind-consciousness«.59 Our text thus appears to present a mixture of Śaiva, Sāṅkhya-Yoga, 
and Buddhist doctrinal elements, which also feature in the following dyad 6.60
The dyads discussed above, and, indeed, the whole chapter 5 of the  Jñānasiddhānta , pres -
ent examples of the vyakhyā style. At the same time, they suggest that the commentator was 
aware of different streams of Indic religions and philosophies and their scriptural canons, 
and document his attempt to reconfigure those originally »Indian« elements into a local 
theology and praxis. The resulting doctrinal and soteriological system may be regarded as 
a synthesis of theologemes and yogic practices belonging to what were perceived in South 
Asian Sanskrit sources as distinct orientations, i.e. Śaivism and Sāṅkhya/Yoga. 
57 See the discussion in Brunner, Analyse du Suprabhedāgama , 53: »quand il [i.e. the ātman ] pénètre dans le ventre 
de la māyā et en même temps rencontre (mais comment?) karman , on le qualifie de sakala […]; śuddha , il devient 
ce qu’il a toujours été en essence, pur et semblable a Śiva: c’est l’état de pureté totale, śuddha avasthā .« See also the 
scheme in Davis, Ritual , 26. 
58 Goodall, Hindu Scriptures , 345 fn. 15.
59 Manovijñāna  is not listed in OJED, which, on the other hand, lists manovijñā (1105) and hesitantly glosses it as 
»knowing the mind, versed in spiritual things?«
60 See Acri, Re-configuration.Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 20] ---
232
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240232
Case Study V: The Bhuvanakośa
The Bhuvanakośa (The Storehouse of Worlds ) is a Śaiva text of the tutur  genre. This tex -
tual source of uncertain dating, probably compiled in different stages, has come down to 
us through Balinese palm-leaf manuscripts. Comprising about five hundred Sanskrit ślokas 
accompanied by translations, paraphrases, and/or commentaries in Old Javanese, the Bhuva -
nakośa is the longest scripture of the tutur  class. A common opinion among Balinese and early 
Western scholars is that the Bhuvanakośa is an early text – probably one of the earliest of the 
tutur  genre. While its formal organization in Sanskrit-Old Javanese translation dyads instead 
of Old Javanese prose (whether interspersed with Sanskrit ślokas or not) would suggest that 
this is the case, one can never be sure: witness, for instance, the bulky tutur  Śivāgama , which 
is organized in just the same way, and yet was composed by Ida Pedanda Made Sidemen in the 
first half of the twentieth century. What is important to stress here is that the Bhuvanakośa  is 
a heterogeneous and conglomerative source, formed by at least two textual units that might 
have been at some point in time (parts of) distinct texts, namely the Brahmarahasya(śāstra)  
(chapters 1-5), and the Jñānasaṅkṣepa /Siddhāntaśāstra /Jñānasiddhānta (chapters 6 to 11). 
The latter chapters are characterized by a remarkable intertextuality with the Jñānasiddhānta  
discussed in the previous section, which has also been preserved uniquely in Balinese manu -
scripts, and which shares several Sanskrit verses and similar – yet not identical – paraphrases.
Although the Bhuvanakośa documents a form of Śaivism that seems to be related to that 
of texts of the tattva  genre transmitted in Java and or Bali, such as the Dharma Pātañjala , the 
Vr̥haspatitattva , and the Tattvajñāna , the text focuses more on yoga and mantric mysticism 
than metaphysics, and would seem to betray a derivation (or influence) from a different South 
Asian prototypical tradition.61 The Śaiva doctrine shares with the Bhuvanakośa several archa -
ic elements, but some sections of the text present Vedāntic analogies that are found in the 
Upaniṣads, as well as in Vedānta-influenced non-dualistic South Indian Saiddhāntika texts. 
Just in the case of the  Jñānasiddhānta , this suggests that the text may be the product of a rela -
tively late Javano-Balinese milieu that appropriated and restated earlier Sanskrit(ic) material, 
or even composed the Sanskrit verses locally.62 Below we quote and analyse two passages that 
illustrate the different forms of vyākhyā  textual organization employed by this text.
61 In this respect, one also notes a non-dualistic flavour of many of its theologemes and the use of a Vedāntic termi -
nology, which is a trait of relatively late (post tenth-century) Śaiva texts composed or transmitted in South India. 
The text may have preserved ancient doctrines that seem to me to be derived by the Sanskrit Upaniṣadic corpus, 
in particular the Śvetāśvatara – the earliest theistic/Śaiva Upaniṣad (whose most recent textual strand might go 
back to the second or third century CE). But the »philosophical« section of the text, from Chapter 2 to Chapter 4, 
shares several doctrinal elements in common with the systematic writings of the tattva  genre.
62 Indeed, it is entirely possible that the majority of the ślokas  of the text were actually composed in Java or Bali, for 
they are characterized by remarkably non-standard features, metrical oddities, and (very rarely) even contamina -
tions from Old Javanese. Furthermore, virtually none of them has been traced back to Indian texts so far.Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 21] ---
233
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240233
Chapter 7.23:
sakāro bhagavān viṣṇuḥ / makāro bhagavān śivaḥ /
bhakāro bhagavān brahmā / ekatattvaṁ63 trayībhavet64 // 7.23
nāhan mataṅyan viśeṣa saṅ hyaṅ śivabhasma / saṅ hyaṅ trisamaya hana riṅ bhasma / 
bhaṭāra viṣṇu sira sakāra / bhaṭāra śiva sira makāra / bhaṭāra brahmā sira bhakāra / nā 
ta lvirnirān tiga dadi eka //
The Lord Viṣṇu is the  SA, Lord Śiva is the MA, Lord Brahmā is the BHA. One reality 
becomes threefold .
Such is the reason why the holy ashes of Śiva are special. The reverend Trisamaya65 
is in the ashes. The Lord Viṣṇu, he is the SA. The Lord Śiva, he is the MA. The Lord 
Brahmā, he is the BHA. Thus is their nature as the three become one.
In this translation dyad, the Old Javanese glosses all the elements of the Sanskrit verse, 
and at the same time re-contextualizes them into a Balinese framework of speculation re -
volving around the concept of trisamaya (»the Union of the Three [Gods]«), whereby the 
three syllables of the word bhasma are connected with the deities of the Trisamaya/Trimūrti, 
and a ritual praxis called śivabhasma (»The Ashes of Śiva«), which is the main topic of the 
chapter. The Sanskrit cvi-verbal compound trayī-bhavet is analysed by the commentator as 
two separate words, trayī being the subject (as if it were trayaḥ , »triad«) and ekatattvaṁ 
the object, resulting in an inverted sequence (i.e. three becoming one rather than one reality 
becoming threefold, as in the Sanskrit).66
63 Em.; ekatattva  Leiden Cod. Or. 5022, IDGC.
64 Em.; trayibhavet Leiden Cod. Or. 5022, IDGC.
65 OJED, 2040: »(›the meeting of three‹?) name of the trinity Brahmā, Wiṣṇu, Śiwa«.
66 Alternatively, trayi could be a corruption of trayaṁ (however, cf. the similar construction eko eva trayībhavet  in 
Bhuvanakośa 3.74d).Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 22] ---
234
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240234
Chapter 8.25:
devadaityamanuṣyāṇām / mudrārccaṇavidhikramāt / kunaṅ ikaṅ mudrā / mvaṅ arc-
caṇa / saha vidhikrama / deva / daitya /67 manuṣya / ya ta phalanya / homabhasman 
tathā mohaṁ / kunaṅ ikaṅ vvaṅ mahoma / mabhasma / yan tar vruh riṅ śaivasiddhān -
tajñāna68 / niyata moha / ṅa / hūṁdhrūtkāram idaṁ mantraṁ  / ikaṅ mantra hūṁdhrūt -
kāra / sakale na tu niṣkalam  / riṅ sakala ikā / kunaṅ ikaṅ niṣkala / tan maṅkana / 
etat sarvvaṁ mahādevi69 / ikā ta kabeh bhaṭārī / yo jñātvā svarggadaṁ mohāt  / yan 
saṅ sādhaka karaktaniṅ mudrārccaṇa / mvaṅ mantravidhikrama / ya ta tumәmuṅ 
svarggaphala sira / makahīṅaniṅ svargga sira / saka ri puṅguṅnira riṅ niṣkalajñāna 
ikā /  mama māyāvimohitaḥ70 / ikā taṅ vvaṅ maṅkana / kna deniṅ bañcanaṅku ikā /  
mudrārccaṇavidhiṅ kuryāt / kunaṅ kagavayanikaṅ mudrārccaṇa / mvaṅ vidhikrama71 
/ argaḍaḥ72 mokṣakāṅkṣiṇaḥ73 / yekā vaṅklaṅ saṅ mahyun iṅ kamokṣan // 
By [following ] the right order of the prescribed regimen, worship, and gestures [one will 
be reincarnated ] among gods, demons, and human beings . The fruit of gestures and 
worship, together with the right order of the prescribed regimen ( vidhikrama ), is [re -
incarnation as] gods, demons, and human beings. Similarly, the fire-ritual and ashes 
[lead] to delusion . The man who performs the fire-ritual and uses ashes, if he does not 
know the doctrine of the Śaivasiddhānta, is called a »deluded one« indeed. This man -
tra hūṁdhrūtkāram . The mantra hūṁdhrūtkāram . [Is] in the realm of form, but not the 
formless . It is within the realm of form. However, the formless is not so. 
All this, o Great Goddess . All this, o Goddess. Which bestows heaven, he who knows it 
because of delusion . If the practitioner is engrossed in gestures and worship, as well as 
mantras and the right order of the prescribed regimen, he obtains the fruit of heaven. 
He has heaven as his limit because of his ignorance about the formless gnosis. He is 
beguiled by my magical power.  This kind of man, he is struck by my beguilement. To 
perform gestures, worship, and the prescribed regimen – The performance of gestures, 
worship, and the right order of the prescribed regimen – is an impediment for one 
desiring deliverance .74 That would be an impediment for he who desires deliverance.75 
This passage documents a case of vyākhyā style inserting the Sanskrit directly within the 
Old Javanese exegesis. The text advances a critique, from a gnostic (Mantramārga) point of 
view, to the outer-oriented forms of worship associated with Atimārga Śaivism. Hūṁdhrūt -
kāram may represent either a local development or a »corruption« of the sound huḍḍuṅ /
huḍḍuk  (huḍḍukkāra ) proffered by the Pāśupatas in the course of their ascetic practice. Also 
remarkable is the usage of the Sanskrit argala (=argaḍa ) in the sense of »impediment«. One 
67 Em.; vidhikrama  / daitya  / Leiden Cod. Or. 5022, IDGC.
68 Em.; śivasiddhāntajñāna  Leiden Cod. Or. 5022, IDGC.
69 Leiden Cod. Or. 5022; mahādevī  IDGC.
70 Em.; māyavimohitaḥ  Leiden Cod. Or. 5022, IDGC.
71 Em.; vidhikarmmā Leiden Cod. Or. 5022, IDGC.
72 Em.; arghaḍa  Leiden Cod. Or. 5022, IDGC.
73 Em.; mokṣakaṁkṣiṇaḥ Leiden Cod. Or. 5022, IDGC.
74 MW glosses argala  (= argaḍa ) as »a wooden bolt or pin for fastening a door or the cover of a vessel; a bar, check, 
impediment«; compare sārgala »obstructed, impeded, prevented«.
75 We accept OJED’s (p. 2197) unattested/reconstructed root vaṅkәl * as the basis of amaṅkәl (1) »to get stuck (in 
the throat, etc.);« (2) »unwilling, recalcitrant, savage (elephant).« Thus, the substantive (+ irrealis) vaṅkәla  seems 
compatible with the meaning of the Sanskrit argaḍa.Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 23] ---
235
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240235
could be tempted to take argaḍa not as a separate word but as a compound that would end 
with mokṣakāṅkṣiṇaḥ (understood as an irregular - a stem in the nominative instead of an - in 
stem in the genitive), therefore argaḍamokṣakāṅkṣiṇaḥ might have been intended as meaning 
»one who desires to be free from an impediment«. But mokṣakāṅkṣin is a cliché in tantric 
literature, meaning »one desiring release«, and the internal doctrinal and logical coherence 
of the passage requires the interpretation of argaḍa as an »impediment« (i.e., gestures, etc.) 
holding back the practitioner desiring release. This suggests that the Sanskrit is either a de -
contextualized quotation from a South Asian text, or the product of a Javano-Balinese milieu.
Conclusion
In examples from the Amaramālā , SHKM, Vr̥haspatitattva, Jñānasiddhānta , and Bhuva -
nakośa we have observed the use of a vyākhyā model in translation and a »dyadic« mode 
of composition based on the juxtaposition of Sanskrit verses and their Old Javanese glosses. 
We have further seen that in the dyadic pattern there is a development from an earlier phase 
when the glosses align closely with the original to one that allows for an increasingly more 
flexible approach to the contents of the glosses. In the Vr̥haspatitattva this tendency is so 
pronounced that the Sanskrit verses in many cases do no more than launch an extended 
doctrinal passage. 
Further studies of the dyadic form have shown that it was used as a text-building stra -
tegy in the Old Javanese parva literature, but was not limited to it: later texts in the  tutur 
traditions once popular in Sunda, Java, and Bali (and still popular in Bali) show us that the 
structuring of larger stretches of discourse in terms of »translation dyads« continued to play 
a major role in text-building, while the Sanskrit-Old Javanese vyākhyā format for glossing 
at the phrase and clause levels lost none of its usefulness in the field of doctrinal exposition. 
Metaphysical texts from the tutur tradition like the Gaṇapatitattva, (parts of) which bear cle -
ar signs of late composition, as well as works devoted to ethics and the art of polity ( Nītisāra, 
Ślokāntara, Vratiśāsana , etc.) are among the many texts organized along these familiar lines. 
One contribution that this study may have to make is the elaboration of a taxonomy, and 
perhaps even the opening up of the possibility of a rough chronology for the development 
of the prose traditions in Old Javanese based on several stages in the use of text-building 
elements, which we believe ultimately owe their origin to the bilingual pedagogy of religious 
institutions of Central Java, c. 732-928 CE. While a methodology that pays close attention 
to formal features of text-building may never be able to provide us with a means for making 
a completely accurate analysis of the textual chronology of the Javano-Balinese tradition, it 
may provide us with a metric that can be used alongside other methods of textual analysis to 
give us a clearer picture of the development of Old Javanese letters. Given that caveat, we will 
propose here four modes or stages (not necessarily occurring in strictly chronological order) 
in the development of Old Javanese text-building strategies that appear to align with textual 
sources from the didactic and prose traditions focused on in this study:Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 24] ---
236
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240236
• A first mode – probably the earliest – where the vyākhyā  model of translation and 
a dyadic form of text-building prevails. This stage, represented by the Amaramālā , 
bespeaks a pedagogy that recapitulates the basic style of glossing known from Indian 
forms of the commentary, but combined with the element of translation that facilitat -
ed a »connecting literature«.
• A second mode, illustrated by the SHKM, where vyākhyā translations and a dyadic 
form of text-building are dominant, but Old Javanese passages elaborating on the 
śloka include expansions that bring in materials from local perspectives, at the same 
time demonstrating the ability of the composers to fashion well-formed Sanskrit 
compounds. 
• A third mode where dyadic composition and the vyākhyā format of translation are 
still prominent, but Old Javanese glosses on Sanskrit verses often develop lengthy 
doctrinal expositions that move far beyond an exegesis on the meaning of the śloka . 
While simpler translation dyads are found in the Vr̥haspatitattva, many run to ex -
traordinary length.
• A fourth mode, not examined in this chapter, where the śloka-vyākhyā format and 
»translation dyads« have been adopted for the needs of prose works like the parva  
literature and Tantri Kāmandaka. 
From this study we can conclude that the apparent lack in the archipelago of commen -
tarial tradition parallel to that of South Asia reveals to us not the absence of a tradition of 
commentary, but exactly the opposite: the norms of the South Asian commentary were so 
deeply embedded in the pedagogy of religious institutions that they left indelible traces on 
all that was to follow. 
We would like to conclude this essay with some theoretical reflections on the nature of the 
texts discussed here in the cadre of Western ideas of translation, paraphrase, and commentary, 
as well as the methodology of philological research. Recent philological work on Sanskrit 
and vernacular languages of South and Southeast Asia has shown an increasing interest 
in the reception of texts. Indic texts were historically malleable and were reinterpreted by 
their audiences in different geographical contexts and epochs, all the more so in Java and 
Bali, where the textual tradition was considerably open to creative reuse rather than faithful 
reproduction of a canonical prototype. In the case of the Old Javanese textual tradition and its 
continuation in Bali, one may say that local authors and copyists were not moved by the intent 
to faithfully translate the Sanskrit sources and interpret them in a manner that is coherent 
with those elaborated within the prototypical religio-philosophical traditions they stem from; 
rather, Sanskrit materials – often fragmentary, and perhaps composed centuries before – in 
the Indian subcontinent were de-contextualized and interpreted in the light of local beliefs 
and practices. That is to say, an Indic textual tradition transmitted to Southeast Asia was 
transformed and adapted into contextually appropriate and meaningful styles and genres.
Thus, Old Javanese texts can be regarded as reflecting a conversation between »Indic« 
and »vernacular« elements. Old Javanese literature was far from being a derivative, trans -
lation-oriented endeavour, but from its very inception showed the traits of originality and 
synthesis, implying a conscious selection of essential elements that resonated within the 
local culture and the creation of a new whole that met the demands of the local audiences. 
These »wholes« inevitably varied across time, local contexts characterized by different his -
tories of reception, socio-cultural factors, and religious contingencies, as well as individual 
agents, although one notes a remarkable resilience of the pedagogical and formal features Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 25] ---
237
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240237
characterizing the genres discussed in this article. Texts composed (or recompiled) in Bali 
after the fifteenth century carried meanings that were quite different from those they had 
in their original milieu, possibly in pre-tenth-century Central Java, and Sanskrit materials 
were understood, appropriated, and restated in Old Javanese in ways that would often be at 
odds with both a Western philological and a South Asian »traditional«/śāstric understanding. 
Inevitably, this local »restating« of Sanskritic religious texts and traditions involves a certain 
amount of »falsification« to create new meanings in context. While this is a totally legitimate 
process, philology should not shy away from identifying and explaining any textual errors, 
contaminations or variants alongside the local interpretations and restatements, which will, 
all together, contribute to our better understanding of Balinese linguistic, orthographic, lex -
ical, grammatical, narrative, and conceptual understandings (and misunderstandings) and 
practices in their historical dimension.76 
Acknowledgements
Andrea Acri would like to acknowledge that research represented in parts of this work was con -
ducted within the programme »Scripta-PSL. Histoire et pratiques de l’écrit« (principal inves -
tigators: Andrea Acri, EPHE, PSL and Arlo Griffiths, EFEO, PSL), »Investissements d’Avenir« 
launched by the French Government and implemented by ANR (ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL).
76 While making a case in favour of a philology that is more concerned with reception and variance than establishing 
»original« texts, Pollock (Philology, 406) still advocates for »a scale of judgment in reading tradition«, according 
to which »not all interpretations are worthy of philological attention to the same degree. People in a tradition 
inherit bad textual variants, or make simple grammatical mistakes, and these misunderstandings, unless they are 
productive of interpretation, carry a dimension of historical consciousness lower on the philological scale of value 
than others. In other words, not all errors […] are equal: some falsehoods (or what appear to be falsehoods) carry 
deeper truths than others, especially in their historical effectivity«.Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 26] ---
238
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240238
References
 
Abbreviations 
MW = Monier Williams’ Sanskrit-English Dictionary (Monier-Williams, 1899)
OJED = Old Javanese-English Dictionary (Zoetmulder and Robson, 1982)
SHKM = Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Mantranaya
WMP = Western Malayo-Polynesian
Manuscript sources
Amaramālā  (within the Candrakiraṇa ), palm-leaf ms. ( gebang ) L631, Perpustakaan Nasional 
Republik Indonesia.
Bhuvanakośa , (1) palm-leaf ms. ( lontar ) Cod. Or. 5022, Leiden University Library; (2) palm-
leaf ms. ( lontar ) IDGC, private collection of Ida Dewa Gede Catra, Amlapura, Karangas -
em, Bali.
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Mantranaya , palm-leaf ms. ( lontar ) Cod. Or. 5068, Leiden Univer -
sity Library.
Aichele, Walter, Vergessene Metaphoren als Kriterien der Datierung des altjavanishen 
Rāmāyaṇa,  Oriens Extremus: Zeitschrift für Sprach, Kunst und Kultur der Länder des 
Fernen Ostens 16 (1969) 127-166.
Acri, Andrea,  Dharma Pātañjala: A Śaiva Scripture from Ancient Java Studied in the Light of 
Related Old Javanese and Sanskrit Texts (second edition) (New Delhi, 2017).
Acri, Andrea (ed.), Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, 
Texts, Icons (Singapore, 2016).
Acri, Andrea, On birds, ascetics, and kings in Central Java: Rāmāyaṇa Kakawin , 24.96-126 
and 25, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 166 (2010) 475-506.
Acri, Andrea, Re-configuration of divinity in Old Javanese Śaiva texts from the Indonesian 
Archipelago (with special reference to Jñānasiddhānta, chapter 19), in: s.n., Travaux de 
Symposium International: Le Livre. La Roumanie. L’Europe. Troisième édition, Tome III 
(Bucharest, 2011) 546-565.
Acri, Andrea, The Sanskrit-Old Javanese tutur  literature from Bali: The textual basis of 
Śaivism in ancient Indonesia, Rivista di Studi Sudasiatici 1 (2006) 107-137.
Acri, Andrea, The Vaimala sect of the Pāśupatas: New data from Old Javanese sources, Tantric 
Studies 1 (2008) 193-208.
Braginsky, Vladimir, The System of Classical Malay Literature (Leiden, 1993).
Brunner, Hélène, Analyse du Kiraṇāgama, Journal Asiatique 253 (1965) 309-328.
Brunner, Hélène, Analyse du Suprabhedāgama, Journal Asiatique  255 (1967) 31-60.
Davis, Richard H., Ritual in an Oscillating Universe: Worshiping Śiva in Medieval India , 
(Princeton, 1991).
Goodall, Dominic, Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary on the Kiraṇatantra, Vol. 1: Chapters 
1-6 (Pondicherry, 1998).
Goodall, Dominic (ed.) Hindu Scriptures (Los Angeles, 1996).
Goris, Rulof, Bijdragen tot de Kennis der Oud-Javaansche en Balineesche Theologie (Leiden, 
1926).Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 27] ---
239
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240239
Dīpaṅkarabhadra,  Guhyasamājamaṇḍalavidhi , ed. Sabine Klein-Schwind, rev. H. Isaacson 
(based on ms. Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen, Cod. ms. 
sanscr. 257), (2008). e-text downloaded from  https://www.tantric-studies.uni-hamburg.
de/research/e-texts/buddhist-e-texts/gusamavi.txt (accessed May 2020)
Hevajrasekaprakriyā , ed. Louis Finot, Manuscripts sanskrits de sādhana ’s retrouvés en Chine, 
Journal Asiatique 225 (1934) 1-85.
Hooykaas, Christiaan, Śaiva Siddhānta in Java and Bali: Some remarks on its recent study, 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 118 (1962) 309-327.
Hunter, Thomas M., Bahasa Sanskerta di Nusantara: terjemahan, pemribumian, dan iden -
titas antardaerah, in: Henri Chambert-Loir (ed.), Sejarah Terjemahan di Indonesia dan 
Malaysia (Jakarta, 2009) 23-47.
Hunter, Thomas M., The Bhagavad-Gītā sections of the Old Javanese Bhīṣmaparwa , 
text-building and the formation of the state in pre-modern Indonesia, in: Shyam Saran 
(ed.), Cultural and Civilisational Links between India and Southeast Asia: Historical and 
Contemporary Dimensions (Singapore, 2018) 193-207.
Hunter, Thomas M.,  The Impact of Indian Forms of the Commentary on Text-building Strat -
egies in Old Javanese . Unpublished seminar paper (Pondicherry, 2005).
Hunter, Thomas M., Translation in a world of diglossia, in: Jan van der Putten and Ronit 
Ricci (eds.), Translation in Asia: Theories, Practices, Histories (Manchester, 2011) 9-26.
Hunter, Thomas M., Yati, a structural principle in Old Javanese versification, Indo-Iranian 
Journal 52 (2009) 1-52. 
Ishii, Kazuko, The correlation of verses of the Sang Hyang Kamahāyānan Mantranaya with 
Vajrabodhi’s Jāpasūtra, Area and Culture Studies 44 (1992) 225-236. 
Jordaan, Roy E. and Brian E. Colless, The Mahārājas of the Isles, the Śailendra and the prob -
lem of Śrīwijaya (Leiden, 2009). 
de Jong, Jan Willem, Notes on the sources and the text of the Sang Hyang Kamahāyanan 
Mantranaya, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde  136 (1974) 619-636.
Kandahjaya, Hudaya, Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan , Borobudur and the origins of Esoteric 
Buddhism in Indonesia, in: Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime 
Asia (Singapore, 2014) 67-112.
Kats, J., Sang Hyang Kamahāyānikan: Oud-Javaansche tekst met inleiding, vertaling en aan -
teekeningen (The Hague, 1910).
Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā , ed. Ryugen Tanemura, E-text based on a preliminary edition of the 
Kriyāsaṃgrahapañjikā , Chapter 6. Unpublished PhD thesis (University of Oxford). 
Krom, Nicolaas J., Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis (The Hague, 1926).
Lokesh Chandra, Chanda-Karaṇa: The art of writing poetry, in: Lokesh Chandra, Cultural 
Horizons of India, Vol. 6: Studies in Tantra and Buddhism, Art and Archaeology, Language 
and Literature (New Delhi, 1997).
Lokesh Chandra, Sanskrit studies in classical Indonesia, in: Lokesh Chandra (ed.), Cultural 
Horizons of India, Volume 4: Studies in Tantra and Buddhism, Art and Archaeology, Lan -
guage and Literature  (New Delhi, 1995) 1-9. 
Miksic, John, Borobudur: Golden Tales of the Buddhas (London, 1990).
Monier-Williams, Monier, Sanskrit-English Dictionary (Oxford, 1899).
Nihom, Max, Studies in Indo-Indonesian Tantrism: The Kuñjarakarṇadharmakathana and 
the Yogatantra  (Vienna, 1994).
Oglobin, Alexander K., Irrealis in Old Javanese . Unpublished seminar paper (Depok, 2005).Translation as Commentary

--- [Page 28] ---
240
medieval worlds  • No. 11 • 2020 • 213-240240
Pollock, Sheldon, The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Pow -
er in Premodern India (Berkeley, 2006).
Pollock, Sheldon, Philology in three dimensions, Postmedieval: A Journal of Medieval Cultur -
al Studies 5/4 (2014) 398-413. 
Pollock, Sheldon, The Sanskrit cosmopolis, 300-1300 CE: Transculturation, vernaculariza -
tion, and the question of ideology, in: Jan E. M. Houben (ed.), Ideology and Status of 
Sanskrit: Contributions to the History of the Sanskrit Language (Leiden, 1996) 197-248.
Radicchi, Anna, More on the Kārakasaṃgraha , a Sanskrit grammatical text from Bali, in: Jan 
E. M. Houben (ed.), Ideology and Status of Sanskrit: Contributions to the History of the 
Sanskrit Language (Leiden, 1996) 289-306.
Raj Pant, Mahesh, Jațarūpa’s Commentary on the Amarakośa, Parts 1 and 2 (New Delhi, 
2000). 
Sarkar, Himamsu Bhushan, Corpus of the Inscriptions of Java (Corpus Inscriptionum Javan -
icarum), up to 928 A.D. (Calcutta, 1971).
Sarvabuddhasamāyoga: Śrīsarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvaranāmatantram (1-8), ed. 
Ṭhākurasena Negī, Dhīḥ: Journal of Rare Buddhist Texts Research Project 58 (2018) 141-
201.
Sudarshana Devi, Wṛhaspati-tattwa, an Old Javanese Philosophical Text (New Delhi, 1957).
Soebadio, Haryati, Jñānasiddhānta: Secret Lore of the Balinese Śaiva Priest (The Hague, 
1971).
Speyer, Jacob S., Ein altjavanischer mahāyānistischer Katechismus , Zeitschrift der Deutschen 
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 67 (1913) 347-362.
Wulff, Kurt S., Sang Hyang Kamahāyānan Mantrānaya: Ansprache bei der Weihe buddhis -
tischer Mönche aus dem altjavanischen übersetzt und sprachlich erläutert (Copenhagen, 
1935). 
Zieseniss, Alexander, Studien zur Geschichte des Śivaismus: Die Śaiva-Systematik des 
Vṛhaspatitattva (New Delhi, 1958).
Zoetmulder, Petrus J., Kalangwan: A Survey of Old Javanese Literature (The Hague, 1974).
Zoetmulder, Petrus J. and Stuart O. Robson, Old Javanese-English Dictionary (The Hague, 
1982). Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter

--- [Page 29] ---
No. 11, 2020medieval worlds
comparative & interdisciplinary studies
medieval worlds
comparative & interdisciplinary studies

--- [Page 30] ---
Table of Contents
Ideologies of Translation, I
Instead of an Introduction: Medieval Europe Translated
Pavlína Rychterová 
Technologies of Translation
The Byzantine Imperial Chancery and its Language Policy from Justin II to Leo III 
(Sixth-Eighth Centuries): From Latin to Greek
Christian Gastgeber
Translation as Interpretation: Translating Galen’s Polysemous Term Physis  into Arabic
Elvira Wakelnig
Between Languages, Genres and Cultures: Diego Collado’s Linguistic Works
Jan Odstrčilík
Politics of Translation
The Latin Talmud and the Extension of Papal Jurisdiction over Jews
Alexander Fidora
»For they did not change their language« (MekhY Pischa 5): 
On the Early Medieval Literary Rehebraicisation of Jewish Culture
Constanza Cordoni
Cultures of Translation
The Tibetan Translation of the Indian Buddhist Epistemological Corpus
Pascale Hugon
Translation as Commentary in the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Didactic 
and Religious Literature from Java and Bali
Andrea Acri and Thomas M. Hunter
Project Report
An Interim Report on the Editorial and Analytical Work of the AnonymClassic Project
Beatrice Gruendler, Jan J. van Ginkel, Rima Redwan, Khouloud Khalfallah, Isabel Toral, 
Johannes Stephan, Matthew L. Keegan, Theodore S. Beers, Mahmoud Kozae, Marwa M. 
Ahmed
eISSN-Nr. 2412-3196
DOI 10.1553/medievalworlds_no11_2020s1 medieval worlds • No. 11 • 2020 • 12
17
60
117
152
165
187
213
241