--- [Page 1] ---
Academic Editor: Jeffery D. Long
Received: 28 February 2025
Revised: 1 May 2025
Accepted: 9 May 2025
Published: 23 May 2025
Citation: Andhifani, Wahyu Rizky,
Hedwi Prihatmoko, Andrea Acri,
Arlo Griffiths, Mathilde Mechling,
and Gregory Sattler. 2025. Maritime
Links Between China, Sumatra, the
Malay Peninsula, and Buddhist
Monasteries in India (c. 11th–12th
Centuries) in the Light of Two
Fragmentary Inscribed Strips of
Copper from Muara Jambi. Religions
16: 664. https://doi.org/10.3390/
rel16060664
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).Article
Maritime Links Between China, Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula,
and Buddhist Monasteries in India (c. 11th–12th Centuries) in
the Light of Two Fragmentary Inscribed Strips of Copper from
Muara Jambi
Wahyu Rizky Andhifani1, Hedwi Prihatmoko1, Andrea Acri2,3,*, Arlo Griffiths4,5, Mathilde Mechling2,3
and Gregory Sattler6
1National Research and Innovation Agency (BRIN), University of Indonesia, Jakarta 10340, Indonesia;
wrandhifani.1981@gmail.com (W.R.A.); hedwi.prihatmoko@gmail.com (H.P.)
2École Pratique des Hautes Études, PSL University (EPHE, PSL), 75014 Paris, France;
mathilde.mechling@ephe.psl.eu
3Groupe de Recherches en Études Indiennes (GREI), 93322 Aubervilliers, France
4École Française d’Extr ême‑Orient, 75116 Paris, France; arlo.griffiths@efeo.net
5Centre Asie du Sud‑Est (CASE), 93322 Aubervilliers, France
6History Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; gsattler@ucla.edu
*Correspondence: andrea.acri@ephe.psl.eu
Abstract: This article explores the maritime connections relating to Buddhism and diplo‑
macy between polities in Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula, the Indian subcontinent, and
China from the beginning of the 11th century up to the 12th century CE. It focuses on new
epigraphic evidence from Muara Jambi in the form of two inscribed strips of copper men‑
tioning the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra, a monastery funded by the king of Śrīvijaya in Naga‑
pattinam (South India), and the Bālādityavihāra, probably located in Nālandā (Northeast‑
ern India). These new findings are compared to archaeological and textual materials from
elsewhere in the Buddhist world that cast light on the web of transregional connections
between Nusantara, China, and India in the early centuries of the second millennium.
Keywords: temples; diplomacy; South Asia; Southeast Asia; China; Sumatra; Muara
Jambi; Nagapattinam; Nālandā; Old Malay
1. Introduction
Maritime connections relating to Buddhism—or, more generally, “temple diplo‑
macy”1—between polities in Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula, South India, and China
from the beginning of the 11th century up to the 12th century CE have been discussed by
scholars since the early 20th century, mainly on the basis of epigraphic and textual sources
in Sanskrit, Tamil, Tibetan, Chinese, and Arabic. Given the dearth of primary sources from
the Buddhist site of Muara Jambi (Sumatra, Indonesia) and the Malay Peninsula in the pe‑
riod under discussion,2any new local sources are welcome, all the more so if they mention
the names of persons or institutions known so far only from non‑local sources. This article
focuses on one such new source, namely a pair of fragmentary inscriptions from Muara
Jambi, which are here translated for the first time and interpreted as two complementary
fragments of distinct copies of a single text. Our discussion presents this new source in
the light of contemporary ones from other parts of the Buddhist world with which Muara
Jambi had close connections.
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 https://doi.org/10.3390/rel16060664

--- [Page 2] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 2 of 35
The two inscription fragments take the form of small strips of copper and were re‑
portedly recovered from the bed of the Batanghari River near the Muara Jambi temple com‑
plex. They are now kept, respectively, at the Culture Conservation Bureau3and at Yayasan
Rumah Menapo,4both in the provincial capital of Jambi. Both artifacts have been curso‑
rily described and photographically reproduced for the first time in a catalogue dealing
mainly with inscribed tin foils from Sumatra by Tejowasono et al. (2019 , pp. 13, 49), while
the lines of the Old Malay text engraved on them have been transliterated in a publication
on inscriptions from the Śrīvijaya polity ( Andhifani and Tedjowasono 2021 ).5If these lines
of text are confirmed to be genuine, then they will constitute a new piece of historical evi‑
dence on the late‑10th–early 11th‑century Śailendra King Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman, who is known
from inscriptions from the Cōl a domains in South India mentioning him as father of King
Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman (as well as in Tibetan and Chinese sources), and two Buddhist
monasteries, which are situated, respectively, at Nagapattinam (Nākappat
˙t
˙inam) in South
India and Nālandā in Northeast India, namely the eponymous Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra and
the Bālādityavihāra, named after Gupta King Bālāditya.
Since past historiography has tended to associate Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman with either
Kedah in the Malay Peninsula (present‑day Malaysia) or Palembang (present‑day Indone‑
sia), him being mentioned in source material recovered from Jambi not only adds to the
scant epigraphical evidence of this king, but it also throws new light on the historical and
geographical context of the polity in those areas (which have been labeled as “Śrīvijaya”
by previous scholarship as well as non‑indigenous sources, though we still lack any local
source using that name in this period) and its links with South India in the framework of
temple diplomacy. This complements the evidence available so far of (Buddhist) transre‑
gional diplomatic networks linking South India, polities in the Malay Peninsula and Suma‑
tra, and China. However, since the new source material was not derived from scientific
excavations and there is no information other than hearsay about the circumstances of its
recovery, concerns about authenticity must be raised. This topic is revisited in the conclu‑
sion, where relevant parallels with pointillistic cold‑working and the possibility of forgery
are explored further. On the basis of the palaeographic and linguistic features of the two
inscription fragments, as well as of our visual inspection of the artifacts, we conclude that
the documents must be authentic.
2. Description of the Artifacts
On 10 and 11 June 2024, a team constituted by Andrea Acri, Hedwi Prihatmoko,
Mathilde Mechling, Gregory Sattler, and Wahyu Rizky Andhifani visually inspected the
two inscription fragments (Figures 1and2), kept respectively at the BPK V (A) and Yayasan
Rumah Menopo (B) in Jambi, and took full photographic documentation. In the follow‑
ing subsections we describe the results of our examination of the physical objects bearing
the inscriptions.6
2.1. Strip Kept at BPK V Jambi
The first strip (A) is catalogued as “010, 01/BPCBJB/Cu/VIII/2019” in Tejowasono et al.
(2019 , p. 13). It is reproduced in recto and verso and described as being written in Old
Malay language and Old Sumatran script, and has having been recovered from the Batang‑
hari River. No classification of its contents is given the catalogue, and no portions of the
text are transcribed. No information on the archaeological context and circumstances of its
discovery are given either, probably because it was not recovered during an official archae‑
ological excavation but was purchased from a private individual. The artifact, most likely
made of fairly pure copper, as is the second artifact (B) presented below,7is a rectangular,
narrow‑shape strip (measuring 10.8 cm in length ×2.3 cm in height ×an estimated thick‑

--- [Page 3] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 3 of 35
ness of 0.1 cm)8with its left end narrower and pierced with a round hole. This may have
served for attaching the strip to another artifact. The right end of the strip shows traces
of tear and has visibly been cut off. Given the thinness of the strip, this could have been
achieved by repeatedly folding the artifact in half one way and then the other, possibly
after its discovery, as there would have been no reason for the strip to be folded during its
time of use.9The inscription it bears is incomplete due to the loss of a part of the support.
While the length of the original artifact is unknown, it seems likely that it would have been
roughly twice its current dimensions.
(a) 
 
(b) 
tt
tt
Figure 1. Recto (top, ( a)) and verso (bottom, ( b)) of strip A (Photos: Wahyu Rizky Andhifani).
The recto of the strip displays two lines of engraved text, the first one of which opens
with a spiral symbol (Figure 1, top). Instead of forming a continuous engraved line, as
is most common for inscriptions on metal in Southeast Asia, the characters ( aks
˙aras) have
been traced by small dots. Upon closer inspection with a magnifying glass, the “dots” were
observed to be V‑shaped. The “V” shape of the tool marks corresponds to the shape of a
burin, which left slightly raised edges along the engraved marks (Figure 3). The deep and
sharp V‑shaped tool marks suggest cold working in the metal after the manufacturing of
the strip. The engraved lines are straight, with regular intervals between the characters
(Figure 4). The tool marks have a consistent shape and depth.

--- [Page 4] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 4 of 35
tt
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
tt
 Figure 2. Recto (top, ( a)) and verso (bottom, ( b)) of strip B (Photos: Hedwi Prihatmoko).tt
ﬃ
tt
ﬀ
ṣ
 
Figure 3. Details of the recto of fragment A showing the V‑shape of the tool marks and their regularity
in space and depth (Photo: Wahyu Rizky Andhifani).tt
ﬃ
tt
ﬀ
ṣ
 
Figure 4. Details of the recto of fragment A showing the regularity of the V‑shaped tool marks and
characters (Photo: Hedwi Prihatmoko).

--- [Page 5] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 5 of 35
The single line engraved on the verso contrasts remarkably with the two lines on the
recto. The tool marks are irregular, the characters are not regularly spaced, and the in‑
scribed line is not straight (Figure 5). Some tool marks are very deep, while others are not
(Figures 5and6). The surface on this face is not smooth, presenting a great number of small
marks and scratches. The central part displays ripples—a feature that none of our photos
captures clearly—which might suggest that the artifact was cast, perhaps in an open, flat
mold (the ripples could be traces of the liquid metal as it cooled down and solidified).
However, it is also interesting that the recto surface is very smooth, with rounded edges
(Figures 3and 4), while the verso surface is rougher, and the edges are raised (Figure 5).
The verso also displays a line incised along the edge, but it does not seem to have been
engraved like the characters. The curled edge and the line running parallel to it are char‑
acteristics observed in hammered gold sheets cut to the desired shape with scissors or fine
shears ( Craddock 2009 , p. 375). Our copper strip was probably cut to the desired shape
using a similar technique, perhaps after hammering the copper into a thin sheet.
 
tt
tt
ṣ ṁ
ṅ
Figure 5. Details of the verso of fragment A with raised edges and an incised line particularly visible
along the bottom edge (Photo: Wahyu Rizky Andhifani). tt
 
tt
ṣ ṁ
ṅ
Figure 6. Details of Figure 5: the V‑shaped tool marks on the verso of inscription A are very light for
the first character, deeper for the following ones, and vary from being widely spaced to being more
closely set. Their length also varies; some are long, others are short.
2.2. Strip Kept at Yayasan Rumah Menapo, Jambi
The second strip (B) is catalogued as “045; 02/PADMA/Cu/VIII/2019” in Tejowasono
et al. (2019 , p. 49). It is reproduced in recto and verso and described as being made of
copper,10written in Old Malay language and Old Sumatran script, and recovered from the
Batanghari River. The measurements of this artifact are in the same order of magnitude
as the first (11 cm in length ×2.2 cm in height ×an estimated thickness of 1 mm). The
content is described as “mantra”, and the following transcription is given of the first few
and last characters:
… nmu ga saks
˙a da mcu o ˙m ra …
… ddhan m kara ( ˙na) la …

--- [Page 6] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 6 of 35
As with the first strip, no record about the archaeological context of its finding exists
for this one either. However, while in the village of Muara Jambi, we were able to speak
to the person—his identity remained undisclosed—who claims (accidentally) to have re‑
covered this inscription from the bed of the Batanghari River, right in front of the main
settlement, while extracting sand. According to him, it was found in an earthenware jar
with various objects in tin and copper, including ancient coins. This is in harmony with
the green corrosion marks described below, which could be the result of corrosion due to
contact between the strip and such objects.
The recto of the strip displays two lines of text, whose characters have been traced by
means of small, engraved dots (Figure 2). These dots are V‑shaped and have visibly been
made by means of a burin, as is also the case for strip A. Both inscribed lines on this face are
irregular. The characters are not set with regular spaces in between each (Figure 7). The
tool marks do not appear to be regular either, but it must be noted that observations on
this artifact were more difficult for several reasons. The surface displays deep horizontal
marks, which suggest that the strip has undergone treatment of corrosion with an abrasive
tool. Furthermore, dust remains encrusted in the tool marks, and chalk powder had previ‑
ously been rubbed on the surface to facilitate reading of the inscription. We removed the
chalk with a soft, non‑abrasive cotton cloth, as well as by blowing on the surface, but we
could not remove all chalk and dust with this method. Although this prevents a precise ex‑
amination of the engraving, our general impression is one of less regularity than the recto
of inscription A (Figure 1).tt
ﬃ
tt
 
ﬀ ﬀ
Figure 7. Detail of the recto of fragment B (Photo: Mathilde Mechling).
On the verso, there is one line of text that ends with a spiral symbol, probably mark‑
ing the end of the text in the same way that this symbol marks the opening of the text
on fragment A (Figure 8). However, near the broken lower left side there are also three
dots/tool marks, which could suggest the presence of a second line of text in the missing
portion of the strip. The surface on the verso is not smooth and shows slightly regular
bumps that could suggest that this artifact was shaped through the hammering technique.
This remains uncertain, as the surface is patinated, shows spots of green corrosion (likely
where the artifact touched another metal object), and shows scratches resulting from clean‑
ing with an abrasive tool. However, similarly to fragment A, but this time on the recto,
fragment B displays curled edges and a line running parallel to the edges, indicating that
it was cut to shape with scissors or shears, likely after being hammered (Figure 2, recto).
The left edge is also noteworthy, as it shows traces of tear where the artifact has broken
off, perhaps by being folded, while the lower left corner is cleanly cut off at an angle, in a
straight line, as if cut with a sharp tool.

--- [Page 7] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 7 of 35
 
ﬀ
āṅś ṇ฀ ̣ ā
ū ā śīāā ā ṇ ฀ ̣ ā ā
śī āā ā ṅ ā
ū฀ ̣āṇ ā ā
ā ā
śī ā ā śī āā
ā ā
ﬀ
ﬀ
Figure 8. Details of the verso of fragment B (Photo: Mathilde Mechling).
3. Text and Provisional Translation
Below, we offer a diplomatic transliteration of the text engraved on the two strips,
with the one facing the other. This transliteration is virtually identical to the one published
by Wahyu Rizki Andhifani and Hedwi Prihatmoko in Andhifani and Tedjowasono (2021 ,
pp. 64–66), except for the division of a few words. The + marks correspond to the spiral‑
shaped opening/closing symbols found at the start of the text on A and at its end on B.
A Bﬀ
 
āṅś ṇ฀ ̣ ā
ū ā śīāā ā ṇ ฀ ̣ ā ā
śī āā ā ṅ ā
ū฀ ̣āṇ ā ā
ā ā
śī ā ā śī āā
ā ā
ﬀ
ﬀ
ﬀ
 
āṅś ṇ฀ ̣ ā
ū ā śīāā ā ṇ ฀ ̣ ā ā
śī āā ā ṅ ā
ū฀ ̣āṇ ā ā
ā ā
śī ā ā śī āā
ā ā
ﬀ
ﬀ
Ar1. + kathora kā ˙nśa kan
˙d
˙a 1 | barisi
valānda …
Ar2. ndenan ·barkna pamūja ka bharāla
śrībā...Br1.…(lā)nda tāsak ·damcu khan
˙d
˙a 5
brātña kā 5 su 1
Br2. … (śrī)bālādityabihāra | d ˙nan·ka
bharālaﬀ
āṅś ṇ฀ ̣ ā
ū ā śīāā ā ṇ ฀ ̣ ā ā
śī āā ā ṅ ā
 
ū฀ ̣āṇ ā ā
ā ā
śī ā ā śī āā
ā ā
ﬀ
ﬀ
ﬀ
āṅś ṇ฀ ̣ ā
ū ā śīāā ā ṇ ฀ ̣ ā ā
śī āā ā ṅ ā
 
ū฀ ̣āṇ ā ā
ā ā
śī ā ā śī āā
ā ā
ﬀ
ﬀ
Av1.…lendracūd
˙āman
˙ivarmmabihāra … Bv1.… (bi)hāra +
The parallel arrangement above allows us to note that the last words preserved on
each of the three lines on strip A can be matched with the initial words on the correspond‑
ing lines of strip B, so much so that words preserved incompletely on the one can be con‑
fidently reconstructed by means of the other, as follows:
valānda—[valā]nda
śrī‑bā[lāditya]—śrī‑bālāditya
bihāra—(bi)hāra
The two strips seem to have slightly different dimensions and bear slightly overlap‑
ping texts. In combination with the technical differences observed above, these observa‑

--- [Page 8] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 8 of 35
tions prove that we are not dealing with two halves of one original strip. Initially, we sus‑
pected that either of the two strips could be a forgery that was created to match a genuine
one. However, the most plausible interpretation seems to be that we are dealing respec‑
tively with authentic artifacts, one being the left and the other the right half of two distinct
copper strips of similar size that bear a similar text. While it would be possible to imagine
a scenario whereby the two strips bore related but not identical texts, nothing stands in
the way of assuming that both strips originally contained exactly the same text. Although
it is admittedly a surprising coincidence that two complementary halves of distinct strips
engraved with an identical text would have been recovered in entirely uncontrolled ar‑
chaeological circumstances, this is the hypothesis that underlies the reconstructed textual
layout for both copies of the text that we now present in the Noto Sans Kawi font that
closely resembles the original script:tt
ṣ
āṅśṇḍ ā ā ṇḍ ā ā ā
ū ā śī āā ā ṅ ā śīś
ūḍāṇ ā
ṅś ā āṭ ṇ
Śī āā
ŚīŚ ū฀ ̣āṇ
ﬃ
ﬃ ā
ﬃ
ﬃ
The characters printed in red color are entirely lost only in the respective copy, and
those printed in blue are lost in both copies, meaning that we assume the two parts not to be
fully complementary, because we need to restore two aks
˙aras at the line transitions Ar1/Ar2,
Ar2/Av1, Br1/Br2, and Br2/Bv1. These restored characters are represented in square brack‑
ets in the conventional epigraphic edition of the combined texts that now follows, along
with a translation, while still leaving some problematic and untranslatable terms in italics.
Reconstruction
kathora kā ˙nśa kan
˙d
˙a 1 | barisi valānda tāsak ·damcu khan
˙d
˙a 5 brātña kā 5 su 1
[valā]ndenan ·barkna pamūja ka bharāla śrī‑bālāditya‑bihāra | d ˙nan·ka bharāla [śrī‑
śai]lendra‑cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmma‑bihāra.
Provisional Translation
1kathora ofka˙nśa, filled with 5 valanda tāsak damcu , weighing 5 kāt
˙i, 1suvarn
˙a.
These valanda are for worship to the Lord of the Śrī‑Bālāditya monastery and to
the Lord of the Śrī‑Śailendra‑Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman monastery.
4. Linguistic and Philological Commentary
Even a cursory glance at our edition of the text is sufficient to confirm the provisional
identification of the language by Tejowasono et al. (2019 ) as Old Malay (OM). Affixed
forms like bar‑isi and brāt‑ña are distinctive among the epigraphically attested early lan‑
guages of the Indonesian archipelago. On the corpus of OM documents known so far
(consisting of about 35 inscriptions and one manuscript), we refer to Griffiths (2018 ); for
further discussion, as well as a map showing the distribution of the other OM inscriptions
known so far, we refer to Clavé and Griffiths (2022 ). For studies of the linguistic features

--- [Page 9] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 9 of 35
of the forms of Malay found in this small corpus, we refer to the same publications, as well
asMahdi (2005 ,2015 ).
OM documents from diverse parts of the Malay world, covering a period from the
7th through the 14th centuries, reveal an orthographic pattern whereby vowels spelled
long are assumed to reflect stress on penultimate vowels in pronunciation (because vowel
length as such was not a phonemic feature of the language). This is observed in the present
text in the immediately transparent word brāt‑ña (Modern Malay berat‑nya ) “its/their
weight” and in the more challenging keyword valānda . The latter figures once before the
demonstrative inan to which it is joined in sandhi so that it appears as valāndenan .11An in‑
stance of sandhi that also touches on word formation is the form tāsak , which is not imme‑
diately recognizable from the perspective of Classical or Modern Malay (C/MM), that we
interpret as ta‑asak with a variant of the coincidental tar‑ prefix that normally corresponds
to C/MM ter‑.12
After those general remarks on spelling and grammar, we turn to a discussion of the
new lexical material roughly in the order of the words’ or word combinations’ appearance
in the text.
kathora kā ˙nśa—The second word, the precursor of both gangsa and kangsa in C/MM
and of Indian origin,13is also attested in the Tanjung Tanah manuscript where we read
(p. 22, lines 4–5): jaka bahu:ta ˙m mas·pirak·riti ra:ncu ˙m ka ˙mśa tambaga .Kozok (2015 , p. 77)
translates the whole passage as “if one owes a debt of gold, silver, brass, rancung , bronze,
copper”, interpreting ka˙mśa to mean bronze. By contrast, Mahdi (2015 , p. 203) translates
the list as “gold, silver, bronze, brass, copper”, taking riti‑rancung as a single expression
meaning bronze and assuming ka˙mśa to mean brass. The fact that this list of terms is
translated differently on different pages of the same book dedicated to the manuscript
illustrates the uncertainty inherent in interpreting premodern terms designating metals
and alloys. The problem of which Malay term corresponds to which copper‑based alloy
has been analyzed in Manguin (1976 , pp. 251–53), and he considers that C/MM kangsa
means “bronze”.14This has been observed likewise for the use of ka˙msain Cambodian in‑
scriptions of the same general period as our inscription.15Although dictionaries of Malay
tend to gloss gangsa and kangsa as “bell‑metal”, we interpret kā˙nśain our inscription to
mean “bronze”.
The word kathora , though apparently likewise of Indian origin,16is not known to us
in this precise form in any Indian source, but it is found in an Old Khmer inscription of
924 Śaka (1002/3 CE) to denote an object of value offered to a deity, though little more can be
inferred from the passage.17The corresponding entry in Jenner (2009 ) cites related words in
Modern Khmer and in Thai—where the meaning is “spittoon, chamber pot, bedpan”—and
glosses the Old Khmer word as “ A vessel of unidentified form and function, perhaps a cus‑
pidor”. A word that expresses an apparently similar meaning and has the closely similar
form kan
˙t
˙orais found in only one Old Javanese (OJ) text, namely the Tantu Pa ˙ngәlaran , on
which basis the corresponding entry in Zoetmulder (1982 ) is formulated as “(Skt kat
˙ora) a
kind of cup or vessel”, although the textual evidence here suggests a vessel significantly
larger than a cup.18A rare epigraphic occurrence of the Sanskrit word cited by Zoetmul‑
der, or more precisely the diminutive form kat
˙orikā , is found in a 6th‑century inscription
from East Bengal, in a list of utensils donated to a community of ascetics; the context allows
the translation “small cup”.19In our context, the meaning of kathora seems to be related to
the meaning of kan
˙t
˙orain the Tantu Pa ˙ngәlaran ; whatever the exact type of container desig‑
nated by kathora , it must have been large enough to contain five smaller containers and, if
our interpretation of damcu is correct, nearly 4 kg of cinnabar.
Although other scenarios cannot be excluded, we are inclined to suppose that the con‑
text is one of transshipment of goods from China to India. Metalwares were commonly

--- [Page 10] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 10 of 35
exported from China to the Indian Ocean region beginning as late as the 9th century and
continuing until recent times; thus, the appearance of such a sizable bronze vessel in our
text corresponds with much of the textual and material record. Such items were perhaps
the most valuable type of commodity on board ships departing from China beginning in
the 11th century.20In terms of large metal vessels, we find examples in the form of caul‑
drons recovered from several shipwrecks. For instance, a variety of cast iron cauldrons
were recovered from the early 9th‑century Belitung wreck, as well as two copper alloy
handles that were once riveted to a large cauldron ( Flecker 2017 , pp. 30–31). Thirty‑two
cauldron handles were also recovered from the early to mid 10th‑century Intan wreck, with
some of those vessels believed to have been made of copper alloy ( Flecker 2002 , p. 98).
Iron cauldrons were also discovered at the sites of the late 10th‑century Cirebon wreck
(Liebner 2014 , p. 206) and the 12th–13th‑century Java Sea wreck ( Flecker 2002 , pp. 26, 87,
98, 138), while the export of such items to Java and the Philippines is likewise attested to in
Song‑period texts ( Wheatley 1959 , p. 117). Most or all of these items found in shipwrecks
would appear to have been Chinese manufactures. Perhaps the best example of a large
bronze vessel would be a fully preserved bronze cauldron that Claudine Salmon describes
as “a straight‑handled deep belly cauldron that was recovered in 1994 near Candi Keda‑
ton (in Muara Jambi)” ( Salmon 2003 , p. 94). Scholars believe that this item was likewise
imported from China. These examples suggest to us that the kathora in question was a sim‑
ilar commodity of high value that additionally functioned as a storage container as it was
shipped overseas.
khan
˙d
˙a—Our text uses first kan
˙d
˙a, then khan
˙d
˙a, as a numeral classifier, a usage attested
neither in C/MM nor in any OM document. The latter spelling seems to be the original one,
allowing us to link this usage to Sanskrit khan
˙d
˙a“portion”. The same tatsama word is used
as a numeral classifier in the new Indo‑Aryan language Oriya ( Neukom and Patnaik 2003 ,
sct. 3.4.3), while the corresponding tadbhava form khān is used in Bengali ( Rácová 2007 ). On
the use of vatu “stone” as a numeral classifier in an OM inscription from Java, see Griffiths
(2018 , p. 279). On the use of numeral classifiers in the Tanjung Tanah manuscript, see
Mahdi (2015 , pp. 207–8).
valānda —This term, with a long āon the penultimate syllable in accordance with the
OM spelling habits outlined above, is found in the exact same spelling also in the Laguna
copper‑plate inscription from Luzon, the Philippines (see below), and corresponds to va‑
landa orvalan
˙d
˙ain some sources written in OJ, both from Java itself and from Bali. All
these terms may be antecedents of belanja in C/MM and blanja Modern Javanese (see our
n. 22 for the meanings of these words), although the correspondence of /d/ in OM and
OJ to /j/ in C/MM and Modern Javanese is linguistically irregular and, hence, requires an
ad hoc explanation. In a recent publication ( Clavé and Griffiths 2022 , p. 193), one of the
present authors argued against this idea, as it had been proposed by Antoon Postma (1991 ,
p. 170).21The main argument against it was the theory that belanja is a loanword from
Sinhalese‑Pali valañja ,22because “there would be no reason for the OM loan to show ndif
valānda too were based on the same Sinhalese‑Pali word with its ñj, i.e., /n Ã/”. The con‑
nection with C/MM belanja thus having been rejected, it was argued that valānda “must
be analyzed as vala + nda , with typical OM marking of vowel length on the penultimate
vowel”. Arlo Griffiths now wishes to withdraw this argument because it failed to give ac‑
count of the complexity inherent in the argument relating C/MM belanja to a Sinhalese‑Pali
term and of the occurrence of valan
˙d
˙a/valanda in OJ sources.
As for the hypothesis connecting Malay belanja to a Sinhalese/Pali term, the complex‑
ity is manifold. First, the early (epigraphic) Sinhalese form of the word in fact has an
/nd/ cluster, and there is reason to believe that the Pali word valañja with an /nj/ cluster
is historically derived from the vernacular word with /nd/.23Second, the semantics are

--- [Page 11] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 11 of 35
also complicated in the Sinhalese data, with the Modern Sinhalese valaňda (singular direct
case form of valan , which is simultaneously stem and plural form) not only meaning “sign,
mark” but also “earthenware vessel, pot” and the verb valaňdanavā “to use, to eat, to enjoy”
apparently being derived from the latter sense of the noun.24Geiger (1941 , p. 158, nos.
2356 and 2357) mentions both noun and verb, though without citing the meaning “vessel,
pot” for the former, and indicates that the historical spelling, attested in inscriptions as old
as the 10th century, was with l
˙instead of l.25In the Dictionary of Sinhala Epigraphical Words
(Ranawella 2007 ), one finds val
˙anto mean “pot, vessel” and numerous related entries all
with /nd/ and meanings derived from the notions of “enjoying, using”. In short, whether
or not Malay belanja is ultimately connected with them, these Sinhalese data are potentially
relevant to the interpretation of valānda in OM and valanda/valan
˙d
˙ain OJ. Let us now first
present the OJ data.
In redacting the entry for his Old Javanese–English Dictionary ,Zoetmulder (1982 ) was
aware only of literary, and not of any epigraphic, data, and he was unable to draw a clear
conclusion as to the word’s basic meaning; however, for the two derived forms amalandani
and pamalandan he proposed the meanings “to place or keep st. in a container” and “that
in which st. (valuable) is kept or offered?” These forms are exceedingly rare, with each
being citable only from a single text, but the texts in question are relatively old (ca. 12th c.
CE), and the contexts leave little doubt about the involvement of some kind of container,
though not necessarily a “box”, as published translations presume.26
Turning to epigraphic evidence, there is only one occurrence in an inscription from
Java proper, viz. in the Telang I charter (825 Śaka, 904 CE), line 1v13: vineh pirak dhā 1
vd
˙ihan yu 1, valandaniran ulih pirak mā 8 sova ˙m“they were given 1 dhāran
˙aof silver, 1 pair of
vd
˙ihan (cloth); their valanda when going home was 8 mās
˙aof silver per person”. The word
valanda here could mean “payment, remuneration”, although we cannot exclude that it
designates a container for valuables. There are several occurrences in OJ inscriptions from
Bali, dating to the 11th and 12th centuries, where the word valanda also appears in the in‑
significantly variant spelling valan
˙d
˙a.27In the Campetan charter (no. 556b, 1071 Śaka, 1149
CE), line 3r2, we read: maśraha ya valan
˙d
˙a mā 4 saput thāyu i hya ˙n bapa “they should deliver 4
mās
˙as ofvalan
˙d
˙aeach to God Bapa”. In this context, “payment” or “tribute” might be a suit‑
able meaning, though again we cannot exclude a kind of container. Otherwise, we have
in the epigraphic corpus of Bali three inscriptions containing one or multiple instances of
the phrase ta˙ngapana ri ˙n pirak lumaku valanda or its equivalent ta˙ngapana ri ˙n pirak lumari va‑
landa with lumari taking the place of lumaku . There are also some cases where the words
manahurānusuna “will repay [and] pile up” or tahilakna “will pay as tribute” take the place
oflumaku/lumari , and there is a number of cases where valantәn —apparently a krama ‑like
derivation, cf. Griffiths (2020 , pp. 124–25)—takes the place of valanda/valan
˙d
˙a.28Very few
specialists of Balinese epigraphy have so far attempted to translate any of these variant
phrases.29For our part, we have the impression that the one with ta˙ngapana means some‑
thing like “they should be hired with silver currency (if lumaku/lumari , literally ‘moving’,
can have this meaning) as valanda ”.
In all these epigraphic passages, the earliest dating to 904 CE, it is evident that
valanda/valan
˙d
˙a(orvalantәn ) appears in contexts where payments are being made and val‑
ues are expressed with the weight measure mās
˙a(abbreviated mā), which represented one‑
sixteenth of the unit suvarn
˙a(abbr. su) that we see in our text as well as in the OM Laguna
copperplate inscription, dating to 900 CE, line 5: anu diparlappas ·huta ˙mda valānda kā 1 su 8 .30
In this context, valānda was interpreted by Clavé and Griffiths (2022 ) as related to the San‑
skrit word bala “(military) force)”, so that the phrase in question was translated to “what
was resolved was his military debt (amounting to) 1 kāt
˙iand 8 suvarn
˙a”. We would now

--- [Page 12] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 12 of 35
rather interpret the phrase as meaning either “what was resolved was his valānda debt of
1kāt
˙iand 8 suvarn
˙a” or “what was resolved was his debt, a valānda of 1kāt
˙iand 8 suvarn
˙a”.
Perhaps we may reconcile the usage related to payments in the epigraphic contexts
with that related to the storage of valuables observed in the two OJ literary texts referred
to above by assuming that the term was able to express not only such senses as “outlay;
disbursement; expenditure; budget” but also the container in which accumulated wealth
was stored, much like the English words “treasury” or “bursary” (and French “bourse”).
It is curious that our text furnishes the only epigraphic occurrence of valanda that clearly
designates a container rather than a payment.31Given the fact that five of these containers
need to fit together into one bronze vessel, we are inclined to think that these valānda s may
have been pliable containers like bags rather than boxes.
In conclusion, we have the impression that the OM and OJ evidence presented above
is not incompatible with the hypothesis that C/MM belanja and Modern Javanese blanja de‑
rive from valānda /valanda , although the modern terms can no longer be used to designate
a container. It also seems possible that the premodern words are ultimately connected
with the Sinhalese word valaňda , although there are aspects of this question that we lack
the competence to judge. Regarding the irregular sound correspondence between C/MM
belanja and OM valānda , we have suggested above that an ad hoc solution is necessary, and
we are inclined to seek it in the phenomenon of krama ‑forms already observed above in the
local Balinese usage of valantәn besides valanda . While the creation of polite‑register ( krama )
words besides inherited vocabulary is generally considered to be characteristic of Javanese,
the phenomenon is known to have impacted Malay as well.32It is therefore imaginable that
belanja is in origin a krama ‑transformation based on valānda . We can cite no precisely anal‑
ogous case of a krama form, but we can point out the existence of some other unexplained
cases of correspondence of /d/ to /j/ in the languages of Indonesia.33
tāsak —We have considered identifying this as C/MM tasik/tasek “sea, lake” or as Old
Javanese tasak “ripe, cooked” (cf. C/MM masak ), but neither option seems particularly suit‑
able. Hence, we tentatively interpret the form as ta‑asak derived from asak “to pack, to fill,
to stuff” (cf. C/MM sesak , originally sa‑asak ). Cf. Mahdi (2015 , pp. 194–95) on ta‑ =ter‑ in
the Tanjung Tanah ms., with examples like taamit and taulih from the Tanjung Tanah ms.
We only need to assume that sandhi has taken place to obtain tāsak .
damcu —To interpret this word, which can be matched neither with any word known
to us from Malay or related languages nor with Sanskrit, we are forced to explore the
possibility of borrowing from other languages. We have considered but rejected the possi‑
bility of borrowing from Tamil த௘ா  tamicu “East Indian kino” (which would have been
perceived by a Malay speaker as something like /tamisu/). From Chinese, we have consid‑
ered淡酒 (Mandarin danjiu , Hokkien tamchiu ) “light wine”, whose Hokkien pronunciation
would have been perceived in terms of Malay phonology as /tamciu/, and 銅子 “copper
coin” (Mandarin tongzi , Hokkien tangchi ortangchu ), probably perceived in Malay phonol‑
ogy as /tangci/ or /tangcu/, but we have rejected these too as likely sources of damcu for
semantic and phonological reasons and, in the second case, also because of the low likeli‑
hood of the term having been in use in the 11th and 12th centuries.34Although the phono‑
logical match with any Chinese pronunciations likely to have been in use in Southeast Asia
in the 11th and 12th centuries is also not perfect, we believe the best combination of plausi‑
ble sense and similar sound is with the Chinese term for cinnabar, written 丹朱 (Mandarin
danzhu , Hokkien tanchu ) and pronounced in Hokkien in such a way that a Malay speaker
might have perceived it as /tancu/ or /dancu/.35Why it was actually spelled damcu , reflect‑
ing perception of the Malay sound and /m/, is a problem, though one that we deem to be
relatively small, since the range of spellings that might have been adopted for transcribing
丹朱 in OM is broad, given how many relevant variables are unknown to us.

--- [Page 13] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 13 of 35
Cinnabar was a commodity commonly imported to and exported from China. Con‑
sidering that it was shipped from China to markets across much of East and Southeast
Asia, it fits well into the historical context of our inscribed strips. It was used in the pro‑
duction of medicine, handicrafts, cosmetics, paint (for structures, paintings, and statues),
and in funerary rites across much of the world ( Gliozzo 2021 ). The two essential compo‑
nents that derived from cinnabar were vermilion, which was used as a coloring agent, and
mercury, which was used to make medicine and in the gilding of metals. China has al‑
ways possessed large cinnabar deposits, as has Vietnam ( Schafer 1967 , p. 157; Zhu fan zhi,
juan 1, Jiaozhi section, ed. R. Zhao n.d. ). During the Tang dynasty (618–907), cinnabar
was shipped out of ports in the Zhedong region (present‑day Zhejiang province) ( Schafer
1963 , p. 153) and from Guangzhou. In the latter port city, it was freely used as a common
medium of exchange along with gold and silver ( Schafer 1967 , p. 153), which is notewor‑
thy because Guangzhou was the main port for overseas trade with states in Southeast Asia
and the Persian Gulf in that period.
In addition to its varied uses, the popularity of cinnabar as a trade commodity can be
attributed to the fact that sizable deposits of the mineral did not exist or were not known
to exist in many areas that actively participated in long‑distance sea trade. Such areas in‑
cluded Japan, Java, India, and possibly Sumatra ( Gliozzo 2021 , p. 7).36The import of Chi‑
nese cinnabar in Japan is well‑documented, as it appears on a list of 60 drugs presented to
the Tōdaiji Buddhist temple in 756 ( Schafer 1963 , p. 180), in a record of gifts given from
a Chinese merchant to a Japanese courtier in 1028 ( von Verschuer 1999 , p. 6), and on a
list of “Chinese goods” dated to 1052 ( Batten 2006 , p. 115).37Cinnabar is also listed as an
item of export from China to Java in the early 13th‑century work Zhu fan zhi (juan 1, Shepo
section). This text further records that, in one of Java’s vassal states, the women used ver‑
milion for makeup, nail polish, and to dye their clothes and that the product was in high
demand ( Wheatley 1959 , p. 91; Zhu fan zhi, juan 1, Sujidan section). In India, around the
time of the Song dynasty, minium, a lead‑based substance very similar to cinnabar (and
often mistaken for it), was known as cīnapis
˙t
˙a, or “China flour” ( Schafer 1956 , p. 425). This
is a strong indication that such substances were commonly imported there from China.
The use of mercury compounds is also prevalent in Indian medicinal texts ( Gliozzo 2021 ,
p. 8). As for archaeological evidence, cinnabar was discovered on the Quanzhou ship‑
wreck, which sank after returning to China from Southeast Asia in the late 13th century
(Museum of Overseas Communications History 1997 , p. 49). Although most of the cargo
consisted of commodities purchased in Southeast Asia, a certain portion also consisted of
unsold Chinese wares, and cinnabar might have belonged in that category. Another ex‑
ample is the Nanhai wreck, which sank around 1183 on its way to Southeast Asia after
departing from Guangzhou. Cinnabar was among a wide range of items discovered in the
ship’s hold, along with precious metals and ceramics ( Zhang et al. 2024 , p. 267).
Looking beyond the historical context of cinnabar as a commodity and toward its re‑
ligious significance, we may point to the lump of cinnabar discovered among precious
stones, minerals, gold objects, a ritual deposit box, and other goods in a shaft underneath
temple ruins at the Santubong site in Sarawak, North Borneo ( Harrisson and O’Connor
1967 , p. 213). It is believed that these items were used in a Tantric Buddhist ritual, much
like a similar collection of goods—some containing traces of mercury on them—that were
found at a temple site in the Bujang Valley area of Kedah ( Treloar 1967 ;Treloar 1968 ). What
is certain is that vermilion was widely used across much of the world to paint religious
structures, statues, and paintings. Mercury, extracted from cinnabar, was also commonly
used as a component in the gilding of copper‑alloy Buddhist statues, one likely example
being the gilt bronze sculpture kept in the Victoria and Albert Museum (London), repre‑
sentative of the Nagapattinam style.38

--- [Page 14] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 14 of 35
Furthermore, the usage in Old Javanese literary contexts of the term valanda to indi‑
cate the storage of wealth in the form of precious metals and jewelry likewise parallels
the known instances of cinnabar being included along with gold and silver as precious
commodities transported by sea across long distances, and of it being used as a means of
exchange along with gold and silver in port cities. Cinnabar is commonly discovered in the
geological deposits of gold and silver, which possibly strengthened such an association be‑
tween the mineral and precious metals in common perceptions ( Gliozzo 2021 , p. 7). Finally,
as Old Khmer ( Vincent 2012 , pp. 182, 184, 185) and Old Malay do not have any known na‑
tive terms for cinnabar or vermilion, the use of a foreign loanword adopted from a region
with longstanding connections with those cultures would render 丹朱 a strong candidate
for the original term from which damcu derived. A notable comparison would be the In‑
donesian term for vermilion and lipstick, gincu , which derives from a Hokkien term for
vermilion, ginchu銀朱 (Mandarin yinzhu , literally ‘silver vermilion’ or ‘silver cinnabar’).39
brat —The word, spelled here with a long āpresumably because, before suffix ‑ ña, it
stands in penultimate position, obviously corresponds to berat in C/MM. While no occur‑
rence of the word is found among OM documents known so far, there are quite a few OJ
inscriptions where brat (orvrat) occurs in similar contexts. See Darmosoetopo (1993 ) and
Wisseman Christie (2015 ) for several examples. As in these OJ instances, and as in the OM
Laguna copper‑plate inscription ( Clavé and Griffiths 2022 , pp. 199–200), the weight is ex‑
pressed using units from a system that seems to have been in use throughout maritime
Southeast Asia. In this system, a consistent set of abbreviations is used to express units, kā
(for kāt
˙i) and su(for suvarn
˙a) being among them. According to Wisseman Christie (2004 ,
pp. 92–93), 1 kāt
˙i= ca. 760 g, while 1 suvarn
˙a= 1/20th of that (38 g), so that the total weight
indicated here is 3838 g. In OJ inscriptions, the unit dhāran
˙a(abbreviated dhā) is used as
an equivalent for suvarn
˙a, specifically for weights in silver, and the next lower unit was
mās
˙a(1/16th of a suvarn
˙a/dhāran
˙a). To illustrate these comparisons, we include in the next
section (5) a photograph of such an Old Javanese inscription on a silver plate.
barkna —This form has not so far been encountered in OM, although ma˙nәnakan , an‑
other form derived from the same base kәna, is attested in the Tanjung Tanah manuscript.
The C/MM morphological equivalent to OM barkna would have to be ber‑kena , but this
form does not exist (while ber‑kena‑an , with a further ‑ ansuffix, does exist and means “con‑
nected, applicable”). From the context, it is clear that barkna must mean “is for” (a meaning
that could be expressed in C/MM with bagi,buat,guna , oruntuk , not one of which seems
to be inherited from Old Malay) or “has the purpose of”. Although there is not a precise
morphological match, it seems that this OM usage must be connected somehow with the
existence in OJ of pakәna “function, purpose” and the derived form mapakәna “to be of use
for, intended for, proper to serve as”.
bharāla —This is at present the oldest known attestation in OM of the ancestor of
C/MM berhala , which is ultimately related to the Indic word bha(t
˙)t
˙ārathat was widely
used as such both in Sanskrit and in vernacular sources in various parts of Southeast Asia,
including the Malay and Javanese spheres.40For discussion of the linguistic background,
seeGriffiths (2014 , pp. 228, 242–43) and Hoogervorst (2017 , pp. 388–89). For examples of
bhat
˙ārain OM and OJ contexts, see the inscriptional comparisons given below (Section 5).
d˙nan—This word, the ancestor of both dan“and” and dengan “with” in C/MM, ex‑
pressed both meanings in OM. See Mahdi (2005 , p. 192).
5. Final Translation and Comparisons
Although the reconstruction proposed in Section 3assumes complete identity be‑
tween the two texts of which fragments have been found, nothing stands in the way of
small differences, notably for the quantities, expressions, and weights. Keeping this inher‑

--- [Page 15] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 15 of 35
ent uncertainty in mind, and with reference to the commentary on the vocabulary items
offered in the previous section, we can at last propose the following interpretation of the
text’s meaning:
1 bronze cauldron ( kathora ), filled with 5 bags ( valānda ) stuffed with cinnabar
(damcu ), weighing 5 kāt
˙i, 1suvarn
˙a(i.e., about 3838 g). These bags are for worship
to the Lord of the Śrī‑Bālāditya monastery and to the Lord of the Śrī‑Śailendra‑
Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman monastery.
It now seems useful to situate the inscription in the broader cultural context of In‑
donesian epigraphy from the point of view of its textual contents and its palaeography.
Above, we mentioned that the report by Tejowasono et al. (2019 ) identifies the script as
“Old Sumatran”. We do not necessarily object to this term, but we wish to emphasize that
its pertinence is a question of definition. Depending on the definition used, it would be
equally correct to assign a label that is not island‑specific, the fundamental problem being
that we have no information about script names that were in use in ancient Sumatra41, nor
do we have any certainty that the two copper strips were manufactured in Sumatra at all.
Not only in language, but also in its palaeographic aspect, we find our text quite similar
to the Laguna Copper‑plate Inscription (900 CE), manufactured thousands of kilometers
away from Sumatra in Northern Luzon, but an equally pertinent comparison can be made
with the inscription on the back of the base of a bronze sculpture of the Buddhist deity
Lokanātha from Gunung Tua in Northern Sumatra (Figure 9).42Śī āā ŚīŚ
ū฀ ̣ā n ̣
ā
 
ā
 ⚬ ś ṣāī ā ś ā ā ā⌈
 n ̣ ฀ ̣ ṭā ā ⚬ ā ś ān ̣
ā ān ̣m ̇ ̥
 ā tt āām ̇ ā ⚬
Ś
ū ṭā
ā
ṭā
ā ṭā ā
ā ā
Figure 9. Inscription on the back of the Lokanātha statue from Gunung Tua, Northern Sumatra
National Museum of Indonesia, inv. no. 4839 or B 626 d (Photo: Garin Dwiyanto Pharmasetiawan).
(1)◦svasti śaka‑vars
˙ātīta 961 caitra‑māsa, tithi tritiya sukla, śukra‑vāra, tatkāla juru pā ⌈‑
(2) n
˙d
˙ai suryya barbvat ·bhat
˙āra lokanātha ◦Imāni kuśala‑mulān
˙i sarbvasatva‑sādharān
˙a˙m
kr
˚‑
(3) tvā Anuttarāyā ˙m samyaksambodhau parināmayami ( ◦)
Prosperity! Elapsed Śaka year 961, third tithi of the waxing (fortnight) of the month
of Caitra, a Friday. At that time, the master smith Sūrya manufactured Lord ( bhat
˙āra)
Lokanātha. [He expressed his intention by citing scripture:] “These roots of what is good
do I share with all beings and turn over to the unsurpassed, perfect enlightenment!”.
The date of this inscription, which consists of an Old Malay sentence and a dedicatory
sentence in Sanskrit, corresponds to 1039 CE.43The palaeographic aspect of this Sumatran
inscription is perhaps even more similar to our copper strips than the Laguna Copper‑plate
Inscription, so that this comparison would support dating our copper strips to the 11th
century CE. As we see below, their date of manufacture cannot have been before 1005/6 CE.
We see how the Buddhist deity in the Gunung Tua inscription is called bhat
˙āra
Lokanātha, using the term bhat
˙ārafrom which we have indicated that the term bharāla ,
in our strips, is derived. An example of use of the same term in an inscription on a metal
artifact from Java is given in the next comparison, which also illustrates the use of the word
brat and abbreviations dhā,su, and māfor expressing units of weight in silver or in gold
(Figure 10).44

--- [Page 16] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 16 of 35
(a) 
 
(b) 
ﬃ tt
ﬃ
 ￮ ṭā īn ̇ ā m ̇ ā ā
ṭā āṇ
ṇ āṣ
ṭā āṇ
Figure 10. Top ( a): back of a silver plate from Muteran, East Java, National Museum of Indonesia,
inv. no. 1738 (Photo: Arlo Griffiths). Bottom ( b): close‑up of the inscription engraved on the back
of a silver plate from Muteran, East Java, National Museum of Indonesia, inv. no. 1738 (Photo:
Arlo Griffiths).
(1)◦bhat
˙āra kakī ˙n abhaya brat ·dhā 11 (2) bratni ˙m mās ya su 1 mā 15
The deity ( bhat
˙āra) at Abhaya: weight 11 dhāran
˙as [in silver]. The weight of the gold,
it is 1 suvarn
˙a, 15mās
˙as.
Apparently, one has to understand that the silver plate was the property of the bhat
˙āra
at Abhaya and that it weighed 11 dhāran
˙as in silver, while allusion is also made to a quantity

--- [Page 17] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 17 of 35
of gold that would perhaps have been placed on the plate. A similar inscription on another
silver artifact from Java furnishes further parallels to the text on our two strips (Figure 11).45
  
(a) ( b) 
 ￮ ṭā ฀ ̣ m ̇ ā ￮
ṭā āṭ
āṅś
ā ā
ﬀ
tt
ﬀ
ﬀ ﬀ
ﬀ
Figure 11. (a) (left) and ( b) (right): Neck of a damaged silver vase from Banjarnegara, Central Java
National Museum of Indonesia, inv. no. 5824 (Photos: Garin Dwiyanto Pharmasetiawan).
(1) //◦// gavayan ·bhat
˙āra I d
˙i(hya)[ ˙m dyun pirak ·brat·k]ā 4 rambutnya lpas ·//◦//
Work belonging to the deity ( bhat
˙āra) of Dieng: silver vase weighing 4 kāt
˙i. Its hairs
are loose.
The use of the expression dyun pirak “silver vase” here, combining the name of an
artifact type and the metal from which it is manufactured, to label the very artifact on
which the text is engraved is exactly analogous to kathora kā ˙nśa“bronze cauldron” in our
strips. We also find the abbreviation kāhere, instead of its equivalent dhā, to express the
weight in silver. The final phrase, “Its hairs are loose”, is rather mysterious but clearly
again aims to add some further detail about the vase in question.
Several of the aspects of the texts engraved on these two pieces of Javanese silver‑
ware are analogous to the inscription on our two copper strips, with the notable difference
that the Javanese items themselves bear their labeling text, whereas our strips must have
served to label other artifacts. Comparable labels attached to cargo found in shipwrecks
elsewhere have been found to denote the ownership or intended recipient of certain items
and, in some instances, also contained details about the volume of goods and their names.
Their purpose was to demarcate commodities and sections of cargo on board a trade ship.
See, for instance, the hundreds of wooden strips found in the Sinan and Quanzhou wrecks
(Y. Li 2023 , pp. 137–43, and Figure 12below). An explanation for the similarities appar‑
ent in both copper plate inscriptions could be that those inscriptions held the same or a
similar function of distinguishing cargo on board a ship and that both inscriptions each
originally denoted distinct items and quantities of cargo but for the same intended recip‑
ient. It should be noted that, in the case of the Sinan wreck, much of the cargo on board
was also intended for Buddhist temples, as such temples often held major roles in finance
and trade. Additionally, the general shape of the copper strips might also be indicative of
a similar function as labels for cargo. Their complete shape, narrower on one end with a
pierced hole and pointed on the other end, can be deduced from the shape of each frag‑
mentary strip. Their similarity in shape and textual contents with cargo labels made of
wood found in the Sinan and Quanzhou wrecks cannot be a coincidence, as textually quite
different land grants inscribed on copper plates from Nusantara are usually also quite dif‑
ferent in shape, with significantly larger dimensions. One important difference between
the Muara Jambi strips and the Sinan and Quanzhou wrecks strips, however, is their ma‑
terial, a difference about which we prefer not to speculate here.

--- [Page 18] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 18 of 35
 
ﬀ ā
Ś ū฀ ̣ā n ̣ ā āā ā
ā ā ōḻ
ō̱ ā
ﬀ
ﬀ tt
ś
ā Ś ū฀ ̣ā n ̣ ā
āī tt ā ṭṭn ̱ tt
ā tt n ̇ Ś Śī ṭā
ū฀ ̣ā n ̣
ā ā Āṉ n ̇
ā ōḻ ōḻ
Figure 12. Wooden tablets from the Sinan wreck. National Museum of Korea (Photo: Lee 2011 ).
6. The Inscribed Text in the Context of Transregional Buddhist
Networks (c. 11th–12th Centuries)
On the basis of the text preserved on the extant fragments, the reconstructed text
lists offerings for the worship to the Lords ( bharāla ), i.e., deities, of the monasteries called
Śailendra‑Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarma‑vihāra and Bālāditya‑vihāra. The first name occurs in virtu‑
ally the same form in the Sanskrit and Tamil Larger Leiden Copper‑plate Inscription of
Rājarāja Cōl a I (r. 985–1014), as well as other nearly contemporary Tamil inscriptions.46
These inscriptions have been discussed in a large number of secondary sources to recon‑
struct the historical background of diplomatic, religious, and commercial links existing
between Sumatra, South India, the Malay peninsula, and China in the period immediately
preceding the Cōl a raids of around 1025 CE, when Rājendra sent a fleet of warships to
raid and destroy important ports in Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula, but also in the pe‑
riod following them (see, e.g., Vogel 1919 ;Krom 1931 , pp. 236ff.; Majumdar 1933–1934 ;
Cœdès 1968 , pp. 141ff.; Chattopadhyaya 1981 , p. 88; Skilling 1997 ,2007 ;Seshadri 2009 ;
Schoterman 2016 ;Gornall 2014 , p. 520, 2020 , pp. 59 n. 91, 69–70, etc.).
As related by the charter, whose praśasti portion was added posthumously in 1019,
early in the reign of Rājendra I (r. 1014–1032), the Śailendra‑Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra was
built at Nāgīpattane (Sanskrit)/Nākappat
˙t
˙inam (Tamil), i.e., Nagapattinam, at the request
of Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman, born in the Śailendra family, lord of Śrīvijaya, king of Kat
˙āha
(Kedah in the Malay Peninsula),47who brought to completion—and claimed as his own
pious foundation48—the work started by his father Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman, in whose name the
monastery was built.49This undertaking, which probably took place in the 21st regnal year
of Rājarāja I (1005/6), who had granted the village of Ān aima ˙ngalam for the monastery’s
maintenance, was supported by his son and successor Rājendra Cōl a I. A subsequent Cōl a

--- [Page 19] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 19 of 35
king, viz. Kulōttu ˙nga I (r. 1070–1120), continued to support this monastery with endow‑
ments ( Jacq‑Hergoualc’h 2002 , p. 275). What is clear is that the Cōl a dynasty—many of
whose kings, like Rājarāja and Rājendra, were staunchly Śaiva—maintained good relations
with the rulers of Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula up to the first quarter of the 11th cen‑
tury, and they then challenged them for the control of the commercial maritime routes.
However, since Kulōttu ˙nga I’s charter explicitly records its issue at the request of two am‑
bassadors from the king of kid
˙āra(i.e., Kat
˙āha), it appears that the relationship between the
Cōlas and Śrīvijaya improved again after the Cōl a raids.50
The grant by Kulōttu ˙nga I states that King Rājarāja gave the village “to the Buddha
(buddhāya ) residing in the surpassingly beautiful Cūl
˙āman
˙ivarma‑vihārā of [such] high
loftiness [as had] belittled the Kanakagiri (that is, Meru)” ( Aiyar 1933–1934b , p. 257;
Karashima and Subbarayalu 2009 , p. 273). It is striking is that the mention of the Bud‑
dha in the monastery, to which the village was gifted, mirrors the mention of the Lord
(bharāla ) of the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman monastery to whom ( ka) the goods listed in the Muara
Jambi strips were to be offered in part. Even more striking is the mention of a Bālāditya‑
vihāra next to the Śailendra‑Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra in the Muara Jambi strips, as both are
found to co‑occur also in two roughly contemporary historical documents from southern
India and Sri Lanka. The first document is the closing verse in the Pali grammatical trea‑
tiseRūpasiddhi by scholar–monk Buddhappiya (fl. between ca. 1008 and 1165 CE) ( Gornall
2020 , p. 54). This monk, also known as Col
˙iya Dīpa ˙nkara, was originally from South In‑
dia but was active in Sri Lanka. In the aforementioned colophon, he claims that he was
a disciple of Ānanda, like a standard for Tambapan
˙n
˙i (La ˙nkā), and that he himself was
renowned like a lamp in the Damil
˙a (i.e., the Tamil) Country, glossed as coladeśaya and
sol
˙īrat
˙ain a Sinhalese commentary to the text (see below) ( Malalasekera 1928 , pp. 211, 220;
Gornall 2014 , p. 520). Indeed, Buddhappiya says that he resided in two (monastic) estab‑
lishments ( vāsa),51one of which was the Bālāditya.52The second (slightly later) document
is a version of the Rūpasiddhi with interlinear commentary in Sinhalese, which provides
the name of the other monastery as cūd
˙āman
˙ikarmavihāraya —obviously a scribal mistake
forcūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāraya (Paranavitana 1944 , p. 20, endorsed by Gornall 2014 , p. 520). It
is generally assumed that the Bālādityavihāra was situated in South India too ( Gornall 2014 ,
p. 520), but there is no direct evidence to prove this, as Paranavitana noted.53Paranavitana
(1944 , p. 21) also argued the following:
the Bālādityavihāra was evidently the more important of the two establishments,
for Buddhappiya made special mention of it while he left the identity of the other
to be explained by his exegetist. Like the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarma Vihāra and Dhammā‑
soka Vihāra of Negapatam, Bālādicca Vihāra, too, appears to have been named
after an important personage. The most famous Bālāditya of Buddhist history
was the king of Magadha who, according to Hieun Tsiang [i.e., Xuanzang], was
the founder of the celebrated vihāra of Nalanda but we cannot assert that a monas‑
tic establishment in the Col
˙a country was named after him.
There being, indeed, no direct evidence that the Bālāditya establishment mentioned in
the documents discussed above was located at Nagapattinam, for instance, as an affiliated
namesake of the famous Bālādityavihāra at Nālandā,54our best candidate for it is still the
original foundation in Bihar; however, it cannot at present be positively identified with any
of the remaining structures.55Bālāditya developed various construction activities outside
of the monastery complex and built a large temple for an image of Śākyamuni Buddha.56
The importance of this (c. 6th century?) Gupta king is highlighted by inscriptional evi‑
dence as well as later Buddhist accounts, including Xuanzang’s 玄奘 (c. 602–664) Datang
Xiyu ji大唐西域記 [Record of the Western Regions from the Great Tang (Dynasty)], the Chi‑
nese biography of Vasubandhu ( Posoupandou fashi zhuan 婆藪槃豆法師傳 ), and the Sanskrit

--- [Page 20] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 20 of 35
Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa .57It is, therefore, not surprising that Buddhappiya only mentioned
that monastery, and that the Sinhalese commentary only glossed the lesser known of the
two. That he resided in those two monasteries far removed from each other is not surpris‑
ing either, as they may have been well‑connected in the network of Buddhist pilgrimage
of the time. More surprising is the curious synchronicity between the Rūpasiddhi commen‑
tary and our inscribed strips, which mention both monasteries. To this, the implication
of our interpretation must be added, namely that the cargo mentioned in the strips from
Muara Jambi was destined for two monasteries at ca. 1800 km distance from each other
as the crow flies. This must have posed logistical challenges, but it was not impossible to
achieve, especially because the greatest part of the journey would have been by sea, just
like the one needed to cover the ca. 2800 km separating Muara Jambi from Nagapattinam.
Contemporary evidence suggests that Buddhappiya’s monastic and scholarly career
was cosmopolitan, and that it transcended the borders of the Tamil country and Sri Lanka,
indeed. Buddhappiya is acknowledged by other sources from Sri Lanka as a famous Bud‑
dhist personality of his time; the Gandhava ˙nsaincludes him in the list of Sri Lankan masters
(la˙nkādīpakācariya ).58Buddhappiya had close ties with the Cōl a court, which, according
toGornall (2020 , p. 70), “may have contributed to the split that took place between the
monastic orders in South India and Sri Lanka”. An inscription issued by the queen of the
Sri Lankan King Vikramabāhu I (1111–1132) found at Polonnaruwa describes Buddhap‑
piya’s teacher Ānanda in similar terms as those found in the colophon of the Rūpasiddhi ,
and it states that the master had contacts (and possibly spent some time) with the Bud‑
dhist community of Tambarat
˙t
˙ha,59which Paranavitana has identified with Tāmbrali ˙nga,
the country around Ligor (Nakhon Si Thammarat, or Nagara Śrī Dharmarāja) in the Malay
Peninsula (see Wolters 1958 , p. 588). This area was also under the authority of Śailendra
kings Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman and Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman. Paranavitana goes against another
view identifying Tambarat
˙t
˙ha with a district in South India, and the matter does not seem
to have been settled yet.60Whatever the case may be, it is likely that Buddhappiya followed
in the foot‑steps of the propagation of Buddhism in the Cōl a country ( Paranavitana 1944 ,
p. 25). The possible presence of Buddhappiya’s teacher Ānanda in the Śailendra domains
of the Malay Peninsula just prior to the foundation of the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra in Na‑
gapattinam further supports the existence of close Buddhist linkages between that region
(with Sumatra) and South India, which go beyond the political and diplomatic aspect of
the donation of the monastery itself.
Other sources that are often used to reconstruct the aforementioned historical back‑
ground are Chinese accounts of diplomatic missions and Buddhist texts in the Tibetan
canon. The former sources describe the arrangement made between Emperor Zhenzong
(968–1022, r. 997–1022) of the Song dynasty (960–1279) and envoys of Śrīvijaya. During
their stay in the Song capital of Kaifeng in 1003—just a couple of years before the building
of the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarmavihāra in Nagapattinam—the envoys informed the emperor that
their King Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman had built a Buddhist temple in Śrīvijaya dedicated to praying
for Zhenzong’s longevity, and they requested that the emperor provide both a signboard
with a temple name, as well as a bell.61The request was met by Zhenzong, who named
the temple Chengtian wanshou 承天萬壽 (“Heaven‑Bestowed Longevity”). According to
Claudine Salmon and Hans Bielenstein, the Chengtian wanshou temple may have actually
been constructed for a Chinese merchant community in Śrīvijaya.62These merchants may
have also advised the Śrīvijaya king on matters of diplomacy, as had happened in Java too,
with the merchant Mao Xu advising the Javanese embassy to China one decade prior to
Śrīvijaya’s embassy in 1003–1004 ( Sattler 2024a , p. 5). Some sources suggest that the Śrīvi‑
jayan envoys downplayed the importance of the Cōl as and even claimed they were under
their dominion, which caused a diplomatic reaction by the South Indian dynasty through

--- [Page 21] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 21 of 35
an embassy to the Chinese Emperor carrying lavish gifts ( Sen 2003 , pp. 229–34; 2009 , p. 62).
Later, a Śaiva temple in Cōl a style was erected in Quanzhou ( Guy 1994 ,2011 , pp. 253–59),
and in 1018, the Cōl a king is recorded as having received large gifts of “Chinese gold” from
Śrīvijaya for a temple staffed by Brahmans ( Sattler 2024b ;Sen 2003 , p. 67; Kulke 2009 , p. 6).
These examples highlight the phenomenon of “temple diplomacy” via maritime links in
the region, which might have “originated in and around the Indian Ocean region and cir‑
culated with the spread of Buddhism”.63
As for the Tibetan sources, they provide data for reconstructing the history, and trans‑
fer, of Buddhism in the region. In particular, they provide some historical details on cele‑
brated masters like Atiśa (a native of northeastern India) and Dharmakīrti of Suvarn
˙advīpa
(Dharmakīrti II) and their whereabouts in the early‑ to mid‑11th century (see in particular
Sinclair 2021 ;Schoterman 2016 ;Skilling 1997 ,2007 ). The latter is believed to have lived dur‑
ing Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman’s reign, as the colophon of one of the Tibetan Kanjur block prints
preserving his works, the Durbodhāloka , says that the original text was composed at the re‑
quest, and during the 10th year of the reign (ca. 1005–8 CE?), of King *Śrī‑Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarma‑
deva ( Lha dpal gtsug gi nor bu’i go cha’ )64of *Suvarn
˙advīpa ( Gser gling ), and its place of
composition was *Śrīvijayapura ( Dpal rnam par rgyal ba’i grong ) (see Sinclair 2021 , p. 7;
Skilling 1997 , pp. 188, 194 n. 12). Atiśa traveled to Suvarn
˙advīpa to learn from this Bud‑
dhist master, who ranked among the most respected and learned personalities of the time.
While these Tibetan sources highlight the cosmopolitan nature of the South and Southeast
Asian Buddhist world of the time, they are often imprecise; the geographical locations of
these political and religious personalities are still problematic. Sinclair (2021 , pp. 7–9) and
Skilling (1997 ) identify Suvarn
˙advīpa (=Suvarn
˙abhūmi) with Kedah in the Malay Penin‑
sula. The latter scholar in particular uses information contained in the Tibetan account
of Atiśa’s maritime journey to argue that the landing point of the ship on which he was
traveling was none other than Kedah. Skilling’s argument that Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman and his
son and successor Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman reigned in Kedah is derived from his analy‑
sis of the Sanskrit and Tamil inscriptions known as the “Leiden Plates”, which state that
Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman was both “lord of Śrīvis
˙aya” (only in the Sanskrit section) and
“lord of Kat
˙āha” (in both Sanskrit and Tamil sections). On the other hand, Miksic (2016 ,
p. 262) argues that “for the people coming from the Indian Ocean, the ruler of Kedah was
seen as more important than that of Palembang”, which is due almost certainly to Kedah
being the first major port that many ships traveled to before entering the Strait of Malacca.
This might also explain why the Leiden Plates were mainly concerned with the ruler of
Kedah. Miksic does not believe that “references to the ‘Lord of Śrīvijaya’ denote the ruler
of Kedah” since “Rulership of Kad
˙āra, Kid
˙āra, Kataha, Kad
˙āram, etc., was probably a glo‑
rious title in itself”. To him, the epigraphic and archaeological evidence rather suggests
that Śrīvijaya meant Palembang. Still, he thinks that “Malayu was the most important
Buddhist center in the Strait of Melaka between 1025 and 1200”, and that “ Atīśa may have
spent his time in Malayu/Jambi rather than in Kedah” ( Miksic 2016 , p. 263) for, according
to him, the only viable candidate for the location of Buddhist institutions of higher learning
as well as royal power that could support the scholarship of Dharmakīrti II and his circle
from an archaeological point of view is Muara Jambi. However, the fact that much is still
unknown about other sites that could be potential candidates for this royal and religious
center, including Kedah itself, makes it difficult to pin so much on Muara Jambi.
While we can only estimate the date of manufacture of the two inscribed strips of
this study, we likewise have no certainty as to the location from which the strips were
created for use as labels of religious donations. However, an examination of the Chinese
textual sources reveals important information that scholars, to date, have overlooked. This
information might provide clues to understand the political dynamics in play when the in‑

--- [Page 22] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 22 of 35
scribed strips were made. Many scholars have accepted the theory that Palembang served
as the capital of Śrīvijaya until sometime after the Cōl a raids of 1025, and by 1079, the
capital was moved to Jambi. This argument is primarily based on O.W. Wolters’ position
that the arrival of a tributary embassy from Jambi to the Song capital in 1079 signified that
the rulership of Śrīvijaya had shifted from Palembang to Jambi ( Wolters 1966 ; Xu zizhi
tongjian changbian, juan 299, ed. T. Li 1881 ). Following this event, two letters were sent
by Jambi leaders to a local Chinese administrator in 1082, though this is the last mention
that is made of Jambi in history until later dynasties ( Xu zizhi tongjian changbian , juan 330).
Wolters believed that, following this period, the frequent references of Śrīvijaya in Chinese
sources were, in fact, all references to a Śrīvijaya state with its capital in Jambi, and such
a view remains influential to this day. However, there is no additional textual evidence
to suggest that this might have been the case at any time prior to the collapse of Śrīvijaya,
which Chinese sources situate in the 13th or 14th century. A close examination of the 1082
entry in fact reveals that the Song court considered the leader of Jambi to be a “sovereign”
(guozhu國主 ), whereas each generation of Śrīvijaya leader was distinguished with a po‑
sition higher than this as “king” ( guowang 國王 ).65This was not an arbitrary distinction
but rather one that denoted clear positions among the Song court’s diplomatic partners,
and a higher title generally entailed greater status and rewards in diplomatic trade. A
more nuanced reading of the sources also demonstrates that the Jambi embassy was re‑
ferred to by Chinese record keepers as “the Śrīvijayan country of Jambi” ( Sanfoqi‑Zhanbei
guo三佛齊詹卑國 ), which implies that there were other states within the broader confines
of what appears to have been a Śrīvijaya confederacy. This comes as no surprise to scholars
who have noted that the Chinese translation of Śrīvijaya ( Sanfoqi三佛齊 ) directly translates
to “Three Vijayas”. Indeed, a range of Chinese sources makes distinctions between Śrīvi‑
jaya and Kedah, which is perhaps better interpreted as a distinction between Palembang
and Kedah rather than Kedah falling outside the confines of a greater Śrīvijaya confeder‑
ation.66In either case, Skilling’s view that Māravijayottu ˙ngavarman ruled from Kedah is
not supported in any way by Chinese sources. Additional distinctions were also made
between “Śrīvijaya” and “Jambi”,67which suggests that “Śrīvijaya” only ever referred to
either Palembang or to a large and loosely aligned political entity, in which Palembang
was originally the symbolic center.
If there continued to be a primary political center of Śrīvijaya following the Cōl a raids
of 1025, such a location might plausibly have remained in Palembang. Archaeological
evidence suggests a very gradual transition in economic prominence from Palembang to
Jambi rather than a sudden one, with much overlap in the 11th century ( Manguin 1987 ). It
is also understood that trade ships would stop at both Jambi and Palembang in the midst of
voyages between China and West or South Asia ( Wolters 1967 , pp. 207–10). Considering
that the copper strips were discovered in or near a riverway used by sea ships that traveled
across great distances, the discovery of the strips in the region of Jambi does not guarantee
that Jambi was the port where they originated from. Thus, both Palembang and Jambi
remain the primary candidates for where the strips were produced until more information
is forthcoming.
7. Conclusions
As mentioned at the beginning of the article, the two artifacts discussed here were not
recovered from a scientific excavation, but were rather purchased from private individuals,
and no written documentation exists about their exact findspots. In the light of these facts,
we feel compelled to exert due diligence and weigh the arguments both against and in
favor of their authenticity.

--- [Page 23] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 23 of 35
As for the arguments in favor of inauthenticity, one may point at some surprising
physical features of the strips, the slightly yet noticeably different engraving technique in
the verso side of A with respect to the recto side, with more irregularities and a different
depth, as well as the rarity of inscriptions engraved by means of a “pointilistic” technique
in Nusantara and the wider Indic world.68It is also important to note the cut in the mid‑
dle section of the strips, which could be an attempt to disguise inauthentic artifacts into
fragmentary antiquities; however, it cannot be excluded that it was deliberately done to
have more portions of authentic artifacts for sale. Further, the mention of the [ śrī‑śail]endra ‑
cūd
˙āman
˙ivarma‑vihāra in strip A and śrī‑bālāditya‑vihāra in strip B, both of which are referred
to in a Singhalese interlinear commentary to the Pali treatise Rūpasiddhi by Buddhappiya
(as already discussed in Paranavitana 1944 ), as well as the reference to the donations being
for the Lord or idol ( bharāla ) of the former monastery, which mirrors the same reference in
the Greater Leiden Copper‑plate inscription by Rājarāja I, looks like a “too good to be true”
scenario. Indeed, this scenario might have been brought to the fore by a putative forger
in order to concoct the narrative of Muara Jambi as the seat of the political power that
supported the funding of the Cūd
˙āman
˙ivarman monastery in Nagapattinam, as well as
the donation to the Bālāditya monastery in Nālandā associated with Buddhappiya—a sce‑
nario that is reminiscent of the donations made by the Sumatran sovereign Bālaputradeva
to build a monastery in Nālandā during Devapāladeva’s reign around 860 CE.69
In spite of this, we believe that their cumulative palaeographic, linguistic, and ma‑
terial features speak against their inauthenticity. Two arguments in particular could be
advanced. First, the forger would need to have had a deep and nuanced knowledge of not
only the script, but also a level of active command of the OM language that is present not
even among the very few scholars involved in this tiny field of study, to have generated
unattested but plausible OM forms like tāsak ,brātña , and barkna , imagining the use of the
loanword khan
˙d
˙aas a numeral classifier, while creating new instances of the challenging
word valānda that no previous scholar has adequately understood, deftly inserting it into
a context analogous to but not identical with its usage in other early Nusantaran sources,
and finally deciding to invent a word that cannot be Indic or Nusantaran, namely damcu .
Second, known forgeries tend to be made of gold, be furnished with decoration, reproduce
known texts, or if they do not, they tend to be long documents intended to buttress elabo‑
rate historical claims.70This is not the case of our strips. The fact that fragment B, which has
been analyzed by XRF (see n. 10), is mainly made of copper, and does not contain any zinc,
is also an indicator of its antiquity. More recent metalworks indeed tend to include zinc in
the alloy or be of brass (a copper–zinc alloy), but brass was not used on a deliberate basis
in South and Southeast Asia before the 16th–17th century ( Craddock 2009 , pp. 145, 151).
Further, at least one of the aforementioned surprising physical features could be inter‑
preted as not being particularly problematic. For instance, it seems relevant to point out
that an inscription (in Chinese) using the pointilistic technique is also found on another
metal item also recovered in the Jambi area, namely the bronze gong discussed by Salmon
(2003 ). This technique was known in China as early as the Han dynasty (202 BC–220 AD)
(Salmon 2003 , p. 108). By the 11th–12th century, at around the time the copper inscriptions
were produced, there are records of Chinese merchants learning Southeast Asian writing
systems. Thus, one could propose that such writing came from nearby workshops staffed
with individuals of different backgrounds, or that the writing could be produced by some‑
one of mixed ethnic heritage or by an Indian or Malay who spent much time in southern
China. This could also explain the unusual shape of the strips—narrow on one end with
a hole and pointed on the other end—resembling that of artifacts also used as labels for
cargo in China, but extant in wood (Figure 12).

--- [Page 24] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 24 of 35
Thus, we conclude that the two strips discussed in this article constitute
authentic—and exceptional—evidence agreeing with, and supporting, the historical sce‑
nario of the existence of two monasteries in South and Northeast India that were linked
economically (and otherwise) to Sumatra and China. The strips seem to have been labels
recording donations meant for both monasteries to be dispatched to India by ship. One
could only speculate about the reasons why the inscriptions never made it to their final
destination—for instance, that the boat in which they were transported in was shipwrecked
in the Batanghari River, or that part of the cargo fell into the river during its loading onto the
ship. Since a great quantity of ancient artifacts, including inscribed tin foils, small bronze
statues, coins, and pottery, have been reportedly recovered from the riverbed, either by
workers extracting sand or by antique‑hunters, this is a scenario that seems to be within
the realm of possibility (although, of course, alternative explanations exist, like for instance
the fact that the river may have shifted its course and what now lays underwater was once
on land). A fragment of a copper plate inscribed in substantially the same script type was
also discovered in the tenth‑century Intan shipwreck ( Flecker 2002 , pp. 89–90). Although,
in that instance, too little is preserved of the original plate to determine the size/shape, and
too few characters are preserved on it to determine the type of text inscribed, at least this
discovery shows that the existence of such items on board ships was not without precedent.
Thus, an explanation for the existence of the two entirely or nearly identical inscriptions
of which the respective remaining fragments have been studied here could be that both
inscriptions each originally denoted distinct items of cargo, i.e., bronze containers filled
with the same (or a similar) quantity of valuable objects, intended for the same recipients.
Author Contributions: All authors contribute equally to the manuscript. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This publication and the research leading to it have been supported, from April to August
2024 by the French National Research Agency project MANTRA—Maritime Asian Networks of Bud‑
dhist Tantra (ANR‑22‑CE27‑015, coordinated by Andrea Acri) and from September 2024 to March
2025 by the European Research Council project MANTRATANTRAM—Monsoon Asia as the Nexus
for the TRAnsfer of TANTRA along the Maritime routes (ERC Consolidator Grant no. 101124214,
led by Andrea Acri as Principal Investigator). The contribution by Arlo Griffiths was made as part
of the project DHARMA—The Domestication of “Hindu” Asceticism and the Religious Making of
South and Southeast Asia (ERC Synergy Grant no. 809094). Views and opinions expressed are those
of the authors only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Re‑
search Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be
held responsible for them.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in this study are included in the
article. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author(s).
Acknowledgments: This manuscript was published in the special issue “Beyond the ‘Spice Routes’:
Indic and Sinitic Religions across the Asian Maritime Realm,” with Andrea Acri and Francesco Bian‑
chini serving as guest editors. The authors of this article would like to acknowledge the partnership
and logistic support of the National Research and Innovation Agency of the Indonesian Republic
(BRIN, Jakarta), and especially the Head of the Research Center for Archaeometry, Dr Sofwan No‑
erwidi, as well as the invaluable support offered by the staff of the Balai Pelestarian Kebudayaan
Wilayah V Jambi dan Bangka‑Belitung, Yayasan Rumah Menapo (Roy and Borju), and the Museum
Nasional Republik Indonesia to access their collections. They also extend their thanks to Raghu‑
nath Akarsh, Catherine Churchman, Max Deeg, Véronique Degroot, Aruna‑Keerthi Gamage, Alas‑

--- [Page 25] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 25 of 35
tair Gornall, Tom Hoogervorst, Petra Kieffer‑Pülz, Henning Klöter, Phua Chiew Pheng, Sim Tze Wei
and Brice Vincent for their comments and feedback.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used:
BPK Balai Pelestarian Kebudayaan
CM Classical Malay
MM Modern Malay
OJ Old Javanese
OM Old Malay
V&AM Victoria and Albert Museum
Notes
1On “temple diplomacy”, see Sattler (2024a ).
2See, for instance, the remark by Griffiths (2011 , p. 139): “Compared to the wealth of epigraphical material using Indic systems
of writing that has been preserved from Java, Bali or from other parts of Southeast Asia, the epigraphical record of the great
island of Sumatra is very limited indeed”. For editions, translations, and discussions of short inscriptions from the Muara Jambi
temple complex, see Griffiths (2011 , pp. 159–65; 2012 , pp. 201–7). There is also a wealth of inscribed amulets ( Tejowasono et al.
2019 ;Meyanti and Andhifani 2021 ). However, none of the published items from Muara Jambi (which can be easily found via
idenk.net , accessed on 13 May 2025) contain any historical information of the type that we will discuss in this article.
3This was formerly the Balai Pelestarian Cagar Budaya (Cultural Heritage Conservation Bureau) in charge of the four provinces of
Jambi, Sumatera Selatan, Bengkulu, and Kepulauan Bangka Belitung ( https://kebudayaan.kemdikbud.go.id/bpcbjambi/tentang‑
kami‑balai‑pelestarian‑cagar‑budaya‑jambi , accessed on 13 May 2025). At the time of our field research, it had become the
Balai Pelestarian Kebudayaan with a smaller coverage area numbered “V”. At the time of this writing, the webpage for BPK
V is not working and the creation of a separate Ministry of Culture presages further changes in the organization of heritage
conservation agencies.
4Formerly Yayasan Padmasana, an NGO devoted to the preservation, study, and dissemination of the (pre‑Islamic) heritage of
Muara Jambi.
5The aforementioned publication paraphrases the information contained in the 2019 catalogue, adding a new transliteration
attributed to Wahyu Rizki Andhifani and Hedwi Prihatmoko, but including no translation, palaeographic and linguistic com‑
mentary, or discussion of the historical context and implications of the inscription, which we offer here for the first time.
6Examination with an optical microscope was not possible. We used a handheld jeweler’s magnifying glass (10 ×magnification,
21 mm viewing field, triplet lens). It was also not possible to bring the two artefacts together for direct comparison.
7Although it has not been possible to carry out an analysis of the metal, the aforementioned catalogue classifies the strip as a
copper inscription (Cu). The orange–red color we observed in areas that are not covered with oxidation—characteristic of fairly
pure copper (in contrast with the yellow–brown color of brass for example)—tends to confirm this assessment. Comparison
with artefact B, of a similar color and the main metal of which is copper according to XRF analysis (see note 10 below), makes
this possibility even more likely. Besides our two inscription fragments, only one example of an artefact not manufactured in
tin is given in the catalogue by Tejowasono et al. (2019 , p. 16), namely “013, 04/BPCBJB/Cu/VIII/2019”, a fragmentary and as
yet undeciphered inscription consisting of a few characters on the two sides of a broken plate of irregular shape measuring
3.8×3.4 cm.
8We did not have a tool, such as a caliper, to measure the thickness of both strips.
9While inscribed silver and gold foils were commonly rolled up to be inserted inside bronze statues as part of consecration
deposits (see Mechling et al. 2018 , p. 99–101, figs. 46–47), the copper strips under discussion had a different function, as we will
explain below. In Sumatra, it seems common practice to cut inscribed strips in half to multiply the number of artefacts that can
be sold after their discovery.
10The catalogue reports that the artifact’s copper content is 88.79%. However, screenshots of the two XRF scans carried out on
two sampling spots of the artifact by the research team in charge of the compilation of the catalogue on 18/06/2019, which were
kindly made available by Wahyu Rizki Andhifani, indicate readings of, respectively, 96.59% and 96.20% Cu, with a margin of
error of +/ −0.05%. The other values of the two readings are as follows: for reading one, 1.53% Si, 1.07% Al, 0.670% S, 0.072% Fe,
0.048% P, and 0.021% Pb; and for reading two, 1.68% Si, 1.03% Al, 0.774% S, 0.21% Fe, 0.081 P, and 0.025% Pb.
11On sandhi in Old Malay, see Clavé and Griffiths (2022 , p. 181).

--- [Page 26] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 26 of 35
12Cf.Mahdi (2015 , pp. 194–95) on ta‑ =ter‑ in the Tanjung Tanah ms., with examples like taamit and taulih from the Tanjung Tanah
ms. While these examples explicitly show hiatus after the prefix, we need to assume that tāsak represents a pronunciation without
hiatus or conceals the hiatus in favor of Sanskrit spelling norms. By way of comparison, we may point out that, in the closely
related Old Javanese writing tradition, it is very common for spelled vowels āto represent what was probably pronounced as a
/aPa/ with hiatus (e.g., kamatān =ka‑mata‑an ‘seen’), although this spelling tendency tends to become less pronounced over the
course of the centuries and is not clearly represented in Zoetmulder (1982 ).
13Turner (1962–1966 ), entries 2576 ka˙msá¹and 2987 kā́˙msya .
14It may be helpful to recall that bronze is a copper alloy with a low tin content; bell metal is a copper alloy with a higher tin
content; and brass is an alloy of copper with zinc.
15Vincent (2012 , p. 167): “Dans le cas des inscriptions sanskrites du Cambodge, ka˙msaqualifie donc plus spécifiquement le bronze,
ce que confirme le plus souvent le contexte dans lequel est employé ce terme.”
16SeeTurner (1962–1966 ), entries 2648 * kat
˙t
˙ōra“cup” and 2651 kát
˙hōra “hard, solid, stiff”. There is some indication in Sanskrit
lexicographic texts that the latter word could also cover other meanings, e.g., Hemacandra’s Anekārthasa ˙ngraha (ed. Hoshing
1929 ) 3.570cd kat
˙horau pūrn
˙akat
˙hinau indicated that it could mean both “full” and “hard”.
17Stela from Prasat Preah Nan (K. 89), https://dharmalekha.info/texts/DHARMA_INSCIK00089 (accessed on 13 May 2025),
lines 4–7: bhūmi man jauv nu padigaḥ jya ˙n 5 bhājana jya ˙n 5 mvāy śata vroḥh prāk 6 nu duk li ˙ngaśodhana bhājana nu dut mvāy, prāk
nu duk kruc mārgga I svok I kathor I, neḥ kalpanā āy kamrate ˙n añ li ˙ngapura “Land which he bought with [one] spittoon of 5 jya˙n;
one platter of 5 jya˙n; 100 vroḥ, 6 (unspecified units of) silver to be devoted to the li˙ngapurification; one platter to be devoted to
[it]; 1 (unspecified unit of) silver to be devoted to kruc mārgga ; 1 plateau; 1 kathora . These are the offerings to My High Lord of
Li˙ngapura”. No more can be learned from a single other occurrence in Khmer epigraphy (K 470).
18Ed. Pigeaud (1924 , p. 105, lines 12–13): kapālani ˙n vva ˙n pinakatahapanira, lavan kan
˙t
˙ora lima kvehnya, ya ta makavad
˙ahnirā ˙nayәm
śavani ˙n vva ˙n. This was translated by Stuart Robson (in Robson and Sidomulyo 2021 , p. 47) “The skull of people they used as
drinking cup, and bowls five in number, these served as their containers for keeping the corpses cool and damp.” A passage
resuming essentially the same words figures a few lines further down in Pigeaud’s edition.
19Furui (2016 , p. 669): “The donated movables listed in the grant include vessels and utensils (brass cooking vessels, brass/copper
water jars, three vessels for bali, kalantakas, brass tas
˙t
˙hakas, small cups), furniture (ivory stools), palanquins, musical instruments
(brass trumpets), parasols and instruments of labour (whetstones, adzes, spades, axes, gleaning baskets, digging instruments,
saws, daggers) (ll. 43–46). The utensils, furniture and palanquins seem to be meant for Ājīvika ascetics, while brass trumpets may
be used for the religious practice of song and dance. Instruments of labour, on the other hand, suggest their use in productive
labour and household duties by some service groups, although their assignment to the use by ascetics cannot be ruled out.”
20Such is the argument in Zhang et al. (2024 ), though the wholesale price of export ceramics abroad does not factor into
their estimations.
21We have since learned that the same idea had already been formulated a few years prior to Postma, with reference to the Old
Javanese equivalent of valānda , by Balinese scholars I Gusti Putu Ekawana and I Made Jaya, as cited below in our note on Balinese
scholarship (note 29).
22Gonda (1973 , pp. 31–32): “There are also some traces of Singhalese influence. The Malay word bĕlanja ‘outlay, expenditure’ and
in polite speech ‘salary’ (regarded as a reimbursement and not as a wage), also euphemistically for ‘a gift’, in modern Indonesia,
besides ‘housekeeping money’ also ‘(public) expenditure’ has long been regarded as the only unaltered Pāli word: valañja which
not only means ‘trace,’ or ‘use, design’, but also ‘that which is spent or secreted’ i.e., ‘outflow, excrement (in sarīravalañja ‘faeces’).
The verb valañjeti , at the root of which [the compilers of the Pali Dictionary used by Gonda] have supposed a Singhalese word,
can also express the idea of ‘spending’. This word, which in Indonesia no doubt always belonged to the ‘economical’ sphere,
seems to have been a commercial loan rather than a direct borrowing from Pāli texts, the more so as it seems to be wanting
in Old‑Javanese (in Balinese where it is also used as a root for ‘going shopping’ it may be considered as a Javanese or Malay
loan).” Before Gonda, we find the idea of a connection with Pali valañja already in the second edition of Gericke and Roorda’s
dictionary of Javanese, revised and enlarged by Vreede and Gunning ( Gericke and Roorda 1901 ), under the entry “ blănja : of
bêlănja , (Pâliwalañja , uitgaven PK.)” where “PK” stands for a personal communication received by the authors from Professor
(Hendrik) Kern.
23Because Pali is a Middle Indo‑Aryan language while Sinhalese is a New Indo‑Aryan one, and the former has status as a language
of scripture while the latter does not, both historical linguistic and cultural attitudes with regard to these languages tend to
predispose scholars to the assumption of Pali priority. Nevertheless, under the entry for the verb form valañjeti that exists beside
the noun valañja ,Rhys Davids and Stede (1925 , p. 603) argued for the opposite relationship in this case: “But the root & its
derivations are only found in lexicographical and grammatical works, therefore it is doubtful whether it is genuine. [...] There
seems to be a Singhalese word at the root of it, as it is certainly dialectical.”

--- [Page 27] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 27 of 35
24Clough (1892 , p. 575): “16. ṭṭō ṭō ﬀ  
tt ā ṅ  
ṭ ūṇṭ
17. tt  
ū ḥ ṅ ā ṅ āś ḥ ā ṅ ś ā ā ā  
ā ḥ āā ṅ ṅ tt ṅ
tt ṅ ḥ ṅ tt
 ā ﬀ  
ṅ 
18. āṅ ṅ ṇṭ ḍ āṅ ə 
ś ṅ ṅ  
 
19.
 ṣṭ  
 
Āī
 
 
20.  
21.  
ā  
22. ĕ  
ā
ī  
 
 ā
 
ă ă  
 
23.  
tt tt  
 
 
24. 575): “වලඳ  ̱ වලဒ ̱  
වලඳනවා
 ̆
25.  வளந்ௌ  ḷ ﬀ  
26. ā
ī
ṅ ə ̄ ṅ ṅ,Walan da, s. sign, mark, spot, token; pot, pan, earthen cooking vessel: pl. ṭṭō ṭō ﬀ
tt ā ṅ
ṭ ūṇṭ
 tt
ū ḥ ṅ ā ṅ āś ḥ ā ṅ ś ā ā ā
ā ḥ āā ṅ ṅ tt ṅ tt
ṅ ḥ ṅ tt
ā ﬀ
ṅ
 āṅ ṅ ṇṭ ḍ āṅ ə
ś ṅ ṅ
 
ṣṭ
Āī
 
 
ā
 ĕ
ā
ī
ā
ă ă
 
tt tt
 වලඳ ̱  pl. වලဒ  valan ̱
වලඳනවා
̆
  வளந்ௌ  ḷ ﬀ
 ā
ī
ṅ ə ̄ ṅ ṅvalan .Walan danavá ,16. ṭṭō ṭō ﬀ  
tt ā ṅ  
ṭ ūṇṭ
17. tt  
ū ḥ ṅ ā ṅ āś ḥ ā ṅ ś ā ā ā  
ā ḥ āā ṅ ṅ tt ṅ
tt ṅ ḥ ṅ tt
 ā ﬀ  
ṅ 
18. āṅ ṅ ṇṭ ḍ āṅ ə 
ś ṅ ṅ  
 
19.
 ṣṭ  
 
Āī
 
 
20.  
21.  
ā  
22. ĕ  
ā
ī  
 
 ā
 
ă ă  
 
23.  
tt tt  
 
 
24. වලඳ ̱ වලဒ ̱  
වලඳනවා  v  
̆
25.  வளந்ௌ  ḷ ﬀ  
26. ā
ī
ṅ ə ̄ ṅ ṅ,v. to eat, used only of priests or men of rank; also, to enjoy”. For the phonological history of the “half nasal” translit‑
erated as ňand on the declension of inanimate nouns in Sinhalese, see Geiger (1938 , sct. 23.1d, 64.2, 107.1, 108.1).
25It seems likely that the Tamil word ṭṭō ṭō ﬀ
tt ā ṅ
ṭ ūṇṭ
 tt
ū ḥ ṅ ā ṅ āś ḥ ā ṅ ś ā ā ā
ā ḥ āā ṅ ṅ tt ṅ tt
ṅ ḥ ṅ tt
ā ﬀ
ṅ
 āṅ ṅ ṇṭ ḍ āṅ ə
ś ṅ ṅ
 
ṣṭ
Āī
 
 
ā
 ĕ
ā
ī
ā
ă ă
 
tt tt
 වලඳ ̱ වලဒ ̱
වලඳනවා
̆
  word  வளந்ௌ  vaḷ ﬀ
 ā
ī
ṅ ə ̄ ṅ ṅval
˙antu , meaning “Big pot or vessel” and recorded only for the Jaffna dialect, is a
loanword from Sinhalese.
26–Sumanasāntaka 142.14, edition and translation by Worsley et al. (2013 ):
embuh tangis ri patangis‑tangisan suputrī
deni ˙n svavandhunira sә‑h atulu ˙n bvat i ˙n luh
prāptāmalandani pirak man
˙i vastu mūlya
len ta ˙n sәrәh kinaja ˙nan saha modakādi
The more the princess wept the more they wept. Her own relatives rushed to her aid because of the force of her tears.
They came and put silver and jewels of great value in a box , while betel, sweetmeats and other offerings were placed on
a cushion.
–Bhomāntaka 3.19, edition and translation Teeuw and Robson (2005 ):
akveh ta ˙n paricārikāmәkulakәn lulut ika ri nareśvarātmaja
tu˙ntu˙nni˙n turidanya rakva ri ˙n avaknya sinahaja vini ˙nkis i ˙n la˙nә‑
len ki ˙nki˙n lara kū ˙n ma ˙nәn‑ha ˙nәn ika ˙n rәn
˙a pamavan unә ˙n raras hati
rәs rūm‑rūm i liri ˙nnya hars
˙a pamalandanika vinavanāmatan‑matan
Many were the servant girls who stretched out their arms to offer the prince their love: The tip of their passion was of course
to be found in their bodies, naturally wrapped in their beauty. Others languished in painful heartache, picturing the pleasure
of being the vessel of his yearning. The awe and sweetness of their joyful glances were the box for storing it, set with jewels
like “eyes”.
27For these items we cite the numbering in the Epigraphica Balica system designed by Goris (1954 ).
28The inscriptions with valanda/valan
˙d
˙aare Kayubihi (no. 446, 999 Śaka/1077 CE, 2v4 and 3r5); Depeha/Bet Ngandang A (no. 555,
mid‑12th century CE, 3v2, 3r5, 3v2 and 4r2); and Kintamani F (no. 704, 1122 Śaka/1200 CE, 4r4–5, 4v2, 4r4–5, 5r2). Those with
valantәn are Dawan (no. 404a, 975 Śaka/1053 CE, 4r2–3, 5v3); Serai AIII (410, 989 Śaka/1067 CE, 6r4, 6v1, 6v2); Pandak Badung
(no. 436, 993 Śaka/1071 CE, 3r2); Bila II (no. 441, 995 Śaka/1072 Śaka, 5r4); Museum Mpu Tantular A (no. 509, 12th c. CE, 3v6);
and Lukluk + Ubung B + Pamecutan B (no. 560, 12th c. CE, 4v2).
29Unfortunately, none of the occurrences fall in the timeframe covered by Goris (1954 ) so that no form of the word valanda figures
in his glossary. In a note to their translation of the Kayubihi inscription, Ekawana and Jaya (1987 , p. 42) suggested that valanda
can express the meaning of belanja in Indonesian (i.e., in C/MM), but it has nothing to do with belanda , contrary to the assumption
previously expressed by Poeger (1964 , p. 12). The relevant passage is 2v3–4 (ed. and translation by Ekawana and Jaya, with
some corrections on the reading): pacaks
˙u ku 1 kabehananya, ri ˙m pirak·lumari valanda, tahilakna I jro paryya ˙nan·ri˙m cetra śukla
tithī saptamī “pacaks
˙ubesarnya 1 kupa ˙n, terhadap perak murni (asli) walanda supaya dibayarkan (disetor) di dalam parhya ˙nan
(bangunan suci) pada bulan Cetra, paro terang, tanggal 7 [the amount of] pacaks
˙uis 1kupa ˙n, against pure silver let a valanda be
paid to the parhya ˙nan(religious establishment) in the month of Cetra, on the seventh day of the waxing fortnight”.
Translations of the Dawan and Pandak Bandung inscriptions are available by Santosa (1965 ) and Ardika and Beratha (1998 ).
In his translation of Dawan and Pandak Bandung, Ida Bagus Santosa did not translate the word valantәn (pp. 62, 92). I Ardika
and Beratha offered different translations of valantәn from one inscription to the other. In the Dawan inscription, they translated
it as “tradition” (pp. 144–45), but in the Pandak Bandung inscription, they translated it as “offering” (pp. 315–16). It is possible
that they believed the word valantәn to have the same meaning as bantәn . Anyhow, they provided no justification for either one
of their translations. These are the relevant passages with Ardika and Beratha’s translations:
–Dawan 4r2–3 amnera ri ˙n pirak lumaku valantәn
“selanjutnya bayaran berupa perak berjalan sesuai dengan tradisi semula”
[furthermore the fee in the form of silver moves in accordance to the original tradition]
–Pandak Bandung 3r2–3 tan panusuna ri ˙n pirak lumaku valantәn
“tidak dikenakan panusuna terhadap biaya pembuatan sesaji”
[not levied by panusuna regarding the payment for making the offering]
30On the weight units, see the references furnished below in our entry brat.
31For the record, we mention here that some OJ inscriptions also use the derived noun pavalanda that seems to denote a tax or levy
related to valanda . The relevant passages do not seem to help in determining the meaning of the base word.

--- [Page 28] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 28 of 35
32Wilkinson (1959 ) indicates certain words as “courtly” synonyms of others and mentions such pairs as antan (alu),bangsal (balai ),
angan (hati),intan (hira),jantan (jalu),jintan (jahe),kacang (kara),negeri (negara ), and santan (sari). Several of these pairs may involve
borrowing from Javanese. As potential additions to Wilkinson’s examples, we would like to mention kencing (kemih ) as well as
kantung (and Javanese kanthong , both presumably related to kan
˙d
˙i‘pouch’ in OJ). Alas, we have not found any example, in Malay
or Javanese, of the derivation of a krama form by changing /d/ to /j/.
33We are aware of a 14th‑century OJ inscription using rujira instead of expected rudira (from Sanskrit rudhira ), and Sanskrit doli
has become joliin OJ.
34The term 銅子 is not prevalent in early Chinese sources. In contrast, we find dozens of occurrences of the term 銅錢 (Mandarin
tongqian , Hokkien tangchiⁿ ) where it definitely means “copper coin” in Song sources alone. The oldest use of 銅子 in the dic‑
tionaries we examined was in three literary works dating to the first half of the 20th century. We use Hokkien to determine
the pronunciation of these terms based on the historical prevalence of southern Fujianese people in Southeast Asia beginning
around the time of the Song dynasty. Middle Chinese would serve as a useful comparison for reconstructing most other Chinese
languages at this time, though Fujian languages would be an exception as they evolved from Old Chinese. See Pulleyblank (1984 ,
p. 3).
35Seehttps://sutian.moe.edu.tw/zh‑hant/tshiau/?lui=tai_su&tsha=%E4%B8%B9 (accessed on 13 May 2025) for modern Hokkien
pronunciations of the first character. The onset of 丹in these recordings sounds like /t/ in Malay, but it is quite possible that a
dialect with a sound more like Malay /d/ was the source ( https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/%E4%B8%B9 , accessed on 13 May 2025).
Regarding the second character, recordings of its modern Hokkien pronunciation are available at https://sutian.moe.edu.tw/zh‑
hant/tshiau/?lui=tai_su&tsha=%E6%9C%B1 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
36Although deposits are now known to exist in Japan, and it is also recorded as an exporter of mercury, Japan was importing
cinnabar at the time that our inscribed artifacts were produced. It is not clear when deposits in central Sumatra were first
discovered, though it is believed that the mineral was being mined in western Jambi at some point prior to European occupation
(Miksic 1985 , p. 69, citation no. 1). The Xin Tang shu does state that Śrīvijaya was a source of gold, cinnabar, and ambergris (Xin
Tang shu, juan 222, Shilifoshi section, ed. Ouyang 1936 ). Although Śrīvijaya’s reputation as a source of gold was widely known,
ambergris was a commodity brought to China from East Africa and West Asia, so it is not clear in this passage if cinnabar was
transshipped to China from Śrīvijaya or if it was mined there.
37It should be noted that this refers to goods brought to Japan by Chinese merchants, as some of the items on the list originated
from Southeast Asia and Korea.
38Inventory no. IPN.2639. See https://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O24788/standing‑buddha‑sculpture‑unknown/ (accessed on 13
May 2025) and Guy (2000 , p. 107, fig. 6). While no scientific analysis has been carried out on this statue, to our knowledge,
gilding through mercury amalgam has been scientifically demonstrated for Buddhist copper–alloy statues from several regions
through surface analyses. One of them is from South India, possibly from the same tradition or even the same workshop as
the V&AM statue ( Gänsicke 2016 , p. 17, fig. 2, ca. 9th century). Other examples come from Java ( Fontein 1990 , p. 183, no. 38,
ca. 8th–9th century), Cambodia ( Bourgarit et al. 2003 , pp. 115–16, Table 5, ca. 7th–9th century and 12th–early 13th century;
Gerschheimer and Vincent 2010 , pp. 117–18), Central Myanmar ( Guy 2014 , p. 89, cat. 37 and 38, ca. 8th century), and China ( Jett
1993 ). The current assumption is that mercury gilding was introduced to South and Southeast Asia perhaps through contact
with China, where the technique was used as early as the second century for the earliest Buddhist images ( Becker et al. 2014 ,
p. 270). However, the development of mercury gilding and the extent to which this technique was used in South and Southeast
Asia deserves more investigation, as systematic research has not yet been done on gilded copper–alloy statues in these regions.
39We thank Tom Hoogervorst for drawing our attention to gincu .
40SeeTurner (1962–1966 ), entry 9402 bhartŕ
˚‑,acc. bhártāram m. “husband”, bhartŕ
˚‑ m. ‘bearer’ RV.: > MIA. bhat
˙t
˙āra‑ m. “noble lord”
lex., [...]; NiDoc. bhat
˙ara,◦aǵa“master”, [...].
41On this issue, see Griffiths (2014 , p. 213).
42SeeGriffiths (2014 , pp. 217–19) for edition, translation, and commentary, as well as further bibliographic references on this
inscription. A digital edition is accessible at https://dharmalekha.info/texts/INSIDENK00059 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
43SeeDamais (1955 , pp. 207–8). This author also points out that the eye‑copy which we reproduce here is unreliable. We use
it nevertheless, for want of a better reproduction and because we deem that it gives an adequate overall impression of the
palaeographic aspect of this inscription.
44For this inscription, see the reading by J. L. A. Brandes in Groeneveldt (1887 , p. 325, note 1). A digital edition is accessible
athttps://dharmalekha.info/texts/INSIDENK00368 (accessed on 13 May 2025). A possibly related inscription, engraved on an
artifact whose whereabouts are alas unknown, is the one edited at https://dharmalekha.info/texts/INSIDENK00396 (accessed on
13 May 2025).
45A reading by F. D. K. Bosch was published without attribution in the Notulen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap (1924 , pp. 334,
657 no. 5824). A digital edition is accessible at https://dharmalekha.info/texts/INSIDENK00388 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
46For the editions and translations, see Aiyar (1933–1934a ,1933–1934b );Karashima and Subbarayalu (2009 , pp. 272–73).

--- [Page 29] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 29 of 35
47The inscription actually uses the designation Śrīvis
˙aya ( Karashima and Subbarayalu 2009 , pp. 272–73). The governance of both
Śrīvis
˙aya and Kat
˙āha is expressed as overlordship ( adhipati ,ādhipatya ). While the identification of the territory called Kat
˙āha in
Sanskrit and Kad
˙āram/Kid
˙āram in Tamil seems fairly secure, the territorial scope of Śrīvi(s
˙/j)aya is a matter of debate. According
toJacq‑Hergoualc’h (2002 , p. 357), the term Kad
˙āram/Kat
˙āha “designates Śrīvijaya as well as its supposed possessions in the
Malay Peninsula, or more precisely, in certain cases, in South Kedah itself”. See also the elaborate commentary in Cœdès(1918 ).
48“This lord of Kat
˙āha of great valour, the abode of virtues, thus prays to all future kings: ‘Protect (ye) for ever this my charity’”
(Karashima and Subbarayalu 2009 , p. 274).
49According to Schoterman (2016 , referring to Vogel 1919 ), the ruins of the sanctuary were located ca. two miles north of Nagapat‑
tinam and were still extant in 1867, before they were destroyed by the Jesuits (for the same view, see Ramachandran 1954 , p. 14).
However, this actually refers to the so‑called “Chinese pagoda” built in 1267 CE; see Guy (2011 , p. 254) and Kulke (2009 , p. 13).
50Kulke (2016 , p. 70). Gregory Sattler has argued that a decline in diplomacy between Song China and maritime states can be
attributed to a shift in attention by the Song court toward militarily powerful states along its northern border after the death of
Emperor Zhenzong in 1022. Any impact of the raids on non‑diplomatic trade with China would be difficult to assess, as such
trade was not systematically recorded in Chinese histories. See Sattler (2024a ). For a detailed list of Śrīvijaya embassies to the
Song empire, see Hartwell (1983 , pp. 172–81).
51According to Gornall, whom we have consulted on this matter (email dated 15 January 2025), the word vāsa (“residence”) was
used here for metrical purposes instead of vihāra , but it must have meant a monastic establishment, and this is indeed the
interpretation of the Sinhalese commentary.
52“[T]his correct Rūpasiddhi was composed by a monk named Buddhappiya, also known as Dīpa ˙nkara—a student of the excel‑
lent teacher Ānanda thera , who was like a standard for Tambapan
˙n
˙i (La ˙nkā)—he (Dīpa ˙nkara) was renowned like a lamp in the
Damil
˙a country, and being the chief incumbent of two monasteries including Bālādicca, caused the religion to shine forth”,
vikhyātānandatheravhayavaraguruna ˙m tambapan
˙n
˙iddhajāna ˙m, sisso dīpa ˙nkarākhyaddamil
˙avasumatīdīpaladdhappakāso; bālādiccādivāsa‑
dvitayam adhivasa ˙m sāsana ˙m jotayī yo, so ’ya ˙m buddhappiyavho yati imam ujuka ˙m rūpasiddhi ˙m akāsi . Trans. adapted by Gornall (2014 ,
p. 520) from Liyanagamage (1978 , p. 115). In an email dated 15 January 2025, Gornall suggests to amend the translation of the
participle adhivasa ˙mfrom “chief incumbent” (or “resident superior”, as in Liyanagamage) to “was a resident”.
53SeeParanavitana (1944 , p. 221): “Neither the Rūpasiddhi nor its Sinhalese gloss has any reference to Negapatam, and we are
therefore not in a position to say whether the other convent, named Baladitya, was situated at that place”. Lokesh Chandra
(1993 , p. 504) states that “Dīpa ˙nkara Thera (1100 A. D.) became the head of the Bālādicca Vihāra at Kancipura” (this Dīpa ˙nkara
is the same as Buddhappiya as their chronologies overlap: Lokesh Chandra calls him “Dīpa ˙nkara alias Buddhapriya”), without
providing any evidence in support of this statement, and that the Gandhava ˙nsa“also refers to twenty other Theravāda teachers
who wrote in Pāli at Kancipura”; however, Buddhappiya‑Dīpa ˙nkara is only mentioned in the list of Sri Lankan masters.
54An emblematic case of affiliated monasteries located at a great distance from each other is that of the Abhayagirivihāra in Anu‑
radhapura in Sri Lanka and its namesake on the Ratu Boko prominence in Central Java, documented by a Sanskrit inscription in
Siddhamātr
˚kā script recovered in the latter Buddhist complex. For a summary and references to previous secondary literature,
seeAcri (2016 , p. 17).
55According to Max Deeg (email dated 10 January 2025), Xuanzang’s description significantly deviates from the line‑up of the
monastic courtyards at Nālandā; hence, the map in Cunningham (1871 , plate XVI) is the fruit of imagination rather than fac‑
tual data.
56Deeg (2020 , pp. 239–40), on the basis of the inscription from the reign of King Yaśovarmadeva found at Nālandā ( Sastri 1942 ,
p. 79, lines 8–9), a seal from Nālandā referring to a Bālāditya‑gandhakud
˙ī (ibid., pp. 38–39), as well as Taishō shinshū daizōkyō no.
2087: 924a.29ff. and no. 2053: 238b.23ff (ed. Takakusu and Watanabe 1924–1932 ).
57See Deeg (2020 , pp. 238, 248–50), who notes that these sources seem to present the king as an amalgamation of different
Gupta rulers.
58Gandhava ˙nsa, ed. Minayeff (1886 , p. 67). See also Malalasekera (1928 , p. 220); Gornall (2020 , p. 69).
59O’Connor (1972 , p. 22), referring to Paranavitana, speculates that Buddhappiya may have been either a native of Tambarat
˙t
˙ha
(=Ligor) or spent some time there, apparently confusing Buddhappiya with his teacher Ānanda.
60SeeParanavitana (1943 , pp. 69–71). Jacq‑Hergoualc’h (2002 , p. 401) seems to support this theory, as he writes that “the term
could also—with less pertinence, however—be applied to a region of the Col
˙a kingdom near Tanjavur (since the sa˙ngha of Col
˙a
country is also described in the inscription as having ties with the same Ānanda)”.
61Song shi , juan 489 (ed. Tuo Tuo 1977 ); see Sattler (2024a , p. 5) and Salmon (2002 , pp. 62–63).
62Salmon (2002 , pp. 62–63); Bielenstein (2005 , p. 75). The archaeological record provides ample evidence of high volumes of trade
between Sumatra and China, for instance, large quantities of Chinese ceramics, many dating to the early 11th century, recovered
in the areas of Palembang and Jambi, with lesser amounts found in other locations throughout Sumatra, as well as in wrecks of
trading ships dating from the 9th to 13th centuries from the waters surrounding Java and Sumatra. For references to the relevant
secondary literature, see Sattler (2024a , p. 6).

--- [Page 30] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 30 of 35
63Sattler (2024a , p. 7). An early example is that of the donation of funds to build a monastery in Nālandā in the Pāla domains
(eastern India) by Sumatran King Bālaputra around 860. In turn, the Pāla King Devapāla granted tax revenue and manpower
from nearby villages for the upkeep of the same monastery ( Sen 2003 , p. 107; Acri 2016 , p. 18).
64Note the interesting overlap with the Chinese rendition of this name, Sili Zhuluowunifomadiaohua 思離咮囉無尼佛麻調華 , at‑
tested in Chinese historical sources, like the Song shi , juan 489.
65Later histories used the term guowang for this event, though this is due to those compilers’ mistaken assumption that the leader
who dispatched the embassy was the king of Śrīvijaya. Such histories make no mention of Jambi. Xu zizhi tongjian changbian
續資治通鑑長編 (juan 299) is aware of the distinction between both Śrīvijaya and Jambi entities and makes note of this to resolve
confusion among contemporary record keepers.
66See for instance an entry for the year 971 in Song shi (juan 198); an entry for the year 983 in Song shi , which also interestingly
draws a distinction between the Śrīvijaya “king” and Kedah “sovereign”, each with different names (juan 490); an entry for the
Xianping 咸平 reign period (998–1003) in Song hui yao jigao (Zhiguan 職官 44, ed. Xu 1936 ); an entry for the year 1015 in the
Zhulian section of the Song shi (juan 489); and an entry for the year 1016 in Xu zizhi tongjian changbian (juan 87), which also
denotes a lower diplomatic status of Kedah compared to Śrīvijaya. This is not to say that, over the span of several centuries,
Kedah’s status did not fluctuate between moments of greater and lesser independence.
67See the collection of writings Yunlu manchao , juan 5 ( Y. Zhao 2009 ), compiled in around 1206. The Zhu fan zhi , com‑
piled in 1225, lists Jambi among the dependencies of Śrīvijaya (juan 1, Sanfoqi section), although it also lists “Palembang”
as well. Elsewhere it states “Previously (Jambi) belonged to Srivijaya, though after a war (its leader) made himself king”
舊屬三佛齊，後因爭戰，遂自立為王 (juan 1, Jianbi section). The text does not describe any conquest of Śrīvijaya or neighboring
polities. One can also note Wolters’ statement that the Tanjore inscription detailing the Cōl a raids of 1025 “implies a distinction
between Śrīvijaya and Malaiyūr which would correspond to Palembang and Jambi” ( Wolters 1966 , p. 227).
68SeeSalomon (1998 , p. 66): “Some early inscriptions, mostly Kharos
˙t
˙hī relic dedications on metal plates, are written with a series
of dots (e.g., the Taxila silver scroll, ClI 2.1, 70–77)”. Sircar (1965 , pp. 76, 86) further mentions the Kalwan plate—also from the
Taxila region—of the 1st c. CE ( see Konow 1931 , p. 259).
69In recent years, there have been attempts to re‑link Muara Jambi to the monastic centers in northeastern India such as Nālandā
and Vikramaśīla, especially by means of the travel of Atiśa to Sumatra ( Inandiak 2013 ;Inandiak et al. 2018 ). This has favored the
awareness of local communities about the pre‑Islamic/Buddhist heritage of the region and stimulated interreligious dialogue.
70For a general discussion of non‑tangible interests involved in the production of fake epigraphic documents, see Gippert (2020 ,
p. 273). Moving to the realm of the transmitted literature from Java, a paradigmatic example of the faking of an elaborate chronicle
claiming to be from the early 17th century, but established to be a forgery using historical data mainly found in Western and
Indonesian scholarship, are the so‑called Pangeran Wangsakerta manuscripts; see Ekadjati (2017 ).
References
Acri, Andrea. 2016. Chapter 1: Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes, 7th–13th Centuries CE.
InEsoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia; Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS
Publishing, pp. 1–25. [ CrossRef ]
Aiyar, K. V. Subrahmanya. 1933–1934a. The Larger Leiden Plates (of Rajaraja I). Epigraphia Indica 22: 213–67.
Aiyar, K. V. Subrahmanya. 1933–1934b. The Smaller Leiden Plates of Kulottunga I. Epigraphia Indica 22: 267–81.
Andhifani, Wahyu Rizki, and Ninie Susanti Tedjowasono. 2021. Prasasti Prasasti Kedatuan Sriwijaya . Palembang: Museum Sriwi‑
jaya/Aksara Pena.
Ardika, I Wayan, and Ni Luh Sutjiati Beratha. 1998. Perajin pada masa Bali kuno . Denpasar: Udayana University Press.
Batten, Bruce L. 2006. Gateway to Japan: Hakata in War and Peace, 500–1300 . Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Becker, Lawrence, Donna Strahan, and Ariel O’Connor. 2014. Technical Observations on Casting Technology in First‑Millenium
Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam. In Lost Kingdoms: Hindu‑Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia . Edited by John Guy. New
York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, pp. 267–70.
Bielenstein, Hans. 2005. Diplomacy and Trade in the Chinese World, 589–1276 . Leiden: Brill.
Bourgarit, David, Benoit Mille, Thierry Borel, Pierre Baptiste, and Thierry Zéphir. 2003. A Millenium of Khmer Bronze Metallurgy:
Analytical Studies of Bronze Artifacts from the Musée Guimet and the Phnom Penh National Museum. In Scientific Research in the
Field of Asian Art: Proceedings of the First Forbes Symposium at the Freer Gallery of Art . Edited by Paul Jett, Janet G. Douglas, Blythe
McCarthy and John Winter. Washington, DC: Smithsonian, Freer Gallery of Art, London: Archetype Publications, pp. 103–26.
Chattopadhyaya, Alaka. 1981. Atīśa and Tibet: Life and Works of Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna in Relation to the History and Religion of Tibet,
with Tibetan Sources Translated Under Professor Lama Chimpa . Delhi, Varanasi and Patna: Motilal Banarsidass, [Reprint of first
edition, 1967].

--- [Page 31] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 31 of 35
Christie, Jan Wisseman. 2004. Weight and Values in the Javanese States of the Ninth to Thirteenth Centuries A. D. In Poids et mesures
en Asie du Sud‑Est: Syst èmes métrologiques et sociétés, 1: L’Asie du Sud‑Est austronésienne et ses marchés . Edited by Pierre Le Roux,
Bernard Sellato and Jacques Ivanoff. Études Thématiques 13. Paris: École Française d’Extr ême‑Orient, Institut de Recherche sur
le Sud‑Est Asiatique, pp. 89–96.
Christie, Jan Wisseman. 2015. Gold and Early Javanese Inscriptions. In Gold in Early Southeast Asia: Selected Papers from the Symposium
Gold in Southeast Asia, Yale University Art Gallery, 13–14 May 2011 . Edited by Ruth Barnes, Emma Natalya Stein and Benjamin
Diebold. Yale Southeast Asia Studies, Monograph 64. New Haven: Yale University Council on Southeast Asia Studies, pp. 75–88.
Clavé, Elsa, and Arlo Griffiths. 2022. The Laguna Copperplate Inscription: Tenth‑Century Luzon, Java, and the Malay World. Philip‑
pine Studies: Historical and Ethnographic Viewpoints 70: 167–242. Available online: https://philippinestudies.net/ojs/index.php/ps/
article/view/5135 (accessed on 13 May 2025). [ CrossRef ]
Clough, Benjamin. 1892. A Sinhalese‑English Dictionary , New and Enlarged ed. Colombo: Wesleyan Mission Press. Available online:
http://archive.org/details/sinhaleseenglish00clourich (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Cœdès, George. 1918. Le royaume de Çrīvijaya. Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extr ême‑Orient 18: 1–36. [ CrossRef ]
Cœdès, George. 1968. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia . Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Craddock, Paul. 2009. Scientific Investigation of Copies, Fakes and Forgeries . Oxford: Butterworth‑Heinemann.
Cunningham, Alexander. 1871. Four Reports Made during the Years 1862‑63‑64‑65, Volume I . Calcutta: Superintendent of Govern‑
ment Printing.
Damais, Louis‑Charles. 1955. Études d’épigraphie indonésienne, IV: Discussion de la date des inscriptions. Bulletin de l’École Française
d’Extrême‑Orient 47: 7–290. [ CrossRef ]
Darmosoetopo, Riboet. 1993. Beberapa benda purbakala berprasasti pendek temuan dari Wonoboyo. Berkala Arkeologi (Yogyakarta)
Khusus 13: 37–47. [ CrossRef ]
Deeg, Max. 2020. How to Create a Great Monastery: Xuanzang’s Foundation Legend of Nālandā in Its Indian Context. Hualin
International Journal of Buddhist Studies 3: 225–55. [ CrossRef ]
Ekadjati, Edi S., ed. 2017. Polemik Naskah Pangeran Wangsakerta , 2nd ed. Bandung: Pustaka Jaya.
Ekawana, I Gusti Putu, and I Made Jaya. 1987. Prasasti Pura Penataran Pucangan Desa Kayubihi Kecamatan Bangli Kabupaten Bangli .
Laporan Penelitian Arkeologi. Denpasar: Balai Arkeologi Denpasar.
Flecker, Michael. 2002. The Archaeological Excavation of the 10th Century Intan Shipwreck . Oxford: BAR Publishing.
Flecker, Michael. 2017. The origin of the Tang Shipwreck: A look at its archaeology and history. In The Tang Shipwreck: Art and
Exchange in the 9th Century . Edited by Alan Chong and Stephen A. Murphy. Singapore: Asian Civilisations Museum, pp. 22–39.
Fontein, Jan, ed. 1990. The Sculpture of Indonesia . Washington, DC: National Gallery of Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Furui, Ryosuke. 2016. Ājīvikas, Man
˙ibhadra and Early History of Eastern Bengal: A New Copperplate Inscription of Vainyagupta
and Its Implications. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 26: 657–81. [ CrossRef ]
Gänsicke, Susanne. 2016. Bodies in bronze: Four South Indian temple bronzes in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. In Metal 2016:
Proceedings of the Interim Meeting of the ICOM‑CC Metals Working Group, 26–30 September 2016, New Delhi, India . Edited by Raghu
Menon, Claudia Chemello and Achal Pandya. New Delhi: International Council of Museums, pp. 14–21.
Geiger, Wilhelm. 1938. A Grammar of the Sinhalese Language . Colombo: Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon Branch. Available online:
http://archive.org/details/geiger‑sinhala_grammar (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Geiger, Wilhelm. 1941. An Etymological Glossary of the Sinhalese Language . Colombo: Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon Branch.
Gericke, Johann F. C., and Taco Roorda. 1901. Javaansch‑Nederlandsch handwoordenboek, vermeerderd en verbeterd door Dr. A. C. Vreede
[...] met medewerking van Dr. J. G. H. Gunning [...] . Amsterdam: Müller.
Gerschheimer, Gerdi, and Brice Vincent. 2010. L’épée inscrite de Boston (K. 1048, 1040‑41 de notre ère). Arts Asiatiques 65: 109–20.
[CrossRef ]
Gippert, Jost. 2020. Identifying Fakes: Three Case Studies with Examples from Different Types of Written Artefacts. In Fakes and
Forgeries of Written Artefacts from Ancient Mesopotamia to Modern China . Edited by Cécile Michel and Michael Friedrich. Berlin
and Boston: De Gruyter, pp. 263–80. [ CrossRef ]
Gliozzo, Elisabetta. 2021. Pigments—Mercury‑based red (cinnabar‑vermilion) and white (calomel) and their degradation products.
Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences 13: 1–53. [ CrossRef ]
Gonda, Jan. 1973. Sanskrit in Indonesia , 2nd ed. Śata‑Pit
˙aka Series 99; New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture.
Goris, Roelof. 1954. Inscripties voor Anak Wungçu . Prasasti Bali diterbitkan oleh Lembaga Bahasa dan Budaja (Fakultet Sastra dan
Filsafat) Universitet Indonesia. 2 vols. Bandung: Masa Baru.
Gornall, Alastair. 2014. How Many Sounds are in Pāli? Schism, Identity and Ritual in the Theravāda sa ˙ngha. Journal of Indian
Philosophy 42: 511–50. [ CrossRef ]
Gornall, Alastair. 2020. Rewriting Buddhism: Pali Literature and Monastic Reform in Sri Lanka, 1157–1270 . London: UCL Press.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2011. Inscriptions of Sumatra: Further Data on the Epigraphy of the Musi and Batang Hari Rivers Basins. Archipel 81:
139–75. [ CrossRef ]

--- [Page 32] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 32 of 35
Griffiths, Arlo. 2012. Inscriptions of Sumatra, II: Short Epigraphs in Old Javanese. Wacana: Jurnal Ilmu Pengetahuan Budaya 14: 197–214.
[CrossRef ]
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014. Inscriptions of Sumatra, III: The Padang Lawas Corpus Studied along with Inscriptions from Sorik Mer‑
api (North Sumatra) and from Muara Takus (Riau). In History of Padang Lawas, North Sumatra, II: Societies of Padang Lawas
(Mid‑Ninth—Thirteenth Century CE) . Edited by Daniel Perret. Cahier d’Archipel 43. Paris: Association Archipel, pp. 211–53.
Available online: https://shs.hal.science/halshs‑01958932 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Griffiths, Arlo. 2018. The Corpus of Inscriptions in the Old Malay Language. In Writing for Eternity: A Survey of Epigraphy in Southeast
Asia. Edited by Daniel Perret. Études Thématiques 30. Paris: École française d’Extr ême‑Orient, pp. 275–83. Available online:
https://hal.archives‑ouvertes.fr/hal‑01920769 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Griffiths, Arlo. 2020. Rediscovering an Old Javanese Inscription: Mpu Mano’s Donation in Favor of a Buddhist Dignitary in 888 Śaka.
Archipel: Études Interdisciplinaires sur le Monde Insulindien 99: 107–41. [ CrossRef ]
Groeneveldt, Willem Pieter. 1887. Catalogus der Archaeologische Verzameling van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschap‑
pen. Batavia: Albrecht & Co.
Guy, John. 1994. The Lost Temples of Nagapattinam and Quanzhou: A Study in Sino‑Indian Relations. Silk Road Archaeology 3:
291–310.
Guy, John. 2000. Buddhist Bronzes of Southern India: Rediscovering a Lost History. Arts of Asia 30: 103–10.
Guy, John. 2011. Tamil Merchants and the Hindu‑Buddhist Diaspora in Early Southeast Asia. In Early Interactions Between South and
Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross‑Cultural Exchange . Edited by Pierre‑Yves Manguin, A. Mani and Geoff Wade. Singapore and
New Delhi: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies; Manohar India, pp. 243–62.
Guy, John. 2014. Lost Kingdoms: Hindu‑Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Harrisson, Tom, and Stanley J. O’Connor. 1967. The ‘Tantric Shrine’ Excavated at Santubong. Sarawak Museum Journal 15: 201–22.
Hartwell, Robert M. 1983. Tribute Missions to China, 960–1126 . Philadelphia: Robert M. Hartwell.
Hoogervorst, Tom. 2017. The Role of ‘Prakrit’ in Maritime Southeast Asia through 101 Etymologies. In Spirits and Ships: Cultural
Transfers in Early Monsoon Asia . Edited by Andrea Acri, Roger Blench and Alexandra Landmann. Singapore: ISEAS‑Yusof Ishak
Institute, pp. 375–440.
Hoshing, Jagannath Sastri. 1929. The Anekārtha Sa ˙ngraha of Āchārya Hema‑Chandra . Kashi Sanskrit Series (Haridas Sanskrit
Granthamālā) 68; Benares: The Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office. Available online: http://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.
2015.281051 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Inandiak, Elizabeth D. 2013. Atiśa: Voice of the Ashes. In Atiśa Śrī‑Dīpa ˙nkara‑jñāna and Cultural Renaissance. Proceedings of the In‑
ternational Conference 16th–23rd January 2013 . Edited by Shashibala. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for The Arts,
pp. 109–22.
Inandiak, Elizabeth D., Marie‑Louise Broch, and Alex Dea. 2018. Dreams from the Golden Island . Yogyakarta: Cahaya Timur.
Jacq‑Hergoualc’h, Michel. 2002. The Malay Peninsula: Crossroads of the Maritime Silk Road (100 BC–1300 AD) . Leiden: Brill.
Jenner, Philip N. 2009. A Dictionary of Angkorian Khmer . Pacific Linguistics 598. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, Research School of
Pacific and Asian Studies, The Australian National University. Available online: http://hdl.handle.net/1885/146750 (accessed on
13 May 2025).
Jett, Paul. 1993. A study of the gilding of Chinese Buddhist bronzes. In Metal Plating and Patination: Cultural, Technical and Historical
Developments . Edited by Susan La Niece and Paul Craddock. Oxford: Butterworth‑Heinemann, pp. 193–200.
Karashima, Noboru, and Y. Subbarayalu. 2009. Ancient and Medieval Tamil and Sanskrit Inscriptions Relating to Southeast Asia and
China. In Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia . Edited by Hermann Kulke, K.
Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 271–91.
Konow, Sten. 1931. Kalawan Copper‑Plate Inscription of the Year 134. Epigraphia Indica 21: 251–59. [ CrossRef ]
Kozok, Uli. 2015. Tanjung Tanah Manuscript TK 214. In A 14th Century Malay Code of Laws: The Nītisārasamuccaya . Edited by Uli
Kozok. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 50–161.
Krom, Nicolaas Johannes. 1931. Hindoe‑Javaansche Geschiedenis . The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Kulke, Hermann. 2009. The Naval Expeditions of the Cholas in the Context of Asian History. In Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflec‑
tions on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia . Edited by Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore:
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 1–19.
Kulke, Hermann. 2016. Śrīvijaya Revisited: Reflections on State Formation of a Southeast Asian Thalassocracy. Bulletin de l’École
Française d’Extr ême‑Orient 102: 45–95. [ CrossRef ]
Lee, Taehee. 2011. Sinan Shipwreck Collection at the National Museum of Korea. Journal of Korean Art & Archaeology 5: 105–16.
Li, Tao李焘 . 1881. Xu Zizhi Tongjian Changbian 續資治通鑑長編 . 980 Juan. Hangzhou: Zhejiang shuju.
Li, Yiwen. 2023. Networks of Faith and Profit: Monks, Merchants, and Exchanges between China and Japan, 839–1403 CE . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

--- [Page 33] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 33 of 35
Liebner, Horst Hubertus. 2014. The Siren of Cirebon: A Tenth‑Century Trading Vessel Lost in the Java Sea. Ph.D. dissertation, The
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
Liyanagamage, Amaradasa. 1978. A forgotten aspect of the relations between the Sinhalese and the Tamils: The Upasakajanalankara:
A re‑examination of its date and authorship and its significance in the history of South India and Ceylon. The Ceylon Historical
Journal 25: 95–142.
Lokesh Chandra. 1993. Od
˙d
˙iyāna: A New Interpretation. In Ludwig Sternbach Felicitation Volume . Edited by G. C. Sinha. Lucknow:
Akhila Bharatiya Sanskrit Parishad, vol. 1, pp. 491–514.
Mahdi, Waruno. 2005. Old Malay. In The Austronesian Languages of Asia and Madagascar . Edited by Alexander Adelaar and Nikolaus
P. Himmelmann. London and New York: Routledge, pp. 182–201.
Mahdi, Waruno. 2015. Script and Language of the Tanjung Tanah Manuscript. In A 14th Century Malay Code of Laws: The Nītisārasamuc‑
caya. Edited by Uli Kozok. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 162–220.
Majumdar, Ramesh C. 1933–1934. Note on the Sailendra Kings mentioned in the Leiden Plates. Epigraphia Indica 22: 281–84.
Malalasekera, George Pieris. 1928. The Pāli Literature of Ceylon . London: The Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Manguin, Pierre‑Yves. 1976. L’artillerie lég ère nousantarienne. A propos de six canons conservés dans des collections portugaises.
Arts Asiatiques 32: 233–68. [ CrossRef ]
Manguin, Pierre‑Yves. 1987. Études sumatranaises I. Palembang et Sriwijaya: Anciennes Hypoth èses, Recherches Nouvelles (Palem‑
bang Ouest). Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extr ême‑Orient 76: 337–402. [ CrossRef ]
Mechling, Mathilde, Brice Vincent, Pierre Baptiste, and David Bourgarit. 2018. Technical Investigations on Thirty‑Nine Indonesian
Bronze Statues (7th–11th c.) from the Musée National des Arts Asiatiques–Guimet, Paris. Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extr ême‑
Orient 104: 63–139. [ CrossRef ]
Meyanti, Lisda, and Wahyu Rizky Andhifani. 2021. Tradisi rajah di Sumatera: Sebuah kajian terhadap prasasti timah koleksi Yayasan
Padmasana Jambi. Siddhayātra 26: 1–12. [ CrossRef ]
Miksic, John N. 1985. Archaeological Research on the “Forbidden Hill” of Singapore: Excavations at Fort Canning, 1984 . Singapore: National
Museum of Singapore.
Miksic, John. 2016. Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra, 7th to 13th Century. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval
Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing, pp. 253–74. [ CrossRef ]
Minayeff, J. P. 1886. Gandha‑Vaṃsa. Journal of the Pali Text Society 1886: 54–80.
Museum of Overseas Communications History. 1997. Chapter 5: The excavated artefacts from the compartments. In Maritime Ar‑
chaeology in the People’s Republic of China . Edited by Jeremy Green. Perth: Australian National Centre of Excellence for Maritime
Archaeology, p. 49.
Neukom, Lukas, and Manideepa Patnaik. 2003. A Grammar of Oriya . Zürich: Seminar für Allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft der Univer‑
sität Zürich. Available online: http://archive.org/details/A‑grammar‑of‑oriya‑neukom‑patnaik‑2003 (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Notulen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap. 1924. Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal‑, Land‑ en Volkenkunde Uitgegeven Door het Koninklijk
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen: Deel LXIV . Batavia and Den Haag: Albrecht & Co; M. Nijhoff, pp. 334, 657
(no. 5824).
O’Connor, Stanley, Jr. 1972. Hindu Gods of Peninsular Siam . Ascona: Artibus Asiae Publishers.
Ouyang, Xiu 歐陽修 . 1936. Xin Tang Shu 新唐書 . 225 Juan. Shanghai: Shangwu yinshuguan.
Paranavitana, Senarat. 1943. No. 9. Polonnaruva: Fragmentary Slab‑Inscription of Sundara‑Mahadevi. Epigraphia Zeylanica IV.2 . London:
Oxford University Press, pp. 67–72.
Paranavitana, Senarat. 1944. Negapatam and Theravada Buddhism in South India. Journal of the Greater India Society 11: 17–25.
Pigeaud, Theodoor G. Th. 1924. De Tantu Panggĕlaran: Een oud‑Javaansch Prozageschrift, Uitgegeven, Vertaald en Toegelicht. Ph.D.
dissertation, ’s‑Gravenhage, Smits, Gravenhage, The Netherlands.
Poeger, Njoman. 1964. Raja Jayaçakti di Bali . Bachelor’s thesis, Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana, Denpasar, Indonesia.
Postma, Antoon. 1991. The Laguna Copper‑Plate Inscription: A Valuable Philippine Document. Bulletin of the Indo‑Pacific Prehistory
Association 11: 160–71. [ CrossRef ]
Pulleyblank, Edwin G. 1984. Middle Chinese: A Study in Historical Phonology . Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.
Rácová, Anna. 2007. Classifiers in Bengali. Asian and African Studies 16: 125–37. Available online: https://www.sav.sk/journals/
uploads/102313111_R%C3%A1cov%C3%A1.pdf (accessed on 13 May 2025).
Ramachandran, T. N. 1954. The Nāgapattinam and Other Buddhist Bronzes in the Madras Museum. Bulletin of the Madras Government
Museum 7: 1–150.
Ranawella, Sirimal. 2007. Dictionary of Sinhala Epigraphical Words , 1st ed. Colombo: Deptartment of Archaeology.
Rhys Davids, Thomas William, and William Stede, eds. 1925. The Pali Text Society’s Pali‑English Dictionary . London: The Pali
Text Society.
Robson, Stuart O., and Hadi Sidomulyo. 2021. Threads of the Unfolding Web: The Old Javanese Tantu Panggĕlaran . Singapore: ISEAS–
Yusof Ishak Institute.

--- [Page 34] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 34 of 35
Salmon, Claudine. 2002. Srivijaya, la Chine et les marchands chinois (Xe‑XIIes.): Quelques réflexions sur la société de l’empire
sumatranais. Archipel 63: 57–78. [ CrossRef ]
Salmon, Claudine. 2003. A Tentative Interpretation of the Chinese Inscription (1231) Engraved on a Bronze Gong Recovered in Muara
Jambi (Central Sumatra). Archipel 66: 91–112. [ CrossRef ]
Salomon, Richard. 1998. Indian Epigraphy: A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the Other Indo‑Aryan Languages .
New York: Oxford University Press.
Santosa, Ida Bagus. 1965. Prasasti‑Prasasti Radja Anak Wungçu . Undergraduate thesis, Fakultas Sastra, Universitas Udayana, Den‑
pasar, Indonesia.
Sastri, Hirananda. 1942. Nalanda and its Epigraphic Material . Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India No. 66. New Delhi:
Archaeological Survey of India.
Sattler, Gregory. 2024a. Temple Diplomacy, Sacred Rites, and Overseas Chinese During the Reign of Song Emperor Zhenzong
(997–1022). Religions 15: 1401. [ CrossRef ]
Sattler, Gregory. 2024b. Zhedong Sea Merchants and the China‑Japan Trade, ca. 800–1000. Journal of Song‑Yuan Studies 53: 59–92.
[CrossRef ]
Schafer, Edward H. 1956. The Early History of Lead Pigments and Cosmetics in China. T’oung Pao 44: 413–38. [ CrossRef ]
Schafer, Edward H. 1963. The Golden Peaches of Samarkand: A Study of T’ang Exotics . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Califor‑
nia Press.
Schafer, Edward H. 1967. The Vermilion Bird: T’ang Images of the South . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Schoterman, Jan A. 2016. Traces of Indonesian Influences in Tibet. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia. Networks of Masters,
Texts, Icons . Edited by Andrea Acri. Translated by Roy Jordaan, and Mark E. Long. [Originally published as Indonesische Sporen
in Tibet . Leiden: Brill, 1986]. Singapore: ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, pp. 113–21. [ CrossRef ]
Sen, Tansen. 2003. Buddhism, Diplomacy and Trade: The Realignment of Sino‑Indian Relations, 600–1400 . Honolulu: University of
Hawai’i Press.
Sen, Tansen. 2009. The Military Campaigns of Rajendra Chola and the Chola‑Srivijaya‑China Triangle. In Nagapattinam to Suvarnad‑
wipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia . Edited by Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja.
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 61–75.
Seshadri, Gokul. 2009. New Perspectives on Nagapattinam: The Medieval Port City in the Context of Political, Religious, and Com‑
mercial Exchanges between South India, Southeast Asia and China. In Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval
Expeditions to Southeast Asia . Edited by Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja. Singapore: Institute of Southeast
Asian Studies, pp. 102–34.
Sinclair, Iain. 2021. Dharmakīrti of Kedah: His Life, Work and Troubled Times. Temasek Working Papers Series 2: 1–35.
Sircar, Dinesh Chandra. 1965. Indian Epigraphy . Delhi, Varanasi and Patna: Motilal Banarsidass.
Skilling, Peter. 1997. Dharmakīrti’s Durbodhāloka and the Literature of Śrīvijaya. Journal of the Siam Society 85: 187–94.
Skilling, Peter. 2007. Geographies of Intertextuality: Buddhist Literature in pre‑modern Siam. Aséanie: Sciences Humaines en Asie du
Sud‑Est 19: 91–112. [ CrossRef ]
Takakusu, Junjirō 高楠順次郎 , and Kaigyoku Watanabe 渡邊海旭 , eds. 1924–1932. Taishō shinshū daizōkyō 大正新脩大藏經 . [Buddhist
Canon compiled under the Taishō Era, 1912–1926.]. 100 vols. Tokyo: Taishō issaikyō kankōkai 大正一切經刊行會 .
Teeuw, Andries, and Stuart O. Robson. 2005. Bhomāntaka: The Death of Bhoma . Bibliotheca Indonesica 32. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Tejowasono, Ninny Susanti, Ni Ketut Puji Astiti Laksmi, Wahyu Rizky Andhifani, Hedwi Prihatmoko, Lisda Meyanti, Churmatin
Nasoichah, Dodi Chandra, and Dara Minanda. 2019. Katalog Prasasti Timah di Sumatra. Prasasti Timah di Indonesia . Jakarta: Pusat
Penelitian Arkeologi Nasional. Available online: https://arkenas.kemdikbud.go.id/Katalog_Prasasti_Timah_22.pdf (accessed on
13 May 2025).
Treloar, Francis E. 1967. Ritual Objects Illustrating Indian Alchemy and Tantric Religious Practice. Isis58: 396–97. [ CrossRef ]
Treloar, Francis E. 1968. Chemical analysis of some metal objects from Chandi Bukit Batu Pahat, Kedah: Suggested origin and date.
Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 41: 193–98.
Tuo Tuo 脫脫 . 1977. Song shi宋史 . 496 Juan. Beijing: Zhonghua shuju.
Turner, Ralph Lilley. 1962–1966. A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo‑Aryan Languages . London: Oxford University Press.
Vincent, Brice. 2012. Saṃrit : Étude de la métallurgie du bronze dans le Cambodge angkorien (fin du xie—début du xiiiesiècle). Ph.D.
dissertation, Université Sorbonne Nouvelle, Paris, France.
Vogel, Jean Philippe. 1919. Het koninkrijk Çrîvijaya. Bijdragen tot de Taal‑, Land‑ en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch‑Indië 75: 626–37.
[CrossRef ]
von Verschuer, Charlotte. 1999. Japan’s Foreign Relations 600 to 1200 A.D.: A Translation from Zenrin Kokuhōki. Monumenta Nip‑
ponica 54: 1–39. [ CrossRef ]
Wheatley, Paul. 1959. Geographical Notes on some Commodities involved in Sung Maritime Trade. Journal of the Malayan Branch of
the Royal Asiatic Society 32: 4–140.

--- [Page 35] ---
Religions 2025 ,16, 664 35 of 35
Wilkinson, Richard J. 1959. A Malay‑English Dictionary (Romanised) . London and New York: MacMillan & Co; St Martin’s.
Wolters, Oliver W. 1958. Tāmbrali ˙nga. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 21: 587–607. Available online: https://www.
jstor.org/stable/610619 (accessed on 13 May 2025). [ CrossRef ]
Wolters, Oliver W. 1966. A Note on the Capital of Śrīvijaya during the Eleventh Century. Artibus Asiae. Supplementum 23: 225–39.
[CrossRef ]
Wolters, Oliver W. 1967. Early Indonesian Commerce: A Study of the Origins of Srivijaya . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Worsley, Peter, Supomo Suryohudoyo, Thomas M. Hunter, and Margaret Fletcher. 2013. Mpu Monagun
˙a’s Sumanasāntaka: An Old
Javanese Epic Poem, Its Indian Source and Balinese Illustrations . Bibliotheca Indonesica 36. Leiden: Brill.
Xu, Song 徐松 . 1936. Song Hui Yao Jigao 宋會要輯稿 . 500 Juan. Beijing: Guoli Beiping tushuguan.
Zhang, Yekun, Meizi Xie, and Yuanlin Wang. 2024. Metal Trade and Contraband: Archaeological Discoveries and Insights from the
Nanhai No.1 Merchant Shipwreck. Journal of Maritime Archaeology 19: 265–89. [ CrossRef ]
Zhao, Rugua 趙汝适 . n.d. Zhu Fan Zhi 諸蕃志 . 2 Juan. Beijing: Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin.
Zhao, Yanwei 趙彥衛 . 2009. Yunlu Manchao 雲麓漫鈔 . 15 Juan. Beijing: Airusheng shuzihua jishu yanjiu zhongxin.
Zoetmulder, Petrus J. 1982. Old Javanese‑English Dictionary . 2 vols. Gravenhage: Nijhoff.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual au‑
thor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.