--- [Page 1] ---
1I am delighted to contribute to this volume in honour of my ﬁrst academic
mentor, who introduced me to the study of Sanskrit, Indian  Philosophy, and tan-
tric Śaiva traditions at the ‘Sapienza’ University of Rome in the earl y 2000 s. His
fascinating lectures, some of which I still vividly remember 20years later, as well
as his brilliant and erudite writings, inspired me to purs ue the study of Śaivism. I
will always be grateful to him for having encouraged me to pur sue my interest in
the Śaiva traditions from Java and Bali, which I developed during m y studies in
Rome and which still forms my main research focus to date.
2In this article, PY Ś refers to the Yogasūtra(YS) with the Bhāṣyacommentary,
possibly by the redactor and systematizer of the sūtras, i.e. Patañjali himself (Maas
2013: 61). On the dating of the PY Ś, see ibid., and Bronkhorst 1985 : 194.
3Cf. Sferra 2000 :14, referring (for P āñcarātra) to the Viṣñusaṃhitā(30.57ff.)
and the Sanatkumārasaṃhitā(R¢ṣirātra 1.14cd, 3.59cd), and to a number of tantricFrom Isolation to Union:
Pātañjala vis-à-vis Śaiva Understandings of the
Meaning and Goal of Yoga1
ANDREA ACRI
(École Pratique des Hautes Études, EPHE, PSL University)
1. Introduction
Two of the major currents of Sanskritic yoga in the medieval
period were P ātañjala Yoga (also referred to as A ṣṭāṅga Yoga,
‘Yoga of [i.e., attained by] Eight Auxiliaries’), going back  to the
seminal Pātañjalayogaśāstra (PYŚ, ca. 325–425)2and its commenta-
ries, and Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga (‘Yoga of [i.e., attained by] Six Auxil -
iaries’), which was widespread in tantric Śaiva (and, to a lesser
extent, Vai ṣñava Pāñcarātra and Buddhist)3scriptural and non-

--- [Page 2] ---
scriptural sources. Recent scholarship has illumina ted various
aspects of the textual and religio-philosophical history of these two
distinct yet related traditions, and also dealt with the relatio nship
between them, for instance with respect to the number and status
of the auxiliaries ( aṅga).4Considering the enormous amount of
available textual sources, more work needs to be done on the rela -
tionship between P ātañjala Yoga and Śaiva Yoga from the early
medieval period onwards. One particular vantage poi nt from
which to approach this problem is the deﬁnition of yoga and its
ultimate goal. This is epitomized by the ideal of isolation ( kaiva-
lya) of Spirit ( puruṣa) from Nature ( prakr¢ti) by way of the puriﬁca-
tion of the mind ( citta), espoused by P ātañjala Yoga, vis-à-vis the
ideal of union ( sāyujya ), qualitative sameness ( samatā, tulya, etc.)
or identiﬁcation ( sātmya/tādātmya) with the Lord, championed by
the Śaiva varieties of Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga.
In this article I shall return to this topic — to the stud y of which
Prof. Torella has also contributed5 — by comparatively surveying
pertinent passages on the meaning and goal of yoga found in th e
PYŚ and in selected genres of medieval Śaiva literature, namely
scriptural sources and commentaries belonging to the P āśupata
and Saiddh āntika traditions, as well as Old Javanese Śaiva scriptu-
res. My aim here is not so much to present new material, but
rather to analyze and link together some relevant passages to
advance the argument that, even though P ātañjala and non-
Pātañjala systems of yoga might very well have emerged from a
share d prototypical milieu,6the PYŚ appears to have exerted an
inﬂuence on the textual sources belonging to rival systems. Fo r
36Andrea Acri
Buddhist texts ( ibid.: 15–16). Cf. also Zigmund-Cerbu 1963 : 129–130, referring to a
Pāñcarātra Sanskrit inscription from the Khmer domains men tioning ṣaḍaṅgayoga .
4Recent overviews of Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga and its relationship with A ṣṭāṅga Yoga are
Vasudeva 2004 , 2017 ; Mallinson and Singleton 2017 : 7–11(cf. also 17–45on the
deﬁnitions of yoga, the ancillaries, etc.). On Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga, cf. the seminal work
by Grönbold ([English translation] 1996 ), as well as Sferra ( 2000 , esp. 11–16) and
Zigmund-Cerbu 1963 .
5See in particular his discussion of the perception of P ātañjala Yoga by non-
dualist Śaiva authors (Torella 2019 , 2020 ).
6While Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga is likely to predate P ātañjala Yoga, it is not impossible
that, as suggested by Wallis ( 2016 ), Śaiva sources ‘drew on a common complex
yogic milieu of the classical period, which must have included m any texts now
lost to us. The ṣaḍaṅgayoga was part of this milieu and clearly developed indepen-
dently of Patañjali’s more famous aṣṭāṅgayoga .’

--- [Page 3] ---
instance, it seems that many Śaiva authors, while providing their
own sectarian accounts of the ultimate goal of yoga, did have t he
Pātañjala understandings in mind. This intertextuality reveals an
appropriation or creative (re)use7of the Pātañjala terminology by
the Śaiva sources, and its application to afﬁrm the hierarchically
higher soteriological efﬁcacy of the Śaiva system. Whether charac-
terized by silent appropriation or more open criticism — by  either
openly or subtly critiquing it, Śaiva authors intended to distin-
guish themselves from a system that they deemed to be a rival as
well as a partial truth —, this attitude suggests not only t hat the Śai-
vas may have been partly indebted to P ātañjala Yoga, but also that
they could not avoid engaging in a dialectic relationship wit h what
must have been a widespread and authoritative system of yoga in
the mainstream Brahmanical religio-philosophical discourse.8
2. Śaiva attitudes towards P ātañjala Yoga
Śaiva texts, both by anonymous and identiﬁable authors, displ ay a
somewhat ambivalent stance towards yoga, championing one or
more approaches across the fourfold soteriological spectrum
forme d by observances ( caryā), ritual ( kriyā), gnosis ( jñāna), and
yoga — the last item representing a sort of ‘middle ground’ b etwe-
en action and knowledge, in which to varying degrees internalized
psycho-physical practices play a role as propaedeutic means of sal -
vation and empowerment.9As Torella ( 2019 : 656) has recently
37From Isolation to Union
7The label ‘adaptive reuse,’ traditionally employed in the domain of archi-
tecture, has been recently discussed by Freschi and Maas ( 2017 ) in the context of
South Asian textual and religio-philosophical traditions, as comprising four main
aspects, viz. ‘( 1.) the involvement of at least one consciously acting agent, who ,
(2.) in order to achieve a certain purpose, ( 3.) resumes the usage ( 4.) of a clear-
ly identiﬁable object after an interruption in its being used.  The attribute “adap-
tive” presupposes that the reusing person pursues a speciﬁc pur pose by adapting
something already existent to his or her speciﬁc needs’ ( ibid. 2017 : 13). Deeming
points 3and especially 4somewhat too restrictive, here I employ the term ‘reuse’
in a more general sense, as reﬂecting dynamics of conscious mimesis , appropria-
tion and reelaboration characterizing traditional Indic text-build ing practices.
8Birch and Hargreaves ( 2016 : 37), commenting on Patañjali’s inﬂuence on
medieval Brahmanical literature, contend: ‘It is as  though many erudite
Brahmins kept the Pātañjalayogaśāstrain their manuscript collections and pulled
it off the shelf, so to speak, when in need of a reference on yo ga.’
9A pioneering yet still useful study of yoga in Śaiva Saiddh āntika texts is
Brunner 1994 .

--- [Page 4] ---
put it, ‘side by side with an utterly derogatory attitude, th e texts of
non-dual Śaivism also address high praises to yoga.’ In this con-
text, ‘yoga’ refers to a variety of tantric yoga practices. Thes e were
sometimes contrasted with P ātañjala Yoga, deemed to be a less
effective path characterized by detachment ( vairāgya) and repeat -
ed practice ( abhyāsa), as opposed to the tantric path characterized
by empowerment and quick and effortless efﬁcacy in bringing
about the identiﬁcation with Śiva or the supreme consciousness.10
For instance, the Kashmirian polymath Abhinavagupta ( ﬂ. ca.
975–1025) repeatedly critiques the yogāṅgas of Patañjali (and any
yogāṅgas, indeed) as an inferior, or even useless, method for reali-
zing the supreme consciousness that is the highest goal of th e non-
dualist Krama system.11Another point of disagreement between
Śaiva and P ātañjala Yoga traditions is the emphasis on God in the
former system, as opposed to its marginality in the latter, where
īśvara covers the secondary role of a perfect puruṣathat could
serve as an optional support for focusing the attention of ch roni-
cally agitated minds, or that of a bestower of grace who may at  best
help those who are in search of liberation (PY Ś 1.4, 2.1). This lack
of theism inevitably relegated the P ātañjala Yoga system (and
Sāṅkhya too, which provided much of its philosophical back-
ground) to a secondary position in the soteriological hier archy in
the eyes of the Śaivas — a view that already emerges in the seminal
Pāśupata treatise Pañcārthabhāṣya(PBh) and continues to be
attest ed in later sources of the Śaiva Mantram ārga.
A similarly negative, yet somewhat more ambivalent, stance
towards P ātañjala Yoga can be detected in the works by Śaiva
Saiddhāntika exegetes, like the strictly dualistic Bha ṭṭa Nārāyaña -
38Andrea Acri
10Cf. verse 14of the Kashmirian nondualist short work Svabodhodayamañjar ī
by Vāmanadatta, contrasting this method (described in Yogasūtra1.12and
Bhagavadgītā4.36cd) to the ‘effortless’ ( ayatnena ) method of suppression ( niro-
dha) championed by the text (Torella 2000 : 404).
11Torella 2019 lists such passages as Tantrāloka4.87(against the ﬁve yama s or
restraints), 4.95(against the three aṅgas of ﬁxation, visualization, and absor-
ption), 4.104(against repeated practice, abhyāsa), 4.90ab (against breath-con-
trol), and 10.215cd–216ab (against withdrawal of the senses from their objects),
as well as Mālinīvijayavārttika 2.106–107; compare Torella 2020 : 846–847, and see
also Tantrasāra4.13–27. The consideration of the aṅgas as mere preliminaries to
the yoga proper, which is the realization of Śiva’s powers, is a fairly widespread
motif in Śaiva literature.

--- [Page 5] ---
kañṭha ( ﬂ.ca. 900–950), Bhaṭṭa Rāmaka ñṭha (II) ( ﬂ.ca.
950–1000), and Aghora śiva (ﬂ.ca. mid- 12thc.). Since these authors
reveal familiarity with the PY Ś, they seemingly consider Patañjali
as an authority in matters of yoga. For instance, in his commen ta-
ry to the Yogapāda(YP) of the Mataṅgapārameśvaratantra , Rāma -
kañṭha refers to the Yogasūtras (YS) no less than 28times, and
quote s 19different sūtras (Creisméas 2015 : 84–85).12Other
Saiddhān tika authors too pay occasional lip service to Patañjali:
for instance, N ārāyañakañṭha, in his commentary on the YP of the
Mr¢gendratantra , approvingly refers to the YS and Patañjali multiple
times (e.g. adYP 6, 7cd, 54c–55b), and so does Aghora śiva’s com-
mentary on the Yogaprakara ñaof the Sarvajñānottara .13Post- 10th-c.
Saiddhāntika commentator Śrī Kumāradeva also quotes Patañjali
with approval,14and Īśānaśiva in his Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati (YP
2) utilizes the eight yogāṅgas taught by Patañjali instead of the six
taught in most tantric scriptures. At the same time, like t heir
Pāśupata predecessors, those authors never hesitate to afﬁrm the
supremacy of Śaiva Yoga, and sometimes openly critique Patañjali
as the promulgator of a system of yoga that leads only to par tial
liberation.15But in doing so, they seem to implicitly acknowledge
that that system was an obligatory point of referen ce in the
domain of yoga by their time.
Inﬂuence from P ātañjala Yoga is detectable in some revealed
Śaiva scriptures, such as Siddh āntatantras, especially those belong -
ing to the later stratum of the corpus. Whereas the majority o f the
Siddhāntatantras adhered to the Śaiva Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga, post- 10th-c.
Sanskrit scriptures hailing from South India (alongside th e 8th–9th
39From Isolation to Union
12Patañjali’s philosophy is referred to extensively by the same au thor in his
commentary on the Kiraña, in the Nareśvaraparīkṣāprakāśa, and in the Paramokṣa -
nirāsakārikāvr¢tti, commenting on the homonymous work by Sadyojyotis (ca.
675–725). The latter critiques the ideal of kaivalya by Sāṅkhyas (as well as the
adherents to the yoga of Patañjali) in verses 2a and 53–56(Watson, Goodall and
Sarma 2013: 225–228, 445–460).
13On Sarvajñānottara , Yogaprakara ña 2, quoting YS 2.30and 2.32(on yama s
and niyama s).
14Cf., e.g., Tātparyadīpikāon Bhoja’s Tattvaprakāśa52(4thpariccheda ), refer-
ring to the treatise of bhagavat patañjali (YS 1.10: abhāvapratyayālambanā nidrā),
and echoing the wording of YS 1.15(dr¢ṣṭānuśravikaviṣaya vit r¢ṣñasya vaśīkārasaṃjñā
vairagyam ) in the expression avairāgyaṃ ca d r¢ṣṭānuśravikaviṣayarāgaḥ.
15Cf., e.g., R āmaka ñṭha on MataṅgaYP 1.3d.

--- [Page 6] ---
c. Kashmirian Netratantra ),16such as the Ajitāgama (Kriyāpāda
2.29),17the Makuṭāgama (Prāñāyāmavidhi 1–2ab),18the Suprabhe -
dāgama (YP 3.53–55ab),19the Śāradātilakatantra (YP 25.5–6),20and
the Jñānasiddhyāgama ,21as well as Tamil texts such as Tirumular’s
Tirumantiram,22adopt the eight auxiliaries of P ātañjala Yoga (or
simply refer to A ṣṭāṅga Yoga) instead, while retaining at the same
time their theistic yoga.23Intriguingly enough, earlier scriptures
preserved in both Nepalese and South Indian manuscripts pre-
sent redacted versions of the auxiliaries in the manuscripts or edi-
tions from the latter region, thereby documenting a shift f rom
Ṣaḍaṅga to Aṣṭāṅga Yoga .24Some scriptures, such as the yoga sec-
40Andrea Acri
16Cf. 8.9(tataḥ prabh r¢ti mukto ’sau na punarjanma c āpnuyāt| aṣṭāṅgena tu yoge-
na prāpnuyān nānyataḥ kvacit ) and 8.21(evam aṣṭāṅgayogena svabh āvasthaṃ paraṃ
dhruvam | dr¢ṣṭvā vañcayate kālam am r¢teśaṃ paraṃ vibhum ), as well as the descrip-
tion of the auxiliaries in-between. The text, however, still up holds a theistic view:
supreme absorption ( paraḥ samādhiḥ) implies the identiﬁcation of the Self with
Śiva ( 8.18).
17yamādy aṣṭāṅgayogena vimal īkr¢tamānasaiḥ| pūjyate netarais tasya p ūjākr¢tyaṃ
viśiṣyate||.
18yamaniyamāsanañ ca [em.; yamanīm āsanaṃ caiva ms.] prāñāyāmam ataḥ
param | pratyāhāraṃ ca dhyānaṃ ca dhārañā ca [em.; na ms.] samādhikam ||
aṣṭāṅgam iti vijñeya ṃ yogīnāṃ yogasādhanam | (= Suprabhedāgama YP 3.54).
19śaivānāṃ sādhanaṃ proktaṃ pañcadhā samudāhr¢tam|yogāṣṭakāṅgau vakṣyāmi
śr¢ñuṣvaikāgramānasaḥ|| yamaniyamāsanañ ca pr āñāyāmaṃ tataḥ param |pra-
tyāhārañ ca dhyānañ ca dhārañā ca samādhikam || aṣṭāṅgam iti vijñeya ṃ yogināṃ
yogasādhanam |.
20yogāṣṭāṅ gair imān jitvā yogino yogam āpnuyuḥ| yamaniyamāv āsanaprāñāyāmau
tataḥ param || pratyāhāraṃ dhārañākhyaṃ dhyānaṃ sārdhaṃ samādhinā| aṣṭāṅgāny
āhur etāni yogino yogas ādhane .
21Cf. pp. 1, 21, 38. Sanderson ( 2014 : 90) sees this work by Jñ ānaśivācārya as a
product of a late medieval South Indian milieu ‘showing a sim ilar admixture of
the Tamil Śaiva Siddh ānta, Śāktism, and Ved ānta.’
22Cf. Tantra 3, p. 86(vv. 551–552), where A ṣṭāṅga Yoga is regarded as a means
to reach samādhi, equated to jñāna.
23Similarly, except the Viṣñusaṃhitāand the Sanatkumārasaṃhitā, the majori-
ty of the P āñcarātra Saṃhitās adopt A ṣṭāṅga Yoga: cf. Sferra 2000 : 14, n. 12.
24For instance, the Devako ṭṭai edition of the Kirañatantra (58.2c–3) substitut -
es tarka of Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga with āsana. Since the Nepalese manuscripts retain tarka ,
Vasudeva ( 2004 : 377) has regarded this substitution ‘as an attempt [by a modern
editor] to approximate the yoga of the Kirañato the classical system of Patañjali’;
Goodall ( 2004 : 351–352, n. 735), however, has shown that the South Indian palm-
leaf manuscripts on which the Devako ṭṭai edition was based already read āsana,
thus suggesting that the adoption of the P ātañjala list of aṅgas goes back to the
premodern period.

--- [Page 7] ---
tions of the relatively late and ‘ śāstric’ Mr¢gendra,25reﬂect an
attempt to ‘hybridize’ the Śaiva and P ātañjala lists of aṅgas. An
analogous attempt is reﬂected in haṭhayoga texts, such as the
Ghera ñḍasaṃhitā, the Gorakṣaśataka, and the Vivekamārtañḍa,
which represents a distinct, ‘Patañjaliﬁed’ traditi on of tantric
Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga.26
A similar attempt to bridge the two systems is documented i n
roughly coeval (Sanskrit-)Old Javanese Śaiva scriptures, for in-
stance through the creation of hybrid lists of seven aṅgas halfway
between Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga and A ṣṭāṅga Yoga, as in the case of the
Tattvajñāna,27or the adoption of certain P ātañjala elements and
terminology in a Śaiva doctrinal framework, such as in the case of
chapter 19of the Jñānasiddhānta, or again the appropriation —
and modiﬁcation along theistic lines — of P ātañjala Yoga by incor-
porating excerpts from the PY Ś, as in the case of the Dharma
Pātañjala .28
These attempts by post- 9th-c. authors and transmitters of Śaiva
texts to ‘interpolate’ certain passages in order to make them com -
pliant with P ātañjala Yoga, or to hybridize Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga and
Pātañjala Yoga, suggest a gradual rise in status and importance of
the latter system in the course of the second half of the ﬁrst  mil-
lennium CEacross the wider Indic world.29On the other hand,
they also tell us that P ātañjala Yoga had achieved a somewhat para-
doxical status in the religio-philosophical discourse, namely  that
of an authoritative system that did not engender a robust phi loso-
41From Isolation to Union
25See YP 3, listing eight auxiliaries including the six of Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga (in
which vīkṣaña= tarka ) plus japa and yoga itself as the climax: prāñāyāmaḥ pra-
tyāhāro dhārañā dhyanavīkṣañe| japaḥ samādhir ity aṅgāny aṅgī yogo ’ṣṭamaḥ svayam .
26On these texts, and the relationship between Patañjali and haṭhayoga , see
Larson 2009 and Mallinson 2007 ; on Śaivism’s appropriation of haṭhayoga , see
Mallinson 2014 .
27This text includes seven auxiliaries, i.e. the six standard auxi liaries of
Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga plus āsana of Pātañjala Yoga. See Table 19.1in Acri 2021 .
28For a survey of these sources and, more generally, of yoga in I ndonesia, see
Acri 2021 .
29The rise and ‘canonization’ of P ātañjala Yoga into Classical Yoga seems to
have occurred in parallel to the rise and ‘canonization’ of the ph ilosophical
system of Ved ānta — which elected P ātañjala Yoga as one of the valid means to
achieve liberation — within what we now call ‘Hinduism.’ The ri se of Ved ānta
inﬂuenced also Śaivism, which in South India ﬂourished as a non-dualist Tami l
variety of Śaiva Siddh ānta from the 11th/12thc. onwards.

--- [Page 8] ---
phical tradition — its textual corpus being limited to a han dful of
authoritative commentaries —, but that was restated in different
ways by different currents, including the theistic ones.30
The above-mentioned facts highlight the close dialectic inter-
relationship existing between these two systems of yoga and th eir
textual corpora throughout the medieval and early m odern
period. Starting from these premises, in what follows I wi ll compa-
ratively discuss some select textual passages containing deﬁnition s
of yoga and its goal in the PY Ś and medieval Śaiva literature.
3. The PYŚ
As remarked above, while Śaiva authors diverged from P ātañjala
Yoga sources on such relatively marginal aspects as the deﬁniti on
and number of the aṅgas or the emphasis on aṅgas31other than
samādhi as their climax,32or again the accentuation of sudden
real ization rather than gradual practice, a more central point of
disagreement was the very deﬁnition of yoga and its ultimate go al.
For instance, the commentary on YS 1.1(atha yogānuśāsanam ,
‘here begins the authoritative teaching on yoga’) clariﬁes that yoga
is to be intended in the sense of absorption ( yogaḥ samādhiḥ), i.e.,
samādhau (and then, by implication, not in the sense of connec-
42Andrea Acri
30Insofar that its primary focus was not on philosophy bu t on practice,
Pātañjala Yoga as formulated in the PY Śwas prone to transcend the boundaries
of distinct philosophical schools, lending itself to integ ration into the scriptures
of rival systems. The PY Ś was described by Larson ( 1999 ) as a ‘tradition text’ of
‘non-sectarian’ nature, which, conﬂating S āṅkhya and Buddhist formulations,
was itself characterized by a hybrid character. It has also been argued  by various
scholars (whose views are summarized in Larson 2008 : 62–64) that the doctrine
of the eight ancillaries originally belonged to a different—and p ossibly older—
system and was merged into the PY Śby the editor and commentator of the sūtras.
31For instance, āsana s, yama s, and niyama s are usually mentioned in Śaiva
texts containing accounts of Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga, yet they are considered mere prepa-
ratory practices to the upāyas or yogāṅgas proper.
32While Pātañjala Yoga does not include tarka among the auxiliaries (but one
may argue that, historically, saṃprajñāta samādhi is related to tarka ), some Śaiva
texts, such as the Mālinīvijayottara and post- 10th-c. Kashmirian nondual Śaiva exe-
getes, consider it the most important among the auxiliaries (Vas udeva 2004 :
373). In many early Śaiva texts, samādhiis not regarded as the most important
aṅga, and it is never regarded as a synonym of yoga, unlike in th e PYŚ (Mallinson
and Singleton 2017 : 325).

--- [Page 9] ---
tion, i.e. yoge).33Thus, the root yujentails samādhāna(‘concentra-
tion,’ or ‘absorption’) into one’s own Self, that is to  say isolation
(kaivalya ) of puruṣafrom prakr¢ti. That goal is achieved through the
puriﬁcation of citta from the three constituents ( guña) of Nature,
which thereby ceases to mistakenly identify itself with the puruṣa.34
It follows that in the PY Ś samādhi is not only one, and the highest,
among the ancillaries of yoga, but rather forms its very essence,
which leads to the state of isolation amounting to ﬁnal releas e.
Having deﬁned yoga as the depletion of the activities of the
mind ( yogaś cittav r¢ttinirodhaḥ) in sūtra1.2, the PYŚ goes on to de -
scribe the ultimate goal resulting from the higher type of samādhi
in sūtra1.3: tadā draṣṭuḥ svarūpe ’vasthānam, ‘Then the seer is estab -
lished in its own form.’ This is a key sūtra, echoes of which, as I will
argue, appear to recur in many of the passages discussed in this
article. A central term is avasthānam, from the stem ava+sthā,
which could be rendered into English as ‘to stay, abide, sto p at any
place,’ ‘to abide in a state or condition,’ ‘to remain or con tinue
(doing anything),’ ‘to be found, exist, be present,’ ‘to enter, be
absorbed in’ (Monier-Williams 1899 : 106). The last two meanings
seem to be particularly appropriate here in view of the meaning of
samādhias ‘intense absorption or a kind of trance’ ( ibid.: 1159),
alongside the other meanings of the stem samādhā, ‘to place, set,
lay, ﬁx, direct, settle, adjust’ ( ibid.). Thus, the P ātañjala system
regards liberation as the spirit or Soul being immersed and p erma-
nently established in itself.
The aforementioned state coincides with the end of its mista-
ken connection or identiﬁcation ( saṃyoga) with the tainted, outer-
oriented mind, which is part of prakr¢ti:35in samādhi, the realization
of the ontological difference between the subject and Nature, cal-
43From Isolation to Union
33A deﬁnition explicitly mentioning the derivation from the Dhātupāṭha
(IV.68) is found in Bhoja’s commentary on the YS, the Rājamārtañḍa (ca. early
11thc.), on the same sūtra(yogo yuktaḥ samādhānaṃ | yuja samādhau ), as well as in
Vācaspatimi śra’s ( 9thc.) commentary ( Tattvavaiśāradī) on the PY Ś (ad. 1.1, p. 2),
which explicitly excludes yujir yoge (as in DhātupāṭhaVII.7). Cf. below , n. 66.
34Cf. YS 3.55: sattvapuruṣayoḥ śuddhisāmye kaivalyam iti , ‘When the purity of
the consciousness ( sattva≈ buddhi ) is equal to that of the Spirit, Isolation
[occurs].’
35Cf. YS 2.17: draṣṭr¢dr¢śayoḥ saṃyogo heyahetu ḥ, ‘The connection between the
seer and what is seen is the cause of what is to be removed (i.e.,  suffering).’

--- [Page 10] ---
led vivekakhyāti,causes the cessation of suffering and the comple-
te separation (or isolation or aloneness, kaivalya ) of the subject
from Nature. This state of liberation is conceived of as an unr e-
stricted self-awareness of the subject, which is then established in
its essential form ( svarūpapratiṣṭha: see PY Ś4.34). The term
svarūpapratiṣṭha, which can be regarded as conveying a meaning
that is analogous to that of sūtra1.3, occurs multiple times in the
PYŚ, viz. in 1.2, 1.3, 2.25, 3.50, and 4.34 — the ﬁnal, climatic sūtra
of the work; cf. svarūpapratilambhe in 2.6. Clearly, all these key
terms epitomize the P ātañjala idea of liberation as kaivalya .
Having brieﬂy presented relevant textual passages of the PY Ś
and the key ideas conveyed by them, I shall now discuss instances
of critique and/or reuse of this P ātañjala Yoga material in Śaiva
literature.
4. Pāśupata sources
The view that yoga is to be intended in the sense of  ‘union’ be -
tween the individual Soul and the Lord is already f ound in the
‘proto-tantric’ P āśupata system, the earliest documented move-
ment of Śaivism. Attesting to an early form of Śaiva yoga, this tradi-
tion — or rather constellation of traditions, colle ctively part of the
Atimārga movement — arguably constitutes the prototypica l sys -
tem from which many medieval currents of Śaiva yoga originated.
For the P āñcārthika Pāśupata system, whose philosophical
tenets are outlined in Kau ñḍinya’s PBh (prob. 4th/5thc.) on the
Pāśupatasūtras (PS) and in the Gañakārikās (GK; prob. 8thc.) with
Bhāsarvajña’s Ratnaṭīkā (RṬ; prob. 10thc.), yoga (in the sense of
‘union with God’) is one of the ﬁve principles or padārthas system -
atized by Kau ñḍinya. The P āśupatas knew a speciﬁc form of yoga,
called pāśupatayoga . This yoga, which is not described in the philo-
sophical treatises but in Pur āñic texts,36mainly consisted in such
disciplines as breath-control and postures, supernatural powers,  as
well as a form of ‘yogic suicide’ ( utkrānti).37As such, it approached
44Andrea Acri
36See the early Skandapurāña(chapters 174–183); chapters 11, 14and 15of the
Vāyupurāña; ch. 33of the Vāyavīyasaṃhitāof the Śivapurāña; as well as several
chapters in the Liṅgapurāña.
37The Pāśupata adept had to die before being united with Rudra (Sanderson
2014 : 10–11). It is relevant to point out here that utkrāntiis already mentioned as
a means leading to liberation in PY Ś 3.39.

--- [Page 11] ---
the kriyāyogaoutlined in the second chapter of the PY Ś, but, un like
it, it was also characterized by a strongly theistic nuance.
We do not know much about the philosophical framework of
this system of yoga, but some textual passages suggest that i t may
have been indebted to ideas elaborated in both P ātañjala and
Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika milieus. Hara ( 2002 : 25–26) argued that, al -
though P āśupata theologians tried to deviate as much as possible
from (Pātañjala) Yoga and even looked down upon it, condemn -
ing it as a false view and regarding its goal ( kaivalya ) as leading to
suffering, its tradition still ‘supplied the basic framework
(Grundgerüst) for the formation of the P āśupata theology’ ( ibid.:
46); furthermore, P āśupata Śaivism ‘tried to distinguish itself from
the “Yoga” as a philosophical system, while taking full advant age of
the “yoga” as a common heritage (Gemeingut) of Indian culture’
(ibid.). Similarly, Hara ( ibid.: 153) argued that the P āśupata philo-
sophical system emerged from S āṅkhya and Ny āya-Vaiśeṣika
ideas.38It is, therefore, not unreasonable to suppose that, while
the yoga of the P āśupatas tried to distinguish itself from those of
its predecessors, especially by evolving in a theistic direction , it was
also intellectually indebted to them.
Be this as it may, the critique of ‘Yoga’ alongside S āṅkhya
(sāṅkhyayoga ),39and the association of both with kaivalya that we
45From Isolation to Union
38‘Although the date of Kau ñḍinya is still uncertain, the main source he used
for the philosophical foundation obviously was from the Sāṃkhya school of
thought, though we meet occasionally the concepts of Ny āya as well as Vai śeṣika’;
cf. Gonda 1963 : 214. Several scholars (cf., e.g., Bhandarkar 1913: 117; Matilal
1977 : 85; Lorenzen 1991 : 110, 134–135, 191; Hara 2002 : 278) have noted that P āśu -
patism was indebted to the Vai śeṣika system, and vice-versa. Cf. Preisendanz 2011:
‘Śaivism was the dominant religious background of the Vai śeṣika tradition from
at least the classical period onward […]. P āśupatas were among those who were
interested in Vai śeṣika and wrote on it, and thus inﬂuenced the development of
the tradition.’
39At least seven occurrences of this compound are found in the PBh  (viz. ad
1.1[twice ], 2.17, 5.7, 5.39[twice ]). The fact that this compound should not be
interpreted as ‘the method ( yoga) of Sāṅkhya’ is suggested not only by the con-
text, but also by the fact that in PBh ad5.8we ﬁnd a separation between Yoga and
Sāṅkhya: evaṃ yat sāṃkhyaṃ yogaś ca var ñayati […]. Cf. PBh ad5.46: yogaviśeṣaḥ |
anyeṣāṃ kaivalyam |iha tu viśeṣo vikara ñam iti , ‘Now the method of distinction with
respect to yoga. In other systems the ﬁnal goal is perfect isol ation ( kaivalya ), but
here the ﬁnal goal is better, namely, freedom from the instrumen ts’ (tr. Hara
2002 : 24), and ad5.40, stating that the P āśupata system is not founded on Yoga

--- [Page 12] ---
ﬁnd in the PBh suggest that Kau ñḍinya had a non-theistic/non-
Pāśupata form of yoga in mind. This may very well have been
Pātañjala Yoga; assuming that the PBh was composed at a slightly
later date than the PY Ś, it is not impossible that Kau ñḍinya might
have had access to that text. Thus, while the yoga described in
Pāśupata philosophical treatises bears some similarities with the
yoga described in the Vaiśeṣikasūtra(VS),40thereby reﬂecting a dif-
ferent prototypical line of ﬁliation — perhaps, a lost non-P ātañjala
Yogaśāstraattributed to Hira ñyagarbha,41or other sources belong -
ing to an early ‘common yogic milieu’42—, one may still try to
detect instances of intertextuality between the PY Ś and the PBh
(as well as the later R Ṭ) — something that has already been noted,
for instance, with respect to such yogic items as the siddhi s or the
yama s and niyama s featuring in the PBh.43
In PBh 1.1, Kau ñḍinya deﬁnes yoga as a (particular) contact
(saṃyoga) between the Soul ( ātman ) and the Lord ( īśvara):
atrātmeśvarasaṃyogo yogaḥ. In this expression, which occurs no less
46Andrea Acri
(in the P ātañjala sense?) as it forms an incomplete kind of knowledge lead ing to
kaivalya . Compare R Ṭ, p. 14.28and p. 15.3(Pāśupata Yoga is superior as it brings
about the complete end of suffering, not just kaivalya ). Hara ( ibid.) notes that
‘the schools from which Kau ñḍinya tries to distinguish his own are S āṃkhya and
Yoga’, whose highest goals are relegated to a position of second ary importance.
PBh ad1.1, p. 5.15–16, states that S āṅkhyas and the Lords of Sa ṅkhya and
(Pātañjala) Yoga are beasts ( paśu); on pp. 2–3, it states that those attaining kaiva-
lya(kaivalyagataḥ; cf. RṬ p. 23.5–7) are still in the cycle of transmigration, while
the Pāśupata adept, being beyond kaivalya (kaivalyavyatirikta ḥ, PBh ad5.40),
obtains the end of suffering (Hara 2002 : 27).
40It should be noted that the relevant sūtras, describing yoga and mokṣa, were
attributed by Wezler ( 1982 ) to the later, (P ātañjala?) yoga-inﬂuenced layers of
the text. See infra .
41Harimoto ( 2021 : 72) has hypothesizes the existence of an early system of
yoga comprising ﬁve aṅgas (āsana, prāñāyāma, pratyāhāra, anddhārañā) subscrib -
ing to the Vai śeṣika mechanism of perception caused by contact ( sambandha /
sannikarṣa/saṃyoga) between objects, sense faculties, mind, and the Self (cf. PY Ś
2.54–55), and according to which yoga consisted in the contact ( saṃyoga) be -
tween mind and Self only (cf. Vivara ñaon PYŚ 1.1; Harimoto 2014 : 200–203).
Harimoto traces this type of yoga back to a pre-P ātañjala yogaśāstratraditionally
ascribed to Hira ñyagarbha (= Brahm ā), which used Vai śeṣika frameworks to
describe its philosophical and soteriological system. Cf. belo w, n. 63.
42Cf. above, n. 6.
43See Hara 2002 (esp. 17–46); cf. also the practice of ‘eruption’ of the breath
(udghāta) described in the PY Ś, the PBh, and several tantric texts (see Mallinson
and Singleton 2017 : 132–133).

--- [Page 13] ---
than seven times in the PBh,44yoga coincides with the climax of
the system. This deﬁnition mirrors the particular contact ( saṃyo-
ga) between the thinking-organ ( manas ) and the ātman in the
Vaiśeṣika deﬁnition of yoga (and mokṣa) in VS 5.2.16–17, which has
been regarded by Wezler ( 1982 ) as an inﬂuence by (P ātañjala?)
Yoga — for a yoga-centred soteriology was not part of the origi nal
system, being unattested in the earliest stratum of the VS.45In
Kauñḍinya’s formulation of saṃyoga, the term īśvara is used instead
of manas , which gives to the deﬁnition of yoga a theistic o rientation.
Now, the ‘special contact’ postulated by the Vai śeṣikas presuppos -
es the absence (i.e., its elimination by way of yoga) of the ‘ wrong
contact’, engendering suffering, between the manas and the Soul:
cf. VS 5.2.20, tadabhāve saṃyogābhāvo ’prādurbhāvah sa moksa ḥ,
‘Since this [ adr¢ṣṭa] does not exist, there is no contact [between
internal organ and Soul, i.e. life], and the non-manifestation [of a
new body]. That is liberation.’46This sūtraclosely mirrors YS 2.25:
tadabhāvāt saṃyogābhāvo hānaṃ tad d r¢śeḥ kaivalyam , ‘Since this
[ignorance that is the cause of the pain to be eliminated] does n ot
exist, there is no contact [between the mind and the spirit]. This
is the elimination [of pain], the isolation of consciousnes s.’47
47From Isolation to Union
44PBh 1.1, 1.20, 2.11, 5.2, 5.12, 5.20, 5.23.
45Cf. VS 5.2.16–17: indriyamano ’rthasannikar ṣāt sukhaduḥkhe tadanārambhātma-
sthe manasi | sa śarīrasya sukhadu ḥkhābhāvaḥ | sa yogah , ‘Pleasure and pain [arise]
out of the drawing near to each other of sense(s), internal organ , and object [of
cognition]; this (i.e. the drawing near to each other...) does n ot arise when the
internal organ is in the soul. [Then] there is neither pleasur e nor pain for the
embodied [soul]. This is yoga’ (as reconstructed and translated by Wezler 1982 :
663, who emends saṃyoga into sa yogaḥ); Candrānanda’s Vr¢tti(9thc.) on sūtra17,
yadā hy ātmani mano ’vasthitam nendriyesu , ‘when the internal organ is established
in the soul and not in the organs of senses’ ( ibid.: 650–652); and 9.13, ātmany
ātmamanasoḥ saṃyogaviśeṣād ātmapratyakṣam, ‘Because of a particular contact of
soul and internal organ [taking place] in the soul [there arises ] perception of the
soul’ ( ibid.: 666). Wezler ( ibid.: 673–674) tentatively identiﬁed in the Padārtha -
dharmasaṅgraha by Praśastapāda (early 6thc.) a terminus post quem for the redac-
tion of these sūtras into the VS, but also reminded that ‘one must not necessari -
ly take for granted that these alterations and expansions of the VS cannot but be
posterior to him’. This bears implications for the issue o f intertextuality dis -
cussed here. For an analogous inﬂuence by the PY Ś on the Nyāyasūtrabhāṣyaby
Pakṣilasvāmin Vātsyāyana, see Oberhammer ( 1964 ) and Wezler ( 1984 ).
46According to Wezler ( 1982 : 651, 669), this sūtratoo would belong to the
later, Pātañjala Yoga-inﬂuenced layer of the text.
47This wrong type of contact was deﬁned in YS 2.17: draṣṭr¢dr¢śayoḥ saṃyogo

--- [Page 14] ---
Thus, while the PBh’s deﬁnition of yoga, echoing the formu lation
found in the VS, departs from the one given in the PY Ś, it also
seems to presuppose it as an intermediary step, so to speak. Th at
this was the case may also be evinced by the sequence of sūtras
5.33–40of the PS:
labhate rudras āyujyaṃ || sadā rudram anusmaran || chittvā doṣāñāṃ
hetujālasya mūlam ||buddhyā||svaṃ cittaṃ48|| sthāpayitvā ca rudre ||
ekaḥ kṣemī san vītaśokaḥ || apramādī gacched du ḥkhānām antam
īśaprasādāt ||
[The Pāśupata adept] obtains union with Rudra, keeping Rudra
in his mind at all times. Having cut the root of the net of  causes of
faults by means of intellect and having ﬁxed the mind by itsel f on
Rudra [continuously], alone, secure, free from sorrow, careful, h e
may reach the end of suffering, because of the grace of the Lord.
This above-quoted string of sūtras, explaining the category of
‘yoga’, characterizes the climax of the system, that is to say t he
ﬁnal stage ( avasthā) of the ﬁvefold ascetic career of the P āśupata
adept according to Kau ñḍinya, during which he puts an end to his
life in a charnel ground through ‘yoga.’ It presents concept ual
and terminological analogies with both the PY Ś’s and the VS’s
deﬁnition of yoga. First, sūtras 33–34declare that the goal of the
system, union with Rudra ( rudrasāyujyaṃ), is to be obtained
through constant recollection ( anusmara ) of him.49Second, sūtras
35–36identify in the intellect ( buddhi ) the instrument to cut the
root of the net of causes of faults ( doṣāñāṃ hetujālasya mūlam — a
concept that is close to the S āṅkhya idea of samyagd r¢ṣṭior ‘right
knowledge’ taking place in the buddhi (or in the citta, for Yoga).
This operation discriminates the difference between prakr¢tiand
48Andrea Acri
heyahetuḥ, ‘The connection between the seer and what is seen is the cause of w hat
is to be removed (i.e., suffering).’
48I apply the emendation, suggested by Sanderson (* 2004 ), of saṃcittam to
svaṃ cittam . Compare R Ṭ adGK 1.7: yo vidyānugr¢hītayā buddhyā svaṃ cittaṃ nirā -
lambanaṃ karoti so ’mūḍha ity ucyate , and Pampāmāhātmya 11.61cd–62ab: tasmād
asmin svakaṃ cittaṃsamstāpatyantaniścalam (cf. Bisschop 2006 : 17).
49Anusmara seems to be an equivalent of dhyānaof both Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga and
Aṣṭāṅga Yoga (or, rather, of tarka of Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga), here denoting a type of
meditation involving the visualization of the deity Compare the expression īśva-
rapra ñidhānain the Kriy āyoga section of the PY Ś.

--- [Page 15] ---
puruṣa, thereby leading to their separation. Third, in contrast to
the PYŚ’s ideal of kaivalya as the Spirit’s establishment in its own
form, as well as the VS’s establishment of the manas in the Soul,
sūtras 37–38deﬁne the climax of ‘yoga’ as establishing the citta —
not a distinctive term of S āṅkhya or Ny āya-Vaiśeṣika, but rather of
Pātañjala Yoga philosophy50— existing ‘by itself’ ( svaṃ) in Rudra
(sthāpayitvā ca rudre ), thereby shifting the target from the Soul/
Self to the deity. Kau ñḍinya glosses svaṃas svayam eva svagu ñatve-
na, ‘by itself, with only its inherent property’, which cal ls to mind
the Pātañjala Yoga idea of an untainted, ‘self-contained’ citta or
buddhi leading to kaivalya .51Thus, it is as if Kau ñḍinya — who, just
like Patañjali, might have not only arranged but also redacted an d
even compiled some of the sūtras — wanted to convey the idea
that the pure cittain the state of kaivalya , triggered by buddhi , con-
stitutes an intermediary stage, and that the ﬁnal stage consists i n
its permanent ﬁxation on Rudra. According to the commentary,
this state is also achieved through the control of the senses from
their objects ( evaṃ viṣayebhya indriy āñāṃ jayaḥkartavyaḥ, PBh
5.38), a practice that is described in VS 5.2.16(indriyamano ’rtha-
sannikarṣāt), as well as in YS 2.54(svaviṣayāsaṃprayoge citta-
svarūpānukāra ivendriyāñāṃ pratyāhāraḥ) and Bhāṣyathereon
(where it is regarded as leading to cittanirodha ). The ensuing state
of release ( ekaḥ kṣemī san vītaśokaḥ, PS 5.39), introduced in the
PBh with a polemic note against ‘those released by way of the
Sāṅkhya and Yoga and who have reached isolation ( kaivalya )
[but] lack knowledge of themselves or of anyone else,’52includes
the end of suffering — an ideal shared by Ny āya-Vaiśeṣika soterio-
logy and, implicitly, P ātañjala Yoga (cf. YS 2.25).
One may compare the expression sthāpayitvā(the causative
form of the root sthā) in PS 5.38(as well as rudrastham, ‘ﬁxed on
Rudra,’ in PBh ad5.37) to similar expressions based on the same
49From Isolation to Union
50Citta occurs only once in the PS ( 5.37), but some 18times in the PBh. Cf.
PBh ad5.37, where antaḥkaraña, coupled with manas , glosses citta (cittaṃ mano
’ntaḥkarañam ity arthaḥ). Note that the treatment of citta, antaḥkaraña and manas
in Śaiva (Mantram ārga) sources is often imprecise (Vasudeva 2004 : 425).
51Compare R Ṭ adGK 1.7: yo vidyānugr¢hītayā buddhyā svaṃ cittaṃ nirālambanaṃ
karoti so ’mūḍha ity ucyate ||tayā dhārañayā nirmalīkr¢taṃ cittaṃ rudratattve sth āpitaṃ
sudīrghakālaṃ na cyavata.
52sāṃkhyayogamukt āḥ kaivalyagatāḥ svātmaparātmajñānarahitāḥ.Cf. notes 39, 56.

--- [Page 16] ---
verbal root sthāin the climatic passages of the PY Ś quoted above
(i.e., avasthānam in 1.3and pratiṣṭhain 4.34), as well as to ātmasthe
in VS 5.2.16(compare ātmani mano ’vasthitam in Candr ānanda’s
Vr¢ttion VS 5.2.17). The root sthāis commented in PBh on 5.38as
follows:
atra ṣṭhā gatiniv r¢ttau|cittasya rudrād avyavadhānaṃ sthitir ity ucyate |
[…] rudre cittam upa śleṣayitavyaṃ nānyatrety artha ḥ |evaṃ viṣayebhya
indriyāñāṃ jayaḥ kartavyaḥ |
Here the root sthāmeans to cessation of motion. The state of rest
is the non-separation of the mind with Rudra. […] The meaning
is: the mind should join Rudra and nothing else. Thus, o ne should
restrain the sense-organs from their objects.
Although the root sthāis used the context of the ﬁnal and perpet -
ual abiding of the mind in Rudra rather than of the  Soul in its own
form, its gloss as ‘cessation of motion’ ( gatiniv r¢ttau) ﬁnds a parallel
in the PY Ś’s explanation of the actionlessness of the puruṣain1.9.53
A deﬁnition of yoga ( lakṣañaṃ … yogasya ) and liberation as the
manas abiding in the Soul and the conjunction of the Soul with
the Lord is found in the P āśupata Yoga section (ch. 1)54of the
early Skandapurāña (ca. 6th–7thc.):
pratyayasya bahir lopo manasy ātmani saṃsthite || 14cd
abhisandhiḥ pare caiva īśvarasyātmanaś ca ha |
eṣa yoga iti vyāsa kīrtitaḥ śambhunā purā|| 15
When the mind abides in the Soul, [there arises] the interrupti on
of the mental conditions pertaining to the outer reality, as w ell as
the conjunction of the Lord and the Soul in the supreme realit y.
O Vyāsa, this was declared to be yoga by Śambhu in former times.
This passage, which traces the teaching of yoga to Śambhu (either
Śiva or Brahm ā, i.e. Hira ñyagarbha?), contains echoes of both the
Vaiśeṣika and P āśupata deﬁnitions of yoga, apparently conceived
50Andrea Acri
53‘Thus [another example]: The Spirit is one whose fundamental p roperties
have been denied, it is without action. In [the sentence] “The arr ow comes to a
standstill, will come to a standstill, has come to a standsti ll”, the meaning of the
verbal root ( sthā, “to stand still”) is to be understood as the cessation of  motion’
(tathā — pratiṣiddhavastudharm ā, niṣkriyaḥ puruṣaḥ | tiṣṭhati bāñaḥ, sthāsyati, sthi-
taḥ, iti gatiniv r¢ttau dhātvarthaḥ).
54This is the Dhyānavidhi , ch. 174of the Skandapurāña(Bhaṭṭarāī’s ed.).

--- [Page 17] ---
of as two steps towards liberation — the ﬁrst purifying th e manas
by isolating it from the sense-objects and establishing it i n the
Soul, the second conjoining the Soul with Rudra.
A deﬁnition of liberation as the establishment of the citta in
Rudra is elaborated in a passage of a much later text, the prob.
10th-c. RṬ on the GK ( 1.6ab, pp. 16.3–11), which bears close simila-
rities with the section of the PS/PBh discussed above:
doṣahetujālasya mūlākhyānivr¢ttau cittasya rudre ’vasth ānam atyanta-
niścalatvaṃ sthitir ucyate | […] kevalarudratattv āvasthiticittatva ṃ
yogitvam | anurudhyamānacittav r¢ttitvaṃ nityātmatvam | […] śarīrādi-
viyuktatvam ekatvam | […] bāhyādhyātmikakriyāśūnyatvaṃ niṣkriya -
tvam | samastacint ārahitatvaṃ vītaśokatvam ity et āni lakṣañāny asya
yogasyātyantotk r¢ṣṭatvapratipādanārtham uktāni |
Fixedness is when the mind, upon the destruction of what is  cal-
led the root of the net of causes of faults comes to rest in R udra
and is absolutely immovable. [...] The condition of yogin ( yogitva )
means that the mind rests uniquely on the principle of Rudra.  The
condition of being of constant Soul means the state where all t he
activity of the mind ( cittav r¢tti) is depleted. […] The state of being
alone ( ekatva ) means the separation of the body [from the Soul],
etc. […] The state of actionlessness means absence of both bodily
and spiritual action. Freedom from suffering means the absence
of all concerns. These characteristics are mentioned in order to
show the extreme eminence of [this type of] union.
The commentary on ﬁxedness ( sthiti ), the fourth attainment
(lābha) in the system outlined by the text, closely echoes PBh
5.35–40: atyantaniścalatvam (‘the state of being absolutely immova-
ble’) conveys the same idea of gatiniv r¢ttau, and so does niṣkriya -
tvam (‘the state of being without action’), which parallels the
niṣkriyaḥ(puruṣaḥ) of PYŚ 1.9.5–6referred to above. Further, the
expression cittasya rudre ’vasth ānam (cf. kevalarudratattv āvasthitici -
ttatvaṃ in the same passage) roughly corresponds to cittasya rudrād
avyavadhānaṃ in PBh 5.38; the former expression may be regar-
ded as a virtual ‘calque’ of draṣṭuḥ svarūpe ’vasthānam in PYŚ 1.3,
shifting the focus from the Self to Rudra. Another notable expres-
sion is anurudhyamānacittav r¢ttitvaṃ (‘the state where all the activi-
ty of the mind is depleted’), qualifying nityātmatvam,55which
51From Isolation to Union
55Cf. PBh ad5.3, discussing the state of constancy ( nityatva ) of the Soul when
the adept, having stilled the mind by modifying its link with the objects of per-

--- [Page 18] ---
recalls the yogaś cittav r¢ttinirodhaḥof YS 1.2. It implies that, while
yoga itself is not the stilling or cleansing of the  mind, a
stilled/pure mind is a necessary condition for reaching liber a-
tion.56Further, the deﬁnition of the state ensuing from the cleans -
ing of the mind, i.e. aloneness ( ekatva ), intended as the separation
of the body from the Soul and so forth (cf. ekaḥin PS 5.39), calls
to mind the concept of liberation as absence of the connection
between manas and the Soul, which causes the non-manifestation
of a new body, expounded in VS 5.2.20. However, I wonder whe-
ther the expression also implies a reference to (or reuse of) the
Pātañjala Yoga concept of kaivalya , which, as we have seen above,
in the Pāśupata system seems to have been understood as a neces-
sary yet intermediate step in the process of attaining yoga or ﬁnal
liberation as union with Rudra — the superiority of pāśupatayoga
lying in its theistic force.
It is tempting to regard the above-discussed kaleidoscope of
conceptual and terminological correspondences detected among
relevant passages of the PY Ś, the VS, the PS- cum-PBh, the early
Skandapurāña, and the R Ṭ as an instance of intertextuality span-
ning several centuries. Admittedly, it is often difﬁcult t o disentan-
gle the exact relationship between those correspondences and
echoes, not to mention the directionality of any actual borrow ings
— for example, one may hypothesize that both the VS and the
PBh independently drew these concepts from a non-P ātañjala
Haira ñyagarbha system of yoga (Harimoto 2021 : 72), or some
kind of shared yogic milieu. However, it does not seem unreas ona-
ble to propose that the PBh, while critiquing S āṅkhya and
(Pātañjala) Yoga, might have had in mind the PY Ś. This is con -
sistent with the window proposed for the dating of the PB h to the
4th/5thc. CE, which is nearly coeval to the probable date of compi-
lation of the PY Ś (i.e. 325–425), and suggests that soon after its
52Andrea Acri
ception and ﬁxing it on God, is joined to Rudra: tasmin nirv r¢tte maheśvare yukto
nitya ity ucyate | ātmā iti kṣetrajñam āha, ‘[The Soul] is called “constant” when this
[object, i.e. God] has been achieved and one is united with the Great  Lord. They
call “Soul” the knower of the ﬁeld.’
56This stance reﬂects a common trend in Śaiva deﬁnitions of yoga (see
below), according to which a mind stilled/cleansed by way of (P ātañjala) yoga is
a necessary yet not sufﬁcient condition to reach release, being only  capable of
leading the adept to kaivalya .

--- [Page 19] ---
ﬁrst diffusion this text had already started to be perceived as  an
authoritative source in the Indic religio-philosophical disco urse.
Further, the apparent similarities existing between the PY Ś and
the RṬ suggest that the latter text consciously reused the former
when formulating its own theistic soteriology.57The fact that the
reuse of the PY Ś is more evident in the R Ṭ supports the view that
the status of the former text became increasingly important in
theistic milieus near the end of the ﬁrst millennium CE.
5. Śaiva Saiddhāntika sources
In harmony with the P āśupata scriptures and commentaries
discussed above, Śaiva sources of the tantric Mantram ārga reﬂect
a thoroughly theistic understanding of the meaning and goal of
yoga. As many such deﬁnitions of yoga in Mantram ārga scriptural
sources have been studied before,58there is no need to delve into
them here. I would like to return, however, to a passage of th e
Trika scripture Mālinīvijayottara (1.46–47) that describes a speciﬁc
form of initiation called yogadīkṣā:
yogadīkṣāṃ samāsādya jñātvā yogaṃ samabhyaset |
yogasiddhiṃ avāpnoti tadante śāśvataṃ padam ||
anena kramayogena sa ṃprāptaḥ paramaṃ padam |
na bhūyaḥ paśutām eti śuddhe svātmani tiṣṭhati ||
After receiving initiation into yoga and learning [the fundamen-
tals of] yoga, he should practise [it]. He will attain the perfect ion
of yoga and at its end the eternal state. By this sequence of event s
the ultimate state is attained. One does not return into bondag e
but abides in one’s own pure self. (tr. Vasudeva 2004 : 245)
Vasudeva ( 2004 : 245) notes that yogadīkṣāis not a variety of initia-
tion commonly encountered in Śaiva scriptures, and argues that it
may reﬂect an originally P āśupata method, for the compounds
53From Isolation to Union
57Cf. Maas 2020 : ‘Soon after its composition, the Pātañjalayogaśāstrawas
recognized widely as an authoritative exposition of  Sāṃkhya philosophy.’
Elsewhere, Maas ( 2013 : 66) proposes a slightly later timeframe: ‘the PY Ś was
widely accepted to be the authoritative exposition of Yoga at the beginning of
the seventh century.’
58See, e.g., Brunner 1994 ; Vasudeva 2004 ; Mallinson and Singleton 2017 :
19–23.

--- [Page 20] ---
yogadīkṣaḥand yogadīkṣitaḥoccur in the P āśupata inscription of
Paldi (Udaipur).59This may very well be the case, and yet the
supreme state ( paramaṃ padam ) conceived of as the elimination of
bondage and ‘abiding in one’s own pure Self’ ( śuddhe svātmani
tiṣṭhati) strikes me as similar to the P ātañjala yoga goal of isolation,
as worded in YS 1.3, 2.25, 3.50, and 4.34. Thus, one may detect a
terminological inﬂuence from the PY Ś,60whether direct or via a
PYŚ-inﬂuenced P āśupata source. It goes without saying that the
passage may have been formulated with a theistic background in
mind: since the supreme state mentioned in the verse must reﬂect
the goal of the Śaivas, abiding into one’s pure Self can only corre-
spond to identity with the Lord, as per the non-dualist st ance of
the Mālinīvijayottara .
I will now discuss selected passages drawn from commentaries
on the Yogap ādas of Saiddh āntika scriptures by authors who,
while still subscribing to Śaiva Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga, reveal an either
implicit or explicit knowledge of Patañjali’s system. Whether their
intent was polemic or neutral, those passages suggest that thos e
authors, when characterizing Śaiva Yoga, considered the PY Ś an
obligatory reference (counter)point.
An oft-quoted passage featuring a typically Śaiva deﬁnition of
yoga as union with Śiva is the commentary by N ārāyañakañṭha on
Mr¢gendratantra YP 2a (tadātmavattvaṃ yogitvaṃ). In line with what
we expect from the orthodox current of dualistic Śaiva Siddh ānta
espoused by N ārāyañakañṭha, it is introduced by a statement and
a quotation from the early Saiddh āntika work Svāyambhuva -
sūtrasaṅgraha (Vidyāpāda [VP] 2.24) on the centrality of initiation
(dīkṣā) as the sole means capable of bestowing liberation, deﬁned
as niratiśayakaivalya, i.e. isolation without superior.61A translation
by Sanderson runs as follows:
54Andrea Acri
59Indeed, yogadīkṣitaḥalso occurs in PBh ad1.9. A description of yogadīkṣā
also constitutes the main subject of Pa ṭala 17of the Saiddh āntika Kālottarāgama .
60Cf. also the śloka-quarter ātmani cetana ḥ sthitaḥin the Dharma Pātañjala
(quoted below, p. 61). It is perhaps not coincidental that another passage of the
Mālinīvijayottara that deals with the propaedeutic role of initiation in the qua-
liﬁcation for Śaiva Yoga has been shown to betray an inﬂuence from the PY Ś: cf.
4.6–8, referring to sabīja yoga, which corresponds to sabīja samādhiof YS 1.46
(Vasudeva 2004 : 244).
61dīkṣaiva mocayaty ūrdhvaṃ śaivaṃ dhāma nayaty api ||iti śruter dīkṣāyā eva nira-
tiśayakaivalyāvāptihetutvāt. A relatively early Saiddh āntika scripture that characte-

--- [Page 21] ---
tadātmavattvaṃ yogitvam | 2a
yujyate śivatvalakṣañayā svasvarūpābhivyaktyāvaśyam iti yogī | tasya
bhāvo yogitvam ātmavattvāvinābhāvi | ata eva ‘yujir yoge’ ity asya dh ātor
yogaśabdo jñeyaḥ na tu ‘ yuja sam ādhau’ iti | asya sam ādhirūpasya
tadaṅgatveneṣṭatvāt ||
To have self-mastery [is] to be a yogin.
The term Yogin means ‘one who is necessarily conjoined with’
(√yuj) the manifestation of his nature[. A yogin], in other words ,
[is one who must experience] the Śiva-state (śivatvam ). It is being
a yogin [in this sense] that is the invariable concomitant of self-
mastery. It should be understood, therefore, that the term Yo ga
derives its meaning not from √yuj‘to be absorbed [in contempla-
tion]’ but from √yuj‘to join.’ This is supported by the fact that
Yoga in the form of absorption ( samādhiḥ) is taught [separately] as
one of its auxiliaries. (tr. Sanderson * 1999 : 4)
Nārāyañakañṭha stresses the theistic nature of yoga by explicitly
stating that yujis to be understood as ‘union’ (rather than samā -
dhi, as in the PY Ś), and this union is ‘unity of nature’ with the
Lord; further, he explains that samādhiis one of the auxiliaries of
yoga, thus implicitly critiquing the PY Ś’s view that samādhiis a
synonym of yoga itself.62Nārāyañakañṭha here is seemingly play -
ing with words, for tadātmavattvam can mean both (in a general
sense) ‘self-mastery’63and (in a more speciﬁcally Śaiva sense) ‘to
55From Isolation to Union
rizes the attainment of Śiva-ness as the goal of yoga (and not of initiation) is the
Sarvajñānottara (Yogaprakara ña 30): ‘Having entered into that [state of unity
with Śiva brought about by yoga], the knower of yoga visibly beco mes Śiva, whose
nature is immortality, who is omniscient, omnipervasive, su btle, the Lord of eve-
rything and the all-doer’, amr¢tātmā śivaḥ sākṣāt tasmin viṣṭas tu yogavit | sarvajña ḥ
sarvagaḥ sūkṣmaḥ sarveśaḥ sarvak r¢d bhavet . Aghoraśiva, commenting upon this pas-
sage, tries to bring it in line with the Saiddh āntika orthodoxy by identifying yoga
as part of dīkṣā.
62Cf. Aghora śiva’s gloss on Sarvajñānottara, Yogaprakara ña 2: na tu pātañjalāder
[em.; patañjalāder ms.] iva samādhirūpaṃ tasya yogāṅgatvena śruteḥ [em.;śrutems.].
63As suggested by jitākṣayopapadyate (‘It is accomplished by he whose senses
have been controlled’) in pāda2b, and its gloss jitendriyasya tv acir ād eva
svarūpalābhaḥ (‘He whose senses have been controlled quickly obtains his essen-
tial nature’). N ārāyañakañṭha closes the passage with a quotation by Sanaka that
echoes the deﬁnition of Yoga in the V Ś 5.2.16–17(quoted above, n. 45): ‘When a
person has controlled his senses, their objects, the subtle elem ents, and his mind,
he becomes free of all desire and dissolves into his ultimate id entity’ ( indriyā -
ñīndriyārthāṃś ca tanmātrāñi manas tathā | niyamya gatisa ṅkalpaḥ paramā tmani līya-

--- [Page 22] ---
possess one’s ātman ’: as pointed out by Brunner ( 1994 : 428–429),
to understand the statement tadātmavattvaṃ yogitvam we must
remember that, according to Saiddh āntika scriptures, ‘the es -
sence of any sentient being […] is not different from Śiva’s own[;
…] to “possess one’s ātman ” is therefore to have become like
Śiva.’64As Nārāyañakañṭha explains, the yogin is characterized by
Śiva-ness as the inevitable consequence of the manifestation of his
real nature ( śivatvalakṣañayā svasvarūpābhivyaktyāvaśyam).
Abhivyakti is typically used in Śaiva texts as a technical term deno-
ting the ‘manifestation’ of the divine qualities or powers ( for
instance, jñānaśa ktiand kriyāśakti) intrinsic to Śiva’s nature that
takes place in the liberated adept. Thus, one’s real nature is nei-
ther the isolated, pure Soul (untainted by guñas and identiﬁcation
with prakr¢ti), as the P ātañjala view would have it, nor the exclusive
union with Rudra, as the P āśupatas would have it, but rather the
manifestation of the pure Soul’s intrinsic Śiva-ness, which
amounts to qualitative (but not numerical) sameness with Śiva.65
Explicitly (and polemically) reinterpreting the sense of yujagainst
the PYŚ’s understanding in the background,66the above-quoted
passage appears to constitute a manifesto of the superiority of  the
Sai ddhāntika ideal of yoga and its goal vis-à-vis the P ātañjala one.
56Andrea Acri
te iti). Sanaka here may be one of the sons of Brahm ā, also called Haira ñya -
garbha, who was deemed to be the revealer of the yoga-themed treatise Dha -
rmaputrikā(Barois 2020 : 12–13; 29n. 55), and the promulgator of a non- or pre-
Pātañjala yogaśāstra(Harimoto 2021 : 72).
64Contrast the P āśupata deﬁnition of yogitvam as the mind’s resting unique-
ly on the principle of Rudra ( kevalarudratattv āvasthiticittatva ṃ) expounded in R Ṭ
1.6ab.
65A nondualistic Śaiva deﬁnitions of yoga as identity (i.e., both qualitative
and numerical sameness) with the Lord is found, e.g., in K ṣemarāja’s Uddyota on
Svacchandatantra 6.45cd: [...] yogaṃ tadaikātmyaprāptim,‘[...] yoga is the attain-
ment of identity with that.’
66Analogous reinterpretations are found in R āmaka ñṭha’s Mataṅgavr¢tti,
introduction to YP 1.7mentioning the auxiliaries ( atha kaścid ‘yuja sam ādhāv’ iti
dhātvarthānusāreña ‘yogaḥ samādhir’ iti bhrāntyā manyate pātañjalabhāṣyakāra iti );
and in Aghora śiva’s commentary on Sarvajñānottara , Yogaprakara ña 1.2(ata eva
yujir yoga [em.;yujin yoga eva ms.] ity asmād dhātor yogaśabdaḥ, na tu yuja sam ādhāv
iti). As pointed out above (n. 33), since neither the Yogasūtrabhāṣyanor Bhoja’s
Rājamārtañḍamake an explicit reference to the rejected etymology of yujin the
sense of ‘connection’ (and the latter does not homologize yoga to samādhi), the
commentary that R āmaka ñṭha had in mind was probably the Tattvavaiśāradīby
Vācaspatimi śra (adPYŚ 1.1): see Creisméas 2015: 90.

--- [Page 23] ---
I will now turn to a passage by the Saiddh āntika exegete R āma -
kañṭha (II), N ārāyañakañṭha’s son. In his commentary to the YP of
the Mataṅga, this author mentions P ātañjala Yoga several times,
mainly to criticize its philosophical and soteriological pos itions.67
At the very outset, he speciﬁes that the form of yoga explained  in
the Tantra is the Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga, not the A ṣṭāṅga Yoga of Patañjali
and others,68and concludes in the following manner:
uttamaś cāyaṃ pātañjalādigītayogavidhibhya ḥ, asya vakṣyamāñana-
yenātmayogatayā tebhyo buddhiyogebhya ḥ prak r¢ṣṭatvaṃ yataḥ | 1.1
Further, this [yoga taught in the Tantra] is superior ( uttamaḥ) to
the yogic methods of the treatises of Patañjali etc., for it is  preemi-
nent compared to those yogas of the intellect ( buddhiyogebhya ḥ) by
virtue of being the yoga of the Soul ( ātmayogatayā), following the
method that is going to be expounded.
Here Rāmaka ñṭha assigns a higher position to the Śaiva Yoga
taught in the Mataṅgawith respect to the yoga taught by Patañjali
by using buddhi as a synonym of citta, which is the soteriological ful-
crum of the PY Ś, so as to contrast it to the notion that the fulcrum
of Śaiva Yoga is the ātman , which is ultimately a Śiva. An analogous
point seems to be adumbrated by Aghora śiva when commenting
on Sarvajñānottara, Yogaprakara ña1.1, to defend the superiority of
Śaiva Yoga vis-à-vis P ātañjala Yoga: ‘This [yoga] puriﬁes the Soul,
not the mind, as the followers of Patañjali maintain, because th e
yoga of Śiva causes the manifestation of omniscience and so forth’
(puruṣasyaivāyaṃ saṃskārako na tu p ātañjalānām69iva cittasyety
arthaḥ, śivayogasya sarvajñatv ādiprakāśakatvāt70).71
57From Isolation to Union
67For a thorough analysis of R āmaka ñṭha’s commentary, see Creisméas 2015.
68Mataṅgapārameśvarav r¢ttiYP 1.1: sa cāyaṃ ṣaḍaṅgo vidhir asmi ṃs tantre, na tv
aṣṭāṅgo vidhir yath ā pātañjalādividhiṣv[pātāñjalādividhiṣvms.] abhihitaḥ.
69Em.; na _ _ taṃjalānām iva ms.
70Em.; sarvajñatvādiprakāśakātms.
71A similar hierarchizing view, according a lower position to P ātañjala Yoga
with respect to Śaiva soteriology, is the distinction between ‘pervasion of th e Sel f’
(ātmavyāpti) and ‘pervasion of Śiva’ (śivavyāpti) made by K ṣemarāja in his com-
mentary on Svacchandatantra 4.387–390, 433–434. As noted by Torella ( 2019 :
651), ātmavyāpti ‘corresponds to the state of kaivalya , sought by the followers of
the Sāṃkhya and P ātañjala yoga, in which “the self becomes aware of its own
form having overcome the identiﬁcation with the bonds” (IV. 434ab pāśāvaloka-
naṃ tyaktvā svarūpālokanaṃ hi yat ).’ This forms an intermediate step that should
not be pursued by the yogin seeking the ultimate śivavyāpti.

--- [Page 24] ---
The division between higher (i.e., internal and sub tle) and
lower (i.e., external and coarse) yoga is expounded  in MataṅgaVP
1.2–5, which declares that the latter causes extreme suf fering
(atīvaduḥkhadaḥ) and is only necessary to cleanse the mind of the
yogin. Having done so, he realizes the establishmen t (avasthānam
… vyaktim āyāti) of the subject in its own nature, by virtue of th e
yoga’s function as an auxiliary. As noted by Créism eas ( 2015: 89),
here we ﬁnd a possible reuse of the key term avasthānam found in
YS 1.3, but in a Śaiva sense. In his commentary, R āmaka ñṭha
unpacks his critique of P ātañjala Yoga, as well as his reorientation
along Śaiva lines, by explaining that the buddhiyoga is produced by
confusion ( bhrānti), as its adepts believe that the Self has no agen-
cy (cf. niṣkriyaḥ puruṣaḥ, PYŚ 1.9), whereas in reality it is the su -
preme agent and knower. Further, the depletion of t he mind’s acti-
vity ( cittav r¢ttinirodha , an obvious reference to the yoga of the PY Ś),
while cleansing ( apamārjana ) the mind, actually produces extreme
suffering ( atiduḥkhada ), hindering as it does the manifestation of
the innate powers of knowledge and action ( sarvajñakart r¢tva).
For Rāmaka ñṭha, the status of P ātañjala Yoga as an auxiliary
(aṅga) — as opposed to the preeminence of Śaiva Yoga, accom -
plished through visualizations ( bhāvanā) and a relation ( samban-
dha)72with the Lord ( Mataṅgavr¢tti ad YP 1.4–5) — implies that it
can only allow the adept to reach the intermediary state of prala-
yakevalin (‘isolated by ﬁnal dissolution’). This term is found in
several post-scriptural Saiddh āntika sources, sometimes along
with that of another category of semi-liberated Souls, the vijñāna-
kevalin (‘isolated by knowledge’). For the Śaivas, a kevalin is not, as
in Pātañjala Yoga, one who is isolated from prakr¢tiand puruṣa, but
one who is separated from some (but not all) the bonds — for
instance, the guñas, as in Pātañjala Yoga — fettering the individual
non-liberated Soul.73The intermediate position of the kevalin is in
58Andrea Acri
72Compare Mataṅgavr¢ttiYP 1.10d–11ab, which deﬁnes the relation between
the meditator and the meditated (i.e., the Lord) as sthiti (‘maintenance’ or ‘ﬁxa-
tion’), which in its turn amounts to yoga ( dhyeyasya dhyeyar ūpatayā dhyātuś ca dhyā -
tr¢rūpeña yā sthitiḥ, sa eva yogaḥ sambandhas tayo ḥ).
73Saiddhāntika sources (e.g., Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha VP1.5,KirañaVP
1.23, Suprabhedāgama 3.53, etc.) list kevala (‘isolated’) as an intermediary state of
the Soul between the bound experiencer ( sakala, bhokt r¢) and the liberated
through initiation ( amala, śuddha ). See below, n. 76.

--- [Page 25] ---
harmony with the one accorded by the Śaivas to P ātañjala Yoga,
and suggests an intentional reuse of the climactic word of the lat-
ter system along inclusivistic lines .
6. Old Javanese Śaiva sources
While the most widespread form of yoga documented in Sanskrit -
Old Javanese Śaiva literature from Java and Bali is the tantric
Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga,74Aṣṭāṅga Yoga was by no means unknown. Besides
the hybrid lists of auxiliaries attempting to bridge Ṣaḍaṅga and
Aṣṭāṅga Yoga mentioned above, such as the one in the Tattva -
jñāna, including the six aṅgas of Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga plus āsana, we ﬁnd
fragments of P ātañjala Yoga doctrines interspersed within other -
wise thoroughly Śaiva texts that uphold Ṣaḍaṅga Yoga . For in -
stance, a cluster of verses in the Jñānasiddhānta (ch. 19.5–7) — one
of which ﬁnds a parallel in the Kirañatantra — deﬁning the cate-
gories of individual Souls and the climax of liberation as becom -
ing the Spotless Śiva echoes P ātañjala Yoga ideas, and a termino-
logy that may be traced to the PY Ś (see Acri 2011; 2021 : 278).75The
deﬁnition of the mind ( citta) projected towards liberation as śu -
ddhasūkṣmasvayambhog ī‘pure, subtle, experiencing itself only’ in v.
6echoes the characterization of the state of kaivalya found in YS
1.3, 3.55, etc. Further, the triadic repartition of the conditions of
the Soul ( sakala , kevala , and śuddha ) that is commonly found in
Saiddhāntika sources is reinterpreted in the commentary to v. 5,76
which declares that the condition of impurity ( malinatva ) means
that the mind ( citta) is not separated from the three constituents,
59From Isolation to Union
74See, for example, a widespread verse listing the six aṅgas in Sanskrit-Old
Javanese Śaiva tutur and tattva texts, which has parallels in several Siddh ānta -
tantras (see Table 19.1in Acri 2021 : 277). Those Old Javanese sources appear to
have inherited their Śaiva Yoga system from relatively early Saiddh āntika texts
that were in circulation in the Archipelago, such as the Mataṅga, the Kālottara ,
and the Kiraña.
75E.g., PYŚ 1.15–16, 1.24, 2.27, and 4.34. A clear echo is the mention of saṃya-
main v. 7(cf. PYŚ 3.4) as leading to liberation, as well as lower dispassion ( vāhya-
vairāgya [a spelling variant of bāhyavairāgya]), higher dispassion ( paravairāgya),
and ﬁxation on God ( īśvarapra ñidhāna); the couplet vāhyavairāgya and para-
vairāgya correspond to apara - and para-vairagya in Yogasūtrabhāṣya 1.15–16, while
īśvarapra ñidhāna occurs in YS 2.45.
76sakalaḥ kevalaḥ śuddhas tryavastha ḥ puruṣaḥ smr¢taḥ |malinatvacittamok ṣaḥ ka -
lpyate nirmala ḥ śivaḥ (≈ Kira ñatantra VP1.23; cf. above, n. 73).

--- [Page 26] ---
thereby indicating the state of bound Soul. This viewpoint  may
reﬂect an archaic doctrinal status quo, in which Saiddh āntika
ideas around stain ( mala ) had not yet been codiﬁed. Of course, it
is also possible — perhaps more likely — that this reﬂects a rela -
tively late attempt to attune Śaiva and P ātañjala Yoga ideas.77
What is by far the most signiﬁcant Old Javanese source for our
knowledge of P ātañjala Yoga in the Archipelago is the Dharma
Pātañjala , a scripture presenting a detailed exposition of the doc-
trinal and philosophical tenets of the form of Śaiva Siddh ānta that
was prevalent in Java (Acri 2017 ). It devotes a long section (about
one-third of its length), which it calls yogapādain the manner of
Sanskrit Siddh āntatantras, to P ātañjala Yoga. This section appa-
rently follows the ﬁrst three chapters of the PY Ś, either inter -
weaving a few Sanskrit verses from an untraced versiﬁed recension
of the sūtras with an Old Javanese commentary, or directly render -
ing into Old Javanese what might have been a likewise unknown
Sanskrit commentary. Although the prose section often bears a
strong resemblance to the arrangement and formulation of the
topics treated in the PY Ś, it occasionally diverges from the com-
mentary, either by presenting speciﬁc doctrinal details that ar e
found in other (sub-)commentaries, or by adding seemingly o rigi-
nal elements that are as yet unattested elsewhere. Being shaped by
an eminently theistic agenda, and imbued with Śaiva tenets, the
Dharma Pātañjala aims at attuning P ātañjala Yoga (and philoso-
phy) to Śaiva yoga (and philosophy). The author’s priority was
apparently to present a synthetic account of the most importan t
doctrinal points and practical techniques of P ātañjala Yoga, and
reformulate them in an idiom that was consonant with the local
Śaiva theological milieu. It seems, therefore, relevant for the pre-
sent enquiry to analyze some pertinent passages below.
At its very outset, before the start of the Yoga section, the
Dharma Pātañjala stresses the soteriological importance of samā -
dhi, along the lines formulated in the PY Ś, but charges the term
60Andrea Acri
77A relatively late transmission of the prototypical source of v . 19.5of the
Jñānasiddhāntato the Indonesian Archipelago is suggested by the fact that the
second line of the verse found in the Kirañais only preserved in South Indian
manuscripts but not in Nepalese ones, and it is also absent fr om Rāmaka ñṭha’s
commentary (Goodall 1998 : 221, n. 188).

--- [Page 27] ---
with a theistic connotation.78The goal of absorption, the summum
bonum (paramārtha), is indeed explained in v. 1and its Old
Javanese exegesis as the supreme aspect of the Lord  Śiva
(194.19–196.7). In the Yoga section, the text makes an attempt to
reinterpret the kaivalya state of the Self (as per the P ātañjala Yoga
deﬁnition) as the Śaiva summum bonum , intended as the manifesta-
tion of the divine powers of the Lord in the practitioner, who
there by becomes identical to Śiva. Whereas sūtras 1.2and 1.3of
the PYŚ deﬁne samādhiand kaivalya , respectively, the Dharma Pāta -
ñjala (298.2–4) echoes sūtras 1.3and 4.34in reply to a question
about what is the absorption of the yogin like in order to  become
one with the Lord, where the free-standing śloka-quarter ātmani
cetanaḥ sthitaḥ deﬁnes the state of samādhi.79Having been
conﬂated with kaivalya , it is glossed as the state where the mind is
left behind by the Self and the yogin obtains the state of superna-
tural prowess, united with the Lord:
Consciousness rests in the soul — The mind disappears. The mind is
left behind in the Holy Soul. That is what closely adheres to  the
Lord. This kind of absorption will be met by the yogin endlessly.
That is the reason why the state of supernatural prowess is met  by
him.80
The expression kavәkas tekaṅ citta ri saṅ hyaṅ ātmārenders the con-
cept of kaivalya . Even if the Śaivas did not regard isolation as the
ﬁnal goal of yoga, the text seeks to attune it to the Śaiva idea of
liberation.
61From Isolation to Union
78Dharma Pātañjala (194.11–13): ‘Right knowledge is not within reach if there
is no absorption. The absorption not coming into being, the summum bonum is
not known, for the obtainment of the summum bonum is the result of performing
absorption’ ( tātan vәnaṅ samyajñāna, yatan hana sam ādhi, ikaṅ samādhi tan dadi
ikā tan kinavruhan sa ṅ hyaṅ paramārtha, apan kapa ṅguhan saṅ hyaṅ paramārtha
doniṅ samādhi ginavayak әn).
79See also pāda2d in v. 2(290): cittav r¢ttinirodhākhyaḥ| yogaḥ paramadurlabha ḥ
| tasmin yoge sam ārabdhe | svayam ātmā prakāśate||, ‘What is called the cessation of
the functions of the mind is yoga, extremely difﬁcult to achi eve. Having under -
taken that yoga, the Soul itself [alone] shines forth’; compar e YS 1.2(yogaś
cittav r¢ttinirodhaḥ) and PYŚ 4.34(tadā svarūpapratiṣṭhaḥ puruṣaḥ).
80ātmani cetanaḥ sthitaḥ — hilaṅ [em.; hiliṅ ms.] ikaṅ citta, kavәkas tekaṅ citta ri
saṅ hyaṅ ātmā, ya tekā rumakәt ri bhaṭāra, lana pveka ṅ samādhi maṅkana kapaṅguha-
nya de saṅ yogi, ya mata ṅnyan kapaṅguh ikaṅ kasiddhyan denira.

--- [Page 28] ---
Another attempt to deﬁne samādhiaccording to a theistic agen-
da is found in 196.8–14:
Your representation of the summum bonum , that is what you
[should] imagine during day and night. ‘Paramount’ is the nam e
of insight, its characteristics are of one level with the summum
bonum . This is the reason why ‘absorption’ is what is constantly
practiced by him who desires the supreme pleasure, for that is
what is designated as ‘release.’ There is the absorption toward t he
summum bonum : that leaves behind the latent impressions in the
mind. That is called ‘right knowledge,’ as distinct from th e ‘wrong
knowledge.’81
Here samādhi is equated with a salviﬁc kind of knowledge ( sa -
myajñāna) and regarded as essential for attaining supreme plea -
sure ( sukha viśeṣa), i.e. release. The statement that the characteri-
stics of insight ( prajñā), seemingly attributed to the yogin, are of
one level ( samapada )82with the summum bonum (paramārtha), an
expression that is used in the text as a synonym of the Supr eme
Śiva, may refer to the Lord’s qualities of omniscience and omnipo-
tence, which constitutes a departure from the P ātañjala view.
A polemic on the role of citta in yoga may be hinted at in
290.10–13, where the Lord, having declared that the true nature of
the Soul is met only when yoga is performed ( yan apa yan kapa ṅguh
jāti saṅ hyaṅ ātmā, yan ginavayak әn ikaṅ yogātah), dispels an objec-
tion related by his son Kum āra as to the experiencing of the Soul
even without performing yoga:
Kumāra:
Whether yoga be performed or not, the Soul is still experienced
by us.
[The Lord]
That which you call [Soul] is by no means the Soul: that is  the
62Andrea Acri
81Ikaṅ hiḍәpta ri saṅ hyaṅ paramārtha, ya ta ina ṅәnaṅәnta ri rahineṅ vәṅi, lәvih
pva ṅaraniṅ prājñā, samapada lak ṣañanya lāvan saṅ hyaṅ paramārtha, ya ta
mataṅnyan samādhi ṅaranikaṅ inabhyāsa saṅ mahyun ri sukha vi śeṣa, apan yekā
sinaṅguh kalәpasan ṅaranya, hana pveka ṅ samādhi ri saṅ hyaṅ paramārtha, ya ta
mamәkasakәn saṅaskāra riṅ citta, ya ta sina ṅguh samyajñāna ṅaranya.
82This expression could actually be a corruption for sapaḍa, ‘being the same,’
or the separate words sama paḍa, if this were the case, the meaning would remain
unchanged.

--- [Page 29] ---
‘mind’. The reason why it is designated as ‘mind ’ is because it has
the same object ( ekaviṣayanya ) [of perception as the Soul]. That is
the reason why only the mind is experienced by him.83
The Lord observes that since both have the same object of percep-
tion, what is experienced or perceived ( kahiḍәp) by the opponent
(in the state of kaivalya ) is just the mind, not the Soul. The impli-
cations of the passage seem to be that the mind should not be con-
fused with the Soul,84and that stillness or dispassion of the mind
alone, belonging to the realm of cognitive absorption, is a neces-
sary but not sufﬁcient condition for the attainment of th e ﬁnal
goal of yoga.85Indeed, in 294.15–22the text critiques those who
deem the stillness of the mind to be yoga and absorption, fo r those
beings who obtain it are not liberated, but become the categories
of lords of yogins known as ‘disembodied’ ( videha ) and ‘dissolved
in prakr¢ti’(prakr¢tilīna).86Stillness or clarity of mind is, therefore, a
means, and should not be confused with its end, as the oppo nent
seems to do. This point is remindful of the perspective uph eld by
Rāmaka ñṭha when commenting on MataṅgaYP 1.1and 1.3, and by
Aghoraśiva when commenting on Sarvajñānottara Yogaprakara ña
1, to defend the preeminence of Śaiva Yoga (the yoga of the Soul)
over Pātañjala Yoga (the yoga of buddhi , probably intended as a
synonym of citta).
63From Isolation to Union
83Tan kagavaya ika ṅ yoga kahiḍәp tah saṅ hyaṅ ātmā de mami, tamatan ātmā ikā
liṅta, yekiṅ citta ṅaranya, mata ṅnyan sinaṅguh citta, apan ekavi ṣayanya, ya
mataṅnyan citta juga kahi ḍәp denya. Here I have arranged this passage slightly dif-
ferently from the printed edition, taking the Lord’s reply to start from tamatan.
84That the issue was regarded in Java as one worthy of being prob lematized
is suggested by the presence of a similar theme in the Sanskrit-O ld Javanese Śaiva
text Vr¢haspatitattva (35.18–19), where V r¢haspati asks the Lord about the charac-
teristic of the Soul in the body, ‘for it is difﬁcult to  understand the difference be -
tween the mind and the Soul’ ( apan ivәh ikaṅ citta lavan ātmā bhedanya ).
85This view is in harmony with that of R āmaka ñṭha, according to whom the
yoga of Patañjali constitutes a mere cleansing of the mind, which  is propaedeu-
tic to the higher Śaiva yoga: see Mataṅgavr¢ttion YP 1.2–4, 3.5–6.
86Dharma Pātañjala 294.14–17: ‘It is not right to designate the stillness of the
mind as yoga, for there are the lords of yogins “disembodied” and those “ dis-
 solved into unevolved matter”’ ( sumahur saṅ para, vruh ta kami ika ṅ sinaṅguh yoga
ñaranya, apan sabariny ān hәnaṅ ikaṅ citta, ya ta sam ādhi ñaranya, yan kva li ṅa saṅ
para, tan yogya ika ṅ hәnaṅni citta, saṅguhәn yoga, apan hana sira yog īśvara videha
lāvan prak r¢tilīna).

--- [Page 30] ---
Overall, the Dharma Pātañjala is not overtly polemical towards
Pātañjala Yoga — in fact, it does not even mention P ātañjala Yoga
as a (separate) system, let alone Patañjali87—, but rather
expounds P ātañjala Yoga within a Śaiva framework.88As I have
mentioned above, this attempt to (silently) attune Śaiva yoga to
Pātañjala yoga appears to be especially signiﬁcant in Śaiva scrip -
tures composed or (re)compiled in the Indian subcontinent at a
relatively late date (i.e. after the 9thor 10thc.). Thus, the attitude
documented in Old Javanese sources may reﬂect, besides the
eclectic attitude of Javanese authors, the rising status of Patañj ali’s
yoga in the medieval Indic world.
7. Conclusion
In contrast to the understanding upheld by such non-theist ic (or
marginally theistic) systems as P ātañjala Yoga and Vai śeṣika, which
regard yoga and its ultimate goal as, respectively, isolation and  the
establishment of the Soul in itself and as a special connection bet-
ween the manas and the Soul, Śaiva sources emphasize the theistic
element by framing yoga and liberation in the sense of union b e -
tween the Soul and the Lord. This sense is formulated in sli ghtly
different ways by distinct Śaiva traditions, depending on the exact
nature of the relationship that they envisage between the indivi-
dual Soul and the Lord.
The Śaiva deﬁnitions constitute a departure from P ātañjala
Yoga insofar as they emphasize the theistic element; and yet, de -
spite the critical stance upheld by Śaiva authors towards P ātañjala
Yoga, one may note a dialectic relationship between those tradi-
tions, as well as a signiﬁcant intertextuality. While the commo nali-
ty of themes detected in the sources presented in this article
highlights a ‘shared register’ in the domain of soteriology  and
64Andrea Acri
87The title of the text possibly documents a conﬂation between th e ﬁgure of
Pātañjala, intended as an incarnation of Śiva (probably a synonym of Agastya),
which is widespread in Old Javanese literature, and the Patañjali o f the PYŚ, who
is never mentioned as such in Old Javanese literature.
88This framework does not conform to the ‘orthodox’ Siddh ānta, for an
important doctrinal feature of the Dharma Pātañjala , which is also reﬂected in the
majority of Old Javanese Śaiva texts, is the view that liberation can be obtained
through yoga and not initiation ( dīkṣā).

--- [Page 31] ---
yoga that could be the outcome of a gradual evolution and dif fe-
rentiation of a core of ‘pre-classical’ ideas found in both non -theis -
tic and theistic systems, the gradual rise of status of the PYŚ during
the medieval period and its inﬂuence on the authors of both
revealed scriptures and commentaries can hardly be denied.
Elaborating on the parallels between the yoga-inﬂuenced sūtras of
the VS, Wezler ( 1982 : 666) remarked that ‘the theory and prac tice
of yoga had in the meantime become so important and widely
accepted that it was deemed a serious defect of any school of
thought not to include it in its own tradition.’ Adapti ng these com-
ments to the present case study, I should like to suggest t hat the
mainstream Śaiva attitude towards P ātañjala Yoga was shaped by,
and responded to, the rise in importance of this system duri ng the
medieval period, so much so that it was deemed a serious ﬂaw no t
to engage with it — and sometimes even not to include it in o ne’s
own tradition.
The instances of intertextuality and reuse identiﬁe d above, as
well as the references — whether polemical or not —  to Pātañjala
Yoga found in the works of medieval Śaiva exegetes, show that the
Pātañjala system assumed a paradigmatic role in the m edieval
Indian religio-philosophical discourse as the most authoritative
system of Yoga not long after its composition. The important sta-
tus of Pātañjala Yoga across the wider Indic world may also be e -
vinced from the progressive inﬂuence of this system  on post- 10th-
c. South Indian Śaiva Siddh āntika sources, which substitute the
six auxiliaries of Ṣaḍaṅga yoga with the eight auxiliaries of
Aṣṭāṅga yoga, as well as on possibly coeval Sanskrit-Old  Javanese
Śaiva sources.
Bibliography
Primary sources
Ajitāgama (Kriyāpāda)
Ajitāgama, ed. N.R. Bhatt. Pondichéry: Institut Français d’Indologie,
1964 .
Aṣṭaprakara ña
Aṣṭaprakara ñam, ed. V. Dvived ī. Varanasi: Sampurnananda Sanskrit
University, 1988 .
65From Isolation to Union

--- [Page 32] ---
Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati by Īśānaśiva (YP)
Īśānaśivagurudeva Paddhati of Īśānaśiva Gurudeva, Vol. 4, ed. T.
Gañapati Śāstrī. Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan, 1990
[Trivandrum 1925 ].
Kālottaratantra
IFP paper transcript (Devan āgarī) T0059 , copied from ms. GOML
No. R 14343 (Madras).
Kirañatantra (VP 1–6)
See Goodall 1998 .
Gañakārikā
GK Gañakārikā of Ācārya Bhāsarvajña with the Ratna ṭīkā and four appendi-
ces, ed. C. D. Dalal. Baroda: Oriental Institute of Baroda, 1966
[1920 ].
Jñānasiddhānta
Ed and tr. by Haryati Soebadio. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1971.
Jñānasiddhyāgama
IFP paper transcript (Devan āgarī) T0178 , copied from ms. GOML
No. R 16810 (Madras).
Tattvajñāna
Tattwajñāna and Mah ājñāna, ed. and Hindi tr. Sudarshana Devi-
Singhal. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture, 1962 .
Tattvavaiśāradīby Vācaspatimi śra
Pātañjalayogadar śanam: Vācaspatimiśraviracita-tattvavai śāradī-vijñāna-
bhikṣukr¢ta-yogavārtikavibhūṣita-vyāsabhāṣyasametam,śrīnārāyañamiśre-
na ṭippañīpariśiṣṭādibhiḥ saha sampaditam . Varanasi: Bh āratīya Vidyā
Prakāśan, 1982 [1963 ].
Tantrāloka by Abhinavagupta
The Tantrāloka of Abhinava Gupta; With Commentary by R ājānaka Jaya -
ratha, ed. Madhusud ān Kaul Śāstrī. 12Vols. Allahabad/Bombay/
Srinagar, 1918 –1938 .
Tātparyadīpikāby Kumāradeva on the Tattvaprakāśa by Bhojadeva
See Aṣṭaprakara ña.
Tirumantiram by Tirumular
Tirumantiram. A Tamil Scriptural Classic by Tirumular . Tamil Text with
English Translation and Notes by Dr. B. Natarajan . Mylapore, Madras:
Sri Ramakrishna Math, no date ( 1991 ?).
Dharma Pātañjala
See Acri 2017 .
Netratantra
Netratantra with the commentary (Netroddyota) of R ājānaka Kṣemarāja,
Vols. 1and 2, ed. Madhus ūdan Kaul Śāstrī. Bombay, 1926 , 1939 .
66Andrea Acri

--- [Page 33] ---
Pañcārthabhāṣyaby Kau ñḍinya
PBh See Pāśupatasūtra.
Paramokṣanirāsakārikās by Sadyojyotis
See Watson, Goodall, and Anjaneya Sarma 2013.
Pātañjalayogaśāstra
PYŚ See Yogasūtra.
Pāśupatasūtra
PS Pasupata Sutras with Pancarthabhashya of Kaundinya , ed. R. Ananta -
krishna Sastri. Trivandrum: The Oriental Manuscript Library  of the
University of Travancore, 1940 .
Makuṭāgama
IFP paper transcript (Devan āgarī) T0274 , copied from a manuscript
belonging to Srisv āminathaśivacarya, Tiruv āvatuturai.
Mataṅgapārameśvaratantra : Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama (Kriyāpāda, Yogapāda et
Caryāpāda), avec le commentaire de Bha ṭṭa Rāmaka ñṭha, ed. N.R. Bhatt.
Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry, 1982 .
Mataṅgapārameśvarav r¢tti(YP) by R āmaka ñṭha
See Creisméas 2015.
Mālinīvijayottaratantra
See Vasudeva 2004 .
Mr¢gendratantra (YP)
Śrī Mr¢gendra Tantram (Vidy āpāda and Yogap āda) with the Commentary of
Nārāyañakañṭha, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Sh āstrī. Srinagar, 1930 .
Yogasūtras by Patañjali
YS Yogasūtram by Mahar ṣipatañjali; With Six Commentaries . Edited with
Notes by Ny āyāchārya Kāvyatīrtha Pa ñḍit Ḍhunḍhirāj Śāstrī.
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan, 1930 .
Yogasūtrabhāṣya
See Yogasūtra.
Ratnaṭīkāby Bhāsarvajña
RṬ See Gañakārikā.
Rājamārtañḍa of Bhoja
See Yogasūtra.
Vr¢haspatitattva
Wr¢haspati-tattwa; An Old Javanese philosophical text , ed. and tr.
Sudarshana Devi. Nagpur: International Academy of I ndian
Culture, 1957 .
67From Isolation to Union

--- [Page 34] ---
Vaiśeṣikasūtra
VS Vaisesikasūtra of Ka ñāda with the Commentary of Candr ānanda , ed. by
Muni Sri Jambuvijayaji. Baroda, 1961 .
Sarvajñānottara (Yogaprakara ña)
[1] ‘Sarvajñānottarāgamaḥ vidyāpādaand yogapāda, ed. by K.
Ramachandra Sarma and revised by R. Thangaswami Sarma.’ Adyar
Library Bulletin 62(1998 ): 181–232.
[2] cf. Sarvajñānottarav r¢tti.
Sarvajñānottarav r¢tti by Aghora śiva (Yogaprakara ña)
Sarvajñānottarav r¢tti (Yogaprakara ñam), IFP paper transcript
(Devanāgarī) T0985 , copied from a paper ms. belonging to the
Sarasvati Mahal Library, Tanjore, Vol. No. 500.
Śāradātilakatantra (YP)
Ed. and tr. by Gudrun Bühnemann in ‘The Śāradātilakatantra on
Yoga: A New Edition and Translation of Chapter 25.’ Bulletin of the
School of Oriental and African Studies 74, 2: 205–235.
Suprabhedāgama
Published by the Dev īkoṭaparipālanasaṃgha. Devakottai, 1931.
Skandapurāña(early)
Skandapurāñasya Ambikākhañḍa, ed. by K r¢ṣñaprasād Bhaṭṭarāī.
Kathmandu: Mahendrasa ṃskr¢taviśvavidyālayaḥ, 1988 .
Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha (Vidyāpāda 1–4.7)
Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgrahaḥ: Vidyāpādaḥ Sadyojyotiṣkṛtaṭīkāsahitaḥ /
The Tantra of Svaya ṃbhū: Vidyāpāda with the Commentary of Sadyojyoti ,
ed. and tr. P.-S. Filliozat. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre
for the Arts/Motilal Banarsidass, 1994 .
Secondary sources
Acri, Andrea
2011 ‘Re-conﬁguration of Divinity in Old Javanese Śaiva texts from the
Indonesian Archipelago (with special reference to Jñānasiddhānta,
Chapter 19).’ In Travaux du Symposium International «  Le livre. La
Roumanie. L’Europe  ». Troisième édition , Tome III , pp. 546–565.
Bucarest: Bibliothèque de Bucarest.
2017 Dharma Pātañjala: A Śaiva Scripture from Ancient Java Studied in the
Light of Related Old Javanese and Sanskrit Texts. 2nded. New Delhi:
Aditya Prakashan. [ 1sted. Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 2011]
2021 ‘Yoga and Meditation Traditions in Insular Southeas t Asia.’ In
Suzanne Newcombe and Karen O’Brien-Kop (eds.), Routledge
Handbook of Yoga and Meditation Studies , pp. 273–290. Abingdon/
New York: Routledge.
68Andrea Acri

--- [Page 35] ---
Barois, Christèle
2020 ‘The Dharmaputrik ā Saṃhitā: Preliminary Notes on an Early Text
on Yoga.’ Journal of Yoga Studies 3: 5–76.
Bhandarkar, R.G.
1913 Vaiṣñavism, Śaivism and Minor Religious Systems. Strassburg: Trübner.
Birch, Jason and Jacqueline Hargreaves
2016 ‘The Yamas and Niyamas: Medieval and Modern Views.’  Yoga
Scotland 50(May): 36–39.
Bisschop, Peter
2006 ‘The Sūtrapāṭha of the P āśupatasūtra.’ Indo-Iranian Journal 49: 1–21.
Bronkhorst, Johannes
1985 ‘Patañjali and the Yoga S ūtras.’ Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 10:
191–209. 
Brunner, Hélène
1994 ‘The Place of Yoga in the Śaivāgamas.’ In Pierre-Sylvain Filliozat, C.
P. Bhatta, and S. P. Narang (eds.), Pandit N. R. Bhatt Felicitation
Volume , pp. 425–461. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Creisméas, Jean-Michel
2015 ‘Le yoga du Mataṅgapārameśvaratantra à la lumière du commentaire
de Bhaṭṭa Rāmaka ñṭha.’ Unpublished PhD Thesis, Université
Sorbonne Nouvelle–Paris 3.
Freschi, Elisa and Philipp A. Maas
2017 ‘Introduction: Conceptual Reﬂections on Adaptive Reuse.’ In E.
Freschi and Ph. A. Maas (eds.), Adaptive Reuse: Aspects of Creativity in
South Asian Cultural History , pp. 11–24. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Gonda, Jan
1963 Die Religionen Indiens, II, Der jüngere Hinduismus.  Stuttgart: W.
Kohlhammer.
Goodall, Dominic
1998 Bhaṭṭa Rāmaka ñṭha’s Commentary on the Kira ñatantra, Vol. 1.
Pondichéry: Institut Français de Pondichéry.
2004 The Parākhyatantra. A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta. A Critical Edition
and Annotated Translation . Pondichéry: IFP/EFEO.
Grönbold, Günter
1996 The Yoga of Six Limbs: An Introduction to the History of Ṣaḍaṅgayoga . (Tr.
from German by R.L. Hutwohl). Santa Fe: Spirit of t he Sun
Publications.
Hara Minoru
2002 Pāśupata Studies (ed. by Jun Takashima). Vienna: Sammlung de
Nobili, Institut für Südasien-, Tibet- und Buddhismuskun de.
69From Isolation to Union

--- [Page 36] ---
Harimoto, Kengo
2014 God, Reason and Yoga: A Critical Edition and Transl ation of the
Commentary Ascribed to Śaṅkara on Pātañjalayogaśāstra 1.23–28.
Hamburg: Department of Indian and Tibetan Studies, Universität
Hamburg.
2021 ‘How Yoga became Yoga: Yoga and Meditation up to the Classical
Period.’ In Suzanne Newcombe and Karen O’Brien-Kop (eds.),
Routledge Handbook of Yoga and Meditation Studies , pp. 65–79.
Abingdon/New York: Routledge.
Larson, Gerard James
1999 ‘Classical Yoga as Neo-S āṃkhya: A Chapter in the History of Indian
Philosophy.’ Asiatische Studien /Études Asiatiques 53: 723–732.
2008 ‘Introduction to the Philosophy of Yoga.’ In G. J. Larso n and R. S.
Bhattacharya (eds.), Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies. Volume XII.
Yoga: India’s Philosophy of Meditation , pp. 21–159. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
2009 ‘Differentiating the Concepts of “yoga” and “tantra” in Sanskri t
Literary History.’ Journal of the American Oriental Society 129: 487–498.
Lorenzen, David N.
1991 The Kāpālikas and Kālāmukhas. Two Lost Śaivite Sects . New Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass. [ 1stEdition 1972 ]
Maas, Philipp A.
2013 ‘A Concise Historiography of Classical Yoga Philoso phy.’ In Eli
Franco (ed.), Periodization and Historiography of Indian Philosophy:
Twelve Lectures Held at the Fourteenth World Sanskrit Confere nce (Kyoto,
September 1–5, 2009), pp. 53–90. Wien: Verein Sammlung de Nobili,
Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Indologie und Religionsforschung, Institut
für Südasien- Tibet- und Buddhismuskunde.
2020 ‘Pātañjalayoga śāstra.’ In Knut A. Jacobsen et al. (eds.), Brill’s
Encyclopedia of Hinduism Online .
Mallinson, James
2011 ‘Haṭha Yoga.’ In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism , Vol. 3, pp. 770–781.
2014 ‘Haṭhayoga’s Philosophy: A Fortuitous Union of Non-Dual ities.’
Journal of Indian Philosophy 42: 225–247.
Mallinson, James and Singleton, M.
2017 Roots of Yoga: A Sourcebook from the Indian Traditions . London and New
York: Penguin Classics.
Matilal, Bimal K.
1977 Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika: A History of Indian Literature , vol. 6, fasc. 2.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
Monier-Williams, Monier
1899 Sanskrit-English Dictionary . Oxford: Clarendon Press.
70Andrea Acri

--- [Page 37] ---
Preisendanz, Karin
2011 ‘Vaiśeṣika.’ In Knut A. Jacobsen et al. (eds.), Brill’s Encyclopedia of
Hinduism , Vol. 3, pp. 699–718. Leiden: Brill.
Oberhammer, Gerhard
1964 ‘Pakṣilasvāmin’s Introduction to His Ny āyabhāṣyam.’ Asian Studies 2:
302–322.
Sanderson, Alexis
*1999 ‘Yoga in Śaivism: The Yoga Section of the Mr¢gendratantra . An
Annotated Translation with the Commentary of Bha ṭṭa Nārā -
yañakañṭha.’ Downloaded from www.academia.edu.
*2004 ‘The Yoga of Dying. The Śaiva Atim ārga. Week 5Handout, 9
November 2004. ’ Downloaded from www.academia.edu.
2014 ‘The Śaiva Literature.’ Journal of Indological Studies 24–25(2012 –13):
1–113.
Sferra, Francesco
2000 The Ṣaḍaṅgayoga by Anupamarak ṣita with Ravi śrījñāna’s Gu ñabhara ñī -
nāmaṣaḍaṅgayogaṭippanī. Text and Annotated Translation . Roma:
Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente.
Torella, Raffaele
2000 ‘The Svabodhodayamañjar ī, or how to suppress the mind with no
effort.’ In Ryutaro Tsuchida and Albrecht Wezler (eds.), Harānanda -
laharī. Studies in Honour of Prof. Minoru Hara on his Seventieth Birthday ,
pp. 387–410. Reinbek: Dr. Inge Wezler Verlag für Orientalistische
Fach publikationen.
2019 ‘Abhinavagupta’s Attitude towards Yoga.’ Journal of the American
Oriental Society 139, 3: 647–660.
2020 ‘Abhinavagupta as an Aristocrat.’ In Vincent Eltsch inger, Vincent
Tournier, and Marta Sernesi (eds.), Archaeologies of the Written. Indian,
Tibetan, and Buddhist Studies in Honour of Cristina  Scherrer-Schaub , pp.
845–857. Naples: Università di Napoli ‘L’Orientale.’
Vasudeva, Somadeva
2004 The Yoga of the M ālinīvijayottaratantra. Chapters 1–4, 7, 11–17.
Pondichéry: Institut Français de Pondichéry / École  française
d’Extrême-Orient.
2017 ‘The Śaiva Yogas and Their Relation to Other Systems of Yoga.’ RIN-
DAS Series of Working Papers: Traditional Indian Thought 26(March).
Wallis, Christopher
2016 ‘The Śaiva Religion and its Philosophy in Context, Part T wo:
Shaivism’s Sources And Inﬂuences.’ Sutra Journal (online).
Watson, Alex, Dominic Goodall and S.L.P. Anjaneya Sarma
2013 An Enquiry into the Nature of Liberation: Bha ṭṭa Rāmaka ñṭha’s Paramo -
kṣanirāsakārikāvr¢tti, A Commentary on Sadyojyoti ḥ’s Refutation of Twenty
Conceptions of the Liberated State ( mokṣa), for the First Time Critically
71From Isolation to Union

--- [Page 38] ---
Edited, Translated into English and Annotated . Pondichéry: Institut
Français de Pondichéry/École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Wezler, Albrecht
1982 ‘Remarks on the Deﬁnition of “yoga” in the Vai śeṣikasūtra.’ In Luise
Anna Hercus et al. (eds.), Indological and Buddhist Studies: Volume in
Honour of Professor J. W. de Jong on His 60th Birthday , pp. 643–686.
Canberra: Faculty of Asian Studies.
1984 ‘On the Quadruple Division of the Yogaśāstra, the Caturvyūhatva of
the Cikitsāśāstraand the “Four Noble Truths” of the Buddha (Studies
in the Pātañjalayogaśāstravivara ña2).’ Indologica Taurinensia 12:
289–337.
Zigmund-Cerbu, Anton
1963 ‘The Ṣaḍaṅgayoga.’ History of Religions 3: 128–134.
72Andrea Acri

--- [Page 39] ---
‘Verità e bellezza’
Essays in Honour of Raffaele Torella

--- [Page 40] ---
Series Minor
XCVII.1—2
Direttore
Francesco Sferra
Comitato di redazione
Riccardo Contini, Martin Orwin, Junichi Oue,
Roberto Tottoli, Giovanni Vitiello
Comitato scientifico
Anne Bayard-Sakai (INALCO), Stanisław Bazyli ński(Facoltà teologica
S. Bonaventura, Roma), Henrietta Harrison (University of Oxford),
Harunaga Isaacson (Universität Hamburg), Barbara Pizziconi (SOAS ,
University of London), Lucas van Rompay (Duke University),
Raffaele Torella (Sapienza, Università di Roma),
Judith T. Zeitlin (The University of Chicago)
Dipartimento Asia, Africa e Mediterraneo
Università degli Studi di Napoli “L’Orientale”
UniorPress
Napoli
2022

--- [Page 41] ---
UNIVERSIT ÁDEGLI STUDI DI NAPOLI “L’O RIENTALE ”
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
Series Minor
XCVII.1
‘Verità e bellezza’
Essays in Honour of Raffaele Torella
Edited by
Francesco Sferra and Vincenzo Vergiani
UniorPress
Napoli 2022


--- [Page 42] ---
ISBN 978-88-6719-209-0
Tutti i diritti riservati
Stampato in Italia
Finito di stampare nel mese di settembre 2022
Ofﬁcine Graﬁche Francesco Giannini & Figli S.p.A.
Via Cisterna dell’Olio 6B, 80134 Napoli
Tutti gli articoli pubblicati in questo volume sono stati sottoposti al va glio di due revisori anonimi.Volume pubblicato con contributi
–del Dipartimento Asia, Africa e Mediterraneo (Universit à degli
Studi di Napoli “L’Orientale”),
– della Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies (Univers ity of
Cambridge),
– e del Progetto ERC n. 803624: «Translocal Identities. The Śiva-
dharma and the Making of Regional Religious Traditions in
Premodern South Asia».
UniorPress - Via Nuova Marina 59, 80133 Napoli

--- [Page 43] ---
Raffaele Torella


--- [Page 44] ---
Table of Contents
Volume I
Preface............................................... .........................................
Foreword............................................ ........................................
Main Publications of Raffaele Torella.................... ...................
Andrea Acri
From Isolation to Union: P ātañjala vis-à-vis Śaiva Understandings
of the Meaning and Goal of Yoga........................... ....................
Lyne Bansat-Boudon
The Surprise of Spanda: An Aesthetic Approach to a
Phenomenology of Transcendence (R āmaka ñṭha ad Spandak ārikā
2.6[1.22/22 ])................................................. ........................
Bettina Sharada Bäumer
Kṣemarāja’s Poetic Non-Dualism:
Examples from his Netratantroddyota............................ ..............
Giuliano Boccali
Lectio difﬁcilior e creazione poetica: esempi dal Kum ārasambhava..13
19
25
35
73
103
115

--- [Page 45] ---
Johannes Bronkhorst
The Sarvadar śanasaṃgraha: One Text or Two?
One Author or Two?.................................... ............................
Maria Piera Candotti and Tiziana Pontillo
The dīkṣita’s Language. Vedic Homologies and r ūpakas
in Jaiminīya-Brāhmaña 2.60–64...............................................
Daniele Cuneo and Elisa Ganser
The Emotional and Aesthetic Experience of the Actor.
Diderot’s Paradoxe sur le comédien in Sanskrit Dramaturgy........ ...
Marzenna Czerniak-Dro żdżowicz
Viṣṇu in his Three Abodes. Some Observations about Three-stor ey
and Triple-shrined Vi ṣñu Temples in South India........................
Florinda De Simini
Rules of Conduct for the Śaivas. The Intersection of Dharma śāstra
and Śaiva Devotion in the Śivadharmottara................................
Vincent Eltschinger
Politics and/in the End of Times. On the Buddhist Reception
of the Arthaśāstra................................................ ....................
Marco Ferrante
The Pratyabhijñ ā on Consciousness and Self-consciousness:
A Comparative Perspective................................ ........................
Giuseppe Ferraro
‘Own-nature’ (svabh āva) in the Abhidharma Tradition and in
Nāgārjuna’s Interpretation................................. ......................
Marco Franceschini
The Printing History of Sargas 9to 17of the Kumārasambhava....
Eli Franco
Prajñākaragupta on Pram āñavārttika 2.1in the Light of Yam āri’s
Interpretation....................................... ...................................129
153
193
273
291
337
375
391
411
433Verità e bellezza
8

--- [Page 46] ---
Elisa Freschi
Reconstructing an Episode in the History of Sanskrit Philos ophy:
Arthāpatti in Kumārila’s Commentators.................................... .
Paolo Giunta
Il rapporto di Śāntarakṣita con Bhart r¢hari. Edizione critica della
Śabdabrahmapar īkṣā e dello Sphoṭavādakhaṇḍana......................
Dominic Goodall
A Glimpse of Classical Saiddh āntika Theology in a Cambodian
Epigraph: A Fresh Edition and Translation of the Sanskrit Śaiva
Hymn K. 570of Banteay Srei....................................... ..............
Alessandro Graheli
Predestination of Freedom in R ūpa Gosvāmin’s Theology
of Devotion......................................... ....................................
Kengo Harimoto
A Few Notes on a Newly Discovered Manuscript of the Śivadharma
Corpus 1................................................... .............................
Harunaga Isaacson
Vasiṣṭha’s Ashram: A Translation of Sarga 1of Kālidāsa’s
Raghuvaṃśa into English Verse................................. ................
Volume II
Mrinal Kaul
A Preliminary Note on the Manuscripts of the Tantr ālokaviveka....
Yohei Kawajiri
A Report on the Newly Found Manuscript
of the Īśvarapratyabhijñ āvivr¢ti................................................. .
Chiara Neri
A Phenomenology of Dreams in Therav āda Buddhism:
An Annotated Translation of the Tenth Chapter of the
Sārasaṅgaha by Siddhattha Thera....................................... ......
9Table of Contents
457
487
543
577
595
627
679
751
773

--- [Page 47] ---
10Verità e bellezza
Cristina Pecchia
With the Eye of a Scholar and the Insight of a Physician:
Gangadhar Ray Kaviraj and the Carakasa ṃhitā..........................
Gianni Pellegrini
On prahasann iva. Bhagavadg ītā 2.10in the Light of Traditional
Commentaries.......................................... ................................
Stefano Piano
Qualche riﬂessione sui diversi tipi di ṣaḍaṅgayoga.......................
Cinzia Pieruccini
Transition and Transformation: On the Roles of Parks
and Gardens in Early India................................ ......................
Isabelle Ratié
Some Hitherto Unknown Fragments of Utpaladeva’s Viv r¢ti (IV):
On Non-being and Imperceptible Demons........................ ............
Antonio Rigopoulos
Prahasann iva. On K r¢ṣña’s Hint of Laughter
in Bhagavadg ītā 2.10................................................... ...........
Margherita Serena Saccone and Péter-Dániel Szántó
A Fragment of Pram āña from Gilgit......................................... ..
Małgorzata Sacha
Imagine the world… Abhinavagupta vis-à-vis the Psychoanalytic
Mystic............................................. .......................................
Alexis Sanderson
The Meaning of the Term Trair ūpyam in the Buddhist
Pramāña Literature......................................... ........................
Cristina Scherrer-Schaub
D’impronte e ombre tra India e Grecia. Questioni e visioni di storia
del pensiero politico e ﬁlosoﬁco tra il V e il II secol o a.C..................797
841
901
913
929
965
1011
1025
1049
1063

--- [Page 48] ---
Francesco Sferra
The Second Chapter of the Abhidharmasamuccayak ārikā
by Saṅghatrāta.................................................. ......................
Federico Squarcini
Ecce yoga. Il miraggio del nome, il fantasma della salute
e la concomitanza delle ‘cose’ qualsiasi.................... ....................
Ernst Steinkellner
Śāntarakṣita on the Induction Problem. A Translation
of Vādanyāyaṭīkā 14,12−16,29...................................................
Lidia Sudyka
Imagined Landscapes or Through the Year: The Descriptions of All
Seasons and All Seasons’ Gardens in Indian Literature.......... ......
Vincenzo Vergiani
Vivakṣā and the Formation of Meaning According to Bhart r¢hari....
Alex Watson
Pratyabhijñā: Recognition’s Nature, Cause and Object.
Critical Edition and Annotated Translation of a Portion
of the Nyāyamañjarī................................................... ..............
11Table of Contents
1145
1167
1223
1237
1253
1325