--- [Page 1] ---
Pratna Samiksha
A Journal of  Archaeology
New Series
Volume 11
2020
CENTRE FOR ARCHAEOLOGICAL STUDIES & TRAINING
EASTERN INDIA  • KOLKATA

--- [Page 2] ---
Pratna Samiksha , New Series
is an annual, peer reviewed, and international  
journal published by the Centre for Archaeological  
Studies & Training, Eastern India, Kolkata.
Editorial Address
Pratna Samiksha
Centre for Archaeological Studies & Training,
Eastern India, State Archaeological Museum
Old Building, First Floor, 1 Satyen Roy Road
Behala, Kolkata 700 034
email: castei5n@gmail.com
Editor
Sharmi Chakraborty
Founding Editor
Gautam Sengupta
Editorial Assistant
Mithu Karmakar
Editorial Advisory Board
Chairperson
Centre for Archaeological Studies  
& Training, Eastern India, Kolkata
Member Secretary
Centre for Archaeological Studies
& Training, Eastern India, Kolkata
K. Paddayya
Professor Emeritus, Deccan College, Pune
B.D. Chattopadhyaya
Former Professor, Centre for Historical Studies
Jawaharlal Nehru University , New Delhi
Suchandra Ghosh
Professor, Department of  Ancient Indian History &
Culture, University of  Calcutta, Kolkata
The Director  (ex officio )
Directorate of  Archaeology and Museums
Government of  West BengalThe responsibility of  the facts stated, opinions expressed and 
conclusions reached are entirely those of  the author of  the respective 
article. Centre for Archaeological Studies & Training, Eastern 
India does not accept any responsibility for them.
© 2020 Centre for Archaeological Studies & Training, 
Eastern India
All rights reserved. No part of  this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior written permission of  the publisher.
ISSN 2229 7979
Periodicity: Annual
Subscription (per volume):  ₹1,000.00
Published by the Member Secretary for the 
Centre for Archaeological Studies & Training,
Eastern India ( An Autonomous Institution of  the 
Government of  West Bengal )
State Archaeological Museum
Old Building, First Floor 
1 Satyen Roy Road, Behala
Kolkata 700 034
castei5n@gmail.com
Typeset in Baskerville  
by Mithu Karmakar  
mithu.karma@gmail.com
Printed in India at Calcutta Art Studio  
185/1 B.B. Ganguly Street, Kolkata 700 012  
caspvt@gmail.com

--- [Page 3] ---
Contents
EXPLORATIONS
 Recently Discovered Intertidal Archaeological Sites Along the Shor eline  
of  Bay of  Bengal: East Medinipur District, West Bengal
 Ahana Ghosh , Chandrima Shaha and Arshad Reza 1
 Preliminary Report on Recently Discovered Archaeological Sites:  
A Study on Kiul River Basin
 Tanmoy Mondal 19 
ART
 Unspecific Mound, ‘Stray’ Sculptures and ‘Missing’ Habitation:  
Revisiting an Artist’s Choice at a Lost Temple Site in Bengal
 Shubha Majumder 31
POTTERY
 A Typo-chronological Study of  Ceramics from Lalpahari, Lakhisarai , Bihar
 Anil Kumar and Siddhartha Saha 41
EPIGRAPHY AND PALAEOGRAPHY
 Work Pattern Analysis at a Major Rock Edict Site: Kalsi
 Susmita Basu Majumdar , Soumya Ghosh and Shoumita Chatterjee 73
 A New Copperplate Inscription: Grant of  the Village Kumudavill ika  
during the Reign of  Sasaoka, Year 8
 Ryosuke Furui and Arlo Griffiths  99
 The Kara- Sasanas  of  Early Medieval Odisha
 Subrata Kumar Acharya 115
ARCHITECTURE
 The Temple at Paschim Jata (South 24-Parganas, West Bengal)
 Sharmila Saha 135
 Architecture of  the F aruqis of  Burhanpur: A Preliminary Study
 Sutapa Sinha 157 
NOTE
 Mahadeo Temple at Zanzane Saswad, Phaltan Taluka, Satara District:  
A Preliminary Study
 Manjiri Bhalerao 189

--- [Page 4] ---
iv CONTENTS
 An Imitated Gold Coin of  Huvi xka Ku xapa from Radh anagar, Odisha
 Umakanta Mishra , Subrata Kumar Acharya and Atula Kumar Pradhan 199
 The Donor-Executor Dilemma: Notes on an Enigmatic Inscribed Sculptur e 
from Bihar in the Indian Museum, Kolkata
 Rajat Sanyal 205
 A Short Note on a Forgotten Um a-Mahe svara Sculpture from Mu pdesvari
 Claudine Bautze-Picron 219
 A Cumulative Author Index to Pratna Samiksha : A Journal of  Archaeology  
New Series 1–10 (2010–19)  
Mithu Karmakar 225
 

--- [Page 5] ---
Editor’s Note
We are presenting the eleventh volume of  the new series of  Pratna Samiksha:  
A Journal of  Archaeology . This volume contains articles on many subdisciplines 
of  archaeology . The note section at the end contains short essays on important 
topics. While some of  the writings exhibit the prospect of  archaeology , some 
offer new data, there are a few articles that present a fresh look at known 
subjects. All in all, this edition of  the journal reflects the trend of  thoughts and 
actions current in archaeology .
This edition contains an index of  articles published in the journal during 
2010–19. I thank Dr Rajat Sanyal for his help in this matter and many other  
concerns of  this journal. A special word of  thanks is also due to Sri Subir 
Sarkar for his suggestion of  preparing an index.
We have lost two members of  the Advisory Board this year. Professor Krishna 
Bose had been a source of  encouragement. She was also the Chairperson of 
the Centre for Archaeological Studies & Training, Eastern India. Mr Pratip  
Kumar Mitra has been with our institution from its inception and always 
forwarded ideas for the betterment of  the journal. Their pr esence is missed.
Kolkata Sharmi  Chakraborty
9 October 2020

--- [Page 6] ---
Pratna Samiksha , New Series 11: 99–113. 2020. ISSN 2229 7979.  
© Centre for Archaeological Studies & Training, Eastern India,  Kolkata. A New Copperplate Inscription:  
Grant of  the Village Kumudavillik a during  
the Reign of  Sasaoka, Year 8
R YOSUKE FURUI
Institute for Advanced Studies on Asia, The University of  Tokyo
ARLO GRIFFITHS1
École française d’Extrême-Orient (Paris)
UMR 5189 Histoire et Sources des Mondes Antiques (Lyon)
abStraCt : This article presents the fifth copperplate inscription explicitly mentioning Sasaoka, who was king 
of  Gau da in the first quarter of  the seventh century Ce. Formulated in Sanskrit prose, this document belongs 
to the class of  land-sale grants, and concerns the purchase and donation of  a village  called Kumudavillik a 
in year 8 of  Sasaoka’s reign. Among points of  interest are the occurrence of  the otherwise unknown term 
naumahattara  and the use of  the karxapapa as a currency unit.
keywordS : Sasaoka, Bengal, early medieval period, Sanskrit, copperplate inscrip tion,  
land-sale grants, karxapapa.
Introduction
Sasaoka, king of  Gau da (r. c. from 602–3 to 
620),2 is one of  the most prominent figures in 
the early history of  northeastern South Asia. He 
ruled a wide area of  eastern Bihar and Bengal in 
the early seventh century and as arch-enemy of 
Harxavardhana had significant impact on larger 
scale political events (Devahuti 1998: 37–53, 
83–6; Bakker 2014: 88–93). Sasaoka’s deeds and 
rule are known from literary , numismatic and 
inscriptional sources. 
Of  the first category , the most important 
is Bapa’s Harxacarita , which mentions him as 
the king of  Gau da who treacherously killed 
Rajyavardhana II, Har xa’s elder brother, and 
against whom Har xa raised an army of  conquest 
(Kane 1965: 43–52). The second source in 
importance is the testimony of  the Chinese 
Buddhist monk Xuanzang recorded in his 
account compiled by Bianji and his biography 
written by Huili and Yancong. Both mention 
Sasaoka by name as the king of  Kar pasuvar pa 
who murdered R ajyavardhana (Li 1995: 72; EPIGRAPHY AND PALAEOGRAPHY
1996: 141–2) and persecuted Buddhism (Li 1995: 
141; 1996: 192, 226–7, 246, 249).3 To these 
sources may be added the 53rd chapter, entitled 
Rajavyakarapa, datable to the late eighth century , 
of  the anonymous scripture Mañju sriyamulakalpa .4 
This text refers to him by the name of  Soma, 
a synonym of  the name Sasaoka which means 
‘moon’, and includes a description of  his rule 
reaching to V arapasi and beyond, his oppression 
of  Buddhism, his rivalry with R ajyavardhana and 
Harxavardhana resulting in the latter’s conquest 
of  Pu pdranagara, his progressive confinement to 
his own territory , and ultimately his death by a 
disease of  the mouth ( mukharoga ) after a reign that 
apparently lasted more than 17 years (Ga papati 
Sastri 1925: 634–5; Jayaswal 1934: 49–51, text 
53–5).5
Sasaoka issued a series of  gold coins, which 
show Siva sitting or reclining on his bull and 
Lakxmi seated on the lotus as motifs of  obverse 
and reverse respectively . Coins of  Sasaoka 
circulated in the western/northern and eastern 
subregions of  Bengal (Mukherjee 1993: 10–13), 

--- [Page 7] ---
100 R YOSUKE FURUI   ARLO GRIFFITHS
though this distribution may not necessarily 
prove the extension of  his rule to eastern Bengal.
As for the inscriptions, four copperplate 
inscriptions explicitly mentioning Sasaoka are so 
far known, as well as a seal matrix. The latter, 
‘cut in the rock at the hill-fort of  Rôhtâsga dh or 
Rôhitâsga dh’ (Fleet 1888: 283), bears the legend 
mahasamanta sasaokadeva . If  it is a genuine piece of 
evidence concerning our king Sasaoka, this seal 
may date from his earlier career as a subordinate 
ruler in Bihar (Fleet 1888: 284). In contrast, all 
the copperplate inscriptions were issued during 
his reign as a sovereign ruler, although none of 
them are royal edicts. Rather, they are documents 
issued by one or the other local office ( adhikara pa) 
or by a subordinate ruler. The Panchrol plate, 
which presents the sovereign as a devout Saiva 
( paramam ahesvara), was issued by the office of  the 
vixaya called Ekat araka6 and records the sale of  a 
plot of  land for donation to a brahmin, petitioned 
by a close associate of  the king ( antara oga) (Furui 
2011: 121–4). Of  the two Antla plates issued 
by the office of  T avira,7 the one dated to the 
eighth year of  Sasaoka’s reign records the sale 
of  land plots with a view to their donation to 
a brahmin, for which mahapratih ara Subhak irti, 
a subordinate ruler governing Da pdabhukti, 
applied to the office (Majumdar 1945: 9), while 
the other, dated to the 19th year, unilaterally 
informs of  the donation of  a village to a brahmin 
by mahasamanta  Somadatta, a subordinate 
ruler of  both Da pdabhukti and Utkalade sa 
(Majumdar 1945: 7–8). All these plates pertain 
to the areas within the present district of  West 
Medinipur and attest to Sasaoka’s control over 
this area.8 The Ganjam plates of  M adhavar aja, 
dated to year 300 of  the Gupta era (619 Ce), 
on the other hand, constitute a royal grant of 
this Sailodbhava king who acknowledged the 
suzerainty of  Sasaoka by mentioning his reign 
(Hultzsch 1900–1: 144). It proves the inclusion 
of  the coastal area of  southern Odisha within 
the sphere of  influence of  Sasaoka, and provides 
an absolute date falling within his reign. All these 
copperplate inscriptions refer to Sasaoka with 
the title of  maharajadhiraja and express the idea 
of  his rule over the earth wearing the four oceans as her girdle. The present inscription is a new 
addition to this series of  copperplate inscriptions.
Physical Description
The plate in question is held in a private 
collection in Delhi. No information is available 
about its provenance, which may have been in 
India as well as in Bangladesh.9 The plate bears 
text on both of  its faces and on its seal. The plate 
measures 18.4 cm in width without seal (23.3 
cm with seal); 13–13.5 cm in height. The outer 
diameter of  the seal is about 6 cm. Although we 
have had occasion to inspect the plate directly , 
we have failed to record information on the 
thickness of  the plate or of  the seal. An estimate 
of  about 0.2 cm in thickness seems reasonable for 
the former, as does an estimate of  about 0.5 cm 
for the latter. As for the seal, which displays the 
common Gajalak xmi device,10 it has clear knobs 
on its top and on its back, and there is a possible 
trace of  the former presence of  a secondary seal. 
Although the plate as a whole is intact, its 
outer surface—where the text is engraved— 
has suffered much more deterioration, and 
deterioration apparently of  a different kind, than 
we see in most Bengal copperplates of  the first 
millennium Ce. It may be said that this is one of 
the least easily legible copperplate inscriptions 
that we have ever dealt with. The script, hardly 
anywhere nicely preserved in this inscription, is 
the form of  Late Northeastern Br ahmi typical 
for inscriptions issued in Bengal during the reign 
of  Sasaoka.11 However, one exceptional aspect 
of  the script observed on our plate is its repeated 
use of  the upadhm aniya and jihvamuliya signs, that 
we have not found so far in other inscriptions 
of  early Bengal. Alas, the plate’s poor state of 
physical preservation does not allow us to be 
entirely sure of  the precise shapes of  the signs 
in this scribe’s hand, but the traces that remain 
are compatible with some of  the shapes shown 
in Singh 1991, plate 178. We would not, out of 
context, have been able to distinguish jihvamuliya 
from o, and yet the akxaras that we read ẖku (twice 
in line 8, once in line 11) show an upper part 
clearly distinct from the shape of  o in sasaoka 
(line 6). See Plate 1.

--- [Page 8] ---
plate  1: The shapes of  the ligatures ok, ẖk (with jihvamuliya) and ḫp (with upadhm aniya) in 
(a) line 6 sasaokadevaraja, (b) line 8 ẖkutumbino , (c) line 8 kaẖkukayaj(ñ)uka , (d) line 11 dharapyaẖkumada   
and (e) line 3 bhagirathiyaḫprakpa . Extracts from RTI by James Miles (2017)(a)
(b)
(d)
(e)(c)

--- [Page 9] ---
102 R YOSUKE FURUI   ARLO GRIFFITHS
Edition
Editorial methodology and conventions
As we have explained on a previous occasion 
in this journal (Griffiths 2018: 24), arriving at 
a nearly complete decipherment of  such very 
badly preserved copperplate inscriptions, making 
it possible to translate the text, would probably 
not have been possible were it not for a number 
of  favourable factors: (i) the strongly formulaic 
and repetitive nature of  such records, which were 
drawn up largely in prose, making it possible 
to restore many lacunae on the basis of  intra-
textual comparison; (ii) the fact that there are 
contemporary documents from the same region 
(as listed above), making it possible to rely on 
inter-textual comparison in an effort to guess at 
the words of  the inscription in damaged passages 
and more generally to determine what its words 
were intended to mean; and (iii) the fact that we 
were able to study this inscription first through 
autopsy and subsequently on the basis of  very-
high-resolution Reflectance Transformation 
Imaging (RTI),12 making it possible to visualise 
the plate and its seal on our computers and bring 
out parts of  akxaras that would have remained 
invisible with more conventional means of 
reproduction.
In our edition, we now follow a slightly 
modified set of  transliteration rules compared 
to our previous publications in this journal. 
The rules we follow are those defined by the 
ERC-sponsored DHARMA project (Balogh and 
Griffiths 2019) which require r ̥ instead of  r (for 
vocalic r) and l instead of  m (for anusvara), ḫ for 
upadhm aniya, h ̱ for jihvamuliya, representation of 
elision of  vowel a in abhinihita sandhi  with ’ even 
though no avagraha  is ever written, as well as the 
conventions V and C explained below.
 (…) graphic elements whose reading is 
uncertain
 […] graphic elements wholly lost or wholly 
unreadable on the plate but restorable on 
the basis of  philological considerations
 〈...〉 expected graphic elements omitted by the 
engraver + one akxara lost due to breaking off  of  a 
piece of  the support
 ? one illegible akxara
 V a vowel that forms an akxara,  
i.e. ‘independent vowel’, of  the type V 
(e.g. A is ‘independent vowel’ a, etc.)
 C a consonant C stripped of  its inherent 
vowel by other means than an explicit 
virama sign (e.g. by reducing the size of 
the akxara or otherwise differentiating 
its shape from the normal akxara with 
inherent vowel)
Seal Legend (Plate 2)
The seal legend seems to read:  
ku(m a)ramatyadhikara pasya
But it must be noted that our restitution of  the 
almost entirely illegible akxara ma implies that this 
akxara would have occupied an unusual amount 
of  space. If  our reading is correct, then it may be 
noteworthy that precisely the same combination 
of  device and legend is also observed in the clay 
sealing from Basarh at the Los Angeles County 
Museum of  Art (AC1993.239.7), referenced in 
Griffiths (2015: 35, n. 24) and on the seal of  the 
Tipperah plate of  Lokan atha (Basak 1919–20: 
302).
Obverse (Plate 3)
 (1) (sva)st[i] ? va ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ra ? kra ? 
vi ? ? (bh avibhi) 〈h〉 saokha-cint amapi-
muktak agara( pai)-
 (2) (s ca)turbhir mmahodadhibhi 〈h〉 mekhalay a 
Ivavr ̥taya(l) himavad-vindhya-  
kailas(ai) 〈h〉 tr ̥bhir mmah a-sikharai 〈h〉 
sobhi 〈tayal 〉 janma-jar a-
 (3) mara pa-bhaya- soka-sa lsarartt(i)-  
haraya bhagirathiyaḫ prak-
pascanusarppi 〈pi〉bhi 〈h〉 sarvvato  
nimn(e)-g abhis copa sobhi-
 (4) tayal vasundhar aya(l) sagra-var xa-
sata-pravarddham ana-kaly apa-
maogalayuxmatas samara- sata-sahasra-
vija-

--- [Page 10] ---
103 Grant of  the Village Kumudavillik a during the Reign of  Sasaoka, Year 8
plate  2: The seal. Photograph by James Miles (2017)
 (5) y(i)no br ahmapa-kxatra-vi t-sudradinal 
pañcanal varppas ramapal n niyamana-
hetor amara-patir iva svaya l-prati xthi-
 (6) tasya mah arajadhiraja-sri-sasaoka- 
deva-r ajasyaxtamai ’bde jyai xthe 
purppamasyal pupye tithau muh urtte 
casmi-
 (7) n divasa-p asa-sambatsare  
radhaputrantara oga-nagabha tagomin a 
sadhikara popeta me(dda)khatadhivasina-
 (8) h ̱ kutumbino mah apradh ana- 
ramaprabh(u)-mah amahattara-
virahadeva-kah ̱kuka-yaj(ñ)uka-vappuka-
vicittra-Udaya-
 (9) da(mbha)-gu padasa-varggap alo(xth)-
itadyabhihit a bhavat al pritya kiñ cic 
chreyam anu xthatum icch amity ebhir 
abhihita
 (10) Eva l kriyat am iti tato ’nena 
nau-mahattara-bhogapatika-
vidagdh anumodan aya Exalm 
adhivasinal sa-kara po- (11) petana(l) sakasat khil avadharapyah ̱ 
kumadavillik a nama gr amo ’sitibhi 〈h〉 
karxapapai〈h〉 kritva yatharahena 
vastranna-
 (12) panais capyayitva yogesvara-
pramukha-k apvika-sakha-n ana-
gotra-tapa-sv adhyayopetebhyo 
vrahmaparyyebhya 〈h〉 yattra  sri-
 (13) (yo)ge svara-bharadv aja-sagotras 
surabhisv ami-katyayana-sagottro 
damaya sasvami-gottraya sasvami-rajña-
 (14) [ya] sasvami〈na〉s ca maudgalya-sagotro 
mmadhavasv ami-dhana(ñja)ya-sagotro 
lilasvami-bharadv aja-sagotro rudrasv ami-
 (15) + + ? nasagotro bhogaya sasvami-
vidagdhasv ami-budhasv ami〈na〉s cety 
ebh(y)as t amrasasanikr ̥(tya) datt(o)  sima 
tas(y)a
Reverse (Plate 4)
 (16) [purvve]( pa suktra)varddh arxaka 

--- [Page 11] ---
plate  3: The plate: obverse. Photograph by James Miles (2017)

--- [Page 12] ---
plate  4: The plate: reverse. Photograph by James Miles (2017)

--- [Page 13] ---
106 R YOSUKE FURUI   ARLO GRIFFITHS
dakxipena ? ? ? ? ? ? ? pa scimena 
(gomayakha) pdah Uttare pa  
(sakrarxa)vakrat aya
 (17) [tas] (ca)  pañca-var xaIka Ity abhis s imabhir
  vi osati-k( a)rxapapya-bh(o)g ada(na)m  
upa(lavdha)n tattra na kena (cc)it 
svalp( apy a)vadha 
 (18) (bhavya) karapal 
 I. vahubhir vasudh a datta rajabhis 
sagar adibhi 
    yasya yasya yad a bhum(i)s tasya tasya tad a 
phala l
 II. (19) xaxt(i)-var xa-sahasr api svargge modati 
bhumi-da  
    Akxepta canumant a ca tany eva narake 
vaseT 
 III. sva-datt al para (20)-dattam vapi yo hareta 
vasundhar al 
    sva-pi xthaya kr ̥mir bh utva pitr ̥bhih saha 
pacyate
Notes on readings
 1–2. - muktak agara(pais): the ga seems clear, but 
we need to emend - muktak abharapais.
 2. - bhir mmahodadhibhi 〈h〉 mekhalay a. Absence of 
doubling of  the m in me (as opposed to the 
doubling of  m in mma) leads us to supply h 
rather than r.
 3. bhagirathiya(ḫ): emend bhagirathyaḫ. The 
assumption of  an akxara ḫpra, with the 
upadhm aniya sign which is not otherwise 
attested in the epigraphy of  Bengal, 
admittedly lends a tentative character to 
our choice of  reading and interpretation. 
However, there are two cases of  ḫpa in 
the Ganjam plates dated to the reign of 
Sasaoka, from southern Odisha (Hultzsch 
1900–1: 143, ll. 5 and 17).
 3. nimn(e)-g abhis: the unexpected e-matra 
is faint but apparently undeniable. 
One must either accept nimne-ga  as an 
otherwise unattested aluk-sam asa, or treat 
the locative case ending as a mere error 
and emend nimna-g abhis.
 6. - rajasyaxtamai: emend - rajasyaxtame. 7. divasa-p asa-sambatsare : emend divasa-m asa-
samvatsare .
 8. -yaj(ñ)uka- : compared, on the one hand, 
with the jña at the end of  l. 13 (as well 
as with cases of  jña in other inscriptions 
of  this period) and, on the other hand, 
with the rppa in l. 5, the subscript 
consonant here can easily be read as p, 
although the shape of  the right loop is 
more compatible with ñ. Since ñ must 
have been intended, we assume that we 
are merely dealing with a ñ of  slightly 
imperfect execution.
 9. - palo(xth)itadyabhihit a: emend - paloxthitadya 
Abhihit a. The reading xth is quite 
uncertain, and U xthita does not seem to 
be a plausible name, but we are unable to 
propose any more satisfactory reading.
 9. chreyam anu xthatum: grammatical mistake for 
chreyo ’nu xthatum.
 10. Exalm adhivasinal: emend Exam adhiv asinal.
 11. khilavadharapyah ̱ kumadavillik a: we propose 
to emend khilavadharapiyah ̱ kumudavillik a. 
Note the omission of  - u- in the second 
syllable of  the name Kumudavillik a.
 11. yatharahena : emend yatharhena .
 14. maudgalya-sagotro : emend maudgalya-sagotr a.
 17. pañca-var xaIka: the intended word is pañca-
varxayika, but pañca-var xika would have 
been better.
 18. na kena (cc)it svalp( apy a)vadha (bhavya) 
karapal vahubhir ... : it seems the engraver 
has written ccit rather than the expected 
cit. For similar phraseology , from the 
Licchavi corpus, closely related to 
Sasaoka in time and place, we may cite 
the Adi-Narayapa Temple Inscription of 
Thankot (Regmi 1983, vol. I, no. 20, ll. 
20–1, 25–7): na kena cid asmat-p adopajivina 
svalpapy abadha kartavy a ... ye ’py agamino 
rajano ’smad-va lsya bhavi xyanti te ’py en am 
asmad-datt am bhumim anumoditum arhanti 
yatkarapal bahubhir vvasudh a ...; and the 
Luñjhya (Patan Palace) Inscription (Regmi 
1983, vol. I, no. 116, ll. 12–13): alpapi 
badha na karya. Cf. also na kena cid v adha 

--- [Page 14] ---
107 Grant of  the Village Kumudavillik a during the Reign of  Sasaoka, Year 8
karapiya in the Soro plate of  Bh anu, year 
5 (Majumdar 1935–6: 203, l. 12). In view 
of  these and numerous other parallels, 
the gerundive bhavya is surprising in our 
context. But it is impossible to read either 
kary(y)a or kart(t)avy a, whereas bhavya 
seems a permissible reading. Regarding 
karapal, the use of  this term to introduce 
the traditional admonitory stanzas is 
also found in the Asiatic Society grant of 
Bhavadeva, year 2 (Sircar 1951: 94, l. 61). 
 18–20. Emended text of  the three admonitory 
stanzas:
 I. bahubhir vasudh a datta rajabhi h 
sagar adibhi h
  yasya yasya yad a bhumis tasya tasya tad a 
phalam
 II. xaxtivarxasahasr api svarge modati 
bhumida h
  akxepta canumant a ca tany eva narake 
vaset
 III. svadatt am paradatt al vapi yo hareta 
vasundhar am
  svavi xthayal krimir bh utva pitr ̥bhih saha 
pacyate 
In III, the syllable pi is not grammatically 
incorrect but needs to be deleted to obtain 
regular meter.
Translation
Seal 
[Seal] of  the office of  the princely advisor.
Plate
(1–6) Hail! On the full-moon-day in the 
month of  Jyai xtha, during an auspicious tithi 
and muhurta, in the eighth year of  the king 
Sri Sasaokadeva, overlord of  great kings 
(maharajadhiraja), victor in a hundred thousand 
battles, endowed with beauty ( kalyapa), 
auspiciousness ( maogala) and longevity ( ayus) 
that prosper during a full hundred years, who 
was, like the king of  the gods (i.e. Indra), 
self-installed as cause of  the taming of  the 
five classes and life-stages of  the Brahmins, 
Kxatriyas, Vai syas, Sudras, and so on, on the earth that is surrounded, as it were, by a girdle 
[formed] by the four great oceans, whose 
decorations are conches, wish-jewels and 
pearls, that are ... ( most of  line 1 illegible ); [on 
the earth] that is beautified by the three great 
peaks, [namely] the Himavat, the Vindhya and 
Kailasa, and additionally beautified by the 
rivers spreading out everywhere to the east and 
west of  the Bh agirathi (i.e. the Ganges), which 
removes the suffering of  reincarnation [that 
consists in] birth, aging, death, fear and sorrow.
(6–10) On this day , in this month and year, 
the antara oga13 [called] N agabha tagomin, son 
of  Radha, addressed the kutumbin s residing in 
Meddakhata,14 together with the office (of  the 
princely advisor),15 [namely] the mahapradhana 
Ramaprabhu, the mahamahattara s Virahadeva, 
Kaxkuka, Yajñuka, Vappuka, Vicitra, 
Udayadambha, Gu padasa, Vargap ala, Uxthita, 
etc.: ‘By your kindness, I wish to carry out some 
meritorious work ( sreyas).’16 He was addressed 
by them: ‘Please do as said!’
(10–15) Therefore, with a view to the assent 
from the nau-mahattara [and] bhogapatika  [named] 
Vidagdha, he purchased from these residents, 
together with the office,17 the village, which 
needed to be ascertained as waste [land], called 
Kumudavillik a,18 for eighty karxapapas, and, 
after duly gratifying them with garments, food 
and beverages, gave it to the noble Brahmins 
of  the K apva School, of  various gotras, steeped 
in ascetic practice and study , led by Yoge svara, 
that is: Sri Yoge svara, of  the Bharadv ajagotra; 
Surabhisv amin, of  the K atyayanagotra; 
Damaya sasvamin, Gotraya sasvamin, and 
Rajñaya syasvamin of  the Maudgalyagotra; 
Madhavasv amin of  the Dhanañjayagotra; 
Lilasvamin of  the Bharadv ajagotra; 
Rudrasv amin of  the ... gotra; Bhogaya sasvamin, 
Vidagdhasv amin and Budhasv amin19—[he gave 
it] to them by way of  edict in copper.
(15–18) Its boundary to the east is 
Suktravarddh arxaka, to the south ..., to 
the west Gomayakha pda, to the north 
Sakrarxavakrat aya. And [based on the 
finding] that they are quinquennial, with these 
boundaries a revenue entitlement worth twenty 

--- [Page 15] ---
108 R YOSUKE FURUI   ARLO GRIFFITHS
karxapapas was obtained. No one should make 
even a small encroachment upon it. 
(18–20) The reason is:
 I. By numerous [kings], land has been given; 
and by many it has been protected. 
Whoever holds land at a given moment, 
to him does the fruit then belong.
 II. The giver of  land revels sixty thousand 
years in heaven; the one who challenges 
[a donation] as well as the one who 
approves [of  the challenge] will reside as 
many [years] in hell.
 III. The one who would steal land given by 
himself  or another becomes a worm in 
his own excrement and is cooked with his 
ancestors.
Contents and Historical Implications  
of  the Inscription
The contents of  the inscription make clear 
that it belongs to the class of  land-sale grants, 
which record sales of  land plots, or villages in 
some cases, to individuals who intend to donate 
them for some religious purpose.20 The present 
grant was issued by the office ( adhikara pa) of  a 
kumaramatya, the official title by which most 
of  the administrators at the district level are 
commonly designated in the early inscriptions 
of  Bengal. The limited information obtainable 
from the plate does not allow us to ascertain the 
location of  the recorded incident whether in 
terms of  geographical coordinates or in terms 
of  administrative units, except that it was within 
the territory of  Sasaoka, and probably in Bengal, 
because it is from this region that we have most 
other known cases of  early medieval land-sale 
grants. The use of  the karxapapa as a currency 
unit may suggest some area in north Bengal, as 
it is so far found only in two copperplates related 
to this subregion in the period between the fifth 
and sixth centuries (Griffiths 2018: 50). On the 
other hand, the time of  the incident is clearly 
stated to be on the full-moon day of  the month 
Jyaixtha in the eighth year of  Sasaoka’s reign  
(ll. 6–7). The reign of  the king is presented with a fairly extensive eulogy in prose (ll. 1–6). He is 
mentioned with the title of  maharajadhiraja, which 
denotes his status as a sovereign ruler (l. 6). On 
the other hand, epithets indicating his religious 
inclinations and devotion to a specific deity , like 
paramadaivata  and paramam ahesvara found in the 
Panchrol plate (Furui 2011: 121, ll. 4–5), are 
missing in the present grant. 
The recorded incident and procedure can be 
summarised as follows. On the aforementioned 
date, N agabha tagomin, the son of  R adha and a 
close associate ( antara oga) of  the king, approached 
the kutumbin s (on this term, see below) residing 
in Me ddakhata—namely one mahapradh ana, 
nine mahamahattara s and others—accompanied 
by the adhikara pa (ll. 7–9). He conveyed to them 
his wish to carry out a certain meritorious deed 
with their favour, and they approved it (ll. 9–10). 
Then N agabha tagomin purchased from the 
residents accompanied by the adhikara pa, namely 
the aforementioned kutumbin s, a village named 
Kumudavillik a (unless the actual spelling kumada-
seen on the plate is not an error) for the price of 
80 karxapapas, with approval of  the naumahattara-
bhogapatika  Vidagdha, on condition that its khila 
(waste or fallow) status be confirmed (ll. 10–11). 
Nagabha tagomin donated the village to eleven 
named brahmins of  the K apva school, headed 
by Yoge svara, belonging to diverse gotras and 
endowed with ascetic practice and learning, after 
providing them with garments, food and drink, 
and making it a tract donated by copperplate 
grant, which most scholars would assume means 
that it was to become tax-exempt, although, 
as we will explain, it may not have this precise 
implication here (ll. 11–15). Next, the border 
landmarks in the four cardinal directions are 
indicated, and said to be quinquennial or five-
yearly (ll. 15–17). By these borders, a bhogadana 
worth 20 karxapapas was obtained, presumably by 
bhogapatika  Vidagdha (l. 17). The description of 
borders as quinquennial reminds us of  a clause 
in the Naradasmr ̥ti which affirms that land kept 
fallow for five years reverts to the legal status 
of  jungle, and of  another in the Arthasastra 
which says that the ownership of  a dike would 
expire if  it remains unused for five years.21 We 

--- [Page 16] ---
109 Grant of  the Village Kumudavillik a during the Reign of  Sasaoka, Year 8
therefore infer that these boundary markers 
being called quinquennial indicates their having 
been abandoned for at least five years, which in 
turn sufficed to confirm the status of  the village 
itself  as waste or fallow. The bhogadana seems 
to denote an annual income from the village, 
to which Vidagdha was entitled as holder of 
revenue entitlement ( bhogapatika ). Its acquisition 
by Vidagdha, who could have held the village 
as his bhoga , as will be suggested below, would 
then denote his recovery of  this privilege. The 
relatively low value of  income, 20 karxapapas, 
may be due to the status of  the village as waste 
to be reclaimed by the resettlement of  brahmins 
through the present grant.
Although we are unfortunately unable to 
propose a plausible reading of  its initial part, it 
is clear that the eulogy of  Sasaoka presented in 
the present inscription is not identical with any 
of  the eulogies found in the other plates issued 
under the same king, while it does globally 
conform to them in contents. Stating Sasaoka’s 
rule over the earth with description of  the 
latter as wearing the four oceans as her girdle is 
common to all the other plates (Furui 2011: 121, 
ll. 3–5; Hultzsch 1900–1: 144, ll. 1–3; Majumdar 
1945: 7, l. 3; 9, l. 3), while the motif  of  Ganges 
water cleansing sins is shared with the two Antla 
plates (Majumdar 1945: 7, ll. 2–3; 9, ll. 2–3). 
Both the present inscription and the Panchrol 
plate mention the four varpas and asramas (Furui 
2011: 121, l. 2), but the present one has a more 
elaborate expression with the unusual idea that 
the varpas would number ‘five’ (l. 5). Though both 
present elaborate depictions of  the earth, the 
rhetoric deployed in both cases is different (Furui 
2011: 121, ll. 1–4), and the present plate also has 
a description of  the oceans themselves (ll. 1–2). 
It is distinguished further from the other plates 
by the descriptions of  the character and deeds 
of  Sasaoka (ll. 4–6). These differences in eulogy 
may be explained as resulting from different 
agencies being responsible for the drafting of 
the plates. Whatever be the case, the scenario 
must have been markedly different from the 
centralised production process typical for later 
royal grants of  Bengal where we observe a high level of  uniformity presumably due to a single 
agency taking charge of  drafting royal edicts. 
On the other hand, the commonality in rhetoric 
observed between the several documents issued 
during Sasaoka’s reign does point to a system 
of  communication through which a particular 
notion of  kingship was broadcast. 
Among the rhetorical elements of  the 
eulogy , most of  which are stereotypical, one is 
noteworthy as possibly reflecting a politically 
significant historical fact: Sasaoka is claimed 
to be self-installed like Indra (ll. 5–6). This may 
allude to his acquisition of  sovereignty not by 
inheritance but through another process. If  one 
is to imagine an event that previous generations 
of  scholars would have termed ‘usurpation’, then 
the king from whom or from whose descendant he 
would have usurped the position may have been 
Jayan aga, a sovereign ruler of  Kar pasuvar pa 
known from his own royal grant and gold coins 
(Barnett 1925–6: 63, ll. 1–2; Devahuti 1998:  
40–5; Mukherjee 1993: 14–15, 42).
The case recorded in the plate generally 
conforms to the pattern observed in the land-sale 
grants of  Bengal issued in the period between the 
mid-sixth and the early seventh century . Local 
magnates with titles like mahattara  and pradhana, 
associated with the adhikara pa, were approached 
by a representative of  a superordinate layer of 
political power and decided on his application for 
purchase of  land in order to donate it to religious 
agents like brahmins (Furui 2020: 90–1, 99). 
However, there are some elements which make 
the present case different from the others. They 
are the object of  sale/donation, the donees and 
the procedure. The antara oga Nagabha tagomin 
purchased a village called Kumudavillik a, 
which was to be confirmed as being khila. The 
confirmation was made through the assessment 
of  boundaries, which were found to have been 
abandoned for more than five years, as explained 
above. The condition of  the village as waste is 
also indicated by the low price with which it was 
purchased. 80 karxapapas seems a very modest 
price to pay for a village, compared with the 400 
papas, which would have been equivalent to 25 
karxapapas (Sircar 1966: 228), paid for a single 

--- [Page 17] ---
110 R YOSUKE FURUI   ARLO GRIFFITHS
plot of  200 dropavapas in the Panchrol plate (Furui 
2011: 121). The donees of  this village, on the 
other hand, were eleven brahmins. The object 
and recipients of  donation suggest the following 
scenario leading to the issue of  the present grant: 
the village Kumudavillik a had been abandoned 
for some reason and its land had been kept fallow. 
Nagabha tagomin purchased the village to settle 
the brahmin beneficiaries. The gift of  garments, 
food and drink, which looks like a simple conferral 
of  honour, could rather be a special provision for 
them to settle the abandoned village and reclaim 
fallow land. 
This scenario would then explain a peculiarity 
of  the procedure adopted in this case, namely 
the approval sought from naumahattara-bhogapatika  
Vidagdha. Of  the titles held by Vidagdha, 
bhogapatika  suggests that he was entitled to 
bhoga , that is revenue, for some service. The 
title naumahattara , of  unclear connotation and 
encountered in no other inscription known to 
us, indicates his position as a landed magnate 
connected with boats. He may have been a 
local notable holding many boats and serving 
the king in this capacity . It can be conjectured 
that the revenue from Kumudavillik a constituted 
his bhoga  or part of  it, so that his approval was 
necessary for the sale of  the village. From his 
perspective, the prospect of  the resettlement of 
the abandoned village and the reclamation of 
fallow land following it could have been sufficient 
motivation for approving the sale. He regained his 
bhoga , although it would yield no more than the 
moderate amount of  20 karxapapas per annum.
The appearance of  kutumbin s as receivers 
of  the petition is the other peculiarity of  the 
present case. The kutumbin s, a term denoting 
either ‘peasant householders’ (Furui 2020: 56– 7)  
or ‘landholders’ (Griffiths 2018: 52, n. 11), 
were a majority group in the rural society of 
Pupdravardhana under the Gupta provincial 
administration in the fifth and sixth centuries. 
Their dominant section, with mahattara s as the 
upper layer, wielded hegemony in rural society , 
especially as constituents of  rural adhikara pas 
which decided on applications for sale of  land (Furui 2020: 48–50). In the following period, the 
ascendancy of  mahattara s as landed magnates 
excluded kutumbin s from the process of  decision 
making (Furui 2020: 91–2). In the present case, all 
the named members constituting kutumbin s were 
prefixed with mahapradhana and mahamahattara , 
indicating their position as landed magnates. 
Thus the case also attests to the ascendancy of 
landed magnates, to whom the term kutumbin  is 
applied just as a category . Still, the invocation 
of  the term as a category is significant, and it 
could be a remnant of  a process through which 
ascending mahattara s differentiated themselves 
from other kutumbin s and monopolised the 
authority shared with the latter. The free disposal 
of  khila land, which was possibly a remnant of 
communal control (Furui 2020: 55) and applied 
to an abandoned village in the present case, could 
be one constituent of  such authority .
The last point to be discussed is the appearance 
of  the karxapapa as a currency unit. The karxapapa 
is found to be used as a currency unit in two 
copperplate inscriptions from north Bengal. In 
the second Raktam ala grant, which was issued 
under the Gupta rule sometime in the fifth or sixth 
century , the price of  one kulyav apa of  land is said 
to be 100 karxapapas, while the actual payment 
for a land plot of  the same size was made with 
200 rupakas (Griffiths 2018: 25, ll. 3–5, 8–9). On 
the other hand, the Mastaka svabhra grant of  the 
time of  Pradyumnabandhu, assignable to the late 
sixth or the early seventh century , mentions tax 
calculated to be 45 karxapapas, for which actual 
payment was made in cowrie shells amounting 
to one thousand curpikas (Griffiths 2015: 30, ll. 
12–14). In these cases, the karxapapa was used as 
a unit of  computation, but actual payment was 
made with other means, either silver currency of 
different value or cowrie shells. If  we take the 
description in the plate literally , the present case 
could constitute evidence for an actual payment 
in karxapapa, though the identification of  actual 
specimens of  contemporary coins with this unit 
has not yet been established. At least we can be 
sure of  the use of  karxapapa as a unit of  currency 
in the period from the fifth century to the early 
seventh. It makes a remarkable contrast with the 

--- [Page 18] ---
111 Grant of  the Village Kumudavillik a during the Reign of  Sasaoka, Year 8
other evidence on the currency system of  Bengal 
in the fifth and sixth centuries, in which the gold 
dinara and the silver rupaka/maxa with exchange 
rate of  1/16 were prevalent. The use of  karxapapas 
under Pradyumnabandhu and Sasaoka, both 
sovereign rulers after the disintegration of  Gupta 
overlordship, indicates the shift of  the currency 
system from dinara-rupaka/maxa to karxapapa. 
The conjuncture of  both systems in the second 
Raktam ala grant suggests that northern Bengal 
went through a transitional period. From the mid-ninth century onwards, north Bengal then 
saw a currency system based on the purapa, a 
unit of  silver currency , and other lower units 
with which production of  land or village was 
estimated under P ala rule (Furui 2020: 146). 
The use of  karxapapa in the three cases including 
the present one points to a phase in the currency 
history of  Bengal, during which the system based 
on gold and silver coins was replaced by another 
based on a notional unit of  silver and imported 
cowrie shells (Furui 2019: 166–9).
NoteS
1. The research for this article has been undertaken 
as part of  the project DHARMA ‘The Domestication 
of  “Hindu” Asceticism and the Religious Making of 
South and Southeast Asia’, funded by the European 
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
(grant agreement no 809994). See https://dharma. 
hypotheses.org.
2. We quote here the estimate for a 17-year-long 
reign given by Devahuti 1998: 52. But see below,  
note 5.
3. For the translations of  the corresponding parts, 
see Beal 1884 (I): 210, (II): 42, 90–1, 118, 121–2; Beal 
1911: 83, 171.
4. On the title actually given to this text, which 
is generally called the Mañjusr imulakalpa , in the 
fundamental manuscript, see Delhey 2012; on the 
dating of  the Rajavyakarapa, see Sanderson 2009: 129, 
n. 300.
5. The textual passage in the Mañju sriyamulakalpa  
(53.673–4) is not very clear: ... sardhal saptama l tatha 
|| var xal dasa sapta l ca masam eka l tathaparam | divas al 
saptama xtau ca  ... . While Devahuti, as quoted above, 
based her estimate of  the length of  Sasaoka’s reign 
on this passage, it must be noted that this evidence is 
contradicted by the Antla plate (see just below) and 
its regnal year 19. We disagree with the idea, first 
formulated by B.P . Sinha (1954: 237) on the basis of 
a weak palaeographic argument, that Majumdar’s 
reading of  number sign 9 was a mistake for 3, which 
led Devahuti (1998: 50, n. 5) to assume the Antla plate 
in question dates to regnal year 13. The number sign 
read, we believe correctly , as 9 by Majumdar has a 
shape sufficiently comparable to the cases of  9 read 
in several Gupta-period plates from north Bengal (see table in Griffiths 2018: 18–22, and especially the 
figures on p. 34) and to the examples of  shapes of  the 
number 9 given by Singh 1991, pl. 177.
6. This is how we now interpret the name of  the 
vixaya, which was interpreted as Ekat akaka in Furui 
2011.
7. See Sanyal 2010: 123–4. For the location of 
Tavira, also mentioned in a recently published Gupta-
period grant, see Griffiths 2018: 43–4.
8. Apart from them, the two copperplate inscriptions 
of  mahabaladhikr ̥ta antara oga mah asandhivigrahika  Soma-
datta, who could be identical with samanta mah araja 
Somadatta of  the Antla plate dated to a year 19, and 
the other of  mahapratihara mah araja Bhanudatta, all 
found near Soro in Baleswar district, Odisha, mention 
a paramabha ttaraka as their overlord (Majumdar 1935–
6: 202, B ll. 1–2, 8–9, C l.1, 203, C l. 8, D l. 8). The 
Kanas and Baleswar grants of  the second ruler also 
contain similar references to a paramabha ttaraka (Mitra 
1935: 622, l. 11; Sircar 1949–50: 334, ll. 1–2, 8–9). 
This paramabha ttaraka could be Sasaoka and the dates 
mentioned in these plates could be in his regnal years 
(Devahuti 1998: 50–1).
9. See Griffiths 2018 for the case of  a plate 
observed at an antique shop in Dhaka before ending 
up in the same private collection in Delhi.
10. On this device in Bengal epigraphy , see 
Griffiths (2015: 18, 28 with n. 24) and Griffiths and 
Noman Nasir (2016: 39).
11. For a script table showing the closely 
comparable akxara sets of  two inscriptions originating 
from the periphery of  Gau da at or around Sasaoka’s 
time, see Griffiths et al. 2017: 102–3.
12. On this technique, besides the references 
furnished in Griffiths 2018: 51, n. 8, we may now 

--- [Page 19] ---
112 R YOSUKE FURUI   ARLO GRIFFITHS
refereNCeSrefer to Miles et al. 2018 for a demonstration of  its 
application to inscriptions of  first-millennium Burma.
13. Sircar (1966): 
Antara oga (IE 8-3; BL), explained as ‘a privy 
councillor or a physician’, though the same 
person is known to be called Raja-vaidya  (i.e. the 
royal physician) and Antara oga; probably a private 
secretary; but mentioned along with Vaisvasika  
(EI 3); regarded by some as a class of  royal servants 
very intimate with the king, probably the same as 
Abhyantara  (HD). Cf. Ep. Ind., Vol. XI, p. 286;  
Vol. XII, p. 99.
14. On other toponyms ending in - khata(ka) , 
see Griffiths 2015: 20 (Raktam ala grant I, l. 20: 
khudd alakhataka, with discussion on p. 26) and 30 
(Mastaka svabhra grant, l. 17: o(ptr)akh( a)ta).
15. The compound sa-adhikara pa-upeta  is redundant.
16. According to Amarako sa 1.4.300 ( syad dharmam 
astriyal pupyasreyasi sukr ̥tal vr ̥xah), sreyas is a synonym 
of  dharma .17. The redundant compound sa-kara pa-upeta  is 
synonymous with sa-adhikara pa-upeta  seen above. The 
use of  karapa for adhikara pa is also found in the Antla 
plate (Majumdar 1945: 1 [seals], 8 [ l. 9], 9 [ l. 7]).
18. For another toponym ending in -villik a, see 
Sr ̥ogatakavillik a in the Mastaka svabhra grant of  the 
reign of  Pradyumnabandu (Griffiths 2015: 30, l. 17).
19. The gotra of  the last three beneficiaries is not 
specified.
20. For the outline of  these documents, see 
Yamazaki 1982. 
21. Pañcavar xavasanna l tu sy at kxetram a tavisamam , 
Naradasmr ̥ti 112.23cd, ed. Lariviere 1989 (the whole 
stanza is quoted with Lariviere’s translation in Griffiths 
2018: 51); pañcavar xoparatakarma pah setubandhasya 
svamyal lupyeta, anyatr apadbhyah , Arthasastra 3.9.32, 
ed. Kangle 1969. Olivelle (2013: 198) translates the 
Arthasastra rule as follows: ‘When a dike is left unused 
for five years, ownership to it ceases, unless during 
time of  adversity’.
Bakke r, Hans T . (2014). The World of  the Skandapur apa: 
Northern India in the Sixth and Seventh Centuries , 
Supplement to Groningen Oriental Studies, 
Leiden: Brill.
Balogh, Dániel and Arlo Griffiths (2019). 
‘Transliteration Guide for Members of  the 
DHARMA Project’, https://halshs.archives-
ouvertes.fr/halshs-02272407.
Barnett, Lionel D. (1925–6). ‘Vappaghoshavata 
Grant of  Jayanaga’, Epigraphia Indica  18: 60–4.
Basak, Radhagovinda (1919–20). ‘Tipperah Copper-
Plate Grant of  Lokanatha: The 44th Year’, 
Epigraphia Indica  15: 301–15.
Beal, Samuel (1884). Si-Yu-Ki: Buddhist Records of  the 
Western World, Translated from the Chinese of  Hiuen 
T siang (A.D. 629) , 2 vols., Trübner’s Oriental 
Series. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner.
———. (1911). The Life of  Hiuen-T siang, by the Shaman 
Hwui Li , Trübner’s Oriental Series, London: 
Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner.
Delhey , Martin (2012). ‘The Textual Sources of  the 
Mañju sriyamulakalpa  (Mañju srimulakalpa ), With 
Special Reference to Its Early Nepalese Witness 
NMGPP A39/4’, Journal of  the Nepal Research 
Centre  14: 55–75.
Devahuti, D. (1998). Harsha: A Political Study , 3rd rev. 
edn., Delhi: Oxford University Press.Fleet, John Faithfull (1888). Inscriptions of  the 
Early Gupta Kings and Their Successors , 1st edn., 
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum 3, Calcutta: 
Superintendent of  Government Printing.
Furui, Ryosuke (2011). ‘Panchrol (Egra) Copperplate 
Inscription of  the Time of  Sasaoka:  
A Re-Edition’, Pratna Samiksha: A Journal of  
Archaeology , New Series 2: 119–30.
———. (2019). ‘ Agrarian Expansion and Rural 
Commercialization in Early Medieval North 
Bengal’, Early Indian History and Beyond: Essays 
in Honour of  B.D. Chattopadhyaya , ed. Osmund 
Bopearachchi and Suchandra Ghosh,  
pp. 155– 74, Delhi: Primus Books.
———. (2020). Land and Society in Early South Asia: 
Eastern India 400-1250 , Abingdon; New York: 
Routledge.
Gapapati Sastri, T . (1925). The Âryamanjusrîmûlakalpa, 
Part III , Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 76, 
Trivandrum: Superintendent, Government Press.
Griffiths, Arlo (2015). ‘New Documents for the 
Early History of  Pu pdravardhana: Copperplate 
Inscriptions from the Late Gupta and Early 
Post-Gupta Periods’, Pratna Samiksha: A Journal of  
Archaeology , New Series 6: 15–38, https://halshs. 
archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-01538645.

--- [Page 20] ---
113 Grant of  the Village Kumudavillik a during the Reign of  Sasaoka, Year 8
———. (2018). ‘Four More Gupta-Period 
Copperplate Grants from Bengal’, Pratna 
Samiksha: A Journal of  Archaeology , New Series 9: 
15–57, https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/  
hal-01954015.
Griffiths, Arlo, Bob Hudson, Marc Miyake and 
Julian K. Wheatley (2017). ‘Studies in Pyu 
Epigraphy , I: State of  the Field, Edition and 
Analysis of  the Kan Wet Khaung Mound 
Inscription, and Inventory of  the Corpus’, 
Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient  103: 
43–205, https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/ 
halshs-01788647.
Griffiths, Arlo and Noman Nasir (2016). ‘Sealings 
from Pu pdravardhana’, Pratna Samiksha: A Journal 
of  Archaeology , New Series 7: 37–41, https:// 
halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-01762695.
Hultzsch, E. (1900–1). ‘Plates of  the Time of 
Sasankaraja; Gupta-Samvat 300’, Epigraphia 
Indica  6: 143–6.
Jayaswal, K.P . (1934). An Imperial History of  India in a 
Sanskrit Text [c. 700 B.C.–c. 770 A.D.] with a Special 
Commentary on Later Gupta Period , Lahore: Motilal 
Banarsidass.
Kane, P .V . (1965). The Harshacarita of  B anabhatta  
(Text of  Ucchv asas I-VIII ), 2nd edn., Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass.
Kangle, R.P . (1969). The Kau tiliya Artha sastra, Part 
I: Sanskrit Text with Glossary , 2nd edn., Bombay: 
University of  Bombay .
Lariviere, Richard W . (1989). The N aradasm rti, 
Philadelphia: Department of  South Asia 
Regional Studies, University of  Pennsylvania.
Li, Rongxi (1995). A Biography of  the Tripi taka Master 
of  the Great Ci’en Monastery of  the Great Tang Dynasty: 
Translated from the Chinese of  Sramapa Huili and Shi 
Yancong (Taish [, Volume 50, Number 2053) , BDK 
Tripi taka Translations Series 77, Berkeley , CA: 
Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and 
Research.
———. (1996). The Great Tang Dynasty Record of  the 
Western Regions: Translated by the Tripi taka-Master 
Xuanzang under Imperial Order Composed by Sramapa 
Bianji of  the Great Zongchi Monastery (Taisho, Volume 
51, Number 2087) , BDK Tripi taka Translations 
Series 79, Berkeley , CA: Numata Center for 
Buddhist Translation & Research.
Majumdar, N.G. (1935–6). ‘Four Copper Plates 
from Soro’, Epigraphia Indica  23 (appeared 1940): 
197–203.Majumdar, R.C. (1945). ‘Two Copper-Plates of 
Sasaoka from Midnapore’, Journal of  the Royal 
Asiatic Society of  Bengal, Letters  11(1): 1–9.
Miles, James, Marc Miyake, and Nathan W . Hill 
(2018). ‘The Use of  Reflectance Transformation 
Imaging in the Recording and Analyses of 
Burmese Pyu Inscriptions’, Archaeological Research 
in Asia  16: 130–8, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ara.2018.09.001.
Mitra, Haridas (1935). ‘Balasore Copper-Plate 
Inscription of  Sri-Bhanu’, Indian Historical 
Quarterly  11(4): 611–26.
Mukherjee, Bratindra Nath (1993). Coins and Currency 
Systems of  Post-Gupta Bengal (c. AD 550-700) ,  
New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Olivelle, Patrick (2013). King, Governance, and Law in 
Ancient India: Kau tilya’s Artha sastra. A New Annotated 
Translation , New York: Oxford University Press.
Regmi, Dilli Raman (1983). Inscriptions of  Ancient 
Nepal , 3 vols., New Delhi: Abhinav.
Sanderson, Alexis (2009). ‘The Saiva Age: The 
Rise and Dominance of  Saivism during the 
Early Medieval Period’, Genesis and Development 
of  Tantrism , ed. Shingo Einoo, Special Series 23: 
41–349, Tokyo: Institute of  Oriental Culture, 
University of  Tokyo.
Sanyal, Rajat (2010). ‘Copperplate Inscriptions of 
West Bengal: Finding Find-Spots and Locating 
Localities’, Pratna Samiksha: A Journal of  Archaeology  
New Series 1: 107–34.
Singh, Arvind Kumar (1991). Development of  N agari 
Script , Delhi: Parimal Publications.
Sinha, B.P . (1954). The Decline of  the Kingdom of  
Magadha (Cir. 455-1000 A.D) , Patna: Motilal 
Banarsidass, https://archive.org/details/in.ernet. 
dli.2015.126840.
Sircar, Dines Chandra (1949–50). ‘Two Plates from 
Kanas’, Epigraphia Indica  28: 328–34.
———. (1951). ‘Copper-Plate Inscription of  King 
Bhavadeva of  Devaparvata’, Journal of  the Asiatic 
Society, Letters  17(2): 83–94.
———. (1966). Indian Epigraphical Glossary ,  
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Yamazaki, Toshio (1982). ‘Some Aspects of  
Land-Sale Inscriptions in Fifth and Sixth 
Century Bengal’, Acta Asiatica: Bulletin of  the 
Institute of  Eastern Culture  43: 17–36.  