--- [Page 1] ---
The Kolkata (Calcutta) Stone and the bicentennial of the British Interregnum in Java, 1811-1816
Above: Boats 
from HM Sloop 
Procris  attacking 
and capturing six 
French gunboats oﬀ 
the cost of Java at 
Indramayu on 31 July 
1811. Engraving by 
Charles Rosenberg 
(ﬂourished mid-19th 
century) after a 
painting by the 
celebrated naval 
artist, William John 
Huggins (1781-1845). 
Courtesy of the  
British Library, 
London.
Left: A light infantry 
sepoy  of one of the 
Bengal Volunteer 
Battalions that took 
part in the British 
invasion of Java in 
August-September 
1811 and the 20 
June 1812 assault on 
the Yogya keraton  
(court). They became 
the core of Britain’s 
military establish -
ment throughout 
their ﬁve-year rule 
(Williams, J. 1817.  An 
Historical Account of 
the Rise and Progress 
of the Bengal Native 
Infantry from its ﬁrst 
formation in 1757 
to 1796,  London: 
John Murray)Above:  
The ‘Airlangga Stone’ 
(Pucangan Inscription, 
1041) in the store-
room (godown) of 
the Indian Museum 
in Kolkata (formerly 
Royal Asiatic Society 
collection), January 
2011, photograph 
courtesy of Professor 
Arlo Griﬃths, École 
française d’Extrême 
Orient, Paris. 
Left:  
'Javanese war  
chief (T.S. Raﬄes,  
History of Java,   
London: Black, 
Parbury & Allen, 
1817, I, p.90).
Below:  
The ‘Minto Stone’  
in the grounds of the 
tied cottage on the 
current Lord Minto’s 
estate. Photograph 
courtesy of Nigel 
Bullough (Hadi 
Sidomulyo) 2006.4 | The Study The Study | 5The Newsletter  | No.74 | Summer  2016 The Newsletter  | No.74 | Summer  2016
The bicentennial of the British Interregnum in Java (1811-1816) provi des the occasion to contemplate a lost opportunity 
to right some of the wrongs perpetrated by Sir Stamford Rales and his light-ing ered administration. Salient here is  
the fate of the two important stone inscriptions – the so-called ‘Minto’ (Sa ngguran) and ‘Kolkata’(Pucangan) stones – 
which chronicle the beginnings of the tenth-century Śailendra Dynas ty in East Java and the early life of the celebrated 
eleventh-century Javanese king, Airlangga (1019-1049). Removed  to Scotland and India respectively, the article assesses 
the historical importance of these two inscriptions and suggests ways in w hich their return might enhance Indonesia’s 
cultural heritage while strengthening ties between the three countr ies most intimately involved in Britain’s brief early  
nineteenth-century imperial moment in Java: India, Indonesia and the U nited Kingdom.
Nigel Bullough and Peter Carey
ON 4 AUGUST 1811 , a 10,000-strong British expeditionary 
force, composed mainly of Indian troops (sepoys)  principally 
from Bengal, but with a handful of specialist troops (horse 
artillery and sappers) from the Madras (Chennai) Presidency 
army, invaded Java to curb the expansionist plans in the Indian 
Ocean of the Emperor Napoleon (reigned 1804-1814, 1815). 
Through his military appointees, Marshal Herman Willem 
Daendels and Lieutenant-General Jan Willem Janssens, who 
had served successively as governor-generals of Java between 
January 1808 and September 1811, Napoleon had instituted  
a Franco-Dutch Government in Java.
The British force landed at Cilincing just to the north- 
east of Jakarta (then Batavia) and swiftly captured the old 
town (Kota) of Batavia (8 August). Just over a fortnight later 
they stormed Daendels’ great redoubt at Meester Cornelis 
(Jatinegara) (26 August), a bloody victory which took a heavy 
toll on the defending Franco-Dutch who sufered more  
than ifty percent casualties (12,000+ out of their 21,500 
troops enlisted were killed during the course of the  
six-week campaign), a death toll forever commemorated  
in the Jakarta place name – ‘the swamp of the corpses’  
(rawa bangké)  – where the British lung the dead from the 
Cornelis battleield. 
The Governor-General of India, Lord Minto (in oice,  
1807-1813), who had accompanied the expedition from 
Kolkata in part to use his Masonic connections to ensure a 
swift political rapprochement with senior Dutch inhabitants,1 
immediately issued a proclamation. This promised the  
inhabitants of Java a new era of enlightened government. 
Meanwhile, Minto’s protégé, Thomas Stamford Rales, 
formerly Secretary (1807-1810) to the Pinang Government, 
was appointed (11 September) Lieutenant-Governor  
(in oice, 1811-1816), marking the beginning of what is  
commonly referred to as the British Interregnum  
(i.e., interim administration) in Java. 
It might have been expected that the 200th anniversary  
of the victory of the British-Indian force at Meester Cornelis 
and the establishment of Rales’ ive-year interim admin-
istration, would have been the occasion for a number of 
ceremonies and historical memorial events, providing an 
opportunity for the staging of exhibitions and conferences 
focussing on the British period in Java. The humanitarian 
reforms of Minto and Rales, in particular Minto’s abolition  
of slavery and judicial torture under the terms of the 1807 
abolitionist legislation, might have been celebrated in such  
a bicentennial, and this in turn might have helped to strengthen 
Anglo-Indonesian relations and quicken an interest in 
Indonesian history and culture. Sadly, none of these  expectations have come to pass. There 
is seemingly no interest in the history 
of the short-lived British Interregnum in 
Java either on the part of the British or 
the Indonesians. This is strange indeed 
given that Indonesians daily experience 
the long-term efects of the British 
occupation by driving on the left and 
buying snacks from ‘ pedagang kaki lima’  
(‘ive-foot’ food peddlers – the number 
referring to Rales’ instruction that all 
pavements should be ive-foot broad). 
This year, on 19 August 2016, the 200th 
anniversary of the formal return of Java 
and its dependencies to the Dutch, the 
bicentennial will have passed. 
India’s contribution during this 
period was crucial for without the 
presence of the Bengal and Madras 
troops, who constituted two thirds of 
Minto’s force, the British could never 
have undertaken such a bold military 
operation. Furthermore, it took place 
under the aegis of the British East India 
Company and was coordinated by the 
Company from its seat of governance 
in India in Calcutta (Kolkata), hence 
Minto’s presence in the expeditionary 
force. Many of the Bengal and Madras 
troops remained in Java throughout 
the period of Rales’ government and 
some even beyond that: the Indonesian 
national hero, Prince Diponegoro’s 
(1785-1855), personal physician was  
an erstwhile Bengal Muslim sepoy, and 
former Bengal Presidency Army troops 
fought on both the Dutch and Javanese 
sides during the Java War (1825-1830).2 
The fact that the entire island of Java 
had been pawned by the returned 
Dutch colonial government in 1824  
for a 300 million Sicca Rupee loan 
(₤2.000.000.000 in today’s money) 
on a private Kolkata bank, Palmer & 
Company, made the bank’s owners 
particularly anxious not to lose their 
investment – hence the ofer of Bengal 
sepoys to the beleaguered Dutch.3 In October-November 1815, some forty years before  
the great Indian war of independence of 1856 – known  
to the British as ‘The Indian Mutiny’ – and nine years after 
the Vellore (Arcot) Mutiny of 10 July 1806, Bengal soldiers 
stationed in south-central Java staged their own insurrection. 
Inspired by the Hindu-Buddhist rituals of the Surakarta 
court and the remains of Java’s great temple structures at 
Prambanan and Borobodur, they planned to kill their British 
oicers, destroy the foundations of European power in Java 
and institute their own Bengal sepoy administration with 
one of their Junior Commissioned Oicers (JCOs) as the 
new Governor-General.4 It might thus have been especially 
appropriate for the bicentennial of the British Interregnum  
in Java to be celebrated jointly by its three principal  
participants: Indonesia, India and Britain. 
Proposed restitution of the ‘Kolkata Stone’
The Javanese king Airlangga (reigned, circa 1019-1049), is a 
well-known and much loved igure in Indonesia. He has even 
been compared to the Pandawa hero Arjuna in 11th-century 
court poet Mpu Kanwa’s famous kakawin  (Old Javanese court 
poem), Arjunawiwāha  (‘The Marriage of Arjuna’), the very 
prototype of Javanese classical poetry. By attaching to his  
lord and sovereign the timeless qualities of the sage-hero, 
the poet ensured that Airlangga’s reign would serve as an 
outstanding example for his royal descendants. 
Such is the mythical aspect. For an accurate historical 
account of Airlangga’s reign we are dependent upon a large 
inscribed stone bearing the Śaka date 963, equivalent to 
6 November 1041. Known to historians as the charter of 
Pucangan, this inscription is unique in that it is the sole known 
documentary source that provides both a chronological 
account of Airlangga’s achievements, and a clear genealogy 
stretching back four generations. Inscribed in two languages 
(Sanskrit and Old Javanese), the charter describes the  
destruction of the kingdom ruled over by Airlangga’s pre-
decessor, Dharmawangsa (d. 1016), and the sixteen-year-old 
Prince Airlangga’s subsequent retreat into the wilderness to 
undergo a period of severe asceticism. This was then followed 
by his consecration as king and a seven-year struggle to 
re-unite the land of Java. In short, the inscription provides us 
with Airlangga’s life story. Without it, we would know almost 
nothing about the details of this remarkable king’s reign. 
Ironically, however, this valuable item of Indonesian cultural 
heritage is not readily accessible to those for whom it holds 
the greatest value since it is currently housed in the Indian 
Museum of Kolkata. For that reason, it has come to be known 
as the ‘Kolkata [Calcutta] Stone’; an object about which 
Indonesian schoolchildren are familiar only by name.
Exactly how and when the charter of Pucangan  found its 
way to Kolkata is not entirely clear. All that we know is that it 
is one of two important Javanese stone inscriptions that were 
sent to India during the period of Rales’ administration. Both 
stone inscriptions were collected by Colonel Colin Mackenzie 
(1754-1821), chief engineer oicer to the British-Indian forces 
in Java (1811-1813) and subsequently Surveyor-General of 
Madras (1813-1821), during his brief sojourn in eastern Java 
early in the year 1812. Concerning the discovery of these 
inscriptions, we have the following information.
The 10th-century stone of Sangguran  was removed from 
the hill region of Malang and shipped to Kolkata on the East 
Indiaman Matilda  in April 1813, as a gift from Rales to his  
patron, Lord Minto. Minto ended his term of oice in December 
of that year and took the stone home with him to Scotland, 
where it was placed at his ancestral seat in Roxburghshire  
in the Scottish borderlands. There it has remained to this day, 
and is popularly known as the ‘Minto Stone’.
As for the Kolkata Stone, we know even less, as the  
precise details of its discovery and shipment still remain 
uncertain. It seems probable, however, that Mackenzie came 
across it during an excursion to the region of present-day 
Mojokerto/Jombang in March 1812, and had it transported 
to Surabaya by way of the Kali Mas river. The details of its 
shipment to Kolkata are as yet unknown, but the inscription 
was quite conceivably among the items that accompanied 
Mackenzie on his return to India in July 1813 on the Matilda .
Rales showed a keen interest in the history of Java and 
instructed Mackenzie to search for “well preserved specimens  
of the country’s ancient letters”; a mission which the latter  
fulilled with admirable zeal. What neither Rales nor 
Mackenzie could possibly have known at the time, however, 
was that the two ‘well preserved specimens’ procured by 
Mackenzie in 1812 were unique historical documents in their 
own right. Indeed, it was not until the early 20th century 
that the contents of both inscriptions were published in their 
entirety, and it was only then that their importance for our 
knowledge of ancient Javanese history became apparent.5 
The ‘Minto Stone’ is the last known recorded document 
issued by the Śailendra rulers of ancient Mataram (8th-10th 
centuries), while the ‘Kolkata Stone’ provides detailed 
information about the King Airlangga, hitherto known only 
in myth and legend. Taken together, both inscriptions have 
helped to establish a coherent chronology linking two impor-tant historical periods. Whereas the Sangguran  inscription 
refers to the prince named Sindok, who was to found a new 
dynasty in eastern Java in the year 929, after the move of the 
Śailendra monarchs from central Java, the charter of Pucangan  
was issued to commemorate the re-uniication of Sindok’s 
kingdom by his great-great-grandson, Airlangga. 
Comparing the fates of these two important stone 
documents, it would seem that the ‘Minto Stone’ has fared 
slightly better than its counterpart in India. The irst Earl of 
Minto, after all, was true to his word and – although he died 
on his way home (at Stevenage, Hertfordshire, 21 June 1814) 
– saw that the inscription was taken to his ancestral seat in 
Roxburghshire, following Mackenzie’s advice: “On the banks 
of the Teviot [the inscription] might some day aford to British 
Orientalists an object of pleasing and useful speculation of 
Asiatic Literature …” At the very least, it shows that Minto 
valued the item and took the trouble to have it transported  
to his estate in Scotland, despite the fact that it weighed more 
than three tons. The ‘Kolkata Stone’, on the other hand, was 
stored in the Indian Museum where it is now almost forgot-
ten. If the former Governor-General had expressed his hope 
that the gift from Mackenzie might “at some day tell eastern 
tales of us”, the only tale that the ‘Kolkata Stone’ can tell is 
one of apathy and neglect.
In reality, of course, the present position of both stones 
is inappropriate. One – the Minto Stone – has been reduced 
to the status of a garden ornament in a remote and barely 
accessible border region of Scotland, while the other has 
sufered a degraded existence as a minor curiosity trapped 
in the godown of a foreign museum as though by historical 
accident. The clarity of its inscription has also been severely 
degraded by the current deplorable conditions in which it is 
kept as we can see from the recent photograph taken by the 
Leiden-trained Sanskritist, Professor Arlo Griiths, currently  
of the École française d’Extrême Orient, in January 2011.
The current Lord Minto (VII), who is the legal owner  
of the Sangguran  charter, has for some years been aware  
of the importance of his unique heirloom inherited from his 
ancestor. He wholeheartedly supports the idea of the ‘Minto 
Stone’s’ repatriation. It would be a ine thing if this spirit of 
generosity found its echo in a sympathetic gesture from the 
Indian Government. In this way two outstanding Indonesian 
national treasures could return home after 200 years in exile, 
to be enjoyed and appreciated by the descendants of the 
people for whom they were initially erected in early medieval 
Java. The placement of both stones in the National Museum 
of Jakarta, through the joint participation of the three major 
participants in the British Interregnum in Java: Indonesia, India 
and Britain, would surely be a itting way to mark the bicen-
tennial. Even if such a return cannot be negotiated in time for 
the end of this 200-year commemoration on 19 August 2016, 
one possible intermediate step would be for a temporary  
loan of both these stone inscriptions to be contemplated by 
the Indian Government and the Minto trustees respectively.  
In this fashion a vital part of Indonesia’s pre-colonial history 
can be restored.
Nigel Bullough (Hadi Sidomulyo) is an independent 
researcher domiciled in Bali who has since 1972 written  
on the pre-colonial history and culture of East Java.  
In November 2015, Nigel won the prestigious Borobodur 
Writer's Sanghyang Kamahayanikam Award for his lifetime 
achievement, in particular his recent researches on 
Majapahit archaeological remains on Mt Penanggungan.
 
Peter Carey is Fellow Emeritus of Trinity College, Oxford, 
and Visiting Professor at the Faculty of Humanities at  
the University of Indonesia in Jakarta. His new book is  
on corruption in the perspective of Indonesian history.
 
Special thanks to Professor Arlo Griﬃths (EFEO) for the 
images of the Airlangga Stone in Kolkata.
References
1  Jordaan, R. 2016 (forthcoming). “Nicolaus Engelhard and 
Thomas Stamford Rales: Brethren in Javanese Antiquities”,  
Indonesia  101 (April), pp.1-28.
2  Carey, P. 2008. The Power of Prophecy; Prince Dipanagara  
and the End of an Old Order in Java, 1785-1855, Leiden:  
KITLV Press, p.428.
3  Tarling, N. 1963. “The Palmer Loans”, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde  119:161-188.
4  Carey, P. 1977. “The Sepoy Conspiracy of 1815 in Java”, 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde  133:294-322.
5  Brandes, J.L.A. & Krom, N.J. 1913. “Oud-Javaansche  
Oorkonden; Nagelaten Inscripties”, Verhandelingen van het 
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen  LX, 
Batavia: Albrecht/‘s-Hage: Nijhof, XXX & XXXI:37-49;  
Kern, H. 1913. “Een Oud-Javaansche Steeninscriptie van  
Koning Er-Langga”, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en  
Volkenkunde  67:610-22; de Casparis, J.G. 1950.  
Inscripties uit de Çailendra-tijd,  Bandung: Nix.