--- [Page 1] ---
© arlo griffiths, 2021 | doi:10.1163/22134379-bja10014
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the cc by-nc 4.0 license.Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26bki
brill.com/bki
The Sanskrit Inscription of Śaṅkara and Its
Interpretation in the National History of Indonesia
Arlo Griffiths
École française d’Extrême-Orient, Paris, France;
umr 5189, Histoire et Sources des Mondes Antiques, Lyon, France
arlo.griffiths@efeo.net
Abstract
It is a well-known fact that Sanskrit had a relatively shorter and less prolific lifespan in
the epigraphy of Indonesia, particularly in the Javanese epigraphic record, than in that
of other Southeast Asian regions. All the more precious, therefore, are the rare oppor-
tunities to add a Sanskrit inscription to the historical record of Java and learn more of
how the Sanskrit language was deployed on the island to represent events recorded for
posterity. In this article, I offer my edition and interpretation of the inscription referred
to in Indonesian publications as Prasasti Sankhara (sic, with kh), that is, the Inscrip-
tion of Śaṅkara ; debunk the entirely unfounded interpretation which it has received
in successive reprints and editions of the greatly influential Sejarah nasional Indonesia
(National history of Indonesia); and show the real historical interest of this inscrip-
tion.
Keywords
Sanskrit – inscription – Śaivism – Buddhism – temple/candi – Śailendra – Mataram –
Java
1 Introduction
J.G. de Casparis, who died in 2002, was the last great specialist of Indonesian
epigraphy who was competent in Sanskrit, but he stopped publishing inscrip-
tions early on in his career. If I am not mistaken, not a single previously unpub-
lished Sanskrit inscription from Java has been published by a trained Sanskrit
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 2] ---
2 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26scholar in nearly 70 years, since an article by De Casparis dating to 1961.1 The
work of this scholar has been greatly influential. This is true especially for
two large volumes, dating respectively to 1950 and 1956, which contain edi-
tions and translations of numerous inscriptions in Old Malay, Old Javanese,
and Sanskrit, along with elaborate discussions of the historical problems on
which the epigraphical documents in question throw light. De Casparis fol-
lowed in the footsteps of several earlier scholars by focusing his attention on
the dynastic history of Central Java in the second half of the first millennium:
the questions of the geographic origin of the Śailendra dynasty; of royal patron-
age of Hinduism versus Buddhism; and of the possible role of foreign, that is,
non-Javanese, political power in these matters. In order to weave a consistent
historical narrative, he often resorted to rather extreme speculations to tie rare
facts together, and has been justly criticized for this by his French contempor-
ary, Louis-Charles Damais, who devoted to De Casparis’s books a book-length
review of 225 pages in befeo volume 54 (1968), published two years after his
death. In the apologetic opening footnote of this review (p. 295, n. 1), we read:2
Actually, I believe that there is already an excess of theories that have
been put forward particularly regarding the ancient history of Java, and I
wanted above all to warn against the acceptance of solutions that may be
seductive but that seem to me insufficiently supported by the documents,
or even plain conjecture. I would prefer, in other words, to return to the
scrupulous study of original documents while avoiding as much as pos-
sible to confuse more or less hypothetical deductions—which one is of
course entitled to make, on the condition that it happens with measure—
with facts that are proven beyond doubt or are sufficiently corroborated.
The same questions and speculative reconstructions have not ceased to occupy
historians of ancient Indonesia of the generation after De Casparis, and we will
see that the interpretation of the inscription of Śaṅkara has suffered from a
biased, nationalistic framework of interpretation and from a deficient compet-
ence in Sanskrit on the part of the responsible historian-epigraphist.
Both De Casparis and Damais were acknowledged as teachers by the late
Boechari (d. 1991), who in turn taught the current generation of senior epi-
graphists in Indonesia, and has during his career prepared numerous ‘provi-
1 I am excluding here my own work, for instance my publication on the Balekambang inscrip-
tion in this journal (Griffiths 2012).
2 For the convenience of an international readership, I have translated all quotations from lan-
guages other than English into that language.
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 3] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 3
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26sional transcriptions’ of newly discovered inscriptions, most of which were
never formally published during his lifetime but have been collected and pub-
lished in the volume Melacak sejarah kuno Indonesia lewat prasasti / Tracing
ancient Indonesian history through inscriptions (2012). One of the inscriptions
that were included there is the inscription of Śaṅkara.3
Boechari, definitely a very serious and admirable scholar, despite the
weighty criticism that I will bring forward in this article, was responsible for
many of the epigraphic contributions to volume ii, entitled Zaman kuno , of
theSejarah nasional Indonesia (sni), the National history of Indonesia, a major
collective publication which was launched in the 1970s and of which new edi-
tions and reprints have appeared continuously since the first edition in 1975,
most recently in an edisi pemutakhiran , or updated edition, that appeared in
2008 and has been reprinted several times since.4 Without quoting more than
one verse-quarter of its original text, but referring to his own transcription,
Boechari in snivol. ii uses data from the inscription to support far-reaching
reconstructions of Indonesian dynastic and religious history, on the basis of
the imagined conversion from Śaivism to Buddhism of its protagonist, named
Śaṅkara, who is presumed to have ruled as king in the eighth century ce. His
dating of the inscription on palaeographic grounds, and his reading into it of
the ‘conversion’ of a ‘king’, allow Boechari to tie together the patronage activ-
ities of monarchs whom he would otherwise have felt constrained to attrib-
ute to two different dynasties, one of which would ostensibly have to be ‘for-
eign’, according to a narrative that was dominant in Boechari’s time and hasn’t
entirely lost its appeal to some scholars even today.5
To set the stage, I need to quote what are presumably Boechari’s own words
at length, while highlighting some elements that demand special attention:6
3 Because it was never published during his lifetime, the inscription is missing in the overview,
by now rather outdated, of Sanskrit inscriptions from Indonesia and Malaysia that was offered
by De Casparis 1991.
4 On Indonesian national and nationalist historiography, see Reid 1979. I cite snivol. ii from
the 4th edition (Bambang Sumadio 1990) and the updated edition (Bambang Sumadio and
Endang Sri Hardiati 2008).
5 By way of example, let me cite Van Naerssen 1947, Bosch 1952, and Jordaan and Colless 2009.
For further references, see the section ‘A critical review of the single-dynasty and two-dynasty
theories’ in Long 2014 (pp. 79–84). Mark Long, an amateur scholar whose work is laudable
but also shows many weaknesses, ignores the short paper on the same topic included as
Chapter 11, ‘Satu atau dua dinasti di kerajaan Matarām Kuno’, in Boechari 2012. Boechari’s
thinking was strongly influenced by the reaction published by Poerbatjaraka (for instance, in
his 1958 article) to the aforementioned articles by Van Naerssen, Bosch, and others.
6 I am translating from snivol. ii (1990), pp. 91–3, including notes 20 and 21. I do so with
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 4] ---
4 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26From the inscription of Sojomerto it is clear that Dapunta Selendra was
a follower of Śaivism. When and for what reason the kings of the Śai-
lendra dynasty began to follow Buddhism may perhaps be known from
an inscription owned by Adam Malik, which we will provisionally refer
to by the name Inscription of Śaṅkara. This inscription is in Sanskrit, but
regrettably only its final part has been found. It seems that the inscrip-
tion was engraved on two stones, but the first stone which contained the
beginning of the text is not available. We therefore do not know when
the inscription was issued—if it contained any date at all. In view of the
unevenness of the back of the inscription, and the presence of parts that
stick out, it seems that this inscription used to be placed in some build-
ing.
The remaining part contains the information that at a certain time
the father of King Śaṅkara fell ill, and for eight days he suffered badly
because of a burning fever. Finally, he died without his priest teacher
being able to cure him. For this reason, King Śaṅkara then felt afraid
of his teacher, whom he considered wrong, and he consequently aban-
doned his devotion to Śaṅkara (the god Śiva) . The concluding part of the
inscription indeed suggests that King Śaṅkara later became a follower of
Buddhism , for it is stated among other things that he gave a favour to the
bhikṣusaṅgha .
[…] Actually this interpretation is still rather doubtful. The matter rests
on the interpretation of the sentence that runs so yan tyaktānyabhak-
tir jagadaśivaharāc chaṅkarāc chaṅkarākhyaḥ , above all the ablative case
jagadaśivaharāc chaṅkarāc . Can this sentence be translated by ‘him, who
is called Śaṅkara, who abandoned his devotion to others, (among others)
from Śiva, who removes the world’s disorder’? Indeed this sounds quite
odd, but keeping in mind that the final portion of the inscription sug-
gests that the King Śaṅkara became a follower of Buddhism by making
a donation to the bhikṣusaṅgha , it is very possible that this oddness res-
ults from the limited comprehension of the writer of the inscription,
who very probably was a native scholar, with regard to Sanskrit gram-
mar. […]What also attracts attention is the information that King Śaṅkara
refers to his teacher as ‘a bad teacher’ ( anr̥taguru ).
silent adjustment of the punctuation and spelling of some words, including the fact that
Boechari consistently writes Śangkhara instead of Śangkara (my Śaṅkara), and the insertion
of a few quotation marks. The corresponding pages of the (only very superficially modified)
edisi pemutakhiran (2008) are 117–8.
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 5] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 5
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26If this interpretation is correct then we find here an epigraphical source
that offers information about the conversion of religion from Śaivism to
Buddhism, and the king who converted was King Śaṅkara, whose name
has not hitherto been found in the sources known to us.
This inscription being incomplete, the year to which it dates is un-
known. However, from a palaeographic perspective it may be estimated
that it dates from the middle of the eighth century ce. It thus very prob-
ably constitutes epigraphical evidence for the theory of Poerbatjaraka
based on information in the Carita Parahyaṅan . In other words, it is very
likely Poerbatjaraka who was right with regard to the pedigree of the Śai-
lendra dynasty, namely that they were native Indonesians, and that there
was only one dynasty, the Śailendra dynasty, whose members initially fol-
lowed Śaivism, but from the government of Rakai Panaṅkaran onwards
became followers of Mahāyāna Buddhism, later to convert again to Śaiv-
ism after the government of Rakai Pikatan.
We need to mention here the idea that the complete title of Rakai
Panaṅkaran was very probably Rakai Panaṅkaran Dyah Śaṅkara Śrī Saṅ-
grāmadhanañjaya.7
Summarizing the historically important points, Boechari believed that Śaṅka-
ra was a ‘native Indonesian’; that he was a king of the Śailendra dynasty, none
other than the Rakai Panaṅkaran famous from the inscriptions of Kalasan (778
ce), Mantyasih i (907 ce), and Wanua Tengah iii (908 ce);8 that he was the
son of King Sañjaya; that he was initially a devotee of Śiva who later converted
to Buddhism; and that he did not write the inscription himself but that who-
ever did had only a mediocre command of Sanskrit. Against the background of
these ideas, let us turn now to the inscription itself.
2 Provenance, Preservation History, and Physical Aspects of the
Stone
The original provenance of the inscribed stone is unknown. Boechari first refers
to the inscription as a recent discovery in two closely related papers published
in 1975,9 and mentions as ‘very likely’ one collector’s report that it would have
7 This idea has been elaborated in a short paper by Bambang Budi Utomo (1989).
8 See Wisseman Christie 2001 and Sundberg 2009.
9 Boechari 1975a (= 2012:265–266) and Boechari 1975b (= 2012:253–254).
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 6] ---
6 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26
figure 1 Black-and-white photo of the stone reproduced from snivol. ii (1990), p. 99
figure 2 Colour photo of the stone (2019)
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 7] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 7
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26
figure 3 Schematic reconstruction by Véronique Degroot of the inscription’s placement.
Not to scale
been unearthed in Central Java near Sragen, to the east of Solo.10 I do not know
why Boechari considered this specific provenance to be so plausible, but at
least it seems safe to assume that the provenance lay somewhere in Central
Java.
After its discovery, the stone was acquired by Adam Malik, an important
political figure under the Sukarno and Soeharto presidencies. After his death
in 1984, his widow, Nelly Malik, took the initiative of founding a museum,
but around the year 2000, the heirs were no longer able to keep this private
museum going and several pieces were sold off so that the collection disinteg-
rated.11
10 My translation of sniii (1990), p. 90 (= 2008:116), n. 16: ‘According to information from
Mr. Adam Malik, the seller of the inscription said that the stone originated in West Java.
But there is information from a collector in Sala who told Boechari that the stone origin-
ates from near Sragen, to the eastern side of Sala, and that at the site in question remains of
brick constructions are still found. That collector is still keeping a head of a Buddha statue
of beautiful manufacture, made of terracotta. Keeping in mind the tendency of dealers
in archaeological artefacts never to mention the provenance of the pieces they sell, and
keeping in mind the contents of the inscriptions, it is very likely that it is the information
from the collector in Sala which is correct.’
11 I rely here on information from an item published on 6 September 2008 on the online
news portal liputan6.com (see ‘Museum Adam Malik tinggal kenangan’, https://www​
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 8] ---
8 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26By the time I started studying the inscription, in 2009, nobody in Jakarta
was able to tell me where the stone was kept. In that phase of my research, I
had to rely on a black-and-white photograph published in sniii (1990, Fig. 1).
The exact whereabouts of the inscribed stone in question are still unknown to
me, but I do know that the stone resurfaced in 2019 in a private collection in
Indonesia. The new owner had the kindness to send archaeologist Véronique
Degroot a recent photo that I include here as Fig. 2. Based on this photo, and
on the observations of Véronique Degroot, I can affirm that the preparation
of this stone and the engraving of the text reveal a workmanship unrivalled in
Indonesian epigraphy.
Although, as stated by Boechari, this single stone does not preserve the
whole of the original inscription, the surface of the one stone that we do have
has been exquisitely polished and stunningly well preserved, even to the point
that there are traces of possibly original red paint on and around the inscribed
surface. The stone is not large, measuring perhaps c. 50×70cm. I agree with
Boechari’s suggestion that it was meant to be placed in a recess of the wall,
such as a niche or a space between two pilasters (Fig. 3). The upper face of the
stone is quite smooth. It is possible that it had been smoothed for the joint with
the upper stone to be seamless. This upper stone, bearing the first part of the
inscription, would have been attached to the wall with horizontal tenons as
well.
3 Edition and Translation of the Text
My edition has been established on the basis of the aforementioned photo-
graphs. In footnotes, I report variant readings found in Boechari’s edition (B)
that I have myself prepared for publication since his death (Boechari 2012:473–
5) on the basis of two frequently varying typescripts (Figs. 4 and 5). In my
edition, I hyphenate the Sanskrit text and insert apostrophes (’) to mark elision
of vowel a- due to sandhi, although no avagraha sign is actually written in any
instance. For these and other aspects of the transliteration system (notably the
.liputan6.com/news/read/164858/museum‑adam‑malik‑tinggal‑kenangan, accessed 7-12-
2020); an item that was published on detikNews.com on 26 November 2008 but is
no longer available now (defunct url: https://news.detik.com/berita/d‑1043374/museum​
‑adam‑malik‑nasibmu‑kini); and a blogpost by Djulianto Susantio (‘Museum Adam
Malik tak tersisa’, https://hurahura.wordpress.com/2013/01/08/museum‑adam‑malik‑tak​
‑tersisa/, accessed 7-12-2020).
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 9] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 9
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26
figure 4
Undated typescript by Boechari: Transkripsi
sementara prasasti batu dalam koleksi Bapak
Adam Malik
figure 5
Undated typescript by Boechari: Prasasti batu koleksi Bapak
Adam Malik: Transkripsi sementara menurut baitnja . The
spelling - njasuggests it is datable to the early 1970s at the
latest
use of capital letters for akṣara vowels), which I apply also to Boechari’s read-
ings in my footnotes, see Balogh and Griffiths (2020). My translation is on many
points different from that of Boechari, but I will discuss only the historically
important differences in the next section.
i Metre: Sragdharā
(0)– – – – ⏑ – – ⏑ ⏑ ⏑ ⏑ ⏑ ⏑ – – ⏑ – – ⏑ –
– – – (1)tvaṁ viditvā svakam api dadataḥ ṣaṭ-suvarṇaṁ vyayārtham·
dharmyaṁ (2)yan māttha vākyan tad iha sa (k)aravāṇīti kr̥tvā pratijñāṁ
prītyā (3)pratyagrahīt tad gata-kapaṭa-manās tāta-dattam prahr̥ṣṭaḥ |||
‘Having made the promise, “I here ( sa) shall in this place ( iha) do that, what
virtuous words ( vākya ) you speak ( āttha ) to me, … having understood ( viditvā )
the … -hood (- tvam ) of one who himself gives six suvarṇa s for the purpose of
expenditures ( vyayārtham )”, with pleasure he, being delighted and with a mind
free of deception, accepted that which had been given by [his] father.’
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 10] ---
10 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26ii Metre: Sragdharā
bhūtvā (4)tuṣṭo ’pi śr̥ṇvan vacanam iti gurus satya-bhāvaṁ vijānan
kālenai (5)vācireṇa glapita-tanu-valas tīvra-dāha-jvareṇa
duḥkhaṁ so ’ṣṭau (6)dināni jvara-kr̥tam avaśas soḍavān svar-ggato
’bhūt
tāte yaś ca praṇa (7)ṣṭe punar api vimanā dhairyya-ruddhāśru-
netraḥ |||12
‘And ( api) shortly thereafter the father ( guru), who had become satisfied by
hearing those words, who recognized the fidelity [underlying them], [but]
whose bodily strength was exhausted due to a fever that burned sharply, after
bearing fever-induced pain in powerless condition for eight days, reached
heaven. And when his father had deceased, he once again became dejected,
[although] thanks to his self-control ( dhairya ) the tears in his eyes were kept
under control.’
iii Metre: Sragdharā
so ’yan tya(k)tānya (8)-bhaktir jagad-aśiva-harāc chaṁkarāc chaṁkarā-
khyaḥ
dhātuḥ putryāḥ pra (9)sādan tuṭivad aṇutamaṁ sv-alpa-puṇyo
’dhigamya
sañcintyātma (10)-pratijñām an-r̥ta-guru-bhayas satyatān netum icchan
prāsādaṁ svā (11)tma-buddhes su-sadr̥śam akarot sārddham ebhiḥ
pravandhaiḥ |||13
‘He (that is, the present poet) here who was called Śaṅkara, who had no other
devotion than that to Śaṅkara, the destroyer of what is inauspicious in [this]
world, [and] who, being of very limited merit, obtained [only] the minutest
atom—no more than a grain of cardamom—of grace from Dhātr̥’s Daughter
12 a. bhūtvā :Aitvā B—for other instances of this shape of bhū, which Boechari didn’t recog-
nize here and in c, see the Canggal inscription (lines 3, 8, and 16) and especially the
Kanjuruhan inscription (line 6). ●c.’ṣṭau:ṣṭoB●soḍavān : norm. soḍhavān .●’bhūt :AitB
●vimanā : an irregularity in the stone has forced the engraver to leave a space between vi
andma.●dhairyyaruddhāśrunetraḥ : a descender from line 6 has forced the engraver to
leave a space between ddhā andśru.
13 c. sañcintyātma -pratijñām : a descender from line 8 has forced the engraver to leave a space
between saandñci, and another one from line 9 has done so between tiand jñā.●d.
pravandhaiḥ : norm. prabandhaiḥ .
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 11] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 11
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26(that is, of Sarasvatī, the patron goddess of poetry), having carefully considered
his own promise, greatly fearing untruthfulness and wishing to bring [his prom-
ise] to realization, made a temple ( prāsāda ) that conformed precisely to his
own intention, together with these compositions.’
iv Metre: Mandākrānta
(12)śreyo mokṣān na param adhikaṅ kathyate jñāna-vidbhir
mokṣa (13)s so ’pi vratibhir an-aghair labhyate jñāna-hetoḥ
tac ca jñā (14)naṁ vratibhir a-malaṁ labhyate yat-prasādād
dhātuḥ putrī janaya (15)tu-tarāṁ vanditā (n)aḥ kavitvam· |||14
‘There is no greater Felicity ( śreyas ) than Release, say those who have access
to Gnosis, and that Release is obtained by sinless ascetics on the grounds of
[their] Gnosis. May Dhātr̥’s Daughter, who is praised by us, and by whose grace
the ascetics obtain that immaculate Gnosis, greatly stimulate [our] poetry.’
v Metre: Puṣpitāgrā
Iha su-dr̥ḍa-yamo ’stu bhikṣu (16)-saṁghaḥ
kula-patir agrya-sukhī cinotu dharmam·
jagad apaga (17)da-māyi-dasyu rakṣan
nr̥-patir arāti-nihā ciraṁ sa jīvyāt· |||15
‘Let the community of mendicants remain steadfast in observance here (in this
world); let the kulapati accumulate dharma (or: construct a monument) [so
that he may one day become] possessed of Supreme Happiness; protecting the
earth [so that it may become] free of ( apagata ) deceitful brigands, may the
king, destroyer of enemies ( arāti-nihan ), live long here (on earth)!’
14 b. mokṣas :mokṣās B●c:(n)aḥ : -aḥB.
15 a. su-dr̥ḍa-yamo :sudr̥ḍaya(ś)o B—norm. sudr̥ḍha -; the adopted reading - yamo is required
both by grammar and by the form of the second akṣara, which does not permit being read
asśo.●c.apagada -:apagaḍa - B—corr. apagata -; a descender from line 8 has forced the
engraver to leave a space between paandga.●cd.rakṣan nr̥ -:rakṣa-nr̥ - B●d.arāti-nihā
ciraṁ :arātir ihāciraṁ B.
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 12] ---
12 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–264 Historical Commentary
Regarding the structure of the text, it is clear that we have preserved only the
final portion of an originally longer inscription. We can be certain that the
stanza here numbered v was indeed the inscription’s final stanza, both because
of its contents (a wish for long life that is reminiscent of the Hampran and
Balekambang inscriptions)16 and because of its metrical form (the Puṣpitāgrā
metre that is used is a typical metre for concluding stanzas in Sanskrit poet-
ics).17 Any possible dating of the inscription would have been contained in its
opening portion and is now lost to us. We are therefore dependent on palaeo-
graphic arguments to establish its date. I will return to this issue below.
The king mentioned in the final stanza remains unnamed in the available
part of the inscription. I do not think the epithet arāti-nihan ‘destroyer of
enemies’ needs to be connected with the complex of epithets that are similar in
meaning but not in sound ( sarvāri-mada-vimathana ,vairi-vara-vīra-mardana ,
vīra-vairi-mathana ) found in inscriptions explicitly related with the Śailendra
dynasty (Bosch 1952:116)— arāti-nihan can easily be considered as a stereotyp-
ical royal epithet, although I cannot exclude that the similarity is more than
coincidental.
Contrary to Boechari’s assumptions, there is absolutely no evidence that
the author of the text was any other than the protagonist Śaṅkara,18 nor that
16 Hampran, pāda d:tasyaitad bhānu-nāmno bhuvi bhavatu yaśo-jīvita(ṁ c)aiva nityaṁ ‘may
it and the life of the fame of this one called Bhānu be eternal here on earth!’ (my edition
and translation, slightly different from those of De Casparis 1950:9–11)—Balekambang,
second hemistich: tasya Ci ⏑ – ⏑ nāmnaḥ jīvitam etac cira(m bhava)tu ‘May this life (on
earth) be long for this one called …!’ (cf. Griffiths 2012:475).
17 See Hooykaas 1955:22–8 (par. 7), esp. the table on p. 27. I owe to Dominic Goodall the
following references for cases where Puṣpitāgrā is used as the end of a canto ( sarga ) in
classic works of Sanskrit poetry: Raghuvaṁśa 5.76, 6.86, 9.76–77; Kumārasambhava 4.46,
6.94; Saundarananda 6.49. It is also noteworthy that among Sanskrit works transmitted
in Indonesia, the last stanza of the Kamahāyānan Mantranaya is likewise in Puṣpitāgrā
(Kats 1910:30).
18 In an initial stage of interpretation, Boechari seems to have considered that the protagon-
ist’s name was Dasyurakṣa. See Boechari 1975a:58 (= 2012:265–6): ‘Penemuan-penemuan
prasasti baru dalam sepuluh tahun terakhir telah menampilkan beberapa nama baru
yang sebelumnya tidak dikenal oleh para ahli sejarah, seperti […] dan Dasyurakṣa di
dalam prasasti berbahasa Sanskerta dari daerah Surakarta.’ However, the corresponding
passage in the same author’s almost identically named and simultaneously published
English-language article already used Śaṅkara instead of Dasyurakṣa (Boechari 1975b:19
[= 2012:253–4]): ‘The past decade alone has yielded several inscriptions promulgated by
hitherto unknown personalities, such as the […] recently discovered Sanskrit inscription
probably dating from the eighth century, which mentions the name of Śaṅkara who, after
the death of his father, changed his religion from Śaivism to Buddhism.’
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 13] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 13
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26this protagonist was the king, let alone that Śaṅkara was part of the complete
title of King Panaṅkaran.19 Our Śaṅkara can possibly be identified with one of
the private persons called Śaṅkara figuring in Damais’s onomastic repertory
(1970:542):
– Kayumwungan (746 Śaka), from the place called Trihaji
– Tunahan (794 Śaka), from the region called Mamali
– Mulak i (800 Śaka), from Mulak
– Poh (827 Śaka), one from the village Kilipan and another from the village
Sampū
Alas, our text contains no date, toponym, or other information that would allow
us to confirm any particular identification, but only the first would be compat-
ible with the date bracket that I will propose for the inscription below. At least
it can be observed that none of these Śaṅkaras was king, and that the name
Śaṅkara—spelt Śaṅkhara in some of these inscriptions but not in ours—was
quite common on Java in the ninth century ce.
I also disagree with Boechari’s arguments that are based on the assumption
that the author of the text had only limited competence in Sanskrit. My impres-
sion is that the author of the text, who identifies himself as Śaṅkara in stanza
iii, was quite an accomplished Sanskrit poet. Only one real error is found in the
text: the misspelling of voiced dafor unvoiced tainpāda c of stanza v, which
may have been induced by the pattern jagada pagada -. The spelling of ḍforḍh
(lines 6 and 15) reflects a regional spelling standard and cannot be deemed a
mistake.
In stanza i, the phrase dadataḥ ṣaṭ-suvarṇaṁ vyayārtham · contains what
may be the earliest attestations in Javanese epigraphy of the terms suvarṇa and
the term vyaya to denote, respectively, a particular weight in gold and expendit-
ures related to pious foundations. Although either one of these terms by itself
19 I have nowhere seen this made explicit, but I assume that Boechari felt that the idea
‘that the complete title of Rakai Panaṅkaran was very probably Rakai Panaṅkaran Dyah
Śaṅkara Śrī Saṅgrāmadhanañjaya’ was supported by the possibility of explaining the Old
Javanese word panaṅkaran as derived with paN-..-an circumfix from a base śaṅkara . Per-
sonally, I find it much more likely that the underlying base is the word recorded with
spelling sǝṅkǝr in Zoetmulder 1982, as spellings with ǝandawere in almost free vari-
ation in early specimens of Old Javanese. A line in the kakavin Bhomāntaka (38.19d) shows
the close association of the idea of a ‘limit’ with the power of a king: aṅhiṅ sira tiki
makadaṇḍanīti sira sǝṅkǝr amuput i jagat ‘only he administers the law; he is the outer-
most limit of the world’ (the translation ‘But only he who has chastisement as his policy
is the spoke that reaches to the outer limits of the world’ proposed by Teeuw and Robson
2005:263 seems less satisfactory). The same association transpires from a phrase in the
unpublished Pūrvādhigama (cited by Zoetmulder 1982 under the entry rājanīti ):vruha ri
səṅkərniṅ śāsananira ‘(the king) should know the limits of his commands’.
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 14] ---
14 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26is a perfectly normal Sanskrit word, their co-occurrence reveals that the partic-
ularly Javanese mix of Sanskrit metrological and administrative terminology
was already in place by the time of the inscription’s composition. The old-
est dated co-occurrence that I am aware of is found in the ninth-century Old
Javanese inscription Kwak i (801 Śaka), lines 1v13–15, where the term vyaya fig-
ures in the Javanized spelling byāya andsuvarṇa in the common abbreviation
su:20
Ekapiṇḍa byāyaniṁ manīma mas su kā 1 su 11 mas· mā 4 mas· ku 3
‘Total of the expenses for demarcating the freehold: 1 kāṭiand 11 suvarṇa
in gold, 4 māṣa and 3 kupaṅ in gold’
In stanza ii, I find the sequence śr̥ṇvan vacanam iti somewhat peculiar, but I
have assumed that it can perhaps stand as equivalent to śr̥ṇvan etad vacanam
‘hearing those words’. Not to speak of Boechari’s obviously impossible inter-
pretation of the sequence tyaktānyabhaktir jagadaśivaharāc chaṁkarāc in
stanza iii, which he himself admitted to be odd and whose oddness he ex-
plained away by accusing the poet of incompetence, the late scholar was clearly
not aware of the possibility of interpreting an-r̥ta-guru-bhayas in this stanza
quite differently, namely by taking guru not as ‘teacher’ but in its literal sense
of ‘heavy’, and joining it with bhayas rather than with an-r̥ta . It is this solution
that yields my translation ‘greatly fearing untruthfulness’, which makes much
better sense in the context.
In stanza iv, I am unable to detect specifically Śaiva or specifically Buddhist
tenets. The emphasis on the salvific power of Gnosis is common to both reli-
gions. The main problem of interpretation, however, and one that is related
to this question about stanza iv, lies in stanza v. What is clear, is that there is
no question of a donation to the bhikṣusaṅgha , let alone of any conversion to
Buddhism. The problem, as I see it, is whether any connection with Buddhism
may be assumed at all.
With the words dharma andbhikṣusaṅgha , we would at first sight seem to
be placed squarely in a Buddhist context. But this interpretation, which would
have as corollary that a Śaiva poet Śaṅkara composed a final stanza in support
of Buddhist institutions, is not necessarily correct. The use of the word bhikṣu ,
to begin with, is not the monopoly of the Buddhists. It generally denotes a beg-
20 See Wicks 1986 and Wisseman Christie 2004 on the Javanese metrological system and on
the various measures of weight in gold used in these examples, notably on the suvarṇa .
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 15] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 15
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26gar in some of the most fundamentally ‘Hindu’ texts in Sanskrit.21 It is also used
in manuals ( paddhati ) for sectarian Śaiva practice to refer to initiates belong-
ing to a set-up under an ācārya , but in one context only, namely when they
speak about going out to beg for food ( bhikṣā ). The author Somaśambhu, for
instance, details various possible arrangements for food in a Śaiva monastic
context, and the topic is complicated. But it is clear that begging is highly rated,
since it seems that the Śaiva initiate raises up the level of everyone’s Dharma
by receiving alms ( dharmonninīṣayā bhikṣāṁ bhikṣur abhyādadīta tām ).22 The
word possibly gained a more general usage in Śaiva circles in Indonesia, where
it occurs in a few texts in the Old Javanese language, some of them specifically
Śaiva.23 It is noteworthy, in this connection, that one of the most common and
21 By way of example, I may cite Mānavadharmaśāstra 3.94kr̥tvaitad bali-karmaivam atithiṁ
pūrvam āśayet | bhikṣāṁ ca bhikṣave dadyād vidhivad brahma-cāriṇe ‘After completing in
this manner the Bali offering, he should feed a guest before anyone else and give alms-
food to a mendicant student of the Veda according to rule’; 3.243 brāhmaṇaṃ bhikṣukaṁ
vāpi bhojanārtham upasthitam | brāhmaṇair abhy-anujñātaḥ śaktitaḥ pratipūjayet ‘Should
a Brahmin or a mendicant come there for food, he should honor him according to his abil-
ity with the permission of those Brahmins’; 6.51 na tāpasair brāhmaṇair vā vayobhir api vā
śvabhiḥ | ākīrṇaṁ bhikṣukair vānyair agāram upasaṁvrajet ‘He should never visit a house
crowded with ascetics, Brahmins, birds, dogs, or other beggars ’; 8.360 bhikṣukā bandi-
naś caiva dīkṣitāḥ kāravas tathā | saṁbhāṣanaṁ saha strībhiḥ kuryur a-prativāritāḥ ‘Men-
dicants , bards, men consecrated for sacrifice, and artisans may converse with women,
unless they have been explicitly banned’; 11.02 navaitān snātakān vidyād brāhmaṇān
dharma-bhikṣukān | niḥ-svebhyo deyam etebhyo dānaṁ vidyā-viśeṣataḥ ‘these nine should
be known as “bath-graduates”, Brahmins who are beggars pursuant to the Law. Gifts must
be given to these destitutes in proportion to their eminence in vedic learning.’ The edi-
tion and translation cited are those of Olivelle (2005). See also the synonyms listed in
Amarakośa 2.6.897–901: bhikṣuḥ parivrāṭ karmandī pārāśary api maskarī | tapasvī tāpasaḥ
pārikāṅkṣī vācaṁyamo muniḥ | tapaḥ-kleśa-saho dānto varṇino brahma-cāriṇaḥ | r̥ṣayaḥ
satya-vacasaḥ snātakas tv āpluto vratī | ye nir-jitendriya-grāmā yatino yatayaś ca te .
22 Somaśambhupaddhati volume 1, section 9. See Brunner 1963:312–3, stanza 26. I owe this
reference and the observations on the larger context to Dominic Goodall. On the usage of
bhikṣu in Śaiva Sanskrit texts, see also Acri 2008:199–200, especially notes 31 and 37.
23 Vratiśāsana (ed. Sharada Rani 1962), Sanskrit stanza 27: yathā bhāskara-candrayor aho-
naktaṁ samaṁ dyutiḥ | tadvad gamanaṁ bhikṣoś ca hr̥dayaṁ na vivarjitam , with Old
Javanese paraphrase … eva maṅkana tāmbəkanta viku | hayva aṅaku paṅavruh | mvaṅ sar-
vaguṇa | hayva kalipyan deniṅ trimala | sattva rajah tamah || maṅkana liṅ bhaṭāra śaṅkara
| kayatnakna tmən || nihan vara-varah bhaṭāra śambhu keṅətakna . See also Vr̥haspati-
tattva (ed. Sudarshana Devi 1957), paraphrase of stanza 25: pravrajyā ṅaraniṅ viku anā-
śaka | bhikṣu ṅaraniṅ dīkṣita . The Amaramālā part of the Candrakiraṇa lists as syn-
onyms: … munīśvara, yogī, dharmajña, viku, r̥ṣi, bhikṣu , bhujaṅga, kalyāṇadharma, budha,
yati, mahāmuni, yatīndra, bhikṣuka , tāpasa ṅaran saṅ paṇḍita ika (ed. Lokesh Chandra
1997:198–9).
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 16] ---
16 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26earliest attested Javanese terms to designate a (Śaiva) mendicant is viku, which
is generally believed to be a loanword based on a Middle Indo-Aryan form of
bhikṣu .24
Our devout Śaiva poet was therefore quite possibly aware of the Śaiva mean-
ing of the term. He may have been playing consciously on its Buddhist associ-
ations by placing it in the direct vicinity of the words dharma and a verb-form
cinotu that is derived from the same root as caitya , and moreover inserting it in
a compound with saṅgha , but the latter word too is not the exclusive property
of Buddhist Sanskrit, nor is the word dharma or the root ci. However, it is also
possible that, despite Śaṅkara’s personal devotion to Śiva, this final stanza is
to be read at a more general level of public affairs, and that the community
of Buddhist monks is actually intended, or perhaps that all mendicants are
intended without regard for their religious affiliation. This would then help to
explain the use of the term agrya-sukhī which, as far as I am aware, has no Śaiva
but does potentially have a Buddhist connotation.25
The word kulapati , on the other hand, is certainly not a Buddhist term but
is found in explicit association with ‘Hindu’ (Vaiṣṇava and Śaiva) temples and
monastic institutions elsewhere. See, for instance, the inscription of Muṇḍe-
śvarī Hill in Bihar, India, re-edited and discussed by Neuss (2003), or the follow-
ing inscription from a Vaiṣṇava context in Nepal, dating to the 660s ce, where
we read:26
kaś cit prasāda-śāsana-paṭṭako ’bhūt sa ca pūrva-rāja-vibhramato naṣṭo
’dhunāsmābhiś cirantana-vyavasthānupālana-jātādaraiḥ sa eva prasādaś
cira-sthitaye śilā-paṭṭakābhilekhyena prasādī-kr̥to ’tra ca maryādā kula-
patinā deyā kārtika-śuklaikādasyām mārga-saṁskārārthan taṇḍūla-mā-
nikā 4
24 See item 5 in Hoogervorst 2017.
25 Cf. the prayer sarve sattvāḥ sarve prāṇāḥ sarve bhūtāś ca kevalāḥ | sarve vaḥ sukhinaḥ santu
sarve santu nirāmayāḥ |, discussed by De Casparis (1956:338) on the basis of a Javanese
attestation.
26 Regmi 1983, Vol. 1, no. 122, lines 7–11. I am grateful to Diwakar Acharya for helping me with
the translation and informing me about the date of this inscription. In an email of 11 May
2020, he informs me: ‘This inscription is now situated near a Śaiva temple but internal
evidence tells that it concerns management and use of the property donated to the temple
of Lokapālasvāmin, obviously a Vaiṣṇava deity. For, it mentions that Kārtika śukla dvā-
daśī (the next day after Viṣṇu rises from his sleep; the day of pārāyaṇa of the vaiṣṇava
cāturmāsya ) is the day of installation of the deity and all other festivals mentioned are on
ekādaśī ordvādaśī ; it also mentions varāhayātrā .’
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 17] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 17
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26‘There was a charter of a (royal) grant ( prasāda ) but that got lost due to
the negligence ( vibhrama ) of the previous kings, and now by us, being
attentive to maintenance and protection of ancient arrangements, that
very grant has been gracefully bestowed through an inscription on a slab
of stone for the sake of its long endurance. And in this connection, there
is the rule: on the eleventh ( tithi) of the waxing (fortnight) of Kārtika, 4
mānikā s of rice should be given for the sake of repair of the (processional)
path by the person in charge of the temple ( kulapati ).’
For a Śaiva context, I may refer to the Cambodian inscription K. 180 (dated 869
Śaka / 948 ce), stanza xxiv (ed. Cœdès 1913:20):
sveṣāṁ māheśvarāṇāṁ yaḥ kulānāṁ patir āśrame
māheśvarāśramābhikhye rājñāṁ kulapatir mmataḥ
‘The one who was the chief of his own groups in the cloister of the Māhe-
śvaras (that is, Śaivas) called Māheśvarāśrama was considered the abbot
(kulapati ) of the kings.’
The term kulapati is not found, as far as I am aware, in other Sanskrit sources
from Indonesia, but it has been borrowed into Old Javanese. There do not seem
to be any occurrences in Old Javanese literary works—and in epigraphic con-
texts too, from Java and Bali, the term is not very common—but there is a
noticeable spike in inscriptions of tenth-century East Java. The meaning is not
evident from the contexts that I have seen, but the following three passages
from the lists of witnesses in two unpublished inscriptions issued by King Sin-
dok suggest that the word had the same range of meanings as illustrated by the
Sanskrit inscriptions cited above:27
– Paradah i (856 Śaka)
I veṣṇava kulapati si suvarṇna punta kabayan si baluk
‘For the Vaiṣṇavas, the kulapati [called] siSuvarṇa and the punta kaba-
yan[called] siBaluk’
– Muncang (866 Śaka)
kulapati I saṁ hyaṁ śāla I himad ḍaṁ hyaṁ marama vinaiḥ pasak-
pasak mas mā 1 ku 2 vḍihan yu 1
27 I quote from typed transliterations found among the unpublished papers of J.G. de Cas-
paris kept at Leiden University Library.
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 18] ---
18 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26‘The kulapati of the sacred hall at Himad [called] ḍaṅ hyaṅ Marama
was given as gifts 1 māṣa and 2 kupaṅ of gold and one set of cloth’
kulapati Iṁ kabikuAn i muñcaṁ si rekal bapani sandhi, I lumbaṁ-lum-
baṁ vinkas ḍapu dadak, gardama, kulapati Iṁ kabikuAn i lumbaṁ-
lumbaṁ kāliḥ si humur bapani sakut, si pāda bapani baśrī
‘The kulapati of the monastery at Muñcaṅ [called] siRekal, father of
Sandhi; at Lumbaṅ-Lumbaṅ, the vinkas [called] Ḍapu Dadak [and]
Gardama; the two kulapatis of the monastery at Lumbaṅ-Lumbaṅ
[called] siHumur, father of Sakur, [and] siPāda, father of Baśrī’
In no Old Javanese context that I have seen is kulapati used in connection with
a recognizably Buddhist institution.
Returning now to our inscription, it seems possible, perhaps even likely, that
Śaṅkara, who refers to himself in the third person in stanza iii, does so again in
stanza v and that the kulapati is none other than himself. Whether or not this
interpretation is correct, the above evidence has made clear that the kulapati
intended in stanza v was probably an abbot of a Śaiva monastic institution or
manager of a Śaiva temple.
5 The Problem of Dating
Let us now turn to the question of dating. Boechari dated the stone to around
the same period as the Kanjuruhan inscription from near Malang in East Java,
which dates to 682 Śaka or 760 ce, but felt it might be a bit earlier.28 This means
that the inscription would have to be placed somewhere close in time to the
inscriptions of Canggal (653 Śaka, 732 ce) and Balekambang, both of which
use the stiff/squarish script style that is usually called ‘late Pallava’,29 and the
Hampran inscription (672 Śaka, 750 ce), which, like Kanjuruhan, uses the more
cursive script style usually called ‘Kawi’. It is this last script style that we also
see deployed in the present inscription, but with a workmanship, glyph-size,
and elegance that far surpasses the Hampran (Fig. 6) and Kanjuruhan (Fig. 7)
specimens—a difference that complicates palaeographic comparison.
28 Boechari 1975b:26–7, n. 9 (= 2012:253–4, n. 9): ‘Our supposition that it might originate from
the eighth century a.d. is based on palaeographical considerations. The script shows close
resemblance to that of the stone inscription of Kāñjuruhan dated 760 a.d., and actually
seems even more archaic.’
29 I am now less confident about my proposal (Griffiths 2012:477) to date the Balekambang
inscription to the second half of the seventh century. It is really impossible to be sure, so
a broad date bracket 650–750 ce is perhaps advisable.
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 19] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 19
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26
figure 6 Photo od 1504 showing a part of an estampage of the Kanjuruhan inscription
figure 7 Estampage efeo n. 2308 of the Hampran inscription
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 20] ---
20 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26It was no doubt Boechari who, in a parenthetic remark in sniii (1990:124
[2008:156]), mentioned the similarity of shape of the virāma signs in the Kan-
juruhan and Śaṅkara inscriptions and assigned this shared feature to the
middle of the eighth century. But in fact the inscription shows two different
shapes: contrast its shape in vyayārtham· in line 1 with that seen in kavitvam· in
line 15, dharmam· in line 16, and jīvyāt· at the very end. And in his review of De
Casparis’s work, Damais (1968:504) had already pointed out that this pointer is
not useful for narrowing down any specific dating between the middle of the
eighth and the middle of the ninth century ce.
I do not believe that the problem can be solved exclusively on the basis of
palaeographic arguments and would like to draw attention to the relevance of
text-internal elements.The first is the very elusive possibility, mentioned above,
thatarāti-nihan in stanza v is to be connected with epithets of similar mean-
ing in the Śailendra inscriptions which date to the last quarter of the eighth
century ce. The second is the equally elusive possibility of identification of our
protagonist Śaṅkara with one of the Śaṅkaras from the inscriptions, with bet-
ter chronological and geographical grounding, listed above. Even the earliest
of these (Kayumwungan, 746 Śaka / 824 ce) would situate us three quarters of
a century later than Boechari’s estimate.30 The third is the fact that we now
have three Sanskrit inscriptions from Central Java—Hampran, Balekambang,
and Śaṅkara—which share the characteristic of expressing a wish for long life
in their final stanzas.31 Of these three, only the Hampran inscription bears a
date, which Damais (1970:43) thought to be equivalent to 750 ce. Personally,
I am inclined to attach chronological significance to this last element, and
provisionally to retain Boechari’s dating estimate, although it is impossible to
exclude that a poet several decades or even a century later would have chosen
to express the same theme, while the exceptionally monumental character of
the script used for our inscription renders palaeographic comparison with any
of the other early Kawi-script inscriptions from Java methodologically prob-
lematic, so that a later date cannot be excluded on palaeographic grounds
either. Until new data become available that will make it possible to narrow
it down, it is necessary to allow a wide date bracket, say 730–830 ce.
30 I do not have access to a usable reproduction of the Kayumwungan stele to compare its
script with that of our inscription. From Sundberg’s comparison (2008:116–9) of the script
of the Kayumwungan stela with that of the short inscriptions on the reliefs of the hidden
base of Borobudur, I gain the impression of a script style somewhat different from that
which we are trying to date in the Śaṅkara inscription. But a difference in style does not
necessarily mean a difference of date.
31 See n. 16 above.
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 21] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 21
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–266 Conclusions
The interpretation of the inscription in Sejarah nasional Indonesia reveals a
number of tendencies that reflect the comparatively unsophisticated level of
historical analysis that was the norm in the 1970s and 1980s and that is, alas,
still the norm today in studies of the early history of Indonesia. These are: (1)
an unwillingness to admit that the pieces of the historical puzzle that have
been passed down to the present are more likely to be disconnected from each
other than to be able to be woven together into a coherent historical narrative;
(2) a belief that all important inscriptions were issued by monarchs; and (3)
the assumption that royal patronage of religious institutions was to the bene-
fit of either Śaiva or Buddhist establishments and that simultaneous patronage
of more than one religion was exceptional.32 His framework of historical ana-
lysis being determined by such misconceptions, and insufficiently controlled
by his ability to understand what the Sanskrit text actually says, Boechari could
present as ‘epigraphical evidence’ a series of ideas that constitute an almost
complete misrepresentation of the data. The larger-scale narrative built up on
such a basis, seen in the second paragraph of the following quotation ( sniii,
1984:109 [= 2008:138]), is therefore very misleading:
From the above analysis, we can imagine that the king of Matarām Saṅ
Ratu Sañjaya had built back up the kingdom Ho-ling after King Sanna
had fallen in battle due to a hostile attack, and the centre of his king-
dom has been destroyed. In the year 717 ce, Sañjaya was inaugurated as
king of Mǝḍaṅ, which was possibly situated at Poh Pitu. In the year 732
ce he established a sanctuary for the worship of the liṅga on top of the
Gunung Wukir, as a symbol of the fact that he had once again subjugated
the minor kings around him, who had formerly acknowledged the suzer-
ainty of King Sanna.
But at a certain moment he fell ill and died, in tremendous suffering
during eight days, because he wanted to comply with what his teacher had
said. His son, called Śaṅkara, or possibly in complete form Rakai Panaṅka-
32 With regard to point 1, see the seminal article of Henige (1975) about a similar tendency in
Indian historiography, aptly described as ‘abhorrence of a vacuum’. With regard to point
2, see the clear distinction made between royal donative inscriptions and private dona-
tions in Salomon 1998, par. 4.1.1–4.1.3. The misconception in point 3 has been effectively
debunked in several recent publications: see Sanderson 2009:117–23 (the section entitled
‘Joint patronage of Buddhism and Śaivism in the kingdoms of the Khmers, Chams, and
Javanese’); Schmiedchen 2011; Pal 2014; and Sanderson 2015:198–207.
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 22] ---
22 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26ran Dyah Śaṅkara Śrī Śaṅgrāmadhananjaya, because he was in fear of the
teacher who was wrong, then abandoned Śaivism, becoming a follower of
Mahāyāna Buddhism, and moved the centre of his kingdom eastwards,
possibly around Sragen at the eastern side of Bengawan Solo, or to the
area of Purwodadi/Grobogan.
My new reading, translation, and interpretation mean that the inscription loses
any pertinence to dynastic history, or to the existence of Buddhist vestiges in
the Sragen area.33 The protagonist of this inscription was called Śaṅkara and
not Śaṅkhara,34 and his lifetime cannot confidently be assigned to the middle
of the eighth century. This figure was not a king but a Śaiva poet with a very
sound command of Sanskrit, who possibly served as abbot of a community of
Śaiva mendicants ( bhikṣusaṅgha ), or as temple manager—depending on what
kulapati means. The inscription records how he fulfils a promise made to his
father to carry out the pious foundation of a temple ( prāsāda ), presumably
to house a liṅga as representation of Śiva, a private foundation but one that
appears to have been perceived as somehow supportive of royal power. It thus
constitutes one of the very few non-royal Sanskrit inscriptions of Java. And it
offers us a glimpse of the religious motivations and the financial aspects of such
a foundation. Finally, we gain with this inscription a precious piece of evidence
for a refined local practice of Sanskrit epigraphy that seems to be on par with
the contemporary tradition in Cambodia.35
33 On these Buddhist vestiges, see Boechari 2012:200–1.
34 See the editorial note * drafted by me on p. 474 of Boechari 2012: ‘Melihat bacaan di sini,
dengan jagadaśivaharāc chaṃkarāc chaṃkarākhyaḥ sebagai hasil sandhi untuk jagad-
aśivaharāt śaṃkarāt śaṃkarākhyaḥ , agaklah mengherankan bahwa secara konsisten di
seluruh kesempatan Boechari merujuk pada prasasti ini beliau salah menulis nama tokoh
ini dengan ejaan Śaṅ khara. Kesalahan tak sengaja ini kami perbaiki di segenap kasus di
dalam buku ini.’ See also my n. 6 above.
35 Pollock (2006:125–32) has given a useful comparative overview of the history of the use of
the Sanskrit language in Cambodia and on Java. However, I believe he was quite mistaken
about Cambodia and not entirely correct regarding Java in noting the following about the
early Sanskrit inscriptions of these cultures (2006:130): ‘As in the case of Khmer inscrip-
tions, these Javanese texts are all royal records; inscriptional practice seems not to have
extended outside the court—one significant difference from the Sanskrit cultural order in
South Asia, where nonroyal records abound.’ As other examples of non-royal (or at least
not explicitly royal) Sanskrit inscriptions from early Java, I cite the Tuk Mas inscription,
as well as the Hampran and Balekambang inscriptions that have already been mentioned
above. For instances of non-royal Sanskrit inscriptions from Cambodia, I refer to Goodall
2015 and 2019.
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 23] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 23
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26Acknowledgements
Begun early on during my posting at the efeo Centre in Jakarta from 2009 to
2014, and initially presented at the World Sanskrit Conference held in Kyoto
in September 2009, the research for this article then went dormant for ten
years until there were two strong reasons for its resumption in 2019: the re-
emergence of the inscription and the launching of the project ‘The Domestic-
ation of “Hindu” Asceticism and the Religious Making of South and Southeast
Asia’ (dharma), funded from 2019 to 2025 by the European Research Coun-
cil (erc) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement no. 809994). On the project, see https://dharma​
.hypotheses.org. It is in the framework of this collective research endeavour
that I have finally been able to bring this study to conclusion, and I thank my fel-
low project members Andrea Acri, Véronique Degroot, Dominic Goodall, and
Annette Schmiedchen for their valuable suggestions on a draft of this article.
References
Acri, Andrea (2008). ‘The Vaimala sect of the Pāśupatas: New data from Old Javanese
sources’, Tantric Studies 1:229–48.
Balogh, Dániel and Arlo Griffiths (2020). ‘dharma transliteration guide’. https://hal​
.archives‑ouvertes.fr/halshs‑02272407.
Bambang Budi Utomo (1989). ‘Rakai Paṇaṁkaran Dyāh Saṅkhara Śri Saṅgramadhanan-
jaya’, Amerta: Berkala Arkeologi 11:9–16.
Bambang Sumadio (ed.) (1990). Sejarah nasional Indonesia . 4th ed., 6th printing. Vol. ii:
Zaman kuno . Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.
Bambang Sumadio and Endang Sri Hardiati (eds) (2008). Sejarah nasional Indonesia .
Edisi pemutakhiran. Vol. ii: Zaman kuno . Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.
Boechari (1975a). ‘Ken Angrok, anak Tunggul Ametung’, Berita Antropologi 7-20:56–
69.
Boechari (1975b). ‘Ken Aṅrok: Bastard son of Tungul Ametuṅ?’, Majalah Ilmu-Ilmu Sas-
tra Indonesia 6-1:15–33.
Boechari (2012). Melacak sejarah kuno Indonesia lewat prasasti / Tracing ancient Indo-
nesian history through inscriptions . Jakarta: Kepustakaan Populer Gramedia (kpg);
Departemen Arkeologi, Fakultas Ilmu Pengetahuan Budaya, Universitas Indonesia;
École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Bosch, F.D.K. (1952). ‘Çrîvijaya, de Çailendra- en de Sañjayavaṃça’, Bijdragen tot deTaal-,
Land- en Volkenkunde 108-2:113–23.
Brunner, Hélène (1963). Somaśambhupaddhati: Le rituel quotidien dans la tradition
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 24] ---
24 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26śivaïte de l’Inde du Sud selon Somaśambhu. Première partie . Pondichéry: Institut fran-
çais d’indologie. [Publications de l’Institut français d’indologie 25.]
Casparis, Johannes Gijsbertus de (1950). Inscripties uit de Çailendra-tijd . Bandung: Nix
& Co. [Prasasti Indonesia 1.]
Casparis, Johannes Gijsbertus de (1956). Selected inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th cen-
tury a.d. Bandung: Masa Baru. [Prasasti Indonesia 2.]
Casparis, Johannes Gijsbertus de (1961). ‘New evidence on cultural relations between
Java and Ceylon in ancient times’, Artibus Asiae 24-3/4:241–8.
Casparis, Johannes Gijsbertus de (1991). ‘The use of Sanskrit in inscriptions of Indonesia
and Malaysia’, in: Colette Caillat and Johannes Gijsbertus de Casparis (eds.), Middle
Indo-Aryan and Jaina studies: Sanskrit outside India , pp. 29–41. Leiden: Brill. [Panels
of the viith World Sanskrit Conference 6/7.]
Cœdès, George (1913). ‘Etudes cambodgiennes’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-
Orient 13-1:1–36.
Damais, Louis-Charles (1968). ‘Bibliographie indonésienne, xi: Les publications épi-
graphiques du service archéologique de l’Indonésie’, Bulletin de l’École française
d’Extrême-Orient 54:295–521.
Damais, Louis-Charles (1970). Répertoire onomastique de l’épigraphie javanaise ( jus-
qu’à Pu Siṇḍok Śrī Īśānawikrama Dharmmotuṅgadewa): Étude d’épigraphie indonési-
enne. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient. [Publications de l’École française
d’Extrême-Orient 66.]
Goodall, Dominic (2015). ‘On K. 1049, a tenth-century cave-inscription from Battam-
bang, and on the sectarian obedience of the Śaiva ascetics of non-royal cave-
inscriptions in Cambodia’, Udaya: Journal of Khmer Studies 13:3–34.
Goodall, Dominic (2019). ‘Nobles, bureaucrats or strongmen? On the “vassal kings”
or “hereditary governors” of pre-Angkorian city-states: Two Sanskrit inscriptions of
Vidyāviśeṣa, seventh-century governor of Tamandarapura (K. 1235 and K. 604), and
an inscription of Śivadatta (K. 1150), previously considered a son of Īśānavarman i’,
Udaya: Journal of Khmer Studies 14:23–85.
Griffiths, Arlo (2012). ‘The epigraphical collection of Museum Ranggawarsita in Sema-
rang (Central Java, Indonesia)’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 168-
4:472–96.
Henige, David P. (1975). ‘Some phantom dynasties of early and medieval India: Epi-
graphic evidence and the abhorrence of a vacuum’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental
and African Studies 38-3:525–49.
Hoogervorst, Tom (2017). ‘The role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia through 101
etymologies’, in: Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, and Alexandra Landmann (eds), Spirits
and ships: Cultural transfers in early Monsoon Asia , pp. 375–440. Singapore: iseas-
Yusof Ishak Institute.
Hooykaas, Christiaan (1955). The Old-Javanese Rāmāyaṇa kakawin: With special refer-
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 25] ---
the sanskrit inscription of śaṅkara 25
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26ence to the problem of interpolation in kakawins . ’s-Gravenhage: Nijhoff. [Verhan-
delingen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 16.]
Jordaan, R.E. and B.E. Colless (2009). The mahārājas of the isles: The Śailendras and the
problem of Śrīvijaya . Leiden: Department of Languages and Cultures of Southeast
Asia and Oceania, University of Leiden. [Semaian 25.]
Kats, J. (1910). Sang hyang Kamahâyânikan: Oud-Javaansche tekst met inleiding, vertal-
ing en aanteekeningen . ’s-Gravenhage: Nijhoff.
Lokesh Chandra (1997). ‘Chanda-Karaṇa: The art of writing poetry’, in: Lokesh Chandra,
Cultural horizons of India .Vol. 6: Studies in tantra and buddhism, art and archaeology,
language and literature , pp. 140–85. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian
Culture and Aditya Prakashan.
Long, Mark (2014). Voices from the mountain: The Śailendra inscriptions discovered in
Central Java and the Malay Peninsula . New Delhi, Delhi: International Academy of
Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan. [Śata-Piṭaka Series 648.]
Naerssen, Frits Herman van (1947). ‘The Çailendra interregnum’, in: India Antiqua:
A volume of Oriental Studies presented by his friends and pupils to Jean Philippe
Vogel, C.I.E. on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of his doctorate , pp. 249–53.
Leiden: Brill.
Neuss, Jürgen (2003). ‘The temple of Muṇḍeśvarī: Reconsidering the evidence’, Berliner
Indologische Studien 15/16/17:531–85.
Olivelle, Patrick (2005). Manu’s code of law: A critical edition and translation of the
Mānava-Dharmásāstra . New York: Oxford University Press.
Pal, Sayantani (2014). ‘Religious patronage in the land grant charters of early Bengal
(fifth-thirteenth century)’, Indian Historical Review 41-2:185–205.
Poerbatjaraka, R.M.Ng. (1958). ‘Çrîvijaya, de Çailendra- en de Sanjayavamça’, Bijdragen
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 114-3:254–64.
Pollock, Sheldon I. (2006). The language of the gods in the world of men: Sanskrit, culture,
and power in premodern India . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Regmi, Dilli Raman (1983). Inscriptions of ancient Nepal . 3 vols. New Delhi: Abhinav.
Reid, Anthony (1979). ‘The nationalist quest for an Indonesian past’, in: Anthony
J.S. Reid and David G. Marr (eds), Perceptions of the past in Southeast Asia , pp. 281–98.
Singapore: Heinemann Educational Books. [Asian Studies Association of Australia
Southeast Asia Publications Series 4.]
Salomon, Richard (1998). Indian epigraphy: A guide to the study of inscriptions in Sans-
krit, Prakrit, and the other Indo-Aryan languages . New York and Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Sanderson, Alexis (2009). ‘The Śaiva Age: The rise and dominance of Śaivism during
the early medieval period’, in: Shingo Einoo (ed.), Genesis and development of tan-
trism , pp. 41–349. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo. [Special
Series 23.]
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access

--- [Page 26] ---
26 griffiths
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 177 (2021) 1–26Sanderson, Alexis (2015). ‘Tolerance, exclusivity, inclusivity, and persecution in Indian
religion during the early mediaeval period’, in: John Makinson (ed.), Honoris causa:
Essays in honour of Aveek Sarkar , pp. 155–224. London: Allen Lane.
Schmiedchen, Annette (2010). ‘Religious patronage and political power: The ambival-
ent character of royal donations in Sanskrit epigraphy’, Journal of Ancient Indian
History 27:154–66.
Sharada Rani (1962). Wratiśāsana: A Sanskrit text on ascetic discipline with Kawi exegesis .
New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture. [Śata-Piṭaka Series (Dvīpānta-
ra-pitaka) 20–5.]
Sudarshana Devi (1957). Wṛhaspati-Tattwa: An Old Javanese Philosophical Text, Critic-
ally Edited and Annotated . Nagpur: International Academy of Indian culture. [Śata-
Piṭaka Series (Dvīpāntara-Piṭaka) 1.]
Sundberg, Jeffrey Roger (2008). ‘Considerations on the dating of the Barabudur stūpa’,
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 162-1:95–132.
Sundberg, Jeffrey R. (2009). ‘Appendix A—The state of Matarām: A review of recent
efforts to clarify its history’, in: Mark Long (ed.), Caṇḍi Mendut: Womb of the Tathā-
gata, pp. 329–62. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan. [Śata-Piṭaka Series 632.]
Teeuw, A. and S.O. Robson (2005). Bhomāntaka: The death of Bhoma . Leiden: kitlv
Press. [Bibliotheca Indonesica 32.]
Wicks, Robert S. (1986). ‘Monetary developments in Java between the ninth and six-
teenth centuries: A numismatic perspective’, Indonesia 42:43–77.
Wisseman Christie, Jan (2001). ‘Revisiting early Mataram’, in: M.J. Klokke and K.R. van
Kooij (eds), Fruits of inspiration: Studies in honour of Prof. J.G. de Casparis , pp. 25–55.
Groningen: Forsten.
Wisseman Christie, Jan (2004). ‘Weight and values in the Javanese states of the ninth
to thirteenth centuries A.D.’, in: Pierre Le Roux, Bernard Sellato, and Jacques Ivan-
off (eds), Poids et mesures en Asie du Sud-Est: Systèmes métrologiques et sociétés, 1:
L’Asie du Sud-Est Austronésienne et ses marches , pp. 89–96. Paris: École française
d’Extrême-Orient; Institut de Recherche sur le Sud-Est Asiatique. [Études Thém-
atiques 13.]
Zoetmulder, P.J. (1982). Old Javanese-English dictionary . 2 vols. ’s-Gravenhage: Nijhoff.
Downloaded from Brill.com06/25/2021 07:31:52AM
via free access