--- [Page 1] ---
The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist
Cosmopolis
Andrea Acri1
Abstract
This article synthesizes and links together evidence published thus far in second-
ary literature, in order to highlight the contribution of Nusantara to the genesis
and circulation of various forms of Sanskritic Buddhism across Asia from the
ﬁfth to the fourteenth century. It places particular emphasis on its expansion
via maritime routes. Archaeological vestiges and textual sources suggest that
Nusantara was not a periphery, but played a constitutive, Asia-wide role as
both a crossroads and terminus of Buddhist contacts since the early centuries
of the Common Era. Sumatra, Java, and the Malay Peninsula hosted major
centres of Buddhist worship and higher learning that were fully integrated
into the trans-Asian maritime network of trade, diplomacy, and pilgrimage. Fre-
quented by some of the most eminent Buddhist personalities of their times, who
prompted doctrinal and cultic developments in South and East Asia, Nusantara
may have exerted an in ﬂuence on paradigms of Sanskritic Buddhism across Asia,
rather than being a passive recipient of ideas and practices.
KEYWORDS: Buddhism, Maha ̄ya ̄na, Mantranaya, Nusantara, Indonesia,
Intra-Asian Interactions, Maritime Silk Routes
INTRODUCTION
THE SPREAD OF SANSKRITIC Buddhism(s) across Asia has mainly been studied
from a perspective focusing on transmission through the overland routes
popularly known as ‘Silk Roads ’, emphasizing Central Asia as an important
transit corridor and contact zone between South and East Asia. However,
current scholarship capitalizing on recent archaeological and epigraphic discover-
ies, as well as a more comprehensive and careful reading of textual evidence from
various cultural areas and historical periods, has recognized the signi ﬁcant role
that the trans-Asian maritime networks or ‘Silk Roads of the Sea ’played in
shaping premodern intra-Asian connectivity. This has paved the way for an appre-
ciation of the important contribution of the southern rim of Asia –especially
South India, Sri Lanka, and Southeast Asia –to the genesis, transformation,
and circulation of various forms of Sanskritic Buddhism.
1École Pratique des Hautes Études (EPHE), Université PSL, France; andrea.acri@ephe.psl.euTRaNS: Trans –Regional and –National Studies of Southeast Asia Vol. 6, No. 2 (July) 2018: 139 –166.
© Institute for East Asian Studies, Sogang University 2018 doi:10.1017/trn.2018.5
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 2] ---
This novel appreciation of the maritime networks has recti ﬁed misconcep-
tions such as the received idea that the Southern regions of India and maritime
Southeast Asia had a marginal role in the Buddhist Cosmopolis, as well as the
overemphasis on the dominance of Therava ̄da/Pa ̄li Buddhism in Sri Lanka and
mainland Southeast Asia.2In fact, prior to the thirteenth century, both Southeast
Asia, especially the Austronesian-speaking littoral and insular regions of South-
east Asia now called ‘Nusantara ’3(Figure 1 ), and Sri Lanka hosted important
(and even predominant) Sanskritic Buddhist traditions.4They also played a con-
stitutive role in the genesis and transmission of both nascent and consolidated
forms of Maha ̄ya ̄na and Mantranaya/Vajraya ̄na across Asia from the ﬁfth to the
thirteenth century. Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka constituted stopovers and entre-
pôts for traders and voyagers. However, they were also frequented by monks and
laymen alike as termini in their own right. Reasons for such visits included: col-
lecting texts, relics, and icons, visiting pilgrimage sites, acquiring knowledge in
institutionalized centres of higher learning or from renowned individual
masters, and securing royal patronage.
Nusantara played an important, Asia-wide role as both a crossroads and ter-
minus of Buddhist contacts from the early centuries of the Common Era. In one
of his recent epigraphical studies, Arlo Grif ﬁths (2014a : 137) makes a case for
“the pan-Asian character of Buddhism and the integral place the Indonesian
Archipelago once held in the ancient Buddhist world ”. Similarly, Peter Skilling
notes that “the peninsular and insular worlds of the ‘Southern Seas ’shared in a
wide culture of ritual and ideas that stretched from Central Asia to East Asia ”
(2015 : 56). Skilling re-evaluates the important participation of premodern Siam
in a much wider world of Buddhist cultural interchange than is usually
assumed at present, questioning “whether ‘India ’should always be the ‘centre ’,
Siam the periphery –a passive recipient of ‘inﬂuence ’”(2009: 42). Hiram Wood-
ward ( 2004 : 353) has advanced an argument for “treating Indonesia and India as
an integral unit well into the ninth century ”, even making “a case for possible
inﬂuence of Borobudur Buddhism upon subsequent developments in India ”.
This survey, synthesizing and linking together evidence published thus far in
secondary literature, highlights the important and constitutive role played by
2The emphasis on Southeast Asia in the constitution of Pa ̄li Buddhism is not unjusti ﬁed; although
Pa ̄li originated on the Indian subcontinent in the late ﬁrst millennium BCE, nearly all of the early
epigraphic evidence in this language has been found in mainland Southeast Asia (Lammerts and
Grifﬁths2015 : 996), and a signi ﬁcant proportion of the existing manuscripts in Pa ̄li is preserved
in present-day Myanmar, Thailand, and Cambodia.
3While the term ‘Nusantara ’is currently used in Indonesia to indicate the whole Indonesian Archi-
pelago and in Malaysia as a synonym of ‘Malay World ’, here I mainly refer to the Malay Peninsula
and the Western Indonesian Archipelago (especially Sumatra, Java, and Bali).
4Indeed, the overwhelming majority of Buddhist texts from Nusantara, whether preserved in
inscriptions or palm-leaf manuscripts, and whether in Sanskrit or in vernacular languages, is af ﬁl-
iated to the Sanskritic canon; little evidence of Pa ̄li Buddhism is known (see Ensink 1978 : 179
n. 8; Grifﬁths2014c : 249).140 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 3] ---
Nusantara in the genesis and circulation of Sanskritic Buddhism(s) across the
geographically wide socio-spatial grouping of Maritime Asia (Acri 2016a ,
2018 ). It presents an historical overview of the networks of sites and agents
from a geographically broad perspective, emphasizing the maritime interactions
that occurred across geographical and cultural boundaries in the region compris-
ing of a web of coastal and inland polities that were connected to each other
through a network of cosmopolitan ports and entrepôts from the Bay of
Bengal to the South China Sea, over the course of several centuries. In so
doing, it advances an alternative, and complementary, historical narrative that
takes the ‘southern pathways ’, i.e. the sea-based networks, into consideration,
thereby revealing the limits of a historiography that is uniquely premised on
land-based, ‘northern pathways ’of the transmission of Buddhism across the
Eurasian landmass.
TRANS-ASIANMARITIME NETWORKS AND THE CONSTITUTION OF
SANSKRITIC BUDDHISM (S),FROM THE FIFTH TO THE FOURTEENTH
CENTURY
Evidence of the long-distance transfer of Buddhism from its north-eastern Indian
cradle to the outlying regions of South India, Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia, and
China via the maritime routes goes back to the early centuries of the Common
Era. From the ﬁfth century onwards, written and material evidence from the
southern rim of Asia becomes more substantial, testifying to an ef ﬂorescence
of long-distance maritime contacts that was to last for several centuries. As is
Figure 1. Buddhist sites in Nusantara (Map by Andrea Acri).The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 141
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 4] ---
shown by textual, epigraphic, and art historical materials –including icons, ritual
accoutrements, dha ̄ran ̣ı ̄s, manuscripts, and monuments –Buddhist cults, imag-
inaries, and ritual technologies ﬂourished across the vast swathe of littoral,
island, and hinterland territory of Maritime Asia. Buddhist vestiges have been
recovered from the Indian Subcontinent littorals, Sri Lanka, the Maldives, pen-
insular and coastal mainland Southeast Asia, and what are now called the Indo-
nesian Archipelago and the Philippine Islands. These speak in favour of the
existence of pervasive and sustained multi-directional Buddhist exchanges
among interconnected nodes linking South Asia in the East to China, Korea,
and Japan in the West through maritime routes (Acri 2018 ; Sen 2014c ). A poly-
centric, geographically wide, and maritime-based approach is necessary to fully
appreciate how religious, mercantile, and diplomatic networks acted as catalysts
for the transmission of Buddhism far and wide across Asia over nearly two mil-
lennia. Making a case for a multi-centric circulation of Buddhism, rather than
a monodirectional transmission from a South Asian ‘homeland ’to Southeast
and East Asian ‘peripheries ’, recent scholarship has unveiled the multi-direc-
tional connections existing between Buddhist centres, tied to each other by over-
lapping networks of relations that were religious as much as economic,
diplomatic, and political in nature (Sen 2003 ,2014a ,2014b ). Therefore, in
order to grasp the multifaceted, trans-regional phenomenon of the patterns of
maritime Buddhist transmission across Asia, it is necessary to adopt a network
approach, focusing on links between nodes and conduits, the movement of
agents, and their role in dynamic processes of exchange.5
While it is undeniable that the overland and maritime ‘Silk Roads ’6were fun-
damentally interlinked and complementary, combined archaeological and textual
evidence increasingly points to the predominant role of the latter in facilitating
the mobility of Buddhist agents, artefacts, texts, and ideas over long distances
from the early centuries of the ﬁrst millennium of the Common Era. By the
second century AD, the seasonal Monsoon winds were fully exploited by mari-
time traders plying the routes connecting the ports in the Mediterranean Sea
with those along the coastal and insular areas of South, Southeast, and East
Asia. The sea was a connecting factor in Asian history from time immemorial:7
cutting across the natural boundaries and barriers of continental topography,
sea-based routes formed a network of conduits that led to the formation of a
mediaeval global Buddhist Asia. By the middle of the seventh century, factors
5See, for example, Neelis 2011 on early Buddhism and trade networks in northwestern India.
6While the expression ‘Silk Roads ’(Die Seidenstrassen ) was coined by the German geographer Fer-
dinand von Richthofen in 1877, the conceptualization of ‘Silk roads of the sea ’might go back to
French scholar Édouard Chavannes ( 1903 : 233). The expression ‘Silk Road(s)/Route(s) ’has been
recently critiqued on the ground that silk was by no means the most commonly traded commodity:
see Sen 2014c :3 9–40.
7Recent surveys of the evidence of pre- and proto-historical maritime contacts between South Asia,
Southeast Asia, and Southern China are Hoogervorst 2012 and Acri et al.2017 .142 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 5] ---
such as the radical expansion of commercial maritime routes connecting South
with East Asia, as well as the gradual decline of Buddhism and Buddhist
exchanges in Central Asia following the Muslim conquest of Transoxiana and
other socio-political contingencies, contributed signi ﬁcantly to the sea-based
exchange, not only of mercantile goods, but also of Buddhist beliefs and ritual
practices.
The existence of Buddhist monasteries near major commercial nodes and
trading routes from the early centuries of the Common Era up to the thirteenth
century may have facilitated the spread of Buddhism, as well as ensured its
support by merchant communities. Early and mediaeval sites in the Western
Deccan, the Konkan coast, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, and Tamil Nadu were
strategically located in the vicinity of ports along the trade routes connecting
the mainland to Sri Lanka and further a ﬁeld to Southeast Asia. This testi ﬁes to
the increasing popularity of maritime travel in Buddhist communities from the
sixth century onwards. The concurrent development in the same locales of
‘Saviour Cults ’–focusing on the bodhisattvas Avalokites ́vara, Ta ̄ra ̄(especially in
heras ̣t ̣amaha ̄bhaya aspect), and Maha ̄pratisara ̄as protectors of travellers, and of
sailors in particular, against the perils encountered along their journeys –may
have been due to the increasing number of merchants and monks plying the com-
mercial routes.8While it is undeniable that lay householders active in trade,
crafts, and warfare played a role in patronizing and spreading Buddhism
through pilgrimage, travel, and migration, the success of Buddhism overseas is
to be attributed primarily to royal sponsorship. According to Ronald Davidson
(2002 :8 2–83, 167), an important factor in the rise and quick spread of esoteric
fashions of Buddhism across Asia from the seventh century was the loss of mer-
cantile support due to the dominance of Persian/Muslim traders on the Indian
Ocean network, and the concomitant escalation in royal patronage. This was
made possible through the intimate relationship between ritual specialists and
the political elites who, lured by the promise of invincibility, protection for the
state, and superhuman powers, often employed tantric monks as royal chaplains
–thereby following the pattern that already existed between Brahmanical puro-
hitas and the courts that they served. Signi ﬁcantly, many of the powerful dynas-
ties that were instrumental in the sponsorship and spread of Sanskritic Buddhism
ruled over domains located along the nodes of commercial and diplomatic mar-
itime networks, such as the Pa ̄las in Northeastern India, the Bhauma-Karas in
Odisha, the Early Second Lambakan ̣n ̣as in Sri Lanka, the S ́ailendras in
Sumatra and Java, and the Tangs in China.
Historical evidence going back to at least the third century provides us with a
picture of a steady traf ﬁc of itinerant monks travelling both eastwards and west-
wards along the sea paths linking a swathe of territory across the Indian Subcon-
tinent and Japan, in search of texts, teachers, and patrons. It would seem that
8See Bopearachchi 2014 : 161 –187; Ray 2012 :5 6–60; Guy 2014 : 226 –264.The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 143
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 6] ---
most of the monks travelling both ways between India and China preferred the
maritime route to the overland one, or at least sought to include a maritime leg in
their journey, which usually included stopovers in Sri Lanka and Nusantara.
Seventh-century monk Yijing informs us that a signi ﬁcant number of the
Chinese and Korean monks who went to India and Southeast Asia during his
time travelled by sea on merchant ships (Pachow 1960 : 211; Kandahjaya 2004 :
58). As recorded by a conservative scholarly estimate, 66 out of the 103 monks
(of all ethnicities and geographical provenances) who were involved in the trans-
mission of Buddhism to China used the maritime routes.9
While the names and life circumstances of most of those anonymous agents
are bound to remain unknown to us, Sino-Japanese biographies allow us to recon-
struct the pedigree and social circle of some prominent monks who have gone
down in history as vigorous translators, commentators, authors of original texts,
initiators of lineages, royal advisers, and thaumaturges.10Theﬁrst monk to
travel from India to China via the maritime route was the Sogdian Kang
Senghui, who arrived in Nanjing in AD 247. Many more monks are recorded
to have reached China from South and Central Asia via Sri Lanka and Southeast
Asia from the fourth to the sixth century. From the seventh century, a remarkably
mobile and cosmopolitan network of monks is associated with the ﬁrst wave of
Mantranaya. This network includes *Vajrabuddhi (Jingangzhi 金剛智; 671 –
741) and his ordained pupil Amoghavajra (Bukong 不空; 704 –774). We also
know about an eighth-century Javanese monk, Bianhong, who went to China
to study under Huiguo and composed an esoteric Buddhist initiation manual
focusing on state protection (Sinclair 2016a ). The networks of seventh- to
ninth-century itinerant monks offer a telling picture of the extraordinary
period of intra-Asian maritime connectivity that became the hallmark of the
rise and spread of esoteric Buddhist traditions over the course of just two or
three generations.
As a result of socio-political contingencies,11the Buddhist traf ﬁc between
India and China decreased from the ninth century, although smaller regional
interlocking networks remained active, and the sea-based transmission of Bud-
dhism between South and Southeast Asia was sustained through the following
centuries at the hands of monks and other (possibly non-monastic) agents who
are bound to remain anonymous due to the paucity of Chinese records of that
period. Notable exceptions are the famous master Atis ́a (*Adh ı ̄s ́a/Atı ̄s ́a?, aka
Dı ̄pan ̇karas ́rı ̄jña ̄na, AD 980 –1054), who travelled from northeastern India to
Sumatra ( suvarn ̣advı ̄pa) and stayed there for twelve years to study with
9Kandahjaya 2004 : 78. The number 103 was estimated by P.C. Bagchi ( 1981 : 255 –277).
10For a survey of the most important monks, see Pachow 1960 ; Sen 2014c ; Acri 2016a ,2018 .
11Such as the decline and ‘provincialisation ’of Buddhism in China from the middle of the ninth up
to the end of the tenth century, the reduced scale of Buddhist building activities in Southeast Asia
(with the exception of the Cam domains), the persecution of Buddhists in Tibet, and the emphasis
on S ́aiva patronage in Java from the mid-ninth century.144 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 7] ---
*Sauvarn ̣advı ̄pı ̄-Dharmak ı ̄rti, one of the ﬁve most prominent Buddhist intellectu-
als of his time; the monk-translator Shihu ( 施護,* D a ̄napa ̄la, d. 1018), apparently
a native of Swa ̄t (now in Western Pakistan), who knew the languages of S ́rı ̄vijaya,
and must therefore have resided there for some time; and, almost ﬁve centuries
later, the sixteenth-century Indian Buddhist Siddha Buddhaguptana ̄tha, who is
recorded by his student the Tibetan chronicler Ta ̄rana ̄tha to have travelled exten-
sively by sea from the Konkan coast to Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia (Java and
Sumatra?), and back to visit Buddhist vestiges and communities (Tucci 1931 ;
Templeman 2009 ).
Despite the lack of biographic records, the continuation or (re)establishment
of long-distance contacts across the Indian ocean from the eleventh to the
thirteenth century is suggested by certain notable facts. These include the
royal-sponsored endowments sent by sea from Myanmar to Bodh Gaya (Singh
2014 ) and the (re)appearance of Na ̄landa ̄-style imagery of Buddhist divinities in
Angkor, Pagan, the Malay Peninsula, and East Java (Skilling 2007 ). Another
example of this is the election (arguably through initiation) of transgressive
and martial forms of ‘Phase Three ’tantric Buddhism as a personal and
ofﬁcial cult by important royal ﬁgures such as Jayavarman VII in Cambodia
(r.c.1181 –1220), Kr ̣tanagara in East Java (r. 1268 –1292), Kublai Khan in China
(r. 1260 –1294), and A ̄dityavarman in Java and Sumatra (r. ? –1375). The rise of
these new networks of tantric Buddhism may have been triggered by unfavoura-
ble international political developments, most notably the decline of Buddhism in
northern India at the end of the twelfth and beginning of the thirteenth century.
When Na ̄landa ̄, Vikramas ́ı ̄la, and Uddan ̣d ̣apura had been razed, scholars and
artisansﬂed to Nepal and Tibet (von Schroeder 1981 ), and possibly further
aﬁeld to Southeast Asia.12According to Ta ̄rana ̄tha, most of the Buddhist scholars
ofmadhyades ́aﬂed to mainland Southeast Asia (i.e. the kingdoms of Pegu,
Campa ̄, Kamboja, and so on) after Magadha was invaded by the Turks
(Chattopadhyaya 1990 [1970]: 330).
SANSKRITIC BUDDHISM IN NUSANTARA –THECONTRIBUTION OF
NUSANTARA TO SANSKRITIC BUDDHISM
Nusantara was a strategic geographical area in the maritime Silk Roads system
that has yielded signi ﬁcant vestiges of its glorious Hindu and Buddhist past,
yet is still underrepresented in contemporary scholarship. Far from being a cul-
tural backwater that passively received and ‘localised ’Indic inﬂuences, it had an
integral place in the Buddhist Cosmopolis as both a crossroads and terminus of
contacts from the early centuries of the Common Era. The contribution of
Nusantara to the Indian Ocean trade network has been recognized through its
12See below on the thirteenth-century inscription by Gautamas ́rı ̄in Karimun Besar.The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 145
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 8] ---
provision of superior shipping technology, nautical terminology, and ship crews.
However, the creative and constitutive force of Southeast Asian agents and socio-
cultural milieux in the transfer, transformation, and translocation of people, texts,
notions, and artefacts in the Buddhist world remains to be fully appreciated.13
Witness the fact that a number of monks who travelled the sea routes and
visited Southeast Asia –such as, for example, *Gun ̣avarman, *Parama ̄rtha,
Yijing, *Vajrabodhi/*Vajrabuddhi, Amoghavajra, and Atis ́a–not only contributed
to shaping the Buddhist paradigm in that region, but also stirred up new
developments in China, Tibet, and the Indian Subcontinent itself (Kandahjaya
2004 : 79).
Sparseﬁnds of Buddha images are documented across a vast area from
Sumatra and Java to Kalimantan and Sulawesi; although their dating is uncertain,
with estimates spanning from the second to the ninth century, they highlight the
maritime mobility of Buddhism within the Archipelago. Vestiges of Buddhism,
such as stu ̄pika ̄s, are also documented on the island of Bali, where communities
of specialists in tantric Buddhist rituals have survived down to the present day. It
is, however, in Sumatra and Java that the most Buddhist vestiges are concen-
trated. These two islands were strongholds of Maha ̄ya ̄na Buddhist tantra from
the seventh to the ﬁfteenth century. Signi ﬁcant Buddhist vestiges include: the
Batang Hari river sites in Muaro Jambi and Padang Lawas in Sumatra, the
central Javanese temple complexes of Borobudur, the Kedu plain, and Ratu
Boko; the royal temples of the Sin ̇hasa ̄ri and Majapahit kingdoms in east Java;
and a number of textual documents preserved in inscriptions and manuscripts.
JAVA
Although S ́aivism had been the dominant religion in Java for over a millennium in
pre-Islamic times, Buddhism has also had a signi ﬁcant place in the religious,
socio-political, and artistic life of the island. Chinese monk Faxian (337, 342 –
c.422) writes in his account that Buddhism in Java was not worth speaking of
and that Brahmanism was very strong. However, just a few years after this, the
Kashmirian monk *Gun ̣avarman, immediately before reaching China, succeeded
in converting the royal family and their Javanese subjects to Buddhism. This
information could be matched with the extensive, and nearly contemporary,
archaeological remains of Batujaya in northwestern Java (Manguin and Indrajaya
2011 ), and with seventh –early ninth century epigraphic evidence featuring
Buddhist formulas traceable to a ﬁfth-century Sarva ̄stiva ̄da milieu (de Casparis
13Cf. Grifﬁths (2014a : 138): “The existence of these mantra and dha ̄ran ̣ı ̄inscriptions in Indonesia
has not as yet played any role whatsoever in the study of Indian and pan-Asian Buddhism …This
seems to be a loss as much for the study of the history of pan-Asian Buddhism, as it is for the study
of Indonesian cultural history ”. Few, if any, references to material from Nusantara are found in
recent seminal monographs on Esoteric Buddhism, such as Davidson ’s(2002 ).146 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 9] ---
1956 : 75). Another report by Yijing indicates that, by the middle of the seventh
century, the Sarva ̄stivada school was prevalent in Southeast Asia,14and that the
Chinese monk Huining visited ‘Kalin ̇ga’(holing ) in central Java from AD 665
for three years, to study and translate A ̄gama literature with a local ( 波凌人)
s ́raman ̣acalled Jña ̄nabhadra. Huining ’s pupil, Yunqi, after going back to China
to present a Chinese translation of the Maha ̄parinirva ̄n ̣asu ̄tra, returned to
Southeast Asia, spending more than ten years in Java and living in S ́rı ̄vijaya up
to the time of Yijing.15
Art historical and textual remains point to the existence of close Buddhist
links between western India, the Malay Peninsula, and Java in the eighth
century. The seemingly ‘archaic ’character of eighth –ninth century Mantranaya
Buddhism in Java and Sumatra, when the two islands were under S ́ailendra
rule, suggests that the early esoteric developments that were emerging from
the western Deccan promptly reached Nusantara via the maritime routes;
these became the basis of, and were preserved in, later religious con ﬁgurations.
For instance, the ‘courtly ’eighth-century Eight Bodhisattvas known from some
of the Ellora ̄caves, Ratnagiri, and the Malay Peninsula, where they are part of
aman ̣d ̣alaarranged around a S ́a ̄kyamuni, are depicted on the exterior walls of
Candi Mendut and in the interior of Candi Plaosan (Bautze-Picron 1997 ). Signiﬁ-
cantly, this man ̣d ̣alic formation is described in the ‘proto-tantric ’As ̣t ̣aman ̣d ̣ala-
kasu ̄tra, translated into Chinese by Amoghavajra ( T1167) and, a century
earlier, by *Pun ̣yodaya (Nati那提,T486). Amoghavajra travelled to China via
Java, and *Pun ̣yodaya was active in Cambodia (Woodward 2004 : 336; Lin
1935 :8 3–100). Indeed, similarities between the iconography of the Eight Bodhi-
sattvas in Java, Shingon Buddhism, and eighth-century Chinese translations have
been discerned by Bautze-Picron ( 1997 : 28). A possible iconographical in ﬂuence
stemming from the later ‘esoteric ’phase of Ellora and other western Indian caves
is detectable on the sculpted triptych of Mendut (Revire 2018 ) and, perhaps,
Candi Bogang in central Java.16This could represent the triad of Avalokites ́-
vara-Padmapa ̄n ̣i, S ́a ̄kyamuni, and Vajrapa ̄n ̣i. These deities are seen as the three
heads of bodhisattva families in texts belonging to the Kriya ̄tantra genre, such
as the Susiddhikarasu ̄traand the Mañjus ́riyamu ̄lakalpa . This con ﬁrms the
archaic, pre-systematized character of Mantranaya or the Maha ̄ya ̄na Buddhist
tantra in the S ́ailendra domains in the eighth and ninth centuries.17Another
echo of the Susiddhikara and other early tantric texts is found in a pan-Asian
14See Takakusu 1896 : 10: “In the islands of the Southern Sea –consisting of more than ten coun-
tries –the Ma ̄lasarva ̄stiva ̄danikaya has been almost universally adopted ”.
15See Kandahjaya ( 2016 : 85; T2066), who points out that Jña ̄nabhadra is recorded in the T377 as
having translated the Maha ̄parinirva ̄n ̣asu ̄tra(in a personal communication, Iain Sinclair suggested
that this is actually the Maha ̄ya ̄na version of the text).
16Degroot ( 2009 : 344) reports that excavations “have brought to the light one Buddha and two bo-
dhisattwa (Wajrapa ̄ni and, supposedly, Awalokites ́wara) ”.
17See below on the presence of these deities in the Chaiya/Vieng Sa inscription from the Malay
Peninsula.The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 147
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 10] ---
pericope including the sequence namas ́can ̣d ̣avajrapa ̄n ̣a-ye/-yis ̣ya maha ̄yaks ̣a-
sena ̄pat-aye /-is ̣ya, found in incantations recovered from epigraphic documents
from Java and Bali, such as the Maha ̄raudra-na ̄ma-hr ̣daya (Grifﬁths2014a :
183–184, 2014b ). Two man ̣d ̣ala-stakes ( kı ̄la) from central Java, palaeographically
dateable to the ninth or tenth century, contain versions of mantras also found in
theGuhyasama ̄jaand the ninth-century ritual manual Sarvavajrodaya by A ̄nan-
dagarbha, and version B of the Sarvadurgatiparis ́odhana (2014a : 170 –171).
Although the exact relationship between dha ̄ran ̣ı ̄s preserved in written texts
(manuscripts) and inscriptions is often dif ﬁcult to disentangle, especially concern-
ing the issue of directionality, the existence of close parallels in the Sarvavajro-
daya suggests that the latter text might have been the source of the central
Javanese material, in which case it must have reached the island soon after its
composition. The availability of Mantranaya material at an early period in Java,
including a gold foil from Candi Plaosan Lor containing the exact same version
of adha ̄ran ̣ı ̄as can be found in the Sanskrit texts brought to Japan by Ku ̄kai in
the early eighth century (Grif ﬁths2014a : 165), as well as a representation of
theGan ̣d ̣avyu ̄ha–a text that Osto ( 2009 ) regards as ‘proto-tantric ’18–on the
Borobudur, suggests not only that a ‘commonality of religious culture ’, especially
with respect to dha ̄ran ̣ı ̄-focused Buddhism, existed across Nusantara and other
locales of the Buddhist Cosmopolis, but also that Nusantara may have played a
role in the circulation and development of ideas and practices.
The major architectural undertakings of the S ́ailendra dynasty in the eighth
and ninth centuries included the majestic and exquisitely crafted Buddhist mon-
uments of Borobudur, Candi Mendut, Candi Sewu, Candi Kalasan, and Candi
Plaosan ( Plate 1 ). Borobudur remains the largest Buddhist monument ever
built and stands unrivalled in its architectural complexity, symbolical depth,
and artistic quality.19Candi Kalasan has yielded one of the biggest bronze bells
ever recovered from a Buddhist monument, and may have hosted a colossal
statue of Ta ̄ra ̄that is, unfortunately, no longer extant. These temples, constituting
artistic and architectural masterpieces, must have ranked among the great sacred
centres of the Buddhist Cosmopolis, and attracted a steady traf ﬁc of monks and
pilgrims to the island. For instance, a ninth-century Siddhama ̄tr ̣ka ̄inscription
unearthed at Plaosan in the Prambanan area describes the worship at a
Buddha-temple ( jinamandira ) by pilgrims continuously arriving from Gurjara-
des ́a in north India (de Casparis 1956 : 188 –189, 202). An account by Yuanzhao
18This text, and in particular the bhadracar ı ̄, has been linked to the monk *Prajña (Boruo 般若 , alt.
Bolaruo般剌若;c.744–810, who translated it for the third time; in his translation, the latter text was
incorporated in the former as its last chapter: see T293). Since *Prajña reached China from South-
east Asia in AD 780, he might have been the source for the depiction the Gan ̣d ̣avyu ̄ha-Bhadracar ı ̄
at Borobudur (Kandahjaya 2009 : 52). It is also notable that the above-mentioned pericope is pre-
ﬁxed to the mantra of Amr ̣takun ̣d ̣alin preserved in *Prajña ’s handwriting and transmitted to Japan
(Giebel 2012 : 190 –192; cf. Acri 2016b : 337).
19On its possible northeastern Indian architectural forebears, see Chemburkar 2016 .148 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 11] ---
compiled into the Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu, as well as a report by the Jap-
anese master Ku ̄kai, records that *Vajrabuddhi ﬁrst met Amoghavajra in Java
(Chou 1945 : 321; Sundberg and Giebel 2011 : 152). An early eleventh-century
illustrated manuscript of the As ̣t ̣asa ̄hasrika ̄-Prajña ̄pa ̄ramita ̄(CUL Add. 1643)
dedicates one of its ﬁrst vignettes to an image of the Buddha D ı ̄pan ̇kara in
Java (f. 2r),20and Javaﬁgures in the early ‘tantric geography ’exposed by the Man-
jus ́riyamu ̄lakalpa (51.636 –640).
Links between masters from the Pa ̄la-Sena domains and S ́ailendra-sponsored
Buddhism may be inferred from the Kelurak Sanskrit/Siddhama ̄tr ̣ka ̄inscription
of AD 782, recording Kuma ̄raghos ̣a, the royal preceptor from Gaud ̣ı ̄dvı ̄pa who
installed an image of Mañjughos ̣a (Mañjus ́rı ̄)a tvajra ̄sana mañjus ́rı ̄gr ̣ha(Candi
Sewu in central Java?) at the request of S ́ailendra King S ́rı ̄San ̇gra ̄madhanañjaya
(Sarkar 1971 , I: 37, 45). The importance of Mañjus ́rı ̄in Java, and especially its
connection to political power, ﬁnds a parallel in the cult of the same deity in eso-
teric Buddhist circles at the Tang court during roughly the same period.21The
Plate 1. Candi Plaosan, central Java. (Photo Andrea Acri, 2016).
20One notes the scantiness of textual and iconographical evidence relating to this Buddha in both
pre-seventeenth-century Nepal and Java –although, according to Sinclair (p.c.), there is still the
possibility that some Nusantaran images could have been misidenti ﬁed as ‘standing Buddhas ’or
‘S ́a ̄kyamunis ’. This fact makes me wonder whether there is a connection between D ı ̄pan ̇kara and
Atis ́aDı ̄pan ̇karas ́rı ̄jña ̄na, who travelled to insular Southeast Asia (see below). Indeed, Sinclair
(2016b : 165) has noted that the identi ﬁcation of an image of the Buddha D ı ̄pan ̇kara at Tham ̣
Bahı ̄with the merchant *Sin ̇halasa ̄rthava ̄ha of Divya ̄vada ̄na36 etc. may be a vestigial memory
of Atis ́a’s maritime journeys.
21See Sundberg and Giebel 2011 : 130, who trace the centrality of this cult in the Kelurak inscription
to Amoghavajra himself. On Mañjus ́rı ̄as a political symbol in Central Java, see Miksic 2006 .The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 149
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 12] ---
ra ̄jaguru Kuma ̄raghos ̣a of the Kelurak inscription is probably to be identi ﬁed
with the anonymous s ́ailendrara ̄jaguru praised in the Siddhama ̄tr ̣ka ̄Sanskrit
inscription of Kalasan of AD 778.22This document opens with a salutation to
A ̄rya ̄-Ta ̄ra ̄, and mentions the construction of a temple for Ta ̄ra ̄(ta ̄ra ̄bhavana ),
which Jordaan ( 1998 ) identiﬁes with what is now called Candi Kalasan. In a frag-
mentary line of the Siddhama ̄tr ̣ka ̄Sanskrit inscription of Plaosan, the wife of an
unidentiﬁed royalﬁgure is said to “shine forth like Ta ̄ra ̄”(ta ̄reva vira ̄jati) (Long
2014 : 244); the same simile ( ta ̄reva) occurs in the Na ̄landa ̄copper plate of
Devapa ̄la, linking that goddess to the queen-mother of Ba ̄laputra –aS ́ailendra
royalﬁgure known in mid-ninth-century Sumatra and Java (Sastri 1923 –24:
326). On the basis of this epigraphic evidence and art historical material,
Jordaan ( 1997 : 287 –288) has hypothesized that the Ta ̄ra ̄cult in Java and
Sumatra was connected to the contemporary Pa ̄la royal cult of (S ́ya ̄ma ̄-)Ta ̄ra ̄.
Be this as it may, both areas are likely to have acted as an important place in
the development of the cult of Ta ̄ra ̄, which had an inherent maritime aspect –
this goddess being a tutelary deity of travellers, and seafarers in particular
(Bopearachchi 2014 ;R a y 2012 :5 6–60).
A steady Buddhist traf ﬁc must have linked Java and Sri Lanka, as evidenced
by biographies of monks, as well as epigraphic and art historical evidence from
both islands. An eighth-century foundation inscription, again in the Sanskrit lan-
guage and Siddhama ̄tr ̣ka ̄script, records that a branch of the Sri Lankan Abhaya-
giriviha ̄ra was established by the S ́ailendras on the Ratu Boko promontory in
central Java ( Plate 2 ). The Ratu Boko structures were apparently intended for
the use of esoteric-minded Sinhalese Buddhist ‘rag-wearing monks ’
(pa ̄m ̣s ́uku ̄lika),23who were active in the eclectic monastic institution at Anu-
ra ̄dhapura where a variety of Buddhist texts were studied. Signi ﬁcantly, the
Abhayagiriviha ̄ra-related structures of Ratu Boko share common architectural
motifs, such as the peculiar double meditation platforms, with their Sinhalese
prototypes (Sundberg 2016 ). Indeed, the area in the Kedu plain where Candi
Sewu and the Prambanan temple complex were built appears to have been
termed Lan ̇kapura ( ‘The Lan ̇kan City ’) by then, as if to recreate a local
‘replica ’of Buddhist Sri Lanka (Grif ﬁths2011a ),24and multiple Abhayagiris
22Three other royal a ̄ca ̄ryas of Buddhist af ﬁliation whose names end in - ghos ̣a, namely Buddha-
gos ̣a, his guru Jinaghos ̣a, and the latter ’s guru Ratnaghos ̣a, are known to us from the nearly contem-
porary seventh –eighth century inscription of Sirpur in Madhya Pradesh in connection with the
upkeep of a caitya (Jain 1971 ).
23The occurrence of the term sam ̣gu ̄d ̣a ̄rtha,‘esoteric concerns/secret meanings ’(?), in both the
Ratu Boko inscription and the Kelurak inscription, is worthy of mention. This could point to an eso-
teric Buddhist context. Sundberg ( 2014 : 96) aptly regards the Abhayagiri inscription as “the textual
equivalent of the Barabud ̣urstu ̄pa”in that it is “superﬁcially an expression of conventional
Maha ̄ya ̄na thought but endowed with a deep esoteric undercurrent ”.
24The Classical Malay text Tambo Minangkabau speaks of a Lan ̇kapuri island located in the area of
“mountain Si Guntang-guntang Mahangiru ”(Bukit Siguntang near Palembang?) in the Sea of
Ceylon and, later, “between Jambi and Palembang ”(Braginsky 2015 :9 3–94, fn. 34). This makes150 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 13] ---
could have existed elsewhere in Southeast Asia: namely in southern Cambodia,
southern Vietnam, and peninsular Thailand (Grif ﬁths2013 : 75).
Evidence for the pan-Asian cult of Maha ̄pratisara ̄, a female deity related to
Ta ̄ra ̄, has been recovered from Java (Mevissen 1999 : 102 –103; Cruijsen, Grif ﬁths,
and Klokke 2012 ). The popularity of this deity in both Central Java and the centre
of the Tang empire in China, namely Dunhuang and Changan, from the eighth to
the tenth century, seems to be linked by the activities of Amoghavajra (Mevissen
1999 : 117), who not only recited the Maha ̄pratisara ̄dha ̄ran ̣ı ̄in order to avert
shipwreck while travelling to China by sea (Chou 1945 : 275, n. 19; Sundberg
and Giebel 2011 : 139), but actually translated it and submitted a copy of it to
Emperor Suzong ( T2120.829b2 –21) in AD 758.25A gold foil recovered from
the approximately tenth-century Cirebon shipwreck off the Java northern
coast, containing a dha ̄ran ̣ı ̄addressed to a goddess personifying the incantation,
and paralleling material found in the Eka ̄das ́amukhadha ̄ran ̣ı ̄andSa ̄dhanama ̄la ̄
conﬁrms that objects like this were actually worn by passengers and/or crews
as amulets intended to protect against the dangers of voyages at sea (Grif ﬁths
2014a : 157 –159).
Plate 2. The Ratu Boko monumental gate, Central Java. (Photo Andrea Acri, 2016).
me wonder whether these Lan ̇ka-related toponyms were associated with the S ́ailendra-S ́rı ̄vijaya
rulers (compare the kingdom of ‘Lan ̇kasukha ’in the Malay Peninsula).
25Compare T2057.294c23 –24, which states that Huiguo sought instruction from Amoghavajra in
the mantra of Pratisa ̄ra between AD 763 and 765 (Sinclair 2016a , p. 38, fn. 52). We also know
about a second translation completed by *Man ̣icintana (Baosiwei 寶思惟 , d. 721, who is said to
have shipwrecked somewhere in the Southern Seas) in AD 693.The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 151
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 14] ---
Woodward has apprehended the in ﬂuence of Borobudur on Buddhism in the
subcontinent: according to him, this monument could represent an early phase of
the system of subtle bodily centres called cakra so rstha ̄nas/a ̄dha ̄ras(2009 : 48).
Furthermore, the same scholar ( 1990 :1 6–17) has advanced the hypothesis that a
tenth-century inscription quoting verse 46 of the Bhadracar ı ̄-pran ̣idha ̄na
(Schopen 1989 )–the text that came to be transmitted as the ﬁnal chapter of
theGan ̣d ̣avyu ̄hadepicted in the uppermost series of reliefs on Borobudur –
on a memorial stu ̄pafound at the Na ̄landa ̄monastery, which was established in
the ninth century by Ba ̄laputradeva for the use of pilgrims from S ́rı ̄vijaya,
might represent a new stimulus introduced by the Sumatran monarch, or in
any event the existence of “longstanding similarities in religious practice ”in
the two areas ( 2004 : 353). This verse is notable in that it is the only passage
from a Maha ̄ya ̄na text so far recorded in an Indian inscription. It also survives
in another inscription that forms part of the Sambas Buddhist hoard found in
Western Kalimantan, which contains more verses traceable to Sanskrit texts,
namely the Maha ̄pratisara ̄maha ̄vidya ̄ra ̄jñı ̄and the Vajracchedika ̄Prajña ̄pa ̄ra-
mita ̄(Grifﬁths2014a : 146 –147).
Vestiges of Vajraya ̄na Buddhism in ninth- and tenth-century Java may be
found in the groups of bronzes from Surocolo and Nganjuk, which have been ten-
tatively identi ﬁed as representing tridimensional esoteric man ̣d ̣alas dominated by
Vajrasattva, one of the central deities of ‘Phase Two ’and ‘Phase Three ’Esoteric
Buddhism (Tanaka 2010 : 339). Since the portrayal of this pantheon in paintings
or statuary is relatively scarce in the Buddhist world, the Surocolo hoard is espe-
cially signi ﬁcant (Szántó and Grif ﬁths2015 : 372). Another hoard, found at Ponor-
ogo, has been associated to goddesses of the Vajrasattvakulaman ̣d ̣ala and the
S ́rı ̄parama ̄dyaseventeen-deity man ̣d ̣alain its connection with the Sarvabuddha-
sama ̄yoga on the basis of commentaries in Tibetan translation (Matsunaga 2017 ).
A small statuette has been recovered from the cargo of the Intan shipwreck sal-
vaged from the waters of Java Sea, which may have belonged to one such tridi-
mensional man ̣d ̣ala(Liebner 2014 : 191 –194). These ﬁndings testify to the
keen interest in initiatory man ̣d ̣alas in Java: signi ﬁcantly, the only text attributed
to the Javanese monk Bianhong is the ‘Ritual Manual for Initiation into the Great
Man ̣d ̣ala of the Us ̣n ̣ı ̄s ̣a-Cakravartin ’(T959), and most of the Sanskrit verses cited
in the Old Javanese San ̇Hyan ̇Kamaha ̄ya ̄nan Mantranaya –a text that identi ﬁes
its main Buddha with Vajrasattva, the transcendent essence of all Tatha ̄gatas –are
traceable to esoteric Buddhist initiatory manuals related to the Guhyasama ̄ja
(Kandahjaya 2016 ). While the date of this text is not certain, a related S ́aivized
version has a colophon mentioning the name of King Mpu Sin ̣d ̣ok of the I ̄s ́a ̄na
dynasty (r. 929 –947), and its early core might date back to the eighth or ninth
century.
Material stemming from the Trailokyavijaya cycle in the Sarvatatha ̄gatatat-
tvasan ̇graha , and also associated with more wrathful Krodha-vighna ̄ntaka
deities, is known from Java. Trailokyavijaya/(Can ̣d ̣a)Vajrapa ̄n ̣i is invoked in152 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 15] ---
incantations that can be found in epigraphic documents from Java and Bali
(Grifﬁths2014a : 183 –184, 2014b ), and at least four images of Trailokyavijaya
have been recovered from central Java (probably from the tenth century). Stand-
ing in pratya ̄lı ̄d ̣haposture trampling over S ́iva and Uma ̄, these images closely
follow Eastern Indian (Pa ̄la) iconographical prototypes. However, the Maha ̄rau-
dra-na ̄ma-hr ̣daya that was recovered near Borobudur attests to a major icono-
graphical discrepancy with the known sculptural corpus all over the Buddhist
world, namely the placement of the right foot on S ́iva and the left foot on
Pa ̄rvatı ̄’s chest, instead of the opposite. To Grif ﬁths (2014b : 32), this suggests a
genuine, as yet unattested iconographic variant, rather than a textual error.
The ‘anti-S ́aiva’overtones of this incantation are also found in a short mantra
engraved on a gold foil from Ratu Boko in central Java as well as on similar arte-
facts (Acri 2016b ; Grifﬁths2014a : 177 –180), which are related to the krodha-vig-
hna ̄ntaka deity T ̣akkira ̄ja and the Sarvatatha ̄gatatattvasan ̇graha cycle.26
An emphasis on ‘Phase Three ’Vajraya ̄na is detectable in the statuary and epi-
graphic remains associated with King Kr ̣tanagara of Sin ̇hasa ̄ri, who was appar-
ently initiated into transgressive, non-dual Buddhist and S ́aiva tantric traditions
and founded a royal cult identifying the monarch with ‘S ́iva-Buddha ’. The later
chronicle Des ́avarn ̣ana (43.2 –5) indicates his commitment to Buddhism,
records his initiation name Jña ̄nabajres ́vara,27and associates him with the teach-
ings of the unidenti ﬁedSubhu ̄titantra ,28as well as the gan ̣acakra rituals that are
known to us via the Guhyasama ̄ja. Indeed, Kr ̣tanagara had a Sanskrit-inscribed,
colossal statue portraying him as Maha ̄ks ̣obhya –the principal deity of the
Guhyasama ̄ja–installed at the cremation ground of Wurare in AD 1289.
Another 5.5 metre-high colossal statue of Aks ̣obhya going back to the same
period lies un ﬁnished at the Reco Lanang site in the vicinity of Trawas in the
Mojokerto District of east Java ( Plate 3 ).
A northeastern Indian and/or Nepalese (Newar) in ﬂuence on the east
Javanese Buddhist art and inscriptions of the Sin ̇hasa ̄ri period has been noted,
for instance in the statuary and decorative features (O ’Brien 1993 : 252 –255; Lun-
singh Scheurleer 2008 : 296 –298). Schoterman ( 1994 : 168) noted that the ﬁve
main statues of Bodhisattvas at Candi Jago were executed according to the teachings
of the Sanskrit Amoghapa ̄s ́asa ̄dhana , which was written by S ́a ̄-kya-s ́rı ̄-bha-dra in
northern India around the year 1200 and may have reached Java shortly thereaf-
ter. However, Sinclair ( 2016b : 150) has convincingly argued that the Malay and
Javanese forms of eight-armed Amoghapa ̄s ́a Lokes ́vara may predate the textual
legacy from the Subcontinent, and may have therefore inspired the Indian and
Nepalese specimens –perhaps via a statue installed at Bodh Gaya by an
26T ̣akkira ̄ja is a protector of the gate of the man ̣d ̣alaso fU s ̣n ̣ı ̄s ̣avijaya, Mañjuvajra ( Guhyasama ̄ja),
and Vajrasattva ( Samput ̣a).
27Or Jña ̄nas ́ivabajra in the Wurare inscription.
28ASan ̇Hyan ̇Tantra Bajradha ̄tu Subhu ̄tiis mentioned in version C of the San ̇Hyan ̇Kamaha ̄ya ̄-
nikan (Kandahjaya 2016 ).The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 153
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 16] ---
Indonesian donor.29The Na ̄garı ̄-inscribed Buddhist statues from Candi Jago, and
the occurrence of the words bhara ̄la(‘god’) and bhara ̄lı ̄(‘goddess ’) in a number
of inscriptions associated with Kr ̣tanagara, support a possible northeastern
Indian, and especially Newar, link.30Interestingly, Nepalese artisans became
popular at the courts of both Khubilai Khan in China and his sworn adversary
Kr ̣tanagara in east Java.31The existence of links between Sumatra (and Java?)
and northeastern India in the thirteenth century may be evinced by the Pasir
Panjang rock inscription in Sanskrit and Rañjana ̄script at Karimun Besar in
the Riau Archipelago, recording a maha ̄ya ̄nika-gaud ̣a-pan ̣d ̣ita-s ́rı ̄gautamas ́rı ̄:
that is, a Maha ̄ya ̄na scholar from Bengal named Gautamas ́rı ̄. This personality,
whose identity and presence in Nusantara have been recently discussed by Iain
Sinclair ( 2018 ), was active in Nepal (speci ﬁcally at Guitah ̣in Lalitpur) and
Tibet before the middle of the thirteenth century, at a time when northeastern
Plate 3. The Reco Lanang un ﬁnished Aks ̣obhya statue, east Java. (Photo Andrea Acri,
2016).
29It is perhaps not coincidental that *Man ̣icintana, an early Buddhist monk who travelled between
India and China through Nusantara, is credited with the translation of a text associated with A-mo-
gha-pa ̄-s ́a Lokes ́vara, i.e. the Scripture of the Amoghapa ̄s ́adha ̄ran ̣ı ̄, Sovereign Lord of Spells
(Bukongjuansuo tuoluoni zizaiwang zhou jing 不空罥索陀羅尼自在王咒經,T1097).
30A discussion of the word forms bhara ̄laandbhara ̄lı ̄and their probable cognates baha ̄la,baha ̄ra,
andbhara ̄d ̣a(<bhat ̣t ̣a ̄ra[ka) in Newar sources may be found in Sinclair 2012 ,2016b ; cf. Grifﬁths
2014c : 242 –243.
31We indeed know of a failed attempt by Khubilai Khan to invade east Java: see Bade 2013 .154 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 17] ---
India had just been raided by the Turks and Buddhism was on the decline. The
fact that this inscription was written in Sanskrit in a non-local cosmopolitan script,
and that it displays a short, graf ﬁti-like (yet well-executed) character, lends credit
to the hypothesis that it could have been engraved by Gautamas ́rı ̄himself en
route to mainland Sumatra and/or Java (according to Sinclair, not long after
the turn of the ﬁrst half of the thirteenth century).
In the Majapahit period, Buddhism was a constitutive (albeit seemingly
subordinate) member of the religious coalition formed by S ́aivism ( s ́aivapaks ̣a),
Buddhism ( sogatapaks ̣a), and the R ̣s ̣is. While the term ‘syncretism ’is not
appropriate to describe this situation of religious pluralism and inclusivism, it
must be noted that the truly hybrid cult of S ́iva-Buddha introduced by Kr ̣tana-
gara appears to have become popular in this period, as it is frequently encoun-
tered in the religious literature as well as in the belles lettres (Acri 2015 ). A
fourteenth-century Old Javanese literary source, the kakavin Sutasoma by
Mpu Tantular, attests to Esoteric Buddhist cults and a form of Maha ̄ya ̄nic
tantra that, despite prescribing the worship of S ́iva-Buddha (i.e. Maha ̄vairocana)
and preaching a form of identity between the two supreme deities, keeps the
Buddhist and S ́aiva ways neatly separate. A similar situation is re ﬂected in the
fourteenth- ﬁfteenth-century kakavin Kuñjarakarn ̣aby Mpu D ̣usun, which has
been shown to contain elements from the Sanskrit Ka ̄ran ̣d ̣avyu ̄hasu ̄tra
(Nihom 1994 : 136 –139). From the chronicle Des ́avarn ̣anawe learn about the
existence in East Java of two types of private Buddhist institutions, namely the
kavinayan and a (more prevalent) kabajradharan (80.1); the former implies
that monastic rules were followed, while the latter is of a tantric type where cel-
ibacy was not enforced. The text (77.3) associates a locale named bud ̣ur(Boro-
budur?) with the latter type of establishment (Sinclair 2013 ), and also informs
us that Java was visited by foreign monks ( bhiks ̣u) coming from mainland
India, such as a certain Sr ı ̄Buddha ̄ditya from Ka ̄ñcı ̄, who made an eulogy of
the king “in countless verses ”(93.1).32While Buddhism declined and eventually
disappeared after the fall of Majapahit, it seems that small communities were still
extant in the sixteenth century: the Buddhist Siddha Buddhaguptana ̄tha (Ta ̄rana ̄-
tha’s guru), travelling from the Subcontinent to Java at that time, allegedly found
the followers of the ‘Sravaka Sendhapa ’there,33and then proceeded to a small
island in the middle of a lake, called Van ̣advı ̄pa ( ‘Forest Island ’, perhaps in
Sumatra?), where he saw the cave of Padmavajra ( mTsho skyes rdo rje ) and a
two-armed image of Hevajra installed in a square-shaped temple, and heard
about the existence of many tantric scriptures (Templeman 2009 : 264). The
32Cf.Des ́avarn ̣ana83.4: “And so constantly all kinds of people come from other countries in count-
less numbers –See: India, Cambodia, China, Annam, Champa, the Carnatic and so on, Gaur and
Siam are their places of origin, sailing on ships with the merchants in numbers. Monks and priests in
particular, when they come they are given food and are happy to stay ”(trans. Robson 1995 : 185).
33According to Skilling ( 1987 : 16) the ‘Sendha-pa ’S ́ra ̄vakas could possibly have been Sa ̄mmat ı ̄yas
(Hı ̄naya ̄nist), deriving from saindhava or‘residents of Sindh ’.The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 155
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 18] ---
tantric legacy and S ́aiva-Buddhist coalition of Sin ̇hasa ̄ri and Majapahit appears to
have continued in Bali to the present day, where Balinese Buddhist ritualists
cover a subsidiary role in certain S ́aiva ceremonies, and have preserved Sanskrit
scriptures that include fragments from several authoritative works of the
Maha ̄ya ̄na and Vajraya ̄na (Hooykaas 1973 : 600 –603).
SUMATRA
Sumatra hosted renowned centres of Buddhist activity and learning. Seventh-
century Chinese monk Yijing praised the high level of Buddhist scholarship
that he found on the island, where he stopped en route from Guangzhou to
Na ̄landa ̄, and from where he procured the shipment of numerous Buddhist
texts (Takakusu 1896 : xxxvi). Yijing reports that S ́a ̄kyakı ̄rti, one of the ﬁve most
distinguished Buddhist teachers of his time, travelled far and large across the
‘Five Indias ’andﬁnally settled in S ́rı ̄vijaya (S ́rı ̄bhoja) (Takakusu 1896 : 184).
The continued existence of a high level of Buddhist scholarship and royal spon-
sorship of the religion is also suggested by the later ﬁgure of Shihu/*Da ̄napa ̄la (施
護, d. 1018), an exceptionally proli ﬁc monk-translator who in the late tenth
century reached China with a good knowledge of the languages of Sanfochi/
S ́rı ̄vijaya and Shepo/Java (Sen 2003 : 384; Orzech 2011 : 449 –450). Skilling
(1997 : 188) notes that the composition, in the early eleventh century, of the Dur-
bodha ̄lokaby *Dharmak ı ̄rti from Suvarn ̣advı ̄pa (which he locates in Kedah) “pre-
supposes the existence and study in S ́rı ̄vijaya of the abstruse Prajña ̄pa ̄ramita ̄and
Abhisamaya ̄lam ̣ka ̄ra literature; of a high level of scholarship; and of royal
sponsorship ”.
Sumatra has yielded a corpus of stone tablets and other inscriptions on metal
foils and statues that are notable in that they cite early Maha ̄ya ̄na Sanskrit texts,
including the Suvarn ̣abha ̄sottamasu ̄tra, which is regarded as ‘proto-tantric ’by
Huntington ( 1987 ), and the Aparimita ̄yuh ̣su ̄tra(Grifﬁths 2011b: 169, 2014a :
152–154). The Talang Tuo Old Malay inscription of AD 684 recovered near Palem-
bang has also been interpreted as an early document of Mantranaya Buddhism
(Woodward 2004 ; Kandahjaya 2016 : 82). The epigraphic legacy, coupled with
the account by Yijing on texts on yoga and incantations ( vidya ̄,dha ̄ran ̣ı ̄) available
in S ́rı ̄vijaya,34and the Sanskrit-Old Javanese manual(s) San ̇Hyan ̇Kamaha ̄ya ̄ni-
kan/San ̇Hyan ̇Kamaha ̄ya ̄nan Mantranaya , would seem to cast new light on the
genesis of Esoteric Buddhism across the Buddhist cosmopolis (Kandahjaya 2016 ).
TheIntan andCirebon shipwrecks, discovered beneath the sea lanes linking
Sumatra to Java, have yielded precious data on tenth-century traf ﬁc of Buddhist
34Compare Mañjus ́rı ̄mu ̄lakalpa 53.832, stating that the ‘wrathful mantras ’(krodhana ̄s mantra ̄h ̣) are
practiced in the southern region, and in the islands of thieves and barbarians in the middle of the
ocean ( krodhana ̄s tu tatha ̄mantra ̄h ̣sa ̄dhyata ̄m ̣daks ̣in ̣a ̄pathe /mlecchataskaradv ı ̄pes ̣u ambhodher
madhya eva va ̄).156 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 19] ---
bronze paraphernalia (including vajra s, spear-shaped sceptres, bells, statuettes,
and inscribed foils) along with other commonly traded merchandises among
regional entrepôts and the larger Indian Ocean and Chinese markets.35On the
Sumatran mainland, most of the archaeological remains and scant epigraphic
documents spread over disparate locales of the island –especially along the
Batang Hari river (for instance, Muara Jambi and Muara Takus) –have yielded
remains of Buddhist monuments and inscriptions mostly dating back to the
tenth to thirteenth centuries.36The 21 gold plates with inscribed seed-syllables
and names of deities found at Candi Gumpung in Sumatra follow an arrangement
that most closely resembles that of the Trailokyavijayamaha ̄man ̣d ̣ala as described
in the Vajras ́ekharatantra , thus suggesting that Trailokyavijaya must have been
the central deity of the man ̣d ̣ala(Nihom 1998 ).
From the eleventh century onwards, Sumatra appears to have been an impor-
tant seat of the Hevajra cult: witness the epigraphic evidence of mantra portions
directly quoted from the Hevajratantra (Grifﬁths2014c : 230),37as well as the
fourteenth-century inscription of Saruaso II, issued by crown prince Anan ̇gavar-
man, son of A ̄dityavarman, which mentions his “daily meditation on Hevajra ”,o r
his“ever keeping in mind the Hevajra(tantra) ”(hevajranitya ̄smr ̣tih ̣;see Hunter
2015 : 324 –327). It would thus seem that A ̄dityavarman was following the same
ideology and ritual technology adopted earlier by Kublai Khan and Kr ̣tanagara,
who equated themselves to the central deity of the man ̣d ̣alas of Buddhist
tantras such as the Guhyasama ̄jaand the Hevajra . The wild, ferocious character
of the Esoteric Buddhist (and tantric S ́aiva) iconography that developed at the
east Javanese courts of Kad ̣iri-Sin ̇hasa ̄ri and Majapahit shares features with
the Sumatran iconography, as attested in Biaro Bahal and Muara Takus, and in
the Maha ̄ka ̄la statue of Padang Roco, attributed to the fourteenth-century
A ̄dityavarman. As suggested by Bautze-Picron ( 2014 : 107), images found at the
Sumatran sites of Padang Lawas are part of a network that connects them to
east Java, South Asia, Cambodia and Campa ̄in the eleventh and thirteenth
centuries; overall, the sites show a kind of Buddhism that belongs to the same
phase of Vajraya ̄na as that which was present in the Khmer and Cham domains
between the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and in east Java and China in
the thirteenth century.
The contribution of S ́rı ̄vijaya to Vajraya ̄na Buddhism in Tibet, which can also
be seen through the handful of texts composed in Suvarn ̣advı ̄pa that were intro-
duced into the Tibetan canon, is acknowledged by the Tibetan tradition from the
eleventh century, and con ﬁrmed by modern scholarship (see Chattopadhyaya
1981 :9 3 –94; Schoterman 2016 [1986]). Atis ́a, a native of Bengal, is said to
35See Hall 2010 :1 5–45; Miksic 2016 : 259 –260; Liebner 2014 : 191 –194.
36See Woodward 2004 ; Reichle 2007 ; Grifﬁths2014c ; Miksic 2016 ; Kandahjaya 2016 .
37Signiﬁcantly, this text mentions Suvarn ̣advı ̄pa as a place of pilgrimage (Schoterman 2016 [1986]:
115).The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 157
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 20] ---
have transmitted the Durbodha ̄loka(a Sanskrit commentary on the Abhisamaya ̄-
lan ̇ka ̄ra) to Tibet. This was composed in Southeast Asia by Atis ́a’s teacher *Sau-
varn ̣advı ̄pı ̄-Dharmak ı ̄rti under King Cu ̄d ̣a ̄man ̣ivarman, who may have founded a
Buddhist temple in Na ̄gapat ̣t ̣inam around AD 1019 (Skilling 1997 ,2007 ).38This
Dharmak ı ̄rti may have been the master who imparted to Atis ́a the teachings of
theKa ̄lacakratantra , and has been identi ﬁed by van der Kuijp ( 2003 : 420,
n. 6) as the author of the Netravibhan ̇ga,a commentary to the Hevajratantra .
Both Atis ́a and *Dharmak ı ̄rti were fervent devotees of Ta ̄ra ̄, whose cult was wide-
spread in insular Southeast Asia, and which may have been popularized in Tibet
by Atis ́a after his stay in Suvarn ̣advı ̄pa (Schoterman 2016 [1986]: 119). Wilkinson
(1991 : 236 –239) presents evidence for a connection between the cult of Gan ̣es ́a
in Tibet and *Dharmak ı ̄rti. The transmission of Buddhist ideas from Sumatra
and/or Java to the Himalayan region has been suggested on the basis of artistic
and architectural similarities between the Tabo monastery in Himachal
Pradesh, which Atis ́a visited in AD 1042, and Borobudur.39Recently, Sinclair
(2016b : 164 –166) has also presented a case that the eight-armed form of Amog-
hapa ̄s ́a in the Tham ̣Bahı ̄monastery in Nepal (founded by Atis ́a) was introduced
from the S ́rı ̄vijayan domains.
THEMALAY PENINSULA
Given its strategic geographical location, the Malay Peninsula, which was
included in the domains of the staunchly Buddhist S ́ailendra-S ́rı ̄vijayan rulers
from the seventh to the thirteenth century, acted as an important intersection
in the traf ﬁc of merchants, monks, and pilgrims plying the maritime routes.
The middle part of the Peninsula was dominated by the city-state of Panpan
from approximately the ﬁfth to the eighth century, and has yielded Buddhist
remains consisting primarily of statues, tablets, and votive stu ̄pas. The city-
state of Lan ̇kasukha extended over the region of present-day Pattani on the
east coast, and has yielded the same type of material evidence plus Buddhist
brick sanctuaries. According to Jacq-Hergoualc ’h(2002 : 183), this legacy re ﬂects
the dominance of the Mu ̄lasarva ̄stiva ̄daschool up to the end of the seventh
century, and the concomitant rise of Maha ̄ya ̄na Buddhist tantra from the
seventh century onwards.
The earliest inscription associated with Buddhism in Southeast Asia, dated to
theﬁfth century, has been found in Kedah. Having been commissioned by sea
captain Buddhagupta from Raktamr ̣ttika ̄(probably Raktamr ̣ttika ̄Maha ̄viha ̄ra in
what is now Rajbadidanga in West Bengal, or another unknown location in
38Schalk ( 2002 : 542) suggests that this monument, usually referred to as a ‘pagoda ’, stylistically
resembles structures from eighth to tenth century Java and Sumatra, and speculates that it
might have been completed by artisans sent by the Southeast Asian ruler.
39See Wayman 1981 : 140 –142; Nihom 1994 : 72, n. 192; Kimmet 2012 :9 8–99.158 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 21] ---
mainland Southeast Asia), it highlights the link between Buddhism and trade in
the peninsula prior to the establishment of monastic centres and the rise of insti-
tutional support in the S ́rı ̄vijayan period (Sen 2014c :4 6–48). Another important
testimony to the translocal nature of Buddhism in the area is the existence of
many votive tablets found at multiple sites in the period from the sixth to the
twelfth century. Two of them, recovered from sites in Kedah and tentatively
dated to the seventh century, quote a passage from the Maha ̄ya ̄na Su ̄traSa ̄gar-
amatiparipr ̣ccha ̄, whose Sanskrit original has survived through fragmentary quo-
tations but has been integrally transmitted in Chinese and Tibetan translations
(Lammerts and Grif ﬁths2015 : 994). Several clay tablets recently found in the
Khao Nui cave in Trang province bear an abbreviated inscription of the Four
Truths of Buddhism in Sanskrit (Revire 2015 : 301 –303,ﬁgs. 26.4 –26.6), while
other specimens display a Maha ̄ya ̄na/early Mantranaya iconography (including,
for example, the Eight Bodhisattvas). The specimens inscribed in northeastern
Indian scripts, as well as those displaying a twelve-armed Avalokites ́vara from
the Perlis caves, could have belonged to pilgrims transiting from the Subconti-
nent (unlike the tablets recovered from dif ﬁcult-to-reach caves, which rather
suggest a local context of religious practice: see Jacq-Hergoualc ’h2002 : 47).
Besides controlling the trade routes, the S ́rı ̄vijaya thalassocracy extended at its
height over Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula, and Java, and was actively engaged in
Buddhist diplomacy with India and China. In addition to the donation by Ba ̄lapu-
tradeva at Na ̄landa ̄, other gifts and diplomatic exchanges with South India and Sri
Lanka are documented in inscriptions dating from the eleventh and twelfth cen-
turies (Jacq-Hergoualc ’h2002 : 274 –275, 346 –347, 400). Under S ́ailendra rule,
the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, and Java shared several elements of Sanskritic Bud-
dhism. The early triad of bodhisattvakula s of the Kriya ̄tantras that we ﬁnd at
Mendut is mentioned in the Chaya/Vieng Sa ( ‘Ligor A ’) inscription of AD 775 as
Kajakara (Padmapa ̄n ̣i-Avalokites ́vara), Ma ̄ranisu ̄dhana (S ́a ̄kyamuni), and Vajrin
(Vajrapa ̄n ̣i), where a brick temple was dedicated by the royal chaplain ( ra ̄jastha-
vira) Jayanta and his disciple Adhimukti at the instigation of a S ́ailendra king
(Long 2014: 25 –27). The exquisitely crafted late eighth-century bronze Avalokites ́-
varas found in the Chaiya district of modern Thailand and in Bidor (Perak, Malay-
sia) show close similarities with the Avalokites ́vara found at Wonogiri in central
Java (Fontein 1990 : 210 –211). These remains suggest a link between the Malay
Peninsula and Java under the S ́ailendras, perhaps also via *Vajrabuddhi (Sharrock
and Bunker 2016 ), Amoghavajra, *Prajña, and other monks.
Links between Nusantara and Nepal can be evinced from the AD 1015
Manuscript CUL Add. 1643 (f. 120r) of the As ̣t ̣asa ̄hasrika ̄Prajña ̄pa ̄ramita ̄,
which mentions a Lokana ̄tha on Mount Valavat ı ̄in Kedah/Kat ̣ahadv ı ̄pa (Kim
2014 : 49, 63, 65).40De Mallman ( 1951 ) and Soper and Chapin ( 1970 ) proposed
40Another illuminated manuscript of the same text from Nepal, dating from AD 1071 and partly
based on CUL Add. 1643, does not contain any reference to both Kedah and S ́rı ̄vijaya. This factThe Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 159
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 22] ---
that the so-called ‘art of S ́rı ̄vijaya ’was inﬂuential on the Avalokites ́vara images
produced in Yunnan around the eleventh to thirteenth century. De Mallman
(1951 : 573 –574) also noted a similarity between certain stylistic features of
these statues that, while being absent from Pa ̄la art, are shared by specimens
found in places located along the maritime networks, including the western
Deccan caves, South India, Sri Lanka, Java, Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula,
Campa ̄, and Japan. This state of affairs led her to conclude that these motifs
were of South Indian origins, yet they were diffused through the intermediary
of S ́rı ̄vijaya.41
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Iain Sinclair for his most valuable comments and insights on a draft of this
article; any mistakes are exclusively my own. I acknowledge the support of the National
Research Foundation of Korea Grant [NRF-362-2008-1-B00018], thanks to which I was
able to present this paper at the conference “Maritime Silk Road in Southeast Asia:
Crossroad of Culture ”, held at the National Museum of Korea, Seoul, in December 2017.
References
Acri, Andrea. 2015. “Revisiting the cult of ‘S ́iva-Buddha ’in Java and Bali. ”InBuddhist
Dynamics in Pre-modern and Early Modern Southeast Asia , edited by Christian
Lammerts, 261 –282. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Acri, Andrea. 2016a. “Chapter 1. Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist networks along the
maritime silk routes, 7th –13th Century AD. ”InEsoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval
Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons , edited by Andrea Acri, 1 –25. Sin-
gapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Acri, Andrea. 2016b. “Once more on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra ’: Magic, realpolitik, and
Bauddha-S ́aiva dynamics in ancient Nusantara. ”InEsoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval
Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons , edited by Andrea Acri, 323 –348.
Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Acri, Andrea. 2018. “Maritime Buddhism ”, entry in the Oxford Research Encyclopaedia
(Religion, Buddhism). Available at: http://religion.oxfordre.com (accessed 1 August
2018).
Acri, Andrea, Roger Blench, and Aleksandra Landmann. 2017. “Introduction: Re-con-
necting histories across the Indo-Paci ﬁc.”InSpirits and Ships: Cultural Transfers
in Early Monsoon Asia , edited by Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, and Aleksandra Land-
mann, 1 –37. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Bade, David. 2013. Of Palm Wine, Women and War: The Mongolian Naval Expedition to
Java in the 13th Century . Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
has led Schoterman ( 2016 [1986]: 115) to speculate that that polity might have lost its prominent
position in the Buddhist world after the Co ̄l ̱a raids.
41In a similar fashion, Lee Yü-min (reported in Bryson 2017 : 416, fn. 31) argues that the iconog-
raphy of Acuoye Guanyin, having originated in the Pa ̄la and Pallava domains, reached Dali
through Java.160 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 23] ---
Bagchi, Prabodh Chandra. 1981. India and China: A Thousand Years of Cultural Rela-
tions . Calcutta: Saraswati Library.
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. 1997. “Le Groupe des Huit Grands Bodhisattva en Inde:
Genèse et Développement. ”InLiving a Life in accord with Dhamma: Papers in
Honor of Professor Jean Boisselier on His Eightieth Birthday , edited by Natasha
Eilenberg et al., 1 –55. Bangkok: Silpakorn University.
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. 2014. “Buddhist images from Padang Lawas region and the
South Asian connection. ”InHistory of Padang Lawas, North Sumatra; II: Societies
of Padang Lawas (Mid-Ninth –Thirteenth century CE) , edited by Daniel Perret,
107–128. Paris: Cahiers d ’Archipel.
Bopearachchi, Osmund. 2014. “Sri Lanka and the maritime trade: The impact of the role
of the Bodhisattva Avalokites ́vara as the protector of mariners. ”InAsian Encoun-
ters: Networks of Cultural Interaction , edited by Parul Pandya Dhar and Upinder
Singh, 161 –187. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Braginsky, Vladimir. 2015. Turkic-Turkish Theme in Traditional Malay Literature; Imag-
ining the Other to Empower the Self . Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Bryson, Megan. 2017. “Between China and Tibet: Maha ̄ka ̄la worship and esoteric Bud-
dhism in the Dali Kingdom. ”InChinese and Tibetan Esoteric Buddhism , edited by
Yael Bentor and Meir Shahar, 402 –428. Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Chattopadhyaya, Debiprasad, ed. 1990 [1970]. Ta ̄rana ̄tha’s History of Buddhism in India
(translated from Tibetan by Lama Chimpa and A. Chattopadhyaya). Calcutta: K.P.
Bagchi & Company (Reprint).
Chattopadhyaya, Alaka. 1981 [1967]. Atı ̄s ́a and Tibet: Life and Works of D ı ̄pam ̣kara
S ́rı ̄jña ̄na in Relation to the History and Religion of Tibet, With Tibetan Sources
(translated under Professor Lama Chimpa). Delhi/Varanasi/Patna: Motilal Banarsi-
dass (Reprint).
Chavannes, Édouard. 1903. Documents sur les Tou Kiue (Turcs) Occidentaux, Recueillis
et Commentés par Édouard Chavannes . St. Petersburg: Commissionnaires de l ’Aca-
démie impériale des sciences.
Chemburkar, Swati. 2016. “Borobudur ’sP a ̄la forebear? A ﬁeld note from Kesariya, Bihar,
India. ”InEsoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters,
Texts, Icons , edited by Andrea Acri, 191 –209. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Chou, Yi-Liang. 1945. “Tantrism in China. ”Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 8(3–4):
241–332.
Cruijsen, Thomas, Arlo Grif ﬁths, and Marijke J. Klokke. 2012. “The cult of the Buddhist
dha ̄ran ̣ı ̄deity Maha ̄pratisara ̄along the maritime silk route: New epigraphical and
iconographic evidence from the Indonesian archipelago. ”Journal of the Interna-
tional Association of Buddhist Studies 35: 71 –157.
Davidson, Ronald. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric
Movement . New York: Columbia University Press.
Degroot, Véronique. 2009. “Candi, Space, and Landscape: A Study on the Distribution,
Orientation and Spatial Organization of Central Javanese Temple Remains. ”PhD
diss., Leiden University Leiden: Sidestone Press.
de Casparis, Johannes. 1956. Prasasti Indonesia II: Selected Inscriptions from the 7th to
the 9th centuries AD . Bandung: Masa Baru.
de Mallman, Marie Thérèse. 1951. “Notes sur les bronzes du Yunnan représentant Ava-
lokites ́vara. ”Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 14(3 –4): 567 –601.
Ensink, Jacob. 1978. “S ́iva-Buddhism in Java and Bali. ”InBuddhism in Ceylon and
Studies on Religious Syncretism in Buddhist Countries. Report on a SymposiumThe Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 161
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 24] ---
in Göttingen , edited by Heinz Bechert, 178 –198. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht.
Fontein, Jan. 1990. “The sculpture of Indonesia. ”InThe Sculpture of Indonesia , edited
by Jan Fontein, 113 –300. Washington: National Gallery of Art.
Giebel, Rolf W. 2012. “Notes on some sanskrit texts brought back to Japan by Ku ̄kai.”
Paciﬁc World (Third Series) 14: 187 –230.
Grifﬁths, Arlo. 2011a. “Imagine Lan ̇kapura at Prambanan. ”InFrom Lan ̇ka ̄eastwards:
The Ra ̄ma ̄yan ̣a in the literature and visual arts of Indonesia , edited by Andrea
Acri, Helen Creese and Arlo Grif ﬁths, 133 –148. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Grifﬁths, Arlo. 2011b. “Inscriptions of Sumatra: Further data on the epigraphy of the
Musi and Batang Hari rivers basins. ”Archipel 81: 139 –175.
Grifﬁths, Arlo. 2013. “The problem of the ancient name Java and the role of Satyavarman
in Southeast Asian international relations around the turn of the ninth century CE. ”
Archipel 85: 43 –81.
Grifﬁths, Arlo. 2014a. “Written traces of the Buddhist past: Mantras and Dha ̄ran ̣ı ̄si n
Indonesian inscriptions. ”Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies
77: 137 –194.
Grifﬁths, Arlo. 2014b. “The ‘Greatly Ferocious ’spell ( Maha ̄raudra-na ̄ma-hr ̣daya ): A
Dha ̄ran ̣ı ̄inscribed on a lead-bronze foil unearthed near Borobudur. ”InEpigraphic
Evidence in the Pre-Modern Buddhist World: Proceedings of the Eponymous
Conference Held in Vienna , edited by Kurt Tropper, 1 –36. Vienna: Arbeitskreis
für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien.
Grifﬁths, Arlo. 2014c. “Inscriptions of Sumatra, III: The Padang Lawas Corpus studied
along with inscriptions from Sorik Merapi (North Sumatra) and Maura Takus
(Riau). ”InHistory of Padang Lawas, North Sumatra. II: Societies of Padang
Lawas (9th c. –13th c.) , edited by Daniel Perret, 211 –262. Paris: Association
Archipel.
Guy, John. 2014. “Catalogue: Savior cults. ”InLost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture
of Early Southeast Asia , edited by John Guy, 226 –264. New York: The Metropolitan
Museum of Art.
Hall, Kenneth R. 2010. “Indonesia ’s evolving international relationships in the ninth to
early eleventh centuries: Evidence from contemporary shipwrecks and epigraphy. ”
Indonesia 90: 15 –45.
Hoogervorst, Tom. 2012. Southeast Asia in the Ancient Indian Ocean World . Oxford:
Archaeopress.
Hooykaas, Christiaan. 1973. Balinese Bauddha Brahmans . Amsterdam: North-Holland
Pub. Co.
Hunter, Thomas M. 2015. “Sanskrit in a distant land: The Sanskritized sections. ”InA
14th Century Malay Code of Laws: The N ı ̄tisa ̄rasamuccaya , edited by Uli Kozok,
281–379. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Huntington, John C. 1987. “Note on a Chinese text demonstrating the earliness of
Tantra. ”Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 10(2): 88 –98.
Jacq-Hergoualc ’h, Michel. 2002. The Malay Peninsula: Crossroads of the Maritime Silk-
Road (100 BC –1300 AD). Leiden: Brill.
Jain, Balachandra. 1971. “Sirpur inscription of Acharya Buddhaghosa. ”Epigraphia
Indica 38(2): 59 –62.
Jordaan, Roy E. 1997. “Ta ̄ra ̄and Nyai Lara Kidul: Images of the divine feminine in Java. ”
Asian Folklore Studies 56(2): 285 –312.
Jordaan, Roy E. 1998. “The Ta ̄ra ̄temple of Kalasan in Central Java. ”Bulletin de l ’École
française d ’Extrême-Orient 85: 163 –183.162 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 25] ---
Kandahjaya, Hudaya. 2004. “A Study on the Origin and Signi ﬁcance of Borobudur. ”PhD
diss., Graduate Theological Union, Berkeley.
Kandahjaya, Hudaya. 2009. “The Lord of all virtues. ”Paciﬁc World: Journal of the Insti-
tute of Buddhist Studies (Third Series) 11: 1 –25.
Kandahjaya, Hudaya. 2016. “San ̇Hyan ̇Kamaha ̄ya ̄nikan , Borobudur, and the origins of
esoteric Buddhism in premodern Indonesia. ”InEsoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval
Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons , edited by Andrea Acri, 67 –112.
Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Kim, Jinah. 2014. “Local visions, transcendental practices: Iconographic innovations of
Indian esoteric Buddhism. ”History of Religions 54(1): 34 –68.
Kimmet, Natasha. 2012. “Sharing sacred space: A comparative study of Tabo and Boro-
budur. ”InSelected Papers from the 13th International Conference of the European
Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 2010, Volume 2: Connecting
Empires and States , edited by Dominik Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke and Mai-Lin
Tjoa-Bonatz, 93 –101. Singapore: NUS Press.
Lammerts, Christian D., and Arlo Grif ﬁths. 2015. “Epigraphy: Southeast Asia. ”InBrill ’s
Encyclopedia of Buddhism Vol. I , edited by Jonathan Silk and Vincent Eltschinger,
988–1009. Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Liebner, Horst H. 2014. “The Siren of Cirebon: A Tenth-Century Trading Vessel Lost in
the Java Sea. ”PhD diss., The University of Leeds.
Lin, Li-Kouang. 1935. “Pun ̣yodaya (Na-t ’i), un propagateur du tantrisme en Chine et au
Cambodge a ̀l’époque de Hiuan-tsang. ”Journal Asiatique 227: 83 –100.
Long, Mark. 2014. Voices from the Mountain: The S ́ailendra Inscriptions Discovered in
Central Java and on the Malay Peninsula . New Delhi: International Academy of
Indian Culture/Aditya Prakashan.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline. 2008. “The well-known Javanese statue in the Tropenmu-
seum, Amsterdam, and its place in Javanese sculpture. ”Artibus Asiae 68(2):
287–332.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves, and Agustijanto Indrajaya. 2011. “The Batujaya site: New
evidence of early Indian in ﬂuence in West Java. ”InIndia and Southeast Asia:
Reﬂections on Cross-cultural Exchange , edited by Pierre-Yves Manguin, A. Mani
and Geoffrey Wade, 113 –136. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Matsunaga, Keiji. 2017. インドネシア新出密教遺跡・遺品の紹介/松長恵史著[The
introduction of new-found ruins and statues on esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia].
Mikkyo ̄gaku kenkyu ̄49: 1 –21.
Mevissen, Gerd. 1999. “Images of maha ̄pratisara ̄in Bengal: Their iconographic links with
Javanese, Central Asian and East Asian images. ”Journal of Bengal Art 4: 99 –129.
Miksic, John. 2006. “Mañjus ́ri ̄as a political symbol in ancient Java. ”InAnamorphoses:
Hommage a ̀Jacques Dumarçay , edited by Bruno Dagens and Henry Chambert-
Loir, 185 –226. Paris: Les Indes Savantes.
Miksic, John N. 2016. “Archaeological evidence for esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra, 7th to
13th Century. ”InEsoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of
Masters, Texts, Icons , edited by Andrea Acri, 253 –273. Singapore: ISEAS
Publishing.
Neelis, Jason. 2011. Early Buddhist Transmission and Trade Networks: Mobility and
Exchange within and beyond the Northwestern Borderlands of South Asia .
Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Nihom, Max. 1994. Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism: The Kunjarakar-
nadharmakathana and the Yogatantra . Vienna: Sammlung De Nobili/Institut für
Indologie der Universität Wien.The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 163
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 26] ---
Nihom, Max. 1998. “The man ̣d ̣ala of Can ̣d ̣i Gumpung (Sumatra) and the Indo-Tibetan
Vajras ́ekharatantra. ”Indo-Iranian Journal 41: 245 –254.
O’Brien, Kate. 1993. “Means and wisdom in Tantric Buddhist rulership during the East
Javanese period. ”PhD diss., University of Sydney.
Orzech, Chales D. 2011. “Translation of tantras and other esoteric Buddhist scriptures. ”
InEsoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia , edited by Charles D. Orzech,
Henrik H. Sørensen and Richard K. Payne, 439 –450. Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Osto, Douglas. 2009. “‘Proto –tantric ’elements in the Gan ̣d ̣avyu ̄ha-su ̄tra.”Journal of
Religious History 33(2): 165 –177.
Pachow, Wang. 1960 [1958]. “The voyage of Buddhist missions to South-East Asia and
Far East. ”University of Ceylon Review 18(3/4): 195 –212 (Reprint).
Ray, Himanshu Prabha. 2012. “Narratives of travel and shipwreck. ”InBuddhist
Narrative in Asia and Beyond: In Honor of HRH Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn
on Her Fifty- ﬁfth Birth Anniversary, Volume 2 , edited by Peter Skilling and Justin
McDaniel, 47 –65. Bangkok: Institute of Thai Studies, Chulalongkorn University.
Reichle, Natasha. 2007. Violence and Serenity: Late Buddhist Sculpture from Indonesia .
Honolulu: University of Hawai ’i Press.
Revire, Nicolas. 2015. “Some newly discovered tablets from peninsular Thailand. ”In
Advancing Southeast Asian Archaeology 2013: Selected Papers from the First
SEAMEO - SPAFA International Conference on Southeast Asian Archaeology ,
edited by Noel Hidalgo Tan, 301 –307. Bangkok: SEAMEO SPAFA Regional
Centre for Archaeology and Fine Arts.
Revire, Nicolas. 2018. “From Gandhara to Candi Mendut? A comparative study of
Bhadra ̄sana Buddhas and their related Bodhisattva Attendants in South and
Southeast Asia. ”InIndia And Southeast Asia: Cultural Discourses , edited by
Anna Dallapiccola and Anila Verghese, 279 –304. Mumbai: K.R. Cama Oriental
Institute.
Robson, Stuart. 1995. Des ́awarn ̣ana (Nagarakr ̣ta ̄gama) by Mpu Prapañca . Leiden:
KITLV Press.
Sarkar, Himanshu Bushan. 1971. Corpus of the Inscriptions of Java. 2 vols . Calcutta:
Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay.
Sastri, H. 1923 –24.“The Na ̄landa ̄copperplate of Devapa ̄ladeva. ”InEpigraphia Indica
17, edited by R.B.H. Krishna Sastri, 310 –327. Calcutta: Manager, Government of
India Central Publication Branch.
Schalk, Peter. 2002. “The period of the imperial Co ̄lar. Tamilakam. ”InBuddhism among
Tamils in Pre- Colonial Tamilakam and I ̄lam, Part 2 , edited by Peter Schalk, et al.
Stockholm: Uppsala University.
Schopen, Gregory. 1989a. “A verse from the Bhadracaripran ̣idha ̄na in a tenth-century
inscription found at Na ̄landa ̄.”Journal of the International Association of Buddhist
Studies 12(1): 149 –157.
Schoterman, Jan. 1994. “A surviving Amoghapa ̄s ́asa ̄dhana : Its relation to the ﬁve main
statues of Candi Jago. ”InAncient Indonesian Sculpture , edited by Marijke J.
Klokke and Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer, 154 –177. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Schoterman, Jan. 2016 [1986]. “Traces of Indonesian in ﬂuences in Tibet. ”InEsoteric
Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons , edited
by Andrea Acri, 113 –122. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing, 2016 (Reprint).
Sen, Tansen. 2003. Buddhism, Diplomacy, and Trade: The Realignment of Sino-Indian
Relations, 600 –1400 . Honolulu: Association for Asian Studies/University of
Hawai ’i Press.164 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 27] ---
Sen, Tansen. 2014a. “Introduction: Buddhism in Asian history. ”InBuddhism Across
Asia: Networks of Material, Intellectual, and Cultural Exchange, Vol. 1 , edited by
Tansen Sen, xi –xxx. Singapore/New Delhi: ISEAS Publishing/Manohar.
Sen, Tansen. 2014b. “Maritime Southeast Asia between South Asia and China to the six-
teenth century. ”TRaNS: Trans-Regional and -National Studies of Southeast Asia 2
(1): 31 –59.
Sen, Tansen. 2014c. “Buddhism and the maritime crossings. ”InChina and Beyond in the
Mediaeval Period: Cultural Crossings and Inter-Regional Connections , edited by
Dorothy C. Wong and Gustav Heldt, 39 –62. Singapore/New Delhi: ISEAS Publish-
ing/Manohar.
Sharrock, Peter D., and Emma Bunker. 2016. “Seeds of Vajrabodhi: Buddhist ritual
bronzes from Java and Khorat. ”InEsoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime
Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons , edited by Andrea Acri, 237 –254. Singapore:
ISEAS Publishing.
Sinclair, Iain. 2012. “Vajra ̄ca ̄ryas, monks or bust: Divergent Buddhisms in Sanskritic Asia,
900–1900 CE. ”Paper presented at the Workshop Orders and Itineraries: Buddhist,
Islamic, and Christian Networks in Southern Asia, c. 900-1900 , Asia Research
Institute (NUS), Singapore, 21 –22 February 2013.
Sinclair, Iain. 2016a. “Coronation and liberation according to a Javanese monk in China:
Bianhong ’s manual on the Abhis ̣ekaof a Cakravartin .”InEsoteric Buddhism in
Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons , edited by Andrea
Acri, 29 –66. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Sinclair, Iain. 2016b. “The Appearance of Tantric Monasticism in Nepal: A History of the
Public Image and Fasting Ritual of Newar Buddhism, 980 –1380. ”PhD Diss.,
Monash University.
Sinclair, Iain. 2018. “Gautamas ́rı ̄: A Bengali Buddhist pundit in transit through the Hima-
layas and the Singapore Strait. ”Unpublished draft paper.
Singh, Upinder. 2014. “Gifts from other lands: Southeast Asian religious endowments in
India. ”InAsian Encounters: Exploring Connected Histories , edited by Upinder
Singh and Parul Pandya Dhar, 43 –61. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Skilling, Peter. 1987. “The Sam ̣skr ̣ta ̄sam ̣skr ̣tavinis ́caya of Das ́abalas ́rı ̄mitra. ”Buddhist
Studies Review 4(1): 3 –23.
Skilling, Peter. 1997. “Dharmak ı ̄rti’s Durbodha ̄loka and the literature of S ́rı ̄vijaya. ”
Journal of the Siam Society 85: 187 –194.
Skilling, Peter. 2007. “Geographies of intertextuality: Buddhist literature in pre-modern
Siam. ”Aséanie 19: 91 –112.
Skilling, Peter. 2009. “Pieces in the puzzle: Sanskrit literature in pre-modern Siam. ”In
Buddhism and Buddhist Literature of South-East Asia; Selected Papers , edited by
Claudio Cicuzza, 27 –45. Bangkok and Lumbini: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation
& Lumbini International Research Institute.
Soper, Alexander C., and Helen B. Chapin. 1970. “A long roll of Buddhist images. ”
Artibus Asiae 32(1): 5 –41.
Sundberg, Jeffrey. 2014. “The Abhayagiriviha ̄ra’sPa ̄m ̣s ́uku ̄likamonks in second Lamba-
kan ̣n ̣aS ́rı ̄Lan ̇ka ̄and S ́ailendra Java: The ﬂowering and fall of a cardinal center of
inﬂuence in early esoteric Buddhism. ”Paciﬁc World: Journal of the Institute of
Buddhist Studies (Third Series) 16: 49 –185.
Sundberg, Jeffrey. 2016. “Mid-9th-century adversity for Sinhalese esoteric Buddhist
exemplars in Java: Lord Kumbhayoni and the ‘rag-wearer ’Pam ̇suku ̄likamonks of
the Abhayagiriviha ̄ra.”InEsoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: NetworksThe Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis 165
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

--- [Page 28] ---
of Masters, Texts, Icons , edited by Andrea Acri, 349 –379. Singapore: ISEAS
Publishing.
Sundberg, Jeffrey, and Rolf Giebel. 2011. “The life of the Tang Court Vajrabodhi as
chronicled by Lü Xiang ( 呂向 ): South Indian and S ́rı ̄Lan ̇ka ̄n antecedents to the
arrival of the Buddhist Vajraya ̄na in eighth-century Java and China. ”Paciﬁc
World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies (Third Series) 13: 129 –222.
Szántó, Peter-Daniel, and Arlo Grif ﬁths. 2015. “Sarvabuddhasama ̄yogad ̣a ̄kinı ̄ja ̄las ́am ̣-
vara. ”InBrill ’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, Vol. 1 , edited by Jonathan Silk, Oskar
von Hinüber and Vincent Eltschinger, 988 –1009. Leiden: Brill.
Takakusu, Junjiro ̄. 1896. A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practised in India and the
Malay Archipelago, I-Tsing (A.D. 671 –695). London: Clarendon Press.
Tanaka, Kimiaki. 2010. Indo ni Okeru Mandara no Seiritsu to Hatten (インドにおける
曼荼羅の成立と発展;“Genesis and Development of the Man ̣d ̣ala in India ”).
Tokyo: Shunju ̄sha.
Templeman, David. 2009. “Becoming Indian: A study of the life of the 16-17th century
Tibetan Lama, Ta ̄rana ̄tha.”PhD diss., Monash University.
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1931. “The sea and land travels of a Buddhist sa ̄dhu in the sixteenth
century. ”The Indian Historical Quarterly 7(4): 683 –702.
van der Kuijp, Leonard W.J. 2003. “A treatise on Buddhist epistemology and logic attrib-
uted to Klong chen Rab ’byams pa (1308 –1364) and its place in Indo-Tibetan intel-
lectual history. ”Journal of Indian Philosophy 31: 381 –437.
von Schroeder, Ulrich. 1981. Indo-Tibetan Bronzes . Hong Kong: Visual Dharma
Publications.
Wayman, Alex. 1981. “Reﬂections on the theory of Barabudur as a Mandala. ”InBarabu-
dur: History and Signi ﬁcance of a Buddhist Monument , edited by Luis Gomez and
Hiram W. Woodward, 139 –172. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
Wilkinson, Christopher. 1991. “The Tantric Ganesa: Texts preserved in the Tibetan
canon. ”InGanesh: Studies of an Asian God , edited by Robert Brown, 235 –275.
Albany: SUNY Press.
Woodward, Hiram W. 1990. “The life of the Buddha in the Pa ̄la monastic environment. ”
The Journal of the Walters Art Gallery 48: 13 –27.
Woodward, Hiram W. 2004. “Review article: Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia in the
light of recent scholarship. ”Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 35(2): 329 –354.
Woodward, Hiram W. 2009. “Bianhong, mastermind of Borobudur? ”Paciﬁc World:
Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies (Third Series) 11: 25 –60.166 Andrea Acri
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . IP address: 117.211.166.104, on 16 Sep 2018 at 11:58:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,