--- [Page 1] ---


--- [Page 2] ---
Andrea Acri  is tenured Assistant Professor in Tantric Studies at the École Pratique des 
Hautes Études (EPHE, PSL University) in Paris, France. His publications include the 
monograph Dharma Pātañjala  (2011), as well as various edited volumes, including 
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia  (2016). His main research and teaching 
interests are Śaiva and Buddhist Tantric traditions, Indian philosophy, Yoga studies, 
Sanskrit and Old Javanese philology, and the comparative religious history of South and 
Southeast Asia from the premodern to the contemporary period, with special emphasis on 
connected histories and intra- Asian maritime transfers.
Paolo E. Rosati  received his PhD in Asian and African Studies from ‘Sapienza’ University 
of Rome, Italy. He has published a double special issue on Tantra for Religions of South 
Asia (14/1–2) in 2020, and several contributions on the yoni cult at Kāmākhyā. His current 
research focuses on magic, memory, and cultural identity in postcolonial Tantric 
contexts.This book explores the cross-  and trans- cultural dialectic between Tantra and intersecting 
‘magical’ and ‘shamanic’ practices associated with vernacular religions across Monsoon 
Asia. With a chronological frame going from the mediaeval Indic period up to the present, 
a wide geographical framework, and through the dialogue between various disciplines, it 
presents a coherent enquiry shedding light on practices and practitioners that have been 
frequently alienated in the elitist discourse of mainstream Indic religions and equally over-
looked by modern scholarship.
The book addresses three desiderata in the field of Tantric Studies: it fills a gap in the 
historical modelling of Tantra; it extends the geographical parameters of Tantra to the vast, 
yet culturally interlinked, socio- geographical construct of Monsoon Asia; it explores 
Tantra as an interface between the Sanskritic elite and the folk, the vernacular, the magical, 
and the shamanic, thereby revisiting the intellectual and historically fallacious divide 
between cosmopolitan Sanskritic and vernacular local.
The book offers a highly innovative contribution to the field of Tantric Studies and, 
more generally, South and Southeast Asian religions, by breaking traditional disciplinary 
boundaries. Its variety of disciplinary approaches makes it attractive to both the textual/
diachronic and ethnographic/synchronic dimensions. It will be of interest to specialist and 
non- specialist academic readers, including scholars and students of South Asian religions, 
mainly Hinduism and Buddhism, Tantric traditions, and Southeast Asian religions, as well 
as Asian and global folk religion, shamanism, and magic.Tantra, Magic, and Vernacular Religions 
in Monsoon Asia

--- [Page 3] ---
Routledge Studies in Tantric Traditions
Series Editor: Professor Gavin Flood
University of Stirling
The Routledge Studies in Tantric Traditions  series is a major new monograph 
series which has been established to publish schola rship on South, East and 
Southeast Asian tantric traditions. The series aims  to promote the serious study 
of both Hindu and Buddhist tantric traditions through the publication of anthro -
pological and textual studies and will not be limit ed to any one method. Indeed, 
the series would hope to promote the view that anth ropological studies can be 
informed by texts and textual studies informed by a nthropology. The series will 
therefore publish contemporary ethnographies from dif ferent regions, philologi -
cal studies, philosophical studies, and historical studies of different periods 
which contribute to the academic endeavour to under stand the role of tantric 
texts and their meaning in particular cultural cont exts. In this way, the series will 
hope to establish what the continuities and diverge ncies are between Buddhist 
and Hindu tantric traditions and between different regions. The series will be a 
major contribution to the fields of Indology, Sinol ogy, History of Religions, and 
Anthropology.
Tantric Buddhist Practice in India
Vilāsavajra’s Commentary on the Mañju śrī-nāmasaṃgīti
Anthony Tribe
The Rādhā Tantra
A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation
Måns Broo
An Indian Tantric Tradition and its Modern Global Revival
Contemporary Nondual Śaivism
D.E. Osto
Tantra, Magic, and Vernacular Religions in Monsoon Asia
Texts, Practices, and Practitioners from the Margins
Edited by Andrea Acri and Paolo E. Rosati
For more information about this series, please visit: www.routledge.com/
Routledge-Studies-in-Tantric-Traditions/book-series/RSTT

--- [Page 4] ---
Tantra, Magic, and Vernacular 
Religions in Monsoon Asia
Texts, Practices, and Practitioners from the 
Margins
Edited by Andrea Acri and  
Paolo E. Rosati

--- [Page 5] ---
First published 2023
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa 
business
© 2023 selection and editorial matter, Andrea Acri and Paolo E. Rosati; 
individual chapters, the contributors
The right of Andrea Acri and Paolo E. Rosati to be identified as the 
authors of the editorial material, and of the authors for their individual 
chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, 
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, 
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice : Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Acri, Andrea, 1981- editor. | Rosati, Paolo E., editor. 
Title: Tantra, magic, and vernacular religions in monsoon Asia : texts, 
practices, and practitioners from the margins / edited by Andrea Acri, 
Paolo E. Rosati. 
Description: New York : Routledge, 2023. | Includes bibliographical 
references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2022015546 (print) | LCCN 2022015547 (ebook) | ISBN 
9781032251288 (hardback) | ISBN 9781032251370 (paperback) | ISBN 
9781003281740 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Tantrism--Asia. | Tantrism--Asia--Customs and practices. 
Classification: LCC BL1283.84 .T365 2022 (print) | LCC BL1283.84 (ebook) 
| DDC 294.5/514--dc23/eng20220820 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022015546
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022015547
ISBN: 978-1-032-25128-8 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-25137-0 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-28174-0 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003281740
Typeset in IndUni-T
by SPi Technologies India Pvt Ltd (Straive)

--- [Page 6] ---
List of figures vii
List of contributors viii
Acknowledgement xi
Introduction  1
ANDREA ACRI
1 More pre-Tantric sources of Tantrism: Skulls and skull-cups  12
RONALD M. DA VIDSON
2 Charnel ground items, śmāśānikas, and the question of the magical 
substratum of the early Tantras  40
ALEKSANDRA WENTA AND ANDREA ACRI
3 Shamans and Bh ūta Tāntrikas: A shared genealogy?  60
MICHAEL SLOUBER
4 Female Ga ṇeśa or independent deity?: Tracing the  
background of the elephant-faced goddess in mediaeval  
Śaiva Tantric traditions  78
CHIARA POLICARDI
5 Crossing the boundaries of sex, blood, and magic in  
the Tantric cult of K āmākhyā 98
PAOLO E. ROSATI
6 ‘Let us now invoke the three celestial lights of Fire, Sun and Moon  
into ourselves’: Magic or everyday practice? Revising existentiality  
for an emic understanding of Śrīvidyā 116
MONIKA HIRMERContents

--- [Page 7] ---
vi Contents
7 Narrative folklore of Khyāḥ from Tantra to popular beliefs:  
Supernatural experiences at the margins among  
Newar communities in the Kathmandu Valley  137
FABIO ARMAND
8 Magical Tantra in Bengal, Bali, and Java: From  
piśāca tāntrika s to balian s and dukun s 154
JUNE McDANIEL
9 Tantrism and the weretiger lore of Burma, Thailand,  
and Cambodia  173
FRANCESCO BRIGHENTI
Bibliography 191
Index 212

--- [Page 8] ---
 3.1 Proposed homeland of proto-Tungusic in 4th-century context 63
 3.2 Iron nails, spikes, and rings for protection from spirits 
(Kathmandu, Ghantakarna holiday 2006) 73
 4.1 Yoginī n° 38, elephant-faced, Hirapur yoginī temple, Odisha, 
second half of the 9th century 85
 4.2 Vin āyakī with other mātṛs or yoginīs, from Rikhiyan, Banda 
district, Uttar Pradesh, ca. 10th century 88
 4.3 Possibly elephant-faced goddess with a donkey vāhana , 
Dandan Oiliq, Buddhist temple CD4, eastern corridor 89
 4.4 Yoginī named Śrī Aiṅginī in the inscription, No. 41,  
elephant-faced, Bheraghat yoginī temple, near Jabalpur, 
Madhya Pradesh, last decades of 10th century 91
 4.5 Elephant-faced yoginī with wine cup, sculpture repurposed 
in a wall outside the Bhairava shrine, Har ṣa temple complex, 
Harshagiri, near Sikar, Rajasthan, ca. 9th–10th century 92
 4.6 Elephant-faced yoginī from Hinglajgadh, on the border 
between Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, middle of  
10th century. Now in Birla Museum at Bhopal 93
 6.1 Śrīcakra 125
 6.2 Identity between the Śrīcakra and Dev ī 131
 6.3 Divinized body 133
 7.1 Nāsaḥdyaḥ temple in S āno Khokana: A copperplate 
representing kālo Khyāḥ and Kawancha  offering pūjā to the 
main deity (left). By lifting the copperplate, a painted canvas, 
representing seto Khyāḥ and Kawancha  in the same attitude, 
appears (right) 142
 7.2 Khyāḥ and Kawancha  dancing in front of Pala ňchowk 
Bhagāwatī (Lagan Ṭol, Kathmandu) 148Figures

--- [Page 9] ---
Fabio Armand  is Associate Professor of Ethnolinguistics and Anthropology at 
the Sciences and Humanities Confluence Research Center (EA1598) of the 
Lyon Catholic University. He holds a Joint PhD in Linguistics (University 
Grenoble-  Alps) and in Psychology, Anthropology, and Educational Sciences 
(University of Turin). He carries out research on experience-  centred narrative 
heritage in faraway alpine environments, from French- speaking Alps to 
Nepalese Himalayas, especially among Hindu Bahun- Chhetri high castes and 
Tibeto- Burman ethnic groups (Newar and Eastern Gurung). He contributed to 
the development of a neurocognitive anthropological model, BRAINCUBUS , 
which aims to bridge field folkloristics and cognitive neuroscience. By taking 
into account the relationships between the neurocognitive systems of human 
brains as ontology engines and their inspirations from the cultural environ-
ments, he examines the cerebral origins of imaginary ontologies, as well as the 
neural basis of shamanism(s).
Francesco Brighenti , PhD (history), Utkal University, Bhubaneswar, India, is an 
independent scholar based in Venice, Italy. His research interests include 
Hindu myths, rituals, and iconography (with focus on Śakti cult), South Asian 
pre- /proto- history and archaeology, comparative linguistics, and cultural 
anthropology (with focus on tribal cultures of Monsoon Asia).
Ronald M. Davidson  is Professor of Religious Studies at Fairfield University. He 
received his degrees in psychology, Sanskrit, and Buddhist studies at the 
University of California, Berkeley, working with Padmanabh Jaini, Frits Staal, 
Barend van Nooten, Lewis Lancaster, and Michel Strickmann. Additionally, he 
worked with Tibetan intellectuals, especially Ngor Thartse Khanpo (Hiroshi 
Sonami), for 17 years on Tibetan documents and rituals. His books include 
Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric Movement  (2002) 
and Tibetan Renaissance: Tantric Buddhism in the Rebirth of Tibetan Culture  
(2005). His current work is on dhāraṇī literature in Indian Buddhism, already 
published in a series of studies, and on pre- Tantric elements of Indian religion 
that contributed to the formation of Tantrism. He is completing a translation of 
the *Mūlamantra , the earliest Indian Buddhist pre- Tantric work that brings 
together elements that eventually will become inscribed in Tantric Buddhism, Contributors

--- [Page 10] ---
Contributors ix
and is also working on the earliest Tantric Buddhist documents, many of which 
are only in Chinese or Tibetan translations.
Monika Hirmer  has recently defended her PhD thesis at SOAS, University of 
London, in religions and philosophies. Her research focuses on a contempo-
rary South Indian Śrīvidyā tradition, for which she conducted extensive 
anthropological fieldwork in 2014, 2017, and 2019. Trained as an anthropolo-
gist at the University of Hyderabad, India, from where she obtained an MPhil 
in anthropology of religions, and at SOAS, United Kingdom, from where she 
obtained an MA in South Asian area studies, Monika’s research lies at the 
intersection of anthropology and philosophy, to which she applies a decolonial 
perspective. She has been a teaching assistant at SOAS for ‘The Margins 
of Philosophy: Postcolonial, Gender and Queer Epistemologies’ and is 
co- founder of the multilingual open access publishing platform Decolonial 
Subversions .
June McDaniel  is Professor Emerita in History of Religions in the Department 
of Religious Studies at the College of Charleston. Her PhD was from the 
University of Chicago, and her MTS was from Emory University. Her research 
areas include mysticism, religions of India, psychology of religion, and ritual 
studies. She did several years of field research in West Bengal, funded by 
Fulbright and the American Institute of Indian Studies, which focused on reli-
gious experience and modern Shaktism. Her books include Lost Ecstasy  (2018) 
and Offering Flowers, Feeding Skulls  (2004), among others. Her current work 
draws comparisons between Bengali and Balinese Hinduism, and examines 
religious emotion in different traditions.
Chiara Policardi  is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Milan, with a 
research project called ‘Of Deities and Animals. Th e Rise of Therianthropic 
Deities in Gupta India’. After graduating in classi cs from the University of 
Milan, she completed her PhD in Indology at Sapienza  University of Rome 
in 2017, under the direction of Raffaele Torella. In he r dissertation, she dealt 
with yoginīs of mediaeval Śaiva traditions, investigating, in particular, the 
peculiar therianthropic representation of these figures, which usually com -
bines an animal face with a feminine body. She has recently published the 
monograph Divino, femminile, animale. Yogin ī teriantropiche nell’India 
antica e medioevale  (2020). Her main research interests concern Hindu femi -
nine deities and the important and multifaceted role  of animals in Hindu 
culture, which finds a particular expression in comp osite animal- human 
deities.
Michael Slouber  researches the religious and medical traditions of early mediae-
val India and teaches South Asian humanities and the study of religion at 
Western Washington University. He is the author of Early Tantric Medicine  
(2017) and the editor of A Garland of Forgotten Goddesses  (2021). He earned 
graduate degrees in South Asian languages and literature at the University of 
California at Berkeley under the supervision of Robert and Sally Goldman, 

--- [Page 11] ---
x Contributors
Alexander von Rospatt, and Somadeva Vasudeva, and at Universität Hamburg 
in Germany under Harunaga Isaacson. He won the DK Award for the best dis-
sertation on Sanskrit 2012–2014 and is an honorary fellow of the International 
Association of Sanskrit Studies.
Aleksandra Wenta  (University of Florence, Italy) holds an MPhil and a PhD 
from the University of Oxford, and a Vidy āvaridhi (PhD) degree from Banaras 
Hindu University. She was Assistant Professor at Nalanda University (2016–
2020) and a postdoctoral fellow at the Indian Institute of Advanced Study 
(2012–2014). She researches the history, literature, and ritual of Tantric 
Buddhism and Śaivism in mediaeval India, as well as religion in premodern 
Tibet. She authored several scholarly articles and book chapters concerning 
Tantric practices and Tibetan Buddhism and co- edited with Purushottama 
Bilimoria the volume Emotions in Indian Thought- Systems  (Routledge, 2015, 
reprint 2018, 2020).

--- [Page 12] ---
This volume is the fruit of a collaboration between the editors, which was kick-
started by discussions and exchanges that took place during a series of forums 
FIND ‘Transcultural Encounters’ held at the Labyrinth in Zagarolo between 2017 
and 2021. This collaboration culminated in a panel at the conference of the 
European Association for the Study of Religions (EASR) held in Pisa in 2021, in 
which several of the contributors to this volume participated. We are grateful to 
all the people involved in those events who contributed to creating an intellectual 
and human atmosphere that was most conducive to fruitful scholarly exchanges. 
We thank in particular Adrián Navigante, director of Research and Intellectual 
Dialogue at FIND, for his support and for providing the intellectual stimuli that 
contributed to the breeding of the intellectual agenda shaping this volume.
Andrea Acri would like to thank the Section des Sciences Religieuses of the 
École Pratique des Hautes Études (EPHE, PSL University, Paris) and the Groupe 
de Recherches en Études Indiennes (GREI, EA2120, Paris) for providing funding 
to cover the publication costs.
Paolo E. Rosati would like to thank the Società Italiana di Storia delle Religioni 
and the EASR, both of which supported the organization of thematic panels on 
Tantra during the EASR annual conferences in Bern (2018) and Tartu (2019), 
which helped him to refine his research focus on the intersection between Tantra 
and magic.
Finally, we would like to thank Prof. Gavin Flood, editor of the Routledge 
Studies in Tantric Traditions Series, for strongly and effectively supporting this 
project, and Dorothea Schaefter, senior editor at Routledge, for making the publi-
cation of this volume possible despite the economic downturn and the many other 
challenges caused by the COVID- 19 pandemic.Acknowledgement

--- [Page 13] ---


--- [Page 14] ---
DOI: 10.4324/9781003281740-1Introduction
Andrea Acri
Framing the intersection between Tantra, magic, and vernacular 
religions in Monsoon Asia
Tantra (used here as a synonym of ‘Tantrism’) is a complex, heterogeneous, and 
protean socio- religious phenomenon. The very definition of Tantra and its status 
as a clearly identifiable discourse, in spite of the existence of such emic terms as 
tantra  and tāntrika , is a matter of controversy. Some scholars would restrict 
Tantra to texts and artefacts associated with initiation lineages within specific 
(and as a norm, esoteric) soteriological systems across sectarian domains of Indic 
religions; others, applying a broader perspective, would understand the phenom-
enon as transcending the boundaries of the belief systems and rituals produced 
within textually and historically established initiatory traditions so as to encom-
pass multifarious manifestations of the cultural, artistic, and political lives of 
many societies of the wider Indic or ‘Indianized’ World.
While the enigmatic origins of Tantra are still debated, textual and art histori -
cal evidence suggests that Tantric traditions ident ifiable as such arose in the 
Indian subcontinent from the middle of the 1st mill ennium CE. From ca. the 7th 
to the 13th century and beyond, Tantric orientation s of major religious traditions 
of ‘Hinduism’ (especially Śaivism and Śāktism) and Buddhism (especially the 
Sanskrit-  dominated Mah āyāna current, but also the Pali-  dominated tradition 
that became a major force in mainland Southeast Asia from the 12th century 
onwards) virtually coincided with mainstream religi osity and ritual practice 
over much of Asia. Transcending the constructed bou ndaries of the region we 
now call ‘South Asia’, Tantra spread over the large  swathe of territory referred 
to as Monsoon Asia1 and continues to this very day to play a central r ole in the 
religious and ritual life of many ‘peripheral’ area s of the former Indic World, 
such as Nepal, Tibet, and Bali. Taking on a local garb according to the socio-  
cultural and geographical contexts in which it deve loped, Tantra has played a 
significant role—albeit often in a subliminal manne r—in shaping the shared 
history and collective identity of a geographically  vast and culturally diversified 
region encompassing the continental and maritime sp ace of the southeastern 
quadrant of Asia.

--- [Page 15] ---
2 Andrea Acri
Admittedly, it seems reductive to pin down Tantra exclusively to specific and 
distinct textual corpora, lineages, or schools, for Tantric traditions have left a 
mark on many cultural phenomena in lay milieus, even in contexts that are far 
removed from those from which they originated. These Tantric orientations, 
which were not in each and every instance esoteric, secret, or initiatory, may 
include, for example, self- divinization, ritual violence, transgressive devotional 
practices, the use of mantras and magical formulas (for both this- worldly and 
other- worldly purposes), healing, sorcery, possession and exorcism, and different 
genres of sacred performance.2 Thus, by applying a polythetic approach, one may 
argue that some of the distinctive features of what we may call ‘elite Tantra’ 
penetrated—through some sort of trickle- down effect—the extended social fab-
ric; conversely, many popular or vernacular cults and practices may have influ-
enced high- cultural/textual manifestations of Tantra. The word ‘vernacular’ is 
used in this volume as an indicator of non- Sanskritic, non- elite, ‘local’ milieus 
but also of ‘lived’ forms of religion, which are in some respects the expression of 
less institutionalized practices and practitioners. The vernacular problematizes 
and complicates the divide between ‘folk’ and ‘elite’, being the outcome of a 
dynamic process of interaction between different milieus and practitioners.
Scholarly work carried out in the past three decades or so has rightly empha -
sized the Sanskritic continuum that contributed to shaping many socio-  cultural 
contexts in the Indic World—for instance, the cultural and geographical forma -
tion called ‘Sanskrit Cosmopolis’ by Pollock (2006) . Highlighting the enor -
mous importance of Tantra for the religious and cul tural history of the Indian 
subcontinent and beyond, and its alliance with the political elites of the societ -
ies across the geographical area that is largely co extensive to that of the Sanskrit 
Cosmopolis, Sanderson (2009)  has called the crucial period from the 7th to the 
12th century the ‘ Śaiva Age’. Thus, Tantra has been mainly studied as a top-  
down, elite-  driven phenomenon that is very much part of the Sanskritic (and/or 
Brahmanical) intellectual and textual tradition, and which was shaped by the 
same dynamics that governed them. And yet, Tantra confronts us with the para -
dox that, from the moment it burst into the Indic r eligious cosmos, its ritual 
system has emerged as a source of incommensurable y et dangerous power, 
which often was consciously formulated in violation and subversion of main -
stream norms, Brahmanical or otherwise. Indeed, Tan tra can be associated not 
only with the religious and political elites that s ponsored it, thereby facilitating 
its spread, but also with marginal ethnic groups an d social milieus, as well as 
with lay communities at large, who resorted to ritual agents (both institutional -
ized and non-  institutionalized) to fulfil their worldly needs. Nowadays emically 
associated in many South and Southeast Asian contexts with low-  caste agents, 
indigenous communities, and black magic, Tantra hig hlights a stratification of 
liminal and transgressive practices within the overarching context of main -
stream Hindu or Buddhist religious ideology and pra xis, as well as a tension 
between the ‘margins’ and the ‘centre(s)’. It is cl ear that Tantra had, throughout 
much of its history and its wide spectrum of different strands, a complex rela -
tionship with Brahmanism, at times ‘alternative and  incompatible’ and at times 
‘dependent and complementary’ (Shin 2018: 33).

--- [Page 16] ---
Introduction 3
A controversial aspect of Tantra is that many of its streams are characterized by 
ideas and practices that are either not found in Vedic religiosity or that overlap 
with non- Vedic, ‘shamanic’, ‘folk’, ‘indigenous’, or ‘vernacular’ traditions of 
healing and communion with spirits, including ritual trance and possession, exor-
cism, theriocephalic (as well as wrathful and bloodthirsty) deities and spirits, as 
well as the concept of iron as a spirit- repelling magical substance (Slouber, 
Chapter 3 of this volume). While these elements are especially evident in what 
Slouber calls the little- studied, yet prolific, ‘underbelly of the Tantras’—namely, 
‘texts on magic, exorcism, snakebite, and a fascinating array of deities orthodox 
Brahmanical Hinduism would have considered beyond the pale’ ( ibid.), they are 
also attested in other genres of Tantric scriptures, as well as many textual and 
non- textual manifestations of Brahmanical culture. This fact does not necessarily 
demonstrate that they are Brahmanical, for their prevalence does not tell us much 
about their origin; rather, they may very well have been appropriated by 
Brahmanism, Buddhism, and Jainism from different streams over a relatively 
long period. Although it is often difficult to establish the direction of influences 
and borrowings, there is evidence of appropriation, repackaging, and codification 
of elements of vernacular practices by Tantric traditions rather than uniquely the 
other way around.3
Furthermore, on the basis of textual evidence, one could hypothesize that the 
spirit- cults referred to by scholars as (early) Indian ‘popular religion(s)’, which 
predate our earliest available evidence of Tantric traditions and indigenous reli-
gions, are to be located in a shared background or matrix.4 Many of such ideas 
and practices show tantalizing similarities with those that have been—generally, 
and vaguely—labelled as ‘shamanic’, ‘tribal’, or ‘indigenous’ religions of non- 
Indo- Aryan language speaking ethnic groups of the Indian subcontinent and 
beyond, thus suggesting multiple levels of entanglement through processes of 
negotiation, assimilation, and mutual transformation between institutionalized 
religions and less institutionalized vernacular or ‘indigenous’ traditions. Quotation 
marks are in order when mentioning the ‘indigenous’ since this category has too 
often been uncritically invoked to represent a counterpart of (inherently cosmo-
politan) high cultures, such as Sanskritic, Sinitic, or Islamicate. Just like ‘folk’ 
religion, the expression carries negative overtones, having been often attributed 
to the religiosity of isolated groups untouched by ‘civilization’ (Mullen 2000: 
127). However, many (relatively isolated) small- scale societies in Monsoon Asia, 
just like their cosmopolitan counterparts, were already the outcome of circulatory 
dynamics, whereby local developments took place against the background of 
translocal exchanges. In other words, ‘the “local” was already, at least in part, 
“cosmopolitan”’ (Acri 2017: 18).
This problem begs for the no less controversial que stion of the origins, i.e. 
the possibly pre-  Tantric genealogy of such elements, in particular imitative 
behaviours associated with wild animals, spirit pos session, the use of bones 
and skulls, etc. A debate has been, somewhat slowly, unfolding as to whether 
Tantra owes to non-  Sanskritic, non-  Brahmanical, and non-  Indo-  Aryan cul -
tural influxes that occurred following the gradual adoption by Indo-  Aryan 
migrants of cultural and religious elements of the pre-  existing inhabitants of 

--- [Page 17] ---
4 Andrea Acri
the Indian subcontinent (the heterogenetic paradigm ) or is rather to be 
regarded as a more or less linear historical developm ent of Vedic and post-  
Vedic religiosity and Indo-  Aryan magico-  ritual praxis that stems from within 
the Brahmanical fold (the orthogenetic paradigm).5 A squarely orthogenetic 
definition of Tantra has been espoused by Gavin Flood (2006 : 14), among 
others, who states that ‘there is no evidence for a non-  Aryan substratum for 
Tantrism, which must be understood as a predominant ly Brahmanical, 
Sanskritic tradition with its roots in the Veda’. O n the other hand, Urban 
(1999 : 126) asserts that the history of Tantrism is impossible to w rite because 
of poverty of data at present and that ‘the most we  can say is that, although 
Dravidian or pre-  Aryan origins may be possible, tantric traditions have clear 
relations to the Vedic tradition as well’. Along sim ilar lines, White ( 2000a : 18) 
elaborates a synthesis between an orthogenetic and heterogenetic approach, con-
textualizing the historical origin of Tantra as ‘an  orthogenic development out 
of prior mainstream (but not necessarily elite) tra ditions, that nonetheless also 
drew on both foreign (adstratal) and popular (subst ratal) sources’. In his recent 
comparative discussion of sorcery across Eurasia, White (2021 : 83) argues 
that to investigate the demonology that forms the ‘ foundation upon which all 
of the magnificent tantric systems and pantheons th at Hindu Tantra specialists 
study are grounded’, substratal (e.g. Vedic and Āyurvedic, as well as ‘popular’ 
yakṣa and nāga cults), adstratal (e.g. Iranian, Chinese, European ), and even 
superstratal (e.g. Indo-  European) traditions have to be taken into account, 
especially when dealing with the issue of origins and influences.
Besides acknowledging the intellectual parameters of this problem, many lead-
ing scholars of Tantra—with some notable exceptions—have tended to steer clear 
of undertaking a systematic investigation of the issue of origins.6 This is under-
standable, given the perceived lack of evidence going back to the period before 
the earliest extant written sources. Yet, to write histories of Tantric traditions on 
the basis of textual sources alone does not eliminate the problem that these 
sources arguably reflected the views of a small (literate) fraction of the total 
population of their time, which is thus reduced to a passive recipient of ideas 
elaborated by the Brahmanical minority, and is de facto  denied agency by assum-
ing that their arguably distinct religious culture had no influence on the elite 
stream (Davidson 2017; Slouber, Chapter 3 in this volume). Furthermore, one has 
to acknowledge the difficulty of bridging the divide between eminently prescrip-
tive texts and underlying social realities, even when trying to reconstruct the latter 
in the light of the former or, more dangerously, vice versa (for example, when 
trying to understand ancient sources in the light of modern practices).
Against the background of these (perhaps unsurmount able) theoretical and 
disciplinary challenges, this volume reflects a preli minary attempt to fulfil 
urgent desiderata in the field of Tantric studies. The first desideratum is the gap 
in the historical modelling of Tantra—namely, an absence of a sophisticated treat -
ment of prior behaviours, practices, and attitudes that contributed to its historical 
formation but were not part of Tantric lineages and  did not engage many of the 
signature elements of mature Tantra (on which see Davidson 2017 and Chapters 1  
and 2 of this volume).

--- [Page 18] ---
Introduction 5
The second desideratum is the interface between the Sanskritic elite and the 
‘folk’, the ‘magical’, the ‘shamanic’—all contested terms and concepts,7 which 
cannot nonetheless be either ignored, dismissed as non- existent figments of the 
distorting lenses of modern scholarship, or replaced by the broad category of 
‘vernacular’. Since traces of these phenomena can be found, often intertwined 
with Tantric elements, in ritual practices, myths, folk and oral traditions, festivals, 
as well as visual and performative ritual arts across Monsoon Asia,8 there is a 
need to revisit the intellectual and historically fallacious divide between ‘cosmo-
politan Sanskritic’ and ‘vernacular local’. This divide has not only contributed to 
generating and immortalizing such constructed notions of aboriginality as the 
ādivāsis in India and the pribumi s in Malaysia (both of which, perhaps not coin-
cidentally, are modern Sanskritic neologisms), but has also obscured the continu-
ities and shared historical genealogies of the various strands of what Urban (2003: 
275) calls a powerful and widespread ‘non- Sanskritic, lower- class, and nonintel-
lectual […] current of nonelite Tantric practice—what we may call low- brow, 
folk, or vernacular Tantra—that has probably always proliferated on the danger-
ous margins of mainstream Hindu and Buddhist traditions’. Attempting to link 
together seemingly disconnected actors, geographies, and discourses, one could 
comparatively study such disparate instantiations of living Tantric (or Tantra- 
influenced) vernacular traditions as the Bauls and Sahajiy ās of Bengal, the 
Tantric- shamanic healers of Nepal and the Western Himalayas and their posses-
sion cults, the South Asian Aghor īs, the Balian sorcerers of Bali, and the Weikj ās 
of Myanmar, as being historically related to, or influenced by, translocal Tantric 
discourses and bodies of textual as well as non- textual knowledge and practices. 
This comparative investigation of categories that have too often been perceived as 
distinct—namely, Tantra (conceived of as inherently high- cultural, Sanskritic, 
and cosmopolitan) and vernacular religions (conceived of as inherently low- 
cultural, local, and embedded)—recognizes that, as noted by Shin (2018: 30), 
Tantric traditions ‘have never been a singular or static … but multiple, diachronic 
and dynamic processes which have proceeded in many different directions 
according to sects, localities and periods’, and were characterized by a typically 
‘creole’ element. This approach may allow us to precisely describe local trajecto-
ries and specificities and, at the same time, transcend the uniquely localist 
approach from which these agents have often been studied. In so doing, it will lay 
the foundations for future studies elaborating a common framework of under-
standing for phenomena that have overlapping traits, shared social milieus, and 
perhaps even common historical roots, and thereby achieve a truly global appre-
ciation of Tantra.
The third desideratum, which forms a corollary to t he previous two, is the 
extension of the geographical parameters of Tantra,  inasmuch as it constitutes 
an eminently translocal and cross-  cultural phenomenon, to outside of the 
boundaries of the Indian subcontinent. While region s that have been regarded 
as historically, ethnically, and linguistically ‘ma rginal’ with respect to the 
Sanskritic/Brahmanical world order, such as Madhya Pradesh and Odisha, 
Assam, Tamil Nadu, and Nepal, have been also percei ved as either cradles or 
strongholds of Tantra, regions like mainland and in sular Southeast Asia have 

--- [Page 19] ---
6 Andrea Acri
too often been glossed over in wider-  ranging studies on Tantra, or regarded as 
passive peripheries at best.9 Therefore, attempting to transcend the constructed 
boundaries of both nation-  states and post-  World War II area studies paradigm, 
the volume takes as its geographical theatre the va st yet historically interlinked 
socio-  geographical construct of Monsoon Asia, a large pa rt of which coincides 
with the transnational, semi-  coherent cultural formation referred to as the 
‘Indic World’.
With a chronological frame going from the mediaeval  Indic period up to the 
present, a wide geographical framework, and through  the dialogue between the 
various disciplines of philology, ethnography, art h istory, and religious stud -
ies, the collective body of work included in the vo lume intends to make an 
innovative contribution to the field of Tantric stu dies by presenting a coherent 
enquiry on the cross-   and trans-  cultural dialectic between Tantra and various 
intersecting phenomena associated with vernacular r eligions across history 
and geography. In so doing, it sheds light on pract ices and practitioners that 
have been frequently alienated in the ‘orthodox’ or ‘elitist’ discourse of main -
stream Indic religions and equally overlooked by mo dern scholarship. (In this 
sense, the ‘margins’ invoked in the subtitle of thi s volume are to be intended 
in terms of social agents and milieus, geographical  regions, and knowledge 
and practice).
Summaries of the chapters
The first three chapters set the tone for the intel lectual agenda of the volume by 
investigating textual and historical evidence that brings a fresh perspective to our 
current appreciation of the origin and development of Tantric traditions in the 
Indian subcontinent, in particular by unpacking the  relationship between Tantric 
texts and social milieus that were illiterate or wh ose records were not transmitted 
through the enduring institutions eventually emergi ng in the early mediaeval 
period. Chapter 1, ‘More Pre-  Tantric Sources of Tantrism: Skulls and Skull-  Cups’, 
by Ronald M. Davidson continues the author’s previo us line of exploration 
(Davidson 2017) investigating the debt Tantric trad itions owe to magical groups 
operating outside of Tantric lineages. For instance , Tantra is often identified with 
the use or ingestion of polluted materials, whether  the employment of bones in 
various manners, the ingestion of sacraments ( samaya ), or the wearing of distinc -
tive garments. Some scholars have argued that ritua lized statements about these 
materials are specifically posed to contradict the admonitions in the Dharma śāstras 
for psychological or spiritual purposes, while othe rs have maintained that they 
have come from one tradition and were borrowed by t he others. However, evidence 
exists for earlier precedent in the use of polluted or inauspicious materials in North 
India that has seldom been factored into discussions of sectarian lineage formation 
in the early mediaeval era. Against this background, the chapter discusses the ori -
gins of the employment of a skull ( kapāla) in Tantric traditions, especially that of 
the ‘skull bearers’ or K āpālikas. It presents the received understanding, exam ines 
its complications, and presents evidence not so far  considered. The basic argument 
is that the use of skull-  cups and bones for both religious and non-  religious 

--- [Page 20] ---
Introduction 7
purposes is much more widely spread than appreciate d and for some of its early 
history was intimately connected with the (possibly pre-  Tantric) worship of the 
piśāca demons in India, from whom Śaivas and others appear to have appropriated 
that behaviour.
Chapter 2, ‘Charnel Ground Items, Śmāśānikas, and the Question of the 
Magical Substratum of the Early Tantras’, by Aleksandra Wenta and Andrea Acri 
builds on, and complements, the analysis outlined in the previous chapter by 
exploring further attestations of ‘skull- magic’ in the early Tantras. Scholars have 
usually traced these elements back to the marginal milieus of Śaiva Kāpālika 
ascetics, who were known for their antinomian rituals that heavily relied upon 
objects procured from the cremation ground, and who were stereotypically por-
trayed through their five- insignia attire ( pañcamudrā); however, the chapter 
argues that in the description of the ‘wrathful magic rituals’ ( abhicāra) attested in 
the early Śaiva and Buddhist Tantras, we find depictions of a different type of 
‘wild’ practitioner that does not entirely conform to the type of K āpālika ascetic 
but rather points to a more archaic, pre- Tantric magical substratum dealing with 
exorcism of demons and skull- magic that could have been subsequently inte-
grated into the textual corpora of Tantric traditions. The authors’ underlying 
hypothesis is that the manipulation of skulls, corpses, and animal parts for magi-
cal purposes, known in non- Tantric texts as śmāśānikakarma s, may point to a 
group of cremation ground specialists already in existence prior to the historical 
emergence and textual codification of Tantric traditions.
Chapter 3 , ‘Shamans and Bh ūta Tāntrikas: A Shared Genealogy?’, by Michael 
Slouber investigates the question as to whether a relationship might exist between 
the beliefs and practices of the Bh ūta Tantra specialist ( bhūtatāntrika ) and the 
‘shamans’ of India’s tribal communities who have lo ng specialized in similar 
ritual practices, such as healing of illnesses perce ived to be caused by spirits. 
Such healing is often accomplished through ‘trance w ork’ and possession, in 
which the trained practitioner enters altered states  of consciousness at will and 
communicates with a spirit being. The chapter first evaluat es the major points of 
debate in the long-  contested etymology of the word ‘shaman’, touches on sha -
manism in prehistory, and engages with debates in a nthropology and religious 
studies about the appropriateness of applying the te rm ‘shaman’ to non-  Siberian 
religious specialists. It then presents present rec ent scholarship on the origins of 
Tantric traditions in India that has tended to empha size the influence of figures 
from non-  elite communities, including numerous tribal groups in the Indian sub -
continent and Monsoon Asia more broadly. Finally, i t presents initial findings on 
the probable influence of shamanic traditions of Ind ia’s tribal peoples on the 
Bhūta Tantras.
The next three chapters move forward through the chronological span of our 
scholarly investigation by accompanying us, so to speak, from the premodern to 
the modern and contemporary periods. In doing so, they focus on regional expres-
sions of Tantric traditions in the Indian subcontinent (Central- Eastern India, 
Assam, and South India, respectively) to unravel the problem of the interplay 
between text- based Tantric lore and vernacular cults and practices, as well as the 
category of ‘magic’. Chapter 4, ‘Female Ga ṇeśa or Independent Deity? Tracing 

--- [Page 21] ---
8 Andrea Acri
the Background of the Elephant- Faced Goddess in Mediaeval Śaiva Tantric 
Traditions’, by Chiara Policardi investigates the Indian elephant- faced female 
deity known as Vin āyakī, Gaṇeśvarī, Gajānanā, and numerous other epithets. 
Although she is usually uncritically identified with Ga ṇeśa’s female form, this 
little- studied figure very early on appears as an independent, if minor, divinity in 
her own right. Particularly significant appear to be the connections with the god-
dess Jyeṣṭhā or Alakṣmī, who, in some texts, is described as elephant- faced and 
as riding a donkey, and who traditionally represents misfortune and disease. After 
the 8th century, the elephant- faced goddess sometimes features as one of the 
Eight Mothers and is often included in groups of yoginīs in both Vidy āpīṭha 
(7th–8th century) and Kaula (post- 10th century) scriptures. The yoginīs’ panthe-
ons of these textual traditions find correspondence, to some extent, in various 
extant pre- 11th- century yoginī temples, such as Hirapur in Odisha and Bheraghat 
in Madhya Pradesh. Furthermore, various sculptural collections of yoginīs also 
include such a figure. Through an analysis of the relevant textual and icono-
graphic evidence, the author sheds light on the genesis of this elephant- faced 
female figure and on its role and significance in the thought- world of mediaeval 
Śaiva Tantric traditions, providing insights into the process that led to the inter-
pretation of the figure as the female form of Ga ṇeśa and highlighting dynamics of 
interrelation between Tantric traditions and marginal, non- Tantric traditions and 
regional cults.
Chapter 5 , ‘Crossing the Boundaries of Sex, Blood, and Magic  in the Tantric 
Cult of K āmākhyā’ by Paolo E. Rosati explores the connection betwee n Tantra 
and the magic tradition of N īlācala in Assam in order to explain the encounter 
between Brahmanism and magic. The chapter first dis cusses the doctrinal, ritual, 
and mythical background of the cult of the Goddess Kāmākhyā, whose roots go 
back to the esoteric sexual path of Kaula Tantra pra xis. Having traced the history 
to this path, which around the 10th century switche d from blood sacrifice to a 
mystic-  erotic ritual centred on the yonipūjā (worship of the vulva), homologizing 
blood offerings and erotic rituals focusing on the human body as a source of sex -
ual fluids necessary to obtain such supernatural accomplishments ( siddhi ), the 
chapter then examines the concept of siddhi  as a ‘magical power’ that can be 
acquired only by those belonging to the kula (clan), the only ones who know the 
yoni’s secret (the restricted transmission of siddhi s over kula’s generations being 
a complement to the ideology of blood sacrifice). Finally, it considers the inter -
section of indigenous traditions and Brahmanical ritual praxis in Assam as the 
source of the peculiar cult of the yoni of Kāmākhyā. From this discussion,  Assamese 
Tantra emerges as a religious phenomenon that crosse s socio-  cultural boundaries 
and encompasses apparently irreconcilable categories.
Chapter 6, ‘“Let us Now Invoke the Three Celestial Lights of Fire, Sun and 
Moon into Ourselves”: Magic or Everyday Practice? Revising Existentiality for 
an Emic Understanding of Śrīvidyā’, by Monika Hirmer tries to depart from the 
positivistic existential outlook cast by Western scholarship on the ‘magical’ ritu-
als carried out by South Indian practitioners of the Goddess Śrīvidyā to cultivate 
oneness with the goddess Tripurasundar ī. Hirmer explores the ontological coor-
dinates that accommodate this oneness cogently and unambiguously, and 

--- [Page 22] ---
Introduction 9
proposes a radical re- evaluation of the concept of ‘beingness’ as conceived by a 
modern scientific framework, revealing an emic understanding where bodies 
expanding into subtle realms and actions partaking in cosmic designs respond to 
ontological coordinates informed by transcendence. The ontological dislocation 
she advocates, where identities and practices deviating from a positivistic frame-
work need no longer be confined to the domain of ‘magic’ but can be appreciated 
in their ontological primacy and epistemic legitimacy, invites novel modes of 
approaching the Śrīvidyā tradition and Tantric traditions generally.
The last three chapters of the volume continue the enquiry along the lines 
developed in Chapters 4  to 6 by extending the geographical focus to the outlying 
regions of the Indian subcontinent, more specifical ly Nepal and insular and 
mainland Southeast Asia, and by focusing on the dis ciplinary perspective of 
ethnography of contemporary societies. Chapter 7, ‘Narrative Folklore of Khyāḥ 
from Tantra to Popular Beliefs: Supernatural Experi ences at the Margins among 
Newar Communities in the Kathmandu Valley’ by Fabio  Armand reveals the rich 
narrative folklore of the Khyāk, a supernatural being that haunts the imaginaries 
of the Newars, a Tibeto-  Burman ethnic group living in the Kathmandu Valley  in 
Nepal. The author strolls on the trails of this sup ernatural being in order to access 
a complex belief system that provides a framework f or understanding some 
Tantric ritual practices pertaining to both Hindu a nd Buddhist traditions. He 
presents two different dimensions of Newar culture through which both etic and 
emic observers can comprehend the nature of Khyāḥs: a Tantric dimension, 
where these beings are direct emanations of the ene rgy produced by the female 
goddesses known as Aṣṭamātṛkās and the dimension of popular beliefs, which 
view these beings as born from the divine union between N āsaḥdyaḥ, the god of 
music and dance, and a human girl. Providing a morphology of the Khyāḥs from 
a taxonomic perspective on the basis of ethnographic work and discussing the 
divine origins of this being through an analysis of  narratives, Armand examines 
an important pre-  pubertal feminine initiation, the bārhā tayegu  ( n e p .  gufā 
basne ), where the Khyāk becomes a symbolic deflowering agent. Focusing on 
the dynamics of the ritual and its possible failure s, the discussion highlights a 
borderline situation: if a girl dies during the ceremony, her ātman  will turn into 
one of the forms of Khyāk and will continue haunting the house where she 
passed away. These circumstances introduce a Tantric-  shamanic perspective 
concerning the categorization of the various forms of Khyāk and the specific 
rituals to pacify them.
Chapter 8, ‘Magical Tantra in Bengal, Bali, and Java: From Piśāca Tāntrika s 
to Balian s and Dukun s’ by June McDaniel investigates how magical Tantra  is 
understood in three distinct Asian regions, mainly in the light of ethnographic 
data drawn from interviews with practitioners. Havi ng introduced the term 
‘magic’ and its disputed use in scholarship, McDaniel examines the processes 
of magical transformation, the emic understanding o f the supernatural, and the 
roles of deity, gender, and ritual empowerment in t he traditions forming the 
subject of the chapter. She shows how magical pract ices can be incorporated 
into both ‘elite’ and ‘folk’ Tantric systems in bot h India and Indonesia, and that 
magical concepts can cross Muslim and Hindu lines m ore easily than many 

--- [Page 23] ---
10 Andrea Acri
other forms of ritual by escaping the critical view  of theologians from both 
traditions. By presenting some Asian models and their understandings of magi -
cal practice and ritual, McDaniel’s study brings ne w material to the study of 
sorcery and magic, which has often focused upon the Western magical tradi -
tion, and also highlights the potential of comparat ive study of the hitherto 
little-  documented traditions of Tantric magic in contempo rary South and 
Southeast Asia.
The final chapter, ‘Tantrism and the Weretiger Lore  of Burma, Thailand, and 
Cambodia’ by Francesco Brighenti explores tradition al beliefs about weretigers 
as physical shapeshifters found among, on the one hand, Austroasiatic-  speaking 
tribal groups inhabiting the Shan Plateau, the Uppe r Laotian highlands, and the 
Annamite Cordillera, as well as Tibeto-  Burman-  speaking ethnic groups of 
northern Myanmar, and, on the other, the Therav āda Buddhist societies settled 
in the river valleys and alluvial plains of Myanmar , Thailand, and Cambodia, 
where similar weretiger beliefs form a little-  studied aspect of the prevalent 
magical lore. Noting that oral traditions regarding human-  to- tiger transforma -
tion in the last three countries have clear links with Tantric black magic, pos -
sibly as a result of the early prevalence of Mah āyāna- cum-  Tantric Buddhism 
(and, as far as the Khmer Empire is concerned, of T antric Śaivism too) in those 
countries during the mediaeval period, and their la ter continuation as ‘Tantric 
Theravāda’ complexes, Brighenti assesses the interplay of indigenous 
(Austroasiatic, Tibeto-  Burman, Tai) and South Asia-  derived (Tantric) cultural 
traditions that shaped the weretiger lore of lowlan d mainland Southeast Asian 
societies.
Notes
 1 Monsoon Asia encompasses South Asia, Southeast Asia, and much of East Asia as its 
cores and includes the greater Himalayan region, Central Asia, and Japan as its edges. 
For a (re)conceptualization of this region, see the introduction in Acri, Blench, and 
Landmann (2017), and Acri (forthcoming).
 2 To give an idea of the cross- cultural potential of the application of a broader definition 
of ‘Tantra’ to disparate socio- cultural contexts across place and time, we may cite the 
list of seven features individuated by Crosby (on the basis of earlier studies by François 
Bizot) to define the Pali- dominated Buddhist tradition of modern Thailand and 
Myanmar as ‘Tantric Therav āda’—viz., (1) ritual creation of a Buddha within one’s 
own body; (2) the use of sacred language for the identification of microcosm and 
macrocosm; (3) sacred language as the creative principle (or the arising of the Dhamma 
from the Pali syllabary); (4) a system of analogic substitution/homologization; (5) ‘[e]
soteric interpretations of words, objects and myths that otherwise have a standard 
exoteric meaning or purpose in Therav āda Buddhism’; (6) necessity of initiation; and 
(7) the application of the six previously outlined methods to pursue mundane and 
supramundane goals (Crosby 2013: 141–142). Cf. also the application by Stephen 
(2005: 85–93) of 18 distinguishing features of Indian Tantra elaborated by Teun 
Goudriaan to premodern and modern Balinese religion.
 3 See Davidson 2002 and, on the relationship between the deities and ritual syntax of the 
Bhūta Tantras and G āruḍa Tantras and shamanic traditions of Austroasiatic communi-
ties in the Indian subcontinent, Chapter 3 by Slouber in this volume; on the profound 
influence exerted by Bh ūta Tantras and G āruḍa Tantras on Āyurvedic medicine, see 

--- [Page 24] ---
Introduction 11
Slouber 2016; on the transformation of the G āruḍatantric goddess Tvarit ā into the 
royal goddess of Nepal, see Slouber 2021. For an argument in favour of the appropria-
tion of autochthonous goddesses by Brahmanism, see Shin 2011. For the appropriation 
of demonological elements (either substratal or astratal), see White 2021. On the issue 
of possession and practices broadly referable to a shamanic typology in the Mar āṭhī 
cultural area, see Rigopoulos 1999.
 4 For instance, many Buddhist J ātakas mention, often in a negative light, non- Buddhist 
offerings of meat, fish, blood, and alcohol to tree spirits ( yakkha s) possessing those 
who interact with them, which are remindful of the offerings to fierce deities found in 
later Tantric texts (see Cowell 1896, J ātakas 50, 113, 347; DeCaroli 2004: 24–25). 
Orthodox Brahmanical sources perceive tree shrines ( caityavṛkṣa) devoted to the cult 
of spirit- deities in a similarly negative light, prescribing expiatory atonement for 
Brahmins who enter in contact with them (along with funeral pyres and a caṇḍāla: see 
Baudhāyana Dharmas ūtra 1.5.9.5). For a discussion of a ‘magical substratum’ or 
matrix shared by Sanskrit texts across genres and time- periods, see Chapter 2 by 
Wenta and Acri in this volume.
 5 For a discussion of the two paradigms, see Acri (2017).
 6 The exceptions being Davidson (2002), Samuel (2008, 2011), Parpola (2015), Acri 
(2017), White (2021) (emphasizing circulatory dynamics but not steering entirely clear 
of the issue of origin), among others. For a (often cherry- picking and over- simplifying) 
critique of the ‘tribal hypothesis’ elaborated by Davidson, and a programmatic dis-
missal of the very possibility of looking for the origins of Tantra, see Wedemeyer 
(2013).
 7 For recent critiques of the categories of magic and shamanism, respectively, see Otto 
(2013) and Pharo (2011). More discussions of these terms and their histories and ref-
erents may be found in Chapters 2, 3, 6, and 8 of this volume. On shamanism and 
Tantra in the Himalayas, see Müller- Ebeling, Rätsch, and Shahi (2002).
 8 For a survey and discussion (including previous literature) on the overlap between 
spirit- possession/-mediumship and Tantric traditions in the masked dances of South 
India, Odisha, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Tibet, and Bali, see Samuel (2008: 315–322).
 9 For an approach aiming at correcting this imbalance, see Acri (2016) and Acri and 
Sharrock (2022).