--- [Page 1] ---
HAL Id: hal-01958103
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01958103
Submitted on 17 Dec 2018
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
The Problem of the Ancient Name Java and the Role of
Satyavarman in Southeast Asian International Relations
Around the Turn of the Ninth Century CE
Arlo Griffiths
To cite this version:
Arlo Griffiths. The Problem of the Ancient Name Java and the Role of Satyavarman in South-
east Asian International Relations Around the Turn of the Ninth Century CE. Archipel, Association
Archipel/Éditions de la FMSH, 2013, 85 (1), pp.43-81. ฀10.3406/arch.2013.4384฀. ฀hal-01958103฀

--- [Page 2] ---
Archipel
The Problem of the Ancient Name Java and the Role of
Satyavarman in Southeast Asian International Relations Around
the Turn of the Ninth Century CE
Arlo Griffiths
Citer ce document / Cite this document :
Griffiths Arlo. The Problem of the Ancient Name Java and the Role of Satyavarman in Southeast Asian International
Relations Around the Turn of the Ninth Century CE. In: Archipel, volume 85, 2013. pp. 43-81 ;
doi : https://doi.org/10.3406/arch.2013.4384
https://www.persee.fr/doc/arch_0044-8613_2013_num_85_1_4384
Fichier pdf généré le 31/08/2018


--- [Page 3] ---
Abstract
One of the most familiar narratives of ancient Southeast Asian history is the account of how
Cambodian king Jayavarman II liberated his country from Javā, and consequently declared himself
emperor in the year 802 CE. These events and this year are widely considered to represent the
beginning of the Angkorian “ empire”. Recent years have seen several new scholarly contributions
questioning parts of this narrative. One issue is the very historicity of the narrative elements about
Jayavarman II, another topic of debate is the identity of Javā in the narratives related to
Jayavarman II, and, more generally, in the history of Southeast Asia. After revealing the very weak
foundations of certain recent attempts to argue that references to Javā in sources of the Southeast
Asian mainland denoted a place on the continent or the Malay peninsula, this paper argues that
the Khmer inscriptions refer to the island of Java when they use the term Javā. The paper shows,
furthermore, that narratives involving Javā do not exclusively concern Jayavarman II, but that a
certain Satyavarman is in some sources attributed a role very similar to that of the much more
famous king Jayavarman II. It is proposed that this Satyavarman may well have been the king of
that name who ruled in southern Campā around 800 CE, and hence that the epigraphical record of
Satyavarman in Campā is likely to hold important clues not only for the history of Campā itself, but
equally for international political relations between the Khmer, Cam and Javanese polities in the
late 8th and early 9th century of our era.
Résumé
Le problème de l’ancien nom Java et du rôle de Satyavarman dans les relations internationales
sud-est asiatiques vers le tournant du IXe siècle EC.
L’un des récits les plus connus de l’histoire ancienne de l’Asie du Sud-Est est celui racontant
comment le roi Jayavarman II libére son pays de Javā et, par voie de conséquence, se proclame
lui-même empereur en 802 EC. Ces événements et cette année sont généralement considérés
comme représentant le début de «l’empire angkorien » . Des contributions savantes parues ces
dernières années ont remis en cause des éléments de ce récit. L’une des questions est celle de
l’historicité des éléments narratifs concernant Jayavarman II, un autre élément du débat étant
l’identité de Javā dans ces récits liés à Jayavarman II, et plus généralement dans l’histoire de
l’Asie du Sud-Est. Après avoir mis en avant les fondations très fragiles de certaines tentatives
récentes cherchant à démontrer que le Javā dans les sources d’Asie du Sud-Est continentale
renvoie à un lieu sur le continent ou en péninsule malaise, cet article avance que les inscriptions
khmères réfèrent à l’île de Java lorsqu’elles usent du terme Javā. Cet article montre, de plus, que
les récits impliquant Javā ne concernent pas exclusivement Jayavarman II, mais que dans
certaines sources un certain Satyavarman se voit attribuer un rôle très similaire à celui du roi
beaucoup plus célèbre Jayavarman II. Nous proposons ici que ce Satyavarman pourrait bien être
le roi du même nom ayant régné au Campā méridional vers 800 EC, et qu’ainsi les données
épigraphiques relatives à Satyavarman au Campā contiennent vraisemblablement des indices
importants, non seulement à propos de l’histoire du Campā lui-même, mais également à propos
des relations politiques internationales entre les entités politiques khmère, cam et javanaise à la
fin du VIIIe siècle et au début du IXe siècle de notre ère.


--- [Page 4] ---
ArloGriffiths *
The Problem of the Ancient Name Java and the Role of
Satyavarman in Southeast Asian International Relations
Around the Turn of the Ninth Century Ce
« Tout revient donc en fin de compte
à une question de méthode. »
Louis-Charles Damais (1964 : 94)
Introduction
One of the most familiar episodes of ancient Southe ast Asian history is
without doubt the account of how Cambodian king Jayavarman II returned
from Javā, in order to liberate his country from it founded the “cult of the
Devarāja”, and consequently declared himself empero r (cakravartin ) on
Mount Mahendra in the year 724 Śaka, or 802 Ce. These events and this year
are widely considered to represent the beginning of the Angkorian “empire”.
Recent years have seen several new scholarly contributions questioning parts
of this account.
One issue is the very historicity of the narrative elements about
Jayavarman II, including those that involve Javā. I t has been argued — to
my mind persuasively — that there is every reason t o read the sources
recounting them as what they are: retrospective acc ounts of events in the
past, whose historical veracity cannot be taken for granted, and which may
reveal more about the period during which they were written than about the
past they pretend to deal with.1
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013, pp. 43-81*I extend my thanks to Éric Bourdonneau, Dominic Goo dall, Christian Lammerts,
Amandine Lepoutre, Jan Wisseman Christie and Hiram Woodward for their aid during the
process of writing this essay; to Pierre Pichard for drawing the map.
1.This is argued most explicitly and exhaustively in a forthcoming paper of Michael
Vickery. Several of his earlier writings (e.g. 1992 , 2001) already foreshadow the idea that

--- [Page 5] ---
Another topic of debate is the identity of Javā in s uch retrospective
accounts, and, more generally, in the history of So utheast Asia. The
contributions on this topic tend to be marked by a focus on particular groups
of sources with their own particular consequences f or the conclusions that
are drawn with regard to the identity (or identities) of the land (or lands) that
the Khmers in the 7ththrough 13thcenturies of our era knew as Javā. Two
studies were contributed by scholars with a primary interest and competence
in comparative-historical linguistics, seeking to a pply their expertise to
problems of history (Mahdi 2008, Ferlus 2010). Both appear to be founded
on the earnest conviction that it is possible, on t he basis of a linguistic
observation, to propose comprehensive solutions to intricate webs of
interrelated problems that have occupied historians for over a century. One
of them is among several contributions of scholars a rguing that Javā was
situated on the Southeast Asian mainland, and here we encounter the
unspoken assumption that it is sufficient to demonstrate that a toponym Javā
has been in use in particular places or a particula r place on the Southeast
Asian mainland at some point in history, to conclude that that particular J avā
was meant in the Khmer inscriptions (all of them), and not the island of Java.
Indeed, more generally, we encounter time and again  a flagrant failure to
comply with fundamental requirements of historiographic method, such as a
weighing of evidence based on a consideration of th e epistemological
hierarchy of sources, and giving account of all relevant sources of evidence. 2
The plethora of tendentious arguments, based on par tial presentations or
simply incomplete awareness of the relevant evidenc e, is in need of a
corrective, for we already see colleagues giving silent approval to one or the
other of these arguments, or declining to express a ny judgment on the
relative persuasiveness of different proposals on t he identity of Javā.3
Although the specialization of areal and disciplinary expertise has advanced
so much that it is no longer possible for any singl e scholar honestly to
pretend to have digested all of the relevant primary and secondary sources, I
have made an effort to read widely, and the presentation of my findings on
the problem of the ancient name Java forms the bulk of this paper.44 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013this narrative is an 11th-century legend. Vickery cites the important observ ation of George
Cœdès (1937–66, vol. VII, p. 129): « Pour l’épigrap hie angkorienne qui commence en fait
avec le règne d’Indravarman en 877, ceux de Jayavarman II et de son fils dont on n’a pas
encore trouvé d’inscription constituent une époque semi-légendaire, à laquelle les grandes
familles religieuses font remonter l’origine de leu r sacerdoce, et les propriétaires de biens
fonciers l’origine de leurs titres de propriétés ». See now also Bourdonneau (2011a: 100–101
with the references in n. 18) and (2011b: 1345, 1359).
2.For a nuanced discussion of the problem of hierarchization of sources in early Southeas t
Asian history, particularly the history of ancient Cambodia, I refer to Bourdonneau (2003).
3.See e.g. Laffan (2009: 20–28); Sharrock (2009: 218); Woodward (2011: 93 and 94).

--- [Page 6] ---
The Narratives of Jayavarman II and Related Account s of the Khmer Past
As background to the discussion that will follow, I must first present the two
epigraphical passages which recount Jayavarman’s ac tions with regard to
Javā, immediately adding to them two other narrativ e passages which are
clearly related to each other and together related to the Javā narrative.
Inscription of Sdok Kak Thom: K. 235, face C, lines 61–62 and lines 69–74 4
man vraḥ pāda parameśvara mok ’aṃvi javā pi kuruṅ n i ’nau nagara indrapura. steṅ ’añ
śivakaivalya ta ’ji prājñā jā guru jā rājapurohita ta vraḥ pāda parameśvara. man vraḥ pāda
parameśvara thleṅ mok ’aṃvi ’indrapura steṅ ’añ śiv akaivalya mok nu vraḥ kandvāra homa
nā vraḥ rājakāryya […] man vraḥ pāda parameśvara da u kuruṅ ni ’āy mahendraparvvata.
steṅ ’añ śivakaivalya dau ’aṅgvay ta nagara noḥ ’uk k paṃre ta vraḥ pāda parameśvara rūva
noḥh ’nau man vrāhmaṇa jmaḥ hiraṇyadāma prājñā sidd hividyā mok ’aṃvi janapada. pi
vraḥ pāda parameśvara ’añjeñ thve vidhi leha leṅ ka ṃ pi kamvujadeśa neḥ ’āyatta ta javā
ley. leṅ ’āc ti kamrateṅ phdai karoṃ mvāy guḥ ta jā  cakravartti. vrāhmaṇa noḥ thve vidhi
toy vraḥ toy vraḥ vināśikha. pratiṣṭhā kamrateṅ jag at ta rāja.
‘When H.M. Parameśvara (i.e. Jayavarman II) 5came from Java to rule and hold sway in
the royal city of Indrapura, the steṅ ’añ Śivakaivalya, the learned patriarch, served as
spiritual preceptor. When H.M. Parameśvara rose up and came from Indrapura, the steṅ
’añŚivakaivalya came as member of the holy College of Sacrifices assigned to the holy
Royal Service. […] When H.M. Parameśvara went forth  to rule and hold sway in
Mahendraparvata, the steṅ ’añ Śivakaivalya went [and] settled in that royal city as well,
continuing to serve H.M. Parameśvara as before. Whe n the brāhmaṇa named
Hiraṇyadāman, who was learned in knowledge of siddhi , came from Janapada — because
H.M. Parameśvara had invited [him] to perform a subl ime rite which would let this
Kamvujadeśa not be subject to Java any longer [and] would let and allow only one H igh
Lord of the earth to serve as cakravartin , — that brāhmaṇa performed a rite according to
the Vināśikha [and] set up the Sovereign High Lord of the World (i.e. the Devarāja of the
Sanskrit text).’ 6
Inscription of Vat Samroṅ: K. 956, lines 14–17
man vraḥ pāda stac dau parameśvara stac ’āy r̥dval pandval ta mratāñ śrī prathivinarendra
pre thve kālyanasiddhi leṅ vvaṃ ’aṃpān vraḥ kaṃvujad eśa pi javā cāp ley ’oy vraḥ
dākṣinā bhūmi sratāc r̥dval nu sarvvadravya ’val ta mratāñ śrī prathivinarendrathe Problem of the Ancient Name Java 45
Archipel 85, Paris, 20134.The “K.” and “C .” numbers c ited in this pap er refer to  the e FeO inventories of the
inscrip tions of Ca mbodia an d those of C ampā, o n which, see Cœ dès 193 7–66, vol. V III;
Cœdès, «  Liste gén érale des in scrip tions du Ch ampa et du C ambodg e » in C œdès &
Parmentier 1 923, pp . 1–37; Ge rschheim er 200 3–04 ; and  Griffiths et al. 201 2a. For
Indonesian inscriptions, I follow  in m ost cases the system  of nom enclature in troduced  by L.-
Ch. Damais (see D amais 195 2 and Da mais 1970 : 37– 54). S ince all epigra phical sources
draw n upon here use the Śaka era, I fav or in principle the use of this era w hen citing dates;
readers not com fortable with th is reckon ing may me ntally add 7 8 to each Śaka-year to
approxim ate the corresponding year of the com mon era. A s much a s possible, I cite texts of
inscrip tions based on m y ow n readings, app lying a uniform  system  of transliteration to all
epigraphical corpora treated here, except that (only in the c ase of Old Javanese texts) the sign
° is used  to indicate in depend ent ( akṣa ra) vowels, whe reas the glottal stop of M on and
Khmer, expressed by  the indepe ndent vow el signs, is m arked w ith ’. M y use of the sig n
·indicates virāma /paten .
5.On this use of a po sthum ous nam e, see Jacq ues (2001).
6.Text an d translation fo llow almost w ithou t modificatio n those offered  by Sak-Humphry &
Jenner (2005 : 96–10 4).

--- [Page 7] ---
‘When his majesty who had gone to Parameśvara (i.e.  Jayavarman II) was pleased to
reside at R̥dval, he deputed Mratāñ Śrī P r̥thivīnarendra to order to carry out an auspicious
stratagem ( kalyāṇasiddhi ) to end Java’s continuing to hold the sacred Kamvujadeśa, he
gave as holy fee the fields of Sratāc and R̥dval, with all their property, to Mratāñ Śrī
Pr̥thivīnarendra.’ 7
The first of these passages has been known to scholarship for more than a
century and forms the basis of the Javā narrative associated with Jayavarman
II found in all works on ancient Southeast Asian history. 8The second was
published about fifty years ago, and despite obvious differences its account
was not at that time felt to be in sufficient disagreement with tha t of the first
to require revision of the Javā narrative. It is only due to the discovery in the
1980s of an important bilingual Sanskrit/Khmer inscription, of 988 Śaka or
thereabouts, that important new light can and must now be cast on the
accounts contained in K. 235 and K. 956. The inscrip tion in question,
K. 1158, was recovered from Sab Bak in Nakhon Ratcha sima province,
Thailand, but it has been suggested that it is not quite certain that thi s is also
where the inscription was originally erected. 9even before it was published
by Chirapat Prapandavidya (1990), it attracted inte rest from scholars, and
publications discussing its significance in greater  or lesser details have
multiplied since then. 10
Part of the interest of this inscription, and of the question where it might
originally have been erected, lies in the fact that  it mentions in its Khmer
part a piece of historical information that is stri kingly reminiscent of an
event recorded in another inscription, K. 111, recovered rather far away from
Nakhon Ratchasima, namely at Vat Sithor, a site abo ut halfway between
Phnom Penh and Kompong Cham. This Vat Sithor inscri ption dates from
about a century earlier, from the reign of Jayavarman III that started in 890
Śaka, and states the following: 1146 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 20137.Text cited after Cœdès 1937–66, vol. VII, p. 130. T ranslation partly taken from Jenner
(2009b: 509).
8.See Cœdès & Dupont (1943–46: 57) : « L’inscription de Sdǒk Kăk Thoṃ a déjà été publiée
deux fois : Aymonier, dès 1901, en a résumé et trad uit partiellement la version khmère,
accompagnant ce travail d’une analyse de la paraphrase sanskrite due à A. Bart h. Louis Finot,
en 1915, a donné édition et traduction complètes des deux textes. »
9.Jacques wrote (2005: 24 n. 29): « la stèle, petite, peut avoir été apportée d’on ne s ait où au
Cambodge ». Vickery (forthcoming) affirms that there is no reason to be skeptical about the
provenance, and furnishes a reason to think the stela may originate in the area w here it was
found.
10.Cf., i.a., Ang Chouléan (1998: 119–120); Sundberg ( 2003: 178 n. 28); Skilling (2004:
157); Jacques (2005: 24); Woodward (2005: 146). Mic hael Vickery discusses it too in his
forthcoming paper, and Julia estève has discussed i t at some length in her unpublished
doctoral dissertation.
11.Vat Sithor Inscription (K. 111; Cœdès 1937–66, vol. VI, p. 195; after 890 Śaka), st. XLV
and XLIX.

--- [Page 8] ---
the Problem of the Ancient Name Java 47
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013AngkorLuang Prabang
Sukhothai
Phnom Kulen
MahendraparvataMy Son,
Oc EoPhan RangMartaban     
Sdok Kak ThomSab Bak ThatonPagan
Vat Samrong
Phnom BayangAngkor BoreiVat Phu
Nui Ba Thê
Merapi
PalembangMusiVat Sithor
Nakhon Si Thammarat
Kota KapurChaiyaVat Cakret
Merapi Gunung Wukir
Ratu BakaMajapahit
Singasari KediriS U M A T R A
BANGKA
J A V ALAMPUNGPandurangaKuthara
Nha Trang
Batang Hari
0 500 1000  kmN
map: Pierre Pichard

--- [Page 9] ---
śrīsatyavarmmaṇā bajrilokeśārccā daśādhikāḥ
sthāpitāḥ prāg girau bhagnāsanā yo tiṣṭhipat punaḥ ||
⏓⎼rmmapaṭṭane grāme svaparārthaprasiddhaye
⏓⏓dīn sthāpayām āsa navaṣaṇmaṅgale śaka ||
Glossing over a few problems of interpretation, 12I propose that these two
stanzas might mean:
‘He [Kīrtipaṇḍita, the subject of the inscription] re-installed the ten excel lent images of
Vajrilokeśa that had been installed formerly on the  mountain by Śrī Satyavarman, and
whose thrones had been broken.
In the settlement ..rmapaṭṭana he installed … etc. in the course of 869 Śaka, for the
realization of both his own benefit and that of others.’
It seems to have been Claude Jacques (1992: 3–4) who first pointed out that
this must be related to the events recorded in the inscription recovered from
Thailand, for there we read: 13
aṣṭāṣṭaraṇdhre sitasaptaśukre tapasyamāse sugatādikārccāḥ
teṅpāsnage bhāgyaviśeṣatīrthe sa vraḥdhanus sūrir atiṣṭhipad yaḥ ||
‘It was he, the learned Vraḥ Dhanus, who in 988 Śaka, on Friday the seventh of the bright
fortnight of the month Tapasya (= Phālguna), erected the images of the Buddha etc. on the
Teṅ Pās mountain, place of pilgrimage capable of yielding extraordinary fortune.’
ri vraḥ vuddhalokeśvara14ta praṃ pvānna ti kaṃsteṅ·  śrī satyavarma ta mān si ddhi
sthāpanā vreṅ·  le ’abhayagiri teṃ kaṃ pi javā ’ākrānta sruk·  khmera • vraḥ noḥ syaṅ ta
nu tvalla dau hoṅ·  • kamrateṅ ’añ·  ta guru dharaṇīndrapura jirṇoddharaṇa thve pi pravai
sthāpanā ’issa vraḥ noḥ viṅ ta tel·  noḥ syaṅ ta ’yat·  vighna • ri ’ācāryya vraḥ dhanu ta
śiṣya gi ta sthāpanā vraḥ neḥ ’āy ta ’aṣṭa ’aṣṭa nava ta gi rājya vraḥ pāda  kaṃmrateṅ·
kaṃtvan·  ’añ·  śrī ’udayādityavarmmadeva • 
‘As for the nine Buddhalokeśvaras, they were formerly established atop the Abhayagiri by
Śrī Satyavarman, who possessed supernatural power (siddhi), in order that Javā would not
attack the Khmer domain. Those deities had fallen t o pieces. K.A. the Guru of
Dharaṇīndrapura has organized repair. He has made e mbellishments. He has newly
installed all those deities. As before, those [deit ies] became free of obstacles. As for
Ācārya Vraḥ Dhanu, his pupil, he has established these deities in 988 [Śaka] duri ng the
reign of His Majesty of the matriline Śrī Udayādityavarmadeva.’
Let me sum up what we gather from the comparison of  these two
inscriptions. A certain Satyavarman is credited wit h the establishment of
Buddhist images on top of a mountain at an unspecified time. The Sab Bak48 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 201312.Mainly the number of images installed ( daśādhikāḥ can and has been interpreted to mean
‘more than ten’) and the identity of these images. Cœdès interpreted “images de  Vajrin et de
Lokeśa”, but comparison with the Sab Bak inscription rather suggests that Vajri lokeśa is a
synonym of Buddhalokeśvara, on which, see note 14.
13.Sab Bak Inscription, K. 1158; ed. Chirapat Prapandavidya 1990; unpublished improved
edition by Julia estève and Gerdi Gerschheimer. Sanskrit: St. XIII; Khmer: l ines 31–36 (both
face A).
14.For a suggestion regarding the identity of these Buddhalokeśvaras, see Woodward (2005:
146); cf. also Woodward (1994–95: 108). It should be noted that this specific name is atte sted
in at least two inscriptions of Campā (C. 92 and C. 213).

--- [Page 10] ---
inscription specifies that the mountain where this original foundation took
place was called Abhayagiri, that is ‘Mountain of S afety’, and that the
purpose of the foundation was to protect sruk khmer , that is the Khmer
domain, from Javā. The Vat Sithor inscription credits the Buddhist scholar
Kīrtipaṇḍita with a restoration of these images, that had apparently suffered
the ravages of time, in or around 869 Śaka. 15The Sab Bak inscription
credits an unnamed Guru of Dharaṇīndrapura with sim ilar restoration
activities at an unspecified point of time. It adds that his pupil Vraḥ Dhanus
erected several Buddhist images on a mountain called Teṅ Pās 16in the year
988 Śaka. In other words, his master, the Guru of Dh araṇīndrapura, must
have lived before that year, and it is not evident that Vraḥ Dhanus’
foundation is geographically or otherwise related to that of Satyavarman.
The parallels with the legend recorded about Jayava rman II in the oft-
cited inscriptions of Sdok Kak Thom and Vat Samroṅ (K. 235 and K. 956),
involving his use of siddhi in defense against Javā, are too striking to be
coincidental, but nobody has so far commented on the discrepancy between
the attribution to Jayavarman II in the case of K. 235 and K. 956 as against
the name Satyavarman in K. 111 and K. 1158. What I want to do in what
follows is to explore the possibility of identifying the Satyavarman figuring
in these Khmer inscriptions with the king of the same name occurring in the
epigraphy of Campā, while simultaneously identifying Javā with the island
of Java, more specifically with the kingdom of central Java associated with
the Śailendra dynasty, 17and to consider the implications of such a combined
hypothesis. In the process, I will review three recent publications addressed
from various perspectives to the issue of Java.
Can the Javā of the Khmer inscriptions be identified  as the island of Java?
The ancient name of the island Java, and its identi fiability with various
similar-sounding names known from ancient Southeast Asian, Chinese and
Arab sources, is an old problem, compounded by the fact that similar-
sounding and obviously related names in some modern mainland Southeast
Asian languages refer not to the Javanese or to Jav a in particular, but to
Malays or the Malay world in general, 18or to localities in northern Laos.
The paper “Localisation, identité et origine du Javā de Jayavarman II”, bythe Problem of the Ancient Name Java 49
Archipel 85, Paris, 201315.See on this inscription and the scholar Kīrtipaṇḍit a the articles by Mertens (2000) and
Sharrock (2009).
16.This means something like ‘Lady of the creepers’. I t is not a Khmer version of Abhayagiri.
17.It is not very important for my argument that I presume, with most other current schol ars,
that former notions of parallel existence of two lines of rulers in 8th–9thcentury Java, must be
abandoned in favor of a ‘single dynasty’ model. See Sundberg 2009 for the state of the field.
18.See Laffan (2009), the contribution of Claudine Salmon to this issue, and the citati on of
Pierre Dupont in n. 78 below.

--- [Page 11] ---
Michel Ferlus aims to demonstrate that the term javā in those Khmer
inscriptions which recount the story of Jayavarman II can be explained as a
word originally meaning ‘mountain’, hence also ‘art ificial mound’, and
would in the latter sense have been applied by other peoples to the Khmers,
and through Khmer expansion to what is now northern Laos have become
associated with that part of mainland Southeast Asia. 19Throughout, Ferlus
is convinced but makes no effort to demonstrate tha t “le vocable javā de
l’inscription de Sdok Kak Thoṃ ne peut en aucun cas désigner l’île de Java”
(2010: 8). This statement was meant to hold for the  inscription of Vat
Samroṅ as well, and by implication also for that of Sab Bak, which Ferlus
was certainly unaware of and hence ignored altogeth er. His complicated
argument is marked at several steps by the methodological flaw of accepti ng
a given interpretation that seems possible, without  asking whether other
interpretations might also be possible, and then do ing the countercheck of
weighing the likeliness of his interpretation again st others. 20I think that
three examples will be sufficient to demonstrate that Ferlus’ argument re sts
on very weak foundations.
First, Ferlus’ entire argument relies on the hypoth esis that the Chinese
designation Funan of the ancient polity associated with such sites as Óc  eo
and Angkor Borei reflects the Old Khmer word vnaṃ meaning ‘mountain’.50 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 201319.Ferlus takes his inspiration from the work of Tatsuo Hoshino, to whom he even dedica tes
his article (just as Hoshino had dedicated his 2002  article to Ferlus). Ferlus (2010: 68)
admits: « dans l’ensemble, les spécialistes n’admet tent pas l’identification avec le Java
indonésien, mais aucun ne va jusqu’à admettre les idées novatrices de Tats uo Hoshino qui
sont parfois même rejetées avec vigueur ». With reg ard to the latter point, I have nowhere
found a vigorous rejection of Hoshino’s work, but only scattered negative remarks showing
that his work is indeed very controversial. Vickery (1998: 81 n. 60) affirms: “I must add he re
that in general I do not accept many of Hoshino’s p resuppositions and methods using
Southeast Asian historical documents. On certain isolated points, however, he has contributed
valuable new insights.” Jacques (2005: 24) specifies: « Sa démonstration toutefois  n’est guère
convaincante. Il explique en particulier que Jayavarman II, venant de Javā, arrivait au Laos:
mais pourquoi dans ces conditions ce roi aurait-il commencé sa conquête du pays khmer par
les provinces les plus méridionales? Il confond souvent d’autre part Yava avec Ja va, voire
avec Yavana. » Woodward (2011: 87) mentions “tendentious aspects of Hoshino’s article”.
20.This same objection was raised against another recent contribution of Ferlus to tackling
an old problem of early Southeast Asian history by Bourdonneau (2007: 132, n. 50, my
emphasis): « Michel Ferlus propose de restituer der rière le titre fan, porté par les premiers
souverains du Funan selon les textes chinois, le sanskrit brahma ou brāhmaṇa . L’hypothèse
avait déjà été envisagée par Pelliot sans grande co nviction. Ferlus y revient avec une
argumentation de phonétique historique : antérieure  à l’effacement de la médiale -r- aux
alentours du IVesiècle, le caractère fanpermettait de transcrire tout à fait correctement l e
sanskrit brahma /brāhmaṇa (Ferlus 2005 : 4-5). Que le terme brahmane ait pu a insi entrer
dans la titulature des premiers rois du Funan soulè ve de nombreuses interrogations. Mais
c’est la démarche en soi qui nous semble d’abord fa ire difficulté . Que le caractère fan
transcrive de façon satisfaisante les [mots] brahma /brāhmaṇa ne nous dit rien sur les autres
correspondances éventuelles avec des termes en vieux khmer et les raisons pour lesquelles il
faudrait alors privilégier l’hypothèse de Ferlus. »

--- [Page 12] ---
This is, however, not more than a possibility, and one that is treated with
much circumspection by more than one historian. 21Ferlus for his part treats
this hypothesis as an established fact (2010: 69):
C’est vraisemblablement dans le sens de « monticule , tertre artificiel (lieu de
cérémonies) » plus que celui de « temple » et encore  moins de « montagne » qu’il faut
chercher la justification du nom « Funan » que les Chinois, frappés par des pratiques qu’ils
ne connaissaient pas, ont donné au Cambodge des pre miers siècles de notre ère. Cette
signification nous accompagnera tout au long de ce texte dans notre quête sur
l’identification du terme Javā.
The presumed meaning ‘artificial mound’ then become s the basis for an
indeed long-drawn web of ingenious and often far-fetched reasoning, but we
see here the shakiness of its very starting point: the assumption that the
designation Funan derives from the Khmer word for ‘ mountain’ and the
associated belief that there are no ‘mountains’ in Funan. It is impossible to
follow Ferlus even in his point regarding the landscape, for there would have
been nothing surprising if the various natural elevations, such as the Nui Ba
Thê which dominates Óc eo, the massif of seven mountains slightly further
north, not to mention the Phnom Bayang, the Phnom A ngkor Borei, etc.,
which so clearly mark the landscape of Funan, had attracted attention both
from the ancient Funanese and from the contemporary Chinese precisely for
what they are, and what they are still called in mo dern Khmer: bhnaṃ
(phnom ), ‘mountains’.
Second, Ferlus accepts without question the hypothesis recorded in H.L.
Shorto’s Dictionary of the Mon inscriptions (1971: 117) that the word ja’ḅa’
occurring in a single 11th-century Old Mon inscription from Thaton, a site on
the coast facing the Bay of Bengal, denotes a “nativ e of the region of
northern Laos”. Ferlus takes the dictionary definition at face value, and has
not bothered to retrace its source. This source is probably the work of G.H.
Luce (1969–70, vol. I: 24–25), who reported that “[i]n line 23 of the main
section the words lwa’ krom ja’ḅa are legible at the end of the line, but the
context is obscure. lwa’ is the tribal term Lawa or Wa, present in the name
of the city, Lavapura (Lăvo, Lopburi). Krom is the Mon word, the western
word for Cambojan (Old Burm. Krwaṁ ; Thai Khôm). Ja’ḅa might be the
Möaṅ Javā of Rāma Gāṁhèṅ’s inscription (1292 A.D.), i.e. Luang Phra
Bang”. On this basis, the sequence lwa’ krom ja’ḅa ’, about whose context we
know nothing, is translated by Shorto as ‘Lawas, Ca mbodians, and
Laotians’, and this interpretation is supported with a reference to “Lao swā
(< *jvā), popular name of Luang Prabang”. 22It is important to note how thethe Problem of the Ancient Name Java 51
Archipel 85, Paris, 201321.See e.g. the relevant work of Michael Vickery (1998: 33, 36 [with reference to Claude
Jacques as expressing doubt about the hypothesis] and 421 n. 1; 2003–04: 125–126).
22.There is a small difference between Luce’s reading ja’ḅa and Shorto’s ja’ḅa’ , but perhaps

--- [Page 13] ---
circumspection of historian Luce has got lost in th e representation of his
hypothesis by linguist Shorto, so that the mere sug gestion that the word
denote ‘Laotians’ becomes an established fact for F erlus. Against Luce’s
suggestion we may raise the objection — given the c ircumstance that
contemporary inscriptions of Java consistently ment ion side-by-side the
ethnonyms campa ‘Cam’, kmir ‘Cambodian (i.e. Khmer)’ and rəmən ‘Mon’
in lists of resident foreign traders 23— that one may justifiably expect Mon
inscriptions of the same period, and all the more so inscriptions from coastal
sites likely to have been frequented by overseas tr aders, to mention the
Javanese. Before further philological evidence is a dduced to exclude the
possibility that this Old Mon word meant ‘Javanese’, it is inadmissible to use
the word as evidence in an argument that Old Khmer javā meant anything
else.
Third, the claim (2010: 70) that Old Mon ja’ḅa’ and Old Khmer javā,
which Ferlus postulates originally to have denoted certain Khmers or the
Khmers in general, « devaient avoir le sens premier  de ‘tertre, monticule’,
comme bhnaṃ et fúnan  » rests solely on the existence of phonetically similar
words meaning ‘mountain’ in certain Aslian language s of the Malay
peninsula. The Aslian languages belong, like Mon an d Khmer, to the
Austroasiatic family of languages, but are not closely related to either Mon
or Khmer within that family, and the oldest data on these languages are
about a millennium younger than the relevant data f rom Mon and Khmer.
Ferlus demonstrates methodically how in terms of historical phonology Old
Mon ja’ḅa’ and Old Khmer javā can be reconstructed to Proto-Mon-Khmer
*ɟəɓaʔ. He does not, however, ask the question whet her the fact that the
words can be reconstructed to a common ancestor also means that they have
to be shared inheritance from the proto-language. In any case, his careful
procedure as historical phonologist stands in stark  contrast to his simple
declaration — as he himself admits: « contre toute attente » — that the
meaning of this inherited word can be determined on the basis of the Aslian
data. Ferlus says nothing about whether the sound correspondences between52 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013this difference is inconsequential (see Shorto 1971 : xv). All the readable parts of the
inscription were published by Khyac Sinḥ [Chit Thein] (1965), inscription nr. 1, who reads
[lva’ krom·] (ja’)[ba]’ .
23.See below, p. 68. As an aside, I wish to question also Ferlus’ apodictic sta tement as to the
modern Cam word kurdenoting the Khmers: « Contrairement à une idée courante, ce terme
n’a rien à voir avec les attestations de kviret kmir des inscriptions chames ». Ferlus does not
state which scholars have expressed this idea, but epigraphical evidence (part  of which has
only become available after Ferlus wrote) seems to show an internal developm ent kmir-kvir-
kurin the course of the history of the Cam language, and may be adduced against Ferlus’
claim. The form kmir is attested in Cam inscriptions of the 11thcentury (C. 64, Griffiths et al.
2012b: 219–224) and the 12th(C. 17, Aymonier 1891: 40); kviris found in inscriptions of the
13thcentury, and kuris found in one of the 15th. See for examples of kvirand kurthe entries
on p. 67 below.

--- [Page 14] ---
the Aslian words and those in Mon and Khmer obey regular patterns or not,
and hence it is unclear whether he is thinking of i nherited Austroasiatic
vocabulary, or whether he perceives the phonetic si milarity between the
various words as due to some loan scenario. Again, no other possibilities,
such as coincidental phonetic similarity with the Mon and the Khmer words,
or an etymological connectedness (whether through i nheritance or
borrowing) without preservation of semantic correspondence, are considered
at all.
In short, the flaws of Ferlus’ reasoning are so fun damental that his
argument in favor of connecting javā in the Old Khmer inscriptions with a
polity in what is now northern Laos need not detain us any longer. This does
not yet mean that the hypothesis itself is disprove n. And indeed I do not
pretend that in matters such as these, anything such as final proof will ever
be forthcoming. We are limited to proposing hypothe ses and counter-
hypotheses, and to weighing their respective power of persuasion. It is an
incontrovertible fact that the inscription of Ram K hamhaeng of 1292 Ce
(face IV , line 26) mentions a möaṅ javā (‘principality of Javā’) and situates it
far to the north of Sukhothai;24it is likewise an incontrovertible fact that a
name spelled javā is associated with the Luang Prabang area of northe rn
Laos till this day. These facts lay at the basis of the argument offered by
Tatsuo Hoshino and, after him, by Michel Ferlus, an d they determine the
way these scholars select and read other sources. 25The historian’s task is to
weigh the possibility that it was this Javā that was  intended in the Old
Khmer inscriptions, against alternative possibiliti es, among which the
possibility that the Old Khmer word denoted the isl and of Java; mutatis
mutandis , the same possibilities must be weighed independen tly for any
words that might be related, such as Old Mon ja’ḅa ’.
I limit myself here to the observation that Hoshino and Ferlus can rely on
not a single local source from Northern Laos that is even remotely proximate
in time to the Khmer inscriptions that associate Javā with Jayavarma n II, let
alone to the supposed events around 800 Ceassociated with Javā in
Jayavarman II’s career. In what follows, I intend to show that, by contrast,
there is a mass of Southeast Asian epigraphical data, relevant to the problem
of Javā, and contemporary with the events reported retrospectively in those
Khmer inscriptions or with those retrospective inscriptions themselves. It isthe Problem of the Ancient Name Java 53
Archipel 85, Paris, 201324.See Cœdès (1924: 43, 48) and Griswold & Prasert ṇa Nagara (1971: 202, 220).
25.For the former scholar’s arguments, see Hoshino (19 86: 34–46); the same ideas are
repeated, without scholarly apparatus, in Hoshino ( 2002). Hoshino shows no awareness of
the fact that the Ram Khamhaeng inscription is cont roversial, and may not constitute
evidence for the existence of a toponym Javā in the Luang Prabang area in 1292 Ce. Ferlus is
aware of this fact, but preempts criticism of the fact that his theory is  essentially based on this
inscription by his characterization of the controve rsy as « stérile » (2010: 67, n. 4). On the
productiveness of the Ram Khamhaeng controversy, see now Terwiel (2011).

--- [Page 15] ---
my contention that these epigraphical data, and rel ated data from later
centuries, can be explained most parsimoniously if o ne assumes (a) that
authors of Southeast Asian inscriptions meant with javā the same thing that
was meant when they used the term yavadvīpa ; (b) that Khmer authors used
these terms with the same intended referent as did authors of inscriptions of
Campā and of the Indonesian archipelago when using those terms; and (c)
that in these three major epigraphic traditions of Southeast Asia, the inte nded
referent of those terms remains stable throughout the epigraphic period. To
this end, I will now proceed to present the evidenc e from these three
traditions, and show that among them, it is only in Javanese inscriptions that
the terms are intended as endonyms, while for the Khmers and Cams they
referred to foreigners or a foreign land.
The first corollary of these observations is that t he intended referent
everywhere in this set of data was the island of Ja va (or a part of it); the
second is that, when in other — in most cases later — Southeast Asian or
foreign records, the term javā or foreign notations assumed to correspond to
such a name denote something else than the island of Java, we are dealing
with a parallel set of data, possibly reflecting mo re recent developments,
whose interpretation must be accommodated historiog raphically next to,
rather than in place of, the mass of epigraphic data. 26
Yava and Java in inscriptions of insular Southeast Asia
A voluminous and learned study “reconstructing the history of Yavadvipa
[sic]” was published by Waruno Mahdi just a few years ago in the pages of
this journal. Its argument is based on the ideas that the name Yavadvīpa
would have applied to a polity in the Batang Hari river basin on Sumatra,
before migrating to the island of Java,27and that the fact that there is a great
volcano named Merapi on both islands is evidence of migration of toponyms
that would have accompanied political migration. Although these ideas are
of no direct consequence for my argument in this paper, Madhi’s study does
directly concern the terms that are central in my d iscussion, and hence
cannot be left unmentioned. The line of reasoning adopted by its author is
complex, and in my view methodologically unsound. B ased as it is on an
argument that is hard to unravel, this contribution is liable to mislead eve n
specialist readers. A short discussion of this 2008 article by Waruno Madhi
will therefore serve as introduction to the history of the toponyms Yavadvīpa
and Java in insular Southeast Asia.54 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 201326.Thus for instance the term jāvaka to denote the Malay Peninsula in the Sinhalese
chronicle Cūlavaṃsa , dealing with the 13thcentury (cf. Jacques 2005: 21–22).
27.This is not a novel idea. For similar ideas, see Krom (1931: 83 and 99), and Moens as
reported by Stutterheim (1939: 84 n. 1).

--- [Page 16] ---
With inevitable simplification, it seems fair to say that Mahdi enga ges too
freely in associating facts that are not clearly co nnected, to build
complicated historical revisionism on the assumptio n of connections that
remain unproven; that he feels too little constrain ed by the results of
preceding scholars and hence proposes radically nov el hypotheses without
addressing the question why existing communes opiniones would be wrong;
that his revisionism is in fact based on an incompl ete knowledge of the
relevant primary and secondary sources, and an insufficient awareness of the
risks of interpreting Sanskrit sources without being familiar with the clichés
of Sanskrit literature; and that he cherry-picks fro m the sources he uses,
ignoring elements which do not fit into the “unitary picture” that he aims to
present (pp. 112, 136). I must limit myself to illu strating these flaws with
just a few examples.
Firstly, the author rightly observes that foreign —  Arabic, Chinese and
Greek — sources often seem to situate places with names resembling Ja va or
Yavadvīpa not where we would prima facie expect them, namely in the place
of the island of Java, but rather in or around the island of Sumatra. In
particular, he retains from his previously publishe d work the conclusion,
with regard to “the Chinese pilgrim Faxian’s itiner ary of his 413-414 Ce
voyage from Sri Lanka via Yavadvipa ( Yēpótí耶婆提 , eMC *jia-ba-dɛj) to
Guangzhou”, that “the most likely location of Yavadv ipa would be on the
east coast of Sumatra”, and that this “practically places it in the  Batang Hari
basin, the location of historical Malayu and Jambi” (p. 112).28Although he
is aware of the work of Michael Laffan (2009, cited  in the form of its
working paper version dating to 2005), he does not consider the possibility
that the foreign sources in question may be in error (cf. Damais 1964: 95), or
may be using toponyms in a less discrete manner tha n we are used to do
today. In this way the question “Why the name came to refer to the island of
Java” ( sic!) can become the dominant thread of the article, whereas the pre-
Islamic indigenous sources — presented below — uneq uivocally associate
the name with the island of Java, so that the historian should rather ask how
the name could ever have come to be applied to any other locality. 29
Second, although the author rightly observes that it is strange to find the
apparently Malay (or Batak) name Merapi applied to the important volcanothe Problem of the Ancient Name Java 55
Archipel 85, Paris, 201328.Although based on a different argument and a different reconstruction of Faxian’s route,
the seminal study of Max Deeg (2005: 179–185), which Mahdi ignores, arrives at a simil ar
location for Yēpótí . excavations at the extensive and ancient Buddhist complex of Batujaya
over the last decade (cf. Manguin & Agustijanto Ind rajaya 2011), whose results were
published internationally too late to come to Deeg’ s attention, can be considered to have
weakened the argument against identifying Yēpótí in West Java to the extent that it is based
on the belief that there was no substantial Buddhist presence there in the 5thcentury (Deeg
2005: 183, n. 894).
29.This is what Michael Laffan has done in his contribution of 2009.

--- [Page 17] ---
at the heart of Java, he ignores the fact that the pre-modern sources are not
unanimous in naming it Merapi: while the majority o f epigraphical and
manuscript sources do refer to it by the name Marapi,  some manuscript
sources call the mountain Mandaragni, which suggest s (because agni is a
synonym of api) that, at least in popular etymology, the element mar- was
associated with the mythical mountain Mandara, rath er than with any
Malay/Batak prefix. More significantly, the only pr e-Islamic indigenous
source known to me that seems to refer to the Merapi in West Sumatra is  an
Old Malay inscription from around the time of Ādityavarman, which names
it not Marapi but Mahāmeru. 30At least insofar as the extant historical
sources have any say in the matter, there is no sup port for the author’s
assumption that “the name Merapi (originally perhaps [ sic] Marapi ) must
have been first coined in Sumatra, and the volcano that originally carried that
name probably was the one on that same island”. Mahdi seems not to have
considered the question when these mountains started to bear their modern
names, and what consequences the answer to this question might have for his
argument of toponymical and political movement from Sumatra to Java.
In the third place, Mahdi makes egregious use of th e first indigenous
document to use the term Yavadvīpa, namely the Sans krit inscription of
Canggal dating to 732 Ce, which against all common sense is forcibly read as
documenting a transplantation of a polity of that name from Sumatra to Java.
To this end, he insists on an idiosyncratic literal interpretation of the pret erite
form āsītat the start of the narrative portion of this inscription, in stanza VII:
āsīd dvīpavaraṃ yavākhyam atulan (dhā)[nyā]divījādhikaṃ
sampannaṃ kanakākarais tad amarais sva[rggād] i[v](o)pārjitam·
śrīmatkuñjarakuñjadeśanihi[taṃ] [ga]ṅgāditīrthāv r̥taṃ
sthānan divyatamaṃ śivāya jagataś śa[mbho]s tu yatrādbhutam·  || 31
‘There once was this excellent island called Yava, abundant in grains such as rice,
endowed with gold mines, as though procured by the immortals from heaven, and ( tu)
where there was the most heavenly astonishing sanct uary of Śiva, situated in the
illustrious land of the elephant’s tusk ( kuñjarakuñja ), surrounded by bathing places such
as the Gaṅgā, bringing prosperity for the people.’ 3256 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 201330.Cf. on the Central Javanese Merapi the references c ollected by Noorduyn (1982:
423–424, 439 n. 4) and Kuntara Wiryamartana (1990: 299–300 and 1993: 503–505). On the
inscription of West Sumatra, see the rather unsatisfactory edition by de Casparis (1995: 923).
31.Text constituted by myself on the basis of an estam page kept in Leiden University
Library. Variant readings vis-à-vis Kern (1885), Chhabra (1965) and Sarkar (1971–72, vol.
I): (a)atulan (dhā)[nyā] ° ◊ atulandhā(nyā) ° Kern; atula(ndhānyā) ° Sarkar. (b)amarais
sva[rggā]d i[v](o)pārjitam ·  ◊ amarai — — dinopārjitam Kern; amarai mantrādinopārjitaṃ
Sarkar; amarais svarggādino[vo?]pārjitam Chhabra (p. 47). The syllable read as ° di° by all
predecessors rather seems to me like a ° dri°. The spelling with m·  rather than anusvāra at
the end of the pāda is certain; Sarkar’s amarai (for expected amarair ) is ungrammatical, and
the traces of following ssvare unmistakeable. (c)nihi[taṃ] ◊ Chhabra Sarkar; nihi[ta] Kern
(unmetr.). — [ga]ṅgāditīrthāv r̥taṃ◊ thus Chhabra (p. 46); ° vr̥tamSarkar (printing error?);
vaṅśāditīvādh r̥tamKern.
32.On the interpretation of this stanza, see also Bern et Kempers (1967) and Stutterheim

--- [Page 18] ---
About the use of the past tense here, Waruno Mahdi affirms that it is “only
understandable if not Java, but a Yavadvipa in Sumatra […] is implied”. The
author is evidently unaware that this is an entirely commonplace way for any
Sanskrit story to be opened, and that Sanskrit (ver se) inscriptions obey
faithfully the conventions of Sanskrit (narrative) poetry. 33The instigation
towards this interpretation is another naively literalistic reading, namely of
the characteristic sampannaṃ kanakākarais , which means ‘endowed with
gold mines’. The conventions of Sanskrit literature  oblige a poet to affirm
that natural surroundings are rich in gold even if this is contrary to fact.34the Problem of the Ancient Name Java 57
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013(1939). Stutterheim (p. 84, n. 1) had already rejected an argument of J.L. Moens, who had
argued precisely as does Mahdi with regard to āsīt, and drawn the conclusion that in his
“opinion the word āsītfurnishes no proof for the hypothesis that the kingdom of Sañjaya’s
father was situated outside Java”. Mahdi, who is ob livious to this pertinent secondary
literature, and hence freely proposes as his own a theory that had been advanced and rejected
already many decades ago, cites a translation only of the first half of the st anza, thus escaping
from the obligation to find a way to force the geographical elements we find here into the
straightjacket of his theory.
33.Indeed, Sheldon Pollock, in his seminal book which is mandatory reading for any scholar
who wishes to make historical use of epigraphical S anskrit praise poems ( praśasti ), has
observed that the Canggal inscription is “nearly a textbook example of the Sanskrit  praśasti ”
(2006: 131). Within Javanese epigraphy itself, the use of āsītis seen also at the opening of
the Sanskrit inscription of Dinaya (or Kāñjuruhan), and repeatedly in the Sanskrit portion of
the stela of Pucaṅan (also known as the Calcutta Stone), stanzas V, XI, XX III. From Sanskrit
inscriptions elsewhere in Southeast Asia, not to me ntion epigraphical and other written
sources from India, the number of examples could be multiplied at will. The burden of proof
is on Waruno Mahdi to demonstrate that all these examples must be interpre ted as having a
contextually significant historical past tense refe rence, and hence to prove wrong the
inclination of Sanskrit scholars to interpret these  forms as situating the narrative in a
dehistoricized (‘mythical’) past. I may also point out that the verb form vu°ara ‘There
was…’, opening the narrative of the Old Javanese in scription Vanua Tṅah III (Boechari
2012: 484), is clearly calqued on this Sanskrit model.
34.See Michel (2011: 13), about the Sanskrit poetic convention called ‘Description cont rary
to reality’ ( asato nibandhanam ), “for example things invariably described a certa in way
though such is not necessarily the case in reality, like mountains always described as rich in
gold and precious gems”. We see the force of the sa me poetic convention at work when,
several centuries after the Canggal inscription, the poet of the Vurare inscripti on from east
Java, writes (cf. the edition of Poerbatjaraka 1922 , who read ° sāmarthyaṃ kumbha °; my
edition from eFeO estampage):
ratnākarapramāṇān tu dvaidhīk r̥tya yavāvanīṃ
kṣitibhedanasāmarthyakumbhabajrodakena vai
‘After the division of the land of Yava , that is endowed with mines of jewels , by use of
Jar- and Vajra-water, powerful enough to effect the division of the earth …’
It is very likely that the poets of the Canggal and the Vurare inscription were influenced by
the model of the ‘primordial Sanskrit poem’ ( ādikāvya ), Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa, which
mentions a Yavadvīpa in stanzas 4.39.28–29:
giribhir ye ca gamyante plavanena plavena ca |
ratnavantaṃ yavadvīpaṃ saptarājyopaśobhitam ||
suvarṇarūpyakaṃ caiva suvarṇākaramaṇḍitam |
yavadvīpam atikramya śiśiro nāma parvataḥ ||
‘And you must go to those islands that can be reached from mountains, by swimming or

--- [Page 19] ---
For Mahdi, however, “reference to goldmines points to Sumatra or the
Peninsula, but practically excludes Java as likely location”. Again we see
how ignorance of basic characteristics of Sanskrit c omposition can lead a
scholar to far-fetched interpretations. When Mahdi affirms that “The central
message of the Canggal inscription is evidently tha t Sanjaya had […]
attained the formal rank that allowed him to challe nge Sri Vijaya”, one
cannot help but wonder how this scholar manages to read so much into a text
which says not an iota about Śrīvijaya.
This Canggal inscription has so far been understood by most scholars as
saying what it says, namely that Sañjaya has installed a liṅga of Śiva in the
year 654 Śaka, and that this king intended to declare with this installation as
much as with the inscription itself his sovereignty over Yavadvīpa. That this
referred to the realm of this Javanese king, and Javanese kings in centuries to
follow, is easy to demonstrate by juxtaposing variou s extracts from
inscriptions found on Java, which reveal that yavadvīpa , yavabhū , yava-
bhūmi , yavāvanī , yavapura (in Sanskrit) and bhūmi (ri) java , nūṣa java or
simply java (in Javanese), all functioned as synonyms. 35
The inscription of Rukam (Central Java, 829 Śaka), for example, invokes
sakvaiḥ ta devata prasiddha maṃrakṣa kaḍatvan· śrī mahārāja °i bhūmi
java ‘all ye celebrated gods who protect the kingdom of his majesty in the
land of Java’ (plate II verso, line 14), 36using a phrase that is found in a58 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013by boat: to Yavadvīpa rich in jewels, splendid with  its seven kingdoms, and to
Suvarṇarūpyaka ornamented with gold mines. Beyond Y avadvīpa, there is a mountain
called Śiśira.’
I cite here from the text as constituted in the critical edition and the  translation of Lefeber &
Goldman (1994).
35.The identity of Java and Yava (and derived names) is now and again called into question,
but never, as far as I can see, with solid arguments. This identity emerges from the sources
themselves. Although the issue is, therefore, not directly relevant to my argument , I may state
here that there is no doubt in my mind that the most original name is Java, and that yava was
chosen at some point as a fitting Sanskrit word to serve as an equivalent. T he similarity in
sound of the Sanskrit word to the indigenous name obviously played a major role, whereas
meaning was less important. We see similar phenomena throughout ancient Southe ast Asia.
Indeed, other important nations of ancient Southeas t Asia likewise knew similar sounding
doublets of names, roughly corresponding to the dif ference of linguistic context between
Sanskrit and vernaculars. See the table below on p. 71. In most cases we lac k hard evidence
to decide which of Sanskrit and vernacular forms was model and which copy, but common
sense suggests that the indigenous name was generally the model of the Sans krit one. Thus
for instance we find Pāṇḍuraṅga presumably mimickin g Panraṅ in Campā, although the
oldest attestation of the indigenous name is younger than that of the Sanskrit e quivalent. If
this assumption is correct, the literal meaning of Pāṇḍuraṅga (‘Pale Color’) presumably
played little role in this matter (cf. Griffiths & Southworth 2011: 285–288), and likewi se the
literal meaning of yava ‘barley’ was not, I think, very relevant in it becoming applied to Java.
36.ed. Titi Surti Nastiti et al. (1982: 23–26). I have verified the reading by autopsy of the
plates. For more discussion of the formula, frequently attested with mataram standing in the
place of java, see Barret Jones (1984: 5).

--- [Page 20] ---
number of variants through the history of Javanese epigraphy, 37and also has
a parallel in the late-7thcentury inscriptions of Śrīvijaya, where we read (in
more than one inscription) kita savañakta devata mahardhikasannidhāna
maṃrakṣa yaṃ kadatuan· śrīvijaya ‘all you gods, whose presence is
benevolent, protecting the kingdom of Śrīvijaya’. 38The author of the
versified Śivag r̥ha inscription (778 Śaka, Central Java) was clearly alluding
to the same kind of phrase when he wrote about a king maṅrakṣa bhūmi ri
java ‘protecting the land of Java’ (stanza VI). 39
The term Yavadvīpa does not seem to occur in any other inscription of
Central Java than the Canggal inscription, but it becomes very common in
the epigraphy of east Java a few centuries later. T hus for instance the
Tuhañaru inscription (1245 Śaka) invokes kita prasiddha rumakṣaṅ
yavadvīpamaṇḍala ‘you celebrated ones who protect the orbit of Yavadvīpa’,
evidently meaning the same thing as did authors of the cited Central
Javanese inscriptions, except that the center of government (and perhaps the
boundaries) of Java had shifted in the meantime. 40
In this later period, a particularly common express ion is
sa(kala)yavadvīpa ‘the entire island of Java’, typically used in the eulogistic
opening parts of inscriptions to indicate the territorial claims of the kings of
Singasari and Majapahit. Some of these passages exp licitly express the
equivalent of this Sanskrit expression in Javanese.  Thus, for example, the
inscription of Mūla-Maluruṅ (1177 Śaka) refers to king K r̥tanagara as
śrīsakalayavadvīpanaranāthādiguru, sira saṃ pinakag uru dainiṃ samaptagrāma,
samastakṣatriya, makādi sakvaiḥnira prabhū ṅke riṃ nūṣa java 41the Problem of the Ancient Name Java 59
Archipel 85, Paris, 201337.The meaning of prasiddha in such phrases is not certain. Always keen to seek
connections with ancestor worship, Stutterheim (192 7: 188) was convinced that devata
prasiddha denotes deceased kings who had become deified. But in the undoubtedly related
context of the stanzas V and VI of the Śivag r̥ha inscription, de Casparis (1956: 311–312,
316–317) gave it one of its basic Sanskrit meanings, i.e. ‘p erfect’. I choose here the other
basic Sanskrit meaning.
38.See Boechari (1979: 38–40 = 2012: 381–384) for a synoptic edition. Whereas previous
scholars have seen two separate words in the sequence mahardhikasannidhāna , it seems to
me most natural to interpret it as as a bahuvrīhi compound. Cf. also kāmu maṃrakṣāña
sakalamaṇḍalāña kadātuanku ‘you who protect the entire orbit of my kingdom’ in l. 20 of
the Sabokingking (Telaga Batu) inscription from Pal embang, also late 7thcentury (de
Casparis 1956: 15–46).
39.Stanza VIII possibly contains a more elaborate allusion, but the reading published by de
Casparis (1956: 312) is almost entirely unverifiable on the stone (National Museum, Jakarta,
D.28): nātha prasiddha ri jagat ni ⏑– ⏑– ⏓rakṣā ni rovaṅ atha vīra varuḥ svaśīla | kālap
kalāguṇaraviprakulasthanāma ginlar ri mamratipurastha maḍaṅ kaḍatvan ‘A king, perfect
in (this) world, ....., a protection for his comrades, indeed a hero who knew the duties of hi s
rank; he adopted a name proper to a family of honou rable Brāhmaṇas (rich in) arts and
virtues, and established his kĕraton at Meḍang situated in the country (?) of Mamrati’.
40.Cf. on this shift of the center of government Boechari (1976 = 2012: 155–181) and Barret
Jones (1984: 6–7).
41.Plates I verso line 7 through II recto line 1. ed. compiled on the basis of readings by Titi

--- [Page 21] ---
‘(in Sanskrit:) the primordial teacher ( ādiguru ) of all the (vassal) kings in Java, (in
Javanese:) the one who served as teacher to all settlements, all noble men, to begin with all
(vassal) kings here in the island of Java’
If any doubt remained about the equivalence of yava(dvīpa) and (nūṣa) java ,
and about the assumption that the island of Java itself is designated there by,
then it seems that this passage, with its emphatic ṅke‘here’, should be
sufficient to dispel it. Several more expressions of  the type sa-
kalayavadvīpa(maṇḍala) have been assembled from east Javanese
inscriptions by Damais (1957: 617), and need not be reiterated here. 42It is
likely that we are dealing with an early Central Javanese equivalent whe n in
the inscription of Vanua Tṅah III (plate II recto, lines 6–7) 43we encounter a
sentence: kumonakan· saṃ hyaṃ dharmmā bihāra °i java kabaiḥ svatantrā
°umāryya kaḍaṇḍān ‘he issued an order with regard to the sacred monastic
foundations on all of Java that they be fiscally exempt and cease to be taxe d’
(although kabaih ‘all’ here might alternatively qualify the ‘monasti c
foundations’). 44Indeed, the Javanese epigraphical data make it hard not to
agree with Damais, who wrote (1964: 127):
Il semble évident que Jawa et Yawa — les deux formes javanaise et sa nskrite — ont dû
être employées côte à côte par les étrangers pendant la période la plus a ncienne aussi bien
qu’à Java pendant la période épigraphique où différents documents sont là pour nous le
prouver, même à une date beaucoup plus tardive. 45
In this general light, and in the specific light of the fact that the metri cal Old
Javanese inscription of Śivag r̥ha of 778 Śaka already used the expression
bhūmi ri java (where the insertion of riis likely to be metri causa ), it is hard
to understand why many scholars have been reluctant to interpret bhūmi jāva60 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013Surti Nastiti and others, by Hadi Sidomulyo (2010: 106–114); verified on the basis of photos
of the plates kindly put at my disposal by Titi Surti Nastiti. The reading samaptagrāma is not
acceptable, and must be emended to samastagrāma , as is assumed in my translation, or else
to samastāśrama .
42.Since aiming at exhaustivity is not useful or realistic in the present c ontext, I add here
only reference to the already mentioned Vurare inscription, whose stanzas V ( yavāvanīṃ ), VI
and IX need to be read in parallel with the Sarvadharma inscription (ed. Brandes 1913, nr.
LXXIX, pp. 188–193), plates III through IV, and to the Pucaṅan inscription (ed. Kern 1917:
83–114), which uses the term yavadvīpa throughout, both in Sanskrit and in Old Javanese.
For further variants on the names of Java in Javane se epigraphy, I refer to Damais (1964:
126–130).
43.edition Boechari (2012: 484–491); verified by autopsy of the plates.
44.It will be observed that in some of the later contexts of sakalayavadvīpa too, the adjective
sakala contextually needs to be applied to a sentence constituent other than yavadvīpa , as in
the example above, where it qualifies naranātha .
45.Damais’ use of wrather vto spell these names is in conformity with his transliteration
conventions, which are different from mine. His Jaw a/Yawa are strictly identical to the
names that I prefer to represent as Java/Yava in the present paper.

--- [Page 22] ---
in the Śrīvijayan inscription of Kota Kapur, on the  island of Bangka, as
denoting (some part of) Java. 46The passage is as follows (lines 9–10): 47
śakavarṣātīta 608 diṃ pratipada śuklapakṣa vulan·  vaiśākha • tatkālāña yaṃ maṃmaṃ
sumpaḥ °ini • nipāhat·  di velāña yaṃ vala śrīvijaya kalivat·  manāpik·  ya ṃ bhūmi jāva
tida bhakti ka śrīvijaya
‘elapsed Śaka year 608, on the new moon day of the bright fortnight of the month
Vaiśākha. That was the time that this admonitory im precation was engraved, on the
occasion that the forces of Śrīvijaya passed to att ack the land of Java which was not
subservient to Śrīvijaya’.
Waruno Mahdi has recently presented an argument tha t bhūmi jāva in this
passage would refer to a polity (Malayu) in the Bata ng Hari river basin
(2008: 118–121), being unaware that Boechari (1979: 31 = 2012: 377) has
presented another argument that it referred to a pl ace in Lampung, or that
Claude Jacques has recently argued that it denoted a place in the Malay
Peninsula. In his last statement on the problem, Boechari admits: “We st ill
could not find reasonable grounds for supposing that with Bhūmi Jāwa in the
inscription of Kota Kapur was meant West Java or the kingdom of Tārumā-
nagara […], or Central Java […]” (1986: 48 = 2012: 398). even though we
are 170 years before the earliest attestation of the term bhūmi java on Java
itself, this manner of viewing things seems aberrant to me. The question the
historian should ask is rather whether he can find reasonable grounds for
supposing that bhūmi jāva here means anything else than Java. In my
opinion, neither Boechari, nor Jacques, nor Mahdi h as succeeded in
demonstrating that there are such reasonable ground s. evidence will be
presented below suggesting that Java was already kno wn under precisely
that name to people on the mainland as early as the  beginning of the 7th
century.
Yava and Java in inscriptions of Cambodia
In a recent article devoted to certain passages in a long Sanskrit inscript ion
of Cambodia issued under Jayavarman VII, the stela of the Prah Khan
(K. 908, 1113 Śaka), Claude Jacques (2005) takes exception to the received
interpretation of its stanza CXLVI, standing at the end of a section of the t ext
describing an annual temple festival in the month of Phālguna:the Problem of the Ancient Name Java 61
Archipel 85, Paris, 201346.The spelling difference ( java in Old Javanese, jāva in Old Malay) is certainly not a
ground for objection. For the use of non-phonemic v owel lengthening in penultimate
syllables is an orthographical feature of Śrīvijayan Old Malay, probably corresponding to a
pattern of penultimate stress or accent in the language (cf. Mahdi 2005: 189). Ferlus  (2010:
69 n. 5) agrees: « ces différences de forme ne sont  pas significatives ». Claude Jacques’
remark on this matter (2005: 21 n. 16) reflects his insufficient familiarity with the corpus of
Old Malay inscriptions.
47.ed. Cœdès (1930: 46–50); verified on the basis of t he eFeO estampages, as well as
photos of the stone.

--- [Page 23] ---
dvijāś śrīsūryabhaṭṭādyā javendro yavaneśvaraḥ 
cāmpendrau ca pratidinaṃ bhaktyā snānāmvudhāriṇaḥ 
‘Brahmins with Śrī Sūryabhaṭṭa at the head, the king of Java, the lord of Yavana and the
two kings of Campā, every day devotedly offer bathing water.’
George Cœdès, the editor of this inscription (to which we shall briefly return
below, p. 70), had interpreted this stanza as expres sing that the mentioned
kings were vassals to the king of Cambodia (1941: 2 67–268), and he
assumed that the stanza referred to the kings of Ja va, of Annam (i.e. Đại
Việt, yavana ) and of Campā. He explained that
La vassalité était effective pour les deux rois du Champa ; elle devait l’être infiniment
moins pour le roi de Java et surtout pour l’empereur d’Annam. Mais on sait avec quel le
facilité les souverains orientaux acceptaient une suzeraineté nominale qui  ne les engageait
à rien et leur assurait la bienveillance de puissants voisins.
To this interpretation Jacques objects with the fol lowing argument (2005: 17).
Jusqu’à preuve du contraire, il semble que les poèm es sanscrits, qui s’adressaient
directement aux dieux, s’ils souffraient évidemment  de larges hyperboles dans leurs
comparaisons, se refusaient à énoncer des contrevérités factuelles. Nous pouvons c ertes,
sous réserve d’une connaissance meilleure de l’état politique du Campā au XIIesiècle, être
d’accord avec G. Cœdès lorsqu’il précise au sujet des « deux rois du Champa » que ce tte
vassalité devait être « effective » au moment de la  composition de ce poème […]
Cependant, s’il est juste qu’il est en effet peu vr aisemblable que le « roi de Java » – à
supposer que javā désigne l’île – et l’empereur d’Annam – ou plus précisément le roi du
Dai-Viet – aient jamais fait acte de vassalité envers le roi khm er, fût-il Jayavarman VII, il
est légitime de se demander si ce qui paraît une invraisemblance ne c ache pas plutôt le fait
que George Cœdès aurait mal identifié géographiquement les sites correspondant a ux Javā
et aux Yavana.
This argument amounts to a willful denial of the nature of royal inscriptions
as instruments of propaganda, that we see throughout the Indianized world,
and the corollary that attempts of 19thand 20thcentury Western historians to
build histoire événementielle by treating epigraphical data as factual
descriptions of historical events need to be treated with utmost care. That  is,
Claude Jacques chooses to deny just about the most important advance in
historiographical understanding in the study of pre -modern South and
Southeast Asian history of the past few decades (cf . Pollock 2006: §3.3).
And this methodological atavism becomes the starting point for a wild goose
chase in search of alternative identifications of J ava/ā and Yavana, which
Jacques finds respectively in “un royaume vassal de population malaise” and
“les Thaï”. But as soon as we accept that the Khmer king was just a s liable to
make counterfactual claims to suzerainty over his neighboring kings, as were
his peers throughout the epigraphically recorded hi story of the entire
Indianized world — including the kings of Java (see  my citation of the
Mūla-Maluruṅ inscription above, p. 59) — the very b asis of Jacques’
reasoning falls away, and we no longer have any gro und to refuse to62 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013

--- [Page 24] ---
acknowledge what the epigraphical evidence clearly reveals, namely that in
the inscriptions of Campā and Cambodia the terms Java and Yavana referred
to Java and Đại Việt. I will briefly return below to the issue of Yavana, but
my focus must remain on Java.
Jacques rightly observes that the Khmer corpus mainly at tests the form
Javā, and only once mentions Yavadvīpa. He then deals with the toponymic
evidence from the island of Java in no more than one paragraph of five lines,
mentioning only the inscription of Canggal with its Yavadvīpa, “sans
pourtant être assuré que l’auteur de ce texte désigne effectivement l’île qui
porte ce nom aujourd’hui”. It is only by totally ig noring all the evidence
presented above, and the work of predecessors such as Louis-Charles
Damais, that the rarity of cases of Yavadvīpa in Kh mer epigraphy can for
Jacques then become an argument to support his clai m that the Khmer
inscriptions did not mean the island of Java when w riting Java/ā, and that
bhūmi jāva in the late-7thcentury CeŚrīvijayan Old Malay inscription of
Kota Kapur would denote the Malay peninsula rather than the island of Java.
Having determined that Claude Jacques’s arguments c annot stand
scrutiny, let us now simply present the few passage s from Cambodian
epigraphy where we find reference to Java or Yavadv īpa, other than the
inscriptions quoted at the outset. The earliest possible reference, not so far
acknowledged by any scholar as far as I am aware, is found in the inscription
of Vat Cakret (or Preah Vihear Kuk; K. 60, 548 Śaka ; ed. Barth 1885:
38–44), from the Ba Phnom region in the heart of Funan, present Prei Veng
province in the far South of Cambodia:
rājendrasya prasādena diṅmaṇḍalavicār(iṇaḥ)
pareṣāṃ kīrttim ākramya yasya kīrttir jjavasthitā
The editor of this inscription, Auguste Barth, took  the word java as the
Sanskrit noun meaning ‘speed’. He proposed:
Par la grâce de ce roi des rois (i.e. Īśānavarman), parcourant le cercle (entie r) des régions,
lui dont la gloire après avoir attaqué la gloire de ces rivaux, s’est arrêtée  dans sa course
rapide …
On the word javasthitā , ‘arrêtée dans sa course rapide’, he gave the
explanatory note: « Pour se reposer, sans doute, et se fixer auprès de lui. Ou
faut-il traduire : “(n’en) est devenue (que plus) rapide” ? ». It seems almost
certain to me that a pun was intended here, and that besides the claim that
the king’s fame is (oxymoronically) ‘steadfast ( sthitā ) in rapid motion
(java)’, the poet here intended to claim that the king’s fame had travelled to
great distance and was ‘present (even) in Java’; in  other words, that he
intended to present a variant of the trope of royal fame being disseminated
far and wide which is exceedingly common in Sanskrit poetry. In support of
this suggestion, I can refer to an inscription of C ampā, C. 211 (820 Śaka;the Problem of the Ancient Name Java 63
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013

--- [Page 25] ---
Griffiths et al. 2012b: 265), where we read on face B, in stanza III:
kīrttiṃ sthitām api mahāmvunidheś ca pāre
puṇyodaya m̐ kr̥tavato bhuvi rājamārggam 
manye guṇā dinakarāṅśusamās tamondhe 
yānty asya ki m̐ punar ime svapure prakīrṇṇāḥ ||
‘I imagine that the fame of him (Jayasiṃhavarman), who has fashioned a royal highwa y
on the earth [in the form of] his abundant merit, is present even on the opposite shore of
the great ocean. His virtues, spreading out, like rays of the sun, penetrate ( yānti ) [even] in
pitch darkness. How much more throughout his own city!’
If this suggestion is correct, then the stanza of K. 60 implies contact betw een
the Khmers and a distant foreign polity known to them as Java already in the
early 7thcentury Ce. It is an attractive speculation to suppose that this polity
was situated on the island which still bears this name.
The next reference comes from an inscription from Angkor of the late 9th
century (K. 809, 80x Śaka; ed. Cœdès 1937–66, vol. I, p. 37), which states of
king Indravarman, in stanza XX on its Southern doorjamb:
cīnacampāyavadvīpabhūbh r̥duttuṅgamastake
yasyājñā mālatīmālānirmmalā cumvalāyate ||
‘His decree, immaculate as a garland of jasmine, fo rms a crown 48on top of the lofty
heads of the kings of China, Campā and Yavadvīpa.’
Besides the two Sanskrit stanzas from K. 60 and K. 809, I must mention the
use of the term javā in a list of cult objects in the inscription K. 947  (815 Śaka),
about which I may cite from Dominique Soutif’s doct oral thesis (2009: 174):
…, il nous reste à évoquer Javā, pays pour lequel n ous disposons de l’unique mention
d’un objet importé d’un pays proche du Cambodge. elle apparaît […] dans l’inscription
K. 947 A : on y relève en effet l’objet suivant : vodī caṃdoṅ prak garop prak taṃve javā i
jyaṅ 4 liṅ ii , « 1 vodī [pourvu d’]un bec en argent, avec un couvercle en argent, travail de
Javā, [pesant] 4 jyaṅ, 2 liṅ» ; comme on le voit, on retrouve encore une fois l e terme
taṃve (l. 26 ; […]). [...] Cette nouvelle occurrence n’ap porte malheureusement aucun
élément permettant de localiser ce Javā. Cependant, il est intéressa nt de noter que ce pays
entretenait manifestement des relations commerciale s avec le Cambodge moins d’un
siècle après que Jayavarman II ait effectué un rite destiné à permettre au royaume khmer
de se dégager de sa tutelle.
Finally, there are a meager two occurrences in lists of persons. There is a loñ
java in a context from which we gain nothing in K. 366 (Vat Phu, 1061 Śaka;
ed. Cœdès 1937–66, vol. V , p. 288), face B, l. 14;49and there is a kurek javā
in a context which also figures a vāp cāmpa and a vāp cāṃ , suggesting
involvement of people of foreign origin, in K. 165 (Thvar Kdei, Kompong
Thom province, 874–79 Śaka; ed. Cœdès 1937–66, vol. VI, p. 132), face N,64 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 201348.See Bhattacharya (1991: 15, 49).
49.If the reading java, with short final a, is correct (which does not seem totally certain on
eFeO estampage n. 799), then we may not be dealing with the name that conce rns us in this
paper, but with the Sanskrit word java ‘speed’.

--- [Page 26] ---
l. 38.50None of the evidence from Cambodia thus provides any internal hint
as to the identity of Java and Yavadvīpa known to the ancient Khmers. At
least we can say that there is no concrete reason to doubt that these te rms
denoted the same place.
Yava and Java in inscriptions of Campā
Let us now turn to the inscriptions of Campā, prese nting the relevant
passages in chronological order. The stela of the temple of Po Nagar at Nha
Trang (C. 38) recounts the history of the cult of Ś ambhu’s ‘Face-Liṅga’
(mukhaliṅga ) and the cult of his consort, the ‘Lady’ ( bhagavatī or bhaṭārī ). It
does so with unusual prolixity, and duplication of information in verse and
prose parts of the text, on face A, in stanzas II through IV , and on face B in
the prose on lines 8–11. We read about an attack, in the year 696 Śaka, at the
hands of foreign men, who came by ship, bearing arm s, stole the liṅga ’s
removable face and the image of the Lady, and took off after setting the
temple on fire, thereby destroying the liṅga . They were pursued and slain on
sea by king Satyavarman, but the liṅga ’s face was lost in the waters, along
with its paraphernalia. This king was able to resto re the temple with its
mukhaliṅga and its image of the Lady to their former condition in the year
706 Śaka. For purposes of my argument below, it is sufficient to cite here
from the prose narrative (face B, lines 8–9; ed. Bergaigne 1893: 74–75):
tataś cirakālakaliyugadoṣād deśāntaraplavāgatapāpanarabhuggaṇasaṃh r̥teṣu
pratimāparibhogabhūṣaṇeṣu śūnyo bhavat
‘Then, due to long-lasting faults of the Kali age, [the temple of Śambhu and the L ady]
became deserted after the images, paraphernalia and  ornaments had been robbed by
hordes of evil cannibals who had come by boat from abroad.’
This inscription does not identify the ethnic identity of the foreign attackers.
But from an inscription issued by Satyavarman’s youn ger brother and
successor, Indravarman (C. 25), we learn that just three years later, in 709
Śaka, foreign forces struck again. Again they arrived on ship, and this time
the object of their vandalism was the temple of a g od Bhadrādhipatīśvara
that must once have stood in Pāṇḍuraṅga, the Cam heartland not far south of
Nha Trang, that was the center of power of Satyavar man and his
successors.51This inscription, issued on the occasion of restorations carried
out in 721 Śaka, is less elaborate in its account o f the event, but its
description (face B, lines 6–7) is strikingly similar to the prose passage from
C. 38 that I have just cited:the Problem of the Ancient Name Java 65
Archipel 85, Paris, 201350.The terms loñ, vāpand kurek are untranslatable indicators of social status in O ld Khmer.
Jacques (2005: 20, with n. 14) has referred to a Ya vapura in an inscription from the Battambang
region. In this case we can agree with him that thi s was « certainement un toponyme local ».
51.For a survey of the relevant sources and what we kn ow about this line of kings, see
Griffiths & Southworth 2011.

--- [Page 27] ---
tataś ca kaliyugadoṣātiśayabhāvena nāvāgatair jjavavalasaṃghair nnirddahyate pi
navāmvarādriyamite śakakāle sa eva śūnyo bhavat 52
‘And then, because of the excessiveness of the faul ts of the Kali age, [the temple of
Bhadrādhipatīśvara] was even burnt by hosts of forces of Java, who had come by ship, in
709 Śaka. In this way it became deserted.’
The verbal parallelism between the accounts of attacks in 696 and 709 Śaka
is such as to suggest that forces of Java were involved also in the attac k of
696 under the reign of Satyavarman. 53Whether this is true or not, it is
unlikely that Java in this context denoted any main land polity or ethnic
group, for even the Khmers, who would most easily h ave had access to a
naval route, preferred to come by land when they at tacked Campā, as
attested by historical records. 54
The next reference that concerns us here is found in an inscription from
Northern Campā, C. 149 (833 Śaka), which recounts t he career of a high
official who served successive kings of the so-called Indrapura dynasty. In
stanzas VIII and XI of this inscription we read:55
yavadvīpapuraṃ bhūpānujñāto dūtakarmmaṇi
gatvā yaḥ pratipattisthaḥ siddhayātrāṃ samāgamat ||
‘Having been assigned by the king with a diplomatic t ask, this dignitary went to the
capital of Yavadvīpa, and met with success of his mission.’
yavadvīpapuraṃ bhūyaḥ kṣitipānujñayānayā 
dvivāram api yo gatvā siddhayātrām upāgamat ||
‘By this (same) assignment of the king he again wen t to the capital of Yavadvīpa, and
even the second time obtained success of his mission.’56
The term Yavadvīpa occurs again in the much later i nscription C. 22 (no
earlier than 1228 Śaka), which states in Old Cam, in lines 2–4 of face A: 5766 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 201352.ed. Bergaigne (1893 : 33); v erifie d on eFe O estamp age n. 195 2. It seem s that evamust
be em ended to  evaṃ , as my  translatio n presupp oses.
53.This w as assum ed as a fact by C œdès (196 8: 95 ). The likelihood  that w e can  indeed
identify the attack ers of 696 Śaka (774 Ce) is strengthened  by the fact that C hinese accou nts
of an attack of “Java” ( 阇婆, Mandarin Shepo, V ietnamese Đồ bà/ Trà và) on an area which
now lies in north ern Vietnam , in 767 Ce, just se ven y ears before the first recorded  attac k on
Campā. See the first footn ote in C laudin e Salmon’s contributio n to th is issue, and its section
entitled “The Jaw a or Di nhân”.
54.See W olters (1973: 2 8–29 = 2008: 17 3–174) and L epoutre (forth coming).
55.edited by H uber (1911: 3 03) and M ajum dar (1927 : 131). W ith regard to stanza VIII, it is
not clear w hether M ajum dar’s reading dūta° in place of H uber’s nūta° is a conscious new
reading or em endation , or the m ere result o f faulty cop ying from  Hub er. Ho wever this m ay
be, direct in spection of the sto ne (N ational M useum  of H istory, H anoi: B2 , 28 = LSb 211 54)
reveals that dūta° is the correct readin g.
56.On the term  siddhayā trā, see N ilakanta Sastri (1937 , 194 8–49) and C hhabra (1948).
Several of the contexts in w hich it occurs in Sanskrit literature exp licitly inv olve travel by
sea.
57.I cite these lines in a provisional edition based  on my own  inspe ction of the eF eO
estam page n. 1073 . The text is badly preserved in parts, an d I do  not fully  understand  the

--- [Page 28] ---
madā agrarājamahiṣī sidaḥ rājaputrī pu po m̃tana rayā (d)evādideva 58ya marai je m̃ vyā
parameśvarī ya samū bhagavatī (śrī) {1} sahajotpati {1} ya m̃(ṅ)·  madā rājaputrī pu po m̃
tana rayā yavādhipa ya marai di yavadvīpa ya d r̥m̃nāma sidaḥ pu po m̃ vyā tāpasī
‘There was an excellent chief queen, namely the daughter of his majesty the Super-God
among Gods, who came to become his queen. She was like the Lady Śrī … natural  birth
… There was a daughter of his majesty the lord of Yava, who came from (?) Yavadvī pa.
She bore the name Pu Po m̃ Vyā Tāpasī.’
The remaining passages from Campā inscriptions are in lists, formulated in
Cam language, of slaves ( hulun ) attached to the service of certain
sanctuaries. These are as follows.
C. 7 (end of the 12thcentury Śaka), ll. 3–4: 59
kvi[r]·  ja[v] ālaum̃ vukāṃ sya(ṃ) [#]3 dri m̃
‘Khmers, Javanese, Laos/Chinese, Paganese, Siamese: #3 people [in total]’.
C. 10 (13thcentury Śaka), l. 5: 60
… vinai javā vinai lamvī vinai yvan·  laki m̃ranuk …
‘… Javanese woman, woman (of) Lamvī, Viet woman, man (of) Ranuk…’
C. 43 (after 1357 Śaka), face B, ll. 21–23: 61
ṅan·  campa si (vu)[ ḥ] dauk·  di ṅauk·  n ī ṅan·  lauvv·  yvan·  kur·  syaṃ [ja]vā
vaṅgalāaviḥ170 
‘And [men] of Campā whom he ordered to reside here in the highlands, with
Laos/Chinese, Viets, Khmers, Siamese, Javanese, Bengalis: all of them 170.’
Again, as in the case of the evidence from the insc riptions of Cambodia, we see
that the data from the inscriptions of Campā are not  in themselves sufficient to
identify what the terms Java/Javā and Yavadvīpa ref erred to. But there is no
reason to assume that they did not denote the same place. We may at least
surmise that this place lay overseas, and that Camp ā maintained connections —
diplomatic and otherwise — with it over a period of  several centuries.
Cams, Khmers, and other foreigners in the Javanese historical record
Having seen how in records of the Cams and the Khme rs the terms
Yavadvīpa and Java often occur in the context of li sts of foreigners orthe Problem of the Ancient Name Java 67
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013passage in question at the time of this writing. See Vickery (2004: 55–58) on the hi story of
interpretation of this passage. In response to Vick ery I can confirm here that the reading
javādhipa , once entertained by Finot, is certainly not correct, and that Aymonier’s improved
reading of 1911 must be accepted. This reading was subsequently ‘rediscovered’ by Jacques
(2005: 21) who ignores Aymonier’s publication.
58.Probably to be understood as devādhideva (cf. the very common Sanskrit expression
rājādhirāja ).
59.Cited after the edition of Lepoutre (forthcoming), used also in Griffiths & Lepoutre
(forthcoming).
60.This unpublished inscription is cited from my provi sional reading based on eFeO
estampage n. 1949.
61.ed. Griffiths et al. (2012b: 205ff.).

--- [Page 29] ---
foreign countries, it will be useful for my argument  to review briefly how
Javanese sources refer to foreigners. 62This occurs most notably in lists of
‘tax farmers’ ( kilalan ),63whose oldest instantiation we find in the damaged
Kaliru ṅan inscription, presumably from Central Java, of 805 Śaka (Boechari
2012: 477–478), and then in a substantial number of  inscriptions of
following centuries, all from east Java. The lists show only slight variati on
from the earliest to later specimens, and the devel opment of their
composition has been described by Wisseman Christie (1999: 246–248). It is
sufficient here to cite only the earliest fully pre served example, from the
inscription of Cane (943 Śaka), line 14:64
kunaṅ ikanaṅ vārgga kilalan kliṅ āryya siṅhala paṇḍikira draviḍa campa kmir r̥mən …
‘and the tax farmer groups of Kliṅ, Ārya, Singhalese, Paṇḍikira, Draviḍa, Cams, Khmers
and Mons…’
The segment campa kmir rəmən occurs (in various spellings) in all
attestations of such lists, and has unanimously been interpreted as denoting
Cams, Khmers and Mons. 65Outside of these lists, the material from
Javanese epigraphy is very limited. Besides one ins cription where the fact
that a person is ‘considered to be of Khmer descent’ ( sinaṅguḥ vka kmir ) is
relevant for his tax status, 66we only find occurrences of Campa and Kmir
that are of no relevance to the present study. 67
Different from the cases of ancient Campā and Cambodia, however, the
ancient Javanese historical record is not limited to epigraphical sources. The
court poem Deśavarṇana (formerly referred to by scholars as Nāgara-
kr̥tāgama ) in praise of the Majapahit king Hayam Vuruk contains important
information on the foreign countries, beyond the sp here of influence of68 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 201362.Barret Jones (1984: 23–26) has discussed the pre-11thcentury Ceepigraphical sources
relevant to this matter.
63.On this term, see Boechari (1976: 7 = 2012: 166 with n. 16) and Zoetmulder (1976: 191).
64.edited in Brandes 1913, nr. LVIII, p. 124.
65.On rəmən , see Wisseman Christie (1999: 245–248) and Krom (1914). I may note here
that the name kliṅ/khliṅ is also attested in Khmer epigraphy, and is commonly interpreted as
referring to (some part of) India (thus e.g. Jenner 2009a: 82 / 2009b: 74), as is the evidently
identical Javanese name k(ə)liṅ (e.g. by Wisseman Christie). The important observations of
L.-Ch. Damais (1957: 635–636 and 1964: 94–104), giving a cautious argument in favor of a
location in the Malay Peninsula, are habitually ignored. The occurrences in Khme r epigraphy
more than once show the ethnonym ramañ ‘Mon’ in the immediate context.
66.Inscription of Vuruḍu Kidul, verso, line 10 (844 Śa ka), edited by Stutterheim (1935:
451–452).
67.See the plate of Guntur, recto, lines 5–6 (829 Śaka ; Sarkar 1971–72/II: 100) for a Si
Campa and the stone of Turyan, face A, line 37, for  a Saṅ Campa (Titi Surti Nastiti 2003:
147); the plate of Paləpaṅan, line 13 (Sarkar 1971– 72/II: 56) for a man called Pu Kmir and the
inscriptions of Ratavun I and II, respectively rect o line 11 and line 8 (Sarkar 1971–72/I: 267
and 273), for a man referred to as si ṅgəh ramani kmir ‘Si Ṅgəh headman of the Khmers’.

--- [Page 30] ---
Majapahit, that were known in east Java in the 14thcentury Ce. First, in a
stanza that comes immediately after a long list of places considered to be
under Majapahit suzerainty, we read the following (15.1):
nāhan lvirniṅ deśāntara kacaya de śrī narapatī
tuhun taṅ syaṅkāyodhyapura kim utaṅ dharmanagarī
marutma mvaṅ riṅ rājapura ṅuniveh siṅhanagarī
ri campā kāmbojānyat i yavana mitreka satatā ||15.1||
‘The above are the various regions protected by His  Majesty; on the other hand, the
Siamese of Ayodhya and also of Dharmanagarī, Marutm a, Rājapura as well as
Siṅhanagarī, Campā, Cambodia and Đại Việt are always friends.’ 68
In a different part of the text, in the context of a description of an annual
festival in the month of Phalguṇa, we read three relevant stanzas (83.4–5):
hetunyānantarā sarvajana təka sakeṅ anyadeśa prakīrṇa
naṅ jambudvīpa kamboja cina yavana len cəmpa karṇātakādi
goḍa mvaṅ syaṅka taṅ saṅkanika makahavan potra milviṅ vaṇik sək
bhikṣu mvaṅ vipramukhyān hana təka sinuṅan bhoga tuṣṭan paṅanti ||83.4||
ndān aṅkən phalguṇa śrī n r̥pati pinaripūjeniv riṅ svarājya
prāptaṅ mantrī sabhūmī java juru kuvu len dhyakṣa sarvopapatti
milvaṅ bālyādi nūṣāntara sahana saha prabhrətin tan pəgat sək
byāpārī mvaṅ vaṇin ri pəkən aṅəbək atip sarvabhāṇḍanya kīrṇa ||83.5||
‘And so constantly all kinds of people come from other countries in countless numbers —
namely India, Cambodia, China, Đại Việt, Campā, the Carnatic and so on, Bengal and
Siam are their places of origin, sailing on ships with merchants in large numbe rs, monks
and priests in particular — when they come they are given food and are happy to stay.
Now every Phalguṇa the King is honoured and treated with solicitude in his own pal ace:
there arrive the officials of all Java, the juru and kuvu as well as the Superintendents and
all the Assessors, joined by the Balinese as first among the other islands , all with their
gifts in uninterrupted numbers; vendors and merchan ts fill the markets and all their
various wares are piled up in abundance.’ 69
For a discussion of the identification of the forei gn countries ( deśāntara ,
anyadeśa ) in these stanzas, I refer to Gerini (1905) and Robson (1997). 70It
is perhaps no coincidence that the court poem of th e 14th-century king of
Majapahit records foreign courtesy visits in close connection with the
festival in Phālguna, while the description of the Phālguna festival under the
Khmer king Jayavarman VII at the end of 12thcentury Ceis likewise statedthe Problem of the Ancient Name Java 69
Archipel 85, Paris, 201368.I have cited with slight adaptations the translatio n furnished by Robson (1997: 431),
which was itself slightly adapted from the complete  translation of the Deśavarṇana in
Robson (1995). Here and in the stanzas below, I have normalized the spelling and made the
necessary small adjustments concerning vowel length and epenthesis of the vowe l əin order
for the text as edited diplomatically by Pigeaud (1960–33, vol. I) to satisfy the require ments
of meter.
69.The translation of stanza 3 is after Robson (1997), that of stanza 4 after Robson (1995).
70.Robson ignores Gerini’s publication. In my opinion, neither author succeeds in giving a
satisfactory explanation of the term Syaṅka. even if, like me, one is unconvinced t hat syaṅka
can be explained as syam with Sanskrit suffix - ka, as Robson proposes, at least one may
agree with him that it denoted Siam.

--- [Page 31] ---
to have involved numerous foreigners. We read about this in the stela of Prah
Khan (K. 908, 1113 Śaka), that we have already cited above, now in stanza
LVII:
atra strīpuruṣās sacāmpayavanās sārddhaṃ pukāṃrvvañjanair 
rakṣyantān triśatā iha triniyutās te ṣaṭ sahasrā api
ṣaṣṭir dvādaśa cāyutan tu gaṇitās sārddhaṃ sahasratrayaṃ 
grāmāḥ kiñ ca na devakāryyakaraṇaṃ kāṣṭhopalādy akṣatam 
‘For this purpose, the men and women including Cams and Viets, 71together with Pagan
and Mon people, numbering three hundred and six thousand three hundred and seventy-
two, as well as the three and a half thousand villa ges, and whatever, made of wood or
stone, serves for the cult of the gods, must be maintained unscathed!’ 72
Implications of nomenclature shared between the anc ient Khmers, Cams
and Javanese
We have seen that rulers of the Central Javanese kingdom in the 8th, 9thand
early 10thcenturies of our era used both yavadvīpa and bhūmi java (and
equivalent expressions) to denote their own realm, and that kings continued
to do so throughout the following centuries, after the center of power had
moved to east Java. The terms were obviously synonymous to the Javanese
rulers themselves, and there is no reason a priori why we should not attempt
to identify the contemporary ancient Khmer and Cam references besides the
earlier Śrīvijayan reference to javā/java/jāva as denoting the island of
Java.73
On the contrary, there is a simple and decisive argument in favor of this
identification. This is the evident agreement in nomenclature both for own
countries (endonyms) and for foreign countries (exonyms) that we see when70 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 201371.Based aga in on  his m isguided presum ption th at the claim of K hmer su zerain ty over
Yavan a in K . 908, st. C XLVI (see above), mu st be factually tru e, Claude Jacq ues (2 005:
25–29) has attem pted to argue against the idea that Y avana here denotes Đ ại Việt, a nd to do
so presents d ata w hich had long  since been presented  by Gerini (1905) show ing that certain
people in northw estern Tha iland  used the sam e nam e, but ig noring entirely  Gerini’s
publicatio n on the list of m ainland polities in the Deśav arṇana , and its sober conclusion  that
it is u nreasonable to presum e the auth or of the Deśavarṇa nainten ded such a peo ple in
northw estern  Thailand rather th an th e Viets, to w hom this term  undo ubtedly refers in
inscription s of Cam pā. If the Javanese and the C ams used the term  to den ote the Viets, th e
question  becom es wh y the same w ould no t hold true for th e Khm ers. On e needs m uch
stronger reasons than Jacques’ argu ment based on the stanza of K . 908 to m ake a persu asive
case. See also V ickery (2004 : 9) on  Yavana as term denoting the V iets in Kh mer inscriptions.
72.Another inscriptio n of th e same period , K. 273 (Śaka 11 08), stanz a LXVII, again
mentions Cam s and  Paga nese together. O n the histo rical bac kgroun d, see Lep outre
(forthcom ing) and Griffiths &  Lepoutre (forthcom ing).
73.Whereas the sp elling jāva is found only in  one so urce, in Old M alay, and is ex plained
above, in n. 46 , the fact that vernacular K hmer and C am sources spell javā whereas Javanese
sources sp ell java can be easily explained  with refe rence to o ther evident cases of vocab ulary
that is shared by the unrelated  lang uages Kh mer and  Malay/Javan ese: instances such as
Khm er trā‘seal’ and māḥ‘gold’ correspo nding to tərain (m odern) M alay, əmas in (m odern)
Malay and masin Jav anese. In the cases o f lexical corresp ondences between the v ery closely

--- [Page 32] ---
we compare the inscriptions of Cambodia, Campā and Java. If we limit
ourselves to names attested in at least two of the three epigraphical corpora,
and exclude terms that certainly refer to countries  outside Southeast Asia
(China and India), the result is as shown in the following table. 74
even if we admit the uncertain case of Kliṅ (see n. 65 above), which is
anyhow different from all other cases in being much  less well attested
epigraphically, and intentionally leave open the identity of Yavadvīpa/Java,
the pattern that emerges from this list is still cl ear enough: all remaining
names can be identified without reasonable doubt as representing one of the
major polities known from ancient Southeast Asian h istory. 76Moreover,
both in the case of the Cams and the Khmers, their endonym as used in their
own inscriptions is identical to that observed in t he inscriptions of their
neighbors to refer to them and their country. These facts leave no space for
reasonable doubt that Java/Yavadvīpa denoted the si ngle major polity of
ancient Southeast Asia which is still missing from the rightmost colum n inthe Problem of the Ancient Name Java 71
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013related languages Cam and Malay, and the somewhat m ore distantly related language
Javanese, we also see that final āin Cam normally corresponds to final ain Malay/Javanese
(e.g. ‘eye’ is matā and ‘enter’ is tamā in Cam, corresponding to mata and tama in Mal./Jav.).
74.The headings “Sanskrit” vs. “Vernacular” are only rough indicators, for names from both
columns are liable to appear both in Sanskrit and in vernacular context. The preci se pattern of
distribution is not relevant to my argument.
75.On this name, see the contribution by Ferlus (2006)  that is equally problematic as his
contribution on the name Java discussed above. For a critical remark (although not one  that
touches on Ferlus’ basic Siam argument), see Griffiths & Lepoutre (forthcoming, n. 23).
76.I define this concept of ‘major polity’ here — without any pretense that it is va lid outside
of the scope of my argument — as a polity attested without uncertainty over a period of
several centuries both in indigenous written sources and in foreign documents.Sanskrit name Vernacular names Identification
Campa/Campā Cam, Cām Cam
Kamvuja Kmer, Khmer Khmer
Kmir, Kvir, Kur
Rāmanya Rmañ, Ramañ, Mon
Rvañ, Rəmən
Pukāṃ Pagan
Syaṃ 75Siam
Yavana Yvan Viet
Kliṅ, Khliṅ ?
Yavadvīpa Java, Javā

--- [Page 33] ---
the list above, and whose pair of endonyms corresponds with a pair of names
found in the list, 77namely the suzerain kingdom of the island of Java.
If we read the epigraphical record of ancient South east Asia, and
particularly that of Campā and Cambodia, in this li ght, then we may note how
mention of Java in inscriptions of the mainland see ms to coincide with known
high points in Javanese political power and foreign  involvement. I hence
propose resolutely to revert to precisely this iden tification expressed with
regard to the Sdok Kak Thom inscription (K. 235) by  its translator, Pierre
Dupont, 78a scholar whom I will have occasion to mention agai n below.
Who was Satyavarman?
Out of the four Khmer insciptions mentioned at the outset, two attribute
defensive rituals against Javā to Jayavarman II, who se posthumous name
was Parameśvara. The accession of this king is supposed to date from 724
Śaka (802 Ce),79according to retrospective inscriptions. The two ot her
inscriptions mentioned at the outset attribute the erection of a substantial
number of Buddhist images to an undated Satyavarman,  and one of these
two, the Sab Bak inscription (K. 1158), specifies a s reason precisely the
same purpose of defense against Javā that we saw specified for Jayavarman
II’s actions in the inscriptions K. 235 and K. 956. None of the many scholars
who have taken note of the historical importance of the Sab Bak inscription
have paid any real attention to the name Satyavarman.80
Now precisely this name is known as that of a ruler of Campā in the last
quarter of the 8thcentury Ce. This is only two decades prior to the presumed72 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 201377.The reader will note that this last clause excludes Śrīvijaya.
78.Dupont (in Cœdès & Dupont 1943–46: 106 n. 1): « Vx- kh. Javā a fait l’objet
d’hypothèses diverses, toutes localisées en Indonésie. Le passage par ‘Javā’ de Jayavarman II
doit être rapproché des témoignages arabes sur la s ujétion du Cambodge vis-à-vis du
mahārāja de Java, et des allusions chames à des expéditions de pillards malais. La
suppression de la suzeraineté de Javā est d’ailleurs un des buts énoncés par Jayavarman II,
comme on verra plus loin. Le terme Javā désigne très probablement en l’espèce  l’île de Java,
en plein essor sous les premiers Çailendra (Cf. à ce sujet, G. Cœdès JMBrAs , XIV, III, et
histoire ancienne des États hindouïsés d’E.o ., p. 116). Le mot ne peut être séparé de kh.-md.
Čvâ (orthographié jvā), qui s’applique indistinctement à tous les Malais . Il avait peut-être
anciennement un sens ethnique, les Javā . »
79.See Majumdar 1943. See also Jacques (1992: 1) who p rovides no argument against
Majumdar in claiming that the year 724 Śaka is that of a special ‘imperi al’ consecration as
opposed to an earlier ‘normal’ royal consecration. This is an utterly ad hoc distinction
without any support in the epigraphical record. We may simply have to accept that  the date is
not reliable, if, as both Jacques and Vickery (fort hcoming) are now inclined to do, we
identify Jayavarman II with a Jayavarman mentioned in certain Cambodian inscriptions
dating from the last decades of the 8thcentury of our era.
80.Sundberg (2003: 178 n. 28) calls the Kaṃsteṅ Śrī Sa tyavarman a “magician”, which
might suggest that, like the officiants presiding o ver Jayavarman II’s execution of similar
stratagems in K. 235 and K. 956, he was a Brahmin, but Sundberg’s choice of words is

--- [Page 34] ---
accession date of Jayavarman II in 802 Ce. Satyavarman was moreover a
ruler whose dynasty, according to the inscriptions of Campā cited above
(C. 38 and C. 25), repeatedly had to face attacks from foreign forces. They
first struck the north of what is now Vietnam in th e year 767 (cf. n. 53
above), then struck Campā in the year 774 Ce. This is just one year before
the erection of the ‘Ligor’ inscription in Nakhon Si Thammarat or in Chaiya
(in the ancient realm of Panpan, on the east coast of what is now peninsular
Thailand), which, whatever its precise historical s ignificance, certainly
implies some presence of representatives of archipelago polities so far north:
its face A was issued by a Śrīvijayan king in 775 Ce, and a Śailendra king
left a record on face B of the same stela, most lik ely at a somewhat later
date. 81Finally, when naval forces struck Campā again, under Satyavarman’s
younger brother Indravarman, thirteen years after th e attack under
Satyavarman in 774 Ce, they were explicitly identified as being Javanese
(javavalasaṅgha ).82
These correspondences of events and dates can, to m y mind, hardly be
coincidental. 83The fact that nobody 84has noticed them may be explained in
the first place by the general marginalization of dat a from Campā history
within the greater picture of Southeast Asian histo riography, especially
outside francophone circles; secondly by the fact that Satyavarman was forthe Problem of the Ancient Name Java 73
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013probably just a casual in terpretation of the fact that this figure is said to mān siddhi ‘possess
magical pow ers’. The suffix  °varm anclearly identifies this ‘mag ician’ as a m ember of the
ruling estate ( kṣatriyavarṇa ).
81.For a sum mary of th e debate on the interpretation  of this inscriptio n’s historical
significance, an d the problem of its proven ance, see Jacq-H ergoualc’h (200 2: 242– 247).
82.I will not enter here into the th orny p roblem s posed by the  Ligor inscriptio n’s association
with a ruler of Ś rīvijaya o n side A, d ated 697  Śaka, but w ith a Śailend ra ruler on the u ndated
and unfin ished side B. It m ust be n oted, how ever, that the curio sity of om itting the  nam e of
the weekday  observed in the dating form ulas of Satyav arman’s inscriptions (Griffiths &
Southw orth 200 7: 367 –368 and 201 1: 284 –285) is shared precisely with  their con temporary,
the inscription Ligor A ; and that face B  of this stela sh ows scrip t which is clearly distinct
from  the scrip t on face A , and w hich is clearly identical to the characteristic cursive script of
inscriptions of Java of the 9thcentury.
83.Of sig nificantly  less certain pertin ence is the partial agreem ent betw een the nam es of
Prathivīnarendra ( sic), ordered to arrange the executio n of the kalyāṇasiddhi againt Java in
K. 956 (quoted above) and that of king Prath ivīndravarm an (sic), alias Rudraloka, of w hom
Satyavarm an is sa id to have been a nephew  (see Griffith s & Southwo rth 2011: 2 93–294).
84.Aym onier (190 0: 261– 270) cites alm ost in  full an 1883 article of Ém ile Sénart. Th e latter
scholar had spoken o f « un personnag e peut-être ro yal d u nom  de Satyavarm an, d ont p ar
malheur la d ate et le rôle nous sont encore com plètem ent in connus », to w hich Aymonier
added a note (p p. 264 –265), exp laining that « ce Satyavarm an, qui avait jadis consacré d es
statu es du B ouddha, d oit être iden tifié, selon to ute vraisem blance, av ec le ministre de ce nom
qui écrivit l’in scription de Phim éanakas, dans le pala is d’A ngkor, vers 832 śaka » . This
inform ation is m isleading, for the inscrip tion in questio n, K . 291 , mentions a figure
Satyāśraya, of wh om it is stated parenthetically that h e received the title M ratāñ  Khloñ Śrī
Satyādhipativarm ma (face A , lines 27– 28; iCIII, p. 199). T here is no t, as far as I can see, any
supporting evidence for the identificatio n propo sed by  Aymonier.

--- [Page 35] ---
more than a century only known to have issued one inscription, the stela of
the temple Po Nagar at Nha Trang (C. 38), where the  years 696 and 706
Śaka are said to fall within his reign, and where he is credited with repe lling
a foreign attack and restoring the damage to the mukhaliṅga at Kauṭhāra
(elsewhere spelled Kuṭhāra), present Nha Trang. This track record seems to
have been insufficiently glorious for scholars of a ncient Cambodia to
consider associating him with the erection(s) of nin e and/or ten Buddhist
images recorded in the Vat Sithor and Sab Bak inscriptions.
But discoveries of two exceptional Sanskrit inscrip tions in recent years
have significantly enriched our picture of this Satyavarman. While the lower
and upper date limits of his reign in Campā are still unaltered, and we have
learned no more of his encounters with foreign forc es, we can now
confidently credit this Satyavarman with the founda tion of the important
temple complex of Hoà Lai, near Phan Rang, and more generally with the
development of Pāṇḍuraṅga as a major bastion of Campā culture. 85Indeed
Satyavarman’s power base seems to have been only here, in the far south of
Campā, and he has left no traces elsewhere in Campā territory. Now Pierre
Dupont, in a remarkably foresighted paper published  in 1949, had already
noted several striking correspondences between Satyavarman’s dynasty and
pre-angkorian Khmer rulers. Chief among these is th e custom of using
posthumous names. 86Other scholars, such as Stern (1942) and Boisselier
(1956), have noticed stylistic correspondences between art of 7thcentury Ce
Cambodia and contemporary Campā art at Mỹ Sơn, far to  the north of
Pāṇḍuraṅga, under Prakāśadharman-Vikrāntavarman, wh o was of Khmer
descent. And they have noted the same between the m entioned temple of
Hoà Lai and the Prasat Damrei Krap on the Phnom Kulen (cf. Griffiths &
Southworth 2011: 272–275). Ornamental and architectural connections have
also been pointed out between temples of Pāṇḍuraṅga  (such as Hoà Lai),
monuments in the realm of former Panpan in peninsular Thailand, the area of
provenance of the ‘Ligor’ inscription mentioned above, and the monumental
art of Central Java (cf. Jacq-Hergoualc’h 2001).
In the light of all the positive evidence for intens ive political contact,
even extending to the migration of a ruler (Prakāśa dharman) from ancient
pre-angkorian Cambodia to take up power in Campā; i n the light of long
recognized artistic connections between insular and mainland Southeast Asia
in general, as well as specific connections around the turn of the 9thcentury
Ce; in the light of the fact that the political situat ion in pre-angkorian74 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 201385.See the articles by Griffiths & Southworth of 2007 and 2011.
86.In his article devoted to posthumous names of Khmer rulers, Jacques (2001: 195–196)
expresses some doubt as to the real existence of such a tradition in these  Campā inscriptions.
The issue is indeed somewhat uncertain, but I see no  specific reasons not to assume, with
Dupont, that some posthumous names were in use in early Southern Campā.

--- [Page 36] ---
Cambodia is very uncertain precisely in the period of Satyavarman’s reign in
Southern Campā; in the light of the positive evidenc e that we have for
attacks from Java and for a Buddhist ruler from the archipelago showing his
influence halfway up the Malay peninsula in precisely this same period; in
the light of all these factors, it appears to me no t so far-fetched at all to
propose that it was the Satyavarman of Pāṇḍuraṅga in Campā who undertook
the erection of the Buddhalokeśvara images on the A bhayagiri,
retrospectively recorded by the two Khmer inscriptions of Vat Sithor and Sab
Bak, or at least to propose that he was a figure of sufficient grandeur to have
left a memory even beyond the boundaries of Campā and could hence have
become the object of attribution of retrospective l egends in ancient
Cambodia.
If the former, more audacious hypothesis is accepte d, we may become
one step more speculative and ponder the possibility that the Abhayagiri was
situated not in Khmer territory, nor in Campā nor on the Malay Peninsula,
but can be identified with the Ratu Baka hillock in  Central Java, which
housed the Abhayagiri monastery founded by a Śailendra king in 714 Śaka
(782 Ce), in which case we would have to presume that the Ratu Baku
hillock was already famous as Abhayagiri before a monastery was founded
on it in collaboration with Sinhalese monks of the eponymous Abhayagiri-
vihāra in Sri Lanka. 87Satyavarman would have made the long pilgrimage to
and made large-scale foundations at that sacred Buddhist site 88not so much
for religious reasons — in fact from the Campā reco rd Satyavarman is
exclusively associated with Brahmanical foundations  — but to engage in
diplomacy with the expansive Śailendra rulers, to p ersuade them to leave
mainland Southeast Asia in peace. 89But I must frankly admit that the
argument for extending the hypothesis this far is entirely circum-stantial, and
that one can easily imagine multiple Abhayagiris in more than one part of
Southeast Asia — southern Cambodia, southern Vietna m, peninsular
Thailand, besides the one on Java — so I will conclude by summarizing my
main claims. These are, first, that the Khmer inscriptions refer to the is landthe Problem of the Ancient Name Java 75
Archipel 85, Paris, 201387.On this point, see the convincing arguments made by Sundberg (2004) for identification
of a structure on the Ratu Baka plateau as Abhayagirivihāra, with evidence of conta cts with a
Sri Lankan eponym. On the site in general, see Degroot (2006).
88.Sundberg (2003: 178): “Lokesh Chandra (…) infers th e existence of a large statue of
Avalokiteśvara on the Ratu Baka from his study of the Abhayagirivihāra inscription, noting
that it would complement the statues of Tārā and Mañjuśrī which were known to be already
positioned on the plain.”
89.Recall the two stanzas from the Campā inscription C . 149 which have a possibly
Buddhist aristocrat undertake no less than two siddhayātrā missions from his country to
Yavadvīpapura. Whatever this may mean precisely, the connection with siddhi in relationship
to Yavadvīpa, which must mean Java, would seem to o ffer a tantalizing parallel with
Satyavarman.

--- [Page 37] ---
of Java when they use the term Javā and, second, that the epigraphical record
of Satyavarman and his immediate successors in Southern Campā is likely to
hold important clues not only for the history of Ca mpā, but equally for
international political relations between the Khmer, Cam and Javanese pol i-
ties in the late 8thand early 9thcentury of our era. This second point holds
especially for a re-appraisal of the early days of Angkor which have thus far
always been associated with the name Jayavarman II, 90despite the fact that
we entirely lack contemporary evidence for his role, because we now have a
source — likewise retrospective — where part of the episodes traditionally
associated with this Jayavarman II are attributed to a Satyavarman.
RefeReNCeS
Ang Chouléan, 1998, “Collective memory in ancient Cambodia with reference to Jayavarma n
II”, in: M.J. Klokke & T. de Bruijn (eds.), southeast Asian Archaeology 1996 , Hull:
Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, 117–122.
Aymonier, Étienne, 1891, « Première étude sur les inscriptions tchames », Journal Asiatique ,
series 8, 17, 5–86.
—, 1900, le Cambodge . [Tome I:] le royaume actuel . Paris: ernest Leroux.
—, 1911, « L’inscription čame de Po Saḥ », Bulletin de la commission archéologique de
l’indochine (1911), 13–19.
Barret Jones, Antoinette M., 1984, Early tenth Century Java from the inscriptions. A study of
the economic, social and administrative conditions in the first quarter of the century .
Dordrecht: Foris Publications.
Barth, Auguste, 1885, inscriptions sanscrites du Cambodge . Notices et extraits de la
Bibliothèque nationale et autres bibliothèques. Tome  XXVII, 1repartie, 1erfascicule
(Paris: Imprimerie nationale), 1–180.
Bergaigne, Abel, 1893, inscriptions sanscrites de Campā et du Cambodge . Tiré des notices et
extraits de la Bibliothèque nationale et autres bib liothèques. Tome XXVII, 1repartie
(Paris: Imprimerie nationale), 1[=181]–448[=628]. [I  cite the page numbering of the
offprint.]
Bernet Kempers, A.J., 1967, “De lotgevallen van een  tekstregel”, spiegel der historie 2.6,
468–476.
Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar, 1991, recherches sur le vocabulaire des inscriptions sanskrites
du Cambodge . Paris: École française d’extrême-Orient.
Boechari, 1976, “Some considerations of the problem  of the shift of Matarām’s center of
government from Central to east Java in the 10thcentury A.D.”, Berita Pusat Penelitian
Purbakala dan Peninggalan Nasional/Bulletin of the research Centre of Archeology , 10.
—, 1979, “An Old Malay Inscription of Śrīwijaya at Palas Pasemah (South Lampung)”, in
Pra seminar Penelitian Śrīwijaya , Jakarta: Pusat Penelitian Purbakala dan Peninggalan
Nasional, 18–40.
—, 1986, “New Investigations on the Kedukan Bukit Ins cription”, in Untuk Bapak Guru.
Persembahan para murid untuk memperingati usia genap 80 tahun Prof. Dr. A.J. Bernet
Kempers , Jakarta: Pusat Penelitian Arkeologi Nasional, Dep artemen Pendidikan dan
Kebudayaan, 33–56.76 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 201390.Cf., among many other studies, Jacques (1972) and Ang Chouléan (1998).

--- [Page 38] ---
—, 2012, Melacak sejarah Kuno indonesia lewat Prasasti. trac ing Ancient indonesian
history through inscriptions . Jakarta: Kepustakaan Populer Gramedia.
Boisselier, Jean, 1956, « Art du Champa et du Cambodge préangkorien. La date de Mi-Sơn e-
I », Artibus Asiae 19.3/4, 197–212.
Bourdonneau, Éric, 2003, « Culturalisme et historiographie du Cambodge ancien : à propos de
la hiérarchisation des sources de l’histoire khmère », Moussons 7, 39–70.
—, 2007, « Réhabiliter le Funan. Óc eo ou la première  Angkor », Bulletin de l’École
française d’Extrême-orient 94, 111–158.
—, 2011a, « Nouvelles recherches sur Koh Ker (Chok Ga rgyar). Jayavarman IV et la
maîtrise des mondes », Monuments et mémoires de la fondation Eugène Piot 90, 93–141.
—, 2011b, « La fondation du culte du devarāja. Danse, sacrifice et royauté au Prasat Thom
de Koh Ker », Comptes rendus de l’Académie des inscriptions et belles-lettres 2011, III
(juillet-octobre), 1343–1382.
Brandes, J.L.A., 1913, oud-Javaansche oorkonden . Nagelaten transscripties van wijlen Dr.
J.L.A. Brandes. Uitgegeven door Dr. N.J. Krom. [ Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap voor Kunsten en Wetenschappen , 60.] Batavia, ’s-Hage: Albrecht & Co.,
M. Nijhoff.
de Casparis, J.G., 1956, selected inscriptions from the 7thto the 9thCentury A.D . [Prasasti
indonesia II.] Bandung: Masa Baru.
—, 1995, “Peranan Adityawarman, Putera Melayu di Asia Tenggara”, in Ismail Husse in et
al. (eds.), Persidangan Antarbangsa tamadun Melayu iii , Kuala Lumpur, Kementerian
Kebudayaan dan Pelancongan Malaysia, 918–943.
Chhabra, B.Ch., 1948, “Siddhayātrā”, indian Culture 14, 201–204.
—, 1965, Expansion of indo-Aryan Culture during Pallava rule  (as evidenced by
inscriptions) . Delhi: Munshi Ram Manohar Lal.
Chirapat Prapandvidya, 1990, “The Sab Bāk Inscripti on. evidence of an early Vajrayāna
Buddhist Presence in Thailand”, Journal of the siam society 78, 11–14.
Cœdès, George, 1924, recueil des inscriptions du siam . Première partie : inscriptions de
sukhothaya . Bangkok: Bangkok Times Press.
—, 1930, « Les inscriptions malaises de Çrīvijaya », Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-
orient 30, 29–80.
—, 1937–66, inscriptions du Cambodge . 8 vols. Hanoi [vol. I], Paris: Imprimerie d’extrême-
Orient [vol. I], eFeO.
—, 1941, « La stele du Práḥ Khằn d’Aṅkor », Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-orient
41, 255–302.
—, 1968, the indianized states of southeast Asia . edited by Walter F. Vella. Translated by
Sue Brown Cowing. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Cœdès, George & Pierre Dupont, 1943–46, « Les stèles de Sdǒk Kăk Thoṃ, Phnoṃ Sandak et
Práḥ Vihār », Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-orient , 43.1, 56–154.
Cœdès, George & Henri Parmentier, 1923, listes générales des inscriptions et des monuments
du Champa et du Cambodge . Hanoi: Imprimerie d’extrême-Orient.
Damais, Louis-Charles, 1952, « etudes d’épigraphie indonésienne. III : Liste des principa les
inscriptions datées de l’Indonésie », Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-orient 46.1,
1–105.
—, 1957, « Bibliographie. Prof. Dr Poerbatjaraka: riwajat indonesia , djilid I », Bulletin de
l’École française d’Extrême-orient 48.2, 607–649.
—, 1964, « etudes sino-indonésiénnes. III. La transcription chinoise 訶陵 ho-ling comme
désignation de Java », Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-orient 52.1, 93–141.
—, 1970, répertoire onomastique de l’épigraphie javanaise ju squ’à Pu siṇḍok Śrī
iśānawikrama Dharmmottungadewa . Paris: ecole française d’extrême-Orient.the Problem of the Ancient Name Java 77
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013

--- [Page 39] ---
78 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013Deeg, Max, 2005, Das Gaoseng-faxian-Zhuan als religionsgeschichtliche Quelle. Der älteste
Bericht eines chinesischen buddhistischen Pilgermön chs über seine reise nach indien
mit Übersetzung des textes . Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Degroot, Véronique, 2006, “The Archaeological Remai ns of Ratu Boko: from Sri Lankan
Buddhism to Hinduism”, indonesia and the Malay World vol. 34, issue 98, 55–74.
Dupont, Pierre, 1949, « Tchen-la et Panduranga : Le sud indochinois aux VIeet VIIesiècles »,
Bulletin de la société des Études indochinoises – nouvelle série 24 (no. 1), 9–25.
estève, Julia, 2009, Étude critique des phénomènes de syncrétisme religi eux dans le
cambodge angkorien . Thèse de doctorat. Paris: École Pratique des Haut es Études,
Section des sciences religieuses.
Ferlus, Michel, 2005, « L’intérêt linguistique des transcriptions chinoises concernant le
Cambodge ancien ( fou-nan et tchen-la ) », paper presented at the Vingtièmes Journées
de linguistique de l’Asie orientale , CRLAO (CNRS-eHeSS), 22–23 June 2005.
—, 2006, « Sur l’origine de la dénomination ‘Siam’ », Aséanie 18, 107–117.
—, 2010, « Localisation, identité et origine du Javā de Jayavarman II », Aséanie 26, 65–81.
Gerini, G.e., 1905, “The Nagarakretagama List of Countries on the Indo Chinese Mainland
(circâ 1380 A.D.)”, Journal of the royal Asiatic society , July 1905, 485–511.
Gerschheimer, Gerdi, 2003–04, « Le Corpus des inscr iptions khmères », Bulletin de l’École
française d’Extrême-orient 90–91, 478–482.
Griffiths, Arlo, Amandine Lepoutre, William A. Sout hworth & Thành Phần, 2012a,
« Épigraphie du Campā 2009-2010 : prospection sur le terrain, production d’estampages,
supplément à l’inventaire », Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-orient 95–96
(2008–2009, published 2012), 435–497.
—, 2012b, the inscriptions of Campā in the Museum of Cham sculpture at Đà Nẵng . Hanoi:
eFeO and Ho Chi Minh City: Center for Vietnamese an d Southeast Asian Studies,
VNUHCM Publishing House.
Griffiths, Arlo & Amandine Lepoutre, forthcoming, “ Campā epigraphical Data on Polities
and People of Ancient Myanmar”, Journal of Burma studies 17.2 (2013).
Griffiths, Arlo & William A. Southworth, 2007, « La stèle d’installation de Śrī
Satyadeveśvara : une nouvelle inscription du Campā trouvée à Phước Thiện », Journal
Asiatique 295, 349–381.
—, 2011, « La stèle d’installation de Śrī Ādideveśvar a : une nouvelle inscription de
Satyavarman trouvée dans le temple de Hoà Lai et so n importance pour l’histoire du
Pāṇḍuraṅga », Journal Asiatique 299, 271–317.
Griswold, A.B. & Prasert ṇa Nagara, 1971, “The Insc ription of King Rāma Gaṃhèṅ of
Sukhodaya (1292 A.D.). [epigraphic and Historical Sudies No. 9]”, Journal of the siam
society 59.2, 179–228.
Hadi Sidomulyo, 2010, “From Kuṭa Rāja to Singhasāri. Towards a Revision of the Dynast ic
History of 13thCentury Java”, Archipel 80, 77–138.
Hoshino, Tatsuo, 1986, Pour une histoire médiévale du moyen Mékong . Bangkok: editions
Duang Kamol.
—, 2002, “Wen Dan and its Neighbours: the Central Mek ong Valley in the Seventh and
eighth Centuries”, in Mayoury Ngaosrivathana & K. B reazeale (eds.), Breaking New
Ground in lao history: Essays on the seventh to twe ntieth Centuries , Chiang Mai:
Silkworm Books, 25–72.
Huber, edouard, 1911, « Études indochinoises VIII-X II », Bulletin de l’École française
d’Extrême-orient 11, 259–311.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel, 2001, « A propos de transferts de formes communs au Campā et a u
Panpan (péninsule Malaise) au IXesiècle », Arts Asiatiques 56, 45–60.

--- [Page 40] ---
—, 2002, the Malay Peninsula. Crossroads of the Maritime silk road (100 BC - 1300 AD) .
Leiden: Brill.
Jacques, Claude, 1972, « Études d’épigraphie cambodgienne, VIII. La carrière de Jayavarman
II », Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-orient 69, 205–220.
—, 1992, “On Jayavarman II, the founder of the Khmer empire”, in southeast Asian
Archaeology 1990 , Hull: Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, 1–5.
—, 2001, « Les noms posthumes des rois dans l’ancien Cambodge », in M.J. Klokke & K.R.
van Kooij (eds.), fruits of inspiration: studies in honour of Prof. J .G. de Casparis ,
Groningen: egbert Forsten, 191–198.
—, 2005, « Deux problèmes posés par l’inscription de la stèle de Praḥ Khan K. 908 »,
Aséanie 15, 11–32.
Jenner, Phillip N., 2009a, A Dictionary of pre-Angkorian Khmer . [Pacific linguistics, 597.]
Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
—, 2009b, A Dictionary of Angkorian Khmer . [Pacific linguistics , 598.] Canberra: Pacific
Linguistics.
Kern, H., 1885, “Sanskrit-inscriptie van Java, van den jare 654 Çaka (A. D. 732)”, Bijdragen
tot de taal-, land- en Volkenkunde 34, 125–138 [ Verspreide Geschriften VII (1917),
VII, 115–128].
—, 1917, Verspreide Geschriften . Zevende deel: Inscripties van den Indischen archipel, slot;
De Nāgarakṛtāgama, eerste gedeelte. ’s-Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff.
Khyac Sinḥ [Chit Thein], 1965, rheḥ hoṅḥ mvan kyok cā poṅḥ khyup [Collected Ancient Mon
Inscriptions]. Yangon: Department of Archaeology.
Krom, N.J., 1914, “Remen”, Journal of the royal Asiatic society , Oct. 1914, 1069.
—, 1931, hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis . Tweede, herziene druk. ’s-Gravenhage:
Martinus Nijhoff.
Kuntara Wiryamartana, I., 1990, Arjunawiwāha. transformasi teks Jawa Kuna lewat
tanggapan dan penciptaan di lingkungan sastra Jawa . Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana
University Press.
—, 1993, “The scriptoria in the Merbabu-Merapi area”,  Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en
Volkenkunde 149.3 ( Manuscripts of indonesia ), 503–509.
Laffan, Michael, 2009, “Finding Java: Muslim nomenclature of insular Southeast As ia from
Srivijaya to Snouck Hurgronje”, in eric Tagliacozzo (ed.), southeast Asia and the Middle
East: islam, movement, and the longue durée , Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press,
17–64.
Lefeber, Rosalind & Robert P. Goldman, 1994, the rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki. An Epic of Ancient
india . Vol. IV: Kiṣkindhākāṇḍa . Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Lepoutre, Amandine, forthcoming, « Les inscriptions  du temple de Svayamutpanna :
contribution à l’histoire des relations entre les pouvoirs cam et khmer (de la fin du XIIe
siècle au début du XIIIesiècle) », Journal Asiatique 300.2 (2012).
Luce, Gordon H., 2003–04, old Burma-Early Pagán . 3 vols. [ Artibus Asiae , Supplementum,
vol. 25.] New York: J.J. Augustin.
Mahdi, Waruno, 2005, “Old Malay”, in A. Adelaar & N .P. Himmelmann (eds.), the
Austronesian languages of Asia and Madagascar , Routledge: London & New York,
182–201.
—, 2008, “Yavadvipa and the Merapi Volcano in West Sumatra”, Archipel 75, 111–143.
Majumdar, R.C., 1927, Champā: history and Culture of an indian Colonial Kingdom in the
far East 2nd– 16thCentury A. D . New Delhi: Gyan Publishing House, 1985 [reprint].
—, 1943, “The Date of Accession of Jayavarman II”, Journal of the Greater india society
10, 52–55.the Problem of the Ancient Name Java 79
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013

--- [Page 41] ---
Manguin, Pierre-Yves & Agustijanto Indrajaya, 2011, “The Batujaya Site: New evide nce of
early Indian Influence in West Java”, in P.-Y. Manguin, A. Mani & Geoff Wade (eds.),
Early interactions between south and southeast Asia : reflections on Cross-Cultural
Exchange , Singapore: ISeAS Publishing, 113–136.
Mertens, Annemarie, 2000, “Beobachtungen zur Herrsc haftslegitimation im Aṅkor-Reich.
Die buddhistisch orientierte Vat-Sithor-Inschrift von Jayavarman V”, in C. Chojnacki, J.-
U. Hartmann & V.M. Tschannerl (eds.), Vividharatnakaraṇḍaka: festgabe für Adelheid
Mette , Swisttal-Odendorf: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 395–411.
Michel, Wesley, 2011, “Poetic Conventions as Opposed to Conventional Poetry? A Plac e for
kavisamayādi in Comparative Kāvya/Kakawin Studies”, in A. Acri, H. Creese & A.
Griffiths (eds.), from la ṅkā Eastwards. the rāmāyaṇa in the literature and Visual Arts
of indonesia , Leiden: KITLV Press, 11–23.
Nilakanta Sastri, K.A., 1937, “Siddhayātrā”, Journal of the Greater indian society 4,
128–136.
—, 1948–49, “Siddhayatra Again”, indian Culture 15 (B.M. Barua Commemoration
Volume), 52.
Noorduyn, J., 1982, “Bujangga Manik’s journeys through Java. Topographical data from an
old Sundanese source”, Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en Volkenkunde 138, 413–442.
Pigeaud, Theodoor Gautier Thomas, 1960–63, Java in the 14thcentury. A study in cultural
history . 5 vols. [Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- e n Volkenkunde. Translation
Series, 4.] The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Poerbatjaraka, R. Ng., 1922, “De inscriptie van het  Mahākṣobhya-beeld te Simpang
(Soerabaya)”, Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en Volkenkunde 78, 426–462.
Pollock, Sheldon, 2006, the language of the Gods in the World of Men: sanskrit, culture,
and power in premodern india . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Californi a
Press.
Robson, Stuart, 1995, Deśawarṇana (Nāgarakṛtāgama) by Mpu Prapañca . Leiden: KITLV
Press.
—, 1997, “Thailand in an Old Javanese source”, Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en
Volkenkunde 153, 431–435.
Sak-Humphry, Chhany & Philip N. Jenner, 2005, the sdok Kak thom inscription (K. 235) .
With a Grammatical Analysis of the Old Khmer Text [publication signed by Chh. S.-H.,
“with the assistance of Ph. N. J.”]. Phnom Penh: Buddhist Institute.
Sarkar, Himansu Bhusan, 1971–72 Corpus of the inscriptions of Java (up to 928 A.D.) .2
vols. Calcutta: Firma K.L. Mukopadhyay.
Sharrock, Peter, 2009, “Kīrtipaṇḍita and the Tantras”, Udaya: Journal of Khmer studies 10,
203–237.
Shorto, H.L., 1971, A Dictionary of the Mon inscriptions from the sixth  to the sixteenth
Centuries . London: Oxford University Press.
Skilling, Peter, 2004, “Random Jottings on Śrīghan a: An epithet of the Buddha”, Annual
report of the international research institute for Advanced Buddhology (Soka
University) 7, 147–158.
Soutif, Dominique, 2009, organisation religieuse et profane du temple khmer du Viieau xiiie
siècle . 3 vols. Thèse de doctorat, Université Sorbonne Nouvelle - Paris 3.
Stern, Philippe, 1942, l’art du Champa (ancien Annam) et son évolution . Toulouse and Paris:
Les Frères Douladoure and Adrien-Maisonneuve.
Stutterheim, W.F., 1927, “een belangrijke oorkonde uit de Kĕḍoe”, tijdschrift voor indische
taal-, land- en Volkenkunde 67, 172–215.
—, 1935, “epigraphica I–V”, tijdschrift voor indische taal-, land- en Volkenkun de75,
420–467.80 Arlo Griffiths
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013

--- [Page 42] ---
the Problem of the Ancient Name Java 81
Archipel 85, Paris, 2013—, 1939, “Note on cultural relations between South-In dia and Java”, tijdschrift voor
indische taal-, land- en Volkenkunde 79, 73–84.
Sundberg, Jeffrey Roger, 2003, “A Buddhist mantra recovered from the Ratu Baka plateau. A
preliminary study of its implications for Śailendra -era Java”, Bijdragen tot de taal-,
land- en Volkenkunde 159, 163–188.
—, 2004, “The wilderness monks of the Abhayagirivihara and the origins of Sino-Javanese
esoteric Buddhism”, Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en Volkenkunde 160, 95–123.
—, 2009, “The State of Matarām: A review of recent efforts to clarify its his tory”, Appendix
A, pp. 329–362, in Mark Long, Caṇḍi Mendut: Womb of the tathāgata , New Delhi:
Aditya Prakashan.
Terwiel, B.J., 2011, “Using Ockham’s Razor with Res pect to the Ram Khamhaeng
Controversy,” in Volker Grabowsky (ed.), southeast Asian historiography: Unravelling
the Myths , Bangkok: River Books, 42–51.
Titi Surti Nastiti, 2003, Pasar di Jawa pada Masa Matarām Kuna, Abad Viii–xi Masehi .
Jakarta: Pustaka Jaya.
Titi Surti Nastiti, Dyah Wijaya Dewi & Richadiana Kartakusuma, 1982, tiga Prasasti dari
Masa Balitung . Jakarta: Proyek Penelitian Purbakala, Departemen P & K. Pusat
Penelitian Arkeologi Nasional.
Vickery, Michael, 1992, “evidence for Prehistoric A ustronesian-Khmer Contact and
Linguistic Borrowing”, Mon-Khmer studies 21, 185–189.
—, 1998, society, Economics, and Politics in Pre-Angkor Cambodia. the 7th-8thCenturies .
Tokyo: The Centre for east Asian Cultural Studies for Unesco.
—, 2001, “Resolving the Chronology and History of 9thCentury Cambodia”, siksacakr 3,
17  –23.
—, 2003–04, “Funan Reviewed: Deconstructing the Ancients”, Bulletin de l’École française
d’Extrême-orient 90–91, 101–143.
—, 2004, Cambodia and its Neighbors in the 15thCentury . Singapore: Asia Research
Institute, Working Paper no. 27.
—, forthcoming, “A legend concerning Jayavarman II”, paper first presented at eFeO Pari s
in September 2004, since revised; subject to further revision.
Wisseman Christie, Jan, 1999, “Asian Trade between the Tenth and Thirteenth Ce nturies and
Its Impact on the States of Java and Bali”, in H.P. Ray (ed.), Archaeology of seafaring:
the indian ocean in the Ancient Period , Delhi: Pragati Publications, 221–270.
Wolters, O.W., 1973, “Jayavarman II’s Military Powe r: The Territorial Foundation of the
Angkor empire”, Journal of the royal Asiatic society of Great Britain and ireland 1973,
21–30.
—, 2008, Early southeast Asia: selected Essays. edited by Craig J. Reynolds. Ithaca, New
York: Southeast Asia Program Publications, Cornell University.
Woodward, Hiram W. Jr., 1994–95, “The Jayabuddhamah ānātha Images of Cambodia”,
Journal of the Walters Art Gallery 52–53, 105–11.
—, 2005, the Art And Architecture of thailand from Prehistor ic times through the
thirteenth Century . Second edition. Leiden-Boston: Brill.
—, 2011, “Dvaravati, Si Thep and Wendan”, Bulletin of the indo-Pacific Prehistory
Association 30 (2010), 87–97.
Zoetmulder, P.J., 1976, review of Sarkar 1971–72, Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en
Volkenkunde 132, 188–192.