--- [Page 1] ---
Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity
and their Bearing on the History of the Śaiva Corpus. Part I:
Parin .āmavāda
Andrea Acri1
Accepted: 18 May 2021 / Published online: 19 July 2021
©The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021
Abstract This article, divided into two parts, traces and discusses two pairs of
analogies invoked in Sanskrit(ic) literature to articulate the paradox of God’s
oneness and multiplicity vis-a `-vis the souls and the manifest world, reﬂecting the
philosophical positions of pariṇāmav āda(and bhed ābheda/dvait ādvaita or, in some
cases ,v iśiṣṭādvaita ) and vivartav āda(and abheda /advaita ). These are, respectively,
the analogies of ﬁre in wood and dairy products in milk, and moon/sun in pools of
water and space in pots. In Part I, having introduced prevalent ideas about the status
of the supreme principle(s) vis-a `-vis creation in S ´aivism, Sa ¯ ṅkhya, and Veda ¯nta, I
investigate instances of the ﬁrst pair of analogies in multiple textual genres, and
especially in S ´aiva literature from South and Southeast Asia, to highlight the
inﬂuence of pariṇāma-Veda ¯nta on the S ´aiva textual corpus. Arguing that the dis-
tribution of the two pairs of analogies may cast some light on the relationship
between different strands of dualistic and non-dualistic scriptures, I propose that the
ﬁrst pair could be traced back to the “formative” period of S ´aivism—that is, prior to
the emergence of the fully dualistic S ´aiva Saiddha ¯ntika corpus known to us.
Keywords bhed ābhedav āda·bhedav āda·pariṇāmav āda·vivartav āda·
satkāryav āda·S´aivism · Veda ¯nta · Sa ¯ ṅkhya · Analogies
Introduction
In the Indic religio-philosophical discourse, many theistic traditions regarded God as
possessing a paradoxical nature, being simultaneously characterized by—and at the
same time being beyond—oneness and multiplicity, transcendence and immanence,
&Andrea Acri
andrea.acri@ephe.psl.eu
1EPHE, PSL University, Paris, France
123Journal of Indian Philosophy (2021) 49:535–569
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10781-021-09475-0 (0123456789().,-volV) (0123456789().,-volV)

--- [Page 2] ---
and identity and difference with creation and the individual souls. The theological
ediﬁces of some of those traditions rested on the philosophical foundations built or
perfected by (different and to varying degrees systematized varieties of) Sa ¯ ṅkhya and
Veda ¯nta, among other systems. With respect to the problem of oneness vs.
multiplicity, i.e. the relationship between God—or the impersonal Supreme Principle,
brahman ,param ātman , etc.—and the individual souls, or between the Supreme
Principle and the manifest universe, three main orientations gradually emerged in the
mature s ´a ¯stric discourse: abheda (non-dualism), bhed ābheda (dualism-cum-non-
dualism, or simultaneous identity-and-difference), and bheda (dualism). Those
orientations have to be understood within the framework of the prevalent theories of
causation accounting for the ultimate origin of the universe and the living beings,
among which were pariṇāmav āda, i.e. the theory of real transformation, and
vivartav āda(ormāyāvāda), i.e. the theory of unreal transformation or illusory
manifestation. The former was generally upheld by Sa ¯ ṅkhya and early Veda ¯nta, while
the latter was championed by a strand of Veda ¯nta that became increasingly inﬂuential
after the ﬂourishing of S ´aṅkara and Man˙d˙anamis ´ra (ca. second half of the 8th century
CE). Both positions—with some qualiﬁcations, in the case of vivarta —are associated
with satkāryav āda, i.e. the theory of the pre-existence, in a latent state, of the effect in
its material cause prior to its actualization or manifestation ( abhivyakti ), as opposed to
asatk āryav āda, i.e. the theory of the absolute non-existence of the effect in the cause,
upheld by Nya ¯ya-Vais ´eṣika.
The positions outlined above are often expressed in Indic literatures through
analogies.1As a matter of fact, in many knowledge-systems across cultures,
analogies are regarded as powerful tools to convey in an immediate and
comprehensible manner some of the ﬁnest theological and philosophical points.
This is unquestionably the case in Sanskrit literature, for analogies occur not only in
the early, pre-Digna ¯ga period of the history of Indian philosophy, in which abstract
theoretical justiﬁcations did not become the norm yet, but also—whether alone or
along with more elaborate logical/syllogistic argumentations—in sources of
different genres composed throughout the medieval period.
In this article, divided into two parts, I will map and discuss two pairs of
analogies invoked to express—sometimes neatly, but often somewhat ambiguously
—the concepts of pariṇāmav āda(and bhed ābheda/dvait ādvaita or, in some cases ,
viśiṣṭādvaita ) and vivartav āda(and abheda /advaita ), namely the metaphors of ﬁre in
wood and dairy products in milk (Part I), and the reﬂection of moon or sun in pools
of water and the limitation of space inside pots (Part II). I will present key instances
of these analogies found in selected sources spanning multiple literary genres, viz.
Upani ṣads, the Mah ābhārata, philosophical treatises and commentaries, S ´aiva
revealed scriptures and post-scriptural sources, Vai ṣn˙ava-Pa ¯n˜cara ¯tra and Hat˙hayo-
gic texts, Sanskrit inscriptions from the Khmer domains, and (Sanskrit-)Old
Javanese S ´aiva texts from Java and Bali.2In the Conclusion to Part II, I will then
1Potter ( 1963 , p. 106) calls some of those analogies “root metaphors”, each epitomizing a speciﬁc theory
of causation. Cf. especially ibid.,1981 , pp. 81–85, for their occurrences in Veda ¯ntic literature.
2All translations from Sanskrit and Old Javanese are my own unless otherwise speciﬁed.
123536 A. Acri

--- [Page 3] ---
argue that an inventory, however preliminary,3of those analogies in S ´aiva sources
could tell us something interesting about doctrinal trends and historical develop-
ments within the S ´aiva textual corpus, as well as the relationship between different
strands of Saiddha ¯ntika scriptures; unravel the dialectics between S ´aivism and some
rival schools, i.e. the two main orientations of Veda ¯nta as we know it; and cast some
light on the dynamics of transmission of S ´aivism across the wider Indic world—
notably, from the Indian Subcontinent to Southeast Asia.
Śaivism, S āṅkhya, and Ved ānta
The paradoxical status of God vis-a `-vis his creation, i.e. whether he is the material
(upādāna-) or/and efﬁcient cause ( nimitta-k āraṇa) of the universe, and whether he is
the same as the individual souls or he is different from them (or both), i.e. if those
entities constitute distinct ontological categories or not, were central concerns in the
Indic theistic religio-philosophical discourse. The issues of causality and of monism
vs. dualism were dear to theorists as much as to mystics and yogins, who elaborated
on them either by formulating precise philosophemes, or merely by hinting at
paradoxical and inexpressible truths with allusive language—the language of
analogies.
The Sanskrit(ic) S ´aiva tradition—beginning from the philosophical texts of the
Atima ¯rga (ca. 4th–5th century CE) and the earliest stratum of the scriptural corpus
of the S ´aiva Siddha ¯nta (ca. 5th–7th century CE) up to the mature, strictly dualistic
Siddha ¯ntatantras and s ´a ¯stric commentaries (ca. 8th–12th century CE) and the non-
dualistic schools of Kashmir and South India (9th–13th century CE and beyond)—
tended to characterize the paradoxical nature of God—both positively or apophat-
ically—as unknowable, transcendent yet immanent in creation (i.e. present, in latent
form, within every human beings), invisible yet inferable, impersonal yet embodied
as personal Lord, unfathomable yet not totally inaccessible to the human mind.4
According to such S ´aiva systems, God’s existence could be logically determined
through inference on the basis of knowable effects, i.e. creation. The logical
demonstration of the Lord’s existence is sometimes present in nuce in the early
Siddha ¯ntatantras, and becomes a well-established cliche ´in the later s ´a ¯stric S ´aiva
3My discussion cannot be considered but preliminary and tentative: a comprehensive inventory and
analysis of even this limited set of analogies both within and without the S ´aiva corpus would require a
much larger project. For the purpose of this article, I have limited my scope to representative published
sources and a few unpublished S ´aiva texts, e-texts of which are accessible on GRETIL and the Digital
Library of the Muktabodha Indological Research Institute (the online collection of the transcripts of the
French Institute of Pondicherry has been most useful to access the original sources). I have also restricted
the upper limit of the chronological scope of this inquiry to the 12th–13th century (with sporadic
exceptions, such as the works of the South Indian S ´rı ¯kan˙t˙ha and S ´iva ¯grayogin, as well as probably post-
13th-century Sanskrit-Old Javanese sources from Bali).
4An attempt to justify on doctrinal grounds the paradoxical character of God as the Absolute, which is
transcendent yet immanent in creation, immaterial yet material, impersonal yet personal, is reﬂected by
the tripartite division encountered in the S ´aiva Saiddha ¯ntika textual corpus into the levels of Paramas ´iva,
Sada¯s´iva, and S ´iva/I¯s´vara, in turn corresponding to the aspects “endowed with parts” ( sakala ), “both
endowed with and devoid of parts” ( sakalani ṣkala), and “devoid of parts” ( niṣkala).
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 537

--- [Page 4] ---
scriptures and the commentaries thereon, where the arguments of non-theistic
systems are refuted in a systematic manner. In the early sources, the Lord’s status
vis-a`-vis creation is usually not problematized in terms of clear-cut monism or
dualism, but simply hinted at or apodictically stated through relatively unsophis-
ticated arguments, including analogies.5These analogies bear the force of proof to
establish the existence of the one invisible Lord, and to account for the multiplicity
of creation.
This situation may be regarded as the continuation of an early speculative trend
traceable to some of the oldest extant Upani ṣads,6and also epitomized by several
passages of a younger one, the Śvetāśvatara (prob. 2nd to 5th century CE). One such
passages (6.11–13) elaborates on the hidden yet pervasive presence of the One God
(eko deva ḥ) within the beings and the whole universe ( sarvabh ūteṣugūḍhaḥ
sarvavy āpīsarvabh ūtāntar ātmā), and on his being changeless and devoid of
qualities and yet at the same time involved in his creation as its cause and ultimate
overseer. Notably, the Upani ṣad declares that those who perceive him—the One
who makes the single seed manifold ( ekaṃbījaṃbahudh āyaḥkaroti )—as abiding
within themselves ( ātmastham ) enjoy eternal happiness, and that that Cause
(kāraṇam) is to be comprehended through the application ( yoga )o fS a ¯ṅkhya
(sāṅkhyayog ādhigamya ).7
As Torella ( 1999 ) has shown, the philosophical matrix out of which the majority
of S´aiva sources, especially those of the Saiddha ¯ntika tradition, emerged was
imbued with the tenets of Sa ¯ ṅkhya, for instance in the domains of epistemology,
ontology, and metaphysics. In particular, for the purpose of our discussion, it must
be noted that the Sa ¯ ṅkhya theory of causation ( satkāryav āda), as well as its
allegiance to ontological realism, is generally espoused by both dualistic and non-
dualistic S ´aiva schools. However, the S ´aiva position differs from the Sa ¯ ṅkhya one in
some important respects, namely that the two ultimate entities admitted by this
atheistic system, i.e. puru ṣaand prakr   ti, are subsumed within the S ´aiva theistic
framework as intermediary principles. Furthermore, while for the Sa ¯ ṅkhyas prakr  ti
is both the material and efﬁcient cause of the universe, for the Siddha ¯ntins S ´iva is
the efﬁcient cause and Ma ¯ya¯ (which, in a way, substitutes prakr  tiby producing
pradh ānaor primal matter) is the material cause. On the other hand, for the non-
dualistic S ´aiva schools of Kashmir, S ´iva is the only ultimately existent entity, and
everything should be regarded as a manifestation ( ābhāsa) from that absolute,
5Goodall ( 2015a , p. 39) regards the absence of any discussion of duality and non-duality, which is one of
the deﬁning features of mature S ´aiva Siddha ¯nta, as a criterion to establish the antiquity of a scripture, for
instance the Niśvāsatattvasa ṃhitā: “the redactors of the sūtras of the Niśvāsaappear not to have seen the
need to choose between philosophical dualism and non-dualism, perhaps because the issue had not yet
been raised as a matter of importance in S ´aiva circles”. Cf. also p. 341, where he argues that, by the time
in which the Uttaras ūtrawas composed, “a clear doctrinal split between philosophical dualism and non-
dualism had probably not yet emerged as a fault-line separating different tantric schools from each other.”
6Cf.Kaṭha Upani ṣad5.9–13.
7eko deva ḥsarvabh ūteṣugūḍhaḥsarvavy āpīsarvabh ūtāntar ātmā|karm ādhyak ṣaḥsarvabh ūtādhiv āsaḥ
sākṣīcetākevalo nirgu ṇaśca||eko va śīniṣkriyāṇāṃbahūṇām eka ṃbījaṃbahudh āyaḥkaroti |tam
ātmastha ṃye’nupa śyanti dh īrāst eṣāṃsukha ṃśāśvataṃnetare ṣāṃ||nityo’nityānāṃcetana ścetan ānām
eko bah ūnāṃyo vidadh āti kāmān|tat k āraṇaṃsāṅkhyayog ādhigamya ṃjñātvādeva ṃmucyate
sarvap āśaiḥ. Some pādas are similar, or identical, to Kaṭha Upani ṣad5.9–13.
123538 A. Acri

--- [Page 5] ---
whereas for the South Indian S ´aiva viśiṣṭādvaitin S´rı ¯kan˙t˙ha, S´iva is both the material
and efﬁcient cause of the universe, which evolves from him.
While the Sa ¯ ṅkhya contribution to S ´aivism has been rightly highlighted by
scholars, the contribution of Veda ¯nta—and early Veda ¯nta in particular, by which I
mean the scantily documented and hardly systematized doctrine(s) of the schools
that ﬂourished before S ´aṅkara, as well as those found in the Upani ṣads—has not yet
been duly appreciated,8apart from the inﬂuence of illusionistic Advaita Veda ¯nta on
scriptures of the Siddha ¯nta and of the Hat˙hayoga corpus compiled or transmitted in
South India from the 9th–10th century onwards.9Indeed, I would argue that the
relationship between S ´iva and the universe formulated in terms of identity or
pervasion in some early scriptures included in the pan-Indian Saiddha ¯ntika canon10
appears to have shared some elements in common with early Veda ¯nta positions on
the relationship between brahman /param ātman and the individual ātman s. In
particular, the idea of the presence of the Lord in a latent state within all the
principles of the universe ( tattva ), his simultaneous (and unfathomable) transcen-
dence and immanence, as well as his causal efﬁciency as material rather than
(uniquely) instrumental cause, among other views, would seem to conform to
pariṇāmav ādaalong the lines formulated not only by Sa ¯ ṅkhya, but also by
bhed ābheda Veda ¯nta.11This position more closely conforms to the one elaborated
by the latter system, and distinguishes itself from both systems by adding a theistic
perspective that transcends the non-theistic dualism of Sa ¯ ṅkhya, admitting only
puru ṣaandprakr  ti, as well as the brahman -ātman discourse of Veda ¯nta.
As mentioned above, a precise formulation of the relationship between the
principles of the Lord and the souls in terms of either dualism or monism along the
lines of mature s ´a ¯stric discourse and systematic theology is rarely found in the early
stratum of the S ´aiva scriptural corpus. Still, one may recognize a tension between
the position of the “systematized” dualistic S ´aiva Siddha ¯nta, positing the ultimate
existence of God, the universe (as an evolute of māyā), and the individual souls as
eternally distinct entities,12and the position of non-dualistic schools, positing the
8A notable exception is the study by Isayeva ( 1995 ).
9Cf. Goodall ( 2004 , pp. xxvi–xxvii) (with the relevant qualiﬁcations by Duquette 2015 , p. 22, fn. 9),
(2006 ), and ( 2015b ) on the S ´aiva Saiddha ¯ntika canon; Mallinson ( 2014 ) on the combination of S ´aiva yoga
and Veda ¯ntic metaphysic found in the Vivekam ārtaṇḍa,Yogab īja, and Gorak ṣaśataka ; and Duquette
(2015 ) on the relationship between Veda ¯nta, S ´aiva Siddha ¯nta, and the śivādvaitav ādaof S´rı ¯kan˙t˙ha and
subsequent South Indian S ´aiva authors. Compare the relevant reﬂections by Fisher: “S ´aiva scriptures such
as the Sūtasaṃhitāgradually conformed to the south Indian religious landscape […] and adopted a
notably Veda ¯nticized inﬂection to hybridize, perhaps for the ﬁrst time, S ´aiva religiosity with the teachings
of the Upani ṣads” ( 2017a , p. 105); “By the seventeenth century, Advaita had so thoroughly permeated the
philosophy and theological commitments of S ´aivas across lineage boundaries that even India’s most
staunchly dualistic S ´aiva tradition, the S ´aiva Siddha ¯nta, had abandoned its prior commitments in favor of
a new theistic monism” ( 2017b , p. 320).
10Cf., e.g., Goodall ( 2016 , p. 82) on the homologization, in the Uttaras ūtraof the Niśvāsatattvasa ṃhitā,
of the tattva s of the macrocosm with the elements of the mantra nāvātman: “expressing S ´iva is therefore a
means of expressing S ´iva’s pervasion of, and perhaps identity with, the universe”.
11Hacker ( 1953 , p. 213) speaks about the bhed ābheda system as the monistic form of the realistic
pariṇāmav āda, and about Sa ¯ ṅkhya as its dualistic or pluralistic form. Both of them are inseparably bound
up with satkāryav āda.
12For the Siddha ¯nta, liberation is an identity between the soul and S ´iva in quality, and not in number.
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 539

--- [Page 6] ---
identity of S ´iva and the universe ( viśvātmā/viśvamaya ) and his being beyond the
limitations of the same ( viśvottara /viśvottīrṇa). A similar tension exists not only in
the domain of doctrine but also of soteriology: while the mature Siddha ¯nta accepts
initiation and ritual activity as necessary salviﬁc means, non-dualistic schools
usually prioritize gnosis. A third stance, so to speak, would seem to be represented
by an (early?) trend emphasizing both knowledge and yoga, which has survived as
the mainstream position in the S ´aiva literature from Java and Bali, and which may
also have contributed to the formation of the yogic strands of the medieval S ´aiva
literature from India.13
The analogies discussed here, attested throughout the S ´aiva corpus, are
instructive with respect to the abovementioned issues insofar as they constitute
“markers”, so to speak, that may allow us to discern the various positions outlined
above and, possibly, even text-historical lines of doctrinal ﬁliation. On this basis, I
distinguish three main trends within the S ´aiva tradition, each characterized by the
(more or less frequent) employment of certain analogies. The analogies of ﬁre in
wood and dairy products in milk form the ﬁrst set, ascribable to both Sa ¯ ṅkhya and
bhed ābheda /pariṇāmaVeda ¯nta. This seems to be distinguished from the second set,
i.e. the reﬂection of moon or sun in pools of water and the limitation of space inside
pots, which, although may have been originally formulated in pre-S ´aṅkarian
pariṇāma-Veda ¯nta contexts, became associated with post-S ´aṅkara and Man˙d˙ana-
mis´ravivartav āda-Veda ¯nta. Both sets of analogies stand in contrast to a third
analogy, which I will not discuss here, namely the ubiquitous image of the
production of the pot (the universe/effect) by a sentient and embodied pot-maker
(the Lord/instrumental cause) from the pre-existing insentient clay ( māyā/material
cause). The last analogy, whose origin may go back to Nya ¯ya-Vais ´eṣika, is often
attested in the scriptures and commentaries of the Saiddha ¯ntika school.
Of course, as we will see, things turn out to be more complex than they would
seem to appear prima facie , mainly because it is not always clear which
philosophical views are conveyed by those analogies, and also because all the
three groups of analogies are simultaneously attested in sources characterized by an
eclectic and/or non-philosophical character.14In spite of those limitations, the
approach proposed in this article seems to be promising insofar as it complements
the observations made by recent scholarship on some little-understood dynamics in
the historical development of S ´aivism and its relationship with Sa ¯ ṅkhya and
13Wallis ( 2016 ) speculates, to my mind not unconvincingly, that there are “some early texts that seem to
be sources for the formation of the S ´aiva scriptures”, and that “the Maitr āyanīyaand the S ´aiva sources
both drew on a common yogic milieu of the classical period, which must have included many texts now
lost to us.”
14This is often the case in non-dialectical Siddha ¯ntatantras, as well as of later sources whose primary
concerns were not philosophical or theological. Cf., for instance, Sva ¯tma ¯ra¯ma’s Haṭhaprad īpikā,which
includes verses from texts of different Veda ¯ntic persuasions, such as the bhed ābhedav ādin
Vasiṣṭhasa ṃhitāand the keval ādvaita Uttarag ītā, and even of Vai ṣn˙ava persuasion (Mallinson 2014 ,
p. 236, fn. 37). Mallinson ( ibid.) further notes: “Sva ¯tma ¯ra¯ma, while rarely borrowing verses that teach
metaphysical doctrine and being somewhat indiscriminate in his choice of those, continued and
contributed to a process that was already underway, in which vedantic and S ´aiva non-dualism were
synthesised, albeit with the vedantic brahman ultimately winning out as the accepted understanding of the
absolute.”
123540 A. Acri

--- [Page 7] ---
Veda ¯nta. In particular, I suggest that the most common philosophical standpoint
embraced by the sources attesting the analogies of ﬁre in wood and butter in milk,
whether together or singularly, may have been a form of pariṇāma-Veda ¯nta that
subscribed to bhed ābhedav āda. Several scholars have convincingly argued that,
with respect to the historical evolution of Veda ¯nta, bhed ābhedav ādarepresents an
old paradigm, i.e. one that can be traced to one of the mainstream traditions of that
school before S ´aṅkara and Man˙d˙anamis ´ra.15On the other hand, the Saiddha ¯ntika
sources become aware of monistic (or clearly vivartav āda) positions, and even start
becoming inﬂuenced by them, only from the 9th century onwards.16Now, the
interesting questions one may ask are whether the ﬁrst pair of analogies could be
traced back to the “formative” period of S ´aivism, and whether a pariṇāmav āda, and
possibly bhed ābhedav āda,orientation of Veda ¯nta contributed to shape the theology
of S´aiva traditions prior to the emergence of the fully dualistic S ´aiva Saiddha ¯ntika
corpus known to us.
Fire in wood and dairy products in milk
The analogies of the latent existence of ﬁre ( agni,vahni , and synonyms) in wood
(kāṣṭha) or kindling-stick ( araṇi), and of milk-products—viz. coagulated milk or
curd ( dadhi ,kṣīra) or clariﬁed butter ( ghr  ta, sarpis )—in milk ( dugdha ,payas,
kṣīra), are often, but by no means always, encountered together in the sources. Both
are unquestionably old, as they already appear in the late Vedic corpus and in some
doctrinal sections of the Mah ābhārata, and are likely to have been associated with
Vedic ritualism.
The former analogy revolves around the common view in the Indic imaginary
that the element ﬁre, which already exists in a latent form within the wood, becomes
manifest only on the occasion of burning triggered by the activity of rubbing.
Similarly, the latter analogy revolves around the observation of the fact that milk
turns into dairy products when churned, and those products must therefore be
already present in a latent state within milk.17In philosophical literature, both
15In spite of the fact that bhed ābhedav ādamay be one the oldest extant tradition of Veda ¯nta, there is a
surprising lack of English-language secondary literature on this school from historians of Indian
philosophy, which may be due to the inﬂuence by 20th century Indian nationalists and Hindu reformers,
claiming that “Advaita Veda ¯nta is the authentic philosophy of India” (Nicholson 2007 , p. 373). Apart
from Ba ¯dara ¯yan˙a, the alleged author of the Brahmas ūtras (ca. 4th century CE), other inﬂuential masters
associated with bhed ābheda/pari ṇāmav ādapositions were Bhartr˚prapan ˜ca (prob. mid-6th century? Cf.
Nakamura 2004 , p. 131), whose works have been lost except for short fragments quoted by S ´aṅkara and
other Veda ¯ntins, as well as Bha ¯skara, the author of a commentary to the Brahmas ūtras, who was probably
a younger contemporary of S ´aṅkara, and who openly refused the latter’s advaitav āda. Cf. below, fn. 36.
16Cf. Part II, Conclusion.
17Useful observations on the art of churning different varieties of dairy products out of milk, and its
metaphorical application to the myth of the churning of the ocean of amr  taas told in the Mah ābhārata,
may be found in Parrott ( 1983 ). He suggests that the metaphor “may also serve as solid ground on which
to stand in illustrating a somewhat more abstract, metaphysical notion. In the process of churning the
butter, no new substances are produced in the milk. By this I mean that no physical changes (e.g., water to
ice) or chemical changes (e.g., lead to gold) take place. ‘Making’ butter is simply a collecting together of
fat globules into lumps, which rise to the surface: Nothing new is created. One could say that the butter is
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 541

--- [Page 8] ---
analogies serve the purpose to illustrate the positions of satkāryav ādaand
pariṇāmav āda. The latter analogy in particular is explicitly invoked in this context
in (early) Sa ¯ ṅkhya literature to establish the existence, causal efﬁciency, and
transformation of the invisible prakr  ti, while the former is mainly used in the
Upani ṣads and in the Mah ābhārata to demonstrate the Veda ¯ntic doctrine of the
invisible existence of Brahman as the supreme principle and ultimate originator of
the universe, as well as to illustrate the relationship between the soul and the bodies.
In theistic contexts, both analogies are (re)used to explain how everything that is
visible emanates, as it were, from the invisible Lord—who, of course, did not hold
the status of ultimate ontological principle in either Sa ¯ ṅkhya and Veda ¯nta.
Upani ṣads
What may be among the earliest references to the idea that ﬁre exists in a latent state
within wood is found in the Br  hadāraṇyaka Upani ṣad1.4.7, which resorts to this
image to explain the relation between the soul and the body.18The same image is
found in a close textual parallel in the Kauṣītaki Upani ṣad, also in the context of the
relationship between Brahman, A ¯tman, and the body.19
Footnote 17 continued
‘found’ in the milk through churning” ( ibid., p. 21). On the association with Vedic ritualism, see Śata-
pathabr āhmaṇa2.2.4.1–18, where milk products are described as the prototypical offerings for Agni, who
had just been generated from Praja ¯pati: rubbing his hands together, “He then obtained ( viveda , found)
either a butter offering or a milk offering: but indeed they are both milk” ( ibid., p. 26).
18“Penetrating this body up to the very nailtips, he remains there like a razor within a case or a ﬁre
within the receptacle of ﬁre (i.e. wood)”, sa eṣa iha pravi ṣṭaānakh āgrebhyo yath ākṣūraḥkṣuradh āne
’vahita ḥsyādv iśvambharakul āye[…]. Olivelle ( 1998 , pp. 47, 493), noting the ambiguity of the term
viśvambhara , among whose meanings are “ﬁre”, “insect” and “scorpion”, translates the expression
viśvambharo v āviśvambharakul āyeas “or a termite within a termite-hill”. However, on the basis of the
context of the passage (see 1.4.6, about the production of ﬁre from the mouth of the primeval Man-
Puru ṣa, through “churning”), I think that the most appropriate translation is “ﬁre” (and note that Monier-
Williams [ 1899 , henceforth MW] glosses kulāyaas “the body as the dwelling-place of the soul”). Indeed,
Deussen ( 1897 , p. 394) regarded this passage and similar ones as describing the Brahman concealed in the
body as ﬁre in wood, and translated viśvāmbharakul āyeas “das allerhaltende (Feuer) in dem
feuerbewahrenden (Holze).” Compare Kaṭha Upani ṣad5.9, associating the presence of a single soul
within multiple bodies with the single ﬁre entering living beings: “As the single ﬁre, entering living
beings, adapts its appearance to match that of each; So the single self within every being adapts its
appearance to match that of each, yet remains quite distinct” (trans. Olivelle 1998 , p. 397), agnir yathaiko
bhuvana ṃpravi ṣṭorūpaṃrūpaṃpratir ūpo babh ūva | ekas tath āsarvabh ūtāntar ātmārūpaṃrūpaṃ
pratir ūpo bahi śca.
19Kauṣītaki Upani ṣad4.20 (= Śāṅkhāyaṇāraṇyaka 6.20): “And when he awakens these scatter—as from
a blazing ﬁre sparks ﬂy off in every direction, so from this self the vital functions ﬂy off to their respective
stations, and from the vital functions, the gods, and from the gods, the worlds. This very breath, which is
the self consisting of intelligence, penetrates this bodily self up to the very hairs of the body, up to the
very nails. Just as a razor within a case or a termite within a termite hill [or: ﬁre within the receptacle of
ﬁre, i.e. wood, A.A.], so this self consisting of intelligence penetrates this bodily self up to the very hairs
of the body, up to the very nails” (trans. Olivelle 1998 , p. 361), yath āgner jvalata ḥsarv ādiśo visphuli ṅgā
viprati ṣṭheran evam evaitasm ādātmana ḥprāṇāyath āyatana ṃviprati ṣṭhante pr āṇebhyo dev āḥdevebhyo
lokāḥ|sa eṣap r āṇa eva prajñ ātmeda ṃśarīram ātmānam anupravi ṣṭaālomabhya ānakhebhya ḥ|tad
yath ākṣuraḥkṣuradh āne vopahito vi śvaṃbharo v āviśvaṃbharakul āya evam evai ṣa prajñ ātmeda ṃ
śarīram ātmānam anupravi ṣṭaālomabhya ānakhebhya ḥ.
123542 A. Acri

--- [Page 9] ---
The Śvetāśvatara , having taught that the Lord abides in one’s body as the ātman
and that the supreme goal is to become the same reality as him, explains how that
realization, which brings about the eradication of the fetters ( sarvap āśāpahā) and
universal sovereignty ( viśvaiśvarya ), can be attained (1.10–12). It then resorts to the
analogies of ﬁre in wood and butter in coagulated milk—along with that of oil in
sesame seed—to explain that the self is subtly present in the body, and that the Lord
can be made manifest through meditation and tapas (1.13–16ab):
vahner yath āyonigatasya m ūrtir na dr  śyate naiva ca li ṅganāśaḥ|
sa bh ūya evendhanayonigr  hyas tad vobhaya ṃvai pra ṇavena dehe ||
svadeham ara ṇiṃkr  tvāpraṇavaṃcottar āraṇim|
dhyānanirmathan ābhyāsād deva ṃpaśyen nig ūḍhavat ||
tileṣu taila ṃdadhan īva sarpir āpaḥsrota ḥsv ara ṇīṣucāgniḥ|
evam ātmātmani gr  hyate ’sau satyenaina ṃtapas āyo’nupa śyati||
sarvavy āpinam ātmānaṃkṣīre sarpir iv ārpitam |
When a ﬁre is contained within its womb, one cannot see its visible form and
yet its essential character is not extinguished; one can grasp the ﬁre once again
from its womb by means of tinder. In just the same way, one can grasp both20
within the body by means of the syllable oṃ. When one makes one’s own
body the bottom slab and the syllable oṃthe upper drill, by twirling it
constantly through meditation one would see God, just as one would the
hidden thing. Like oil in sesame seeds and butter in curds, like water in the
riverbed and ﬁre in the ﬁre-drills, so, when one seeks it with truth and
austerity, one grasps that self ( ātman ) in the body ( ātman )—that all-pervading
self, which is contained [in the body], like butter in milk. (Trans. Olivelle
1998 , pp. 416–417)
The stanzas describe the procedure for producing ﬁre by means of a ﬁre-drill, which
metaphorizes a yogic technique to manifest the Lord who is present in the human
body as the Self. According to Olivelle ( 1998 , p. 617), “The womb is the depression
on the lower slab into which the drill is inserted and twirled to produce ﬁre.
‘Essential character’ ( liṅga) appears to refer to the essential element of ﬁre, which
remains within the ﬁre-drill even when its visible form is extinguished”.21Olivelle
(ibid., p. 618) concludes that “the point of all these images is that in every case one
has to engage in a strenuous activity (crushing the sesame seeds, churning the curds,
or digging up the riverbed) to obtain what is hidden therein.” There is no doubt that
20That is, the Lord and unevolved matter mentioned in verse 1.9.
21On the possible sexual/reproductive overtones of the image of the production of ﬁre from the friction
of kindling-sticks, cf. Br  hadāraṇyaka 1.4.6 (on which Olivelle 1998 , p. 492 remarks: “The depression on
the slab is often compared to a vagina, and the churning stick to a penis. The entire production of ﬁre by
this method has highly sexual connotations”) and Kaṭha Upani ṣad4.8:araṇyor nihito j ātaved āgarbha iva
subhr  to garbhi ṇībhiḥ,“Ja ¯tavedas (i.e., ﬁre) is hidden within the two ﬁre-drills, fostered, as a foetus by
women with child”. In the Uttarak āṇḍa(51.5.205–209; cf. Goldman and Sutherland Goldman 2017 ,
pp. 356, 929), Janaka is born from the rotation of ﬁre-sticks on the invisible body of his “father”, Nimi.
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 543

--- [Page 10] ---
the context here is that of an early form of yoga,22for this key passage not only
precedes the description of yoga in Chapter two, but also strikes me as a likely
prototype for the descriptions of an analogous yogic procedure found in later S ´aiva
scriptures (cf. infra).
A passage echoing the same context of the Śvetāśvatara is found in the
Amr  tabindu, one of the so-called Yoga Upani ṣads (prob. 9th–13th century, Bouy
1994, p. 48, fn. 197). It equates the process of mental realization of Brahman to the
extraction of butter from milk and the production of ﬁre through a churning-stick
(vv. 20–22):
ghr  tam iva payasi nig ūḍhaṃbhūte bh ūte vasati vijñ ānam |
satata ṃmanthayitavya ṃmanas āmanth ānabh ūtena ||
jñānanetra ṃsamādhāya uddhared vahnivat param |
niṣkalaṃniścalaṃśāntaṃtad brahm āham iti smr  tam ||
sarvabh ūtādhiv āsaṃca yad bh ūteṣu vasaty adhi |
sarv ānugr āhakatvena tad asmy aha ṃvāsudeva ḥ||
Like clariﬁed butter is hidden within milk, the knowledge [of the Self]
dwells within every being. That should be churned out constantly with the
mind as the churning-stick. Having applied the cord of knowledge [to the
churning-stick], one should extract, like ﬁre [by friction], the Supreme
[Brahman], without parts, immovable, paciﬁed; “I am that Brahman”—it is
said. The one that dwells inside all the beings and is also everyone’s home
—I am that, I am Va ¯sudeva, by being the sustainer of everything!
The use of the term netra in 21a as “the string by which a churning-stick is whirled
round” (MW), as attested in the Mah ābhārata, instead of “eye”, as well as of
anugrahaka in the sense of “sustainer” (i.e., “supporter”) or “preserver”, instead of
“one who bestows grace”, suggests that the passage may have been borrowed from a
much older source.23
Another relatively late Yoga Upani ṣad, the Dhy ānabindu (northern recension),
contains the analogies of fragrance in ﬂower, clariﬁed butter in milk, oil in seed, and
22Commenting on pseudo-S ´aṅkara’s interpretation (in his Vivara ṇa)o f Śvetāśvatara 2.6—a verse,
occurring in a passage preceding the actual description of yoga in vv. 8–13, set against the backdrop of
Vedic ritual and evoking the image of the mind arising from the churning of the ﬁre-sticks and the ﬂowing
of the Soma-juice—, Schwartz ( 2017 , pp. 375–376) notes that the author elucidates the meaning of the
ﬁre as the supreme self that burns away ignorance, and of the human body as the kindling stick ( araṇi):
“Just as the force of friction ignites the ﬁre, so too does meditation set ablaze a human being. Our
commentator tells us that the mechanism by which this process commences, is none other than breath
control, which encompasses different approaches to ﬁlling, holding, and expelling the breath through the
nasal cavities.”
23The use of anugraha as an equivalent of sthiti rather than pras āda(“grace”) in the Pañc ārthabh āṣya
(ca. 5th century) and in the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Vr  haspatitattva has been suggested by Nihom ( 1995 ,
pp. 660–661, fn. 30; cf. Acri 20172, pp. 355–356, fn. 30). It is, therefore, not impossible that this passage
of the Amr  tabindu reﬂects a discourse inﬂuenced by early S ´aiva theology, of the kind we also ﬁnd in the
Śvetāśvatara Upani ṣad, a text which bears clear afﬁnities with some of the Pa ¯s´upata doctrines attested in
thePañc ārthabh āṣya.Cf. also the verse quoted by S ´aṅkara as śrutiin his commentary to the BSB, which
features in the medieval Brahmabindu Upani ṣadas verse 12 (cf. Part II).
123544 A. Acri

--- [Page 11] ---
string and pearls (cf. infra) to illustrate the subtlety and pervasiveness of the Self,
and its relationship with Brahman.24
Mah ābhārata
The Mok ṣadharma , forming the third book of the Śāntiparvan (Mah ābhārata 12),
has been rightfully considered as an important source of the late post-Upani ṣadic
period, probably dating back to the timespan between the 1st century BC and the 1st
or 2nd century CE (as such, it may be earlier than the Śvetāśvatara ). It documents an
old trend of speculation that provides the intellectual background of later traditions
of systematized Sa ¯ ṅkhya and Veda ¯nta. A passage (187.2–6) in the philosophical
section that is the dialogue between Bhr˚gu and Bharadva ¯ja, representing the views
of renunciant thinkers, makes a point for the existence of the unseen soul in the body
through the image of the unseen ﬁre existing in wood:
naśarīrāśrito j īvas tasmin na ṣṭe pra ṇaśyati |
samidh ām iva dagdh ānām yath āgnir dr  śyate tath ā||
bharadv āja uv āca
agner yath ātathātasya yadi n āśo na vidyate |
indhanasyopayog ānte sa c āgnir nopalabhyate ||
naśyatīty eva j ānāmiśāntam agnim anindhanam |
gatir yasya pram āṇaṃvāsaṃsthānaṃvāna dr  śyate ||
bhr  gur uv āca
samidh ām upayog ānte yath āgnir nopalabhyate |
ākāśānugatatv ād dhi durgraha ḥsa nir āśrayaḥ||
tathāśarīrasa ṃtyāge jīvo hy ākāśavat sthita ḥ|
na gr  hyate sus ūkṣmatv ād yath ājyotir na sa ṃśayaḥ||
[Bhr˚gu said:] […] The soul which abides in the body does not perish when
the body is destroyed. Just like ﬁre is thought to exist even when its kindling
wood has been burned, so too is the soul thought to exist. Bharadva ¯ja said:
As it is for ﬁre, so it is for the soul: perhaps it is not destroyed. However,
when the kindling wood has been fully consumed, ﬁre is not perceived.
When a ﬁre has been extinguished, and has no more kindling wood, I think
that it is destroyed for it has no movement, dimension or shape. Bhr˚gu said:
Fire is not perceived when its kindling wood has been consumed because it
has entered into space, and being without a physical locus it is impossible to
perceive. In much the same way, when the soul has abandoned the body its
existence is just like that of space. It is because of its subtlety, undoubtedly,
that it cannot be perceived—just like ﬁre. The ﬁre that upholds the vital
breaths in the body ought to be thought of as the soul. For ﬁre is supported
by the wind found in the body, but disappears when a person restrains his
breathing. When the ﬁre in the body disappears, the body becomes
24Dhy ānabindu Upani ṣad5–7: puṣpamadhye yath āgandha ḥpayomadhye yath āghr  tam | tilamadhye
yath ātaila ṃpāṣāṇeṣv iva k āñcanam || eva ṃsarv āṇib h ūtāni ma ṇau s ūtra iv ātmani | sthirabuddhir
asaṃmūḍho brahmavid brahma ṇi sthita ḥ|| til ānāṃtu yath ātaila ṃpuṣpe gandha iv āśritaḥ| puru ṣasya
śarīre tu sab āhyābhyantare sthita ḥ.
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 545

--- [Page 12] ---
insentient. It falls down and devolves into earth, for the earth is its ﬁnal
resting place. (Trans. Wynne 2009 , pp. 123–123)
The passage goes as far as implying the continuous existence of the ﬁre even after
its substratum, wood, is destroyed, as it returns to where it came from. This serves
the purpose of demonstrating the post-mortem existence of the soul in its unmanifest
source. As such, it recalls Upani ṣadic and pariṇāma-Veda ¯nta ideas about liberation
as the reabsorption ( laya) of the soul within its source—Brahman (or, in Veda ¯nta-
inﬂuenced S ´aiva sources, S ´iva). It also presents the view that the soul is like the
space, which may be regarded as the basis for later Veda ¯ntic formulations of the
theory of resorption of the individual souls into space (cf., e.g., Bha ¯skara’s
Śārīrakam īmāṃsābhāṣya ad Brahmas ūtra1.4.24), as well as the analogy of space
delimited by jars.
Another passage of the Mok ṣadharma (202.8–11), found in the yoga- andmokṣa-
oriented dialogue between Manu and Br˚haspati, characterizes the supreme principle
as omnipresent ( vyāpaka ) and efﬁcacious ( sādhaka ) in the world like a mantra
(mantravat ), the ultimate cause of all things ( sarvahetu ), and of which everything
else is just an effect ( kāryam ato yad anyat ). This description would seem to be
consistent with a pariṇāma-Veda ¯nta perspective attributing to the Brahman the
status of both upādānakāraṇa(=sarvahetu ) and nimittak āraṇa(=sādhaka ).25Then,
in 202.12–13, the text associates the perception/generation of the supreme principle
hidden within the human body through exertion ( yoga ) with the analogy of the
production of ﬁre through the churning of the ﬁre-drill:
yath āca ka ścit para śuṃgr  hītvādhūmaṃna pa śyej jvalana ṃca k āṣṭhe |
tadvac char īrodarap āṇipādaṃchittv āna pa śyanti tato yad anyat ||
tāny eva k āṣṭhāni yath āvimathya dh ūmaṃca pa śyej jvalana ṃca yog āt|
tadvat subuddhi ḥsamam indriyatv ād budha ḥpara ṃpaśyati sva ṃ
svabh āvam ||
Just as a person would not be able to see smoke or a ﬂame in a log by simply
picking up an axe, so people do not see what is beyond the body by cutting
open its stomach, hands and feet. When a person exerts himself and churns
those logs he sees smoke and ﬁre. In the same way a wise, an intelligent
person of inner power perceives the unchanging, transcendent, self-existent
state. (Trans. Wynne 2009 , pp. 261–263)
The idea of the latent presence of ﬁre in wood is repeated in 203.3 to advance an
argument in favour of the existence of a singular Soul that is the perceiver of the
senses and their objects, and that there is no speciﬁc sense through which the Soul
can be perceived.26
25With the caveat that, Brahman being changeless, the universe would be merely a manifestation ([ abhi]
vyakti ) of the latent principle as an effect through Ma ¯ya¯. Does mantravat here imply that Brahman is
effective as mantras, insofar as mantras/language “manifest” ( vyañj ) meaning/a higher reality?
26“The soul experiences passion, darkness and purity—the third—in the forms of the various objects of
existence. Thus the soul enters into the sense faculties, just like wind enters into the ﬁre that lies dormant
in its kindling sticks” (trans. Wynne 2009 , p. 267), rajas tama ḥsattvam atho tr  tīyaṃgacchaty asau
sthānagu ṇān vir ūpān | tathendriy āṇyāviśateśarīrīhutāśanaṃvāyur ivendhanastham.
123546 A. Acri

--- [Page 13] ---
In a later passage of the Mok ṣaparvan (331.2cd–4ab), the analogy of butter in
milk is alluded to through the image of the churning of the supreme ocean of
knowledge ( jñānodadhim anuttamam ) with the churning of the thought ( matiman-
thena ) as butter from milk ( navan ītaṃyath ādadhno ).
A verse containing, just like in the Śvetāśvatara , all three analogies of oil in
sesame seed, butter in milk, and ﬁre in wood is found in the Āraṇyakaparvan of the
Mah ābhārata (3.33.25–26), as part of Draupadı ¯’s speech to Yudhi ṣt˙hira in the
context of the Great Lord who impels all creatures to act, and who distributes
karma.27Here the analogies are used to illustrate the necessity of a proper means to
attain (i.e. manifest) a latent effect from its cause in a more general context—not
yoga , but individual action in the world.
Philosophical literature
The analogy of the transformation of milk into curd forms a cliche ´in several
commentaries on the Sāṅkhyak ārikā, being invoked (often along with the analogy of
oil in sesame seed) to defend satkāryav ādaand the transformation ( pariṇāma)o f
prakr  tiinto its evolutes.28Milk is the cause of curd, being made of the same
material as curds, and being merely transformed into a solid state; thus, the effect “is
the very same stuff as the cause, being altered merely in what we should call its
‘secondary’ qualities” (Potter 1963 :106).
An early attestation of the analogy of ﬁre in wood is found in Bhartr˚hari’s
Vākyapad īya(ca. 5th century) 1.45, in the context of the deﬁnition of the two kinds
of ‘basic’ words ( upādānaśabda ) given in 1.44—a word that causes all words, and
another used to convey meaning, which were deﬁned by the teachers of old as being
either essentially different (a bheda position?) or the same but thought variously (a
bhed ābheda position?) (1.45):
araṇistha ṃyath ājyotiḥprak āśāntarak āraṇam |
tadvac chabdo ’pi buddhistha ḥśrutīnāṃkāraṇaṃpr  thak ||
27“In sesame is oil, in cow milk, in wood ﬁnally is ﬁre; with one’s own intelligence one should
intelligently know the means to effect it; and it is on this accomplishment of their acts that creatures live
here” (trans van Buitenen 1975 , p. 284), tile taila ṃgavi k ṣīraṃkāṣṭhe p āvakam antata ḥ| dhiy ādhīro
vijānīyādu p āyaṃcāsya siddhaye || tata ḥpravartate pa ścāt kara ṇeṣv asya siddhaye | t āṃsiddhim
upaj īvanti karma ṇām iha jantava ḥ.
28Cf., e.g., Sāṅkhyasaptativr  tti(and Suvar ṇasaptati )ad S āṅkhyak ārikā(SK) 9: sesame oil exists in the
seed (cf. infra) and milk must be used to produce curd to prove that buddhi preexists in prakr  tiand is a
product thereof; the material cause must be appropriate and agent should be capable; adSK 16: the mode
of production of evolutes from prakr  tiinvolves signiﬁcant transformation ( pariṇāma), like when milk
produces cream, as opposed to generation of children by man and woman; Sāṅkhyavr  ttiand
Sāṅkhyak ārikābhāṣya ad SK 15: unmanifest is existent and is the cause of the uniformity of the three
worlds, so milk must necessarily give curds; Sāṅkhyavr  tti ad SK 16: one primordial materiality produces
a multiple world through the interactions and modiﬁcation of guṇas, not like parents producing a child,
but like milk produced from curds; Sāṅkhyasaptativr  tti ad SK 9: intellect exists in prakr  ti, one desirous of
curds should use an appropriate cause—milk (cf. Sāṅkhyak ārikābhāṣya);Māṭharavr  tti ad SK 9 (oil in
seed and butter in milk) and 16 (butter in milk); Sāṅkhyatattvakaumud īadSK 3 (the sixteen productions
are non-modiﬁable and of the same essence as prakr  ti,as curd is a modiﬁcation of milk) and SK 7 (the
curd exists in milk even if it is not perceived).
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 547

--- [Page 14] ---
Just as the ﬁre/light that resides [latently/potentially] in the ﬁre-stick is the
cause of further lights (or: the instrument for other [objects] to become
manifested/visible?), so also the Word that resides in the mind is the cause
of separate audible words.
Here the relationship between the “supreme” and “mundane” word seems to evoke that
between the single Brahman and the multiple individual souls as elaborated by later
Advaita Veda ¯nta. Although Bhartr˚hari was active during the period in which the
pariṇāmav ādaorientation of that school was preponderant, he has been often labeled
an early advaitin (Nakamura 2004 , pp. 457–460; Ferrante 2015 ). As he does not easily
ﬁt into any of the speciﬁc forms that Veda ¯nta will come to acquire in the early medieval
period, one may regard him as having assumed an intermediary position between the
two schools, for his work attests elements that are peculiar to both.29
While Ba ¯dara ¯yan˙a’sBrahmas ūtra(BS), the seminal text of Veda ¯nta, does not
itself attests the analogy of ﬁre in wood, a passage of S ´aṅkara’s commentary
(Brahmas ūtrabh āṣya, BSB) adumbrates the idea of the latent presence of the former
in the latter. Su ¯tra 3.2.6, dehayog ādvā“because of the contact with a body”, was
interpreted by S ´aṅkara as referring to the obscuration of the innate power of
knowledge ( jñāna) and lordship ( aiśvarya ) inherent to the Soul due to contact with
the body and other constituents. In this context, S ´aṅkara uses the Upani ṣadic
analogy of the ﬁre hidden in the kindling-stick ( araṇi) and its existence after the
source is exhausted.30S´aṅkara draws on this analogy to express the concealment of
the powers of the Self, but he makes clear that this concealment is merely due to the
limiting adjuncts ( upādhi). S´aṅkara never uses the analogy of ﬁre in wood to
describe the relationship between the Brahman and the souls. Sometimes he cites
the Upani ṣadic passages presenting the analogy between ﬁre and its sparks, notably
in his commentary on Gaud˙apa ¯da’s Māṇḍūkyak ārikā/Āgama śāstra, along with the
rope-snake metaphor, to help explain how the Self can produce individual
awareness through prāṇa, but not in a pariṇāmasense.31Indeed, the analogy of ﬁre
and sparks is one of the signature-images of bhed ābheda Veda ¯nta, adhering to
pariṇāma, according to which the universe is Brahman with qualities obscured, and
the souls are parts ( aṃśa) of that Brahman, produced from itself as scintillae are
produced from ﬁre—both the same as that ﬁre and different from it.32For S´aṅkara
this view is untenable, and to dispel it he uses the analogy of space existing
29Indeed, his work also contains the reﬂection analogy (cf. Part II).
30“There is an analogy for that: just as the ﬁre, even though possessing the power to burn and to illuminate,
has its burning and illumination obscured when it remains [concealed] in the ﬁre-stick or when it is covered
with ashes, in the same manner, the obscurement of the Knowledge and Lordship of the individual Self
results from the confusion arising from the absence of discrimination caused by the contact with limiting
adjuncts such as names and forms, the body etc., which are manifested by ignorance”, asti c ātropam ā
yath āgner dahanaprak āśanasa ṃpannasy āpy ara ṇi tasya dahanaprak āśane tirohite bhavato yath āvā
bhasmacchannasya | evam avidy āpratyupasth āpitan āmarūpakr  tadeh ādyup ādhiyog āt tadavivekabhra-
makr  to jīvasya jñ ānaiśvaryatirobh āvaḥ.
31Cf. BSB 2.3.17; Br  hadāraṇyaka Upani ṣad2.1.20; Muṇḍaka Upani ṣad2.1.1.
32In 1.4.22 S ´aṅkara, referring to the presence of this analogy in the scriptures, remarks that the
origination should be understood to abide in the limiting adjuncts only.
123548 A. Acri

--- [Page 15] ---
undivided in jars, just like Brahman exists undivided in the individual bodies (cf.
Part II).
In his commentary to 2.1.18, S ´aṅkara defends satkāryav āda, afﬁrming that
effects are both existent and non-different from their cause, and referring to the
example of curds being a product of milk. Su ¯tra 2.1.24, as a response to the
objection that the single Brahman can produce multiple effects through an
assemblage of means, states that Brahman is like milk ( upasa ṃhāradar śanān neti
cen na k ṣīravad dhi ). S´aṅkara explains that milk undergoes modiﬁcations into curds
without expecting any external means; the potentiality to modify itself—i.e.,
manifesting/lumping together its fat globules—is inherent to milk (i.e., Brahman)
and the process is merely accelerated by heat. S ´aṅkara here may have been forced,
so to speak, to (re)use a bhed ābhedav ādaanalogy,33only because the su ¯tra deﬁnes
Brahman as “milk”.34In his commentary to 1.1.4, just like in 2.1.24, he couples the
analogy of milk and curd with the analogy of the pot manufactured out of earth,
using both to argue that entities that undergo such modiﬁcations are not observed to
be everlasting—hence, liberation cannot be the result of action. To this erroneous
view he opposes the analogy of the omnipervasive space: all persons always happen
to possess it in themselves as their own nature. Finally, in 2.3.10, S ´aṅkara expounds
a view of non-continuous/successive pariṇāmav āda, justifying it with a scriptural
passage stating that cheese is made from curds and curds from milk, but neither of
those are derived directly from the cow: this model is one of non-direct ﬁliation or
transformation, according to which brahman abides in its effects as their Self.
There are undoubtedly other instances of these analogies in the works attributed
to S´aṅkara, but the detailed discussion of them would take us too far from the main
scope of this article. Sufﬁces here to mention a passage in the Upade śasahasr ī
(1.2.58–59), where the teacher draws on the analogy of the space and the Self as not
being in contact with anything and yet being related to everything (like the Self is
not in contact with, yet is related to, the body). There is no valid means of
knowledge to determine that the Self is present in the body, unlike our seeing ghee
in milk or curd ( kṣīre sarpi ḥ), oil in sesamum seeds ( tile tailam ), etc.—which could
amount to say that the relationship between Brahman and self is inexpressible.35In
conclusion, the peculiar, sometimes ambiguous, and relatively infrequent use of this
pair of bhed ābheda /pariṇāmav ādaanalogies by S ´aṅkara seems to be consistent with
33A similar argument is invoked by Bha ¯skara, a pariṇāma-Veda ¯ntin, who in his Śārīrakam īmāṃsābhā-
ṣya ad BS 2.1.24 uses the analogy of milk changing into curds to describe Brahman’s transformation into
the world (cf. comm. ad1.4.25, p. 85, and 2.1.14, p. 97). Bha ¯skara regards this transformation to be due to
the intrinsic power of Brahman, which undergoes transformation while remaining unchanged. This
position resembles the one espoused by later S ´aiva authors who championed either unqualiﬁed or
qualiﬁed non-dualism (like, e.g., S ´rı ¯kan˙t˙ha).
34Cf. BSB ad2.3.7, where S ´aṅkara accepts pariṇāmav ādaand mentions the example of the curd from
milk and tree from seed, but speciﬁes that there is a gradual transformation of one cause without contact
and without an assemblage of means, citing BS 2.1.24.
35On the other hand, the Ātmabodha (108–109)—whose authorship by S ´aṅkara, it is worth stressing
here, has been seriously questioned (Potter 1981 , p. 323)—states that all existing entities and practical
affairs are united with Brahman and imbued with consciousness; Brahman pervades everything, as milk
pervades butter.
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 549

--- [Page 16] ---
his agenda to reinterpret the doctrine of the BS and the earlier Upani ṣadic tradition
by reorienting it towards a vivartav ādaandadvaitav ādadirection.36
Śaiva literature from the Indian Subcontinent
The two analogies discussed here occur in Sanskrit S ´aiva scriptures, usually in
passages expressing, like in the Upani ṣads and the Mok ṣadharma , the idea that the
Lord exists within the world and the human beings, and that he can be made
manifest through yogic means. According to this monistic view, S ´iva, albeit
transcendent, shares the same substance of his creation, but the forms and attributes
are different. Just like ﬁre becomes manifest in wood and curd or butter in milk, so
the souls are manifestations, so to speak, of S ´iva. While it is already used in the
Upani ṣads as well as in Veda ¯nta and Sa ¯ ṅkhya treatises (for instance, to denote the
manifestation of the effect from the cause), the term abhivyakti epitomizes the
viewpoint of the dualistic S ´aiva Siddha ¯nta, adhering to abhivyaktiv ādaor the
doctrine of the manifestation of the Powers of the Lord that are intrinsic in any
individual soul.37It seems to me, however, that some early Saiddha ¯ntika sources (or
layers thereof) do not support a strictly dualistic perspective, but rather a form of
bhed ābhedav ādainvolving the emanation from/modiﬁcation of a single supreme
principle. Signiﬁcantly, the analogies of ﬁre in wood and butter in milk feature in a
small number of Siddha ¯ntatantras, nearly all of them relatively early, and/or
associated with non-dualistic positions.
A point that is remindful of the one found in the Śvetāśvatara Upani ṣad, both in
terms of doctrine and of its application to a yogic context, is illustrated in several
verses attested throughout the Kālottara -corpus. See in particular Trayoda śa-
śatikak ālottara, Pa ṭala3 (f. 16a):
tattva ṃsarvagata ṃviddhi var ṇe var ṇe vyavasthitam ||
saṃprad āyenāsau devo jñ ātavya ḥsādhakottamai ḥ|
anyath ānaiva j ānanti prayoge ṇa vin āguha ||
yath ākṣīre sthita ṃsarpir na śakya ṃ38manthitu ṃjanai ḥ|
prayoge ṇa39vinābhadra tadvad devo nirañjana ḥ||
prayogo bhavate tasya k ṣīrasya tu mah ātapaḥ|
36It is beyond doubt that the BS and other pre-S ´aṅkara Veda ¯nta sources (e.g. the lost commentary on the
Br  hadāraṇyaka Upani ṣadby Bhartr˚prapan ˜ca) upheld bhed ābhedav āda,i.e. a theory of simultaneous
transcendence and immanence of Brahman (Nakamura 1989 , p. 500). This might even have extended to
S´aṅkara himself (although somewhat inconsistently), who is otherwise known for his advaita and
vivartav ādaposition ( id.2004 , p. 42). Some scholars have argued that the commentaries of S ´aṅkara and
Bha ¯skara were based on earlier bhed ābhedav ādinsources, and that many of the non-illusionistic similes
found in S ´aṅkara’s BSB, which do not ﬁt his illusionistic doctrine, must have derived from an older and
authoritative bhed ābhedav āda/pariṇāmav ādacommentary on the BS: cf. Andrijanic ´2017 . Potter ( 1963 ,
p. 165) sees S ´aṅkara’s use of the pariṇāmaanalogy of milk and curd unproblematic, in the sense that he
“uses the word ‘ vivarta ’ hardly at all and doesn’t seem to mind talking in terms of pariṇāma—although in
the last analysis he will perhaps have no causal theory at all.”
37On the abhivyakti theory as formulated by Sa ¯ ṅkhya and S ´aiva schools, cf. Ratie ´2014 .
38Em.; nāśakya ṃms.
39Em.; prayoyoge ṇams.
123550 A. Acri

--- [Page 17] ---
dadhn ābhāvaṃ40yath āyāti rajjusa ṃdānasa ṃyutam41||
manthakasya va śād eva ṃtadāsarpi ḥpraj āyate |
evaṃśivo’pi†tam ajñer †jāyate tattvagocar āt||
Know the omnipervasive reality as contained in each and every form. God
should be known by the best among sādhaka s through the transmitted
doctrine; they will not know Him otherwise without the application of a
means, o Guha (Skanda). Just like it is not possible to churn the clariﬁed
butter existing in milk for the people without the application of a means, so
the stainless God [cannot obtained without a means], my dear. The means is
to greatly heat the milk. It attains the state of thick cream when it is in
contact with the rope and foot fetter; then, by force of the churner, clariﬁed
butter is produced. Likewise, S ´iva too † tam ajñer † is born from the
perceptible level of reality.
And Pat˙ala 8 ( kālajñāne k ālacakrapa ṭalaṃ), f. 37v.2–3:
yath ākṣīre sthita ṃsarpir na dr  śyed aprayogata ḥ|
tathādhanañjay āvastho na dr  śyeta śivaḥsadā||
As the clariﬁed butter existing within milk will not become visible without
[applying the proper] means ( prayoga ), thus S ´iva, the support of the
dhanañjaya [breath], will not be manifest at all times [without applying the
proper means].
The above passages allude to some bodily or subtle yogic techniques involving the
use of ma(n)thana , “churning” or “kindling”, which are described, e.g., in the
Kubjik āmatatantra (12.60–65), combining yogic techniques and visualization in the
cadre of a sexual intercourse metaphor, and in Tantr āloka (5.22–24), implying a
meditation on the rubbing of Soma, Su ¯rya, and Agni as the kindling stick ( araṇi)i n
the framework of an internalized ritual (Mallinson 2007 , pp. 27, 208).
In another passage of the Trayoda śaśatikak ālottara (Pat˙ala 10, f. 44a), the
analogy of ﬁre in wood is coupled with that of the splendour residing in the jewel,42
to prove the existence of the Lord in the body, whereas the analogy of butter in milk
proves his existence in (i.e., non-separation from) the S ´akti:
agamyam apratarkyañ ca dehastha ṃdehavarjitam |
yath āmaṇistho tejas tu k āṣṭhastho v āhutāśanaḥ43||
kṣīrastha śca44yath āsarpis tath āśaktistha-m- īśvaraḥ|
[Parames ´vara is] inaccessible and incomprehensible by reason, abiding in
the body and deprived of body—like the splendor residing in the jewel and
40I take this to be a compound whose ﬁrst member ( dadhi /dadhan ) retains the instrumental case ending.
41Em.; rajjusa ṃdhānasa ṃyutam ms.
42This is also the case in the Vr  haspatitattva , a Sanskrit-Old Javanese text from Java (cf. infra).
43Em.; hutārānaḥms. ( tāis added in the margin).
44Em.; kṣīrasthasya ms.
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 551

--- [Page 18] ---
the oblation-eater (i.e., ﬁre) residing in logs. Like the clariﬁed butter abiding
in milk, so the Lord resides in the Power.
The same analogy of clariﬁed butter in milk reoccurs in f. 46a, among others, but in
a “reverse” manner, i.e. as an example of putting the cause after the effect and
producing an absurd argument.45The text also makes the point that the mere
knowledge of the fetters does not result in liberation. This point also features, along
with both analogies of ﬁre in wood and clariﬁed butter in milk, in the Dīkṣottara
section of the Niśvāsakārikā,465.24–27 (ms. T17), in the context of yoga:
evaṃsarvagato bindu ḥyogah īno na dr  śyate |
araṇistho yath āvahni ḥvidyam āno na dr  śyate ||
yogah īnas tath ābindu ḥna tu dr  śyate47sundari |
saṃyogena tath ābindu ḥpratyak ṣod r  śyate tad ā||
sarpi ḥkṣīre yath āvyakta ṃvidyam ānaṃna dr  śyate |
tadvat sarvagato bindu ḥyogah īno na dr  śyate ||
yath āsarpi ca agni śca prayoge ṇa tu sundari |
prāpyate ca tath ābindu ḥyogin āñ ca mah ātman ām||
Likewise, the omnipervasive bindu is not seen by one lacking in yoga. The
ﬁre that resides in the kindling-stick, [even though] it exists [there], it is not
seen; similarly, the bindu is not seen by one lacking in yoga, o Beautiful One.
Then, through an effort, the bindu is seen before one’s own eyes. Like the
clariﬁed butter exists in milk: unmanifest, it is not seen. In like manner, the
omnipervasive bindu is not seen by one lacking in yoga. Like the clariﬁed
butter and the ﬁre will be obtained through an effort, o Beautiful One, just in
the same manner the bindu will be obtained by the great-souled yogins.
And in 13.46–48ab (ms. T17), to explain the pervasion of the universe by the Lord:
sa jīvaḥsarvamantr āṇāṃkathita ṃtava śobhane |
tena sarvam ida ṃdevi trailokya ṃsacar ācaram ||
vyāpitaṃparame śena n ātra k āryāvicāraṇā|
tirya ṅmr  ganar ākhyānāṃsa jīvaḥparik īrtitaḥ||
tena sarvam ida ṃvyāptaṃpayas īva yath āghr  tam |
I have taught you, o Fair One, that He is the life of all mantras. This entire
triple world is pervaded by Parames ´a, o Goddess, along with all the beings.
There is no doubt about that. He is taught to be the life principle of what are
45Pat˙ala 10, f. 46a: “When a woman generates a child without man, only then S ´iva is obtained through
the [mere] knowledge of the fetters, o son of the Kr˚ttika ¯s (i.e., Kuma ¯ra). Further, when the milk is
produced from clariﬁed butter, o Guha, only then what is called “bound soul” in the Tantras becomes the
embodiment of knowledge. When the people make a cloth by joining together a lump of clay, and a pot
by [waving] threads, only then S ´iva [will be obtained] by the logicians, o son”, puru ṣeṇa vin ānāri yad ā
janayate sutam | tad āśivaṃpaśujñānaiḥprāpyate kr  ttikāsuta || sarpi ṣātu yad ākṣīraṃpuna ḥsambhavate
guha | tad āpaśūktaṃtantre ṣu bhavate jñ ānadehit ām || mr tpi ṇātu yad ālokāḥpaṭaṃkurvanti sa ṃhitam |
tantubhyo v āghaṭaṃvatsa tad āhetuvidai ḥśivam.
46This is a relatively late, and apparently multi-layered, Siddha ¯ntatantra, whose date of compilation may
perhaps be ascribed to the period between the 7th and the 10th century (cf. Goodall 2015a , p. 26).
47Em.; dr  śyatims.
123552 A. Acri

--- [Page 19] ---
called wild and domestic animals and human beings. This entire universe is
pervaded by Him, like clariﬁed butter [exists latently] in milk.
The same analogy is also found in a non-dualistic early Siddha ¯ntatantra, the
Sarvajñ ānottara (28.7), to explain the relationship between the soul and the fetter:
yath ātu avibh āgena ghr  taṃpayasi sa ṃsthitam |
tathātmāpāśasaṃśliṣṭa avibh āgena sa ṃsthita ḥ||
As clariﬁed butter is contained in milk without distinction, so the Soul is,
without distinction, blended together with the fetter.
As argued by Goodall ( 2006 , pp. 97–101), the stanza belongs to a series of twenty
verses describing the Soul vis-a `-vis S ´iva in non-dualistic terms, which has been
interpolated from the Sūtasaṃhitā, a monistic work belonging to the six Sa ṃhita¯s
attributed to the Skandapur āṇa.
The analogy of the manifestation/extraction of ﬁre from wood in the context of
S´aiva initiation is elaborated on at some length in the widely transmitted
Svacchandatantra (10.365–372), a Bhairavatantra of the dakṣiṇasrotas :
mohit āmalamohena baddh āḥkarmakal ādinā|
nigūḍhās tatra ti ṣṭhanti k āṣṭhe vahnir yath ātathā||
uddhr  tas tu yath āvahnir manthakasya va śāt sphu ṭam|
svasvar ūpaṃprapa śyeta bh āsvara ṃyatsunirmalam ||
[…]
tathātmātu vij ānāti yatsvar ūpam an ādimat |
manthakasya va śād devi n ānyath ātu katha ṃcana ||
manthakas tv iha deve śi svayam eva sad āśivaḥ|
ācāryatanum āsthāya sad ācānugrahe sthita ḥ||
mantr āmanthanavaj jñey āadhv ācātrāraṇir yath ā|
vāgīśīyonisa ṃsthānādhūmo jñeyo mal ādivat ||
ātmāvai vahnivaj jñeyo bodhakas tu para ḥśivaḥ|
udbodhito yath āvahnir nirmalo ’tīva bh āsvara ḥ||
na bh ūyaḥpravi śet kāṣṭhaṃtathātmādhvana uddhr  taḥ|
malakarmakal ādyais tu nirmukto vigataklama ḥ||
The bound souls, bewildered by the delusion of maculation and bound by
karma, individuation, etc., abide there [in the impure path], hidden as ﬁre in
wood. As the ﬁre is evidently extracted by the force of the churner, one will
see before his eyes his own nature, brilliant, perfectly clear. […] So the soul
will know its own nature, having no beginning, by means of the churner, o
Goddess, not in any other way. The churner here, o Goddess, is Sada ¯s´iva
himself. Resorting to the body of the ācārya, He resides at all times in the
blessing [conferred by Him during initiation]. The mantras are to be known
as the churning stick, and the path as the wood, Va ¯gı¯s´ı ¯ as the receptacle of
the slab, the smoke as the stain and so on. The soul is to be known to be like
the ﬁre, while the awakener is the Supreme S ´iva. Like the ﬁre made
manifest, it is spotless, extremely brilliant. It will not enter anymore into the
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 553

--- [Page 20] ---
wood; likewise, the soul, having been extracted from the path, is liberated
from maculation, karma, and individuation, its weariness disappeared.
The reformulation of the analogy so as to epitomize initiation rather than yoga is
striking, and may reﬂect a conscious attempt to appropriate and refashion an early
yoga-focused stream of S ´aiva soteriology along Saiddha ¯ntika ritualistic lines.
The analogies of butter in milk and oil in seed are paired together in the South
Indian S ´a ¯kta/Ma ¯tr˚tantra text Brahmay āmala , to explain the relationship between the
kṣetraand the kṣetrajña ,48while those two plus the image of ﬁre in wood, fragrance
in ﬂower, and shadow and tree, are attested in the Akulav īratantra (v. 52), a kaula
text associated with Matsyendrana ¯tha.49
It is pertinent to mention here a Vai ṣn˙ava work, the Jayākhyasa ṃhitā, inasmuch
as it testiﬁes to a form of tantric Vai ṣn˙avism that shares doctrinal elements with
S´aiva scriptures,50and is also indebted to a pariṇāma-Veda ¯nta metaphysical model.
The text uses both analogies of ﬁre in wood and butter in milk to describe Vi ṣn˙u’s
all-pervading existence and the means to perceive him, along the following lines
(4.102–104):
na hy asy ānto’sty ato ’nantas tr  ptatv ādd uḥkhavarjita ḥ|
amūrta eva sarve śo hy abhy āsād upalabhyate ||
yath ākāṣṭhāntar ād vahnir ghr  taṃkṣīrāntar ād yath ā|
svānubh āvād vin ānaiva vaktu ṃsaṃyujyate yath ā||
mādhuryam ik ṣusaṃsthaṃca am ūrtam upalabhyate |
evaṃsvadehaga ṃdeva ṃparam ātmānam avyayam ||
There is nothing of him that is an end, for he is endless; he is devoid of
suffering on account of his state of satisfaction. He is without bodily form, the
Lord of everything, and can be perceived through repeated practice. It is not
ﬁtting to speak about [Him] without personal experience, like [when speaking
about] ﬁre [without being aware of its presence] within logs, and [when
speaking about] clariﬁed butter [without being aware of its presence] within
milk. And [like] the formless sweetness resides in the sugarcane is perceived:
likewise is the God residing in one’s body, the Supreme Self, undecaying.
According to Rastelli ( 1999 , pp. 189–190), the Jayākhyasa ṃhitābetrays bhed ābhe-
davada , as it uses Veda ¯ntic-ﬂavoured terms like brahman ,abhinna, etc.; describes
emancipation as dissolution ( laya) into God (cf. supra, p. 9, and Part II, fn. 60); and
employs other typically Veda ¯ntic analogies to describe the relationship between the
48Brahmay āmala , p. 36: kṣetraṃkṣetrajña [ms: kṣetrasya ]rūpeṇa vibhed āpaṭhyate may ā|tilamadhye
sthita ṃtaila ṃkṣīramadhye yath ādhruvam ||tilavat k ṣetram ity āhuḥtaila ṃkṣetrajña [em.; ms.
kṣetrasya ]ucyate . This text, on which cf. Sanderson 2007 , p. 277, is not to be confused with the northern
Brahmay āmala/Picumata .
49dadhimadhye yath āsarpi ḥkāṣṭhe c āgniḥsthito yath ā|p u ṣpe gandhas tile taila ṃvr  kṣec h āyā
samāśritā.
50For evidence of plagiarism of the Jayākhya by the S ´aiva Br  hatk ālottara, cf. Sanderson 2001 , pp. 38–
41.
123554 A. Acri

--- [Page 21] ---
Lord and the souls, like ocean and waves (e.g., 4.49 and 4.99).51Another Vai ṣn˙ava-
Pa¯n˜cara ¯tra scripture, the Lakṣmītantra, attests what appears to be a “revisited”
version of the butter in milk analogy (Pat˙ala 35.27–28):
sarvatra naika ṃbudhyeta macchaktevilaya ṃbudha ḥ|
yath āhi sarpir āsiñcet k ṣīre tanmathanodbhavam ||
sarpir anyatra ca k ṣīre tatsarpi ṣy api c ānyakam |
evam āprakr  teḥśaktir adhi ṣṭhātrīḥsmared budha ḥ||
The wise should know that the process of the involution of my śaktis is not the
same in each case. Just as butter churned out of milk may be thrown into the
same milk, (or) (the butter) may sometimes be thrown into some other milk,
or it may be thrown into other butter, so the wise think that the tutelary śaktis
may be thrown (into their sources) till the (attainment) of the prakr  ti-state (in
a different order of dissolution). (Trans. Gupta 2000 , p. 205)
A similar image occurs in Pat˙ala 54.4–7, in a context of visualisation and resorption
of the elements through a mantric technique, whereby the practitioner should revert
the S´akti to a ﬁre-state ( māṃca vahniman āvr  ttyā, 4c) and then dissolve everything
in the prakr  ti: “as (a lump of) butter may be dissolved either in the milk from which
it was churned, in some other milk, or else in some other (lump of) butter, so also
the wise should call to mind the S ´akti, the supreme supervisor, (of dissolution) back
to the ﬁnal source, (which is) prakr  ti”.52In both passages, the image of milk being
thrown in butter, becoming indistinguishable from it, conveys a more distinctly
monistic ﬂavour.53This is not surprising since, as noted by Sanderson ( 2001 ,
pp. 35–38) and Torella ( 2016 ), this work shows indebtedness to doctrines elaborated
by 11th-century Kashmirian non-dualistic S ´aiva authors.
Let us now turn to the canon of the strictly dualistic Siddha ¯ntatantras and the
commentaries of the medieval exegetes. A reference to the analogy of the
transformation of milk into curd is found in the Kiraṇatantra , where its negation
serves the purpose of afﬁrming the non-difference between S ´iva and his Power,
neither of which can, by deﬁnition, undergo transformation.54In his commentary
on that verse, Ra ¯makan˙t˙ha (c. 950–1000 CE) remarks that transformation is only
possible for the insentient, without unpacking the analogy. But when comment-
ing on KiraṇaVP 2.12cd, he describes māyāas not being the deluder since she
51It is no doubt signiﬁcant that Ra ¯makan˙t˙ha in his Sarv āgamapr āmāṇyopany āsaplaces the Pa ¯n˜cara ¯trikas
in the level of prakr  tialong with pariṇāma-Veda ¯ntins (Goodall 2015b , p. 276).
52Vv. 6–7ab (trans. Gupta 2000 ):yath āhi sarpir āsiñcet k ṣīre tanmathanodbhavam |sarpir anyatra ca
kṣīre tatsarpir api c ānyakam ||evam āprakr  teḥśaktim adhi ṣṭhātrīṃsmared budha ḥ.
53Both the Vivekam ārtaṇḍaand its 101-verse pre ´cisGorak ṣaśataka , two Hat˙hayogic sources, feature the
possibly related image of pouring milk into milk, clariﬁed butter into clariﬁed butter, and ﬁre into ﬁre, to
metaphorize the achievement of non-duality with the paramount reality by the yogin: dugdhe k ṣīraṃghr  te
sarpir agnau vahnir iv ārpita ḥ| advayatva ṃvrajen nitya ṃyogavit parame pade (Gorak ṣaśataka 100≈
Vivekam ārtaṇḍa172). (For other non-dualistic analogies in the former text, cf. Part II, fn. 33).
54Kiraṇa, VP 5.30cd–31ab: “It is not however the case that such a power [i.e., S ´iva’s śakti] is subject to
transformation, as milk is, because the power of S ´iva is differentiated [only nominally] by the nature of its
function” (trans. Goodall 1998 , p. 354), na punas t ādr  śī śaktiḥkṣīravatpari ṇāminī||yataḥśaktimata ḥ
śaktiḥkr  tyasa ṃsthānabhedag ā.
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 555

--- [Page 22] ---
illuminates through her effects ( māyāno mohin īprokt āsvata ḥkāryāt prak āśikā),
as existing in a potential (and thus inactive) form as clariﬁed butter exists in a
potential form in milk.55The point that insentient entities like prakr  ti(which is
upādānakāraṇa, not nimittak āraṇa) cannot be agents, often advanced in the
context of a refutation of Sa ¯ ṅkhya, is a cliche ´found in a number of
Ra ¯makan˙t˙ha’s commentaries, viz. Paramok ṣanir āsakārikāvr  tti ad 3c,56
Nare śvarapar īkṣāprak āśaa d 1.22cd57and 1.56,58and Mata ṅgavr  tti ad VP
6.27cd.59Aghoras ´ivaad Mr  gendra VP 9.260explains that Ma ¯ya¯ cannot be the
unique material cause as she does not transform totally ( sarv ātma) into her
effects, as milk into clariﬁed butter, but only partially ( ekade śa), as an insect in
clariﬁed butter—a point that he repeats, virtually verbatim, while commenting on
Bhogak ārikā120c–121b.
From the above it may be concluded that in the dualistic Saiddha ¯ntika scriptures
and commentaries, a partial/qualiﬁed form of pariṇāmav ādais only accepted at the
level of Ma ¯ya¯ and not of the Lord. The analogy of clariﬁed butter in milk is invoked
to illustrate (and sometimes criticize) pariṇāma, along the lines formulated in
Sa ¯ṅkhya treatises with respect to the evolution of the undifferentiated prakr  ti,t o
explain the transformation of primal matter that cannot be conscious. It is never
used to characterize S ´iva, his immanence in the universe and his relationship with
the souls.
The same analogy carries a more Veda ¯ntic ﬂavor in the Dakṣiṇamūrtivārttika/
Mānasoll āsa,61aS´aiva post-scriptural work that teaches a form of monism that
reminds us of such Kashmirian systems as the Pratyabhijn ˜a ¯ (Potter 1981 , pp. 550–
551). In 2.9–14 it defends satkāryav āda(against the Vais ´eṣika view) and the
ubiquitous status of existence ( sattā) and illumination ( sphuratt ā) as the cause of
everything by adducing the example of the modiﬁcation of substances, like when
55“It is not the case the Ma ¯ya¯ of herself ( svata ḥ) performs the sullying of souls, because, since she exists
as potential and therefore not in manifest form, she is inactive, just as curds and fresh butter and other[
dairy product]s exist [only] as potential in milk” (trans. Goodall 1998 , p. 237), naiva m āyāyāḥsvata ḥpuṃ
malin īkaraṇam upapadyate śaktir ūpatven āvyaktar ūpatve satyakriy āvattv ātkṣīrādyavasthitadadhinavan ī-
tādiśaktivat.
56kartr  tve’pi prayojyatvam ity āgam āntaram | ayam artha ḥjñātr  tvavat kartr  tvam api pu ṃsaḥsvabh āva
eva | na tu prakr  teḥkartr  tvaṃyuktam, k āraṇatvāt tasy āḥ| anyad dhi k āraṇatvaṃsvar ūpāny-
athābhāvarūpaṃ jaḍavastu ṣu svabh āvatayaiva pari ṇāmitv ādyavyabhic āri k ṣīradadhy ādiṣv
adhyak ṣasiddham .
57tad apy ayukta ṃvirodh āsiddhe ḥ.a kṣaṇikasyaiva gha ṭādeḥkṣīragh ṛtadh āraṇādyarthakriy ākrame ṇa
(ed. Watson et al.2013 , p. 391, fn. 635).
58This is virtually identical to Paramok ṣanir āsakārikāvr  tti ad 3c (anyad …adhyak ṣasiddham ).
59dharma ścāyam ak ṣaṇikasyaiva gha ṭādeḥkrame ṇakṣīradadhidh āraṇādikaḥprad īpādeśca yugapad
vartid āhatailak ṣapaṇādiko’rthakriy ākāritvalak ṣaṇaḥpratyak ṣeṇa siddha ḥ(ed. Watson et al. 2013 ,
p. 391).
60ata eveda ṃna k ṣīradadhiny āyena sarv ātman āpariṇāmi | kintu ghr  takīṭanyāyenaikade śenaiva
binduvad iti mantavyam .
61This is traditionally, but almost certainly spuriously, attributed to Sures ´vara, being a commentary on
theDakṣiṇāmūrtistotra , traditionally attributed to S ´aṅkara.
123556 A. Acri

--- [Page 23] ---
milk becomes curd.62The analogy is here reformulated along the lines of non-
dualistic S ´aivism: all dualities like cause and effect, part and whole, action and
agent, etc., are constructions ( kalpan ā) of just the one light ( prak āśa) (12b); milk is
transformed into curds by God’s power of activity ( kriyāśakti) in the form of time
(kāla), whereas the world comes to exist as made up of the perceiver and the objects
of perception through his Power of Knowledge (14).63
A late instance of the analogy of milk and curd is found in the work of S ´rı ¯kan˙t˙ha,
a prob. 14th-to-15th century South Indian S ´aiva author64who commented the BS
(Brahmam īmāṃsābhāṣya) from that viewpoint, following a S ´aiva interpretation of
the transformationist Veda ¯nta that he calls viśiṣṭaśivādvaita , and anonymously
drawing on the works of non-dualistic S ´a ¯kta S ´aivas from Kashmir, like Utpaladeva
and Abhinavagupta (Sanderson 2014 , p. 90). He resorts twice to the analogy of milk
and curd to illustrate the view according to which the Lord is the single material
cause of the universe, for instance when commenting on BS 2.1.24:
The transformation of just a single [cause] into the form of an effect is
possible: just like [the transformation] of the single milk into the substance of
curd. Hence, Brahman is the single cause, and the world is the effect.65
In 2.1.26 he invokes the analogy by way of a pūrvapak ṣindenouncing that if
Brahman, the single cause of everything, was irreversibly transformed into the
multifarious world, as milk into curd, then no Brahman would be left over.66He
replies that Brahman’s transformation must be accepted on account of scripture, for
it is unlike any other commonly observable object, and is also possessed of intrinsic
special powers, thanks to which it is possible for him to be both the ultimate cause
and effect. Indeed, milk transforms itself into curd without the need of the
intervention of an external agent. This is a special kind of transformation
(apūrvapari ṇāma) that reorients the concept in order not to conﬂict with the
changeless nature of the supreme principle, which is one, and yet indissolubly
united with Ma ¯ya¯(Brahmam īmāṃsābhāṣya ad BS 1.4.27).67Thus, according to
S´rı ¯kan˙t˙ha, S´iva is to be regarded as both the material and efﬁcient cause of creation.
It is worthy to mention that, while adhering to pariṇāmav āda,S´rı ¯kan˙t˙ha explicitly
622.11: “When the ﬂower becomes the fruit, when milk becomes curd, properties—such as form, taste
and the like—of a distinct class from those of the cause are cognized,” puṣpe phalatvam āpanne k ṣīre ca
dadhit āṃgate |vijātīyāḥprat īyante gu ṇārūparas ādaya ḥ.
63“Through his Power of Action assuming the form of time, milk is transformed into curd. Through his
Power of Knowledge the universe comes into being as made up of the perceiver and the objects of
perception,” kālarūpakriy āśakty ākṣīrāt pari ṇamed dadhi | jñ ātr  jñānajñeyar ūpaṃjñānaśakty ābhavej
jagat. Compare fn. 33 supra on Bha ¯skara.
64Cf. Duquette 2021 , pp. 19–21.
65ekasy āpi k āryar ūpeṇa pari ṇāmaḥsambhavati, yath ākṣīrasyaikasyaiva dadhibh āvena | tasm ād
brahmaikak āraṇakaṃjagatk āryam.
66tasya k ṣīrasyaiva dadhir ūpeṇa sarv ātman ājagad ākāreṇa pari ṇāme kr  tsnasy āpi k āryatvaprasakti ḥ,
brahma n āvaśiśyeta.
67According to S ´rı ¯kan˙t˙ha, S´iva “is not merely the possessor of māyā, or the māyin: He is qualiﬁed by it
(māyāviśiṣṭa)” (Duquette 2015 , p. 11).
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 557

--- [Page 24] ---
critiques bhed ābheda positions, for instances those embraced by such S ´aiva
Veda ¯ntic groups as the Vı ¯ras ´aivas (cf. Duquette 2021 , pp. 85, 214–216).
An even later instance of the use of the ﬁre in wood image in an analogous non-
dualistic context is found in the Śaivaparibh āṣāof S´iva ¯grayogı ¯ndra Jn ˜a ¯nas´iva¯ca¯rya
(aka S ´iva ¯grayogin), who lived in Vijayanagara in the mid-late 16th century. This
text, adhering to a form of non-dualism also claiming that S ´iva is both the material
and efﬁcient cause of the universe, employs the image to deﬁne the relationship
between the Lord and the Soul in terms of identity ( tādātmya ). According to
S´iva ¯grayogin (40), the oneness between the two entities exists even in the state of
saṃsāra:
However, that [oneness] that is unmanifest due to the covering becomes
manifest at liberation, when the covering goes away. Just as the ﬁre which,
though hidden by the forms of the wood actually abides in the identity
(tādātmya ) relation with the woods, such as the kindling sticks etc.,
subsequently becomes manifest through the forms of the wood when the
obstructing factors, viz. heaviness, hardness, ﬂuidity and earthiness, are burnt
through the activity of rubbing, in like manner [the identity between the Lord
and Soul becomes manifest].68
(Sanskrit-)Old Javanese Śaiva texts from Java and Bali
The analogies of ﬁre in wood and butter in milk occur, often as a pair, in various
seminal (Sanskrit-)Old Javanese S ´aiva texts of the tattva andtutur genre,69as well
as in two Old Javanese poems in Sanskritic metres ( kakavin ). In Vr  haspatitattva
verse 49 and exegesis, the two analogies provide a logical demonstration of the
existence of the Lord through inference, against an opponent contending that there
are no proofs to establish it since he is bodiless:
yad gh ṛtaṃpayasi hari śca yad d āruṣukṣitaḥjalaṃnabha ḥsthita ṃsarvago
’nilaḥ|
rajas tamo ’dṛśyam āno nare ṇa sann asat tath ābāhye jagati tan nopalabh-
yate ||
49c ’dṛs´yama ¯no naren˙a]em.; ’d ṛs´yaṃmano nare Ed.; d ṛsyamanas sa
narena mss. AD; d ṛs´yamanas sa narena mss. BEF; v ṛṣamana sa naren˙a mss.
CG
apa kari pana ṅguhanta ri ṅapuy yan hane ṅkayu |umapeka tan katon
sәṅguhәn hana |apa ya tan g әsәṅikaṅkayu denya |tan hana li ṅanta |mijil ta
ya sa ṅkeṅkayu |ndya pana ṅguhanterika |mapa deyanta mastvi ma ṅkana |
68kiṃtuāvaraṇavaśāt tad āanabhivyakta ṃāvaraṇāpagame mukt āv abhivyajyate | yath āhy
araṇiprabhr  tiṣuk āṣṭheṣut ādātmyen āvasthita eva k āṣṭhākāratirohito vahni ḥpaścān math-
anakriy ādagdh āvārakaguruka ṭhinadravap ārthiv āpyāvayavar ūpakāṣṭhākāratven ābhivyajyate tadvat.
69Just like revealed tantric scriptures from the Indian Subcontinent, these texts are notoriously difﬁcult
to date, all the more so because they have apparently undergone various stages of compilation. Generally
speaking, most of them might have achieved their current form between the 8th (but this lower limit is
purely speculative) and the 16th or 17th century.
123558 A. Acri

--- [Page 25] ---
maṅkana teka ṅmiñak sa ṅkeṅsusu |hana li ṅanterika |vvay juga ta lvirnika ṅ
susu |taya li ṅaterika |hana mata ya |ika ta umapa ma ṅkana |vastu b āhya ika
iva ma ṅkana ev әh yan linak ṣaṇan|tan kәna vinastvan |ika pak ṣanta pva
sinaṅguh ta vi śeṣa|apeka sor deni ṅvastu b āhya |yāvat kadya ṅgānikaṅapuy
lavan miñak |yāvat ma ṅkana ta sa ṅhyaṅviśeṣa|tan kәna linak ṣaṇan|mevәh
vinastvan |apa kari pana ṅguhanta ri sira |sūkṣma juga ya |alakṣaṇa|atyanta
paramadurgr āhya |ya ta sina ṅguh vi śeṣaṅaranya |
Just as butter [invisibly resides] in milk and ﬁre in wood, as water abides in
clouds and the wind is omnipresent, so also are rajas andtamas . They are
existent and yet not existent in as much as they are not grasped by the man
in the visible world.
What is your means to know the ﬁre that is present in wood? Why should
something that is not seen be described as existent? As the wood is not burnt
by that [ﬁre,] so according to you it does not exist. [Yet] that [ﬁre] comes out
of the wood: that is your means to know about it. In what way will you
acknowledge the factual existence of such [an event]? Similarly, butter comes
out of milk. You can say that it exists. You can say that water alone is the
nature of milk, and [butter] does not exist. But it exists! How can it be so?
Even though it is a visible substance it is difﬁcult to be clearly deﬁned; it
cannot be perceived in its concrete form. What, according to your proposition,
is denoted as viśeṣa, is it anything less than a visible substance? As long as it
can be compared to ﬁre and butter, the holy viśeṣais as such, it cannot be
clearly deﬁned, it is difﬁcult to be perceived in its concrete form. What is your
means to know it? It is just subtle, without external marks, extremely difﬁcult
to grasp. This is regarded as viśeṣa.
Of the four similes mentioned in the śloka, only two are taken up in the
commentary, namely those of butter in milk and ﬁre in wood. Nor is the analogy of
theguṇas explained there;70rather, the probandum is the ultimate existence of the
Lord and supreme principle ( viśeṣa) in both transcendent and immanent form.
A slightly different (and corrupt) version of the same s ´loka is found in
Jñānasiddh ānta25.5.71The single line constituting the Old Javanese exegesis
simply states: “The means ( prayoga ) of the master to meet with the Lord is
yogasandhi ”(prayoga sa ṅpaṇḍitān tumәmvakәn bha ṭāra yogasandhi ). The s ´loka
that follows, which seems to be only feebly related to the preceding one, refers to
70The simile of oil in seed is used in the Liṅgapur āṇa(1.70–74), just as in the Vr  haspatitattva ,t o
demonstrate the existence of the (three) guṇas: “As oil is in the sesame seed or butter resides in milk, so
the universe follows from tamas ,sattva andrajas ,”tile yath ābhavet taila ṃghr  taṃpayasi v āsthitam |
tathātamasi sattve ca rajasy anusr  taṃjagat. The same simile is paired with that of ﬁre in wood in
Brahmapur āṇa23.28: īdr  śānāṃtathātatra ko ṭikoṭiśatāni ca |d āruṇy agnir yath ātaila ṃtile tadvat pum ān
iha.The mention of the guṇas may denote antiquity, and/or Sa ¯ ṅkhya inﬂuence.
71yath āghr  taṃpayasi v āri ca d āruṣu|k ṣitaṃjalaṃnabha ca savargo ’nilaḥ| rajas tamo vr  ttimana (?)
guṇāni ca | tathaiva sarvaga ṃca nopalabhyate . Soebadio ( 1971 , pp. 240–241), having emended pari in
the mss. to vāri, translates it as “juice” (in the trees); however, the parallel in the Vr  haspatitattva suggests
that the correct reading is hari, which, according to Sanskrit lexicons, means “ﬁre”.
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 559

--- [Page 26] ---
the yogin leaving his body with his breath, realizing to be S ´iva himself.72In s´loka
25.1cd and exegesis, the text characterized the Siddha ¯nta (“Supreme Doctrine”) as
omnipervasive through the analogy of clariﬁed butter in milk.73
Either one or the other analogy, or both, are resorted to in the Vr  haspatitattva ,
Tattvajñ āna, and Dharma P ātañjala to justify either the presence of the Lord as
the Soul within human beings, or the union between the Soul and Ma ¯ya¯, according
to the modes of being woven crosswise ( ūta) and lengthwise ( prota ), respectively.
See, for instance, Vr  haspatitattva 14.2:
inūtanira ika ṅsarvatattva | in ūtaṅaranya | viny āpakanira | kadya ṅgani ṅ
miñak hane ṅsusu | haneka ṅmiñak ṅkāneṅsusu | ndatan katon | ya ta sina ṅguh
ūtaṅaranya |
The ensemble of the principles is woven crosswise. Woven crosswise means
that it is pervaded by him, like the butter that is in the milk. The butter there in
the milk exists, but it is not seen. That is what is called woven crosswise.
And Tattvajñ āna29.4–7:
siṅgih bha ṭara hana pinakahuripni ṅvvaṅkabeh | ndan ūtaprota lak ṣaṇanira|
ūtaṅaranya | kadya ṅgāniṅapuy hana ri ṅәsәyәn | pri ṅampyal kayu | kuna ṅ
tan kinavruhan | tan katon juga hananya | vyakta tan vyakta juga hananya ||
The Lord indeed is what renders the life of all human beings possible. His
characteristics are being woven crosswise and lengthwise. Woven crosswise is
like the ﬁre that is in the ﬁre drill. Be it either (bamboo-)wood of the priṅor
ampyal variety, it is not perceived, its existence is not seen. Its existence is
both manifest and unmanifest.
InTattvajñ āna5.1–4 the simile of ﬁre in wood is resorted to in order to illustrate the
pervasion of the principles by the Soul: the ātmikatattva , which is equal to
sadāśivatattva , pervades Ma ¯ya¯ in a woven crosswise-manner, like ﬁre pervades the
ﬁre drill:
nihan ta ṅsinaṅguh ātmikatattva ṅaranya | bha ṭāra sad āśivatattva kuna ṅ
lakṣaṇanira | ūtaprota | ūtaṅaranya kadya ṅgani ṅapuy hana ri ṅәsәyәn|
sūkṣma juga ka ṅapuy hana ri ṅkayu pri ṅ|m a ṅkana ta bha ṭāra sad āśivatattva
an vy āpaka ri ṅmāyātattva | tan katon tan kinavruhan | sira vibhu humib әkiṅ
māyātattva |
What is designated as ātmikatattva is as follows: the Lord sadāśivatattva . Its
characteristic is that of being woven crosswise and lengthwise. Woven
crosswise is like the ﬁre that is within the ﬁre drill. The ﬁre, when it resides
within the priṅbamboo-wood, is invisible. In the same way is the Lord
72Compare Niśvāsamūla6.8 and Sārdhatri śatikālottaratantra 19.4.
73tad eva hi sarva ṃvyāpi sarpi ḥkṣīravad i ṣyate […] vyāpaka ri ṅsarvabh āva, pa ḍanira kadi miñak
vyāpaka ri ṅpәhan asin, “It is said that that only pervades all, like clariﬁed butter the milk […]. It
pervades all that exists, like butter pervading sour milk”.
123560 A. Acri

--- [Page 27] ---
sadāśivatattva when He pervades the principle Ma ¯ya¯. He is not seen nor
known. He is pervasive, ﬁlling the principle of Ma ¯ya ¯.
A similar set of ideas is echoed in Kum āratattva (II) f. 19r, where the text attempts
to characterize Sada ¯s´iva, previously deﬁned as vyāpivy āpaka “pervasive and
pervaded”, as being “subtle like the ﬁre that is in what is to be set on ﬁre, and also
like what is full of milk (i.e. butter?)” ( sūkṣma kadya ṅgāniṅapvi ane ṅapvyәn[em.;
apvan ms.], mvaṅmibәkan i ṅpәhan).
The Dharma P ātañjala (214.1–4) describes the pervasion of the universe by the
Soul as ūtaprota through the analogy of butter in milk:
ndan lak ṣaṇa nika ṅsaṅhyaṅātmā|a nb y āpaka irika ṅtattva sama ṅkana |
ūtaprota | ūtaṅaranya | kadya ṅgāniṅmiñak hane ṅpə  han | ma ṅkana lak ṣaṇa
saṅhyaṅātmāan by āpaka irika ṅtattva kabeh |
The distinctive characteristic of the Soul in pervading the principles thus
[enumerated] is woven crosswise-and-lengthwise. Woven crosswise means:
like the butter that is within milk, such is the characteristic of the Soul as it
pervades all the principles.
The pervasion of Ma ¯ya¯—and hence, by extension, of its lower products—by either
the Lord or the Soul is described by the three tattva texts (viz. Dharma P ātañjala,
Vr  haspatitattva, andTattvajñ āna) in almost identical terms, as if they inherited that
view from a common source. S ´iva/the Soul pervades the principles as if woven
crosswise, just like butter within milk or ﬁre within wood, and as if woven
lengthwise, just like a crystal loses its transparency according to the light it is
traversed by,74or like a thread ( sūtra) keeps the pearls of a necklace in a row.75
Both images are usually invoked in Sanskrit sources to explain the relationship
between the supreme Brahman or God vis-a `-vis the plural individual souls. The
former analogy, i.e. the crystal and its colours, is found in Bhartr˚hari’s, S ´aṅkara’s,
and Man˙d˙anamis ´ra’s works, to characterize the relationship between a single, pure
reality (such as Brahman, or the linguistic universal of “being”) and the upādhis;76
the latter, i.e. pearls in a necklace, is invoked by commentators to the
Sāṅkhyak ārikās (18) to represent a pūrvapak ṣaon the pervasion of the bodies by
the Spirit, which must have been an early form of pariṇāma-Veda ¯nta (Nakamura
1989 , p. 335),77sometimes referred to as vedav āda.78It is also found in the
74Cf.Vr  haspatitattva 30;Tattvajñ āna5, 30, 34
75Cf.Vr  haspatitattva 14;Dharma P ātañjala 214.3–4.
76Cf. Nakamura 2004 , pp. 206–207, 568. Cf. Vākyapad īya3.3.40–41; S ´aṅkara’s BSB 1.3.19;
Man˙d˙anamis ´ra’sBrahmasiddhi pp. 13, 15–16, 37, 119–121.
77Cf.Māṭharavr  tti, p. 22 (contrasted to the analogy of reﬂection of moon, on which cf. Part II);
Suvar ṇasaptati (Takakusu 1904 , p. 1003); Gaud˙apa ¯da’s Sāṅkhak ārikābhāṣya, introduction adSK 18.
78To Nakamura ( 1989 , p. 335), the use of the word vedav ādininstead of vedāntav ādinsuggests that by
that time “the independence of the Veda ¯nta school had not yet been generally accepted”. Cf. Māṭharavr  tti
adSK 61 (the vedav ādins are associated with verse 3.15 of the Śvetāśvatara );Nare śvarapar īkṣāad3.80,
placing the vedavid si npuru ṣa;Sarvajñ ānottara 14.3 ( brahmavedin si npuru ṣa);Mṛgendrav ṛttidīpikāad
VP 2.11; Mok ṣakārikāvṛtti ad 148c–150b (Watson et al. 2013 , p. 445).
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 561

--- [Page 28] ---
Buddhist Vijñaptim ātratāsiddhi (ibid.), and in a number of S ´aiva texts, among which
a remarkably early one, the Nayas ūtraof the Niśvāsatattvasa ṃhitā.79
TheDharma P ātañjala resorts to the analogies of ﬁre in wood and butter in milk
when explaining that the relationship between the supreme Lord and his
“manifestation” is one of non-direct identity; it is the Lord in his sakalani ṣkala
(or Sada ¯s´iva) aspect that has a relation with the perfect yogin who attains his Powers
and glorious body, thus becoming in every respect similar to him. Thanks to the
yogin’s perfect absorption and prayogasandhi , the Lord is made manifest
(abhivyakta ) in an incarnated being. The nature of this manifestation is then
explained in 288.12–18 through the simile of ﬁre in wood: like the ﬁre that is in
wood manifests itself when the wood burns, so the Lord only manifests himself in
the perfect yogin:
mata ṅnyan ma ṅkana | apan siddha sam ādhi sa ṅyogi | apan yek ākābhibyaktan
bhaṭāra ri janma | kapa ṅguhanira de sa ṅyogi | yan vruh ri ṅprayogasandhi
padanira | kadya ṅgāni apvy ane ṅkayu | apan ham әtvakәnāvaknya | ika ṅapvy
aneṅkayu | ulihni ṅaṅәsə ̄atah prast āvany ānmәtu | ma ṅkana teka ṅmiñak | tan
vәtu ik āyan tan pinut әran | ika pva vastu maganal tath āpi tan vәtu ik āyan tan
inup āya ri sandhi | bha ṭāra paramak āraṇa kari tan kapa ṅguha | ya tan han ā
prayogasandhi | yadyapin vruha ri prayogasandhi | ya tan gavayakna | tan
kapa ṅguhatah bha ṭāra denya |
The reason why it is so is that the absorption of the yogin is perfect, for that
[absorption] is the manifestation of the Lord in a human being. It will be
obtained by the yogin if he knows about the application of the esoteric
knowledge ( prayogasandhi ). To exemplify it: like the ﬁre which is in the
wood, for it brings forth its body. The ﬁre which is in the wood, the cause for it
to come out is the activity of rubbing. Likewise, the butter is not produced if it
is not churned. That is a coarse substance, and yet it is not produced if no
working procedure is applied with a tool (or: sandhi =yoga ?). The Lord
Supreme Cause will not be met by him, if there will be no application of the
esoteric knowledge. Even though one may know about the esoteric knowledge
of the means, if one does not put it into practice, one will deﬁnitely not meet
the Lord by way of that [knowledge].
The passage explains the term prayoga as the activity of churning ( pinutәran) and
rubbing ( aṅәsə ̄), and sandhi as a “tool” (Zoetmulder 1982 , p. 1650). Perhaps here
the word may also indicate a “subtle means” through which an invisible yet material
substance—the butter—can be produced (i.e., made manifest) by being processed
(inup āya). Here prayogasandhi may refer to a kind of yogic procedure, the details of
which are not explained, involving effort or focused attention to make the latent
presence of the Lord visibly manifest ( kābhibyaktan ) in the body of the practitioner.
The analogy of ﬁre in wood occurs in a similar context in the Sanskrit-Old
Javanese tutur Bhuvanako śa(2.18–19):
79Nayas ūtra4.146ab (≈Niśvāsakārikā37.11cd, Nāradaparivr ājaka Upani ṣadp. 152, Brahma Upa ṇiṣad
p. 86, Liṅgapur āṇa2.16.12–13).
123562 A. Acri

--- [Page 29] ---
kāṣṭhe k āṣṭhe yath ābahni ḥsūkṣmatv ān nopalabhyate |
bhūte bh ūte mah ādeva ḥsūkṣmatv ān nopalabhyate ||
18b su¯kṣmatva ¯n nopalabhyate] em.; su ¯kṣmatvam upalabhyate mss. 17d
su¯kṣmatva ¯n nopalabhyate] em.; su ¯kṣmagno upalabhyate mss.
saṅhyaṅapuy hanerika ṅkayukayu | nd ātan katon | makanimitta s ūkṣmanira |
yath ā| kadya ṅgāniṅākāśa|m a ṅkana ta bha ṭāra mah ādeva, an hana ri ṅsarva
māvak | nd ātar kapa ṅguh sira | makanimitta ṅsūkṣmanira ||
araṇimanthanop āye loke bhavati p āvaka ḥ|
jñānayogas tathop āye dvayam eko mahe śvaraḥ||
19aaran˙imanthanopa ¯ye] em.; haran˙imanmanopa ¯ye mss. 19deko] em.; eke
mss.
inup āya pveka ṅkayu | i ṅusvan | umijil teka ṅapuy | ṅkeṅloka | sama ṅkana ta
bhaṭāreśvara | an kahi ḍәp | makanimitta jñ āna sira | yoga pa ṅupāyānta juga ||
As the ﬁre [which is] in every piece of wood is not perceived because of
[its] subtlety, so Maha ¯deva [who is] in every creature is not perceived
because of [His] subtlety.
The reverend Fire is in every piece of wood, but it is not seen because of its
subtlety; yath ā—like the atmosphere, in the same way is the Lord Maha ¯deva
as He exists in all embodied beings
Through the means of rubbing the ﬁre-stick, the ﬁre comes to exist in the
world. In the same manner, through the means [of] the yoga of knowledge,
the one Lord [becomes] double.
When the wood is used as a means, being rubbed tenaciously, the ﬁre comes
out here in the world. Just in the same manner the Lord [comes to exist], when
He is visualized by means of the gnosis. You should use yoga as the means.
Compare the ﬁrst two stanzas of the hymn to S ´iva of the early 11th-century kakavin
Arjunaviv āha(10.1–2):
oṃsambahni ṅanātha ti ṅhalana de triloka śaraṇa
vāhyādhyātmika sambah i ṅhulun i j ə ̄ṅta tan hana vaneh
saṅlvir agni sake ṅtahәn kadi miñak sake ṅdadhi kita
saṅsākṣātmәtu yan hana vva ṅamutәr tutur pinahayu
byāpiby āpaka s āriniṅparamatattva durlabha kita
icch āntan hana tan han āganal alit lavan halahayu
utpattisthitil īnani ṅdadi kit āta kāraṇanika
saṅsaṅkan parani ṅsarāt sakalani ṣkalātmaka kita
May the homage of him who is in need of a protector ( anātha) be noticed by
Him who is the refuge of the three worlds! My homage to your feet is both
bodily and mental—there is nothing else [but you]. You are like the ﬁre
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 563

--- [Page 30] ---
[that comes out] from wood and the butter [that comes out] from the milk.
You come out in visible form when there is a man who carefully churns the
consciousness.
Pervaded and pervasive, you are the essence of the supreme reality, difﬁcult
to grasp. According to your will is what exists and what does not exist, what
is gross and subtle and what is good or evil. Of the origin, existence and end
of creation you are the Cause. You are the origin and end of the whole
universe, having both a manifest and unmanifest form.
And the didactic S ´aiva kakavin Dharma Śūnya, 15.9:
nahan ikin upamanye ṅagnīmuṅgv i kayukayu
dinәlәta ya vin āsvās tan k āton kahanan ik ā
upayanika ya p әtәn byakta ṅkaṣṭa mijilak әn
ya ta pa ḍanira sa ṅhyaṅjñānāyan sinarisari
Thus is the analogy of the ﬁre abiding in the logs: it is observed attentively
and thoroughly examined, [yet] its state is [still] invisible. The means to
produce it in visible form [from] the log is the pәtaṅ-bamboo. That is the
likeness of the divine innermost being when it is constantly [practiced].
The above passages hint at a yogic method, illustrated through the analogies of ﬁre
in wood and butter in milk, to make the Lord or the Soul manifest in the man who
practices it. In the Arjunaviv āha, the verb amutәr(“churn”) is connected with tutur
(“consciousness, awareness, remembrance”) and pinahayu (“carefully, with due
care”). This theme clearly reﬂects the one found in passages of the Trayo-
daśaśatikak ālottara ,Niśvāsakārikā,andSvacchandatantra quoted above (which in
turn remind us of Śvetāśvatara 1.13–16ab and Mok ṣadharma 202.12–13), where this
manifestation could not be affected only through knowledge but also through the
application of an appropriate means as well as effort.
It is evident that these analogies played an important role in the S ´aiva theological
and soteriological paradigm that was current in premodern Java and Bali. The
presence in Sanskrit-Old Javanese S ´aiva texts of several images attested in early
Veda ¯nta sources and non-dualistic S ´aiva Tantras, and their seemingly non-dualistic
doctrinal stance indeed, suggest that this body of texts from Java and Bali may
reﬂect an early phase in the development of S ´aivism, i.e. prior to the blossoming of
the dualistic Saiddha ¯ntika corpus of scriptures and commentaries on the one hand,
and to the inﬂuence of vivartav āda-Veda ¯nta, which took place after the 9th century,
on the other (cf. Part II).
Conclusion
In Part I of this article, I have mapped and discussed instances of the analogies of
ﬁre in wood and dairy products in milk in Sanskrit(ic) literature. Both analogies
belong to an early trend of speculation—attested in both Sa ¯ ṅkhya, Veda ¯nta, and
S´aiva sources—articulating the immanence of the universal Self in the beings (or
123564 A. Acri

--- [Page 31] ---
the existence of any invisible things, or of the cause in the effect). Besides
epitomizing the concept of the existence of an effect in/by its cause ( satkāryav āda),
they exemplify the idea of an evolutionary and irreversible transformation of a
substance ( dravya ) into another. This is especially true in the case of the
latter analogy, which is often employed in Sa ¯ ṅkhya commentaries to illustrate the
production of evolutes from prakr  ti. In the Śvetāśvatara , both analogies are applied
to a form of theistic yoga, which is also attested in medieval S ´aiva sources from
both South and Southeast Asia.
Judging from the distribution of the two analogies in the S ´aiva corpus, and
especially in Saiddha ¯ntika texts that are either non-dualistic or not clearly dualistic
(such as the Kālottara , the Niśvāsakārikā, the Sarvajñ ānottara , etc.), and their
association with other early Veda ¯ntic metaphors (such as the oil in seed, the
coloured crystal, and the pearls in a necklace), I suggest that the most common
philosophical standpoint embraced by the sources attesting them may have been a
form of pariṇāma-Veda ¯nta that subscribed to bhed ābhedav āda, and that can be
traced to the period before S ´aṅkara and Man˙d˙anamis ´ra. This is consistent with the
fact that these analogies are well-attested in S ´aiva texts from Java and Bali, whose
non-dualistic doctrinal framework seems to predate the dualistic Saiddha ¯ntika
systematizations of the corpus. The wider implications of these views, namely
whether the ﬁrst pair of analogies could be traced back to the “formative” period of
S´aivism, and whether bhed ābhedav ādacontributed to shape the theology of S ´aiva
traditions prior to the emergence of the fully dualistic S ´aiva Saiddha ¯ntika corpus
known to us, will be discussed in Part II of this article. Presenting the analogies of
the reﬂection of moon or sun in pools of water and the limitation of space inside
pots, I will argue that they mainly express vivartav ādapositions ascribable to
Advaita Veda ¯ntic milieus from the 9th–10th century onwards, and could therefore
be used as a tool to tentatively discern the dating and doctrinal (af)ﬁliation of some
medieval S ´aiva scriptures.
References
Primary Sources in Sanskrit and Old Javanese
Akulavı ¯ratantra: Kaulajñ ānanir ṇaya and Some Minor Texts of the School of Matsyendran ātha,ed. P.C.
Bagchi. Calcutta: Metropolitan Printing and Publishing House, 1934.
Amr˚tabindu Upani ṣad:The Yoga Upanishads: With the Commentary of Sri Upanishad-Brahma-Yogin , ed.
A. Mahadeva Shastri. Madras: The Adyar Library, 1920.
A¯ran˙yakaparvan (Maha ¯bha ¯rata 3): e-text (GRETIL) by Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune,
1999, on the basis of the text entered by Muneo Tokunaga et al., revised by John Smith, et al.
Arjunaviva ¯ha: Arjunawiw āha: The Marriage of Arjuna of Mpu Ka ṇwa, ed. Stuart Robson. Leiden:
KITLV, 2008.
A¯tmabodha: Atma Bodha of Sri Sankaracharya, ed. P.N. Menon, Palghat, 1964. [2d edition]
Bhogaka ¯rika ¯:Aṣṭaprakara ṇam: Tattvaprak āśa, Tattvasa ṅgraha, Tattvatrayanir ṇaya, Ratnatraya, Bhoga-
kārikā,Nādakārikā, Mok ṣakārikā, Paramok ṣanir āsakārikā,ed. Brajavallabha Dvivedi. Varanasi:
Sampurnananda Sanskrit University, 1988.
Bhogaka ¯rika ¯vr˚tti of Aghoras ´iva: Cf. Bhogak ārikā.
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 565

--- [Page 32] ---
Bhuvanakos ´a: [1] Lontar ms. Leiden Cod. Or. 5022, 1878 CE; [2] Lontar ms. from the collection of Ida
Dewa Gede Catra [bearing a colophon dated 1625 CE/S ´aka 1547, but probably last copied in the
19th or 20th century].
Brahmabindu Upani ṣad:The Atharvana-Upanishads , ed. Ramamaya Tarkaratna. Calcutta: Ganesha Press,
1872.
Brahmapura ¯n˙a: e-text (GRETIL) of A ¯dhya ¯yas 1–246, input by Peter Schreiner and Renate Soehnen-
Thieme for the Tu ¨bingen Purana-Project.
Brahmasiddhi: Brahmasiddhi by Ācārya Ma ṇḍanami śra, with Commentary by Śaṅkhap āni,ed.
S. Kuppuswami Sastri. Madras: The Superintendent, Government Press, 1937.
BS—Brahmasu ¯tra: Cf. Brahmas ūtrabh āṣya.
BSB—Brahmasu ¯trabha ¯sya of S ´aṅkara: Brahmas ūtra-Śāṅkarabh āṣya with the Commentaries: Bh āṣyarat-
naprabh āof Govind ānanda, Bh āmatīof V ācaspatimi śra, Ny āyanir ṇaya of Ānandagiri , ed. J.L.
Shastri. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1980. [Revised and reprinted from the edition of M.S. Bakre,
Nirnn˙ayasa ¯gar Press, Bombay, 1934]
Brahmasu ¯trabha ¯sya of S ´rı ¯kan˙t˙ha (Brahmamı ¯ma¯ṃsa ¯bha ¯ ṣya):The Brahma S ūtra Bh āṣya of Śrīkaṇṭhācārya
with the Commentary Śivārkama ṇiDīpikāby the Famous Appaya D īkṣita,ed. R. Halasyanatha
Sastri, 2 Vols. New Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1986 [reprint of 1908 edition].
Brahmaya ¯mala: IFP paper transcript (Devana ¯garı ¯) T522, copied from a ms. belonging to Candras ´ekhara
Gurukkal, Tirukkalikkundram.
Br˚hada ¯ran˙yaka Upani ṣad: Cf. Olivelle 1998.
Dakṣin˙amu¯rtiva ¯rttika/Ma ¯nasolla ¯sa: Dakshinamurti stotra of Sri Sankaracharya; and Dakshinamurti
Upanishad with Sri Sureswaracharya ’s Manasollasa and Pranava vartika; with the introductory
essay The Vedanta doctrine of Sankaracharya, ed. Alladi Mahadeva Sastry. Madras: Samata Books,
1978.
Dharma Pa ¯tan ˜jala, Cf. Acri 20172.
Dharma S ´u¯nya kakavin: Dharma Śūnya: Memuja dan Meneliti Śiwa, ed. Ida Bagus Made Dharma
Palguna. PhD dissertation, Leiden University, 1999.
Dhya ¯nabindu Upani ṣad:The A’tharva ṇa Upanishads, with the Commentary of Na ’ra’yaṇa,ed. Ra’mamaya
Tarkaratna. Calcutta: Ganes ´a Press, 1872.
Gorak ṣas´ataka: Gorak ṣaśatakam, ed. Swa ¯mı¯ Kuvalaya ¯nanda & S.A. Shukla, in Yoga-M īmāṃsā,7 ,4 .
Kaivalyadha ¯ma: S.M.Y.M. Samiti, 1958.
Jaya ¯khyasa ṃhita¯:Jayākhyasa ṁhitāof P āñcar ātraĀgama, ed. Embar Krishnamacharya. Baroda: Oriental
Institute Baroda, 1967.
Jn˜a ¯nasiddha ¯nta: Cf. Soebadio 1971.
Kat˙ha Upani ṣad: Cf. Olivelle 1998.
Kauṣı ¯taki Upani ṣad: Cf. Olivelle 1998.
Kiran˙atantra (VP): Cf. Goodall 1998.
Kubjika ¯matatantra: Kubjik āmatatantra, Kul ālikāmnāya Version, ed. Teun Goudriaan and Jan Schoterman.
Leiden: Brill, 1998.
Kuma ¯ratattva (II): Romanized transcript K.IIIc 2256 by I Gusti Nyoman Agung (1941), of a lontar from
Singaraja.
Lakṣmı ¯tantra: Lakṣmī-tantra: A P āñcar ātraĀgama, ed. Pandit V. Krishnamacharya, Adyar: The Adyar
Library and Research Centre, 1959.
Liṅgapura ¯n˙a:Liṅgapur āṇa. Bombay: S ´rı¯V eṅkates´vara Steam Press, 1906.
Ma¯n˙d˙ukyaka ¯rika ¯/A¯gamas ´a ¯stra: The Āgama śāstra of Gau ḍapāda, ed. Vidhushekhara Bhattacharya.
Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1943.
Mata ṅgavr˚tti (VP): Mata ṅgapārame śvarāgama (Vidy āpāda) avec le commentaire de Bha ṭṭaRāmaka ṇṭha,
ed. N.R. Bhatt. Pondicherry: IFI, 1977.
Ma¯t˙haravr˚tti:Sāṃkhyak ārikāofŚrīmad Īsvarak ṛṣṇa: With the M āṭharav ṛtti of M āṭharācārya, ed. Vishnu
Prasada Sharma. Varanasi: The Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Ofﬁce, 1970. [1st ed. 1922]
Mok ṣaparvan (S ´a ¯ntiparvan 3, Maha ¯bha ¯rata 12): [187, 202] Cf. Wynne 2009. [331] The Śāntiparvan (Vol.
4 [16 of the Critical Edition of the Mah ābhārata]), ed. S.K. Belvalkar. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1954.
Mr˚gendravr˚tti:ŚrīMr.gendra Tantram (Vidy āpāda and Yogap āda) with the Commentary of N ārāyaṇa-
kaṇṭha, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Sha ¯strı ¯. Srinagar, 1930.
123566 A. Acri

--- [Page 33] ---
Mr˚gendravr˚ttidı ¯pika ¯: Śrī mr  gendram k āmikop āgamam vidy āyogap ādādvayamilita ṃ
śrībhaṭṭanārāyaṇakaṇṭhaviracitay ā vr  ttyā tadvy ākhyay āghora śivācāryaviracitay ā dīpikay ā
cālaṅkr  tam, ed. K ṛṣn˙as´a ¯strı ¯ and K.M. Subrahman˙yas´a ¯strı ¯. Devakottai, 1928.
Mun˙d˙aka Upani ṣad:The Principal Upani ṣads, ed., intro. and trans. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan. Delhi/
Bombay/Calcutta: Oxford University Press, 1953.
Na ¯radaparivra ¯jaka Upani ṣad: In F.O. Schrader (ed.), The Minor Upani ṣads. Vol. 1: Sa ṃnyāsa-upani ṣads.
Madras: Adyar Library, 1912.
Nares ´varaparı ¯kṣa ¯praka ¯s´a:Nare śvarapar īkşāof Sadyojyotis with the Commentary (-prak āśa) of Bha ṭṭa
Rāmaka ṇṭha,ed. Madhusu ¯dan Kaul S ´a ¯strı ¯. Srinagar, 1926.
Nis´va ¯satattvasa ṃhita ¯ (Mu ¯lasu¯tra, Nayasu ¯tra, Uttarasu ¯tra): Cf. Goodall 2015a.
Nis´va ¯saka ¯rika ¯: [1] Paper transcript, Devana ¯garı ¯, IFP MS T. 17, from a MS belonging to M.K.S. Bhattar
Madurai; 188 leaves / 635 pp. [2] Devana ¯garı ¯ transcript, IFP MS T. 127, from MS GOML R. No.
16804; 506 pp. [3] Devana ¯garı ¯ transcript, IFP MS T. 150, from MS GOML R. No. 14403; 353 pp.
[4] e-texts of the above transcripts, typed principally by S.A. Sarma and Nibedita Rout (T. 17), R.
Sathyanarayanan (T. 127), Nibedita Rout (T. 150). [The verse and chapter numeration used here is
that of the e-text of T. 17]
Paramok ṣanira ¯saka ¯rika ¯vr˚tti: Cf. Watson et al. 2013.
S´aivaparibha ¯ ṣa¯:The Śaivapraibh āṣāofŚivāgrayogin, ed. R. Balasubramanan and V.K.S.N Raghavan,
trans. S.S. Suryanarayana Sastri. Madras: The Dr. S. Radhakrishnan Institute of Advanced Study in
Philosophy, 1982.
SK—Sa ¯ ṅkhyaka ¯rika ¯:The S āṃkhyak ārikā:Īśvarak ṛṣṇa’s Memorable Verses of S āṃkhya Philosophy with
the Commentary of Gau ḍapādācārya, ed. and trans. H. Dutt Sharma. Poona: The Oriental Book
Agency, 1933.
Sa ¯ṅkhyaka ¯rika ¯bha ¯ ṣya: Cf. Sāṅkhyak ārikā.
Sa ¯ṅkhyatattvakaumudı ¯:The S āṁkhya-Tattva-Kaumud ī:V ācaspati Mi śra’s Commentary on the
Sāṁkhyak ārikā, ed. and trans. Maha ¯mahopa ¯dhya ¯ya Ganganatha Jha (with Introduction and Critical
Notes by Har Dutt Sharma, revised and reedited by M.M. Patkar). Delhi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit
Pratishthan, 2004.
Sa ¯ṅkhyavr˚tti:Sāṅkhyav ṛtti: A Commentary on the S āṅkhya K ārikā, ed. E.A. Solomon. Ahmedabad:
Gujarat University, 1973.
Sa ¯ṅkhyasaptativr˚tti:Sāṃkhyasaptativ ṛtti (V1), ed. E.A. Solomon. Ahmedabad: Gujarat University, 1973.
S´a ¯ntiparvan: The Śāntiparvan (4 Vols.), ed S.K. Belvalkar. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,
1954.
Sa ¯rdhatris ´atika ¯lottaratantra: Sārdhatri śatikālottara with the Commentary (-vr .tti) of Bha ţţaRāmaka ṇṭha,
ed. N.R. Bhatt. Pondicherry: Institut Franc ¸ais de Pondiche ´ry, 1979.
S´a¯rı¯rakamı ¯ma¯ṃsa ¯bha ¯ ṣya:The First Two Chapters of Bh āskara’sŚārīrakam īmāṃsābhāṣya—Critically
Edited with an Introduction, Notes and an Appendix , ed. Takahiro Kato. PhD Dissesrtation, Martin-
Luther-Universita ¨t Halle-Wittenberg, 2011.
Sarvajn ˜a ¯nottara (VP): Sarvajñ ānottar āgama ḥvidy āpāda and yogap āda,ed. K. Ramachandra Sarma,
Adyar Library Bulletin 62, 1998, pp. 181–232.  
Suvarn˙asaptati: Cf. Takakusu 1904.
Svacchandatantra: The Svacchandatantram; With Commentary ‘Uddyota ’by K ṣemar ājācārya, ed. Vraj
Vallabh Dvivedi. Delhi: Parimal, 1985.
S´veta¯s´vatara Upani ṣad: Cf. Olivelle 1998.
Tantra ¯loka: The Tantr āloka of Abhinava Gupta: With Commentary by R ājānaka Jayaratha , ed.
Madhusuda ¯n Kaul S ´a ¯strı ¯ (12 vols.). Allahabad/Bombay/Srinagar, 1918–38.
Tattvajn ˜a ¯na: Tattwajñ āna and Mah ājñāna, ed. Sudarshana Devi Singhal. New Delhi: International
Academy of Indian Culture, 1962.
Trayodas ´as´atikaka ¯lottara: paper Ms, Devana ¯garı ¯, NAK 5-4632, NGMPP Reel No. B 118/7
(Kālottaratantra ).
Upades ´asahasrı ¯:Śaṅkara’s Upade śasahasr ī, ed. Sengaku Mayeda. Tokyo: Hokuseido Press, 1973.
Va ¯kyapadı ¯ya: Bhart ṛharis V ākyapad īya. Die M ūlakārikās nach den Handschriften herausgegeben und mit
einem P āda-index versehen . Wiesbaden: Komissionsverlag Frans Steiner, 1977.
Vivekama ¯rtan˙d˙a: e-text by James Mallinson 2009, based on ms. Central Library, Baroda Acc. No. 4110.
Vr˚haspatitattva: Wṛhaspati-tattwa: An Old Javanese Philosophical Text , ed. Sudarshana Devi. Nagpur:
International Academy of Indian Culture, 1957.
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 567

--- [Page 34] ---
Secondary Sources
Acri, A. (20172).Dharma P ātañjala: A Śaiva Scripture from Ancient Java Studied in the Light of Related
Old Javanese and Sanskrit Texts. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan [1st Edition Groningen: Egbert
Forsten Publishing/Brill, 2011].
Andrijanic ´, I. (2017). “Traces of Reuse in S ´aṅkara’s Commentary on the Brahmas ūtra”, in E. Freschi and
P.A. Maas (eds.), Adaptive Reuse: Aspects of Creativity in South Asian Cultural History , pp. 109–
134. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Deussen, P. (1897). Sechzig Upanishad ’s des Veda . Leipzig: F.A. Brockhaus.
Duquette, J. (2015). “Is S ´iva ¯dvaita Veda ¯nta a Saiddha ¯ntika School? Parin˙a ¯mava ¯da in the Brahma-
mam īmāṃsābhāṣya”.The Journal of Hindu Studies, 8 (1), 16–43.
Duquette, J. (2021). Defending God in Sixteenth-Century India: The Śaiva Oeuvre of Appaya D īkṣita.
Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
Ferrante, M. (2015). “V ṛṣabhadeva on the Status of Ordinary Phenomena: Between Bhart ṛhari and
Advaita Veda ¯nta”. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 43 (1), 61–83.
Fisher, E. (2017a). Hindu Pluralism: Religion and the Public Sphere in Early Modern South India .
Oakland: University of California Press.
Fisher, E. (2017b). “Remaking South Indian S ´aivism: Greater S ´aiva Advaita and the Legacy of the
S´aktivis ´iṣt˙a ¯dvaita Vı ¯ras ´aiva Tradition”. International Journal of Hindu Studies, 21 (3), 319–344.
Goldman, R.P., and Sutherland Goldman, S.J. (2017). The R āmāyaṇao fV ālmīki: An Epic of Ancient
India, Volume VII, Uttarak āṇḍa; Introduction, Translation, and Annotation . Princeton, Oxford:
Princeton University Press.
Goodall, D. (1998). BhaṭṭaRāmaka ṇṭha’s Commentary on the Kira ṇatantra. Vol. I: Chapters 1 –6. Critical
Edition and Annotated Translation . Pondicherry: Institut franc ¸ais de Pondiche ´ry/E´cole franc ¸aise
d’Extre ˆme-Orient.
Goodall, D. (2004). The Par ākhyatantra: A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddh ānta. A Critical Edition and
Annotated Translation . Pondicherry: Institut franc ¸ais de Pondiche ´ry/E´cole franc ¸aise d’Extre ˆme-
Orient.
Goodall, D. (2006). “Initiation et de ´livrance selon le S ´aiva Siddha ¯nta”, in G. Tarabout and G. Colas
(eds.), Rites hindous: Transferts et transformations , pp. 93–116. Paris: E ´ditions de l’E ´cole des
Hautes E ´tudes en Sciences Sociales.
Goodall, D. (2015a). Niśvāsatattvasa ṃhitā: The Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra. Volume 1. A Critical
Edition & Annotated Translation of the M ūlasūtra, Uttaras ūtra & Nayas ūtra, edited by D. Goodall in
collaboration with A. Sanderson & H. Isaacson, with contributions of N. Kaﬂe, D. Acharya &
others. Pondicherry/Hamburg: Institut Franc ¸ais de Pondiche ´ry/E´cole Franc ¸aise d’Extre ˆme-Orient/
Asien-Afrika-Institut, Universita ¨t Hamburg.
Goodall, D. (2015b). “The S ´aiva Siddha ¯nta and the Vivartava ¯da of the Aupani ṣadas” in G. Mishra (ed.),
Vedānta Without M āyā? A Debate on Saptavidha-Anupapatti , pp. 269–285. Delhi: Indian Council of
Philosophical Research & Motilal Banarsidass.
Goodall, D. 2016. “How the Tattvas of Tantric S ´aivism Came to Be 36: The Evidence of the
Niśvāsatattvasa ṃhita”, in D. Goodall and H. Isaacson (eds.), Tantric Studies: Fruits of a Franco-
German Collaboration on Early Tantra , pp. 77–111. Pondicherry/Hamburg: Institut Franc ¸ais de
Pondiche ´ry/E´cole Franc ¸aise d’Extre ˆme-Orient/Asien-Afrika-Institut, Universita ¨t Hamburg.
Gupta, S. (2000). LakṣmīTantra: A P āñcar ātra Text . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Hacker, P. (1953). Vivarta: Studien zur Geschichte der illusionistischen Kosmologie und Erkenntnis-
therorie der Inder . Mainz, Wiesbaden: Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur.
Isayeva, N. (1995). From Early Ved ānta to Kashmir Shaivism: Gau ḍapāda, Bhart ṛhari and Abhinava-
gupta . Albany: State University of New York Press.
Mallinson, J. (2007). The Khecar īvidy āofĀdinātha. A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation of an
Early Text of Ha ṭhayoga . London: Routledge.
Mallinson, J. (2014). “Hat˙hayoga’s Philosophy: A Fortuitous Union of Non-Dualities”. Journal of Indian
Philosophy, 42, 225–247.
(MW) Monier-Williams, M. (1899). Sanskrit-English Dictionary . Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Nakamura, H. (1989). A History of Early Ved ānta Philosophy, Part I . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Nakamura, H. (2004). A History of Early Ved ānta Philosophy, Part II . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Nicholson, A.J. (2007). “Reconciling Dualism and Non-Dualism: Three Arguments in Vijn ˜a ¯nabhik ṣu’s
Bheda ¯bheda Veda ¯nta”. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 35, 371–403.
123568 A. Acri

--- [Page 35] ---
Nihom, M. (1995). “Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa25.25 and 24.117ab: A Study in Literature and Pa ¯s´upata
S´aivism”. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques, 39, 653–671.
Olivelle, P. (1998). The Early Upani ṣads; Annotated Text and Translation . New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Parrott, R. (1983). “A Discussion of Two Metaphors in the ‘Churning of the Oceans’ From the
Mah ābhārata”.Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 64, 17–33.
Potter, K.H. (1963). Presuppositions of India ’s Philosophies . Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Potter, K.H. (1981). Encyclopedia of the Indian Philosophies, Volume III: Advaita Ved ānta up to Śaṃkara
and His Pupils . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Rastelli, M. (1999). Philosophisch-theologische Grundanschauungen der Jayakhyasa ṃhitā: mit einer
Darstellung des täglichen Rituals . Wien: Verlag der O ¨sterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Ratie´, I. (2014). “A S ´aiva Interpretation of the Satka ¯ryava ¯da: The Sa ¯ ṃkhya Notion of Abhivyakti and Its
Transformation in the Pratyabhijn ˜a ¯ Treatise”. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 42, 127–172.
Sanderson, A. (2001). “History through Textual Criticism in the Study of S ´aivism, the Pan ˜cara ¯tra and the
Buddhist Yoginı ¯tantras”, in F. Grimal (ed.), Les sources et le temps; A colloquium. Pondicherry, 11 –
13 January 1997 , pp. 1–47. Pondicherry: Institut Franc ¸ais de Pondiche ´ry/E´cole franc ¸aise d’Extre ˆme-
Orient.
Sanderson, A. (2007). “Atharvavedins in Tantric Territory: The A ¯ngirasakalpa Texts of the Oriya
Paippala ¯dins and their Connection with the Trika and the Ka ¯lı¯kula, with Critical Editions of the
Para ¯japavidhi, the Para ¯mantravidhi, and the *Bhadraka ¯lı¯-mantravidhiprakarana”. in Arlo Grifﬁths &
Annette Schmiedchen (eds.), The Atharvaveda and its Paippal āda Śākhā: Historical and
Philological Papers on a Vedic Tradition , pp. 195–311. Aachen: Shaker Verlag.
Sanderson, A. (2014). “The S ´aiva Literature”. Journal of Indological Studies (Kyoto), 24 –25(2012–2013),
1–113.
Schwartz, J. (2017). “Parabrahman Among the Yogins ”.International Journal of Hindu Studies, 21, 345–
389.
Soebadio, H. (1971). Jñānasiddh ānta; Secret Lore of the Balinese Śaiva Priest . The Hague: Nijhoff.
Takakusu, J. (1904). “La Sa ¯ ṃkhyaka ¯rika ¯, e´tudie´ea`la lumie `re de sa version chinoise”, Bulletin de l ’École
française d ’Extrême-Orient ,4, 1–65 and 978–1064.
Torella, R. (1999). “Sa ¯ ṃkhya as Sa ¯ma¯nyas´a ¯stra”. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques, 53, 553–561.
Torella, R. (2016). “A Vai ṣn˙ava Parama ¯dvaita in 10th-Century Kashmir? The Work of Va ¯manadatta”. in
Eli Franco & Isabelle Ratie ´(eds.), Around Abhinavagupta: Aspects of the Intellectual History of
Kashmir from the Ninth to the Eleventh Century , pp. 425–450. Berlin: Lit Verlag.
Van Buitenen, J.A.B. (1975). The Mah ābhārata: The Book of the Assembly Hall; The Book of the Forest .
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Wallis, C. (2016). “The S ´aiva Religion and its Philosophy in Context, Part Two: Shaivism’s Sources and
Inﬂuences”, Sutra Journal [http://www.sutrajournal.com/the-s ´aiva-religion-and-its-philosophy-in-
context-part-two-by-christopher-wallis ].
Watson, A., D. Goodall, and S.L.P. Anjaneya Sarma. (2013). An Enquiry into the Nature of Liberation:
BhaṭṭaR āmaka ṇṭha’sParamok ṣanira ¯saka ¯rika ¯vṛtti, a Commentary on Sadyojyoti ḥ’s Refutation of
Twenty Conceptions of the Liberated State ( mokṣa), for the First Time Critically Edited, Translated
into English and Annotated . Pondicherry: Institut Franc ¸ais de Pondiche ´ry/E´cole franc ¸aise
d’Extre ˆme-Orient.
Wynne, A. (2009). Mah ābhārata, Book Twelve, Peace; Volume Three the Book of Liberation . New York:
New York University Press, JJC Foundation.
Zoetmulder, P.J. (1982). Old Javanese-English Dictionary . (With the collaboration of S.O. Robson; 2
vols.). ’s-Gravenhage: Nijhoff.
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
123Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity … 569