--- [Page 1] ---
Philippine Studies: Hist orical and Ethnogr aphic Viewpoints Philippine Studies: Hist orical and Ethnogr aphic Viewpoints 
Volume 70 
Number 2 Rereading the Laguna Copperplate Article 2 
9-8-2022 
The Laguna Copperplate Inscription: T enth-Centur y Luzon, Ja va, The Laguna Copperplate Inscription: T enth-Centur y Luzon, Ja va, 
and the Mala y World and the Mala y World 
Elsa; Univ ersity Cla vé 
Arlo Griffiths 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /archium.ateneo.edu/phstudies 
 Part of the Anthr opology Commons , Education Commons , History Commons , Political Science 
Commons , and the Sociology Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Clavé, Elsa; Univ ersity and Griffiths, Arlo (2022) "The Laguna Copperplate Inscription: T enth-Centur y 
Luzon, Ja va, and the Malay W orld," Philippine Studies: Hist orical and Ethnogr aphic Viewpoints : Vol. 70: 
No. 2, Ar ticle 2. 
DOI: https:/ /doi.or g/10.13185/2244-1638.1123 
Available at: https:/ /archium.ateneo.edu/phstudies/v ol70/iss2/2 
This Ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the A teneo Journals at Ar chīum A teneo. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Philippine Studies: Hist orical and Ethnogr aphic Viewpoints b y an authoriz ed edit or of 
Archīum A teneo. 

--- [Page 2] ---
Philippine Studies: Historical 
and Ethnographic Viewpoints
Ateneo de Manila University • Loyola Heights, Quezon City • 1108 Philippines
The Laguna Copperplate Inscription:
Tenth-Century Luzon, Java, and the Malay World
Elsa Clavé and Arlo Griffiths
Philippine Studies: Historical and Ethnographic Viewpoints
vol. 70 no. 2 (2022): 167–242
Copyright © Ateneo de Manila University
Philippine Studies: Historical and Ethnographic Viewpoints  is 
published by the Ateneo de Manila University. Contents may not be 
copied or sent via email or other means to multiple sites and posted in 
a listserv without the copyright holder’s written permission. Users may 
download and print articles for individual, noncommercial use only.
This article is an open-access resource. It can be uploaded in the 
author’s institutional repository, with this copyright page retained.
Republication of this article or its storage in electronic databases 
other than as specified above is not allowed without prior permission 
in writing from the publisher.
For any further use of this work, please contact the publisher at 
philstudies.soss@ateneo.edu. 
http://www.philippinestudies.net

--- [Page 3] ---
Philippine Studies  Historical and Ethnographic Viewpoints
© Ateneo de Manila University70, NO. 2 (2022) 167–242The Laguna Copperplate Inscription is one of very few Philippine historical 
documents dating from the precolonial period and the only one bearing 
information on the social life of the Manila region before the arrival of the 
Spanish. Building on previous studies which discussed the significance of the 
inscription in the context of Luzon and the Philippines, this article proposes 
a reading of the inscription in the larger context of maritime Southeast Asia. 
We focus on how this document complicates the current understanding 
of the historical roles of the Malay language. On this basis, we call for a 
revision of the notion of a “Malay World.”
KEYWORDS: COSMOPOLITANISM • OLD MALAY • INDIC SCRIPT • DEBT CLEARANCE • 
SOUTHEAST ASIAThe Laguna 
Copperplate 
Inscription  
Tenth-Century 
Luzon, Java, and 
the Malay WorldELSA CLAVÉ AND ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 4] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)168This article is dedicated to the oldest locally written document 
of the Philippines, published thirty years ago in this journal 
(Postma 1992a). Issued by a political authority in the Laguna 
area of Luzon precisely on 21 April, in the year 900 CE, this 
document records the clearance of a debt and is formulated 
in an early form of the Malay language. Much of our discussion revolves 
around the Malay aspects of this document and around the question how 
we are to understand the fact that the written record of Philippine history 
commences in the tenth century with a document formulated in Malay. 
In so doing, we confront the vexed question of external influence on the 
formation of cultural practices in the Philippines and demonstrate the need 
for a paradigm shift in envisioning Malayness in the premodern history of 
the Philippines.  
With the exception of Wilhelm von Humboldt’s use of the German term 
“malayisch” (Malay) at an early stage of Austronesian linguistic scholarship 
to designate the language matrix common to maritime Southeast Asia,1 the 
term Malay is used elsewhere in early scientific discourse almost exclusively 
in a civilizational context. To explain the peopling of the country, early 
scholars have postulated models of ancient migration to the Philippines that 
are quite different from what is generally accepted in scholarship today. What 
is common to these early models is their postulation of successive waves 
of migration, one or more of which involved “Malays,” who are generally 
presented as relatively more civilized than others.2 
The necessary postcolonial reaction against this discourse has 
understandably led to the term Malay being generally eschewed in the 
Philippine social sciences. Felipe Landa Jocano (1965) was the first to oppose 
such migration theories by proposing a model in which the peopling of the 
Philippines resulted from complex movements of people and a long process 
of evolution. However, it is in the work of E. Arsenio Manuel (1990) that the 
disavowal of any Malay origins was expressly formulated through the concept 
“Philippineasian.” The term was coined to replace the culturally loaded 
terms Indonesian, Malayan, and Malayo-Polynesian, which are widely used 
in Oceanic, Austronesian, and Southeast Asian studies and “ have generated 
concepts and ideas that disturb Filipino identity and nationality”  (ibid., 25).  
Meanwhile, Zeus Salazar (1998), in his collection of articles entitled The 
Malayan Connection  published in 1998, argued in a nuanced manner for 
the importance of such a connection in understanding Philippine culture 

--- [Page 5] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION169and history, but his subsequent discourse appears less nuanced regarding 
historical processes of cultural and linguistic contact because it blurs the 
categorical boundaries between Austronesian, Malayo-Polynesian, and 
Malay (Salazar 2013). Our study is built on a different understanding of 
the term Malay. For us, Malay is first and foremost a language, one that has 
over the centuries been used by various people from different cultures as a 
vehicle of communication over a large area, including the Philippines.
The Document
Accidentally discovered around 1986 during dredging operations in the 
Lumbang River, which drains into the Laguna de Bay, the copperplate 
that will occupy us in the following pages was subsequently acquired by 
the National Museum of the Philippines and registered there under the 
accession number 1990-B-1. 
Not much written data from the premodern and early modern periods 
have been recovered for the Philippines, compared with other Southeast 
Asian countries. The inscription is one of the very few precolonial records 
found in the country and the oldest. The major contribution of the document 
has therefore been to give the Philippines a place in the early history of 
Southeast Asia. While it is unique, as far as we know, in the archaeological 
record of the Philippines, the plate is an example of a type of archaeological 
artifact that is widespread in Java and Bali. On those Indonesian islands, 
similarly shaped plates, manufactured in copper or bronze, have been found 
in the hundreds, the oldest known specimen dating to 807 CE.3 
The vast majority of plates found in Java and Bali record endowments 
of tax-exempt status on land made by representatives of the state (typically, 
the king) to individual or collective beneficiaries. Given this conjunction of 
the form (metal plates, individually or in sets) with the content (endowment 
records), which is also found in India, where considerably older specimens 
of copperplate grants have been found, it is evident that this cultural 
practice of recording land endowments on highly durable documents in the 
form of copperplates is only one facet among many of the adoption and 
adaptation of Indian cultural practices in premodern Southeast Asia.4 The 
fact that these documents from Java and Bali are always engraved in a script 
commonly designated as “Old Javanese” or “Kawi,” which belongs to the 
family of Indic scripts, is another of these facets.5 While Indian copperplate 
grants are expressed in Sanskrit or vernacular languages of South Asia, in all 

--- [Page 6] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)170specimens from Java, and in most specimens from Bali, the (main) language 
of expression is Old Javanese (OJ).6 The Laguna Copperplate Inscription 
(LCI), as it has come to be called, is the only known example of its kind that 
bears a text in the Old Malay (OM) language. 
In terms of content, an innovation that seems specific to maritime 
Southeast Asia is the use of the copperplate medium to issue debt-clearance 
documents as well as certificates of successful litigation, and the use for such 
records of a small set of terms— jayapa(t)tra , (vi)śuddhapa (t)tra —which, 
although borrowed from Sanskrit, are not found in Indian copperplate 
records until centuries after their first recorded use in Southeast Asia.7 The 
LCI is one of these debt-clearance records.
The LCI measures 17.5 centimeters in height, 30.5 centimeters in width, 
and is around 0.1 centimeter thick. The plate is so thin that the repoussé 
effect of the writing engraved on the obverse (fig. 1) is very pronounced on 
the reverse (fig. 2); although Indian and Indonesian copperplate documents 
are often engraved on both sides, the same could not have been the intention 
of those who manufactured the LCI. It is said to have been crumpled when 
it was found, and indeed the plate, although it has been flattened since, still 
shows clear traces of its former condition. These physical features set the 
plate apart from otherwise comparable artifacts from India and Indonesia, 
where copperplate documents from the same general period are thicker and 
would generally allow being engraved on both sides, although one often 
sees, in the case of multi-plate documents, that the outer sides of the first 
and last plates have been kept blank. Since the text engraved on the plate is 
incomplete but does not seem to lack a substantial portion, one may assume 
that it would originally have formed part of a set consisting of two plates, 
each inscribed on a single side.
Previous Studies
Shortly after the LCI’s discovery, the Dutch missionary and scholar Antoon 
Postma, a specialist of Mangyan manuscripts who lived and worked in 
Mindoro for half a century,8 offered to the world of scholarship an edition of 
the inscription, a translation, an analysis of its language, and an interpretation 
of its historical significance in a string of writings that are largely overlapping 
in contents. Three were published as articles (Postma 1991a, 1991b, 1992a) 
while one was communicated at a conference but never formally published 
(Postma 1992b). 

--- [Page 7] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION171 From the outset, Postma identified the language of the LCI as OM; he 
noted that several of the OM words that it contains exist in an identical or 
closely related form in premodern varieties of Tagalog and are also shared 
by OJ.9 Despite the undeniably cosmopolitan character of his approach to 
deciphering the document, Postma (1992a, 8) chose to apply a local lens—
what he called the “Tagalog angle”—to analyze the sociocultural dimensions 
of the text. While he only mentioned a possible link with Java (ibid., 193), 
a connection that was also emphasized in an Indonesian-language reaction 
to Postma’s paper at the 1990 conference of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory 
Association held in Yogyakarta (Kusen 1991),10 other authors speculated 
on the influence from the kingdom of Śrīvijaya  (Patanñe 1996, 88, 96; 
Andaya 2008, 56) . The only other study that gauged the significance of this 
inscription in a wider geographical context is the one on debt and credit 
in early island Southeast Asia by Jan Wisseman Christie (2009a), whose 
results we respond to and seek to improve. The most recent study by Jaime 
Tiongson (2013b), by contrast, adopts a radically local approach with a new 
interpretation based on early Tagalog dictionaries.
Aware of past attempts to counterfeit old documents,11 Postma first had 
to verify the LCI’s authenticity. Once he had established it as authentic 
(Postma 1991b, 4; 1992a, 189), the second issue he needed to resolve was the 
plate’s geographic origin. The fact that the engraved text’s vocabulary turned 
out to be OM and OJ naturally suggested the possibility that the plate might 
have been imported to Luzon. However, Postma demonstrated convincingly 
that the inscription concerned an event in the Tagalog-speaking region 
that comprised Manila and its surroundings. Although the choice of a local 
approach is thus quite understandable and most of Postma’s conclusions are 
acceptable, the Malay dimensions of this inscription written locally in OM 
have not been fully explored. 
Postma’s text edition has become the point of reference for all 
subsequent scholarship, and it should be emphasized that, although Postma 
was a specialist neither of OM nor epigraphy, his generally reliable work 
counts among the best publications not only in OM epigraphy but also in 
Fig. 1. Laguna Copperplate Inscription, obverse; photo taken by Arlo Griffiths (next spread)
Fig. 2. Laguna Copperplate Inscription, reverse; photo taken by Arlo Griffiths (next spread)

--- [Page 8] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)172


--- [Page 9] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION173


--- [Page 10] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)174the study of the precolonial history of the Philippines. Its excellence does not 
mean, of course, that it cannot be improved, and part of the raison d’être of 
this article is to attempt to do so by making use of our knowledge of OM and 
OJ epigraphy and the broader historical record of maritime Southeast Asia 
around 900 CE.12 On this basis, we aim to show the benefit of a transregional 
approach to studying this unique document.
Scripts, Languages, and Epigraphic Sources
Before we turn to our analysis of the inscription, we must make clear that, 
with the exception of the Jawi tradition, which we will briefly mention, 
all indigenous documents produced in maritime Southeast Asia in the 
premodern period were written in some form or another of what we call 
the Indic family of scripts, i.e., writing systems descending ultimately from 
the Brahmi writing system created in South Asia some centuries before the 
beginning of the Common Era. Later forms of this system were adopted and 
adapted in Southeast Asia at various points of time.13 The particular form of 
Indic script that we encounter in the LCI seems identical to the one used 
in contemporary documents from Java. How its users named that script is 
unknown, but as mentioned earlier it is referred to in the scholarly literature 
under the names “Old Javanese” and “Kawi.”14 
Our discussion of the linguistic content of the plate involves data 
from various languages—mainly Malay and Javanese and to a lesser 
extent the indigenous languages of the Philippines—belonging to the 
Austronesian language family. Within that language family, data are 
derived from at least two distinct subgroups of the Malayo-Polynesian 
group: the “Western Indonesian” subgroup, to which Malay and Javanese 
belong, and the “Philippine” subgroup, to which Tagalog and the other 
Philippine languages belong.15 Each of these languages exists in a range of 
geographically, chronologically, and sociologically determined varieties. 
Forming part of a common linguistic ecosystem, they have exerted 
influence on each other over the centuries, loanwords from Malay into 
Tagalog being a particularly significant instance of such influence.16 And 
by the time they made their appearance in the historical record, all of 
them had (directly or via Malay) borrowed substantial amounts of cultural 
vocabulary from the cosmopolitan language of Sanskrit, originating in 
India, whose impact on Southeast Asian languages went hand in hand with 
the introduction of Indic script.17 

--- [Page 11] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION175Readers who are unfamiliar with Sanskrit but wish to learn more 
about the place this language occupies in the historical record of maritime 
Southeast Asia can consult a wealth of recent scholarship, among which 
we particularly recommend the sophisticated work of Sheldon Pollock 
(1996, 2006) and Daud Ali (2011). For the historical role of OJ, there is not 
a comparable, recent, and sophisticated abundance of studies, so we refer 
readers to the somewhat more old-fashioned but reliable overview by P. J.  
Zoetmulder (1974, chapter 1).
We concur with the simple but important observation by K. Alexander 
Adelaar (2005, 19) that “Old Malay and modern Malay are forms of the same 
language, in spite of some considerable differences between them,” and we 
use the term OM to designate the varieties of the Malay language found in 
documents written in an Indic system of writing dating before 1500 CE.18 
What precedes is a positive way of formulating what is, in fact, a negative 
definition, aiming to capture the states of the Malay language before it had 
undergone large-scale influence from Arabic. It is especially the absence 
of such influence that differentiates OM from Classical Malay (CM), the 
term used to designate forms of the language seen in manuscripts and 
inscriptions written in Jawi script,19 more recent varieties of Malay written 
in Indic script,20 or modern forms of spoken or written Malay, all of which 
are marked by a significant percentage of loanwords borrowed from Arabic.
We see the un-Arabicized OM language almost exclusively in inscriptions,21 
engraved on stone or metal artifacts from what is now Indonesia, dating 
from the seventh to the fifteenth century, after which the writing of Malay 
in Indic script seems to have become increasingly marginal.22 It is ironic 
that, while in today’s world Malaysians and Bruneians have appropriated the 
custodianship of Malayness, the premodern historical documentation for the 
Malay language—that is, the OM epigraphic corpus—has almost entirely 
been assembled from archaeological discoveries in what is now Indonesian 
territory, primarily from Sumatra but also from Java. To our knowledge, just 
one document falling under the adopted definition has been found within 
the boundaries of what is now Malaysia, but it is a borderline case from the 
fifteenth century; a very fragmentary inscription from Singapore (the locally 
famous Singapore Stone) also seems to be in OM. Finally, one important 
OM inscription has been found in the Philippines, and it is the subject of 
this article. Fig. 3 (cf. Griffiths 2018,  281–83 ) is a map of the inscriptions 
alluded to here.

--- [Page 12] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)176


--- [Page 13] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION177Regarding OM grammar, by far the most systematic and most informative 
publication of recent years is the study by Waruno Mahdi (2005). While 
Mahdi limits his discussion to only a group of OM inscriptions, namely 
those produced in the seventh century under the Śrīvijaya  kingdom on 
the islands of Sumatra and Bangka, the study is nevertheless quite useful 
for the study of other varieties of OM. We must make clear, however, that 
we do not agree with one idea that fig ures prominently in Mahdi’s work, 
namely, the chronological limitation of the label OM to “the language of 
the earliest Malay epigraphy (seventh to tenth centuries AD)” (ibid., 182). 
This chronological limitation, which is made without any justification, not 
only excludes a substantial number of Malay documents23 but also tends to 
obscure “the existence and persistence of certain expressions over centuries, 
indicating that Old Malay enjoyed the status of a—to some extent—
standardized language” (Griffiths 2018, 279).24
To avoid needlessly crowding the article with bibliographic references 
for inscriptions cited, we refer to Indonesian inscriptions by their standard 
designations in the scholarly literature, normally specifying their island 
of provenance and their date, or using the expression “ Śrīvijayan ,” which 
implies a late–seventh-century date and a provenance from southern Sumatra 
or Bangka. Specifically, for OM inscriptions, we use the designations 
listed in Arlo Griffiths’s (ibid.) “The Corpus  of Inscriptions in the Old 
Malay Language,”  in which the reader may find the relevant bibliographic 
references for text editions. Whenever possible, OJ inscriptions from Java 
are cited by their designations listed in Kōzō Nakada’s (1982) An Inventory 
of the Dated Inscriptions in Java , which furnishes bibliographic references 
for each inscription, complete up to the year of publication of that work. 
Inscriptions from Bali are cited exclusively from Wisseman Christie’s 
(2009b) “References  to Debt and Debt Bondage in the Epigraphic Record 
from Early Island Southeast Asia,”  in which the reader may find the relevant 
bibliographic references.
Fig. 3 [facing page]. Map showing the distribution 
in Southeast Asia of Old Malay inscriptions 
inventoried as of March 2022
Source: The authors, with cartographic assistance 
from Chea Socheat

--- [Page 14] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)178


--- [Page 15] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION179The Document’s Text
Philological Methodology
The text presented, translated, and analyzed in the following pages has been 
edited in comparison with the published tracing by Postma, using published 
and unpublished photos (fig. 4), as well as based on direct inspection of 
the plate at Manila on 14 May 2012. The lines of text in the original are 
indicated with parenthetical numbers and in bold face.
The transliteration system that we use to edit the text is the adaptation 
of the standard 15919 of the International Standards Organization described 
by Dániel Balogh and Arlo Griffiths (2020), which means that we represent 
the superscript dot (Sanskrit: anusvāra , Javanese: cecak ) in our edition with 
ṁ, although (outside of the edition itself) we use ṅ/ng or m, depending on 
the context. 
In this regard, we should explain that we make a three-way distinction 
in romanization between (1) strict transliteration (used in our edition of 
the document), (2) loose transliteration, which is close to a phonological 
transcription (used when citing the linguistic contents of the OM text), 
and (3) simplified transcription (used in our 
translation and when citing names from the 
text) based on the standard spelling system of 
the contemporary Indonesian national variety 
of Malay, called Ejaan Bahasa Indonesia 
(EBI).25 Concretely, this differentiation means 
that in strict transliteration ṁ/ṅ/m  and ḥ/h are 
distinguished and vowel length is shown; in 
loose transliteration, ṁ is interpreted as ṅ or m, ḥ 
and h are merged into h, v is reinterpreted as  b where necessary, while vowel 
length is still shown; in simplified transcription, we use w instead of v, ng 
instead of ṅ, do not retain vowel length, do not retain the distinction between 
retroflex/dental consonants, and do not differentiate the three sibilants of 
Indic script ( ś and ṣ are merged into s).
We break words following the same EBI rules, meaning that the 
preposition di is split from the word it precedes, while the passive prefix 
di- is not. Postma’s edition contains inconsistencies of transliteration and 
word division among others, and does not represent all punctuation. Our 
edition marks an improvement on these points and is more precise than Fig. 4 [facing page]. Laguna 
Copperplate Inscription, obverse 
Source: Photo made by or 
for Antoon Postma, which he 
disseminated at a conference in 
the early 1990s. Jan Wisseman 
Christie collection, EFEO 
photothèque, Paris.

--- [Page 16] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)180that of Postma because we explicitly represent independent vowels as capital 
letters and vowel killer signs (Sanskrit: virāma,  Javanese: paṅkon  or paten ) as 
the median dot.26
Edition and Translation  
(1) svasti śakavar ṣātīta  822 vaisākhamāsa di ṁ jyoti ṣa, caturthi 
kr̥ṣṇapak ṣa so (2)mavāra sāna tatkāla daya ṁ Aṅkatan · lavan · dṅan·ña 
sānak · barṅāran · si buka ḥ (3) Anak·da da ṁ hvan namvran · dibari 
varadāna viśuddhapā/tra\ Uli ḥ saṁ pamgat · senāpati di tu ṇḍu(4)n· 
barjā da ṁ27 hvan nāyaka tuhān · paila ḥ jayadeva, di krama da ṁ hvan 
namvran · dṅan· daṁ28 kāya (5)stha śuddhānu  diparlappas · huta ṁda 
valānda29 kā 1 su 8 di hadapan · daṁ hvan nāyaka tuhān · pu(6)liran · 
kasumuran ·, daṁ hvan nāyaka tuhān · paila ḥ barjādi ga ṇaśakti, da ṁ 
hvan nāyaka tu (7)hān· binvā ṅan· barjādi biśruta tathāpi  sādānda30 
sānak·31 kaparāvis · Uliḥ saṁ pamgat · de(8)vata varjādi32 saṁ pamgat · 
mḍaṁ dari bhaktinda diparhulun·33 saṁ pamgat ·, ya makāña sādāña 
Anak· (9) cucu da ṁ hvan namvran · śuddha  ya kaparāvis · di huta ṁda 
daṁ hvan namvran · di saṁ pamgat · devata, Ini gra ṁ (10)  syāt · syāpa 
ntāha paścāt · diṁ Āri kamudyan · Āda  gra ṁ Ura ṁ barujara vlu ṁ34 
lappas · huta ṁda da ṁ hva-
Hail! Elapsed Śaka  year 822, month of Vaisākh a according to the 
astral sciences ( jyotiṣa ), fourth ( tithi) of the waning fortnight, a 
Monday: that was the time when a female servant ( dayaṅ ) who had 
been taken over ( aṅkatan ) [in debt bondage] together with her siblings 
(lavan dṅan-ña sa-anak ), called si Bukah, child of daṅ hvan  Namwran,35 
was awarded a debt clearance document (viśuddhapātra ). [It was 
awarded] by the official ( saṅ pamgat ), army commander ( senāpati ) at 
Tundun, with the title daṅ hvan nāyaka tuhān36 of Pailah Jayadeva.37 
Regarding the specifics ( di krama ) of daṅ hvan  Namwran, with the 
scribe ( kāyastha ), being cleared ( śuddha ): what ( anu) was resolved 
(diparlappas ) was his military debt38 (amounting to) 1 kāṭi and 8 suvarṇa  
[that had been contracted]  in front of (the following witnesses):39 
daṅ hvan  nāyaka tuhān  of Puliran Kasumuran,40  daṅ hvan  nāyaka tuhān  
of Pailah, with the title Ganasakti, daṅ hvan  nāyaka tuhān  of Binwangan, 
with the title Bisruta.

--- [Page 17] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION181But by the deity official ( pamgat ) with the title official of Mdang,41 all 
(sa-ada-nda ) her (i.e., Bukah’s) siblings together ( kaparāvis ), because 
of (dari) their loyalty ( bhakti-nda ) [when they were] owned as slaves 
(diparhulun ) by the official, that was the reason why ( ya makāña ) all 
children [and] grand-children of daṅ hvan  Namwran were cleared 
together of ( di) the debt of daṅ hvan Namwran  to ( di) the deity official.
If there be ( syāt) anyone who will doubt this, subsequently, in the days 
ahead; if there be people who will say “the debt of daṅ hva [n Namwran] 
has not yet been resolved . . . ”42
The Document’s Language
As previously mentioned, from the outset Postma identified the language of 
the LCI as OM. This identification has not remained uncontested in the 
Philippines (p. 195) but has been confirmed by international linguists and 
underlies our interpretation of the text.43 The following discussion of the 
linguistic data in this document proceeds on the assumption of the reader’s 
familiarity with the description of OM spelling and grammar as outlined by 
Lars Vikør (1988) and Mahdi (2005). With a few exceptions, we limit our 
discussion to facts that will need to be taken into account in a future, more 
comprehensive grammatical description of OM and in a future dictionary 
of this language.
Spelling and Phonology
The phoneme / ə/, spelled e in Standard/Indonesian Malay (S/IM), is 
not spelled as such in the LCI but is represented either by a (bari = S/IM 
beri) or by no vowel at all (see the example vluṁ ). In this regard, the spelling 
of the LCI is entirely in line with what we find in other OM inscriptions 
(Vikør 1988, 71–72; Mahdi 2005, 188). The text includes several examples 
of spelled long vowels that seem to reflect word stress on penultimate 
syllables, as in barjādi, valānda,  and kaparāvis , among others, a phenomenon 
already described by Vikør (1988, 69–70) and Madhi (2005, 189). What 
has not yet been described for OM, although it is well known in OJ, is 
the vowel sandhi  observable in śuddhānu  (śuddha  anu) and sādānda/sādāña  
(sa-ada-nda/sa-ada-ña ),44 the latter also exemplifying vowel lengthening 
in a stressed syllable. The spelling variation b/v in barjādi/varjādi  for S/
IM berjadi and the spelling vluṁ  for S/IM belum  illustrate the fact that, 
in spelling, both b and v may represent either /b/ or /w/, a case where v 

--- [Page 18] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)182may express /w/ or /b/ being lavan  “with,” “and” (cf. Mahdi 2009, 74). The 
anusvāra  (cecak ) sign is used to transcribe both /m/ and / ŋ/.45
Morphology
The text of the LCI contains a few morphological phenomena that have 
not yet been well documented on the basis of Śrīvijayan  OM:
1. Adelaar (1994b, 3) wrote that: 
[n]one of the known varieties of Malay has a separate morpheme 
ŋ, and this observation includes Classical Malay and the Old Malay 
of the seventh century inscriptions of South Sumatra. However, it 
seems that some forms of Malay exhibit a fossilised ŋ. Standard 
Malay has a relative pronoun yang , which is generally assumed 
to have developed from the third person pronoun ia and a clitic 
element ŋ. This ŋ would be a cognate of the “linker” or “ligature” 
found in languages such as Old Javanese and Tagalog. 
Mahdi (2005, 194) reported no such morpheme for Śrīvijayan  OM 
other than in the words “ iyaṃ ~ yaṃ  (neutral) and daṃ (honorific), 
thought to derive from combinations of iya ~ ya  and da with a nasal 
linker ŋ  .” Both Adelaar and Mahdi ignored the fact that precisely such 
a morpheme had been identified in several Śrīvijayan  OM texts (Cœdès 
1930, 71, under diṁ), one of which is quoted in the following section. 
Moreover, as pointed out in a previous publication on inscriptions from 
North Sumatra (Griffiths 2014b, 225 n. 58), such a morpheme occurs 
in post-Śrīvijayan  OM. It also occurs in the LCI, certainly in lines 1 and 
10 (diṁ = /di-ŋ/) and possibly in line 4 (if one is to read dṅan-da-ṅ  in 
place of dṅan daṅ ).
2. That OM had an irrealis (or “subjunctive”) suffix - a, lost in later forms 
of Malay, has been documented for Śrīvijayan  OM (Mahdi 2005, 198) 
although only based on very few examples. The LCI contains two clear 
instances in the verb forms ntah-a  and bar-ujar-a . 
3. Instead of the suffixes ni- and mar-  that are typical for Śrīvijayan  OM, 
the LCI uses the prefixes  var- and di-, corresponding neatly to S/IM 
ber-/di-, just like we find in the OM variety of later Sumatran sources, 
such as the Bukit Gombak I inscription and the Tanjung Tanah 
manuscript. Those who wish to learn more about epigraphic and 

--- [Page 19] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION183grammatical data may refer to the diagnostic prefixes column in the 
table in Griffiths’s (2018, 281–83) “ The Corpus of Inscriptions in the 
Old Malay Language ” and the one in Uli Kozok’s (2015, 199) A 14th 
Century Malay Code of Laws .
4. The apparently free variation of third-person singular and plural 
pronominal suffixes -ña and - (n)da  in sādāña  (line 8) besides sādānda  
(line 7), perhaps also in dṅan-ña  and dṅan-da-ṅ  (line 4), requires 
explanation, as does the function of -ña in lavan· dṅan·ña sānak  (line 2).
Lexicon
We only comment here on words for which we can improve or add 
something vis-à-vis the last version of Postma’s (1992b, appendix 1) “tentative 
vocabulary.” The words are arranged in roman alphabetical order. A number 
appearing parenthetically after a headword indicates the line(s) of the text 
where the word in question, or a derived form, occurs. A question mark, in 
this context, indicates that the occurrence of the given word is not certain 
in the given line.
aṅkatan  (2): Postma listed this word as a personal name, and 
consequently translated the combination dayaṅ aṅkatan  as “Lady 
Aṅkatan.”  On dayaṅ , see our entry below. We tentatively connect 
aṅkatan  with the meaning “to raise, adopt,” which is common for the 
verb angkat  in CM and S/IM, and translate it as “taken over.” A problem 
with this interpretation is that the derived nominal form angkatan  never 
seems to have such a meaning in CM and S/IM.  A second possibility 
would be to consider aṅkatan  as marking an elevation to a higher 
social status, which is another common meaning for angkat  in CM 
and S/IM. However, this second possibility does not seem consistent 
with the situation of debt bondage. Thirdly, in CM and S/IM, angkatan  
can express the meaning “expedition, troops,” which would yield for 
dayaṅ aṅkatan  a meaning like “female attendant of the troops.”
anak  (2, 3, 7, 8): “child.” See sānak .
anu (5, śuddhānu  = śuddha+anu ): From Postma’s text and his entry 
under śuddha , it appears that he understood śuddhānu  as consisting of 
two words, śuddha  and nu, with the second meaning “and,” but there is 
no separate entry nu in his vocabulary. We see no evidence to support 
Postma’s interpretation, which also fails to explain the long ā. Rather, 

--- [Page 20] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)184we must have here śuddha  plus anu joined by the vowel sandhi . (For 
the meaning of anu required here, cf. OJ anu /anuṅ  and Blust and 
Trussel 2010, 3688.) 
barjādi  (4?, 6, 7, 8): Hector Santos (in Patanñe 1996, 98) pointed 
out that “Postma’s first and third versions translate barjadi  as 
‘representing.’ His second version translated barjadi  as ‘represented 
by’. Finally, the fourth one assigns different meanings to barjadi  and 
is the most inconsistent of the four versions as far as the translation 
of barjadi  is concerned.” In fact, Postma’s glossary entry jadi cites the 
meanings “to be(come); represent; to wit” and mentions the cognates 
dadi  (Javanese) and yari (Tagalog). What does not seem to have been 
stated clearly so far is that, although a variety of forms based on jadi 
are very commonly used in Malay, the derivation barjādi  (which would 
be berjadi  in S/IM) is extremely uncommon, and no forms of jadi/dadi  
are ever used in similar contexts in other OM/OJ inscriptions. In other 
OM texts, we only find the base form jādi in the meaning “to be born” 
(Cœdès 1930, 40, 68; Casparis 1956, 5, 346). We have the impression 
that barjādi  is used in our text to mark formal appellations that their 
bearers would have received as adults, for instance, during some 
kind of initiation, as opposed to barṅaran , which would mark a name 
given at birth or in youth. (Since we have no knowledge of the naming 
system that was current in the given context, we try to use our words 
carefully.) In two cases, barjādi  stands directly before Sanskrit names; 
in one case it introduces a long title terminated by a Sanskrit name, 
and in the fourth it stands before a Javanese title ( saṅ pamgat mḍaṅ ). 
If our understanding is correct, it means that jādi has the expected 
sense of “becoming” but with the nuance of gaining a new identity in 
the form of a title.46
barṅāran  (2): It is remarkable that the language of this inscription 
does not use nāma  for “name” (known already to have been borrowed 
into some forms of OM prior to 900 CE from the Sojomerto and Sang 
Hyang Wintang inscriptions referred to by Postma [1991a, 168 n. 5; 
1992a, 200 n. 9; 1992b, 16 n. 8] in all his publications), but ṅāran , a 
typically OM spelling (with vowel length on the penultimate syllable) 
of OJ ṅaran  that is not found in other OM documents. Among modern 
Malay varieties, the heavily Javanized dialect of Banjarmasin in 
Kalimantan Selatan Province on Borneo has ba-ngaran  in the same 

--- [Page 21] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION185meaning (Abdul 1977, 126). The only occurrence of barṅāran  stands 
immediately before what is clearly an indigenous name, Si Bukah. See 
also the discussion under barjādi .
daṅ hvan  (3, 4, 5, 6, 9): Without further comment, Postma translated 
this combination that is unattested elsewhere in OM as “his honor.” 
The first element is only very rarely attested in other OM texts, once 
in the combination daṅ hyaṅ ratnatraya  (the holy triple jewel [of 
Buddhism]), and another instance standing before the word svāmi  
(master, husband) in a fragmentary inscription (Casparis 1956, 6, 345). 
Thus, its function is not clearly determinable on the basis of OM data 
alone. However, the cognate word ḍaṅ is well known in OJ where it is a 
“particle preceding a noun or proper name, denoting a religious person 
(guru ) of distinction; often followed by hyaṅ ” (Zoetmulder 1982). 
Although it has never been recognized as such, the term ḍaṅ hvan  
occurs in a half dozen of Javanese inscriptions, some of them not yet 
properly published, dating between 851 and 944 CE, and seems to 
have been current especially in East Java.47 The occurrences in OJ 
epigraphy leave no doubt that ḍaṅ hvan  was distinguished both from 
ḍaṅ hyaṅ  (the holy one [named]) and ḍaṅ ācārya  (the master [named]). 
It seems, like those expressions, to have been used as a personal 
article preceding proper names although it also seems to have served 
as a common noun designating some kind of occupation. Much more 
common than ḍaṅ hvan , in OJ, are verbal forms derived from the base 
hvan , such as (m)aṅhvan , meaning “to herd, to observe attentively.” We 
therefore tentatively suggest that the combination ḍaṅ hvan  means 
something like “the overseer” in the Javanese context and that its OM 
equivalent daṅ hvan  does the same in our context.
dayaṅ (2): The word dayang  means “female attendant; damsel; maid 
of honor” in CM (Marsden 1812), implying not only the idea of service 
but also the possibility of a certain prestige attached to the task, while 
ḍayaṅ  is glossed as “female (of an animal or bird); prostitute” in P. J. 
Zoetmulder’s (1982) Old Javanese–English Dictionary  (OJED ).48 In 
the heavily Javanized Malay dialect of Banjarmasin, pan-dayang-an  
has the meaning of “prostitute” (Abdul 1977, 134). Th e word dayang  
is not widespread in the languages of the Philippines, suggesting that 
where it does occur (Tagalog, Ilokano, and Palawano), it is a borrowing 
from Malay (Blust and Trussel 2010). Postma (1992b, 16) indicated 

--- [Page 22] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)186that the Tagalog meaning is “wife of leader” and opined that “ Dayang  
in the LCI would be difficult to maintain in its Old Javanese meaning 
of ‘prostitute.’ Here, too, a Tagalog meaning would make more sense.” 
We doubt that Postma would have maintained this position if he had 
been aware of the abundant evidence, in OJ sources, which would 
have allowed him to make an explicit connection between ḍayaṅ  
and the enslaved status of hulun  (see diparhulun  in line 8). For the 
language of our text, we need to assume a meaning like “female 
attendant” or even “concubine.” Regarding the possibility that the 
status of dayaṅ  might have implied an intimate relationship with 
a master/creditor, we may cite the following two OJ inscriptions, 
both from East Java. The first is the Gandhakuti charter (1042 
CE), lines 1v1–1v4: ika umguṅ riṅ dharmma gandhakuṭi iṅ kambaṅ  
śrī, vkanira vnaṅa . . .  marabya ḍayaṅ,  ahuluna ḍayaṅ ,  pujut j ə̄ṅgi, 
amupuhāṅrahana,  aṅguntiṅāmupuheṅ tumpər , . . . "The residents of the 
foundation of Gandhaku ṭi at Kamba ṅ Śrī, [i.e.,] their offspring should 
have the privilege . . . to mate with ḍayaṅ ; to own ḍayaṅ, pujut  or jǝṅgi  
as slaves, to beat and wound [them], to amputate or beat them with 
a burning stick ( tumpǝr ); . . ."49 The second inscription is the Malenga 
charter (1052 CE), line 3r4: vnaṅ ajamaha kavula, aṅrvabaṇa utaṅ,  
adr ̥ vya ḍayaṅ, ahuluna boṇḍan, pujut , which means "entitled to mate 
with slaves, to wipe their debt clean by taking them in possession 
as ḍayaṅ , to have boṇḍan  or pujut  as slaves."50 Similar terminology 
is also found in a passage from an unpublished prescriptive text 
called Śaivaśāsana  cited in the OJED  (Zoetmulder 1982) under 
bikaṅ: vǝnaṅ ta sirārabya ḍayaṅ bikaṅ, ahuluna ta sira ḍayaṅ  
bikaṅ vuṅkuk bule , which translates as "They are authorized to 
mate with ḍayaṅ bikaṅ ; they may have ownership of ḍayaṅ bikaṅ , 
hunchbacks, albinos."51
devata  (9): Postma (1991a, 166; 1991b, 8; 1992a, 193; 1992b, 10) listed 
this word among possible personal names or toponyms and “names of 
Sanskrit origin,” translated it as though it were a toponym, and offered 
an interesting argument in support of the idea that the place called 
Devata was located in Butuan or elsewhere in Mindanao: “the map of 
Mindanao mentions Diuata (or Diwata) in three locations, 1) as Diwata 
Point of Butuan Bay; 2) as Diwata Mountains east of Butuan City, 
and 3) as Mount Diwata further to the East” (Postma 1992b, 13). In 

--- [Page 23] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION187his glossary, he indicated “God (J/M); fairy/nymph (K/T); placename 
in Mindanao.” In a passage of the sixteenth-century Boxer Codex, 
which concerns the islands of Luzon, Panay, and Cebu, one reads that 
the population “had and revered one God, the creator of all things, 
whom some call Bathala, others May-ari and others Dioata.”52 The 
word devata  in the languages of maritime Southeast Asia ultimately 
originates in the Sanskrit word devatā , which means “deity” in general. 
However, the word has undergone a semantic specification after it 
was borrowed and come to be connected with the ancestors. Thus, 
in OJ, the word means “god, deity; having entered the divine state, 
deceased” (Zoetmulder 1982). More specifically, in OJ inscriptions 
contemporary with the LCI, devata  is used to designate deceased kings 
in their places of enshrinement.53 The word also occurs in Śrīvijayan  
OM, but has been interpreted by most scholars as meaning simply 
“deity.”54 Significantly, Jan Gonda (1973/1998, 221) has pointed out 
that “[i]n the Philippines divata  or davata  (Bisaya) or dinata  (Manobo) 
are the souls of the deceased.” In this light, it seems that the type of 
deity conveyed by the word devata  in the LCI is very likely to have been 
a deceased ancestor.
diparlappas  (5): See lappas .
dṅan (2, 4): Postma translated the first occurrence (in the combination 
lavan dṅan ) as “with”  and the second as “through,” and listed “by” as 
a meaning in his glossary. To take the word in any other way than as 
meaning “with” (Mahdi 2005, 196) would be forced; the meaning “by” 
is expressed with ulih in this text. We consider lavan dṅan  equivalent to 
S/IM bersama dengan .
graṅ (9, 10): Postma glossed this word as “if, perchance [gerang (M); 
galang (K); barang (Y)],” meaning that he considered Kapampangan 
galang  and Mangyan barang  cognates with the OM word. In his 
comments on the two occurrences of the word in three Śrīvijayan  OM 
inscriptions, Johannes de Casparis (1956, 346) noted that the word 
was used in every instance before the word kadāci , borrowed from 
Sanskrit, where kadācit  means “at any time.” He further observed that 
the word must be connected with gerangan  in S/IM, but its use seems 
to be slightly different. Still, according to De Casparis (ibid.), “The 
meaning of graṃ kadāci  appears to be ‘if, on the contrary’, ‘if, however.’ 
As a matter of fact, kadāci  alone is used to formulate crimes with their 

--- [Page 24] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)188sanctions, whereas graṃ kadāci  is found towards the end of the texts 
when good acts with recompenses are mentioned.” In the LCI the word 
is used without kadāci but is separated by the word syāt (see the lexicon 
entry below) from syāpa.  We believe that we are dealing with the OM 
antecedent of S/IM barang siapa . Similarly, the combination graṁ kadāci  
can be interpreted as equivalent to barang kali  or sembarang waktu.  On 
the linguistic history of the Malay morpheme barang , one may also 
consult Adelaar’s (1994b) "The History of Thing, Animal, Person and 
Related Concepts in Malay." Historical linguists do not so far seem 
to have given attention to the history of Malay gerang-an , so we limit 
ourselves to noting the phonological and functional similarity between 
graṅ  in OM (where baraṅ  is unattested) and barang  in later forms of 
Malay (where graṅ  seems to survive, but in slightly different usage, in 
the word gerangan ).55
jādi: See barjādi .
jyotiṣa (1): According to Amrit Gomperts (2001, 99), “ Jyotiṣa  is the 
general Sanskrit word for Indian astronomy, astrology and divination, 
while the Old Javanese word jyotiṣa  means  ‘astrologer’.” In fact, the 
word can designate both astral science and a specialist thereof in 
Sanskrit. Although a person called Bhagavanta Jyoti ṣa occurs in the 
OJ Palepangan inscription (906 CE), line 3, and Postma has interpreted 
diṅ jyotiṣa  as “according to the astronomer,” it seems more likely to us 
that the science rather than the expert is intended here. 
kaparāvis  (9): See Cœdès (1930) on parāvis ; the ka- seems to be 
equivalent in function to the ke- in S/IM kesemua(nya) .
kasumuran  (6): This word is derived by the circumfix ka-. . .-an  from a 
base sumur . In OJ there are occurrences of sumur  (and various derived 
forms) already in texts dating to the ninth or tenth century. In S/IM, 
besides sumur , meaning “well,” there is sumber  /sumb ǝr/ meaning 
“source.” This second word is presumably related to the first although 
showing an epenthetic b, and both are presumably loanwords from 
Javanese.56 The base sumur  is not found in Austronesian languages 
that have not undergone heavy influence from Javanese, no cognates 
being attested in languages of the Philippines, and no corresponding 
entry included in the ACD  (Blust and Trussel 2010). There are two 
occurrences of the precise word kasumuran , which may have been a 
toponym, in OJ inscriptions of the late ninth century (Damais 1970, 

--- [Page 25] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION189530). On morphological grounds, one expects it to mean something 
like “well area,” but such a meaning cannot be confirmed from the 
contexts in the two passages in question. The first is in the Jurungan 
charter (Java, 876 CE): anuṅ milu manusuk kasumuran si niru mas mā 8  
vḍihan aṅsit yu muaṅ raṅga yu 2 , meaning "The one who took part in 
demarcating the kasumuran  [named] si Niru: 8 māṣa  of gold, [2] sets of 
vḍihan aṅsit  and 2 sets of raṅga ." The second is in the Mulak I charter 
(Java, 878 CE): paṅuraṅ rakryan mavanua saṅ kasumuran pu maṅlīna "the 
paṅuraṅ  [tax collector] was the lord village-owner, the kasumuran  
[called] pu Maṅlīna." It seems unlikely to us that Postma (1991b, 22; 
1992b) was right in leaving open the possibility that the word serves 
as a personal name. Tiongson (2013b, 24–26) has tried to argue, with 
reference to the modern-day Javanese toponyms Sumur Upas and 
Sumur Bandung, that kasumuran  in the LCI is connected with the idea 
of “source,” which allows him to link the toponym Puliran Kasumuran 
to the upstream area of river systems feeding into Laguna de Bay. If 
only for the reason that the predominant meaning of sumur  is “well” 
and not “source,” we find this hypothesis too weakly founded.
kāyastha  (4–5): This word, borrowed from Sanskrit, is used in Indian 
inscriptions of the first millennium CE to designate the scribes of 
legal documents.57 In her monograph dedicated to the social history 
of kāyastha in India, Chitrarekha Gupta (1996, 27) explained that 
legal documents were often written by kāyastha  and that the Sanskrit 
legal text Yājñavalkyasmr ̥ ti  “prescribed that if a document of debt was 
written by a person not belonging to the parties involved the writer 
was to put his own signature in it, along with those of the debtor 
and the witnesses, otherwise it would not be regarded as a valid 
document.” The word is found in one other OM inscription (Casparis 
1956, 20, 32) and also very occasionally in OJ epigraphy. However, the 
function of the class of people it designates never emerges clearly in 
these Indonesian sources. We interpret the LCI’s brief and anonymous 
indication of the scribe with the words dṅan daṅ kāyastha  in the light of 
the evidence from the Yājñavalkyasmr ̥ ti  and refer for further discussion 
to pp. 198 and 207.
krama  (4): Postma (1992a, 186–87) printed dikrama  as a single word 
and translated it as “This means that” without an explanatory note. 
In his unpublished paper (Postma 1992b), he translated it as “To the 

--- [Page 26] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)190effect that,” while the glossary (ibid., 2–3) makes clear that he took 
krama  to be a noun through the entries: “ dikrama  4 thru conduct, 
behaviour; by action of (?)” and “ krama  (S) 4 conduct; behaviour; action; 
dikrama  4 thru conduct, behaviour; by action of (?).” The meanings 
quoted by Postma are those cited for this loanword from Sanskrit in 
the OJED  (Zoetmulder 1982, krama I 3). The other meanings listed 
for this word in the OJED  (ibid., krama I 1 and 2) are “order, sequence” 
and “how something is or happens, state, condition.” We are aware 
of only one other occurrence of krama  in the OM corpus. However, 
it is in a fragmentary inscription (Bukit Seguntang, line 18), was left 
untranslated by its editor (Casparis 1956, 2–6), and is not preceded 
by di there. In OJ, di would be ri(ṅ), or i(ṅ), but the combination ri(ṅ) 
krama  occurs very rarely in epigraphy. The only passage we can cite 
at this time is from the eleventh-century Pucangan inscription, face 
B, lines 32–33: yāṅkǝn mantrastavanamaskāra śrī mahārāja ri bhaṭāra  
sāri-sāri, mvaṅ paṅliṅgānanikāṅ rāt, karuhun saṅ anāgataprabhu hlam  
i dlāhaniṅ dlāha, ri kramani de śrī mahārāja munarjīvākǝn sāśvatāniṅ  
sayavadvīpa , "It was like the Great King’s permanent homage 
with mantras and eulogies to the Lord and was to be evidence for 
the people, first of all the future kings, thereafter in the future’s 
future,  regarding the specifics  of the manner of the Great King’s 
reviving the constant well-being of the whole island of Java." 
However, in contrast to this passage, in which ri krama  responds to 
paṁliṅgānanikāṁ rāt (evidence for the people) in what precedes it, it 
seems to us that the LCI uses di krama  rather to refer forward to the 
specifics that will be given in the remainder of the sentence. For such 
usage, we may compare the expression kunaṅ kramanya  (as for its 
details) in an eleventh-century Javanese inscription, which Griffiths 
(2020a, 111–13) has recently studied.
lappas  (10), diparlappas  (5): The spelling reflects the pronunciation /
lǝpas/, i.e., S/IM lepas . The term is used here as the Malay equivalent of 
the Sanskrit śuddha  to express a debt being settled. The most common 
term in S/IM is lunas  (paid back), which is from Javanese, but the 
expressions melepaskan hutang  (to acquit a debt) and lepas dari utang  
(acquitted from a debt) continue the ancient usage seen in our text.
makāña  (8): Postma glossed it as “and; then; subsequently (s)he,” but 
the meaning we see in S/IM makanya  (the reason why) would be more 

--- [Page 27] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION191suitable in this context. See also modern Javanese mangka-ne  in the 
same meaning. It initially seemed uncertain to us that this meaning 
existed already in earlier forms of Malay. However, consultation of 
the Malay Concordance Project  (Proudfoot n.d.) reveals that some 
relatively early CM prose texts, such as Hikayat Indraputra , already 
use makanya  in the causal sense. It is, therefore, unproblematic to 
postulate this sense also for OM.
mḍaṅ (8): The occurrence of the toponym M ḍaṅ seems to be an 
undeniable piece of evidence for a direct connection with the political 
and religious life of contemporary Java, where this toponym was 
closely associated with the name of the founder of the polity in Central 
Java, i.e., with King Sañjaya, who seems to have been enshrined at 
Mḍaṅ, as it appears from his posthumous designation as “Ancestor 
who has been deified at M ḍaṅ.”58 The Javanese epigraphic data 
published by the 1960s and previous opinions were summarized in 
Soekmono’s (1967) “A Geographical  Reconstruction of Northeastern 
Central Java and the Location of Medang”  (cf. Boechari 1976, 2012). 
Also, De Casparis (1988, 39) summarized the data as follows: “The 
site (or sites) of the famous Central Javanese royal residence of 
Mĕḍang (OJ) is still unknown.” It should be noted, however, that the 
list of more than 120 persons called saṅ pamgat  (or, in abbreviated 
form, samgat ) in Javanese epigraphy published by Damais (1970, 
986–89) contains not a single saṅ pamgat or samgat of M ḍaṅ. See the 
entry for pamgat .
ṅāran : See barṅāran . 
nāyaka tuhān  (4, 5, 6): Postma translated this combination as “the 
Leader and Elder.” While nāyaka  is a loanword from Sanskrit (where 
its basic meaning is indeed “leader”), tuhān  is a Malay/Javanese term 
meaning “master, foreman,” not to be confused with tuha  (old).59 The 
two words are attested both in Śrīvijayan  OM and in OJ epigraphy.60 
They are, moreover, found together in OJ epigraphy, but in the reverse 
order, in the expression tuhānniṅ nāyaka (master of nāyaka ) that is 
also seen extended to tuhānniṅ kanāyakan (master of the group of 
nāyaka ).61 In the Javanese context, the nāyaka  had some connection 
with revenue collection.62 The combination nāyaka tuhān  that we find 
in our text, always preceded by ḍaṅ hvan  (see the relevant entry), is not 
found in any other source known to us, and its concrete meaning must 
therefore remain a matter of speculation. 

--- [Page 28] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)192ntāha  (10): This form, not recognized by Postma (whose publications 
show a single “word” syāpantāha ), must be an irrealis form derived 
from ntah , i.e., S/IM entah  (to doubt, to ignore).
pamgat  (3, 7, 8, 9): Postma cited an array of evidence suggesting the 
possibility that this derivation from a base pǝgat  was indigenous to 
ancient Luzon. However, it seems equally possible, and indeed more 
plausible, that the term originated in Javanese administrative culture 
and was borrowed from there into OM, through which it was exported 
far from Java. Several hundred years after the creation of the LCI, 
we find the word samgat  (= saṅ pamgat ) in a fourteenth-century OM 
manuscript from highland Sumatra (cf. Kozok 2015, 86, 125).
paścāt di ṅ āri kamudyan (10): Paścāt  is Sanskrit and means 
“subsequently,” diṅ āri kamudyan  would be di hari kemudian  or 
di kemudian hari  in S/IM. This kind of twin-form involving synonyms 
from Sanskrit and the vernacular language is typical of discourse in 
various ancient Austronesian languages from “Indianized” cultures. 
See sana tatkāla  in this same inscription. For examples further afield, 
from the Kingdom of Campā, see the article by Edouard Huber (1905, 
172–74).63 Jan Gonda (1973/1988, 472–73) provides an explanation of 
the phenomenon as a stylistic device, which he calls “twin-forms” and 
cites numerous examples from the languages of Indonesia.64
puliran  (6–7): This toponym is reminiscent of the OJ base pulir  “to 
whirl” and of the toponym Vuliran found twice in roughly contemporary 
OJ inscriptions (Jurungan of 876 CE and Paradah II of 943 CE — cf. 
Damais 1970, 668).
sāda  (7, 8): Postma first glossed sāda as “all of them,” and under the 
same entry he glossed the suffixed forms sādā-ña/sādā-nda  as “all his/
her existing/available . . .” while under the entry sa- he had glossed 
them as “all that belong(s) to him/her.” We are inclined to give to sa-ada  
the precise OM equivalent of OJ sa-hana , exactly the same sense as 
the OJ word has, namely “all,” although we cannot exclude that the 
word meant more specifically “all those present of the . . . .”
sāna tatkāla  (2): On this “twin-form,” widespread in this form and 
some variants throughout the OM epigraphic corpus, see Griffiths 
(2014b, 217, 225, 227, 234; 2018, 279; 2020b, 57). See also our general 
comments on “twin-forms” under the entry paścāt diṅ āri kamudyan .
sānak  (2, 7): Postma listed its possible meanings as “brother/sister/

--- [Page 29] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION193relative” (citing OJ) and “kindred” (citing S/IM), and translated the 
word as “relative” in line 2 and “family” in line 7. We have considered 
translating the word as “all children” or as “relatives,” but settled 
in the end for “siblings,” in line with one of the meanings defined 
for the word sānak  in the OJED  (Zoetmulder 1982) and cited by 
Postma.65 Although it is theoretically possible to interpret the prefix 
sa in sānak  (= sa-anak ) as meaning “all” when sānak  occurs in line 2, 
which tallies well with what one might expect the text to say about 
inherited debt (see pp. 201–5), it is impossible to obtain the meaning 
“all children” from sādānda sānak kaparāvis  in line 7 (unless one is 
willing to assume a redundancy of sa in sa-ada-nda sa-anak ), for which 
“all her relatives together” or “all her siblings together” would seem 
to be much more natural translations. All in all, it seems to us that 
“siblings” fits all contexts best and fits just as well as “children” with 
what we expect the text to be saying about inherited debt. In lines 8–9, 
sādāña anak cucu daṅ hvan namvran  then designates the same group 
of siblings and their children from the perspective of the siblings’ 
father’s generation. 
śuddha  (5, 9): For the technical/legal sense of this word, which lies 
behind S/IM sudah , see the work of Gonda (1973/1988, 565). See also 
pp. 199 and 209.
syāt  (10): Postma glossed it as “eventually (?).” The word is an inflected 
Sanskrit verb form, the third person singular optative of as (to be), 
inserted into the text presumably to emphasize the irrealis modality of 
the sentence. The OJ usage of astu (third person singular imperative 
from the same Sanskrit verb) is comparable. Zoetmulder (1982) 
defines it as follows: “frequent at the beginning of an imprecation, a 
curse, a blessing, a prophecy.”
varadāna  (3): The use of this Sanskrit word, which means “the 
granting of a boon or request; the giving of compensation or reward,” in 
the phrase dibari varadāna viśuddhapātra  describes the viśuddhapātra  
as something bestowed in granting a request. We may presume that 
Si Bukah petitioned to get one and the present document is the result.
valānda  (5): Postma (1992a, 187) translated this word as “salary-
related,” while adding in a footnote that “The word is obscure in this 
context. However, if walānda  could be read as welānda , it could be 
translated as ‘to the amount of’. . .” in relation to a debt, and simply 

--- [Page 30] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)194adopted the latter solution in his unpublished translation (Postma 
1992b), with “the amount of, amounting to [ balanja , blanja  (J/M)]” in 
the corresponding glossary entry. We do not understand how reading 
velānda  would yield the indicated meaning (and we have indicated in 
note 29 that we consider this reading impossible). Postma (1991a, 170) 
had already raised the same idea in his initial publication, in which he 
wrote: “ Walānda  (or welānda ?) might be related to Javanese balanja or 
blanja  (salary, living expenses), tentatively translated here as ‘salary-
related.’” However, the explanation of the word in connection with S/IM 
belanja  does not work because belanja  is very likely a loanword from 
Sinhalese-Pali valañja  (Gonda 1973/1988, 80–81), and there would be 
no reason for the OM loan to show nd if valānda  too were based on the 
same Sinhalese-Pali word with its ñj, i.e., /n ʤ/. Clearly, the word must 
be analyzed as vala+nda , with typical OM marking of vowel length 
on the penultimate vowel. It is not hard to imagine how vala, from 
Sanskrit bala , meaning “force,” could come to mean “weight, amount,” 
which would yield one of Postma’s translations. However, considering 
the way amounts of gold are stated in contemporary OJ inscriptions, 
often without any word explicitly expressing the meaning “amount,” 
we think it is unnecessary to seek this meaning in valānda . Moreover, 
vala never seems to have undergone such a semantic development in 
the languages of Indonesia (cf. ibid., index entries for bala  and vala), 
where the meaning is always “army” or similar, and the word occurs 
in this meaning already in the Śrīvijayan  OM Kedukan Bukit inscription 
(ibid., 204). We, therefore, interpret the word as meaning “. . . (of) his 
army,” without excluding the possibility that valānda  is an error for 
vapānda  in which case we could translate it as “of her/their father.” 
viśuddhapātra  (3): See pp. 198–99 for further discussion of this 
word, which was borrowed from Sanskrit (where one would expect 
the spelling viśuddhipattra  or viśuddhipatra ).
vluṁ (10): Although Postma recognized that this word is S/IM belum , 
his transcription wlung  obscures the sound correspondence as it is 
based on the wrong assumption that the  anusvāra/cecak  sign ṁ always 
represents a velar nasal (see p. 182 and especially note 45 on p. 224). 

--- [Page 31] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION195The Old Tagalog Hypothesis
For anyone with knowledge of OM epigraphy, and with the 
aforementioned reference works at hand (Vikør 1988; Mahdi 2005), there 
can be no reasonable doubt about the identification of the language of the 
LCI as being a variety of OM. The facts that the inscription’s variety of OM 
is rich in loanwords, especially from Javanese, and that it contains some 
toponyms known from Old Tagalog sources as well as some lexical items 
that also exist in Old Tagalog do not furnish a linguistically or historically 
sound argument for considering the language of the inscription as 
anything other than OM. Yet these features of the LCI seem to underlie 
the reluctance to accepting the linguistic facts that are noticeable in the 
way the document is received in the Philippines, leading to a variety of 
qualifications that react against an ostensible “Indonesian bias” and leave 
open some role for Old Tagalog.66 
Tiongson (2013b), in his recent study, even goes so far as to claim that the 
language was not OM at all but Old Tagalog.67 This Old Tagalog hypothesis, 
as propounded by Tiongson, suffers from a number of methodological 
weaknesses. First and foremost, the author does not propose a new edition, 
making it impossible to grasp in detail where he diverges from Postma’s 
readings—except for a few cases explicitly commented upon—and word 
divisions. Instead, Tiongson offers lists of lexical correspondences between 
words excerpted from the LCI and entries from seventeenth-century Tagalog 
dictionaries, leading to a translation into Modern Tagalog that differs in 
many ways from Postma’s. This approach tends to obscure the presence of 
composite expressions, such as those we have exposed in our lexicon (e.g., 
sāna tatkāla and paścāt diṅ āri kamudyan ), which make perfect sense against 
the background of OM epigraphy but cannot be explained as Old Tagalog. 
The specific arguments reveal a willingness to squeeze the data into a 
predetermined interpretive mold (e.g., the claim that the sounds expressed 
by the letters d, r, and l are interchangeable [ibid., 57–58]) and insufficient 
familiarity with the OM primary data as well as the relevant secondary 
literature (e.g., the claim that LCI bari cannot be equated with S/IM beri 
“to give” because of the difference of the vowel in the first syllable, or the 
claim that di- as passive prefix occurs only in one OM inscription [ibid., 58, 
67]). For these reasons, and others to be discussed in the conclusion of this 
article, the identification of the language of the LCI as Old Tagalog must be 
considered unsubstantiated.

--- [Page 32] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)196Historical Interpretations
The LCI forms the first part of an inscription that would have extended over 
at least two plates in its original state. Therefore, the information we have 
is incomplete. Despite this condition, it allows for formulating interesting 
hypotheses on certain aspects of sociopolitical life in ninth- or tenth-century 
Luzon. As discussed previously, the text concerns the clearance of a debt 
contracted by a certain daṅ hvan  Namwran. The plate mentions the date on 
which the clearance was issued and the amount of debt cleared, confirms 
that all descendants were cleared from the debt, and gives the names and 
titles of the people involved: one relative of the indebted, the indebted 
himself, a scribe, three witnesses, and an official. 
The Date of the LCI
The dating formula at the opening of the document uses terms of the 
Indian pañcāṅga  or “five-element” calendar system based on the Sanskrit 
astronomical treatise Sūryasiddhānta  (Casparis 1978, 7, 23, 53). Our formula 
involves the following variables and their corresponding value: era– Śaka, 
year–822 (expired), month–Vai śākha, fortnight– kr̥ṣṇa (waning), number–
caturthi  (4), and weekday– somavāra  (Monday).  
|Śaka 822 Vaiśākha #19|
AD 900 Apr 21 Mo21: siddha17'41" 13'49" 9'03"
22: sādhya
19: mūla26'23" 26'27" 25'18"
20: p.āṣāḍhā
19: caturthī k ṛṣṇa49'26" 18'29" 47'12" 15'41" 43'55"
Fig. 5. The dating parameters of the inscription 
Source: The authors, using HIC software

--- [Page 33] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION197If one fills in the above parameters in the online date conversion 
software Pancanga (Yano and Fushimi 2014), the result is 21 April 900 CE, 
which fell on a Monday as required by the text so we may consider this 
conversion secure. Hector Santos (1996) reached the same result through 
other means.68 The result is confirmed by the software HIC (Gislén and 
Eade 2007), which we used to create the diagram shown in fig. 5.
The way the variables of the date are expressed is strongly reminiscent of 
the way such formulas are expressed in inscriptions of Indonesia, and more 
particularly with the pattern observable in the dating formulas of Javanese 
inscriptions. To bring out this comparison, let us juxtapose the LCI’s formula 
with one from an OJ inscription from Central Java of roughly the same 
period and with another from an OM inscription from South Sumatra that 
is more than 200 years older (see table).69
Comparison of the LCI dating formula with Old Malay and 
Old Javanese inscription from Sumatra and Java
SOURCE FORMULA
Laguna Copperplate Inscription svasti śakavarṣātīta  822 vaisākhamāsa  
diṁ jyotiṣa,  
caturthi kr ̥ ṣṇapakṣa somavāra  
sāna tatkāla ...
Old Javanese Humanding 
copperplate inscription from Central 
Java (Damais 1955, 32–33)svasti śakavarṣātīta  797 baiśākhamāsa
dvitīya śuklapakṣa , tuṅlai pon · somavāra,
tatkāla ...
Old Malay Talang Tuwo (or Śrīkṣetra ) 
stone inscription, South Sumatra 
(ibid., 235)svasti • śrī śakavarṣātīta  • 606 diṁ 
dvitīya śuklapakṣa  vulan · 
caitra sāna tatkālāña ...
Our dating formula has in common with the Javanese pattern, as 
opposed to the Sumatran one, the fact that the month is called māsa  and 
not vulan , and the fact that the month is stated before the number of the day 
and the fortnight rather than after those variables.70 However, there are also 
noteworthy differences: The variables for the indigenous Javanese five-day 
and six-day cycles ( tuṅlai  and pon in the above example), typically stated in 
Javanese dates before the Sanskrit name of the “seven-day cycle” (week), 

--- [Page 34] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)198are absent in the LCI’s date as they are from the Talang Tuwo formula and 
indeed from all known dating formulas of Sumatran inscriptions, while the 
use of the words diṁ jyotiṣa  (for reference, see jyotiṣa  in the lexicon) finds 
no analogy in any Indonesian dating formula that we know. In short, the 
way the date is expressed reveals simultaneously a clear impact of Javanese 
documentary culture, some agreement with Malay documentary culture, 
and a small (possibly local) adaptation of Malay and Javanese patterns.
The Nature of the Document
The document styles itself a viśuddhapātra , a localized spelling of what 
would be called a viśuddha-patra  or viśuddhi-patra , i.e., a “document ( patra ) 
of clearance ( viśuddhi ),” in the Sanskritic juridical vocabulary that spread 
from South Asia to Southeast Asia in the course of the first millennium.71 
Although Luzon is far from India, and this article focuses on our document’s 
Southeast Asian context, it seems indispensable to note that Sanskrit legal 
literature has a long history, not well documented in all periods, and that 
the first important occurrence of the technical term śuddhi , equivalent 
here to viśuddhi , is found in the fifth-century collection of legal rules called 
Yājñavalkasmr ̥ti, where we read (in stanza 2.97):
dattvar ṇaṁ pāṭayel lekhya ṁ śuddhyai  vānyat tu kārayet |
sākṣimac ca bhaved yas tu dātavya ṁ tat sasāk ṣikam || 
After paying back the debt, he should tear up the document; or he 
should have another executed as acquittance. A debt contracted in 
the presence of witnesses should be repaid also in the presence of 
witnesses.
We cite the edition and translation by Patrick Olivelle (2019, 144–45), on 
whose work we also rely for the dating of the text. The same scholar has 
pointed out (ibid., xiii) that Y ājñavalkya, the author of the Sanskrit work, 
“is the first to use the technical term lekhya  for a legal document. The 
importance of documents is evident in the rise of a professional scribal 
class called kāyastha  mentioned for the first time by Y ājñavalkya.” This 
last term, kāyastha , also figures in the LCI (see the lexicon). We thus see 
that the terminological frame of reference for recording the transaction 
that took place in Luzon in 900 CE was a cosmopolitan tradition of legal 

--- [Page 35] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION199scholarship that had its roots in India. The term viśuddhipattra  occurs as 
such in Indian legal literature in texts that cannot always be dated with any 
precision, but some of which may be assumed to have been in circulation 
by the end of the ninth century. However, it has a different meaning in 
those early texts. The first datable occurrence of the term in the meaning 
of “debt clearance document” in Sanskrit literature is quite a bit later 
than our inscription, in Vijñ āneśvara’s (ca. 1100 CE) commentary on the 
above Yājñavalkasmr ̥ti stanza.72 And physical examples of such documents 
from South Asia are even more recent.73 On the one hand, our document 
thus shows a usage that must have existed in India but for which textual 
evidence is still lacking in contemporary Sanskrit sources.74 On the other 
hand, documents that are in many ways comparable to the LCI and style 
themselves śuddhapatra  or else use the terms śuddha  or śuddhapariśuddha  
to designate clearance of debt, were issued in Java within a very similar 
timeframe.75 Together, these documents attest to the wide dissemination of 
a very specific documentary practice and vocabulary in maritime Southeast 
Asia around the turn of the tenth century. 
Measures and Metals
The turn of the tenth century stood at the very beginning of a period of 
expansion of Asian trade, with the opening of the Chinese market and the 
intensification of trade with South India (Wisseman Christie 1998; Wade 
2009). The period saw an increase in interinsular exchanges, where measured 
weights of gold and iron bars and measures of rice were all standardized 
enough to be readily used as a medium of exchange. However, they were 
progressively replaced by golden and silver alloy coinage that used a hybrid 
weight-value system, combining Indian and local unit names (Wisseman 
Christie 1996, 256). It is in this context that we should read the use of kāṭi 
and suvarṇa in the LCI. 
The inscription gives the amount of the debt initially contracted as 1 
kāṭi and 8 suvarṇa  of gold, which amounts to between 1,058.8 and 1,076.8 
grams. As was the convention in all the places where this system was in use, 
the units appear in the abbreviated forms kā and su (Wicks 1986,  45). On 
the one hand, the term kāṭi, borrowed into Javanese and Malay from the 
Tamil kaṭṭi (Hoogervorst 2015, 72; 2019, 179–80),76 was the largest unit in 
this early currency system. The term was widely used in maritime Southeast 
Asia and had a varying weight depending on the period. In early Java it 

--- [Page 36] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)200weighed between 750 and 768 grams. On the other hand, suvarṇa , a Sanskrit 
term for gold and gold coins, appeared as a unit of weight (38.60 grams) 
for measuring gold in the currency weight system in early Java (Wisseman 
Christie 1996, 257, 259).
These units were not directly represented by standardized coins or ingots 
but were related to coinage as accountancy units (ibid., 261). Therefore, the 
amount of 1 kāṭi and 8 suvarṇa  of gold may have been borrowed under 
various forms. The so-called piloncito ,77 a type of gold coin of relatively small 
size and globular shape, immediately comes to mind as it was used as a 
medium of exchange and circulated between Indonesia and the Philippines 
from the ninth through the twelfth centuries. Such coins, whose prototypes 
were first created in the Javanese kingdom of Mataram between the eighth 
and ninth centuries, weighed between 2.1 and 2.5 grams78 in Java and Bali 
(Wicks 1986, 45, 55; Wisseman Christie 1996, 24). However, the ones found 
in the Philippines, precisely in the Laguna area (Calamba, Mandaluyong, 
and Makati) and Manila Bay (Bataan), and also in Mindoro and Mindanao, 
weigh between 0.09  and 2.65 grams (Legarda 1976a, 8, 11; 1976b, 192, 
197–98). Gold ornaments, barter rings, and bamboo tubes filled with gold, 
attested in exchange in the Philippines (Legarda 1976a, 15), may also have 
been part of this system of monetary-weight values. 
Previous authors have written about the importance of the gold industry 
in precolonial Luzon in relation to the inscription. These studies are based 
either on the rich vocabulary found in dictionaries of the early seventeenth 
century (Postma 1992a, 197; Tiongson 2013b, 36–39), emphasizing the 
technical sophistication and aesthetic qualities of local production, or on 
ethnoarchaeological findings showing how gold traveled from min es to 
bulking villages and ephemerous markets ( tiangge/tabu-tabuan ) to finally 
reach coastal maritime trading centers in northern Luzon (Canilao 2013, 
2017, 2018a, 2018b, 2018c). Such approaches, as valuable as they are to 
understanding the socioeconomic role of gold in Philippine protohistory, 
have overshadowed the importance of the unit system in which the debt is 
recorded—and the same may be said about the attempts to localize what 
could have been the major mining area for gold in relation to the region of 
the inscription (cf. Tiongson 2013a).79 The epigraphic record indicates that 
this unit system was also used in Java to express monetary value in  the interest 
and repayment schedules on debt, among other transactions (Wisseman 
Christie 1996, 257), and that it was the common frame of reference for gold 

--- [Page 37] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION201and gold coinage between Java and Luzon around the turn of the tenth 
century (Wicks 1992, 351, 353).
Debtor and Debt Inheritance
The name of the debtor is preceded by the words daṅ hvan , which, as 
suggested in the lexicon, are used to designate a person of some distinction. 
His status is different from that of the three other persons designated as 
daṅ hvan  because they are further specified as nāyaka tuhān , terms that 
might indicate their responsibility for the collection of revenue in different 
places. Wisseman Christie (2009a, 45) thought that the debt ( hutaṅ ) had 
been contracted by a religious official. This reading seems to have been 
founded on her interpretation of daṅ hvan  as equivalent to ḍaṅ hyaṅ  in OJ, 
an equivalence that is demonstrably untenable . 
We know almost nothing about the debtor, except that he contracted 
a debt for his army ( hutaṅda valānda ), implying that he was involved in 
some military activity. The need to borrow money could arise in a situation 
where there was no standing army sustained from the state’s revenue but 
where armed forces were conscripted on an ad hoc basis. Later accounts 
on warfare in Southeast Asia suggest that soldiers usually foraged food for 
themselves (Charney 2004, 193–94), but even if we assume that such may 
also have been the case here, it remains that the party organizing the military 
campaign would have had to provide the means of transport—the river or 
sea-going vessels—which would have implied substantial expenditure.80
 Another piece of information regarding the debtor concerns his family. 
We know that he had at least one direct descendant, his daughter, Bukah—
and possibly also other children—representing him on the day of the debt 
clearance. His absence can only be explained by assuming that he had died 
by the time of the event. In Wisseman Christie’s (2009b) corpus of twenty-
eight inscriptions related to debt in Java and Bali between the ninth and 
twelfth centuries, there is only one recorded case about the absence of a 
person during the settlement of a debt, involving a man who made a claim 
demanding a repayment but a court ruled against him on the grounds of his 
absence (cf. ibid., 179–80). 
We know that when a debt exceeded the lifetime of the indebted, it was 
passed on to the debtor’s children (Henley and Boomgaard 2009, 4). Debt was 
a common condition, even for the elite, in premodern maritime Southeast 
Asia, where direct economic assistance was often sought and commonly led 

--- [Page 38] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)202to servitude. The borrowing of money was therefore the first reason for debt 
bondage (Wisseman Christie 2009a, 51). Different categories of debt-bound 
people—those living with their masters and those maintaining their own 
households—appear not only in inscriptions of the ninth to twelfth centuries 
in Java and Bali (ibid., 49) but also in accounts from the sixteenth century 
in the Philippines. In the latter case, the aliping namamahay  or “householder 
slaves” had often bought their condition with gold, which enabled them to 
live separately and only come on call, whereas the aliping sa gigilid/gigilir or 
“hearth slaves” lived in the lower part of the creditor’s house where the hearth 
was (Postma 1992b, appendix 2; Scott 1991, 16–17).81 However, more than 
their place of living, what differentiated them were their marital status and 
the condition of having a family (Scott 1983b, 149–50).
Bukah is mentioned as being a dayaṅ , that is to say, in our interpretation, 
a female servant who entered the service of the creditor to repay the debt 
of her father. As a consequence, she was considered an adopted member 
(aṅkatan ) of her new household. The word dayaṅ  (also discussed in the 
lexicon) is not attested in other OM documents but designates a female 
member of a courtly entourage or a maid-servant in later Malay sources 
(Matheson and Hooker 1983, 199); its OJ cognate ḍayaṅ  can imply some 
sort of sexual servitude to the master of the house. In the present context, 
dayaṅ  indeed seems to designate a servant and, although it is not possible to 
ascertain the nature of her relationship with the creditor, it should be kept 
in mind that intimate relations are attested in the context of debt bondage in 
Java in several inscriptions (two of them cited above, p. 186), which mention 
sexual intercourse in compensation for monetary debt.82 
The  ḍayaṅ explicitly figures as a category of servants ( hulun ) in several 
OJ inscriptions. In the LCI the dayaṅ  Bukah is clearly designated as being in 
a position of debt bondage ( diparhulun ). The ter m hulun  is not only common 
in OJ but is also one of the terms used in Old Balinese inscriptions to refer to 
classes of people held in debt bondage (Wisseman Christie 2009a, 49); it is 
used in the same sense in Old Cham records (Lepoutre 2015, 131–37); and 
it occurs in Śrīvijayan  OM in the fixed combinations hulun-tuhān  (cf. note 
61) and hulun haji . The latter, also common in OJ inscriptions, presumably 
corresponds to the hamba raja  known from later Malay sources; it seems 
that such “royal servants” were not necessarily of low social status (Casparis 
1956, 37–38, n. 14; Matheson and Hooker 1983, 184, 195–96). The use of 
the term hulun  in the LCI indicates that Luzon was part of a much larger 
area with a commonality of cultural practices involving the status of hulun .

--- [Page 39] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION203In the LCI Namwran’s direct descendants were bound to the creditor, 
which means that the debt might have been passed not only to Bukah but to 
her siblings as well ( lavan dṅan-ña sa-anak ). If we look at the few contemporary 
inscriptions from Java and Bali that deal with issues of debt, the inheritance 
of debt varies from one case to the other, without any particular rule being 
applied consistently, and the same can be said for later periods.83 We can cite 
the Guntur inscription (907 CE), which speaks of a husband who was asked 
to repay the debt of his wife and was relieved from doing so on the grounds 
of his ignorance of the contract, or the inscription of Wuru Tunggal (912 
CE), presented in nearly integral translation below (p. 209), where a child 
repaid the debt of his or her father (Wisseman Christie 2009b, 179–80). 
However, in all cases, only one person was responsible for the debt. The 
LCI may present an exception or simply state more clearly than the other 
known inscriptions something implied by debt bondage in general: Even if 
only one descendant has been designated to pay the debt, more broadly, the 
family remains responsible for paying it.
Debtor, Inheritance, and Settlement of the Debt
Finally, we should say a few words on debt settlement. In the inscriptions 
related to debt in Java and Bali, the compensation for monetary debt is 
normally expressed through terms derived from the base sahur , which 
are applied irrespective of the means of repayment, whether in currency 
or in-kind (through services).84 Another term, the base puhaka  and forms 
derived from it, seems to have been more specific and employed only in the 
case of a monetary repayment. Finally, the legal possibility offered to servants 
to pay off their debt, irrespective of the chosen means, could be designated as 
bayar hutaṅ  (Sembiran AI inscription, Bali, 922 CE). Interestingly, the LCI 
uses the term lappas  (S/IM lepas ) to indicate that all the relatives together 
(sa-ada-nda kaparāvis ) were rel eased from their bond to the creditor on the 
basis of their loyalty ( bhakti-nda ). We have here a formulation particular to 
the context, reminiscent of the phrase lapas na ang utang ko sa iyo , meaning 
“my debt to you is now dissolved,” recorded to have been used in Old Tagalog 
when a debt has been paid (Postma 1992a, 198). The use of the word lappas  
therefore implies that the debt has been paid “on the grounds of (completed) 
service in bondage” ( dari bhaktinda diparhulun ).
The creditor is named twice, first as  saṅ pamgat devata , which we have 
translated as “the deity official,” then as saṅ pamgat mḍaṅ , “the official of 
Mdang.” Mdang is the name of a place associated with the ancestors of the 

--- [Page 40] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)204Javanese kings of the Mataram dynasty (see mḍaṅ  in the lexicon). Contrary to 
Kusen (1991), we do not think it is necessary to assume that any place in Java 
is directly in question here because the toponym may have been translocated 
from Java to Luzon while keeping its association with ancestors,85 or the 
term saṅ pamgat mḍaṅ  may have been coined in Java (although we have no 
Javanese evidence of its existence) to designate a priest linked with ancestors 
at Mdang and then come to designate a priest involved with the worship of 
the ancestors more generally. The fact that the creditor was associated with 
the cult of a deity, probably a deified ancestor ( see devata  in the lexicon ), 
means that he was attached to some kind of religious institution. Despite 
the valuable studies undertaken so far on precolonial religious beliefs in the 
Philippines (Scott 1994; Tantoco et al. 2001; Brewer 2004), we do not have 
a sufficiently precise idea of the religious institutions of Luzon in the tenth 
century to determine which type of institution could have been intended 
here. Archaeological data recovered from burial sites located around Laguna 
de Bay consist mostly of funerary items, none of them being recognizably 
related to Hindu or Buddhist practices. The only element possibly associated 
with Indic influence is a stone structure, believed to be a crematorium, that 
dates from the eleventh to twelfth centuries (Vitales 2013, 65). However, 
cremation practices are attested in the Philippines since the early Holocene 
(Lara et al. 2015), so the recovery of a crematorium does not in itself 
constitute proof of the prevalence of Indic cultural practices. By contrast, 
in northeastern Mindanao, several artifacts like the Mahāpratisarā  amulet 
from Butuan (Orlina 2012), the golden statue of T ārā from Agusan, and the  
kinnarī  vessel from Surigao (Capistrano-Baker 2011, fig. 1.8, 4.65–66) form 
more recognizable traces of Buddhist or Hindu impact on local religious 
life. The scarcity of such information in the Philippines impels us to turn to 
Java and South Asia for comparative materials.
We infer from the text of the LCI the existence of a religious institution, 
represented by saṅ pamgat mḍaṅ , which lent money to an individual for some 
business relating to armed forces. In Java we have a number of more explicit 
indications that religious dignitaries were involved in moneylending during 
the same period. One likely case is the debt to a person named mpu guru  
Dhayā in the Wuru Tunggal inscription (see p. 209), and a small handful of 
inscriptions concerning pawning ( saṇḍa ) of land to Buddhist priests (Griffiths 
2020a, 129–32). In South Asia we also find interesting comparative data in 
the example of the great Brihadisvara temple at Tanjore (Tamil Nadu). In 

--- [Page 41] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION205total, twenty-one short inscriptions engraved on the temple’s walls deal with 
temple moneylending and inform about the way money donations to the 
temple were subsequently lent in cash to different groups. Interestingly, 
military figures were at the origin of most of the donations, which were 
lent to the agriculturalists, allowing monetary resources to be redistributed 
(Spencer 1968, 286–87). These examples do not correspond exactly to what 
we find in the LCI, and they belong to a somewhat later period (the reigns 
of the Chola rulers R ājarāja I, ca. 985–1014, and his son R ājendra I, ca. 
1012–1044). However, a few elements remain relevant for our study. In 
Tanjore temple moneylending was possible in the first place because the 
temple received donations in cash. Although we cannot affirm that such 
was also the case in the Laguna area around the turn of the tenth century, it 
remains that the religious institution must have had enough resources to do 
so and probably held a central economic role. The origin of the resources 
remains unknown and could have come from donations following military 
raids. Agricultural activities or trade may also have generated revenue 
transferred to the religious institution. In Laguna, as at Tanjore, we seem 
to confront a close interweaving of social, economic, political life around 
religious institutions.
Other Actors and Associated Toponyms
Considering the nature of the debt, it may not be a coincidence that the 
viśuddhapātra  was issued by an army commander ( saṅ pamgat senāpati ) in 
charge of the area of Tundun  but also nāyaka tuhān  of Pailah. According to 
the interpretation we have chosen, the debt was contracted in the presence 
of three other persons having the same position, the nāyaka tuhān  of Puliran 
Kasumuran, the one of Pailah named Ganasakti, and the one of Binwangan 
named Bisruta. We cannot, however, exclude the possibility that the role of 
these three persons was rather to have witnessed the clearance of the debt, 
or even that they had witnessed both its contracting and its clearance. Three 
further elements need to be clarified here. 
First, both Jayadeva and Ganasakti are mentioned as nāyaka tuhān  of 
Pailah (present-day Pila). Our interpretation of the role of the witnesses 
makes it possible to assume that the first one bore this title at the moment 
of the debt clearance, whereas the second was nāyaka tuhān  of Pailah when 
the debt was contracted. As already mentioned in the lexicon, the words 
nāyaka tuhān  are found in reverse order, as tuhān  nāyaka , in OJ inscriptions 

--- [Page 42] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)206to designate collectors of some sort of tax, possibly on rice harvest. It seems 
plausible that the words nāyaka tuh ān also designate some sort of collectors 
in our context. If we then consider the alternative scenario that the role 
of the witnesses concerned the clearance of the debt, we may infer that 
their activity necessitated or allowed two persons for a given area, in this 
case, Pailah. Or else, they may have been associated with Pailah because 
their lineage had a link with it or because it was their individual place of 
origin. The sources of the revenue collected are uncertain . According to 
archaeological data from the tenth to twelfth centuries, the Pila area had a 
fishing-oriented economy with an agricultural base (Tenazas 1982, 10). If 
we are looking in the right direction with our hypothesis that nāyaka tuh ān 
were charged with or authorized to collect any products, we may have here 
one of the sources of the religious institution’s revenue. However, it remains 
unclear under whose authority this transaction happened and if there were 
other parties who benefited from it.
The second point that needs to be clarified concerns the location of 
the places with which the witnesses are associated (fig. 6): Pailah, Puliran 
Kasumuran, Binwangan, and Tundun . Initially, Postma considered Pailah 
as the old spelling of contemporary Pila, located south of the lake, where he 
also placed Puliran, which, according to the seventeenth-century Tagalog 
dictionary by San Antonio, designated the southern shore. However, several 
elements he considered that were inconsistent with this hypothesis made 
him revise his initial judgment (Post ma 1991a, 166–67 ). He finally located 
Puliran, along with the other place names to the north of Manila, in the 
province of Bulacan, more specifically on the rivers Angat and Bulacan, 
while he remained uncertain whether to take Kasumuran as a toponym or 
proper name. In his recent study, Tiongson (2013b) has moved the context 
back to Laguna. Using the Vocabulario de lengua tagala  by Pedro de San 
Buenaventura (1613/1994), in which namumulilan  means going from 
Manila to Laguna de Bay, Tiongson argues that Puliran was the name of 
the lake, which may also have implied its shores. According to him, in the 
LCI, Puliran should be read together with Kasumuran and taken as a place 
name. He cited the word sumur , known in languages of Indonesia, to suggest 
that kasumuran  designated not the lake’s shore but a water source (see the 
discussion of sumur  in the lexicon), which would mean that this place was 
located upstream (Tiongson 2013b, 22 –25). 
While we follow Tiongson’s identification of Puliran as the ancient 
name of Laguna de Bay, we are inclined to give Kasumuran a different 

--- [Page 43] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION207meaning, in relation to foraging for water, for example, for boats departing 
to the high sea . This hypothesis would bring the word semantically closer to 
the predominant meaning of sumur  and is all the more plausible as Laguna 
de Bay was probably easier to reach from the open sea in the first millennium 
CE than it subsequently became.86 In such an earlier territorial configuration, 
it is therefore imaginable that traders would have visited a place where 
freshwater was known to be available and easily accessible from the coast. 
Binwangan  may have been located in Capalonga, Camarines Norte, where 
a place bears the almost identical name Binawangan (ibid., 35). However, 
it may also have been situated on the northern part of the lake, in Rizal 
Province, where there is a settlement called Binangonan (as observed by 
Kusen 1991, 6). Neither alternative agrees perfectly with the ancient name, 
and both involve points difficult to reconcile with other known facts, so we 
will leave the question of Binwangan’s location open.87 The only location 
for which there is no doubt is Tundun, convincingly identifiable as modern 
Tondo. When the Spanish arrived in the early sixteenth century, the port and 
the surrounding regions were administered by three sovereigns, Raja (Muda) 
Suleiman, Raja Matanda, and Raja Lakandula, the third being presented as 
the sovereign of Tondo and the surrounding regions (Santiago 1990). 
Now it is striking that of the four nāyaka tuhān , only three are mentioned 
by their titles, which are pukka Sanskrit and thus testify to a degree of cultural 
Indianization on the part of their bearers, whereas the nāyaka tuhān of Puliran 
Kasumuran remains anonymous. An advantage of Tiongson’s hypothesis, 
situating  Puliran Kasumuran  in the highlands, would be that it might 
explain the absence of an Indianized name or of the mention of any name.88 
However, a number of other scenarios, no more or less speculative, could be 
proposed to explain the irregularity away.
The third and final point to be clarified is that an unnamed scribe 
referred to with the term kāyastha  is said, quite explicitly, to be party to 
the clearance of the debt. We understand this to mean that the kāyastha  
had drawn up the original loan agreement and played the role of witness 
besides his role as scribe, which would be consistent with the contemporary 
inscriptions from Java that often mention among the listed witnesses the 
same person identified at the end of the document as its scribe. In other 
words, in Javanese inscriptions, the involvement as a scribe often explicitly 
went along with participation as a witness, although admittedly, in Java, the 
roles of scribe and witness seem to have been relevant only for clearance 
of debt, while we have no Javanese document that concerns a debt being 

--- [Page 44] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)208


--- [Page 45] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION209contracted. What is clear, in any case, is that the three nāyaka tuh ān served 
as witnesses (see pp. 198, 205–6), and so one might be led to see prima 
facie an illustration of the theory according to which political leaders and 
administration could guarantee contracts, i.e., give certain insurance of their 
fulfillment, while their presence facilitated the collection of debts (Henley 
and Boomgaard 2009, 6). However, if we again place our document in a 
larger context, we do not find further support for this idea. In an inscription 
issued in Java in 912 CE, concerning the clearance of a debt to a creditor 
apparently residing in the village Wuru Tunggal, we find five residents of 
other villages serving as witnesses:
[That] was the time that Banawi repaid the debt of his/her father 
to his/her master ( mpu guru ) Dhaya. The repayment consisted in 
16 suvarṇa , 10 māṣa , 2 kupaṅ , and 5 hatak. pu  Lati, father of Bayal, 
resident of the village of Wuru Tunggal, tutuganniṅ taṇḍa , together 
with  pu Wijah, father of Bh ūmi, (also) resident of the village of 
Wuru Tunggal, received the gold. The debt of Banawi to the master 
(mpu guru ) Dhaya was cleared ( śuddha ). The witnesses to it were (1) 
saṅ Teguhan, resident of the village of Pilang, vatak  of Panggil Hyang; 
(2) saṅ . . . resident of the village of Walakas, vatak  of Walakas; (3) saṅ 
Bhāskara, resident of the village of Walaing,  vatak  of Walaing; (4)  saṅ 
Pakambangan, resident of the village of Tangga,  vatak  of Hino; (5) 
saṅ Ratirang, resident of the village of Limo, vatak  of Pagar Wsi. The 
document was written by the Lord of Pilang.89 
It appears, therefore, that the clearance of a debt did not necessarily require 
the involvement of a political institution per se  but rather necessitated an 
official act of formulation and its recording in the form of a document.
Political Entities in the Premodern Philippines 
Despite the relative uncertainty about the location of some of the 
toponyms, it is possible to affirm that the document refers to events that 
happened in the Laguna de Bay region. What remains to be understood is the 
sociopolitical context in which the transaction took place and the inscription 
Fig. 6 [facing page]. Map showing the places on Luzon 
related to the findspot and textual contents of the LCI
Source: The authors, with cartographic assistance from Chea Socheat

--- [Page 46] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)210was created. The LCI needs to be seen in the larger frame of the “Asian 
Sea Trade Boom” (Wisseman Christie 1998) or “Early Age of Commerce” 
(Wade 2009) in Southeast Asia (ninth to thirteenth centuries), a period 
when important commercial changes occurred in China, the Indian Ocean, 
and Southeast Asia, leading to the emergence of ports and urban centers in 
the region (Wisseman Christie 1998; Wade 2009). In the Philippines two 
polities started to be mentioned during that period in the Chinese sources, 
namely, Pu-duan ( 蒲端 ), identifiable as Butuan in Mindanao, and Ma-yi  
(麻逸 ), which, according to the secondary literature, was located either in 
Luzon or Mindoro.90
At a period slightly posterior to that of the LCI (960–1087), the trading 
port of Butuan, on the Agusan River in the northeastern quadrant of 
Mindanao, sent three missions to the Song court (Wade 2009, 227, 258), 
which led to Butuan entering the Chinese historical records, next to the 
kingdom of Camp ā, with which the Chinese source affirms that it stood 
in some relation. Indeed, the Song hui-yao ji-gao  (宋會要輯稿 , Draft 
Compilation of the Song Collected Statutes ) mentions that between the 
tenth and the twelfth centuries, Camp ā was connected to San-fo-qi (a term 
referring to one of the manifestations of Śrīvijaya , cf. Jordaan and Colless 
2009, 106–21), Ma-yi, and Butuan (Wade 2009, 242–43). Several Chinese 
texts from the Song (960–1279) and Yuan (1271–1368) dynasties also refer 
to the navigation routes from Camp ā to Butuan via Ma-yi (Scott 1983a, 
1–3). The Song hui-yao ji-gao  finally indicates that Butuan was “under” the 
kingdom of Camp ā, meaning to its south (Wade 1993, 84–85).
There is little doubt that Butuan served as a major port for trade with the 
Southeast Asian mainland during the ninth to the thirteenth centuries. The 
discovery of shipwrecks near the Masao River, in the northeast of Mindanao, 
has brought to light a total of nine large wooden boats of the balanghai  type, 
of which only six are documented,91 and which would have been used for 
long-distance maritime trade (Peralta 1980; Evangelista and Peralta 1991; 
Lacsina 2015). Although there has been quite a bit of confusion previously 
on the dating of these boats (Lacsina 2016, 118–20), the most recent results 
of the accelerator mass spectrometry C-14 analysis of wood samples from 
the boats date the artifacts from the eighth- to ninth-century range (Lacsina 
2015, 129). One element pointing to the regional and even transregional 
importance of Butuan is a rhinoceros-horn seal engraved with the toponym 
Butuan ( butvan ) and generally assumed to have been created to mark the 

--- [Page 47] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION211origin of the foodstuffs traded or offered in tribute (Cembrano 1998; Gallop 
2016, 133–34). Another element is the recently published inscription on 
gold foil (1.85 by 10.05 centimeters) datable to the tenth to the eleventh 
centuries and written in a script very similar to that of the LCI (Orlina 
2012). The inscription has been identified as a mantra dedicated to the 
Buddhist goddess Mah āpratisarā, protectress of travelers at sea, and the gold 
foil would have been worn as an amulet. Unlike the many statuettes found 
in the region,92 interpretable as prestige goods from outside and therefore 
possibly unrelated to local religious practice, the amulet bears the name of a 
local person, Si Angai ( si aṅai ), and seems, therefore, to have been produced 
locally. 
These traces of Buddhist practices in Mindanao could be 
contemporaneous with the reign of a sovereign bearing a partially Indic title. 
The Song hui-yao ji-gao  tells us that in 1011 CE, Śrī Pāda Haji (Xi-li Ba-da 
Xia-zhi, 悉离琶大遐至 ),93 through his envoy Li Yu-xie ( 李于燮 ),94 presented 
a commemorative gold plate, a slave from the “south seas,” and camphor as 
well as cloves at the court of the Chinese emperor. The Butuan embassy was 
treated on this occasion with the same honors as those reserved for Camp ā. 
Interestingly, four years earlier, such honors had been refused despite the 
explicit formulation of a request from the Butuanons (Scott 2000, 66–67). 
Such a change in the protocol might indicate that this polity benefited 
from a change of status at the beginning of the eleventh century, which 
would explain why it received honors that it had previously been denied. 
The nature and possibly the volume of the products brought as tribute 
could account for such a change. Indeed, in the previous mission, Butuan 
had sent red parrots in addition to sea products like tortoise shells (ibid., 
66). Yet, in 1011 CE, the capacity of Butuan to acquire camphor95 from 
Brunei and cloves from the Moluccas supports the idea that this polity was 
better integrated into the interinsular trading network and so might have 
benefited from greater prestige. Between the tenth and thirteenth centuries, 
both Camp ā and Butuan formed major relays in the cloves trade from the 
Moluccas to China (Ptak 1993).
Butuan was said to be farther from China than Ma-yi (Scott 2000, 
66). Ma-yi first appeared in Chinese sources in 982 when traders from that 
country brought valuable goods to Canton (Hirth and Rockhill 1911, 160 
n. 1). Mait was the common name of Mindoro when the Spanish arrived 
(Martínez de Zúñiga 1893, 391, quoted in Donoso 2011, 276 n. 103), and 

--- [Page 48] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)212this island has therefore long been considered the location of Ma-yi (Scott 
2000, 70). However, there is also a growing body of archaeological evidence, 
including ceramics dating from the ninth to thirteenth centuries (Vitales 
2013, 57, 64 –65), in support of the idea that Ma-yi could have referred to a 
place in Luzon, possibly the very same one as that which has given its name 
to Laguna de Bay (Wade 2009, 242 n. 121). Indeed, in some varieties of 
Chinese, the characters transcribed as Ma-yi in Pinyin may have represented 
the Tagalog pronunciation Ba-i (Wade 1993, 84 n. 59; Go 2005, 123).96
Ma-yi is described in some detail in the Zhu-fan zhi (諸蕃志 , An 
Account of Barbarian Nations ),97 which reports on events contemporary to 
this text’s redaction in the first quarter of the thirteenth century, as a country 
located to the north of Borneo where:
Over a thousand families are settled together along both  banks of a 
creek (or, gully 溪). The natives cover themselves with a sheet of cotton 
cloth (披布如被 ), or hide the lower part of the body with a sarong (lit., 
“loin-cloth” 腰布 ). There are bronze images of gods ( 佛), of unknown 
origin, scattered about in the grassy wilderness. (Hirth and Rockhill 
1911, 159)
It was the most important of the places visited by the Chinese on the 
western coast of the Philippines, along the route to Borneo. Other places—
Pu-li-lu (蒲里嚕 ), San-xu  ( 三嶼 ),98 Bai-pu-yan ( 白蒲延 ), Li-jin-dong ( 里金
東), Liu-xin ( 流新 ) and Li-han ( 里漢 )—are said to “belong” to the country 
of Ma-yi, a belongingness that we interpret to imply the existence of close 
ties and certain supervision of trade by Ma-yi.99 Vessels, which anchored 
in front of the designated trading site, visited this port-entrepot.100 Their 
merchandise was brought to secondary centers where Chinese merchants 
did not venture. Once the goods had been presented to local traders, they 
carried them to other islands and came back eight to nine months afterward 
(ibid., 160). This system contrasted with the way trade was undertaken in other 
places like San-xu, where boats did not remain anchored for more than four 
days. A direct administration of those islands by Ma-yi, however, was unlikely 
as the same source clearly mentions that the San-xu were “not connected 
by a common jurisdiction” (ibid., 162). The trade consisted mainly of local 
products like beeswax, cotton, tortoiseshell, pe arls, and betel nuts, as well as 
native textiles (Scott 2000, 72, 74).

--- [Page 49] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION213Besides Ma-yi figuring in the mentioned Chinese sources, it is possibly 
also relevant to take into account the M āyṭ that appears in certain Arab 
sources. It is difficult to say if these names designate the same entity, but we 
are tempted to assume that they do. M āyṭ, which occurs as early as the tenth 
century, has been interpreted as a place somewhere near Sumatra and the 
Malay Peninsula.101 However, the Arab sources do not always point to the same 
location, and later ones localize M āyṭ near China. While Isaac Donoso (2011) 
has proposed an erroneous translation as the cause of the discrepancy between 
sources,102 one should also keep in mind that the authors of the Arabic texts 
only knew M āyṭ through secondary, if not tertiary, accounts by travelers who, 
in the tenth century, did not venture much further than northern Sumatra 
or the Straits of Malacca. This fact may explain certain aspects that seem 
inconsistent or imprecise in the Arabic texts. We tend to think that Ma-yi/M āyṭ 
forms a case similar to that of Zâbaj/Jâba (Java) in Islamicate sources, which 
designate a kingdom loosely located in the vicinity of Sumatra, whose extent 
and possible location vary from source to source (Laffan 2009, 24–29).103 While 
Javanese kings between the eighth and the tenth centuries used the terms 
yavadvīpa  and bhūmi java  to designate their lands (Griffiths 2013, 70), Zâbaj/
Jâba came to refer, in foreign accounts, to places in Java and Sumatra. This 
phenomenon can be explained with reference not only to the compilation 
of secondhand sources by Arabic and Persian authors but also to the fact that 
a toponym may have been used to designate settlements or ports belonging 
to the sphere of influence of a place originally designated by it. This second 
explanation is the hypothesis we would like to propose for Ma-yi. The Zhu-fan 
zhi repeatedly mentions settlements or islands that “belonged” to Ma-yi in 
the thirteenth century, and so it seems imaginable that the name Ma-yi/M āyṭ 
originally designated a place around Laguna de Bay and subsequently came 
to simultaneously designate a connected settlement on the island of Mindoro, 
which retained the name Mait after the historical center of Ma-yi/M āyṭ had 
ceased to exist as a political entity. 
This kind of connection may be interpreted using theoretical models 
from the literature on state formation in Southeast Asia.104 Although 
imperfect and highly schematic, such models are useful to infer what may 
have been the sociopolitical organization of the settlements mentioned in 
the LCI. We may not be too far from historical reality if we imagine that 
Tundun , which does not appear in the Chinese sources as a trading center , 
was an outpost of Ma-yi/M āyṭ under the supervision of an army commander 

--- [Page 50] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)214(senāpati ). Tundun may have had a function of supervision over external 
trade and exercised some sort of control over several other settlements (e.g., 
Pailah, Binwangan, Puliran Kasumuran), some of which may have been 
trading stations, where persons charged with collecting revenue needed 
to come together for a legal transaction to be validated. A system of ritual 
suzerainty, involving an official in charge of the cult of one or more deified 
ancestors, may have contributed to the noncoercive influence of certain 
settlements. Saying any more than this would be extrapolating too much 
from the very limited sources at our disposal. 
Luzon, Java, and the “Malay World”
In this study, we have contextualized the LCI within the cultural and 
economic world of maritime Southeast Asia using predominantly Malay 
and Javanese materials as a comparative frame, which has allowed us to 
understand better the meaning of the words used in the inscription and 
propose a new interpretation of some parts. Acknowledging the relevance of 
Malay and Javanese cultural and linguistic influence on Luzon around 900 
makes it possible and necessary to conceive of a “Malay World” centuries 
before the special role in Southeast Asia of Malay, as a language, drew the 
attention of the first European visitors:
The first European visitors to the Malay World had much to say about 
its language ecology. As early as the sixteenth century, these authors 
. . . noted three important facts. First, they observed that there was 
an enormous diversity of languages, often with little or no mutual 
understanding. Second, in that forest of language diversity, Malay 
was the single, most widespread language of Southeast Asia, where it 
served as a contact language among speakers of different languages. 
Third, moreover, Malay was not simply the language of trade, a pidgin 
language, but it was also the language of diplomacy, religion, and 
learning; Malay was a written language . (Collins 2008, 160, emphasis 
added)
It is in the epigraphic record of Śrīvijaya , centered in seventh-century 
South Sumatra, that Malay became the first vernacular language of maritime 
Southeast Asia to emerge into the domain of literacy, a process evidently 
stimulated by the meeting of Śrīvijaya  with the “Sanskrit Cosmopolis” 
(Pollock 1996, 2006). Once it had become a written language, Malay then 

--- [Page 51] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION215seems to have played a key role in propelling other Austronesian languages 
to enter the written record. In this connection it bears reminding that 
the earliest inscriptions of Central Java written in a language other than 
Sanskrit— the inscriptions of Sojomerto (possibly dating to the late seventh 
century) and Mañju śrīgr̥ha (792 CE) (cf. fig. 3 )—were written in OM and 
not in the vernacular OJ, thus revealing how early the Malay language 
had become a translocal and transethnic means of communication or, 
in the expression coined by Sheldon Pollock (1998), a “cosmopolitan 
vernacular.”105
These facts are very little, if ever, taken into consideration in the 
idea of a “Malay World,” which is part and parcel of the development of 
Malay studies in Malaya and later Malaysia. The interest of the first British 
administrators in Malay language and culture led in the nineteenth century 
to a flourishing of mainly philological studies, almost exclusively related to 
the Malay Peninsula and Borneo. The establishment of the Department 
of Malay Studies at the University of Malaya in 1970, which became the 
Institute of the Malay World and Civilization (Institut Alam dan Tamadun 
Melayu, ATMA) in 1993, has continued to focus the conception of a “Malay 
World” on the territory of a very recently conceived nation-state that is not 
historically its center (Shamsul A. B. 2003, 109–13). In other contexts, 
scholars have entertained variant notions of a “Malay World,” generally 
with a larger geographical scope but not more historically nuanced than the 
one that has taken hold in Malaysia. Thus, the French geographer Charles 
Robequain (1946, [i]) saw an “undisputable unity” in what he named the 
“Malay world,” formed by several “colonized countries” that stretched from 
the Malay Peninsula to the Philippines; and the American linguist James T. 
Collins (2008, 159) offered a definition in terms of spoken languages:
The Malay World can be described, on geographic and linguistic 
grounds, as those parts of Southeast Asia where the Malay language is 
spoken, whether as a first or second language. This simple description 
encompasses many parts of Southeast Asia. In Indonesia, Malaysia, 
Brunei, Singapore, and Thailand, Malay is spoken as a home language; 
while, in the Philippines, Cambodia, and Vietnam, Malay is spoken by 
communities as a second or third language.  
Although we recognize the pertinence and convenience of underlining 
the cultural and linguistic features shared over a vast swathe of maritime 

--- [Page 52] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)216Southeast Asia, it seems to us that the analysis of a phenomenon as complex 
as the formation and transformation of a “Malay World” must be built on an 
approach that is more sensitive to the historical and cultural dynamics of its 
constituent periods and regions.
The OM inscriptions that we have from across maritime Southeast 
Asia reflect the social and economic contexts in which the use of the Malay 
language evolved. In the case of the LCI, the use of Malay as documentary 
language reveals that the parties involved were part of a wider cultural world 
characterized by a shared legal and documentary terminology (with lexical 
items from Sanskrit, Javanese, and Malay), shared documentary and cultural 
practices (e.g., the engraving of a legal text on a copperplate, debt bondage), 
and the variety of regional manifestations of these shared elements. While 
we assert that Old Tagalog has not made a significant contribution, lexical 
or otherwise, to the language of the inscription, this assertion does not in 
any way imply a slight of Tagalog culture and its specificity. As we have 
noted several times in this study, the LCI is rich in unique combinations 
or forms of Sanskrit, Malay, and Javanese terms, revealing how they were 
locally appropriated and adapted. By the turn of the tenth century, Old 
Tagalog had probably not yet begun to be written any more than Javanese 
in Java by the turn of the ninth century. This is why the debt clearance was 
not recorded in the language spoken in Laguna at the time. The fact that 
it was written in Malay seems to indicate that this language was, despite 
the scarcity of surviving documents, the most widely used documentary 
language in maritime Southeast Asia at the time. In other words, the use of 
Malay in tenth-century Luzon should be interpreted as a practice related to a 
cosmopolitan context and does not imply migration or political dominance 
from a part of Southeast Asia where Malay was the local spoken language 
any more than the use of Malay in ninth-century Java.
While we have thus offered an explanation for the use of OM, we still 
need to explain the major importance of Javanese linguistic and cultural 
elements in the LCI. As we have shown, the inscription contains numerous 
OJ loanwords and participates in many ways in a clearly discernible Javanese 
documentary culture. Such elements have not failed to inspire more or 
less strongly Java-centric interpretations. Notably, the Indonesian (and 
Javanese) scholar Kusen (1991, 7) formulated the hypothesis of Javanese 
settlers, whereas Wisseman Christie ( 2001, 49) saw the inscription as proof 
of the influence of the Javanese kingdom of Mataram in Luzon, following 

--- [Page 53] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION217increased trading opportunities and an expansion of their regional trading 
network.
What those Javanese elements in an OM document from Luzon mean 
is certainly not that the protagonists involved in the debt clearance were 
Javanese or of Javanese descent, any more than the use of Sanskrit in early 
Southeast Asia implies the migrations and political domination from India 
that now-discredited theories of “Indianization” imagined. Instead, we see 
Javanese language and documentary practice as constituent elements of 
the cosmopolitan Malay culture that reached the people of the Laguna 
region. There are potential analogies with the situation, one millennium 
later, at the court of Palembang in Malay-speaking South Sumatra, which 
used both Javanese (in Javanese script) and Malay (in Jawi script) as written 
languages. It issued charters predominantly in Javanese.106 Its royal library 
had a collection of eighteenth-century manuscripts written in Malay and 
Arabic as well as a localized form of Javanese. Among the documents in 
Javanese, besides wayang and Panji stories, which originated from Java, the 
library contained Javanese translations of Malay works such as a local legal 
digest ( Undang-Undang Palembang ) clearly addressed to people living in 
surrounding districts and villages in Sumatra, mentioning their obligations 
to the court (Drewes 1977, 188–244). What the LCI suggests is that the 
meeting of Malay and Javanese documentary and literary cultures observed 
in eighteenth-century Palembang had started many centuries earlier and was 
not limited to the immediate vicinity of Java. 
As we have emphasized, it was in Sumatra, under the kingdom of 
Śrīvijaya , that OM first emerged into the historical record, in the second 
half of the seventh century, at a time when the few inscriptions we have in 
Java were exclusively written in Sanskrit and the first word of OJ had yet 
to be written. As far as one can tell from physical remains and epigraphic 
evidence, by the beginning of the ninth century, the kingdom of Mataram, 
whose court was situated in Central Java, had overtaken Śrīvijaya  as the 
most powerful political and cultural force in maritime Southeast Asia. 
However, it is only in the course of the ninth century that OJ became its 
favored language of written expression. The nature of the political relations 
between Java and Sumatra in the period leading up to Mataram’s hegemony 
is much debated (cf. Jordaan and Colless 2009) but does not concern us 
here because there is ample evidence to show that Java had started to exert 
influence far beyond its boundaries well before the time of our inscription 

--- [Page 54] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)218(Griffiths 2013). In Java itself, as already mentioned, several OM inscriptions 
have been found, dating between the late seventh and early ninth centuries. 
The brief efflorescence of epigraphic production using OM seems to have 
died out as soon as production in OJ took off. It therefore stands to reason 
that the very idea of using a vernacular language (as opposed to Sanskrit) for 
epigraphic expression was transmitted to Java from Sumatra. It is this process 
of integration of the Javanese-speaking parts of Java into the “Malay World” 
that we subsequently see reproduced by the integration of the Tagalog-
speaking parts of Luzon, as evidenced by the LCI.107
That there is no such thing as a unique Malay identity is generally 
admitted.108 Likewise recognized is the increasing number of Javanese 
loanwords adopted into Malay from its early modern written varieties to 
contemporary Indonesian (Soepomo Poedjosoedarmo 1982). However, 
attempts to study how Javanese and Malay cultural spheres were articulated 
and the extent to which they overlapped in premodern and early modern 
Southeast Asia are still too rare in the scholarly literature. Some relevant 
observations are found in studies on hikayat  or other forms of narration 
in CM.109 Even more relevant in our context are the contemporary 
regional variations of more or less heavily “Javanized” Malay, such as 
those of Banjarmasin or Palembang, which are acknowledged but remain 
understudied in their historical manifestation. The LCI, also written in a 
Malay dialect that had undergone much influence from Javanese, forms 
a unique example of the overlapping of the Malayophone and Javanese-
speaking cultural worlds outside of the core Malay- or Javanese-speaking 
islands. As such, it is a crucial document for studying the cosmopolitan 
history of the Malay language and for conceiving a nuanced notion of a 
“Malay World” that is neither purely a matter of spoken language nor of 
ethnoreligious affiliation.
Abbreviations Used
CM Classical Malay
LCI Laguna Copperplate Inscription
OJ Old Javanese
OJED  Old Javanese–English Dictionary 
OM Old Malay
S/IM  Standard/Indonesian Malay

--- [Page 55] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION219Notes
This article was originally conceived as a contribution to a collective project launched by 
Nicole CuUnjieng Aboitiz and Anthony D. Medrano for a collection of papers under the title 
“Returning to the Region: Philippine History and the Contingencies of Southeast Asia.” For a 
variety of reasons, we were unable to pursue publication as part of that volume, but we wish to 
thank the mentioned colleagues, as well as all other scholars involved, for the inspiration we 
have received from the collective endeavor to rethink Philippine history from a macro-regional 
perspective. We also gratefully acknowledge various forms of assistance received in the course of 
our research for and writing of this article from many colleagues, among whom we are pleased to 
mention K. Alexander Adelaar, Henri Chambert-Loir, Chea Socheat, Ramon Guillermo, Tom 
Hoogervorst, Timothy Lubin, Pierre-Yves Manguin, Roderick Orlina, Wayan Jarrah Sastrawan, 
Jaime Tiongson, Emil Robles, Adrian Vickers, Timothy Vitales, and Geoff Wade. Arlo Griffiths’s 
research for this article, as well as its publication in Open Access, has been made possible by 
the project DHARMA or “The Domestication of ‘Hindu’ Asceticism and the Religious Making 
of South and Southeast Asia,” funded from 2019 to 2025 by the European Research Council 
(ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant 
agreement no. 809994). On the proje ct, see https://dharma.hypoth eses.org.
1  Malcolm Ross (1996) showed that the currently more generally accepted term Malayo-Polynesian 
was already in use in Humboldt’s time. See also Salazar 1998, 114.  The priest and chronicler 
Joaquín Martínez de Zúñiga noted that the indios  (natives) spoke different idioms that resembled 
each other and, therefore, must have come from a common source, like Latin for Spanish, French, 
and Italian. Martínez de Zuñiga thus postulated a language family descending from a common 
ancestor (the Malayo-Polynesian languages) in  the eighteenth century, one century before 
linguists defined it (ibid., 113).
2  The North American administrators of the archipelago adopted this concept when they composed 
the first school textbooks on the history of the Philippines. David Barrows, whose work History 
of the Philippines  (1925) was republished three times in 1905, 1911, and 1924, saw the Malays 
as the common denominator of all the tribes of the archipelago, except the Negritos. The Malays 
were presented as having colonized the Philippines and pushed back the previous inhabitants into 
the mountains. See, e.g., Jernegan 1904, 3.
3  This specimen is the Munduan inscription. For its text, see Nakada 1986, and for a photograph, see 
Griffiths 2014a, 54.
4  On copperplate documents from India, see Francis 2018, in which quite a few examples are 
illustrated.
5  On the names “Old Javanese” and “Kawi,” and more generally on Indic writing systems, see the 
section “Scripts, Languages, and Epigraphic Sources.”
6  For more information on OJ, see the section “Scripts, Languages, and Epigraphic Sources.” In some 
rare copperplates from Java, there are minor portions in Sanskrit. Some of the oldest specimens 
from Bali are in Old Balinese, but this local language soon got pushed out of use by the more 
cosmopolitan language of Java. See Damais 1959 for a useful overview of material for the study of 
Balinese epigraphy and the history of research in this field up to 1959. No major progress has been 
made in the field over the last half century.

--- [Page 56] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)2207  See Lubin 2015, 251–52. For an overview of the Javanese examples, see Boechari 1975, included 
as ch. 15 in Boechari 2012. For more on viśuddhapatra , see the subsection “The Nature of the 
Document.”
8  Apparently, no formal scholarly obituary was published after his death, so we refer to the Dutch 
Wikipedia  (2022) page, which cites two Philippine newspaper articles (Sta. Maria 2009; Virola 
2016), to which we may add an online magazine article (Gonzalez 2016). 
9  On several occasions, Postma expressed thanks to the Dutch specialist of Indonesian epigraphy, J. 
G. de Casparis, who had advised him about the interpretation of the LCI in the light of his expertise 
in OM, OJ, and Sanskrit epigraphy. In this connection, we wish to mention here a trace of the two 
scholars’ correspondence that is preserved in the form of a letter kept in the archives of the former 
Kern Institute at Leiden University Library, the Netherlands.
10  Without citing the Indonesian scholar in the printed version of his own conference paper, Postma 
(1991a,  165 ) mentioned part of Kusen’s interpretation as possible: “The LCI might therefore have 
been issued by recognized authorities outside the Philippines (e.g., in Java) who had personal or 
national interests there. Perhaps important person(s) in the Philippines with a substantial debt 
in gold had appealed to these foreign authorities for help in the provision of a debt acquittal 
document, officially sanctioned, under certain conditions not mentioned in the LCI itself.” In 
subsequent publications, Postma abandoned this idea, which we find far-fetched and unnecessary 
since, as we show in this article, there is no need to assume it has any direct involvement of other 
than local agents.
11  Examples of these fake documents are the Code of Kalantiaw and the Maragtas, published in 1917 
and 1938, respectively. For a full account regarding the forgery of these fake old manuscripts 
based on existing oral accounts, see Scott 2000, 91–135.
12  Postma (1992a, 187 n. 1) himself admitted that his translation is “[t]o be considered as preliminary, 
pending further research.”
13  See Salomon (1998, 19–30) on the problem of the origin of Brahmi script and on Indic script 
outside of India (ibid., 150–60).
14  Neither of the terms “Old Javanese” and “Kawi” is satisfactory, but the latter has some 
advantages over the former. See de Casparis 1975, 29. For illustrated general presentations of the 
development of Indic writing in Southeast Asia and Kawi script in Indonesia, see Hunter 1996 and 
Griffiths 2014a.
15  We rely here on some of the most recent iterations in the debate about the subgrouping of 
Austronesian languages as represented by Smith 2017. Current linguistic scholarship thus 
dispenses with the Western Malayo-Polynesian group that still underlies the classification 
proposed by Adelaar (2005, 9–10, 16–20).
16  See Wolff 1976, whose conclusions were summarized by Adelaar (1994a, 62): “Wolff points out 
that, in order for it to have had such a heavy impact on almost every part of Tagalog vocabulary, 
Malay must have been more than an important trade language. It must have been a prestige 
language which was known by a considerable portion of the Tagalog speech community. . . . Wolff 
concludes that Tagalog speakers at some point had apparently become familiar enough with 
Malay to be able to use the language in a creative way in order to express certain complex or 
unusual concepts. Wolff points to comparable tendencies, later on, to build neologisms on the 
basis of Spanish and English loanwords.”

--- [Page 57] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION22117  Unfortunately, despite the recent publication of some new evidence for writing in the Philippines 
during the centuries between the LCI and the earliest manuscripts using the localized Indic 
scripts called baybayin  (Orlina 2012), there is still not anywhere near enough to piece together a 
continuous history of writing from the tenth through fifteenth centuries. As stated, the LCI is not 
written in a Philippine language. It is theoretically possible that the same Kawi script used in it 
was also deployed in contemporary documents to transcribe vernacular languages, but we do not 
believe it is likely (see the section “Luzon, Java, and the ‘Malay World’”). Whether or not it was used 
to transcribe vernacular languages already by the time of the LCI, it is possible that the Kawi script 
forms the direct ancestor of the baybayin  scripts, just as it is possible that the baybayin  scripts 
are derived from another historical antecedent. The issue of the origin of the baybayin  scripts is 
beyond the scope of this article, but we may note that the main reason why the solid work of Juan 
R. Francisco (1973) does not take the former scenario into account is simply because the LCI was 
not yet known at his time. By contrast, the reason why the work of Christopher Miller (2010) does 
not stop to consider such a scenario is evidently the author’s general unawareness of the full 
historical picture and its time-depth into the first millennium CE, including ignorance of the LCI.
18  We repeat here almost verbatim the definition one of us has proposed in a recent publication 
(Griffiths 2018, 275–76). For the most recent addition to the corpus of OM inscriptions, see Griffiths 
2020b. The date 1500 is not meant to suggest that no Malay had been written in Jawi script before 
that date. See also note 19.
19  Jawi is the name given to the Arabic script adapted to the Malay language with five additional 
consonants ( ڤ  p,  چ c, ‎ݢ g,  ڠng, and ڽ ny). The resulting Malay alphabet has also been used to 
render other Austronesian languages and is called Pégon when it is used for Javanese and Sérang 
for Bugis/Makassar (Gallop 2015, 14). While Indic script seems to have predominated for writing 
Malay through the end of the fifteenth century, it has to be noted that Jawi script started to be used 
at least from the thirteenth century onward, both for writing inscriptions (notably the Trengganu 
Stone, see Paterson [1924], Syed Muhammad Naguib Al-Attas [1970], Omar bin Awang [1980]) 
and to compose literary works such as the Hikayat Muhammad Hanafiah  (Brakel 1975).
20  See, for example, the Pasar Malay letters written in Banten, dated 1619 and published by M. C. 
Ricklefs (1976), or the surat ulu  manuscripts from Sumatra mentioned in note 22.
21  It has recently been demonstrated (Kozok 2015) that a paper manuscript from Tanjung Tanah in the 
Kerinci area of highland Sumatra is likely to date to the fourteenth century, and both its language 
and script agree with what we see in inscriptions of this period. As such, there is every reason to 
classify the language of this manuscript as OM and believe that there was once a broad tradition 
of manuscripts written in this language, among which at least this one has been preserved into the 
present. On this issue, see also the book review by Griffiths (2010).
22  Besides the exceptional Pasar Malay letters cited earlier (note 20), the term “marginal” that we 
use here, not without hesitation, is intended to cover a variety of Malay writing traditions found in 
the highlands of the island of Sumatra. Against the widespread idea that “there was no tradition 
in the Malay world of writing on palm leaf or similar materials before the arrival of Islam,” Kozok 
(2015, 55–56) has rightly opposed that it is “meaningful only if one accepts the premise that the 
Malay language manuscripts in the indigenous surat ulu  scripts of southern Sumatra (Kerinci, 
Bengkulu, Pasemah, Ogan, Komering, Serawai, and Lampung) do not constitute Malay writing.” All 
of these highland Malay writing traditions make use of varieties of Indic script, in place of or beside 

--- [Page 58] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)222Arabic-based Jawi script, but the few samples of the language we have seen fall outside of our 
definition of OM because Arabic loanwords seem not to be uncommon.
23  Mahdi (2005, 182) merely states that “[t]he language of Malay inscriptions of the subsequent 
period, though also preceding Classical Malay (CM), the language of Malay classical literature, 
is usually not considered OM” and on this point refers to an Indonesian-language publication that 
itself does not furnish any argument for why Malay documents, that date from the tenth century 
onward but cannot be labeled CM, should not be called OM. The same limitation of the scope of 
the designation OM is found, still without any justification but with a number of implications for 
the reliability of the historical and linguistic analysis, in Mahdi’s contributions in Kozok 2015 on the 
language of the manuscript referred to in note 21. For us, the language of this manuscript falls 
squarely under the definition of OM.
24  This claim was supported with reference to the expression sana tatkāla  “at that time” and variants 
such as inan tatkāla  and tatkala itu , found in inscriptions including the LCI. To those examples can 
now be added the two occurrences of divasenan  = divasa inan  at the beginning and end of the 
Tanjung Tanah manuscript, unrecognized in Kozok 2015.
25  Formerly referred to as Ejaan yang Disempurnakan (Vikør 1988), the system was renamed by 
ministerial decision in 2016. See Tim Pengembang Pedoman Bahasa Indonesia 2016.
26  Among other indigenous names for such vowel killers, we may cite tanda bunuh  in Sumatran 
varieties of Malay (Kozok 2015, 131) and pangolat  in Batak. This important historical feature 
of Indic script appears to have left no trace in the baybayin  writing systems recorded after the 
Spanish arrived in the Philippines (Francisco 1973, 68). If the script form seen in the LCI may be 
considered the ancestor of later indigenous scripts (see note 17), then it must be assumed that the 
vowel killer was lost in the course of palaeographic development of Indic scripts in the Philippines 
over the centuries between the LCI and the earliest preserved baybayin  manuscripts. As Ramon 
Guillermo and Tom Hoogervorst have pointed out to us, the absence of a vowel killer is a feature 
that the baybayin  systems share with the Bugis-Makassar lontaraq  script, suggesting their 
descendance from a common source. However, this common ancestor may have been younger 
than the script form seen in our inscription.
27  The words barjā daṁ  seem to be in need of correction to barjādi daṁ . If so, we are dealing with a 
case of scribal omission of the syllable di. Another conceivable correction would be barṅāraṁ daṁ , 
but it seems slightly less likely given the predominant use of barjādi in this text. Finally, it is 
possible that the intended text was tuṇḍun · daṁ hvan nāyaka tuhān · pailaḥ barjādi jayadeva , 
with barjādi  in front of the name Jayadeva, as we see the word placed before the names Ganasakti 
and Bisruta in lines 6 and 7.
28  It is conceivable to read dṅan·daṁ  as one word and analyze dṅan-da-ṅ , analogous to dṅan·ña  in 
line 2. Cf. the pair sādāña/sādānda  in lines 7 and 8.
29  Postma (1991a, 170; 1992a, 187 n. 5) has alluded to an alternative reading hutaṁ velānda , 
which we can confidently exclude on the basis of one of our own photos, as these clearly show 
hutaṁda valānda . For our part, we feel tempted to emend vapānda , i.e., vapā  (father) plus 
pronominal suffix -nda . Cf.  santanū namāṇḍa bāpaṇḍa , "his father’s name was Santanū," in the 
Sojomerto inscription from Central Java. The akṣaras lā  and pā mirror each other in the script 
used in the LCI.
30 Where we read sādānda , Postma read sādānya . In support of our reading, we may refer to the 
shapes of subscript d and y in valānda  in line 5, syāt· syāpantāha  in line 10, kamudyan · in line 10.

--- [Page 59] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION22331  Where we read sānak · with a long ā in the first syllable, Postma read sanak .
32  Where we read varjādi  with initial v, Postma read barjādi .
33  Where we read diparhulun ·, Postma read diparhulon . Although the reading with o is repeated 
in all of Postma’s (1991a, 1991b, 1992a, 1992b) writings on the LCI, it must have originated in a 
simple typing error that was made in Postma’s initial typed transcription and was subsequently 
never corrected.
34  Postma transcribed the word vluṁ  as wlung . See the entry vluṅ  in our lexicon.
35  Postma translated the words from dayaṁ  to Anak·da daṁ hvan namvran  as follows: “Lady 
Angkatan together with her relative, Bukah by name, the child of His Honor Namwran.” This 
translation leaves unclear the relation the woman had with Namwran. We initially attempted to 
address this problem by a translation still directly influenced by Postma’s attempt, which would 
read: “Lady ( dayaṅ ) Angkatan together with her relative ( sa-anak ) called Bukah, (both of them) 
children of daṅ hvan  Namwran.” However, in the end, it seems to us that dayaṅ aṅkatan  is 
unlikely to be a proper name, which opens up the possibility of taking Bukah as the name of the 
female protagonist. The term sa-anak  used here is more general than expected. However, the 
more concrete meaning that is presumably implied here is clarified further on in the text. See this 
article’s lexicon for all the relevant vocabulary items and our discussion of the socioeconomic 
aspects in the section “Debtor and Debt Inheritance” and the subsection “Debtor, Inheritance, and 
the Settlement of Debt.”
36  See the entries daṅ hvan  and nāyaka tuhān  in this article’s lexicon.
37  Or “ . . . at Tundun, daṅ hvan nāyaka tuhān  of Pailah with the title Jayadeva” if the final suggestion 
in note 27 is accepted.
38  An alternate to “military debt” could be “of her/their father’s debt,” if we adopt our emendation 
hutaṁda vapānda , as suggested in note 29.
39  The text leaves unclear exactly which event was witnessed by the three persons listed in lines 5–7 
after di hadapan , whether the drafting of the original debt contract, the awarding of the present 
clearance document, or both, and an equally valid alternative translation can be proposed that 
suggests a different s cenario: 
. . . was awarded a debt clearance document by the official . . . with the title  
. . . Jayadeva—regarding the specifics of daṅ hvan  Namwran, with the scribe, being 
cleared: what was resolved was his military debt (amounting to) 1 kāṭi and 8 suvar ṇa—
in front of (the following witnesses): . . .
  The comparison with contemporary Javanese debt-clearance documents indeed 
suggests that the witnesses were present at the awarding of the clearance document, and thus 
that di hadapan  would be the OM counterpart of the words tatra sākṣ ī that typically introduced 
witness lists in OJ epigraphy. However, this would mean that two dignitaries held the position of 
daṅ hvan nāyaka tuhān  of Pailah at the same time. We do not know whether such an implication 
is problematic, but the translation we have retained here is based on the assumption that it is. See 
also our discussion in the section “Historical Interpretations,” specifically the subsection “Other 
Actors and Associated Toponyms.”
40  On the toponym(s) Puliran Kasumuran and for a speculative explanation of why the title of the first 
daṅ hvan nāyaka tuhān  remains unmentioned, see the subsection “Other Actors and Associated 
Toponyms.”

--- [Page 60] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)22441  In order to bring out the apparent ambiguity of this complex sentence, where the 
agent noun phrase ( Uliḥ saṁ pamgat · devata varjādi saṁ pamgat · mḍaṁ ) stands 
far removed from the predicate śuddha , while the grammatical subject is stated twice 
(sādānda sānak · kaparāvis · and sādāña Anak· cucu daṁ hvan namvran · . . . ya kaparāvis ·) and 
the causal noun phrase is also presented in two parts ( dari . . . ya makāña . . . ), we translate 
it following the original order as closely as possible. The result is admittedly very disjointed in 
English, but we are not sure the original OM text, as disjointed as it may seem to us, would have 
appeared disjointed or even ambiguous to readers at the time. The reader of our translation may 
mentally move the phrase “by the deity official . . . Mdang” to the very end of the sentence, where 
it will sound more like the agent of “were cleared.”
42  Similar sentences are found in several OJ legal documents, among which we may cite: “As for 
the aim of this victory document ( jayapatra ), it is that [even] into the future’s future there should 
no more be any one to discuss it!” (Guntur, 907 CE); “Those are the ones who gave the victory 
document, in order that there be no one who shall say it [again] into the future’s future. For the 
[. . .] is already clear” (Wurudu Kidul, 922 CE); and “May the kings take good notice, so that the holy 
freehold shall not be discussed again [even] into the future’s future!” (Palebuhan, 927 CE). Such 
sentences tend to stand near the end of the document, suggesting that only a small part of our 
original śuddhapātra  has been lost with the loss of the second plate (see p. 170).
43  See e.g., Adelaar (1994a, 64): “. . . loanwords also show that Malay was a prestige language in 
precolonial times. It had a tremendous cultural impact on speakers of Malagasy and Tagalog, and 
was not just a simplified lingua franca used for basic communication in trade and the like. In this 
context the discovery a few years ago of an Old Malay copper inscription from the tenth century 
AD in the vicinity of Manila is worth mentioning. Its language is very close to that of the Old Malay 
inscriptions of South Sumatra. This inscription is another very important piece of evidence in the 
study of the earliest history of Malay.”
44  For further examples of vowel sandhi  in OM, see Griffiths 2020b, 57, under tatkāletu .
45  According to De Casparis (1950, 113, n. 6, our translation from the scholar’s Dutch, with silent 
correction of two errors): “although the Indian anusvāra  is used already in the earliest inscriptions 
in an Indonesian language in the function of the guttural nasal, one sporadically finds the true 
anusvāra -function (as result of sandhi for m, followed by a consonant) in older inscriptions. 
Consequently, it is possible to find immediately juxtaposed (in the Talang Tuwo inscription, line 2) 
yaṁ  (phonetically yang ) and nitānaṁ  (phonetically nitānam ). For this reason, Cœdès deemed the 
transcription with ng that is conventionally used for Indonesian languages misleading” (cf. Cœdès 
1930, 31). See also Vikør 1988, 76.
46  We may record here our hunch that the similarity of jādi with S/IM jati (“real, genuine,” also in 
the expression jati diri  “identity”) may not be insignificant. Although Richard James Wilkinson’s 
(1959) dictionary connects Malay jati with Arabic zat, it is now generally agreed (Jones et al. 2007, 
133) that this word jati is from Sanskrit jāti, which means precisely “birth, origin,” thus furnishing 
not only similarity in sound and meaning to the inherited Malay word jadi but also a potential 
connection with concepts like name and identity. In a forthcoming paper entitled “Lexical influence 
from South Asia,” Tom Hoogervorst (n.d.) goes so far as to suggest that Malay jadi and cognates 
in other Austronesian languages all descend from an early borrowing into Malay from a Middle 
Indo-Aryan form jādi itself descending from Sanskrit jāti. The borrowing would have taken place 
early enough for the word to have subsequently undergone the wholesale sound-change /j/ > /d/ 
that has taken place in Javanese, where the cognate is dadi .

--- [Page 61] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION22547  The items are, in chronological order, 1° Hujung or Dinoyo II (772 Śaka ), line 2 
tatkāla ḍaṅ hvan kalāta saṅ hivil ri hujuṅ manusuk s īma vatak hiliran ri ḍaṅ hyaṅ guru  
and line 8 tatkāla ḍaṅ hvan al ī – – n ri hujuṅ mavaih savah; 2° Kaladi  (831 Śaka ), line 7v6 
hulun haji, manambaṅi, saṅka, dhura, pamaṇ īkan, ḍaṅ huan, huñjamān ; Gilikan (ca. 845 Śaka ), 
final plate rāma i pamratan gusti si ḍaṅ huan ramani ḍaluṅ ; 4°–6° finally, in Hering (856 Śaka ) line 
d28, in Anjuk Ladang (859 Śaka ), line A38, and in Muncang (866 Śaka ), B14–15, we find nearly identical 
versions of the phrase citralekha saṅ lumku ḍaṅ hvan parujar i hino kaṇḍamuhi ḍaṅ acāryya basu . 
All items except 2° have a known provenance in East Java.
48  The latter gloss is perhaps not to be taken too literally, at least not as implying all that prostitution 
might imply in the modern world. Meanings like “concubine, female servant” might also have to be 
taken into account.
49  The form amupuhāṅrahana  (for amu ṁpuha ṅrahana  on the original) is emended based on 
parallels in other inscriptions.
50  This passage is cited here based on the edition included in Boechari 2012, 501–3, but with an 
emendation aṅrabvaṇa  based on the reading arabvaṇa  that we find in an unpublished typescript 
by the same author. We tentatively interpret this form derived from the base rob/rwab  (“high tide, 
high water; to be at the flood, be at high tide, overflowing”) as meaning “to wipe clean.”
51  On the various categories of marginalized people listed in these passages ( jǝṅgi, pujut, bule, vu ṅkuk), 
see Jákl 2017.
52  See Souza and Turley (2015, 87, 373) for the original text in Spanish and the translation. In his 
review of Souza and Turley’s work, Pierre-Yves Manguin (2017, 539) has pointed out that “les 
éditeurs , dans leurs gloses diverses, ne se sont pas aperçu qu’il s’agissait là des termes d’origine 
sanskrite bhaṭāra  (« Seigneur ») et devatā  (« divinité » )” (the editors, in their various glosses, 
have failed to recognize that the terms in question originate in Sanskrit bhaṭāra  [lord] and devatā  
[deity]).
53  The most explicit argument for this interpretation of the epigraphic occurrences of devata  was 
made in Dutch by W. F. Stutterheim (1925, 211–12) and has since become generally accepted 
in the study of ancient Java so that authors writing in English generally do not give an elaborate 
argument. Among the relevant English-language publications, we may mention Boechari 1976, 19; 
2012, 172–73, n. 22; Naerssen 1977, 73; Casparis 1991, 35 (“ Dewatā kaki , literally: grandfather-
divinity, appears to denote a deified ancestor”).
54  Kulke 1993 is an exception. See especially ibid., 164, n. 20: “Although we have no positive evidence 
about Śrīvijaya’s  devatā , it [is] quite likely that they, too, were deified ancestors of the datu  of 
Śrīvijaya .”
55  In a personal communication in 2020, Tom Hoogervorst informed us “that the -an suffix in 
gerang-an  is absent in many Malay varieties: Kutai Malay garang , Minangkabau garan , Makassar 
Malay garang , Banjar Malay garang , etc.” and that “It’s still a question word in all these varieties, 
which some older dictionaries beautifully translate as ‘ye think’ or ‘prithee.’”
56  In a personal communication in 2020, K. Alexander Adelaar suggested that the b in sumber  can be 
explained “phonotactically”: an epenthetic stop appears in Malay loan vocabulary after a stressed 
syllable ending in nasal when an unstressed syllable ending in (or beginning with) l or r follows. In 
Adelaar 1988, 65, several examples are furnished, among which are ember  (from Dutch emmer ), 
jendela  (from Portuguese janela ), inggeris  (from Portuguese ingles , colloquial ingres ), jenderal  
(from English general).

--- [Page 62] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)22657  See Griffiths (2015, 20, 24) for an example in a sixth-century inscription from Bengal.
58  See the opening line of the charter Wanua Tengah III: vuara sira rahya ṅta i hāra ṅarannira ari 
rahya ṅta ri m ḍaṅ," There once was a prince of Hara, younger brother of the prince of Mḍaṅ ." For 
the text of this inscription, discovered in the 1980s, see Boechari 2012, 484–91.
59  The spelling distinction between tuan  (master) and tuhan  (God) in contemporary forms of Malay 
is not historical.
60  Although Adelaar (1992, 397) has proposed to analyze the expression hulun-tuhāṅku , found 
several times in the Sabokingking inscription, as consisting in hulun-tuha-ṅku , and this view has 
since been accepted by other scholars (notably Mahdi [2005, 192]), we find De Casparis’s (1956, 
26) original interpretation as hulun-tuhān-ku  more persuasive.
61  See De Casparis 1956, 227: “The term tuhān  frequently occurs in Old Javanese inscriptions. It 
is never applied to high dignitaries, although it is also clear that the people denoted by tuhān  
are not ‘commoners’ either. . . . The most important hint as to the meaning of nāyaka  in Old 
Javanese might be the fact that the nāyakas  are usually mentioned at the beginning of the lists 
of maṅilala drawya haji  [i.e., revenue collectors]. They are especially forbidden to interfere with 
the affairs of free-holds. Probably, they were some local chiefs managing the affairs of greater 
lords. . . .” De Casparis (ibid., n. 63) also pointed out that tuhān  and juru  are synonymous in OJ, 
and OJED  glosses the latter as “head, leader, chief (of a division, military or administrative; of a 
group or trade); tradesman, trained worker” (Zoetmulder 1982).
62  Besides the quotation from De Casparis in the previous endnote, see especially Barrett Jones 
1984, 107–8.
63   Edouard Huber (1905, 172–74, our translation) in his article, “Etudes indochinoises,” presents 
examples of the so-called twin-forms from Campā: “Thus the words vayauṅ pinaṅ  in the Mĩ-
sơn inscription are a simple Cham translation of the Sanskrit expression Kramukava ṁśa, 
which immediately precedes them. This repetition in Cham of a Sanskrit expression is by the 
way far from being exceptional in the inscriptions of Mĩ-s ơn. For example in the inscription xxii, 
A, savāhyābhyantara  is immediately followed by its Cham equivalent liṅāv dalaṁ , which also 
means ‘outside and inside’. I will cite yet another more curious example: it is (inscription xvi, A) 
the word viddhi , ‘custom, rule’, translated by the Cham word tanatap . Old Javanese allows us 
to understand this word. Tanatap  is certainly derived from a word *tatap  (Old Javanese  tatā, 
Sundanese tata, Balinese dabdab , Malay tetap ), which means ‘to settle, to fix’. This word is itself a 
reduplicated form of *tap , which exists in Old Javanese with the meaning of ‘on one line, aligned’. 
Tanatap  is a passive from tatap  obtained by the insertion of n preceded by a vowel which is i in Old 
Javanese, but which appears to be regularly a in Old Cham. Tanatap  therefore means ‘to be fixed, 
what is fixed’, that is to say ‘the rule, the law, viddhi’ . The practice of following the Sanskrit word 
with its translation into the native language seems to have been as general in Java as in Campā.” 
The reader must note that repeated viddhi  is a localized spelling for what would be vidhi  in proper 
Sanskrit.
64  From Malay alone, we can add cantik jelita , mala petaka , and muda belia , examples that could 
easily be multiplied.
65  Between Malay and Javanese, only the former is cited in Blust and Trussel 2010, which does 
not indicate a meaning for the reconstructed form sa-anak . Zoetmulder (1982) glosses sānak  as 
“brother, sister, relative; with his brother(s).”

--- [Page 63] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION22766  An example is Hector Santos in Patanñe (1996, 101): “The question of the language of the LCI is 
another serious matter that I think suffers from an Indonesian bias. Since Indonesian copperplates 
were either Old Javanese or Old Malay, efforts to portray the LCI in these two languages hinder 
its complete understanding. A document is necessarily in one language and the LCI is no different 
from any other. The LCI is written in a language or dialect that was similar to Old Javanese, Old 
Malay, and even Old Tagalog. It had cognates in those languages and yet [was] sufficiently different 
from any of them. It also had words that are not found in any of those languages. Suffice it to say, 
it is a language that has not been previously encountered in other documents. In Sulat sa Tanso , 
I proposed to call the language Puliran Malay.” Although postulating a dialectal form of Malay 
(“Puliran Malay”) is not problematic in itself, several objections may still be made here, most 
notably that not a single copperplate inscription in OM is known besides the LCI and that the 
author does not seem to take into account the possibility of some languages influencing others 
(e.g., through lexical borrowing).
67  See Tiongson 2013b, 57: “There is no doubt, if we read it using seventeenth-century dictionaries, 
that the inscription was written in ancient Tagalog using some technical Sanskrit terms. ( Hindi 
maipag-aalinlangan, kung babasahin sa pamagitan ng mga diksyunaryo ng ika-17 ng dantaon, na 
isinulat ang Inskripsyon sa Sinaunang Tagalog gamit ang ilang terminong teknikal na Sanskrit ).” 
See also ibid., 67. The statement by Wisseman Christie (2001, 49) that the LCI is “written in 
what appears to be a dialect of Old Tagalog influenced by trade Malay” seems to be based on a 
misunderstanding of Postma’s work and is not repeated in her subsequent publications that refer 
to the LCI.
68  This paper gives a lot of useful detail that will be helpful for readers unfamiliar with such dates. 
However, it does not make any comparison with Indonesian dates and contains a few minor errors, 
although these do not affect the result obtained.
69  Unfortunately, there are no more closely contemporary inscriptions from Sumatra that can be 
used for comparison.
70  The other dates from Sumatran inscriptions of the late seventh century collected by Damais 
(1955, 235–36 under numbers E.1 through E.4) confirm the Sumatran pattern for that period.
71  As noted by Hector Santos (in Patanñe 1996, 101), there has been some confusion in the scholarly 
literature on the meaning of the terms viśuddhapatra , śuddhapatra , and jayapatra  that occur 
in OJ epigraphy. While śuddhapatra  may be a synonym of viśuddhapatra , the term jayapatra  
designates a different kind of document, namely a record of successful litigation. On the meaning 
of jayapatra , see Olivelle et al. 2015, 167–68; Lubin 2015, 251–52; Wisseman Christie 2009a, 
44. The statements by De Casparis (1956, 256 n. 57, 333) on the relationship between the terms 
śuddhapatra  and jayapatra  are partly misleading.
72  See Strauch 2002, 355 for a presentation of the textual evidence on viśuddhipatra  from India. 
Olivelle et al. (2015, 363) only record the meaning “document attesting to the exoneration of a 
person accused of a crime through the performance of an expiation,” ignoring Strauch’s discussion. 
Wisseman Christie (2009a, 43) has correctly captured the meaning of (vi)śuddhapatra  in Javanese 
epigraphy.
73  The only example we can cite (which does not style itself a viśuddhipatra ) dates from 1627 CE. It 
was published by K. P. Jayaswal (1928).

--- [Page 64] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)22874  See also Davis 2016 on the “perennial challenge in the study of law in medieval India,” that is, the 
encounter between scholastic jurisprudence in Sanskrit and vernacular juridical traditions.
75  There are some documents belonging to this category that remain unpublished, but the published 
ones are the Bulai, Kurungan, and Wuru Tunggal inscriptions (Wisseman Christie 2009b, items 1, 
2, and 5).
76  Hoogervorst’s (n.d.) citation of the OJ data is slightly misleading. In the only four cases of 
inscriptions contemporary with the LCI that use a full spelling instead of the abbreviation kā, we 
find that two texts have kāṭi  (Kurungan and Rumwiga I, respectively of 885 and 904 CE) and the 
other two kati  (Kayu Ara Hiwang and Salingsingan, 901 and 880/905 CE). It is true that in later 
Javanese sources, the spelling kati/kāti  with dental t predominates. In the OJED  entry kati/kaṭi , 
one of the examples illustrates the number word kǝṭi “one hundred thousand” rather than the unit 
of weight kati/kaṭi  (Zoetmulder 1982).
77  The term  piloncito  has been given by Philippine numismatists because of the resemblance in 
shape to the pilon , which are receptacles for sugar (Legarda 1976a, 13; Wicks 1986,  55).
78  The most common weight, hence the standard, seems to have been 2.4 g, which is also the weight 
of the unit called māṣa  (Wicks 1986,  45).
79  Gold mines were numerous in the Philippines; the major ones were located in Baguio, Camarines, 
Masbate, and eastern Mindanao. As the gold mentioned in the transaction could have come from 
several places, using the hypothetical source of origin to identify the place of the transaction 
seems tenuous to us. For a map showing gold mines in the Philippines, see Capistrano-Baker 
2011, 19.
80  Readers may compare the brief record of a seventh-century military expedition, including the use 
of the word vala (army) and mention of vessels for transportation, contained in the Śrīvijayan  OM 
inscription of Kedukan Bukit (Cœdès 1930, 33–37; Boechari 1986; 2012, 385–99). If we were to 
amend valānda  to vapānda  (see note 29), the meaning would become “the debt of his/their” father, 
and we would no longer have even such a small indication of why the debt had been contracted.
81  For a detailed account of slavery in the sixteenth-century Philippines, see Scott 1994, 224–29.
82  As the term dayang  is used in several languages of the Philippines to designate the wife of a 
leader, it is possible to postulate a semantic shift from its description as a servant with whom 
sexual intercourse was acceptable (OJ and possibly OM) to a concubine and then to a wife. The 
hypothesis is all the more plausible as debt bondage for women was considered an opportunity 
for social mobility. For female servants, being taken into the place of a ruler amounted to an honor, 
and their social status was far from destitute (Reid 1983, 25–26). Moreover, a bonded woman 
could be given as a wife by a ruler to one of his subordinates. In the Tagalog communities of the 
sixteenth century, it was common for the timawa , the supporters of the chief class datu, to receive 
secondary wives from the superordinate class (Scott 1983b, 146).
83  For examples from Malay codes whose manuscripts date to the nineteenth century but were 
possibly composed quite a bit earlier, see Matheson and Hooker 1983, 188 –89, 191, 198.
84  See for example the inscriptions of Kurungan, Java, 885 CE; Wuru Tunggal, Java, 912 CE; Dawan, 
Bali, 1053 CE; Gunun Pai/Pandak Bandung, Bali, 1071 CE; Srokadan B/Sukawati C, Bali, 1077 CE.
85  Compare the translocation of Javanese  Mataram to the island of Lombok, or places in Brunei, 
Kalimantan Selatan, and Bali, whose shared name Kuripan/Koripan (= Kahuripan) originally 
designated a region in East Java. Such translocation may have happened through direct or indirect 

--- [Page 65] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION229contacts but does not necessarily imply a Javanese settlement. See also Vickers 2005, 283 on 
the reproduction of the Javanese landscape of the Majapahit kingdom in the form of place names 
in Bali and Lombok. We see here a clear analogy with the types of “geographical transposition of 
South Asian toponyms onto the Southeast Asian landscape” alluded to in Griffiths 2011, 146.
86  The Laguna de Bay region underwent a substantial change in the mid-Holocene and a geological 
event isolated Laguna from the open part of the Manila Bay around 3700 years BP (Ward and 
Bulalacao 1999). At least for the twelfth century, archaeological data also tended to suggest 
that the area was swampy and that the settlements were on elevated land, as communicated to 
us by Emil Robles on 18 August 2020. Juan Bon Go (2005, 125–28) suggested that Manila Bay 
and Laguna de Bay formed one uninterrupted body of water in historical times but did not give 
substantial evidence to support this claim.
87  Several articles in the Filipino-language volume edited by Tiongson (2013a) attempt to 
demonstrate the historical importance of Binawangan in Capalonga. However, in the context of the 
transaction registered in the LCI, the distance of the settlement from the others does not match 
what we know about the way debt clearance was conducted in the presence of witnesses. The 
settlement of Binangonan in Rizal seems to agree better with the known or suspected localizations 
of the other toponyms but agrees less closely with the name found in the LCI.
88  The important role of traditional elites from the highlands in the early modern period in the 
Philippines is possibly attested in the case of Sulu, where the first embassy sent to China in 1417 
included administrators ( quan  權) of the eastern and western parts of the archipelago, as well as 
the deceased wife of the administrator of something called the dong  (峒) of Sulu, which may have 
indicated a place in the highlands (Wade 2005). For Mindanao, early Spanish documents show the 
predominant role played by Raja Bwayan, ruler of the upstream, in what is known as the Sultanate 
of Maguindanao (Morga 1890, 51; De la Costa 1961, 294, 296, 308).
89  This translation is by Griffiths. In her translation of an extract from this longer passage, Wisseman 
Christie (2009b, 180) translated the expression tutuganniṅ taṇḍa  as “who signed [the document].” 
This is misleading because the expression, which occurs quite frequently in OJ inscriptions of the 
tenth century, is never found in any other context than immediately following a toponym and thus 
seems to state something about the preceding place-name rather than about any of the persons 
who may figure in the context. The expression, whose literal meaning seems to be either “groove 
of the ensign” or “extent of the ensign,” must have had an idiomatic sense that has so far not been 
convincingly explained but certainly does not indicate who the signatory of a document was.
90  We cite Chinese names and titles in hyphenated Pinyin transcription (by contrast with William 
Henry Scott, who used the Wade-Giles system) and acknowledge the kind help that Tom 
Hoogervorst and Geoff Wade gave us in our treatment of the Chinese sources.
91  The number could reach eleven if two additional discoveries are confirmed. Of the nine identified 
boats, only five have been excavated (Lacsina 2016, 12–13). 
92  The first Jesuit missionaries found bronze statues associated with Hindu-Buddhist cults among 
the Mandaya in Mindanao (Beyer 1947, 301–02; Scott 2000, 31).
93  We take the Chinese characters, Pinyin transcription, and Sanskrit/Malay interpretation from 
Orlina (2012, 165 and n. 19). On the one hand, Xi-li-ba-da-sha-zhi is the transcription given by 
Scott (1983a, 4; 2000, 66–67), while Wolters (1983, 58–59 n. 46) gave Śrī “Pa-to-hsia-chih,” 
which he interpreted as possibly reflecting Śrī Pad[uk]a Haji. Wade (1993, 84), on the other hand, 

--- [Page 66] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)230proposed that “[r]ead in Hokkien, the characters are pronounced Sīt-lî Bá-dâi-ha-zhi , which can be 
reconstructed as ‘Sri Maharaja.’”
94  Scott (2000, 67) represented his name as “Likan-hsieh,” where the transcription of 于 as kan was 
probably due to its misreading as  干 (Pinyin gan). We owe this observation to Tom Hoogervorst. 
Geoff Wade added that the name Li Yu-xie indicates that its bearer was likely a Chinese person.
95  The two principal sources for high-quality camphor in Southeast Asia were Barus in Sumatra and 
Brunei (Drakard 1989, 55; Harrisson 2003, 99).
96  Salazar (2013, 355–67) has developed this argument further based on a different interpretation of 
the inscription and of the territorial configuration of the political entities.
97  We refer to this source on the basis of the famous translation by Hirth and Rockhill (1911) while 
also consulting the very recent online publication by Yang (2021), which offers a slightly modified 
translation of part 1 of the Zhu-fan zhi  with reference to Hirth and Rockhill and to Bowen Yang’s 
(1996) annotated and punctuated critical edition of the text.
98  The toponym means “three islands,” namely, Busuanga, Calamian, and Palawan (Hirth and Rockhill 
1911, 161).
99  Shao-yun Yang (2021) has mentioned these settlements as being “vassals,” which may render 
the original Chinese character well enough but is probably misleading in suggesting a situation of 
political domination.
100 Hirth and Rockhill (1911, 159) translated as “officials place” ( sic) the term guan chang  (官場 ), 
which is literally “public official+place or site.” In China the term refers to a type of officially 
designated market site or marketplace. We owe this piece of information to Wade and have 
confirmed it in Yang’s new translation, where one reads: “official marketplace.”
101 The first occurrence appears in the Kitāb al-Masālik wa-l-mamālik  by Ibn Khurradādhbih. For a 
detailed review of the Arab sources and the problems posed by their interpretation, see Donoso 
2011, 269–82.
102 Donoso 2011, 270–72 has identified a section in the Murūj al-Dhahab  by al-Masʿūdī as being the 
possible origin of the confusion. The said section describes a region near China called al-Mānd, and 
Donoso has argued that the toponym might have been later erroneously copied as al-Mayd, with 
m-y-d ( ديم )inste ad of m-n-d ( دنم ,)allowing the authors to associate al-Māyd with Māyṭ so that in 
later sources we see these two toponyms merged into one .
103 For a discussion of the complex question of what place was designated by the toponym “Java” 
around the ninth century, see Griffiths 2013 , which revises some of the previously accepted ideas 
mentioned in Laffan 2009.
104 For a synthesis of the important literature on the topic, see Wisseman Christie 1995.
105 The dating of the oldest substantial inscription in OJ is problematic (Damais 1955, 187–89), but 
it is in any case younger than the Sojomerto inscription. See also Griffiths 2012, 477. About the 
production of OM inscriptions in Java, see Griffiths 2018, 2020c. On the special role of OM among 
vernacular languages of ancient maritime Southeast Asia, see also Ali 2011.
106 On such charters ( piagǝm  in Javanese), see the series of eight articles published by J. L. A. 
Brandes, of which we list only the first and last in our bibliography (Brandes 1889, 1902), and the 
more recent contributions of Machi Suhadi (1990) and Boechari (2012, 524–2).

--- [Page 67] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION231107 Luzon, as well as the Visayas, remained part of the “Malay World” in the following centuries. When 
the Spaniards arrived in the sixteenth century, they described the alphabet used by the Visayans as 
“Moro letters,” explaining that the script had been brought there by the Muslims (Scott 1994, 94, 
96). It is unclear to which population the term “Muslims” refers here, as it could have designated 
Malays as well as any other Islamized ethnic groups from Mindanao or Sulu. It is quite certain that 
the Visayans used Jawi, the aforementioned adaptation of the Arabic script adapted to the needs 
of Malay and other vernacular languages in Southeast Asia, besides a baybayin  script. The same 
seems to have been true in the Manila region. When the Spanish governor Francisco de Sande 
sent a letter to the sultan of Brunei in 1578, it was written in Malay and accompanied by two 
translations in another language written in two scripts by local interpreters, one in Arabic script 
and the other in baybayin  (Donoso 2019, 97). While the language of those two translations is 
impossible to assess from the secondary sources we have, it seems safe to suppose that they were 
in Tagalog. We see here another example of the complex linguistic landscape of the “Malay World.”
108 See several papers edited by Timothy Barnard (2004), as well as Mohamad and Aljunied (2011). 
In the context of the present study, it is poignant to observe that the volume edited by Barnard 
(2004, vii), which attempts to consider Malay identity across boundaries, excludes almost all of the 
Philippines and the whole of Luzon from the map of the “Malay World.”
109 Hikayat  is a Malay literary form of narration, in prose or in verse, which records past stories, often 
the adventures of a hero. Malay hikayat  are all posterior to our period. The studies we are alluding 
to concern the influence of the Pegon (modified Arabic alphabet used to write languages of Java) 
on the Jawi script as well as motifs or narrative frames in Malay texts. See, for example, Ras 1968; 
Wieringa 2003; Ricci 2012; Proudfoot 2018.
References
Abdul Djebar Hapip. 1977. Kamus Banjar-Indonesia . Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan 
Bahasa, Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan. 
Adelaar, K. Alexander. 1988. More on Proto-Malayic. In Rekonstruksi dan cabang-cabang Bahasa 
Melayu induk  [Reconstruction and branches of proto-Malay], ed. Mohd. Thani Ahmad and Zaini 
Mohamed Zain, 59–77. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, Kementerian Pendidikan 
Malaysia.
——— . 1992. The relevance of Salako for Proto-Malayic and for Old Malay epigraphy. Bijdragen tot 
de taal-, land- en volkenkunde / Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia  
148(3): 381–408.
——— . 1994a. Malay and Javanese loanwords in Malagasy, Tagalog and Siraya (Formosa). Bijdragen 
tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde / Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast 
Asia  150(1): 50–65.
——— . 1994b. The history of thing, animal, person and related concepts in Malay. In Austronesian 
terminologies: Continuity and change , ed. Andrew K. Pawley and Malcolm D. Ross, 1–20. Canberra: 
Department of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, The Australian National 
University.

--- [Page 68] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)232——— . 2005. The Austronesian languages of Asia and Madagascar: A historical perspective. In The 
Austronesian languages of Asia and Madagascar , ed. K. Alexander Adelaar and Nikolaus P. 
Himmelmann, 1–42. London: Routledge.
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naguib. 1970. The correct date of the Trengganu Inscription . Kuala Lumpur: 
Muzium Negara.
Ali, Daud. 2011. The early inscriptions of Indonesia and the problem of the Sanskrit cosmopolis. In 
Early interactions between South and Southeast Asia: Reflections on cross-cultural exchange , ed. 
Pierre-Yves Manguin, A. Mani, and Geoff Wade, 278–95. Nalanda-Sriwijaya Series 2. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Andaya, Leonard Y. 2008. Leaves of the same tree: Trade and ethnicity in the straits of Melaka . 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Balogh, Dániel and Arlo Griffiths. 2020. DHARMA Transliteration guide.  https://hal.archives-ouvertes.
fr/halshs-02272407.
Barnard, Timothy P., ed. 2004. Contesting Malayness: Malay identity across boundaries . Singapore: 
NUS Press.
Barrett Jones, Antoinette M. 1984. Early tenth century Java from the inscriptions: A study of economic, 
social, and administrative conditions in the first quarter of the century . Dordrecht: Foris.
Barrows, David Prescott. 1925. History of the Philippines . Rev. ed. Yonkers-on-Hudson: World Book.
Beyer, H. Otley. 1947. Outline review of Philippines archaeology by islands and provinces. The Philippine 
Journal of Science  77(3–4): 205–372.
Blust, Robert and Stephen Trussel. 2010. The Austronesian comparative dictionary: Web edition . 
https://www.trussel2.com/acd/.
Boechari. 1975. Jayapatra: Sekelumit tentang pelaksanaan hukum dalam masyarakat Jawa-Kuna 
[Jayapatra: A tiny bit about legal procedure in ancient Javanese society]. In Simposium sejarah 
hukum, diselenggarakan oleh Badan Pembinaan Hukum Nasional, Jakarta, 1–3 April 1975  [Legal 
history symposium organized by the National Agency for Legal Development], 79–88. Jakarta: 
Binacipta.
——— . 1976. Some considerations on the problem of the shift of Mataram’s center of government 
from Central to East Java in the 10th century A.D. Bulletin of the Research Center of Archaeology 
of Indonesia , 10.
——— . 1986. New investigations on the Kedukan Bukit inscription. In Untuk bapak guru: Persembahan 
para murid untuk memperingati usia genap 80 tahun Prof. Dr. A.J. Bernet Kempers  [For our 
teacher: Offering from his students to celebrate the eightieth birthday of Prof. Dr. A.J. Bernet 
Kempers], 33–56. Jakarta: Proyek Penelitian Purbakala, Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan.
——— . 2012. Melacak Sejarah kuno Indonesia Lewat Prasasti / Tracing ancient Indonesian history 
through inscriptions . Jakarta: Kepustakaan Populer Gramedia; Departemen Arkeologi, Fakultas 
Ilmu Pengetahuan Budaya, Universitas Indonesia; École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Brakel, L. F. 1975. The Hikayat Muhammad Hanafiyyah: A medieval Muslim-Malay romance . The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Brandes, J. L. A. 1889. Nog eenige javaansche piagĕm’s uit het mohammedaansche tijdvak afkomstig 
van Mataram, Bantĕn en Palembang [Some more Javanese piagəms of the Muslim period 
from Mataram, Banten, and Palembang]. Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 

--- [Page 69] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION233uitgegeven door het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen  (Journal for 
[East] Indian Linguistics, Geography and Ethnography published by the Batavian Society of Arts 
and Sciences) 32:557–601.
——— . 1902. Nog eenige javaansche piagĕm’s uit het mohammedaansche tijdvak afkomstig van 
Mataram, Bantĕn en Palembang (achtste vervolg) [Some more Javanese piagəms of the 
Muslim period from Mataram, Banten, and Palembang (eighth sequel)]. Tijdschrift voor Indische 
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde uitgegeven door het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en 
Wetenschappen  (Journal for [East] Indian Linguistics, Geography and Ethnography published by 
the Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences) 45:272–75.
Brewer, Carolyn. 2004 . Shamanism, Catholicism, and gender relations in colonial Philippines, 1521–
1685 . Aldershot: Ashgate.
Canilao, Michael Armand P. 2013. Ang ginto ng Tagalog at ang tradisyunal na teknolohiya sa pagmimina 
nito. In Ang saysay ng Inskripsyon sa Binatbat na Tanso ng Laguna , ed. Jaime Figueroa Tiongson, 
309–24. Pila: BAKAS and Pila Historical Society Foundation.
——— . 2017. Early historical gold trade networks in northwestern Luzon, as reconstructed from 
ethnohistorical accounts, WorldView2 satellite remote sensing and GIS predictive modelling: The 
Gasweling case. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports  16:127–48.
——— . 2018a. Bulked gold, riverine trade, hiking trails, and WorldView2 satellite remote sensing 
in northwestern Luzon: The Angaqui network. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports  
17:689–711.
——— . 2018b. Charting the Abra gold trade network of northwestern Luzon using ethnohistorical 
archaeology and WorldView-3 satellite imagery. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports  
19:357–96.
——— . 2018c. Determining the suitability of gold bulking villages articulated to the Lepanto 
gold district of northwestern Luzon with the aid of WorldView2 satellite imagery. Journal of 
Archaeological Science: Reports  19:357–96.
Capistrano-Baker, Florina H. 2011.  Philippine ancestral gold . Makati City: Ayala Foundation.
Casparis, Johannes Gijsbertus de. 1950. Inscripties uit de  Çailendra-tijd  [Inscriptions from the 
Śailendra  period]. Prasasti Indonesia [Inscriptions of Indonesia] 1. Bandung: A. C. Nix.
——— . 1956. Selected inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th century A.D.  Prasasti Indonesia [Inscriptions 
of Indonesia] 2. Bandung: Masa Baru.
——— . 1975. Indonesian palaeography: A history of writing in Indonesia from the beginnings to c. A.D. 
1500 . Leiden: Brill.
——— . 1978. Indonesian chronology . Leiden: Brill.
——— . 1988. Where was Pu Si ṇḍok’s capital situated? In Essays offered to Dr. R. Soekmono on the 
occasion of his retirement as the first occupant of the “Wisselleerstoel” for Indonesian studies in 
Leiden, September 1986–June 1987 , ed. H. I. R. Hinzler, 39–52. Leiden: Koentji Press.
——— . 1991. The use of Sanskrit in inscriptions of Indonesia and Malaysia. In Middle Indo-Aryan and 
Jaina studies; Sanskrit outside India , ed. Colette Caillat and Johannes Gijsbertus de Casparis, 
29–41. Panels of the VIIth World Sanskrit Conference 6/7. Leiden: Brill.
Cembrano, Margarita R. 1998. Patterns of the past: The ethno archaeology of Butuan . Butuan: National 
Museum of the Philippines.

--- [Page 70] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)234Charney, Michael. 2004. Southeast Asian warfare, 1300–1900 . Leiden: Brill.
Cœdès, George. 1930. Les inscriptions malaises de Çrīvijaya  [The Malay inscriptions of Śrīvijaya ]. Bulletin 
de l’Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient (Bulletin of the French School of the Far East)  30:29–80. 
Collins, James T. 2008. Language ecology and language communities in the Malay world. In 
Encyclopedia of language and education , vol. 9:  Ecology of Language , ed. Angela Creese, Peter 
Martin, and Nancy H. Hornberger, 159–68. Boston: Springer.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1955. Études d’épigraphie indonésienne, IV: Discussion de la date des 
inscriptions [Studies in Indonesian epigraphy, IV: Commentary on the inscriptions’ dates]. Bulletin 
de l’Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient (Bulletin of the French School of the Far East)  47:7–290.
——— . 1959. Notices bibliographiques: Ouvrages d’études Indonésiennes [Bibliographic notes: Works 
in Indonesia Studies] — Dr Roelof Goris, Prasasti Bali. Bulletin de l’Ecole française d’Extrême-
Orient (Bulletin of the French School of the Far East)  49(2): 679–702.
——— . 1970. Répertoire onomastique de l’épigraphie javanaise  (jusqu’à Pu Si ṇḍok Śrī Īśānawikrama  
Dharmmotu ṅgadewa): étude d’épigraphie indonésienne  [Onomastic index of Javanese epigraphy 
(up to P. S. Ś. Ī. Dh.): A study in Indonesian epigraphy]. Publications de l’École française d’Extrême-
Orient 66. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Davis, Donald. 2016. Toward a history of documents in medieval India: The encounter of scholasticism 
and regional law in the Smṛticandrikā . The Medieval Globe  2(2): 167–98. 
De la Costa, Horacio. 1961. The Jesuits in the Philippines, 1581–1768 . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Donoso Jiménez, Isaac. 2011. El islam en Filipinas (siglos X-XIX). PhD thesis, Universidad de Alicante.
——— . 2019. Letra de Meca: Jawi script in the Tagalog region in the 16th century. Journal of Al-
Tamaddun  14(1): 89–103.
Drakard, Jane. 1989. An Indian Ocean port: Sources for the earlier history of Barus. Archipel 37(1): 
53–82.
Drewes, G. W. J. 1977. Directions for travellers on the mystic path: Zakariyyāʾ  al-Anṣārī’s  
Kitāb Fatḥ al-Raḥmān  and its Indonesian adaptations, with an appendix on Palembang 
manuscripts and authors . Leiden: Brill.
Evangelista, A. E. and J. T. Peralta. 1991. A brief report on a 10th century midden in Butuan City, North 
Agusan, Philippines. Manila: National Museum.
Francis, Emmanuel. 2018. Indian copper-plate grants: Inscriptions or documents? In Manuscripts 
and archives: Comparative views on record-keeping , ed. Alessandro Bausi, Christian Brockmann, 
Michael Friedrich, and Sabine Kienitz, 387–418. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Francisco, Juan R. 1973. Philippine palaeography . Philippine Journal of Linguistics . Special Monograph 
Issue 3. Quezon City: Linguistic Society of the Philippines.
Gallop, Annabel Teh. 2015. Introduction. A Jawi sourcebook for the study of Malay palaeography and 
orthography. Theme issue, “Special issue in honour of E.U. Kratz.”  Indonesia and the Malay World  
43:13–37.
——— . 2016. The early use of seals in the Malay world. Bulletin de l’Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient 
(Bulletin of the French School of the Far East)  102:125–63.
Gislén, Lars and J. C. Eade. 2007. HIC (version 2.0). http://home.thep.lu.se/~larsg/Site/download.html.

--- [Page 71] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION235Go, Bon Juan. 2005. Ma’i in Chinese records – Mindoro or Bai? An examination of a historical puzzle. 
Philippine Studies  53(1): 119–38. 
Gomperts, Amrit. 2001. Sanskrit Jyoti ṣa terms and Indian astronomy in Old Javanese inscriptions. 
In Fruits of inspiration: Studies in honour of Prof. J. G. de Casparis, retired professor of the early 
history and archeology of South and Southeast Asia at the University of Leiden, the Netherlands, 
on the occasion of his 85th birthday , ed. M. J. Klokke and K. R. van Kooij, 93–133. Groningen: 
Forsten.
Gonda, Jan. 1973/1998. Sanskrit in Indonesia . 2d ed. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian 
Culture.
Gonzalez, Michael. 2016. Antoon Postma and the Mangyan legacy. Positively Filipino , 24 Dec. http://
www.positivelyfilipino.com/magazine/antoon-postma-and-the-mangyan-legacy.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2010. Review of “Kitab Undang-Undang Tanjung Tanah: Naskah Melayu Yang Tertua.” 
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde / Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of 
Southeast Asia  166(1): 133–38.
——— . 2011. Imagine La ṅkapura at Prambanan. In From Laṅkā  eastwards: The Rāmāyaṇa  in the 
literature and visual arts of Indonesia , ed. Andrea Acri, Helen Creese, and Arlo Griffiths, 133–48. 
Leiden: KITLV Press.
——— . 2012. The epigraphical collection of Museum Ranggawarsita in Semarang (Central Java, 
Indonesia). Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde / Journal of the Humanities and Social 
Sciences of Southeast Asia  168(4): 472–96. 
——— . 2013. The problem of the ancient name Java and the role of Satyavarman in Southeast Asian 
international relations around the turn of the ninth century CE. Archipel  85(1): 43–81. 
——— . 2014a. Early Indic inscriptions of Southeast Asia. In Lost kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist sculpture 
of early Southeast Asia , ed. John Guy, 53–57. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.
——— . 2014b. Inscriptions of Sumatra, III: The Padang Lawas Corpus studied along with inscriptions 
from Sorik Merapi (North Sumatra) and from Muara Takus (Riau). In History of Padang Lawas, 
North Sumatra, II: Societies of Padang Lawas (mid-ninth – thirteenth century CE) , ed. Daniel 
Perret, 211–53. Paris: Association Archipel.
——— . 2015. New documents for the early history of Pu ṇḍravardhana: Copperplate inscriptions from 
the late Gupta and early post-Gupta periods. Pratna Samiksha: A Journal of Archaeolog y, n.s., 
6:15–38.
——— . 2018. The corpus of inscriptions in the Old Malay language. In Writing for eternity: A survey of 
epigraphy in Southeast Asia , ed. Daniel Perret, 275–83. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
——— . 2020a. Rediscovering an old Javanese inscription: Mpu Mano’s donation in favor of a Buddhist 
dignitary in 888 Śaka . Archipe l 99:107–41. 
——— . 2020b. Inscriptions of Sumatra, IV: An old Malay epitaph from Pananggahan (Barus, North 
Sumatra) and a mixed-language poem from Lubuk Layang (Pasaman, West Sumatra). Archipel  
100:55–68.
——— . 2020c. The Old Malay Mañjuśrīgr ̥ha inscription from Candi Sewu (Java, Indonesia). In 
Archaeologies of the written: Indian, Tibetan, and Buddhist studies in honour of Cristina Scherrer-
Schaub , ed. Vincent Tournier, Vincent Eltschinger, and Marta Sernesi, 225–62. Naples: Università 
degli Studi di Napoli L’Orientale. 

--- [Page 72] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)236Gupta, Chitrarekha. 1996. The Kāyasthas: A study in the formation and early history of a caste . 
Calcutta: K.P. Bagchi.
Harrisson, Barbara. 2003. The ceramic trade across the South China Sea c. AD 1350–1650. Journal of 
the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society  76(1): 99–114. 
Henley, David and Peter Boomgaard, eds. 2009. Credit and debt in Indonesia, 860–1930: From peonage 
to pawnshop, from Kongsi to cooperative . Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Hirth, Friedrich and W. W. Rockhill. 1911. Chau Ju-Kua: His work on the Chinese and Arab trade in 
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, entitled Chu-Fan-Chï . St. Petersburg: Imperial Academy of 
Sciences.
Hoogervorst, Tom. 2015. Detecting pre-modern lexical influence from South India in maritime 
Southeast Asia. Archipel  89:63–93.
——— . 2019. Linguistic intersections in Malay and Tamil. In Sojourners to settlers: Tamils in Southeast 
Asia , ed. Arun Mahizhnan and Nalina Gopal, 174–86, 222–24, 230–31. Singapore: Indian Heritage 
Centre; Institute of Policy Studies.
——— . [n.d.] Lexical influence from South Asia. In Traces of contact in the lexicon: Austronesian and 
Papuan studies , ed. Marian Klamer and Moro Francesca. Leiden: Brill.
Huber, Edouard. 1905. Études indochinoises [Indochinese studies], I–V. Bulletin de l’Ecole française 
d’Extrême-Orient (Bulletin of the French School of the Far East)  5:68–84.
Hunter, Thomas M. 1996. Ancient beginnings: The spread of Indic scripts. In Illuminations: The writing 
traditions of Indonesia, featuring manuscripts from the National Library of Indonesia , ed. Ann 
Louise Kumar and John H. McGlynn, 3–12. Jakarta: The Lontar Foundation.
Jákl, Jiří. 2017. Black Africans on the maritime silk route: Jəŋgi in Old Javanese epigraphical and 
literary evidence. Indonesia and the Malay World  45(133): 334–51.
Jayaswal, K. P. 1928. A deed of acquittance in Sanskrit. Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research 
Society  14:63–64.
Jernegan, Prescott F. 1904. A short history of the Philippines for use in elementary schools . Manila: 
Van Buskirk, Crook.
Jocano, Felipe Landa . 1965. Beyer’s theory on Filipino prehistory and culture: An alternative approach 
to the problem. In Studies in Philippine anthropology: In honor of H. Otley Beyer , ed. Mario Zamora, 
128–50. Quezon City: Alemar Phoenix.
Jones, Russell, Carstairs Douglas, and Thomas Barclay. 2007. Loan-words in Indonesian and Malay . 
Leiden: KITLV Press.
Jordaan, Roy E. and Brian E. Colless. 2009. The Mahārājas of the isles: The Śailendras  and the 
problem of Śrīvijaya . Leiden: Department of Languages and Cultures of Southeast Asia and 
Oceania, University of Leiden.
Kozok, Uli, with Thomas Hunter, Waruno Mahdi, and John Miksic. 2015. A 14th century Malay code of 
laws: The Nītisārasamuccaya . Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Kulke, Hermann. 1993. “Kadātuan Śrīvijaya ” – Empire or Kraton of Śrīvijaya ? A reassessment of the 
epigraphical evidence. Bulletin de l’Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient (Bulletin of the French 
School of the Far East)  80:159–80.

--- [Page 73] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION237Kusen. 1991. Prasasti Laguna: Sebuah petunjuk tentang adanya hubungan antara Jawa dan Luzon pada 
abad 10 Masehi [The Laguna inscription: An indication of the existence of connections between 
Java and Luzon in the tenth century CE]. Paper presented at Diskusi Ilmiah Epigrafi [Scholarly 
discussion of epigraphy],  Komisariat Ikatan Ahli Arkeologi Indonesia, Yogyakarta, 9–10 Nov. 
Lacsina, Ligaya. 2015. The Butuan boats of the Philippines: Southeast Asian edge-joined and lashed-
lug watercraft. Journal of the Australasian Institute for Maritime Archaeology  39:126–32.
——— . 2016. Examining pre-colonial Southeast Asian boatbuilding: An archaeological study of the 
Butuan boats and the use of edge-joined planking in local and regional construction techniques. 
PhD thesis, Flinders University.
Laffan, Michael Francis. 2009. Finding Java: Muslim nomenclature of insular Southeast Asia from 
Śrîvijaya  to Snouck Hurgronje. In Southeast Asia and the Middle East: Islam, movement, and the 
longue durée , ed. Eric Tagliacozzo, 17–64. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Lara, M., V. Paz, H. Lewis, and W. Solheim. 2015. Bone modifications in an early Holocene cremation 
burial from Palawan, Philippines. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology  25(5): 637–52.
Legarda, Angelita Ganzon de. 1976a. Piloncitos to pesos: A brief history of coinage in the Philippines . 
[Manila]: Bancom Development Corp. 
——— . 1976b. Some notes on the piloncitos . Barilla  3(4): 192–98.  
Lepoutre, Amandine. 2015. Études du corpus des inscriptions du Campā, VII: L’inscription de Jaya 
Parameśvaravarman à Tháp Đôi (C. 213) avec en annexe deux nouvelles inscriptions du même 
souverain (C. 218.2 et C. 219) [Studies of the Corpus des inscriptions du Campā , VII: The inscription 
of Jaya Parameśvaravarman at Tháp Đôi (C. 213) with two new inscriptions of the same ruler (C. 
218.2 et C. 219) in an appendix]. Bulletin de l’Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient (Bulletin of the 
French School of the Far East)  101:117–57.
Lubin, Timothy. 2015. Writing and the recognition of customary law in premodern India and Java. 
Journal of the American Oriental Society  135(2): 225–59.
Machi Suhadi. 1990. Piagam Sukabumi dan Palembang dari Sumatera Selatan [The Sukabumi and 
Palembang piagams  from South Sumatra]. In Monumen: Karya persembahan untuk Prof. Dr. R. 
Soekmono  [Monument: Work offered to Prof. Dr. R. Soekmono], ed. Edi Sedyawati, Ingrid Harriet 
Eileen Pojoh, and Supratikno Rahardjo, 143–55. Seri Penerbitan Ilmiah, 11 (Edisi Khusus). Depok: 
Lembaran Sastra, Fakultas Sastra Universitas Indonesia.
Mahdi, Waruno. 2005. Old Malay. In The Austronesian languages of Asia and Madagascar , ed. 
Alexander Adelaar and Nikolaus P. Himmelmann, 182–201. London: Routledge.
——— . 2009. In search of an historical sea-people Malay dialect with -Aba- . In Austronesian historical 
linguistics and culture history: A festschrift for Robert Blus t, ed. K. Alexander Adelaar and Andrew 
K. Pawley, 73–89. Pacific Linguistics 601. Canberra: Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, 
The Australian National University.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. 2017. Review of "The Boxer codex: Transcription and translation of an illustrated 
late sixteenth-century Spanish manuscript concerning the geography, history and ethnography of 
the Pacific, South-East and East Asia." Bulletin  de l’Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient (Bulletin of 
the French School of the Far East)  103:537–43. 
Manuel, E. Arsenio. 1990. Introducing Philippineasian. Agham-Tao  8:22–28.

--- [Page 74] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)238Marsden, William. 1812. A dictionary of the Malayan language . London: Cox and Baylis.
Martínez de Zúñiga, Joaquín. 1893. Estadismo de la Islas Filipinas o mis viajes por este pais , ed. W. E. 
Retana. Madrid: Viuda de M. Minuesa de los Ríos.
Matheson, Virginia and M. B. Hooker. 1983. Slavery in the Malay texts: Categories of dependency and 
compensation. In Slavery, bondage and dependency in Southeast Asia , ed. Anthony Reid, 182–208. 
St. Lucia: University of Queensland Press.
Miller, Christopher. 2010. A Gujarati origin for scripts of Sumatra, Sulawesi and the Philippines. Annual 
Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society  36(1): 276–91.
Mohamad, Maznah and Syed Muhd. Khairudin Aljunied. 2011. Melayu: The politics, poetics, and 
paradoxes of Malayness . Singapore: NUS Press.
Morga, Antonio de. 1890. Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas , ed. José Rizal. Paris: Garnier Hermanos.
Naerssen, F. H. van. 1977. The economic and administrative history of early Indonesia. In The economic 
and administrative history of early Indonesia , ed. F. H. van Naerssen and R. C. de Iongh, 1–84. 
Leiden: Brill.
Nakada, Kōzō. 1982. An inventory of the dated inscriptions in Java . Tokyo: Toyo Bunko.
——— . 1986. The Munduan copper-plate inscriptions found in Java. Nantoh Shigaku (Journal of 
Ryukyuan Studies)  28:1–21.
Olivelle, Patrick. 2019. Yajnavalkya: A treatise on Dharma . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Olivelle, Patrick, David Brick, and Mark McClish, eds. 2015. A Sanskrit dictionary of law and statecraft . 
New Delhi: Primus.
Omar bin Awang. 1980. The Trengganu inscription as the earliest known evidence of the finalisation of 
the Jawi alphabet. Federation Museums Journal  25:43–59.
Orlina, Roderick. 2012. Epigraphical evidence for the cult of Mahāpratisarā in the Philippines. Journal 
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies  35(1–2): 159–69.
Patanñe, E. P. 1996. The Philippines in the 6th to 16th centuries . Quezon City: LSA Press.
Paterson, H. S. 1924. An early Malay inscription from Trengganu. Journal of the Malaysian Branch of 
the Royal Asiatic Society  2(92): 252–58.
Peralta, Jesus T. 1980. Southwestern Philippine art . Manila: National Museum.
Pollock, Sheldon I. 1996. The Sanskrit cosmopolis, 300–1300 CE: Transculturation, vernacularization, 
and the question of ideology. In Ideology and status of Sanskrit: Contributions to the history of the 
Sanskrit language , ed. Jan E. M. Houben, 197–248. Leiden: Brill.
——— . 1998. The cosmopolitan vernacular. The Journal of Asian Studies  57(1): 6–37.
——— . 2006. The language of the gods in the world of men: Sanskrit, culture, and power in premodern 
India . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Postma, Antoon. 1991a. The Laguna Copper-Plate Inscription: A valuable Philippine document. Bulletin 
of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association  11:160–71.
——— . 1991b. The Laguna Copper-Plate Inscription (LCI): A valuable Philippine document. National 
Museum Papers  2(1): 1–25.
——— . 1992a. The Laguna Copper-Plate Inscription: Text and commentary. Philippine Studies  40(2): 
183–203.

--- [Page 75] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION239——— . 1992b. The Laguna Copper-Plate Inscription (LCI) (the oldest Philippine document): A Javanese 
connection? Paper presented at the International Workshop on Indonesian Studies No. 7. Leiden: 
Royal Institute of Linguistics and Anthropology.
Proudfoot, Ian. 2018. Old Muslim calendars of Southeast Asia . Leiden: Brill.
——— . n.d. Malay concordance project . http://mcp.anu.edu.au/Q/mcp.html.
Ptak, Roderich. 1993. China and the trade in cloves, circa 960–1435. Journal of the American Oriental 
Society  113(1): 1–13.
Ras, Johannes Jacobus. 1968. Hikajat Bandjar: A study in Malay historiography . Bibliotheca Indonesica 
1. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Reid, Anthony, ed. 1983. Slavery, bondage, and dependency in Southeast Asia . St. Lucia: University of 
Queensland Press.
Ricci, Ronit. 2012. The discovery of Javanese writing in a Sri Lankan Malay manuscript. Bijdragen tot 
de taal-, land- en volkenkunde / Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia 
168(4): 511–18.
Ricklefs, M. C. 1976. Bantĕn and the Dutch in 1619: Six early “Pasar Malay” letters. Bulletin of the 
School of Oriental and African Studies  39(1): 128–36.
Robequain, Charles. 1946. Le monde malais: P éninsule  malaise, Sumatra, Java, Bornéo, Célèbes, Bali 
et les petites îles de la Sonde, Moluques, Philippines  [The Malay world: Malay peninsula, Sumatra, 
Java, Borneo, Celebes Bali and the minor Sunda islands, Moluccas, Philippines]. Paris: Payot.
Ross, Malcolm. 1996. On the origin of the term “Malayo-Polynesian.” Oceanic Linguistics  35(1): 143–45.
Salazar, Zeus. 1998. The Malayan connection: Ang Pilipinas sa Dunia Melayu . Quezon City: Palimbagan 
ng Lahi.
——— . 2013. Tundun-Pailah-Binwangan: Ang sistemang ilog ilaya-ilawud ng Katagalugan bilang 
halimbawa ng isang proseso ng pagkabuo ng mga sinaunang pamayanan ng Kapilipinuhan. In Ang 
saysay ng Inskripsyon sa Binatbat na Tanso ng Laguna , ed. Jaime Figueroa Tiongson, 341–467. 
Pila: BAKAS & Pila Historical Society Foundation.
Salomon, Richard. 1998. Indian epigraphy: A guide to the study of inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and 
the other Indo-Aryan languages . New York: Oxford University Press.
San Buenaventura, Pedro de. 1613/1994. Vocabulario de lengua tagala: El romance castellano puesto 
primo . Valencia: Librerias Paris Valencia.
Santiago, Luciano P. R. 1990. The houses of Lakandula, Matanda and Soliman (1571–1898): Genealogy 
and group identity. Philippine Quarterly of Culture and Society  18(1): 39–73.
Santos, Hector. 1996. The date of the Laguna Copperplate Inscription. Philippine Studies  44(4): 514–25.
Scott, William Henry. 1983a. Filipinos in China before 1500. Asian Studies  21:1–19.
——— . 1983b. Oripun and alipin in the sixteenth century Philippines. In Slavery, bondage and 
dependency in Southeast Asia , 138–55. St. Lucia: University of Queensland Press.
——— . 1991. Slavery in the Spanish Philippines . Manila: De la Salle University Press.
——— . 1994. Barangay: Sixteenth-century Philippine culture and society . Quezon City: Ateneo de 
Manila University Press.

--- [Page 76] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)240——— . 2000. Prehispanic source materials for the study of Philippine history . Quezon City: New Day.
Shamsul A. B. 2003. The Malay world: The concept of Malay studies and national identity formation. In 
Malaysia: Islam, society and politics , ed. Norani Othman and Virginia Hooker, 100–125. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Smith, Alexander D. 2017. The western Malayo-Polynesian problem. Oceanic Linguistics  56(2): 435–90.
Soekmono, R. 1967. A geographical reconstruction of northeastern Central Java and the location of 
Medang. Indonesia  4:2–7.
Soepomo Poedjosoedarmo. 1982. Javanese influence on Indonesian . Canberra: Department of 
Linguistics, Research School of Pacific Studies, The Australian National University.
Souza, George Bryan and Jeffrey Scott Turley. 2015. The Boxer Codex: Transcription and translation 
of an illustrated late sixteenth-century Spanish manuscript concerning the geography, history 
and ethnography of the Pacific, South-east and East Asia . European Expansion and Indigenous 
Response 20. Leiden: Brill.
Spencer, George W. 1968. Temple money-lending and livestock redistribution in early Tanjore. The 
Indian Economic and Social History Review  5(3): 277–93.
Sta. Maria, Dina. 2009. Bapa Antoon. Starweek Magazine , 5 Apr. https://www.philstar.com/
other-sections/starweek-magazine/2009/04/05/454886/bapa-antoon.
Strauch, Ingo. 2002. Die Lekhapaddhati-Lekhapañcāśikā: Briefe und Urkunden im mittelalterlichen 
Gujara t [The Lekhapaddhati-Lekhapañcāśikā: Letters and charters in medieval Gujarat]. Berlin: 
Reimer.
Stutterheim, W. F. 1925. Een oorkonde op koper uit het Singasarische [A copper charter from the 
Singasari area]. Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde uitgegeven door het 
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen (Journal for [East] Indian Linguistics, 
Geography and Ethnography published by the Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences)  65:208–81.
Tantoco,  Regulus, Ma. Bernadette Abrera, and Dante Ambrosio. 2001.  Pagbubuo ng kalinangan at 
kamalayang bayan. In  Kasaysayang bayan: Sampung aralin sa kasaysayang Pilipino , ed. Rowena 
Boquiren, Ma. Bernadette Abrera, Ferdinand Llanes, and Jaime Veneracion, 53–76. Quezon City: 
ADHIKA ng Pilipinas Inc. and National Historical Institute.  
Tenazas, Rosa C. P. 1982. Evidences of cultural patterning as seen through pottery: The Philippine 
situation. SPAFA Digest  3(1): 4–17.
Tim Pengembang Pedoman Bahasa Indonesia. 2016. Pedoman umum ejaan Bahasa Indonesia  
[General guidelines for Indonesian spelling]. Edisi ke-4. Jakarta: Badan Pengembangan dan 
Pembinaan Bahasa, Kementerian Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan. https://badanbahasa.kemdikbud.
go.id/lamanbahasa/sites/default/files/PUEBI.pdf.
Tiongson, Jaime Figueroa, with Grace Barretto-Tesoro, Nancy Kimuell-Gabriel, Lars Raymund C. Ubaldo, 
Timothy J. Vitales, Donna Mae N. Arriola, Luciano P. R. Santiago, Michael Armand P. Canilao, Anna 
Carla L. Pineda, Zeus A. Salazar. 2013a. Ang saysay ng Inskripsyon sa Binatbat na Tanso ng Laguna , 
ed. Carmen V. Peñalosa and Zeus Salazar. Pila: BAKAS and Pila Historical Society Foundation.
——— . 2013b. Ang saysay ng inskripsyon sa binabat na tanso ng Laguna: Bagong pagpapakahulugan. 
In Ang saysay ng Inskripsyon sa Binatbat na Tanso ng Laguna , ed. Jaime Figueroa Tiongson, 17–
86. Pila: BAKAS and Pila Historical Society Foundation.
Vickers, Adrian. 2005. Journeys of desire: A study of the Balinese text Malat . Leiden: KITLV Press.

--- [Page 77] ---
CLAVÉ AND GRIFFITHS / THE LAGUNA COPPERPLATE INSCRIPTION241Vikør, Lars S. 1988. Appendix: The spelling and phonology of old Malay. In Perfecting spelling: Spelling 
discussions and reforms in Indonesia and Malaysia, 1900–1972 , 67–84. Dordrecht: Foris.
Virola, Madonna. 2016. Dutch anthropologist Antoon Postma dies; 87. Inquirer.net , 23 Oct. https://
newsinfo.inquirer.net/830053/dutch-anthropologist-antoon-postma-dies-87.
Vitales, Timothy James. 2013. Archaeological research in the Laguna de Bay area, Philippines. Hukay  
18(1): 54–81.
Wade, Geoff. 1993. On the possible Cham origin of the Philippine scripts. Journal of Southeast Asian 
Studies  24(1): 44–87.
——— . 2005. Southeast Asia in the Ming Shi-Lu: An open access resource. The NUS E-Press . http://
epress.nus.edu.sg/msl/.
——— . 2009. An early age of commerce in Southeast Asia, 900–1300 CE. Journal of Southeast Asian 
Studies  40(2): 221–65.
Ward, Jerome V. and Lolita J. Bulalacao. 1999. Pollen analysis of Laguna de Bay, Luzon. National 
Museum Papers  9(1): 1–26.
Wicks, Robert S. 1986. Monetary developments in Java between the ninth and sixteenth centuries: A 
numismatic perspective. Indonesia  42:43–77.
——— . 1992. Money, markets, and trade in early Southeast Asia: The development of indigenous 
monetary systems to AD 1400 . Ithaca, NY: Southeast Asia Program, Cornell University.
Wieringa, E. P. 2003. Dotting the Dal and penetrating the letters: The Javanese origin of the Syair Seribu 
Masalah and its Bantenese spelling. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde / Journal of the 
Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia  159(4): 499–518.
Wikipedia . 2022. Antoon Postma. Wikipedia , accessed 15 June 2022. https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Antoon_Postma.
Wilkinson, Richard James. 1959. A Malay-English dictionary (Romanised) . 2 vols. London: MacMillan.
Wisseman Christie, Jan. 1995. State formation in early maritime Southeast Asia: A consideration of the 
theories and the data. Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde / Journal of the Humanities and 
Social Sciences of Southeast Asia  151(2): 235–88.
——— . 1996. Money and its uses in the Javanese states of the ninth to fifteenth centuries A.D. Journal 
of the Economic and Social History of the Orient  39(3): 243–86.
——— . 1998. Javanese markets and the Asian sea trade boom of the tenth to thirteenth centuries A.D. 
Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient  41(3): 344–81.
——— . 2001. Revisiting early Mataram. In Fruits of inspiration: Studies in honour of Prof. J. G. de 
Casparis, retired professor of the early history and archeology of South and Southeast Asia at the 
University of Leiden, the Netherlands, on the occasion of his 85th Birthday , ed. M. J. Klokke and K. 
R. van Kooij, 25–55. Groningen: Forsten.
——— . 2009a. Preliminary notes on debt and credit in early island Southeast Asia. In Credit and debt 
in Indonesia, 860–1930: From peonage to pawnshop, from Kongsi to cooperative , ed. David Henley 
and Peter Boomgaard, 41–60. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
——— . 2009b. Appendix: References to debt and debt bondage in the epigraphic record from early 
island Southeast Asia. In Credit and debt in Indonesia, 860–1930: From peonage to pawnshop, 

--- [Page 78] ---
PSHEV 70, NO. 2 (2022)242from Kongsi to cooperative , ed. David Henley and Peter Boomgaard, 178–90. Singapore: Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies.
Wolff, John U. 1976. Malay borrowings in Tagalog. In Southeast Asian history and historiography: 
Essays presented to D. G. E. Hall , ed. Charles Donald Cowan and Oliver William Wolters, 345–67. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Wolters, O. W. 1983. A few and miscellaneous Pi-Chi jottings on early Indonesia. Indonesia  36:49–65.
Yang, Bowen, ed. 1996. Zhu-fan zhi jiao-shi  諸蕃志校釋 , Zhongwai jiaotong shiji congkan [Annotated 
gazetteer of barbarian nations]. Beijing: Zhonghua.
Yang, Shao-yun. 2021. A Chinese gazetteer of foreign land: A new translation of part 1 of the Zhufan 
Zhi. https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/39bce63e4e0642d3abce6c24db470760.
Yano, Michio and Makoto Fushimi. 2014. Pancanga (version 3.14). http://www.cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp/~yanom/
pancanga/.
Zoetmulder, P. J. 1974. Kalangwan: A survey of old Javanese literature . The Hague: Nijhoff.
——— . 1982. Old Javanese-English dictionary . 2 vols. Gravenhage: Nijhoff.
Elsa Clavé  is assistant professor of Southeast Asian studies at Asien-Afrika-Institut, University 
of Hamburg, Edmund-Siemers-Allee 1, 20146 Hamburg, Germany, and associate researcher at the 
Centre Asie du Sud-est (Paris). She specializes in the modern history of Muslim polities in Southeast 
Asia, and manuscript studies, with a particular interest in the cultural history of the Malay-speaking 
world. <elsaclave@gmail.com>
Arlo Griffiths  is professor of Southeast Asian history at the École française d’Extrême-Orient, 
French School of Asian Studies, EFEO, 22 avenue du Président Wilson 75116 Paris, France, and one 
of three principal investigators of the research program “The Domestication of Hindu Asceticism 
and the Religious Making of South and Southeast Asia,” financed by the European Research Council 
(2019–2025). His research focuses on the edition and analysis of historical sources in the form of 
inscriptions and manuscripts written in Sanskrit and (Austroasiatic or Austronesian) vernacular 
languages. < arlo.griffiths@efeo.net>