--- [Page 1] ---
1 Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022
ON MPU TANAKU Ṅ, DAṄ HYAṄ NIRARTHA, AND THE  
AUTHORSHIP OF THE BHUVANAKOŚA1 
 
Andrea Acri 
École Pratique des Hautes Études (EPHE), PSL University, Prancis 
École française  d’Extrême -Orient (EFEO), Prancis  
 
Korespondensi: andrea.acri@ephe.sorbonne.fr  
 
ABSTRAK 
Artikel ini mengambil titik tolak dari pupuh Sanskerta pertama dari kitab suci Śaiva Sanskerta -Jawa 
kuno berjudul Bhuvanakośa , yang telah sampai kepada kita dalam manuskrip lontar Bali. 
Diperkirakan bahwa ayat ini membentuk sebuah himne pengantar ( maṅgala atau stuti) dalam 
memuji Śiva dan, pada saat yang sama,  mengungkapkan kepengarangan penulis teks —apakah asli 
atau fiktif yang muncul secara ex post —melalui “tanda ” yang diungkapkan melalui kata Sansekerta 
yang mengisyaratkan nama Tanaku ṅ, seorang pengarang karya sastra Jawa Kuno dan karya -karya 
agama yang hidup pada abad ke -15. Artikel ini kemudian menguraikan latar belakang sosio-historis 
dan agama pada periode itu, dan menghubungkan sosok Tanaku ṅ dan teks- teks yang dianggap 
berasal darinya dengan sosok Ḍaṅ Hya ṅ Nirartha, seorang tokoh agama penting Bali yang diyakini 
aktif di pulau itu antara akhir abad ke- 15 dan awal abad ke -16. 
 
Kata kunci : Bhuvanakośa ; Kesusastraan Jawa Kuno ; Saskrit; Śaivisme ; Buddhisme ; Mpu 
Tanaku ṅ; Ḍaṅ Hyaṅ Nirartha  
 
ABSTRACT 
This article takes as a point of departure the first Sanskrit verse of the Sanskrit- Old Javanese Śaiva 
scripture Bhuvanakośa , which has come down to us in Balinese palm-leaf manuscripts. I t argue s 
that this verse forms an introductory hymn ( maṅgala or stuti) praising Śiva and, at the same time, 
revealing the identity of the compiler of the text —whether genuine or fictively attributed ex post —
through a “signature” expressed by means of a Sanskrit word  hinting at the name Tanaku ṅ, an author 
of Old Javanese literary and religious works who lived in the 15th century . It then elaborates on the 
socio-historical and religious background of that period, and links the figu re of Tanaku ṅ and the 
texts ascribed to him to Ḍaṅ Hya ṅ Nirartha, an important Balinese religious figure who is believed 
to have been active on the island between the late 15th and early 16th century.  
 
Keywords : Bhuvanakoś a; Old Javanese literature ; Sanskrit; Śaivism ; Buddhism ; Mpu Tanaku ṅ; 
Ḍaṅ Hyaṅ Nirartha  
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Bhuvanakośa  (“The Storehouse of Worlds” ) is a Sanskrit- Old-Javanese Śaiva 
tantric text of the tutur  genre.2 This textual source of anonymous authorship, probably 
comp iled in various stages between the late first millennium CE and the early 16th century , 

1 An early version of this article was presented at the International Symposium “Sañcaya Sari: 
Untaian Adikarya Stuart Robson” (Malang, East Java, 16 –17 November 2019). I am grateful to Hadi 
Sidomulyo for his comments, and to IGA Darma Putra and Putu Eka Guna Yasa for  having 
generously shared with me their knowledge about the Balinese literary tradition. Any m istakes are 
mine  alone . I would like to acknowledge the support of the programme “Scripta -PSL. Histoire et 
pratiques de l’écrit”, Investissements d’Ave nir, launched by the French Government and 
implemented by ANR (ANR- 10-IDEX -0001 -02 PSL), and , from 202 0 onwards, of the project 
DHARMA (ERC Synergy Grant 809994, “The Domestication of ‘Hindu’ Asceticism and the 
Religious Making of South and Southeast Asia” ). 
2 On this class of texts, and the sub- genre of tattva s, see Acri 2006, 2017.  P- ISSN 2087-1074   E- ISSN 2685 -7391
DOI: 10.37014/jumantara.v13i1.1150
Diajukan 24-11-2020 Direview 12-02-2020 Direvisi (accepted)  Diterima 18-05-2022

--- [Page 2] ---
Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022 2Andrea Acri 
has come down to us through  a handful of Balinese palm -leaf manuscripts ( lontar ), as well 
as typed Romanised transcriptions , kept in public or private collections in Indonesia and 
the Netherlands. Mainly arranged in a dyadic style (see Acri and Hunter 2020) , the text is 
by far the bulkiest tutur  known to us, c ompris ing about five hundred Sanskrit stanzas 
(śloka ) accompanied by translations, paraphrases, and/or commentaries in Old Javanese. 
 
The Bhuvanakośa  is still regarded in contemporary Bali as a “Classic”  in the domain 
of Śaiva mysticism. The appreciation —or even “canonisation ”—of th is scripture is not a 
new phenomenon, but may date back to the pre-colonial period, for the Bhuvanakośa  is 
included in a list of eight authoritative scriptu res described as the “secret texts of the 
Brahmans” by the 19th -century observer Rudolph Friederich.3 It is no wonder that this text 
has been known long since to  both Western and Indonesian scholars. For instance, Roeloef 
Goris (1926) and Alexander Zieseniss (1939) described and studied parts of it in their 
pioneering works on Javano- Balinese Śaivism . The text was also used by Haryati Soebadio, 
who pinpointed several textual parallels with the Jñānasiddhānta , another Sanskrit- Old 
Javanese tutur  preserved uniquely on Balinese manuscripts, which focuses on mysticism 
and yoga (Soebadio 1971) . In spite of this state of affairs, the Bhuvanakośa  has not yet 
been critically edited and fully translated in to either Indonesian or European languages.4  
 
A common opinion among Balinese and Western scholars is that the Bhuvanakośa  
is an early text —probably one of the earliest of the tutur  genre. While its formal 
organisation in Sanskrit- Old Javanese “translation dyads” instead of Old Javanese prose 
(whether interspersed with Sanskrit śloka s or not) would suggest that this is the case, one 
can never be totally sure: witness for instance the bulky Tutur  Śivāgama , which is organised 
in just the same way, and yet was composed by Ida Pedanda Made Sidemen, probably in 
the first half of the 20th century. While the first section of the Bhuvanakośa  may very well 
be early, what is important to stress here is that the text is a heterogeneous source, formed 
by at least two discrete textual units , structured as follows: 
 
Ch. 1–5: Bhuvanakośa, Brahmarahasyaśāstra, prathamaḥ… pañcama paṭ alaḥ. 
 Ch. 6: Jñānasiddhāntaśāstraṁ , prathama ḥ paṭalaḥ. 
 Ch. 7: Bhasmamantrasakalavidhiśāstraṁ, dvitīyaḥ  paṭalaḥ. 
 Ch. 8: Jñānasaṅ kṣepaṁ, tr̥tīyaḥ paṭalaḥ. 
 Ch. 9: Bhuvanakośan, navamaḥ  paṭalaḥ. 
 Ch. 10: Siddhāntaśāstraṁ, jñānarahasyaṁ, daśamaḥ  paṭalaḥ. 
Ch. 11 + explicit : Bhuvanakośa, paramarahasyaṁ, jñānasiddhāntaśāstraṁ , 

3 Friederich (1959,  28–29) listed the following titles [spelling as in the original 1849-50 edition in 
Dutch, pp. 22- 23], 1) Boewana Sangksepa ; 2) Boewana Kosa ; 3) Wrĕhaspati Tatwa ; 4) Sārasa 
Moestjaja ; 5) Tatwa Djnjāna ; 6) Kandampat ; 7) Sadjotkranti ; 8) Toetoer Kamoksa . 
4 A critical edition and English translation of the text by the present author is in preparation. The 
versions that have been published in Bali in recent years, which come with a loose  Indonesian 
translation of the Old Javanese portions only (see, for example, Mirsha et al. 1994; Budha  Gautama 
2009), appear to be based on a single (unspecified) source, namely a r ather faulty typewritten 
romanized transcription of a palm-leaf manuscript from  the collection of the Pusat Dokumentasi 
Budaya Bali in Denpasar. Although these publications are of great importance for the “socialization ” 
of the Hindu religion in the contemporary Balinese community, they are not very useful for scholarly 
purposes as they gloss over a number of crucial philological issues. 

--- [Page 3] ---
3 Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022On Mputanakuṅ, Daṅhyaṅnirartha, And The authorship of The Bhuvanakośa 
śivopadeśaṁ  samāptam . 
 
The Bhuvanakośa  deals with cosmography, geography, soteriology, ontology, yoga, 
subtle physiology, connections between microcosm and macrocosm, mantric mysticism 
(both sonic and graphic), and other aspects of Śaiva doctrine and practice. Although it 
documents a form of Śaivism that in terms of doctrine is related to that of texts of the tattva  
genre transmitted in Java and/or Bali, such as the Dharma Pātañjala,  the Vr̥haspatitattva , 
and the Tattvajñāna , the Bhuvanakośa  does not deal extensively with metaphysics, and 
parts of it seem to  betray a derivation from a different South Asian prototypical tradition. 
In this respect, some sections of the text present analogies that are found in the  
Mahābhārata  and the Upani ṣads, early non- dualistic Śaiva Saiddhāntika  texts , such as 
those belonging to the Kālottara  (or Vātula/Āgneya) corpus , as well as Vedānta -influenced 
relatively late (post 10th-century) non- dualistic South Indian Śaiva Saiddhāntika texts .5 
While the Śaiva doctrine of  the Bhuvanakośa  displays several archaic elements, such as a 
list of 26 cosmic principles ( tattva ) encompassing the 25 principles of the Sāṅ khya plus 
Rudra at the top (vis- à-vis the 31 or 36 tattva s accepted by subsequent Śaiva schools), as 
in Pāśupata Śaivism  (or Atimār ga Śaivism) , it espouses a n Atimārgic  gnostic approach to 
soteriology focusing on internalised yogic practices, including visualisations and the 
association of syllables to subtle centres of the body. Chapters 6 to 11 are chara cterized by 
a remarkable intertextuality with the Jñānasiddhānta , which shares with the Bhuvanakośa  
a similarly heterogeneous textual arrangement, and which may possibly be roughly 
contemporaneous to its eponymous second section , the Jñānasiddhāntaśāstra . 
 
2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Having described the general features of the Bhuvanakośa , I will now focus on the 
Sanskrit verse ( maṅgala) that opens the text. While I have already dealt with this verse 
elsewhere (Acri 2015a), in the context of a parallel between the maṅgala verse found in 
the “colophon” of the Nītisārasamuccaya (“Compendiu m of the essence of policy”), a  legal 
text written in Indic script and pre-Classical Malay language preserved in the Tanj ung 
Tanah codex in the Kerinci highlands of Central Sumatra,6 in what follows I will analyse 
it to advance a tentative hypothesis about the authorship —or, more precisely, the identity 
of the compiler —of the text.7 This discussion will serve as a point of departure to elaborate 
on two emblematic literary and religious figures of the late Majapahi t period in East Java 
and its aftermath in Bali, namely Mpu Tanaku ṅ and Ḍaṅ Hyaṅ Nirartha (or Dvijendra ). 
 

5 For a discussion of some of these analogies, see Acri 2021a and 2021b. 
6 This may be the oldest Malay manuscript currently known (ca. 14th or earl y 15th century). 
7 It is notoriously difficult to determine the authorship, dating, and regio n of compilation of tutur s, 
for they are esoteric texts mainly concerned with metaphysical realities. Just like the tantr ic 
scriptures in Sanskrit from the Indian subcontinent, these revealed scriptures were stu diously freed 
from any references to worldly realia and human agents (including their au thors) in order to keep 
them consistent with the mythical/atemporal plane in which they are set, where a dialogue between  
the supreme deity (usually Śiva) and his interlocutor (usually the Goddess, Kumār a, or a sage) takes 
place. 

--- [Page 4] ---
Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022 4Andrea Acri 
The verse, together with its Old Javanese prelude and commentary, runs as follows:8 
 
saṅ saṅgrahakāri9 sira mavuvus | li ṅnira |  
 
  pra ṇamya śirasā deva ṁ10 | vakti11 munir amanmatha ḥ12 |  
  devadeva mah ādeva | parame śvara śaṅkara || 1.1 
 
śrī muni bh ārgava | sira mahyun tumakvanakǝ n ika ṅ pada nirb āṇa ri bha ṭāra | 
maṅkana pv ābhipr āyanira | manambah ta sira ri bha ṭāra | śirasā | makak āraṇa 
hulunira sira | ri t әlasnira manambah | mojar ta sira || he devadeva | kita devani ṅ 
devata kabeh | he mah ādeva | kita bha ṭāra mah ādeva ṅaranta | he mahe śvara | kita 
bhaṭāra mahe śvara ṅaranta | he śaṅkara | kita bha ṭāra śaṅkara ṅaranta ||  
 
The reverend author of the compendium spoke. His words were: 
 
Having bowed down with the head before God, the sage who is free from 
[erotic ] desire spoke: ‘O God of Gods, O Great God, O Supreme Lord, O 
Śaṅkara!’  
 
The sage Bh ārgava desired to ask the Lord about the stage of extinction. Such was 
his intention. He worshipped the Lord with the head —he used his head. Having 
finished to worship, he spoke: O God of Gods —you are the God of all the Gods! 
O Mah ādeva —You are Lord Mah ādeva b y name! O Mahe śvara—you are Lord 
Mahe śvara by name! O Śaṅkara—you are Lord Śaṅkara by name!  
 
The verse, as it is customary for maṅgalas or stutis in both Sanskrit and Old Javanese 
literature, is a hymn of praise directed to the paramount deity worshiped by the poet, uttered 
by the poet himself. In this case, the commentary explicitly tells us that the author or 
compiler of the text —who is the interlocutor of Śiva , seemingly receiving his revelation in 
the form of a vision —asked the deity about the state of extinction ( nirvāṇ a), thus triggering 
the Lord to impart to him the lessons constituting the text itself. The compiler seems to be 
hinted at by the expression saṅ saṅgrahakāri . I interpret  saṅgrahakāri  as a tadbha va (i.e., 
a Sanskrit loanword that has been morphologically altered) formed by the compound 
saṅgraha  (“a compendium, summary, catalogue, list, epitome, abridgment, short 
statement ”, Monier -Williams 1899) plus kāri(n) (“doer, maker”) —compare “[ saṅgraha ]-
kāra, m. the composer or author of the Sa ṃgraha ” (Monier -Williams  1899 ). The label 

8 Here I have used my own in-progress critical edition of the text; an edition of the first six Sanskrit 
verses plus Old Javanese glosses of the text, on the basis of the single manuscript (from Lombok)  
Leide n Cod.Or. 5 022, may be found in Goris 1926, 78–81. 
9 Em. All manuscripts read sasaṅgraha kāri sira . (The romanized version published by Pusat 
Dokumentasi Budaya Bali reads saṅ saṅgraha kāri  (where kari is an “emphatic particle (often, but 
by no means exclusively, in interrogative sentences)”, Zoetmulder 1982, 807),  which is likely to be 
an editorial improvement rather than reflecting a genuine variant reading found  in the manuscript 
prototype).  
10 Em. Al l manuscripts read deva . 
11 Conj. All manuscripts read vākya. See my discussion below. 
12 Em. All manuscripts read amanmatha . 

--- [Page 5] ---
5 Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022On Mputanakuṅ, Daṅhyaṅnirartha, And The authorship of The Bhuvanakośa 
saṅgraha  used to define the text makes perfect sense in this context, as the Bhuvanakośa  
itself is a composite text, a compendium of mat erial redacted  together by a compiler. It may 
be noted here that in the maṅgala of the Old Malay Nītisārasamuccaya , which shares some 
similarities with the first verse of the Bhuvanakośa , the text expounded ( vakti ) by the poet 
is said to be “ extracted from various authoritative sources”  (nānāśāstroddh r̥taṁ), which 
equals to say,  it is a synthetic compilation or compendium ( = saṅgraha). I should also like 
to point out  that some early Śaiva Tantras from the Indian subcontinent are conceptualized 
as saṅgraha s, and bear that element in their titles —see, for instance, the 
Rauravasūtrasaṅ graha  and the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅ graha ; compare the 
Niśvāsatattvasaṁ hitā (saṁhitā being a collection of texts). 
 
The first quarter of the Sanskrit verse, praṇamya śirasā deva m, is also attested , either 
in exactly the same form or with minor variants,  in the  Nītisārasamuccaya  and in a number 
of Balinese and South Asian Sanskrit texts (Acri 2015a, 66–67). The second quarter, vakti 
munir amanmatha ḥ, presents some grammatical and lexical problems, yet it is the most 
interesting, and constitutes the pivot of the argument presented in this ar ticle. Vakti  is my 
emendation of vākya , from √ vac, “to speak, declare, proclaim” . Vākya  may be either a non-
standard form  of the optative participle vācyaṁ  (“what is to be spoken/desired to be 
spoken/going to be spoken ”), or a non-standard form equivalent to the substantive 
vākya(ṁ), “speech”. Amanmatha ḥ (nominative)  is my emendation from  amanmatha 
(vocative) . If we accept either vākya  = vācya (ṃ) or vākyaṁ  (subst.),13 the verse-quarter 
could be the result of a contamination between a nominal sentence with genitive ( vākyaṁ 
muner amanmathasya ,14 which is, however, hyperme trical ), and a verbal sentence, the 
correct form of which would be : vakti munir amanmatha ḥ. Indeed, the shift from vakti  to 
vākya (ṁ) is justifiable on palaeographic grounds, entailing the confusion between the 
subscript ya and ta, the drop of the  hulu (or its transformation into an anusvāra ), and the 
artificial lengthening of the first a (which is already metrically long as it occurs before a 
consonantal cluster).  The form vakti , it should be noted, is not only reflected in the Old 
Javanese commentary ( mojar ta sira ), but, as I have mentioned above, also occurs in the 
maṅgala of the Nītisārasamuccaya .15  
 
As for amanmatha ḥ, the context requires it to be a qualifier of muni ḥ, the sage who 
is the saṅ saṅgrahakāri , and who, having bowed down to Śiva, utters ( vakti ) the invocation 
to him.  The Sanskrit manmatha ḥ means “agitating”, “love or the god of love”  (i.e., 
Kāma[deva]), “amorous passion or desire” ; therefore , as an adjectival compou nd, 
amanmatha ḥ could mean “he who is free from [erotic] desire” . The form with an added 
alpha privans  is, to the best of my knowledge, unattested in both the Sanskrit and Old 

13 In Bhuvanako śa 1.3c we find the nominal construction vākyan te , which is (faithfully) glossed as 
nihan vuvusani ṅ hulun i kita (“my speech to you is as follows ”).  
14 Being equivalent to amanmathina ḥ (manmathin meaning  “enamoured/impassioned/in love”).  
15 Insofar that it obviously represents an introductory eulogy to (variou s manifestations of) Śiva, the 
verse mirrors the colophon of the Nītisārasamuccaya  with respect to both context and function. The 
two passages contain a verbal praise ( stuti) of, and re present a physical act of worship towards, a 
paramount deity —that is, Śiva—by either the text’s author or, in the case of the Bhuvanako śa, the 
main interlocutor of Śiva and “revealer” of the text. Note the mention of Mahā deva in the line 
preceding the colophon of the Nītisārasamuccaya , and the epithets Mah ādeva, Parame śvara, and 
Śaṅkara in the Bhuvanako śa.  

--- [Page 6] ---
Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022 6Andrea Acri 
Javanese textual corpus. We are, therefore, dealing with a hapax,16 and a highly unusual 
form  too, especially given the fact that it is used to qualify a person, for the same concept 
could have been conveyed through a number of well-attested synonyms (e.g. virāga , 
niṣkāma , niḥspr̥ha, etc.). In view of this fact, I would like to tentatively advance the 
hypothesis that the Sanskrit bahuvrīhi  compound amanmatha ḥ could be a “signature”, i.e., 
reveal (and hide at the same time)17 a reference to the name of the compiler of the text.  
 
An element supporting the above-mentioned hypothesis is that one of the possible 
translations into Old Javanese of the compound amanmatha ḥ would be tan aku ṅ, “[he who 
is/one] without a morous passion/desire” ,18 and (Mpu) Tanaku ṅ happens to be the (pen) 
name of an author who flourished in the second half of the 15th century in East Java. In 
their discussion about the name of this author , Teeuw et al. (1969, 13) translate kuṅ as 
“sexual love”, “pangs of love”, “amorous yearning”, and the derivation akuṅ as 
“enamoured”, “filled with amorous desire”. They note that the former corresponds to the 
Sanskrit word rāga —tan aku ṅ mea ning “without amorousness”, “without passion”, 
“indifferent”, being more or less the equivalent of the Sanskrit virakta ;19 and they conclude 
that “[c]learly  it is a fitting pen-name for a poet who, in his own words, strives to attain a 
state of passionlessness or indifference” ( Teeuw et al. 1969, 14).20  
 
Pen names (parab ), either in Old Javanese or, less frequently, Sanskrit, were 
common in the literary world of kakavin s, and poets often hid them in the introductory 
maṅgalas or final verses of their works as signatures ( sometimes making playful and ironic 
allusions about themselves).21 Clearly, premodern Javanese authors were keen to exploit 

16 One may suggest that the Old Javanese gloss mahyun (“desired ”) might represent the Sanskrit 
amanmatha ḥ (“free from [sexual] desire ”) in the second verse -quarter, where the commentator 
would have taken a- as an Old Javanese prefix rather than as the Sanskrit alpha privans that it is. 
While this possibility cannot be discarded, it seems to me rather unlikely, f or the Old Javanese gloss 
quite faithfully renders the other elements of the verse (cf. Acri 2015a), an d it is only natural that 
the commentator would have wanted to add an explanation about what he defines as th e abhiprāya  
of the sage for speaking to Śiva.  
17 On the cryptic character of parab s or pen names, see Zoetmulder 1974, 151. 
18 Cf. Zoetmulder 1982,  925–926 s .v. kuṅ: “love, amorous desire, lovesickness, languishing with 
love”; akuṅ “1. in love, infatuated, full of amorous desire, lovesick, languishing with love; ‘ ṅ akuṅ’ 
may refer to a man or woman, but usually the former. ”  
19 Or virāga . If we go back to the word amanmatha ḥ, we see that it may hide not only a pen name, 
but a playful pun: virāga  (equivalent to virakta ), if analyzed as Sanskrit vi “without” + Old Javanese 
and Balinese rāga “body”, can also mean “the one without a body”, an epithet of Kāma or 
Manmatha, t he God of Love.  
20 Zoetmulder (197 4, 365) noted that five out of the seven poems of the Bhāṣa Tanaku ṅ, a collection 
of short lyrical poems attributed to Tanaku ṅ, “are laments by the poet at his beloved being forced 
by her parents to marry another man, so that he (the poet) is now ‘without love’ ( tan akung ). Possibly 
it was such an event in his life which prompted him to adopt Tanakung as a no m-de-plume.” I find 
this explanation rather unlikely, for Tanaku ṅ’s authorship of the Bhāṣa Tanaku ṅ could have been 
spuriously attributed by the later Balinese tradition precisely on account of the conte nts of the poem 
rather than reflecting a genuine life event of the author (pace Robson: see b elow, fn. 22) . 
Furthermore, one cannot even exclude the existence of two different Tanaku ṅs.  
21 This is the case of, for example, Mpu Tantular ( tan tular ), the author of the 14th- century Buddhist 
kakavin Sutasoma  (cf. also below, fn. 2 7). I tentatively advance the hypothesis that the Sanskrit 
word dhairya  occurring in the opening hymn of kakavin Bhomāntaka  (1.3)  could represent one such 
“signatures”,  allud ing to the name Tantular. Dhairya  in Sanskrit means “firmness” (OJ: “fortitude, 
courage”, or as an adjective, “firm, constant, steady, self -controlled”, etc.). The first line of verse 

--- [Page 7] ---
7 Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022On Mputanakuṅ, Daṅhyaṅnirartha, And The authorship of The Bhuvanakośa 
the polysemy of Old Javanese and Sanskrit, and to use various synonyms to indicate their 
pen names. As noted by Supomo (1977, 4), since “the manipulation of synonyms is one of 
the most characteristic features of Old Javanese poetry […] it is not surprising to obse rve 
that in every kakawin  a person, a god or a country is called by several proper names.”  
 
Now, we know that Mpu Tanaku ṅ was the author of at least two Old Javanese 
kakavin s: the Vr̥ttasañcaya  and the —strongly Śaiva in religious persuasion and theme —
Śivarātrikalpa . Another didactic poem, the Udyalāka , explicitly states that its author is 
Tanaku ṅ, but Teeuw et al. (1969, 13) cast doubt on the authenticity of this claim, and opine 
that it might have been either an early work of the poet (due to the presence of mistakes 
and other irregularities), or “ it may be that it was written in Bali years later  and for some 
reason traditionally ascribed to Tanaku ṅ.” Similarly, some short lyrical poems, like the 
Bhāṣ a Tanaku ṅ, are ascribed to this author;22 but some among them are also ascribed to 
Nirartha ( Teeuw et al. 1969, 13). In fact, in Bali, the collections of poems by Tanaku ṅ and 
Nirartha are usually found in the same manuscript bundles. And some texts attr ibuted to 
Nirartha,23 like the Usana Bali May āntaka , do mention (and praise) Tanaku ṅ. This 
association between the two figures, as we shall see below, is relevant. Teeuw et al.  point 
out that at least two other Old Javanese poets had “negative” names, namely Tantular  and, 
indeed, Nirartha. The latter is traditionally ascribed to the period between the late 15th and 
early  16th century, and plays a paramount role in the Balinese Śaiva  tradition as the initiator 
of the lineage of the Pedanda Śiva, the highest Brahmanical ritual agents of Bali . The Śaiva 
didactic religio -philosophical poem Nirarthaprak r̥ta, existing in only one manuscript from 
the Puri Cakranegara collection in Lombok, has a colophon declaring that the text was  
composed by Puputut Tanv riṅdeya (Student “Baffled”) in Ś aka year 1381 ( AD 1459) in a 
location called Kañcana (“Gold”) , a (predominantly Buddhist?) religious centre not far 

1.3 runs: maṅgalyāni ṅ hulun dhairya sahaja mak әdә̄ mrākә tāṅ bhomakāvya , “May he (i.e., Kāma, 
and the poet’s sponsor, whom he embodies) be a sure source of blessing for me too, as of my own 
accord I do my best to render the kāvya of Bhoma in Javanese” (trans. Teeuw 2005 , 71). It  seems 
that Teeuw translates dhairya  + makәdә̄ (Zoetmulder 1982, 837: “feeling the urge to, feeling 
impelled to, set on; [wanting, seeking to obtain, etc.] at all costs [by any mean s]; keeping on, cannot 
but unremittingly, insistently, obstinately, unavoidably”) as “I do my best”; however, dhairya  here 
is more likely to represent a (Sanskrit or Sanskritic) epithet of the poet (who is writing in the first 
person, ṅhulun ), which is the positive equivalent of the negative Old Javanese expression tan tular  
“immovable, unchanging, unperturbed”. Some elements in the maṅgala evoke the East Javanese 
cultural milieu of Majapahit, in which Tantular was active. For instance, the expression dhyak ṣeṅ 
kalaṅvan, which Teeuw translates “Chief Judge in Poetical Affairs”, recalls the title dharmādhyak ṣa, 
“Superintendent of Religion”, a fig ure that is often mentioned in inscriptions of the Majapahit period 
(cf. below); and also the emphasis on Kāma, a divine figure whose significance becom es rather 
central in the religious and literary culture of the time. Teeuw (2005,  57) characterized the 
Bhomakāvya  as “a well -thought out and well-composed literary creation by an intelligent, creative, 
and well- informed author”, which Tantular undoubtedly was . Darma Putra (2020), in a short study 
on the maṅgala of the Bhomāntaka , has advanced a different hypothesis, connect ing the text to an 
earlier historical period, namely the reign of Jayabhaya (AD 1135 –1157 ), and interpret ing dhairya 
sahaja  as referring to the unwavering quality of the poet- viku who authored the text. This remains 
an open iss ue that needs to be explored further. On the hypothesis that Prapañca, the author of the 
Deśavarṇ ana/Nāgar akr̥tāgam a, is to be identified with (the young) Tantular ( prapañca  being an 
antonym of tan tular ), or perhaps wi th an opponent, see Supomo 1977,  2–3.  
22 Robson (1979,  304–305) considers this attribution verisimilar, on account of the author’s seeming 
reliance on Sanskrit sources .  
23 See Dvijendratattva  25a. 

--- [Page 8] ---
Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022 8Andrea Acri 
from Majapahit.24 Robson (1979, 305) correctly notes that “The use of a pen -name 
containing the word tan (“not” ) reminds us of the poets Tantular and Tanakung.”25 Both 
the Sutasoma  by Tantular and the Nirarthaprak r̥ta display signs o f mixed Śiva -Buddha 
religiosity.26 Nirartha  himself was, according to the Balinese tradition, a Buddhist who 
converted to Śaivism in order to marry the daughter of a Śaiva p riest.  As it is often the case, 
Balinese chronicles and other folk-accounts, even though containing imaginific narratives 
elaborated to make sense of certain literary, historical, or religious reali ties, reflect a kernel 
of historical truth , or in any event preserve a memory of important historical personalities. 
 
There is one more kakavin  that needs to be mentioned in this context, namely the 
Dharma Śūnya , a Javanese manuscript of which contains a colophon dated Śaka 1382, or 
AD 1460. Commenting on the date of this colophon, Robson (1979, 305) notes that 
“Assuming that this reading is correct, we can see that the works of Tanakung were not 
entirely alone. ” Then, we have a major didactic-religious poem written at the same time in 
which Tanaku ṅ flourished. Is it a coincidence, or could this text have been penned by 
Tanaku ṅ himself  (or by somebo dy in his “workshop”) ? An association  going into that 
direction has already been made by the Balinese tradition, according to which  the author 
of the Dharma Śūnya  was not the Kamalanātha  mentioned in the text, but Nirartha (Dharma 
Palguna 1999, 6) . According to Dharma Palguna, Kamalanātha states that he is a man of 
religion ( viku) without any possession (verse 153), which he links to the name Nirartha, 
nirartha meaning “without (nir) material possessions ( artha )” in Sanskrit.27 This 
attribution is difficult, but not impossible, to reconcile with the date of  AD 1463 given in 
the above-mentioned colophon, for Nirartha ’s stay in Bali  is traditionally ascribed by 
Babad s to the period between AD 1488 and AD 1536. (On the other hand, the colophon of 
the Nirarthaprak r̥ta gives the date of 1381 Śaka  or AD 1459, but it must have been copied 
from a previous manuscript as the lontar  in question is obviously Balinese, and the same 
bundle contains texts with later colophons).  
 
Now, some interesting connections between the Dharma Śūnya  and Tanaku ṅ have 
been advanced by Dharma Palguna. For instance, the late scholar has noted the presence 

24 The Old Javanese inscription of Kañcana record s the purchase of land for the establishment of a 
Buddhist foundation. According to  Sidomulyo (2018, 231), this charter dates from the 9th century , 
and as such represents “the earliest documentary evidence of the central Javanese courtʼs in terest in 
the Brantas Delta region. ” More recently, however, Griffiths ( 2020, 133)  has argued in favour of a  
10th century  dating, accepting the argument advanced by Kro m in 1914.  
25 This link was already pointed out by Poerbatjarka (1951, 204, note 9, along with the name or 
epithet Mapañji Tanutama (Tan Utama?), which is attributed to the dharm ādhyak ṣa of the Śaivas, 
Ḍaṅ Ācārya Śivanā tha, in the Sarvadharma charter) ; cf. Supomo (1977,  3) and Teeuw et al. 1969,  
14. Supomo (1977, 3) has noted how the words tan aku ṅ and tamatan tular  occur at the beginning 
of the first line of two stanzas of the Rāmāyaṇ a kakavin  (8.164a  and 8.165a ), which suggests that 
those pen-names could have denoted two authors living under the same ruler in  Paṇḍan-salas, who 
must have had access to the same copy of the Old Javanese text. 
26 I do not say “syncretic”, because this “mixed” religiosity could actually be the outcom e of an 
inclusivistic attitude (see Acri 2015b ). 
27 Another possible meaning is “without aim”. But in the text Dharma Pitutur , attributed to Nirartha 
by the Dvijendratattva , the author uses the pen name “Braja Miskin”, miskin  meaning “poor” in high 
Balinese. Cf. Dharma Pitutur , 52b: kaputus dharma kavi tan pitutur makasadhanani ṅ mpu braja 
miskin . I thank Putu Eka Guna Yasa of Udayana University in Denpasar for having poin ted out to 
me this reference. 

--- [Page 9] ---
9 Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022On Mputanakuṅ, Daṅhyaṅnirartha, And The authorship of The Bhuvanakośa 
of a praise to the Goddess Sarasvatī in both the Dharma Śūnya  and the Vr̥ttasañcaya  
(Dharma Palguna 1999, 227). Furthermore, he (1999, 307) pointed out that in Bali, some 
stanzas on Paramaśiva from the Dharma Śūnya  and kakavin Bh ārgavaśī kṣā,28 as well as 
the Śivarātrikalpa —all works characterized by a similar religious content —are sung to 
introduce the devayajña , the worship to the highest Gods. I will discuss the implication of 
the name Bh ārgava below; for the time being, let me note that the association between the 
Dharma Śūnya and the  Śivarātrikalpa  in Balinese worship seems to be relevant indeed. As 
a last point, I should mention that, as reported by Dharma Palguna (1999, 217), the Balinese 
scholar Ida Bagus Gede Agastia has linked the Kamalanātha mentioned in the  Dharma 
Śūnya as its author  to Kāmanātha, on account of the information found in Balinese babad s 
that the Buddhist priest Daṅ Hyaṅ Smaran ātha (son of Mpu Tantular) was the father of Da ṅ 
Hyaṅ Nirartha (a  Buddhist converted to Śaivism).29 While the superficial resemblance 
between the kama - in Kamalan ātha and the kāma - in Kāmanātha  seems to me not a strong 
piece of evidence to suppose an identity between the two (provided the former is, i ndeed, 
not the outcome of corruption), I believe that it is worthwh ile to follow IBG Agastia’s lead.  
 
Dharma Palguna (1999, 214) has noted that in the portions of the Dharma Śūnya  and 
Dharma Putus30 that attribute the authorship to Kamalanātha, the authors are faithful to the 
well-established convention of self-critique as being of modest understanding, of not 
mastering kakavin  prosody properly, etc. This stands in contrast, and is not consistent with, 
the adoption of the self- aggrandizing name Kamalanātha (“The Lord [ nātha ] of/in the 
Lotus [ kamala ]”) instead of such names as Tanakuṅ , Nirartha, etc. Indeed, Kamalanātha 
would virtually imply an equation of the poet with Paramaśiva, the supreme deity that is 
said to reside in the lotus (= heart) inside the human  body in a number of tutur s. However , 
since kamala  in Sanskrit may also have the (much less common) m eaning of “desirous, 
lustful” (Monier -Williams  1899, on the basis of BRD, as per Atharvaveda  VII, 6, 9; 
compare kāmala  “libidinous, lustful”, L.),  then Ka malanātha could be a Javano-Sanskrit 
“neologism” intended to be a synonym of Kāmadeva, and equivalent to Smaranātha.31 A 
version of the Babad Brāhmaṇ a mentions Nirartha as the son of ( A)smaranātha, himself 
the son of Tant ular (Dharma Palguna 1999, 262), giving the following genealogy: Bh r̥gu > 
Bajrasattva > Bharada > Bahula > Mpu Tantular (also Sa ṅ Hyaṅ Aśokanātha)32 > 

28 Another Bhārgavaśīk ṣā is an Old Javanese prose version of the Bhuvanakośa  without śloka s. The 
text is evidently named after the sage Bhārgava, mentioned at the beginning of the text . 
29 See Rub instein 2001, 83. 
30 Kakavin Dharma Putus , Leiden Cod. Or. 19.526 (Dharma Palguna 1999, 207).  
31 Intriguingly enough, kamala  appears to be the antonym of tan aku ṅ.  
32 Tan tular  in Old Javanese means “not moving, immovable, unchanging, unperturbed”; thus, 
Aśokanātha (sometimes spelled Aṅ śokanātha) “The Lord ( nātha ) without ( a) affliction/trouble 
(śoka)” would be an appropriate translation of tan tular . 

--- [Page 10] ---
Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022 10Andrea Acri 
(A)smaranātha33 > Da ṅ Hyaṅ Nirartha.34 As noted b y Ru binstein, Balinese babad s 
narrating the genealogy and biography of Nirartha a ttribute to many of his Javanese 
ancestors (including his father Ḍaṅ Hyaṅ Asmaranātha)  the status of royal purohita s and 
poets of Majapahit, identifying them as the authors of certain Old Javanese kakavin s 
(Rubinstein 2001, 83–85).35 Further, she points out that the list of Nirartha’s ancestors 
given by these texts does not spec ify the exi stence of kinship ties, b ut rather depict a type 
of “intellectual genealogy” ( Rubinstein 2001, 84).  
 
All the above suggests that there was not only an association, but perhaps at som e 
point even a “confusion”, between the two figures of Tanaku ṅ and Nirartha in Bali —or, at 
the very least, an attempt to link them together as belonging to the same spiritual , 
intellectual, and literary lineage . How is all this relevant to the issue of the authorship of 
the Bhuvanakośa ? My tentative hypothesis is that the Sanskrit expression munir 
amanmatha  in the maṅgala may be equivalent to the Old Javanese “Mpu 
Tanaku ṅ”/“Asmaranātha” , and that this could reflect a Balinese attempt to link the text to 
a (to some extent fictional, and to some extent historical) religious and  intellectual tradition 
that orginated in Majapahit.36 I will provide some further internal and external support to 
this idea below. 
 
The Old Javanese commentary of the maṅgala of the Bhuvanakośa  does not unpack 
this supposed “ pen name ”, just passing over in silence the second quarter of the Sanskrit 
śloka . Yet, it does mention the nam e of the sage who is the interlocutor of Śiva,  namely 
Bhārgava. Bhārgava means “son of Bh r̥gu”, or “descendant of B hr̥gu”. As we have seen 
above, th e Babad Brāhmaṇ a traces the genealogy of both Tanaku ṅ and Nirartha to Bh r̥gu; 
the Dvijendratattva  (2b) associates Nirartha to the “Bhr̥guva ṅśa” of Griya Mās in Dāha by 
marriage.37 Therefore, the mention of Bhārgava —who nota  bene does not appear anywhere 

33 Smaranātha seems to have been a fairly common name in East Java, for two Old  Javanese charters 
from Majapahit, viz. the Decree Jaya Song of c. AD 1350 and the undated Ch arter of Batur (Pigeaud 
1960 , 104–114; cf. Sanderson 2009, 119, fn. 267 ), refer to the officials known as dharmopapatti  
(“Assessors of Religion”), among whom is a certain Smaranātha (the latter inscription actually refers 
to two different Smaranāthas); the Bendosa ri copper plates, issued under the reign of Hayam Vuruk 
(Śrī Rājasanāgara, r. 1350 –1389), mention a Smaranātha (along with Śivanātha and Agreśvara) as 
belonging to the Bhairava denomination ( Brandes 1913 I, 209).  Compare the Ācāryas named 
Smaradahana and Smaradeva mentioned in the Sarvadharma charter of AD 1269 (is sued under 
Kr̥tanag ara’s reign: see Pigeaud 1960 , 99–103).  
34 The Dvijendratattva  (2a–2b; compare the other versions of the same text, like the Babad 
Dvijendra ) regards A( ṅ)śokanātha as the brother of Dvijendra, son of Asmaranātha, the purohita  of 
Majapahit. Another version of the Babad Brāhma ṇa (Leiden Cod.Or. 13.733, 2a) gives the 
following genealogy: Mpu Śrīnātha > Mpu Aṅśoka and Mpu Nilartha.  
35 For instance, to Tantular is attributed the authorship of the Arjunavijaya , the Sutasoma , and the 
Vr̥ttasañcaya (contrast  Supomo 1977,  1, reporting a passage from Friederich’s  account of a Balinese 
tradition assigning only the first tw o kakavins to “Mpu Tantular Boda” from Keḍ iri). The last 
kakavin  is by Tanaku ṅ, but see Supomo ( 1977, 3) on the connection or relationship between Tantular 
and Tanaku ṅ; cf. above, fn. 25.  
36 Actually, the Balinese tradition rather consistently link Nirartha to Ke ḍiri rather than Majapahit. 
According to Hadi Sidomulyo (email dated 26/09/2020), this may suggest that h e lived during the 
time when the Javanese royal family had abandoned the royal capital (after AD 1478) and fled 
southward. 
37 Nirartha is said to have married the daughter of a Brahman priest, named Da ṅ Hya ṅ Panavaran, 
whose ancestor was Bh r̥gu. Rubinstein (2000,  76) notes that, according to one version of the  Babad 

--- [Page 11] ---
11 Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022On Mputanakuṅ, Daṅhyaṅnirartha, And The authorship of The Bhuvanakośa 
else to my knowledge in Old Javanese or Balinese literature as the name of a  historical 
person, nor it appears again as such in the Bhuvanakośa  itself , except in the colophon of 
the Lombok manuscript Cod.Or. 502238—may just be an appellative to denote the familial 
line of the author. Indeed, in 3.24, in the Sanskrit śloka  the Lord addresses his interlocutor 
as bhr̥gusattama ḥ (“the excellent Bh r̥gu/the excellent among the Bh r̥gus”), which the Old 
Javanese commentary glosses with the Sanskrit compound bhr̥gutanaya , “the son of 
Bhr̥gu”.39 To make things even more complicated, elsewhere in the first chapter of the 
Bhuvanakośa , the interlocutor of Śiva is addressed by the Lord as  dvijarājendra  “Supreme 
King of Brahmins” (S anskrit verses, 1.15 and 1.16; Old Javanese commentary, 1.1 6) and 
dvijendra (Old Javanese commentary, 1.15). Another name of Nirartha was Mpu 
Dvijendra. Of course, dvijendra /dvijarājendra  could just be a general appellative applied 
to Brahmins (like yogīśvara , or munisattama ḥ in 1.31), and perhaps it may have had some 
specific linkage with the Javanese and Balinese Brahmanical milieus of that time . But it 
could also reflect an attempt by the text to associate itself to both Tanaku ṅ and 
Nirartha/Dvijendra , thereby confusing/coalescing them, or rather, it should be understood 
in the context of what was perceived by the tradition to be a “priestly family”  or 
“intellectual genealogy” . Or, could it be that Dvijendra was regarded as being present, 
along with Amanmatha/Bhārgava (alias Tanakuṅ/(A)smaranātha), on the occasion of the 
“hearing” of the text from  the mouth of Śiva?  
 
Let us now go back to Asmaran ātha, whom, as we have seen above, some scholars 
have identified with Tanaku ṅ. In regular Sanskrit, Asmaranātha could mean either “he who 
does not have Kāma as Lord”, or “The Lord without [erotic] love” . But, if this is indeed a 
Javanese Sanskrit ic compound intended to be a pen name, could it have been understood 
as a synonym of Amanmatha? Both Smaranātha (“God of Love”) and Manmatha refer to 
Kāmadeva, and both are prefixed by an a-. My hypothesis is that Smaranātha  (occurring in 
East Javanese inscriptions) and its synonym ( ?) Kamalanātha (occurring in the colophons 
of the Dharma Śūnya  and Dharma Putus ) denoted a different individual than Tanaku ṅ, but 
they might have been coalesced with Asmaranātha , representing Tanaku ṅ, in the Balinese 
babad  tradition.40 As for the identification of K amalanātha (= Smaranātha ?) with Nirartha , 
it is not impossible that it is the result of an ex post  association between the sage, who 
obtained release disappear ed from this world at Maśceti in Bali , and Kāma , who was 
regarded as being without a body (due to its burning by Śiva) —witness his epithets Atanu 

Brāhma ṇa (for instance, K. 237), “Nirartha acquired some ancestral writings from his father -in-law, 
a Brahmana Siwa priest from Daha, Java, around the period that Majapahit fell into dec line”.  
38 Oṁ namaḥ śivāya | oṁ  namo vāgīśvaraya | oṁ  namo bhārggavāya || śrī gurubhyo nama ḥ ||. 
39 A recently discovered Merapi-Merbabu manuscript (dated Śaka  1493 /AD 1571) of a Śaiva tutur  
entitled Mahāpadmaśāstra , belonging to  a Griya in Buleleng, North Bali, appears to be arranged as 
a teaching imparted by Bhagavān Bh r̥gu to his disciples. Although this Bh r̥gu may represent the 
mythical sage rather than a historical figure, the possibility that it may refer to the Bhr̥gu associated 
with Gri ya Mās of Dāha canno t be ruled out. ( Although I have been unable to access this manuscript, 
a transcription of a few words at beginning and end of the text contained in it was kindly shared wi th 
me by Sugi Lanus via WhatsApp in July 2018. On this manuscript, see 
https://baliexpress.jawapos.com/read/2019/09/30/158436/lontar-merapi- merbabu -ditemukan- di-
desa-jinengdalem- usia-300-an-tahun).  
40 Confusingly enough, the  a- could be taken either as a Sanskrit alpha privans  or as an Old Javanese 
adjectival prefix, resulting in the meaning of “he who has Kāma as Lord”/“he who is Kāma”.  See 
above, fn. 19, about the equivalence of tan aku ṅ, virāga , and Kāma.  

--- [Page 12] ---
Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022 12Andrea Acri 
and Ana ṅga, “the one without a body”  (see above, fns. 19 and 40). This would evoke an 
important point of doctrine in the religious literature of the time, namely the achievement 
of release through a form of yoga causing the disappearance of the body in to the 
nothingness/Supreme Reality (cf. e.g. Kidu ṅ Dharm a Pitutur  47–52a). 
 
If Asmaranatha/Amanmatha was indeed Tanaku ṅ, the legendary or pseudo-historical 
account of the Babad  Brāhmaṇ a does not seem to be too far off the mark, as the chronology 
of the two figures is not distant. As for Nirartha, Balinese oral accounts ascribe his arrival 
on the island to AD 1489, in the period of King Waturenggong of Gelgel. While 
Nirartha/Dv ijendra was long deemed by Western scholars to be a fictitious figure, r ecently 
discovered manuscript evidence suggests that it might have been a historical f igure after 
all. Worsley et al. (2013 , 24) have described a colophon (actually, one of three) contained 
in a manuscript preserving the kakavin Sumanasāntaka  (Leiden University Library Cod.Or. 
5015) , which states that “the copy was completed on 14 July 1537 in Bali, at ‘the sima 
Kanaka by one whose parab was Nirartha’ ( tlas sinurat ing  nūṣa Bali, ring sima Kanaka, 
de sang aparab Nirartha ).” Worsley et al. note that all the elements of the elaborate dating 
system check, and conclude: 
 
Taking the date to be genuine, we may further assume that Nirartha mentioned in 
this colophon must be none other than the Nirartha, the priest and poet, who migrated 
from Java to Bali to found the brahmana families during the turbulent period 
preceding the demise of the kingdom of Majapahit at the end of the fifteenth o r 
beginning of the sixteenth century […]. As it happens, the date also conforms to the 
dates of Nirartha’s other literary activities recorded in later Balinese sources. 
According to the Dwijendratattwa and the Babad Br āhmaṇa, in 1536 —that is the 
year before he copied the Sumanas āntaka —he had just completed a work called 
Mahi ṣa Mĕgat K ūng (Rubinstein 2000, 73).  
 
Another element of interest  is that the sima  Kanaka  mentioned in the colophon could 
be linked to the kañcana  (both meaning “gold”) mentioned in the colophon of the 
Nirarthaprak r̥ta copied by Tan Vri ṅdeya (allegedly in 1381 Śaka ), identified by 
Poerbatjaraka as a Majapahit (Buddhist) religious site, mentioned as the place of origin of 
the author. This may correspond to the Griya Mas of Dāha (mās/mas meaning “gold” in 
Old Javanese and Balinese) of the Bhr̥guva ṅśa mentioned in the Dvijendratattva . Could it 
be that Nirartha “replicated” in Bali this kañcana/ Griya  Mas in East Java, or that perhaps 
there existed kinship links between the priestly institutions in the two locations?41  
 
Further codicological evidence needs to be mentioned here. It is worth noting that 
the same manuscript bundle from the Lombok collection that preserves the Nirarthaprak r̥ta 
(Leiden Cod. Or. 5023) also contains the Añaṅ Nirartha  and Saṅu Sәkar by Nirartha, the 
Śivarātrikalpa  by Tanaku ṅ, and other late Majapahit works, some of which of Buddhist 
persuasion, such as the Deśavarṇ ana/Nāgarak r̥tāgama , the Jinarthiprak r̥ti, and the 

41 I wonder whether the Buddhist dharmādhyak ṣa Kanakamuni mentioned in the Decree Jaya Song 
(see above, fn. 33) could have  been linked to this religious site, on account of the element kanaka - 
(“gold”) in his name, and his Buddhist affiliation. 

--- [Page 13] ---
13 Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022On Mputanakuṅ, Daṅhyaṅnirartha, And The authorship of The Bhuvanakośa 
Kuñjarakar ṇa. Here not only a work of Tanaku ṅ is included, but in the whole, we come 
across the coexistence of Śaiva and Buddhist spirituality that was emblematic of late 
Majapahit, and that was attributed to Nirartha by the Balinese tradition (allegedly a 
“convert” from Buddhism to Śaivism). Furthermore, it may be not coincidental that  one of 
the oldest known manuscrip ts of the Bhuvanakośa , Leiden Cod. Or. 5022, stems from the 
same collection.  
 
One more intriguing piece of evidence is the Central Javanese Merapi-Merbabu 
codex Ms.Or.fol 410 preserved in the Berlin Staatsbibliothek, which contains the Dharma 
Śūnya  and the Dharma Putus , plus other two unidentified mystical poems. Perhaps 
significantly, as I have mentioned above, the Dharma Putus , a text of mixed  Śaiva -
Buddhist religiosity, declares to have been composed by one whose name ( parab ) is 
Kamalanātha (Dharma Palguna 1999, 207). This text (along with the Dharma Śūnya Kәliṅ  
and the Dharma Pitutur , among many others) is attributed to Nirartha by the Balinese 
tradition , namely the Dvijendratattva  (2a–2b; cf. pp. 116 –117). The Merapi-Merbabu 
Dharma Putus  bears a colophon dated 1535 Śaka  or AD 1613. Dharma Palguna (1999, 
278) notes that in Bali, too, several manuscripts of the Dharma Śūnya  also contain the 
Dharma Putus .  
 
There is much in common between Tanaku ṅ and Nirartha as historical and literary 
figures. Both figures must have been remarkable indeed, and must have exerted an 
influence on the literary and religious culture of their time. Both Tanaku ṅ and Nirartha 
were exponents of elite social milieus, and probably even held positions at the roy al courts 
of Majapahit and Bali; Nirartha is depicted in Balinese texts as a poet , intellectual, wonder-
worker, and advisor to rulers.42 Tanaku ṅ is regarded as an innovator who had access to 
Sanskrit sources that were unavailable in Java at his time, such as the Padmapurāṇ a and 
Sanskrit treatises on prosody , as well as Śaiva texts  and practices that did not exist in Java 
before the 15th century, for instance the ritual of śivarātri  (after which his chef d’eouvre , 
the Śivarātrikalpa , is named).43 This has led to the speculation that he might have visited 
India —more precisely, South India, by then part of the Vijayanagara Kingdom —by the 
second half of the 15th century, and introduced the new doctrines and texts to Java after he 
returned back to his homeland (Teeuw et al.  1969, 19 –20). The view that Tanaku ṅ’s 
“knowledge of the religious and cultural life of South Asia was gained first  hand ” was 
supported by Hunter (2001, 90) on the basis of the analysis of the Vr̥ttasañcaya  and its 
South Asian Sanskrit prototypes, which led him to conclude that the figures found in t hat 
text are not those “ of a poet whose cultural horizons were bounded by the walls of an East 
Javanese court or monastery ”, his world being one in which the translocal “Sanskrit 

42 Indeed, Balinese Pedandas —an institution founded by Nirartha, according to the Balinese —were 
regarded as religious and ritual advisers ( purohita ) to rulers (Rubinstein 1991, 64–66), as well as 
scholars and poets (Rubinstein 2000). 
43 See Nihom 1997 , 108, who suggests that the association between initiation ( dīkṣā ) and the five 
doctrinal and ritual items known as kalās found in South Indian Śaiva texts and, in Java, uniquely 
in the stuti of Tanaku ṅ’s Śivaratrikālpa , “is a reflection of the continued, or renewed (?), contacts 
between the East Javanese kingdom of Majapahit and the southern Indian kingdom  of 
Vijayanagara.” It is worthy of note that the only other locus where the five kalās are mentioned, 
both singularly and collectively as pañcakalā s, is the Jñānasiddhānta  (Chapter 12), which also 
contains circumstantial evidence of late southern Indian influences: cf. f n. 45. 

--- [Page 14] ---
Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022 14Andrea Acri 
Cosmopolis”  was very much alive. As for Nirartha , he is depicted by the Balinese tradition 
as a well-travelled innovator or reformer, who transmitted to Bali the form of Śaivism that 
was in vogue in Majapahit during his ti me, which is believed to be practiced by the Pedanda 
Śiva to these days.44 This could be interpreted as an attempt by the compiler (whether 
Tanaku ṅ, or more likely, Nirartha, or a subsequent author linked to that Brahmanical family 
stemming from East Java) to reform the prevalent mode of Śaivism in Bali, and initiate a 
new line of priests. Nirartha must have adhered to the Śaivism of the cosmopolitan East 
Javanese court as opposed to the more archaic form of the religion that must have 
constituted the mainstream religiosity of priests in the more isolated and r eligiously 
conservative island of Bali.   
 
Finally, as I have pointed out above (see also Acri 2021a, 2021b), the Bhuvanakośa  
contains illusionistic metaphors —e.g., the reflection of sun or moon on water, or the space 
in pot —that seem to derive from  a form of Śaivism  influenced by non-dual istic Vedānta  
that developed in South India after the 10th century, which we do not find in other Old 
Javanese Śaiva  sources of the tattva  genre. This suggests a possible influence from South 
India, and a relatively late date of compilation.45 The Bhuvanakośa  is also characterized by 
a somewhat higher degree of reconfiguration of Indic doctrinal elements , which may reflect 
a cultural context —either late Majapahit or Bali—in which religious ideology and practice 
had progressively moved away from their prototypical traditions. One also notes the 
appearance of Buddhist or Buddhist-flavoured terms such as nirvāṇa, śūnya , etc., although 
one never finds any traits of clearly and explicitly mixed  or syncretic Śaiva -Buddhist 
religiosity.  All these  aspects  are compatible with the biographies and chronologies of the 
figures of Tanaku ṅ and Nirartha. 
 
3. CONCLUSION 
It would probably be a fruitless (not to say misleading) endeavour to try to estab lish 
the authorship and date of composition of such a multi-layered and heterogeneous source 
as the Bhuvanakośa . Yet, the hints at the author(s) or compilers of the text that are found 
in its maṅgala verse as well as in other parts of Chapter 1 of the text may give us some 
clues on the context in/for which it was produced and in which it circulated —namely , its 
reception. The proposed association with either Tanaku ṅ or Nirartha, or both —whether 
genuine or fictitiously attributed ex post —suggests that the Bhuvanakośa  may stem from a 
late Majapahit , “Javano -Balinese ” context, and probably reflects the “horizon of 
expectation” of the Balinese religious specialists who were the prime vecto rs for its 
circulation. 
 
 
 

44 Chapters 6–9 of the Bhuvanakośa give us some glimpses of what  Nirartha’s  “reform” might have 
consisted  in, namely a critique of a localized form Śaivism stemming from the Atimārga tradition 
from the perspective of a form  of Mantramārga (Saiddhāntika ) Śaivism, upholding a gnostic 
(niṣkala) stance against exterior ( sakala ) forms of worship.  
45 The Jñānasiddhānta  preserves a verse from a South Indian version of the Śaiva Saiddhāntika 
scripture Kiraṇatantra , which is not found in the earlier Nepalese recensions, thus suggesting a late 
South Indian line of transmission to Java (see Acri 2006). 

--- [Page 15] ---
15 Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022On Mputanakuṅ, Daṅhyaṅnirartha, And The authorship of The Bhuvanakośa 
REFERENCES 
 
Acri, A. “The Sanskrit -Old Javanese Tutur Literature from Bali. The Textual Basis of 
Śaivism in Ancient Indonesia”, Rivista di Studi Sudasiatici 1 (2006): 107 –137.  
 
Acri, A . “The Sanskrit Colophon of the Tanjung Tanah Codex and its Malay Gloss as 
Illuminated Balinese and South Asian Parallels”,  Bijdragen tot de Taal -, Land- en 
Volkenkunde 171 (2015a ): 56–68. 
 
Acri, A. “Revisiting the Cult of ‘Śiva -Buddha’ in Java and Bali” . In Buddhist Dynamics in 
Premodern and Early Modern Southeast Asia , edited by C. Lammerts, 261 –82. 
Singapore: ISEAS Publishing. 2015b. 
 
Acri, A. Dharma P ātañjala; A Śaiva Scripture from Ancient Java Studied in the Light of 
Related Old Javanese and Sanskrit Texts , Second Edition. Delhi: Aditya Prakashan. 
[First edition: Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 2011]. 2017. 
 
Acri, A. “Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity and Their Bearing on 
the History of the Śaiva Corpus. Part I: Pariṇāmavāda ”, Journal of Indian Philosophy  
49/4 (2021a): 535 –569. 
 
Acri, A. “Vedāntic Analogies Expressing Oneness and Multiplicity and Their Bearing on 
the History of the Śaiva Corpus. Part II: Vivartavāda ”, Journal of Indian Philosophy  
49/4 (2021b ): 571–601. 
 
Acri, A. , and T. M. Hunter Jr. “Translation as Commentary in the Sanskrit –Old Javanese 
Didactic and Religious Literature from Java and Bali ”, Medieval Worlds  11 (2020): 
213–240. 
 
Babad Brāhmaṇ a: Romanised transcription , Leiden Cod.Or. 13.733. 
 
Bhomāntaka : see Teeuw 2005. 
 
Bhuvanakośa: in-progress critical edition and translation by Andrea Acri, based on several 
palm-leaf manuscripts. Unpublished. 
 
Brandes, J.L.A. Oud-Javaansche Oorkonden: nagelaten transcripties . Edited by Nicolaas 
Johannes Krom, Parts 1 and 2. Batavia; ’s -Hage: Albrecht; Nijhoff. 1913. 
 
Budha Gautama, Wayan. Tutur Bhuwana Ko ṣa. Surabaya: Paramita. 2009. 
 
Darma Putra, IGA. “Manggala Kakawin Bhomȃntaka [Petunjuk Penting Pengarang]”, draft 
paper presented at the Rembug Sastra Purnama Badrawada, 1 October 2020, 
Denpasar. Unpublished. 
 
Dharma Palguna, Ida Bagus Made. Dharma Śūnya; Memuja dan meneliti Śiwa, ed. and 
(Indonesian) trans. PhD dissertation, Leiden University. 1999. 
 
Dvijendratattva: Dwijendra Tattwa . Edited and translated by I.B.G Agastia. Jaka rta: 
Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, 1992 –1993.  
 
Friederich, R.H. “Over de godsdienst van Bali”. Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië 11 
(1849): 318 –328. 

--- [Page 16] ---
Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022 16Andrea Acri 
 
Friederich, R.H.Th. The civilization and culture of Bali . Translated to English by R. Rost. 
Calcutta: Susil Gupta [originally “Voorlopig verslag van het eiland Bali ”, 
Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen  
22, pp. 1-63, and 23, pp. 1-57, 1849-1850]. 1959. 
 
Goris, Roeloef. Bijdragen tot de kennis der Oud -Javaansche en Balineesche theologie . 
Dissertation, Leiden University. 1926. 
 
Griffiths, A. “Rediscovering an Old Javanese Inscription: Mpu  Mano’s Donation in Favor 
of a Buddhist Dignitary in 888 Śaka” , Archipel: Études Interdisciplinaires Sur Le 
Monde Insulindien  99 (2020): 107 –141.  
 
Hunter, T.M. , Jr. “ Wrttasañcaya  Reconsidered ”, Bijdragen tot de Taal -, Land - en 
Volkenkunde  157 (2001): 65–96. 
 
Jñānasiddhānta. See Soebadio 1971.  
 
Kakavin Dharma Putus : Romanised transcription, Leiden Cod.Or. 19.526. 
 
Kakavin Dharma Śūnya and Kakavin Dharma Putus: Ms.Or.fol 410, Berlin 
Staatsbibliothek. 
 
Kidu ṅ Dh arma Pitutur: Kidung  Jayendriya (Grantang ), Romanized transcription, 
Denpasar: Kantor Dokumentasi Budaya Bali, 1993. 
 
Mirsha, I Gusti Ngurah Rai, et al. 1994. Buana Kosa. Alih aksara dan alih bahasa (Brahma 
Rahasyam) . Denpasar: Upada Sastra.  
 
Monier-Williams, M. Sanskrit-English Dictionary . Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1899. 
 
Nihom, M. “ Dīksā, kalā  and the stuti of Śiwarātrikalpa  33.1- 2”, Bijdragen tot de Taal -, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 153 (1997): 103 –111. 
 
Pigeaud, Th.G.Th. Java in the 14th Century. A Study in Cultural History. The Nagara -
Kĕrtāgama by Rakawi Prapanca of Majapahit, 1365 A.D. Volume I: Javanese Texts 
in Transcription . Third edition, revised and enlarged. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
1960. 
 
Poerbatjaraka, R. “Nirartha -Prakreta” , Bijdragen tot de Taal -, Land - en Volkenkunde  107 
(1951): 201 –225. 
 
Robson, S. “ Notes on the early Kidung literature ”, Bijdragen tot de Taal -, Land - en 
Volkenkunde 135 (1979) : 300 –322. 
 
Rubinstein, R. “The Brahmana According to Their Babad” . In State and Society in Bali: 
Historical, Textual and Anthropological Approaches , edited by Hildred Geertz. 
Ledien: KITLV Press. 1991.  
 
Rubinstein, R. Beyond the realm of the senses : The Balinese ritual of kekawin composition . 
Leiden: KITLV Press. 2000.  
 

--- [Page 17] ---
17 Jumantara: Jurnal Manuskrip Nusantara Vol. 13 No. 1 Tahun 2022On Mputanakuṅ, Daṅhyaṅnirartha, And The authorship of The Bhuvanakośa 
Sanderson, A.G.J.S. “The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the Early 
Medieval Period” . In Genesis and Development of Tantrism , edited by Shingo 
Einoo, 41 –349. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo. 2009. 
 
Sidomulyo, H. “Notes on the Topography of Ancient Java: Identifying Four Sīma 
Territor ies from the Majapahit Period” . In Writing for Eternity: A Survey of 
Epigraphy in Southeast Asia , edited by Daniel Perret, 223 –241. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême -Orien t. 2018. 
 
Soebadio, H. Jñānasiddh ānta; Secret Lore of the Balinese Śaiva Priest . The Hague: 
Nijhoff. 1971. 
 
Supomo, S. Arjunawijaya: A kakawin of Mpu Tantular; Introduction and Text , Vol. 1 . The 
Hague: Nijhoff. 1977. 
 
Teeuw, A. Bhomāntaka : The Death of Bhoma . Leiden: KITLV Press. 2005. 
 
Teeuw, A., Th.P. Galestin, S.O. Robson, P.J. Worsley and P.J. Zoetmulder. Śiwarātrikalpa 
of Mpu Tanakung : An Old Javanese Poem, its Indian Source and Balinese 
Illustrations , ed. and trans. The Hague: Nijhoff. 1969. 
 
Usana Bali Mayāntaka : Romanised transcription, Leiden Cod.Or. CB75.  
 
Vr̥ttasañcaya: Wrtta -Sancaya; Oudjavaansch leerdicht over versbouw . In Kawi -tekst en 
Nederlandsche vertaling, edited by H. Kern. Leiden: Brill.  1875. 
 
Worsley, P., S. Supomo, T. Hunter, and M. Fletcher. 2013. Mpu Monagu ṇa’s 
Sumanas āntaka: An Old Javanese epic poem, its Indian source and Balinese 
illustrations . Leiden: Brill. 
 
Zieseniss, A. “Studien zur Geschichte des Ś ivaismus: die śivaitische Systeme in der 
altjavanischen Literatur” , Bijdragen tot de Taal -, land - en volkenkunde  98 
(1939): 75–223.  
 
Zoetmulder, P.J. Kalangwan:  A Survey of Old Javanese Literature. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff. 1974. 
 
Zoetmulder, P.J. Old Javanese -English Dictionary . (With the collaboration of S.O. 
Robson; 2 vols). ’s -Gravenhage: Nijhoff. 1982. 