--- [Page 1] ---
11
INTRODUCTION
Re-connecting Histories across the 
Indo-Paciﬁc
Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
1. Origin of This Volume
This volume is the result of a collaborative project that culminated in 
the conference “Cultural Transfer in Early Monsoon Asia: Austronesian-
Indic Encounters”, organized by Andrea Acri and Ale xandra Landmann in 
December 2013 at the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre, ISEAS – Yusof Ishak 
Institute.1 The event brought together fourteen scholars from different 
disciplinary backgrounds and regional expertise, in th e attempt to provide 
the widest possible framework to synthesize and (re-)assess the broad 
subject under investigation. Besides providing a venue for dialogue
 
1 Although Roger Blench was not able to make it to the meeting in Singapore, he was 
invited to join the editorial committee in view of his multidisciplinary experience in 
the ield. Reproduced from Spirits and Ships: Cultural Transfers in Early Monsoon Asia,  edited by Andrea Acri, Roger Blench 
and Alexandra Landmann (Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, 2017). This version was obtained 
electronically direct from the publisher on condition that copyright is not infringed. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced without the prior permission of ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute. E-book is available at  
<http://bookshop.iseas.edu.sg >

--- [Page 2] ---
2 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
between various disciplines, it has aimed to (re-)focus scholarly attention 
on cultural phenomena side-by-side with linguistics, archaeology, and 
genetics.
Conceptually, the conference sought to foreground a “borderless” 
history and geography of South, Southeast and East Asian littoral 
zones that would be maritime-focused, and thereby e xplore the 
ancient connections and dynamics of interaction that favoured fruitful  
“encounters” among the cultures found throughout the region stretching 
from the Indian Ocean littorals to the Western Paciic, from the early 
historical period to the present. A hallmark of its intellectual framework 
has been to transcend the artiicial spatial demarcations and imagined 
boundaries of macro-regions and nation-states, as well as to bridge the 
arbitrary divide between (inherently cosmopolitan) “high” cultures (e.g. 
Sanskritic, Sinitic, or Islamicate) and “local” or “indigenous” cultures. 
Indeed, many “local” small-scale societies and cosmopolitan cultures 
in the region stretching from Eastern India and Sou theast Asia to 
China and Japan were already plural from the earliest times, yet retain 
some remarkable common features, such as wet-rice monoculture and 
houses on stilts (Abalahin 2011, p. 661). Religion, too, shows common 
forms, in terms of dual organization and a focus on an ancestor cult, 
often vaguely deined as “shamanic” or “animist” (Re uter 2014).  
Remarkably similar head-hunting and burial practices characterize the 
religion of Nāga tribes of Eastern India, as well as the past religions 
of some Tibeto-Burman and Austroasiatic-speaking et hnic groups 
settled in Myanmar, and might have been once widespread in maritime  
Southeast Asia, Taiwan, and the whole of Oceania (Brighenti 2009, 
p. 92; Hutton 1928, pp. 406–7). A shared core of cultural identity 
or Weltanschauung  across Southeast Asia and Melanesia includes  
narratives of multiple origins, the importance of precedence, clan and 
social binding systems, small-scale societies, auto nomy for women,  
and a speciic close interconnection of spatial, soc ial and religious 
differentiation marking centre and periphery. Many authors (see reviews 
in Fox 1993; Bellwood, Fox and Tryon 1995; Fox and Sather 1996)  
have noted the persistence of dualism, i.e. culturally deined oppositions 
that include poetry, house-form, clan structures an d much else.  
Ironically, these dichotomies appear to relect mode ls proposed by  

--- [Page 3] ---
1. Introduction 3
Levi-Strauss more closely than the Amazonian societies he chose to  
study.
One of the main hypotheses discussed in the forum is that despite 
the rich ethnic, linguistic and sociocultural diversity, a shared pattern of 
values, norms and cultural models occurs throughout Monsoon Asia—a 
vast geographical area inhabited by speakers of numerous language 
phyla, where the circulatory dynamics of cultural transfer, interaction, 
acceptance, selection and avoidance can be discerned. For millennia, this 
region has been an integrated system of littorals where crops, goods, 
ideas, cosmologies and ritual practices circulated along the sea-routes  
governed by the seasonal monsoon winds. Some of the  questions 
asked during the forum included: what were the translocal cultural 
dynamics before (and beyond) “Indianization”? What were the lows and  
interactions across the Indo-Paciic area? Did a common cultural matrix 
exist in the region stretching from the Bay of Bengal to the Western 
Paciic? Can we reconstruct an early shared matrix or common source for 
widespread cultural traits that we observe empirically today throughout 
the region?
Adhering to the spirit of the intellectual enquiry informing the  
conference, this multidisciplinary volume encourages both an “oceanic  
turn” and a longue durée  approach to the study of the luid and 
complex translocal dynamics governing historical pr ocesses that 
transcend the boundaries of both nation-states and macro-regions as 
they are commonly framed in the Area Studies paradigm. In focusing 
on Monsoon Asia, we encourage a widening of the geo -historical  
framework through which cultural phenomena linked b y a shared 
history going back to a remote past are to be investigated. In so doing, 
we advocate a change of paradigm in studying the cultural exchanges 
between premodern South Asia, Southeast Asia, and E ast Asia—as  
if those concepts were actual distinctive entities, with intrinsic, clear-
cut and enduring geographical and ethno-linguistic boundaries—as well 
as a disciplinary de-parochialization. At any rate, it is important to  
remind us that the Area Studies segregation of region-bound separate and 
self-contained ields of study is a modern construct. It creates imagined 
boundaries and, as rightly noted by Ali (2009, p. 11), obscures rather 
than reveals:

--- [Page 4] ---
4 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
When speaking about pre-modern cultural interaction s… the ways we 
conceptualise these often has as much to do with the ‘onward historical 
developments’ which culminated in the formation of modern nationalism 
as with the cultural, economical and political lows which traversed the 
pre-colonial world.
Our perspective posits the occurrence of circulator y dynamics of 
globalization and diverse intercontinental, cross-cultural human relations 
that have conigured trajectories of the existing cultural patterns in the 
area. These were formed and accommodated in prehistoric and early 
historical times, and constitute processual continuities that are still being 
negotiated in the modern period. By focusing on agency, interaction, 
and multi-directional transfer, our perspective aims at avoiding both 
essentialism and extreme fragmentation, thereby achieving greater depth 
in historical analysis. 
2. (Re-)connected Histories: Conceptualizing  
Monsoon Asia
Kauz (2010, p. 1) highlights the interconnected and cosmopolitan nature 
of the premodern Indian Ocean trade network, noting that it has emerged 
as a “largely coherent structure, and has been a space which served as 
a huge stratum connecting the various kingdoms and cultures adjacent 
to it, causing interchanges in all possible ields and certainly mutual 
inluences”. Asking whether the history of the civilizations around and 
beyond the Indian Ocean exhibits any intrinsic and perceptible unity, 
expressed in terms of space, time, or structures, Chaudhuri has found 
“a basic underlying structure, the ground loor of material life, which 
remained invariant while displaying variations within certain limits” 
(1993, pp. 1, 7). Andre G. Frank (1998) has considered the Indian Ocean 
area as extending to the South China Sea, and as having been central  
in global history for at least ive millennia up to about 1800. 
Starting from these ocean-focused premises we imagi ne Monsoon Asia 
as a vast geographical, historical, and environmental space characterized 
by great variation and, at the same time, an underlying unity. From a 
geographical perspective, this space may be conceptualized as the belt 
of territory spanning from the eastern shores of the Indian Subcontinent 

--- [Page 5] ---
1. Introduction 5
(and their hinterlands) in the west to the South China Sea, the Philippine 
islands and Papua New Guinea in the west.2 Its fulcrums are the 
littorals of peninsular and mainland Southeast Asia, and what is now the  
Malay-Indonesian Archipelago or Nusantara. Cutting across the natural 
boundaries and barriers of continental topography a s well as the  
political borders of modern nation states, and tran scending such  
constructed geographical divisions as South/Southeast/East Asia, this 
largely maritime expanse—which encompasses the environmental 
region of the “Indo-Paciic” and the “Indomalaya eco zone”—was 
inluenced by environmental and climatic factors, such as the seasonal 
monsoon winds. Monsoon Asia can be theorized as an environmentally 
uniied space and also as an interconnected and integrated network 
that—just like Eurasia (Lewis and Wigen 1997, p. 143)—presents the 
characteristics of a cultural ecumene. What Reynolds (2006, p. x) calls 
“the geoenvironmental metaphor of Monsoon Asia” could be translated 
into a “human-environmental metaphor” indeed, which here is offered 
as an heuristic device for the purpose of suggesting a commonality of 
cultural traits and epistemes against the background of millennia of 
human interaction—or, to say it with Abalahin (2011, p. 664), to frame 
“a series of world-historical developments that bring together histories 
that have customarily been viewed apart”.
Monsoon Asia, by virtue of its maritime corridors, formed a natural 
space that favoured the long-distance movement of people, commodities, 
languages and ideas across the Indian and the Western Paciic Oceans. 
While a great deal of scholarly attention has been traditionally devoted 
to the phenomenon of “Indianization” of Southeast Asia, the past two  
or three decades have witnessed intensive archaeolo gical research  
into its early history, which has resulted in the formulation of new  
paradigms in the study of South and Southeast Asian exchanges (Bellina 
2002, 2003; Smith 1999; Theunissen, Grave and Bailey 2000). These 
paradigms are taken by Gupta (2005) as the basis for conceptualizing  
2 If we strictly apply geoenvironmental criteria, and at the same time take into account 
historical and ethnolinguistic factors, Korea and Japan would belong to Monsoon Asia 
as its “appendices” or “edges”.

--- [Page 6] ---
6 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
the Bay of Bengal as an “Interaction Sphere” in the period  from 1000 BC  
to 500 AD. Abalahin (2011), discussing the non-Sini tic, i.e. (proto-) 
Austronesian identity in the pre- and proto-histori c periods of what we 
now call “China”, has connected—and at the same time dissolved—
early Southeast Asia and Inner/North/East Asia into  the macro-region 
called “Sino-Paciica”. Using these innovative model s as sources of 
inspiration, the collective body of work presented here intends to 
emphasize processes of cultural exchange and integr ation, and to raise 
the question as to whether these dynamics may have extended to an 
even wider geographical area over a longer period o f time. By taking 
the “early” as our main chronological frame, we foc us on the crucial 
transitional proto-historic period from 1500 BC to 500 AD, while at 
the same time taking into account earlier periods t hat paved the way 
for later historical developments, as well as moder n phenomena that 
may give us a key to access and reconstruct an olde r layer of resilient 
cultural frameworks.
The idea of an interconnected and integral Monsoon Asia is not  
new. As pointed out by Yule and Rath (2000, quoted in Gupta 2005, 
p. 22), already in the 1920s, “eastern India came i nto the spotlight of 
world archaeology as the westernmost link in a comp lex of prehistoric 
cross-cultural relations which extended as far east  as Japan”. At the same 
time, French scholars like Paul Mus, Sylvain Lévi, Jean Przyluski and 
George Coed̀s—whose studies at a later date inspire d the proponents 
of the Greater India perspective—hypothesized the e xistence of a 
cultural substrate, labelled “Austroasiatic” or “Au stric”, common to 
South, Southeast, and parts of East Asia. An “Austr oasiatic culture” that 
included ancestor worship and funerary practices, m atrilineal dualism, 
and structural analogies of myths was inferred on t he basis of evidence 
from linguistic, mythology, art history, and archae ology. Mus (1975,  
pp. 8–9 [1933]) posited the “existence in ancient t imes of a certain  
unity of culture throughout an extensive zone in which India, Indo-
China, Indonesia, a Paciic islands fringe and doubt less southern China 
are to be united”. Further, Mus rightly emphasized the “borderless” 
character of long-distance cultural transfer in Mon soon Asia, favoured 
by its unique maritime geography: 

--- [Page 7] ---
1. Introduction 7
The wide distribution over the surface of the globe  of the regions 
I have just mentioned is not as absolute a barrier as you might be 
tempted to believe at irst. For too long, ethnography has proceeded by 
purely continental groupings.… A hundred, two hundred or a thousand  
kilometres of sea, especially where there are preva iling winds, are 
a distance much less considerable than a hundred, t wo hundred or a 
thousand kilometres of land, divided by mountains, forests and hostile 
tribes… whenever sea lanes establish communication, it is reasonable to 
expect a cultural unity, and it makes more sense to speak of a religion of 
the monsoon zone of Asia than to speak of Indian religion, or Chinese  
religion, prior to the civilizations which were lat er to give meaning to 
these words.
Following Mus’ idea of Monsoon Asia as an integrated cultural zone, 
Coed̀s (1968, p. 15) espoused an analogous perspective by stating that 
Southeast Asian people were “endowed with a civilization that had traits 
in common with the civilization of pre-Aryan India”, and that there 
existed, “under an Indian veneer, a base common to all of monsoon 
Asia”, which made the spread of Indic cultural elements throughout 
Southeast Asia so quick and productive. 
The rise of post-WWII Area Studies paradigm relecting current 
geopolitical trends relegated the approach of the earlier generation of 
scholars to an intellectual dustbin. Attempts to revive the Monsoon 
Asia perspective have remained sporadic and isolated at best; these 
include, e.g., Ian Mabbett’s (1977 a, 1977 b) idea that “Indianization of 
Southeast Asia” is a “confusion of categories”, suggesting as it does that 
South and Southeast Asia already shared common socio-cultural traits 
before “Indianization”; Chihara’s (1996, p. 7) hypothesis concerning a 
“substratum of pre-Aryan culture” shared between India and Southeast 
Asia, which made it easy for the waves of Indianization to penetrate 
Southeast Asian societies “as if by osmosis”; and the case-studies by 
Emigh (1996), Jordaan and Wessing (1996, 1999), and Dentan (2002 a, 
2002 b, this volume), which have attempted to unravel the intricate 
relationship between “Indic” and “autochthonous” phenomena (and their 
ultimate origin) from a wider-ranging Monsoon Asia perspective (see 
Acri, this volume). 

--- [Page 8] ---
8 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
As a reaction to the “Indianization” or “Greater India” paradigm in 
vogue around the irst half of the twentieth century, which stressed the 
civilizing role of India and West–East dynamics of transfer, the Area 
Studies paradigm has insisted on Southeast Asian agency in regional 
“localizations” of Indic phenomena. This perspective is the hallmark 
of the inluential model proposed by Wolters (1999 [1982]), who took 
into account the Southeast Asian region as a “broadly based community 
of outlook”, or a distinctive “mosaic of literary cultures characterised 
by foreign and local features itting into various t ext-like wholes”  
(p. 65). While we recognize Wolters’ masterful contribution to the ield 
of Southeast Asian studies, his characteristic focus on literacy does 
not do full justice to the concept of “cultural matrix”: whatever was 
responsible for the unity of the Southeast Asian area, it was certainly 
not a relatively late external factor such as literacy.
Some scholars attempted to reine the theoretical parameters of both 
extremes adding a new element of complexity. For instance, de Casparis 
(1983) put the emphasis on the fact that this process of cultural exchange 
was hitherto analysed in too simplistic a way, implying on the contrary 
“a complicated network of relations, both between various parts of  
each of the two great regions and between the two regions themselves” 
(ibid., pp. 18–19). He further considered that in a nalysing the phenomenon 
of Indianization one could hardly avoid focusing on either India or 
Southeast Asia, implying that one area “gave” and the other “received”, 
whereas the picture is much more complicated by the mosaic of different 
cultures which characterized both regions (ibid., p. 2). Kulke (1990) 
suggested an (independent) socio-cultural “convergence”. Calling India 
and Southeast Asia “partners of mutual ‘processes of civilisation’ which 
comprised both sides of the Bay of Bengal”, Kulke (2014, p. 10) posits 
a socio-economic and political convergence in both regions during the 
early centuries AD that enabled similar solutions to similar problems 
of social change. 
A recent trend in contemporary scholarship has been the emphasis on 
cosmopolitan phenomena. Such is the case of the “Sanskrit Cosmopolis” 
model advanced by Pollock (1996, 2006), which has developed a critique 
of the “civilizationalist indigenism” of Wolters an d any “defensive 
indigenist” approaches that see an undeterminable cultural matrix in 

--- [Page 9] ---
1. Introduction 9
Southeast Asia, i.e. an echt “Southeast Asianness”. However, Pollock’s 
model is limited to Sanskrit and “Cosmopolitan vernacular” languages 
and literatures, and therefore biased towards high cultural, top-down 
phenomena; the supralocal dynamics shaping bottom-u p phenomena 
that do not it the model, such as e.g. magic, folk religion, ritual, 
and performances remain largely to be investigated. As noted by Ali 
(2009, p. 16), “the full implications of Pollock’s theory have yet to be  
explored and may still help us reconceptualize the nature of linkages 
between South and Southeast Asia in ways perhaps consonant with 
Kulke’s suggestive remarks”. One cannot but agree with Lombard’s 
(1995, p. 15) hope that one day  the historical reconstructions made 
by archaeologists, linguists, geneticists, and scholars of culture “will 
give way to a true consideration of synchronisms, t hat is to say 
to a comparative theory, which will examine parallels  between the  
evolutionary paths of the different ‘layers’ or ‘sectors’”. (Lombard was 
a follower of Heine-Geldern (1932 a), for whom the synchronisms of the 
Dongsonian period and its bronze drums and the so-called “Indianized” 
period, characterized by state formation and dissemination of the Indian 
script and Sanskrit languages, seemed signiicant, although we now know 
this was a chronological accident.) This perspective may be compared to 
Lieberman’s (2009) “strange parallels”, i.e. synchronous developments 
between geographically distant regions in Southeast Asia and the wider 
Eurasian area.
It is worth commenting here on the signiicance of bronze drums, 
since they are so widely—yet unwarrantedly—cited by so many authors 
as somehow typical of the Southeast Asian region and the period of 
“Indianization”. The most recent summary of the arc haeology and 
ethnography of bronze drums is Calò (2014). The drums, which were 
manufactured in workshops in Northern Vietnam and possibly adjacent 
Laos from 400 BC onwards, were traded widely across the region for 
nearly a millennium. A radically different type, the moko , began to be 
manufactured and spread in Indonesia from 600 AD (see Figure 1.1). 
We have no idea who the makers of the drums were and why this 
particular object was so widely diffused. Other products of the Dongson 
culture, such as the daggers and the bronze vessels, largely stayed on 
the mainland. In later periods, the bossed gong, originally from China, 

--- [Page 10] ---
10 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
figure 1.1
Moko and Classical Bronze Drum
Source : Roger Blench.

--- [Page 11] ---
1. Introduction 11
replaced the bronze drum. Bronze drums are rich markers of early trade 
routes, but in the end cannot be regarded as being characteristic of the 
Southeast Asian region.
In a recent appraisal of the dynamics of early inte ractions and 
cross-cultural exchange between South and Southeast Asia, Manguin 
(2011, p. xx) argues that the “relationship between Southeast Asian and 
Indian societies had already come a very long way” before the irst 
Indian-inspired archaeological, linguistic and cult ural vestiges begin 
to appear between the third and ifth century CE. This fact prompted 
him to formulate the question, was Southeast Asia Indianized before 
Indianization? If so, the preceding period “would then only be considered 
as a contact and exchange phase with South Asia, allowing for a variety 
of comparable but variable processes at play”. While this formulation 
shifts the chronological parameters of the issue at stake, it does not 
introduce a substantial change in the theoretical framework. Whether 
the “comparable processes” constituted independent developments, as 
in Kulke’s “convergence” theory, or stemmed from an early common 
source or civilizational coniguration, as in the “M onsoon Asia” paradigm, 
remains to be investigated. 
3. The Genesis of Early Seafaring in the Southeast  
Asian Region
Much of the historical writing on Southeast Asia has failed to read 
the literature on the prehistory of the region. Archaeology has now 
demonstrated that the maritime history of Southeast Asia is virtually 
coincident with the earliest human settlement of the region. Australia was 
settled from Timor around 55,000 BP, a voyage which  cannot be explained  
as accidental drift (O’Connor 2003). Burials on the  islands of the  
Ryukyus, the chain stretching north of Taiwan to Sou thern Japan, indicate 
inter-island trafic as early as 35,000 BP (Pearson 2014). Bednarik  
(2003) reviews the evidence for inter-island voyagi ng in island  
Southeast Asia in the Pleistocene, as well as attempting to reproduce 
a possible vessel of the period and test its feasibility. Bulbeck (2008) 
has shown that inter-island transfers of trade goods in island Southeast  
Asia long predate the Neolithic. Regrettably, we do  not know the  

--- [Page 12] ---
12 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
identity of these early voyagers, nor what languages they spoke or  the 
types of watercraft they used. But we can say that the dramatic expansion 
of sea-voyaging following the Austronesian dispersa l had antecedents 
in deep antiquity (Mahdi, this volume).
After 4,000 BP it can be fairly said there was a re volution in ship 
construction that made possible long distance and large-scale inter-
island trafic (Bellwood 1995, 2007). Neolithic site s in island Southeast  
Asia multiply rapidly and by 3,500 BP, the Austrone sians have  
reached the Marianas, some 3,500 km east of the Phi lippines. The 
irst archaeologist to point to similarities around the South China Sea 
indicating early maritime contact was Solheim (1957 ) who identiied 
the remarkable Kulanay complex which joins the Phil ippines with 
the Southeast Asian mainland. Solheim (1984–85) lat er went on to  
model the similarities deining the Austronesian cul ture area as the 
“Nusantao”. Although this model has been quite inlu ential, Solheim 
never really engaged with the lingusitic data, in c ontrast to Bellwood, 
and his concept of Austronesian as a trade language  is no longer 
considered viable. 
With these skills, trade goods, such as nephrite fr om Taiwan,  
began to diffuse throughout the whole Southeast Asi an area, 
both mainland and islands (Hung et al. 2013). The a dvantage of  
archaeology over vague speculation is that the geog raphy of inds 
can provide concrete evidence for both shared cultu ral elements 
and chronology. From the distribution of shared cer amic types and  
motifs, we can see how improved maritime skills sti mulated a web of 
connections across the South China Sea from 3,500 B P onwards (see 
Figure 1.2). Only later do Dongson artefacts enter the record, spreading 
out from workshops in what is now Vietnam. Such map s provide  
graphic evidence for the complete independence betw een the  
evolution of a Southeast Asian shared culture and t he later impact of 
Indianization.
Parallel developments were taking place on the mainland at exactly 
this period. A revised chronology using direct dates from a sample major 
of sites from Southeast Asia (Higham et al. 2011) has indicated the 
Southeast Asian mainland Neolithic was conined to a  small window, from 

--- [Page 13] ---
1. Introduction 13
figure 1.2
Kalanay and Dongson Culture Areas
Source : Adapted from Hung et al. (2013)
3,800–4,100 BP. It is dificult not to associate this with the dispersal of 
Austroasiatic (cf. arguments in Sidwell and Blench 2011) and possibly 
also Tai-Kadai languages. Austroasiatic at least seems to have been an 
aquatic dispersal, driven by improved rivercraft, following the main 
watersheds of the region.
A consequence of this period of parallel expansions  is a “community of 
culture”. Austronesian in particular is characterized by a raft of common 
cultural features, which can be identiied from Taiwan to New Zealand 
(Bellwood et al. 1995). Austroasiatic societies and cultures are more 

--- [Page 14] ---
14 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
diverse, presumably due to their fragmentation caused by subsequent 
incursions from speakers of Tai-Kadai and Sino-Tibe tan languages. 
Even so, the signiicance of improved boats in exploring the inland  
waterways of mainland Southeast Asia created a simi larly rapid  
expansion. The intense circulation of ideas in parallel with material 
culture goes a long way towards explaining the consensus culture which 
characterized the region long before the arrival of the irst ships from 
South Asia.
A second maritime revolution seems to have occurred with the 
evolution of new ship types (Manguin 1993). Moving away from simple 
boats to larger outriggers constructed with nails meant that much larger 
cargoes and crews could ply regular routes. Figure 1.3 neatly illustrates 
this transition, showing the contrast between the limsy construction of 
earlier boats (left) compared with the large trade ships (right) in the 
friezes at Borobudur (eighth/ninth century AD).
figure 1.3
Two Types of Boat Shown at Borobudur
Source : Andrea Acri.

--- [Page 15] ---
1. Introduction 15
This period sees the genesis of the Srivijaya thalassocracy which 
begins to move trade goods, ideas and languages around the region. 
The frontiers of exploration reach as far as the east coast of Africa 
westwards and to Papua in the east. The multilingual crews that reached 
East Africa and went on to colonize Madagascar (Adelaar, this volume) 
mark the entry of Southeast Asia into the world system, pioneering the 
trans-Indian Ocean trade (Blench 2010).
South Asian contact had begun prior to 0 AD, but with a strong focus 
on religion, and with impacts typically on architecture and iconography. 
There is very little evidence for technological transfers, and it seems 
that shipbuilding techniques were most likely indigenous to the region. 
What can be said is that the pre-existing networks of the region were 
already adapted to the pioneering of new trade routes, and for this reason 
there were signiicant transfers of crops and maritime technology to 
South Asia (Mahdi 1999). The imbalanced picture presented by scholars 
focusing on writing and stone architecture is gradually being rectiied 
as archaeology and cultural analysis demonstrates ever more clearly the 
existence of two-way trafic.
4. The Contribution of Linguistics
Linguistic data has shed new light on cultural contact in the Indian 
Ocean from the mid-second millennium BCE. The online Austronesian 
Comparative Dictionary of Blust3 reconstructs over 5,000 forms and 
is accompanied by an interpretative commentary, providing a resource 
unequalled even in Indo-European for understanding regional history.  
The advanced knowledge of seafaring testiied to by numerous nautical 
terms in Malayo-Polynesian languages from Malaysia to Hawaii  
suggests the existence of reconstructible forms in proto-Malayo-Polynesian 
(Pawley and Pawley 1994). While there is increasing evidence of the 
traces left by Southeast Asian seafarers on the Western Indian Ocean 
shores (Blench 2010), the impact of Southeast Asia on India remains 
3 URL: <http://www.trussel2.com/acd/> (accessed 20 September 2015).

--- [Page 16] ---
16 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
poorly understood, in terms of the dispersal of cultigens, languages, and 
ideas. Mahdi (1999) is one of the few scholars to discuss this topic in 
detail. Connections can be discerned along two quite distinct routes, the 
sea-routes to the east coast of mainland South Asia and the overland 
trade routes passing through Yunnan into the valley of the Brahmaputra. 
Potential links include megalithic traditions and cultural practices of 
the northeastern region of the Indian Subcontinent and Southeast Asia 
(ibid., p. 4). For example, it has recently been discovered that the rice 
domesticated in India ( Oryza sativa  var. indica ) was subject to early 
introgression with the japonica  varieties domesticated in East Asia 
(Castillo et al. 2015). This can only have occurred in the corridor 
linking China to the valley of the Brahmaputra via Yunnan. There can 
be little doubt the Austroasiatic-speaking Munda peoples, who arrived 
in the northeastern region of the Indian Subcontinent from Southeast 
Asia with a fully-realized agricultural package, played a major role in 
this meeting of traditions.
The ever-increasing body of linguistic, genetic and archaeological 
evidence unearthed in the past two decades can tell us much about the 
origin and dispersal of population across the Indo-Paciic (Lansing et al.  
2011). There is little doubt the Austronesians originated in Taiwan, 
although their ancestral source was clearly the Chinese mainland. What 
remains controversial is whether this was a demographic expansion 
driven by agriculture (the Bellwood model) or rather a seaborne dispersal 
motivated by trade and the quest for aquatic resources (Bulbeck 2008; 
Blench 2012 b). Recent dates for the Neolithic of island Southea st 
Asia point ever more strongly to a very rapid expansion favouring the 
second interpretation (Spriggs 2011). Genetics indicates that the “Asian” 
component in western Island Southeast Asia is overw helming and 
Lansing et al. (2011) provide a useful model of how marriage patterns 
and cultural dominance all but eliminated the traces of pre-existing 
resident populations. 
On the mainland, there was a meeting of four major language 
phyla. An important chapter in this saga is the debate over whether a 
“Neolithic package” of rice cultivation was superimposed on a substrate 
of vegeculturalists (van Driem 2001, pp. 324–7, 2012; Difloth 2005; 
Ferlus 2010). The core language group in the region  is evidently 

--- [Page 17] ---
1. Introduction 17
Austroasiatic, spreading both along the Mekong and parallel watersheds 
westwards, as well as down the Thai Peninsular and on to the Nicobar 
Islands (Sidwell and Blench 2011). However, as the map shows all too 
clearly, Austroasiatic has been fragmented by the subsequent southward 
spread of Sino-Tibetan and Tai-Kadai languages (Blench 2011 b, 2013 a). 
The homeland of Sino-Tibetan is disputed, but the broad consensus is 
that it must have been in the west, Nepal, Bhutan and Northeast India, 
where the diversity is greatest (Blench 2014 a). The dispersal eastwards 
seems to have occurred multiple times; isolated lan guages such as  
Tujia and Bai testify to these early movements. The ancestors of the 
Chinese apparently moved to North China, where they picked up millet 
and other cold weather crops from the resident Altaic speakers. It is  
likely that they subsequently moved south to the valley of the Yangtse, 
displacing the resident Hmong-Mien speakers. Rice is domesticated  
(as opposed to the management of wild rice) at about 6,500 BP and it 
becomes a core cultural concept of Sinitic society, fuelling the massive 
demographic increase which allowed the Han to domin ate a vast 
geographical region.
5. Cosmopolitanism vis-à-vis  Indigenism 
Area Studies scholars, ethnographers, historians and philologists in the 
past ifty years or so have tended to analyse Southeast Asian cultural 
phenomena in terms of a synthesis or hybridization between foreign 
elements/influences and “local” or “indigenous” phe nomena. The 
former have been regarded as intrinsically cosmopolitan, whereas the 
latter as intrinsically embedded or vernacular. Thus, elements of the 
Indic/Sanskritic, Sinitic, and Islamicate high culture would have been 
localized along the prevalent place-speciic socio-cultural and linguistic 
coordinates. Even when a higher degree of agency an d dynamism 
is accorded to the pre-existing civilizations of Southeast Asia, those 
civilizational conigurations are too often only vaguely deined through 
such self-explanatory labels as “local” or “indigen ous”—without a 
clear deinition of what is to be understood as local or indigenous. For 
example, to describe Southeast Asian varieties of imported religions and 
their mixture of Indic (or Sinitic) elements and pre-existing indigenous 

--- [Page 18] ---
18 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
(e.g. “shamanic” or “animist”) cultural features, such vague notions as  
“hybrid”, “assimilated”, or “syncretic” are often invoked, yet hardly 
ever explained. No detailed comparative research has unravelled whether 
there had been or not a common civilizational coniguration prior to 
“Indianization”, and what the features of such a ci vilizational coniguration 
might have been.
The concept of “local genius” has been popular amon g Indonesianists, 
and especially art historians, who generally speak of an “indigenous 
Indonesian spirit” (Holt 1967, p. 29); yet, it is not entirely clear in 
what exactly this indigenous spirit consists of, and where its “local” 
boundaries lay. Edi Sedyawati, when referring to premodern Central 
Javanese dance, rightly notes that “the adjective ‘local’ and ‘indigenous’ 
are ambiguous terms used to denote anything which does not belong to 
‘standard’ classical Hindu ( sic) dance style” (1982). Similar considerations 
can be made with respect to religious ideas and pra ctices, which 
are often deemed to be “local” but may in fact be part of a shared 
heritage that circulated through networks of folk practitioners—or what  
scholarship has tended to call “shamans” (see Acri 2014). In short, we 
feel that there is a need to realize that features that are often perceived  
as local or indigenous have turned out to be the pr oduct of  
circulatory dynamics, whereby local developments took place against 
the background of translocal exchanges. In other words, the “local” 
was already, at least in part, “cosmopolitan”: compare Pollock’s concept 
of “Cosmopolitan vernacular”. This is the case, for instance, of the 
“Austronesian cultural package” that seafaring voyagers spread as they 
gradually settled through Southeast Asia, and which eventually was  
localized. 
The last two decades have witnessed the emergence of a focus 
on a linguistically and archeologically deined Aust ronesian shared 
background of the people inhabiting mainland and insular Southeast 
Asia, as well as Oceania. New indings from genetics and physical 
anthropology, point to a more nuanced model of migration. A combined 
approach to reconstruct the history and evolution o f ideas that  
integrates and moves beyond linguistics, archaeolog y, and genetics, could 
produce and connect new insights by delving into the hitherto little 
explored domains of production and transfer of knowledge, mythologies, 

--- [Page 19] ---
1. Introduction 19
ancestral legal systems and religious beliefs, as w ell as aspects of  
material culture such as trade, navigation technology, etc.
Fox (2006, p. 1 [1996]) lamented a “localization” of interests and 
disciplinary/areal parochialization relected in current academe. Going 
against this trend, Bellwood, Fox and colleagues, in many publications 
stemming from the “Comparative Austronesian Project”, have drawn 
together different disciplinary approaches for the study of the Austronesian-
speaking populations and to elaborate a general framework for the 
interpretation of the complexities of the Austronesian heritage across 
Southeast Asia and the Paciic Ocean. They have compared features 
traceable to a common heritage beyond language despite millennia of 
interaction and change, namely a “Southern Mongoloid” genetic ancestry 
for Austronesian-speakers. These include widespread cultural features 
such as tattooing, use of outriggers on canoes, features of ethnographic 
and prehistoric art styles, and social norms concerning siblings’ rank 
and a reverence for ancestral kin group founders (Fox 2006, p. 6). In 
spite of these common features, however, “there is little which can be 
characterised as exclusively and uniquely Austronesian he ld widely today 
in common among all the Austronesian-speaking regions” (2006, p. 3). 
This state of affairs suggests that a polythetic approach is needed to 
evaluate the complex issue of origin, dispersal, and transformation of 
the “Austronesians” and their “cultural package(s)” through millennia 
(see Landmann, this volume). 
In the short manifesto “Towards an integrated comparative study of 
Austronesian Cultures”, Edi Sedyawati (2011, pp. 54–5) has noted that 
by comparing cultures and their respective culture bearers it would be 
possible to discern whether they are related, and therefore presumably 
share the same origin. Blench (2012 b, p. 135), discussing the pervasive 
and highly distinctive set of iconographic elements in igurative art 
that is widely spread across the Austronesian-speaking areas, argues 
that this strongly religion-associated imagery may be “a manifestation 
of adat, the traditional religion of I[sland] S[outh] E[ast] A[sia] prior 
to the spread of world religions”. The curious irony is that this type 
of regional cultural comparison is the major feature of what is now 
considered outmoded or bypassed Kulturkreislehre , the typical pattern 
of North European ethnology from about 1890 to the 1950s. The careful 

--- [Page 20] ---
20 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
mapping of comparable features of culture was typical of this period and 
monographs such as Speiser’s (1923) work on Vanuatu illustrate the value  
of these approaches. The authors of these studies had no archaeological 
chronology to guide them and were hobbled by interpretations which 
emphasized cultural “layers”. Nonetheless, the comparative side of their 
work could well be emulated by modern scholars concerned with the 
identiication of a common Austronesian cultural core. 
6. Where Do We Stand?
Monsoon Asia constitutes a geographical arena with a shared, millennia-
long history of migration of people, long-distance trade, linguistic contact 
and dispersal, and cultural transfer. Gupta (2005, p. 21) distinguishes 
interactive, long-distance “processes of human dispersals and techno-
cultural diffusions (including the Neolithic expansion from southern 
China into Southeast Asia) and short term movements of men and 
material inspired by trade opportunities”, arguing that the latter were 
usually effected through conduits opened by earlier expansions. More 
evidence of prehistoric contacts between South Asia, Southeast Asia 
and East Asia has turned up in recent years. The presence of jar burials 
along the Indo-Paciic arc suggests the possibility of interactivity and 
sharing of religious ideas and practices from East to South Asia, while 
studies on the distribution of ceramics, cultigens, and nautical terms 
and devices, have highlighted the regular maritime links between early 
farming communities in South and Southeast Asia since at least the irst 
millennium BCE (Gupta 2005, p. 22, Hoogervorst 2013, p. 102). 
As noted by Hoogervorst (2013, p. 12), there is an increasing  
awareness that “literary references to commercial activities between 
these state-level societies [across the Indian Ocean] only reveal the 
culmination of much older networks”, which in the c ase of South 
and Southeast Asia go back to at least the second half of the second 
millennium BCE. Intra-regional Southeast Asian circuits of interaction 
preceding an “Indianization” period have also been deduced from the 
distribution of Dongson drums, Sa-Huynh ornaments and jar burials, 
and agate and carnelian beads (Theunissen, Grave and Bailey 2000). 
Nephrite artefacts from Southeast Asia and Taiwan, dating to between 

--- [Page 21] ---
1. Introduction 21
3,000 BCE and 500 CE, have been unearthed through much of mainland 
Southeast Asia and the Philippines, thus providing evidence for extensive 
sea-based trade networks across the South China Sea (Hung et al. 2007). 
Long-range contacts between North China and the South China Sea or 
even the Indian Ocean are suggested by the indings of shell cowries in 
elite burials of Northern China as early as the second millennium BCE 
(Li Shuicheng 2003, Liu 2004). Blench (2013 b) has hypothesized the 
existence of an arc of vegeculture as early as 10,000 BP, characterized 
by tubers, Musaceae, sago exploitation and sugar-ca ne stretching between 
Melanesia and Eastern Nepal, correlated with linguistic evidence as 
well as a suite of material culture items and, perhaps, ideas. Certain 
Austronesian cultural and religious features have b een detected in 
premodern Japan (Abalahin 2011, pp. 661, 676), while an argument 
in favour of an early direct inluence from pre-Indicized Java to Japan  
has been made by Kumar (2009); other intriguing similarities in the 
realm of the performing arts from Java, Bali and Japan have been 
pointed out by Coldiron (2005 a, 2005 b). Many specialists in the  
region are sceptical of these (in some cases) rather vaguely deined 
similarities and we must be wary of assuming these represent a  
scholarly consensus. The possibility of pre- or early-historical exchanges 
and commonalities between South and Southeast Asia in the realm of 
religion have been proposed by Dentan and Acri (see their respective 
chapters in this volume). An attempt to revise the mainstream  
historical paradigm concerning human dispersal across Monsoon Asia 
and the Paciic Ocean has been made by Oppenheimer (1998) and  
Santos (2005), who have traced the ultimate origin of the Austronesians 
back to the Sunda shelf or Sundaland; although these works remain 
highly controversial, they relect the uncertainty—and openness—  
of a ield that promises exciting discoveries, and w hich makes an 
increasingly important contribution to global history.
Given the paucity of records, research on cultural elements going 
back to a remote past is bound to be fraught with uncertainty; however, 
it needs to be pursued with renewed vigour as it could help us to link 
together, and make sense of, data drawn from linguistics, archaeology, 
and genetics. 

--- [Page 22] ---
22 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
7. The Present in the Past
Modern visitors to Southeast Asia often express frustration at the rush 
to modernity; traditional architecture demolished, older clothing styles 
discarded and musical traditions displaced in the hurry to reach the 
twenty-irst century on schedule. Angkor or Borobudu r are valued, 
not much for their artistry or their place in the identity of the present 
residents of the area, but as tourist and commercia l opportunities.  
Perhaps the fact that both were forgotten, covered by the humid 
forest, and had to be uncovered by European visitors, points to a local  
perception of impermanence of the material world. Culture is politics 
in Southeast Asia and the unfolding perception of the region’s past  
is being rapidly incorporated into the narrative of the present (Glover 
2006).
Nonetheless, perhaps characteristically, both the Sinitic and “Malay” 
areas have begun to recognize the importance of history and culture  
in constructing national identity. Mobile phones can be made anywhere, 
but distinctive regional cultures which can re-insp ire architecture, 
writing and build national consciousness are beginning to be valued. 
The National Museum and Asian Civilisations Museum of Singapore  
are striking examples of this approach. While Singapore is largely a 
colonial construct, recent archaeological excavatio ns have unearthed 
its precolonial heritage, which has been integrated into the national  
master-narrative of the (old and modern) port-city at the crossroads  
of the maritime routes connecting India and China via Southeast Asia 
(Miksic 2013). But the bulk of the heritage must be bought in and so it 
has been, on a considerable scale, to the beneit of international auction 
houses. The three major communities which make up the population—
the Chinese, Malay, and Indian—are all represented by artefacts from 
their ancestral areas, the emphasis being on the harmonious relations 
between them. 
A somewhat different approach can be seen in Taiwan, the ancestral 
home of the Austronesians. Inhabited from roughly 2 5,000 BP by 
diverse peoples from the mainland, the island was revolutionized by 
the appearance of Neolithic migrants at around 5,500 BP. These spread 
out and diversiied into every possible ecozonal niche. Han migration 
began in the seventeenth century, encouraged by the Dutch, and by the 

--- [Page 23] ---
1. Introduction 23
period of the Japanese occupation, the indigenous Austronesians had  
been swamped demographically, and many lowland popu lations 
assimilated. During most of the twentieth century, these “aborigines” 
were disdained and marginalised. In a disgraceful act of indifference,  
the Nationalist government turned Lanyu, the home of the Yami people, 
into a nuclear waste dump. However, the evolution of democracy in 
Taiwan in the 1990s, began an almost magical transformation. The  
notion of Taiwan as the seat of ancestral Austronesian culture suddenly 
implied the indigenous populations were to be respected if not entirely 
understood. Literacy programmes were rolled out, mu seums were  
opened or expanded, international conferences were funded, foreign 
scholars who had taken an interest in Austronesians in Taiwan invited. 
In 2016, the Taiwanese Government issued a formal apology to its 
indigenous populations for their treatment. Welcome as this was, it was 
not entirely disinterested; it was clearly intended to relect an identity 
separate from mainland China. The requirement for Taiwan to be seen 
as distinctive, not simply another province of the People’s Republic, 
clearly underlies the rather sudden interest in the  Austronesians.  
Sadly, it is too late for many languages. Kavalan and Pazeh have 
disappeared in the late twentieth century and some others are set to  
follow. Meanwhile Taiwanese logging companies are complicit in the 
logging and eviction of Austronesian speakers in th e highlands of 
northeastern Cambodia. The rise of the nation state entertains a wide 
variety of ironies.
A recent phenomenon of “Pan-Austronesianism” involvi ng the 
valorisation of Malayo-Polynesian origins and identity can be witnessed 
in Malaysia and Indonesia. This can be charitably divided into what 
might be called the “lunatic fringe”, the alignment of Austronesians 
with the inhabitants of the lost continent of Lemur ia proposed by 
the Theosophists, which would be coterminous with the submerged 
continental shelf of Sundaland (a link between Lemuria or Atlantis  
and Java was theorized by the Theosophist Leadbeater in 1951). More 
recently, the above-mentioned studies by Oppenheimer and Santos, as 
well as the discovery of allegedly man-made early structures on Gunung 
Padang in West Java, have fuelled a wave of historical/historiographic 
revisionism in the Malay-Indonesian world—both in scholarly press and 

--- [Page 24] ---
24 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
on social media, mainstream press and TV . Alas, the ensuing body of 
work is characterized entirely by a nationalistic agenda, and therefore 
is more interesting as a socio-cultural phenomenon than for its potential 
to revolutionize the current historical paradigms.
More mainstream are the groups headed by academics and public 
intellectuals to bring together the so-called “Malay race”—which would 
include all Malayo-Polynesian language speakers, as far east as the 
Māori. There is nothing wrong with this idea in principle, although  
the framing of Austronesian as a type of Malay expansion goes back 
to the long-discredited Proto- and Deutero-Malay mo del espoused  
by Heine-Geldern (1932 b). These groups are also elaborating a  
(trans-)national narrative that revives and re-evaluates the Austronesian 
roots of the Malay people and culture by linking them to an ancestral 
“lost civilization” that would predate the earliest known vestiges of the 
Sumerian and Chinese civilizations. This has rather odd consequences: 
some of the papers in a volume on the Austronesians of Sulawesi 
suggest that some ethnic groups are “more Austronesian” than others 
(Simanjuntak 2008). 
8. Summary of the Contributions
This volume includes seven of the fourteen papers presented at the 
conference, with the addition of four papers from invited contributors. 
The aim of our intellectual enquiry is to investiga te the cultural  
lows, interactions and agencies across the seas and land masses of 
Monsoon Asia. The chapters relect the disciplinary perspectives of 
History and Historiography, Linguistics, Ethnography, Archaeology and 
Art History, and Religious Studies. They discuss various expressions 
of cultural trajectories, shared commonalities, and continuities before,  
during and after the Austronesian ethnolinguistic a nd cultural 
expansion. They interpret its encounter with an indigenous substrate of  
Austroasiatic-speaking cultures on the one hand and Indic Cosmopolitan 
polities on the other—a process of cross-fertilization that might have 
occurred over a millennium. Taken collectively, they try to transcend 
the traditional paradigm of “Indianization”/“Sanskritization” vs. “local 
genius”, and explore the possibility of the existen ce of supra-local  

--- [Page 25] ---
1. Introduction 25
cultural formations both before and after the emergence of the so-called 
“Sanskrit Cosmopolis” around 500 AD. 
The discussion is opened by two closely-related cha pters that, 
situating themselves in the “Monsoon Asian approach ” advanced by early  
twentieth-century French scholarship, tackle the co ntroversial issue  
of a shared religious matrix in early Monsoon Asia. Robert Dentan’s 
“Fearsome Bleeding, Boogeyman Gods and Chaos Victorious: A 
Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious Tropes” tries to 
reconstruct the religious situation current among Austroasiatic-speaking 
populations of islands across South and Southeast Asia around 1500 BC 
—that is, before Indian thought took solid form in the Vedas and 
Austronesian-speakers dominated the islands. Drawing from his previous 
comparative work, Dentan hypothesizes a common ancestry between 
Nkuu’, the thundersquall-God of the Semai ethnic group in highland 
peninsular Malaysia, and the ierce Vedic Rudra, on account of their 
similar nature and common features. 
Andrea Acri’s “Tantrism ‘Seen from the East’” raises the question 
as to whether the socio-religious current we now call “Tantrism” may 
represent a wider Monsoon Asian areal phenomenon, with roots in a  
past that predates the common era. Being directly inspired by, and  
engaging with, the work of Robert Dentan, this chapter evaluates his 
theory of a common religious base in South and Southeast Asia. It  
focuses on the hypostases of the Vedic god Rudra-Śiva and the related 
Śaiva and Śākta Tantric traditions that arose in So uth Asia in the 
mediaeval (Post-Gupta) period, and adds evidence from premodern and 
modern South Asian, Javano-Balinese, and Malay contexts. The presence 
of similar religious tropes and a shared vocabulary suggest long-standing 
historical connections between South and Southeast Asian societies, which 
cannot always be explained in terms of inluences of the former over 
the latter but are rather suggestive of a complex process of exchange, 
and perhaps of a common ancestry.
Next come three chapters dealing with the tantalizing relationship 
between ethnolinguistic, socio-cultural, and archae ological features 
over mainland and island Southeast Asia. Alexandra Landmann’s “Can 
We Reconstruct a ‘Malayo-Javanic’ Law Area?” advances a hypothesis 

--- [Page 26] ---
26 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
concerning the reconstruction of a posited ethno-li nguistic Malayo-Javanic 
cultural and law area, and pinpoints lines of evidence to delineate the 
boundaries of such an area. On the basis of secondary literature, and 
previous ieldwork on indigenous and traditional legal systems ( adat, 
pikukuh karuhun, dresta ) in Bali, Banten and Central Kalimantan,  
it uses historical anthropology and a triangulation of linguistic, 
archaeological and biological evidence to reconstruct a cultural and  
legal complex that would be shared by several ethnic groups of the 
Western Malayo-Polynesian linguistic area.
In his “Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an Mainland 
Southeast Asia Linguistic Area”, Roger Blench argues that the broadly-
recognized linguistic convergence area of mainland Southeast Asia must 
also have material and social correlates. Setting out the evidence for 
musical instruments, the crossbow, house types and dress, he considers 
whether this area can also be connected with the So utheast Asian 
distribution of sumatraliths. Finally, the chapter speculates that the type 
of linguistic similarities relect a “consensus” culture, where sounding 
and behaving like neighbouring peoples is desirable, while underlining 
minor differences.
“Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian Maritime 
Space? Insight from Settlements and Industries” by Bérénice Bellina 
investigates the hypothesis that the strong spatial and human integration 
in Southeast Asia that we can see in modern times is the outcome  
of much earlier dynamics of maritime Southeast Asian globalization, 
possibly dominated by Austronesian speakers. Recent archaeological 
excavations have indeed demonstrated that the second millennium BC 
populations actively interacted within the South China Sea, establishing 
networks that could have laid the ground for common practices and 
cultural afinities by 500 BC. To answer the question as to whether 
there is evidence for shared patterns of values, norms and cultural 
models during the late prehistoric period that could be indicative of  
an ancient regional integration, the author discusses two sets of data.  
The irst are the settlements of Co Loa in northern Vietnam and the  
Khao Sam Kaeo in the Thai-Malay Peninsula, where pr ocesses of  
urbanism emerged in the late prehistoric period, that is well before 

--- [Page 27] ---
1. Introduction 27
the emergence of early States. The second are the t wo types of 
industries found within maritime networks, i.e. stone ornaments and the  
“Sa Huynh-Kalanay” ceramics. These archaeological datasets throw light 
on the socio-political and economic dynamics that many populations 
were facing in Southeast Asia at that time, which arguably preigure 
later historical conigurations.
The ensuing two chapters extend the correlation of linguistic features, 
social mores and material culture to the issue of h uman dispersal. “Looms, 
Weaving, and the Austronesian Expansion” by Chris Buckley focuses on 
a fascinating and important aspect of the material culture of mainland 
and island Southeast Asia and Southern China, namely the distributions 
of the body-tensioned loom and the ikat weaving technologies for 
making decorated textiles. The author attempts to interpret the present-
day distributions of these technologies stemming from the premodern 
past by contrasting it to the archaeological record, and elaborate a theory 
about prehistoric dispersals by comparing the looms of the mainland  
with those of the Austronesian-speaking peoples of island Southeast Asia. 
He concludes that it is dificult to explain the present-day distribution  
of looms and ikat weaving according to the popular “out of Taiwan” 
model, and that these characteristically “Austrones ian” technologies 
appear to have originated directly from the Asian mainland.
Waruno Mahdi’s “Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular 
Southeast Asia” is an enquiry into an important yet poorly understood 
chapter of global history, namely the earliest sea crossings and  
offshore ishing. On the basis of archaeological and  linguistic data, Mahdi 
argues that island Southeast Asia was the area where these activities 
could have originated, around 45,000 BP. Using biogenetic data that 
place the populations of Taiwan and island Southeast Asia closer to 
one another than either of them to that of the Chinese mainland, the  
author argues that early navigational technology was acquired from 
ancestors of present-day “Negritos” who, retreating before the rising  
seas, travelled to Fujian and then Taiwan. By correlating these indings  
with linguistic data, Mahdi makes a case for the existence of early 
maritime networks spanning from the South China Sea to the Bay of  
Bengal.

--- [Page 28] ---
28 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
An approach to cultural transfer and human migration from the 
disciplinary perspective of linguistics is the hallmark of the next two 
chapters. In “The Role of ‘Prakrit’ in Maritime Southeast Asia Through 
101 Etymologies”, Tom Hoogervorst presents a novel contribution to 
the study of language contact between South and Southeast Asia, in 
particular the oft-neglected “Prakrit” or Middle Indo-Aryan loanwords 
that were borrowed by Malay, Old Javanese and many other Southeast 
Asian languages during the irst millennium CE. While scholarship 
on the exchange of vocabulary between South and Sou theast Asia  
has traditionally prioritized the role of Sanskrit and the “high culture” 
carried by it, a focus on (North) India’s historical spoken languages 
reveals a vernacular dimension of interethnic conta ct, challenging  
scholars to reconsider the shape, structure and nature of the maritime 
networks that have shaped Asia’s pre-colonial past.
Alexander Adelaar’s “Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did 
They Speak?” offers a glimpse of island Southeast Asia and Madagascar 
as parts of an interconnected world by investigating what the Malagasy 
homeland in Borneo looked like from a geographical,  social, and 
political perspective. Adelaar discusses what the linguistic information 
about Malagasy and other members of the Southeast Barito language 
family in South Borneo tell us about the time when Malagasy became 
a separate language. Several linguistic developments (the abundance  
of Malay, Javanese and Sanskrit loanwords, the slightly different ways  
in which certain consonants have changed, and the adoption of the  
Javanese politeness marking preix ra-) set Malagasy off against other 
Southeast Barito languages. They show that it is not a direct continuation 
of any of these languages. On the contrary, it had already undergone  
a separate evolution before the migration of its speakers to East Africa. 
This has possible implications for the way we should view the social 
position of these speakers. Rather than slaves obtained from communities 
that have persisted until today in any of the existing Southeast Barito 
speaking groups, they may have been vassals who lived on a relatively 
equal footing with members of the Malay metropolis (nowadays 
Banjarmasin) and were on their way to become assimilated to that 
metropolis.

--- [Page 29] ---
1. Introduction 29
The two chapters closing this collection elaborate on the interplay 
between the cosmopolitan and the local in Southeast Asia and the 
wider Western Malayo-Polynesian/Austronesian worlds. “ ĝāstric  and 
Austronesian Comparative Perspectives: Parallel Frameworks on Indic 
Architectural and Cultural Translations Among Western Malayo-
Polynesian Societies” by Imran bin Tajudeen investigates the nature 
of the interplay between autochthonous and Indian elements in the 
formation of Southeast Asia’s Indic cultures. The a uthor describes 
the translations of Ğāstric  sources into architecture and art forms 
according to patterns that integrated Indic and Austronesian paradigms. 
Early architectural examples from Central Java, Sum atran sites 
and Kedah prompts us to reconsider some existing assumptions on 
processes and phases of “Indianization” resting upon a dichotomous 
conception of Indian and indigenous elements that assume a separation 
between them and their juxtaposition as distinct elements accessible  
to “stratigraphic” scrutiny. Neither the “Sanskrit Cosmopolis” perspective 
nor the opposite reactionary emphasis on “localization” or “indigenization” 
is adequate, since they do not go beyond the presum ption of a 
model of centre-periphery relations that presume Indian agency and  
indigenous passivity followed belatedly by a “verna cular” response. Thus, 
Imran argues, the analysis of the Austronesian-Indic cultural encounter 
and its outcomes in architecture and art should seek to identify the 
interaction and mutual transformation of the autochthonous and Indic 
simultaneously.
Robert Wessing’s “The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast 
Asia” focuses on a igure whose position, though locally referred to 
by various titles, can be characterized as “the Lord of the Land”, and  
whose referent can vary from a spirit, the founder of a community, the 
head of a village or localized descent line, or a king. In his capacity  
as leader of this descent group, this igure fulils a role that encompasses 
land-rightly, priestly, and politico-administrative  tasks. Rather than 
attributing the differences to local variation, Wes sing tries to link 
together the ideas that—at least in the past—underlay and uniied these 
usages throughout Southeast Asia.  His indings pave the ground for 
further comparative study of this apparently translocal trope in the wider 
Austronesian world.

--- [Page 30] ---
30 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
REFERENCES
Abalahin, Andrew. “‘Sino-Pacifica’: Conceptualizing  Greater Southeast Asia  
as a Sub-Arena of World History”.  Journal of World History  22, no. 4 (2011): 
659–91.
Acri, Andrea. “Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans: (Re-)Tracing the Indic Roots  
of Some Ancient and Modern Performing Characters from Java and Bali”.  
Archipel  88 (2014): 13–70.
Ali, Daud. “Connected Histories? Regional Historiog raphy and Theories of  
Cultural Contact between Early South and Southeast Asia”. In Islamic 
Connections: Muslim Societies in South and Southeast Asia , edited by  
R. Michael Feener and Terenjit Sevea. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, 2009.
Bednarik, Robert G. “Seafaring in the Pleistocene”. Cambridge Archaeological 
Journal  13, no. 1 (2003): 41–66.
Bellina, Bérénice. “Le port protohistorique de Khao  Sam Kaeo en Thaïlande 
péninsulaire: lieu privilégié pour l’étude des premìres interactions indiennes  
et sud-est asiatiques”. Bulletin de l’Ecole Française d’Extrême-Orient  89  
(2002): 329–43.
———. “Beads, Social Change and Interaction between India and Southeast  
Asia”. Antiquity  77, no. 296 (2003): 285–97.
Bellwood, Peter. “Austronesian Prehistory in Southeast Asia: Homeland, Expansion 
and Transformation”. In The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative 
Perspectives , edited by Peter Bellwood, James J. Fox and Darrel l Tryon. 
Canberra: ANU Press, 1995.
———. “Southeast China and the Prehistory of the Austronesians”. In Lost  
Maritime CulturesŚ China and the Paciic , edited by Tianlong Jiao. Hawaii: 
Bishop Museum Press, 2007.
Bellwood, Peter, James J. Fox, and Darrell Tryon, eds. The Austronesians: Historical 
and Comparative Perspectives . Canberra: Anthropology, Research School of 
Paciic and Asian Studies, 1995.
Blench, Roger M. “From the Mountains to the Valleys : Understanding  
Ethnolinguistic Geography in SE Asia”. In The Peopling of East Asia , edited 
by Laurent Sagart, Roger M. Blench, and Alicia Sanchez-Mazas. London: 
Routledge, 2005 a.
———. “Fruits and Arboriculture in the Indo-Paciic Region”. Bulletin of the  
Indo-Paciic Prehistory Association  24 (2005 b): 31–50. 
———. “Stratiication in the Peopling of China: How F ar does the Linguistic Evidence 
Match Genetics and Archaeology?”. In Human Migrations in Continental East 
Asia and Taiwan: Matching Archaeology, Linguistics and Genetics , edited by 
Alicia Sanchez-Mazas, Roger M. Blench, Malcolm D. Ross, Illia Peiros and 
Marie Lin. London: Routledge, 2008 a. 

--- [Page 31] ---
1. Introduction 31
———. “Re-evaluating the Linguistic Prehistory of South Asia”. In Occasional 
Paper 3: Linguistics, Archaeology and the Human Past , edited by Toshiki Osada 
and Akinori Uesugi. Kyoto: Indus Project, Research Institute for Humanity and 
Nature, 2008 b. 
———. “A History of Fruits on the SE Asian Mainland”. In Occasional Paper 4: 
Linguistics, Archaeology and the Human Past , edited by Toshiki Osada and 
Akinori Uesugi. Kyoto: Indus Project, Research Institute for Humanity and 
Nature, 2008 c. 
———. “Remapping the Austronesian Expansion”. In Discovering History through 
Language: Papers in Honour of Malcolm Ross , edited by Bethwyn Evans. 
Canberra: Paciic Linguistics, 2009 a.
———. “New Evidence for the Austronesian Impact on the East African Coast”.  
In Global Origins and the Development of Seafaring , edited by Atholl  
Anderson, James H. Barrett and Katherine V . Boyle. Cambridge: Macdonald 
Institute, 2010.
———. “Was there an Austroasiatic Presence in Island SE Asia prior to the 
Austronesian Expansion?”. Bulletin of the Indo-Paciic Prehistory Association 
30 (2011 a): 133–44.
———. “The Role of Agriculture in the Evolution of Southeast Asian Language 
Phyla”. In Dynamics of Human Diversity in Mainland SE Asia , edited by Nick 
J. Enield. Canberra: Paciic Linguistics, 2011 b.
———. “Vernacular Names for Taro in the Indo-Paciic Region and Their Possible 
Implications for Centres of Diversiication”. In Irrigated Taro Colocasia  
Esculenta  in the Indo-PaciicŚ Biological, Social and Historical Perspectives , 
edited by Matthew Spriggs, David Addison and Peter J. Matthews. Osaka: 
Minpaku, 2012 a.
———. “Almost Everything You Believed about the Austronesians Isn’t True”. In 
Crossing Borders: Selected Papers from the 13th International Conference of 
the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Volume 1 , edited 
by Dominik Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke and Mai Lin Tjoa-Bonatz. Singapore: 
NUS Press, 2012 b.
———. “Finger-millet: The Contribution of Vernacular  Names towards Its  
Prehistory”. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences , 2012 c. Available at 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12520-012-0103-6>.
———. “The Prehistory of the Daic (Tai-Kadai) Speaki ng Peoples and the  
Hypothesis of an Austronesian Connection”. In Unearthing Southeast Asia’ s 
Past: Selected Papers from the 12th International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Volume 1 , edited by Marijke J. 
Klokke and Véronique Degroot. Singapore: NUS Press, 2013 a.
———. “Was There Once an Arc of Vegeculture Linking Melanesia with Northeast 
India?”. In Paciic ArchaeologyŚ Documenting the Past 50,000 YearsŚ Papers 

--- [Page 32] ---
32 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
from the 2011 Lapita Paciic Archaeology Conference , edited by Glenn R. 
Summerhayes and  Hallie Buckley. University of Otago Studies in Archaeology, 
no. 25, Dunedin: Otago University Press, 2013 b. 
———. “The Contribution of Linguistics to Understanding the Foraging/Farming 
Transition in NE India”.  In 50 Years after Daojali HadingŚ Emerging  
Perspectives in the Archaeology of Northeast India : Essays in Honour of T.C. 
Sharma , edited by Tia Toshi Jamir and Manjil Hazarika. New Delhi: Research 
India Press, 2014 a.
———. “The Origins of Nominal Afixes in MSEA Languages: Convergence, 
Contact and Some African Parallels”. In Mainland Southeast Asian Languages: 
The State of the Art , edited by Nick J. Enield and Bernard Comrie. Canberra: 
Paciic Linguistics, 2014 b.
Brighenti, Francesco. “Traditions of Human Sacriice in Ancient and Tribal India 
and their Relation to Śāktism”. In Breaking Boundaries with the Goddess: 
New Directions in the Study of ĝāktismŚ Essays in Honor of Narendra Nath 
Bhattacharyya , edited by Cynthia Ann Humes and Rachel Fell McDermott. 
New Delhi: Manohar, 2009.
Bulbeck, Francis. “An Integrated Perspective on the Austronesian Diaspora: The 
Switch from Cereal Agriculture to Maritime Foraging in the Colonisation of 
Island Southeast Asia”. Australian Archaeology  67 (2008): 31–52.
Calò, Ambra. Trails of Bronze Drums Across Early Southeast Asia: Exchange 
Routes and Connected Cultural Spheres.  Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, 2014.
de Casparis, Johannes Gijsbertus. India and Maritime Southeast Asia: A Lasting 
Relationship . Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya, 1983.
Castillo, Cristina Cobo, Katsunori Tanaka, Yo-Ichiro Sato, Ryuji Ishikawa, Bérénice 
Bellina, Charles Higham, Nigel Chang, Rabi Mohanty, Mukund Kajale and  
Dorian Q. Fuller. “Archaeogenetic Study of Prehistoric Rice Remains from 
Thailand and India: Evidence of Early Japonica  in South and Southeast Asia”. 
Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences , 2015. Available at <http://link.
springer.com/article/ 10.1007/s12520-015-0236-5> .
Chaudhuri, Kirti Narayan. “The Unity and Disunity of Indian Ocean History from 
the Rise of Islam to 1750: The Outline of a Theory and Historical Discourse”. 
Journal of World History  4, no. 1 (1993).
Chihara, Daigoro. Hindu-Buddhist Architecture in Southeast Asia . Leiden, New 
York, Köln: E.J. Brill, 1996.
Coed̀s, George. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia , translated by Susan  
Brown Cowing and edited by Walter F. Vella. Kuala Lumpur: University of 
Malaya Press, 1968.
Coldiron, Margaret J. Trance and Transformation of the Actor in Japanese Noh 
and Balinese Masked Dance-Drama . Lewiston/Queenston/Lampeter: The Edwin 
Mellew Press, 2005 a. 

--- [Page 33] ---
1. Introduction 33
———. “Lions, Witches, and Happy Old Men: Some Parallels between Balinese 
and Japanese Ritual Masks”. Asian Theatre Journal 22, no. 2 (2005 b):  
227–48. 
Dentan, Robert Knox. “‘Disreputable Magicians’, the Dark Destroyer, and the 
Trickster Lord”. Asian Anthropology 1 (2002 a): 153–94. 
———. “Against the Kingdom of the Beast: An Introduction to Semai Theology, 
Pre-Aryan Religion and the Dynamics of Abjection”. In Tribal Communities 
in the Malay World: Historical, Cultural and Social Perspectives , edited by 
Geoffrey Benjamin and Cynthia Chou. Leiden: Interna tional Institute for  
Asian Studies and Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2002 b. 
Difloth, Gérard. “The Contribution of Linguistic Palaeontology and Austroasiatic”. 
In The Peopling of East Asia: Putting Together Archaeology, Linguistics and 
Genetics , edited by Laurent Sagart, Roger Blench and Alicia Sanchez-Mazas. 
London: Routledge Curzon, 2005. 
van Driem, George. Languages of the Himalayas: An Ethnolinguistic Handbook . 
Handbuch der Orientalistik. Leiden: Brill, 2001.
———. “The Ethnolinguistic Identity of the Domestica tors of Asian Rice”.  
Comptes Rendus Palevol  11, no. 2 (2012): 117–32.
Emigh, John. Masked Performance: The Play of Self and Other in Ritual and 
Theatre . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1996.
Ferlus, Michel. “The Austroasiatic Vocabulary for R ice: Its Origin and  
Expansion”. Journal of the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society  3 (2010):  
61–76.
Fox, James J. “Comparative Perspectives on Austronesian Houses”. In Inside 
Austronesian Houses: Perspectives on Domestic Designs for Living , edited by 
James Fox. Canberra: Research School of Paciic and Asian Studies, Australian 
National University, 1993.
———. “Chapter One: Introduction”. In Origins, Ancestry and Alliance:  
Explorations in Austronesian Ethnography , edited by James J. Fox and  
Clifford Sather. Canberra: Department of Anthropology in association with 
the Comparative Austronesian Project, Research Scho ol of Paciic Studies,  
Australian National University, 1996.
Fox, James J. and Clifford Sather, eds. Origins, Ancestry and Alliance: Explorations  
in Austronesian Ethnography . Canberra: Department of Anthropology in 
association with the Comparative Austronesian Project, Research School of 
Paciic Studies, Australian National University, 1996.
Frank, Andre G. ReORIENT: Global Economy in the Asian Age.  Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1998.
Glover, Ian C. “Some National, Regional, and Political Uses of Archaeology in 
East and Southeast Asia”. In Archaeology of Asia , edited by Miriam T. Stark. 
Oxford: Blackwell, 2006.

--- [Page 34] ---
34 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
Gupta, Sunil. “The Bay of Bengal Interaction Sphere (1000 BC–AD 500)”. Indo-
Paciic Prehistory Association Bulletin 25 (2005): 21–30. 
Heine-Geldern, Robert. Bedeutung und herkunft der ältesten hinterindischen 
metalltrommeln (kesselgongs) . Leipzig: Verlag Asia Major GMBH, 1932 a.
———. “Urheimat und früheste Wanderungen der Austronesier”. Anthropos  XXVII 
(1932 b): 543–619.
Higham, Charles, Thomas Higham and Amphan Kijngam. “Cutting a Gordian Knot: 
The Bronze Age of Southeast Asia: Origins, Timing and Impact”. Antiquity  85 
(2011): 583–98.
Holt, Claire. Art in Indonesia: Continuities and Changes . Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 1967. 
Hoogervorst, Tom. Southeast Asia in the Ancient Indian Ocean World . Oxford: 
Archaeopress, 2013.
Hung, Hsiao-Chun, Yoshiyuki Iizuka, Peter Bellwood, Kim Dung Nguyen, Bérénice 
Bellina, Praon Silapanth, Eusebio Dizon, Rey Santiago, Ipoi Datan, and Jonathan 
H. Manton. “Ancient Jades Map 3,000 Years of Prehis toric Exchange in Southeast 
Asia”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America  104, no. 50 (December 2007): 19745–50.
Hung, Hsiao-Chun, Kim Dung Nguyen, Peter Bellwood, and Mike T. Carson. 
“Coastal Connectivity: Long-term Trading Networks Across the South China 
Sea”. The Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology  8, no. 3 (2013): 384–404.
Hutton, J.H. “The Signiicance of Head-Hunting in Assam”. The Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland  58 (July–December 
1928): 399–408.
Jordaan, Roy and Robert Wessing. “Human Sacriice at Prambanan”. Bijdragen tot 
de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 152 (1996): 45–74. 
———. “Construction Sacriice in India, seen from the East”. In Violence Denied , 
edited by Jan E.M. Houben and Karel R. van Kooij. Leiden: Brill, 1999.
Kauz, Ralph. “Preface”. In Aspects of the Maritime Silk Road: From the Persian 
Gulf to the East China Sea , edited by Ralph Kauz. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz 
Verlag, 2010.
Kulke, Hermann. “Indian Colonies, Indianization or Cultural Convergence?  
Relections on the Changing Image of India’s Role in South East Asia”. In 
Onderzoek in Zuidoost-Azie. Agenda’ s voor de jaren negentig , edited by Henk 
Schulte-Nordholt. Leiden: Rijksuniversiteit te Leiden, 1990.
———. “The Concept of Cultural Convergence Revisited: Relections on India’s 
Early Inluence in Southeast Asia”. In Asian Encounters: Exploring Connected 
Histories , edited by Parul Pandya Dhar and Upinder Singh. New Delhi: Oxford 
University Press, 2014.
Kumar, Ann. Globalizing the Prehistory of Japan: Language, Gene s and 
Civilization . London: Routledge, 2009.

--- [Page 35] ---
1. Introduction 35
Lansing, J. Stephen, Murray P. Cox, Therese A. de Vet, Sean S. Downey, Brian 
Hallmark, and Herawati Sudoyo. “An Ongoing Austrone sian Expansion in  
Island Southeast Asia”. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology  30, no. 3 
(2011): 262–72.
Leadbeater, Charles W. The Occult History of Java . Madras: Theosophical Pub. 
House, 1951.
Lewis, Martin W. and Kären Wigen. The Myth of Continents: A Critique of 
Metageography . London and Los Angeles: University of California Press,  
1997.
Li Shuicheng. “Ancient Interactions in Eurasia and Northwest China: Revisiting 
J.G. Andersson’s Legacy”. Bulletin of the Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities 
75 (2003): 9–30. 
Lieberman, Victor. Strange ParallelsŚ Southeast Asia in Global Context , c. 800–1830. 
Volume 2: Mainland Mirrors: Europe, Japan, China, So uth Asia, and the Islands . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Liu, Li. The Chinese Neolithic: Trajectories to Early States. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2004. 
Lombard, Dénis. “Networks and Synchronisms in South east Asian History”.  
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies  26, no. 1 (1995): 10–16.
Mabbett, Ian W. “The ‘Indianization’ of Southeast A sia: Relections on the  
Prehistoric Sources”. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies  8 (1977 a): 1–14.
———. “The ‘Indianization’ of Southeast Asia: Relect ions on the Historic Sources”. 
Journal of  Southeast Asian Studies  8 (1977 b): 143–61. 
Mahdi, Waruno. “Linguistc and Philological Data tow ards a Chronology of  
Austronesian Activity in India and Sri Lanka”.  In Archaeology and Language 
IV: Language Change and Cultural Transformatiom , edited by Roger Blench 
and Matthew Spriggs. London and New York: Routledge, 1999.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. “Trading Ships of the South C hina Sea: Shipbuilding 
Techniques and their Role in the History of the Development of Asian Trade 
Networks”. Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient/Journal 
de l’histoire economique et sociale de l’Orient  36, no. 3 (1993): 253–80.
———. “Introduction”. In Early Interactions between South and Southeast Asia: 
Relections on Cross-Cultural Exchange , edited by Pierre-Yves Manguin,  
A. Mani, and Geoff Wade. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies,  
2011.
Miksic, John. Singapore and the Silk Road of the Sea, 1300–1800. Singapore: NUS 
Press, 2013.
Mus, Paul. “India seen from the East: Indian and Indigenous Cults in Champa” 
(translation). Monash Papers on Southeast Asia  3 (1975). [“Cultes indiens 
et indig̀nes au Champa”. Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  33 
(1933): 367–410.]

--- [Page 36] ---
36 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench, Alexandra Landmann
O’Connor, S. and J. Chappell. “Colonisation and Coastal Subsistence in Australia  
and Papua New Guinea: Different Timing, Different Modes?”. In Paciic 
Archaeology: Assessments and Anniversary of the Fir st Lapita Excavation 
(July 1952) Koné, Nouméa, 2002 , edited by C. Sand. Nouméa, New Caledonia:  
Les Cahiers de l’Archéologie en Nouvelle-Calédonie, 2003.
Oppenheimer, Stephen. Eden in the East: The Drowned Continent of Southeast 
Asia. London: Phoenix, 1998.
Pawley, A. and M. Pawley. “Early Austronesian Terms  for Canoe Parts and Seafaring”. 
In Austronesian Terminologies: Continuity and Change , edited by Andrew K. 
Pawley and Malcolm D. Ross. Canberra: Paciic Linguistics, 1994.
Pearson, Michael. The Indian Ocean . London and New York: Routledge, 2003.
Pearson, Richard J. Ancient Ryukyu: An Archaeological Study of Island Communities . 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2014.
Pollock, Sheldon. “The Sanskrit Cosmopolis, 300–130 0: Transculturation, 
Vernacularization and the Question of Ideology”. In Ideology and the Status 
of Sanskrit: Contributions to the History of the Sanskrit Language , edited by 
J.E.M. Houben. Leiden: Brill, 1996. 
———. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and 
Power in Premodern India . Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006. 
Reuter, Thomas.  “Is Ancestor Veneration the Most Universal of All W orld  
Religions? A Critique of Modernist Cosmological Bias”.  Wacana  15, no. 2 
(2014): 223–53.
Reynolds, Craig J. “A New Look at Old Southeast Asia”. Journal of Asian Studies  
54, no. 2 (1995): 419–46. 
———. Seditious Histories: Contesting Thai and Southeast Asian Pasts . Seattle: 
University of Washington Press, 2006.
Santos, Arysio. Atlantis, The Lost Continent Finally FoundŚ The Dei nitive  
Localization of Plato’ s Lost Civilization . Lynwood: Atlantis Publications, 2005.
Sedyawati, Edi. “The Question of Indian Inluence on Ancient Javanese Dance”. 
Review of Indonesian and Malayan Affairs 16, no. 2 (1982): 59–82.
———. “Towards an Integrated Comparative Study of Austronesian Cultures”. In 
Paths of Origins: The Austronesian Heritage in the Collections of the National 
Museum of the Philippines, the Museum Nasional Indonesia and the Netherlands 
Rijksmuseum voor Völkenkunde , edited by Purissima Benitez-Johannot. Manila: 
Artpostasia, 2011.
Sidwell, Paul and Roger M. Blench. “The Austroasiatic Urheimat : The Southeastern 
Riverine Hypothesis”. In Dynamics of Human Diversity in Mainland SE Asia , 
edited by Nick Enield. Canberra: Paciic Linguistics, 2011.
Simanjuntak, Truman. Austronesian in Sulawesi . Depok: Centre for Prehistoric and 
Austronesian Studies, 2008.

--- [Page 37] ---
1. Introduction 37
Smith, Monica L. “Indianization from the Indian Point of View: Trade and Cultural 
Contacts with Southeast Asia in the Early First Millennium CE”. Journal of the 
Economic and Social History of the Orient  42, no. 1 (1999): 1–26.
Solheim, Wilhelm G. II. “The Kulanay Pottery Complex in the Philippines”. Artibus 
Asiae 20 (1957): 279–88.
———. “The Nusantao Hypothesis: The Origin and Sprea d of Austronesian  
Speakers”. Asian Perspectives 26 (1984–85): 77–88.
Speiser, Felix. Ethnographische Materialen aus den Neuen Hebriden u nd den  
Banks-Inseln . Berlin: C.W. Kreidel’s Verlag, 1923.
Spriggs, Matthew T.J. “Archaeology and the Austronesian Expansion: Where Are 
We Now?”. Antiquity  85 (2011): 10–528.
Theunissen, Robert, Peter Grave, and Grahame Bailey . “Doubts on Diffusion: 
Challenging the Assumed Indian Origin of Iron Age A gate and Carnelian  
Beads in Southeast Asia”. World Archaeology 32, no. 1 (2000): 84–105.
Wolters, Oliver W. History, Culture and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives . 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies [1982], 1999.