--- [Page 1] ---
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cimw20
Indonesia and the Malay World
ISSN: 1363-9811 (Print) 1469-8382 (Online) Journal homepage: https://ww w.tandfonline.com/loi/cimw20
Indic-Islamic encounters in Javanese and Malay
mystical literatures
Andrea Acri & Verena Meyer
To cite this article:  Andrea Acri & Verena Meyer (2019) Indic-Islamic encounters in Javanese
and Malay mystical literatures, Indonesia and the Malay World, 47:139, 277-284, DOI:
10.1080/13639811.2019.1657723
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13639811.2019.1657723
Published online: 10 Oct 2019.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 423
View related articles 
View Crossmark data


--- [Page 2] ---
EDITORIAL
INDIC-ISLAMIC ENCOUNTERS IN JAVANESE AND MALAY
MYSTICAL LITERATURES
Andrea Acri and Verena Meyer
Conceptually, this special issue in Indonesia and the Malay World stems from two colla-
borative projects undertaken by Andrea Acri and Verena Meyer in the period from 2016
to 2019, focusing on the Suluk Lonthang.1The projects investigated the enigmatic suluk
with respect to the relation it portrays between sex, transgression –intended as the sub-
version of gender roles, norm breaking in sexual ethics, and sacrilegious mockery of scrip-
tural religion –and spiritual prowess (as opposed to puritan legalism and scriptural
authority) as key elements in the religious experience. Our analysis upheld a comparative
perspective that considered the resonances between those ideas in both Su ﬁsm and Tantr-
ism, in particular the concept that an advanced spirituality required the overcoming of all
oppositions, including those relating to gender and social status (Zoetmulder 1994 ). Over
time, the scope of these projects has broadened further so as to include a larger body of
Javanese and Malay mystical literature composed in the period from the 16th to the
19th century, and a wider-ranging variety of ‘encounters ’between Indic and Islamic reli-
gious strands embedded in the textual and cultural fabrics of the Javanese and Malay-
speaking societies of Nusantara.
The idea of putting together this special issue arose from an intellectual need to not only
stimulate the investigation of the little-studied bodies of mystical literature like suluk etc.,
but also to overcome a disciplinary compartmentalisation and parochialisation that has
shaped, and is continuing to shape, the ﬁeld of Javanese and Malay textual and cultural
studies after World War II. This situation had resulted in a lack of engagement
between researchers working in these ﬁelds, who have often been unwilling to go
beyond the ‘localised ’micro-histories and philologies that have investigated religious
dynamics in the Javanese and Malay-speaking cultural worlds as self-contained phenom-
ena. From a chronological perspective, scholars of the ‘Hindu-Buddhist ’period have
rarely, if ever, taken into account ‘Islamic ’material post-dating the 16th century, and
vice-versa. Indeed, the major divide in the ﬁeld would seem to be nowadays represented
by scholars studying (Early) Modern Javanese and Malay religious phenomena uniquely
from the prism of Islam on the one hand, and those focusing on Hinduism and Buddhism
in Java, Sumatra, or the Malay Peninsula up to c.1500 CE on the other. This in spite of the
fact that scholars are inevitably dealing with overlapping geographical contexts and tem-
poralities, and phenomena that clearly present as many continuities as changes, or that are
amenable to being studied from a comparative and trans-local perspective.
© 2019 Editors, Indonesia and the Malay WorldCONTACT Andrea Acri andrea.acri@ephe.sorbonne.fr
1On the Suluk Lonthang and its protagonist, L ĕbe Lonthang, see Acri ’s contribution in this special issue. An edition and
English translation of the suluk by Acri, Aminullah, and Meyer is forthcoming.INDONESIA AND THE MALAY WORLD
2019, VOL. 47, NO. 139, 277 –284
https://doi.org/10.1080/13639811.2019.1657723

--- [Page 3] ---
We believe that this predicament has prevented us from achieving a better understand-
ing of the complex dynamics at play in the development of the pluralistic religious dis-
course in Java and other regions of Nusantara, over a period of at least one thousand
years. This phenomenon is, in some respects, still ongoing: witness, for instance, living
Javanese mystical currents, many of which feature elements of continuity (whether due
to uninterrupted transmission or conscious re-appropriation and re-statement) with
pre-Islamic Śaiva and Buddhist traditions. An urgent desideratum is, therefore, to stimu-
late a conversation and a concrete sharing of questions and approaches, expertises and
methodologies. This will help develop a more nuanced appreciation of the multi-vocal
and multi-layered Javanese and Malay mystical literatures. We hope to integrate this dis-
course with recent advancements in our understanding of both Su ﬁsm and Indic religions
in their transnational dimensions, in the ﬁrst place in Southeast Asia. These recent devel-
opments, especially as far as the phenomenon of Śaiva and Buddhist Tantrism/Tantra is
concerned, have yet to be widely received by mainstream cultural and historical studies,
which still linger on outdated knowledge and preconceptions. This state of a ﬀairs has rele-
gated what once constituted a phenomenon of primary importance for many religious,
cultural and artistic paradigms of medieval Asia (including the Javanese and Malay
worlds) to a curiosum, or a marginal episode at best.2
We are fully aware of the formidable challenges that such a programme entails, which
are such that no single scholar could ever hope to be able to undertake it. These challenges
include the mastering of several old and modern languages (such as Sanskrit, Arabic,
Persian, Old Javanese, Old Sundanese, Classical Malay, Modern Javanese, Bahasa Indone-
sia, etc.) and their respective philologies, as well as familiarity with primary and secondary
sources of religious traditions as they developed in both their South Asian and Middle
Eastern ‘cradles ’and their trans-local, cosmopolitan instantiations. This gigantic task
can be more easily undertaken in the frame of collaborative projects allowing di ﬀerent
scholars to combine their respective disciplinary expertises and research foci. This
special issue, therefore, hopes to create a forum for a productive engagement among scho-
lars working on Javanese and Malay mystical texts from the 16th to the 19th century (with
incursions into pre-16th century Old Javanese literature and early 20th century Javanese
literature) from various perspectives and disciplinary backgrounds, including Islamic
studies applied to Modern Javanese and Malay literatures (Meyer, Wieringa), Tantric tra-
ditions in India, Java, and Bali (Acri), Modern Javanese literature (Arps), and Classical
Malay texts (Braginsky). Far from imposing a unitary perspective and methodology, the
issue re ﬂects the multi-vocality and plurality of views that currently shapes the ﬁeld,
oﬀering material for a preliminary re ﬂection and suggesting possible future research
directions.
Teasing out the ‘Indic ’and ‘Islamic ’in Javanese religion
Since the special issue focuses on Indic-Islamic encounters, it seems unavoidable to at least
brieﬂy discuss previous scholarship on the issue of syncretism and hybridity of Javanese
(literary) culture and religion, and in particular its mystical strands referred to as ‘Javan-
ism ’. Various scholars, including Geertz ( 1964 ,1973 ), Beatty ( 1999 ), and Ricklefs ( 2006 )
2A recent survey of tantric traditions in pan-Asian perspective is Gray ( 2016 ).278 A. ACRI AND V. MEYER

--- [Page 4] ---
with his model of ‘mystic synthesis ’, have perceived Javanese religion as quintessentially
syncretic, having been shaped by the historical layering of indigenous/animistic traditions
with Indic religions ﬁrst and, from the 15th century, Islam. Critical stances towards these
models, and syncretism in particular, which seems to be the least apt term to properly
characterise Javanese religion and its textual archive, do not seem unwarranted. Yet, a
scholarly approach that programmatically avoids the categories of ‘Indic ’and ‘Islamic ’,
while uniquely admitting a (hard-to-de ﬁne, and supposedly quintessential) ‘Javaneseness ’
of the phenomena under scrutiny, falls in the (methodo)logical fallacy of regarding ‘Java-
nese(ness) ’as a category on its own and capable of being explained uniquely in its own
terms (and, conversely, of explaining everything ‘Javanese ’). Furthermore, to refrain
from disentangling and historically tracing the genealogy and transformation of these
various strands in a local and translocal context in the longue durée runs the risk of creat-
ing an anachronistic picture. Worse still, this approach also runs the risk of uncritically
accepting and, perhaps, even fuelling, potentially distorting nativist and indigenistic per-
spectives by local actors.3Therefore, an etic distinction –to be taken with a grain of salt –
between the general categories of ‘Islamic ’and ‘Indic ’, in their multifarious immanent
instantiations, as distinct from the ‘Javanese ’may still be useful to the cultural and reli-
gious historians, who have to deal with a religious discourse that was shaped by centuries
of translocal contacts, even if local agents may not always have been aware of those cat-
egories and their pedigrees.4By invoking ‘Javaneseness ’as a heuristic category, we may
not realise that what is perceived and de ﬁned both etically and emically as ‘Javanese ’
was (and still is) already the outcome of centuries of recon ﬁgurations of Indic and
Islamic in ﬂuxes, which can indeed be traced to prototypical ideas, practices, and textual
bodies all over the Sanskrit Cosmopolis and Islamicate world.5
Furthermore, awareness of encounters between Indic and Islamic traditions can be
found in a number of Javanese and Malay texts from the 16th century to the present.
These texts are written by Muslim authors, often with advanced training in the disciplines
of classical Islamic learning. These authors may have consciously borrowed from their pre-
Islamic heritage with some appreciation (see Arps ’article in this issue), or may have
viewed the material much more sceptically and been careful to only borrow aesthetic
media while repudiating the traditions themselves (see Meyer in this issue). In either
case, the authors were consciously aware of working with two sorts of ideas: artistic
3During his interactions with contemporary ‘Hindu ’or ‘Javanist ’teachers and practitioners from Mount Lawu in Central
Java, Acri has often recorded views tracing the ultimate origin of Indic beliefs, myths, etc., to Java, such as, for instance,
the idea that the Rāmāyan aepic originated in Java and was subsequently transferred to India, or statements about the
‘indigenous ’/‘Javanese ’character and ultimate origin of ‘left-hand ’or Bhairava-tantra.
4Such emic (mis)conceptions as the one described by Wieringa (see this issue) in the Suluk Gat oloco with respect to its
‘intriguing ’obliviousness to the fact that the pre-Islamic buda religion of Java was ultimately also foreign-derived, or
modern perceptions of Indic political concepts counting as local wisdom from Indonesia ’s own heritage, may also
reﬂect a nativist point of view, or the extent to which those Indic elements were appropriated and repackaged as quin-
tessentially ‘Javanese ’. The argument that, since Javanese sources did not recognise such categories as ‘Hindu ’,‘Indic ’,
‘tantric ’, etc., or did not consider their local instantiations as exogenous, they must be modern abstractions or ﬁctitious
constructs, bear no force. These etic concepts and theorisations did not have comparable emic counterparts even in pre-
modern India; yet this fact does not mean that these phenomena were not part of the cultures of South and Southeast
Asia, and are not susceptible of being studied from an etic historical perspective.
5For example, such a quintessentially ‘Nusantaran ’(and, at the same time, ‘Islamic ’) institution as the Islamic religious
seminar ( pondok orpesantren) may well have originated from the madrasa religious school invented and modelled
by the Persian S āmānid dynasty (9th –10th century) along the pattern of the Buddhist monastery-schools in eastern
Iran (Yusuf 2010 : 178), or independently, from local pre-Islamic institutions of higher learning of the vihāra,patapan ,
man dala,o rkabuyutan type.INDONESIA AND THE MALAY WORLD 279

--- [Page 5] ---
media, and ascetic and ritual practices. Therefore, although these authors may not have
used the terms ‘Indic ’and ‘Islamic ’to describe them, the distinction is not foreign to
them, and the cautious use of the categories by contemporary scholars is warranted.
Another contentious aspect of the problem is the overemphasis of one element over the
other, for instance when characterising ‘Javanism ’(or even ‘Javanese Islam ’) as a Hindu-
Buddhist system with an Islamic uppercrust or, conversely, as a uniquely Islamic phenom-
enon with little or no in ﬂuence from pre-Islamic/Indic strands. Both perspectives may be
adjusted by a multi-disciplinary approach to the sources by teams of scholars, who could
thereby minimise the risks of interpreting the material univocally in the light of their dis-
ciplinary specialisation. To be fair, the reaction to the Orientalist overemphasis on Hindu-
ism and Buddhism mentioned earlier, which was in part dominated by cultural prejudices
(cf. for instance Florida 1997 ; Masuzawa 2005 ), and ended up creating an asymmetry in
subsequent scholarship on pre-Islamic and Islamic Javanese religion, is a welcome correc-
tive, as it has brought a more punctual and nuanced assessment of the thorough appro-
priation of Islam by the Javanese elite and populace alike.
Still, as a specialist in Old Javanese religious literature, Acri thinks that (Earl y) Modern
Javanese mystical literature appropriated, carried forward, and recon ﬁgured Indic exogenous
elements, which can hardly be recognised as such by scholars who are not su ﬃciently
acquainted with relevant primary and secondary sources. Such exogenous elements were so
deeply rooted in the socio-cultural (and textual) fabric of Java that what is often perc eived
as quintessentially ‘Javanese ’–such as the centrality of ‘power ’(sakti, kasakten )–is actually
indebted to strands of Indic religions, and especially Śaiva and Buddhist tantric traditions,
which dominated the religious discourse across South and Southeast Asia throughout the
Indic middle ages (c.7th –13th century CE) and beyond to the present day –for instance, in
Bali. Such cosmologies, mythologies, textual canons, and mystical currents did not di sappear
overnight after the arrival and rise to dominance of Islam in Nusantara, but continue d to live
in recon ﬁgured, reworked, and adapted forms in the literature, performing and ﬁgurative arts,
folklore, mystical traditions, and many other cultural manifestations.6The passage from Indic
to Islamicate paradigms would not be the introduction of totally new forms, but rather the
refashioning of existing ones through a shared register in the realm of mystical expe rience.
To appreciate this process, more attention needs to be paid to the body of Old and Middle
Javanese religious texts and its relationship with Modern Javanese literature.
Similar re ﬂections may be applied to the contentious issue of the resonances between
Suﬁand tantric modes of religiosity that appear to characterise many strands of Javanese
and Malay mysticism.7The ‘Suﬁ’and the ‘tantric ’are categories that were already
entangled, there being no ‘pure ’manifestations of either of them. Historically speaking,
this means that the genesis and development of many important Su ﬁtraditions, including
those that in ﬂuenced Islamic paradigms in many contexts of Nusantara, may already owe
to contributions from Indic strands of yoga, Tantra, Hinduism, and Buddhism in the
Indian subcontinent and Central Asia, even prior to reaching Southeast Asia.8The fact
6For a non-exhaustive list of key studies highlighting Indic/pre-Islamic continuities in Modern Javanese arts and cultures,
religion, and literature, see footnotes 3 and 6 in Acri ’s article in this issue.
7See, for instance, the discussion in Acri ’s article in this issue about a recon ﬁgured Śaiva motif along Su ﬁlines (p. 300), as
well as the possible Indic pedigree of monistic and antinomian doctrines in suluk .
8See, for instance, Paul ( 1996 ), Ernst ( 2003a : 183 –187), Sakaki ( 2005 , in particular, pp. 136 –137 contra Ernst 2003b : 205 –
206), and Mayer 2010 ; see also Braginsky ’s article in this issue. On the more general issue of the long history of relations,280 A. ACRI AND V. MEYER

--- [Page 6] ---
that Su ﬁdoctrines were so eagerly accepted in Javanese and Malay mystical circles suggests
that Southeast Asian authors and practitioners recognised in them familiar elements that
were already present in the register of local, Indic-derived mysticism, which they could
successfully appropriate and translate. And even their rejection and critique, as in the
case of Hamzah Fansuri ’s disparaging remarks towards ascetic practices carried out in
seclusion by spiritual seekers that refer, in a surprisingly detailed way, to yogic techniques
known in both Indian and Javano-Balinese tantric Śaiva traditions (Braginsky 2004 : 142 –
148), suggests that these practices and practitioners were perceived as ‘too close to be
ignored ’, and that Su ﬁmysticism was located in an existing local discourse rather than
uniquely echoing issues current in Middle Eastern Su ﬁmilieus.9
Conversely, Meyer is interested in the ways in which Muslims in Indonesia and else-
where conceive of their di ﬀerent kinds of thought and practice as authentically Islamic
while drawing on and appropriating from a range of di ﬀerent sources. With the Islami-
sation of Southeast Asia and the theological and aesthetic paradigm shifts associated with
this transition, some Muslims of Southeast Asia did not fail to notice the perseverance of
certain aspects of their pre-Islamic past, both in their intellectual traditions and their
everyday life as Muslims. Conscious of the multiple strands within their religious and
cultural heritage, they did not only speak about local concerns, but also contributed to
conversations in the wider Islamic world. This became all the more common as steam-
ship made travel to the Middle East easier and more a ﬀordable for many Southeast Asian
Muslims. As a result, the local and the global became increasingly intertwined, thus
making any clear di ﬀerentiation between ‘Muslim ’and ‘Javanese ’tenuous at best. Fur-
thermore, Indonesian Muslim writers ’views on the di ﬀerent strands of their religious
tradition and their relationship with each other were varied, entailing also debates on
the question whether Southeast Asian Islam constitutes a distinct current, and if so,
whether this distinct current should be viewed positively, with cautious distance, or as
a problem to overcome.10Such debates continue to the present day, for example
around the term Islam Nusantara, o ﬃcially adopted by Indonesia ’s largest traditionalist
Islamic organisation Nahdlatul Ulama in 2015 as a designation of the Islam that has been
practiced in Java since the wali sanga , the nine saints who, according to tradition,
brought Islam to the area by skilfully using local custom and knowledge as a vehicle
to convert people.11While scholarly approaches to such negotiations have more often
employed an anthropological perspective than a textual or theological/philosophical
one,12anthropologists of Islam in Southeast Asia bene ﬁt from learning about the
textual history of how the global and the local on the one hand, and the Hindu-Buddhist
and religious encounter, between Islam and Buddhism, see Muslim World: a special issue on Islam and Buddhism (Yusuf
2010 ), as well as Elverskog ( 2013 ).
9This is the opinion of Braginsky ( 2004 ,2017 , and in this issue), as opposed to Wormser ( 2012 ). It should also be noted that
even the issues current in Middle Eastern Su ﬁmileus could have re ﬂected ideas carried by in ﬂuential Shaykhs from India
(see Braginsky ’s article in this issue, p. 376).
10For an example of an appreciative appropriation of pre-Islamic literature into an Islamic framework, cf. Ricklefs ( 1998 :
127 –162) and Arps in this issue. Cf. Azra ( 2004 ) for a perspective on historical movements criticizing what was considered
syncretistic or otherwise heterodox Islam.
11For an analysis of the ideological programme and deployment of the concept Islam Nusantara, cf. for instance, Woodward
(2017 ).
12Questions on how particular strands in Islamic thought and practice are conceptualised have been central in the anthro-
pology of Islam since Talal Asad ’s seminal article on The idea of an anthropology of Islam (1986 ). Among anthropologists
working on Islam in Southeast Asia, Asad ’s questions were taken up most explicitly by John Bowen (1989), although many
other scholars build on his work and the discussions Asad initiated.INDONESIA AND THE MALAY WORLD 281

--- [Page 7] ---
and Islamic on the other, are negotiated. It is our hope that the articles in this issue will
be a resource for overcoming those limitations.
The present issue
Theﬁve contributions of the present issue o ﬀer new perspectives to the debate articulated
above by analysing Javanese and Malay mystical texts, as well as other genres of Javanese
literature, from various approaches, and focusing on the categories of Indic and Islamic
(and the related buda /buddhic , Hindu-Buddhist, Śaiva, tantric, Su ﬁ, etc.) to formulate
hypotheses about their encounter (or clash), their emic conceptualisations and relation
to the issue of religious identity (whether entangled or distinct), the possible historical
continuities between them, typological resonances, or actual hybridities.
Theﬁrst article, ‘Becoming a Bhairava in 19th-century Java ’by Andrea Acri, sets the
tone of the issue by o ﬀering an exploration of the possible continuities and hybridities
between the pre-Islamic Śaiva literature of Java and suluk texts. Starting from the work
and ideas of P.J. Zoetmulder on Javanese mystical literature, and guided by Ricklef ’sr eﬂec-
tion that ‘The evolution of Javanese Islam in the 19th century is a complex matter, with
transitional stages and hybrid states that are unclear in the evidence and di ﬃcult to untan-
gle’(Ricklefs 2007 : 30), Acri tries to revisit and rebalance scholarly perspectives that have
analysed 19th-century Javanese mystical literature uniquely from the prism of Su ﬁIslam.
His contribution focuses on the theme of transgression as a means to empowerment and
union with the Divine found in suluk in association with the ‘heretical ’characters of L ĕbe
Lonthang, Malang Sumirang, and Siti J ĕnar, which resonate with practices current in both
tantric and Su ﬁcontexts, and which may show indebtedness to ideas stemming from a
pre-Islamic tantric fund.
Ben Arps in ‘The power of the heart that blazes in the world: an Islamic theory of
religions in early modern Java ’continues the exploration of (Early) Modern Javanese
literature by focusing on the late 18th-century ‘renaissance ’of Old Javanese literature
in the Islamic kingdom of Surakarta and its possible earlier prototypes. Questioning
the misguided assumption that Javanese were so strongly disposed to syncretism that
doctrinal clashes did not bother them, he sc rutinises several unstudied manuscripts
to examine Javanese theoretical ideas abou t the relationship between the Hindu-Bud-
dhist and Islamic traditions, and the conn ection between epic narratives and the
present and future of Java. He argues that what interested Javanese intellectual and pol-
itical elites were a quest for inner and outer power, knowledge and revelation, and future
kingship.
Remaining within the boundaries of the philological study of suluk and related Javanese
literary sources, Edwin Wieringa ’s‘A nativist defence of Javanism in late 19th-century
Java: the Suluk Gat ̣oloco andits co-texts in the Sĕrat Suluk Panaraga compilation ’dis-
cusses the tension between Islam and Javanese religiosity in the 19th-century Suluk
Gat ̣oloco, a notoriously anti-Islamic satirical poem. He argues that the text ’s nativist dis-
course does not advocate a return to Hindu-Buddhism, but rather a ‘turning to the origins ’
identi ﬁed with what in a later period has come to be known as kĕjawen orkĕbatinan , i.e.
mystical currents that privilege the inner ( batin ) spiritual aspect of religion. Questioning
the relevance of Tantra for the understanding of the intellectual context of this text, he
maintains that the protagonist ’s indulging in the three M ’s, namely minum (drinking282 A. ACRI AND V. MEYER

--- [Page 8] ---
alcohol), madat (smoking opium), and main (gambling), must not necessarily testify to an
involvement with the tantric pañcamakara or the ﬁve M ’s.
Shifting to the domain of Malay mystical literature from Sumatra, Verena Meyer in
‘Translating divinity: punning and paradox in Hamzah Fansuri ’s poetic Su ﬁsm’examines
Hamzah as a ﬁgure at the threshold between two religious traditions and linguistic worlds.
Meyer explores how Hamzah exploited the Arabic and Malay languages by using puns to
describe the incomprehensible di ﬀerence between God and humans, while showing how
everything that exists does so by virtue of its participation in the reality of wujūd, Ibn al-
ʿArab ī’s term for God ’s being, which is identical to God ’s being found. Hamzah ’s work is
conceptualised as a process of translating Arabic theological works into Malay poetry
based on an epistemology and ontology that points beyond impasses in contemporary
translation studies. Furthermore, Hamzah deliberately drew on theological and literary
currents in the wider Islamic world and cautiously appropriates pre-Islamic religious
imagery while, at the same time, explicitly distancing himself from Hindu-Buddhist
thought and practice, situating himself squarely within the Islamic tradition.
The article by Valdimir Braginsky, ‘Through the optics of imagination: the internal
vision of the science of women ’documents and comparatively analyses a corpus of Clas-
sical Malay texts characterised by the interaction between Su ﬁand tantric/yogic elements.
This article, closely linked to two previous contributions (Braginsky 2004 ,2017 ), presents
a translation of key passages of the Bust ān al-s ālikīn(Garden of wayfarers), a themed
anthology composed between the 16th and 19th century in Aceh with the sexo-yogic
‘science of women ’as its centrepiece. Braginsky argues that this body of literature
attests to the existence of a Malay form of Su ﬁ-Tantrism that may have been in ﬂuenced
by c.16th –17th centuries Hat ̣hayoga sources from the Indian subcontinent, either directly
or indirectly, as it shows correspondences with doctrines and practices revolving around
visualisation or imagination ( dhāran ̣ā,dhyāna, etc.), and the internal manipulation of
male and female sexual ﬂuids known in Sanskrit texts as vajrol īmudr ā.
The collective body of work presented here, grounded on a rigorous philological study
of Old and Modern Javanese as well as Classical Malay texts, attempts to create a space for
further re ﬂection on the possible Indic/tantric and Islamic/Su ﬁentanglements, while pre-
serving at the same time the individual perspectives of the contributors with respect to
those contested categories and their bearing for the textual and religious history of Nusan-
tara. It thus makes a case for situating the texts in a larger context of mystical discourses
that was rooted in a century-old religious landscape that admit possible continuities as well
as cross-fertilisations.
Acknowledgements
The research resulting in this special issue was carried out with the support of a collaborative
research grant programme sponsored by Columbia University and PSL University (ANR-10-
IDEX-0001-02), as well as an International Collaborative Research Grant Program of the American
Academy of Religion (AAR). The guest editors would like to thank the contributors to this issue, as
well as Zakariya Pamuji Aminullah for his assistance in editing the Suluk Lonthang .
ORCID
Andrea Acri http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9633-829XINDONESIA AND THE MALAY WORLD 283

--- [Page 9] ---
References
Asad, T. 1986 .The idea of an anthropology of Islam . Georgetown: Center for Contemporary Arab
Studies, Georgetown University
Azra, A. 2004 .The origins of Islamic reformism in Southeast Asia . Honolulu: University of Hawai ’i
Press.
Beatty, A. 1999 .Varieties of Javanese religion: an anthropological account . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bowen, J. 1993. Muslims through discourse: religion and ritual in Gayo society . Princeton NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Braginsky, V. 2004 . The science of women and the jewel: the synthesis of Tantrism and Su ﬁsm in a
corpus of mystical texts from Aceh. Indonesia and the Malay world 32 (93): 141 –175.
Braginsky, V. 2017 . The manner of the Prophet –concealed, found and regained, Indonesia and the
Malay World 45 (132): 250 –291.
Elverskog, J. 2013 .Buddhism and Islam on the Silk Road . Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian
Studies.
Ernst, C.W. 2003a . Muslim studies of Hinduism? A reconsideration of Arabic and Persian trans-
lations from Indian languages. Iranian Studies 36 (2): 173 –195.
Ernst, C.W. 2003b . The Islamization of Yoga in the Amrtakunda Translations, Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society Series 3 (13, 2): 199 –226.
Florida, N. 1997 . Writing traditions in colonial Java: the question of Islam. In S.C. Humphreys (ed.),
Cultures of scholarship . Ann Arbor MI: University of Michigan Press.
Geertz, C. 1964 .The religion of Java . New York: Free Press Paperback.
Geertz, C. 1973 . Ritual and social change: a Javanese example. In C. Geertz, The interpretation of
cultures: selected essays . New York: Basic Books, pp. 142 –169.
Gray, D. 2016 . Tantra and the Tantric Traditions of Hinduism and Buddhism, Oxford Research
Encyclopedia of Religion .<https://oxfordre.com/religion/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.
001.0001/acrefore-9780199340378-e-59 > Accessed 9 May 2019.
Masuzawa, T. 2005 .The invention of world religions: Or, How European universalism was preserved
in the language of pluralism . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mayer, T. 2010 . Yogic-S ̣ūfīHomologies: the case of the ‘Six principles ’yoga of N āropa and the
Kubrawiyya, The Muslim World 100 (2/3): 268 –86.
Paul, J. 1996 .I nﬂuences indiennes sur la naqshbandiyya d’Asie centrale? [Indian in ﬂuences on the
naqshbandiyya of Central Asia? ], Cahiers d ’Asie Centrale 1/2: 203 –217.
Ricklefs, M.C. 1998 .The seen and the unseen world in Java, 1726-1749: history, literature and Islam
in the Court of Pakubuwana II . Honolulu: University of Hawai ’i Press.
Ricklefs, M. 2006 .Mystic synthesis in Java: a history of Islamization from the fourteenth to the early
nineteenth centuries . Norwalk CT: EastBridge.
Ricklefs, M. 2007 .Polarising Javanese society: Islamic and other visions c. 1830 –1930 . Singapore:
Singapore University Press.
Sakaki, K. 2005 . Yogico-tantric traditions in the Hawd al-Hayat. Journal of the Japanese Association
for South Asian Studies 17: 135 –156.
Wormser, P. 2012 . The religious debates of Aceh in the sixteenth and seventeenth century: an invis-
ible cultural dialogue? Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 55 (2 –3): 369 –382.
Yusuf, I. 2010 . Islam and Buddhism relations from Balkh to Bangkok and Tokyo. Muslim World
100 (2 –3): 177 –186.
Woodward, M. 2017 . Islam Nusantara: a semantic and symbolic analysis. Heritage of Nusantara:
International Journal of Religious Literature and Heritage 6 (2): 181 –198.
Zoetmulder, P.J. 1994 .Pantheism and monism in Javanese suluk literature; Islamic and Indian mys-
ticism in an Indonesian setting . Leiden: KITLV Press. First published in Dutch 1935.284 A. ACRI AND V. MEYER