--- [Page 1] ---
ESOTERIC BUDDHISM IN  
MEDIAEVAL MARITIME ASIA
Front Matter.indd   1 17/8/16   10:42 PM

--- [Page 2] ---
The Nalanda-Sriwijaya Series , established under the publishing programme of ISEAS  – Y usof Ishak Institute, 
Singapore, has been created as a publications avenue for the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre. The Centre focuses 
on the ways in which Asian polities and societies have interacted over time. To this end, the series invites 
submissions which engage with Asian historical connectivities. Such works might examine political relations 
between states; the trading, financial and other networks which connected regions; cultural, linguistic and intellectual interactions between societies; or religious links across and between large parts of Asia.
The ISEAS  –  Y usof Ishak Institute (formerly Institute of Southeast Asian Studies) was established as an 
autonomous organization in 1968. It is a regional centre dedicated to the study of socio-political, security and 
economic trends and developments in Southeast Asia and its wider geostrategic and economic environment. 
The Institute’s research programmes are the Regional Economic Studies (RES, including ASEAN and APEC), 
Regional Strategic and Political Studies (RSPS), and Regional Social and Cultural Studies (RSCS).
ISEAS Publishing, an established academic press, has issued more than 2,000 books and journals. It is 
the largest scholarly publisher of research about Southeast Asia from within the region. ISEAS Publishing works with many other academic and trade publishers and distributors to disseminate important research and analyses from and about Southeast Asia to the rest of the world.
Front Matter.indd   2 17/8/16   10:42 PM

--- [Page 3] ---
ESOTERIC BUDDHISM IN  
MEDIAEVAL MARITIME ASIA
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons
Edited by
ANDREA ACRI
Front Matter.indd   3 17/8/16   10:42 PM

--- [Page 4] ---
First published in Singapore in 2016 by ISEAS Publishing
ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute
30 Heng Mui Keng TerraceSingapore 119614
E-mail: publish@iseas.edu.sg
Website : http://bookshop.iseas.edu.sg
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of the ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute.
© 2016 ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute
The responsibility for facts and opinions in this publication rests exclusively with the authors and their interpretations do not necessarily reflect the views or the policy of the publishers or their supporters.
ISEAS Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia : Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons / edited by Andrea Acri.
1.
 
Buddhism—Asia. 
I.
 A
cri, Andrea, 1981–
BQ266 E77
  2
016
ISBN 978-981-4695-08-4 (soft cover)ISBN 978-981-4695-09-1 (e-book, PDF)
Cover image : c. 9th century seated Vajrapāṇi statue from Central Java; gift of John and Evelyn Kossak, The 
Kronos Collections, 1984. Photo courtesy of The Metropolitan Museum of Art (www.metmuseum.org)
Typeset by Andrea AcriPrinted in Singapore by Mainland Press Pte Ltd
Front Matter.indd   4 17/8/16   10:42 PM

--- [Page 5] ---
For 
Roy Jordaan
Front Matter.indd   5 17/8/16   10:42 PM

--- [Page 6] ---
Front Matter.indd   6 17/8/16   10:42 PM

--- [Page 7] ---
Acknowledgements                      ix
List of Abbreviations
                       
xi
Conventions                    xiii
1.
 I
ntroduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes,  
7th–13th Century ad
                   
   1
A
ndrea Acri
PART I: MONKS, TEXTS, PATRON S
2.
 C
oronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China:  
Bianhong’s Manual on the abhiṣeka  of a cakravartin  
               29
I
ain Sinclair
3.
  S
aṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan , Borobudur, and the Origins of  Esoteric Buddhism  
in Indonesia
                  
           
 6
7
Hudaya Kandahjaya
4.
 T
races of Indonesian Influences in Tibet
       
          
     
113 
Jan A. Schoterman
         
5.
 Th
e Politics of Esoteric Buddhism: Amoghavajra and the Tang State
           
   1
23
Geoffrey Goble
6. (
Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia? International Relations, the Balance  
of Powers, and the Tantric Buddhism of K ṛtanagara and Khubilai Khan                   141
David Bade
PART II: ART, ARCHITECTURE, AND MATERIAL CULTURE 
7. I
mages of Devotion and Power in South and Southeast Bengal
          
          
    1
63
Claudine Bautze-PicronCONTENTS
table of contents.indd   1 16/8/16   9:50 AM

--- [Page 8] ---
viii Contents
8. B orobudur’s Pāla Forebear? A Field Note from Kesariya, Bihar, India                            191 
Swati Chemburkar
9. I
magery, Ritual, and Ideology: Examining the Mahāvihāra at Ratnagiri
          
      
   
   
  2
11 
Natasha Reichle
10. S
eeds of Vajrabodhi: Buddhist Ritual Bronzes from Java and Khorat
          
       2
37 
Peter D. Sharrock & Emma C. Bunker
11.
 A
rchaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra,  
7th to 13th Century  
               
    
 2
53
John Miksic
12.
 Th
e Tale of Sudhana and Manoharā on Candi Jago: An Interpretation of a  
Series of Narrative Bas-reliefs on a 13th-Century East Javanese Monument
   
       
   2
75
Kate O’Brien
PART III: BAUDDHA-ŚAIVA DYNAMICS
13. O
nce More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’: Magic, Realpolitik, and Bauddha-Śaiva  
Dynamics in Ancient Nusantara
                             3
23
Andrea Acri
14.
 M
id-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java:  
Lord Kumbhayoni and the ‘Rag-wearer’ Paṁsukūlika  Monks  
of the Abhayagirivihāra
                
 3
49
Jeffrey R. Sundberg
15.
 A Ś
aiva Text in Chinese Garb? An Annotated Translation of the  
Suji liyan Moxishouluo tian shuo aweishe fa  
             
     3
81
Rolf W. Giebel
APPENDIX A: The Names of Nāgabuddhi and Vajrabuddhi              3 89
Iain Sinclair
APPENDIX B: Notes on the Alleged Reading vālaputra  on the Pikatan Funeral Stele          3 93
Jeffrey R. Sundberg 
The Contributors  
               
 39
5
Bibliography                    399
Index                          441
table of contents.indd   8 16/8/16   9:50 AM

--- [Page 9] ---
I sincerely thank the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre 
(NSC) at ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, and 
especially Director Tan Chin Tiong and Deputy 
Director Ooi Kee Beng, for having generously 
supported this project. I am also grateful to Derek 
Heng and Terence  Chong who, in their capaci-
ties as NSC Heads, facilitated the completion of 
this volume. I would naturally hope that this 
book will further stimulate the study of Buddhism, 
Tantric traditions, and intra-Asian connecti ons at 
the NSC and, more generally, in Singapore. 
A word of thanks is also due to Ng Kok Kiong 
and Stephen Logan at ISEAS Publishing, who 
handled the publication process in a most profes-
sional manner.
I am most grateful to Rolf Giebel, Arlo Grif-
fiths, Roy Jordaan, Nicolas Revire, Iain Sinclair, 
and Jeffrey Sundberg for their feedback and/or as-
sistance on several aspects of this volume, including 
my own Chapter 1 and Chapter 13. I extend my 
thanks to John Guy, who facilitated the procure-
ment of the image of the Vajrapāṇi statuette kept 
at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, reproduced  on the book cover. A number of indivduals and 
institutions need to be credited for kindly grant -
ing permission to reproduce pictures, drawings, 
or artworks under their copyright, namely: the 
American Institute of Indian Studies, the Archae -
ological Survey of India, Joachim Bautze, Osmund 
Bopearachchi, Sven Bretfeld, Birgit Breitkopf, Ven. 
Rangama Chandawimala, Swati Chemburkar, Pia 
Conti, Véronique Degroot, Michael Flecker, Goh 
Geok Yian, Alexander Götz, Yves Guichard, John 
and Susan Huntington, the Leiden University 
Library, the Leiden Museum of Ethnology, the 
National Gallery of Victoria, Mori Masahide, Gerd 
Mevissen, and Ulrich von Schroeder.
Jongwook Kim and Sarah Chay are to be credit -
ed for consolidating the general bibliography, while 
Shaashi Ahlawat, Pritha Mukherjee, and especially 
Azad Hind Nanda, for helping me to create the 
Index. 
Last but not least, I express my gratitude and ap -
preciation for the contributors who, besides sharing 
their knowledge, endured with patience the rather 
long and complex editorial process. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
acknowledgements.indd   9 12/7/16   3:28 PM

--- [Page 10] ---
acknowledgements.indd   10 12/7/16   3:28 PM

--- [Page 11] ---
AKR  =  Amoghapāśakalparāja
ASI
 =
 
Archaeological Service of India
APP  =  A dhyardhaśatikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra 
    (Nayasūtra )
Chin.
 =
 
Chinese
CUL
 =
 
Cambridge University Library
DDB  =
 
Digital Dictionary of Buddhism
ed. =
 
editor, edited, edition
EI
 
=
 Epi
graphia Indica
EMC
 =
 
Early Middle Chinese 中古漢語   
   
 (
http://eastling.org/tdfweb/midage.aspx)
GNP  
=
 G
aṇapatitattva
GST  =
 
Guhyasamājatantra
GSMV 
 =
 
Śrīguhyasamājamaṇḍalavidhi
GSVV 
 = 
Śrīguhyasamājamaṇḍalopāyikāviṁśa- 
     t
ividhi 
J. 
=
 
Japanese
JS 
 =
 
Japasūtra
JTS 
 =
 
Jiu Tangshu 舊唐書  
K
 =
 K
hmer inscription (as per Cœdès’ nu- 
  
     
meration)
KS 
 =
 
Kriyāsaṅgraha
KSP 
 = 
Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā
LOr 
=
 
Leiden Oriental (manuscript)MDJ  =  Mikkyō daijiten  密敎大辞典  → Mikkyō  
     G akkai (1983) 
MJ
 
=
 
Mikkyō jiten 密敎辞典  → Sawa 1981 
MMK
 
=
 
Mañjuśrī- (or Mañjuśriya- )mūlakalpa 
MMoA
 =
 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New 
 
     Y
ork (http://met-museum.org)
MVA  =  Mahāvairocanābhisaṁbodhi-sūtra or 
                  -tantra [also: VAT ]
SDP  
 =
 
Sarvadurgatipariśodhana
SHK  
 =
 
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan
SHKAS  = S aṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Advayasādhana
SHKM   =  Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Mantranaya
Skt 
=
 
Sanskrit
STTS  
 =
 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha
SV 
 =
 
Sarvavajrodaya
T  =  Taishō shinshū daizōkyō 大正新修大  
					藏經	
Tōh.  = T ōhoku Catalogue nos. of the Derge  
         C anon
TC 
= 
Tibetan Canon
tr. =
 t
ranslator, translated, translation
VAT  = V airocanābhisaṁbodhitantra [also: M VA ]
VŚ = Vajraśekhara
XTS
 =
 
Xin Tangshu 新唐書	ABBREVIATIONS
acknowledgements.indd   11 12/7/16   3:28 PM

--- [Page 12] ---
acknowledgements.indd   12 12/7/16   3:28 PM

--- [Page 13] ---
Romanization of Asian languages follows the 
systems commonly used in the contemporary scholarly community, viz. (unaccented) Pinyin 
for Chinese, revised Hepburn for Japanese, Wylie 
for Tibetan, etc. Sanskrit follows IAST, with the 
variants included in the international standard 
‘ISO 15919:2001 Information and documentation—
Transliteration of Devanagari and related Indic 
scripts into Latin characters’; the same standard, with some upgrades, is used for the romanization of Old Javanese (cf. Acri and Griffiths 2014). For 
East Asian languages, traditional unsimplified 
characters are used; modern simplified charac -
ters are provided in the bibliography for the names and works of scholars, as per the original sources. Reconstructions of (doubtful) Sanskrit words and 
proper names are preceded by an asterisk (e.g., 
*Maṇicinta  na ). A general, unified bibliography is 
provided at the end of this volume, while primary sources in Asian languages are listed at the end of 
each chapter. Common abbreviations, such as  titles 
and editions of primary sources, are noted in each chapter as well as in a unified section on p. xi. The copyright for the reproduction of images has been sought whenever possible. In cases where this was 
not possible, common guidelines established for the 
fair use of images that are intended solely for schol -
arly and research purposes have been followed.CONVENTIONS
acknowledgements.indd   13 12/7/16   3:28 PM

--- [Page 14] ---
acknowledgements.indd   14 12/7/16   3:28 PM

--- [Page 15] ---
Chapter 1
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the  
Maritime Silk Routes, 7th–13th Century ad
andrea acri
In their introduction  to a recent special issue 
of History of Religions devoted to (Esoteric) 
‘Buddhist Visual Culture’, Jinah Kim and Rob 
Linrothe (2014) encouraged ‘a geographically wide 
framing of almost every question that can be asked 
about Esoteric Buddhism’. They argued:
Yunnan, Java, Japan, and the Tibetan regions of 
the Indian Himalayas can be as important as 
Bodh Gaya, Chang’an, or Lhasa, and an over -
ly narrow focus limits the prospects for fruitful 
comparison. The Ekādaśamukhadhāraṇī , for ex-  
ample, seems to have found purchase from Gan -
dhā
ra to Nara, Gilgit to Palembang. It is the de -
provincializing and simultaneous decentering of 
any particular locale and any particular type of 
evidence (texts, epigraphical records, or visual 
art) that must occur in order for the study of Eso -
teric Buddhism to generate greater insights. (p. 2)
Espousing an analogous wide-ranging perspec -
tive, this volume studies the genesis, development 
and circulation of Esoteric (or Tantric) Buddhism 
throughout the vast geoenvironmental area that 
may be defined as ‘Maritime Asia’, from the 7th 
to the 13th centuries ad . In doing so, it upholds 
a trans-regional approach laying emphasis on 
the mobile networks of human agents (‘Masters’), 
textual corpora (‘Texts’), and visual/architectural 
models and artefacts (‘Icons’) through which Eso -
teric Buddhist discourses and practices spread far 
and wide across Asia. This extensive Introduction 
proposes several issues for consideration in survey -
ing recent scholarly literature and in contextual -
izing the religious, historical, and socio-political 
dynamics—intervening on a local/regional as well 
as cosmopolitan/supralocal scale—that shaped 
these networks as they moved across different ge -
ographical and cultural contexts.Maritime Asia, encompassing ‘Monsoon Asia’1 
as its core, spans the eastern littorals of the Indian 
Subcontinent (and their hinterlands) in the west 
to the South China Sea littorals (and their hinter -
lands), the Philippine islands, Korea and Japan in 
the east;2 its geographical fulcrums are the littorals 
of peninsular and mainland Southeast Asia, and 
the Malay-Indonesian Archipelago . Spreading 
across the superimposed geopolitical boundaries 
of modern nation states, and transcending such 
equally arbitrary and historically constructed ge -
ographical divisions as South/Southeast/East Asia, 
this largely maritime expanse was influenced by 
similar environmental and climatic factors, such 
as the seasonal monsoons. Being the theatre of 
circulation of people, goods, languages and ideas 
through sea routes since time immemorial, Mar -
itime Asia may be theorized as forming—just 
like Eurasia—one interconnected network, and 
arguably even an integral cultural ecumene with 
a shared background of human, intellectual, and 
environmental history. 
During the period that concerns us here, which 
is defined by way of convention as ‘mediaeval’,3 
1.What Reynolds (2006: x) calls the ‘geoenvironmental 
metaphor of Monsoon Asia’ inspired early 20th-centu -
ry French savants, such as Paul Mus, Sylvain Lévi, Jean
Przyluski, and George Cœdès; see in particular Mus 1933.
2.Inn
er continental (North) India and China, Tibet, as
well as Korea and Japan may be considered as ‘appendices’ 
or ‘edges’ of Monsoon Asia, linked to the sea- and land-
based networks of trade, cultural, and religious exchange 
that collectively shaped Maritime Asia. Similarly, the Eur -
asian continent may be conceptualized as ‘core’, and the
Mediterranean and North Africa as ‘edges’ (Wang Gungwu 
in Ooi 2015: 121).
3.This i
s the widely used periodization referring to the
post-Gupta period of South Asian history (especially as per
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   1 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 16] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia2
Maritime Asia may be conceptualized as a ‘socio -
spatial grouping’ or world region (Lewis and Wigen 
1997) constituted by a pattern of ever-changing rela -
tions dominated by basic underlying affinities. This 
region comprised a web of coastal and inland pol -
ities connected to each other through a network of 
cosmopolitan port- cities across the Bay of Bengal/
Indian Ocean and the South China Sea/Western 
Pacific Ocean, forming a ‘single ocean’ (Wolters 
1999: 44–45) or, rather, a ‘Two-Ocean Mediterrane -
an’ (Wang Gungwu in Ooi 2015: 57–93) . Following 
an increasing recognition of the predominant role 
played by the sea routes (the so-called ‘Maritime 
Silk Roads’)4 in shaping premodern intra-Asian 
connectivity, it seems appropriate to study both 
regional and cosmopolitan manifestations of Es -
oteric Buddhism, not just on their own terms but 
also for their participation in complex circulatory 
processes involving economic/mercantile, diplo -
matic, and religious networks moving across the 
‘Southern Seas’.5
Cutting across the natural boundaries and bar -
riers of continental topography, sea-based routes 
formed a network of conduits that led to the for -
Davidson 2002; cf. 2015: 372–73). I extend the application 
of ‘mediaeval’ to the wider area of Maritime Asia, as done 
by Sprengard and Ptak (2004: vii), and also by Wong and 
Heldt (2014: 16) with respect to China, ‘as a gesture to a 
more global history’; compare Abu-Lughod’s (1989) and 
Pollock’s (2006) application of the term to the Eurasian world.
4. Sen (2014a: 39) argues that the labels (Maritime/Over -
land) ‘Silk Road(s)/Route(s)’ are misnomers, for ‘Silk from 
China was neither the earliest nor the most commonly 
traded commodity. The early history of maritime trade 
indicates the prevalence of beads, precious stones, and 
pearls as the main merchandise; during the later periods, 
bulk goods, such as incense, pepper, spices, and porce -
lain dominated the trading activity’ (cf. Whitfield 2007: 
208–10). However, since the terms ‘Silk Road(s)/Route(s)’ 
have become part of the modern global parlance, I will not 
refrain from using them here.
5. Advocating a maritime focus in the study of intra-Asian 
connectivity, Ray (2013: 13) rightly notes that ‘though the 
seas have been important for the five millennia of human 
history, they are also the most glossed over in historical 
discourse, which has tended to focus on predominantly 
land-based national histories’. For a similar critique against 
a land-based approach in the spread of Buddhism across 
Asia, see Sen (2014a: 40); on the fundamentally interlinked 
nature of overland and maritime routes, see Whitfield 
2007: 206–8. mation of a mediaeval global Buddhist Asia. The 
Indian Ocean trade network emerged as a ‘largely 
coherent structure, and has been a space which 
served as a huge stratum connecting the various 
kingdoms and cultures adjacent to it, causing inter -
changes in all possible fields and certainly mutual 
influences’ (Kauz 2010: 1). By the middle of the 
7th century ad , factors such as a radical expan -
sion of commercial maritime routes connecting 
South with East Asia contributed significantly to 
the exchange not only of mercantile goods but also, 
and more importantly, of ideas, beliefs and ritual 
practices, and artistic styles. 
defining esoteric buddhism:  
its genesis, and its relationship 
with śaivism
Esoteric Buddhism is a phenomenon of enormous 
importance for the religious and cultural history of 
Asia. Esoteric Buddhism favoured the transmission 
of cults and philosophical ideas, ritual technologies, 
artistic motifs, material culture, political paradigms, 
and scientific notions across the Buddhist ecumene; 
at the same time, it partook of, and had an impact 
on, the imaginaries and related practices character -
izing the Sanskritic continuum that shaped many 
sociocultural contexts in Maritime Asia and its 
bordering regions from the 7th to the 13th century 
and beyond. Y et its genesis, development and circu -
lation remain poorly understood.6 The very terms 
‘Esoteric/esoteric Buddhism’ and ‘tantric/Tantric 
Buddhism’ (or ‘Tantra’) are still contested,7 and 
none of the emic labels of Mantranaya (‘Method of 
6. Authoritative histories of Esoteric Buddhism are re -
markably few. Recent works focusing mainly on the Indian 
Subcontinent and Tibet include those by Wedemeyer (2013), 
Sanderson (2009, esp. 70–243, which also encompasses 
Southeast Asia, and 1994), Davidson (2002), and Tribe 
(2000); cf. also the now classic, yet still seminal, Indo-Ti -
betan Buddhism  by Snellgrove (1987). For studies focusing 
on Central and East Asia, see my n. 31.
7. For a
n overview of the problems and a survey of the 
relevant secondary literature, see especially McBride 2004; 
Orzech, Sørensen and Payne 2011: 3–10; Lehnert 2012: 247, 
n. 2. A promising shift in focus from the etic terms used 
to describe the traditions to the actual content of ritual 
practice may be found in the text-historical study of early 
Mantranaya  literature by Shinohara (2014).  
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   2 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 17] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes3
Mantra’), Vajrayāna (‘Diamond/Thunderbolt Way’) 
and Mantrayāna (‘Way of Mantra’)—though legiti -
mate and attested in primary textual sources—can 
be used as a single catch-all label for the diverse 
array of strands, orientations, and historical trends 
of Esoteric Buddhism.8 
In dealing with a broad range of Buddhist tradi -
tions over an extensive geographical area and time -
span, this volume adopts the descriptor ‘Esoteric 
Buddhism’ widely employed in contemporary Bud -
dhological scholarship—being fully cognizant of 
the fact that any etic catch-all category unavoidably 
entails some level of essentialization and generali -
zation. While this general label in many instances 
may be considered as virtually coterminous with 
‘Tantric Buddhism’,9 it also extends to the whole 
8. Vajrayāna, first attested in the late 7th century (Tribe 
2000: 196), refers to a specific strand of vajra -centred Man -
tranaya Buddhism, while Mantranaya is a more neutral 
term encompassing a variety of (early) Esoteric Buddhist 
traditions; Mantrayāna is a rather late usage (11th century 
ad, see de Jong 1984: 92–93). Kapstein (2001: 236) differ -
entiates the philosophical and exegetical literature on Va -
jrayāna, or ‘the developed Tantrism that becomes promi -
nent only during the last few centuries of Indian Buddhist 
history’, from the practice of mantranaya , ‘as it was con -
ducted in the monastic universities in India during the mid-
first millennium’. To Linrothe (1999: 58), the term ‘Tantric 
Buddhism’ ‘may be used to designate within Mahāyāna 
the ritualized use of dhāra ṇī and c ertain imagery shared 
with more developed forms of Esoteric Buddhism’. Orzech 
(2006a: 148), discussing a Song Buddhist catalogue of ad  
1013, notes that all texts are classified as belonging to the 
Hīnayāna, the Mahāyāna, or the ‘esoteric portion of the 
Mahāyāna Scriptural Collection’ ( 大乘經藏秘密部 ); this 
fact suggests that ‘“esoteric” ( 秘密) was a well-understood 
and frequently employed taxonomic term and a distinct 
subdivision within the Mahāyāna’. 
9. I con
sider the descriptor ‘Tantric Buddhism’, and the 
related adjectives ‘pre-/proto-Tantric’, as legitimate alterna -
tives to ‘Esoteric Buddhism’, for a number of reasons. First, 
the word tantra  is firmly established in Buddhism (and 
Śaivism) by the 8th century: for instance, tantra  designates 
texts such as the Susiddhikara  and Vairocanābhisaṁbodhi  
in Sanskritic discourse, and Śāntarakṣita’s Tattvasiddhi  (ca. 
750–80) refers to numerous Buddhist Tantras; moreover, 
many of the beliefs and practices found in the ‘mature’ 
Tantric scriptural corpus had already been around since at 
least the 5th century. The unwillingness of many modern 
scholars to adopt this descriptor may reflect a (subcon -
scious) tendency to avoid the label ‘Tantric’ because of its 
(projected) monothetic association with radical, eroticized, gamut of ‘hidden’ or ‘secret’ texts, practices and 
teachings from around the 4th to the 10th century 
and later that characterized certain orientations 
of Mahāyāna Buddhism, especially in East and 
Southeast Asian contexts.
Admittedly, it is often difficult to reduce or pin 
down Esoteric Buddhism exclusively to specific and 
distinct textual corpora, lineages, or ‘schools’, for 
many religious, social and institutional phenom -
ena occurring in lay milieux across the Buddhist, 
Śaiva, Vaiṣṇava, and Jaina divide since the early 
mediaeval period were increasingly dominated by 
Tantric orientations. These orientations, which were 
not in each and every instance ‘esoteric’, ‘secret’, or 
initiatory, may include (e.g.) ritual violence, trans -
gressive devotional practices, the use of mantras 
and magical formulas (for both this-worldly and 
other-worldly purposes), sorcery, possession and 
exorcism, and different genres of sacred perfor -
mance. Thus, by applying a polythetic approach, 
one may argue that some of the distinctive features 
of elite Esoteric Buddhist milieux penetrated—
through some sort of ‘trickle-down effect’—the 
extended social fabric; conversely, many ‘popular’ 
cults and practices influenced high-cultural/textual 
manifestations of Esoteric Buddhism.10
A key area of contention has focused on whether 
there was a clearly defined and self-consciously 
distinctive stream of Esoteric Buddhism that de -
veloped in the Indian Subcontinent in the first few 
centuries of the Common Era that preceded the 
more markedly Mantranayic/Vajrayānic develop -
ments from the 7th century onwards.  According to 
and transgressive forms of Buddhism. On the other hand, 
the cognate label ‘Tantric Śaivism’ is widely accepted, even 
to indicate the mainstream, ‘soft core’ currents of the Man -
tramārga, such as the Śaiva Siddhānta.
10. For instance, the striking similarities shared by some 
(both premodern and contemporary) ritual dances and 
performances in Tibet and Nepal (i.e., caryānṛtya, bhairab 
naach ), Bali ( topeng pajegan  and the masks Sidha Karya, 
Barong, and Rangda), and Japan ( sanbasō dance and the 
mask Okina) have been ascribed to a common Tantric 
Buddhist source by Coldiron (2005: 240–44) and Emigh 
(1996); cf. Acri 2014. Wedemeyer (2013: 257–58, n. 130) con -
siders performances like the caryā dance as the historical 
descendants of earlier Tantric ceremonies dominated 
by the ritual logic and ‘elite ideology’ of esoteric fringe 
practitioners. 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   3 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 18] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia4
one representative scholarly opinion, Esoteric Bud -
dhism ‘evolved gradually, becoming a distinctive 
stream within the late Mahāyāna closely connected 
with dhāra ṇī pra ctice’ (Orzech, Sørensen and Payne 
2011: 6).11 Even though the use of magical formulas 
(dhāra ṇī, mantra , vi dyā) is not per se a marker of 
Esoteric Buddhism (as these formulas were widely 
used in exoteric, mainstream Buddhist milieux 
for this-worldly purposes), dhāra ṇī-pr actice may 
account for the genesis of early Mantranaya Bud -
dhism within the Mahāyāna, emphasizing as it does 
the efficacy of mantras for soteriological purposes; 
over time, the practice of reciting spells became 
more complex, incorporating elements of image 
worship and visualization (Shinohara 2014: 194). 
Thus, many strands of Esoteric Buddhism may be 
seen as special trends or ‘fashions’ of (esoteric or 
secret, and therefore superior) ritualism, magic 
and meditation, which ‘encompassed a variety of 
different sub-movements and doctrinal and ritual 
innovations within (primarily Mahāyāna, or bo -
dhisattva-oriented) Buddhism, beginning in the 
early-mid first-millennium’ (Wedemeyer 2013: 
9–10). As such, Mantranaya—as opposed to the 
exoteric Pāramitānaya—was often perceived as 
an esoteric salvific path within the Mahāyāna. Its 
advocates regarded this path as superior, and in 
any event faster and easier, than other Buddhist 
paths. 
11. Prior to the development of a self-conscious esoteric 
Ma
hāyāna mo
vement distinct from the exoteric Mahāyā -
na, the dhāra ṇī-te xts that were translated into Chinese 
from the 4th century onward formed the matrix out of 
which the Vidy ādha ra Collection ( Chimingzhou zang 持明
咒藏 ; Vidy ādharapiṭaka ) wa s compiled during the mid-7th 
century (see Gray 2009: 2–3, Davidson 2002: 24, and the 
seminal study by Hodge, 1992; cf. Shinohara 2014). The 
Vidy ādharapiṭaka  it self was perceived as the precursor of 
later extensive Tantric collections such as the Vajraśekhara/
Māyājāla (see Dalton 2005: 122). These prototypical esoteric 
varieties of Buddhism may already have been in existence 
by the 5th and 6th centuries, as suggested among other 
things by the iconography of early cultic sites in Maha -
rashtra. Early Śaiva (proto-)Tantric scriptures, such as the 
core of the Niśvāsatattvasaṁhitā (prob. ad 450–550),  attest  
to the same stock of beliefs and practices—vetāla -rituals, 
possession, initiation, and the acquisition of supernatural 
powers through mantras, elixirs, or magical procedures—
that are also found in slightly later Buddhist texts, such as the Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa.A distinguishing feature of mediaeval Esoteric 
Buddhism was initiation ( abhiṣeka ). The practition -
ers of this path—both monastic and lay—under -
went an initiation ceremony bestowed by a master 
in order to pursue a fast process of liberation, or 
fulfill mundane goals, with the assistance of psy -
cho-physical techniques ( sādhana , upāya ) such 
as yogic meditation and visualization, ma ṇḍal as, 
mantras, magico-ritual procedures, and worship of 
(Esoteric) Buddhist icons. Esoteric Buddhism, and 
especially the Vajrayāna strand, had in its central 
practices and discourses an element of initiation by 
a vajrācārya, tr ansgression, empowerment, divin -
ization, worship of wrathful deities, and secrecy.12
Esoteric Buddhism shared significant common 
elements with Tantric Śaivism, to the extent that 
the two religions participated in an interdepend -
ence of discourse in such disparate domains as 
philosophy, soteriology, ritual, and iconography. 
This complex phenomenon of dialectic influence 
and interchange has triggered a wide range of etic 
interpretations. While the formative phase of the 
non-dual and transgressive Vajrayāna Buddhism 
and its foundational texts (labeled Yoganirut -
taratantras in the Tibetan tradition) is still a matter 
of debate as only a fraction of ‘proto-Tantric’ Bud -
dhist (and Śaiva) textual corpora have survived for 
us, scholars generally agree on the view that the 
whole canon was the result of a synthesis with a 
corpus of Sanskrit texts of antinomian character 
called Yoginītantras or Ḍākinītantras, which began 
to appear in South Asia by the 7th or 8th century. 
Sanderson (1994, 2001), hypothesizing a direct in -
fluence from Śaiva milieux of the Mantramārga 
(‘Way of Mantra’) where mantra-related salvific 
and/or mundane practices rose to prominence 
during the 6th and 7th centuries, argues that the 
Yoginītantras were originally of Śaiva persuasion, 
and reflected the transgressive rhetoric and prac -
tices of such marginal groups as the Kāpālikas, the 
ash-smeared, skull-bearing devotees of the terri -
fying Bhairava/Mahākāla. Conversely, Davidson 
(2002) maintains that in the early siddha  milieux 
of composition and circulation of such corpora 
the boundaries between Buddhism and Śaivism 
12. For a description of ‘eight significant features of 
Tantric Buddhism’, see Tribe 2000: 197–202.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   4 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 19] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes5
were not clear-cut, and the vectors were subaltern 
individuals or (tribal) ethnic groups living at the 
margins of the Brahmanical social order. Another 
position, advocated by Seyfort Ruegg (1964, 2008), 
posits an early ‘pan-Indian religious substratum’ 
or common cultic stock that would ex hypothesi 
form the endogenous common source and cultural 
background from which both Śaiva and Buddhist 
traditions derived, and to which they ultimately 
owe their shared common elements. 
consolidation and spread of  
esoteric buddhism: ‘royal’ vs. ‘mer -
cantile’ paradigms
A widespread scholarly opinion views the develop -
ment of Esoteric Buddhism as an eminently royal 
affair. According to Ronald Davidson (2002: 23), 
one of the main exponents of this paradigm, ‘eso -
teric Buddhism has a very strong political element 
which is occluded in the modern Buddhist apologia’. 
To Davidson, Esoteric Buddhist ideology, even the 
monastic one, is a mirror of Indian mediaeval life 
(2002: 115):
When the Mantrayāna becomes culturally im -
portant outside India, it is principally through 
the agency of official patronage, either aristo -
cratic or imperial. Given these circumstances, 
it would be extraordinary if the military and 
political culture of early medieval India had 
not shaped esoteric institutions, doctrines, 
literature, rituals, and iconography, at least 
to some degree.… Esoteric Buddhism is the 
form of medieval Buddhism that internalized, 
appropriated, reaffirmed, and rearranged the 
structures most closely associated with the sys -
tems of power relations, ritual authentication, 
aesthetics, gift-giving, clan associations, and 
sense of dominion that defined post-Gupta In -
dian polities.
According to Davidson, what ensured the con -
solidation and expansion of Esoteric Buddhism was 
its alignment to state interests, effected through 
monastic agents who entered the royal courts and 
secured the support of the elites, often competing 
with the ritual specialists of what was the most 
popular religion and ritual technology of their 
time over large portions of South and Southeast Asia: Śaivism. Thus, the relationship between Es -
oteric Buddhist ritual specialists and royal elites 
seems to be coterminous with one that existed 
between Brahmanical purohita s and the courts 
they served .13 
By acting as royal chaplains, religious precep -
tors ( rājaguru ), subduers of demons,14 magicians, 
thaumaturges, and even courtly advisors, Buddhist 
monks whose ritual practice adhered to ‘esoteric’ 
traditions provided warring monarchs with rituals 
geared towards the obtainment of what was most 
sought after by them: power. Through the invoca -
tion of powerful entities, the proffering of mantras 
and spells, and the enactment of royal initiations, 
those masters promised kings the safeguarding 
of their kingdoms, victory against their enemies, 
invincibility in battle,15 and indeed divinization of 
their body (see Flood 2006: 11). White (2012: 165) 
captures the translocal dynamics involved in this 
process by noting that besides trade, warfare, and 
political expansion, the contacts and exchanges 
favouring the spread of (Indic) adstratal Esoteric 
Buddhist (and Tantric Śaiva) traditions took place 
at the hands of religious and magico-ritual spe -
13. Linguistic evidence supporting this inextricable con -
nec
tion between politics and religious/ritual ideology is 
provided by the use of terms pertaining to the ritual sphere 
in the mediaeval Indic political domain (and vice versa), 
such as the important terms ma ṇḍal a or mantrin  (‘pos -
sessor of [secret] spells’: Davidson 2002: 143–44); the latter, 
indicating the king’s counselors, has remained in use in 
modern Hindi, Indonesian, and Malay with the meaning 
of ‘minister [of state]’ (compare the Chinese and English 
‘mandarin’: see Strickmann  1996). 
14. On th
e importance of demonology and ‘exorcism’ as 
vectors of transregional transfer and adoption of Buddhism 
(and Śaivism), see Strickmann 1996: 149, White 2012: 150, 
and Giebel, this volume.
15. To be s
ure, the employment of monks in warfare is 
not exclusive to this period: witness the Chinese military 
campaigns that started in the 4th century (Sen 2003: 36). 
However, the Esoteric Buddhist signature of the martial 
rituals carried out by Amoghavajra at the Tang court is 
miles apart from the ‘true Buddhism’ claimed by Xuan -
zang, who turned down an offer by Emperor Taizong to 
accompany him in his Korean campaign (ibid.: 37). Much 
has been written on the topic of ‘war magic’ and Esoteric 
Buddhism in India and beyond (besides the contributions 
by Acri, Bade and Goble in this volume, see Sinclair 2014, 
White 2012, Sanderson 2004, Davidson 2002, and Lokesh 
Chandra 1992a, 1992b).
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   5 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 20] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia6
cialists enjoying royal or imperial patronage—‘a 
prime example being the battlefield sorcerers whose 
magical devices and counter-devices were con -
sidered to be choice weapons in battle’. Through 
rituals, whether internalized or enacted, these 
agents offered the courtly elites an easy path to the 
mainstream Buddhist ideal of personal salvation on 
the one hand, and to the Tantric ideal of diviniza-
tion on the other. By the same token, they ensured 
a broader support for their cause by providing lay 
householders with equally powerful means—ritual, 
magical, meditative, and devotional—to achieve 
both their mundane and supramundane goals. 
An alternative view lays emphasis on traders—
who were among the original propagators of Bud -
dhism in its early stage—as the main agents of 
the dissemination of ‘Maritime Buddhism’ across 
Asia (see, e.g., Bopearachchi 2014, Dayalan 2013, 
Lancaster n.d.).16 While the success of Buddhism 
(in both its exoteric and esoteric forms) overseas 
has been too often simplistically perceived as the 
unique result of economic and social forces con -
nected to a mercantile class-ideology, characterized 
by an inherent dynamism and opposed to a ‘static’ 
Brahmanism, it is undeniable that lay householders 
active in trade, crafts, and warfare played a role in 
patronizing and spreading—e.g., through pilgrim -
age, travel, or migration— Esoteric Buddhist cults.17 
Hiram Woodward, criticizing Davidson’s model for 
failing to make a place for the ‘link’ between courts 
and monasteries on the one hand, and between 
monasteries and society at large on the other (2004: 
332), questions Davidson’s assumption that ‘a factor 
in the rise of the Mantrayāna or of institutional 
esoterism … was the loss of mercantile support 
and the rise in official patronage’ (2004: 353; cf. 
Davidson 2002: 82–83, 167). Trying to bridge the 
gap between the ‘royal’ and ‘mercantile’ model, 
Woodward rightly argues that 
16. By contrast, Sen (2014a: 42–43) discusses evidence of 
‘antagonistic encounters’ between Buddhist monks and 
(Hindu?) merchants plying the overland and maritime 
commercial routes.
17. See Szántó 2012: 34–35 on the readership of the Ca -
tuṣpīṭhatantra , an d his n. 47 for a summary of Pāla evidence 
of Buddhist patronage by members of the above-mentioned 
social groups; cf. Mishra 2011 on the ‘vertical’ spread of 
Vajrayāna in mediaeval Odisha (formerly: Orissa). the turn to Mantrayāna in Java in the 780s and 
790s is hard to square with such a notion, as 
is ninth-century Southeast Asian support for 
a monastery in Nālandā. Only merchant net -
works could have sustained the contacts with 
Bengal and Sri Lanka that made possible the 
movement of monks and the transfer of texts. 
It is hard to see why the territorial and defen -
sive aspects of the Mantrayāna, so connected 
in Davidson’s mind with official patronage, 
need be thought incompatible with merchant 
values. Indeed, bonds among merchants in 
widely separated ports could well have been 
enhanced by beliefs in secret codes, despite dif -
ferences in language and ethnicity, much as a 
cluster of mandalas exhibits alternate paths to 
a single unified goal.
Recent scholarship has unveiled the multi-direc -
tional connections existing between Buddhist 
centres, tied to each other by overlapping networks 
of relations that were religious as much as economic, 
diplomatic, and political in nature.18 Therefore, to 
understand the establishment (and disruption) of 
complex networks, an eclectic, rather than ‘single 
model’, approach is required. To better grasp such 
a multifaceted, trans-regional phenomenon as the 
patterns of Buddhist transmission across Maritime 
Asia, which was shaped by socio-political, econom -
ic, and perhaps even environmental factors, one 
may try to apply, as was done by Neelis (2011: 10) 
with respect to South, Central, and East Asia, a 
‘networks approach’ or ‘networks model’. As Neelis 
(2011: 319) persuasively puts it:
Multidirectional movement by agents of Bud -
dhist transmission … who selectively left 
traces of their journeys in literary texts, in -
scriptions, and material artifacts indicates 
more complex patterns of transmission than 
an oversimplified flow of influence in a single 
direction along a fixed route. As they consol -
idated multifaceted links between religious, 
economic, and political nodes along multiple 
18. On the intersection between trade, diplomacy, the 
emergent Esoteric Buddhist networks in the 7th century, 
and their integration in the wider Asian Buddhist world in 
the 8th century, see Sen 2003; cf. Hall 2010 on the (inter-)
regional trade networks of insular Southeast Asia  in the 9th 
and 10th centuries, in the light of archaeological evidence 
from shipwrecks and epigraphy.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   6 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 21] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes7
lines of communication, they formed their 
own parallel exchange networks, thus enhanc -
ing possibilities for cross-cultural contact and 
transfer.… It remains to be seen if trade net -
works played comparative roles as catalysts for 
long-distance transmission in other Buddhist 
geographical and historical contexts that were 
beyond the scope of this inquiry: Sri Lanka 
and Southeast Asia.
This approach individuates the nodes, conduits, 
and hubs that facilitated the dynamic processes 
of exchange, thus going beyond the metaphors of 
cultural ‘flows’ and ‘influences’ that have so far 
characterized the scholarly discourse. To fully 
appreciate how religious, mercantile, and diplo -
matic networks acted as catalysts for transmission 
of Esoteric Buddhism far and wide across Asia, it 
is necessary to adopt a geographically wider ‘Mar -
itime Asian’ perspective, and take into account the 
maritime vectors linking together the nodal centres 
in the Buddhist ecumene.
placing esoteric buddhism in  
mediaeval maritime asia
As is shown by scriptural, epigraphic, and art 
historical materials, esoteric cults, doctrines , and 
ritual technologies flourished across the mediae -
val Buddhist ecumene. Vajra -accoutrements, icons 
of Esoteric Buddhist deities, and dhāra ṇīs base d 
on Esoteric Buddhist texts in Sanskrit have been 
recovered across a vast swathe of both the conti -
nental landmass and island territory of Maritime 
Asia.19 Networks of Buddhist clerics of different 
ethnicities adhering to novel Tantric developments 
began to emerge in the 7 th century in disparate 
locales, moving along the maritime routes con -
necting South, East, and Southeast Asia . Those 
sea routes, established over the centuries—if not 
millennia—by a steady flow of traders and seafarers, 
19. Evidence from insular areas, which is rarely accounted 
for in studies on Esoteric Buddhism, has been found in 
Sri Lanka (see Mudiyanse 1967; Chandawimala 2013), the 
Maldives (see Gippert 2004, 2005), the Indonesian Archi -
pelago (see Nihom 1994, 1998a; Sundberg 2003; Kandahjaya 
2009, this volume; Griffiths 2011b, 2012, 2014a, 2014b, 2014c; 
Griffiths, Revire and Sanyal 2013; Cruijsen, Griffiths and 
Klokke 2012; Long 2014; Hall 2010; Miksic, this volume), 
and the Philippines (see Orlina 2012).were also plied by pilgrims and religious specialists 
who crossed oceans and lands in search of esoter -
ic knowledge, rare Sanskrit scriptures, relics and 
icons, powerful spells, and rituals of maṇḍalic in -
itiation ( abhi ṣeka) i
mparted by renowned ācāryas, 
as well as in search of political sponsors.
Esoteric Buddhism coexisted in many contexts 
with varieties of mainstream exoteric Mahāyāna 
or Pali Buddhism(s). Gaining momentum in the 
8th century, in what could indeed be described 
as a ‘Tantric turn’, it eventually became a nearly 
pan-Asian phenomenon. Its expansion was ini -
tially driven by a handful of exceptional masters 
endowed with a remarkably cosmopolitan vision 
and ‘international’ ambitions, who gained the 
support of the ruling elites of their time. Kings who 
either sponsored or granted direct recognition as 
state religion to Esoteric Buddhism during its ‘first 
wave’20 of pan-Asian expansion belonged to such 
prominent, and roughly coeval, Asian dynasties 
as the early Candras (r. ca. 850–1050) and Pālas (r. 
ca. 750–1199) in the northeastern Indian Subcon -
tinent, and the early Bhauma-Karas in Odisha (r. 
ca. 825–950); the Yarlung dynasty in Tibet (r. ca. 
618–842); the early Second Lambakaṇṇas in Sri 
Lanka (from the late 7th to the mid-9th century, 
up to Sena I); the Śailendras and cognate Śrīvijayan 
rulers in Java, Sumatra, and the Malay Peninsula 
(r. ca. 7th–13th centuries);21 the Chinese Tangs (r. 
20. Linrothe (1999) has elaborated a schematic model en -
compassing three phases of Esoteric Buddhism on the basis 
of the iconographical and doctrinal developments carried 
by each one of them. While pointing out that some of the 
stages after the 8th century may be contemporaneous and 
contiguous, he argues that ‘Phase One dominates the period 
between the late sixth to the eighth centuries, Phase Two 
presides from roughly the eighth to the late tenth century 
and Phase Three from the late tenth century through to 
the twelfth’ (ibid.: 13). Although this model may retain its 
usefulness when analysing wider-ranging historical or 
soteriological aspects of Esoteric Buddhism, here I would 
rather use the term ‘wave’ as a metaphor for the spread of 
esoteric fashions far and wide across Asia, and identify two 
main waves: the first from around the 7th to the early 10th 
century, the second from around the late 10th to the 13th 
century. Each of these waves appears to have been char -
acterized by new religious networks, socio-political con -
figurations, scriptural canons, and iconographic fashions.
21. The i
ssue as to whether the Śailendra Buddhist kings 
belonged to a distinct dynasty—of either Javanese, South -
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   7 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 22] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia8
618–907), especially under Emperors Xuanzong 
(r. 712–56) and Daizong (r. 762–79); the later Silla 
dynasty in Korea (r. 661–935); and the Japanese 
imperial dynasty in the Heian period (r. 794–1185). 
Having suffered a sudden decline in royal support, 
if not outright persecution, in locales as disparate 
as Tibet, Sri Lanka, Central Java, and China in the 
middle of the 9th century,22 Esoteric Buddhism 
picked up momentum again in the 11th century 
(the ‘second wave’) and remained vital through 
the 12th and 13th centuries across much of Mari -
time Asia. Major royal figures of that period who 
elected Esoteric Buddhism as their personal and 
official cult, or supported Tantric rituals as a means 
of achieving their political ends, are Jayavarman 
VII in Cambodia (r. ca. 1181–1220 ), Kṛtanagara in 
East Java (r. 1268–92), and Kublai Khan in China (r. 
1260–94). Having virtually died out in the Indian 
Subcontinent by the late 13th century, it continued 
to live or even thrive—in its localized adaptations—
until the 15th century in Java and Sumatra (e.g., 
under King Ādityavarman, r. ?– 1375) , and to the 
present day in Nepal, Tibet, Bali, and Japan.
Early, if rare, Esoteric Buddhist vestiges are 
found in Western India, as evidenced e.g. by im -
east Asian, or even South Asian origin—that reigned in Java 
up to ca. ad  850, and was followed by a Javanese line of 
Śaiva kings, has been the object of a longstanding contro-
versy among scholars; among the supporters of a dual-dy -
nasty theory are Jordaan (2006, and Jordaan and Colless 
2009) and Long (2014), while Sundberg (2011, this volume), 
along with the majority of archaeologists and historians 
of premoden Java, opt for a single-dynasty theory. As this 
introduction is not the right place to discuss this complex 
issue in detail, suffice it to say that in Java from the mid-9th 
century we note a prevalence of royal support for Śaivism 
instead of Buddhism, and no more mentions of Śailendra 
monarchs, whereas in Sumatra Buddhism continues to 
thrive, and we find references to ‘Śailendra’ monarchs and 
a ‘Śrīvijaya’ polity. For a useful survey of the literature, and 
a balanced approach favouring a ‘Javanese multi-dynastic’ 
model, see Zakharov 2012.
22. Apa
rt from socio-political contingencies, such par -
adigm-shifts may have occurred as the result of religious 
‘reforms’ that promoted a turn towards non-Esoteric va -
rieties of Buddhist traditions (as happened, e.g., in Sri 
Lanka [see Sundberg, this volume] and, at a later date, 
in Myanmar and Cambodia with respect to the preva -
lence of Theravāda/Pali Buddhism over Mahāyāna and 
Vajrayāna) or even different religions (as happened, e.g., 
in Central Java). ag ery from Buddhist caves in the Western Dec -
can, such as Ellorā (Malandra 1996), Aurangabad 
(Brancaccio 2010) and Kānherī, where Tārās and 
(esoteric) Avalokiteśvaras are found as early as the 
6th–7th centuries (Pandit 2015; Bopearachchi 2014: 
164–67).23 By the 9th century, a Buddhist monastery 
hosting a famous caitya  and a Tārā temple was 
located in Mahābimba in Koṅkana (the Konkan 
coast of western India); the well-known illustrated 
Nepalese manuscript of the A ṣṭasā hasrikā-Pra -
jñāpāramitā  dated ad  1015 (CUL ms. Add. 1643, f. 
193r), presenting a visual documentation of divin -
ities and renowned centres across Buddhist Asia, 
mentions Mahāviśva (a corruption of Mahābimba?) 
as the seat of a famous Lokanātha (cf. below, n. 57; 
Szántó 2016: 2), and links a significant number of 
other Buddhist sites to Koṅkana (see Kim 2014: 48). 
It is generally acknowledged that major centres 
of Esoteric Buddhism (and of Tantrism in general) 
were found in the northeastern areas of the Indian 
Subcontinent, roughly corresponding to modern 
Bihar (itself the cradle of Buddhism since the time 
of the Buddha), West Bengal, and Bangladesh. Bihar 
was the seat of such prestigious institutions of Bud -
dhist learning as Nālandā, Vikramaśīla, Somapura, 
and Uddaṇḍapura (Otantapurī), where esoteric 
fashions seem to have become popular from the late 
8th through the 12th century;24 the whole northeast -
ern region hosted major masters of Mantranaya and 
Vajrayāna  Buddhism, and several Tantric works 
stem from there. 
 It is now increasingly recognised that Odisha 
(Oḍra) played a significant role in the formation 
of Esoteric Buddhism and its spread to Southeast 
Asia. This region, part of which was formerly known 
across the Indic world as ‘Kaliṅga’, boasted impor -
tant monastic centres and sacred pilgrimage sites, 
such as Ratnagiri, Udayagiri, and Lalitagiri, which 
were connected to the maritime networks via the 
23. Malandra (1993: 116) has noted a similarity between 
the depiction of the eight Bodhisattvas on the exterior 
of the Central Javanese Candi Mendut and some of the 
Ellorā caves; a possible iconographical influence stemming 
from Ellorā on the sculpted triptych of Mendut has been 
hypothesized by Revire (2015a).
24. On the Pāla-sponsored monasteries as centres of 
Tantrism, see Saran 1981, Tanaka 2008, Sanderson 2009: 
87–108, Delhey 2015: 4, Decleer n.d.: 15–16. 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   8 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 23] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes9
ports of Kaliṅgapatana and Puri.25 An evocative 
locale in the pan-Asian Tantric world across the 
Bauddha-Śaiva divide was Śrīśailam/Śrīparvata 
in Andhra Pradesh.26 Some have identified this as 
the ‘Vajraparvata’ mentioned in the 14th-century 
Sri Lankan chronicle Nikāyasaṅgraha  as a seat 
of the heretic V ājir iyavāda an d Nīlapa ṭadar śana 
monks who introduced varieties of Tantric Bud-
dhism on the island in the 9th century, while others 
have linked it to the early Buddhist site of Nāgār -
junakoṇḍa—another source of Mahāyāna and 
perhaps also Tantric cults.27 This area, connected 
25. See Malandra 1996: 186 n. 12, 204; Sadakata 1997; Don -
aldson 2001; Ray 2008: 130–33; Sanderson 2009: 80–83; 
Mishra 2011; Reichle, this volume. Szántó (2016: 4)  reports 
that the Saṁvarodayā  —th e to date only surviving initiation 
manual of the Saṁvara  cycle, copied on a Nepalese ms. 
dated 1054 ad —was written by a certain Bhūvācārya at 
Ratnagiri. On the important role of Odisha in the spread 
of (Esoteric) Buddhism overseas, see Patra 2013, several 
papers in Patnaik 2014, and Tanaka 2014, who describes 
some dhāra ṇīs un earthed at Udayagiri II that have not 
been found anywhere else in India, but versions of which 
are extant in Sri Lanka, Tibet, China and Japan (the same 
documents provide evidence of the connection between 
Śubhākaradeva of the Bhauma-Kara dynasty and Uda -
yagiri). On the hypothesis (now largely abandoned) of a 
connection between the Javanese Śailendras and Indian 
dynasties, such as the Śailodbhavas of 7th-century Odisha 
or the Ikṣvākus of Śrīśailam/Śrīparvata of Andhra, see 
Majumdar 1937; Sarkar 1985a, 1985b; Lokesh Chandra 
1995a. On the identification of the Tantric seat of Oḍḍiyāna 
with Odisha (rather than the Swat valley), see Donaldson 
1995: 174, 2001: 8–16. On the possible influence of Tantric 
practices from Odisha on the demonic figures of Balinese 
dance-drama, see Emigh 1996. 
26. See Yamano 2009 and White 1996: 60–61, 110–12. 
White discusses the close associations of Śrīśailam/Śrīpar -
vata with the siddha s and esoteric/alchemical traditions 
(including those stemming from Nāgārjuna) in both Bud -
dhist and Śaiva lore, and points out that there may have 
been two separate toponyms—the one being in the Kurnool 
district of the central Deccan plateau, the other one sixty 
miles to the east, near Nāgārjunakoṇḍa (White 1996: 375, 
n. 47, referring to an earlier work by Arion Roşu). On the 
esoteric features of some early Buddhist sites in Andhra, 
see Ray 2008: 128–30.
27. Lokesh Chandra (1993a: 500) links Śrīparvata to 
Vajraparvata on the grounds of the former’s close asso -
ciation with Vajrayāna . On the introduction of Esoteric 
Buddhism in Sri Lanka by a monk of the Vajraparvata 
ordination lineage ( vajraparvvata-nik āyav āsīvū bhik ṣu), 
and its adoption by Matvalasen (i.e., King Sena I, r. 834–54), to the important seaport of Viśakhapatnam, was ‘a 
launching point for missionaries to Kashmir, China, 
Bengal, and Sri Lanka’ (White 1996: 60).
Other South Asian locales that are at present 
not commonly associated with Buddhism, such 
as the prevalently Śaiva South India (Kāñcī and 
Nākappa ṭṭiṉam in Tamil Nadu in particular),28 
or that are now associated with Theravāda/Pali 
Buddhism, such as Sri Lanka,29 are also being 
recognised as prominent centres—if not cradles, 
indeed—of Esoteric Buddhist activities in the 
early mediaeval period. Scholarly investigations 
of archaeological remains confirm the information, 
found in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese textual 
sources, that both South India and Sri Lanka once 
hosted important lineages of Esoteric Buddhist 
masters and repositories of Tantras, and acted as 
hubs for the spread of esoteric traditions to South -
east Asia and beyond. Foundational scriptures, such 
as the Mahāvairocanatantra  and Sarvatathāga -
ta tattvasaṅgraha , may h ave been compiled there 
(Hodge 2003: 11–12). According to Esoteric Buddhist 
hagiography, Nāgārjuna—one of the Mahāsiddhas 
often associated with South India in mediaeval 
Sanskrit sources—received his revealed texts from 
Vajrasattva in an iron stūpa , and later transmitted 
them to Nāgabodhi (a.k.a. Nāgabuddhi; see Ap -
see Sankrityayana 1934: 214–16; Mudiyanse 1967: 9; Lokesh 
Chandra 1993a and 1993b: 118–26; Sundberg and Giebel 
2011: 215, n. 168; Chandawimala 2013: 117. Interestingly, the 
Nikāyasaṅgraha  contains a list of early Esoteric Buddhist 
scriptures followed by the Vajraparvata-dwelling monks, 
such as the seminal Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha , Māyā -
jāla, Paramādya , Cakra  śa ṁvara , etc. (Lokesh Chandra 
1993b: 125; ). 
28. Lokesh Chandra (1993a: 500–502) has stressed the 
importance of Kāñcī—which he connects to Oḍḍiyāna—for 
overseas (and especially insular Southeast Asian) Esoteric 
Buddhism (see also Guy 2004 and, on Buddhism in Tamil 
Nadu, Monius 2001). 
29. Although Sri Lanka was one of the early recipients and 
exporters of Theravāda/Pali Buddhism, recent studies have 
underlined the numerous vestiges of both Mahāyāna and 
Esoteric Buddhism existing on the island. These includes 
images of Vajrasattva and Tārā, sealings with Vajrayāna 
elements, the fragments of Ratnakū ṭa Sūt
ra found in the 
Ceṭiyagiri Monastery, the Dhāra ṇīgh ara mentioned in the 
Mahāvaṁsa , the dhāra ṇīs fro m Abhayagiri and those found 
in the Great Book of Protection (see Mudiyanse 1967; Sund -
berg 2004; Sundberg and Giebel 2011; Chandawimala 2013). 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   9 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 24] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia10
pendix A) in South India (Orzech 1995); monks of 
the caliber of Puṇyodaya, Amoghavajra and Prajña 
travelled from China to South India and/or Sri 
Lanka to get hold of some rare esoteric texts and 
receive initiation from local consecration masters.
Many of the Southeast and East Asian locales re -
ceived their Buddhism(s) via high-profile diplomat -
ic and commercial contacts entertained with South 
Asian entrepôts that doubled as centres of Bud -
dhist diffusion. In these cosmopolitan entrepôts, 
Buddhism coexisted alongside Śaivism, being 
either sponsored, or at least benignly tolerated, by 
predominantly Śaiva dynasties.30 These strategic 
crossroads of mercantile and political power con -
stituted the ‘nodes’ that probably played a crucial 
role in the genesis and development of Buddhism in 
general, and Tantric traditions in particular, insofar 
that they supported prestigious centres of learning, 
sponsored monastic congregations and institutions, 
or housed ancient relics visited by pilgrims coming 
from all over the Indic world. Think, for instance, 
of Nālandā and Vikramaśīla in northeastern India, 
Abhayagirivihāra at Anurādhapura in Sri Lanka, 
the Buddhist institutions of higher learning in 
Sumatra alluded to by Yijing, and the Buddhist 
monumental complexes of Central Java. 
30. Such as the Pallavas in the Tamil country, who did 
no
t oppose Buddhism. Gillet (2013: 115) argues that Bud -
dhism played a major role in the construction of Pallava 
iconography through dynamics of assimilation, yet the 
alleged ‘silence’ of this dynasty regarding Buddhism ulti -
mately suggests a counter-acting strategy through inclu -
sion. Singh (2014: 56) regards this attitude as an ‘incor -
porative kingship within a polytheistic or monolatrous 
context’ dictated by reasons of realpolitik. For instance, 
the Pallava may have acted out of diplomatic politeness 
when dealing with other Buddhist powers, as suggested 
by the protection enjoyed by Vajrabodhi in Kāñcī, and by 
their religio-diplomatic links with contemporary pro-Bud -
dhist dynasties such as the Tangs, the Śailendras, and the 
Lambakaṇṇas. Around ad 1019 a Buddhist temple, the 
Śailendra-C ūḍāmaṇi varmavih āra, w as founded at Nākap -
paṭṭiṉam by C ūḍāmaṇiva rman, king of Kaṭ āha ( Kedah in 
the Malay Peninsula), with the support of staunch Śaiva 
King R ājarāja Cō
ḻa I. In a similar fashion, the Pālas were 
early adopters of Mahāyāna Buddhism and its Mantra -
naya and Vajrayāna developments, but at the same time 
patronized Śaivism, especially in its Atimārga branch (see 
Sanderson 2009: 87–88, 108–15; Bagchi 1993: 13; Davidson 
2002: 85).the place of southeast asia in the 
esoteric buddhist ecumene
A series of recent, monumental works on Esoteric 
Buddhism in South, Central, and East Asia has 
dramatically improved our knowledge of these 
traditions in their regional contexts, and laid out 
the basis for an exploration of the connections—
mostly across the overland Silk Roads—that linked 
the opposite ends of the Eurasian landmass.31 Yet 
scholarship needs to move beyond the paradigm 
envisaging a ‘diffusionist’ spread of Esoteric Bud-
dhism from a South Asian ‘heartland’ or ‘mother -
land’ to East and Southeast Asian ‘peripheries’, for 
cults were transmitted from multiple centres, and 
by no means followed a mono-directional pattern. 
According to Sen (2003: 11), during the Tang period 
Chinese Buddhist monks ceased to suffer from a 
‘borderland complex’: hence, China ceased to be 
a ‘frontier’ and became a terminus, and centre of 
diffusion, of Buddhism in its own right.32 Similar -
ly, Skilling (2009: 42) re-evaluates the important 
participation of premodern Siam in a much wider 
world of Buddhist cultural interchange than is 
usually assumed at present, questioning ‘whether 
‘‘India’’ should always be the ‘‘centre’’, Siam the 
periphery—a passive recipient of ‘‘influence’’’.
Southeast Asia—and large areas of what are now 
the Malay peninsula and the Indonesian Archipel -
ago in particular—played an important, Asia-wide 
role as both a crossroads and terminus of Buddhist 
31. See, e.g., Kapstein and van Schaik 2010, Dalton 2011, 
Meinert 2016 (Central Asia and Tibet); McRae and Nattier 
2012 (India, Central Asia and China); Orzech, Sørensen 
and Payne 2011 (East Asia).
32. For instance, while the 3rd-century Ga ṇḍa vyūha  
locates the original seat of Mañjusrī at Nāgārjunakoṇḍa, 
Yijing considered Mount Wutai in China to be the adopted 
home of that Bodhisattva (Lamotte 1960: 84–85), and this is 
the very reason why Indian monks Prajña and Vajrabodhi 
travelled to China (Copp in Orzech, Sørensen and Payne 
2011: 361; cf. Sen 2003: 76–86); ms. CUL Add. 1643 of the 
Aṣṭasāhasrikā-Prajñāpāramitā men tions a mahācīne mañ -
jugho ṣaḥ [‘Mañjuśrī in (Greater) China’] (Kim 2014: 49, 
67). Mediaeval Sanskrit and Tibetan sources speak about 
the traditions of Mahācīna- or Mahācīnakrama-Tārā and 
a (markedly transgressive) Chinese mode ( cīnācāra ) of 
worshipping Tārā (see N.N. Bhattacharyya 2005: 98, 106, 
110; Bühnemann 1996).
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   10 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 25] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes11
contacts. With the exception of a handful of recent 
studies dealing with aspects of ( Esoteric ) Buddhism 
in the context of Southeast Asia and maritime 
connectivity,33 much of previous scholarship has 
tended to either display a bias towards (reified 
and/or constructed) manifestations of Theravāda 
and exoteric Mahāyāna Buddhism in the area, or 
perceive it as a consumer rather than a ‘genera -
tor’ of Esoteric Buddhism. As a consequence, the 
creative and constitutive force of Southeast Asian 
agents and milieux in the transfer, transformation, 
and ‘translocation’ of people, texts, notions, and 
artefacts remains to be fully appreciated. The ex -
istence of a Sinhala monastic complex in Central 
Java, a Śailendra-Śrīvijayan monastery at Nālandā, 
and a Śailendra ‐Cūḍāmaṇ ivarmavih āra at  Nākap -
paṭṭiṉam; the survival, besides the Chinese reports, 
of Sanskrit and vernacular textual materials (from 
epigraphic as well as manuscript sources) of Man -
tranaya and Vajrayāna persuasion, some of which 
contain quotations traceable to Sanskrit Tantras; 
and the significant remains of statues, ritual im -
plements, and monuments, all conjure up the role 
of insular Southeast Asia as a recognized seat of esoteric cults in a highly interconnected Buddhist 
cosmopolis rather than a remote and backward 
periphery.34 Recent epigraphical studies by Grif -
fiths have underlined ‘the pan-Asian character of 
Buddhism and the integral place the Indonesian Ar -
chipelago once held in the ancient Buddhist world’ 
(2014a: 137). Woodward (2004: 353) has advanced an 
argument for ‘treating Indonesia and India as an 
integral unit well into the ninth century’, making ‘a 
case for possible influence of Borobudur Buddhism 
upon subsequent developments in India’, yet at the 
same time admitting that ‘there is little evidence of 
inhabitants of Southeast Asia participating in the 
creation of the Yogini Tantras’. On the other hand, 
33. See Woodward 2004; Kandahjaya 2004 (esp. 40–112); 
Sundberg and Giebel 2011; Sharrock 2012, 2013a; Sen 2014a; 
Long 2014.
34. These data would seem to lend some support to 
Tāranātha’s claim—however exaggerated it may be—that, 
from the time of king Dharmapāla (late 8th–early 9th 
century) on, there were in madhyadeśa  many students 
from Southeast Asian kingdoms, and  during the time of 
the four Senas about half of the monks of Magadha were 
from Southeast Asia (see D. Chattopadhyaya 1982: 330).the contribution of insular Southeast Asian masters 
to Vajrayāna Buddhism in Tibet, also through the 
handful of texts composed in ‘Suvarṇadvīpa’ that 
were introduced into the Tibetan canon (e.g., the 
Durbodhāloka  by Dharmakīrti), is acknowledged 
by the Tibetan tradition from the 11th century, and 
confirmed by modern scholarship (see Schoter -
man, this volume, and below, p. 19). Transmission 
of Buddhist ideas from Sumatra and/or Java to the 
Himalayan region has been suggested on the basis 
of artistic and architectural similarities between 
the Tabo monastery in Himachal Pradesh, which 
Atīśa visited in 1042, and Borobudur (Wayman 
1981: 140–42; Nihom 1994: 72, n. 192; cf. Kimmet 
2012: 98–99 and Lokesh Chandra and Singhal 1999). 
Be this as it may, it is difficult not to concur with 
Skilling (1997: 188) that ‘the composition of Dur -
bodhāloka presupposes the existence and study 
in Śrīvijaya of the abstruse Prajñāpāramitā and 
Abhisamayālaṃkāra literature; of a high level of 
scholarship; and of royal sponsorship’.  This sce -
nario is also suggested by the figure of Shihu ( 施護,  
*Dānapāla, d. 1018), an exceptionally prolific South 
Asian monk-translator who in the late 10th century 
reached China with a good knowledge of the lan -
guages of Sanfochi (Śrīvijaya) and Shepo (Java) (see 
Sen 2003: 384; Orzech 2011a: 449–50).
Both Sumatra and Java are likely to have acted 
as important places in the development of (eso -
teric fashions in) the cults of Mañjuśrī and Tārā, 
which had an inherent ‘maritime’ aspect insofar 
that they were tutelary deities of travellers, and 
seafarers in particular (Hanneder 2008, Ray 2012: 
56–60, Bopearachchi 2014); the popularity of those 
deities in Sri Lanka, mainland Southeast Asia, Java, 
Sumatra, and China suggests the existence of strong 
Buddhist connections between those locales by the 
9th century.35 As pointed out by Chou (1945: 321) 
35. On Java and Sumatra as early seats of Mañjuśrī and 
Tārā cults, as well as the possible connection between forms 
of Tārā, the Javanese Nyai Loro Kidul, and the Chinese 
Guanyin, see respectively Miksic 2006 and Jordaan 1997, 
1998. On the pan-Asian cult of Mahāpratisarā—a female 
deity not unrelated to Tārā—and especially its Javanese 
attestations, see Cruijsen, Griffiths and Klokke 2012. Sund -
berg (2004: 114–16) has postulated the presence in Java 
of Chinese Buddhist personalities on the basis of a lin -
tel-piece from Candi Sewu, which depicts among many 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   11 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 26] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia12
and Sundberg and Giebel (2011: 152), according to 
an account by Yuanzhao compiled into the Zhenyu -
an xinding shijiao mulu, and also to the Japanese 
master Kūkai , Vajrabodhi (a.k.a. Vajrabuddhi; see 
Appendix A by Sinclair) first met Amoghavajra 
in Java, which should have displayed evidence of 
theological sophistication because it likely
ranked among the locales suitable for a well-ed -
ucated Indian religious adept like Vajrabodhi 
to occupy his time, instead of energetically re -
suming his approach to his intended destina -
tion of China. Indeed, Java had for centuries 
been an exponent of Indian Sanskritic culture, 
in both Śaiva and Bauddha strains, and some 
locations on the island must have been per -
ceived as hospitable ground for Vajrabodhi.
Java under the Śailendras, with such majestic 
and exquisitely crafted Buddhist monuments as 
Borobudur, Candi Sewu, Plaosan, and Mendut, 
must have ranked among the great sacred centres of 
Buddhism. This may be inferred, e.g., from the mid 
9th-century Siddhamātṛkā inscription unearthed at 
Candi Plaosan in the Prambanan area (de Casparis 
1956: 188–89, 202), which describes the worship 
of a Buddha-temple ( jinamandira ) by pilgrims 
continuously arriving from Gurjaradeśa (Gujarat, 
or the dominions of the Gurjara-Pratihāras in 
North India?). The illustrated manuscript of the 
Aṣṭasāhasrikā-Prajñāpāramitā CU L Add. 1643 
dedicates a vignette to (an image of the Buddha) 
Dīpaṅkara in Java (f. 2r). As argued by Sinclair (this 
volume, p. 31)  on the basis of the Tantric geography 
exposed by the Manju śriya mūlak alpa (51.636–640), 
‘by the late eighth century Kaliṅgoḍra, the ‘‘Mari -
time Kәliṅ’’, had been accorded Buddhavacana-lev -
el recognition in the Sanskritic world’.
Given its strategic geographical location, the 
Malay Peninsula, where the domains of Śailendra/
Śrīvijayan Buddhist rulers were located, acted as 
an important intersection in the traffic of pilgrims 
bearded figures one of distinctive Sinitic appearance (cf. 
Klokke 2011: 20–21). Woodward (1977) has discussed some 
Chinese silk patterns on the decorative motifs of Candi 
Sewu, hypothesized a Chinese (Daoist) influence on the nu -
merological patterns of Borobudur’s upper terraces (1999), 
and argued that the Javanese Bianhong, who studied in 
China under Huiguo, might have been the ‘mastermind’ 
of Borobudur (2009).plying the maritime routes. Testimony to this fact 
are the many sealings found at multiple sites in the 
period from the 6th to the 12th century; some of 
these objects display (esoteric) Mahāyāna iconog -
raphy and are inscribed in northeastern Indian 
scripts, suggesting that they could have belonged 
to pilgrims from the Subcontinent (Jacq-Her -
goualc’h 2002: 47). Manuscript CUL Add. 1643 (f. 
120r) mentions a Lokanātha on Mount Valavatī in 
Kedah (Ka ṭahad vīpa).36 The exquisitely crafted late  
8th-century bronze Avalokiteśvaras found in the 
Chaiya district of modern Thailand and in Bidor 
(Perak, Malaysia) show close similarities with the 
Avalokiteśvara found at Wonogiri in Central Java, 
suggesting a link between those locales (see Shar -
rock and Bunker, this volume).
As attested to by epigraphic and archaeological 
evidence, the Cam and Khmer domains were fully 
integrated in the web of intra-regional Southeast 
Asian networks connecting the mainland and 
the Malay Peninsula to Java, Sumatra, and China 
between the 7th and 10th centuries. Those locales 
hosted Esoteric Buddhist masters (such as Kīr -
tipaṇḍita and Puṇyodaya),37 and were the seats 
of monastic institutions or temples devoted to 
the worship of esoteric Mahāyānic Lokeśvaras.38 
36. See Kim 2014: 49, 63, 65 (who erroneously locates 
Kedah in Indonesia rather than Peninsular Malaysia).
37. An inscription of the reign of Jayavarman V (r. 968–ca. 
1000) tells us that Kīrtipaṇḍita, an adept of the Buddhist 
Yogatantras, acted in the capacity of royal guru, teach -
ing the Tattvasaṅgraha  and its commentaries (Sanderson 
2003–4: 427, n. 284, 2004: 238; Green 2014: 84–85). Puṇyo -
daya travelled from India to China and then back to main -
land Southeast Asia (see Lin 1935, Woodward 1988, 2004). 
On peninsular Southeast Asian traces of Vajrabodhi, see 
Sharrock (2012, 2013a, this volume).
38. A ste
le found at An Thái village in Vietnam’s Quảng 
Nam province, dated ad  902, documents an example of a 
monastery built primarily as a site of Mah āyāna an
d Va -
jrayāna worship (Sinclair 2012). Chutiwongs (2005: 80–81) 
has hypothesized a connection between doctrinal elements 
featuring in the inscription and the Sanskrit-Old Javanese 
text Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan . Sanderson (2009: 117–18) 
discusses a few inscriptions from the 9th and 10th cen -
turies that record the installation of esoteric Mahāyānic 
Lokeśvaras —and, at the same time, Śaiva deities—along 
with the construction and support of associated vihāra s, 
e.g., the Đông Dương stele of 875 and the Nham Biền stele 
of 908. The latter inscription relates that the courtier R ā-
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   12 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 27] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes13
Several iconographic features of Wat Phra Maen 
in Nakhon Pathom, as well as related Buddhist 
statuary from Dvāravatī, display esoteric overtones, 
suggesting that esoteric forms of Mahāyāna Bud -
dhism may have evolved there in Theravāda guise.39
the ‘first wave’ of esoteric buddhism 
(ca. 7th–early 10th century ad)
The early networks that initiated the expansion of 
an ‘Esoteric Buddhist package’ from the 7th century 
were constituted by monks affiliated to related es -
oteric orders,40 who travelled—often alongside, or 
even in the capacity of diplomatic envoys41—along 
the paths opened by long-distance traders that fa -
voured the quick exchange of goods, peoples, and 
ideas.42 Thanks to textual evidence, and especially 
jadv āra made two trips ( si ddhayātra , either pilgrimages 
or diplomatic missions) to Java (Mabbett 1986: 302, Green 
2014: 80–83). Green 2014 and Schweyer 2009 are surveys 
of the relevant epigraphic and (art-)historical evidence. 
On the iconography of Đông Dương and its relationship 
with the Tantric Kāra ṇḍav yūhasūtra , see Woodward 2011.
39. See Revire 2010. For the worship of Bodhisattvas 
Avalokiteśvara and Vajrapāṇi in central Thailand, perhaps 
as early as the second half of the 7th century, see Boisselier 
1965: 149; Chutiwongs 1984: 221, 256–57; Revire 2010: 98. For 
a khakkhara  finial and several other bronze ritual objects 
that have close parallels with Esoteric Buddhist material 
found in Central Java and beyond, see Revire 2009, 2015b: 
139, n. 22).
40. All t
he major figures in the transmission of Esoter -
ic Buddhism to China and Southeast Asia up to the 8th 
century were monks. However, a category of non-monastic, 
householder vajrācārya s seems to have become more im -
portant than vajrācārya  monks in South Asia during the 
late phase of Vajrayāna in South Asia (modern Balinese 
‘Bauddha Brahmins’ may be considered the heirs to this 
category of householder-practitioners: see Sinclair 2012). 
A current scholarly desideratum remains to identify the 
networks of non-institutionalized practitioners, including 
siddha s and low-caste ritual or performance specialists, 
who contributed to the spread of forms of Tantrism over -
seas (see Acri 2014).
41. See Sen (2003: 37–44) on the Tang-sponsored Bud -
dhist diplomatic missions in the 7th century, and further, 
Sundberg and Giebel (2011) on the diplomatic connections 
of Vajrabodhi’s journeys. Sinclair (this volume, p. 48) spec -
ulates that the diplomatic lines of communication between 
the Tang capitals and insular Southeast Asia might have 
been used by Buddhist monks Bianhong and Prajña.
42. P.C. Chakravarti (in Majumdar 1971: 662), citing Pliny the Sino-Japanese biographies of early masters, 
we are now able to reconstruct, albeit with an 
element of uncertainty, the probable pedigree and 
social circle of those prominent individual agents. 
Those charismatic personalities, more often than 
not associated with a vigorous activity of transla -
tion, commentarial work, and initiation of pupils, 
travelled—at times tracing the footsteps of their 
master(s)—both eastwards and westwards along 
the sea routes between the Indian Subcontinent 
and Japan. It is probably this network of masters 
and their disciples that acquired, transformed, and 
propagated images, texts and devotional practices 
connected with Buddhist divinities ranging from 
the Bodhisattvas and Goddesses that were popular 
in both exoteric and esoteric Mahāyāna milieux, 
such as Avalokiteśvara, Mañjuśrī, Vajrapāṇi, and 
Tārā, to the ferocious forms of Vajrapāṇi/Vajras -
attva and Heruka (and his hypostases Hevajra and 
Saṁvara) that became predominant in Phase Two/
Three Vajrayāna. 
That the 7th- and early 8th-century networks 
were crucial for the formation and consolidation 
of Esoteric Buddhist cults and practices across 
Maritime Asia is suggested by the ‘archaic’ nature 
of the theological and ritual framework of major 
Esoteric Buddhist traditions outside of the Indian 
Subcontinent. As White (2000: 21) points out: 
What we find, in fact, is that the historical time 
frame in which the transmission (to China, 
Tibet, Korea, Japan, Southeast Asia) of vari -
ous Indian Tantric paradigms occurred has 
invariably proven definitive for the structure 
and content of the ‘export’ Tantric tradition in 
question. It is as if the original revelation re -
and the account by Chinese pilgrim Faxian, notes that the 
journey by merchant ship from the Pāla port-city of T ām-
ralipti to Sri Lanka (en route to Southeast Asia and China) 
took only a fortnight. Yijing recounts that thirty-seven out 
of the sixty Chinese monks who went to the Indian Sub -
continent travelled by sea on merchant ships; further, he 
states that his own journey from Canton to Sumatra took a 
month, while the remaining leg from Kedah in Peninsular 
Malaysia to the Nicobar islands took ten days, and from 
there to Tāmralipti it took fifteen days (Ray 2008: 124). 
But according to other sources, because of the prevailing 
direction of monsoon winds, it was nearly impossible to 
make a return voyage between China and the Indian Sub -
continent in one year (see Jordaan and Colless 2009: 112).
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   13 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 28] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia14
mained fossilized, like an insect in a block of 
amber, in the export tradition. This is mani -
festly the case, for example, with Japanese Shin -
gon—founded by Kūkai (774–835 C.E.)—whose 
core revelations are the seventh-century C.E. 
Mahāvairocana-sūtra  and the Tattvasaṅgra -
ha-sūtra .… Shingon practice remains, in many 
respects, a preserved specimen of those en -
shrined in seventh-century Indian paradigms, 
but with a Japanese overlay.… Similarly, Tibet -
an Buddhism, with its preponderance of Va -
jrayāna practice based on revelations found in 
what would later be classified as the Tantras of 
Yoga and Supreme Yoga, preserves the Tantric 
status quo of eighth-century India, from which 
it was introduced into Tibet by the legendary 
Vimalamitra and Padmasambhava.
Analogous considerations have been made by 
Nihom (1994: 189) with respect to Buddhist data 
preserved on Java and Sumatra. Reflecting a doc -
trinal situation preceding 8th-century systemati -
zations, they 
may greatly aid us in attempting to reconstruct 
the intellectual history of the Tantras in In -
dia itself by providing a control relative to the 
much better known, preserved and studied tra -
ditions of Central and East Asia’.43 
Among the early prominent monks are the 
Central Indian Atikū ṭa (fl. 6 50s) and Puṇyodaya 
(Chin. Nati 那提 , fl. 650s), the Chinese Yijing 
(635–713),44 Baosiwei ( 寶思惟, Skt. *Maṇicinta -
na/*
Maṇicinta or *Ratnacinta, d. 721), and the 
South Indian Dharmaruci/Bodhiruci (d. 727). 
The vectors and initiators of a systematic, fully 
developed form of Esoteric Buddhism are ‘three 
great ācāryas’ of the mid-Tang period, namely 
the Indian Śubhākarasiṁha (Chin. Shanwuwei 善
43. See Acri 2011a: 12–15 for analogous remarks on the 
archaic theology informing Śaiva texts from premodern 
Java and Bali, which also seem to predate the mature Said -
dhāntika systematizations.
44. Although the status of Yijing as an Esoteric Buddhist 
monk is debated, his biographies suggest that he trained 
with Śubhākarasiṁha and was acquainted with the teach -
ings of the Vajraśekhara and Guhyatantra , besides writing 
a commentary of the Mahāvairocanasūtra  (see Keyworth 
in Orzech, Sørensen and Payne 2011: 342–43; Shinohara 
2014: 147–67).無畏 , 637–735),45 Vajrabodhi (Chin. Jingangzhi 金
剛智 ; 671–741),46 and Vajrabodhi’s ordained pupil 
Amoghavajra (Chin. Bukong 不空 ; 704–74; probably 
a native of Samarkand).47 This triad, which inspired 
various generations of pupils,48 was bound to be 
associated with a ‘canon’, as it were, of revealed 
scriptures, commentaries, ritual manuals and their 
connected practices49 for many centuries to come. 
Among the 8th- and 9th-century figures related 
to this triad, and especially to its last member 
Amoghavajra, were Nāgabodhi (Chin. Longzhi 龍
智),50 whose biography remains obscure but who is 
45. He was probably the eldest son of King Buddhakara, 
the alleged ancestor of the Bhauma-Kara dynasty kings of 
Odisha (Chou 1945: 251–52, n. 3; Pinte in Orzech, Sørensen 
and Payne 2011: 340; cf. Tanaka 2014).
46. Acc
ording to an account by Zanning, he was a Brah-
man from South India (Malayakū ṭa), 
whose father served 
as purohita  at the royal court of Kāñcī (Orzech 2011c: 346). 
Conversely, Lü Xiang’s biography reports that he was the 
third son of Īśānavarman ( yeshanawamo  伊舍那靺摩 ), 
the kṣatriya  ki ng of a Central Indian dynasty (i.e., the 
Maukharis), and ‘because he was later recommended to 
the [Chinese] emperor by Mizhunna ( 米准那 ), the general 
of the king of a South Indian kingdom, he ended up being 
called a South Indian’ (trans. Giebel, in Sundberg and 
Giebel 2011: 134). (On the rendering of Chin. Jingangzhi 
金剛智  as Vajrabuddhi, see Appendix A).
47. Chi
nese biographies of Amoghavajra present contra -
dictory information, describing him as either the son of 
a Brahman or a merchant from Central Asia. Chou (1945: 
322) argues that Amoghavajra’s biographers tried to conceal 
his embarrassing background as a merchant, which would 
be undignified for a monk of his rank.
48. Orz
ech (2011c: 345) has noted that the three monks, 
who are traditionally referred to by later Chinese disci -
ples and Japanese scholars as the founders of the Chinese 
Zhenyan school, did not represent themselves as such.
49. These were the Mahāvairocanasūtra  a nd Susiddhi -
karamahātantra  (first propagated by Śubhākarasiṁha), 
the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha  (propagated by Va -
jrabodhi),  (versions of) the Guhyasamāja  (already known 
to Nāgabodhi), Śrīparamādya , Sarvabuddha  sa māyoga , ot-  
her revealed scriptures belonging to the Sarvatathāgata -
tattvasaṅgraha /Vajraśekhara  cycle ( Jingangding  金剛頂 , 
summarized and propagated by Amoghavajra), as well 
as Amoghavajra’s Jingangding jing yuqie shibahui zhigui .
50. The bi
ographical material on this figure, who is said 
to have lived for one hundred years and counted among 
the Mahāsiddhas, is mostly of a supernatural or legendary 
nature—for example that he was instructed by the Mahāsid -
dha Nāgārjuna, and, like the latter, resided at Śrīśailam or 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   14 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 29] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes15
believed to have met Amoghavajra in Sri Lanka in 
the 740s, and previously Vajrabodhi; Amogha  vaj ra’s 
Chinese disciples Huilang (?–781) and Huiguo 
(745–806); the latter’s Javanese disciple Bianhong  
(辨弘 , fl. late 8th century); Prajña (Chin. Boruo 般若 , 
alt. Bolaruo 般剌若 ; ca. 744–810, likely from pres -
ent-day Afghanistan), disciple of Amoghavajra’s 
prominent pupil Yuanzhao (d. 800); the Koreans 
Pulga Saui and Hyecho (both fl. 8th century),51 dis-
ciples of Śubhākarasiṁha and both Vajrabodhi 
and Amoghavajra respectively); and the Japanese 
Kūkai (774–835, Huiguo’s and Prajña’s disciple).52 
The networks of 7th- to 9th-century monks may 
be visualized on a map of Maritime Asia (Map 1.1, 
p. 16), where ‘Indian’, ‘Sri Lankan’, ‘Śailendra and 
Javanese’, ‘Chinese’, and ‘Korean-Japanese’ circles 
offer a telling picture of the extraordinary period of 
intra-Asian connectivity that became the hallmark 
of the rise and spread of Esoteric Buddhist tradi -
tions in the course of just two or three generations.
The initial triad formed by Nāgabodhi, Va -
jrabodhi and Amoghavajra had strong ties with 
Southern India and Sri Lanka, both of which areas 
acted as an important hub for the dissemination of 
Esoteric Buddhism to Southeast Asia. On account 
of the shared artistic styles and iconographical 
motifs, Holt (1991: 82) argued that the regions of 
Pallava South India, Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia 
‘constituted a veritable cultural triangle from the 
seventh into the ninth century’. Noting the ‘pan-
Asian influence of the cultural dyad of Pallava 
India and Śrī Laṅkā’ in the 8th century, Sundberg 
and Giebel (2011: 153) focus on the status of some 
Buddhist sects operating in Kāñcī and at the  
Abhayagirivihāra as custodians of esoteric texts 
and oral teachings that played a key role in shaping 
Kāñcī; yet, his historicity cannot be automatically discount -
ed on those grounds. On this figure, whose Chinese name 
is variously rendered in secondary sources as Nāgabodhi, 
Nāgabuddhi, or *Nāgajñāna/Nāgajña, see Van der Kuijp 
2007, Sundberg and Giebel 2011, and especially Sinclair’s 
Appendix A in this volume. 
51. On th
e extensive, and seemingly repeated, travels of 
Hyecho to India and Central Asia, see Deeg 2010.
52. For a list of several other Indian monks who ‘came to 
the Tang and settled, taught, and translated texts’ in the 
course of the 9th century, such as Shi Mayue, Bodhivajra, 
Vajrasiddhi, Bodhirṣi, and Prajñacakra, see Orzech 2011b: 
328–30.the mediaeval pan-Asian Esoteric Buddhist par -
adigm. King Narasiṁhapotavarman (i.e., Nara -
siṁhavarman II R ājas iṁha, r. 700–728) of Kāñcī 
granted Vajrabodhi special protection and sent his 
general ‘Mizhunna’ (Chin. 米准那 ) along with him 
to China on a diplomatic mission. So amicable were 
the relations between the Pallavas and the Tangs 
in that period that Narasiṁhavarman II built a 
Buddhist ‘Pagoda’ in Nākappa ṭṭiṉa m in honour 
of the Chinese emperor, allowing him to name 
it (Seshadri 2009: 109–18).53 It is, again, through a 
Pallava link that Vajrabodhi, on the occasion of his 
visit to Sri Lanka on the way to China, enjoyed the 
protection of King Mānavarman (‘Śrīśīla’ of Va -
jrabodhi’s biography), who prior to his coronation 
in 684 underwent a long exile in Kāñcī, serving as 
a general (Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 145–46). As 
argued by Sundberg and Giebel (ibid.),
Such repeated, persistent diplomatic inter -
course may serve as an explanatory context for 
Vajrabodhi’s easy access to the inner sanctum 
of the Tang court. In fact, given the chronol -
ogy, one surmises that the welcome arrival of 
Vajrabodhi or Mizhunna in Guangfu in 719 
ce actually instigated the series of intense and 
cordial diplomatic interchanges between the 
Chinese and the Pallavas recorded to occur in 
720. If so, their salutary effect paralleled the ar -
rival of Amoghavajra in Laṅkā in 742, where 
the transmission of religious knowledge and texts between highly adept monks immediate -
ly stimulated a high-level religio-diplomatic 
interchange between the Buddhist Sinhalese 
king at Anurādhapura and the Tang emperor 
at Chang’an. A similar occurrence seemingly 
transpired some half a century later, when the 
Javanese kings became patrons involved in the 
Sinhalese dispensations, likely involving pre -
cisely this same style of interchange of Tantric 
texts and, in the Javanese case, a cadre of adept 
monks as well. 
53. Sen (2003: 26) argues that this alliance, and in par -
ticular the 720 diplomatic mission (and in general other 
post-Harṣa South Asian missions), might have had the 
purpose of contrasting contemporary Arab and Tibetan 
invasions of areas of the Subcontinent. Equally amicable 
relations between the Buddhist Tang and Kanauj could be 
evinced by the 7th-century Buddhist diplomatic missions 
(ibid.: 34–40), which Sen characterizes as ‘spiritual under -
pinnings of diplomatic exchanges’.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   15 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 30] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia16
Map 1.1: Paths travelled by the monks (7th–9th century) between India, mainland and insular Southeast Asia, 
China, Japan and Korea. (Map by Swati Chemburkar and Andrea Acri)
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   16 16/8/16   9:51 AM--------- -------------- .~-------------------,------------- -----------------------------e .~~~~~------------------ ~~-~~~----- -------· ··e ~?~~;~·-;J' ~" ...... ----
\ \ . '0 ~ Chinese Eso,!!ric Bu_fjdhist Circle 1j : • ~ 
' Awruta. Pu171yoday~ . Man!Cintane . ang'an ~--
~rus:lBodhisena , e ... ·-·'. _ . , " ... _ . -· t 
0 Indian Esoteric 
Buddhist Circle \ 
Ah'{u;a. Pu171yodaya . 
Yifmg. Kumaraghosa. 
Mai'IICintana . 
Bodhlrua iOhaJ'TTlarucJ 
Bodhisena . Niigabuddl" 
SubMkaras.lmha . 
va,abuddlll. Amoghava jra. 
Huiguo. PrBJna. Hyedl'o 
Arabian Sea 
A 
350 700 Kilometers 
1.400 I 
Kanci -subhakaraslmha . VaJra~ . Amoghava)ra . 
Bodbisanli Huiang. Huiguo. Blanhong. 
Pmina. YICSo. Ha1yun. Faquan. 00f•;,.Gemb6. 
SaiCI16. Pulga Saui. Hyech·o. KukBJ, Eho1n. I Tang domain 
Shllei ~ 
' \ \ 
I \ 
Bay of~en 'ga• DongOCHrng ,..., 
~v-Jf,aya l · -\ Korean and 
I Japanese 
' Esoteric 
Buddhist Circle 
06jl. Gemb6. 
Bodhisena SaichO. 
·Pulga Saui, Hyedfo. 
Kukai. Enn.n. Shue1 I 
~ 
~ikappattillllm r ·, '. ·, ·~ ' , .... 
,~·-=::·· ..... " . ,£ J / South China sei 
Chaiya 'V · 1 , .-,· i .• 
\~ SrM~~~--~' -· -. 
2.100 , ..... .: 
.Stl Lankan E~d~r~o . · 
Buddhist Circle · .::. 
Punyodaya . Nagabu~1 
'Ralnabodh J (?). -
'Samantabhadra (?). ....., 
VaJrabuddhl . Amoghavajra 
Jayabhadra • 
2.800 -' I 
Paths traveUed by the monks between India, Sri lanka. 
mainland and island Southeas t Asia. China, Japan and Korea . . . . 
• Important mediaeval ports e Important Buddhist centn!s -----=::-~uo~u ~ ~ J ------··--·---- ---------------·--------

--- [Page 31] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes17
It would appear that in the Sri Lankan Buddhist 
milieux—i.e., in the Abhayagirivihāra itself—were 
found repositories of esoteric texts unavailable in 
China, and perhaps even inaccessible to travellers 
to India. As argued by Sundberg and Giebel (2011: 
148), it was the quest for these texts, and the desire 
to receive abhi ṣek a in a Sinhalese lineage seemingly 
associated with either Nāgabodhi or *Ratnabodhi 
(Chin. Baojue 寶覺 ), that prompted Amoghavajra 
to travel to Sri Lanka from China following the 
footsteps of his teacher Vajrabodhi.54 Prajña too 
returned to South India from China to look for 
esoteric texts belonging to the Vidyādhara tradi -
tions ( chiming 持明 ), and studied yogic techniques 
under consecration master *Dharmayaśas (Chin. 
Damoyeshe 達摩耶舍 : Copp in Orzech, Sørensen 
and Payne 2011: 360–61).
So great was the religious aura and political 
prestige of South Asian centres of Buddhism that 
the ‘peripheries’ (i.e., outer regions) of the Buddhist 
cosmopolis tried to link themselves to these centres, 
thus becoming themselves centres with respect to 
the new peripheries that were being created as net -
works moved and the Buddhist frontiers extended—
what Sen (2014b: xvii) has described as the emer -
gence of ‘multiple centres of Buddhist discourse’. A 
case in point is that of late 8th-century Central Java, 
where a branch of the Sri Lankan Abhayagirivihāra, 
apparently intended for the use of esoteric-mind -
ed Sinhalese Buddhist monks, was established by 
the Śailendras on the Ratu Boko promontory;55 
indeed, the area in the Kedu plain where Candi 
Sewu and the Prambanan temple complex were 
built appears to have been termed Laṅkapura by 
then, as if to recreate a local ‘replica’ of (Buddhist) 
Sri Lanka.56 As shown by Miksic (1993–94), Degroot 
54. On p. 190 the authors, referring to the biography of 
Hanguang ( T 2061.879b18), mention the Sinhalese *Sa -
mantabhadra as Amoghavajra’s ‘final’ initiator (cf. Chou 
1945: 290–91; Lokesh Chandra 1993b: 114). Other biogra -
phies mention *Nāgajñāna (i.e., Nāgabodhi/Nāgabuddhi 
龍智) and *Ratnabodhi (Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 192–93; 
Sundberg 2014: 77). 
55. As is t
estified to by an 8th-century Siddhamātṛkā 
foundation inscription (see de Casparis 1950: 11–22, 1961, 
1981; Lokesh Chandra 1993a; Sundberg 2004, this vol -
ume). 
56. See Griffiths 2011a, and compare with Acri 2010, 
arguing that Rāvaṇa’s defeat by Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa in (2006), and Sundberg (2004, 2011, this volume), the 
Abhayagirivihāra-related structures of Ratu Boko 
share with their Sinhalese prototypes—that is to say, some of the Abhayagiri peripheral structures 
apparently populated by ascetic monks—common 
architectural motifs, such as double meditation 
platforms. 
The use of Siddhamātṛkā—a (north)eastern-In -
dian variety of script, native to Nālandā—in foreign 
lands is well documented in extensive Esoteric 
Buddhist textual corpora from China and Japan. 
The numerically small, but culturally significant, 
corpus of inscriptions using this script scattered 
over disparate locales of Maritime Asia, besides 
being a token of the networks of Esoteric Buddhist 
specialists who plied those routes, may constitute 
‘an attempt to be cosmopolitan, to connect with a 
respected cultural powerhouse, and implies the 
rapid dissemination of knowledge and of religious 
innovation’ (Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 200, n. 
126). Pāla-sponsored Nālandā in the northeastern 
part of the Subcontinent, apart from being an old 
and illustrious centre of Buddhism, was also the 
cultural centre that dictated the predominant re -
ligious and aesthetic paradigm in the Buddhist 
cosmopolis from the 8th to the 13th century. As 
documented by the dual Siddhamātṛkā/Grantha 
inscription of Narasiṁhapotavarman to his early 
8th century cave-temple Atiraṇacaṇḍeśvara and 
in the Kailāsanātha, even a fervently Śaiva dynasty 
such as the Pallava was eager to anchor itself to it by 
conforming to a certain ‘Nālandā idiom’ (Sundberg 
and Giebel 2012: 199, n. 126; Francis 2013).
Nālandā, which by the 9th century was ‘the 
center of a new Asia-wide Tantric network’ (Hall 
2010: 21), constituted—alongside the South Indian 
Pallava realms and Sri Lanka—the common nexus 
(whether real or imagined) between many of the 
agents who played a role in shaping early Esoteric 
Sri Lanka as described in the Sanskrit and Old Javanese 
versions of the Rāmāya ṇa rep resents an allegory for so -
cio-political events of mid 9th-century Java—that is, the 
shift from an extended royal Buddhist favouritism to a new 
Śaiva course. See also Griffiths 2013 for a hypothesis con -
cerning the existence of ‘multiple Abhayagiris in more than 
one part of Southeast Asia—southern Cambodia, southern 
Vietnam, peninsular Thailand, besides the one on Java’ (p. 
75), and cf. Conti 2014: 384 and 394, n. 3.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   17 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 32] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia18
Buddhist networks.57 It was in the milieu of Nālandā 
that Śubhākarasiṁha, Vajrabodhi and Prajña were 
instructed and received their ordination before 
undertaking the career of travelling masters; Va -
jrabodhi received royal patronage in Kāñcī and Sri 
Lanka. Influence from both the Pallava realms and 
Nālandā may be detected at the enigmatic Rājiṇāvi -
hāra, a Pallava-style late 8th-century temple built 
in a locale just north of Kandy, which now bears 
the name of Nālandā. The temple ( geḍigē ) features 
erotic reliefs of transgressive character (Mudiyanse 
1967: 71; Chandawimala 2013: 146–47), and Doha -
nian (1977: 26, 131, n. 27) refers to the existence of a 
short 9th-century Siddhamātṛkā  inscription found 
nearby (cf. Sundberg, this volume, n. 13). The evoca -
tive name of Nālandā extended further to Southeast 
Asia: the Sumatran royal Bālaputradeva, who was 
seemingly involved in the dynastic struggle that 
took place in Central Java in the mid-9th century,58 
is mentioned in an inscription issued by Devapāla at 
Nālandā, which records his sponsorship of a vihāra  
for the use of pilgrims from Śrīvijaya;59 a locale 
57. For a concise summary of the interactions between 
Sri L
anka and the centres of Tantrism patronized by the 
Pālas, see Sen 2014a: 53. It is noteworthy that, according to 
Tāranāth a (D. Chattopadhyaya 1980: 18), the Sri Lankan 
Jaya bha
dra, one of the earliest exegetes of the Laghusaṁ -
vara/Herukābhidhāna, was vajrācārya at Vikrama śīla (f or 
a mid-9th century date, see Gray 2005a: 61, n. 61 and 62, n. 
65; contrast Sanderson 2009: 159, who traces his tenure back 
to 880–92). The same Jayabhadra, at an earlier stage of his 
career, is recorded in the colophon of his Cakrasaṃvara -
pañjikā  (ed. Sugiki, 2001) as having resided in the famous 
Buddhist establishment of Mahābimba in Koṅkana (the 
Konkan coast of western India; see Szántó 2016: 2 and cf. 
above, p. 8). Tāranātha reports the same information (see 
D. Chattopadhyaya 1980: 325; cf. 296).
58. Sundberg (this volume, Appendix B) contests the 
reading vālaputra  on the Śivagṛha inscription, which 
was at the basis of the dynastic theory proposed by de 
Casparis (1956). While his effort is valuable insofar that it 
highlights the need to re-edit and translate that important 
(and, regrettably, heavily withered) inscription, I remain 
unconvinced by his re-evaluation, and regard the reading 
bālaputra as the most likely.
59. See H. Sastri 1923–24. Jordaan and Colless (2009: 28–40), 
having compared the Wanua Tengah III inscription with 
the N āland ā ed ict in the light of Jordaan’s revised chronol -
ogy of the P āla ki ngs, argue that B ālap utra was already king 
in Sumatra before he came to Java, only to advance his 
claim to succession after Rakai Pikatan ascended the throne named Nālandā ( nalәnda , nalanda ) is mentioned, 
alongside Vārāṇasī, in two 10th-century Balinese 
inscriptions in connection with the Buddhist pre -
ceptor ( upādhyāya ) Dhanavan (Ardika 2015: 34; 
Goris 1954: 83, 86).60 As has long since been noted, 
Nālandā played a major role in the transmission 
of artistic motifs to Southeast Asia since the 8th 
century (Bernet Kempers 1933, Lunsingh Scheurleer 
and Klokke 1988).
The period from the middle of the 9th up to 
the end of t he 10th century has been character -
ized as a ‘dark age for Buddhism’ in China and 
Tibet (Matsunaga 1978: viii), and one also notes 
a reduced scale of Buddhist building activities in 
Southeast Asia, with the single exception of the 
temple of Đông Dương in Campā (Woodward 
2011: 33). This predicament may have been related 
to the disruption of diplomatic, religious, and 
trade networks between locales where support for 
Esoteric Buddhism, or Buddhism alt ogether, by 
the ruling elites faded away, such as China under 
Emperor Wuzong (r. 814–46), Tibet under King 
Lang Darma (r. 838–41), Sri Lanka under Sena II 
(r. 854–89) and his successors (Sundberg 2014), and 
Java from around 850 onwards (see the chapters by 
in 847. This hypothesis suggests that the contacts between 
Bālap
utra and the P āla Ki
ng Devap āla ma
y have been not 
only of a religious and cultural nature. For instance, the 
possibility of a political alliance formed by B ālap utra, just 
a few years before his Javanese expedition, with the P āla 
ru
ler would make perfect sense in the system of alliances 
among neighboring ma ṇḍal as as theorized in the Sanskrit 
Artha śāstra (cf . Wolters 1999: 28–29 for Southeast Asian 
examples). A link between Java and northeastern India, 
i.e., a Śailendra effort to connect to Pāla-sourced Esoteric 
Buddhist doctrines, is also suggested by the mention, in 
the Siddhamātṛkā inscription of Kelurak ( ad 782) found 
between Candi Sewu and Candi Lumbung in Central Java, 
of one Kumāraghoṣa, a royal preceptor ( rājaguru ) from 
Gauḍīdvīpa (modern Bengal) who installed an image of 
Mañjughoṣa (Mañjuśrī) at the request of Śailendra King Śrī 
Saṅgrāmadhanañjaya (Sarkar 1971 I: 37, 45). The word go -
lapa ṇḍitā (= gauḍapa ṇḍitā) f eaturing in the undated Pasir 
Panjang rock inscription at Karimun Besar in the Riau 
archipelago has been interpreted as having been engraved 
by a monk from Bengal (i.e., Nālandā?) en route to main -
land Sumatra or Java by Caldwell and Hazlewood (1994).
60. As po
inted out by Ardika (ibid.), those Balinese in -
scriptions indicate that roponyms associated with centres of 
Buddhism in the Subcontinent, such as Vārāṇasī, Nālandā 
and Amarāvatī, were transferred to local places. 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   18 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 33] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes19
Sundberg and Acri in this volume). Another factor 
may have been the contraction of the P āla e mpire 
from ca. 850 to 977, which could have caused a 
decline in royal benefactions to Esoteric Buddhism 
in northeastern India (Sanderson 2009: 96–97) and 
a negative ‘cascade effect’ overseas, especially with 
respect to maritime trade.
the ‘second wave’ of esoteric  
buddhism (ca. late 10th–13th  
century ad)
Nālandā-style imagery of Esoteric Buddhist divin -
ities (re)appears in 11th- and 12th-century Angkor, 
Bagan, the Malay Peninsula, and East Java. As 
argued by Skilling (2007: 97), 
When we take into account other inscriptions 
and icons from the Malay Peninsula, togeth -
er with epigraphic and iconographic evidence 
from Cambodia, we can conclude that in the 
eleventh century the Malay Peninsula and the 
Khmer lands participated in the intellectual, 
ritual, and iconographic world of P āla cu
lture, 
which at that time spread throughout the region, 
from India to Tibet and insular Southeast Asia.
Vestiges of Vajrayāna Buddhism in 10th- and 
11th-century Java may be found in the groups of 
bronzes from Surocolo and Nganjuk, which have 
been suggested to represent esoteric ma ṇḍal as 
dominated by Vajrasattva, the central deity of 
Phase Two and Three Esoteric Buddhism.61 Sumatra 
hosted renowned centres of Buddhist activity and 
higher learning by the 7th century, as documented 
by Yijing’s account,62 yet the archaeological remains 
61. See Lokesh Chandra and Singhal 1995; Tanaka 2010: 
33
9; Sharma 2011. On the popularity of Vajrasattva as Ādi -
budd
ha in Java and Cambodia, see Sharrock 2006, 2007, 
2011a; cf. Conti 2014: 273–77 (note the mention of Vajrasat -
tva as Ādibuddha in the Sab Bāk inscription).
62. In 671, this Chinese monk praised the high level 
of Buddhist scholarship he found in Sumatra, where he 
stopped—en-route from Guangzhou to Nālandā and from 
there back to China—to read Sanskrit Sūtras. In the ac -
counts of his travels he advised that ‘if a Chinese priest 
wishes to go to the West in order to hear (lectures) and read 
(the original), he had better stay here [i.e., in Sumatra] one 
or two years and practice the proper rules and then proceed 
to Central India’ (Takakusu 1896: xxxiv). Further, Yijing 
reports that Śākyakīrti, one of the five most distinguished and scant epigraphic evidence spread over dis -
parate locales of the island—especially along the 
Batang Hari river (e.g., Muara Jambi and Muara 
Takus)—have yielded remains of Buddhist mon -
uments and inscriptions that mostly date back to 
the 10th to 13th century, and which display Tantric 
features.63 Nearly contemporary Tibetan traditions 
explicitly link esoteric teachings and lineages of 
masters to Sumatra ( suvar ṇadv īpa): for instance, 
the South Asian *Dīpaṅkaraśrījñāna, aka Atīśa/
Atiśa64 (980–1054) was believed to have resided 
in Suvarṇadvīpa for twelve years (ca. 1011 to 1023), 
where he received the teaching of the Kālacakratan -
tra by a local master, known to the sources as 
Dharmakīrti, Dharmapāla, Piṇḍo/Pi ṭo, o r Kalki 
Śrīpāla.65 Atīśa is said to have transmitted to Tibet 
the Durbodhāloka (a Sanskrit commentary on the 
Abhisamayālaṅkāra ), composed in Southeast Asia 
by his teacher Dharmakīrti from Suvarṇadvīpa 
under King Cūḍāmaṇivarman, who around ad  
Buddhist teachers of his time, travelled far and large across 
the ‘Five Indias’ and finally settled in Śrīvijaya (Śrībhoja).
63. See W
oodward 2004; Reichle 2007; Griffiths 2014c; 
Miksic (this volume); Kandahjaya (this volume). Pointing 
out that Buddhism thrived in Sumatra until the 14th or 
even 15th century, Griffiths (2014c: 239) makes the follow -
ing relevant point: ‘Despite being right across the Bay of 
Bengal from Sri Lanka, not to mention the proximity of 
Burma and Thailand, there is not a single written trace 
of influence of Pali Buddhism. On the contrary, we have 
evidence for the study and use of a variety of Sanskrit texts, 
both Mah āyānasūtra s and Tantras’.
64. Isaacson and Sferra (2014: 70–71, n. 51) note that while 
it has become standard practice to prefer the form Atiśa 
(from Atiśaya?), the form Atīśa is just as problematic; they 
venture the speculation that the latter might be a corrup -
tion or ‘transformation’ of Adhīśa, which has the merit of 
being attested as a name or epithet. Kano (2016: 83, n. 2) 
refers to an interlinear gloss in a Tibetan manuscript from 
the unpublished Tanjur Canon  by Üpa losel (ca. 1270–1355), 
reading a dhe [or rhe ] śa.
65. Thus a
ccording to Newman (1991: 72–73), who identi -
fies Suvarṇadvīpa with Java rather than Sumatra, whereas 
according to Skilling (1997: 190) the actual site might have 
been Kedah (contrast Schoterman, this volume, and Kan -
dahjaya 2014). The Blue Annals assert that Piṇḍo (perhaps 
standing for pai ṇḍap ātika , a monk living on alms?) hailed 
from the Southern Seas, and was a disciple of Gser gling pa 
of Suvarṇadvīpa (Gnoli and Orofino 2006: 67). On Atīśa’s 
(largely imaginative) account of his eventful oceanic 
journey to Suvarṇadvīpa, see Decleer 1995.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   19 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 34] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia20
1019 founded a Buddhist temple in Nākappa ṭṭiṉa m 
(Skilling 1997, 2007). Van der Kuijp (2003: 420, n. 
6) identifies this Dharmak īrti 
with the author of a 
commentary to the Hevajratantra  (Netravibhaṅga , 
Tōh. 1191). Both Atīśa and Dharmakīrti were fervent 
devotees of Tārā, a deity that was popular in insular 
Southeast Asia. 
A renewed focus on Esoteric Buddhism, no 
doubt triggered by royal patronage, can be detected 
between the 10th and 12th centuries in polities of 
mainland Southeast Asia, including the domains 
of the Cams along the Vietnamese littorals. Chut -
iwongs (2006) discusses information concerning 
the construction of a shrine to Heruka in Camp ā 
by Śrī Sūryavarmadeva towards the end of the 12th 
century, during Khmer occupation. The sanctuaries 
of Phimai and Si Thep, as well as several temples 
built at Angkor under the reign of Jayavarman 
VII, attest to Tantric iconographic programmes, 
as do the numerous bronze statues unearthed in 
the region.66 The temple of Abeyadana (late 11th 
century) at Bagan displays Tantric features, argu -
ably as the result of contemporary religious links 
and marital relations between the rulers of Bagan 
and those of Pa ṭṭike rā in Bengal.67 As suggested 
66. For an up-to-date, synthetic overview of Esoteric 
Buddhism at Phimai, and in the Khmer domains in general, 
see Conti 2014; on Angkorean sites such as Si Thep, Angkor 
Thom, the Bayon, Banteay Chhmar, etc., see the studies by 
Woodward (1981, 2012) and Sharrock (2006, 2007, 2009, 
2011a, 2012, 2013a, 2013b). The Vajrayāna character of the 
Sab Bāk inscription of ad  1067 (K. 1158), recovered near 
Nakhon Ratchasima, has been discussed by Prapandvidya 
(1990), Sinclair (2012), and Conti (2014). Besides mentioning 
the Guhyasamāja  and betraying knowledge of that system, 
the inscription echoes a ‘signature verse’ by Vāgīśvarakīrti, 
a Guhyasamāja -exegete who flourished in eastern India 
in the early 11th century (see Szántó forthcoming, who 
argues that Vāgīśvarakīrti might have been the paramagu -
ru (guru’s guru)  of Vraḥ Dhanus, the author of the verse).
67. Abeyadana, the chief queen of King Kyanzittha (r. 
1084–1112), was believed to hail from Bengal, and to be a 
follower of Mantranaya Buddhism. Kyanzittha’s son, King 
Alaungsitthu (r. 1113–67), married a queen from Pa ṭṭike rā, 
which was an important centre of worship of the fierce 
goddess Cundā; Burmese literature and folk drama have 
preserved a memory of the romantic affair between the 
prince of Pa ṭṭike rā and Kyanzittha’s only daughter (S. Bhat -
tacharya 1994: 264–65). Much controversy exists around the Buddhist sect of the Aris (or Araññavāsins), which is 
described by 18th and 19th century Myanmar chronicles by Bautze-Picron (2014b: 107), images found at the 
Sumatran sites of Padang Lawas are integrated in 
a network that connects them to South Asia, East 
Java, Central Sumatra, Cambodia and Campā in 
the 11th and 13th centuries; overall, the sites show a 
kind of Buddhism that belongs to the same phase of 
Vajrayāna as what was present in Khmer and Cam 
domains between the 12th and 13th centuries, and 
in East Java and China in the 13th century, ‘when 
esoteric Buddhism was tightly intertwined with 
politics and when fierce characters like Mah ākāla 
or Heruka/Hevajra were made the protectors of 
various kingdoms’ (ibid.: 123).68 The wild, ferocious 
character of the Esoteric Buddhist (and Tantric 
Śaiva) iconography that developed at the East Ja -
vanese courts of Kaḍiri, Siṅhasāri and Majapahit69 
and scant epigraphic sources as a congregation of ‘debased’ 
monks devoted to sex, alcohol, dance and animal sacri -
fice, and worshipping local spirits ( nat) and Hindu deities. 
Some scholars, such as Duroiselle, Ray and Luce, consid -
ered them followers of Tantric cults, whereas Than Tun 
(and most contemporary specialists of Myanmar) regard 
them as having little if anything to do with Tantrism (see 
S. Bhattacharya 1994). Championing the latter school of 
thought, Bautze-Picron (2003: 121–23, 199, 226 nn. 69, 70) 
has cast doubt on the view, advanced by earlier scholars 
mainly on account of the sexual nature of some of their friezes, that the Hpayathonzu (12th century) and Nanda -
manya (13th century) temples at Bagan were informed by 
a Tantric iconographic agenda. Further research is needed 
to clarify this issue.
68. The Hevajratantra  ap pears to have enjoyed some 
popularity in Sumatra (and, conversely, Suvarṇadvīpa 
is mentioned by this text: see Schoterman this volume, 
p. 115). Besides the circumstantial evidence mentioned 
above attributing to Dharmakīrti from Suvarṇadvīpa the authorship of a commentary to the Hevajra , and the epi -
graphic evidence presented by Griffiths (2014c), must be 
considered the inscription of Saruaso II, which praises 
the crown prince Anaṅgavarman, son of Ādityavarman, the last line of which mentions his ‘daily meditation on 
Hevajra’ ( Hevajra-nityāsmṛtiḥ ). It would thus seem that 
Ādityavarman was following the same ideology and ritual 
technology adopted earlier by Kublai Khan and Kṛtana -
gara, who equated themselves to the central deity of the 
maṇ ḍalas of Buddhist Tantras such as the Guhyasam āja or  
the Hevajra  (see Hunter in Kozok 2015: 324–27; Bautze-Pi -
cron 2014b; Reichle 2009: 139; O’Brien 1993). 
69. Besides the statuary and architectural vestiges, 
14th-century Old Javanese literary sources, such as the 
kakavin Sutasoma , attest to Esoteric Buddhist cults. In his 
Deśavarṇana  ( 80.1) Prapañca refers to the existence of two 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   20 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 35] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes21
shares features with the Sumatran one, as attest -
ed in Biaro Bahal and Muara Takus, and in the 
Mahākāla statue attributed to Ādityavarman. The 
wrathful deity Hevajra and his Heruka instantia -
tion are represented in a number of Khmer bronzes 
(Lobo 1994), and perhaps made into cult objects at 
Banteay Chhmar and other sanctuaries (Sharrock 
2006, 2013a; Conti 2014: 273–77; contrast Green 
2013), while Tantric Yoginīs prominently feature at 
the Bayon and Phimai (Sharrock 2013b). Heruka/
Hevajra was part of the royal cults of the Mongol 
Khans (Bade, this volume), while Mahākāla was 
worshipped by the elites of the Dali kingdom in 
Yunnan (Bryson 2012). 
It may be argued that the fierce, military-orient -
ed iconography of Phase Two and Three of Esoteric 
Buddhism represents an ‘antagonistic paradigm’ 
reflecting socio-political contingencies. This par -
adigm, recently revisited by Verardi (2011), posits a 
hostility or antagonism between the two religions 
as reflected in either actual historical events, such 
as various forms of competition for royal support, 
devotees and resources, occasional interethnic 
or interreligious violence, or iconographic rep -
resentations, such as Śaiva gods being trampled 
upon or subdued by Buddhist deities, and vice versa. 
Whereas modern scholarship often emphasizes the 
‘inclusive’ and ‘syncretic’ character of Buddhism, 
whether or not in its esoteric varieties, in many 
Asian contexts, much of the extant textual and 
archaeological evidence points to the existence of a clear divide between Buddhism and competing 
religious systems, at least in elite milieux (see, e. g., 
Miksic 2010) .70 Having said that, it is beyond doubt 
types of private Buddhist institutions, namely kavinayan 
and a (more prevalent) kabajradharan, and associates  a 
locale named buḍur  (Borobudur?) with the latter type of 
establishment (for a synthesis of relevant secondary litera -
ture, see Sinclair 2012). The Tantric legacy of Siṅhasāri and 
Majapahit appears to have been preserved by the Sanskrit 
sources used by Balinese Buddhist ritualists, which include 
fragments from several authoritative works of the Ma -
hāyāna and Vajray āna: Śānti deva’s Bodhicary āvatāra, t he 
Sarvadurgatipari śodh ana, and Advayavajra’s Kudṛṣṭinir -
ghāṭana  ( Hooykaas 1973: 600–603). 
70. It goes without saying that in lay milieux the boundar -
ies tend to become more porous, and lay devotion displays 
an inclusive attitude in many cultural contexts. Even so, 
I reiterate my argument that the (imprecise) category of that certain regional contingencies and personal 
idiosyncrasies favoured the formation of actual syn -
cretic cults uniting doctrinal and ritual elements 
pertaining to distinct traditions—a paradigmatic 
case being the ‘Śiva-Buddha cult’ inaugurated by, 
and revolving around the figure of, East Javanese 
king Kṛtanagara (r. 1268–92), who leaned towards 
Esoteric Buddhism while at the same time patron -
ised Tantric Śaivism.71
Unfavourable international political develop -
ments, and most notably the decline of Buddhism in 
northern India, may have triggered the rise of new 
networks at the turn of the 13th century. Nālandā 
and Vikramaśīla having been razed, scholars and 
artisans fled to Nepal and Tibet (von Schroeder 
1981: 311), and possibly further afield to Southeast 
Asia.72 A Nepalese (Newar) influence on the Khmer 
architecture of that period has been noted by Fillio -
zat (1969: 47) and Sharrock (2007: 252); as pointed 
out by O’Brien (this volume), a diaspora of Newar 
artisans existed in the Sino-Tibetan sphere, and 
these artisans became popular at Khubilai Khan’s 
court at a time that coincides with the reign of 
Kṛtanagara, Khubilai’s Javanese adversary, and 
the patron of Candi Jago. Northeastern Indian or 
Newar elements have long since been noted in the 
statuary and decorative features of East Javanese 
Buddhist art;73 similarly, the Nāgarī-inscribed Bud -
‘syncretism’ has often been (and continues to be) misused; 
cf. Est ève 20
09. 
71. For a reevaluation of this cult in the East Javanese 
Siṅhasāri context, see Hunter 2007 and, for an added dis -
cussion on Majapahit and Bali, Acri 2015. A Bhairavika 
priest and other categories of Śaiva clergymen as well as 
mainstream Brahmans are mentioned in the Mula Maluruṅ 
inscription associated with Kṛtanagara (see Sidomulyo 
2010: 107–8).
72. Tār
anātha states that most of the Buddhist scholars 
of madhyadeśa  fled to mainland Southeast Asia (i.e., the 
kingdoms of Pegu, Campā, Kamboja, etc.) after Magadha 
was invaded by the Turks (D. Chattopadhyaya 1980: 330).
73. See O’Brien 1993: 252–55, this volume. Schoterman 
(1994: 168) noted that the five main statues of Bodhisattvas 
at Candi Jago were executed according to the teachings of 
the Sanskrit Amoghapāśasādhana , which was written by 
Śākyaśrībhadra in northern India around the year 1200, 
and may have reached Java shortly thereafter. Lunsingh 
Scheurleer (2008: 296–98) underlines the northeastern 
Indian influence on a sculpture of Java in the Siṅhasāri 
period and also of Sumatra in ad  1286 by Kṛtanagara, 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   21 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 36] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia22
dhist statues from Candi Jago, and the occurrence 
of the words bharāla  (‘god’) and bharālī  (‘goddess’) 
in a number of inscriptions associated with Kṛtan -
agara, support a possible northeastern Indian, and 
especially Newar, link.74 
summary of the contributions
In dealing with various aspects and traditions of Es -
oteric Buddhism and intra-Asian maritime connec -
tions from the 7th to the 13th century, the fourteen 
essays in this volume are not grouped according 
to strictly chronological or geographical criteria, 
but follow a thematic and disciplinary arrange -
ment, under the three headings of ‘Monks, Texts, 
Patrons’ (Part I), ‘Art, Architecture, and Material 
Culture’ (Part II), and ‘Bauddha-Śaiva Dynamics’ 
(Part III). Rather than focusing uniquely on re -
gion-specific manifestations of Esoteric Buddhism, 
whether bound to modern nation-states or not, this 
volume embraces a perspective emphasizing the 
(maritime) intra-Asian interactions—also intend -
ed as the dialectic encounters between cultures 
and religions, doctrines and practices, and their 
human carriers —that occurred across geographical 
and cultural boundaries in the course of several 
centuries. Within this framework, it reveals the 
limits of a historiography that is premised on land-
based, ‘northern’ pathways of transmission of ( es-
oteric varieties of ) Buddhism across the Eurasian 
continent, and advances an alternative—actually, 
complementary—historical narrative that takes the 
‘southern’ pathways, i.e. the sea-based networks, 
into due account. In harmony with this perspective, 
several studies in the present collection focus on 
what is now the Indonesian Archipelago—a stra -
tegic geographical area that has yielded significant 
which was reconsecrated around the mid 14th century by 
Ādit
yavarman (cf. Reichle 2007: 56ff). 
74. See L
okesh Chandra 1983, Kandahjaya 2004: 68–69, 
Sinclair 2012, and Griffiths 2014c, who discuss the attes -
tation of the word forms bharāla  and bharālī and their 
probable  cognates  bahāla, bahāra  and bhar āḍa (<bh aṭṭāra[ -
ka], as suggested by Lienhard 1999: 38) in Newar sources. 
While these synchronic linguistic facts do not necessarily 
demonstrate the existence of direct links, they nonethe -
less suggest that analogous religious developments were 
probably taking place in different locales of late mediaeval 
Buddhist Asia. vestiges of its glorious Buddhist past, yet is still 
underrepresented in contemporary scholarship.
Capitalizing on recent Buddhological research, 
the essays integrate and link together perspectives 
from various disciplines (philology, history, art 
history, archaeology, and religious studies) and 
area-studies expertise. Concomitantly, a number of 
studies deal with textual materials in various pre -
modern languages. This reflects the ongoing effort 
to lay a solid foundation upon which theoretical 
and historical analysis could rest, especially given 
the sheer amount of primary sources, in the form 
of manuscripts and inscriptions, which urgently 
await to be catalogued, edited, and studied. 
Following on the main themes set out in this 
introductory Chapter 1, Part I explores a para -
mount aspect of intra-Asian interactions, namely 
the circulation of monks and texts. This aspect is 
inextricably linked to the adoption (and adaptation) 
of Esoteric Buddhist cults and rituals by the con -
temporary ruling elites, which form the primary 
focus of its two concluding chapters. 
Chapter 2, ‘Coronation and Liberation Ac -
cording to a Javanese Monk in China: Bianhong’s 
Manual on the abhi ṣeka o
f a cakravartin’, by Iain 
Sinclair addresses the links between 8th-century 
Tang China and insular Southeast Asia. It exam -
ines a key figure in the transmission of Vajrayāna 
lineages between the Javanese and Sinitic worlds, 
namely a monk known by his Chinese name Bi -
anhong, who in the 8th century travelled from his 
native island of Java to the Tang capital to study 
Esoteric Buddhism under Huiguo, one of Amogha -
vajra’s pupils. The chapter includes an edition and 
annotated translation of the sole work attributed 
to him, the Ritual Manual for Initiation into the 
Great Ma ṇḍala of the U ṣṇīṣa-C akravartin . Sinclair 
argues that the Manual  embodies the interest in 
conversion and state protection shared by other 
Esoteric Buddhist masters moving through South, 
East and Southeast Asia at the time.
The islands of Java and Sumatra and their over -
seas connections provide the setting of the next 
two chapters. Hudaya Kandahjaya’s ‘ Saṅ Hyaṅ 
Kamahāyānikan , Borobudur, and the Origins 
of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia’ (Chapter 3) 
focuses on the pre 10th century Sanskrit-Old Ja -
vanese Esoteric Buddhist compendium Saṅ Hyaṅ 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   22 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 37] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes23
Kamahāyānikan . Having discussed the relationship 
of this unique scripture with Esoteric Buddhist 
texts in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese, Kan -
dahjaya provides preliminary answers to some 
key questions concerning its date and doctrinal 
inspiration, the milieu of its authorship, and its 
relationship with the Central Javanese Buddhist 
monument Borobudur. His analysis reveals that 
this text, which contains early esoteric material of 
possible northeastern Indian provenance, played 
an important role in the development of Esoteric 
Buddhist traditions in Indonesia; concomitantly,  
data from the Archipelago cast new light on the 
genesis of Esoteric Buddhism across the Buddhist 
cosmopolis, suggesting that the development of 
esoteric teachings could have occurred earlier than 
has been hitherto assumed.
Chapter 4 (‘Traces of Indonesian Influences in 
Tibet’) is an English translation by Roy Jordaan 
and Mark Long of a too rarely cited Dutch essay 
published as the pamphlet Indonesische Sporen 
in Tibet in 1986 by Jan Schoterman (d. 1989). This 
short yet seminal essay merits a re-edition and 
English translation insofar that it discusses the 
fascinating, and understudied, links between the 
Sumatran kingdom of Śrīvijaya and Tibet in the 
light of the accounts of the lives of famous Buddhist 
monks—such as Atīśa—and other primary sources 
in Sanskrit and Tibetan. 
The two concluding chapters of Part I focus on 
the crucial issue of Esoteric Buddhism and royal 
sponsorship against the background of intra-Asian 
connections. Geoffrey Goble’s ‘The Politics of 
Esoteric Buddhism: Amoghavajra and the Tang 
State’ (Chapter 5) focuses on the incorporation of 
Esoteric Buddhism in the bureaucratic imperial 
state of 8th century Tang China. Taking this as 
a case study, he suggests that the spread of early 
Esoteric Buddhism in Maritime Asia was driven by 
the tradition’s guiding ethos of hegemony, control, 
and power and its consequent appeal to members 
of the ruling class .
The prominently historiographical Chapter 6,  
‘(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia? Inter -
national Relations, the Balance of Powers, and the 
Tantric Buddhism of Kṛtanagara and Khubilai 
Khan’, by David Bade examines the connections 
between, and explanations proposed for, the Tantric Buddhism and political actions of East Javanese 
ruler Kṛtanagara and the Mongol Khubilai Khan in 
light of recent scholarship on Tantric developments 
in the Buddhist world of the 13th century, as well 
as Rosenstock-Huessy’s theory of religion. 
In Part II we shift to the realm of the visual 
arts, architecture, and material culture within the 
context of intra-Asian connections. Its six chap -
ters consider the circulation of Esoteric Buddhist 
iconography and architectural motifs between 
South and Southeast Asia, from the disciplinary 
perspective of art history and archaeology. 
The first four chapters are set against the 
back  gro
und of north- and southeastern India. 
This extensive geographical area, which includes 
Bangladesh and the modern Indian states of Bihar, 
Jharkhand, Odisha and West Bengal, has been rec -
ognized as one of the cradles of Esoteric Buddhism, 
and in general as a major source of inspiration for 
the arts of Tibet and Southeast Asia. The discussion 
is opened by Claudine Bautze-Picron in Chapter 7, 
‘Images of Devotion and Power in South and South -
east Bengal’, which focuses on Esoteric Buddhist 
art, and in particular on images of the Buddha and 
other Buddhist deities, in eastern India from the 
8th up to the 12th century. Bautze-Picron examines 
such different types of production as stone, terra -
cotta, stucco or cast images, manuscript illumina -
tions, cloth-paintings and murals, and sees them as 
reflecting contemporary religious values and daily 
concerns, as well as historical and socio-political 
factors—including the relationship between Bud -
dhism, Brahmanism, and political power.
Swati Chemburkar’s ‘Borobudur’s Pāla Fore -
bear? A Field Note from Kesariya, Bihar, India’ 
(Chapter 8) continues this line of enquiry, address -
ing the ‘paradigm-shift’ in Buddhist texts, ritual 
and sacred architecture brought about by the rise 
of the Pāla dynasty in 8th century Eastern India, 
which sent cultural waves across the expanding 
maritime and land trade routes of Asia. Chembur -
kar focuses on architectural breakthroughs, and 
argues that the design of a circular mountain stūpa  
of Buddhas at Kesariya (Bihar) was the precedent 
that made possible the celebrated and much more 
elaborate structure of Borobudur in Java. 
Natasha Reichle’s ‘Imagery, Ritual, and Ide -
ology: Examining the Mahāvihāra at Ratnagiri’ 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   23 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 38] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia24
(Chapter 9) investigates another important Bud -
dhist site of Eastern India, namely the main mon-
astery of Ratnagiri in Odisha. Having elaborated on 
the Mahāyāna roots of the monastery and the later 
esoteric developments, Reichle notes that aspects of 
the esoteric iconography found at Ratnagiri are also 
seen at temple sites in Java and Sumatra, and may 
reflect similarities in the development of religious 
practices across insular Southeast Asia. 
In Chapter 10, ‘Seeds of Vajrabodhi: Buddhist 
Ritual Bronzes from Java and Khorat’, Peter Shar -
rock and Emma Bunker trace a link between 
Eastern India and the Khmer Khorat plateau via 
the Malay Peninsula. Expanding on recent research 
focused on the role of Vajrabodhi in spreading 
esoteric teachings across the Buddhist ecumene, 
the authors argue that the little-known Buddhist 
bronzes from Khorat are part of the same cross-cul -
tural expansion of Esoteric Buddhism over the 
seas between India and China that opened with 
Vajrabodhi’s momentous journey.
The concluding two chapters of Part II are set 
in Sumatra and East Java respectively—two locales 
that, as we have seen in previous chapters, were 
at the heart of a thick web of overseas religious, 
economic, and diplomatic networks. Chapter 11, 
‘Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism 
in Sumatra, 7th to 13th Century’, by John Miksic 
presents an overview of recent archaeological 
discoveries of vajra s and inscribed gold objects 
in Sumatra and under the water near the island. 
These discoveries, as well as Sumatra’s rich herit -
age of Buddhist monuments, lend support to the 
hypothesis that this area was a significant centre 
of Esoteric Buddhist activity during an important 
phase of the genesis and growth of that religious 
orientation, and that several streams of Buddhist 
thought and practice coexisted in various areas of 
the island for more than half a millennium.
Kate O’Brien’s ‘The Tale of Sudhana and Mano -
harā  on Candi Jago: An Interpretation of a Series 
of Narrative Bas-reliefs on a 13th-Century East Ja -
vanese Monument’ (Chapter 12) focuses on some 
narrative reliefs at the temple of Jago, the Buddhist 
shrine commissioned in ad  1268 by King Kṛta -
nagara. She proposes that an unidentified series of 
reliefs represent the tale of the Bodhisattva prince 
Sudhana and the kinnarī  princess Manoharā, which on the one hand accords with the maṇḍalic pro -
gramme of the shrine, and on the other reflects 
the Esoteric Buddhist ideal of kingship embraced 
by Kṛtanagara (and, perhaps, by his contemporary 
rival Khubilai Khan). 
Part III comprises three chapters that add an 
important dimension to the discussion, namely 
the relationship between the cognate religious and 
ritual systems of Esoteric Buddhism and Tantric 
Śaivism. Coexisting in many contexts, yet often ri -
valling each other, these two traditions contributed 
to shape the religious discourse across Maritime 
Asia in the mediaeval period, giving rise to phe -
nomena of hybridity, dialectics, appropriation, or 
antagonism. 
The first two essays primarily analyse sets of 
textual and archaeological evidence from Java, 
linking them to contemporary developments in 
overseas regions. In Chapter 13, ‘Once More on 
the ‘‘Ratu Boko Mantra’’: Magic, Realpolitik, and 
Bauddha-Śaiva Dynamics in Ancient Nusantara’, 
I build on the work of previous scholars on the 
Esoteric Buddhist mantra in Sanskrit inscribed 
on a circa 8th-century gold foil recovered from 
the Ratu Boko prominence in Central Java, and 
identify two hitherto unnoticed attestations of it in 
two sources from Bali—one in a Sanskrit Buddhist 
hymn (the Pañcakā ṇḍa), t he other in a Sanskrit-Old 
Javanese Śaiva text (the Ga ṇapat itattva ). Through 
an analysis of related textual sources from the 
Indian Subcontinent and East Asia, my study casts 
new light on the context and function of the Ratu 
Boko artefact, and elaborates on the religious and 
socio-political scenarios opened up by it.
Jeffrey Sundberg’s ‘Mid-9th-Century Adversity 
for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java: 
Lord Kumbhayoni and the ‘Rag-wearer’ Paṁsukū -
lika Monks of the Abhayagirivihāra’ (Chapter 14) 
examines the relationship between two chronolog -
ically and thematically distinct sets of late 8th- to 
early 9th-century lithic structures and inscriptions 
at the southern end of the Ratu Boko promontory in 
Central Java: the first is Buddhist and relates to the 
Sinhalese monks of the famous Abhayagirivihāra, 
the second is Śaiva and is connected to the Java -
nese nobleman Pu Kumbhayoni. The essay seeks to 
offer a plausible narrative about how the Bauddhas 
and the Śaivas intersected in ad  856 on that small 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   24 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 39] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes25
patch of Central Java, arguing that the Ratu Boko 
archaeological remains mirror an important event 
in the course of Buddhism in Asia: the emphatic ad  
854 reversion of Sinhalese Buddhist kings from the 
Mantranaya to the Theravāda in the wake of the 
traumatic sacking of Anurādhapura after a circa 
840 battle seemingly fought in the grounds of the 
Abhayagiri itself. Sundberg points out that the loss 
of Sri Lanka was part of the dimming of prospects 
and support for Esoteric Buddhists across Asia in 
the same decade. The appended Annex, ‘Further 
Considerations of the Ratu Boko Mantra’, offers 
additional insights on the inscribed gold foil dis -
cussed by myself in Chapter 13.
In the final Chapter 15, ‘A Śaiva Text in Chinese 
Garb? An Annotated Translation of the Suji liyan 
Moxishouluo tian shuo aweishe fa ’, by Rolf Giebel we 
return to Tang China. Giebel takes up The (Garuḍa) 
Āveśa Rite Explained by the God Maheśvara Which 
Swiftly Establishes Its Efficacy , being a Chinese 
translation, attributed to Amoghavajra, of an un -
identified original (South Asian?) Sanskrit source. 
This text, the greater part of which describes the use 
of child mediums in rites of spirit possession for the 
purpose of divination, would seem to be entirely 
devoid of any Buddhist content; given the many 
elements belonging to the Gāruḍa strand of Tantric 
Śaiva literature, this source may be indeed regarded as a Śaiva text in Chinese Esoteric Buddhist garb.
The volume is closed by two Appendices. Appen -
dix A, ‘The Names of Nāgabuddhi and Vajrabud -
dhi’ by Iain Sinclair, makes a persuasive argument 
in support of a reinterpretation of the names of 
the famous Esoteric Buddhist masters popularly 
known as ‘Nāgabodhi’ and ‘Vajrabodhi’. Appendix 
B, ‘Notes on the Alleged Reading vālaputra  on the 
Pikatan Funeral Stele’ by Jeffrey Sundberg, engages 
with de Casparis’ reading on the Śivagṛha Central 
Javanese inscription, which bears on the hypothesis  
of an end to Buddhist Śailendra rule in Java.
The collective body of work presented in this 
volume highlights the important role played by Es -
oteric Buddhism in shaping maritime intra-Asian 
connectivity from the 7th century onwards, and 
in influencing many cultural aspects of the local 
and cosmopolitan societies throughout Buddhist 
Asia to the 13th century and beyond. The result -
ing perspective contributes to transcend—in fact, 
overturn—the still dominant paradigm regarding 
Esoteric Buddhism as a marginal, or even aber -
rant and degenerate, phenomenon as opposed to 
mainstream Theravāda and Mahāyāna Buddhism 
in many Asian contexts. Indeed, one may even say 
that by the 10th century, Esoteric Buddhism had 
virtually become identical with ‘Buddhist practice’ 
throughout much of Asia.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   25 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 40] ---
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   26 16/8/16   9:51 AM

--- [Page 41] ---
PART I
MONKS, TEXTS, PATRONS
Part I.indd   1 12/7/16   3:18 PM

--- [Page 42] ---
Part I.indd   2 12/7/16   3:18 PM

--- [Page 43] ---
Chapter 2
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in 
China: Bianhong’s Manual on the abhiṣeka of a cakravartin   
iain  sinclair
A key figure  in the 8th-century  transmis -
sion of Buddhism between the Sanskritic 
and Sinic worlds is a monk known by his 
Chinese name Bianhong (perhaps a.k.a Ājñāgar-
bha).1 To date, Bianhong’s life and work have been 
known primarily from one account circulated in 
Japan by his more famous fellow student K ūkai. 
Here Bianhong’s career will be examined in the 
light of the sole work attributed to him: the Ritual 
Manual for Initiation into the Great Maṇḍ ala of 
the U ṣṇīṣa-Cakravartin (Taish ō Tripi ṭaka 959), 
herea fter the Manual . Although Bianhong is 
often discussed in connection with the spread of 
Buddhism in his Javanese homeland, his Manual  
has been entirely overlooked to date. No other 
individual from Java is known to have travelled 
to the Tang and written in Chinese, but it will be 
argued here that the author of the Manual  was 
indeed a foreign member of China’s most prestig-
ious lineage of Esoteric Buddhism. The Manual ’s 
protocols were however determined not only by 
the twin- maṇḍ ala system of the Tang masters, but 
also the more obscure and archaic system of the 
Uṣṇīṣ a kalpas. It was the U ṣṇīṣakalpas that o ffered 
the most compelling rituals for the coronation  
(abhi ṣeka) of a universal emperor, a cakravartin —a 
process that interested many Buddhist cognoscenti 
in South, East, and Southeast Asia at the time. To 
1. I dedicate this essay to Adrian Snodgrass, whose en-
couragement I have been fortunate enough to receive from 
the outset of my studies in this field. I also thank Andrea 
Acri for attentive and helpful editorial comments, Rolf 
Giebel for diligent feedback on the textual criticism of the 
Manual and copies of the relevant pages of the Fuhōden,  
Gudrun Bühnemann for corrections, as well as Hong Luo 
and other colleagues whose feedback is acknowledged 
throughout the essay. All errors are of course mine.facilitate the discussion of these rituals, a prelimi-
nary Chinese edition and annotated translation of 
the Manual is also presented for the first time here. 
Bianhong emerges into history in the wake of the 
first transmissions of soteriology-oriented Tantric 
Buddhism2 to Tang China. The novelty of this form 
of Buddhism lay in the fact that it was transmitted 
from guru to disciple through initiation, and in 
its ability to harness the power of Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas through mantras and yogic medita-
tion. It had an exclusive character suited to talented 
monks and adventurous laypersons—especially 
those in the ruling elite, up to the level of the 
head of state, for whom the rituals of initiation 
(abhi ṣeka) could be performed with full e ffect as a 
coronation ( rājyābhiṣeka).3 The Tang subtradition 
of the pan-Asian Mantranaya, in which Bianhong 
trained, while now well known,4 will be reintro-
2. With regard to the use of the word ‘Tantra’ here, it 
should be pointed out that the two main scriptures prom-
ulgated by the Tang ācāryas, the VAT  and STTS , are in 
fact called Tantras in the Sanskritic tradition (especially 
in expository works such as the Jñānasiddhi , Tattvasiddhi , 
and Cary āmelāpakaprad īpa) from the 8th century onwards. 
The Chinese word jing 經, used to designate these scriptures, 
undoubtedly translates a range of Sanskrit terms such as 
āgama , sūtra, kalpa, and tantra . The claim that ‘Esoteric 
Buddhism’ (the usual designation for the Tang tradition) is 
not Tantric or is di fferent in kind from Tantric Buddhism 
has no evidential support.
3. The essential element of the rite is ‘unction’, abhi ṣeka 
proper, in which the candidate is bathed in waters poured 
over his head, thereby enacting his ‘rebirth’ and the inves-
titure of royal power. The Buddhist performance shares 
this element with the classical, i.e. Vedic, performance of 
rājyābhiṣeka, as described by Heesterman ( 1957: 114–22).
4. For the most recent survey of scholarship on ‘Esoteric Bud -
dhism and the Tantras in East Asia’, which provides important 
background for this essay, see Orzech, Sørensen and Payne 2011.
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   29 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 44] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 30
duced here in brief, as its major players and ideas are 
essential in the conception of Bianhong’s Manual . 
The primary carriers of this Buddhism were 
Śubhākarasi ṁha 善無畏  (637–735), Vajrabodhi 
(a.k.a. Vajrabuddhi: see Appendix A) 金剛智  
(671–741), and Amoghavajra 不空金剛 (704–74). 
These masters ( ācārya) of the doctrine and praxis 
of Buddhist Tantric systems of South Asian origin, 
literate in both Sanskrit and Chinese, were re-
nowned for their expertise in two Tantras in 
particular. The first, the Vairocan ābhisa ṁbodhi -
tantra  (VAT ), was translated into Chinese under 
the guidance of Śubhākarasi ṁha, who was also 
versed in its practice. He initiated disciples into 
the principal schema or ma ṇḍala of this Tantra, 
the Mah ākaruṇodbhava-garbhama ṇḍala, a de-
veloped form of which was transmitted to Japan 
as the Genzu or ‘current diagram’ ma ṇḍala. The 
second of the two main Tantras transmitted in the 
Tang, the Sarvatath āgata tattvasa ṅgraha  (STTS ), 
was the speciality of Vajrabodhi and Amoghav-
ajra, who selectively translated it and some related 
works into Chinese. Both were acquainted with the Tantras connected to the STTS , generically called 
‘*Vajra śikhara  works’ 金剛頂經  in the Tang, which 
by the middle of the 8th century had been incor-
porated into a set of eighteen mah āyogatantras.5 
Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra likewise bestowed 
initiation into the central  maṇḍala of the STTS , the 
Vajradh ātu-mah āmaṇḍala, upon many East Asian 
students. Their lineage descended directly from the 
famous South Indian exponent of the mah āyoga 
Tantric system, N āgabodhi 龍智  (fl. ca. 645 –745).6 
As the VAT  and STTS  have the same main object 
of worship—the omniscient, omnipresent Buddha 
5. The earliest account of a corpus of eighteen works con-
nected with the STTS  is given by Amoghavajra ( T 869), on 
which see Giebel ( 1995). These texts were first connected 
with the eighteen mah āyoga  Tantras of the Rnying ma pa, 
which centre on the Guhyasam āja rather than the STTS 
itself, by Eastman ( 1983: 44). We can safely dismiss Da-
vidson’s ( 2012 : 83) speculation that the Sanskrit original 
of Jingangding  金剛頂  is *Vajro ṣṇīṣa due to the lack of any 
discernible connection between the Jingangding texts and 
the U ṣṇīṣakalpas. See also Appendix A (p. 389 ).
6. See Appendix A on N āgabodhi/N āgabuddhi’s name 
and dates and his tutelage of Vajrabodhi. Fig. 2.1: The Twin Ma ṇḍalas. Le ft: Japanese ma ṇḍala of the Matrix World ( 15th–16th century) ( Taizōkai man-
dara  胎座界曼荼羅 ), opaque watercolour and gold paint on silk, 218 .4 × 184 .5 cm (image and sheet), National 
Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne (AS 9-1971), detail: central matrix ( Chūtai-in  中台院 , garbhama ṇḍala). Right: 
Japanese ma ṇḍala of the Diamond World ( 15th–16th century) ( Kong ōkai mandara 金剛界曼荼羅 ), opaque water-
colour and gold paint on silk, 218.3 × 180.3 cm (image and sheet), National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne, AS 10-
1971, detail: Vajradh ātumah āmaṇḍala based in part on the fi rst chapter of the Sarvatath āgatatattvasa ṅgraha .
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   30 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 45] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 31
Mahāvairocana—the two Tantras came to be regard -
ed as teaching complementary systems, epitomized 
in the ry ōbu 긟部  or ‘twinned’  maṇḍalas. Th e two 
maṇḍ alas were propagated in China for a few gener -
ations and up to the present day in Japan within the 
Shingon 真言宗  and Tendai 天台宗  orders (Fig. 2 .1). 
Several sources of the Esoteric or Tantric Buddhism 
transmitted in and through Tang China have now 
been studied in depth in Anglophone scholarship,7 
although the exploits of key players such as Bianhong 
have barely begun to be explored.
Bianhong studied with the ācārya Huiguo 惠果  
(746–805), an in fluential heir of Śubhākarasi ṁha’s 
and Amoghavajra’s lineages, who gave initiation 
and instruction to several disciples in China. Hu-
iguo’s famous Japanese student K ūkai 空海  pro-
vided the richest, earliest, and most authoritative 
account of Bianhong in his Himitsu Mandaraky ō 
Fuhōden (herea fter Fuhōden 付法傳 ), completed 
in 806.8 Another brief notice of Bianhong appears 
in a lineage history composed in 834 by Haiyun 
海雲 , a Chinese monk in Huiguo’s lineage. Hai-
yun’s Liangbu dafa xiangcheng shizi fufa has been 
published in the Chinese Tripi ṭaka of the Taish ō 
era (herea fter T), No. 2081 . The passages relating 
to Bianhong in these works have been competently 
translated into English.9 They may now be revisit-
ed in connection with new information from the 
Manual  (T 959), which provides by far the most 
detailed documentation of Bianhong’s training, 
expertise, and religious interests. 
a critical biography of bianhong
Bianhong is said to have been active in China in 780 
and 806. His dates of birth and death are unknown; 
7. The Chinese translations of the ryōbu Tantras have been 
translated by Giebel ( 2001 , 2005 ) and Hodge ( 2003 ), while 
the twinned ma ṇḍalas have been described in detail by 
Snodgrass ( 1988). Many associated biographical, scriptural, 
and ritual sources have been treated in the useful survey 
of Orzech, Sørensen, and Payne ( 2011).
8. Reprinted in K ōbō Daishi Zensh ū 弘法大師全集  v.I.
9. The biographical account in the Fuhōden has been 
paraphrased by Yutaka Iwamoto ( 1981: 85) and translated by 
Hudaya Kandahjaya ( 2004 : 95) and Rolf Giebel (Sundberg 
and Giebel 2011: 130–31). One of two relevant passages in 
Haiyun’s lineage history has been translated by Harriet 
Hunter ( 2004 : 48–49).he was probably born at least two decades before 
visiting China. Bianhong’s homeland is identi fied 
as Heling 訶陵 , a Chinese transliteration of the 
toponym K әliṅ, cognate with the Sanskrit name 
Kaliṅga. The kingdom of K әliṅ was located wholly 
or in part in the Indonesian Archipelago, probably 
on Java, though the kingdom’s boundaries do not 
seem to have been coextensive with the island of 
Java in the 8th century.10 At this time K әliṅ was an 
important waystation for Buddhist pilgrims travel -
ling the sea route between the Indian Subcontinent 
and the Tang. It was visited by Vajrabodhi, who 
stayed there in 719, and by Amoghavajra in the 740s. 
There had been a signi ficant Buddhist presence in 
Java since at least the 7th century. By the late 8th 
century, Kali ṅgodra, the ‘Maritime K әliṅ’, had been 
accorded Buddhavacana-level recognition in the 
Sanskritic world in the Mañju śrī-mūlakalpa (or 
Mañju śriya- , herea fter MMK ).11 
Little is known of Bianhong’s life in K әliṅ. In 
East Asian sources he is regarded as a monk, and 
so seems to have received at least the ordination 
of a novice before leaving for China. According 
to an anecdote related by K ūkai, while in K әliṅ 
Bianhong is said to have gained some pro ficien-
cy in the yogic invocation of the Bodhisattva 
Cakra  varticint āmaṇi.12 This Bodhisattva person  
10. The location of ‘Ho-ling’ has been debated by Lou-
is-Charles Damais ( 1964 ) and W.J. van der Meulen ( 1977), 
among others. Today the place name can be reconstructed 
in Early Middle Chinese (EMC) phonology as *X αliәng, 
which corresponds to K әliṅ or Khli ṅ. In the Song dynasty 
translation of the STTS , the two glyphs 訶 陵 transliterate 
the syllables hā rīṁ in the word sarvatath āgata-pratih ārīṁ 
 一切如來鉢囉帝訶陵  (T 882.350b13–14). Here it will be pro-
visionally accepted that K әliṅ is located on Java, follow-
ing Keiji Matsunaga’s ( 1999 : 33) comparison of premodern 
Chinese toponyms for places in Southeast Asia. Matsun-
aga’s data show that Heling is consistently distinguished 
from West and East Sumatra, Bali, the Malay Peninsula, 
etc. in Chinese historical sources. 
11. See MMK 51.636–640 (ed. Jayaswal 1934: 32). A further 
remark that the kings of this place ‘will be’ Buddhists, in 
the ‘prophetic present’, occurs in the Tibetan translation 
of this passage. According to Patra ( 2013: 56), the toponym 
Kaliṅgodra refers to the sea between Java and Kali ṅga 
proper, which he locates in Odisha.
12. The name Cakravarticint āmaṇi has now been estab-
lished as the Sanskrit original counterpart of the Chinese 
name Ruyilun (J. Nyoirin) 如意 輪 , deprecating *Cint āmaṇi-
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   31 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 46] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 32
 ifies a wish-ful filling dhāraṇī that circulated 
throughout Asia in a variety of texts and trans-
lations. One work on yogic self-identi fication 
with Cakravarti cintā maṇi is extant in a Chinese 
translation attributed to Vajrabodhi ( T 1087). Its 
visualization procedure describes a six-armed form 
of the Bodhisattva that is well known in East Asia.13 
Images of this form of Cakravarticint āmaṇi, as 
well as a four-armed form of similar appearance, 
have been recovered from South Asia, Java, and 
elsewhere in Southeast Asia (Fig. 2.2).14 Most of 
the Chinese translations are old enough to con firm 
Kūkai’s report of the Bodhisattva’s cult in K әliṅ in 
the 8 th century.
Cakravarticint āmaṇi’s power of wish ful filment 
furnishes K ūkai’s biography of Bianhong with an 
appropriate moment of serendipity. Bianhong is 
said to have desired initiation into the system of 
the Vairocan ābhisa ṁbodhi , which was apparently 
unavailable in K әliṅ at the time. As K ūkai tells it, 
his wish was facilitated by a ‘sudden’ meeting with 
a person who advised Bianhong to seek initiation 
in China rather than in the southern part of the 
Indian Subcontinent (Nan Tianzhu 南天竺 ):
The man declared: ‘ That dharma [of the Vairo -
canābhisa ṁbodhi ] used to be transmitted by 
vajrācārya Amogha in the land of the Great 
Tang 大唐國 . His disciple, ācārya Huiguo, now 
at Qinglong Monastery 青龍寺 in Chang’an, 
received the transmission. If [you] stay [there, 
you] shall meet [Huiguo and] receive [it]; oth-
erwise, [it will be] hard to get’. 
[His] speech finished, [the man] disap-
peared. Immediately [Bianhong] knew [that he 
was a] divine being. Furthermore, [Bianhong] 
turned around, heading for the Great Tang.15
cakra. Sarah Fremerman has noticed that the proper form 
is given in Chinese transcription, namely in T 1080 and 
1088 ( 2006 : 118). A short related text in Siddham ātṛkā has 
been studied by Giebel ( 2012 : 197).
13. See Fremerman ( 2006 : 125ff .) on the canonical Chinese 
sources for the Bodhisattva’s iconography, i.e., T 1084 –89.
14. The only known example of the six-armed form found 
in Java, now kept in the Wereldmuseum, Rotterdam  (for-
merly Museum voor Land- en Volkenkunde), has been 
identi fied by Nandana Chutiwongs ( 1994 : pl. 5 ).
15. 彼人報云 땻 僯彼法者땿 不空金剛阿ꊙ梨將去傳大唐國 땾 彼弟
子惠果阿ꊙ梨 땿今見在長安青龍寺傳授땾若住必合受땿 不然者難得땾僰 言畢不見땾即知 神人 땾更却向大 唐  (Fuhōden, Kō bō Daishi 
Zensh ū I. 42 5 –8, with punctuation added.)
Fig. 2.2: The six-armed Bodhisattva Cakravarticint ā-
maṇi, metal statuette, 7 th–9th century, ‘found near 
the ruins at Brambanan and in the Mountain Diéng 
or Prahu’, current location unknown; drawing in Raf-fles (1817 II: 56 –57, third page of plates). The iconogra-
phy is described in Vajrabodhi’s text: ‘ The first [right] 
hand is pensive due to [his] sympathising [with] beings. Th e second holds a wishing gem, which can 
fulfill all desires. Th e third holds a rosary, as though 
lifting out from the su ffering of rebirth. Th e left 
[hand] holds down the radiant mountain, succeed-ing in not upturning [it]. The second holds a lotus, which can purify sinful dharmas. Th e third holds a 
wheel, which can circulate the unsurpassed dharma’ (T 1087 .213b17, 20–25). Other Indonesian icons of the 
Bodhisattva are extant, most of them four-armed (e.g., MMoA Acc. Nr. 1984 .473).
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   32 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 47] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 33
This meeting, the Fuhōden suggests, is the fru-
ition of Bianhong’s mantric practice. In Japan it 
was well known that recitation of the dhāraṇī could 
summon the Bodhisattva to grant the mantrin ’s 
wishes.16 Kūkai thereby elevated a minor anecdote 
about his fellow initiate to one link in a chain of 
momentous events leading up to the inheritance 
of Huiguo’s Tantric lineage.17
In 780 Bianhong arrived at the Tang capital 
Chang’an 長安 , as is brie fly recorded in an anony-
mous, posthumous biography of Huiguo  (T 2057 ).18 
By this time Huiguo was versed in the major Tantric 
systems transmitted in the Tang capital.19 Bianhong 
arrived carrying ‘a set of brass cymbals from his 
homeland intended [as a gi ft,] presented at the 
Shengfo-yuan 聖佛院[Hall of Sacred Buddhas at 
Daxingshan monastery]’. The wording suggests that 
these may have been o fficial gi fts, which further 
implies that Bianhong travelled under state spon-
sorship.20 Bianhong’s familiarity with Tantric Bud -
dhist protocol is demonstrated by other gi fts: ‘a pair 
of conches, a brass [object21], and four vases for the 
16. The conditions under which the Bodhisattva may 
appear to the sādhaka  are speci fied in Japanese lore dis-
cussed by Fremerman ( 2006 : 56).
17. Rhetorical strategy in K ūkai’s autobiographical 
writing, his ‘hand in the creation of his own legend’, has 
been discussed by Matsuda ( 2003 : 22–28).
18. ‘In the inaugural year of Jianzhong [ 780], there was 
Bianhong, a monk of K әliṅ nationality’ 建中年初,有訶陵國僧
辨弘  (T 2057 .295b16–b18). This biography was composed in 
826 (Baoli 2 寶䧗二年 ); its author must have been a disciple of 
Huiguo, according to Shigeo Kamata in Kamata ed. ( 1998).
19. In 768 Huiguo had been initiated into the systems of 
the Vairocan ābhisa ṁbodhi  and Susiddhikara  Tantras by 
Śubhākarasi ṁha’s disciple Xuanchao 玄超 , and Amogha-
vajra himself bestowed initiation into the STTS —or, in 
the wording of the biography, the ‘* Mah āyoga  Tantras 
(dajiaowang ) of the * Vajra śikhara ’ 金剛頂大瑜伽大教王經 
(T 2057 .295a9–13). 
20. Cong benguo qiang 從本國將 may, alternatively, convey 
the mere fact that the items were made in Java. In any case, 
the long journey would necessarily have been supported 
by persons of some means. State permission would also 
have been needed, if later Javanese policy is any guide (cf. 
Deśavar ṇana 16.2, trans. Robson 1995 : 35).
21. Tong  銅: the lacuna (indicated by  儬) probably orig-
inally referred to a dish or begging bowl, pātra, following 
the Fuhōden. From comparable passages in Tantric sources, 
we might also expect wan ꛡ (e.g., T 893.622b9), bo 缽  
(T 901.889b28), or simply ‘utensils’, qi 器 (e.g., T 893 .637c5).abbot [Huiguo], the full o fferings’.22 Bianhong was 
much more familiar with Tantric protocol than his 
East Asian fellows, such as the Korean monk Hye-il 
惠日, who in 781 came from Silla to see Huiguo 
bringing only his ‘faith’ ( xinwu  信物 ), like K ūkai.23
Bianhong duly received initiation from Huiguo 
into the Tantric system of the Vairocan ābhisa ṁbo-
dhi. Kūkai referred to this event at least twice in 
his writings, thereby establishing a precedent, and 
legitimacy, for his own credentials as a foreign dis-
ciple of Huiguo. No other monks from Southeast 
Asia are known to have received their authority 
to practise Tantric Buddhism in Tang China. Bi-
anhong is unlikely to have spoken much Chinese 
soon a fter arriving, and as Huiguo is not known to 
have been fluent in Sanskrit, communication must 
have been di fficult. The Japanese monk Enchin 늦珍  
(814–91) relayed misgivings about Bianhong’s train -
ing: ‘in the chatter it is said that Bianhong did not 
receive the eight seals [optionally imparted in the 
transmission of the Vairocan ābhisa ṁbodhi ].’24 
Haiyun reports that Bianhong also received 
initiation into the system of the STTS , the *Va-
jradh ātu-abhi ṣeka, along with other a ffiliates of 
the Daxingshan monastery.25 This report is not 
corroborated in Huiguo’s main biography, and 
sits uneasily with K ūkai’s claim that he was the 
only non-Chinese student to be initiated into the 
ryōbu ma ṇḍalas by Huiguo.26 Nonetheless, the 
Manual  affirms that its compiler formulated it ‘in 
compliance with the Vajradh ātu-mah āmaṇḍala’ 
of the STTS , and in so doing possessed credentials 
in that system. The *Vajradh ātu-abhi ṣeka could 
have been bestowed on Bianhong by someone other 
than Huiguo, as Amoghavajra le ft several Chinese 
22. 螺兩具땾銅 儬 瓶四 儬 , 奉 上 和上 땾 充供養땾 求授胎藏飮盧遮
那大法  (T 2057 .295b16–b18).
23. Cf. T 2057 .295b19–21. 
24. The source for this remark is the Taizō Yuga ki  胎藏
瑜伽記  of Enchin, which G ōhō 杲寶 (1306 –52) quotes: 又語
話中曰 땾辯弘ꊙ梨未得八印  (T 2216.56b18–19). The reference is 
to VAT  Ch. 14 (祕密八印品 , T 848.36c ff., trans. Giebel 2005 : 
151–53). Enchin added: ‘the commoners of Bianzhou [see 
n. 33 below] have no understanding of the eight seals’ 汴州
門下不解用八印  (T 2216 .56b18–19).
25. 所傳金剛界法者 땾 則有 大興善寺傳灌頂教同學惠應阿ꊙ梨
惠則成都府惟尚땾汴淋辨弘  (T 2081 .784a27–b1).
26. Kūkai presents this claim as Huiguo’s own testimony 
(Matsuda 2003 : 55–56).
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   33 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 48] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 34
disciples who were quali fied to administer it.27 It 
is also conceivable that the initiation was received 
in Kәliṅ. Nonetheless, the lineage histories com-
posed a fter Kūkai explicitly identi fied Huiguo as 
the guru who bestowed the *Vajradh ātu-abhi ṣeka 
upon Bianhong.28 
Bianhong’s movements between his final train-
ing with Huiguo and the end of the 8th century 
are obscure.29 Soon a fter taking initiation—while 
still called a śrama ṇa, not yet an ācārya—Bian -
hong moved to Shengshan-si 聖善寺 , a prestigious 
monastery founded several decades earlier in the 
Tang dynasty’s eastern capital, Luoyang 洛陽 . 
Shengshan monastery was the last residence of 
Śubhākarasi ṁha, and had strong ties to the ruling 
elite. Although the monastery had served as a base 
for Tantric practitioners, Bianhong may have been 
stationed there by the Tang government,30 since 
its reputation as a site of Tantric practice was at 
the time being overshadowed by its growing role 
as a nexus of Northern Chan 北宗禪 .31 Śubhāka-
27. The lives and quali fications of the disciples ‘moulded 
in the * pañcakula ’ 五部琢磨 whom Amoghavajra men -
tions in his will ( T 2120 ) have been treated by Goble 
(2012 : 254ff .).
28. So said, e.g., Enchin; see the Chish ō Daishi s ōjō  
智証大師系되 , MDJ  (Appendix: Mikky ō hōryū keisan 密教法
流系되 , Sankoku s ōjō 三国相承 , no. 6, p. 3). Later accounts 
in agreement include T 2373 .436c22–25 and T 2390 .108c8.
29. In 788, a translation team working on the * Ṣaṭ-
pāramit āsūtra—supervised by Prajña 般若 , the Indian 
monk best known as K ūkai’s Sanskrit teacher—was joined 
by a monk called Biankong 筱空 residing at Zhangjing-si 
章敬寺  in Chang’an ( T 261.865b8; cf. T 2156 .756b11). The pos -
sibility that the name of this otherwise unknown individual 
is misspelled (i.e., kōng 空 as a homophone of hōng 弘) is 
remote, but should not be ruled out in view of the fact that 
Bianhong’s name was spelled in various ways.
30. Monks from the Sanskritic world could not leave 
China without imperial permission, even those as eminent 
as Śubhākarasi ṁha (Chou 1945: 269). As Charles Orzech 
observes, ‘highly educated monks quickly became serv-
ants of the state, and their movements and activities were 
surveyed and controlled’ ( 2011: 27).
31. Since the entire monastery was razed in the after -
math of the An Lushan rebellion 安史之亂  between 762 
and 771, according to Jinhua Chen ( 2006 : 143), it is un -
likely that much of Śubhākarasi ṁha’s legacy survived in 
a form that Bianhong could use; even Śubhākarasi ṁha’s  
remains had been transferred to nearby Longmen 龍門  
(Chou 1945 : 270).rasiṁha’s famous disciple Yixing 一行  (683–727),32 
who had studied at the monastery, was routinely 
called a (Northern) Chan master ( chanshi  禪師 ). 
It was at Shengshan-si that the Manual  was 
compiled, as its front matter records. Parts of 
the Manual  suggest that Bianhong there studied 
Tantric practices transmitted outside Huiguo’s 
lineage, about which more will be said below. 
By the beginning of the 9th century Bianhong 
had moved to Bianzhou 汴州 ,33 the area surround-
ing present-day Kaifeng city 開封市 . Bianzhou is 
32. On Yixing, see, in brief, Keyworth ( 2011).
33. Bianzhou 汴州 is mentioned as Bianhong’s abode in 
Kūkai’s Fuhōden and in T 2216, T 2373, and T 2453 (based 
on Haiyun). It is therefore unlikely to be a permutation of 
Luozhou 洛州, i.e., Luoyang; the alternative name Bianlin  
汴淋  given in T 2081 is probably a synonym or an error. 
There are no indications that this place is located any-
where other than China. That is, Bian 汴 (EMC Bhy ὲn) does Map 2.1: Places of signi ficance in Bianhong’s career 
and initiatory circle (simpli fied, selective topography): 
Kәliṅ, Bianhong’s homeland, probably located on 
Java; Chang’an, the western capital of the Tang dy-
nasty, where Bianhong was initiated into the ma ṇḍala 
of the Vairocan ābhisa ṁbodhitantra  in 780 ; Luoyang, 
eastern capital, where Bianhong compiled his Manual  
(T 959 ); Bianzhou, Bianhong’s last known residence, 
reported in 805 ; and Yangzhou, where Bianhong’s dis-
ciple Quanya was active. Some of Bianhong’s fellow initiates travelled to China from Korea/Silla (Hye-il 
惠
日, O-jin 悟ꟃ ) and Japan/Nippon (K ūkai, a.k.a. K ōbō 
Daishi  弘法大師 ). (Map drawn by author)
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   34 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 49] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 35
located near Luoyang, closer to China’s northern 
coast (Map 2.1), and during the Tang dynasty 
several monasteries flourished there. This place is 
Bianhong’s last reported destination. In 806 Kūkai 
wrote that ‘Bianhong is nowadays ( 今) seen resid-
ing in Bianzhou, promulgating the secret  maṇḍala  
(秘輪 )’.34 After Huiguo had passed away the year 
before, the epitaph composed in his honour by 
Kūkai recorded that ‘Bianhong of K әliṅ passed 
as many as five days prostrating’ out of respect for 
their departed teacher.35
Bianhong is not heard of again until the second 
generation of Japanese pilgrims arrives in China 
to study Tantric Buddhism. In 839 a monk iden -
tified as Bianhong’s Chinese student, Quanya 全
雅, met Ennin 圓仁  (794–864) shortly a fter he 
embarked from a Japanese ship at Yangzhou 揚
州. There Quanya set up a  maṇḍala of Cakravar -
ticint āmaṇi, according to Ennin’s diary.36 This 
was presumably done in order to speed up Ennin’s 
goal of visiting Tiantai Mountain 天台山 . Ennin 
separately wrote in his catalogue of texts obtained 
in China that
[I] came across ācārya Quanya, the dharma 
transmission disciple of the Great-Tang-re-
vered ācārya Bianhong. [We] conferred [about 
the possible transmission of] the secret dhar-
ma. [I] thereupon implored him to bestow the 
*dharmapary āya of [mantra] repetition, togeth-
er with the Twinned Ma ṇḍalas, the *Garbha 
and Vajra [Ma ṇḍalas], the various [related] 
*maṇḍalavidhi s and so on.37 
Ennin did not receive initiation from Quanya, 
but was initiated by others in Huiguo’s lineage later 
not transliterate a non-Chinese place name (e.g., Bawean, 
Dieng) or the name of an island ( zhou  洲).
34. 彼辯弘見住汴淋 땹 宣傳秘輪  (Fuhōden, op. cit.) 
35. 訶陵辨弘經五天而接足  (Keika Hibun 惠果碑文 , quoted 
in T 2433 .418b13 and MDJ 1979). Parts of the epitaph have 
been translated by Matsuda ( 2003 : 40ff .).
36. The Nittō guhō junrei k ōki 入唐求法巡禮行記 is the trav -
elogue referred to by Reischauer ( 1955) as ‘Ennin’s Diary’. 
For the text of the short passage on Quanya see e.g., Pan 
(1998 : 65). The meeting is brie fly discussed by Jesse Palmer 
(2009 : 124 –25).
37. 又逢大唐內供奉辯弘阿ꊙ梨付法弟子全雅阿ꊙ梨 땾 諮稟
祕法땾遂乃囑授念誦法門 땾 并胎藏金剛兩部曼荼羅諸壇樣等  
(T 2165 .1076 a29). in his stay.38 Nonetheless, Ennin sent to Japan writ -
ings used or written by Quanya. These included 
treatises in Siddham ātṛkā,39 at least one of which 
is extant—an alphabet ( varṇamālā) in Sanskrit 
and Chinese kept at the T ō-ji 東寺  in Kyoto.40 It is 
unclear whether these little-known texts convey 
any of Bianhong’s teachings.
The writings of Ennin record the last direct 
contact between Japanese pilgrims and Bianhong’s 
immediate circle. As Quanya was unknown to 
members of Huiguo’s lineage before Ennin, he must 
have been accepted as a disciple when Bianhong 
was quite old. There are no indications that Bian-
hong returned to K әliṅ, or that he had the freedom 
to do so; rather, he almost certainly remained in 
China until the end of his life.41
38. According to Pa lmer ( 2009 : 125), ‘La ter accounts… 
claim that Ennin received the Diamond World ( kong ōkai 
金剛界 ) maṇḍala initiation from Quanya as well’. Here 
Palmer may be referring to the Tendai monk Keichin 慧꺍  
(1281–1356) who, writing in 1323 (Ono 1933–35 I: 322), states 
that Quanya received from Bianhong initiation into the 
ryōbu ma ṇḍalas, but transmitted only the Vajradh ā-
tu-mah āmaṇḍala to Ennin: 傳 全雅 受金剛於辨弘大師受
金界灌頂  (T 2373.436c29). This factoid is still repeated in 
standard reference works (e.g., Buswell Jr. and Lopez 2013). 
A Jingangjie zhuzun yigui 金剛界諸尊儀軌  (*Vajradh ātunā-
nā devat āvidhi ) cited in Ennin’s diary is known only  
through mentions in Japanese works (cf. e.g., T 2391.157a16; 
T 2400 .709c18).
39. Quanya’s Siddham ātṛkā treatise on the ‘Wheel of Syl -
lables (*Ak ṣaracakra)’ chapter of the Vairocan ābhisa ṁbodhi 
has not yet been identi fied with any extant work, but it was 
known in Japan (e.g., 全雅悉曇初載大日經中字輪品 , cited in 
T 2702 .391c9–392 a5). 
40. The Siddham ātṛkā treatise 悉曇章  of Quanya, kept 
at the Kong ōzō of the T ō-ji, has been published in fac-
simile by Mabuchi ( 2006 : figs. 4–6). It begins (verbatim 
transcript of the Sanskrit part, with selective correction): 
᠀ namo sa ṁmaṁntābuddh ānāṁ a ᠀ nam ā (post-corr.: 
namo ) saṁmaṁntā buddh ānāma (read: dharm āṇām) ᠀ 
namo sa ṁmaṁntāvajrāṇāṁ va (post-corr.: vaṁ) ᠀ namo 
sarvajñ āya || siddhir astuḥ  siddh ā (post-corr.: siddh āṁ) a 
ā i ī u ū ṛ ṝ ḷ ḹ e ai o au a ṁ aḥ || ka kha ga gha ṅaḥ ca cha 
ja jha ñ āḥ ṭā ṭha ḍa ḍha ṇāḥ ta tha da dha na ḥ pa pha ba 
bha ma ḥ ya ra la va śa ṣa sa ha jña ṁ kṣaḥ || ka kā ki k ī ku 
kū ke kai ko kau ka ṁ ka ḥ….
41. This is by far the most likely outcome, in light of 
the aforementioned restrictions on monks’ travel. The 
hypothesis that Bianhong returned to Java, entertained 
by Woodward ( 2009 : 25) and others, has no support in 
Chinese historical sources.
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   35 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 50] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 36
the uṢṆīṢakalpas  as a source  for 
bianhong ’s manual
The compiler of the Manual  demonstrates a sound 
knowledge of the esotericism of the Twinned 
Maṇḍalas. He was also versed in another, sep-
arate system, described in texts here called the 
Uṣṇīṣakalpas. A number of these texts were 
translated into Chinese before Bianhong’s arrival 
in China. They were of only minor interest to later 
propagators of Huiguo’s lineage, especially in Japan. 
As the textual bases and characteristic features of 
these Tantras have not yet been described in depth 
in Western-language scholarship, aspects of the 
Uṣṇīṣakalpas relevant to the Manual  will be in-
troduced here.42
In the U ṣṇīṣakalpas the main object of vener-
ation is the ‘Buddha Crest’, the tathāgatoṣṇīṣa or 
buddho ṣṇīṣa (Foding 佛頂 ). The uṣṇīṣ a e m bod -
ies the supernormal power associated with the 
cranial protrusion, one of the Buddha’s charac-
teristic marks. As is fitting for wielders of such 
power, the dei fied Buddha Crest is o ften identi fied 
with and depicted as a cakravartin , a world-con-
quering emperor or universal ruler.43 Diffe r e n t 
uṣṇīṣa deities, the Crests, embody various powers, 
each manifested by their own dhāraṇī and cultic 
systems. Sit ātapatr ā (‘White Parasol’) protects 
from magical and other attacks; Vijayo ṣṇīṣā or 
Uṣṇīṣavijay ā (‘Victory Crest’) is a bestower of en-
during long life. As the Crests’ powers are said to 
be strong enough to eradicate bad karman , they 
have soteriological potential. The Uṣṇīṣacakravar-
tin (Dinglunwang 頂輪王 ) of the single syllable, 
Ekākṣara-u ṣṇīṣacakravartin, who personi fies the 
sound bhrūṀ  and the crests of all Buddhas, grants 
emancipation on both the worldly and world-tran-
scending ( laukikalokottara ) levels. Expert use of 
this syllable bestows numerous lo fty bene fits up 
to and including the status of an ‘Emperor-like 
Spellcaster’ ( vidyādharacakravartin ).44 This goal of 
42. Giebel ( 2011: 31–32) has brie fly summarized the liter-
ature of the system transmitted in Chinese translation in 
the Taish ō Tripi ṭaka. Fuller summaries of individual texts 
are given by Ry ōsei Fukuda in Kamata ed. ( 1998).
43. See Snodgrass ( 1988 I: 347) on the dei fications of the 
uṣṇīṣ a in the Genzu ma ṇḍala and their representations.
44. Ronald Davidson’s treatment of what he whimsi-magical sovereignty was alluring for South Asian 
authors of Tantric and even non-Tantric texts for 
a time, though interest began to fade by the end 
of the 7 th century.45 
The primary text of the system is focused 
on Ek ākṣara-u ṣṇīṣacakravartin and four other 
tathāgatoṣṇīṣa, and was propagated in at least three 
recensions, all referred to here as * Cakravartitan -
tra, for want of a better term.46 All versions of the 
text set out directions for painting a portrait of a 
Buddhist emperor ( cakravartin ) under the Bodhi 
tree alongside the Buddha. This leitmotif of the 
Uṣṇīṣakalpas appears to have been preserved in at 
least one sculpture from South Asia (Fig. 3). The 
‘painting procedure’ that describes the iconography 
of the Buddha and his retinue, the paṭavidhi or 
paṭalavidh āna, provides the raw material for the 
maṇḍala rituals in Bianhong’s Manual . 
The textual history of the U ṣṇīṣakalpas will 
be set out here in brief (Table 2.1).47 The earliest 
recension of the * Cakravartitantra , translated into 
Chinese by Bodhiruci 菩提流志  in 693, sets out 
paṭavidhi in its third and fourth chapters ( T 952). 
In the next recension ( T 951), translated in 709—
also by Bodhiruci—the two painting rituals are 
merged into a single third chapter. The single-syl-
lable mantra is introduced in this recension. The 
most developed recension of the text ( T 950) was 
cally calls ‘overlords of the Sorcerers’ ( 2002 : 331–34), i.e. 
vidyādharacakravartin , succeeds in making the point that 
cakravartin  in this context is a metaphor for the mantric 
practitioner’s mastery.
45. Perhaps the earliest Buddhist method for obtaining 
*vidyādharacakravartip āda 得持明轉輪王位  is offered in the 
*Mah āmaṇivipulavim ānavi śvasuprati ṣṭhitaguhyadh āraṇī  
(T 1005 A.625c11–12), in this case as a side e ffect of * añja-
nasiddhi  安怛那成就  (T 1005 A.625c11–12). In the cakras ādha-
na of MMK  25, one becomes a vidyādharacakravartin  by 
worshipping a mantri fied twelve-spoked wheel. The status 
of Spellcaster-Emperor was also known outside the Bud-
dhist Tantras, as in Har ṣa’s Nāgānanda  (1.17, Karandikar 
and Karandikar 1953: 22) and,  as has been noticed by Shiba -
zaki ( 1998), in non-Buddhist works such as the Bṛhatkath ā.
46. Hajime Nakamura uses the name ‘ Uṣṇīṣ a-cakra-var -
ti-tantra ’ (1980 : 316), though the grounds for categorizing 
this work as a * tantra are not stated. Other works of similar 
content and vintage belonged to the Buddhist kalpa  genre.
47. The textual history of this Tantric system has been 
articulated by Jakuun Kiyota ( 1983: 16–17), whose account 
is followed here.
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   36 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 51] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 37
translated by Amoghavajra in 755. A distinct but 
related work, the * Ekākṣara-adbhuto ṣṇīṣakalpa , 
herea fter *Adbhutakalpa , was also translated by 
Amoghavajra ( T 953). It is a kind of uttaratantra , 
providing guidance on additional topics. Its proce -
dures for initiation and the suppression of invasive 
spirits, vināyaka, were also adapted by Bianhong 
into the Manual . Neither the * Cakravartitantra  
nor the * Adbhutakalpa  survive in Sanskrit, but 
elements of the cult surrounding the Crest deities 
were kept up in some currents of the Sanskritic 
tradition. In particular, much of the lore and pro-
tocol of the U ṣṇīṣakalpas was taken into the MMK . 
This enormous ritual digest gives instruction on 
the creation and magical use of a painting of the 
Ekākṣaroṣṇīṣacakravartin in its twenty- fifth to 
twenty-seventh chapters.
Table 2.1: Th e Chinese translations of the Uṣṇīṣakalpas
*(Ekākṣara-u ṣṇīṣa-) 
Cakravartitantra 
一字頂輪王經T 952 trans. Bodhiruci, 693 
T 951 trans. Bodhiruci, 709 
T 950 trans. Amoghavajra, 755 
*Ekākṣara-adbhu -
toṣṇīṣakalpa  
(or *Adbhutakalpa ) 
一字奇特佛頂經T 953 trans. Amoghavajra
Although the U ṣṇīṣakalpas constituted an in flu-
ential subtradition of South Asian Buddhist esoteri -
cism, they were soon overshadowed by the soteriol-
ogy-oriented Tantras and received little attention 
in China. The full practices of the U ṣṇīṣakalpas 
were not propagated in an independent initiatory 
lineage. Yet some kind of permission to meditate 
and o fficiate in this system, as conferred through 
initiation, would still have been needed; this was 
common practice in the Tang.48 There is then the 
question of how the compiler of the Manual  re-
ceived authorization to compose a work based on 
the U ṣṇīṣakalpas as well as the ry ōbu ma ṇḍalas. 
The front matter to the Manual  seems intended 
to affirm that the compiler is quali fied to teach the 
*Cakravartitantra system, though the basis of this 
quali fication is not clear at first glance. Its author, 
Bianhong, is identi fied by his ‘old’ (pre-initiatory) 
and ‘new’ (post-initiatory) names, each given in 
48. ‘Those who had not entered the ma ṇḍala were not 
allowed to read [newly translated Tantras]’ (Chou 1945: 266).Fig. 2.3: Śā kyamuni-Vairocana under the Bodhi tree 
with four Tath āgatoṣṇīṣas, dharma wheel and spon-
sors. Ratnagiri Archaeological Site, Odisha, 7 th–8th 
century. (Photo courtesy of Masahide Mori [http://air.
w3.kanazawa-u.ac.jp]). An approximately matching 
description is given in the * Cakravartitantra : ‘Not far 
from the Buddha’s  [1] left side, paint Sit ātapatra [ 6], 
[his] form like [that of] a great king. His body, gold-en-coloured, sits on a lotus. His hand holds a lotus, eyes watching the wheel-king. Not far from Sit āta-
patra, paint Unnato ṣṇīṣa [10], [whose] form is like a 
great king, sitting on a white lotus. The hand holds a citron; [he] watches the wheel-king. Neither near to nor far from the wheel-king, paint Tejor āśi [8], sitting 
on a white lotus, haloed by variegated light, sitting amid blazing refulgence. The body is made golden in colour, holding a cint āmaṇi. Underneath Tejor āśi, 
paint the practitioner [ 2], heedlessly kneeling and 
sitting [on the other leg], looking up to the * uṣṇīṣ a-
cakrar āja. The wheel-king’s outstretched hand makes 
the mudr ā of granting requests; [he] regards the 
practitioner. Near Tejor āśi, not obscuring his portrait, 
paint Jayo ṣṇīṣa [4], [his] body golden, le ft hand hold-
ing a gem, right hand granting requests, eyes gazing upon the wheel-king’ ( T 950 .198c14–23).
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   37 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 52] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 38
transliterated Sanskrit and Chinese translation. 
The Sanskrit name corresponding to bian  𧦪 (‘dis-
course’, ‘eloquence’) + hong  弘 (‘broad’, ‘vast’) is 
transliterated Ajiagalipo (?) 阿迦
 焈婆 . This may 
be very tentatively restored to * Ājñāgarbha (* 誓
藏); it is di fficult to construe a Sanskrit name that 
is consistent with both the transliteration and 
translation.49 The compiler is also credited with 
a second, initiatory name, Svastika. This name 
is more easily established: it is written with the 
transliteration Safusuodijia 薩縛娑底迦 , the cor-
responding translation ji 吉 + xiang  祥 (‘blessed’), 
and in Siddham ātṛkā, albeit corruptly. 
The initiatory name of the Manual ’s compiler, 
Svastika, does not follow conventions for naming 
initiates in the ryōbu Tantric systems.50 The name 
49. The reconstitution of Bianhong’s Sanskrit name is 
complicated by the problematic third character of the trans -
literation, which is non-standard (J. gaiji 外字) and possibly 
miscopied. It may be a permutation of 𧃯 or, more likely, 蘖. 
This latter glyph is pronounced nie, bi, or bo in Standard 
Chinese, but transliterates Sanskritic ga (as Rolf Giebel 
has pointed out in email, April 2014 ). The third and fourth 
glyphs most likely correspond to gar, as in the mantra of 
mahārṢi -Garga  摩訶焈釤 二合蘖焈伽 二合 (T 852.139b7 = T 
853.160c29). However, none of the Sanskrit equivalents 
of 辯 or 弘 in Hirakawa’s dictionary ( 1997 §§ 3732 , 1089 ) 
correspond to the transliterated name. The proposal ājñā- 
(owed to Arlo Gri ffiths, email, June 2014 ) does not smoothly 
fit Standard Chinese ajia 阿迦  (*aka, EMC * qɑga), but may 
explain bian  𧦪 as a confusion of the more common char-
acter shi 誓, ‘oath’. In that case ājñā may have the sense of 
jinājñā or sugat ājñā, and 弘 would be a free translation 
of -garbha . Other hypotheses have been considered and 
rejected: ( 1) the transliterated word corresponding to 弘 
might render - garva , -jṛmbha , -kalpa, - kara ṇa, etc. None of 
these alternatives work with any likely pre fix. (2) ākhy āna 
‘telling’ + ūrva  ‘extensive’. This requires the third charac-
ter of the transcription to be pronounced nie, against the 
probable EMC pronunciation. ( 3) ākhy āna + bṛhat ‘vast’. 
This assumes that the third glyph of the transcription has 
the modern pronunciation bi; it additionally has to assume 
confusion between * va/ba 婆 and * ha 婆, and a dropped 
final - t. (4) If read in reverse as hong  弘 + bian  𧦪, abhi  ‘over’ 
+ jalpa  ‘talk’ or goṣṭha ‘conversation’ may be considered. 
These are unlikely names. ( 5) augha ‘flood’ + gauravat  or + 
cāru+v āc; neither name is feasible. ( 6) Perhaps Old Javanese 
elements are present, e.g. agal (‘far and wide’, according to 
Zoetmulder 1982 I: 23). However, monastic names had to be 
Sanskritic in the Sanskritic nikāyas. 
50. Initiatory names germane to a particular Tantric 
fam ily (kulānurūpato n āma) are enumerated in N āgabo-does, however, appear in Amoghavajra’s transla-
tion of the * Cakravartitantra . Here Svastika is the 
name of the ‘seal of the auspicious mark of the 
Buddhas’ (* tathāgatasvastikamudr ā) taught in the 
chapter on secret mudr ās. In this chapter various 
qualities of the Buddha are associated with a par-
ticular mudr ā: his gazelle-like shanks ( jaṅgha 髀), 
resounding voice ( siṁhan āda 師子吼 ), and other 
attributes mentioned in standard lists of the Bud-
dha’s features. However, the primitive esotericism 
of the U ṣṇīṣakalpas has no protocol for naming 
initiates. The name Svastika might instead have 
been conferred during initiation into the  maṇḍ ala 
of the Vairocan ābhisa ṁbodhi , which Bianhong 
is known to have received. A Bodhisattva called 
Svastika (Wanzi 卍字) appears in a version of the 
maṇḍala associated with Śubhākarasi ṁha, though 
this Bodhisattva was eliminated as an independent 
figure from the later Genzu  maṇḍala.51 Perhaps the 
Bodhisattva Svastika of the VAT  was identi fied with 
the svastikamudr ā of the * Adbhutakalpa , such that 
the compiler of the Manual  could claim authority 
to interpret the U ṣṇīṣakalpas. 
If Bianhong did train in the system of the 
Uṣṇīṣakalpas, this training may have taken place 
under a teacher other than Huiguo. Amoghavajra 
gave only rudimentary instruction in this system 
to Huiguo,52 which fell short of a complete trans-
mission. Bianhong may have instead received initi -
ation into the U ṣṇīṣakalpas according to the more 
archaic system of the Tuoluoni ji jing ,53 the Tantric 
dhi’s Viṁśatividhi 14  (ed. Tanaka 2010 : 704 –5). Th e esoteric 
names (J. mitsugon  密號 ) of deities who form a compact 
(samaya ) with an initiate in the system of the Vairocan ā-
bhisaṁ bodhi  are enumerated in T  864B. Names of male ini -
tiates customarily end in - vajra . See also Appendix A (p. 389).
51. Svastika is depicted in an iconographic compendium 
transmitted to Japan as the Taizō Zuzō 胎座䆈像  (Hatta 2002 
§46). On the ma ṇḍala represented by this compendium, 
see Tanaka ( 2010 : 147). In the Genzu ma ṇḍala, Svastika 
was absorbed into the figure of the *Tath āgatajñ ānamudr ā  
一切如來智印 , on which see Snodgrass ( 1988 I: 255 ).
52. Between 763 and 765, ‘[Huiguo] sought from the abbot  of 
Xingshan-si instruction in the mantras of the Great Buddha 
Crest [*Maho ṣṇīṣa], the De flector [Pratis āra] and others’ 乃
於興善寺三藏和上 땾 求授大佛頂隨求等真言  (T 2057 .294c23–24).
53. The ritual related to Ek ākṣaroṣṇīṣa in this compen-
dium is set out in T 901.793a4–794a14, §32 (一字佛頂法껐  
and 佛頂八肘壇法 ).
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   38 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 53] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 39
compendium translated into Chinese in the mid 
7th century by Atik ūṭa 阿地瞿多 . This compendi-
um prescribes at least two methods of induction 
into the worship of Crest deities involving ‘anoint-
ment’ proper, that is, initiation ( guanding  灌頂 , 
abhi  ṣeka).54 In Bianhong’s Manual  the initiand is 
said to experience the ‘dharma of singular libera-
tion’ 一解法 (ekavimok ṣa), an expression borrowed 
from the Tuoluoni ji jing .55 The initiatory tradi-
tion associated with this compendium remained 
current in Bianhong’s day. Saich ō 最澄  (767–822), 
Kūkai’s contemporary and later rival, received 
Tathāgatoṣṇīṣa initiation performed according to 
Atikūṭa’s compendium at the monastic complex on 
Mount Tiantai at the beginning of the 9th century.56 
Atikūṭa’s compendium prescribes a prototypical 
‘all-purpose’ (* sarvak ārmika ) initiation, a generic 
process of identifying the initiate with an inter-
changeable deity. Bianhong may have undergone 
initiation in this manner.
What led Bianhong to seek out a Tantric system 
that was becoming obscure by the late 8th century, 
not only in South Asia but also in China? Bianhong 
had in fact been interested in the system from the 
start of his journey; his first request to Huiguo, 
according to K ūkai, was to receive the Seven Treas-
ures Initiation (* saptaratn ābhiṣeka 七寶灌頂 ). This 
seems to have been a distinct type of initiation 
identi fied with the seven treasures of a univer-
sal ruler, that is, a cakravarty- or rājya-abhi ṣeka. 
The notion that a righteous king ( dharmar āja), a 
cakravartin , possesses the treasures of wheel, horse, 
elephant, etc., had been established as far back as 
the Buddhist Āgamas; however, particular Tantric 
54. The ritual in T 901.794b11–c9 has been translated 
by Davidson ( 2012 : 85–86). Koichi Shinohara ( 2010 : 399) 
summarizes a separate ritual, T 901 .891b–c. 
55. See the notes to the translation, § 2. The Tuoluoni ji 
jing is a work conceived and compiled in China, though 
it draws on Sanskritic sources (Shinohara 2010 : 393 –94).
56. The circumstances of this initiation are brie fly dis-
cussed by Paul Groner ( 2000 : 61). See also Orzech ( 2011: 265) 
and Shinohara ( 2010 : 398) on the longevity of the ritual tra -
dition stemming from the Tuoluoni ji jing . The invocation 
of the Ek ākṣaroṣṇīṣacakravartin (J. Ichijikinrin mandara  一
字金輪曼荼羅 ; cf. MDJ  85, MJ 25) via a so-called ‘single-de-
ity maṇḍa la’ tradition (J. besson mandara 別尊曼荼羅 )  
is maintained in Japan, but its scriptural sources, chie fly 
T 948 and T 954, are di fferent to those used in the Manual .means for endowing the saptaratna  were brand new 
in the Tang. Such an initiation had been given by 
Amoghavajra himself to the Tang emperor Suzong 
肅宗  in 758 or 759. Suzong’s initiation is explicitly 
called a Seven Treasures initiation (* cakravartir ā-
ja-saptaratn ābhiṣeka 轉輪王七寶灌頂 ) in a biogra-
phy of Amoghavajra.57 
The proceedings and textual sources of Su-
zong’s cakravartyabhi ṣeka are not well docu-
mented.58 Since Amoghavajra had translated some 
Uṣṇīṣakalpa-type texts just a few years earlier, it 
is quite likely that Suzong’s initiation ritual was 
patterned a fter their distinctive protocols.59 An 
initiation ceremony based on these newly translated 
texts would have been an exclusive and prestigious 
affair, since Amoghavajra had already initiated 
thousands into the Vajradh ātu-mah āmaṇḍala.60  
A coronation-cum-conversion of a powerful head 
of state following Buddhist protocols was an act of 
tremendous signi ficance for the sangha. News of 
the Tantric abhi ṣeka of the Tang emperors would 
no doubt have reached and heartened Buddhists 
in Bianhong’s homeland, where Śaivism was fast 
growing in in fluence during the 8 th century.61 
57. T 2056 .293b12–13 (recapitulated in T 2061 .713a3), trans -
lated by Chou ( 1945: 295 ).
58. The lack of information on Suzong’s initiation was 
raised by Chou ( 1945: 295) and similarly Goble ( 2012 : 
62, n. 48). This initiation was brie fly discussed by K ūkai, 
albeit second-handedly and without indicating which 
Tantric system was employed, in his Shōrai Mokuroku   
(T 2161 .1062 c16–18, trans. Takagi and Dreitlein 2010 : 210).
59. Amoghavajra’s translations of the * Cakravartitantra  
and related texts are dated to the mid- 750s (T 2157.881b25, 
trans. Goble 2012 : 187). 
60. ‘The Military Governor-General and his subordinates 
all wanted to receive abhi ṣeka. Several thousand people 
of high and low degree attended the ceremony’ (Chou 
1945: 293–94). Goble also refers ( 2012 : 173–74) to a note in 
T 2056 .293a20 recording Amoghavajra granting a * pañ-
cakul ābhiṣeka 五部灌頂  (i.e., ācāryābhiṣeka, often called 
pañc ābhiṣeka in Newar Buddhism) to Xuanzong 玄宗.
61. Although Śaivism has received much attention in 
recent years, its role in centres such as Java, Nepal, etc., 
is yet to be explained in depth. Numerous Śaivite Candis 
were built in Java from the 8th to 9th century, and Śaiva 
Tantras were probably introduced to Java during the 
period (Acri 2006 : 127ff .), later inspiring much of the rich 
Old Javanese and Balinese tutur literature. An important 
milestone of Śaiva-state connivance during the period is 
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   39 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 54] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 40
the transmission  of the manual   
in japan
Bianhong’s Manual  on performing initiation ac-
cording to the system of the * Cakravartitantra s 
has been preserved only in Japan, and le ft no trace 
in China. It is first mentioned in the catalogue 
of texts procured by the Japanese monk-pilgrim 
Shūei 宗鑡  (809–84), written on his return to Japan 
in 865. Shūei lists the Manual  as a work in seven 
sheets compiled by Jixiang, i.e. Svastika.62 At least 
two manuscripts are known to have circulated in 
Japan a fter Sh ūei. One copy was made on 21 May 
1053 by Raish ō 榏昭 , an ācārya affiliated with the 
Tō-ji.63 Another manuscript was copied in Kyoto 
by Jichigen 實嚴  (fl. 1185; cf. MDJ  984a), a monk of 
Ansh ō-ji 安祥寺 . Both manuscripts were con flated 
in the copy produced by Sh ōkai 聖快 , alias D ōkai 
道快 , one-time abbot of the T ō-ji (fl. 1390; cf. MDJ 
1129c). The colophon to the manual mentions these 
manuscripts, but gives no other information about 
these scribes or their circumstances. 
Shōkai’s copy of the Manual  apparently pro-
vided the basis for the text published in volume 
19 of the Taish ō Tripi ṭaka in 1925. The source for 
this printed edition is identi fied only as an ‘old 
copy’ kept in the Sanmitsu Depository 三密藏  of 
a subsidiary temple of the T ō-ji, the H ōbodai-in 宝
菩提院 .64 In the 1930s Ryūjō Kambayashi reiterat-
ed that a manuscript is extant at the H ōbodai-in, 
which was presumably a second-hand report.65  
No further information about the manuscript has 
become available, and it was out of the question to 
access it in connection with the present study.66All 
the Plumpungan inscription, set up in 750 or 760, which 
grants tax-exempt status to the local village ( grāma) with 
the assent ( anumata ) of Śaiva siddhadev ī. For a text of the 
inscription, of sorts, see Nikolic ( 2008 : 95).
62. 頂輪王大曼荼羅灌頂儀軌 一卷 沙門吉祥集僘七紙 (T 
2174A.1110b11).
63. According to unveri fied information on a Japanese 
website [http://reichsarchiv.jp/], a Raishō was the son of 
Fujiwara no Masataka 藤原方隆  (d. 998 ).
64. 東寺三密藏古寫本  (T vol. 19 p. 329, n. 12 ). 
65. See Ono ed. ( 1933–35 VIII: 65 ). 
66. It is apparently ‘impossible’ for foreigners to access 
manuscripts kept at the T ō-ji. (I nonetheless thank the 
librarians at Monash University’s Asian Studies Research 
Collection for making enquiries on my behalf).remarks on the Manual  presented here refer to the 
Taish ō edition. 
Although the printed text of the Manual  cannot 
yet be critically compared with the manuscript tra -
dition, its reliability can be assessed partly on the 
basis of internal evidence. On this basis it must be 
said that the Taish ō edition is not very dependable. 
With the aid of textual parallels, dozens of errors 
have been identi fied and corrected in the appended 
revised text. Most of these errors apparently result 
from homoglyphic confusion, but it is hard to tell 
which mistakes are due to the scribes and which 
are due to the publishers’ conservative or oblivious 
editing. Part of the text also seems to be printed 
out of order. The preamble and the visualization of 
the maṇḍala (§§0–1) are set out a fter the directions 
for painting the  maṇḍala and bestowing initiation 
(§§1.1–2), which is the opposite of normal proce-
dure. This might have been caused by copying 
sheets out of order. The revised text makes two al -
terations to the published order: the preamble and  
maṇḍala visualization (pp. 329a7–18) are relocated 
to the beginning; and the directions for painting 
Hayagr īva and Apar ājita (pp. 328a18–329b2) are 
appended to the  maṇḍala painting instructions 
(§1.4.1), instead of following the initiation pro-
cedure. 
Anonymous annotation of the text, typeset as 
‘split notes’ (J. warich ū 割注 ), is also included in 
the Taish ō edition of the Manual . The annotation 
mostly comprises short extracts from Tantric works 
circulating in late 8th-century China. Many notes 
supply iconographic detail taken directly from 
Amoghavajra’s translation of the * Cakravarti -
tantra . This shows de finite interest in using the 
maṇḍala speci fied by the Manual . Otherwise, the 
anonymous author of the notes demonstrates no 
apparently unusual expertise or traits; he could 
have been writing at any time between the Tang 
and the Taish ō era. It is also possible that some 
annotations were miscopied into the main text. For 
example, the visualization of the Buddha under the 
Bodhi tree is super fluously described twice (§ 1a ≅ 
§1.1.1). But it is also likely that some problems in 
the text originate at the point of its compilation, 
since its compiler demonstrates very little facility 
with classical Chinese. 
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   40 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 55] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 41
the composition  and  content  
of the manual  
Bianhong’s Manual  sets out the procedure for ini-
tiation into the yoga of Mah āvairocana according 
to the protocols of the U ṣṇīṣakalpas (Table 2.2). 
It covers three topics: the layout of the maṇḍala 
painting, the central prop of the ritual; the initi-
ation proper, in which the maṇḍala is revealed to 
the initiand; and the Tantric meditations he is to 
use in his regular ritual. The Manual  begins with 
a preamble declaring that the ma ṇḍala accords 
with tradition, and should be painted on cloth of 
a certain size (§ 0). A ma ṇḍala of 108 inhabitants centred on the Buddha Śākyamuni qua Mah āvai-
rocana, the practitioner, and eight tathāgatoṣṇīṣa 
deities is to be visualized (§ 1) and painted (§§ 1.1–1.5). 
Then, during initiation, the initiand is put before 
the maṇḍala while he is anointed with consecrated 
water (§ 2). The initiate is taught how to meditate by 
self-generating as Mah āvairocana, whose body is 
visualized as a stūpa comprising the five mantri-
cally emanated elements (§ 3). This visualization 
is complemented by the universe-instantiating 
visualization involving four vajra  mantras (§ 3.3). 
The Manual  closes with an optional invocation of 
the boy-princes Sub āhu and M ūrdhaṭaka, used for 
the suppression of obstacles (§ 4). 
§ T 959 S ources of the M anual
0 329a7–10 Semi-original; cf. T 900.781c24–26, T 1086.207a16–19 ≅ T 1087 .211c11–14
1 329a11–12 T 953.292b19–20 
1a 329a12–17 T 953.292b20–5 
1.1 327c27–28 Original
1.1.1 327c29–328a7 T 950.198c4–9 
1.1.2 328a7–10 T 950.198c11–13 
1.1.3 328a11–16 Semi-original (cf. T 950.198c13–20); 
From the *Cakravartitantra : four tath āgatoṣṇīṣas (4, 6, 8, 10); 
From the VAT : four tath āgatoṣṇīṣas (3, 5, 7, 9) 
1.2 328a17–b11 From the * Cakravartitantra : four padmakuladev īs (13, 14, 16, 17), four kum āras (29, 30, 33, 34), 
four goddesses of Buddha-qualities ( 38, 39, 40, 42), and most of the aṣṭamah ābodhisattva s (12, 
15, 23[?], 31 , 37, 41); 
From the Genzu  maṇḍala: six of the daśapāramit ā (20–26). From the STTS : the four vajrīs (11, 19, 27, 35) 
1.3 328b12–c9 From the *Cakravartitantra : chthonic deities (54–57 , 60–61 ), mantric deities (66, 67 , 71), Bo-
dhisattvas in Mañju śrī’s retinue (77 –80, 82 ). From the VAT : various deities (70 , 72, 75 , 76); 
From the Genzu maṇḍala: four deities (46, 47 , 58, 59);
From the STTS : the four inner goddesses of o ffering (43, 53, 63 , 73). Some deities are common to 
the ry ōbu maṇḍalas (65, 68, 69 ); others have no identified M ūlatantric origin (64 , 74, 81) 
1.4 328c10–22 From the *Cakravartitantra : the gods of the directions (ordinal directions: 85 , 94, 96, 103; cardi-
nal directions: 88, 91, 97 , 100), also found in the Vajradh ātu-mah āmaṇḍala; 
From the STTS : the four outer goddesses of o ffering (83 , 89, 95, 101) and the four attraction god-
desses (86, 92 , 98, 108). Th e wives of the directional protectors (84 , 87, 90, 93 , 96, 99, 102, 105) are not 
in the ry ōbu maṇḍalas, but appear in other Tantric traditions, e.g., among the mahā mātṛ of MMK 1 
1.4.1 328a18–329b2 T 950.199a18–20 (107), 199a23–b3 (108) 
1.5 328c23–5 Semi-original (cf. T 897) 
2 328c27–329a4 T 953.291c17–292a7 
3 329b3–5 Mantra: T 861.188c17 (?)
3.1 329b6–16 T 848.52b19 (cf. T 852.110b24–c5, T 853.146b13–23) 
3.2 329b17–28 [Unidentified] 
3.3 329b28–c7 T 917 .945c19–946a3 (cf. STTS , T 882.364a28–b2; T 874.314a13–21) 
4 329c8–c11 329c11–c16 Cf. T 1308.427c9–14 (33), T 953.302c11–18 (34 ) Table 2 .2: The composition of the Manual
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   41 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 56] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 42
The main innovation introduced by the Manual  
is its unique ma ṇḍala (§1, Fig. 2.4). Several Tantric 
traditions have been incorporated into the  maṇḍ a-
la’s design, although its main structure derives  from a single source, the painting ritual of 
Amoghavajra’s * Cakravartitantra . In this ritual 
the Buddha is depicted on cloth together with the 
practitioner-cum- cakravartin , both to be portrayed Fig. 2.4: Th e maṇḍala of the Uṣṇīṣacakravartin uniquely described in Bianhong’s Manual. Th e Buddha Śākyamu-
ni-Vairocana (1) abides at the centre of the inner enclosure (garbhamaṇḍala, §1.1), in the company of the practi-
tioner-cakravartin  (2), his seven treasures (2a–2g) and eight uṣṇīṣa deities (3–10). This enclosure is bounded by a 
five-coloured path. Th e next two enclosures (§§1.2, 1.3) are bordered by chains of single-pronged vajra s (eka -
sūcikavajra), here represented with thick black lines. Th ese enclosures are fi lled partly with deities from the VAT  
and its Genzu maṇḍala (20–26, 46, 47 , 58, 59, 65, 68, 69, 70, 72, 75, 76). Th e goddesses of o ffering and attraction 
from the STTS  also appear in the three intermediary enclosures (§§1.2–1.4): 11, 19, 27 , 35, 43, 53, 63, 73, 83, 86, 89, 
92, 95, 98, 101, 108. Th e outermost enclosure (§1.5) is a garden with fi ve-pronged vajra s (pañcaśū kavajra) in the 
corners, here marked with stars (   ). Th e practitioner receives initiation facing the west gate. (Diagram by author)
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   42 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 57] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 43
surrounded by tathāgatoṣṇīṣ as, Bodhisattvas, Spell-
queens ( vidyārājñī), princelings ( kum āra), serpent 
deities ( nāga), and deva s. In the * Cakravartitantra  
some figures are required to be shown in adoring 
or defensive poses, but the painting’s iconography 
is not described fully or systematically. Such hap-
hazard speci fications are typical of the painting 
procedures in early Tantric Buddhist discourse, 
called ‘landscape ma ṇḍalas’ by Kimiaki Tanaka 
(2010 : 44–48, 732). These are the forerunners of later, 
more regularized ma ṇḍalic schemata.67 In short, 
the compiler of the Manual  turns a paṭavidhi into 
a maṇḍalopā yikā. He upgrades the * Cakravarti -
tantra ’s archaic mode of representing the object 
of worship, making it interoperable with newer 
Tantric paradigms.68 
The process of rewriting may be spelled out in 
a little more detail here. Positions le ft vacant in 
the process of ‘maṇḍalifying’ the painting of the 
*Cakravartitantra  were filled by deities from the 
ryōbu Tantric systems. The eight-petalled inner 
enclosure described in the VAT, the garbhamaṇḍ ala 
proper, has been borrowed to form the core of the 
maṇḍala of the (U ṣṇīṣa-)cakravartin. Numerous 
Bodhisattvas and Mantrar ājas appearing in the 
developed form of the VAT ’s maṇḍala fill gaps in 
the outer enclosures. Most of the additional figures 
also appear in the mah āmaṇḍala of the Guhyatan -
tra, which had been translated by Amoghavajra 
and may have been consulted during compilation 
of the Manual .69 Furthermore, the Bodhisattvas of 
offering and attraction, signature elements of the 
Vajradh ātumah āmaṇḍala, have been inserted at 
67. Passages comparable to the paṭavidhi  of the * Cak ra-
vartitantra  are given in kalpa -type texts such as the AKR , 
MMK  et al. ( Ōtsuka 2013 : 694 , 816).
68. In the parlance of Japanese scholarship, a ‘prosaic’ 
(J. sanbunteki  散文的 ) ma ṇḍala has been converted into a 
‘geometric’ (J. kikagakuteki  幾何学的 ) maṇḍala (see e.g., MJ 
635, Bodaij ōkyōmandara  菩提場經曼荼羅 ).
69. See the notes to the translation, § 1.5, on the Manual ’s 
use of terminology unique to the Chinese Guhyatantra . 
The *mah āmaṇḍala 摩訶曼荼羅  of Guhyatantra  7 is de-
scribed in T 897.764a10–b29, illustrated in Tanaka ( 2010 : 
91). Deities of note that are common to the Guhyatantra  
and the  maṇḍala of the Manual  include the cakravartin  (2), 
the * Prajñ āpāramit ā-kavaca  般若經甲  (36), the boy-princes 
(kum āra, 30, 33, 34), Tath āgatalak ṣaṇa goddesses ( 39, 40, 
42[?]), and the A ṣṭadikp ālas (89, 92, 95, 98, 101, 104, 107, 110).appropriate places.70 Such repurposing of ma ṇḍal-
ic elements from the ryōbu Tantric systems is a 
distinctive feature of Tang-era esotericism and of 
Amoghavajra’s lineage in particular. The generic 
‘boilerplate’ extracted from the T winned maṇḍalas 
provided a means for fabricating new ritual sche-
mata out of earlier sources, making otherwise het-
erogeneous traditions compliant with high Tantric 
soteriology.71 The application of this technique to 
the * Cakravartitantra  in the Manual  indicates 
that its compiler was steeped in Amoghavajra’s 
tradition. 
Initiation (§ 2) is the central, unifying act of the 
Manual . The initiand is to sit facing the painting 
holding the insignia of royalty, the parasol and 
fly-whisk (* chatrac āmara 蓋及拂 ), while benedic-
tory stanzas (* maṅgalag āthā 吉慶聲讚 ) are recited 
in Sanskrit. He identi fies with the m a ṇ ḍa l a’s 
central deity by forming the hand gesture of the 
Tathāgatoṣṇīṣa. As the abhi ṣeka reaches its climax, 
musical instruments are played. The whole proce-
dure follows the * Adbhutakalpa  with only minor 
alterations. One omission is the instruction for 
walking into the ma ṇḍala (maṇḍalaprave śa 入曼
茶羅 ), because in Bianhong’s version of the ritual 
the maṇḍala is instantiated as a hanging cloth 
painting rather than being drawn on the ground. 
Furthermore, a remark in the * Adbhutakalpa  that 
the climactic music is to be performed ‘as in a royal 
consecration’ (* rājyābhiṣekeva  如國王受灌頂 ) is le ft 
out. This excision makes sense if the purpose of 
the Manual  is in fact to guide the coronation of a 
Buddhist king; the original ritual in the * Adbhu -
takalpa , by contrast, is performed as the initiation 
of an o fficiant ( ācāryābhiṣeka).72 Initiation into this  
maṇḍala involves a certain prestige: it is said to be 
equivalent to entering any and all other ma ṇḍalas. 
The wording of the * Adbhutakalpa  moreover allows 
for the interpretation that its ma ṇḍala supersedes 
70. See the notes to the translation, § 1.4.
71. Applications of the ‘architectonic ritual paradigm or 
template’ developed in Amoghavajra’s lineage have been 
described by Orzech ( 1996 : 222 ).
72. The initiation procedure of the * Adbhutakalpa  is ex-
plained in response to the question * Bhagav ān ācāryaḥ 
katama ḥ? abhi ṣekaḥ katama ḥ? 世尊云何偻阿ꊙ梨云何灌頂  
(T 953 .291c15–16).
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   43 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 58] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 44
those of non-Buddhist Tantric systems.73 This 
claim to superiority permits the system of the 
Uṣṇīṣakalpas to join a synthesis of other Tantric 
Buddhist systems, including the later and ‘higher’ 
ryōbu Tantras. 
Instruction is given to the initiate on the mantra 
of five parts: a vi ra hūm̐  khaṀ  (§3). Although it 
is not stated explicitly that the mantra is imparted 
during post-initiatory teaching, it could only have 
been included for the edi fication of the initiate; 
initiation is a prerequisite for its use. Each of the 
mantra’s five syllables corresponds to its own shape, 
colour, element, and part of the body, and brings 
about a particular e ffect when properly visualized. 
The five-part mantra is a signature element of the 
soteriology of the VAT. It is said to e ffect the van-
quishing of the M āras, freedom from the six loci 
of rebirth, and the ful filment of Mah āvairocana’s 
omniscience.74 The mantra is widely represented in 
the form of a cairn of the five elements ( dhātucaitya , 
73. 於此灌頂 땾 一切曼茶羅得灌頂  (T 953.289b28–29). Śaiva 
Tantras of comparable vintage to the * Cakravartitantra , 
such as the Śivadharma , Niśvāsa, Kālottara , and others, 
indeed prescribe the veneration of objects called  maṇḍalas 
or maṇḍalaka s.
74. 說降伏四魔解脫六趣 땾 滿足一切智智金剛字句  (VAT  6, T 
848.20a17–18, trans. Giebel 2005 : 80ff .).J. gorint ō 五輪塔 ; examples of caitya  with this form 
have, incidentally, been found in Java; cf. Fig. 2.5). 
The main exegesis of the mantra in the Manual  
(§3.1) is borrowed from the Chinese VAT  or a quo-
tation in a derivative work. A second explanation 
of the mantra (§ 3.2), not yet located in a Chinese 
source, describes a further set of correspondences 
that convey homophonic associations ( nirukti ) of 
the fi ve syllables.75
Meditation on the final syllable of the five-part 
mantra—namely, kha , representing the element 
of space, emptiness—is expedited by four vajra  
mantras (§ 3.3): om̐ sūkṢmavajra , om̐ tiṢṬha  vajra , 
om̐ spharaṆa v ajra , om̐ saṀhara vajra . Each 
mantra precipitates a phase of a universe-instan-
tiating meditation: inception, firming, spreading, 
and withdrawing, respectively. The mantras are 
originally given in the STTS  in connection with its 
75. The Manual ’s nirukti  of the five-part mantra follows 
the following pattern: a stands for gold (* akupya  黃 金 ), 
precepts (? * anuśāsana  戒), square shape (* aśracatuṣ ka 方), 
etc. Buddhaguhya’s commentary on the five-part mantra 
of the VAT  employs a full homology between the graphic, 
phonic, and semantic associations of a single phoneme (cf. 
trans. Hodge 2003 : 183–96). A simple nirukti  of the whole 
alphabet is given in the VAT  (T 848.41a28–c27, trans. Hodge 
2003 : 368 –69; Giebel 2005 : 179–82).Fig. 2.5: Three instantiations of the cairn of the elements (dh ātucaitya ). Left: visualized according to the Vai -
rocan ābhisaṁbodhi: yellow a at the base, topped by white vi, red ra, blue-black hū m̐ and translucent khaṀ. 
Middle: A st ūpa from East Java, 10th century (MMoA Acc. nr. 1987 .142.195, Samuel Eilenberg Collection). Right: 
Illumination in a South Asian manuscript, 11th–12th century (MMoA Acc. Nr. 1985.400.5).
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   44 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 59] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 45
third  maṇḍala, the Vajras ūkṣmadharmama ṇḍala. 
The relevant part of the STTS  was not translated 
into Chinese by Amoghavajra, but the associated 
maṇḍ ala was incorporated into the aggregated Va-
jradh ātumah āmaṇḍala transmitted in his lineage, 
the Nine Ensembles (J. Ku’e 九会 maṇḍala.76 The 
process of this meditation is set out in the STTS  
as follows: 
Having put the tongue at the roof of the mouth, 
he should focus on the tip of the nose. Let his 
thought be equipoised from contact with the 
bliss of the subtle vajra . (1)
When the sign of contact with the bliss of the 
subtle vajra  arises, he should spread that sign—
nay, spread that mind—everywhere. ( 2)
By spreading as one wishes, the mind may 
spread even [as far as] the triverse. Moreover 
he should consolidate that, now, back as far as 
the tip of the nose. ( 3)
From then onwards, the well-equipoised one 
may create anything whatsoever. And all this, 
fabricated in the experience of meditation, he 
should make fi rm. ( 4) 
Then they become the heart [mantra]s: sūkṢma  
vajra  [1], sphara vajra [ 2], saṀhara vajra 
[3], vajra dṚḌha tiṢṬha [ 4].77
The Manual ’s direct source for the four mantras 
is not the STTS , however, but rather a meditation 
tradition first taught in China by Śubhākarasi ṁha. 
76. The Vajras ūkṣmadharmama ṇḍala is conveyed in 
Amoghavajra’s lineage as the Subtle Ensemble (J. misai-e  
微細会 , *sūkṣmasamā ja) located in the lower le ft corner of 
the Nine Ensembles  maṇḍala. The absence of a correspond -
ing scriptural source in Chinese translation caused the 
associated meditations to remain ‘obscure’ and ‘di fficult’ 
in East Asia (Snodgrass 1988 II: 665ff .).
77. Jihvāṁ t ālugat āṁ k ṛtvā nāsikāgrea tu cintayet /
sūkṣmavajrasukhaspar śād bhavec citta ṁ sam āhitam // 1 
sūkṣmavajrasukhaspar śeb nimitta ṁ jāyate yad ā / spharayet 
tan nimitta ṁ tu tac citta ṁ sarvata ḥ spharet // 2  yathec -
chāsphara ṇāc citta ṁ traidh ātukam api spharet / punas tu 
saṁharet tat tu y āvan n āsāgram āgatam // 3  tata ḥ pra-
bhṛti yat ki ṁcid bh āvayet susam āhitaḥ / sarva ṁ caitad 
dṛḍhīkuryā t sam ādhijñ ānakalpita ṁ // 4  athai ṣāṁ h ṛ-
dayā ni bhavanti / sūkṢma vajra // sphara vajra // 
saṀhara vajra // vajra dṚḌha tiṢṬha ; STTS  §§455–
458, ed. Horiuchi ( 1983 I: 262, my translation). Horiuchi’s 
text has been twice emended here: a nāsikāgre em. (cf.  
於鼻端 , T 882), nāsikāgraṁ ed.; b -sparśe nimitta ṁ em. (cf.  
觸中僘從是出生殊勝相 , T 882 ) -sparśanimitta ṁ ed. The mantras are given in Śubhākara’s meditation 
primer, the Wuwei Sanzang Chanyao  (T 917). They 
were taught to meditators as a method for making 
fast progress; being especially e ffective, they are 
given both in Siddham ātṛkā and in Chinese 
transcription.78 The meditation employing these 
mantras was commended to trainees or beginners, 
ādikarmikas. Generally the subject matter of the 
Chanyao  corresponds to works on ādikarman  in 
the later Sanskritic tradition.79 
Brief directions for painting two of the ma ṇḍa-
la’s boy-princes, Sub āhu and M ūrdhaṭaka (§ 4), 
conclude the Manual . These are obscure figures 
in developed Tantric Buddhism. Sub āhu features 
as the interlocutor of a dialogue on Tantric practice 
in an independent work, the Subāhuparip ṛcchā  
(T 895, 896), now lost in Sanskrit; M ūrdhaṭaka is 
the protagonist of an old rebirth story, in which 
he is said to have sprung from the head ( mūrdha ) 
of a king, growing to overpower the gods, an ar-
chetypal cakravartin .80 The purpose of painting 
these two princelings in the broader process of 
initiation is not explained by Bianhong. In the 
context of the original sources for this passage, 
however, it appears that the boy-princes are painted 
optionally, in order to overcome ‘obstacles’. The 
descriptions of their iconography in the Manual  
are not usefully detailed; the Manual ’s painting 
instructions would have to be read in conjunction 
with the U ṣṇīṣakalpas, or at least with the aid of 
78. The four mantras are called the ‘union of all dhāraṇī’ 
(一切總持門相應 ) and ‘the Bhagav ān’ (婆꣋梵 ) by Śubhā-
karasi ṁha (T 917.945c17–946a8, trans. Bagchi 1946 : 154–55).
79. Śubhākarasi ṁha refers to the practitioner of his in-
troductory meditation as an * ādikarmikasattva 初學人  or 
*sādhak ādikarmika 行人初學 . Likewise, in South Asia, the 
pseudo-Candrak īrti, commenting on how to maintain 
the ‘compact’ ( samaya ), commenting on the correspond-
ing passage in the STTS  (‘mūlatantre ’), designates the 
subtle meditation ( sūkṣmavajrasukhaspar śa) as suitable 
for all beginner Tantric practitioners who recite Vairo-
cana’s mantra ( sarvavajradhar ā ādikarmik ā vairocan ādi-
jāpina ḥ; Prad īpodyotana  on Guhyasam āja 17.34–35, ed. P. 
Chakravarti 1984 : 208 ).
80. The story of M ūrdhāta aka M āndhāta is told in the 
Māndhātāvadāna (Divy āvadāna 17), recently translated by 
Rotman ( 2008 : 348ff .). Mūrdhaṭaka is regarded as a kind 
of vināyakādhipati  in kriyātantra  such as the Susiddhi -
kara  (T 893.629c21) and Subāhuparip ṛcchā (T 895.723c29,  
T 896 .749c20).
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   45 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 60] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 46
iconographic compendia, spoken guidance, and 
so on.81 
Subāhu is to be painted together with images 
of the Seven Luminaries, who personify the seven 
days of the week ( saptav āra 七韛 ) and their seven 
heavenly bodies. The names of the Seven Lumi-
naries are given in the Chinese transcription of a 
Central Asian language, probably Sogdian (Table 
2.3). Here the nomenclature of the Manual  follows 
a saṁhitā-type astrological work compiled by a 
*Brāhmaṇa saṁnyāsin-Ka ṅkaṭa 婆羅門僧金俱吒  
(T 1308). Variants of these names are also given 
in an astrological treatise by Yixing ( T 1311). In 
his separate commentary on the VAT (T 1796), 
Yixing discusses the Seven Luminaries in connec-
tion with the timely inauguration of the ma ṇḍala 
ground.82Although the purpose of painting the 
Seven Luminaries is not explained in the Manual , if 
its compiler follows Yixing, they may serve to coun -
teract an inauspiciously timed consecration of the 
maṇḍala. This Central Asian or ‘Br āhmic’ (Fantian 
梵天 ) tradition of astrology was exported to Japan 
by monks who studied Tantric Buddhism in China, 
and was used in rites for dispelling the misfortunes 
attributed to * graha s, *nakṣatras and other astral 
bodies. In these  maṇḍalas the Ek ākṣara-cakravartin 
is often the primary object of worship.83
81. For one inventory of the paraphernalia at the dispos-
al of a quali fied Tantric o fficiant, see K ūkai’s Go sh ōrai 
Mokuroku (T 2161, trans. Takagi and Dreitlein 2010 , esp. 
212ff .).
82. The passage discussed by Yixing is in VAT  2 (T 848 
4c4–6, trans. Giebel 2005 : 19); his commentary mentions 
the Seven Luminaries ( T 1796 .618a13–17).
83. Maṇḍalas of the Northern Dipper (J. Hokuto mandara The occasion for painting M ūrdhaṭaka in the 
company of eight vināyaka s, although again not 
stated in the Manual , is the suppression of obsta-
cles. In the original passage in the * Adbhutakalpa,  
such a painting is capable of dispelling ‘all gods, 
serpent deities etc.’ who may impede the viewing 
of the ma ṇḍala. The eight vinākaya s are to be 
painted in order to restore sanity to a candidate 
who loses his mind during initiation.84 In this san-
itization ritual, the ‘previously described’ painting 
of the cakravartin  is repainted at a ‘riverbank or 
other clean place’. The disciple is readmitted to 
the maṇḍala after the urn ( kalaśa) containing the 
consecratory waters is empowered, and the ritual 
paraphernalia protected, with the mantra of the 
ferocious deity Am ṛtakuṇḍalin:85 
namo ratnatrayāyaa /  
namaś caṆḌa  vajrapāṆayeb mahā -  
yakṢa  senā  patayec /  
namaś caṆḌavajrakrodhāyad / 
北斗曼荼羅 ; cf. MDJ  2043 , MJ 633) may be centred on *Cakra -
ratna- Śākyamuni (J. Shaka Kinrin 斞迦金輪 , i.e. the object 
of worship of the * Cakravartitantra ) or uṣṇīsacakravartin  (J. 
Chōrinn ō 頂輪王 ), whose retinues include the Seven Lumi-
naries together with R āhu 羅喉 and Ketu 計都 , comprising 
Nine Luminaries (* navagraha ). Japanese * grahama ṇḍalas 
(J. hoshi mandara 星曼荼羅 ) are centred on figures such 
as Cakravarticint āmaṇi, My ōken 妙見菩薩  (cf. MDJ  2116), 
and others.
84. ‘Beings driven mad by initiation are [thereby] now 
no [longer] mad’ 灌頂故狂心有情為令不狂  (T 953 .302c11).
85. 於河岸邊或餘淨處 땾 其地如先所說輪王曼茶羅儀則  […] 以
此大忿怒王ꟃ言 땾加持迦羅奢땾供養種種槱食땾懸蓋幢幡然酥燈땾
以此ꟃ言應作一切加護  (T 953 .302c12–13, 303 a3–5).Table 2.3: Th e names of the seven days. Pahlavi names follow Pingree (2004); Sogdian names follow Gharib (1995 
§§5637 , 5253, 10264, 9753, 10165, 60, 5134)
English day planet Sanskrit Pahlavi Sogdian Mandarin (EMC)
T 959day
Sunday Sun Āditya Mehr Myr Mi (Mjet) 密 日
Monday Moon Soma Māh M āx Mo (Mɑk) 莫 月
Tuesday Mars Aṅgāraka Wahrām Waxašγan Yunhan (Hiuənx `ɑn) 雲漢 火
Wednesday Mercury Budha Tir Tīr Di (Æk) 嘀 水
Thursday Jupiter Bṛhaspati Ohrmazd Ōrmazd Womeisi (Uənmuətsiɛ) 温沒斯 木
Friday Venus Śukra An āhīd Āδēn ē Naxie (Nɑhet) 那纈 金
Saturday Saturn Śanai ścara Kewān K ēwān Jixuan (Ɣetnu `ɑn) ꦸ暖 土
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   46 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 61] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 47
om̐ hulu hulue tiṢṬha tiṢṬha bandha 
bandhaf hana hana amṚte hūṀ phaṬ 
svāhā //86
Mūrdhaṭaka’s role in this ritual is to speak 
his characteristic mantra, which is targeted at 
‘everything in the world causing obstruction, 
withholders of siddhi , harassers of siddha s’, and 
makes the eight vināyaka s ‘fighting, fallen, startled, 
frightened, depressed, cut o ff’.87 This set of eight 
vināyaka s—Vajr ālaṅkāra, *Vajramala, Vajrap āśa 
et al.—is unique to the * Adbhutakalpa . Other 
Indian Tantric texts in Chinese translation deal 
with sets of vināyaka s, but these groupings di ffer 
from the present set of eight, which comprises 
‘Vajra’ vināyaka s—converts to Tantric Buddhism.88 
86. a -*tray āya: T 954A 怛 囉二合夜引也 -*trayaya: T 953, 
954B 怛羅二合夜耶 ;   b -*pa ṇāye: T 953 波拏上曳, -*pa ṇaye: 
T 954A 跛拏曳 T 954B 波拏曳 ;   c -*sena-: T 953, 954B  
細那  ≅ T 954a 細曩 ;   d -*krodhaya: T 953, 954B 句ꥷ馱耶  ≅  
T 954a 句路馱耶 ;   e *huru huru: T 953, 954A, 954B  虎嚕虎嚕 ; 
f *madha madha: T 953, 954A, 954B: 滿 馱 滿 馱 . The 
transcriptions of the mantra in the * Adbhutakalpa  (T 
953.302c19–303a2) and an * Ekākṣaroṣṇīṣacakravarti-j āpavi-
dhi (T 954A.310c2–7 ≅ T 954B.313b9–12) are very similar. 
In the latter work this mantra performs the function of 
‘securing the boundaries’ (* sīmabandha  結界) in a more 
formally structured ritual. Similar forms of the mantra 
are given in Tibetan transcription in several texts, e.g. a 
Ṣaṇmaṇḍalavidhi  (Sde dge 2906 f.278b6) and a Susiddhi -
karas ādhanasa ṅgraha (Sde dge 3066 f.121b7).
87. 於一切世界作障者 땾 奪悉地者攪擾成就者  […] 復次頂行
懟自ꟃ言 땾時一切彼金剛莊嚴等大障飮那夜迦땾皆戰掉驚怖悶嫡  
(T 953 .302b19–20, b25–6).
88. Converts to Tantric Buddhism are given names with 
the pre fix or su ffix vajra  in the system of the STTS . See 
Nihom ( 1998 b) on the four vināyaka s renamed according to 
this protocol, Vajra śauṇḍa et al., who guard the Vajradh ā-
tu-mah āmaṇḍala. These four do not, however, correspond 
to the eight in the * Adbhutakalpa , who seem to be targets 
of suppression rather than compliant ‘converts’. Another 
set of eight vināyaka s is given in a * Mah ādūtavidy ā (T 
1268 .299b21–28; see Duquenne [ 1988 : 323] regarding its 
sole witness): Vakratu ṇḍa (Qŭbi 曲鼻), Ekadanta (Yiya 
一牙), Gajavaktra (Xiangtou 象頭 ? T 象牙, probably a trans-
position), N īlagrīva (Heitou 黑頭), Lambodara (Dandu  
擔肚 , T 擔牡 ), Vika ṭa (Liya 利牙), Vighnar āja (Mowang   
魔王), and Dh ūmravar ṇa (Yanse 煙色). This set of ‘pre-con-
version’ vināyaka s is of Paur āṇic origin, with some var-
iation in individual names (cf. Agnipur āṇa III.300.4, 
ed. Mitra 1879 : 99; Garu ḍapur āṇa I.129.21, ed. Pandeya  
1986 : 183). Vajra -vināyaka s also occur, prior to the yoga -The method for suppressing vināyaka s set out in 
the Manual  is unusual, and its inclusion further 
marks the Manual ’s compiler as willing to probe 
the margins of Tantric Buddhism in East Asia.
conclusion : the motives  and  traces  
of bianhong ’s authorship 
The foregoing examinations of the biographical 
and religious literature associated with Bianhong 
support the conclusion that he wrote the Manual  
bearing his name. In particular, there need now be 
little doubt regarding Bianhong’s ability to write 
on and perform Tantric Buddhist ritual in Chinese. 
From the reports of monks in his circle, it may be 
surmised that Bianhong spent at least two decades 
in China. His expertise was generally recognized 
by his East Asian fellows, and this recognition 
persisted beyond his lifetime; he nurtured at least 
one Chinese disciple who was literate and ritually 
proficient. 
The level of classical Chinese used in the Manual  
is nonetheless rudimentary, and this would be ex-
pected of a non-native speaker such as Bianhong. 
His language skills did not rise to the level required 
to produce new translations or to gain in fluence at 
the Tang court, as other monks from the Sanskritic 
world—especially his lineal predecessor, Amogha-
vajra—had done. Even literate monks from the 
margins of the Sinosphere had signi ficant problems 
communicating while studying Tantric Buddhism 
in China.89 Bianhong’s e fforts to codify the corona -
tion procedure in Chinese nonetheless reveal some 
effort made to overcome language barriers, and to 
thereby devise a suitable means of bringing togeth -
er Tantric Buddhism and the state. His Manual  
was most likely conceived as an attempt to recover 
Amoghavajra’s method for conducting rājyābhiṣeka. 
Its compilation stretched Bianhong’s capability in 
Chinese to the limit, as is apparent from the text’s 
numerous shortcomings. The Manual  consists 
tantra s, in the Guhyatantra  (e.g., *Vajravikrama 金剛奮
迅, T 898 .774c17).
89. See Yang et al. ( 1984 : 20) on the improbability of 
Hye-Cho 慧超  participating in the translation work at-
tributed to him, and Palmer ( 2009 : 15, 78, 162 n. 46) on 
Saich ō and Ennin—who could not speak Chinese—‘texting’ 
their way through the Tang.
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   47 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 62] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 48
almost entirely of extracts, strung together with 
redundancies and without cohesion or explanation. 
It was evidently compiled with di fficulty, which 
shows that it was written in order to be put into 
practice, even though the text can hardly be read 
as a stand-alone work. The emperors who were in 
power during Bianhong’s sojourn in China o ften 
expressed interest in Buddhism, but their reigns 
were too turbulent to have provided any suitable 
occasion for coronation as an absolute ruler, namely, 
as a cakravartin  proper.90 Amoghavajra had to ac-
commodate Confucian sentiment in order for Bud -
dhism to be accepted as a means for defending the 
realm,91 but Bianhong’s Manual , by contrast, adopts 
translated Indian sources almost verbatim, and 
admits very few distinctively Chinese elements. If 
the Manual  was composed for the sake of initiating 
the Tang rulers, it remained a dead letter in China, 
though it aroused at least a little interest in Japan.
The Manual ’s compiler was certainly more 
attuned to the norms of South Asian scholarship 
and Tantric Buddhist protocol than other works 
composed in East Asia. The preamble in verse 
(śāstrārambha , §0) is a well-known formality in 
Sanskrit writing, but not in literary Chinese, gen-
erally speaking; Bianhong’s attempt at compos-
ing such a preface—barely comprehensible in the 
printed text—marks him as an outsider in the Sino -
sphere. Bianhong’s understanding of the workings 
of the two ryōbu Tantras is also remarkable. The 
fusion of the Twinned Ma ṇḍalas into a synthesis 
modelled a fter a third Tantric system (§§ 1.1.3–1.5) 
involves obvious learning and ambition; numerous 
problems had to be solved in the process of creating 
this composite  maṇḍ ala.92 Unusual figures present 
90. During this period independent Vajray ānic lineages 
were beginning to flourish in these civilizations, each 
having the means to claim universal Buddhist sovereignty. 
See, e.g., Martin Slobodnik ( 1997) on the constant struggle 
of Daizong  䙡宗 (r. 780–805) to contain the separate incur-
sions of Uighur and Tibetan forces. 
91. Amoghavajra’s accommodation of Confucianism has 
been articulated by Orzech ( 2002 : 69ff.), while the more 
general problems of Buddhist aspirations to kingship in 
Confucian society have been addressed by Walter ( 2011).
92. The fact that repeated appearances of some deities 
appear twice in the maṇḍala of the Manual is problematic 
in normative Tantric Buddhism, although these repetitions 
accurately re flect Bianhong’s source material in Chinese. in the  maṇḍala raise the tantalizing prospect that 
Bianhong drew on otherwise lost material, such as 
untranslated mah āyogatantra s.93 Bianhong’s distil -
lation of the praxis of this complex system to just 
five mantras suitable for neophyte practitioners 
(§3) indicates con fident authorship. 
Ultimately, Bianhong’s career exempli fies 
Tantric Buddhism’s pronounced transnational 
character—far more extensive in its reach than 
any comparable religious movement—during one 
of its most vibrant periods. At no other time in the 
premodern era has a monk from Southeast Asia 
been known to have journeyed to China with the 
aim of learning from its leading religious experts.94 
While there is no indication that Bianhong ever 
left China, he probably remained in contact with 
his homeland. The foreign travels of Bianhong’s 
contemporary Prajña and the intermittent tribute 
missions from K әliṅ present at least two plausible 
lines of communication between the Tang capitals 
and the domains of the Indonesian Archipelago. It 
For example, Par ṇaśabarī appears twice in Bodhiruci’s 
translation of the paṭavidhi , once as a ‘Loke śvara’ 半拏囉
婆韷霊觀世音母  (13) and again as a ‘deity’ 缽刺拏捨䅢䂛神  
(71). Similarly, Prajñ āpāramit ā appears twice in the 
Genzu  maṇḍala, embodying both the pārāmitā (26) and 
the pustaka  (36). The inclusion of figures who occur in 
neither the ryōbu Tantras nor the U ṣṇīṣakalpas, such as 
Ucchu ṣma (64) and Dharmodgata ( 74), further shows the 
assurance of the compiler in going beyond the templates 
of Tang-era esotericism.
93. A block of peaceful padmakula  deities in the ma ṇḍa-
la’s third enclosure (§ 1.3) includes goddesses such as *Pad-
mam ālā 蓮華髻菩薩  (50) and *Padmayak ṣiṇī 蓮華藥叉菩薩  
(51), who are not mentioned in Tang-era Chinese trans-
lations of Tantric texts. This block of deities might have 
originated in a part of the STTS  that had not been translated 
into Chinese by Amoghavajra, i.e. the Sakalajagadvinay-
amah āmaṇḍala- and Padmaguhyamudr āmaṇḍala-vidhi-
vistara chapters. Some goddesses in this block are also 
mentioned in the Amoghap āśakalpar āja (T 1092 ), but as 
its Sanskrit text remains unedited, it cannot yet be easily 
determined whether this was a source for Bianhong. It is 
also remarkable that part of the * Adbhutakalpa  read by 
Bianhong (cf. § 4) refers the reader to ‘eighteen * mah ātan-
trarāja’ 由纔見此十八大教王安樂易得成就  (T 953 .292b5–6).
94. On the other hand, pilgrims from elsewhere in the 
Sanskritic world were counted in the Tang’s Tantric line-
ages, such as the ‘Indian ācārya’ who studied with Amogha -
vajra’s disciple Huilang: 大興善寺惠朗阿ꊙ梨傳於崇福寺天竺
阿ꊙ梨 天竺阿ꊙ梨傳付䙡美惠  (T 2081 .784a15).
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   48 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 63] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 49
is especially remarkable that Bianhong’s Manual  
deals with the same subject matter as the only 
other Javanese Buddhist work datable to the late 
8th or early 9th century, namely, the Saṅ Hya ṅ 
Kamahā yānikan . This treatise, like the Manual , is 
explicitly a guide to the coronation of a cakravartin , 
and its guidance is likewise informed primarily 
by the combined esotericism of the VAT  and the 
mah āyogatantras. But these commonalities need 
not have resulted directly from communication 
between Bianhong and Java. The project of bringing 
the head of state into the fold of Tantric Buddhism 
was not the preserve of a single person, clique, or 
lineage. It was a pressing concern wherever the 
saugata s were in competition with other religions, 
and so interest in the coronation of a Buddhist ruler 
was sustained over much of Asia for a long time. 
*
annotated  translation95
Translation strategy 
The present translation is based on a revised text 
of Bianhong’s Manual . The text printed in Taish ō 
Shinsh ū Daiz ōkyō vol. XVIII ( T 959 327c21–329c24), 
herea fter the ‘received text’ or ‘printed text’, has 
been revised with two reordered sections and nu-
merous corrections and emendations. The skopos  
of the translation is primarily to facilitate access 
to the text for the many specialists in South Asian, 
Indonesian, and Buddhist studies who do not read 
Chinese, and secondarily to expose the processes 
underlying the text’s composition. To serve these 
ends, the translation aims for formal equivalence: 
the word order of the Chinese is followed as far as 
English syntax allows, and the filling of ellipses 
with English conjunctions, prepositions, etc., is 
maximally signposted. Notes to the translation 
are limited in scope to the explication of unusual 
features of the text: internal anomalies or lacunae, 
the filling of lexical gaps (as might be found in 
standard dictionaries), and pertinent text-critical 
remarks. 
95. I gratefully acknowledge Rolf Giebel’s learned remarks  
on problematic aspects of the text and constructive input 
on an earlier dra ft of this translation.Typographical conventions 
• Pinyin is used for proper names phonetically 
transcribed from Sanskrit. This convention 
distinguishes instances of the same Sanskrit-
ic identity appearing under di fferent Chinese 
names (e.g., Par ṇaśabarī is the two figures 
Ponashemoli 缽拏攝末里 , 71 and Leaf-Clad 葉
衣, 13). The convention also disambiguates the 
translation of words that could be rendered in 
more than one way (e.g., yanmo  焰魔  could be 
rendered phonetically as ‘Yama’ or semantically 
as ‘Fire Devil’). Word spacing and punctuation 
follows established practice for literary Chinese.
• italics  are used for other substantives tran-
scribed from Sanskrit with Chinese characters 
(e.g., spha ṭika 西頗胝迦 , samaya  三昧耶 ). San-
skrit words that have been unproblematically 
back-translated from Chinese (e.g., ma ṇḍala 壇, 
Bodhisattva 菩薩 ) are set in regular type.
• an asterisk (*) precedes reconstructions of 
Sanskrit words that are particularly doubtful. 
Such words may be unattested in the corpus of 
probable parallels (e.g., *Vajrasen ā 金剛將明妃 , 
29) or are entirely unattested back-translations 
(*Āryāṣṭāṅ gikāvalokite śvara 八聖觀音 , 46). 
• an ambidextrous apostrophe (') replaces vowels 
that have been elided with a syncopation ( erhe 
二合 ) operator (e.g., Heyeg'lifu 賀野仡哩 二合䅢). 
• a question mark (?), superscribed to indicate that 
a question is not being asked in speech, indicates 
a doubtful translation. 
• small  caps  are used for mantric utterances. All 
the mantras in the Manual  have been conveyed 
in Siddham ātṛkā in other East Asian documents. 
• bold type identi fies the numbered position 
of a deity ( devat ā 聖者 ) or other figure in the 
maṇḍala. Refer to the layout in Fig. 4 .
• the comments transmitted with the text are 
typeset in small type, as in the Taish ō printing, 
and between parentheses. 
On translating the names of female deities  
in Chinese
Names marked with feminine gender in the source 
language of Chinese Buddhist texts o ften lose 
their gender in translation. The present English 
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   49 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 64] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 50
translation of the Manual  nonetheless attempts to 
clarify the gender of each of the maṇḍala’s inhab-
itants. There are a few explicit markers of gender 
in the Chinese text of the Manual . The suffix gou 
镃, ‘female heir apparent’, ‘crown princess’ (?), id-
iosyncratically designates the female partners of 
some deities; the term seen in parallels is hou 后, 
‘sovereign’. It is translated here as ‘wife’. The term 
fei 妃, ‘concubine’, ‘consort’, is also used in the text 
and commentary with much the same meaning. A 
mingfei  明妃 , ‘spell consort’, designates a mantra 
goddess (* vidyārājñī, *vidyādevī, *vidyādevat ā). 
Sanskrit names given in the translation derive 
from parallels in extant Sanskrit texts, where 
available. Some Sanskrit equivalents of Chinese 
names given in standard reference works are not 
reliable (an extreme example: ‘Pal āçaval ī’, MDJ  
2212, for Par ṇaśabarī 葉衣觀音  17). The names of 
the wives of the eight directional protectors ( 84, 
87, 90, 93, 96, 99, 102, 105) follow Mah āvyutpatti  
§254.12–19 (ed. Sakaki 1916: 527–28). The goddesses 
of attraction stationed at the four gates ( 86, 92, 98, 
104) are treated as female in the present translation, 
but their gender is not uniform in the parallels. In 
the early literature surrounding the STTS , their 
names oscillate between female and male (e.g., in 
the Ṛtasaṅ graha: Vajr āṅkuśā, Vajrap āśa, Vajra-
sphoṭa, Vajragha ṇṭā; cf. Hatta 2002 a §§34–37). 
This oscillation may be due, in some cases, to the 
grammatical necessity of identifying these deities 
with the (male) yogin. Later, all-male and all-female 
sets of these deities were speci fied—even in the 
same work (e.g., Vajrāvalī 13.3.5.1: Vajr āṅkuśī-Va-
jrapāśī-Vajra ṣphoṭā-Vajragha ṇṭānām; 13.3.21.1: Va-
j rāṅ kuśa-Vajrap āśa-Vajraspho ṭa-Vajr āveśānām). 
* *
Rules for Initiation into the Great Maṇḍala
of the Cakravartin
Ajiaga?lipo [* Ājñāgarbha?96], Bianhong (‘Discourse 
Vast’)—Old name
Safusuodijia [Svastika], Jixiang (‘ Auspicious’)— 
New name
96. Ajiaga(?)lipo 阿迦
 焈婆: problematic. The transcrip-
tion of the name and its translation (i.e., Bianhong 
 弘) 
are di fficult to reconcile; see the Introduction.(Conformant with the Forms and Colours of the 
Adamantine Realm’s Inhabitants. 
Compiled by the Ś ramaṇa Svastika, Jixiang, of the 
Shengshan Monastery in the Eastern Capital.)
[0. Preamble]  T 959 .329a11–18
I now, relying on scripture, expound rules for 
painting an icon [of a] Wheel[-turning] King.
A practitioner97 endowed with a heap of merit98— 
just [such a practitioner] is fit to perform ritual.99
As scripture extensively states [and] narrates, 
The white cloth [for painting] should be de-
mar cated as rectangular,100 five cubits or three 
cubits [high].101
[1. Visualizing and painting the ma ṇḍala]  
T 959 .329a11–18
Paint the icon of the deity. First, from the great 
ocean springs forth Xumi [Sumeru], king of moun -
tains, formed of four jewels (North: gold, East: silver, 
South: the colour of vaiḍūrya, blue-coloured, West: the 
colour of spha ṭika gemstone, red-coloured).
<[1a.]102 [The Buddha → 1] sits upon a white lotus 
97. xingren  行人 *sādhaka : a tentative emendation; the 
received text has jinren  近人  ‘close person’, which is insen -
sible—perhaps understood by the copyist as related to qinjin  
親近, *sevā (cf. VAT T 848.32a5), or jinzhunü 親近女 , *upāsikā.
98. zhong de  眾德  *puṇyaskandha: the reading zhong liu  
眾流  ‘manifold currents’ seems corrupt. It would have been 
anachronistic to understand 流 in the sense of a Tantric 
‘lineage’ in the 8th century; xuemai 血脈  ‘bloodline’ is the 
preferred term. Most likely liu  流 miscopies de  德.
99. This awkward construction may be the outcome of 
reworking a passage from the Cakravarticint āmaṇidhāraṇī 
(T 1086 /1087) or, more likely, a passage from a work attrib-
uted to Huiguo ( T 900 .781c24–6).
100. dun fang 頓方 ‘arrange/delimit’ ‘square/rectangle’: 
this uncommon expression speci fies objects such as the 
homaku ṇḍa, maṇḍala, etc., in the Susiddhikara , e.g. 作護
摩爐頓方一肘  (T 893 .621b26).
101. wu zhou huo san zhou 五肘或三肘 : this instruction 
follows Bodhiruci’s * Cakravartitantra (T 951.238a3), which 
also recommends times and places for painting, the paint-
er’s a ffirmation of Buddhist faith (* triratna śraddheṇ a poṣa-
dhikena citrakare ṇa), etc.
102. This part of the Manual  is redundant. The instruc-
tions for visualizing the Buddha and his disciple, extracted 
from the * Adbhutakalpa , are repeated with little variation 
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   50 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 65] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 51
atop the mountain, [having a] body clear gold in 
colour, [in] concentration, entering the Most Vic-
torious King Samādhi,103 seated in the cross-legged 
position. A twelve-spoked golden wheel blazing 
with refulgence surrounds his entire body. This 
should be painted upon the mountain summit. 
The summit is formed of various jewels. Variegat-
ed luminances stream forth from the noble one’s 
crest: blue, yellow, red, white, swirling of their own 
accord. At the right side of the noble one, paint the 
practitioner [ →2], hands grasping a censer, gazing 
upon the Tath āgata’s face.> A lotus pond should be 
painted below. (The rest is as scripture teaches).
[1.1. Central Enclosure]  T 959 .327c27–28
In the middle of the Central Pericarp Enclosure104 
[bounded by] the samaya  boundary path105 of 
the [ maṇḍala’s] Inner Enclosure, paint the Lord 
Buddha [ 1] sitting upon a lion seat.
[1.1.1. Th e Bhagavān Buddha and Kalpavṛkṣa]  
T 959.327c29–328a7
The [Buddha’s] seat has many types of jewelled 
ornaments. The noble one’s body is seated upon 
a white lotus, a body clear gold in colour, [with 
the] appearance of entering the Most Victorious 
King Samādhi, seated in the cross-legged position. 
[He has the] appearance of preaching the dharma. 
in §1.1.1, which instead draws on the corresponding section 
in Amoghavajra’s translation of the * Cakravartitantra . This 
super fluous passage is nonetheless retained in the present 
translation (marked between < >) in order to illustrate the 
compiler’s (poor) literary capabilities.
103. zuisheng sanmodi-wang  最勝三摩地王 , *vijaya ḥ sam ā-
dhirājaḥ: is described in the * Adbhutakalpa  as the distinc-
tive meditation of the *Ek ākṣaracakravartin, the cause of 
all sam ādhis of all tath āgata s (T 953 .286c19).
104. Zhongtai Yuan 中台院  (alternatively 中臺院 ): the 
central enclosure of the maṇḍala of the VAT , J. Ch ūtai 
Hachiyō ’in 中台八葉院  (Snodgrass 1988  I: 162; Mammitzsch 
1991: 179ff .), and of some ‘individual’ (J. besson ) maṇḍalas. 
The name metonymically refers to the central deity, who 
sits on the pericarp ( 中台) of an eight-petalled lotus.
105. sanmeiye jie dao 三昧耶界道 : unattested elsewhere. 
Apparently * samaya  三昧耶 , ‘sacramental bond’, indicates 
the five-coloured border of the Genzu maṇḍala’s inner 
enclosure, as it is ‘particularly associated by tradition with 
initiation rituals’  (Snodgrass 1988 I: 214 ). The entire body manifests a twelve-spoked golden 
wheel blazing with refulgence that surrounds like 
a halo. Variegated luminances stream forth from 
[his] crest: blue, yellow, red, white. [He] possesses 
the characteristics of a great man resting [under-
neath] a bodhi  tree.
This tree has many kinds of leaves resembling 
cintāmaṇi [gems]. At the top of the tree a variety 
of silken drapes and banners is fastened, vaiḍūrya 
gems, heavenly fruit and superb fabrics106 are fas -
tened, and107 low clouds pour down rain; there are 
many flower buds. Auspicious flocks of birds also 
perch upon it, and various jewelled leaves are among 
the branches, growing [into an] Aeon Tree. The Lord 
leans back upon the tree with both shoulders.
[1.1.2 Th e Cakravartin ]  T 959.328a7–10
At the Buddha’s right side, seated beneath, paint the 
form of a Wheel-turning King [ cakravartin , 2] seated 
upon a white lotus, made [by the artist] in the pose 
of gazing upon the Buddha. His body is golden in 
colour, haloed by refulgence. [He has] attained the 
seven treasures [of a universal ruler, among which] 
only the wheel treasure [ 2a] is haloed by light and 
is situated on a lotus. The remaining six treasures 
[elephant 2b, horse 2c, gem 2d, woman 2e, leader 2f 
and minister 2g108] are arranged in sequence.
[1.1.3. Th e Uṣṇīṣas]  T 959.328a11–16 
[In the] southeast corner: Pulverizing Crest [Vi-
kiraṇoṣṇīṣa, 3], south: Victory Crest [Jayo ṣṇīṣa, 4], 
106. tianguo miao yi  天果妙衣 : an abridgement of the 
original passage ‘fruit is fastened; handbells, bells are 
fastened; superb heavenly fruit is fastened’ 或繫果或繫
鈴鐸或繫天妙果  (T 950.198c6). Regarding  或 *vā, see the 
following note.
107. chui 或 *vā: combines rather than separates these 
quali fiers, in the sense of api  or eva .
108. lun, xiang, ma, zu, nü ji zhuzang  輪象馬珠女兵及主藏  
(cakra- , hasti- , aśva-, maṇi-, strī-, gṛhapati- , pariṇāya-
ka-ratna ): the seven treasures of a universal ruler, a 
cakravartin, are well known from the āgama s, etc., and 
are not speci fied in the Chinese * Cakravartitantra s. This 
enumeration is from a related text, T 948.190a28–b1. They 
may be understood to be arranged either on the eight petals 
of the central enclosure’s lotus, or at its sides and corners; 
both alternatives are illustrated in the Mandarashu 曼荼
羅集 (cf. MDJ  83, 85).
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   51 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 66] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 52
southwest corner: Boundless Sound Crest [Anan-
tasvaro ṣṇīṣa, 5], west: White Parasol Crest [Sit āta-
patro ṣṇīṣa, 6], northwest corner: High Extended 
Crest [Abhyudgato ṣṇīṣa?,109 7], north: Light-Multi-
plying Crest [Tejor āśi, 8] (seated on a white lotus, haloed 
by variegated light, amidst a blazing refulgence, with a 
golden body, hands holding a cintāmaṇi jewel) , northeast 
corner: Most Victorious Crest [Vijayoṣṇīṣ a, 9], east: 
Tall Crest [Unnato ṣṇīṣa, 10] (appearance is like a great 
king, seated on a white lotus, hand holding a citron, in the 
pose of a wheel[-turning] king).
The foregoing is the Central Enclosure (ten Bud-
dha-Crests are named).
[1.2. Th e Second Enclosure] T 959.328a17–b11
Next is the second enclosure, [bounded by] a 
single-pronged [ vajra ] pounder110 boundary path  
(start painting from the northeast corner, finishing in the 
south).  [In the] southeast corner [paint]: Law Per-
fection Bodhisattva [Dharmavajr ī, 11], then Great-
Strength-Attained Sound-Regarding Bodhisattva 
[Mah āsthāmapr āpta, 12], Leaf-Clad Sound-Re-
garding Bodhisattva [*Par ṇaśabarī-loke śvara,111 
13], Duoluo Sound-Regarding Bodhisattva [T ārā, 
14] (having adornments of various dressings, clothed in 
delicate silk. The usual form of her body is immaculate and 
carefree. The right hand holds a blue lotus, the le ft hand 
grants requests. [She is] seated on the pericarp of a flower. 
Create [her] in a light green colour), Avalokite śvara Bo-
dhisattva [ 15], Pijuzhi Sound-Regarding Bodhisat-
tva [Bh ṛkuṭī, 16] (white, three-eyed and four-armed, 
upper right hand holding a stick, upper le ft holding a vase, 
lower right holding a rosary, lower le ft holding a lotus, 
body calm and quiet) , White-Clad Sound-Regarding 
Bodhisattva [P āṇḍaravāsinī, 17] (body adorned with 
109. Gaoguang Foding 高廣佛頂 : unattested elsewhere. 
The name 極廣大  in the Chinese VAT  apparently trans-
lates Atyunnato ṣṇīṣa, who is one of the Tath āgatoṣṇīṣas 
mentioned in MMK 1, together with Atyadbhuta- and 
Abhyudgata-u ṣṇīṣa.
110. duguchu  獨古杵  (usually 獨鈷杵 ) *ekasūcikavajra : the 
boundary path is delineated with single-pronged vajra s, as 
in the East Asian Vajradh ātumah āmaṇḍalas (Snodgrass 
1988 II: 577 ).
111. Yeyi Guanyin 葉衣觀音 : Parṇaśabarī also appears in 
position 71. The Chinese names of the two figures di ffer, 
but they have the same Sanskritic name. a lotus garland, clad in a bejewelled silk upper garment,112 
right hand holding a cintāmaṇi gem, le ft hand granting 
requests, seated upon a lotus. She is the mother of the entire 
lotus clan) , Watching Spontaneity King Bodhisattva 
[Loke śvarar āja,113 18] (seated upon a lotus, hands clasped 
in the pose of reverence).
Southwest corner: Action Perfection Bodhisat-
tva [Karmavajr ī, 19], then Meditation Perfection 
Bodhisattva [Dhy ānapāramit ā, 20] (binding the 
meditation [gesture], the body itself...114 like gold), Pa-
tience Perfection Bodhisattva [K ṣāntipāramit ā, 21], 
Giving Perfection Bodhisattva [D ānapāramit ā, 22], 
Sky spell-consort [ sic, Gaganagañja?,115 23] (form 
like a god, seated on a lotus, hands clasped in the pose 
of reverence), Discipline Perfection Bodhisattva 
[Śīlapāramit ā, 24], Spiritual Progress Perfection 
Bodhisattva [Vī ryapāramit ā, 25], Intelligence Per-
fection Bodhisattva [Prajñ āpāramit ā,116 26].
Northwest corner: Adamant Perfection Bo-
dhisattva [Sattvavajr ī, 27], then Suppressing Three 
Worlds Adamant Bodhisattva [Trailo  kyavijaya, 28] 
(bodily appearance as in the Yoga117), Adamant Warlord 
112. jiaolao 角絡 ‘horn netting’: obscure. If read literally, 
the underlying Sanskrit could be śṛṅgāra (Monier-Williams: 
a ‘dress suitable for amorous purposes, elegant dress’). 
However, in Amoghavajra’s translation of the STTS (繒角絡披 , 
T 865.218a8) the word translates Sanskrit vastrottar īya, 
‘upper-garment-clad’.
113. Guanzizaiwang 觀自在王 : the tathāgata correspond -
ing to Amit ābha in the Sanskrit STTS (cf. T 865.208b5 etc.).
114. 結定即身儬如金 : lacunose, and no parallel has been 
identi fied.
115. Xukong Mingfei 虛空明妃 : corrupt; should be Ga -
ganagañja or Ākaśagarbha 虛空藏 , one of the aṣṭamah ābo-
dhisattva s present at the preaching of the * Cakravarti -
tantra s; the others are present in the maṇḍala (12, 15, 31, 
37, 39, 41). Perhaps mingfei  明妃 was permuted from 
zang  藏 by homoteleuton with Jingangjiang Mingfei 金
剛將明妃  (29). 
116. hui 惠: this word elsewhere renders mati , but here 
only prajñā  (hui 慧) can be intended. Prajñ āpāramit ā also 
appears elsewhere in the maṇḍala (36) as a personi fication 
of the scripture rather than the perfection, as in the Genzu 
maṇḍala. 
117. Yujia  瑜伽 : short for Jingangding Yujia  金剛頂瑜伽 , i.e. 
the STTS and related works (the back-Sanskritization * Va-
jraśekharayoga  is misleading; see the introduction). There 
is little iconographic information on Trailokyavijaya in the 
STTS itself, however.
Sinclair mockup copy 1.indd   52 11/7/16   11:32 PM

--- [Page 67] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 53
spell-consort [Vajrasen ā,118 29], Adamant Warlord 
boy [Vajrasena, 30 ] ([depicted as a warlord] like the  
name; no other characteristics [are stated119]), Ada-
mant-in-Hand Bodhisattva [Vajrap āṇi, 31] (right 
hand holding a white fly whisk, le ft hand holding a vajra , 
seated upon a lotus), Adamant Mother Bodhisattva 
[Vajrakulodbhav ā,120 32] (named Momozhi [M āmakī,121 
whose] bodily appearance resembles a girl, indigo in 
colour, adorned with various necklaces, seated upon a 
lotus, abiding in the self-nature of prajñā ,122 [her] right 
hand holding a Sanskrit scripture case, le ft hand holding 
a cintāmaṇi and in the pose of granting wishes, must not 
be tall.123 [Her] facial expression utterly pleases the mind. 
The mother of the vajra clan) , Supohu boy Bodhisattva 
[Subāhu, 33], Noggin124 boy Bodhisattva [M ūrdhaṭa-
ka, 34], same as the foregoing (wearing [his] hair loose).
Northeast corner: Jewel Perfection Bodhisatt-
va [Ratnavajr ī, 35], then Boreboluomi Bodhisattva 
[Prajñ āpāramit ā,125 36], Benevolence Bodhisatt-
118. Jingangjiang-mingfei 金剛將明妃 : unattested in other 
Chinese texts. According to Monier-Williams ( 1899), Sen ā 
is ‘also personi fied as wife of K ārttikeya’, i.e., Kum āra.
119. ru ming bie wu xiang 如名別無相 : Vajrasena’s iconog-
raphy is, however, documented in connection with the 
Genzu ma ṇḍala (Snodgrass 1988 I: 446 ).
120. Jingang-mu 金剛母 : not *Vajram ātṛ; the correspond -
ing name in T 950 is Jingangzumu 金剛族母 , Vajrakulod-
bhavā (cf. Snodgrass 1988 I: 323 ).
121. Momozhi 摩莫枳 : Māmakī (75) and Vajrakulod  bhavā 
are distinct in Amoghavajra’s * Cakravartitantra , and dif-
ferentiated iconographically ( T 950 .199b14–18, b18–21).
122. Two par ts of a passage in T 950.199b15–17 are con flat-
ed here: ‘[she] abides in the self-nature of prajñ āpāramit ā.... 
Māmakī abides in the Mah ā-Āryaprajñ āpāramit ā’ 住般若
波羅蜜自性 …大聖般若波羅蜜多住 .
123. bu dei gao 不得高 : the parallel reads ‘not too tall’   
不太高  (T 950 .199b18).
124. Dingxing-tongzi 頂行童子 : Giebel’s translation 
‘Head-Goer’ ( 2001 : 290) reflects the way it would gener-
ally be taken in Chinese. However, xing 行 was probably 
used to convey the sense of a ‘de fining activity’ (cf. DDB ) 
corresponding to Skt. - ta + diminuitive - ka, i.e. ‘Little One 
of the Head’ (Australian English: ‘Heado’).
125. Boreboluomi 般若波羅蜜 : Prajñ āpāramit ā appears 
elsewhere in the maṇḍala (26) with a di fferent Chinese 
name. This repetition also occurs in the Genzu maṇḍala, 
as Snodgrass explains ( 1988 I: 282) with reference to the 
Kyōdaiki  (i.e., Kōdaiki  廣大軌 , T 851.106b19–28), paraphras-
ing MDJ  1839. This position might otherwise be occupied 
by Samantabhadra, who in the corresponding passage in 
T 950 sits next to Maitreya ( 37).va [Maitreya, 37] (holding a white fly whisk in hand), 
Buddha Benevolent Bodhisattva [Buddhamaitr ī,126 
38], Buddha Eye Bodhisattva [Tath āgatalocan ā, 39] 
(form like a goddess, seated on a jewelled lotus, [having] 
various ornaments, the body resembling the colour gold, 
[one] eye surveying the multitudes, clad in a satin upper 
garment, right hand holding a gem, le ft hand granting 
requests, surrounded by a halo, of peaceful bodily ap-
pearance), Buddha Tu ft Appearance Bodhisattva 
[Tath āgator ṇā, 40] (form like a goddess, colour and 
appearance the same as before, except the right hand holds 
a lotus, the le ft hand grants wishes; [her] radiance is the 
same as before, not di fferent), Wenshu Bodhisattva 
[Mañju śrī, 41] (the bodily appearance is golden in colour),  
Wishing Gem Bodhisattva [Cint āmaṇi,127 42].
The above is the second enclosure (thirty two 
deities are named).
[1.3. Third Enclosure] T 959.328b12–c9
Next, the third enclosure, [bounded by] the same128 
boundary path as the second [enclosure]. Southeast 
corner: Song O ffering Bodhisattva [Vajrag ītā, 43] 
(form and clothing all golden) , then Wishing Wheel 
Bodhisattva [Cakravarticint āmaṇi, 44], When-Vo -
lition-Aroused Dharma-Wheel-Turning Bodhisat -
tva [Sahacittotp ādita -dharma  -cakrapravartin, 
45], Eight Holies Sound-Regarding Bodhisattva 
[*Āryāṣṭāṅ gikāva lokite śvara,129 46], Lotus Auspi-
cious Bodhisattva [Padma śrī,130 47], Lotus Suntuoli 
126. Foci 佛慈: Buddhamaitr ī appears in the company of 
Crest deities in the Susiddhikara  (T 893.627c, 631c; cf. Giebel 
2001 : 279, 301 , etc.), and personi fies a mudr ā in MMK  37.
127. ruyibao  如意寶 : possibly an instantiation of the 
cintāmaṇi 真陀摩尼珠  in the maṇḍala of the VAT  (T 
848.6c28; cf. Giebel 2005 : 29). In any case, this figure is 
different from 44 .
128. tong  同: i.e., also delineated with single-pronged  
vajra s (cf. § 1.2).
129. ba sheng 八聖: the text is corrupt. The deity’s name 
might have dropped dao 道 ‘path’, i.e., of the āryāṣṭāṅ ga-
mārga 八聖道  observed in ceremonies centred on Amogha -
pāśa-avalokite śvara. More probably ba bi 八臂  ‘eight arms’ 
is the original reading, as a Babi-Guanyin 八臂觀音 is at-
tested, e.g., in T 901.838b10. Avalokite śvara manifests with 
eight arms in the form of Amoghap āśa or (as she is named 
in the STTS ) Padmanarte śvarī.
130. Lianhuajixiang 蓮華吉祥 : one of the padmakula ’s 
goddesses of attraction in the STTS  (in the Song dynasty 
translation, e.g. T 882 .401c25).
Sinclair mockup copy2.indd   53 11/7/16   11:33 PM

--- [Page 68] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 54
Bodhisattva [Padmasundar ī,131 48] (four-armed, first 
right hand holds a lasso, le ft hand holds an axe. The second 
right hand grants requests, the second le ft hand holds a 
fruit. [She is] seated on a lotus, radiant in the same way as 
before) , Blue-Necked Sound-Regarding Bodhisattva 
[Nīlakaṇṭha, 49], Lotus Curls Bodhisattva [*Pad-
mam ālā,132 50], Lotus Yaocha Bodhisattva [*Pad-
mayak ṣiṇī,133 51], Eleven-Faced Sound-Regarding 
Bodhisattva [Ek ādaśamukha,134 52].
Southwest corner: Dance O ffering Bodhisattva 
[Vajran ṛtyā, 53]  (form, clothing all golden) , then Polijia 
Dragon King [Balika,135 54] (Polijia is seven-hooded) , 
Enantuo Dragon King [Ananta,136 55] (these above two 
Dragon Kings saw the Buddha. [ They] have seven hoods, 
[their] hands are clasped, [they] kneel upon the ground—
namely, the above Ananta [and] Balika. Only [one] holds 
a flower garland, which is the di fference [between them]) , 
Untainted River Spirit [Nirañjana, 56] (that is, the 
Nilian River spirit also sees the Buddha arrive, the body 
and form like that of Muzhilin [Mucilind ā →61] Dragon 
King; further, no di fference is apparent) , Earth Deity 
[Pṛthivī, 57] (the body is white in colour, both hands 
offer up a basket of gem-blossoms, both legs kneel on the 
ground) , Invincible Bodhisattva [Apar ājita,137 58], 
Invincible Consort [Apar ājitā, 59], Unscorched 
131. Lianhuasuntuoli 蓮華孫陀利 : appears in the paṭavi-
dhi of the * Cakravartitantra s and of the Sanskrit AKR  (in 
e.g., ed. part 6, p. 187 = 蓮華遜那利 , T 1092 .305a8ff). In the 
STTS , Padmakulasundar ī is the padmakula ’s counterpart 
of Vajrad īpā (43). 
132. Lianhuaji 蓮華髻 : obscure. Padmam ālā is the pad-
makula ’s counterpart of Vajram ālā (73) in the STTS  and 
the personi fication of a mudr ā in the MMK . Alternatively, 
she is Padmaja ṭā, who in the AKR and MMK  also person-
ifies a mudr ā.
133. Lianhuayaocha 蓮華藥叉 : appears in the Padmaku-
lasamayama ṇḍala of STTS  15.
134. Shiyiyimian 十一面觀音 : this manifestation of Av-
alokite śvara features in the same section of the STTS  as 
Padmayak ṣiṇī (51). .
135. Polijia 䅢哩迦 : corresponds to Kalika (Jialijia 迦
里迦 ) in Bodhiruci’s * Cakravartitantra translation, T 
951.231a29.
136. Enantuo 阿難陀 : the name in the parallel in T 951 
is *Ānanda (Enanduo 阿難钼 ), one of the nāgas in the 
Mah āmāyūrī.
137. Wunengsheng-gou 無能勝镃  is the reading of the 
received text; the feminine su ffix gou 镃 is inconsistent with 
the feminine su ffix fei 妃 attached to Apar ājitā (59), and may 
result from dittography. The Apar ājitā marked with female Dragon King [Anavatapta, 60] (holding a lotus garland, 
bent bowing with clasped hands) , Muzhenlin Dragon 
King [Mucilind ā,138 61] (also, the foregoing two Dragon 
Kings are blue-coloured and black-coloured [respectively]. 
[Their] forms are feminine, seven-headed, in the pose of 
clasping hands in reverence. The former and latter are the 
same [in this regard]) , Serpent Lady [N āgakany ā?,139 
62] (splendidly ornamented in appearance).
Northwest corner: Presenting Pleasure140 Bo-
dhisattva [Vajral āsyā, 63] (form, dress all golden in 
colour) , then Wuchusemo Adamant [Ucchu ṣma, 
64], Adamant Trove Bodhisattva [Vajragarbha, 65], 
Ambrosia Junzhali Bodhisattva [Am ṛtakuṇḍalin, 
66], Adamant Suntuoli Bodhisattva [Sundar ī,141 
67] (this is a spell-consort, [having a] form like a goddess, 
adorned with various necklaces. The body is blue-coloured, 
the hand holds a lotus. [She] sits upon a jewelled mountain) , 
Adamant A ffection Bodhisattva [Vajrar āga, 68], 
Adamant Fist Bodhisattva [Vajrasandhi, 69], Be-
stowing Fearlessness Bodhisattva [Abhaya ṁdada, 
70], Ponashemoli Bodhisattva [Par ṇaśabarī, 71], 
Adamant Needle Bodhisattva [Vajras ūcī, 72].
Northeast corner: Garland O ffering Bodhisatt-
va [Vajram ālā, 73] (the form [and] dress are all golden in 
colour),  Tanwujie Bodhisattva [Dharmodgata,142 74], 
Tuoluoni Spontaneity Bodhisattva [Dh āraṇīśvara, 
75], Momaji Bodhisattva [M āmakī, 76] (sits on the 
pericarp of a lotus. The form is feminine, the head wears 
a jewelled crown, the le ft hand holds a five-pronged vajra , 
the right hand grants requests, the body has a beautiful 
gender, 59, is not mentioned in the * Cakravartitantra s and 
is here borrowed from the Genzu ma ṇḍala.
138. Muzhenlin 目真鱗 : the female Mucilind ā appears in 
the Kā raṇḍavyūha and other scriptures.
139. Longnü 龍女 : alternatively N āginī, Nāgī, etc.
140. Xianxi 獻喜 : in a consistent nomenclature Xigong-
yang 喜供養  would be expected.
141. Jingangsuntuoli 金剛孫陀利 : there is no *Vajrasun-
darī in the * Cakravartitantra s (only Sundar ī 孫那䂛 , T 
950.199a12) or in the related Sanskrit corpus. The compiler 
here probably relies on Amoghavajra, who describes her 
as the vidyārājñī of the vajrakula  (金剛孫那利 땿 菩薩以偻明妃  
(T 903.899b22–23), i.e., a counterpart of T ārā (padmakula , 
14) and Apar ājitā (tathāgatakula , 59).
142. Tanwujie 談無竭 : unattested elsewhere. Tan 談 is a 
homophone of tan 曇 in Tanwujie 曇無竭  (EMC *Dh ɑm-
mio-ghyɛt), the transliterated name of Dharmodgata 
in the Chinese Aṣṭasāhasrik ā Prajñ āpāramit ās (T 224, 
T 227 ).
Sinclair mockup copy2.indd   54 11/7/16   11:33 PM

--- [Page 69] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 55
appear ance, haloed in blazing light) , Great Intelligence 
Bodhisattva [Mah āmati, 77] (the body resembles the 
making-prostrations pose, hands clasped. [He] sits on 
the pericarp of a lotus, golden in colour and endowed 
with beauty) , Peaceful Bodhisattva [ Śānta(mati143), 
78] (same as the foregoing, [having] Great Intelligence’s 
appearance) , Unsullied Intelligence Bodhisattva 
[Vimalamati,144 79] (same as the foregoing, [having] 
Peaceful’s appearance) , Sky Immaculate Bodhisattva 
[Gagan āmala, 80] (same as the foregoing, [having] Un-
sullied Intelligence’s appearance) , Ocean Intelligence 
Bodhisattva [S āgaramati, 81], Good Elephant Rage 
Bodhisattva [ sic, Akṣayamati?,145 82]. 
Concluded: the foregoing third enclosure (forty 
deities are named).
[1.4. Fourth Enclosure: Outside the Vajradh ātu]  
T 959.328c10–22
The Adamant Ones Outside The Adamant Realm,146 
the [so-called] fourth enclosure, arranges gods and 
the like in order.
[Starting] from the Outer O ffering [Bodhisat-
tva147 in the] southeast corner: Lamp O ffering 
Bodhisattva [Vajrad īpā,148 83] (both hands o ffer up 
143. Jijing 寂靜 : the name in the * Cakravartitantra s is 
Śāntamati 寂靜慧 .
144. Wugouhui 無垢惠 : A Bodhisattva probably called 
Vimalamati is depicted in the paṭavidhi  of the Sanskrit 
AKR  (Mikky ō Seiten Kenky ūkai 2001 : 6).
145. Shanxiangmeng 善象猛 : doubtful; no Bodhisattva 
has a name resembling *Varagajamatta. The well-known 
Bodhisattva Gandhahastin 香象 appears in the Chinese 
*Cakravartitantra s, but not in the paṭavidhi . The corre-
sponding figure in the paṭavidhi  is Ak ṣayamati ( 無盡慧 ,  
T 950: 無量慧 , T 951), whose name may have been misco-
pied here.
146. wai jingang 外金剛 , *bāhyavajrakul āni: common to 
the Genzu, Vajradh ātu, and other maṇḍalas transmitted 
in East Asia. It is named ‘outside’ ‘because it is made up 
of converts from the “outer paths” ( gedō [外道 ]) of the 
non-Buddhist and heretical religions, and because it de fines 
the limits of the ma ṇḍala’ (Snodgrass 1988 II: 454 ).
147. wai gongyang 外供養 , bāhyap ūjā: outer worship 
is personi fied by the four vajra  goddesses D īpā, Dhūpā, 
Gandh ā, and Pu ṣpā, while inner worship is personi fied by 
Lāsyā, Mālā, Gītā, and N ṛtyā (Snodgrass 1988 II: 626–29).
148. Denggongyang 燈供養 : Vajr ālokā and D īpapūjā are 
the names used in the STTS , whereas the name Vajrad īpā 
is usual in the later Sanskritic tradition.a lampstand.149 The bodily form and clothes are all red) , 
then Fire God’s Wife [ Āgneyī, 84], Yanmo God 
King [Yamar āja, 85], at the gate: Adamant Bell Bo-
dhisattva [Vajragha ṇṭā, 86], (the form and clothes are 
all green in colour. [She] rings a bell, residing at the gate) , 
then Yanmo King’s Wife [Y āmyā,150 87], Luocha 
God Lord [R ākṣasādhipati, 88 ].
Southwest corner: Perfume Bodhisattva [Va-
jragandh ā, 89] (the clothes and bodily form are yellow 
in colour) , Luocha God’s Wife [R ākṣasī,151 90], 
Pishamen God Lord [Kubera,152 91], at the gate: 
Adamant Hook Bodhisattva [Vajr āṅkuśī, 92] (the 
form and clothes are blue. [She] holds a hook, the location 
is standard153), then Pishamen God’s Wife [Kauber ī, 
93], Wind God Lord [V āyu, 94 ].
Northwest corner: Incense O ffering Bodhisat tva 
[Vajradh ūpā, 95] (black in colour, both hands hold a 
censer) , Wind God’s Wife [V āyavī, 96], Water God 
King [Varu ṇa, 97], at the gate: Adamant Lasso Bo-
dhisattva [Vajrap āśī, 98] (the form and clothing are all 
yellow. [She] holds a lasso, positioned at the gate) , Water 
God’s Wife [V āruṇī, 99], Yishena God [ Īśāna,154 100].
Northeast corner: Flower O ffering Bodhisattva 
[Vajrapu ṣpā, 101] (sits on a white lotus. [Her] clothes and 
face are coloured white, both hands holding a flower in the 
pose of worship) , Yishena God’s Wife [Ai śānī, 102], 
Dishi God King [ Śakra, 103], in the gate: Adamant 
Chain Bbodhisattva [Vajraspho ṭā, 104] (the form and 
clothes are both red. [She] holds shackles, in the standard 
149. tai 臺: perhaps a translation (or a misunderstood 
image) of a ‘wick’, * yaṣṭi, the deity’s characteristic cihna  
(Snodgrass 1988 II: 660 fi g. 354 ).
150. Yanmowang-gou 焰魔王镃 : Yama’s consort in the 
VAT  is called Yam ī, according to Hatta ( 2002 b: 133, 139). 
Snodgrass ( 1988 II: 472) gives the name K ālarātrī or even 
‘Mṛiti’, sic  (after MDJ  2185 c, ‘M ṛityu’).
151. Luochatian-gou 羅剎主镃:  the name R ākṣasī is given 
in Siddham ātṛkā script in the VAT  literature (Hatta 2002 b: 
133; cf. T 854 A.168 b8). Mah āvyutpatti 254 .14: Nair ṛtī. 
152. Pishamentian 飮沙門天 : a standard transcription of 
Vaiśravaṇa, but the corresponding name in the * Cakravar -
titantra is Kubera, Juweiluo 俱尾羅  (T 950 .199c1).
153. zai benwei  在本位  lit. ‘in the original position’: perhaps 
a reference to the Bodhisattva’s corresponding position in 
the Vajradh ātumah āmaṇḍala; also cf. 104 .
154. Yishen ā 伊舍那 : Īśāna, according to Hatta ( 2002 b: 
133); Rudra, according to T 854.166a2: namaḤ  saman -
tabuddhānāṀ rudrāya svāhā .
Sinclair mockup copy2.indd   55 11/7/16   11:33 PM

--- [Page 70] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 56
[way]) , Dishi’s Wife [Aindr ī,155 105], Fire God Lord 
[Agni, 106 ].
Concluded: the foregoing fourth enclosure 
(twenty deities are named) . 
[1.4.1. Painting Hayagr īva and Aparājita]  
T 959.329a18–329b2
Paint the two great mantra kings with appearanc-
es as explained in the following. The venerable 
demeanour of the great Mantra King Heyeg’lifu 
[Hayagr īva, 107 ]: the body is similar to the colour 
of fire, of furious form, the nose like an ape’s or 
monkey’s,156 with an ornamental snake necklace, 
armlets, anklets [and] a garland of lotuses fastened 
to the head. Make [Hayagr īva have] the expression 
of gazing and observing.
Next, the Invincible Fury King [Apar āji-
ta-krodhar āja, 108]: the body is white-coloured, 
four-armed, [four-faced,157] of furrowed brow, an-
gry-faced, having a tiger pelt for a lower garment, 
large snakes for earrings, Dechajia Dragon King 
[Takṣaka] for a girdle, Posuzhi Dragon King 
[Vāsuki] for a sacred cord, an indulged belly draped 
in an upper garment. The bodily form is somewhat 
dwar flike. Venomous snakes adorn the crown, the 
mouth gnaws the lower lip, the whole body is haloed 
by a fiery blazing light. The upper right hand holds 
a vajra, the lower right hand makes the threaten-
ing gesture, the upper le ft hand holds a trident, 
the lower le ft hand bears an axe. The front face is 
made in the expression of aṭṭāṭṭah āsa laughter,158 a 
155. Dishi gou 帝釋镃 : From the transliteration, Śākrā 
might be expected (see e.g., Monier-Williams 1899 ). 
However, Hatta ( 2002 b: 127) reconstructs the deity’s mantra 
as indriye sv āhā; yet the transliteration of the mantra clearly 
conveys aindriye  (ai- 愛). 
156. bi ru yuanhou 鼻如猿猴 : this odd phrase in Amogha-
vajra’s translation ( T 950.199a19) is unparalleled in Bodhi-
ruci’s translation, which instead has: ‘the body is scarlet-
violet in colour, the face and eyes look angry, the right 
hand holds a hatchet, upright, beside the chest, the le ft 
(Ch. ‘right’ 右) hand arches over a lotus. [He has] a snake of 
lotus petals, stems, etc. for a necklace [* padmadalan ālādi-
sarpayajñopav īta]’ (T 951 .231a6–7).
157. si mian 四面 ‘four-faced’: this attribute is mentioned 
in the parallel in T 950 .
158. azhazhahesuo xiao  阿吒吒賀娑笑  (received text:  
po 𥬒): in Bodhiruci’s translation, ‘his proper, central, multicoloured blaze appearing from the mouth; the 
face on the right side is made with the expression 
of watchful gazing; the face on the le ft side looks 
down. The face on top of the head is made with 
the expression of watching the masses. [Apar ājita] 
stands upon a jewelled lotus.
Concluded: the foregoing painting of the two 
sacred ones on both sides outside the ma ṇḍala’s 
gateway.159
[1.5. Fift h Enclosure] T 959.328c23–5
Around this fifth, Enjoyable Path160 enclosure, 
[in the] four corners, paint a five-pronged [ vajra ] 
pounder emblem161 with the dynamic appearance 
of a blazing halo.
The foregoing completes the ma ṇḍala of the 
Wheel [Turning] King’s consecration rite, and 
the deities upon the ma ṇḍala within. Altogether 
one hundred and twenty-two162 deities’ names are 
reckoned.
[2. Initiation Procedure] T 959.328c27–329a4
The ācārya should give the disciple initiation 
large face has angry eyes, a gaping mouth’ 正中大面怒目
張口 (ibid.). 
159. men  門: Not speci fied in the parallels. The usual lo-
cation of the initiands’ entrance is on the western side, as 
in the maṇḍalas of the MMK  et al. (Tanaka 2010 : 98–99ff.).
160. shidao  食道  ‘food path’: obscure. This is a signature 
term of the Guhyatantra: ‘[For] the third [outermost] 
enclosure only white pigment is used to create the 
boundary path. It is the food enclosure and the walkway 
enclosure […] Flowers, as though falling, [are] over the 
food enclosure’ 第三外院唯用白色而作界道 땾 其著食院及
行道院 […] 花若墮於食院之上  (T 897.765a13–14, 769c25). 
The underlying Sanskrit may derive from √bhoj , as in 
‘enjoyment’ of the maṇḍala’s surroundings: ‘the outside 
border of flowers represents the garden surrounding the 
palace’ (Snodgrass 1988  II: 554).
161. qi 契 ‘agreement’: probably translates samaya , i.e. an 
emblematic ( cihna ) rather than a syllabic or anthropomor -
phic, etc., representation (Snodgrass 1988 I: 22ff .).
162. yiba ershier 一百二十二 : The subtotals given by the 
commentator total to only 102 names ( 10 + 32 + 40 + 20). A 
total of 122 deities can be reached by adding the cakravar -
tin’s seven treasures ( 2a–2g), the two gate guardians ( 107, 
108), and Sub āhu, Hayagr īva, M ūrdhaṭaka and the eight 
vināyaka s described in § 5.
Sinclair mockup copy2.indd   56 11/7/16   11:33 PM

--- [Page 71] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 57
beside163 the great ma ṇḍala.164 Facing towards 
the assembled deities, separately make [before it 
a quadrangular,165] smeared ma ṇḍala using white 
powder, three cubits in size. Throughout the centre, 
paint a lotus flower. Upon the central pericarp, 
paint a lion seat. Order the initiand to sit upon 
a cast flower. Order the disciple of the Singular 
Liberation Law166 to hold a parasol and a fly-whisk; 
recite auspicious words of praise steadily, without 
interruption. Fetching water in a vase, empower 
[it] a hundred and eight times. Teach the disciple 
[to] bind167 the Buddha Crest seal resting upon the 
head (the details are as copiously explained in the initiation 
manual168). Then blow a conch, beat a drum, make 
various musical sounds and so on.
[3. Th e five-part mantra of Vairocana]   
T 959.329b3–5
Next, visualise the five parts of the object of 
worship: a vi ra hūm̐ khaṀ169 (it is also said that 
Que170 [Akṣobhya], Jewel [Ratnasambhava], Measure [Am -
itāyus], Infallible [Amoghasiddhi], Pilu [Vairocana] are 
163. ce 側 ‘side’: the reading of the parallel is better: ‘ Then 
(ze 則), the ācārya, facing the maṇḍala...’ 則阿ꊙ梨對曼茶羅
前 (T 953 .292a2).
164. da-mantuluo 大曼荼羅 , mahāmaṇḍala: i.e., a painted 
maṇḍala in the fourfold maṇḍala typology (i.e., mahā-, sama-
ya-, dharma- , karma-ma ṇḍala); see Snodgrass ( 1988 I: 22–28).
165. si fang 四方: mentioned in the parallel in T 953, ibid .
166. yijiefa  一解法 : the parallel in T 953 lacks this phrase. 
The designation of the initiate as the * ekavimok ṣadhar -
ma-bhik ṣu 一解法比丘  occurs only in T 901 .793a27–28.
167. jiao di zi jie  教弟子結 : read ‘teach the disciple to bind...’, 
not ‘teach the disciple, bind...’, following the parallel in  
T 953 , which uses ‘command’ 令 in place of ‘teach’.
168. guan ding yi 灌頂儀  *abhiṣekavidhi : unidenti fied. 
This might refer to the * sarvatath āgatoṣṇīṣamudr ā taught 
in the VAT : ‘Then bring the fingertips of the right hand 
together and place them on the crown. This is the seal of 
all Buddha-Crowns’ 又以慧手指꘴땾聚置頂上 땾是一切佛頂印   
(T 848 .28c17; trans. Giebel 2005 : 114).
169. benzun  本尊 : i.e., Mah āvairocana, who is to be iden-
tified with Śākyamuni ( →1). His omniscience is articulated 
with the mantra a vi ra hūm̐ khaṀ  (cf. Snodgrass 1988 
II: 749–50); later variant: āḤ khaṀ vī ra hūm̐ (Vajrāvalī 
20.8 etc., ed. Mori 2009 : 393).
170. que/que/jue 闕: a phonetic alternative for or a miscop -
ying of chu ꤹ in the common Chinese spelling of Ak ṣobhya, 
Achu 阿ꤹ .behind the crown [where the syllable khaṀ is located].171 
The remaining [four syllables] are located from the forehead 
[downwards172]).
a (because grasped by diamond ground)
vi (because moistened by the milky ocean of great 
merit)
ra (because reared warmly by the lamp of samādhi 
insight)
hūm̐ (because released by the wind of obstruction-
removing gnosis)
khaṀ (because unobstructed by intrinsically un-
bounded space)
[3.1. Th e five-part mantra: appearance in yoga]  
T 959.329b6–16
Having set out the five parts, next is the explanation 
of [their] yogic appearances:
The syllable a, true173 gold in colour, 
everywhere174 manifest [as] an adamantine 
circle, empowers the lower body;
[it is] explained [that its] name is Y oga Seat.
The syllable vi, silk-white moonlight
located in dense vapour,
empowers the navel [and] above;
its name is Great Compassion Ocean.
The syllable ra, first light of day,
a red shape located in a triangle, 
empowers the heart [and is]
called Gnosis Fire Majesty.
The syllable hūm̐, the blaze of Aeon[-ending] Fire,
daubed murky [black], similar to175 a disc of wind,
empowers the white tuft of the forehead [and is]
named Spontaneous Power.
The syllable khaṀ, due to [being] the vast sky,
contains every colour; [it]
empowers the crown [and] above,
so [it has the] designation Person Without Equal.
171. ding hou  頂後: it is a well-known convention that the 
five tath āgata s are located at the crown.
172. cong e  從額 : i.e., a (lower body), vi (navel), ra (heart), 
hūm̐ (brow), khaṀ  (crown).
173. zhen  ꟃ ‘true’, ‘reality’; parallel:  遍 ‘fully’, ‘everywhere’.
174. pu 普 ‘everywhere’; parallel: 用 ‘use’.
175. tu xuan ruo 塗玄若 : a miscopying of 湞色在  ‘black in 
colour, located in...’ from the VAT  (T 848.52b25) or one of 
the manuals based on it ( T 852 , 853).
Sinclair mockup copy2.indd   51 11/7/16   11:33 PM

--- [Page 72] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 58
[3.2. The five-part mantra: correspondences]   
T 959 .329b7–28
Next, the correspondence of the five limbs with 
the ma ṇḍalas of earth, water, fire, wind, and space:
The syllable a is imagined underneath the seat. 
Having formed the adamantine  seat, its colour and 
appearance resemble yellow gold, itself meaning 
the precepts. The maṇḍala’s appearance is square, 
and it is the ma ṇḍala per se.176
The syllable vi is imagined at the navel, colour-
ed white, the water of merciful compassion, itself 
meaning meditation. This ma ṇḍala’s appearance 
is round. Th e outer ma ṇḍala is like a full moon.
The syllable  ra is imagined at the heart, its 
appearance and colour a deep red, signifying in-
telligence. This ma ṇḍala has triangular form. The 
outer ma ṇḍala is also a triangle.
The syllable hūm̐ is imagined between the 
brows, coloured the black of unimpeded wind, itself 
meaning liberation. This ma ṇḍala is imagined with 
a blue form, like a half moon. The form of the outer 
maṇḍala is also the same.
The syllable khaṀ  rests above the crown, trans -
forming into a point of vast space, itself meaning 
the vision of liberating knowledge. This ma ṇḍala 
resembles the meaning of the glyph: a point of 
space [ kha], colourless in appearance, capable of 
transforming actions. Such is the signi ficance of 
the dh āraṇī(s).177
[3.3 Th e four vajra meditation mantras]  
T 959.329b28–c7
om̐ sūkṢmavajra [Om ̐     , subtle vajra!]
(This says ‘subtle like diamond’. This dhāraṇī can 
compel whatever is visualised178 to originate.)
om̐ tiṢṬha vajra179 [Om̐  , steady, vajra!] 
176. er 耳: alternatively, and less probably, a is the ‘hand-
grip’ (* karṇa) of the ma ṇḍala.
177. ji shi tuoluoni  即是陀羅尼義也  *tadyath ā mantranay-
am: the following four mantras belong to the exegesis of the 
*mahābindu śūnya (dakongdian  大空點 ) and the syllable kha .
178. suo guan 所觀 : The parallel in T 917 was translated 
by Bagchi ( 1946 : 155) as vipaśyanā. It rather seems to be a 
correlative, referring to a bimba , ālambana , etc.
179. dis’chafur’luo  底丁以反 瑟姹 二合䅢日囉 二合, tiṣṭha vajra : (This says ‘unmoving like a diamond’ . This dhāraṇī can 
compel whatever is visualized to be lossless.)
om̐  spharaṆavajra180 [Om̐ , spreading vajra!]
(This says ‘pervasion like diamond’ . This dhāraṇī can 
compel whatever is visualized to gradually expand, 
encompassing the dharma realm.)
om̐ saṀhara vajra181 [Om̐ , retract, vajra!]
(This says ‘resolved182 like diamond’ . This dhāraṇī 
can compel whatever is visualized to be gradually 
narrowed, just like the tips of hairs located at the end 
of a white hair tuft—whatever pleases the mind—
located at the tip of the nose.)
[4. Painting Sub āhu and M ūrdhaṭaka]   
T 959.329c8–c15
Next, the painting of the boy Sub āhu [→33] is 
explained. [His] bodily form and his retinue’s 
venerable bodies resemble a boy, [their] forms 
golden in colour, like the name.183 Paint, afraid 
and trembling, the Seven Luminaries surrounding 
the venerable’s deportment: Mi, Mo, Yunhan, Di, 
Womeisi, Naxie, Jixuan184 [Mehr, M āh, Wahr ām, 
Tir, Ohrmazd, An āhīd, Kew ān]. Each one is similar 
to the main form. Paint [them] staying beside 
Hayagr īva-vidy ā[rāja →107], standing on a lotus. 
the corresponding mantra in STTS  3 (Horiuchi 1981 I: 262) 
is vajra d ṛḍha tiṣṭha, the last of the four mantras. The form 
tiṣṭha vajra , i.e. an irregular imperative followed by a voc-
ative, is generally preferred over tiṣṭhavajra in editions of 
the Sanskrit parallels.
180. s’poluonafur’luo 薩頗 二合 囉 拏䅢 日 囉 二合 sphara ṇa-
vajra : the corresponding mantra in STTS 3 is printed by 
Horiuchi ( 1981 I: 262) as sphara  vajra (cf. 颯頗二合囉䅢日
囉, T 882.364a29). Hatta ( 2002 a: 18) reads the mantra in 
Ṛtasaṁ graha 36 as spharavajra.  Bagchi ( 1946 : 155) has supra  
vajra (cf. 娑頗囉 二合  䅢日囉 二合 , T 917 .945c27). 
181. sengheluo  僧賀囉  saṁhara: T 917.946a2 has the variant 
saṁhāra- 僧賀 引囉.
182. liao da 了達: renders * adhi- √gā, -√gam, etc., accord-
ing to DDB .
183. ru minghao 如名號 : unclear. The boy’s name is likened 
to gold: *Suvar ṇa, *Sudhana or the like (regarding which 
see MMK  53: subāhuḥ sudhanakhyā to mahendracandrasa-
mas tath ā), or may be a pun on ‘rich in gold’ ( bahusuvar ṇa).
184. Mi… Jixuan 密… 雞顎 : the deities of the seven days 
(saptavara ), starting with Sunday, enumerated in a Central 
Asian language. See the Introduction, Table 2 .3.
Sinclair mockup copy2.indd   52 11/7/16   11:33 PM

--- [Page 73] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 59
Next paint the boy M ūrdhaṭaka [→34]. [His] bodily 
form and his retinue’s venerable bodies are golden 
in colour, with dangling locks. The left hand 
holds a vajra. The right hand is akimbo. He is to 
be [portrayed] surrounded by eight vināyaka s:185 
Adamant Ornament, Adamant Dirt, Adamant 
Lasso, Adamant Axe, Adamant Extreme Laughter, 
Adamant Transformation Ornament, Adamant 
Peak and Adamant Pinnayeri [Vajr ālaṁkāra, 
*Vajramala, Vajrap āśa, *Vajrapara śu, *Vajravikur-
vitālaṁkāra, *Vajr ātihāsa, Vajravin āyaka]. [ Their] 
weapons are as allocated [in] the text.186 
Concluded: the foregoing Crest-Wheel[-King] 
maṇḍala rite has been completely written down.
[Colophon]
(The exemplar says:) Written on the first day of the 
fifth lunar month of the inaugural year of Tengi 
[21 May 1053 ad ]. 
Checked once: Monk Raish ō.
Conflated with the book held by Jichigen, monk 
of the Tendai [order]. 
—Tōji śrama ṇa Dōkai. 
(In red ink:)  Was this ritual really compiled by the 
upādhyāya Benk ō [Bianhong]? Both characters 
[with which the name may be written], ‘Ben 辨’ 
and ‘Ben 
  ’, are interchangeable with each other. 
Produced b y a pupil of the Qinglong [monastery’s] 
upādhyāya [Huiguo]. It is particularly to be used 
as a model.187
* * *
185. ba pinnayejia 八頻那夜迦 : this set of eight vināyaka s 
is unknown in the extant Sanskrit corpus. They may be 
female (e.g., 八飮那耶迦天女 , T 397 .368a03).
186. ru wenpei 如文配 : unidenti fied. The iconography of 
these eight vināyaka s is not speci fied in connection with 
the original passage in T 953, nor elsewhere in the Chinese 
canon. This remark might have been miscopied from the 
commentary into the text.
187. guimo  規模  ‘pattern’ in the sense of ritually author-
itative, due to its famous compiler.t 959: revised chinese text
轉寫凡例
Ⓣ 〈大正新脩大藏經〉 第十九冊  No. 959 頁 
 327c23–329c
CBETA  〈大正新脩大藏經〉(中華電子佛典協會)
SAT 大正新脩大藏經テキストデータベー 2012
x   曼荼羅尊號 x  (粗體)
(什麼什麼)  割注
什麼什麼   疑點
em.     emendation 改正
conj.     conjectural emendation 校勘
corr.     correction 訂正
≈              homoglyphic congruence 同余
頂輪王大曼荼羅灌頂儀軌
舊名：阿迦 
  188 㗚婆   弘
新名   薩縛   娑   底迦  吉祥
（并金剛界眾形色  東都聖善寺沙門 svastika189 吉祥集）
[0 序言 ]  T 959.329a7–10
我今依經說      輪王畫像法
行190人具眾德191   作法方可為
如經廣稱述       白㲲192須頓方    五肘或三肘
[1 道場觀 ]  T 959.329a11–18
畫聖者像。先從大海踊出須彌山王四寶所成 (先
188. 
 Ⓣ  蘖 conj.
189. svastika  corr.  bu ṇika.Ⓣ  bu ṇ i ka CBETA
190. 行 conj.  近 Ⓣ
191. 德 conj.   流 Ⓣ
192. 㲲 em.  疊 Ⓣ
Sinclair mockup copy3.indd   59 11/7/16   11:35 PM

--- [Page 74] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 60
北金。東白銀。南吠瑠185璃色青色。西頗胝迦寶色紅色)
 <1a 於山上坐白蓮華。身白金色。正受186入
最勝王三摩地。結跏趺坐。從一切身遍滿流出十
二輻187金輪熾盛光明。於上應畫山峰。其峰以種
種寶成。聖者從頂流出種種光明。青、黃、赤、
白。旋轉自在。聖者右邊畫持誦人。手執香爐。
觀如來面。下應畫蓮花池>  (餘如經說也) 。
[1.1  中台院 ]  T 959.327c27–28
內院三昧耶界道中台院中、畫佛世尊 1、坐師子座。
[1.1.1  佛世尊像 ]  T 959.327c29–328a7
其座種種寶莊嚴。聖者身坐白蓮華、身白金色、
入最勝三摩地王相、結跏趺坐、作說法相。從一
切身普遍出十二輻188金輪、熾盛光明、如輪圍
繞。從頂流出種種光明：青、黃、赤、白。具
大仗夫相、倚菩提樹。其樹有種種葉如眞多摩
尼。樹形於上繫種種繒綵、或繫吠琉璃寶、天
果、妙衣、或垂雲降雨、有種種芽。吉祥眾鳥
並坐其上、或於枝間種種寶葉已、成劫樹。世
尊兩肩後倚著其樹。
[1.1.2  轉輪王像 ]  T 959.328a7–10
佛右邊座下畫轉輪王 2形、坐白蓮華、作觀佛勢。
其身金色周遍光明。七寶 2a–2g成就。惟輪寶以
光圍繞、在蓮華上。餘六寶如次安之。
[1.1.3  佛頂像 ]  T 959.328a11–16
東南角：摧碎佛頂 3、南：勝佛頂 4、西南角：無
邊聲佛頂 5、西：白傘蓋佛頂 6、西北角：高廣佛
頂7、北：光聚佛頂 8(坐白蓮花上。種種光圍繞。在
185. 瑠 Ⓣ  琉 CBETA
186. 正受 corr. (R.G.; parallel, T 953 .292b)  正面  Ⓣ
187. 輻 corr.  幅 Ⓣ
188. 輻 corr.  幅 Ⓣ熾光明中坐。身金色。手持眞多摩尼寶) 、東北角：
最勝佛頂 9、正東：高佛頂 10(如大王形。坐白蓮
花上。手持俱緣果。作睹189輪王勢) 已上中院 (十佛
頂名號)。
[1.2  第二院 ]  T 959.328a17–b11
次第二院、獨古190杵界道(從東北角、起首畫向南也) 。
 東南角：法波羅蜜菩薩 11、次大勢至觀音菩
薩12、葉衣觀音菩薩 13、多羅觀音菩薩 14(種種嚴
具莊嚴、著輕縠191衣。其身形不麤不細中庸形。右手
持青蓮花、左手施願、坐花台上、作淺綠色也) 、觀
世音菩薩 15、毘俱胝觀音菩薩 16(身白色、三目四
臂、右上手持仗。左上手持瓶、右下手持念珠、左下
手持蓮花。身儀寂靜) 、白衣觀音菩薩 17(以蓮花鬘
莊嚴身。用寶繒角絡被。右手持眞多摩尼寶、左手施
願。坐蓮花上。此192是一切蓮花族母) 、觀自在王菩
薩18(坐寶蓮花上。合掌作禮勢) 。
 西南角：羯磨波羅蜜菩薩 19、次禪波羅蜜菩
薩20(結定[印]即身□如金) 、忍波羅蜜菩薩 21、施
波羅蜜菩薩 22、虛空明妃19323(如天形。坐蓮花上。
合掌作禮勢 )、戒波羅蜜菩薩 24、精進波羅蜜菩薩 25、
惠194波羅蜜菩薩 26。
 西北角：金剛波羅蜜菩薩 27、次降三世金剛
菩薩 28(身相如《瑜伽》) 、金剛將明妃 29、金剛將
童子 30(如名別無相) 、金剛手菩薩 31(右手持白拂。
左手持金剛杵。坐蓮花上) 、金剛母菩薩 32(名摩莫枳。
身相如童女、淡紫青色、種種瓔珞莊嚴、坐蓮花上、
住般若自性、右手持梵夾、左手持眞多摩尼、施願勢。
189. 睹 Ⓣ  瞻 conj. (parallel, T 950 .198c)
190. 古 Ⓣ  鈷 corr.
191. 種種嚴具莊嚴、 著輕縠縠 em. (parallel, T 950.199b)    
種種嚴具莊著。 輕縠□  Ⓣ
192. 此 em.  角此  Ⓣ
193. 明妃 Ⓣ  藏 conj.
194. 惠 Ⓣ  慧 corr.
Sinclair mockup copy3.indd   60 11/7/16   11:35 PM

--- [Page 75] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 61
不得、高顏極令195悅意。是金剛族母) 、蘇婆呼童子
菩薩 33(作童子形) 、頂行童子菩薩 34、同前 
(准被髮相) 。
 東北角：寶波羅蜜菩薩 35、次般若波羅蜜菩
薩36、慈氏菩薩 37(手執白拂) 、佛慈菩薩 38、佛眼
菩薩 39(形如天女、坐寶蓮花、種種莊嚴、身如金色、
目觀眾會。著輕縠196衣角被、右手持寶、左手施願、
圓光周遍、身相寂)、 佛毫197相菩薩 40(形如天母、 
色相同前、唯右手持蓮花、左手施願、光明同前 
無異)、文殊菩薩 41(身相金色) 、如意寶菩薩 42。
已上第二院 (三十二聖者名) 。
[1.3  第三院 ]  T 959.328b12–c9
次第三院同第二界道。東南角：歌供養菩薩 43 
(形服皆金色) 、次如意輪菩薩 44、纔發心轉法輪
菩薩 45、八聖198觀音菩薩 46、蓮華吉祥菩薩 47、
蓮華孫陀利菩薩 48(四臂、右第一手持罥索、左手持
鉞斧。右第二手施願、左第二手持果。坐於蓮花。 
光明同前) 、青頸觀音菩薩 49、蓮華髻菩薩 50、 
蓮華藥叉菩薩 51、十一面觀音菩薩 52。
 西南角：舞供養菩薩 53(形服皆金色) 。次嚩
哩迦龍王 54(嚩哩迦七頭) 、阿難陀龍王 55(此上二龍
王、曾見佛、有七頭、合掌跪、地即上嚩哩迦 . 
阿難陀也。唯持花鬘有異也) 、無染河天者 56(即尼
蓮河神也。並見佛來、身相如目止鄰[陀199]龍王、 
更無別狀) 、地天20057(身白色、以二手捧寶花籠子、
二膝跪地) 、無能勝姤菩薩 58、無能勝妃 59、無熱
惱龍王 60(持蓮花鬘曲躬合掌) 、目眞鱗龍王 61 
(并前二龍王青色黑色、如女形、七頭、合掌作禮勢。
195. 不得高、 極令 em. (parallel: 不太高 , T 950.199b)   
不得、 高□  Ⓣ
196. 縠 em. (parallel, T 950 .199a)  穀 Ⓣ
197. 毫 em. (parallel, T 950 .199b)  豪 Ⓣ
198. 聖 Ⓣ  臂 conj.
199. 目止鄰陀  corr. (parallel: 母止鄰陀 , T 950.199b)  目止鄰  Ⓣ
200. 地天 em. (parallel, T 950 .199b)  地天供養  Ⓣ前後同)、龍女 62(相端嚴)。
 西北角：獻喜菩薩 63(形服皆金色)。次烏芻 
瑟摩金剛 64、金剛藏菩薩 65、甘露軍吒利菩薩 66、 
金剛孫陀利菩薩 67(此是明妃、形如天女、種種
瓔珞莊嚴。其身青色、手執蓮花、坐寶山上)、 
金剛愛菩薩 68、金剛拳菩薩 69、施無畏菩薩 70、
缽拏攝末里菩薩 71、金剛針菩薩 72。
 東北角：鬘供養菩薩 73(形服皆金色) 、談無
竭菩薩 74、陀羅尼自在菩薩 75、摩麼雞菩薩 76 
(坐蓮花臺、如女形、首戴寶冠。左手執五古杵、 
右手施願。身相端嚴、圓光熾盛也) 、大惠菩薩 77 
(身如作禮勢、合掌、坐蓮臺、金色、具端嚴) 、寂靜
[慧201]菩薩 78(同前大惠相) 、無垢惠菩薩 79(同前
寂靜相)、虛空無垢菩薩 80(同前無垢惠) 、海惠菩薩
81、善象猛202菩薩 82。已上第三院 (四十聖名號)
[1.4  第四院 ]  T 959.328c10–22
金剛界外金剛第四院、辦事天等。次第外供 
養從203。
 東南角：燈供養菩薩 83(二手捧燈臺、身形衣
服並赤)。次火天姤 84、焰魔天王 85、當門：金剛
鈴菩薩 86(形服並綠色。搖鈴、居本門) 、次焰魔王
姤87、羅剎天主 88。
 西南角：塗香菩薩 89(衣服身形黃色) 、次羅
剎主姤 90、毘沙門天王 91、當門：金剛鉤菩薩 92 
(形服青。執鉤在本位) 、次毘沙門天姤 93、風天主 94。
 西北角：香供養菩薩 95(黑色、二手執香爐) 、
風天姤 96、水天王 97、當門：金剛索菩薩 98(形服
並黃、執索、當門位) 、水天姤 99、伊舍那天 100。
 東北角：花供養菩薩 101(坐白蓮花、衣服面色
具白。二手持花。供養勢也) 、伊舍那天姤 102、 
201. 寂靜慧  em.  寂靜  Ⓣ
202. 善象猛  Ⓣ  無盡慧  conj.
203. 天等。 次第外供養從 corr.   天等次第。 外供養從  Ⓣ
Sinclair mockup copy3.indd   61 11/7/16   11:35 PM

--- [Page 76] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 62
帝釋天王 103、當門﹕金剛鎖菩薩 104(形服並赤、
持鎖、本位中) 、帝釋姤 105、火天主 106。
 已上第四院 (二十天名號) 。
[1.4.1  二大明王畫像 ] T 959.328a18–329b2
畫二大明王、相如後說。尊儀賀野仡哩 二合嚩大
明王 107：身如火色、忿怒形、鼻如猿猴。以蛇
莊嚴瓔珞、臂釧、膊釧、頭繫蓮華鬘。作瞻睹勢。
 次無能勝忿怒王 108：身白色、四臂、頻眉
面嗔、虎皮為裙、蟒蛇為耳璫、得叉迦龍王以
為腰縚204、婆蘇枳龍王以為神線205角絡被耽肚。
身形稍短。以毒蛇莊嚴髻冠、口咬下唇、遍身火
焰熾盛圓光。右上手持金剛杵、右下手作期剋
勢、左上手持三古戟叉、左下手執鉞斧。 
正面作阿吒吒賀娑笑206勢、從口火焰種種色相。
右邊面作觀瞻勢、左邊面下看也。頭上面作觀
大眾勢。於寶蓮華立也了。
 已上二聖者於曼荼羅門外兩邊畫。
[1.5  第五院 ] T 959.328c23–5
從此第五食道院四角畫五古杵契焰鬘威相成。
 已上曼荼羅輪王大灌頂儀軌中上壇聖者。
都計一百二十二尊號。
[2  灌頂] T 959.328c27–329a4
阿闍梨與弟子灌頂、應於大曼荼羅、側對207聖眾
面前。別塗作曼荼羅、以白粉三208肘量。其209於
中畫蓮花。中台上畫師子座。令灌頂弟子、擲210
204. 腰縚 corr.   腰。縚  Ⓣ
205. 神線 corr.   神。線  Ⓣ
206. 笑 em.   
  Ⓣ ≈ 𥬒 
207. 側。 對  Ⓣ  則對 conj. (parallel, T 953 .292a) 
208. 三 em. (parallel, T 953 .292a)  參 Ⓣ  
209. 其 conj.   普 Ⓣ
210. 擲 em. (R.G.)   
  Ⓣ  花了者坐上。令一解法弟子211持蓋及拂、 
誦吉慶聲讚、徐徐不絕。取中瓶水、加持一百
八遍。教弟子結佛頂印安於頂上 (餘如灌頂儀中 
廣說)。然須吹䗍212擊鼓。作諸音樂等。
[3  本尊五支觀 ] T 959.329b3–5
次觀本尊五支也。阿尾囉吽欠 (亦云：闕213 . 寶 . 量 
.不空 . 毘盧居頂後。餘從額配之)
 阿字 (金剛寶地214所執持故) 　
 微字 (功德乳海所滋潤215故)
 囉字 (三昧惠炬所溫育故)
 吽字 (除障智風所216開發故)
 欠字 (無邊性空不障礙故)
[3.1  本尊五支觀] T 959 329b6–16
五支先布已次說瑜伽相。
 阿字眞217金色 普218現金剛輪 
 加持於下體 說名瑜伽座
 微字素月光 在219於霧聚中 
 加持於齊220上 是名大悲海
 囉字初日暉 形221赤在三角 
 加持於心位 稱為智火威222
211. 令一解法弟子  corr.  令一解法。 弟子  Ⓣ
212. 䗍 Ⓣ  蠡 CBETA, SAT  蜑螺  conj.
213. 闕 Ⓣ  閦 conj.
214. 金剛寶地 em. (parallel: 大悲地界。 金剛座下金剛寶地 ,  
T 860 .165c)  金剛寶地大悲地界  Ⓣ
215. 滋潤 conj. (parallel, T 860 .165c)  資𨳝 Ⓣ
216. 所 Ⓣ  能  conj. (parallel, T 860 .165c)  
217. 眞 Ⓣ  真 CBETA  遍 conj. (parallel, T 848 .52b)
218. 普 Ⓣ  用 conj. (parallel, T 848 .52b)
219. 在 em. (parallel, T 848 .52b)  匪 Ⓣ
220. 於齊 Ⓣ  自臍 conj. (parallel, T 848 .52b)
221. 形 Ⓣ  彤 conj. (parallel, T 848 .52b)
222. 威 Ⓣ  光 conj. (parallel, T 848 .52b)
Sinclair mockup copy3.indd   62 11/7/16   11:35 PM

--- [Page 77] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 63
 吽字劫火焰 塗玄若223風輪 
 加持白毫際 名為自在力
 欠字由大空 含容一切色  加持於頂上 故號無等人
[3.2  五輪塔 ] T 959.329b17–27
次五支從地、水、火、風、空配成及壇。
 阿字想座下。金剛座已成。色相如黃金、
即戒義也。其壇相方。曼荼囉亦耳。
 微字想於臍。色白慈悲水、即定義也。 
其壇相圓。外壇如滿月。
 囉字想於心。其相色赤紅、為惠義也。 
其壇三角形。外壇亦三角。
 吽字想眉間。色黑為無礙風、即解脫義也。
其壇想青形如半月。外壇相亦同。
 欠字安頂上。以成大空點、即解脫知見義也。
其壇如字義、空點無色相。能成諸事業。即是
陀羅尼義也 ：
[3.3  四金剛眞言 ] T 959.329b28–c7
唵引 速乞灑 二合摩嚩日囉 二合   (此云微224細如金
剛。此陀羅尼能令所觀成就)
唵引 底丁以反瑟姹二合嚩日囉 二合  (此云不動如金剛。
此陀羅尼能令所觀無失)
唵引 薩頗二合 囉拏嚩日囉 二合  (此云周遍如金剛。
此陀羅尼能令所觀漸廣、量周法界)
唵引 僧賀囉嚩日囉 二合 (此云了達如金剛。此陀羅
尼能令所觀漸略。猶如毫端、住白毫際、或住
鼻端。隨心所樂)。
223. 塗玄若  Ⓣ  黒色在  conj. (parallel, T 848 .52b)
224. 微 em.  細 Ⓣ[4 蘇婆呼、頂行童子畫像 ] T 959.329c8–c16
次說畫蘇婆呼童子。身形眷屬尊身如童子、 
形225金色如名號。悚慄畫尊儀、七曜圍繞：密  . 
莫 . 雲漢226 . 嘀227 . 嗢沒斯 . 那纈 . 雞暖228。各如本
形。畫229住賀野仡哩嚩明側立花上。
 次畫頂行童子。身形眷屬。尊身金色。髻
髮下垂。左手持金剛杵、右手叉腰。八頻那夜
迦圍繞所為：金剛莊嚴、金剛塵、金剛索、金
剛鉞斧、金剛極笑、金剛成莊嚴、金剛頂、金
剛頻那夜釰。器仗如文配。 
 已上並是頂輪壇法具足寫了。
[落款 ] T 959.329c18–24
(書本云)天喜元年五月一日書了
 一交了　僧賴昭
以天台實嚴僧正持本交合之
 東寺沙門道快
(朱筆)此軌者230弘和尚集歟？「辨  . 
」兩字通
用之間。青龍和尚門人制作。尤以可為規模者也。
* * * *
225. 子、形  corr.   子 形。Ⓣ
226. 漢 em. (parallel, T 1308 .427c)  漠 Ⓣ
227. 嘀 conj.   𠼬 Ⓣ
228. 暖 em. (parallel, T 1308 .427c)  
  ≈ 㭸 Ⓣ
229. 各如本形。 畫  corr.    各如本形畫。  Ⓣ
230. 
 ≈ 𧦪 Ⓣ  辯 CBETA
Sinclair mockup copy3.indd   63 11/7/16   11:35 PM

--- [Page 78] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 64
Primary Sources
Sanskrit titles
Agnipur āṇa: ed. Mitra. Calcutta: Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, 1879 .
*Adbhutakalpa: T 953 .
Amoghapāś akalpar āja: T 1092 . 
Aṣṭasāhasrik ā Prajñ āpāramit ā: T 224 , 227.
*Ekākṣaroṣṇīṣacakravartitantra : 
Uṣṇīṣ akalpa s: T 950, 951, 952, 953, 954A, 954B (cf. 
Giebel 2011 ).
Ṛtasaṁ graha by Śubhākarasi ṁha: ed. Hatta (cf. id. 
2002 a) → Ritas ōgyara . 
Garu ḍapur āṇa: ed. Pandey. Varanasi: Chaukhamba 
Vidyabhavan, 1986 .
Guhyatantra: T 897 . 
Guhyasam ājatantra: ed. Matsunaga (cf. id. 1978); 
T 885 (not referenced here).
Guhyasam ājama ṇḍalopā yika-Vi ṁśatividhi  by N ā-
gabodhi: ed. Tanaka (cf. id. 2012 ). 
*Cakravartitantra : T 950 (also: T 951 , 952 ).
*Jātakacittabh ūmibh āvanā: T 159 .
Nāgānanda  by Har ṣa: eds. M.A. Karandikar and 
S. Karandikar. Bombay, 1953 .
Prad īpodyotana  by Candrak īrti: ed. Chakravarti, 
Gu h yasam ājatantraprad īpodyotana ṭīkāṣaṭkoṭī-
vy ākhy ā. Patna: Kashi Prasad Jayaswal Research 
Institute, 1984. 
Brahm āṇḍapur āṇa: ed. Ks ẹmarāja Śrīkrṣṇạdāsa. 
Mumba ī: Śrīveṅkaṭeśvara s ṭīm yantr ālaya, 1935. 
*Mah āmaṇivipulavim ānaviśvasuprati ṣṭhitaguh- 
 yaparamarahasyakalpar ājadh āraṇī: T 1005 A.
Mah āvyutpatti : ed. Sakaki (cf. id. 1916 ).
Mañju śrī-mūlakalpa  (or Mañju śriya-): ed. Śāstrī 
(cf. id. 1920 –1925)
'Rasaratnasamuccaya  by Vāgbhaṭa: ed. B āpaṭa. Śrīmad 
Vāgbha ṭācāryaviracita ḥ Rasaratnasamuc  ca yaḥ. 
Puṇyākhyapa ṭṭana: Ānan dāśra ma saṁ skṛ ta-
gran th āvali 19, 1890 . 
Vajrāvalī by Abhay ākaragupta: ed. Mori (cf. id. 2009 ).
Vairocan ābhisa ṁbodhitantra : T 848 .
Sarvatath āgatatattvasa ṅgraha : ed. Horiuchi (cf. id. 
1983); T 865 , 866 (part), T 882 .
Samājasādhanavyavasthol ī: partial ed. Tanaka (cf. 
id. 2012 ). 
Subāhuparip ṛcchā: T 895 , 896 .
Susiddhikaratantra: T 893 .Chinese titles: Taish ō Shinsh ū Daiz ōkyō (T)
Vol. 3 no. 159. Dasheng bensheng xindiguan jing 大乘
本生心地觀經 . Prajña 般若  (translator/author?). 
8 rolls. 
Vol. 8 no. 224. Daoxing Bore jing  道行般若經  
(Aṣṭas āhasrik ā Prajñ āpāramitā). Lokakṣema 
支婁迦讖  (tr). 10 rolls. 
Vol. 8 no. 227. Xiaopin Bore boluomi jing 小品般
若波羅蜜經  (Aṣṭas āhasrik ā Prajñ āpāramit ā). 
Kum ārajī va 鳩摩羅什  (tr). 10 rolls. 
Vol. 8 no. 261. Dasheng liqu liu boluomiduo jing 大
乘理趣六波羅蜜多經 . Prajña 般若 (chief trans-
lator). 10 rolls. 
Vol. 13 no. 397. Dafangdeng daji jing  大方等大集經 . 
Sengjiu 僧就  (harmoniser). 60 rolls. 
Vol. 18 no. 848. Da Piluzhena chengfo shenbian 
jiachi jing 大飮盧遮那成佛神變加持經 (Vai-
rocan ābhisa ṁbodhitantra ). Śubhākarasiṁha 善
無畏 , Yixing 一行  (translators). 7 rolls. 
Vol. 18 no. 851. Da Piluzhena jing guang da yi gui
大飮盧遮那經廣大儀軌 . Śubhākarasiṁha 善無
畏 (tr). 3 rolls. 
Vol. 18 no. 852. Da Piluzhena chengfo shenbian jiachi 
jing lianhua taizang bei sheng mantuluo guang 
da chengjiu yigui gongyang fangbian hui 大飮盧
遮那成佛神變加持經蓮華胎藏悲生曼荼羅廣大
成就儀軌供養方便會 . Faquan 法全  (compiler). 
Vol. 18 no. 853. Da Piluzhena chengfo shenbian jiachi 
jing lianhua taizang puti chuang biaozhi putong 
zhenyanzang guang da chengjiu yujia  大飮盧遮那
成佛神變加持經蓮華胎藏菩提幢標幟普通真言
藏廣大成就瑜伽 . Faquan 法全  (compiler). 3 rolls. 
Vol. 18 no. 861. Piluzhena wuzi zhenyan xiuxi yigui 
飮盧遮那五字真言修習儀軌 . Amoghavajra 
不空  (tr). 1 roll. 
Vol. 18 no. 865. Jingangding yiqie rulai zhenshishe 
dasheng xianzheng dajiaowang jing  金剛頂一切
如來真實攝大乘現證大教王經  (Sarvatath āga-
tatattvasa ṅgraha ). Amoghavajra 不空  (tr). 3 rolls. 
Vol. 18 no. 866. Jingangding yujia zhong lüechu  
niansong jing 金剛頂瑜伽中略出念誦經 (Sar-
vatath āgatatattvasaṅgraha). Vajrabodhi 金剛
智 (tr). 4 rolls. 
Vol. 18 no. 882. Foshuo yiqie rulai zhenshishe dasheng 
xianzheng sanmei dajiaowang jing  佛說一切如來
真實攝大乘現證三昧大教王經  (Sarvatath āga-
tatattvasa ṅgraha ). *Dānap āla 施護  (tr). 30 rolls. 
Sinclair mockup copy3.indd   64 11/7/16   11:35 PM

--- [Page 79] ---
Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China 65
Vol. 18 no. 893. Suxidijieluo jing  蘇悉地羯囉經  
(Susiddhikaratantra ). Śubhakara 囉波迦羅  (tr). 
3 rolls. 
Vol. 18 no. 895. Supohu tongzi qingwen jing  蘇婆
呼童子請問經 (Sub āhuparipṛcch ā). Śubhakara  
囉波迦羅  (tr). 3 rolls. 
Vol. 18 no. 896. Miaobi pusa suowen jing  妙臂菩薩
所問經 (Sub āhuparipṛcch ā). Fati ān 法天  (tr). 
4 rolls. 
Vol. 18 no. 897. Ruixiye jing  蕤䁘耶經  (Guhyatantra ). 
Amoghavajra 不空  (tr). 3 rolls. 
Vol. 19 no. 901. Tuoluoni ji jing . 陀羅尼集經 . Atik ūṭa 
阿地瞿多  (tr). 12 rolls. 
Vol. 19 no. 917. Wuwei Sanzang chanyao  無畏三藏禪
要. Śubhākarasiṁ ha 善無畏  (author), Huijing 慧
警 (editor?). 1 roll. English translation: Bagchi 
(1946).
Vol. 19 no. 948. Jinlunwang Foding yaolüe  niansong 
fa 金輪王佛頂要略念誦法 . Amoghavajra 不空  
(tr). 1 roll. 
Vol. 19 no. 950. Putichang suoshuo Yizi Dinglun-
wang jing 菩提場所說一字頂輪王經  (*[Ek ā-
kṣaroṣṇīṣa-]Cakravartitantra ). Amoghavajra 
不空 (tr). 5 rolls. 
Vol. 19 no. 951. Yizi Fodinglunwang jing 一字佛頂
輪王經 (*[Ek ākṣaroṣṇīṣa-]Cakravartitantra ). 
Bodhiruci 菩提流志  (tr). 5 rolls. 
Vol. 19 no. 952. Wu foding sanmei tuoluoni jing  五
佛頂三昧陀羅尼經 (*[Uṣṇīṣa-]cakravartitantra ). 
Bodhiruci 菩提流志  (tr). 4 rolls. 
Vol. 19 no. 953. Yizi qite foding jing  一字奇特佛頂經  
(*Ekākṣarādbhutoṣṇīṣakalpa, *Adbhutakalpa). 
Amoghavajra 不空  (tr). 3 rolls. 
Vol. 19 no. 954A. Yizi Dinglunwang niansong yigui 
一字頂輪王念誦儀軌 (*Ekākṣaroṣṇīṣacakravarti -
jāpavidhi). Amoghavajra 不空  (tr). 1 roll. 
Vol. 19 no. 954B. Yizi Dinglunwang niansong yigui 
一字頂輪王念誦儀軌  *Ekākṣaroṣṇīṣacakravarti -
jāpavidhi). 1 roll. 
Vol. 19 no. 959. Dinglunwang da mantuluo guanding 
yigui  頂輪王大曼荼羅灌頂儀軌 . Bianhong 𧦬弘 
(compiler). 1 roll. 
Vol. 19 no. 1005A. Dabao guangbo louge shan zhu 
mimi tuoluoni jing  大寶廣博樓閣善住祕密陀
羅尼經  (Mah āmaṇivipulavim ānaviśvasupra-
tiṣṭhitaguhyaparamarahasyakalpar ājadhāraṇī). 
Amoghavajra 不空  (tr). 3 rolls. 
Vol. 20 no. 1080. Ruyilun tuoluoni jing  如意輪陀羅尼經 . Bodhiruci 菩提流志  (tr). 1 roll. 
Vol. 20 no. 1083. Guanshiyin pusa Ruyimoni tuoluoni 
jing 觀世音菩薩如意摩尼陀羅尼經 . *Ma ṇicinta 
寶思惟  (tr). 1 roll. 
Vol. 20 no. 1086 . Guanzizai pusa Ruyilun yujia  觀自
在菩薩如意輪瑜伽 . Amoghavajra 不空  (tr). 1 roll. 
Vol. 20 no. 1087. Guanzizai Ruyilun pusa yujia fayao 
觀自在如意輪菩薩瑜伽法要 . Vajrabodhi 金剛
智 (tr). 1 roll. 
Vol. 20 no. 1088 . Ruyilun pusa guanmen yizhu mijue  
如意輪菩薩觀門義注祕訣 . Shiyi 失譯  (tr). 1 roll. 
Vol. 20 no. 1092. Bukongjuansuo shenbian zhenyan 
jing 不空罥索神變真言經  (Amoghap āśakalpar ā-
ja). Bodhiruci 菩提流志  (tr). 30 rolls. 
Vol. 21 no. 1268. Dashi zhou fa jing 大使咒法經 . 
Bodhiruci 菩提流志  (tr). 1 roll.
Vol. 21 no. 1308. Qi yao rangzai jue 七韛攘災決 . 
*Kaṅkaṭa 金俱吒 . 2 rolls. 
Vol. 21 no. 1311. Fantian huoluo jiuyao  梵天火羅九韛 . 
Yixing 一行  (compiler). 1 roll.
Vol. 29 no. 1558. Apidamo jushe lun  阿飮達磨俱舍
論 (Abhidharmako śabhāṣya). Ārya-Vasubandhu 
尊者世親  (author), Xuanzang 玄奘  (tr). 30 rolls. 
Vol. 29 no. 1559. Apidamo jushe shi lun 阿飮達磨俱舍
釋論  (Abhidharmako śabhāṣya). Vasubandhu 婆
藪盤豆  (author), Param ārtha 真諦  (tr). 22 rolls. 
Vol. 39 no. 1796 . Da Piluzhena chengfo jing shu  大飮
盧遮那成佛經疏 . Yixing 一行  (author). 20  rolls.
Vol. 49 no. 2035. Fo zu tong ji 佛祖統紀 . Zhipan 
志磐 . 54 rolls. 
Vol. 50 no. 2056 . Da Tang gu dade zeng sikong dabian 
zhengguangzhi Bukong sanzang xingzhuang  大唐
故大德贈司空大辯正廣智不空三藏行狀 . Xiao -
qian 逍遷  (compiler). 1 roll.
Vol. 50 no. 2057 . Da Tang Qinglong-si sanchao gong-
feng da dexing zhuang 大唐青龍寺三朝供奉大
德行狀 . Anonymous. 1 roll. 
Vol. 50 no. 2081 . Liangbu da faxiang chengshi zi fufa ji  
兩部大法相承師資付法記 . Haiyun 海雲 . 2 rolls. 
Vol. 52 no. 2120. Dai Zong chao zeng si kong da bian 
zheng Guangzhi Sanzang heshang biao zhi ji 代
宗朝贈司空大辯正廣智三藏和上表制集 . Yu-
anzhao 圓照  (compiler). 6 rolls. 
Vol. 52 no. 2134. Tang-Fan wenzi 唐梵文字  
(*Cīnabrahmalekh ākṣara [sic]). Quanzhen 全真 
(compiler).
Vol. 55 no. 2154. Kaiyuan shijiao lu  開元釋教錄 . 
Zhisheng 智昇 . 20 rolls. 
Sinclair mockup copy3.indd   65 11/7/16   11:35 PM

--- [Page 80] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 66
Japanese titles
Genzu maṇḍala 現䆈曼荼羅 : cf. Snodgrass (1988 I: 
183ff .), Mammitzsch (1991: 174ff .). 
Kōbō Daishi zensh ū 弘法大師全集  by K ūkai: ed. 
Kōbōdaishi K ūkai zensh ū hensh ū i’in kai 
(1986).
Taish ō Shinsh ū Daiz ōkyō 大正新脩大藏經  → T 
(Chinese titles). 
Vol. 55 no. 2161. Go sh ōrai mokuroku 御請來目錄 . 
Kūkai 空海 . 1 roll. 
Vol. 55 no. 2165. Nipponkoku Sh ōwa gonen nitt ō 
guhō mokuroku 日本國承和五年入唐求法目
錄. Ennin 圓仁 . 1 roll. 
Vol. 55 no. 2174A. Shin shosha sh ōrai h ōmont ō 
mokuroku  新書寫請來法門等目錄 . Shūei 宗鑡 . 
1 roll. 
Vol. 55 no. 2176. Sho ajari shingon mikky ōbu rui 諸
阿ꊙ梨真言密教部類總錄 . Annen 安然  (com-
piler). 2 rolls. Vol. 59 no. 2216. Dainichiky ōsho enn ō shō 大日經疏
演奧鈔 . Gōhō 杲寶 . 60 rolls. 
Vol. 74 no. 2373. Enmitsu niky ō my ōmoku 圓密二教
名目 . Keichin 惠鎮 . 1 roll. 
Vol. 75 no. 2391. Kongō kai daih ō tsuiju ki 金剛界大
法對受記 . Annen 安然  (writer). 8 rolls. 
Vol. 75 no. 2400. Kongō sanmitsu sh ō 金剛三密抄 . 
Kakuch ō 覺超 . 5 rolls. 
Vol. 84 no. 2702. Shittan z ō 悉曇藏 . Annen 安然 . 
8 rolls. 
Vol. 84 no. 2706 . Shittan y ōketsu  悉曇要訣 . Meikaku 
明覺 . 4 rolls.
Taizō Zuz ō 胎藏圖像 : ed. Hatta (cf. id. 2002b).
Nittō guhō junrei k ōki 入唐求法巡礼行記  by Ennin: 
tr. Adachi (cf. id. [1970]–1985) 
[Himitsu Mandaraky ō] Fuhōden 祕密漫荼羅教付 
法傳  by K ūkai. 2 rolls: ed. K ōbō Daishi zensh ū 
V .1
Ritas ōgyara gobu shinkan 哩多僧蘖五部心觀  by 
Śubhākarasiṁha: ed. Hatta (cf. id. 2002a).
Sinclair mockup copy3.indd   66 11/7/16   11:35 PM

--- [Page 81] ---
Chapter 3
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan, Borobudur, and the Origins 
of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
hudaya kandahjaya
Research into the  Sanskrit-Old Java-
nese Buddhist compendium Saṅ Hyaṅ 
Kamahāyānikan  (hereafter SHK ) has been 
going on for over a century.1 Despite the long 
history of scholarship, however, a number of per -
tinent questions still linger. We are yet to identify 
the date when this scripture was compiled. We also 
are far from being able to map its relationship with 
other Buddhist scriptures or to appreciate its role 
in the development of Buddhism, particularly in 
Indonesia. Suggested answers to these questions 
from previous studies are generally conflicting. The 
status quo is thus intriguing and urges this study 
to re-examine this unique Buddhist scripture. This 
time I will necessarily limit the report to providing 
preliminary answers to some key questions, namely 
the origins of the SHK , its date and relationship 
with other textual as well as visual materials, and 
its role in the development of Esoteric Buddhism 
in premodern Indonesia. 
My report is briefly sketched as follows. Having 
summarized the inherited issues on dating and 
origin of the SHK , I will retrace the prototypical 
1.I have been fortunate to encounter Andrea Acri, a
ka
lyāṇamitra , whose attention to detail and keen eyes
have given me the opportunity not only to learn further
even from my own paper but also to save me from em -
barrassing mistakes. I am grateful and deeply indebted
to his efforts, which made this paper more legible. In the
interim, Prof. Lokesh Chandra sent me his valuable review 
and encouragement; later, Hiram Woodward too provided 
me with many useful suggestions. Comments also came
from Jeffrey Roger Sundberg. While I gratefully accepted 
the help of those scholars and revised this paper accord -
ingly, because of all types of constraints, I was forced to
leave many of their worthy suggestions for the future. So,
despite all the feedback, errors may still remain and they
are no doubt mine.sources from which the text drew its teachings. My 
reassessment individuates some Sanskrit texts that 
were previously not deemed to have any relation -
ship with Buddhist developments in the premodern 
Indonesian Archipelago. Those newly identified 
sources help confirm the SHK ’s claim that its own 
teachings came from Dignāga—perhaps through 
oral tradition. I will then argue that bits and pieces 
of data from the Indonesian  Archipelago contribute  
in recovering a still poorly documented stage in  
the development of ‘hidden’ Buddhist teachings 
that, as sug     ges ted by Chinese Buddhist sources, 
might have already started as early as the 3rd cen- 
tury ad .
Having explored a range of possibilities with 
regard to the transmission of Esoteric Buddhist 
teachings to Sumatra and Java, I argue that the ad -
vanced ‘hidden’ teachings recorded in the SHK  may 
be dated to the 8th century at the latest. Because of 
the long period of incubation occurring between 
the earliest attestations of those teachings and their 
appearance in the SHK , I venture to suggest that 
this text has preserved components of esoteric 
doctrines attributable to a Buddhist lineage that 
died out, and has thereby been forgotten ever since. 
Finally, in an attempt to recapture this lost tradi -
tion, I will compare some doctrinal features found 
in the SHK  and other Esoteric Buddhist texts to 
features of the architectural plan and iconographic 
programme of Borobudur—the most magnificent, 
yet perhaps least understood, Buddhist monument 
in the world.
the discovery of the shk
Jacob Kats was the scholar who made the SHK  
widely available through a critical edition accom -
Kandahjaya.indd   67 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 82] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia68
panied by a Dutch translation published in 1910.2 
And yet, except for his reference to the information 
given by Jan Brandes in his monograph on Candi 
Jago , published in 1904, we find no further clari -
fication about the discovery of the SHK . Brandes 
himself only mentioned Puri Cakranegara (on 
the island of Lombok, Indonesia) being the site 
from where in the year 1894 he obtained the lontar 
palm-leaf manuscript preserving this important 
Javanese Buddhist scripture, along with the famous 
Old Javanese historical records, the Deśavarṇana 
(formerly referred to as Nāgarakṛtāgama ).3 While 
this was likely the earliest information about the 
manuscript of the SHK  coming from the discoverer 
himself, the description was disappointingly brief. 
The obscurity is even more intriguing when we read 
the statement by Hendrik Juynboll in 1908 that 
the year of the discovery was 1895, which is not in 
agreement with Brandes’ description. Kats (1910: 4) 
did read and quote Brandes’ as well as Juynboll’s 
accounts,4 and yet surprisingly he did not try to 
explain how exactly the SHK  was discovered, or—if 
he ever noticed the discrepancy—to reconcile the 
accounts by Brandes and Juynboll.
It is from Juynboll that we get a sense for the first 
time that the discovery was related to an assault on 
Puri Cakranegara. Many decades later Theodore 
Pigeaud gave a more informative account of this 
event in his study on the Deśavarṇana , which was 
published in 1960. Even though he did not provide 
us with a source, Pigeaud (1960: xi) described the 
circumstances of the discovery of the manuscript 
of the Deśavarṇana  as follows:
2. See Kats 1910. A brief mention of the SHK  wa s made 
earlier by H. Juynboll (1908: 56–61).
3. See Brandes 1904: 94: ‘Not less remarkable is what one 
finds in a very important and remarkable Old Javanese 
Buddhist text, which was also found in 1894 in the puri  at 
Tjakranagara, and which is titled Sang hyang Kamahāyānan  
(or Kamahāyānikan ), i.e. ‘‘The Sacred Mahāyānistic Ca -
thechism’’’ (my translation from original Dutch).
4. Juy
nboll 1908: 56: ‘Among the descriptions of the col -
lection of Old Javanese manuscripts that were looted in 
1895 during the raid of the puri of Cakranegara, and that 
were incorporated in the Legatum Warnerianum in Leiden 
after the death of Dr. Brandes, I found a few manuscripts, 
from which better appears, what the ancient Javanese have 
known of Mahāyānism’ (my translation from the original 
Dutch).The old-Javanese manuscript written on palm-
leaves, now known as Codex Orientalis 5023 of 
the Legatum Warnerianum, Leyden University 
Library, was discovered on the 18th of Novem -
ber 1894 by Dr J. Brandes in the palace-com -
pound of the Balinese King of Cakra Nĕgara, 
on the island of Lombok, one of the Lesser 
Sunda Islands to the east of Bali. By order of 
the Governor-General of the Netherlands East 
Indies, Dr Brandes, then Government linguist, 
was attached to the staff of the military forc -
es engaged in the Lombok war, with a view to 
preserve from destruction all objects of cultur -
al interest to be found, especially manuscripts.
Pigeaud’s description gives us a much better 
sense of what was going on and, more importantly, 
a clue as to where we would be able to acquire clearer 
understanding out of this vagueness. A detailed 
description of the Lombok War, and probably its 
earliest published account, was written by Wouter 
Cool, a Captain of Dutch Military Engineers. Cool 
(1896: 455–67) gives a full account of what happened 
when the soldiers of the Netherlands East Indies 
attacked Puri Cakranegara.5 His reconstruction 
leads us to believe that 19 November 1894 was most 
likely the day Brandes collected all manuscripts 
from Puri Cakranegara, and only later—probably 
in 1895—did he discover the SHK  among them.6 The 
collection was essentially looted out of the Lombok 
War and in a way might suggest a reason for the 
terseness of the scholarly accounts.
inherited issues on dating  
 and source
Kats identified three versions of the SHK , which he 
named A, B, and C.7 He also clarified that the SHK  
consists of two sections. The first section is titled 
5. An English translation of this passage may be found in 
Cool 1897: 346–54. The summary by Wahyu Ernawati (2007: 
195–96) in her study on the Lombok Treasure provides us 
with succinct, yet most relevant and revealing, information 
on the assault on Puri Cakranegara.
6. This was probably the reason for Juynboll (1908: 56) 
to put the discovery in 1895 when he mentioned it in his 
‘Nieuwe bijdrage tot de kennis van het Mahâyânisme of Java’.
7. A recension of version C, which is in fact a Śaiva 
or ‘Śaivized’ text, was later published in full by Lokesh 
Chandra (1997: 7–101).
Kandahjaya.indd   68 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 83] ---
69 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Mantranaya  (SHKM ), 
meaning ‘The Mantra System of Mahāyāna’ (Kats 
1910: 30). The second, as witnessed by version B, is 
called Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Advayasādhana  
(SHKAS ), meaning ‘The Mahāyāna Method for 
Attaining Non-Duality’ (Kats 1910: 70). Version A, 
consisting of 65 palm leaves, is more complete than 
version B, which consists of only 27 palm leaves 
(Kats 1910: 5–6); both versions A and B contain 
Buddhist teachings, while C contains mostly Śaiva 
teachings. For this reason, both A and B are called 
the Bauddha version and C the Śaiva version.
Out of the three, only version C can be dated 
with a terminus ante quem , because the colophon 
mentions the name Mpu Siṇḍok of the Īśāna 
dynasty (r. 929–47 ad ). However, this did not stop 
further studies to determine the actual date of 
version C, as well as of the two other versions. 
Being a Śaiva recension derived from the 
Bauddha version, version C must have necessarily 
been written after the latter, which must have been 
compiled in an earlier period (Gonda 1976: 193); 
furthermore, its Sanskrit verses must have existed 
before the Old Javanese commentaries were written 
(de Jong 1974: 477). Roelof Goris suggested on 
philological grounds that the oldest Old Javanese 
commentary is that of version A, which possibly 
was already in existence in the Śailendra period:
It is therefore not impossible that the older parts 
already existed during the Śailendra period [ca. 
750–850 ad] as a commentary to a Sanskrit 
work, and that our A version with its younger 
parts might be dated before the time of Siṇḍok, 
whilst the C version, being a revision, might be 
considered Eastern Javanese and recorded dur -
ing or after the time of Siṇḍok. (Goris 1926: 156, 
English trans. Stutterheim 1956: 35)
Kurt Wulff (1935: 9–10), while summarizing 
scholarly opinions on the date of the SHK  which 
varied from before the first half of the 10th century 
to the 15th century, did not seem convinced by Goris’ 
suggestion. In due course, Jan Willem de Jong (1974: 
477) aptly clarified that we need to address two 
dating problems at the same time: the date of the 
original composition of the Sanskrit verses and the 
date of their arrival in Java. Establishing himself 
mainly on the general history of the Adhyardhaśa -tikāprajñāpāramitāsūtra  (APP )8 because its verses 
had already been found in the SHKM , de Jong (1974: 
482), pace Goris, concluded that the Old Javanese 
text could not be older than the 10th century. This 
controversy clearly indicates that the dating issues 
surrounding the three versions of the SHK  have 
not been resolved.
Scholars began investigating the contents of 
the SHK  soon after Kats published the text. Even 
more attention has been paid to the SHKM .9 Some 
attempted to improve the readings, while others 
tried to identify the sources of the Sanskrit verses.10 
As we received it, the SHKM  contains 42 Sanskrit 
verses provided with Old Javanese paraphrases. 
Early investigations discerned that some of these 
Sanskrit verses are found in Buddhist scrip -
tures from the Indian Subcontinent, such as the 
Mahāvairocanābhisaṁbodhitantra  (M VA ), the  APP , 
etc. Lokesh Chandra (1995: 297) has collected and 
tabulated the correspondences of all the 42 verses. 
Here his table is reproduced with minor modifi -
cation for convenience (Table 3.1).
Given the relationship existing between the 
SHKM  and a variety of prototypical Esoteric 
Buddhist Sanskrit texts, it has been suggested that 
verses of the SHKM  reflect some kind of Tantric 
initiation ritual (Lokesh Chandra 1995: 298–99). 
The M VA  and APP  alone supply a total of 32 verses 
to the SHKM . This is probably the reason why de 
Jong (1974: 467–68) seemed to consider these two 
scriptures the primary sources from which the 
SHKM  obtained its teachings. And yet, if such was 
the case, there has been no adequate explanation as 
to why the compiler extracted those 32 particular 
verses and not the rest. In addition, since verses 23 
to 25 have thus far never been identified, the M VA  
and APP  cannot be the only primary sources for 
the SHK . The issue becomes even more problematic 
when we notice that the other text in the manu -
script, the SHKAS —which, unlike the SHKM , has 
not received much scholarly attention—establishes, 
8. For extensive studies on this scripture, see Astley-Kris -
tensen 1991; for a critical edition and brief summary, see 
Tomabechi 2009.
9. De Jong (1974) provides us with a useful survey of 
efforts up to the early 1970s. Lokesh Chandra (1995: 295–
300) supplies additional notes up to the early 1990s.
10. See de Jong 1974: 465–68; Lokesh Chandra 1995: 295–300.
Kandahjaya.indd   69 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 84] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia70
Table 3.1: Correlation of the SHKM with other texts
SHKM MVA
(T 848)STTS
(T 865)JS
(T 866)SV KS KSP SDP APP   
(T 244)
1 ◉ ◉
2 ◉ ◉
3 ◉ ◉
4 ◉ ◉
5a ◉ ◉
6 ◉ ◉
7 ◉ ◉
8 ◉ ◉
9 ◉ ◉
10 ◉
11 ◉
12 ◉ ◉ ◉
13 ◉ ◉ ◉ ◉
14 ◉
15 ◉
16 ◉ ◉ ◉ ◉
17 ◉ ◉ ◉ ◉
18 ◉ ◉ ◉
19 ◉
20 ◉ ◉ ◉ ◉ ◉
21 ◉ ◉ ◉ ◉ ◉
22 ◉ ◉ ◉ ◉ ◉
23
24
25
26 ◉ ◉ ◉
27 ◉ ◉ ◉
28 ◉ ◉
29 ◉ ◉ ◉
30 ◉ ◉ ◉
31 ◉ ◉ ◉
32 ◉ ◉ ◉
33 ◉
34 ◉
35 ◉
36 ◉
37 ◉
38 ◉
39 ◉
40 ◉
41 ◉
42 ◉
Tota l 15 2 14 8 15 11 4 17
Kandahjaya.indd   70 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 85] ---
71 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
along with the SHKM , one whole set of practical 
teachings, so the two texts and their Buddhist 
textual sources should not be considered separately.
Thus far, only two authors have attempted 
to unravel the mysteries of the SHK . Magetsari 
(1997)11 tried to exploit Goris’ suggestion on the 
early dating of the SHK  in order to explain the doc -
trinal status quo that inspired the construction of 
Borobudur, but unfortunately employed an anach -
ronistic classification of Buddhist currents into 
Pāramitānaya and Mantranaya.12 Lokesh Chandra 
(1995: 295–434) supported de Jong’s conclusion that 
the SHKM  originated from the M VA  and the APP , 
and continued to maintain that the SHKAS  reflects 
both the Caryātantra s and Yogatantra s, with the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha  being the primary 
source, but unfortunately did not elaborate on how 
the unique daśapāramitā  and the catur-  or the pañ -
ca-devī  of the SHKAS  came to exist. 
newly identified sources
Tadeusz Skorupski (2002: 3–4) recently published 
an English translation of the Kriyāsaṅgraha  (KS), 
which a number of scholars consider to have been 
composed in the period between the 8th to the 
13th century. This translation, which represents a 
version of the entire KS  integrating all parts that 
earlier came under the title KS  and Kriyāsaṅgra -
hapañjikā  (Skorupski 2002: 1), opens up an option 
to merge the columns of the KS  and Kriyāsaṅgra -
hapañjikā  (KSP)13 in Table 1. By collapsing these 
two columns, there would be 17 verses of the KS  
matching with those in the SHKM . As such, the KS  
comes closer to the APP  in terms of the number of 
11. This is a revision of the author’s dissertation (1982). 
1
2. The t
erm pāramitānaya  itself is well known from the 
Prajñāpāramitānayaśatapañcaśatikā , where it is not clearly 
put in contrast to mantranaya . The contrast or the pairing 
comes later. Magetsari (1982: 44), while insisting that the 
‘Pāla synthesis’ described by Edward Conze was the key 
for analysing the SHK,  anachronistically uses the later 
classificatory terminology of Pāramitānaya and Mantra -
naya—probably introduced by Nāropā or Advayavajra in 
the 10th or 11th century (Joshi 1977: 274)—and therefore 
detracts credibility from his own theory. In addition, the 
SHK  itself never uses the term pāramitānaya .
13. Sk
orupski (2002: 5) explains how these two titles got 
mixed up.verses contributed to the SHKM . In terms of range, 
however, the KS  covers verses which originally were 
considered only parts of either the M VA  or the 
APP. Upon further examination, instead of just 17 
verses, I have found a total of 26 Sanskrit verses of 
the SHKM  to be recorded in the KS . Those 26 verses 
are located among the first 32 verses of the SHKM  
(see Table 3.2). This indicates that the KS  as a single 
text contains the most verses among the texts that 
have hitherto been matched against the SHKM . 
However, despite the significant number of cor -
respondences, we may still question the source(s) 
for the last 10 verses of the SHKM , which are not 
attested in the KS .
Guhyasamājamaṇḍala rituals
A rare Sanskrit ritual text titled the Śrīguhya -
samājamaṇḍalavidhi  (hereafter, the GSMV ) has 
been recently discovered (Bahulkar 2010). Accord -
ing to the colophon of the manuscript through 
which it has survived for us, the text was composed 
by Dīpaṅkarabhadra. In the history of Vikramaśīla 
monastery, Dīpaṅkarabhadra was known as the 
second preceptor after Buddhajñāna. He was thus 
commonly considered to belong to the Jñānapāda 
or the Jñāna tradition of the Guhyasamāja . The two 
masters were active in this monastery towards the 
end of the 8th century (Gray 2005: 62). The text that 
we receive today carries only 436 verses, fewer than 
the total 450 mentioned in the last verse ( ślokaiḥ 
śataiḥ sārddhacatuṣṭayaiḥ ). More importantly, how -
ever, the GSMV  contains 27 verses corresponding 
with those in the SHKM.  These verses are spread 
rather evenly from the first up to the last verse. In 
other words, the GSMV  includes most of the verses of 
the SHKM  that were previously thought to be found 
either in two separate scriptures, as in the case of 
the M VA  and the APP, or in a single text, i.e. the KS .
There is another rare Sanskrit text which has 
also been recently discovered, titled the Śrīguhya -
samājamaṇḍalopāyikāviṁśatividhi  (hereafter, the 
GSVV ). The GSVV  is ascribed to Nāgabodhi (a.k.a. 
Nāgabuddhi; see Appendix A), who is considered 
a member of the Āryapāda, or the Ārya tradition 
of the Guhyasamāja .14 According to this tradition,
14. A series of articles related to Nāgabodhi’s G SVV  has 
been published by Tanaka (2000, 2002, 2003a, 2003b, 2004).
Kandahjaya.indd   71 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 86] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia72
Table 3.2: Correlation of the SHKM with newly identified texts
SHKM KS GSMV GSVV Guhyendutilaka Gurupañcaśikhā Ratnamegha
1 ◉ ◉ ◉
2 ◉ ◉ ◉
3 ◉ ◉ ◉
4 ◉ ◉ ◉
5ab ◉ ◉ ◉
6 ◉ ◉
7 ◉
8 ◉
9 ◉
10 ◉ ◉ ◉
11 ◉ ◉
12 ◉ ◉ ◉
13 ◉ ◉ ◉
14 ◉ ◉
15 ◉
16 ◉ ◉
17 ◉ ◉ ◉
18 ◉
19
20 ◉
21 ◉ ◉
22 ◉ ◉
23 ◉ ◉
24 ◉
25 ◉
26 ◉ ◉
27 ◉ ◉ ◉
28 ◉ ◉
29 ◉ ◉
30 ◉ ◉
31 ◉ ◉
32 ◉ ◉ ◉
33 ◉ ◉ ◉
34 ◉ ◉ ◉
35 ◉ ◉ ◉
36 ◉ ◉
37 ◉
38 ◉ ◉
39 ◉ ◉
40 ◉
41 ◉ ◉
42 ◉
Total 26 27 24 1 6 1
Kandahjaya.indd   72 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 87] ---
73 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
Nāgabodhi received the teachings from Nāgārjuna 
and eventually imparted them to Vajrabodhi (a.k.a. 
Vajrabuddhi: see Appendix A). However, in contrast 
to the GSMV , the GSVV  shares 24 verses with the 
SHKM , 7 of which are not found in the GSMV . At 
this point, we cannot determine if the difference 
reflects some sort of distinguishing feature between 
the two traditions, or is merely due to corruption 
in textual transmission. Interestingly, the title 
of the GSVV  contains the phrase guhyasamāja -
maṇḍalopāyikā , and the colophon of the GSMV  
claims the same. If these two texts actually came 
from the same source, then we would have obtained 
the prototype containing all the 34 verses that the 
GSVV  and GSMV  together share with the SHKM , 
from the beginning to the end. 
Ratnameghasūtra
Having identified the last 2 of those 10 verses, we 
are left with 8 unidentified ones. A question arises, 
again, as to how we are to explain these 8 verses 
of the SHKM  that are neither in the GSMV nor in 
the GSV V.
If we inspect Table 3.2, we see that 6 verses out 
of those 8 unaccounted ones correspond in one 
way or another with verses in one or more texts. 
Verses 7, 8, and 9 are recorded in the M VA ; verse 
15 in the KS ; verse 19 in the SV; and verse 20 in 
the KS, M VA , JS, or SV . Thus, these 6 verses are 
recorded in the collection of texts that is somehow 
related to other SHKM  verses. The last 2 of those 
8, i.e verses 25 and 37, are problematic in terms of 
concept, origin, and date. Verse 25 of the SHKM  
in Sanskrit runs as follows:
ye cānye samayadviṣṭāḥ  
samayabhraṣṭāḥ ye janāḥ / 
māraṇīyāḥ prayatnena  
buddhaśāsanapālane //
The śloka  is followed by an Old Javanese commen -
tary that in a way also translates the Sanskrit verse:15
15. Ka: Hana vvaṅ dveṣa ri saṅ hyaṅ samaya, melik ri 
s
aṅ hyaṅ Mantrānaya; samayabhraṣṭāḥ ye janāḥ , hana 
vvaṅ samayabhraṣṭāḥ vih sampun kṛtasamaya, manaḍah 
upadeśa. Apa kunaṅ vivartika ta ya vәkasan? Kinasam -
payannya ta saṅ guru, inumpәtnya sira. Māraṇīyāḥ prayat -
nena , ikaṅ vvaṅ maṅkana nāṅ samayadviṣṭa mvaṅ sa -The meaning is: There are persons who [feel] 
aversion towards the Saṅ Hyaṅ Samaya , who 
dislike the Saṅ Hyaṅ Mantrānaya ; samaya -
bhraṣṭāḥ ye janāḥ , there are persons who are 
samayabhraṣṭaḥ , i.e. have already completed 
initiation ( kṛtasamaya ) and received teachings 
(upadeśa ). Why have they turned away [from 
them] at last? They treat scornfully the rever -
end master, speak ill of him. Māraṇīyāḥ prayat -
nena , such persons that are samayadviṣṭa  and 
samayabhraṣṭa , they should be ordered to be 
killed, they should not be an object of concern 
for the Lord; buddhaśāsanapālane , in order to 
protect the teachings of the Lord Buddha, and the respect of the Saṅ Hyaṅ Samaya , thus is the 
fruit of the killing of the samaya -haters, etc.
I haven’t been able to find this verse anywhere 
thus far. However, according to Śantideva, the 
concept of permitting the killing of a person who 
is going to commit a deadly sin ( ānantarya ) is re -
corded in the Ratnameghasūtra : ‘In the holy Rat -
namegha the slaying of a man who was intending 
to commit a deadly sin, is allowed’ (Bendall and 
Rouse 1922: 164).16
Gurupañcaśikhā
The Sanskrit verse 37 of the SHKM  and the trans -
lation of its Old Javanese commentary are as 
follows:
nityaṁ svasamayācāryyaṁ 
praṇair api nijair bhajet / 
mayabhraṣṭa kinonaken ikā pejahana, tan patagvakna de 
bhaṭāra, buddhaśāsanapālane , yatanyan karakṣā śāsana 
bhaṭāra hyaṅ buddha, lāvan katvaṅana saṅ hyaṅ samaya, 
maṅkana phalanyan patyana ikaṅ samayavidveṣādi  (Kats 
1910: 25).
16. Śikṣāsamuccaya: s phuṭaṁ cāryaratnameghe ānan -
taryacikīrṣupuruṣamāraṇānujñānāt  (Bendall 1897: 168). On 
the other hand, the Sarvadurgatipariśodhanasūtra  seems 
to suggest a different concept: ‘There are living beings who 
are desirous of all kinds of wealth, food, drink and pleasure, 
who are (potentially) Lords. They hate the pledge and are 
unable to aspire to the previously mentioned practice and 
the rest. But even they on entering here will gain com -
plete fulfillment of all their hopes in accordance with their 
wish’ ( santi bhagavantaḥ sattvāḥ sarvārthabhojanakāma-
guṇagṛddhāḥ samayadviṣṭāḥ puraścaraṇādīṣṭāśaktās teṣām 
apy atra yathākāmakaraṇīyā praviṣṭānāṁ sarvāśāparipūr -
tir bhaviṣyati ; see Skorupski 1983: 100, 284).
Kandahjaya.indd   73 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 88] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia74
adeyaiḥ putradārair vā  
kim punar vibhavaiś calaiḥ // 
The meaning is: Even life is to be given to the 
reverend Guru, its goal is to serve him; adeyaiḥ 
putradārair vā , let alone children and wife, all 
are to be offered to Bharāla Guru; dāsabhūtā , 
having become his servants, their task is to 
serve him, kim punar vibhavaiś calaiḥ , do not 
speak about possessions, like gold, jewels, gar -
ments, silver, all these are to be offered to the 
reverend Guru.17
When we do a further search, verse 37—and in 
fact the whole range of verses from 33 to 38—of the 
SHKM  actually corresponds to verses 10, 15, 19, 21, 
17, and 18 of the Gurupañcaśikhā (‘The Fifty Verses 
of Guru Devotion’).
Guhyendutilaka
Verse 23 of the SHKM  provides one of the most fun -
damental arguments defending Tantric practices:18
nāsti kiñcid akartabyaṁ  
prajñopāyena cetasā / 
nirviśaṅkaḥ sadā bhūtvā  
prabhuṅkṣva kāmapañcakam  //
The meaning is: There is no work that you will 
not be able to do, even though the work appears 
as [the most] difficult in the triple world, which 
cannot be done by those in heavens, those 
among mankind, those in the underworlds. 
17. Ka: Hurip tuvi tinarimakan ri ḍaṅ guru, gumavaya 
kabyāpāran ira donya, adeyaiḥ putradārair vā , āstām ikaṅ 
anak rabi inarpaṇāken ikā kabeh i bharāla guru, dāsabhūtā , 
hulunan ira umyāpāra ri sira pakenanya, kim punar vibha -
vaiś calaiḥ, hayva ta vinuvus ikaṅ dṛvya ṅaranya, kady 
āṅgan iṅ mās maṇik dodot pirak pinūjākennikā kabeh i 
ḍaṅ guru  (Kats 1910: 29).
18. Ka: Nora gavai anuṅ tan ta kavenaṅa gavayan, ta yady -
apin tribhuvanaduṣkara lviran iṅ karmma, tan kavәnaṅa 
ginave de saṅ hana riṅ svargga, manuṣya, pātāla, ikān 
maṅkana atiduṣkara nikaṅ karmma kavәnaṅ i taya ginave 
denta; prajñopāyena cetasā , ndan ikaṅ prajñā atah āmbәka -
kәnanta, nirviśaṅkaḥ sadā bhūtvā , lāvan tan kahilaṅana 
atah kita irika nissandehacitta sadākāla; prabhuṅkṣva 
kāmapañcakam , paribhogan taṅ pañcakāmaguṇa denta, 
salvir niṅ kaviṣayan hayva pinilihan paribhogan kabeh 
denta, āpan don ni kadi kita sādhaka, ndan hayvatah tan 
pakāmbәk ika nissaṅśaya  (Kats 1910: 24).While such very difficult work can be done [by 
you], there is none done by you; prajñopāyena 
cetasā , that is the prajñā , which you should 
strive to attain with the mind, nirviśaṅkaḥ 
sadā bhūtvā , moreover you should not lose the 
state of a mind free from apprehension at all 
times; prabhuṅkṣva kāmapañcakam , objects 
of the five senses ( pañcakāmaguṇa ) should be 
enjoyed by you—do not give your preference to 
that which pleases [the senses only], [but] all 
[the objects] should be enjoyed by you, because 
[that is] the goal of a practitioner like you; do 
not cease to strive to attain that [state], without 
doubt.
Verse 23 is found in the GSVV , and also in 
the Tattvasiddhi.19 The latter text was ascribed to 
Śāntarakṣita, who is believed to be a renowned 
abbot of the Nālandā monastery in the 8th century. 
Śāntarakṣita, however, stated that the verse in 
question—like some adjacent verses in his Tat -
tvasiddhi —as shown below, was quoted from the 
Guhyendutilaka .
According to the Tibetan record The Blue Annals , 
there are three Tantric traditions out of eighteen 
that have had a significant influence on Tibetan 
Buddhism from the start. Those three are named 
after their foundational texts, i.e. the Guhyasamāja  
(‘The Secret Assembly’), the Guhyendutilaka (‘The 
Secret Moon Drop’), and the Buddhasamayoga  
(‘The Yoga of Buddha Equality’):20
Here the first three divisions of the eighteen 
great divisions of the Tantras of the Mantra 
school of the Old Believers ( rNying ma pa ): the 
Śrīguhyasamāja  (dpal gsang ba ‘dus pa ), the Can -
draguhyatilaka  or Guhyendutilaka  (zla gsang 
 thig le ), and the Buddhasamayoga  (sangs rgyas 
mnyam sbyor ). They are also called the Tantras 
19. As verse 2cd and 3ab. S.B. Dasgupta (1974: 179–98) 
devoted a whole chapter to the arguments produced by 
the Tantric Buddhists in defence of their yoga, in which 
he uses the Tattvasiddhi  as one of his two main sources. 
On pages 186–87, Dasgupta gives the Sanskrit verse cor -
responding to verse 23 of the SHKM  and its translation: 
‘There is nothing not to be done by a man whose mind is 
equipped with Prajña and Upāya; he should always enjoy 
the five objects of desire most unhesitatingly’.
20. Louis de la Val lée Poussin (1898: 146) lists five treatis -
es: Guhyasamāja , Mayajāla  [sic], Buddhasamayoga , Can-
draguhyatilaka , and Mañjuśrīkrodha .
Kandahjaya.indd   74 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 89] ---
75 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
of Mind, Speech, and Body ( thugs gsung sku’i 
rgyud  [kāyavākcittatantra ]). Their preaching 
lasted long. (Roerich 1979: 102)
Among those just mentioned, the Guhyendutila -
ka is the most obscure, as we know next to nothing 
about the tradition it stems from. However, an in -
teresting series of quotations may be found in the 
Tattvasiddhi  (see Dvivedi and Śāsanī 1989: 35–36):
aśeṣayogatantreṣu  
guhyendutilakādiṣu  / 
nāsti kiñcid akartavyaṁ  
prajñopāyena cetasā  // 2  
nirviśaṅkaḥ sadā bhūtvā  
bhoktavyaṁ pañcakāmakam  / 
oṣadhīcūrṇasaṁyogād  
uragasyeva bandhanam  //3 
kāmino nityaraktasya 
gītavādyaratasyaṁ ca  / 
kāmasaukhyair atṛptasya  
sidhyate nātra saṁśayaḥ // 4  
bodhicittaṁ dṛḍhaṁ yasya  
niḥsaṅgā ca matir bhavet / 
vicikitsā naiva karttavyā  
tasyedaṁ sidhyate dhruvam  // 5 
sunirūpya susañcintya  
praveśaṁ kārayed budhaḥ  / 
anyathāgnipraveśo ’sya 
kalāṁ nārhati ṣoḍaśīm // 6  
tattvaṁ vijñāya tattvena 
yo ’dhimuktiṁ niṣevate / 
sa sidhyaty anyathā tasya  
mahānirayapātanam  // 7
As seen above, the half-verses 2cd–3ab of the 
Tattvasiddhi  are practically the same as verse 23 of 
the SHK . Verse 5 of the Tattvasiddhi  is also found 
in the Śikṣāsamuccaya , but here Śantideva says that 
this verse came from the Trisamayarāja (Bendall 
and Rouse 1922: 137).21 According to Stephen Hodge 
(2003: 9), the Trisamayarāja  was one of the sources 
of the MV A.
Indrabhūti quoted some verses of the Guh-  
yendutilaka  also in his Jñanasiddhi :
sarvāṅgabhāvanātītaṁ  
kalpanākalpavarjitaṁ  / 
mātrābindusamātītam  
21. Without having a complete text of both, we cannot 
d
etermine if these texts are the same.etan maṇḍalam uttamam  // 
sa caiva sarvabhāvena  
sarvadā samavasthitaḥ  / 
anādinidhanaḥ sattvo  
vajrasattvaḥ paraṁ sukhaṁ  // 
bodhicitthād ṛte nānyat  
saukhyam asti tridhātuke  / 
bodhicittam ayaṁ saukhyaṁ  
sarvasaukhyaprasarpaṇam  //
The first verse of the Jñānasiddhi  cited above is 
found in the Pradīpodyotana , a commentary to the 
Guhyasamājatantra  composed by Candrakīrti.22 
But, there, Candrakīrti says that it came from the 
Bhagavatavyākhyātantra , perhaps a synonymous 
title for the  Guhyendutilaka .23 Then, the Pradīpo -
dyotana  quoted another verse from the Guhyendu -
tilaka , as follows:24
Utsṛjya ratnojvalapadmamadhyataḥ saṅguh-  
ya mūrtiḥ sakalaṁ jinānām / 
abhiṣiñcya mūrdhnāmalaratnavarṣair viśud -
dhavajrodbhavajñānatoyaiḥ  //
A verse from the Guhyendutilaka  is also retained 
in an early Tantric text, the Caryāmelāpakapradīpa 
by Āryadeva. Christian Wedemeyer (1999: 243) has 
translated the verse from the Guhyendutilaka  in 
the Caryāmelāpakapradīpa  as follows:25
Again, the aggregates and so on are each sub -
divided into five making one hundred; in the 
Secret Moon Drop it says: Families are taught 
to be hundred-fold; Briefly summarized, five. 
Correlated with body, speech and mind, they 
are also three-fold.
22. See Chakravarti 1984: 45. A reference to this source 
i
s also mentioned by Campbell (2009: 72).
23. Ag
ain, as in the case of the Trisamayarāja , without 
having a complete text of both, we cannot determine if 
these texts are the same, or if one is quoting the other.
24. Se
e Chakravarti 1984: 79. It is to be noted, though, 
that the title given here is Guhyendratilaka , which may 
be a typo.
25. This comes from lines 12 to 15 in Chapter 2 of the 
Caryāmelāpakapradīpa: ete skandhadhātvādayaḥ punar 
ekaikaśaḥ pañcapañcākārair bhidyamānāḥ śatadhā 
bhavanti  / kulāḥ śatavidhāḥ proktāḥ saṅkṣepeṇa tu pañ -
cadhā / punas trividhatāṁ yānti kāyavākcittayogata iti / 
śrīguhyendutilake vacanāt //.
Kandahjaya.indd   75 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 90] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia76
Yogāvatāra, Yogāvatāropadeśa, and  
Yogabhāvanāmārga
The SHK  presents us with a set of comprehensive 
practical teachings that goes through four steps. 
They are: one, Mahā-mārga  (the great path); two, 
Parama-bodhi-mārga  or Parama-mārga  (the 
supreme path); three, Mahā-guhya  (the great secret); 
and four, Parama-guhya  (the supreme secret). The 
first step, the Mahā-mārga , is described in the 
SHKM . The remaining three steps are explained in 
the SHKAS . When we examine the paths explained 
in the SHKAS , we find many unusual concepts 
or terms that immediately attract our attention, 
such as yoga and bhāvanā , and the daśapāramitā  
(ten perfections). Upon further examination, these 
prove to be entry points that enable us to distinc -
tively identify potential sources.
A significant clue comes from a paragraph in 
the SHKAS  telling us that the method for attain -
ing non-duality ( advaya ) was received from Ḍaṅ 
Ācāryya Śrī Dignāgapāda:
Mahā-guhya is the method to be united with 
the Bharāla, viz.: yoga and bhāvanā . There are 
four yogas, according to the instructions left 
by Ḍang Ācāryya Śrī Dignāgapāda, viz.: the 
mūla-yoga , the madhya-yoga , the vasāna-yoga , 
and the anta-yoga .26
This Dignāgapāda might be identified with 
the famous Buddhist philosopher Dignāga, who 
flourished in India circa ad  480–540. According 
to Hajime Nakamura (1980: 281):
The teaching of yoga  as was set forth in 
Dignāga’s Yogāvatāra  was elaborated on in 
Ye-śes-zla-ba (Jñānacandra?)’s Yogācāryābhā-  
vanātātparyārthanirdeśa and Ye-śes-sñiṅ-po 
(Jñānagarbha?)’s Yogabhāvanāmārga , and fi -
nally culminates in Kamalaśīla’s Bhāvanāyo -
gāvatāra . This information leads us to a small 
Sanskrit meditation text, titled the Yogāvatāra . 
The colophon says that the composer was 
Dignāga. However, according to Vidhushekha- 
ra Bhattacharya (1928: 775–78), there was an -
26. Mahāguhya: ikaṅ kāraṇa ri kapaṅguhan bharāla, 
lvirnya: yoga lāvan bhāvanā. Pāt lvir niṅ yoga, pavәkas ḍaṅ 
ācāryya śrī Dignāgapāda, lvirnya; mūla-yoga, madhya-yoga, 
vasāna-yoga, anta-yoga  (Kats 1910: 45).other Sanskrit recension attributed to Nāgār -
juna, and this one was found under the title 
Prajñopāyaviniścayasiddhi by Anaṅgavajra.
The Yogāvatāra  was commented by Dharmen -
dra, who was allegedly contemporaneous with 
Dignāga. Dharmendra’s commentary is titled the 
Yogāvatāropadeśa  (Chatterji 1929: 249–59). There 
are two significant messages in this commentary. 
First, according to Dharmendra:
Any devoted and noble young man or woman 
whose character has been purified by śīlapāramitā  
and who thinks in his or her mind that all beings 
are to be liberated in accordance with the pre -
scribed manner and begins to act upon the teach -
ings of yoga by means of the supreme knowledge, 
obtains the said knowledge in this very life, being 
fired with enthusiasm, strong through discipline, 
and ever irresistible. (Chatterji 1929: 258) 
In emphasizing the importance of meditation 
practice, Dharmendra quoted Tathāgata’s statement 
in the Gambhīraśīla: ‘Those who have recourse to 
books only, foregoing the prescribed process, fail to 
obtain success and to them come various miseries 
and mortifications’ (Chatterji 1929: 258). Secondly, 
Dharmendra points out that ‘now any subject that is 
appropriate, profound and not easily comprehensi -
ble should be learnt orally from the teacher’ (ibid.).
Dharmendra’s messages underline the im -
portance of yoga , teach er, and oral teaching.27 
Dharmendra’s comment was well perpetuated by 
Buddhajñāna (or Buddhaśrījñāna) when the latter 
stressed the concept of mukhāgama —‘the tradi -
tion from the mouth’, or ‘from the mouth of one’s 
own guru’ (Wayman 1977: 95). All these elements 
resonate with what we find in the SHK , when the 
SHKAS  from the beginning emphasizes the prac -
tice of yoga, and when the SHKM  cites six verses 
verbatim from the Gurupañcaśikhā .
Jñānagarbha (ca. ad  700–760) was considered 
the teacher of Śāntarakṣita (Hodge 1988). He com -
posed the  Yogabhāvanāmārga , which in many ways 
is similar to the Yogāvatāra  or Yogāvatāropadeśa , 
putting emphasis on practical teachings. In his 
English translation of this text, Stephen Hodge 
(1988: 34) indicates that the sources of some pas -
27. See also De La Vallée Poussin 1932: 416–17.
Kandahjaya.indd   76 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 91] ---
77 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
sages in Jñānagarbha’s writing were likely the 
Mahāvairocanatantra  and the Guhyasamājatantra . 
Then, in explaining his meditation technique based 
on the formula ś amatha-vipaśyanā , Jñānagarbha 
urged the mind of the meditator to abide in the 
brahmavihāra  while wishing to guide beings. 
Yet because perceptions of things contrary to 
that may be encountered, a yogin should act 
without relinquishing his mindfulness that 
all dharmas are like space, therefore his mind 
will not become involved in the unwholesome. 
While abiding with the wish to guide beings, 
you should transmute all perturbations with 
the purity of the three elements [the purity of 
the agent, the action, and the recipient of the 
action], even regarding the wholesome. In 
that way, you should always abide in kindness, 
compassion, joy and equanimity [= the four 
brahmavihāra s].
Yet without entirely fulfilling the accumula -
tions of merit and awareness, you will not be 
able to acquire in this way the means to bring about the Enlightenment of infinite numbers 
of beings or the state of supreme Enlighten -
ment. The two accumulations are summarized 
by the Six Perfections [i.e., merit ( puṇya ) is ful -
filled by the first five Perfections, and aware -
ness ( jñāna ) by the Perfection of Insight], and 
therefore, beginning with the Perfection of 
Generosity, you should be mindful that you 
should continually fulfil all aspects of it, and 
likewise for each of the six. (Hodge 1988: 36–37)
The combination of the six pāramitā s and the 
brahmavihāra s as stated in the Yogabhāvanāmār -
ga turns out to be similar to the SHKAS’ s unique 
definition of the da śa pāramitā (ten perfections) 
as a collection of the six perfections ( ṣaṭ pāramitā ) 
and the four perfections or immeasurables ( catur 
pāramitā ), corresponding to the four brahmavi -
hāra s (metrī, karuṇā, muditā, upekṣā ): see Kats 
1910: 42, 45. This tenfold arrangement is different 
from the ten perfections generally known in either 
Mahāyāna or Theravāda today.
Bhāvanākrama
Śāntarakṣita is known to have attempted to inte -
grate Madhyamaka teachings from Nāgārjuna with 
teachings from the Yogācāra tradition introduced by Asaṅga. He too was considered one among 
the pioneers who brought Buddhism to Tibet. A 
famous disciple of Śāntarakṣita was Kamalaśīla. 
The debate between Kamalaśīla and the Chinese 
monk Heshang at Bsam yas Monastery in Tibet in 
the years 792 to 794 is well known. The debate was 
performed before King Khri Srong Lde Bstan, who 
reigned from 742 to 798. At the end of the debate, 
the king declared Kamalaśīla the winner.
Kamalaśīla composed a text titled the Bhā-
van
ākrama  in three parts. If we meticulously 
examine the first part of the Bhāvanākrama , we 
find that some passages are related to the SHKAS  
(Kats 1910: 31, 42, 45, 64). The corresponding pas -
sages are tabulated in Table 3 (next page).
The comparison shows that some basic concepts 
in these passages of the SHKAS  correspond with 
those in the first part of the Bhāvanākrama . Both 
of them call the disciple an ādikarmika  (adhikarmi -
ka in SHKAS , arguably a corruption) who follows 
the Mahāyāna path. Three practices to achieve the 
highest attainment are karuṇā , bodhicitta , prati -
patti , which in the SHKAS  are spelled out as asih 
(Old Javanese for ‘compassion’), puṇya , and bhakti . 
Another interesting correspondence is the concept 
related to the compound pāramitāpramāṇa , or the 
six pāramitā s and the four apramāṇa s, as stated 
in the Bhāvanākrama . This unique configuration 
parallels the definition of the daśapāramitā  (‘ten 
perfections’) described in the SHKAS.
The first part of the Bhāvanākrama  was written 
by Kamalaśīla while he was still in India (Tan -
iguchi 1992: 307). As displayed in Table 3.3, Ka -
malaśīla stated that the sources for the concept 
pāramitāpramāṇa were the Akṣayamatisūtra  and 
the Ratnameghasūtra .28 Even though the concepts
28. The Pāli Dhammapada  3 68 (also Aṅguttara Nikāya 
I.10) describes a meditation based on kindness ( metta ). The 
Mahāvastu  describes the system mentioned in Dhamma -
pada  368 together with compassion, joy, and equanimity. 
The Yogasūtra of Patañjali  also explains the brahmavihāra , 
as follows: maitrīkaruṇāmuditopekṣāṇāṁ sukhaduḥkha -
puṇyāpuṇya-viṣayāṇāṁ bhāvanātaś cittaprasādanam  
(1.33). The Akṣayamatisūtra  likely refers to T 310(45), or 
the Akṣayamatiparipṛcchāsūtra , which together with the 
Kāśyapaparivartasūtra  is considered the earliest core, 
already in existence by the time of Nāgārjuna, out of 
which the Mahāratnakūṭa  was compiled (see Nakamura 
1980: 210).
Kandahjaya.indd   77 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 92] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia78
Table 3.3: Correlation between the Advayasādhana   
and the Bhāvanākrama
Advayasādhana Bhāvanākrama
Nihan saṅ hyaṅ Ka-
mahāyānikan ya 
varahakna mami ri kitaṅ 
tathāgatakula jinaputra, 
adhikarmika saṅ hyaṅ 
Mahāyāna , ya ta vara-
hakna mami ri kita.mahāyānasūtrāṇāṁ ya 
ādikarmikasya  caryāni -
yamaḥ /
tamadhikṛtya saṁkṣepād 
bhāvanākramas tv 
abhidhīyate //
Nihan tattva niṅ tri-
parārtha kavruhana, 
triparārtha  ṅaranya: 
asih, puṇya, bhakti.acireṇa sarvajñatāṁ 
prāptukāmaiḥ saṁkṣepa-
taḥ karuṇā, bodhicittam, 
pratipattiś  ceti triṣu 
sthāneṣu  prayatitavyam  /
Papupul ni caturpāramitā 
mvaṅ ṣaṭpāramitā , 
lvirnya: dāna, śīla, kṣānti, 
vīryya, dhyāna, prajñā, 
metrī, karuṇā, muditā, 
upekṣā. Ya tikā sinaṅguh 
daśapāramitā.sā ca pratipattir bodhisat-   
  tvas
ya pāramitā pramāṇa -
saṅgr
ahavastvādibhedena 
akṣayamatiratnameghā  di
- 
sūtreṣu vistareṇa varṇitā /
Karuṇā ṅaranya:  
paraduḥkhaviyogec ca, 
ākāra niṅ jñāna sa ṅ satva  
viśeṣa ahyun hilaṅa ni  
duḥka niṅ sarbva satva. 
Tiga lvir niṅ duḥka niṅ  
para , pagavayan saṅ satva  
viśeṣa karuṇā, lvirnya: 
duḥka-duḥkatā, saṅskāra-
duḥkatā, pariṇāma -
duḥka
tā. Nāhan lvirnyan 
tigaṅ duhka.sā ca karuṇā sarvapīḍi-
tasattvaduḥkhāvagamec 
chākārāsti  / lokatrayasya 
sarvasattvānāṁ trivi-  
dhaduḥkhatayā  yathāyo -
gam atyantaduḥkhitatvāt  
tadartha sarvasattveṣu sā 
bhāvanīyā /
outlined in the SHK  are not exactly the same as 
those found in the Bhāvanākrama , the resonances 
shown above suggest that both Kamalaśīla and 
the compiler of the SHK  might have obtained 
their doctrines from a common Sanskrit source. 
This reminds us of the concept behind verse 25 of 
the SHKM,  which according to Śāntideva was re -
corded in the Ratnameghasūtra . Since Śāntideva 
apparently inserted many quotations from the 
Ratnameghasūtra  in his works, we can infer that 
this scripture was considered authoritative in that 
period. Unfortunately, no Sanskrit manuscripts of 
the Ratnameghasūtra  have been found so far, and 
the text is known to us only through a Chinese 
translation dating back to as early as ad 503 ( T 658). If the Sanskrit text employed by Śāntideva was the 
same as the one translated into Chinese, its doc -
trines must have been known in Indian Buddhist 
milieux from at least the 5th century.
Piṇḍīkrama
Verse 2 of the SHKM  and the translation of its 
commentary are as follows:
atītā ye hi sambuddhāḥ 
tathā caivāpy anāgatāḥ / 
pratyutpannāś ca ye nāthāḥ 
tiṣṭhanti ca jagaddhitāḥ  //
The meaning is: The Lord Buddhas, those of 
the past, those who attained perfect enlight -
enment in the former times, like the Lord 
Vipaśyī, Viśvabhū, Krakucchanda, Kanaka -
muni, and Kāśyapa, all of them are the Bud -
dhas of the past. Tathā caivāpy anāgatāḥ : 
The Lord Buddhas of the future are those ap -
proaching to attain the perfect enlightenment, 
like those [in the series] starting with Lord 
Āryya Maitreya and ending with Samantai -
bhadra [ sic], all of them are the Buddhas of 
the future. Pratyutpannāś ca ye nāthāḥ : In 
addition, the Lord Śrī Śākyamuni is the Bud -
dha of the present: he is [worshipped as] your 
divine Buddha now [in our era], his teachings 
are what your heart is to follow. Tiṣṭhanti ca 
jagaddhitāḥ , they continuously strive after 
the happines of all beings, thinking about the 
release of all beings from rebirth, while mak -
ing plans against the extinction by the total 
annihilation in this world.29
29. Ka: Bhaṭāra hyaṅ buddha saṅ atīta, saṅ maṅ -
abhisaṁbuddha ṅūni riṅ āsitkāla, kady aṅgān bhaṭāra 
Vipaśyī, Viśvabhū, Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, Kāśyapa, 
atīta buddha ṅaranira kabeh. Tathā caivāpy anāgatāḥ , 
kunaṅ bhaṭāra buddha saṅ anāgata, saṅ abhimukha 
maṅabhisaṁbuddha, kady aṅgān: bhaṭāra āryya Mai -
treyādi, Samantabhadra paryyanta, anāgatabuddha ṅa -
ranira kabeh. Pratyutpannāś ca ye nāthāḥ , tumamvah 
bhaṭāra śrī Śākyamuni, vartamānabuddha ṅaranira, sira 
ta pinakahyaṅ buddhanta maṅke, śāsananira ikeṅ tinūt 
atinta. Tiṣṭhanti ca jagaddhitāḥ , tamolah ta sira kum[i]
ṅkiṅ hitasuka niṅ sarbvasatva, umaṅәn-aṅәna kalәpasan 
ikaṅ rāt kabeh saka riṅ saṅsāra, duvәg kumirakira paḍәma 
niṅ mahāpralaya rike bhuvana (Kats 1910: 17).
Kandahjaya.indd   78 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 93] ---
79 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
The three categories of Buddhas of the past, 
present, and future are well known. But there are 
two aspects in the description here that attract our 
attention. First, in the SHKM,  the name of one of 
the past Buddhas, i.e. Śikhin, is missing. It may be 
that the commentator or the scribe made a mistake, 
and yet this feature reminds us of the list inscribed 
on the stūpa of Bharhut. This stūpa is regarded as 
one of the oldest great Buddhist stūpa s built around 
the 2nd century before the Common Era. Alexander 
Cunningham suspected that the railing inscribing 
the name Śikhin was missing.30 To date, however, 
there has been no confirmation, and therefore there 
is still a chance that the name was not there. If that 
was the case, it may suggest that there once existed 
a list containing no Śikhin and such was probably 
the one transmitted to the SHK.
Secondly, the name Samantabhadra (in the 
SHKM : Samantaibhadra) is added behind Maitreya, 
both being the future Buddhas. Nicholaas J. Krom 
(1920 I: 609) was the first scholar to notice this 
peculiar list. In an earlier article about the Bo -
dhisattvas at Mendut, Krom (1918: 419–37) argued 
that they belonged to the Eight Great Bodhisattvas 
of Esoteric Buddhism,31 and conformed to the list 
found in the  Piṇḍīkrama  of the Pañcakrama (ed. 
De la Vallée  Poussin 1896: 3), as follows:
paṭṭikāyāṁ nyaset pūrve  
maitreyaṁ kṣitigarbhakam  /  
vajrapāṇiṁ khagarbhaṁ ca  
nyased dakṣiṇato vratī  // 30  
lokeśaṁ mañjughoṣaṁ ca 
paścimāyāṁ nyaset punaḥ  /  
sarvāvaraṇaviṣkambhiṁ  
samantabhadrañ cottare  // 31
These verses show that those Eight Great Bo -
dhisattvas are assigned to the four cardinal direc -
tions, as follows (Table 3.4):
30. See Cunningham 1879: 45–46 and Barua 1979 I: 50, 
I
I: 2.
31. Following Krom’s identification, Bautze-Picron (1997) 
and Shōji Itō (1985) expanded and discussed the appearance 
of these Bodhisattvas as depicted in the Javanese Buddhist 
temples of Mendut, Borobudur, and Plaosan; among these 
temples, Mendut is considered the oldest and is usually 
dated to the 8th century.Table 3.4: Assignment of Eight Great Bodhisattvas to 
the four cardinal points
Cardinal Points Eight Great Bodhisattvas
East Maitreya
Kṣitigarbha
South Vajrapāṇi
Khagarbha
West Lokeśvara
Mañjughoṣa
North Sarvanivaraṇaviṣkambhin
Samantabhadra
Krom overlooked the arrangement in this as -
signment, but if we observe this list carefully, it is 
clear that the series of Eight Great Bodhisattvas 
begins with Maitreya and ends with Samantab -
hadra, thus corresponding exactly to the Old Ja -
vanese commentary to verse 2 of the SHKM . That 
commentary was possibly composed while bearing 
in mind this list, which begins with Maitreya and 
ends with Samantabhadra.
Furthermore, in addition to the group of Eight 
Great Bodhisattvas, the Piṇḍīkrama  provides yet 
another significant grouping: a group of six Bo -
dhisattvas in relation to the six sense organs.32 The 
Piṇḍīkrama  describes the grouping of six as follows 
(ed. De la Vallée  Poussin 1896: 5):
thlīṁkāraṁ cakṣuṣi nyasya  
kṣitigarbhaṁ vibhāvayet  /  
oṁkāraṁ karṇayornyasya  
vajra-pāṇiṁ vibhāvayet  // 61  
oṁkāraṁ vinyased ghrāṇe  
khagarbhaṁ tu vibhāvayet  /  
oṁkāraṁ rasane dhyātvā  
lokeśaṁ ca vikalpayet // 62  
hūṁkāraṁ manasi dhyātvā  
mañjughoṣaṁ prabhāvayet  /  
oṁkāraṁ sarvakāye ca  
dhyātvā viṣkambhiṇaṁ smaret  // 63
32. This text is an early source in which the two group -
i
ngs appear together. Wayman (1977: 239, 247–48) shows 
the configuration for the group of six and a list of Eight 
Great Bodhisattvas. 
Kandahjaya.indd   79 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 94] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia80
A similar systematization is recorded in the 
Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa ,33 the Sādhanamālā ,34 and 
verse 16 of the Guhyasamājanidānakārikā .35 Verse 
34 of the GSMV  records the association as follows:
kṣitigarbhādikāñ chaṭkāṁś  
cakṣurādisvabhāvajān  / 
kṣiṁ jrīṁ khaṁ gaṁ ṣkam ity ebhiḥ 
saṁ bījāc ca yathākramam // 34
This verse associates Kṣitigarbha with the 
eye-organ and with the syllable kṣiṁ . The corre -
lations among the group of six Bodhisattvas, the six 
sense organs, and the seed syllables are tabulated 
in Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Correlation among the Group of Six’
Bodhisattva Sense Organs
(kāyaviveka /indriya )Seeds
(bīja )
Kṣitigarbha Eye ( cakṣuḥ) kṣiṁ
Vajrapaṇi Ear (śrotraṁ ) jaṁ
Khagarbha Nose (nāsā  or ghrāṇa) khaṁ
Lokeśvara 
(Avalokiteśvara)Tongue (jihvā ) gaṁ
Sarvanivaraṇa- 
viṣkambhinBody-surface 
(kāya  or tvak )ṣkaṁ
Mañjuśrī Mind (manas ) saṁ
The Shilun jing  (十輪經  or Daśacakrasūtra ) is 
the earliest scripture related to Kṣitigarbha known 
in China. This scripture contains a dhāraṇī , which 
is shown on the left column of Table 6 below. A 
parallel dhāraṇī  associated with Bodhisattva 
Ava  lokiteśvara is shown on the right column. The 
33. Ed. Vaidya (1964: 315): kṣitigarbhasya mahāmudrā  / 
mantraṁ cātra bhavati sarvaṁkarmikam—kṣiṁ /
34. Ed. B
hattacharya (1925 I: 20): paścāt ṣaḍaṅganyāsaṁ 
kuryāt / bhagavato cakṣuṣorubhayoś candramaṇḍalaṁ 
tadupari kṣiṁkāraṁ śuklavarṇaṁ, śrotrayoś candra-
maṇḍalopari jaṁkāraṁ nīlavarṇaṁ, nāsāpuṭayoś can -
dramaṇḍalopari khaṁkāraṁ pītavarṇaṁ, jihvāyāṁ 
candr
amaṇḍalopari gaṁkāraṁ raktavarṇaṁ, lalāṭa -
candramaṇḍalopari skaṁkāraṁ, śyāmavarṇaṁ, stana-  
dvaye candramaṇḍalopari saṁkāraṁ śuklavarṇam iti 
ṣaḍaṅganyāsaṁ.
35. Wayman (1977: 10, 238–39): sarvatathāgatakāyaś ca -
turmudrayā mudritaḥ / cakṣurādyātmanā tatra kṣitigar -
bhādijinaurasāḥ .right-column dhāraṇī  (T 1336.616c1) comes from 
the collection of 185 dhāraṇī s compiled during 
the Liang dynasty and translated by an unknown 
translator between 502 and 557.
Table 3.6: Two dhāraṇīs associated with the Group of Six
T 410.685b21: The Shilun 
jing (the Daśacakrasūtra )T 1336.616c1 觀世音說滅一
切罪過得一切所願陀羅尼 
(M10047)
namo ratnatrayāya /
tad yathā  /
kṣobha kṣobha /
saṁkṣobha /
ākaśakṣobha /
bhaskarakṣobha /
akrakṣobha /
barakṣobha /bajrakṣobha /
ālokakṣobha /
dharmakṣobha /
bācamakṣobha /
patyanirharakṣobha /
byāvalokaśamakṣobha /
upaśamakṣobha /nāyanakṣobha  /
prajñānasammuccaraṇa-
ksobha /kṣanakṣobha /
biśariyanakṣobha /
śāstrabākṣobha /cumbu cumbu /
akṣa cumbu /
bakara cumbu /
java cumbu /
bira cumbu /bakti cumbu /
aloka cumbu /
tama cumbu /
satata cumbu /satinihara cumbu /
avalokyata cumbu /
upaśama cumbu /nanaya cumbu /
baracasamuktirana cumbu /
bidhiśriya cumbu /
śastaba cumbu /
biatrasotamahile /
yamayame / cakrase / 
cakramāśrīḥ / mili /
kalpapravarte / 
śrīprabhe /
paracarabandhani /
ratne / baracacacaca /
hilimili / āgaccha / duḥkhe / 
duḥkheruttaretare /
hilimili / mocantakaṁ /
kule mile / 
aṁkucittabi / are gire /
pare gire / kutaśambari / 
ṭiṁke tiṁke / ṭiṅkule /
hulu hulu hulu / kulut os- 
mire / miritre miritre / 
paṣā /
tahara / hare / huru huru /
rūpa pacabiśodhane 
svāhā /
mahābhūtakaluṣat -
biśodhane svāhā /
kaluṣarabhabhiśodhane payaṭamahritami /
śami cani rasi / cani ramasri 
/ caridhirihe kisvarabatati / 
hetra biprabatati /
ratati caṭa caṭa /
hili mili / ekadaki / 
takṣuru dahri dhari /
mili manṭadanṭa /
kuri miri 
akṣacita bimuri / 
prakrikuṭa cambari
taṅki taṅkuri /
śuru śuru krutu /
mili mili 
cibhanṭa /
daha rahri śuru śuru
rūpapasparśa / biśodhani 
svāhā /
mahābuddha karuśa 
biśodhani svāhā /
karuśa ucchabiśodhani
Kandahjaya.indd   80 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 95] ---
81 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
svāhā  /
kaluṣa ojabiśodhane svāhā /
sarvāśaparipūraṇi svāhā /
sarvasaṁsyasaṁpadani svāhā  /
sarvatathāgata arthe svāhā  /
sarvabodhisattva arthe svāhā  //svāhā  /
sarva avaranibiśodhani svāhā  /
karuravabiśodhani svāhā  /
sarva aśaparapūrani svāhā  /
sarvatiṣṭha adhiṣṭhi svāhā  /
sarvabodhisattva adhiṣṭhiti 
namaḥ stuti svāhā  //
tad yathā  /
munimūle  / munigarbhe  /
munihṛdaya  / muniruha-  
bicale  / munihṛde  / 
munigame  / śuklapakṣe  / 
pālaśapakṣe  / nīlapakṣe  / 
saurisakṛte / toraṇakṛcale / 
pātākakṛte  / kukunamile  / 
apakṣasāre / anohakilpi  
munipathāpi svāhā  //
The selected words for these dhāraṇī s provide 
us with another clue. The dhāraṇī  from the Shilun 
jing uses kṣobha  at the beginning, while the one 
for Avalokiteśvara uses cumbu . The Sanskrit word 
cumbu  comes from the root cumb , meaning ‘to kiss’. 
We may surmise that this refers to the organ of 
themouth, or to the tongue. The kṣ in kṣobha  does 
not seem to be arbitrary either, because this akṣara  
occurs in the Sanskrit words caksuḥ  and kṣiṁ . 
Then, the word kṣobha  is the opposite of akṣobha , 
meaning ‘unagitated, unmoved’, and the trans -
formed word, akṣobhya , is known to be a Buddha 
name. The word kṣobha means ‘shaking, agitation, 
disturbance, tossing, trembling, and emotion’ 
(Monier-Williams 1899: 331). This word probably 
refers to the eye-organ. For this reason, these two 
dhāraṇī s are likely to have originated from a pro -
totypical set that associated the six Bodhisattvas to 
the six sense organs, though unfortunately we have 
yet to find the remaining four dhāraṇī s. Nonethe -
less, from what we have obtained so far we may infer 
that they must be dhāraṇī s that circulated among 
those who practised the hidden early teachings of the Guhyasamāja  tradition. Then, if the dating of 
the Chinese collection of the dhāraṇī s can serve 
as a guide, the Guhyasamāja  tradition could have 
already been in existence in an embryonic form 
around the 5th or early 6th century.dating of the shk
Some concepts culled from a series of texts belong -
ing to Dignāga’s line of teachings, ranging from 
the Yogāvatāra to the Bhāvanākrama , clearly echo 
those retained in the SHK . These correspondences 
corroborate and support the SHK ’s claim that its 
set of teachings was received from Ḍaṅ Ācāryya Śrī 
Dignāgapāda, who lived in India circa ad  480–540 
(Buswell and Lopez 2013: 259). While this does not 
automatically date the SHK  to the 6th century, it 
nonetheless helps us to draw a terminus post quem : 
The SHK  must have been compiled some time after 
ad 540.
The following discussion attempts to determine 
the upper limit of the range and, if possible, narrow 
the range of the compilation time. In order to do 
so, some gruelling controversies surrounding the 
rituals, texts, events, and authors behind the newly 
identified sources of the SHK  need to be addressed. 
To elucidate intricate points I shall draw upon Bud -
dhist data from, or closely related to, insular South -
east Asia, which have been hitherto overlooked. My 
comparative analysis will hopefully cast a fresh 
perspective on the way Buddhism was transmitted 
to insular Southeast Asia, and possibly suggest a new view on how the process took place.
hidden teachings from sumatra
In many past studies on Buddhism in Indonesia, 
the source for the story of the early transmission 
of Yogācāra teachings to the Archipelago was the 
Tibetan account compiled by 16th- to 17th-century 
Tibetan historian Tāranātha. The record relates that 
Dharmapāla, a disciple of Dignāga, having taught at 
Nālandā for more than thirty years, spent the end of 
his life in Sumatra (D. Chattopadhyaya 1980: 212–14). 
These events probably occurred in the second half 
of the 6th century.36 However, the validity of this 
claim depends on Tāranātha’s reliability.37 In fact, 
36. Nakamura (1980: 276), following Chinese accounts, 
fixed Dharmapāla’s life in India between the years 530 and 
561. On the other hand, Takakusu (1966: lvii–lviii) suggested 
that Dharmapāla was a contemporary of Bhartṛhari and that he must have died before 635. So, if he ever moved to 
Sumatra, the event likely happened after 561.
37. One source for his compilation was his guru, Bud -
dhagupta, who travelled to many places, including Java 
Kandahjaya.indd   81 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 96] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia82
a different picture is given by Chinese accounts, 
which regard Dharmapāla as having died young in 
India (Buswell and Lopez 2013: 250). Confirming 
either one of these accounts is difficult, especially 
when data from Sumatra itself are not readily avail -
able, controversial, or stem from a later historical 
period (e.g., from the 11th to the 13th century). Thus, 
the status of Buddhism in 7th-century Śrīvijaya 
has been far from clear, since even the location 
of this kingdom has until recently been contested 
(see Jordaan and Colless 2009; Zacharov 2012). 
The transmission of Buddhism to Java is not clear 
either. However, this state of uncertainty is bound 
to change after a careful re-examination of data 
from Sumatra and Java.
(1) Talang Tuo Inscription . The earliest dated 
evidence of Esoteric Buddhism in the Archipelago 
comes from the Talang Tuo Old Malay inscrip -
tion of ad 684. The inscription, discovered near 
Palembang in 1920, was written when Dapunta 
Hyaṅ Śrī Jayanāśa was the king of Śrīvijaya. Ph.S. 
van Ronkel published a transcription along with its 
English translation in 1923; in 1930, Georges Cœdès 
took notice of the term vajraśarīra  inscribed in 
this inscription. He first elaborated on its signifi -
cance by pointing it out as a synonym to vajrakāya , 
meaning ‘diamond body’. C œdès connected it to 
an earlier study on the kāyavākcittavajrasādhana  
of Anuttarayoga  by Louis de la Vallée Poussin, who 
explained that one who could successfully gener -
ate the diamond body would be able to identify 
Tathāgata in his body .38 This explanation comes 
from the Pañcakrama , a commentary to the Gu-
hyasamājatantra . Because of the date of the Talang 
Tuo inscription, Cœdès connected the teachings in 
the inscription to coeval Tantric developments in 
Bengal, where Anaṅgavajra—who was a contempo -
rary of Dapunta Hyaṅ Śrī Jayanāśa—composed the 
Prajñopāyaviniścayasiddhi . This text of Anaṅgava -
and Sumatra in the 16th century (see Tucci 1931: 684, 696, 
698–701, and Ray 1936: 81–86). Ray (1936), in his Stellingen 
no. VII at the end of his dissertation, indicated that ‘the 
Tibetan tradition regarding the introduction of Mahāyāna 
Buddhism and allied cults into Burma, as recorded by 
Tāranātha and Buddhagupta as well as in the Pag Sam 
Jon Zang , is in the main in accordance with the evidence 
of archaeological research’.
38. De la 
Vallée  Poussin 1898: 146; Wayman 1977: 94.jra, as I have mentioned earlier, was closely related 
to the Yogāvatāra .
Cœdès also made a point—thereby supporting 
the earlier attempt by Krom—to relate the SHK  to 
Borobudur. He suggested that the development in 
Java was under the influence of Śrīvijaya. Although 
none seem to have ever heeded his advice, in the 
light of the newly identified sources related to the 
SHK , the direction Cœdès has shown is worthy 
of consideration. In fact, it is now easy to demon -
strate that the Talang Tuo inscription contains 
many concepts akin to the instructions recorded 
in the SHKAS . As pointed out earlier, the SHKAS  
contains an exceptional concept of daśapāramitā  
(ten perfections) combining the six pāramitā s and 
the four apramāṇa s, which also occurs in teach -
ings leaning towards Tantric Buddhism. Besides 
the term vajra śarīra, elements of daśapāramitā  of 
the SHKAS  appear in the Talang Tuo inscription, 
thereby setting the teachings in this inscription 
apart from those commonly found in Mahāyāna 
doctrine. Thus, cultivating brahmavihāra  (maitrī ) 
in combination with the ṣaṭpāramitā  (tyāga  [= 
dāna ], kṣānti , vīryya , samāhitacinta  [= dhyāna ], 
and prajñā ) while establishing vodhicitta  and 
producing the vajraśarīra  for the attainment of 
anuttarābhisamyaksaṅvodhi  as recorded in the 
Talang Tuo inscription echo the unique pattern of 
teachings set in the SHKAS.
(2) Yijing on Dhāraṇī Practitioners, and His Res -
idence in Śrīvijaya. The transmission of Yogācāra 
teachings to the Archipelago is documented by 
Yijing ( ad 635–713). But because of scholastic con -
troversies surrounding the development of Tantric 
Buddhism and especially the controversy about the 
existence of Śrīvijaya in Sumatra, few have paid 
attention to Yijing’s information on Esoteric Bud -
dhism39 and for this very reason we have missed a 
piece of substantial evidence linking up Buddhist 
data from Sumatra with those from Java, India, 
and China.
Yijing tells us that his teacher, Śākyakīrti, was 
one among the five most respected Buddhist 
masters of the time, matching Dignāga in his logical 
skills and possessing an unrivalled knowledge of 
39. Among the few were Seyfort Ruegg (1981: 104) and 
Hodge (2003: 9–11).
Kandahjaya.indd   82 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 97] ---
83 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
the (Yogācāra) teachings of Asaṅga, Nāgārjuna, and 
Saṅghabhadra (Li 2000: 154). From Yijing’s per -
spective, Śākyakīrti was a very significant figure,40 
who mastered a broad range of Buddhist teachings. 
If we consider that Yijing’s sojourn in Śrīvijaya41 
occurred in the period within which the Talang 
Tuo inscription was inscribed in Palembang, the 
teachings as reflected from the inscription were 
probably within the range of Śākyakīrti’s. 
Additional information from Yijing’s accounts 
on the practice and stories associated with dhāraṇī s 
may provide evidence that embryonic forms of 
Tantric Buddhism had already been practised 
for some time in India as well as in other regions 
(Hodge 2003: 10). The following are relevant ex -
cerpts from Yijing’s accounts. The first character -
izes the monks Daolin, Shanxing, Shibian, Bi’an, 
and Zhi’an (Lahiri 1986: 18, 45, 63–68, 83): 
40. Yijing’s estimate was in the ballpark, as Śākyakīrti’s 
w
ork, the Shouzhang-lun  手杖論  or the Hastadaṇḍaśāstra  
translated by Yijing in 711, has survived for us as part of 
the Chinese Buddhist canon ( T 1657).
41. The l
ocation where Yijing resided during his sojourn 
in Śrīvijaya is not known. Yet, the empirical verification of 
astronomical events—the shadow on the sundial during 
different seasons and times of the day—recorded by Yijing 
while residing in Śrīvijaya, and confirmed through a pre -
liminary empirical observation carried out by an Indone -
sian team, suggests that Muara Jambi was in all likelihood 
the location where Yijing resided (I am indebted to the 
Indonesian team leaders who readily volunteered and 
helped with the successful measuring of the shadow of a 
stick placed vertically on the ground of Muara Takus and 
Muara Jambi in 2011: Hermanto [Riau], Pak Hidayat and 
Rudy Zhang [Jambi], Pak Sudhamek and Heru Suherman 
Lim [Jakarta]). Archaeological sites such as that of Mua -
rojambi and the area surrounding the River Batanghari 
have produced quite a number of Buddhist artefacts, a 
fact suggesting that there must have been lots of activities 
related to Buddhism in the past. In the site of Muarojam -
bi alone, covering an area of around 26 square kilome -
tres (around 10 square miles), more than eighty Buddhist temples ( candi s, or manapos) of different sizes have been 
discovered, marked, or identified, and some of them have 
been restored. The site is the largest Buddhist complex in 
the southern hemisphere thus far known. Although the 
majority of the artefacts and vestiges date back to a much 
later period, namely between the 11th and 14th century, 
some of them have been dated—albeit with some degree 
of uncertainty—to between the 7th and 9th century (Budi 
Utomo 2011).[Daolin] with a mendicant stick, reached the 
South Sea in a foreign ship and from there set 
sail for India. On his way he passed through 
copper pillar and arrived at Langka. He 
crossed Holing and Luoguo to reach India. He 
received very warm and affectionate welcome 
from the kings of those countries he passed 
through. He spent a couple of years there and then he reached Tāmralipti in East India. He 
spent three years there in studying Sanskrit 
language.
The pilgrim spent much of his time in stud -
ying carefully Dhāraṇī Piṭaka …. Then he pro -
ceeded to West India where he spent hardly a 
year at Lāṭa country. There he established an 
altar [ maṇḍala ?], got acquainted with spells 
(vidyā ). Sometimes he tried to explain the 
teachings of that Śāstra…. [D]ao-lin desired to protect his mysterious Sūtra . Because this 
Dhāraṇī Piṭaka  says, ‘one may ascend to heaven 
sitting on the dragon-drawn vehicle, one may 
order hundreds of gods as one’s slaves. One’s 
desired object may be achieved only by recit -
ing the mystic gestures and formulae.’ While 
Yijing was at Nālandā, he regularly went to 
the altar [ maṇḍala ?] and wholeheartedly tried 
to study this Sūtra ; he worked quite hard but 
could not attain full success. His primary aim 
was to propagate this idea among a vast mul -
titude of heterodox people. So he wrote down 
only a general outline.
The priest Shanxing…. As he grew, he 
studied the rites on Discipline and expressed 
his feelings to learn Vidyāmantra , spells. Mild 
and humble, frugal and simple by nature, he 
became the disciple of Yijing and followed him 
to Śrīvijaya but always remembered his own 
country. When he got ulcer, he took a small 
boat and returned to China at the age of a little 
over forty.
Dharmācārya Shibian, Śrī Kaśa … thor -
oughly studied the Sanskrit language and
 
Vidyāmantra .
Bi’an, Dharmācārya Nirvāṇa, and Zhi’an, 
Jñā na
pārin. Both these monks were the 
natives of Turfan. They went to the capital city 
cherishing the idea of becoming monks. They 
were anxious to visit Mid-India and to witness with their own eyes the transforming influence 
(of the Doctrine) that had taken place there. 
Kandahjaya.indd   83 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 98] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia84
Then, Bi’an and Zhi’an with the Chinese envoy 
Wang Xuanguo boarded the ship. On board 
they fell sick and died. Many copies of Bud -
dhist Sūtras and Śāstras in Chinese translation, 
texts on Yoga belonging to them were left in 
the country of Śrīvijaya.
Yijing also vividly narrated stories on Nāgārjuna 
and Dignāga in relation to Tantric Buddhism, as 
follows (Lahiri 1986: 65–68):
Generally, the meaning of Vidyā  in Sanskrit is 
Vidyādhara Piṭaka . Vidyā  has been translated 
as Mingzhou …. Thus, it is called Vidyādhara 
Piṭaka . The Sanskrit text, it is told, contained 
100,000 śloka s. It might have been translated 
into Chinese three hundred juan s, (chapter, fas -
ciculi). Now (at the time of Yijing) most of those 
translations were lost, only a few were extant.
After the Mahāparinirvāṇa of the Great 
Sacred One (Buddha), Arya Nāgārjuna that 
is Nāgārjuna Bodhisattva preserved the true 
spirit of the Piṭaka .
One of his disciples, known as Nanda, was 
a brilliant scholar, and was very much proud of 
his knowledge; he paid special attention to this 
text. He spent twelve years in Western India, 
wholeheartedly studied the Vidyā  or Spell and 
acquired great knowledge of the mystic man -
tras. Every mealtime he chanted the mantras 
and food would fall from the sky. No sooner 
did he recite the mantras and ask for food with 
magic bowl than he obtained it from the sky. 
He could get all the desired objects with this 
magic bowl in his hand. Supposing the man -
tras were not chanted the bowl would vanish 
in no time.
Therefore, the great monk Nanda was 
afraid that his knowledge of the Vidyā  would 
be of no use if it was not practised regularly. 
He collected 12,000  śloka s which later on were 
compiled into a separate school of thought. 
Each and every word of the printed text was 
carefully compared. Although the language 
and the words of the book were same, the 
meaning and applications were completely dif -
ferent. Until it was expounded orally no one 
could understand and realise the significance 
of the mantras.
Later on, when the Śāstrācārya Dinnāga 
studied his works, he was astonished to find his lofty and noble ideas, profound knowledge and 
his extreme attachment to the subject.
Touching the Sūtra  affectionately, he said 
with a deep sigh—‘If he (Nanda) attains per -
fection in Hetu Vidyā  could I be compared any 
longer with him in scholarship? Not only a 
wise man could comprehend the range of his 
knowledge but also a stupid one could under -
stand his profound scholarship’. This Dhāraṇī 
Piṭaka  was never very popular in China.
Yijing’s account suggests five important points: 
(1) Yijing likely picked up his stories from those 
being commonly narrated during his stay in 
India or Sumatra. (2) In regard to Nāgārjuna and 
Dignāga, the accounts must be prevailing stories 
from India, and these stories clearly put them in 
direct connection with Tantric practices. Yijing’s 
stories appear to be first-hand accounts, and look 
different in comparison to Kumārajīva’s account 
of Nāgārjuna’s association with Tantric teach -
ings (Corless 1995: 525–31). Yijing’s stories also 
predate any Tibetan records. (3) Yijing said that 
the Vidyādhara Piṭaka  was already translated and 
known in China, but to his understanding it was 
lost and was never popular; yet, from accounts of 
Shanxing and Shibian we may infer that Chinese 
monks seemed to know the practice while they 
were still in China (Lahiri 1986: 18, 83). (4) Yijing 
apparently was not successful in mastering Tantric 
teachings. (5) Yijing’s statements that Nanda col -
lected 12,000 śloka s that were later compiled into 
a separate school of thought, that their meanings 
and applications were completely different, and 
that until they were expounded orally no one could 
understand the significance of the mantras, suggest 
that there was a different type of manuscript pro -
duction intended for a special audience, perhaps 
for the purpose of transmitting hidden meaning. 
tantric transmission to java
Having explored some Buddhist data from Sumatra, 
however briefly, I take the opportunity to roughly 
sketch the range of possibilities with regard to dates 
and patterns of the transmission of Esoteric Bud -
dhist teachings to the Archipelago, and to Java in 
particular. The evidence gathered thus far allows 
us to surmise that early hidden teachings, e.g. those 
Kandahjaya.indd   84 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 99] ---
85 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
that were related to the Guhyasamāja  tradition, 
were already redacted and thriving in India in the 
5th to 6th century at the latest. From there, those 
hidden teachings spread to regions outside. The two 
Chinese dhāraṇī s associated with the Group of Six 
dated to the 6th century corroborate development 
in outlying regions. The Talang Tuo inscription 
dated to 684 may provide additional clues on such 
development.
When we now ponder over Buddhist data from 
Java, we must first of all keep in mind that this 
island was not a blank sheet while Sumatra was 
bustling with Buddhist activities. Chinese records 
on Faxian and Guṇavarman suggest that Buddhism 
in Java began in the 5th century at the latest.42 
Early on, J.G. de Casparis (1956: 70) ascribed the 
appearance of eleven gold plates engraved with 
the complete texts of the Pratītyasamutpādasūtra , 
the Vibhaṅga , and the Upadeśa  to the missionary 
activity of Guṇavarman, who disembarked in Java 
from his seaborne journey in the beginning of the 
5th century. The appearance of the gold plates de -
scribed above supports the report given by Yijing 
that there was a Buddhist centre in Java, called 
Kaliṅga (Heling 訶陵 ), in the 7th century.43 Accord-
ing to his story, a Chinese monk, Huining 會寧  by 
name, a native of Chengdu in Sichuan, travelled 
by the sea route and reached Kaliṅga in Java in 
the year 665, and then lived there for three years 
with a well-reputed monk, Jñānabhadra (Lahiri 
1986: 36–38). In the Chinese canon, the name 
Jñānabhadra indeed appears as the translator of 
the Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra .44
42. See Kandahjaya 2004: 42–44, where I discussed the 
s
tate of Buddhism in Java in relation to these two monks.
43. Se
e Lahiri 1986: 36–38. The Balinese Aṣṭa-mahā-bha -
ya-kliṅ  contains the toponym Kliṅ (Kәliṅ ), which has been 
identified as Java by Goudriaan and Hooykaas (1970: 311). It 
has been debated whether the name Heling 訶陵 refers to 
Kaliṅga, also the location of this toponym. Damais (1964), 
van der Meulen (1977), and lately Mahdi (2008) are among 
those who have contributed to the discussions. While the 
discussions on Heling may have pointed to a number of 
geographical locations, including Kaliṅga in India and 
the Malay Peninsula, the Chinese accounts from the Tang 
dynasty record descriptions of Heling unmistakably refer -
ring to Java (Groeneveldt 1960: 12–15). 
44. T 377
: Daban niepan jing hou fen 大般涅槃經後分  (2 
juan s).Huining ordered his disciple monk Yunqi 運
期 to go back to China to present the Chinese 
translation of the Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra . Yunqi 
returned to Kaliṅga and spent more than ten years 
there. He was well acquainted with the language 
of the people of Kunlun (the South Seas) and ac -
quired some knowledge of Sanskrit. Later on, he 
retired to lay life and lived in Śrīvijaya up to the 
time of Yijing. A sudden change took place in him; 
he was greatly moved by the Law of the Buddha 
and again he travelled across the island preaching 
the religion in the city. He propagated the religion 
among non-believers. He breathed his last when 
he was forty (Lahiri 1986: 38–39). While we do not 
have further information about Yunqi, this account 
reveals a truly significant clue about insular com -
munication and transmission. It shows that Java 
and Sumatra were not secluded islands, and that 
a Chinese monk could acquire and speak the local 
language and even preach.
Recently, a large Buddhist complex has been 
unearthed at Batujaya, Karawang, in West Java 
(Djafar 2010). Archaeological activities, which 
started in 1984, have identified thirty Buddhist 
temples within an area of around 5 square kilo -
metres (around 2 square miles). The temples have 
been dated to the 5th to 8th century. In this area, 
the excavation unearthed clay votive tablets and 
gold leaf inscriptions at the Blandongan site. Some 
scholars believe that those clay votive tablets display 
a depiction of the miracles of Śrāvastī (Manguin and Indradjaja 2011). The inscriptions were dated 
on palaeographic grounds to the 6th to 7th century. 
These inscriptions contain passages similar to those 
discovered in the Malay Peninsula, and interesting -
ly enough to those in Sungai Tekarek, Batu Pahat 
(West Kalimantan), which were palaeographically 
dated to the 5th century.45 
45. The Kedah inscription, Cherok Tokun inscription, 
Mahānāvika Buddhagupta inscription in the Malay 
Peninsula, and inscriptions from Sungai Tekarek, Batu 
Pahat, West Kalimantan, include lines which are similar 
to inscriptions from Blandongan (see Chhabra 1935, Her -
goualc’h 2002: 213–15). The Sungai Tekarek inscription 
runs as follows: ajñānāc=cīyate karma janmanāḥ karma 
kāraṇam / jñānān=na kriyate karmma karmmābhāvān=na 
jāyate (‘Through ignorance karma  is accumulated. The 
cause of birth is karma . Through knowledge karma  is not 
Kandahjaya.indd   85 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 100] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia86
Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra and Prājña
Besides the early indications of Buddhist influence 
described above, more definitive information on 
initial Tantric activities comes from Chinese ac -
counts of Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra, and Prājña,46 
as well as the Kalasan and the Kelurak inscriptions 
from Central Java. All of these are dated to the 
8th century.
The sea route transported two prominent Eso -
teric Buddhist masters in the 8th century.47 They 
were Vajrabodhi, who travelled extensively in the 
South Seas before going to China, and his disciple, 
Amoghavajra. These two, together with Śubhāka -
rasiṁha, who reached China overland,48 were later 
considered to be the three founders of the Chinese 
Esoteric Buddhist school.49 Because of Vajrabodhi’s 
and Amoghavajra’s vital roles in the development 
of Esoteric Buddhism in China and other countries, 
their biographies have been subjected to repeated 
studies and at the same time have spurred schol -
arly debates. One of the controversies is related to 
whether or not these two monks met in Java in 719, 
or whether Amoghavajra took the sea route on his 
first trip from his native land to China.50 I agree 
accumulated. Through absence of karma  one is not [re-]
born’; trans. Chhabra).
46. I conveniently borrow the writing of the accounts 
of Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra, and Prājña from my own 
dissertation (Kandahjaya 2004).
47. I am referring to records of Vajrabodhi disembarking 
on Java around 719 on the way to China (Chou 1945: 321) 
and of Amoghavajra disembarking on Java on the way to 
Sri Lanka around 742 (ibid.: 290).
48. Śubhākarasiṁha himself reached Xian in China in 716 
via overland route (see Chou 1945: 263). He was famous for 
his translation of the Mahāvairocanasūtra  (T 848).
49. See Soothill and Hodous 1977: 333. This school is 
often referred to as the True Word or Mantra School or 
Zhenyanzong 真言宗  in Chinese or Shingonshū in Japa -
nese. Another term is the True Word or Mantra Vehicle 
or Zhenyancheng 真言乘 . From the latter, one may get a 
back-translation Mantrayāna.
50. For this debate, see, for instance, Orzech 1998: 140 and 
Sundberg and Giebel 2011. Amoghavajra’s native land is 
also a su bject of debate, because one source said his native 
country is Sri Lanka (Pachow 1958: 17–18), and Weerasin -
ghe (
1995: 27) even considered Amoghavajra a Sri Lankan 
Brahmin who was once sent to China as the king’s envoy; 
Chou (1945: 321) opted for Samarkand.with Raffaello Orlando (1981: 10) that even though 
Chou Yi-liang tried his best, Amoghavajra’s origin 
is not yet sufficiently established. However, by the 
same token, until it can be convincingly proven 
otherwise, the possibility of Amoghavajra taking 
the sea route to China and therefore meeting Va -
jrabodhi on the way to China cannot be dismissed. 
Regardless of this dispute, in addition to a number 
of scriptures which Vajrabodhi himself carried 
to China, Amoghavajra greatly expanded the col -
lection of esoteric texts in China after gathering 
more scriptures in Sri Lanka (and perhaps also 
India) from 741 to 746. From his translations, we 
have inherited many Esoteric Buddhist texts of 
primary importance, such as portions of the Va -
jraśekharasūtra , which is often considered to be a 
collection of sutras that includes, for example, the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgrahasūtra .51
Considering Vajrabodhi a disciple of Nāgabo -
dhi, the author of the GSVV , and Amoghavajra the 
successor of Vajrabodhi as well as a translator of 
many esoteric texts—which are nota bene  all related 
to the identified sources of the SHK  discussed pre -
viously—we now have a study by Sundberg and 
Giebel (2011) to reconsider their relation with Java 
beyond just a casual disembarkment. This relation 
is significant, as a Javanese monk named Bian -
hong became a disciple of Huiguo, the successor 
of Amoghavajra. Thus, Vajrabodhi’s meeting with 
Amoghavajra in Java in 719, and Amoghavajra’s 
possible disembarkation in Java in 742 on his way 
to Sri Lanka, might have provided a spur for further 
developments in Javanese Esoteric Buddhism. As a 
result, we could raise the lower limit for the range 
of the compilation time of the SHK  to the year 719.
Furthermore, when Amoghavajra was ap -
51. T 865 was translated by Amoghavajra, T 866 by Va -
jr
abodhi. On the relation between the Sarvatathāgatatat -
tvasaṅgraha  and the Vajraśekhara , see Todaro 1985: 36–39. 
Amoghavajra also retranslated some sūtra s, such as the 
Ghanavyūhasūtra  (T 682) and the Renwangjing 經 (T 246). 
The complete title is Ren wang hu guo ban ruo bo luo mi 
duo jing 仁王護國般若波羅密多經 . C.D. Orzech (1998) has 
already translated this text, the English title of which is 
The Scripture for Humane Kings . These two sutras were 
especially worth noting as Emperor Daizong wrote prefaces 
to them (Chou 1945: 296), which indicates both the intimate 
relationship between Amoghavajra and the emperor and 
the degree to which Buddhism had received royal patronage.
Kandahjaya.indd   86 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 101] ---
87 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
proaching his final days, one of the texts he greatly 
praised and talked about frequently was the Bhad -
racarī .52 Buddhabhadra had already translated this 
text ( T 296), and afterwards Prājña translated it 
again for the third time. But, differing from the 
previous two translations in which the Bhadracarī  
appeared as a discrete text, the third translation by 
Prājña incorporates it—as its last chapter—in the 
40-fascicle Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra (T 293), the text for 
which Prājña was especially famous. Prājña himself 
was probably the last notable Indian monk who 
used the sea route and whose final destination was 
China. Before arriving in Canton in 780, he trav -
elled extensively in the South Seas (Pachow 1958: 19). 
His presence in the South Seas might be the source 
for the depiction of Prājña’s Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra  at 
Borobudur, even though there was also a chance 
that Bianhong took a copy of that text back to Java 
from China (Kandahjaya 2009). 
Kalasan inscription
The Kalasan inscription contains an opening 
passage ( maṅgalācaraṇa ) paying homage to Tārā 
(tārādevī ), as follows (Sarkar 1971 I: 35):
Namo bhagavatyai āryātārāyai  // 
yā tārayaty amitaduḥkhabhavādbhimagnaṁ 
lokaṁ vilokya vidhivattrividhair upayaiḥ  / 
sā vaḥ surendranaralokavibhūtisāraṁ tārā 
diśatvabhimataṁ jagadekatārā  //
Two significant corollaries result from this 
passage. First, the maṅgalācaraṇa  of the Kalasan 
inscription may relate the worship of Tārā to the 
teachings of Dignāga, because the Yogāvatāra opens 
with a homage to Tārā as well ( namas tārāyai ). Sec -
ondly, this inscription consecrated the construction 
of a temple for Tārā ( tārābhavana ) in the year ad 
782. The date draws our utmost attention, as Stephen 
Beyer (1973: 6) considered it the oldest epigraphic 
evidence for the worship of Tārā. Furthermore, 
in addition to the characterization of Tārā being 
a goddess ( tārādevī ), the first adoration statement 
in this inscription bears the epithet Bhagavatī 
Āryātārā  (‘Blessed Noble Tārā’), which is also 
found in the extended title of the Tantric manual 
52. See Chou 1945: 299. The text itself is T 297.Tārāmūlakalpa , and in the text itself.53 Thus, this 
inscription is by far the earliest evidence showing 
the appearance of Tantric Buddhism in Java. The 
Tārā cult may have been partially preserved in Bali, 
since her famous mantra for protection from the 
eight fears, the Aṣṭa-mahā-bhaya-kliṅ , is declared 
to have originated in Kliṅ (Kaliṅga, or Java) and is 
still being chanted in the Balinese living tradition.54
Kelurak inscription
The Kelurak inscription, dated ad  782, consecrates 
an image of Mañjuśrī installed by Kumāraghoṣa, 
a guru from Gauḍīdvīpa (modern Bengal or 
Bangladesh). Its maṅgalācaraṇa  is as follows (Bosch 
1928: 18; Sarkar 1971 I: 42, 44):
namo ratnatrayāya  
jayalokeśvarasugatapadākṣara jayabhad -
reśvarasugatapadākṣara  / 
jayaviśveśvarasugatapadākṣara jaya - - 
śvarasugatapadākṣara  //
Homage to the Triple Jewels.
The victorious Lokeśvara, the imperishable 
Sugata; the victorious Bhadreśvara, the imper -
ishable Sugata.
The victorius Viśveśvara, the imperishable 
Sugata; the victorius - - śvara , the imperishable 
Sugata.
Attempts have not been lacking to identify this 
Mañjuśrī by resorting to this maṅgalācaraṇa . Yet, 
the last one in the list of Lokeśvara, Bhadreśvara, 
Viśveśvara, and - - śvara  is missing two syllables and 
therefore hinders scholars from identifying the list 
right away. At the time of his reading, F.D.K. Bosch 
53. See Landesman 2008: 44–59 and Shaw 2006: 315. 
Marcelle Lalou (1936: 327–49) shows that these two texts 
are correlated. It is worth noting that the colophon of the 
manuscript preserving the Tārāmūlakalpa attributes this 
text to Atīśa, who according to Tibetan sources introduced 
(or, more likely, reinvigorated) the cult of T ārā i n Tibet from 
Suvarṇadvīpa, which has been identified with Sumatra (see 
Schoterman, this volume).
54. See Goudrian and Hooykaas 1971: 309–12. This mantra 
identifies the deity being the essence of all ( sarvasattva ). 
In the Kalasan inscription, Tārā carries the essence of 
spiritual power of heaven and human realms ( surendra -
naralokavibhūtisāra ).
Kandahjaya.indd   87 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 102] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia88
proposed Ratneśvara as the most likely reconstruc -
tion.55 There is ample reason to adopt Bosch’s sug -
gestion, as Mañjuśrī is in fact often associated with 
the Tathāgatas. A relevant iconographic form for 
this is Mañjuśrī in the form of Arapacana. This 
form includes Vairocana, Ratnasaṁbhava, Amitā -
bha, and Amoghasiddhi.56 These four, as suggested 
by Bosch, may be related to Bhadreśvara (Samant -
abhadra), Lokeśvara (Padmapāṇi), Viśveśvara 
(Viśvapāṇi), and thus Ratneśvara (Ratnapāṇi). 
Verse 8 mentions a nīlotpala , suggesting that he 
holds a ‘blue lotus’ (blue water-lily)—one of the 
three principal symbols of Mañjuśrī (Sarkar 1971 I: 
48). It is therefore likely that this Mañjuśrī belongs 
to the family of Akṣobhya,57 and thus may be iden -
tified as Vajrapāṇi, Mañjuvajra, or Vajreśvara. This 
form of Arapacana became more explicit later and 
was known to the Javanese.58 Moreover, the SHKAS 
corroborates this association when it says that the 
five Tathāgatas create the five Īśvaras.59 Later, King 
Kṛtanagara (1268–92) of the Siṅhasāri dynasty was 
consecrated as a Jina, Jñānabajreśvara, thus incor -
porating the name Vajreśvara. When he died, King 
Kṛtanagara was enshrined as Śiva-Buddha at Candi 
Jawi, where Akṣobhya was placed at the pinnacle 
of this tower temple.
We obtain the identification of Mañjuśrī being 
Vajrapāṇi, or vice versa, from the Guhyasamājatan -
tra. Verses 72 to 75 in Chapter 17 of this text identify 
55. See Bosch 1928: 44–45. This reconstruction is supported by 
Sarkar (1971 I: 47), but rejected by Lokesh Chandra (1995: 218).
56. Bhattacharyya (1968: 120–21) describes Mañjuśrī in 
the form of Arapacana, while Foucher (1900: 40–41) de -
scribes Mañjuśrī depicted together with Vairocana, Rat -
nasaṁbhava, Amitābha, and Amoghasiddhi.
57. See Bhattacharyya 1968: 102–23 and Foucher 1900: 
40–41. None of the Tathāgatas belonging to the family of 
Amitābha holds a lotus (Bhattacharyya 1968: 49).
58. Archaeologists discovered at least one copy of his 
image in Candi Jago in East Java. Unfortunately, we do 
not know exactly where this statue is now. See Kinney, 
Klokke, and Kieven (2004: 117): ‘An important statue of 
Manjushri dated 1343 was taken from Candi Jago to the 
Berlin Museum in 1861 and disappeared at the end of World 
War II. [Endnote: This sculpture along with other objects 
from Berlin museums is rumored to be in storage at the 
Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg]’.
59. SHK
AS, folio 54a: …Pañcatathāgata maṅdadyakәn 
pañceśvara …Vajrapāṇi as the supreme lord of all Tathāgatas 
(sarvatathāgatādhipati) , Mahāvajradhara, as well 
as Mañjunātha, another name for Mañjuśrī, Mañ -
juvāk, or Mañjughoṣa.60 These verses also show the 
relationship between Vajradhara and the four god -
desses ( devī) of Locanā, Māmakī, Pāṇḍaravāsinī, 
and Tārā. In verse 51 of this chapter, the relationship 
is described via the five elements ( dhātu ), as follows:
prthivī locanākhyātā abdhātur māmakī smṛtā  /
pāndarakhyā bhavet tejo vāyus tārā prakīrtitā  / 
khavajradhātusamayaḥ saiva vajradharaḥ 
smṛtaḥ  // 51
ity āha bhagavān sarvatathāgatabhuvaneśvaro 
mahāvajrasattvaḥ  /
These correspondences are recorded in the 
GSMV  as well as the GSVV . Verses 36 and 37 of 
the GSMV  are as follows:61
60. Matsunaga (1978: 110), basing himself on other wit -
nesses and commentaries, attempts to emend the phrase 
mañjunātha , found in the Bhattacharyya or Bagchi edi -
tions, into adya nātha . While this is of course a possibility, 
it is important to remember that even if it is just nātha , 
the Mañjuśrīnāmasaṅgīti  informs us that nātha  is also 
an epithet of Mañjuśrī. See also Wayman 1977: 299–301.
61. Pak Hidayat in Jambi brought my attention to a stone 
inscription discovered at Candi Bungsu in Muara Takus 
(Sumatra), which bears a viśvavajra motif and nine bīja s in 
Nāgarī script (see Fig. 11.8 in Miksic, this volume, p. 270). 
Although this inscription has already been described by 
J.W. Yzerman (1891: 59) and recently by Griffiths (2014: 236), 
it has not been properly read or understood in terms of its 
meaning and role for Indonesian Buddhism. My reading 
of this inscription shows that the syllable in the centre 
is hūm̐ (usually for Akṣobhya). Then, clockwise, starting 
from the eastern direction (in the middle on the far right 
side of the stone), the syllables are: kha m̐ (for Vairocana; 
contrast Griffiths’ ṇa m̐), on the southern direction below is 
om̐ (for Ratnasambhava), on the western side is am ̐ (for Am -
itābha; contrast Griffiths’ tra m̐), and on the north at the 
top is hrī m̐ (for Amoghasiddhi). On the four corners, be -
ginning from the southeast, the syllable is ta m̐ (Tārā), on 
the southwest it is la m̐ (Locanā), on the northwest it is  
mam̐ (Māmakī), and on the northeast it is pa m̐ (Pāṇḍar -
avāsinī). All these syllables are enumerated in verses 36 
and 37 of the GSMV, with minor variants (e.g., ā -s for the 
correlates to the Devīs). I have found similar series of bīja s 
(i.e., in different order, in full or partial count) in many 
other sources, such as the Mañjuvajramaṇḍala  in the first 
chapter of the Niṣpannayogāvalī , the Gurumaṇḍalapūjā , 
the Mañjuśrīsamaguhyānuttaradhyānamukhamahātan -
trarājasūtra , and the Hevajra [dākinījālasambara ]tantra .
Kandahjaya.indd   88 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 103] ---
89 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
locanādyās tu tā vidyāḥ 
pṛthivyādisvabhāvajāḥ /
lāṁ māṁ pāṁ tām iti tv ebhir 
jagaddharmātmatattvajāḥ  // 36
śāśvatādyāṁs tu saṁbuddhān  
rūpādiskandhasvabhāvajān  /
buṁ āṁ jrīṁ-bhiś ca khaṁ hūṁ-bhyāṁ 
sarvadharmān samutsṛjet  // 37
These are followed by a description that also 
includes the connection of each goddess with each 
of the four brahmavihāra s:
moharatīti āgneyāṁ 
kṛpopāyajanārthadā  /
kāyeśavat svarūpā syāl
locanā svendumaṇḍale // 76
dveṣaratīti nairṛtyāṁ
maitrī praṇidhikāmadā  /
citteśavad ratautsukyā
māmakī candramaṇḍale  // 77
rāgaratīti vāyavyāṁ
modabalasamādhidā  /
vāgīśābhārthaśuddhā sā
pāṇḍarā candramaṇḍale  // 78
vajraratīti caiśānyām
upekṣā jñānasādhikā /
ratneśavat svarūpā syāc  
candre tārā manoramā  // 79
The SHKAS  contains parallel descriptions for all 
the pentads. The relationship between and among 
all the pentads is presented in Table 3.7. 
An echo of the Guhyasamāja  may be found in 
the Kelurak inscription. Verses 13 to 15 run:62
This peerless pillar of glory is an excellent 
bridge of religion.63 The image of Mañjuśrī is
62. See Bosch 1928: 19–20, Sarkar 1971 I: 41–48, and 
C
handra 1995: 218–24. The verses are as follows: kīrti -
stambho ’yam atulo dharmmasetur anuttaraḥ  / rakṣārthaṁ 
sarvasatvānāṁ mañjuśrīpratimākṛtiḥ  // atrabuddhaś ca  
dharmmaś ca saṅghaś cāntargataḥ sthitāḥ / dṛṣţavyo dṛś -
yaratne ’smin smarārāti nisūdane  // ayaṁ sa vajradhṛk 
śrīmān brahmā viṣṇur mmaheśvaraḥ  / sarvadevamayaḥ 
svāmī mañjuvāg iti giyate //.
63. In support of the translation of dharmasetu  a s ‘bridge 
of religion’ I may refer to the Kalasan inscription dated to 
778, which consecrated a statue of Tārā. This inscription 
also contains the term dharmasetu  in verse 10, as follows: 
sarvān evāgāminaḥ pārthivendrān bhūyo bhūyo yācate 
rājasiṃhaḥ  / sāmānyo yaṃ dharmmasetur narānāṃ kāle 
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan Guhyasamājatantra
Ratnatraya Tathāgata Śīla Pāramitā Devī Elements Tathāgata Devī Tathāgata
Buddha kāya Vairocana asih catur pāramitāmetrī ya Locanā ākāśa Akṣobhya Locanā Akṣobhya
karuṇā e Māmakī āpaḥ Ratnasambhava Māmakī Ratnasambhava
muditā vaṁ Pāṇḍaravāsinī teja Amitābha Pāṇḍaravāsinī Amitābha
upekṣā ma Tārā bāyu Amoghasiddhi Tārā Amoghasiddhi
Dharmma vāk Amitābha puṇya ṣaṭ pāramitā ṣaṭ pāramitā yaBajradhātvīś-
varīpṛthivī Vairocana(Vajradhātvīś-
varī)Vairocana
Saṅgha citta Akṣobhya bhaktiacts in accord 
with āgamaTable 3.7: Correlations between and among the triads and the pentads
Kandahjaya.indd   89 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 104] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia90
for the protection of all beings.
Here standing inside are the Buddha, the Dharm -
ma, and the Saṅgha. They are to be seen in this 
beautiful jewel destroying the enemy Smara. 
This one, he, vajradhṛk,  the auspicious one, is 
Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara. This lord, made 
of all gods, is praised as Mañjuvāk.
These verses state that Mañjuśrī is a lord made 
of all gods ( sarvadevamayaḥ  svāmī ), and is identi -
fied with vajradhṛk  (= vajradhara , and hence, as in 
the Guhyasamāja , Vajrapāṇi). The relation of the 
highest form of the Buddha—here Mañjuśrī—to 
the totality of divine manifestations finds a parallel 
in the SHKAS  (Kats 1910: 59–61), where Bhaṭāra 
Divarūpa (Divine Light) is characterized as em -
bodying different divine forms, among which is a 
triad formed by the Buddha Śākyamuni, Lokeśvara, 
and Vajrapāṇi, which is called Ratnatraya and rep -
resents the triad of Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha. 
Vairocana—who ultimately constitutes an ema -
nation of the above triad—is said to be the source 
from where all the gods and lesser beings emerge, 
namely the triad of Īśvara, Brahmā, and Viṣṇu, 
who ‘are ordered to perfect the Triple-World’ ( sira 
ta kinon mamaripūrṇāknaṅ tribhuvana ) and are 
the ‘accomplisher of all deeds’ ( sarvakāryakarttā ) 
on behalf of Vairocana. 
Thus we find a commonality of ideas between 
this passage of the SHKAS  and the verses of the 
inscriptions, which indicate that Mañjuśrī possesses 
the Triratna (Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha) and is 
also identical to the Trimūrti (Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and 
Maheśvara). As unusual as it may have been from 
the perspective of ordinary Buddhism, a similar as -
sociation with the triad of Brahmanical gods is also 
recorded in the Guhyasamāja (ed. Tripathi 1988: 44):
kāle pālanīyo bhavadbhiḥ  (‘The lion of kings again and 
again requests to all future kings. This bridge of religion 
of all people should be protected by you at all times’). A 
dictionary of Chinese-Sanskrit compiled by Liyan 禮言  and 
dated to the Tang dynasty Fanyu zaming  (T 2135 梵語雜名 ) 
lists the transcription for setu  as xidu  細睹  (T 2135.1234b8) 
and the meaning as qiao  橋 (i.e., bridge). The term suggests 
that the Javanese of the time viewed the monuments of 
Kalasan and Kelurak as ‘equipment’ (i.e., a bridge) which 
‘took one to the other shore’. However, since the Kelurak 
inscription also stated that Ratnatraya was identical to the 
Trimūrti, the term dharmasetu  may as well be interpreted 
as a bridge between Buddhism and Śaivism.Trivajrasamaya siddhyartha 
bhavet trikāya vajriṇaḥ  / 
daśadik sarvabuddhānāṁ  
bhavec cintamaṇyodadhiḥ  // 12.50 
The three diamond samayas are identical to the 
triple diamond bodies, the ocean of cintamaṇi  
creates all Buddhas in the ten directions.
Compare the following passage:64 
atha vajrapāṇiḥ sarvatathāgatādhipatiḥ trivajra -
sam
ayaṁ svakāyavākcittebhyo niṣcārayām āsa /
kāyavajro bhaved brahmā  
vāgvajras tu maheśvaraḥ /
cittavajradharo rājā  
saiva viṣṇur mahardhikaḥ  // 17.19
Then Vajrapāṇi, the supreme lord of all Ta-  
thāgatas, caused to appear to all Svakāyavākcit -
tas the three diamond samaya s:
Granted the diamond-like body is Brahmā, the 
diamond-like speech is Maheśvara;
Likewise, he, the king, the Vajradhara-like mind 
is Viṣṇu, the great power.
This identification is also attested in the Dale-jin -
gang-bukong-zhenshi-sanmeiye-jing-banruo-boluo -
miduo-liqushi 大樂金剛不空真實三昧 耶經般 若波
羅蜜多理趣釋  translated by Amoghavajra ( T 1003), 
which is a commentary to his own Chinese trans -
lation of the Adhyardhaśatikāprajñāpāramitāsūtra 
(T 243: Dale-jingang-bukong-zhenshi-sanmeiye-jing 
大樂金剛不空眞實三摩耶經 ). In the commentary, 
Amoghavajra said that the three brothers ( 三兄弟 ) 
mentioned in the sutra are the three gods, Brahmā, 
Nārāyaṇa, and Maheśvara, and they represent 
the Triratna and the Trikāya of Buddhism.65 It 
further identifies the Buddha with Vajrasattva, 
the Dharma with Avalokiteśvara, and the Saṅgha 
with Ākāśagarbha.66
If we peruse and tabulate the associations 
related to all the triads mentioned in the SHK , we 
find that the compiler of the Old Javanese text knew 
64. See Tripathi 1988: 105; also Wayman 1977: 33, 106–7, 
118–19, 218–19, 248–49. In the text the three Brahmani -
cal gods are identified with Vairocana, Amitābha, and 
Akṣobhya, and further homologized with the tryakṣara  
consisting of oṁ, āḥ, and hūṁ  (see also Wayman 1973: 177–82).
65. T 1003.616b6: 此 三天 表佛法中三寶三身 .
66. T 10
03.616b6-b8: 佛寶者是金剛薩埵. 法寶者觀自在菩薩. 
僧寶者是虛空藏菩薩 .
Kandahjaya.indd   90 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 105] ---
91 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
this identity. The identification of the Buddha with 
Vajrasattva is recorded in the SHKAS . Then the 
opening paragraph of the SHKM  relates the three 
syllables ( tryakṣara : oṁ aḥ hūṁ) to the three di -
amonds ( kāya -, vāk-, citta-bajra ), and then to the 
Triratna, and to the Trimūrti (see Table 3.8). By 
looking at the correlations among and between 
the triads, Akṣobhya is identified with Vajradhṛk,  
Sarvajñāna , and hūṁ , and in turn is identical to 
his procreator Vajrapāṇi, and to Śākyamuni, and 
ultimately to Bhaṭāra Divarūpa (which is likely 
a reference to divine clear light, or prabhāsvara ).
Miji jingang lishi hui
The three categories of Body, Speech, and Mind 
are commonly known from many early Buddhist 
texts. They are fundamental categories for actions 
(karma ) and are critical for comprehending prac -
tical activities that go towards or come from en -
lightenment, or else force downward towards the 
realm of miseries. But then the nuance shifts if one 
considers them as three mysteries. The shift marks 
a significant change in Buddhism, when the empha -
sis was attached to secret or hidden aspects. Richard 
McBride II (2006 [2008]: 305–55) pointed out that 
the origins of the three mysteries or three secrets 
(triguhya ) as related to the three mysteries of Body, 
Speech, and Mind first occurred in the Miji jingang 
lishi hui 密迹金剛力士會 . This scripture was trans -
lated into Chinese by Dharmarakṣa (Fahu 法護 ) 
in ad 280. Its Chinese title has been variously 
retranslated into Sanskrit as the Tathāgatācint -
yaguhyanirdeśa or T athāgataguhya (ka)sūtra .67 
The latter is in fact mentioned as Rulai miyao jing  
如來祕要經  in the scripture itself.68 The relationship 
between the latter text and the Guhyasamājatantra  
is still debated.
Hara Prasad Shāstri (1917: 17–21) noted that 
a confusion between the Guhyasamāja and the 
Tathāgathaguhyaka  occurred at some point. He be -
lieved that the manuscript with catalogue number 
10765 is the original Tathāgataguhyaka  and that 
the first book of Guhyasamāja  and sometimes 
the second also are called Tathāgataguhyaka  by 
67. See K. 22(3), Nj. 23(3), or T 310(3) in Lancaster and 
Park (1979).
68. T 3
10.80b25: 又復名曰如來祕要經法之品 .
Kelurak Inscription Guhyasamājatantra Commentary to the Adhyardhaśatikā Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan
MañjuśrīVajrapāṇi
Mahāvajradhara
MañjunāthaMañjuśrīMañjuvākMañjughoṣaMañjuvajraVairocana Deva Viśeṣa (God Par Excellence)
Bhaṭāra Paramaśūnya
Saṅ Hyaṅ AdvayaSaṅ Hyaṅ Advaya-jñānaSaṅ Hyaṅ Y ogādi Parama Nairātmya
Bhaṭāra DivarūpaBhaṭāra Hyaṅ Buddha
ratna mūrti vajra mūrti kāya mūrti ratna kāya ratna akṣara kāya
Buddha Brahmā kāya BrahmāVairo-
canaNirmāṇa oṁ Brahmā Buddha Vajrasattva Buddha ŚākyamuniVairocana
Īśvara
Brahmā
Viṣṇuoṁ kāya
Dharmma Maheśvara vāk Maheśvara AmitābhaSaṁ
-
bh
ogaaḥMaheś-
varaDharma Avalokiteśvara Dharmma Lokeśvara Amitābha aḥ vāk
Saṅgha Viṣṇu citta Viṣṇu Akṣobhya Dharma huṁ Nārāyaṇa Saṅgha Ākāśagarbha Saṅgha Bajrapāṇi Akṣobhya huṁ cittaTable 3.8: Correlations between and among the triads
Kandahjaya.indd   91 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 106] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia92
analogy. Unfortunately, Shāstri’s suggestion was 
not taken up for further investigation. The follow -
ing analysis—while not exhaustive—attempts to 
demonstrate that Shāstri was probably right and 
that we can suggest a clue for the gradual devel -
opment of the Guhyasamāja  corpus. This is sum -
marized in Table 3.9 through Table 3. 11 (pp. 94–98).
Table 3.9 tabulates sixty sounds as listed in 
Chapter 4 of the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra , titled the 
Speech (Sound) Mystery ( vākguhyaparivarta ).69 The 
total in this table is not precisely sixty but this may 
be because the exact sound names are not properly 
recognized. However, this table attempts to corre -
late the sound names in Sanskrit in the Tathāga -
taguhyakasūtra , the Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra , the 
Mahāvyutpatti , and their approximate corre -
sponding Chinese tra nslations as they appear in 
the Chinese Tathāgataguhyasūtra  (T 310(3) Miji 
jingang lishi hui ), as well as in Chengguan’s com -
mentary ( T 1736 Dafangguang fo huayan jing shu ). 
The latter demonstrates that the Miji jingang lishi 
hui had truly been utilized in the past. Meanwhile, 
in the commentary to the Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra , 
Vasubandhu explained that those sixty elements are 
taken from the Guhyakādhipatinirdeśa ;70 or in his
other work, the Vyākhyāyukti , he called the source 
the Tathāgataguhya  (Nance 2012: 218). The correla -
tion in this table establishes the connection among 
these texts. The correspondences also suggest that 
T 310(3) is likely a Chinese translation of one of the 
early recensions of the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra , or 
its alias the Guhyakādhipatinirdeśa . Table 3.10 tab -
ulates a couple of phrases from the Tathāgataguh -
yak
asūtra  that are quoted by Śantideva and in his 
Śikṣāsamuccaya (the first phrase from Chapter 14 
and the second from Chapter 1).71 This table does 
not exhaust all of Śantideva’s quotations, as it is 
merely an attempt to show that T  310(3) and T  312 
are correlated with the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra , or 
at least share similarities with the scripture referred 
to by Śantideva.
69. My study on the sixty sounds has grown over time. 
I co
nveniently borrow the updated table and discussion 
inserted herein from my recent paper (Kandahjaya 2014: 
196).
70. Jamspal (2004: 156), following Sylvain Lévi, shows that 
this list is also recorded in the Mahāvyutpatti .
71. See B
endall 1897: 242, 7–8. Table 3.11 tabulates the opening statements of 
the Sanskrit Tathāgataguhyakasūtra , the Sanskrit 
Guhyasamājatantra , and T 310(3). This table shows 
that the opening line of the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra  
and the Guhyasamājatantra  is identical, while 
the opening line in T 310(3) is different, being a 
phrase commonly found in many Buddhist scrip -
tures. The discrepancy indicates that the extant 
Sanskrit Tathāgataguhyakasūtra  must have already 
been modified vis-à-vis the Chinese version. This 
modification was likely the cause of the confusion 
between the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra  and the Guh -
yas
amājatantra .
At this time, without the Sanskrit original, it 
is unlikely that we would be able to restore the 
Chinese title Miji jingang lishi hui 密迹金剛力士會  
to its former Sanskrit title. Nonetheless, having 
examined its relationship to the Tathāgataguh -
yakasūtra , or the Guhyakādhipatinirdeśa , it is now 
clear that the original Sanskrit title for the Chinese 
translation was likely the Guhyakādhipatinirdeśa .  
Then, considering that the Guhyasamājatantra  
is indeed all about the secret assembly in which 
Vajrapāṇi describes the mysteries of Tathāgata, it 
is then likely that the Miji jingang lishi hui 密迹金
剛力士會 was one among the early versions of the 
Guhyasamājatantra , or the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra , 
or the Guhyakādhipatinirdeśa .
The previously mentioned suggestion, however, 
directly resurrects the dating problem of the Guh -
yasam ājatantra . A lot of ink has been spilled on this 
problem. Until recently, scholars have assigned the 
latter half of the 8th century as the likely (formative) 
period when this scripture was fixed in its present 
form (Matsunaga 1978: xxvi). But this leads to an 
inconsistency when we take into consideration the 
composition of the GSMV  and the GSVV , and their 
compilers, Dīpaṅkarabhadra and Nāgabodhi. If 
Nāgabodhi was truly the teacher of Vajrabodhi, 
and Vajrabodhi arrived in Luoyang, China, around 
720, Nāgabodhi must have already compiled his 
GSVV  at the beginning of the 8th century at the 
latest. Then if the GSVV  is a ritual based on the 
Guhyasam ājatantra , how could it be that the ritual 
was composed while the Tantra itself had not been 
completed? Or, do we now have to think about the 
ritual as the actual base from which the Tantra 
was written up? Else, we have to accept that the 
Kandahjaya.indd   92 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 107] ---
93 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
dating of the Guhyasam ājatantra to the second half 
of the 8th century is incorrect. If such is the case, 
some Buddhist circles must have already known the 
hidden teachings as recorded in the initial version 
of this scripture in the 3rd century, as suggested 
by the translation date of the Miji jingang lishi hui 
密迹金剛力士會 . In other words, this also means 
that the historical development of Tantric systems 
did not seem to follow the famous four classifica -
tion of Kriyā, Caryā, Yoga, and Niruttarayoga,72 
and even less that the start of the systems should 
be dated to the 7th century or after.73 Evidence 
supporting the latter claim is available.74
72. Dalton (2005: 152) suggests that Niruttarayoga is a 
better back-translation than Anuttarayoga. See Matsunaga 
(1978: xviii–xix) for a brief discussion on the chronology of 
the four classes of Buddhist Tantra. De Jong (1984: 93), re -
viewing Matsunaga’s Mikkyō kyōten seiritsushi-ron , shows 
that the four groups, kriyā , caryā , yoga , and anuttarayoga , 
came from the 13th century Bu-ston.
73. Williams (2012: 144–45) suggests: ‘Yet to think of the 
third century as the starting point for tantric Buddhism 
is somewhat misleading. As a self-conscious tradition 
within the Mahāyāna tantric Buddhism probably does 
not appear until the mid to late seventh century…. From 
around the beginning of the eighth century tantric tech-
niques and approaches increasingly dominated Buddhist 
praxis in India’.
74. In discussing the Piṇḍīkrama  a bove, I report that 
dhāraṇī s of the Guhyasamāja  family were already in cir -
culation around the 5th century. In this regard, I may 
suggest that the reason why we have been off the mark 
may have something to do with the underlying research 
paradigm. In strictly applying a modern scholarly meth -
odology necessitating proof by material evidence (textual 
or visual), we may have neglected or even discounted the 
significance of oral teaching imparted by gurus, or non-ma -
terial transmission. In some cases we may obtain hints to 
support this argument, namely: information documented 
by Yijing mentioned earlier; multiple references to ‘the 
tradition from the mouth’, or ‘from the mouth of one’s 
own guru’ ( mukhāgama ); and the prohibition of diffusing 
secret teachings, such as those promulgated in the SHK . All 
these elements show that particular teachings might have 
been intentionally disguised, or might have been required 
to be orally imparted and ‘decoded’ by a competent guru. 
For this reason, we may have to re-examine our research 
norms, as the requirement for orality may entail a number 
of factors to be seriously reconsidered. First, orality is part 
of legitimate tradition. Secondly, orality did not end when 
the tradition began to shift by employing script or visual 
objects. Thirdly, orality may be considered a silent agent of Saṅ Hyaṅ Tantra Bajradhātu Subhūti
The colophon of the ‘Śaivized’ version of the SHK  
(version C) records the following:75
Hail to the Buddha!
This is the Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan , the in -
struction of he who had accomplished siddhi s, 
Hyaṅ Sarbvasiddhi (all siddhi s); he was Śrī 
Sambhara Sūryāvaraṇa. He was the noble guru 
in Vañjaṅ. You have to keep in mind that your 
duty is [to study] the scriptures; you, Son of 
the Victor ( jinaputra ), are of the same lineage 
(vaṁśa ) as him, who inherited the freehold [of] 
Vañjaṅ, which was an offering to this master 
(guruyāga ) by [King] Śrī Īśāṇa Bhadrottuṅga[l]
deva Mpu Siṇḍok, who had perfected the Saṅ 
Hyaṅ Tantra Bajradhātu Subhūti , who had 
mastered instructions in the esoteric teachings 
of Mahāyāna, the supreme secret, the culmina -
tion of the teachings of the Guru, for it is the 
essence of the teachings of Tantra, logic, and 
grammar. It is the quintessence of the holy pos -
session ( aveśa  < Skt āveśa ), and embodiment of 
the ultimate reality. It is right knowledge. That 
is the reason why the Jinaputra should be zeal -
ous when embracing the Saṅ Hyaṅ Pustaka 
Kamahāyānan ; if [you do] so, clearly you will 
be blessed by Bhaṭāra Samyaksambuddhāya (= 
Samyaksambuddha?) himself.
change, as it allows teachings to shift over time. Fourthly, due partly to orality, we may never be able to fully recover 
earlier occurrences of doctrines that only by chance ended 
up being partially preserved in texts. Fifthly, we may be able 
to get a glimpse of what earlier masters might have said in their time through a series of treatises and commentaries that record their lives and teachings.
75.
 Namo
 Buddhāya. Nihan saṅ hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan, 
pamәkas saṅ siddhagati hyaṅ sarbvasiddhi, sira Śrī Sam -
bhara Sūryyāvaraṇa, sira Śrī aryya guru pāda ri vañjaṅ 
ya ta keṅәtaknanta dentāji denta, kita jinaputra, makādi 
savaṅśanira saṅ kumalilir iṅ sima vañjaṅ guruyaga Śrī 
Īśāṇa Bhadrottuṅga[l]deva mpu Siṇḍok, mvaṅ saṅ mak -
abvatan saṅ hyaṅ tantra bajradhātu Subhūti, ya ta kuma -
vaśākna saṅ hyaṅ samayopadeśa mahāyāna paramāra -
hasya, vәkas iṅ varah saṅ guru sira, apan sira peh niṅ 
haji, tantra tarkka vyākaraṇa, sāri saṅ hyaṅ aveśa sira, 
pāvak niṅ paramārttika, pramāṇa sira, ya ta mataṅnyan 
hayva tan prayatna sira jinaputra tumәmva saṅ hyaṅ 
pustaka kamahāyanan sākṣāt hinanugrahan de bhaṭāra 
samyaksambuddhāya kita yan maṅkana  (Kats 1910: 118–19 
and Lokesh Chandra 1997: 10).
Kandahjaya.indd   93 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 108] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia94
Table 3.9: Correlation among the Tathāgataguhyakasūtra , Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra , Mahāvyutpatti, T 310(3), and T  1736
Tathāgataguhya -
kasūtraMahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra Mahāvyutpatti
T 310(3) T 1736
vāk ṣaṣṭyākāra Sanskrit English ṣaṣṭyaṅgasarvanāmāni 六十種音
1 snigdhā snigdhā kindly 445. snigdhā 【中】柔軟
【中】流澤柔軟音。 柔軟音。
2 mṛdukā mṛdukā gentle 446. mṛdukā 妙 吉祥音。 吉祥音。
3 manojñā manojñā  beautiful 447. manojñā 【中】如意【中】悅意
4 manoramā manoramā appealing 448. manoramā 【中】得意【中】可樂聲可樂音。 可愛樂音。
5śuddhā śuddhā  pure 449. śuddhā 【中】真實【中】清淨悅意清淨音。 悅意清淨音。
6 vimalā vimalā  stainless 450. vimalā 【中】無垢【中】離於垢聲離垢音。 離垢音。
7 prabhāsvarā prabhāsvarā  luminous 451. prabhāsvarā 【中】明顯【中】明亮顯曜音。 顯曜音。
8varṇa valguḥ  attractive 452. valguḥ 入耳甘美 微妙音。 微妙音。
9śravaṇīyā śravaṇīyā  worth hearing 453. śravaṇīyāḥ 【中】堪敬【中】樂聞明聽音。 明德音。
10 anelā anantā [anelā ] unassailable 454. anelā 【中】不能【中】無劣
11 kalā kalā melodious 455. kalā  (kālā ) 【中】聞【中】圓具無亂音。 無亂音。
12 vinītā vinītā disciplined 456. vinītā 【中】柔善【中】調順無憒音。 無憒音。師父音。
13 akakkarśā akarkaśā without harshness 457. akarkaśā 【中】不粗俗【中】無澁無剛硬音。
14 aparuṣā aparūṣā without severity 458. aparuṣā 【中】無惡【中】無盡意無麤獷音。
15 suvinītā suvinītā well-disciplined 459. suvinītā 【中】極柔善【中】柔善善順音。
16 karṇasukhā karṇasukhā pleasant to the ear 460. karṇasukhā 【中】悅耳【中】悅耳鼻安重音。 安重音。
17 kāyaprahlādakarī kāyaprahṇā  da nakarī physically satisfying 461. kāyaprahlā  da nakarī 【中】適身 身所吉和音。 身所吉利音。
18 cittodvillajanana cittaudvilyakarī mentally satisfying 462. cittodvilyakarī 【中】滲於心【中】心生勇銳隨心時音。 隨心隨時音。
19 hṛdayasantuṣṭikarī hṛdayasaṁtuṣṭikarī gladdening to the heart 463. hṛdayasaṁtuṣṭikarī 【中】心中喜【中】心喜空悅音。 如如悅意音。
Kandahjaya.indd   94 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 109] ---
95 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in IndonesiaTathāgataguhya -
kasūtraMahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra Mahāvyutpatti
T 310(3) T 1736
vāk ṣaṣṭyākāra Sanskrit English ṣaṣṭyaṅgasarvanāmāni 六十種音
20 prītisukhasaṁjananī prītisukhasaṁjananī creative of joy and bliss 464. prītisukhajananī 【中】發喜樂
【中】悅樂與愛安想音。 天愛安想音。
21 niṣparidāhā niḥparidāhā not disturbing 465. niṣparidāhā 【中】無煩惱【中】無熱惱無惱熱音。 無熱惱音。
22ājñeyā ājñeyā eminently understandable 466. ājñeyā 【中】周知【中】如教令方正音。 方正音。
23 vijñeyj vijñeyā to be realized 467. vijñeyā 【中】覺諸事【中】善了知識達音。 識達音。
24 vispaṣṭā viṣpaṣṭā transparent 468. vispaṣṭā 【中】明諸事【中】分明親近音。 親近音。
25 premakaraṇīyā premaṇīyā lovable 469. premaṇīyā 【中】作意【中】善愛意好音。 意好音。
26 abhinandanṇīy abhinandanīyā delightful 470. abhinandanīyā 【中】現前喜【中】令生歡喜歡悅音。 歡悅音。
27ājñāpanīyā ājñāpanīyā authoritative 471. ājñāpanīyā 【中】遍知【中】使他如教令和教音。 和雅音。
28 vijñāpanīyā vijñāpanīyā informative 472. vijñāpanīyā 【中】普覺【中】使他善了知曉了音。
29 yuktā yuktā reasonable 473. yuktā 【中】如理 精勤音。
30 sahitā sahitā appropriate 474. sahitā 【中】相連【中】利益和忍音。
31 punaruktadāṣa punarūktadoṣajahā without redundancy 475. punaruktadoṣajahā 【中】言無過【中】離重複過失重了音。 重了音。
ūhanī mohavidhama -
nī
 māragnasanī其響去穢音。 其響去穢音。
32 siṁhasvaravegā siṁhasvaravegā energetic as the lion’s roar 476. simhasvaravegā 【中】獅音力【中】如獅子音應師子音。 應師子音。
33 nāgasvaraśabdā nāgasvaraśabdā sounding like an ele-
phant’s trumpeting47 7. nāgasvara  ś abdā 【中】如象音【中】如龍音龍鳴音。 龍嗚音。
34 meghasvaraghrṣā meghasvaraghoṣā sounding like the crash of 
thunder478. meghasvara  gh oṣā 【中】如雲雷吼【中】如龍音雨好音。 好雨音。
35 sāgaragarjjitasvarā 
nāgendrarutānāgendrarutā like the voice of the drag-
on-king479. nāgendrarutā 【中】如龍音【中】如龍王音海雷龍王音。 海雷龍王音。
36 kinnarasaṅgitighoṣā kinnarasaṅgītighoṣā like the kinnaras’ song 480. gandharva  s aṅgīti  gh oṣā【中】如緊那羅
妙歌真陀羅伎音。 真陀羅伎音。
Kandahjaya.indd   95 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 110] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia96
Tathāgataguhya -
kasūtraMahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra Mahāvyutpatti
T 310(3) T 1736
vāk ṣaṣṭyākāra Sanskrit English ṣaṣṭyaṅgasarvanāmāni 六十種音
37 kalaviṅkirutasvarā kalaviṅkasvararūtaravitā like the kalaviṅka ’s song 481. kalaviṇka  sv ararutā 【中】頻伽鳥音
【中】如迦陵頻
伽音哀鸞音。 哀鸞音。
38 brahmasvararuta -
racitubrahmasvararutaravitā like Brahma’s cry 482. brahma  sv ararutāravitā 【中】梵音【中】梵王如音鷹暢音。 鷹暢音。
39 jīvañjīvakasvararuta -
raci
tājīvaṁjīvakasvararuta -
ravi
tālike the pheas   an t’s call 483. jīvañjīvaka  sv ararutā -
ravi
tā【中】響錢音【中】如共命鳥音鶴鳴音。耆域
音。英鳥音。鶴嗚音。耆域音。
英鳥音。
40 devendramadhura -
nir
ghoṣādevendramadhura -
nir
ghoṣā sweet as the voice of Indra 484. devendramadhura -
nir
ghoṣā【中】如天主妙音【中】如天帝釋美
妙音
41 dundubhisvara dundubhisvarā like the sound of the 
drum485. dundubhisvarā 【中】鼓音【中】如震鼓音雷震音。 雷震音。
42 anunnatā anunnatā not haughty 486. anunnatā 【中】不滿足【中】不高不卒音。 不卒音。
43 anavanatā anavanatā not lowly 487. anavanatā 【中】不低【中】不下不暴音。 不暴音。
44 sarvvanavanatā -
varāṣṭāsarvaśabdānupraviṣṭā immersed in language 488. sarvaśabdānupraviṣṭā 【中】隨諸音所入【中】隨入一切音普入響音。 普入響音。
45 apaśabdavigatā apaśabdavigatā grammatically impeccable 489. apaśabdavigatā 【中】無邪音【中】無缺減去非時音。 去非時音。
46 avikalā avikalā never fragmented 490. avikalā 【中】無不備具【中】無破壞無乏音。 無乏音。
47 alīnā alīnā undaunted 491. alīnā 【中】無退縮【中】無染汙無怯音。 無怯音。
48 adīnā irrepressible 492. adīnā 【中】無劣【中】無希取
49 pramuditā pramuditā joyful 493. pramuditā 【中】具足【中】令眾意歡喜悅豫音。 悅豫音。
50 prasṭatā prasṛtā comprehensive 494. prasṛtā 【中】莊嚴【中】具足通暢音。 通暢音。
51 sakhilā akhilā[sakhilā] holistic 495. sakhilā 【中】入【中】說眾生心行具足音。 具足音。
52 saritā saritā continuous 496. saritā 【中】長貪【中】莊嚴
53 luḍitā madhurā 
sphuṭā darśanīyalalitā playful 497. lalitā 【中】連續【中】顯示戒禁音。美甘
音。進行音。戒禁音。甘美音。
進行音。
Kandahjaya.indd   96 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 111] ---
97 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in IndonesiaTathāgataguhya -
kasūtraMahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra Mahāvyutpatti
T 310(3) T 1736
vāk ṣaṣṭyākāra Sanskrit English ṣaṣṭyaṅgasarvanāmāni 六十種音
54 sarvvasvarapūranī sarvasvarapūraṇī fulfilling all words 498. sarvasvarapūraṇī 【中】諸音滿圓
【中】圓滿一切音廣普音。 廣普音。
55 sarvvondrayatoṣanī sarvasattvendriyasan-
toṣaṇīsatisfying to the faculties 
of all beings499. sarvendriyasaṁtoṣaṇī 【中】諸根滿足【中】諸根適悅諸根無瑕音。 諸根無班音。
56 aninditā aninditā irreproachable 500. aninditā 【中】不欺【中】無譏毀
57 acañcalā acañcalā unchangeable 501. acañcalā 【中】無輕轉 無住音。 無住音。
58 acapalā acapalā unwavering 502. acapalā 【中】無動搖 不輕疾音。 不輕疾音。
59 sarvvaparṣadanura  ci tā, 
rāgaśamanī, doṣavina-  
yanīī, mohavi  d
harmanī, 
māragnasanīsarvaparṣadanuravitā resounds through all 
audiences503. sarvapariṣadanuravitā 【中】名稱普遍【中】隨入一切
眾會響普入眾會音。 響聲普入眾會音。
60 sarvvākāravaropetā sarvākāravaropetā endowed with the best of 
all forms504. sarvākāravaropetā 【中】具足諸最勝【中】諸相具足宣諸德音。 宣諸德音。
Table 3.10: Correlation between T 310(3), T 312, and the Śikṣāsamuccaya
T 310(3) 密迹金剛力士會  (280 ad) T 312 (1018–58 ad) Śikṣāsamuccaya of Śāntideva
66a21║猶如寂意。拔樹根株。莖節枝葉花實一時
并除永無有樹。行者如是。以消貪身便無諸見六
十二疑。以無貪身。732c07║寂慧。譬如大樹若斷其根。即枝葉莖幹而
悉枯悴。此有身見亦復如是。若近止已諸煩惱亦
止。寂慧當知。From Chapter 14 (Bendall 1897: 242):
yathoktam āryatathāgataguhyasūtre—tadyathāpi nāma śāntamate 
vṛkṣasya mūlacchinnasya sarvaśākhāpatrapalāśāḥ śuṣyanti, evam 
eva śāntamate satkāyadṛṣṭyupaśamāt sarvakleśā upaśāmyantīti //
76b21║誰興佛乎。答曰。大王。能興篤信了本無
者也。又問。誰興篤信乎。答曰。若有能發菩薩
心者也。又問。誰發菩薩心乎。答曰。其有志性
定不亂者也。又問。誰有志性定不亂乎。答曰。
其行大哀未曾絕者也。又問。誰不絕大哀乎。答
曰。其不棄捨一切眾生者也。又問。誰不捨眾生
乎。答曰。其安己身并安一切者也。746b09║如何是佛出世。佛言大王。隨發菩提心即
是佛出世。王言。云何發菩提心。佛言。所謂大悲
出生。王言。云何大悲出生。佛言。謂即發起淨
信。王言。云何發起淨信。佛言。若發菩提心。即
是發淨信。王言。當云何發彼菩提心。佛言。深心
不退轉。是發菩提心。王言。云何是深心不退轉。
佛言。即是所起大悲。王言。云何能發大悲。佛
言。於一切眾生不生厭捨之心。即是大悲。王言。
云何於眾生得不厭捨。佛言。所謂不著己樂。王
言。云何是不著己樂。佛言。謂於三寶常不捨離。
王言。云何能於三寶不捨離邪。佛言。若能除去一
切煩惱。即於三寶而不捨離From Chapter 1 (Bendall 1897: 7–8):
asya punas tathāgataguhyasūtrasya ko ’bhiprāyaḥ? Yaduktam—
kasya bhagavan bodhicittotpādaḥ? Āha—yasya mahārāja adhy -
āśa
yo ’vikopitaḥ / āha—kasya bhagavannadhyāśayo ’vikopitaḥ? 
Āha—yasya mahārāja mahākaruṇotpādaḥ / āha—kasya bhaga-
van mahākaruṇotpādaḥ? Āha—yasya mahārāja sarvasattvāpar-
ityāgaḥ / āha—kathaṁ bhagavan sattvā aparityaktā bhavanti? 
Āha—yadā mahārāja ātmasaukhyaṁ parityaktaṁ bhavatīti //
Kandahjaya.indd   97 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 112] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia98
The Tantra Subhūti  is again mentioned in Canto 
43.3 of the Deśavarṇana :76
But as he grew somewhat older he held to all 
sorts of esoteric rites;
Mainly of course it was the Subhūti Tantra the 
essence of which he guarded and cherished in 
his heart.
He applied himself to worship, yoga and medi -
tation for the stability of the whole world,
Not to mention the Gaṇacakra always accom -
panied by gifts, beloved of his subjects. (Rob -
son 1995: 55–56)
The reference to the Saṅ Hyaṅ Tantra Bajradhā -
tu Subhūti in version C of the SHK  draws our at -
tention as it mentions an important personal name, 
i.e. Subhūti, and the title of a scripture, i.e. Tantra 
Bajradhātu .
Subhūti
While exploring Javanese Tantric Buddhism, N.J. 
Krom mused whether whenever the Javanese 
texts mentioned the name Subhūti, they referred 
to Dhārmika-Subhūti. Krom went along with the 
lead by Sylvain Lévi who, following Tibetan ac -
counts, attempted to identify Dhārmika-Subhūti 
with Aśvaghoṣa, whose name is mentioned as the 
author of the Gurupañcaśikhā , a text that is well 
76. Ndan riṅ vrәddha nireki mātra rumәgәp sarvva kri -
yādhyatmika, mukyaṅ tantra subhūti rakva tineṅәt kempәn 
rasanye hati, pūjā yoga samādhi pinrihiran amrih sthityan 
iṅ rāt kabeh, hastam taṅ gaṇacakra nitya madulur dānenivö 
hiṅ prajā.known among the adherents of Vajrayāna. Scholars 
have debated whether this name is the same as that 
of the famous author of the Buddhacarita , and 
Lévi’s idea was eventually rejected by Paul Mus.77 
A current scholarly opinion thinks of two 
masters with the same name Aśvaghoṣa, because 
they were ascribed to two different sets of Buddhist 
teachings, i.e. Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna. Aśvaghoṣa, 
the author of the Gurupañcaśikhā , has been as -
signed to the 10th century (Buswell and Lopez 
2013: 76), perhaps on account of the date of the 
Chinese translation done during the Northern Song 
dynasty in the 11th century. But, if such reasoning 
was correct, we should then assign Śantideva to the 
10th century as well, because the Chinese transla -
tion of the Śikṣāsamuccaya  was done during the 
same period, though evidently we know that such 
dating cannot be true. Furthermore, the fact that 
some Sanskrit verses of the Gurupañcaśikhā  had 
already been recorded in the GSVV  and the GSMV  
suggests that the dating of Aśvaghoṣa—the author 
of the Gurupañcaśikhā —to the 10th century must 
be considered an educated error.
 As Christian Wedemeyer (1999: 6, 27–73) 
demonstrated in his dissertation Vajrayāna and its 
Doubles , there is actually no sufficient evidence to 
support the view that prominent Buddhist authors 
such as Nāgārjuna, Candrakīrti, and Āryadeva,  
had ‘doubles’, or homonyms. It is therefore possi -
ble that the author of the Buddhacarita  and of the 
Gurupañcaśikhā  were the same Aśvaghoṣa. Further 
77. See Lévi 1928: 193–216; Mus 1939: 186–91; Seyfort Ruegg 
1981: 119–21.T 310(3)  密迹金剛力士會 Tathāgataguhyaka Guhyasamāja
Oṁ namaḥ śrīvajrasattvāy  a, oṁ nam
o 
buddhāya, oṁ namo dharmāya, oṁ namaḥ 
saṅghāya,
聞如是。 evaṁ mayā śrutam evaṁ mayā śrutam /
一時佛遊王舍城靈鷲山。 ekasmin samaye bhagavān sarvatathāgata   -
kāya
vākcittaguhyahṛdayavajrayoṣid- 
bhageṣu vijahāra /ekasmin samaye bhagavān sarvatathāgata -
kāya
vākcittahṛdayavajrayoṣid   -
bh
ageṣu vijahāra /
anabhilāpyānabhilāpyaiḥ kāyasyārthāya 
hitāya sukhā [ya] devānāṁ ca 
manuṣyāṇāṁ ca yasya tathāgatam arthaṁ 
paripṛṣṭavyaṁ manyase /anabhilapyānabhilāpyaiḥ sarvabuddha -
kṣetr
asumeru  pa
ramāṇurajaḥsamair 
bodhisattvair mahāsattvaiḥ /Table 3.11: Correlation among T 310(3), the Tathāgataguhyaka , and the Guhyasamāja
Kandahjaya.indd   98 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 113] ---
99 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
research in the doctrinal outlook of the two texts 
is needed to throw light on the matter. For the 
time being, it is difficult to judge with certainty 
to which figure the Subhūti mentioned in the Old 
Javanese texts referred, as this name is known to 
have been ascribed to quite a number of texts. Yet, 
the possibility of Subhūti having a relation with the 
Gurupañcaśikhā  is interesting since this text is one 
of the sources of the SHK.78 On the other hand, it 
is important to note that a new twist in research 
on the Gurupañcaśikhā has occurred: Péter-Dániel 
Szántó (2013) recently discovered a Nepalese San -
skrit manuscript of the Gurupañcaśikhā , whose 
colophon attributes the authorship of the text to            
Vāpilladatta.79
Tantra Bajradhātu
An even more significant piece of evidence for 
the present study is the occurrence of Tantra Ba -
jradhātu  in the version C of the SHK.  This name 
confirms that by the time that version was compiled, 
i.e. during the reign of Mpu Siṇḍok (929 to 947), 
Tantric teachings relating to vajradhātu —appar -
ently the Vajradhātumaṇḍala—had already been 
circulated among Javanese Buddhists.
In Shingon Buddhism, the Vajradhātumaṇḍala 
is considered a complement for the garbhamaṇḍala. 
This is significant as the latter maṇḍala  is connect -
ed with Bianhong 僧辨弘 , the Javanese Buddhist 
monk from Kaliṅga 訶陵國 who is said to have 
been initiated by Huiguo 慧果  and consecrated as 
ācārya  for the garbhamaṇḍala . In Chinese records 
we read that Bianhong arrived at Chang’an 長安  in 
78. In Tibetan records we also find a Subhūtipālita (Su -
bh
ūtipāla) who was the teacher of Ānandagarbha. Ānan -
dagarbha is one among the three most influential teach -
ers of Tibetan Buddhism: Buddhaguhya, Ānandagarbha, 
and Śākyamitra (see Dalai Lama, Dzong-ka-ba, Hopkins 
2005: 18; Weinberger 2003: 83; Chandra Das 1907: 223). Su -
bhūtipālita was the pupil of King Prakāśacandra (Wein -
berger 2003: 3, 86): King Prakāśacandra received the 
Tattvasaṅgrahatantra  descending  onto his palatial roof; 
and that Ānandagarbha was the latest of the three: Bud -
dhaguhya, Śākyamitra, and Ānandagarbha . Ānandagarbha 
wrote the Vajradhātumahāmaṇḍalopāyikāsarvavajrodaya  
(the same as the Sarvavajrodaya ?).
79. I thank Andrea Acri for bringing my attention to 
this new development, and Péter-Dániel Szántó for swiftly 
providing me with a copy of his article. the first year of Jianzhong 建中  (780 ad ). By the 
time he arrived there, we are told that he already 
mastered Esoteric Buddhism. The purpose of his 
visit to China was to study the Mahāvairocan -
amahākaruṇagarbha-mahāmaṇḍala  大毗盧遮那
大悲胎藏大慢荼羅法  from Huiguo:80
In the first year of Jiànzhōng (780), there was 
a monk from Kaliṅga [of Central Java], Bian -
hong, [who] from his native country brought 
a copper cymbal [and] respectfully presented 
it to the sagely Buddhist Monastery, [as well 
as] two conches [and] four copper … bottles … 
[which he] respectfully presented to the Vener -
able Master [Huiguo]. He made offerings, and 
earnestly sought for the great teachings of the 
garbhadhātu  of Vairocana.
Huiguo was the successor to Amoghavajra and 
was considered one among the three founders of 
the Chinese Mantra school ( zhen-yan  真言 ). While 
studying at the Green Dragon Monastery (Qin -
glong-si  青龍寺) , Bianhong was accompanied by 
Huiri 慧日  from Korea, and Hongfa (J. Kōbō, or 
Konghai 空海 , J. Kūkai) from Japan. The latter in 
turn became the founder of the Japanese Shingon 
school  真言  at Kōya-san 高野山 , in Japan, and told 
the story of Bianhong as follows (Sundberg and 
Giebel 2011: 130–31):
Bianhong, a monk of the country of Heling, 
was while in his native land practicing the yoga 
of Cakravarticintāmaṇi and had attained some 
degree of spiritual power. On suddenly hearing 
that the teachings of Mahāvairocana’s Great 
Mandala of the Matrix of Great Compassion 
were to be found in South India, he fervently 
yearned to study them and set out for South 
India. On the way he suddenly met someone 
who asked, ‘Where are you going?’ He replied, 
‘I have heard it said that the great teachings of 
the Matrix [of Great Compassion] are to be 
found in South India. I yearn in my heart to 
study them, and therefore I have equipped my -
self for a journey and taken to the road’. That 
person informed him, ‘Those teachings have 
been taken by the Ācārya Amoghavajra and 
transmitted to the land of the Great Tang, and 
80. T 2057.295b16–18:  建中年初。 有訶陵國僧辨弘 。從本國 。
將 銅 鈸一具。奉 上聖佛院。螺兩具。銅 □ 瓶四。□奉 上 和上。充 供
養。 求援胎藏毘盧遮那大法。
Kandahjaya.indd   99 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 114] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia100
his pupil, the Ācārya Huiguo, is presently at 
Qinglong Temple ( 青龍寺 ) in Chang’an ( 長安 ), 
where he is giving instruction in them. If you 
go there, you will certainly be able to receive 
them together with others, but otherwise they 
will be difficult to obtain’. When he had fin -
ished speaking, he vanished. It is thus evident 
that he was a divine being. [Bianhong] turned 
back and set out for the Great Tang. He even -
tually visited Qinglong Temple, where he met 
His Reverence [Huiguo] and explained in de -
tail the purpose of his visit, offering him one 
seven-gemmed initiation flask, one bronze 
bowl, three conch shells, and various famed ar -
omatics. His Reverence held an initiation [cer -
emony] for him and conferred on him the great 
teachings of the Matrix [of Great Compassion]. 
Bianhong presently resides in Bianzhou ( 汴州 ), 
where he propagates the esoteric teachings [lit. 
‘esoteric wheel’].
Kūkai’s account mentioning that Bianhong 
while in his native land had already practised the 
yoga of Cakravarticintāmaṇi and had attained 
some degree of spiritual power ( 訶陵國僧辯弘在
本國日誦持如意輪瑜伽稍得法力 ) is significant. The 
term for the practice is parallel to the term used in 
the SHKAS . In the cultivation to find the supreme 
secret ( paramaguhya ), the embodiment of Bhaṭāra 
Viśeṣa, or the Saṅ Hyaṅ Divarūpa, is summarized 
by the SHKAS  as follows:81
When there is someone in pain, or even sor -
row, your mindfulness should become like a 
wish-fulfilling jewel ( cintāmaṇi ); [then] the 
miseries are annihilated by it, because [when] 
your mind ( jñāna ) is touched by the spotless 
form ( nirmmalākāra ) in your own intellect ( ri 
svacittanta ), it becomes Saṅ Hyaṅ Divarūpa.
The cultivation involves seven concentrations 
(samādhi ). One of these is called the mahāmuni -
varacintāmaṇisamādhi  and is described as follows:82
81. Yan hana vvaṅ alara prihati kunaṅ katuturananta 
kady aṅgan iṅ cintāmaṇi, hilaṅ ikaṅ duḥka denya, apan 
ikaṅ jñāna kita kәna nirmmalākāra ri svacittanta, atәma -
han saṅ hyaṅ divarūpa sira (Kats 1910: 52).
82. Dadi taṅ āmbәk ādibuddha ni ratu cakravartti huvus 
malahaken śatru sakti vәnaṅ aveh sakaharәp niṅ sarbva -
satva, ikaṅ āmbәk maṅkana mahāmunivaracintāmaṇi -
samādhi ṅaranikā  (Kats 1910: 57).Then the Ādibuddha-mind of the Cakravarti 
king after defeating powerful enemy is able to 
fulfil all wishes of all beings, hence such mind 
is called the mahāmunivaracintāmaṇisamādhi .
The parallel suggests that by the time Bianhong 
left for China around 780, the so-called teachings 
of the Tantra Bajradhātu Subhūti, as recorded in 
the SHK , had already been secured by Javanese 
Buddhists. On one hand, this explains the reason 
that compelled Bianhong to study the complemen -
tary set of teachings, the garbhamaṇḍala ; on the 
other, it corroborates the fact that the teachings 
of the Kalasan inscription dated to 778 and the 
Kelurak inscription dated to 782 have a parallel 
with those of the SHK . The short time between 
the installations of these two inscriptions may, as 
rightly suggested by Roy Jordaan (1997), be due to 
the fact that they were instigated by the same royal 
guru, Kumāraghoṣa. We may therefore consider 
782 as the date marking the upper limit by which 
the SHK  had already been compiled or diffused by 
a Javanese Buddhist master, possibly during the 
period in between the arrivals of Vajrabodhi and 
Kumāraghoṣa. This inference first of all supports 
Goris’ early dating of the text. Then, we may also 
conclude that the compilation time of the identi -
fied sources of the SHK  must naturally have been 
much earlier. As indicated by the Guanshiyinshuo 
mieyijiezuiguode yijiesuoyuan tuoluoni  觀世音說滅
一切罪過得一切所願陀羅尼 , and further confirmed 
by the Miji jingang lishi hui 密迹金剛力士會 , the 
hidden teachings related to the tradition of the 
Guhyasamāja  might have started before the 6th 
century already.
The fact that there are altogether 34 verses out 
of all 42 verses of the SHKM  that can be traced 
back to a manual for an initiatory ritual ( abhiṣeka ) 
related to the Guhyasamāja is interesting. It may 
simply suggest that the SHKM  originated from the 
Guhyasamāja  tradition, especially when those 34 
verses are spread evenly from the beginning to the 
end of the SHKM . On the other hand, it is clear 
that neither the GSMV  nor the GSVV  individual -
ly corresponds one-to-one with the SHK M, and 
even if we only select the corresponding verses, 
these ritual texts cannot make up the whole SHKM.  
There are also other peculiarities of the SHK , such 
as a different order of the verses, and a dissimilar 
Kandahjaya.indd   100 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 115] ---
101 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
pairing of dhātu . Therefore, we may wonder if this 
again is just a matter of corrupt transmission, or if 
we are in fact encountering yet another lineage or 
tradition, or an earlier common source.
The appearance of concepts parallel to the 
teachings in the Ratnameghasūtra  in verse 25 of 
the SHKM , which is found neither in the GSMV  nor 
in the GSVV  nor in any other text, suggests that the 
Old Javanese text came from a different tradition, 
perhaps older, than that of Ācārya Dīpaṅkara -
bhadra, or even Ācārya Nāgabodhi. The archaic 
doctrinal outlook and the succinctness of the SHK  
in comparison with the GSMV  and the GSVV  may 
give the additional impression that that was proba -
bly the case.83 Since thus far we have two prominent 
names, i.e. Vajrabodhi and Kumāraghoṣa, related 
to Java, both have a chance of being the carriers 
of esoteric teachings. However, we are yet to find 
sources in East Asian Buddhist collections to in -
dicate that Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra, Huiguo, or 
even Śubhākarasiṁha, ever carried a ritual manual 
similar to the GSMV  or the GSVV . In the absence 
of such evidence, it is difficult to justify Vajrabodhi 
being the carrier.84 On the other hand, as discussed 
earlier, the majority of newly identified sources of the 
SHK  are mainly related to regions in Northeast India. 
Hence, Kumāraghoṣa, although obscure, seemingly 
has the greater chance of the two. Considering that 
the Kelurak inscription mentions Kumāraghoṣa, a 
master at the rank of a royal preceptor who came 
directly from Gauḍīdvīpa—the site of Vikramaśīla, 
Nālandā, and Somapura—he himself might have 
been the one who transmitted to Java this esoteric 
tradition.
83. The SHKM  h as only 42 verses, while the GSMV  and 
GSVV  both have more than 400 verses.
84. If t
he initial trip plan of Bianhong could serve as an 
indicator of his perception of the source of the teachings 
he had acquired, the original destination was a region 
outside of China, thus more likely South Asia. But then, 
when Giebel (2012: 187–230) documents the Sanskrit texts 
brought back to Japan by Kūkai, this information does not 
give any additional indication that might lead us to the 
set of teachings parallel to those preserved by the SHK . In 
other words, the set of teachings brought by Vajrabodhi 
or Amoghavajra from either South India or Sri Lanka was 
somewhat different from those transmitted to Java. Of 
course, new evidence that may change our current perspec -
tive on how the transmission flowed might come to light.The SHK,  although compact and succinct, is ap -
parently a complete scripture combining initiatory 
ritual, fundamental doctrine, as well as practical 
instructions for daily cultivation to achieve the 
highest goal. Despite its relatively simple and un -
sophisticated look, it is underpinned by a complex 
system that cannot be easily unpacked without as -
sistance from a fully competent master, and thereby 
follows the tradition of the Mukhāgama  that is well 
known in the lineage of Dignāga in particular, or 
in the Mantranaya tradition in general. 
borobudur
In an attempt to explain the Buddhism of Boro -
budur, Krom took the SHK,  together with other 
sources, and briefly analysed them in his mon -
ograph on the Javanese monument. Krom (1931: 
332) concluded that Borobudur was a stūpa em -
bodying teachings of Tantric Mahāyāna based on 
the Yogācāra school. He was not quite certain if 
Borobudur represented exactly the teachings re -
corded in the SHK  (ibid.: 331). It is only later, when 
Willem F. Stutterheim took his turn investigating 
Borobudur, that the SHK  became the main source 
for interpreting the architecture of the monument. 
Stutterheim (1961: 35), while resorting to the con -
clusion suggested earlier by Goris (1926: 156), indi -
viduated some key concepts in the SHK —mainly 
the tridhātu and stūpa-prāsāda —and related them 
to Borobudur. Mus (1978: 57–65, 85–106) modified 
Stutterheim’s idea of stūpa-prāsāda  and incorpo -
rated it into his voluminous study of Borobudur. 
In due time, de Casparis discarded the compound 
bhūmisam  bh ārabhūdara  being the origin of the 
name Borobudur, and shifted to a combination 
of the Ratu Boko and Tri Tepusan inscriptions to 
recapture Mus’ idea of stūpa-prāsāda  to arrive at 
the notion of the ‘dual nature’ of Borobudur. De 
Casparis did it while still insisting that no Tantric 
elements could be detected in Borobudur, not real -
izing that around 1960 Mus himself had dramati -
cally changed his views on the monument (Soekmo -
no 1981: 132). Another attempt to utilize the SHK  to 
explain Borobudur re-emerged in the study on the 
worship of Tathāgatas in Java by Nurhadi Magetsari 
(1982). Magetsari concludes that Borobudur surely 
represents the progress in a yogin’s experience, and 
Kandahjaya.indd   101 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 116] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia102
that it contains elements from Mahāyāna, Yogācāra, 
and Tantra, yet he does not specifically elaborate 
on how exactly those elements informed the archi -
tectural plan and iconography of Borobudur. In 
other words, if we follow Magetsari’s view closely, it 
would seem that the plan does not necessarily have 
to come from the SHK , as it was posited by Krom, 
but that anything possessing Mahāyāna, Yogācāra, 
and Tantric elements could be the driving force 
behind the creation of Borobudur. However, if such 
were the case, studies on the relationship between 
the SHK  and Borobudur would have been pointless.
Many scholars have contended that Borobu -
dur has nothing to do with Tantric Buddhism.85 
If Borobudur truly has no Tantric elements, there 
could naturally be no talk about relating the SHK  
to it. Thus, even before citing the SHK , one has 
to prove beyond doubt that Borobudur is really a 
Tantric Buddhist monument, or at least one related 
to Buddhist Tantric practices. This fundamental 
problem is difficult to solve, as the rationale behind 
Borobudur architecture, symbolism, and function 
is not readily accessible. This fact justifies the 
continued scholarly disputes on the Buddhism of 
Borobudur, while at the same time the debaters do 
not seem to offer solid arguments to address the 
underlying problem.
For the reason just mentioned, we have to con -
sider it very fortunate that a team of archaeologists 
unearthed a large number of clay stūpikā s and 
votive tablets, a few silver plates, and a lead-bronze 
inscription from the Borobudur yard in 1974. Many 
of these artefacts are dated to no later than the 
second half of the 9th century. They were therefore 
likely in use when Borobudur was consecrated. As I 
reported earlier (Kandahjaya 2009), these artefacts 
help us confirm that Borobudur was architectur -
ally a stūpa-prāsāda  representing a dharmadhātu -
maṇḍala . These artefacts were related to practices 
of both the exoteric Mahāyāna and esoteric Man -
tranaya tradition, yet their association with the site 
named Buḍur which according to the 14th-century 
Deśavarṇana  belonged to the Vajradhara school 
(kabajradharan ) suggests that Esoteric Buddhism 
85. Such as Omura Segai, Heinrich Zimmer, Lokesh 
Chandra, John Huntington, Jan Moens, Ph. Pott, J.G. de Casparis, Jan Fontein, and Marijke Klokke.played an important role there. The sanctum was 
consecrated by the Kayumvuṅan inscription of 
824 and was later addressed as Bhūmisambhāra.
The SHK , together with the clay stūpikā s and 
the Kayumvuṅan inscription,86 jointly provide us 
with further insight into the doctrinal background 
of Borobudur and enable us to deduce that Boro -
budur architects had access to stūpa construction 
manuals and to rituals for the confession of faults, 
and thereby had embedded a set of instructions for 
moral cultivation in the monument. I will describe 
the details in the following discussion.
Stūpa-prāsāda
As some of the clay stūpikā s are inscribed with an 
abbreviated form of the formula oṁ ye te svāhā in ancient Javanese script,
87 they provide us with an 
86. Jeffrey Sundberg and Mark Long have persistent -
ly reminded me of an issue affecting the relationship of 
the Kayumvuṅan inscription to Borobudur, which was 
hypothesized by de Casparis (1981: 60–63) and myself 
(2004: 256–57, 2009: 13). This issue is the (still debated) 
provenance of the inscription, which Long (2014: 177) has 
argued to be relatively far from the environs of Borobudur. 
However, while in certain cases provenance helps, in others 
it may not be as helpful. I do not think we can or should be 
totally dependent simply on provenance to explain things 
happening more than a thousand years ago, for ancient 
inscriptions were often found in locations far removed from 
their original whereabouts (such is the case of the ‘Calcutta 
stone’ or Pucangan inscription, which was sent to India by 
Thomas Stamford Raffles). Furthermore, archaeology in 
Java knows of a sīma  called aṅśa , which allows granted land 
to be located far from the temple (Poesponegoro and Noto -
susanto 1984: 114). What is even more important to stress 
here is that the Kayumvuṅan inscription, irrespective of 
its original location, clearly partakes of the set of Buddhist 
doctrines prevalent in 8th- and early 9th-century Śailen -
dra-ruled Java, which are reflected in Borobudur. While 
the burden of proof demonstrating that the Kayumvuṅan 
inscription relates to another Buddhist temple remains 
on Sundberg’s and Long’s shoulders, in the absence of a 
convincing argument, I prefer to keep de Casparis’ take as 
it is more in line with the context and doctrinal message 
of the inscription, as well as the form of Buddhism that 
seems to have been followed by the builders of Borobudur.
87. See Boechari 1982: 93. The full formula runs: ‘Tathāga -
ta, the great śramaṇa , has stated those things that have a 
cause and their cause, also their cessation’ ( ye dharmā 
hetuprabhavā hetuṁ teṣāṁ tathāgataḥ  / hy avadat teṣāṁ 
ca yo nirodha evaṁvādī mahāśramaṇaḥ ).
Kandahjaya.indd   102 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 117] ---
103 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
indication that the people who used these objects 
in the vicinity of Borobudur were familiar with 
the concept of dharmakāya-caitya  (a caitya  of the 
Dharma body), and particularly with caityavan -
dana  (‘worship of caitya’ ) inscribed on a panel at 
the hidden foot of Borobudur (Tucci 1988: 27–29). 
Yijing states that producing and offering a votive 
stūpa  is believed to grant merit (Li Rongxi 2000: 12). 
Familiarity with a dharmakāya-caitya  implies that 
the constructed stūpa does not necessarily contain 
relics,88 and the Javanese must have understood that 
by building such stūpa (or caitya , as these terms 
are often interchangeable) they would renew the 
preaching of the Dharma, gain merit and accumu -
late knowledge, grasp the law of causation, and have 
the vision of the Buddha.89 We can further deter -
mine that the architects of Borobudur followed an 
Indian prototype called the kūṭāgāra-prāsāda —or 
the stūpa-prāsāda  in the SHK —to memorialize the 
eight miraculous events in the life of Śākyamuni, 
and to represent the body of the Tathāgata ( dhar -
madhātu ) embedded with multifarious virtues (Śrī 
Ghananātha),90 so that builders, supporters, and 
cultivators could accumulate virtues to speedily 
accomplish the highest goal.
Considering the inscription of caityavandana 
on the hidden foot, the thousands of votive stūpa s 
recovered in the vicinity of the monument, the 
expiatory ritual to be described later, and the 
structure of the monument itself, we cannot but 
be certain that the architects of Borobudur must 
have had access to manuals for stūpa or caitya  
construction. A number of scholars have inves -
tigated and documented Buddhist scriptures that 
prescribe a set of techniques for building a stūpa .91 
88. See Lokesh Chandra, ‘Introduction’ in Tucci 1988: vii: 
‘If stūpa /caitya had been primarily a funerary monument, 
it would not have been associated with the birth of Lord 
Buddha. That would be blasphemous’. Then, on page 24, 
Tucci states: ‘Not all the caityas were built to contain relics, 
but … most of them had a symbolic value’.
89. Fo
r a fuller discussion on this, see Tucci 1988: 28–32.
90. I suggested a relationship between the name Śrī 
Ghananātha and the multitude of virtues of the Sugata 
(sugataguṇagaṇa ) occurring in verses 11 and 15 respectively 
of the Kayumvuṅan inscription (see Kandahjaya 2009). 
91. See Tucci 1988: 13–21; Roth 1980: 182–209; Pema Dorjee 
1996: 1–21.According to their examination, a stūpa structurally 
comprises two main components: the (lion) throne, 
which is often missing in the production of stūpikā , 
and the stūpa proper.92 The stūpa proper consists 
mainly of eight parts: (1) a base of ten virtues (Tib. 
dge-ba bcu ; Skt. daśakuśala ) at the bottom with 
a shape following the steps above the base; (2) a 
flight of steps that is square, circular, or polygonal 
in shape;93 (3) a base for the dome; (4) the dome; 
(5) the harmikā  in rectangular or polygonal form; 
(6) the spire; (7) the wheels; and (8) the umbrella.94 
Then, if we compare and tabulate the structure of 
Borobudur with the structure of a stūpa  proper, we 
find more correspondences than differences (see 
Table 3.12, p. 104). 
From the comparison in Table 3.12, it is clear 
that if it were not for the changes at the base and at 
the top, Borobudur would have perfectly fitted the 
structure of a stūpa . While this definitely brings us 
back to the same question as to why the architects 
made such changes, a better understanding of the 
eight different types of stūpa s seems to lead us to a 
possible answer, especially when we recall that the 
dominant set of votive stūpa s from the Borobudur 
yard has an elongated aṇḍa  with eight subsidiary 
stūpikā s around it. Those eight types of stūpa s are 
of two categories: four commemorating the essen -
tial moments of Śākyamuni’s earthly life, and four 
commemorating some of his most famous miracles 
(Tucci 1988: 24). Each of the series of eight stūpa s 
has some specific features, usually on their steps, 
which differentiate one from another. Those eight 
may reflect a further development in the concept 
of commemorating the miraculous events, in con -
trast to the initial four commemorating Buddha’s 
92. This is according to Tucci (1988: 15–17), whereas Dorjee 
(1996: 61) divides it into three parts: (1) the lion throne, (2) 
the intermediate section, and (3) the upper section.
93. The p
olygonal shape in twenty corners like the one 
shaping Borobudur is called viṁśatikoṇa ; the word is 
attested, e.g., in the Sanskrit ritual manual titled Kri-
yāsaṅgrahapañjikā  compiled by Kuladatta (see Skorupski 
2002: 165).
94. I s
pecifically choose these eight parts among other 
parts mentioned by Tucci and Dorjee for the purpose of 
comparing them with the parts in Borobudur. For a more 
complete enumeration of the parts of a stūpa , see Tucci 
1988: 40–43 and Dorjee 1996: 61–71.
Kandahjaya.indd   103 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 118] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia104
life recommended by the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra .95 
By comparing the architecture of the eight stūpa s 
with Borobudur, we may envisage a correspondence 
between the features of the eight stūpa s commem-
orating the eight miraculous events in the life of 
Śākyamuni and the main architectural elements of 
the monument. In Table 3.13 we can see that, except 
95. See Mahākarmavibhaṅga , pa ragraph LXII (Lévi 1933: 
82–83): ‘Which are the ten benefits if one pays homage and 
prostrates before the caitya of the Tathāgata, i.e., the four 
great caitya s at Lumbinī, Mahābodhi, and others in the 
Middle Kingdom (Madhyadeśa)?... Here is the summary: 
country-clothings-family-form-voice-intelligence-faith-re -
ligious disciplines-scholarship-liberality-memory-wisdom. 
When one joins the palms in worship before Buddha shrine 
of Tathāgata, with devotion, one obtains excellent mind 
of wisdom, and exhaustion of the flows. And it is as in the 
sūtra , O Ānanda, all those who circumambulate the caitya s 
with devotion, when they die, like an arrow fixed at the 
ground, after the dispersion of their body, they will be born 
in heavens’ ( katame daśānuśaṁsā madhyadeśe caturmahā-
caityalumbinīmahābodhiprabhṛtiṣu tathāgatacaityāñja -
likarmapraṇipāte …. asyoddānam . deśavastrakularūpa  sva-
rapratibhānatāśraddhāśīlaśrutatyāgān smṛtimān bhavati for the octagonal shape in the stūpa of Reconcilia -
tion, most of the main features of the eight stūpa s 
correspond to features of Borobudur. Also, except 
for two types of stūpa s, i.e. of Victor and Parinir -
vāṇa, all the stūpa s have four steps—a feature that 
can be related to the four polygonal platforms or 
altars at Borobudur. The 108 niches and the four 
doors of the stūpa of Preaching correspond neatly 
with the 108 niches and four doors at each side of 
Borobudur.96 The bell-shaped dome of the stūpa of 
Parinirvāṇa matches the bell-shaped dome of the 
main stūpa of Borobudur. The ladders demanded 
by the stūpa of Descent from Trayastrīṁśa and 
prajñāvān tathāgatasya buddhaprasādaṁ kṛtvāñjaliṁ 
labhate dhīraḥ saprajña udāram āśravakṣayam . uktaṁ ca 
sūtre . ye kecid ānanda caityacaryāṁ caramāṇāḥ prasanna -
cittāḥ kālaṁ kariṣyanti . athā bhallo nikṣiptaḥ pṛthivyāṁ 
tiṣṭhate evaṁ kāyasya bhedāt svargeṣūpapatsyanti ).
96. As Tucci (1988: 128, 142) points out, the stūpa  of 
Preaching in Tibet typically has Buddha niches, which 
are also found at Borobudur. See also Chemburkar’s con -
tribution in this volume.Table 3.12: A stūpa  proper vis-à-vis Borobudur
Structure of a stūpa Symbolic Meaning Borobudur
Umbrella Great compassion 
(mahākaruṇā )Three umbrellas were installed by van Erp for experiment 
in 1910 and subsequently removed
Wheels Ten knowledge-powers 
(daśa jñāna-balāni)Nine wheels were installed by van Erp for experiment in 
1910 and subsequently removed
Spire (yaṣṭi) Ten knowledges 
(daśa jñānāni )The spire for the abandoned original main stūpa  is un-
known; now the octagonal spire of the main stūpa
Harmikā/droṇa Eightfold path 
(aṣṭāṅga-mārga)The harmik ā for the abandoned original main stūpa  is un-
known; now the quadrangular harmikā of the main stūpa
The dome (kuṁbha/aṇḍa) Seven factors of enlighten-
ment (sapta bodhyaṅgāni)The dome for the abandoned original main stūpa  is un-
known; now the dome of the main stūpa
The base of the dome 
(kuṁbha sandhī/kaṇṭhaka )Five powers 
(pañca balāni )The base of the dome for the abandoned original main 
stūpa  now hidden underneath the first circular terrace
The steps (cataśro vedyaḥ/ 
caturthā jaṅghā vedī): 4Five faculties 
(pañcendriyāni )4th platform or altar in polygonal shape
(tṛtīyā vedī): 3 Four spiritual powers 
(catvāri ṛddhipādā )3rd platform or altar in polygonal shape
(dvitīyā vedī ): 2 Four renunciations 
(catvāri prahāṇani)2nd platform or altar in polygonal shape
(ādhāra vedī ): 1 Four awareness 
(catvāri smṛty-upasthāna)1st platform or altar in polygonal shape
The base of ten virtues Ten virtues 
(daśa kuśala )Hidden foot with reliefs from the scripture on ten good 
and bad deeds (the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra)
Kandahjaya.indd   104 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 119] ---
105 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
the reliefs demanded by this stūpa as well as by 
the Grand Miracle are all present at Borobudur. 
Should there be no expanded base, even the re -
quirement for a base of ten virtues is met with 
what now constitutes the hidden foot of Borobu -
dur, displaying reliefs from the scripture on ten 
good and bad deeds (the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra ). But 
the most fascinating feature in this list is perhaps 
the prescription to have three circular steps for 
the stūpa of Victor, which in Borobudur are not 
located where we would expect them—i.e. at the 
bottom, starting from the ground—but on top 
of the four polygonal platforms or altars. There 
is also an exclusive requirement for the stūpa of 
Parinirvāṇa (i.e., bell-shaped dome without steps), 
which at Borobudur is again fulfilled by placing the 
whole solid bell-shaped stūpa on top of the third 
circular terrace. From all these arrangements we 
can perceive the architects’ desire to conform to 
all specifications at once, so as to make Borobu-    
dur contain all the major features of all the eight 
stūpa s.97
97. Tucci (1988: 51) records that the most common type 
i
n Tibet is the Enlightenment, followed by the Preaching, 
the Victor, and the Descent from Trayastrīṁśa.Anuttarapūjā
Verses 14 and 15 of the SHKM  describe an instruc -
tion to practise mantra, japa , and pūjā :98
Idañ ca maṇḍalam paśya 
śraddhāñ janayathādhunā  / 
kule jāto ’si buddhānāṁ 
sarbvamantrair adhiṣṭhitaḥ
Behold the Holy Maṇḍala, śraddhāñ janaya-
thādhunā : generate faith, do not be disrespect -
ful to the Holy Maṇḍala, kule jāto ’si bud -
dhānām : because you are now [in] the Buddha 
family ( buddhakula ), because soon your name 
will be Bhaṭāra Hyaṅ Buddha, sarbvamantrair 
98. Comm. Verse 14: ka : v ulati saṅ hyaṅ maṇḍala, 
śraddhāñ janayathādhunā , gavayakәn taṅ śṛddha, hayva 
tan sagorava ri saṅ hyaṅ maṇḍala, kule jāto ’si bud -
dhānāṁ , apan kita buddhakula maṅke, apan bhaṭāra hyaṅ 
buddha ṅaranta mәnә, sarbvamantrair adhiṣṭhitaḥ , tuvi 
sampun kṛtādhiṣṭhāna iki de saṅ sarbvatathāgata, inajyan 
sinaṅaskāra rikaṅ sarbvamantra.  Comm. Verse 15: ka : 
Aparәk tekaṅ hayu ri kita, siddhayo gatayaś ca te , samaṅka-
na ikaṅ kasiddhyan abhimuka ikā kabeh, agya kapaṅguha 
denta; pālaya samayaṁ siddhye , lәkas ta umabhyāsa saṅ 
hyaṅ samaya, marapvan katәmu ikaṅ kasiddhyan usәn 
denta; mantreṣūdyogavān bhava , gavayakan taṅ utsāha 
ri mantra japa pūja usәn, hayva hәlәm-hәlәm, yatānyan 
kopalambha ikaṅ kasugatin irikeṅ ihajanma ṅūniveh dlāha  
(Kats 1910: 21–22).Table 3.13: Eight stūpa s vis-à-vis Borobudur
Type of stūpa Site Main Features Borobudur
1 Birth (Heap of 
Lotuses)Kapilavastu Four (or seven) steps with lotuses Four polygonal platforms or altars
2 Enlightenment Nairañjanā- 
MagadhaSquare; four steps above a base of 
ten virtuesFour polygonal platforms or altars 
above the hidden foot with reliefs from 
the scripture on ten good and bad deeds 
(the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra)
3 Preaching 
(Many Doors)Vārāṇasī 108 niches; four doors in four sides 
are four truths108 niches each in four sides
4 Grand Miracle Jetavana- 
ŚrāvastīSquare; four steps and reliefs in four 
sidesFour polygonal platforms or altars and 
reliefs
5 Descent from 
TrayastrīṁśaKānyakubja- 
SāṁkāśyaLadders; four (or eight steps) and 
reliefsFour polygonal platforms or altars; 
stairs in four sides and reliefs
6 Reconciliation Rājagṛha Octagonal; four steps Four polygonal platforms or altars
7 Victor (Medita-
tion on Life)Vaiśālī Three circular steps Three circular terraces
8 Parinirvāṇa Kuśīnagara Bell-shaped dome without steps Bell-shaped dome of the main stūpa
Kandahjaya.indd   105 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 120] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia106
adhiṣṭhitaḥ : you also have already become an 
abode for all Tathāgatas, have been instructed 
and consecrated in all mantras.
Sampado ’bhimukhāḥ sarbvāḥ 
siddhayo gatayaś ca te / 
pālaya samayaṁ siddhyai 
mantreṣūdyogawān bhava  //
Fulfillments come closer to you; siddhayo ga -
tayaś ca te , likewise all the perfections are 
close at hand, and you will attain them quick -
ly; pālaya samayam siddhye , begin to practise 
the Holy Samaya, so that the state of perfection 
is quickly attained by you; mantreṣūdyogavān 
bhava , diligently perform mantra , japa , pūja  
immediately, do not delay, so that Buddhahood 
will be obtained accordingly in this very life, 
and even more in the future.
These two verses are found in a Sanskrit ritual 
manual titled Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā  compiled by 
Kuladatta.99 In this manual, those verses are recited 
after obeisance at the four gates of a maṇḍala  and 
followed by a recitation of the formula of the con -
fession of faults  (pāpadeśanā ). The passages that 
surround the two verses are as follows (trans. Sko -
rupski 2002: 114–15):
[Ch. 6] Four obeisances, confession of sins, vows  
Next the disciple makes obeisances (praṇā -
ma) at the four portals of the maṇḍala while 
reciting the appropriate  mantra s. Making the  
puṣpāñjali , and prostrating himself at the east -
ern portal, he recites:
‘oṁ, as I prostrate before the body, speech and 
mind of the Tathāgatas, I worship the vajra . 
May I be blessed by all the Tathāgatas. oṁ  I 
offer myself for the service of worshipping 
(pūjopasthāna ) all the Tathāgatas. O Vajrasat -
tva of all the Tathāgatas bestow upon me your 
99. See Ishii (1989: 55–70 and 1992: 228). The portion of 
this manual edited and published by Sakurai (1988: 17) 
records verses 14 and 15 of the SHK with minor variants, 
as follows: idam hi maṇḍalam paśyan śraddhām janayamś 
cādhunā  / kule jāto ’si buddhānām vidyāmantrair adhis -
thitah // sampado ’bhimukhāh sarvāh siddhiyogatayaś ca 
te / pālayan samayān siddho mantresūdyogavān bhava  //. 
In 1984 Alex Wayman, who used a manuscript of the Kri-
yāsaṅgraha  reproduced by Sharada Rani in the Śatapiṭaka 
series, pointed out that verses 6–9, 16–17, 20–22, 26–27, 
29–32 of the Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan  are found in this 
manuscript (see Ishii 1992: 228).blessing’. He executes similar recitations at 
the remaining portals, offering himself at the 
southern portal for the consecration of wor -
ship (pūjābhiṣeka ), at the western portal for 
the continuation of worship  (pūjāpravartana ), 
and at the northern portal for the performance 
of worship  (pūjākarma ), and asks to be blessed 
by Vajraratna (south), Vajradharma (west), and 
Vajrakarma (north).
The teacher envisages the disciple as being fully 
confirmed  (adhiṣṭhita ) by the Tathāgatas, and 
then invigorates his faith ( śraddhā ):
‘Behold this  maṇḍala , and generate faith. You 
have been born in the family of the Buddhas, 
and blessed with vidyā s and  mudrā s. You are 
confronted with excellent advantages ( sampad ) 
and the  yoga  of attainments ( siddhi ). Gain the 
attainments through protecting the pledges, and 
apply yourself to the practices of the mantra s’.
After that, the disciple recites the formula of the 
confession of sins  (pāpa-deśanā ), rejoices in 
the merit  (puṇyānumodana ) of all the Buddhas 
and Bodhisattvas, supplicates the Buddhas not 
to pass into nirvāṇa,  and offers his merit and 
himself for the attainment of buddhahood.
Next, the disciple raises the thought of enlight -
enment, and recites the vows relating to the 
Buddha families.
‘I raise the perfect and highest thought of en -
lightenment in the same way as it has been 
raised by the Buddhas of the three times.
I firmly embrace the threefold morality: the mo -
rality of precepts ( śīlaśiksā ), the morality of ac -
cumulating wholesome qualities ( kuśaladhar -
maśīla ), and the morality of acting for the 
benefit of living beings ( sattvārthakriyāśīla ).
From today onwards, I take the vow born in the 
Buddha family, the highest and best Three Jew -
els: the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha.
In the great Vajra family, I truly grasp the vajra,  
the bell, and the mudrā, and receive my teacher.
In the great Ratna family with the pleasing 
yoga  and pledge, I offer the four gifts (caturdā -
na), six times every day.100
In the great Padma family, pure and born from 
the great enlightenment, I receive the holy 
Dharma in its outer, inner and secret Vehicles.
100. According to the SDP , th e four gifts include worldly 
possessions, fearlessness, dharma , and friendship (Skorups -
ki 1983: 288): caturdānaṁ pradātavyaṁ tridive ca trirātri   ke 
// āmīṣābhayadharmākhyā maitrī ratnakuloccaye  // (for 
English translation, see Skorupski 1983: 102).
Kandahjaya.indd   106 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 121] ---
107 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
In the great assembly of the Karma family, I 
truly take on the comprehensive vow of per -
forming the task of worship (pūjakarma ) to the 
best of my abilities.
It is for the benefit of all living beings that I raise 
the perfect and highest thought of enlighten -
ment, and embrace this comprehensive vow.
I shall lead to the other shore those who have not 
as yet reached there. I shall liberate those who 
are not liberated, inspire those who are inert, and 
bring living beings to emancipation ( nirvṛti )’.
This concludes the procedure of taking the 
vows ( saṁvaragrahaṇa ).
These passages are also found in the SDP  as well 
as the GSVV . Moreover, it is important to note that 
a portion of the passage on the confession of faults  
(pāpa  d eśanā ) survives in the Balinese traditi on and 
is known as the Anuttarapūjā  (see Table 3.14, p. 108).101
The Sevenfold Supreme Worship ( sapta  v idhā-
anuttarapūjā ) is one of the more popular repent -
ance rituals known in Buddhist practice today. 
This ritual is often associated with two Buddhist 
masters, Śāntideva and Atīśa. In the beginning of 
the Śikṣāsamuccaya , Śāntideva quotes a passage 
from the Bhaiṣajyaguruvaiḍūryaprabhasūtra  in 
which the seven members of the anuttarapūjā  are 
listed in connection with the ‘walk of the Bodhisat -
tva’ ( bodhisattvacaryā ).102 But the vital source for 
101. See Lévi 1933: 82; Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971: 
433–38.
102. The members are: homage ( v andana) , worship 
(pūjana) , confession of faults ( pāpadeśana) , delight in 
virtue ( puṇya) , solicitation and entreaty of Buddhas ( anu-
modanabuddhādhyeṣaṇa) , application of the merit to the 
attainment of enlightenment ( yācana bodhipariṇāmana ). 
The Chinese translation of the list is in T 1636 from 78b10 
to 78b12: 禮拜供養。 說罪及隨喜福。 勸請諸佛住世說法。 乃至
迴 向菩 提。  The Dharmasaṅgraha  (entry number 14) gives 
the following seven items: vandanā , pūjanā , pāpadeśanā , 
anumodanā , adhyeṣaṇā , bodhicittotpādaḥ , pariṇāmanā . It 
is possible that the manuscript used by Śāntideva is different 
to what we have today, because the exact quotation cannot 
be found either in the Sanskrit or in the many Chinese 
versions of the Bhaiṣajyaguruvaiḍūryaprabharajasūtra  that 
have come down to us (for the translation of the Chinese 
versions, see Birnbaum 1989). The family of this scripture 
indeed contains many references to pūjā  and repentance 
ritual and how to perform it. In fact, T 1161, the Sūtra 
Spoken by the Buddha on the Contemplation of the Two 
Bodhisattvas, King of Healing and Supreme Healer is the 
original source for praises to the fifty-three past Buddhas. the anuttarapūjā  is actually the Bhadracarī , to 
which Śāntideva also refers (Bendall 1922: 264–65, 
269). Atīśa confirms the role of the Bhadracarī  in 
his commentary to the Bodhipathapradīpa (Sher -
burne  2000: 43). He explains that the anuttarapūjā 
is related to verses 1 to 12 of the Bhadracarī , and 
that all other verses, i.e. verses 13 to 62, are for 
transferring merit. Verse 12 includes all the seven 
elements of the anuttarapūjā , namely (1) homage 
(vandanā ), (2) worship ( pūjanā ), (3) confession of 
faults ( pāpa-deśanā ), (4) rejoicing ( anumodanā ), 
(5) prayer ( adhyeṣaṇā ), (6) supplication ( yācanā ), 
and (7) transfer of merit ( pariṇāmanā ), as follows:
vandanapūjanadeśanatāya modanādhyeṣa -
ṇay
ācanatāya /
yac ca śubhaṁ mayi saṁcitu kiṁcid bodhayi 
nāmayamī ahu sarvaṁ  // 12
Panel IV12 of the Bhadracarī  at Borobudur  
(Fig. 3.1, p. 109) l ikely depicts verse 12. This depiction, 
together with the survival of a Balinese recension, 
may imply that the anuttarapūjā  was widely known 
in ancient Indonesia, and performed at Borobudur. 
Krom (1931 II: 104) interprets this panel as follows:
[I]n the middle, a Buddha seated in vitarka-  
mudrā  with a very high uṣṇīṣa , at his back the 
tablet with a flaming border; beneath him sits Samantabhadra, his hands folded in sĕmbah , 
on each side of him a dish of incense with the 
smoke rising out of it placed on a little cush -
ion in the air. On either side of this group is 
a Bodhisattva standing on a lotus cushion, on 
the right Vajrapāṇi with his emblem worn-off, 
left, one with a flower in bud shape and a dam -
aged headdress. Then kneeling on the ground, 
to the right, the second chief person with his 
escort; left another group of worshippers, and 
up above on clouds, heavenly beings with right 
and left a Buddha in dhyāna-mudrā.
The standing figure to the left of the Buddha is 
probably Avalokiteśvara, while the one kneeling 
on the right—arguably the second most important 
character in the relief—is Sudhana, who is making 
various offerings and performing merit transfer 
together with his retinue.
The latter is part of the main ingredient for the liturgy of 
the 88 Buddhas Repentance  (see Kandahjaya 2010).
Kandahjaya.indd   107 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 122] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia108
Table 3.14: Anuttara-Pūjā
Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā, Chapter 6 Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan Balinese Anuttara-Pūjā 
Idaṁ hi maṇḍalam paśyañ śraddhāṁ jan-
ayaṁś cādhunā  /
kule jātāsi buddhānāṁ vidyāmantrair 
adhiṣṭhitaḥ // 1Idañ ca maṇḍalam paśya śraddhāñ 
janayathādhunā  /
kule jāto ’si buddhānāṁ sarbvamantrair 
adhiṣṭhitaḥ // 14
sampado ’bhimukhāḥ sarvāḥ siddhiyogata-
yaś ca te /
pālayan samayān siddho mantreṣūdyo -
gavāṁ bhava // 2sampado ’bhimukhāḥ sarbvāḥ siddhayo -
gatayaś ca te /
pālaya samayaṁ siddhyai mantreṣūdyo -
gavān bhava  // 15
Ratnatrayaṁ me śaraṇaṁ 
sarvaṁ pratidiśāmy agham / 
anumode jagatpuṇyaṁ 
Buddhabodhau dadhe manaḥ  //
utpādayāmi varabodhicittaṁ  
nimantrayāmi bahu sarvasattvān / 
iṣṭāṁ cariṣye varabodhicārikāṁ 
Buddho bhaveyaṁ jagato hitāya //
Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra
utpādayāmi paramaṁ 
bodhicittam anuttaram  /
yathā traiyadvikā nā [128a] thāḥ  
sambodhau kṛtaniścayāh  // 3Utpādayāmi paramaṁ 
bodhicittam anuttaram  //
yathā traiyadhvikanāthāḥ
saṁbodhau kṛtaniścayāḥ //utpādayāmi paramaṁ
Bodhicittaṁ anuttaram / 
yathā traiyadhvakā nāthāḥ
saṁbodhau kṛtaniścayāḥ //
trividhāṁ śīlaśikṣān ca 
kuśalaṁ dharmasaṅgraham /
sattvārthakriyāśīlañ ca pratigṛhṇāmy ahaṁ dṛḍham // 4trividhāṁ śīlaśikṣāṁ ca
kuśaladharmasaṅgraham  //
sattvārthakriyāśīlaṁ capratigṛhṇāmy ahaṁ dṛḍham //trividhāṁ śīlaśikṣāṁ ca 
kuśaladharmasaṅgraham / 
sattvārthakriyāśīlāṁ capratigṛhṇāmy ahaṁ dṛḍham //
buddhaṁ dharmañ ca saṅghañ ca
triratnāgram anuttaram  /
adyāgreṇa gṛhīsyāmi
saṁvaraṁ buddhayogajam // 5buddhaṁ dharmaṁ ca saṅghaṁ ca 
triratnāgram anuttaram  // 
adyāgreṇa grahīṣyāmi 
saṁvaraṁ buddhayogajam //Buddhaṁ Dharmañ ca Saṅghañ ca 
Triratnāgram anuttaram / 
adyāgreṇa grahiṣyāmiaṁvaraṁ Buddha-yoga-jam /
vajraṁ ghaṇṭāñ ca mudrāñ ca 
pratigṛhṇāmi tattvataḥ /
ācāryañ ca gṛhīṣyāmi
mahāvajrakulōccaye  // 6vajraghaṇṭāṁ ca mudrāṁ ca 
pratigṛhṇāmi tattvataḥ / 
ācāryaṁ ca grahīṣyāmi 
mahāvajrakuloccaye //vajraṁ ghaṇṭāñ ca mudrāñ ca 
pratigṛhṇāmi tattvataḥ / 
ācāryāt tān grahiṣyāmi
mahāvajrakuloccaye //
caturdānaṁ pradāṣyāmi 
ṣaṭkṛtvā ca dine dine /
mahāratnakule yoge samaye ca manorame  // 7caturdānaṁ  pradāsyāmi 
ṣaṭkṛtvā tu dine dine / 
mahāratnakule yoge samaye ca manorame  //caturdānaṁ pradāsyāmi 
satkṛtaṁ tu dine dine / mahāratnakule yogesamaye ca manorame //
saddharmaṁ pratigṛhṇāmi
bāhyaṁ guhyaṁ triyānikam  /
mahāpadmakule śuddhemahābodhisamudbave  // 8saddharmaṁ pratigṛhṇāmi
bāhyaṁ guhyaṁ triyānikam  / 
mahāpadmakule śuddhemahābodhisamudbhave  //saddharmaṁ pratigṛhṇāmi 
bāhyaguhya-kriyānvitam / 
mahāpadmakule śuddhemahābodhisamudbhave //
saṁvaraṁ sarvasamyuktaṁpratigṛhṇāmi tattvatah /pūjākarma yathāśaktyāmahākarmakuloccaye  // 9saṁvaraṁ sarvasaṁyuktaṁ pratigṛhṇāmi tattvataḥ / pūjākarma yathāśaktyāmahākarmakuloccaye //saṁvaraṁ sarvasaṁyuktaṁpratigṛhṇāmi tattvataḥ / pūjākarma yathāśaktyā mahāvajrakuloccaye //
utpādayāmi paramaṁ
bodhicittam anuttaram  /
gṛhītaṁ saṁvaraṁ kṛtsnaṁ
sarvasattvārthakāraṇāt // 10utpādayitvā paramaṁ
bodhicittam anuttaram  /
gṛhītaṁ saṁvaraṁ kṛtsnaṁ
sarvasattvārthakāraṇāt //utpādayāmi paramaṁ
Bodhicittam anuttaram /
gṛhītaṁ saṁvaraṁ kṛtsnaṁ
sarvasattvārthakāraṇam //
tīrṇāṁ tārayiṣyāmi 
amuktān mocayāmy aham  /
anāśvastān āśvāsayiṣyāmi
sattvān sthāpayiṣyāmi nirvṛttau // 11atīrṇān tārayiṣyāmyamuktān mocayiṣyāmy aham  // 
anāthān  nāthayiṣyāmi 
sattvān sthāpayāmi nirvṛttāv iti //atīrṇān tārayiṣyāmiamuktān mocayāmy aham / anāthān nāthayiṣyāmi
sthāpayiṣyāmi nirvṛtau //
Kandahjaya.indd   108 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 123] ---
109 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
A practice which is usually related to the anut -
tarapūjā  is the liberation of living beings.103 Verse 
21 of the Bhadracarī  describes it in this way:104
Extinguishing all pains in the evil paths, es -
tablishing all creatures in happiness, let me 
practice [the life of Bhadra] for the benefit of 
all creatures, as far as there are lands and paths 
in the ten quarters.
Panel IV43 (Fig. 3.2) shows Samantabhadra 
sitting in a pavilion liberating a bird (Krom 1930 
103. This ceremony is widely known in Chinese Bud -
dhism; it is called fang sheng  (放生 ): ‘to set free captive 
animals’. It is also known in Japanese and Tibetan Bud -
dhism. See Shiu and Stokes 2008, and Law 1994.
104. Sa
rvi apāya dukhāṁ praśamanto sarvajagaṁ sukhi 
sthāpayamānaḥ sarvajagasya hitāya careyaṁ yāvata kṣetra -
pathā diśa tāsu // 21II: 109), while those that have already been liber -
ated are seen flying away on the upper left corner. 
One of the people on the left side of the panel is 
seen emptying a bowl of fish into a lotus pond and 
the man behind him is carrying a squirrel. Other 
animals that are freely roaming are on the lower 
left corner. This panel is closely following verse 21 
and shows how all beings live freely and peacefully.
The whole Bhadracarī  is uniquely depicted in 
full on 72 panels along the main wall of the top 
gallery of Borobudur. This placement likely reflects 
the highest regard that Borobudur architects had 
conferred upon the Bhadracarī . Moreover, since 62 
verses of the Bhadracarī  are allotted into 72 panels 
of reliefs, those verses are not mapped against the 
panels in one-to-one fashion. Thus, this assignment 
provides us with a supplementary indication that 
the figure 72 was not selected at random but must 
Fig. 3.2: Panel IV43. (Photo: adapted from Krom 1920  II: 109)Fig. 3.1: Panel IV12. (Photo: adapted from Krom 1920  II: 104)
Kandahjaya.indd   109 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 124] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia110
have been chosen deliberately, so as to conform to 
a grid formula that I have discussed earlier (Kan -
dahjaya 2009), and to which I will return anon.
Vuddhacarita
The Kayumvuṅan inscription praises Princess 
Prāmodavarddhanī for not only practising bhakti  
(verse 9) but also performing conducts of Buddha 
(vuddhacarita , verse 4). Not knowing the context, 
we may comprehend this statement as it is but will 
not be able to appreciate it to the fullest extent of its 
meaning. The SHK , however, allows us to further 
appreciate these two concepts in the inscription. The 
SHK  explains the meaning of bhakti  as follows:105
[When] one acts by always following the es -
sence of the sacred scriptures, is firm in main -
taining asceticism, observances, purification 
rituals, and the teachings of Buddha, and is 
never satisfied in practising the Dharmma, 
that is considered bhakti .
We can also ascertain that the vuddhacarita  is 
identical to buddhacārya  and the latter is described 
as such in the last verse-cum-commentary of the 
SHK :106
This bodhi  rising from samādhi , all mudrā s, 
and tathāgata s,
The ultimate secret sown, are to be known by 
one of wisdom and buddhacārya .
The meaning is: The teaching on enlightenment, 
samādhi , and all mudrā s are to be possessed 
105. Ikaṅ lumaku satatānut rasa niṅ āgama, matәguh 
rumakṣa tapa brata saṅskāra mvaṅ buddhaśāsana tan 
kavanәhan maṅulahakәn dharmma, ya sinaṅguh bhakti 
ṅaranya  (Kats 1910: 64–65).
106. Evaṁ bodhisamadhyottaḥ sarbvamudrātathāga -
ta
, suguhyatopitajñeyo buddhacāryyavicakṣanaiḥ. Ka: 
Ikaṅ kājaran iṅ bodhi samādhi mvaṅ ikaṅ sarbvamudrā 
pinakalakṣaṇanta mvaṅ ikaṅ tathāgata inaṅәn-aṅәnta, 
mvaṅ ikaṅ paramaguhya tathāgata niyata ikā kavruhana 
de saṅ buddhacāryyavicakṣaṇa, ka, ikaṅ mahābodhi, ikaṅ 
samādhi, ikaṅ sarbvamudrā mantra yoga bhāvanā mvaṅ 
kavicakṣaṇan ya tikāvak niṅ caturdevī Locanā, Pāṇḍara -
vāsinī, Māmakī, Tārā. Iti caturdevī kavruhana hayva tan 
prayatna, paḍa pavitranira mvaṅ bhaṭāra hyaṅ Buddha 
yan ta kapaṅgih pāvaknira caturdevī de saṅ yogīśvara  (Kats 
1910: 69–70).by you. Further, you should constantly med -
itate on the tathāgata , and this paramaguhya 
tathāgata  is indeed to be known by one of wis -
dom and buddhacāryya , i.e.: mahābodhi , samā -
dhi, all mudra-mantra -yoga -bhāvanā , and wis- 
dom are the bodies of the four Devīs: Locanā, 
Pāṇḍaravāsinī, Māmakī, and Tārā. The four 
Devīs should be known as such; do not be inat -
tentive. They are as pure as Bhaṭāra Hyaṅ Bud -
dha; if these four Devīs are found they are to be 
embodied by the Yogīśvara.
If we now recall that Samantabhadra is one of 
the many epithets of Buddha Gautama,107 then we 
can find the identity of the terms Vuddhacarita  
in the Kayumvuṅan inscription, Buddhacāryya  
in the final verse of the SHK , and the Bhadracarī . 
In other words, all of them are pointing out the 
same practice: the Bhadracarī , the conducts of 
the Buddha.
The description of buddhacārya  also reveals a 
well-defined understanding of the four goddesses 
(caturdevī ) of Locanā, Pāṇḍaravāsinī, Māmakī, and 
Tārā. All of their bodies are said to be identified 
with mahābodhi , samādhi , all mudrā s, mantras, 
yoga, bhāvanā , and wisdom; or in other words, with 
buddhacārya  and wisdom. Thus, according to the 
SHK,  those four goddesses are really not female 
deities, as the word goddess might conventionally 
suggest, but conducts of the Buddha and wisdom. 
These conducts and wisdom are the objects that the 
Yogīśvara is to acquire and embody. As such, we will 
never find at Borobudur conventional female forms 
of Locanā, Pāṇḍaravāsinī, Māmakī, and Tārā,108 
nor for that matter, Bajradhātvīśvarī, because those 
forms did not represent the symbolism espoused by 
the SHK  or Borobudur architects. Instead, they are 
embedded in the totality of the reliefs. At Borobu -
dur, various conducts of the Buddha are displayed 
through many accounts of buddhacarita , from 
those recounted in the Jātaka s, the Jātakamālā , 
the Avadāna s, and the Lalitavistara , up to the 
107. Thus in verse 29 of the Amaramālā  (s ee Lokesh 
Chandra 1997: 149), an 8th-century Sanskrit-Old Javanese 
dictionary, which is perhaps related to the Amarakośa  
known to Indian literati.
108. How
ever, as we have seen above, the syllables asso -
ciated with these four goddesses are found on a stone in -
scription from Candi Bungsu in Muara Takus (see my n. 61).
Kandahjaya.indd   110 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 125] ---
111 SHK, Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia
Gaṇḍa   v
yūha , and the summary of all these feats 
is depicted on the panels of the Bhadracarī .
The final configuration of the Borobudur ar -
chitecture thus reflects a complete instruction for 
cultivation by undergoing four steps as expounded 
in the SHK , i.e., one, Mahā-mārga (the great path); 
two, Parama-bodhi-mārga  or Parama-mārga  (the 
supreme path); three, Mahā-guhya  (the great secret); 
and four,  Parama-guhya  (the supreme secret).
The broad terrace at the base functions as an 
altar for offerings while performing the anuttara -
pūjā  or initiatory rituals ( abhiṣeka ), and as such is 
specially built to conduct processes necessitated 
by the first step, the Mahā-mārga . The formed 
corridors become the venue for undertaking the 
second step, the Parama-bodhi-mārga  or the Para -
ma-mārga , whereby the disciple learns and acquires 
the ten perfections ( daśapāramitā ) by cultivating 
all Buddha’s conducts ( buddhacārya ) and wisdom. 
These two steps provide the necessary equipment for 
the disciple to be able to fully engage in the tasks 
required by the last two steps, the Mahā-guhya  and 
the Parama-guhya . The symbolism underpinning 
the circular terraces, where the perforated stūpa s 
make the Buddha inside visible, may reflect the de -
scription of the Mahā-guhya . In addition, it seems 
that the transition from the rectangular to the cir -
cular terraces was deliberately made perceptible 
as a continuity, implying as it does a correlation 
between the 72 Bhadracarī  panels running along 
the main wall of the top gallery of Borobudur and 
the 72 Buddha statues inside the perforated stūpa s 
on the circular terraces. As I have demonstrated 
earlier (Kandahjaya 2009), the number of Buddha 
statues on each floor is designated in accordance 
with the figure in the series calculated following 
Amoghavajra’s grid formula for the construction 
of the Garbhadhātumaṇḍala. For this reason, the 
correlation must have denoted that, on the reverse, 
all the Buddhas too continue reverberating the Bhad -
racarī  while observing and listening to the universe.
The central stūpa on the very top is a fully en -
closed construction. It is singular and non-dual 
(advaya ), solid and dense ( ghana ), and the chief 
(nātha ), and thereby is correlated with the descrip -
tion of the Parama-guhya  in the SHK , and with the 
name Śrī Ghananātha in the Kayumvuṅan inscrip -
tion. This main stūpa crowns the whole structure, as if it embraces the manifold attributes embedded 
in the edifice. Hence, Śrī Ghananātha, being the 
Buddha as the Lord of All Virtues, is portrayed 
as an Excellent Buddha Image (Sinhalese, vara-
budu-r ; Skt. vara-buddha-rūpa ).
conclusion
Comparative content analysis reveals that, in addi -
tion to the Sanskrit sources that have already been 
identified in previous studies, a number of newly identified texts are related to the SHK , namely:
ŚrīguhyasamājamaṇḍalavidhiŚrīguhyasamājamaṇḍalopāyikāviṁśatividhi
Ratnameghasūtra
GurupañcaśikhāGuhyendutilaka
YogāvatāraYogāvatāropadeśaYogabhāvanāmārga
BhāvanākramaPiṇḍīkrama
In contrast to earlier identifications, these new 
sources are significant insofar that they allow us 
to elucidate many peculiarities of the SHK,  as well 
as other epigraphic and archaeological documents 
from both Java and Sumatra. Some preliminary, 
and yet relevant, findings are the following:
1)  The
re are resonances, in terms of emphasis on 
practice, yoga, and oral teaching received from 
the guru, between the SHK  and a series of texts 
including the Yogāvatāra , the Yogāvatāropadeśa , 
the Yogabhāvanāmārga , and the Bhāvanākra -
ma. As these texts are connected to the 5th- to 
6th-century Buddhist logician Dignāga and his 
scions, the claim made in the SHK  that its set 
of teachings was received from Ḍaṅ Ācāryya 
Śrī Dignāgapāda opens up the possibility that 
this figure might be none other than the famous 
Buddhist logician. The possibility that doctrines 
related to Dignāga and his tradition reached 
the Indonesian Archipelago by the late 6th or 
early 7th century is conceivable on account of 
the information provided by Tāranātha, who 
relates that Dharmapāla, a disciple of Dignāga, 
spent the end of his life in Sumatra.
Kandahjaya.indd   111 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 126] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia112
2)  Several verses and concepts of the SHK  res onate 
with similar ones retained in the Guhyasamāja 
scriptural tradition. However, the brevity of 
the SHK , its ‘idiosyncratic’ re-ordering of the 
verses, the peculiar configuration of some key 
concepts, and the echoes of teachings attested in 
the Ratnameghasūtra  in the hitherto untraced 
verse 25 of the SHKM  all suggest that the SHK  
as a whole originated from a tradition that is 
yet to be recognized, or that—being perhaps a 
remarkably early one—did not survive for us.
3)  Ins
criptions from the Indonesian Archipelago 
and foreign accounts, particularly the Chinese 
ones, assist us in fixing the upper chronolog -
ical limit of the SHK  to the 8th century (thus 
confirming Goris’ conclusion); however, the 
deployment of early ‘hidden teachings’, like the 
ones advocated by the Guhyasamāja  tradition, 
suggests that its lower limit may be pushed back 
to as early as the 5th century. 
4)  There are indications that the SHK  teac h-
ings came from the northeastern regions of 
the Indian Subcontinent; this is in harmony 
with the evidence attested in the Sanskrit in -
scription of Kelurak ( ad 782), written in Sid -
dhamātṛkā script, mentioning a royal precep -
tor Kumāraghoṣa from Gauḍīdvīpa (modern 
Bengal or Bangladesh).
5)  The SHK  p
reserves an integrated set of practi -
cal esoteric teachings for the attainment of the 
highest Buddhist goal. The set consists of four steps: one, Mahā-mārga  (the great path); two, 
Parama-bodhi-mārga  or Parama-mārga  (the 
supreme path); three, Mahā-guhya  (the great 
secret); and four, Parama-guhya  (the supreme 
secret). This set inspired the architects to final -
ize the design and symbolism of Borobudur, 
so that the sanctum would represent this pro -
gramme and in turn provide the practitioners 
with an aid to achieve the highest goal.
6)  The SHK  m entions a set of four goddesses ( devī) 
attested in Tantric texts from other regions of 
the Buddhist world, and it explicitly connects 
them to a set of doctrinal practices rather than 
representing them uniquely as conventional 
female deities. The same may also be true in 
the case of Borobudur, where such commonly 
conceived female deities are not depicted as such 
on any of its reliefs, and yet the latter symboli -
cally embody the doctrinal practices connected 
to the deities.
All of the above outcomes are preliminary 
results that need verification and confirmation. 
There are also many other details of the SHK  that 
necessitate further investigation. For instance, we 
are yet to clarify its concealed background, to 
unpack its complex system, and to draw a more 
accurate map of its relationship with textual as well 
as visual sources of other Buddhist (and Śaiva) tra -
ditions. I would naturally hope that future studies 
will verify and expand the investigation.
Kandahjaya.indd   112 16/8/16   9:47 AM

--- [Page 127] ---
Ever since the rediscovery by the French 
scholar George Cœdès (1918) of the Indo -
nesian kingdom of Śrīvijaya, which for 
more than half a millennium (7th–13th century 
ad) played a major role in the history of South -
east Asia, the study of this polity has assumed a 
prominent position in the research of the ancient 
history of Indonesia .1 This kingdom and its capital 
Śrīvijayapura, probably located near the modern 
city of Palembang in Sumatra, functioned for a 
long period as a relay station and resting point in 
the vibrant sea trade between India and China, 
to which it also contributed an array of prod -
ucts. Apart from this, Śrīvijaya also maintained 
close contacts with kingdoms on the mainland of 
Southeast Asia. Its important position in Asian 
commercial traffic aside, Śrīvijaya was for many 
centuries a prominent international centre in the 
Buddhist world. Chinese monks, on their way to 
India by sea, often stayed in the cpital of Śrīvijaya 
for some length of time to familiarize themselves 
with Sanskrit before travelling on to India. Of 
these Chinese monks the best known was perhaps 
Yijing, who stayed in the capital for a period of six 
months in the year 671. However, bhikṣu s from 
India itself also did travel to the famous Śrīvijaya. 
Thus we read in Tāranātha’s History of Buddhism 
in India (in Tibetan, 16th century) that, after his 
retirement from Nālandā University, Dharmapāla, 
originally from Kāñcī and a contemporary of Xu -
anzang, left for Sumatra to stay there for the rest 
1.The original paper, Indonesische Sporen in Tibet,  w as
presented by J. Schoterman (1948–89) as a lecture at a
meeting of the Dutch Oriental Society in Leiden on 18
March 1985, and subsequently published by E.J. Brill, also 
in Leiden (Schoterman 1986). The present English trans -
lation was a joint effort by Roy Jordaan and Mark E. Long.of his life. According to this late Tibetan source 
he gained immortality ( amṛtasiddhi ) there, never 
to be reborn again. This Dharmapāla followed the 
spiritual tradition of the famous Buddhist scholar 
Diṅnāga (5th century), who in turn is mentioned 
in the Old Javanese Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan  as 
the proclaimer of the fourfold Yoga.
Because of the many foreign contacts, both 
commercially and in religious matters, it almost 
goes without saying that non-Indonesian sources 
could contain important information regarding 
the history of Śrīvijaya. Apart from indigenous 
sources (inscriptions, artefacts, etc.), the Chinese in 
particular have contributed much to our knowledge 
of the kingdom of Śrīvijaya. The reports of pilgrims 
as well as the more official documents of the many 
Chinese embassies offer a wealth of information, 
although a correct interpretation of the data is ham -
pered by the Chinese transcription of the Indonesian 
(mostly Sanskrit) names. In stark contrast to this is 
the meagre information from Indian sources. These 
sources yield little more than the Indian name for 
the Archipelago, the Island of Gold [ suvarṇadvīpa ], 
and the rich mines found there. Factual information 
is hardly ever offered. Next to the information from 
Chinese, Indian and—not to be overlooked—Arab 
and Persian sources, there is yet another foreign 
category in which to find information about Śrīvijaya, 
namely the vast Tibetan literature. Having once been 
an important Buddhist centre, it is not surprising 
that Śrīvijaya is mentioned as such in Tibetan texts, 
although in general the information therein cannot 
be called abundant. The exceptions are the writings 
by or about the Tibetan saint Atīśa (982–1054), one 
of the most prominent saints of Tibet, who for a 
period of twelve years stayed in Sumatra at the court 
of Śrīvijaya.Chapter 4
Traces of Indonesian Influences in Tibet
jan a. schoterman
Schoterman mockup.indd   113 12/7/16   3:11 PM

--- [Page 128] ---
114 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
In any discussion about Buddhism the mention 
of the name Tibet often has a nearly magical effect 
in which one is apt to lose sight of the fact that it is 
precisely Tibet which converted to Buddhism at a 
relatively recent date. In order to view the matter 
from a correct perspective it seems wise to devote 
a few remarks to the spread of Buddhism in Asia 
in general and in Indonesia in particular.
At the Council of Pāṭaliputra ( ad 245), under 
the auspices of the Emperor Aśoka, it was decided 
to disseminate the Buddhist doctrine universally. 
Relying on the texts, monks were dispatched to 
almost every known country to preach Buddhism 
successfully. However, the only thing that is certain 
is that the bhikṣu  Mahendra arrived in Sri Lanka 
to teach the Doctrine shortly after the Council. 
Khotan, located on the southern Silk Road, must 
also have come into contact with Buddhism at an 
early date. As is so often the case, religion and 
commerce went hand in hand and therefore it is 
not surprising that Buddhism also reached China 
at the beginning of the Common Era via the Silk 
Road. One Lokaṣema, a Yüeh-chih, is credited with 
the introduction of Mahāyāna Buddhism in China 
(see Zürcher 1972: 35). After Buddhism had gained 
foothold in China, Japan also came into contact 
with Buddhism in the year 552, when the Korean 
King Songwang sent a Buddha statue and a few 
manuscripts to the Japanese emperor. The dissemi -
nation of Buddhism in Southeast Asia and Indone -
sia in particular is less clearly traceable. Contacts 
between India on the one hand and Southeast Asia 
on the other presumably existed from very early 
times onwards but are only clearly discernible at 
the beginning of the Common Era and, once again, 
primarily concern commercial interests. As gold 
in India itself is only found in small quantities (the 
goldfields near Kolar), from time immemorial the 
Indians used to import gold from Central Asia 
and Siberia, but in the last two centuries before 
the Common Era this was impossible due to the 
turmoil triggered by the large population move -
ments in Central Asia. Consequently vast amounts 
of gold coinage were imported from Rome, ap -
parently in such huge numbers that the Emperor 
Vespasianus (69–79) was compelled to prohibit any 
further exports. Out of sheer necessity gold was 
looked for in other areas, including the Indonesian Archipelago. Although gold had perhaps been the 
main motive, other products were also appreci ated. 
This is apparent from the (Sanskrit) names given to 
the different new areas. Thus we hear among other 
things of Camphor Island, Coconut Island, etc. Gold 
Island fits in this series, designating Sumatra, but 
not exclusively. ‘Gold Island’ is the literal translation 
of the Sanskrit suvarṇadvīpa , being used side by 
side with ‘Gold Land’ ( suvarṇabhūmi ). The latter 
probably designates Pegu in Burma. It is against 
this background that the dissemination in Indone -
sia of Buddhism, and of course also of Hinduism, 
should be understood. The monks and priests who 
joined the lengthy sea voyages earned their position 
on board not least because of their knowledge of 
the stars and medicine. When exactly Buddhism 
reached the Archipelago cannot be determined. The 
oldest traces of Hinduism (and gold) are found on 
Kalimantan, where are the well-known Kutai in -
scriptions of King Mūlavarman, dating to around 
the year 400 (de Casparis 1975: 14ff.). We may assume 
that Buddhism also reached Indonesia in this period. 
In support of this contention the fact is often men -
tioned that early Buddha statues have been found in 
widely separated places such as Sempaga in Sulawesi, 
Jember (Java) and Seguntang (Sumatra). Both the 
geographical dispersion and the early date assigned 
to these statues (4 th–5th century; see Cœdès 1968: 
18) would point to an early and wide presence of 
Buddhism in the Archipelago. Recently, however, 
it has been rendered plausible that these statues 
date from a much later period, presumably the 8th 
or 9th  century (see Barrett 1954: 41ff.). Even so, it 
seems beyond doubt that Buddhism was present in 
the Archipelago at an early date and almost simulta -
neously with Hinduism, although in the beginning 
Hinduism may have enjoyed a greater popularity. 
Perhaps the report of the Chinese pilgrim Faxian, 
who visited the Archipelago in 414 (Cœdès 1968: 
54–55), sheds light on this. Faxian stated to his regret 
that Buddhism was not yet influential in contrast 
to the flourishing community of ‘heretic Brahmins’ 
(see Krom 1931: 82).
In light of the above, the introduction of Bud -
dhism in Tibet occurred at a relatively late date. 
Although it cannot be excluded that in incidental 
cases Tibet had gotten into touch with Buddhism 
from Central Asia, China, or Nepal even earlier (see 
Schoterman mockup.indd   114 12/7/16   3:11 PM

--- [Page 129] ---
Traces of Indonesian Influences in Tibet115
Tucci 1970: 13), it was probably only during the reign 
of King Songtsen Gampo (617–50) that Buddhism 
was introduced there. It will be generally known 
that Tibet and Tibetan Buddhism soon acquired 
a great authority within the Buddhist world. Still, 
it is worth knowing that there had been Buddhists 
in the Indonesian Archipelago long before the 
introduction of Buddhism in Tibet. Therefore, it 
seems like false modesty when it was stated during 
a symposium in Jakarta on Śrīvijaya that Buddhism 
in Śrīvijaya would have been influenced by Tibetan 
Buddhism (Suleiman 1978: 59; Satari 1979: 88). If 
indeed there has been some form of influence, then 
it would have been the other way around, as we 
will presently see.
As was already observed, most of the informa -
tion on Śrīvijaya is found in Tibetan texts dealing 
with the saint Atīśa (982–1054). Originating from 
northeast India, Atīśa stayed in Sumatra at the court 
of Śrīvijaya for twelve years (1013–25). It was rather 
chaotic in northern India, especially in this period. 
From Ghaznī, a fortress south of Kabul, Mahmūd 
of Ghaznī launched several attacks against India, 
in 1018 almost reaching Benares (which he plun -
dered in 1033) and attacking Somnāth (Kathiawar) 
in 1024. The northeastern part of India, along with 
the famous Buddhist University in Nālandā, still 
remained spared, but unrest undoubtedly would 
have penetrated into this region. Although the Bud -
dhism in northeastern India during this period 
was not yet directly confronted with Islam, it was 
highly susceptible to infiltration by various Tantric 
currents, as a result of which ‘classical’ Buddhism 
virtually disappeared. It is not difficult to imagine 
that Śrīvijaya took over the role of northeast India 
in this period. There one could study classical Bud -
dhism in peace. Representative in this context is 
an illustrated manuscript of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā 
Prajñāpāramitā  from the year 1015 (Foucher 1900, 
1905), produced three years after Atīśa’s departure 
for Sumatra. Aside from the text, this manuscript 
contains a large amount of miniatures of Buddhist 
divinities and sanctuaries. Most of the illustrations 
relate to India itself, but a few foreign sanctuaries 
are also listed. Sri Lanka, for instance, is thrice 
mentioned and depicted. As for the Indonesian 
Archipelago, three localities are depicted along 
with the following captions: (1) ‘On the island of Java is Dīpaṅkara (= an early Buddha)’, (2) ‘On the 
island of Sumatra in Śrīvijayapura is Lokanātha (= 
Avalokiteśvara)’, (3) ‘In Kedah on Mount Vālavatī 
is Lokanātha’. In the manuscript’s series of shrines 
the absence of Nālandā is striking. The fame in 
India which Śrīvijaya enjoyed in this period is ap -
parent but was of limited duration. Weakened by 
the attacks from southern India at the hands of 
the Cōḻas (see Cœdès 1968: 141ff.), Śrīvijaya lost its 
prominent position in the Buddhist world. Perhaps 
this is borne out in another manuscript of the pre -
viously mentioned Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā  
(Foucher 1900–5), but which dates from 1071. In 
this manuscript we also find a series of miniatures 
of Buddhist sanctuaries in India and beyond. The 
island of Sri Lanka is again mentioned thrice, which 
suggests that little changed in the intervening 
period. As regards the Indonesian Archipelago, 
however, the picture has radically altered. Only Java 
is still mentioned. Both Śrīvijaya and Kedah have 
disappeared from the list of important Buddhist 
sanctuaries.
As said before, the information on Śrīvijaya in 
Tibetan sources is, generally speaking, not abun -
dant. Yet, a few more or less salient details are worth 
mentioning. In a list of eight localities where relics 
of the historical Buddha are venerated, mention is 
made of Gold Island (see Das 1973: s.v. gnas ). Al -
though the Tibetans use the standard translation of 
the Sanskrit suvarṇadvīpa , ‘Gold Island’ (Tibetan 
gser gliṅ ), it is not immediately clear that this refers 
to Sumatra. The other seven places enumerated are 
all located in India or Tibet. Gold Island is the one 
exception. In spite of the fact that it could confirm 
the importance of Sumatra, another interpretation 
is conceivable. Although it is true that the Tibetan 
word gliṅ is the equivalent of the Sanskrit dvīpa, 
it can also designate a large monastery. In this 
case it would relate to a ‘Golden Monastery’, not 
an unusual name for a vihāra  in Nepal and Tibet. 
A clearer reference to Sumatra is found in the He­
vajratantra . In a list of pilgrimages is mentioned 
an ‘island yielding gold’ ( Hevajratantra  1.7.16). In 
contrast to the common suvarṇadvīpa  for Sumatra, 
we here find the expression cāmīkarānvita dvīpa, 
which faithfully recurs in the Tibetan version ( gser 
daṅ ldan pa’i gliṅ ). The Yogaratnamālā , the most 
important Sanskrit commentary on the Tantra, 
Schoterman mockup.indd   115 12/7/16   3:11 PM

--- [Page 130] ---
116 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
leaves little doubt that Sumatra is indeed intended 
here and gives the usual gloss of suvarṇadvīpa .
All in all, it is evident that Śrīvijaya on Sumatra 
was a renowned centre of Buddhism in the first 
quarter of the 11th century. From days of old it 
was a place for studying classical Buddhism fre -
quented by Buddhist pilgrims and scholars. An 
adventitious circumstance was that Śrīvijayapura 
was a well-known Buddhist site of pilgrimage. It is 
not surprising therefore that Atīśa sought refuge 
here when the situation in northeastern India 
was no longer favourable for studying classical 
Buddhism.
As one of the most prominent saints in Tibet, 
it is understandable that a vast amount of second -
ary literature has come into existence about Atīśa. 
His biography is found in various Tibetan texts. 
Herewith it is notable that hardly any attention is 
devoted to his stay in Sumatra, which must have 
been of crucial significance for the training of Atīśa. 
Almost perfunctorily, the outward journey is re -
ferred to as ‘dangerous’ but hardly anything is said 
about the stay itself. Here I will confine myself to 
a short biography of Atīśa while referring others 
to the study of Alaka Chattopadhyaya (1967) for 
more detailed information.
Atīśa, a title of honour that he was bequeathed 
with later, was born into a royal family in Vikrama -
pura (Bengal) in the year 982. At birth he was 
named Candragarbha. Following his admission 
to the Buddhist order, in 1001 he received the name 
Dīpaṅkaraśrījñāna. For a period of eleven years he 
studied the Buddhist doctrine in northeast India, 
but by force of circumstances in 1012 he left for 
Śrīvijaya in Sumatra, where, as said, he arrived in 
1013 after a dangerous sea voyage. For a period of 
twelve years (1013–25) he studied at the court of 
Śrīvijayapura with the teacher Dharmakīrti. In 1025, 
Atīśa returned to India to become the head of the 
Vikramaśīla Vihāra in Bengal. At the invitation 
of the Tibetans, Atīśa left for India in 1040 and, 
after a short stay in Nepal (1041), reached Tibet in 
1042. After a fruitful life he finally died at the age 
of seveny-two in Netang, a small place ten miles 
to the southwest of Lhasa.
As said before, little is known of his stay in 
Sumatra. Actually, we know little more than of 
his study with the teacher Dharmakīrti. According to the Tibetan texts translated by Das (1893a), this 
Dharmakīrti was a Sumatran prince who one day 
discovered a Buddha statue in a cave. Through his 
sincere veneration of the Buddha, the Sumatrans 
had an abundant harvest and spontaneously con -
verted to Buddhism. Longing to know more of the 
creed, the Sumatran prince left for India, where 
he stayed for seven years and visited Bodh Gāyā, 
among other places. From his teacher he received 
the name Dharmakīrti, ‘Fame of the Dharma’. 
Having returned to Sumatra he became a famous 
teacher whose reputation was known as far as India. 
This hagiography more or less follows a well-known 
pattern: birth into a royal family, a miraculous 
acquaintance with Buddhism, embracing the Doc -
trine. It is obvious that Dharmakīrti must have been 
one generation older than his pupil Atīśa. Whereas 
Dharmakīrti had gone to northeast India (presum -
ably Magadha) to study the Doctrine, Atīśa went 
to Sumatra as the situation prevailing in northeast 
India had completely altered. Of course the reputa -
tion of Dharmakīrti also could have played a role 
in Atīśa’s decision to leave for Sumatra. We know 
from the Tibetan author Sum pa that Atīśa had 
not been the only pupil of Dharmakīrti. At least 
three other pupils are mentioned by name: Śānti, 
Śrī Jñānamitra and Ranakīrti ( Sum pa , edited by 
Das 1908: 118). What precisely Dharmakīrti taught 
his pupils is not recorded, but considering the 
contents of the seven texts attributed to him this 
must have been in accordance with the traditional 
Mahāyānic beliefs as taught by famous teachers 
such as Nāgārjuna, Maitreyanātha and Candrakīrti 
(see A. Chattopadyaya 1967: 95). In view of the po -
sition of Śrīvijaya as a centre of classical Buddhism 
there is little reason to assume that local beliefs or 
ideas could have exerted any influence. The ulti -
mate reason why Atīśa was subsequently invited to 
Tibet was for the ‘restoration’ and purification of 
Buddhism again so as to be able to overcome the 
setback that Tibetan Buddhism had suffered from 
the persecutions initiated by King Lang Darma2  
(838–42). Apparently, Atīśa had enjoyed such a 
thorough traditional education as to be entrusted 
2 O r King Lang Dharma as it more frequently appears 
in other historical works (translators’ note).
Schoterman mockup.indd   116 12/7/16   3:11 PM

--- [Page 131] ---
Traces of Indonesian Influences in Tibet117
with such a commission—a task that he completed 
successfully. 
When Atīśa left Sumatra in 1025 to return to 
India, he had a small gold statue of the Buddha in 
his luggage that he had received from his teacher 
Dharmakīrti. At the occasion of his death in 1054, 
the statue and a few other personal possessions 
were distributed among the monks (A. Chatto -
padhyaya 1967: 439). If this small gold statue was 
of Sumatran origin and not brought from India by 
Dharmakīrti, it would imply that a small Buddha 
statue from Indonesia might still be found some -
where in Tibet. Far more important than this small 
gold statue are the manuscripts that Atīśa took with 
him from Sumatra. These manuscripts, amounting 
to seven, have survived in Tibetan translation and 
are recorded as such in the Tibetan Canon ( TC). 
The original texts, which clearly were written in 
Sanskrit, are undoubtedly lost. That these texts 
originate from Sumatra and were for a large part 
recorded by Atīśa from the mouth of his teacher 
is evident from the different colophons. Without 
going deeper into the texts themselves at this time, 
it is possible to make a few remarks so as to indicate 
their significance.
According to the Index of the Tibetan Canon 
(Peking edition; ed. Susuki 1955–61) the seven 
manuscripts contain six different texts; one text 
is believed to be found in two manuscripts (sc. TC 
nos. 5338 and 5464). This turns out to be incorrect. 
The composer of the said Index apparently relied 
on the colophons of both manuscripts, which 
indeed are nearly identical. The only difference is 
that the divinity Mañjuvajra (’ jam pa’i rdo rje ) is 
mentioned in no. 5338, whereas no. 5464 gives the 
variant Mañjuśrīvajra (’ jam dpal rado rje ). Both 
colophons mention the Śikṣāsamuccayābhisamaya  
text. However, a cursory glance over both texts 
does suggest that we are dealing with two different 
works. No. 5464 (around 35 lines) is almost three 
times as long as no. 5338 (around 13 lines). Any 
remaining doubt is removed when we read the be -
ginnings of both texts, wherein as usual both the 
Sanskrit (in Tibetan transcription) and the Tibetan 
are given. The text no. 5338 indeed appears to have 
the name Śikṣāsamuccayābhisamaya , but the other 
(no. 5464) yields the title Śikṣāsamuccayakārikā . 
As a result of the strong resemblance, in title and also probably in colophon, between the two texts, 
the colophon of no. 5338 has also been used for no. 
5464. Whether the last text was also brought from 
Sumatra to Tibet by Atīśa is, however credible, hard 
to prove for the moment.
The colophons of the two texts in question have 
created a problem in connection with the kings of 
Śrīvijaya. In translation the two (nearly identical) 
colophons read as follows:
Dīpaṅkaraśrījñāna and bhikṣu  Jayaśīla have 
translated this text [into Tibetan]. The King of 
Gold Island, the illustrious Dharmapāla, who 
had incurred the favour of the Sublime Mañju -
vajra, exposed the Śikṣāsamuccayābhisamaya  
to Kamala and Dīpaṅkara.
So we are told that Atīśa (Dīpaṅkaraśrījñāna) trans -
lated the said text from Sanskrit into Tibetan with 
the help of Jayaśīla, a renowned translator—the 
usual procedure. Next we learn of the name of 
Atīśa’s fellow student, one Kamala. From another 
colophon we know that his full name was Kamala -
rakṣita. In the list of Sum pa (page 16) this Kamala -
rakṣita is not mentioned. What matters, however, is 
the fact that King Dharmapāla of Gold Island, who 
must have ruled during Atīśa’s stay in Sumatra (see 
Das 1893b: 31; Krom 1931: 249; A. Chattopadhyaya 
1967: 92), assuredly is mentioned in both colophons. 
Here the most common Tibetan word for ‘king’, 
rgyal po , is used, thus leaving little doubt as to 
the existence of a king Dharmapāla. This implies, 
however, that during the twelfth year of Atīśa’s 
stay in Sumatra three kings must have ruled suc -
cessively—something that cannot be dismissed out 
of hand. From one of the colophons of the seven 
texts (no. 5192) we learn that during Atīśa’s stay in 
Indonesia, the king Cūḍāmaṇivarman reigned in 
the capital city of Śrīvijayapura. Each of the two 
Sanskrit names is clearly rendered in Tibetan: 
Cūḍāmaṇivarman is referred to as gtsug gi nor 
bu’i go cha , and the capital city Śrīvijayapura as 
dpal nram par rgyal ba’i groṅ. King Cūḍāmaṇivar -
man is especially known from the so-called ‘Great 
Leiden Charter’, a copperplate inscription from 
South India rendered both in Sanskrit and Tamil, 
in which mention is made of a gift by the Cōḻa king 
Rājarāja I (985–1012) to a Buddhist sanctuary at 
Nākappaṭṭiṉam, which had been built here by King 
Schoterman mockup.indd   117 12/7/16   3:11 PM

--- [Page 132] ---
118 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Māravijayottuṅgavarman in honour of his father 
Cūḍāmaṇivarman. In the ‘Little Leyden Charter’, 
a shorter South Indian copper plate inscription, we 
are informed of the exact name of this sanctuary 
demolished by Jesuits in 1868, namely Śrīśailen -
dracūḍāmaṇivarman Vihāra (see Vogel 1919: 
630; Krom 1931: 236 ff.; Cœdès 1968: 141 ff.). King 
Cūḍāmaṇivarman was thus succeeded by his son 
Māravijayottuṅgavarman. The latter must have 
been succeeded by Dharmapāla, known from the 
Tibetan colophons. Although it is very well possi -
ble that the said three kings ruled over Śrīvijaya 
during the 1013–25 period, it is remarkable that 
in this case Cūḍāmaṇivarman and Dharmapāla 
are mentioned in the Tibetan colophons, but not 
Māravijayottuṅgavarman. Also worth noticing 
is that the first two kings bear a name ending in 
-varman , which is not unusual in this connection, 
whereas [the name] Dharmapāla clearly deviates 
from this. Lastly, it seems that a king would not 
be the first eligible person to expound a Buddhist 
text to two monks. All in all, one can call into 
question this king Dharmapāla of Gold Island, 
whose name is not recorded in any epigraphic or 
Chinese source. The only scholar who entertained 
doubts as regards King Dharmapāla was J. Naudou 
(see Cœdès 1968: 325, n. 87). That Naudou’s doubts 
were justified is borne out by a closer examination 
of the colophons.
In the colophons of the works that Atīśa took 
with him and translated, his Sumatran teacher is 
mentioned several times. Only once is he referred 
to as Dharmakīrti, twice as ‘Dharmapāla, the guru 
of Gold Island’, and again twice as ‘The guru of 
Gold Island’. Apparently, the Sumatran teacher was 
known both as Dharmakīrti and Dharmapāla. In 
this connection it seems obvious that the suspect 
king Dharmapāla was in reality this teacher. The 
mention of the title ‘king’ remains problematic, 
however. Although it might refer to the royal 
descent of Dharmakīrti/Dharmapāla, this seems 
hardly plausible. Rather, here one must assume 
that the Tibetan rgyal po  (Skt. rāja , ‘king’) stands 
for the longer * rgyal po’i bla ma or rgyal po gu ru , 
which in India as well as in Indonesia is the title of 
an adviser or minister of the king, particularly in 
the field of religion (Skt. rājaguru ). This hypothesis 
is confirmed in the colophon of a work by Atīśa himself. In the colophon of the Satyadvayāvatāra  
(TC no. 5298) Atīśa refers to his teacher as the ‘Rā -
jaguru of Gold Island’ ( gser gliṅ rgyal po gu ru ).
From the above it may be concluded that Atīśa’s 
teacher in Sumatra was no ordinary instructor, but 
the incumbent of the highest religious position 
at the court of Śrīvijaya, namely the ‘minister of 
religious affairs’. That the Rājaguru indeed held 
a very important position can be inferred, for 
instance, from the inscription on the Ligor stele 
(ad 775) which states that the king of Śrīvijaya had 
three brick temples erected and that the Rājaguru 
(here Rājasthavira; see Vogel 1919: 633ff.), named 
Jayanta, erected three more stūpa s. According to 
the Kalasan inscription ( ad 778), King Panaṅkaran 
[of Java] had a temple for Tārā built at the  instiga -
tion of the Rājaguru(s).3  
Considering the actual content of the six or 
seven texts that Atīśa took with him, I will be 
brief. Four (or five) texts are technical and deal 
with subjects that are fully in line with classical 
Mahāyāna Buddhism. The other two texts are so-
called sādhana s, manuals detailing the correct 
rules for the veneration of a particular deity/di -
vinity. Of both texts it is stated in the colophon 
that they were made by the guru  of Gold Island 
himself. As such, these two sādhana s are the only 
two known examples of this genre from Indonesia. 
The one sādhana  concerns the Bodhisattva Acala 
(TC no. 3883), whereas the other pertains to Kro -
dhagaṇapati ( TC no. 4994). The latter sādhana  is 
especially remarkable. Generally speaking, each 
sādhana  is often known in various versions that, 
as far as the Sanskrit versions are concerned, are 
mainly found in the Sādhanamālā  and for Tibetan 
versions in the [Tibetan] Canon. However, the Kro ­
dhagaṇapatisādhana  exists in the form of one text 
only, namely that of the guru of Gold Island. Closer 
inspection of the said sādhana  yields some interest -
ing information. Although Gaṇapati or Gaṇeśa, the 
well-known god with the elephant head, is indeed 
3. N ote from the translators: Schoterman writes ‘his’ 
Rājaguru(s), meaning Panaṅkaran’s Rājaguru, but his in -
terpretation is disputable. The Kalasan inscription itself 
refers to the Rājaguru(s) of an unnamed Śailendra king 
whose identification with the Javanese King Panaṅkaran 
is still hotly contested in archaeological circles and is in 
need of further substantiation.
Schoterman mockup.indd   118 12/7/16   3:11 PM

--- [Page 133] ---
Traces of Indonesian Influences in Tibet119
the only divinity mentioned in this text, that two 
gods are involved is clearly shown through the 
ritual and the mantra used. Within one [and the 
same] sādhana  is combined the veneration of both 
Gaṇapati and Jambhala, the Buddhist god of wealth. 
Furthermore, it is noteworthy that a segment from 
the ninth chapter of the Bhūtaḍāmaratantra , a text 
of mainly magical contents, of which there exists 
both a Buddhist and a Hindu version, is cited in 
the sādhana . The Buddhist version definitely is of 
respectable antiquity (first half of the 7th century; 
see Goudriaan 1981: 118).
In the above we have already referred briefly to 
the construction of a temple for the goddess Tārā, 
as reported in the Kalasan inscription of ad 778. 
The goddess Tārā assumes an important position, 
at least according to the Tibetan sources, in light 
of the relationship between Tibet and Indonesia. 
Tārā, more or less the national goddess of Tibet, 
allegedly would have revealed herself especially 
through the line of Dharmakīrti of Gold Island 
and his pupil Atīśa, whereby the latter would have 
introduced the Tārā cult in Tibet. About this, a 
Tibetan source says the following: ‘Here in Tibet 
five traditions have come down to us. The most 
important is Atīśa’s School. Both he and his own 
teacher, Dharmakīrti of Gold Island, continuously 
saw the face of the Noble Lady (i.e., Tārā) and they 
both expounded the tradition. Hers is the first of 
the traditional schools introduced in our country’ 
(see Beyer 1973: 417ff.). From this and other Tibetan 
sources (Beyer 1973: 14ff.), it is clearly shown that 
the goddess Tārā first revealed herself to Dhar -
makīrti who then passed on the tradition to Atīśa. 
Although the information from Tibetan sources 
stresses the importance of the Guru from Gold 
Island in relation to Tibetan sources, these claims 
should not be accepted at face value.
For if we accept the Tibetan information it 
would imply that the cult of Tārā was introduced 
from Śrīvijaya into Tibet only after ad  1042. Al -
though this view is hardly tenable, it may contain a 
kernel of truth. The most common tradition about 
the introduction of Tārā in Tibet centres around 
the time of King Songtsen Gampo (617–50), during 
whose reign Buddhism gained firm footing in Tibet 
(see above, p. 115). For political reasons, according 
to indigenous sources, the king married a Nepalese princess and a Chinese princess, who were both 
regarded as incarnations of Tārā (see Tucci 1962: 
121–26). As part of the wedding gifts, the Nepalese 
wife brought a sandalwood statue of Tārā to Tibet 
where it was erected in a temple. Beyer rightly ob -
serves that a widespread veneration of Tārā could 
not yet have existed in this early period and that the 
statue was erected in the temple largely for political 
motives (Beyer 1973: 6). Still, it is clear that the 
goddess Tārā was known in Tibet from as early 
as the first half of the 7th century. Seen in this 
light, the claims in the Tibetan sources that it was 
Atīśa who introduced Tārā in Tibet should rather 
be understood as referring to the beginnings of a 
widespread Tārā cult, which must have been less 
important and/or had suffered from the persecu -
tions initiated by King Lang Darma prior to Atīśa. 
From the biographies of Atīśa, it appears that 
he had a close relationship with Tārā from an early 
age. Thus it becomes understandable that it was 
precisely Tārā who appeared to him in a vision to 
renounce royal power and search for a teacher in 
another country (see Roerich 1949 and 1953: 242). 
Everything points to the fact that Atīśa was a devout 
adherent of Tārā long before his visit to Śrīvijaya. 
It is known that the goddess Tārā was venerated 
in Northeast India long before Atīśa’s time. One 
of the earliest references is found in the itinerary of the Chinese pilgrim Xuanzang, who travelled 
in India between 633 and 645. He reports to have 
seen two statues of To-lo (i.e., Tārā) in the envi -
rons of Nālandā. Another ‘early’ Tārā from the 
region is a statue of the goddess dating from about 
ad 845 and originating from Hilsa (Patna; Sircar 
1967: 128). Inscribed on this statue is the mantra 
oṁ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā, which still is the 
most important mantra in the cult of Tārā up to 
this very day.
There is, clearly, little reason to regard Śrīvi -
jaya in Sumatra as the place of origin of the cult 
of Tārā, thence finding its way to Tibet. Atīśa was 
already familiar with Tārā before his arrival in 
Sumatra, and Dharmakīrti is almost automatically 
mentioned in this connection for the simple fact 
that he was Atīśa’s teacher. Here we should not 
forget that Dharmakīrti himself spent seven years 
in northeast India studying Buddhism and that he 
may have learned about the Tārā cult existing there. 
Schoterman mockup.indd   119 12/7/16   3:11 PM

--- [Page 134] ---
120 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Even though it is not very likely that Tārā revealed 
herself in Śrīvijaya to Dharmakīrti, who passed on 
the tradition to his pupil Atīśa, we cannot rule out 
the possibility that the cult of Tārā was known in 
Indonesia at an early date. The Sanskrit inscription of 
Kalasan from 778, which mentions the construction 
of a temple for Tārā ( tārā bhavana ) in the plain of 
Prambanan, is actually one of the earliest extant 
references to a Tārā cult.
In summary, we could advance the supposition 
that Atīśa found a long-existing Tārā cult upon his 
arrival in Śrīvijaya in 1013, as a result of which his 
own interest in the goddess was further strength -
ened. Aside from this, his teacher Dharmakīrti 
could have contributed to the enthusiasm and the 
diligence with which Atīśa later propagated the 
veneration of Tārā in Tibet.
A final point relating to the relationship of In -
donesia and Tibet concerns the possible existence 
of a monument in memory of Dharmakīrti in 
Tibet. The Tibetan monk Mkhyen brtse (1820–92) 
compiled a sort of religious travel guide for pil -
grims who wanted to visit the holy places in central 
Tibet. To assist these pilgrims he presents a list of 
the sanctuaries and what can be found inside the 
walls of Ü, the central province of Tibet with the 
capital Lhasa. First mentioned by Mkhyen brtse 
is the famous monastery Reting ( rva sgreṅ ) to the 
northeast of Lhasa. According to the guidebook, 
the relics of bla ma gser gliṅ pa , of jo bo , and of 
’brom ston pa rgyal ba’i byun gnas are to be found 
inside the walls of the said monastery. There is no 
doubt as regards the identification of the latter two 
individuals. Jo bo (Skt. ārya ) refers to Atīśa, his 
usual name in Tibet. The last ’Brom ston (1003–63) 
is the most important pupil of Atīśa. Certainly, the 
Reting monastery harbours the relics of Atīśa and 
his pupil ’Brom ston.
As already said (p. 116), Atīśa died in 1054 at 
Netang ( sñe thaṅ ), a small place to the southwest 
of Lhasa. After his cremation the major part of 
Atīśa’s ashes were installed in a stūpa there. In 
the 20th century the tomb was visited by Waddell 
in 1904 (Waddell 1905: 320ff.) and by Sir Charles 
Bell (1931: 58, followed by a photograph of the said 
tomb). However, the guidebook mentions Reting 
as the place where Atīśa’s relics are found. Appar -
ently, the relics or a part thereof were transferred to Reting (Ferrari 1958: 77, n. 3). Three years after 
Atīśa’s demise, Reting monastery was founded in 
1057 (Tucci 1970: 41) by his pupil ’Brom ston at the 
instigation of his teacher. It seems plausible that 
the relics of the founder, ’Brom ston, are kept in the monastery, and that the same ’Bron ston also 
ordered the transfer of the relics of his own teacher 
to Reting. After all, Atīśa was a very important 
and popular figure and the interment of his relics 
would only add to the fame of the monastery. The 
question remaining is the identity of bla ma gser 
gliṅ pa whose relics are safeguarded in the Reting 
monastery next to Atīśa and ’Brom ston.
In her notices on this bla ma gser gliṅ pa, Alfonsa 
Ferrari observes that it probably refers to Gser gliṅ 
pa Bkra śis dpal, who was born in Gser glin and 
lived from 1292 until 1365 (Ferrari 1958: 78, n. 6). 
In fairness to Ferrari, I must add that she states in 
a note that ‘there also was a bla ma Gser gliṅ pa 
(Suvarṇadvīpika), master of Atīśa, but since he was 
an Indian teacher (in fact, this is but a surname 
of Dharmakīrti—L[uciano] P[etech]) it seems im -
possible to me that his relics should be preserved 
here’. Obviously the views of Alfonsa Ferrari will 
not be endorsed here. Firstly, the ‘master of Atīśa’ 
was not an Indian teacher but originated from 
Sumatra, in spite of the fact that Luciano Petech 
clearly confuses Dharmakīrti of Gold Island with 
the famous Buddhist logician Dharmakīrti (7th 
century), who is never said to originate from Gold 
Island. Aside from this, it seems very unlikely that 
a rather unknown monk, who lived three centuries 
after Atīśa, would have been interred in the vicinity 
of Atīśa and ’Brom ston. It seems more logical to in -
terpret bla ma gser gliṅ pa  literally and as referring 
to the guru of Gold Island, meaning Atīśa’s teacher 
Dharmakīrti. This would imply that the relics, or at 
least parts thereof, of Dharmakīrti in the Tibetan 
Reting monastery are interred next to the relics 
of his most renowned pupil Atīśa and the latter’s 
most famous pupil, ’Brom ston. The circle is closed. 
Ferrari finds it inconceivable that the relics of an 
Indian teacher of Atīśa were interred here, let alone 
those of a Sumatran teacher. Yet it is known that 
Atīśa did take the relics of an Indian teacher with 
him to Tibet, namely the relics of Nāropā that were 
interred in a caitya at Netang (see A. Chattopadyaya 
1967: 439). In memory of this, Atīśa is depicted with 
Schoterman mockup.indd   120 12/7/16   3:11 PM

--- [Page 135] ---
Traces of Indonesian Influences in Tibet121
a smaller caitya . In light of this connection it is 
no longer odd to suppose the existence of a stūpa 
or caitya  in the Reting monastery in memory of 
Dharmakīrti of Gold Island. This would imply that 
when Atīśa left Śrīvijaya in 1025, his teacher was 
no longer living. Perhaps the demise of his teacher 
was the direct cause for Atīśa to return to India. Be that as it may, Atīśa must have brought a part of the 
relics with him to India and subsequently to Tibet. 
If this line of reasoning is acceptable, it would imply 
that the relics of Dharmakīrti, the Rājaguru of the 
Sumatran kingdom of Śrīvijaya, are found in the 
Reting monastery in central Tibet.
Schoterman mockup.indd   121 12/7/16   3:11 PM

--- [Page 136] ---
Schoterman mockup.indd   122 12/7/16   3:11 PM

--- [Page 137] ---
It is broadly recognized in scholarship today 
that Esoteric Buddhism spread rapidly through -
out Asia from the 8th century onwards and was 
consistently aligned with local political institu -
tions and ruling classes.1 This relationship between 
esoteric traditions and local political structures 
can be found historically from post-Gupta India, 
to the maritime kingdom of Śrīvijaya, to Central 
Asian Tibetan states, and the pseudo-Sinitic polity 
of Dali 大理  in what is now southwestern China. 
The alignment of Esoteric Buddhism and local po -
litical institutions throughout Asia likely reflects 
fundamental structural elements of the movement 
stemming from its Indic origins. Following Ronald 
Davidson’s (2002) thesis that Esoteric Buddhism 
emerged in India as the result of particular shifting 
social realities and as a reflection of the political 
structures he refers to as ‘Samānta feudalism’, 
one expects a consistent association of Esoteric 
Buddhist practitioners and institutions with local 
1.Dating the emergence and dissemination of Esoteric
Buddhism to the 8th century is based on a privileging
of locally recognized, institutional articulations of the
tradition. The earliest of which I am aware occurred in
China during the 8th century. Although less well-docu -
mented, the 8th-century dissemination of Esoteric Bud -
dhism by Padmasambhava in Tibet would also argue for
this time frame. Other approaches that would shift this
date, sometimes dramatically, are possible. If identified
with texts in which are found the practical precursors
of what is sometimes considered to be ‘mature’ Esoteric
Buddhism, then this date might well be pushed back to
the 4th or 5th century, with the Chinese translation of
a number of Buddhist scriptures in which dhāraṇī  are
central. Alternately, one might identify the development 
of doxographical projects aimed at incorporating esoteric 
texts into a larger bibliographic framework, in which case 
a 7th-century date predicated on Buddhaghuya’s would
be apropos (see Hodge 2003).political institutions and rulers. Even considered 
in the abstract, Esoteric Buddhism appears to be 
a crypto-political system. The maṇḍala is simul -
taneously a central aspect of the late-mediaeval 
Indian political system and a paradigmatic element 
of Esoteric Buddhist systems throughout Asia. 
In addition to the examples mentioned above, 
there was also an integration of Esoteric Buddhism 
and the apparatus of the state in Tang dynasty China 
(618–907). The nature of this integration is an in -
structive case study for considering how some of the 
features of Esoteric Buddhism made it such an ap -
pealing religious and ritual ideology for local rulers. 
Among the characteristics of Esoteric Buddhism that 
conduced to its assimilation within the apparatus of 
the state were (1) its ethical flexibility, (2) its emphasis 
on mundane rather than strictly soteriological goals, 
and (3) the violent, militarily applicable nature of 
many Esoteric Buddhist rites. These characteristics 
reflect the central ethos of the Esoteric Buddhist 
tradition that emerged in the 8th century: an ethos 
of subjugation, coercion, and control.  
esoteric buddhism in china
The Comprehensive Mirror for Aiding Government 
(Zizhi tongjian 資治通鑒 ), an 11th- century chroni -
cle produced by the court academician Sima Guang  
司馬光  (1019–86), depicts the following scene:
Jiashen day 甲申 of the ninth month [of the sec -
ond year of Highest Prime ( shangyuan 上元 )], 
(Oct. 5, 761): the festival of Heavenly Paci -
fication (i.e., the Emperor’s birthday)—His 
Highness set up a maṇḍala (daochang  道場 ) 
in the Triple Hall ( sandian  三殿 )2 taking the 
2.Sandian  三殿 : In the Tang dynasty, the Triple Hall was Chapter 5
The Politics of Esoteric Buddhism: 
Amoghavajra and the Tang State
geoffrey goble  
goble mockup.indd   123 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 138] ---
124 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Palace Women ( gongren 宮人 )3 to act as Bud -
dhas and Bodhisattvas and the North Gate 
military elite ( beimen wushi 北門武士 )4 to act 
as Vajra[pāṇis? -sattvas?] and divine kings. He 
summoned the Grand Ministers ( dachen 大臣 )5 
 to prostrate to and circumambulate them.6
This passage is illustrative of a number of issues 
germane to the present inquiry. First, taken as a 
reflection of true historical events, this scene indi -
cates the degree to which Esoteric Buddhist norms, 
ideals, and structures were adopted in Tang dynasty 
China: the Chinese emperor Suzong 肅宗  (Li Heng 
李亨, r. 756–62) is shown employing the maṇḍala  
structure as a model of political authority. In other 
words, fundamental elements of Esoteric Buddhism 
were incorporated into the most rarefied strata of 
the Chinese imperial government. However, this 
passage is taken from a historical work written by 
one of the most elite members of the Song dynasty 
literati class. As such, the Comprehensive Mirror 
for Aiding Government is a didactic work. This is 
indicated by its title, which invokes the traditional 
Chinese trope of history-as-mirror for investigating 
used as another name for the Hall of Virtuous Lin  (linde 
dian  麟德殿 ), which was a three-sided structure, hence the 
epithet. Generally, though, it was a reference to the three 
halls of the Central Palace. 
3. G ongren  宮人 is a general term indicating imperial 
servants. Rather than court eunuchs, the term generally 
indicates women of the palace, though it is sometimes used 
exclusively as a reference to servant-women and does not 
include the empress, imperial consorts, concubines, or 
other high-ranking women in the Imperial Palace. The 
precise referent here is not clear, though the different pos -
sibilities have little influence on the scene that Sima Guang 
is creating (Hucker 1985: 293).
4.
 B
eimen wushi  北門武士 : this appears to be a reference 
to the military leadership of the Four Imperial Armies of 
the Northern Gates ( beimen si jun 北門四軍 ). These con -
sisted of the two (right and left) Forest of Plumes Armies 
(yulin jun 羽林軍 ) and the two (right and left) Militant as 
Dragons Armies ( longwu jun 龍武軍 ). These four armies 
were stationed at the imperial capital and were tasked with 
the protection of the emperor and the imperial government 
(Hucker 1985: 372).
5.
 D
achen  大臣 : the term chen  is a generic, often dimin -
utive, term for individuals holding government positions. 
Modified here by da  大 (‘great, grand’) the term indicates 
high-ranking members of the central government. 
6. Z
izhi tongjian  資治通鑒  222.oneself and thereby avoiding the pitfalls and errors 
of the past. Given the rampant discord during 
Suzong’s relatively brief reign, the moral of this 
anecdote would have been apparent: the emperor 
is engaging in misguided, inappropriate behaviour 
detrimental to political stability and personal lon -
gevity. He is adopting a foreign religious system, 
the implementation of which has court officials 
(like Sima Guang and his literati confr ères) making 
obeisance to military men and to women. Suzong 
is inverting the political and social norms central 
to the Confucian tradition, in which court literati 
like Sima Guang were steeped. This aspect of the 
anecdote points to a second issue concerning the 
assimilation of Esoteric Buddhism in Tang China: 
the adoption of Esoteric Buddhism by the Tang did 
not occur in a cultural or political vacuum. Rather, 
in Tang dynasty China, Esoteric Buddhism was 
adopted and implemented within well-established 
cultural institutions. While the maṇḍala system 
of Indic feudalism and the esoteric traditions that 
emerged from it provided the political template for 
a number of Asian states, such was not the case in 
China. With well-defined and entrenched systems 
of governance and political legitimation established 
long before the first Buddhists reached the Central 
Kingdom during the Han dynasty (206 bc–ad 220 ), 
we see not a restructuring of the Chinese state ac -
cording to the religio-political patterns of Esoteric 
Buddhism so much as the incorporation of Esoteric 
Buddhism into the well-established apparatus of 
the Sinitic state, governed according to bureaucrat -
ic and ritual norms effectively established in the 
Han dynasty and anchored in the idealized Zhou 
dynasty. As such, the case of the Chinese appro -
priation of Esoteric Buddhism is instructive, for it 
allows us to explore the question of how Esoteric 
Buddhist practices and practitioners were able to 
mesh with institutions foreign to those from which 
they originated. Although we must recognize the 
fluidity of local and historical conditions and be 
careful not to overextend our evidence through 
over-broad conclusions, consideration of Esoteric 
Buddhism in 8th-century China may provide some 
insight into the basic elements of the pan-Asian 
esoteric tradition that facilitated its rapid and ex -
tensive spread. 
goble mockup.indd   124 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 139] ---
The Politics of Esoteric Buddhism125
The exact referent of Esoteric Buddhism, espe -
cially in the Chinese case, is a contentious matter 
in contemporary scholarship.7 While the text -
book definition of the tradition as being strictly 
associated with the foreign Buddhist monks 
Śubhākarasiṁha, Vajrabodhi (a.k.a. Vajrabuddhi; 
see Appendix A) and Amoghavajra is contested, I 
will largely restrict my consideration of Esoteric 
Buddhism to the person of Amoghavajra, since it 
was his activities and accomplishments that most 
directly impinge on our topic of the intersection of 
Esoteric Buddhism and local political institutions 
in China. This much is implicitly indicated in Sima 
Guang’s passage, as Emperor Suzong was an ardent 
supporter of Amoghavajra. If we are to take that 
scene to be veridical, then it occurred as a result 
of Amoghavajra’s actions and relationship with the 
emperor and other members of the ruling elite. In 
any case, the prestige of Amoghavajra in the Tang 
court is well known and the extent of that prestige 
was not lost on later court literati: 
The barbarian ( 胡) monk Amoghavajra’s gov -
ernmental appointment reached the rank of 
Chief Minister ( 卿監 )8 and he was enfeoffed as 
a Duke of State ( 國公 ).9 He secured an official 
position in the Imperial Palace with the pow -
er to remove Palace Ministers 公卿 . He strove 
7. For example, Sharf (2002) argues that the scholarly 
construction of Esoteric Buddhism as a sectarian Chinese 
tradition is an anachronistic projection of Japanese norms 
and institutions. McBride (2005) makes a similar argument 
by arguing that apparent references to the ‘esoteric teaching’ 
(mijiao  密教 ) in relevant sources are merely references to 
mainstream Mahāyāna Buddhism rather than to a self-con -
sciously distinct sectarian movement in China. For his 
part, Orzech (2006) takes a different approach, arguing 
that evidence indicates that Amoghavajra represented Es -
oteric Buddhism as a distinct teaching within the Chinese 
Buddhist milieu.  
8. Qi
ngjian  卿監: in both the Tang and Song dynasties, 
the term qingjian   was employed as a generic rather than 
specific title. In the Song, from which our quoted passage 
comes, it was used as a designation for officials holding 
prestige titles ( sanguan  散官), that is individuals holding 
a title fixing their seniority and rank within a particular 
bureaucratic hierarchy without relation to their actual 
functional post or activities (Hucker 1985: 174, 398).
9. G ougong 國公 : The Duke of State was a title of nobility 
behind only Prince ( 王) and Commandery Prince ( 君王).  
See Hucker 1985: 298.for authority and arrogated power, vying even 
with the sun itself. ( JTS 118.3417)
The incorporation of Amoghavajra—the most 
elite ācārya of Esoteric Buddhism in China—into 
the official bureaucratic structure indicated here 
effectively represents the incorporation of Esoteric 
Buddhism into those structures.  Accordingly, the 
incorporation of Amoghavajra into the structures 
of the Chinese imperial government may be taken 
generally as representative of the assimilation of 
Esoteric Buddhism.  However, insofar as Amogha -
vajra is known to have employed texts and tech -
niques derived from a number of sources and given 
that we are concerned here not only with the linea -
ments of the Esoteric Buddhism in China but also 
throughout Asia, I will draw illustrative examples 
of aspects of this movement that are relevant to its 
adoption by the Tang government from a range of 
materials produced in China by Amoghavajra as 
well as by Śubhākarasiṁha and Vajrabodhi.
the tang imperial state
The imperial Sinitic state during the Tang dynasty 
may be conceptualized as consisting of three basic 
sectors: (1) the imperial family, (2) the imperial 
central government, and (3) the imperial military. 
With its references to the ‘Northern Gate Military 
Elite’, ‘Palace Women’, and ‘the Grand Ministers’, 
these three dimensions of the central Sinitic state 
are reflected in Sima Guang’s vignette above. 
In sources concerning Amoghavajra, including 
those that he himself composed, his relationship to 
three successive emperors of the Tang dynasty is 
emphasized. In his final testament, Amoghavajra 
provides the following brief autobiography:
I left home as a child ( 髫齓 ) and relying on the 
Master [Vajrabodhi] I sought the Indic texts for 
more than twenty years. Day and night [stud -
ying] diligently. I humbly received his council 
and accepted the Law of Yoga in 4,000 verses. 
Alas, he eventually became ill and the Master’s 
life came to an end. Living without anyone 
to rely on, on whom could I depend? Thus, I 
distantly roamed to India – traversing the 
perilous seas, everywhere studying yoga, and personally honoring the remains of the Sage. 
I obtained the 10,000 verse seal of the Law 
goble mockup.indd   125 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 140] ---
126 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Treasury, which I transmitted, returning to 
the land of the Emperor ( 帝), blessing the land 
and practicing conversion. Thus, in one court 
I served as the master of three generations of 
Emperors. To the lords of men I exhaustively 
conferred the secret yoga and transmitted the 
seal of the Law.  Consequently, since the cur -
rent Sage expanded the teaching, the most pro -
found eighteen assemblies of yoga have been 
exhaustively established, the thirty-seven Sage 
Worthies are each cultivated, the ritual field is 
always entered, in reliance on time there is rec -
itation and recollection. The Nine-fold Layers 
of Ten-thousand Chariots10 continuously visu -
alizes ( 觀) the heart of the Five Wisdoms. The 
Imperial Courtyard of One Hundred Houses11 
exhaustively grasp the seal of the triple mys -
tery. ( T 2120.844a18–27)
There are a number of significant elements to 
this brief summary of his career, but for our present 
purposes we should note Amoghavajra’s references 
to the adoption of Esoteric Buddhism by the Tang 
emperors—Xuanzong 玄宗  (Li Longji 李隆基 ; r. 
712–56), Suzong 肅宗  (Li Heng 李亨; r. 756–62), and 
Daizong 代宗  (Li Yu 李豫 ; r. 762–79). As to the 
nature of these relationships, while  there is over -
whelming evidence of Amoghavajra’s interactions 
with Suzong and Daizong, material concerning 
his relationship with Emperor Xuanzong is scant, 
largely circumstantial, and frequently legendary. In 
short, not much can be said with certainty concern -
ing Amoghavajra’s interactions with Emperor Xu -
anzong. It appears to be the case that Amoghavajra 
conducted an initiation or consecration ( guanding 
灌頂 ) rite for Xuanzong, but the precise nature of 
this rite is indeterminable. In any case, it is with 
the reign of Emperor Suzong that an image of 
Amoghavajra’s relationship with a Tang emperor 
becomes distinct . Suzong, however, died in May 
of 762 at the age of fifty-one. His six-year reign 
was brief and characterized by radical upheaval 
and strife. While Amoghavajra’s relationship with 
Emperor Suzong is fairly well documented, it was 
under Emperor Daizong that Amoghavajra (read: 
10. 九重萬乘  jiuzhong wansheng :  ‘Nine-fold Layers of 
Ten-thousand Chariots’ is a metonym for the emperor.
11.
 闕庭百寮  queting bailiao: ‘Imperial Courtyard of One 
Hundred Houses’ is a reference to the imperial courtesans 
and officials.Esoteric Buddhism) enjoyed the most widespread 
and long-lasting imperial patronage during the 
Tang dynasty.12 
Although it is typically the persons of the Tang 
emperors who are emphasized in treatments of 
Amoghavajra and of Esoteric Buddhism in China, 
imperial patronage did not flow simply from the 
Sons of Heaven. Such patronage also came from 
members of the imperial family, many of whom had 
a personal relationship with, and were disciples of, 
Amoghavajra.  Esoteric Buddhism was adopted by 
members of the imperial family, not just by sitting 
emperors. For example, it appears that Suzong’s 
empress Zhang 張皇后  was a patron of Amoghav -
ajra and, one may therefore assume, a practitioner 
of Esoteric Buddhism. On 19 May 758, one month 
after having named the empress, Amoghavajra con -
veyed his congratulations to Suzong ( Memorials 
and Edicts, T 2120.828c13). These congratulations 
might have been more significant than a simple 
attempt to curry favour or observe a certain eti -
quette. It is possible that she was known personally 
to Amoghavajra. Empress Zhang was a dedicated 
Buddhist. In an effort to cultivate merit and assist 
the emperor during a period of illness, she report -
edly copied out sutras in her own blood in February 
of 761.13 Although we have no direct evidence of a 
personal relationship between Amoghavajra and 
Empress Zhang, there is strong circumstantial ev -
idence in support of such a theory: she delivered 
an elegy for Amoghavajra on 16 August 774—the 
day of his interment ( Memorials and Edicts, T 
2120.0847b25–c13). There is also the example of 
the Huayang Princess 華陽公主 , the daughter of 
Emperor Daizong and his empress, Lady Dugu 
獨孤氏 . On 7 November 773 Amoghavajra sent a 
memorial to Emperor Daizong thanking him for 
a gift of the canon of scriptures. The recipient of 
this gift was not, however, Amoghavajra. It was the 
Huayang Princess, who had evidently been placed 
in his personal care. 
12. Th e significance of Emperor Daizong’s patronage 
has been noted by other scholars as well. See, for example, 
Orzech 2006: 51, 2011: 274–75, and Chen 2004: 132–33.
13. J TS  10.260. The composition and copying of Buddhist 
scriptures in one’s own blood, while not a widespread 
practice, was a known practice of Chinese Buddhists: see 
Benn 2007. 
goble mockup.indd   126 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 141] ---
The Politics of Esoteric Buddhism127
The śramaṇa  Amoghavajra says: the Palace 
Receptionist, Director Wu Xiuyue 吳休悅  pre-
sented the declaration of the Sage’s edict [that] 
Qionghua Zhenren Truly Like a Diamond ( 瓊
華真人真如金剛 ) [receive] a treasury of all the 
scriptures—5,050 fascicles in all—with sandal -
wood spools and cases of woven silk brocade. 
Much incense accompanied the scriptural 
treasury—a fragrant wooden scripture table, a 
golden, bejeweled incense burner with glowing 
rosy clouds and the sun and moon in the space 
between. The lustrous radiance and sweet fra -
grance overflow into the streets and thorough -
fares…. Indeed all those who contemplate and 
receive and keep the Buddha’s sagacious can -
on win blessings without end. I hope that my 
slight realization will be the cause of success. 
I have accordingly dispatched fourteen people 
to continuously recite scriptures. I hope that 
Zhenren Truly Like a Diamond, of firm bless -
ings and virtues, an ornament to the Sagacious 
Emperor’s throne, will be renewed for 10,000 
kalpas . (T 2120.843a18–a27)
Upon the death of the princess in June of 774 
Amoghavajra sent another memorial to the grieving 
Daizong, describing the diligence with which he 
attended her, though to no avail, she being human 
and subject to death ( T 2120.843c14–27). Daizong 
responded, acknowledging as much and two days 
later made a personal gift of white mourning garb 
for Amoghavajra ( T 2120.844a5–15). Before her 
death, however, a sum of thirty million strings of 
cash had been donated to finance one of Amogha -
vajra’s projects on Mount Wutai, the construction 
of a Mañjuśrī pavilion. The donors were Emperor 
Daizong, his empress Dugu, their son the Han Prince, 
and his sister, the Huayang Princess ( T 2056.293c14).
The patronage of Amoghavajra and the adop -
tion of Esoteric Buddhism in Tang dynasty China 
extended beyond members of the imperial family 
to also include office holders in the central impe -
rial government.  The Tang central government 
was administered by an extensive bureaucracy of 
civil officials ( wen guan 文官 ). The most prestig -
ious members of this bureaucracy were the Three 
Preceptors ( san shi 三師 ) and the Three Dukes ( san 
gong 三公 ).14  Though these posts carried no official 
14. The Three Preceptors were the Grand Preceptor ( T aishi  
太師), the  Grand Mentor ( Taifu 太傅), and the Grand Guar -duties, these men were traditionally expected to 
advise the emperor on matters of state. The actual 
business of managing the Imperium fell mainly on 
the agencies of the Three Departments ( san sheng 
三省 ): the Department of State Affairs ( shangshu 
sheng 尚書省 ), the Central Secretariat ( zhongshu 
sheng 中書省 ), and the Chancellery ( menxia sheng 
門下省 ). Actual administrative duties were over -
seen by the Department of State Affairs, which 
was managed through the Department’s Executive 
Office by one director and two vice directors. These 
men exercised oversight over the six ministries 
that composed the Department of State Affairs: 
the Ministries of Personnel, Revenue, Rites, War, 
Justice, and Works. Each of these ministries su -
pervised particular aspects of state administration 
(XTS 46.1184–1186). The Ministry of Personnel ( libu
吏部 ) administered the appointments, promotions, 
demotions, and so forth of the civil officials who 
staffed the vast imperial bureaucracy ( XTS 46.1184–
1186). The Ministry of Revenue ( minbu 民部  or hubu 
戶部 ) directed the assessment and collection of 
taxes ( XTS 46.1192–1193). The Ministry of Justice 
or Punishment ( xingbu 刑部 ) was charged with 
supervision of prisons, convicts, and the general 
application of justice throughout the empire ( XTS 
46.1199–1201). Each of these individual ministries 
was managed by a minister who supervised the 
bureaus of which the ministries were composed. 
The Ministry of Rites ( libu 禮部 ), for example, which 
typically held responsibility for imperial and court 
rituals, oversight of visiting foreign dignitaries, and 
of Daoist and Buddhist institutions, consisted of 
a Headquarters Bureau, a Bureau of Sacrifices, a 
Bureau of Receptions, and a Bureau of Provisions 
(XTS 46.1193–1196). Although the Department of 
State Affairs was the functional administrative 
unit of the central bureaucracy, the Secretariat 
and Chancellery held greater de facto power. This 
power was the result of the function of these two 
dian  ( Taibao  太保). For the Three Preceptors see Hucker 
1985: 30, 48, 401, 477, 480, and also Des Routers 1947: 19. 
The Three Dukes were the Defender-in-Chief ( Taiwei 太
尉), the Minister of Education ( Situ 司徒 ), and the Minister 
of Works ( Sikong  司空 ). For the Three Dukes see Hucker 
1985: 30, 399, 450, 458, 485. The description of the Three 
Preceptors and Three Dukes in the Tang appears in the 
Newer Tang History : XTS  46.1184.
goble mockup.indd   127 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 142] ---
128 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
departments: the control of information in the form 
of edicts from, and memorials to, the throne. 
The most powerful members of the central bu -
reaucracy were the Grand Councillors ( zaixiang 宰
相 or xianggong 相攻 ). Officially, the Grand Coun -
cillors were composed of men serving in the central 
bureaucracy as directors and vice directors of the 
Three Departments and who, in theory, met in daily 
conference with the emperor.15 In practice, though, 
the Grand Councillors were usually composed of 
men selected from a variety of offices on the basis 
of a given emperor’s personal regard or trust. Such 
men had their titles supplemented and qualified 
with the official designation ‘Jointly Manager of 
Affairs with the Secretariat-Chancellery’ ( tong 
zhongshu-menxia pingzhang shi 同中書門下平章事 ), 
or simply ‘Manager of Affairs’ ( pingzhang shi 
平章事 ). Under the reign of Daizong, when Amogha -
vajra received his most ardent and indulgent impe -
rial support, at least four Grand Councillors—Du 
Hongjian 杜鴻漸 , Wang Jin 王晉 , Yuan Zai 元載 , 
and Li Baoyu 李抱玉 —were devoted supporters 
of Amoghavajra and, by extension, perhaps also 
practitioners of Esoteric Buddhism. 
The role played by Du Hongjian, Wang Jin, and 
Yuan Zai in Amoghavajra’s imperial support was 
not lost on the editors of the Older Tang History . An 
object of their opprobrium, the blame for Emperor 
Daizong’s devotion to Esoteric Buddhism and his 
patronage of Amoghavajra is laid specifically at the 
feet of those three men: 
Initially, Daizong delighted in the ancestral 
temple and deities and did not lay much im -
portance on the Buddha, but Yuan Zai, Du 
Hongjian, and [Wang] Jin delighted in [pro -
viding] meals for monks. Daizong once in -
quired as to the affairs of blessing and karmic 
retribution, so Zai and the others produced a 
memorial and Daizong followed this memori -
al excessively. He once commanded that food 
for 100 monks [be provided], that Buddha im -
ages be laid out in the central palace, and that 
the recitation ( 念誦 ) of scriptures be practiced. 
He called it the Inner [Palace] ritual platform  
(道場 ). The meals that were provided were gen -
erous and of exceedingly rare [dishes]. Com -
ing and going, [the monks] rode horses of the 
15. S ee Hucker 1985: 30; XTS  46.1182–1183.[Imperial] stables. The Ministry of Revenue  
(度支 ) provided them with an allowance from 
the Granary. Whenever the Tibetans ( 西蕃 ) 
invaded [Daizong] would certainly command 
the monks to recite the Scripture for Humane 
Kings  in order to resist and capture the invad -
ers. If there happened to be the good fortune 
of those [invaders] retreating, then [Daizong] 
would unreasonably bestow gifts.16
The passage clearly conveys a negative valu -
ation of the emperor’s support, and the story of 
Daizong’s so-called conversion as the result of the 
Grand Councillors’ memorial is, like the story of 
Suzong constructing a living maṇḍala , probably 
fabricated for didactic purposes. Nevertheless, this 
passage does reflect certain historical realities. For 
example, it is evident from the correspondence 
between Daizong and Amoghavajra preserved in 
the Memorials and Edicts that Du Hongjian, Wang 
Jin, and Yuan Zai were instrumental in facilitating 
Amoghavajra’s imperial patronage under Daizong. 
From the beginning of Daizong’s reign, the names 
of these men consistently appear on memorials 
and edicts from and to Amoghavajra. As with 
the members of the imperial family mentioned 
above, it is evident that Amoghavajra had person -
al relationships with these men. However, given 
their positions in the imperial bureaucracy, these 
personal relationships translated into institutional 
support for Amoghavajra and Esoteric Buddhism.
Du Hongjian 杜鴻漸  (?–13 Dec. 769) was the 
scion of a family of officials whose own career path 
closely followed that of his father, Du Xian 杜暹  
(d.u.).17 Du Hongjian earned the rank of Present -
ed Scholar and joined the army. In 755, when the 
An Lushan 安路山 Rebellions erupted, Hongjian 
occupied several posts. He was Rectifier for the 
Chamberlain of Law Enforcement ( dali sizhi 大理
16. J TS  118.3417. The information in this passage is essen -
tially repeated by Zanning in his Great Song Brief History 
of the Saṅgha ( T 2126.247b23–247c8).
17. H is father had earned the rank of Classicist ( mingjing  
明經 ) in the civil service recruitment exam before joining 
the army. Xian went on to serve with distinction on the 
Western frontier in the Tang protectorate of Anxi during 
the reign of Xuanzong. He ended his career holding the 
post of Grand Councillor. For Du Xian’s biography, see JTS  
98.3075–3077. See also Twitchett and Fairbank 1978: 390–91.
goble mockup.indd   128 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 143] ---
The Politics of Esoteric Buddhism129
司直 ) on the staff of the Heir Apparent, Li Heng. 
Hongjian maintained his ties to the Tang military 
at this time, serving concurrently as Capital Liaison 
Representative to the Military Commissioner of 
Shuofang 朔方  and as Deputy Fiscal Commission -
er.18  With his close ties to both the Heir Apparent 
and to the Tang military establishment, Du Hong -
jian was immediately promoted when Emperor Xu -
anzong abdicated and Li Heng ascended the throne 
to become Emperor Suzong. Under the nascent 
Emperor Suzong, Du Hongjian was first appointed 
to the Ministry of War 兵部郎中  (JTS 108. 3283)  and 
then to Supervisor of the Supreme Area Command 
of Jingzhou 荊州 and Military Commissioner of 
Jingnan 荊南 .19 On 1 June 757, still serving as Vice 
Director of the Ministry of War, Du Hongjian was 
installed as Military Commissioner of Hexi ( JTS 
10.246). When Emperors Xuanzong and Suzong 
both died in 762, Hongjian, as Minister of the Court 
of Imperial Sacrifices  ( taichang liang 太常卿 )  and 
Commissioner for Ceremonial Propriety ( liyi shi
禮儀使 ), oversaw the imperial funerary rites. His 
prominence in the imperial bureaucracy contin -
ued under Emperor Daizong as he was appointed 
Vice Director of the Secretariat on 2 September 
764 ( JTS 11.275-6; 108.3283). Hongjian ended his 
career with an unfortunate appointment as Deputy 
Marshal of Shanzhou and Jianzhou and Military 
Commissioner of Jiannan. In this capacity he was 
charged with restoring imperial regulation in the 
Sichuan Basin in the face of persistent barbarian 
incursions and the open insolence of Cui Gan 崔旰 . 
Hongjian was specifically tasked to put down Cui 
Gan’s insurrection, but was unable to do so. Instead, 
Gan was symbolically brought to heel by recog -
nizing him as Capital Liaison Representative of 
Sichuan.20 Hongjian’s failures later in life, however, 
18. JTS 10 8.3283. Zhidu fushi 支度副使 : the Fiscal Commis -
sioner was responsible for administering the finances of 
military units stationed on the frontier and for submitting 
fiscal reports to the central government (Hucker 1985: 164).
19. JTS 1 08.3283. The administrative seat of Jingnan De -
fence Command was modern Jingzhou in Hubei Province.
20. JTS 1 08.3283–4. The failure of Du Hongjian to ade -
quately deal with this challenge to Tang authority, and what 
was arguably an inappropriate appointment given Du’s 
advanced age and lack of current command experience, 
may represent the emergence of what would become a trend overshadowed neither his earlier accomplishments 
nor the esteem with which he was held by Emperor 
Daizong. Upon his death on 13 December 769, the 
emperor suspended court for three days of mourn -
ing and Hongjian received the posthumous title 
Defender-in-Chief and the courtesy name Wenxian 
文憲 , the ‘Literary Charter’ ( JTS 11 .294; 108.3284).
The biographies of Wang Jin 王縉  (700–31 Dec. 
781) in the standard histories are not as detailed as 
those of Du Hongjian. Indicative of a subsequent 
generation’s disdain, the biography of Wang Jin 
in the Older Tang History essentially reports only 
Jin’s devotion to Buddhism and his inappropriate 
influence on Emperor Daizong. The Newer Tang 
History offers little improvement, adding only a 
cursory outline of Jin’s promotions during and 
following the Rebellion Period. According to the 
Newer Tang History , Wang Jin began his career 
with an appointment as Vice Governor to Taiyuan. 
This was immediately following the rebellion of 
An Lushan. The appointment was significant and 
intuitive. Taiyuan was the ancestral home of both 
Wang Jin and the Tang ruling family. During the 
Rebellion Period, Taiyuan served first as a bulwark 
and then as a forward operating base as loyalist 
troops assembled and counter-attacked under the 
command of Li Guangbi 李光弼 , who was assisted 
by Wang Jin ( XTS 145.4715). As a result of his service 
and success at this time, Wang Jin was promoted 
to a post in the central bureaucracy in the Min -
istry of War. Following the re-establishment of 
the Tang rulers in 758, Wang Jin became a Grand 
Councillor under Emperor Suzong with an ap -
pointment as Vice Director of the Chancellery ( XTS 
145.4715). His importance in court did not wane 
when Daizong ascended the throne in 762. Two 
years later, on 2 September 764—the same date as 
Du Hongjian’s promotion to Vice Director of the 
Secretariat—Wang Jin was appointed Director of 
the Chancellery and was promoted to the peerage 
as Duke of Taiyuan Commandery ( XTS 145.4716; 
JTS 11.275–6). Three weeks later, Wang Jin became 
Regent of the Eastern Capital ( dongdou liushou  
東 都留守 ) (JTS 11.276; XTS 145.4716). In this capacity, 
Wang Jin was empowered as the emperor’s personal 
later in the Tang of appointing scholars and bureaucrats 
to positions of command in the military. See Graff 2000.
goble mockup.indd   129 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 144] ---
130 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
representative in Luoyang, the secondary dynastic 
capital. Wang Jin’s power grew at a seemingly ex -
ponential rate. By 18 October 768, in addition to 
being Vice Director of the Chancellery and Regent 
of the Eastern Capital, Wang Jin was also the Re -
gional Chief of Youzhou 幽州 , the Commissioner 
with Special Powers, Deputy Marshal of Henan, 
and Controller of the Mobile Brigade of Eastern 
Shannan Circuit. He was Military Commissioner 
of the armies of Youzhou and Lulong 盧龍21 and 
Commissioner in the Taiqing Palace ( taiqinggong 
shi太清宮使 ). To these positions was added the title 
and authority of the Administrator of Taiyuan and 
Regent of the Northern Capital ( JTS 11.290). Wang 
Jin’s power radiated from the eastern capital Loyang 
through what is presently Henan province, north 
to modern Hebei and Shanxi provinces. He would, 
however, end his career ignominiously. In May of 
777 he was implicated along with Yuan Zai in an 
unidentified misdeed. One suspects he fell victim 
to the endless intrigues that characterized life in the Chinese court. Wang Jin was demoted to the 
relatively insignificant position of Regional Chief 
of Kuozhou 括州 .22 He died in 781 at the age of 
eighty-one, holding the essentially powerless office 
of Advisor to the Heir Apparent.23
While Du Hongjian and Wang Jin had entered 
the central bureaucracy in the regular manner, i.e. 
as sons of important families and recognized lit -
térateurs, Yuan Zai’s entry was unorthodox. Yuan 
Zai 元載  (?–11 May 777) was of common stock, born 
to a poor family from Qishan 岐山 in what is now 
Shanxi 陕西  Province. His biography in the Older 
Tang History represents him as studious but unable 
to pass the regular civil service recruitment exam. 
However, in February of 741, Emperor Xuanzong 
issued an edict directing the establishment of a 
temple to the Lord of Mysterious Origin ( xuanyu -
an huangdi 玄元皇帝 ) and a School for Venerating 
the Mysteries ( chongxuan xue 崇玄學 ) at which 
students would study Zhuangzi  莊子 , Laozi 老子 , 
Wenzi 文子, and Liezi  列子  (JTS 9.213). These four 
Daoist texts were the basis for a special imperial 
21. Th ese armies were based in what is now Hebei province.
22. M odern Lishui 麗水 in Zhejiang 浙江 .
23. H e was eighty-two by the traditional Chinese reck -
oning.recruitment examination by means of which able 
men could gain entry into the civil service. This 
system instituted by Emperor Xuanzong expanded 
the base of recruitment for the civil bureaucracy to include men who were not trained exclusively 
in the Confucian canon. Yuan Zai was one of the 
earliest beneficiaries of this new policy. He passed 
the Daoist examination on or around 7 November 
741 ( JTS 9.214). His first duty assignment was as 
Commandant of Xinping 新平 in Bin Prefecture 
邠州 , modern Shanxi 山西  province.24 He was 
subsequently promoted to Case Reviewer in the 
Court of Judicial Review.25 As with so many other 
men of this time, the disruption to the imperial 
administrative system wrought by the An Lushan 
Rebellions led to Yuan Zai’s promotion to rela -
tively important positions. He became Deputy to 
Li Xiyan 李希言  before eventually attaining the 
position of Director of the Ministry of Revenue 
following the recovery of the two capitals in 758 
(JTS 118.3409). By December of 763, Yuan Zai as -
cended to the position of Adjutant Marshal of the 
Armies as well as Governor of Chang’an and Vice 
Minister in the Ministry of Personnel. Yuan Zai’s 
power during these years was pronounced. The 
Older Tang History , for example, reports that Yan 
Zhenqing 顏真卿  was demoted for having openly 
disagreed with Zai in 766 ( JTS 11.282). But Yuan Zai 
continued to support Amoghavajra. On 18 August 
774 he personally delivered a eulogy for the de -
ceased master ( T 2120.849c24–850a9). 
These men, each from rather different back -
grounds and each following somewhat different 
career paths in the Tang central government, were 
all ardent supporters of Amoghavajra and of the 
Esoteric Buddhism tradition that he propagated. 
Although their backgrounds and responsibilities 
24. J TS  118.3409. ‘Commandant’ ( wei 尉) was a common 
military title, sometimes honorific and not indicating 
actual field command, as it appears to be the case here 
(Hucker 1985: 564).
25. J TS  118.3409. The Court of Judicial Review ( dali si  
大理寺 ) was the agency within the central bureaucracy re -
sponsible for reviewing reports of judicial proceedings 
from all levels of territorial administration, recommend -
ing to the emperor which of these cases involving major 
punishments should be returned for retrial, submitted to a 
gathering of court dignitaries for deliberation, or decided 
by the emperor himself (Hucker 1985: 468).
goble mockup.indd   130 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 145] ---
The Politics of Esoteric Buddhism131
at times blurred the distinction between the civil -
ian government and the military establishment, 
Du Hongjian, Wang Jin, and Yuan Zai were office 
holders in the central government and may be 
taken as indicative of the extent to which Esoteric 
Buddhism was adopted in the imperial Chinese 
government in the second half of the 8th century. 
In other cases, supporters of Amoghavajra and 
Esoteric Buddhism were strictly members of the 
Tang dynasty imperial military. 
The military establishment of 8th-century 
China was dominated by Military Commissioners 
(jiedu shi 節度使 ). Holders of this military position 
commanded the troops of the Frontier Garrisons 
(fangzheng 方鎮 ) quartered along the periphery 
of Tang political control. The institution of Mili -
tary Commissioner was established in 711–12 ( XTS 
50.1329), developing from the post of border gener -
als (bianjiang 邊將 ),26 but by the mid 8th century 
Military Commissioners were de facto rulers of the 
territory that they were charged with defending 
and administering. Military Commissioners and 
commanders in the Tang imperial military were 
among Amoghavajra’s earliest and most significant 
supporters. The examples of Geshu Han and Li 
Baoyu are telling illustrations of this fact. 
In 754 or 755 Amoghavajra was sent to the head -
quarters of Geshu Han 哥舒翰  (?–1 Dec. 757), the 
Military Commissioner ( jiedu shi 節度使 ) of the 
Hexi-Longyou Defence Command.27 This was by 
imperial command, prompted by the request of 
Geshu Han. Han was a man of relatively humble 
origins. A member of the Turkish Geshu clan 
from which his surname derives, Geshu Han was 
of mixed, non-Han ancestry. His mother was re -
portedly hu 胡, a term applied during the Tang 
dynasty to Central Asian people typically hailing 
from Sogdiana.28 His father, a Turk ( tujue 突厥 ), had 
served in the imperial army and attained the rank 
26. XTS 5 0.1328. For fangzheng  方鎮  Hucker suggests the 
translation ‘Defence Command’, which reflects the function 
of these troops rather than the term itself (Hucker 1985: 209).
27. The sources that mention this—the Stele Inscription , 
t
he Account of Activities , and the Zhenyuan Catalogue—
provide different dates for this event. 
28. This designation had, according to Pulleyblank (1952: 
318–19), come to refer specifically to Sogdians by the late 
6th to early 7th century.of Deputy Protector-General ( fu duhu 副都護 ) of 
Anxi 安西 .29 His father reportedly died when Han 
was still a boy. Joining the Hexi army, Geshu Han 
quickly made a name for himself in the seemingly 
interminable conflict between Tang China and the 
Tibetan Yarlung dynasty. His military successes in 
the campaigns against the Tibetans eventuated in 
rapid promotion and accumulated honours.30 He 
was appointed Deputy Military Commissioner of 
Longyou 隴右 , Commander of the Guanxi 關西
area command, and Commissioner of the Heyuan 
Army 河源軍  in 747 or 748. In 753 or 754 he was 
enfeoffed as Duke of the Kingdom of Liang 涼, 
collecting revenue from 300 households. Simul -
taneously he became Military Commissioner of 
Hexi 河西  and was conferred the title of Prince 
of Xiping Commandery 西平郡王  (JTS 140.3211). 
By 754 or 755, when he requested Amoghavajra’s 
presence, Geshu Han held the position of Grand 
Guardian of the Heir Apparent, Li Heng, the man 
who less than two years later would be enthroned 
as Emperor Suzong.31 Geshu Han met his end in 
the rebellion of An Lushan, having been captured 
29. Geshu Han’s ancestry is cited in a constructed con -
versation between Geshu Han and An Lushan in the Older  
and Newer Tang History ( JTS 140.3211; XTS  4135.571).
30. Geshu Han’s biography in the Older Tang History goes 
to great lengths describing his ferocity in killing Tibetans. 
One anecdote concerning his reported zeal in dispatching 
Tibetan invaders (‘traitors’) should suffice to illustrate this: 
Han had a slave in his home called Left Army 左車, 15 
or 16 years-old, who was also strong. Han was good 
with a spear. He would chase traitors and when he 
caught them he would tap them on the shoulder with 
his spear and give a shout. The traitor would turn 
around and Han would thereby stab him through the 
throat, tossing [the head] up 15 chi into the air and 
letting it fall. There were none who were not killed. Left 
Army would then dismount and collect the decapitated 
heads. ( JTS 140.3211)
31. Ta
izi taibao 太子太保 : one of the Three Preceptors of 
the Heir Apparent. The other two are the Grand Precep -
tor and the Grand Mentor of the Heir Apparent. Hucker 
(1985: 485) observes that these titles were frequently empty 
designators awarded to already high-ranking officials as 
a means of increasing their prestige and income. That is 
possibly the case here, but the title was certainly not without 
significance given that the Heir Apparent in question fled 
to Geshu Han’s military command region during the An 
Lushan Rebellion, where he ascended the throne as Suzong. 
goble mockup.indd   131 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 146] ---
132 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
and subsequently executed by enemy troops. But in 
many respects, Amoghavajra’s patronage and the 
adoption of Esoteric Buddhism in Tang China may 
be linked to the person of Geshu Han.  According to 
the biographical section of his Zhenyuan Catalogue 
composed by Yuanzhao circa ad  800, it was while 
attached to Geshu Han’s regional administration of 
Hexi-Longyou that Amoghavajra began what would 
be two of his most persistent and important activ -
ities: the production of scriptures and initiations 
into Esoteric Buddhist practices. And Yuanzhao 
specifies that at this time Amoghavajra produced 
the most significant scripture in his corpus, the 
Diamond Pinnacle Scripture ( Vajra śekharatantra  
or Vajroṣṇīṣa ):
Arriving at the city of Wuwei 武威  [Amogha -
vajra] dwelled in the Opened Prime Monas -
tery 開元寺 . The Military Commissioner [Ge -
shu Han] welcomed him with all manner of 
offerings and requested that he translate the 
scriptures, offer initiation 灌頂 , and explain 
the Yoga Teaching of maṇḍalas …. At that time 
the Prince of Xiping [Geshu Han] requested a 
translation of the Diamond Pinnacle: the Cor -
rect Inclusion of all the Tathāgatas, the Great 
King of Teachings Scripture in three fascicles for 
the sake of the kingdom. Adjutant and Director 
of the Ministry of Rites Li Xiyan 李希言32 act-
ed as scribe.33 [Amoghavajra] also trans  l ated 
32. A ssuming that the Li Xiyan mentioned in Yuanzhao’s 
account is the same Li Xiyan who appears in the Older  and 
Newer Tang History , it is highly improbable that he was 
present in Wuwei with Amoghavajra. His official post was 
in Wu Commandery, centred on what is presently Suzhou 
蘇州  in Jiangsu province 江蘇州 , approximately 1,000 miles 
to the southeast of Wuwei. Li Xiyan is mentioned only twice 
in each of the standard histories, where his official titles 
are given as ‘Investigating Commissioner of Wu Prefecture’ 
(Wu jun caifang shi 吳郡採訪使 ) (JTS 107.3265; XTS  82.3611) 
and ‘Prefect  of Suzhou and Investigating Commissioner of 
Jiangdong’ (S uzhou cishi, Jiangdong caifang shi 蘇 州 刺史、江
東採訪使 ) (JTS 118.3409; XTS  145.4711). Li Xiyan is possibly 
included here based on his friendly relationship with Yuan 
Zai, who was an ardent supporter of Amoghavajra. Zai had 
served as Li Xiyan’s Deputy in Suzhou, and it’s possible 
that Amoghavajra established a relationship with both 
men when he was in that region preparing for his maritime 
journey to the southern Indic regions.
33. I n later eras the scribe ( bishou 筆受) was responsible for 
the initial translation and its recording, though it is highly the Single-Syllable Pinnacle Wheel-Turning 
Rul e
r Scripture Spoken at the Seat of En  l
ight-
en 
ment  in five fascicles,34 the Yoga Scripture 
of the Single-syllable Pinnacle Wheel-turning 
Ruler  in one fascicle,35 and the Ritual Proce -
dures of Visualizing and Reciting the [ Scripture ] 
of the One-syllable Pinnacle Wheel-turning 
Ruler [T 954a]. The Administrative Assis -
tant to the Military Commissioner, the In -
vestigating Censor Tian Liangqiu  田良丘36 
acted as scribe and also undertook the proof -
ing of the smaller scriptures. ( T 2157.881b14–27)
The Stele Inscription and the Account of Conduct 
also refer to Amoghavajra’s association with Geshu 
Han in Wuwei, though neither of those sources 
provides such specific details concerning his activ -
ities. If we assume a didactic quality to Yuanzhao’s 
account, as we have with passages drawn from Con -
fucian-oriented sources, the import of this vignette 
would appear to be that it was with Geshu Han’s 
patronage in the Hexi-Longyou Defence Command 
that Amoghavajra began his activity of propaga -
tion of Esoteric Buddhism. The Diamond Pinna -
cle Scripture —the jewel of Amoghavajra’s textual 
corpus and the keystone to Esoteric Buddhism in 
China—as well as the One-Syllable Ruler series 
were produced at this time.
unlikely that this is the connotation here. As Amoghavajra’s 
facility in Indic and Chinese languages argues against 
the view that an official of the Tang government would 
perform this function, I take it that Li Xiyan transcribed 
the (oral?) translation provided by Amoghavajra, though the term may be used here merely as a means of signalling 
Li Xiyan’s material support for the project. For this term 
and its designate in the Song dynasty, see Orzech 2006.
34. P utichangsuoshuo yizi lunwang jing  菩提場所說一字
頂輪王經 (T 950).
35. Y
izi lunwang yujia jing 一字顶轮王瑜伽经 . This most 
probably is T  955 一字頂輪王瑜伽觀行儀軌 , but there are two 
other possible referents contained in the Taisho canon:  
T 957 金剛頂一字頂輪王瑜伽一切時處念誦成佛儀軌  and T  958 
金剛頂經一字頂輪王儀軌音義 . 
36. T ian Liangqiu’s involvement is perhaps more certain 
than that of Li Xiyan. He served as Geshu Han’s Adjutant 
upon the outbreak of rebellion in 755 or 756, and as de facto 
commander of the troops guarding the Tong Pass against 
Lushan and Shiming. Beyond this, nothing is known of 
Tian Liangqiu, though his presence in Wuwei with Geshu 
Han and Amoghavajra stands to reason given his close re -
lationship with the former ( JTS 104.3213, 3214; XTS  135.4571).
goble mockup.indd   132 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 147] ---
The Politics of Esoteric Buddhism133
Geshu Han was not the only military com -
mander to patronize Amoghavajra and Esoteric 
Buddhism in China. Equally noteworthy in this 
regard was Li Baoyu 李抱玉  (?–777/8). A descend -
ant of An Xinggui 安興貴 , Li Baoyu’s ancestral 
home was in Liangzhou 涼州 , in modern Gansu 
province.37 Li Baoyu’s family is described as raising 
horses in the western prefecture of Hexi 河西  and 
serving in the Tang military, livelihoods typical 
of the non-Han peoples of the Western Frontier 
region.38 Li Baoyu’s own rise to prominence in Tang 
society was based on his military service to the 
throne. He was promoted to squad commander 
(pianpi  偏裨 ) by Li Guangbi 李光弼  during the early 
years of the Rebellion Period in 758 or 759.  During 
these tumultuous years Li Baoyu’s ascent was me -
teoric. The next year, on 17 May 759, he ascended 
to the position of General-in-Chief of the Right 
Forest of Plumes Army,39 and was Regional Chief 
of Zhengzhou 鄭州 Concurrently Commissioned 
with Special Powers over all of the armies of Zheng -
zhou, Acting Vice Censor-in-Chief, and Military 
Commissioner of the four prefectures of Zheng 鄭, 
Chen 陳, Ying 潁, and Bo 亳 (JTS 132.3645). Under 
Daizong, Li Baoyu’s prestige continued to increase. 
In addition to serving as Military Commissioner 
of Zelu 澤潞 , Administrative Supreme Area Com -
mander of Lu 潞 Prefecture, concurrently Grand 
Master Censor of Zheng and Chen Prefectures, he 
was also installed as the Chief Minister of War 
(bingbu shangshu 兵部尚書 ) (JTS 132.3645).  He 
formally entered into the peerage in 763 when he 
was recognized as Prince of Wuwei Commandery 
(JTS 11.272). Li Baoyu was a man of great influence 
during the reign of Emperor Suzong and espe -
cially during the reign of Daizong. From 762 to 
37. An Xinggui had received a fiefdom there from 
Emperor Taizong in 626 consisting of the income of 
700 households. This was almost certainly a reward 
for the killing in 619 or 620 of Li Gui 李軌 , a holdout 
against Tang control along the Western Frontier ( JTS 
57.2294–5, 2414). 
38. For the stereotypical roles and perceptions of 
non-Han peoples during the Tang dynasty, see Abramson 
2008.
39. Yulin jun  羽林軍 : the two Forest of Plumes Armies, 
Left and Right, were stationed in the Northern Command 
in the Tang capital (Hucker 1985: 91).777 or 778, nearly the entirety of Daizong’s reign, 
Li Baoyu served the emperor as Chief Minister 
of War and as an esteemed Grand Councillor, 
holding the title Jointly Manager of Affairs with 
the Secretariat-Chancellery. He was also a disciple 
of Amoghavajra (read: practitioner of Esoteric 
Buddhism). Li Baoyu states this to be the case in 
the elegy that he delivered on 16 August 774, the 
day of Amoghavajra’s interment. 
As for me, the late sage laid out the teachings 
that I sought. I consulted and studied with him 
as my master. Relying on benevolence to sup -
port virtue, I began to deduce the secret mean -
ing. ( T 2120.848a3–5)
esoteric buddhism and the ethos  
of power
The patronage that Amoghavajra received from 
members of the Tang imperial family, from 
high-ranking officials in the central government, 
and from elite military commanders may be read 
more broadly as the adoption of Esoteric Buddhism 
in these various sectors of the Tang government. 
While no doubt involving personal and social 
factors, the adoption of Esoteric Buddhism among 
the ruling class of 8th-century China also reflected 
the ethos of the esoteric tradition that had emerged 
by that time. While the practical and soteriolog -
ical dimensions of early Esoteric Buddhism were 
effectively established through the reformulation 
of Śākyamuni’s enlightenment as a process of vis -
ualizations and initiations,40 the driving ethos of 
the tradition, or at least the ethos that most directly 
contributed to the consistent alignment of Eso -
teric Buddhism with local political institutions, is 
encapsulated in the account of the subjugation 
of Maheśvara.41 In his Synopsis of the Eighteen 
Assemblies of the Diamond Peak Yoga Scripture ,42 
40. This reformulation is fully articulated in the Sar -
v
atathāgatatattvasaṅgraha : se e Giebel 2001, and also 
Weinberger 2003.
41. Fo
r a full translation of this account as recorded in 
Tibetan sources, see Dalton 2011: 159–206. For a discussion 
of this theme and its political undertones in 9th-century 
Java, see Acri, this volume.
42. Fo
r a full, critical translation of this text, see Giebel 
1995.
goble mockup.indd   133 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 148] ---
134 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Amoghavajra provides a brief description of this 
story:
Maheśvara43 (Moxishouluo  摩醯首羅 ) was un -
yielding and difficult to convert ( 化). He would 
not accept conversion by means of the method 
of pacification ( 寂靜法 ).44 All of the Tathāgatas 
throughout the Dharma Realm as inexhaust -
ible as space spoke with one voice through 
different mouths a request of Vajrasattva by 
means of the rite of praising the 108 names (of 
the Buddhas): ‘Thusly, various deities will not 
accept conversion by means of the method of 
pacification’. At that time, the Bodhisattva Va -
jrapāṇi received the request of all the Tathāga -
tas and then entered into a wrathful diamond 
samādhi, manifested in a mighty result body,45 
and through various skillful means subdued 
[Maheśvara] to the point that his allotment 
came to an end and [Maheśvara] died. Then 
Maheśvara appeared in the lower quarter46 and 
in a world system called Ash-adorned 灰莊嚴
engaged in ( 過) the sixty-two [wrong views]47 
for as long as there are sand grains. Within that 
world he achieved awakening ( 正覺 ) and his 
name became Terrifying Lord.48 The Tathāga -
tas directed ( 執) Vajrasattva to restrain [Terri -
fying Lord] under foot. He recited the mantra 
of diamond long-life and [Terrifying Lord] was 
revived and accepted conversion. Vajrasattva 
then explained the Great Maṇḍala and led the 
43. M aheśvara is variously a Buddhist reference to the 
Hindu god Indra or, in this case, Śiva. 
44.
 寂靜法  jijing fa : the method of pacifying ( 寂靜法 ) is a 
reference to the practice or method of eliminating calam-
ities ( xizai fa 息災法 ; Skt. śāntika ), one of the four classical 
siddhi s of Esoteric Buddhism.
45. 德身  de sheng : a celestial body reflective of the innu -
merable good qualities of an awakened being (Skt. sam-
bhogakāya ) 
46. 下方 xiafang : a reference to the three bad rebirths; 
rebirth as an animal, a ghost, or in hell.
47.
 Th
is translation is somewhat provisional. It appears 
to indicate the extent of the wicked and heterodox prac -
tices and views engaged in by Maheśvara. As outlined in 
the Pali Brahmajāla Sutta  (Dīghanikāya  1), the sixty-two 
views refer to various views held by Brahmanical ascetics 
regarding the past (eighteen specific beliefs) and the future 
(forty-four specific beliefs). See Walshe 1995: 73–88.
48. B uwei zizai wang 怖畏自在王 : this appears to be a 
translation-cum-transliteration of the Sanskrit Bhairava, 
‘frightful, terrible, terrifying’.  various deities [into the maṇḍala ] to receive di -
amond titles. ( T 869.285a17–28)
From here Amoghavajra’s text goes on to enu -
merate five classes of deities who have been simi -
larly suppressed and assimilated into the external 
Diamond division of the Diamond Maṇḍala. The 
subjugation of Maheśvara, and the consequent as -
similation of him and wicked deities of his ilk as 
related in this digest, illustrates the central theme 
that I contend directly contributed to the appeal of 
Esoteric Buddhism for the ruling elite. This account 
is in part an explanation and argument for the di -
minishment and assimilation of local, rival deities 
within the framework of Esoteric Buddhism, but 
the central ethos of Esoteric Buddhism as indicat -
ed by the defeat of Maheśvara is one of coercion, 
control, and hegemony. In short: power. The appeal 
of such a tradition to rulers and would-be rulers 
is transparent. Additionally, the ethos of power 
that runs throughout the early Esoteric Buddhist 
tradition is evident in a number of secondary char -
acteristics that we may identify as holding direct, 
practical appeal for the ruling elite. I propose here 
that we can see the adoption of Esoteric Buddhism 
in the local political institutions of Tang China as 
being facilitated or encouraged by three specific 
and interrelated characteristics springing from the 
ethos of power: (1) the ethical flexibility of Esoter -
ic Buddhist systems, (2) a pronounced emphasis 
on mundane goals or effects, and (3) the violent 
nature and martial applications of many Esoteric 
Buddhist rites.
Esoteric Buddhism afforded its adherents a 
degree of ethical flexibility such that standard 
ethical proscriptions and prescriptions for both 
monastic Buddhists and lay practitioners could 
be disregarded through their effective subordi -
nation to the ethics of power.49 This aspect of the 
49. Th e degree to which monastic Buddhists may have 
been empowered to disregard Vinaya proscriptions is 
unclear and in any case was probably quite limited in actual 
practice. Nevertheless, there is an indication that Esoteric 
Buddhist ācāryas were rather less constrained than other 
monastic Buddhists. A telling illustration of this is the fact 
that Amoghavajra interacted freely and frequently with 
military leaders and was attached to army headquarters at 
multiple times during his life, as discussed below. These 
actions are a clear violation of Vinaya proscriptions and 
goble mockup.indd   134 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 149] ---
The Politics of Esoteric Buddhism135
esoteric tradition is suggested, for example, in the 
numerous examples found in Esoteric Buddhist 
ritual procedures promising to eradicate all nega -
tive karma. To give one example, in the Methods 
of Having Requests Heard by Ākāśagarbha , a text 
translated in China by Śubhākarasiṁha and a part 
of the Diamond Peak cycle of scriptures and ritual 
manuals, we are told that the performance of the 
rite will eliminate all sins and hindrances accu -
mulated from beginningless time:
All Buddhas and the Bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha 
will accept and receive this person, all crimes 
and hindrances will all melt away and one’s 
body and mind will be pure, blessedly wise, 
and longevous. All ghosts and vināyaka s will 
all be unable to gain advantage [over you]. ( T 
1145.602b4–6)
Techniques and practices explicitly promising 
the eradication of all negative karma are hardly 
uncommon in the Buddhist tradition, especially in 
the Mahāyāna. Further, ritual techniques explicitly 
for eliminating the stain of negative karma are 
a necessary element of Esoteric Buddhist rites in 
particular, insofar that they are intended to bring 
the performer into contact with exalted Buddhas, 
Bodhisattvas, and deities. However, these ritual 
procedures and their effects may also be read as 
implying an acceptance of practitioners who are 
obviously less than virtuous.  There is scriptur -
al evidence that such an appeal was not merely 
implicit or simply a vestigial element of general 
Buddhist ritual practices. In the Brief Explanation 
of the Production, Recollection, and Recitation of 
the Yoga of the Diamond Peak Scripture , a practical 
manual by Vajrabodhi, we find the following:
As for those who possess a sufficiency of the var -
ious wisdoms and virtues, they are permitted to 
notably diverge from the actions of Xuanzang 玄奘, who 
refused to accompany Emperor Taizong (r. 626–49) on 
his campaign in the Korean Peninsula on the basis of 
monastic prohibitions disallowing associations with and 
viewing of military operations and armies ( T 2053.253b17–
c1). Nevertheless, the real import of this element of the 
early Esoteric Buddhist tradition is that it effectively 
permitted the inclusion of laypersons without making 
any effective demands on them to alter their lifestyles 
or aspirations. enter into the methods of recitations, setting 
up homa , and receiving consecration in this 
great maṇḍala  (daochang  壇場 ) of the Dia -
mond Realm and the method of explaining it 
and guiding diamond disciples into it. Among 
those who enter the platform, the highest rea -
son for doing so is for the sake of relieving the 
suffering and increasing the joy of all sentient 
beings. [But] as for those who enter this great 
platform, you should not choose between those with ability and those without. Why is this? Both World Honored Ones [i.e., Buddhas] 
and sentient beings who have committed great 
crimes are to be seen in this great maṇḍala  of 
the Diamond Realm. And as for those who 
enter [the maṇḍala ], each and every one of all 
of their crimes and hindrances are removed. 
Again, World Honored One, there are sentient 
beings who give themselves over to lucre and to 
food and drink, desirous of pleasure, who de -
test the samaya  and do not regularly make of -
ferings—these  people are [also] in the maṇḍa -
la. As for those who enter in order to do as they 
please, they will completely attain all that they 
seek, both World Honored Ones and sentient 
beings. Those who practice for the sake of the 
pleasure of women, the pleasure of song and 
dance and food and drink, who do not know 
the Great Vehicle of all the Buddhas or do not 
inquire about the Dharma enter the temple of 
the various great gods of heretical paths within the platform. ( T 866.224a3–15)
This passage clearly articulates a vision of Es -
oteric Buddhism that is inclusive of the morally 
upright and virtuous as well as those who are de -
cidedly less so. The appeal of Esoteric Buddhism to 
individuals who dealt regularly in intrigue, punish -
ment, and death, to say nothing of indulgence in 
aesthetic and carnal pleasures, is clear. In a word, 
the ethical flexibility of Esoteric Buddhism argued 
for and permitted the involvement of rulers, the 
governing elite, and military men in a way that 
other Buddhist traditions did not. And it is in -
structive to notice that the specific articulation 
of the inclusion of transgressive and sinful indi -
viduals in the passage above essentially mirrors 
the subjugation of Maheśvara topos in explicitly 
referring to the incorporation of less-than-virtu -
ous practitioners into the paths of non-Buddhist 
deities, the sector of the Diamond Maṇḍala into 
goble mockup.indd   135 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 150] ---
136 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
which Maheśvara and the five classes of violent, 
non-Buddhist deities were assimilated according 
to the account cited above. Just as the evil and un -
restrained Maheśvara is included in the totalizing 
maṇḍala of Esoteric Buddhism, so too are humans 
given to less restrained modes of behaviour.  The 
ethos of power that characterizes Esoteric Bud -
dhism was not simply a tool of subjugation and 
oppression, but one of inclusion for those already 
given to the ethics of power in the form of violence, 
appetitiveness, and misbelief. 
The implications of the ethics of power that runs 
through Esoteric Buddhism are also plainly evident 
in its promised effects. While Esoteric Buddhism 
extended the promise of soteriological effects (Skt. 
laukikasiddhi; Chin. chu shijian xidi 出世間悉地 ), 
it is well known that more mundane results (Skt. 
lokottara siddhi ; Chin. shijian xidi 出世間悉地 ) were 
also available. These results, both soteriological 
and mundane, are articulated as the four classi -
cal goals of Esoteric Buddhism: (1) pacifying, (2) 
augmenting, (3) controlling, and (4) killing. These 
various results were and are sometimes interpret -
ed as referring to soteriological goals— afflictive emotions are pacified, merit is augmented, the de -
lusion of self is killed. However, it is abundantly 
clear that these were articulated as rather more 
quotidian goals—one’s wealth and power are aug-
mented, one’s enemies are pacified, controlled, or 
killed. It is also evident that the quotidian effects 
promised by Esoteric Buddhism were a particu -
larly important factor in the imperial patronage 
of Esoteric Buddhism in Tang dynasty China. For 
example, on 7 October 758, Amoghavajra submitted 
a carnelian image of the Buddha Ratnasambhava and a copy of the Dhāraṇī of the Great Protectress 
who is Universally Radiant, Pure, Incandescent, 
a Wish-granting Gem, and the Sealed Essence of 
the Invincible King of Mantras (hereafter Dhāraṇī 
of the Great Protectress )50 to Emperor Suzong  
(T 2120.829b2–21). The text in which that titular 
dhāraṇī is given describes a number of promised 
50. T 1 153 Pubian guangming qingjing chisheng ruyi 
baoyinxin wunengsheng damingwang da Suiqiu tuolu -
oni jing 普遍光明淸淨熾盛如意寶印心無能勝大明王大隨求陀
羅尼經 . Skt. Mahāpratisarā-vidyārājñī ; The first text of 
the Pañcarakṣā  corpus, devoted to Mahāpratisarā (Chin. 
Da Suiqiu 大隨求 ).effects, some of which are soteriological, but in 
the main these results are of a more mundane, 
practical nature. For example, the dhāraṇī , which 
one may write down and wear on one’s person 
(T 1153.617c4),  is said to protect against both human 
and non-human malefactors, agrarian disasters 
such as insect infestation, excessive rain, and 
wind (ibid. 617c1–2), and invulnerability against 
fire, poison, and blades (ibid . 62b17–22).51 Such 
promised effects would putatively be appealing to 
any member of a pre-industrial, agrarian society 
like Tang China, but would perhaps be particu -
larly so to the ruler of such a society. Given the 
nexus of political legitimacy, social stability, and 
agricultural productivity in Tang dynasty China 
in addition to the persistent threat of assassination, 
such effects as promised by the Dhāraṇī of the Great 
Protectress  had real practical and political import. 
However, while these elements cannot be ignored, it 
seems that the Dhāraṇī of the Great Protectress was 
specifically submitted to Emperor Suzong for the 
purpose of healing an unknown ailment. The text 
(T 1153.618a24) specifically states that the dhāraṇī 
provides protection against illness for both kings 
(guowang 國王 ) and queens ( hougong 後宮 ), and in 
biographical sources Amoghavajra is said to have 
performed the dhāraṇī on behalf of Suzong as a 
curative ( T 2056.293b13–5). 
While the promise of addressing the quotidian 
concerns of the political class in particular argued 
for the adoption of Esoteric Buddhism among the 
Chinese ruling elite, it was perhaps the violent, 
murderous aims of the tradition that spoke most 
strongly in its favour. If there was a single systemic 
feature of the emergent Esoteric Buddhist tradition 
that most facilitated its integration into Tang po -
51. I n the biography of Vajrabodhi by Lü Xiang, it is re -
counted that  the ship carrying the master to Java was the 
only one able to escape wreckage during a storm because 
he recited the Mahāpratisarā-dhāra ṇī  (Suiqiu  隨求): see 
Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 139. This account appears on 
my reading to be based on a standard trope from Chinese 
hagiographical literature in which the voyager encoun -
ters perilous difficulties, rather than rooted in actual fact. 
Nevertheless, the inclusion of the Mahāpratisarā-dhāra ṇī  
in the account reflects the author’s awareness of the text, 
its relative importance in the imperial Esoteric Buddhism 
that emerged in China in the second half of the 8th  century, 
and its role in bringing about beneficial mundane effects.  
goble mockup.indd   136 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 151] ---
The Politics of Esoteric Buddhism137
litical structures, it was the unfailing acceptance 
of Esoteric Buddhism and its representatives of 
state-sanctioned violence and their willingness 
to contribute to its application. The adoption of 
Esoteric Buddhism in Tang China occurred during 
a time of radical social upheaval precipitated by the 
rebellion of An Lushan and reinforced by persistent 
incursions into Tang territory by non-Han forces. 
Amoghavajra and the esoteric tradition that he 
presented in China actively contributed to the Tang 
war effort in these years. For example, his memorial 
stele inscription reports that during the rebellion 
of An Lushan, Amoghavajra performed the rites 
of the Banner of Acala and the Divinities of the 
Eight Directions Scripture on the emperor’s behalf.52 
The effects of Acala rites described in texts pro -
duced in China by Amoghavajra are clearly violent 
and applicable to military operations.  There is 
a procedure by which an opposing army may be 
rendered immobile and easy prey for an attack -
ing force ( T 1200.11b25–29). Alternately, there are 
rites by which one may starve an enemy army out 
of the field (ibid . 11c11–12). One may empower an 
army’s banners with Acala’s mantra and thereby 
win certain victory (ibid. 11b23–4). One can target 
an enemy commander with rites promising certain 
death (ibid. 11c8–10). In short, there are a variety of 
lethal and militarily applicable ritual techniques 
contained in Amoghavajra’s textual corpus and 
there is evidence that he performed them in service 
to the Tang emperors, who perceived him as pos -
sessing the ability to ritually bring about the deaths 
of enemies to the throne. The assassination of Zhou 
Zhiguang 周智光  in 767 is a case in point.  
Zhou Zhiguang was a Military Commission -
er exercising command in Tongzhou 同州  and 
Huazhou 華州 northeast of the imperial capital, but 
suspicions concerning his loyalty to the Tang led 
Emperor Daizong to dispatch an envoy to meet with 
Zhou and ascertain his intentions. Upon reaching 
Zhou’s headquarters the envoy found the general 
unguarded, so he simply chopped off Zhou’s head 
and delivered it to the emperor ( JTS 114.3368–3370; 
XTS  224.6373–6374). Hearing this news, Amogha -
52. Even accurately predicting the date of Chang’an’s 
recovery, if we are to believe Feixi’s Stele Inscription   
(T 2120.848c29–849a3).vajra sent Daizong a letter of congratulations  
(T 2120.834c2–834c3). In his prosimetrical reply, 
Daizong suggests that Amoghavajra played a role 
in killing Zhou Zhiguang:
Zhiguang, violent and murderous, dared to 
harass frontier supply posts ( 關鋪 ). The Prince -
ly Master53 [Amoghavajra], from him there was 
an execution, entirely unexpected.54 The nu -
minous power of the ancestral and tutelary di -
vinities, the great sage deployed their blessings. 
The master’s protective recollection, inauspi -
cious signs forever purified. ( T 2120.834c14–
834c15)
Evidently Emperor Daizong saw Zhiguang’s 
decapitation as facilitated or even caused by the 
practice of Esoteric Buddhist rites by Amoghav -
ajra. As a ritual technology putatively capable of 
bringing about the deaths of enemies either singly 
or en masse, Esoteric Buddhism was effectively a 
weapon to be used by those in power to maintain 
their position and by those who aspired to power 
over others.  
conclusion
Esoteric Buddhism spread throughout Asia rapidly 
from the 8th century onwards. This diffusion of 
Esoteric Buddhist traditions throughout a vast geo -
graphical area inhabited by ethnically, linguistically, 
and culturally diverse people appears consistently 
to have occurred as a result of or concomitantly 
with the adoption of Esoteric Buddhist norms and 
practices by local ruling elites. In the Chinese case, 
among the earliest and best-documented instances 
of the pan-Asian adoption of Esoteric Buddhism, 
we see the assimilation of Esoteric Buddhism in 
the form of elite patronage of its practitioners 
throughout every dimension of the Tang dynasty 
political system. Sitting emperors, their empresses 
53. Wangshi  王師 : is parallel, and therefore contrastive, to 
Zhiguang in this passage. Wangshi  is a bureaucratic title for 
one of the Crown Prince’s tutors. Here, though, it seems to 
refer to Amoghavajra as a ‘princely master’ based on the reference in the concluding line concerning the ‘master’s 
(shi 
師) protective recollection ( hu’nian  護念)’. 
54. Zhuyi  誅夷: literally ‘to punish Yi barbarians’, invoking 
legal terminology and in reference to cultural or ethnic 
inferiority, the phrase most basically means to kill someone.
goble mockup.indd   137 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 152] ---
Esoteric Buddhsim in Mediaeval Maritime Asia138
and children, high-ranking officials in the central 
bureaucracy, and professional military men were 
all to be counted as patrons of Amoghavajra and, 
by extension, as adherents of Esoteric Buddhism. 
In the Chinese case, we do not see political insti -
tutions molded on the model of Esoteric Buddhist 
structures of power and hierarchy, as in other his -
torical cases. Rather, Esoteric Buddhist practices 
and norms were assimilated within pre-established 
models and institutions of governance—those of 
the bureaucratic state of late mediaeval imperi -
al China. Given that Esoteric Buddhism did not 
present a viable political structure in China, the 
Chinese case indicates the strong appeal of Eso -
teric Buddhism as a religious ideology and ritual 
technology, not simply as a template for structuring 
the institutions of an emergent state or establishing 
modes of legitimation. Its widespread acceptance 
among the Chinese ruling class is instructive as 
a case study illustrating some of the other and 
perhaps more compelling reasons for its adoption. 
Among these were Esoteric Buddhist emphases 
on ethical flexibility or acceptance of behavioural 
norms that lay beyond the ken of other Buddhist 
traditions, the elevation of practical, mundane 
goals and effects—specifically effects salutary to 
the flourishing of existing political institutions and 
office holders—and, perhaps most importantly, the 
violent, martial application of specific Esoteric Bud -
dhist rites.  These various, interrelated elements of 
Esoteric Buddhism reflect one of the central topoi 
of the tradition. As a guiding topos of early Esoteric 
Buddhism, the subjugation of Maheśvara reveals 
that in its early articulation Esoteric Buddhism is a 
tradition informed by ideals of hegemony, control, 
and power. These are not simply narrative tropes. 
They amount to an ethos of power and as such, we 
may speculate, Esoteric Buddhism was particularly 
appealing to ruling classes across cultures. Among 
other things, Esoteric Buddhism appears to have 
been a technology for maintaining the positions 
of the privileged and powerful in the face of rivals. 
In its rhetorical justifications and in its intended 
applications, early Esoteric Buddhism may be seen 
as a hegemonic tool, a religious system and ritual 
technology both accepting of and contributing to 
the quashing, coercing, and killing of individuals, 
institutions, views, and movements that, like Ma -heśvara, challenged the authority and power of 
local ruling elites. 
Asian Language Sources
Jiu Tangshu 舊唐書  [JTS] 16 vols. Beijing: Zhonghua
shu ju chuban fa xing 1975. (Reprint, 2002.)
Xin Tangshu 新唐書 [XTS]. 20 vols.  Beijing: Zhong
hua shu ju chuban fa xing, 1975. (Reprint, 2002.)
Zizhi tongjian 資治通鑑 . Beijing: Guji chubanshe,
1956.
T 18, 866. Jingangding yujia zhonglue chuniansong
jing 金剛頂瑜伽中略出念誦經  [Briefly Ex- 
       plaining the Production, Recollection, and Reci- 
      ta
tion of the Yoga of the Vajra Peak Scripture ].
T 20, 1145. Xukongzang pusa neng man zhuyuan
zuisheng xin tuoluoni qiuwenchi fa 虛空藏菩薩
能滿諸願最勝心陀羅尼求聞持法 [Methods for
Having Requests Heard by Ākāśagarbha Bo -
dhisattva, Capable of Fulfilling of Wishes, the
Most Victorious Heart Dhāraṇī ].
T 20, 1153.  Pubian guangming qingjing chisheng
ruyibao yinxin wunengsheng damingwang da 
suiqiu tuoluoni jing 普遍光明清淨熾盛如意寶
印心無能勝大明王大隨求陀羅尼經  [Dhāraṇī of 
the Great Protectress who is Universally Radiant, 
Pure, Incandescent, a Wish-granting Gem, and 
the Sealed Essence of the Invincible King of 
Mantras ].
T 21, 1200. Di lisanmeiye budongzun weinuwang 
shizhe niansongfa 底哩三昧耶不動尊威怒王使者
念誦法  [Trisamaya, Recollection and Recitations 
Methods of the Immovable Worthy, Wrathful 
King Emissaries ].
T 50, 2056. Da Tang gudade zeng sikong dabian zheng 
guangzhi bukong sanzang xingzhuang 大唐故大
德贈司空大辨正廣智不空三藏行狀 [Account of 
Conduct of the Former Great Worthy Bestowed  
with the Title Minister of Works, Dabian Zheng 
Guangzhi Trepiṭaka Bukong of the Great Tang ].
T 52, 2120. Daizongchao zeng sikong dabian zheng -
guang zhi sancang heshang biaozhiji 代宗朝贈
司空大辨正廣智三藏和上表制集 [Memorials and 
Edicts of the Venerable monk Dabian Zheng 
Guangzhi Trepiṭaka, bestowed [ with the title ] 
Minister of Works by the Daizong court ].
T 54, 2126. Da Song seng shilue 大宋僧史略  [Great 
Song  Dynasty Brief History of the Saṅgha ].
goble mockup.indd   138 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 153] ---
The Politics of Esoteric Buddhism139
T 55, 2157. Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu 貞元新
定釋教目錄  [The Honorable Prime (785–805) 
Revised  Catalogue of Buddhist Teachings ].
T 50, 2053. Da Tang dabei’ensi sanzang xuanzang fashi zhuan 大唐大慈恩寺三藏法師傳  [Great 
Tang Biography of the Trepiṭaka Dharma 
master Xuanzang of the Great Compassion 
Monastery ]. 
goble mockup.indd   139 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 154] ---
goble mockup.indd   140 12/7/16   12:09 AM

--- [Page 155] ---
Following up on moens’ (1924) remark that 
Kṛtanagara’s Buddhism was similar to the 
Tantric Buddhism of Khubilai, C.C. Berg 
argued in a series of publications during the 1950s 
and 1960s that Kṛtanagara of Siṅhasāri adopted the 
particular form of Buddhism that he knew to be 
practised by Khubilai, great Khan of the Mongols, 
in order to acquire spiritual powers to aid him in 
an expected military engagement with the latter. 
Many others have argued that Khubilai adopted 
that particular form of Buddhism as an instrument 
of rule in order to justify his military conquest and 
reign over Tibet. 
Is religion a mask for the will to power and its 
justification? Do the political-military situations of 
Kṛtanagara and Khubilai explain their adoption of 
Tantric Buddhism? Or are the relationships between 
religious and political practices not so simple and uni -
directional? In this chapter I examine the connections 
between and proposed explanations for the Tantric 
Buddhism and political actions of Kṛtanagara and 
Khubilai in light of Rosenstock-Huessy’s theory of 
religion as life in the service of what one loves. If re -
ligion is understood thus, then both the religious and 
political practices of these two kings can be explained 
as following from their devotion to power: instead of 
politics explaining their (and our) religions, the gods 
they served explain their religion and their politics.
kṛtanagara versus khubilai 
Moens (1924: 544) argued that the Buddhism as -
cribed to Kṛtanagara in the Deśavarṇana (formerly 
called Nāgarakṛtāgama ) belonged to a kālacakra
tradition of Tantric Buddhism,1 and that Kṛtana -
1. As observed by Griffiths  (2014c),  the emphasis on K āla-
cakra as the source of Tantric or Vajray āna Buddhism ingara’s initiation into this form of Buddhism was 
much like Khubilai’s consecration as Hevajra.2 As 
a result of his consecration Khubilai would have 
become Mahāmitābha, which Moens regarded as 
the same as Mahākṣobhya, with which Kṛtanagara 
was associated by a statue in his image.3 In a series 
of publications throughout the 1950s and 1960s, 
Berg4 took Moens’ association with Khubilai and 
Indonesia is a rather stereotypical feature of early 20th-cen -
tury scholarship (which has however been taken over un -
critically in much later secondary literature) that seems 
to reflect the knowledge of the time on Tantric Buddhism, 
which heavily relied on sources from Tibet, where the 
Kālacakra indeed played an important role.
2
.Ea
rlier Kern  (1910a: 9) had noted that in Kṛtanagara’s 
consecration as Jina, the term Jina—what European schol -
ars referred to as Dhyāni-Buddha—was the same as that
used in Tibet and Nepal, but Kern drew no conclusions
from that connection. Nihom (1986: 485) stated that Moens 
had already suggested that Kṛtanagara was initiated in
response to Khubilai’s consecration, as it may be inferred 
by the following remarks (Moens 1924: 544): ‘The most
well-known of these rulers of China, Kublai Khan, con -
temporary of Kṛtanāgara, was consecrated as Jina through 
the Hevajrābhiṣeka’ ( De meest bekende dezer keizers van
China, Kublai Khan, tijdgenoot van Kṛtanāgara, werd tot
Jina gewijd door de Hewajrābhiṣeka ), and ‘The iṣṭadewatā
of Kṛtanāgara, who thought of himself as Kublai’s match, 
should not have been less demonic’ ( De iṣṭadewatā  van
Kṛtanāgara, die zich Kublai’s evenknie dacht, zal niet minder 
demonisch geweest zijn ). I have been unable to determine
whether or not Moens was the first to suggest that Kṛtana -
gara imitated Khubilai.
3.On the Simpang statue (now in Surabaya), see Kern
1910b and Poerbatjaraka 1922 for the earliest discussions,
and Nihom 1986 for a post-Berg reinterpretation.
4. As t
his chapter is not a study of Berg’s ideas but of the 
historiography related to Mongolian-Javanese relations in 
the 13th century, I shall make no attempt to present a survey 
of Berg’s publications nor even present his ideas in his own Chapter 6
(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia? 
International Relations, the Balance of Powers, and the Tantric 
Buddhism of Kṛtanagara and Khubilai Khan
david bade
bade mockup.indd   141 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 156] ---
142 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
went further with what he described in his last 
paper on the topic as a ‘guess’: 
Since Kĕrtanagara introduced a similar form 
of Buddhism in Java, we may guess that he 
followed Kubilai’s example in order to acquire 
the same degree of power so as to be able to 
protect his country against Kubilai’s raiders... 
(Berg 1965: 99) 
Furthermore, Kṛtanagara’s Amoghapāśa in -
scription of 1286 is understandable, Berg argued, 
only ‘if interpreted as a symbolic invitation to 
join an alliance against Kubilai on the basis of 
Buddhism and connubium’ (1965: 99). Describing 
Kṛtanagara as a pacifist, Berg (1956: 408) agreed 
with Krom that for Kṛtanagara it was fear of the 
Mongols that guided his foreign policy, not aggres -
sive expansionist aims, and that the inscription 
expressed his desire to establish ‘friendly relations 
with Champa and Malayu’ (1956: 407). 
Berg insisted that the texts that comprise the 
sources of our knowledge of Kṛtanagara’s reign 
cannot be read on the basis of Western historio -
graphical assumptions, but must be read within 
the cultural assumptions of the culture of origin. 
Such an exhortation is salutary, and perhaps it is 
primarily upon that basis that Berg captured his 
readers’ attention. As summarized by Kwa (1970: 45), 
Berg also added that if we read these texts as their 
intended readers read them, then we find that they
had a magical function: to legitimize and justi -
fy the contemporary political scene, to provide 
the reigning regime with a genealogy that jus -
tifies their being in power. The texts therefore 
had an optive, wish-fullfillment character, de -
scribing events that should have happened, not 
events that did happen.  
That actually sounds very much like a reading 
made after Marxist historiography;5 Zoetmulder 
words. I am in fact much more interested in how his ideas 
have been repeated and responded to than in his interpre -
tations themselves. His principal publications relevant to 
the discussion are listed in the references for the reader’s 
convenience (Berg 1950, 1951a, 1951b, 1953, 1956, 1962, 1965), 
but few of them will actually be discussed in what follows. 
5. N ot only post-Marxist, but according to Andries Teeuw, 
‘deconstructionist avant la lettre’ (Teeuw 1991: 219).  (1974: 170), while crediting Berg with the indisput -
able merit of having shed light on the ‘magical’ 
aspect of Old Javanese literature, and the relation 
between the poem, its poet, and his kingly sponsor, 
also warned that ‘it is doubtful whether the founda -
tion is sufficiently sound to enable us to reconstruct 
a complete picture either of Old Javanese life and 
thought in general, or of the position of the poet 
within its framework’. Berg did declare that the 
Deśavarṇana  was a priestly statement and ‘there -
fore, an elaborate optative’ (Berg 1965: 105). How 
Berg knew that he was reading texts in the way they 
were originally intended to be read is not clear, but 
it appears to be the case that his assumptions about 
the relationship between religion and politics un -
derwrote his interpretations, not the assumptions 
that a 14th-century Buddhist (whether poet-priest, 
king, or ascetic) would have made (whatever those 
might have been). In any case, according to Berg’s 
thesis, the proper interpretation of those texts con -
cerning Kṛtanagara entailed that he strove to unite 
the Archipelago in a sacred confederacy through 
his supernatural powers obtained through Tantric 
rites, and that he did this in response to and in 
imitation of Khubilai.
From D.G.E. Hall (1955) to Kenneth Hall (2011), 
variants of this interpretation of the Kṛtanaga -
ra-Khubilai conflict, and in particular its religious 
dimension, have been repeated, criticized, mis -
understood, misstated, and often accepted and 
asserted as fact. More significantly, narratives of 
Kṛtanagara’s adoption of Buddhism in imitation 
of Khubilai and against him—that is, as an act 
of pure realpolitik—have often been suggested 
without reference to Berg or any later scholarship, 
a disconcerting development about which Bosch 
was alarmed already in 1956.6 As early as 1955, Hall 
wrote of Kṛtanagara that ‘in imitation of Kublai’s 
consecration as a Jina Buddha, he was in 1275 con -
secrated as a Bhairava Buddha, and strove to build 
up a sacred confederacy united by the power of 
Tantric Yoga to withstand the Mongols’ (Hall 1955: 
785), without providing any references to primary 
and secondary literature; and twenty-five years 
6. B osch 1956 remains the clearest refutation of Berg’s 
early theories but Berg, rather than Bosch, informs most 
subsequent discussions. 
bade mockup.indd   142 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 157] ---
(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia?143
later when Mendis (1981: 316) wrote (also without 
references) of ‘a “heavenly duel” between Kublai 
as the avatar  of Buddhism against Kṛtanagara the 
tantric power  of the Circle of Yoginis’, he referred 
to this interpretation simply as ‘the traditional In -
donesian version’.7 Mendis, however, was neither a 
careful reader nor a clear thinker, as he revealed in 
his reference to ‘the legend that he [i.e., Khubilai] 
made himself a Djin Buddha to counteract Kṛtan -
agara’ (ibid.: 319). Some scholars have even gone 
so far as to dismiss the 1293 invasion of Java as a 
myth, apparently having pushed Berg’s reading to 
its most extreme conclusions.8 
One may—and probably ought to—assume 
that Kṛtanagara was well informed about Khu -
bilai’s military campaigns throughout southeast 
and eastern Asia as well as his expansionist in -
tentions, not only through the envoys sent from 
the Yuan court to Java but from merchants (both 
Arab and Chinese), refugees from southern China, 
and perhaps even refugees from the Muslim cam -
paigns in northern India.9 The Yuan shi records 
that Mongol envoys came to Java in 1279, 1280, 1281, 
and 1286 and that they came back without having 
obtained submission and royal hostages, and fur -
thermore that a mission to Java in 1289 (?) resulted 
in the mistreatment of the Mongol envoy. These 
missions all occurred during Kṛtanagara’s reign in 
Java and Khubilai’s reign as Great Khan, and there -
fore indicate a prolonged diplomatic relationship 
between the two kings and resistance to Khubilai’s 
demands on the part of Kṛtanagara. One can infer 
that in his interactions with the Mongol envoys 
Kṛtanagara both learned a great deal and developed 
7. Although this reference to the ‘traditional Indonesian 
version’ made me suspicious, if O’Brien (2008) is right 
in her understanding of the Sutasoma as being based on 
the historical relations between Kṛtanagara and Khubilai, 
the Sutasoma  may indeed represent the ‘traditional’ Java -
nese version.  For O’Brien’s reading of the Sutasoma  and 
Kṛtanagara’s relation to Khubilai, see below, as well as her 
essay in this volume.
8. Thi
s appears to be the case with Michael Aung-Thwin 
(2011: 35), who recently remarked that the Mongols ‘could 
not hold Java—if in fact that invasion were historical and not myth’.
9.
 Re
ichle (2007: 102 ff.) discusses the possible influence 
of Newar art on the reliefs of Candi Jago, a suggestion she 
attributes already to Brandes (1904). his foreign policy accordingly. But exactly what 
he knew, how his knowledge directed his foreign 
policy, and how his religious practices related to his 
political decisions or to the religious practices of 
Khubilai are simply matters that are not on record.
The 20th- and 21st-century historiography of 
Kṛtanagara’s domestic and foreign policy including 
his military campaigns has been oriented, guided, 
and often completely determined by the historians’ 
assumptions about the nature of religion and its 
relation to politics, as much as by their assumptions 
about the writing of history and the interpretation 
of texts. Furthermore, Kṛtanagara’s religion has 
been discussed in relation to the religion of Khubi -
lai more often than not. That is to say, Kṛtanagara’s 
religion has been seen as arising out of a relation -
ship that was at once political and personal, but 
the personal dimension of his religious practices 
and beliefs (insofar as they can be determined) has 
been understood (in every case with which I am 
familiar) to be explicable in terms of the political 
conditions of his reign. 
Why did Kṛtanagara embrace Tantric Bud -
dhism? If he did so in imitation of Khubilai, then 
why was Khubilai initiated into Tantric Bud -
dhism? If not in imitation of some other initiate, 
then why should one assume that Kṛtanagara’s 
initiation was due to mimesis? What is the rela -
tion between politics and religion in the lives and 
reigns of these two kings? If their religion follows 
from mimesis, of what relevance is politics? If po -
litical conditions explain their religious actions 
and orientations, of what relevance is mimesis? 
In what follows I shall look at how scholars have 
understood and written about first Khubilai’s 
and then Kṛtanagara’s adoption of Tantric Bud -
dhism, and then look at the relations between 
religion, politics, and power. The religious and 
political worlds of Khubilai and Kṛtanagara will 
be reassessed in light of that discussion, and also 
in light of the related ideologies adopted by dy -
nasties from other locales of maritime Asia in 
the 11th to 14th century.
khubilai’s religion
All known sources, Chinese, Mongol, and Ti -
betan, agree that Khubilai was given a conse -
bade mockup.indd   143 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 158] ---
144 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
cration ( abhiṣeka ) in 1253. It was an initiation 
to the rites of dGes-pa rdo-rje (Sans. Hevajra), 
a tutelary deity specially worshipped in the 
Sa-skya monasteries and whose cult is closely 
linked with that of Mahākāla, a protector and 
defender of the faith who is, like Hevajra, rep -
resented in a terrifying aspect. It seems that 
rites connected with Hevajra and Mahākāla 
became customary for every enthronement of 
a Yüan emperor, a fact which is also mentioned 
in the Chinese sources. The terrible Mahākāla 
was invoked when the Sino-Mongol armies went into battle. (Franke 1981: 308)
As a point of departure in an examination of 
Khubilai’s religion, we note that Franke’s statement 
reveals one of the problems the reader of histories 
encounters: while Franke confidently asserted in 
1981 that ‘all known sources’ agree on 1253 as the 
date of Khubilai’s consecration, we find Lokesh 
Chandra stating in 1995 (1995c: 156, without any 
references or argument) that Khubilai was initiated 
twice—first in 1264 and again in 1269—as a prelude 
to aggression, and an even more recent historian 
asserting with equal confidence that his consecra -
tion took place only once in 1263, citing a number 
of Tibetan sources to back up his claim (Davidson 
2005: 14, 379, n. 27). Seyfort Ruegg (1995: 40) agreed 
with Franke that the consecration occurred in 1253, 
but that was only the first consecration, which was 
followed by a second consecration in 1258 (ibid.: 42) 
and a third one for which he gave no date (ibid.: 
49). This dispute does not matter in the discussion 
that follows, for my concern here is only with the 
nature of Khubilai’s religious orientation, not in 
specific dates, but it does illustrate how easy it is to 
build narratives—and counter-narratives—in the 
absence of first-hand knowledge that circumscribes 
the historian’s situation.  
Moses (1977) situated Mongolian Buddhism in 
the context of the earlier history of Buddhism in 
Central Asia. He noted that the earliest Buddhist 
remains in Mongolia are Kitan, and went on to 
claim that the Kitan adopted Buddhism like their 
predecessors the To-pa Wei and Uygur since it pro -
vided ‘a prop for the barbarian ruling class. Without 
such a prop the barbarians had no way other than 
force and terror to enlist the loyalty and support 
of the Chinese masses’ (ibid.: 37). Yet this Bud -dhism-as-state-policy was not adopted by the Kitan 
in their relations with the ‘outer barbarians’, and 
‘religion played no part in control of the dissident 
tribes’ (ibid.: 37). It was after they had conquered a 
sedentary civilization that
the need arose for a sustaining state religion.... 
The need to cloak their ruler in symbols which 
would attract an essentially alien population 
is obvious. So, too, is the need to present the 
barbarian ruler as a protector of faiths and a 
divine figure. Only in this way could a con -
quest chieftain capture the loyalty or fear of a 
conquered population, and counter the tradi -
tional state philosophy of a ruling class. (Moses 
1977: 40).
The Mongols, Moses claimed, followed those 
earlier traditions. At the beginning of Khubilai’s 
reign, ‘co-optation of popular Buddhism seemed 
one way of appealing to the mass in their own lan -
guage’ (ibid.: 66–67), but Khubilai’s Buddhism was 
shaped by Turco-Mongol Buddhism rather than 
a Chinese form. According to a Tibetan account 
(often characterized as legendary), Tibetan Bud -
dhism reached the Mongol court through Sakya 
Paṇḍita, who met with Godan (second son of 
Ögödei Khan, in charge of Gansu) in ad  1246 after 
the election of Güyük as Great Khan (ibid.: 76). 
‘Out of gratitude, and most likely out of political 
need, the two became allies’ (ibid.: 77). According 
to that account, ’Phags-pa was at that meeting in 
1246. By 1255 he had become Godan’s advisor in 
both spiritual and political matters, and after 1260 
he was recommended to Khubilai. Moses argued 
that Khubilai was already oriented towards Bud -
dhism and that ‘the usual assertion that Qubilai was 
converted by ’Phags-pa is misleading. Qubilai was 
already Buddhist and already familiar with western 
Buddhism’ (ibid.: 77). Rossabi’s understanding of 
Khubilai’s Buddhism differed significantly from 
Moses’, but both wrote of the relationship between 
Khubilai’s Buddhism and his politics in the same 
terms. Khubilai, Rossabi wrote, won over the Bud -
dhists by ‘appearing to be attracted to their religion’ 
(Rossabi 1988: 145). Tibetan Buddhism, he argued
was the ideal vehicle for his political purpos -
es. It could offer ideological justification for 
the Mongol ruler’s accession to power. Its em -
bade mockup.indd   144 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 159] ---
(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia?145
phasis on magic... appealed to Khubilai, but its 
most attractive feature was its involvement in 
politics.... The Tibetan ‘Phags-pa lama of the 
Sa-skya sect proved a useful figure to support 
Khubilai’s aspiration to be perceived as the 
rightful ruler of China.... As soon as Khubi -
lai took power, he began to woo the ‘Phags-pa 
with honors and titles. (Rossabi 1988: 143)
 If we compare the accounts of Mongolists like 
Moses and Rossabi with accounts by scholars of 
Tibetan and Tantric history, we see clearly how 
different perspectives lead to significantly different 
narratives. Scholar of Tantrism Ying Chua (2003: 
45) claimed that ’Phags-pa’s role in Khubilai’s court 
was ‘as spiritual master of Kublai’ and that this ‘was 
the pivotal force of their relations’. Having first con -
verted Khubilai’s wife Chabi and initiated her into 
Hevajra and Mahākāla, he then brought Khubilai 
‘under his religious influence, conceivably assist -
ed by Chabi’s encouragement’ (ibid.: 45). Khubilai 
‘took Mahākāla as his personal deity (yidam) and 
tutelary’ (ibid.) with full awareness of Mahākāla’s 
powerful and militant character. 
On the face of it, this description of the relation 
between ‘Phags-pa and Khubilai seems signifi -
cantly different from both Moses’ and Rossabi’s 
description, for instead of Khubilai ‘co-opting’ or 
‘appearing to be interested’ in Buddhism, here we 
find ’Phags-pa to be the guiding figure, gradually 
bringing the Mongol court under his influence 
rather than the Mongol Khan bringing the Tibet -
an(s) under his influence. Chua proceeds to portray 
the Buddhists providing spiritual aid for Khubi -
lai’s military campaigns, and providing him with 
‘sacred authority to rule’:
Phagpa directed Anige, the imperial art direc -
tor (see below), to create an image of Mahaka -
la for use in a ritual to aid the Khan in his bat -
tles against the Southern Song. Even during 
Kublai’s lifetime, Phagpa and other Tibetan 
Buddhists recognized him as an emanation 
or incarnation of the Bodhisattva Manjushri, 
as well as a Universal Emperor, or Chakravar -
tin, a Buddhist title denoting a benevolent, 
virtuous ruler who promotes the well-be -
ing, education, and diverse religious paths of 
all his people.... The identification of Kublai 
with Manjushri is particularly significant in view of Manjushri’s role, since at least Tang 
dynasty, as China’s Bodhisattva, residing in 
his sacred abode on Mount Wutai in Shanxi 
province. This association thus provided Kub -
lai with the religious sanction he needed to se -
cure his sacred authority to rule China. (Chua 
2003: 45–46)
Thus, to Chua, the adoption of an esoteric 
Tibetan sect would serve to legitimate Khubilai 
in the eyes of his Chinese subjects. The desire to 
explain religion in terms of its functioning as a 
political legitimation has led Ronald Davidson, a 
historian of Tantric Buddhism in India and Tibet, 
to provide yet another perspective. Grounding his 
account in a narrative of the development of the 
Sakya sect within Tibetan Buddhism, Davidson 
(2005: 374) argued that members of the Khön clan 
‘domesticated the wild image of Virūpa, making 
the Lamdré, one of the most esoteric systems of 
siddha practice’. The Sakya monks, ‘skillful in the 
world, spiritually mature, with magical and ad -
ministrative ability, possessed of internal divinities 
and external alliances—powerful in every sense 
of the word’, prepared the form of Buddhism that 
‘became a great part of the ground from which the 
seeds for the association of Sakya patriarchs with 
Khubilai Khan would eventually be grown’ (ibid.). 
Davidson noted that some scholars (he cites Franke 
1981 and Heissig 1980) have interpreted ’Phags-pa’s 
involvement in Mongolian affairs as a sign that he 
was the one who ‘legitimated Khubilai as a “univer -
sal monarch” ( cakravartin ), or divine bodhisattva’, 
but that few have asked ‘what was there about Sakya 
Paṇḍita and Pakpa that caused the Mongols to 
require their presence in the first place’ (Davidson 
2005: 7).10 In Davidson’s view, the Sakya Paṇḍita 
10. Davidson does not mention that some of those who 
h
ave asked the question have regarded the Mongol invita -
tions to Tibetan monks as demands rather than invitations, 
and the Tibetans’ presence at court more a matter of hos -
tages than spiritual advisors. While Wylie (1977: 113), citing 
The Golden Annals of Lamaism , declared that the ‘invitation 
to ’Phags-pa was an ultimatum accompanied by the threat 
of military action’, and Heissig (1980: 24) flatly stated that 
the Tibetan monks were taken specifically as hostages, 
Petech wrote more cautiously of Köden’s (Godan in Moses’ 
transcription above) invitation to the Sakya Paṇḍita that 
‘a refusal was out of the question’ (Petech 1983: 181) and 
bade mockup.indd   145 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 160] ---
146 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
fascinated the Mongols with his abilities, ‘yogic 
systems, magical rites, monastic decorum, clan 
connections, intellectual acumen, administrative 
ability, medicine, logic, language’, and in fact in 
their dealings with Tibetans throughout the years 
the Mongols always selected those with the most 
skills and abilities. Davidson (ibid.: 375–76) also 
argued that the Sakya monks, as neoconservatives, 
were good Buddhists who
did not elect to mandate their vision through 
the force of law, even when given the oppor -
tunity by their Mongol lords. They would be 
magnanimous rulers: having achieved victory, 
they could afford to grant religious freedom to those at the margins. In this, they were simi -
lar to other Buddhists who were satisfied that 
eventually all the world would see the truth. 
Davidson pointed out that the common manner 
of understanding the role of these Tibetans in Mon -
golian Buddhist affairs ‘reflects the predisposition 
of those authors to assess this role principally 
through the filters of Chinese political documents’ 
(ibid.: 8).11 He observed that ’Phags-pa’s Buddhism 
‘was perhaps the least accommodating to actual 
shamanic practice’ (ibid.) and that none of the 
arguments about the usefulness of Buddhism to 
referred to the young ’Phags-pa as ‘practically a hostage’ 
(ibid.: 185). 
11. F ranke (1981: 297) noted this matter and his comments 
are worth being quoted in full here: 
Chinese history was written by Chinese intellectuals, 
and the majority of these were not active Buddhists. 
A negative bias in all official and most private sources 
as far as the attitude towards Buddhism is concerned 
must therefore be expected. The picture changes as 
soon as one turns to Tibetan sources. These are exclu -
sively Buddhist-Lamaist and concerned only with the 
propagation of the faith. Activities of Tibetan lamas 
in Yüan China, which appeared to the Chinese as 
arrogant and insolent and at the best as foreign extrav -
aganzas, may be viewed in Tibetan sources as selfless 
missionary efforts aimed at influencing Mongol rulers 
and propagating the doctrine of the Buddha through -
out the whole empire... At the risk of oversimplification 
it could be said that the respective sources reflect the 
genuine antagonism between state and religion, and 
that the aim of the Tibetan lamas was precisely to 
bridge the gulf between religion and state by creating 
a theocratic theory of secular rule.the Mongols could be applied to Hülegü’s adop -
tion of Buddhism, since ‘no muslim population 
has ever perceived the Buddhist religion as legiti -
mate’ (ibid.: 9). Far from legitimating Mongol rule, 
Buddhism in the Il-Khanate and arguably also at 
Khubilai’s court problematized Mongol rule, for 
‘esoteric Buddhism also tended to reinforce a social 
agenda that militated against long term political 
unity’ (ibid.: 10).
Jagchid (1988) was one of those who did ask why 
the Mongols adopted Buddhism, and in particular 
he asked why Khubilai chose ‘Tibetan Buddhism 
as his personal faith’ (ibid.: 89). Of course this way 
of asking the question—framing it as a matter of 
personal faith—if taken seriously almost requires 
setting aside politics as the main factor, and it is 
no surprise that Jagchid answers his own question 
the way he does:
Political reasons aside, the cultural similarity 
between the Mongols and Tibetans and their 
common distance from the Chinese may have 
been the main factors which caused Khubilai 
to make this historic decision. (ibid.)
Clearly, this is a pretty weak response to such 
an important question, and no more preferable 
than offering stark political motives as the deciding 
matter in his ‘faith’. 
Heissig, while not asking the question of why 
the Mongols chose Tibetan Buddhism, offered an 
answer anyway, and did so as though the question 
did not even need to be asked. For Heissig (1980: 
24), ‘the first conversion of the Mongols to Lamaism 
did not go very deep’ and ‘the first contacts of the 
Mongols with the Lamaist church in Tibet were 
primarily political in nature’. It was not due to 
any spiritual need that ‘Phags-pa arrived at the 
Mongol court, but because Khubilai ‘wanted to 
hold a representative of the Sa skya pa ’ as a hostage 
(ibid.). The subsequent conversion to Buddhism of 
the Mongols at the court and the ruling class was 
a result of ’Phags-pa’s ‘adroitness in arousing the 
interest of the ruling class in his religion ... the 
influence of Tibetan medicine as practiced by the 
Tibetan monks, which proved more convincing to 
the Mongols... and on the greater magical effective -
ness of Tantric magic’ (ibid.). In a conclusion similar 
to Jagchid’s, Heissig blandly states that Tibetan 
bade mockup.indd   146 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 161] ---
(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia?147
Buddhism ‘fitted in especially well with the political 
dynamism of the Mongols and with their militant 
nature’ (ibid.: 25). 
’Phags-pa himself wrote of Khubilai’s adop -
tion of Buddhism in a passage quoted in a Bud -
dhist chronicle from the Yuan era and written in 
Chinese, the Fozu lidai tongzai ( 佛祖歷代通載 ). In 
this passage he states simply that Khubilai ‘subju -
gated many countries and territories and became 
powerful by extending his frontiers. He adopted 
the teachings and the Law of the Buddha and civ -
ilized his people according to the Law. Therefore 
the teachings of the Buddha flourished twice as 
much as before’ (quoted in Franke 1980: 306), the 
only connection between the expansions of the 
religious and political realms being that the latter 
facilitated the former —not the other way around. 
How seriously should such an interpretation be 
taken? Franke notes that the Mongol rulers appear 
here as the legitimate successors of the Buddhist 
universal emperors, not the Chinese dynasty, and 
Khubilai’s son Zhen Jin ( 真金 ) is addressed in this 
work as ‘Bodhisattva Imperial Prince’, this being 
‘one of the many instances of Buddhist sacralization 
conferred upon the family of Chinggis Khan by 
the Tibetan lamas’ (Franke 1980: 307). Here the 
sacralization is made in the context of a Buddhist 
history —not a Chinese or Mongolian or even 
Tibetan history —but Franke immediately follows 
this note with a remark which puts the whole matter 
under the aegis of the political once more: ‘Because 
of its inherent supranational character, Buddhist 
sacralization was acceptable to the Mongols. It pro -
vided them with a sacral kingship that legitimized 
their domination over China and the world’ (ibid.: 
307). Petech (1983) provided an account of the many 
Tibetan Buddhist lamas who had contacts with the 
Mongol court, from Chinggis Khan to Khubilai and 
the patronage of Tibetan sects by the Mongol royal 
family. The history is varied and extensive: miracle 
workers (such as Karma Pakshi), learned monks 
and interreligious disputations (some of which 
were presided over by the not yet khan Khubilai), 
and negotiations regarding Mongol policy towards 
Tibet are all well documented prior to Khubilai’s 
patronage of ’Phags-pa. Regarding this latter monk 
and the role he was to play at the Mongol court, 
Petech asks: ‘Why did Khubilai select the young Sa-skya hierarch?’ (Petech 1983: 184). Like most 
writers on this matter, Petech offers a political ex -
planation: ‘He was the religious chief who offered 
the best guarantees of intelligent subservience 
to the aims of the new ruler of China’ (ibid.: 185). 
While Petech mentions ’Phags-pa’s initiation of 
Khubilai into Buddhism, he has nothing more to 
say about Khubilai’s religious life, and indeed in a 
later work Buddhism plays almost no role at all in 
Khubilai’s relations with Tibetan Buddhists: Khu -
bilai selected ’Phags-pa ‘as his advisor and tool in 
Tibetan matters’ (Petech 1990: 16) and that is all 
there was to the relationship.
In a counter-narrative to all those who offer 
the ‘Buddhist explanation’ —that Buddhism simply 
legitimated the Mongol rulers —Elverskog argued 
that it was the rites related to the cult of Chinggis 
Khan alone that provided the Mongol rulers with 
their political legitimacy in the early imperial 
period. Although Franke (1981: 308) stated that 
Tantric rites were a part of every Yuan enthrone -
ment, Elverskog argued that there was a dual le -
gitimation involving both Buddhist rites and rites 
pertaining to the cult of Chinggis. If Elverskog is 
correct, Khubilai could not have derived his le -
gitimacy from his adoption of Tantric Buddhism 
unless the results of his initiation were such as to 
indicate the blessings of heaven (according to the 
cult of Chinggis).
There is of course one clearly documented link 
between Khubilai’s political-military policies and 
the Buddhists within the Mongol Empire, namely 
that representatives of all religions were required to pray to their gods for the Khan’s good fortune 
and blessing, and this included prayers for mil -
itary campaigns. ’Phags-pa not only performed 
rituals for the success of the khan’s armies, but 
as noted above, engaged artists as well for the 
making of religious articles for the performance 
of those rituals. Atwood (2004: 249) argued that 
Mongol policy towards all religions from the time 
of Chinggis Khan onwards was based on one simple 
assumption: that prayer benefited the ruler. In a 
similar fashion, Jagchid claimed that ‘if foreign 
priests, monks, or khoja s communicated with 
Heaven and prayed for the khan, they also would 
be honored as böes , for the more prayers for the 
life of the khan and the tranquility of the people 
bade mockup.indd   147 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 162] ---
148 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
the better’ (Jagchid 1979: 7). Yet the study of state 
policy regarding religion is not at all the same as 
studying Khubilai’s religious beliefs, practices, and 
orientation. Atwood’s remark that ‘of all the khans, 
Qubilai Khan (r. 1260–94) tried hardest to curtail 
religious privileges’ (Atwood 2004: 251) is a clear 
reminder of the difference between understanding 
Khubilai’s religion and understanding his religious 
policy; everything is much simpler if one tries only 
to understand state policy. 
Apart from Davidson’s account, historians 
have been nearly unanimous in seeing and un -
derstanding Khubilai’s religion as primarily or 
even solely a matter of political expediency. It is 
as though Khubilai, because he was a powerful 
member of the ruling class, could have no expe -
rience of or interest in religion except as a tool of 
state policy. Davidson’s narrative, the questions 
he asks, and the criticisms he offers suggest that 
Khubilai’s Buddhism has never been adequately 
discussed for the simple reason that it has never 
been taken seriously. Theoretical orientations 
and unstated assumptions have determined the 
discussions of Khubilai’s Buddhism so completely 
as to have rendered religion invisible in the rel -
evant historiography: in the historiography of 
Khubilai’s Buddhism, there is hardly anything 
but realpolitik. 
In fact, it is even a bit worse than that. In many 
discussions there is simply a restatement of what 
some earlier writer had written, without any critical 
engagement and often without understanding or re -
stating either the complexity of the issues involved 
or the sources from whence knowledge has been 
obtained. To make matters worse, the Mongols are 
often portrayed as barbarians—simple-minded, 
rural-dwelling nomads of yesteryear—fascinated 
by the magic and miracles of charlatans, shamans, 
and miracle workers, envious and in awe of the 
baubles of urban civilization and its religions. It 
is therefore this predisposition that explains their 
religious life and orientation. When it comes to 
religion among the Mongols, attitudes that would 
not be countenanced in discussions of other social 
practices abound in the writings of Sinologists, 
Mongolists, and Tibetologists. kṛtanagara’s religion
If the historiography of Khubilai’s Buddhism leaves 
a lot to be desired, so does that relating to Kṛtan -
agara’s Buddhism. 
The sources for learning of Kṛtanagara are few 
but varied. He himself left a number of inscriptions, 
and there are later inscriptions mentioning him. 
There are lengthy passages in the Deśavarṇana 
of 1368 and in the 16th(?)-century Pararaton  as 
well as in the later kiduṅ.12 Since the Deśavarṇana  
was written by a Buddhist and the Pararaton  by a 
‘somewhat anti-Buddhist’ (O’Brien 2008: 237), in -
terpreting what they have to say about Kṛtanagara’s 
religion is fraught with problems. The inscriptions, 
on the other hand, are brief but accompanied by 
statuary, and although each aids in the interpre -
tation of the other, their interpretation is no easier 
than understanding the longer poems and prose 
works, as the literature on these inscriptions clearly 
demonstrates.
In the Jaka Dolog inscription there are four 
verses in Sanskrit that tell of Kṛtanagara; inter -
preting what they have to say about that king in -
volves translation, and on that there has been no 
consensus. Nihom (1986: 487) suggested translating 
them thus:
Just as the Indra of the kings of the earth is the 
sage, the master of the four continents, (so) he 
is the son of Śrī Jayawardhanī (and) born of the 
essence of Śrī Hariwarddhana. (10) Endowed 
with the complete truth, he is the teacher of the 
doctrine of the Dharma. Actively engaged in 
the ritual actions which redeem the fallen, he 
is the best of those who know the lawbooks. (11)
 Na
med J ñānaśiwabajra, he is fully conver -
sant with the gnosis of enlightenment. One 
who has the limbs (of the ṣaḍaṅgayoga ) puri -
fied by the rays of Insight, he is adorned with 
the jewel which is mind. (12)
 W
ith devotion having erected this (image) 
conformable to the nature of Mahākṣobhya, in 
the cemetery named Wurara he had previously 
had consecrated himself. (13)
12. Th e dating of the Pararaton and the kiduṅ s is irrelevant 
to the discussion here. 
bade mockup.indd   148 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 163] ---
(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia?149
Nihom’s conclusion was that they reveal a great 
deal about Kṛtanagara’s Buddhism, that ‘there is 
good reason to suppose that a cult of Hevajra was 
practised by the royal house’, and that ‘the conse -
cration of Kṛtanagara was indeed in all probabil -
ity a consequence, in syncopation or reaction, to 
the tantric consecrations of Kublai Khan’ (Nihom 
1986: 497). The big surprise in this conclusion is that 
Nihom mentions nothing at all about Khubilai or the 
Mongols between his reference to Moens’ suggestion 
in his first paragraph and this closing remark.
Lokesh Chandra agreed with Nihom that the 
Jaka Dolog inscription informs us of Kṛtanagara’s 
Buddhism, but what Nihom learned from the in -
scription was not exactly what Lokesh Chandra 
learned. Among other differences, Lokesh Chandra 
argued that Kṛtanagara’s Buddhism was of the Gu -
hyasamājatantra tradition. He did agree with Nihom 
on several other matters, namely that ‘Kṛtanaga -
ra had performed consecrations and he had been 
purified by the luminosity of knowledge ... which 
made him ever more dedicated to Dharma. National 
stabilization was achieved through cosmic powers’ 
(Lokesh Chandra 1995c: 154).13 Lokesh Chandra also 
agreed that his initiation imitated Khubilai’s:
Kublai Khan got initiated into Hevajra  in 1264 
and again in 1269, as a prelude to further con -
quests. To stem the Mongol threat of aggression, 
Kṛtanagara imitated Kublai Khan’s dedication 
and tried to develop magical might by taking 
the empowerment of Akṣobhya. The Hevajra  
pertains to Mother Tantras and Akṣobhya to 
Father Tantras. To supersede Kublai Khan who 
had been initiated into Mother Tantras, he got 
empowered into the more virile and powerful 
Father Tantras represented by Guhyasamāja  
(Wayman 1973: 234–35). The first empowerment 
referred to in the inscription could have taken 
place in 1281, when Kṛtanagara had been invit -
ed to come in person to the imperial court and 
to pay homage to the Mongol Emperor (Lokesh 
Chandra 1995c: 156–57). 
Lokesh Chandra takes the old argument one 
step further, suggesting that the re-dedication of 
13. Lokesh Chandra earlier in the article attributed uni -
fi
cation of the island realm to Kṛtanagara’s father Viṣṇu -
vardhana (to whom the statue was dedicated). the statue followed upon Kṛtanagara’s mistreatment 
of the envoy sent by Khubilai to Java in 1289 (Meng 
Qi, according to the undated notice in the Yuan shi ):
To avert any serious eventuality the King 
re-dedicated the same image, which had ward -
ed off for eight years the calamitous situation, 
with more esoteric rites to gain supernatural 
powers to preempt the aggression. (ibid.: 157)
Another inscription mentioning Kṛtanagara 
is the Amoghapāśa inscription, an inscription in 
two parts. The longer part on the back in praise of 
Amoghapāśa/Ādityavarman was added upon the 
reconsecration of the statue in the time of Ādit -
yavarman (r. 1347–76), a reconsecration that ritually 
asserted his independence from Java (Kozok and 
Reijn 2010: 136). The inscription on the base (which 
was not altered or removed for the reconsecration) 
records that the statue was sent by maharājādhirāja  
Kṛtanagara as a gift to the people of Malayu in 
1286. The inscription contains no further informa -
tion on Kṛtanagara or his relations with Malayu 
except that he hoped that they would enjoy this 
and the other fourteen statues that he had sent. 
Both the Deśavarṇana  (‘the King gave the order 
to move against the land of Malayu’ in Robson’s 
translation [1995: 54]) and the Pararaton  (‘he sent 
an expedition to attack Malayu’ [Phalgunadi 1996: 
99]) present Kṛtanagara’s expedition to Malayu 
as a military action, and an eventually success -
ful conquest (as his gift of statues also indicates). 
Nevertheless Sedyawati (2004: 721) concurred with 
Berg in thinking that the Amoghapāśa inscription 
indicated ‘a religious diplomatic expedition rather 
than a military one’ and made no mention of Khu -
bilai or a campaign to gather allies against him. 
The Deśavarṇana  contains the lengthiest de -
scription of Kṛtanagara and was written by the Bud -
dhist Mpu Prapañca. In that poem Kṛtanagara is 
in one passage (Canto 43: 2) called J ñānabajreśvara, 
‘the king whose weapon is knowledge’ (Berg 1965: 
97). The land of Malayu was defeated ‘through his 
divine incarnation’ (Canto 41.5), as would later be 
the case with Bali too. Likewise the other regions 
sought protection at the feet of the King:
The whole territories of Pahang and of Malayu 
bowed humbly before him;  
bade mockup.indd   149 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 164] ---
150 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
 Th e whole of Gurun and of Bakulapura also 
took refuge before him,
 N
ot to mention Sunda and Madura, for the 
whole of Java was unquestioningly devoted to 
him. (Robson 1995: 55)
After this description of conquests and lands 
under his dominion (unless we accept that those 
lands did indeed seek his protection instead of 
being conquered), the text continues with a de -
scription of his religious character in Canto 42.3 
and the whole of Canto 43:
Canto 42
3. Nevertheless the King was not negligent, was 
free of intoxication, and was more and more 
energetic in his policy,
 F
or he had realized how difficult it is to pro -
tect the world in the age of Kali.
 Th
is is why he held fast to esoteric doctrines 
and observances, and was firmly committed to 
the sect of the Buddhists,
 I
n order to imitate the kings of old, and to 
guarantee the continued prosperity of the 
world. (Robson 1995: 55)
Here we do have an explicit reference to imi -
tation, but it is not in imitation of Khubilai that 
Kṛtanagara was ‘committed to the sect of the Bud -
dhists’ but rather ‘the kings of old’. In Canto 43 
Prapañca declares that ‘only the divine being who 
concentrates on the six supernatural faculties of 
the Buddha could protect the world as god-king’ 
and it was for that reason that ‘the King was firmly 
devoted to the Śākhya Lion, And attentively adher -
ing to the Five Commandments he was inaugurated 
and duly consecrated’ (Robson 1995: 55). Having 
been consecrated as a Jina, ‘the King studied the 
scriptures on reasoning, analysis and so on till he 
was completely accomplished’ (ibid.). At this point 
in his description of Kṛtanagara the author then 
mentions his esoteric rites:
Canto 43
3. But as he grew somewhat older he held to all 
sorts of esoteric rites;
 M
ainly of course it was the Subhūti Tantra 
the essence of which he guarded and cherished 
in his heart.
 H
e applied himself to worship, yoga and 
meditation for the stability of the whole world....4. He had mastered completely the sixfold 
stategy against enemies, was learned in the 
scriptures and expert in the works containing 
teaching on reality;
 H
e was very virtuous, firm in his Buddhist 
observances and very energetic in the rites for 
application of magic.  (Robson 1995: 55–56)
As an example of Buddhist hagiography it is 
unremarkable that he saw it as his duty to ‘protect 
the world in the age of Kali’ and engaged in reli -
gious practices ‘for the stability of the whole world’, 
but these same practices (whatever they were) were 
perhaps regarded quite differently by the non-Bud -
dhist author of the Pararaton . In that text Kṛtan -
agara’s consecration as Bhaṭṭāra Śiva-Buddha is 
mentioned (Phalgunadi 1996: 99), but the unknown 
author later relates that when he was attacked by 
Jaya-katon, ‘King Kṛtanagara Bhaṭṭāra Śiva-Buddha 
was then merrily absorbed in enjoying palm wine’ 
(ibid.). The author again notes that Kṛtanagara was drinking palm wine when he narrates the 
circumstances of his death, but gives no further 
indication as to the nature of that drinking session, 
nor does he describe it as either religious or irreli -
gious. Many scholars writing of this passage have 
concluded that the drinking was part of a Tantric 
Hevajra ritual and therefore probably accompa -
nied by orgies and other transgressive practices. 
When Fic (2003: 86) declared that ‘Kṛtanagara was 
assassinated while performing a Tantrik rite’, we 
should understand that the hypothesis vigorously 
argued by earlier historians has become a simple 
and unquestioned truth. More carefully, Hall (2011: 
320) noted that although Kṛtanagara was known 
as Śiva-Buddha, ‘neither his inscriptions nor the 
long Nāgarakĕrtāgama passage dealing with his 
reign show unambiguous evidence of Śaivism’ but 
clearly indicate Tantric Buddhism of the Vajrayāna 
variety. The ceremonies associated with that variety 
of Buddhism—such as the gaṇacakra  mentioned 
in Deśavarṇana  43.3—remain, however, unclear 
(ibid.).14 
14. U nclear, that is, at least to Hall and all those still 
looking for the Subhūtitantra  (on which, see Kandahjaya’s 
contribution, this volume, pp. 98–99). For Lukas (2004), 
the associated ceremonies were known: ‘In this Bhairavist 
(Tantric) tradition attempts are made to come into power in 
bade mockup.indd   150 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 165] ---
(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia?151
The kiduṅ offer pointed critiques of Kṛtanagara. 
He is described as a bad king ‘like a hot sun beating 
down mercilessly upon all’ in the Raṅga Lave  (Berg 
1930: 35), living a gay and carefree life even as war 
broke out and his killers bore down upon him (1930: 
36–39). His religious life is evident only in his title 
Śiva-Buddha. The Kiduṅ Harṣavijaya offers a bit 
more, but not much. Kṛtanagara is described in less 
than flattering terms: he pays no attention to his 
ministers, who leave his service one after the other 
or are exiled. He declares his intention to become 
an ascetic (a bhagavan ) but changes his mind after 
being encouraged to subject Malayu to his rule and 
take the princesses of Malayu, Dara-Petak, and 
Dara-Jiṅga as wives for his nephew Harṣavijaya.15 
After he learns of Jayakatoṅ’s attack upon the capitol, 
he wants to close the palace gates but his former 
prime minister and Virakṛti reprimand him for 
his cowardice, reminding him that ‘a king who 
died in the women’s quarters would end up in hell’ 
(Berg 1931: 77). He therefore goes out to do battle 
and, fighting alone, is killed; his death is marked 
by natural phenomena.
In these kiduṅ s, apart from the narrative con -
cerning his desire to retire and become an ascetic, 
little is revealed about his religious life and prac -
tices. The reproach about dying in the women’s 
quarters clearly indicates that the author of the 
Kiduṅ Harṣavijaya could not have considered what -
ever Kṛtanagara was doing at the end of his life to 
have been responsible religious behaviour, whether 
or not Tantric rituals were involved. 
Surveying all of these sources for the religious 
life and foreign policies of Kṛtanagara, there seems 
to be not one shred of evidence to connect his Bud -
a Rimbaud-like dérèglement systematique des sens —drunk -
enness, sexual orgies and ritual murder.... The Bhairava-rit -
uals—during which, among other things, a sexual inter -
course between the Lord of the ring ( mandala ) and the 
yogini s—were sufficient to give rise to the consolidation of 
the ruler’s power ( sakti ): The yogini s were therefore chiefly 
considered to be representatives of magic power’. 
15. Christie ( 1964: 58) claimed that in ‘the Kidung 
Harṣa-wijaya  Krtanagara became bhagavan  (as did Vikra -
mavardhane [sic] later), a statement which seems to have 
implied an attempt to increase the royal kesekten  (cf. Skt. 
sakti ) by spiritual exercises and tapa . While this is not 
affirmed in the Nagarakrtagama or the inscriptions, it is 
consistent with these sources’. dhism directly with Khubilai, nor his campaign 
to Malayu with a threat from the North, however 
plausible both explanations may appear to be. Nev -
ertheless, from Berg in the 1950s to the present, 
Kṛtanagara’s Buddhism and his foreign policy 
have been repeatedly linked to and presumed to 
be explained by Khubilai’s Buddhism and foreign 
policy. What is most striking about that literature 
is that explaining Kṛtanagara’s Buddhism in terms 
of realpolitik and mimesis appears to be the only 
option ever considered by most historians, primari -
ly because of the historians’ own assumptions about 
the relations between religion and politics. This is 
all the more striking when we consider O’Brien 
(2008), in which such ‘obvious’ explanations are set 
aside in the interest of inquiring into the self-un -
derstanding of an early author. Having observed 
that in the historiography concerning the worlds 
of Khubilai and Kṛtanagara the relation between 
religion and politics has been much discussed 
and everywhere explained but rarely questioned, 
it seems necessary to proceed by questioning that 
relationship.  
powers, religious and political
Benedict Anderson (1990: 23) offered as one of 
the distinguishing features of the Javanese un -
derstanding of power that ‘power does not raise 
the question of legitimacy’. As he described it, it 
‘would be meaningless to claim the right to rule on 
the basis of differential sources of power.... Power 
is neither legitimate nor illegitimate. Power is’ 
(ibid.). This of course raises significant questions 
about any attempt to ‘see’ in Javanese religion the 
legitimation of a political regime, and Anderson 
(ibid.: 26) noted this in reference to ceremonies 
of state: 
This obsession with ceremony has commonly 
been interpreted either as simple love of ideol -
ogizing; as manipulative sleight-of-hand, con -
cealing political and economic realities from 
the population; or as a way of formally inte -
grating conflicting groups and interests.... Such 
judgments are doubtless partly valid... but it 
would be unreasonable to deny that the impor -
tance attached to ceremonies may also have a 
more traditional basis, certainly in the minds 
bade mockup.indd   151 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 166] ---
152 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
of the spectators and probably, if to a lesser de -
gree, in the minds of the leaders themselves. 
Thus, according to Anderson, in Java religious 
rituals and ceremonies are means of acquiring 
power, and neither masks nor justifications for 
the exercise of power. Yet Anderson misses a 
crucial point: if ‘power is’, then we are dealing 
with a metaphysical presupposition which both 
precedes and informs social structures, political 
action, and theological disputation, and not with 
ideological constructions elaborated on the basis 
of a pre-existing situation.
In his study of the historiography of Mongol–
Manchu relations, Elverskog (2006) noticed that 
state-supported Buddhism was everywhere un -
derstood to be ‘a form of Dharmic agitprop that 
secured the support of the Qing dynasty’s Bud -
dhist subjects’ (ibid.: 3). The assumption he found 
throughout was that the Manchus secured the 
loyalty of their Mongol subjects by ‘ritually con -
firming their rule through the symbols, myths and 
history of Buddhist political authority’ (ibid.). He 
noted that the Jesuit Amiot described the relation -
ship this way already in the late 18th century, as 
did the Qianlong emperor in his ‘Proclamation 
on Lamas’. Elverskog (ibid.: 3–4) observed that 
this interpretation has been especially favoured 
by Mongols:
Ever since then, virtually every source touch -
ing upon the Mongols, Buddhism and the 
Qing dynasty has echoed the same refrain... 
they all agree: the Manchus used Buddhism 
to rule the Mongols.... The ‘Buddhist explana -
tion’ assumes that by promoting the Dharma the Manchus were able to ensure the loyalty of their Mongol subjects.
Whereas ‘Buddhist history often reads like a 
laundry list of famous Asian rulers who promoted 
the faith’ (ibid.: 9), Elverskog found ‘conceptualiza -
tions of community, state formation, political au -
thority and religion’ informing one another (ibid.: 
11). He suggested that the theoretical concerns of 
historians who arrive after the fact ‘potentially 
distort our understanding of the past’ (ibid.: 15). 
Elverskog turned the terms of the discussion 
upside down. Given that Nurhaci (the Jurchen leader to whom the Khorchin Mongols gave allegiance in 
1626 and whose descendants established the Qing 
dynasty of China) was ‘praised as a divine ruler 
who saves the Khorchins’, Elverskog questioned 
whether we should think of this as a conquest or a 
submission, for ‘using such terms not only shapes 
but also defines our interpretation’ (ibid.: 16).16  He 
suggested instead that:
In large measure the Mongols hoped that the 
Manchu state could restore order among the 
fractious Mongol groups. Rather than seeing 
the Mongols as inherently anti-Qing, we need to 
recognize that many Mongols actually welcomed 
the rise of the Manchu state within the parame -
ters of the ulus/törö  framework. (ibid.: 30)
The ulus/törö  framework he mentioned was the 
Mongolian system of state organizing and medi -
ating among independent local authorities. Elver -
skog argued that what was at stake for the Mongol 
groups was not their independent existence ‘but 
the absence of a proper mediating authority’ (ibid.). 
The question that remains is why Nurhaci and the 
later Manchu rulers were described in religious 
terms (‘divine ruler’ etc.). Contrary to traditional 
historiography, it appears that the desire for peace 
among the various Mongol groups justified their 
unification with the Manchu state, which possessed 
the requisite political power to end the internecine 
warfare and effect a peace. Elverskog suggested that 
‘most often, actual military, political and economic 
success is ipso facto evidence of God’s grace, while 
failure is proof of having lost favor. Yet ... for the 
Mongols, God was a dynamic force that demanded 
prayer in order to secure blessings and continued 
favor’ (ibid.: 48). Political power (as well as its 
acceptance) depended upon the ritually secured 
blessing of God. At least some Mongols understood 
that the Manchus possessed the political power as 
the blessing of God, which the Mongols no longer 
possessed.
Bourdieu (1991: 20) argued that ‘religious spe -
cialists must always conceal that their struggles 
16. Th is is precisely what is at stake for the interpretation 
of Mpu Prapañca’s remark quoted above that the regions 
under Kṛtanagara’s dominion ‘sought protection at the 
feet of the King’.
bade mockup.indd   152 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 167] ---
(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia?153
have political interests at stake’. It seems to be 
clear in the case of both Kṛtanagara and Khubilai 
that Tantric Buddhist practices were inextrica -
bly involved in their orientations and actions as 
rulers, but that political interests were nowhere 
concealed. In spite of the near unanimous agree -
ment of three centuries of historians, I propose to 
argue in a manner similar to Elverskog that the 
religious aspects of the political crises in the 13th 
century were not simply produced to legitimate 
or conceal political conditions, but were in fact 
a way of understanding the situation and at the 
same time the beliefs which produced the situa -
tion; the political significance of Kṛtanagara’s and 
Khubilai’s religious engagements arose from those 
engagements rather than determining them. In 
short, Kṛtanagara and Khubilai responded to the 
powers that moved and shook the world of their 
time—including the actions of both of these kings—
on the basis of their beliefs about the world in which 
they found themselves, and for both of these kings 
their beliefs and actions were oriented (we might 
say disoriented) by Tantric Buddhism.
tantric buddhism and the love  
of kings
To argue—as many have—that Kṛtanagara’s adop -
tion of Tantric Buddhism was in imitation of or 
in response to Khubilai’s initiation requires the 
assumption that Tantric Buddhism offered effective 
power—spiritual, political, and military power—
and that neither Kṛtanagara nor Khubilai ever 
questioned that. Without that operative assump -
tion, mimesis makes no sense. If indeed Kṛtanagara 
and Khubilai understood their situation as one of 
(spi)ritual warfare in which Tantric Buddhism 
offered the greatest potency in action, we may 
acknowledge the political conditions as prompting 
the question of power and its attainment but not 
as explaining the adoption of Tantric Buddhism, 
much less the belief in its efficacy. And if both 
kings believed in the efficacy of Tantric Buddhism, 
there is no need to assume any act of mimesis. 
If we re-examine Kṛtanagara’s and Khubilai’s 
Buddhism with the understanding that it cannot 
be explained by their political situation, we are 
left with the question: ‘Why Tantric Buddhism?’ In Bade (2013) I argued that Mongol expan -
sion in the 13th century was driven by traditional 
Mongol beliefs about the means for achieving social 
peace, namely social unity.17 During the reign of 
Chinggis, the belief in one truth, one world, and 
one ruler to ensure peace and justice through his 
own actions which expressed both the order of 
God and the order of the world had come to be the 
foundation of that social unity, a matter explicitly 
recorded in later Mongol rulers’ correspondence 
with the papal authorities. These Mongol notions 
can be found in the Secret History  (Mongγol-un 
niγuca tobčiyan ) and other documents of the 13th 
century, and provided the foundation for the re -
ligious and political worlds into which Khubilai 
was born. In Khubilai’s youth the Mongols came 
into contact with Buddhism while campaigning 
in the south, and sometime during the reign of 
Ögedei (1229–41) two Kashmiri monks, Otochi and 
Namo, arrived at the Mongol court (Jagchid and 
Hyer 1979: 178). In the years that followed Khubilai 
was introduced to Tantric Buddhism and eventually 
consecrated in (one or more) Hevajra ceremonies 
(see discussion above). Why did he embrace this 
form of Buddhism?
The Secret History  records that Alan Gua, the 
mythical ancestor of the Mongols, taught her 
sons that power is achieved through unity, and 
that through unity her sons could become lords 
of the earth and lords of the air. By the time of 
Khubilai, the question had become how to produce 
and maintain that unity on the scale of an empire. 
For this task, Mongolian mythology and traditions 
provided no answer. ’Phags-pa proposed an answer 
involving Tantric practices and all the evidence in -
dicates that Khubilai embraced that religious-ritual 
path to acquiring the power his position required.18 
17. That work, as the present chapter, was greatly in -
fl
uenced by my readings of the works of Eugen Rosen -
stock-Huessy, in particular his Out of Revolution  (Rosen -
stock-Huessy 1993). While he wrote very little on Buddhism, 
his Soziologie  (Rosenstock-Huessy 1956–58) contains a few 
remarks and a great deal of his thought about religion. 
Although the secondary literature on him is not extensive, 
three recent works are relevant: Cristaudo 2008 on power, 
Cristaudo 2012 on religion and politics, and Leutzsch 2009 
on globalization and international relations.
18. Pott (1966: 68ff.) provided a discussion of the ceremony 
he assumed accompanied Khubilai’s consecration, and 
bade mockup.indd   153 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 168] ---
154 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
In doing so he also embraced the religio-political 
doctrine of the cakravartin , ‘a just and virtuous 
world-monarch’ initiating ‘a universal, world-wide 
empire of enduring tranquility’ and ‘who should 
put an end to the perpetual struggle of the con -
tending states’ (Zimmer 1952: 128). The Tantric 
initiate ‘strives after the attainment of supreme 
insight, however he may conceive this. And one 
concomitant of this supreme insight is supernatural 
power’ (Pott 1966: 105). 
Davidson (2002: 168) argued that Esoteric 
Buddhism was ‘accepted and supported by the 
monarchs on the Indian borderlands, for they un -
derstood that Buddhist institutions had provided 
them with exactly the right combination of political 
and religious authority’. Those rulers of foreign 
lands—among whom both Kṛtanagara and Khu -
bilai should be counted—received training, rituals, 
spells, and medicine, all of which ‘could be used 
in service to the authenticity of the monarch and 
his state’ (ibid.). Davidson understood the relation 
of foreign monarchs to Esoteric Buddhism on the 
basis of his understanding of its origins in Indian 
feudal society:
Thus institutional esoterism sought to sacralize 
observable reality, employing the techniques 
that had always been successful. Here, the 
Buddha was depicted as a king with a crown, 
clothed in all the ornaments of royalty. Here, 
the monks received the ritual coronation and 
became divine in the process. Here, they en -
visioned the spiritual state filled with Bud -
dhas and bodhisattvas, with worldly beings 
and families of divinities. Here, they acted as 
agents for the Dharma, for the law. They per -
formed the ceremonies that—in their minds—
would bring peace where there was war, wealth where there was poverty, control where there was chaos, and destruction to the enemies of 
religion. (Davidson 2002: 168)  
even suggests that a set of bronze statues discovered and 
photographed in the 1920s (and disappearing again shortly 
thereafter, its fate remaining unknown) was originally 
produced for use ‘at Khubilai’s Hevajravaśitā’. Sharrock 
(2006: 63) suggested as an alternative interpretation that 
‘the bronzes may have been created for a performance of 
the cakrasaṁvara-tantra ’.In his view, monks and siddha s sought to 
bring the real into line with their spiritual vision 
through their involvement ‘with real courts 
of local lords’ (ibid.: 334). Yet the rituals they 
devised for coronation ‘yielded dominion within 
a maṇḍala of vassal figures and conferred control 
over self and others in a world where hierarchy 
was not the primary model of social relations, it 
was the only model’ (ibid.).
Once again it appears that the religious is both 
determined and explained by the social and politi -
cal conditions within which it appears. The siddha s 
(at least some of them) produced their distinctive 
doctrines and ways of life ‘in a desperate move to 
make sense of the world that continued to unravel 
as the gods seemingly supported the capricious 
conduct of men with swords, power, and wealth’ 
(ibid.: 335). And in every case their goal was ‘the 
appropriation of power’ and in their scriptures 
they ‘maintained various versions of the imperial 
model of dominion over the gods, the sorcerers, 
and other religious groups’ (ibid.: 335).  Yet David -
son argued that for Buddhists, ‘the fundamental 
reason they could engage the world in this way is 
that they believed in the transformation of per -
sonality’ (ibid.: 164). The rituals of coronation and 
‘the public persona of the overlord is, among other 
things, an attempt to impress it with a consensual 
sense of responsibility’ (ibid.). Whence this belief? 
Two pages later Davidson offered a hint: 
How often can a monk visualize himself as 
King of the World, erotic and powerful, with -
out being captured by the fantasy of his own 
vision? When the new scriptures explicit -
ly proclaim that the individual can become 
all-powerful in this one life, what perspective 
can be expected of a semiliterate monk from 
a small village that has just been burned and 
had its wells poisoned by the local warlord in 
a dispute over tribute?... They would surely ask 
whether there were not some way to harness 
the power of Vajrapāṇi, the General of Secrets, 
to overcome these armies and to rectify the 
barbaric displays of inhumanity. In the process 
they would, as the Mahākālantantra teaches, try to use magic and visualization to engage in 
battle with the forces of evil and obtain success 
to rule the state. (ibid.: 166)
bade mockup.indd   154 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 169] ---
(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia?155
Davidson offers quite a contrasting response 
to Tantric teachings depending upon whether he 
is dealing with a ‘semiliterate monk from a small 
village’ (who responds by being carried away with 
his own fantasies) or the kings of foreign lands 
(who ‘understood that Buddhist institutions had 
provided them with exactly the right combination 
of political and religious authority’). Is it not kings 
and emperors who are more given to megalomania 
and fantastic dreams about their own divinity? If 
we rewrite the paragraph quoted above, substi -
tuting Khubilai or Kṛtanagara for monk, we have 
a new way to approach the relationship between 
political reality and religious belief, not only in the 
13th century but in our own time as well.
The widespread adoption of Tantric Buddhism 
at courts throughout Asia in the 13th and 14th  cen -
turies does not indicate the clever appropriation of 
religion as a ‘prop for the barbarian ruling class’ 
(Moses, as quoted above) nor as a means of legit -
imating their rule any more than it indicates the 
attraction of religious medicine, magic, and mira -
cles, or the superiority of urban civilization to those 
rulers. If Tantric Buddhism arose in response to 
that world characterized by ‘the capricious conduct 
of men with swords, power, and wealth’ (ibid.: 
335)—and this does seem to be the case—it did 
not arise as an attempt to justify or legitimate those 
conditions but to challenge and to change them. It 
was a response to political and social conditions, 
and judging by its spread throughout Asia, it was a 
particularly powerful response. The consequences 
of the adoption of Tantric Buddhism, both for the 
Buddhist monks and laity as well as for the kings 
and nobility who embraced it, were perhaps not 
what those who fashioned it would have desired, 
predicted, or even imagined, but they seem fairly 
clear in hindsight.
Tantric Buddhism, with its imagination of a just 
and universal world ruler bringing about a state 
of affairs on earth that would mirror the heavenly 
state of affairs—the world as it ought to be—was 
not just a fantasy world of escape for monks and a 
useful mask hiding ugly realities for kings; it was 
a powerful motivating force that shaped political and social conditions throughout Asia. For some, 
the Buddhist rulers brought peace and political 
stability; for others, the Buddhist rulers brought war, destruction, and death. Whether Kṛtanagara 
was described as a wise king ushering in an era 
of expanding peace and prosperity, as a foolish 
and belligerent king, or as a rebellious local official 
threatening the peace and stability of the empire 
depended upon the point of view of the authors who 
wrote about him. For Mpu Prapañca, Kṛtanagara’s 
Tantric Buddhism provided the realm with a period 
of peace that was interrupted by his assassination, 
an act which plunged the world into a period of 
social disorder and evil. For the authors of the Par -
araton  and the kiduṅ , Kṛtanagara’s Tantric rituals 
(or more precisely, those of his behaviours that later 
historians have assumed were Tantric rituals) were 
his downfall. For the Chinese chroniclers, Kṛtana -
gara threatened world peace by resisting and even 
insulting the envoy of the ruler of heaven, but his 
religious practices were never mentioned. And at 
the other end, the Tibetan ’Phags-pa credited Khu -
bilai with the expansion of Buddhism and world 
order as cakravartin .
As a technique for obtaining power and con -
trol over the world, Tantric Buddhism—and 
especially its rituals—came to occupy the same 
place in 13th- and 14th-century Asian societies 
that science and technology occupies in our own 
time. The advocates of scientific method, like the 
advocates of Tantric Buddhism, have claimed that 
this method alone leads to knowledge and that 
knowledge is power. In his theological treatise 
Meditationes sacrae (1597), the early advocate 
of scientific method Francis Bacon wrote ipsa 
scientia potestas est (‘knowledge itself is power’) 
and in the 1651 edition of Leviathan  (written by 
Bacon’s secretary, the young Thomas Hobbes) we 
find the phrase scientia potentia est  for the first 
time.19 The order in which these phrases appeared 
19. In Novum Organum , t he later work in which the 
foundation of modern scientific method was first out -
lined, Bacon (1872 I: 222) wrote: ‘Now, the empire of man, 
over things, has its foundation exclusively in the arts and 
sciences; for it is only by an obedience to her laws, that 
Nature can be commanded’ ( Hominis autem imperium in 
res, in solis artibus et scientiis ponitur. Naturae enim non 
imperatur, nisi parendo ).  The spiritual practices of Tantric 
Buddhism that are supposed to bring the initiate to absolute 
knowledge—to God—are precisely those which are to rid 
the initiate of all attachment, desires, and the perspective 
of separation, just as in Baconian science it is necessary to 
bade mockup.indd   155 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 170] ---
156 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
in England reflects the priority of the ideology over 
its political expression. Political orientations and 
political actions are always preceded and oriented 
by beliefs about the way the world is, about who 
we are, and about how we ought to respond to the 
world in which we find ourselves. 
The parallels between 13th- and 14th-century 
Tantric Buddhism and technoscience in our time as 
a means—the only effective means—of controlling 
and remaking the world according to our own 
desires and demands do not end with the identifi -
cation of knowledge and power. Either the ruling class become initiates or the initiates become the 
ruling class, for in both cases it is the possession of 
power that is sought and the service of power that 
is actually realized. In the time of Kṛtanagara and 
Khubilai, as in our time, lives put into the service 
of power lead to war and global disorder, while 
those actors themselves proclaim that their way 
offers the sole effective means to a world of peace 
and justice. I stress the difference between effective 
and legitimate, for it is not the legitimacy of the 
regime (the service of any particular power) that 
matters but efficacy. For the mediaeval Mongol and 
Javanese kings as for the scientist and politician 
of today, what is achieved is its own justification 
because it has been achieved. The Tantric concep -
tion of knowledge as something to be obtained by 
particular methods and techniques is identical to 
the modern scientific conception of knowledge, 
and in both cases the acquisition of knowledge 
know Nature’s laws—reality as it is rather than as we desire 
it to be—in order to have the knowledge that would allow us 
to act effectively upon Her (gender is important here!). This 
is why knowledge alone confers true and effective power. 
But the initiate or scientist who desires knowledge in order 
to obtain power to rule over the world of man and nature is 
acting on the basis of desires that reflect the absence of that 
knowledge, and this perverts the entire enterprise. Were 
we to know the mind of God we would be lovers suffering 
for all creation, not tyrants dreaming of controlling her. 
As Davidson (2002: 161) noted, the ritual system of Tantric 
Buddhism ‘sacralized the political metaphor’, imagining 
the Buddha in the image of the kings of India. In similar 
fashion for Bacon and the science he founded, God is con -
ceived according to the Renaissance European ruler, as an 
all-powerful being imposing its will on all, and that both 
reveals Bacon’s failures as a theologian and predicts the 
future trajectory of science. is the acquisition of power as such, natural and 
supernatural. With the acquisition of complete 
and perfect knowledge through science, we shall 
become God:
If we do discover a complete theory, it should 
in time be understandable in broad principle 
by everyone, not just a few scientists. Then we 
shall all, philosophers, scientists, and just ordi -
nary people, be able to take part in the discus -
sion of the question of why it is that we and the 
universe exist. If we find the answer to that, it 
would be the ultimate triumph of human rea -
son—for then we would know the mind of God. 
(Hawking 1998: 191)
The desire for power and the means of obtain -
ing it does not arise from political conditions, but 
from our being born into the world and the ne -
cessity of negotiating our lives within that world. 
Living involves struggles in the realms of bodily 
existence, desires and frustrations, social relations, 
and natural environment. All questions of acting 
involve the exercise of power as they always entail 
consequences and corresponding actions in the 
world around us. We may act out of habit and in -
stinct or we may set our minds to learning about 
the world and adjusting our thoughts and actions 
in accordance with what we learn. The development 
of Tantric Buddhism and modern science were 
both responses to the world in a particular time 
and place, and both were/are oriented by the idea 
that knowledge is power, total knowledge being 
total power. 
Kṛtanagara and Khubilai both lived in a time 
of war and social crisis, and if we are to believe 
the histories that have been written, it seems that 
war and social crisis were in great part due to their 
own actions. They each lived in a world in which it 
was widely believed that only a single king could 
rule, however there may be many lesser rulers 
within his realm, a polity conceived as containing 
‘core zones of authority and buffer client states’ 
(Davidson 2002: 337). They both sought to rule 
as divine rulers with complete knowledge and 
complete power. Their social position set each of 
them certain problems of action, and in seeking to act within that world, they sought a means for 
securing their own effectiveness. Tantric Bud -
bade mockup.indd   156 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 171] ---
(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia?157
dhism supplied the most advanced and effective 
science known in their world and time. Were they 
living today, both would seek out the services of 
physicists and psychologists, just as Hitler secured 
the services of Heisenberg, Elizabeth Hecker, and 
Johannes Heinrich Schultz, while Roosevelt accept -
ed the services of Oppenheimer, Leo Szilard, Erik 
Erikson, and Jerome Bruner (among many others 
on both sides).20
When their two worlds came together, as they 
did during the diplomatic missions sent by Khu -
bilai to Kṛtanagara, submission or war loomed as 
the only two options. Both Kṛtanagara’s refusals to 
meet Khubilai’s demands and Khubilai’s repeated 
missions indicate that neither king was willing 
to submit to the other, since both were intent on 
being the one king within the realm; war was 
inevitable. Because the Mongol offers of peace via 
submission did not allow refusal we may assume 
that peace negotiations were not really ever at 
stake—only proper submission to Khubilai. We 
may assume the same for Kṛtanagara since no 
peace was ever concluded and in 1289 (?) an envoy 
from Khubilai was sent back to the Mongol court 
with an unambiguous refusal of Khubilai’s offer. 
Political and military actions both follow from 
the idea, the belief in, and the commitment to 
realizing heaven on earth through becoming God. 
War was therefore spiritual before it was ritual 
and physical.
What distinguishes this approach to the rela -
tion between religion and politics, what makes this 
analysis something other than realpolitik, is that 
by putting what one loves and serves at the root of 
human action—in other words, religion—the love 
of power (and realpolitik) becomes a love that can 
be overridden or contested by other loves. Those 
counter-loves may be proposed by religious teach -
ing or by encounter. Tantric Buddhism can thus 
be seen on the one hand as a response to political 
conditions, and on the other as creating those very 
conditions; in both cases, its existence produces 
the conditions for its use and manipulation by any 
actors in any contested political realm. 
20. The physicists enlisted are well known; for psycholo -
gists and the Third Reich, see Cocks 1997; for the Americans, 
see Hoffman 1992.If Tantric Buddhism is understood as a response 
to, and a creator of, social and political conditions, 
then the involvement of actors other than kings 
and rulers is important and perhaps crucial. The 
political role of ’Phags-pa’s Buddhism and that of 
other monks has often been investigated, as has 
the role of Buddhism in the policies of kings and 
rulers, although almost always from a perspective 
giving priority to the political. The importance 
of other agents—such as women—in determin -
ing the political and social conditions of Java and 
Mongolia has been given far less attention than it 
deserves. Both Worsley (1991) and O’Brien (2008) 
have stressed the importance of women in the Ja -
vanese conception of kingship, in particular the 
role of the queen in relation to the king and the 
nation. They have also noted Kṛtanagara’s associ -
ation with Tantric rites, which bring together male 
and female. Others have noted the involvement 
of Chabi in getting Khubilai to pursue initiation 
with ’Phags-pa, as well as attributing to her the 
idea of dividing Khubilai’s and ’Phags-pa’s realms 
between the earthly and the spiritual.21 If indeed 
these two kings loved power, they also seem to 
have loved their queens. Could it be that Tantric 
Buddhism was introduced to the courts in both Java 
and Mongolia not only because the kings believed 
that it would bring them power but more impor -
tantly because the women they loved realized that 
power was too dangerous to leave in the hands of 
men alone? A focus on the legitimating function 
of religion has kept the historians’ attention away 
from its guiding and constraining functions (its 
role in demanding, initiating, and directing as well 
as inhibiting change), and has led them to misun -
derstand or ignore the involvement of other agents 
(e.g., monks, women) situated differently than a 
king, perhaps acting upon assumptions other than 
realpolitik, and probably driven by other desires.   
In a recent study of a 14th-century Old Javanese 
kakavin , Mpu Tantular’s Sutasoma , O’Brien (2008) 
offered one of the most interesting variations on 
the Kṛtanagara-Khubilai war yet published. She 
has argued that Candi Jago made ‘a very clear 
21. Seyfort Ruegg (1991: 448) cites the Mongolian historian  
’Jig-med-rig-pa’i-rdo-rje as making this claim in his Hor 
Chos’byung  of 1918.
bade mockup.indd   157 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 172] ---
158 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
and eloquent statement about the status of Java -
nese kingship and the Singhasari dynasty’ and 
that Kṛtanagara had the monument made ‘as a 
statement to the world, perhaps even more so, as 
a warning to Khubilai’ (O’Brien 2008: 245). In her 
book on the Sutasoma she argued that the author 
attempted ‘literally to prove the royal divinity of 
Kṛtanagara and, given that his great-grandson, Rā -
jasanagara, was also practising a similar if not the 
same system of Buddhist mysticism, then he too 
was Wairocana in mortal embodiment’ (O’Brien 
2008: 245). According to her, the Sutasoma  was an 
allegory that utilized a story known to its readers—
the life of Kṛtanagara and the Mongol attempt to 
conquer Java—presented as a Buddhist tale to argue 
that Kṛtanagara had been a Buddha from birth. In 
her reading we are presented with a 14th-century 
interpretation of the spiritual meaning of the war 
in Java and the kings involved. It is a reading that 
is radically different from Berg’s readings of the 
kiduṅ , the Deśavarṇana , and the  Pararaton  because 
she has not tried to unmask the political realities 
falsified by the texts, but instead set out to under -
stand what the story meant and how it may have a 
historical analogue that its original readership (or 
audience) would (or at least might) have known 
and understood. 
O’Brien’s hypothesis is that in the protagonists 
of the Sutasoma  we can see the historical figures 
of Kṛtanagara (= Sutasoma himself), Khubilai (= 
Poruṣāda), Bajradevī (= Candravatī), Viṣṇuvard -
hana (= Mahāketu), Mahākāla (as himself), Ken 
Aṅrok (= Agrakumāra), and even Chinggis Khan (= 
Śūciloma). Prince Sutasoma must confront evil, yet 
violence is forbidden to him. In the final showdown 
with Poruṣāda (for which she would have us read 
Khubilai), she would like to see an analogy for the 
Kṛtanagara-Khubilai conflict, but of course the 
analogy could not extend to the actual historical in -
vasion for by that time Kṛtanagara was dead. In the 
climax, Sutasoma/Kṛtanagara defeats both Poruṣā -
da and Mahākāla through his ‘Buddha-Mind, the 
weapon of Absolute Knowledge’ (O’Brien 2008). 
The story thus read offers us the meaning of the 
Kṛtanagara-Khubilai relationship and the tensions 
of international relations in late 13th-century Asia 
as it was perhaps understood in 14th-century Java, and not as a 21st-century historian would write it. If O’Brien is on the right track here, then for Mpu 
Tantular and his readers, there was indeed (spi)
ritual warfare—as well as a naval campaign and 
land battles—for the 14th-century Javanese, and 
perhaps for Kṛtanagara and Khubilai as well.
In such a reading, the politico-military world 
of Kṛtanagara and Khubilai is nowhere legitimated 
by religious practices of any sort but understood 
entirely in terms of ‘the spirit of the times’, which 
was a spirit of war and conflicting territorial claims 
as a Buddhist saw it. Instead of Berg’s optative, we 
have a poet’s record of the resolution of a great 
crisis, the aversion of social collapse, and the es -
tablishment of peace. For the readers or hearers of that story, there were not only historical parallels 
to be drawn relating to the time of Kṛtanagara and 
Khubilai, but contemporary parallels as well, and, 
perhaps most importantly, lessons for the future. 
Mpu Tantular’s Sutasoma was, in similar fashion to 
his Arjunavijaya  in Worsley’s analysis, a story for 
the future rather than a dead statement about the 
past. No history worth reading can be otherwise. 
conclusion
Were the politico-military actions of Kṛtanagara 
and Khubilai legitimated or supported by their 
religious practices? Were their politico-military 
successes proof of the genuineness of their religious 
practices or indications of the superficiality and 
concealing function of the latter? The possibility of 
asking these questions challenges the assumption 
that the political and the religious dimensions of 
human action may be investigated and understood 
separately. Following Humphrey and Ujeed (2013: 
23) I would insist that while ‘Buddhism ... cannot 
be explained by given social practices, [it] is nev -
ertheless inflected by them—and vice versa’. The 
long history of philosophical and practical efforts to 
find a workable relationship between the religious 
and the political dimensions of social life suggests 
that their separation always leads to making a to -
talitarian religion out of politics or a totalitarian 
politics out of religion. 
Instead of always and only seeing religion as 
concealing political and economic realities, as 
a fiction maintained to ground and legitimize 
existing power structures and a ruling class, we 
bade mockup.indd   158 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 173] ---
(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia?159
may see religion as the expression of a judgement 
concerning the past and a will towards a desired 
future. Humphrey and Ujeed offer an excellent case 
of this when they argued that the genealogy com -
piled by Mergen Gegen ‘was little concerned with 
the preoccupations anthropologists have usually 
assigned to it, property and legitimate succession, 
but instead it created a framework through time for 
a moral world’ (ibid.: 91). The past being judged may 
be seen as a golden age, a time of previous peace to 
be re-established; it may also be seen as a chaotic 
period of violence from which the new powers will 
extricate us. This is precisely how Lokesh Chandra 
(1995c: 152) understood the description of Viṣṇu -
vardhana in the Jaka Dolog inscription. ‘The in -
ternecine assassinations were absolved by virtue of 
ushering in an era of peace and prosperity, kindness 
to the people ( kṛpālu ), and fervent devotion and 
dedication to Dharma’, Lokesh Chandra wrote, 
and ‘the past acts of coming to power had been 
blood-stained and their expiation was to ensure 
the continuance of his dynasty by political, social 
and religious achievements’ (ibid.). The making of peace was an achievement, the conquest of chaos 
and the establishment of social security.
Historiography is always and necessarily an 
attempt to interpret and ‘divine’ the meaning of 
events, and consequently belongs in the realm of 
the spiritual and the religious. It is never possible 
to argue about ‘what happened’ without making 
assumptions about the meaning of artefacts, the 
meaning of texts, the meaning of words, and the 
meaning of actions: whether an initiation into 
Tantric Buddhism is described as a religious ex -
perience or a political strategy will be determined 
in large part by how the historian understands 
religion, politics, and the relation between them. A 
historian who understands religion as a strategy for 
concealing political truths will produce a history 
like those encountered above in the historiography 
of the religious life of Khubilai and Kṛtanagara. 
A historian who does not make that reduction 
may not provide a better understanding, but the 
possibility of a more complex and perhaps better 
interpretation of the past at least remains open.
bade mockup.indd   159 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 174] ---
bade mockup.indd   160 11/7/16   11:40 PM

--- [Page 175] ---
PART II
ART , ARCHITECTURE,  
AND MATERIAL CULTURE
Part II.indd   1 12/7/16   3:18 PM

--- [Page 176] ---
Part II.indd   2 12/7/16   3:18 PM

--- [Page 177] ---
Chapter 7
Images of Devotion and Power in South 
 and Southeast Bengal
claudine bautze-picron
The importance of buddhist art in 
Eastern India from the 8th up to the 12th 
century has been recognized since the late 
19th century as a major source of inspiration for 
the arts of Tibet and Southeast Asia. This artistic 
period has been associated with ‘esoteric’ practices 
and rituals and shows aspects which can differ from 
region to region over the centuries. Eastern India is 
a vast geographical area that includes Bangladesh 
and the modern Indian states of Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Odisha, and West Bengal. Bengal (Bangladesh and 
the state of West Bengal) and Odisha stretch along 
the Bay of Bengal, and the former region—in par -
ticular South and Southeast Bengal, an area which 
extends from the south of Dhaka up to Chittagong—
was instrumental as the source of various aspects 
of Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia. 
This art is usually labelled as ‘Esoteric’ or 
‘Tantric’ and belonging to the Vajrayāna,1 and in 
inscriptions which mention them or in colophons 
of manuscripts which they had ordered to be 
produced, the Buddhists of Eastern India defined 
themselves as followers of the ‘excellent Mahāyā -
na’ ( pravaramahāyāna ; see below). The creation 
and development of a rich pantheon of characters, 
male and female, from the 6th century onwards, 
culminated in 12th-century Eastern India.2 But 
how was it really perceived and viewed? What were 
1. I am thankful to Christian Wedemeyer and other 
c
olleagues for having replied to my query on the use 
of this term in the H-Buddhism Log for March 2012  
(http://h-net.msu.edu/cgi-bin/logbrowse.pl?trx=lx -
&list=h-buddhism&user=&pw=&month=1203 ); see also 
Wedemeyer  2013: 9–10. 
2. See Linrothe 1999 for an in-depth study of the de -
velopment of the iconography of wrathful deities and its 
subsequent periods.its functions? And were all its different types of 
production, i.e. stone, terracotta, stucco or cast 
images, manuscript illuminations, cloth-paintings 
or murals, regarded in the same way, without for -
getting that images could also be visualized? It is 
beyond the scope of this chapter to try to answer 
these questions, which have already been assessed 
by authors in various different ways. For a long 
period, a major interpretation was the sectarian 
view, according to which the images are seen as re -
flecting a conflict between the Buddhist community 
and Brahmanical or Hindu society. More recently, 
Rob Linrothe has put them in a new perspective, as 
reflecting or symbolizing philosophical or religious 
experiences.3 This should however not lead us to 
abandon completely the more basic interpretation 
of some of these images as picturing deep tensions 
occurring between the different faiths existing in 
the region, which could surface and find expression 
in the art—thus acting as a form of religious propa -
ganda or helping to ease off the pressure.4 If images 
could be appreciated from different perspectives 
depending on the social position of the viewer, they 
also most probably reflect on the situation of the 
community of monks within society at large. Due 
to the extremely rich amount of material, we shall 
confine our attention here to art-historical material. 
From its very early period, the Buddhist com -
munity had entertained close relations with the 
royal power. This connection, which can already 
be surmised from the biography of the Buddha 
3. Linrothe (1990: 16–18 and passim) summarizes previous 
views on the topic. 
4. Se
e, for instance, Verardi 2011: 284–93, who analyses 
images of Cāmuṇḍā clearly betraying features of aggression 
towards the Buddhists. 
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   163 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 178] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia164
as recounted in the sources, survived through 
all the periods and found echoes in the imagery 
which emerged and developed as a language used 
within the Buddhist monastic community as well 
as among the laity. In the course of time, this visual 
language probably acted as intermediary between 
the different social groups: for instance, the image 
of the Buddha seated in bhadrāsana  commonly 
met with on the façades of excavated monuments 
in Maharashtra in the 5th and 6th centuries could 
convey different meanings when conceived, com -
missioned, and seen by monks on the one hand, and 
when seen by laypeople on the other. For the monks 
it referred to the Sermon on Mount Meru—where 
the Buddha taught while seated on the throne of 
Indra, king of the divine universe, signifying the 
Buddha as a universal and divine king ruler over all 
gods of the Brahmanical pantheon, and hence also 
his power over human rulers. For the laity it was an 
image showing the Buddha dispensing his wisdom 
to humans like them. I doubt that laypeople could 
consciously have read more into such an image.  
However, it is true that such iconographic features, 
i.e. a major character seated in bhadrāsana  on a lion 
throne, date back to the early centuries of our era, 
when it was used in depictions of Kushan rulers; it is 
thus possible to argue that these features remained 
lying in the collective imaginaire  as pertaining to 
the iconography of a ruler. 
Images thus bear multiple purposes and mean -
ings; their understanding occurs at different levels, 
some conscious, which I would qualify as ‘exoteric’, 
some unconscious, which I would regard as (to a 
certain degree) ‘esoteric’. What is exoteric here is 
the immediate perception of the depiction of the 
Buddha, seated on a lion throne, with hands joined 
in a specific gesture in front of the breast, which 
leads to the equally immediate identification of the 
Buddha as teacher. The esoteric element would be 
the subconscious knowledge that this image is one 
of royal power, portraying as it does a saintly man 
who became ruler of the universe as he could sit at 
the top of the Meru, occupying the throne of the 
king of the gods. This, I would add, is an under -
standing of the image that was willingly used by the 
Buddhist community on the façades of their mon -
uments in order to transmit a message of power to 
lay society at a certain period and in certain regions. This is not only the Buddha as a teacher, but it is 
the Buddha at the centre of the universe and thus 
teaching to the whole of society. This is not the use 
that is traditionally made of the term ‘esotericism’ 
in scholarly research, and one could argue that 
this interpretation actually concerns the symbolic 
message of the image. As a matter of fact, if one 
goes beyond the materiality of images—and this is 
the aspect with which I shall mainly be concerned 
here—then a mental, non material, conception of 
them emerges: the initiate creates an image which is 
part of an evanescent continuity and with which he 
either identifies ( sādhana ) or constructs a maṇḍala . 
Such spiritual practices have been described in texts 
such as the Sādhanamālā or the Niṣpannayogāvalī , 
whose rich iconographic material can help us to 
identify, i.e. to name, images actually cast, carved, 
or painted. But we should keep in mind that these 
texts describe another, purely visual, category of 
images, aimed as they were at practitioners involved 
in spiritual practices and not at serving as ‘user 
manuals’ for artists.   
Turning to Eastern India,5 and in particular to 
Bengal, where mainstream Buddhism flourished 
in the 11th and 12th centuries, we cannot ignore 
the strategic geographical position of the region, 
which makes it a crossroads between the Indian 
Subcontinent and mainland (as well as insular) 
Southeast Asia. This region, being traversed by 
monks not necessarily adept in the Mahāyāna, not 
to speak of its late esoteric phase, became a point of 
convergence of all monks visiting Eastern India and 
especially Bodh Gayā, which was and still is today a 
place where Buddhists from all over Asia meet. The 
main image of the temple was and still is venerated 
by Buddhists of every obedience, which implies that 
it bears different layers of interpretation: it can be 
Śākyamuni, but it can also be Vairocana (Bautze-
Picron  2010a: 33, 37–38 and passim). This may lead 
us to wonder about the context in which images 
of the Buddha in South Bengal were produced and 
worshipped, and by whom (see below). 
Buddhists excelled in the production of images 
of power. Images are basically of a material nature. 
5. For a general presentation of Buddhism in Eastern 
India from the 8th century onwards, see Niyogi 1980, Sen 
Majumdar  1983, and Chatterjee 1985: 230–356. 
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   164 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 179] ---
165 Images of Devotion and Power
They can, however, also be immaterial, such as those 
described in sādhana s, being created mentally and 
imbued with deep magical energy. These images 
have left no material traces; being ‘esoteric’ and 
‘subtle’, they were created by monks during their 
meditation. More than any material icon, a visual -
ized immaterial image allows the monk to identify 
with the deity evoked.
Material images likewise become active when 
brought to life through specific rituals performed 
after being carved or cast by artists. Thus, material 
images always lie in a grey area, bearing an aura 
which is not materially perceptible but is none -
theless existent. Some images are more powerful 
than others; such are the cult images which are 
the objects of regularly performed rituals. Other 
images, e.g. those distributed on the façades of 
monuments, do not undergo similar treatment and 
their meaning is altogether of a different nature: 
they may, for instance, illustrate various aspects of 
the deity, i.e. of the Buddha in a Buddhist context; 
they may help in defining the sanctuary as a place 
inhabited by the Buddha; or they may contribute 
to reflecting the universal presence of the Buddha.6
bengal, an ‘international’ region
There are different ways of approaching the vast 
topic that is the presence of similar Buddhist images 
in the countries bordering on the Bay of Bengal and 
the Andaman Sea. The relations between images 
and monuments dating back to the 8th century and 
later from Indonesia, mainly Java, but also Sumatra 
or Borneo, and the homeland of Buddhism were 
noted a long time ago. Bihar—more precisely the 
6. Such was the case of the temple at Bodh Gayā: before 
i
ts massive restoration in the 19th century, stucco images 
of the Buddha—more rarely of Bodhisattvas (e.g., Mañ -
juśrī)—were distributed in the niches now occupied by 
stone images (Cunningham 1892: pls. XII -B, XIV– XV). 
Monument 1 in Nālandā also had its façades with niches 
containing stucco images not only of the Buddha, but also 
of Mañjuśrī and Avalokiteśvara, and this major difference 
between the two monuments (and sites) can be accounted 
for by the fact that the Mahābodhi temple at Bodh Gayā is 
the ‘house’ of Śākyamuni par excellence; Mañjuśrī being 
an integral part of the Buddha iconography at Bodh Gayā 
(see below), his presence among the stucco images is not 
out of place. old Magadha—was considered to lie at the source 
of the ‘esoteric’ iconography noted in the Southern 
Seas. Recent research has, however, contributed to 
a more discerning appraisal of the situation during 
this fairly long period. Land routes within the 
Indian Subcontinent connected different regions 
and maritime routes crossed the Bay of Bengal and 
the Andaman Sea in all directions.7
Bengal is a vast region located at the convergence 
of different routes, from Assam and Yunnan in the 
east, Bagan and Arakan in the southeast, Odisha 
in the southwest, Bihar in the west, and Nepal and 
Tibet in the north and northwest. It is also a region 
of transition between sea and dry land, between 
South and Southeast Asia, with inland ways leading 
to harbours like Tamluk or Chittagong which were 
connected with maritime routes along which mer -
chants and monks travelled back and forth.8 Monks 
came from abroad to join the Mahāvihāras and par -
ticipate in the teachings that were dispensed there,9 
but also to go on pilgrimage to the places visited by the Buddha. They came from all over Asia, but 
relations between the Himalayan range, Bihar, and 
North Bengal were particularly intensive in the 11th 
and 12th centuries.10 In this context, monks from 
various countries and sects converged in particular 
7. See Huntington 1989 and 1990 for a presentation of the 
‘international legacy’ of the art of Eastern India, and Pande 
and Pandya Dhar  2004, which includes a number of papers 
dealing with various cultural, in particular iconographic, 
aspects shared by South and Southeast Asia.  
8. Mukherjee 2011 is an in-depth study of the position of 
Bengal within the Asian network. 
9. Besides monks from Tibet—as one could expect—
others from Sri Lanka professed their faith in Mahāyāna, 
i.e. esotericism; such was the case of Jayabhadra who came 
to study at Vikramaśīla (A. Chattopadhyaya 1981: 325). See 
also Frasch  1998: 76–77.
10. Some inscriptions inform us about the movements 
of monks. See for instance the 9th-century Ghosravan 
inscription mentioning the monk Vīradeva who originated 
from northwest India (Sastri 1942/1989: 89–91; Bautze-
Picron  2014a: 163, n. 4 for detailed references); the Bodh 
Gayā inscription of Vīryendra, native of Samatata (South-
east Bengal) and monk from Somapura (Paharpur) (Dutt 
1962: 375–76 with further references); and the 12th-century 
Nālandā inscription of Vipulaśrīmitra, related to monks 
from Somapura (Sastri 1942/1986: 103–5; Dutt 1962: 376). For 
a study of the Bodh Gayā inscriptions and of the foreign 
presence at the site, see Leoshko 1987: 26–75. 
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   165 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 180] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia166
at Bodh Gayā, which was at the centre of a centrip -
etal movement (Leoshko 1987: 40–56). Conflicts 
between monks originating from Sri Lanka and 
from the Himalaya are evoked in Tibetan historical 
sources, reflecting conflicts between Theravāda 
and Esoteric Buddhism.11 Similar conflicts seem 
to have arisen in Bagan during the early phase of 
the Bagan kingdom (Frasch 1998: 78), but from the 
second half of the 11th century onwards, Theravāda 
definitely grew stronger than Mahāyāna there.12 
The Bagan rulers took deep interest in the Bodhi 
tree and the attached temple, sending missions to 
Bodh Gayā to preserve and restore the monument.13  
In the reverse direction and as a final stately gesture 
vouching for the depth of the relation between the 
two sites, a copy of the Mahābodhi temple was 
erected most probably during the reign of King Na -
daungmya (r. ad  1211–ca. 1231) (Frasch 1998: 79–80, 
2000b: 41). Travelling all the way from Bagan up to 
Bodh Gayā, pilgrims had to cross Bengal, leaving 
artistic evidence of various natures: bronzes cast 
in Eastern India were discovered at Bagan,14 and 
stone images of the Buddha discovered in Bengal 
illustrate an iconographic programme encountered 
in the murals of Bagan and share stylistic similari -
ties with the 11th- and 12th-century stone carvings 
from this site.15 
11. Apparently, the site was also visited and inhabited by 
monks originating from Sri Lanka; the existence of a Ther -
avādin monastery in the close vicinity of the Bodhi temple 
is attested from the 4th century up to the 12th century 
(Frasch 2000a: 58, n. 7; 1998: 73–74). The Tibetan monk 
Dharmasvāmin, who visited the site in the 13th century, 
tells how he was advised by a śrāvaka  to throw the man -
uscript of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā , which he 
was carrying, into the river and not to worship images 
of Avalokiteśvara or the Tārā (Roerich 1959: 73–74). And 
Tāranātha records how ‘a large silver-image of Heruka … 
[was] smashed … into pieces … used … as ordinary money’ 
(A. Chattopadhyaya 1981: 279). 
12. This does not mean that Esoteric Buddhist monks 
were altogether absent from Bagan, but they did not hold 
a major function in the site.
13. As F
rasch (1998: 78–79) reminds us, there were three 
such missions during the Bagan period; see also Frasch 
2000b: 41–43. 
14. See L
uce 1969–70 III : pls. 445a, 446, 447a–d. 
15. Leoshko 1990; Allinger 2002; Lee 2009: figs. 24, 74, 
82–83, 90; Huntington  1984: figs. 222–23; A. Sengupta 1993: 
figs. 54–55.Besides this intense relation with nearby Burma, 
which is attested by various sorts of evidence, the 
region’s contacts extended beyond the seas. As 
mentioned below, Atīśa left his homeland to study 
in Suvarṇadvīpa, where he remained twelve years 
before returning to the continent and pursuing 
his brilliant academic career; and in the 11th to 
12th century the worship of Heruka, so important 
in the Delta, found direct continuation at Padang 
Lawas, a Buddhist site in North Sumatra. Likewise, 
East Java established itself as heir to iconographic 
topics illustrated in Bengal in the 13th century.16  
The presence of Buddhism in the region is well 
documented with sources of different natures, all 
showing how Eastern India in general, and Bengal 
in particular, held a fundamental position in the de -
velopment of Buddhism around that period: many 
names of scholars survived in the Buddhist canon 
(Niyogi 1987, 1988), and the rich poetic work of the 
Mahāsiddhas was not only preserved in old Bengali 
but also translated into Tibetan.17 Concerned with 
16. With regard to the names Hevajra and Heruka, see 
my n. 15 in Bautze-Picron 2014b. Mallmann (1986: 182–86) 
considers the names as being interchangeable when 
applied to some images, including the one encountered in 
Southeast Bengal; Linrothe (1999: 250), and following him 
Lee (2009), prefers retaining the name ‘Heruka’ for the 
images under consideration, underlining that the name 
refers to a ‘type’ but also to the ‘ultimate krodha-vighnān -
taka ’ depicted by these images. For the sake of easiness, 
but not necessarily being correct in view of Linrothe’s 
analysis, I shall retain here the name ‘Hevajra’ as in my 
previous study of the Padang Lawas material (Bautze-
Picron  2014b), but remain aware that more attention 
should be devoted to the topic. 
17. Shahidullah 1928; Moudud 1992; Dasgupta 1976: 3–109; 
Jackson 2004, with numerous references; Bagchi 1982: 64–75.  
Mahāsiddhas, whose iconography is well developed in Tibet 
(Robinson 1979; von Schroeder 2006; Linrothe 2006), found 
only a (timid) echo in the artistic representation of the 
region; for an example showing Śavaripa and probably 
from North Bengal or East Bihar, see Bautze-Picron 2007b: 
85 and pl. 10.9; for an individual portrait, probably from 
Lakhi Sarai: Bautze-Picron  1991–92: fig. 34 and Linrothe 
2006: cat. 4 188–89. Siddha s could also be depicted on the 
outer surface of petals of lotus maṇḍala s; see, for instance, 
Huntington and Bangdell 2003: cat. 68; Linrothe 2006: cat. 
5 190–93; Weissenborn 2012b: pl. 52. Emaciated ascetics, 
possibly situated in a rocky landscape, can be found in 
some stone images (for instance, see Fig. 7.6), a situation 
which might be related to the tradition of the Mahāsiddhas 
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   166 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 181] ---
167 Images of Devotion and Power
the history of Buddhism, Tibetan authors furnish 
ample information about Bengali scholars and the 
monasteries built in the region, as well as the local 
rulers who sponsored donations made to the Bud -
dhist community or were instrumental in fostering 
the foundation of monasteries.18 
Although these sources must always be ap -
proached gingerly, they do fortunately provide 
information that is not available from the Indian 
side. Due to the nature of the available documents, 
i.e. royal copperplates ratifying donations of land 
revenues, no details are indeed given concerning 
the real function or position of Buddhist monks 
at the court, or the genuine spiritual beliefs of the 
rulers.19 Data collected from local archaeology, 
epigraphy, and art history will be summarized 
here with a view to reappraising this part of the 
material and place it within its geographical and 
historical contexts. 
and of the Aris in Bagan (Bhattacharya 1994). An isolat -
ed and distant group of low reliefs showing siddha s and 
carved on the façade of caves is to be seen at Panhāle Kājī 
in Maharashtra (Deshpande 1986 and 1989). 
18. See in particular Tāranātha (D. Chattopadhyaya 1 980) 
and Sumpa (Das 1908).
19. The p
resence of the Buddhist seal at the top of the 
copperplates of the Pāla rulers and the fact that they label 
themselves as paramasaugata  cannot be considered to 
be definite evidence of the affiliation of the kings to the 
last esoteric phase of Buddhism. As seen in the inscrip -
tions also, the recipients or donators respect the ‘excellent 
Mahāyāna’ (see below), and this is perhaps how they really 
felt. No local information is preserved which would vouch 
for the interference of monks in the royal function. Quite 
on the contrary, I would suggest that, at least in South 
Bengal—in the region of Vikrampur-Maināmatī—it was 
the Brahmins who might have held a major position in 
specific rituals. Remains of only one Hindu temple were 
recovered on the Devaparvata, i.e. Maināmatī, which 
recalls the situation encountered at Bagan from the 11th 
century onwards, where we know that the Brahmins were 
involved in rituals related for instance to the foundation 
of the royal palace (see Bautze-Picron 2009b: 434). An 
important piece of information is however given in a 
biography of Śākyaśrībhadra (1140–225), who acted ‘as 
chaplain to the king of Jayanagara for some time’ (Jackson 
1990: 11, 18 n. 1) and had visions of Maitreya while at court 
(ibid.: 10). Jayanagara was most probably the modern 
village of Jaynagar located south of Lakhi Sarai, where 
12th-century Buddhist images were recovered in large 
numbers (Bautze-Picron  1991–92: 239–41).  political landscape
Numerous inscribed copperplates have been recov -
ered throughout Bihar and Bengal; the information 
that they contain is manifold and brings light to 
various aspects of the regional history, their main 
purpose being to record donation of land. They 
mention kings and their genealogy, name the re -
cipient, and describe the land that is given. While 
naming the rulers who authorized the donation, 
the texts also mention their religious affiliation: 
the Pālas, mainly ruling in Bihar, West and North 
Bengal from the 8th up to the 12th century, and 
the Candras, ruling in Southeast Bengal from the 
10th century up to ca. ad  1050 are two dynasties 
that officially claimed to be Buddhist. The king was 
described as paramasaugata , and the seal bearing 
the Buddhist symbol of the wheel flanked by two 
deer was affixed at the top of their copperplates, 
above the name of the ruler. 
The Pālas —When considering the recipients of 
the donation which these copperplates record, it 
should be noted that they are very rarely mentioned 
as being Buddhist: of all the official inscriptions of 
the Pāla rulers, only five out of twenty-two concern 
a donation made to a Buddhist institution, all the 
others referring to donations towards Brahmins or 
Brahmanical temples dedicated to Viṣṇu or Śiva.20  
These five donations which were made during the 
reigns of the early Pālas (8th–9th century) in Bihar 
and North Bengal are recorded in the two Nālandā 
inscriptions of Dharmapāla and his son Devapāla 
respectively, the so-called Murshidabad inscription 
of the first ruler, the Jagjivanpur inscription of his 
grandson Mahendrapāla, and the Mohipur inscrip -
tion of Gopāla II, son of Śūrapāla, the second son of 
Devapāla.21 Already in that period, the rulers might 
20. G. Bhattacharya (2000: 441–42) lists nineteen inscrip -
tions. See the following n. for the inscriptions regarding 
donations to the Buddhist community and which might 
have been discovered after the publication of Bhattacharya’s 
paper. See also Sen Majumdar 1983: 144–50. 
21. Nālandā inscription of Dharmapāla: see G. Bhattacha -
rya 2000: 441 no. 1 and S. Bhattacharya 1985: 124, 154–55 no. 
31 for further references. So-called Murshidabad copper -
plate of the same ruler: G. Bhattacharya 2000: 441 (second 
group) no. 1; see Furui 2011: 145 on the find-spot of the plate. 
Nālandā copperplate of Devapāla: see G. Bhattacharya 
2000: 441 no. 4 and S. Bhattacharya 1985: 125, 154–55 no. 33  
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   167 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 182] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia168
also have recognized donations made towards 
Brahmins or a Brahmanical temple, a practice 
which was to be preserved by their descendants.  
At the same time, Brahmins also appear as lay 
Buddhist donors responsible for the production 
of manuscripts as shown by Jinah Kim.22  
The official inscriptions of the first Pāla rulers 
reflect a continuous tradition of donations made to 
the saṅgha  by the king but also by his subjects, the 
sovereign ratifying the donation of land revenues 
for the upkeep of the institution while his subjects 
had provided the funds for the initial donation. 
Tibetan sources, however, mention that Dharmapā -
la had been involved in the establishment of the 
great monasteries of Vikramaśīla and Somapura 
(Paharpur, North Bengal),23 and seals were discov -
ered in situ at Paharpur naming the monastery 
śrīsomapure śrīdharmapāladevamahāvihārīyārya- 
bhikṣusaṁghasya .24 The recent discovery of a cop -
perplate inscribed in the year 26 of the ruler’s reign 
confirms this link in referring to a donation of land 
plots for the upkeep of a community of monks at 
the Somapura-Mahāvihāra.25 
for further references. Jagjivanpur inscription of Mahen -
drapāla: G. Bhattacharya 2000: 442 (second group) no. 2. 
Mohipur copperplate of Gopāla  II: Furui 2008. 
22. See Kim 2013: 236–47. It is perhaps within this context 
that one should consider the contents of tortoise-shell in -
scriptions discovered at Vajrayoginī (Vikrampur): both 
the Buddha and Vāsudeva, i.e. Viṣṇu, are praised side by 
side (Sircar 1949; Biswas 1995: 58). See also Prasad 2011a: 
130, noting that in Southeast Bengal, donations were made 
to Brahmins rather than to Buddhist monasteries and that 
donations made to the monasteries had been done in a spe -
cific limited area; and Prasad 2010 for a study of donors of 
images in Southeast Bengal who rightly remarks ‘a general 
absence of donation of any Buddhist deity by any member 
of society in early medieval Comilla, Sylhet, Noakhali and 
adjoining parts of Tripura’ (ibid.: 34). 
23. A. Ch
attopadhyaya 1981: 274–83; Niyogi 1980: 52–59; 
Majumdar 1971: 115; Sen Majumdar  1983: 125–27, 128–31.  
24. Dikshit 1938: 90; Niyogi 1980: 21–22, 52–59; Furui 
2011: 155, n. 26.
25. See G
. Bhattacharya 1994 and 2000: 442. See Furui 
2011: 145 for a reading of the plate and for discussion of the 
find-spot: this was initially thought to be in the Murshi -
dabad district but the author suggests that—considering 
the information given in the inscription—it must have 
originated further north (South Dinajpur district in West 
Bengal; Dinajpur or Bogra districts in Bangladesh). Even though the eulogy may start with the 
evocation to the Buddha and the ruler mentioned 
as paramasaugata , its text reveals that the world 
of Hindu gods was an integral part of the ruler’s 
culture.26 In the case of the official inscriptions 
of the Pāla and Candra rulers, who acknowledge 
their Buddhist faith through the seal fixed at the 
top of the copperplates and the label paramasauga -
ta, we hardly find any mention of female or male 
characters of the Vajrayāna. This does not imply 
that the individuals involved in the act of dona -
tion were not aware of this form of Buddhism: for 
instance, Mahendrapāla’s army chief who had the 
monastery built for which the donation was made 
is named Vajradeva ( G. Bhattacharya 2000: 436). 
In the Devapāla Nālandā, the Mahendrapāla Jag -
jivanpur, and the Gopāla II Mohipur inscriptions, 
the donations were similarly made 
for the worship, copying etc. accordingly of 
the lord Buddha-bhaṭṭāraka, of the abode of 
all the leading virtues like the Prajñāpāramitā 
etc., of the multitude of the noble Avaivarttika 
Bodhisattvas, [and] for garments, food, lying 
and sitting accommodation, meditation and 
personal belongings etc. of the community of 
noble Buddhist monks [belonging to the] Eight 
classes of great personages [and] for repairing 
work [of the monastery] when damaged and 
broken.27
26. Let us briefly observe that, as one could expect (see 
Bautze-Picron  2010a: 39, n. 91), it is the Vaiṣṇava mythology 
that is predominant in all inscriptions, with numerous 
analogies being drawn between the king and the god. The 
transition from one belief to the other at this ‘official’ level 
is made during the rule of the Candras in South Bengal 
(see below).
27. G. Bhattacharya (2000: 444–45) remarks how 
similar the formulation is between the Nālandā and Jag -
jivanpur texts, which he translates as ‘noble Buddhist 
monks (belonging to the) Eight classes of great person -
ages’ ( aṣṭamahāpuruṣapudgalāryabhikṣu saṁghasya ). Cf. 
Mukherji 1992: 172 (whose translation is, however, unreli -
able). Furui (2008: 70) writes: ‘making the grant…. to the 
Buddha, the abode ( sthāna ) of all Dharmanetrīs beginning 
with the Prajñāpāramitā, a group ( gaṇa ) of non-returning 
(avaivarttika ) Bodhisattvas, and to the bhikṣu-saṁgha  as 
an embodiment of the eight great persons ( aṣṭa-ārya-pu -
ruṣa )… according to their ranks. This was for the following 
purpose: worship, offerings and rituals…’. I wish to quote 
here an email by Peter Skilling, dated 16 March 2009, re -
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   168 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 183] ---
169 Images of Devotion and Power
Southeast Bengal —Out of the thirty-five in -
scriptions that Swapna Bhattacharya  had collected 
in 1985 in her study of the epigraphic material from 
Bengal and Bihar28 and which were found in South -
east Bengal—from Faridpur district up to Chit -
tagong, most having been discovered in Maināmatī 
and the area of Vikrampur—only nine refer to a 
Buddhist recipient, all other beneficiaries being 
Brahmins.29 As mentioned above, the Candras 
who ruled from Vikramapura in the 10th and 11th 
plying to a question formulated by myself: ‘Avaivartaka is a 
quality of a bodhisattva, usually connected with the eighth 
stage ( bhūmi )—a significant point because he cannot turn 
back, but must go on to full awakening.… One interesting 
thing about the inscriptions—only a handful, which belong 
to the Pāla period in Eastern India—is that they seem to 
take us from the ideal world of the texts—in which the 
ascent though the bhūmi s takes many lifetimes—to the 
‘‘real world’’ community of the monks, the saṁgha . Usually 
the inscriptions record donations to the mahāyanika-avai-
vartaka-bhikṣu-saṁgha —the community of avaivartaka  
Mahāyāna monks. In at least one case, the compound is 
preceded by the “eight noble individuals” ( aṣṭa-ārya-pud -
gala) or similar terminology of Śrāvaka attainments…. 
The question is: were the monks of the vihāra s in question 
actually regarded as having these attainments? Did they 
so proclaim themselves? Usually Buddhist tradition is dis -
creet—or in some contexts restrained by Vinaya—about 
proclaiming one’s spiritual achievements. Or is the phrase 
simply a rhetoric that expresses the perceived worthiness 
of the recipients of dāna  by the donor(s), or, more properly, 
by the eulogist(s)? In any case the term does not mean ‘‘the 
Mahāyāna Avaivartaka Buddhist sect’’ as it has sometimes 
been translated. In fact, the inscription(s) that mention the 
āryapudgala  and the avaivartaka  in the same breath are 
good examples for the fact that Śrāvakayāna (Hīnayāna, if 
one likes) and Mahāyāna lived under the same monastic 
roof and shared the same ideological bed. Again the idea 
of ‘‘sect’’ is quite inappropriate’. 
28. Se
e S. Bhattacharya 1985: 150–61. More copperplates 
have been discovered since S. Bhattacharya submitted her 
PhD, but their content does not invalidate the observations 
based on her list. Importance is to be attributed to the 
content of the mid 9th-century inscription discovered at 
Jagjivanpur, a site located in Malda district, West Bengal: 
it records a donation made towards the Nandadīrghika 
Udraṅga Mahāvihāra by Mahendrapāla’s general Vajradeva 
for the worship of (Buddhist) deities and the performance 
of rituals including the copying of manuscripts (G. Bhat -
tacharya 1992). 
29. Se
e Furui 2013 for a study of the position of the Brah -
mins in Bengal. However, this is not decisive with regard 
to the situation of Buddhism among the society: Brahmins centuries30 claimed to be paramasaugata and had 
the Buddhist seal and their names affixed to the 
top of their copperplates (Sircar 1973: 20, 51). All 
inscriptions of Śrīcandra start with devotion being 
paid to the Jina, i.e. the Buddha, the Dharma, and 
the saṅgha (Sircar 1973: 51), whereas his grandson 
Laḍahacandra (r. 1000–1020) claims his affiliation 
to Viṣṇu while preserving the Buddhist seal affixed 
to his copperplates ( Sircar 1969–70: 199; 1973: 45–49, 
51–54). As for Laḍahacandra’s successor, Govin -
dacandra, he also preserves the seal and is named 
paramasaugata , but the content of his inscription is 
uniquely Brahmanical.31 From around the middle 
of the 11th century, the Candras were followed by 
the paramavaiṣṇava  Varmans who also ruled from 
Vikramapura (Majumdar 1971: 197–204) and at a 
still later period, the site became the capital of the 
Senas, themselves devotees of Sadāśiva. 
A clear shift in the religious affiliation of the 
rulers in the region thus took place towards 1050.32 
The Buddhist community could still, however, enjoy 
royal support in the region of Comilla at a later 
period: an inscription dated 1141 Śaka, i.e. ad 1219, 
was incised in the 17th regnal year of Raṇavaṅka -
malla Harikāladeva, who claimed to be Buddhist; 
the inscription confirms the donation of land for the upkeep of a vihāra  erected in the city of Paṭṭik -
erā and dedicated to Durgottārā.
33 As a matter of 
fact, although no major donation to the Buddhist 
community can be anymore ascribed to a ruler af -
terwards, Buddhism remained present in Paṭṭikerā, 
a region that entertained close contacts with nearby 
could also become Buddhist and commission the produc -
tion of manuscripts (see Kim 2013: 238–40). 
30. See S. Bhattacharya 1985: 125–26, 154–56, inscriptions 
no. 38–50. See also Biswas 1995: 11–26 for a presentation of 
the history of the region.  
31. Sircar 1969–70: 199; 1973: 49–51, 54–55; S. Ghosh 
2008–9: 112–13; Prasad (2011a: 129) suggests ‘a gradual loss 
of Buddhist hegemony in Samataṭa’ in the 11th century.
32. For a survey on the ‘Religious condition of Vanga and 
Samatata’, see Biswas 1995: 51–60. 
33. See D.C. Bhattacharya 1933: 283–84. The region, 
kingdom, or city known as Paṭṭikerā was part of the region 
of Samataṭa and is already mentioned in inscriptions of 
the Candras from Ladahancadra’s reign; it was located 
east from Comilla in Tripura district (old Tippera) (S. 
Bhattacharya 1985: 264; see also D.C. Bhattacharya 1933: 
285–86).
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   169 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 184] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia170
Bagan.34 And in an inscription dated 1158 Śaka, i.e. 
ad 1236, Gautamadatta, minister of the Vaiṣṇava 
ruler Dāmodaradeva, was ‘said to be “devoted to the 
feet of Śrī-Gautama”’ (Dani 1954: 186–87, line 16). As 
we will see below, even in the absence of royal pa -
tronage, the Buddhist community was active in the 
region, with manuscripts being produced around the 
beginning of the 12th century. Political relations and 
trade with the neighbouring kingdom of Bagan also 
characterize this period (Bautze-Picron, 2015), these 
connections being part of a wider network linking 
Bagan to Bodh Gayā, where the Burmese undertook 
restorations of the temple (Frasch 2000b: 41–42). 
lay practitioners and their  
manuscripts
From the numerous manuscripts produced during 
this period, many are richly illustrated with images 
of male and female characters, and many are de -
scribed in texts such as the Sādhanamālā .35 Few 
colophons give any information as to the place 
of production; when given, this site is often said 
to be Nālandā, whereas a number of manuscripts 
were produced in various sites.36 As Jinah Kim ’s 
research shows, most manuscripts produced in the 
12th century reflect a dramatic change in the nature 
of the donors—henceforth, lay practitioners. The 
production still, however, seems to be important 
in Bihar and probably North Bengal; although no 
indication of the site of production is given for them, 
a small number of manuscripts can be considered 
to have been produced in the region of Vikrama -
pura-Maināmatī, since their colophons refer to 
rulers of Southeast Bengal. 
A manuscript was probably produced at 
Vikramapura during the reign of Govindacan-
34. See Bautze-Picron 2014b; on this kingdom and its 
location, see Majumdar 1971: 257–59. 
35. Exhaustive bibliographies on illuminated manuscripts 
are included in the works of Karen Weissenborn (2012b) 
and Jinah Kim (2013).
36. As re
ported by Weissenborn (2012a), the site is unre -
corded in thirty-three manuscripts; it is given as Nālandā 
in seven cases and various other sites in ten further exam -
ples, among which a manuscript may have been produced 
at Somapura as suggested by J. Losty 1989b (as quoted by 
Weissenborn 2012a: 298 no. 26). dra;37 three others were donated during the reign 
of Harivarman, two being illustrated38 and dated 
in the regnal years 8 and 19 respectively whereas 
the third, not illustrated, bears the date of 39.39 The 
first reproduces the Pañcaviṁśatisāhasrikā Pra -
jñāpāramitā  and has for donor ‘Rāmadeva who 
is said to be a follower of the excellent Mahāyāna 
(Figs. 7.1, 7.16–17). The writing of the manuscript                                                               
was completed in the eighth year of the prosperous 
reign of Mahārājādhirāja Parameśvara, Parama -
bhaṭṭāraka, Paramavaiṣṇava Śrīmad Harivarma 
Deva in the month of Kārttika, on the twelfth day of 
the moon, on Wednesday in the constellation of Ut -
tarāphālgunī’ (B. Bhattacharya 1944: 18). The second, 
preserved in the Varendra Research Museum in Ra -
jshahi, contains the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā .40 
The third, kept in the library of the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal in Kolkata, includes the Vimalapra-  
37. See Weissenborn 2012: 308 no. 43 for further references.
38. Bautze-Picron  1 999 and 2009a; Weissenborn 2012a: 
301–2 nos. 31 and 33, with further references. 
39. See Majumdar  197 1: 201,  n. 1 for a discussion concern -
ing the two dates given in this third manuscript, which 
would imply that Harivarman ruled at least forty-six years, 
starting his reign in 1073 or 1074.
40. See S
iddhanta 1979: 383–84, where the manuscript is 
dated in the 19th regnal year; the six paintings are repro -
duced in Bautze-Picron 1999: pls. 13.32–35, 40–41, and pp. 
192–93; see also p. 160 for further references. 
Fig. 7.1: Mañjuśrī as Dharmadhātu Vāgīśvara (detail of 
ms. from Harivarman’s regnal year 8; Baroda Museum inv. E.G.121). (Photo courtesy of Birgit Breitkopf)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   170 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 185] ---
171 Images of Devotion and Power
bhā, a commentary on the Kālacakratantra .41  
A further illustrated manuscript donated in 
the regnal year 47 of Lakṣmanasena was possibly 
produced in this part of Bengal, considering the fact 
that the ruler was then reigning from Vikramapu -
ra.42 The same can be said of an illuminated man -
uscript of the Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra :43 although no 
precise date or location is given in the colophon, 
the style of the paintings includes features noted 
in the manuscripts of Harivarman’s reign, and 
the subdued colours profoundly differ from the 
vibrancy reflected by the manuscripts produced 
at Nālandā.44  Two basic features seem to charac -
terize the paintings of South Bengal: stylistically, 
line clearly prevails over volume, i.e. the surfaces 
are flat and covered with plain colours, and, as 
far as iconography is concerned, we observe a 
tendency towards a narrative rendering rather 
than the clear iconic images seen in manuscripts 
from Bihar or North Bengal. This is illustrated 
particularly well in a manuscript—the present 
location of which is unfortunately unknown, but 
which was photographed in the monastery of Nor 
in the 1930s—which Eva Allinger analysed, con -
cluding that it is to be related to the art ‘of Bagan 
and eastern Bengal’.45
Depicted in the pedestals of images of the Tārā, 
Avalokiteśvara, and Mañjuśrī (Figs. 7.2, 7.21, 7.23) 
that are carved in the region is the worship of the 
manuscript which lies on a stand, beside which sits 
a monk wearing a ‘pointed cap’ and holding the two 
classical attributes of the ritual, i.e. the bell and the 
vajra .46 From comparison of images of Mañjuśrī 
41. Shāstri 1917: 79–82: the author supposes that the river 
‘Veng’ mentioned in the post-colophon was located in 
Jessore district (also mentioned by Majumdar 1971: 201, n. 1). 
42. Kim 2013: 59, Ms. D10; Weissenborn 2012a: 294 no. 
24, with further references.
43. Losty 1989a; Weissenborn 2012a: 311 no. 48; Kim 2013: 
57, Ms. B5. 
44. B autze-Picron  1999: 162; Kim 2013: 106 after Losty 
1989a: 5. 
45. See Allinger 2010: 36–38 and fig. 6. Two narrative 
texts that were illustrated in the region and in Nepal are 
the Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra and the Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra , e.g. 
Weissenborn 2012a: 310–11 and  Allinger 2008. 
46. B autze-Picron  1995: 61–62 and figs. 5–7, 10–11, 17, 22; for 
illustrations, see Lee 2009: figs. 16, 19, 27, 31, 95–96; fig. 80 
shows the monk alone with no depiction of the manuscript; in North (Fig. 7.3) and Southeast Bengal (Fig. 7.2) 
it immediately emerges that this double motif, i.e. 
the manuscript on the stand and the monk with 
pointed cap, is not only repeatedly encountered in 
the art of the region, but also occupies a predom -
inant place in the ornamentation of the pedestal. 
The manuscript is also one of the Bodhisattva’s 
major attributes from an early period on; besides, 
Mañjuśrī is one of the Bodhisattvas encountered 
by Sudhanakumāra in his quest for wisdom and 
this is also a rare example of this iconographic motif at the 
bottom of a Buddha image.
Fig. 7.2: Mañjuśrī (Chandimura, Lalmai, Comilla Dis-trict; Rammala Library, Comilla). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   171 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 186] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia172
knowledge (see below). He is thus clearly an image 
reflecting the fundamental importance attribut -
ed to this quest gained through the production, 
reading, and worship of manuscripts. 
geography and the archaeology of 
monasteries
North Bengal —Major Buddhist sites are located 
in North Bengal:47 Paharpur or Somapura, known 
47. See Niyogi 1980: 50–61 for a survey of the monasteries 
in North Bengal; see ibid.: 61–65 for the monasteries in West from inscriptions and written sources as a mon -
astery, is said to have been founded in the second 
half of the 8th century by Dharmapāla, probably 
on the remains of an earlier religious structure.48  
East from Paharpur, Mahasthangarh was a major 
city in the region for a very long period. Though 
apparently occupied up to quite a late period, none 
of these sites seem to have taken a very active part 
in the late phase of Esoteric Buddhism, embodied 
in Paharpur by the fragment of a small image of 
Hevajra embracing his Prajñā.49 Besides Somapu -
ra, another ‘Great monastery’ (Mahāvihāra) was 
located at Jagaddala, the foundation of which is 
attributed to Rāmapāla in the second half of the 
11th century (Niyogi 1980: 59–60). Its precise loca -
tion in North Bengal had long remained uncer -
tain; however, excavations led at Jagdal in Naogaon 
District, North Bangladesh, a site situated some 
twenty kilometres from Paharpur, revealed Bud -
dhist remains, including another—very delicately 
carved—small image of Hevajra and his Prajñā em -
bracing each other, which might support the iden -
tification of the site with the famous monastery.50 
Large 11th- and 12th-century images of Mañ -
juśrī teaching (Fig. 7.3), of the Tārā (Fig. 7.4) and of 
Mārīcī (Fig. 7.5) were recovered in a vast area that 
roughly coincides with the Division of Rajshahi 
and the Dinajpur District in Bangladesh, and the 
districts of South Dinajpur (Dakshin Dinajpur) and 
Malda in the Indian state of West Bengal.51 West 
Bengal. To her survey, one may add the monastery discov -
ered and excavated recently at Jagjivanpur (Roy 2002). See 
also Dutt 1962: 328–80 for a survey of the Mahāvihāras and 
the monasteries during the Pāla period. Ranjusri Ghosh 
carried out intensive fieldwork in South and North Dina -
jpur districts ( R. Ghosh 2006–7, 2008–9, 2012). 
48. See Lefèvre 2012: 239–40 for a summary of the various 
hypotheses; the author himself suggests that the Buddhist 
monument was built on the remains of a Brahmanical temple.
49. Today preserved in the Indian Museum, Kolkata: see 
D. Mitra 1989: 182 and figs. 1–2; A. Sengupta 1993: fig. 40; 
and Niyogi 2001: figs. 39–40. 
50. See Zakariah 1994 and Miah 2003: 153 pl. 11.6; see also 
Nazimuddin Ahmed in Banglapedia . 
51. Tod
ay preserved in the Varendra Research Museum, 
Rajshahi. For the Mañjuśrī images, see Bautze-Picron 1993a: 
151–52, n. 15; see also the following references: Rahman 1998: 23 and pls. 28–29, 39, and A. Sengupta 1993: fig. 41. 
For the Mārīcī images, see Bautze-Picron 2001a: 268–69, 
Fig. 7.3: Mañjuśrī (Niyamatpur, Rajshahi District; Na-tional Museum of Bangladesh). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   172 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 187] ---
173 Images of Devotion and Power
from this wide region was located the monastery 
of Vikramaśīla (today Antichak, on the south bank 
of Ganga River, Bhagalpur District, state of Bihar), 
the foundation of which is also attributed to Dhar -
mapāla.52 The site opens the way to Magadha and 
its fundamental seats of learning, like Nālandā for 
instance, or to the pilgrimage route connecting all 
sites visited by the Buddha. As revealed by a very 
large number of stone images carved in the 12th 
century and found around the city of Lakhi Sarai, 
a place situated on the route between the Mahāvi -
hāras of Nālandā and Vikramaśīla (Bautze-Picron  
1991–92), the area held a crucial role in the region 
288 no. 35–38, fig. 18, and also Rahman 1998: 45–46 and 
pls. 62–63.  
52. Se
e above, n. 23.during this period. One of the villages located in 
the southern suburbs of the town is Jaynagar, where 
important images were recovered,53 and which might 
well be the old Jayanagara where once stood the royal 
palace of a Pāla ruler, at whose court the Kashmiri 
scholar Śākyaśrībhadra resided for some time in 
the second half of the 12th century (see above, n. 19). 
As neighbouring regions, North Bengal and 
Bihar are closely related. In the 11th and 12th cen -
turies, the Buddhist artistic production of both 
regions shared profound aesthetic similarities that 
are clearly distinguished from the artistic trend 
53. To the references listed in Bautze-Picron 1991–92 is to 
be added the recently published paper by J. Kim (2012) on 
the nun who donated an Avalokiteśvara image (cf. Bautze-
Picron 1991–92: 256, A.9). 
Fig. 7.4: Tārā (Jagdal, Naogaon District; Paharpur 
site Museum). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)Fig. 7.5: Mārīcī (Narikelbaria, Paba, Rajshahi District; Varendra Rersearch Museum). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   173 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 188] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia174
characterizing the production in South Bengal. The 
iconography is also directly in the circle of influ -
ence of Bihar, whereas specific iconic formulations 
emerge in the southern regions.
South and Southeast Bengal54—South of Dhaka, 
the site of Bikrampur, i.e. Vikrampura (also named 
Vikramapurī), covers a very large area over which 
some seventeen or eighteen villages are scattered 
and which is limited by the Dhaleshvari River to 
the north and the Meghna to the east.55 The village 
of Vajrayoginī is said to be the birthplace of Atīśa 
(982–1054), who belonged to a royal family.56 Atīśa, 
also known as Dīpaṅkaraśrījñāna, left Bengal, 
probably in ad  1012, to study under Dharmakīrti 
‘of Suvarṇadvīpa’, often identified with Sumatra 
although this was recently interpreted as a general 
name for the region of Southeast Asia.57 He re -
turned to Bengal in ad  1025, having spent twelve 
years under the guidance of Dharmakīrti in the 
kingdom of the ruler Cūḍāmaṇivarmadeva, who is 
also remembered for having had a monastery built 
in Nākappaṭṭiṉam during the reign of Rājarāja 
around ad  1005.58 
54. See Niyogi 1980: 65–86 for a survey of the monasteries 
located in the region. Special attention should be paid to the 
PhD Thesis on the Buddhist art of the Dhaka region which 
was presented in 2009 at the University of Texas, Austin, 
by Eun-Su Lee, whose life tragically ended prematurely. 
55. As me
ntioned and described by A.M. Chowdhury in 
Banglapedia , the area has greatly suffered and much trans -
formed in the course of centuries through the evolution 
of the rivers, mainly the Padma, which runs south of the 
area (see also Abu Musa 2000: 1–4). 
56. See A
bu Musa 2000: 11–12; on Atīśa, see Eimer 1979: 
182–96 and A. Chattopadhyaya 1981: 56–66. 
57. Eim
er 1979: 182–96; A. Chattopadhyaya 1981: 84–96; 
Cœdès 1964: 259, 264. See Skilling 1997: 188 for his and 
Wheatley’s opinions concerning the location of Suvarṇad -
vīpa. For the traditional views on the location, see Bautze-
Picron  2014b, n. 79. ‘Śrīvijayapura (or Vijayanagara) of 
Suvarṇadvīpa’, where Dharmakīrti lived, can thus be 
tentatively located in South Sumatra (Palembang) (ibid.: 
n. 80; Schoterman this volume) or in the Malay Peninsula 
(Kedah) (Skilling 1997: 188–91 sums up the evidence), both 
regions being practically equidistant from the region of 
Padang Lawas, another major Buddhist site of the 11th and 
12th centuries (on the Buddhist remains of this Sumatran 
site, see Bautze-Picron  2014b). 
58. A. Chattopadhyaya 1981: 88; Cœdès 1964: 259–64; 
Skilling 1997: 188; Sen 2009: 67; Seshadri 2009: 125. See Guy Vikramapura was the capital of various Hindu 
kings who ruled in the region. The initial centre of 
power of the Candras who ruled in the 10th and 
11th centuries was located on the Devaparvata, i.e. 
Maināmatī, before Vikramapura became their 
administrative seat during Śrīcandra’s reign (ca. 
ad 930–75). They were followed by the Varmans, 
who ruled in the 11th and the first half of the 12th 
century from Vikramapura, before being ousted by 
the Senas who reigned till the 13th century.
Throughout this period, from the middle of the 
10th up to the beginning of the 13th century, the 
site proves to have been a very intensive Hindu 
place: numerous images of Viṣṇu, Sūrya, and Śiva, 
mainly as a dancing god, were produced then, all 
reflecting very high aesthetic quality. No major 
architectural remains similar to those uncov -
ered at Maināmatī or Paharpur could, however, 
be recovered; this may be due to the changing 
landscape of the region provoked by its rich and 
intricate water system.59 
Going east from Vikramapura in the direc -
tion of Comilla, one is struck by the Devaparvata 
(today Maināmatī), a hill that rises out of the flat 
country and reveals abundant archaeological re -
mains.60 Besides numerous architectural structures 
adorned with terracotta panels, a large number 
of small cast images and some, very rare, of large 
dimensions, were recovered during the excavations. 
Stone images were not found in abundance at the 
top of the hill but some were discovered in the 
countryside from here as far as the region of Chit -
tagong, where a large group of 9th-century bronzes 
was recovered at Jhewari—now preserved in the 
Indian Museum (A.K. Bhattacharya 1989; D. Mitra 
1982); an equally important 12th-century stone 
image of the Buddha was found at Betagi, where 
it is now worshipped. Tibetan authors mention 
2004 for a survey of the Buddhist data attesting to contacts 
between South India and Southeast Asia.  
59. Excavations recently revealed, however, a monas -
tery at Dholagaon: http://bangladeshunlocked.blogspot.
de/2012/05/atish-dipankars-vihara-dholagaon.html ; 
http://bdnews24.com/bangladesh/2013/03/23/ancient-bud -
dhist-vihara-found-in-munshiganj  (last accessed December 
2015).
60. See Bhuiyan 2008–9 for a small site located northwest 
of Comilla. 
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   174 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 189] ---
175 Images of Devotion and Power
the existence of a monastery, the Piṇḍa or Paṇḍi -
ta-vihāra, in or near Chittagong: the monastery 
owes its fame to the debate which saw Buddhists 
and Brahmins opposed, and to the victory of the 
former after putting on ‘pointed caps’, which have 
since remained part of the clothing of monks, espe -
cially in Tibet.61 As recalled by Puspa Niyogi ( 1980: 
69), the Mahāsiddha Tilopa (988–1069) and at a 
later period, Vanaratna (1384–1468), the teacher of 
Tāranātha, were also native to the region.62 
iconography and the function of 
the images
From the immensely rich world of images which 
emerged within Vajrayāna in eastern India and 
which was inherited and further developed by 
the Tibetans, only specific characters found their 
way into the visual iconography of Southeast Asia. 
While this phenomenon has yet to be rightly appre -
ciated or even studied, we may suggest that the cre -
ation of such a rich iconography and the extremely 
abundant production of images in the monasteries 
of Bihar, Bengal, and Odisha might have partly 
resulted from the presence of Tibetan monks and 
their probable involvement in the transformations 
that the iconography underwent. A second aspect 
that the study of iconography brings to light is 
the geographical distribution of the images: not 
all ‘gods’ and ‘goddesses’ were represented evenly 
everywhere. This observation helps in localizing 
the specific South Asian geographical area where 
images carved or cast in Southeast Asia had the 
source of their inspiration. The iconography is 
closely intermingled with the way of depicting 
these characters, i.e. with ‘style’: as demonstrated 
by Pauline Lunsingh-Scheurleer, the earliest so-
called Javanese bronze images were in fact cast in 
southeast Bangladesh, and more particularly in the 
region of Maināmatī (see n. 64 below). 
Maināmatī was at the centre of an active Mahā -
yāna community from the post-Gupta period 
onwards. Stone images were rarely produced, 
61. See Niyogi 1 980: 69 and Bautze-Picron  1995: 62, n. 35.  
62. Se
e Pal 1989 and Niyogi 1988: 44. Like most monks, 
Vanaratna was widely travelled, going to study in Sri Lanka 
where he stayed six years before returning to India and 
Tibet. where  as the production of metal images seems 
t
o have been very important, with numerous 
small bronzes from an early period (late 7th up 
to 9th century) having been recovered in the site 
and the region, depicting the main Bodhisattvas 
Avalokiteśvara and Mañjuśrī or the Tārā among 
others.63 The advance of Vajrayāna can be appre -
ciated thanks to the discovery of a human-size 
bronze of Vajrasattva. Most of this material should 
be dated prior to the 9th century and is contem -
porary with images from the region exported to 
Java, where they would inspire a rich produc -
tion of cast images in the subsequent centuries.64 
Studies of iconography rely heavily on textual 
sources.65 However, the visual iconography often 
presents features of which we find no echoes in the 
texts. Producing an image is a creative process not 
locked in dogma and meets very specific religious 
or spiritual needs at the time of its fabrication; 
monasteries were not entities withdrawn from 
the world, but were interacting with the space 
around them, and they were also open to monks 
coming from faraway countries. The fact that the 
monasteries of Bihar and Bengal were engaged in 
extremely dynamic religious and spiritual activi -
ties may also have overshadowed the fact that they 
might have been influenced by developments which 
had taken place in other countries. Clear evidence 
is, for instance, provided by the representation 
of Sudhanakumāra standing or seated near the 
Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara in images from Bihar 
and Bengal dated from the 10th century onwards  
(Fig. 7.6).66 Sudhanakumāra is no god and no image 
of him alone has, to the best of my knowledge, ever 
been produced: he is an attendant to the Bodhisat-
tva forming a pair with Hayagrīva, whereas the 
63. Lee 2009: figs. 127 to 162 reproduce such early bronzes 
discovered at Maināmatī or in the region. 
64. See Lunsingh-Scheurleer a nd Klokke 1988: 66–69, 
cats. 14–17.
65. Wh
en researching on the late Buddhist art of South 
and Southeast Bengal, one is confronted with an abundance 
of publications which address various different topics; out -
standing bibliographies on the topic of Esoteric Buddhist 
art have been prepared by Ulrich von Schroeder in his 
publications of 1981 and 2001, to which one can add Utpal 
Chakraborty’s book published in 2006. 
66. B autze-Picron  2014a: 99–100 (with further references). 
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   175 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 190] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia176
Tārā is paired with the Bhṛkuṭī. Likewise, he can 
attend on Mañjuśrī in images of the latter.67 But 
he is the main character of a spiritual quest which 
leads him to Bodhisattvas like Avalokiteśvara 
and Mañjuśrī and which is narrated in the Gaṇḍa- 
vyūhasūtra .68 The text was illustrated in the 9th 
century on Borobudur in Central Java and in the 
13th century on Candi Jago in East Java (see O’Brien, 
this volume); other versions are known from murals 
at Tabo (Western Himalayas), dated before 1042, 
and from a Nepalese manuscript tentatively dated 
around the mid 12th century or slightly later.69 
67. See Bautze-Picron  19 93a: 152–53 and Casey 1985: cat. 22. 
68. Bautze-Picron  2 014a: 99 (n. 116 for references). 
69. See Allinger 2008: 153 (date of the manuscript as 
proposed by Jerry Losty), 154 and Klimburg-Salter 1997: 
120–24. For a comparison of the narrative in Tabo and 
on Borobudur, see Kimmet 2012: 98–99. For other icono -There is no doubt that the text was known in Bihar 
and Bengal as it was in these regions bordering 
India, but the main character was here singled out 
of the narrative and introduced as an attendant 
to the two major Bodhisattvas to be worshipped 
in Bihar and Bengal. Here he becomes a figure 
of knowledge, his main and sole attribute being 
the manuscript which he holds clasped under his 
left armpit, both hands joined in the gesture of 
veneration in front of his chest. We cannot exclude 
the possibility that the importance of the text in 
Java—which cannot be doubted, considering the 
fact that it is illustrated through 460 panels on 
Borobudur (Soekmono 1976: 20)—stretched out to 
Eastern India and beyond. In India, it is included 
in the iconography of two Bodhisattvas of differ -
ent but to some extent complementary functions, 
although in both cases the fact that this young 
man in search of wisdom carries the manuscript 
symbolizing the spiritual knowledge which he ac -
cumulates through his encounters with wise men 
and Bodhisattvas may show how fundamental the 
book cult was within the monastery itself, but also 
beyond its limits, among the lay community (Kim 
2013: 223–24, 236–50). 
The 8th and 9th centuries constitute a major 
period in the history of Buddhism in Java, marked 
notably by large constructions like Borobudur and 
Candi Sewu. Around the middle of the 9th century, 
Bālaputradeva, a Śailendra ruler, had a monastery 
built in Nālandā for monks originating from Java, 
and as a diplomatic gesture of good will, the Pāla 
ruler of the time, Devapāla, had the revenue from 
land and villages donated for the upkeep of this 
institution.70 The years around ad  830 have been 
considered by J. Dumarçay as pivotal between two 
phases of development of Javanese architecture, 
showing a ‘new cultural impulse’ which originates 
from India and brings new architectural techniques, 
and which is characterized by the creation of major 
construction sites (after Klokke 2006: 51). For dif -
ferent but complementary reasons, Marijke Klokke  
(ibid.:  52) reached the same conclusion. In this 
context we should mention the dedication of an 
graphic similarities between Java and Western Himalaya, 
see Lokesh Chandra and Singhal 1999. 
70. See Fu
rui 2011: 155, n. 25 for the references. 
Fig. 7.6: Avalokiteśvara (Mahakali, Vikrampur area; 
National Museum of Bangladesh). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   176 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 191] ---
177 Images of Devotion and Power
image of Mañjuśrī made by a monk from Bengal 
or ‘Gauḍīdvīpa’ in the year 782 at Kelurak,71 i.e. in 
the vicinity of Candi Sewu, a monument whose 
date is much debated, but can be roughly dated 
between the second half of the 8th and the first 
part of the 9th century.72 An inscription found in 
the Candi Sewu compound mentions the enlarge-
ment in 792 of a mañjuśrīgṛha , which could very 
likely be Candi Sewu itself (ibid.). Candi Sewu, like 
Borobudur, offers a majestic three-dimensional 
illustration of a topic generalized in the sculpture 
and the painted manuscripts of Eastern India 
from the 9th century on, i.e. the depiction of the 
five Tathāgatas, which was favoured mainly in the 
iconographies of Avalokiteśvara, Mañjuśrī, and 
the Tārā.73 As we will see below, the motif of the 
five Tathāgatas saw a particular treatment in the 
iconography of the Potala mountain on which the 
Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara resides (Fig. 7.6); this 
iconography is encountered in particular after the 
9th century in Bihar and South Bengal,74 which 
suggests that the visual concept ‘Mountain cum 
Tathāgatas’ might have been inspired by the im -
pressive Javanese monuments. 
Images of specific deities were more favoured 
than others and may not have found the same 
degree of religious fervour everywhere. Thus, we 
witness a radical change in the 11th and 12th cen -
turies in the regions of Vikrampur and Maināmatī, 
when large stone images of Mañjuśrī75 and Heruka/
Hevajra are produced (Figs. 7.2, 7.20–21; 7.9–10).76  
This period follows a phase where the monastery of 
Nālandā seems to have exerted a major function: 
71. See Miksic 2006: 188–90 and Klokke 2006: 53–54. 
7
2. Kl
okke 2006: 53–54 (with further references).
73. Bu
t not exclusively; it crowned, for instance, the tall 
image of the Buddha standing at Jagdishpur, near Nālandā 
(Bautze-Picron  2010a: fig. 125a). 
74. One of the most accomplished examples was found at 
Kurkihar (Bihar) and can be dated to the late 9th or 10th 
century; see Bautze-Picron  2014a: fig. 110.
75. Ca
sey 1985: cats. 22, 33; M. Mitra 1999; Lee 2009: figs. 
95–96. 
76. Bh
attasali 1929: 35–37 and pl. XII ; Saraswati 1977: ill. 
172; Huntington 1984: fig. 215; Biswas 1995: 40 and pls. 38–39; 
Linrothe 1999: 249–66 and fig. 188 (on Heruka, as named 
by Linrothe) and 267–75 (on Hevajra); Haque and Gail 
2008: 279, 301–2 and pls. 506–7; Lee 2009: figs. 66–67, 69; 
Bautze-Picron  2014b: figs. 1–2. images that are outstanding in terms of iconog -
raphy and aesthetic quality have been recovered 
in the area of Vikrampur, which clearly relate on 
the evidence of their style to the ateliers located 
around Nālandā/Ghosravan/Tetravan in Bihar. 
Such is the case of a unique depiction of a specific 
aspect of Mārīcī (Fig. 7.7) or a representation of Ava -
lokiteśvara seated on the Potala (Fig. 7.6).77 More-
77. See Bautze-Picron  2 001: 272–75 on the Mārīcī found 
at Bhavanipur; see also: Bhattasali 1929: 54–56 and pl. XIX ; 
Huntington 1984: fig. 206; Samsul Alam 1985: fig. 69; Haque 
and Gail  2008: 131 and pl. 518; Lee 2009: 168–81 and fig. 51.  
Two further images of the elephant god Gaṇeśa found in 
Southeast Bengal and dated through inscriptions in the 
10th century could likewise have been ‘imported’ from 
Bihar (Bautze-Picron  2014a: 160–61, nos. 15–17); it is most 
interesting to read that the donors of these two images and 
of a third one, of Viṣṇu, also sharing features with the art 
of Bihar, were donated by merchants who might indeed 
have been travelling between Southeast Bengal and Bihar 
Fig. 7.7: Mārīcī (Bhavanipur, Vikrampur area; National Museum of Bangladesh). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   177 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 192] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia178
over, a 9th-century bronze image of Mahāpratisarā 
found at Kurkihar in Bihar is a clear product of 
the ateliers located around Maināmatī (Fig. 7.8).78 
The importance of Heruka under different 
(Prasad 2010: 31–33). See Bautze-Picron 1991–92: 249–50 
on similarities shared by the image of the Bodhisattva on 
the Potala and sculptures from Bihar, and also: Bhattasali 
1929: 27–28 and pl. VII a; Saraswati 1977, fig. 59; Shamsul 
Alam  1985: fig. 78; Haque and Gail 2008: 129 and pl. 512; 
Lee 2009: 54–55, 179–90 and figs. 54–55. 
78. Ba
utze-Picron  2014a: 18 and fig. B36, and 135, n. 358 
for further references. See Mevissen 1999 for a study of this 
iconography in Bengal and abroad.aspects in Bengal (Hevajra; Saṁvara; Cakra -
saṁvara; Buddhakapāla; Figs. 7.9–10, 7.15) reminds 
us that Atiśa, who originates from the region of 
Vikrampur, ‘had the visions of  Tār ā, Avalokiteśvara, 
Trisaṁvaravyūha (?) and Hevajra’.79 Hevajra/
Heruka as seen in Southeast Bengal (Figs. 7.9–10), 
i.e. dancing and at times trampling on a corpse, 
alone or at the centre of a circle of eight Yoginīs, 
was also worshipped in North Sumatra (Padang 
Lawas) and Cambodia. Other similar isolated 
images are found scattered in various sites of Bihar 
and Odisha, like Nālandā or Ratnagiri,80 and the 
deity can also be depicted with even more frightful 
aspects known as Saṁvara or Cakrasaṁvara, which 
seem to have been favoured in North Bengal, with 
images showing twelve or sixteen arms, four faces 
and embracing the Prajñā (Vajravārāhī).81 
Veneration of Hevajra/Heruka and Mahākāla, 
another major wrathful male deity present in Bengal 
and Bihar,82 extended far beyond the South Asian 
Subcontinent; Mahākāla was protector of the state 
in the Dali kingdom and under the Yuan (Howard 
1996: 235; Bryson 2012), and is also present in East 
Java and Sumatra. Hevajra was worshipped in 
North Sumatra and was a major deity in Cambodia,83 
79. See A. Chattopadhyaya 19 81: 378 and Eimer 1979: 
92: ‘Als Dīpaṁkaraśrījñāna studierte … sah er im Traum 
Heruka vor sich am Himmel und hörte ihn sagen… er solle 
Mönch werden und viele Schüler anleiten’.  
80. They were apparently to be found everywhere, but 
seem to have remained isolated in the sites where they 
were discovered (D. Mitra 1989, 1997–98). We also know of 
a silver image of the deity which must have stood at Bodh 
Gayā (above, n. 11).
81. See Weissenborn 2012b: 69–76 and figs. 51–55 on 
this iconography (also illustrated in manuscripts, 2012b: 
figs. 41a, 42c, 45a, 47–48). See Davidson 2002: 206–11 and 
Herrmann-Pfandt  2006–7 on the Cakrasaṁvaramaṇḍala, 
assimilated with Jambudvīpa and showing the universal 
power of the god over all Hindu, mainly Śaiva deities and 
sites of pilgrimage. 
82. See L
ee 2007: 204–8 and figs. 70–71 on two examples 
found in the Vikrampur area; the presence of a tiny Buddha 
image at the top of the slab, probably Amoghasiddhi (as 
recognized by Lee, whereas the author in Haque and Gail 
2008 sees here Amitābha), makes it a Buddhist and not 
Śaiva image (also reproduced by Haque and Gail 2008: 163, 
pl. 462, and by Rahman 1998: cat. 72 and pl. 46).  
83. See B
autze-Picron  2014b with further references on 
both gods in Sumatra and beyond. 
Fig. 7.8: Mahāpratisarā (Kurkihar, Bihar; Patna Muse-
um). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   178 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 193] ---
179 Images of Devotion and Power
while his image found at Padang Lawas in North 
Sumatra is evidently based on those carved in the 
region of Vikramapura—another evident element 
of contact between the Buddhist centres of these 
countries. A still enigmatic three-faced wrathful 
god standing in the victory posture and trampling 
corpses was found in the region of Vikrampur 
(Fig. 7.11): although doubt remains as to the proper 
identification of the wrathful three-headed image, 
this is evidently visually related to the more ‘clas -
Fig. 7.9: Hevajra (Lajjair, Comilla District; National 
Museum of Bangladesh). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Fig. 7.10: Hevajra (Barkanta, Comilla District; National Museum of Bangladesh). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Fig. 7.11: Wrathful three-headed male deity (Paschim-para, Vikrampur area; Varendra Research Museum, Rajshahi). (Photo courtesy of G.J.R. Mevissen)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   179 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 194] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia180
sical’ image of Mahākāla as found for instance in 
Lakhi Sarai but also in Vikrampur, or to further 
images of Yamāntaka and Krodhas from Bihar.84  
The two gods, Hevajra and Mahākāla, are physically 
very different from each other: Hevajra/Heruka, in 
his images found in South and Southeast Bengal, 
has a beautiful well-proportioned human body, 
although he frowns and has fangs. This is not the 
case for Mahākāla and the wrathful image from 
Vikrampur: both are pot-bellied, have bulging 
eyes, have a heavy body with short legs, and do 
not display the lightness of movement which the 
dancing Hevajra shows. Other aspects of Heruka, 
like Cakrasaṁvara, found more particularly in 
North Bengal, partake in the same type of image, 
with a heavy body that expresses violence and ag -
gressiveness, and whose obvious aim is to frighten. 
Images exported by monks evidently reflect -
ed concepts developed in Eastern India, but they 
merged with local Southeast Asian spiritual and 
political considerations. Clearly, both Hevajra 
and Mahākāla were images of political power in 
regions outside the Indian Subcontinent, symbol -
izing the duty of the ruler to protect the country 
by destroying its enemies (Mahākāla), while il -
lustrating the presence of the political power as 
universal (Hevajra/Heruka standing at the centre 
of a maṇḍala ) and destructive of negative forces 
(Hevajra/Heruka dancing on corpses). One may 
thus wonder whether in India, as was the case 
in Southeast Asia or China, they had the leading 
position of protecting the state; there is no clear 
evidence that the rulers of Eastern India ever placed 
themselves and their states under the protection 
of Mahākāla or Hevajra.85 Taking this into con -
sideration we may surmise that these gods had 
the function to protect the saṅgha : the monastery 
becomes the maṇḍala  on which Hevajra rules.86
How are we to assess the function of these 
images in their historical context? Can we approach 
84. See Bautze-Picron  199 1–92: figs. 16, 25, 17 for a Krodha 
(Lakhi Sarai). For Yamāntaka, see Linrothe 1999: 162–76. 
For the Vikrampur image, see above. n. 82.
85. To which remark one should add the observation 
made by B.N. Prasad on the absence of inscriptions on 
images which would refer to a donor (compare above, n. 22).
86. See Bautze-Picron  20 10a: 22–23 and Davidson 2002: 
113–68. the carved and cast images, and the illuminations 
inserted in manuscripts alike? Probably not, since 
their basic function, which justifies their creation, 
differs. Large stone or cast images are to be dis -
played publicly, even if only to the monks, whereas 
small images can be carried as private belongings of 
monks, or donated to the monastery by monks and 
laypeople. Small objects could easily be transported, 
which makes their study rather difficult: were they 
produced in the site where they were discovered? 
Were they carried away from another site? Were 
they part of a set of images? Studying them thus 
means taking on many doubts and unknowns. 
The production of a manuscript reflects a com -
pletely different situation.87 When the eye and 
the mind focus on a material image—for simple 
worship or identification with it—the movement 
is centripetal, going from outside (the viewer) 
towards one single object. But opening and reading 
a manuscript opens entirely different vistas, the eye 
wandering through many different divine images 
and the mind following the spatial directions in 
which the deities depicted in the manuscript are 
distributed. The creation of a richly illuminated 
manuscript allows the insertion of practically as 
many images as desired; these male and female 
characters show a wide range of physical features 
known from their descriptions in sādhana s and can 
even be rarely shown in stone (Figs. 7.12–15). Their 
insertion all throughout a manuscript transforms it 
into a frame for these images, which are most often 
unrelated to the text, usually of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā 
Prajñāpāramitā . In short, they do not illustrate 
the text, or only rarely do so, such as in the case of 
narrative texts or of the Pañcarakṣā text (Mevissen  
1989, 1990, 1991–92, 1992, 1999). 
One manuscript of the Pañcaviṁśatisāhasrikā 
Prajñāpāramitā  donated in the early period of Hari -
varman’s reign as seen above has a rich and pecu -
liar iconography88 where Avalokiteśvara appears 
87. See Jinah Kim’s book (2013), which offers a range 
of n
ew and challenging considerations regarding such 
manuscripts. 
88. For Kim (2013: 104–6), the folios preserved in Baroda 
and those kept in different Western collections, private and 
public, do not belong to the same manuscript, whereas for 
Weissenborn  (2012a: 301–2 no. 33) they all belong to one 
single manuscript. 
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   180 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 195] ---
181 Images of Devotion and Power
as a major Bodhisattva, showing many different 
aspects (Figs. 7.16–17); his importance is consistent 
with the attention paid to different types of images 
of the Bodhisattva—for instance residing on his 
mountain, the Potala—found in the region (Fig. 
7.6).89 The motif of the mountain quite naturally 
enhances the divine position of the Bodhisattva, 
this also being the place of residence of a major god 
like Śiva (Lee 2009, fig. 64), or the seat of the Tārā 
in a unique and outstanding carving found around 
Maināmatī.90 In this image, the Tārā preaches, 
evoking the ‘Potalake Bhagav[at]ī Tārā’ depicted 
in two Nepalese manuscripts of the 11th century.91 
The fact is that these manuscripts, like the illustrat -
ed Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra  kept in the British Library, 
take part in the very same iconographic tradition 
reflected by the manuscript dated in the regnal year 
8 of Harivarman, i.e. they depict ‘famous’ images 
89. See above, n. 77. Lee 2009: fig. 59 is related to this 
iconography, a trefoil arch being the only reminder of the 
niche within the mountain where the Bodhisattva sits: 
see Bautze-Picron  1999: 183–85. For other images of the 
Bodhisattva in the region, see Bhattasali 1929: 25–26 and 
pl. VIa; Saraswati 1977: ill. 60; A. Sengupta 1993: fig. 56; 
Haque and Gail 2008: 158, 160–61 and pls. 513–14; Lee 2009: 
121–29, 185 and figs. 27, 31, 58–60. 
90. Se
e Lee 2009: 190 and fig. 65. For other images of the 
goddess in the region, see Bhattasali 1929: 56-58 and pls. 
XX–XXII;  Shamsul Alam  1985: figs. 49, 65; Biswas 1995: 32, 
35 and pl. 28; Niyogi 2001: fig. 50; Haque and Gail 2008: 
146–47 and pl. 46; Lee 2009: 96–99, 105–12 and figs. 15, 17–19. 
91.  See Foucher 1900: 192 no. 16, 210 no. 18, and pl. VII. 16 . 
Fig. 7.14: Eleven-armed blue goddess (folio 173b;  
Varendra Research Museum, Rajshahi). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)Fig. 7.15: Four-armed blue god (Hevajra?) (folio 388b; Varendra Research Museum, Rajshahi). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)Fig. 7.12: Ḍākinī (?) (Manuscript dated N.S. 393 or ad 1273, folio 401a; Varendra Research Museum, Rajsha-hi). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Fig. 7.13: Eight-armed red goddess (folio 297a; Varen-
dra Research Museum, Rajshahi). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   181 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 196] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia182
of the entire Buddhist world, with images of deities 
located in faraway countries like China, Java, Sri 
Lanka, or Maharashtra to quote only a few, whereas 
the images in the Harivarman manuscript are those 
of many aspects of Avalokiteśvara, the Tārā, or 
Mārīcī for instance.92  
Looking back at the history of the Buddhist 
community in South Asia, more particularly at 
its carved artistic production, it is obvious that 
the dividing line which one would wish to draw 
between the community and the non-Buddhist 
society within which the saṅgha  was evolving was 
never deeply anchored: Buddhists were well aware 
of the existence of Hindu gods and goddesses, in -
troducing them in their own artistic imagery but 
having a perception of them which could thorough -
ly change over the centuries (Bautze-Picron 1996, 
2010b). Thus, Brahmā and Śakra (Indra) are present 
from the very beginning, appearing as peaceful 
characters fully submitted to the Buddha, an aspect 
that they preserve up to the 13th century. But from 
perhaps the late 10th century onwards, they also 
appear as demons belonging to Māra’s army, thus 
suffering the fate of deities like Gaṇeśa/Gaṇapati,93 
Śiva, Pārvatī, and others who were perceived as 
malevolent characters and hence could be trodden 
on by frightful Buddhist characters whose major 
function was to destroy them. Going through the 
centuries, one thus attends a permanent encoun -
ter between the Buddhist and the Brahmanical 
(Hindu) imaginary worlds that finds its visual 
expression in a Buddhist context.94 
When considering ‘Buddhist’ images, one tends 
too easily to forget that they were conceived in a 
context where the religious imagery was not exclu -
sively Buddhist. Quite on the contrary, Buddhist 
92.  See Bautze-Picron 19 99: 188 and Kim 2013: 56–57 
and 93–109. 
93. Lan
caster 1991: 278 mentions a 5th-century Chinese 
translation of a text referring to him as Vināyaka, an ill-in-
tentioned character ‘who keeps the practitioners from pro -
gressing and is thus a negative force that must be overcome.’ 
On Gaṇapati/Vināyaka in the Śaiva and Buddhist realms, 
see Acri, this volume. 
94. This i
s not to say that the Hindu side was unaware of 
the existence of the Buddhists, but the main, if not only, 
character who was shown in a demeaning position was the 
Buddha; see Verardi 2011, passim. monasteries were surrounded by a landscape which 
was fundamentally inhabited by ‘Hindu’ gods and 
goddesses and which might have felt dangerous, 
if not threatening. In a wide movement which 
swept over Bihar and Bengal from the 10th century 
Fig. 7.16: Avalokiteśvara (detail of ms. from Harivar-
man’s regnal year 8; private collection). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Fig. 7.17: Twelve-armed Avalokiteśvara (detail of ms. from Harivarman’s regnal year 8; Baroda Museum inv. E.G. 122). (Photo courtesy of Birgit Breitkopf)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   182 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 197] ---
183 Images of Devotion and Power
onwards, Hindu deities were considered to belong 
to Māra’s army where they held a leading position, 
replacing the traditional monsters of the army 
(Bautze-Picron  1996, 2010b: 111–16), and possibly 
having their outer appearance modified—Brahmā 
becoming for instance a threatening character 
showing fangs (Bautze-Picron 1996: 126–27 and 
fig. 20). This perception of the Hindu pantheon 
apparently arose in the 10th century, an outstand -
ing example being the image of Jagdishpur, a site 
located in the direct vicinity of Nālandā (Bautze-
Picron 2010b: 108–11). From there, it is found up 
to Bagan in Burma, following a line that crosses 
Lakhi Sarai in East Bihar and the entire Delta (Figs. 
7.18–19; below: The Buddha). Images are not only carriers of religious or 
spiritual values, they also deeply reflect daily con -
cerns; images could be conceived as an answer to 
other images which were produced by men of dif -
ferent beliefs, and as such could be acting as echoes 
to them. Images were clearly part of a ‘campaign’ 
that was aimed against those belonging to the ‘other’ 
side. Some examples can be given here, drawn from 
various parts of Eastern India and belonging to dif -
ferent periods: images of the Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī 
produced in Magadha in the 7th to 9th century, 
more particularly in the region of Bodh Gayā, 
Fig. 7.18: Buddha and his life (Betagi, Chittagong Dis-
trict; Ratnankur Vihar, Betagi). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Fig. 7.19: Buddha and his life (Sibbari, Khulna District; Kamalapur Buddhist Monastery, Dhaka). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   183 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 198] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia184
clearly borrow elements from images of Skanda, 
such as the necklace and the hair-dress, whereas 
the lion serving as vāhana  was probably borrowed 
from Durgā’s iconography.95 At a later date, the 12th 
century, outstanding images of Mahākāla closely 
resembling contemporary images of Bhairava were 
carved in the area of Lakhi Sarai.96 
And, turning to South Bengal in the 11th and 
12th centuries, it is probably no coincidence that 
most Hevajra images (Figs. 7.9–10) were produced 
in this region where the cult of Śiva Naṭarāja was 
particularly important, or that Avalokiteśvara 
shows various ‘Śaiva’ aspects in the manuscripts 
of the region, notably the rare form of Padmanart -
teśvara.97 Another factor might lie in the proximity 
of Assam, more particularly of the Kāmākhyā-pīṭha 
located north of the area here considered, and in 
the vicinity of which ‘a cemetery called Heruka’ 
would be located according to the Kālikāpurāṇa .98 
Hevajra images receive a fighting stamp in being a 
wrathful character sharing features with the fright -
ful Hindu goddess Cāmuṇḍā, whereas images of 
this goddess and of Śiva-Bhairava can also convey 
a strong message of violence towards the Buddhist 
community, wearing for instance a long garland 
of Buddha’s heads or trampling on a bowl full of 
similar heads.99 
95. Not forgetting that Skanda is chief of the divine armies 
and that Durgā is a fighting goddess; see Bautze-Picron 
1989: figs. 1, 4–15, 18 and 1993a: 151–52 (on the lion).  
96. Mahākāla: Bautze-Picron 1991–92: figs. 16 and 35; Bhaira -
va: Kumar 2011: figs. 15a–b. On the similarities, see Lee 2009: 
206–7. Davidson 2002: 211–17 relates Heruka to Bhairava, 
‘Heruka [being] formed in imitation of Maheśvara’, and 
Heruka being a ‘divinity of a cremation ground’; the sit -
uation is indeed very complex as the author also notes on 
p. 214. It is indeed likely that the (Buddhist) cult of a god 
named Heruka owes a lot to the (tribal and Hindu) Tantric 
tradition which had emerged in Assam (ibid.). 
97. See Bautze-Picron  19 99: 184. As Saṁvara, Heruka 
rules over the universe from Mount Meru, reminding us, as 
mentioned by Davidson (2002: 210), that this image echoes 
the motif of Śiva on Mount Kailāsa; but it also echoes the 
presence of the Buddha on Mount Meru, where he teaches 
the Dharma to his mother and the gods (Bautze-Picron 
2010a: 28–35). 
98. Dav
idson (2002: 213) mentions that the cemetery is 
today named Bhairava.
99. As shown by Verardi (2011), visual language was a 
major vector of propaganda and could reflect deep conflicts Also, Mañjuśrī is armed with a sword and 
represented in the gesture of using it, holding it 
high above his head.100 The development of the 
Bodhisattva iconography at Nālandā in the 7th 
and 8th centuries finds an echo in his importance 
in Java in the late 8th century. As seen in an earlier 
paper (Bautze-Picron  1993a), his function is to teach 
when Śākyamuni becomes Buddha, which makes 
the two iconographies—of the Buddha’s enlighten -
ment and of the Bodhisattva teaching—profoundly 
complementary.101 Mañjuśrī possesses the sword 
with which darkness is slit and light (of the Bodhi) 
pervades the mind: such a major image used to 
stand at Bodh Gayā till it was stolen from the site,102 
and the very characteristic gesture of holding the 
sword above the head as if going to be used occurs 
in three outstanding sculptures from Southeast 
Bengal (Lee 2009: 239–53 and figs. 95–96, 101). These 
include a rare depiction of Arapacana Mañjuśrī  
(Fig. 7.20)103 which foreshadows a 13th-century 
image of the same iconography carved in East 
Java,104 and two images of the also very rarely 
illustrated Mañjuvajra (Fig. 7.21) where the Bo -
dhisattva is three-faced and six-handed, and has 
attributes which illustrate his function as slayer of 
which were tearing the society apart. And in the ‘Buddhist 
camp’, this goddess was really perceived as a dangerous 
deity, belonging to the army of Māra and ferociously at -
tacking the Buddha (Bautze-Picron 2010b: 111–16). 
100. See Bautze-Picron  19 99: figs. 1, 9–10. The weapon 
can be symbolic of destroying ignorance and darkness, 
opening the way to wisdom and light, but it might also be 
considered at a more basic level, being a visual rendering 
intended for non-Buddhists; the same can be said of the 
sword being held by Mārīcī (and other deities), whereas 
in the opposite camp it is Cāmuṇḍā who is depicted in an 
even more aggressive mood (see above, and n. 4 ). 
101. It is worth noting that the Mañjuśrī illustrated in Fig. 
7.2 is accompanied by Maitreya and Avalokiteśvara, thus 
partly reproducing the triad so often encountered in Bihar 
of having the Buddha flanked by these two Bodhisattvas 
(Bautze-Picron  2010a: 77).
102. Ba
utze-Picron  2014a: 117–18, 214 n. 170 (see also fig. 
170).
103. Bha
ttasali 1929: 28–29 and pl. VII b; Saraswati 1977: 
ill. 27; Shamsul Alam 1985: fig. 89; A. Sengupta 1993: fig. 
62; Haque and Gail 2008: 132 and pl. 491; Lee 2009: 248–53 
and fig. 191. 
104. As rightly suggested by Pauline Lunsingh-Scheur -
leer; see Bautze-Picron  2014a, n. 30 for further references. 
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   184 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 199] ---
185 Images of Devotion and Power
ignorance—a main attribute still being the manu -
script—and as bestowing his compassion.105 
The Bodhisattva is not the only character who 
makes a reference to Bodh Gayā and the Bodhi. 
A major goddess is then Mārīcī, whose numer -
ous images were found all through the region  
(Fig. 7.22)106 and hardly differ from those wor -
105.  See Lee 2009: 239–48 and figs. 95–96. An even rarer 
d
epiction of the Bodhisattva as Nāmasaṅgitī has been dis -
covered in the Vikrampur area; the particular feature of 
this image is that it is the real female Nāmasaṅgitī who is 
depicted and not the usually seen male one (Akman 1999; 
Bautze-Picron  2000: 108–11; Lee 2009: 145–55 and fig. 37).  
106. Se
e my article of 2001 for a study of the iconog -
raphy of the goddess in Eastern India and in particular, 
Fig. 7.20: Arapacana Mañjuśrī (Jalkundi, northeast of 
Vikrampur; Nat. Mus. of Bangladesh). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Fig. 7.21: Mañjuvajra (probably from Southeast Bangladesh). (Photo: MMoA, New Y ork, www.metmuseum.org)
Fig. 7.22: Mārīcī (Salban vihara, Mainamati; formerly at the Mainamati Museum, present location un-known). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   185 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 200] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia186
for the images produced in Southeast Bengal, see pp. 
268–69 and 288–89: no. 39–47; cf. also the two images in 
the Khulna Museum published by Mevissen (2009) and 
Lee (2009: 155–68). The image reproduced here was stolen 
from the Maināmatī Museum (for further references, 
see Mevissen 2009: 280) and reappeared on the Belgian 
art market in 2006–7 ( 52e Foire des Antiquaires de Bel -
gique : 209 where the provenance is said to be a ‘private 
English collection’); I myself saw it with the art-dealer 
K. Grusenmeyer (Sablons, Brussels). See also: Bhattasali  
1929: 43–45 and pls. XIII b–XIV ; Huntington 1984: fig. 217; 
A. Sengupta 1993: figs. 27, 67–68; Haque and Gail 2008: 83, 
146, 172–273, 282–83 and pls. 519, 523–25; Lee 2009: 155–68 
and figs. 23, 42–49. shipped in Bihar or North Bengal. This is not a 
peaceful deity: she carries weapons in her eight 
hands, presenting the vajra  in the upper-right 
hand;107 four sow-faced female deities surround her. 
All of them form thus a maṇḍala , a structure which 
is encountered in more than one iconographic type; 
see for instance the images of Arapacana Mañ -
juśrī, Mañjuvajra (Figs. 7.20–21), Hevajra (Fig. 7.9), 
the five Tathāgatas, and the Aṣṭamahābhaya Tārā 
(Fig. 7.23),108 or even the image of the Buddha’s life 
(see below). Mārīcī symbolizes the sunlight which 
penetrates the entire universe when Śākyamuni 
becomes Buddha; with her position of victory and 
her numerous armed hands, she is depicted as a 
warrior-goddess chasing away the darkness, i.e. 
ignorance. The very fact that she also stands within 
the womb of a stūpa is there to prove that light 
resides in the bosom of the Buddhist monastery. 
Her numerous images also testify to the importance 
of the female element as a dynamic, creative force. 
Movement is what opposed her to the images 
of the Tārā but brings her close to depictions of 
Parṇaśabarī (Fig. 7.24),109 a frightful goddess of 
folk origin, clad with leaves, who protects from 
diseases but also dispels hindrances to the spiritual 
quest, using the vajra  and the aṅkuśa  as weapons. 
Her images are rare but they are the reflection of 
the way chosen by the Mahāsiddhas, drawing their 
inspiration from non-canonical literature, refus -
ing to be part of the ‘official’ Buddhist communi -
ty, and opting for a freedom of mind which they 
found in the solitude of the forest.110 As far as one 
can surmise from the existing material remains, 
Buddhism in this part of Bengal was not solely 
confined to the monasteries where monks were 
107. In Bihar, she can present the sword (Bautze-Picron 
20
01: figs. 6, 9, 14–15). 
108. Bhattasali 1929: 56–57 and pl. XXI; B. Bhattacharyya 
1958: fig. 375; Saraswati 1977: ill. 103; M. Ghosh 1980: 42 
and ill. 11; Shamsul Alam 1985: fig. 90; A. Sengupta 1993: 
fig. 31; Haque and Gail 2008: 146 and pl. 530; Lee 2009: 
99–105 and fig. 16. 
109. Bhattasali 1929: 58–61 and pls. XXIII a–b ; B. Bhat -
tacharyya 1958: figs. 173–74; Saraswati 1977: ills. 188–89; 
Huntington 1984: fig. 210; A. Sengupta 1993: fig. 70; Haque 
and Gail  2008: 147 and pl. 541; Lee 2009: 129–44 and figs. 
33–34; see also M. Mitra 2000. 
110. On th
e siddha s, see Davidson 2002: 169 ff. 
Fig. 7.23: Aṣṭamahābhaya Tārā (Sompara, Vajrayoginī, 
Vikrampur area; National Museum of Bangladesh).(Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   186 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 201] ---
187 Images of Devotion and Power
mainly active: as Jinah Kim’s research recently 
demonstrated, the lay practitioners were more 
and more active notably in the production and 
worship of the book; besides, the Mahāsiddhas were 
also very active as ‘independent’ spiritual seekers 
throwing a critical look on the ‘official’, mainstream 
Buddhist way. Lay practitioners and these ascetics 
reflect two further aspects of Buddhism, the study 
of which is more difficult to grasp, but which had to 
be taken into consideration by the saṅgha —hence 
the existence of these large images of Parṇaśabarī in what was the capital, i.e. Vikramapura, where 
many other images were collected side by side with 
those of Sūrya, Viṣṇu, or dancing Śiva, and where, 
let us remember, the political power was openly 
Brahmanical. The community was evidently out -
numbered and this severely reduced position might 
also explain the multiplication of Mārīcī images; 
emerging as seen above in the womb of a stūpa , 
but also belonging to the kula  of Vairocana, it is 
the monument as body of the latter which is here 
standing, but it is also the monument as symbol 
par excellence of the Buddhist way, and thus of the 
community, which is here depicted. 
The Buddha— Considering the rich pantheon 
which we just briefly surveyed and which developed 
during nearly two centuries, it must be noted that 
the iconography of the Buddha is rather uniform, 
depicting him touching the earth, i.e. at the very 
moment of his enlightenment. However, details 
added to this model can vary from image to 
image, and features can be inserted which are not 
encountered in Bihar, for instance the protome of 
an elephant below the Buddha.111 The main image 
remained, however, the one of Śākyamuni at Bodh 
Gayā, i.e. evoking the earth-goddess while touching 
the soil with the fingers of his right hand; as such, 
it could be venerated by any monk.  
A very specific iconographic programme depict -
ed on book covers and in a series of illuminations 
traditionally distributed at the beginning and the 
end of the text echoes the narrative rendering of the 
Buddha’s life, which is carved in the lower part of 
images produced in the region in the 12th and 13th 
centuries, and which reflects a boundary between 
the ‘eight scenes’ model encountered in Bihar and 
the detailed rendering of the biography painted in 
various temples of Bagan.112 As also observed by Eva 
111. See Lee 2009: 217–32 and figs. 74–80, 82–88, 90 for a 
l
engthy discussion of the Buddha image in the region of 
Dhaka. The motif of the elephant protruding below the 
Buddha is also encountered on the images of Viṣṇu or 
Śiva in Bengal (Bautze-Picron  1999b: n. 16). Further, see 
Bhattasali 1929: 30–34 and pls. VIII , IXb; Saraswati 1977: 
ills. 196, 199; Huntington 1984: figs. 208–9, 223; Shamsul 
Alam 1985: figs. 55, 72, 77; A. Sengupta 1993: fig. 52; Biswas 
1995: 36, 40–41 and pl. 40; Haque and Gail 2008: 129–30, 
157 and pls. 486, 503. 
112. Al
linger (2010) wrote a detailed analysis of the ques -
tion. 
Fig. 7.24: Parṇaśabarī (Naynanda, Vikrampur area; 
National Museum of Bangladesh). (Photo: J.K. Bautze)
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   187 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 202] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia188
Allinger, this iconographic model is also illustrated 
in early cloth-paintings that have been preserved 
in Tibetan monasteries.113 Even if one surmises 
that the carving of the images is posterior to some 
murals at Bagan, I personally do not think that their 
presence in the lower part of stone images from the 
Delta specifically reflects a Burmese influence, but 
rather illustrates a conscious choice of presenting 
the biography.  
The model retained is based on a composition 
which was elaborated in Magadha around the 9th 
century and which shows that the life of the Buddha 
reached its peak at Bodh Gayā, where the Bodhisat -
tva became Buddha: this is the moment from where 
no return is possible (Figs. 7.18–19). Around the 
central large image, seven scenes are distributed 
following a very specific visual pattern, paired as 
they are according to their iconography and not 
in a chronological order.114 All scenes, apart from 
the final decease, are depicted as if they were icons 
standing on their own, in their own shrines, and 
not as part of a continuous narrative. Now, the 
motif of the shrine is typical of the art of Southeast 
Bengal, but the profile of the tower is apparently that 
of the Bodh Gayā temple and only certain godly 
figures sit within such a structure, i.e. the Buddha 
and Mañjuśrī. In these images only the central 
Buddha sits in a niche supporting this particular 
type of spire, whereas the secondary scenes are 
distributed in niches having their arch fully in -
serted in a series of flat and broad recesses which 
support an āmalaka , a structure well known in 
manuscript illuminations and which is considered 
to be a motif of (northern) Bengali origin.115 The 
spire of the Bodh Gayā temple, being only noted 
above images of the Buddha and Mañjuśrī ,is a 
consistent feature since, as mentioned above, the 
113. Allinger 2010: 34–35; Bautze-Picron 19 95–96. The 
place of manufacture of these cloth-paintings is still a 
matter of debate; I personally tend to consider the thangka s 
reproduced by Eva Allinger, figs. 5–6, to be of Bengali origin 
but made for a Tibetan patron (the painting of fig. 5 includes 
the depiction of heavily clad characters and monks).
114. See Bautze-Picron  20 02: 222–23, with further ref -
erences.
115. But w
hich could occur in manuscripts produced at 
Vikramaśīla, a site located in East Bihar; see Losty 1989b: 
89, 95.Bodhisattva holds a major position in the iconog -
raphy of the enlightenment.116 Not only does the 
presence of a tower transform the image into a 
shrine, but through the presence of four subsidiary 
shrines distributed around the spire the sculpture 
also illustrates a maṇḍala . 
The secondary scenes can also be seen as re -
flecting specific aspects of the Buddha, since apart 
from the Birth scene—always depicted in the lower 
part—all refer to Śākyamuni as a Buddha. The Birth 
scene is symmetric to the offering of madhu by the 
monkey which took place at Vaiśālī; both scenes 
refer to final moments in a long spiritual quest, the 
Birth scene coinciding with the end of the career 
of Gautama as a Bodhisattva, whereas the Vaiśālī 
event marks the moment when Śākyamuni took the 
decision to definitively depart from this life, thus 
putting an end to his life as a Buddha (Leoshko 
1993–94: 258–59). Similarly, the first sermon held 
at Sarnath illustrates a ‘real’ event, whereas the 
sermon at Śrāvasti reflects the magic powers pos -
sessed by the Buddha—and it is also there that 
the Buddha takes the decision to go on Mount 
Meru where he will teach his mother and the gods 
(Bautze-Picron  2010a: 28, n. 50). The Parinirvāṇa 
scene topping the composition indicates that the 
Buddha is now out of reach, in undefined realms.  
Now, the ‘perfect’ life which is here illustrated 
rests upon a high base covered with scenes carved 
in low-relief; what is depicted in the lower part of 
the image, being in contact with the soil beneath 
it, is located at a human level and thus is of a lower 
essence per se than the divine world seen above and 
which it has also for function to support (Bautze-
Picron 1995, 2007a: 93–94). As a matter of fact, the 
scenes carved in the lower part of the image mostly 
show Śākyamuni as a Bodhisattva: the first scene 
depicts his father presenting the newborn to Asita, 
followed by the great departure, the cutting of hair, 
the long period of asceticism up to the moment 
where Mucilinda protects the meditating monk, 
with further scenes being inserted. Now, what could 
appear to be a ‘simple’ narrative depiction of this 
116. Moreover, these two images of the Bodhisattva also 
include a depiction of the Seven Jewels of the Cakravartin, 
a theme which was well favoured at Bodh Gayā (on which 
topic see Hsu 2008). 
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   188 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 203] ---
189 Images of Devotion and Power
phase of the Buddha’s life hides or reveals specific 
aspects of the Buddha’s personality. As seen in a 
previously published paper (Bautze-Picron 2008: 
89–91), the depictions of the emaciated Buddha and 
of the Buddha being sheltered by Mucilinda refer 
in fact to two contradictory but complementary 
aspects of the Buddha’s personality which have 
been exemplified since the beginning of our era 
in Gandhāra, i.e. the Buddha as master of fire and 
water. In small images carved in the so-called 
andagu  stone and which were mainly, but not ex -
clusively, discovered in Burma, these two scenes are 
symmetrically distributed below the main cycle of 
eight events; in cloth-paintings or on painted book 
covers, they are usually seen side by side (Bautze-
Picron 2008: fig. 5 and p. 89, n. 21). 
The image of the Buddha, being elaborated so 
as to include the canonical topic of the ‘Eight great 
events’—seven being distributed around the main 
one—and adding to it further moments of this 
biography, is addressed to any Buddhist. Thus, this 
‘perfect’ life finds its conclusion in the imperceptible 
moment of the enlightenment, which is the aim to 
be reached by the devotee, even if it is through radi -
cally different ways. Such images, besides narrating 
the initial phase of the Buddhist way, in some way 
also speak for the eternity of the Dharma. 
The five Tathāgatas and the maṇḍala— The motif 
of the five Buddhas is commonly encountered 
topping the images of the Buddha (whoever he is), 
Avalokiteśvara, Mañjuśrī, and the Tārā. However, 
it occurs irregularly in the images just considered 
which depict the biography of Śākyamuni, where 
it is the set of the seven Buddhas of the past joined 
by Maitreya that always crowns the image (Bautze-
Picron 1995–96: 360–61). The depiction of the five 
Buddhas is also seen in illuminated manuscripts 
and/or on their book covers.117 The distribution 
of their five images118 all through the manuscript 
transforms the linear text into a three-dimensional 
structure.119 Their presence crowning stone images 
117. Kim 2013: 83–85; Weissenborn 2012b: 25 and fig. 9.  
118. Even if there are only three, they still suffice to create 
a direction, i.e. a three-dimensional volume: see Bautze-
Picron 1999a: 186–87. 
119. See Kim 2013: 132–48 on the three-dimensional space 
that painted images confer to the manuscript (besides the 
fact that the very act of handling the manuscript transforms allows them to achieve the same result, particularly 
when carved in a rock-like landscape that symbol -
izes the Potala Mountain on which Avalokiteśvara 
resides; they constitute the basic maṇḍala , four 
of them marking the four cardinal points around 
the fifth one located at the centre. However, one 
should mention that nowhere in Eastern India were 
architectural compositions such as those achieved 
in Central Java in the 8th and 9th centuries ever 
created in stone. 
The concept of the maṇḍala  is observed in 
numerous images produced in the region: Mārīcī, 
the Aṣṭamahābhaya Tārā, Arapacana Mañjuśrī, 
Mañjuvajra, or Hevajra, as mentioned above.  Even 
the topic of the Buddha’s life has been reproduced 
according to a maṇḍala -like model that refers 
to Bodh Gayā, centre of the Buddhist universe, 
where Śākyamuni became buddha—a place and 
moment in time which shows the start of a new 
beginning and the emergence of a new spiritual 
thought. This model also integrates all around this 
fundamental scene smaller depictions of major 
events of Śākyamuni’s life. What is shown here 
is a pilgrimage that can be done through visual -
ization. The idea of the non-dual universe with 
images emerging out of its centre found a particu -
lar achieved form in cast lotus maṇḍala s, found 
in the Faridpur district in Southeast Bangladesh 
up to Bihar, where the deity presiding over the 
maṇḍala can be Hevajra, Vajratārā, Cakrasaṁvara, 
or the Buddha.120 And beyond Bengal, this type 
of object was also produced in Bagan, having as 
central image the Buddha, a stūpa, or the spire of 
the Mahabodhi temple bearing a depiction of the 
eight great events, while monks are distributed on 
the eight petals.121 These images of gods and god -
the flat two-dimensional surface into a three-dimensional 
space). 
120. Lee 2009: 340–44 and figs. 192–94: Hevajra, Vajratārā; 
Kim 2013: 65–68 and figs. 2–6, p. 67: Vajratārā, Buddha 
surrounded by eight Bodhisattvas; Weissenborn 2012a: fig. 
52; Huntington and Bangdell 2003: cat. 68; Linrothe 2006: 
190–93, cat. 5: Cakrasaṁvara. 
121. See Luce 1969–70: pls. 425–28. Although it might 
appear difficult to consider these cast lotuses as being ‘es -
oteric’ or ‘ maṇḍala s’, the fact is that the main topic which 
is depicted within the inner space shows the eight great 
events drawn from the Buddha’s life either distributed 
around a central shrine or fixed on the eight petals around 
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   189 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 204] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia190
desses each offer in their own way a subtle version of 
this symbolic vision of the universe, and similarly 
these cast lotuses perfectly illustrate the oneness 
of the universe with its central point out of which 
all peripheral deities emerge. But the maṇḍala  
also represents—in a more prosaic manner—the 
monastery; such images are then subdued ways 
of visually expressing this spiritual stranglehold 
that the monastery pretends to possess.122 Certain 
deities can be magically invoked or worshipped 
within this context, having for function to protect 
from any danger, like the Pañcarakṣā goddesses,123 
or from dramatic situations encountered while 
travelling, like the Aṣṭamahābhaya Tārā (who 
had inherited this function from Avalokiteśvara),124 
or to protect from diseases, like some aspect of 
Avalokiteśvara (Kim 2012: 210). Asserting such 
powers and declaring its own sectarian vision of 
the universe—thought to be merged with the Bud -
dhist community—were a necessary reaction in a 
religious landscape where highly powerful Hindu 
images were created in the 11th and 12th centuries, 
reflecting the strength of the Brahmanical temples 
sustained by the political power.125  
a central stūpa . Thus it would be as if these various aspects 
of the Buddha either irradiated out of the central shrine or 
all merged into the central and final monument. 
122. Davidson 2002: 206–11 and Herrmann-Pfandt 2006–7 
study the Cakrasaṁvaramaṇḍala, which includes deities 
linked to specific pilgrimage sites distributed all over India 
and which are not specifically Buddhist, but mainly Śaiva 
or Śākta—a particular way of ‘assimilating’ the world of 
the other, of ‘magically reclaiming the whole of India for 
Buddhism’ (Herrmann-Pfandt  2006–7: 16). 
123. See Mevissen 1999. For an image found in the 
Vikrampur area, see: Bhattasali 1929: 61–62 and pl. XXIX ; B. 
Bhattacharyya 1958: fig. 185; Niyogi 2001: fig. 80; Haque and 
Gail  2008: 131 and pl. 5; Lee 2009: 112–13, 143–45 and fig. 36. 
124. All
inger 2000; Bautze-Picron 2004: 239 and n. 105 
for further references.
125. For instance, the images of Viṣṇu generally show the 
god surrounded by tiny images of his avatāra s, and those 
of Sūrya present him with similar images of the Grahas or of the Ādityas: these three models illustrate the gods 
as a power which is eternal (the avatāra s) or which rules 
throughout the universe (the Grahas) (see Mevissen 2006b 
and 2010; Bautze-Picron  1985: 473–74, 2007a: 101). Śiva is 
worshipped in the region mainly as dancing, displaying his 
power to destroy the universe, which he achieves through 
this action.conclusion
Artistic production in Bihar fits within a long 
tradition; ateliers were numerous and very active 
and they were closely related to monasteries and 
sites of pilgrimages. This presence might account 
for stronger and stricter iconographic rules. The 
situation differs in the Delta: there is no site of 
pilgrimage and the monasteries do not seem to have 
played the same intensive ‘cultural’ role of drawing 
monks from abroad to remain and study there. 
Rather, the region seems to have been the bastion 
of the last ramifications of Esoteric Buddhism as 
strongly practised in, and originating from, Bihar 
and North Bengal. This type of Buddhism under -
went deep transformations in Bengal, allowing 
the lay society to perform rituals involving the 
production of manuscripts, and being confronted 
with the countercultural ways of life advocated by 
the Mahāsiddhas. Moreover, being an area to pass through on the way to Bihar when coming from 
Burma, it was thus visited by Theravādin monks 
and not exclusively by those advocating Mahāyāna. 
As we may surmise from the short survey presented 
here, this late (and last) phase of Buddhist art in 
Bengal reflects a deep intricacy which makes the 
study of its iconography difficult but also stimu -
lating. Whereas images of Mārīcī and Mañjuśrī 
relate to the Bodhi and thus to the homeland of 
Buddhism, i.e. old Magadha or Bihar, the history 
of the wrathful representations of Heruka is deeply 
interwoven with the iconographies of Śiva and 
Cāmuṇḍā as they emerged in Bengal and Assam, 
and the iconography of the Buddha’s life betrays 
deep similarities with its representation in Burma 
and Tibet. This chapter of the history of Buddhist 
art would undoubtedly deserve to be written anew.
Bautze-Picron mockup.indd   190 11/7/16   10:16 PM

--- [Page 205] ---
Chapter 8
Borobudur’s Pāla Forebear?  
A Field Note from Kesariya, Bihar, India
swati chemburkar
The rise of the pāla dynasty in the 8th 
century ad brought paradigm shifts in Bud -
dhist text, ritual, and sacred architecture that 
sent cultural waves across the expanding maritime 
and land trade routes of Asia.1 This chapter focuses 
on how the architectural concepts travelled in the 
connected Buddhist world between the Ganges 
valley and Java. A movement of architectural 
ideas can be seen from studying the corpus of the 
temples in the Pāla ( ad 750–1214) and Śailendra ( ad 
775–1090)2 domains of India and Indonesia. This 
chapter proposes that we see a paradigm shift in the 
design of a stūpa architecture at Kesariya (Bihar) 
that emphasizes the arrangement of deities in the 
circular maṇḍalic  fashion with a certain numer -
ological configuration of life-size Buddha figures 
placed in the external niches of the monument. 
This new architectural concept possibly played a 
key role in the development of a more elaborate 
structure of Borobudur in Java.
1.I owe a special word of thanks to Prof Tadeusz Sko -
rupski for introducing me to Buddhism and generously
sharing his breadth of knowledge, and to Dr Peter Sharrock 
for encouraging me to think beyond the boundaries of the 
established scholarship and reading and commenting on
the manuscript. Many thanks to Prof Max Deeg, for all
his valuable comments on the paper and for generously
helping out with the reading material, and to Dr Andrea
Acri for all his support, help and patience throughout the 
editing process. Dr K.K. Muhammed’s interest in my work, 
his insights and his significant contributions in excavating 
and restoring Kesariya stūpa  are gratefully acknowledged.
Thanks to Yves Guichard for providing me with the aerial 
images of Nandangaṛh, Kesariya, and to Deepak Anand,
without whose help Bihar field work would have been dif -
ficult.
2.Pāl
a period dates after Huntington and Huntington
1990: 542, chart 1; Śailendra dates after Zakharov 2012: 1.The architectural linkages emerge stronger 
with the central fivefold structure of the temples 
of the Pālas and Śailendras. In order to make the 
essential comparison, a quick method of drawing 
architectural plans is developed that is based on the 
basic measurements and not archaeological plans.3 
architectural development 
in stūpa  structure
The main archaeological sites of the middle and 
lower Ganges plain were recorded in the 19th 
century by Alexander Cunningham, following the 
travel accounts of the Chinese scholar-pilgrims 
Faxian (ca. 337–422) and Xuanzang (ca. 602–64). 
Northeast India contained not only early Buddhist 
stūpa s and monastic complexes, but also a range 
of stūpa structures that advanced from the tradi -
tional hemispherical stūpa of Sanchi, through the 
cruciform, terraced stūpa structure of Nandangaṛh 
(Fig. 8.1) to the elaborate stūpa-maṇḍala  of Kesariya. 
Most of the Pāla structures that may have served 
as a model for Central Javanese temples are in di -
lapidated state today, making it difficult to track 
the architectural borrowings. 
But since 1998, the Archaeological Survey of 
India (ASI) excavations of some parts of Kesariya 
have uncovered striking design similarities with 
the massive Central Javanese stūpa of Borobudur, 
whose stepped pyramid structure and maṇḍalic  
3.The drawings of Kesariya are from 2011 field trip
measurements and Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)
reports. For temple buildings in Śailendra domain, the
plans displayed at the Candi Sewu site museum have been 
used as a reference material but the details are mine. For
Buddhist sites in present-day Bangladesh, I have mentioned 
the specific references for each drawing.
Chemburkar mockup.indd   191 11/7/16   11:05 PM

--- [Page 206] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia192
 
arrangement of deities in circular form has hitherto 
been considered unique and without precedent 
(Figs. 8.2 and 8.3). Borobudur’s pyramidal slopes 
and circular summit are covered with niches 
and small bell-shaped stūpa s hosting 504 life-size 
Buddha icons of the supreme pentad of Jina-Buddhas.Kesariya also appears to be a monumental 
maṇḍala  with life-size Buddhas facing the quarters 
of the universe. It is too early in the excavation cycle 
to identify the maṇḍala , but we already know that 
at least two of the Borobudur Buddhas, Amitābha 
and Akṣobhya, are present at Kesariya. From the Fig. 8.1: Cruciform structure of the stupa of Nandangaṛh, Champāran, Bihar. (Photo courtesy of Yves Guichard)
Fig. 8.2: Aerial view of Kesariya stupa, showing all the 
terraces. (Photo courtesy of Yves Guichard)Fig. 8.3: Model of Borobudur stūpa  kept at the site 
museum, showing all the terraces. (Photo: author)
Chemburkar mockup.indd   192 11/7/16   11:05 PM

--- [Page 207] ---
193 Borobudur’s Pala Forebear?
current evidence available it seems that Kesariya 
marked a major shift in the architectural devel -
opment of the stūpa structure under the Pālas to 
a Buddha-bedecked, mountain- maṇḍala  model. 
This breakthrough model for a ceremonial centre 
is what appears to have travelled, presumably with 
related texts and ritual practices, between the Pāla 
and Śailendra domains. 
kesariya in legend 
The dating of the Kesariya stūpa is in its infancy. 
The structure that is partly visible today, following 
only partial excavation, is the ultimate phase of a 
stūpa constructed on a natural hill that evolved 
through an unknown number of phases. 
This may be the stūpa  mentioned by Xuanzang, 
who traveled on the well-known route from Vaiśālī 
to Kuśinagara on the way to reside at Nālandā.4
 Cunningham, the British archaeologist and 
army engineer considered the father of the ASI, 
wrote the first detailed description of Kesariya in 
1861 and 1862. Following the leads of Xuanzang, 
he carried out some excavations of the adjacent 
mound known as Raniwās and found traces of an 
old Buddhist monastic establishment, with a temple 
enshrining a colossal Buddha image. However on 
his second visit, Cunningham said local people had 
pillaged the mound and the large cult image was 
lost. Cunningham suggests that Raniwās was the 
site of a large Buddhist monastery or vihāra  linked 
to the stūpa of Kesariya.5
4. Xuanzang mentions a cakravartin  s tūpa , approximately 
200 li to the northwest of Vaiśālī, which Cunningham (1871: 
65) identifies with Kesariya. See Xuanzang’s The Great Tang 
dynasty record of the Western Regions, translated in English 
by Li (1996: 214); cf. Watters 1905 II: 71–72 (English trans. 
of the French edition by Julien, 1858).
5. Co
lonel Mackenzie of the Madras Engineers was the 
first modern explorer to survey the mound of Kesariya in 
1814, along with his associate Kashinath Babu. (Coinciden -
tally, in the same year Borobudur was ‘rediscovered’ by 
Cornelius, an envoy of Sir Stamford Raffles). Mackenzie and 
Babu excavated the east side of the huge mound. Unfortu -
nately, there are no first-hand records of their excavations. 
In 1835, Captain Brian Hodgson, assistant to the resident in 
a new office of British-ruled Nepal, published the survey 
efforts of Mackenzie along with his sketch of the ruins 
without any descriptive note. The sketch is published by 
Bengal Asiatic Society’s Journal  (1835, plate VII ). Hodgson According to local legend, the big Raniwās 
(‘Palace of the queen’) mound is associated with 
cakravartin  king Bena, who is said to have immo -
lated himself there with his family because of the 
death of his wife Kamalāvatī. The Padmapurāṇa  
mentions King Bena as a Buddhist cakravartin  who 
acquired superhuman powers, but due to some mis -
conduct, his powers left him and his wife fell into 
a royal tank and drowned. The tank of the legend 
has been identified as the present-day Gangayā 
tank, about 1 kilometre south of the Kesariya. The 
despairing king, on the advice of the court priests, 
built the Kesariya stūpa and entered it with his 
family, never to be seen again.6
kesariya in history
Xuanzang’s 7th century account mentions a stūpa 
built in the area of Champāran, Bihar, where the 
Licchavis of Vaiśālī took leave of the Buddha, on his 
way to parinirvāṇa . Here the Buddha left his alms 
bowl as a memento for them. The record mentions 
the stūpa , possibly built in the location of Kesariya 
as a memory of the event (see Cunningham 1871: 
66), as one of the principal Buddhist sanctuaries 
of the region and notes that Buddhists referred to 
it as a cakravartin stūpa —a monument that com -
memorates the abhiṣeka  ceremony of a Buddhist 
king of kings.7 
collected several Buddhist texts and had worked in this 
area during his ten-year tenure in Nepal. Finally, in 1861 
and 1862, the first detailed description of the Kesariya 
stūpa  was offered by General Alexander Cunningham. 
Cunningham never excavated the actual stūpa  of Kesariya 
but only the surrounding area. During the excavations, 
Cunningham had found an old Buddhist establishment, 
with a temple enshrining a colossal Buddha image. The 
statue was removed in 1860 by the Bengali Babu of the 
Rāmgarh Indigo factory. Cunningham dates the stūpa  to 
the 2nd to 7th century in his four reports made between 
1862 and 1865 and published by ASI (Cunningham 1871: 65).
6. See Cunningham’s four reports made between 1862 
and 1865 and published by ASI (1871: 65–67); see also Mu -
hammed 2002: 3.
7. Xuanzang describes: ‘In the city there is a stūpa  at  
the place where Buddha had told an assembly of various 
Bodhisattvas and men and heavenly beings about his past 
events of cultivating Bodhisattva deeds. He was once a 
universal monarch [ cakravartin ] named Mahādeva (known 
as Datian or great city in Chinese), in this city, possessing 
Chemburkar mockup.indd   193 11/7/16   11:05 PM

--- [Page 208] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia194
The available archaeological evidence suggests 
there were various stages of construction, and the 
sheer size of the stūpa implies that it was funded by 
royal resources at each stage.8 Its construction at the 
junction of four major roads and its striking revolu -
tionary maṇḍalic design both tend to support such 
a cakravartin  claim, as do the legendary cakravartin  
stories of King Bena.
harṣa and a link to pāla
The Licchavi stūpa  was possibly expanded by King 
Harṣa (ca. 606–47), the first great post-Gupta king 
in the region.9 Harṣa’s empire was a loose federation 
of several kingdoms that at the peak of his power 
covered the present-day regions of Uttar Pradesh, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Bihar, Bengal, and Odisha.10 
He was a lover of art and literature and was con -
verted to Buddhism according to Xuanzang, who 
resided for eight years in his empire. Xuanzang 
records several monastic buildings patronized by 
Harṣa along with thousands of stūpa s, each over 
hundred feet high, gardens, water tanks, and nu -
merous endowments to Nālandā.11 Construction 
activity in northeastern India gained momentum 
first under Harṣa and then under later Guptas of 
Magadha. 
the seven treasures and being competent to rule over the 
four continents of the world’ (Li 1996: 214).
8. The structure clearly shows two phases of construc -
tion activity: Śuṅga/Kuṣāṇa and late Gupta period (late 
7th, early 8th century), according to Indian Archaeology: 
A Review 1998-99 (2004: 11). In a telephonic conversation 
on 16 January 2014, Muhammed stated that the slopes are 
strewn with late Gupta period bricks or maybe even bricks 
from a later date. 
9. This is my hypothesis, based on the ASI findings of 
the post-Gupta period bricks at the site. The sheer scale 
of the monument would not have been possible without 
significant royal funding. Champāran was part of Harṣa’s 
vast kingdom.
10. Devahuti 1970: 87, 111; Thapar 2002: 289; Scher -
rer-Schaub 2003: 226.
11. See W
atters 1905 II: 164 and Li 1996 (Fascicle V: 144). 
Even though Xuanzang mentions Harṣa’s building activ -
ity, the only architectural evidence from his reign may be 
sought at Nālandā. The archaeological remains of Nālandā 
date from the 5th century to the end of the 12th century ad, 
and during Harṣa’s reign the monastery-cum-university 
was certainly at the height of its fame. Harṣa extended his kingdom in battle until his 
power stretched from Valābhī (Gujarat) to Magadha 
(Bihar, Odisha). With an empire consolidated at 
home he became the first Indian king to cement 
ties with the Tang court of China, notably through 
his personal friendship with the well-connected 
Xuanzang. Harṣa had ruled from Kanauj (Uttar 
Pradesh) for decades and then moved his capital 
to Magadha in ad 641.12 He announced the event 
by sending a delegation to the Chinese emperor, 
who in response dispatched an embassy in ad 643  
(Sen 2001: 8), presumably to attend his Buddhist 
cakravartin  coronation.13 Did  Kesariya play a part 
in this ceremony?
Chinese sources mention another delegation to 
Harṣa’s state in ad 648, which resulted in a battle 
between Wang Xuance, the lead envoy of the vis -
iting Chinese delegation, and King Aluonashun 
(Aruṇāśa?), who had just usurped Harṣa.14 The fact 
that Champāran (the region of Kesariya stūpa ) 
was the scene of this major historic battle gives 
us some indication of its importance in Harṣa’s 
vast empire.
12. Based on her understanding of the Chinese sources, 
De
vahuti mentions that Harṣa was the king of Kanauj for 
a long time, but by the time the Chinese mission arrived in 
ad 641, he had already proclaimed the throne of Magadha: 
see Devahuti 1970: 84, 214, 217. Based on his readings of Xin 
Tang shu  221a ( New History of the Tang [ Dynasty ]), Tansen 
Sen (2005: 19) concludes the same. 
13. Based on Xuanzang’s travel account, Elliot (1921: 100) 
paints a picture of this ceremony in which a golden image of 
the Buddha was borne on an elephant while Harṣa, dressed 
as Indra, held a parasol over it, and his ally, dressed as 
Brahmā, waved a fly whisk. 
14. The na
me of Harṣa’s usurper is known through the 
Chinese inscription of Bodh Gayā and Chinese historiogra-
phy as ‘Aluonashun’ (Lévi 1900: 297, Sen 2003: 22). Chinese 
sources describe Aluonashun as king of Nafuti or Tinafuti 
kingdom (see Devahuti 1970: 207–29). Modern scholars 
have deciphered the name of the kingdom as Tīrabhukti, 
a feudatory kingdom of Harṣa in northern Bihar (Waddell 
1911: 37–65). Sen’s reconstruction of Aluonashun as Aruṇāśa 
is tentative. Lokesh Chandra (1992a: 260–61) interprets 
Aluonashan as King Arjuṇa. The battle site of Chapoholo on 
the banks of Chientowei is identified by Lévi (1900: 297–401) 
as Champāran on the banks of river Gaṇḍakī . Supporting 
the identification of Lévi, Devahuti (1970: 228) adds that 
Tīrabhukti, Champāran, and Gaṇḍakī are all in the same 
region. Apparently Champāran, situated on the Gaṇḍakī, 
was a part of Tīrabhukti kingdom in the 7th century. 
Chemburkar mockup.indd   194 11/7/16   11:05 PM

--- [Page 209] ---
195 Borobudur’s Pala Forebear?
Archaeological research has not yet begun at 
many sites in the middle and lower Ganges, but the 
available evidence points to Harṣa as the most likely 
post-Licchavi and pre-Pāla builder at Kesariya. The 
ASI superintendent for the site, K.K. Muhammed, 
has found Gupta and late-Gupta period bricks from 
the 7th century on the slopes of the stūpa .15 
According to  Dilip Chakaravarti (2001: 203), the 
site remained active in later centuries:
The recent excavations by the Archaeological 
Survey of India at this site have discovered a 
Pāla period stūpa dating from the eighth cen -
tury. The excavations have revealed the terrac -
es of the stūpa, with ‘Pradakshinā Path’, which 
follows the pattern of those reported from 
Pahārpur in East Bengal and Nandangarh [in 
east Champāran]. The stūpa has been found 
with several [life-size] stucco figures of Lord 
Buddha in ‘Bhumīsparśā posture in the cells 
provided all over the terraces. 
Chakravarti (ibid.: 206) reports a later Pāla-peri -
od structure was added to the stūpa summit in the 
8th century, but the exact nature of the construction 
is very difficult to determine. Champāran played a 
significant role during the subsequent Pāla period, 
given the constructions of the massive stūpa sites of 
Bisa Sāgar and Purnadih. Along with the Kesariya 
stūpa , these huge stūpa  sites in Chamapāran await 
the excavations. A large Pāla-period black stone 
slab with a 10th- to 12th-century inscription in 
Siddhamātṛkā script was also found at Kesariya.16  
It is the same script that was introduced to Java 
by the builders of Borobudur, the Śailendra kings 
(Jordaan 2006: 6).
The Pālas inherited the territory that was previ -
ously united by Harṣa and by the Magadha Guptas 
(Asher 1980: 69; see Fig. 8). Their control of the 
Gangetic plain extended over the trade routes of the 
Bay of Bengal, giving the dynasty more internation -
al influence than any of its predecessors. Nālandā, 
15. Based on the findings during the excavations and the 
s
ize and the nature of the bricks, ASI has tentatively dated 
the structure to the late Gupta period ( Indian Archaeology: 
A Review 1998–99 , ASI  2004: 11).
16. Ac
cording to Patil (1963: 201), the stone slab that was 
found by J.B. Elliot in 1835 had a representation of a Viṣṇu 
image. The exact nature of the representation is not known, 
but it could be one of the incarnations of Viṣṇu.the prime monastery-university, already had an 
Asia-wide network and was bolstered by Pāla 
patronage. But along with Nālandā, Pāla finance 
also brought the construction of the new Bud -
dhist centres of Uddanḍapura (Odantapurī) and 
Vikramaśīla in South Bihar, of Somapura, Lālmai, 
and Maināmatī in modern-day Bangladesh, and 
other Buddhist sites in Odisha17 providing a broad 
monastic base in northeastern India.
Pāla sway dominated after King Dharmapāla 
(ca. 775–815) proclaimed his control over the Bay 
of Bengal trade.18 He was an extraordinary king 
whose political and military ambition was matched 
by an unprecedented generosity towards Buddhist 
establishments that provided a platform for the 
sacred art and architecture. The dynasty’s influence 
would soon be traceable across Asia in religious 
texts, bronze ritual icons, sacred architecture, and 
in the Esoteric Buddhist schools formed by Indian, 
Chinese, Korean, Japanese, and Javanese masters, 
who travelled both eastwards and westwards along 
the maritime and land routes to the Ganges valley 
monasteries. 
From the basis of the above data, we can con -
clude that Kesariya hill first bore some kind of 
pre-Pāla structure and that the mound was active 
and under modification throughout the Pāla period. 
The Pālas modified and enlarged many Buddhist 
sites, sometimes constructing on the older vestiges.19 
Thus, the other new Pāla Buddhist centres appear 
to be parallel—and major—8th- and 9th-century 
architectural enhancements of a maṇḍalic form 
that evolved from the older Nandangaṛh stūpa 
17. Donaldson (1995: 177) mentions the developments 
at Ratnagiri, Udayagiri, and Lalitagiri in Odisha, during 
the Pāla period.
18. The K
halimpur charters of Dharmapāla were issued 
from Paṭaliputra, ‘where a variety of boats had formed 
a bridge on the Bhagirathi’ (Kielhorn 1896–97: 249). A 
verse from the Rāmacaritam , an epic poem by Sandhyā -
karanandin about the Pāla emperor Rāmapāla, describes 
his seafaring abilities as well as Pāla renown abroad (see 
Shāstri and Basak 1969: 3). 
19. Asher (1980: 92–93) has discussed the earlier Gupta-pe -
riod fragments and their adaptation in several sculptures 
of Somapura Mahavihāra in Pahārpur, which is a Pāla 
monastery. He observes the strong Gupta character of some 
of the sculptures at Somapura.  
Chemburkar mockup.indd   195 11/7/16   11:05 PM

--- [Page 210] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia196
in to the Champāran and Kesariya stūpa type.20 
Apart from its religious function as a monument 
expressing the form of Mahāyāna or Esoteric Bud -
dhism that flourished during the Pāla period, the 
temple became a statement of political power and 
a major ceremonial centre under the Pālas. These 
developments appear to be reflected in the art and 
architecture of Kesariya. 
20. The terraces projecting out in the cardinal direc -
tions, on all levels of Nandangaṛh stūpa , develop into brick 
chambers housing life-size Buddha images erected as at 
Kesariya, and later on form the four shrine halls at the 
cardinal directions found at Vikramaśīla and Somapura, 
with huge cult images, concluding the fold system in ar -
chitecture. For a detailed account of Nandangaṛh stūpa , 
see van Lohuizen-de Leeuw (1956).comparing kesariya  
and borobudur
Based on the overall measurements and the ar -
chitecture of the two stūpa s, Muhammed (2005) 
compares the structure of Kesariya to Borobudur.  
Long (2008: 187–91) also observes the similarities 
and differences between the two structures. The 
period between the Gupta and Pāla dynasties, 
when Kesariya was built, was a transitional pe -
riod in art. The relative paucity of sculpture in 
stone and metal in the pre-Pāla period turned to 
prolific large-icon production in all media from 
the 8th to the 12th century. Some Nālandā sculp -
tures from this period show Gupta traits (Asher 
1980: 80, 93) and some art bears features identi -Fig. 8.4a: Kesariya east elevation showing brick niches 
housing Buddhas at all the levels. (Photo: author)Fig. 8.4b: Borobudur east elevation Buddhas.  (Photo: author)
Fig. 8.4c: Kesariya brick niche detail showing Buddha in bhūmisparśa-mudrā. (Photo: author)Fig. 8.4d: Borobudur stone niche detail showing Akṣhobhya in bhūmisparśa-mudrā. (Photo: author)
Chemburkar mockup.indd   196 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 211] ---
197 Borobudur’s Pala Forebear?
fiable as Pāla.21 Large niches on the outside walls 
of the temples were created during this threshold 
period to house life-size stucco sculptures. At the 
turn of the 8th century, Maniyār Maṭha in Rājgīr, 
stūpa III at Nālandā, and the Mahābodhi temple 
in Bodh Gayā were adorned with such stucco fig -
ures.22 Susan Huntington drew attention to this 
feature in her short survey of Pāla-period archi -
tecture.23 The feature was further developed at the 
Pāla monasteries at Pahārpur (Somapura vihāra ) 
and Antichak (Vikramaśīla vihāra ), where huge 
Buddha statues were enshrined in the niches that 
were erected in the cardinal directions of the 
21. As Huntington (1984: 10, 20) notes, ‘one might assume 
that “Pāla art” began with “Pāla dynasty”, but since there 
are no remains which may be definitely assigned to the 
first Pāla emperor-Gopāla, this assumption thus remains 
unfounded’.
22. Be
rnet Kempers 1933: 10–11; Weiner 1962: 173; Asher 
1980: 75.
23. See Huntington 1990: 90–91. Claudine Bautze-Picron 
(1993b: 283) supports this in her review: ‘As the author em -
phasizes, a special feature of the architecture was then the 
niches on the outside walls of the temple. Those niches 
were occupied by sculptures as we know from temple 2 
at Nālandā, still adorned with stone panels, or from the 
Maniyar Matha at Rajgir or the temple at Aphsad where 
stucco images used to adorn the niches’. central terraced temple.24 Sculpture thus became 
an integrated part of the monumental structure 
and was no longer just an adornment. The Pāla 
foundations of Lalitagiri, Ratnagiri, and Udaya -
giri in Odisha all made prominent use of massive 
sculpture. Earlier Buddha images were replaced 
by sculptures of Bodhisattvas, especially Mañ -
juśrī, and sculptural maṇḍala s (Donaldson 1995: 
179–80). 
The fivefold, terraced architecture of Kesariya 
with large external Buddhas in niches appears to 
be a somewhat radical enhancement of the fea -
ture that Huntington noticed as the new trait of the transitional period (Figs. 8.4a–4d).
The concentric six terraces of the partly excavat -
ed stūpa  at Kesariya are built on a natural hill in the 
same way as Borobudur. The lower four Kesariya 
terraces are more circular than those of Borobudur, 
but close examination reveals two square terraces 
on the top level, resembling the combination of
24. The structure is characterized by a cruciform plan 
raised on three receding terraces with a circumambulatory 
path. Four shrine halls of roughly the same size project 
in the cardinal directions on the second terrace, which 
probably held the Buddha statues. Above the second terrace 
is the construction of the hollow but inaccessible central 
shaft that probably served as the base to the superstructure 
of stūpa  (Dikshit 1938: 14). Fig. 8.5a: Kesariya plan showing the overall layout of the structure. (Drawing: author)Fig. 8.5b: Borobudur plan. (Adapted from an undated drawing in the Kern Institute collection, Leiden Uni-versity Library, GD 14 1472)
Chemburkar mockup.indd   197 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 212] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia198
square and circular terraces found on Borobudur 
(Figs. 8.5a and 8.5b).
Like Borobudur, Kesariya’s design combines 
three elements: a natural hill, a stūpa , and a 
maṇḍala . Both monuments present themselves to 
the viewer as horizontally flattened. Anyone stand -
ing at the base of either monument cannot see the 
topmost stūpa . Much like the stūpa of Borobudur, 
Kesariya has a certain numerological configura -
tion of brick chambers on each terrace at regular 
intervals with a life-size Buddha statue positioned 
in them.25 Atop the fifth terrace rises the stūpa to 
a height of 9.38 metres and 22 metres in diameter. 
25. The average chamber size at Kesariya is 2.20 x 1.80 
metres with an approximate height of 2.25 metres. Each 
chamber has an opening 70 to 90 centimetres in width. 
There is a 25-centimetre high platform touching the wall to 
house a Buddha ( Indian Archaeology: A Review 1999–2000 , 
2005: 11).The exposed terraced structure of the monument 
measures 123 metres in diameter and 37.5 metres in 
height (Muhammed 2005: 9). The length and height 
of Borobudur are almost the same as Kesariya. 
The topmost, fifth terrac e of the Kesariya struc -
ture, just below the stūpa , houses a single brick 
chamber facing each cardinal direction.26 The 
chamber on the eastern side at this level contains 
an image of Akṣobhya in bhūmisparśa-mudrā . 
We await further excavation to discover which 
images faced the other cardinal directions. The 
fourth terrace has triple chambers facing the same 
directions. The lower three terraces in addition 
have triple brick chambers facing the subcardi -
nal directions. All the chambers have a raised 
plat
form for a Buddha image. The entire mon -
ument, from the fifth terrace to the lowermost 
26. Indian Archaeology: A Review 1999–2000 (2005: 17, 19).Fig. 8.6: Kesariya stupa: Probable arrangement of Buddhas in the exposed and restored brick chambers on all the 
terraces. Only the basic dimensions are given. (Drawing: author)
Chemburkar mockup.indd   198 11/7/16   11:06 PMAssumed symmetry ot Buddhas •t KtNriya • Aktobhya 
Amltibha • 
Unknown 
PLAN 
Kesanya Stupa A 
East Champaran Bihar IN~ 
NOT TO SCAlE 

--- [Page 213] ---
199 Borobudur’s Pala Forebear?
terrace, would have housed (4 + 4 + 8 + 8 + 8 = 32) 
brick chambers and would have once contained 
(4×1 + 4×3 + 8×3 + 8×3 + 8×3 = 88) Buddha stat -
ues.27 Figure 6 shows the Buddhas from the top 
level of the monument to the bottom level, based 
on the ASI report of 1999–2000. The drawing 
assumes symmetry in the unexcavated sections. 
The two upper-level terraces are connected 
by an 80-centimetre wide staircase in the south-
west corner that is concealed within the polyg -
onal designs between the chambers.28 Since the 
excavations are not yet complete, it is difficult to 
determine the number and exact nature of the 
staircase(s). The circumambulatory paths on all 
the terraces are today devoid of reliefs but there 
is ample space to have housed them. Whether 
there were any narratives in stucco, plaster, or 
paint is impossible to determine from the pres -
ently accumulated archaeological evidence. Boro -
budur is of course renowned for its kilometres 
of carved stone reliefs along the five terraces.
At present, there are three brick chambers on 
the eastern side, beyond the base of Kesariya’s 
lowest terrace and rammed earth base. Due to 
the incomplete excavation, it is not yet possible 
to ascertain whether they were part of the stūpa 
structure, but their alignment and size strongly 
suggest they were. They seem to be later addi -
tions to the main structure and they may indicate  
that there was a further terrace below them, 
much like the hidden foot of Borobudur. This hy- 
pothesis can only be tested in further excavation 
(see Fig. 8.6).  
The excavators have unearthed a number of 
beautifully carved bricks with geometrical patterns 
and Kīrttimukhas (‘faces of glory’), tiles, vases, and 
many small red earthenware ritual pots with lids, 
27. The topmost level has a single chamber in all four 
cardinal directions, containing an image of the Buddha 
in each chamber (4 × 1 = 4). The fourth-floor terrace has 
four chambers facing the four cardinal directions and 
each chamber has three compartments, thus containing 
(4 × 3 =) 12 images. The lower three terraces have eight 
chambers facing the cardinal and subcardinal directions. 
Each chamber has three compartments housing (8 × 3 =) 
24 images. The total number of Buddha statues is therefore 
88 (4 + 12 + 24 + 24 + 24).
28. See Indian Archaeology: A review 2000–01 (2006: pl. 8).spouts, and sprinkler heads that are presumed to 
have been used in consecrations. The scale of Kes -
ariya implies that it was a mass ceremonial centre, 
but its relationship to the dynastic centre is so far 
unknown. Given the kind of ruins found around 
Kesariya, it appears to have been a part of a vihāra  
or temple monastery,29 where daily rituals would 
have been performed by senior monks. 
Borobudur is precisely aligned with the fire 
ritual temple called Candi Pawon and the regal 
Candi Mendut, clearly forming the ceremonial 
centre of the Śailendra kingdom.30 No trace of a 
palace has yet been found, but it may have been 
beside Candi Pawon, as the king would sometimes 
partake in daily homa  rituals. Archaeological finds 
made in a five-kilometre radius of Borobudur in -
dicate a monastic complex.31 
kesariya and the pāla vihāra s of 
vikramaśīla and somapura
Kesariya’s innovation of a crowning stūpa and life-
size Buddha images in external niches at cardinal 
points was further developed at the early Pāla mon -
astery of Somapura at Pahārpur. Established by 
Dharmapāla (775–810),32 the central temple of So -
mapura vihāra  has a maṇḍalic plan.33 An imposing 
brick structure twenty-one metres in height rises at 
the centre of the courtyard. It is raised on a cruciform 
plan in three receding terraces with circumambula -
tory paths housing narrative reliefs and accessed by 
a flight of stairs on the north side. Four shrine halls 
29. See the four reports made by Cunningham in the 
period 1862–65 (1871: 67 and plate XXIII ).
30. Va
n Erp (1917: 285–310) was the first person to recog -
nize the significance of the alignment of the three struc -
tures. Krom (1927) believed that the three temples would 
have functioned as part of a single plan. It was Mus (1935: 
418–20) who talked about the ritual dependency of the 
three structures that Moens (1951, English trans. Mark 
Long 2007: 7, 8, 67) supported. See Lokesh Chandra 1980a : 
35–36 and Long 2008: 98–99. 
31. Ba
sed on Boechari’s excavation report (1982: 90–95), 
Miksic (1990: 34–35) argues about the monastic complex 
placed next to Borobudur.
32. According to Dikshit (1938: 19), who carried out 
the excavations at Pahārpur from 1926 to 1927 and 1933 
to 1934. 
33. Di
kshit 1938: 19; Myer 1961: 3; Gail 1999: 131.
Chemburkar mockup.indd   199 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 214] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia200
of roughly the same size project out in the cardinal 
directions on the second terrace, which presumably 
originally held Buddha statues. Above the second 
terrace is a hollow but inaccessible central shaft that 
probably served as the base for a crowning stūpa 
(Dikshit 1938: 14), as at Kesariya and Borobudur. 
One theory of Seema and M.M. Haque is that the 
central chamber and surrounding shrine halls 
would have once housed the supreme pentad of 
Jina-Buddhas,  an expression of the Vajradhātu -
maṇḍala.34
The contemporary monasteries of Vikramaśīla 
at Antichak (patronized by the Pālas) and others at 
Maināmatī (patronized by the Devas) have a central 
34. Seema and M.M. Haque in a conference paper in 2004 
thus speculated on the superstructure of the monument, 
which is today mostly abraded. Snodgrass (1992: 135) argues 
that stūpa s with five Jina-Buddhas are expressions of the 
Vajradhātumaṇḍala.stūpa  structure that is identical to Pahārpur.35 These 
monuments share a cruciform plan and rise in 
stepped terraces. The niches facing the cardinal di -
rections are empty today but presumably would have 
been occupied by huge Buddha statues,36 much like 
at Kesariya and Somapura. Archaeological research 
has unearthed several monuments with similar 
plans (i.e., a fivefold central structure) in Bihar and 
Bengal37 showing an identical arrangement of a 
35. For Antichak monasteries, see Asher 1980: 91; for 
Maināmatī monasteries, see Imam 2002: 614–16. 
36. In a niche of the Antichak stūpa , th e excavators 
found the crossed legs of a huge image made of clay. Plate 
IIIa (Indian Archaeology: A Review 1961–62 ) depicts the 
remains of an image from the South chamber, while plate 
IXa (Indian Archaeology: A Review 1962–63 ) shows the 
remains of another image. 
37. Imam (2000: 133) mentions that further cruciform 
temples ‘in the 7th–8th century time bracket’ have been 
discovered in recent excavations at Savar near Dhaka. Fig. 8.7a: Kesariya stūpa , Champāran. Central cruciform structure on the topmost level. (Drawing: author)
Fig. 8.7b: Somapura Mahāvihāra, 
Pahārpur. End of 8th century.(Drawing: author) Fig. 8.7c: Vikramaśīla vihāra , 
Antichak. End of 8th century. (Drawing: author) Fig. 8.7d: Rupban Mura vihāra, Maināmatī. End of 8th century. (Drawing: author) 
Chemburkar mockup.indd   200 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 215] ---
201 Borobudur’s Pala Forebear?
sacred space that could have served parallel func -
tions in Borobudur, Sewu, Lumbung, Bubrah, and 
Plaosan in the Śailendra domain38 (see Figs. 8.7a–d).
From the above architectural plans of the 
central structure of these vihāra  it is clear that 
the Buddhist monasteries began to resemble 
one another as never before. As pointed out by 
Joanna Williams (1982: 154–55, 174), the differ -
ence of layout between Nāgārjunakoṇḍa, Sañci, 
Taxila, and Ellora shows a wide variety of region -
al architectural forms, but the megastructures of 
Somapura, Maināmatī, Vikramaśīla and, I add, 
Kesariya, show a remark-able uniformity; in one 
sense, the development at Somapura appears to be 
an ancient Buddhist equivalent of 20th-century 
neoclassical office buildings—an early Indic model 
of university architecture ( Davidson 2002: 107) .
This appearance of the new sacred architectural 
model raises many questions about what prompt -
ed the paradigm shift to a stūpa -maṇḍala , with a 
fivefold or ninefold maṇḍalic structure, and about 
how the Śailendras, the builders of contemporary 
Borobudur, inherited the model developed in Pāla 
Bihari-Bengali stūpa s.39
the paradigm shift in design: the 
maṇḍala  model and the cakravartin
New forms normally arise in religious architecture 
when there are significant changes in belief and 
Maināmatī monasteries (Salbān vihāra,  Bhojā vihāra , 
Aṇandā vihāra , Rupbān vihāra ) in Comilla district in 
Bangladesh show an identical cruciform structure at the 
centre of the temple. 
38. Rowland 1953; van Lohuizen-de Leeuw 1956; Bhat -
tacharya 1978; Samuel 2002.
39. Hermann-Pfandt’s study (2008) has observed the 
maṇḍala  elements in Buddhist architecture in India, Tibet, 
and Indonesia, and compared the well-known architec -
tural maṇḍala s of Uddaṇḍapura/Otantapurī, Candi Sewu, 
Borobudur, Mendut, Tholing, Tabo, and Gyantse. The first 
Tibetan monastery of Samye was built between 767 and 779 
ad (Lo Bue 1990: 17). Since the architecture of Samye dis -
plays they typical fivefold maṇḍalic structure (Yang 1996: 
pl. 152; Wong 2014) and was modeled after Uddaṇḍapura as 
per the account given in Pag-sam-jon-zang, part II (see Das 
1908: content XI), it is natural to assume that Uddaṇḍapura 
was constructed on a maṇḍala  model. Hermann-Pfandt 
mentions the Abhidharmakoṣa  (4th century ad) as the 
basis for the maṇḍalaritual. Although the specific maṇḍala  of Kesariya 
cannot yet be determined, this is the monument 
that marks the shift to the new stūpa -maṇḍala  
architecture that was to spread in the Pāla period 
to Vikramaśīla, Somapura, Maināmatī, and Boro -
budur. These latter monuments follow the fivefold 
Buddha-family scheme that forms the key pentad 
of Jina-Buddhas in the seminal Yogatantra text 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha (Snellgrove 1987: 175, 
189, 198); it is therefore possible that Kesariya will 
eventually be shown by archaeologists to embody 
the same maṇḍala  in its final form.
In the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha , the five -
fold Buddha-family scheme became dominant 
after Vairocana became a Buddha (Snellgrove 
1987: 203). Vairocana then draws in a number of 
personages, beginning with Samantabhadra, who is 
crowned and consecrated with the name Vajrapāṇi. 
Later, the other thirty-six figures of the maṇḍala  
are consecrated with names conferred on them 
by Vairocana, before they are positioned in the 
maṇḍala  (Snellgrove 1987: 8). These texts contain 
explicit references to human kingship. David Snell -
grove (1959b: 206) establishes intimate connections 
between maṇḍala , kingship, abhiṣeka ritual, and 
Vairocana as the cakravartin  Buddha in Vajrayāna 
Buddhism. 
During the abhiṣeka a lustration vessel is placed 
at the centre. The properties of the Buddhas and Bo -
dhisattvas of the maṇḍala  are understood to gather 
into the water of the lustration vessel. When anoint -
ed with this water, the monarch would acquire all 
the powers embodied in the central deity to become 
universal earthly ruler or cakravartin . He would 
then be able to exercise the powers of the central 
Buddha, whether mundane (e.g., producing rain) 
or supramundane (e.g., deepening one’s store of 
wisdom and compassion), and be responsible for 
the spiritual as well as the temporal well-being of 
his geographical maṇḍala  or the kingdom (Snell -
grove 1959b: 208).
The Vajradhātumaņḍala that was described 
in the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha  (Lokesh 
Chandra 1980b: 319) found its way into the archi -
tecture as a concrete arrangement of deities, on a 
basic fivefold or ninefold model.40 Akṣobhya and 
40. There are two extant Sanskrit manuscripts of Sar -
Chemburkar mockup.indd   201 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 216] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia202
his attendants in the east, Ratnasambhava in the 
south, Amitābha in the west, and Amoghasiddhi in 
the north made up a maṇḍalic arrangement around 
Vairocana or Mahāvairocana. This pentad and the 
attendant deities demarcating respective Buddha 
fields and one thousand Buddhas of Bhadrakālpa 
found prominent places in architecture.41
Brajdulal Chattopadhyaya (1994) sees these 
textual developments of the maṇḍala  with the 
strong centre and subsidiary sets in relation to 
the hierarchical structure of ‘ samānta  feudalism’ 
of mediaeval India.  The idea of a maṇḍala  with 
the central figure representing a supreme deity 
and directional figures as subordinate deities re -
flects the idea of the supreme king at the centre, 
surrounded by lesser kings that are expected to 
exercise power as local landlords rather than in -
dependent rulers. The nature of the maṇḍala  is 
therefore to map the social and political interests 
and designate levels of hierarchy. Ronald Davidson 
(2002: 121) argues that ‘the central and defining 
metaphor for mature esoteric Buddhism is that of 
an individual assuming kingship and exercising 
dominion … through a combination of ritual and 
metaphysical means, thereby becoming a supreme 
overlord (Buddha) or universal ruler ( cakravartin )’.
These textual developments in Buddhism served the 
interests of imperial figures in organizing political 
and social landscapes with the assistance of their 
spiritual advisors. Architecture played a key role as 
ceremonial or ritual centre in these developments. 
The terraced architectural design of Kesariya and 
Borobudur, along with the arrangement of Buddha 
vatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha  from Nepal. Guiseppe Tucci 
obtained a 19th-century manuscript of the Tantra, and 
in 1956 David Snellgrove and John Brough discovered an 
Indian palm-leaf manuscript that they identified as a 9th- 
or 10th-century work from Bihar, India. Snellgrove and 
Lokesh Chandra (1981) published a photographic repro -
duction of this manuscript; Do-Kyun Kwon (2002: 22, 28, 
29) and Weinberger (2003: 47, 61, 62, 72, 73) have described 
the formation of Vajradhātumaṇḍala in the Sarvatathāga -
tatattvasaṅgraha in the light of its Indian, Chinese, and 
Tibetan commentaries.
41. For a detailed description of the maṇḍala s se e Sno -
dgrass (1988: 634); for their use in the architecture of Candi 
Sewu, Mendut, and Borobudur, see Lokesh Chandra 1980a: 8  
and Bosch 1929: 111, mainly on Sewu.statues, clearly displays the hierarchical organiza -
tion of the maṇḍala  structure.
There are examples of an early maṇḍala  model 
and its application in the geo-political and religious 
domain during the time of Kesariya’s construc -
tion. Harṣa, in the tradition of the universal ruler, 
formally installed Bhāskaravarman on the throne 
of Kāmarūpa (modern-day Assam) as a symbol 
of his sovereignty over northeast India (Devahuti 
1970: 45, 74, 75). The 6th-century Maitrika king 
Droṇasiṁha was anointed by a Gupta overlord, 
a fact that is proudly related in Valabhi grants in 
western India (Fleet 1888: 168). Maitrika queen 
Duddā was known for establishing a maṇḍala  of 
monasteries in the 6th century, where the central 
monastery built by the queen became the nucleus 
that supported an extensive monastic group, known 
as the Duddā group of monasteries. This circle of 
monasteries was maintained and protected by the 
Maitrika kings, as overlords.42 Valabhī was one of 
the distinguished Buddhist seats of higher learn -
ing in India, along with Nālandā.43 The maṇḍala  
concept evidently permeated the political organi -
zation of Śubhākaradeva I ’s (ca. 780–800) kingdom 
of Odisha, when he created a group of feudatory 
states called maṇḍala s in a semicircular format, 
surrounding the central authority.44 It seems that 
the application of the term maṇḍala to a polit -
ical circle of vassals in the 6th and 7th century 
was already being reflected within the religious 
structures. In the subsequent centuries, it became 
well established in the politico-religious sphere of 
India as well as China (Davidson 2002: 126–40). 
How this maṇḍala  model was used in the ritual 
is difficult to determine, as many of the teachings 
42. See Guhasena’s grant ( Ind ian Antiquary  VII: 67). The 
monasteries that formed part of the Duddā circle were 
under royal care and protection. For the details of the 
grants by Maitrika kings to these monasteries, see the 
table in Dutt 1962: 227.
43. The 7th-century Chinese monk Yijing mentions 
Valabhī and Nālandā in the same breath during his time 
in India (Takakusu 1966: 177).
44. Don
aldson (1995: 180) says that the central Odishan 
authority was situated along the coastal area, which created 
a group of feudatory states such as the Airāvata maṇḍala , 
Śvetaka maṇḍala , Kodalaka maṇḍala , Yamagarta maṇḍala , 
Khijjiṅga maṇḍala , and Banai maṇḍala  to define the po -
litical boundaries. 
Chemburkar mockup.indd   202 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 217] ---
203 Borobudur’s Pala Forebear?
associated with the Vajradhātumaņḍala were oral, 
secret, and esoteric in nature. The narrative of the 
king Indrabhūti receiving the hidden scriptures 
in the important commentary of Prajñapāramitā 
Nayaśatapañcāśatikā  (‘150-Line Perfection of 
Insight ’) provides insight into the preaching and 
practice of such esoteric scriptures. The narrative 
shows how the royal chief priest divided up the 
court of princes, princesses, and ministers and 
placed each member on a maṇḍala  board. This is 
then revealed as the physical enactment of the Va -
jradhātumaņḍala derived from the Sarvatathāgata -
tat t va  s aṅgraha by the members of the court.45
pāla buddhism (8th– 9th century) 
and the connected buddhist world 
It seems that Empress Wu Zetian (r. 690–705) was 
interested in these new religious currents  —e spe-
cially the concepts regarding the maṇḍala  and 
cakravartin —as she officially assumed the title 
of cakravartin  after usurping the Tang throne 
(Forte (2006: 23–24). Her attempt to rule as an 
incarnation of Maitreya, born to rule the conti -
nent of Jambudvīpa, evidently fulfils the need to 
legitimize her usurpation and enhance her political 
status through Buddhist prophecies.46 The worldly 
benefits of maṇḍalic rituals remained attractive 
throughout the reigns of Emperor Zhongzong 
and Ruizong in the early 8th century, who em -
ployed monk Fazang to perform esoteric rituals 
during the drought struck capital of Tang China.47 
45. Jñānamitra’s commentary on Prajñapārāmitā-nayaśat -
apañcāśatikā  is found in the imperial catalogue of the 
Denkar library of ca. 8 10 ad (Toh. 2647, fols. 272b7-294a5; 
cf. Davidson 2002: 242–44). 
46. The evidence for the presence and involvement of 
South Asian monks in Wu Zetian’s political propaganda 
comes from a colophon found on the Dunhuang manu -
script of the Ratnameghasūtra , translated by Forte (1976: 
171–76, 253–70). The colophon records the names of the 
monks involved in the translation of the Sūtra  under super -
vision of Huaiyi. Of the thirty people listed in the colophon, 
nine were monks from South Asia.
47. In the year 708, Fazang successfully performed a 
rain-praying ritual at Jianfusi, which was the monastery 
Zhongzong dedicated to the posthumous welfare of his 
father Gaozong. In year 711, Fazang performed an esoter -
ic ritual at a temple on Mount Zhongnan and allegedly 
brought down some snow (see Chen 2005: 30–31).Emperor Suzong (r. 756–62) consecrated himself as 
cakravartin  while acknowledging the supernatural 
powers of Buddhism for his victory against the rebel 
forces.(Weinstein (1987: 58). Under the patronage of 
Emperor Daizong (r. 763–79), Amoghavajra managed 
to elevate the status of Mañjuśrī, the main deity of the 
Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa ,48 as the protector of the emperor 
and the nation.49 Mañjuśrī became important in 
the Pāla,50 Śailendra,51 and Tang domains, possibly 
to serve the political needs of the kings. By the end 
of the 8th century, Mañjuśrī’s cult, centred on the 
five-peaked mountain called Wutai Shan, was one of 
the most important cults in China, where aspirants 
to cakravartin  status would seek the Bodhisattva’s 
support (Miksic 2006: 186). Is the importance of 
Mañjuśrī in Pāla, Śailendra and Tang domains an 
indication of the well-established cultural and dip -
lomatic ties between the three dynasties?
Buddhism became a new bridge that fostered 
dialogue between the Chinese and Indian courts. 
Sen (2003: 16) believes that during the 8th century, 
an orchestrated use of Indic paraphernalia was em -
ployed to establish a Buddhist realm in China. The 
prominent Indian and Chinese Buddhist travellers 
in this period played a crucial role in transmitting 
the new religious thought through artefacts pre -
sented to the courts. They are recorded as carrying 
texts, icons, and drawings with them.52 The delega -
tion that attended Harṣa’s Buddhist ceremony in ad  
643 visited Rājagṛha (Rājgīr) and the Mahābodhi 
48. Th e Mañjuśrī - (or Mañjuśriya- )mūlakalpa  (‘Primary 
Ritual Ordinance of Mañjuśrī’) is believed to be one of 
the earliest texts of esoteric Buddhism (N. Dutt 1958: 487). 
Possibly composed during 7th to 8th century in India, it 
became an important text in the Buddhist world. 
49. Se
e the studies of Demiéville (1952), Lamotte (1960) 
and Birnbaum (1983: 30–38). Birnbaum’s excellent mono -
graph builds on the earlier work of Demiéville and Lamotte 
and draws attention to the centrality of Mañjuśrī during 
the late period of Amoghavajra’s esoteric practice in China.
50. Jayaswal (1934) sees Chapter 53 as a Pāla period ad -
dition to the text. Snellgrove (1987: 314) sees Mañjuśrī’s 
iconographic appearance in art only after the 6th century).
51. For its popularity in the Śailendra domains, see Miksic 
2006.
52. Sc
hafer (1963: 268) points out that ‘a prime objective 
of Chinese pilgrims in the holy lands of the Indies was the 
acquisition of holy statues, and images to edify the faithful 
at home and adorn the rich temples of T’ang’. 
Chemburkar mockup.indd   203 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 218] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia204
complex in Bodh Gayā, where the artist Song Fazhi 
made drawings of Buddhist architecture and arte -
facts to carry to the Tang court.53 A model of the 
Nālandā monastery, an image of the Mahābodhi 
shrine, and other Buddhist illustrations were also 
taken to China at this time by the monk Huilun 
(Bagchi 1950: 196). The biography of Japanese 
monk Ennin notes that five esoteric images of the 
Buddha housed at the Jinge monastery on Mount 
Wutai were modelled after images from Nālandā 
and installed there by the Esoteric Buddhist pa -
triarch Amoghavajra in the 8th century ( Ennin’s 
Diary , trans. by Reischauer 1955: 253). The same 
53. See Sen 2001: 9, quoting from the Lidai minghua ji 
(‘Rec  ords of the Famous Painters of All the Dynasties’) au-  
thored by Tang dynasty scholar-critic Zhang Yanyuan in 
ad 847: ‘a painting of Maitreya drawn in India by Song 
Fazhi seems to have used as a blue print for a sculpture 
at the Jing’ai monastery in Luoyang’. For the exchange of 
architectural ideas, see Boerschmann 1931.monastery also housed a rubbing of the Buddha’s footprint, obtained by Wang Xuance from India 
(Reischauer 1955: 254–55). John Guy (1991: 362–64) 
has traced around twenty late Pāla-Sena period 
architectural models of the Mahābodhi temple that 
were dispersed from eastern India to Nepal, Tibet, 
Arakan, and Burma, indicating the continuity in 
Buddhist travels.
The well-developed Sino-Indian exchanges 
during the Tang period continued even when po -
litical upheavals, wars and economic changes took 
place across Asia during 9th and 10th centuries. 
Now the exchanges shifted across the maritime 
channels. Puri in Odisha had already established 
its position as the key port between India, the 
southern sea states, and China. Nākappaṭṭiṉam 
in South India also became a convenient transit 
port by the early 8th century. In ad  720, King 
Narasiṁhavarman Pallava II, also known as Rā -
jasiṁha (691–729) of South India, sent an embassy Map. 8.1: The connected Buddhist world of India, China, and Indonesia during the 7th to 10th century. (Map: author)
Chemburkar mockup.indd   204 11/7/16   11:06 PMIndian Buddhist Circle! 
Xuanzang. Yijing. \ 
Kumaragho~a . VaJrabudcDt i. 
Subhakarasirhha . 
Amoghavajra , Huiguo 
Prajiia, Dharmapala , Shihu 
(Danapala) 
Arabian Sea 
' 
0 435 87Q Kilometers 
1,740 2,610 
Northea•l orn India (Hafla), China (Tang) and Indonesia (Sailendra) _ EJ-. Palhs travelled by lhe monks between India, 
Area added by lhe Palas Indonesia and China , . ,, 
-..~· ;(, , ., 
I 
. -From Japan 
; 
, ,South China Sea 
I 
.'I SrTvijayan and 
Javanese Buddhist 
Circle 
Yijing, Kumaragho~. 
Vajrabuddh i. ~ 
Amoghava jra, 
Bianhong, Prajiia.._ 
Dharmapala, Shihu 
anapala) 
udur/S,ewul~ 
·enan ....t 

--- [Page 219] ---
205 Borobudur’s Pala Forebear?
to China requesting military help in order to mount 
an attack on the Arabs and the Tibetans.54 He later 
honoured this support by erecting a Chinese-style 
Buddhist temple in Nākappaṭṭiṉam with the huge 
crowning stūpa (Sheshadri 2010: 114 fig. 7.4, 118, 128). 
The Chinese Buddhist imagery of the late Tang 
period also shows signs of increased interaction 
with northern and southern Indian art (Rhie 1988: 
39–40). This two-way sea traffic of monks and pil -
grims interacting with each other was part of a 
single symbolic language (Verwey 1962: 141; Iyer 
1998: 9) in which the Śailendras played a part as 
cultural brokers (Jordaan 1999a: 228).
By the 9th century, the shoreline of the Bay of 
Bengal, nourished by its river networks, had acquired 
a vibrant new commercial identity (Ray 2006: 78). 
Strong links, mostly Buddhist, provided connections 
with eastern India, Java, and Sumatra. Indonesia’s 
Śrīvijayan port at Palembang, Sumatra, became a 
centre of Sanskrit language study for monks trav -
elling to the sacred sites and institutions of India. 
Palembang lay halfway between India and the 
Chinese capital Chang’an (Xi’an today), and interna -
tional scholars congregated there and consolidated 
the growing Buddhist network (see Map 8.1). 
There are several indicators of the growing 
importance of Sumatra and Java. Guṇavarman, 
one of the earliest known travelling Indian schol -
ars, stayed in Java in the 5th century before being 
invited to China by the emperor (Miksic 1991: 20). 
Dharmapāla, the chief abbot of Nālandā in the late 
Gupta period, departed for Sumatra after his retire -
ment in the early 7th century, and stayed there till 
his death (Schoterman, this volume, p. 113). Yijing 
arrived in Nālandā in ca. 673 after spending con -
siderable time in Śrivijaya.55 The earliest written 
sources in Sumatra, from the late 7th century, are 
Buddhist and are connected with the foundation of 
the Śrīvijayan polity. By the 7th century Buddhism 
appears to be well established in Sumatra, and 
54. See Sen 2001: 27 and Sheshadri 2010: 110–11. 
55. Yijing was interested in the new religious developments 
and was aware of the esoteric currents at Nālandā: see Chou 
1945: 245, 314 (quoting Chavannes 1894: 104–5). On his way to 
Nālandā, Yijing had spent six months in Śrībhoga (Śrīvijaya) 
studying Sanskrit grammar. He spent 10 years in Nālandā, 
and then again remained in Śrīvijaya for a few years on his 
way back to China (see Takakusu 1966: xxv–xxxvii).probably maintained Guṇavarman’s foothold in 
Java (Miksic 2006: 187). The monk Śubhākarasiṁha 
from Odisha (637–735) arrived in Chang’an in ca. 
716, bringing paintings of the maṇḍala s of the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha  to China.56 Vajrabodhi 
(671–741; a.k.a. Vajrabuddhi, see Appendix A) from 
Kāñcī in southern India studied at Nālandā, visited 
the Kāñcī-supported dynasty in Sri Lanka, and then 
sailed to the Malay Peninsula on his way to Sumatra 
and Java. It was King Narasiṁhavarman Pallava II  
who sent his emissaries along with Vajrabodhi.57 He 
eventually reached China after an eventful journey 
on a Persian ship in ad  719. Amoghavajra (705–74), 
who also became a patriarch of Chinese Buddhism, 
met Vajrabodhi in Java and accompanied him to 
Chang’an.58 The success of their magical powers 
in Chinese military operations is celebrated. They 
became the most influential monks of Chinese Es -
oteric Buddhism and made the major contribution 
of weaving Esoteric Buddhist concepts through 
the increasingly connected international Buddhist 
world. 
java during the pāla period
According to Dumarçay (1986b: 22),
By the 8th century ad , Javanese Buddhism was 
at its peak and consequently Javanese Buddhist 
rites had been modified [to suit the need of the 
new dynasty?]…. Buddhist temple architecture 
developed elaborate plan to embody maṇḍa -
la systems…. Javanese Buddhist temples as -
sumed the cruciform plan. The plan provided 
56. Lokesh Chandra (1980: 13) argues that the monk knew 
six maṇḍala s of the text; cf. Iyanaga 1985: 724–25..
57. See Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 143–49. As She -
shadri (2010: 118) reports, ācārya  Vajrabodhi had helped 
Narasiṁhavarman Pallava II  when his country was caught 
in famine. When he expressed his urge to meditate on 
Mañjuśrī in China, the king decided to send his emissaries 
along with the scripture Mahāprajñāpāramitā . 
58. The 
generally accepted view takes Yuanzhao’s biog -
raphy as the most reliable source. Sundberg and Giebel 
(2011: 148) are in agreement with Chou (1945: 321) over Java 
being the meeting place of Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra. 
However, Woodward (2004: 339), following biographies 
of Amoghavajra by Zhao Qian ( T 2056) and Feixi ( T 2120), 
maintains that Amoghavajra never went to Java (on this 
trip) and never met Vajrabodhi there. 
Chemburkar mockup.indd   205 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 220] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia206
separate rooms for 5 images with the central 
cella opened to all sides. 
The Javanese monk Bianhong, who was ulti -
mately headed for India, arrived in Chang’an in ad  
780, to undergo the Garbhadhātumaṇḍala conse -
cration.59 His arrival in China coincides with the 
Śailendra period and the early construction phase 
of Borobudur. He joined the enormously influential 
Chinese Buddhist circle of Śubhāka  ras iṁha, Va -
jrabodhi, Amoghavajra, and Hyecho that was very 
well aware of the Indian Buddhist developments.60
These masters were all experts in state pro -
tection Sūtras and maṇḍala  consecration rituals. 
Whether Bianhong returned to Java and played any 
role at the Śailendra court, or in the construction 
of Borobudur, is not known, but it seems likely.61 
An inscription found less than a hundred metres 
from Borobudur shows that Buddhists following 
the Mantrayāna were active in the vicinity of the 
monument.62 It seems highly improbable that the 
Śailendra Buddhist dynasty in Java was unaware of 
the ambient international propagation of text, phi -
losophy, art, architecture, and ritual technology by 
these powerfully connected Buddhist leaders, who 
were apparently pursuing an Asia-wide strategy. 
The Buddhist centre in Java enjoyed interna -
tional esteem since the time of Guṇavarman in the 
5th century and beyond the end of the 10th century 
when Shihu (*Dānapāla), one of the Indian trans -
lators, arrived in China with a good knowledge of 
the languages of Khotan, Sanfoqui (Śrīvijaya), and 
Shepo (Java).63 The fact that Shihu was well versed 
59. Iwamoto 1981: 85; Kandahjaya (2004: 65, 94–96, 108, 
165) examines four independent references to the Javanese 
monk Bianhong. See also Sinclair, this volume.
60. Based on the inscription on a Pāla period Buddha 
statue, Deeg (2010: 196–211) has convincingly argued about 
Hyecho’s journey to Nālandā between 751 and 790.
61. The h
ypothesis that Bianhong did return to Java and 
was involved in the design of Borobudur was proposed by 
Kandahjaya (2004: 165, 251) and supported by Woodward 
(2009: 24).
62. See Kandahjaya 2009 and this volume; Griffiths 2014b.
63. Between ad 97 7 and 1032, four Indian monks reached 
China and were extensively engaged in Song translation 
projects. Shihu was the most productive one, as a record 
of 111 Song translations is attributed to him (see Sen 2003: 
122–23; Orzech 2011a: 449–50).in those two Southeast Asian languages indicates 
that either he must have spent a good amount of 
time in Śrīvijaya/Java or the Chinese Buddhist 
circle included a few Indonesian monks. 
All drew on the common platform of Indian 
Esoteric Buddhism. The Buddhas of Borobudur, 
for example, resemble in some ways the stone 
Buddhas of the Pāla Buddhist monastery of Rat -
nagiri in Odisha (Huntington 1985: figs. 19 and 
44). Śubhākarasiṁha was the prince of a ruling 
central Indian family of Odisha. He is recorded 
in the Chinese annals as achieving the Saddhar -
mapuṇdarīka-samādhi  at Ratnagiri vihāra , before 
travelling to China (Chou 1945: 251–55; Donaldson 
1995: 176). This samādhi involves reciting the whole 
Lotus  Sūtra in an endeavour to see the Bodhisattva 
Samantabhadra. The Sūtra opens with the introduc -
tion of Mañjuśrī and then Samantabhadra. Hudaya 
Kandahjaya’s (2009: 10) study of the Kayumvuṅan 
inscription ( ad 824) demonstrates the presence of 
the Lotus Sūtra in Java at the time of Borobudur’s 
construction. Both Samantabhadra and Mañjuśrī 
play decisive roles in the reliefs of the topmost 
terrace of Borobudur, where the pilgrim Sudhana 
is guided to Buddhahood. 
The king of Uḍra (present-day Odisha) had sent 
the Gaṇḍavyūha-bhadracarī  text to the Chinese 
emperor around ad  795, which was immediate -
ly translated by Prajña (Donaldson 1995: 177), an 
Indian monk who flourished in China from ca. 
785 to 810 ad . The text is an important source for 
Mañjuśrī’s role as one of Sudhana’s guiding kalyāṇa-  
mitra  (‘good friends’). He is the first of the fifty-two 
spiritual friends that Sudhana visits on the terraces 
of Borobudur. The text also mentions Maitreya, 
Samantabhadra, and Mañjuśrī as cakravartins 
in earlier lives along with Vairocana. The Gaṇḍa  
vyūha-bhadracarī  illustrations at Borobudur con -
for
m to the text translated by Prajña.64 Before ar -
riving in China, Prajña had travelled extensively in 
64. See Kandahjaya 2004: 197, 218, 250, 260. The first 
portion of the Gaṇḍavyūha-bhadracarī  is depicted in the 
reliefs of the second and third galleries, the second portion 
on the fourth gallery. These two scriptures had existed 
independently until brought together in the 8th century, 
perhaps not until the creation of the text sent by the ruler 
of Uḍra to the Chinese emperor. This text was translated 
by Prajña in 796–98 (see Gimello 1997: 144). 
Chemburkar mockup.indd   206 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 221] ---
207 Borobudur’s Pala Forebear?
the southern seas and probably spent a few years 
in Java and Sumatra (Pachow 1958: 19; van Gulik 
1980: 22). The script that was employed by Śailendra 
kings is close to the one implemented by Prajña.65 
It is possible that the Javanese gained knowledge 
of the text from the Chinese esoteric circle, but the 
ties between Java and Odisha are also well attested 
by art-historical evidence, and recent excavations 
at Udayagiri near Ratnagiri vihāra  are expected to 
strengthen the evidence for these ties.66 
During the reign of Devapāla ( ad 850), Bālapu -
tradeva, the scion of the Śailendra dynasty, estab -
lished a monastery at Nālandā (Sastri 1942: 95, 
1923–24: 310–27). A verse inscribed on a small stūpa  
at this monastery is taken from the Bhadracar ī text. 
The same text is depicted in the uppermost series of 
reliefs on Borobudur, which were probably carved 
in the early 9th century. Based on the invocation of 
the Bhadracarī-praṇidhāna  on the Nālandā stūpa , 
Hiram Woodward suggests that either the concepts 
embodied in the great stūpa in Central Java were 
well known in Nālandā, or Bālaputra’s monastery 
brought to Nālandā new emphasis from abroad.67 
The Śailendras were focused on Esoteric Buddhism. 
Bianhong, for example, first headed towards South 
Asia but then heard that the esoteric knowledge was 
available in China, so changed course to Chang’an.  
To promote esoteric teachings the Śailendra king 
Cūḍāmaṇivarman founded the Buddhist Śailendra 
Cūḍāmaṇi- vihāra  in Nākappaṭṭiṉam, which was in 
turn supported by Cōḻa grants.68 Nākappaṭṭiṉam 
65. Van Gulik (1980: 22) sees the similarities between 
some Siddhamātṛkā glyphs used by Prajña and the one em -
ployed by the Śailendras in ad  778 and ad  792 inscriptions. 
66. Woodward (2009: 27) sees a s trong connection based 
on the ASI, ‘Excavations 2000-2005-Orissa’: http://asi.nic.
in/asi_exca_2005_orissa.asp (last accessed February 2016) .
See also Reichle’s contribution in this volume.
67. Sastri (1942) provided the text of an inscription on 
the small stūpa  at Nālandā site 12. Schopen (1989: 149–57) 
translated the text. Based on the presence of Jinas and the 
invocation of Bhadracarī-praṇidhāna  on this memorial 
stūpa , Woodward (1990: 16–17) sees a strong connection 
between Nālandā and Java.
68. The Leiden Copperplate inscription of the Cōḻa ruler 
Rājarāja I dated to ad  1006 refers to this construction ( Epi-
graphia Indica  XXII : no. 34). For a detailed discussion of 
all the references of the inscription, see Karashima and 
Subbarayalu 2010: 272–73. in South India was the port that Vajrabodhi left  
from on his voyage to Sri Lanka, Sumatra/Java, 
and China, with a copy of the Sarvatathāgatatat -
tvasaṅgraha . The Nākappaṭṭiṉam monastery was 
to remain the last major Buddhist bastion in India 
after the destruction of Nālandā and Vikramaśīla 
between ad 1197 and 1207. 
the śailendra s and  
 indian buddhism
There are unresolved debates about the origin of 
the Śailendra dynasty69 and their sudden rise to  
power in Central Java in ca. 750–1090 that coin -
cided with a massive surge in temple construc -
tion that included Borobudur (ca. 760–830) and 
Candi Kalasan. The ad  778 inscription says the 
latter temple, dedicated to Tārā, was erected by 
the will of the preceptor of the Śailendra  family. 
This corresponded with the rise of the Pāla dynasty 
in eastern India (ca. 750–1214) and the construc -
tion of the large monasteries of Somapura, Pa -
harpur (ca. 775–810) in present-day Bangladesh 
and Vikramaśīla, Antichak (ca. 770–810) in Bihar. 
The construction of the Tārā temple at Somapura 
would have been contemporary with Kalasan.70
The ad  782 Buddhist inscription of Kelurak in 
Central Java mentions Bengali guru Kumāraghoṣa 
from Gauḍīdvīpa (Bengal), who consecrated an 
image of the Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī at the requestof 
the Javanese king (Bosch 1928: 18–19, 21, 29–30; 
Sarkar 1971 I: 44, 46). Bengal was already part of 
the Pāla empire by then. The inscription envisions 
the new image of Mañjuśrī bringing prosperity and 
welfare to the kingdom. As this inscription was 
found between Sewu and Lumbung, John Miksic 
(2006: 189) believes that Lumbung was probably 
a Mañjuśrī temple. Another inscription found in 
the ruins of Candi Sewu, dated ad  792, mentions a 
69. The paper by Jordaan (2006) and the monograph by 
Jordaan and Colless (2009) sum up all the earlier views 
on the origins of the Śailendra dynasty and conclude that 
the dynasty was a non-Javanese one. For a counterargu -
ment and discussion on ‘Śailendra as Javanese dynasty’, 
see Zakharov 2012.
70. A 12th-century Nālandā inscription mentions the 
construction of a Tārā temple at Somapura for the eradi -
cation of dangers ( Epigraphia Indica , 1923–24 XXI: 97–101). 
Chemburkar mockup.indd   207 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 222] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia208
Mañjuśrīgṛha, or Mañjuśrī sanctuary. Mañjuśrī ev -
idently played the same significant role in Śailendra 
Buddhism as he played under the Pāla and the Tang.
Yet another inscription dated to the middle of 
the 9th century at Candi Plaosan says this Central 
Javanese temple was visited by people who were 
continuously arriving from Gurjaradeśa, which 
refers either to Gujarat in western India, the Valabhī 
domain of the Maitrika kings, or to the kingdom 
of the Gurjara Pratihāras in central north India 
(de Casparis 1956: 188–89, 202). 
The construction dates of Buddhist monuments 
of the Śailendras and the Pālas are close and they 
have many design features in common. In ad  
792, Candi Sewu underwent an enlargement in a 
cruciform structure,71 probably to represent the 
Vajrādhātumaṇḍala.72 Two important architectural 
changes that occurred in Central Java during the 
construction of Sewu are the transformation from 
a square to a cruciform pla n and the inclusion of 
four entrances instead of one (Dumarçay 1986b: 
22), presumably to follow the fivefold structure of 
Pāla monuments.
The entire Central Javanese complex of Pram -
banan is thought to reflect the ruling dynasty’s 
feudal political structure, where the ruler of the 
centralized state controlled the autonomous regions 
with its subordinate rulers. According to Chinese 
71. See Dumarçay 1989: 25 and Chihara 1996: 99.
72. Bosch (1929: 111) had identified Sewu as a Vajradhātu -
maņdala drawn from the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha . 
Lokesh Chandra (1980a: 8) has demonstrated in detail how 
a Śailendra ruler, as an aspirant to the status of cakravartin , 
dedicated the temple to Vairocana.sources, Holing, identifiable with a kingdom in 
Central or East Java, enjoyed suzerainty over twen-
ty-eight self-governing territories in the manner 
of the geopolitical maṇḍala s of northeast India.73   
The designs of Somapura, Vikramaśīla, Maināmatī 
and Kalasan, Sewu, Lumbung, Bubrah, and Plaosan 
have striking similarities (see Figs. 8.7a–d and 8.8). 
Roy Jordaan (1999a: 225) takes this as support for 
his view of the Śailendras as newly arrived outsiders 
from northeast India:
Even though we cannot exclude the possibility 
of the designs for the Śailendra monuments 
being the brainc hild of a single pilgrim-ar -
chitect genius [i.e., Bianhong], it would seem 
much more likely that they originated from 
one of the prominent Indian centres of art 
and scholarship such as Nālandā in North -
eastern India. 
From an architectural point of view, a mon -
ument like Borobudur can only have been the 
culmination of a long period of artistic gestation. 
Wolff Schoemaker (1924: 22) suggests three to four 
centuries of an autochthonous gestation period and 
argues about the lack of an autonomous develop -
ment of sculpture in Java. Given the Śailendra-Pāla 
contacts and the construction of the earlier Śaiva 
temples on the Dieng plateau, it is not beyond the 
73. Chihara (1996: 100) mentions that this was possibly a 
Śailendra domain enjoying suzerainty over twenty-eight 
self-governing territories, which would suggest that it had 
seven dependencies in each of the four quarters. For a 
discussion of the identification of the toponym Holing (or 
Heling), see Damais 1964.
Candi Sewu central shrine Candi Lumbung central shrine Candi Kalasan central shrine
Fig. 8.8: The fivefold structure of the central shrines of Javanese monuments. (Drawings by author; not to scale)
Chemburkar mockup.indd   208 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 223] ---
209 Borobudur’s Pala Forebear?
bounds of possibility in this connected Buddhist 
world that a breakthrough development in the Pāla 
domain, which transformed a stūpa  into a maṇḍala  
of life-size Buddhas, was enhanced with narrative 
reliefs at Somapura and Vikramaśīla and reached 
its ultimate form of expression on Javanese soil. 
Jordaan has argued that the Śailendras built their 
monuments in direct cooperation with Indian ar -
chitects and craftsmen. This seems possible at the 
high conceptual level of architectural design, but 
at the level of relief carving and highly innovative 
stūpikā designs, there is no trace of non-Javanese 
influence. We have already seen how the design ideas for 
Buddhist art and architecture were circulating from 
the 5th century. It was the network of monks, artists, 
and craftsmen that made possible the construction 
of the huge monuments and ritual centres.
The first record of the association of the Śailen -
dras and Pāla India is dated to the Kelurak inscrip -
tion of ca. 778 and the last inscription found in 
India referring to Śailendras is the smaller Leiden 
copperplate inscription of ca. 1090.74 By then, the 
ties between the two states had been sustained for 
more than three centuries. 
74. The inscription of Kulottuṅga Cōḻ a  refers to the 
grant of villages to the Buddhist temple constructed by 
the Śrīvijayan king ( Epigraphia Indica , 1923–24 XXII no. 
35). For the Sanskrit inscription and English translation, 
see Karashima and Subbarayalu 2010: 280–82. 
Chemburkar mockup.indd   209 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 224] ---
Chemburkar mockup.indd   210 11/7/16   11:06 PM

--- [Page 225] ---
Chapter 9
Imagery, Ritual, and Ideology: 
Examining the Mahāvihāra at Ratnagiri
n ata s h a  r e i c h l e 
The main monastery of ratnagiri in 
Odisha (formerly known as Orissa) was 
built over a period of several centuries to 
fit the needs of a changing Buddhist communi -
ty. Unlike the structure of a Hindu temple with 
power radiating outward from the sacred centre, 
the plan of the Mahāvihāra  of Ratnagiri features 
a central axis leading through the monastery to 
the rear shrine. This axis is deliberately broken up 
by a series of portals or façades which serve both 
as demarcations of sacred space and as markers 
of developing theologies. At least two stages of 
construction of the monastery are evident , and 
while some of the underlying modifications were 
for purely structural purposes, transformations in 
religious ideology and ritual practice are reflected 
in changes in architecture and iconography.1 The 
imagery used in earlier stages of building suggests 
links to long-standing traditions in India, including 
worship of deities associated with nature, like the 
river goddess Yamunā, as well as figures connected 
with notions of wealth and fertility, like Pāñcika 
and Hārītī. The Mahāyāna roots of the monastery 
are evident in the frequent depictions of Bodhisat -
tvas, especially paired images of Avalokiteśvara and 
Vajrapāṇi, who can be seen as role models for the 
monastic community. Evidence from later parts 
of the monastery demonstrates the relevance of a 
wider range of deities, as well as what seems to be 
an increasing interest in Tantric Buddhist practices. 
Aspects of iconography found at Ratnagiri are also 
seen at temple sites in Java and Sumatra and may 
reflect similarities in the development of religious 
1.A very late third stage of minor renovation took place 
ar
ound the 16th century (Donaldson 2001: 57). It will not
be discussed here.practices across maritime Southeast Asia. Beginning 
with an overview of connections between an  cie nt 
Odisha and Southeast Asia and a summary of past 
scholarship on the site of Ratnagiri, this chapter 
will then look closely at the monastery itself. In 
particular it will explore how the development of 
religious practices is mirrored in the architectural 
framework of the monastery and, when applicable, 
in Buddhist sites in island Southeast Asia.  
odisha and maritime southeast asia
The ancient region of Kaliṅga (which encom -
passed much of Odisha, northern regions of 
Andhra Pradesh, and parts of Madhya Pradesh) 
is perhaps best known for its conquest by the 
Mauryan emperor Aśoka in the 3rd century bc . 
Reflections on the devastation of this war are said 
to have turned Aśoka to Buddhism. Located in 
eastern India, with numerous ports along the Bay 
of Bengal, the region has also long been asso -
ciated with seafaring. For millennia the Bay of 
Bengal has acted as an avenue of exchange for 
goods and ideas between South Asia and Southeast 
Asia. Evidence of maritime crossings from as far 
back as the 2nd millennium bc has led scholars to 
include this region in the broader Bay of Bengal 
interaction sphere (Gupta 2005, 2006).2 Archaeo -
logical finds of pottery, coins, and beads from the 
early common era indicate coastal trading routes 
that stretched across and throughout the Bay of 
Bengal, both down the eastern coast of India to 
2. Neolithic sites on the coast of Odisha have yielded
pottery and stone tools similar to those found in Southeast 
Asia. Some scholars have theorized this may be evidence of 
very early Southeast Asian maritime crossings but further 
investigation is needed (Gupta 2005, 2006: 117).
Reichle mockup copy.indd   211 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 226] ---
212 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Sri Lanka and across the ocean to mainland and 
island Southeast Asia. 
Many sources remark on the maritime prowess 
of Kaliṅga. Prosperous port towns were mentioned 
in Pliny’s Naturalis Historia (1st century ad ), 
the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea (1st century) , 
and Ptolemy’s Geographia  (2nd century).3 South 
Asian texts also mention Kaliṅga in many dif -
ferent contexts. The 5th-century Raghuvaṁśa  of 
Kālidāsa  calls the king of Kaliṅga ‘Lord of the 
sea’. An 8th- or 9th-century Buddhist text, the 
Āryamañju śrīmūlakalpa , describes the Bay of 
Bengal as the ‘Kaliṅga Sea’ (Behera 1977). 
The many references to Kaliṅga’s seafaring in 
ancient texts have led some scholars to hypothe -
size that the kingdom played an important role in 
the spread of Indic ideas to Southeast Asia. The 
theories of R.C. Majumdar (1937) in this regard 
were especially popular.4 Majumdar theorized that 
Indic culture spread to Southeast Asia through 
benevolent colonization, and proposed that the 
port of Poulara (Palur, Palour), located in Kaliṅga, 
served as the main embarkation site for overseas 
ships travelling directly to the Malay Peninsula. 
According to Majumdar (1937: 7), evidence of this 
colonization could be seen in the name Hēlíng   
(訶陵 ) or Holing  that was used by the Chinese to 
refer to Java and other islands of the Archipelago. 
He believed Holing to be derived from the word 
Kaliṅga. This theory was questioned by Lou -
is-Charles Damais and today Holing  is thought 
by many to refer to a place name in West or Central 
Java, perhaps Valaiṅ, Areṅ, or Aryaṅ (Van der 
Meulen 1977; Cribb 2000) .5
Majumdar was one among many scholars who 
sought to find the foreign roots of the Śailendras, 
the dynasty associated with the great Central Ja -
vanese Buddhist monuments of the 8th and 9th 
centuries. He thought that the construction of these 
3. Arora 2006 examines descriptions of South and South-
east Asia by Greek geographers. The dating of Ptolemy’s 
Geographica  is disputed. Some scholars think large por -
tions were compiled in the 10th or 11th century (Wheatley 
1983: 439–55).
4. Se
e Ray 2007: 11–66 for a critical appraisal of Majum -
dar’s theories regarding Southeast Asia.
5. The
re is still contention regarding this identification; 
see Ray 2007: 219–52.temples was spurred by the introduction of Bud -
dhism by a foreign empire. Sumatra, Funan, and 
various  sites in India were all proposed as possible 
places from which the Śailendra dynasty might 
have originated (Zakharov 2012). Among the many 
Indian suggestions were the dynasties of the Ma -
laiyamāns, Pāṇḍyas, Eastern Gaṅgas, Śailodbhavas, 
Śailas, and Ikṣvākus (Sarkar 1985b). Many of these 
dynasties were linked to the Śailendras because of 
similarities in their names, with little regard for 
religious affiliations.
Majumdar (1937) conjectured that the Śailendra 
dynasty was related to the Śailodbhava dynasty 
of 7th-century Odisha. In more recent times H.B. 
Sarkar (1985b) and Lokesh Chandra (1994) have 
proposed that the Śailendras arose from the region 
near Śrīśailam in Andhra Pradesh. Opinions are 
still divided regarding the Śailendras, but many 
scholars today are looking to Java, rather than 
elsewhere for their origins (Jordaan 1999; Klokke 
2004; Zakharov 2012).
Although no evidence exists for of the coloni -
zation of Indonesia by any South Asian kingdom, 
communities of foreign merchants did live in 
Java, including traders from Kaliṅga. Inscriptions 
dating between the 9th to 14th centuries consist -
ently mention traders from three regions of India: 
Andhra Pradesh and southern Odisha, Tamil Nadu, 
and the western Konkan coast (Wisseman Chris -
tie 1998). These inscriptions indicate that Kaliṅga 
was an important source for the import of cotton 
textiles into the Indonesian Archipelago. By at least 
the 16th century, the term kәliṅ  was used in parts 
of the Malay world to refer to either southern India 
or the Subcontinent as a whole.6
What we know about the role of Kaliṅga in the 
trade networks of the 1st millennium ad  derives 
from brief mentions in inscriptions, texts, and in 
the lingering memory of the name keling  in current 
usage. The locations of many ancient ports thought 
to have been located in Odisha are not definitively 
6. The 15th-century Malay literary chronicle, the Sejarah 
Melayu , refers to a Cōḷa king as ‘Raja Kәliṅ’. Even today the 
word keling is used in the Malay world to indicate people 
of South Asian heritage. Because of its use in phrases with 
derogatory connotations, in 2003 a lawsuit was filed in Ma -
laysia over the inclusion of the word in an official dictionary.
Reichle mockup copy.indd   212 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 227] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology213
identified,7 and further excavation is needed along 
the coastline. It does seem clear, though, that mer -
chants from Kaliṅga were active in trading with 
Java in the late 1st millennium. And it is very likely 
that the large monastery site of Ratnagiri (and the 
neighbouring sites of Lalitagiri and Udayagiri) were 
connected to this maritime network of trade routes. 
Land and riverine trade routes linked Ratnagiri 
with major urban centres, including Pāṭaliputra 
(Patna) to the north, and to ports along the coast 
(Nayak 2004). The records of Chinese pilgrims 
(who sailed through the Strait of Melaka to reach 
India) also attest to the connections between the 
Buddhist sites like Ratnagiri and the coastal ports 
(Behera 1977). The vast number of donative st ūpas 
found at Ratnagiri is evidence of its popularity as a 
pilgrimage site. Unfortunately there are no inscrip -
tions connecting Ratnagiri with island Southeast 
Asia like the Nālandā inscription of 860, which doc -
umented the dedication of a monastery at Nālandā 
by Bālaputra, a ruler from Sumatra.
Scholars have suggested stylistic connections 
between the statuary of Odisha and Java, especially 
between the Buddha images of Ratnagiri and those 
of Central Java (Ghosh 1933; Behera 1977). Specific 
comparisons have been made between the mod -
elling of the body, the simple style of drapery, the 
undecorated oval nimbuses, and the proportions 
of the figures in relation to their stelae. Behera 
suggested that the k āla-makara  motif so popular 
in Java was derived from an Odishan source, but 
the example he cites from Mukteśvara temple in 
Bhubaneswar is not a particularly close comparison 
to Javanese models.
Although some stylistic similarities exist 
between the statuary of both regions, it would 
be difficult to say that the Buddhist sculpture 
of Central Java was modelled on that of Odisha. 
Many features are quite different, especially the 
7. The locations of many of the ports mentioned in ancient 
texts are not known with any certainty. For instance, the 
port of Palur (Paloura) was thought by R.C. Majumdar and 
other Indian scholars to be located in modern Dantapura in 
Andhra Pradesh (Majumdar 1927: 6–7). Other scholars have 
placed Paloura in Odisha in the city of Puri, in the town of 
Palur, or much further down the coast of Andhra Pradesh, 
in Machilipatnam, in a region that was not claimed by the 
ancient kingdom of Kaliṅga (Casson 1989: 232).heavy-lidded eyes, voluptuous bodies, and intricate 
headdresses of Odishan images. Direct stylistic 
influences are difficult to prove, and it may be 
more fruitful to think of regional connections that 
existed over long periods of time via networks of 
maritime trade. 
Similarities in Buddhist iconography in Odisha 
and Java suggest communities in both regions were 
experiencing shifting trends in religious practice, 
and adapting new ideas to distinct environments.
previous scholarship on ratnagiri
Although Odisha has a long history of Buddhism, 
the monasteries and stū pas at Ratnagiri were largely 
forgotten after the site fell into disuse after the 16th 
century. Explorations of the Buddhist remains 
were mentioned in governmental reports in the 
late 1800s and early 1900s, and brief articles by 
scholars followed in the 1920s and 1930s (Hock 1987: 
11–12). The site was described in Indian Archaeology  
(Ghosh 1957–58; 1958–59; 1959–60; 1960–61), and by 
the archaeologist and scholar Debala Mitra in In -
do-Asian Culture  and Buddhist Monuments (Mitra 
1960, 1971). The first in-depth art-historical exam -
ination of the site was in Robert Brown’s master’s 
thesis and subsequent Artibus Asiae  article (Brown 
1978). His work focused on dating the main mon -
astery at Ratnagiri by comparing the architectural 
motifs to the ornamentation of contemporaneous 
Hindu temples in Odisha.8 Looking primarily at 
architectural design elements (rather than religious 
iconography), Brown places Ratnagiri within a 
larger historical framework of temple building 
within Odisha. A study of the st ūpas of the site in 
comparison to those of Bodh Gayā was published 
by Mireille Benisti (1981).
It was not until Debala Mitra’s two-volume Rat -
nagiri 1958–61 (1981) that an archaeological survey 
of the site was compiled. This report documents 
Mitra’s four seasons of work with the Indian Ar -
chaeological Service in which two thirds of the 
8. The commonality found in decorative motifs on Hindu 
and Buddhist structures suggests that the same workshops 
of artisans were constructing these monuments. This is 
likely to have been the case in Central Java as well, where 
Hindu and Buddhist buildings with similar ornamental 
motifs are found in close proximity.
Reichle mockup copy.indd   213 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 228] ---
214 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
mounds at site were excavated. Mitra’s seminal 
work attempts to document, as thoroughly as pos -
sible, the remains of buildings, statues, stū pas, and 
other artefacts at the site. 
Scholars have defined at least two phases of 
building of the main monastery of Ratnagiri. Early 
construction dates from the late 8th century. At 
some point in the 11th to early 12th century, sub -
stantial renovations were made to the monastery 
(Mitra 1981: 155). The sculpture from this period 
is markedly different in both style and religious 
significance, and certain scholars have commented 
on the decline of what they saw as both moral and 
artistic standards. According to Mitra (1981: 181), 
the later façade of the monastery 
failed to compete with the earlier façade of the 
shrine either in the dignified bearing of sensi -
tively-modelled figures or in the workmanship 
of decorative pattern. Revelling in over-orna -
mentation, the new sculptors lacked to some 
extent the high aesthetic vision of their prede -
cessors and following the contemporary tradi -
tion freely introduced indecent and even erotic 
figures in the façade of the sanctuary of one who 
had risen above the world of passions. Indeed, 
the figures present a dire contrast to the earli -
er ones not only in style but also in taste, and 
the embellishment fell short of the standard 
achieved by the early builders and sculptors.
Other scholars have tended to agree with Mitra’s 
judgements; therefore these images have been 
largely dismissed by those who have studied the 
monument.9 In her monograph, Mitra discusses 
some of these later images, but cursorily and often 
without photographs.
The next close examination of Ratnagiri was 
in Nancy Hock’s dissertation, Buddhist Ideology 
and the Sculpture of Ratnagiri, Seventh through 
Thirteenth Centuries  (Hock 1987). Hock’s thesis 
focuses specifically on sculpture found at Ratnagiri 
and infers from the iconography of these images 
what types of texts might have been known at the 
site. Through her identification of these texts she 
suggests phases of developing Esoteric Buddhist 
ideology at Ratnagiri, including an early and ex -
9. See, for example, Fabri 1974.tended period of use of Kriyātantras followed by the 
use of Niruttarayogatantras. Using this approach, 
her study obviously does not address images for 
which she could not identify a textual source, nor 
does it focus on the architecture of the site. Because 
of the lack of regional, textual source materials 
from this period, this type of endeavour is naturally 
hypothetical, and cannot take into account oral or 
visual traditions that left no trace. And as Thomas 
Donaldson (2001) suggests, ‘images themselves may 
have served as incipient sources for the texts.’Don -
aldson’s 2001 book, The Iconography of Buddhist 
Sculpture of Orissa , also uses available texts to 
attempt to identify a vast array of sculpture from 
sites throughout Odisha. His work is an important 
source for the documentation and classification of 
Buddhist statues throughout the region, but it does 
not hypothesize on religious practice from these 
works of art. Finally, the work of Rob Linrothe 
(1999), while not focusing specifically on Ratnagiri, 
draws upon many images from the site in his ex -
amination of the development of wrathful deities 
in India and Tibet. 
This chapter draws upon the work of all the 
above-mentioned scholars but has a narrower focus. 
It focuses primarily on the sculpture decorating 
the portals of the main monastery at Ratnagiri 
and argues that changing religious needs of the 
community are reflected in the iconography of the 
different phases of construction. Unlike previous 
scholars, this article examines the imagery of the 
later stage of construction, the period that has been 
most closely related to the development of esoteric 
practices at the site. When relevant, connections 
between this important site in Odisha and Buddhist 
sites in Indonesia are explored.
the development of the vihāra 
The establishment of Indian Buddhist monaster -
ies, or vihāra , arose not out of a need to ‘house a 
god’ or to construct, in Stella Kramrisch’s words, 
a ‘monument of manifestation’. Instead, it came 
from a much more mundane concern: the need to 
shelter monks during the monsoon season. The 
first Buddhist monks were wandering almsmen, 
who begged for food in the mornings and settled 
in makeshift shelters at night. During the rainy 
Reichle mockup copy.indd   214 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 229] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology215
season, there was a necessity for more lasting refuge, 
and groups of monks began to settle in shelters 
known as āvāsa  and ārāma . The āvāsa  were built by 
the monastic community in rural areas, while the 
ārāma  were settlements donated and maintained 
by a patron or patrons and were located closer to an 
urban centre. Members of congregations were not 
necessarily fixed, and wandering almsmen might 
have spent different rain-retreats at varying set -
tlements. Legends supply most of our information 
about these early āvāsa  and ārāma , but a few of the 
structures have been excavated (Dutt 1962). 
Although it is difficult to ascertain how these 
early monk-settlements were used, their plans are 
strikingly different from those of later vihāra.10 
Sukumar Dutt (1962: 95) notes that ‘while the devel -
oped ... vihāra  ... was a compact and unitary build -
ing for the accommodation of a single company, a 
unitary body of monks, meeting the needs of their 
communal living, the āvāsa  or ārāma  occupied a 
larger area, having the look of an outspread colony, 
more suitable for seasonal gatherings of monks 
hailing from all quarters’. The change from a set -
tlement to a proper monastery was the result of 
the monks’ growing sense of their community as 
settled and circumscribed. This development of a 
corporate identity was in no small part the result of 
a growing number of congregational activities, such 
as communal chanting, systems of training and 
ordination, the holding of symposia and debates, 
and other collective rites and ceremonies. 
Some of the earliest vihāra  in India can be found 
in the rock-cut architecture of the Western Ghats. 
At vihāra  19 at Bhājā from the 1st century bce we 
see a simple rectangular courtyard bordered by a 
veranda that is in turn surrounded by small cells. 
This basic pattern persists over the centuries and 
across India with few changes. A plan from Nāsik 
in the 2nd century ad  shows a more regular ar -
rangement of cells around the courtyard (Fig. 9.1), 
and a small space between the two cells opposite 
the entrance. On this convex portion of the wall, 
an image of a stū pa and two worshippers has been 
carved. By the 5th century ad , at sites like Ajaṇṭā, 
10. Compare, for instance, the open plan of Jīvakāmra -
va
na in Rājgīr in the Nālandā district of Bihar with plans 
of the monasteries at Sanchi in Madhya Pradesh.a small but significant change in the structure of 
the vihāra  occurs—the cell opposite the entrance is 
transformed into a shrine with a devotional image 
(Fig. 9.2). This model is similar to that at the main 
monastery of Ratnagiri. 
Fig. 9.1: Plan of vihāra III (‘Gautamiputra’ cave) at Nasik. (Drawing by J. Huntington; after Huntington 1985, fig. 9.8)
Fig. 9.2: Plan of vihāra  17 at Ajaṇṭā. (Drawing by J. 
Huntington; after Huntington 1985, fig. 12.16)
Reichle mockup copy.indd   215 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 230] ---
216 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
The addition of a shrine to the monastic dwell -
ings results in the combination of a religious space 
with a pragmatic shelter, a meeting of sacred and 
mundane realms. According to John Huntington 
(1985: 253): 
The incorporation of the Buddha shrine into 
the vihāra  format transforms the excavation 
from a mere dwelling place for the monks into 
a metaphor for a Buddhist paradise in which 
a Buddha preaches the dharma  to the resident 
bodhisattvas who are in the process of attaining 
perfection and are awaiting their final rebirths. 
In Mahāyāna Buddhism, monks take the vow 
of the bodhisattva (relinquishing their own at -
tainment of Buddhahood until all sentient be -
ings are saved) and progress through the vari -
ous stages of bodhisattvahood. The vihāra  is a 
microcosmic version of paradise wherein the monks, as bodhisattvas (which they have be -
come through the process of taking the vows), 
reside, listening to the teachings of the Buddha.
Huntington (1985: 253–54) notes that at Ajaṇṭā 
the metaphor of the vihāra  as a paradise is support -
ed by an inscription that compares the vihāra  with 
Indra’s palaces and also by the painted images on 
the ceilings of the Ajaṇṭā vihāra .
For centuries, monasteries had been built near 
sites of worship: st ūpas, caitya  halls, and places 
associated with the life of the Buddha. But in later 
monasteries, the object of worship is brought into 
the living quarters of the community, and housed 
in a cell not so different from the cells the monks 
themselves occupied. This moving of a sacred object 
inward reflects changes in monastic rites and cere -
monies, and even, as Huntington suggests, a change 
in the monks’ conception of themselves.11 
monastic practices at the mahā-  
vihāra of ratnagiri
The connections between the form and function 
of the main monastery at Ratnagiri are difficult to 
reconstruct. An initial stumbling block is the fact 
11. Interestingly, there are no traces of stone vihāra  of  
this type that can be positively identified as such in In -
donesia. Clearly large monastic communities existed, but 
they must have been housed in buildings made of less 
permanent materials. that the site was occupied for a very long period 
of time; the dates of epigraphical evidence range 
from the 5th to 13th century. Secondly, the mon -
astery was not excavated until the late 1950s, and 
over the years statues were moved or displaced, 
images destroyed or appropriated. Theories about 
Buddhist rituals at Ratnagiri are thus speculative. 
They are based upon drawing together informa -
tion from Chinese annals, from Buddhist texts, 
and from the structure, iconography, and physical 
remains of the monastery itself. Whether practices 
reported at other Buddhist sites also occurred at 
Ratnagiri is uncertain, and whether the texts I cite 
were known there is also unclear. But as a major 
pilgrimage site and academic centre, it would be 
reasonable to assume that the monks at Ratnagiri 
were aware of practices and texts widely known at 
other monasteries in India. Unfortunately there are 
few historical records concerning Ratnagiri, and 
the inscriptions from the site are mostly sealings 
of the Buddhist creed or ritual phrases ( dhāraṇī ).12 
The popularity of votive stūpa s and sealings at the 
site tells us about one aspect of Buddhist practice, 
but they do not give us information about the 
founding or subsequent use of the vihāra .
Conventional descriptions of monastic practices 
include meditation, chanting, and teaching. But 
evidence suggests the lives of the saṅgha  were less 
eremitic and more deeply entwined with the lives 
of the laity than thought by early scholars. Prasad 
(2011b) deftly summarizes scholarship tracing the 
evolution of Buddhist monasticism and its links 
with the development of trade, urbanism, and 
empire. While some information about monastic 
life in India has come from Chinese pilgrims such 
as Yijing, who travelled to India in the 7th century, 
most evidence concerning the early practices of 
Buddhist monks comes from texts compiled by 
the monastic communities themselves, including 
vinaya , or monastic codes of conduct.13
12. See Mitra 1981: 15, 29–31, 43–44, 99–100, 104, 380–422. 
See Schopen (2005: 314–44) for a discussion of the Bodhi -
garbhālaṅkāralaksa  and Vimalosṇīsadhāraṇī .  
13. Interestingly, Chinese visitors’ accounts sometimes 
relied heavily on these monastic codes. Schopen (1995) 
points out that an entire chapter of Yijing’s travel account 
was not observed by the monk himself, but translated di -
rectly from a monastic code.
Reichle mockup copy.indd   216 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 231] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology217
Gregory Schopen notes that scholars have often 
sought in vain for the spiritual essence of such 
texts, and that one French scholar wrote that these 
codes ‘contain hardly a whisper about the numer -
ous spiritual practices ... which constituted the very 
essence of the Buddhist ‘‘religion’’  ’.14 According to 
Schopen (1995: 473), monastic literature presents 
the picture of a monk who is ‘caught up in a web of 
social and ritual obligations, is fully and elaborately 
housed and permanently settled, preoccupied not 
with nirvāṇa but with bowls and robes, bathrooms 
and doorbolts, and proper behavior in public’. A 
close examination of vinaya  emphasizes the fact 
that monastic life was not isolated asceticism, but 
often deeply entwined in local spheres of economics, 
politics, and religious beliefs. 
The initial construction of the Mahāvihāra of 
Ratnagiri has been dated to about the 8th century 
and presumably was built under the Bhauma-Kara 
dynasty ( ad 736–931).15 Their capital was in Jajpur, 
twenty-one kilometres from Ratnagiri, and they 
were known to be Buddhist rulers. Surprisingly, 
there are no inscriptions linking the site with royal 
donors of this dynasty.16 The History of Buddhism 
in India , written by Tāranātha in 1608, describes 
Ratnagiri as a site populated by 500 monks who 
kept both Hīnayāna and Mahāyāna śāstra s (Chatto -
padhyaya 1970: 144). Statuary and inscriptions seem 
to indicate that at first the dominant system of belief 
was Mahāyāna and later Vajrayāna Buddhism. In 
some Tibetan accounts Odisha is considered to be 
the birthplace of Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna (Moha -
rana 2001). Tibetan sources identify the Ratnagiri 
monastery as a site from which the Kālacakratan -
tra was disseminated (Donaldson 2001: 12), while 
Chinese sources credit a king from Odisha with 
introducing Tantrayāna to China (Donaldson 1995: 
175–76).17
14. Schopen 1995: 473, quoting André Bareau.
15. See Brown 1978. Mitra (1981) discusses the various 
theories as to when this dynasty actually ruled, with hy -
potheses ranging from the 7th to the 9th century.
16. The wr
itten records at this site consist mostly of seal -
ings of the Buddhist creed and mantras and a few stone 
inscriptions of the Pratītyasamutpādasūtra . 
17. Thes
e accounts were written long after the time Rat -
nagiri was actively occupied. But the consistent mention of 
Odisha as a place where Tantric adepts visited and gained It is possible, and indeed perhaps likely, that 
monks affiliated with different schools of Buddhism 
shared the monastery. As Mukherjee (1961: 147–48) 
points out, 
a Mahāyānist Bhikṣu is not one who belongs 
to a Mahāyāna order in the sense of a separate 
religious corporation, but simply one who, ob -
serving in fundamentals the same monastic 
discipline as his Hīnayāna brother, devotes 
himself to the study of the Mahāyāna sūtras. 
Similarly a Hīnayāna monk is simply one who 
follows the Hīnayāna sūtra s.
According to Dutt (1962: 177),
monks of different sects could live in the same 
saṅgha . For this there is evidence both from 
inscriptions discovered in the monastic ruins 
and the eyewitness accounts of the Chinese 
pilgrims. Although there were monasteries ex -
clusively occupied by Mahāyānist or by Hīna -
yān
ist monks, or by monks of a particular 
sect, co-existence of different sects in a saṅgha  
seems to have been the normal practice.
A wide variety of sculptures of Buddhas, Bo -
dhisattvas, and peaceful and wrathful Buddhist 
deities were found at the site. As documented by 
Mishra (2011), these include forms of Tārā, Av -
alokiteśvara, Mañjuśrī, and a range of Bodhisattvas 
and their emanations. The popularity of female 
deities, especially Tārā, is pronounced at Ratnagiri, 
and has been linked with developing esoteric forms 
of Buddhism. 
Hock (1987: 1, 30) classifies much of the sculp -
ture at Ratnagiri as Tantric, with the earlier ma -
terial primarily associated with the Kriyā- and 
Caryātantra s. This is disputed by Linrothe (1999: 
38–41), who makes the distinction between ‘mature 
devotional Mahāyāna Buddhism’ and ‘early Eso -
teric Buddhism’. He argues that while sites like the 
late 6th- and early 7th-century caves of Aurang -
abad and Ellorā show ‘nascent Esoteric Buddhist 
thought and imagery’, they fit more clearly into a 
Mahāyāna framework, with an emphasis on a triad 
of Buddha and attendant Bodhisattvas, as well as 
on the Bodhisattva cult (especially Avalokiteśvara). 
knowledge points to the historical importance of the region 
for the development of Tantric Buddhist cults.
Reichle mockup copy.indd   217 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 232] ---
218 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
This emphasis is true of the early stages of Ratnagiri 
as well. Linrothe (ibid.: 51–59) acknowledges that 
these theological traditions exist on a continuum 
and are at times difficult to distinguish, but argues 
convincingly that the artworks produced during 
the earliest stage of development at Ratnagiri can 
be classified as Mahāyāna.
Some images from the later stages of the occu -
pation of Ratnagiri do clearly fit into a Vajrayāna 
context, including numerous images of the wrath -
ful deity Heruka. Linrothe (ibid.: 251–57) describes 
the emerging popularity of wrathful deities as a key 
component of Esoteric Buddhism in eastern India 
in the 11th century. The image of Heruka found 
near the main monastery at Ratnagiri balances 
on one foot atop a corpse—a symbol, according to 
Linrothe, of the ‘pre-enlightenment self-image’. A 
very similar image was found at Biaro Bahal II in 
Padang Lawas, North Sumatra, and suggests that 
changes in religious practices that were leading to 
the popularity of wrathful figures like Heruka in 
India, were also occurring in parts of island South -
east Asia at about the same time (Reichle 2007: 
133–41). Although numerous other images depicting 
demonic figures have been found at Padang Lawas, 
with the exception of the sculpture of Heruka, not 
much among the scattered remains of the site bears 
resemblance to objects or architecture from Rat -
nagiri. This suggests that the Esoteric Buddhist 
beliefs that were spreading to the islands took very 
local forms when adapting to new environments. 
the pathway through the  
mahāvihāra
Like many other Buddhist sites, Ratnagiri is located 
on a hill, in close proximity to water and not too 
far from an urban centre. The complex is located 
on a low knoll of the Assia range, a site surrounded 
by two rivers—the Brahmani and the Birupa. The 
southernmost portion of the site contains a large 
stūpa , surrounded by hundreds of smaller votive 
stūpa s. To the north of this are a quadrangular 
Mahāvihāra, and another smaller, and slightly 
later monastery. Eight small temples are scattered 
mostly between the vihāra  and the stūpa s, although 
one lies slightly to the southeast of the large stūpa . 
On the northeastern portion of the hill there is an isolated single-winged monastery. Although the 
arrangement of northern vihāra  facing stūpa s to 
the south may have been patterned after earlier 
sites like Sarnath (Mitra 1981), it seems more likely 
that the topography of the hill determined the 
placement of structures (Fig. 9.3). The large stūpa 
is located on the highest part of the hill, and looks 
across at the neighbouring hills of Udayagiri and 
Lalitagiri. The monasteries are at a slightly lower 
elevation. They are not directly due north of the 
stūpa , but the stūpa can easily be seen from the 
entrance to the vihāra . 
The monastery itself has a four-halled plan, 
closely resembling early examples of rock-cut vihāra 
(Fig. 9.4). The precedent for this type of building 
probably stems from a type of domestic architec -
ture, which consisted of a courtyard surrounded on 
all sides by rooms opening into the central space. 
This type of enclosed, windowless architecture 
is much more private than the earlier āvāsa  or 
ārāma . At Ratnagiri a paved forecourt leads up to 
a flight of stairs into the entrance complex of the 
vihāra . After passing through a front and rear porch 
one reaches the central courtyard, which is sur -
rounded by twenty-four cells. The individual cells
Fig. 9.3: Ratnagiri site map. (After Mitra 1981, fig. 2; 
courtesy of ASI) 
Reichle mockup copy.indd   218 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 233] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology219
originally had wooden doors (and possibly bolts 
and locks) (Barua 1969: 17). The central courtyard 
provided a space for congregational gatherings. At 
the rear of the monastery, two antechambers were 
built leading into the rear shrine (Fig. 9.5). This 
shrine contains a large stone image of Śākyamuni 
with sculptures of Padmapāṇi and Vajrapāṇi on 
either side (Fig. 9.6). This arrangement of deities 
is similar to those found in the early 9th-century 
Candi Mendut of Java, where a large stone image 
of a seated Buddha is attended by Avalokiteśvara 
and Vajrapāṇi.18
The first sculpted images visible when ap -
proaching the entrance of the Mahāvihāra are 
carv
ed panels that stand in front of pylons on 
either side of the front porch (Fig. 9.7). Only one 
of these panels is in place today; its principal image 
is a female figure holding a flowering branch (or 
stalk of grain) in her left hand, with her right hand 
displaying the varada-mudrā  (Fig. 9.8). Her lavish 
adornment—necklaces, belts, armlets, bracelets, 
anklets, headdress, and earrings—contrasts with 
her simple, transparent robes. Debala Mitra (1981: 
158) suggests the figure might be a river goddess, 
but it is difficult to determine her identity because 
she stands on a double petal lotus base, rather 
than a turtle or makara , the traditional vāhana s 
of Yamunā and Gaṅgā. Donaldson (2001: 307) sug -
gests she is the goddess A śokak āntā-Mār īcī, who 
is known to display the varada-mudrā  and hold a 
branch of the A śoka tree. Whoever this figure rep -
resents, she follows in a long tradition of propitious 
female figures ( yakṣī)  often found at entrances to 
Buddhist sites.
A small front porch precedes the portal of the 
vihāra . The lateral walls of the porch contain a niche 
with an image. On the west side is a panel depicting 
Avalokiteśvara standing below small, seated images 
of the Jina -Buddhas Akṣobhya and Ratnasambhava 
(Fig. 9.9). On the east wall is a matching image 
of Vajrapāṇi, with the same Buddhas above him  
(Fig. 9.10). The two figures have identical attrib -
utes with the exception of their headdresses and 
18. Geri Malandra (1993: 116) notes that with the eight 
Bodhisattvas depicted on the exterior, the iconography of 
Mendut is similar to the Ellorā caves. She calls the arrange -
ment a nascent Tantric Buddhist programme.Fig. 9.5: Ratnagiri shrine of main monastery. (After 
Mitra 1981, fig. 12; courtesy of ASI)
Fig. 9.4: Ratnagiri main monastery plan. (After Mitra 1981, fig. 8; courtesy of ASI)
Reichle mockup copy.indd   219 12/7/16   3:10 PMMONASTERY I: SHRINE-COMPLEX 
COURnMO 
'"' ;..• "'---J:..-- -= 

--- [Page 234] ---
220 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
uppermost left hands, in which Vajrapāṇi carries 
his characteristic vajra , while Avalokiteśvara is 
in a four-armed form. The figures are similar in 
composition to the goddess at the entrance. They stand on a double lotus with two seated Buddhas 
on small lotuses floating at the top of either side of 
the main figure. Below the lower-left hand of each 
Bodhisattva is a kneeling supplicating figure, most Fig. 9.6: Interior of main monastery, Ratnagiri. (Photo © Daniel Limma, Wikimedia Commons) 
Fig. 9.7: View of main monastery, Ratnagiri. (Photo © Mitrabhanu.Panda, Wikimedia Commons)
Reichle mockup copy.indd   220 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 235] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology221
likely a preta  (hungry ghost), who seems to cup 
his hands to receive the mercy falling from the 
Bodhisattva’s varada-mudrā . Below the lower left  
hand (holding a water vessel) of each main image is 
a stout four-armed male figure, who kneels on one 
knee with two of his hands clasped before his chest. 
With his other two hands he holds a noose and 
offers a gesture of homage. His fanged countenance 
and dwarf-like stature identify him as Hayagrīva.
Avalokiteśvara and Vajrapāṇi are often the 
flanking images in a triad with the historical 
Buddha, Śākyamuni. Looking down the central 
axis of the vihāra  from the front porch, one can 
see the large image of Śākyamuni Buddha in the 
rear shrine. A triad can thus be formed, standing 
between the two Bodhisattvas but looking across 
the courtyard for the third member. Bodhisattvas 
represent the ideals of the monastic community, 
and in Mahāyāna Buddhism monks often took Fig. 9.8: Female figure at entry. (Photo: author)
Fig. 9.9: Avalokiteśvara, entry porch. (Photo: author)
Fig. 9.10: Vajrapāṇi, entry porch. (Photo: author)
Reichle mockup copy.indd   221 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 236] ---
222 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Fig. 9.11: Rear wall of front porch. (Photo: author)
Fig. 9.12: Detail of portal of rear wall of front porch. 
(Photo: author)‘Bodhisattva vows’ along with other monastic vows 
when they were ordained (Lopez 1995: 503–12). 
These vows were public events in which monks (and 
laypeople) promised to postpone their own enlight -
enment in order to help others attain Buddhahood. 
Vows were a very important part of the monastic 
community as a rite that bound and united them 
both spiritually and as an institution. The presence 
of the figures of Avalokiteśvara and Vajrapāṇi here 
in the entry to the monastery could have served as 
a daily reminder of these vows to monks who were 
entering and leaving the vihāra . 
The rear wall of the front porch is the most 
spectacularly carved part of the monastery (Fig. 
9.11). As one approaches the building and climbs 
the steps, the portal is visible as a kind of frame through which one can look across the courtyard 
to the doorway of the rear shrine with the prin -
cipal image of the seated Buddha. This portal is 
further emphasized by the media of its construc -
tion: a bluish-green chlorite which contrasts with the darker brown khondalite at the edges and the 
generic red bricks of the vihāra . The frames of the 
doorway contain a series of motifs that are also 
found on contemporaneous Hindu buildings in 
Reichle mockup copy.indd   222 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 237] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology223
Fig. 9.13: Portal of rear wall of front porch. (© Amartyabag, Wikimedia Commons)
Bhubaneswar such as Vaital Deul and Śiśireśwara. 
The doorjamb around the portal is divided into 
three strikingly different facets that are separated 
by pearl borders (Fig. 9.12). The innermost facet is 
carved with an intricate foliated arabesque pattern: 
a thin vine twisting upwards with delicate curving 
offshoots. The centre facet has stylized lotus petals 
radiating outward. This bold pattern emphasizes 
the portal, with the lines of the petals forming a 
series of haloes. Thus, as one walks through the 
doorway one becomes the centre of an auspicious 
blooming lotus. The third facet depicts a gelabai  
motif of boys playing on vines. It is the most exu -
berant of the borders with plump youths playing 
on a swing, hanging upside down from one leg, 
and climbing playfully up the curving vine. These 
figures lead the eye up the doorway but do not con -
tinue across the lintel. Instead, a row of vidyādhara s 
flew across the top of the doorway; unfortunately 
today only their legs remain. In the middle of the lintel is a seated Gajalak ṣmī, a figure borrowed 
from the Hindu pantheon and commonly found 
on the lintels of Hindu temples in Odisha (Fig. 9.13). 
The figure of Lakṣmī is depicted being lustrated by 
two elephants that stand on small lotus pedestals 
above her. Lakṣmī is commonly associated with 
prosperity, and in this case her abhiṣeka also sug -
gests a connection with purification. Donaldson 
(1976: 211) describes her presence as both propitious 
and protective:
Although the goddess is essentially peaceful it 
is her very benign and smiling presence that 
wards off any adverse influences approaching 
the temple. As a dvāra-lalāṭa-bimba  image 
over the doorway (niche) she functions as a 
vajra-mastaka  (kīrtimukha ), the most power -
ful apotropaic motif conceived by the Indian 
sculptor, the evil-dispelling motif upon which 
the security of the temple depended. 
Reichle mockup copy.indd   223 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 238] ---
224
The portal also has door guardians ( dvārapā -
la) to afford protection. They can be found at the 
base of the door frame in a niche containing four 
small figures (Fig. 9.14). The figures on the left  
and right sides of the doorway are not identical in 
posture, but form rough mirror images. The heads 
of all four figures in each group are tilted slightly 
towards the entranceway. The innermost figure is 
a male who leans inward on a large club. On the 
left, the dvārapāla  is somewhat forbidding, with 
his thick arms and large hands resting on his hips. 
The guardian on the right, in contrast, is much 
more relaxed. He leans nonchalantly on his club 
and holds an utpala  in his left hand. On the whole,
though, these dvārapāla s seem somewhat obliga -
tory figures; they are small in stature and not very 
threatening. The second figure in each row stands 
below a parasol, which is held by the attendant 
next to him. He holds the hem of his robe in his 
outer hand, and a jewel or fruit in his inner hand. 
Mitra (1981: 164) suggests that this figure might be 
royalty and thus could associate the temple with a 
donor. But there is little else about him to indicate 
his royal stature—no special distinctions in his 
clothing, jewellery, or size. The third and fourth 
figures appear to be attendants, one carrying a 
parasol and another a bag.
Extending out from the portal, only a small 
portion of the rear wall of the front porch remains 
in place today. But what we can see of it, on either 
side of the doorway, suggests that the carving was as intricate and as carefully planned as the 
entranceway itself. The west and the east wall are 
divided into two sections. Next to the portal is a 
flat area, which is itself divided into three sections. 
On the outermost edge of the wall is a sapta-ra -
tha projection. Too many patterns and motifs are 
present to try to catalogue all of them, so I will only 
mention the ones with clear symbolic significance. 
A pillar adjacent to the portal contains the following 
motifs, listed from bottom to top: pūrṇa-kumbha , 
yakṣī , caitya  window, vidyādhara s, and more foliat -
ed patterns. Next to this pillar is a wider segment of 
the wall that contains niches between two smaller
piers. At the base and top of these small piers are 
pūrṇa-kumbha . In the lower niche is an image of 
Pāñcika or Jambhala, the Buddhist equivalent of the 
Hindu god of wealth, Kubera (Fig. 9.15). He sits on 
a throne in lalitāsana , above pots of wealth. In an 
identical niche above Pāñcika sits Padmapāṇi in a  
similar pose, but with his signature lotus above his 
left shoulder (Fig. 9.16). It is likely that other figures 
may have been placed in niches above these two, Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Fig. 9.14: Detail of Fig. 9.13 (base of portal).
Fig. 9.15:  Pāñcika on rear wall of front porch. (Photo: author)
Reichle mockup copy.indd   224 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 239] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology225
Fig. 9.16:  Avalokiteśvara on rear wall of front porch. 
(Photo: author)
Fig. 9.17:  Y amunā on rear wall of front porch. (Photo: 
author)
but this is as high as the remaining wall reaches 
today. The third segment of the wall has a different 
set of motifs. At the bottom is a standing nāga 
whose hands clasp a kumbha . Above him, a pattern 
of pineapple-like fruit ensconced in palm fronds 
is repeated up the pillar. 
The sapta-ratha  projection has a complicated set 
of mouldings as its base. The patterns on the bands 
are no longer in place. The niche of the central pro -
jection on the west side contains the image of the 
auspicious river goddess Yamunā (Fig. 9.17). Pre -
sumably at one time an image of Gaṅgā, the person -
ification of the Ganges, occupied the corresponding 
niche on the east side of the portal. Yamunā and 
her companions do not have the formal frontal -
ity of some of the other images and their poses 
suggest a sisterly camaraderie. River goddesses are 
an extremely common motif at the entrances to 
both Hindu and Buddhist establishments, although 
they are not found on many early Odishan temples 
(Donaldson 1976: 190). As representations of the two 
most sacred rivers in India, Gaṅgā and Yamunā 
connote fertility and purification. The Gaṅgā in 
particular is also associated with the transition 
between the heavenly and earthly spheres. Accord -
ing to legend, she descended from heaven through 
Śiva’s locks to save the earth from drought. Thus she 
is a perfect threshold goddess, and walking between 
images of Gaṅgā and Yamunā is a way of cleansing 
oneself before entering a sacred compound. 
What is the significance of the other motifs 
on these walls? Jars of plenty and elaborate foliate 
designs are signs of wealth and fertility. The yakṣī 
and the nāga , two figures which appear in the ear -
liest Buddhist art, likely have their roots in village 
cults, and their presence indicates the incorporation 
of local beliefs into Buddhist iconography. Pāñcika 
also is a symbol of abundance. The juxtaposition of 
his figure below with that of Avalokiteśvara above is 
an interesting one. Pāñcika is a symbol of material 
well-being—he surrounds himself with his pots of 
gold, and often holds a mongoose that spews forth 
gems. In contrast, Padmapāṇi is an example of 
spiritual generosity. He represents the Bodhisattva 
ideal of an individual who is so selfless that he 
delays his own nirvāṇa  until all sentient beings can 
reach enlightenment. These two figures represent 
opposing sides of the monastic existence: on one 
Reichle mockup copy.indd   225 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 240] ---
226 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Fig. 9.18: Pāñcika in niche in second porch. (Photo: 
author)
Fig. 9.19: Hārītī in niche in second porch. (Photo: 
author)hand the spiritual ideal of a selfless devotion, and 
on the other the practical concerns of everyday life. 
Despite, or perhaps because of, its spiritual quest 
for enlightenment, the monastic community was 
deeply dependent upon the contributions of lay 
society, and their monastic codes demonstrate an 
attendant obsession with quite mundane concerns, 
including money (Schopen 1995: 473–502). 
Continuing into the monastery, a second porch 
connects the front porch with the courtyar d. 
Another image of Pāñcika is found on the west 
wall of the rear porch (Fig. 9.18). Here he is paired 
with his consort Hārītī who occupies a niche on the 
east wall (Fig. 9.19). This combination of figures was 
common in Buddhist monasteries and commented 
on by the Chinese pilgrim Yijing (Takakusu 1966: 37). 
Pāñcika’s wealth is emphasized by his pots 
of riches and also by his corpulence. His jew -
el-spitting mongoose is almost flattened by the 
weight of his hand. Hārītī’s body is also large 
and she holds only one child, instead of the 
usual five. Buddhist legends describe Hārītī as a 
child-eating ogress who was converted to Bud -
dhism only after one of her own children was 
stolen. According to Huntington (1985: 147–48):
Representations of Hārītī are commonly found 
in Buddhist refectories, and the donor of a 
meal is obligated to offer food to her. Her pres -
ence is therefore a daily reminder of the need 
for empathy and its result in compassion. As 
a pair, Pāñcika and Hārīti represent an ex -
pression of the desire of the monkhood for the 
material wellbeing that allows them to pursue 
their religious aims in peace. In addition to the 
popular stories about Pāñcika and Hārīti told to the Chinese pilgrim or otherwise appearing 
in Buddhist literature, the two divinities have 
an esoteric symbolism. Pāñcika is the keeper 
of the wealth or treasure of enlightenment 
while Hārīti is the embodiment of the Bud -
dhamātṛkā  itself. Thus, it is easy to see in these 
two sculptures the two levels, the popular and 
the esoteric, present in many images.
Pāñcika and Hārītī play a similar role in the 
Central Javanese temple of Candi Mendut. They 
appear on reliefs carved on either side of the interior 
walls in the entryway leading to the main cells. At 
Mendut, as at the Mahāvihāra of Ratnagiri, the 
Reichle mockup copy.indd   226 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 241] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology227
central image of the shrine is a seated Buddha, with 
Avalokite śvara and Vajrapāṇi on either side. At 
both sites images of the goddess Cundā are found, 
depicted on stūpa s at Ratnagiri and in a relief at 
Mendut. Likewise, depictions of an eight-Bodhisat -
tva maṇḍala  are present at both places, on the exte -
rior walls at Mendut and in free-standing sculpture 
at Ratnagiri. The imagery, while similar in content, 
is not particularly similar in style, and suggests that 
iconography rapidly spread from India (where it is 
seen at Ellorā as well) to Indonesia.
At the Ratnagiri Mahāvihāra  the rear porch leads 
into the courtyard. This courtyard is surrounded by a 
pillared veranda, which some scholars suggest might 
have been used for walking.19 The veranda original -
ly had a svastika  format that allowed rooms to be 
built in the far corners of the square. All around the 
courtyard are small cells, whose equal size reflects 
the relative equality of stature among the monks. 
Most of these rooms are quite large and probably 
housed more than one monk. They contain no trace 
of furnishings, no niches for lamps or images, and 
no windows. One of the cells was converted into a 
treasury for the monastery. A short passage leads 
from each of the cells to a doorway, which opens 
out onto the courtyard. 
In the southeast corner of the courtyard a large 
stone staircase leads up to a no longer extant second 
storey. In the opposite corner of the courtyard the 
floor dips and a small area is surrounded by a low 
wall. A perforated grill drain set into the corner in -
dicates that this was a washing area, perhaps where 
the monks would bathe before entering the main 
shrine. It is possible the images were also washed, 
although if that occurred it might be in the centre 
of the courtyard where it could be observed by the 
saṅgha . Chinese travel accounts and translated 
sutras give elaborate descriptions of the bathing of 
images, a ceremony that continues today in South 
and Southeast Asian countries. These accounts 
give us some idea of the possibilities of ritual life 
in the monasteries. 
Luis O. Gomez’s translation of a 7th-century 
Mahāyāna liturgy provides the reader with a vivid 
description of ritual worship (Gomez 1995: 183–96). 
19. Yijing mentions monks ‘strolling quietly along the 
corridors of the monastery’ (Takakusu 1966: 114).The liturgy, an introduction to the Bodhisattva path, 
describes a ritual of worship and self-consecration. 
The pūjā  begins with offerings of ‘all the flowers, 
fruits, and medicinal plants, all the treasures that 
there are in the universe’ and continues to de -
scribe gifts  of such extravagance (wish-fulfilling 
and gem-bearing trees) that their metaphorical 
nature is clear. Besides offerings of all sorts, the 
worshipper offers himself as slave. The worshipper 
bathes, clothes and feeds the deities, adorns them 
with garlands, and provides them with incense, 
perfume, and music.
Yijing reports that
all the monasteries of the Western Regions 
[especially India and Central Asia] bathe the 
noble image. Every morning the monastic di -
rector sounds the bell. He spreads a jeweled 
awning over the courtyard of the monastery. 
At the side of the [image] temple are arranged 
jars of incense. He takes the gold, silver, bronze, 
or stone image and places it inside a basin made 
of bronze, gold, wood, or stone, He orders the 
female musicians to play their music while he 
smears the image with ground incense and 
bathes it with scented water. He rubs it with a 
clean, white cloth, and afterwards puts it back 
in the temple, furnishing it with floral decora -
tions. This then is the custom of the majority 
of monasteries and the task of the revered di -
rector of monastic affairs. In the same manner 
the monks individually bathe the noble im -
age within their respective cell. Each day they all perform the essentials without deficiency. 
(Boucher 1995: 62; brackets in the original)
20
Ceremonies like this may have occurred at 
Ratnagiri. There is evidence that incense was pre -
pared in the cells of the monastery; pieces of saddle 
querns used to grind pastes and herbs were found 
(Mitra 1981: 197). Vinaya texts like the one discussed 
by Gregory Schopen describe the settlement of an 
estate, in which the great pigments, yellow, vermil -
lion, blue, and so on, are to be put in the ‘perfumed 
chamber’ to be used for the image (Schopen 1995: 
20. Yijing also translated a Sūtra of the bathing of the 
Buddha containing a very similar description, which elab -
orates on the types of incense to be used and the merits of such an activity. Boucher notes that the authenticity of 
this Sūtra is to be questioned. 
Reichle mockup copy.indd   227 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 242] ---
228 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Fig. 20:  View of rear shrine and remnants of façades. 
(Photo: author)499). Several Buddhist texts also refer to a gan-
dhakuṭ ī or ‘perfumed chamber’ in which images 
were stored.21 This cell was considered reserved for 
the Buddha himself, a room in which he resided.22 
At Ratnagiri the principal image is made out of 
several blocks of stone and therefore would not 
have been practical to move. But smaller images of 
Bodhisattvas are portable and it is likely that lighter 
metal images were also kept in the main shrine. 
Yijing’s description of female musicians accom -
panying the ceremony is somewhat surprising.23 It 
is all the more thought-provoking because Yijing 
does not seem disturbed by their appearance in the 
vihāra.  Images of female musicians and dancers 
are found at many Hindu and Buddhist sites, and 
presumably they played a role in ceremonies at 
Hindu temples. But the mention of these women 
being involved in Buddhist ceremonies is more 
puzzling due to monastic prohibitions on interac -
tions between the sexes. Yijing’s other comments 
on women in his Records  involve discussions of 
the proper behaviour of nuns. He does mention 
nuns entering a monastery compound for gath -
erings, but notes that they must not travel alone 
(Takakusu 1966: 63). At another point, though, he 
mentions female servants (1896: 84). These snippets 
of information are tantalizing and give us a view of 
the monastery in which people of various genders 
and different status interacted perhaps more freely 
than might be assumed.
The rear shrine of the vihāra  and its antechamber 
have seen various stages of construction (Fig. 9.5). 
There are three façades to the shrine proper; the 
oldest is the furthest north and therefore closest to 
21. Étienne Lamotte describes the ‘Original Perfumed 
Room’ ( Mūlagandhakuṭī ) as the personal cell of the his -
torical Buddha. A temple has been built over this spot at 
Sārnāth (Lamotte 1988: 317). 
22. Gregory Schopen (1990) discusses the extensive refer -
ences to the presence of the Buddha as owner and resident 
in inscriptions referring to Buddhist monasteries. 
23. Da
s (1978) suggests that there were devadāsī s at Bud -
dhist establishments. His argument is based on a copper -
plate found at Ratnagiri that mentions a Rani Karpūraśrī 
from the Saloṇapura Mahāvihāra. The inscription does 
not mention the father of Karpūraśrī but does mention 
her mother and grandmother. D.C. Sircar interprets this 
to mean that the woman was a devadāsī . Other scholars, 
such as Mitra (1981: 352), assume the woman was a nun.the shrine. During the second stage of construction 
at Ratnagiri the veranda in front of the shrine was 
converted into a larger, wider antechamber. At the 
back of this late antechamber are the remains of a 
second façade, which was also built at the second 
stage of construction. The west side of this later 
antechamber has been converted into a brick side-
shrine with niches for images. Finally, there is a 
third façade that presumably was originally placed 
even further towards the courtyard, in front of 
the second façade. (This façade has been largely 
reconstructed and now stands on the west side 
of the courtyard of the vihāra ). I will discuss the 
imagery from the later stages of building after 
looking at the façade and shrine, which date from 
the earlier period. In the first stage of construction, 
one would move from the veranda into a small an -
techamber. The rear wall of this chamber forms the 
portal leading into a passage into the shrine proper. 
Only the lower hundred centimetres of this structure 
exists, but even from this one can clearly see that it 
is in a style reminiscent of the front portal (Fig. 9.20).
Reichle mockup copy.indd   228 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 243] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology229
Fig. 9.21: Detail of early façade to shrine. (Photo: author)
The doorjambs consist of two decorative bands 
separated by a pearl border. The motifs are familiar: 
the innermost is the thin foliated arabesque, and 
the outer is the gelabai  motif. At the bottom of the 
jambs, a small dvārapāla  stands in a pearl-bordered 
niche. He leans on a large club and has a small 
attendant at his side. The wall next to the portal has 
the same general pattern as the front entrance with 
three flat pillar-like facets. They contain many of 
the same motifs, radiating outward—a yakṣī figure, 
pūrṇa-kumbha , and more foliate and pineapple/
palm patterns. At the bottom of each of these bands 
is a figure in a small individual niche (Fig. 9.21).
The innermost is a Bodhisattva, then a yakṣī , 
and finally a seven-hooded nāga figure. The yakṣī  
are individualized with different hairstyles, and 
the Bodhisattvas also have subtle differences. Mitra 
(1981: 175) suggests that the figure on the west is 
Maitreya, because he holds nāga-kesara  flowers in 
his left hand. She tentatively identifies the figure on 
the eastern wall as Mañjuśrī. As in the rear wall of 
the front porch, a projection, this time pañca-ratha  
protrudes on the eastern and westernmost sections 
of the wall. A figure of Pāncika can be seen in a 
niche on one of the projections. The central panel 
possibly contained images of the river goddesses. 
All of these motifs are common and carry propi -
tious connotations. 
A narrow, undecorated passage leads to the rear 
of the shrine. The shrine contains a two-metre high 
central image of a Buddha in bhūmisparśa-mudrā , 
who sits on a tri-ratha pedestal carved with a double 
lotus pattern (Fig. 9.6). A plain halo surrounds his 
head, with a small projecting halo above it contain -
ing a Bodhi tree carved in relief. The image is made 
up of several slabs of khondalite, a method that was 
used for large statues in the Ratnagiri area, but also in neighbouring Sirpur (Huntington 1985: 418). The 
Buddha has a tall round uṣṇīṣa , very round curls, 
and cakra  marks on his palm and soles. The outer 
corners of the pedestal below the Buddha have 
crouching lions facing the lateral walls. The middle 
section shows two kneeling three-headed nāga s 
on either side of a double lotus. To the Buddha’s 
right stands a separate statue of Avalokiteśvara as 
Padmapāṇi, and to his left an image of Vajrapāṇi 
(Figs. 9.22–23). Unlike the images of these Bodhisat -
tvas that we saw earlier, these are two-armed and 
have no attending Jina-Buddhas. As stated before, 
this triad is a popular one and each of the Bo -
dhisattvas has come to be associated with certain 
qualities:
Vajrapāṇi is the personification of wisdom 
(prajñā ), which is conceived as one half of 
the state of Buddhahood. Padmapāṇi, as a 
manifestation of Avalokiteśvara, personifies 
compassion ( karuṇā ), the other half of Bud -
dhahood. Through the meditational experi -
ence of the unity of these two components, 
the s
tate of enlightenment ( bodhi ), or Bud -
dhahood, is achieved. The exact meaning of 
the v
ajra and padma  attributes held by the 
bodhisattvas is problematic, as any inter -
pretations must be extrapolated from much 
mor
e recent but conflicting usages. In one 
later tradition, the vajra  symbolizes prajñā 
and the lotus denotes karuṇ ā, while in an -
other the padma  is e q uivalent to the prajñā  
and the vajra  represents the skillful means 
(upāya ) of implementing karuṇ ā. (Hunting -
ton 1985: 154)
Images from the second stage of building are 
found in the later antechamber of the shrine, in -
cluding the second façade, and in the reconstruct -
ed third façade, which now stands in the court -
yard. Very little remains of the second façade 
of the building; at its highest it stands less than 
half a metre high. A familiar dvārapāla  holding a 
staff stands in a niche next to the doorway. In the 
niche next to the dvārapāla  is a woman standing 
under a tree—the familiar śālabhañjikā from both 
Buddhist and Hindu art. The next niche contains 
the lower half of a pot-bellied man, who sits in 
mahārājalīlāsana . There are no pots of gold to as -
sociate him with Pāñcika. The first three of these 
Reichle mockup copy.indd   229 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 244] ---
230 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Fig. 9.25:  Detail of haircutting scene from third façade to 
rear shrine. (Photo: author)
Fig. 9.22:  Avalokiteśvara in rear shrine. (Photo: author)
Fig. 9.23:  Vajrapāṇi in rear shrine.  
(Photo: author)
Fig. 9.24:  Detail of haircutting scene from second façade to rear shrine. (Photo: author)
Reichle mockup copy.indd   230 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 245] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology231
images are standard fare for many Buddhist sites, 
but the fourth poses many questions. The final, 
westernmost niche contains three figures: a man 
and woman in an erotic pose, with a third figure 
who stands behind the man and holds his hair 
with one hand and perhaps grasps a knife in the 
other (Fig. 9.24). Interestingly, a similarly pro -
vocative image can be found on the third shrine 
façade, which was built shortly thereafter (Fig. 9.25).
Ancient images depicting an erotic scene com -
bined with what appears to be a ritual haircutting 
are extremely rare.24 In a Buddhist context, tonsure 
is commonly associated with a monk’s renunci -
ation or ordination. In Hindu contexts, hair is 
sometimes cut and offered to the gods in temple 
ceremonies. Desai (1972–73: 86–90) notes that the 
Tantric texts Karpūrādistotram  and Kakārakuṭa -
rahasyam , associated with the worship of K ālī, de -
scribe the offering of hair and semen to the goddess. 
Woodward’s (2004: 332) discussion of the esoteric 
practices associated with the development of the 
Hindu Yoginītantras mentions sexual discharges 
as offerings for the purpose of increasing occult 
powers. Whether similar rituals were actually per -
formed in a Buddhist context is undocumented 
24. Desai (1972–73) notes only four examples, three of 
which were found in Odisha.and, as Woodward notes (2004: 333), it is difficult 
to distinguish metaphorical language from actual 
practice in descriptions of the behaviour of siddha s 
in texts of this sort.  
Erotically explicit imagery (especially showing 
the sex act itself) is rare at Buddhist sites, although 
it is common on Hindu temples in Odisha (Donald -
son 1975).25 The presence of images of loving couples 
(mithuna ) on temple walls is thought to have been 
propitious through its allusion to fertility. Donald -
son (1975: 91) suggests that while erotic images of 
figures displaying genitalia or engaging in inter -
course serve an auspicious function, some images 
of more complicated sexual acts may illustrate 
Tantric rituals. But Desai (2012: 207) notes that
it is questionable whether erotic sculptures on 
medieval temples were the work of committed 
Tāntrikas. Moreover, the ‘depiction’ of erotic 
scenes, as distinct from the ‘practice’ of sexual 
rites, was not functionally related to or an inte -
gral part of T āntrism.
The late third façade is the most completely re -
constructed portion of the vihāra (Fig. 9.26). The 
façade consists of three tall (2.69 metres), deep 
niches on either side of a doorway. At the centre 
25. See also Brown 1978, and Desai 1972–73.
Fig. 9.26:  Third façade to rear shrine. (Photo: author)
Reichle mockup copy.indd   231 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 246] ---
232 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
of each of the lintels of the niches is an image 
of Tārā, and it is assumed that large sculpted 
images of Tārā would have been placed below.26 
The central niche on either side is surrounded by 
nāga  pilasters of the type found at other sites in 
Odisha such as Chaurasi and Mukteśvara. At the 
top of each nāga  pilaster is a dwarf, who acts as 
a support for the superstructure. Two of these 
figures are in what Mitra (1981: 183) calls ‘indecent 
poses’. Much of the stonework is missing from the 
lower portion of these niches, but a few images 
remain. They include a female flautist and female 
cauri bearer, and a dvārapāla . On the far side of the 
façade (originally the east side) is a second image 
of what seems to be some kind of haircutting 
ritual. In this image a man appears to hold the 
hair of a kneeling woman, while another woman 
with upraised arms stands behind them (Fig. 9.25).
The superstructure of the third façade is ex -
tremely ornate and contains a vast array of different 
figures. Many of these images are extremely small 
and difficult to identify. In her monograph, Mitra 
(1981:184) merely reels off a list of images, rather 
than describing them individually: 
Buddha (one in the dhyāna-mudrā , the oth -
er being in either bhūmisparśa-mudr ā or 
vara [da]-mudrā ), a teacher with a disciple, 
devotee either with offering or with an in -
cense-burner, dancers, erotic figures, pot-bel -
lied dwarf in the attitude of supporting super -
structure, etc.
26. Mitra (1981: 183) notes that three images of Tārā were 
found in the immediate vicinity.Fortunately Mitra’s description is more com -
plete when she is discussing the Buddha figures 
at the top of the superstructure. The chart above  
shows the relationship of images to each other—
the mudrā and associated Buddha are indicated 
as well as the one Bodhisattva, Mañjuśrī. Three 
of the images are not explicitly religious—a head 
with earrings, a dwarf, and a dancer. Below each 
of the mudrā s is a very speculative identification 
of the Buddha, as well as the direction with which each is often associated.
The presence of Buddha figures in the dhyāna- , 
dharmacakra- , abhaya- , varada- , and bhūmi-
sparśa-mudrā s immediately calls to mind the five 
Jina-Buddhas (the five transcendent, trans-his -
torical Buddhas). A sixth Jina -Buddha, known as 
Mahāvairocana or Vajrasattva, is found in some 
Tantric Buddhist traditions and is considered the 
Ādi-Buddha from whom the other Jina-Buddhas 
emanate.27 If these are indeed the Jina -Buddhas de -
picted on the third façade, how are they arranged? 
The Buddha associated with the dhyāna-mudrā and 
the west, Amitābha, appears on what would have 
been the west side of the façade, while Akṣobhya, 
whose mudrā  is bhūmisparśa and direction is east, 
appears on that side. The other figures are more 
problematic. Amoghasiddhi and Ratnasambha -
va, associated with north and south respectively,
appear on the left and right side of the jamb of 
the uppermost central niche. Vairocana, who is 
often associated with the centre, is the centre of 
the western three niches, but not the centre of the 
27. The name of this Adī-Buddha may vary by tradition. 
See, for example, the list in Gomez and Woodward 1981: 229.dharma -
cakramudrā
ŚākyamuniMañjuśrī
dhyāna-mudrā dharmacakra- 
mudrāhead abhaya-mudrā varada-mudrā dwarf dancer bhūmisparśa-mudrā
Amitābha Vairocana Amoghasiddhi Ratnasambhava Akṣobhya
West Centre North South East
bhūmisparśa-mudrā
Śākyamuni
Akṣobhya?
Reichle mockup copy.indd   232 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 247] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology233
façade as a whole. There is another Buddha figure 
in dharmacakra-mudrā  in the central position, and 
it would be tempting to see him as Vairocana, the 
Buddha of the centre. But below this Buddha is a 
small image of a wheel with deer to either side. This 
iconography identifies the figure as Śākyamuni, 
preaching the first sermon. Below this figure, on 
the lintel of the uppermost niche, is an image of 
Mañjuśrī, who displays the varada-mudrā  with 
one hand and holds the stalk of a lotus bearing a 
book in the other. The presence of Mañjuśrī further 
complicates the picture.  
One speculative theory about the arrangement 
of these figures depends on this image of Mañjuśrī. 
The Litany of Names of Mañjuśrī ( Mañjuśrīnāmasaṅ ­
gīti) is a Mantrayāna text, in which the Śākyamuni 
Buddha extols the virtues of the bodhisattva Mañ -
juśrī. Ronald Davidson (1995b: 105), according to 
whom this 7th-century text ‘became one of the most 
popular liturgical works of later Buddhism, and 
was recited daily by monks and laymen in India’,28  
describes the content of the litany as follows:
The core of the work ... sets forth the use of syl -
lables as a precursor to the actual visualization 
of many divinities, all of whom are considered 
forms of Mañjuśrī. It is here that the Buddha 
also elaborates the meditative environment of 
the circle of the divinity ( maṇḍala , mandala) in 
the Path of Secret Spells. A mandala in tantric 
Buddhism is a perfected environment, often 
depicted as a buddha’s palace. Ritual entry into 
this environment is the central event in tantric 
Buddhist initiation, and the manifestation of 
oneself as a buddha and one’s environment as 
a perfect mandala is one of the prime goals of 
tantric Buddhist practice.
28. Davidson  (1995b:  105) writes: ‘Unlike most earlier 
works in praise of the Buddha or the great bodhisattvas, 
the Litany of Names of Mañjuśrī was evidently written for 
an esoteric audience, one that would have had the mandala 
revealed to them in the ritual of consecration by a master of 
the Path of Secret Spells. Perhaps the most curious aspect 
of the Litany of Names is its unusual ability to have crossed 
over into a popular cultus of the bodhisattva of intelligence 
while retaining its function as a evocation of various eso -
teric diagrams. That one text could speak simultaneously 
to multiple communities seems to indicate that it directly 
addressed an important facet of both popular and monastic 
Buddhism in India’.In the first section of the work, verses 26–162, 
Śākyamuni Buddha describes and praises Mañ -
juśrī, listing a series of epithets. In verse 42 he 
states, ‘Being Mahāvairocana, he is buddha’ (ibid.: 
109). Later in verse 59 Mañjuśrī is described as ‘[a] 
buddha in his nature of five bodies, an overlord by 
his nature of five types of gnosis, wearing a diadem 
whose nature is five buddhas, having five eyes, he 
maintains dissociation’ (ibid.: 111). The five Buddhas 
referred to are ‘Vairocana, Akṣobhya, Ratnasam -
bhava, Amitābha, and Amoghasiddhi—together 
forming the fundamental maṇḍala arrangement’ 
(ibid.: 125). The first of these verses refers to Mañ -
juśrī as Mahāvairocana, who is the sixth Jina-Bud -
dha and the progenitor of the other five. The second 
quote refers to those Jina-Buddhas as forming a 
diadem for Mañjuśrī. Thus one possible explanation 
for the arrangement of figures on the third façade 
of the vihāra  would be a maṇḍala  containing all 
of these figures. At top and center is Śākyamuni 
Buddha, below him Mañjuśrī as Mahāvairocana, 
and on both sides the other Jina-Buddhas.
The concept of grouping of Buddhas into three 
different families ( kula), the vajrakula , tathāgathaku-
la, padmakula  developed in Mahāyāna Buddhism. In 
esoteric Buddhism the idea of a five Buddha group -
ing became more prominent. These Jina -Buddhas 
were especially important in Java and the Himālayas. 
They are represented at a number of the Buddhist 
monuments, most famously at Borobodur.  
esoteric imagery of the  
third façade
Whatever the meanings of the iconography of the 
third façade, a question that remains is why the 
monks felt the need to build it. The simplest ex -
planation would be based on structural reasons. 
During the second stage of construction extensive 
changes were made to the monastery—the cells 
of the first floor were bricked up, the antecham -
ber extended and a portion of the verandah was 
converted into rooms. The restructuring of the 
antechamber into a much larger space, the addi -
tion of a brick side-shrine and the iconography of 
the third façade itself suggest that builders were 
responding to a changing set of religious beliefs and 
practices. The large antechamber might have been 
Reichle mockup copy.indd   233 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 248] ---
234 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
necessary for ceremonies or initiations involving 
larger groups of individuals. The construction of 
the brick side-shrine was likely a response to the 
need to worship an expanding pantheon of dei -
ties.29 (This also explains the small shrines in the 
vicinity of the Mahāvihāra, which are also from 
a later stage of construction and associated with 
Tantric pantheons).30  
The iconography of the third façade also points 
to increasing interest in Esoteric Buddhism. 
Worship of Tārā, the female Bodhisattva of com -
passion, was especially prevalent in Mahāyāna and 
Vajrayāna schools of Buddhism. Tārā was also an 
important deity in early island Southeast Asia. An 
8th-century inscription from Candi Kalasan de -
scribes the dedication of a temple to the goddess 
(Jordaan 1998), and images, particularly in bronze, 
have been found on Java and Sumatra (Reichle 
2008: 142–43).31 The goddess seems to have had 
the same import in Java as she did in eastern India, 
where numerous images depict her in her various 
forms. One of these, Aṣṭamahābhaya Tārā, sav -
iouress of the eight perils, may have been popular 
among travellers, who could seek her protection 
from the peril of shipwrecks.32
The representation of sexual imagery is another 
indication of the esoteric nature of religious beliefs 
29. This side-shrine contains eight images, which, ac -
cording to Mitra (1981: 189) are ‘of differing dates and 
varying artistic merit’. They include four images of Buddha 
in bhūmi  s parśa-mudrā , two images that might be the Ji -
na-Buddha Akṣobhya, and one image of Vasudhārā. Most 
of these images are dated from the 10th to 11th century or 
later. These images are representative of a shift in popular -
ity of the representation of Buddhist deities. The earliest 
Buddhist images in Odisha show the historical Buddha, 
with a later development of the Buddha being attended 
by two Bodhisattvas. At the end of the 7th century artists 
began producing images showing Bodhisattvas, female 
deities and images showing configurations of subsidiary 
figures around a Buddha (sculptural maṇḍala s). Most of 
these sculptural maṇḍala s are dated between the 8th and 
10th centuries (Donaldson 1995).
30. Se
e Hock 1987, especially Chapter 4.
31. Jo
rdaan (1998: 177) suggests a possible arrangement 
of deities on the superstructure of Candi Kalasan that has 
a counterpoint in a maṇḍala  of Ratnagiri.
32. Another saviour deity, Amoghapāśa, Lokeśvara with 
the unfailing noose, was popular at Ratnagiri and in Java 
(Reichle 2007).during the second phase of building at Ratnagiri. 
Davidson (1995a:292) writes: 
The use of sexuality for religious purposes is al -
most as shocking in the Indian environment as 
it is in the West but was considered acceptable 
in secrecy since the purpose of an action de -
notes its ethical value in the Buddhist system. 
Accordingly, sexuality between consenting 
members in a secret ritualized context leading 
to awakening can be considered a profoundly 
religious experience.... Yet precisely this event 
was potentially destabilizing for the monastic 
community, which was committed to celiba -
cy. Out of a wide variety of potential methods 
of interpreting or institutionalizing the event, 
two became standard—either sexual congress 
was restricted to the lay community or it be -
came visualized in a ritual context.
It is impossible to tell if the erotic imagery at 
Ratnagiri was used for purposes of visualization, 
or if it depicted acts in which initiated monks 
actually took part. It does suggest though, that at 
this time the community of monks needed dif -
ferent kinds of images, presumably for different 
kinds of worship.
Recent scholarship has begun to give us a much 
broader picture of ancient Buddhist practices and 
beliefs: 
Western students of Buddhism have generally 
regarded ritual attainment of enlightenment 
and desires for prosperity and fortunate re -
birth as indicative of lay Buddhist interests 
and goals. This is contrasted with the pre -
sumption that monastics seek enlightenment 
strictly through contemplative practices and 
a strict moral life—the so-called ‘true’ path 
expounded by the Buddha. Such a dichoto -
my is not supported by much of the evidence. 
Yijing’s travel log, for example, specifically 
describes activities taking place in the mon -
asteries. Although we do not want to detract 
from the importance of meditation and re -
lated practices for Buddhist mendicants, this 
is certainly only part of the picture. The vast 
majority of our data suggests that an array of 
practices were available to and taken up by 
monks and nuns of all periods. Not all of these 
practices were necessarily complementary. 
Many, in fact, may have been in competition 
with one another, reflecting competing con -
Reichle mockup copy.indd   234 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 249] ---
Image, Ritual, and Ideology235
ceptions of how the presence of the departed 
teacher—be it the legacy of his teachings or his 
bodily remains and representation—was to be 
maintained and, more importantly, to be en -
countered. (Boucher 1995: 63)
Thus, the ritual life of the monastery did not 
consist of only meditation and prayer but also 
many more mundane tasks and obligations. The 
changing concerns of the saṅgha  are reflected in 
the architecture the monks inhabited. Their move 
from open settlements to private vihāra  occurred 
because of their developing corporate identities. 
Private cells were needed for permanent residents 
and a large courtyard for congregational activities. 
The pillared veranda served as a place for walking, 
or in some cases perhaps for circumambulating 
a sacred image. The courtyard was also the place 
where images were taken out and worshipped in 
public ceremonies. More private veneration could 
take place at the sacred sanctum at the rear of the 
vihāra . 
An important change in the structure of Bud -
dhist vihāra  was the addition of these shrines at the 
rear of the monasteries. Whether they transformed 
the vihāra  into ‘a microcosmic version of paradise’ 
or merely provided a more convenient setting for 
daily worship is unclear, but in either case they 
did transform the nature of the space by mixing 
the sacred and mundane. This mixture of both worldly and spiritual concerns is also reflected in 
the iconography of the monastery. In order for the 
very survival of their way of life, monks had to 
be concerned for their own material well-being. 
This concern is reflected in images of popular gods 
associated with prosperity and wealth like Pāñcika 
and Hārītī, who appeared alongside Bodhisattvas 
who represent spiritual transcendence. 
Throughout all stages of construction at Ratna -
giri, the central axis remained important. Along 
it were built a series of portals leading back to 
the most sacred site at the rear of the shrine. The 
elaborate decoration of these portals emphasizes 
their importance not only as thresholds, but also 
as demarcations of sacred space. In a Hindu temple 
the entrance leads to the garbhagṛha , the sacred 
centre. At Ratnagiri the model is not composed of 
concentric circles of radiating power, but rather an 
axis of portals leading inward. Each of these façades 
points one towards the sacred image in the rear, but 
also interrupts the passage. This pathway of portals 
demands that the viewer not only stop and view 
each façade but also contemplate himself within 
this telescoping axis of frames. Facing the main 
image of Śākyamuni Buddha a monk remembers 
his pratimokṣa  vows; surrounded by Padmapāṇi 
and Vajrapāṇi he recalls his own Bodhisattva vows; 
confronted with esoteric images he contemplates 
Tantric vows.
Reichle mockup copy.indd   235 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 250] ---
Reichle mockup copy.indd   236 12/7/16   3:10 PM

--- [Page 251] ---
Chapter 10
Seeds of Vajrabodhi: 
 Buddhist Ritual Bronzes from Java and Khorat 
peter d. sharrock & emma c. bunker
George cœdès (1968: 96) considered the 
arrival in Southeast Asia of the Esoteric 
Buddhist vehicle or Vajrayāna as the domi -
nant fact of the 8th century. While Vajrayāna spread 
in Southeast Asia in different waves and through 
different channels and agents, India’s Buddhist 
strategists of the Pallava dynasty in the south and 
the later Pāla dynasty in the north, forged alliances 
in Southeast Asia in the 8th century that became 
key to keeping alive their international proselytiz -
ing mission when the emperors of China and Tibet 
ordered the closure of thousands of monasteries 
on political-religious whims. And the roots they 
put down in the region survived for a century or 
more the eventual sacking of the Buddhists’ huge 
homeland monasteries in the Ganges valley by 
Islamic armies at the end of the 12th century. This 
southward expansion of what is now often called 
‘northern Buddhism’ can be glimpsed through the 
official Chinese biographies of the Indian pioneers 
and more surely traced through the architectural 
remains and the bronze icons that have survived 
from the rituals of the new Buddhist communities 
in Java, the Malay Peninsula, and Khorat in modern 
northeastern Thailand. 
The link between Bihar and Bengal and the Bud -
dhists of Java has been well researched by Dutch 
scholars. This paper traces a parallel link with the 
Khmer Khorat plateau via the Malay Peninsula and 
seeks to expand on valuable recent research focused 
on the role of the Indian master popularly known 
as Vajrabodhi (a.k.a. Vajrabuddhi: see Appendix 
A; Chin. Jingangzhi 金剛 , 671–741), the son of a 
king of the southern Pallava dynasty in Kāñcī,1 
1.‘His Reverence was originally the third son of Īśāna -
va
rman (Yishenawamo, 伊舍那靺摩 ), the kṣatriya king ofthe princely proponent of a new current of Eso -
teric Buddhism, who imprinted its doctrines and 
rituals on Southeast Asia and China. The form of 
Pallava-style Kāñcī Buddhism that Vajrabodhi and 
his disciple Amoghavajra propagated across Asia 
was to profoundly influence the Buddhism of the 
Pāla dynasty in northern India which arose a few 
years after Vajrabodhi’s death in China in 741. We 
argue that the form of Buddhism he propagated, 
as well as his cosmopolitan vision, prefigured the 
‘internationalism’ that would later characterize the 
Pāla political and religious ideology. Furthermore, 
having frequented Nālandā and its environs, his 
own thinking was no doubt tuned to the trends 
and styles that were current in the regions that 
would eventually become the homeland of the Pāla 
empire, and that he contributed to spread overseas.
Vajrabodhi, son of an Indian king, must have been 
a man of immense charisma as well as learning, 
for his influence spread across Asia from southern 
India, to Sri Lanka, to the Malay world and Java, to 
China, Korea, and Japan. The new esoteric system 
of five supreme Buddhas linked to a ma ṇḍala that 
he propagated early in the 8th century left traces 
in the sacred architecture and iconography of the 
whole area. His contact with island Southeast Asia 
was brief, during the years ad 717–20, when he was 
slowly journeying to China. In China he would 
become a renowned master of ritual, a translator 
of major Sanskrit texts, and eventually a patriarch 
of Chinese Buddhism. In these three years, when 
weather delayed his eventually stormy passage 
to China, he propagated the system of the Sar-
a kingdom in Central India’ (Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 134). 
Conversely, Zanning reports that he was a Brahman from 
South India (cf. Acri, Introduction to this volume,  n. 46).
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   237 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 252] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia238
vatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha ( STTS )—what Charles 
Orzech (2010: 347) calls ‘cutting-edge Buddhism’—
in the courts of Sri Lanka, the Malay Peninsula, 
Sumatra, and Java, before going on to make his 
impact on Tang China. Esoteric Buddhist con -
cepts can be seen in the magnificent monuments 
of Central Java like Borobudur (a unique form of 
the STTS  pentad?),2 Mendut ( Maṇḍalāṣṭasūtra  or 
womb maṇḍala), Kalasan (T ārā), and Sewu (Vairo -
cana, Mañjuśrī), and also later in the ritual bronzes, 
datable stylistically to the 9th to 11th century. Figs. 
10.1a–c show how the Javanese artists embellished 
with poise, power, and refinement a Bihari model 
both in bronze and on a large scale in s tone in 
Candi Mendut. The postures and throne designs 
2. Sundberg (2004: 118) offers this interpretation of the 
Bo
robudur structure: 
While not wishing to deny the indisputable arguments 
adduced by Snellgrove (1996) and Klokke (1995) against 
the interpretation of the Barabuḍur as an explicit 
maṇḍala  of the STTS , we cannot exclude a tantrically 
conceived background for this monument…. However, 
I suggest the worthiness of consideration of the top 
levels of the Barabuḍur as the ‘secret universal palace 
of the mind’ as described by Kūkai in his Record of 
the Dharma Transmission, a universal palace in which 
resided the Dharmakāya Tathāgata Mahāvairocana 
accompanied by his attendants, all of whom were none 
other than Dharmakāya Tathāgatas (Abe 1999: 221). 
The Dharmakāya Tathāgata Mahāvairocana was the 
first patriarch in Kūkai’s lineage, originator of the 
teachings of the STTS .are close but the Javanese icons have the presence, 
tranquillity, and facial traits that remind us of the   
Buddhas of Borobudur.3
Details of Vajrabodhi’s journey in those three 
years are left vague in his official Chinese biogra -
phies but there are enough shreds of evidence to 
suggest that he influenced not only Java, but also 
the Malay Peninsula and the Khmer Buddhists of 
the Khorat plateau. 
The bronzes from Khorat are little known, as 
many are in private collections and little has been 
written about them, but there can be no doubt 
that they are part of the same cross-cultural ex -
pansion of Esoteric or Tantric Buddhism over the 
seas between India and China that opened with 
Vajrabodhi’s momentous journey. The discovery 
of 8th- through 10th-century Buddhist bronzes 
in Khmer-controlled territories in Īśān (modern 
Isan in northeastern Thailand), which are refined 
representations of the new esoteric deities, appears 
to reveal a direct spiritual and artisanal link with 
Pāla India. In the past, scholars called such bronzes 
‘Śrīvijayan’, presumably because they were consid-
ered outliers related to the clearly attested Esoteric 
Buddhism of Java/Sumatra and because, despite 
their diversity in style, the still ill-defined ‘Śrīvijaya’ 
polity was considered to be a widespread shipping 
3. The delicacy, refinement, and human immediacy of 
Javanese bronzes are widely reputed. In the words of a 
well-known London dealer: ‘They are to die for!’
Fig. 10.1a: Patna Museum Buddha. (Photo courtesy Swati Chemburkar); Fig. 10.1b: Buddha of Candi Mendut in stone. (Photo: author); Fig. 10.1c: Javanese bronze (Collection Nationaal Museum van Wereldculturen, RV-1403-2844) 
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   238 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 253] ---
239 Seeds of Vajrabodhi
polity with no local specific artistic traditions. More 
recently Hiram Woodward (2003: 93) has called the 
Khorat bronzes Bengali-influenced. This chapter 
examines ritual bronzes found in Java and Khorat 
and concludes they were cast for related but distinct 
Javanese and Khmer Buddhist communities. Most 
such images exhibiting significant Pāla-derived 
features appear to have been cast at regional found -
ries throughout present-day northeast Thailand, 
peninsular Thailand, and Malaysia. The very ear -
liest icon models, which have Indic facial features, 
clothes, and jewellery, were probably made in Bihar/
Bengal, but we will look at series of bronzes that are 
progressively Javanized or Khmerized. 
sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha  
The root Tantra of the new Buddhism being prop -
agated was the Compendium of Principles of All 
Tathāgatas  and Vajrabodhi was one of its early 
masters. Weinberger (2003: 1) estimates the text 
was finalized towards the end of the 7th century—at 
the time Vajrabodhi was completing his training 
in the Ganges valley monasteries of North India.  
The key messages of the STTS  are twofold. First, 
Śākyamuni is shown to ascend in meditation from 
the Bodhi tree to the court of the unifying Esoteric 
Mahāyānic fifth Buddha Vairocana, where he is 
taught a new form of self-transforming yoga to 
achieve inner fusion with deities that procures 
immediate enlightenment (and thus rapidly ac -
celerating the Mahāyāna’s traditional 3,000-year 
Bodhisattva career towards perfection).4 The 
second message comes through a stirring narrative 
account of the Bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi’s battle with 
the universal god Śiva using arsenals of magical 
weapons.5 Vajrapāṇi, in his wrathful Trailokyavi -
4. The doctrine also countered the Therav ād a or southern 
Buddhist concept of one reigning Buddha per age of 5,000 
years or more.
5. ‘The Compendium of Principles of All Tathāgatas ( S ar-
va-tathāgata-tattva-saṁgraha ) is arguably the single most 
important development of Indian Buddhist Tantra. In this 
text we find the coalescence of a variety of Tantric elements 
organized around two new and seminal narratives—Śāk -
yamuni’s enlightenment recast in Tantric terms and Va -
jrapāṇi’s subjugation of Maheśvara—that for the first time 
self-consciously announce Tantra as a new and distinct 
form of Buddhism. In declaring Tantra’s independence, jaya or ‘conqueror of the three worlds’ form, trades 
insults and intimidating displays with Śiva until 
he kills the pan-Indic god with his vajra  (thunder -
bolt) and revives him in the Vajradhātumaṇḍala as 
the Tathāgata-bhasmeśvara-nirghoṣa  (‘soundless 
lord Buddha of ashes’). In the 9th century, this 
Tantra and its widely reproduced narrative battle 
established Trailokyavijaya as the principal deity of 
the expansion of international Tantric Buddhism 
(Linrothe 1999: 178). The Tantra thus opened the 
way to rituals and meditative concentrations that 
conferred achievement of Buddhahood in one life -
time and offered kings state protection through 
supernatural powers. 
This powerful new text, offering a politically 
aggressive Buddhist alternative to the rising power 
of the Brahmins across India, found a committed 
and persuasive external propagator in Vajrabodhi. 
After being ordained in Nālandā, he went south and 
was early on venerated for his rain ritual (part of 
state protection for kings). Despite court pressure 
to stay, he was, according to his Tang biography, 
inspired by a vision of the compassionate Bodhisat -
tva Avalokiteśvara to mastermind an expansion of 
Esoteric Buddhist thought and ritual across the 
tropical southern seas and into China, where he 
would encounter the wisdom Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī. 
He is principally remembered as a translator of 
Tantric works for the Tang emperors and a patri -
arch of Chinese, Japanese, and Korean Esoteric 
Buddhism, but his influence went even further 
through his contacts during his travels from 717 
to 720. The spread of the Siddhamātṛkā script across 
island Southeast Asia in the same period seems to 
follow his movements.
Esoteric Buddhism reached its first apogee in 
Tang China under Vajrabodhi and his disciple 
Amoghavajra. Orzech (2010: 348) says Vajrabodhi’s 
emphasis on the self-transforming ‘deity yoga’ 
portion of the STTS  was considered the pin -
nacle, and he first rendered extracts in 723 ( T 
866) … of the mudrā s and mantras necessary 
these narratives present a clearly defined soteriological goal, 
a new paradigm for this liberative path in which ritual is 
central, and innovations such as deity yoga (self-generation 
as an enlightened figure), consecration rites, and practices 
involving violence and sex’ (Weinberger 2003: Abstract A). 
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   239 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 254] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia240
for entry into the ma ṇḍala; techniques for ac -
complishing samādhi ; details of the Vajradhā -
tu ma ṇḍala; various signs of meditative ac -
com  pli
sh men
t; tech  niq
ues for erecting altars, 
making offerings, bestowing abhiṣeka ; and 
per for
ming various types of homa . 
The ritual bronzes that are the focus of this 
chapter were crucial paraphernalia in his world, 
as they made up the ma ṇḍalas and enabled the 
deep meditative states or samādhi and the initia -
tion ceremonies. A ma ṇḍala sanctuary in the royal 
palace became a key to Buddhist power.
The transmission of Buddhist innovations from 
India to China was however blocked in 845 when 
late Tang emperor Wuzong closed all monaster -
ies and promoted Daoism. China and Japan were 
cut off from the subsequent development of the 
Yoginītantras enshrined in texts such as the Guhya -
samājatantra  (‘Secret Assembly’), Hevajratantra , 
and Cakrasaṁvaratantra . The later texts, which 
introduce the supreme sixth Buddha Vajrasattva/
Vajradhara and his fierce emanations Hevajra and 
Saṁvara, did however reach Java and Khorat and 
the Peninsula, as is attested by the extant ritual 
bronzes of these deities.6
Jeffrey Sundberg and Rolf Giebel have recently 
put new emphasis on Vajrabodhi’s role in leading the 
8th-century propagation of Esoteric Buddhism (see 
Sundberg and Giebel 2011). Their translations and 
elucidations of the old Chinese biographies and their 
work on recent Sinhalese studies incite us to suggest 
that the Buddhist ritual bronzes found in both Java 
and Khorat may all be seen as later growths from 
the Pallavan seeds of the type of Esoteric Buddhism 
sown by Vajrabodhi in the early 8th century. The 
claim rests partly on a still-disputed identification of 
the Chinese references to the territories Vajrabodhi 
visited, and more firmly on the resemblances in the 
ritual bronzes of both places.
6. See Weinberger (2003: abstract B): ‘The Compendi -
um of Principles marks the emergence of mature Indian 
Buddhist Tantra at the end of the seventh century, and it 
immediately spawned a body of literary progeny that has 
played a central and enduring role in the development 
of Tantric Buddhism in India, Tibet, China, and Japan. 
Consolidated over time into traditions known in some 
Indian circles as Yoga Tantra, they spread as widely as Sri 
Lanka, Southeast Asia, Khotan, Mongolia, and Sumatra.’According to the Tang biography by Lü Xiang, 
now translated by Giebel, Vajrabodhi spent seven 
years with his preceptor Nāgajñāna at the Pallava 
court at Kāñcī, before setting off on his long voyage 
of spiritual discovery and Buddhist propagation that 
began in Sri Lanka. In Kāñcī he must have known 
Mānavarman, the Sinhalese ex-regent and future 
Sri Lankan king Śrīśīla (r. 684–718). The latter was 
then in exile in South India and a serving general in 
the Pallava army, awaiting his eventual successful 
return to Anurādhapura at the head of a Pallava 
army, where he installed himself as king of the 
Second Lambakaṇṇa dynasty (Sundberg and Giebel 
2011: 146). Mānavarman’s descendants reigned until 
772 and this first ninety-year period of the dynasty, 
favourable to the Esoteric Buddhism of Kāñcī, was 
to prove a rich source for the esoteric texts that 
were key to the Chinese and Southern Seas strategy 
of both Vajrabodhi and his disciple Amoghavajra. 
Sundberg and Giebel (2011: 146) suggest that 
the first of Vajrabodhi’s esoteric seeds planted 
outside India was in southern Sri Lanka in the 
kingdom of Rohaṇa, which his Tang biography 
claims turned from the Theravāda to Mahāyāna 
when he met the local king. The appearance of icons 
of Avalokiteśvara and a possibly royal inscription 
to a Tārā temple in the south of the island seem to 
vindicate the Tang claim. 
‘vijaya’ in the peninsula or sumatra?
What people—especially remote Chinese authors—
meant by ‘Śrīvijaya’ could be Palembang, Jambi, 
Chaiya, or Kedah at different times in the con -
nected, maritime Malay world of the Peninsula 
and Sumatra. Śrīvijaya has at least three names 
in Chinese texts and one of them, San Foqi, could 
mean ‘the three Vijayas’ according to Miksic (2013: 
110). After returning to South India, Vajrabodhi 
began the next phase of his propagation of the new 
radical Buddhist thinking and rituals in the years 
between heading south from Nākappaṭṭiṉam in 
717 with a courtly escort and then joining a fleet of 
thirty-five Persian vessels in Sri Lanka (at Trinco -
malee?). He finally reached China in 719 or 720. The 
Chinese biographies are vague on the intervening 
three years after leaving Sri Lanka. Lü Xiang’s mid 
8th-century record mentions only one event:
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   240 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 255] ---
241 Seeds of Vajrabodhi
After a month they reached the kingdom of 
Vijaya (Foshi, 佛逝 ). The king of Vijaya [876b] 
welcomed His Reverence with a golden parasol 
and a golden litter. Hampered by foul winds, 
they stayed for five months. It was only after 
the winds had settled that they were able to 
set out. It is impossible to describe in detail 
the minor incidents and strange things in the countries through which they passed and the perils at sea, with its immense waves and 
seething waters. (Trans. Giebel, in Sundberg 
and Giebel 2011: 139)
The later Song biography by Buddhist master 
Zanning gives a shorter account published in 988: 
‘Travelling eastward, he visited twenty countries or 
more, including Bhoja 佛誓  [Vijaya], the country 
of naked people, and others. Having heard that 
Buddha’s Law was prospering in China, he went 
there by the sea route. Because of frequent mishaps, 
he took several years to get there’ (trans. Giebel, in 
Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 185).
Piriya Krairiksh is among a growing number of 
historians, whom we would support, who interpret 
Vajrabodhi’s visit to ‘Vijaya’ as a stay for five months 
under poor weather conditions at the kingdom of 
Kedah in the northern part of the Peninsula. Krai -
riksh argues that Tantric Buddhism may have been 
introduced by Vajrabodhi to present-day Thailand 
in 717.7 Kedah was crucial to navigation because of 
the landmark mountain Gunung Jerai that rises 
over the port and the Bhujang Valley kingdom. 
Before marine chronometers made longitude cal -
culations possible, navigators would head east or 
west into the rising or setting sun and otherwise 
use the stars to keep them on a straight line. Ships 
leaving Sri Lanka would head east, skirting Aceh on 
the tip of Sumatra, until Gunung Jerai appeared on 
the horizon (Miksic 2013: 58).8 Storm-enforced stays 
7. This information is based on Piriya Krairiksh’s talk 
at the London launch of his book The Roots of Thai Art on 
20 November 2012. 
8. Qu
aritch Wales earlier referred to the importance of 
Kedah Peak: ‘Secondly [Malaya’s] north-west coast provid -
ed the first sight of land and possibility of rest and refresh -
ment to would-be Indian colonists after their crossing the 
Bay of Bengal. Kedah combined the practical advantage of 
an excellent anchorage (the estuary of the Merbok) with the 
spiritual attraction of being dominated by a high mountain 
(Kedah Peak), which to the superstitious Indian sailors in Kedah could have been routine. George Cœdès 
(concluded that under the influence of Nālandā 
teachers in the last quarter of the 8th century: 
Mahāyāna Buddhism established a definite 
foothold on the Peninsula and in the archipel -
ago. Its principal characteristics were: (1) a ten -
dency toward the Tantric mysticism of the Va -
jrayāna, popular in Bengal from the middle of 
the eighth century; (2) a syncretism with Hindu 
cults which, already in the inscription of Kelu -
rak, was to become clear in Cambodia in the 
Angkor period and was to culminate later in Java 
in the cult of Śiva-Buddha. (Cœdès 1968: 343)
 H.G. Quaritch Wales, another pioneer of South -
east Asian art history, first linked Vajrabodhi’s 
visit to the emergence of Mahāyāna icons on the 
Peninsula.9 Peter Skilling firmly identifies Kedah 
(Kadāra in Cōḻa texts) as the ‘Śrīvijaya’ where the 
monk Atīśa, the great 11th-century reformer of 
Tibetan Buddhism, studied from 1012 to 1024 under 
guru Dharmakīrti. On one of Dharmakīrti’s texts, 
known only in its Tibetan translation, a colophon 
says it was written ‘in the city of Śrīvijaya in Su -
varṇadvīpa’ (Skilling 1997: 188; see also Skilling 
2007 and Schoterman, this volume). A year after 
Atīśa left, a Cōḻa fleet from Tanjor attacked the 
major ports in the Melaka Strait and installed a 
crown prince as viceroy in Kedah (Miksic 2013: 79).
In the three years before Vajrabodhi finally set 
off for China, there are enough suggestions about 
his visiting Java and meeting the youthful disciple 
Amoghavajra there to suggest he made this story 
current in Chang’an. Sundberg and Giebel (2011: 
152) assume the princely Indian sage with his pres -
tigious entourage from Kāñcī would have taken the 
opportunity to visit all the important cities in the 
region with Buddhist communities: 
From Kūkai and other sources we are told that 
Vajrabodhi acquired Amoghavajra as a disci -
ple during the 3 years. First, it is obvious that 
must have appeared to be a veritable home of the gods’ 
(Quaritch Wales 1940: 1).
9. See Quaritch Wales 1939: 41. This view is echoed in the 
catalogue of the New York Metropolitan Museum’s exhi -
bition by John Guy (2014: 251), and by Professor Takashi 
Suzuki: see http://bharatkalyan97.blogspot.com/2011/07/
jayankondam.html  (last accessed 9 December 2015) 
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   241 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 256] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia242
Java ranked among the locales suitable for a 
well-educated Indian religious adept like Va -
jrabodhi to occupy his time, instead of energet -
ically resuming his approach to his intended 
destination of China.… It is thus well within 
the realm of historical possibility that Vajrabo -
dhi planted the seed of appreciation for Esoter -
ic Buddhism in Java during his sojourn in 717: 
the elaborate, richly, and regally endowed Bud -
dhism of the high Śailendra period some dec -
ades later seems to have sought to ground itself 
in the very locales and traditions esteemed by 
Vajrabodhi a half-century before.10 
The local progeny of Vajrabodhi’s mission to 
the Peninsula world and Java therefore include 
the pentad of Buddhas described in the STTS  and 
the Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara, Mañjuśrī, and 
Vajrapāṇi—all visible on a monumental scale in 
the statues and reliefs of Borobudur—but also, by 
extension into the coming centuries, a second wave 
of esoteric deities from what the Tibetans classified 
as the ‘Yoginītantras’, including the sixth Buddha 
Vajrasattva/Vajradhara and his fierce emanations 
Hevajra and Saṁvara, who followed through the 
channels Vajrabodhi opened. These deities were 
probably unknown to Vajrabodhi and were not 
venerated in China—because of Wuzong’s closure 
of the monasteries—until much later, under Kublai 
Khan’s Tibetan-influenced Mongol Yuan dynasty 
in the 13th century. Yet they did arrive in Java and 
Khorat from northern India, where their presence 
is primarily attested in 10th- to 12th-century ritual 
bronzes.
The earlier Mahāyāna Buddhism of the Per -
fection Path ( pāramitāyāna ) showed its presence 
in Sumatra shortly before Vajrabodhi’s visit in 
the Old Malay/Sanskrit inscription dated 684 at 
Talang Tuwo near Palembang, which refers to bo -
dhicitta , vajraśarīra , and kalyānamitra  (like those 
visited by the pilgrim Sudhana in his search for 
enlightenment in the Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra  that is 
prominently featured on the Borobudur reliefs). 
A century later and some decades after Vajrabo-
10. Other sources, traced in Raffaello Orlando’s (1981) 
PhD dissertation, suggest that Amoghavajra travelled over -
land from his Sogdian boyhood home in northern India 
with his uncle and met Vajrabodhi in China. Woodward 
(2004: 339) inclines to this interpretation.Fig. 10.2a: Wat Keow Chaiya. (Photo: author)
Fig. 10.2b: Wat Keow Akṣobhya. (Photo: 
author)
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   242 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 257] ---
243 Seeds of Vajrabodhi
dhi’s visit, three high brick temples, bearing Cam 
tower features, were built at Chaiya (‘Siwichaiya’ 
in Thai) on the Gulf of Siam side of the Peninsula. 
Wat Keow has external directional Buddhas in 
niches on three sides (Fig. 10.2a) and contained 
a 69-centimetre stone icon of Akṣobhya, head of 
the vajra  family, seated in bhūmisparśa-mudrā 
on a pedestal displaying a large vajra  (Fig. 10.2b). 
This was one of ‘three beautiful brick buildings, 
resting places for Kajakara (Padmapāṇi), for the 
destroyer of Māra (Śākyamuni) and for Vajrin 
(Vajrapāṇi)’ erected by a king of Śrīvijaya, accord -
ing to the Wat Hua Wiang inscription dated 775 
(Cœdès 1929–61: 23). These temples held the princely 
bronze Avalokiteśvaras with inlaid silver eyes of 
the Bangkok National Museum (Fig. 10.3a). 
A similar 79-centimetre bronze with eight arms 
joined at the elbows in the Kuala Lumpur History 
Museum w as dredged in 1936 from the Bidor, Perak 
tin mine (Fig. 10.3b). They ha ve been compared with 
a silver and gilt icon that was found at Tekaran, 
Wonogiri in Central Java (Fontein 1990: 210–11). 
The Perak icon holds a noose ( pāśa ) and appears to 
Figure 10.3a: Wat Wiang eight-armed Avalokiteśvara. 
(Photo: author) Figure 10.3b: Avalokiteśvara from Bidor, Perak tin mine. (Photo: Gryffindor [CC BY 3.0], Wikimedia Commons)
Figure 10.4: Clay tablet of Śākyamuni-Vairocana and eight Bodhisattvas. (Photo: author)
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   243 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 258] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia244
be an early Tantric Amoghapāśa (‘unfailing lasso’),  
the form of the Bodhisattva later found prominent -
ly for exa mple in East Java in the 13th century (e.g., 
at Candi Jago). This suggests they are all Tantric 
icons. 
The courtly 8th-century Bod hisattvas with 
high mukuṭa  and elaborate jewellery also appear 
in a ma ṇḍala around a wheel-turning Śākyamu -
ni-Vairocana on votive tablets (Fig. 10.4) in caves 
and other sites on the Peninsula—a formation that 
appears on a grand scale in Candi Mendut late in 
that century. The Maṇḍalāṣṭasūtra  that defines 
this maṇḍala was translated by Amoghavajra ( T 
1167) and earlier by the early Indian Tantric master 
Puṇyodaya, who twice travelled to Cambodia on 
imperial missions when Xuanzang wanted him 
out of the Chinese capital.11 The ma ṇḍala is not 
however found in Cambodia.
Woodward (2004: 330) defines the distinction 
between Mahāyāna and Tantric ritual environ -
ments thus: ‘Mantrayāna differs from the Perfection 
Path ( pāramitāyāna ) Mahāyāna Buddhism that 
historically preceded it in its emphasis on the ritual 
entering of a circle of divinities (a ma ṇḍala) and 
on the recitation of sacred formulas ( mantra )—the 
production of sounds whose wavelengths cause 
fundamental universal powers to resonate.’ 
Mantrayāna or Esoteric Buddhism, emphasiz -
ing ritual to obtain supernatural powers, is what 
Vajrabodhi propagated, and ‘Śrīvijaya’ appears to 
have been primed for his message.12 Links between 
Chaiya and Vajrabodhi’s former base in southern 
India were maintained for a long period, for in 1005 
a king of ‘Śrīvijaya’ named Cūḍāmaṇivarman and 
his son Māravijayottuṅgavarman, both direct heirs 
of the king who issued the Chaiya 775 inscription, 
had a Buddhist temple built in Nākappaṭṭiṉam 
entitled Cūḍāmaṇivarmavihāra (Jacq-Hergoualc’h 
2002: 275).
11. See Woodward 2004 and Lin 1935: 83–100.
12. See Woodward 2004: 336: ‘The Srivijayan inscriptions, 
when taken together, evoke a realm familiar with the teach -
ings of Perfection Path Buddhism, the ancillary magical 
powers those at the end of the path acquire, and the use of 
mantra and yantra as instruments of war. If mantra and 
yantra could be used to defeat enemies, could they also not 
be used to help achieve Buddhist enlightenment? Sumatra, 
therefore, was fertile ground for Mantrayāna Buddhism’.We have to assume that the new Buddhist doc -
trines and icons transited from Kedah and Chaiya 
to Khorat in modern northeast Thailand along the 
coast, and then through the Mun river valley that 
was Cambodia’s well-plied main external trade. A 
string of Mahāyāna communities along this route 
is signalled by the presence of icons of Buddhas 
seated on the coils of giant serpents—the central 
sanctuary icon of the 12th-century Bayon state 
temple in Angkor that we and certain other art 
historians consider to be the Khmer Vairocana. 
When Pierre Dupont researched the origins of the 
Khmer nāga-enthroned Buddhas, he concluded 
that only a Mon intermediary could have assured 
the transit of the nāga-enthroned icon found in 
8th-century Sri Lanka that first appeared among 
the Khmers in the Buddhist revival led by purohita  
Kīrtipaṇḍita in the 10th century. (We will return 
to him shortly). Dupont (1959: 263) wrote:
It is therefore not possible that at the end of the 
10th century Khmer art borrowed directly from 
Ceylon and, as an intermediary was indispen -
sable, only the art of the Mons could have per -
formed this role. We must therefore have to de -
termine that the Khmer image of the Buddha on 
the naga was inspired … by Mon iconography. 
He identified five nāga-enthroned stone 
Buddhas in high relief from Nakhon Si Thammarat, 
Dong Si Maha Phot, Lopburi, and Pracinburi. Most 
of these places were sea or riverine ports on Cam -
bodia’s trade route. The Peninsula was linked cul -
turally and at times politically to Śrīvijaya and Java, 
but the nāga-enthroned Buddha appears neither 
on Sumatra nor Java, so the Buddhist cultural 
influence that had the supreme Khmer Buddha 
sit on a nāga  can only have come from Sri Lanka, 
under the 8th-century Lambakaṇṇa dynasty where 
Vajrabodhi was a major presence.13 
mahāyoga  icons of the  
yoginītantras
The germination of the last wave of Yoginītan -
tras must have occurred in the great monasteries 
of Bihar and Bengal in the 8th to 10th century. 
13. The history of the Khmer nāga-enthroned Buddha is 
traced at more length in Sharrock 2011b: 481 –91, Appendix 2. 
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   244 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 259] ---
245
Icons that facilitated the consecrations ( abhiṣe -
ka) into the ma ṇḍalas of these secret rituals only 
appear towards the end of this period. The Buddhist 
southern communication channels that Vajrabodhi 
played a role in opening were evidently working 
between Pāla India and Java, and with the Malay 
Peninsula/Khorat. By the 10th century, bronze 
icons of the fierce new deities begin to appear 
and by the 11th century, they proliferate and a few 
related inscriptions occur.
One author’s first acquaintance with the icons 
of the second florescence of the Esoteric Buddhist 
wave was in the Phnom Penh National Museum, 
where a 10-centimetre bronze in the corner of a 
cabinet was seated in the distinctive mudrā  of the 
sixth Buddha V ajrasattva with a vajra  balanced 
on the fingers of the right hand and a bell on the 
left hip (Figs. 10.5a, 10.6a). It was also unusually 
dressed with epaulettes, earplugs resting on the 
shoulder, tribhaṅga  in the hips, long necklaces, and 
with five small Buddhas in a high dome of hair. 
The posture and headdress resembled a Vajrasat -
tva relief in the Sarnath Museum that is dated to 
the 9th century (Fig. 10.5b). The French curators 
in Phnom Penh called it a Buddha from 5th- to 
6th-century Funan, the coastal polity that preceded 
the formation of the Khmer state. It was catalogued 
but never published. On a subsequent visit, the 
tiny bronze from Lovea Em village in Kandal 
province around the capital had disappeared 
from the cabinet. The then museum director Hab 
Touch said he had doubts about the style of the 
jewellery and questioned whether it was a Khmer face. A letter arguing against its removal from 
the permanent exhibition was later reproduced in 
Khmer Bronzes: New Interpretations of the Past.14 
The bronze was difficult to date because it seemed 
unlike any other Khmer piece. (It is still kept 
downstairs in the Museum’s reserve collection).
When the authors later collaborated on the proofs 
of Khmer Bronzes , the Phnom Penh bronze’s 
uniqueness evaporated, for there was an almost 
identical icon in the National Museum of Australia 
(Fig. 10.6b). Another is on display in the Bangkok 
National Museum.
The best preserved icon (Figs. 10.7a, 10.7b) has 
been published by Bunker and Latchford (2011, fig. 
7.28); it belongs to what proved to be a series of 
similar Vajrasattvas, with the five Buddhas set into 
a more elaborate crown and with a tenon that slots 
14. See Bunker and Latchford 2011, which includes Shar -
rock’s ‘Discussion on Vajrasattva of Barong Lovéa Em, 
Kandāl (K.5432, E.808)’ (Sharrock 2011a: 493–96, Appen -
dix 3).
Fig. 10.5a: Lovea Em bronze. (Photo: author)
Fig. 10.5b: 9th-century Vajrasattva relief. (Photo cour-
tesy American Institute of Indian Studies)
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   245 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 260] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia246
into a lotus throne with high throne-back, with 
parasol and festoons that are more typical of Java.
All but the Lovea Em icon were unearthed in 
the mid 20th century in Khorat, northeast Thai -
land. They yield no stylistic clues to their original 
context in India, Khorat, or Cambodia, and no 
inscriptions assist in dating them. However, the 
freer environment for Khmer Buddhists in the 
mid 10th century (after almost three centuries of 
suppression) suggests they arrived with the Tantric texts brought in from abroad by the Khmer Bud -
dhist leader Kīr  ti paṇḍ ita as recorded in the ca. 970 
Wat Sithor inscription K.111, which like the Phnom 
Penh National Museum icon was also found in 
Kandāl province (Sharrock 2007: 263, n. 143). These 
Vajrasattva icons, perhaps suggesting the presence 
of the Guh  yasamājatantra  o f the second wave of 
Mahāyoga (Weinberger 2011: Abstract B), clearly 
met a Khmer need and yet do not look Khmer. We 
reached the conclusion that they were either cast Fig. 10.6a: Lovea Em bronze, 10.5 cm, Ga 5432, E 808.  
(Photo courtesy Bunker and Latchford 2011)Fig. 10.6b: 10.4 cm, National Museum of Australia 1968.11. (Photo courtesy Bunker and Latchford 2011)
Figs. 10.7a, 10.7b (left to right): Enthroned Indic model Vajrasattva from Khorat. (Photo courtesy Bunker and Latchford 2011, fig. 7.28)
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   246 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 261] ---
247 Seeds of Vajrabodhi
in India on orders from Khmer patrons in Khorat, 
or they were made in Cambodia by itinerant Indian 
craftsmen.
The local ritual need for Vajrasattva icons, proven 
in the material record, persisted for another three 
centuries and the icons were gradually infused with 
Khmer facial and body features, as well as dress and 
posture. They became fully Khmerized. Pauline 
Lunsingh Scheurleer traces a similar process taking 
place somewhat earlier in Java.15 Another bronze 
Vajrasattva (Fig. 10.8) shows a Khmer craftsman 
trying to remain faithful to the early Indic model. 
15. ‘The Javanese bronze casters quickly expanded their 
own idiom and very soon the bronzes became Javanized…. 
Here is a summary of the situation: from the 8th century 
onwards bronzes from what is now south east Bangla -
desh were imported into Java. At first the Javanese bronze 
casters copied them but, within a very short space of time, 
the native Javanese element predominated, eventually to 
result in a purely Javanese style by about the middle of the 
9th century’ (Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 29) .Yet Khmer features intrude. The jaw is more square 
and the cheeks fuller in the Khmer style; the tri -
bhaṅga  is reduced, the body is more corpulent and 
muscular. The epaulettes have become standard 
Khmer upper arm bands and the Buddha pentad 
remains set in the hair but with the high dome 
reduced. However, the long double necklaces, the 
earrings on the shoulder bone, and the vajra  leaning 
on the chest remain loyal to the probably Indic model. 
The first fully Khmer Vajrasattva is a 21-cen -
timetre icon  (Figs. 10.9a–b) wit h braced elegant 
limbs and torso, dressed in the courtly style named 
after the Śaiva Baphuon state temple—including a 
sampot  pulled high over the loins and low into a 
U-shape in front, a lightweight coronet and jew -
ellery, and incised eyes and eyebrows. The vajra  is 
now held away from the chest and the pentad of 
Buddhas has gone from the hair.
This bronze from Khorat may be dated to close 
to the time of the ad 1066 Sab Bāk inscription K.1158 
from Khorat, which venerates the sixth Buddha 
Fig. 10.8: Partly Khmerized Vajrasattva, 8.9 cm. (Photo courtesy Bunker and Latchford 2011, fig. 7.30)
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   247 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 262] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia248
Vajrasattva as overlord of the Vajradhātu pentad 
(śrīpañcasugata ) and uses several times the short 
form ‘Śrīsamāja’ of the Guhyasamājatantra: ‘For 
salvation I salute Vajrasattva, the sixth (Buddha), 
who is the bearer of all the Buddhas and the master 
of all the existing Bodhisattvas’.16 Woodward has 
suggested that the principal deity in the pentad of 
Buddhas in the northern lintel of the nearby large 
Phimai temple complex looks similar to the descrip -
tion of the form of Vajrasattva called Mañjuvajra, 
as defined in the 11th-century Niṣpannayogāvalī 
compendium of ma ṇḍalas.17 Pia Conti (2014: 391) 
16. Bajrasatvas tu ṣaṣṭhas sadvodhisatvaprabhur varaḥ  / 
ādhāraḥ sarvavuddhānāṁ tan namāmi vimuktaye  // 
(quoted in Chirapat Prapandvidya 1990: 11–14)
17. ‘The c
entral figure in the northern lintel appears to 
be akin to the “Vajrasattva in the form of Mañjuvajra”, 
the central deity in maṇḍala number one in the late elev -
enth-century northern Indian compendium the Niṣpan -
nayogāval ī’ (Woodward 2004: 350).sees the central Buddha flanked by four others as 
‘Akṣobhya, with his four fellow Jinas. Akṣobhya is 
the Jina in the centre of the GST maṇḍala ’. Phimai 
was presumably built by the usurper Jayavarman 
VI, who brought to power the Mahīdhara dynasty 
of Angkor’s greatest builders. Phimai houses the 
only known Khmer icon of the Heruka Saṁvara 
bursting open the elephant hide of illusion (Fig. 
10.10) and must affirm the presence there of the 
Cakra  saṁvaratantra . Th is text, which David Gray 
(2001: 204) considers an unorthodox contemporary 
tradition to the STTS , could well have been one of 
the large number of Tantric texts imported earlier 
by the Khmer royal purohita  Kīrtipaṇḍita.
Fully Khmerized Vajrasattva bronzes evolved 
with the temple styles into the 12th and 13th cen -
turies like Ga 202 in the Phnom Penh National 
Museum (Fig. 10.11a), and an icon with parasol and 
ribbons found in the Srah Srang pond in Angkor 
(Fig. 10.11b). They are fully integrated into the 
Figs. 9a, 9b (left to right): Baphuon style late 11th-century Vajrasattva 21 cm, with attachment for parasol. (Photos courtesy Bunker and Latchford 2011, fig. 7.31a, 7.31b)
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   248 16/7/16   10:28 AM

--- [Page 263] ---
249 Seeds of Vajrabodhi
Khmer idiom through their facial features, jewel -
lery, sampot , coronet, and earrings .
earlier khmer buddhism
There is an almost complete break of three centuries 
in the historical record of icons, architecture, and 
inscriptions of the Cambodian Buddhist communi -
ty from late 7th-century Zhenla until Kīrtipaṇḍita’s 
royally patronized revival, recorded in the Wat 
Figure 10.10: Phimai Saṁvara dances on the head of 
an elephant. (Photo courtesy Pia Conti)
Fig. 10.11a (left): Vajrasattva, 9.3 cm, Ga 202; Fig. 10.11b (above): Vajrasattva, Srah Srang, Angkor, Ga 2657/2647. (Photos courtesy Bunker and Latchford 2011)
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   249 16/7/16   10:29 AM

--- [Page 264] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia250
Sithor inscription. Yijing travelled in the area and 
reported that in the late 7th century the Khmer 
Buddhists were suppressed or exiled ‘by a wicked 
king’ (Takakusu 1966: 12). Cambodian craftsmen 
were to produce no more of the quiet, contemplative 
Buddhas of Sambor Prei Kuk and the Mekong delta 
dressed in flowing bhikṣu robes until the arrival of 
Theravāda at the end of the 13th century. The 8th 
and 9th centuries, however, saw a Bodhisattva cult 
flourish somewhere over the Dangrek mountains in 
the Mon-Khmer inhabited Īśān. A hoard of more 
than 200 superbly modelled and cast Bodhisattvas 
was found in the 1960s at Prakhon Chai, attesting 
to a regal-looking cult of Bodhisattvayāna, pos -
sibly in the shadowy state ‘Śrī Canāśā’ fleetingly 
mentioned in inscriptions. Nothing is yet known 
of this community that suddenly re-entered history 
with the discovery of the buried bronze masterpiec-es. This Buddhist culture presumably went on to 
produce the ‘Bengali-influenced’ Tantric bronzes 
from Khorat like the splendid Vajradhara on a 
high double-lotus throne—like those found in the 
10th- to 11th-century Kurkihār, Bihar hoard—and 
with Pāla-style Buddhist lions bringing chthonic 
elephants to their knees that was recently auctioned 
in New York (Fig. 10.12a; cf. Fig. 10.12b). It w as not 
until the 10th century that the domestic  Khmer 
Buddhists re-emerged with inscriptions and began 
again erecting shrines and icons guided by Bud -
dhist guru Kīrtipaṇḍita.
stylistic links among  
 ritual bronzes
Of particular significance is the ubiquitous use of 
double-lotus bases placed on pedestals supported Fig. 10.12a: Bronze Vajradhara with six arms and three 
faces, seated on a high, tiered Kurkihār Bihar style lo-tus throne with Bihari-Bengali style lions crunching el-ephants in the base. (Photo courtesy A. Götz, London)Fig. 10.12b: Raised lion throne from 10th-century 
Kurkihār, Bihar. (Photo courtesy American Institute of Indian Studies)
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   250 16/7/16   10:29 AM

--- [Page 265] ---
251 Seeds of Vajrabodhi
by four three-dimensional grinning lions that are 
provided for many bronze deities. Similar lions 
can be traced back to Pāla traditions in northeast 
India. The circular haloes adorned with concentric 
designs and flames along the rim also derive from 
a Pāla tradition. Parasols ( chattra ) festooned with 
ribbons surmount the haloes of some images, an 
important honorific element also found on Pā -
la-style bronzes. Some of these Khorat bases display 
a semicircular panel falling over the front of the 
pedestal that represents a piece of drapery found 
earlier in Dvāravatī, but can also be traced back 
to the Indic world. One group of images found in 
northeast Thailand is portrayed seating on bases 
with honorific parasols that often display a vertical 
raised rib on the back of their haloes. The raised rib represents a technical device used to support 
the wax pieces of the base-assembly during the 
casting process, reflecting a foundry characteristic 
traceable to northeast Indian traditions (Bunker 
and Latchford 2011: 193).
Dating of the sophisticated Khorat bronzes 
remains tentative, as is reflected in the 7th–14th 
century spread maintained by the Asia Society for 
the best known of them in the Rockefeller collec -
tion.18 The Rockefeller Mañjuśrī (Fig. 10.13a), with 
broad shoulders and leaning seated in tribhaṅga , 
was discovered in Khong district north of Phimai. 
18. John Guy (2014: cat. 165) has published a second Mañ -
juśrī from the Asia Society collection without throne-back, 
but seated in an almost identical posture with high crown 
and very similar jewellery.
Fig. 10.13a (left): Mañjuśrī, Khong district, Khorat; Rockerfeller collection, 1979.082. (Photo courtesy Bunker and Latchford 2011, fig. 6.16b) Fig. 10.13b (centre): Vajrasattva, Khorat. (Photo courte-sy Bunker and Latchford 2011, fig. 6.16a)   
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   251 16/7/16   10:29 AM

--- [Page 266] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia252
Seated at royal ease in varada-mudrā , a form known 
as Sita Mañjughoṣa (‘white, gift-bestowing’) in 
Tibet, the icon has the pentad of Buddhas in his 
high, tiered crown that is seen in the Lovea Em 
Vajrasattva. The Huntingtons (Huntington and 
Huntington 1990: cat. 74) suggest a circa 9th-centu -
ry date, but Woodward (2003: 93) indicates a narrow 
date range of the 770s to 780s, presumably aligning 
the icon in time with the three temples built in 
Chaiya and also the Kelurak inscription, dated ad  
782, found between Candis Sewu and Lumbung in 
Central Java, which mentions the erection of an 
image of Mañjughoṣa (see Miksic 2006: 189). Guy 
(2014: 258) agrees with a late 8th-century date and 
speculates, despite the find-spot, that they were 
made somewhere near Chai ya in the Peninsula. 
Yet the high double-lotus throne—with parasol 
and ribbons and with four lions raising a defiant 
paw on a plain, stepped rectangular base—is 
almost identical to a Khorat Vajrasattva (Fig. 13b),  
and the Padmapāṇi icon called ‘Indonesia’ in 
the former Alice Boney collection in Tokyo that 
is dated to the 9th century. Stylistically, the thrones 
are so similar they suggest they were made contem -
poraneously in the same foundry. The Vajrasattva 
has the same long necklaces and vajra  leaning on 
the chest as the Lovea Em and related icons earlier 
suggested to be imported Indic models for Khorat 
patrons of castings by itinerant Indian artisans 
(Figs. 6a, 6b) that may have been brought in by 
guru Kīrtipaṇḍita in the mid 10th century. A late 
8th-century date for a Vairocana icon is reasonable 
but it is too early for an icon of Vajrasattva who 
does not appear in the iconographical record before 
the 10th century. 
13th century
In the 11th century the monk Atīśa underwent the 
Hevajra abhiṣeka before sailing to Kedah to study 
under Dharmakirtī, ahead of his final career move 
to Tibet to purge the Esoteric Buddhism being 
practised there (Woodward 2004: 345). But in the 
world of kings the Hevajratantra  took hold in the 
12th and 13th centuries, when Jayavarman VII of 
Cambodia (ca. 1200?), Kublai Khan (1260), and 
Kṛtanagara of East Java (1263) took the Hevajra 
consecration to counter Kublai Khan’s invasion plan.19 Many Hevajra icons and numerous liba -
tion conch holders have been found in Phimai 
and
 Angkor;20 Sundberg and Giebel (2011: 218) 
suggest that Hevajra or another Heruka may have 
eventually replaced Mañjuśrī as principal deity 
of Candi Sewu. Lokesh Chandra and Sudarshana 
Devi Singhal (1995: 121 –47), Woodward (2004: 343), 
and Sundberg and Giebel (2011: 218–19 n. 173) see 
half the 10th- to 11th-century Surocolo hoard from 
East Java as being part of Hevajra’s ma ṇḍala. The 
arrival of this major Esoteric Buddhist deity in the 
13th century can ultimately be traced back to the key 
external links to the Ganges monsteries and South 
India that underpinned Vajrabodhi’s strategy to pre -
serve Buddhism outside India, which he forged in 
Sri Lanka, Kedah, and Java in the early 8th century. 
19. Rob Linrothe, an authority on the texts and icons 
of Tantric Buddhism in Tibet and China who would not 
claim close acquaintance with Southeast Asia, makes a 
brief reference which captures the singularity of what 
appears to have been a politically driven Hevajra cult of 
Cambodia. He surveys the evolution and spread of Tantric 
Buddhism through a 9th- to 11th-century phase led by 
Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya and defines a further phase 
dominated by texts and images of Heruka, Hevajra, and 
Saṁvara. He perceives that something special happened 
with the deities of this phase in Phimai, Angkor and Ja -
va-Sumatra, where Hevajra/Heruka was adopted politically 
into a royal cult and not only in monasteries. Linrothe 
(1999: 274) observes a clear political application of such a 
third phase cult:
If there was a Hevajra cult, it seems to have thrived 
in Southeast Asia. Hevajra imagery may have come 
overland to Thailand from eastern India, directly from 
Bengal via Burma. The transmission of Hevajra teach -
ings was probably reinforced through contacts along 
the maritime routes from island Southeast Asia and 
eastern India. Whatever the route it clearly had consid -
erable influence in the highest levels of society. Seem -
ingly removed from his yogic and monastic origins, 
Hevajra was utilized in the royal cult, not, as in the 
Ming court, to improve relations with Tibet, but as 
part of an attempt at local political legitimisation.… 
The compelling power of the Hevajra image seems to 
have contributed to the cult, which sponsored com -
memorative monuments more so than monasteries. 
On the political aspects of the Hevajra-cult practised in the 
East Javanese and Mongol courts, and a problematization 
of the historical accounts, see Bade, this volume.
20. An account of the Khmer Hevajra icons can be found 
in Sharrock 2012: 41–55. 
Sharrock Bunker mockup.indd   252 16/7/16   10:29 AM

--- [Page 267] ---
Chapter 11Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra, 7th to 13th Centuryjohn miksicRecent archaeological discoveries of vajras and inscribed gold objects in Sumatra  and under the water near the island lend support to the hypothesis that Sumatra was a sig-nificant centre of Esoteric Buddhist activity during an important phase of that religious orientation’s genesis and growth. Archaeological and histori-cal data suggest that several streams of Buddhist thought and practice coexisted in Sumatra for more than half a millennium. Geographic correlations between these artefacts and inscriptions with ethnic groups and imported items suggest that Sumatra offered fertile ground for the development of Esoteric Buddhist concepts. This chapter will summarize the archaeological correlates of Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra from the late 7th to the end of the 13th century, and explore the implications of this data in terms of Buddhism’s links to social, political, and economic variables.Most modern Malays, even those who are highly educated, believe that their ancestors were Hindus. Archaeological data flatly contradict this assumption: they show that Buddhism was much more popular than Hinduism in Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula during the Classic period (ap-proximately 1,000 years long, from the 4th to the 14th century ad). In Kedah, one of the bastions of the Buddhist kingdom of Śrīvijaya, an invasion by the Cōḻa Tamils of 1025 led to a period of Hindu domination lasting through the 11th century. The large ruin of a temple probably dedicated to Śiva at Candi Bukit Batu Pahat built during this period, and the eventual decline of Buddhism in India, may have biased public opinion. Another potentially confusing factor includes the tendency of early European scholars to label everything pre-Islamic as ‘Hindu’.Much of the art generated in the Malay realm during this period is very different from Buddhist art in modern Southeast Asia. Whereas the figure of Buddha and the stūpa dominate in modern Southeast Asian Buddhism, early Buddhist prac-tice in Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula tended to favour a multiplicity of deities more reminiscent of contemporary Hinduism. The stūpa was present but rare in the architectural inventory. Statues of some deities associated with Hinduism have been found in Sumatra and the Siamo-Malay Peninsula, but this is also true of such major Buddhist sites as Nālandā in India. Buddha did not deny the exist-ence of Hindu gods; some Buddhists of the Classic period in India and Southeast Asia depicted Śiva as a convert to Buddha’s law (see for example the Gaṇḍavyūha reliefs of Borobudur). Manifestations of the elephant-headed Hindu god Gaṇeśa are found in the Buddhist art of Japan, and may have existed in Southeast Asia. The people of the Strait of Melaka during the Classical period were not passive recipients of exter-nal influences. Chinese and Indians viewed Śrīvi-jaya as an active participant in the evolution of Bud-dhist doctrines and rituals. Since George Cœdès first identified this kingdom in 1918, Śrīvijaya has been envisioned by many scholars as a major thalas-socracy which dominated the Strait of Melaka from the late 7th to the late 13th century. Archaeologists and art historians have been less confident about the nature and geographical extent of the kingdom. This uncertainty stems from several factors. One factor is that the majority of the inhabitants in the kingdom’s capital may have lived on water (specif-ically the Musi River) rather than on dry land. The second is that the art of Śrīvijaya has defied most art historians’ efforts to define a particular style
miksic mockup.indd   25312/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 268] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 254
Map 11.1. (© Goh Geok Yian)
miksic mockup.indd   254 12/7/16   9:46 AMN 
400 0 
~~~ 
km SOUTI-T Cl /JN/1 SFdl 

--- [Page 269] ---
Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra255associated with the kingdom (Diskul 1980). Śrīvi-jayan sculpture seems to blend styles from main-land Southeast Asia and India, and Śrīvijayan (Sumatran) styles may have influenced sculptors in other regions. Another reason is that very little systematic archaeology has been conducted at Clas-sical sites in the Strait of Melaka. Most Buddhist sculptures attributed to Sumatra lack provenance. We are almost helpless in the endeavour to restore the contexts from which they were ripped.A similar lack of focus afflicts the historical record. Most contemporary references to the kingdom were written by outsiders, rather than the people of Śrīvijaya. Observers from China seem to have perceived Śrīvijaya differently from people coming from the west (i.e., Arabs, Per-sians, Armenians, Indians, Sinhalese). Viewed from the Indian Ocean, the most important territories of Śrīvijaya were located at the north end of the Strait of Melaka, in Kedah, southern Thailand, Aceh, and Barus. The Chinese on the other hand viewed Śrīvijaya through the lens of their proximity to southeast Sumatra, which led their observers to give particular prominence to the port of Palembang.  The exact extent of Śrīvijaya and the political and economic threads which bound its people and territory together are likely to remain permanent matters of debate. It is unlikely that we will ever attain more than a very imperfect understanding of the network of political and economic institutions which constituted Śrīvijaya. The same blurriness of vision unfortunately applies to religion. As a result, Śrīvijaya’s con-tributions to Buddhist theology and art are un-derappreciated. Religious ideas, however, unlike political or even economic concepts, tend to be expressed in material form, including buildings, sculptures, and locally written texts. Archaeo-logical research has begun to shed some light on the development of Buddhism in the Strait of Melaka, and this field offers the best hope that new data may yet be discovered. Unfortunately, archaeological sites are being rapidly looted or de-stroyed—sometimes intentionally—in this region, and the window for making new discoveries is rapidly closing.the malays and the spread  of buddhismThe Malay cultural realm stretches from south Thailand, down both coasts of the Strait of Melaka, to west Kalimantan (Andaya 2008). Malay culture is carried by Austronesian-speaking people who adapted to the estuaries of the equatorial zone of Southeast Asia. This type of location favoured the development of societies which were adept at man-aging the exchange of commodities from special-ized collectors in the hinterlands and the offshore islands. Śrīvijaya was one of the most prominent of these, but we know of many others, large and small. These populations were related to those who expanded into the Indian Ocean, reaching Madagascar off the southeast coast of Africa, and at the same time discovered and settled the islands of the vast Pacific thousands of kilometres in the other direction. They were the most successful and advanced sailors of the ancient world. It was they or their near ancestors who made possible the first interaction sphere of the South China Sea, trans-porting Dongson bronzes from north Vietnam to eastern Indonesia (see Calò 2013). They were proba-bly present at the first ports in the isthmian region of the Siamo-Malay Peninsula, starting with Khao Sam Kaeo, where Chinese and Indian ceramics are found together. The oldest texts composed in the Malay realm are Buddhist inscriptions found in the north-western part of Peninsular Malaysia, in Kedah and Seberang Perai (formerly known as Province Wellesley), which may date back to as early as the 5th century. When writing appeared in Sumatra, about two centuries later, the earliest texts were political documents infused with Buddhist refer-ences. Roughly ninety per cent of the artefacts of pre-Islamic religious character in the Malay realm are Buddhist. As in much of Southeast Asia, Buddhists in the Malay cultural realm coexisted with devotees of Śiva, Viṣṇu, Gaṇeśa, and Durgā. We have no reliable way of gauging the degree of devotion which the average person in the Malay realm felt for Hinduism or Buddhism, but the distribution of Buddhist sites over the Sumatran highlands as well as in the coastal zone implies that Buddhism penetrated different social strata 
miksic mockup.indd   25512/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 270] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia256and various ethnographic groups to a significant degree. The highland populations of Sumatra speak languages which are derived from the same root as Malay, but they prefer to maintain distinctive identities, calling themselves by various ethnonyms such as Toba, Karo, Minangkabau, Kerinci, Rejang, and Serawai, rather than Malay. Politically and economically, they formed symbiotic relationships with the lowland port-cities, but the highlanders retained a considerable amount of autonomy in their dealings with the lowlands (Miksic 1985, 2009). How does the nature of Sumatran Buddhism mirror this situation? Was Buddhism in the highlands a pale and generalized reflection of that found in the cosmopolitan lowland ports, or was it equally varied and complex? In the conventional history of Sumatran Bud-dhism, the name Śrīvijaya shines so brightly that it tends to blot out references to the other ancient kingdoms and regions of this huge island and the Siamo-Malay Peninsula. This is partly due to the frequent references to that name (or names such as Suvarṇadvīpa, Zabag, and Sanfoqi [Sānfóqí] which have been assumed to refer to Śrīvijaya) in Chinese and Arab texts, and partly to the importance of inscriptions found in Palembang for understand-ing early Southeast Asian history. Certainly the Palembang inscriptions are important, but they are few in number, and were written in a very brief period during the late 7th century. About all they tell us about religion is that some Buddhist terms which imply espousal of a certain stream of belief were integrated into public proclamations by Jayanāśa, ruler of Śrīvijaya. Tangible remains of Buddhism are scattered over the length and breadth of Sumatra, including many locations in the hin-terland that were far from the trading enclaves on the estuaries visited by foreigners. The Buddhagupta inscription and other remains in Kedah indicate that Buddhism was probably well integrated into Malay culture long before Śrīvijaya was founded (Christie 1990). Śrīvijaya was not the wellspring of Buddhism in Malay culture. No doubt Buddhism took root at different times in various locations in Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula. Mahāyāna Buddhism placed great emphasis on sutras, on texts, and on ontological disputation and speculation. This attitude generated a stream of communication between centres where Buddhist scholar-monks congregated. These monasteries are not seldom located in areas of sparse popula-tion, but Sumatra is criss-crossed with numerous thoroughfares, both riverine and overland, along which people, ideas, and commodities have moved regularly throughout history. Buddhist sites in inland Sumatra are situated along the trade routes which early European visitors recorded when they began to penetrate the hinterland in the late 18th century. The presence of Buddhist remains at strategic locations along these routes strongly suggests that they already existed a thousand years ago.the rise of śrīvijayaThe inscriptions from Palembang contain few ref-erences to Buddhist subjects, but there is enough information to conclude that the ruler of what we might for simplicity’s sake call the kingdom of Śrīvi-jaya expressed himself in terms found in Vajrayāna Buddhism, which was differentiated from earlier Perfection Path (pāramitāyāna) Buddhism by its emphasis on maṇḍalas and recitation of mantras (Woodward 2004: 330). ‘By far the most extensive text of the empire of Śrīvijaya’ (de Casparis 1956: 17) appears on a stone formerly called the Telaga Batu inscription, but now referred to as Sabokingking after the place of its discovery in Palembang. The inscription is undated but is believed to be contem-porary with dated inscriptions from Palembang and other locations in south Sumatra. The inscrip-tion, ‘precisely the kind one would expect to find in the capital of the empire’ (Wolters 1967: 209), is a long oath threatening dire penalties against traitors. Two dated inscriptions have been found near Palembang. The text that gives the greatest insight into Śrīvijaya’s religion is the Talang Tuwo inscription (ad 684). It contains a long statement of His Majesty Jayanāśa’s wish that everything in a garden which he has founded, including coconuts, areca, sugar and sago palms, fruit trees, bamboo, ponds, dams, etc., contribute to the welfare of all beings. Reli-gious aspects of the text include the wish that the thought of Bodhi will be in them, references to the 
miksic mockup.indd   25612/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 271] ---
Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra257
three jewels and the diamond body (vajraśarīra) of the mahāsattva, and the concluding wish that all will attain enlightenment. Cœdès argued that these concepts belonged to Vajrayāna or Mantrayā-na, which rose to prominence in the northeastern region of the Indian Subcontinent not long before this date (Cœdès 1930). It is more likely that the term vajraśarīra, which Cœdès thought was clearly Tantric, means something like ‘having a physical body as diamondlike as that of a Bodhisattva such as Vajrapāni’.… It may be that the terms in the inscription can all be found in [various Buddhist] texts; more prob-ably, someone with a good knowledge of San-skrit invented paraphrases. At any rate, the in-scription leaves no doubt that Perfection Path Buddhism was well established in Sumatra in the seventh century. (Woodward 2004: 335)There are a few other scattered fragments of stones with tantalizing references to Buddhist con-cepts. The Bukit Seguntang inscription was found during road construction. Unfortunately we only have parts of it. One fragment has only the initial portions of twenty-one lines. Another fragment purchased later bears the word śikṣāprajñā. Śikṣā refers to mundane knowledge (including rules of discipline), which is acquired from others; prajñā refers to the highest intuitive wisdom, which is inseparable from the true vision of emptiness (śūnyatā). The inscription may have begun with an invocation of a perfect Buddha, Mañjuśrī, or Avalokitesvara (de Casparis 1956: 11). In addition to formal proclamations, two other types of written materials give us some insight into the religious attitudes prevalent in the lower Musi River in the 7th to 10th century. One category con-sists of religious objects, of bronze or clay, some in the form of miniature stūpas or stūpikās, bearing the Sanskrit Pratītyasamutpādagāthā, often known as the ye dharmā formula (sometimes styled the ‘Buddhist creed’, but this is inaccurate; see Grif-fiths 2011: 144–45). The other category consists of over forty small stones inscribed with the word siddhayātra, palaeographically dated to the 7th century, found in several districts of Palembang.  The term is Sanskritic, but not specifically Buddhist. Cœdès defined it as ‘a voyage or a pilgrimage in order to obtain supernatural powers’.1 Another stone found in the district of Kedukan Bukit in Palembang mentions a royal pilgrimage in which the king with 1,312 soldiers went to acquire sid-dhayātra (Fig. 11.1). The word seems to have denoted ritual visits to sacred places in order to acquire spiritual power for political or military purposes. Why those locations were believed to be places where such power could be acquired is not speci-1. For more discussion of this and related terms, and more sources, see Woodward 2004: 336, n. 14..
Fig. 11.1: The Kedukan Bukit stone inscription. (Photo: author)
miksic mockup.indd   25712/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 272] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia258fied. The same practice is attested in Javanese in-scriptions, where it is sometimes associated with mountain springs (de Casparis 1956: 2).The first person known to have written the name Śrīvijaya (as Śrībhoja) was a Chinese Bud-dhist monk named Yijing. He recorded his travels in search of Buddhist texts. In 671 he sailed from China to Śrīvijaya on a ship belonging to Śrīvijaya’s ruler. After a residence of six months there which he spent studying Sanskrit grammar, the king’s ship carried him to Malayu (Jambi, in the Batanghari valley north of Palembang), where he spent two more months. Next he went to Kedah, where he remained for a few months more before the winds became favourable for his voyage to India. From Kedah he sailed direct to Nālandā, where he spent the next eighteen years. He then took all the texts he had collected, which he stated contained 500,000 ślokas, and returned to Śrīvijaya via Kedah and Malayu, both of which he said had now become part of Śrīvijaya. He strongly advised future Chinese pilgrims to spend one or two years in Śrīvijaya to ‘practise the proper rules’ before going to India. He himself spent at least four more years in Śrīvijaya before he returned to China for good in 695. While he was in Sumatra, several other Chinese monks joined him, some of whom also spent several years there. He noted that of the seven most distinguished Buddhist teachers of his day, one, Śākyakīrti, had ‘travelled all through the five countries of India in order to learn, and is at present in Śrībhoga [Śrīvijaya]’ (Takakusu 1966: 184). Yijing took one of Śākyakīrti’s texts to China and translated it into Chinese.Yijing depicted Śrīvijayan Buddhism as almost identical to that of India. One practice which he observed both in India and Sumatra was the recita-tion of Jātaka stories by both monks and laypeople (Takakusu 1896: 163). He also noted several customs peculiar to Sumatran monks. One was the practice of using a cloth three or five feet long, which they carried folded over one shoulder when walking.2 He said that ‘whenever Indian Bhikṣus come to the islands, they cannot but smile when they see this custom’ (Takakusu 1896: 111). 2. This is similar to a cloth in traditional Malay culture called a selendang.Archaeological remains of Yijing’s period (the late 7th century) and the next 200 years are of limited quantity in the Palembang area. This situation is partly the result of destruction of ar-chaeological sites in the early 20th century; for instance, in 1930 the Dutch archaeologist F.D.K. Bosch (1930: 153–54) recorded that important archaeological sites such as Seguntang Hill and Candi Angsoka had been mined for bricks for a long period. This practice was still going on in 1960, when remains of a brick stūpa on Seguntang Hill were reported to have been found and im-mediately used as building material (Bronson et al. 1973: 7). At the important site of Telaga Batu, where the Sabukingking inscription was found, F.M. Schnitger (1937a: 1ff.) found ‘heaps of bricks’ in 1935 and 1936. Archaeologists who explored Palembang in the 1970s found it puzzling that they could find no material remains which Chinese and Arab descriptions of a wealthy kingdom in southeast Sumatra led them to expect should be found there (Bronson et al. 1973). Concentrated archaeological research since then has yielded some notable results, and enough archaeolog-ical remains have now been discovered in and around Palembang that any reasonable person would accept that Palembang was Śrīvijaya’s capital from the 7th to 9th centuries (Manguin 1993); yet, no major Buddhist structures from the Śrīvijayan period have ever been discovered there. underwater archaeology  in inland sumatraMuch of the archaeological evidence for life in Śrīvijaya probably lies beneath the Musi River, which forms the heart of modern Palembang. The Musi River has been a major artery of commerce for over 2,000 years. It connects the sources of gold, ivory, and other tropical luxuries with the long-distance maritime trade route through the Strait of Melaka. Whereas nobility in southeast Sumatra traditionally lived on dry land, the ma-jority of Śrīvijaya’s population lived over the river. Dredging of the riverbed in the first decade of the 21st century led to the discovery of many antiq-uities with market value; looting of the riverbed quickly ensued. By 2014, the volume of antiqui-
miksic mockup.indd   25812/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 273] ---
Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra259
ties reaching the market from Palembang had de- clined, suggesting that either all the items on the riverbed had been discovered, or that the limits of the simple technology used by the looters had been reached. Few of these finds have been recorded by scholars. Two locations on the Batang Hari, Suma-tra’s second-longest river, which flows from West Sumatra province through Jambi to the Strait of Melaka, have been subjected to similar treatment. Items known to have reached the antiquities market include cylindrical amulet containers of a silvery metal, perhaps tin, meant to be suspended from strings hung around the neck, gold items such as coins, and jewellery such as rings for fingers and ears, including types known from Central Java and dated to the late 1st millennium ad. Beads of gold, glass, and stone are common finds. Religious objects included numerous items associated with Buddhism, such as bronze statues of Buddha, and examples of what appear to be stamps used to print Buddhist texts on clay. Bronze items include faces of Kāla, mirrors, and bells with vajra handles for use in Esoteric Buddhist rituals (Fig. 11.2). Rolled sheets of heavy metal appear to be tin or lead votive objects inscribed with mantras. Utilitarian objects include scale weights. Imported items include a wide range of Chinese ceramics, from Tang Yue bowls through middle-Ming cobalt blue wares, and large quantities of Chinese coins of the Tang through Song dynasties (Miksic 2012). One of the few objects to have been studied with potential to illuminate the range of Buddhist practices in the Musi River basin is a bronze base for three images (two standing, unfortunately lost, and one kneeling in the posture of a devotee), said to have been found beneath the Musi River at Palembang. It bears a dedicatory inscription. In several respects it bears comparison with an image of Lokeśvara discovered at Gunung Tua, in the Padang Lawas region (Griffiths 2011: 151). shipwrecks and buddhism Marine archaeology beneath the sea lanes in the western Java Sea has yielded important data on the nature of trade in Buddhist ritual apparatus.  The Intan, discovered in 1997 off the southeast coast of Sumatra (Flecker 2002), was a South-east Asian ship, probably built in western Indo-nesia, possibly in southeast Sumatra. The bulk of the cargo consisted of tin ingots, probably from somewhere in the tin belt stretching from Bang-ka Island, off the mouth of the Musi River, and south Thailand. Above the ingots were Chinese ceramics. Chinese coins on board fix the prob-able date when the ship sank between 917 and 942 ad. The wreck also yielded Indonesian gold coins and silver ingots with Chinese characters.Smaller items in the Intan site included a wide range of bronzes, possibly made in Sumatra, where the raw materials for making bronze (copper and tin) are available. Most of the bronze objects are finished artefacts, many for Buddhist rituals. These include bronze finials with loose rings that rattled (khakkhara), to be fastened to the heads of wooden walking staffs carried by priests (Flecker 2002).3 A large group of bronze vajras, and small bells perhaps meant to be worn by priests, 3. For an example found in Java, see Miksic and Soekatno (1995: 143, fig. 38).   
Fig. 11.2: Vajra-bell from the Musi river region. (Photo: author)
miksic mockup.indd   25912/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 274] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia260
were also recovered (Figs. 11.3, 11.4). Other com-ponents of the cargo included statues of Buddhist deities, mainly the historical Buddha Śākyamuni.   It is possible, but rather unlikely, that the Buddhist implements were being transported by a single monk, or a group of them. They seem to have come from the same part of the ship as other items of cargo. This indicates that Buddhism was sufficiently popular that an industry specializing in producing bronze items including mirrors (probably secular items) and religious parapher-nalia developed, perhaps in the Palembang area. The large quantity of vajras compared to the other bronze items in the cargo implies that they were in high demand by Buddhist practitioners in Java and Sumatra in the mid-10th century, and that Sumatran bronze casters were well acquainted with their iconographic details.the end of śrīvijaya?Chinese scribes used the transcription Shīlìfóshì (or Shìlìfóshì) to transcribe ‘Śrīvijaya’ until the end of the Tang dynasty in 906, most probably to refer to a polity centred at Palembang. Beginning in the early 10th century, Chinese records dropped Shīlìfóshì and a new name appeared: Sānfóqí. The name Śrīvijaya had already disappeared from Southeast Asian sources; its last known use was in 775, when Face A of an inscription was carved at Ligor/Nakhon Si Thammarat in south Thailand. A Nepalese manuscript of the late 10th or early 11th century mentions an important Bud-dhist statue in Śrīvijayapura (Sastri 1949: 77–78). An 11th-century illuminated Sanskrit manuscript preserving a copy of an important Buddhist text, the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā, contains depic-tions of famous statues and sanctuaries, three of which are found in the Malay realm: a Dīpaṅkara from Java, a Lokanātha in Kedah, and another at Śrīvijayapura in Suvarṇapura (Schoterman, this volume, p. 115 [1986: 12]). The last primary source to mention Śrīvijaya was composed in south India in 1030–31 (Cœdès 1968: 142). Numerous other sources from India mention the ‘Golden Island’, Suvarṇa- dvīpa, referring to Sumatra in general, rather than Śrīvijaya. This includes a charter from mid 9th-cen-tury Nālandā, where a monastery for Sumatran monks was endowed by a Pāla king. Chinese sources mention no missions from Śrīvijaya from 742 to 904; in that period, the only east Sumatran kingdom sending missions to China was named Jambi. In 904, the chief of the foreign quarter in Fujian was from Śrīvijaya (Wolters 1966: 226, n. 11). Historians, notably O.W. Wolters, long per-sisted in translating Sānfóqí as ‘Śrīvijaya’, despite the possibility that a kingdom by this name no longer existed after the Cōḻa attack in 1025. Wolters (1975: 35) speculated that Jambi was the capital of Sānfóqí/Śrīvijaya from around 1080 until it was devastated by a Javanese attack in 1377. Eventual-ly Wolters granted the possibility that after 1082, ‘“Śrīwijaya” may not be the appropriate name of the overlord’s center’ (Wolters 1983: 51). The character san actually might have been meant in its literal sense, ‘the Three Vijayas’, denoting a new and more accurate Chinese perception of the multicentric nature of the political pattern of southeast Sumatra. The term Sānfóqí may have been used to refer to an area including both rival centres.
Figs. 11.3 (above) and 11.4 (right): Vajras from the Intan shipwreck. (Photos courtesy Michael Flecker)
miksic mockup.indd   26012/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 275] ---
Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra261One of the implications of this historical uncer-tainty is that we cannot be sure whether references to the southeast Sumatra region as Sānfóqí after 904 refer to Palembang or Jambi. This ambiguity makes it impossible to connect important histori-cal personages mentioned in foreign sources with specific archaeological sites.  where did atīśa go?  the rise of malayu/jambiMalayu sent a mission to China in ad 644. The oldest known reference to the place named Jambi (Zhānbēi) appeared in 840, in another Chinese source (the Youyang zazu). Chinese records mention two missions, in 853 and 871, from Jambi (Wolters 1967: 85). The kingdom of Malayu is thought to have been in the region of modern Jambi. Did Malayu change its name to Jambi, or was Jambi a new kingdom? We cannot tell. The gap of two centuries can however be explained by Yijing’s statement that Malayu had become part of Śrīvijaya. Śrīvijaya may have monopolized com-munication between the Malay realm and China. The dispatch of embassies to China in 853 suggests that Malayu, now calling itself Jambi, was now free from Śrīvijaya’s monopoly.  No archaeological site corresponding to the kingdom(s) which sent missions to the Tang court under the names Jambi or Malayu has yet been found in the Batanghari basin, where in later times kingdoms of those names were established. Some Buddhist images which may date from this period have been found, but no Chinese porcelain or other trade commodities from the Tang dynasty have yet been recorded there. There is a Śrīvijayan oath inscription similar to the one found on Bangka which contains the date 686 at Karang Berahi, in the Jambi hinterland. This is probably a token of subordination to Śrīvijaya. This area has not been thoroughly explored; perhaps remains from the 7th century may one day be found to explain why this location was sufficiently important that Śrīvijaya would go to the trouble of carving that inscription.This site is situated near the junction of the Batang Merangin and several smaller tributaries. The distance from the coast is great, but near this point, the Batang Asai tributary of the Batang Hari and the Air Kelumpang tributary of the Musi are only fifteen kilometres apart. This fact may explain why the Mahārāja of Śrīvijaya chose this site to erect an important oath of loyalty to his newly expanded kingdom of Śrīvijaya: Malayu and Śrīvijaya may have communicated via this route as well as the water trail down the Musi, up the Strait of Melaka, and then up the Batang Hari. A number of other sites with classic statues are found along the middle course of the Batanghari: Tanah Periuk, Teluk Kuali, Betung Berdarah, and Marem River; set-tlement remains at Pamenang, Dusun Tuo Suamai, Sengkati, Rantau Kapas Tuo, and Solok; brick ruins at Teratai, Pematang Jering, and Solok Sipin; and remains of both brick structures and settlement at Danau Bangko. Remains in Jambi mainly date from the 11th through 13th centuries, when few signs of Buddhist activity have been found in Palembang. The Jambi remains are overwhelmingly Buddhist, as will be shown below.Several Chinese sources mention Buddhism in Sānfóqí. In 1003 Sānfóqí envoys reported that their king had built a Buddhist temple to pray for the emperor, and asked for temple bells. In 1017 Sān-fóqí’s king sent tributes, including a letter written in gold Chinese characters and Sanskrit palm-leaf books (Groeneveldt 1960: 62–65). During this period a Chinese Buddhist, Fa-yü, met an Indian priest in Sānfóqí (Cœdès 1968: 131–32). The Song Shi section which deals with Sānfóqí states that ‘the king is styled Zhanbi’. It is possible that Jambi’s ruler had already become the paramount ruler in southeast Sumatra at this time. The early 11th century is a critical period in the study of Sumatran Buddhism. Suvarṇadvīpa, the ‘Golden Island’, had a reputation as a great centre of Buddhism. Suvarṇadvīpa is mentioned in Tibetan sources of this period such as the Hevajratantra and the Yogaratnamālā (Schoterman this volume, pp. 115–16 [1986: 13]). According to a 16th-century Tibetan history of Buddhism, a monk named Dhar-mapāla, who served as chief abbot of Nālandā in the early 7th century, retired just before Xuanzang arrived. He then departed for Suvarṇadvīpa where he undertook further study, remaining there until he died (ibid.: 113 [1986: 6]). He was one of a number of senior Indian monks from Nālandā who went to Suvarṇadvīpa.
miksic mockup.indd   26112/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 276] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia262In the late 10th century a king of Suvarṇadvīpa found a Buddha image in the ground, whereupon the people reaped a rich harvest, and converted to Buddhism. His son the prince made a pilgrimage to Bodh Gayā, where he stayed for seven years and was nurtured by a great teacher. The prince changed his name to Dharmakīrti, and eventually returned to Sumatra to teach. According to a Tibetan source, several students went to Suvarṇadvīpa to study with Dharmakīrti. One of these was the Indian monk Candragarbha (986–1054), who was renamed Dīpaṅkaraśrījñāna when he entered the monkhood, and later received the title Atīśa after initiation into an Esoteric Buddhist order. Atīśa, then aged 26, went to Śrīvijayanagara, which he described as being in Malayagiri in Suvarṇadvīpa, to study tantra with Dharmakīrti (or Dharmapāla) from 1012 until 1024 (Skilling 1997: 187; Bimalendra Kumar 2008: 103; B.B. Kumar 2008: 185). In 1025, which is perhaps not coincidentally the year when the Cōḻas invaded the Strait of Melaka, he returned to Bengal and became head of a monastery there. In 1040 he accepted an invitation to move to Tibet, and after fourteen years he died at Netang, sixteen kilometres from Lhasa (Schoterman this volume, p. 116 [1986: 14–15]). There is therefore reason to believe that when Atīśa went to Tibet in order to ‘purify’ Buddhism according to Tibetan sources, he replicated much of what he was taught in Sumatra. Sources depict him as discussing ways of med-itating in buildings constructed as multi-storey maṇḍalas. Other scholars have debated the possibility that concepts regarding maṇḍalas which Atīśa espoused while in Tibet were first formulated in Sumatra. The remains of a monastery at Tabo, Spiti, Himachal Pradesh, contain murals which are closely parallel to those at Borobudur. Atīśa visited Tabo in 1042, and may have been present at its founding. This too may be evidence of the transmission of Bud-dhist ideas from Indonesia to India (Wayman 1981: 140–42; Nihom 1994: 72, n. 192.)Atīśa is credited with the authorship of over 200 works, including a commentary on the Kālacakratantra. His teachings were based on the Yogācāra and Madhyāmika systems, but also on Vajrayāna Buddhism (Banerjee 1984: 30, 50, 61, 74). He was considered to be an incarnation of the Bodhisattva of wisdom, Mañjuśrī (ibid.: 51). The central Tibetan monastery of Reting is believed to contain relics of three people: Atīśa himself, his principal Tibetan student ’Brom ston, and his teacher, ‘the Guru from Golden Island’, whose epithet is almost certainly a reference to Sumatra (Schoterman this volume, p. 120 [1986: 28–29]).Atīśa translated a work by Dharmakīrti, Dur-bodhāloka, into Tibetan. This translation in Tibetan is the only known surviving example of Śrīvijayan literature, and one of the oldest in all of Southeast Asia (Skilling 1997). This work is a commentary on the Abhisamayālaṅkāra, ‘Ornament of Re-alization’, which in turn is an explication of the Prajñāpāramitā, ‘Perfection of Wisdom’. The text contains the information that the original text of the Durbodhāloka was composed in the tenth year of the reign of King Cūḍāmaṇivarman in Śrīvi-jayapura (or Śrīvijayanagara; ‘Tibetan grong can stand for nagara as well as pura of Suvarṇadvīpa’, Skilling 1997: 194, n. 12). He died between 1005 and 1008. Chinese and Cōḻa sources mention him (Cœdès 1968: 141–42). Some texts add the detail that he died in Malayagiri or Malaya, which could be taken as a reference to Malayu/Jambi; Skilling (1997: 193, n. 8) suspects that ‘the extra detail comes from a catalogue of the Tanjur’. Skilling (1997; see also Wheatley 1983: 267) equates Suvarṇadvīpa with Suvarṇabhūmi, which he identifies with the Malay Peninsula. Indian sources are certainly vague and imprecise in their use of these terms, both signifying an association with gold. Skilling goes on to assert that King Cūḍāmaṇivarman and his successor ruled from Kedah. This is possible; I have argued that for the people coming from the Indian Ocean, the ruler of Kedah was seen as more important than that of Palembang (Miksic 1995). I do not however believe that references to the ‘Lord of Śrīvijaya’ denote the ruler of Kedah. Rulership of Kaḍāra, Kiḍāra, Kataha, Kaḍāram, etc., was probably a glorious title in itself. Arguments for locating Śrīvijaya in Kedah or south Thailand are still in circulation, but the inscrip-tional evidence, combined with the archaeological research of Soeroso and Pierre-Yves Manguin (see Manguin 1993) in South Sumatra, is in my opinion conclusive that Śrīvijaya meant Palembang. I do however concur with Skilling (1997: 191) that ‘as 
miksic mockup.indd   26212/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 277] ---
Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra263accepted by Coedès (1934: 63; 1968: 320–21, n. 176) there is no proven link between the earlier name Shih-li-fo-shih and San-fo-ch’i’. Sānfóqí could include Kedah. I will however advance reasons to believe that Malayu was the most important Buddhist centre in the Strait of Melaka between 1025 and 1200, and that Atīśa may have spent his time in Malayu/Jambi rather than in Kedah. As for Suvarṇadvīpa, the territory encompassed by this name cannot be narrowed any further than ‘Sumatra’. It could mean either Palembang or Jambi, but probably not Kedah. Skilling (1997: 191) notes that ‘three other works translated or written by Atīśa are associated in their colophons not with Śrīvijaya as such but with Suvarṇadvīpa (Eimer 1981: 73–78). The evidence of these colophons is ambiguous, and raises more questions than it answers’. One hopes that Skilling will return to this subject in future.According to Skilling (1997: 188), ‘the composi-tion of Durbodhāloka presupposes the existence and study in Śrīvijaya of the abstruse Prajñāpāramitā and Abhisamayālaṅkāra literature; of a high level of scholarship; and of royal sponsorship’. It also implies a major Buddhist institution of learning existed somewhere in east Sumatra at the beginning of the 11th century. The only viable candidate for this role from an archaeological point of view is located at the site of Muara Jambi and its environs along the Batang Hari river, in the eastern coastal plain of Sumatra.muara jambi archaeologyThe National Center for Archaeological Research and Development of Indonesia has identified at least twenty-six sites from the early historic period along the 800-kilometre-long Batang Hari. In addition to sites along the upper course of the Batang Hari, there are at least fifteen sites with remains of ancient settlement in the lower 120 kilometres of the river, some of which also have yielded brick ruins. By far the most significant site is Muara Jambi, 40 kilometres downstream from the modern city of Jambi. It covers over 2,000 hectares of land along a 7-kilometre-long section of a natural levee on the left (north) bank of the river. The eastern coastal plain of Sumatra is so flat that the river is still tidal at this point, so that it could technically be called an estuarine rather than riverine site.Muara Jambi consists of eight principal brick temples of the 9th to 13th centuries, as well as perhaps a hundred mounds called menapo; water features including a large pool and man-made canals, as well as probable alterations of natural streams; and surface scatters of bricks and ceramics. Some of the menapo have been excavated and found to contain brick ruins. In some cases they are sur-rounded by artificial moats. Two more complexes of brick ruins (called Candi Teluk I and II) and menapo lie on the right (south) bank of the river opposite the downstream end of Muara Jambi (Eka Asih P. Taim 2013).A small stream called the Malayu River flows north from the levee, then west, then north again, then eventually south to the Seno River, an artificial channel south of Kedaton. The upper portion of the Malayu roughly divides Muara Jambi into two sectors of unequal length: an upstream or western sector about 5 kilometres long, and a downstream or eastern sector about 2 kilometres long. Major sites in the western sector include Gedong I, Gedong II, Kedaton, and Mahligai. They are scattered over a large area. Major sites in the eastern sector include Tinggi, Kembar Batu, Astana, and Gumpung, the most important site yet investigated archaeologi-cally. These sites all lie in close proximity to one another, and are associated with the largest artifi-cial water feature, a rectangular pond called King’s Pool (Telaga Raja). In 2008 the Indonesian National Research Center for Archaeology undertook excavations at Menapo Adam, one of a cluster of menapo 30 metres northeast of Astana. Results included high-quality ceramics, both Chinese and Fine Paste Ware made somewhere in Southeast Asia, probably southern Thailand, and a large quantity of bronze nails and a star-shaped ornament with a hole in the centre; it was probably meant to be fastened to a wooden structure. One of the most important sets of data for the history of Sumatran Buddhism was recovered from one of the sites at Muara Jambi: a large brick ruin called Candi Gumpung. This site was reconstruct-ed in the early 1980s. The work was mainly con-ducted by technicians rather than archaeologists. 
miksic mockup.indd   26312/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 278] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia264During the dismantling of the original structure, eleven ‘holes’ in the base of the temple foot were found to contain ritual deposits comprising cups of gold, silver, and bronze, small gold plates, some without inscriptions, gold lotus flowers, semi-pre-cious stones, and crushed lead plates which were described in the reports as ‘ash’. At an academic workshop held in 1985, an important paper was presented on the ‘ritual deposits’ recorded from this site (Boechari 1985). Boechari concluded that these deposits were supposed to replicate a Vajradhātumaṇḍala, which would have required seventeen holes. The inscriptions enabled Boechari to identify twenty-two deities, all but one including the element Vajra. The Vajradhātumaṇḍala has thirty-seven deities; perhaps seventeen of the names found at Candi Gumpung belong to this group. However, the five Tathāgatas (Vairocana, Akṣobhya, Rat-nasambhava, Amitābha, and Amoghasiddhi) are missing; only the Vajrabodhisattvas for Akṣobhya and Amoghasiddhi and two of the four Vajrabo-dhisattvas of Ratnasambhava and Amitābha were represented. Only three of the four doorkeepers and two of the twelve Vajratārās were found. They may have once been present, but as Boechari notes (1985: 37), ‘apparently the recording of the finds by the technicians in charge of the demolition of the temple was not accurate, causing the loss of some of the inscribed gold plates’. Inscribed bricks were found, but their precise location in the temple was not re-corded. At least two different types of script were used: standard Kawi, probably dating from the mid 9th to early 10th centuries (de Casparis 1975), and a squarish form resembling East Javanese script of the 11th to 12th centuries. Sherds of Chinese porcelain, mostly from the Song dynasty, were found in the compound, but their find-spots were not recorded.It is unfortunate that no proper archaeologi-cal research was performed at Candi Gumpung.  Now it will never be known whether the deviations between the finds and textual prescriptions are due to intention, and how much to chance. These discoveries have been subjected to some important analysis by learned scholars, but their conclusions are limited by the quality of the data. In an important study, Max Nihom (1998a: 245–46) concluded that no clear textual trace of this historically im-portant maṇḍala [i.e. the Vajraśekharatantra] is to be found in Indonesia and that, in conse-quence, the syncretic maṇḍalas of the yogatan-tras such as the Sakalajagadvinaya, Sarvadur-gatipariśodhana and Trilokavijaya which may be shown to be extant in the Archipelago are chronologically prior to the Vajradhātu, which is orthodox insofar as it is inhabited by Bud-dhist divinities alone. That is, the yogatantra maṇḍalas populated by both ‘Hindu’ and ‘Bud-dhist’ divinities are necessarily earlier than the Vajradhātumaṇḍala which, the Tattvasaṃgra-ha explicitly holds, the other maṇḍalas reflect.Thus, the syncretic features of Indonesia’s cul-tures are not necessarily of indigenous origin. The primary influence of Tantric Buddhism in Indo-nesia must have occurred before the compilation of the Tattvasaṅgraha, the fundamental text of the Yogatantras, in India; this influence must have arrived before ad 700. The textual source of the Gumpung maṇḍala is probably from material also found in the Vajraśekharatantra, which was prob-ably found in Indonesia in a very different form to that found in the extant Tibetan canon.Nihom found the nearest textual source for the Gumpung maṇḍala in the Trailokyavi-jayamahāmaṇḍala as described in the Vajra- śekharatantra. Internal evidence led him to the inference that the Indonesian version was older than the Tibetan version (Nihom 1998a: 249). The important—albeit tentative—conclusion he derived was that Indian Buddhist influence in Indonesia between the early 8th and 13th century ‘was at best modest, and perhaps even substantially non-ex-istent’. The lack of evidence for Tantric Buddhist influence from India after the syncretic Yogatantra maṇḍalas were introduced may indicate ‘either an abatement of contacts between the Subcontinent and the Archipelago or a socio-economic shift  in the status of Tantric Buddhism in India itself, which was subsequently reflected in the nature and/or patterns of trade with what is now Indonesia’ (Nihom 1998a: 252). In 2004, Hiram Woodward returned to the Gumpung ritual deposits in the context of a discussion of Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia as a whole. He used the data from Jambi in conjunction with collections of bronze statues 
miksic mockup.indd   26412/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 279] ---
Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra265from approximately the same period found in East Java to test hypotheses about the knowledge of Mantrayāna and more advanced texts in Java, and whether they were transmitted from North-ern India or Sri Lanka. One collection found at Nganjuk in 1913 portrays deities ascribable to the Vajradhātumaṇḍala as described in 8th-century texts. A second collection found at Surocolo in 1976 contains twenty-two statues which seem to belong to two maṇḍalas: the Vajradhātumaṇḍala plus a maṇḍala of Hevajra (Woodward 2004: 344). Was the  Hevajratantra, ‘a fundamental Yoginī tantra’, known to the 8th-century Buddhists of Java?  Perhaps it appeared in Indonesia in the early 11th century, around the time of Atīśa. It is known that he was familiar with the Hevajratantra; he may have either taken it to Sumatra, or been induced to go there because the Hevajratantra was being explored by Sumatran Buddhist intellectuals (Woodward 2004: 345).4  Woodward (2004: 346) is willing to consider the possibility that Indonesian Buddhists devel-oped ideas which made their way to India, rather than being merely passive recipients of thoughts originating from elsewhere. One possible instance he cites is a verse from the Bhadracarī found on a small stone stūpa at Nālandā dated to the 9th century. This is the general period when the Pāla king Devapāla endowed a monastery for the monks from Suvarṇadvīpa, specifically connected with King Bālaputra, whose ancestors had probably ruled in Java. It is also the time when the long series of reliefs illustrating this text were carved on the walls of the highest terrace at Borobudur. It is possible that the Bhadracarī was already well known in Nālandā, but the Javanese representation indicates that it occupied special prominence there (Woodward 1990; Schopen 1989).A second instance concerns Atīśa, who as Wood-ward notes spent more than a decade in ‘Śrīvijaya’, which might be Palembang, Kedah, or Jambi. It is known that Atiśa found texts in Sumatra which he 4. Recent studies on images of frightful Buddhist deities from Padang Lawas (Bautze-Picron 2014) and Sanskrit inscriptions recording exact parallels to the Hevajratan-tra (Griffiths 2014: 18–22) suggest that the cult of Hevajra enjoyed a certain popularity in Sumatra from the 11th to the 13th century.took back to India, and then carried even further to Tibet. Tibetan tradition holds that Atīśa and his teacher Dharmakīrti of Suvarṇadvīpa were devoted to the goddess Tārā. It has also been argued that Atīśa acquired concepts regarding inner and outer maṇḍalas in Śrīvijaya, but Max Nihom has disputed this (Woodward 2004: 347, n. 53). Woodward (2004: 347) speculates that the mantra oṁ maṇi padme huṁ which is popular in Tibet may also owe its origin to Atīśa’s years in Śrīvijaya. As Woodward (2004: 330) shows, Tantric teach-ings evolved in two historical contexts. He uses the term Mantrayāna to refer to institutional esoterism, which arose within monasteries, and represented a new development from earlier pāramitāyāna or ‘perfection path’ Buddhism through its emphasis on maṇḍalas and mantras. He uses the term Yoginī Tantra for ‘siddha esoterism’, which arose from marginal antinomian practitioners and shared fea-tures with Śaiva and Śākta Tantric cults, including union with female partners. The chief deities of maṇḍalas are male gods, ‘but one could also argue that the males are only conduits for the transcen-dental wisdom of the females’ (Woodward 2004: 330). In his article, written as an extended review of Ronald M. Davidson’s book Indian Esoteric Bud-dhism: A Social History of the Tantric Movement (2002), Woodward notes that in 6th-century India, kingdoms formed political structures modelled on maṇḍala symbolism. Female involvement associat-ed with pāramitāyāna Buddhism was de-emphasised in the new structures. Either because of, or in tandem with, the male-oriented Mantrayāna, the siddhas, saints or perfected ones, possessors of supernatural powers (siddhi) arose as socio-political alternatives to increasing centralization. By ad 1000, siddha texts came to be accepted as Buddhist scripture.The political advantages of playing the role of an overlord (rājādhirāja) of a circle of vassals (sāman-ta-maṇḍala) was not lost on Indian abbots (Wood-ward 2004: 353; citing Davidson 2002: 106), or on Sumatran chiefs. The Sabukingking inscription contains the term sakalamaṇḍala (‘all the maṇḍa- las’), but whether one can infer that King Jayanāśa was attempting to manipulate the symbolism of the Vajradhātu for political ends is uncertain. Wood-ward himself feels that ‘the term [maṇḍala] has become so overworked in Southeast Asian histori-
miksic mockup.indd   26512/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 280] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia266ography and has become so imprecise in meaning that it might best be avoided’ (Woodward 2004: 353). The author of this chapter, it must be declared, was a student of O.W. Wolters, whose book History, Culture, and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives (1999) thrust the term squarely into the forefront of discussions about early Southeast Asian polities.5 The resonance which Wolters’ explication of the term has achieved over the last three decades, and the controversies which his work has incited, would seem to be good reasons to continue to explore the advantages and weaknesses of this line of enquiry.Woodward observes that the extension of Da-vidson’s analysis to incorporate Southeast Asian data contradicts some of the latter’s conclusions. Davidson argued that Mantrayāna’s rise in India was due to ‘the loss of mercantile support and the rise in official patronage’ (82–83, 167)’ (Woodward 2004: 353, citing Davidson 2002), but this model would seem to neglect the importance of the communication between Java, Sumatra, Bengal, Nākappaṭṭiṉam, and Sri Lanka, as well as the Pyu of Myanmar, which flourished due to expanding commerce, with religion following rather than leading the way. Woodward believes that Indonesia and India remained equal partners in Buddhist development until about ad 900. This date is correlated with the rise of Hindu Angkor and the collapse of Central Javanese civilization. However, the examples of Indian savants who visited Sumatra, and in the case of Atīśa went on to expand Buddhism’s sphere, suggests otherwise. In addition to the finds at Gumpung, other related items have been discovered at other sites in the Muara Jambi area. Two have been recov-ered from Tinggi temple, which lies in the same eastern complex. One, found in a subsidiary shrine of the main temple, bears ‘the ye dharmā formula in curiously amputated form … extraordinarily corrupt’ (Griffiths 2011: 150). Palaeographically its script, which resembles eastern Indian Nāgarī, can be dated to approximately the 11th century. In ad-dition to the writing, the plaque is decorated with two vajras which Griffiths compares with other gold plaques from Tandihet and Aek Sangkilon, 5. For divergent views, see Kulke (1993); Christie (1990b).Padang Lawas (see further below). Another plaque was found in the east gateway of the main temple at Tinggi. It is related to the first, but ‘it represents less than a quarter of that formula, and the re-mainder of the inscription clearly does not belong to any known version of the formula’ (Griffiths 2011: 162). Gedong I, also located in the same eastern complex of Muara Jambi, yielded a plaque of quite unique form: it consists of two halves, each half composed of a different metal (probably gold and silver). It was found in the fourth course of bricks on the north side (presumably of the wall; whether it was near the entrance is not mentioned). It com-prises mantras resembling those connected with Mahāpratisarā, a Buddhist goddess of protection, including the goddess’ name, but with fundamental differences which cast doubt on the identity of the exact text used for the composition (Griffiths 2011: 163–64). padang lawasIt is not surprising to discover a site so rich in Buddhist materials as Muara Jambi in a lowland estuary easily accessible from the major maritime thoroughfare through the Straits of Melaka, along which many Buddhist pilgrims passed on their way to and from the important sites in China, India, and Java. Padang Lawas is quite a different type of site. It lies far up two medium-sized rivers, the Barumun and Panai. The name ‘Pannai’ appears in the list of places raided by the south Indian Cōḻas in ad 1025, and also in the 14th-century Javanese poem Deśavarṇana (Wolters 1967: 193), but no sites of ports or other important early remains have been found in its lower course. Bosch (1930: 147–48) thought the name might have been derived from the Tamil word for ‘colony’. This region (the name means ‘broad plain’) lies on the eastern fringe of the Barisan mountain range which separates the east coast of Sumatra from the west. Its location has one strategic benefit: it lies at the eastern en-trance to the easiest pass between east and west in the entire chain (Miksic 1980). On this plain, which covers about 1,500 square kilometres, are at least twenty-six ruined brick temples and temple complexes, almost all Buddhist. 
miksic mockup.indd   26612/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 281] ---
Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra267Padang Lawas is unlikely to have supported a large agrarian population: dry winds from the west coast blow through the pass and sweep across the plain, creating an unusually barren landscape (Mohr 1944: 538; Verstappen 1973: 11). A British traveller in 1849 was struck by the strangeness of the place on an island largely blanketed by tropical rainforest:We have ascended Gunung Tua and cast our eye downwards from the summit Sipolpal. There we see unrolled a plain without horizon and without variety; an unbounded carpet on which the more or less luxuriant growth of the lalang makes the only diversity and on which not a single living creature appears to move, where a tree is literally a rarity and has the appearance of stunted dwarfishness, where at a distance of miles, we descry like an oasis in the desert an insignificant thicket, or a small strip of brushwood along the banks of a marsh or stream; where a fell scorching wind blows for months together and from the numerous conflagrations of lalang generally spreads a dull glow through which the sunlight scarce-ly forces itself wavering and heavy —in a word where all nature appears to have gone to an eternal sleep. Such is the appearance of Padang Lawas.... (Willer 1849: 367)Little systematic archaeology was conducted in the region until a Franco-Indonesian team began excavations there in 2006 (Perret et al. 2007). The earliest dated object from Padang Lawas is a bronze statue of the Lokanātha with an inscription con-taining the date 1039. The inscription contains a Malay word which probably indicates that the statue was made locally (Bosch 1930: 144). Nine other inscriptions from the region are known at present. One of them is dated 1179 (Tandihet I). Another, from Porlak Dolok, which records a do-nation from a senapati, is unusual because it uses both Sumatran and Tamil scripts and languages. Bosch (1930: 147) read the date as 1245, but another date in the 13th century is possible (Perret et al. 2007: 54). Although the use of Tamil language and script in one inscription is evidence for connections with South India, there are even better grounds for emphasizing the probability of links to Sri Lanka (Miksic 2004b: 207; Schnitger 1936: 6). The date on another inscription has been read as 1372 (Bosch 1930: 147; Schnitger 1936: 13). Other undated inscrip-tions have been attributed to the 13th–14th centuries (Tandihet II) and the 12th–14th centuries (Bahal I; Perret et al. 2007: 54–55). Estimates for the dates of the temples on stylistic grounds vary. Bosch (1930: 147) assigned them to the late 13th and early 14th centuries. Schnitger (1936) and Bernet Kempers (1959: 75–76) placed them earlier, i.e. in the 12th–13th centuries. I (Miksic 2004a: 207) have speculated that they may be even earlier, i.e. 11th to 13th centuries. The excavations at Si Pamutung in 2006 yielded more precise evidence for dating that particular site. Imported ceramics indicate that occupation began in the 10th century, increased in the 11th and 12th centuries, and then declined until the site was abandoned in the early 14th century (Perret et al. 2007: 70).  The architectural motifs from Padang Lawas are closely identified with Buddhism: stūpas, garlands, chattras, and vajra motifs (Perret 2007: 62; see Fig. 11.5). Architectural elements found at ten sites have been identified as stambhas (Perret et al. 2007: 67), but Ślączka (2007) gives good reasons for consider-ing them stūpas. Three possible Hindu images have been found (if one includes a four-armed Gaṇeśa), but statuary recovered from Padang Lawas is over-whelmingly Buddhist. In addition to images of Buddha, Amitābha, Ratnasambhava or Akṣobhya and Amoghasiddhi, the inventory includes a rare image of the deity Heruka. The gold plaque from Tandihet II with eight lines in Nāgarī with a vajra (palaeographically dated to the 13th–14th centuries) and a rectangular gold plate from Aek Sangkilon, also inscribed with Nāgarī script, Sanskrit language, with a vajra (Perret et 
Fig. 11.5: Vajra-base at Si Joreng Blangah. (Photo: author)
miksic mockup.indd   26712/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 282] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia268al. 2007: 54–55) were collected by F.M. Schnitger, who did not provide much contextual information. The gold plate from Aek Sangkilon was found in the main room of the temple, and has a double vajra in the centre and the letters hūm̐, with seven lines of Nāgarī script which Bosch found similar to Muara Takus (Ślączka 2007: 364; Ijzerman 1891: 59; see further below). They are reminiscent of the ‘ritual deposits’ from Muara Jambi. The possibili-ty of a direct connection between the two sites is strengthened by the discovery of orange kendis (gargoulette) very similar to those probably made at Muara Jambi (Perret et al. 2007: 65). Perhaps Jambi provided Padang Lawas with earthenware. padang rocoAnother complex of brick sanctuaries deep in the Sumatran hinterland has been under study by Indonesian archaeologists since 1991. The area where the Pingian joins the Batang Hari, including Padang Roco (literally ‘statue field’) and nearby sites such as Pulau Sawah and Sungai Langsat, seven kilometres away, has long been known to be important; two large statues were found here during the early 20th century: an Amoghapāśa from Rambahan with inscriptions of the 13th and 14th centuries, and a statue from Sungai Langsat representing a male standing on a corpse lying on a pile of skulls, holding a skull bowl and sacrifi-cial knife, with bulging eyes and a figure—perhaps of Amitābha—in the headdress. Measuring 4.41 metres in height and four tons in weight, the latter is the largest statue ever found in Indonesia. It is conventionally identified as either Bhairava (a form of Śiva) or Mahākāla (its Buddhist ‘counterpart’). As eminent art historian Jan Fontein has noted:These two deities have so many iconographic characteristics in common that it is often dif-ficult to draw clear distinctions between them. Not only in India but also in Indonesia, the identity of statues of these deities can often not be determined with certainty. This is especial-ly true of statues created during the Majapahit period.… (Fontein 1990: 167; Reichle 2007: 250, n. 25)A statue of a person holding a skull in the left  hand, and a sacrificial knife in the right (Fig. 11.6), was found in Bahal II at Padang Lawas, the ruin where the Hevajra was found (Schnitger 1937a: 27).  Scholars such as Reichle (2007: 154) and Bosch (1930b: 143, plate 42b) have identified the figure as a female, but Bautze-Picron (2014: 10) points out that it is most likely another image of Mahākāla (viewers may have been deceived by the image’s rather rotund physique).6 Two famous stone statues of Amoghapāśa were carved in Indonesia. One is found at Candi Jago, a 13th-century Buddhist site in East Java; the other statue was sent by King Kṛtanagara of Siṅhasāri to Malayu in the 13th century. The meaning of this act is disputed: it may have been a claim to suze-rainty, or a means of solidifying an alliance against the aggressive designs of the Mongols. This statue bears an inscription on its back which gives the date Śaka 1208 (ad 1286) and says that the statue ‘was brought from the Land of Java to Suvarṇabūumi, and erected at Dharmasraya as a gift’. The inscrip-tion also mentions the name of Malayu’s king at that time. The implication is that Dharmasraya, located in the highlands of central Sumatra, was the capital of the kingdom. It is likely that the centre of power had moved here, far into the highlands. 6. Bautze-Picron (2014) argues that most, if not all, the so-called ‘Bhairavas’ recovered from Buddhist contexts of Sumatra and Java actually represent frightful (krodha) forms of Buddhist deities, such as Mahākāla, Heruka, or Hevajra.Fig. 11.6 (Left): Mahākāla? (Photo: Oudheidkundige Dienst 10593 [detail])
miksic mockup.indd   26812/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 283] ---
Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra269The reasons for this move are disputed, but it seems that the Padang Roco area was heir to the Bud-dhist culture of Muara Jambi. A Prajñāpāramitā statue in late 13th-century style found at Muara Jambi indicates that the site might not have been entirely abandoned, but few imported ceramics of that period have been discovered at Muara Jambi, whereas samples of them have been found in the Padang Roco region.Three foundations of brick sanctuaries were found at Padang Roco and restored in the early 1990s (Teguh Hidayat and Yusfa Hendra 2006). The largest measures 21 x 21 metres, and was extended after its original construction. A makara has been found at Candi Bukik Awang Maombiak, across the river from Candi Pulau Sawah. Two sanctuaries have been excavated, but were badly damaged. At least seven more are suspected to exist. Bricks from the site have been reused for Islamic graves and looters (Marsis Sutopo 1992). Imported ceramics from the vicinity date from the Song period (11th to 13th centuries). The Pulau Sawah site has yielded the best evi-dence for the Buddhist nature of the activities con-ducted in this region. The evidence consists of a fragment of a stone inscribed with a Sanskrit stanza from a Buddhist text, the Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra:  ‘And by this good deed may I soon become a Buddha in the world. May I teach the Dharma for the benefit of the world. May I release creatures tortured by many sufferings’. The script dates from the 9th or 10th century ad (Griffiths 2011: 169). The object is small and so could have been brought to the site at any time after its composition, but it strengthens the conclusion that the site had already become a prominent centre of Buddhist activity before the large Amoghapāśa and Mahākāla statues were erected there. smaller sites of esoteric buddhism in the sumatran hinterlandMuara TakusThe remains at this site, lying on the upper Kampar River, consist of a complex of brick structures. The major feature is a large stūpa-form temple called Candi Mahligai (Fig. 11.7), the date of which is conjectural: estimates range between the 8th to 9th centuries (Krom 1931: 133) and the 12th to 14th centuries (Bernet Kempers 1959: 69). The outer layer of the structure envelopes an earlier building with a different profile which can only be glimpsed through a small opening in the base. The style of the stūpa has been compared to one in Villagaam, Sri Lanka (Groeneveldt 1879: 219). The best depiction of the ruins in their original state (i.e., before restoration) is found in Ijzerman 1893.The site lies in a remote locale of central Sumatra; there is no evidence that a large population ever lived in the area. It has been suggested that the site was in use for only a short time (Bronson et al. 1973: 16, 45). J.L. Moens (1937) once suggested that Muara Takus was the centre of Śrīvijaya, but this hypothesis has not been generally accepted.  Legend connects the construction of the temples with Ādityavarman, and suggests that he acquired power over Kampar by marrying his daughter to the local chief (Ijzerman 1893: 51; Schnitger 1940: 
Fig. 11.7: The Mahligai stūpa. (Photo: author)
miksic mockup.indd   26912/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 284] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia270399–401). Muara Takus may have been in some way linked to Padang Lawas, hundred kilometres to the north, via Pasir Pengarajan and Hokan; in support of this are small finds at Manggis and Ko-tanopan-Pinarik, and a legend of a Batak attack on the site (Schnitger 1936: 40). A set of eleven inscribed gold plates found in one of the ruins has been assigned on palaeographic grounds to the 12th century (Krom 1930: 149). The last plate bears diagrams including a lotus beneath a cakra with eight rims or a sun, a moon, an ele-phant-goad (aṅkuśa), and a trident (triśūla). J.G. de Casparis (1956: 48) identified the text as a Sanskrit treatise on Dependent Origination. Several differ-ent inscribers worked on it, but the style of script is uniform. He dated it much earlier than Krom: between 650 and 800. The text on the large plates begins with the Pratītyasamutpādasūtra, which is also found inscribed on bricks at Nālandā. The plates give a detailed commentary on the sutra, termed Vib haṅga (‘division, analysis into sets of categories’), which has also been found on two bricks discovered at Nālandā. Vibhaṅga is also preserved in a Chinese translation made by Xu-anzhang, dated 661.  This text has an unusual list of the three Thirsts (tṛṣṇa), which according to de Casparis is proba-bly an older stage of speculation than the known existing ones. The text follows the Sarvāstivādin point of view, whereas the Nālandā version gives a different division of tṛṣṇa. Some other minor points also suggest an association of this Indonesian text with the Sarvāstivādins. No Mahāyāna in fluence is discernible in the Indonesian version; the variations found in the Nālandā version are due to Mahāyā-na influence. These plates have some significant differences from those at Nālandā, so cannot be seen as directly influenced from that cosmopolitan centre of Buddhism.Schnitger (1937b) found a gold disc in the upper part of one of the temples at the site which is unique in that it records the names of Buddhist priests who supervised the construction, and says that the temple was built by Vajradharas (Ślączka 2007: 364–65). Another plate found in the Bungsu temple bears an inscription in Nāgarī which Bosch compared to another found at Aek Sangkilon (Schnitger 1937a: 11; Ślączka 2007: 363–64). In this example we have more contextual information than usual: it was found together with fragments of gold leaf, soil, and ash, inside a lotus-shaped base, supported by a 36-sided base which itself was supported by a 20-sided base. The plate bears engraved vajras7 and three Nāgarī letters. A stone with nine Nāgarī letters and vajras (Fig. 11.8) was also found nearby (on which, see Griffiths 2014: 236 and, for a revised reading and interpretation, Kandahjaya, this volume, n. 61). Similar inscribed objects (bricks) are reproduced here as Figs. 11.9–11. Tanjung MedanThis site is located approximately 75 kilometres northwest of Muara Takus. In 1876 a stūpa-form structure still stood here, but in 1930 only brick heaps remained. A gold plate and a kendi (water goblet) with neck of gold and rim of silver have been reclaimed from the rubble. The plate bore a maṇḍala of eight Bodhisattvas and an inscription 7. As argued by Griffiths (2014), what Ijzerman described as ‘triśūlas’ (i.e., tridents, which are Śaiva symbols) are in fact vajras (or viśvavajras), i.e. eminently (Esoteric) Bud-dhist symbols. 
Fig. 11.8: Stone with Nāgarī letters. (Photo: Kern Institute collection, Leiden University Library, GD 13 1321)
miksic mockup.indd   27012/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 285] ---
Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra271
of Buddhist formulae in Nāgarī script, which cannot be older than the 12th century (Bosch 1930: 133; Schnitger 1937a: 14; Bronson et al. 1973: 59). It is diffi-cult to date the remaining fragments of the temples, six of which are found spread over an area of 18,000 square metres. Temples I, II, and VI have been restored, while the others are too fragmentary to reconstruct. Temple VI may be the gateway to the site. Kota CinaWith this site we return to the coastal zone. Kota Cina is now seven kilometres inland from the coast, and only about 1.5 metres above sea level. When it was occupied the site may have been much nearer the Strait of Melaka; deposition of silt seems to have been rapid during the last few centuries. Remains include at least three complexes of brick ruins, stat-uary, bone, stone, glass, artefacts of gold, bronze, and iron, and remains of tree resins (dammar), an article of trade associated with Sumatra during the classical period. Edwards McKinnon also recovered about a ton of potsherds, of which about two-thirds are earthenware, most probably made locally, and the remaining one-third imported porcelain and stoneware, mostly of Chinese manufacture (Miksic 1979; Edwards McKinnon 1984).Evidence from dated Chinese and Sinhalese coins, Chinese porcelain, statuary, and radiocarbon dates all support the conclusion that the site was occupied in the late 11th and late 13th centuries. Vil-lagers in Kota Cina have found two granite Buddha statues, one of which is very similar to a South Indian image of the 13th century, while the other appears more closely related to Sri Lanka. One intact lingam of polished granite and a fragment of another, and statues of Viṣṇu and Lakṣmī indicate that the people of Kota Cina may have belonged to two religious communities. (It is also possible that they belonged to slightly different time periods).  Numerous porcelain and stoneware fragments indicate that the population carried on a thriving commerce with China. The Buddhist remains from Kota Cina, princi-pally the two granite statues, display no esoteric traits. They appear more closely related to the Theravāada aesthetic which was sweeping into the central part of the Siamo-Malay Peninsula, at the border between the Malay and Siamese ethno-linguistic groups. It seems that this busy trading community espoused a type of Buddhism which was not part of the esoteric tradition. This suggests that it was inhabited mainly by foreigners and by locals who were neither Hindu nor Buddhist. No historical documents have yet emerged to enable us to link it with any polity known in any sources, foreign or indigenous.
Figs. 11.9–11 (top to bottom): Inscribed bricks. (Photo: author) 
miksic mockup.indd   27112/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 286] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia272consecration deposits Many of the sites discussed here have yielded small inscribed objects, including gold, brick, and stone.  This phenomenon is not limited to Sumatra; numer-ous other examples have been noted in other parts of Southeast Asia. The largest and possibly most complete set was recovered from Gumpung Temple in Muara Jambi, but even there many elements of the set were no doubt lost. A study of this type of archaeological data by Anna A. Ślączka (2007) has added significantly to our understanding of them by reference to a South Indian text on architec-ture and ritual, the Kāśyapaśilpa. It was probably written in the 11th or 12th century. According to Ślączka’s data, there is much more archaeological information available for this type of artefact in Southeast Asia than exists in India. She found only about fifteen examples where archaeologi-cal data on the practice of making consecration deposits exists in India, whereas there are about 200 such reports from Southeast Asia (ibid.: 1). It is not possible to explain this discrepancy, but this situation makes it possible to add significantly to the comparative data which enables us to study the relationships between the two regions. One inter-esting feature is that the Kāśyapaśilpa is written to guide the builders of a Hindu temple, whereas most of the sites where such deposits have been found in Southeast Asia are Buddhist.The Kāśyapaśilpa gives instructions for three ceremonies during the process of constructing a temple. These are: prathameṣṭakā-nyāsa, ‘the placing of the first bricks’, mūrdheṣṭakā-nyāsa, ‘the placing of the crowning bricks’, and garbha-nyāsa, ‘the placing of the embryo’ (ibid.: 5). In Southeast Asian archaeology, early discoverers of such depos-its tended to call them ‘relics’, under the assumption that they contained ashes of cremated humans, and that the temples were funerary monuments. Thus, the containers were called ‘reliquaries’. This as-sumption still can be found in many texts, but the Javanese archaeologist R. Soekmono (1975, 1995) has thoroughly disproved this notion. Thus, Ślączka proposes the term ‘consecration deposits’ for this category of material.In the first phase of construction, the descrip-tion of the ceremony of placing the first bricks in the Kāśyapaśilpa gives instructions for digging the foundation pit. When conducting the ceremony of kumbha- or kalaśasthāpana, ‘the placing of the jars’, the text specifies that: ‘Then one should make karāla8 and so on in order to fix (the finial) firmly’ (Ślączka 2007: 171).  The excavated pit is filled up with gravel (ibid.: 173). These passages may help to clarify a phenomenon which is found at several temples in Sumatra and Java. At Muara Jambi, Kedaton was found to have had its base filled with huge quanti-ties of white quartz pebbles several centimetres in diameter. At Sungai Langsat, a temple was found to have been built on a layer of andesite cobbles mixed with kaolinite (Marsis Sutopo 1992). A similar layer of white gravel was discovered beneath Puntadewa on the Dieng Plateau in Central Java. It seems highly probable that this practice derives from a ritual pre-scription similar to that found in the Kāśyapaśilpa. The consecration deposit container (garbha- bhājana, phelā) should be constructed of metal (Ślączka 2007: 177). In Gumpung, it seems that the containers were in fact made of lead. The text gives directions for placing mantras and vowels (svara) in the compartments of the casket (ibid.). Also placed in the deposit container are various metals, semi-precious stones, attributes of the main deity, and grains. The location for the garbha is near the door to the temple. In Kedah, at site 15, a deposit was in fact found to the right of the door. In some North Indian texts, however, the garbha is placed in the centre (ibid.: 210, n. 41). In Vaiṣṇava texts, a tortoise is often accompanied by other attributes such as the conch shell, the discus, the club, and Garuḍa (ibid.: 226, n. 20).  Ślączka compiled an exhaustive list of conse-cration deposits (or what may well have been such deposits) at Southeast Asian sites. It seems that none of them precisely follows the Kāśyapaśilpa instructions, but elements of the same type of ritual practice can almost always be discerned. the 14th centuryThis chapter has omitted the 14th century, not because it is unimportant, but because it is so 8. A type of coating or mortar; according to Māyāmata 18.93, however, karāla is ‘gravel stones the size of abhaya or akṣa fruits’ (Dagens 1994: 275).
miksic mockup.indd   27212/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 287] ---
Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra273complex that it would take another chapter to discuss it, and because little archaeological data for that century is yet available. There are many inscriptions from this time, but their translations are still beset with many uncertainties. Most of the information for the 14th century comes from the highlands, specifically the area of Padang Roco, but more significantly from another region further north, the Tanahdatar region. That area and period are of great interest because of deviations displayed by the Buddhism there and then from the Bud-dhism which had existed in Sumatra in the previous 600 years rather than continuity with the past.  conclusionSumatran Buddhism was definitely a local product, not a mere reflection of foreign beliefs, though Su-matrans were definitely rapidly apprised of new artistic and philosophical ideas from the Buddhist realm which covered South Asia, Central Asia, East Asia, and Southeast Asia.9 In the year ad 1000, these regions covered about half of the urbanized, literate areas of the entire globe. The history of this enor-mous area can only be understood by examining the similarities and differences between them in their interpretations of religious doctrines. The statement by Arlo Griffiths (2011: 172) that ‘while political or economic history may not stand to gain much from further discoveries, it is especially our perspective on the history of Buddhist institutions and practices in Sumatra, which stands to become significantly enriched as new discoveries become known to scholarship’ is much too humble. As Woodward has indicated, Buddhist ideas were at least excellent proxies for the political and social ideology of the societies where they were espoused, and more likely they were an independent varia-ble shaping the possibilities of the political sphere rather than reacting to them. 9. While acknowledging the importance of the Pāla intellectual world in shaping the Buddhist cultures of the Malay Peninsula and the Khmer domains, Skilling  (2007: 97) points out that ‘[t]he icons and architecture of the region are accomplished and distinctive—they are not mere copies of Pāla or other Indian forms. That is, the members of local cultures were active participants who responded to normative texts according to their own social and religious needs and their own æsthetic ideals’. The frequency with which vajras and viśvava-jras appear in two- and three-dimensional forms in the archaeological record of Sumatra seems without precedent in archaeology in South Asia. This fascination with the vajra implies two char-acteristics about Sumatran Buddhism: its esoteric aspects were extremely popular in ritual; and the local Buddhism, like other Sumatran appropria-tions of cultural materials from South Asia, made use of certain motifs from South Asian art, but placed very different emphases on some of them. Sumatra was not an isolated backwater; even the people in the highlands (where the majority of Esoteric Buddhist sites are found) for most of the Buddhist period were well aware of developments in the Buddhist cosmopolitan world, as witnessed by the use of Nāgarī script for Sanskrit mantras and yantras engraved on stone, metal foils, and bricks.The extraordinary complexity of the temple con-struction rituals discussed by Ślączka hints at the level of detail which could have been recovered had the consecration deposits in the 200 sites in South-east Asia where they appear been properly recorded. In fact none of them can be reconstructed in its entirety. This situation is due to numerous factors, but one which could have been avoided is the use of technicians to dismantle temples for restoration rather than allocating the job to archaeologists. There are still sites in Muara Jambi which have not been restored, Mahligai Temple being the most important. This site lies at the northwest corner of the site, and appears to have great potential to yield relatively intact consecration deposits. Using the insights of Ślączka’s research as a guide, and employing Davidson’s and Woodward’s depiction of the link between maṇḍalas and political ideol-ogy, it is still possible for Buddhist archaeology in Sumatra to reach a much higher level of precision, and thus insight into Sumatra’s role as a source of Buddhist ideas as well as art.
miksic mockup.indd   27312/7/16   9:46 AM

--- [Page 288] ---
page after miksic.indd   1 17/2/16   11:17 am

--- [Page 289] ---
Chapter 12
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago: 
An Interpretation of a Series of Narrative Bas-reliefs
on a 13th-Century East Javanese Monument
kate  o’brien
Candi jago is located at tumpang , some 
fourteen kilometres east of Malang in East 
Java.1 It is commonly held that the shrine was 
commissioned in ad 1268 by King K ṛtanagara on 
the death of his father, Vi ṣṇuvardhana, with a date 
of completion around 1280 to coincide with fune-
real rites held twelve years a fter death. Its relatively 
small size and current state of deterioration possibly 
belie the scope of its importance. This monument 
came into existence during a dramatic period not 
only in Javanese history, but in the history of East 
and Southeast Asia. This was the time of Khubilai 
Khan, whose expansionist aims throughout Asia 
were known to include Java. However, with K ṛta- 
nagara also keen to broaden his sovereignty well 
beyond Java, con flict was inevitable. Tension 
between China and Java may well have continued 
until the Yuan dynasty came to an end in 1368. As I 
have indicated elsewhere (O’Brien 1988 , 1990 , 1993, 
2008 , 2011), much of the design and embellishment 
of Candi Jago re flects the tension of those times. 
Since the publication of Brandes’ extensive 
monograph on Candi Jago in 1904 ,2 most of the nar -
ratives portrayed on its five tiers of bas-relief  panels  
have been identi fied. However, for some years 
1. I would like to acknowledge the assistance of a number 
of colleagues and friends who have kindly read this work 
in its various dra fts and o ffered numerous valuable 
suggestions for its improvement, in particular, Roy Jordaan, 
Andrea Acri, and Ian Dunn. For the many shortcomings 
that no doubt remain, I am solely responsible.
2. All references ‘(Brandes ph.*)’ herein relate to numbered 
photographs as published in that monograph, all of which 
may be viewed on the Digital Sources website of Leiden 
University ( https://socrates.leidenuniv.nl , then to ‘Kern 
Institute’). As Brandes photographed Jago’s reliefs in the 
opposite direction to the flow of all the narratives, the plate 
numbers are now read (le ft to right) in reverse.two series did continue to resist e fforts at positive 
identi fication. One is located on the southern and 
eastern faces of the first terrace (see Diagram 12.13) 
and has since been interpreted in terms of a Bud-
dhist redaction of the Aji Dharma  tale.4 The second 
series begins at the eastern end of the southern 
face of the beugel5 and continues on the eastern 
and northern faces of this same band. This latter 
series—the subject of this chapter—was interpreted 
some years ago6 as being an extension of the Kuñja -
rakar ṇa tale, which had much earlier been correctly 
identi fied among the reliefs of the first terrace and 
beugel by van Stein Callenfels ( 1916: 445ff .).
As an alternative identi fication, I propose to 
show that in fact the second unidenti fied series 
is the tale of the Bodhisattva prince Sudhana and 
the kinnar ī princess Manohar ā. As will become 
apparent, such an interpretation is not without 
problems. However, it would seem to supply far 
more satisfactory explanations for the great major 
ity of scenes within this bas-relief series than can 
be be provided by attempting to rationalize them 
as an extension of the Kuñjarakar ṇa tale. 
3.Diagram 1 is a skeletal plan of Candi Jago showing the 
layout of the bas-relief narratives on their various terraces. 
The points marking the start and finish of each story are 
indicated thereon.
4. Also known as Angling-darma (Rdn. Bambang 
Soetrisno 1985 ), and Aridharma (Hunter 2000 : 69–102). 
5.The beugel  is a narrow band of reliefs girding the base 
of the second terrace (see Diag. 1). Beugel  appears to have 
been a descriptive term used by Brandes and is retained 
here for its one-word convenience.
6. See Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan 1977, and 
also Soetrisno 1985: 14–20. No comparison with either of 
these two works will be made here in order not to further 
complicate an already multifaceted discussion of damaged 
reliefs. 
obrien mockup 1.indd   275 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 290] ---
276 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Diagram 12.1: Plan of Candi Jago showing the layout of the bas-relief narratives. (Drawing: author)
obrien mockup 1.indd   276 12/7/16   10:02 AM\ K111rjnrnknmn -Aji Dltnrmn 
1 pnrll ~-Is:::;:====:;;;~~;;;~::==~ 
+I , -1 nrt tnynjlrn 
e11ds 
J\arwlvt iW'IIng pomts 
I•T•IIllr~~ • A.,..,_ .. ,.,.~ 
4•1\t,._.,..... I I • 
L----first 
terrace I 
I 
I 
I 
r.J 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
'""'" Fllbk<- I ----------- --...1 Sudlra wkumara 
starts 
\ ( Krm;n knmn 
pnrt 2 ds) 
1 s ... ti 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
--'~ 
,t I. 
I 
I _.J 
Diag.l 
}ago ground plan 

--- [Page 291] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 277
:
The romantic tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā is 
well known throughout Asia and Southeast Asia, 
and has evidently been so for many centuries.7 
What gives added interest as regards Candi Jago, is 
the presence of the amoghap āśa (‘unfailing noose’) 
within this tale. The amoghapāś a is a major attrib-
ute of the bodhisattva Amoghap āśa Loke śvara, its 
purpose being to snare unenlightened beings and 
lead them to nirvana. It becomes signi ficant then, 
that Amoghap āśa Loke śvara (inscribed bhar āla 
āryāmoghap āśa loke śvara) is also the central divin -
ity of Jago’s statuary. Jago’s particular emanation 
of Amoghap āśa is a white form, eight-armed and 
accompanied by the divinities Śyāmatārā, Su dha-
na kum āra, Bh ṛkuṭī, and Hayagr īva.
Evidence of devotion to the emanation of Av-
alokite śvara known as Amoghapāś a Loke śvara can 
be traced back as far as the late 6th century in East 
Asia (Leoshko 1985: 128) and late 8th century in 
7. Concerning the diversity of this tale, see for example 
Padmanabh S. Jaini’s extensive survey ( 1966 : 533ff .) and, 
more recently, Csaba Dezsö 2014 : 74.Southeast Asia (Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 
1988: 58), but is strangely scarce if not completely 
absent in India. The forms of Amoghap āśa are 
many and varied but Pal ( 1967: 26) notes that it 
is the eight-armed fi gure that gained prominence 
in Java, Tibet, and Nepal. This divinity is much 
venerated in Tibet and particularly in Nepal, where 
the Aṣṭamīvrata  rite—during which images of the 
deity are consecrated—is still performed by Newar 
Buddhists on the eighth day of the month, with nu -
merous paṭas and ma ṇḍalas going back as far as the 
16th century attesting to his worship (Pal 1985: 31, 68 
[P18], 214). The iconography of Jago’s Amoghap āśa 
and that of the four companion statues closely 
follows a sādhana  known to have been composed 
by the great Kashmiri scholar, Śākyaśrībhadra ( ad 
1127–225),8 much revered in Tibetan Buddhism. I 
will return to this fi gure in the fi nal discussion.
Success in the most esoteric forms of Tantric 
practice was believed not only to bring Buddha-
hood in life to the devotee, but also potential access 
8. O’Brien 1993 : 252 –55; Schoterman 1994 : 154–77. 
Fig. 12.1a: Candi Jago. (Original photo: Brandes N.W . 234)
obrien mockup 1.indd   277 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 292] ---
278 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
to extraordinary magical powers. This concept 
certainly seems to have gained the interest of a 
number of rulers in Asia and Southeast Asia by the 
time of Khubilai Khan.9 Attainment is achieved 
through the union of Wisdom and Compassion10 
that is expressed at the highest level of Non-du-
ality in the union of the female and male princi-
ples (respectively  ) and is said to bring forth the 
Buddha as ‘son’.11 This triad of father/mother/son 
is described in precisely these terms in the Old 
Javanese Saṅ Hya ṅ Kamah āyānikan of indetermi-
nate dating (Kats 1910: 48)12 and the Sutasoma  of 
the 14th century (O’Brien 2008 : 56, 208). I would 
argue that the establishment of such a triad was 
King K ṛtanagara’s plan in deifying his father 
as the Bodhisattva, Amoghap āśa Loke śvara, in 
Candi Jago.13 Accordingly, K ṛtanagara’s abhiṣeka 
9. Perhaps one of the earliest examples of royal initiation 
in the highest Tantras is the sādhana  devised by At īśa for 
the king of Western Tibet some three centuries earlier. 
The sādhana  is based on the Guhyasam ājatantra  and 
its maṇḍala is emanated with Amit ābha at its centre 
(Roerich 1949 : 250–51; also O’Brien 1993 : Appendix 2). 
How this process came to gain wider royal interest may 
be uncertain, but by the 12th century there are notable 
examples: Jayavarman VII (Cambodia, r. 1181–1218, see 
also n. 16, below); K ṛtanagara and Khubilai Khan, 13th 
century; and various Japanese emperors from late 13th 
century on (Kamikawa 1990 )—all initiated in one form 
or other of the Ādibuddha. On the nature of the politico-
religious rivalry between K ṛtanagara and Khubilai, see 
Bade in this volume. 
10. Also known as ‘Wisdom and Means’: it carries all the 
same connotations since ‘Means’ motivated by universal 
Compassion are deemed to be inseparable.
11. In Tibetan (and Nepalese) maṇḍalas where the 
male and female divinities are shown in union, they are 
described as yab-yum (‘father-mother’).
12. Various opinions have placed its compilation as early 
as the first half of the 10th century and as late as the 14th 
or even 15 th century.
13. Deśavarṇana: Canto 41.4ab (Robson 1995: 54). Given 
the absence of epigraphic evidence, Gri ffiths (2010 : 361) 
counsels caution in accepting that the Amoghap āśa statue 
of Jago was intended as the dei fied image of Vi ṣṇuvardhana. 
This will always be a moot point. Even Prapañca, author of 
the Deśavarṇana, was gently cautioned by his informant, 
an elderly abbot, as to the complete accuracy of all the 
details he was about to impart, since they were based on oral 
traditions (Robson 1995: 52ff.). However, Vi ṣṇuvardhana’s 
enshrinement image is far from the only one mentioned, name refers to his being a Jina(-Buddha) but as the 
oneness of Śiva and Buddha at the highest level 
of truth.14 Essential to the most esoteric practice 
is the ‘right’ female partner. For K ṛtanagara this 
was Śrī Bajradev ī and in death we find the couple 
commemorated as Vairocana and Locan ā (Robson 
1995: 56). Thus, the identi fication of K ṛtanagara 
as Buddha Vairocana ties well with the interment 
image of his father in the particular eight-armed, 
white form of Amoghap āśa who occupied Vairo-
cana’s central position in Jago’s ma ṇḍala.15 
At a more secular level, fundamental to the 
Javanese concept of ideal kingship is the impor-
tance of the ‘right’ queen and the obligation on 
the king to pursue that quest, since it is the queen 
who embodies the fertility and good fortune of the 
kingdom. I have long maintained that Candi Jago, 
while ful filling its commemorative role of housing 
the divine image of a dead king, is at the same time 
an exposé on the rising status of Buddhist-empow -
ered kings of Java. So it is perhaps no surprise that 
besides the power of the pāśa to ensnare beings and 
draw them towards enlightenment, in the tale of 
the Bodhisattva prince Sudhana it is also the means 
of capturing his ideal wife and future queen, the 
kinnar ī princess  Manohar ā.16
there being a number of other rulers mentioned covering 
a span of more than a century. Although of later dating, 
the Pararaton  also mentions the enshrinement of Vi ṣṇu- 
vardhana at Jago (Brandes 1920 : 24, 77).
14. In the Deśavarṇana, the consecration name is given 
‘as a Jina, Jñ ānabajre śvara’ (Robson 1995: 55). The 1351 
Singhasari  inscription  gives it as ‘ Śṛī Jñ āneśvarabajra’; 
the Pararaton , as Bha ṭāra Śivabuddha (Brandes 1920 : 24).
15. It may well be that a similar situation had already 
been earlier adopted in Cambodia with the triads 
founded by Jayavarman VII. By deifying the images of his 
deceased father and mother as Loke śvara (Bodhisattva of 
Compassion) and Prajñ āpāramit ā (Perfection of Wisdom) 
he would be in a position to build his claim as Buddha-king, 
and indeed the king’s triad of Loke śvara, Prajñ āpāramit ā, 
and the Buddha seems to have ‘dominated the first decade 
of his reign’ (Sharrock 2007 : 234). Supported then by 
subsequent Tantric initiation rites to the great Tantric deity, 
Hevajra, he later projected this vision of himself as supreme 
Buddha in the multiple faces of the Ādi-Buddha, Vajrasattva, 
on his regnal temple at the Bayon (Sharrock 2007 : 230–81). 
16. The quest for the right queen is also the subject of two 
other tales illustrated on Jago, in particular the Kṛṣṇā yaṇa 
on the damaged cella  walls and the Aji Dharma tale on the 
obrien mockup 1.indd   278 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 293] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 279
While evidence of the Sudhana and Manohar ā 
tale in Java has not as yet been unearthed among 
extant manuscripts, its appearance among the 
reliefs of Borobudur suggests that it had at least 
some currency in Central Java by the 8th century, 
when Buddhism flourished there. The story as it 
appears on Borobudur was not correctly identi fied 
until late in the 19th century. However, there were 
still problems in resolving some of its episodes 
and Krom, though he consulted many texts, was 
not able to precisely match the Borobudur version 
with any known sources of the tale.17 On the 
basis of his survey, Jaini proposed that while the 
Borobudur reliefs show a ffinity with the Sudhana-
kumārāvadāna from the Divy āvadāna collection, 
they also appear to share details found in later Pali 
recensions of the tale, suggesting an intermediate, 
unknown version (Jaini 1966 : 555, 558). 
Similar di fficulties are met with Jago’s ‘Sudhana’. 
Even though the present work draws on three Bud-
dhist versions, i.e. the Sudhan āvadāna occurring 
first terrace. In the Kṛṣṇā yaṇa kakavin , King K ṛṣṇa rejects 
the wife chosen for him, taking instead the Princess 
Rukmi ṇī by abduction even though his action brings about 
war (Krom 1974: 284–90). The origin and interpretation 
of the Aji Dharma  reliefs on Jago are ongoing problems 
and the reader is referred to Hunter 2000 : 69–102 for an 
in-depth discussion. In essence, the queen has taken her 
own life as a result of misadventure by the couple. Aji 
Dharma is so grief-stricken that he journeys in quest of 
his lost love, convinced she is by now reincarnated. The 
narrative reliefs suggest their reunion. Among the other 
stories depicted, in the Pārthayajña (second terrace), the 
ruling P āṇḍava clan have been tricked into the loss of 
their kingdom. It falls to Arjuna to take up the yoke of 
asceticism in order to win the favour of the gods and 
regain his family’s right to reign. The Arjunaviv āha, on the 
third terrace, sees Arjuna granted the magical Pa śupati 
weapon with which he will re-establish his family’s right 
to rule. However, god Indra first draws Arjuna into his 
own battle against the demon king Niv ātakavaca who 
currently threatens heaven. Arjuna defeats the demon 
king and is rewarded by Indra with temporary marriage 
to a number of celestial nymphs in Indra’s heaven (Krom 
1974: 234–49).
17. For information concerning the earliest scholars to 
have worked with the Sudhana reliefs on Borobudur, see 
Krom 1927: 230ff . and Jaini 1966 . For a more recent exam-
ination of the Sudhanakum ārāvadāna tale as depicted on 
Borobudur, see Miksic 1990 : 77–81 and Levin 2011: 191–204.in the Tibetan canon,18 a Kinnar ī contained in the 
Mah āvastu ,19 and a third version of Khotanese 
origin,20 problems are still encountered. Whether 
any of these or some other localized text inspired 
the artisans of Jago is yet to be made clear, for as 
noted by Fontein ( 1981: 92) in his discussion of a 
particular panel in the Sudhana-Manohar ā reliefs 
on Borobudur:
Like some of the reliefs of Prambanan, this 
relief from Baraba ḍur suggests the possibility 
that later texts from all over Southeast Asia 
may have preserved divergent traditions which found their expression in the reliefs of Bara-
baḍur, and that such material should not be ex-
cluded from our research simply because it was 
so obviously committed to writing long a fter 
Barabu ḍur was built.
18. Originally translated from the Tibetan Kah-gyur 
into German  by F. Anton von Schiefner in 1882 and later 
translated from the German into English by W.R.S. Ralston: 
Tibetan Tales derived from Indian Sources (1906 : 44–74). An 
identical Sanskrit version of this avad āna is apparently also 
held in the Divy āvadāna collection of Nepalese manuscripts 
(copies held in Cambridge and Paris). This collection was 
transcribed but not translated by Edward B. Cowell and 
Robert A. Neil in The Divyâvadâna—A Collection of Early 
Buddhist Legends (repr. 1970), in which the tale is given 
the name Sudhanakum āra (‘Young Sudhana’). For the 
convenience of this study, I have made extensive use of 
Ralston’s English translation based on von Schiefner’s 
Kah-gyur version in German, and page numbers cited 
will refer to Ralston’s volume. Therefore, all references to 
‘the avad āna’ herein will denote the Kah-gyur  version. I 
am also indebted to Andrea Acri, who has alerted me to 
a very recent critical edition and English translation by 
Csaba Dezsö ( 2014 ) of an incomplete manuscript of the 
Sudhana-Manohar ā tale held under the auspices of the 
Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project. The text 
is believed to have been written in Bengal by the Buddhist 
scholar, Śāntākaragupta, and is possibly datable to the late 
11th century. 
19. J.J. Jones, Th e Mah āvastu , Vol. II ( 1952: 91–111).
20. H.W. Bailey, ‘ The Sudhana Poem of Ṛddhiprabh āva’ 
(1966 : 506–32). This version by Ṛddhiprabh āva was one 
of three Khotanese texts in Saka language examined by 
Bailey. He observed that it di ffered from the other two 
‘markedly in phrases, in additional verses, and in orthog -
raphy [being written] in a less developed form of the 
language’. Bailey also noted a colophon by Ṛddhiprabh āva 
stating that he had taken the tale from an ancient śāstra 
(1966 : 506).
obrien mockup 1.indd   279 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 294] ---
280 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Or, as observed by Pal ( 1978: 82) in reference to 
a Nepalese paubha  in the possession of the Boston 
Museum of Fine Arts, which painting contains a 
great number of scenes from the kinnar ī tale in its 
middle register: ‘ There are two versions of this story 
in Buddhist literature, but the Newari rendering 
depicted in this paubha  seems to be yet a third 
variation which has taken on much local colour’.
As with Borobudur and the Newar paubha , even 
with access to the three versions at hand we will 
still find ourselves at variance with some episodes 
projected in Jago’s reliefs. That we may in fact be 
dealing with a ‘localized’ adaptation will become 
abundantly clear when the scenes are considered 
one by one. For example, one sees that the action 
and venue of a scene can be resolved with the 
avad āna version, only to find that the actors appear 
to be at variance—or vice versa . The sequential 
ordering of some episodes within the reliefs also 
provides di fficulties.  It may be prudent to also bear 
in mind that given Jago’s emphasis on kingship, the 
story as illustrated in the reliefs may be a deliberate 
melding of speci fic episodes gathered from one or a 
number of sources, and chosen for inclusion on the 
shrine with more earthly motives in mind, as well 
as those of a spiritual and commemorative nature.
Making the task of dealing with the tale even 
more di fficult, 2.7 metres of stonework containing 
an unknown number of the opening scenes are 
missing, with another small section near the end 
of the series showing signs of never having been 
finished, the stones being only partially carved. As 
well, the beugel—which, unlike the other narrative 
bands on Jago, carries no upper or lower decorative 
frieze or ogive bands—has lost the top course of its 
stones in a number of places so that identi fication 
of individual characters is frequently hampered by 
the loss of heads, headwear, facial features, etc. The 
natural erosion of time and climate together with 
geological disturbance and the more insidious and 
faster working e ffects of industrial pollution have 
also contributed to the damage.
Yet in spite of these obstacles, there are still 
enough key episodes le ft in situ to make compari-
son with the Sudhana–Manohar ā tale a thoroughly 
worthwhile exercise. Additional help also comes in 
the strong, vertical relationship that exists between 
the narrative bands on Jago’s various terraces, by which ‘like-themes’ are projected in vertical ‘par-
allels’ down through the reliefs on all wall facings.21 
The relevance of these ‘parallels’ to the story will be 
indicated and brie fly discussed during the scene-
by-scene description and interpretation given below.
It should perhaps also be pointed out that 
discussion here will only deal with the tale on a 
scene-by-scene basis with a view to establishing 
identi fication. Any wider discussion of the tale 
from the point of view of its choice, location on the 
structure, its sequential position among the other 
narratives, etc., must be temporarily put aside, as 
also, regrettably, any detailed comparison with the 
Sudhana tale as it appears, say, on Borobodur. It is 
the sole aim here to initially establish a relationship 
between the speci fied reliefs on the beugel  with the 
tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā.
In interpreting the beugel  reliefs, the avad āna 
(through Ralston’s translation) has been used as 
the primary source for three reasons: ( 1) within my 
current knowledge, it appears to contain most of 
the episodes depicted in the Jago reliefs, but more 
importantly its comprehensive telling of the tale 
21.  A quick perusal of Diag. 1 will reveal that there is no 
consistent point on Jago for the starting and stopping of 
relief narratives. This alone suggests that there is a fixed 
spatial order for the arrangement of narrative episodes 
and this is further supported by the fact that in some 
instances, a single episode may occupy an entire panel, 
while the very next panel (e.g., around a corner) may hold 
a number of episodes, all tightly condensed. This led me 
to the discovery that a system of vertical, parallel themes 
exists down each of the four sides. How these themes ac-
curately and ingeniously express tenets of Vajray āna is 
extensively explained in O’Brien 1993, esp. 261–79. Basically, 
the parallel themes relate to symbolism associated with 
the maṇḍala of the five Jina-Buddhas: Vairocana (centre), 
Akṣobhya (east), Ratnasambhava (south), Amit ābha (west), 
and Amoghasiddhi (north). These five are the central di-
vinities of the Diamond World maṇḍala but are also to be 
found in the central ‘palace’ of many other mandalas in 
Tantric Buddhism, including the mandala of Amoghap āśa 
Loke śvara who is the central divinity of Jago.
A similar system relating to symbolism associated with 
the Jina-Buddhas is also found to be operating in the 
Old Javanese kakavin  Sutasoma , a 14th-century literary 
work centring on Vairocana (O’Brien 2008 ). A potential 
link between composition of the Sutasoma  and a possi-
ble 14th-century refurbishment of Jago is also considered 
therein (O’Brien 2008 : 245–46) and again, from a di fferent 
perspective, in a later essay (O’Brien 2011 ).
obrien mockup 1.indd   280 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 295] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 281
allows recognition of small details featured in the 
reliefs; ( 2) it features (as does the Ṛddhiprabh āva 
redaction) the amoghap āśa, which is the major at-
tribute of the temple’s central divinity, Amoghap āśa 
Loke śvara; ( 3) Sudhanakum āra is also one of the 
four acolyte figures who frequently accompanies 
Amoghap āśa in his maṇḍalas, and who also figures 
as a member of the cella  statuary of Jago.22 
Due to di fficulties in describing and positively 
identifying some of Jago’s more eroded and deplet-
ed bas-relief scenes, it will be necessary to supply a 
reasonably detailed summary of the avad āna tale, 
itself quite lengthy. In many cases, it is precisely 
the small details contained in the literary version 
that make identi fication possible.
the sudhanāvadāna
The tale opens by relating of two kings in Pañc āla: 
one who ruled in the north, the other in the south. 
22.  According to Mukhopadhyay ( 1985: 124), Sudhana-
kumāra, an acolyte of Amoghap āśa, is held to be the same 
Sudhanakum āra of the Gaṇḍavyūha Mah āyānasūtra. 
Amoghap āśa himself is a Bodhisattva figure, the spiritual 
son of Amit ābha. Mukhopadhyay also notes that Sudhana -
kumāra, during his search for enlightenment, is directed 
by the Bodhisattva S āmantabhadra ‘to approach Buddha 
Amit ābha of the west from whom he learns the highest 
truth’. Iconographically, the acolyte Sudhanakum āra has a 
noble appearance, and his hands are held in añjali-mudr ā 
with a book (of learning) under his le ft arm (Bhattacha-
ryya 1958: 129). While any positive link between Prince Su- 
dhana(-kum āra) of the Kah-gyur  or Nepalese avad ānas 
and Sudhanakum āra (son of a rich merchant) of the Gaṇḍa- 
vyūha is unknown to me, it is interesting to note that both 
the avad āna and Gaṇḍavyūha Sudhana tales appear on 
Borobudur; the avad āna being located on the lower register 
of reliefs on the main wall of the first terrace (actually the 
second terrace when counting the covered terrace) with the 
Gaṇḍavyūha story being the last of the narrative series on 
the upper galleries. One may also note a certain similarity 
in their separation on Jago, where the avad āna tale is also 
depicted on the second-from-lowest tier, with the statue 
of Sudhanakum āra highly likely to have resided in the 
temple’s cella with Amoghap āśa. On the appearance of 
both Sudhanas on Borobudur, Fontein ( 1967: 170) remarks:
The appearance of a namesake of the person whom we 
may call the hero of the Barabu ḍur in such an impor-
tant place on the first gallery suggests the possibility 
that these two di fferent persons may have had more 
in common than their names, at least in the eyes of 
the architects of the Barabu ḍur. King Dhana of North Pañc āla was a law-abiding 
monarch; his capital of Hastin āpura was therefore 
prosperous and abundant, totally free of disorder, 
crime, and disease. In the city was a beautiful lake 
inhabited by the nāga Janmacitra, whose power 
over the rains caused the land to be fertile; the 
people, being well supplied, tended generously 
to the welfare of Buddhist monks ( śrama ṇa) and 
Brahmans, as well as the poor and needy.
The king of South Pañc āla, on the other hand, 
was negligent, cruel, and unjust. Because he did 
not rule in accordance with his dharma, the rains 
failed and eventually, out of fear and despair, the 
people ran away to North Pañc āla.
One day when the king of South Pañc āla was 
out inspecting his domains, he found the towns and 
villages deserted, the parks and temples fallen into 
decay. The reason, he was told, was the situation 
of peace and plenty in North Pañc āla due to the 
righteousness of its king and the presence of the 
nāga Janmacitra. 
The king, heeding the opinions of his minis-
ters, immediately promised to reform his ways on 
condition that the nāga could be brought to South 
Pañc āla. To that end, a snake charmer was hired 
and promised a basket of gold when the task was 
accomplished. The snake charmer surveyed the 
lake and ordered the preparation of utensils and 
offerings, guaranteeing to capture the nāga within 
seven days.
The nāga, noting the arrival and purpose of 
the snake charmer, feared great distress at being 
separated from his parents and thus approached a 
hunter who lived nearby. Since his own livelihood 
depended on the continued presence of Janmacitra 
in the lake, the hunter readily agreed to help him. 
The nāga explained that when the snake charmer 
performed his ritual, the waters would begin to 
seethe and at that point the nāga would be drawn 
to the surface. Before killing the snake charmer, 
the hunter must force him to reverse the spell; 
otherwise, the nāga would forever remain captive 
to the spell.
The nāga Janmacitra then ‘took up his abode 
in a lonely spot [and] when seven days had passed, 
the hunter hid himself near that place’ (Ralston 
1906 : 48). As the snake charmer proceeded with 
his ritual preparations, he was duly set upon by the 
obrien mockup 1.indd   281 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 296] ---
282 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
hunter in the manner prescribed by the nāga, and 
then killed. Now that the nāga had been released 
from the spell, ‘he came forth from the lake’ and 
in gratitude led the hunter to his abode to meet 
his parents. They in turn rewarded him with many 
precious jewels and gold.
Relating the incident to a gentle and kind ṛṣi 
who also lived near the lake, the hunter was ad-
monished for having taken the jewels, etc. Instead, 
the ṛṣi advised him to ask for the ‘ amogha -chain’ 
(Skt. amoghap āśa). At first the nāgas were reluctant 
to part with it, but as the debt was one of honour, 
they fi nally agreed.
The story then shi fts to North Pañc āla... Now, 
the king and queen of North Pañc āla did not have 
a son and this was a great sadness for them. On 
the advice of the Buddhist monks, Brahmans, 
and others, King Dhana was exhorted to pray 
to the gods. He therefore prayed to Śiva, Varu ṇa, 
Kubera, Vasudeva, and many others. In answer to 
his prayers ‘a Bodhisat of the Bhadrakalpa entered 
into the womb of his good spouse’ (Ralston 1906 : 
51). Being gi fted and intuitive in such matters, the 
queen advised the king that she was expecting a son. 
The king was utterly delighted, his pleasure mani-
fest in strings of pearls and other jewels with which 
he adorned her. No expense was spared to ensure 
the comfort of the queen during her pregnancy 
and at the end of the nine months, a son was born 
‘of noble form and lovely aspect, fair and gleaming, 
like unto gold in colour, with a head like a canopy, 
long arms, a brow of great width, interlacing 
eyebrows, a high-arched nose and provided with 
the full complement of limbs and joints’ (Ralston 
1906 : 51). He was called Sudhana. 
By the time the boy was grown up he was 
well schooled in reading and writing, ‘adroit in 
his manners’, and skilled in the five arts as was 
demanded by his status as a future kṣatriya  king. 
King Dhana bestowed three palaces upon the young 
Sudhana, with a wife in each.
The tale switches back to the forest... where the 
hunter has learned of a beautiful lake nearby where, 
on the fifteenth day of each month, the beautiful 
kinnar ī princess, Manohar ā, attended by a great 
number of kinnar ī, would come there to bathe. The 
hunter resolved to use the amogha -chain to capture 
Manohar ā, which task he duly accomplished.Since it would be most inappropriate for a 
mortal man to lay hands on a kinnar ī, she o ffered 
her head jewel, the means of her power to fly 
and therefore escape, if he would promise not to 
touch her. Now, on that particular day, ‘the youth 
Sudhana23 had gone forth to the chase’, during 
which he encountered the hunter with Manohar ā. 
Realizing that very much more was to be gained by 
offering Manohar ā as a gi ft, the hunter presented 
her to Sudhana. There follows a long discourse 
on the voluptuous nature of her physical charms. 
Sudhana was immediately besotted with her ‘whose 
countenance was like unto the moon’ and on re-
turning to his palace installed her in the upper 
rooms and there spent all his time.
One day, two Brahmans came to H āstinapu-
ra—one attaching himself to the king as purohi -
ta, the other to Sudhana. In order to secure his 
own position, the purohita devised a plot against 
Sudhana. An ongoing rebellion in the mountains 
gave the purohita his opportunity; he advised the 
king to send Sudhana as a test of his strength and 
courage. The king then summoned the youth who 
prepared to do his father’s bidding. However, when 
Sudhana returned to his own palace to take leave 
of Manohar ā, upon seeing her he immediately 
forgot the words of his father. The purohita , aware 
of this, advised the king to summon the troops 
to the ready, call upon the youth, and send him 
without further ado. This was arranged and the 
king summoned Sudhana again. Before leaving, 
Sudhana gave Manohar ā’s head jewel to his sym-
pathetic mother with the request that it should be 
returned to Manohar ā should any danger come to 
her during his absence.
23. In the Kah-gyur  avad āna the youth of Sudhana 
is consistently emphasized (eg., Skt. Sudhanakum āra, 
Sudhanar ājakum āra), which is also supported by the 
Divyā vadāna version . This is important as regards Jago, 
where the very youthful figure of Sudhana is never attired 
regally, with the possible  exception of one problematic 
episode that could be interpreted as taking place in the 
kinnar ī palace when Manohar ā needed to regally dress 
Sudhana before presenting him to her father. This episode 
aside, Sudhana is consistently clothed quite simply in a kain  
that is tied and draped in the same manner throughout the 
reliefs. Apart from bracelets, he wears no other jewellery, 
save for one or possibly two episodes in which he wears 
an object around his neck.
obrien mockup 1.indd   282 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 297] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 283
With the aid of the yakṣa king Vai śravaṇa 
and his mighty army, the mountain rebels were 
quickly intimidated into surrendering peacefully 
to Sudhana. In fact, the people avowed that they 
were not in rebellion against the king but the king’s 
ministers. Being more than ready to accept the 
young and wise Sudhana, they opened the gates 
and went forth with full pomp to meet him.
At the palace... King Dhana asked the purohita 
to explain a fearful dream he had just experienced. 
Although the purohita  knew the dream was a sign 
that Sudhana had won over the rebels, he instead 
told the king that it was a bad omen and that a 
very complicated rite must be held to combat it. 
Such a rite demanded that Manohar ā be put to 
death. The king, swayed by the purohita , reluctantly 
agreed. However, Manohar ā learned of the plan and 
went to the queen. The head jewel was returned to 
Manohar ā and she was able to escape.
On her way back to the kingdom of her father, 
Manohar ā recalled Sudhana’s love for her and 
went to the ṛṣi. Knowing that Sudhana would also 
question him, Manohar ā gave the ṛṣi her ring and 
a message for Sudhana should he wish to follow 
her. She warned that the journey was really far too 
arduous for a mortal as there were many dangerous 
obstacles to be overcome, but nevertheless le ft full 
instructions on how to deal with each—should he 
still be intent on making the journey.
The victorious Sudhana returned with his army 
from the mountains. A fter reporting to his father, 
he begged leave to return to his palace and there 
learned of Manohar ā’s departure. From his mother 
he heard details of the a ffair and he resolved to 
follow Manohar ā. The ṛṣi reassured Sudhana con-
cerning his future happiness and proceeded to 
pass on Manohar ā’s instructions. He told of the 
mountains, the fabulous animals and ogres with 
terrifying weapons and appearance, of the many 
strange rivers Sudhana would need to cross. The 
last two would be a river of snakes—the crossing 
of which would require a ‘charm against snakes’—
and a river of reeds, requiring ‘the magic of sharp 
weapons struck together’. A fter crossing the last 
river, he would come to a land ‘rich in bushes’ where 
he would have to overcome the 500 yakṣas who 
dwelt there. There too he would find the capital of 
the kinnar ī king (Ralston 1906 : 70).After gathering the recommended potions, 
remedies, and spells, Sudhana set out. In turn, he 
met and overcame all the obstacles as forewarned 
by the ṛṣi and eventually arrived at the kinnar ī 
kingdom ruled by King Druma. As he stood gazing 
at the beautiful city, a number of kinnar ī came to 
draw water. He asked them the purpose of all the 
water being drawn and was told that the princess 
Manohar ā had recently returned, having escaped 
from mortal capture, and that now the smell of 
humanity had to be washed o ff her. As he conversed 
with them, Sudhana dropped Manohar ā’s ring into 
one of the jugs and instructed that it be the first 
to be poured.
As soon as she saw the ring, Manohar ā realized 
that Sudhana had indeed come. She went to her 
father and a fter soothing his anger towards the 
youth, presented Sudhana in ‘divine array’. Even 
though King Druma was much impressed by 
Sudhana and greatly desired him as son-in-law, he 
nevertheless set the youth several tasks to perform. 
After performing truly amazing feats with sword 
and arrow, Sudhana was set one more task by the 
king: he was required to pick Manohar ā out from 
amid one thousand other beautiful kinnar ī exactly 
like her. However, drawing on her love for him, 
Sudhana ordered that the real Manohar ā present 
herself, with which command she readily complied.
King Druma could find no anger for this and 
instead summoned his people to pay great honour 
to Sudhana. The king happily agreed to the union 
of his beautiful daughter with Sudhana, although 
with a warning that he should never desert her. The 
happy couple sojourned in the kinnar ī kingdom 
for some time, but Sudhana became increasingly 
distressed by the prolonged separation from his 
own parents and so begged leave of the king in 
order to take Manohar ā back to the world of men. 
There was great rejoicing in H āstinapura upon 
their arrival and the entry of the royal couple was 
a triumphant a ffair.
After receiving gi fts of jewels from Sudhana and 
an account of his journey to the city of the kinnar ī, 
King Dhana invested his son as king. For his part, 
Sudhana realized that his good fortune in acquiring 
Manohar ā and the might of kingly power was the 
result of ‘earlier deeds’ and resolved to spend his 
reign bestowing gi fts and practising good works.
obrien mockup 1.indd   283 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 298] ---
284 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
the tale  of sudhana  on candi  jago
Following the description of each scene, an inter-
pretation will be o ffered based for the most part, 
as noted earlier, on the Schiefner/Ralston transla-
tion of the avad āna as contained in the Kah-gyur . 
However, in a few instances of variance between 
the reliefs and the avad āna, I will also draw upon 
the jātaka  version as related in the Mah āvastu for 
possible explanation and, in one interesting case, 
the Khotanese redaction.24 Given the di fficulties 
posed by damage and loss and resulting uncer-
tainties, each interpretation will be followed by an 
analysis of the relationship between the relevant 
scene and those appearing in the narrative bands 
immediately above and below the beugel , bearing 
in mind the earlier mentioned system of ‘parallel 
themes’ operative on Jago which may well assist 
in any discussion of the subject matter of a scene. 
As an appendix to this work, I have also included 
a tabulated list of the scenes with an abbreviated 
summary of each.
southern  face
Scene 1
Reading from le ft to right, the first scene of the 
Sudhana ta le (Fig. 1.1b) is separated from the last 
scene of the previous tale ( Kuñjarakar ṇa) by a 
triangular floral motif followed by what appears 
to be a banana palm. Beside the palm, stands a 
corpulent male figure dressed in royal garb. His 
damaged face looks towards the remainder of this 
24. It should be noted that while the Mah āvastuj ātaka 
does occasionally provide quite a plausible interpretation for 
some puzzling scenes, it does not feature the amoghap āśa 
at all— the hunter trapped Manoh āra by means of a spell. long scene, which is a highly ordered landscape, 
perhaps a formal garden or a park. The sequence 
of two di fferent tree types with constructed sur-
rounds is repeated three times in the remaining 
stonework. No other figures are visible and it is 
unknown how far this scene may have extended—
the rest of the panel along to the southeast corner 
of the shrine ( 2.7 metres) is missing, as is a shorter 
distance around the corner on the eastern face.
Interpretation: In terms of the avad āna tale, this 
scene likely depicts the king of South Pañc āla as he 
goes out to inspect his domains and finds them de -
serted. Perhaps in scenes on the now-missing section, 
we might have seen him discussing the desertion of 
his people with his ministers, promising to reform 
if they will return. We might have also seen some 
reference to the rain-bringing nāga who resided 
in North Pañc āla and to the snake charmer being 
dispatched to snare the nāga and bring it to South 
Pañc āla. While we can only speculate on missing 
episodes, could it be mere coincidence that the start 
of the tale showing the ruler and kingdom of South 
Pañc āla is depicted on Jago’s southern face?
Parallel themes: Parallels for this scene 
are provided on the temple by stories above 
(Pārthayajña , second terrace), and below ( Aji 
Dharma , first terrace). Whereas at this point on 
the beugel the bad king of South Pañc āla finds 
himself ruler of a kingdom bere ft of its populace, 
Yudhi ṣṭhira (directly above), through a foolish 
act, has a kingdom of people of which he is no 
longer ruler. Directly below on the first terrace, 
Aji Dharma is similarly kingdomless through self-
imposed exile.25 
25. According to the well-known episode from the Tantri 
tales, King Aji Dharma has le ft his kingdom to wander in Fig. 12.1b: Th e King of South Pañc āla goes out to inspect his domain. (Brandes ph. 102/103)
obrien mockup 1.indd   284 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 299] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 285
abject remorse for having allowed his wife (Satyavat ī) to 
commit suicide. Added to this, the kingdom is now without 
its most valuable asset, the queen. At this point in the Aji 
Dharma story, Jago’s episodes begin to deviate from other 
known versions. Aji Dharma, unable to fill the void in his 
life with any other woman, abandons his kingdom but then 
encounters Ambaravat ī, the daughter of an ascetic. She is 
the image of Satyavat ī and Aji Dharma perceives her to 
be the reincarnation of his lost love. However, her father 
is violently opposed to this match (Soetrisno 1985 : 1–19).southern  face
Scene 2
As can be seen better in Fig. 2a (detail), there are 
actually three figures in this early photo by Brandes. 
Only the lower limbs are visible on the figure at far 
left. Given that it is separated from the two figures 
shown by a small vegetal motif, it is conceivable 
that the first figure may have belonged to a prior 
scene that has now disappeared. The stance of the 
feet, however, indicates that it is faced in the same 
direction as the second fi gure.
Of the two main figures, one is certainly female; 
the other, male and somewhat paunchy. Though 
the upper portion of his head is missing, the lower 
half of the face seems rather gross and rākṣasa-
like. His adornments suggest a royal figure, a king. 
The headless female figure has her le ft hand on 
the shoulder of the male. Her right hand, at chest 
height, appears to be holding something small. The 
male’s right arm is outstretched, his hand behind 
her back or around her waist. His le ft hand seems 
to grasp his paunch. The couple appear to be in 
‘inhabited’ space—perhaps a palace. To the right 
of the ‘king’ there is a highly stylized tree in a 
kuru ṅan,26 followed by a wall and gateway.
26. A kuru ṅan appears to be a constructed, formal 
surround for a tree. In his discussion of the Kuñjarakar ṇa 
reliefs of Candi Jago, Bernet Kempers remarks that this 
particular tree motif (of which there seems to be at least 
two di fferent types) ‘indicates that the action takes 
place in heaven [while] the last one in a series of such 
trees at the same time marks the end of the scene in 
Fig. 12.2: King and queen of North P āñcala (?). (Brandes ph. 101/100)  
Fig. 12.2a: Detail. (Brandes ph. 101) 
obrien mockup 1.indd   285 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 300] ---
286 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Interpretation: Through steadfast performance 
of appropriate rites, the king and queen of North 
Pañc āla have finally been blessed with a child who 
will be a ‘Bodhisat of the Bhadrakalpa’. When the 
queen tells the king that she knows she is expect-
ing a son, ‘the king joyfully drew himself up, and 
stretched out his right arm and said, “I shall behold 
the son whom I have long been desiring”.... Thus 
did he joyfully exclaim’ (Ralston 1906 : 51). Apart 
from the fact that in the Jago scene a kingly figure 
plainly extends his right arm to a female figure, 
perhaps we can also gauge a little of his ‘joy’ in 
the posture of his le ft hand as he clasps his paunch. 
In further explanation of this scene, the story 
goes on to relate that throughout the queen’s preg-
nancy the king pampered her with special measures 
to preserve her comfort in times of heat and cold 
and she was given special foods, etc. ‘With strings 
of pearls of various kinds and with other ornaments 
he adorned the body of his wife’ (Ralston 1906 : 
51–52). That we should find a queen bejewelled so on 
Jago would not be unique, but could it be suggested 
that the small item held by her is perhaps a ring or 
a jewel with which the king has demonstrated his 
pleasure at her condition?
Parallel themes: The pregnancy aspect is well 
suited for placement on the eastern face of the 
shrine, where we find episodes on all levels very 
much concerned with aspects of femininity and 
feminine behaviour. These will become obvious as 
the scenes unfold. Here, in the Sudhana tale, the 
emphasis that is placed on producing a son under-
lines one of the most important roles of a queen.
Scene 3
Three figures occupy the scene in Fig. 12.3, which 
is separated from the next by a bountiful tree 
heaven’ (as cited in A. Teeuw and S. Robson 1981: 208). 
Notably on Jago, this particular type of tree with kuru ṅan 
motif seems only to appear on the first terrace and the 
beugel . It does not seem to have been used at all on the 
second and third terraces or the cella  where other ‘heavenly’ 
locales might have prompted its use. On the other hand, 
if the monument was refurbished and/or modi fied in the 
14th century—which could well explain the odd nature of 
the beugel in the overall design—it may also account for 
the inclusion of variations from those employed in the 13th 
century when the temple was originally commissioned.(see Fig. 12.3a). The absence of stones on the top row 
causes some problems with the first figure, but from 
his corpulence and dress, it could be the same royal 
figure from the previous scene. The second figure is 
obviously female but, if it is the same woman from 
the previous scene, then she seems older.
These two figures face a young male figure seated 
in a respectful pose before them. This latter figure 
has sustained some damage to the face, but we can 
see that his hair is wavy, his eyebrows meet over 
his nose, and his dress seems to consist of a kain , 
rolled and tied at the waist. There are a number of 
curling motifs around the seated figure.27 The three 
figures in this scene are separated from the next 
scene by a tree with luxuriant foliage—its lower 
branches, laden with fruit, dip to the ground (see 
detail, Fig. 12.3a). This particular tree motif is the 
only one of its kind on Jago.
27. On Jago, ‘curling flame motifs’ near a character would 
seem to most o ften indicate divine or magical status.
Fig. 12.3: Th e king and queen of North Pañc āla with 
their son, Sudhana (?). (Brandes ph. 100/99)
obrien mockup 1.indd   286 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 301] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 287
Interpretation: Scene 3 presumably depicts the 
king and queen of North Pañc āla some years later. 
Although the facial features, like the others in this 
scene, are badly damaged, the smaller figure who sits 
in attitude of obeisance would be none other than 
Sudhana as a youth. The submissive nature of this 
character is constant throughout the series, and togeth -
er with speci fic features and dress, makes it consistently 
recognizable as being one and the same. The avadāna 
relates that among other qualities, he was ‘adroit in 
his manners’. Here, the posture suggests compliancy 
towards his parents. The avadāna describes Sudhana 
as having ‘a head like a canopy, long arms, a brow of 
great width, interlacing eyebrows, a high-arched nose, 
etc.’ and while these features are damaged here, they 
can easily be recognized in later illustrations such as 
Figs. 12.6 and 12.11a. From the avad āna we also learn 
that when Sudhana came of age and was skilled in the 
arts and qualities of a future king, the king bestowed 
three palaces upon the youth, with a wife in each.Returning to Fig. 12.3 (main illustration), it 
might be suggested that the le ft hand of the female 
figure seems to be holding something small, deli-
cately poised between thumb and fore finger. Some -
thing this small could conceivably be a ring or a 
gem—might it have some connection with the gi ft 
of the previous scene? Or is this the presentation of 
the palaces? In any event it would seem to be the 
royal female who dominates the scene, with the 
king standing behind her.
As regards the fruiting tree, its shape is distinctly 
anthropomorphic, clearly suggesting feminine 
form and grace—the four upper limbs rather like 
a four-armed goddess. Its fluid, curving form and 
gracefully weeping branches, heavy with fruit, may 
well be signifying the abundance of the capital of 
North P āñcala, Hā stinapura. In kakavin  literature, 
the motif of a tree whose laden branches hang down 
to the ground is frequently employed to indicate 
fertility and abundance in a landscape. Fertility and 
abundance are also primary attributes of a queen. 
The tree also serves here as a most unique scene 
divider—a function to which we will return shortly. 
Although thus far the jātaka  version from 
the Mah āvastu has contributed little to the 
interpretation of the Jago scenes, at this point the 
jātaka  does relate that having come of age, Sudhanu 
(= Sudhana) was invested as ruler on the retirement 
of his father. It also mentions among the many 
virtues of Sudhanu, that he was ‘accomplished and 
dutiful to his mother and father’ (Jones 1952 : 92).
Scene 4
The stance of the larger figure—right hand on 
hip, le ft hand raised with first and middle fingers 
extended—suggests an attitude of directive. The 
young male looks towards the larger figure with 
head slightly bowed (Fig. 12.4a, detail). His right 
hand is raised and held flat, palm against his le ft 
breast and upper forearm, the fingers spread into 
two groups. This interesting posture suggests al-
legiance or obedience to a command with the feet 
turned away from the regal fi gure, as if leaving to 
carry out an order. Again there is damage to the face, 
but enough is le ft of the dress to suggest that it is 
the same young figure from the earlier scene. There 
will be seen to be a consistency in the dress—par-
Fig. 12.3a: Detail of anthropomorphic tree. (Brandes 
ph. 99 )
obrien mockup 1.indd   287 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 302] ---
288 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
ticularly in the tying of the kain —that like the facial  
features, will also carry through ensuing scenes.
The figures are framed on the leading (le ft) side by 
the aforementioned anthropomorphic tree—which 
would appear by its ‘stance’ to be ‘concerned’ with 
the current scene rather than the former—and on 
the far (right) side by vegetal and rock motifs. There 
are a number of curling flame motifs near the young 
male (at his far side) with no such motifs apparent 
near the thickset figure; indeed, it is the anthropo -
morphic tree which seems to attend him. A circular 
type of motif separates the two figures at head level; 
whether it has some special meaning is di fficult to 
say as similar motifs appear throughout the series.
In the lower right-hand corner of the same scene, 
there is a series of water motifs in which the head 
of some sort of horned aquatic creature appears 
to emerge from the waves. Above this creature 
there are motifs that seem to represent rocks and 
vegetation. These also continue into the next scene. 
What ties the aquatic creature to the current scene 
and not the following one is the fact that it faces 
back towards the two figures previously described.28
Interpretation: Precisely what is being acted out 
in this scene is somewhat di fficult to establish from 
28. In his description of this particular relief, Brandes 
(1904 : 55) refers to the creature as een dier  (‘an animal’) 
with no further comment.
Fig. 12.4: A corpulent, bejewelled r ākṣasa/yakṣa figure addresses the young male. (Brandes ph. 99/98)
Fig. 12.4a: Detail. (Photo: author)
obrien mockup 1.indd   288 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 303] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 289
the avad āna. The youthful figure shares many 
similarities with the earlier figure proposed as 
Sudhana, although there may be a suggestion here 
of Sudhana being slightly older. Given the similar -
ity with the rotund figure in Figs. 12.2 and 12.2a, it 
could be suggested that the corpulent figure here 
is the king of North Pañc āla (Su  dhana’s father); 
however, this presents di fficulties later in Scene 9 
where the royal figure can also be taken contextu -
ally to be King Dhana but where his appearance 
is much slimmer.
An alternative explanation, also to be found 
in the avad āna, is that when the nāga, Janmaci-
tra, learned of the plot to send a snake charmer to 
capture him, he assumed the form of a man and 
went to the hunter, Phalaka, who lived nearby in 
order to elicit his help. A plan was devised to kill 
the snake charmer by the lake.
Connected to the same idea is the possibility 
that it is the king of South Pañc āla commissioning 
the snake charmer to abduct the nāga, who gains 
warning by apparently overhearing (?) them. Is the 
horned creature performing the role of listening 
to the previous two fi gures?
This is surely a scene where the venue of Jan-
macitra is being introduced, but as yet we have no 
certainty as to the actors.
Parallel themes: Unfortunately, in this in -
stance, there seems little help to be gleaned 
from parallel scenes either above or below. In the 
Pārthayajña  scene immediately above, Arjuna 
encounters two pairs of courting couples in the 
forest, which is followed by the first views of 
Mah āyanī’s hermitage. Since the incident of the 
courting couples is not related in the Pārthaya -
jña kakavin , we are left to guess its content and meaning on the temple.29 In the Aji Dharma  story 
on the tier below, there is the ‘demonic’ form of 
Ambaravat ī’s father as he faces the fatal arrow from 
Aji Dharma’s bow,30 and to a certain extent, this 
echoes the action against the snake charmer in the 
Sudhana tale, although not shown in the reliefs.
Scene 5
This scene (Fig. 12.5) is the longest and most prom-
inent on the eastern face of the beugel . On the le ft 
half are two figures in similar crouching positions 
among rock motifs at the edge of an expanse of 
water motifs (continued out of range of this pho-
tograph). Although both figures have sustained 
considerable damage to their faces, the one on the 
right appears to have some form of headdress with 
jewellery comparable to the ‘royal’ figure in the 
previous scene and probably again in Scene 6 (Fig. 
12.6). The attributes of the le ft-hand figure are too 
marred to be recognizable but his kain  may also 
be similar to that of the youth in Fig. 12.4a. The 
head of the larger figure appears to be turned back 
towards his slender companion as if the two are in 
conversation.31 
29. Arjuna has just undertaken a quest to regain the 
kingdom for his brother, Yudhi ṣṭhira. In order to prepare 
himself physically and mentally as well as gain the favour 
of the gods, he has taken an oath of penance and chastity. 
On the eastern wall the sight of courting couples is his first 
temptation, but not his last. On the far end of the same 
face he will brush aside the attempted seduction by a nun. 
30. For the Pārthayajña  scene, see Brandes ph. 149/148 
and for the Aji Dharma  scene, see Brandes ph. 43 /42.
31. Interestingly, the crouching posture of these two 
figures is very like that of figures elsewhere on Jago depicted 
Fig. 12.5: At the lake of Janmacitra. (Brandes phs. 98 and 97)
obrien mockup 1.indd   289 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 304] ---
290 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
In the centre of the water motifs there is a large 
conical-shape ‘pile’ of rock motifs. At the centre of 
its base, one of the rock motifs has the appearance 
of an arched cavern with a tiny figure of indeter-
minate form inside. This rocky ‘cavern’ marks 
near enough the centre of the eastern face of the 
beugel .32
To the right of the ‘cavern’ is a small boat con-
taining a single figure. Seen in detail (Fig. 12.5a), 
the head in pro file is strangely shaped with quite 
definitely bulging eye(s). Part of the odd shape of 
the head could be due to some form of head cover-
ing. The hands are held, seemingly clasped together. 
Wave motifs surround the cra ft, both above and 
below. This scene is separated by vegetation and 
rock motifs from the next scene.
Interpretation : According to the story, Janma-
citra ‘then took up his abode in a lonely spot’ and 
the hunter took up a position ‘near that place’. In 
the Jago scene, neither of the two crouching figures 
appears to be armed with a bow and arrow as related 
in the avad āna. The similarity between these two 
figures and those of the preceding scene and follow -
ing scene has already been noted. Brandes ( 1904 : 55) 
suggested that the larger figure with the crown 
and assorted jewellery is a ‘ reuzenkoning ’ (‘rākṣasa 
king’), with teeth showing as if laughing.33 The 
smaller figure he described as a servant ‘ boeta ’—a 
being of a lower class of demon ( bhūta). 
If the identities of the two crouching figures are 
ambiguous, so too is the figure in the boat. Con-
textually, it is the nāga. The water motifs do seem 
disturbed in nature as described in the tale.34 Of 
as flying (se e, e.g., Fi g. 12.14, Scene 14); see also Brandes 
phs. 40 and 187. Notably, however, the flying figures are 
accompanied by a fluttering ribbon-like motif, distinctly 
different to the rock motifs of the current scene.
32. In the Pārthayajña above, the centre of the main 
panel is marked by a thirteen-storey pagoda-like ( meru ) 
structure in Mah āyānī’s hermitage (Brandes ph. 148/147). 
Below, on the first terrace ( Aji Dharma ), it is the liberated 
‘good’ character of the demon ascetic that marks the centre 
(Brandes ph. 42 /41).
33. I thought the figure a little too damaged, at least in 
the photo, to be sure about the ‘laughing’.
34. ‘...when, as he is performing a ceremony of this kind, 
the waters of the lake begin to seethe and over flow, and 
I come forth from them’: see the summary of the tale as 
given above.interest, Brandes ( 1904 : 55) describes the boat as 
‘een naga-vormig schuitje, met een beeldje er in ’ (‘a 
small, nāga-shaped boat with a tiny figure in it’). 
However, if it is the nāga, Janmacitra, where is the 
royal regalia of the previous scenes? Is it then the 
hunter on his way to the abode of the nāga’s parents 
where he is to be rewarded? Another possibility, 
albeit remote, is that in some form of localized ad-
aptation, the figure involved in this whole episode 
is not a hunter but Sudhana himself.35  
35. Andrea A cri (personal communicaton) has raised the 
possibility that the head of the figure in the boat could be 
bird-like and that with its beak-like nose and bulging eye 
it may well represent a garu ḍa figure. As the archenemy 
of snakes, its aid is frequently invoked in spells aimed at 
the healing of snakebite, etc. While none of the versions 
of the tale in my possession give any detail of mantras or 
spells used by the snake charmer, this does not preclude the 
possibility that a Javanese version may well have featured 
a garu ḍa spell, given the popularity of the bird in Javanese 
and Balinese art and literature.
Fig. 12.5a: Detail. (Photo: author)
obrien mockup 1.indd   290 12/7/16   10:02 AM

--- [Page 305] ---
As with the previous scene, the venue can be 
resolved according to the story, but not the par-
ticipants.  
The notable absence in this episode in the reliefs 
is the slaying of the snake charmer; however, the 
parallel scene directly below on the first terrace 
may assist. 
Parallel themes: At this point, mid-centre of 
Jago’s eastern face, the scenes on the other levels 
above and below those of the Sudhana tale become 
quite important (see Fig. 12.5b). For example, in the 
tale on the first terrace below, Aji Dharma (out of 
sight to the le ft) has killed the demon ascetic with 
his bow and arrow, along with the demon’s two 
accomplices. The three lie dead, directly below the 
lake scene on the beugel.
As noted, at this juncture in the Sudhana 
avad āna, the hunter kills the snake charmer al-
though neither of the crouching figures appears 
to be armed. If it is Sudhana, a Bodhisattva, who 
is in league with Janmacitra or has been charged with guarding the nāga, it would not be in order 
for him to be involved in a killing, and perhaps 
this situation has been resolved here by suggested 
reference to the story below where a ‘killing’ actu-
ally has taken place.
If we accept that the lake and cavern scene is 
the domain of Janmacitra into which Sudhana has, 
or is about to enter, then it is closely paralleled 
above on the second terrace where, in a scene to 
the right of Mah āyanī’s hermitage, we see Arjuna 
being ushered into Mah āyanī’s bale.36
Scene 6
The first thing to be noted about this scene (Fig. 12.6) 
is that it is clearly not taking place within the 
boundaries of formalized space (ie., no gates or 
structures). ‘Rocks’ and a tree separate the two 
figures beside the lake in the previous scene, with 
similar motifs forming a divide between this and 
the ensuing scene. Fig 12.6a shows the two figures 
in detail. The one to the le ft is paunchy and regally 
garbed. His le ft hand (much less damaged and 
more obvious in Fig. 12.6) is extended towards the 
second figure—whether it is just a raised finger or 
whether the hand once held something is unclear. 
The second figure is that of a young male seated on 
the ground in a very respectful posture, hands held 
in obeisance. When examining this relief in situ, 
I noted that these hands, although damaged, may 
also once have held something which protruded 
from underneath. In Brandes ph. 95 there is the 
suggestion of perhaps a chain or string of beads 
running over the outside of the hand—but it is 
difficult to be certain. 
It was earlier suggested that the headgear or 
crown on the larger of these two figures might 
be similar to that worn by a similar figure in Fig. 
12.5, while the seated figure is very similar to the 
young male in an identical pose in Fig. 12.3 and 
very likely the same as in Fig. 12.4. Each of these 
representations of the youth is accompanied by 
a curling motif. In Fig. 12.5 a curling motif is set 
36. While there is considerable di fficulty with the 
Janmacitra scene on Jago, it is perhaps worth noting that 
Krom ( 1927: 251) also had similar problems with the same 
episode as depicted on Borobudur.
Fig. 12.5b: Section of beugel, second and third terraces 
on eastern face. (Photo: author)The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 291
obrien mockup 2.indd   291 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 306] ---
292 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
between the two crouching figures, a further indi-
cation that it is the same youth as in Figs. 12.3 and 
12.4. As for the curling motifs present in the current 
scene, although ubiquitous in the scenes pertaining to this tale on Jago—particularly those involving 
Sudhana—here, both figures are attended by them.
Interpretation: We know from the source tale 
that the hunter was rewarded by the nāgas with theFig. 12 .6: Sudhana receives the amogha- chain? (Brandes ph. 96 )
Fig. 12.6a: Detail. (Photo: author)
obrien mockup 2.indd   292 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 307] ---
293 The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago
 
amoghapāś a and we might surmise that the Jago 
scene portrays the bestowing of the gi ft—perhaps 
with variant characters. It is interesting that while 
the avad āna does not appear to ascribe royal status 
to Janmacitra or his parents, when Krom wrote of 
the same episode on the Borobudur version using the Divy āvadāna as the source tale, he identi fied 
the parents of Janmacitra as the nāga king and 
queen. Looking at the elaborate headgear on the 
‘royal’ figure in this scene, we can see serpent-like 
scrolls at the back of it.37 This scene may then be 
rendering a grateful nāga ‘king’ as he presents the 
amogha -chain to the saviour of his son—but here 
on Jago the recipient appears to be Sudhana. It may 
well be that in these episodes on Jago, the youthful 
figure has been Sudhana all along.
Parallel themes: If it is counsel that Sudhana is 
receiving (along with the amogha -chain?) from the 
nāga king, then it is paralleled above in the Pār-
thayajña  reliefs where Arjuna is receiving counsel 
from Mah āyanī on the true nature of existence 
and the evil power of rajas and tamas , which must 
be overcome (Zoetmulder 1974: 369). Arjuna will 
shortly have cause to put this advice to good use. 
As for the amogha -chain on the beugel , it came to 
be used in the capture of Manohar ā.
37. Brandes ( 1904 : 55) describes the figure as a ‘ boeta-
vorst (?) of titan, met mako ṭa (kroon) en wild naar achten 
krullende lokken ’ (‘a demon king (?) or giant, with crown 
and unruly hair curling at the back’).Scene 7
The lone figure (ci rcled) in this scene (Fig. 12.7) 
is once again that of the young male. He walks 
in the direction of the narr ative reliefs but looks 
back over his shoulder to the two figures in the 
previous scene. Clearly visible on this figure is the 
presence of a decorative item worn around the neck, 
extending out to the shoulders. While such an item 
being worn is not apparent in the previous scene, 
here, bead shapes on the chest and shoulder are 
quite clear. The youthful figure is separated from 
the ensuing scene to the right by a highly stylized 
tree motif (without kuru ṅan); notably, he is without 
the curling motif.
Interpretation: Here, a young male journeys on, 
alone. He looks back however, as if to the previous 
scene. Possibly this is a device to portray recollec-
tion (of received counsel). According to the story, 
on the day that Sudhana acquired Manohar ā, the 
kinnar ī princess, he had gone ‘forth to the chase’, 
and the next scene may actually depict the first 
meeting of the couple. As for the item around the 
figure’s neck, could this be the amoghap āśa itself?38
Regarding the tree motif, whether we under-
stand it as a ‘tree of heaven’ ( pārijāta) may be open 
to question but there is no doubt that its placement 
38. In later scenes, Sudhana will again be shown wearing 
certain items of signi ficance—perhaps an artistic device to 
convey that he has such items in his possession.
Fig. 12 .7: Sudhana (circled). (Photo: author; cf. Brandes phs. 96 , 95)
obrien mockup 2.indd   293 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 308] ---
294 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
here, in lieu of rock or vegetal motifs, clearly has 
meaning. Like the earlier fruit-laden tree, this is 
a special scene divider, marking either the entry 
or exit point of an extraordinary area. Perhaps it 
serves to mark the end of the special area through 
which Sudhana has passed: the kingdom of North 
Pañcāla and the cave-realm of the nāgas. This being 
the case, the fruiting tree may have marked the 
entry point and this in itself is signi ficant since we 
are told that the fertility and abundance of North 
Pañc āla were entirely due to the presence of the 
nāga Janmacitra who lived in its lake and who held 
the power over rain. 
Parallel themes: The parallel that occurs here 
with the Pārthayajña  scene above is both subtle 
and interesting. As noted, Sudhana is looking back 
as he journeys, as if in re flection on the advice or 
instruction he has just received. In a scene almost 
directly above, Arjuna is sitting alone in his bale, 
having retired for the night. The story relates that at 
this time Arjuna is beset by problems with his own 
desires but that Mah āyanī’s advice brings calm to 
his mind as he re flects on her words (Zoetmulder 
1974: 369). In this scene, Arjuna sits in his bale also 
facing the previous scene (Brandes ph. 146 ).
The stylized tree separating the journeying 
Sudhana from the next scene is also paralleled 
below on the first terrace where, according to the 
available version of the Aji Dharma , the Brahman 
accompanies the ‘liberated’ ascetic (shown as 
flying) to the realm of Vairocana (see Brandes ph. 40).
Scene 8 
This illustration includes part of the previous scene 
(Sudhana and parij āta tree) to demonstrate conti-
nuity in the image of the young man. The action 
in Scene 8 (Fig. 12.8) appe ars to be taking place 
outside a walled compound, the enclosing fence 
and gateway acting as a scene divider. There are 
four figures taking part. The young male (some 
damage) to the le ft faces another slender, somewhat 
regally dressed figure (slightly less damaged). The 
regal figure wears a headdress featuring a back-
ward curling diadem at the front and what might 
be a ‘lobster-claw’ at the back (see detail in Fig. 
12.8a). The vestiges of a bosom in the Brandes photo 
suggest that this figure is female. To the rear of this 
‘regal’ person stand two panakawan- like figures.
Fig. 12 .8: Sudhana meets Manohar ā (?). (Brandes phs. 95 , 94)
obrien mockup 2.indd   294 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 309] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 295
Fig. 12.8a: Sudhana and Manoharā. (Photo: author)
In the top register, a curling motif separates the 
two main figures, while at ‘ground level’ there is 
a floral motif.Interpretation : As related in the  avad āna, while 
Sudhana was out on a chase he encountered a 
hunter who had used the amoghap āśa given to him 
by the nāga to capture Manohar ā as she bathed at a 
lake. The hunter had then presented Manohar ā to 
Sudhana, who was immediately captivated by her 
charms—on which the story dwells at some length. 
That this scene shows the hunter is unlikely; the first 
figure to the le ft—in spite of its deterioration—is 
much closer to that of our Sudhana. The second 
figure is regally attired with jewellery and ornate 
headdress. Moreover, there is no sign of obeisance 
between these two: they clearly meet as equals. It 
would appear that because it is Sudhana himself 
who has acquired the amogha -chain (the beaded 
item is still apparent in this scene), it is he who has 
also met or captured Manohar ā. 
If the second figure is Manohar ā, then the head -
dress as described would not be out of keeping with 
her status as a princess.39 The eyes on this particular 
figure were very well defi ned and a comparison with 
those of the female in the next scene revealed them 
to be very similar in shape. We are also told that 
she surrendered her head jewel (the means of her 
ability to fly) to her captor. Perhaps it is her head 
jewel that she is here o ffering to Sudhana. 
As an alternative explanation, the Jago scene 
of Fig. 8a and the next scene (Fig. 12.9) might refer 
to an incident related in the Mah āvastu (jātaka ) 
version of the Sudhana tale. In the Mah āvastu  
episode, Prince Sudhanu (= Sudhana) is sent by 
his father to attend a grand sacri ficial rite being held 
in a neighbouring kingdom. Among the creatures in the sacri ficial enclosure is the beautiful kinnar ī, 
Manohar ā. When Sudhanu sees her, he falls in love 
with her and she with him. He persuades the king 
to abandon his planned sacri fice and hold a ‘blame -
less’ rite instead. Sudhanu then returns with his
39. Although having no discernible connection with Jago, 
the Museum of Antiquities in Mojokerto, East Java, has 
in its collection a largish statue of a kinnar ī displaying 
distinctly royal embell ishments (Fig. 8b). Her crown (a 
little damaged) appears to have been of the same style as 
that of the royal figure in the Jago scene, though perhaps 
not so exaggerated in height. Enquiries at the Museum 
revealed that the exact provenance of the statue was not 
known, other than that it was ‘from the area’ and the dating: 
‘around Majapahit’.
Fig. 12.8b: Statue of a ‘royal’ kinnar ī in Mojokerto Mu-
seum, East Java. (Photo: author)
obrien mockup 2.indd   295 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 310] ---
296 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
beautiful kinnar ī to his own kingdom, where he 
sets up court solely with her.
The introduction of panakawan (Fig. 12.8c) at 
this point in the story is intriguing. In a discus -
sion of the Aji Dharma reliefs on the first terrace 
of Jago, Hunter ( 2000 : 75, 81) notes the presence of 
two distinct sets of panakawan figures who seem to 
bear a strong resemblance to current-day ‘le ft’ and 
‘right’ panakawan  figures appearing in Javanese and 
Balinese wayang performances.  
The Sudhana-Manohar ā panakawan are obvi-
ously of a similar class of figures as those in the Aji 
Dharma  reliefs, but the now deteriorated state of the 
carvings makes it impossible to say that they are 
the same characters. They may well be attendants 
of Sudhana or even Manohar ā, in much the same 
way as Arjuna is attended by panakawan  on the 
second terrace. 
Parallel themes: The wall and gateway that act 
as a scene divider in this Sudhana relief are also 
employed below in the Aji Dharma  tale on the first 
terrace. Here, according to the available version, 
we find that the Brahman and ascetic have arrived 
outside Vairocana’s heaven, where ostensibly the 
ascetic will receive instruction and salvation.40 In 
40. Hunter ( 2000 : 87). The gateway in the Aji Dharma 
tale seems of a di fferent design to that depicted in the series 
above, being more of the split variety (Brandes ph. 40 ).the Pārthayajña  reliefs above, a nun is slipping away 
from a bale in which other nuns are still asleep, 
in order to go to Arjuna (Brandes ph. 144). The 
Pārthayajña  scene provides an interesting interplay 
with the Sudhana tale. Whereas the nun steals away 
voluntarily from her companions in an attempt 
to seduce Arjuna, who rejects her in accordance 
with his ascetic aspirations, Manohar ā has, by her 
capture, been isolated from her female companions 
against her will. In the avad āna, Manohar ā must 
reject the possible (and inappropriate) attentions 
of the hunter, but then—as we may presume from 
the next scene has also happened on Jago—she 
takes up with Sudhana, the equality of their regal 
status being closer and a union therefore more 
appropriate.41
Scene 9 
This scen e (Fig. 12.9) is qui te obviously set within a 
compound, bordered by a sloping wall with a gate 
at the front (le ft) and a similar wall without a gate 
to the rear (right). Five persons are involved in the 
scene: the first is the young male who stands in re-
spectful posture before another figure whose crown 
suggests that he is a king. There is some damage, 
but the second figure appears either to be holding 
something or to show his right hand in a gesture of 
instruction (with index finger raised), his le ft arm 
by his side (see detail, Fig. 12.9a).  Reclining in the 
bale is a young, voluptuous female. Her long hair 
falls down behind her shoulders as she leans back, 
head turned away as though in grief, not wanting 
to hear the words of the king (see Fig. 12.9b).42 The 
rear wall of the compound divides this scene from 
41. On the third terrace above ( Arjunaviv āha), the parallel 
panel has disappeared. However, the storyline up to this 
point in the reliefs suggests that we might have seen the 
celestial nymph Suprabh ā feigning to o ffer herself to 
the demon king Niv ātakavaca in order to lure him into 
revealing the secret of his great power. Indra, who had 
devised the plan himself, also ordered that Arjuna should 
accompany and protect the nymph.  On no account was 
she to su ffer violation at the hands of the demon.
42. A less likely alternative is that she is involved in the 
conversation of the two panakawan  figures seated outside the 
bale behind her. Whether these two panakawan  are the same 
as those of the previous scene is di fficult to say. It would seem 
logical, but they are just too damaged to be absolutely certain.
Fig. 12 .8c: Detail showing Panakawan fi gures. 
(Brandes ph. 94 )
obrien mockup 2.indd   296 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 311] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 297
Fig. 12.9: Sudhana’s palace quarters. (Brandes phs. 94, 93, 92)
Fig. 12.9a: Royal figure. (Detail of Brandes ph. 93)
Fig. 12.9b: Manohar ā. (Detail of Brandes ph. 93)
obrien mockup 2.indd   297 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 312] ---
298 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
the next, which shows a figure in a forest setting 
walking away from the compound.
Interpretation : The charms of Manohar ā as 
related in the avad āna are too vividly portrayed 
in this scene for us to consider any other identity 
for the female in the bale. Indeed, this female form 
is far more voluptuous than any other (extant) on 
the shrine. She is also quite clearly without the 
elaborate crown of the previous scene. If we contin -
ue to follow the avad āna, there seems little doubt 
that this scene depicts Sudhana’s father, King 
Dhana, counselling his son on his obligations to 
the kingdom (regarding the rebellion, etc.) and 
ordering him to put aside Manohar ā. However, 
this perhaps raises di fficulties when we look at the 
difference in features and build between this kingly 
‘father’ and the one given similar identi fication in 
Fig. 12 .2 (detail Fig. 12 .2a). 
Parallel themes: If the first alternative is true, 
that this scene portrays Sudhana’s father ordering 
the young prince to put aside Manohar ā in favour 
of royal duties, then there is a very clear parallel 
directly above in the Pārthayajña  reliefs where 
Arjuna is also lecturing the besotted nun on her 
duties. Directly below ( Aji Dharma ), the parallel 
may be more one of contrast. Vairocana is said to 
be counselling the ascetic father (accompanied by 
the Brahman). According to the version of the story 
at hand, the ṛṣi had wanted to take his daughter, 
Ambaravat ī, away from Aji Dharma. Vairocana tells 
him that Ambaravat ī is really the incarnation of 
Queen Satyavat ī, Aji Dharma’s late wife, and that 
the two should be allowed to live in peace.
Scene 10 
Outside the palace, a solitary person of slim build 
proceeds alone, looking ah ead (Fig. 12.10). Sep-
arated from the previous scene by a compound 
wall, the figure is surrounded by vegetal motifs 
and rock scrolls. Here ends the eastern panel of 
the beugel  band.
Interpretation: The figure has su ffered deteriora -
tion to the extent that it is di fficult to decide whether 
it is male or female. On the one hand it could be 
the young Sudhana figure who now journeys in 
a forest setting or, as seems more likely contex-
tually, it is Manohar ā fleeing the palace in fear of court conspiracies and plotting.43 The avad āna 
relates that although the young prince agreed to 
his father’s summons to duty, he quickly forgot 
when back in Manohar ā’s company and it was then 
necessary to summon him to the court. However, 
while the next scene (Fig. 12.11) seems to be taking 
place in a palace environment, some of the figures 
are ambiguous. The first two figures are priestly and, 
given the context of the story, their appearance at 
this point would not necessarily be unexpected.
Parallel themes: Above, in the last scene of the 
Pārthayajña reliefs on the eastern face, Arjuna is 
shown alone at his ablutions before leaving the 
convent to continue his journey (Brandes ph. 
143). Below, in the last scene of the Aji Dharma  
tale, the available account relates that Aji Dharma 
43. Looking ahead to Scene 18 (Fig. 12.18, detail), it will 
be seen that the Manohar ā figure holds the le ft arm in a 
very similar position.
Fig. 12.10: Manohar ā (or Sudhana?). (Detail of Brandes ph. 92)
obrien mockup 2.indd   298 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 313] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 299
and the panakawan , led by Ambaravat ī (former -
ly Satyavat ī), are entering a compound, there to 
live happily ever a fter. However, it could also be 
suggested that Ambaravat ī is about to enter the 
compound (perhaps a convent?) alone and that 
her gesture back towards Aji Dharma is one of 
farewell (Brandes ph. 37).
Summary of the Eastern Wall
The stories carved on Jago display in their upward 
progression a rise in the power and righteous be-
haviour of kings that increasingly will depend on 
the principles of esoteric practices. With attainment 
of the right queen being an essential attribute of 
ideal kingship, the activities of women as leading 
players in the lives of kings, kings-to-be, and would-
be kings are clearly evident on the eastern face of 
the temple as a whole. For example, at the southern 
end of the eastern face of the third terrace that 
features the Arjunaviv āha, we see a scene totally 
devoted to the celestial nymphs in Indra’s heaven 
(Brandes ph. 184/183). Although the ensuing panels 
are missing, from the context of the kakavin  tale, 
we can surmise that they would have shown the 
nymph Suprabha bravely carrying out her danger-
ous mission against the demon king Niv ātakavaca 
on behalf of Indra, King of the Gods; while at the 
same time gently rebu ffing her protector and com-
panion, Prince Arjuna, whose amorous advances 
might well have distracted her from her task. Had 
she not been successful, heaven and earth would 
surely have been destroyed by the demon. 
Next, in the Pārthayajña on the second terrace, 
the eastern panels begin with a scene showing 
Arjuna in tears. Having le ft his distressed wife and 
mother, he thinks of how they must be missing 
him and of the sorrow he caused them. He then 
encounters courting couples. As noted earlier, the 
central panel (and remainder) of this terrace is ded -
icated to the nunnery run by the abbess Mah āyanī, 
with the final panel on this face devoted to the 
nuns themselves and their interaction with Arjuna, 
in particular the abbess who gives Arjuna wise 
counsel. The very last scene of this episode on the 
eastern wall shows Arjuna completing his ritual 
morning ablutions at the nunnery before departing 
to continue his quest (Brandes phs. 152 –143). As we have already seen, the eastern panel of 
the beugel  deals with a number of issues, beginning 
with the birth of a son to the reigning queen and 
the fruit-laden tree, both of which are emblems of 
fecundity and intricately bound up with concepts 
of queenhood. There is the capture-acquisition of 
the kinnar ī princess, Manohar ā, whom Sudhana 
takes as bride and future queen, with the last scene 
on the eastern wall showing either Sudhana as he 
leaves his bride, setting out from the palace to ful fil 
his father’s quest, or, as seems more likely, Mano-
harā leaving Sudhana’s palace. Ostensibly, a similar 
struggle is going on in the first terrace ( Aji Dharma ) 
below. It has been suggested that Aji Dharma also 
struggles for the woman he desires as queen and, 
indeed, in the last scene on the eastern face, she 
leads the group into its fi nale. 
northern  face
Scene 11
Marred by the loss of the top row of stones, the 
first scen e (Fig. 12.11) is long and set in a com -
pound—whether it is a palace or hermitage is 
difficult to say. There are a num ber of bale—at 
least three—one of which is enclosed and has a 
central staircase. A fourth structure, second from 
left, with the suggestion of a Meru -roof, may be 
an offering place or, given perspective, a Candi 
set further away. Several water pots and plants are 
neatly arranged. Six figures occupy this scene: two 
are at the front of the open bale; they face a young 
male figure seated on the ground. The first figure 
is clearly priestly, his hair is clearly bound up and 
swathed into a large turban-like arrangement; he 
stands holding a (woven?) basket-like receptacle. 
The headdress of the other figure, however, is en -
tirely di fferent. It appears to have a crown-like 
diadem at the front and the swathing sits in an 
odd shape right at the back of the head, rather 
than on top. Just how one is to resolve this figure 
is problematic: on the one hand, the swathing 
suggests a member of the priestly class; on the 
other, his facial features are somewhat gross and 
his manner suggests a certain arrogance or what 
might be a regal pose—possibly a form of lalitāsa-
na, a posture of relaxation or serenity adopted 
obrien mockup 2.indd   299 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 314] ---
300 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
by royal figures and deities.44  He points (in either 
an accusatory  or directional gesture) towards the 
young male figure who is seated on the ground 
before him, holding his le ft hand over his ear, his 
right hand to his chin. In the background, between 
the accusatory ‘priest’ and the young male, is a 
small servant-like figure. Immediately behind the 
young male are two more figures, one of which 
leans against, or is being held by, the other. Since 
these last two are not separated from the previous 
figures by any formal dividing motif, they are con-
sidered here as perhaps belonging to the one scene 
or within the same venue. 
Interpretation: At first glance, this scene would 
seem relatively easy to deal with inasmuch as the 
major participants are mostly identi fiable from 
the avad āna. However, placing the action into 
the contextual flow of that version proves to be a 
little more di fficult. In one sense the scene follows 
the reference story in logical sequence, for we are 
told that it was through the insistence of the high 
priest that Sudhana was summoned to the court 
by his father. Actually, the story relates of two 
Brahmans: one attaches himself to Sudhana and 
the other becomes purohita to the king. While the 
two arrive at the court together, in reality they 
connive against each other as well as against the 
king and Sudhana. Are the two ‘priestly’ figures 
the Brahmans? Or, given that they have split up 
on arrival in North Pañc āla, is one a Brahman  
and the other the king—Sudhana’s father—in 
ascetic garb?
Sudhana’s posture at this point is intriguing: he 
is seated on the ground, lower than the two figures 
at the bale, yet his gesture is not entirely one of 
obeisance (Fig. 12.11a). His le ft hand is held to his ear, 
either covering or cupping it. A comparison with 
Fig. 12.11 reveals that a great deal of deterioration has 
occurred since Brandes’ photographs were taken. 
Sudhana’s le ft arm is now all but missing—only his 
hand remains at his ear. There is enough detail le ft 
in the face, however, to recognize a similarity with 
the seated character in Fig. 12.3. The mood of the 
44. In his description of these figures, Brandes o ffers no 
opinion as to who or what they might represent. The pose 
is similar to one displayed by a later figure in Scene 19 (see 
Fig. 12.19a). See also Brandes phs. 156 and 157 for renditions 
of viku /guru  figures in the Pā rthayajña  reliefs. 
Fig. 12.11: Introduction of the two Brahmans (?) into the tale. (Brandes phs. 91, 90, 89)
obrien mockup 2.indd   300 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 315] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 301
scene is certainly not one of tranquillity and one 
may guess that Sudhana is less than pleased with 
what he is hearing. But whether his consternation 
is due to what he hears from the pair in front of 
him or from those behind is not possible to say. 
The role of the tiny figure here is unclear but may 
be explained later in Scene 12 . 
The two figures behind the young male are also 
intriguing (see Fig. 12.11b). Lacking a formal di-
viding motif between these two groups, we might 
assume that all are in the same locale. Identi fication 
is further hampered by the row of missing stones 
at the top, resulting in details of the upright figure 
being lost. 
While appearing to be well dressed, the upright 
figure has bare arms and does not appear to be 
wearing arm jewellery; the second figure is not 
clear enough to be positively identi fied. The upright 
figure holds something (not identi fiable) in the 
right hand, while the le ft hand appears to be at or 
around the other’s throat. 
The leaning figure is slimmer, more like the 
build of Sudhana, although the hairstyle is clearly different, seeming rather more feminine. The de-
meanour of this figure is also curious—even though 
‘she’ appears to be held by the throat, there does 
not appear to be any aggression.45  On the contrary, 
there is almost a feeling of helpless submission. 
On the one hand, we know from the avad āna that 
before Sudhana le ft to do his father’s bidding, he 
gave Manohar ā’s head jewel to his sympathetic 
mother with the request that it should be returned 
to Manohar ā should the latter encounter danger. 
On the other hand, could this be Sudhana’s 
mother returning the head jewel to her daughter-
in-law? The Khotanese text has the following de-
45. On one of my visits to Jago, I took the opportunity 
of asking Rdn. Bambang Soetrisno (caretaker of Jago and 
author of the earlier mentioned Sejarah Percandian Daerah 
Malang ) for his opinion on these two figures. He pro ffered 
that these two figures were embracing each other ( memeluk ). 
However, in his publication he describes them as fighting 
(berkelahi ). 
Fig. 12 .11a: Detail of Brandes ph. 92 . (Photo: author)
Fig. 12 .11b: Detail of Brandes ph. 89.
obrien mockup 2.indd   301 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 316] ---
302 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
scription of Sudhana’s mother returning the head 
jewel to Manohar ā:
When the queen S ūryaprabh ā knew the cir-
cumstance she gave the brilliant jewel and like-
wise the robe to her. She so said to her, Please to 
accept this back from me, my daughter. Mano-
harā, prostrate on her breast, cried out aloud... 
(Bailey 1966 : 511)
The Mah āvastuj ātaka version relates that a fter 
learning that Manohar ā had obeyed his wishes 
and le ft the court, the king sent for Sudhana and 
embraced him and comforted him. However, while 
Sudhana as the leaning figure could be a possibility, 
this would seem to be precluded by the hairstyle 
and dress—the hair being more reminiscent of the 
female in Fig. 12 .9b.
Regarding the dwar fish figure that can be seen 
near the bale in Figs. 12.11 and 12.11a (detail), it is also 
related in the jātaka that, although under guard, 
Sudhana was able to leave the court secretly with 
one devoted companion, Vasantaka, to search for 
Manohar ā. A similar figure appears with Sudhana 
in the next scene (Scene 12, Fig. 12.12). Perhaps this 
figure is filling a similar role to Vasantaka of the 
jātaka —although he does not appear in the reliefs 
after Scene 12 . 
To summarize, the most likely scenario for the 
episode depicted is that Sudhana, having been 
summoned by the purohita (or king) to the court, 
hears that he must leave the court immediately to 
fight the rebels in the mountains. Perhaps he is also 
hearing that Manohar ā is to be, or has already been, 
ousted. This would logically explain the two figures 
immediately behind Sudhana: one may well be 
Manohar ā, the other the queen (Sudhana’s mother) 
who is returning Manohar ā’s head jewel so that the 
kinnar ī princess might escape danger in Sudhana’s 
absence. 
Parallel themes: As regards parallel themes with 
the stories on the other terraces, at this point the 
Pārthayajña  above shows Arjuna and the panaka-
wan leaving Mah āyanī’s hermitage (the gateway is 
visible) to begin what will turn out to be a most 
traumatic journey through the forest. There, iso -
lated deep in the woods during a storm, he will 
face the demons of his inner self (Brandes phs. 
142–38). Notably, on the beugel , Sudhana is also leaving to undertake an equally traumatic journey. 
On the first terrace, directly below the compound 
of the Sudhana scene, are the opening scenes of 
the Kuñjarakar ṇa tale. Kuñjarakar ṇa is in Vairo-
cana’s heaven, where the Omniscient One advises 
Kuñjarakar ṇa that he is to journey through hell to 
see its punishments for himself and thus strength-
en his resolve to seek enlightenment. In the next 
scene, Kuñjarakar ṇa is seeking directions from the 
demon of the crossroads as to the correct route to 
hell—a bene ficial journey but also a harrowing one 
(Brandes phs. 34–33). The parallel between the three 
terraces at this point is indeed striking.
Scene 12
Part of the previous scene has been incorporated 
into Fig. 12.12 to show the relationship between the 
figures and the separation provided by the vegetal 
motifs. Scene 12 clearly shows the three figures 
(framed in the centre) as being in a forest setting. 
Once again, damage to the head and upper torso of 
the thickset figure prevents easy recognition of its 
category or character, although the three-quarter 
length  coat with its long sleeves might suggest a 
member of the priestly class.46 The left hand of this 
figure is extended towards the young male—the 
fingertips holding something small—as if to pass 
it to the young male whose hands, in a reverential 
pose, make ready to receive it. Behind the thick-
set figure stands a dwar fish figure wearing a large 
swathed headpiece.
Interpretation: From the avad āna we know that 
Sudhana sought information regarding Manohar ā 
from his mother and from the ṛṣi who lived near 
the lake frequented by the kinnar ī maidens.47 It 
appears that Manohar ā had been forced to leave 
Sudhana’s palace by the intrigues of the purohi-
ta, which eventually put her life in danger. The
46. See for example, Brandes ph. 164, which shows Arjuna 
meeting with the sage, Dvaip āyana, at the I ṅgitāmṛtapada 
hermitage (second terrace, Pā rthayajña ).
47. Taking the context of the avad āna into account, it will 
be immediately obvious that—thus far at least—the episode 
of Sudhana’s military commitment in the mountains has 
not been recounted in the reliefs. This matter will be taken 
up again later in this work.
obrien mockup 2.indd   302 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 317] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 303
queen had then returned the head jewel with which   
Manohar ā was able to make good on her escape. 
Before returning to the kinnar ī kingdom, however, 
Manohar ā also gave her ring to a ṛṣi to keep for 
Sudhana, together with instructions for the hard 
and perilous journey to the land of the kinnar īs, 
should the prince wish to follow her. The thick-
set figure in this scene is certainly di fferent to the 
rotund figure of the previous scene. The garb is 
different: the arms are covered—indeed the upper 
garment has the appearance of a coat. The dress 
and setting would seem to suggest that this is the ṛṣi 
handing the ring  to Sudhana, together with direc-
tions for the journey to the kinnar ī kingdom. This 
is further borne out in the next scene ( 13), where 
a round object is clearly visible around Sudhana’s 
neck. Regarding the short figure to the le ft, his 
posture and body build are similar to the tiny figure 
present in Scene 11—to identify them as one and 
the same would seem reasonable. 
Parallel themes: There is an interesting parallel 
below, on the first terrace, where Kuñjarakar ṇa 
has met with the guardian of the crossroads who 
is also giving him directions as to which path to 
take to hell (Brandes ph. 34).  In the first of two 
wide scenes of the Pāthayajña  above, Arjuna and 
the panakawan are at the start of their journey 
in the forest, and in the second the group has 
encountered a rainstorm (Brandes phs. 141–139). 
Above the second terrace, the walls are no longer 
in situ. Scene 13
Surrounded still by scrolling rock and vegetal 
motifs, the y oung male (highlighted) walks on 
alone, looking back over his shoulder as if to the 
previous scene (Figs. 12 .13, 12.13a).
Interpretation: As noted earlier, this looking 
back to a previous s cene seems to infer the recalling 
of previously given counsel. Of importance is the 
object that the figure now wears at his neck (Fig. 
12.13a). It is a protruding, round flat ‘lump’ with a 
slight depression at its centre. In the context of the 
Fig. 12.12: Sudhana takes advice for his journey. (Brandes phs. 89, 88)
Fig. 12.13: Sudhana starts his journey. (Brandes ph. 88 )
obrien mockup 2.indd   303 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 318] ---
304 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
tale, I am fairly con fident in identifying this figure 
as Sudhana wearing Manohar ā’s ring tied around 
his neck as his means of carrying it—somewhat 
like an amulet. Thus we may assume that his quest 
for Manohar ā, fraught with danger so we are told, 
has begun.
Parallel themes: There are very clear parallels 
with this and ensuing scenes on all the other ter-
races. Kuñjarakar ṇa’s journey through hell has 
just begun on the first terrace below, as has Ar-
juna’s night of terror during his journey through 
the ‘enchanted’ forest on the second terrace, above 
(Pārthayajña ). Also, on the third terrace, the major 
battle of the Arjunaviv āha, with all its associated 
traumas, would have just been unfolding in a scene 
that once wholly occupied the major panel of the 
northern face of the third terrace.
Scene 14
This long scene (highlighted) is set in a direct ver-
tical line beneath the central panels of the upper terraces (Fig. 12.14). It includes two sets of water 
motifs separated by what appears to be the young 
male (face and head damaged, but identi fiable by 
the distinctive tie in his  kain), who is in a crouching 
position on one knee, supported and surrounded 
by a long, undulating ribbon motif ending in the 
familiar curling flame motif. The left bank of the 
first water motif shows a rocky shoreline (curling, 
knobby rock motifs) and some vegetation. The 
surface of the water in the first section is di ffer-
ent to that in the second, being more agitated in 
appearance. The ripple lines in the second body 
of water are smoother and more ordered. Though 
damaged, the head of the central figure is looking 
forward.  Of note, the ribbon-like motif is the same 
as that employed elsewhere on the shrine to indi-
cate flying.48 If one looks closely, an object is still 
present around the neck, but now what appears to 
be a jacket has also been added.
Interpretation: I have no doubt that this scene 
represents a portion of Sudhana’s journey to the 
kinnar ī kingdom in search of Manohar ā. The more 
disturbed nature of the water as suggested by the 
first group of motifs, together with the presence 
of tiny heads and the appearance of scales on the 
undulating shapes, indicates that this is the river 
of snakes which could only be passed, according to 
the story, by means of magical charms. The second 
water motif is made up of much flatter, longer 
ripple lines, suggesting that the water surface is 
smoother and more tranquil than the previous 
group. Whether this is the second river (‘of reeds’) 
or a device to indicate the working power of the 
charm on the same body of water, it is di fficult 
to say. The avad āna does not mention what form 
the snake charm took—perhaps the ring—but as noted above in the detail of this scene (Fig. 12.14a), 
Sudhana is also wearing what appears to be a tiny 
jacket. While the Sudhana tale says nothing about 
a jacket, the Old Javanese Arjunaviv āha relates that 
48. See for example in the Aji Dharma  reliefs ( first terrace) 
where figures of an ascetic and Brahman and their prox-
imity to the sun makes it certain they are flying (Brandes 
ph. 40). The same ribbon motif is also employed in the 
Arjunaviv āha reliefs to portray Arjuna and the two gan-
dharva  messengers flying to Indra’s heaven (Brandes ph. 
187), although they are also provided with swing motifs 
as aids to their fl ight.
Fig. 12 .13a: Detail. (Photo: author)
obrien mockup 2.indd   304 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 319] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 305
the gandharva s gave Arjuna a magic jacket and a 
pair of sandals, which were the means of his flight 
to Indra’s heaven.49 
49. See Zoetmulder ( 1974: 235). See also Brandes ph. 187: 
it is not possible to con firm in the photo whether Arjuna 
is wearing the items spoken of in the kakavin.Parallel themes: As mentioned, this scene of 
Sudhana’s encounter with the river of snakes is 
beautifully paralleled on the terraces above and 
below. On the first terrace (below), Kuñjarakar ṇa 
continues his sightseeing tour of hell past lines of 
suffering sinners tormented and goaded by their an -
imal-headed keepers. Above, on the second terrace, 
Arjuna is also continuing his journey through the 
‘enchanted forest’ where he is about to encounter tree 
monsters, demonic apparitions, copulating animals, 
etc., and on the third terrace, as noted, the whole 
of the major panel would have dealt with the battle 
waged by Arjuna and his army of gods against the 
demonic hordes led by Nivā takavaca.
Scenes 15 , 16, 17, and 18
This tableau consists of four tightly interrelated 
and overlapping scenes, which requires them to 
be condensed into one illustration.50 
Scene 15
The forest motifs at the extreme le ft end adjoin 
the water motifs of the previous scene and overall, 
form a surround for the single figure who now 
50. This convention of overlapping scenes is not an 
isolated case on Jago. Other notable examples are the 
tableau illustrating Arjuna’s sojourn in Mah āyanī’s 
hermitage on the second terrace in an episode from the 
Pārthayajña —and a parallel scene from the Kuñjarakar ṇa 
on the fi rst terrace below (see also Fig. 12 .18a). Fig. 12 .14: Sudhana crosses two (?) rivers. (Brandes phs. 87 , 86)
Fig. 12 .14a: Detail. (Photo: author)
obrien mockup 2.indd   305 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 320] ---
306 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
approaches the wall (without gateway) of an 
inhabited compound (Fig. 12.15). However, while 
at first glance the clothin g is certainly that of the 
young man from previous scenes, a close inspection 
of Fig. 12.15a suggests that he has become somewhat 
dishevelled, his hair is not quite as it was, and he has 
grown a moustache. It is also possible that his ribs 
are showing. Nowadays, the figure is so deteriorated 
that the facial features are no longer evident at all.
Interpretation: The avad āna relates that having 
crossed the last of the rivers, Sudhana reached a 
land ‘rich in bushes’. It further tells that he must 
meet and subdue 500 yakṣa who dwell there, but 
that this place was also the capital city of the kinnar ī 
king. We are not shown the yakṣa or the kinnar ī 
maidens who, in the context of the tale, came to draw 
water for Manohar ā’s bath from a pond near where 
Sudhana stood gazing at the city. Unlike Borobudur, 
which presents a beautiful depiction of this episode, 
Jago does not show Sudhana dropping Manohar ā’s 
ring into one of the water jugs. But neither is the 
ring to be seen now around Sudhana’s neck, nor is 
he wearing the jacket of the previous scene.Fig. 12 .15: Sudhana’s arrival at the court of King Druma. (Brandes phs. 86 , 85, 84)Fig. 12.15a: Sudhana approaches the kinnar ī palace. 
(Detail of Fig. 12 .15)
obrien mockup 2.indd   306 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 321] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 307
Parallel themes: If we were to look for a parallel 
among the other reliefs, then the most notable one 
would be on the first terrace directly below, where 
Kuñjarakar ṇa is coming to the end of his tour through 
hell and in an almost identical scene is also approach -
ing the wall of a compound (Brandes ph. 31).
Scene 16
The central setting in the tableau shown in Fig. 12.15 is a 
large bale in the foreground of a compound, separated 
from the previous scene by the wall. A smaller bale 
is situated in the background. To the le ft of the main 
bale stands a bejewelled female figure (see Fig. 12.15 and 
detail, Fig. 12.16), her long hair trailing down over her 
left shoulder. She appears to be proceeding towards 
the bale, but with her head turned as if looking back 
towards the approaching figure of the male described 
in the previous scene. Her le ft hand is upraised, clasping 
something small, while her right arm hangs by her side.51
51. Brandes ( 1904 : 54) also noted that she seemed to be 
holding something.Scene 17
There are two levels in the large bale (see Fig. 12.15 
and detail, Fig. 12.17). On the upper level, a figure 
sits as if listening to a second figure on the lower 
level, who is seated in the pose of obedience, hands 
joined in sәmbah. Due to corrosion, the sex of 
neither figure is immediately obvious. The hairstyle 
of the lower figure is certainly di fferent from that 
of the female fi gures shown at either side, outside 
the bale (see Figs. 12.15, 12.16, and 12.18), and in fact 
is closer to that of the upper figure. However, the 
upper-body jewellery on the lower figure is closer 
to that worn by the females outside.  Brandes ( 1904 : 
54) suggested that the lower figure is female, and we 
will return to this possibility later in the discussion.  
While the jewellery on the lower figure is reasonably 
well de fined, the upper figure is too damaged for 
any such adornments to be clear. 
Scene 18
On the far (right-hand) side of the bale (Fig. 12.15 
and also 12.18 detail) , a figure that is obviously 
female52 heads back towards the bale , again looking 
52. There is just enough detail le ft of the flowing hair 
over the shoulder to suggest that it is a similar, or the same, 
female fi gure as that in Fig. 12 .16. 
Fig. 12.16: Manohar ā receives the ring. (Detail of Fig. 12.15)
Fig. 12.17: Sudhana (or the queen?) with King Druma. 
(Detail of Fig. 12 .15) 
obrien mockup 2.indd   307 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 322] ---
308 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
back over her shoulder—this time in the opposite 
direction, towards the gate in the far wall. 
Interpretation of Scenes 15, 16, 17, and 18: We 
know from the source tale that Manohar ā received 
notice (in the form of her ring) that Sudhana had 
arrived, so it would seem in order to suggest that 
the figure in Scene 16 (and detail Fig. 12.16) is 
Manohar ā. Recognizing her ring and realizing that 
Sudhana has come for her a fter all, she looks back 
over her shoulder in the direction of his approach 
as she goes towards the court of her father. While 
the vestiges of the two figures in the bale do not give 
us much to go on, the raised position of one figure, 
while the lower sits respectfully, suggests that the 
former has supremacy and may be King Druma 
himself. As for the lower figure, I have already 
noted that the hair is di fferent from either of the 
two female figures outside the bale. The avad āna 
relates that Manohar ā did speak to her father about 
the arrival of Sudhana, but that it was necessary to 
both cool his anger and to dress Sudhana in more
Fig. 12.18: Manohar ā gazes out through the 
gateway. (Detail of Fig. 12.15)
Fig. 12.18a: First terrace ( Kuñjarakar ṇa), the bale of King P ūrṇavijaya directly below that of King Druma on the 
beugel (top left). (Brandes ph. 30)
obrien mockup 2.indd   308 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 323] ---
princely finery than what he had arrived in, before 
presenting him to her father. In such a context, it 
could be suggested that the figure on the lower level 
of the bale is Sudhana. However, there is another 
important and more plausible alternative for the 
two seated figures to be found in a source other 
than the avad āna, and we will return shortly to 
its consideration.  
 In the last scene of this tableau (Fig. 12.15), 
we see Manohar ā again, this time heading back 
towards the bale, but with her head turned, gazing 
somewhat anxiously or disconsolately out through 
a gate in a wall (see Fig. 12.18, detail) towards a 
group of people outside.
Parallel themes: To explain the duplication of 
Manohar ā in the same tableau, it will be helpful 
to look at the parallel scene directly below on the 
first terrace (Fig. 12.18a). The layout of Sudhana’s 
arrival at the court of King Druma is remarkably 
similar to Kuñjarakar ṇa’s arrival at the court of 
his friend, King P ūrṇavijaya. 
Kuñjarakar ṇa has come to warn the king that he 
is shortly to be punished in hell for his transgressions. 
Earlier, for his own good, Kuñjarakar ṇa had been 
sent by Buddha Vairocana on a journey to see the 
torments of hell so that the demon ascetic might 
avoid such punishments himself. So at the far le ft 
of Fig. 12.18a we see Kuñjarakar ṇa, having finished 
his journey, arriving at the compound—in much 
the same way as Sudhana arrives at the compound 
of King Druma a fter his traumatic journey. 
Compacted into the next scene is the bale where 
Queen Gandhavat ī reclines with King P ūrṇavijaya 
(prostrate, head on her lap), and Kuñjarakar ṇa is 
seated opposite them. Immediately then, outside 
the bale (to the right), we find Kuñjarakar ṇa again, 
with P ūrṇavijaya pleading at his knees for help. 
Beyond this pair, just inside the gate in the wall, we 
see the queen once again, this time heading back 
towards the bale but half-turned, gazing back over 
her shoulder through the gateway to the departing 
figures of P ūrṇavijaya, Kuñjarakar ṇa, and the 
royal entourage (out of view in this illustration; 
see Brandes ph. 30/29). Perhaps displaying a 
little more despondency, the posture of Queen 
Gandhavat ī in this last scene is nevertheless very 
much like that of Manohar ā almost directly above 
(connected by arrow in Fig. 18a), who is also gazing through the gate to a retinue of persons 
of similar numbers.
It is interesting that although the trauma of a 
dangerous journey is over—at least for the heroes of 
the first terrace and beugel —tension still abounds. It 
can clearly be seen in King P ūrṇavijaya’s panic and 
the grief of the queen at his departure. Although 
it is not indicated as clearly in the Sudhana relief, 
we know from the story that King Druma was at 
first angry enough to kill Sudhana, and we see that 
there is also a certain anxiety about Manohar ā’s 
posture as she looks towards and through the 
gate. Perhaps we can draw the conclusion from 
this (and as echoed in the Kuñjarakar ṇa panel)53 
that Sudhana has had to leave her again and that 
danger is still imminent for him. 
Scene 19
This next scene (Fig. 12.19), to which Manohar ā 
appears to direct her gaze (from the left  side through 
the gate), takes place outside the compound (no 
buildings evident). It is dominated by a regal figure 
who sits on a low bench in lalitāsana . His eyes are 
bulbous; his right hand rests on his hip, while the 
left hand holds a long, thin object, suggested by 
Brandes ( 1904 : 54) to be a lontar . He is attended by 
five other persons: one at his right and four at his 
left. The one at his right is described by Brandes as 
a servant who holds a box, probably for betel. At 
his le ft, the first figure is seated in the posture of 
obeisance, completely attentive to the regal figure. 
Next, are two seated figures in conversation with 
each other—they are wearing a peculiar kind of cap 
that is also worn by the attendants of Vairocana 
in the Kuñjarakar ṇa tale on the fi rst terrace.54 Due 
to a missing course of stones, the last male figure 
(standing) is headless. He stands, arms crossed over 
the chest; the tie of his kain is not unlike the one 
found in earlier depictions of Sudhana.
Interpretation:  The figure who sits in sәmbah  
(Fig. 12.19b), also described by Brandes as female, 
53. Above, on the second terrace, Arjuna is still in the 
forest of frightening, demonic apparitions. Above this 
again, on the central panel of the third terrace, Arjuna 
would have still been embroiled in the great battle against 
the demon army of Niv ātakavaca (panel missing).
54. See for example Brandes phs. 28 and 105 .The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 309
obrien mockup 3.indd   309 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 324] ---
310 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
bears great similarity to the figure seated on the 
lower level of the bale of the previous scene (Fig. 
12.17), in terms of the posture, hair, etc. On the 
other hand, from the context of the avad āna it 
could also be Sudhana, who has been restored to a 
state of re finement in order to be presented to King 
Druma.  Whether the royal figure with the ‘sceptre’ is the same as the one in Fig. 12.17 is uncertain, 
although the hairstyle and regal bearing suggest 
the possibility.55 
55. The iconographic features of the royal figure of Druma, 
king of the kinnara , seem to bear analogies to those of 
Vaiśravaṇa, king of the yakṣa; renditions of Vai śravaṇa in 
Asian art frequently depict him seated in lalitāsana , also 
with bulging eyes, holding a jewel-sceptre in one hand and 
a jewel-spitting mongoose or sometimes a stupa in the 
other. In the avad āna, Manohar ā related to Sudhana that 
he would come to a land rich in bushes where he would 
have to overcome the 500 yakṣa who dwelt there, and where 
he would find the capital of the king of the kinnara . It is 
possible that this panel re flects a con flation of ideas and 
iconographical features, resulting in the assimilation of 
Fig. 12.19: The kinnar ī queen pleads with King Druma, on behalf of Sudhana and Manoharā (?). (Brandes phs. 84, 83)
Fig. 12.19b: Detail. (Photo: author)Fig. 12.19a: Detail. (Brandes ph. 83)
obrien mockup 3.indd   310 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 325] ---
311 The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago
If these two figures are King Druma and 
Sudhana, then the simple interpretation of the 
entire group would be that the kinnar ī king is or-
ganizing the tests (archery and other martial skills) 
through which Sudhana will prove his suitability to 
be the husband of Manohar ā. To that end, perhaps 
it is a bow and/or arrow that the royal figure holds, 
and Sudhana is making ready to receive it. 
If however Brandes is right, i.e. the figure 
making obeisance in this scene and the previous 
one is female, then the avad āna is of no help since 
this female cannot be Manohar ā, whose depiction 
is entirely di fferent. This point is signi ficant and 
will be taken up again shortly.
Parallel themes:  While there is an important 
parallel for this scene in the Pārthayajña  reliefs 
directly above, it may serve us well to look at the 
content of the next (and last) remaining scenes in 
this story, returning later to draw what conclusions 
are then possible. 
Scene 20
Between Scenes 19 and 20, a length ( 0.56 metres) of 
stonework has been only partially carved, as can 
be seen at the le ft-hand end of Fig. 12.20b. Thus we 
kinnara  and yakṣa on the one hand, and of Druma and 
Vaiśravaṇa on the other. In the Mah ābhārata, King Druma 
is associated with Kuvera (Vai śravaṇa) as a member of the 
latter’s court (Dezsö 2014 : 76). The depiction of Vai śravaṇa 
on the northern face of Jago would have certain signi ficance 
since he is the Guardian of the North.must consider that possibly the scene was un fin-
ished. From this point to the end of the beugel  at 
the western corner, stones are randomly missing 
from the upper row of the narrative.
This long scene—here spread across Figs. 12.20a, 
12.20b, and 12.20c—contains approximately twelve 
figures,56 at least two of which are short and podgy 
like panakawan and are on their hands and knees. 
Viewing the postures of the first half-dozen figures, 
it is impossible to say whether it is a form of coop-
erative activity or whether an altercation of some 
sort is in progress. At the far end of the scene there 
is a wall (Fig. 12.20c), beyond which there is a bale 
(also partly visible at le ft in Fig. 12.21), from where 
begins the next scene. 
56. There are quite possibly more than twelve, but due 
to weathering some are nothing more than indistinct 
shapes.
Fig. 12 .20a: Overlap and continuation of Scene 20 . (Brandes phs. 82 , 81) 
Fig. 12.20b: Uncarved stonework and beginning of Scene 
20. (Brandes ph. 82 )
obrien mockup 3.indd   311 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 326] ---
312 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Scene 21
This scene (Fig. 12.21) opens at le ft with a sloping 
wall and an enclosed bale within a compound (the 
wall can be seen at far right of Fig. 12.20c). There is 
also a tree in a kuru ṅan beside the bale.  
Whether there was once anyone or anything 
to be seen inside the open doorway of the bale is 
now impossible to say. Proceeding from the bale to 
the gateway are three figures. The first two figures 
(from the le ft) are female, with a clearly de fined 
feminine form. Both appear bejewelled, the second 
very heavily at the neck and waist. The second 
female also has long hair falling over her shoulder 
in a style that is reminiscent of earlier depictions 
of Manohar ā (see Fig. 12 .9b), but damage to facial 
features makes certainty di fficult. She proceeds 
half-turned, gesturing to the first female behind her 
as if in conversation. The third figure, in the style of 
a panakawan , is possibly  female. The gateway is very 
similar to the gateway in Fig. 19 though the position 
of the tree in its surround is slightly di fferent. 
Proceeding from the gateway of the previous 
scene are another nine figures walking in single file 
in the same direction as the three inside the gate—
with the possibility that this scene is a continuation 
of the previous one shown in Fig. 12.21. In Fig. 12.21b 
only five are included (one of whom is missing the  
upper body)—the balance appear in Fig. 12.21c. The 
back four at least seem to be bare-topped, dressed 
in long sarongs, and appear to be in conversation 
with each other. Each holds alo ft a platter, similarly 
piled with what appears to be food or o fferings. 
Weathering has made it di fficult to determine if 
the processional figures are all the same gender.  
Certainly they are more plainly attired than the 
two main females in the previous scene. Between 
the second and third, and third and fourth figures 
are curling motifs such as have been randomly 
noted throughout the series. 
Due to missing stones from the upper course, we 
cannot see if the figures which form the balance of 
the group in the preceding photo are also bearing 
platters or other items. However, the leading figure 
in the procession is complete and carries a sta ff to 
which something (a banner, flag?) is attached at 
the top end. The total procession of nine figures 
approaches a tenth, similarly dressed figure stand-
ing at the end of the scene. While the gender of 
the figure carrying the banner is not clear, this 
last figure would appear to be male. He is set apart 
from the procession by two sets of large, decorat-
ed, scrolling motifs set symmetrically on either 
side of him. He stands, facing back towards those 
approaching. This scene, the last on the northern 
face of the beugel , is also the last in the Sudhana 
 Fig. 12 .20c: Continuation of Scene 20 . (Brandes ph. 80 )
obrien mockup 3.indd   312 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 327] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 313
series. Around the corner on the western face are 
the opening scenes of the second part of the Kuñ-
jarakar ṇa, being continued from below on the first 
terrace (see Diag. 1 ). 
Interpretation of Scenes 19–21: Under Scene 19, 
two possible though broad interpretations o ffered 
by the avad āna were noted, with yet a third from 
another source depending on the gender of two 
figures. Beginning with the first possibility men-
tioned, i.e. that the ensuing Scene 20 relates to King 
Druma’s testing of Sudhana, we have already noted 
the possible resemblance of the two main figures 
of Scene 19 with those in the bale  of Scene 18 . The 
remainder of the figures in Scene 19 would then 
be commensurate with those one might expect to 
find in a court scene (keeping in mind, however, that 
Fig. 12 .21: A retinue bearing o fferings. (Brandes phs. 79 , 78, 77)
Fig. 12.21a: Detail showing last three figures in retinue.
Fig. 12 .21b: Detail showing fi ve figures at centre of retinue.
Fig. 12 .21c: Detail showing leading fi gures in retinue.
obrien mockup 3.indd   313 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 328] ---
314 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
the venue seems to be outside the compound). What 
kind of an implement the ‘ kinnar ī king’ would be 
holding in such circumstances is uncertain. Brandes 
suggested that the figure holds a lontar , but the object 
appears to be pointed at least at the top end. Con -
cerning the tasks set for Sudhana by King Druma, 
the avad āna narrates that Sudhana, amid dance 
and music, cut seven golden stems with a sword 
that looked like the leaf of a blue lotus into small 
fragments, and shot an arrow through seven palm 
trees, seven kettledrums, and seven boars (Ralston 
1906 : 72). The avad āna then relates that Sudhana 
was required to pick out Manohar ā from a thousand 
kinnar ī just like her, which he duly accomplished. 
Now satis fied with Sudhana, King Druma calls his 
people forth to honour him, a fter which the king 
formally presents Manohar ā to Sudhana.
If one could understand precisely what actions 
are taking place in Scene 20 (Figs. 12.20a, 12.20b, 
and 12.20c) on Jago, then perhaps the total context 
of the final scenes would fall into place. Though 
the reliefs have su ffered deterioration, some of the 
figures in Scene 20 clearly exhibit the features of 
coarse beings, and others are strangely attired, with 
two having unidenti fiable items around their necks. 
The implements or items they hold are largely un-
recognizable. Only one figure (fourth from the le ft) 
shows any a ffinity with the familiar Sudhana figure 
from the rest of the series. Progressing further 
along the same scene, the action appears increas-
ingly frenetic—but are the characters fighting or 
dancing? In any event, the action does not seem to 
match the tasks set for Sudhana by King Druma, 
unlike Borobudur where the drama of the tests is 
beautifully portrayed. However, it may allude to the 
music, song, and dance described in the avad āna. 
It would then follow that the assessment tasks were 
deliberately not depicted or simply did not occur 
in the version being illustrated. 
Allowing some latitude in identifying the action 
in this scene ( 20), perhaps the final scene ( 21) relates 
to Sudhana being required to pick out Manohar ā 
from a line of kinnar ī maidens who are clearly ad-
vancing towards him.57 So why then does Jago not 
57. While it is reasonable not to expect that a thousand 
kinnar ī or even a sizeable crowd could be displayed on Jago, 
it is interesting to note that there are only seven kinnar ī go on to display the eventual outcome of attain-
ing his beloved Manohar ā—especially in light of 
ancient Javanese concepts of ideal kingship, where 
gaining the right queen is paramount? In the final 
episode of the tale, the couple live happily in King 
Druma’s kingdom but eventually make their way 
back to Sudhana’s kingdom, where they are received 
with great rejoicing. Jago makes no reference in its 
reliefs to this last part of the tale.
For a potentially more plausible possibility, let 
us return to Brandes’ opinion that in Scenes 17  
(Fig. 12.17) and 19 (see Figs. 12.19, 12.19a, and 12.19b) 
the two figures seated in obeisance are females. 
Here, we resort again to the Khotanese text, which 
relates that when Manohar ā discovered the ring 
and thus the arrival of Sudhana, she was fearful of 
her father’s reaction and went first to her mother. 
The queen was sympathetic to her daughter and 
full of admiration for the ordeals of Sudhana’s 
twelve-year journey to find Manohar ā. She ordered 
that Sudhana be brought to her. Being much taken 
with him, the queen nevertheless warned that ‘King 
Druma threatens violently’. She therefore under-
took to inform the king herself; when the king 
had heard, he imposed upon Sudhana ‘unlimited 
punishment, harsh threats, abusive speech’ (Bailey 
1966 : 513). If these two very similar figures sitting 
in sәmbah  are, as Brandes suggests, female, could 
they both represent the queen? It would then mean 
that in Scene 17 the queen is informing the king 
of Sudhana’s arrival, and in Scene 19 she pleads 
with the king on behalf of Sudhana who awaits the 
king’s judgement. This would explain Manohara’s 
consternation in the previous scene as she looks 
out through the gate (Fig. 12.18). She is obviously 
very much connected to the outcome of activities 
in the ensuing scene. In such an event, it may well 
be Sudhana who stands at the right-hand end of 
Scene 19 (Fig. 12.19) with arms folded across his 
chest. The Khotanese text does not detail what 
forms the punishment took, only that Sudhana 
‘went out invincible as a kesarin  lion’; nor does the 
text mention the king’s directive that Sudhana must 
in the P āli ve rsion (Jaini 1966 : 552). As observed earlier, 
of the three figures inside the compound of Scene 21, one 
could easily pass for Manohar ā, given her depiction in 
previous scenes.
obrien mockup 3.indd   314 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 329] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 315
pick out Manohar ā from a number of her kinnar ī 
sisters. 
Earlier, Scene 20 was considered from the pos-
sible aspects of fighting or dancing. The Mah āvas-
tujātaka offers yet a third way of viewing this scene. 
Having been told by Manohar ā that Sudhana had, 
after all, managed to reach the kinnara kingdom, 
there is no talk whatsoever by King Druma of retri -
bution. In fact, he orders that the city and palace be 
festooned with all manner of finery and flowers and 
for the city elders and the army to go forth bedecked 
with flags and banners to meet Sudhana. When 
the commands have been carried out, a reception 
is arranged with great pomp, hosted by ‘several 
thousand Kinnaras and to the accompaniment 
of thousands of musical instruments’ (Jones 1952: 
107). Thus, the jātaka  certainly presents a plausible 
scenario for Scenes 20 and 21 on Jago. However, 
the jātaka  says nothing of prior intervention by 
the queen.58 For its part, the Khotanese text makes 
much of the queen’s role, but says nothing of wel-
coming festivities.59 The avad āna does not mention 
the queen or receptions, but makes much of the 
punishment and conditions imposed on Sudhana, 
which he needed to undergo before being accepted 
as Manohar ā’s husband. 
Based on the evidence of the last few scenes, it is 
plain that neither the Sudhanakum ārāvadāna and 
the Kinnar ījātaka (Mah āvastu ), nor the Khotanese 
text of Ṛddhiprabh āva, was the sole source of ref-
erence for the sculptors of the Sudhana-Manohar ā 
tale on Jago. However, if the matter of an interpre-
tation of the last few scenes of the Sudhana tale 
still lies in doubt, perhaps our confusion was also 
shared by the sculptors themselves, for there is 
still the matter of the uncarved stonework between 
Scenes 19 and 20 .
58. Nor does it feature the nāga, Janmacitra, or the 
amoghap āśa; nor the Vai śravaṇa episode of the prince 
being sent to put down a rebellion. Instead, Sudhana is 
held con fined in his own palace and Manohar ā is sent away. 
This latter possibility has already been noted in connection 
with Scene 11 .
59. The Khotanese text tells of a nāgarāja and the 
amoghap āśa; it also tells of Sudhana conducting war 
against rebels in the mountains but does not mention 
Vaiśravaṇa.Parallel themes: An investigation of the reliefs 
above and below these final scenes of the Sudhana 
tale yields some interesting parallels, but little help 
in de fining precisely what is taking place in these 
last scenes. For example, on the first terrace below 
(Brandes phs. 30–28) we find that Kuñjarakar ṇa 
and King P ūrṇavijaya, accompanied by members 
of his court bearing o fferings as well as a number 
of musicians,60 have gone o ff to plead with Buddha 
Vairocana for a means of avoiding the terrible pun -
ishment in store for P ūrṇavijaya. In fact, P ūrṇavi-
jaya’s entreaty to Vairocana (Brandes phs. 29, 28) 
exactly re flects the queen’s suggested entreaty to 
King Druma in the Sudhana tale directly above (Fig. 
12.19), even down to the similarly dressed members 
in the two courts.
Continuing with the Kuñjarakar ṇa tale below, 
King P ūrṇavijaya can be seen leaving his wife 
and home to undertake the journey to hell. He 
is followed by trident-wielding individuals. Curi-
ously, at the end of the last scene (Brandes ph. 23) 
Pūrṇavijaya has turned his back on the direction 
to be travelled and now faces his armed pursuers, 
in the same way that Sudhana faces those who 
approach him at the end of the last scene in the 
Sudhana tale (see Fig. 12.21c).61 Taking now the 
parallels directly above on the second terrace, the 
Pārthayajña  reveals a number of scenes relative to 
the appearance of the goddess Śrī Lakṣmī to Arjuna 
(Brandes phs. 134–30). The whole episode is spread 
over two large panels; thus, it would be reasonable 
to assume it had prime signi ficance. In the first 
panel Śrī Lak ṣmī appears in a blaze of dazzling 
light, which in e ffect puts an end to the darkness 
and the demonic apparitions that were plaguing 
his imagination as he journeyed through the forest. 
She reassures Arjuna by foretelling that he will be 
successful in his mission and then gives instruction 
on the ‘enemies in the innermost part of man that 
must be fought relentlessly’ (Zoetmulder 1974: 369).  
On Jago, as she does this, the positioning of the 
60. These musicians, featured in two consecutive scenes, 
are located directly below the problematic scene of the 
Sudhana  tale, which it is proposed may feature dancers.
61. These are the last scenes of the Kuñjarakar ṇa on the 
northern wall. It is then continued on the western face of 
the beugel around the corner from where the Sudhana  tale 
finishes (see Jago layout in Diagram 1 ).
obrien mockup 3.indd   315 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 330] ---
316 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
goddess on the panel exactly parallels King Druma 
below, whereas it is (presumably) the queen who 
parallels Śrī Lak ṣmī, successfully interceding on 
behalf of Sudhana. The last scene of the Pārthayajña  
on the northern face of the second terrace (Brandes 
phs: 128/127) shows Arjuna watching a procession 
of celestial beings comprising K āma and Ratih with 
their attendants on the far side of a beautiful lake. 
In an ensuing panel around the corner, K āma too 
will give words of guidance and encouragement. In 
the last panel of the Arjunaviv āha on the northern 
face of the third terrace,62 there is also a group of 
divinities arranged around a small multi-roofed pa -
vilion in which sits Arjuna, who has been crowned 
temporary king of Indra’s heaven.
As can be seen from the above discussion of the 
last few scenes in the Sudhana  tale on the northern 
face, visual and thematic parallels exist both above 
and below. Gods and goddesses are intervening on 
behalf of supplicants, enabling them to overcome 
their di fficulties, with the end panels finishing 
with processions or groups of people or celestial 
beings attending or paying homage to a divine or 
victorious character. However, the signi ficance of 
these ‘parallels’ comes to the fore when read from 
the base up, for it is then we can see an ascend-
ancy of kingship. In the Kuñjarakar ṇa, the king 
fearlessly sets out to undergo transformation and 
purification in his step towards enlightenment and 
Buddhahood. On the next level, the virtuous bo-
dhisattva prince Sudhana, through his endurance 
and determination, has won the right to keep the 
kinnar ī princess as wife and future queen. On the 
second terrace, Arjuna’s austerities have won the 
initial help he needs on his quest to restore his 
kingdom to its rightful rulers ( Pārthayajña ). On 
the third terrace, we see that Arjuna’s e fforts on 
behalf of heaven in the war against the demons 
have earned him temporary rule in Indra’s place 
as king of the gods ( Arjunaviv āha). 
Just taking these four tales into consideration, 
it becomes clear that the choice of narratives was 
in no way a random a ffair for Jago, much less their 
62. While this panel is the last on the northern face of the 
third terrace, it is not in direct vertical parallel with the 
final scenes on the first terrace, beugel , or second terrace. 
The third terrace bands the base of the cella , which is set 
well towards the back of the monument (see Diag.1 ).arrangement around the shrine. In terms of the 
maṇḍala,63 the overall thematic parallel which runs 
vertically between narratives on the northern wall 
is plainly related to Amoghasiddhi, Jina-Buddha 
of the Northern Quarter, whose abhaya-mudr ā 
signi fies the Performance of Duty and the gi ft of 
the Absence of Fear, so clearly provided by the 
various divine and semi-divine beings.
conclusion
With a survey and interpretation of the Sudhana 
narrative series now complete, I would like to recall 
once again Pal’s earlier-mentioned views on the 
Newar paubha and propose that Jago’s rendering, 
too, seems to be another ‘variation which has taken 
on much local colour’. Working with three Bud-
dhist versions of the Sudhana tale, I found many 
affinities as well as many di fferences; there were 
times when the venue and action could be attrib-uted to one version or other, but the actors could 
not. On the other hand, depictions of Sudhana, the 
lake of Janmacitra, the introduction of Manohar ā, 
the crossing of the river of snakes, Sudhana’s arrival 
at the kingdom of the kinnar ī, and Manohar ā’s 
discovery of the ring all seem obvious in their 
identi fication, so much so that, even taking into 
account the problems of the final episodes which 
seem to find clearer resolution in versions other 
than the avad āna, there can be little serious doubt 
at all that we are basically dealing with the right tale. 
This view is also supported, on the whole, by the 
system of thematic and visual parallels that plays such an important part in the arrangement (and 
consequently our understanding) of the narrative 
reliefs on this shrine.
Whether the Sudhana tale as depicted on Jago is 
the result of ‘local colour’, whether it is a composite 
of versions, or whether it belongs totally to an as-
yet-unknown version is impossible for this writer 
to speculate on at the moment, for while at least three other narratives depicted on Jago find very 
close parallels in extant Old Javanese literature,
64 
63. Discussed brie fly in note 22 above.
64. The Kuñjarakar ṇa, Pārthayajña , and Arjunaviv āha 
tales are all represented in Old Javanese kakavin  
literature, and in the main, the narrative reliefs on Jago 
seem to follow them fairly closely (excluding panakawan  
obrien mockup 3.indd   316 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 331] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 317
such is not the case for the story of Sudhana and 
Manohar ā, though we may suppose that it must 
have had some currency in Java given its depiction 
on Borobudur. As noted earlier, it is not inconceiv-
able that the sculptors worked with multiple texts 
simultaneously, though the notion of them working 
with a localized tale that derived  over time seems 
somewhat more attractive. Unfortunately, such a 
Javanese version, if it exists in manuscript form, 
still awaits discovery.
Another possibility to be considered is that the 
tale may indeed be a localized version ‘imported’ 
from outside the Javanese sphere. In consideration 
of other elements of the shrine, namely the stat-
uary and some other decorative features, I have 
elsewhere supported input by in fluences (or even 
artisans themselves) from the Newars of Nepal 
(O’Brien 1993: 252–55).65 History records that 
Newar artisans were in high demand in Central 
Asia during the period.66 The most powerful of the 
characters). Sections of the Aji Dharma  tale are also known 
in Old Javanese literature. The narrative reliefs that adorned 
the cella walls have been identi fied as the Kriṣṇāyana , but 
there remains too little of it le ft on Jago to assert that it 
followed the kakavin  version of this tale, which deals with 
King Kri ṣṇa’s desire to have Rukmi ṇī as his wife and queen 
and his subsequent abduction of her. 
65. In 1987 (O’Brien 1987: 139–41), I pointed to the distinct 
similarities between the decorative over- and under- bands 
of Jago’s bas-reliefs and the decorative bands on the ‘walls’ 
and ‘circles of protection’ that surround the ‘palace’ of the 
sovereign deity of linear maṇḍalas, in particular those 
maṇḍalas emanating from the Nepalese (Newar) and 
Tibetan (Sakya-pa) traditions. In her discussion of Nepali 
architecture, Slusser ( 1982 I: 145) asserts that there ‘can 
be little doubt that the Newar-style temple, in some of its 
variations at least, is a three dimensional ma ṇḍala’, noting 
the testimony of Nepali records, which frequently specify 
that a temple was constructed as a maṇḍala. She also draws 
attention to other similarities of features including the 
decorative cornices that encircle the Newar temple, which 
she also notes are comparable to the palace ‘walls’ of linear 
maṇḍalas. These same bands were also employed on later 
temples in East Java, e.g. Tigawangi and Surowono (Bernet 
Kempers 1959, pls. 296 –98). 
Of the five bands of bas-reliefs on Jago, it is notable that 
the beugel  is the only one that does not carry either upper 
or lower decorated bands.
66. At the turn of the 13th century, Buddhism in northern 
India was in crisis, having come under attack by Muslim 
forces. The great Buddhist universities, including N ālandā Buddhist sects in Tibet, the Sakya-pas, who ruled 
their large region virtually as abbot kings, used 
Newar artisans—architects, painters, sculptors, 
metal casters, etc.—almost exclusively. In fact, Pal 
(1985: 61–67) has noted that Sakya-pa domination 
is perhaps the reason why more of their maṇḍalas 
seem to have come down to us from that period. 
When the Sakya-pas came to occupy in fluential 
positions at the Yuan court as religious advisers, 
their preference for Newar artisans was extended 
there too.67 
Now, the iconography of Jago’s Amoghap āśa and 
that of the four companion statues closely follows a 
sādhana  known to have been composed by the great 
Kashmiri scholar, Śākyaśrībhadra ( ad 1127–1225), 
much revered in Tibetan Buddhism, particularly 
by the Sakya-pa sect (O’Brien 1993: 252–55; Scho-
terman 1994 : 154–77). Śākyaśrībhadra was teacher 
to Sakya Pa ṇḍita, who became chief abbot of the 
Sakya-pas, the most powerful theocratic state in 
Tibet. It was Sakya Pa ṇḍita who gained the interest 
of the Mongol Khans of Yuan China in Tibetan 
Buddhism. Sakya Pa ṇḍita was eventually succeeded 
by his nephew, ’Phags-pa, who went on to become 
Imperial Preceptor to Khubilai Khan. Such was 
the extent of his in fluence that Phags-pa was able 
not only to retain authority in his own court but 
was also given complete jurisdiction in religious 
matters in the Mongol court. The extraordinary 
popularity of Newar artisans in this Sino-Tibetan 
and Vikrama śīla, had been razed. Those scholars and 
artisans who managed to escape the onslaught, ‘ fled with 
texts and portable icons into the Himalayas’ (Sharrock 
2007 : 252), with signi ficant numbers settling in Nepal (von 
Schroeder 1981: 311). From there they spread even further 
eastwards, not inconceivably as far as Southeast Asia. In 
his study of the faces on the Bayon towers in Cambodia, 
Sharrock notes Jean Filliozat’s suggestion ( 1969 : 47) that 
as a result of the enforced dispersion of learned Tantric 
masters there were ‘links between Nepalese and Khmer 
architecture at this period’ (Sharrock 2007 : 252).
67. The great name among Newar artisans is Aniko, who 
went into the service of the Sakya-pas under ’Phags-pa in 
1260 . His abilities as an artisan and architect gained him 
many major commissions under Khubilai Khan. However, 
as Tucci ( 1949 : 277) notes, Aniko was only the first in a 
long line of Newar artists whose works are praised in the 
eulogies and chronicles of numerous monasteries, attesting 
to an ‘uninterrupted flow into Tibet of Nepalese artists 
and cra ftsmen’.
obrien mockup 3.indd   317 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 332] ---
318 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
sphere is important because the time also coincides 
with the reign of Khubilai’s Javanese adversary, 
King K ṛtanagara, builder and patron of Candi Jago 
and, like Khubilai, a follower of Tantric Buddhist 
doctrine and an aspiring empire builder (see Bade, 
this volume).
In his study of the iconographic concordance 
between Jago’s statuary and iconographic details 
contained in the sādhana composed by Śākyaśrī-
bhadra, Schoterman ( 1994 : 154) felt inclined to 
support Bernet Kempers’ ( 1933) opinion that ‘the 
Candi Jago statues have been in fluenced by a new 
wave of Buddhism from Northeast India, which 
reached Java in the first part of the 13th century’. 
Even earlier, Brandes ( 1904 : 83) also gave thought 
to Indian in fluences on the statuary—perhaps 
even non-Javanese artists—among other things, 
pointing to their N āgarī inscriptions.68 While 
exploring the bas-reliefs of Jago, I noted that the 
features of Śiva carved in the Arjunaviv āha reliefs 
on the south face of the third terrace are strik -
ingly similar to the features of Jago’s Jina-Buddha 
statuary (cf. Locan ā and M āmakī), so much so 
that I am of the opinion that whoever carved the 
statuary was—at least in part—involved in the 
carving of the bas-reliefs on the temple (O’Brien 
1993: 254–55, pls. 31c and d ). 
Whether the iconography and/or cra ftsmanship 
of Jago’s statuary was directly imported at the time or 
sourced locally from monks and artisans—refugees 
of the earlier Muslim onslaught in northern India 
and who were now established and practising in 
Java—is an argument which may never be resolved.  
But given the importance of the maṇḍala in under -
standing the layout of the narratives on Jago and the 
close similarity of a number of its decorative features 
to maṇḍalas of Newar in fluence, whether direct or 
indirect, it may well prove useful to examine the 
same regional sources for help with the Sudhana  
68. Both Lokesh Chandra ( 1984 ) and Pal ( 1985: 145ff .) 
have published a selection of pages from Nepalese (Newar) 
sketchbooks containing images of deities, sometimes 
accompanied by their names and other iconographic 
details in N āgarī (see for example Lokesh Chandra 1984 : 
Sketchbook 1, p. 9 with two images of Amoghap āśa 
Loke śvara). However, while very little survives from the 
13th century, these examples existing from the 17th century 
may re flect practices from earlier times.tale, bearing in mind Pal’s earlier-quoted comments 
on the popularity and diversity of the tale in Nepal.
appendix
Inasmuch as missing scenes, lost features, and 
rampant ambiguity allows, the following is an 
attempt to summarize the scenes, bearing in 
mind that it is based on subjective choices from 
the multiple options provided by some scenes. The 
first thing that will have already become evident 
is that Sudhana appears to play a far more ubiqui-
tous role in Jago’s episodes than he is given in the 
literary works mentioned, such as the avad āna. As 
suggested earlier, this may be due to Jago’s reliefs 
being based on an as yet unknown version; or there 
may have been more local and pragmatic reasons 
for featuring the Bodhisattva prince as a future 
heroic, steadfast, and capable king. From the lowest 
level and moving upwards to culmination in the 
cella , Jago clearly displays the ascendancy of divine 
kingship in accordance with principles of Esoteric 
Buddhism. For K ṛtanagara, the shrine’s patron, 
the divine status would later climax in his own 
person: the oneness of Buddha/ Śiva with that of 
a mortal king. The tale of Sudhana on his father’s 
shrine was another step towards that goal. Exactly 
why it was chosen and how it—among the other 
narratives—participates in that progress is yet to 
be made clear. 
Scene 1   The unjust king of South Pañc āla 
     inspects his domains and finds them  
    deserted by his citizens.
 
[2.7 metres of missing stonework containing an 
unknown number of scenes.]
Scene 2  King and queen of North Pañc āla;  
    joy at the queen’s pregnancy.
Scene 3  King and queen of North Pañc āla; 
    presentation of their deferential son,  
    Prince Sudhana. 
Scene 4  Tree symbolizing the fertility and pros- 
    perity of North Pañc āla provided by 
     the presence of the benevolent nāga,  
obrien mockup 3.indd   318 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 333] ---
The Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago 319
    Janmacitra. A king ( nāga?) in discussion  
     with a respectful (but not submissive)  
    Sudhana, who is perhaps being charged 
     with protecting Janmacitra.
Scene 5  Two fig ures (from Scene 4) crouch by t he  
     lake of Janmacitra, whose home is a 
     cavern at the centre of the lake (or 
     beneath the waves). Sudhana or snake 
     charmer (?) approaches the cavern in a 
     small boat.
Scene 6  Sudhana receives a gi ft (the amoghap āśa) 
     from the grateful nā ga king.
Scene 7  Sudhana (wearing amoghapāś a) leaves 
     the realm of the nā gas.
Scene 8  Sudhana meets Manohar ā who surren- 
    ders head jewel (?), her magic amulet 
     for fl ight.
Scene 9  Manohar ā installed in Sudhana’s palace  
     quarters as his wife. Regal person in- 
    structs Sudhana to put aside Manohar ā 
     and present himself to the royal court. 
     Manohar ā is distraught. 
Scene 10   Manohar ā (or Sudhana?) undertakes 
     a journey away from the quarters.
Scene 11  Sudhana meets with two priestly figures  
    in the royal compound—he is loath to 
     hear the instruction of the high priest. 
     The loyal Vasantaka overhears their con-  
    versation. Meanwhile, Manohar ā takes  
     comfort from Sudhana’s sympathetic 
     mother and receives back the magic head-  
    jewel (and cloth?). Alternatively, it may 
     be Sudhana, full of grief, who visits 
     his mother. In any event, both parts of  
    this scene appear to be in the same venue.
Scene 12  Vasantaka accompanies Sudhana to a 
     friendly ṛṣi to whom Manohar ā has      given a ring, a magic token to protect 
     Sudhana on the arduous journey should  
     he decide to follow her. There are also 
     special instructions for the journey,  
    which the ṛṣ i passes on to Sudhana
Scene 13  Sudhana accepts the ring-token (now 
     worn around his neck) and sets out on 
     the journey, the words of the ṛṣi upper-  
    most in his mind.
Scene 14  Sudhana, now wearing a jacket, flies 
     over the river of snakes.
Scene 15  A gaunt and older-looking Sudhana 
     arrives at the kinnar ī kingdom, coming  
     to the palace of King Druma.
Scene 16  Manohar ā recognizes the ring she had 
     earlier le ft for safekeeping with the ṛṣi— 
    she knows that Sudhana has arrived and  
    fears her father’s reaction.
Scene 17  Manohar ā has informed her mother,  
    the queen, who now faces King Druma  
    with news, pleading on behalf of the 
     couple.
Scene 18  Manohar ā watches fearfully through 
     the gateway…
Scene 19  …as, outside the compound, King 
     Druma confronts Sudhana, the queen 
     still pleading at his feet.
Scene 20  Numerous figures fighting or dancing? 
     Or, in the previous scene, King Druma 
     is much pleased with his princely son-in-  
    law and has ordered that the kingdom 
     be prepared and decorated for celebra- 
    tion.
Scene 21  Manohar ā goes forth from the com- 
    pound with a retinue of kinnar ī to meet  
    and be reunited with Sudhana.
obrien mockup 3.indd   319 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 334] ---
obrien mockup 3.indd   320 12/7/16   10:03 AM

--- [Page 335] ---
PART III
BAUDDHA-ŚAIVA DYNAMICS 
Part III.indd   1 12/7/16   3:18 PM

--- [Page 336] ---
Part III.indd   2 12/7/16   3:18 PM

--- [Page 337] ---
Chapter 13
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’:
Magic, Realpolitik, and Bauddha-Śaiva Dynamics 
in Ancient Nusantara 
andrea acri
In his groundbreaking article  ‘A Buddhist 
mantra recovered from the Ratu Boko plateau: 
A preliminary study of its implications for 
Śailendra-era Java’, Jeffrey Sundberg (2003) high -
lighted an important gold artefact recovered from 
the Ratu Boko hillock near Prambanan in Central 
Java.1 The artefact, an inscribed gold foil consisting 
of two connected diamond-shaped leaves recalling 
a vajra , bears the Sanskrit mantra oṁ ṭakī  hūṁ 
jaḥ svāhā  repeated on each of its four sides.2 A 
unique, and intriguing, feature of the inscription 
is the engraving of the words panarabvan and kha -
nipas  within an exaggerated circular bubble in the 
two cases of the grapheme ī in the sequence ṭakī. 
This feature led Sundberg to advance the hypothesis 
that the artefact, and the mantra(s) inscribed on it, 
was connected to King Rakai Panaraban (r. ad 784–
803),3 who is known to us through the inscription 
1. I wish to thank Rolf Giebel, Arlo Griffiths, Roy Jordaan, 
Iain Sinclair, and Jeffrey Sundberg for having read and 
commented on various drafts of this chapter. Any mistakes 
are, of course, mine alone. I am particularly grateful to 
Iain Sinclair who, besides providing me with references 
to relevant passages of Tantric Buddhist manuals, has 
kindly shared with me many e-texts and rare editions of 
Buddhist sources that otherwise would have remained 
inaccessible to me. 
2.  Regrettably, the present whereabouts of the gold foil are 
unknown; what remains is a hand-drawn facsimile made 
by Suhamir ( Oudheidkundig Verslag  1950: 36), reproduced 
in Sundberg 2003: 165 and again here as Fig. 13.1.
3. In fact the identification of panarabvan  with Rakai 
Panaraban was already proposed by the late Indonesian 
archaeologist Kusen (1994), whose work is acknowledged by 
Sundberg. While I am entirely persuaded by the phonetic 
and orthographic arguments adduced by Sundberg (2003: 
176–77) in support of the identification of the panarabvan  
inscribed on the plate with the historical king Rakai Pana -
raban known from Old Javanese inscriptions, most notably of Wanua Tengah III recovered from Central Java, 
as well as from the 16th-century Old Sundanese 
historical chronicle Carita Parahyaṅan (Sundberg 
2011). Sundberg (2003) discovered instances of very 
similar mantras (i.e., takki hūṁ jaḥ, ṭakkijjaḥ 
huṁ )4 in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Sino-Japanese 
Tantric Buddhist texts, and pointed out that in the 
Sanskrit Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha (STTS )—a 
7th-century mūlatantra  consolidated over time 
into the Yogatantra tradition (Weinberger 2003: 
4)—the mantra occurs in the context of the Bud -
dhist Trailokyavijaya myth or the ‘Subjugation of 
Maheśvara’ by the Bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi, while in 
Sino-Japanese sources it is associated with Aizen’s 
subjugation of Īśvara and Nārāyaṇa. In view of 
these interesting facts, Sundberg concluded that 
the epigraphic document was Vajrayāna in nature, 
thus opening the grounds ‘to find expressions of 
these tantric convictions in the stone temples of 
Java’ (ibid.: 181); that it might have had an anti-Śaiva 
character (and purpose)—being a repudiation in 
strong terms of the religion of Panaraban’s ances -
tor Sañjaya (ibid.: 183); and that it was devised by 
Panaraban, in order to ‘link himself to the mantra 
or the cosmic being it points to’ (ibid.). In the 
conclusion to his essay, Sundberg anticipated that 
the study of this mantra ‘has hopefully only just 
Wanua Tengah III, I must leave aside the discussion of his 
proposed identification of this figure with the Śailendra 
king Samaratuṅga, which goes beyond the scope of this 
contribution (for a critical appraisal of his hypothesis, see 
Jordaan and Colless 2004: 58–59).
4. I consider the doubling of consonants in the versions of 
the mantra attested in Sanskrit and Tibetan sources on the 
one hand and Archipelagic sources on the other (e.g., ṭakki  
vs ṭaki) a trivial matter, which reflects minor orthographic 
variation rather than linguistic variation.
Acri mockup.indd   323 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 338] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia324
begun’ (ibid.), and invited scholars with the neces -
sary philological skills to search for attestations of 
this mantra in textual sources from South, Central, 
Southeast, and East Asia; to explore the meaning 
of the obscure Old Javanese (?) word khanipas ; and 
to pay archaeological attention to the Ratu Boko 
Buddhist site.
Sundberg’s appeal was promptly taken up 
by Roy Jordaan and Brian Colless, who in 2004 
published the short study ‘The Ratu Boko mantra 
and the Śailendras’. Jordaan and Colless (2004: 58) 
wrestled with Sundberg’s proposed identification 
of Panaraban as Samaratuṅga, the Ś ailendra ruler 
under whose auspices the 792 Buddhist inscription 
of Abhayagirivihāra was composed, as well as his 
adherence to Buddhism. They assume that he was 
in fact a Śaiva and that, given the association of the 
mantra with the Trailokyavijaya myth, its ‘intention 
could have been the mantrical subjugation and 
conversion of Panaraban’ (ibid.: 61).5
Recently, Arlo Griffiths (2014a) has returned to 
the ‘Ratu Boko mantra’ in section 7 (pp. 177–80) of 
his fine study entitled ‘Written Traces of the Bud -
dhist Past: Mantras and Dh āraṇīs i n Indonesian 
Inscriptions’. Griffiths, crediting Sundberg with 
having done much to throw light on this unique 
gold artefact, has drawn attention to attestations of 
precise matches to the mantric sequence oṁ ṭa(k)
kī/i hūṁ jaḥ in the Guhyasamājatantra (14.22) 
and in the Tibetan version of the pre-9th century 
Sarvavajrodaya , a ritual manual by Ānandagarbha 
based on the system of the STTS . Having fulfilled 
Sundberg’s desideratum to find exact attestations 
of the mantra in early Tantric Buddhist sources, 
Griffiths pointed out that the same mantra ṭaki 
5. A succinct ‘rejoinder’ to the critiques and alternative 
hypotheses advanced by Jordaan and Colless may be found 
in Sundberg 2006: 112–13, n. 25; for his 2014 comments 
amending his 2006 rebuttal, see Sundberg, this volume, 
Annex to Chapter 14.hūṁ jaḥ  is also attested in three short Old Java -
nese stone pillar inscriptions that previous schol -
ars, followed by Sundberg, read as paki hūṁ jaḥ ; 
furthermore , he pinpointed a very similar mantric 
sequence attested on a fourth Old Javanese inscrip -
tion, whose whereabouts and context are presently 
unknown, as well as on a lead-bronze inscription 
from Borobudur, which contains a dhāraṇī  devoted 
to a wrathful form of Vajrapāṇi (Griffiths 2014a).
Building on the work of my predecessors, I will 
enter this fascinating discussion by identifying two 
other attestations—in a slightly modified form—
of the ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ mantra: one in a Sanskrit 
Buddhist hymn ( stuti ) from Bali, and the other in 
the Gaṇapatitattva , a Sanskrit-Old Javanese tutur  
text of Śaiva persuasion. The latter—admittedly 
unusual—attestation of a Buddhist mantra in a 
Śaiva text named after Gaṇapati will give me the 
opportunity to elaborate on the links between the 
mantra and the figure of the elephant-headed god. 
Further, given the commonality of themes—that 
is, Tantric magic—shared by the section of the 
tutur  attesting the ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ mantra and the 
Ratu Boko gold foil, I will try to throw new light 
on the context and the function of the latter. By 
analysing relevant textual evidence from Java and 
the Indian Subcontinent, I will then discuss the 
religious and socio-political scenarios opened up 
by it.6 The documents, I will argue, bear witness 
to dynamics of interaction and appropriation of 
mantric technology across the Śaiva and Bauddha 
divide in Central Java, Bali, and much of the pre -
modern Indic cosmopolitan world. 
6. Given the uncertainty about the exact spot where the 
artefact was found, and other basic archaeological facts 
about the Ratu Boko complex, I will leave aside such ques -
tions as whether the gold foil was part of a foundation 
deposit related to the construction of the great western 
entrance-gate of the complex, or rather was meant to ac -
company the consecration of the statue of a tutelary deity, 
as speculated by Sundberg.Fig. 12.1: Drawing of the Ratu Boko gold foil by Soehamir. (Adapted from Oudheidkundig Verslag  1948 [1950: 36])
Acri mockup.indd   324 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 339] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’325
the mantra jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ huṁ phaṭ  
in the pañcakāṇḍastava
The Pañcakāṇḍastava  was edited and translated by 
Goudriaan and Hooykaas (1971: 241–43) as stuti  no. 
375, ‘Hymn to the Five Constituents’.7 The authors 
called this an ‘interesting hymn … nearly con -
fined to Buddhist sources’, which they found in its 
entirety on at least twelve Buddhist manuscripts 
on daily ritual and death ritual, while its first two 
śloka s—precisely those attesting our mantra—they 
found also in three Śaiva sources (mss. 1590/I3a, 
5160/33b, 2335). According to their Śaiva informant, 
this hymn is not used by the Śaiva priests (ibid.: 
242). Below I reproduce Goudriaan and Hooykaas’ 
edition, critical apparatus (converted from their 
footnotes 1–7), and English translation of this stuti  
and its ‘sprinkling formula’.
jaḥ-kāraḥ parvato jñeyaḥ  
taḥ-kāro jaladhis tathā / 
kiḥ-kāraś ca mahātejo 
huṁ -kāro vāyur eva ca // 1
phaṭ -kāraś ca mahākāśaḥ  
sarvavighnavināśanam /
etāni sarvabhūtāni  
tad eva satataṁ punaḥ  // 2
devapūjāṁ kariṣye naḥ   
sarvakleśavināśanam /
dīrghāyuṣyam avāpnoti   
bhuktilābham avāpnuyāt  // 3
ādityasya parāyaṇam  
sarvarogavināśanam /
toyavahaṁ jagatpuṇyam   
pavitraṁ  pāpasakala m // 4
Sprinkling formula (PVTg18; PPKA29):
oṁ oṁ  Śrī Śrī ambhavana  
Sarvarogavināśanam, sarvapāpavināśāya  
Sarvakleśavināśanaṁ, sarvaduḥkhavināśāya, 
Namaḥ svāhā
2b sarvavighna°  ] 7× vighna; 7× roga   2c etāni sarvabhū-  
tāni ] thus two mss.; others etānām sarvabhūtānām  2d  
tad eva  ] 8× sadeva  2d punaḥ  ] 6× udaḥ; others pudaḥ  3c  
avāpnoti  ] 5× apaśyataḥ  3d bhuktilābham āvāpnuyāt  ] five 
mss.  saṁgrāme vijay ī b havet  4d °sakalam  ] mss. sakatam
7. An alternative, more faithful, translation may be ‘The 
five-constituents mantra’ (where ‘constituents’ stands for 
‘portions’ or ‘divisions’ rather than ‘constitutive elements’).The syllable jaḥ is to be known as the moun -
tain, and the syllable taḥ as the ocean;8 and 
the syllable kiḥ  as the fire, and the syllable 
huṁ9 as the air. (1)
And the syllable phaṭ  is space; destruction of 
all hindrances; all these elements are always 
that…10 (2)
I will perform the worship of the gods … which 
means destruction of all stains; [the worship -
per] obtains the condition of a long life and will 
obtain enjoyment. (3)
The refuge given by the Sun; destruction of 
all disease; a stream of water, blessing to the 
world; a purifier destroying all evil. (4)
Sprinkling formula:
oṁ oṁ  …;
Destruction of all disease; towards destruction 
of all evil;
destruction of all stains; towards destruction 
of all sorrow, honour, hail.
Goudriaan and Hooykaas (1971: 242) comment -
ed that ‘the language is good-looking, although 
the second part of [ śloka ] 2 is somewhat puzzling. 
Perhaps the sentence has been broken off’. Further, 
they noted the similarity between śloka s 1 and 2 
and those found in the edited Gaṇapatitattva  as 
śloka s 54 and 55, but confirmed Sudarshana Devi’s 
(1958: 117) view that ‘the bījas mentioned in these 
verses do not seem to be found elsewhere’. In a 
rather speculative attempt to make sense of them, 
they proposed that 
they originally constituted the mantra Jā-na-kī 
Huṁ Phaṭ. Jānak ī, (= Sītā) is indeed often wor -
shipped as the Great Mother of existence and 
might on this function very well be considered 
as a personification of the Five Great Elements 
which constitute Prak ṛti (Nature).
8. Goudriaan and Hooykaas (1971: 242–43, nn. 1 and 2) 
pointed out that here ‘mountain’ and ‘ocean’ represent 
‘earth’ and ‘water’ respectively, corresponding to pṛthivī 
and āpaḥ  of the Gaṇapatitattva ; see below.
9. Huṁ  here could be restored to hūṁ . 
10. The reading sadeva  attested on 8 mss. could be sadaiva  
(i.e., sadā  + eva), ‘at all times/eternally’, which is however 
redundant in a verse-quarter featuring satatam  and punar .
Acri mockup.indd   325 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 340] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia326
In view of the attestation of the parallel mantra 
ṭa(k)kī/i jaḥ hūṁ in Buddhist texts, this hypoth -
esis is no longer tenable. Furthermore, apart from 
the intriguing occurrence of the originally Bud -
dhist mantra found in śloka s 1–2 in three Śaiva 
ritual sources, it should be noted that both śloka s 
3–4 of the stuti  and the sprinkling formula present 
thematic analogies with the śloka s and Old Javanese 
commentary of relevant portions of the Gaṇapa -
titattva , which I will present and discuss in the 
next section.
the mantra jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ in 
gaṇapatitattva  59–60 (54–55)
The Gaṇapatitattva  is a Śaiva scripture belonging 
to the Javano-Balinese tutur  genre;11 arranged 
as a dialogue between the Lord Śiva and his son 
Gaṇapati, it consists of sixty Sanskrit śloka s provid -
ed with Old Javanese prose glosses, introduced by 
an extensive Old Javanese prose section. The text, 
which has come down to us only through palm-
leaf manuscripts from Bali, is of uncertain date. 
While the prose section appended to śloka s 51–53 
reveals various Balinisms and (Middle-)Javanisms, 
thereby suggesting a late date of composition (16th 
century onwards), its earliest textual stratum, and 
in particular its śloka s, may be several centuries 
older, and perhaps even date back to the Central 
Javanese period.12 
11. On this genre of Śaiva literature, see Acri 2006. 
12. A small number of verses of the Gaṇapatitattva /
Tutur Kamokṣan /Jñānasiddhānta  have parallels in pre-9th 
century Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras from the Indian Sub -
continent (Acri 2006), while verses 57–59 have a parallel 
in a Sanskrit stuti  from Bali ( Praṇavajñāna , no. 890.1–3, 
Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971: 524); compare also verses 
1–2 and 3cd of the Pañcakāṇḍa  with Gaṇapatitattva  54–55 
and 56cd. Recent research has shown that many Balinese 
stuti s have preserved material stemming from the Central 
Javanese period: see, e.g., Kandahjaya (2009) and Griffi -
ths (2014b) on the Navakampa (no. 510, G oudriaan and 
Hooykaas 1971: 314–15), and Acri and Jordaan (2012) on 
stuti s that, together with the Śaiva Sanskrit-Old Javanese 
tutur  Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa (also handed down uniquely on 
Bali), arguably informed the masterplan of 9th-century 
Candi Śiva at Loro Jonggrang. See also stuti  no. 450 (Gou -
driaan and Hooykaas 1971: 274–77), attesting a fragment 
from the pre-8th century Vīṇāśikhatantra  (cf. Acri 2006: 
118–19).As Hooykaas (1962, especially pp. 314–18) 
painstakingly showed, the printed edition of the 
Gaṇapatitattva  (ed. Sudarshana Devi Singhal 1958), 
produced on the basis of a single palm-leaf manu -
script, turned out to be just one version among the 
many that were circulating on Bali under different 
titles. The edited version corresponds to Īśvara 
Uvāca Gaṇapati Matakvan (‘Īśvara Spoke, Gaṇapati 
Asked’, Gedong Kirtya manuscript K2411), which 
appears to be the most ‘mature’ one as it betrays a 
complex process of compilation. It was carved out 
of a core of sixty śloka s (four of which are lacking 
in Sudarshana Devi’s edition), supplemented with 
extra material related to Gaṇapati at its beginning 
and end, namely: an opening maṅgala  verse to 
Gaṇapati followed by an Old Javanese prose portion 
containing ten questions-and-answers between 
Gaṇapati and Śiva; a concluding series of śloka s 
(59–61) with appended Old Javanese paragraphs; a 
prose paṅlukatan gaṇapati  or ‘exorcism (by means) 
of Gaṇapati’; and three eulogizing śloka s (62–64) 
and short Sanskrit and Old Javanese invocations 
(65) to the same god.13 Judging from the number of 
Balinese manuscripts preserving various redactions 
of this text it may be argued that the Gaṇapatitattva  
enjoyed certain popularity on the island.
The section that primarily concerns us here con -
sists of the two śloka s 59–60 (54–55 in the printed 
edition) plus an Old Javanese prose appendix of 
three paragraphs. The Sanskrit-Old Javanese dyad 
follows an (apparently unrelated) long prose section, 
stretching over nineteen paragraphs, appended to 
śloka s 57–59 (51–53 in the printed edition);14 this 
13. The ‘core text’ out of which further versions of the 
Gaṇapatitattva  were carved is the Tutur Kamokṣan , which 
in its turn forms a part (with some sections rearranged in 
different order) of the Tutur Ādhyātmika (an expanded 
version of the latter text was edited as  Jñānasiddhānta: 
see Soebadio 1971: 4–7). An ‘intermediate’ version of the 
Gaṇapatitattva  is the Tatva Gaṇapati  (romanized tran -
scription by Ketut Sudarsana, PusDok, 1993), which inclu -
des the ten questions-and-answers but lacks the maṅgala , 
and the concluding material after śloka  61.
14. The three  śloka s and long prose section are also found 
in the Tutur Kamokṣan , but not in Tutur Ādhyātmika/
Jñānasiddhānta —the three śloka s alone, i.e. without the 
long Old Javanese prose appendage, being attested in 
Jñānasiddhānta  3.1–3, 17.4, and 18.12; cf. also stuti  809.1–3 
(Praṇavajñāna ). The relation, admittedly superficial, that 
Acri mockup.indd   326 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 341] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’327
is followed by an (arguably related) śloka  on the 
mṛtyuñjaya  mantra (61), the paṅlukatan gaṇapati , 
and the concluding Sanskrit and Old Javanese in -
vocations. The two śloka s and the first paragraph 
of the Old Javanese commentary run as follows:15 
jaḥkāre pṛthivī jñeyaḥ 
ṭaḥkāre āpa-saṁsthitaḥ / 
kiḥkāraś ca mahātejaḥ  
hūṁkāre bāyu-saṁnyaset // 59  
phaṭkārāk āśa-saṁyuktaḥ  
mahāpātakanāśāya / 
pañcāṅgaṁ japayed vidvān  
śivalokam avāpnuyāt // 60 
ndya ta ya / jah / ṭah / kih  / hūṁ  / phaṭ  //16 iti 
saṅ hyaṅ pañc āṅga17 / japākna  śivadhyāna / 
mahāpātaka vināśa denya // 0 // 
59a jaḥkāre  ] GaṇEd , TGaṇ, GaṇUd; jaḥkare PDok; ja -
ḥkarai GaṇL; pṛthv ī ] cor r.; prathivi TGaṇ, GaṇUd; pra -
vivi PDok; praviviṁ GaṇL; jñeyaḥ  ] PDok, GaṇL, TGaṇ, 
GaṇUd (m. aḥ for f. ā); jñeyā GaṇEd;   59b ṭaḥkāre  ] corr.  
(°e ā° for °a ā°); taḥkāra GaṇEd; taḥkārai GaṇL; thaḥkare 
PDok (as 59c); ṭāḥkāre GaṇUn.; āpa-sa ṁsthitaḥ  ] corr. 
(nom. sing. for f. plur., °a-s° for °ḥ s° or °s s°, m.c.); 
āpaḥ saṁsthitāḥ GaṇEd; apa saṁstitaḥ GaṇL; hapa 
saṁsthitaḥ PDok; apa saṁsthitaḥ TGaṇ, GaṇUd   59c 
kiḥkāraś ca  ] cor r.; kiḥkaraś ca, GaṇL, TGaṇ, GaṇUd, 
PDok (as 59b); kiḥkāre GaṇEd (em.); mahātejaḥ  ] cor r.; 
mahatejaḥ TGaṇ, GaṇUd; mahāteja GaṇEd (GaṇL); 
hūṁkāre  ] em.; hūṁkar e TGaṇ, GaṇUd; uṁkāre 
GaṇEd; uṁkarai GaṇL; uṅkare PDok;   59d bāyu  ] em. 
(m. sing. acc. ending °ṁ dropped m.c.); vāyuṁ GaṇEd; 
bayu GaṇL, GaṇUd, PDok; saṁnyaset  ] GaṇEd; s anya -
set PDok; śanyaṣet GaṇL; śanyaset GaṇUd; śūnyayet 
TGaṇ   60a phaṭkārākāśa-saṁyuktaḥ] em. (°rā° for °ra 
ā° [°e + ā°  ] (double sandhi ), and °a-s° for °aḥ s°, m.c.); 
phaṭkārākāśasaṁyukto GaṇEd; phaṭkarakāśasaṁyuktaḥ 
this part bears to the two śloka s following thereupon seems 
to be limited to the statement, found in the end of para -
graph 19, that the obtainment of release ( kapadamokṣan ) 
corresponds to śivapada , which may be linked to śloka  61d, 
which speaks about the obtainment of śivaloka . 
15. The passage has been collated from five different wit -
nesses, namely the edited text and the single manuscript it 
stems from (= Īśvara Uvāca Gaṇapati Matakvan , K2411 ≈ 
LOr 11461), and three versions of the Gaṇapatitattva  proper 
(for the sigla used in the apparatus, see the primary sources 
section at the end of this chapter).
16. jaḥ / ṭaḥ / kiḥ / hūṁ / phat] em.; / jah / ṭah / kih / uṁ / 
phaṭ GaṇEd; jaḥ / ṭaḥ / kiḥ / hūm / phaṭ GaṇL (?); jah / tah 
/ kih / uṁ / phat PDok; jaḥ / ṭaḥ / kiḥ / hūṁ / phat GaṇUd
17. pañcāṅga  ] em.; pañcaṇdha GaṇUd, pañcandha PDok; 
pañcakāṇḍa  GaṇEd, pañcakāṇdha GanL.GaṇL; phatkārakāśasaṁyuktaḥ TGaṇ, GaṇUd; phan-
kare kasa saṁyuktaḥ PDok   60b  mahāpātakanāśāya  ] 
em. GaṇEd (°śā° unmetrical); mahāpaṭakanaśāya 
GaṇL; mahāpaṭakanasaya GaṇUd; mahāpatakanasaya 
TGaṇ, PDok   60c  pañcāṅgaṁ japayed vidvān  ] con j.; 
pañcāṇḍaṁ japed yo vidvān GaṇEd (em.);  pañcāṇḍhaṁ 
japayet vidvan GaṇUd; pañcaṇḍhaṁ japayaid vidvān 
GaṇL; pañcaṇdhaṁ japayet vidvaṁ TGaṇ; pañcāndhaṁ 
japayet vidvān PDok   60d avāpnuyāt] corr. GaṇEd; ava -
snuyat GaṇL, GaṇUd, TGaṇ, PDok
In the jaḥ  the earth is known [to reside]; in the 
ṭaḥ is placed the water. The kiḥ is full of fire; 
[one] should place the wind in the hūṁ . (59)
The phaṭ  is fixed in the space. For the annihi -
lation of great sins, the wise should mutter the 
[mantra of] Five Units, so that he may reach 
the world of Śiva. (60)
Jaḥ, ṭaḥ, kiḥ,  hūṁ, phaṭ : Thus is the sacred 
[mantra] of Five Units. The visualization of 
Śiva should be muttered. Great sins are annihi -
lated by means of it. 
The two  śloka s, composed in a typically ‘Tantric 
register’ of Sanskrit, attest virtually the same re -
configured version of the mantric sequence  ṭaki 
jaḥ hūṁ  found in the  Pañcakāṇḍastava . In both 
the Sanskrit verses and the Old Javanese gloss, the 
sequence ṭaki  is divided into its constituents ṭa  
and ki, each of which is provided with a visarga .18 
The mantra phaṭ  occurs in place of the svāhā  
attested in the Ratu Boko gold foil.19 The fivefold  
mantric sequence  jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ  is called 
pañcāṅga  (my emendation from pañcāṇḍa ) in both  
the śloka  and  the Old Javanese gloss, meaning the 
‘(Mantra of) Five Units’;  but one manuscript attests 
the reading pañcakāṇḍa in the gloss, which mirrors 
18. The visarga  in the syllables jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ might have been 
part of the first person singular nominative declension, but 
appears to have been understood by the compiler of the 
śloka  as an integral part of the single mantric units (for 
he wrote jaḥkāra  and not jakāra , etc.). This form has been 
retained in the Old Javanese commentary.
19. A similar form of the mantra is attested in a book 
of yantra  etc. drawn up by Newar artisans in the Ming 
dynasty, where it is given as oṁ ṭakkir āja h ūṁ p haṭ 
(i.e., the signature mantra of Ṭakki). In fact, what may be 
the earliest attestations of the mantra ṭṭakki huṁ phaṭ 
is in the STTS  (ed. 200, lines 12–14), where it is connected 
with magical ‘killing with a glance’ (vajra ṛṣṭayā nirīkṣed  
 … maraṇam āpnuyāt ). I thank Iain Sinclair for these refer -
ences (email dated 30 August 2014; cf. Sinclair 2013).
Acri mockup.indd   327 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 342] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia328
the title of the Balinese stuti .20 In the  śloka s these 
units are linked to the five elementals, whereas in 
the Old Javanese gloss they are declared to constitu -
te the visualization of Śiva ( śivadhyāna ). A notable 
feature, attested in both the Gaṇapatitattva and the 
Balinese stuti, is the transformation of the original 
sequence ṭaki jaḥ  into jaḥ taḥ kiḥ , which may 
represent an instance of purposeful ‘inversion’.21 
The continuation of the first paragraph of the 
Old Javanese gloss seems to be an addition, and 
yet is apparently related to śloka s 60–61. So is the 
second paragraph, as well as the four śloka s and 
eulogy that bring the text to its end. The first pa -
ragraph elaborates on śivadhyāna , prescribing the 
muttering ( japa) of aṁ-aḥ  sixteen times, the fruit 
of which is purity ( nirmala ).22 The remaining part of 
the first paragraph describes a fivefold visualization 
technique ( dhyāna ) aimed at obtaining specific 
20. Aṅga is a common technical term for the constituents 
of a mantra, whereas aṇḍa  (‘egg’) does not make sense here. 
The reading pañcakāṇḍaṁ  supported by GaṇL may represent 
a ‘contamination’, in the light of the attestation of the form in 
several mss. of the Balinese stuti  Pañcakāṇḍa , and perhaps 
also because of semantic overlap ( kāṇḍa  = ‘part, unit, portion, 
division, constituent’; compare khaṇḍa  ‘piece, part, fragment, 
portion, section’, and skandha  ‘part, division, section’; pañ -
caskandha  is a well-attested unit in Buddhist literature, e.g. 
in the Guhyasamāja  exegesis, where it represents the the five 
constituent elements of being). The causative form japayed  
attested in all mss. may be the outcome of the insertion of 
one extra syllable as required by the metre, or may represent 
a corruption of japed yo vidvān ). 
21. Compare the mantra ‘ ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ jaḥ hūṁ kiṭa 
h(ū)[ṁ] ṭaki  (dhuṁ ) kiṭa dhu (ṁ)…’ engraved on a lead-
bronze foil from Borobudur, where the sequences jaḥ hūṁ 
kiṭa and kiṭa dhu(ṁ) may represent inversions of ṭaki 
hūṁ jaḥ  and ṭaki dhu(ṁ)  respectively; Griffiths (2014b: 
25) notes the inversion with respect to the element kiṭa .
22. Perhaps here the Sanskrit (and Old Javanese) nirmala  
should be understood as being equivalent to the Sanskrit 
abstract noun nirmalatva (‘purity’).faculties. This is hierarchically ordered from the 
highest to the lowest attainment, as corresponding 
to the highest and lowest mainifestations of Śiva. 
Although there is no explicit indication in the Old 
Javanese commentary that the five forms of visual -
ization following thereupon are connected to each 
one of the five mantric units detailed in the śloka , 
the redactor might have implied thus, in order to 
obtain the list of correspondences illustrated in 
Table 13.1.23
The progression is from the foremost visuali -
zation of Paramaśiva, connected with the subtlest 
element of space or ether ( ākāśa ),24 the mantra phaṭ , 
23. The redactions of the text corresponding to the 
ms. titled Tatva Gaṇapati  (TGaṇ ≈ LOr 14982) add yan 
sadāśivadhyāna dīrghāyuṣa phalanya (spelling standard -
ized) between Śivadhyāna and Rudradhyāna, against the 
redactions corresponding to the edited version of the 
Gaṇapatitattva  and ms. titled Īśvara Uvāca Gaṇapati 
Matakvan . This sentence may be an addition as it disrupts 
the fivefold arrangement and the correspondence with the 
elements of the mantra in the śloka . As far as the fivefold 
hierarchical arrangement is concerned, it is tempting to 
detect a spatial arrangement as well, where the four main 
points of the compass plus the centre are linked to the 
five deities presiding over/associated with the respective 
direction. If one links the names of the manifestations of 
Śiva mentioned in the passage to the corresponding deities 
known from the navasaṅa  arrangement that has survived 
down to modern Bali, the resulting arrangement, starting 
from the east and proceeding in counterclockwise direc -
tion, would be as follows: Īśvara in the east (like Indra, he 
rides an elephant in Balinese iconography), Śaṅkara in the 
northwest, Mahādeva in the west, Rudra in the southwest, 
and Paramaśiva in the centre.
24. This is in harmony with the widespread homologiza -
tion of the highest form of godhead (or paramount meta -
physical entity, such as the Self, or even a yogic attainment, 
such as tarka ) to space ( ākāśa )—and, at the same time, 
‘emptiness’ ( śūnya [tā])—attested in several texts of both 
Śaiva and Buddhist persuasion from the Indonesian Archi -phaṭ space Paramaśivadhyāna final release (mokṣa)
hūṁ wind Rudradhyāna destruction of enemies (ripusaṁhāra )
kiḥ fire Mahādevadhyāna success in the world (kasvasthan iṅ rāt)*
ṭaḥ water Śaṅkaradhyāna accomplishment of all actions ( sakārya siddha )**
jaḥ earth Īśvaradhyāna affection of somebody (kasihana deniṅ janma)Table 13.1: Correspondences between mantric units and visualizations in OJ commentary, GNP  60–61
* Here I follow GaṇL ( kasvastan ) and Gaṇ Ud ( kaśvastan ), agains t GaṇEd ( kasvastyan ).
** Here I follow PD ok and GaṇUd against GaṇEd ( sakāryanta  siddha) and GaṇL ( sakāryyantā ).
Acri mockup.indd   328 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 343] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’329
and the attainment of liberation, to the lowest vis -
ualization of Īśvara, connected with the coarsest 
element earth ( pṛthvī ), the mantra jaḥ , and the 
securement of the affection of somebody.25
The paragraph ends with a characterization of 
the mantras aṁ-aḥ —the former is ‘the seed-syl -
lable of the Soul’ ( ātmabījākṣara ), the latter ‘the 
seed of emptiness’ ( śūnyatābīja ); together, they 
are called ‘the great union’ ( mahāsaṁyoga ). They 
should be used with restraint. The section ends 
with a caption iti saṅ hyaṅ mahājapa  ‘[here ends] 
the sacred Great Muttering [formula]’, which is a 
paramount secret ( paramarahasya ). 
The second paragraph links the Sanskrit word 
khaḍgarāvaṇa  (see below) to the mantric sequence 
oṁ ha ka śa ma la va ra yaṁ uṁ ,26 which should 
be visualized ( kahiḍ әpanya ) as Ardhanār īśv ara 
(a half-male, half-female form of Śiva). The ten 
syllables should be placed in the body following a 
clockwise direction ( pradakṣiṇakrama ); this results 
in the obtainment of impenetrabilty from any kind 
of weapons ( tan kataman iṅ sarvvasañjāta ) and 
being free from all hindrances ( luput iṅ sarvvavi -
ghna ). Then the concentration ( anuṣṭhāna ) of the 
mṛtyuñjaya  should be performed, as follows: oṁ  
in the fontanelle, aṁ in the mouth, kaṁ  in the 
throat, aḥ in the cavity of the earth, aṁ from the 
navel down to the feet; these go together with the 
ten-syllable mantra ( daśākṣaramantra ) from the 
crest to the feet, and also with the mantra maṁ 
(i.e., jūṁ?) saḥ vauṣaṭ m tyuñjayāya namaḥ 
svāhā vaṣat ( see below, n. 4 3). 
Śloka 61 elaborates on the  mṛtyuñjayamantr a, 
granting long life ( dīrghāyuṣa ) and victory in battle 
(saṅgramavijaya ).27 The Old Javanese gloss simply 
pelago (see, e.g., Gonda 1971; Acri 2011a: 347, 589); also note 
that a Chinese Buddhist text attributed to Śubhākarasiṁha 
links Mahāvairocana—the highest Tathāgata—with space 
and the centre (see Damais 1969: 85–86). 
25. This amounts to a form of vaśīkaraṇa: cf. below. 
26. This mantra, which still plays an important role in the 
theology and yogic praxis of present-day Balinese Hindu -
ism, is indeed a variant of the old, in origin Saiddhāntika, 
Śaiva mantra nāvātman , most often represented by the 
sequence rhrkṣmlvyūṁ  (see Padoux 2011: 58–60).
27. Compare Pañcakāṇḍastava  3cd, 5 manuscripts of 
which read: dīrghāyuṣyam avāpnoti, saṁgrāme vijayī 
bhavet , and Gaṇapatitattva  61cd (ed. 56cd): dīrghāyuṣam 
avāpnoti saṅgramavijayī bhavet.states that it is not to be used or revealed indiscri -
minately, and that its aim is to keep death far away 
(hayva cāvuh, madoh maraṇa donira t әlas).28 The 
word tәlas (‘finished’, ‘the end’) suggests that the 
original text ended here.29  The ‘exorcism (by means 
of) Gaṇapati’ that follows—attested only in the 
edited Gaṇapatitattva  (= Īśvara Uvāca Gaṇapati 
Matakvan )—starts with an Old Javanese passage 
containing instructions for a pūjā  to invoke the 
intervention of the elephant-headed god against 
the damage caused by field-mice.30 The three śl okas, 
constituting the mantra to be employed in the pūjā , 
eulogize Gaṇapati as the son of Śiva who destroys 
all poisons ( sarvaviṣavināśana ) and calamities 
(roga ), and bestows success ( siddhārthada ). The 
text ends with a short auspicious formula in honour 
of Gaṇapati and Sarasvat ī, by w hich one obtains 
long life and prosperity.31 
28. This is the correct reading, as shown by Hooykaas 
(1962: 315), versus the hayva cāvuh, adomraṇa denira tәlas  
of the edition (however, the variant denira , ‘by means 
of it’, is permissible and attested in some manuscripts). 
I do not agree with Hooykaas’ translation of maraṇa  
(māraṇa ) as ‘field-mice’, but take it in its most evident 
meaning of ‘death, killing’, which is consonant with the 
content of the śloka  devoted to the Mṛtyuñjaya mantra. 
It is evident that Hooykaas was misled by the contents of 
the paṅlukatan gaṇapati  that follows thereupon, which 
deals with ‘agricultural exorcism’; it is entirely possible 
that the compiler of the ‘mature’ redaction of the Gaṇa -
patitattva  took maraṇa  to mean ‘field-mice’, but the same 
reasoning cannot be applied retrospectively to the Old 
Javanese gloss of śloka  61.
29. The ‘intermediate’ version of the Gaṇapatitattva  from 
ms. PDok, as well as the Tutur Kamokṣan , end here indeed.
30. Hooykaas ( 1962: 315–16) described this as  ‘an addi -
tional note for peasants … only a rustic and picturesque 
accretion to our philosophical/metaphysical text’. The 
practitioner is prompted to ‘make a circuit ( scilicet : of his 
rice-field), using an ‘‘ivory bamboo’’ ( scilicet : adorned with) 
a drawing of Gaṇapati, with a disc [ cakra ] in His left hand 
and a cudgel [ gadā ] in His right’ (ibid.: 315). This kind 
of ‘agricultural magic’ does not represent an ‘indigenous’ 
Balinese invention, but has clear parallels in South Asia. In 
current Indian harvest festivals, and also in folk literature, 
Gaṇapati is worshipped as a ‘harvest hero’, and especially 
as a destroyer of mice (he is often portrayed as riding a rat, 
his vehicle): see Michael 1983.
31. Oṁ ghmuṁ gaṇapataye namaḥ / oṁ sarasvatyai 
namaḥ / oṁ siddhir astu / tad astu / astu // oṁ dīrghāyuṣaṁ 
sukhaśriyā / darśanāt tava vṛddhiśriyā //.
Acri mockup.indd   329 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 344] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia330
a kind of magic? the ratu boko gold 
foil as a yantra
The mantra jaḥ-ṭaḥ-kiḥ-hūṁ-phaṭ  is apparently 
associated in the Gaṇapatitattva  with purification, 
averting of calamity, and bestowal of supernatural 
goals. Both the śloka s and the Old Javanese gloss 
declare that the use of the five-unit mantra is ‘for 
the annihilation of great sins’ ( mahāpātakanāśa ), 
which results in the attainment of śivaloka . The Old 
Javanese gloss implies that the murmuring of the 
five units amounts to śivadhyāna , which is connect -
ed to the mantra aṁ aḥ (the so-called rva bhineda  
formula that is widespread in Javano-Balinese lore). 
A similar stress on purification, averting of calam -
ity and sins, and bestowal of supernatural goals is 
found in śloka s 61–64 (56–59 ed.) on mṛtyuñjaya  
and Gaṇapati-related mantras, as well as in the 
Pañcakāṇḍastava .32
Three of the goals listed in the Old Javanese gloss 
to Gaṇapatitattva  59–60, namely the destruction 
of enemies (aptly homologized with Rudra, the 
destructive form of Śiva), worldly success, and 
attracting the affection of somebody, apparently 
correspond to the operations of māraṇa , puṣṭi  and 
vaśīkaraṇa  respectively, which we find in the ‘six 
acts/practices’ or ‘six rites of magic’ ( ṣaṭkarmāṇi ). 
Sanskrit literature, from the Atharvaveda  to Tantric 
texts of Śaiva, Buddhist, and even Jaina and Vaiṣṇa -
va persuasion, defines ritual practices connected 
with protection, pacification, exorcism, incanta -
tion, and the acquisition or cultivation of prosper -
ity, according to different systematizations. The 
standard, ‘mature’ list as defined in many Tantric 
works is the one adopted by the early 16th-century 
Śaiva  author Mah īdh ara in his manual Mantrama -
32. Compare the stuti ’s sarvavighnavināśanam , sarva -
kleśavināśanam , bhuktilābham , sarvarogavināśanam , 
pavitraṁ pāpasakalam , and sarvapāpavināśāya  with 
Gaṇapatitattva ’s sarvaviṣavināśanam , parāṇi rogāṇi mūrch -
hantam , siddhārthadam  (62–64 = ed. 57–59), and  mahāpā -
takanāśāya/mahāpātakavināśa (śloka s and commentary 
59–60 = ed. 54–55) . In particular, note that Gaṇapatitattva  
61cd (ed. 56cd) is the same as Pañcakāṇḍastava  3cd (see 
my n.  27 above); the whole śloka  3 of the latter source is 
also attested in the Balinese ritual text Pūjā Kṣatriya  
(ms. PKTb, as stanza 3 of the Śaiva stuti  no. 13): cf. below, 
n. 43 and 46. .hodadhi,33 which  comprises appeasement (ś ānti), 
subjugation ( vaśya, vaśīkaraṇa ), immobilization 
(stambha, stambhana ), enmity ( dveṣa, vidveṣa ), 
eradication ( uccāṭana ), and liquidation ( māraṇa ); 
but other sources also attest lists of four or fewer 
elements,34 while sources listing nine elements—the 
aforementioned six plus delusion ( mohana ), attrac -
tion ( ākarṣaṇa ),35 and acquisition ( puṣṭi )—are also 
known. In fact ākarṣ aṇa (i.e., bringing a person 
under the practitioner’s control), even if it is not 
included in the ‘standard’ list of six acts, is ‘one of 
the best known and most widely performed acts of 
magic’ (Goudriaan 1978: 294), and as such it plays 
an important role in many of the documents dis -
cussed here. As I have mentioned above, the ṭaki 
jaḥ hūṁ mantra has been linked to a context of 
mantric subjugation; and since the version of the 
mantra attested on the Ratu Boko gold foil and 
the version in the Gaṇapatitattva  seem to have 
been used in a context of magic, an investigation 
of selected key sources related to magical practices 
in Buddhist and Śaiva contexts may throw light on 
the contexts and purposes of the mantra. 
Let us turn to Chapter 25 of the Mantramahoda-
dhi. In verses 30–32ab Mah īdh ara declares that in 
the six rites the seed syllables of a yantra— a ‘coer -
cive diagram’ (Brunner 2003: 164–65)36—consist of 
33. Being a systematic manual compiled on the basis of 
several earlier authoritative texts, the Mantramahodadhi  
remains a valuable source on the ṣaṭkarmāṇi  in spite of 
its relatively late date of composition. A translation and 
analysis of Chapter 25 of this text, which I will draw from 
in my discussion, may be found in Bühnemann 2000. 
34. In fact Vedic sources already subdivide all karman  (in 
the sense of ritual) into three kinds, namely śānti  (pacifica -
tion), puṣṭi  (welfare or acquisition), and abhicāra  (harming 
others) (Goudriaan 1978: 252).
35. In some other lists, ākarṣaṇa —which is relevant to 
our discussion—replaces śānti , especially in (con)texts 
where the rite assumes a more cruel appearance (Goudriaan 
1978: 260–61).
36. Cf. Sanderson’s (2004: 290) definition of yantra  as ‘a 
Mantra-inscribed diagram written in various colours and 
with various inks on cloth, birchbark, the hides of various 
animals and the like, wrapped up and then employed in 
various ways (by being worn as an amulet, by being buried 
in a cremation ground, and so on) for purposes such as 
warding off ills, harming an enemy, or forcing a person 
to submit to the user’s will’. Iain Sinclair (email dated 30 
December 2014) pointed out to me that many Nepalese 
Acri mockup.indd   330 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 345] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’331
the letters of the moon, water, earth, ether, wind, 
and fire (Bühnemann 2000: 457). One may wonder 
whether the correlation between the five syllables 
jaḥ-ṭaḥ-kiḥ-ḥu(/ ū)ṁ-phaṭ  and the five elements 
in the Pañcakāṇḍastava , as also between the last 
two series and the five manifestations of Śiva in the 
Gaṇapatitattva,  reflect an analogous systematization, 
as well as the widespread idea that, by connecting 
(on a subtle level) syllables or mantras to elements, 
the latter are purified. Correlations between five 
mantras, the five elements, and five Tathāgatas, are 
often found in Tantric Buddhist maṇḍala s (see e.g., 
Kandahjaya 2009, table 4, and my n. 23 above), so 
this idea need not be distinctively Śaiva.
The Mantramahodadhi  (verses 17cd–23ab, see 
Bühnemann 2000: 449 and table 26.5) describes 
six arrangements for connecting the mantra to be 
uttered in each rite with the letters of the name of 
the victim of the magical act; such methods may 
include the insertion of the victim’s name at the end, 
or the insertion of letters between its syllables, and 
so on. Padoux (2011: 96–97), describing in detail 
analogous practices on the basis of Netratantra  Ch. 
18 and Kṣemarāja’s commentary, characterizes the 
technique called saṁpuṭa  as the symbolic ‘encasing’ 
of a mantra ‘(or any part thereof, or any element 
with which it is associated) inside a space or casket, 
covered as with a lid or within two covers’. He adds 
that in his commentary on Netratantra  6.18 Kṣema -
rāja describes a written procedure: mantram ādau 
likhet ;37 similarly , in Agnipur āṇa Ch. 138, ‘where 
saṃpuṭa is prescribed for the magical action of 
vaśīkaraṇa and ākarṣaṇa , it is described as the 
placing of the mantra around the sādhya— above, 
under and to its right and left: a spatial pattern, not 
an oral operation’.38 This practice, which is signifi -
Buddhist mantra manuscripts attest a placeholder for the 
name of the ‘target’, usually ‘Devadatta’, and that while 
Buddhists classically used terms such as rakṣācakra , con -
temporary Newar Vajr ācāry as talk about yantra  (jantra ). 
On examples of yantra s found in early Śaiva Tantras, see 
Kiss 2014.
37. Sanderson (2004: 290) draws attention to Kṣemarā -
ja’s definition ( ad Netratantra  20.59c) of a yantracakram  
as ‘a series of Mantras written in a particular spatial ar -
rangement … yantracakraṁ viśiṣṭasaṃniveśalikhito man -
trasamūhaḥ ’.
38. Compare also Padoux’s (2011: 97–98) description of 
techniques that appear to be related to saṁpuṭa , namely: cantly associated with vaśīkaraṇa and ākarṣaṇa , 
resonates with the encasing of the personal raka  
title ‘Panaraban’ (and ‘Khanipas’) on the Ratu Boko 
gold foil within the circular ī of the mantra ṭakī. It 
is therefore not too far-fetched to assume, as was 
done by Sundberg (2003: 177), that the inscription 
of Panaraban’s personal title within a grapheme 
was intended to infix it ‘as a vital component of 
the sacred mantra’. Whatever the actual intended 
procedure might have been, the practices described 
in the Sanskrit documents presented above would 
seem to support the link with practices of adduc -
tion and subjugation hypothesized by Sundberg as 
well as Jordaan and Colless, and lead us to regard 
the Ratu Boko gold foil as a yantra  of coercive magic.
Exploring further the hypothesis that the 
Ratu Boko artefact indeed might have constituted 
a yantra , I turn again to the Mantramahodadhi , 
which in verses 23cd–26ab (B ühnemann 2000: 
455–56, and table 26) describes the symbolic shapes 
of the elements that have to be drawn in such 
yantra s: for subjugation this is a triangle endowed 
with svastika s, for immobilization it is a square 
connected with thunderbolts ( vajra ), and for enmity 
it is a circle. Other sources give different combi -
nations, namely vajra  and liquidation, square and 
pacification, circle and pacification, subjugation, 
eradication, or acquisition (see Goudriaan 1978: 
292). An early Śaiva Tantra, the Brahmayāma -
la, declares that the practitioner ‘should draw a 
square and write [the target’s] name in its centre’ 
(5.78cd–79ab, Kiss 2014: 212). We may connect these 
ideas to the shape of the Ratu Boko artefact and 
see in the vaguely vajra -shaped double quadrangle 
a counterpart of the ‘square connected with thun -
derbolts’ associated with subjugation; on the other 
grasta  (‘swallowed or eclipsed, but also surrounded’), which 
is in fact what Agnipurāṇa  Ch. 138 calls saṁpuṭīkaraṇa ; 
ākrānta  (‘seized or invaded’—applying to the name of the 
victim, which Kṣemar āja characterizes as ‘when the mantra 
is placed so as to surround the name which is in the centre’; 
Padoux sees this as a variant of what is called grasta  by 
the Netratantra  and saṁpuṭīkaraṇa  by the Agnipurāṇa ); 
garbhastha : this corresponds to the Agnipurāṇa ’s defini -
tion of saṁpuṭa , except that Kṣemarāja on Netratantra  
‘mentions the four directions of space instead of the four 
sides of the written mantra. It is also the reversal of what 
is defined as grasta . Like the AgP’s saṁpuṭa , this can be 
done only in writing’.
Acri mockup.indd   331 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 346] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia332
hand, the engraving of the raka  title panarabvan  
(and, perhaps, the personal name khanipas ) within 
the circle of two of the the ī signs may correspond 
to ‘enmity’, as per Mah īdh ara, or again subjuga -
tion, according to an alternative list. Although no 
definitive conclusion can be drawn, it seems safe 
to assume that the choice of these shapes was not 
entirely arbitrary but reflected systematizations 
described in manuals of yantra -magic. 
Further, Mah īdh ara associates six closing words 
of mantras with the respective acts, namely namaḥ  
and pacification , svāhā  and subjugation, vaṣaṭ  
and immobilization,  vauṣaṭ  and enmity,  hūṁ  and 
eradication, phaṭ  and liquidation  (verses 32cd–
33ab, B ühnemann 2000: 457). According to this 
categorization, the closing svāhā  in the ‘Ratu Boko 
version’ of the mantra would neatly correspond to 
subjugation;39 on the other hand, the closing phaṭ  
in the series attested in the Pañcakāṇḍastava  and 
Gaṇapatitattva  may be linked to liquidation.40 But, 
also in this case, different systematizations exist, 
and it is therefore difficult to establish with certain -
ty which one was used as a prototype by the authors 
of these documents;41 we may just conclude that 
although the details differ widely, the principles 
underlying the application were probably the same. 
I should also like to point out that such formulas 
as namaḥ , svāhā  and phaṭ , together with the be -
ginning oṁ, constitute very general mantric units 
39. The Hevajratantra  (II, ix.21) describes a mantra of 
attraction ( ākarṣaṇa )—which is in fact related to subju -
gation ( vaśikaraṇa ) in that text—made up by the syllables 
oṁ, hūṁ, and the closing svāhā  (in connection with the 
names of celestial nymphs to be attracted): see Nihom 1995: 
524–25. On the other hand, Sundberg (2003: 178) envisaged 
an element of ‘auspiciousness’ in it, for svāhā  is admittedly 
an exclamation of blessing used in benign contexts, be they 
mantric, ritual, or otherwise. Contrast my remark about 
the sequence oṁ … svāhā below, as well as my nn. 42, 44. 
40. This would be in harmony with the goal of final li -
beration ( mokṣa ): besides noting the mention of māraṇa , I 
refer to Goudriaan’s (1978: 74) definition of phaṭ  as a word 
‘loaded with magic’, a ‘sonic explosion’ used for piercing. 
41. The Vaiṣṇava Pāñcarātra Jayākhyasaṁhitā  prescribes 
svāhā  for homa , svadhā  for ancestor worship, phaṭ  for 
destructive activities, hūṁ  for creating hatred, and namaḥ  
for release (Goudriaan 1978: 74); other combinations are 
found in different texts, namely phaṭ  with vidveṣana , uc-
cāṭana and māraṇa ; svāhā  with śānti , ākarṣaṇa  and puṣṭi ; 
hūṁ  with vidveṣana  and māraṇa  (ibid.: 75, 288). that enclose bījamantra s to form effective mantric 
sequences, and therefore need not necessarily be 
connected with a particular function.42
Let us turn to the Gaṇapatitattva  again. The 
mention of Khaḍgarāvaṇa, the ten syllables, and 
the mṛtyuñjaya mantra43 in the second paragraph 
of the Old Javanese commentary to śloka s 59–60 
offers a hint to the fact that the mantra jaḥ-ṭaḥ-
kiḥ-hūṁ-phaṭ  was meant to be employed—as, it 
appears, also in the Pañcakāṇḍa —in a context of 
Tantric magic. Khaḍgarāvaṇa is the chief deity of 
the Bhūtatantras of the exorcistic Paścimasrotas di -
vision of the Mantramārga (Sanderson 2003–4: 374),  
a Rudra possessing the demonic identity of both 
Rāvaṇa and Bhairava, who presides over evil beings 
and is invoked in his capacity as lord of the bhūta s 
(bhūtanātha ) to chase them away.44 The mṛtyuñ -
jaya (‘Conqueror of Death’) is both a mantra and 
a god—the Old Javanese commentary indeed calls 
it a deva —i.e., a mantric representation of the form 
of Śiva called Mṛtyuñjaya, Mṛtyujit or Amṛteśa (see 
White 2012; Padoux 2011: 95); besides granting, as 
the śloka  and the Old Javanese commentary puts 
it, impenetrability from all weapons, long life, and 
victory in battle,45 it also ensures ‘ freedom from 
42. Griffiths (2014a: 177, n. 125) notes that the absence 
of svāhā  in the sequence [oṁ] ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ attested in 
some Sanskrit, Tibetan and Old Javanese documents ‘can 
be considered a trivial difference’.
43. The mantra oṁ maṁ saḥ in the sequence oṁ maṁ 
saḥ vauṣaṭ / m ty uñjayāya namaḥ svāhā vaṣaṭ should 
probably be emended to oṁ juṁ saḥ on the basis of the 
reading oṁ mjuṅ saḥ  in GaṇUd and in the prose part of 
Stuti 453, Mṛtyuñjaya  (which is found, interestingly, only 
in the Pūjā Kṣatriya : cf. n. 46). Oṁ jūṁ saḥ  is indeed 
the base-mantra ( mūlamantra ) of Amṛteśvara/Mṛtyujit/
Mṛtyuñjaya (see Sanderson 2004: 260; Padoux 2011: 95). In 
Kriyākālaguṇottara  9.45, the sequence oṁ jūṁ saḥ svāhā  
is invoked as the armour ( kavaca ) of the mūlamantra  of 
Khaḍgarāvaṇa (see Slouber 2007: 73). 
44. Chapter 9 of the Kriyākālaguṇottara  (verses 39–44, 
ed. Slouber 2007) relates that by chanting the heart mantra, 
oṁ bhūtapati svāhā , one is able to subjugate ( vaśam ) and 
drive off spirits, subjugate even the gods, and perform the 
six acts by thought alone. Khaḍgarāvaṇa is also mentioned 
in the Balinese ritual for the preparation of consecrated 
water (Hooykaas 1974: 54). 
45. Besides in the Netratantra  (see Padoux 2011: 95–96), 
the mṛtyuñjaya  is featured in the context of ṣaṭkarmāṇi  
in the Sanskrit Siddhayogeśvarīmata , a text of the Kaula 
Acri mockup.indd   332 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 347] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’333
hindrances’ ( luput iṅ sarvvavighna), which may 
be linked to another function of  this all-powerful 
mantra, namely controlling, routing, and destroy -
ing demons ‘with total efficacy’ (White 2012: 145). 
In fact the mṛtyuñjaya  mantric lore has a royal 
dimension to it, converging with the exorcistic 
aspect.46 This is apparent, for instance, in Chapter 19 
of the Netratantra —a pre-9th century Kashmirian 
text devoted to the cult of Mṛtyujit/Amṛteśa. As 
pointed out by Sanderson (2004: 246), this chapter 
‘details procedures for countering possession by 
various classes of being. Here the Guru’s role is 
portrayed almost exclusively as that of priest to 
the royal family’.47
stream of Śaivism. It considers the objectives of the six 
rites as siddhi s, divided into the categories of sāttvika , 
rājasa  and tāmasa  (Törzsök 2000: 138–39). The sāttvika  
include, e.g., well-being ( puṣṭi ), expiation or pacification 
(śānti ), conquering death ( mṛtyuñjaya ), and final release 
(mokṣa); the rājasa include, e.g ., subjugating people to 
one’s will ( vaśya) and attracting people ( ākarṣaṇa); the 
tāmasa include, e.g ., murder ( māraṇa ) and annihilation 
(jambhana )—compare the analogous goals of final release , 
destruction of enemies, success in the world, and attracting 
the affection of somebody in the first paragraph of the Old 
Javanese commentary to śloka s 59–60, and long life and 
victory in battle in śloka  61.
46. This royal dimension is also suggested by the fact 
that the half- śloka  dīrghāyuṣam … saṅgrāmavijāyī bhavet  
attested in (some manuscripts of) the apotropaic Pañ-
cakāṇḍa  3cd and in the mṛtyuñjaya -focused śloka  61cd of 
the Gaṇapatitattva  has a parallel in the Pūjā Kṣatriya , a 
ritual compilation with Vaiṣṇava overtones that apparently 
contains materials geared towards the protection of royal 
committers (see Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971: 281).
47. Sanderson (2004) has made a number of points that 
are directly relevant to the themes I am treating here. When 
discussing the nineteenth chapter of the Netratantra in 
connection with the rites performed by Śaiva and Buddhist 
royal chaplains for the protection of the kingdoms of their 
patrons, he (2004: 233) notes that the ‘protective, thera -
peutic, and aggressive rites for the benefit of the monarch 
and the kingdom’ performed by rājaguru s were grounded 
in the Tantras of the Śaiva Mantramārga. On the basis of 
Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa  3.1.10, Sanderson (ibid.: 239) describes 
‘(1) rituals to ward off dangers and ills of every kind from 
the king and his kingdom ( śāntikaṃ karm a), some of them 
simple rites to  protect the king’s person to be performed at 
various times every day, others much more elaborate cere -
monies to be performed periodically, (2) rituals to restore 
his health and vigour ( pauṣṭikaṃ karma ), (3) rituals to 
harm his enemies ( ābhicārikaṃ karma ), (4) the regular and the ‘ratu boko mantra’ and  
gaṇapati: on taming demons…
Several elements in both the Pañcakāṇḍa hymn and 
the closing section of the Gaṇapatitattva  conjure 
up a context of magic and exorcism, i.e. dispelling 
or pacifying ‘demonic agents, hostile to well-being’ 
(Linrothe 1999: 24), or  ‘beings that cause injury’ 
(hiṁsaka ; see White 2012: 148). The crescendo of 
apotropaic magic culminates in the ‘agricultural 
exorcism’ of the paṅlukatan gaṇapati, which at 
some point was inserted into the textual transmis -
sion. The insertion of this material as a conclusion 
to a text dominated by the figure of Gaṇapati is 
appropriate, for Gaṇapati, beside being the remover 
of obstacles ( vighnāntakṛt ) par excellence, is also 
the ‘Lord ( pati) of Demonic Hosts ( gaṇa )’. As White 
(2012:  149) puts it, such beings as yakṣa s, rākṣasa s, 
graha s, vināyaka s, and so forth
can only be controlled by placating the mas -
ters of their respective hosts: that is, one of the Seven Mothers, or gods like Bhairava, Gaṇapa -
ti, V īrabhadra, or Hanumān. These multiple 
Spirit Lords ( bhūteśvara s, bhūtanātha s)—ge -
neric terms already attested in the Āyu rvedic 
literature … and that continue to be employed 
throughout modern-day South Asia—constitut -
ed the original pantheons of the ‘Bhūta Tantras’. 
White (2012: 150) notes that the Netratantra  
itself, and texts of later Tantric traditions, came 
to subsume the bhūtanātha s beneath a principal 
deity (e.g., Amṛteśa), and relegated them to
the maṇḍala’s dark fringe … where the bhūta -
nātha s, now reduced to the status of guardians 
at the gates, were mobilised to wall out the 
demonic horde that would have liked noth -
ing better than to break through and devour 
everyone in sight.
The role of ‘guardian of the gate’ fits the profile 
of Gaṇapati, who is invoked as remover of obstacles 
prior to undertaking any activity, and portrayed at 
occasional rituals ( nityaṃ karma  and naimittikaṃ karma ) 
required of the king, (5) reparatory rites ( prāyaścittīyaṃ 
karma ), and (6) postmortuary rites ( aurdhvadehikaṃ 
karma )’. See my discussion of the Khmer materials pre -
sented by Sanderson below, p. 346.
Acri mockup.indd   333 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 348] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia334
the boundaries of Hindu and Buddhist temples. It 
is therefore not surprising that the closing section 
of the Gaṇapatitattva  mentions the mantra jaḥ 
ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ  side by side with a series of 
Bhūtanāthas: Khaḍgarāvaṇa, Mṛtyuñjaya (or Mṛ -
tyujit/Amrteśabhairava), and Gaṇapati, for all these 
deities (and the mantras they personify) play a role 
in dispelling hindrances and malevolent influences. 
The dictum luput iṅ sarvvavighna (‘free from 
all hindrances’), specifically attributed by the 
Old Javanese commentary to śloka s 59–60 to the 
mṛtyuñjaya  mantra, exactly corresponds to the 
outcome of the familiar opening benedictory 
formula oṁ avighnam astu,  ‘let there be no hin -
drances’. This formula occurs at the beginning of 
Javanese and Balinese manuscripts, and notably 
also, as pointed out by Griffiths (2014a: 178), in 
Old Javanese inscriptions from the 9th century 
onwards. One of these—the Guluṅ Guluṅ inscrip -
tion of Śaka 851—starts with oṁ avighnam astu 
gaṇapataye namaḥ  (Oṁ, let there be no obstacles! 
Homage to Gaṇapati!), thereby making the con -
nection with Gaṇapati—the god who removes ob -
stacles—explicit. Griffiths (2014a: 177–78) points 
out that three brief inscriptions on stone boundary 
markers from Central Java substitute this common 
opening with the formula ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ , which 
obviously served the purpose of removing obstacles. 
Interestingly, two out of three of these inscriptions 
seem to have been recovered from seemingly Śaiva 
contexts , and both date back to the second half of 
the 9th century.48 
Griffiths corroborates the association of the 
mantra ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ with removal of obstacles 
on the one hand, and with ākarṣaṇa  on the other, 
by citing an important parallel from the Tantric 
Buddhist text Sarvavajrodaya , section 56:
He who wishes to effect complete freedom 
from obstacles should cover them (i.e. the effi-
gies of the directional deities who might cause 
trouble, pinned down in section 55) with mud. 
If in this condition ( evam ) they [still] make 
48. The three short inscriptions are: a cylindrical stone 
carved in the  Śaiva cave-shrine of Abang, dated 872 (Stut -
terheim 1932: 293; Damais 1955: 29–30); an (undated) stone 
post from the Śaiva Candi Bongkol (Stutterheim 1932: 294); 
a stone post, mentioning a (Buddhist?) vihāra,  dated 874 
(Stutterheim 19З2: 296; Damais 1955: 236).trouble, he should immerse himself in [the de -
ity] Vajrahūṁkāra and adduct them with the 
Ṭakkirāja; should also adduct them with the 
Vajra-goads etc.; should bind the [seal of] Va -
jrahūṁkāra; and should step on the effigy of 
the obstacle with his left foot. After the practice 
of [self-]expansion with hūṁ vaṁ  hūṁ etc., he 
should stand in pratyālīḍha  stance… (trans. 
Griffiths 2014a: 178)
To Griffiths, ‘it seems that ṭakkirājen ākṛṣya  can 
be interpreted as ‘‘having adducted by reciting the 
mantra named Ṭak kirāja’’, and that the intended 
mantra is the one that concerns us here’. In fact 
the Sarvavajrodaya  seems to break up the discrete 
constituents of a longer  mantra. By mentioning, 
besides Ṭakkirāja, ‘also the actions of adduction etc. 
by means of the vajra -goad etc.’ ( vajrāṅkuśādibhir 
apy ākarṣaṇādikaṁ kṛtvā ), as well as mentioning 
the binding of Vajrahūṁkāra, the text is appar -
ently referring to the fourfold sequence of actions, 
instruments, deities, and mantras hinted at in 
the sequence vajrāṅkuśādibhir ākṛṣya praveśya 
baddhvā vaśīkṛtya  ‘having adducted, drawn in, 
bound, brought under control’ in section 55.49 Those 
actions correspond to those detailed in a passage 
of the Trailokyavijayamahāmaṇḍala section of 
the STTS . Snellgrove (1987: 222–23), pointing to 
a passage describing a fourfold process by which 
‘all the Great beings, the Buddhas and the others, 
are summoned, drawn in, bound, so entering his 
power’, notes that 
the four door guardians represent the four stag -
es of introducing the divinities into the maṇḍa-
la, which are effected by the mantra Jaḥ Hūṁ 
Va ṁ Hoḥ ! Vajrāṅkuśa (Vajra-Hook) summons 
them; Vajrapāśa (Vajra-Noose) draws them in; 
Vajrasphoṭa (Vajra-Fetter) binds them and Va-
jrāveśa (Vajra-Penetration) alias Vajraghaṇṭ ā 
(Vajra-Bell) completes the pervasion of the 
maṇḍala  by wisdom…. This fourfold function 
of the door guardians fully explains their names, 
which might otherwise appear quite arbitrary.
A similar arrangement, with minor variants, is 
found in the Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra , in the 
section where the master introduces his pupil into 
the maṇḍala (ed. Skorupski, p. 103 and 290), in the 
49.  Cf. also sections 13 and 40.
Acri mockup.indd   334 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 349] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’335
Vajraśekhara  (one of the explanatory Tantras of the 
STTS ), and several other Esoteric Buddhist texts.50 
The set of correspondences (from below upwards) 
may be schematized as follows: 
hoḥ North Vajraghaṇṭā/ 
Vajrāveśavajra -bell/ 
vajra -pene-
trationto penetrate/
draw within 
one’s power
vaṁ West Vajraśṛṅkhala/  
Vajrasphoṭavajra -fetter/  
vajra -chainto bind
hūṁ South Vajrapāśa vajra - 
nooseto draw
jaḥ East Vajrāṅkuśa vajra -goad to adduct
Having noted that the set of names and mantric 
acts found in Sarvavajrodaya  55–56 correspond to 
those connected to the male gate-guardians of the 
Vajradhātumaṇḍala of the STTS  and other Buddhist 
sources, I should like to make the following points: 
(1) The four guardians are personifications of 
their hand-attributes, namely the hook, noose, 
chain, and bell, and of the activities and mantric 
50. On the STTS  (194.4–14, ed. Lokesh Chandra) and 
Vajraśekhara  (49b6/8.17), see Nihom 1998a: 248 and 253, 
notes 16–17 ( STTS : vajrāṅkuśa + ākarṣa + hūṁ jjah ; va-
jrapāśa +praveśa +  huṁ hūṁ ; vajrasphoṭa + bandha + huṁ 
vaṁ;  vajrāveśa + āveśa + hum aḥ ; VŚ: aṅkuśa + ākarṣa + 
hūṁ jaḥ ; vajrapāśa + praveśa +  hūṁ hūṁ ; vajrasphoṭa  + 
bandha + hūṁ baṁ ; vajrāveśa  + āveśa + hūṁ phaṭ ho ). 
Nihom (ibid.: 248) notes that the bījas for Vajrāṅkuśa ( jaḥ) 
and Vajrapāśa ( hūṁ ) correspond to those given in the 
mantras inscribed on the gold foils recovered from Candi 
Gumpung in Sumatra, which he regards as reflecting a 
form of the Garbhadhātumaṇḍala; I cannot however agree 
with his statement that ‘the bījas for Vajrasphoṭa, oṃ  in the 
Candi Gumpung evidence and vaṃ , or baṃ , in these two 
tantras, are different and can not be reconciled’, for o is a 
common spelling variant of va in documents from ancient 
Indonesia (therefore oṁ = vaṁ = baṁ ); on the other hand, 
the Candi Gumpung text has oṁ vajramuṣṭi baṁ . The 
item reflecting Vajrāveśa is absent. Sādhanamālā  no. 251 
lists the sequence jaḥ  (ānīya , adduction), hūṁ  (praveśa , 
penetration), vaṁ  (bandhana , binding), hoḥ  (toṣaṇa , 
satisfaction); no. 97 ( samayamaṇḍala ) gives the feminine 
names of goddesses (e.g., vajrāṅkuśī , -pāśī, -sphoṭā , -ghaṇṭā , 
associated with the activities of ākarṣa  and the syllable 
jaḥ, praveśa  and huṁ , bandha  and vaṁ , vaśīkaraṇa  and 
hoḥ  (Goudriaan 1978: 271). An analogous account of fem -
ininized deities is found in the Tibetan translation of the 
Herukasādhana  of Huṅkāravajra, f. 204r5–7 (see Sanderson 
2009: 153, n. 349). See also Sinclair, this volume, p. 50; S no-
dgrass 1988: 629–33; and fig. 1 in Sharma 2011: 211.operations they imply, and as such they are included 
in the sets of attributes of many wrathful ( krodha ) 
Buddhist deities, such as (Caṇḍa)Vajrapāṇi/Trai -
lokyavijaya, Yamāntaka, Hevajra, etc., whose func -
tion is to tame demonic forms of Śiva.51 The obvious 
implication is that in the Sarvavajrodaya  passage 
the practitioner is imagined to embody the deity: 
he is explicitly invited to identify himself with, or 
connect to, Vajrahūṁkāra ( vajrahūṁkārayogaṁ 
kṛtvā ), perform the four actions with the four at -
tributes, bind his ‘seal’ or mudrā  (vajrahūṁkāraṁ 
baddhvā ), and assume the pratyālīḍha  pose.52  
(2) ‘Ṭakkirāja’ denotes the mantra ṭakki , and 
at the same time a wrathful deity of Esoteric Bud -
dhism linked to Trailokyavijaya, whose function 
is to eliminate disasters and subdue demons and 
ghosts; his attributes are the hook and the noose. 
Similarly, a deity called Vajrarāja, inhabiting the 
Vajradhātumaṇḍala and associated with Akṣobhya, 
represents the unit jaḥ and the aṅkuśa  (as such it 
is also attested in the Candi Gumpung gold foil: 
oṁ vajrarāja jaḥ ).
51. See Griffiths (2014b) on the Borobudur inscribed foil 
attesting a hṛdaya  invoking Caṇḍavajrapāṇi, where that 
wrathful deity is characterized as bearing a sword, club, axe, 
snare, cudgel ( vajra ) and flaming fire, and putting his left 
and right foot respectively on the breasts of Pārvat ī an d the 
locks of Paśupati (Śiva). Griffiths (2014a: 178) notes that in 
Guhyasamājatantra  14.22 the mantra oṁ ṭakki hūṁ jaḥ 
is explicitly called sarvatathāgataṭakkirājamahākrodha ; 
the Tattvasaṅgraha  and Vajraśekhara  characterize the four 
weapons associated to the guardians of the maṇḍala  with 
the epithet mahākrodha . The STTS  relates that Vajrapāṇi 
issued forth from the hearts of all the assembled Tathāgatas,  
gathering together to create the body of Mahāvajrakrodha; 
then Vairocana uttered the mantra oṁ ṭakki jjaḥ , which 
is the disciplinary aṅkuśa of all the Tathāgatas (Davidson 
1991: 200) .
52. Cf. Griffiths 2014a: 178, n. 130. Goudriaan (1978: 217) 
quotes a verse of the Sādhanamālā  (71, p. 144) declaring that, 
when performing subjugation, a practitioner should master 
attributes such as ‘ vajra , disc, trident, arrow, hammer, 
noose, elephant hook, ointment, paste to be smeared on 
the feet, and painted spot on the forehead’; he argues that 
the implication from this and similar passages is that 
the practitioner should meditate on himself as bearing 
one or more of these attributes. An instance, found in a 
Dunhuang Tibetan manuscript, of ritual purification of 
the practitioner and his imaginative transformation of 
himself into the wrathful Buddha Ṭak kirāja is described 
by Dalton (2011: 87).
Acri mockup.indd   335 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 350] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia336
(3) The ‘extended’ mantric sequence given by 
Sarvavajrodaya  56 could be  ṭakki jaḥ hūṁ vaṁ 
hoḥ .53 The text is not the only one to add the unit 
ṭakki  (ṭakkirāja ) to the other four: significantly 
enough, a similar sequence is attested in the fourth 
Old Javanese stone inscription (9th century) men -
tioned by Griffiths (2014a: 179), bearing twice the 
sequence ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ jaḥ hūṁ vaṁ hoḥ —an 
extended variant of the ṭakki jaḥ hūṁ  mantra.54
(4) The mantras ṭaki  (Ṭakkirāja) and jaḥ 
(Vajrāṅkuśa) in the Sarvavajrodaya  are both as -
sociated with attraction ( ākarṣaṇa , goad),55 while 
hūṁ  is associated with drawing to oneself ( praveśa , 
snare)—which ultimately corresponds to a form of 
vaśīkaraṇa .56 Thus, the sequence ṭakki jaḥ hūṁ 
implies both attraction ( ākarṣaṇa ) and drawing to 
oneself ( vaśīkaraṇa ).57 In fact the sources display 
53. This is given in the devat āyoga  section of Kuladatta’s 
Kriy āsasaṅgraha  (ed. Inui, Part 2): oṁ ṭakki h ūṁ ja ḥ / iti 
paṭhan trir vajram ull āla yet / oṁ ṭakki ja ḥ hūṁ va ṁ ho ḥ 
// hṛdy utkar ṣaṇam (I thank Iain Sinclair for pointing out 
this reference in an email dated 30 August 2014).
54. This reading is reconstituted by Griffiths on the basis 
of Damais’ transcription paki hūṁ jaḥ jaḥ hūṁ vaho  
(2x); the original artefact is regrettably no longer available, 
and the context and function of the inscription remain 
obscure.  Griffiths (2014a: 179) traces this sequence to a 
virtually identical one in a section on the consecration 
of the Tantric master in the Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā  (6.2.9), 
namely oṁ ṭakki jaḥ hūṁ vaṁ hoḥ .
55. What Sundberg (2003: 173) calls ‘the hṛdaya  of 
aṅkuśa  used in the text as both the elephant-goad means 
of summoning the gods to Sumeru’ is actually (oṁ) ṭakki 
jaḥ and not hūṁ ṭakki jaḥ . His claim that this is also 
the personal hṛdaya or quintessence of Vajrapāṇi is in -
correct, for in the STTS  and related Buddhist literature 
the personal mantra of Vajrapāṇi—and of his alter-egos 
Vajrasattva, Vajradhara, Vajrah ūṁkāra,  and Trailok -
yavijaya—is hūṁ (see Linrothe 1999: 156) . One may also 
argue that the syllable jaḥ alone is the element that effects 
summoning. 
56. Mantramahodadhi  25.26f links the snare-seal ( pāśa-
mudrā ) with vaśīkaraṇa  (Goudriaan 1978: 289). 
57. See, e.g., Guhyasamāja  14.27–30, where ākarṣaṇa  is 
carried out by means of both vajrāṅkuśa  and vajrapāśa ; 
see Nihom 1995: 525 on the identification of ākarṣaṇa  and 
vaśīkaraṇa  in Esoteric Buddhist manuals. An illuminating 
discussion on the relationship between the attributes (and 
especially the hook and snare) of Esoteric Buddhist deities 
and the magical acts of ākarṣaṇa and  vaśīkaraṇa may be 
found in Goudriaan 1978: 316–17. a tendency to consider both goad and snare as 
characteristic of attraction, which constitutes 
a ‘reflection of the tendency to make attraction 
a facultative introductory stage to subjugation’ 
(Goudriaan 1978: 317). As Sundberg (2003: 173) 
notes, the basic idea of the mantra ṭakki (j)jaḥ , 
as found in the STTS ,
is that it is the mantra of a ‘hook’, ‘goad’ or a 
‘prod’ for summoning, for compulsion, for con -
vocation, the utterance of which has compelled 
Mahādeva to Sumeru. Iyanaga (1985: 669, note 
47) notes that the Japanese commentary pro -
vides some control over the meaning of the 
Sanskrit mantra, which could also be consid -
ered as ākarṣaṇa  (magic to draw to oneself) or 
by vaśīkarana (magic to draw someone to your 
will). Davidson (1991: 200) offers ‘dragged’ as a 
term suitable to connote what happened to the 
gods after Vairocana intoned the mantra.
At the same time Sundberg (2003: 173) refers 
to Snellgrove’s (1987: 222–23, quoted above) more 
articulated reading of the relevant passage of the 
STTS , which ‘serves very well to differentiate the 
use of the aṅkuśa from other Tantric implements’. 
The four actions of attracting, drawing to oneself, 
snaring and ‘penetrating’ are those narrated in the 
main episode in the Trailokyavijaya cycle of the 
taming of Maheśvara, the lord of demonic hosts. 
In fact taming or pacification ( śānti ) involves a 
more elaborate procedure than just the mantric 
abduction/attraction ( [ṭakki] jaḥ ) and binding 
(hūṁ ) of the victim, for it also implies mantric over -
powering (= vaṁ ) and resurrection (= hoḥ ), after 
which ‘conversion’ occurs. In view of that fact, one 
may connect the mantric units vaṁ  with fettering 
or immobilization ( bandhana  or stambhana , chain), 
and hoḥ  with ‘penetration’ or ‘possession’ ( āveśa , 
bell). The latter may be regarded as a violent act, as 
penetration implies ‘stabbing’ (with bell, perhaps 
figuratively indicating a ‘mantric penetration’ via 
the medium of sound).58
58. Perhaps because according to Sanskritic ontology 
sound pervades (i.e., ‘penetrates’) space ( ākāśa )—compare 
the association of phaṭ  with ākāśa  in the Gaṇapatitat -
tva and mahākāśa  in the Pañcakāṇḍa.  Also note that 
the word kīlayet  (‘he should pierce’ [with a kīla/kīlaya ]) 
appears after the sequence vajrāṅkuśādibhir ākṛṣya 
praveśya baddhvā vaśīkṛtya in Sarvavajrodaya  55. The 
Acri mockup.indd   336 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 351] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’337
(5) The invocation of these mantra-deities 
during the preliminary stage of the practice for the 
purpose of removing obstacles may correspond 
to the invocation of Gaṇapati as gate-guardian 
and remover of obstacles at the beginning of any 
undertaking; this trans-sectarian aspect mirrors 
the use of the opening formula ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ  
in the three short Old Javanese inscriptions in a 
manner that is co-functional with the use of the 
formula oṁ avighnam astu [ gaṇapataye namaḥ ] 
in inscriptions and manuscripts. Thus, the aim 
seems to have been apotropaic, i.e. to exorcise the 
potentially dangerous beings and transform them 
into benign guardians of the gates or points of the 
compass.59 This process is symbolically enacted 
through the summoning, drawing, overpowering, 
and reviving of the deity, who is thereby trans -
formed. At the same time, it cannot be exclud -
ed that the formula presupposes an element of 
anti-Śaiva polemic, alluding to the taming, con -
version, and transformation of Gaṇapati into an 
auspicious Buddhist deity. 
(6) The mention of ‘the refuge given by the 
Sun’ ( ādityasya parāyaṇam ) in śloka  4 of the Pañ-
cakāṇḍa—which does not explicitly refer to the 
deity it is devoted to—in association with purifi -
cation and destruction of disease and evil could be 
a reference to Amṛtakuṇḍali(n), a Buddhist vigh-
nāntaka  deity not unrelated to Vināyaka-Gaṇapati, 
STTS  makes clear that Mahādeva, having been rendered 
powerless and lying prostrate under the feet of Vajrapāṇi, 
literally becomes possessed as a result of the mantra oṁ 
vajrāviśa hanaya traṁ traṭ uttered by the latter. The 
‘suffering of Mahādeva’s possession’ only ceases after Va -
jrapāṇi intones the essential phrase of loving kindness of 
all the Buddhas: oṁ buddha maitrī vajra rakṣa haṁ 
(Davidson 1995c: 555). 
59. For a representative example of apotropaic and pro -
tective use of the ṭakkirāja- mantra in a Sanskrit source, 
see Vajrasattvaniṣpādana  of pseudo-Candrak īrt i (ed. 
Luo and Tomabechi 2009), 2.4.4, where a protective fence 
(prākāra ) and canopy ( vajrapañjara ) is meditatively visu -
alized: tataṣ ṭakkirājamantreṇa lohajalāgnivāyuprākāra -
catuṣṭayaṁ yathākramaṁ bāhyato vicintayet  / tatrāyaṁ 
mantraḥ—ṭakki hūṁ jaḥ ; similarly, in the Vajra śekhara /
Vajra śikhara , the mantra ṭakki ja  is used to clean out 
kleśa s (Taidō Kitamura 2012: 341, sec. 597), while in the 
Trailokyavijayamah āka lparāj a, ṭakki h ūṃ ja is used as 
a kavacamantra  (Taidō Kitamura 2014: 34). I thank Iain 
Sinclair for these references.who also resides, as the latter, in the northern sector 
of the maṇḍala .60 In connection with point (5) 
above, I wonder whether the use of the mantra  
jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ in the Gaṇapatitattva  
and the Old Javanese inscriptions reflects an 
attempt to ‘bridge’ the Buddhist Amṛtakuṇḍalin and the Śaiva Gaṇapati, which would amount to 
a Śaiva appropriation of a largely co-function -
al Buddhist apotropaic deity. Given that in the 
Amṛtakuṇḍalivināyakaban  d ha d hāraṇī  (cf. Giebel 
2010: 191) Amṛtakuṇḍalin is described as ‘having 
put an end to the life of Mahāgaṇapati’ ( mahāg -
aṇapatijīvitāntakarāya ), implying a fundamental 
enmity between the two vināyaka /vighnāntaka  
deities, this appropriation would carry an element 
of anti-Buddhist polemic.
...and on taming elephants 
The mantric unit jaḥ  is well represented in Buddhist 
Tantras as the mantric expedient used to adduct or 
invoke the victim or deity in the preliminary part 
60. Indeed the Shibahui zhigui  (Giebel 1995: 143) places 
the Sun ( sūrya ) among the apotropaic, originally Hindu 
deities of Maheśvara’s retinue (which includes Gaṇapa -
ti-Vināyaka), who are confined to the outer space of the 
maṇḍala ; the STTS  instead of Sūrya has Amṛtakuṇḍalin, 
‘for which the Tibetan sDe-dge and sNar-thang editions 
have ‘‘Nyi-Ma’’, viz. Sūrya/ Ādi tya, while Āna ndagarbha 
also identifies Amṛtakuṇḍali with Sūrya/ Ādi tya’ (ibid.: 145, 
n. 62). Griffiths (2014c) has detected a variant of the mantra 
of Amṛtakundalin, which is known from various ritual 
manuals in Sanskrit, in a prob. 11th- to 13th-century  stone 
inscription from Muara Takus in Sumatra; what might be 
another instance of a mantra related to Amṛtakuṇḍalin 
is that of the lead-bronze foil unearthed near Borobudur 
(cf. Griffiths 2014b), which shares the invocation namo 
ratnatrayāya  / namaḥś caṇḍavajrapāṇaye  / mahāyak -
ṣasenāpataye (with slight variants) with the opening part 
of the Amṛtakuṇḍalin mantra found in T 953.302c12–13, 
303a3–5 (cf. Sinclair, this volume) , the Amṛtakuṇḍalivinā -
yakabandhadhāraṇī  (cf. Giebel 2010: 190, and 192 for a 
discussion of parallels in the Susiddhikarasūtra  etc.). 
On the other hand, the connection between *Tāra-
Sūrya (Sgro ma nyi ma) or *Tāraka-Sūrya (Sgrol ba nyi 
ma) and Ṭakkirāja discussed by Dalton (2011: 239, n. 43) 
may be worth exploring. Tāraka features in a Śaiva myth 
as a demon oppressing Hindu gods, who is defeated by Śiva. 
Note also that on his vāhana  (the rat), ‘Gaṇapati symbolized 
a sun god covering the animal, which in ancient mythology 
is a symbol of the night’ (see Michael 1983: 95–96).
Acri mockup.indd   337 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 352] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia338
of the ritual or visualization.61 Being called ‘hook’ 
or ‘elephant-goad’ ( aṅkuśa ), it bears a strong asso -
ciation with elephants in the Indic imaginaire . The 
reason why jaḥ represents a hook or elephant-goad 
is obvious: in North and Eastern Indian scripts, 
such as Devan āgar ī and Siddhamātṛkā, this graphe -
me closely resembles such instruments ( ज D.;     and 
 S.).62 Furthermore, elephants represent the pre -
ferred victims of rituals of subjugation—especially 
in Buddhist texts; as noted by Goudriaan (1978: 332), 
‘when there is a question of animals to be tamed and 
brought under power, the elephant will be the most 
impressive object on which a performer’s abilities 
can manifest themselves’. 
A version of the ‘taming of Maheśvara’ myth 
featuring a demonic form of Gaṇapati is found in 
the 14th-century Old Javanese Buddhist kakavin 
Sutasoma . There Prince Sutasoma, a manifesta -
tion of the Bodhisattva Vairocana, ‘tames’ (i.e., 
converts to Buddhism) a nāga , a tigress, and the 
elephant-headed giant Gajavaktra—all explicitly  
portrayed as followers of the demonic form of Śiva 
known as Mahākāla, the counterpart of the Ma -
heśvara of the Trailokyavijaya cycle. The text cli -
maxes in the final confrontation between Sutasoma 
and Mahākāla, which also results in the taming 
and conversion of the latter to Buddhism. 
Insofar that it portrays the transformation of 
violent, unrestrained, and subversive demonic char -
61. See, e.g., GST  p. 55, 1f (Goudriaan 1978: 297), Heva -
jratantra  Ch. 4 (ibid.: 298); Sādhanamālā  no. 59 (ibid.: 
303). For occurrences of variants of the mantra ‘Aṅkuśa’ 
in Amoghapāśa-related ritual texts in the Taish ō canon, 
see Shinohara 2014: 135.
62. These associations are by no means uncommon in the 
Sanskritic tradition. Jayabhadra, the 9th-century Sinha -
lese vajrācārya  of Vikramaś īla, in his commentary to the 
Cakrasaṁvaratantra  homologizes the letters ra  and ha  of 
the Sanskrit syllabary (as written in northeastern India in 
that period) with the male and female genitals by virtue 
of their similarity in shape (Gray 2005: 440); in a similar 
fashion, the grapheme e (as written in Śāradā, as well as 
Devanāgar ī script) was called trikoṇa  (‘triangle’) and as -
sociated with the female organ by non-dual Śaiva authors 
Abhinavagupta and Jayaratha (Padoux 1990: 263–65). An 
association between ākarṣaṇa  and a ‘hook’ may be found 
in the Ṣaṭkarmadīpikā  (p. 188 st. 52), which declares that the 
victim of ākarṣaṇa  should be thought of as being ‘caught 
and dragged along like a fish by a fish hook’ (Goudriaan 
1978 : 291). acters—Mahākāla and his retinue—into ‘demon 
devotees’ of the Buddha, the narrative cycle of the 
Sutasoma  recalls that of the ‘taming of Maheśvara/
Rudra’ in the Trailokyavijaya cycle . Canto 32–33 
of the Sutasoma  is devoted to the conversion of 
the degraded demonic form of Gaṇapati (Gaja -
vaktra, Gajendramukha)63 from (Śaiva) demon to 
(Buddhist) Lord of demons, and hence protector of 
the outer space of the maṇḍala . If O’Brien’s (2008) 
view that the Sutasoma  narrative is a representa -
tion of a maṇḍala  is correct, then the Gajavaktra 
episode, which occurs at an early stage of Sutaso -
ma’s journey, would (fittingly) represent its outer 
section .64 Amoghavajra’s Shibahui zhigui  (‘Indi -
cations of the Goals of the Eighteen Assemblies’), 
describing the section of the Vajraśekharasūtra  
on the Trailokyavijayamaṇḍala (which, being in 
the section of the First Assembly, corresponds to 
the STTS ), mentions twenty Protectors residing 
in the outer space of the maṇḍala , who were con -
verted by Vajrapāṇi, like their ‘head’ Maheśvara 
(Snodgrass 1988: 559–63, 637).65 From this evidence 
one may infer that a cycle on the conversion of 
Gaṇapati—intended as a member of Maheśvara/
63. Gajavaktra is declared to be a grossly evil being that 
is different from the god Gaṇarāja, son of Śiva, who is de -
picted in positive terms as the victor over the Great Lord 
of Demons. Gajavaktra belongs to a set of eight ‘pre-con -
version’ vināyaka s in some Chinese Buddhist texts; this 
set probably derives from an earlier Purāṇic set (cf. Agni -
purāṇa  III.3.4 and Garuḍapurāṇa  I.129.26 [as Hastimukha], 
referred to in Sinclair, this volume, p. 47, n. 88). As reported 
by Iain Sinclair (email dated 4 April 2014), Gajavaktra is 
a synonym of Gaṇeśa in some Newāri Buddhist works.
64. O’Brien (ibid.: 179) places the episode in the northern 
sector, which is in agreement with the description of a 
form of Vināyaka in the northern sector of the maṇḍala  by 
Amoghavajra. As the bo d hyagrī-mudrā  used by Sutasoma to 
overcome Gajavaktra (see below, n. 67 ) is usually associated 
with Mahāvairocana and the vajra , O’Brien sees a contra -
diction between this and the fact that the Jinabuddha of the 
northern quadrant is Amoghasiddhi, which is normally 
associated with the dhyāna-mudrā . However, the reference 
to Mahāvairocana’s bodhyagrī-mudrā would seem to be 
appropriate in the Gajavaktra episode—cf. above, n.  51 on 
Vairocana’s connection with the ṭakki hūṁ jaḥ mantra, 
ākarṣaṇa , and the conversion of Maheśvara in the STTS .
65. Snodgrass uses the Japanese form, Jūhachie  sh iki  (‘Syn -
opsis of the Eighteen Assemblies’), i.e. the Kongōchōkyō-
yuga-jūhatte-shiki  (T 869); an annotated translation is 
provided by Giebel (1995: see esp. 142–46, and 150–51, n. 92).
Acri mockup.indd   338 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 353] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’339
Mahākāla’s retinue—must have existed by the time 
of Amoghavajra, and that the Gajavaktra episode of 
the Old Javanese Sutasoma might have been based 
on such a cycle.66
The subjugation of Gajavaktra in the Sutasoma 
is effected through a mantric thunderbolt-weapon 
(bodhyagrī-mudrā ) generated from the ‘knowledge 
that is a means of destroying violence’.67 This 
66. The STTS  (ed. Horiuchi, vol. 1, p. 520), in a section 
dealing with the outer space of the maṇḍala , details a 
series of mantras and invocations to Vajrapāṇi for the 
harming and warding off of Gaṇapati, Mahāgaṇapati, 
and Vināyaka; in section 1245 the process involves the six 
acts of ākarṣaṇa , praveśa , āveśa , bandhana , vaśīkaraṇa , 
and māraṇa  (oṁ vajramālagaṇapate mālayākarṣaya 
praveśayāveśaya bandhaya vaśīkuru māraya huṁ phaṭ ). 
It would be worthwhile to investigate the sādhana- text 
pertaining to Krodhagaṇapati (Tibetan Canon no. 4994) 
attributed to At īśa ’s guru from Suvarṇadv īpa (see Schoter -
man, this volume), as well as Chinese Tantric Buddhist 
materials, such as those described by Duquenne (1988) and 
Lancaster (1991), which ‘present a wealth of references to 
Vināyaka along with the spells, dhāraṇ ī, mud ra, and other 
rituals that could keep this malevolent spirit under control’ 
(ibid.: 279). As related by Lancaster (ibid.: 282), a text ( T 
849) devoted, like the Sutasoma , to the Buddha Vairocana, 
informs us that the Vināyakas and all the evil yakṣa s will 
be seized with fear and run away when they hear the spell 
being recited. Duquenne (1988: 323) mentions a Japanese 
Daijizaiten-hōsoku-giki  (Maheśvara-vidhi-kalpa ?), which 
is in fact a slightly enlarged version of the Shijuhō-kyō  (i.e., 
Shizhoufa jing , T 1267) attributed to Bodhiruci, which is 
dedicated to Vināyaka rituals and spells. The former text 
points to a Śaiva (or perhaps Trailokyavijaya cycle-related) 
context in its title.
67. Sutasoma hits Gajavaktra in the chest, and the demon 
is ‘rendered completely powerless; exhausted, he lay pros -
trate, unable to budge the heavy thunderbolt-weapon 
weighing down on him’ (O’Brien 2008: 45). Gajavaktra is 
thus ‘exorcised’ and the Gaṇa who had taken hold of him 
departs from the elephant-faced being, who regains control 
of his passions. The bodhyagrī-mudrā  is characterized in 
Canto 33.9c as jñānāveśa minuṣṭi , perhaps ‘penetration 
by Gnosis embodied in a fist’. This characterization calls 
to mind the mudrā  (and weapon) of the central divinity 
of the STTS  (i.e., either Vajrasattva or Vairocana), jñāna-
muṣṭi-mudrā  ‘fist of knowledge’ (Lokesh Chandra 1987: 
46), which is indeed a synonym of bodhyagrī-mudrā  (or 
bodhāgrī mudra , as described in STTS , ed. Horiuchi vol. 
1, p. 185, section 285; Sarvavajrodaya , suppl., ed. Takahashi 
1990: 78): cf. de Mallman (1986: 33, 34, 62, 130, 242, 331, 386, 
392, 393), B.T. Bhattacharya (1949: 66–68), and Bautze-Pi -
cron (2010a: 59–60). Snodgrass (1988: 316–17) describes a knowledge is, appropriately enough, suggested 
to Sutasoma by the god Indra (Canto 31.10), the 
arch-enemy—and tamer—of elephants, who rides 
the white Airāvata elephant and bears a vajra , an 
elephant-goad, and a net as his attributes. The 
mention of Indra is significant: as argued by Bosch 
(1947), Vajrapāṇi (and later, Vajrasattva) represents 
a Buddhist development of the Brahmanical god 
Indra; the former retains the attributes of the latter, 
and his hostility to (or mastership over) elephants; 
both reside in the eastern point of the compass.68 
As we have seen, (a fierce form of) Vajrapāṇi is 
the main Bodhisattva in the Trailokyavijaya cycle. 
That this cycle was known in Central Java 
around the 9th century may be inferred, apart 
from the mantra inscribed on the Ratu Boko gold 
foil, from a dhāraṇī  inscribed on a lead-bronze 
foil unearthed near Borobudur, which could be 
dated to between the 8th and early 10th century 
Vajramuṣṭi Bodhisattva (himself representing Mahāvairo -
cana’s inner realization), whose vajramuṣṭi -mudrā  ‘strikes 
and destroys doubt, karma and other hindrances’. One 
may connect the bodhyagrī-mudrā and Vajrahūṁkāra, 
both of which are associated with penetration ( āveśa ). A 
vajrahūṁkāra-mudrā  associated with the krodha -deities 
Saṁvara and Hevajra is described by Linrothe (1999: 283, 
286–87, 290, 298, 334); this is also the mudrā  that the prac -
titioner should assume (in meditation) in Sarvavajrodaya  
56. Scriptural evidence linking the vajrahūṁkāra-mudrā  
to the vajramuṣṭi  is found in the Sarvadurgatipariśodhana  
(ed. Skorupski p. 136, trans. p. 13): ‘The inner enclosure is 
made by means of Vajrahuṁkāra , saying: huṁ . He binds 
the vajra -fists [ vajramuṣṭidvaya ] and forms a vajra  with his 
arms; the little fingers he makes into hooks [ aṅkuśa ] and 
raises the forefingers into a point known as Trilokyavijaya 
(Victor over the Threefold World). This is the gesture of 
Vajrahuṁkāra ’. 
68. In fact, an association between Indra and Gaṇapati 
is already found in the early Vedic corpus (see Michael 
1983: 103–6). We also find an association between hūṁ , 
wind, Rudra and Vajrapāṇi/Vajrasattva/Indra: all these 
deities embody, to varying degrees, the terrible aspect of 
such fierce atmospheric phenomena as storm and thunder. 
In the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Buddhist manual Saṅ Hyaṅ 
Kamahāyānikan , Vajrasattva is placed in the east, asso -
ciated with the mantra hūṁ , and attributed an elephant 
as vehicle (the last association is found in ms. B only; see 
Damais 1969: 89). In Gaṇapatitattva  59–60, the mantra 
hūṁ  is linked to the element wind (the same is found in 
a Chinese text by Śubhākarasiṁha: see Damais 1969: 86), and associated with the visualization of Rudra.
Acri mockup.indd   339 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 354] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia340
(Kandahjaya 2009; Lokesh Chandra 2013; Griffiths 
2014a , whose reconstituted text and translation I 
am quoting here). In the Mahāraudranāmahṛdaya , 
a fierce form of Vajrapāṇi (Caṇḍavajrapāṇi as 
Mahāyakṣasenāpati)—and his ‘greatly ferocious 
mantra’—is invoked to cause ‘the destruction of all 
of (Śiva’s) bhūta s and Gaṇas, that causes terror, fear 
and conflict, that causes the success of all rituals!’ 
(sarvvabhūtagaṇavināśakaraṁ raudrākāraṁ trās -
abhayavivādakaraṁ sarvvakarmmasiddhikaraṁ ). 
This mantra is declared to destroy all enemies ( sar-
vaśatru ), obstacles ( sarvavighna ), diseases ( sarva -
vyādhi ), illnesses ( sarvaroga ), and all Vināyakas 
(sarvavināyaka ). The left foot of Vajrapāṇi is placed 
on the pair of breasts of Pārvat ī.69 The inscription 
closes with a second text, a mantra composed in 
standard Sanskrit, which also opens with the same 
invocation to Caṇḍavajrapāṇi, and ends with the 
sequence  ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ jaḥ hūṁ kiṭa hūṁ ṭaki 
dhuṁ kiṭa dhuṁ iya ija i_ḥ svāh ā—a variant 
of the ‘Ratu Boko mantra’. As noted by Griffiths, 
it seems that these two texts were not originally 
composed together, yet they clearly display a com -
monality of context and function.70 
It is significant that besides the destruction of 
enemies ( sarvaśatru ) and obstacles ( sarvavighna ), 
the mahāraudranāmahṛdaya  explicitly mentions 
the destruction of all Vināyakas, namely the 
demonic forms of the elephant-headed god Gaṇapa -
ti. As we have seen above, the mantra ṭakki jaḥ 
hūṁ represents the (Elephant-)goad hostile to 
69. Compare the above-quoted passage of the Sarva -
vajrodaya , where the practitioner (embodying the deity 
Vajrahūṁkāra) is invited to assume the pratyālīḍha  stance 
and step on the effigy of the obstacle ( vighnaprakṛti , the 
tamed Śaiva deity?) with his left foot. This image re-enacts 
the events described in the Trailokyavijaya myth, when 
‘Maheśvara and his consort Umā were dragged nude and 
feet up before Vajrapāṇi, who stepped on Maheśvara with 
his left foot and on Umā’s breasts with his right’ (Sund -
berg 2003: 169). Griffiths (2014b) discusses the problem 
posed by the iconography transmitted by the dhāraṇī  and 
the known sculptural corpus all over the Buddhist world, 
which shows representations of Trailokyavijaya/Vajrapāṇi 
with an opposite position of the feet (i.e., left foot on Śiva, 
right foot on Pārvat ī).
70. As discovered by Kandahjaya (2009), the first text 
has a parallel in the Navakampa , a Sanskrit stuti  recovered 
from Balinese manuscripts (see above, n. 12 ). Gaṇapati, and is also connected with purification 
and removal of obstacles. Either of these facts, or 
perhaps both, could explain the occurrence of the 
sequence oṁ ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ as a calque of oṁ avi -
ghnam astu (oṁ gaṇapataye namaḥ)  in Old 
Javanese inscriptions and manuscripts. The same 
concern with the removal of obstacles, purification, 
and subjugation/destruction of enemies is found 
in the Pañcakāṇḍa ; even more so, it features in 
the closing section of the Gaṇapatitattva , where a 
pot-pourri of mantras and visualization techniques 
with both harmful and protective purposes, and to 
grant (ritual) success and destroy obstacles, were 
compiled one after the other.71
Represented in Esoteric Buddhist texts and 
visual documents as a quintessentially Śaiva de
mon  ic deity being tamed (i.e., trampled upon) 
by krodha-vighn āntaka  deities such as Acala, 
Vighnān  taka, and Heruka/Saṁvara,72 Gaṇapati 
was absorbed as a minor deity ( vināyaka ) with the 
71. A series of goals that calls to mind those described 
in the Mahāraudranāmahṛdaya  and the closing section 
of the Gaṇapatitattva  is listed in connection with the 
mahāhṛdayadhāraṇī  bestowed by the ferocious goddess 
Vidyutkarāl ī t o Sutasoma at the beginning of his journey 
(Sutasoma  12.1), namely (the destruction of) hindrances 
(vighna ), impurity ( mala ), all enemies ( sarvaśatru ), diseases 
(roga ) and misfortunes ( upadrava ), as well as the highest 
supernatural prowess ( siddhyottama ).
72. A useful treatment of the historical development of 
the apotropaic Krodha-Vighnāntaka deities vis-à-vis the 
Dharmapāla and Guardian deities ( dikpāla ) is offered by 
Linrothe (1999: 19–28). Having noted that ‘the essential 
metaphor behind the krodha-vighnāntaka  is that of the 
dompteur-dompté  relationship’, Linrothe (1999: 214) draws 
attention to the pair Acala and Vighnāntaka, ‘who are both 
depicted dominating ‘‘obstruction’’ itself, in the form of 
Gaṇeśa or Vināyaka’. As for Heruka Saṁvara, Linrothe (ibid.: 
277) notes that this deity  ‘appears just as Trailokyavijaya 
disappears, and he has so much in common with Trailok -
yavijaya that Saṁvara may be considered the Phase Three 
reincarnation of Trailokyavijaya’. A standard element of the 
iconography of Saṁvara is the elephant skin (representing 
illusion, which is destroyed by Saṁvara); a Saṁvara dancing 
on the head of an elephant (prob. 11th or 12th century) is 
depicted in the Khmer sanctuary of Phimai in modern Thai -
land (see Conti 2014: 388). Another Phase Three Tantric Bud -
dhist example of subjugation of Gaṇeśa/Vināyaka is the rep -
resentation of the latter as prostrated at the bottom of stelae 
depicting the healing goddess Parṇaśavar ī/P arṇaśabar ī, an  
emanation of Amoghasiddhi (Verardi 2011: 373).
Acri mockup.indd   340 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 355] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’341
function of protecting, overcoming obstacles, and 
guarding boundaries. In fact Gaṇapati/Vināyaka 
occupies an ambivalent position in both the Bud -
dhist and Śaiva pantheons:
As one whose demon ancestry is manifest … 
Gaṇeśa is superbly qualified to be lord over 
Śiva’s gaṇa s, themselves a generally unruly 
bunch. As one of the demons brought over 
into the family of the great lord Śiva, Gaṇeśa 
mediates between the oppositional forces of 
the divine and the demonic. He understands 
the demons; he knows their ways and does 
not fear their powers. Like his father [Śiva] … 
Gaṇeśa stands both outside and inside the di -
vine worlds as he dwells at the threshold…. He 
both places and removes obstacles and facili -
tates and thwarts undertakings. (Courtright 
1985: 136)
[Vināyaka] is at once the creator and remover 
of hindrances. He is maleficent unless con -
trolled, and many Buddhist rituals commence 
with formulae to prevent Vināyaka from ob -
structing the efficacious performance of the 
ritual and to rechannel his energies in guard -
ing the mandala from disrupting influences. 
The dual character of Vināyaka is like that of 
an elephant, powerfully destructive and terri -
fying when uncontrolled, but obediently using 
his immense strength to serve those who nur -
ture and control him. (Snodgrass 1988: 642)
Gaṇapati’s ambiguous status secured him a 
liminal position at the boundary between the Śai -
va-Buddhist divide, resulting in a trans-sectarian 
cult where the god maintained a co-functional role 
in both religions. 
A series of Buddhist and Śaiva embodiments of 
Gaṇapati intended as vighnāntakṛt , i.e. destroyers 
of obstacles, are attested in texts and visual do -
cuments as wrathful deities that display demonic 
features, and whose main function was to dispel 
demons and remove hindrances. Linrothe (1999: 
25) reminds us that ‘the primary activity of the 
krodha -vighnāntaka  deities … is not merely to 
protect sacred territory or the aspirant, but to 
destroy obstacles, both outer and inner, mundane 
and transcendental’. F orms of Vināyaka appear 
in the list of twenty outer Guardian or Protector 
gods of each of the four gates of the Perfected Body maṇḍala  in Sino-Japanese Tantric Buddhist texts; 
a separate Vināyaka is also placed in the northern 
sector.73
As a ‘tamed demon’ and at the same time a tamer 
of demons, creator of obstacles ( vināyaka ) and 
destroyer of obstacles ( vighnāntakṛt ), Vināyaka/
Gaṇapati represents the outcome of the Buddhist 
(and Śaiva) narrative of transformation from bhūta  
to bhūtarāja , or from criminal to protector of the  
religion. According to Mayer (1998: 274) this nar -
rative, most effectively portrayed in the Trailokya -
vijaya cycle, repeats 
a widespread pattern found in Indian religions 
in which deities transform hostile demons into their loyal devotees (often giving them 
the specific function of guardian or protector) through the medium of first slaying them, and 
then bring  ing them back to life. 
(inter-)religious implications  
of the ratu boko yantra
The materials presented above share a constella -
tion of common themes in the domain of mantric 
technology, which is mainly used to avert illnesses, 
acquire mundane and supramundane goals, influ -
ence other people, and purify or ‘convert’ hostile 
beings. Having advanced the hypothesis that the 
Ratu Boko gold foil and its engraved mantra con -
stitute a yantra  of Tantric magic, and having elab -
orated on the connections between the mantra and 
Gaṇapati, I now proceed to discuss its implications 
for the contemporary Central Javanese religious 
and socio-political situation. 
Continuing the train of thought started by 
Sundberg and Jordaan and Colless, a fruitful line 
of enquiry seems to be the analysis of the yantra , 
and the mantra ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ  in general, in the 
context of the Bauddha- Śaiva polemic . An evident 
anti-Śaiva stance is reflected in the use of the ṭaki 
jaḥ hūṁ  mantra in the context of the taming of 
Maheśvara by Vajrapāṇi in the Trailokyavijaya 
cycle narrated in the STTS  and related Buddhist 
sources in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese, as well 
73. See, e.g., Śākyamitra’s commentary to the Vajraśekha -
rasūtra  and Amoghavajra’s Shibahui zhigui  (Japanese 
Jūhachieshiki ), discussed in Snodgrass 1988: 588–89, 640–42.
Acri mockup.indd   341 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 356] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia342
as, more generally, in the context of annihilation of 
obstacles by krodha-vighnāntaka  deities. A similar 
anti-Śaiva attitude is found in some documents 
from premodern Java, namely the Borobudur 
dhāraṇī  devoted to Caṇḍavajrapāṇi, which destroys 
all Vināyakas, and the Sutasoma kakavin , which 
narrates a version of the taming of Śiva/Mahākāla 
that also features the taming of his retinue (Gaja -
vaktra, a nāga , and a tigress). On the other hand, 
the association of the mantra with Gaṇapati, as 
witnessed by its occurrence as the incipit of two 
Old Javanese inscriptions recovered from Śaiva 
sites (where o ṁ ṭakkijaḥ  represents a calque of 
oṁ avighnam astu [ gaṇapataye namaḥ ]), and in 
the closing section of the ( Śaiva ) Gaṇapatitattva , 
suggests that dynamics of trans-sectarian appro -
priation were at play from the second half of the 
9th century in Central Java. The homologization 
of the five units of the mantra jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ 
phaṭ,  already attested as such in the (Buddhist) 
Pañcakāṇḍa,  with a pentad of manifestations of 
Śiva may constitute a Śaiva ‘signature’ implying the 
‘rebranding’ of what was perceived as an eminently 
Buddhist mantra.74 
One may wonder whether the Śaiva appropria -
tion of a Buddhist mantra implied a statement of su -
periority of the former religion over the latter, and 
whether this appropriation represented a (subtle, or 
implied) Śaiva ‘retaliation’ towards what was felt 
to be a mantra hostile to Śaivism in general, and 
Gaṇapati in particular, because of the connections 
with the acts of ākarṣa ṇa and vaśīkaraṇa , their 
instruments (elephant-goad and the snare), and 
the deity Vajrapāṇi in the Trailokyavijaya cycle.75  
74. I wonder whether the inversion of the element jaḥ in 
the mantric sequence given in both the Pañcakāṇḍa  and 
the Gaṇapatitattva , i.e. its shift to before ṭaki (oṁ ṭaki 
jaḥ hūṁ svāhā > jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ) , may be seen 
as a sign of purposeful ‘rebranding’; however, this would 
be at odds with the fact that the Pañcakāṇḍa  seems to 
be predominantly Buddhist, and indeed still not used by 
modern Balinese Śaiva priests.
75. Snellgrove (2004: 141–42, n. 50) argues that the element 
niśumbha  in the spell oṁ niśumbhavajra hūṁ phaṭ  
uttered by Vajrapāṇi just before the spell oṁ ṭakki jaḥ 
in the STTS  means ‘slaughter’, and ‘thus it may have come 
into use as a destructive spell with Śaivite associations’ 
(on the association of ṭakki  with phaṭ  and māraṇa , cf. 
my n. 19  above); with respect to ṭakki jaḥ , he notes that Mayer (1998: 274) seems to portray a less clear-cut 
situation when he says that the ‘taming of Ma -
heśvara/Rudra narrative’
can be seen to document the process described 
by Levi-Strauss as ‘bricolage’, in which persisting 
cultural materials are re-worked to create new 
cultural  r econstructions.76
In fact, one may also suppose that dynamics 
of mantric and ritual technology might have been 
at play here: ritual, and especially magic, was a 
‘grey zone’—or ‘penumbra’, as Orzech, Payne and 
Sørensen (2011: 12) put it—that favoured inclusion 
and eclecticism in view of the co-functionality of 
the practices from the point of view of practitioners, 
ritual specialists, and patrons alike. All the more 
so in Java where, as noted long ago by Stutterhem 
(1989 [1925]: 242), ‘the main point was always the 
mantras themselves, in short the magic practices. 
Śivaite or Buddhistic are here no more than [a] 
difference of system[s] of magic’.
‘Ṭakka seems to have been applied to certain aborigines, 
hence the meaning of ‘‘wild’’. Ṭak kijjaḥ would thus mean 
‘‘savage-born’’. Ṭak kara is an epithet of Śiva’ (indeed, Ṭak kī 
in some Prakrit grammatical works is regarded as an un -
refined dialect of Apabrahṁśa, spoken by semi-educated 
people, and is sometimes associated with Drāviḍ ī: se e 
Nitti-Dolci 1938: 101, 127–29). On the other hand, Dalton 
(2011: 239, n. 43) associates Ṭak ki with the root tāraka  and 
the name of the demon Tāraka, which features in a Śaiva 
cycle (cf. above, n. 60). Dalton argues that Tāraka may be 
‘a pseudonym for Takkirāja or a case of creative etymology 
on the part of Indians or Tibetans (or both)’, and draws 
attention to the toponym Ṭak ki in northern Punjab, which 
according to Tucci was the place of origin of a ‘local deity’ 
called Ṭakkirāja. Given the lack of evidence in Śaiva litera -
ture, it would be speculative to maintain that the ṭaki jaḥ 
mantra was originally Śaiva, and only later borrowed—and 
preserved—by the Buddhists; however, given the evidence 
of widespread borrowing of originally Śaiva materials in 
Buddhist texts documented by Sanderson (2009: 124–240), 
this possibility must be kept in mind. 
76. Mayer (1998: 274) also sees the Trailokyavijaya cycle as 
constituting ‘the charter myth (more or less in a Malinows -
kian sense) of the Vajrayāna in its specifically kāpālika 
forms, in other words as the myth by which the Buddhists 
explained and justified to themselves and to the world 
their co-option of so much of the religion of their Śaiva 
rivals’. This implies that the ‘anti-Śaiva’ sentiment could 
have been triggered by the realization that Śaiva elements 
indeed permeated Tantric Buddhism. 
Acri mockup.indd   342 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 357] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’343
On account of the association between the 
mantra on the Ratu Boko artefact and the taming 
of Maheśvara by Vajrapāṇi , Sundberg (2003: 182–83) 
argued that 
implicit in the choice of mantra used by Pa -
narabwan is a story of some degree of tension 
between the Buddhist yoga tantrists and the 
Śaivites whose god was mythically subdued, 
murdered, resurrected, and converted.… In 
adopting his Buddhism, and more importantly 
in scribing his name to a plaque of anti- Śaivite 
character, Panarabwan seemingly repudiated 
in strong terms the religion of his probable an -
cestor Sañjaya.
While I agree with Sundberg’s interpretation of 
the mantra as fundamentally anti-Śaiva in nature 
and purpose, I do not share his opinion that the 
yantra  would have been crafted by Panaraban him -
self.77 In a somewhat contradictory manner (see 
Jordaan and Colless 2004: 62), Sundberg (2003: 
179; 2006: 112, n. 25) suggests that the mantra 
might have had a benedictory nature on account 
of its being enclosed within the mantric units oṁ 
… svāhā , and its having been recovered beneath 
the west rather than east gate of the Ratu Boko 
complex—the east being the direction of the first 
summoning ( ākarṣaṇa ) rite according to the STTS . 
The former argument can be easily dispelled by 
noting, as I have done above, that sv āhā  does not 
77. Sundberg (2003: 177) speculates that Panaraban ‘by 
inscribing his name within the dot of the ‘‘i’’, has infixed 
his name as a vital component of the sacred mantra. In 
this way, he is operating within the circumference of the 
mystic vowel itself, and clearly intends to link himself to the 
mantra or the cosmic being it points to, albeit in a manner 
we cannot understand’; see also Sundberg 2006: 112, n. 25: 
‘What is more, the essence of the conceptual innovation 
which defined the yoga stage of the tantras was the yogic 
identification of the practitioner with the deity—it is en -
tirely expected within this system that Panarabwan actively 
seek the binding of his preferred deity to himself’. The latter 
argument is a valid one, as we have seen that some of the 
usages of the mantra ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ (vaṁ hoḥ) involved 
an element of (self-)visualization as the krodha  deity de -
stroying or taming the opponents; however, this element of 
visualization cannot be applied to the Ratu Boko artefact, 
which evidently represents a yantra , and which only attests 
the name(s) of the victim(s) without mentioning any deity. 
In fact, Tantric manuals often prescribe visualization by 
the attacker of the victim  of the spell.necessarily entail a benedictory nuance—in fact, 
it is connected with ākarṣaṇ a and vaśīkaraṇa  in 
some Tantric texts on yantra s (cf. above, p. 332). 
Similarly, to counter the latter argument I may 
point out that the west is connected with snaring, 
and deities bearing the snare ( pāśa ) as attribute 
in both Buddhist and Śaiva sources;78 the pāśa is 
in turn connected with vaśīkaraṇa , and therefore 
does not necessarily imply an ‘inversion’ resulting 
in a beneficient rather than maleficient procedure. 
Given that the mantra ṭakki hūṁ jaḥ  was used 
in the context of the ‘mantric battle’ narrated in the 
various myths of the subjugation of Maheśvara, it 
is logical to assume that it was used as a means to 
subjugate or ‘spellbind’ the ruling king. The idea 
that the artefact would represent the re-enactment 
of a similar battle in the real world, which implies 
conversion of a king from Śaivism to Buddhism, 
was advanced by Jordaan and Colless (2004: 61) . 
They argued that, there being no evidence that the 
mantra was composed at Panaraban’s instigation, 
the engraving of the personal raka  title of Pana -
raban within the inflated ī of ṭak ī conveyed ‘the 
idea of his being caught and tied up with ropes and 
rendered powerless’ (p. 62), and its main intention 
‘could have been the mantrical subjugation and con -
version of Panaraban’ from Śaivism to Buddhism 
(ibid.: 61). Even the Javanese geographical setting, 
i.e. the Ratu Boko hillock, would correspond to 
Mount Sumeru, when the Trailokyavijaya story is 
set. To Jordaan and Colless (ibid.: 61–62), the ar -
tefact could have been crafted by the monks of the 
Buddhist establishments (maybe the Abhayagiri -
vihāra?) on the Ratu Boko hillock, who ‘by infixing 
Panarabwan’s name into the same mantra that was 
used to subjugate Śiva in the myth of Trailokya -
vijaya … sought to establish a similar coercive 
hold over Panarabwan’. While we know virtually 
nothing about the historical figure of Panaraban 
and the events that occurred during his reign, in 
the Carita Parahyaṅan  we find a reference to a di -
alogue between this king and his (alleged) father 
Rahyaṅ Sañjaya, who addresses him as follows: ‘O 
child, change (from) my religion, because it scares 
78. The association of the western side of Buddhist 
maṇḍala s with the fetter is noted by Sundberg too (2003: 
179).
Acri mockup.indd   343 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 358] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia344
people’ ( hayva dek nurutan agama aiṅ, kena aiṅ 
mrәtakutna uraṅ ryea ). This intriguing detail leads 
us to speculate that the Old Sundanese text might 
have preserved a vague memory of a dramatic and 
far-reaching religious conversion, or even of a re -
ligious conflict, linked to this king and his reign, 
which predates the Carita Parahyaṅan  by perhaps 
six or seven centuries.79
Examples of (Buddhist) narratives being used 
as a commentary on real-world scenarios of re -
ligious (i.e., Śaiva-Bauddha) frictions abound in 
the Sanskrit and Tibetan traditions. For instance, 
Mayer (1998: 273) has described Esoteric Buddhist 
discourses on the ‘all-powerful malignance of 
Śiva and his entourage, specifically in their more 
radically transgressive or kāpālika tantric forms’, 
which were criticized for seducing many devotees 
into demonic religious practices, thereby posing 
a threat to the Buddhist religion. To Mayer (ibid.: 
274), the ‘taming of Maheśvara/Rudra narrative’ 
may be seen as ‘giving a Buddhist commentary (in 
the Geertzian sense) upon Śaiva-Buddhist relations’. 
According to Dalton (2011: 36),
the Rudra-taming myth reflects these bur -
geoning sectarian rivalries … by destroying 
Śiva and binding all the Brahmanical gods into 
service, the buddhas were not only providing 
a model for subsequent ritual of demon-tam -
ing; they were also demonstrating Buddhism’s 
superiority over Brahmanism, and Śaivism in 
particular.
Davidson (2002: 197), when discussing the 
vajra , i.e. the symbol of Vajrayāna par excellence, 
introduces an element of realpolitik, arguing that 
the vajra  represented the king’s right to force—
the metaphorical legal ‘staff’ ( daṇḍa ), which 
legal literature claimed as the essence of kin -
gship—and therefore the symbol of the Bud -
dha’s Law (Dharma). The enforcement of the 
law was left to Vajrap āṇi (Vajra in Hand), who 
ensures that the criminal elements (mythically 
represented by either M āra or [ Śiva] Mahe śvara 
79. A discussion of the passage in question and, in general, 
of the Carita Parahyaṅan  and other textual sources that 
may help us to reconstruct the socio-political and religious 
landscape of the early Mataram kingdom of Central Java 
may be found in Sundberg 2011.in the esoteric system) would not overwhelm 
the monasteries. The Mahe śvaras of the world 
were stubborn, and Vajrap āṇi was represented 
as the ‘best of those subduing the difficult to 
tame’ ( durd āntadamakaḥ paraḥ ).
To Davidson, the worlds of feudal politics, un -
stable social realities and sectarian competition 
largely coincided during the ‘Tantric turn’ that 
dominated the early Mediaeval Indic world.
socio-political implications  
of the ratu boko yantra
That the relationship between certain Buddhist and 
Śaiva factions may have been less than idyllic was 
suggested by Jordaan (1999b: 70), who did not rule 
out the possibility that ‘Central Javanese society 
was riddled by social tensions in which religious 
affiliations came to play an ever important part’. 
On the other hand, Jordaan (1999b: 47–54, 2006: 
6, 10) also argued against the often too simplis -
tic view of relationships between Śaiv ism and 
Buddhism in early Central Java propounded by 
scholars, pointing out that the two religions may 
have peacefully cohabited and any anti-Buddhist 
sentiment may be attributable to political reasons, 
namely the conflict between the Sañjaya and the 
Śailendra lines of kings. What the archaeological 
remains—and, with an element of ambiguity, the 
literary sources—tell us is that by the middle of the 
9th century Buddhism continues to coexist along 
with Śaivism, yet it ceases to be the ‘state religion’, 
and from that period onwards the architecture of 
Central Java becomes predominantly Hindu (i.e., 
Śaiva). This is witnessed, for instance, by the ‘oc -
cupation’ of the Ratu Boko promontory (formerly 
colonised by Buddhist foundations, such as the 
Abhayagirivihāra) by Śaiva religious foundations 
(Sundberg, this volume; Degroot 2006: 71), the pro -
liferation of inscriptions of Śaiva character (some 
of which were associated with Vināyaka),80 and the 
construction of the Loro Jonggrang temple in the 
80. The Pereng and Dawangsari inscriptions share a close 
association with the cult of Vināyaka, and were formerly 
placed in the vicinity of a colossal Gaṇeśa image on the 
Ratu Boko hillock, which is indeed referred to in the latter 
(Griffiths 2011: 137–39). Both inscriptions, and seemingly 
also the contemporary statue, are associated with the figure 
Acri mockup.indd   344 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 359] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’345
Śaiva complex of Prambanan. This phase has been 
rightfully regarded as coinciding with the end of 
the Śailendra rule (or influence) in Java (Jordaan 
1999b: 66–67; 2006: 6, n. 8).
Even if we leave aside the anti-Śaiva implica -
tions, we may still see in the Ratu Boko yantra  an 
element of attraction and subjugation, i.e. a magical 
operation directed towards the person of Panara -
ban—perhaps by a political rival,  with the com -
plicity of Esoteric Buddhist monks . This scenario 
is supported by evidence drawn from manuals of 
Tantric magic for the drawing of yantra s that I have 
presented above,  which connect symbolic shapes 
such as square, vajra  and circle—all present in the 
Ratu Boko artefact—to various harmful actions, i.e. 
subjugation, immobilization, or enmity . 
Resorting to magical practices to fulfill aims of 
realpolitik is a clich é in many Śaiva and Bauddha 
Tantras, and even in Brahmanical Sanskrit nor -
mative texts, such as the Arthaśāstra  and the 
Manusm ṛti; these manuals also invoke the use of 
infiltrated agents posing as siddha s, i.e. power -
ful wizards bearing the insignia of such antino -
mian Śaiva groups as the Kāpālikas ( Davidson 
2002: 174–75) . Analogous ideas are found in the 
Rāmāyaṇa kakavin , the arguably contemporary 
Śivag ṛha inscription of ad 856, and narrative reliefs 
of Central Javanese temples. These documents 
allegorically allude to the deceitful activities of 
sham ascetics and sorcerers associated with covert 
political manoeuvring during the dynastic struggle 
that opposed Bālaputra of the Śailendra line and 
Rakai Pikatan in the middle of the 9th century, 
which seems to have had its final resolution preci -
sely on the Ratu Boko hillock (see Acri 2010, 2011). 
Jakl (2013: 11–12), on the basis of his reading of the 
Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa  and other kakavin s, has 
concluded that malicious ‘black magic’ practices 
of ritual destruction, aimed at securing victory 
in war, were conceptualized in premodern Java 
as a part of vicious practices of Tantric wizards 
of the siddha  type, portrayed as ‘demon-ascetics’ 
(viku rākṣasa ); to him (ibid.), ‘these practices of 
subjugation, immobilization and annihilation, cen -
sured as aji śāstra wĕgig in kakawin R āmāyaṇa 
of Kumbhayoni, whose anti-Bauddha activities on the Ratu 
Boko hillock are discussed by Sundberg (this volume).8.31, are to be best understood as acts of Tantric 
sorcery ( ṣaṭkarm āṇi)’.81 Hunter (2007: 35–36) has 
discussed 13th-century East Javanese inscription -
al evidence of practices, stemming from a Śaiva 
Tantric ( bhairavika ) antinomian milieu, aimed 
at granting King K ṛtanagara invulnerability and 
victory in battle; Santiko (1997: 217–18) discusses a 
statuary group consisting of images of Cāmuṇḍā, 
Bhairava and Gaṇeśa, which she connects with a 
vaśīkaraṇa  ritual aimed at defeating K ṛtanagara’s 
enemies. Similar, and contemporary, instances 
of royal-sponsored ‘war magic’ centred on such 
demonic Tantric deities as Mahākāla, Heruka, and 
Hevajra, are well documented among the Mongols, 
Tibetans, and Chinese.82
Vaśīkaraṇa is mentioned in the long Old Malay 
‘Śrīvijayan’ inscription of Telaga Batu (Sabokin -
gking, near Palembang in Sumatra) from the 
late 7th century. The text contains imprecations 
against the enemies of the state and the king; it 
mentions an oath of loyalty to the king taken by 
his entourage, which, if broken, will result in the 
culprits being killed by spells. In line 13, ‘the curse 
is directed against the king’s servants, should they 
be in contact with various sorts of people well-ver -
sed in the use of magical practices’ (de Casparis 
1956: 23–24). Lines 12–14 allude to conspirators who 
would make use of Tantric rituals, philtres, and 
magical artefacts—most notably a śrīyantra —to 
cause madness in other people. Referring to this 
inscription, Goudriaan (1978: 323) concludes:
There is no question here of an abstract use 
of these expressions but of real magical cere -
monies is proved by a reference made by the 
king to certain methods used by the rebels 
such as designing or painting an image of him 
(rūpinaṅku ) and application of ahses ( bhasma ), 
wizards … and spells ( mantra ).
Goudriaan (ibid.: 324) maintains that ‘[a]s with 
the act of ākarṣaṇ a, it is a matter of probability 
that persons of high status and wealth such as 
kings have often figured as the victims of rites of 
81. Jakl (ibid.: 12) has also drawn attention to a passage 
of the Bhom ān taka (82.3) mentioning the application of 
mantras in order to harm an enemy. 
82. See Bade, this volume; Dalton 2011: 137; Sinclair 2014.
Acri mockup.indd   345 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 360] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia346
subjugation’.83 A Buddhist instance of these practi -
ces is found in the Vidyottamātantra , a so-called 
Caryātantra or Kriyātantra now available only in 
Tibetan; sections 1–3 of this text describe a ritual 
for the subjugation ( vaśīkaraṇa ) of kings ‘in the 
presence of Vajrapāṇi’ ( vajrapāṇisya /vajrapāṇer 
agrataḥ );84 similarly, the Susiddhikārasūtra  states 
that ‘the mantra s of the Vajra [Family] are for ābhi-
cāruka (subjugation) [rites]’ (Chinese trans. of ad 
726, Giebel 2001: 130–31, 133). The Vīṇāśikhatantra , 
a Śaiva scripture of the Vāmasrotas mainly devoted 
to magic, describes rituals for the subjugation of 
kings and queens (pp. 174–77), and of the entire 
threefold world ( trailokya , pp. 163–64, 270–74, see 
Einoo 2009: 33). Describing one such rituals for 
rulers, this text declares that, at the end of a sacrifice 
making use of human flesh, the practitioner ‘should 
imagine the victim as being out of his mind and 
benumbed, struck on his head by the Elephant-goad 
(aṅkuśa ) and bound by the Māyic noose; even a 
king or queen he will subjugate within a week’ (pp. 
160–61). The Vīṇāśikhatantra  figures (as Vināśikha) 
in the ad  1052 Sdok Kak Thom Sanskrit-Old Khmer 
inscription hinting at Tantric rituals performed by 
the Brahmin Hiraṇyadāman for the ‘liberation’ of 
the Khmer domains from the subjugation of Javā,85 
by means of which King Jayavarman II founded the 
Khmer Empire in the early 9th century and became 
a Cakravartin (Goudriaan 1985: 24–26;  Brown 2003; 
Sanderson 2003–4: 357, 2004: 235) . Sanderson (2004: 
238) also discusses the Sanskrit inscription K.111 of 
the reign of Jayavarman V (ca. 968–1000/1) that 
tells us that K īrt ipaṇḍita, a Buddhist master fol -
lowing the Yogatantras, ‘had been adopted by the 
royal family as their Guru, [and] was frequently 
engaged by the king to perform apotropaic, restor -
ative and aggressive Mantra rituals within the royal 
palace for the protection of his kingdom’—namely, 
‘rituals for the quelling of dangers, the restoration 
of health and the rest’ (to Sanderson, ‘the rest’ 
presupposes abhicāra ). As I have argued above, 
83. A discussion of Sanskrit texts that describe rituals 
of subjugation targeting rulers and their ministers and 
subjects may be found in Goudriaan 1978: 322–26.
84. See Ito Gyokan (ed.) 2005: 264–65 (I thank Iain Sin -
clair for this reference, email dated 30 August 2014).
85. On the identification of this Javā with Yavadv īpa  (i.e., 
Java), see Griffiths 2013.both the Pañcakāṇḍa  and the section closing the 
Gaṇapatitattva share a commonality of themes and 
mantric technology with scriptures—such as the 
Netratantra , the Vīṇāśikhatantra , and the Bhūtat -
antras—devoted to the rituals of Tantric magic 
devised for the benefit of royal sponsors.
In view of the above facts, one may assume that 
the word khanipas  inscribed on the lower part of 
the bubble where the raka  title of Panaraban is 
also inscribed represents a personal name, perhaps 
that of the king himself, or of one of his associ -
ates—a general, minister, his royal chaplain, or 
a close family member, e.g. his queen.86 I find it 
more plausible that Khanipas would be a victim 
of the subjugation spell together with Panaraban, 
but one may also speculate that Khanipas would 
be the individual who wanted to ‘bind’ Panaraban 
to himself, or influence him.
conclusion
Two śloka s of the Pañcakāṇḍa , a Sanskrit Bud -
dhist stuti  from Bali, and the Sanskrit-Old Javanese 
Gaṇapatitattva , a Śaiva tutur  text that has come 
down to us in many Balinese redactions to varying 
degrees dominated by the figure of Gaṇapati, attest 
the mantra jaḥ ṭaḥ kiḥ hūṁ phaṭ . This  is a re-
86. The possibility that Khanipas might have been Pana -
raban’s queen was already voiced by Sundberg (2003: 177).  
Degroot (2006: 66) reports a personal communication 
by Klokke (2004) casting doubt on Sundberg’s identifica -
tion of Panarabvan with King Panaraban, on the ground 
that ‘the absence of any title is suspicious given the fact 
that Panaraban is a rake  title, not a personal name’. This 
objection is not very compelling, for the epigraphical ev -
idence has only yielded attestations of the rake  title and 
consecration names of kings; similarly, in the allegori -
cal passages of the kakavin  Rāmāyaṇa , we find allusions 
to kings such as Rakai Pikatan (as pikatan, 24.115, 25.13 
[pikatan  = decoy bird]) and Rakai Kayuvaṅi (as caṇḍana , 
‘sandalwood’, 21.94; kyātīnaran ar ūm, ‘known as fragrant’, 
and taru kanak ā, ‘sandalwood tree’, 24.126 [kayuvaṅi = 
‘fragrant tree/wood’, i.e. sandalwood]) that refer to these 
titles (without the honorific particle rakai ) rather than the 
personal names, thereby implying that the former were 
the appellations under which these kings were popularly 
known at the time. Even if Klokke is right, then one may 
speculate that Khanipas is the personal name of Rakai 
Panaraban, and that as such both appellations were in -
scribed on the yantra .
Acri mockup.indd   346 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 361] ---
Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’347
configured version of the  ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ mantra—a 
quintessentially Buddhist mantra attested in the 
context of the Trailokyavijaya cycle in a number of 
Vajrayāna texts in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese. 
The instance of the ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ mantra found 
in the Pañcakāṇḍa  and Gaṇapatitattva —the latter 
being the only one thus far documented in a thor -
oughly Śaiva religious text—adds to the series 
of rare attestations of this sequence recovered 
from Central Javanese inscriptions, namely the 
Ratu Boko gold foil, two boundary-stones dating 
back to the second half of the 9th century (from 
a Śaiva context), an undated stone mentioning a 
vihāra , and a Buddhist lead-bronze inscription 
from Borobudur (prob. 9th or 10th century). All 
these documents bear some implications for our 
understanding of the purpose of the Ratu Boko 
inscribed gold foil, as well as of the religious and 
socio-political context in which it was produced.
Having argued that the attestation of the mantra 
in both the Pañcakāṇḍa and the Gaṇapatitattva  
occurs in a context of apotropaic, siddhi -oriented, 
and coercive magic characterizing Tantric litera -
ture of various sectarian persuasions across the 
mediaeval Indic world, I have concluded that the 
Ratu Boko artefact was most likely intended as 
a magical yantra.  Given that, as noted by Sund -
berg, the mantra involves an element of anti-Śai -
va polemic, I further elaborated on Jordaan and 
Colless’s hypothesis that the mantra was meant to 
influence, i.e. ‘spellbind’, the late 8th-century Java -
nese King Panaraban, either for religious purposes 
(i.e., to convert him to Buddhism) or for aims of 
realpolitik. This picture fits well in the context of 
political and religious transition that Central Java 
seems to have witnessed during the 9th century, 
namely the shift from a ( Śailendra-dominated ) 
Buddhist paradigm to a new Śaiva course.
Building on the work of Sundberg and Griffiths, 
who have shown the association of the (various ver -
sions of the) ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ mantra with removal of 
obstacles and magical operations of ākarṣaṇa  and 
vaśīkaraṇa  in Indic Buddhist sources, I have ex -
plored the links between this mantra and the figure 
of the elephant-headed god Gaṇapati/Vināyaka, 
which had a place in both Śaiva and Buddhist 
pantheons as a remover of obstacles. Gaṇapati, 
as a demonic member of Maheśvara’s entourage, constitutes the victim par excellence of subjugation 
through the mantric elephant-goad ( jaḥ) and snare 
(hūṁ ) of Vajrapāṇi, which the Bodhisattva used 
to tame Maheśvara in the Trailokyavijaya cycle.
The transmogrification of the ṭaki jaḥ hūṁ 
mantra in the Gaṇapatitattva , in a context of Tantric 
magic, suggests that the compiler of the text carried 
out an operation of ‘textual bricolage’ that involved 
the trans-sectarian appropriation of (co-functional) 
Buddhist mantric technology and its translation 
into Śaiva terms. This appropriation may have 
involved a direct borrowing from (a version of) 
the Pañcakāṇḍa , as suggested by the association 
between Gaṇapati/Vināyaka and Am ṛtakuṇḍalin, 
a Buddhist apotropaic, outer- maṇḍala  deity that 
might have been invoked through the epithet ‘Sun’ 
(āditya ) in the Pañcakāṇḍa .
In the fluid context of Tantric magic, where 
borrowing commonly occurs, and many ritual (and 
sectarian) distinctions become blurred, the produc -
tion of counter-narratives (and counter-mantras) 
may not necessarily entail an implied element 
of trans-sectarian polemic. However, given the 
climate of fierce religious competition for royal 
patronage across the Indic world (Java included) 
in the Mediaeval period, the possibility that ‘as the 
tantric ritual technologies were widely adopted, 
the new ritual resemblances that resulted can only 
have heightened sectarian anxieties’ (Dalton 2011: 
36) should be kept open.
Primary Sources
Old Javanese titles
Gaṇapatitattva
(1) [GaṇEd:]  Gaṇapati-tattwa . Ed. and (Hindi)  
 trans. Sudarshana Devi-Singhal. New  
 Delhi: International Academy of Indian  
 Culture, 1958.
(2)  [GaṇL:] Lontar Gaṇapatitattva , collection  
  of the International Academy of Indian  
 Culture.
(3) [ TGaṇ:] Tatwa Gaṇapati , romanization  
  by Ketut Sudarsana, Kantor Dokum-  
 entasi Budaya Bali, Denpasar, 1993.
(4) [PDok:] Lontar ms. XX 4, Pusat Doku-  
 mentasi Budaya Bali, Denpasar.
Acri mockup.indd   347 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 362] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia348
(5) [GaṇUd:] Lontar ms. Rt 6, Universitas  
 Udayana.
Sutasoma kakavin , see O’Brien 2008.
Sanskrit titles 
Agnipurāṇa : ed. Mitra. Calcutta: Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, 1879. 
Hevajratantra : see D. Snellgrove (ed.) 1959a.
Kriyāsasaṅgrahapañjikā (Ch. 6) by Kuladatta: ed. 
Inui, Hitoshi, ‘Kriyāsaṁgraha no honzon yuga: 
bonbun tekisuto chū [‘On deity yoga in the 
Kriyāsaṁgraha: Sanskrit text, Part 2’]’, Mikkyō 
Bunka Kenkyūjo Kiyō  5: 160–33, 1992.
Netratantra: The Netra Tantram with Commentary 
by Kṣemarāja, vol. 1 , ed. Pandit Madhusudan 
Kaul Shāstr ī, Ka shmir Series of Texts and 
Studies No. XLVI. Bombay: Tatva Vivechaka 
Press, 1926.
Pañcakāṇḍa : see Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971, 
stuti  no. 375.Sādhanamālā : ed. Benoytosh Bhattacharya.  2 vols. 
Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1928.
Sarvadurgatipariśodhana: The Sarvadurgatipari -
śodhana Tantra. Elimination of All Evil Desti -
nies. Sanskrit and Tibetan texts with Introduction, 
Translation and Notes , ed. and trans. Tadeusz. 
Skorupski. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983.
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha: see Lokesh Chandra 
ed., with D. Snellgrove) 1981.
Sarvavajrodaya by Ānandagarbha: e-text by 
Ryugen Tanemura , based on  Vajradhātuma -
hāmaṇḍalopāyikā-sarvavajrodaya  by Ān an-
dagarbha, ed. Mikky ō S eiten Kenkyūkai in 
Taisho daigaku sougou-bukkyou-kenkyūjo kiyou 
8: 228–56 (1986), 9: 216–22 (1987).
Susiddhikārasūtra (Chinese trans.): see Giebel 2001.
Vajrasattvaniṣpādana of pseudo-Candrak īrt i (San -
s krit and Tibetan) : see Luo and Tomabechi 
(eds.) 2009.
Vidyottamātantra: see  Ito Gyokan (ed.) 2005.
Vīṇāśikhatantra: see Goudriaan 1985.
Acri mockup.indd   348 2/8/16   12:40 am

--- [Page 363] ---
The two primary buddhist monuments of 
Śailendra Java, Candi Sewu and Borobudur, 
are impressive but, as little is known about 
their genesis or ultimate meaning, mute and his -
torically uninformative.1 On the other hand, as this 
essay will attempt to show, there is an important 
and fascinating dynamic locked in the architectur -
ally unremarkable lithic remains on the southern 
end of the Ratu Boko prominence, a dynamic which 
is of much greater importance than either Sewu 
or Borobudur to both Buddhist sectarian history 
as well as the history of Bauddha-Śaiva relations. 
The primary goal of this chapter is to examine 
the relationship between two chronologically 
and thematically distinct sets of lithic structures 
and inscriptions at the southern end of the Ratu 
Boko promontory in Central Java. The first set of 
structures is Buddhist and relates to an ad  792 
Śailendra foundation inscription (Fig. 14.1) that 
explicitly identified the occupants as Sinhalese 
monks of the renowned Abhayagirivihāra. The 
specific identification of these Sinhalese monks as 
paṁsukūlika ,2 literally ‘rag-wearers’, is inferred by 
1.I am indebted to a number of correspondents who
contributed to my present understanding of the curiosities 
associated with the 9th-century Śaiva response to the Sin -
halese monks of the Abhayagirivihāra who came to inhabit 
the padhānaghara in Java. Among them are Andrea Acri,
Osmund Bopearachchi, Sven Bretfeld, Robert Brown, Ven. 
Rangama Chandawimala Thero, Véronique Degroot, Em -
manuel Francis, Ryosuke Furui, Rolf Giebel, Roy Jordaan, 
Gerd Mevissen and Corinna Wessels-Mevissen, Nicolas
Revire, Sudarshan Seneviratne, Peter Sharrock, Vincent
Tournier, and Hiram Woodward.
2.In th
e precursor to this essay (Sundberg 2014: 66, n.
14), I chose to distinguish the ‘rag-wearers’ associated with 
the Abhayagirivihāra from those of the Mahāvihāra by
denominating them according to what seems to be thethe telltale presence of their seemingly signature 
architecture, the double-platform structure. The 
second set of structures and artefacts is Śaiva in 
character, and was erected around 856 by a cul -
tivated Javanese blue blood, the raka  of Valaing 
pu Kumbhayoni, one of whose several Gunung 
Kidul inscriptions mentions him to have once 
reigned over some kingdom, although obviously 
not in Central Java itself. Despite the vast acreage 
of open terrace available on the plateau, Kum -
bhayoni’s Śaiva structures were erected in remark -
ably tight proximity to the Abhayagiri structure, 
with sacred Śaiva architecture, inscriptions, and 
emblems placed just metres from the prākāra  
walls and surrounding them on at least three sides.
This chapter seeks to explicate these archaeo -
logical facts and offer a plausible narrative about 
how the Bauddha and the Śaiva intersected in 856 
on that small patch of Central Java. I conclude that 
it is difficult to discern any evidence that Kumbha -
yoni’s Śaiva symbology was intended to promote 
rather than thwart the Abhayagiri group, but 
rather represented a deliberate attempt to stamp 
a countervailing Śaiva presence on the plateau. I 
favoured scriptural and administrative languages in each 
vihāra . Accordingly, I assigned the Sanskrit ‘ pāṁśukū -
lika’ to discussions of the Abhayagiri’s ‘rag-wearers’ and 
retained the ‘ paṁsukūlika ’ of the Pali chronicles when 
referencing the Mahāvihāran analogues. In this chapter, 
I drop this notational distinction and employ the Pali in 
which the extant mentions of both groups are preserved.
In Sundberg 2014: 117, n. 14, I have pointed out the 
large numbers of Sanskritic epigraphic references found 
within the Abhayagiri’s precincts even during the period 
of the Second Lambakaṇṇa where the Pali-dominat -
ed Mahāvihāra reigned, leading me to suggest that the 
Abhayagirivāsins pursued their activities in Sanskrit even 
to the eve of the Cōḻa reign. Chapter 14
Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exem-
plars in Java: Lord Kumbhayoni and the ‘Rag-wearer’ Paṁsukūlika  
Monks of the Abhayagirivihāra
jeffrey r. sundberg
sundberg mockup very last.indd   349 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 364] ---
350 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
believe that the collision, when seen in context and 
perspective, represents one facet of a consequen -
tial event in the course of Buddhism in Asia: the 
emphatic reversion of Sinhalese Buddhist kings 
from the Mantranaya to the Theravāda teachings 
which had been conserved in the Abhayagiri’s 
rival Mahāvihāra, which had last seen royal Sin -
halese favour perhaps several centuries before. 
To assist the reader in navigating through this 
chapter, I provide the following rough orientation:
In Section I, I summarize the most pertinent 
aspects of my recently issued study (Sundberg 2014) 
on the phenomenon of the paṁsukūlika monks of 
the Abhayagirivihāra in Sri Lanka, which included 
the delegation of the Abhayagiri monks who came 
to the Śailendra court. I survey the efflorescence of 
these Abhayagiri monks and the Esoteric Buddhist 
texts that they seemingly promoted in the early 
period of the second Lambakaṇṇa dynasty, as well 
as the rejection of those doctrines and that specific 
nikāya  in the wake of the disastrous sacking of Anurādhapura around ad  840, when the Sinha-
lese kings resumed sponsorship of the Theravā -
da doctrines conserved by the rival Mahāvihāra.
In Section II, I provide a brief presentation of the 
Śaiva activities of pu  Kumbhayoni3 some sixty years 
3. An extensive analysis of the figure of Śrī Kumbhayoni, 
the nature of his Śaivism, and the contemporary Javanese 
historical background will be deferred to other venues 
(Sundberg 2016b, 2016c). For the purposes of the present 
chapter, with its exploration of a specific episode of Baud -
dha-Śaiva relations in the 9th century, it is necessary to 
examine the immediate Buddhist antecedents. In Sundberg 
2014, I examined the history of the Abhayagirivihāra in 
Sri Lanka from the reign of Mānavarman (684–718) to 
the abandonment of Rājaraṭṭha by the Abhayagiri’s paṁ -
sukūlika  monks in the twentieth regnal year of Sena II 
(854–89), the Sinhalese king who restored the Theravāda 
doctrines of the Mahāvihāra after the disaster of the ca. 
840 Pāṇḍya invasion. 
For the Central Javanese situation ca. 856, the most im -
mediate data is present at the Buddhist Plaosan Lor temples 
a few kilometers to the north of the Ratu Boko bluffs (Sund -
berg 2006: 109–13). Following a pioneering identification by Fig. 14.1: The Abhayagiri inscription of Central Java as composited from photographs of the portions in the Na-
tional Museum (the proper right of the inscription) and in the Indonesian Archaeological Service in Y ogyakarta (the proper left). Missing from this depiction is the arrow-headed fragment in the middle, which de Casparis (1950: 11–22) denoted as ‘e’ .
sundberg mockup very last.indd   350 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 365] ---
351 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
after the Śailendra’s sponsorship of the Abhaya -
girivihāra, about whose monks’ activities in the 
intervening decades nothing is known. Supposing 
the presence of an Abhayagirin ritual space akin 
to that established by Kūkai  空海  at his Kongōbuji 
金剛峯寺  monastery, I present an analysis of the 
positioning and nature of Kumbhayoni’s inscrip -
tions and a lithic Śiva-temple simulacrum for the 
generation of consecrated water just metres away 
from the prākāra  walls of the Abhayagiri. 
In Section III, I draw attention to the collapse 
of institutional support for Esoteric Buddhism in 
a number of countries across the Buddhist world 
in the years shortly after 840. I tentatively conclude 
that Kumbhayoni’s activities on the Abhayagiri -
vihāra need to be seen in light of not only the con -
temporary general reaction to military failures and 
Kusen (1994: 87) of the presence among the Plaosan shrines 
of the same raka  lord who had accompanied King Garuṅ 
(r. 829–47) on his ad  829 restoration of the support of the 
crown lands at Vanua Tṅah for the Pikatan vihāra  founded 
by King Sañjaya’s younger sibling ( avi), I noted (Sundberg 
2006: 117, n. 37) the rather tight chronologization of the 
Plaosan shrines offered by other mentions of noble and 
official Plaosan shrine donors during the Garuṅ period. I 
further noted (Sundberg 2006: 117, n. 39) a fundamental mystery, greatly pertinent to the present chapter and the 
history of Bauddha-Śaiva relations in Central Java: the two 
pre-regnal Plaosan shrine donations offered by Garuṅ’s 
successor Pikatan (r. 847–55), which run across two faces 
of their harmikā : the first face gives Pikatan’s personal 
name and his territorial title from before he gained the 
crown; while the inscription of the second face updates 
the prior dedication with his new title as Śrī Mahārāja. It 
is hoped that the considerations in the present chapter will 
shed some light upon the question of how and why this same 
royal raka  of Pikatan should come to be interred in 856 with 
a pronounced Śaiva funeral stele (de Casparis 1956: 280–330). 
Finally, it should be noted that the Ratu Boko, the 
Plaosan temple, and all of the other great Javanese Śailen -
dra edifices seem to be clustered around the location of 
the dynast Sañjaya’s (r. 717–46?) camp, if the Taji Gunung 
inscription does indeed derive from the village at the foot 
of the Ratu Boko (Sundberg 2003: 17, n. 32) as thought. 
The recently unearthed ad  869 sīmā  inscriptions from 
the Kedulan temple in the Kalasan district specifies the 
sīmā  to originate at ‘Panaṁṅgaran ’ (Pramastuti et al. 2007: 
31), suggesting that all of these Prambanan-area edifices 
lay within the compass of the historic vatak,  the raka  of 
Panaṅkaran, who reigned from 746 to 783 and who orig -
inally donated the Vanua Tṅah crown lands to Sañjaya’s 
avi’s vihāra . perceived moral excesses in Esoteric Buddhism 
across Asia, but quite particularly the hitherto 
unperceived reaction against the Abhayagiri’s es -
oteric doctrines by the contemporary Sinhalese 
regent Sena II himself. The Śailendra sponsorship 
of an Abhayagiri edifice was predicated on that 
monastery’s reputation and predominance in its 
homeland, and it therefore might not be surprising 
to see it fall when the mother monastery fell from 
grace.
In the Annex, I provide my current thoughts on 
the vajra -shaped gold foil which was found in front 
of the Great Gate of the Ratu Boko plateau (Acri, 
this volume, Fig. 13.1) and which seemingly impli -
cated the Central Javanese regent, the mahārāja  
Rakai  Panaraban (r. 784–803), whose misfortune 
at the hands of his treasonous son is recounted in 
the Carita Para  h yaṅan (Darsa and Ekadjati 1997) , a 
16th century Sundanese narrative source which pre -
serves the  sole surviving historical remembrance 
of the glorious Sañjaya period. 
i. antecedents to the abhayagiri 
presence on the ratu boko plateau
Prompted by studies of sources like the double-  
platform structure on the Ratu Boko plateau (Fig. 
14.2) and the biographies of Vajrabodhi (a.k.a. Va -
jrabuddhi) and Amoghavajra, I (Sundberg 2014) 
recently investigated the prominence of Esoteric 
Buddhism in the early (684–ca. 840) portion of Sri 
Lanka’s second Lambakaṇṇa dynasty,4 which was 
almost coincident with what little is known of the 
history of the Yogatantras. The sources which stim -
ulated my enquiries were not indigenous but rather 
foreign, and in the novel consideration of these foreign 
sources, I believe that I moved towards a history of that 
period of the island which might be termed ‘Abhayagi -
rigenic’ rather than the traditional historical narrative 
4. In my essay, I did not attempt to comprehensively 
address all of the Esoteric Buddhist material which has 
been found in Sri Lanka, and an even smaller portion of 
that evidence is presented for this chapter. Chandawimala 
(2013) conveniently summarizes a good portion of that 
which has been reported by Paranavitana (1928), Mudi -
yanse (1967), Dohanian (1977), and von Schroeder (1990), 
but Chandawimala’s praiseworthy book was not intended 
to serve as a catalogue or database.
sundberg mockup very last.indd   351 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 366] ---
352 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
which is sustained by the literary and epigraphical 
efforts of the Mahāvihāra, the long-subordinated but 
eventually victorious rival to the Abhayagiri  vi hāra for 
doctrinal primacy, royal influence, and ultimately the 
right to write history.5 To facilitate a discussion of the 
goings-on at the Abhayagiri padhānaghara  at Ratu 
Boko promontory in 856, I summarize in this section 
the most pertinent portions of my companion essay.
Mānavarman and Vajrabodhi;  
Mānavarman and Kāñcī
As mentioned above, the advent of Esoteric Bud -
dhism almost perfectly coincides with the history of 
the second Lambakaṇṇa, and the dynast Mānavar -
man (r. 684–718) features large in each story. Pro -
pelled on to his Rājaraṭṭha throne at the ancient 
5. As nearly as I was able to determine at thirteen cen -
t
uries’ remove, the Mahāvihāra Chronicles acknowledge 
what had been subsequently ‘Theravādicized’, like the Pal -
lava-styled Rājiṇāvihāra located at the curiously named 
upland town of Nālandā, or brought under Mahāvihāran 
control, or what could be referenced as a Mahāvihāran 
archetype like the paṁsukūlika s, or what they shared with 
the rival Abhayagirivihāra (i.e., vinaya  codes which were 
‘not in dispute with the tradition’).capital of Anurādhapura by a Pallavan army that 
he had himself commanded on behalf of his South 
Indian hosts during his long years of exile in Kāñcī, 
Mānavarman’s descendants would proceed to rule 
for the remainder of the Anurādhapura period. 
The basic facts of his reign are documented most 
completely in Chapter 47 of the Cūḷavaṁsa , the 
13th-century historical chronicle generated by the 
Mahāvihāra.6 It is the references to Mānavarman’s 
6. Novel biographical material, differing in every respect 
from those recorded in the 47th chapter of the Cūḷavaṁsa  
formally devoted to Mānavarman, is to be found in its 
Chapter 57 (Geiger 1953: 193ff), devoted to the junction of 
the Moriya and Lambakaṇṇa in the person of Vijayabāhu. 
The first datum concerns Mānavarman’s eye, the fluids of 
which he ‘offered’ to the war god Skanda’s peacock vāhana  
in compensation for the unsatisfactorily desiccated coconut 
used in a mantra-effected ritual. Even more remarkable 
than this apparent reference to Mānavarman suffering a 
conspicuous wound in a military campaign is the subse -
quent passage, not fully coherent because of its internal 
contradictions with other chapters of the Cūḷavaṁsa  and 
further contradictions with other Sinhalese chronicles 
(Geiger 1953: 192, n. 2), which involves Māna, a younger 
brother of Mānavarman. The passage claims that Māna 
assumed the throne while the disfigured Mānavarman 
himself was ordained under the Abhayagirivihāra, as -
suming directorship of a new Abhayagiri pirivena , directly 
Fig. 14.2: The north and west faces of the prākāra  wall around the ad 792 double-platform structure of the 
Abhaya  gir
ivāsins on the Ratu Boko promontory. The presence of the portal on the west side is remarkable, as al-
most every such structure in Sri Lanka has a portal on the east, and is most probably harmonized to the orientation 
of the Great Gate (Fig. 14.7) which provides access to the plateau. (Photo © Crisco 1492, Wikimedia Commons)
sundberg mockup very last.indd   352 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 367] ---
353 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
kindness to and interest in the seminal monk Va -
jrabodhi, captured in a contemporary biography by 
the academic Lü Xiang 呂向  (Sundberg and Giebel 
2011), which appear to most directly betray an inter -
est in Esoteric Buddhism seemingly acquired from 
South Indian Vajrayāna innovators,7 presumably 
during his exile there. 
supervising the guardians of the Tooth Relic and furnishing 
his regnal younger brother with counselors drawn from 
the ranks of the Abhayagiri. 
This passage clearly merits much more skillful reli -
gio-historical explication than I am able to bring to bear, 
but the passage and its Mantranayic vocabulary ( mantra , 
japa , akṣamālā , siddhi ) support the idea that Mānavarman 
was an Esoteric Buddhist king with a special relationship 
with the Abhayagiri, an analysis which accords with the 
research results of my 2014 essay. (I thank Ven. Rangama 
Chandawimala Thero for his kind identification of some 
of the original Pali terms of Geiger’s translation). 
7. In t
he early biographical accounts of Vajrabodhi and 
the mytho-historical accounts of the origins of the Va -
jroṣṇīṣa,  lies, insofar as I am aware, the best support for 
the claims that these texts originated in the South of India, 
and too that Mānavarman and the Abhayagirivihāra were 
intimately knowledgeable of that important process. 
While I am fully cognizant of the well-documented 
involvement of northeastern India and specifically Nālandā 
in the genesis of the Caryātantric Mahāvairocanasūtra  
(Hodge 1995), it seems to me that this was decidedly not 
true for the  Vajroṣṇīṣa , led as it was by the Yogatantric Sar -
vatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha . While the biographical notes 
prepared by Hunlunweng ( 混倫翁 ; T 2157.876b29–877a21) 
as the epitaph for Vajrabodhi’s memorial stūpa do indeed 
allude to ‘esoteric doctrines’ learned by Vajrabodhi in his 
many years at Nālandā (Rolf Giebel, p.c.), both Vajrabodhi 
and his disciple Amoghavajra are seen acting in a manner 
which suggests Nālandā is irrelevant to them. There is, for 
example, no hint of specifically Esoteric Buddhism in the 
representation of Vajrabodhi’s Nālandā years in the longer 
early biography of Lü Xiang (Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 
134). Considerations of Lü Xiang’s biography serve instead 
to reinforce the impression of the conventional character of 
the teachings promoted at nearly contemporary Nālandā 
as witnessed by Yijing 義淨. Indeed, the sterility of early 
7th-century Nālandā in the genesis of the Yogatantras 
may be made explicit in Amoghavajra’s comment in his 
account of the South Indian Iron Stūpa episode that ‘in 
the country of Central India the Buddhist teaching had 
gradually decayed’ (Orzech 1995: 315). On the other hand, 
everything in Vajrabodhi’s biography and the recitations of the Iron Stūpa legend point to his acquaintance with—
and allegedly fumbled acquisition of—these cardinal Va-
jroṣṇīṣa  texts in South India. It is undoubtedly this specific 
corpus, which is designated in Hunlunweng’s mention as Three exemplary temples from early in the Second 
Lambakaṇṇa reign: The Thūpārāma at Anurādha-
pura, the Girikaṇḍivihāra at Tiriyāy, and the 
Rājiṇāvihāra at Nālandā
Although the religious proclivities of Mānavar -
man, his three Kāñcī-born successor-sons, or his 
grandson, Aggabodhi VI (r. 733–72), the Sinhalese 
patron of Amoghavajra during his extended (742–
46) text-gathering stay in Laṅkā, remained unac -
knowledged by the orthodox Theravādin Cūḷavaṁ -
sa and in the epigraphical record,8 these sources 
do document religious endowments that can now 
be understood to be linked to Esoteric Buddhism. 
Three in particular are worth reciting in the present 
context, for they illustrate the contemporary Ab -
hayagiri and background the Śailendra establish -
ment of that nikāya  in the 8th-century heartland 
of that kingdom. These three are the Thūpārāma 
stūpa and its ‘palace’ to the immediate south of 
the citadel in the middle of urban Anurādhapu -
ra, the Girikaṇḍivihāra at coastal Tiriyāy, and 
the Rājiṇāvihāra at upland Nālandā near Matale.
I (Sundberg 2014: 89–90) pointed out that the 
Lambakaṇṇa dynast, Vajrabodhi’s friend and 
patron Mānavarman, had roofed the Thūpārā -
ma (Fig. 14.3) which harboured the Collarbone 
originating from South India, that Vajrabodhi procured: 
‘a text of the great bodhisattva  teachings in 200,000 words 
and a Sanskrit manuscript of yoga’ (Sundberg and Giebel 
2011: 199, n. 125. For more on what is meant by this ‘yoga’, 
see Orzech 2006b). The handoff of pedantic primacy to 
institutions in Buddhist Sri Lanka seems natural in light 
of Mānavarman’s return from his long Kāñcī exile and is 
reflected in Vajrabodhi’s half-year residence at the Abha -
yagiri and subsequent lifelong correspondence with his 
Sinhalese ‘master’ *Ratnabodhi, as well as Amoghavajra’s 
selection of Sri Lanka for his critical mission of gathering 
the canon of essential Mantrayāna texts. For a survey, only 
slightly stale, of the Pallava-styled relics extant in Sri Lanka, 
see Dohanian 1983.
8. In 
a long footnote of the companion essay (Sundberg 
2014), I examined the curious resumption of the Sri Lankan 
epigraphic record only at the end of the reign of Sena I (r. 
834–54), and the very end of the period of Abhayagirin 
dominance, and compared it to the absence of royal admin -
istrative inscriptions in Java before the reign of Kayuvaṅi 
(r. 855–83), noting in particular the pertinence of my ex -
planation (Sundberg 2006: 124; 2011: 155, n. 30) of possibly 
widespread retractions of Javanese tax privileges during 
the reigns of Varak (r. 803–27) and Pikatan (r. 847–55). 
sundberg mockup very last.indd   353 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 368] ---
354 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
Relic, transforming the open stūpa into a pillared 
vaṭadāge,9 and had built a ‘palace’ which he gifted 
to ‘rag-wearer’ paṁsukūlika monks. In doing so, I 
believe, Mānavarman built an Esoteric Buddhist
9. Vaṭadāge  h ave been found in Anurādhapura at the 
Thūpārāma, Laṅkārāma, Toluvila, and Vessagiri; and 
elsewhere in Sri Lanka at Mädigiriya, Polonnaruwa, 
Ambasthale in Mihintale, Tiriyāy, Attanagalla, Sigiriya, 
Virandagoda, Rajangana, Mänikdena, and Devundara. 
The earliest extant vatadage  is at Mädigiriya, which dates 
from the reign of Aggabodhi IV (r. 667–83), from whose 
short-reigned successor Mānavarman wrested the Sin -
halese throne. 
These vaṭadāge  structures also seemed to have at -
tracted the patronage of kings who accepted Esoteric 
Buddhism, not only Mānavarman at the Thūpārāma and ritual centre at the oldest of Sri Lanka’s stūpa s—a 
vaṭadāge  configuration astoundingly reminiscent 
of the primordial, permeable Iron Stūpa (Orzech 
1995) of the Mijiao and Shingon creeds which
either Mānavarman or his grandson Aggabodhi VI at 
Tiriyāy, but also Sena I at the vaṭadāge  at Polonnaruwa 
(Ranawella 1999: 10–11; Epigraphia Zeylanica  III: 291–94), 
although Ranawella’s discussion of the finding leaves some 
substantial doubt about whether Sena I intended for his 
inscribed stone to be incorporated as an element in the 
stairwell. Apart from the vaṭadāge ’s associations with Es-
oteric Buddhists at Tiriyāy and the Thūpārāma, it is of in -
terest that a Vajrasattva/Dharmadhātu icon was recovered 
from Mädigiriya (Mudiyanse 1967: 62–63). Consultation 
of the archaeological record may shed further light on
its association with the vaṭadāge  there. It is interestingFig. 14.3: A reconstruction of the vaṭadāge of the Collarbone Relic of the Thūpārāma. Such a permeable 
stūpa , erected also at Tiriyāy and elsewhere in Sri Lanka, may have modelled the Iron Stūpa of Amogha-
vajra’s account. The roofing (and implicitly the pillars which supported it) was instigated by Mānavar-man. (Photo courtesy of Osmund Bopearachchi)
sundberg mockup very last.indd   354 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 369] ---
355 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
 
stemmed from the activities of Vajrabodhi and 
Amogha  vajra—and provided for the Thūpārāma a 
‘palace’ which he bestowed upon the paṁsukūlika s, 
to observe that the only king admitted by the Theravā -
din secondary historical literature to have been a Tantric 
Buddhist, the luckless Sena I whose military defeat led 
to the sacking of Anurādhapura, had an inscribed stone 
built into the stairs of the vaṭadāge  in Polonnaruwa, the 
inland city to which he retreated after the disaster. This 
same Sena I built the extra-urban Riṭigala site, the largest 
concentration of double-platformed structures, for the 
Abhayagiri paṁsukūlika s, endowing them with workers 
and slaves as well as equipment of a royal standard. 
It is of note that ruins of a vaṭadāge  have been found in 
Vessagiri on the south side of Anurādhapura, for that site 
also turned up an inscription with the only known refer -
ence to the Abhayagiri’s Vīrāṅkurārāma, the site specified 
by the Nikāyasaṅgraha  as the locus of the Vājiriyavāda 
heresy which ensnared Sena I (Sundberg 2014: 75, 131 n. 55). about whom Wijesuriya (1998: 144) observed ‘the 
extraordinary respect and treatments paid to these 
monks, both by the rulers and the public’. I further 
noted that this ‘palace’ was likely the building with 
the pillars terminating in vajra  emblems (Fig. 14.4), 
and that the paṁsukūlika s in question were almost 
certainly those of the Abhayagiri rather than the 
Mahāvihāra, given the laboured assertions by the 
later Mahāvihārans that specifically this prime and 
prestigious site did indeed lie within their original 
sīmā  boundaries. These Abhayagiri paṁsukūlika s 
were in turn the most likely inhabitants of the dou -
ble-platform structures that harboured the Esoteric 
Buddhist statues at Tiriyāy and were selected for 
replication by the Śailendras at the Ratu Boko 
plateau.
The Girikaṇḍivihāra site at Tiriyāy, known 
to preserve one of the Buddha’s hair relics under 
its stūpa , and itself formed into the smallest of 
Sri Lanka’s vaṭadāge  by a circle of pillars which 
supported a superstructural roof, was supported 
by the monks at the site’s two double-platform 
padhānaghara s, one of which disgorged the largest 
hoard of Esoteric Buddhist statues yet found on the 
island (Fig. 14.5).10 These padhānaghara structures 
are seemingly associated with the ‘rag-wearers’ or 
paṁsukūlika s, and within the century such a dou -
ble-platform structure would be constructed as the 
10. Von Schroeder (1990) offers the best photographic 
coverage of this Tiriyāy set of statues.Fig. 14.5: The double-platform structure at Tiriyāy, 
under the paving stones of which was discovered the largest collection of Vajrayāna and Mahāyāna statuary in Sri Lanka. (Photo courtesy of Sven Bretfeld)
Fig. 14.4: The vajra  capitals on the columns of the 
building adjacent to the Thūpārāma, likely the ‘pāsā -
da’ erected by Mānavarman and dedicated to the 
‘rag-wearer’ paṁsukūlika s. (Photo courtesy of  
Osmund Bopearachchi)
sundberg mockup very last.indd   355 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 370] ---
356 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
centrepiece of the Abhayagirivāsin presence on the 
Ratu Boko plateau. Although the Girikaṇḍivihāra 
site is ancient, the more recent constructions are 
associated by a Pallava-Grantha Sanskrit boulder 
inscription with the twenty-third regnal year of the 
Siṅghaḷendra  Śilāmegha  Mahārāja . No king of the 
Lambakaṇṇa dynasty other than Mānavarman (r. 
684–718) and Aggabodhi VI (r. 733–72) reigned that 
long and the Śilāmegha coronation name could 
denote either of them,11 so the more recent construc -
tions date from either ad  707 or 756, either shortly 
before Vajrabodhi arrived in Sri Lanka or a decade 
after Amoghavajra left. Given that 8th-century ac-
11. Lü Xiang’s biography (Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 138) 
merely glosses Mānavarman’s name as ‘Śrīśīla’ (Shilishiluo, 
室哩室囉 ), but it is clear from the alternating pattern of 
Lankan throne names that he ruled under the full name 
of Śīlamegha, as did his grandson Aggabodhi VI.tivities at the Girikaṇḍivihāra are not mentioned in 
the Cūḷavaṁsa , it is not quite clear which king was 
active in construction there, but it is recorded that it 
was Mānavarman who roofed in the Thūpārāma in 
the centre of urban Anurādhapura, so it is not out 
of the question that he also turned the ancient stūpa  
for one of the Buddha’s hair relics into the pillared 
vaṭadāge  form. Paranavitana’s (1943: 152–54) discus -
sion of the site paleography suggests that it most 
closely convenes with specimens of Pallava inscrip -
tions used around the 680s, suggesting strongly that 
it was Mānavarman rather than his grandson who 
embellished the site. While an affiliation with an 
Anurādhapura parent monastery is unconfirmed, 
the Tiriyāy site’s votive shrine depicting the Bud -
dha’s Footprint (Sirisoma 1983: 2) may indicate its 
primary affiliation with the Abhayagiri (Sundberg Fig. 14.6: The Pallava-styled image house associated with the Rājiṇāvihāra at upland Nālandā. Built as Sri Lanka’s 
oldest roofed structure by Mānavarman or his Kāñcī-born son Aggabodhi V , the Rājiṇāvihāra site was engraved with two small transgressive erotic friezes. (Photo courtesy of Ven. Rangama Chandawimala Thero)
sundberg mockup very last.indd   356 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 371] ---
357 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
and Giebel 2011: 161, 219 n. 177),12 a relationship not 
unexpected given the chronology and the theme 
of the complex.
The Rājiṇāvihāra13 and its temple (Fig. 14.6) is 
likely referenced in the Cūḷavaṁsa  as the Rājinīdīpi -
ka (vihāra ) and its ‘mansion’ ( pāsāda ), which are, 
not unexpectedly, mentioned as gifted to the Abh -
a y
agiri bhikkhu s (Cūḷavaṁsa  48.1–2; Geiger 1953: 
109). The marked Pallava styling tends to confirm 
the Cūḷavaṁsa ’s attribution to either Mānavarman 
or his oldest son, the Kāñcī-born Aggabodhi V (r. 
718–24).14 The site is notable for two small friezes 
12. Sirisoma (1983: 9) mentions a pillar inscription, 
located near the ponds to the east of the shrine, which 
has yet to be transcribed or translated, and which Siri -
soma (ibid.: 4) anticipated was a grant of tax immunities. 
If Sirisoma is correct, the extant inscription represents a 
Theravāda regularization of Tiriyāy’s monastery by one of 
the 10th-century kings, in much the same manner as the 
Lankan Rājiṇāvihāra site at upland Nālandā (Ranawella 
2005: 109–10).
13. Ra
nawella (2005: 109–10) transcribes and translates 
the extant 10th century administrative inscription which 
provides the original name of the site. In Sundberg 2014: 
127, n. 48, I conveyed Dohanian’s (1977: 26, 131, n. 27) de -
scription of ‘ dhāraṇī  stones’, composed in a Sanskrit which 
was ‘incorrect’, found nearby the site. Consultation of Do -
hanian’s source, the Annual Report of the Archaeological 
Survey of Ceylon (1947: 17), reveals no justification for the 
‘dhāraṇī  stones’ Dohanian describes, but does document 
the existence of a single-lined Siddhamātṛkā  inscription 
from three kilometres away. This inscription, written in 
‘incorrect’ Sanskrit, mentions a sthavira  whose name might 
be Guṇabhadra.
Siddhamātṛkā  tablets, this time demonstrably engraved 
with dhāraṇī s, were found at the so-called dhāraṇīghara  
to the immediate southwest of the stūpa  at Abhayagiri. 
These dhāraṇī  include extracts from both the Sarvatathāga -
tatattvasaṅgraha  as well as the Sarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhāna , 
another stūpa -oriented text that Amoghavajra favoured 
(Schopen 1982; Chandawimala 2013: 128–48). 
14. Al
though the single surviving terminus of Cūḷavaṁ -
sa’s Chapter 47, devoted to Aggabodhi’s father Mānavar -
man, states that it was the father who built the Rājinīdīpika 
and gave it to the Abhayagirivāsins, Geiger (1953: 108, n. 1) 
considers this passage an interpolation. Whether father or 
son, the patronage by either candidate would convene with 
the apparent Pallava styling of the Rājiṇāvihāra temple.
I consider it somewhat remarkable that each and every one 
of the Cūḷavaṁsa  manuscripts available to Geiger were 
ruined at the point where they discussed the termination 
of Mānavarman’s reign.of a sexually explicit nature, with a depiction of 
a female engaged in a sexual act with two males 
(Sundberg 2014: 126, n. 48).
Mānavarman as first esoteric Indic king
It is not out of the question that Mānavarman was 
the primordial Mantranaya Indic king, and even 
that his ascension was due to the aboriginal employ -
ment of apotropaic Abhayagirin state-protection 
rites, whose credibility only grew when Amoghav -
ajra used them to great effect during the Tang crises 
of the 750s and 760s. However, if I am correct about 
what the vaṭadāge  represented to its builders, then 
the first influence of Esoteric Buddhist thought 
is exhibited during the reign of Aggabodhi IV (r. 
667–83), the ethnically Tamil king of Rājaraṭṭha 
whose successor was overthrown by Mānavarman 
and the Pallava army, whom the Cūḷavaṁsa  records 
as forming the vaṭadāge  at Mädigiriya. Whether 
Aggabodhi IV or Mānavarman, the dates for such 
an adherence concur strongly with the dates 
allowed for the development of the novel texts and 
conceptualizations of the Buddhist Yogatantras, 
and Mānavarman may have been the first such 
Esoteric Buddhist king to be admired for his regnal 
achievements, with his acquisition of the Sinhalese 
throne—the Milvian Bridge of its day. Given the 
appreciation of the Abhayagiri’s monks during his 
reign and for more than a century afterwards, it is 
plausible that a coterie of these monks resided with 
him during his Kāñcī exile and received credit for 
his military success. Unfortunately, such informa -
tion would have only survived in the Abhayagiri’s 
own chronicles and is not available in the extant 
Mahāvihāran representations.
Abhayagirin successes in state ritual, particularly 
apotropaic doctrines
It is an uncontroversial statement, one of the few 
facts on which all his biographies concur, that 
Amoghavajra went to Sri Lanka, where he and his 
entourage received his final abhiṣeka  at the hands 
of his Sinhalese preceptor *Samantabhadra, learned 
the recondite Buddhist doctrines, and accessed the 
texts—the biographies say over 500 of them—of 
their Mantranaya creed. Some small controversy 
sundberg mockup very last.indd   357 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 372] ---
358 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
exists over the question of whether Amoghavajra, 
per the contemporary Zhao Qian 趙遷  and accepted 
two centuries later by the Song Buddhist historian 
Zanning 贊寧 , went to India as well. Amoghavajra’s 
putative journeys, Zhao Qian claims, led to such 
an overabundance of exploits and encounters in 
the ‘Five Indias’ that they defied his ability to de -
scribe; overwhelmed by the task of providing even 
a single detail, he excused a description of this leg 
of Amoghavajra’s journey with a brief and awkward 
disclaimer: ‘Amoghavajra then visited India; he 
travelled in all of India’s kingdoms. The traces of his 
activities are so plentiful that we must leave a gap, 
as we cannot record all the details’ ( T 2056.293a16). 
The biographical sketch composed upon imperial 
order within days of Amoghavajra’s death by his 
disciple and collaborator Feixi 飛錫 , on the other 
hand, states that Amoghavajra went directly to Sri 
Lanka, stayed on the island, and returned from 
there, strictly confining his journey to that limited 
destination (Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 149). 
In singling out Sri Lanka, Amoghavajra was not 
only following his master Vajrabodhi’s experiences 
there, but was likely actively exploiting a relation -
ship which Vajrabodhi had himself maintained 
over the decades since his six-month domicile at 
the Abhayagirivihāra: Hyecho’s ( 慧超 ) unique but 
incidental mention of Vajrabodhi’s esoteric manu -
script borrowed from his ‘master’, the ācārya  *Rat -
nabodhi (Baojue 寶覺 ) in Sinhala (Sundberg and 
Giebel 2011: 192, n. 97), as late as the last year of his 
life implies at least one reliable monastic resource 
for Amoghavajra to track down, adding confidence 
to the result of an ocean voyage otherwise blindly 
undertaken.15
Given the concurrence of all the sources that 
Amoghavajra achieved his Esoteric Buddhist 
textual acquisitions in Sri Lanka, the nature of his 
astounding apotropaic successes in the service of 
the Tang emperors must have redounded upon the 
15. The relationship between Vajrabodhi’s Sinhalese 
master *Ratnabodhi and Amoghavajra’s Sinhalese master 
*Samantabhadra is unknown. This attested ad  741 rela -
tionship between Vajrabodhi and *Ratnabodhi may be 
the genesis of the early biographical claims that Amogha -
vajra received tutelage in Sri Lanka by Vajrabodhi’s old 
master, the Shingon Patriarch Nāgaj ñā/Nāgabodhi (a.k.a. 
Nāgabuddhi: see Appendix A).Abhayagirivihāra, which might itself have been 
already held in admiration for the role I surmise 
that it played in Mānavarman’s restoration. That there were successes accruing to the Abhayagirin 
name seems confirmed by the subsequent estab -
lishments of delegations of their monks in other 
Southeast Asian countries, not only in Śailendra 
Java but likely in the lands of the Khmer, where a 
particular set of Buddhist statues, the propitiation 
of which was considered supernaturally integral 
to Jayavarman II’s liberation of Cambodia from 
the yoke of his nemesis ‘Javā’, was erected on the 
‘Abhayag i r i ’.16
16. At least three extant Cambodian inscriptions refer to 
the Jayavarman’s ceremonial efforts to free Cambodia from 
the dominating hand of ‘Javā’ and have a cakravartin  of its 
own. It is not clear whether the ceremony was undertaken 
only once or in a number of places. Choulean (1996: 117–20) 
provides a fuller discussion of this issue, while substantive 
amplifications and more appreciative translations of the 
relevant inscriptions are presented in Sharrock (2012) and 
Conti (2014).
In a prior paper (Sundberg 2003: 178, n. 28), I speculated 
that the statues mentioned in the Sab Bāk inscription were 
offered by Satyavarman to Java’s Abhayagiri rather than 
a Cambodia-based one or the mother monastery itself. 
This possibility was also suggested by Griffiths (2013), who 
refined it by observing that the -varman  suffix implies that 
Satyavarman was royal, quite possibly the Cam king who 
suffered destructive Javanese sea-raids from at least 787. 
(Griffiths leaves unexplored the implication of a very tight 
anti-Javanese alliance between the Khmer and the Cam if 
the Cam king was indeed allowed to perform fundamen -
tal rites in the Khmer homeland. I proposed [Sundberg 
2011: 147] that those raids were only possible because Java 
had subordinated Sumatran Śrīvijaya, and those same 
raids ceased when King Varak’s coup against his father 
split the unified kingdom). However, I am unconvinced 
by Griffiths’ argument that the - varman  suffix requires 
Satyavarman to be a king, and cite the counterexample 
of a Devapāla-era ‘Śrī Nālandā bhikṣu ’, the Sarvāstivādin 
named Mañjuśrīvarman (Sastri 1986: 103). (For an articu -
late argument that the ‘Javā’ in question was not the island 
of Java but rather a nearby mainland kingdom, see Ferlus 
2010; see also Woodward 2011 for a view that the candidate 
kingdom was Wendan. While acknowledging the force of 
Ferlus’ and Woodward’s arguments, I am still inclined to 
believe that the subjugation was achieved by the island of 
Java, as argued most fully by Griffiths 2013).
It should be noted that in light of the research ad -
vanced in the present chapter it appears that the Javanese 
Abhayagirivāsins were quite nullified when it came time 
to refurbish the ad  802 statues, which had fallen into dis -
sundberg mockup very last.indd   358 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 373] ---
359 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
Paṁsukūlikas as the key group  
of this Abhayagirin elite
If the cosmopolitan Abhayagirivihāra was the fa -
voured monastery among the early second Lam -
bakaṇṇa kings, the paṁsukūlika ‘rag-wearers’ seem 
to be the favoured group within that monastery. I 
observed that they are to be found in an astonishing 
variety of situations and locales, from their ‘palace’ 
at the urban Thūpārāma to (I infer) the sole custodi -
anship and ritual superintendence of the vaṭadāge  
at Tiriyāy, to the tracts of double-platform struc -
tures established by the hapless Tantrist Sena I (r. 
834–54)17 at the extra-urban site of Riṭigala,18 where 
repair, and furthermore there was no longer a reason for 
a Khmer to come to Java to placate an imperium. It now 
seems certain to me that the 802 Khmer efforts concerned 
a different Abhayagiri than the one in Java, and I consider 
my 2003 comments to be ill founded. Conti (2014: 384) 
suggests that the Khmer Abhayagiri lies near the village 
of Sap Bak on the Khorat Plateau in Thailand. The rela -
tionship between this Abhayagiri and the Khmer palace 
remains uncertain.
17. Sc
holars unfamiliar with the careful research results 
of Perera and Paranavitana, as reflected in the monumental 
University of Ceylon’s History of Ceylon , may encounter an 
alternate set of dates associated with the Lambakaṇṇa kings, 
a set which invalidates the present chapter’s observations 
on the tight chronological linkage of the rejection of the 
Abhayagiri in both Sri Lanka and Java. Despite the wide -
spread use of this alternate set (see, e.g., the present Wiki -
pedia entry), it was generated in the early days of Island 
historical scholarship and is to be considered immature and 
erroneous. As noted in Sundberg 2014, Ranawella’s (1999: 
72; 2004: 118–22) skillful adjustment of Sena II’s accession 
year shifts it from the University of Ceylon’s History of 
Ceylon ’s ad  853 to 854. 
18. The s
election of the Ritigala site may be taken as re -
storing the paṁsukūlika  monks to a situation of austerity 
were it not for the record that they were provided with 
slaves and other service help. It is in the reading of the 
Guhyasamāja , which specifies the types of locations where 
adherents are advised to practice, that we might obtain 
some sense of what Sena I was trying to accomplish by 
erecting the scores of double-platforms: ‘Then Vajradhara 
the Teacher, the Lord, the Master of all Dharma, pure in 
body, speech and mind, spoke vajra  wisdom: “On pleasant 
mountain-tops and in lonely forests practise vajra  medita -
tion by the method of chanting mantras; Vajrasattva and 
all the others, aroused by mantra and meditation, will 
perform the various actions according to the word of the 
Work of Speech”’ (Freemantle 1971: 102; cf a similar passage they were provisioned with implements worthy of 
royalty and many slaves and servants. Apart from 
the vajra -finials on the Thūpārāma-area ‘palace’ 
that Mānavarman gave to them and the hoard of 
esoteric statues which lay under the paving stones 
of the double-platform padhānaghara  structures 
at Tiriyāy, the attentions of the esoteric admirer, 
the Śailendra king, and his desire to construct an 
Abhayagirin double-platform structure to attend 
to the needs of his court, all speak to the intimate 
awareness of sophisticated Esoteric Buddhist doc -
trine by these ‘rag-wearers’ and the appreciation 
accorded to them by both the kings of Sinhala and 
from overseas.
The foreign Śailendra patronage seems to val -
idate the suggestion, thrown up by both circum -
stance and the Tiriyāy archaeological record, that 
the soteriology and utility of the Sinhalese monks 
who occupied the meditation platform extended far 
beyond their adoption of mild nibbāna-facilitat -
ing privations of the monks featured in the extant 
Theravādin literature.
Śailendra patronage in context: The role of the 
Abhayagiri at the Javanese court
At the time of the Śailendra invitation, the Abha -
yagirin reputation must have stood at its very 
zenith. These monks were reputed both at home 
and overseas, and indeed it is not impossible that 
in their positioning on the Ratu Boko promontory, 
they were seated at the kraton /kaḍatvan , the very 
centre of Śailendra rule marked by an impressive 
double-tiered gate, which may, like the gate of 
Yapahuwa, be modelled upon an earlier Lankan 
precedent (Fig. 14.7). Being the only attested Bud -
dhist presence there, the Abhayagiri’s counsel must 
have been of tremendous value, and their stature 
on the island must have been very great indeed.  
The nature of Abhayagiri  
paṁsukūlika asceticism 
Regarding the eponymous signature feature of 
the Abhayagirin paṁsukūlika ‘rag-wearers’, which 
specifying ‘a great deserted wilderness, on forested moun -
tain-sides, and river-banks’ [ibid.: 70]).
sundberg mockup very last.indd   359 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 374] ---
360 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
shows up explicitly at Riṭigala and in the ‘palace’ 
at the Thūpārāma and implicitly in their seem -
ingly preferred architecture, the double-platform 
structure at Tiriyāy and in Java on the Ratu Boko 
plateau, I examined the extant references to their 
royal provisioning and suggested that these monks 
were ascetic ‘rag-wearers’ in name only, or only 
intermittent practitioners of the most extreme form 
of this ascetic practice—the wearing of robes culled 
from the cemetery. In the ordinary course of their 
day, however, it seems likely that they practised 
only the most trivial of ascetic practices—that of 
merely receiving worn clothing—especially when 
that clothing happened to be the finery of the Sin -
halese king. (Indeed, I questioned whether or not 
the ‘rag-wearer’ term was a residual term of honour 
rather than designating an essential component 
of their soteriology). Such mild asceticism would 
be comprehensible to, and indeed may have in -
spired, the intermittent wilderness retreats of such 
Sino-Japanese Tantric figures as Kūkai, Hanguang 
含光 , and Amoghavajra himself at their imperially 
sponsored mountain vihāras  of Jingesi 金閣寺  on 
Mount Wutai 五臺山  and Kongōbuji 金剛峯寺  on 
Mount Kōya 高野山 .The fall from grace: The Abhayagiri, Anurādha -
pu
ra, and the Pāṇḍya disaster ca. ad 840 
In Section Ibii of my companion essay, devoted to 
the fall of the Abhayagiri, I pointed out that any 
state-protection claims that had once given them 
domestic and international credence had certain -
ly vanished instantly in the wake of the ca. 840 
Sinhalese military defeat by the invading Pāṇḍya 
army, a disaster where the battlefield apparently 
lay within the precincts of the Abhayagirivihāra 
itself (Walters 2000: 133). Two later subsidiary 
Mahāvihāran chronicles, in the sole admission in 
any extant Sinhalese historical literature that a Sri 
Lankan king accepted the Vajravāda, blamed the 
defeat on the regent Sena I’s foolish heresy. After 
the Pāṇḍya had looted Anurādhapura of all of its 
valuables and accepted further payments by Sena I  
to return to Madhurai, Anurādhapura would have 
stood desolate for a period of two decades or more, 
during which the long-held primacy of the Ab -
hayagiri was lost, absolutely and irrevocably. The 
historical record does not allow the determination 
of whether it was Sena Ⅰ himself who resumed the 
royal promotion of the Theravāda doctrines which 
had been tenaciously maintained in the Mahāvi -
hāra, but it is clear beyond all doubt that Sena II Fig. 14.7: (Left) The west-facing, five-portalled Great Gate of the Ratu Boko plateau (late 8th century). Im  me di-
ate
ly in front of it lies a three-portalled analogue. (Right) The gate of the palace-fortress of Y apahuwa. The Ratu 
Boko installation was fashioned out of stone using timber-building construction techniques. Both buildings may 
be modelled on an earlier Anurādhapura form derived from the timber gates of its royal Citadel. (Y apahuwa photo courtesy of Osmund Bopearachchi; Ratu Boko photo: author)
sundberg mockup very last.indd   360 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 375] ---
361 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
(r. 854–89) had taken unprecedentedly Theravā -
din rites of coronation within the grounds of the 
Mahāvihāra itself.
The sacking of Madhurai and the trajectory of Sri 
Lanka’s religious history 
Resurrected from royal disregard by the Sinha -
lese military disaster ca. 840, the Theravāda creed 
newly reaffirmed in Sena II’s 854 coronation at the 
Mahāvihāra would, in less than a decade, be vali -
dated by a glorious and utterly surprising turning 
of the tables: the 862 killing of the offensive Pāṇḍya 
king; the counter-sacking of Madhurai which re -
stored to Anurādhapura all of its lost treasures and 
even more; and the placement of Sri Lanka’s puppet 
on the Pāṇḍya throne. This epochal event, which 
together with Sena’s reintegration of the breaka -
way Rohaṇa province doubtlessly clarified in many 
doubters’ minds questions about the efficacy of 
the Mahāvihāra’s long-husbanded and long-disre -
garded Theravāda, seemingly imparted sufficient 
momentum to sustain that venerable creed through 
thick and thin in the many centuries hence. 
Indeed, the disaster of Anurādhapura sealed the 
fate of not only the Abhayagiri’s reputation but of its 
heterodox doctrines, for that vihāra  was the object 
of a royally directed campaign to regularize it and 
bring it into subordination to the Mahāvihāra, 
which seems evident from the very outset of Sena II’s  
reign;19 and by his twentieth regnal year, the Abhaya -
girivihāra’s paṁsukūlika s had walked out on him, 
never to be heard from again in the Mahāvihāran 
histories. Further, the Anurādhapura catastrophe 
sealed the fate of the Abhayagirin’s own chronicles 
of Sri Lankan history, which probably constituted 
a tremendous wealth of collateral knowledge about 
other Buddhist countries in contact with the most 
19. This aspect of Sinhalese history is well explicated in 
various writings of Jonathan Walters (e.g., 1997, 1999, 2000), 
which use both the pre-eminent historical commentary of 
the 10th century, the Vaṁsatthappakāsinī , an important 
Theravāda commentary on the Mahāvaṁsa , in conjunction 
with the contemporary Lankan epigraphic record. I can 
see little among the many new inscriptions subsequently 
published in Sirimal Ranawella’s praiseworthy compendi -
um Inscriptions of Ceylon Volume V (Ranawella 2001, 2003, 
2004) that requires adjustments to Walters’ conclusions.cosmopolitan of Anurādhapura’s major monaster -
ies. It is unknown whether its literature was actively 
destroyed or merely allowed to passively rot, but the 
Abhayagirin histories would certainly have narrated 
the contacts with South India, with China and with 
Java. In the absence of these chronicles, the Ratu 
Boko’s Abhayagirivihāra inscription is, so far as I am 
aware, the only instance where the Abhayagirivāsins 
speak with something of their own voice.
For the purposes of this essay, however, the en -
dorsement of the Theravāda in the form of the Ma-
dhurai conquest lay ahead by six years. We pick up 
the situation as it stood in 856, with Anurādhapura 
in ruins and the Abhayagiri in deep discredit, with 
new kings (Sena II in ad  854 and Kayuvaṅi in ad  
855) installed on the thrones of Java and Sri Lanka, 
both with seemingly greatly different confessional 
allegiances than those kings in their immediate 
pasts.
ii. the raka of valaiṅ pu  
kumbha  yo
ni: śaiva erections  
and the terminus of the abhayagiri 
padhānaghara , ca. ad 856
The advent of Kumbhayoni
So far as I am aware, no piece of evidence on the 
plateau sheds light on the Abhayagiri and its mo -
nastic denizens in the years between its founding in 
ca. 792 and the year ad 856, when the next cluster 
of datable structures and artefacts begins to be 
imposed on the area. Such fundamental questions 
as whether the original ethnically Sinhalese del -
egation was replaced by native Javanese ordained 
into the Abhayagiri order; whether the doctrines 
these initial Abhayagirivāsins advocated were 
especially strongly appreciated or discounted by 
the successive Śailendra kings; or whether new 
Buddhist doctrines and literature passed readily 
from the mother monastery in Sri Lanka during 
the sixty-four years after the installation of the 
Abhayagiri monks,20 will be forever unknown.
20. As noted in Sundberg and Giebel (2011: 192, n. 97; Sund -
berg 2014) there is a remarkable precedent for the lending 
of texts across the oceans in a Taishō Tripiṭaka  mention 
of Vajrabodhi’s return of a manuscript borrowed from the 
sundberg mockup very last.indd   361 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 376] ---
362 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
The second cluster of buildings on the Ratu 
Boko plateau crops up around ad  856, a year after 
the (possibly traumatic) death of King Pikatan.21 
Thw new installations can be attributed to th e raka  
of Valaiṅ pu  Kumbhayoni, who is known to have 
left eight emphatically Śaiva inscriptions along the 
Gunung Kidul ridgeline (Map 14.1), the western 
end of which terminates in the abrupt cliff-edge 
on the Ratu Boko plateau, from the years ad  856 to 
863. Kumbhayoni’s inscriptional efforts included at 
least three stones (and more probably five) within 
a few metres of the Abhayagirivihāra’s walls.22 His 
Sinhalese master *Ratnabodhi. If Vajrabodhi could achieve 
this unofficially, I suspect that such transmissions would 
be routine for the Abhayagirivāsins stationed in Java.
21. Insofar as we know him from the scant historical 
evidence, Pikatan is a curious afigure who was provided 
a Śaiva burial (de Casparis 1956: 280–330), even though 
his two stūpa -shrines at the Buddhist Plaosan temple were 
inaugurated before he was even installed on the Javanese 
throne and were then affirmed by his incision of his new 
royal title upon his assumption of the throne in 847. See 
Acri (2010, 2011b) for explication of allegorical passages 
in Old Javanese texts that seemingly implicate Pikatan in 
political, and perhaps inter-religious, struggle. 
22. The available Kumbhayoni corpus is at present unsat -
isfactory. It consists of eight inscriptions (Griffiths 2011a: 
134–40): one is both unreadable and fragmentary, one 
remains unpublished, and those that were transliterated 
by de Casparis (1956: 269–70, 273–74, 277) present some 
readings that have been contested by Damais (1968: 467) 
as flatly impossible. Five of the inscriptions were recovered 
from the Ratu Boko and at least four of them concerned the 
erection of  liṅga  devoted to Śiva in his various denomina -inscriptions are accompanied by some architec -
tural structures, such as a featureless oblong block, 
which were built along the vihāra ’s south and east 
sides, and the particularly interesting Śaiva temple 
platform with a water- holding tank (Figs. 14.8–9). 
At least one liṅga is implied by his site inscriptions, 
but none have ever been found.
A fuller accounting of Kumbhayoni’s ac -
tivities and beliefs is beyond the scope of this 
ch
apter, as the topic demands an independent 
essay of comparable size. In Sundberg (2016c), I 
extend the observations on Kumbhayoni that I 
made in Sundberg (2011: 152, n. 19) and argue that 
tions, seemingly to mark some triumph, probably military 
because of the Tripurāntaka imagery, of Kumbhayoni. It 
is not known precisely where on the Ratu Boko two of the 
three earliest ones originated (de Casparis 1956: 244), but 
one would expect that they were found closer to some of 
the architecture rather than on the tiers of broad, flat, and 
featureless terraces which comprise most of the central 
area of the plateau, and where no other archaeological 
residue has been discovered. If this surmise is correct, then 
Kumbhayoni’s other inscriptions were found either near the 
buildings in the northwest of the complex or in the cluster 
of lithic architecture to the south: the latter is much more 
likely as the three well-documented discoveries from the 
1954 campaign were found in the immediate environs of the 
Abhayagiri structure (de Casparis 1956: 341–43). Indeed, it is 
not impossible that Kumbhayoni had pegged śivaliṅga s in 
all cardinal directions around the Abhaya  gi ri vi hāra: the 
relevant Laporan Tahunan  (1954: 19) reports the recovery 
of what seems to be the upper half of the Pinakin liṅga  
inscription to the west of the Abhayagiri prākāra , another 
inscription about 1.5 metres from the south walls, and a 
final one in the corridor just outside the walls to the east.Map 14.1: A photomap of the bluffs on the spur of Gunung Kidul to the south of Prambanan, showing the archaeological  
ruins on the Ratu Boko promontory and the spatial extent of Kumbhayoni’s inscriptions. (Wikimapia)
sundberg mockup very last.indd   362 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 377] ---
363 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
Kum  bhayoni: (1) was a descendant of royalty; 
(
2) was himself royal; (3) seemingly reigned in 
Sundanese Western Java after the post-Varak 
fracture of a unified kingdom into Western and 
Central Javanese entities (Sundberg 2011, 2016b);23 
(4) operated on and around the Central Javanese 
Ratu Boko plateau under the auspices of King 
Kayuvaṅi (r. 855–85), who was almost certainly a 
blood relative; (5) had military skills or military 
resources that may have been instrumental in 
some critical event occurring in the immediate 
aftermath of the possibly traumatic death of King 
Pikatan—possibly a resurgence of dissident forces 
in Sumatra which was recognized as threatening 
to both Sundanese and Central Javanese; and (6) 
that each of Kumbha  yo ni’s district sites across and 
beneath the Gunung Kidul ridgeline is devoted 
to a different Purāṇa.24
23. Based on the precedent of the modern Central Javanese 
toponym pairs like Warak-Warakan and Garung-Garun -
gan that are candidates for the raka  domains of Kings Varak 
and Garuṅ, I believe that the Raka  of Valaiṅ pu  Kumbhay -
oni is referred to in the Carita Parahyaṅan ’s listing of ‘Saṅ 
Wәlәṅan’ as the third king after the post-Varak division of 
the kingdom (Sundberg 2011: 152, n. 19).
24. Ku
mbhayoni’s own name—which is itself an epithet What is greatly pertinent for the purposes of the 
this chapter are several facts associated with Kum -
bhayoni’s erections to the immediate sout h and east 
of the padhānaghara , which are best appreciated 
by the visuals keyed to the maps 14.1 and 14.2, and
of Agastya—may have a noteworthy association with the 
island of Sri Lanka. According to a popular tale of Indian 
mythology, Indra found reason to discharge his semen 
into a pitcher, out of which was born Varuṇa. The son of 
Mitra and Varuṇa is called Kumbhayoni (‘born of a pot’), 
i.e. Agastya, and his place is Laṅkā; he is the Laṅkāvāsin 
(see chapter 61.50–51 of the Matsyapurāṇa ).
Fig. 14.8: A photograph of the three miniature temples; 
the Abhayagiri-associated structures lie to the left of the photo. The reader will observe the water sluices that feed into the water reservoir to the front. Clearly, provision has been made for the collection of a large volume of sanctified water, and the collection tank is large enough to immerse a human. Jordaan (1996: 48–60) has envisioned and adduced much convincing evidence for a similar function for the confines of the central courtyard at Prambanan. (Photo: author)Fig. 14.9: A photograph of the back of the central temple showing the origins of the water sluices. (Photo: author)
Fig. 14.10: An excellent depiction of the rubble-filled 
wall building technique on the terrace below the Abha
 ya g
i r
i v
ihāra, which contained the animal-symbol 
pillars which suggested to Degroot (2006: 65–66) the presence of a ritual hall devoted to Vairocana. The use of this building technique is first attested during the reign of the raka  of Garuṅ (r. 829–47) and seems to 
indicate construction during the Kumbhayoni period rather than the Buddhist one. (Photo: author)
sundberg mockup very last.indd   363 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 378] ---
364 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
illustrated in Figs. 14.8–12. It will be seen from the 
maps that Kumbhayoni’s additions to the Ratu 
Boko were all placed in intimate proximity to the 
Abhayagiri structures, in a manner which serves 
not to complement the pre-existing Buddhism, but 
rather to react to it by placing Śaiva cultic items in 
deliberate opposition to them. This interpretation 
is augmented by the observation that in his inscrip -
tions, Kumbhayoni is seemingly not talking to the 
Buddhist monks but is rather talking past them, 
in the language of Śaiva triumphalism. As will be 
argue d in the next Section, the incidence of Kum -
bhayoni’s new structures almost certainly signalled 
the end of the Abhayagirivās in presence in Java.  Kumbhayoni and the Abhayagiri
The presence and proximity of Śaiva activity could 
hardly be uncustomary or unfamiliar to the Abha -
yagirivāsins of the time, whether the original cadre 
was replenished with younger Sinhalese from the 
mother monastery or supplanted by native Javanese 
disciples who had been inducted into the Abhaya -
girin order. Besides the presence of the (presumably 
many) members of the Javanese court and upper 
reaches of the local aristocracy who maintained 
the Śaiva traditions attested in earlier generations 
in Java, we must take note of a somewhat similar 
familiarity in Rājaraṭṭha itself. Mahinda II (r. ad Map 14.2: A map of the Ratu Boko plateau depicting the Kumbhayoni additions. Adjacent to the 
double-platform structure of the Abhayagirivihāra stands the trio of Kumbhayoni’s miniature temples, and farther to the east on a lower tier, a terrace with passageways, walled courtyards, and cylindrical holes which might also belong to Kumbhayoni’s era or later. While the Ratu Boko prominence is formed by forbiddingly high and steep bluffs to the north, west, and south, a ridge running off from the east side of the plateau allows for gentler access from that direction, and more of Kumbhayoni’s relics have been discovered along that ridge. (Map taken from Degroot 2006)
sundberg mockup very last.indd   364 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 379] ---
365 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
772–92), who reigned at the time of the establish -
ment of the Ratu Boko delegation (although his 
name is seemingly not acknowledged in the availa -
ble portions of the foundation inscription), patron -
ized Brahmanical establishments: the Cūḷavaṁsa  
(48.143; Geiger 1953: 155) noted that he ‘restored 
many dilapidated temples of gods ( devakula ) here 
and there and had costly images of the gods made, 
and also he gave the brāhmaṇa s delicious foods 
such as the king receives, and gave them milk 
with sugar to drink in golden goblets’. However, 
the Cūḷavaṁsa  (51.65; Geiger 1953: 152) records a 
parallel honouring of brāhmaṇa s and bhikkhu s 
by Sena II’s clearly Theravādin successor Udaya 
II (1,000 brāhmaṇa s received a jar filled with gold 
and jewels, while the bhikkhu s received the three 
garments), so the similar activities attributed to 
the presumably vajravādin  Mahinda II may there -
fore signify nothing of especial importance. More 
pertinent to the point, the Esoteric Buddhism of 
the day was suffused to an unprecedented degree 
with Buddhacized Śaiva figures (e.g.,Vināyaka25 
and the subsidiary maṇḍala s of the STTS ), cultic 
25. The only extant translation by Hanguang 含光 , 
Amoghavajra’s only other known companion on the 
journey to Sri Lanka, in the Taishō Tripitaka concerns 
the worship of the dual-headed form of Gaṇeśa. Lancaster 
(1991: 284) provides the most complete résumé of Han -
guang’s extant work and notes that it encompasses many 
forms of Vināyaka, including the yuganaddha  (‘yab-yum ’) 
embracing figures, Gaṇapati, and the elephant-headed 
king. Significantly, it was translated in ad  747 (Tianbao 
天寶 6) (Getty 1936: 74), seemingly just after Hanguang 
and Amoghavajra had returned from Sri Lanka, making it 
almost certain that Hanguang’s work was sourced from the 
island and motivated by his experiences there. It therefore 
possibly reflects practices by Aggabodhi VI. Hanguang’s  
appreciation for the double-headed (androgynous?) 
Gaṇe  śa persisted throughout his life: in 774, he advised the 
Chinese monk Jingshe 憬瑟  on how to form an image and 
of the benefits of worshipping him (Getty 1936: 74, citing 
T 1274; Sanford 1995 greatly amplifies the implications of 
this particular erotic form of Vināyaka). The subtleties 
of the Buddhist perception of Vināyaka as either hostile 
or benign as expressed in works by Śubhākarasiṁha, Va -
jrabodhi, and Amoghavajra are treated in both Lancast -
er (1995) and Sanford (1995) and are explicit in Kūkai’s 
inaugural rites at Kongōbuji, as we shall see later in this 
chapter. For a discussion of Gaṇapati/Vināyaka in the 
cadre of Central Javanese Śaiva–Bauddha relations, see 
Acri, this volume.Fig. 14.12 (right): A photograph looking west to the three miniature structures (centre of photograph,  sil
 ho
u ett
ed against the sky) and the southern and 
eastern walls of the Abhayagirivihāra (farther back, extending from the middle to the right, with the snaggle-toothed pattern 0f wall finials). The  photograph was taken from the lower eastern terrace looking towards the west, and indicates the tight proximity of Kumbha
 yo
ni’s platform to the walls of the 
wilderness monastery. (Photo: author)Fig. 14.11: The corridor between the prākāra  of the 
Abhayagiri (right) and the rectangular platform (left) to the east. (For orientation, the reader will note that the upper half of the largest of the three miniature temples is slightly visi
 b le pr
otruding upward from the 
southern side of the oblong platform.) The proper left half of the Abhayagiri
 vāsin fo
undation inscription 
was recovered in the rub  ble ab
out halfway along this 
corridor, while fragments of one of Kumbhayoni’s inscriptions were recovered clos
  er to t
he far southern 
end of the corridor. (Photo: author)
sundberg mockup very last.indd   365 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 380] ---
366 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
artefacts, and other elements of Tantric Śaiva 
thought (Sanderson 2009; Sundberg and Giebel 
2011: 155; Giebel, this volume). Archaeologists have 
recovered votive items such as a hermaphroditic 
Ardhanārīśvara of the 7th to 8th centuries from the 
southwest of the very courtyard of the Abhayagiri 
stūpa in Anurādhapura (Fig. 14.13, von Schroeder 
1990: 264).26 (Indeed, Xuanzang in the mid 7th 
26. This particular four-armed Ardhanārīśvara image 
was noted for its Pallava styling and dates from the 7th to 
8th centuries (Indrapala 2005: 308). It was cast dancing in 
pratyālīḍha  and holding nāga  and  śaṅkha  attributes. The 
dual-divinity attributes seem to imply the pairing of Śiva 
with one of Viṣṇu’s consorts, which I will argue (Sundberg, 
2016c) to be a practical presentation of the fecundation of 
Viṣṇu episode in the Liṅgapurāṇa  (Rajarajan 2000 provides 
a bibliography on this icon and argues that this particular century noted that on Mount Potalaka in South 
India, Avalokiteśvara appeared in the form of either 
Maheśvara or an ash-smeared ascetic [Li 2000: 332]). 
Not least among the reasons for proposing the 
likelihood of Abhayagirivāsin comfort with Śaiva 
ways (and possibly Śaiva esoteric theology), is a 
feature observed by Degroot (2009: 237, n. 125), who 
points out an aspect of the Javanese monastery’s 
construction that I myself had overlooked in my 
several visits there: the gargoyles at the Abhayagiri 
are makara -yoni , i.e. yoni  placed under the chin 
of the makara . (While it defied my recent limited 
efforts to further exploit by identifying corollary 
features in Sri Lanka, Degroot’s observation may 
very well prove critical in refining a specific un -
derstanding of the Javanese padhānaghara , the 
Sri Lankan instances of which were designed to be 
flooded (personal communication with Osmund 
Bopearachchi). This perceptive observation con -
venes with Alexis Sanderson’s thesis of Esoteric 
Buddhists’ knowing dependence on Śaiva materi -
al and indeed may by itself provide an indication 
of the coexistence of, and interactions between, 
Śaivism and Buddhism that characterized Cam-
statue exhibits not only a dominant feminine mode, but 
that the statue specifically represents the Pattiṉi-Kaṇṇaki 
pair attested in the Cōḻa era). 
One wonders whether the stray find of this particular 
Ardhanārīśvara is the detritus of one of the mediaeval 
sackings of Anurādhapura. If the art-historical 7th–8th 
century dating (Kulatunge 1999: 65) is accurate, the stat -
ue’s loss must have occurred during the Pāṇḍya sacking 
under Śrīmāra Śrīvallabha, ca. ad 840. It is possible that 
the detailed archaeological reports of the unearthing of 
the Lankan Ardhanārīśvara will shed further light on the 
background of its findings. 
I draw attention in n. 43 belo w to a similar Śaiva arte -
fact recovered from the courtyard of Candi Sewu, which 
is likewise the probable residue of a sacking of the temple. 
In the Javanese case, the statue in question was part of a 
clearly Buddhist maṇḍala  as it depicts Śiva in the respect -
fully subordinate añjali -mudrā .
Such appreciations of Śaivism are not limited to the 
Abhayagirivihāra. Van Lohuizen de Leeuw (1957, cf. Myer 
1961) observes in her work on the great historic vihāra  of 
Somapura at Nandangaṛh that of the sixty-three figures 
on the outside, only Avalokiteśvara is Buddhist and all the 
remainder are Hindu. At the time of this writing, I know 
of no published study investigating whether the Somapu -
ra’s depictions were intended to flatter Hindus or else to 
indicate their subordination to Buddhists. Fig. 14.13: The Ardhanārīśvara found at the southwest courtyard of the Abhayagiri stūpa,  now at the National 
Museum of Colombo. Kulatunge (1999: 65) suggests that the conch shell denotes a feminine Vaiṣṇava fig
 ure
, of the type perhaps implied in Kumbhayoni’s 
Śaiva inscriptions (de Casparis 1956: 267–68) where they pair Śiva not with Pārvatī or Umā but rather with consorts of Viṣṇu. (Photo taken from von Schroeder 1990: 264–65, plate 67A)
sundberg mockup very last.indd   366 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 381] ---
367 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
bodia by the mid 9th century27 and Java in the 10th.
This background of the Abhayagirivāsin ac -
quaintance with Śaiva ideas and practitioners 
being noted, it must be said that there is little about 
Kumbhayoni’s activities that I can construe as fa -
vourably disposed towards Buddhism or supportive 
of the Abhayagirivāsins. There being no shortage 
of space on which to implement his cultic vision 
across the Gunung Kidul ridgeline and even on the 
broad terraces of the Ratu Boko plateau (see Map 
14.1), Kumbhayoni deliberately chose to encroach 
on the Abhayagiri and entangle it with his struc -
tures. In building his platform and erecting on it 
a trio of symbolic temples for the generation of 
sanctified water,28 Kumbhayoni could hardly have 
made himself a welcome neighbour to the Abha -
yagirivāsins. As noted above, his liṅga inscriptions 
were found on at least three sides of the meditation 
platform, with one or two more likely originally 
found on the relatively rubble-free north side of 
the Abhayagiri prākāra : therefore, Kumbhayoni 
pegged in the padhānaghara  with inscriptions 
about liṅga . If Kumbhayoni was not talking to the 
Abhayagirivāsins in his Śaiva inscriptions at their 
site, he was certainly talking at them, with actions 
that injured. The square platform to the south of 
27. See, for example, the ad  8 68 Sanskrit-Khmer inscrip -
tion of Bo Īkō (Prapandvidya 2010: 49) in which the king 
resolves to seek enlightenment and donates a herd of cows 
and buffaloes to the Saṅgha on one side of the inscription, 
even while donating a golden śivaliṅga  on the other.
28. Bopearachchi, Jordaan, and Sundberg (2016) will 
examine the incorporation of fluid water in contempo -
rary Pallava, Sinhalese, and Javanese religious architecture.the Abhayagiri must have been Kumbhayoni’s as it 
was established so close that it effectively obstruct -
ed the drainage spouts of the Abhayagirivihāra 
(Degroot 2006: 68, see Fig. 14.14). Whether in ad -
dition to building his own edifices uncomfortably close to the Abhayagirivihāra, Kumbhayoni also 
tore down the walls of the vihāra  and shattered 
its foundation inscription is uncertain, as all the 
9th–10th century Javanese temples were masses 
of ruined masonry when first noted by Colonel 
MacKenzie (1814: 24–28) in the historical record. 
However, portions of the Abhayagiri inscription 
were found both at the centre of the rubble pile as 
well as underneath the fallen masonry of the eastern 
wall, so the inscription had been split at some time 
before the walls were destroyed.29 Whether the 
29. The Abhayagirivāsins seemingly kept their founda -
tion inscription close at hand throughout their tenure in 
Central Java. The Abhayagirivihāra inscription has by now 
been almost wholly recovered, but it has been found in a 
greater state of fragmentation than almost any other Java -
nese inscription and seems to have fractured from only a 
few discrete percussion points. This may suggest that the 
shattering was deliberate, induced by human agency (rival 
Buddhist sects, Śaivas in 856, or just common vandals). 
However, given the proximity of this inscription to open-
air walls, it is not out of the question that they fractured 
so severely as a result of the earthquake-induced tumbling 
of the Abhayagiri walls. Pertinent to considerations of this 
question, all three of Kumbhayoni’s Ratu Boko inscriptions 
found near the walls of the Abhayagirivihāra are broken 
and the inscription which rivals Abhayagirivihāra in its 
state of fracture is the genealogical inscription of Kum -
bhayoni (de Casparis 1956: 342–43, Griffiths 2009: 16–20), 
the proper right half of which was recovered just down the 
Fig. 14.14: Kumbhayoni’s temple platform reached the lip of the makara  of the Abhayagirivihāra’s outer 
wall. A section sketch created and published by Degroot (2006: 68) and republished here with the kind permission of the author.
sundberg mockup very last.indd   367 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 382] ---
368 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
destruction of the prākāra  walls was the doing of 
Kumbhayoni around 856 or by nature sometime 
thereafter will be forever unknown.
Besides the unwelcome physical encroachment 
of Kumbhayoni’s temple platform, there are deeper 
considerations which arise from the fortuitous pres -
ervation of some of the statuary and the material 
deposited in the foundation boxes of the miniature 
temples, which might also be interpreted as part 
of Kumbhayoni’s agenda against the Buddhists 
of the Abhayagirivihāra. Kumbhayoni’s erection 
of his triple shrines, whose statuary and mantras 
may have been in some way connotative of the 
Tripura30 mentioned in his liṅga inscriptions and 
buttressed by the carved Tripura mural noticed in 
1815 by Crawfurd (1967, cf. Bernet Kempers 1949), 
was apparently invested with aggressive Śaiva sym -
bology and positioned to thwart or negate the puta -
tive supernatural efficacy of the Abhayagiri. In so 
doing, Kumbhayoni was asserting a metaphysical 
challenge to the nearby Abhayagiri structure via 
a mode which he considered effective, namely the 
magical and supernatural Śaiva symbols that he 
had strewn around the Abhayagiri precincts.31 Such 
a challenge would convene with the Tripura story 
corridor from the Abhayagiri fragments turned up in the 
1954 archaeological campaign.
However, given the finding of the earliest fragments 
on top of the peṇḍapa  but the majority of the inscription 
under the rubble of the eastern prākāra  wall, it seems 
as though the Abhayagiri inscription was shattered and 
scattered before the collapse of the walls. In comparison, 
Walters (2000: 142) pointed out that Rājendra I’s inscrip -
tions from the Cōḻa interregnum in Sri Lanka were smashed 
but allowed to remain rather than being eliminated.
30. De C
asparis (1956: 244–79) translates and explicates 
three Kumbhayoni inscriptions which invoke the Tripurā -
sura imagery, while Crawfurd not only noted a now-missing 
panel image of the Tripurāsura but correctly identified it 
(Bernet Kempers 1949: 186). Griffiths’ (2011: 135) report that 
the Tryambaka inscription has gone missing is thankfully 
mistaken; it continues to stand in public in the National 
Museum in Jakarta.
31. Se
e Sanderson 1994: 93–94. A prime example of such 
supernaturally potent symbolism was the vajra -shaped 
plate recovered from the Ratu Boko plateau, where King 
Panaraban’s name was circumscribed within the vowel 
token of a mantra. See the Annex to the present chapter 
for an updated discussion of this mantra-foil as well as the 
contribution by Acri in this volume.that Kumbhayoni held firmly in mind when he 
was composing his Śaiva Sanskrit inscriptions and 
commissioning the Tripura mural.32 Kumbhayoni 
32. So far as I know from the evidence available to me, if 
Kumbhayoni’s material in any way addresses the nearby 
Buddhists of the Abhayagiri, it is through the device of the 
Tripura references which pervade his liṅga  writings (de Cas -
paris 1956: 244–79), both those that were found on the Ratu 
Boko as well as those from elsewhere along the bluff; that 
the Tripura concept was important at the Abhayagiri site 
is confirmed by Crawfurd’s 1815 notice of a long-vanished 
carved panel depicting this famous episode in Śaiva mythol -
ogy (cf. Bernet Kempers 1949: 186) . Gerd Mevissen provides 
an excellent itemization of the use of the Tripurāntaka story 
in the contemporary Dravidian kingdoms of the Pallavas, 
the Āy-vēḷs, the Irrukuvēḷs, the Early Western Cāḷukyas, and 
the Rāṣṭrakūṭas. As he (2006a: 134) notes, ‘o nly a limited 
number of the pre-10th century dynasties produced large 
sculptures of Tripurāntaka. There is no evidence that this 
form was depicted by the Pāṇḍyas, the Muttaraiyars, the 
Western Gaṅgas, the Noḷambas, or the Chāḷukyas of Veṅgi, 
not to speak of North India, where representations of Tri -
purāntaka became popular only after the 10th century’. In 
attempting to find the potential Abhayagiri-relevant signif -
icance to Kumbhayoni in the paradigms established in the 
early reifications of the Tripura myth enacted by such early 
figures as Narasiṁhavarman II Rājasiṁha at Kailāsanātha, I can only note Mevissen’s (2001: 755) observation that ‘the 
ancient myth of Śiva as destroyer of the three demon cities 
evidently attracted the attention of South Indian rulers as it 
appealed to their claim of paramount overlordship’. However, 
turning to the Tripurāntaka instances of the Cōḻa period 
suggests a much greater potential relevance to the situation 
on the Ratu Boko in 856, for such temples as Rājarāja’s 
Rājarājeśvara or Brihadīśvara at Tanjavur instantiate the 
variant of the myth which represents the form taken by 
Viṣṇu in his deceptive role of Māyāmohin, Buddha as Great 
Deceiver, in preliminary operations to confuse the Asuras 
(Mevissen 1997: 295). Mevissen (ibid.: 302) discusses Rā-
jarāja’s conquest of the Buddhist Sinhalas as the reason for 
the prominent depiction of the Buddha as Great Deceiver 
at his temples. As an added element which supports this 
particular identification, Mevissen notes that in the specific 
version of the Tripura myth discussed by Doniger (1973), the 
Asuras had won from Brahmā the Three Cities as a result 
of their asceticism, and Lakṣmī, ‘won over by the demons’ 
asceticism, blessed them with Glory and Prosperity’, thus 
closely tying the Tripura myth to the Lakṣmī themes which 
are also the hallmark of Kumbhayoni’s inscriptions.
In regard to these leads into Kumbhayoni’s motivations, 
the loss of the Ratu Boko Tripurāntaka mural seen by Craw -
furd is felt with especial keenness, as it might have provided 
important definitive identifications of the exact permuta -
tion of the Tripura myth employed by Kumbhayoni. While 
sundberg mockup very last.indd   368 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 383] ---
369 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
may therefore have responded to the conspicuous 
anti-Śaiva Buddhist myths by enacting his own 
destruction of the walls and taunted zealous Java -
nese Buddhists by the erection of his own durable 
Tripura as a token of Śiva’s power.33
The one element of the Ratu Boko fact pattern 
which perhaps indicates Kumbhayoni’s acknowl -
edgement of the Abhayagirin might lie in the 
inscription, only half of which has been found,34 
which describes his genealogy going back four gen -
erations (de Casparis 1956: 342–43, Griffiths 2009). 
The extant fragments were recovered not far from 
the proper left half of the Abhayagirivihāra inscrip -
tion, along the pathway between the eastern wall 
of the Abhayagiri prākāra  and the parallel oblong 
platform (Fig. 14.12) which had been consecrated 
to Buddhism (Sundberg 2014: 103). While nothing 
else is known about the role of this undecorated 
Buddhist platform, its position suggests that it 
was an integral component of the early Buddhist 
rituals conducted under the auspices of the Abha -
it is beyond my capacities to pursue this line of thought 
further, Mevissen (2006a: 135, nn. 1, 2, 4) provides a good 
bibliography of the Tripurāntaka in Sanskrit and Tamil 
sources, as well as Indian inscriptions referring to him.
33. Gr
ay (2007: 39) addresses the parallel Buddhist tale 
between hostility to Hindus by Buddhists and the war 
between gods and Asuras in the Triple City, noting that ‘the 
origin myths of the tantric Buddhist deities … were likely 
composed in reaction to such hostile discourse [referring 
to the Tripurāntaka legend]. Buddhist versions reproduce 
Hindu polemical discourse in describing a hostile encoun -
ter between Buddhist and Hindu deities, but, naturally, 
resolve it with the victory of the former over the latter’. 
Indeed, the Cūḷavaṁsa  (51.39, Geiger 1953: 154) describes 
Sena II’s sacking of Madhurai with the same Tripurāsura 
imagery invoked by Kumbhayoni. 
34. Without knowing the depth of archaeological in -
vestigation in the Ratu Boko archaeological campaigns 
of the 1950s, it is difficult to assess the likelihood that the 
remainder of the inscription might be recovered in the 
vicinity of the extant fragments (I’m certain that the ar -
chaeologists looked carefully for the other elements). Given 
that the superstructure of the three miniature temples was 
actually found to the east of the oblong platform, it is not 
out of the question that the remainder of Kumbhayoni’s 
ancestor inscription is to be found in that location rather 
than to the west of the platform, further complicating any 
attempt to coherently describe the exact set of actors and 
sequence of events which led to the recovered distribution 
of artefacts on the Ratu Boko plateau. ya girivāsins. Among the rather limited number 
of roles which might be plausibly proposed for 
this platform is as an abhiṣeka platform for either 
Esoteric Buddhist or royal consecrations. If the Ab -
hayagirivāsins consecrated the Śailendra kings as 
cakravartin s as Amoghavajra did for Suzong, then 
the location of Kumbhayoni’s inscription appreci -
ating his royal ancestors might make sense if one 
or all of the ancestors he mentions was consecrated 
there, even if he no longer supported the religion 
under which these rites were conducted. 
In an effort to appreciate the full dimensions 
of Kumbhayoni’s contrivance against the Abhaya -
girivihāra, and specifically why his primary effort 
should be focused to the immediate south of the 
padhānaghara , it will be useful to examine the 
rituals and rites which likely served to sanctify and 
prepare that padhānaghara  structure for use. We 
have no record or evidence of the rituals that may 
have been used to consecrate the Abhayagirivihāra 
in 792, nor has there been any sustained archaeo -
logical exploration of the deep structure of any of 
the Sri Lankan padhānaghara .35 It is quite reason-
able to assume that Sinhalese consecration rituals 
shared the goal of those actions employed by, for 
example, Kūkai around 818 to make his signature 
monastery of Kongōbuji on Mount Kōya 高野山  
habitable, or by the Tibetan king Trisongdetsen to 
create the propitious atmosphere which allowed the 
walls of his Samye monastery to be erected around 
the year 779 by deliberately and visibly introduc -
ing countervailing forces to any vighna  present. 
Indeed, given the observations raised in, inter alia, 
Sundberg and Giebel (2011) about the South Indian 
or Sri Lankan provenance of some of the mijiao 
密教  doctrines, it is possible that Kūkai effected 
at Kongōbuji a ritual strategy and regime which 
originated with the Sri Lankans of the prior century. 
The particulars of the ritual performed by Kūkai are 
unknown, but the underlying spiritual motivations 
have been thankfully preserved in some detail. In 
clearing a sacred space for Kongōbuji, Kūkai es -
tablished sīmābandha  (kekkai 結界 ) stones to mark 
out boundaries separating the sacred and profane 
(Gardiner 2000: 122) with two successive rites. The 
35. Woodward (1976) pointed out the merits of the profes -
sional excavation of at least one of Sri Lanka’s padhānaghara .
sundberg mockup very last.indd   369 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 384] ---
370 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
first rite correlated to the ‘Text of Declaration for 
the First Consecration at the Founding of Mount 
Kōya’ ( Kōya konryū no hajime no kekkai no toki no 
keibyaku no bun 高野建立初結界時啓白文 ; Gardiner 
2000: 127–29) which initially invoked the chain of 
patriarchal transmission (from Mahāvairocana to 
Kūkai via Vajrasat  tv a, Nāgārjuna, Vajrabodhi, and 
Amoghavajra) of the Vajroṣṇīṣa  texts which lay at 
the heart of the Shingon doctrine,36 and then called 
upon unnamed deities as well as the spirits of prior 
emperors and empresses37 to help him establish the 
Diamond and the Womb-World maṇḍala s at the 
Kongōbuji. The second rite, based upon the ‘Text 
of Declaration for the Consecration of an Altar at 
Mount Kōya’ ( Kōya ni dōjō o konryū shite kekkai 
suru keibyaku no bun, 高野建立道場結界啓白文 ), 
was the basis for a purification of the Dharma Altar 
that lasted one week. This second rite implicated 
a number of Buddhist potentates: the palace of 
the Three Jewels, the reverend teacher Śākyamuṇi 
Buddha, the protector and liberator Avalokiteśvara 
觀世音 , the Bodhisattva Vajrakuṇḍali 金剛軍荼利 , 
the two Medicine King Bodhisattvas Bhaiṣajyarāja  
藥王  and Bhaiṣajyasamudgata 藥上  and their 
36. Kūkai mentions his patriarchal precursors Nāgārjuna, 
Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra, and Huiguo 惠果  in the chain 
that stretched back to Vajrasattva, but strangely omits the 
single figure of Nāgajñā (Longzhi 龍智; for the alternative 
rendering ‘Nāgabuddhi’, see Appendix A by Sinclair in this 
volume). Per the suggestion in Sundberg and Giebel (2011: 
160) that Nāgajñā was a wilderness monk unaffiliated with 
any established South Indian monastery, it is not out of the 
question that Kūkai found his invocation inappropriate 
for Kongōbuji.
37. It i
s interesting to observe that Kūkai’s Esoteric Bud -
dhism accommodated a role for the spirits of prior Japanese 
emperors and empresses in Japanese sacred architecture. 
Such invocations of sacralized prior Javanese kings are 
known from the inscriptions, but the extant evidence 
allows a dating only to the year 880, where they are implied 
in the inscription of Wuatan Tija.
While Sañjaya himself in his one extant inscription had 
recognized his immediate predecessor and his pedigree (‘a 
king of very noble lineage of the name of Sanna’ [Sarkar 
1971a: 20]), the kings of subsequent centuries recognized 
Sañjaya as their progenitor, seemingly because it was he 
who surged out of Sundanese Galuh into the Merapi area. 
(Indeed, King Dakṣottama [r. early 10th century], in his four 
extant inscriptions, even dated his calendar with reference 
to Sañjaya’s coronation rather than the Śaka era that was 
customary for the inscriptions of the Javanese kingdom).retinues, the Bodhisattva Vajragarbharāja 金剛藏
王38 and his retinue, the gods Brahmā 梵 (an ab -
breviation of 梵天 ) and Indra 釋 (an abbreviation 
of 帝釋天 ), the four kings 四王 , and Nāgas 龍神  
(Gardiner 2000: 129–30, with amplification by Rolf 
Giebel). This second rite was formulated specifically 
to sanctify the monastery’s altar by driving out 
‘obstructers’ in the form of Vināyakas (binayak -
ya 毘那耶伽 )39 as well as other maleficent spirits 
who oppose the True Dharma. Although Kūkai’s 
second text was modelled upon an earlier work in 
Chinese ( Tuoluoni jijing 陀羅尼集經 , T 901.813c),40 
the targets of both of the rites are cast specifically 
as manifestations of Śiva, so it seems safe to say 
that Kūkai’s rite may have been indeed devised in 
Greater India, where such concerns about purging 
the Śaiva would have a greater immediacy. Indeed, 
these Kongōbuji sanctification rites are implicat -
ed in the Śaiva-Bauddha doctrinal disputes and 
competition for patronage that led to the creation 
of such mythological and narrative episodes as 
the Trailokyavijaya myth. A manifestation of that 
tension may exist in the golden vajra -shaped in -
scribed foil which was recovered near the great 
entry gate of the Ratu Boko plateau itself and which 
implicated the raka  of Panaraban, the Javanese king 
38. Giebel (2012: 215–16) notes that among the Siddham 
t
exts brought by Kūkai, one is called the King of Eulogies 
of Vajragarbha-Trailokyavijaya ( Kongōzō gōzanze san’ō 
金剛藏降三世 讃王 ) while another is entitled Mantra of 
Thousand-Armed Amṛtakuṇḍalin . The fact that Sanskrit 
Siddham texts existed seems confirmation of the Indic 
origins of both these two removers of obstruction and the 
perceived character of the obstructions.
39. La
ncaster (1995: 283–84) discusses the Vināyaka-re -
lated rituals in Amoghavajra’s Mārīcīdharaṇīsūtra  (see 
also Duquenne 1988 and Lokesh Chandra 1992c). One 
of the Siddham texts brought by Kūkai, the Mantra of 
Thousand-Armed Amṛtakuṇḍalin  (Kuṇḍali-bodhisattva 
is also mentioned in Kongōbuji’s purification ceremonies), 
is devoted to a deity related to Vināyaka. The mantra oṃ 
āḥ bighnantak  hūṁ phaṭ sv āhā in
scribed on a stone 
found in the Muara Takus site in Sumatra has been iden -
tified by Griffiths (2014c: 237) as a variant of ‘a mantra for 
the maṇ ḍ ala d eity Amṛtaku ṇḍal i(n), a protective deity not 
unrelated to Kubera and Vin āya ka (Ga ṇeśa) ’.
40. This work was translated by Atikūṭa and its title 
should be restored as * Dhāraṇīsaṅgraha  (Davidson 2002: 
145).
sundberg mockup very last.indd   370 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 385] ---
371 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
who held his crown when the Abhayagirivihāra 
was founded.41
With this examination of the metaphysical 
cleansings and clearings which likely sanctified 
the Javanese Abhayagirivihāra and purified it for 
monastic habitation in a manner suited for con -
temporary Shingon practice, we are positioned to 
better appreciate Kumbhayoni’s intentions when 
he specifically endowed his temple platform system 
with statues of Vināyaka and consecrated it with 
gold-foil invocations of Rudra: Kumbhayoni may 
have deliberately and visibly introduced counter -
vailing forces, durably establishing the presence of 
exactly those irksome Śaiva personalities that the 
Buddhist rites were designed to expel. Further -
more, Kumbhayoni did so with an establishment 
to the south of the Abhayagiri that may have been 
necessitated by some Buddhist cultic centre there. 
Without knowing any more about what the Abhaya -
giri consisted of in 792 other than the characteristic 
double-platform structure, with the small stūpa and 
the two caves as adjuncts, the precedent of Kūkai’s 
vihāra  at Kongōbuji—quite possibly derived from 
a Lanka-originated model—arguably provides a 
reason to suspect that an analogous Dharma altar 
was erected to the south of the Abhayagirivihāra, where it would have served as the functional and 
ritual centre for this Śailendra monastic complex. 
In short, one compelling reading of the southern 
Ratu Boko evidence envisions Kumbhayoni working 
diligently to contravene the Abhayagirivāsins with 
the physical and metaphysical resources available 
to him: crumbling their foundation inscription, 
pushing down their walls, pegging ś ivaliṅga s 
around their compound, and nullifying their ritual 
centre with his own sanctified ritual platforms and 
Śaiva ‘holy water machine’ (Jordaan 1996: 45–60). 
The inferred cultic statue of Avalokiteśvara may 
have been toppled and cast down the hillside before 
it was buried with rubble (Sundberg 2014: 64, fig. 8). 
41. See my Annex and Acri, this volume, for extended dis -
cussions of this artefact. The Sanskrit text entitled Vajragar -
bha-Trailokyavijaya , the Siddham text of which was brought 
from China by Kūkai, is of potentially great importance 
for studies of early tensions between the Buddhists and the 
devotees of Śiva. Unfortunately, it is not treated by Hase 
(1976) and may now be tragically lost (Giebel 2012: 215–16). Their building may have been retained as a mockery 
and reminder.42 
In evaluating Kumbhayoni’s actions, it seems 
that the ca. ad  856 efforts were uniquely directed 
against the Abhayagiri. I know of no other evidence 
that suggests a parallel Śaiva effort to expunge 
the grand traces of Buddhism in the other extant 
monuments like Borobudur.43 The strenuous and 
42. In the epigraph to the companion to this chapter 
(
Sundberg 2014), I cited the British intelligence writer 
John Le Carré’s operational precept: find the facts then 
search through explanatory scenarios, trying them on ‘like 
clothes’. In this vein, it should be noted that Central Java is 
seismically active, and it would be difficult to distinguish 
between millennium-old archaeological sites which had 
been deliberately ruined by human agency and those ruined 
by geological forces. I am indebted to Peter Sharrock (email 
dated 31 March 2015) for a comparative observation, hope -
fully merely the first of many which explore this seemingly 
rewarding avenue, which relies on the Khmer situation: 
‘Iconoclasm was rare in ancient Southeast Asia. In Angkor 
king Jayavarman VII built shrines to Śiva and Viṣṇu in his 
Bayon Buddhist state temple. He also donated a large statue 
of Viṣṇu to one of his predecessors’ Vaiṣṇava state temple, 
i.e. Angkor Wat, which was presumably still functioning. 
The gods of previous reigns were venerated under the new 
regime, their sacred power being appropriated rather than 
removed. Indeed there are far more Śaiva ṛṣi  carved on 
the walls of Jayavarman’s temples than monks, reflecting their still dominant presence in the city. This was perhaps 
more appropriation or accumulation than syncretism, for 
there was no fusion of deities nor presumably of ritual. 
Kumbhayoni’s positioning of Śaiva icons at important Bud -
dhist sacred spots in Ratu Boko may have similarly been 
appropriating or transforming their sacred power rather 
than destroying it. (I should add that a century after Jaya -
varman’s death there was indeed iconoclasm in the Bayon. 
Śaiva liṅga s were erected and Bodhisattva icons chiseled 
into liṅga s, and thousands of Buddha reliefs chipped out of 
the other Jayavarman temples. This appears to have been 
the work of King Jayavarman-Parameśvara who left an 
inscription dated 1327 making pūjā  provisions for a new 
liṅga  in the first year of his brief reign, an isolated event 
that left a large scar)’.
43. In Sundberg 2016b, I propose that the Candi Sewu 
temple complex fell victim to at least one sacking, which 
likely occurred during what the evidence suggests to be 
a bitter succession war around the year ad  887, although 
a date which lies closer to Kumbhayoni’s ad  856 actions 
against the Abhayagiri cannot be ruled out. The Sewu 
temple complex was only partially repopulated with in -
expensive stone Buddha statues in the years between the 
sacking and the great but poorly understood disaster of 
sundberg mockup very last.indd   371 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 386] ---
372 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
densely focused effort by Kumbhayoni to thwart 
their presence suggests to me once again that the 
Abhayagiri paṁsukūlika s were not just an impotent, 
marginal ascetic group of myopic vinaya  experts, 
but rather a group whose potency required repu -
diation via every valid force Kumbhayoni could 
muster, a group whose efficacy justified the close 
attention and support paid to them by the Lam -
bakaṇṇa kings.
If the actions taken by Kumbhayoni to coun -
tervail the structure are clear, I have no idea what 
he did with the Abhayagiri monks themselves. 
The possibilities are many. Perhaps, like the Sin -
halese kings, they were deprived of rations or were 
parcelled out to other monasteries. Perhaps they 
suffered one of the grimmer fates associated with 
heresy, limned by extant Sinhalese and Pallava 
sources which attest to punishments which could 
range from a relatively benign exile to corporal 
punishments such as branding, whipping, stoning, 
and even impalement.44 Whether these monks had 
929, when all inscriptional evidence of a thriving Central 
Javanese kingdom abruptly terminates. 
Kusen and Haryono (1992) present an inventory of 
the various recesses in the original pedestals of the Candi 
Sewu complex that indicates the astonishing size and quan -
tity of the metal statuary that was originally installed in 
the 240 shrines there. There remains, however, a small, 
free-standing metal relic of the original thematic set which 
populated Sewu in one of its earlier configurations, and is 
extraordinarily diagnostic of the doctrines embodied in 
Candi Sewu: a statue of Śiva in the respectful and subor -
dinate añjali posture (Haryono 1996). Such a statue clearly 
functioned in a Buddhist maṇḍala that subordinated the 
Hindu deities.
The doctrine embodied in the middle phase of Sewu is 
uncertain—there is no evidence that it remained Buddhist, 
although the architectural amendments which instantiat -
ed the bearded siddha -like figures (Sundberg and Giebel 
2011: 165–68) seem to have been executed by King Garuṅ  
(r. 829–47) because they stylistically match what he was 
doing at the Plaosan temple, within sight to the east 
(Klokke 2006: 55–57). Further considerations on Garuṅ’s 
involvement in the Sewu refurbishments will be advanced 
in Sundberg 2016b.
44. Indrapala (2005: 193), commenting on the contest 
between competing religions (Jain, Buddhist, Śaiva, and 
Vaiṣṇava) in Pallava domains observes that ‘one of the 
notable features of the Śaiva campaign was the conduct of 
public disputations between the Śaiva Nāyanārs and their 
opponents. Often harsh punishments seem to have been developed independent lay support, as their Sinha -
lese counterparts seemed to have enjoyed, cannot 
be known but I consider it unlikely; given the diffi -
culty of access to the monastery, I surmise that they 
were strictly provisioned by the king and interacted 
solely with the court. In any case, their monastery 
had been ruined and its ability to function ritually 
had been deprived by Kumbhayoni. 
iii. the ratu boko drama in context: 
turmoil in the esoteric buddhist 
world, ad 840–56
The archaeological and textual evidence suggests 
Kumbhayoni’s unsolicited and ill-willed intrusion 
on to the sīmābandha  of the Abhayagirivāsins. 
Lacking any explicit statement by the protagonist 
to describe the incident or explain his motiva -
tions, there is much latitude for historical spec -
ulation about why the Abhayagiri was so treated. 
The reasons might be found locally, in Java, and 
meted out to those who were defeated. Śaiva traditions refer 
to opponents being impaled on stakes. Other traditions 
mention banishments…. Later Telugu works … refer to 
an eighth century Jaina teacher, Akalāṅka by name, from 
Sravana Belgola in Karnataka, as having disputed with the 
Buddhists of Kanchi and defeated them. These Buddhists, 
we are told, were in consequence banished to Sri Lanka. 
The substance of these accounts seems credible, for two 
Kannada inscriptions of earlier dates also refer to the same 
incident’. Hudson (2008: 79) provides an image of a temple 
frieze depicting Pallava Nandivarman Pallavamalla (ca. 
731–96) attending the impalement of two men, one upside 
down, as a depiction of his use of righteous punishment 
(daṇḍa ). Sharrock ( 2009: 114) draws attention to  Yijing’s 
record that the Buddhist monks had all been killed or 
expelled by ‘a wicked king’ not many years before his visit 
to Cambodia.
Bronkhorst (2011: 189, n. 274), citing Schopen (2006: 
228) for his information, writes that ‘losing a debate at 
the royal court could presumably have dire consequences 
(death, slavery)’. But even elsewhere a lost confrontation can 
bring disaster, if we go by the testimony of the Mūlasarvās -
tivāda Vinaya : ‘When members of other religious groups 
(tīrthya s) are completely humiliated by the Buddhist Monk 
Śariputra in a contest of “magical” powers that humiliation 
is, at least in part, narratively signaled by the fact that, in 
order to remain in Śrāvastī, they are reduced to acting 
as day laborers on the monastery being built there, and 
must work under the eye of a latāvārikaḥ puruṣo , a “man 
in charge of the whip” or “work-boss’’’.
sundberg mockup very last.indd   372 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 387] ---
373 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
perhaps were particular to Kumbhayoni under his 
prerogatives as local raka  lord. However, there is 
a broader context which might bear relevance to 
the instance of the Ratu Boko: royal support for 
Esoteric Buddhism darkened across large swathes 
of Buddhist Asia in a shockingly short time just 
after 840, suffering from official backlash against 
excesses, disappointments, or shortcomings in its 
practices or doctrines.
There is clear and pertinent evidence of adversity 
in China, Tibet, and Laṅkā. In China, the stimu -
lus for the anti-Buddhist Huichang 會昌 backlash 
(Chen 1956; Weinstein 1987: 114–36) seemed largely 
practical, undertaken for financial motives: so many 
Chinese had exploited the tax exemptions available 
for Buddhist monks that the Empe ror Wuzong  
武宗  (r. 840–46) in 841 to 845 was forced to purge 
the monasteries of their monastic tax dodgers. He 
shut down 4,600 monasteries and 40,000 temples 
and shrines, returning 260,500 monks and nuns 
to civil life and restoring vast acreage of farmland 
to the imperial tax registers. According to Li Jie  
李節  and the Japanese monk Ennin 圓仁  (793–864), 
the destruction of both monasteries and st atues 
was carried out quite thoroughly in places far from 
Chang’an 長安 . Ennin describes the persecution of 
monks by Emperor Wuzong in 844, saying that 
all the stone pillars engraved with dhāraṇī s were 
destroyed as well as the monasteries (Chou 1945: 
322–23, cf. Palmer 2009: 225ff.), thus accounting 
for the scarcity of these stone pillars today.45 In 
Tibet, quite remote from Java but still a powerful 
Buddhist kingdom, the 842 assassination of the 
king by a Buddhist monk set off 150 years of chaos 
and disorder known as the ‘dark period’, during 
which the empire disintegrated and little progress 
in Buddhist studies was made (Dalton 2011: 4–5). 
45. Since Ennin makes special mention of these stone 
pillars, they must have existed in great numbers prior to 
Suzong’s 肅宗  reign. Their loss constitutes an enormous 
tragedy for the history of Esoteric Buddhism. The reader 
will find in Sundberg 2014 remarks on a similar absence of 
Sinhalese inscriptions from before ad  839 and the parallel 
absence of royal administrative inscriptions from Java 
before the time of Kayuvaṅi (855–83), which was almost 
certainly the result of revocations of prior kings’ sīmā  al-
locations like those enacted by Varak and Pikatan for the 
Pikatan monastery’s fields at Vanua Tṅah.The cumulative effect of this reaction on the north -
ern periphery of the Buddhist world, as Matsun -
aga (1978: viii) notes, is that ‘the period from the 
middle of the ninth century until around the end 
of the tenth century was a dark age for Buddhism 
in both China and Tibet. Since there were hardly 
any translations of sutras made during this period, 
it is difficult to know and follow the history of the 
translations or the development of Buddhism in 
India at this time’.
Whether these ripples in the Buddhist kingdoms 
to the far north had ultimately affected the Javanese 
court’s disposition towards the Abhayagirivāsins 
might depend on an appraisal of the tightness of the 
Javanese cultural and intellectual coupling to those 
Buddhist realms, but there can be little doubt that 
the cosmopolitan Abhayagirivāsins were attuned to 
trends in other countries, and their equally cosmo -
politan Javanese patrons likely shared this interest.
The most significant of the Buddhist adversi -
ties for the Javanese Abhayagirivāsins, with their 
presumably close links to their Sri Lankan home -
land, was the comprehensive sacking and looting 
of the mother monastery when Sena I, certainly 
the last of Rājaraṭṭha’s Esoteric Buddhist kings, 
lost control of his capital at Anurādhapura to the 
South Indian Śaiva Pāṇḍyas, who, the reader will 
recall, had invaded Sri Lanka sometime between 
ad 839 and 845. For the decade prior to the advent 
of Kumbhayoni, then, the vihāra s, palace, and cer -
emonial halls at Anurādhapura had stood vacant, 
devoid of wealth or costly devotional icons like 
the gem-eyed Buddha of the Ratnaprāsāda whose 
loss seemed particularly stinging ( Cūḷavaṁsa  51.48, 
Geiger 1953: 151). During the two long intervening 
decades before Sena II turned the tables on the 
Pāṇḍya by plundering Madhurai in 862, the deso -
lation of the capital’s monasteries would have been 
an unceasing reproach to the Abhayagirivāsins, 
whose state-protection doctrines maintained such 
a durable grip on the kings of Sri Lanka in the 
prior centuries.
The latent tensions posed by a subordinated 
soteriology existed in both Sri Lanka and Java. In 
the former case that creed was the Theravāda, while 
in Java that creed was the Śaiva. They had both 
tolerated the slights and nursed their grievances in 
their lifetimes out of royal favour, and both proved 
sundberg mockup very last.indd   373 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 388] ---
374 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
ready to seize their moment.46 At the time that 
Kumbhayoni acted against the Abhayagirivāsins, 
royal Sri Lanka in its reversion to the Theravāda 
doctrines was striking out in a way which was new 
and yet old, for there had been a stock-taking and 
a radical change in ethos in the aftermath of the 
Pāṇḍya disaster. There can be no doubt that the 
vajra -inflected Mahāyāna of Sena II’s predecessors 
had given way to the Theravāda doctrines retained 
at the rival Mahāvihāra: Sri Lanka’s own abruptly 
impoverished king had broken with centuries of 
precedent and repudiated Abhayagiri primacy. At 
the time that Kumbhayoni set out to disrupt them 
and negate their potency, the Abhayagiri and the 
creeds it peddled may have been perceived not only 
in Sri Lanka but across the Buddhist world as a 
disastrous sham, the trick of charlatans. Indeed, 
Kumbhayoni was acting at precisely the instant 
that the Buddhist world began bifurcating into 
its Northern and Southern doctrinal schools, 
although it would take the Muslim conquests of 
Bengal and Bihar to achieve the final physical step 
of that process.
Sena II had yet to enact his devastating and 
humiliating coup de main against a justifiably hated 
Pāṇḍyan enemy in Madhurai, the stunning feat 
which seemingly served to confirm and validate 
the efficacy of the Theravāda doctrines to which he 
had reverted. That glorious ad  862 victory, which 
imparted the momentum that sustained Sri Lanka 
on its orthodox course for the past eleven centu -
ries, still lay six years in the future. Kumbhayoni, 
whether intending to assist Sena II or not,47 par-
alleled the contemporary project in the homeland 
46. A study of the multiple royal religious conversions 
of the Khmer kings, with solid attestations of Śaivism, 
Esoteric Buddhism, Vaiṣṇavism, and finally Theravāda 
Buddhism, would be both interesting by itself but would 
also serve as a valuable comparative reference for the 
sparsely documented kings of Central Java. I am grateful 
to Peter Sharrock for a profitable discussion of these 
kings and the motivations for the shifting doctrinal 
allegiances. 
47. On
e wonders whether there had been a formal com-
munication between Sena II and Kayuvaṅi, advising the 
Javanese of the new Rājaraṭṭha stance towards the Sin -
halese vihāra  in his kingdom. Like many aspects of this 
1,200-year-old story, little is known of the collaboration 
between kings across the greater Indic world. to rein in the Abhayagiri, an endeavour which, by 
the twentieth year of Sena II’s reign, had resulted in 
the departure en masse of the type of Abhayagiri 
monk hosted in the padhānaghara  on the Ratu 
Boko plateau.
Whatever the happenings in the contemporary 
Buddhist world, the decision to act against the 
Abha  yagirivāsins was ultimately decided locally, 
in Central Java. Whether the actions of Kumb -
hayoni (however he acquired raka -lord primacy 
on the Gunung Kidul) were stimulated by King 
Kayuvaṅi or whether the Javanese regent merely 
concurred with Kumbhayoni’s desires, the ability to 
act was restricted to a few aristocratic and possibly 
sacerdotal figures who had come to power upon 
the death of King Pikatan in 855. The pronounced 
Śaivism of this new group may have represented 
a royally ordained reversion to an alternate, but 
long dormant, religious tradition of the island, a 
correlate to the shift towards the Theravāda in Sri 
Lanka, but there are suggestions that the precipi -
tating disaster was local and may have been related 
to the circumstances that brought about Pikatan’s 
death.48 If the success of the counter-strike against 
Madhurai sealed the rehabilitation of the Theravā -
da against the Abhayagiri doctrines, the military 
success implied by Kumbhayoni’s apparent pillar 
of victory  (jayastambha ) may have had a corre -
sponding effect for the Śaivas in Java, reinvigor -
ating royal favour based on demonstrated results. 
The sharp reaction to the Abhayagirivāsins may 
have been necessitated by the royal readoption of 
a mainstream form of Śaiva religion, as the failures 
associated with the Abhayagirivāsins may have 
served as exemplars of the excesses connected 
48. As will be argued more expansively in Sundberg 2016b, 
Pikatan’s death may have been related to events in the old 
domains of Sumatran Śrīvijaya, but in a slightly different 
manner than surmised by de Casparis (1956: 288, 300), 
who translated his funeral stele. A willing Buddhist in his 
younger years, Pikatan affirmed his youthful donation of 
two of the Buddhist shrines at the Plaosan temple by vali -
dating them with his new royal title. His ‘Śivagṛha’ funeral 
memorial inscription (de Casparis 1956: 280–330), the only 
such material yet recovered for any of the Javanese kings, shows surprisingly that he was interred in a Śaiva context. 
Sadly, the inscription offers merely minimal legibility in 
the portions that would seem to shed most light on the 
events surrounding his death.
sundberg mockup very last.indd   374 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 389] ---
375 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
with Tantric forms of Buddhism and Śaivism;49 
as an honour-driven response to the Buddhist 
disparagement of Śaivism; or even, as suggested 
in Section II above, active suppression of it spear -
headed by the Abhayagirivāsins. Finally, Kum -
bhayoni’s efforts may represent the repudiation of 
the often-reviled Yoginītantra- related transgressive 
character of certain strands of Esoteric Buddhism, 
whose doctrines may have been primarily carried 
by these paṁsukūlika  monks and may have been 
no more welcome to the Javanese populace than 
they were to the emperors of China from whom 
the excesses were concealed, or to the Tibetans 
whose 10th-century king stamped them out only 
with great effort (Dalton 2011: 97ff.). If I am correct 
about the transgressive character of the Buddhism 
allowed to surface during the reign of King Garuṅ 
(r. 829–47) and his associate Śrī Kahulunnan (Sund -
berg 2016a), and the supplementary evidence that 
the Abhayagirivāsins channelled, if not originated, 
the very same advaya  doctrines known by Amogha -
vajra and practised by Garuṅ, then Kumbhayoni’s 
selective response is comprehensible.
Our final glimpse of the Ratu Boko Abhaya -
girivāsins leaves them in their new and doubtlessly 
embittering situation, the dismaying conclusion to 
a collaborative interregnal endeavour which had 
seemed so important sixty years before, as well as a 
repudiation of the sophisticated Buddhist doctrines 
which that royal endeavour sought to promote. 
What must have been felt when, one morning, 
49. As suggested by Acri (2010, 2011b), who interprets both 
the allegorical sections of the Rāmāyaṇa  kakavin  as well 
as the Śivagṛha inscription of ad  856 as a critique directed 
by the mainstream religious (and political) establishment 
towards marginal groups of siddha -like antinomian as -
cetics of both Śaiva and Buddhist persuasion. Analogous 
dynamics have been described by Dalton (2011: 104), who 
noted that the Tibetan king ‘Yeshe Ö targeted the nonmo -
nastic tantric communities that had flourished in the social 
fragmentation of the late ninth and tenth centuries. His 
edict was explicitly addressed to the tāntrika s of central 
Tibet, “you tantrists who live in the villages”, and it com-
plained of the “ Bajiwa ” (‘Ba jiba ), Buddhist heretics who 
claimed for themselves the highest enlightenment and to 
have transcended all distinctions of sacred and profane, 
moral and immoral’. In Sundberg 2016a, I will argue that 
transgressive texts and practices may have been allowed to 
surface not only in the Panaraban years of Central Javanese 
history but in the Garuṅ-Kahulunnan era as well.Śrī Kumbhayoni, his attendants, his sheriffs, and 
his architects first ascended the great staircase of 
the Ratu Boko and appeared at the threshold of 
Abha  y agiri padhānaghara ? Did the monks have an 
inkling that it would occur? Had there been a series 
of public disputes and accusations by the seemingly 
erudite Kumbhayoni himself; possibly ever since 
questions about the efficacy of their apotropaic 
skills had arisen in the wake of the disastrous fall 
of Anurādhapura more than a decade prior; or 
possibly because of the very recent decision of the 
newly crowned Sinhalese monarch Sena II to repu -
diate their monastery, reform its institutional creed, 
and take his shower-bath into kingship in a novel 
Theravāda rite devised by the rival Mahāvihāra, 
held within its precincts and incorporating soil 
sacralized by the presence of prior Buddhas on 
the grounds of the Mahāvihāra itself? (Walters 
2000: 125ff.) Or did a quorum of Śaiva religious 
advisers quietly point out to Kayuvaṅi that this 
small, stranded group of Abhayagiri monks had 
to go, tasking Kumbhayoni with the errand? Sadly, 
the passage of twelve centuries prevents any certain 
answer to this well-defined question, important for 
the broader study of the historical relationships 
between Śaivism and the Esoteric Buddhism that 
seems to have borrowed heavily from it. 
*
annex:  
further considerations on the  
ratu boko mantra
 Treason doth never prosper. What’s the reason?
 Fo
r if it prosper, none dare call it treason.50 
A fascinating relic, an inscribed double-diamond 
vajra -shaped gold foil invoking the mantra Oṁ 
ṭakī huṁ ja ḥ svāhā, wa s discovered in front of 
the Great Gate on the Ratu Boko plateau (see Fig. 
1 on p. 324, this volume). The scribing of the word 
panarabvan  within the circle of the ī vowel  in ṭakī 
seemingly implicated the Śrī Mahārāja Rakai Pa -
naraban who reigned from ad  784 to 803 (Kusen 
50. John Harington, Epigrams. Cf. Kevin Costner’s mo -
nologic courtroom summation in the Oliver Stone film JFK .
sundberg mockup very last.indd   375 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 390] ---
376 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
1994: 95), while the other word within the circle, 
khanipas , possibly referenced another personality. 
I observed (Sundberg 2003: 166) that the script of 
the Ratu Boko mantra seemed to be quite early as 
it contained an archaic form that was also found in 
the ad 792 inscription of Mañjuśrīgṛha from Candi 
Sewu. Furthermore, I argued that the panarabvan  
of the gold-plate inscription almost certainly refers 
to the king with that approximate raka  title, who 
reigned during the time of the ad  792 installation 
of the Abhayagirivāsin delegation at the southern 
end of the same plateau.
I first offered an exploration of this artefact 
in Sundberg (2003), which I explicitly denoted as 
a preliminary study as it was clear that I lacked 
the mastery of languages and access to texts that 
would allow a fuller exploitation of the material. It 
is satisfying to see that the intervening decade has 
offered welcome new facts that better control the 
range of the plausible interpretations which might 
be draped over the factual skeleton. The amplified 
factual base extends in many directions, including a 
novel contextual understanding of the strife-ridden 
relationship between Panaraban and his son, the 
raka  of Varak (Sundberg 2011), as well as the new 
textual attestations of the core mantra turned up 
in the investigation of Griffiths (2014a) and Acri 
(this volume), which yield new understandings of 
the range of interpretations that may be assigned to the vajra -plate. 
The new textual attestations of the mantra 
all seem to derive from the themes of opposing 
obstruction ( vighna ) and controlling obstructers, 
which in Esoteric Buddhist mythology are sub -
sumed under the figure of Śiva. While the genre 
of Esoteric literature in which these new instanc -
es have been found is not wholly unanticipated 
given the vidyarāja /krodharāja  and vajra -hook 
(aṅkuśa ) context initially discerned in 2003,51 
51. To those novel attestations adduced by Griffiths and 
Acri I add one more notice which convenes with the original 
identification of the mantra from Lokesh Chandra’s notice 
of an Aizen Myōo 愛染明王 /Rāgarāja/Ṭakkirāja nexus in 
the Sūtra of all Yogas and Yogīs of the Pavilion with the 
Vajra-top  (Jingangfeng louge yiqie yuqie yuzhi jing  金剛峯
樓閣一切瑜伽瑜祇經 , Goepper 1993: 15, excerpted in Sund -
berg 2003: 171–72) , one of the five fundamental texts of 
the Shingon school and ascribed to either Vajrabodhi or what is fundamentally novel to the study of the 
vajra -plate mantra is the attestation of the ‘ oṁ… 
svāhā’ pairing in a hostile rather than benedictory 
context (cf. the gold foil inscription reading oṁ 
rudr āya nama ḥ svāhā f ound at the miniature 
Triple Temple ‘consecration water machine’ to the 
southeast of the Abhayagirivihāra at Ratu Boko). 
Based on the erroneous supposition that the va -
jra-foil mantra must be benedictory and involve 
Panaraban in a benign way, I (Sundberg 2006: 112, 
n. 25) wrongfully dismissed a valid interpretation 
offered by Jordaan and Colless (2004). 
On the circumscription of Panaraban’s name 
(as well as the mysterious word khanipas ) on the 
gold plate, Jordaan and Colless (2004: 62) wrote 
of ‘the encircling of Panarabvan’s name to convey 
the idea of his being caught and tied up with ropes 
and rendered powerless’. Supplemental grounding 
for their conceptualization is offered by Goble’s 
(2013: 17) recent examination of the Trisamaya  
texts translated by Amoghavajra and apparently 
employed by him in his defeat of Tang enemies 
about four decades before the production of the 
Ratu Boko mantra, in which the texts instruct the 
ritual technician to ‘imagine those enemies bound 
with ropes by the envoy [Acala], lead to the south -
ern direction of stifling suffering, vomiting blood, 
and perishing. Those [enemies] and their ilk will all 
be unable to recover. Not a single one will survive’.
The final set of new information derives from 
narrative passages in the 16th-century Carita Pa-
Amoghavajra, where the mantra was employed in sweep -
ing away dangers for the Buddhist monks by unsavoury 
characters. Dalton’s (2011: 87–88) recent researches turn 
up an elaboration of the Vajra-Peak Pavilion Sūtra ’s 
theme: ‘Next a final purification of the victim’s mental 
impurities is performed, in conjunction with the ritual 
master’s imaginative transformation of himself into the 
wrathful Buddha Ṭakkir āja. The Guhyasamāja Tantra  
includes a brief description of this deity. ‘‘The great wrath -
ful Ṭakkirāja,” it reads, “has three terrifying faces and 
four supremely terrifying arms”. The mere appearance of 
this fearsome Buddha, our Dunhuang manual explains, 
with his apocalyptic gaze and wild laughter, completes the 
cleansing of the victim’s karmic imprints. From his right 
eye burst flames that incinerate the impurities, from his 
left eye flood waters that wash them away, and the winds 
of his laughter blow away any that remain, leaving him 
thoroughly purified’.
sundberg mockup very last.indd   376 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 391] ---
377 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
rahyaṅan  that uniquely record the circumstances 
around King Sañjaya (r. 717–46?), his predecessors, 
and his successors. While early scholars of this text 
recognized that the Carita Parahyaṅan  correctly 
identified Sañjaya’s immediate predecessor, they 
were mystified by inexplicable references to his 
successors, which commenced with the kings ‘Pa-
naraban’ and then ‘Manarah’. In a previous study 
(Sundberg 2011) I employed data made available 
only by the 1983 discovery of the Wanua Tengah 
III inscription, with its revelation of the kingships 
of the raka  of Panaraban (personal name presently 
unknown) and the raka  of Varak dyah  Mānara 
(r. 803–27), to show that another two crucial 
generations of Javanese kings could be recognized 
in the Carita Parahyaṅan  before it trailed off into a 
featureless recitation of the historically unknown 
kings of West Java, who were different than the 
epigraphically well-attested post-Varak sequence 
who ruled Central Java. My 2011 essay addressed 
the startling events offered up in the Carita Para -
hyaṅan ’s brief narration of the reigns of Panaraban 
and Varak. Those pertinent claims made by the Old 
Sundanese chronicle included Sañjaya’s instruction 
to his putative son Panaraban to adopt a new reli -
gion; Panaraban’s own relish for destroying ascetics 
(tapasvin ); and Panaraban’s subsequent impris -
onment by his son Varak, who was crowned king 
after a fight against a brother who rose to defend 
Panaraban. In my essay, I concluded that the Carita 
Parahyaṅan  was likely correct in its claim of both 
a Sañjaya-stipulated conversion and a Varak-led 
rebellion against his father. Both of these claims 
contribute valid context to the vajra -foil and its 
circumscription of Panaraban’s name.
Regarding the last of the Carita Parahyaṅan ’s 
claims, I deduced from the alien post-Varak West 
Javanese king-list that the unitary power implied by 
the 8th-century Arab epithet ‘Mahārāja of the Isles’ 
seemed to have split into the tripartite kingdoms of 
Sumatra, Sunda, and Java, at a time coincident with 
or after Varak’s coup;52 furthermore, the Javanese 
52. The formerly unitary late 8th-century archipelagic 
kingdom had been divided, with no implication by the 
Carita Parahyaṅan  that the division into Western and 
Central Javanese portions was a violent or contested event. 
Such a consensual division finds precedent in the division 
of the Pallava domains in Nanidivarman’s time, while it raids on, or even subjugation of, Cambodia and 
Campā came to a halt around the time of Varak’s 
successful treason.
Regarding the other of the Carita Parahyaṅan ’s 
claims, i.e. that Sañjaya himself commanded his 
putative son Panaraban to change religions, I 
pointed out that every time the successors of the 
Śaiva Sañjaya are visible in the historical epigraph -
ical record in the century following his death, they 
are seen in a Buddhist context engaged in Buddhist 
activities: Sañjaya’s sibling’s establishment of a 
Buddhist vihāra  at Pikatan which existed without 
interruption throughout the 8th and 9th centuries, 
even when the kings had seemingly resumed a pref -
erence for Sañjaya’s epigraphically attested Śaivism 
around ad 855, at the tail end of the decade of dis -
enchantment and setback for the Esoteric Buddhist 
world noted in Section III above; the endowment of 
royal lands at Vanua Tṅah for the Pikatan vihāra  
by Sañjaya’s seeming successor and descendant 
the raka  of Panaṅkaran; the same Panaṅkaran’s 
building of a Tārā temple and vihāra  at Kalasan, 
possibly within his personal raka  domain,53 at the 
may have served as the precedent for the later Eastern 
Javanese division of his kingdom by Airlaṅga (Jordaan 
2007). Regarding the multiple branches of the Cāḷukya 
who may have been even more widely scattered than the 
Śailendra, Davidson (2002: 41) wrote: ‘despite their eventual 
loss of power in their homeland, in a manner similar to 
that of the Kāḷachuris of Madhya Pradesh, branches of the 
house of Chāḷukya continued to operate in various milieus 
throughout the early medieval period’. 
The Sumatran Śailendras are visible not because they 
are known through their own domestic inscriptions, but 
only because of the chance preservation of the evidence in 
their interactions with kings of India, both with the Pālas 
in the 9th century and the Cōḻas in the 11th.
I am grateful to Marijke Klokke (personal communi -
cation) for drawing my attention to aspects of the pale -
ography of the undated side of the Ligor inscription that 
negate my assumption (Sundberg 2011: 127, n. 8) that the 
two sides were written by the same hand and that this 
implied a Śailendra regency high in the Malay Peninsula in 
ad 775. I will modify the expression of my 2011 argument 
in Sundberg 2016b
53. On
e of the two lithic sīmā  inscriptions recently un -
earthed at the ad  869 Kedulan temple in the Kalasan dis -
trict specifies the sīmā  to originate at ‘Panaṁṅgaran’ (Pra -
mastuti et al. 2007: 31), which seems to be an orthographic 
variant of Panaṅkaran (personal communication with 
Tjahjono Prasodjo and Andrea Acri), the vatak  designated 
sundberg mockup very last.indd   377 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 392] ---
378 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
suggestion of the Śailendrarājaguru; Panaraban’s 
acceptance of the Vanua Tṅah sīmā ; Borobudur 
arguably being erected during Varak’s reign and 
within his home vatak  (Sundberg 2006); Garuṅ’s 
uncoerced actions in 829 to restore the Vanua 
Tṅah sīmā  and his building of the primary Plaosan 
temples; Pikatan’s post-inaugural validation of the 
shrines that he sponsored at Plaosan during his pre -
decessor Garuṅ’s regency; and finally the inscribed 
statue that I observed in illicit hands (Sundberg 
2014: 167, n. 190). 
While I know of no evidence that confirms the 
Buddhist adherence of Panaraban other than his 
maintenance of the royal sīmā  provisions for the 
family vihāra  recorded in the Wanua Tengah III 
inscription, I know of no fact at the time of this 
writing that mandates or even sustains an an -
ti-Śaiva interpretation for the Ratu Boko mantra. 
However, I now look quite favourably upon the 
interpretation advanced by Jordaan and Colless, 
now ably buttressed by the novel and well-expli -
cated material discussed by Acri, which perceives 
hostility to Panaraban but relies upon the vigh -
nāntaka  character of the mantra, for Panaraban 
represented a potent threat to an individual who 
potentially had access to the Great Gate area of 
the Ratu Boko plateau which quite possibly served 
as a kraton /kaḍatvan  (Sundberg 2014: 170, n. 199), 
and who was motivated to struggle against him 
with every available resource, including the su -
pernatural means which were so widely accepted 
in 8th-century Indic religions. Quite specifically, I 
now believe that the potent, antagonistic individual 
who instigated the mantra was Panaraban’s son 
Varak, who was every bit as disloyal to his father as 
the multitude of contemporary Sinhalese princes 
and queens whose treacheries were documented in 
the Sinhalese Cūḷavaṁsa  and labelled as such in the 
histories only because their treasons were unpros -
perous.54 Indeed, it is not out of the question that 
for the regent from 746 to 783. The greatest and grandest 
of the early Śailendra Buddhist temples, the Candi Sewu 
once so astonishingly  richly endowed with metal statu -
ary, had been both constructed during the latter part of 
Panaṅkaran’s reign and likely within his personal vatak 
(in Sundberg 2006, I argued that the same relationship 
held for Borobudur and the reign and vatak  of King Varak).
54. In order to preserve Varak’s legitimacy, the Carita the term khanipas  encircled with panaraban  on the 
vajra -plate is that of Panaraban’s other son ‘Baṅga’ 
who loyally came to his father’s aid, who battled 
Varak, and who also might need to be warded from 
the kraton  gate by mantric means. 
Thanks to the scholarly efforts of Jordaan, 
Colless, Griffiths, and Acri, fundamental infor -
mation about the core mantra and its context is now 
much more broadly and thickly documented than 
in 2003, with a correspondingly greater refinement 
of the interpretive possibilities. I think that there is 
still some need for research into the implications of 
the selection of gold as the material on which the 
mantra is inscribed, as the selection of that noble 
metal deviates from the bone or inflammable cloth 
enjoined for hostile Buddhist wizardry by those 
textual sources and ritual manuals which have 
thus far come to scholarly attention. It is possible 
that deeper understandings of the manufacturer’s 
selection of the precious metal might once again 
tip the interpretation of the artefact towards one 
of benevolence towards Panaraban. 
* *
As a finale to the topic of the Ratu Boko mantra, 
I should report the results of enquiries by the ev -
er-productive and astute Roy Jordaan (p.c.) into the 
disposition of the mantra plate. The 1950 Annual 
Report of the Indonesian Archaeological Service 
(Laporan Tahunan  1950: 2) reported that shortly 
after his return from Holland, Soehamir request -
ed resignation from the Archaeological Service, 
permission for which was granted to him (with 
honours) shortly afterwards. Jordaan surmises that 
his resignation may have been motivated by the 
explicit criticism of his refusal to bring the archae -
Parahyaṅan  has Panaraban unjustly murdering the prior 
incarnation—as a blameless pandit  —o
f Varak, who in his 
new royal embodiment took revenge upon his father and 
murderer. It was clearly of some importance to the Sun -
danese author of the Carita Parahyaṅan  to delegitimize 
Panaraban even while sustaining the reputation of the trea -
sonous son Varak. Presumably some dynastic issue was at stake, with others of Panaraban’s descendants still potent 
some place in the Archipelago, possibly in Central Java and 
possibly in Sumatra or the Malay Peninsula. I will explore 
the issue in greater depths in Sundberg 2016b.
sundberg mockup very last.indd   378 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 393] ---
379 Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java
ological archives of the field office at Prambanan 
into safety before the Dutch attack on Yogyakarta. 
Soehamir’s argument was that the office had re -
mained undamaged during the Japanese invasion 
and occupation, so was likely to remain so when the 
Dutch attacked. Not so: Dutch artillery and guns 
damaged the building and its doors, enabling the local inhabitants to enter and loot the place. The 
Annual Report  (1950: 10) reported that the people 
took away the safe containing the money of the 
Archaeological Service and all the gold artefacts 
that had been stored away in it. This was seemingly 
the sad end of the 1,200-year-old gold plate and 
Ratu Boko mantra.
sundberg mockup very last.indd   379 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 394] ---
sundberg mockup very last.indd   380 11/7/16   3:03 PM

--- [Page 395] ---
The taishō canon attributes (in some 
cases spuriously) more than 160 translations 
to Amoghavajra (Bukong 不空 ; 704–74), and 
they cover a wide range of subject matter.1 One of 
the more unusual translations attributed to him 
is the Suji liyan Moxishouluo tian shuo (jialouluo ) 
aweishe fa 速疾立驗魔醯首羅天說 (迦樓羅 )阿尾奢
法 (T 1277.329b–331a), or The (Garuḍa ) Āveśa Rite 
Explained by the God Maheśvara Which Swiftly 
Establishes Its Efficacy (hereafter: The Āveśa Rite ), 
the greater part of which describes the use of child 
mediums in rites of spirit possession ( āveśa ) for 
the purpose of divination. The text itself would 
seem to be entirely devoid of any Buddhist content 
(apart from one reference to a Buddha when de -
scribing the iconography of Maheśvara), and Alexis 
Sanderson (2009: 136–38, n. 318) has pointed to the 
possible influence of Śaivism, but to the best of my 
knowledge it has not yet been fully translated in a 
Western language. The aim of this brief study, then, 
is to provide a complete annotated translation of 
The Āveśa Rite in the hope that it may serve as a 
basis for others more qualified than myself to de -
termine with greater precision the influences, Śaiva 
or other, that may be present in the text and the 
text’s possible provenance. Before presenting the 
translation itself I wish to touch briefly on textual 
and other matters, including prior research.
The Āveśa Rite is not included in the list of trans -
lated works Amoghavajra submitted to the Tang 
court in 771,2 and it appears for the first time in 
1.I gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from
Andrea Acri and Arlo Griffiths and detailed feedback from 
Iain Sinclair and Michael Slouber in the course of preparing 
this study. The responsibility for the views expressed here 
and the errors committed is of course entirely my own.
2. T
 2120.839a25ff.Yuanzhao’s 圓照 addendum to the Kaiyuan cata -
logue ( Da Tang Zhenyuan xu Kaiyuan shijiao lu  
大唐貞元續開元釋教錄 ), compiled in 795–96, among 
translations attributed to Amoghavajra, where it is 
listed under the title Suji liyan Moxishouluo tian 
shuo jialouluo aweishe fa 速疾立驗魔醯首羅天說迦
樓羅阿尾奢法 .3 It was first brought back to Japan 
by Kūkai  空海  (774–835) in 806.4 There can thus 
be little doubt that even if this text was not actu -
ally translated by Amoghavajra, it was circulating 
in China by the late 8th century. It is to be noted, 
however, that Yuanzhao states that the text occupies 
six sheets,5 whereas Kūkai gives its length as four 
sheets,6 although it is not clear what the discrepancy 
between these figures may signify.7
3.T 2 156.753c13–14, 768b18–19.
4. T 2
161.1062a13–14.
5.T 2
157.1032b5.
6.T 2
161.1062a14.
7.Matsunaga Yūkei (1980: 322–24; 1985: 889–91) has
used the fact that Kūkai gives the length of Amoghava -
jra’s translation of Chapter 41 of the Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa
(MMK ) (‘Garuḍapaṭalaparivarta’; Wenshushili pusa genben 
dajiaowang jing jinchi niaowang pin 文殊師利菩薩根本大
教王經金翅鳥王品  [T 1276]) as three sheets to argue that
the version Kūkai brought back was considerably shorter
than the current extant version, which, he states, ‘is
almost three times as great as that recorded’ by Kūkai
and was, he maintains, later expanded. But Yuanzhao
already gives the length of Amoghavajra’s translation of
the ‘Garuḍapaṭalaparivarta’ as eleven sheets. The lengths
of texts as recorded in sheets by Yuanzhao and Kūkai are 
sometimes the same, but often they differ, with the number 
of sheets given by Yuanzhao tending to be larger than that 
given by Kūkai. Does this mean that there were differences 
in the size of paper used or in the size of the writing? Or,
in view of the considerable discrepancy in the case of the
‘Garuḍapaṭalaparivarta’, did Kūkai bring back a shorter
version even though a longer version already existed?Chapter 15
A Śaiva Text in Chinese Garb? 
An Annotated Translation of the Suji liyan Moxishouluo tian 
shuo aweishe fa 
rolf w. giebel
Giebel mockup.indd   381 11/7/16   11:42 PM

--- [Page 396] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia382
That there was a demand for texts pertaining 
to spirit possession and the use of child mediums 
in 8th-century China is evident from the activities 
of Vajrabodhi (671–741; a.k.a. Vajrabuddhi: see Ap -
pendix A), Amoghavajra’s teacher. Not only do two 
texts supposedly translated by him into Chinese 
include instructions for the use of child mediums,8 
but according to one of his biographies he himself 
performed such a rite, using two seven-year-old 
girls, when one of the emperor’s daughters was on 
the verge of death.9
Amoghavajra too was a renowned thauma -
turge, skilled in a wide repertoire of rituals, and 
although it is not known whether he performed 
rites of the type described in The Āveśa Rite , they 
would undoubtedly have fallen within the ambit 
of his expertise, given the fact that āveśa rites are 
mentioned in several other texts translated by him, 
starting with the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha .10 
Shortly after Vajrabodhi’s death in 741, Amogha -
vajra travelled to Sri Lanka and possibly India,11 
returning to China in 746, and even if The Āveśa 
Rite was not actually translated by Amoghavajra, it 
may have been acquired by him during his travels, 
perhaps in Java or Sri Lanka, where Tantrism, both 
Buddhist and Śaiva, was being practised to some 
extent around this time. Alternatively, the text 
Matsunaga does not elaborate on how he calculated the 
extant version to be ‘almost three times as great as’ the 
three sheets recorded by Kūkai, but the difference between 
Yuanzhao’s and Kūkai’s figures raises questions about 
Matsunaga’s thesis (which is cited without comment by 
Sanderson [2009: 129, n. 300], whereas Slouber [2012: 83] 
is more critical of Matsunaga’s reasoning). This is perhaps 
a subject deserving further investigation.
8.  J ingangfeng louge yiqie yuqie yuqi jing  金剛峯樓閣一切
瑜伽瑜祇經 (T 867.269b23–28) and Budong shizhe tuoluoni 
mimi fa  不動使者陀羅尼祕密法 (T 1202.24b15–21). The at -
tribution of the former to Vajrabodhi is problematic. Cf. 
Strickmann 2002: 206–8.
9.  T 
2061.711c6–18. Cf. Chou 1945: 278–79.
10.  On ā
veśa  as employed during initiation in the Sarva­
tathāgatatattvasaṅgraha , see Sanderson 2009: 132–39. 
For an English translation of the corresponding section 
in Amoghavajra’s translation of the Sarvatathāgatatat ­
tvasaṅgraha  (T 865.218a29–c9), see Giebel 2001: 76–78. On 
examples of spirit possession in other texts translated by 
Amoghavajra, see Strickmann 2002: 233–37.
11.  On t
he destination and objective of Amoghavajra’s 
journey see, e.g., Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 44–47.may have been brought to China via Central Asia, 
possibly from Kashmir. 
Moving on to past research on The Āveśa Rite , 
the most detailed treatment is probably that by 
Michel Strickmann (2002: 229–32), who translates 
or paraphrases the entire text. Excerpts had been 
earlier translated in French in the Hôbôgirin (I: 7), 
and it is also mentioned by Edward Davis (2001: 125) 
in his discussion of Tang-dynasty precedents for 
the use of child mediums. As noted above, Alexis 
Sanderson cites it, with a summary of its content, 
in the context of the assimilation of the Śaiva Kaula 
practice of ‘possession’ in the Sarvatathāgatatat ­
tvasaṅgraha , although it is debatable to what extent 
practices involving possession can be regarded as 
specifically Śaiva or even Tantric. On the subject of 
oracular possession and the use of child mediums 
in Esoteric or Tantric Buddhism, a useful summary 
is provided by James Robson (2011), and on the 
broader Indian context reference should be made 
to Frederick Smith’s comprehensive study.12
A perusal of the above studies would suggest 
that The Āveśa Rite has until now attracted the at -
tention of scholars almost exclusively on account of 
its description of spirit possession, specifically orac -
ular possession. But in view of the fact that the main 
rite described in the text involves Garuḍa and is 
referred to as ‘the most excellent among all Garuḍa 
rites’, there is perhaps also a need to consider it as 
a Gāruḍic text in a broad sense of the term, even 
though it does not deal with what Michael Slouber 
has called ‘Gāruḍa Medicine’, the primary concern 
of the Gāruḍatantras.13 In this connection it is 
worth noting the inclusion in the Chinese canon 
of the Jialouluo ji zhutian miyan jing 迦樓羅及諸天
密言經  (Scripture of Mantras of Garuḍa and Gods  
[T 1278]), which is essentially a manual of Gāruḍic 
medicine, primarily the treatment of snakebites, 
that was translated, or perhaps compiled, by ‘the 
venerable ( bhadanta ) *Prajñābala (Boreli 般若力 ), 
a Trepiṭaka from the land of Kashmir’, possibly in 
12.  See Smith 2006; on Chinese sources in particular, 
see ibid.: 435–40, 444–48.
13.  Se
e Slouber 2012. In a personal communication (21 
April 2014) Michael Slouber informed me that he no longer 
uses the phrase ‘Gāruḍa Medicine’ and now prefers to 
call it just Gāruḍam or Gāruḍa Tantra and not draw any 
artificial lines between its medical and magical aspects.
Giebel mockup.indd   382 11/7/16   11:42 PM

--- [Page 397] ---
A Śaiva Text in Chinese Garb? 383
the latter part of the 8th century.14 This means that, 
along with the ‘Garuḍapaṭalaparivarta’, three texts 
pertaining to Garuḍa were translated into Chinese 
during roughly the same period, although it is not 
clear whether this was a mere coincidence or some 
other factors were at play.
Lastly, while I do not feel competent to comment 
in detail on the content of The Āveśa Rite , it can 
at least be noted that Maheśvara (or Rudra, as he 
is referred to in three of the mantras), who dis -
penses the teachings of The Āveśa Rite , is here not 
presented in his normal role in Esoteric Buddhist 
scriptures, namely, as the pre-eminent of evil and 
deluded beings who is vanquished by Vajrapāṇi, 
most notably in the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha , 
or by Heruka in some later scriptures, to become 
a protector of Buddhism.15 This fact alone should 
suffice to show that our text is not Buddhist in either 
its inspiration or provenance, and along with the 
Jialouluo ji zhutian miyan jing it is perhaps one 
of the least ‘Buddhist’ texts in the entire esoteric 
section of the Taishō canon. The pivotal role played 
14.  Although the Jialouluo ji zhutian miyan jing is not 
mentioned in any Chinese catalogues and the base text for 
the Taishō edition is a Japanese manuscript copied in 1173 
(Jōan 承安  3), a ‘Trepiṭaka from Kashmir’ named  *P rajñā -
bala (Zhu 2003 has ‘Banruoli, Prajñabhava?’) is mentioned 
in the biography of Huaidi 懷迪  in the Song gaoseng zhuan  
宋高僧傳  (T 2061.720c23–28), according to which he arrived 
in China in 758 (Qianyuan 乾元  1) together with two other 
Trepiṭakas, one from central India and the other also from 
Kashmir. If we assume that this *Prajñābala is the same 
person as the translator of the Jialouluo ji zhutian miyan jing , 
then this text would have been translated during roughly 
the same period as our Āveśa Rite and the aforementioned 
‘Garuḍapaṭalaparivarta’, although it has also been suggested 
that *Prajñābala who translated the Jialouluo ji zhutian 
miyan jing was the same person as the well  -k nown translator 
Prajña/Prajnā (733/734–ca. 810) (for details see Yoritomi 
1979: 32–33). While a detailed examination of the Jialouluo 
ji zhutian miyan jing must await another occasion, it can 
be pointed out that it includes permutations of the Vipati 
mantra ( kṣipa oṁ svāhā), the most important Gāruḍa 
mantra, evidence for which, according to Slouber (2012: 
101), is weak before the 10th century (oṁ kṣipa svāhā oṁ 
pakṣi svāhā  [T 1278.332a9–10], which is treated as a single 
mantra, and oṁ pakṣi svāhā [338b29]). If the Jialouluo ji 
zhutian miyan jing  does indeed date from the latter part 
of the 8th century, then it may contain valuable material 
for tracing the evolution of the Gāruḍatantras.
15.  Se
e, e.g., Iyanaga 1985; Davidson 1991.by Maheśvara/Rudra as both expositor of the text’s 
teachings and as object of the practitioner’s invo -
cations, along with the text’s links with Gāruḍic 
lore, would seem to suggest that it is indeed a Śaiva 
text in Chinese garb.
In the following translation, the page and register 
of the Taishō edition have been inserted in square 
brackets. Tentative translations of the mantras have 
been added in parentheses; ellipses indicate word(s) 
the meaning of which is uncertain.
translation
The Āveśa Rite Explained by the God Maheśvara 
Which Swiftly Establishes Its Efficacy
Respectfully translated at Imperial Command 
by Bukong (Amogha[vajra]), a Trepiṭaka and 
śramaṇa of Daxingshan Monastery who was 
a Commander Ceremonially Equal to the 
Three Monitoring Offices, a [Lord] Specially 
Advanced, Probationary Chief Minister of the 
Court of State Ceremonial, and Duke of the 
Kingdom of Su with a fief of three thousand 
households, upon whom was bestowed the 
purple [robe], and who was posthumously 
appointed Minister of Works, posthumously 
named Dajianzheng,16 and titled Daguangzhi 
(Great and Extensive Wisdom).
At that time the god Nārāyaṇa was on the 
summit of Mount Gandhamādana.17 He made a 
request of Maheśvara in Īśvara’s palace,18 making 
16. The posthumous name conferred on Amoghavajra 
by the emperor Daizong 代宗  was Dabianzheng 大辨正  (T 
2120.848a10), not Dajianzheng 大鑒正 , but in translations 
attributed to Amoghavajra his posthumous name, when 
mentioned, is generally given as Dajianzheng. It is con -
ceivable that this was due to a taboo associated with the 
character bian  辨, but I have not come across any discussion 
of this anomaly.
17. Nārāyaṇa is usually equated with Viṣṇu, as whose 
mount Garuḍa is perhaps best known, but according to 
Slouber (personal communication) it is extremely unusual 
in Śaiva Gāruḍatantras for Garuḍa to be associated with 
Viṣṇu, who is, moreover, here made to appear incompetent.
18. Vv.ll. ‘his palace’ ( 自宮) for ‘Īśvara’s palace’ ( 自在宮 ). 
If qing  請 is taken in the sense of ‘to invite’ rather than 
Giebel mockup.indd   383 11/7/16   11:42 PM

--- [Page 398] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia384
offerings, bowing down at his feet, and saying to 
Maheśvara, ‘The messenger Garuḍa whom I ride is 
able to accomplish things sought by worldlings but 
is unable to do so quickly. I but beg you, O Great 
God (Mahādeva), to explain for future sentient 
beings the āveśa rite which swiftly establishes its 
efficacy.’19
Thereupon Maheśvara addressed Nārāyaṇa, 
saying, ‘You should listen attentively as I expound 
for you the messenger’s rite of swift accomplish -
ment. One is able to perform [thereby the rites for] 
the cessation of calamities ( śāntika ), the increase 
of benefits ( pauṣṭika ), subjugation ( abhicāraka ), 
and [the gaining of] respect and love ( vaśīkaraṇa ). 
Again, one can send [the messenger] to and from 
the realm of Yama and is able to know of future 
good and evil, fortune and misfortune, success 
and failure, irregularities in droughts and floods, 
aggression by neighbouring countries, rebellions 
by wicked persons, and various favourable and 
unfavourable omens.
‘If you wish to know future events, you should 
select four or five (virgin) boys or (virgin) girls, 
seven or eight years of age, their bodies free of scars 
and moles, and intelligent and astute. First, make 
them eat plain [vegetarian] food for seven days or 
alternatively for three days.
‘Whenever you wish to perform the rite, you 
should do so on an auspicious day, governed either 
by the lunar mansion Ghost (Puṣya) or the lunar 
mansion Year;20 best of all is a day governed by nectar 
‘to request’, this passage could perhaps be translated (in 
accordance with the variae lectiones): ‘He invited Ma -
heśvara to his palace.’ But it is perhaps more reasonable 
to suppose that Nārāyaṇa visited Maheśvara rather than 
vice versa. The position of Maheśvara as a divinatory deity 
is noted by Smith (2006: 434).
19. The Sanskrit equivalent of the phrase ‘swiftly 
establishes its efficacy’ ( suji liyan  速疾立驗 ), used also 
in the title of our text but not attested anywhere else 
in Chinese translations of Indian texts, is quite pos -
sibly sadyaḥpratya  ya kāraka , which occurs, e.g., in the 
Kubji  kāmatatantra  ( 4.1, 4.3, 5.100), Kriyākālaguṇottara  
(1.3), and Mālinīvijayottaratantra  (11.22, 21.20). That 
Gāruḍatantras offer instant proof of the efficacy of 
mantras is regarded as one of their hallmarks, on which 
see Slouber 2012: 86ff.
20. Suisu  歳宿 . Strickmann (2002: 230) interprets this 
as the lunar mansion ‘Year Star’ (Jupiter). Suixing  歳星 [days].21 Bathe [the children], rub unguent all over 
their bodies, dress them in clean clothes, and have 
them hold in their mouths camphor and cardamom.  
   ‘The incantator sits facing east. In front of him he 
smears a small altar, about one cubit in size,22 with 
white sandalwood paste. He has [one of] the girls 
and [boys] stand on the altar, scatters flowers in 
front of the girl, and sets down a vessel23 of argha 
(water). Taking some Parthian incense (benzoin), 
‘year star’ does indeed refer to Jupiter, but it is uncertain 
whether this is what is meant by suisu . In the Hôbôgirin   
(I: 7b) it is equated with Abhijit.
21. St
rickmann (2002: 230) translates ‘a day on which 
sweet dew has fallen’ and goes on to say that ‘“sweet dew” 
was a long-standing Chinese portent of greatest auspi -
ciousness’. But, as he also mentions, ganlu  甘露  ‘sweet 
dew’ was used to translate Sanskrit amṛta , especially in 
its meaning of ‘nectar’, and here it probably corresponds 
to amṛta  in the sense of various conjunctions of planets 
supposed to confer long life. In this connection it is worth 
noting the following passage in the Wenshushili pusa ji 
zhuxian suoshuo jixiong shiri shan’e suyao jing 文殊師利
菩薩及諸仙所說吉凶時日善惡宿曜經 , a manual on Indian 
astrology, which provides a definition of ‘nectar days’  
(T 1299.398b21–26): 
When the moon and [the lunar mansion] Cross Board 
(Hastā) meet on a day governed by the Sun, when the 
moon and [the lunar mansion] Net (Rohiṇī) meet 
on a day governed by the Moon, when the moon 
and [the lunar mansion] Tail (Mūlā) meet on a day 
governed by Mars, when the moon and [the lunar 
mansion] Willow (Aśleṣā) meet on a day governed 
by Mercury, when the moon and [the lunar mansion] 
Ghost (Puṣya) meet on a day governed by Jupiter, 
when the moon and [the lunar mansion] Room 
(Anurādhā) meet on a day governed by Venus, and 
when the moon and [the lunar mansion Seven] Stars 
(Maghā) meet on a day governed by Saturn—the 
above are called ‘nectar (* amṛta ) days’. They are very 
auspicious and are suitable for coronations, receiving 
initiation rites, constructing temple buildings, as 
well as receiving the precepts, studying scriptural 
doctrine, and leaving home to cultivate the path. 
They are propitious for everything.
22.  St
rickmann (2002: 230) makes the size of the ‘small 
ritual area’ ‘perhaps a yard square’. But zhou  肘 ‘elbow’ is 
a standard translation for hasta  as a measure of length 
from the elbow to the tip of the middle finger, and it is so 
rendered in the Hôbôgirin  (coudée ; I: 7b). Thus, while Strick -
mann has all the children stand in the ritual area, I have 
assumed that there would be room for only one of them.
23. Vv
.ll. Base text has ‘censer’.
Giebel mockup.indd   384 11/7/16   11:42 PM

--- [Page 399] ---
A Śaiva Text in Chinese Garb? 385
he empowers it seven times with the mantra of 
the great seal ( mahāmudrā ),24 lights it, and has 
the girl fumigate her hands with it. Then he takes 
some red flowers, empowers them seven times, and 
places them in the girl’s palms, whereupon she 
covers her face with her hands. The incantator then 
binds the great seal: it is formed by clasping the two 
hands together [with the fingers] interlocking on 
the outside, the left pressing against the right, and 
leaving the palm hollow. [329b] With this seal he 
empowers five places on his own person, namely, 
the forehead, right shoulder, left shoulder, heart, 
and throat. He disperses the seal on the crown of 
his head and then recites [this] mantra:
namo bhagavati mahāmudre kaṭalaśi -
khe triś
ire trilocani īśāni paśupate 
svāhā
(Homage! O Blessed One! great seal! you 
who are …,25 three-headed, and three-
eyed! Īśānī! Paśupati! All hail!)
‘Then he rests this seal on the crown of the girl’s 
head and visualizes on top of her head the radiance 
of a blazing circle of fire ( agnimaṇḍala ), triangular 
and red in colour, and recites the mantra seven 
times. The fire circle mantra is:
oṁ agni śikhe svāhā
(oṁ, fire on the topknot.26 All hail!)
‘Then he rests this seal on the girl’s mouth 
and visualizes inside her mouth a circle of water 
24. A lthough mahāmudrā  became an important term in 
later Tantric Buddhism with several meanings, referring 
in particular to a state of enlightened awareness, here it 
refers simply to a specific hand gesture ( mudrā ), described 
below. It may be noted that virtually identical descriptions 
of a mahāmudrā  appear in the Gāruḍic Jialouluo ji zhutian 
miyan jing  (T 1278.334a12–13, 337a7–8).
25. The meaning of kaṭala  ( or possibly kaṭara  or a 
variation thereof with lengthened vowels) is uncertain.
26. Or
, if read agniśikhe , ‘O flame (or: you who have a 
point like fire)!’ I have provisionally read agni  and śikhe  
separately (and taken śikhe  as an example of the common 
Middle Indic phenomenon of a masculine ending with 
a feminine noun) on the assumption that the mantra is 
indicating the part of the girl’s body that the practitioner is sanctifying (cf. nn. 27, 30).(vārimaṇḍala ), white in colour and shaped like 
a half-moon, and recites the mantra seven times. 
The mantra is:
oṁ jala cūḍāmaṇi27 svāhā
(oṁ, water [in] the crest-jewel! All hail!)
‘Next, he should move the seal and rest it on her 
heart, visualizing a circle of earth ( pṛthivīmaṇḍala ), 
square in shape and yellow in colour, and reciting 
[the mantra] seven times. The mantra is:
oṁ mahābala parākrama28 svāhā
(oṁ, O you who are very strong and coura-
geous! All Hail!)
‘Next, he should move the seal and rest it on 
her navel, visualizing a circle of wind ( vāyumaṇḍa ­
la), circular in shape and black in colour, and re -
citing [the mantra] seven times. The mantra is:  
oṁ vinatākulana[n]da svāhā
(oṁ, O joy of Vinatā’s family!29 All Hail!)
‘Next, he should empower both her legs with 
the great seal, visualizing Garuḍa and reciting the 
mantra:
oṁ pakṣirāja pada svāhā
(oṁ, king of birds [i.e., Garuḍa] [at] the 
feet!30 All hail!)
27. Text reads jalacurṇāmaṇi , p ossibly for jala -
cūrṇamaṇi  ‘jewel ground by water’. I have provisionally 
adopted the reading cūḍāmaṇi  (suggested to me by Andrea 
Acri) and separated jala  and cūḍāmaṇi  on the assumption 
that the mantra is indicating the part of the girl’s body that 
the practitioner is sanctifying (cf. nn. 26, 30).
28. Text reads parakrama , w hich could also be inter -
preted as prakrama  if the interlinear gloss specifying a 
conjunct is assumed to have been omitted.
29. Vinatā is the name of Garuḍa’s mother. The same phrase 
(with °naḍa  for ° na[n]da ) occurs also in a mantra for donning 
armour in the aforementioned  Jialouluo ji zhutian miyan jing : 
namo tattvasuvarṇa  pa kṣamahāteja vinatākulanaḍa 
rakṣa rakṣa mahābala svāhā  (T 1278.336c5–7). Phrases 
similar to this, indicating that Garuḍa is a joy to his mother or 
her family, are common epithets of Garuḍa (e.g., vinatānan ­
da[kara ], vinatānandana , vinatākulanandana ).
30. Or, if read pakṣirājapada ,  ‘O feet of the king of birds!’ 
Giebel mockup.indd   385 11/7/16   11:42 PM

--- [Page 400] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia386
‘Next, he should recite the armour mantra with 
the great seal to empower the girl, going around 
her entire body. [330a] The mantra is:
oṁ kavaca ma[hā]bhūtādhipate svāhā
(oṁ, O armour! Great overlord of beings!31 
All hail!)
‘The practitioner should next turn himself into 
the god Maheśvara. He has three eyes, on his head 
there is a crown decorated with strings of jewels, 
and on top of the crown on his head are a Buddha 
and a half-moon; his throat is blue, and he has eight -
een arms, holding in his hands various weapons; 
he has a dragon ( nāga ) for a girdle32 tied together 
at the ends, and he also has a blood-smeared ele -
phant-hide. Having [thus] visualized himself in an 
instant, [the practitioner] should next protect the 
girl’s one hundred and eight life-nodes33 with the 
great seal. The mantra is:
oṁ pṛthivyapastejovāyurākāśam34
(oṁ, earth, water, fire, wind, and ether)
‘Binding the great seal and reciting [this] mantra, 
he empowers clockwise her entire body, thereby 
Here too I have provisionally separated pakṣirāja  and 
pada  on the assumption that the mantra is indicating the 
part of the girl’s body that the practitioner is sanctifying 
(cf. fns. 26, 27).
31. ‘G
reat overlord of beings’ ( mahābhūtādhipati ) is 
a common epithet of Śiva in the Bhūtatantras (Slouber, 
personal communication).
32. Shenxian  紳線 . If one adopts the variant reading 
shenxian  神線 ‘sacred thread’, this could possibly refer to 
the yajñopavīta .
33. This and the second occurrence immediately below 
appear to be the only instantiations of the term mingjie  
命節  in Chinese translations of Buddhist texts. It probably 
refers to marman , lethal or vulnerable points on the body, 
of which there are, according to Vāgbhaṭa’s Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya , 
107; cf. Wujastyk 2003: 236–44. In classical Āyurvedic acu -
puncture, there are said to be traditionally 108 major, or 
original, marman  and 160–220 minor marman. The Japanese 
scholar-monk Chōen 長宴 (1016–81) speculated that the term 
in question might correspond to hyakue  (Ch. baihui ) 百會, 
a point on the top of the head used in acupuncture and 
moxibustion ( T 2408.960a), but this is unlikely.
34. Text reads pṛthivyaṭatajavāyurakaśam  ( v.l. 
pṛthi  v y  aṭ taja ° = pṛthivyaptejo °). I am indebted to protecting the one hundred and eight kinds of 
life-nodes.
‘Next, again with the great seal and mantra, he 
empowers flowers, incense, argha , and so on. Next, 
again with the great seal and mantra, he binds the 
realms in the ten directions. Then he should face the 
girl and recite the mantra of Maheśvara’s messenger:
ḷ[ṁ]35 ceṭaka matanāga viṣada[r]paṇa 
samānagara vikramavilāsagati ḷ[ṁ] 
ceṭaka pratipātraṃ cala cala cali 
cali36 paṇa paṇa paṇi paṇi panni panni 
kaṭṭi kaṭṭi āviśa āviśa ḷ[ṁ] ceṭaka 
rudro ’jñāpayati svāhā
(ḷ[ṁ], O servant! esteemed nāga !37 you who 
are arrogant with venom! you who have 
homogenous venom! you who have a val-
iant and playful manner! ḷ[ṁ], O servant! 
Tremble, tremble in each vessel!  …! Ent
er, 
enter! ḷ[ṁ], O servant, Rudra commands 
[you]! All hail!)
‘He should recite this mantra seven times, 
whereupon the girl will tremble. Know that the 
Holy One has entered her body. Then he further 
snaps his fingers and recites the mantra [again]. 
If there is no apparent effect, he next recites the 
mantra for coercing the messenger:
ḷ[ṁ] ḷ[ṁ] yamalohitasurāsurapūjita 
hana hana brahmānaṇina truṇi truṇi 
moṇi moṇi panni panni kaṭṭi kaṭṭi 
āviśa āvi[330b]śa ḷ[ṁ] ceṭaka rudro 
’jñāpayati svāhā
(ḷ[ṁ] ḷ[ṁ], O you who are worshipped 
by Y ama, lohita s, gods, and demi-gods!38 
Iain Sinclair for assistance in deciphering this somewhat 
corrupt transliteration. On the use of r  as an internal sandhi 
consonant in vāyurākāśam  (instead of vāyvākāśam ), see, 
e.g., Pischel 1900: §353.
35. Li 唎. Here and below uncertain; alternatively, possibly 
ṛ[ṁ].
36. Te
xt reads praripātraṁ cala cala cali cali (vv.
ll. cara cara cari cari ).
37. Or p
ossibly ‘furious nāga’ if matanāga  is taken as 
an error for mattanāga .
38. Both the reconstruction and translation are uncertain. 
In the Chinese transliteration the words read and are 
Giebel mockup.indd   386 11/7/16   11:42 PM

--- [Page 401] ---
A Śaiva Text in Chinese Garb? 387
Strike, strike! …! Enter, enter! ḷ[ṁ], O serv-
ant, Rudra commands [you]! All hail!)
‘If he recites this mantra, there will most cer -
tainly be a swift effect in response, and he may ask 
about future good and evil and all favourable and 
unfavourable omens. If [the messenger] does not 
speak [through the girl], or speaks slowly, then he 
binds the staff seal ( daṇḍamudrā ): the two hands 
are clasped together, the two ring fingers are in -
tercrossed outwards, the two middle fingers are 
raised side by side, the two forefingers are each 
hooked over the tips of the ring fingers, and the two 
thumbs each press down on the middle [fingers], 
intercrossed. Recite the mantra:
oṁ mudgara turu turu svāhā
(oṁ, O hammer! Hurry, hurry! All hail!)39
‘Bind this staff seal, and then when you have 
finished asking about various matters, empower the 
argha with the great seal and mantra, and sprinkle 
it three times on the girl’s face, whereupon she will 
be released.
‘This messenger’s mantra should have been 
recited ten thousand times previously, and then the 
rite will be successful, that is, you will see him come 
in person. You must offer him argha and make your 
wish: that you wish to employ the Holy One in all 
places and at all times to attend to everything. He 
will then vanish and be no longer visible. Thereafter, 
when you wish to employ him, mark out a small 
altar, place on it incense, flowers, food, and drink, 
and recite the mantra one hundred and eight times, 
whereupon he will appear in person. Then tell him 
to fetch the elixir of longevity or wish-fulfilling 
divided as follows: ḷ[ṁ]ḷ[ṁ]ya malohitā (maruhitā, 
marohitā?) surasurā pujita.
39. As w
ell as occurring in the Gāruḍic Kriyākālaguṇot ­
tara (available from http://www.muktabodha.org; NGMPP 
B 25/32, 125a), the phrase turu turu  also appears in numer -
ous Buddhist mantras, and in the case of the mantra oṁ 
turu turu hūṁ , used for dispatching a carriage to convey 
the deity to the ritual site in invocation rites, Toganoo 
Shōun (1935: 302) interprets it as a variant of tara tara  
in the sense of ‘run (or operate) [the carriage]!’ presum-
ably deriving from √ tṝ. I have tentatively assumed that it 
is related to √ tur ‘to hurry, press forwards’.gem from the dragon palace, or dispatch him to 
the place of King Yama to prolong your life and 
increase your life span, or dispatch him [to heaven] 
above to fetch wondrous nectar, or dispatch him 
to other countries to inquire about their good and 
bad points. He can also help an army to destroy its 
enemies. Employ him in various ways, and he will 
be able to accomplish everything.
‘This rite is the most excellent among all Garuḍa 
rites, secret and difficult to obtain. You should select 
a Dharma-vessel worthy of being initiated and 
transmit it to him. If you transmit it to someone 
who is not a [suitable] vessel, then it will harm him 
and thereafter the rite will not work [for you either]. 
Therefore it must be kept most secret and must not 
be transmitted recklessly.40
‘The garuḍa ­dh āraṇī of Maheśvara is:
namo bhagavate rudrāya chinnaka -
pā
lāya41 sarvavinayaṅkarāya sarva -
kar ma sād
hanāya sarvavaśīkaraṇāya 
sarva  śatr
uvināśanāya oṁ kapālacit -
aṃ chin   n
akapālabhūtaṃ rudro ’jñā-
pa
yati svāhā
(Homage to the Lord Rudra, whose head 
has been severed and who makes all rules, 
accomplishes all deeds, exercises control 
over everything, and destroys all enemies! 
oṁ, him who is covered with skulls and 
whose head has been severed, Rudra com-
mands.42 All hail!)
‘To subjugate someone [with] this dhāraṇī take 
a red banana leaf, draw that person [on it], inscribe 
40. This passage is quoted in the Hishū kyōsō shō 祕宗教
相鈔 (completed in 1139) by Chōyo 重誉  in a discussion of 
the requirements for initiation ( T 2441.645b12–16).
41. I have found no other attestations of chinnakapāla ,  but 
it is presuma bly a synonym for chinnamastaka  ‘decapitated’ 
(assuming that kapāla  may, like mastaka , sometimes mean 
‘head’ rather than just ‘skull’), which appears most famously 
in the name of the Hindu deity Chinnamastakā (or Chinna -
mastā), who holds her own severed head in one hand and a 
knife in the other; see, e.g., Kinsley 1997: 144–66. However, 
I am not aware of any references to Rudra’s self-decapitation.
42. Since chinnakapāla  w ould appear to be an epithet of 
Rudra, perhaps the text ought to be emended to kapālacitaś  
chinnakapālabhūto  and translated ‘Rudra, who is covered 
with skulls and whose head has been severed, commands’.
Giebel mockup.indd   387 11/7/16   11:42 PM

--- [Page 402] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia388
his name on the [figure’s] heart, [330c] recite the 
dhāraṇī one hundred and eight times, and then 
bury it in cow dung, whereupon he will be sub -
jugated.
‘If you wish to make foolish people43 hate each 
other, draw the figures of the man and the woman 
on a tāla (palm) leaf, inscribe their names back to 
back, take a cord to tie it, take the hairs of rats and 
wolves, the feathers of pheasants, and the discarded 
skins of snakes, burn them, fumigate [the leaf], 
recite the dhāraṇī one hundred and eight times, 
place it inside a kapāla (skull), and then bury it in 
charnel grounds, whereupon they will hate each 
other. If you remove [the leaf], they will revert to 
their former state.
‘If you [wish to] make people love each other, 
then draw the figures of the husband [and wife?]44 
on a tāla leaf, inscribe their names merged together, 
take a white cord to tie it, take sparrows’ feathers 
and snakes’ skins, burn them, fumigate [the leaf], 
and recite the dhāraṇī one hundred and eight times, 
whereupon they will love each other.
‘Another rite: if you wish to make people fight 
each other, on the skin of a tiger45 or on oxhide draw 
two people grabbing each other’s hair, inscribe their 
names, take a cord to tie it, fumigate it over a fire, 
43. Shuzi  竪子 , meaning ‘child’ or, as a term of abuse, 
‘imbecile’. It is thus similar in meaning to bāla , but was 
seldom used in Chinese translations of Buddhist texts. 
Interestingly, apart from two further occurrences below, 
it is used twice in the very succinct instructions for rites 
suggestive of those described more fully here and below 
that appear at the end of the Chinese translation of the 
‘Garuḍapaṭalaparivarta’ ( T 1276.329a22, 24), in the section 
that has no parallel in the Sanskrit text of the MMK.
44. V.
l. ‘that person / those people’.
45. Da
chong  大虫  (or 大蟲 ). The use of dachong  (literally, 
‘large insect’) in the sense of ‘tiger’ can be seen in the term 
dachong rou  大蟲肉 , used in the Chinese translation of the 
‘Garuḍapaṭalaparivarta’ as the equivalent of vyāghramāṁsa  
‘tiger flesh’ ( T 1276.328b8–9 = MMK  360.13). But it should be 
noted that the same term dachong rou  大虫肉  (or 大蟲肉 ) is 
also used in the same text as the equivalent of mahāmāṁsa  
‘great (i.e., human) flesh’ ( T 1276.328a13–14 = MMK  360.3; 
328b10 = MMK  360.13; 328c2 = MMK  360.19), on which see 
Matsunaga 1980: 323; 1985: 890. Matsunaga cites this use of 
the term ‘meat of large insects’ ( dachong rou ) as evidence 
for his thesis that the latter part of the Chinese transla -
tion of the ‘Garuḍapaṭalaparivarta’ was not translated by 
Amoghavajra and is a later accretion (cf. n. 7).and bury it under a mortar,46 whereupon they will 
fight each other daily. If you remove [the leaf], they 
will stop [fighting].
‘Another rite: if you wish to subjugate someone, 
take a palm leaf, draw the person’s figure on it, in -
scribe his name, recite the dhāraṇī one hundred 
and eight times, and then bury it under his bed, 
whereupon you will succeed in subjugating him.
‘Another rite: to make someone pass blood in his 
urine, take a tāla leaf, draw that person, inscribe his 
name, take a nail, recite the dhāraṇī one hundred 
and eight times [over it], and nail [the leaf] down 
for seven weeks, whereupon you can remove it.
‘Next, I shall explain a rite for eye ointment. If 
you [wish to] subjugate foolish people, take a snake’s 
head, gara (poison), añjana (collyrium), costus root, 
weevils,47 and two bees, on the fourteenth day of 
the dark [half-]month pound them to make powder, 
mix it with meat, and apply it in the corner of the 
eye. All foolish people will follow you, and those 
in heaven above will also come, not just those in 
the human realm.’
[331a] [Here ends] The Garuḍa Āveśa Rite Ex ­
plained by the God Maheśvara Which Swiftly Es ­
tablishes Its Efficacy in one roll.
Asian Language Sources
Kriyākālaguṇottara : Nepal-German Manuscript 
Preservation Project ms. 3/392, reel no. B 25/32 
(e-text by anonymous, Cat. No. M00278, accesi -
ble at http://www.muktabodha.org).
Kubjikāmatatantra: Teun Goudriaan and Jan A. 
Schoterman, eds., The Kubjikāmatatantra: Ku­
lā li
kāmnāya Version . Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1988.
Mālinīvijayottaratantra : Madhusūdan Kaul Shāstrī, 
ed., Śrī Mālinīvijayottara Tantram . Kashmir 
Series of Texts and Studies 37. Srinagar: Re -
search Department, Jammu and Kashmir State, 
1922.
Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa [ MMK ]: see Vaidya 1964.
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō [ T] 大正新修大藏經 .
46. Duijiu  碓臼. Strictly speaking, a mortar for hulling 
grain with a pestle worked by the foot.
47. R
eading xiangjia  象甲 (vv.ll.) for xiejia  冩甲 .
Giebel mockup.indd   388 11/7/16   11:42 PM

--- [Page 403] ---
Appendix A: 
The Names of N āgabuddhi and Vajrabuddhi 
iain  sinclair
Attempting to understand the lives of South Asian 
Buddhists documented primarily in non-South 
Asian sources can be a di fficult enterprise, impeded 
by barriers of language that cause names to be 
obscured or simply reinvented. Leonard van der 
Kuijp ( 2007 : 1006 ) has recently argued that the 
original names of Longzhi 龍智  and Jingangzhi
金剛智  should  now be understood as N āgabud-
dhi/N āgabodhi and *Vajrabuddhi respectively. A 
root-and-branch investigation of  these important 
figures, whose lives lie at a con fluence of Sanskritic, 
Sinic, and Tibetan traditions of Tantric Buddhism, 
while certainly desirable, is a task far beyond the 
scope of the present Appendix. For now, the fol-
lowing observations may be o ffered:
(1) The name N āgabuddhi is attested in extant
Sanskrit works reliably credited with N āgabud-  
dhi/N ā ga bodhií s authorship: the Guhya  samāja- 
maṇḍa  lo pāyika-Viṁś ati vidhi (ëasyaiva N āgabud -
dhi[pā daiḥ]í, ed. Tanaka 2010: 688) and the Sam ā- 
jasādhanavyavasthol ī (ëkṛtir ācārya Nāgabuddhi-
pādā [nām]í, ed. Tanaka 2012: 73), etc. Th ese two
works cor  respond to the Dkyil í khor nyi shu pa
(Sde dge 1810) and Rnam gzhag rim pa (Sde dge
1809) respectively, which are counted in a corpus
of five works attributed to Kluí i blo or Kluí i byang
[chub] by Bu ston (van der Kuijp 2007: 1015, nos. 1
and 3). The two forms Kluí i blo (*N āgabuddhi) or
Kluí i byang chub (*N āgabodhi) are both found in
about equal measure in the Tibetan Bstan í gyur;
this no doubt reflects the diversity of readings
translated by the Tibetans. However, the name
Nāgabodhi has barely any cur rency in the extant
Sanskritic tradition.
(2) The Sanskrit source that gives the name
Nāgabodhi, in a lineage of alchemists, is quiteremote from the Buddhist mainstream, namely 
the Rasaratnasamuccaya  attributed to V āg bha-
ṭa (v. 1 .4, ed. B āpaṭa 1890 : 1). The pseudo nym 
*NāgajÒāna adopted by Sundberg in Sundberg and
Giebel 2011: 179, n. 27  has no currency whatsoever
in original Sanskrit texts, nor is it supported by
Tibetan sources.
(3) Any assumption that Vajrabodhi/Vajra-
bud dhií s teacher N āgabuddhi lived too early to
have been familiar with the Guhyasam ājatantra
is untenable in the light of Tomabechií s (2008)
findings that date major developments in the
exegesis of the Guhyasam āja to the mid 8th
century at the latest. N āgabuddhi is reported to
have been alive during Amoghavajraí s visit to Sri
Lanka in the 740 s (cf. Goble 2012: 262ñ63) and
even later (cf. Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 133ñ
34). According to Haiyun and others following
Amoghavajraí s tradition, N āgabuddhi is supposed
to have lived for a hundred years (T 2081.783 c25,
annotation). This claim of a very long lifespan
can be accepted even if exaggerated by one or twodecades. An individual born in the 640 s or 650 s
could have mastered the STTS in his youth, taught
the system in the late 7th century, and expounded
the Guhyasam āja throughout the first half of the
8th century. Th e report of N āgabuddhií s advanced
age has some credibility in that it originates in his
own lifetime, among persons said to have known
him. In the more fragmented and fantastic milieu
of 12th-century Tantric Buddhism, by contrast, ë it is
said that he [N āgabuddhi] will live for two thousand
yearsí  (in the words of the Grub thob brgyad cu rtsa
bzhií i lo rgyus, trans. Robson 1979 : 235).
(4) It is apparently believed by some tradi tion-
al ists that the Guhyasam āja (solely asso ciated with
Sinclair appendix.indd   389 12/7/16   3:16 PM

--- [Page 404] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 390
Nāgabuddhií s oeuvre in the Sanskritic corpus) is 
fundamentally unconnected to the STTS (with 
which N āgabuddhi is associated in East Asia)ó
such that the Tibetan and Chinese teaching 
line ages are similarly unrelated. This is now 
unsupportable. By the middle of the 8th century 
both Tantras were part of a large Tantric corpus 
that is recognizably similar in the accounts of 
Amoghavajra (cf. Giebel 1995), in the Indo-Sinic 
tradition, and Śāntarakṣita (cf. Moriguchi 1993 ), 
in the Sanskritic tradition. Although diff erent 
versions of the corpus are articulated in diff erent 
transmissions, these varied corpora nonetheless 
share crucial similarities: eighteen constituent 
texts, or a very large size (e.g., ë 16,000í  stanzas); a 
set core of texts, including one or both of the STTS  
or Guhyasam āja; and the classification of most 
or all texts as mah āyogatantra . An eighteenfold 
corpus is alluded to in the Sanskritic tradition 
with expressions such as aṣṭā daśaśatagrantha-
śrīSam āja (N ārop āí s Sekodde śaṭīkā, ed. Sferra 
2005: 68). Some exegetes familiar with the Guhya -
sa māja expressed the view that the STTS  was its 
mūlatantra  (see, e.g., Moriguchi 1993 : 185). 
(5) The tradition of N āgabuddhií s tremendous 
longevity and his studentship under N āgārjuna, 
conveyed in both Chinese and Tibetan lineage 
histories, is widespread in the Sanskritic tradition. 
It reached beyond Tantric Buddhism and into 
alchemical works such as the aforementioned 
Vāgbha ṭaí s Rasa  ratnasamuccaya 1.4 (ed. B āpaṭa 
1890: 1). N āgabuddhií s fame as an adept extended 
even to late non-Buddhist scripture such as 
Brahm āṇḍapur āṇa III 19 .75 (ed. Ks ẹmar āja Śrī-
krṣṇạd āsa 1935: 221r) et al. It is unlikely that 
this South Asian ë common knowledgeí  about 
Nāgabuddhií s age refers to a N āgabuddhi distinct 
from either the Tibetan or Chinese traditionó
ëprima facie  incredibleí, in van der Kuijpí s words 
(2007: 1008).
As for Vajrabodhi/Vajrabuddhi:
(1) Regarding the old back-translation of 
Jingangzhi as *Vajrabodhi, van der Kuijp rightly 
points out that zhÏ  智 usually never trans  lates 
bodhi  (2007: 1006). Although jÒāna is by far 
the most common word translated by zhi  智, it undoubtedly also, if secondarily, translates 
buddhi . See for example Hirakawaí s index to the 
Abhidharmako śabhāṣya (T 1558, 1559): gaura  vā di-
buddhi 自黑等智 , buddhy antara 別智 , and other 
expressions trans  lating buddhi  with zhi  智 are at-
test ed (1977 : 401, 415, 425). Under the headword 
zhi 智 in Hirakawaí s ChineseñSanskrit dictionary 
(1997 : 605ñ7, ß1626) there is, further, bud  dhy abhā-
va 智即無 , buddhivadha  智害 , bud dhi śab dār cis 智
聲光  etc.
(2) The Sanskrit name of Jingangzhi was rec-
orded as *Vajra-buddhi or -bodhi in Chi nese 
transcription during his lifetime. In the year 730 , 
in the well-known Kaiyuan shijiao lu  開元釋教錄 , 
his name is transcribed as Variluo-puti 跋日羅菩
提 (T 2154.571b27), EMC pronunciation -*bəkdhei. 
This cat  a log ue was widely read; it was probably 
the source for Haiyun, who gives the similar-
looking gloss *VajrajÒ āna < Furí luojí niangnan  
嚩曰囉 二合吉孃 二合曩 (T 2081.786 b19, copied with 
inserted Sid dha mātṛkā in T 2706.504 b15ñ16). In all 
likelihood these semi-learned ë correctionsí  drew 
on the crude lexicographical material used by 
Tantric Buddhists of the Tang (e.g., T 2134.1217c29 ). 
Thes
e same sources may have informed the 
writing of the 9th-century portrait inscriptions 
discussed by Sundberg in Sundberg and Giebel 
(2011: 179, n. 27). In the 9th century there seems 
to have been a fad among Chinese Tantric 
monks to adopt fanciful back-Sanskritizations 
of monastic names. *Arthanarta 阿囉他捺哩荼 , 
the alias of Yicao 義操 , is an example. Likewise, 
Chen (2013 : 129ñ30) has identified *PrajÒ ācakra  
般若斫迦 , the pseudonym of Zhihuilun 智慧輪  (d. 
879), as ë very likely Chineseí  in ethnicity. 
(3) It so happens that Vajrabuddhi is the 
initia to ry name of the Bodhisattva Vajrat īkṣṇa 
in the STTS : tataḥ sarvatath āgatair  ëVajrabuddhir 
Vajrabuddhir !í  iti vajran āmābhiṣekeṇābhiṣikta ḥ (ed.  
Horiuchi 1983 I: 60 ß 99). This pas  sage was of course 
known to Jingangzhi, whose translation here 
employed the normal Chinese rendition of buddhi , 
jue 覺 (T 866.231c5ñ 6); Amoghavajraí s translation 
here preferred huÏ  慧 (T 865.211c1ñ 3). It may be 
that Vajrabuddhi received his name aft er identi-
fying with Vajrat īkṣṇa during initiation. This 
possibility seems especially compelling in view of 
Sinclair appendix.indd   390 12/7/16   3:16 PM

--- [Page 405] ---
Appendix A 391
the fact that Vajrat īkṣṇa is the manifestation of 
MaÒ  juśrī in the STTS . It was, aft er all, Vajrabuddhií s 
ë sincere vow to go to the land of China to pay his 
respects to MaÒ ju śrī and spread the Buddhist 
dharmaí  (Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 138); and 
likewise Vajrabuddhií s chief disciple Amoghavajra 
sought to enshrine MaÒ ju śrī on Mount Wutai  五
台山  ë as the preeminent seat of Imperial Buddhism 
and its inextricable relationship to Esoteric Bud-
dhist practice in the Tang Dynastyí  (Goble 2012: 
253).
(4) Finally, there is a previously unremarked 
con nection between persons called N āgabuddhi 
and Vajrabuddhi in the exegetical literature sur -
rounding Buddhaghoṣa. Tenuous though this 
con nection may be, it is enticing enough to 
mention here with the aim of stimulating further 
investigation. First, a Sanskrit verse attributed 
to a N āgabodhi-sthavira is quoted in the 13 th-
century Viśuddhim ārgasanne  (-sannaya ?), as was 
noticed by Godakumbura (1943 : 91). This verse 
has not been traced in any Sanskrit or Tibetan work credibly attributed to N āgabuddhi (email, 
Kimiaki Tanaka, June 2014 ); but, as Godakumbura 
implies, the Tantric Buddhist author is the only 
person named N āgabodhi/N āgabuddhi to whom 
it may be credited. Secondly, one Vajirabuddhi 
wrote a subcommentary on the Pali Vinaya, the 
Anugaṇṭhipada , some time aft er Buddhaghoṣaí s 
Samantap āsādikā. Internal features of this sub- 
commentary locate its author in South India, as 
opposed to Sri Lanka, and date it to between the 
7th and 9th centuries, according to Petra Kieff er-
P¸ lz (2013 ). This approximate time and place 
is consistent with Vajrabuddhií s early activity. 
Although Vajrabuddhi seems to have worked 
only with Sanskrit texts in China, Kieff er-P¸ lz has 
determined that the author of the Anugaṇṭhipada  
ë was familiar with Sanskrit texts and capable of 
translating them into P ālií  (2009: 145, n. 8). Such 
erudition indeed seems to be the work of a monk 
who ë for six years Ö  studied the vinaya  of the 
Mah āyāna and H īnayānaí  ( 六年學大小乘律 , T 
2157.875b6; cf. trans. Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 
134), as Vajrabuddhi is said to have done. 
Sinclair appendix.indd   391 12/7/16   3:16 PM

--- [Page 406] ---
Sinclair appendix.indd   392 12/7/16   3:16 PM

--- [Page 407] ---
Appendix B: 
Notes on the Alleged Reading vālaputra  
on the Pikatan Funeral Stele 
jeffrey r. sundberg
In another venue (Sundberg 2009: 310, n. 45), I have 
written of my inability to confirm de Casparis’ 
(1956: 312) published reading of the word vālaputra  
on the Indonesian National Museum’s inscription 
D28, commonly known as ‘Śivag ṛha’, the ad  856 
funereal stele of King Pikatan. Because his reading 
stands at the basis of a nexus de Casparis’ claims 
about the history of the Ratu Boko plateau and 
his interpretation of an end to Buddhist Śailendra 
rule in Java, it is worth some energy to provide 
a minute analysis for those interested specialists 
who read Kawi. 
My notes on my original observations on are 
no longer available to me, but I can offer an anal -
ysis de novo  to refute de Casparis’ reading thanks 
to an image of the pertinent section of the stone 
which was kindly furnished by Andrea Acri. The 
reading of the first six akṣara s of line 10 (marked by 
the red circle on the photograph) per de Casparis 
(1956: 312) is ‘ hī vā la pu tra // ’. In order to regis -
ter my comments and objections  —wh ich are by 
no means as skillful or nuanced as I would have 
wished because I have not practised reading the 
script in over a decade—to most of de Casparis’ 
transliteration, I have imposed Roman letters on 
to the photograph and will take up the pertinent 
features of the stone in turn.
(A) The con
centric arcs to the right of the ‘ A ’
must be the elements that de Casparis reports
as a ha , a character which in Kawi assumes the
serpentine form ഗ. The proper form is obviously
lacking on the stone.
(B) De C
asparis reads a long vowel ī. While it
is not out of the question that the open semi  cir   
cle does in
deed represent a superscript i ratherthan a subscripted ga from the line above (nu  - 
mer ous exam
ples of such an open form exist 
on the ad 792 inscription of Mañju  śrīgṛ h
a), there 
is no indication of a vowel-lengthening element. 
(For ref  erence t
o how the i-vowel is lengthened in 
Mañjuśrīgṛ ha, see the twenty-first akṣara of line 7).
(C) Belo
w this letter must be the akṣara read
by de Casparis as vā . The leftmost margins seem -
ingl
y originate very close to the terminus of the
concentric arcs described in B, and there is some
rather clear structural element at the right which
seemingly does signify the vowel-lengtheningstroke. Un
 for tunat
ely for the reading that de Cas-   
pari
s proposes, there is seemingly intact stone to
the right of the leftmost curvature, and seemingly
a solid chisel stroke at the margin of the lower left 
which seems to emphatically open up the primary
character. The pronounced inflection point chiseled 
on the lower horizontal limb seems mirrored by one on the upper limb as well. (According to Andrea
Acri [email dated 27 December 2015], the sequence
of akṣaras represented here may be bā ).
(D)
The elem ent of the akṣara to the lower left  
does indeed seem to be an element denoting a
vowel-lengthening and is possibly to be com  pre-
hende
d by being interpreted in conjunction with
the concentric arcs de  scri
bed in A.
(E) Abo
ve this letter lies the akṣara that de
Casparis proposes to read as la , the Kawi form
of which is the reflection (taken either verticallyor horizontally) of the ha . To achieve his reading,
de Casparis ignored several features of the stone,
including a serif at the apex and the seeminglyintentional occlusion of what should be the left  
Sundberg appendix B.indd   393 12/7/16   3:15 PM

--- [Page 408] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia394
side of de Casparis’ la , forming an irregular circle 
reminiscent of some instances of ca  or even a 
lumpy va .
(F)  Belo
w this character lies a vertically de -
scendin
g element which was capped by a serif and 
seemingly embellished with a medial hori  zont
al 
chisel stroke, a lithographic tech  nique us
ed on, 
inter alia, the Mañjuśrīgṛ ha as an aid to clearly 
identify the akṣara. This line bends leftward as 
it descends, and is possibly conjoined with the 
oblong circle at a sharp angle which approaches 
120° rather than the fluid spline dictated by the 
canonical form of the la . While more study of the 
junction of the akṣara on the stone is required, it 
is not out of the question that the akṣara lying 
directly under F is a ra .(G)  Whi
le this character is seriously dis  fig-
ure
d, the serif that appears underneath the G as 
well as the upward-facing line to the left seems to 
convincingly mark this akṣara  as a pa , and there 
are two serif-like engravings below which are 
candidates for a very short u marker.
(H) The tra t
o the upper left and the // strophe-
closing marks to the upper right of the H are 
unobjectionable readings. On this, de Casparis is 
indisputably correct.
In short, I cannot endorse de Casparis’ as -
sertion of a mention of a vālaputra  on Pikatan’s 
funereal Śivag ṛha inscription, much less accept it 
as a reference to a cross-straits Sumatr an Śailendra 
king. Fig. 1: The first characters on lines 9, 10, and 11 of the ‘Śivagṛ ha’ funereal stele of Rakai Pikatan. (Photo courtesy of 
Andrea Acri)
Sundberg appendix B.indd   394 12/7/16   3:15 PM

--- [Page 409] ---
Andrea Acri was trained at Leiden University 
(PhD 2011, MA 2006) and at the University of 
Rome ‘La Sapienza’ (Laurea degree, 2005). He is 
Maître de Conférences in Tantric Studies at the 
École Pratique des Hautes Études in Paris since fall 
2016. Prior to joining EPHE he has been Visiting 
Assistant/Associate Professor at Nalanda University 
(India) and, since 2013, Visiting Fellow at the Nalan -
da-Sriwijaya Centre, ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute 
(Singapore). He has spent several years in Indonesia, 
and held postdoctoral research fellowships in the 
Netherlands, Australia, the UK, and Singapore. His 
main research and teaching interests are Śaiva and 
Buddhist Tantric traditions, Hinduism and Indian 
Philosophy, Yoga traditions, Sanskrit and Old Java -
nese philology, and the comparative religious and 
intellectual history of South and Southeast Asia 
from the premodern to the contemporary period. 
His publications include Dharma Pātañjala  (2011) 
and From Laṅkā Eastwards  (2011, co-edited with 
Helen Creese and Arlo Griffiths).
David Bade  studied linguistics and library science 
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 
He is currently a member of the Board of Directors 
of The Mongolia Society (Bloomington, Indiana) 
and editor of its journal Mongolian Studies , a 
member of the Executive Committee of the Inter -
national Association for the Integrational Study of 
Language and Communication, an officer of the 
Council and Executive Committee of the Eugen 
Rosenstock-Huessy Society of North America, 
and a founding member of Signum: International 
Society for Mark Studies. He has published several 
bibliographies on Mongolian studies, a three 
volume catalog of African language texts in the 
Herskovits Library of African Studies at Northwest -ern University, and a number of books and papers 
on Mongolian studies, library and information 
science, philosophy of language and linguistics. 
In 2014 he retired from the University of Chicago 
where he was for many years a librarian and now 
devotes much of his time to raising livestock on 
his family’s farm in Illinois.
Claudine Bautze-Picron  studied at the Uni -
versities of Brussels, Lille, Jawaharlal Nehru in 
New Delhi, and Aix-en-Provence. Since 1980 she 
has been research fellow at the National Centre 
of Scientific Research (CNRS, Centre National 
de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR 7528 ‘Mondes 
Iranien et Indien’, Paris) and since 1992 she has 
taught Indian art history at the Free University of 
Brussels. Her research focuses on the late Buddhist 
iconography of South Asia, on the art of Eastern 
India and Bangladesh, and the murals of Bagan 
(Burma).
Emma C. Bunker, Research Consultant at the 
Denver Art Museum, is a world authority on 
ancient Chinese and ancient Khmer bronze, whose 
pioneering work has produced exhibitions and pub -
lications over some decades. On Southeast Asia, she 
wrote a seminal work on the bronzes of Prakhon 
Chai, and, with Douglas Latchford, the latest clas -
sics on Cambodian icons and jewelry: Adoration 
and Glory: the Golden Age of Khmer Art (2004); 
Khmer Gold (2008); Ancient Khmer Bronzes: New 
Interpretations of the Past (2011).  
Swati Chemburkar  is an architectural historian 
whose work focuses on Southeast Asia, especially 
Cambodia. She directs a post graduate diploma 
course on Art and Architecture of Southeast Asia THE CONTRIBUTORS
authors bionotes.indd   395 2/8/16   12:57 am

--- [Page 410] ---
396 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
at Jnanapravaha, Mumbai. She is the editor of Arts 
of Cambodia: Interactions with India  (2015) and 
has published articles on the Khmer monuments.
Rolf W. Giebel  is an independent researcher who 
has translated Two Esoteric Sutras  (2001) and The 
Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sutra  (2005) and co-trans -
lated  Shingon Texts (2004) and Esoteric Texts (2015) 
for the BDK English Tripiṭaka. He has a particular 
interest in the reconstruction of Sanskrit as pre -
served in Chinese transliteration in the Chinese 
Buddhist canon, on which he has published several 
studies.
Geoffrey Goble is a specialist in Chinese Reli -
gions and Tantric Buddhism. He earned his PhD 
from Indiana University in 2012. He is presently 
a Postdoctoral Fellow in East Asian Religion at 
Washington University in St. Louis. He is currently 
revising a monograph concerning Amoghavajra 
and the establishment of Tantric (or Esoteric) Bud -
dhism in China and is engaged in ongoing research 
on violence and religion in medieval China, the role 
or Esoteric Buddhism in contemporary Chinese lay 
Buddhist practice, and the formative influence of 
Esoteric Buddhism on Daoism in the Song Dynasty 
(960–1279).
Hudaya Kandahjaya , born in Bogor, Indonesia, is 
currently employed at the BDK America in Moraga, 
California, USA. He graduated from the Graduate 
Theological Union, Berkeley, in 2004 with a PhD 
in Buddhist Studies. In addition to scholarly and 
literary study particularly on Indonesian Buddhism, 
he has engaged in practical aspects of Buddhism. 
All these gear his interests in Buddhism, educa -
tion, and theoretical and practical understanding 
of engaged Buddhism.
John N. Miksic  is Professor in the Southeast Asian 
Studies Department, National University of Singa -
pore. He received his PhD from Cornell University. 
He spent four years in Malaysia as a Peace Corps 
Volunteer, worked as a Rural Development Advisor 
in Sumatra for two years, and taught at Gadjah 
Mada University, Yogyakarta, for six years. In 1987 
he moved to the National University of Singapore. 
He served on the board of the Center for Khmer Studies from 2000 to 2015.  He is an academic 
adviser to the Southeast Asian Ministers of Edu -
cation Organization Sub-Centre for Archaeology 
and Fine Arts. He received a Special Recognition 
Award from the Ministry of Information, Com -
munication, and the Arts, the Pingat Bakti Setia 
from the government of Singapore, and the title 
of Kanjeng Raden Haryo Temenggung from the 
Susuhunan of Surakarta (Indonesia). His specialty 
is the archaeology of maritime trade and commu -
nication in Southeast Asia.
Kate O’Brien  earned her doctorate in 1995 with 
the University of Sydney through research into 
Tantric Buddhist influences on Javanese rulership 
during the 13th and 14th centuries.  The subsequent 
awarding of an Australian Research Fellowship 
allowed her to continue in that research, resulting 
in the publication of  Sutasoma—The Ancient tale of 
a Buddha Prince from 14th century Java ,  an updated 
translation and analysis of a Javanese kakavin  of 
the same name. 
Natasha Reichle  studied literature at Yale, and 
received her PhD in the History of Art from U.C. 
Berkeley. She is currently Associate Curator of 
Southeast Asian Art at the Asian Art Museum of 
San Francisco. At the museum she has curated 
exhibitions on a wide range of subjects, including 
Javanese puppets, Asian performing arts, batik tex -
tiles, Southeast Asian jewelry, and the first major 
U.S. exhibition on the arts of Bali ( Bali: Art, Ritual, 
Performance , 2010). Her early research focused on 
Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia ( Violence and 
Serenity: Late Buddhist Sculpture from Indonesia, 
2007). Most recent endeavors have focused on art 
and global trade in the seventeenth century ( China 
at the Center: Ricci and Verbiest World Maps , 2015). 
Jan A. Schoterman (Amersfoort 1948–1989) 
studied Indo-Iranian and Dravidian languages at 
Utrecht University (PhD 1982); he was research 
assistant at the same University, lecturer at the Kern 
Institute, Leiden University, and research fellow 
of the KITLV, Leiden. He published on Sanskrit, 
Hindu Tantrism, history of Sanskrit and Indian 
culture in Indonesia. Among his various publi -
cations are The Yoni Tantra, critical edition and 
authors bionotes.indd   396 2/8/16   12:57 am

--- [Page 411] ---
The Contributors397
translation (New Delhi, 1980), and The Ṣaṭsāhasra 
Saṃhitā, chapters 1-5, edited, translated and anno -
tated  (Leiden, 1982). 
Peter D. Sharrock researches the art history of 
the Angkorian Khmer Empire and the Esoteric 
Buddhist and Hindu art of Maritime Asia from 
ad 800 to 1400. He lectures at London Univer -
sity’s School of Oriental and African Studies 
(SOAS), where he is a Project Board member of 
the School’s growing Southeast Asian Academic 
Art Programme (SAAAP). 
Iain Sinclair  studied Sanskrit, philology and Bud -
dhist philosophy at the Unversity of Hamburg and 
Monash University. He lived and worked in Nepal 
and Southeast Asia for several years. His research 
currently specialises on the formation of Newar 
Buddhism during the 11th to 14th centuries. He is interested more generally in the history of ideas 
and art in Asian civilisations.
Jeffrey Sundberg is an independent researcher.  
His primary interest lies in Central Javanese history 
and religious culture, but his investigations into the 
background of the Śailendra sponsorship of Abha -
yagirivāsins have led to recent collateral publica -
tions on the Esoteric Buddhist monk Vajrabodhi (in 
collaboration with Rolf Giebel) and the dedication 
of a number of early Second Lambakaṇṇa kings 
to an Esoteric Buddhism promoted at the Abhaya -
girivihāra in Rājarattha.  In prior publications, he 
has addressed the gold-foil mantra unearthed on 
the Ratu Boko prominence, the dating of the Boro -
budur stūpa , and an evaluation of the historical 
claims of the Old Sundanese Carita Parahyaṅan 
in light of the new dynastic data in the Wanua 
Tengah III inscription.
authors bionotes.indd   397 2/8/16   12:57 am

--- [Page 412] ---
authors bionotes.indd   398 2/8/16   12:57 am

--- [Page 413] ---
Abramson, S. 2008. Ethnic Identity in Tang China . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Abu-Lughod, J. 1989. Before European Hegemony: The World System A.D. 1250–1350. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Abu Musa, M. 2000. Archaeological Survey Report, Munshiganj District . Dhaka: Department of Archae -
ology, Minister of Cultural Affairs, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh. 
Acharya, P.K. 1979. An Encyclopaedia of Hindu Architecture . New Delhi: Oriental Books Reprint Cor -
poration. 
Acker, W.R.B. 1954–74. Some Tang and Pre-Tang text on Chinese Painting , Vol. 2. Leiden: Brill. 
Acri, A. 2006. ‘The Sanskrit-Old Javanese Tutur Literature from Bali. The Textual Basis of Śaivism in 
Ancient Indonesia’, Rivista di Studi Sudasiatici 1: 107–37.
———2010. ‘On Birds, Ascetics, and Kings in Central Java: Rāmāyaṇa Kakawin , 24.96–126 and 25’, 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde /Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of 
Southeast Asia 166: 475–506.
———2011a. Dharma Pātañjala: A Śaiva Scripture from Ancient Java Studied in the Light of Related Old 
Javanese and Sanskrit Texts . Groningen: Egbert Forsten Publishing.
———2011b. ‘More On Birds, Ascetics and Kings in Central Java: Kakawin Rāmāyaṇa , 24.111–115 and 
25.19–22’, in A. Acri, H. Creese and A. Griffiths (eds.) From Laṅkā Eastwards ; The Rāmāyaṇa in 
the Literature and Visual Arts of Indonesia , pp. 53–91. Leiden: KITLV Press.
———2014. ‘Birds, Bards, Buffoons, and Brahmans: (Re-)Tracing the Indic Origins of some Ancient 
and Modern Javano-Balinese Performing Characters’, Archipel 88: 13–70.
———2015. ‘Revisiting the cult of ‘‘Śiva-Buddha’’ in Java and Bali’, in C. Lammerts (ed.) Buddhist Dy -
namics in Pre-modern and Early Modern Southeast Asia , pp. 261–82. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Acri, A. and Jordaan, R. 2012. ‘ The Dikpālas of Ancient Java revisited: A new identification for the 
twenty-four directional deities on the Śiva temple of the Loro Jonggrang complex’, Bijdragen tot 
de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde /Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia 
168: 274–313. 
Adachi Kiroku 足立喜六  (tr.); Shioiri Ryōdō 塩入良道  (notes). Nittō guhō junrei kōki. Tokyo: Heibonsha, 
[1970]–1985. 
Ahmed, N. 2014. ‘Jagaddala Mahāvihāra’, in: Banglapedia, National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh . [Last 
accessed February 2016 at: http://en.banglapedia.org/index.php?title=Jagaddala_Mahavihara]
Akman, A. 1999. ‘Two Hitherto Unpublished Images from the Vikrampur Area, Munshiganj District’, 
Journal of Bengal Art 4: 467–76. 
Allinger, E. 2000. ‘Some Problems about the Green Tārā together with the Eight Great Dangers and the 
21 Tārā, The Indian Origin and Tibetan Resolutions’, in M. Taddei and G. De Marco (eds.), South Asian Archaeology 1997, Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference of the European 
Association of South Asian Archaeologists, held in the Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente, Palazzo 
Brancaccio, Rome, 7-14 July 1997, Vol.  3, pp. 1368–81. Rome: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente.BIBLIOGRAPHY
bibliography.indd   399 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 414] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia400
———2002. ‘The Paintings in the Loka-hteik-pan at Pagan, Myanmar: Stylistic Connections with 
Paintings from Bengal’, Journal of Bengal Art 7: 9–29. 
———2008. ‘An early Nepalese Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra  Manuscript: an Attempt to discover Connections 
between Text and Illuminations’, in. C. Bautze-Picron  (ed.), Religion and Art: New Issues in Indian 
Iconography and Iconology, Volume 1 of the proceedings of the 18th conference of the European 
Association of South Asian Archaeologists, London, 2005 . London: The British Association for 
South Asian Studies/The British Academy, 
———2010. ‘Considerations on the Development of the Representation of the Buddha’s Life in early 
Tibetan Thangkas’, in E. Lo Bue and C. Luczanits (eds.), Tibetan Art and Architecture in Context, 
pp. 27–42 (PIATS 2006: Tibetan Studies: Proceedings of the Eleventh Seminar of the International 
Association for Tibetan Studies, Königswinter 2006). Halle: International Institute for Tibetan 
and Buddhist Studies.
Andaya, L.Y. 2008. Leaves of the Same Tree: Trade and Ethnicity in the Straits of Melaka. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press.
Anderson, B. 1990 [1972]. ‘The idea of power in Javanese culture’, Language and Power: Exploring Political 
Cultures in Indonesia, pp. 17–77. Ithaca/London: Cornell University Press. [Originally published in 
1972 in C. Holt (ed.), Culture and Politics in Indonesia , pp. 1–69. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.]
Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi. 2004. Indian Archaeology: A Review , 1998–99.  
———2005.  Indian Archaeology: A Review , 1999–2000.
———2006. Indian Archaeology: A Review, 2000–2001.
Ardika, I.W. 2015. ‘Early contacts between India and Bali’, in ASEAN-India Cultural Links: Historical and 
Contemporary Dimensions. Proceedings of the International Conference on “ASEAN-India Cultural 
Links: Contemporary and Historical Dimensions”, 23–24 July 2015, New Delhi, India, pp. 27–37.  
New Delhi: ASEAN-India Centre, Research and Information System for Developing Societies.
Arora, U.P. 2006. ‘Greek Geographers on the Indian Ocean and Southeast Asia’, in G.C. Pande (ed.), 
History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization; Volume: 3, Part I, India’s Inter -
action with Southeast Asia , pp. 167–97. New Delhi: Centre for Studies in Civilizations.
Asher, F.M. 1980. The Art of Eastern India, 300 to 800 . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Astley-Kristensen, I. 1991. The Rishukyō : The Sino-Japanese Tantric Prajñāpāramitā in 150 Verses ( Amogha-
vajra’s Version ). Tring, UK: The Institute of Buddhist Studies. 
Atwood, C.P. 2004. ‘Validation by holiness or sovereignty: religious toleration as political theology in the 
Mongol world empire of the Thirteenth Century’, The International History Review 26/2: 237–56. 
Aung-Thwin, M.A. 2011. ‘A new/old look at ‘‘classical’’ and ‘‘post-classical’’ Southeast Asia/Burma’, in 
M.A. Aung-Thwin and K.R. Hall (eds.), New Perspectives on the History and Historiography of 
Southeast Asia: Continuing Expolorations , pp. 25–55. London and New York: Routledge. 
Bacon, F. 1872. The Works of Francis Bacon (collected and edited by James Spedding et al.). New edition. 
London: Longmans.
Bade, D. 2013. Of Palm Wine, Women and War: The Mongolian Naval Expedition to Java in the 13th 
Century . Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Bagchi, J. 1993. The History and Culture of the Pālas of Bengal and Bihar (Cir. 750 A.D.–Cir. 1200 A.D.). 
Delhi: Abhinav Publications.
Bagchi, P.C. 1946. ‘Bodhisattva-śīla of Śubhakarasiṁha’, Sino-Indian Studies 1/3: 132–56.———1950. India and China: A Thousand Years of Cultural Relations . Revised edition. Bombay: Hind 
Kitabs Limited
——— 1982. Indological Studies: A Collection of Essays. Santiniketam: Visva-Bharati Research Publica -
tions Committee.
Bahulkar, S.S. (ed.). 2010. Śrīguhyasamājamaṇḍalavidhiḥ of Ācārya Dīpaṅkarabhadra . Varanasi: Central 
University of Tibetan Studies. 
bibliography.indd   400 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 415] ---
Bibliography401
Bailey, H.W. 1966. ‘The Sudhana Poem of Ṛddhiprabhāva’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies 29: 506–32. 
Banerjee, A.C. 1984. Aspects of Buddhist Culture from Tibetan Sources . Calcutta: Firma KLM.
Barret, D. 1954. ‘The Later School of Amarāvatī and its Influences’, Art and Letters 28: 41–53.
Barua, B. 1979. Barhut. Patna: Indological Book.
Barua, D.K. 1969. Vihāras in Ancient India: A Survey of Buddhist Monasteries . Calcutta: Indian Publications.
Bautze-Picron, C. 1985. ‘L’image de l’Âdimurti Vâsudeva au Bihar et au Bengale, du 5e au 12e siècle’, 
Annali dell’Istituto Universitario Orientale  (Naples) 45: 437–81.
———1989. ‘Some Aspects of Mañjuśrī Iconography in Bihar from the 7th century onwards’, Tribus, 
Jahrbuch des Linden-Museums 38 (December): 71–90. Stuttgart: Linden-Museum Stuttgart-Staat -
liches Museum für Völkerkunde.
———1991–92. ‘Lakhi Sarai, An Indian Site of Late Buddhist Iconography and Its Position within the 
Asian Buddhist World’, Silk Road Art and Archaeology 2: 239–84.
———1992. ‘A Preliminary Report on the Buddha Image from Betagi’, in C. Jarrige (ed.), South Asian 
Archaeology 1989; Papers from the Tenth International Conference of South Asian Archaeologists in Western Europe, Musée National des Arts Asiatiques Guimet, Paris, France, 3-7 July 1989 , pp. 
301–8. Madison, Wisconsin: Prehistory Press.
———1993a. ‘Mañjuśrī au geste de l’enseignement’, in  Premier Colloque E. Lamotte (Bruxelles et Liège 
24–27 septembre 1989) , pp. 149–60. Louvain-la-Neuve: Publications de l’Institut Orientaliste de 
Louvain, Université Catholique de Louvain.
———1993b. ‘Crying Leaves: Some Remarks on ‘The Art of Pala India (8th-12th Centuries) and Its 
International Legacy’, East and West  43/1–4 (December): 277–94. 
———1995. ‘Between men and gods, small motifs in the Buddhist art of Eastern India, an interpretation’, 
in K.R. Van Kooij and H. Van Der Veere (eds.), Function and Meaning in Buddhist Art, Proceedings 
of a seminar held at Leiden University , 21-24 October 1991 , pp. 59–79. Groningen: Egbert Forsten.
———1995–96. ‘Śākyamuni in Eastern India and Tibet from the 11th to the 13th centuries’, Silk Road 
Art and Archaeology 4: 355–408. 
———1996. ‘From God to Demon, from Demon to God: Brahmā and other Hindu deities in Late Buddhist 
Art of Eastern India’, Journal of Bengal Art 1: 109–35. 
———1997. ‘Le Groupe des Huit Grands Bodhisattva en Inde: Genèse et Développement’, in N. Eilenberg 
et al. (eds.), Living a Life in accord with Dhamma: Papers in Honor of Professor Jean Boisselier on His Eightieth Birthday , pp. 1–55. Bangkok: Silpakorn University.
———1999a. ‘Buddhist Painting during the reign of Harivarmadeva (end of the 11th c.) in Southeast 
Bangladesh’, Journal of Bengal Art 4: 159–97. 
——— 1999 b. ‘Between India and Burma: The “andagu” stelae’, in D.M. Stadtner (ed.), The Art of Burma, 
New Studies , pp. 37–52. Mumbai: Marg Publications. 
———2000. ‘The Los Angeles manuscript covers: uncovering and explaining their iconography’, Journal 
of Bengal Art 5: 95–128. 
———2001. ‘Between Śākyamuni and Vairocana: Mārīcī, Goddess of Light and Victory’, Silk Road Art 
and Archaeology 7: 263–310.
———2002. ‘The biography of the Buddha in Indian art: How and when ?’, in A. Schüle (ed.), Biographie 
als religiöser und kultureller Text/Biography as a religious and cultural text , pp. 197–239. Münster/
Hamburg/London: LIT Verlag.
———2003. The Buddhist murals of Pagan: Timeless vistas of the cosmos . Bangkok: Orchid Press.
———2004. ‘The universal compassionate Bodhisattva: Miscellaneous Aspects of Avalokitasvara/
Avalokiteśvara in India’, Silk Road Art and Archaeology 10: 225–90.
———2007a. ‘Sculpture. a. Ancient Period’, in Lala Rukh Selim (ed.) , Fine Arts and Crafts , pp. 91–109. 
Dhaka: Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. 
bibliography.indd   401 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 416] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia402
———2007b. ‘The Hidden God: Some Remarks on Yama and the Protectors of the sacred Space in 
Buddhist Art’, in G. Bhattacharya et al. (eds.), Kalhâr (White Water-Lily), Studies in Art, Iconog -
raphy, Architecture and Archaeology of India and Bangladesh, Professor Enamul Haque Felicitation 
Volume , pp. 81–95. New Delhi: Kaveri Books. 
———2008. ‘The Emaciated Buddha in Southeast Bangladesh and Pagan (Myanmar)’, in C. Bautze-
Picron (ed.), Miscellanies about the Buddha Image , pp. 77–96. Oxford: BAR International Series 
1888 (South Asian Archaeology 2007, Special Sessions 1, Università di Bologna & Istituto Italiano 
per l’Africa e l’Oriente).
———2009a. ‘Three more Folios from the Harivarmadeva Manuscript, dated regnal Year 8’, in S.H. 
Jahan (ed.),  Abhijnân, Studies in South Asian Archaeology and Art History of Artefacts, Felicitating 
A.K.M. Zakariah , pp. 118–21. (South Asian Archaeology Series, edited by A.K. Kanungo, No. 10.). 
Oxford: Archaeopress.
———2009b. ‘The presence of the five dreams of the Bodhisatta in the Murals of Pagan’, in C. Bautze-
Picron (ed.), The Indian Night, Dream and Sleep in Indian Culture , pp. 418–51. New Delhi: Rupa 
and Co. 
———2010a. The Bejewelled Buddha from India to Burma, New Considerations (Sixth Kumar Sarat 
Kumar Roy Memorial Lecture). New Delhi/Kolkata: Sanctum Books/Centre for Archaeological Studies & Training, Eastern India.
———2010b. ‘The Buddha and his emaciated Demons’, Berliner Indologische Studien 19: 87–122.
———2014a. The forgotten Place: Stone Images from Kurkihar, Bihar . New Delhi: Archaeological Survey 
of India. 
——— 2014 b. ‘Buddhist Images from Padang Lawas region and the South Asian connection’, in D. Perret 
(ed.), History of Padang Lawas, North Sumatra; II: Societies of Padang Lawas (Mid-Ninth–Thirteenth 
century CE ), pp. 107–28. Paris: Cahiers d’Archipel.
———2015. ‘Textiles from Bengal in Pagan (Myanmar) from late eleventh century and onwards’, in 
M.H. Bhuiyan (ed.), Studies in South Asian Heritage Essays in Memory of M Harunur Rashid , pp 
19–30. Dhaka: Bangla Academy.
Behera, K.S. 1977. ‘Maritime Trade in Ancient Orissa’, in M.N. Das (ed.), Sidelights on History and Culture 
of Orissa,  pp. 115 –21. Cuttack: Vidyapuri.
Bell, Sir C. 1931. The Religion of Tibet . Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bendall, C. 1897. Śikshā-samuccaya: A Compendium of Buddhistic Teaching compiled by Śāntideva . St. 
Petersburg: Commissionnaires de l’Académie Impériale des Sciences.
Bendall, C. and W.H.D. Rouse. 1922. Śikshā-samuccaya: A Compendium of Buddhist Doctrine. London: 
John Murray. 
Benn, J.A. 2007. Burning for the Buddha: Self-Immolation in Chinese Buddhism . Honolulu: University 
of Hawai’i Press.
Berg, C.C. 1930. Rangga Lawe: middeljavaansche historische roman: critisch uitgegeven . Weltefreden: 
Albrecht & Co.
———1931. Kidung Harṣa-Wijaya: tekst, inhoudsopgave en aanteeekeningen . ’s-Gravenhage: Martinus 
Nijhoff. 
———1950. ‘De geschiedenis van pril Majapahit I. Het mysterie van de vier dochters van Kṛtanagara’, 
Indonesië 4 : 481–520.
———1951a. ‘De geschiedenis van pril Majapahit II. Achtergrond en oplossing der pril-Majapahitse 
conflicten’, Indonesië  5: 193–233.
———1951b. ‘De Sadeng-oorlog en de mythe van Groot-Majapahit’, Indonesië  5: 385–422.
———1953. Herkomst, vorm en functie der Middeljavaanse rijksdelingstheorie . Amsterdam: N.V. 
Noord-Hollandsche Uitgeverij. 
———1956. ‘Kṛtanagara’s maleise affaire’, Indonesië  9: 386–417.
bibliography.indd   402 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 417] ---
Bibliography403
———1962. Het rijk van de vijfvoudige Buddha . Amsterdam: N.V. Noord-Hollandische Uitgevers 
Maatschappij. 
———1965. ‘The Javanese picture of the past’, in Soedjatmoko et al. (eds.), An Introduction to Indonesian 
Historiography , pp. 87–117. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Bernet Kempers, A. J. 1933. ‘The Bronzes of Nalanda and Hindu-Javanese Art’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 90: 1–88.
———1949. ‘Crawfurd’s beschrijving van Prambanan in 1816’, Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch 
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschapen 83: 177–93.
———1959. Ancient Indonesian Art . Amsterdam: van der Peet.
Beyer, S. 1973. The Cult of Tārā: Magic and Ritual in Tibet . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Bhattacharya, A.K. 1989. Jhewari Bronze Buddhas; A Study in History and Style . Calcutta: Indian Museum. 
Bhattacharya, B.T. 1925.  The Sādhanamālā: Vol. 1 . Baroda: Oriental Institute.
———1944. ‘Twenty-two Buddhist Miniatures from Bengal (11th Century A.D.)’, Bulletin of the Baroda 
Museum and Picture Gallery 1/1: 17–36.
———1949. Ni ṣpa
nnayog āva
lī o
f Mah āpaṇḍi
ta Abhay āka
ragupta . Baroda: Oriental Institute. 
———1958. The Indian Buddhist Iconography mainly based on the Sādhanamālā and other cognate Tāntric 
Texts of Ritual; Second edition revised and enlarged with 357 illustrations . Calcutta: Firma K.L. 
Mukhopadhyaya. [First edition: 1924, London/New York: Humphrey Milford/Oxford University 
Press.]
Bhattacharya, D.C. 1933. ‘The Maināmati Copper-Plate of Raṇavaṅkamalla Harikāladeva (1141 Śaka)’, 
Indian Historical Quarterly 9: 282–89.
Bhattacharya, G. 1992. ‘The New Pāla Ruler Mahendrapāla’, Pratna Samiksha 1: 165–70.
——— 1994. ‘Newly Discovered Copper Plate Grants of the Pāla Dynasty’, in N. Balbir and J.K. Bautze 
(eds.), Festschrift für Klaus Bruhn zur Vollendung des 65. Geburtstages: dargebracht von Schülern, 
Freunden und Kollegen , pp. 195–224. Reinbek: Wezle. [Reprint in G. Bhattacharya 2000, pp. 441–54.]
———2000. Essays on Buddhist, Hindu & Jain Iconography & Epigraphy (ed. E. Haque). Dhaka: The 
International centre for Study of Bengal Art.
Bhattacharya, S. 1985. Landschenkungen und Staatliche Entwicklung im Frühmittelalterlichen Bengalen . 
Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.
——— 1994, ‘The Ari Cult of Myanmar’, in U. Gärtner and J. Lorenz (eds.), Tradition and Modernity in 
Myanmar , pp. 251–71. Münster/Hamburg: LIT Verlag.
Bhattacharya, S.K. 1978. Kŗşņa cult . New Delhi: Associated Publishing House.
Bhattacharya, V. 1928. ‘Yogāvatāropadeśa’, The Indian Historical Quarterly 4/3: 775–78. Bhattacharyya, N.N. 2005. History of the Tantric Religion: An Historical, Ritualistic and Philosophical 
Study . Second revised editon. New Delhi: Manohar. [First edition 1982.]
Bhattasali, N.K. 1929. Iconography of Buddhist and Brahmanical Sculptures in the Dacca Museum . Dhaka: 
Dacca Museum Committee.
Bhuiyan , M.H. 2008–9. ‘Buddha survives as V āsudeva’ , Journal of Bengal Art 13–14: 229–36.
Birnbaum, R. 1983. Studies on the Mysteries of Mañjusrī: A Group of East Asian Mandalas and their 
Traditional Symbolism . Boulder: Society for the Study of Chinese Religions.
———1987. ‘Mañjuśrī’, in M. Eliade (ed.), Encyclopedia of Religion , Vol. 9, pp. 174–75. New York & 
London: MacMillan.
———1989. The Healing Buddha . Boston: Shambhala. 
Biswas , K. 1995. Sculptural Art of Ancient Bengal . New Delhi: Bhawan.
Boechari, M. 1982. ‘Preliminary report on some archaeological finds around the Borobudur Temple’, in 
Pelita Borobudur Seri CC No. 5 (Reports and Documents of the Consultative Committee for the Safeguarding of Borobudur, 5th meeting, April 1976), pp. 90–96. 
———1985. ‘Ritual deposits of Candi Gumpung (Muara Jambi)’, in SPAFA, Final Report Consultative 
bibliography.indd   403 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 418] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia404
Workshop on Archaeological and Environmental Studies on Srivijaya (I-W2b), Appendix 7d, pp. 
229–43. 
Boerschmann, E. 1931. Die Baukunst und religiöse Kultur der Chinesen. III: Chinesische Pagoden . Berlin/
Leipzig: Walter de Gruyter & Co.
Boisselier, J. 1965. ‘Récentes recherches archéologiques en Thaïlande: Rapport préliminaires de mission 
(25 juillet–28 novembre 1964)’, Arts Asiatques  12: 125–74. 
Bopearachchi, O. 2014. ‘Sri Lanka and the maritime trade: the impact of the role of the Bodhisattva 
Avalokiteśvara as the protector of mariners’, in P.P. Dhar and U. Singh, Asian Excavation: Networks 
of Cultural Interaction , pp. 161–87. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Bopearachchi, O., R.E. Jordaan, and J. Sundberg. 2016. ‘Ancient hydrological connections between South 
India, Sri Lanka and Java’. Manuscript in preparation.
Bosch, F.D.K. 1928. ‘De inscriptie van Keloerak’, Tijdschrift voor Indische taal-, land-en Voleknkunde  68: 1–64
———1930. ‘Report of a Journey through Sumatra’, Oudheidkundig Verslag 1930 : 133–57.
———1947. ‘The Bhīmastava’, in F.D.K. Bosch et al. (eds.), India Antiqua; A Volume of Oriental Studies 
Presented by his Friends and Pupils to Jean Philippe Vogel, C.I.E. on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of his Doctorate , pp. 57–62. Leiden: Brill. 
———1961. ‘Buddhist Data from Balinese Texts, and Their Contribution to Archaeological Research in 
Java’, in F.D.K. Bosch (ed.), Selected Studies in Indonesian Archaeology . pp. 109–35. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff. [Dutch version originally published in 1929 in Mededelingen Kon. Ned. Akademie 
van Wetenschappen, Afd. Letterkunde , Ser. B, vol. 68: 43–78.]
Boucher, D. 1995. ‘Sutra on the Merit of Bathing the Buddha’, in D.S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.), Buddhism in Practice , 
pp. 59–68. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bourdieu, P. 1991. ‘Genesis and structure of the religious field’, Comparative Social Research  13: 1–44.
Brancaccio, P. 2010. The Buddhist Caves at Aurangabad: Transformations in Art and Religion . Leiden: Brill.
Brandes, J.L.A. 1904 . Archaeologisch Onderzoek op Java en Madura, I: Beschrijving van de ruïne bij 
de desa Toempang , genaamd Tjandi Djago : in de residentie Pasoeroean . ’s-Gravenhage/Batavia: 
Martinus Nijhoff/Albrecht & Co. 
———1920. Pararaton (Ken Arok) or Het Boek der Koningen van Tumapĕl en van Majapahit . ’s-Graven -
hage: Martinus Nijhoff.
Bronkhorst, J. 2011. Buddhism in the Shadow of Brahmanism . Leiden: Brill.
Bronson, B, et al. 1973. Laporan Penelitian Arkeologi di Sumatra . Jakarta: Lembaga Purbakala dan 
Peninggalan Nasional; University of Pennsylvania Museum. 
Brown, R.L. 1978. ‘The Four Stone Façades of Monastery 1 at Ratnagiri’, Artibus Asiae  40: 15–28.
———2003. ‘A Magic Pill: The Protection of Cambodia by the Recitation of the Vinasikhatantra in AD 
802’, Udaya: Journal of Khmer Studies 4: 1–6.
Brunner, H. 2007. ‘Maṇḍala and yantra in the Siddhānta school of Śaivism: Definitions, descriptions 
and ritual use’, in G. Bühnemann et al. (eds.), Maṇḍalas and Yantras in the Hindu Traditions, pp. 153–77. New Delhi: DK Printworld.
Bryson, M . 2012. ‘Mahākāla worship in the Dali kingdom (937–1253)—A study of the Dahei tianshen 
daochang yi’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 35/1–2: 3–70.
Budi Utomo, B. 2011. Kebudayaan Zaman Klasik Indonesia di Batanghari . Jambi: Dinas Kebudayaan 
dan Pariwisata Provinsi Jambi. 
Bühnemann, G. 1996. ‘The Goddess Mahācīnakrama-Tārā (Ugra-Tārā) in Buddhist And Hindu Tantrism’, 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 59: 472–93.
———2000. ‘The Six Rites of Magic’, in D.G. White (ed.), Tantra in Practice , pp. 447–62. Princeton/
Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Buswell, R.E. Jr. and D.S. Lopez Jr. 2013. Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism . Princeton: Princeton Uni -
versity Press. 
bibliography.indd   404 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 419] ---
Bibliography405
Campbell, J.R.B. 2009. Vajra Hermeneutics : A Study of Vajrayāna Scholasticism in the Pradīpoddyotana . 
PhD dissertation, Columbia University.
Caldwell, I. and A. Hazlewood. 1994. ‘The holy footprints of the venerable Gautama; A new translation 
of the Pasir Panjang inscription’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 150: 457–80.
Casey, J.A. 1985. Medieval Sculpture from Eastern India, Selections from the Nalin Collection . Livingston , 
New Jersey: Nalini International Publications.
de Casparis, J.G. 1950. Prasasti Indonesia I . Bandung: A.C. Nix & Co.
———1956. Prasati Indonesia II: Selected inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th centuries AD . Bandung: 
Masa Baru.
———1961. ‘New evidence on cultural relations between Java and Ceylon in ancient times’, Artibus 
Asiae  24: 241–48.
———1975. Indonesian Palaeography.  A History of Writing in Indonesia from the Beginnings to ca. AD 
1500. Leiden/Köln: Brill. 
———1981. ‘Dual nature of Barabudur’, in L. Gomez and H.W. Woodward (eds.), Barabudur: History 
and significance of a Buddhist monument. pp. 47–73. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
Chakrabarti, D. 2001. Archaeological geography of the Ganga Plain: The lower and the middle Ganga . 
Delhi: Permanent Black.
Chakraborty, U. 2006. Bibliography on Indian Buddhist Art and Archaeology, General and classified 
under Geographical Sites. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld.
Chakravarti, C. 1984. Guhyasamājatantrapradīpodyotanaṭīkā-ṣaṭīoṭīvyākhyā . Patna: Kashi Prasad Jayas -
wal Research Institute.
Chandawimala, R. 2013 . Buddhist Heterodoxy of Abhayagiri Sect. A Study of the School of Abhayagiri in 
Ancient Sri Lanka . Saarbrücken: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Chatterjee, R. 1985.  Religion in Bengal during the P āla and the Sena Times (Mainly on the basis of 
epigraphic and archaeological sources). Calcutta: Punthi Pustak.
Chatterji, D. 1929. ‘The Yogāvatāropadeśa: A Mahāyāna Treatise on Yoga by Dharmendra’, Journal and 
Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal (New Series) 23: 249–59.
Chattopadhyaya, A. 1981. At īśa and Tibet: Life and Works of Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna in relation to the History 
and Religion of Tibet, With Tibetan Sources translated under Professor Lama Chimpa . Delhi/
Varanasi/Patna: Motilal Banarsidass. [Reprint of first edition, 1967.]
Chattopadhyaya, B. 1994. The Making of Early Medieval India . Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Chattopadhyaya, D. (ed.). 1980. Tāranātha’s History of Buddhism in India (translated from Tibetan 
by Lama Chimpa and A. Chattopadhyaya). Calcutta: K.P. Bagchi & Company. [Reprint of 1970 
edition, Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study.]
Chavannes, É. 1894. Mémoire composé à l’époque de la grande dynastie T’ang sur les religieux éminents 
qui allèrent chercher la loi dans les pays d’Occident . Paris: Leroux.
Chen, J. 2004. ‘The Tang Buddhist Palace Chapels’, Journal of Chinese Religions 32: 101–73.
———2005. ‘Fazang (643–712): The Holy man’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies 28/1: 11–84.
———2006. ‘The Statues and Monks of Shengshan Monastery: Money and Maitreyan Buddhism in 
Tang China’, Asia Major 19: 111–60. 
———2013. ‘A Chinese Monk under a “Barbarian” Mask? Zhihuilun (?-876) and Late Tang Esoteric 
Buddhism’, T’oung Pao 99: 88–139.
Chen, K. 1956. ‘The economic background of the Huichang suppression of Buddhism’, Harvard Journal 
of Asian Studies 19: 67–105.
Chhabra, B.C. 1935. ‘Expansion of Indo-Aryan culture during Pallava Rule, as evidenced by inscriptions’, 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal , Letters  1/1: 1–64. 
Chihara, D. 1996. Hindu-Buddhist Architecture in Southeast Asia . Leiden/New York/Köln: Brill.
bibliography.indd   405 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 420] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia406
Chou, Y.L. 1945. ‘Tantrism in China’, Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 8/3–4: 241–332.
Choulean, A. 1996. ‘Collective memory in ancient Cambodia with reference to Jayavarman II’, in M.J. 
Klokke (ed.), Proceedings of the 6th International Conference of the European Association of South 
East Asian Archaeologists , Leiden, 2–6 September 1996 , pp. 117–22. Hull: Center for Southeast 
Asian Studies, University of Hull.
Chowdhury, A.M. 2014. ‘Vikramapura’, in Banglapedia, National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh. [Last 
accessed January 2016 at: http://en.banglapedia.org/index.php?title=Vikramapura]
Christie, A. 1964. ‘The political use of imported religion: An historical example from Java’, Archives de 
sociologie des religions (9e Année) 17: 53–62.
Christie, J.W. 1990a. ‘The Sanskrit inscription recently discovered in Kedah, Malaysia’, Modern Quaternary 
Research in Southeast Asia 11: 39–54. 
———1990b. ‘Trade and state formation in the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra, 300 B.C.–A.D. 700’, in J. 
Kathirithamby-Wells and J. Villiers (eds.), The Southeast Asian Port and Polity. Rise and Demise, 
pp. 39–60. Singapore: National University of Singapore Press. 
Chua, Y. 2003. ‘Tantra in China’, in J.C. Huntington, R.A.F. Thurman, and D. Bangdel (eds.), The Circle of 
Bliss: Buddhist Meditational Art , pp. 45–50. Chicago: Serindia Publications; Columbus: Columbus 
Museum of Art.
Chutiwongs, N. 1984. The Iconography of Avalokite śva
ra in Mainland South East Asia , Doctoral Disser -
tation (unpublished), Rijksuniversiteit Leiden. 
———1994. ‘An aspect of the Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara in Indonesia’, in M.J. Klokke and P. Lunsingh 
Scheurleer (eds.), Ancient Indonesian Sculpture, pp. 98–116. Leiden: KITLV Press.
———2005. ‘Le Bouddhisme du Champa’, in P. Baptiste and T. Zéphir (eds.), Trésors d’art du Vietnam. 
La sculpture du Champa Ve-XVe siècles, pp. 65–87. Paris: Réunion des Musées Nationaux and 
Musée des Arts Asiatiques Guimet .
———2006. ‘A Buddhist Bhairava’, in B. Baumer et al. (eds.), Sahṛdaya: Studies in Indian and South 
East Asian Art in Honour of Dr. R. Nagaswamy , pp. 53–64. Chennai: India Tamil Arts Academy.
Cleary, T. 1989. Entry into the Realm of Reality . Boston: Shambhala. 
Cocks, G. 1997. Psychotherapy in the Third Reich: The Göring Institute . Second edition. New Brunswick, 
New Jersey: Transaction.
Cœdès, G. 1918. ‘Le Royaume de Śrīvijaya’, Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient 18: 1–36.———1928. ‘The excavations at P’ong Tük and their importance for the ancient history of Siam’, The 
Journal of the Siam Society 21: 195–210.
———1930. ‘Les inscriptions malaises de Çrivijaya’, Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient 30: 
29–80. 
———1935. ‘Discovery of the sacred deposit of Angkor Vat’, Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeology 
10: 43–47.
———1940. ‘Etudes Cambodgiennes’, Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient 40: 315–49.———1952. ‘Un yantra récemment découvert à Angkor’, Journal Asiatique 240: 465–77.
———1964. Les États hindouisés d’Indochine et d’Indonésie (Nouvelle édition revue et mise à jour). Paris: 
Éditions E. De Boccard.
———1968. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Coldiron, M. 2005. ‘Lions, Witches, and Happy Old Men: Some Parallels between Balinese and Japanese 
Ritual Masks’, Asian Theatre Journal 22/2: 227–48.
Conti, P. 2014. ‘Tantric Buddhism at Prasat Hin Phimai: A New Reading of its Iconographic Message’, in 
N. Revire and S. Murphy (eds.), Before Siam; Essays in Art and Archaeology , pp. 374–95. Bangkok: 
River Books & The Siam Society.
Cool, W. 1896. De Lombok Expeditie . Batavia: G. Kolff & Co.
Coquet, M. 1986. Le Bouddhisme ésotérique japonais . Paris: Vertiges.
bibliography.indd   406 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 421] ---
Bibliography407
Corless, R. 1995. ‘The Chinese Life of Nāgārjuna’, in D.S. Lopez Jr. (ed.), Buddhism in Practice, pp. 525–31. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Courtright, P.B. 1985. Gaṇeśa; Lord of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings. New York/Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Cowell, E.B. and R.A. Neil. 1970. The Divyâvadâna—A Collection of Early Buddhist Legends. Amsterdam: 
Oriental Press.
Crawfurd, J. 1967. History of the Indian archipelago: Containing an account of the manners, arts, languages, 
religions, institutions, and commerce of its inhabitants . 3 vols. London: Cass.
Cribb, R. 2000. Historical Atlas of Indonesia. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Cristaudo, W. 2008. Power, Love and Evil: Contribution to a Philosophy of the Damaged . Amsterdam/
New York: Rodopi.
———2012. Religion, Redemption, and Revolution: The New Speech Thinking of Franz Rosenzweig and 
Eugen Rosenstock-Huessy . Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Cruijsen, T., A. Griffiths, and M.J. Klokke. 2012. ‘The cult of the Buddhist dh āraṇī dei
ty Mah āpr
atisar ā 
along the Maritime Silk Route: new epigraphical and iconographic evidence from the Indonesian 
Archipelago’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 35: 71–157.
Cunningham, A. 1871 [reprinted 2000]. Four reports made during the years 1862 to 1865 for Archaeological 
Survey of India . New Delhi: Archaeological Survey of India.
———1879. The Stūpa of Bharhut . London: W.H. Allen. 
——— 1892. Mahâbodhi, or the great Buddhist temple under the Bodhi tree at Buddha-Gaya . London: 
W.H. Allen.
Dalton, J. 2002. The uses of the Dgongs pa ‘dus pa’i mdo in the development of the rNying-ma School of 
Tibetan Buddhism . PhD dissertation, University of Michigan.
———2005. ‘A Crisis of Doxography: How Tibetans Organized Tantra during the 8th–12th Centuries’, 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 28: 115–81.
———2011. The Taming of the Demons: Violence and Liberation in Tibetan Buddhism . New Haven and 
London: Yale University Press.
Damais, L.C. 1955. ‘Etudes d’épigraphie indonésienne IV: Discussion de la date des inscriptions’, Bulletin 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 47: 7–290. 
———1964. ‘Etudes sino-indonésiennes III: La transcription chinoise Ho-ling comme designation de 
Java’, Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient 52: 93–141.
———1968.‘Bibliographie indonésienne XI: Les publications épigraphiques du Service Archéologiques 
de l’Indonésie’, Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient 54: 295–522.
———1969. ‘Études javanaises III: A propos des couleurs symboliques des points cardinaux’, Bulletin 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 56: 75–118.
Dani , A.H. 1954. ‘Sobharampur Plate of Dāmodaradeva’, Epigraphia Indica, vol. 30, pp. 185–88.
Darsa, U., and Ekadjati, E. 1995. Fragmen Carita Parahyangan dan Carita Parahyangan (kropak 406): 
Pengantar dan Transliterasi . Jakarta: Yayasan Kebudayaan Nusantara.
Das, B. 1978. The Bhauma-Karas: Buddhist kings of Odisha and their times. New Delhi: Oriental Publishers 
& Distributors.
Das, S.C. 1893a. ‘Life of Atīśa’, Journal of the Buddhist Text Society 1: 1ff.———1893b. Indian Pandits in the Land of Snow . Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press.
———1907. ‘Notices of Orissa in Tibetan Records’, Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 3/4: 223.———(ed.) 1908. Pag Sam Jon Zang. Part I: History of the Rise, Progress and Downfall of Buddhism in 
India by Sumpa Khan-po Yeçe Pal Jor. Calcutta: Presidency Jail Press.
———1973.  Tibetan English Dictionary . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Dasgupta, S.B. 1974. An Introduction to Tantric Buddhism . Berkeley/London: Shambhala.
——— 1976. Obscure Religious Cults . Calcutta: Firma KL Mukhopadyay.
bibliography.indd   407 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 422] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia408
Davidson, R.M. 1991. ‘Reflections on the Maheśvara subjugation myth: Indic materials, saskya-pa 
apologetics, and the birth of Heruka’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 
14/2: 197–235.
———1995a. ‘Atiśa’s A Lamp for the Path to Awakening’, in D.S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.), Buddhism in Practice , 
pp. 290–301. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
———1995b. ‘The Litany of Names of Mañjuśrī’, in D.S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.), Religions of India in Practice , 
pp. 105–25. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
——— 1995c. ‘The Bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi’s Subjugation of Śiva’, in D.S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.), Religions of India 
in Practice , pp. 547–55. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
———2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric Movement . New York: Columbia 
University Press.
———2012. ‘Some Observations on an Uṣṇīṣa Abhiṣeka Rite in Atikūṭa’s Dhāraṇīsaṃgraha ’, in István 
Keul (ed.), Transformations and transfer of Tantra in Asia and beyond, pp. 77–97. Berlin: De Gruyter.
———2015. Review of Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism: History, Semiology, and Transgression in the 
Indian Traditions by Christian K. Wedemeyer, History of Religions 54: 371–75.
Davis, E.L. 2001. Society and the Supernatural in Song China . Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Dayalan, D. 2013. ‘Role of Trade and Tamil Traders in Promoting Buddhism’, in D. Dayalan (ed.), Śivaśrī:  
Perspectives in Indian Archaeology, Art and Culture , pp. 15–31. New Delhi: Agam Kala Prakashan.
Decleer, H. n.d. ‘The Life of Buddha-Jñāna-pāda and his spiritual descendants for the Samāja and 
Yamāntaka transmissions in the “Nyö (Gnyos) lineage” thankga’. Unpublished manuscript.
———1995. ‘Atiśa’s Journey to Sumatra’, in D.S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.), Buddhism in Practice, pp .532–40. Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press.
Deeg, M. 2010. ‘Has Huichao Been Back to India? On a Chinese Inscription on the Back of a Pāla Bronze 
and the Chronology of Indian Esoteric Buddhism’ in E. Franco and M. Zin (eds.), From Turfan 
to Ajanta: Festschrift for Dieter Schlingloff on the Occasion of his Eightieth Birthday , pp. 197–213. 
Kathmandu: Lumbini International Research Institute.
Degroot, V. 2006. ‘The archaeological remains of Ratu Boko: From Sri Lankan Buddhism to Hinduism’, 
Indonesia and the Malay World 34/98: 55–74.
———2009. Candi, space, and landscape: A study on the distribution, orientation and spatial organ -
ization of Central Javanese temple remains. Doctoral dissertation, Leiden University. Leiden: Sidestone press.
de Jong, J.W. 1974. ‘Notes on the sources and the text of the Sang Hyang Kamahāyānan Mantranaya’, 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 130: 465–82.
———1984. ‘A new history of Tantric literature in India’ [review of Matsunaga Yūkei, Mikkyō kyōten 
seiritsushi -ron (Kyoto, 1980)], Indo Koten Kenkyū [ Acta Indologica ] 6: 91–113.
Delhey, M. 2015. ‘The Library at the East Indian Buddhist Monastery of Vikramaśīla: An Attempt to 
Identify Its Himalayan Remains’, Manuscript Cultures 8: 3–24.
Demiéville, P. 1952. Le Concile de Lhasa: Une controverse sur le quiétisme entre bouddhistes de l’Inde et 
de la Chine au VIIIe siècle de l’ère chrétienne. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan. 1977. Naskah Lama Daerah Jawa Timur–Kunjara Karnna . 
Jakarta: Proyek Pengembangan Media Kebudayaan.
Desai, D. 1972–73. ‘Some Rare Sculptures Depicting Offering of Hair and Maithuna’, Journal of the Indian 
Society of Oriental Art 5: 86–90.
———2013. Art and Icon: Essays on Early Indian Art . New Delhi: Aryan Books International/Asoka 
Mission.
Deshpande, M.N. 1986. The caves of Panāle-Kājhī (Ancient Praṇālaka), An art historical study of transi -
tion from Hīnayāna, Tantric Vajrayāna to Nāth Sampradāya [Third to fourteenth century A.D.]. (Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India 84). New Delhi: Archaeological Survey of India.
bibliography.indd   408 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 423] ---
Bibliography409
———1989. ‘Praṇālaka (Panāle-Kājhī) Caves: A Hinayāna and Tāntric Vajrayāna Centre with Nātha 
Sampradāya Caves’, in Buddhist Iconography , pp. 69–73. New Delhi: Tibet House.
Des Rotours, R. 1947. Traité des Fonctionnaires et Traité de L’armée . Leyde: E.J. Brill.
Devahuti, D. 1970. Harsha: A Political Study . Delhi: Oxford University Press.
———2001. The Unknown Hsüan-Tsang . Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Dezsö, C. 2014. ‘Inspired Poetry—Śāntākaragupta’s Play on the Legend of Prince Sudhana and the 
kinnarī’ , Indo-Iranian Journal 57: 73–104.
Dikshit , K.N. 1938. Excavations at Paharpur (Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India 55). Delhi: 
Manager of Publications.
Dikshit, M. 1955. ‘Some Buddhist Bronzes from Sirpur, Madhya Pradesh’, Bulletin of the Prince of Wales 
Museum  5: 10–11.
Diskul, M.C.S. 1980. The Art of Śrīvijaya. Kuala Lumpur/Oxford/New York/Melbourne: Oxford Uni -
versity Press.
Djafar, H. 2010. Kompleks Percandian Batujaya : Rekonstruksi Sejarah Kebudayaan Daerah Pantai Utara 
Jawa Barat . Bandung: Penerbit Kiblat Buku Utama, EFEO, Puslitarkenas, KITLV. 
Dohanian, D. 1977. The Mahāyāna Buddhist Sculpture of Ceylon . New York: Garland House.
———1983. ‘Sinhalese sculptures in the Pallava style’, Archives of Asian Art , 36: 6–21.
Donaldson, T. 1975. ‘Propitious-Apotropaic Eroticism in the Art of Orissa’, Artibus Asiae  37/1–2: 75–100.
———1976. ‘Doorframes of the Earliest Odishan Temples’, Artibus Asiae  38/2–3: 189–218.
———1995. ‘Probable Textual Resources for the Buddhist Sculptural Mandalas of Orissa’, East and 
West  45/1: 173–204.
———2001. Iconography of the Buddhist Sculpture of Orissa . New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre 
for the Arts/Abhinav Publications.
Doniger O’Flaherty, W. 1973. Asceticism and Eroticism in the Mythology of Śiva . New York: Oxford 
University Press.
———1976. The Origins of Evil in Hindu Mythology . Berkeley: University of California. 
Dorjee, P. 1996. Stūpa and Its Technology: A Tibeto-Buddhist Perspective . New Delhi: Indira Gandhi 
National Centre for the Arts/Motilal Banarsidass.
Dumarçay, J. 1986a. ‘Candi Sewu dan Arsitektur Bangunan Agama Budha di Jawa Tengah’, in J. Miksic 
(ed.), ‘Early Buddhist Temples of Java’ , in Indonesian Heritage Series Vol. 1: Ancient History. 
Singapore: Archipelago Press.
———1986b. The Temples of Java . Singapore/New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———1989. ‘Architectural Composition in Java from Eighth to Fourteenth Centuries’, The Journal of 
the Siam Society 77: 21–27. 
Duquenne, R. 1988. ‘Gaṇapati Rituals in Chinese’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 77: 321–54.
Dutt, S.N. 1958. ‘Schools and Sects of Buddhism’, The Cultural heritage of India ; Vol. 1 (2nd edition). 
Calcutta: Ramakrishna Missions Institute of Culture. 
———1962. Buddhist Monks and Monasteries of India; Their History and their Contribution to Indian 
Culture . London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd. 
Dvivedī, V. and Ṭ. Śāśanī. 1989. ‘Lupta Bauddha-vacana Saṃgraha (Lost Buddha-Vacana Saṃgraha)’, 
Dhiḥ  8: 35–43. 
Eastman, K.W. 1983. ‘Mah āyo ga Texts at Tun-huang’, Bulletin of the Institute of Buddhist Cultural Studies 
22: 42–59. 
Edwards McKinnon, E. 1984. Kota Cina: Its Context and Meaning in the Trade of Southeast Asia in the 
Twelfth to Fourteenth Centuries. Ph.D. dissertation, Cornell University.
Eimer, H. 1979 . Rnam Thar Rgyas Pa, Materialien zu einer Biographie des Ati śa (Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna), 1. 
Teil: Einführung, Inhaltsverzeichnis, Namensglossar . Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
Einoo, S. 2009. ‘From kāma s to siddhi s—Tendencies in the Development of Ritual towards Tantrism’, 
bibliography.indd   409 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 424] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia410
in S. Einoo (ed.), Genesis and Development of Tantrism , pp.17–39. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental 
Culture, University of Tokyo.
Elliot, C. 1921. Hinduism and Buddhism: An Historical Sketch (3 vols). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Elverskog, J. 2006. Our Great Qing: The Mongols, Buddhism and the State in Late Imperial China. Hon -
olulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Emigh, J. 1996. Masked Performance: The Play of Self and Other in Ritual and Theatre . Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Ernawati, W. 2007. ‘The Lombok Treasure’, in P. ter Keurs (ed.), Colonial Collections Revisited,  pp. 195–96. 
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
van Erp, T. 1917. ‘Eenige mededeelingen betreffende de beelden en fragmenten van Boroboedoer in 1896 
geschonken aan Z. M. den Koning van Siam’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-en Volkenkunde van 
Nederlandsch-Indie  73: 285–310.
Estève, J. 2009. Étude critique des phénomènes de syncrétisme religieux dans le Cambodge angkorien . 
PhD Dissertation, École Pratique des Hautes É tudes.
Fabri, C. 1974. History of the Art of Odisha . New Delhi: Orient Longman, Ltd.
Ferlus, M. 2010. ‘Localisation, identité, et origine du Javā de Jayavarman II’, Aséanie  26: 65–82.
Ferrari, A. 1958. mKhyen brtse’s Guide to the Holy Places of Central Tibet. Roma:  Istituto Italiano per il 
Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
Fic, V.M. 2003. From Majapahit and Sukuh to Megawati Sukarnoputri: Continuity and Change in Plu-
ralism of Religion, Culture and Politics of Indonesia from the XV to the XXI Century. New Delhi: Abhinav Publications. 
Filliozat, J. 1969. ‘Emigration of Indian Buddhists to Indo-China c. A.D. 1200’, in K.S. Lal (ed.), Studies 
in Asian History: proceedings of the Asian History Congress 1961 , pp. 45–48 . New Delhi: Asia 
Publishing House.
Flood, G. 2006. The Tantric Body . The Secret Tradition of Hindu Religion. London/New York: IB Tauris.
Fontein, J. 1967. Pilgrimage of Sudhana . The Hague: Mouton & Co.
———1981. ‘Notes on the Jātakas  and Avadānas  of Barabuḍur’, in L. Gomez and H.W. Woodward 
(eds.), Barabudur: History and Significance of a Buddhist Monument , pp. 86–108. Berkeley: Asian 
Humanities Press. 
———1990. ‘The Sculpture of Indonesia’, in J. Fontein (ed.), The Sculpture of Indonesia, pp. 113–300. 
Washington: National Gallery of Art. 
Forte, A. 1976. Political Propaganda and Ideology in China at the End of the Seventh Century: Inquiry into 
the Nature, Authors and Functions of the Tunhuang Document S. 6502; Followed by an Annotated Translation. Napoli: Istituto Universitario Orientale.
———2006. ‘Brief notes on the Kashmiri Text of the Dharani Sutra of Avalokitesvara of the Unfailing 
Rope  Introduced to China by Manicintana (d. 721)’, in Gu Chengmei (ed.), Buddhism and Buddhist 
Art of the Tang, pp. 13–28. Xinzhu , Taiwan: Chuefeng.
Foucher, A. 1900–5. Étude sur l’Iconographie Bouddhique de l’Inde. 2 vols. Paris: Ernest Leroux. Francis, M. 2013. ‘North Indian Scripts & South Indian Kings’. Article printed from the research blog 
Regionalism and Cosmopolitanism: South India. [Last accessed Feruary 2016 at: http://rcsi.hy -
potheses.org/288]
Franke, H. 1981. ‘Tibetans in Yüan China’, in J.D. Langlois, Jr. (ed.), China under Mongol Rule, pp. 
296–328. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Frasch , T. 1998. ‘A Buddhist Network in the Bay of Bengal: Relations between Bodhgaya, Burma and Sri 
lanka, c. 300-1300’, in C . Guillot et al. (eds.), From the Mediterranean to the China Sea: Miscella -
neous Notes , pp. 69–92. Wiesbaden: Harrassovitz Verlag.
——— 2000a. ‘Der Buddhismus im Jahre 1000’, in H. Kulke (ed.), Periplus, Jahrbuch für außereuropäische 
Geschichte, Band 10—Asien im Jahre 1000 , pp. 56–72. Berlin, etc.: LIT Verlag.
bibliography.indd   410 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 425] ---
Bibliography411
———2000b. ’A Remark on the Mahabodhi Temples at Pagan’, in W. Lobo and S. Reimann (eds.), 
Southeast Asian Archaeology 1998, Proceedings of the 7th International Conference of the European 
Associations of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 31 August–4 September 1998 , pp. 41–49. 
Berlin: Centre for South-East Asian Studies, University of Hull/Ethnologisches Museum, Staatliche 
Museen zu Berlin, Stiftung Preußischer Kulturbesitz.
Fremerman, S. 2006. Divine Impersonations: Nyoirin Kannon in Medieval Japan . PhD dissertation, 
Stanford University.
Furui, Ryosuke. 2008. ‘A New Copper Plate Inscription of Gopala II’, South Asian Studies 24/1: 69–75.
———2011. ‘Indian Museum Copper Plate Inscription of Dharmapala, Year 26: Tentative Reading and 
Study’, South Asian Studies 27/2: 145–56.
———2013. ‘Brāhmaṇas in Early Medieval Bengal: Construction of their Identity, Networks and Au -
thority’, Indian Historical Review 40/2: 223–48.
Gail, A. J. 1999. ‘On the Mandalic Structure of the Paharpur Temple’, The Journal of Bengal Art 4: 131–39.
Gardiner, D. 2000. ‘The consecration of the monastic compound at Mount Koya by Kukai’, in D.G. White 
(ed.), Tantra in Practice , pp. 119–30. Princeton: Princeton University Press.  
Geiger, W. 1953. Cūlavamsa: Being the More Recent Part of the Mahāvaṃsa, Part I . (tr. C. Mabel Rickmers). 
Colombo: Ceylong Government Information Department.
Getty, A. 1936. Gaṇeśa: A monograph on the elephant-faced God . New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Gharib, B. 1995. Sogdian Dictionary (Sogdian-Persian-English) . Tehran: Fahrangan Publications.
Ghosh, D. 1933. ‘Relation between the Buddha Images of Orissa and Java’, The Modern Review 120/2: 500–4.
Ghosh, M . 1980. Development of Buddhist Iconography in Eastern India: A Study of Tārā, Prajñās of Five 
Tathāgatas and Bhṛikuṭī. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers.
Ghosh, R. 2006–7. ‘Archaeological Investigation in the Districts of Dakshin Dinajpur and Uttar Dinajpur, 
West Bengal: A Report’, Journal of Bengal Art 11–12: 323–59.
———2008–9, ‘Second Report of Archaeological Investigation in Two Dinajpur District (Dakshin and 
Uttar) of West Bengal’, Journal of Bengal Art 13–14: 119–42.
———2012. ‘Towards understanding the Buddhist Environment in two Brāhmanical Settlement Zones 
from some unpublished Buddhist Antiquities of erstwhile West Dinajpur, West Bengal’, Journal of Bengal Art 17: 17–38.
Ghosh , S. 2008–09. ‘Nature of Royal Patronage in South-Eastern Bengal: 507 AD–1250 AD’, Journal of 
Bengal Art 13–14: 109–18.
Giebel, R.W. 1995. ‘The Chin-Kang-Ting Ching Yu-Ch’ieh Shih-Pa-Hui Chih-Kuei : An Annoted Translation’, 
Naritasan Bukkyo Kenkyujo Kiyo (Journal of Naritasan Institute for Buddhist Studies) 18: 107–201.
———2001. Two Esoteric Sutras: The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra. The Susiddhikara Sutra. Translated from 
the Chinese (Taishō Volume 18, Numbers 865, 893) . BDK English Tripiṭaka 29-II, 30-II. Berkeley: 
Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research.
———2005. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sutra. Translated from the Chinese (Taishō Volume 18, Number 
848). Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. 
———2011.  ‘Taishō Volumes 18–21’, in C.D. Orzech, H.H. Sørensen and R.K. Payne (eds.), Esoteric 
Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia , pp. 19–27. Leiden: Brill.
——— 2012. ‘Notes on Some Sanskrit Texts Brought Back to Japan by Kūkai’, Pacific World  (Third Series) 
14: 187–230. 
Gillet, V. 2013. ‘Pallavas and Buddhism: Interactions and Influences’, in D. Dayalan (ed.), Śivaśrī: Per -
spectives in Indian Archaeology, Art and Culture , pp. 105–35. New Delhi: Agam Kala Prakashan.
Gimello, R. 1997. ‘Ch’eng-kuan’s Meditations on the ‘Three Holy Ones’’’, in S. Kamata (ed.), Kegon gaku 
ronsh ū, pp. 131–213. Tokyo: Daizo Shuppan.
Gippert, J. 2004. ‘A Glimpse into the Buddhist Past of the Maldives; I: An Early Prakrit Inscription’, 
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 48: 81–109.
bibliography.indd   411 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 426] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia412
———2 005. ‘Sanskrit as a Medium of Maldivian Buddhism’, in L. Göhler (ed.), Indische Kultur im 
Kontext: Rituale, Texte und Ideen aus Indien und der Welt; Festschrift f ür K laus Mylius , pp. 213–20. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Goble, G.C. 2012. Chinese Esoteric Buddhism: Amoghavajra and the ruling elite . PhD diss., Indiana 
University. 
———2013. ‘The legendary siege of Anxi: Myth, history, and truth in Chinese Buddhism’, Pacific World: 
Journal of the Instutute of Buddhist Studies ( Third series) 15: 1–32.  
Go
dakumbura, C.E. 1943. ‘References to Buddhist Sanskrit writers in Sinhalese literature’, University 
of Ceylon Review 1: 87–93 
Goepper, R. 1993. Aizen-myōō, the Esoteric King of Lust: An iconographic study . Zurich: Artibus Asiae.
Gomez, L.O. 1995. ‘A Mahāyāna Liturgy’, in D.S. Lopez (ed.), Buddhism in Practice, pp .183–96. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Gomez, L.O and H.W. Woodward. 1981. Barabudur: History and significance of a Buddhist monument . 
Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
Gonda, J. 1971. ‘Balinese Hymns addressed to god Ākāśa’, in S. Ganesan (ed.), K.A. Nilakanta Sastri 
Felicitations Volume , pp. 404–15. Madras: Professor Nilakanta Sastri Felicitation Committee.
———1976. ‘Old Javanese Literature’, in L.F. Brakel et al. (eds.), Handbuch der Orientalistik: Literaturen, 
Abschn. 1 , pp. 187–245. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Goris, R. 1926. Bijdrage tot de Kennis der Oud-Javaansche en Balineesche Theologie . Leiden: A. Vros. 
———1954. Prasasti Bali: Inscripties vóór Anak Wungçu . 2 vols. Bandung: Masa Baru.
Goudriaan, T. 1978. Māyā Divine and Human . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
———1981. ‘Hindu Tantric Literature in Sanskrit’, in T. Goudriaan and S. Gupta (eds.), Hindu Tantric 
and Śākta Literature , pp. 1–62. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
———1985. The Vīṇāśikhatantra: A Śaiva Tantra of the Left Current . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Goudriaan, T. and C. Hooykaas. 1971. Stuti and Stava (Bauddha, Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava) of Balinese Bauddha 
Brahmans . Amsterdam/London: North Holland Publishing Company.
Graff, D.A. 2000. ‘The Sword and the Brush: Career Patterns and Military Specialisation in the Tang 
Dynasty’, War and Society 18/2: 9–21.
Gray, D.B. 2001. On supreme Bliss: A Study of the History and Interpretation of the Cakrasamvara Tantra . 
PhD dissertation, Columbia University.
———2005a. ‘Eating the Heart of the Brahmin: Representations of Alterity and the Formation of Identity 
in Tantric Buddhist Discourse’, History of Religions 45: 45–69.
———2005b. ‘Disclosing the Empty Secret: Textuality and Embodiment in the Cakrasamvara Tantra’, 
Numen  52/4: 417–44.
———2007. The Cakrasamvara tantra (The discourse of Śrī Heruka): A study and annotated translation . 
New York: Columbia University Press.
———2009. ‘On the Very Idea of a Tantric Canon: Myth, Politics, and the Formation of the Bka’ ’gyur’, 
Journal of the International Association of Tibetan Studies 5: 1–37.
Green, P.S.E. 2013. ‘Two internal pediment scenes from Banteay Chhmar’, Udaya  11: 99–139.
———2014. ‘The Many Faces of Loke śva
ra: Tantric Connections in Cambodia and Campā between the 
Tenth and Thirteenth Centuries’,  H
istory of Religions 54/1: 69–93.
Griffiths, A. 2011a. ‘Imagine Laṅkapura at Prambanan’, in A. Acri, H. Creese, and A. Griffiths (eds.), 
From Laṅkā eastwards: The Rāmāyaṇa in the literature and visual arts of Indonesia, pp. 133–48. 
Leiden: KITLV Press.
———2011b ‘Inscriptions of Sumatra: Further data on the epigraphy of the Musi and Batang Hari rivers 
basins’,  Archipel  81: 139–75.
———2012 ‘Inscriptions of Sumatra II: Short epigraphs in Old Javanese’, Wacana  14/2: 197–214. 
———2013. ‘The Problem of the Ancient Name Java and the Role of Satyavarman in Southeast Asian 
bibliography.indd   412 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 427] ---
Bibliography413
International Relations Around the Turn of the Ninth Century CE’, Archipel  85: 43–81.
———2014a. ‘Written Traces of the Buddhist Past: Mantras and Dhāraṇīs in Indonesian Inscriptions’, 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 77: 137–94.
———2014b. ‘The ‘‘greatly ferocious’’ spell ( Mahāraudra-nāma-hṛdaya ): A dh āraṇī i nscribed on a lead-
bronze foil unearthed near Borobudur’, in K. Tropper (ed.), Epigraphic Evidence in the Pre-Modern 
Buddhist World: Proceedings of the Eponymous Conference Held in Vienna, pp.  1–36. Vienna: 
Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien.
———2014c. ‘Inscriptions of Sumatra, III: The Padang Lawas Corpus studied along with inscriptions 
from Sorik Merapi (North Sumatra) and Maura Takus (Riau)’, in D. Perret (ed.), History of Padang 
Lawas, North Sumatra. II: Societies of Padang Lawas (9th c.–13th c.) , pp. 211–62. Paris: Association 
Archipel.
Griffiths, A., N. Revire and R. Sanyal. 2013. ‘An Inscribed Bronze Sculpture of a Buddha in bhadr āsan
a 
at Museum Ranggawarsita in Semarang (Central Java, Indonesia)’, Artibus Asiae  68: 3–26.
Groeneveldt, W. 1879. Note appended to: G. du Rij van Beest Holle, ‘Beschrijving van de Hindoe 
oudheden te Moeara Takoes, XII Kotta Kampar’, Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde  25: 219.
———1960. Historical Notes on Indonesia & Malaya: Compiled from Chinese Sources . Jakarta: Bhratara.
Van Gulik, B.H. 1980. Siddham: An essay on the history of Sanskrit studies in China and Japan . New 
Delhi: Sharada Rani.
Gupta, S. 2005. ‘The Bay of Bengal interaction sphere (1000 BC–AD 500)’, Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific 
Prehistory Association  25: 21–30.
———2006. ‘Early Indian Ocean in the Context of Indian Relationship with Southeast Asia’, in G.C. 
Pande (ed.), History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization; Volume 3, Part I: 
India’s Interaction with Southeast Asia , pp. 111–42. New Delhi: Centre for Studies in Civilizations.
Guy, J. 1991. ‘The Mahābodhi Temple: Pigrim Souvenirs of Buddhist India’, The Burlington Magazine 
133/1059 (June): 356–67.
———1993–94. ‘The Lost Temples of Nagapattinam and Quanzhou: A Study in Sino-Indian Relations’, 
Journal of the Institute of Silk Road Studies 3: 291–301
———2001. ‘Tamil Merchant Guilds and the Quanzhou Trade’, in A. Schottenhammer (ed.), The Em -
porium of the World: Maritime Quanzhou, 1000–1400 , pp. 283–308. Leiden: Brill.
——— 2004. ‘South Indian Buddhism and its Southeast Asian Legacy’, in A. Pande and P.P. Dhar ( eds.) , 
Cultural Interface of India with Asia, Religion, Art and Architecture , pp. 155–75. New Delhi: D.K. 
Printworld/National Museum Institute.
———2014. Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asi a. New York: The Metro -
politan Museum of Art.
Hall, D.G.E. 1955. ‘China and South-East Asia—yesterday and today. Part I’, Far Eastern Economic Review  
18/25 (June 23): 784–85. [Reprinted (with Part II) as ‘China and South-East Asia’ in The University 
of Hong Kong History Society Annual , 1960, pp. 6–11).
Hall, K.R. 2010. ‘Indonesia’s Evolving International Relationships in the Ninth to Early Eleventh Centuries: 
Evidence from Contemporary Shipwrecks and Epigraphy’, Indonesia  90: 15–45.
———2011. History of Early Southeast Asia: Maritime Trade and Societal Development, 100–1500. Lanham, 
Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield.
Hanneder, J. 2008. ‘Candradāsa’s Tārāstuti ’, Essays and Studies on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature, pp. 
171–85. Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag. 
Haque, E. and A.J. Gail (eds.). 2008. Sculptures in Bangladesh: An Inventory of Select Hindu, Buddhist and 
Jain Stone and Bronze Images in Museums and Collections of Bangladesh (up to the 13th Century) . 
Dhaka: The International Centre for Study of Bengal Art.
Haque, S. and M.M. Haque. 2004. ‘Understanding the Paharpur Temple Architecture in New Perspective’, 
bibliography.indd   413 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 428] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia414
Proceedings of the International Seminar at Dhaka , 20–24th March, 2004.  Dhaka: The Department 
of Archaeology.
Haryono, T. 1996. ‘A bimetallic statue of Shiva recently found in Central Java’, in MJ. Klokke (ed.), 
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference of the European Association of South East Asian 
Archaeologists , Leiden, 2–6 September  1996, pp. 231–36. Hull: Centre for South-East Asian Studies, 
University of Hull.
Hase, H. 長谷寶秀 . 1976. Daishi go-shōrai bonji shongon shū 大師御請来梵字真言集 . Tokyo: Kokusho 
Kankōkai 国書刊行会 . [First published in 1938 in two volumes (Kyoto: Kyōto Senmon Gakkō 京
都專門學校 ) and later reprinted, first in one volume in 1976 (Tokyo: Kokusho Kankōkai 国書刊
行会 ) and then in 1997 as volumes 4 and 5 of Shuchiin Daigaku Mikkyō Shiryō Kenkyūjo 種智院
大学密教資料研究所 , ed., Hase Hōshū zenshū 長谷寶秀全集  (Kyoto: Hōzōkan).]
Hatta, Y. 八田幸雄 . 2002a. Gobu Shinkan no kenkyū . Kyoto: Hōzōkan. [Reprint of 1981 edition.]
———2002b. Taizō Zuzō no kenkyū . Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
Hawking, S. 1998. A Brief History of Time . New York: Bantam.
Heissig, W. 1980. The Religions of Mongolia (Translated from the German edition by G. Samuel). London/ 
Henley: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Herrmann-Pfandt,  A 2006–7, ‘Cakrasaṃvara Iconography and Buddhist Religious Politics in Medieval 
Bengal’,  Journal of Bengal Art 11–12: 9–20.
Hermann-Pfandt, A. 2008. ‘Maṇḍala elements in tantric Buddhist architecture in India, Tibet and Indo -
nesia’, in. C. Mani (ed.),  The Heritage of Nalanda , pp. 52–67. New Delhi: Aryan Book International. 
Hidayan, T. and Y. Hendra. 2006. Peninggalan Masa Klasik di Sumatera Barat. Batusangkar: Balai 
Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala Batusangkar, Wilayah Kerja Provinsi Sumatera Barat, Riau 
dan Kepulauan Riau.
Hirakawa, Akira. 1977. Index to the Abhidharmakośabhāṣya (Taisho Edition); Part two: Chinese-Sanskrit . 
Tokyo: Daizo Shuppan Kabushikikaisha.
———1997. Buddhist Chinese-Sanskrit Dictionary . Tokyo: The Reiyukai.
Hock, N. 1987. Buddhist ideology and the sculpture of Ratnagiri, seventh through thirteenth centuries. 
PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.
Hodge, S. 1988. ‘The Path of the Cultivation of Yoga’, The Middle Way 63/1 (May): 33–37.
  
 ——
—1992. ‘Considerations on the Dating and Geographical Origins of the Mah āvai
rocan ābhi
saṃbo-
dhi-
sūtr
a’, in T. Skorupski and U. Pagel (eds.), The Buddhist Forum, Vol. 3, pp. 57–83. New Delhi: 
Heritage Publishers.
———2003. The Mahā-Vairocana-Abhisaṃbodhi Tantra , with Buddhaguhya’s commentary . New York: 
RoutledgeCurzon. 
Hodiwala, S.H. 1939. Studies in Indo-Muslim History , Vol. 1. Bombay: S.H. Hodiwala.
Hoffman, L.E. 1992. ‘American Psychologists and Wartime Research on Germany, 1941–1945’, American 
Psychologist  47/2 (February): 264–73.
Holt, J. 1991. Buddha in the Crown: Avalokiteśvara in the Buddhist Traditions of Sri Laṅkā . Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Hooykaas, C. 1962. ‘Śaiva Siddhānta in Java and Bali, some remarks on its recent study’, Bijdragen tot 
de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 118: 309–27.
———1973. Balinese Bauddha Brahmans . Amsterdam: North-Holland Pub. Co.
———1974. Cosmogony and Creation in Balinese Tradition . The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Horiuchi, K. 堀内寬仁 . 1983. Bon-Zō-Kan taishō shoe Kongōchōgyō no kenkyū : Bonpon kōtei hen (ue) . 
Kōyachō: Mikkyō Bunka Kenkyūjo. 
Howard, A.F. 1996. ‘Buddhist Monument of Yunnan: Eclectic Art of a Frontier Kingdom’, in M.K. Hearn 
and J.G. Smith (eds.), Papers prepared for an international symposium organized by The Metro -
politan Museum of Art in conjunction with the exhibition Splendors of Imperial China: Treasures 
bibliography.indd   414 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 429] ---
Bibliography415
from the National Palace Museum, Taipei , pp. 231–45. New York: Department of Asian Art, The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Hsu, C.A . 2008. ‘Sieben-Juwelen’ und Stifter Reliefs in Bodh-Gayā, Bihar. Taipei: Shen-cho Lai, Research 
Center for East-West Philosophy and Hermeneutics. [PhD Dissertation, Universität Heidelberg, 
2007.]
Hucker, C.O. 1985. A Dictionary of Official Titles in Imperial China . Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Hudson, D.D. 2008. The body of God: An emperor’s palace for Krishna in eighth-century Kanchipuram . 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Humphrey, C. and H. Ujeed. 2013. A Monastery in Time: The Making of Mongolian Buddhism . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Hunter, H. 2004. ‘Faquan’s Transmission of the Susiddhi  Category of the Esoteric Buddhist Teachings’, 
Journal of the International College for Advanced Buddhist Studies 8: 43–93. 
Hunter, T.M. 2007. ‘ The Body of the King: Reappraising Singhasari Period Syncretism’, Journal of 
Southeast Asian Studies 38/1: 27–53.
———2000. ‘The Aridharma Reliefs of Candi Jago’, in Lokesh Chandra (ed.), Society and Culture of 
Southeast Asia—Continuities and Changes , pp. 69–102. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan. 
Huntington, J.C., R.A.F. Thurman, and D. Bangdel. 2003. The Circle of Bliss, Buddhist meditational Art . 
Chicago/Columbus: Serindia Publications/Columbus Museum of Art.
Huntington, S. 1984. The ‘Pala-Sena’ Schools of Sculpture . Leiden: E.J. Brill.
———(With contributions by John C. Huntington). 1985. The art of ancient India; Buddhist, Hindu, 
Jain. New York/Tokyo: Weatherhill.
Huntington, S.L. and J.C. Huntington. 1989 . ‘Leaves from the Bodhi  Tree: The Art of Pāla India (8th–12th 
centuries) and Its International Legacy’, Orientations  20/10: 26–46.
———1990. Leaves from the Bodhi Tree: The Art of Pala India (8th–12th centuries) and Its International 
Legacy . Seattle/London: The Dayton Art Institute/University of Washington Press.
Husain, A.B.M. et al. (eds.). 1997. Mainamati-Devaparvata . Dhaka: Asiatic Society of Bangladesh.
Ijzerman, J.W. 1893. ‘Beschrijving van de Boeddhistische bouwwerken te Moeara Takoes’, Tijdschrift  
voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde  35: 48–74.
Im
am, A. 2000. Excavations at Mainamati: An  Exploratory Study. Dhaka, Bangladesh: International 
Centre for Study of Bengal Art. 
———2002. ‘Samataùa, Mainamati: Some Observations’, in G. Sengupta and S. Panja (eds.), Archaeology 
of Eastern India: New perspectives , pp. 613–23. Kolkata: Centre for Archaeological Studies and 
Training, Eastern India. 
Indrapala, K. 2005. The evolution of an ethnic identity: The Tamils in Sri Lanka c. 300 BCE to c. 1200 CE . 
Sydney: South Asian Studies Centre.
Isaacson, H. and F. Sferra (eds.). 2014. The Sekanirdeśa of Maitreyanātha (Advayavajra) with the 
Sekanirdeśapañjikā of Rāmapāla. Critical Edition of the Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts with 
English Translation and Reproductions of the MSS . Napoli: Università degli Studi di Napoli 
‘L’Orientale’.
Ishii, Kazuko. 1989. ‘Sang Hyang Kamahāyānikan ni miru ko Jawa no Mikkyō’ (Old Javanese Esoteric 
Buddhism as Seen in the Sang Hyang Kamahāyānikan), Tōnan Ajia Kenkyū 27/1 (June): 55–70.
———1992. ‘The Correlation of Verses of the Sang Hyang Kamahāyānan Mantranaya with Vajrabodhi’s 
Jāpa-sūtra’, Area and Culture Studies 44: 225–36.
Ito, G. 2005. チベット訳密教経典にみられる王敬愛法の梵文音写に関する報告 金剛手灌頂タントラ  (Report 
on Sanskrit transliterations of the king attraction ritual in Tibetan tantric texts from the Vidyot -
tama ), Journal of Chisan studies 54: 261–86.
Itō, S. 1985. ‘A Tentative Identification of Bodhisattva Images in Chandi Plaosan’, in Special Report for SPAFA 
Consultative Workshop on Archaelogical and Environmental Studies on Srivijaya (I-W2b): 263–71.
bibliography.indd   415 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 430] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia416
Iwamoto, Y. 1981. ‘The Śailendra Dynasty and Chandi Borobudur’, in Proceedings of the International 
Symposium on Chandi Borobudur, pp. 83–88. Tokyo: Executive Committee for the International 
Symposium on Chandi Borobudur.
Iyanaga, N.  19 85. ‘Récits de la soumission de Maheśvara par Trailokyavijaya d’après les sources chinoises 
et japonaises’, in M. Strickmann (ed.), Tantric and Taoist studies in honour of R.A. Stein, Vol. 3, pp. 633–745. Bruxelles: Institut Beige des Hautes Études Chinoises.
Iyer, A. 1998. Prambanan: Sculpture and dance in ancient Java; A study in dance iconography . Bangkok: 
White Lotus.
Jackson, D.P. 1990. Two Biographies of Śākyaśrībhadra: The Eulogy by Khro-phu Lo-tsā-ba and its 
‘Commentary’ by bSod-nams-dpal-bzag-po, Texts and Variants from Two Rare Exemplars Preserved 
in the Bihar Research Society, Patna . Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.
Jackson,  R.R. 2004. Tantric Treasures, Three Collections of Mystical Verse from Buddhist India , Oxford/
New York: Oxford University Press.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, M. 2002. The Malay Peninsula: Crossroads of the Maritime Silk-Road (100 BC–1300 
AD). Leiden: Brill. 
Jagchid, S. 1979. ‘The Mongol Khans and Chinese Buddhism and Taoism’, Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies 2/1: 7–28.
———1988. ‘Why the Mongolian Khans adopted Tibetan Buddhism as their faith’, in S. Jagchid (ed.), 
Essays in Mongolian Studies. Provo, Utah: David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies, Brigham Young University. [Reprint; originally published in 1970 in Proceedings of the 3d East Asian Altaistic Conference , pp. 108–28. Taipei: National Taiwan University.]
Jagchid, S. and P. Hyer. 1979. Mongolia’s Culture and Society . Boulder, Colorado: Westview.
Jaini, P.S. 1966. ‘The Story of Sudhana and Manoharā: An Analysis of the Texts and the Borobudur 
Reliefs’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 29: 532–58.
Jakl, J. 2013. ‘Warriors Killed, Sliced as Cucumber: Food Symbolism in the Martial Arts Scenes of Old 
Javanese Kakawin s’, Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre Working Paper 13.
Jamspal, L., et al. (trs.). 2004. The Universal Vehicle Discourse Literature (Mahāyānasūtrālaṁkāra). New 
York: American Institute of Buddhist Studies. 
Jayaswal, K.P. 1934. An Imperial History of India in a Sanskrit Text [c. 700 B.C.–c. 770 A.D.]; With a Special 
Commentary on Later Gupta Period. With the Sanskrit Text Revised by Ven. Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana . 
Lahore: Motilal Banarsi Dass. 
Jones, J.J. 1952. The Mahāvastu , Vol. 2. London: Luzac & Co.
Jordaan, R.E. 1996. In Praise of Prambanan; Dutch essays on the Loro Jonggrang temple complex . Leiden: 
KITLV Press
———1997. ‘Tārā and Nyai Lara Kidul: Images of the divine feminine in Java’, Asian Folklore Studies 56/2: 
285–312.
———1998. ‘The Tārā temple of Kalasan in Central Java’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 
85: 163–83.
———1999a. ‘The Śailendras, the Status of the Kşatriya Theory, and the Development of the Hindu-Ja -
vanese Temple Architecture’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 155: 210–43
———1999b.   The Śai lendras in Central Javanese history . Yogyakarta: Penerbitan Universitas Sanata 
Dharma. 
———2006. ‘Why the Śailendras were not a Javanese dynasty’, Indonesia and the Malay World 34/98: 3–22. 
———2007. ‘Bělahan and the division of Airlangga’s realm’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volken-
kunde , 163: 326–55.
Jordaan, R. and B. Colless. 2004. ‘The Ratu Boko mantra and the Sailendras’, Berkala Arkeologi 24/1: 56–65. 
———2009. The Mahārāja of the Isles: The Śailendras and the Problem of Śrīvijaya . Leiden: Department 
of Languages and Cultures of Southeast Asia and Oceania.
bibliography.indd   416 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 431] ---
Bibliography417
Joshi, L.M. 1977. Studies in the Buddhistic Culture of India during the Seventh and Eighth Centuries A.D. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Julien, S. 1858. Mémoires Sur les Contrées Occidentales , Vol. 2. Paris: L’Imprimerie imp ériale. 
Juynboll, H.H. 1908. ‘Nieuwe bijdrage tot de kennis van het Mahâyânisme of Java’ , Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 60: 56–61.
Kamata, S. 鎌田茂雄  et al. (eds.) 1998. Daizōkyō zenkaisetsu daijiten . Tokyo: Yūzankaku Shuppan. 
Kamikawa, M. 1990. ‘Accession Rituals and Buddhism in Medieval Japan’, Japanese Journal of Religious 
Studies , 17/2–3: 243–80.
Kandahjaya, H. 2004. A study on the origin and significance of Borobudur . PhD dissertation, University 
of California, Berkeley.
———2009. ‘The Lord of All Virtues’, Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies (Third 
Series) 11: 1–25.
———2010. ‘The origins of the 88 Buddhas Repentance’. Paper presented at the AAR Annual Meeting 
in Atlanta, October 30–November 1, 2010.
———2014. ‘Revisiting Ādi Buddha and Tantric Doxography’, in R. Banerjee Sarkar et al. (eds.), 
Souvenir of Seventh International Alexander Csoma de Kőrös Symposium on Buddhist Tran -
screations in Tibetan Literature and Art , pp.  190–218. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for the Arts.
Kano, K. 2016. ‘The Transmission of Sanskrit Manuscripts from India and Tibet: The Case of a Manuscript 
Collection in the Possession of Atiśa Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna (980–1054)’, in C. meinert (ed.), Transfer 
of Buddhism along Central Asian Networks (7th to 13th Centuries) , pp. 82–117.
Kapstein, M.T. 2001. Reason’s Traces, Identity and Interpretation in Indian & Tibetan Buddhist Thought . 
Boston: Wisdom Publications. 
Kapstein, M.T. and S. van Schaik. 2010. Esoteric Buddhism at Dunhuang: Rites and Teachings for this 
Life and Beyond. Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Karandikar, M.A. and S. Karandikar (eds.). 1953. The Nāgānanda of Śrīharṣa . Bombay: Joshi.
Karashima, N. and Y. Subbarayalu. 2009. ‘Ancient and medieval Tamil Inscriptions Relating to Southeast 
Asia and China’, in H. Kulke, K. Kesavapany and V. Sakhuja (eds.), Nagapattinam to Suvarna -
dwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia , pp. 271–92. Singapore: ISEAS 
Publishing.
Kats, J. 1910. Sang hyang Kamahâyânikan : Oud-Javaansche tekst , met inleiding , vertaling en aanteeke -
ningen . ’s-Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Kauz, R. 2010. ‘Preface’, in R. Kauz (ed.), Aspects of the Maritime Silk Road: From the Persian Gulf to the 
East China Sea , pp. 1–2. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Kern, H. 1910a. ‘Geschiedkundige gegevens in ’t gedicht Nāgarakrĕtāgama’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- 
en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 63: 1–32.
———1910b. ‘De Sanskrit-inscriptie van ’t Mahākṣobhya-beeld te Simpang’, Tijdschrift voor Indische 
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 52: 99–108.
Kieffer-Pülz, P. 2009. ‘The Ganthārambhakathās of Upasena’s Saddhammapajjotikā and Vajirabuddhi’s 
Vajirabuddhitīkā’, Indo-Iranian Journal  52/2–3: 143–77. 
———2013. Verlorene Gaṇṭhipadas zum buddhistischen Ordensrecht; Untersuchungen zu den in der 
Vajirabuddhiṭīkā zitierten Kommentaren Dhammasiris und Vajirabuddhis . 3 vols. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz. 
Kielhorn, F. 1896–97. ‘Khalimpur Plate of Dharmapaladeva’, Epigraphia Indica, vol. 4, pp. 243–54.
Kim, J. 2012. ‘Unheard Voices: Women’s Roles in Medieval Buiddhist Artistic Production and Religious 
Practices in South Asia’, Journal of the American Academy of Religion 80/1: 200–32.
———2013. Receptacle of the Sacred, Illustrated Manuscripts and the Buddhist Book Cult in South Asia . 
Berkeley/Los Angeles/London: University of California Press.
bibliography.indd   417 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 432] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia418
———2014. ‘Local Visions, Transcendental Practices: Iconographic Innovations of Indian Esoteric 
Buddhism’, History of Religions 54/1: 34–68.  
Ki
m, J. and R. Linrothe. 2014. ‘Introduction: Buddhist Visual Culture’, History of Religions 54/1: 1–4.
Kimmet, N . 2012. ‘Sharing Sacred Space: A Comparative Study of Tabo and Borobudur’, in D . Bonatz, 
A. Reinecke, and M.L. Tjoa-Bonatz (eds.), Selected Papers from the 13th International Conference 
of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 2010 , Volume 2: Connecting 
Empires and States, pp.  93–101. Singapore: National University of Singapore Press.
Kinney, A.R. 2004. Worshipping Śiva-Buddha . Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Kinsley, D. 1997. Tantric Visions of the Divine Feminine: The Ten Mahāvidyās . Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Kiss, C. 2014. ‘On yantras  in Early Śaiva Tantras’, Cracow Indological Studies 16: 203–33. 
Kiyota, J. 清田寂雲 . 1983. ‘Enchin no Bodaijōkyō ryakugishaku ni tsuite’ (On the Bodaijōkyōryakugishaku 
(菩提場経略義釈 ) of Enchin [ 円珍 ]), Mikkyō Bunka [ Journal of Esoteric Buddhism ] 143: 14–23. 
Klimburg-Salter, D.E. (with contributions by C. Luczanits, L. Petech, E. Steinkellner, E. Wandl). 
1997. Tabo: A lamp for the Kingdom; Early Indo-Tibetan Buddhist Art in the Western Himalaya. 
Milan: Skira.
Klokke, M.J. 2004. ‘The Sailendras of Java: Javanese or non-Javanese?’, Paper presented at the interna -
tional symposium Non-Javanese, not yet Javanese, and un-Javanese: Encounters and fissures in a civilization . Leiden, 23–25 March 2004.
——— 2006. ‘The history of Central Javanese architecture: Architecture and sculptural decoration as 
complementary sources of information’, in H . Chambert-Loir and B. Dagens (eds.) , Anamorphoses: 
Hommage à Jacques Dumarçais, pp. 49–68. Paris: Les Indes Savantes.
———2011. ‘Culturele ontmoetingen in Zuid- en Zuidoost-Azië: De kunsthistorische bronnen’. Pamphlet 
of the inaugural professorial lecture (Oratie) delivered on 27 June 2011, Leiden University.
Kōbōdaishi kūkai zenshū henshū i’in kai 弘法大師空海全集編輯委員会  (ed.). 1986. Kōbōdaishi Kūkai 
zenshū . 5 vols. Tokyo: Chikuma shobō. 
Kozok, U. (with Contributions by  T. H
unter, W. Mahdi and J. Miksic). 2015. A 14th Century Malay Code 
of Laws: The Nītisārasamuccaya . Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Kozok, U, and E. van Reijn. 2010. ‘Adityawarman: Three inscriptions of the Sumatran king of all supreme 
kings; Translated and annotated from H. Kern and F.D.K. Bosch’, Indonesia and the Malay World  
38/110: 135–58.
Krom, N.J. 1918. ‘De Bodhisattwa’s van den Mĕndut’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde 74: 
419–37.
———1927. Barabuḍur:  Archaeological description , Vol. 2. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
———1931. Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. [Revised Edition.]Krom, N.J. and Th. van Erp. 1920. Beschrijving van Barabudur , Vols. 1 and 2. ’s-Gravenhage: Martinus 
Nijhoff. 
Ku, C.M. 2003. Cong Tianwang Chuantong dao Fowang Chuantong: Zhongguo Zhongshi Fojiao Zhiguo 
Yishi Xingtai Yanjiu (Devarāja Tradition to the Buddharāja Tradition: Studies in Medieval Chinese 
Buddhist Political Ideology). Taipei: Shangzhou Chuban.
van der Kuijp, L.W.J. 2003. ‘A Treatise on Buddhist Epistemology and Logic attributed to Klong chen 
Rab ’byams pa (1308–1364) and Its Place in Indo-Tibetan Intellectual History’, Journal of Indian Philosophy  31: 381–437. 
———2007. ‘*Nāgabodhi/Nāgabuddhi: Notes on the Guhyasamāja Literature’, in B. Kellner, H. Krasser, 
and H. Tauscher (eds.), Pramāṇakīrtiḥ—Papers dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner, Vol. 2. Wien: 
Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien Universität Wien.
Kulatunge, T.G. 1999. Abhayagirivihara at Anuradhapura . Colombo: Ministry of Cultural and Religious 
Affairs.
bibliography.indd   418 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 433] ---
Bibliography419
Kulke, H. 1993 ‘‘‘Kadātuan Srivijaya’—Empire or Kraton of Srivijaya? A reassessment of the epigraphical 
evidence’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 80/1: 159–80.
Kumar, B. 2008. ‘Contribution of Ācārya Dharmapāla of Nalanda’, in C. Mani (ed.), The Heritage of 
Nalanda, pp.  103–5.  New Delhi: Aryan Books International/Asoka Mission.
Kumar. B.B. 2008. ‘Nalanda: Its significance’, in C. Mani (ed.), The Heritage of Nalanda, pp.  183–86.  New 
Delhi: Aryan Books International/Asoka Mission. 
Kusen. 1994. ‘Raja-raja Mataram Kuna dari Sanjaya sampai Balitung: Sebuah rekonstruksi berdasarkan 
prasasti Wanua Tengah III’, Berkala Arkeologi 14: 82–94.  
Ku
sen, and T. Haryono. 1992. ‘Kemungkinan penetempatan arca perunggu di dalam Candi Perwara 
Sewu (Kajian berdasar bentuk lapik arca)’, Pertemuan Ilmiah Arkeologi VI . Malang.
Kwa, C.G. 1970. ‘The historical roots of Indonesian irredentism’, Asian Studies 8/1: 38–52.
Kwon, D.K. 2002. Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha: Compendium of all the Tathāgatas, A study of its 
origin, structure and teachings . PhD dissertation, School of Oriental and African Studies, London.
Lahiri, L. 1986. Chinese Monks in India . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Lalou, M. 1936. ‘Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa et Tārāmūlakalpa’, Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies  1/3–4: 327–49.
Lamotte, É . 1960. ‘Mañjuśrī’, T’oung pao 47: 1–96.
———1984. ‘Mahāyāna Buddhism’, in H. Bechert and R. Gombrich (eds.), The World of Buddhism , pp. 
90–93. London: Thames & Hudson.
———1988. History of Indian Buddhism . Louvain-La-Neuve: Institut Orientaliste Louvain-La-Neuve. 
Lancaster , L.R. 1991. ‘Gaṇeśa in China: Methods of Transforming the Demonic’, in R. L. Brown (ed.), 
Ganesh: Studies of an Asian God , pp. 277–86. Albany: State University of New York Press.
———n.d. ‘The ‘‘Great circle’’ of Buddhism’. Unpublished manuscript. [Last accessed February 2016 at: 
https://www.academia.edu/7437599/The_Great_Circle_of_Buddhism]
Lancaster, L.R. and S.B. Park. 1979. The Korean Buddhist Canon : A Descriptive Catalogue . Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
Landesman, S.S. ‘Goddess Tārā: Silence and Secrecy on the Path to Enlightenment’, Journal of Feminist 
Studies in Religion 24/1: 44–59.
La Vallée Poussin, L. de. 1896. Études et Textes Tantriques Pañcakrama. Gand: H. Engelcke.
———1898. Bouddhisme: Études et Matériaux . London: Luzac & Co.
———1932. ‘Notes et Bibliographie Bouddhiques’, Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques 1: 416–17.
Law, J.M. ‘Violence, Ritual Reenactment, and Ideology: The ‘‘Hōjō-e’’ (Rite for Release of Sentient Beings) 
of the Usa Hachiman Shrine in Japan’, History of Religions 33/4: 325–57.
Lee, E.S . 2006–7. ‘A Preliminary Note on Buddhist Sculptures from Dhaka Region’, Journal of Bengal 
Art 11–12: 265–83.
———2009. On defining Buddhist Art in Bengal: The Dhaka Region . PhD dissertation, The University 
of Texas, Austin. 
Lefèvre , V. 2012. ‘Pāhārpur, une oeuvre de circonstance ?’, in V. Lefèvre (ed.), Orientalismes, De 
l’archéologie au musée;  Mélanges offerts à Jean-François Jarrige, pp. 237–53. Turnhout: Brepols 
Publishers.
Legge, J. 1991. A record of Buddhistic Kingdoms: Being an account by the Chinese monk fa-Hien of his 
travels in India . New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. [Reprint of 1886, London: Clarendon Press.]
Lehnert, M. 2012. ‘Tantric threads between India and China’, in A. Heirmann and S.P. Bumbacher (eds.), 
The Spread of Buddhism , pp. 247–76. Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Leoshko , J. 1985. ‘The Appearance of Amoghapāśa in Pāla Period Art’, in A.K. Narain (ed.), Studies in 
Buddhist Art of South Asia, pp. 127–34. New Delhi: Kanak Publications.
———1987. The Iconography of Buddhist Sculptures of the Pāla and Sena Period from Bodhgay ā. PhD 
dissertation. The Ohio State University, Columbus.
———1990. ‘The issue of Influence in Burmese Art’, in C. Bautze-Picron (ed.), Makaranda: Essays in 
bibliography.indd   419 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 434] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia420
honour of James C. Harle , pp. 185–88. Delhi: Indian Books centre.
———1993–94. ‘Scenes of the Buddha’s Life in Pāla-Period Art’, Silk Road Art and Archaeology  3: 251–76.
Leutzsch, A. 2009. Geschichte der Globalisierung als globalisierte Geschichte: die historische Konstruktion 
der Weltgesellschaft bei Rosenstock-Huessy und Braudel . Frankfurt/New York: Campus Verlag.
Lévi, S. 1900. ‘Les missions de Wang Hieuen-Ts’e dans I’Inde’, Journal Asiatique , 15: 297–341, 401–68.
———1928. ‘Encore Aśvaghoṣa’, Journal Asiatique  213: 193–216.
———1932. Mahā-Karmavibhaṅga et Karmavibhaṅgopadeśa . Paris: Librarie Ernest Leroux. 
———1933. Sanskrit Texts from Bāli . Baroda: Oriental Institute. 
Lévi, S., J. Takakusu, and P. Demiéville (eds.). 1929. Hôbôgirin: Dictionnaire encyclopédique du Bouddhisme, 
d’après les sources chinoises et japonaises, Vol. 1. Tokyo: Maison Franco-Japonaise.
Levin, C. 2011. ‘Sudhana and Manoharā: A story of love, loss and redemption at Candi Borobudur’, in 
Manjushree (ed.), From beyond the Eastern Horizon , Essays in Honour of Professor Lokesh Chandra,  
pp. 191–204. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Lewis, M. and K. Wigen. 1997. The Myth of Continents: A Critique of Metageography . Berkeley: University 
of California Press.
Li, R. (trans.) 1996. The Great Tang Dynasty record of the Western Regions , translated by the Tripiṭa -
ka-Master Xuanzang under Imperial Order, Composed by Śramṇa Bianji of the Great Zongchi 
Monastery . Berkeley: Numata Centre for Buddhist Translation and Research.
———2000. Buddhist Monastic Traditions of Southern Asia : A record of the inner law sent home from 
the South Seas . Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. 
Lienhard, S. 1999. Diamantmeister und Hausväter: buddhistisches Gemeindeleben in Nepal . Wien: Verlag 
der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Lin, L.K. 1935. ‘Puṇyodaya (Na-t’i), un propagateur du tantrisme en Chine et au Cambodge à l’époque 
de Hiuan-tsang’, Journal Asiatique  227: 83–100.
Linrothe , R. 1990. ‘Beyond Sectarianism: Towards Reinterpreting the Iconography of Esoteric Buddhist 
Deities Trampling Hindu Gods’, Indian Journal of Buddhist Studies 2/2: 16–25.
———1999. Ruthless Compassion: Wrathful deities in early Indo-Tibetan esoteric Buddhist art. Boston: 
Shambhala.
———(ed.). 2006. Holy Madness: Portraits of Tantric Siddhas . Chicago: Serindia Publications.
Lobo, W. 1994. ‘Reflections on the Tantric Buddhist Deity Hevajra in Cambodia’, in P.Y. Manguin (ed.), 
Southeast Asian Archaeology 1994. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists; Paris, 24th–28th October 1994, Vol. 2 , pp. 113–27. 
University of Hull: Centre for Southeast Asian Studies.
Lo Bue, E. and F. Ricca. 1990. Gyantse Revisted . Turin: Casa Editrice Le Lettere.
Lokesh Chandra. 1980a. ‘Borobudur as a Monument of Esoteric Buddhism’, The Southeast Asian Review 
5/1: 1–41.
———1980b. ‘Chandi Mendut and Chandi Pawon: A New Interpretation’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-en 
Volkenkunde  36: 313–20.
———1983. ‘Remarks on Kuñjarakar ṇa’
, Bijdragen tot de Taal, Land- en Volkenkunden 139: 363–65.
———1984. Buddhist Iconography in Nepalese Sketchbooks. New Delhi: Jayyed Press.
———1987. Sarva-tathāgata-tattva-saṅgraha . Sanskrit Text with Introduction and Illustrations of Maṇḍalas . 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
——— 1992a. ‘Tantras and the Defence of T’ang China’, in Lokesh Chandra, Cultural Horizons of India, 
Vol. 2, pp. 257–66. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture.
———1992b. ‘Emperor Hsuan-Tsung, Vajrayāna and Quarter of Vajras’, in Lokesh Chandra , Cultural 
Horizons of India, Vol. 2, pp. 267–76. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture. 
———1992c. ‘Gaṇeśa in Japan’, in Lokesh Chandra , Cultural Horizons of India, Vol. 2, pp. 7–22. New 
Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture/Aditya Prakashan.
bibliography.indd   420 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 435] ---
Bibliography421
———1993a. ‘Oḍḍiyāna: A New Interpretation’, in T. Chandrika (ed.), Cultural Horizons of India, Vol. 
3, pp. 491–514. Delhi: South Asia Books.
———1993b. ‘Evolutions of the Tantras’, in T. Chandrika (ed.), Cultural Horizons Of India , Vol. 3, pp. 
7–139. Delhi: South Asia Books.
——— 1995a. ‘The Śailendras of Java’, in Lokesh Chandra, Cultural Horizons of India, Vol. 4, pp. 205–41. 
New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture/Aditya Prakashan.
———1995b. ‘Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan’, in Lokesh Chandra, Cultural Horizons of India, Vol . 4, pp. 
295–434.
——— 1995c. (in collaboration with S. Devi Singhal). ‘The Jaka Dolog inscription of King Kṛtanagara’, 
in Lokesh Chandra (ed.), Cultural Horizons of India , Vol. 4, pp. 148–66. New Delhi: International 
Academy of Indian Culture/Aditya Prakashan.
———1997. ‘Śaiva Version of Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyanikan’, in Lokesh Chandra, Cultural Horizons of 
India,  Vol 5, pp. 7–101.
———1999. ‘From the Goddesses of Plaosan to the Dhāraṇi-Maṇḍala at Alchi’, in N.N. Bhattacharyya 
and A. Ghosh (eds.), Tantric Buddhism: Centennial Tribute to Dr. Benoytosh Bhattacharyya , pp. 
54–64. New Delhi: Manohar. 
———2001. Tibetan-Sanskrit Dictionary . New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture/Aditya 
Prakashan.
———2013. ‘Borobudur Inscription of Trailokyavijaya’, in  Lokesh Chandra , Lord Śiv
a and Buddha in 
the Golden Isles: in Search of Classical Indonesia , pp. 232–37. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Lokesh Chandra and Sudarshana Devi Singhal. 1995 ‘The Buddhist bronzes of Surocolo’, Cultural 
Horizons of India , Vol. 4, pp. 121–47. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture/
Aditya Prakashan.
van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, J. E. 1956. ‘South-East Asian Architecture and the Stūpa of Nandangaŗh’, Artibus 
Asiae  19/3–4: 279–90.
———1957. ‘The ancient Buddhist monument at Pāhārpur’, Antiquity and Survival  2: 34–37.
Long, M. 2014. Voices from the Mountain: The Śailendra inscriptions discovered in Central Java and on 
the Malay Peninsula . New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture/Aditya Prakashan.
Lopez, D.S. Jr. (ed.). 1995. ‘A Rite for Restoring the Bodhisattva and Tantric Vows’, in D.S. Lopez Jr . (ed.), 
Buddhism in Practice , pp. 503–12. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Losty , J.P. 1989a. ‘An early Indian Manuscript of the Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra’ , in D. Mitra and G. Bhattacha -
rya (eds.), Nalinīkānta-Śatavārṣikī: Studies in Art and Archaeology of Bihar and Bengal , pp. 1–21. 
Delhi: Indian Books Centre.
——— 1989b. ‘Bengal, Bihar, Nepal? Problems of Provenance in 12th-century illuminated Buddhist 
Manuscripts, Part One’, Oriental Art  (New Series) 35/2: 86–96.
Luce,  G.H. 1969–70. Old Burma-Early Pagán .  3 vols. New York: J.J. Augustin Publisher/ Artibus Asiae /
The Institute of Fine Arts, New York University.
Lukas, H. 2003. ‘Theories of Indianization: Exemplified by Selected Case Studies from Indonesia (Insular 
Southeast Asia)’, Südostasien Working Papers  1. Wien: Kommission für Sozialanthropologie, 
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften. [Accessed on 2-2-2016 at: http://www.oeaw.ac.at/
sozant/files/working_papers/suedostasien/soa001.pdf]
Lunsingh Scheurleer, P. 2008. ‘The well-known Javanese Statue in the Tropenmuseum, Amsterdam, and 
its Place in Javanese Sculpture’, Artibus Asiae  68/2: 287–332.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, P. and M.J. Klokke. 1988. Divine Bronzes: Ancient Indonesian Bronzes from A.D.600 
to 1600; Catalogue of the Exhibition organised in collaboration with the Society of Friends of Asiatic 
Art held in the Department of Asiatic Art, Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam April 30-July 31, 1988 . Leiden: 
E.J. Brill.
Luo, H. and T. Tomabechi. 2009. Candrakīrti’s Vajrasattvaniṣpādanasūtra (Vajrasattvasādhana); San -
bibliography.indd   421 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 436] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia422
skrit and Tibetan Texts. Beijing/Wien: China Tibetology Publishing House/Austrian Academy 
of
 Sciences Press.
Mabbett, I. 1986. ‘Buddhism in Champa’, in D.G. Marr and A.C. Milner (eds.), Southeast Asia in the 9th 
to 14th Centuries , pp. 289–331. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing. 
Mabuchi, K. 馬淵和夫 . 2006. Shittanshō no kenkyū . Tokyo: Bensei Shuppan.
Mackenzie, C. 1814. ‘Narrative of a Journey to examine the remains of an ancient city and temple at Brambana 
in Java’, Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschapen 7: 1–54.
Magetsari, N. 1997. Candi Borobudur: Rekonstruksi Agama dan Filsafatnya . Depok: Fakultas Sastra 
Universitas Indonesia.
Mahdi, W. 2008. ‘Yavadvipa and the Merapi Volcano in West Sumatra’, Archipel  75: 111–43.
Majumdar, R.C. 1937. Ancient Indian colonies in the Far East , Vol. 2. Dacca: Ashok Kumar Majumdar. 
———1951–69. The History and culture of the Indian people . 11 vols. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.
——— 1971. (ed.) The History of Bengal, Volume I: Hindu Period . Lohanipur/Patna: N.V. Publications. 
[Reprint of first edition, 1943. Dacca: University of Dacca.] 
Malandra, G .H. 1993. Unfolding a ma ṇḍal a: The Buddhist cave temples at Ellora . Albany: State University 
of New York Press.
———1996.  ‘Th
e Mandala at Ellora / Ellora in the Mandala’, Journal of the International Association of 
Buddhist Studies 19: 181–208.
de Mallmann, M.T . 1986. Introduction à l’iconographie du tântrisme bouddhique . Paris: Librairie d’Amé -
rique et d’Orient Adrien Maisonneuve. [Reprint of first edition, 1975.]
Mammitzsch, U.H.R. 1991. Evolution of the Garbhadhātu maṇḍala . New Delhi: International Academy 
of Indian Culture/Aditya Prakashan. 
Manguin, P.Y. 1993. ‘Palembang and Sriwijaya: An early Malay harbour-city rediscovered’, Journal of 
the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 66/1: 23–46.
Manguin, P.Y. and A. Indradjaja. 2011. ‘The Batujaya Site: New Evidence of Early Indian Influence in 
West Java’, in P.Y. Manguin et al. (eds.), Early Interactions between South and Southeast Asia: 
Reflections on Cross-cultural Exchange , pp. 113–36. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Marsis Sutopo. 1992. Laporan Survai Pendataan Arkeologi DAS Batanghari dan Ekskavasi Candi Sungai 
Langsat. Batusangkar: Suaka Peninggalan Sejarah dan Purbakala Wilayah Provinsi Sumatera 
Barat dan Riau.
Matsuda, W.J. 2003. The Founder Reinterpreted: Kūkai and Vraisemblant Narrative . MA thesis, University 
of Hawai’i. 
Matsunaga, K. 松長恵史 . 1999. Indoneshia no Mikkyō . Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
Matsunaga, Y. 1977. ‘A History of Tantric Buddhism in India with reference to the Chinese Translations’, 
in L.S. Kawamura and K. Scott (eds.), Buddhist Thought and Asian Civilization: Essays in Honour 
of Herbert V. Guenther on His Sixtieth Birthday, pp. 167–81. Emeryville, California: Dharma 
Publishing.
———1978. The Guhyasamāja Tantra: A New Critical Edition . Osaka: Tōhō Shuppan. 
———1980. Mikkyō kyōten seiritsushi ron . Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
———1985. ‘On the Date of the Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa ’, in M. Strickmann (ed.), Tantric and Taoist Studies 
in Honour of R. A. Stein , Vol. 3, pp. 882–94. Bruxelles: Institut Belge des Hautes Études Chinoises.
Mayer, R. 1998. ‘The Figure of Maheśvara/Rudra  in t he rÑiṅ-ma-pa Tantric Tradition’, Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 21/2: 271–310.
McBride, R.D. II. 2004. ‘Is There Really ‘‘Esoteric’’ Buddhism?’, The Journal of the International Associ-
ation of Buddhist Studies 27/2: 329–67.
———2006 [2008]. ‘The mysteries of body, speech, and mind: The three esoterica (sanmi) in medieval 
Sinitic Buddhism’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 29/2: 305–55.
McRae, J. and J. Nattier (eds.). 2012. Buddhism Across Boundaries: The Interplay of Indian, Chinese, and 
bibliography.indd   422 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 437] ---
Bibliography423
Central Asian Source Materials [Sino-Platonic Papers 222]. Philadelphia: Department of East 
Asian Languages and Civilizations, University of Pennsylvania.
Meinert, C. (ed.). 2016. Transfer of Buddhism along Central Asian Networks (7th to 13th Centuries) . 
Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Mendis, V.L.B. 1981. Currents of Asian History . Colombo: Lake House Investments Ltd, Publishers.
van der Meulen, W.J. 1977. ‘In Search of Ho-ling’, Indonesia 23 (April): 87–112.
Mevissen , G.J.R.  1989. ‘Studies in Pañcarakṣā Manuscript Painting’, Berliner Indologische Studien 4–5: 339–74.
———1990. ‘The Indian Connection: Images of Deified Spells in the Arts of Northern Buddhism, Part 
I [Mahāmāyūrī ]’, Silk Road Art and Archaeology ; Journal of the Institute of Silk Road Studies 
1: 227–46.
———1991–92. ‘The Indian Connection: Images of Deified Spells in the Arts of Northern Buddhism, 
Part II’, Silk Road Art and Archaeology ; Journal of the Institute of Silk Road Studies 2: 351–82.
———1992. ‘Transmission of Iconographic Traditions: Pañcarakṣā Heading North’, in C. Jarrige (ed.), 
South Asian Archaeology 1989: Papers from the Tenth International Conference of South Asian 
Archaeologists in Western Europe, Musée national des Arts asiatiques-Guimet, Paris, France, 3–7 
July 1989 , pp. 415–24. Madison, Wisconsin: Prehistory Press.
———1997. ‘The stone chariot at Darasuram and the myth of Siva Tripurāntaka’, in R. Nagaswamy 
(ed.), Studies in South Indian History and Culture (Prof. V. R. Ramachandra Dikshitar Centenary 
Volume), pp.  290–307.  Chennai: V.R. Ramachandra Dikshitar Centenary Committee.
———1999. ‘Images of Mahāpratisarā in Bengal: Their Iconographic Links with Javanese, Central Asian 
and East Asian Images’, Journal of Bengal Art 4: 99–129.
———2001. ‘Hiterto unnoticed images of Tripurāntaka in the Rājasiṃheśvara (Kailāsanātha) temple, 
Kanchipuram’, in D.W. Lönne (ed.), Toḥfa-e-Dil ; Festschrift Helmut Nespital , pp. 755–67. Reinbek: 
Verlag für Orientalistische Fachpublikationen.
———2006a. ‘Early stone sculptures of Tripurāntaka in South India’, in A. Banerji (ed.), Hari Smriti: 
Studies on Art, archaeology, and Indology. Papers Presented in Memory of Dr. Haribishnu Sarkar , 
pp. 122–42. New Delhi: Kaveri Books.
———2006b. Ādityas, Grahas, and other Deities of Time and Space on Sūrya Sculptures, Predominantly 
from Bengal . Kolkata: Centre for Archaeological Studies and Training, Eastern India.
———2009. ‘Two Unpublished Mārīcī Sculptures in the Khulna Museum, Bangladesh, and Related 
Images from Mainamati’, in D. Desai and A. Banerji (eds.), Kalādarpaṇa: The Mirror of Indian Art, Essays in Memory of Shri Krishna Deva , pp. 273–84. New Delhi: Aryan Books International.
———2010. ‘Corpus of Viṣṇu Images with Daśāvatāras, predominantly from Bengal’, Berliner Indolo -
gische Studien  19: 171–286.
Miah, Md. A.H. 2003. ‘Archaeological Excavations at Jagadalla Vihara: A Preliminary Report’, Journal 
of Bengal Art 8: 147–66.
Michael, S. M. 1983. ‘The Origin of the Ganapati Cult’, Asian Folklore Studies 42: 91–116.
Mikkyō Gakkai 密教学会  (author), Mikkyō Jiten Hensankai 密教辞典編纂会  (ed.). 1931–33. Mikkyō 
daijiten . 6 vols. Kyoto (repr. Hōzōkan, 1 vol. Compact edition, 1983). 
Mikkyōseiten Kenkyūkai 密教聖典研究会 . 2001. ‘The Results of a joint study on the Buddhist Tantric 
Texts: Transcribed Sanskrit Text of the Amoghapāśakalparāja Part IV’, Annual of the Institute for Comprehensive Study of Buddhism, Taisho University 23: 1–76. 
Miksic. J.N. 1979. Archaeology, Trade, and Society in Northeast Sumatra. PhD dissertation, Cornell 
University.
———1980. ‘Classical archaeology in Sumatra’, Indonesia  30: 43–66.
———1985. ‘Traditional Sumatran Trade’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême Orient 74: 423–67.———1990. Borobudur: Golden Tales of the Buddha. London: Periplus.
———1993–94. ‘Double Meditation Platforms at Anuradhapura and the Pendopo of Ratu Boko’, in 
bibliography.indd   423 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 438] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia424
Saraswati: Esai-Esai Arkeologi , No. 10, pp. 23–31 ( Kalpataru , 2). Jakarta: National Research Centre 
for Archaeology.
———1995. ‘Hubungan sejarah antara Srivijaya Palembang dan Lembah Bujang’, in I. Hussein, A.A. 
Deraman, and Abd.R. Al-Ahmadi (eds.), Tamadun Melayu, Vol. 3 , pp. 894–917. Kuala Lumpur: 
Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka.
———2004a. ‘From Megaliths to Tombstones: The transition from prehistory to the early Islamic period 
in highland West Sumatra’, Indonesia and the Malay World 32/93: 191–210.
———2004b. ‘The Classical Cultures of Indonesia’, in I. Glover and P. Bellwood (eds.), Southeast Asia: 
From Prehistory to History, pp. 234–56. London: Curzon. 
———2006. ‘Mañjuśrī as a Political Symbol in Ancient Java’, in B. Dagens and H. Chambert-Loir (eds.), 
Anamorphoses: Hommage à Jacques Dumarçay , pp. 185–226. Paris: Les Indes Savantes.
———2009. ‘Highland-lowland connections in Jambi, South Sumatra, and West Sumatra, 11th to 14th 
centuries’, in D. Bonatz et al. (eds.), From Distant Tales: Archaeology and Ethnohistory in the 
Highlands of Sumatra, pp.  75–103.  Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
———2010. ‘The Buddhist-Hindu Divide in Pre-modern Southeast Asia’, Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre 
Working Paper Series 1: 1–39 
———2012. ‘Riverbeds of Sumatra: The latest target of treasure hunters’, International Institute for Asian 
Studies Newsletter  59 (Spring): 47. 
———2013. Singapore and the Silk Road of the Sea 1300–1800 . Singapore: NUS Press.
Mishra, U. 2011. ‘Vajrāyana Buddhism as a Religion of the Laity in Early Medieval Odisha (India)’, in 
B.N. Prasad (ed.), Monasteries, Shrines & Society: Buddhist and Brahmanical Religious Institutions 
in India in their Socio-Economic Context , pp. 137–78. New Delhi: Manak Publications.
Misra, B. 1934. Odisha Under the Bhauma Kings . Calcutta: The Vishwamitra Press.
Mitra, D. 1960. ‘Ratnagiri: Unearthing of a new Buddhist Site in Orissa’, Indo-Asian Culture 9/2: 160–75. 
———1971. Buddhist Monuments. Calcutta: Sahitya Samsad.———1978. Bronzes from Achutrajpur, Odisha . Delhi: Agam Kala Prakashan.
———1981. Ratnagiri, 1958–61. (Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India No. 80). New Delhi: 
Archaeological Survey of India.
———1982. Bronzes from Bangladesh: a study of Buddhist images from District Chittagong . Delhi: Agam 
Kala Prakashan.
———1997–98. ‘Notes on Heruka/Hevajra and a Few Images of this Vajrayana Deity’, Silk Road Art and 
Archaeology  5: 377–93.
——— 1989. ‘Some Images of Heruka-Hevajra’, in D . Mitra and G. Bhattacharya (eds.), Nalinīkānta 
Śatavārṣikī : Dr. N.K. Bhattasali Centenary Volume (1888–1988), Studies in Art and Archaeology of 
Bihar and Bengal , pp. 179–88. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.
Mitra , M. 1999. ‘An Image of Mañjuśrī in the company of Jālinīprabha and Candraprabha preserved in 
the Bangladesh National Museum’, Journal of Bengal Art 4: 497–514.
———2000. ‘The Buddhist Goddess Parṇaśabarī in Bangladesh and Some Other Countries’, Journal 
of Bengal Art 5: 263–81.
Moens, J.L. 1937. ‘Çrīvijaya, Yāva en Kaṭāha’,  Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 77: 
318–27.
———1951.  ‘Barabuḍur, Mendut en Pawon en hun onderlinge samenhang’, Tijdschrift voor de Indische 
Taai-, Land- en Volkenkunde 86: 326–86.
Moharana, S.K. 2001. Tantric Buddhism: An Obscure Aspect of the Cultural Heritage of India with Special 
Reference to Orissa . New Delhi: Aryan Books International.
Mohr, E.C. 1944. The Soils of Equatorial Regions. Ann Arbor: J.W. Edwards.
Monier-Williams, M. 1899. A Sanskrit-English dictionary etymologically and philologically arranged with 
special reference to cognate Indo-European languages . Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
bibliography.indd   424 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 439] ---
Bibliography425
Monius, A.E. 2001. Imagining a Place for Buddhism: Literary Culture and Religious Community in 
Tamil-Speaking South India . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mori, M. 2009. Vajrāvalī of Abhayākaragupta: Edition of Sanskrit and Tibetan Versions . 2 vols. Tring, 
UK: Institute of Buddhist Studies.
Moriguchi, M. 森口光俊 . 1993. ‘Tattvasiddhināmaprakaraṇa I’, in H. Miyasaka (ed.), Indogaku—Mik -
kyōgaku Kenkyū. Miyasaka Yūshō Hakushi koki kinen ronbunshū, pp. 157–99. Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
Moses, L.W. 1977. The Political Role of Mongol Buddhism . Bloomington, Indiana: Asian Studies Research 
Institute, Indiana University. 
Moudud , H.J.  1992. A Thousand Year Old Bengali Mystic Poetry . Dhaka: University Press Limited.
Mudiyanse, N.  1
967. Mahāyāna Monuments of Ceylon . Colombo: M.D. Gunasena.
Muhammad, K.K. 2002. ‘Kesariya: The Tallest Stupa’, India Perspectives  (February): 1–10.
———2005. ‘Evolution of Terraced stupa in India with special emphasis on Kesariya’. Unpublished 
conference paper, Allahabad.
Mukherjee, P. 1961. Guide to Lalitagiri, Udayagiri and Ratnagiri. Kaligali, Cuttack: Mahabodhi Society.
Mukherjee , R. 2011. ‘Introduction: Bengal and the Northern Bay of Bengal’, in R. Mukherjee (ed.), Pelagic 
Passageways; The Northern Bay of Bengal Before Colonialism, pp. 1–260. Delhi: Primus Books.
Mukherji, S.C. 1992. ‘The three recently discovered copper plates of the Pāla Period’, Pratna Samiksha 
1: 171–78.
Mukhopadhyay, S.P. 1985. Amitābha and his Family . Delhi: Agam Kala Prakashan.
Muller, A.C. (ed.). 1995–. Digital Dictionary of Buddhism . [Last accessed February 2016 at: http://bud -
dhism-dict.net/ddb]
Mus, P. 1933. ‘Cultes indiens et indigenes au Champa’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 33: 
367–410.  
——
—1935. Barabudur . Hanoi: Imprimerie d’Extrême Orient.
———1939. La lumière sur les six voies . Paris: Institut d’Ethnologie. 
———1978. Barabudur . Vols. 1 and 2. New York: Arno Press. [Reprint.]
Myer, P.R. 1961. ‘Stupas and Stupa-Shrines’, Artibus Asiae 24: 25–34. 
Nakamura, H. 1980. Indian Buddhism: A survey with bibliographical notes . Tokyo: Sanseido Co. Ltd.
Nance, R.F. 2012. Speaking for Buddhas : Scriptural Commentary in Indian Buddhism . New York: Co -
lumbia University Press.
Nayak, C. 2004. Trade and Urban Centers in Ancient and Medieval Orissa . New Delhi: New Academic 
Publishers.
Neelis, J. 2011. Early Buddhist Transmission and Trade Networks: Mobility and Exchange within and 
beyond the Northwestern Borderlands of South Asia . Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Newman, J.R. 1991. ‘A Brief History of the Kalachakra’, in G.L. Sopa, R.J. Jackson and J.R. Newman 
(eds.), The Wheel of Time: The Kalachakra in Context , pp. 51–90. Ithaca: Snow Lion Pub -
lications.
Nihom, M. 1986. ‘The identification and original site of a cult statue on East Java: The Jaka Dolog’, Journal 
of the American Oriental Society 106: 485–501.
———1994. Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism: The Kunjarakarnadharmakathana and the 
Yogatantra.  Vienna: Sammlung De Nobili/Institut für Indologie der Universität Wien. 
———1995. ‘On Attracting Women and Tantric Initiation: Tilottamā and ‘‘Hevajratantra,’’ II, v. 38–47 
and I, vii. 8–9’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 58/3: 521–31.
———1998a. ‘The Maṇḍala of Caṇḍi Gumpung (Sumatra) and the Indo-Tibetan Vajraśekharatantra’, 
Indo-Iranian Journal  41: 245–54.
———1998b. ‘Vajravinayā and Vajraśauṇḍā: A ‘‘Ghost’’ Goddess and her Syncretic Spouse’, Journal of 
the International Association of Buddhist Studies 21: 374–82. 
Nikolic, H. 2008. ‘Analisis stilistika wacana terjemahan resmi naskah prasasti Plumpungan (kajian 
bibliography.indd   425 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 440] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia426
historis)’, Kajian Linguistik dan Sastra 20/2 (December): 88–107. [Last accessed February 2016 at: 
https://publikasiilmiah.ums.ac.id/handle/11617/175]
Nitti-Dolci, L. 1938.  The Prakrita Grammarians . New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Niyogi,  P. 1980. Buddhism in Ancient Bengal . Calcutta: Jijnāsa.
———1987. ‘Buddhist Scholars of Ancient Bengal, Part One’, Annali dell’Università degli studi di Napoli 
‘L’Orientale’. Rivista del Dipartimento di Studi Asiatici e del Dipartimento di Studi e Ricerche su 
Africa e Paesi Arabi 47: 373–96.
———1988. ‘Buddhist Scholars of Ancient Bengal, Part Two’, Annali dell’Università degli studi di Napoli 
“L’Orientale”. Rivista del Dipartimento di Studi Asiatici e del Dipartimento di Studi e Ricerche su Africa e Paesi Arabi 48: 11–34.
——— 2001. Buddhist Divinities. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers.
O’Brien, K. 1988. ‘Candi Jago as a Mandala: Symbolism of its narratives (Part I)’, Review of Indonesian 
and Malaysian Affairs 22 (Summer): 1–61.
———1990. ‘Candi Jago: A Javanese Interpretation of the Wheel of Existence?’, Review of Indonesian 
and Malaysian Affairs 24 (Winter): 23–85.
———1993. Means and Wisdom in Tantric Buddhist Rulership during the East Javanese Period . PhD 
dissertation, University of Sydney. 
———2008. Sutasoma: The ancient tale of a Buddha-Prince from 14th century Java by the poet Mpu 
Tantular . Bangkok: Orchid Press.
———2011. ‘Non-duality in the narrative design of the Sutasoma’, in Manjushree (ed.), From Beyond the 
Eastern Horizon; Essays in Honour of Professor Lokesh Chandra, pp. 43–62. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Ono, G. 小野玄妙  (ed.). 1933–35. Bussho kaisetsu daijiten (The Encyclopedia of East Asian Buddhist Texts). 
Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha. [Reprint Daito Publishing, compact edition, 1999.]
Ooi, K.B. 2015. The Eurasian Core and its Edges: Dialogues with Wang Gungwu on the History of the 
World . Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Orlando, R. 1981. A Study of Chinese Documents Concerning the Life of the Tantric Buddhist Patriarch 
Amoghavajra (A.D. 705–774) . PhD dissertation, Princeton University.
Orlina, R. 2012. ‘Epigraphical evidence for the cult of Mahāpratisarā in the Philippines’, Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 35/1–2: 91–101.
Orzech, C.D. 1995. ‘Legend of the Iron St ūpa’
, in D.S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.), Buddhism in Practice, pp.  314–17. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
———1996. ‘Maṇḍalas on the Move: Reflections from Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Circa 800 C.E., Journal 
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 19: 209–44.
———1998. Politics and Transcendent Wisdom: The Scripture for Humane Kings in the Creation of Chinese 
Buddhism . University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press. 
———2002. ‘Metaphor, Translation, and the Construction of Kingship in The Scripture for Humane 
Kings  and the Mahāmāyūrī Vidyārājñī Sūtra ’, Cahiers d’Extrême-Asie  13: 55–83. 
———2006a. ‘Looking for Bhairava: Exploring the Circulation of Esoteric Texts Produced by the Song 
Institute for Canonical Translation’, Pacific World Journal (Third Series) 8: 139–66.
———2006b. ‘The ‘‘Great Teaching of Yoga’’, the Chinese Appropriation of the Tantras and the Question 
of Esoteric Buddhism’, Journal of Chinese Religions 34: 29–78.
———2011a. ‘Translation of Tantras and other Esoteric Buddhist scriptures’, in C.D. Orzech, H.H. 
Sørensen, and R.K. Payne (eds.), Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia, pp. 439–50. 
———2011b. ‘Esoteric Buddhism in the Tang: From Atikūtạ to Amoghavajra (651–780)’, in C.D. Orzech, 
H.H. Sørensen, and R.K. Payne (eds.), Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia, pp. 263–85. 
Leiden/Boston: Brill.
———2011c. ‘Vajrabodhi’, in C.D. Orzech, H.H. Sørensen, and R.K. Payne (eds.), Esoteric Buddhism and 
bibliography.indd   426 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 441] ---
Bibliography427
the Tantras in East Asia, pp. 345–50 . Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Orzech, C.D. (gen. ed.), H.H. Sørensen, and R.K. Payne (assoc. eds.). 2011. Esoteric Buddhism and the 
Tantras in East Asia . Leiden/Boston: Brill. 
Ōtsuka, N. 大塚伸夫 . 2013. Indo shoki mikkyō seiritsu katei no kenkyū (A study on the development of 
the early Esoteric Buddhism in India). Tokyo: Shunjūsha.
Oudheidkundig verslag . 1950. Oudheidkundig verslag 1948. (Uitgave van de Oudheid-kundige Dienst 
in Indonesie in samenwerking met het Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en 
Wetenschappen). Bandung: Nix.
Pachow, W. 1958. ‘The Voyage of Buddhist Missions to South-East Asia and Far East’, Journal of the 
Greater India Society 17: 1–22.
Padoux, A. 1990. V āc: Th
e Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras . Delhi: Sri Satguru.
———2011. Tantric Mantras: Studies on mantrasastra . Oxon and New York: Routledge.
Pal, P. 1967. ‘The Iconography of Amoghapāśa Lokeśvara—II’, Oriental Art 13/1: 21–28.
———1978 . The Arts of Nepal, Part II—Painting . Leiden: Brill.
———1985 . Art of Nepal . Los Angeles: County Museum.
——— 1989. ‘The Last Buddhist Pandit of Bengal’, in D. Mitra and G. Bhattacharya (eds.), Nalinīkānta 
Śatavārṣikī: Dr. N.K. Bhattasali Centenary Volume (1888–1988), Studies in Art and Archaeology of Bihar and Bengal , pp. 189–97. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.
Palmer, J.D. 2009. Searching for the Law: Ennin’s Journal as a Key to the Heian Appropriation of Tang 
Culture . PhD dissertation, University of California at Irvine.
Pan, P. 
潘平  (and X. Shi 釋星雲 ). 1998. Ru Tang qiu fa xun li ji . Taipei: Fo guang wen hua shi ye you xian 
gong si 佛光文化事業有限公司 .
Pande, A. and P.P. Dhar. 2004. C ultural Interface of India with Asia: Religion, Art and Architecture . New 
Delhi: D.K. Printworld/National Museum Institute.
Pandit, S. 2015. ‘Ekādaśamukha Avalokiteśvara from Kanheri’, in K.K. Naik and E. Siva Nagi Reddy 
(eds.), Cultural Contours of History and Archaeology, in honour of Snehasiri Prof. P. Chenna Reddy, 
Vol VII: Buddhism and Other Religions , pp. 58–64. Delhi: B.R. Publishing Corporation.
Panigrahi, K.C. 1957. ‘Bhauma Art and Architecture of Odisha’, Arts Asiatiques  4: 275–92.
———1961a. Archaeological remains at Bhubaneswar. Bombay: Orient Longmans.———1961b. Chronology of the Bhauma-Karas and the Somavamsis of Odisha . Madras: M.L.J. Press.
Paranavitana, S. 1928. ‘Mahāyānism in Ceylon’, Ceylon Journal of Science (section G) 2: 35–71.———1943. ‘Tiriyāy rock inscription’, Epigraphia Zeylanica , Vol. 4, pp. 151–60. London: Oxford Uni -
versity Press.
———1967. Sinhalayo . Colombo: Lake House Investments.
Patil, D.R. 1963. The Antiquarians Remains in Bihar . Patna: Kashi Prasad Jayaswal Research Institute.
Patnaik, S.K. (ed.). 2014. Buddhism and Maritime Heritage of South East Asia; Odishan Perspective . Bhu -
baneswar/Delhi: Odishan Institute of Maritime and South-East Asian Studies/Pratibha Prakashan.
Patra, B. 2013. ‘Connectivity and Beyond: Maritime Contacts of Kalinga with Java’, Odisha Review 
(November): 54–64. [Last accessed February 2016 at: http://odisha.gov.in/e-magazine/Orissare -
view/2013/nov/engpdf/55-65.pdf]
Pelliot, P. 1923. ‘Notes sur quelques artistes de Six Dynasties et des T’ang’, T’oung Pao 22: 215–91.
Perret, D. et al. 2007. ‘Le programme archéologique franco-indonésien sur Padang Lawas (Sumatra 
Nord). Réflexions préliminaires’, Archipel  74: 45–82.
Petech, L. 1983. ‘Tibetan relations with Sung China and with the Mongols’, in M. Rossabi (ed.), China 
Among Equals: The Middle Kingdom and its Neighbors, 10th–14th Centuries, pp. 173–203 . Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
———1990. Central Tibet and the Mongols: The Yüan-Sa-Skya Pperiod of Tibetan History . Roma: Istituto 
Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
bibliography.indd   427 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 442] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia428
Phalgunadi, I G.P. 1996. The Pararaton: A Study of the Southeast Asian Chronicle . New Delhi: Sundeep 
Prakashan.
Pigeaud, Th.G. 1960. Java in the 14th Century : A Study in Cultural History , Vol. 1. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff. 
Pingree, D. 2004. ‘Horoscope’, Encyclopædia Iranica vol. 12, fasc. 5: 477–78. New York. [Online edition, 
last accessed February 2016 at: http://www.iranicaonline.org/ articles/horoscope]
Pischel, R. 1900. Grammatik der Prakrit-Sprachen. Strassburg: Verlag von Karl. J. Trübner.
Poerbatjaraka. 1922. ‘De inscriptie van het Mahākṣobhya-beeld te Simpang’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land-, en Volkenkunde 78: 426–62.
Poesponegoro, M.D. and N. Notosusanto (eds.). 1984. Sejarah Nasional Indonesia II . Jakarta: Departemen 
Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan. 
Pollock, S. 2006. The language of the gods in the world of men: Sanskrit, culture, and power in premodern 
India . Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Pott, P.H. 1966. Yoga and Yantra: Their Interrelation and Their Significance for Indian Archaeology ( trans. 
R. Needham). The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Pramastuti, H. et al. 2007. Pusaka Aksara Yogyakarta: Alih Aksara dan Alih Bahasa Prasasti Koleksi 
Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala Yogyakarta . Yogyakarta: Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan 
Purbakala Yog ya karta.
Prapandvidya, C. 1990. ‘The Sab Bāk Inscription: Evidence of an Early Vajrayāna Buddhist Presence in 
Thailand’, Journal of the Siam Society 78/2: 11–14.
———2010. ‘Śaivism in Thailand as Recorded in Inscriptions and Old Documents from the Sixth Century 
to the Early Ayudhyā Period’, Journal of the Royal Institute of Thailand 2: 44–59.
Prasad, B .N. 2010. ‘Votive Inscriptions on the Sculptures of Early Medieval Samataṭ-Harikela, Bengal: 
Explorations in Socio-religious History’, Religions of South Asia 4: 27–43.
———2011a. ‘Monarchs, Monasteries and Trade on an “Agrarian Frontier”, Early Medieval Sa -
mataṭa-Harikela, Bangladesh, c. 400 CE–1250 CE’, in B.N. Prasad (ed.), Monasteries, Shrines & 
Society, Buddhist and Brahmanical Religious Institutions in India in their Socio-Economic Context , 
pp. 116–36. New Delhi: Manak Publications.
———2011b. ‘Studies in the Socio-Economic History of Indian Monastic Buddhism in the Part One 
Hundred Years: A Historiographical Survey’, in B.N. Prasad (ed.), Monasteries, Shrines and Society: 
Buddhist and Brahmanical Religious Institutions in India in their Socio-Economic Context , pp. 
27–83. New Delhi: Manak Publications.
Przyluski, J. 1923. ‘Les Vidāyarāja: Contribution à l’histoire de la magie dans les sectes Mahâyânistes’, 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 23: 301–68.
Pulleyblank, E.G. 1952. ‘A Sogdian Colony in Inner Mongolia’, T’oung Pao 41: 317–56. 
Quaritch Wales, H.G. 1939. ‘Pioneering in the Unexplored Field of Malayan Archaeology: New Light 
on the Expansion of Ancient Indian Culture and Mahāyāna Buddhism from sites in Kedah’, 
Illustrated London News , June 24, No. 1169–71.
———1940. ‘Archaeological Researches’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 18/1: 
1–84.
Rahman , M. 1998. Sculpture in the Varendra Research Museum: A Descriptive Catalogue . Rajshahi: 
Varendra Research Museum, University of Rajshahi.
Rajarajan, R.K.K. 2000. ‘Dance of Ardhanārī as Pattiṉi-Kaṇṇaki with special reference to the Cilappa -
tikāram ’, Berliner Indologische Studien 13–14: 401–14.
Ralston, W.R.S. 1906. Tibetan Tales derived from Indian Sources. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner 
& Co, Ltd.
Ranawella, S. 1999. The inscriptions of Äpā Kitagbo and Kings Sena I, Sena II, and Udaya II. Ratmalana, 
Sri Lanka.
bibliography.indd   428 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 443] ---
Bibliography429
———2001. Inscriptions of Ceylon, Volume V, Part I, containing pillar, slab, and rock inscriptions from 
815 AD to 923 AD . Colombo: Department of Archaeology, Sri Lanka.
———2004. Inscriptions of Ceylon, Volume V, Part II, containing pillar inscriptions and slab inscriptions 
from 924 AD to 1017 . Colombo: Department of Archaeology, Sri Lanka.
———2005. Inscriptions of Ceylon, Volume V, Part II, containing pillar inscriptions and slab inscriptions 
from 9th century to 10th century AD. Colombo: Department of Archaeology, Sri Lanka.
Ray, H. (ed.). 2007. Studies on India China and South East Asia: Posthumous Papers of Prof. Adhir 
Chakravarti . Kolkata: R.N. Bhattacharya.
Ray, H.P. 2006. ‘The Archaeology of Bengal: Trading Networks, Cultural Identities’, The Journal of 
Economic and Social History of the Orient 49/1: 68–95.
———2008. ‘Providing for the Buddha: Monastic Centres in Eastern India’, Arts Asiatiques 63: 119–38.
———2012. ‘Narratives of Travel and Shipwreck’, in P. Skilling and J. McDaniel (eds.), Buddhist Narra -
tive in Asia and Beyond , Vol. 2, pp. 47–65. Bangkok: Institute of Thai Studies and Chulalongkorn 
University. 
———2013. ‘Introduction: Beyond National Boundaries’, in S. Chandra and H.P. Ray (eds.), The Sea, 
Identity and History , pp. 13–39. Singapore/New Delhi: ISEAS Publsihing/Manohar.
Ray, N. 1936. Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma . Amsterdam: H.J. Paris. 
Reichle, N. 2007. Violence and Serenity: Late Buddhist Sculpture from Indonesia . Honolulu: University 
of Hawai’i Press.
Reischauer, E.O. 1955. Ennin’s Diary: The Record of a Pilgrimage to China in Search of the Law . New York: 
Ronald Press Co.
Revire, N. 2009. ‘À propos d’une « tête » de khakkhara  conservée au Musée national de Bangkok’, 
Aséanie 24: 111–34.
———2010. ‘Iconographical Issues in the Archeology of Wat Phra Men, Nakhon Pathom’, Journal of 
the Siam Society 98: 75–115.
———2015a. ‘From Gandhara to Candi Mendut? A Comparative Study of Bhadrāsana Buddhas and 
Their Related Bodhisattva Attendants in South and Southeast Asia’. Draft of a paper presented at the seminar ‘Cultural Dialogues Between India and South-East Asia from the 7th to the 16th Centuries’, K.R. Cama Oriental Institute, Mumbai, January 17–18,
 2015. 
———2015b. ‘New Perspectives on the Origin and Spread of Bhadrāsana Buddhas throughout Southeast 
Asia (7th–8th Centuries CE)’ in. C. Lammerts (ed.), Buddhist Dynamics in Pre-modern and Early 
Modern Southeast Asia , pp. 127–43. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Reynolds, C.J. 2006. Seditious Histories: Contesting Thai and Southeast Asian Pasts. Seattle: University 
of Washington Press.
Rhie, M.M. 1988. Interrelationship between the Buddhist Art of China and the Art of India and Central 
Asia from 618–755 A.D. Napoli: Istituto Universitario Orientale.
Robinson , J.B.  1979. Buddha’s Lions: The Lives of the Eighty-Four Siddhas . Berkeley: Dharma Publishing.
Robson, J. 2011. ‘Mediums in Esoteric Buddhism’, in C.D. Orzech, H.H. Sørensen, and R.K. Payne (eds.), 
Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia , pp. 251–54. Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Robson, S. 1995. Deśawarṇana (Nāgarakṛtāgama) by Mpu Prapañca . Leiden: KITLV Press.
Roerich, G.N. 1949. The Blue Annals . 2 vols. Calcutta: Society of Bengal Monograph Series. [Reprint: The 
Blue Annals . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979].
——— 1959. Biography of Dharmasvāmin (Chag lo-tsa-ba Chos-rje-dpl), A Tibetan monk pilgrim ; With a 
historical and critical Introduction by A.S . Alekar . Patna: K.P. Jayaswal Research Institute.
van Ronkel, Ph.S. 1923. ‘A preliminary notice concerning Two Old Malay Inscriptions in Palembang 
(Sumatra)’, Acta Orientalia  2/1: 12–21.
Rosenstock-Huessy, E. 1956–58. Soziologie; Band I: Die Übermacht der Räume; Band II: Die Vollzahl der 
Zeiten.  Stuttgart: Kohlhammer.
bibliography.indd   429 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 444] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia430
———1993 [1938]. Out of Revolution: Autobiography of Western Man . Providence, RI/Oxford: Berg.
Rossabi, M. 1988. Khubilai Khan: His Life and Times . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Roth, G. 1980. ‘Symbolism of the Buddhist Stūpa’, in A.L. Dallapiccola and S. Zingel-Avé Lallemant 
(eds.), The Stūpa : Its Religious, Historical and Architectural Significance , pp. 182–209. Wiesbaden: 
Franz Steiner Verlag.
Rotman, A. 2008. Divine Stories: Divyāvadāna . Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Rowland, B. 1953. The art and architecture of India: Buddhist, Hindu, Jain . London: Penguin.
Roy, A. 2002. ‘A Newly Discovered Buddhist Monastery at Jagajjivanpur’, in G. Sengupta and S. Panja 
(eds.), Archaeology of Eastern India: New perspectives , pp. 551–611. Kolkata: Centre for Archaeo -
logical Studies and Training, Eastern India.
Sadakata, A. 1997. オリッサ州の仏教遺跡   (Buddhist Sites of Orissa), Proceedings of the Faculty of Letters 
of Tokai University 67: 173–96.
Sahu, J.K. 1997. ‘Rise and Fall of the Śailodbhavas’, in P.K. Mishra (ed.), Comprehensive History and 
Culture of Orissa , Vol. 1, pp. 158–77. New Delhi: Kaveri Books.
Sahu, N.K. 1958. Buddhism in Odisha . Cuttack: Utkal University.
Sakaki, R. 榊亮三郎 . 1916. Bon-Zō-Kan-Wa shiyaku taikō Hon’yaku myōgi taishū . Kyoto: Shingonshū 
Kyōtō Daigaku.
Sakurai, M. 1988. ‘Kriyāsaṇgrahapañjikā no Kanjōron (1)’, Chizan Gakuhō  37: 17.
Samuel, G. 2002. ‘Ritual Technologies and the State: The mandala from Buddhist temples of Bangladesh’, 
Journal of Bengal Art 7 : 39–56.
———2008. Origins of Yoga and Tantra . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sanderson, A.G.J.S. 1994. ‘Vajrayāna: Origin and Function’, in Buddhism into the Year 2000. International 
conference proceedings , pp. 87–102. Bangkok/Los-Angeles: Dhammakaya Foundation.
———2001. ‘History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the Pañcarātra and the Buddhist 
Yoginītantras’, in F. Grimal (ed.), Les sources et le temps: A colloquium. Pondicherry, 11–13 January 
1997, pp. 1–47. Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry/École Française d’Extrême Orient.
———2003–4. ‘Śaivism among the Khmers; Part I’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 90–91: 
349–462.
———2004. ‘Religion and the State: Śaiva Officiants in the Territory of the Brahmanical Royal Chaplain 
with an Appendix on the Provenance and Date of the Netratantra’ , Indo-Iranian Journal 47: 229–300. 
———2009. ‘The Śaiva Age—The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the Early Medieval Period’, 
in S. Einoo (ed.) , Genesis and Development of Tantrism , pp. 41–350. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental 
Culture, University of Tokyo.
Sanford, J. 1991. ‘Literary aspects of Japan’s dual-Gaṇeśa cult’, in R. Brown (ed.), Ganesh: Studies of an 
Asian God , pp. 287–326. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Sankrityayana, R.  19
34. ‘Recherches Bouddhiques: Les Origines du Mahāyāna et du Vajrayāna et les 84 
Siddhas’ , Journal Asiatique 225: 195–230.
Santiko, H. 1997. ‘The Goddess Durgā in the East-Javanese Period’, Asian Folklore Studies 56: 209—26.
Saran, S.C. 1981. ‘Vikraṃśilā University—A Centre of Tantricism’, in J.S. Jha (ed.), K.P. Jayaswal Com -
memoration Volume , pp. 117–22. Patna: K.P. Jayaswal Research Institute.
Saraswati, S.K. 1977. Tantray āna Art: An Album . Calcutta: Asiatic Society.
Sarkar, H.B. 1971. Corpus of the Inscriptions of Java . 2 vols. Calcutta: Firma K. L. Mukhopadhyay. 
———1985a. Cultural relations between India and Southeast Asian countries. New Delhi: Indian Council 
for Cultural Relations/Motilal Banarsidass.
———1985b. ‘The Kings of Srī Śailam and the foundation of the Sailendra Dynasty of Indonesia’, Bijdragen 
tot de Taal-, Land- end Volkenkunde 141: 323–38.
Sastri , H. 1923–24. ‘The Nālandā copperplate of Devapāladeva’, in R.B.H. Krishna Sastri (ed.), Epigraphia 
Indica , vol. 17, pp. 310–27. Calcutta: Manager, Government of India Central Publication Branch.
bibliography.indd   430 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 445] ---
Bibliography431
———1986. Nalanda and Its Epigraphic Material . Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications. [Reprint of first edition, 
1942. Delhi: Manager of Publications.]
Sastri, K.A.N. 1949. History of Sri Vijaya. Madras: University of Madras.
Śāstrī, T.G. (ed.). 1920–25. Āryamañjuśrīmūlakalpaḥ . (Anantaśayanasaṃskṛtagranthāvali Nos. 70, 76, 
84). Anantaśayana: Rājakīyamudraṇayantrālaye. [Reprint, 1989. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.]
Satari, S.S. 1981. ‘Proposed Program on the research of Śrīvijaya’, in S. Suleiman et al. (eds.), Studies on 
Srivijaya , pp. 85–94. Jakarta: Pusat Penelitian Arkeologi Nasional.
Sawa, R. 佐和隆研 . 1981. Mikkyō jiten . Kyoto: Hōzōkan. 
Schafer H.E. 1963. The Golden Peaches of Samarkand: A Study of T’ang Exotics . Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Scherrer-Schaub, C. 2003. ‘Tibet: An Archaeology of Written’, in C. Scherrer-Schaub (ed.), Old Tibetan 
Studies: Proceedings of the Tenth Seminar of the International Association of Tibetan Studies , Vol. 
14, pp. 217–35. Leiden: Brill.
von Schiefner, F.A. 1882. Tibetan Tales. London: James R. Osgood & Co.Schnitger, F.M. 1936. Oudheidkundige Vondsten in Padang Lawas. Leiden: E.J. Brill.———1937a. The Archaeology of Hindoo Sumatra. Leiden: E.J. Brill. ———1937b. ‘The quest for mysterious kingdoms in Sumatra: Pioneer archaeological discoveries in the 
ancient realms of Panai and Śrīvijaya, whose ruler in the eight century conquered Malaya and Cambodia, and delighted in a silver-paved pool filled with bars of gold’, The Illustrated London News , Nov. 20.
———1940. ‘Het onstaan der rijken aan de Kampar Kanan’, Koninklijk Nederlands Aardrijkskundig 
Genootschap 57: 399–401.
Schopen, G. 1982. ‘The text on the ‘‘Dhāraṇī Stone’’ from Abhayagiriya: A minor contribution to the 
study of Mahāyāna literature in Ceylon’, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Scholars  5: 101–8.
———1989. ‘A verse from the Bhadracaripraṇidhāna  in a 10th century inscription found at Nālandā’, 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 12: 149–57.
———1990. ‘The Buddha as an Owner of Property and Permanent Resident in Medieval Indian Mon -
asteries’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 18: 181–217.
———1995. ‘Deaths, Funerals, and the Division of Property in a Monastic Code’, in D.S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.),  
Buddhism in Practice , pp. 473–502. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
———2005. Figments and Fragments of Mahāyāna Buddhism in India . Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i 
Press.
———2006. ‘On monks and menial labor: Some monastic accounts of building Buddhist monasteries’, 
in P. Callieri (ed.), Architetti, capomastri, artigiani: L’organizzazione dei cantieri e della produzione 
artistica nell’Asia ellenistica: Studi offerti a Domenico Faccenna nel suo ottantesimo compleanno , 
pp. 225–45.  Roma: Istituto italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente.
Schoterman, J.A. 1986. Indonesische Sporen in Tibet.  Leiden: Brill.
———1994. ‘A surviving Amoghapāśa sādhana: Its relation to the five main statues of Candi Jago’, in 
M.J. Klokke and P. Lunsingh Scheurleer (eds.), Ancient Indonesian Sculpture, pp. 154–77. Leiden : 
KITLV Press.
von Schroeder, U. 1981. Indo-Tibetan Bronzes. Hong Kong: Visual Dharma Publications.———1990. Buddhist sculptures of Sri Lanka . Hong Kong: Visual Dharma Publications.
———2001. Buddhist Sculptures in Tibet, Volume One, India & Nepal, Volume Two, Tibet & China . Hong 
Kong: Visual Dharma Publications.
——— 2006. Empowered Masters; Tibetan Wall Paintings of Mahāsiddhas at Gyantse . Chicago/Hong 
Kong: Serindia Publications/Visual Dharma Publications.
Schweyer, A.V. 2009. ‘Buddhism in Čampā’, Moussons 13–14: 309–37.
bibliography.indd   431 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 446] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia432
Sedyawati, E. 2004. ‘Kertanagara (r. 1268–1292): Harboring ambitions beyond Java’, in K.G. Ooi (ed.), 
Southeast Asia: A Historical Encyclopedia, from Angkor Wat to East Timor , pp. 720–22. Santa 
Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. 
Sen Majumdar , G. 1983. Buddhism in ancient Bengal . Calcutta: Navana.
Sen, T. 2001. ‘In Search of Longevity and Good Karma: Chinese Diplomatic Missions to Middle India 
in the Seventh Century’, Journal of World History 12/1: 1–28.
———2002. ‘The Revival and Failure of Buddhist Transitions during the Song Dynasty’, T’oung Pao 
(Second Series) 88: 27–80.
———2003. Buddhism, Diplomacy, and Trade: The realignment of Sino-Indian Relations, 600–1400 . 
Honolulu: Association for Asian Studies/University of Hawai’i press.
———2014a. ‘Buddhism and the Maritime Crossings’, in D.C. Wong and G. Heldt (eds.), China and 
Beyond in the Mediaeval Period: Cultural Crossings and Inter-Regional Connections, pp. 39–62. 
Singapore/New Delhi: ISEAS Publishing/Manohar.
———2014b. ‘Introduction: Buddhism in Asian History’, in T. Sen (ed.), Buddhism Across Asia: Networks 
of Material, Intellectual, and Cultural Exchange, Vol. 1 , pp. xi–xxx. Singapore/New Delhi: ISEAS 
Publishing/Manohar.
Sengupta , A. 1993. Buddhist Art of Bengal (From the 3rd Century B.C. to the 13th Century A.D.) . Delhi: 
Rahul Publishing House.
Seshadri, G. 2009. ‘New Perspectives on Nagapattinam: The Medieval Port City in the Context of Political, 
Religious, and Commercial Exchanges between South India, Southeast Asia, and China’, in H. 
Kulke, K. Kesavapany and V. Sakhuja (eds.), Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia , pp. 102–34. Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Seyfort Ruegg, D. 1964. ‘Sur les rapports entre le bouddhisme et le ‘‘substrat religieux’’ indien et tibétain’, 
Journal Asiatique  252: 77–95.
———1981. The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India . Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 
———1991. ‘Mchod yon, yon mchod and mchod gnas/yon gnas: On the historiography and semantics 
of a Tibetan religio-social and religio-political concept’, in E. Steinkeller (ed.), Tibetan History and Language: Studies Dedicated to Uray Géza on his Seventieth Birthday , pp. 441–53. Vienna: 
Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien.
———1995. Ordre spirituel et ordre temporel dans la pensée bouddhique de l’Inde et du Tibet: quare 
conférences au Collège de France . Paris: Collège de France, Institut de civilisation indienne. 
———2008. The symbiosis of Buddhism with Brahmanism/Hinduism in South Asia and of Buddhism 
with ‘local cults’ in Tibet and the Himalayan region . Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften.
Sferra, F. and S. Merzagora (eds.). 2006. The Sekoddeśaṭīkā by Nāropā (Paramārthasaṃgraha) . Roma: 
Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente.
Shahidullah, M. 1928. Les chants mystiques de Kāṇha et de Saraha : Les doh ā-ko ṣa (en apabhraṃśa, avec 
les versions tibétaines) et les cary ā (en vieux-bengali) avec introduction, vocabulaire et notes. 
Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve.
Shamsul Alam , A.K.M . 1985. Sculptural Art of Bangladesh: Pre-Muslim Period . Dhaka: Department of 
Archaeology and Museums.
Sharf, R.H. 2002. ‘Appendix I: On Esoteric Buddhism in China’, in R.H. Sharf, Coming to Terms with 
Chinese Buddhism , pp. 263–78. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Sharma, N. 2011. ‘Surocolo Bronzes and their Tantric Text’, Acta Orientalia Academiae Scientiarum 
Hungaricae 64: 209–19.
Sharrock, P.D. 2006. ‘Hevajra at Bantéay Chmàr’, The Journal of the Walters Art Museum 64–65: 49–64.
———2007. ‘The Mystery of the Bayon Face Towers’, in J. Clark (ed.), Bayon: New Perspectives, pp. 
230–81. Bangkok: River Books.
bibliography.indd   432 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 447] ---
Bibliography433
———2009. ‘Garuḍa, Vajrapāṇi and religious change in Jayavarman VII’s Angkor’ , Journal of Southeast 
Asian Studies 40: 111–51.
———2011a. ‘Discussion on Vajrasattva of Barong Lovéa Em, Kandāl (K.5432, E.808)’, Appendix 4 in 
E.C. Bunker and D. Latchford (eds.), Khmer Bronzes: New Interpretations of the Past, pp. 493–96.  
Chicago: Art Media Resources.
———2011b. ‘The Naga-enthroned Buddha of Angkor’, in E.C. Bunker and D. Latchford (eds.), Khmer 
Bronzes: New Interpretations of the Past Art media Resources, pp. 481–91. Chicago: Art Media 
Resources.
———2012. ‘Kīrtipandita and the Tantras: The revival of Buddhism in 10th century Angkor’, Udaya  
10: 203–37.
———2013a. ‘The Tantric Roots of the Buddhist Pantheon of Jayavarman VII’, in M.J. Klokke and V. 
Degroot (eds.), Materializing Southeast Asia’s past: selected papers of the 12th international con -
ference of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Vol. 2 , pp. 41–55. Singapore: 
NUS Press. 
––——2013b. ‘The Yoginīs of the Bayon’, in I. Keul (ed.), ‘Yoginī’ in South Asia: Interdisciplinary Approaches, 
pp. 117–30. London and New York: Routledge.
Shāstri, H.P. 1917. A Descriptive Catalogue of Sanscrit Manuscripts in the Government Collection under the 
care of the Asiatic Society of Bengal , Vol. I: Buddhist Manuscripts. Calcutta: The Baptist Mission 
Press. 
Shāstri, H.P. (ed.) and R. G. Basak (rev.). 1969. Rāmacaritam of Sandhyākaranandīn . Calcutta: The 
Asiatic Society.
Shaw, M. 2006. Buddhist Goddesses of India . Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Sherburne, R. 2000. The Complete Works of Atīśa . New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan. 
Sheshadri, G. 2010. ‘New Perspectives on Nagapattinam’, in H. Kulke, K. Kesavapany and V. Sakhuja 
(eds.),  Nagapattinam to Suvarnadvipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast 
Asia . Singapore: ISEAS Publishing.
Shibazaki, M.  柴崎 麻 穂 . 1998. ‘ Brhatkatha hide kigentan to shichinin no vidiyaadara tenrinnō’, Minami 
Ajia Kenkyū [ JJASAS ] 10: 74–91 [unseen, Iain Sinclair].
Shinohara, K. 2014. Spells, Images, and Maṇḍalas: Tracing the Evolution of Esoteric Buddhist Rituals . 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Shiu, H. and L. Stokes. 2008. ‘Buddhist Animal Release Practices: Historic, Environmental, Public Health 
and Economic Concerns’, Contemporary Buddhism  9/2 (November): 181–96.
Sidomulyo, H. 2010. ‘From Kuṭa Rāja to Singhasāri; Towards a Revision of the Dynastic History of 13th 
Century Java’, Archipel  80: 77–138.
Sinclair, I. 2012. ‘Vajr ācāry as, monks or bust: Divergent Buddhisms in Sanskritic Asia, 900–1900 CE’. Draft 
paper (unpublished) presented at the Workshop ‘Orders and Itineraries: Buddhist, Islamic, and 
Christian Networks in Southern Asia, c. 900-1900’, Asia Research Institute (NUS), February 2012.
———2013. ‘Ming China as a Sanskritic Polity’. Paper presented at the Chinese Studies Research Seminar, 
Asia Institute, University of Melbourne, 13th December 2013.
———2014. ‘War Magic and Just War in Indian Tantric Buddhism’, Social Analysis  58/1: 149–66.
Singh, U. 2014. ‘Gifts from Other Lands: Southeast Asian Religious Endowments in India’, in U. Singh 
and P.P. Dhar (eds.), Asian Encounters: Exploring Connected Histories, pp. 43–61. New Delhi: 
Oxford University Press.
Sircar , D.C. 1949. ‘Two Tortoise-Shell Inscriptions in the Dacca Museum’ , Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society of Bengal, Letters , 15/2: 101–8.
———1967. ‘The Tārā of Candradvīpa’, in D.C. Sircar (ed.), The Śakti Cult and Tārā , pp. 128–33. Calcutta: 
University of Calcutta.
———1969–70. ‘Mainamati Plates of the Chandra Kings’, Epigraphia Indica , vol. 38, pp. 197–214.
bibliography.indd   433 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 448] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia434
———1973. Epigraphic Discoveries in East Pakistan . Calcutta: Sanskrit College.
Sirisoma, M.H. 1983. The Vaṭadāgē at Tiriyāya . Colombo: Department of Archaeology, Sri Lanka.
Skilling , P. 1997. ‘Dharmakīrti’s Durbodhāloka and the Literature of Śrīvijaya’, Journal of the Siam 
Society  85: 187–94.
———2007. ‘Geographies of Intertextuality: Buddhist Literature in pre-modern Siam’, Aséanie 19: 91–112.
———2009. ‘Pieces in the puzzle: Sanskrit literature in pre-modern Siam’, in C. Cicuzza (ed.), Buddhism 
and Buddhist Literature of South-East Asia; Selected Papers , pp. 27–45. Bangkok and Lumbini: 
Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation & Lumbini International Research Institute.
Skorupski, T. 1983. The Sarvadurgatipariśodhana Tantra: Elimination of All Evil Destinies . Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass. 
———2002. Kriyāsaṃgraha : Compendium of Buddhist Rituals ; An abridged version . Tring, UK: The 
Institute of Buddhist Studies. 
Ślączka, A. 2007. Temple Consecration Rituals in Ancient India: Text and Archaeology . Leiden: Brill. 
Slobodnik, M. 1997. ‘The early policy of Emperor Tang Dezong (779–805) towards Inner Asia’, Asian 
and African Studies 6/2: 184–96. 
Slouber, M.J. 2007. The Cult of Khaḍgarāvaṇa. MA thesis, University of California, Berkeley.
———2012. Gāruḍa Medicine: A History of Snakebite and Religious Healing in South Asia . PhD disser -
tation, University of California, Berkeley.
Slusser, M.S. 1982. Nepal Mandala, Vols. 1 and 2. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Smith, F.M. 2006. The Self Possessed: Deity and Spirit Possession in South Asian Literature and Civilization . 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Snellgrove, D.L. 1959a. The Hevajra Tantra: A Critical Study . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———1959b. ‘The Notion of Divine Kingship in Tantric Buddhism’, in La Regalità Sacra: Contributi 
al tema del VII Congresso Internazionale di Storia delle Religioni , Roma, Aprile 1955, pp . 204–18.  
Leiden: Brill.
———1987. Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists and their Tibetan successors. Boston: Shambhala.
Snellgrove, D.L. and Lokesh Chandra. 1981. Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha . New Delhi: Motilal Banar -
sidass.
Snodgrass, A. 1988. The Matrix and Diamond World Mandalas in Shingon Buddhism. 2 vols. New Delhi: 
Aditya Prakashan.
———1992. The Symbolism of the Stupa . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidaas
Soebadio, H. 1971. Jñānasiddhānta; Secret Lore of the Balinese Śaiva Priest . The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Soekmono, D. 1975. ‘Candi, fungsi dan pengertiannya. Le candi, sa fonction et sa conception’, Bulletin 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 62: 441–55.
———1976. Chandi Borobudur: A Monument of Mankind . Assen/Amsterdam/Paris: Van Gorcum/The 
Unesco Press.
———1981. ‘The Meaning of Chandi Borobudur’, in Proceedings of the International Symposium on 
Chandi Borobudur , pp. 129–35. Tokyo: The Executive Committee for the International Symposium 
on Chandi Borobudur.
———1995. The Javanese candi: Function and meaning . Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Soetrisno, Rdn.B. 1985. Sejarah Percandian daerah Malang. Malang: mimeographed, self-published.
Soothill, W.E. and L. Hodous. 1977. A Dictionary of Chinese Buddhist Terms . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Sprengard, K.A. and R. Ptak. 1994. ‘Preface’, in K.A. Sprengard and R. Ptak (eds.), Maritime Asia: Profit 
Maximisation, Ethics and Trade Structure , pp. vii–xi. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
van Stein Callenfels, P.V. 1916. ‘De Kuñjarakarṇa-Legende aan Tjandi Toempang (Djago)’, Tijdschrift  
voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 57: 445–54.
Strickmann, M. 1996. Mantras et mandarins: Le bouddhisme tantrique en Chine . Paris: Gallimard.
———2002. Chinese Magical Medicine . Stanford: Stanford University Press.
bibliography.indd   434 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 449] ---
Bibliography435
Stutterheim, W.F. 1932. ‘Van een tja ṇḍi, ee
n grottempel en een oorkonde’, Djåwå 12: 292–303.
———1956. ‘Chaṇḍi Barabuḍur: Name, Form & Meaning’, in W.F. Stutterheim , Studies in Indonesian 
Archaelogy , pp. 3–90. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
———1989. Rama-Legends and Rama-Reliefs in Indonesia. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre 
for the Arts. [Trans. of 1925 edition.]
Subuddhi, U. 1978. The Bhauma-karas of Odisha . Calcutta: Punthi Pustak.
Sugiki, T. 2001. ‘Chakurasanvaratantorano Seiritsu Dankai ni tsuite: Oyobi Jayabhadra saku Śrīcakra -
sa
ṃvarapañjikā Kōtei Bonpon’, Chisan Gakuhō  50, pp. 91–141.
Suleiman, S. 1981. ‘Research on Srivijaya history and art history’, in Studies on Srivijaya, pp. 53–69. 
Jakarta: Pusat Penelitian Arkeologi Nasional.
Sundberg, J. 2003. ‘A Buddhist mantra recovered from the Ratu Baka plateau: A preliminary study of 
its implications for Śailendra-era Java’,  Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 159: 163–88.
———2004. ‘The wilderness monks of the Abhayagirivihāra and the origins of Sino-Javanese esoteric 
Buddhism’, in Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-en Volkenkunde 160: 95–123.
———2006. ‘Considerations on the dating of the Barabuḍur stūpa’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde 162: 95–132.
———2009. ‘The state of Matarām: a review of recent efforts to clarify its history’, in M. Long (ed.), 
Caṇḍi Meṇḍut: Womb of the Tathāgata , pp. 285–318. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
———2011. ‘The Old Sundanese Carita Parahyangan, King Warak and the fracturing of the Javanese 
polity, c. 803 A.D.’, in ManjuShree (ed.), From beyond the Eastern Horizon: Essays in honour of 
Professor Lokesh Chandra , pp. 143–57. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
———2014 [2015]. ‘The Abhayagirivihāra’s pāṃśukūlika  monks in Second Lambakaṇṇa Śrī Laṅkā and 
Śailendra Java: The efflorescence and fall of a center of influence in early Esoteric Buddhism’, 
Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies (Third Series) 12: 49–185.
———2016a. ‘Imagine Saṃvara at Sajiwan: Śrī Kahulunnan and transgressive practice at the temples 
of Central Java’. Manuscript, in preparation.
———2016b. ‘Episodes of contested succession and dynastic discontinuity in medieval Central Javanese 
history: A recontextualization and examination of their consequences for the renaissance of power 
in Sumatra’. Manuscript, in preparation.
———2016c. ‘Kumbhayoni and the Śaiva edifices on the Gunung Kidul, 856–863 AD’. Manuscript, in 
preparation.
Sundberg, J. (in collaboration with R. Giebel). 2011. ‘The Life of the Tang Court Vajrabodhi as Chronicled 
by Lü Xiang ( 呂向): South Indian and Śrī Laṅkān Antecedents to the Arrival of the Buddhist 
Vajrayāna in Eighth-Century Java and China’, Pacific World : Journal of the Institute of Buddhist 
Studies (Third Series) 13: 129–222.
Susuki, T. (ed.). 1955–61. The Tibetan Tripitaka, Peking Edition . Tokyo/Kyoto: Tibetan Tripitaka Research 
Institute.
Szántó, P.D. 2012. Selected Chapters from the Catu ṣpīṭha tantra. (1/2) Introductory study with the annotated 
translation of selected chapters . PhD dissertation, Oxford University. 
———2016. ‘Some unknown/unedited fragments of Cakrasaṃvara  literature’, handout distributed at 
the conference ‘Transgression and Encounters with the Terrible in Buddhist and Śaiva Tantras’, University of Zurich, 19–20 February 2016.
———forthcoming. ‘Vāgīśvarakīrti’, in D. Goodall et al. (eds.), Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions: Essays 
in Honour of Alexis Sanderson . Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Taidō, K. 2012. 全訳金剛頂大秘密瑜伽タントラ  / Zen’yaku Kong ōchōdaihimitsu yuga tantora . Urayasu-
shi: Kishin Shobō.
———2014. 全訳降三世  大儀 軌王/同ムディタコーシャ註釈  / Zen’yaku gōzanze daigiki ōdō muditakōsha 
chūshaku . Urayasu: Kishinshobō 起心書房  (2014/3).
bibliography.indd   435 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 450] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia436
Taim, E.A.P. 2013. ‘Ancient settlement of Muaro Jambi and its related sites’. Paper presented to SPAFA 
Conference on Archaeology. Thailand: Burapha University.
Takahashi, H. 1988. ‘Kong ōkai daimandara giki issai kong ō shutsugen: yoteki (A supplement of Va -
jradh ātumah āmaṇḍal opāyi ka-sarvavajrodaya), Buzan Gakuhō 33: 131(1)–81(58).
Takakusu, J. 1966. A Record of the Buddhist religion as practised in India and the Malay Archipelago, I-Tsing 
(A.D. 671–695).  Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. [Reprint of 1896 edition. London: Clarendon Press.]
Tanaka, K. 田中公明 . 2000. ‘Nāgabodhi の Śrī-guhyasamājamaṇḍalopāyikā-viṃśati-vidhi における
śiṣyādhivāsanavidhi について ’, Mikkyo Bunka  205: 68–85.
———2002. ‘Nāgabodhi の Śrī-guhyasamājamaṇḍalopāyikā-viṃśati-vidhi における  śiṣyādhivāsanavidhi
について ’, Mikkyo Bunka  209: 1–15.
———2003a. ‘Nāgabodhi の Śrī-guhyasamājamaṇḍalopāyikā-viṃśati-vidhi における灌頂次第 ’, Toyo 
Bunka Kenkyusyokyo  142: 193–217.
———2003b. ‘Nāgabodhi の Śrī guhyasamājamaṇḍalopāyikā-viṃśati-vidhi における灌頂の後方便につ
いて ’, Toyo Bunka Kenkyusyokyo  144: 233–48.
———2004. ‘Nāgabodhi’s Śrī-guhyasamāja-maṇḍalopāyikā-viṃśati-vidhi: The Tibetan Translation 
and Sanskrit Text of Chapters 5 and 6’, in S. Hino and T. Wada (eds.), Three Mountains and Seven 
Rivers , pp. 857–69. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
———2008. ‘Nālandā as a Centre of Esoteric Buddhism’, in C. Mani (ed.), The Heritage of Nalanda , pp. 
93–95. New Delhi: Asoka Mission.
———2010. Indo ni okeru mandara no seiritsu to hatten インドにおける曼荼羅の成立と発  展 (Genesis 
and development of the maṇḍala in India ). Tokyo: Shunjūsha. 
———2012. ‘ Himitsu shūe ni okeru masayoshi no mandara ni tsuite: Nāgabodhi no Adachi shidai ron 
dai 4 shō sansukuritto shahon rōmaji ka tekisuto (Nāgabodhi’s * Samājasādhanavyavasthālī : The 
Tibetan Translation and Sanskrit Text of Chapter IV)’, Tōyō bunka kenkyūjo kiyō  (Memoirs of the 
Institute for Advanced Studies on Asia ) 162: 61–76.
———2014. オリッサ州ウダヤギリⅡ出土の石刻陀羅尼について  (‘A Newly Identified Dhāra ṇī-sū tra from 
Udayagiri II’), The Memoirs of Institute for Advanced Studies on Asia 166: 124(161)–34(151).
Taniguchi, F. 1992. ‘Quotations from the First Bhāvanākrama  of Kamalaśīla Found in Some Indian Texts’, 
in S. Ihara and Z. Yamaguchi (eds.), Tibetan Studies : Proceedings of the 5th Seminar of the Interna -
tional Association for Tibetan Studies , Narita 1989 , Vol. 1, pp. 303–8. Narita: Naritasan Shinshoji. 
Cool, W. 1897. With the Dutch in the East (trans. E.J . Taylor). London: Luzac & Co.
Teeuw, A. 1991. ‘The text’, in J.J. Ras and S.O. Robson (eds.), Variation, transformation and meaning: 
Studies on Indonesian literatures in honour of A. Teeuw, pp. 211–29. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Teeuw, A. and S.O. Robson. 1981. Kuñjarakarṇa Dharmakathana: Liberation through the law of the 
Buddha; An Old Javanese poem by Mpu Dusun . The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Thapar, R. 2002. The Penguin History of Early India: From the origins to AD 1300 . New Delhi: Penguin 
Books.
Todaro, D.A. 1985. An Annotated Translation of the ‘Tattvasaṃgraha’ (Part 1) with an Explanation of 
the Role of the ‘Tattvasaṃgraha’ Lineage in the Teachings of Kūkai . PhD dissertation, Columbia 
University.
Toganoo S. 1935. Himitsu jisō no kenkyū . Kōyasan: Kōyasan Daigaku Shuppanbu.
Tomabechi, T. 2008. ‘Vitapāda, Śākyamitra and Āryadeva: On a Transitional Stage in the History of 
the Guhyasamāja Exegesis’ in Editorial Board, ICEBS (eds.), Esoteric  Buddhist Studies: Identity 
in Diversity. Proceedings of the International Conference on Esoteric Buddhist Studies, Koyasan University, 5 Sept.–8 Sept. 2006, pp. 171–79. Koyasan: Koyasan University.
———2009. Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā:  Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts . Beijing/Vienna: China 
Tibetology Publishing House/Austrian Academy of Sciences Press.
Törzsök, J. 2000. ‘Tantric Goddesses and their Supernatural Powers in the Trika of Kashmir ( bhedatraya  
bibliography.indd   436 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 451] ---
Bibliography437
in the Siddhayogeśvarīmata )’, Rivista  degli Studi Orientali 78: 131–47.
Tournier, V. 2014. ‘Mahākāśyapa, His Lineage, and the Wish for Buddhahood: Reading Anew the 
Bodhgayā Inscriptions of Mahānāman’, Indo-Iranian Journal  57: 1–60.
Tribe, A. 2000. Mantranaya/Vajrayāna: Tantric Buddhism in India’, in P. Williams and A. Tribe, Bud -
dhist Thought : A complete introduction to the Indian tradition, pp. 197–244. London: Routledge.
Tripathi, S. 1988. Guhyasamāja Tantra or Tathāgataguhyaka. Second edition. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute. 
Tucci, G. 1931. ‘The Sea and Land Travels of a Buddhist Sādhu in the Sixteenth Century’, The Indian 
Historical Quarterly 7/4: 683–702.
———1935. Indo-Tibetica , Vol. 3. Roma: Reale Accademia d’Italia.
———1949. Tibetan Painted Scrolls . 4 vols. Roma: Libreria dello Stato.
———1962. ‘The wives of Sroṅ btsan sgam po’, Oriens Extremus  9: 121–26.
———1988. Stūpa: Art, Architectonics and Symbolism . New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan. 
Tucci, G. and W. Heissig. 1970. Die Religionen Tibets und der Mongolei . Stuttgart: Kohlhammer.
Twitchett, D.C. and J.K. Fairbank. 1978. The Cambridge History of China: Sui and T’ang China , Vol. 3. 
Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ui, H., et al. (eds.). 1934. A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons (BKah-hgyur and Bstan-
hgyur). Sendai: Tôhoku Imperial University. 
Vaidya, P.L. (ed.). 1964. Mahāyānasūtrasaṁgraha , Part II.  Darbhanga: Milthila Institute.
Verardi , G. 2011. Hardships and Downfall of Buddhism in India . Delhi: Manohar Publishers.
Verstappen, H.Th. 1973. A Geomorphological Reconnaissance of Sumatra and Adjacent Islands (Indonesia). 
Groningen: Wolters-Noordhof.
Verwey A.H.N. 1962. ‘A distant relative of the silver Mañjuśrī from Ngemplak Semongan’, Mededelingen 
van het Rijksmuseum voor Volkenkunde 15: 132–47.
Vogel, J.Ph. 1919. ‘Het Koninkrijk Śrīvijaya’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde 75: 626–37.
Voûte, C. and M. Long. 2008. Borobudur: Pyramid of the Cosmic Buddha . New Delhi: D.K. Printworld.
Waddell, L.A. 1905. Lhasa and its Mysteries: With a Record of the British Tibetan Expedition of 1903–1904. 
London: J. Murray.
———1911. ‘Tibetan Invasion of India in 647 AD and Its Results’, The Imperial and Asiatic Quarterly 
Review and Oriental and Colonial Record 31, no. 61–62 (January–April): 37–65.
Walshe, M. 1955. The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the D īgh a Nik āya. B oston: Wisdom 
Publications.
Walters, J. 1997. ‘Mahāyāna, Theravāda and the origins of the Mahāvihāra’, The Sri Lanka Journal of the 
Humanities  23/1–2: 100–19.
———1999. ‘Mahāsena at the Mahāvihāra: On the Intepretation and Politics of History in Pre-Colonial 
Sri Lanka’, in D. Ali (ed.), Invoking the Past: The Uses of History in South Asia , pp. 322–66. New 
Delhi: Oxford University Press.
———2000. ‘Buddhist history: The Sri Lankan Pāli vaṃsa s and their community’, in R. Inden (ed.), 
Querying the medieval: Texts and the history of practices in South Asia , pp. 99–164. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Watters, T. 1904. On Yuan Chwang’s travels in India 629–645AD (edited after his death by T.W. Rhys 
Davids and S.W. Bushell). London: Royal Asiatic Society.
Wayman, A. 1973. The Buddhist Tantras: Light on Indo-Tibetan esotericism . New York: S. Weiser. 
———1977. Yoga of the Guhyasamājatantra . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
———1981. ‘Reflections on the theory of Barabudur as a Mandala ’, in L. Gomez and H.W. Woodward, 
Jr. (eds.), Barabudur: History and Significance of a Buddhist Monument, pp.  139–72. Berkeley: 
Asian Humanities Press.
———1984. ‘The Mahāvairocanasūtra and the Kriyā-Saṃgraha’, Kōbōdaishi to Gendai , pp. 23–34.Tokyo: 
Chikuma Shobō.
bibliography.indd   437 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 452] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia438
Wedemeyer, C.K. 1999. Vajrayāna and its Doubles : A critical historiography , exposition , and translation 
of the Tantric works of Āryadeva . PhD dissertation, Columbia University.
——— 2013. Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism: History, Semiology, and Transgression in the Indian 
Traditions . New York: Columbia University Press.
Weerasinghe, S.G.M. 1995. A History of the Cultural Relations Between Sri Lanka and China: An Aspect 
of the Silk Route . Colombo: The Central Cultural Fund, The Ministry of Cultural Affairs.
Weinberger, S.N. 2003. The Significance of Yoga Tantra and the Compendium of Principles  (Tattvasaṃgraha 
Tantra) within Tantric Buddhism in India and Tibet . PhD dissertation, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville.
Weiner, S.L. 1962. ‘From Gupta to Pala Sculpture’, Artibus Asiae  25/2–3: 167–92.
Weinstein, S. 1987. Buddhism under the T’ang . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weissenborn , K. 2012a. ‘Eine Auflistung illuminierter buddhistischer Sanskrit-Handschriften aus Os -
tindien’, Berliner Indologische Studien 20: 277–318.
———2012b. Buchkunst aus Nālandā: Die Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā-Handschrift in der Royal Asiatic 
Society/London (Ms. Hodgson 1) und ihre Stellung in der Pāla-Buchmalerei des 11./12. Jahrhunderts . 
Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien Universität Wien.
Welter, A. 2011. ‘From Cakravartin Ideal to Realpolitik: Zanning and the Accommodation of Chinese 
Buddhism to Neo-Confucianism’, Yugyo Sasang Yeongu (The Study of Confucianism ) 44: 105–28.
Wheatley, P. 1983. Nagara and Commandery . Chicago: University of Chicago.
White, D.G. 1996. The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in medieval India . Chicago and London: The 
University of Chicago Press.
———2000. ‘Introduction; Tantra in Practice: Mapping a Tradition’, in D.G. White (ed.), Tantra in 
Practice , pp. 3–38. Princeton/Oxford: Princeton University Press.
———2012. ‘Netra Tantra at the Crossroads of the Demonological Cosmopolis’, Journal of Hindu Studies 
5: 145–71.
Whitfield, S. 2007. ‘Was there a Silk Road?’, Asian Medicine 3: 201–13.
Wijesuriya, G. 1998. Buddhist Meditation Monasteries of Sri Lanka (Memoirs of the Archaeological 
Survey of Sri Lanka, Volume 10). Pikakotte: State Printing Corporation.
Willer, T.J. 1849. ‘The Battas of Mandheling and Pertibi’, Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern 
Asia 3: 366–78. 
Williams, J. 1982. The Art of Gupta India: Empire and Province . Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Williams, P., et al. 2012. Buddhist Thought : A Complete Introduction to the Indian Tradition . New York: 
Routledge. 
Willets, W. 1963. ‘An 8th Century Buddhist Monastic Foundation’, Oriental Art  9/1 (Spring): 15–21.
Wisseman Christie, J. 1998. ‘The Medieval Tamil-Language Inscriptions in Southeast Asia and China’, 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 29/2 (September): 239–68.
Wittern, C. 2004. WWW Database of Chinese Buddhist texts. Kyoto: Kyoto University. [Last accessed 
February 2016 at: http://www.kanji.zinbun.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~wittern/can/can2/ind/canwww.htm]
Wolff, S. 1924. Aesthetiek en oorsprong der Hindoe-kunst op Java . Semarang/Soerabaia/Bandoeng: Van 
Dorp.
Wolters, O.W. 1967 Early Indonesian Commerce: The Origins of Sumatra. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
———1999. History, Culture and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives . Second Edition. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Wong, D.C. and G. Heldt. 2014. ‘Introduction: Cultural Crossings’, in D.C. Wong and G. Heldt (eds.), 
China and Beyond in the Mediaeval Period: Cultural Crossings and Inter-Regional Connections. 
Singapore/New Delhi: ISEAS Publishing/Manohar.
Wong, W.S. 2014. ‘Introduction’, in Shen, W. (ed.), Da xi le yu da yuan man: qing zhu Tan Xiyong xian 
sheng ba shi hua dan Han Zang fo xue yan jiu lun ji = 大喜乐与大圆满——庆祝谈锡永先生八十
bibliography.indd   438 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 453] ---
Bibliography439
华诞汉藏佛学研究论集  (Omniscient Wisdom—Architecture of the Heart Sutra, the Mandala and 
the Samye Monastery, Supreme Bliss and Great Perfection: Studies in Sino-Tibetan Buddhism in 
Honor of Master Tam Shek-wing’s 80th Birthday) . Beijing: China Tibetology Publishing House.
Woodward, H.W. Jr. 1976. ‘Review of Sinhalese Monastic Architecture: The Vihāras of Anurādhapura by 
Senake Bandaranayake’, Journal of the American Oriental Society , 96/2: 329–31.
———1977. ‘A Chinese silk depicted at Candi Sewu’, in: K.L. Hutterer (ed.), Asia: Perspectives from 
prehistory, history, and ethnography , pp. 233–43. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan, Center 
for South and Southeast Asian Studies.
———1981. ‘Tantric Buddhism at Angkor Thom’, Ars Orientalis 12: 57–67.———1988. ‘Southeast Asian traces of the Buddhist pilgrims’, Muse: Annual of the Museum of Art and 
Archaeology, University of Missouri-Columbia 22: 75–91.
———1990. ‘The life of the Buddha in the Pāla monastic environment’, Journal of the Walters Art Gallery 
48: 13–17.
———1999. ‘On Borobudur’s upper terraces’, Oriental Art  45/3: 34–43.
———2003 . The Art and Archaeology of Thailand: From Prehistoric Times through the Thirteenth Century. 
Leiden:  Brill.
———2004. ‘Review article: Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia in the Light of Recent Scholarship’, 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 35/2: 329–54. 
———2009. ‘Bianhong, Mastermind of Borobudur’, Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist 
Studies (Third Series) 11: 25–60.
———2011. ‘The temple of Dong Duong and the Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra’, in Manjushree (ed.), From Beyond 
the Easter Horizon; Essays in Honour of Professor Lokesh Chandra , pp. 33–42. New Delhi: Aditya 
Prakashan.
Worsley, P. 1991. ‘Mpu Tantular’s kakawin Arjunawijaya and conceptions of kingship in fourteenth 
century Java’, in J.J. Ras and S.O. Robson (eds.), Variation, Transformation and Meaning: Studies on Indonesian Literatures in Honour of A. Teeuw, pp . 163–90. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Wujastyk, D. 2003. The Roots of Ayurveda: Selections from Sanskrit Medical Writings . London: Penguin 
Books.
Wulff, K. 1935. ‘Sang Hyang Kamahāyānan Mantrānaya: Ansprache bei der Weihe buddhistischer Mönche 
aus dem altjavanischen übersetzt und sprachlich erläutert’, Historisk-filologiske Meddelelser  21/4: 
9–10.
Wylie, T.V. 1977. ‘The first Mongol conquest of Tibet reinterpreted’, Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 
37/1: 103–33.
Yamano, C. 2009. ‘Śrīparvata as Nāgārjuna’s Abode: At the confluence of legend, history, and geography’, 
Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 57/3: 1246–52.
Yang, H.S. et al. (eds., trs.). 1984. The Hye Ch’o Diary: Memoir of the Pilgrimage to the Five Regions of 
India . Berkeley/Seoul: Asian Humanities Press/Po Chin Chai Ltd. 
Yang, Y. 1996. Chinese Ancient Architecture Overview . Tianjin: Tianjin Science and Technique Publishers.
Yijing, see Takakusu 1896. Yoritomi, M. 
頼富本宏 . 1979. Chūgoku mikkyō no kenkyū 中国密教の研究  Tokyo: Daitō Shuppansha.
Yzerman, J.W. 1893. ‘Beschrijving van de Boeddhitische Bouwwerken te Moeara Takoes’, Tijdschrift voor 
Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 35: 48–74.
Zakariah , A.K.M. 1994. ‘Jagaddala Mahavihara’, Journal of the Varendra Research Museum 8: 29–41.
Zakharov, A.O. 2012. ‘The Śailendras Reconsidered’, Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre Working Paper 12.Zhu, Tianshu. 2003. ‘The Sun God and the Wind Deity at Kizil’, in M. Compareti, P. Raffetta and G. 
Scarcia (eds.), Ēran ud Anērān. Studies Presented to Boris Ilich Marshak on the Occasion of his 
70th Birthday , pp. 681–718. Venice: Cafoscarina. 
Zimmer, H. 1952. Philosophies of India . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
bibliography.indd   439 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 454] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia440
Zoetmulder, P.J. 1974. Kalangwan; A Summary of Old Javanese Literature. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Zürcher, E. 1972. The Buddhist Conquest of China . Leiden: Brill.
bibliography.indd   440 12/7/16   3:37 PM

--- [Page 455] ---
Abang, cylindrical stone inscription 334
Abeyadana 20n7; temple 20Abhayagiri(vihāra) 9n29, 10, 15, 17, 343–44, 
349–52, 353nn6–7, 355–61, 362n22, 363–69, 371–72, 374–76; esoteric doctrines 351; inscrip-
tion 324, 350, 361, 365, 367, 369; monks 350, 
352, 356–358n16, 361, 362n20, 364, 366–67, 369, 371–76; prākāra  walls of 351; ‘replicas’ in South-
east Asia 17n56, 359n16; structure 362n22; 
stūpa  366; 
abhicāra  (ābhicāraka , ābhicāruka ) 330, 333, 346, 384
Abhidharmakoṣa  201n39
Abhidharmakośabh
ā
ṣy
a 390
Abhisamayālaṅkāra  262–63; literature 11, 19
abhiṣeka  4, 7, 17, 29, 39, 43, 193–94, 201, 223, 
240, 245, 252, 278, 357, 369; ācārya - 39n60; 
cakravarty - 39; pañca - 39n60; pañcakula - 
39n60; rājya - 29, 39, 43, 47; * saptaratna-  39; 
*Vajradhātu- 33–34
Acala, Bodhisattva 118, 340, 340n72, 376; rites 137; 
mantra 137 
ācārya( s) 7, 34, 40, 57n163, 99, 134n49, 358; three 
great ācārya s of mid-Tang period 14
Account of Activities  131n27
Account of Conduct  (T 2056) 132
Acri, A. 326n12, 329n24, 345, 378, 393
*Adbhutakalpa (* Ekāk ṣa
ra-adbhuto ṣṇīṣa
kalpa , T
953) 37, 43, 46–48n93, 50n102, 51n103
Adhyardha śat
ikāprajñāpāramitāsutra (T  243, APP )
69, 71, 90
Ādityavarman, King 8, 20n68, 21, 22n73, 149, 269Ādi-Buddha 19n61, 100, 232, 278n9; see also
Vajrasattva
advaya 76, 375
Aek Sangkilon inscription 266–68, 270Advayavajra 21n69
Āgamas (Buddhist) 39
Agastya 363n24Aggabodhi IV, King 354n9, 357Aggabodhi V, King 356–57Aggabodhi VI, King 353–54, 356, 365n25Agni 56
Agnipurā
ṇa 47n
88, 321, 321n38, 338n63
Airlaṅga, King 377n52Aizen 376n51; subjugation of Īśvara and Nārāyaṇa 323Aja
ṇṭ
ā 215–16
Aji Dharma  (Aṅliṅ Darma , Aridharma ) 275, 
278n16, 279n16, 284, 285n25, 289, 290n32, 291, 294, 296, 298–99, 304n48, 317n64
*Ājñāgarbha 29, 38, 50; see also Bianhong
Akalāṅka 372n44
ākarṣa
ṇa 33
0–34, 336, 336n57, 338n62, 338n64,
339n66, 342–43, 345
Ākāśagarbha, Bodhisattva 52n115, 90, 135
akṣamālā  353n6
Akṣayamatisūtra  77
Akṣobhya 57, 81, 88–89, 90n64, 91, 149, 192, 198,
201, 219, 232–33, 234n29, 243, 248, 264, 267, 280n21, 335; head of the vajra  family 243
Alan Gua 153Alaungsitthu 20n67Allinger, E. 171Aluonashun (* Aruṇāśa?) 194
Amarako
śa 110
n107
Amaramālā  110n107
Amarāvatī 18n60Amitābha 52n113, 88–89, 90n64, 91, 232–33, 178, 
192, 202, 264, 267, 268, 278n9, 280n21, 281n22 
Amitāyus 57
amoghapā
śa (amog
ha-chain) 277, 281, 282, 284n24, 
292–93, 295, 315n58–59, 319
Amoghapāśa (Avalokiteśvara/Lokeśvara) 53n129, 
54n134, 149, 234n32, 244, 268–69, 277–78, 281, 
317, 318n68; inscription of 142, 149; iconogra-
phy at Candi Jago 277; statue of Jago 278n13; 
maṇḍa
la of 280–81
Amoghapā śa
kalparāja  (AKR, T 1092 ) 43n67, 48n93, 
55n144INDEX
Index.indd   441 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 456] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 442
Amoghapā śa sādhana 21n73
Amoghasiddhi 57, 88–89, 178, 202, 232–33, 264, 
267, 280n21, 316, 338n64, 340n72
Amoghavajra (Bukong) 5n15, 10, 12, 14–15, 17, 
30–31, 33, 34n27, 37–40, 42–43, 45, 47–48, 
51n102–54n141, 56n156, 86, 90, 99, 101, 111, 
125–28, 125n7, 130–34, 132n32, 136–38, 137n53, 
203–206, 237, 239–41, 242n10, 244, 338, 338n64, 
339, 341n73, 351, 353–58, 360, 365n25, 369–70, 
375–76, 381, 383, 388n45, 389–91; biographies 
86; journey to the Five Indias 358; meeting 
with Vajrabodhi in Java 12, 86n47, 205n58, 358; 
memorial stele inscription 131n27, 132, 137; 
travels of 382
Amṛtakuṇḍali(n) 46, 54, 337, 337n60, 347, 370n39; 
mantra 337n60; 
Amṛtaku
ṇḍ
alivināyakabandhadhāra ṇī
 337, 337n60
Amṛteśa (Am ṛteśvara, Am ṛteśabhairava) 332–34
Ānandagarbha 99n78, 324, 337n60
Anaṅgavajra 76, 82Anaṅgavarman 20n68Angkor 19–20, 244, 248–49, 252, 266, 371n42Angkor Thom 20n66
Angling Darma ( Aridharma ) 275n4; see also Aji 
Dharma
Anige 145Aniko 317n67An Lushan Rebellions 34n31, 128–31, 131n31, 137An Thai stele 12n38
Anugaṇṭhipada  391
Anurādhapura 10, 15, 240, 350, 352–53, 354n9, 
355n9, 356, 360–61, 366, 373, 375; period 352
Anuttarapūjā 105, 107–109, 111Anuttarayoga 82, 93n72
An Xinggui 133, 133n37Aparājita 40, 54, 56
ārāma  215, 218
Arapacana 88Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) 191, 193n5, 
194n9, 195n15
Ardhanārīśvara 329, 366Aris (or Araññavāsins) 20n67, 166n17Arjuna 279n16, 289, 291, 293–94, 296, 298–99, 
302–305, 309n53, 315–16
Arjunavivāha  279n16, 296n41, 299, 304, 316, 318
Arjunavijaya  158
Artha
śās
tra 18n59 , 345
Āryadeva 75, 98
Āryamañju śr
īmūlakalpa  212
Āryapāda (or Ārya tradition) 71Asaṅga 77, 83Asher, F.M. 195n19Aśoka, Emperor 114, 211; tree 219Aśokakāntā-Mārīcī 219Aṣ
ṭa
dikpālas 43n69
Aṣṭ
a-mahā-bhaya-kliṅ  85n43, 87
Aṣṭa
mahābhaya Tārā, see Tārā
Aṣṭa
mīvrata 277
Aṣṭ
āṅgahṛdaya  386n33
Aṣṭ
asāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā  8, 10n32, 12, 115, 
166, 170, 180, 260; Chinese ( T 224, T 227) 
54n142
Astrology, Indian 384n21Asuras 368n32, 369n33Aśvaghoṣa 98
Atharvaveda  330
Atharvavedapari
śi
ṣṭ
a 333n47
Atikū
ṭa 1
4, 39
Atiraṇacaṇḍeśvara inscription 17Atīśa (a.k.a. Dīpaṅkaraśrījñāna) 11, 19–20, 87n53, 
107, 113, 115–21, 166, 174, 178, 241, 252, 261–63, 
265–66, 278n9, 339n66;  account of journey to 
Suvarṇadvīpa 19n63; relics of 120; school 119; 
see also Candragharba
Atwood, C.P. 147–48
Avadāna s 110
avaivartaka  (Mahāyāna) monks 169n27
Avalokiteśvara (Lokeśvara) 8, 13, 52, 53n129, 
80–81, 90, 107, 165, 166n11, 171, 173n53, 175–78, 
180–82, 184, 189, 190, 217, 219–22, 225, 227, 
229–30, 239–40, 242–43, 257, 259, 277, 366, 
370–71; icons from Chaiya, Perak and Wonogiri 
12; images of 211
āvāsa  215, 218
āve
śa r
ites 382, 384
Āyurvedic acupuncture 386n33
Bacon, F. 155Bagan 166, 170–71, 183, 187–89; visual culture 
linkages with Bengal 166
Bahal II 268Bajradevī 158, 278
Bajradhātu (Subhūti) Tantra , see Subhūti  
Bajradhātvīśvarī 110Bajrapāṇi 91Bālaputra(deva), King 18, 176, 207, 213, 265, 345, 393–94Balinese ‘Bauddha Brahmins’ 13n40Bangladesh 172, 175–77, 189, 191n3, 195, 200n37, 
207; and Java 175
Banteay Chhmar 20n66, 21
Index.indd   442 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 457] ---
Index443
Baosiwei 14
Baphuon 247Barong 3n10Batanghari, River 19, 83n41, 259–61, 263, 268Batu Pahat inscription 85Batujaya 85Bauddha-Śaiva dynamics 349, 350n3, 351n3, 366; 
antagonistic paradigm 21; anti-Śaiva Buddhist 
myths 369; anti- Śaiva polemic s 323–24, 337, 
341–45, 347; Buddhaicized Śaiva deities in 
Sri Lanka 365; divide 9; doctrinal disputes 
370; Hindu gods and goddesses in Buddhist 
contexts 182–83; problem of syncretism 21; 
subordination of Hindu deities at Candi Sewu 
372n43; violence 372n44
Bautze-Picron, C. 20, 79, 197, 265n4, 268, 268n6Bay of Bengal 195, 205, 211; interaction sphere 211; 
as the ‘Kaliṅga Sea’ 212
Bayon state temple 20n66, 21, 244, 278n15Behera, K.S. 213Bell, Sir C. 120Bena, King 194Benedict, A. 151–52Bengal 165–90, 200–201, 207; copperplate inscrip-
tions 167–69, 167n21, 168n28; Muslim conquest 
374; relations with Bagan 170, 190; relations 
with Tibet 167, 175, 190, 188n113; see also 
Gauḍīdvīpa
Benisti, M. 213Berg, C.C. 141–43, 151, 158Bernet Kempers, A. J. 285n26, 318Beyer, S. 87, 119
Bhadracarī 87, 107, 109–11, 265
Bhadreśvara 87–88
Bhagavatavyākhyātantra 75
Bhairava/Mahākāla 4, 134n48, 268, 332–33, 345; 
rituals 150–51n14
Bhairavika Priest 21n71
bhairab naach  3n10
Bhaiṣajyaguruvaiḍūryaprabhasūtra  107
Bhaiṣajyarāja 370Bhaiṣajyasamudgata 370Bhairava 184Bhājā 215
bhakti  110
Bharāla 76Bhart ṛhari 81n36
Bhāskaravarman, King 202Bha
ṭār
a Divarūpa 90–91
Bhaṭār
a Hyaṅ Buddha 110Bhaṭāra  Samyaksambuddhāya 93
Bhaṭār
a Śivabuddha  278n14, 318
Bhaṭār
a Viśeṣa, (or the Saṅ Hyaṅ Divarūpa) 100
Bhattacharya, V. 76, 88n56Bhauma-Kara, dynasty 7, 9n25, 217
bhāvanā  76, 110
Bhāvanākrama  77–78, 81, 111
Bhāvanāyogāvatāra  76
Bhik
ṣu(
s), 113, 250; Mahendra 114
Bhoja 241; see also Vijaya
Bhomāntaka  345n81
Bhṛkuṭī 52
, 176, 277
Bhujang Valley 241Bhūmisambhāra 102
Bhūta
ḍām
aratantra  119
Bhūtanātha 332–34Bhūtatantras  332, 346, 386n31Bhūvācārya 9n25Bi’an, Dharmācārya Nirvāṇa 83–84Bianhong (Ājñāgarbha?) 12n35, 13n41, 15, 29, 
31–37, 39–41, 43, 45, 47–50, 59, 86–87, 99–100, 
101n84, 206–208
Biaro Bahal 21Biaro Bahal II 218Bidor 243Bihar 165–91, 193–95, 200–207; copperplate 
inscriptions 167; Muslim conquest 374
bījas 88n61
Bisa Sāgar, stūpa  195
Blandongan, gold leaf inscriptions of 85n45
Blue Annals  19n63
Bodh Gayā 1, 116, 164–66, 170, 178, 183, 185, 
187–89, 213, 262; images 184, 188, 165n6, 197, 
204; inscriptions of 194n14 
Bodhi (tree/temple) 37, 40, 185, 229, 239; see also 
Mahābodhi
Bodhicaryāvatāra 21n69
bodhicitta  (vodhicitta ) 77, 82, 242
Bodhigarbhālaṅkāralaksa  216n12
Bodhipathapradīpa  107
Bodhiruci (Dharmaruci) 14, 36, 48n92, 50n101, 
54n135, 56n158
Bodhisattva(s) 4, 8n23, 13, 21n73, 29, 41, 43, 106, 
124, 134–35, 193n7, 197, 211, 216–17, 220–21 
232, 234, 239, 242, 244, 248, 257, 275, 277–78, 281n22, 291, 353n7, 370, 371n42; cult in Mon–
Khmer land 250; group of six 80–81; Eight 
Great Bodhisattvas ( aṣ
ṭam
ahābodhisattva s) 41, 
52n115, 78–79; ma ṇḍa
la of eight 270; medicine 
kings 370; path 227; Svastika 38
Index.indd   443 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 458] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia444
Bodhisattvahood 216
Bodhisattvayāna 250
bodhyagrī-mudrā  338–39, 339n67
Boechari 264Borobudur 11–12, 21n69, 67, 71, 79, 82, 87, 101, 
103–105, 107, 109–12, 191–92, 193n5, 195–202, 
204, 206, 208, 233, 238, 242, 253, 262, 265, 279–80, 281n22, 291n36, 293, 306, 314, 317, 349, 
371, 378; art and architecture of 176, 191–92, 
196–202, 206–207; Buddhism of 11, 101–102; 
iconography of 102; lead-bronze inscription, see 
Mahāraudranāmahdaya
Bosch, F.D.K. 87–88, 258, 266–68, 270Bourdieu, P. 152Brahmā 90–91, 182–83, 194n13, 368n32, 370
Brahmajāla Sutta  134n47
Brahm
āṇḍapu
rāṇ
a 390
Brahmanical, ascetics 134n47; social order 5Brahmanism 6Brahmans (Brahmins, brāhma
ṇa
s) 14n46, 21n71, 
114, 167n19, 168–69, 175, 282, 300, 365
brahmavihāra s 77, 82, 89
Brahmayāmala  331
‘Brāhm
ic’ (Fantian) tradition of astrology 46
Brandes, J.L.A. 68, 275, 290, 293n37, 307, 311, 314, 
318
Bṛhatkathā  36n45
Brief Explanation of the production, Recollection, 
and Recitation of the Yoga of the Diamond Peak 
Scripture  (T 866) 135
Brihadīśvara 368n32
’Brom ston 120, 262
Bronkhorst, J. 372n44Brown, R.L. 213Bsam yas Monastery 77Bubrah see Candi BubrahBuddha(s) 29, 38, 40, 50–51, 91, 106, 127, 135, 
200–202, 220, 234n29, 239n4, 247, 253, 257, 259–60, 262, 267, 269, 271, 278, 281n22, 334, 
337n58, 338, 344, 368n32, 371n42, 376; 108 
names of 134; as a universal and divine king 
ruler ( cakravartin ) 164, 201–202;  as Bhairava 
142; biography of 163, 188–90, 193; depictions/
images/statues of 164–66, 174, 177n73, 178n82, 
183, 186–89, 191–93, 194n13, 195–96, 198–202, 
204, 206, 209; Dhyāni/Jina-Buddha(s) 141, 
141n2, 143, 219, 229, 232–33, 248, 278, 280n21, 
316, 318 (see also Five Tathāgatas); directional 
243; discourses/preaching/sermon/teaching/ut-
terance of 164; donations to 168–69; Eight Great Events of Buddha’s life ( A
ṣṭ amahāpratiharya ) 
187–88, 189n121; footprint 356; gem-eyed 373; 
images at Kesariya 199; in Brahmanical images 
184; of Bhadrakālpa 202; of Borobudur 238; 
pentad of 242, 245, 252 (see also Jina-Buddhas, 
Pañcatathāgatas); nāga -enthroned 244; of the 
present and future 78–79; oneness with Śiva 278, 
318; of Sambor Prei Kuk 250; of the past 78–79; 
Supreme 278n15; see also Śākyamuni (Buddha), 
Tathāgata(s)
Buddhabhadra 87
Buddhacarita ( Vuddhacarita ) 98, 110
buddhacārya 110–11
Buddhaghoṣa 391Buddhaguhya 44n75, 99n78, 123n1Buddhagupta 81n37; inscription 256Buddhahood 216, 239, 277, 316Buddhajñāna (or Buddhaśrījñāna) 71, 76Buddhakapāla 178Buddhakara, King 14n45; dynasty 14n45
Buddhasamayoga  74
Buddhism/Buddhist, and royal power 169–70, 
167n19; council, first 203; cult of books 176, 180, 187; donations 167–69; donors 167–70, 177, 180; interaction with Brahmanism 168–69, 175, 182–84, 190, 182n94, 190n122; monasticism 182, 169n27; pilgrimage 165, 165n10, 173; transmis-
sion between the Sanskritic and Sinitic worlds, 
29
Buddhist iconography, incorporation of local 
beliefs 225
Bühnemann, G. 330n33–n32Bukit Seguntang, inscription 257Bureaucracy, in Tang China 127–131Bu ston 389
caitya  8, 103, 216; window 224; dharmakāya-  103; 
worship of 103
caityavandana , inscription of 103
Cakranegara, raid of the Puri of 68n4
Cakrasaṁvara(tantra ) 9n27, 154n18, 240, 248, 
338n62; - ma
ṇḍa
la 178n81, 190n122
Cakrasaṃvarapañjikā  18n57
Cakravarticintāmaṇi (Bodhisattva) 31–32, 35, 
46n83, 53, 99–100; - dhāra ṇī 50n9
9
cakravartin  29, 36, 39, 42, 43n69, 45–46, 48–50, 
56n162, 100, 145, 154–55, 188n116, 193–94, 
201–203, 206, 208n72, 346, 358n16, 369; as 
a ma ṇḍa
la’s central Buddha or Bodhisattva 
201–202; vidyādhara- 36; stūpa , see stūpa
Index.indd   444 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 459] ---
Index445
*Cakravartitantra (s) 36–44n73, 46n83, 50n101–
55n152
Cāḷukya, dynasty 377n52; Early Western 368n32
Campā 18, 377Cāmu
ṇḍā 16
3n4
Caṇḍavajrapāṇi 335, 335n51, 340, 342Candi Angsoka 258Candi Bongkol, stone post inscription 334n48Candi Bubrah 201, 208Candi Bukit Batu Pahat 253Candi Bungsu 88n61, 110n108Candi Gumpung 263–64, 266, 272; gold foil 
inscription 335, 335n51; ma
ṇḍa
la 264
Candi Jago 21–22, 68, 88n58, 143n8, 157, 244, 268, 
275–319; artisans of 279; cella statuary of 281; 
maṇḍa
la 278; reliefs 176, 275–319
Candi Jawi 88Candi Kalasan 90n63, 207–208, 238, 377Candi Kedulan 377n53; inscriptions 351n3, 377n53Candi Lumbung 18n59, 201, 207–208, 252Candi Mahligai 263, 269, 273Candi Mendut 8n23, 12, 79, 199, 201n39, 202n41, 
219, 226–27, 238, 244; iconography of 219n18; 
and Ellorā caves 219n18; Bodhisattvas at 79
Candi Pawon 199Candi Plaosan 12, 79, 201, 208; inscriptions 208; 
Lor, 350n3, 351n3, 362n21, 372n43, 374n48
Candi Pulau Sawah 269Candi Sewu 11n35, 12, 17, 18n59, 177, 191n3, 201, 
202n41, 207–208, 238, 252, 349, 366n26, 371n43, 
372n43, 376, 378n53
Candi Śiva 326n12Candra, dynasty 167–69, 174; inscriptions 169Candragarbha 262; see also Atīśa
Candraguhyatilaka  74
Candrakīrti 75, 98, 116; pseudo 45n79Candras, dynasty 7
Carita Parahyaṅan  323, 343–44, 344n79, 351, 
363n23, 377, 378n54
Caryā 93
caryāntya  3n10
Caryāmelāpakapradīpa  29n2, 75
Caryātantras 71, 217, 346Casparis, J.G. de 18n58, 85, 101, 102n86, 256, 270, 
374n48, 393
Catu
ṣpī
ṭhatantra 6n17
Ceṭiyagiri Monastery 9n29Chaiya 12, 240, 243–44, 252; 775 inscription 244Chakaravarti, D.K. 195Champāran 192–96, 200Cāmuṇḍā 345Chang’an (present–day Xi’an) 1, 15, 32–34, 99–100, 
205–207, 241, 373
Chapoholo, battle site of 194n14Chattopadhyaya, B. 202Chaurasi, temple 232Chengguan 92Cherok Tokun inscription 85n45Chientowei, River 194n14Chinese monks/pilgrims 213, 216, 226, 258, 266; in 
the Indonesian Archipelago 113–14
Chinggis Khan 147, 153, 158; cult of 147Chinnamastakā (or Chinnamastā) 387n41Chōen 386n33Chou, Y–L. 11, 86Chōyo 387n40Clay sealings/votive tablets 85Coedès, G. 1n1, 82, 113, 237, 241, 253, 257, 263Cōḻa, dynasty 115, 207, 253, 262, 266, 377n52; 
attack on Sumatra 260, 262, 266; fleet 241; 
inscriptions 207n68; interregnum in Sri Lanka 
368n29; period 368n32; Rājarāja 174, 207n68; 
texts 241; 
Colless, B. 323n3–24n5, 331, 341, 343, 347, 376, 378
Compendium of Principles of All Tathāgatas 239Comprehensive Mirror for Aiding Government 
123–24
Confucian tradition (Confucianism) 48n91, 124; 
canon 130
Consecration deposits (ritual deposits) 264, 268, 
272–73
Conti, P. 248Conze, E. 71n12Cool, W. 68Cornelius, H.C. 193n5Crawfurd, J. 368Cū
ḍām
aṇiv
arman, King 10n30, 19, 117–18, 
174, 207, 244, 262; -vihāra, see Śrīśailen-
dracū ḍām
aṇiva
rman Vihāra
Cui Gan 129
Cūḷavaṁsa  352–53, 356–57, 365, 369n33, 378
Cundā, goddess 227Cunningham, A. 79 191, 193, 199n29
Dafangguang fo huayan jing shu ( T 1736) 92
Daijizaiten-hōsoku-giki  (Mahe
śva
ra–vidhi–kalpa ?) 
339n66
Daizong, Emperor 8, 48n90, 86n51, 126–29, 126n12, 
133, 137, 203, 383n16
Ḍākinītantras 4
Index.indd   445 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 460] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia446
Dale-jingang-bukong-zhenshi-sanmeiye-jing-ban-
ruo-boluomiduo-liqushi  (T 1003) 90
Dali, Kingdom 21, 123, 178
Dalton, J. 93n72, 335n52, 337n60, 342, 345n82, 347, 
375n49
Damais, L.C. 212Dāmodaradeva, King 170Daoism 240Daolin 83Dapunta Hyaṅ Śrī Jayanāśa 82Dara–Jiṅga 151Dara–Petak 151
da
śap
āramitā  71, 76–77, 82, 111
Dasgupta, S.B. 74Davidson, R. 4–6, 123, 145–46, 148, 154–55, 202, 
233, 265–66, 273, 335n51–37n58, 342, 344–45, 
377n52
Davis, E.L. 382Daxingshan, monastery 33, 383Dawangsari inscription 344n80Deccan, western 8Degroot, V. 363, 366Des Routers, R. 127n14Desai, D. 231
De
śav
arṇana  (Nāgarakṛtāgama ) 20n69, 33n20, 68, 
98, 102, 141–42, 148–50, 158, 266, 278n13–14
devadāsī s 228
Deva dynasty 169–70, 200Devahuti, D. 194n12Devapāla, King 18, 167–68, 176, 207, 265, 358n16
devī 110 ; catur- 71, 110;  pañca-  71
Dhammapada368 (Aṅguttara Nikāya ) 77
dhāraṇī (s) 3n8, 4, 7, 9n25, 32, 36, 58, 80–81, 83, 
85, 93n74, 123n1, 136, 216, 324, 339, 340n69, 
357n13, 373, 387; garu
ḍa-
 387–88
dhāra ṇīg
hara  9n29, 357n13
Dhāra ṇī of t
he Great Protectress ( T 1153) 136; see 
also Mahāpratisarādhāraṇī /Mahāpratisarā–
vidyārājñī
Dhāra ṇī Piṭak
a 83–84
dharmadhātu  103, 354n9; maṇ ḍal
a 102
Dharmakīrti (of Suvar ṇad
vīpa) 11, 19–20, 116–21, 
174, 241, 252; relics 121
Dharmakīrti (7th-century Buddhist logician) 120Dharmapāla (Dharmakīrti), Chief Abbot of 
Nālandā 205, 261–62, 265
Dharmapāla, King 11n34, 19, 81–82, 111, 113, 
117–18, 167–68, 172–73, 195, 199;
Dharmarakṣa 91
Dharmasaṅgraha  107n102Dharmasetu 90n63Dharmasraya 268Dharmasvāmin 166, 166n11Dharmayaśas 17Dharmendra 76Dholagaon 174n59
dhyāna  328
dhyāna-mudrā  338n64
Dhyāni-Buddha(s), see under Buddha(s) Diamond Maṇḍala, see Vajradhātu[mahā]maṇḍala
Diamond Pinnacle Scripture/Cycle , see Vajra
 śekha -
rat
antra/Vajro ṣṇīṣa
Di
eng Plateau 272
Dignāga (Diṅnāga) 67, 76, 81–82, 84, 87, 101, 111, 
113
Dignāgapāda, Ḍaṅ Ācāryya Śri 76, 81, 84, 111Dīpaṅkara 260Dīpaṅkarabhadra 12, 71, 92, 101Dīpaṅkaraśrījñāna, see Atīśa
Divyāvadāna  279, 282n23, 293
Donaldson, T. 214, 219, 223, 231
Đông Dương 13n38; stele 12n38; temple 18
Dongson bronzes 255Dorjee 103n92Droṇasiṁha, King 202Druma, King 314Duddā, Queen 202Du Hongjian 128–31, 129n20Dumarçay, J. 176, 205Dunhuang 376; monastery 203n46; Tibetan manu-
script 335n52
Dupont, P. 244
Durbodhāloka  11, 19, 262, 263
Durgā 184, 255Durgottārā 169Dutt, S.N. 215, 217Du Xian 128
dvāra–lalā
ṭa–b
imba  223
dvārapāla  224, 229, 232
Dvāravatī 13, 251
dveṣa ( vidveṣana ) 330, 332n41
Eastern India, art 163–66, 175; Gupta period 194n8, 
195–96, 205; Kuṣāṇa period 194n8; Pāla period 163–206; Sena period 204; Śuṅga period 194n8
Edwards McKinnon, E. 271
Ekāda
śamu
khadhāraṇī 1
Ellorā 8, 201,  217, 227 Elverskog, J. 147, 152–53Enchin 33–34
Index.indd   446 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 461] ---
Index447
Ennin 35, 47n89, 373; diary 204
Esoteric Buddhism 2–5, 7, 10–11, 13–15, 18–22, 
99, 102, 237–40, 244, 252, 318, 351–53, 370n37, 
374n46, 375; and early mediaeval polities 5; 
and magical sovereignty 36; and politics 46–47, 
123–24, 137–38; and the ethos of power 133–35; 
and war 137; archaic nature outside of the 
Subcontinent 13; as distinct sectarian tradition 
in China 125n7; at Phimai 20n66; bestowing 
Buddhahood in life 277; bestowing super-
natural powers 278; collapse of institutional 
support after 840 ad 351; conflict with Thera -
vā
da 66;  cult of wrathful deities 178–80, 184, 
190; decline after 840 A.D. 8, 18; denominator, 
vis-à-vis Tantric Buddhism 29n2; definition 
2–3; Esoteric teachings ( mijiao  密教 ) 129n7; in 
China 205, 207; in India 172, 190, 196, 206; in 
Java 11–12, 86, 207, 242; in Sri Lanka 9n27, 351; 
loss of royal support after 840 A.D. 373; origin 
4–5; relationship with śaivism 2; royal and 
mercantile models 5–6;  scholarly construction 
of 125n7; significant features 4; soteriology-ori-
ented, transmission to China 29; Three Phases 7,  
252n19; waves 13, 19
Eurasia 1, 2n3
fang sheng 109n103
Fanyu zaming ( T 2135) 90n 63
Faxian 13n42, 85, 114, 191Fa-yü 261Fazang 203Feixi 358Ferrari, A. 120Five Indias 19n62Fontein, J. 268, 279, 281n22Foucher, A. 88n56
Fozu lidai tongzai 147
Franke, H. 144, 146n11, 147
Fuhōden (Himitsu Mandarakyō Fuhōden) 31, 33, 
34n33
Funan 212, 245
Gajalakṣmī 223Gajavaktra 47n88, 338–39n67, 342; see also Gajen-
dramukha, Gaṇapati, Vināyaka
Gajendramukha 338
Gambhīra
śīla 76
g
aṇacakra  98, 150
Gaṇap
ati (Ga ṇe
śa) 118–19, 182, 253, 255, 267, 324, 
326, 329–30, 333–34, 337–42, 344n80–347, 365n25; Gaṇapati-Vināyaka 337, 337n60, 341, 347; Krodhagaṇapati 339n66; Mahāgaṇapati 337, 339n66
Ga
ṇap
atitattva ( Tatva Ga ṇap
ati) 324–34, 336n58, 
337, 339n68, 340, 340n71, 342, 342n74, 346–47
Gaṇḍakī, River 194n14
Gaṇḍ
avyūha  10n32, 111, 281n22; -( mahāyāna )sūtra  
(T 293) 87, 171n45, 176, 242, 281n22; -bhadra-
carī 206–207;  reliefs of  Borobudur 253
gandhakūti/mūlagandhakū ṭi 228
G
andhamādana, Mount 383
Gandhāra, art 189
gandharva  304n48, 305
Gaṇe
śa, see Gaṇapati, Vināyaka
Gaṅgā, River 191, 195, 225Ganges, Valley 237, 239; monsteries 252Gaozong, Emperor 203n47Garbhadhātumaṇḍala 99, 111, 206, 370; garbha
-
maṇḍa
la 35, 42–43, 99–100, 335n50
Garu ḍa 27
2, 382–85, 387; rites 382
Gāru ḍa m
edicine 382
Garu ḍa,
 Mount 383n17
Garu ḍap
aṭalaparivarta ( T 1276) 381n7, 383, 388n43, 
388n45; see also Mañju śrī
mūlakalpa
Garuḍapurā ṇa 47n
88, 338n63
Gāru ḍat
antras 382, 383n14, 384n19; Śaiva 383n17
Gāru ḍic
 lore 383; texts 382
Garuṅ, King 351n3, 363, 372n43, 375, 378; period 
351n3
Gauḍīdvīpa (present-day Bengal) 18n59, 87, 101, 
112, 177, 207
Genzu ma ṇḍa
la, 36n43, 38, 41–42, 48n92, 
53n119, 53n125, 54n137, 55n146; see also 
Mahākaruṇodbhava–garbhamaṇḍala
Geographia  212
Geshu Han 131–33
Ghanavyūhasūtra ( T 682) 86n51
Ghaznī 115Giebel, R.W. 12, 15, 17, 86, 101n84, 240–41, 252, 
361n20, 369–370n36
Girika
ṇḍiv
ihāra  353, 355–56; Pallava-Grantha 
Sanskrit inscription 356
Godan/Köden 144, 145n10Gold plates, Buddhist inscriptions from Java 85Golden Monastery 115
 ‘Gold Island’/‘Gold Land’, see Suvar
ṇdv
īpa
Gomez, L.O. 227Gopāla II, King 167, 197n21;Goris, R. 69, 71, 101
Go sh
ōrai
 Mokuroku ( T 2161) 46n81
Index.indd   447 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 462] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia448
Goudriaan, T. 85n43, 325–26n12, 330–32nn40–41, 
335–36, 338, 345–46n83
Govindacandra, King 169–70;
graha s 46, 190n125
Grand Councillors 128–29
Gray, D.B. 248Great Leiden Charter 117
Great Song Brief History of the Saṅgha 128n16
Green Dragon, Monastery 99Griffiths, A. 11, 19n63, 88n61, 265–66, 270n7, 273, 
278n13, 324, 326n12, 334–37n60, 340, 344n80, 
346n85, 347
Gser gliṅ pa 19n63, 120Guangzhou 19n62
Guanshiyinshuo mieyijiezuiguode yijiesuoyuan 
tuoluoni  100
Guhasena, King 202n42
Guhyakādhipatinirde
śa 92
Guh
yasamāja(tantra; also  Śrīguhyasamāja) 14n44, 
20n66, 45n79, 71, 74–75, 77, 81–82, 85, 88–93, 
98, 100, 112, 149, 240, 246, 248, 278n9, 324, 
328n20, 335n51, 336n57, 359n18, 376, 389–90
Guhyasamājama ṇḍa
la, rituals 71
Guhyasamājamaṇ ḍal
avidhi (GSMV; also Śrī–)  71, 
73, 80, 88, 92, 98, 100–101, 111
Guhyasamājamaṇ ḍal
opāyikā  73
Guhyasamājama ṇḍa
lopāyikāviṁ śat
ividhi  (GSVV ; 
also Śrī-) 38n50, 71, 73–74, 86, 88, 92, 98, 
100–101, 107, 111, 389
Guhyasamājanidānakārikā  80
Guhyatantra  43, 47n88, 56n159
Guhyendutilaka  74–75, 111
Gujarat 194, 208; see also GurjaradeśaGuluṅ Guluṅ inscription 334Gumpung, see Candi GumpungGuṇabhadra 357n13Guṇavarman 85, 205–206Gunung Kidul 363; inscriptions 349Gupta dynasty 194–96; art and architecture of 
195–97
Gupta, S. 211Gurjaradeśa (present-day Gujarat) 12, 208Gurjara-Pratihāra dynasty 12, 208
Guruma
ṇḍa
lapūjā  88n61
Gurupañca śikh
ā 73–74, 76, 98–99, 111
Guy, J. 204, 252Gyantse 201n39
Haiyun 31, 389–90Hall, D.G.E. 142Han dynasty 124Han Prince 127Hanguang 360, 365n25; biography of 17n54Hanumān 333Hārītī 211, 226, 235Harivarman 170–71, 181–82; manuscript 182Harṣa, King 36n45, 194–95, 202–203;
Har
ṣa
vijaya , kiduṅ  151
Harṣavijaya (nephew of K ṛtanagara) 151
Hastada ṇḍ
aśāst
ra 83n40
Hayagrīva 40, 56, 58, 175, 221, 277Heian period 8Heissig, W. 146Heling (or Holing), Kingdom 31, 208, 212; see also 
Kaliṅga, Keliṅ
Hermann-Pfandt, A. 201n39Heruka 13, 20–21, 166, 177n76, 178–80, 189n1210, 
190, 184n96–97, 218, 248, 252, 267–68n6, 340, 
345, 383; see also Hevajra
Herukasādhana  335
Heshang 77Hetu Vidyā 84Hevajra 13, 20–21, 166, 172, 177n76, 178–82, 184, 
186, 189, 166n16, 265n4, 268, 335, 339n67, 345; 
ma
ṇḍa
la 252, 265; see also Heruka
Hevajra (dākinījālasambara )tantra  13, 20–21, 88n61, 
141, 144–45, 149–50, 153, 240, 242, 252, 261, 265, 
265n4, 278n15, 332n39, 338n61; cult in South-
east Asia 252n19
Hevajrābhi ṣek
a 141n2
Hevajratantra  149, 115, 240, 252
Hilsa 119Hīnayāna 3n8; monks 217; śāstras 217; sūtra s 217
Hinduism in Sumatra 253, 255Hindu temples 213; in Odisha 213, 223, 231; in 
Bhubaneswar 222
Hiraṇyadāman 346
Hishū ky
ōsō s
hō 3
87n40
History of Buddhism in India 217
Hobbes, T. 155
Hôbôgirin  382, 384n20
Hock, N. 214, 217Hodge, S.75– 76Hodgson, B. 193n5Holt, J. 15
homa  135, 199, 240
Hongfa 99Hooykaas, C. 85n43, 325–26n12, 329nn28–30, 
332n44
Hor Chos’byung 157n21
Index.indd   448 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 463] ---
Index449
Hpayathonzu 20n67
Huaidi 383n14Huayang, Princess 126–27Hucker, C.O. 127n14, 131n26, 131n31Hudson, D.D. 372n44Huichang 373Huiguo 12n35, 15, 31–36, 38–39, 50n99, 86, 99–101, 
206, 370n36
Huilang 15, 48n94Huilun 204Huining 85Huiri 99H
üle
gü 146
H
umphrey, C. 158–59
Hunlunweng 353n7Hunter, T.M. 296Huntington, J.C. 216, 226, 252Huntington, S.L. 197, 252Hyecho 15, 358Hye-il 33
Ijzerman, J.W. 88n61, 269–70n7
Ikṣvāku, dynasty 9n25Indian Ocean, trade network 2Indra 148, 134n43, 164, 182, 279n16, 296n41, 299, 
304n48, 305, 316, 328n23, 339, 363n24, 370; see 
also Śakra
Indrabhūti 75, 203
Intan  shipwreck 259–60
Iron stūpa  9, 353n7, 354
Īśān (modern Isan) 250Īśāna, dynasty 69Īśāna (form of Śiva) 55Īśānavarman, King 14n46, 237 
Ī
śvar
a(s) 90–91, 323, 328n23, 329; five 88; palace 
383
Jagaddala Mahāvihāra 172Jagchid, S. 146–47Jagjivanpur, 172n47; inscription 167–68, 167n21, 
169n28
Jago, see Candi Jago Jaini, P.S. 279Jaka Dolog inscription 148–49, 159Jambhala 119Jambi 88n61, 240, 258–65, 268Jambudvīpa 203Jamspal, L. 92n70
japa  106, 328, 353n6,
Japasūtra  (JS) 73Jātaka (s) 110, 258, 284, 287, 302; -mālā  110
Java 176, 191, 195, 205–209, 213, 358; ad 1293 
invasion by Khubilai 143; and Bangladesh 175; 
and China 11–12, 31–34, 207; and India 165–66, 
176–78, 184, 189, 191, 195, 205–209; and Kaliṅga 
212; connections with Odisha 213
Javanese literature, magical aspect of 142Jawi, Candi 88Jayabhadra 18n57Jayakatoṅ 150–51
Jayākhyasaṁhitā 332n41; see also Pāñcarātra, 
Vaiṣṇava
Jayanagara see Lakhi Sarai, JaynagarJayanāśa, King 256, 265Jayanta (Rājasthavira) 118Jayaśīla 117Jayavarman II, King 346, 358Jayavarman V, King 12n37; Sanskrit inscription (K. 
111) 346
Jayavarman VI, King 248Jayavarman VII, King 8, 20, 252, 278n9, 278n15, 
371n42
Jayavarman-Parameśvara, King 371n42Jesuits 118
Jialouluo ji zhutian miyan jing ( ‘Scripture of 
Mantras of Garu
ḍa an
d Gods’ [ T 1278]) 382–83, 
385n24, 385n29
Jianfusi, monastery 203n47Jianzhong 99
’Jig-med-rig-pa’i-rdo-rje 157n21
Jina 88; -temple ( jinamandira ) 12; -Buddha(s) 
200–201; see also Buddha(s), Tathāgata(s)
Jing’ai, monastery 204n53Jinge, monastery 204Jingshe 365n25
Jingangfeng louge yiqie yuqie yuzhi jing 376n51Jingangding jing yuqie shibahui zhigui 14n49
Jingangzhi 14, 389–90; see also Vajrabodhi
Jiu Tangshu ( JTS) 125–33, 137
Jīvakāmravana 215n10
jñāna  77
Jñānabajreśvara 88, 149, 278n14Jñānabhadra 85Jñānacandra 76Jñānagarbha 76, 77Jñānapāda (Jñāna tradition) 71
Jñānasiddhānta  326nn12–14
Jñanasiddhi  29n2, 75
Jñānaśiwabajra 148Jong, J.W. de 69, 71, 93n72
Index.indd   449 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 464] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia450
Jordaan, R.E. 100, 113n1, 208–209, 234n31, 323n3, 
324, 326n12, 331, 341, 343–45, 347, 363, 376, 378 
Jūhachieshiki  341n73
Juynboll, H.H. 68
Kabajradharan  21n69
Kaḍiri-Siṅhasāri 20
Kah-gyur 279, 281n22, 282n23, 284
Kailāsa, Mount 184n97
Kailāsanātha 17, 368n32Kaiyuan catalogue ( Kaiyuan shijiao lu ) 
381, 390
Kakāraku
ṭar
ahasyam  231
Kāla, faces of 259; see also Kīrttimukha
Kālacakra  141, 141n1
Kālacakratantra  19, 171, 217, 262
Kāḷachuri, dynasty 377n52
Kāla-makara , architectural motif 213
Kalasan, inscriptions 86, 87, 89n63, 100, 118–20, 
234; see also Candi Kalasan
Kālī 231Kālidāsa 212
Kālikāpurā
ṇa 184
K
aliṅga (Heling, Kәliṅ) 8, 31, 34–35, 48, 85, 87, 
99, 211, 213; in trade networks 212; maritime 
prowess of 212; traders from 212
Kaliṅgapatana 9Kaliṅgoḍra 12Kalki Śrīpāla 19
Kālottara  44n73
Kāma 316Kāmākhyā 184Kamalarak
ṣita
 117
Kamalaśīla 76–78Kāmarūpa (present-day Assam) 202Kanauj 194Kāñcī 9, 10n30, 14n46, 15, 18, 113, 205, 237, 240–41, 
352–53, 357, 372n44; Pallava–style Buddhism 
at 237
Kandahjaya, H. 206Kānherī 8
kapāla  387n41, 388
Kāpālika(s)/ kāpālika  4, 342n76, 344–45
Kapstein, M.T. 3n8
Kāra
ṇḍa
vyūha(sūtra)  13n38, 54n138, 171, 181
Karang Berahi inscription 261Karma, family 107
Karmavibhaṅgasūtra 104–105Karpūrādistotram  231
Kārttikeya 53n118; see also Skandakaru
ṇā 22 9
Kāśya
paparivartasūtra  77
Kāśya
paśilpa 27
2
Kats, J. 67–69Kaula, stream of Śaivism 332n45Kauz, R. 2
kavinayan  21n69
Kayumvuṅan inscription 102, 103n90, 110–111, 206Kayuvaṅi, King 346n86, 353n8, 361, 363, 373n45, 
374n47, 375
Kedah (Ka
ṭāh
a) 10n30, 12, 19n63, 115, 174, 240–41, 
244, 253, 255–56, 258, 260, 262–63, 265, 272; 
inscription 85n45
Kedulan, see Candi Kedulan Kedulan inscriptions 351n3, 377n53Keichin 35n38
kәliṅ  212
Kelurak inscription 18n59, 86–87, 89, 90n63, 91, 
100–101, 112, 207, 209, 241, 252
Kempers, B. 267Ken Aṅrok 158Kern, H. 141n2Kesariya 191–93, 195–202; inscription 195; stūpa  
architecture 193, 196–202; 
Ketu 46n83Khaḍgarāvaṇa 329, 332, 332nn43–44, 334Khagarbha 79–80; among the Eight Great Bo-
dhisattvas 79; among the group of six Bodhisat-
tvas 80
Khalimpur, charter 195n18
Khanipas  323–24, 331–32, 346, 346n86, 376
Khao Sam Kaeo 255Khmer, Khorat plateau 237–38; art 244Kh
ön cl
an 145
Khotan 114Khri Srong Lde Bstan 77Khubilai Khan 8, 20n68, 21, 141–51, 153–59, 242, 
252, 275, 278, 317–18; and Buddhism 144, 148, 
153;  and foreign policy 151; and K ṛtanagara 141, 
142, 158; consecration of 141n2, 142, 153n18; 
historiography on 148; invasion of Java 143, 252; 
wife of (Chabi) 157
Kiduṅ 148, 151, 155, 158
Kim, J. 1, 168, 170, 187
King of Eulogies of Vajragarbha-Trailokyavijaya 
(Kongōzō gōzanze san’ō ) 370n38
kinnarī  278; jataka  315
Kīrttimukha, architectural motif 199, 259Kīrtipaṇḍita, purohita  12, 244, 246, 248–50, 252, 346
Kitan 144
Index.indd   450 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 465] ---
Index451
Klokke, M.J. 176, 238n2, 346n86
Kōbō Daishi Zenshū  31n8
Kongōbuji 360, 365n25, 369–71; monastery 351
Koṅkana/Konkan coast 8, 18n57Kota Cina 271Kōya, Mount 99, 360, 369–70
Kōya ni dōjō o konryū shite kekkai suru keibyaku 
no bun (‘ Text of Declaration for the Consecra-
tion of an Altar at Mount Kōya’) 370
Krairiksh, P. 241Kramrisch, S. 214Kriyā 93
Kriyākālaguṇottara  332nn43–44, 384n19, 387n39
Kriyāsaṅgraha (KS) 71, 73, 106n99Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā  71, 103n93, 106
Kriyātantra(s) 45n80, 214, 217, 346Krodhaga
ṇapa
ti 118
Krodhagaṇapatisādhana 118Krodha (-vighnāntaka ) deities 166, 180, 335, 
339n67–343n77
Krom, N.J. 79, 82, 98, 101–102, 107, 142, 279, 293Kṛṣṇa 279n16
Kṛṣ
ṇā
yaṇa 2
78n16, 279n16, 317n64
Kṛtanagara, King 8, 20n68, 21–22, 88, 141–43, 
148–51, 153–59, 252, 268, 275, 278, 318, 345; and 
Buddhism 141, 148, 151, 153; and foreign policy 
151; and Khubilai 142, 158; consecration of 141n2; i
ṣṭa
devatā  of 141n2
Kṣemarāja 331, 331nn37–38Kṣitigarbha 80; among the group of six Bodhisat-
tvas 80; among the Eight Great Bodhisattvas 79
Kubera 55, 224, 282, 311n55, 370n39Kubilai, Kublai, see Khubilai
Kubjikāmatatantra  384n19
Kudṛ
ṣṭi
nirghāṭana  21n69
Kuijp, L. van der 389Kūkai 12, 14–15, 29, 31–35, 39, 46n81, 100, 101n84, 
238n2, 241, 351, 360, 365n25, 369–71, 381, 382n7
Kuladatta 103n93, 106Kulottuṅga Cōḻa inscription 209n74Kumāraghoṣa 18n59, 87, 100–101, 112, 207Kumārajīva 84Kumbhayoni, Lord 349–51, 361–64, 368–69, 
371–75; inscriptions 351, 362, 365–369n33; 
Śaiva structures 349; Śaiva symbology 349; 
temple 367; temple platform 368
Kunlun 85Kuñjarakarṇa, character 303–305, 307, 309, 315
Kuñjarakar
ṇa,
 tale 275, 284, 285n26, 302, 305n50, 
308–309, 315–16 Kurkihār 250Kusen 351n3Kuśinagara 193Kutai inscriptions 114Kyanzittha, King 20n67
La
ḍah
ancandra, King 169, 169n33
Laghusaṁvara/Herukābhidhāna  18n57
Lakhi Sarai/Jaynagar 173, 167n19, 180, 184Lakṣmaṇa 17n56Lakṣmaṇasena, King 171Lakṣmī 223, 271, 315–16, 368n32, Lalitagiri 8, 195n17, 197, 213, 218
lalitāsana  224, 299, 309, 310n55
Lalitavistara  110
Lālmai, Buddhist centre 195Lamaism 146Lamaist church 146Lambakaṇṇa (Second), dynasty 7, 10n30, 240, 244, 
349n2, 350–53, 356, 359, 372
Licchavi, (Nepalese) dynasty 193–95
Lidai minghua ji (‘Records of the Famous Painters 
of All the Dynasties’) 204n53
Lumbung, see Candi LumbungLamdré 145Lamotte, É. 228n21Lang Darma, King 18, 116, 119
Laozi  130
Laporan Tahunan  362n22
la Vall
ée Po
ussin, L. de 82
Lévi
, S. 1n1, 92n70, 98
Leviathan  155
Lhasa 1, 120
Liangbu dafa xiangcheng shizi fufa (T 2081)  31
Liang, dynasty 80Li Baoyu 128, 133
Liezi 130
Ligor inscription 118, 260Li Guangbi 129, 133Li Gui 133n37Li Heng 129, 131Li Jie 373
liṅga  362, 367, 368n32, 371n42; inscriptions 367–68
Liṅgapurāṇa  366n26
Linrothe, R. 1, 3n8, 7n20, 163, 166, 214, 217–18, 
252n19, 333, 336n55, 339n67–341
Little Leyden Charter 118Li Xiyan 132, 132n32Liyan 90n63Locanā 88–89, 110, 278, 318
Index.indd   451 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 466] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia452
van Lohuizen-de Leeuw,  J.E. 196n20
Loka ṣema 1
14
Lokanātha 8, 12, 115, 260, 267; see also Avalo  ki te
ś-
var
a, Lokeśvara
Lokesh Chandra 68n7, 69, 71, 103n88, 144, 149, 159, 
212, 252
Lokeśvara (Avalokiteśvara) 12, 48n92, 87–88, 
90–91, 234n32, 278n15; among the Eight Great 
Bodhisattvas 79; among the group of six Bo-
dhisattvas 80; see also Avalokiteśvara
Long, M. 102n86, 113n1, 196
Longzhi 14, 389; see also Nāgabodhi
lontar  (palm leaf manuscript) 68
Lopburi 244Loro Jonggrang 326n12, 344Lumbinī 104n95Lumbung, see Candi LumbungLunsingh Scheurleer, P. 175, 247Luoyang 34–35, 92, 130, 204n53Lü Xiang 240, 353; biography 14n46, 353n7, 356n11
MacKenzie, C. 193n5, 367Madhurai 360, 373–74
madhyade
śa 11n
34, 21n72
Madhyamaka 77, 262Mädigiriya 354n9, 357Magadha 11n34, 116, 165, 173, 183, 188, 190, 
194–95; Turkic invasion 21n72
Magetsari, N. 71, 101–102
Mahābhārata  311n55
Mahābimba 8, 18n57
mahābodhi  110
Mahābodhi Temple 104n95, 165n6, 166, 189, 197, 
203–204
Mahādeva 328n23, 336, 337n58, 384
*Mahādūtavidyā  (T 1268.299b21–28) 47n88
Mahā-guhya  111–12
Mahāhdayadhāra
ṇī 34
0n71
Mahākāla 20–21, 144–45, 158, 180, 184, 268–69, 
338, 339, 342, 345
Mahākālantantra  154
Mahākaruṇodbhava-garbhamaṇḍala 30; see also 
Genzu ma ṇḍa
la
Mahāk ṣob
hya 141, 148; see also Akṣobhya
mahāmāṁsa  388n45
Mah āmaṇ
ivipulavim ānav
iśvasuprati ṣṭh
itaguhya -
dhāraṇī 3
6n45
Mah āmāyūrī 54n
136
Mahāmitābha 141; see also AmitābhaMahānāvika Buddhagupta inscription 85n45Mahāparinirvāṇa 84
Mahāparinirvā
ṇa
sūtra  85
Mahāprajñāpāramitā  205
Mahāpratisarā 11n35, 136n50, 178, 266
Mahāpratisarādhāraṇī /Mahāpratisarāvidyārājñī  
136n50, 136n51; see also Dhāra ṇī o
f the Great 
Protectress
mahārājalīlāsana  229
Maharashtra 164, 166n17, 167, 182
Mahāratnakū ṭa 77
Ma
hāraudranāmahṛdaya (Borobudur lead-bronze 
inscription) 206–207, 324, 328n21, 335n51, 
335n51, 337n60, 339,  340, 342, 347
Mahāsiddhas 9, 14n50, 166, 186, 166n17, 190n125; 
see also siddha s
Mahasthangarh 172Mahāvairocana 31, 41, 44, 232–33, 329n24, 338n64, 
339n67, 370; as Śākyamuni 57n169; Dharma
-
kā
ya Tathāgata 238n2; Great Maṇḍala 99; 
Tantra  9; see also Vairocana
Mahāvairocanābhisaṁbodhitantra (MVA, MVT, 
Mahāvairocanatantra)  69, 71, 73, 75, 77; see 
also Mahāvairocanasūtra, Vairocanābhisaṁbo -
dhi(tantra)
Mahāvairocanamahākaru ṇa
garbha-mahāma ṇḍa
la 
99
Mahāvairocanasūtra  (T 848) 14, 86n48, 353n7
Mahāvajrakrodha 335n51
Mahāvaṁsa  9n29, 361n19
Mahāvastu  77, 279, 284, 287, 315; jataka  284n24, 
295, 302, 315
Mahāvihāra at Anurādhapura 349n2, 350, 352, 355, 
360–61, 374–75; chronicles 352n5
Mahāvyutpatti  50, 55n151, 92, 92n70, 94
Mahāyakṣasenāpati 340Mahāyāna 3, 4, 7–13, 21n69, 77, 82n37, 98, 102, 116, 
118, 125n7, 135, 164–67, 169–70, 175, 190n125, 196, 211, 216–18, 221, 233–34, 239–44, 256, 270, 
355, 374; Avaivartaka Bodhisattvas 169n27; 
Bhik
ṣu 21
7; bhūmi  169n27; conflict with 
Theravāda 166; emergence of icons in the Malay 
peninsula 241; images 163;  introduction in 
China 114; liturgy 227; monks 217; śās
tras 217; 
Scriptural Collection 3n8; sūtras  19n63, 217; 
Tantric 101
Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra  92, 94
Mahāyānism 68n4Mahāyoga 244; second wave of 246; -tantras 30, 
33n19, 48–49, 390
Mahendrapāla, King 167–68, 169n28
Index.indd   452 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 467] ---
Index453
Maheśvara 90–91, 134, 134n47, 138, 239n5, 337n60, 
338, 338n64, 340n69, 343–44, 347, 366, 384, 
386–87; as Indra or Śiva 134n43; iconography 
of 381; or Rudra 383; subjugation/taming of by 
Vajrapāṇi 133–36, 138, 323, 336, 338, 341–44
Mahīdhara, dynasty 248, 330, 332Mahinda II, King 364–65Mahmūd of Ghaznī 115Maināmatī 169–70, 174–75, 177–78, 181, 167n19, 
195, 200–101, 208; see also Vikrampura
Maitreya 53, 79, 167n19, 184n101, 189, 203, 204n53, 
206, 229; among the Eight Great Bodhisattvas 
79
Maitreyanātha 116Maitrika, dynasty 202, 208Majapahit 20, 21n69, 295n39Majumdar, R.C. 212, 213n7
makara  219, 367
Malandra, G.H. 219n18Malay Peninsula 12, 19, 205Malay, people and culture 253, 255–56Malayu 149, 151, 258–63, 268; K ṛtanagara’s expedi -
tion against 149
Mālinīvijayottaratantra  384n19
Māmakī 53–54, 88–89, 110, 318Mānavarman, King 15, 240, 350n3, 352–59Manchu state/rulers 152
Maṇ
ḍal
a(s) 4, 5n13, 40 , 42, 44n73 , 57, 105–106, 
123, 132, 136, 201–203, 205, 208–209, 233, 
237, 238n2, 240, 244, 248, 256, 277, 278n9, 280n21, 281, 316–17, 365, 366n26, 372n43; 
fourfold typology 57n164; Hevajra 252; in stone 
images 166n17, 180, 188–90, 197; in structures 
(stūpa-ma
ṇḍa
la) 191–93, 198–99, 201–202; 
Japanese Matrix World 30; living 128; model 
of Indic polity/political authority  6, 18n59, 
124; Newar and Sakya-pa 317n65; of agni , vāri , 
pthivī,  and vāyu  385; of Candi Jago 278, 318; 
of secret rituals 245; of the Eight Bodhisattvas 
227; of the Guhyasamājatantra 20n68, 248; of 
the Vairocanābhisaṁbodhi 38; Perfected Body 
341; sculptural 234n29; see also Garbhadhātu-
maṇḍala, Vajradhātu(mahā)maṇḍala 
Maṇḍ
alāṣṭas
ūtra 238, 244
Manguin, P.–Y. 262 Maṇicintana/*Maṇicinta 14Maniyār Ma
ṭha 1
97
Mañjughoṣa 18n59, 88, 252; among the Eight Great 
Bodhisattvas 79; image of 252
mañjunātha  88, 88n60Mañjuśrī 10n32, 11n35, 13, 41, 53, 87–90; 145, 165, 
170–72, 175–77, 183–85, 184n101, 188–90, 197, 
203, 205n57, 206–207, 217, 229, 232–33, 238–39, 242, 251–52, 257, 262, 391; among the group of 
six Bodhisattvas 80; Arapacana 184–86, 189; 
cult of, maritime aspect 11; pavilion 127; see 
also Mañjughoṣa, Mañjuvajra
Mañjuśrīg ṛha (Mañjuśrī sanctuary) 177, 208; 
inscription 376, 393–94
Mañjuśrīkrodha 74
Mañju
śrī
mūlakalpa  (or Mañju śri
yamūlakalpa, 
MMK ) 4n11, 12, 31, 36n45, 37, 43n67, 52n109, 
53n126, 58n183, 80, 203, 388n43, 388n45; 
maṇḍa
las of 56n159; see also Garu ḍap
aṭalapa-
rivarta ( T 1276)
Mañju śrī
nāmasaṅgīti  (‘Litany of Names of Mañ-
juśrī’)  88n60, 233
Mañju śrī
samaguhyānut -
taradhyānamukhamahātantrarājasūtra  88n61
Mañjuśrīvarman 358n16
Mañju śri
yamūlakalpa  (MMK ) 381n7, 
Mañjuvajra/Mañjuśrīvajra 88, 117, 184–86, 189–90, 
248; - maṇḍa
la 88n61; see also Mañjuśrī
Mañjuvāk 88, 90Mantra (s) 4, 84, 106, 110, 239, 244, 323–47, 353n6, 
376; Gāru
ḍa 29
0n35, 383n14; armour 386; four 
vajra - 58; five-part mantra of Vairocana 57; of 
the great seal ( mahāmudrā ) 385; mantric deities 
41
Mantramahodadhi  330–31, 336n56
Mantramārga 3n9, 4, 332; Tantras 333n47; see also 
Paścimasrotas
Mantra of Thousand-Armed Amtaku ṇḍa
lin 370n38
Mantra school (Zhenyanzong) 86n49, 99; of the 
Old Believers 74
Mantranaya 2, 3n8, 4, 8, 10n30, 11, 20n67, 71, 357; 
and dhāra ṇī pr
actice 4; shift to Theravāda in Sri 
Lanka 350; Tang tradition 29
Mantrayāna 3, 5–6, 244, 257, 265–66, 353n7 
mantrin  5n13
Manusmṛti  345
Māra 243
māra ṇa 3
29n28, 330, 332nn40–41, 333n45, 339n66, 
342n75
Māravijayottuṅgavarman, King 118, 244Mārīcī 172–73, 177, 182, 184n101, 186–87, 189–90, 
184n100
Mārīcīdhara
ṇīs
ūtra 370n39
Maritime Asia 1–2, 6–7, 13; Buddhism in 6; Esoter-
ic Buddhist circles in 15
Index.indd   453 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 468] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia454
marman  386n33
Mataram, Kingdom 344n79
Matsunaga, Y. 88n60, 93n72, 373, 381n7, 382n7, 
388n45
Maukhari, dynasty 14n46
Māyājāla  4n11, 9n27, 14n44, 74
Māyāmata  272n8
Mayer, R. 341–42, 342n76, 344McBride, R.D. II. 91, 125n7
Meditationes sacrae  155
Melaka Strait 241, 253, 255, 258–59, 261–63, 266, 271
Memorials and Edicts ( T 2120) 126, 128
Mendis, V.L.B. 143Mendut, see Candi Mendut Meru, Mount 184n97
Methods of Having Requests Heard by Ākā
śag
arbha 
(T 1145) 135
Mijiao 354, 369
Miji jingang lishi hui 91–93, 100Mikky
ō d
aijiten ( MDJ ) 39n56, 46n83, 51n108, 
53n125
Mikky ō j
iten (MJ) 39n56
Miksic, J. 207Mishra, U. 217Mitra, D. 213–14, 219, 224, 229, 232, 234n29, 363n24
mithuna  231
Mizhunna 14n46, 15Mkhyen brtse 120Moens, J.L. 141, 141n2, 269
mohana  330
Mohipur inscription 167–68, 167n21Mon 244; iconography 244Mongolian Buddhism 144Mongol-Manchu relations 152Monsoon Asia 1Moriya 352n6Moses, L.W. 144–45Mṛtyujit 332–33; see also M ṛtyuñjaya
Mṛtyuñjaya 332, 334; mantra 327, 329–30, 332–34; 
see also M ṛtyujit
Muara Jambi 83n41, 263, 266, 268–69, 272–73Muara Takus 21, 88n61, 110n108, 268–70, 370n39; 
stone inscription 337n60
Mucilinda 188–89
mudrā (s) 38, 54n132, 106, 110, 232, 239, 245; 
abhaya - 232, 316; añjali-  281n22, 366n26; 
bhūmispar
śa-
 198, 229, 232, 234n29, 243; da ṇḍa- 
(
staff seal) 387; dharmacakra - 232–33; dhyāna-  
107, 232; mahā-  (great seal) 386–87; varada - 219, 
221, 232–33, 252; vitarka - 107Muhammed, K.K. 195–96
Mukhāgama  101
Mukherjee, P. 217Mukhopadhyay, S.P. 281n22Muktesvara, temple 213, 232Mula Maluruṅ inscription 21n71
Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya  372n44
Mūlavarman, King 114Mūrdha
ṭak
a 41, 45–47, 53, 56n162, 58–59
Murshidabad inscription 167, 167n21Mus, P. 1n1, 98, 101Musi, River 253, 257–59, 261
Nadaungmya 166Nafuti (or Tinafuti), Kingdom see Tīrabhukti
nāga (s) 43, 54n136, 225, 232, 244, 281n22, 282, 284, 
289–95, 315n58, 319, 338, 342, 366n26, 370, 386; 
-rāja  315n59; seven-hooded 229; three headed 229
Nāgabodhi (a.k.a Nāgabuddhi) 10, 14–15, 17, 30, 71, 
73, 86, 92, 101, 358n15, 370n36, 389–91; see also 
Nāgajñāna
Nāgajñāna/Nāgajñā 15n50, 240, 370n36Nāgānanda 36n45
Nāgarakṛtāgama , see De
śav
arṇa
na
Nāgarī script 21, 88n61, 266–68, 270–71, 273, 
318n68
Nāgārjuna 9, 14n50, 73, 76–77, 83–84, 98, 116, 370, 
390; Bodhisattva 84
Nāgārjunakoṇḍa 9, 10n32, 201Nakamura, H. 76, 81n36Nākappa
ṭṭiṉ
am 9, 10n30, 11, 20, 117, 174, 204–205, 
240, 244, 266; Chinese-style Buddhist temple in 
15, 205; Mahāvihāra 207
Nakhon Si Thammarat 244Nakhon Pathom 13Nakhon Ratchasima 20n66
nakṣatra s 46
Nālandā 8, 10–11, 17–19, 21n69, 81, 83, 101, 119, 
170–71, 173, 176, 178, 183, 184, 193, 195, 205, 
206n60, 215n10, 237, 239, 241, 253, 258, 260–61, 265, 270, 317n66, 353, 356–357n12; archaeolog-
ical remains 194n11, 197; art and architecture 
of 196–97; copper-plate inscription 165, 167–68, 
167n21, 207n67, 207n70, 213; influence on 
pan-Asian Esoteric Buddhism 17; Mahāvihāra 
170, 177, 194–97, 202–208; monastery 6, 74, 213; 
University 113, 115
Nālandā (locality in Sri Lanka) 18, 352n5
Nāmasaṅgīti  185n105
Namo 153
Index.indd   454 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 469] ---
Index455
Nanda 84
Nandadīrghika Udraṅga Mahāvihāra 169n28Nandamanya, temple 20n67 Nandanga ṛh 191–92, 195, 366n26; stūpa  architec -
ture 196n20
Nandivarman II Pallavamalla, King 372n44, 
377n52
Narasiṁha(pota)varman II Rājasiṁha, King 15, 17, 
204–205, 368n32
Nārāya
ṇa 90
, 323, 383–84
Nāropā (or Advayavajra) 71n12, 390; relics of 120Na
ṭar
āja see Śiva, dancing
Naturalis Historia 212
Naudou, J. 118
Navakampa  326n12, 340n70
nāvātman  (mantra) 329n26
Nāyanārs 372n44Neelis, J. 6Netang 116, 120, 262
Netratantra  331–33n47, 346
Newar, art 143n9; artesans, diaspora of in Central, 
East, and Southeast Asia 21, 317, 329n19, 
338n63; Buddhists 277; paubha  316
Newer Tang History 127n14, 131n29
Nganjuk, bronze ma
ṇḍa
la 19, 265
Nham Biền stele 12n38Nihom, M. 14, 148–49, 141n3, 264–65
nikāya  350, 353
Nikāyasaṅgraha  9, 355n9
Nīlapaṭadarśana 9Niruttarayoga 93, 93n72Niruttarayogatantras 14, 214
nirvā
ṇa 10
6, 225, 277
Niṣpannayogāvalī  88n61, 248
Niśvā
satattvasaṁhitā ( Niśvā
sa) 4n11, 44n73
Nivātakavaca 279n16, 296n41, 299, 305, 309n53
Novum Organum  155n19
O’Brien, K. 151, 157–58Odisha 163, 165, 175, 178, 194–95, 197, 204–206, 
212; conquest of 211; in Tibetan accounts 217; 
ma
ṇḍa
la states of 202n43; maritime connec-
tions with Southeast Asia 9n25, 211–12; stylistic 
connections with Java 213; temple building 
within 213; see also Lalitagiri, Ratnagiri, 
Udayagiri, 
Older Tang History 130, 131n30
Old Javanese, 9th century stone inscription 323n3, 
324, 336; glosses to Sanskrit verses 326–30, 332, 334, 336oṃ ma
ṇi pa dme huṁ, mantra 265
Orlando, R. 86Orzech, C.D. 3n8, 14n48, 86n51, 125n7, 238–39Otochi 153
Padang Lawas 20, 166, 174, 178–79, 218, 259, 
265–68, 270; Hindu images at 267
Padang Roco 268, 269, 273
padhānaghara  352, 359, 363, 366–67, 369, 375; at 
Ratu Boko 352, 374n47; at Anurādhapura 352; 
at Tiriyāy 355
padmakula  48n93, 53n129, 54n131, 54n141, 233
Padmapāṇi 88, 219, 224–25, 229, 235, 243, 252
Padmapurā
ṇa 
193
Padmasambhava 14, 123n1Padoux, A. 331, 331n38, 338n62
Pag Sam Jon Zang 82n37 , 201n39
Pahārpur, see Somapura MahāvihāraPahlavi, language 46Pak Hidayat 88n61Pal, P. 280, 317Pāla, dynasty 7, 167–68, 172, 191, 193–97, 199–201, 
203–209, 237–38, 245, 260, 265, 273n9, 377n52; 
art and architecture of 191, 193, 195–97, 
199–200, 204, 208; features in Southeast Asian 
bronzes 239, 251; inscriptions 167, 167n21, 
206n60; political and religious ideology 237; 
religious synthesis 71n12, 168; reviseed chro-
nology 18n59
Palembang 82–83, 113, 205, 240, 242, 256, 260Pali Buddhism(s) 7, 8n22, 19n63Pallava, dynasty 10n30, 237, 357, 366n26, 368n32, 
372, 377n52; and competing religions 372n44; 
army 240, 352, 357; inscription 356; relations 
with Tangs 15
Paṁsukūlika (s) 352n5, 355, 359–61, 372, 375; 
monks 349–50, 354
Panai 266
Panakawan  294, 296, 299, 302–203, 311–12, 316n64
Panaṅkaran, King 118, 351n3, 377Panaraban, King ( panarabvan , Panarabwan) 
323–24, 331–32, 343, 343n77, 345–47, 351, 368n31, 370, 375n49, 376, 378
Pañcakā
ṇḍ
astava  (pañcakā ṇḍa) 3
25–33n46, 
336n58, 337, 340, 342, 342n74, 346–47
Pañcakrama  79, 82
Pañcarakṣā 180; goddesses 190
pañca-ratha  229
Pāñcarātra, Vaiṣṇava 332n41Pañcāla 287
Index.indd   455 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 470] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia456
Pañcaviṁ śatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā  170 , 180
Pāñcika (or Jambhala) 211, 224–26, 229, 235
Pāṇḍaravāsinī 52, 88–89, 110Pāṇḍava, clan 279n16Pāṇḍya, dynasty 366n26, 368n32, 373–74; disaster 
360, 374; invasion of Anurādhapura 350n3, 360; 
king 361
Panhāle Kājī, Maharashtra 167n17
Parama-guhya  111–12
Paramādya 9n27
paramasaugata  167–69
Paramaśiva 328; see also Pa
śupa
ti, Rudra, Śaṅkara, 
Śiva
Pararaton  148–50, 155, 158, 278n13–14
Pāramitā s (perfections), 77; four 77; six 77, 82; ten 
41
Pāramitāyāna (Perfection Path) 4, 71, 242, 244, 
256–57, 265
Paranavitana, S. 356Parṇaśabarī (Parṇaśavarī) 48n92, 50, 52, 186–87, 
340n72
Pārthayajña  279n16, 284, 289, 290n32, 293–94, 296, 
298–300n44, 302–305n50, 311, 315–16
Pārvatī 182, 335n51, 340, 340n69, 366
pā
śa, see 
amoghpā śa 278
Pa
ścimasrotas, stream of Śaivism 332
Pasir Panjang rock inscription 18n59Paśupati 335n51, 385; weapon 279n16; see also 
Rudra, Śiva
Pāṭaliputra 195n18, 213; council of 114Paṭṭikerā 20, 169
pau
ṣṭika 38
4
Perak 12Pereng inscription 344n80Perfected Body ma
ṇḍal
a 341
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea 212
Petech, L. 147, 120
’Phags-pa 144–47, 145n10, 153, 155, 157, 317; 
spiritual master of Khubilai Khan 145
Phimai 21, 248, 252, 340n72Pigeaud, Th.G. 68Pilgrims, Japanese travelling to China 35, 40Pikatan, King 18n59, 345, 346n86, 351n3, 353n8, 
362–63, 374n47, 378, 393–94; locality in Central 
Java 377; monastery/ vihāra 351n3, 373n45 
Pinakin liṅga  inscription 362n22
Pi
ṇḍīkr
ama 78–79, 93n74, 111
Piriya Krairiksh 241Plaosan (Lor), see Candi PlaosanPliny 212Plumpungan inscription 40n61Polonnaruwa 354n9, 355n9Porlak Dolok inscription 267Poru
ṣāda
 158
Possession, and the use of child mediums in 
8th-century China 382; Śaiva Kaula practice, 
382; see also āve śa rite
s
Post-Gupta period 1n3Post-Marxist historiography 142n5Potala(ka), Mount 177, 181, 189, 366Poulara, port 212, 213n7
Pradīpodyotana  45n79, 75
Prājña/Prajña (monk) 10, 13n41, 15, 17–18, 34n29, 
48, 74, 86–87, 206–207, 229, 383n14; travel to 
the Southern Seas 207
Prājñā, as companion of Hevajra 172, 178Prajñābala 382, 383n14Prajñāpāramitā (deity and text) 11, 48n92, 
52–53, 168, 262–63, 278n15; Mah
ā-Ārya
pra-
jñāpāra
mitā 53
; statue 269; see also Aṣ ṭasāh
as-
rikā Prajñāpāramitā , Pañcaviṁ śatis
āhasrikā 
Prajñāpāramitā  
*Prajñ āpārami
tā-kav
aca 43n69
Prajñāpāramitā  Naya śat
apañca śat
ikā 71n12, 203; 
commentary by Jñānamitra 203n45
Prajñopāyavini ścaya
siddhi  76, 82
Prākāra  349
Prakāśacandra, King 99n78Prambanan 12, 17, 120, 208, 279, 323, 345, 351n3, 
362–63
Prāmodavarddhanī 110Prapañca, Mpu 20n69, 149–50, 152n16, 155, 278n13Prasad, B.N. 216
pratipatti  77
Pratītyasamutpādagāthā ( Pratītyasamutpādasūtra , 
ye dharmā formula) 85, 217n16, 257, 266, 270
pratyālīḍha  posture 334–35, 340n69, 366n26
‘proto-Tantric’ Buddhist (and Śaiva) textual 
corpora 4
Przyluski, J. 1n1Ptolemy 212
Pūjā Kṣatriya 330n32, 332n43, 333n46
Pulga Saui 15
pu
ṇya 77
P
uṇyodaya 10, 12, 14, 244
Purāṇa 363Puri 9Purnadih, stūpa  195
Purohita  5, 14n46, 282–83, 300, 302
puṣ
ṭi 330,
 330n34, 332n41, 333n45
Index.indd   456 17/7/16   10:23 PM~· 

--- [Page 471] ---
Index457
Qianlong 152
Qing, dynasty 152Qinglong temple/monastery 32, 59, 100Qionghua Zhenren 127Quanya 34–35Quaritch Wales, H.G. 241Qubilai, see Khubilai
Raffles, S. 193n5
Raghuvaṁ
śa 212
R
āhu 46n83
Raja Kĕliṅ (Cōḻa king) 212n6
rājaguru  5
Rājarāja Cōḻa I, King 10n30, 117, 174Rājara
ṭṭha 3
50n3, 357, 364, 373; throne 352
Rājasanagara, King 158Rājendra I, inscriptions 368n29Rājgīr/Rājagṛha 197, 203, 215n10Rājiṇāvihāra 18, 352n5, 353, 356–57; temple 357n14Rājinīdīpika 357n14Rāma 17n56
Rāmacaritam 195n18
Rāmapāla, King 172, 195n18;
Rāmāya
ṇa k
akavin  17n56, 345, 346n86, 375n49
Ranakīrti 116Raṇavaṅkamalla Harikāladeva, King 169Ranawella, S. 357n13, 359n17, 361n19
Raṅga Lave 151
Rangda 3n10Raniwās 193
Rasaratnasamuccaya 389–90
Rāṣ
ṭra
kūṭa, d
ynasty 368n32
Ratna, family 106Ratnabodhi 17, 353n7, 358, 362n20Ratnagiri 8, 9n25, 178, 195n17, 197, 207;
Ratnakūṭa Sūtra 9n29
Ratnamegha 73
Ratnameghasūtra  73, 77–78, 101, 111–12; Dun-
huang manuscript of 203n46
Ratnasambhava 57, 88–89, 202, 264, 267Ratneśvara 88Ratnatraya 90Ratih 316Ratnagiri 37, 213, 218, 227–29, 234–35; Buddhist 
rituals at 216; monastery/Mahāvihāra 211, 
214–17, 219, 226–27
Ratnasambhava 136, 219, 232–33, 280n21Ratu Boko hillock/promontory (Ratu Boko 
Buddhist site, Ratu Boko complex) 17, 24, 101, 
323–24, 343–345n80, 349–52, 355–56, 359–65, 367–73, 375, 393; gold foil/artifact (artifact) 323–24, 327, 330–31, 339, 341, 343, 345, 347; 
mantra/ yantra  323–24, 331–33, 340–41, 
343n77–47, 351, 368n31, 375–76, 378–79; Śaiva 
structures at 349
Rāvaṇa 17n56, 332Ray, H.P. 2n5
Ṛddhiprabhāva 279n20, 281, 315
Record of the Buddhist religion as practised in India 
and the Malay Archipelago 228
Record of the Dharma Transmission 238n2Reichle, N. 268Relic, Collarbone 354; Buddha hair 355–56
Renwangjing (T 246) 86n51
Reting, monastery 120–21, 262Ri
ṭig
ala 359–60
Ritual Manual for the Initiation into the Great 
Maṇḍ
ala of the Uṣ ṇīṣ
a-Cakravartin  (T 959) 
(Manual ) 29–31, 33–34, 36–38, 40–49
Robson, J. 382Rohaṇa, Kingdom 240
van Ronkel, Ph.S. 82
Rosenstock-Huessy, E. 153n17; theory of 141Rossabi, M. 144–45
ṛṣi(s) 282–83, 298, 302–203, 319, 371n42
Ṛtasaṅgraha 50, 58n180
Rudra 55n154, 328n23, 330, 332, 339n68, 344, 371, 
386–87; with severed head 387; see also Maheś
-
va
ra, Paśupati, Śiva
Ruizong, Emperor 203Rukmiṇī 279n16
Rulai miyao jing 91
ryōbu Tantras/Tantric system 31n7, 38, 43–44, 48; 
(‘twinned’) ma
ṇḍa
la(s) 31, 33, 35n38–37, 41, 43, 48
Sab Bāk inscription 19n61, 20n66, 247, 358n16Sabokingking inscription, see Telaga Batu inscrip-
tion 
ṣa
ḍaṅg
ayoga 148
Sadāśiva 169
Saddharmapu ṇdar
īka-sūtra (Lotus Sūtra) , 
sādhana  277, 278n9, 317–18
Sādhanamālā  80, 118, 170, 335n50, 335n52, 338n61
Saicho 47n89
Śailendra-Cūḍāma ṇiv
armavihāra 10n30, 11
Śailendra, dynasty (era of Java) 7, 8n21, 9n25, 12, 15, 
17, 18n59, 69, 191, 195, 199, 201, 203, 205–209, 
242, 323–24, 344, 345, 347, 349, 351, 353, 355, 
358–59, 369, 377n52, 378n53, 393; art and 
architecture of 191, 201, 207–209; court 350; 
Index.indd   457 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 472] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia458
diplomatic links with Tangs and Lambaka ṇṇas 
1
0n30; foreign roots of 212; inscriptions 207, 
209, 349; kings 361; links with Pāla dynasty 191, 
193, 203, 207–209; origins 9n25, 207–208, 212
Śailendrarājaguru 378
Śailodbhava, dynasty 9n25, 212Śaiva 3, 5, 9n26, 12n38, 14n43, 21, 69, 362n21, 
364–68, 370–71, 372n44, 373, 375n49, 377; dy-
nasties 10, 17; inscriptions 362, 367–68; Kings 
8n21; liṅgas  371n42; priests of Bali 325, 342n74; 
(proto-)Tantric scriptures 4n11; recension of 
SHK  69; ṣi  371n42; scriptures from Bali 324–26, 
330n32, 346; Siddhānta 3n9; Tantras 39n61, 331, 331n36, 333n47, 345–46; teachings 69
Śaivism (Śaiva religion) 5, 8n21, 10, 90n63, 150, 
350n3, 366, 374n46, 375, 377, 381; adoption of 
mainstream form in Central Java 374; Atimārga 
branch 10n30; boundaries between Buddhism 
and Śaivism 4; incorporation of texts into Bud-
dhism 382–83; influence of in The Āve
śa Ri
tes 
381; in Java 12, 39; Tantric 3n9, 4, 21n69
Śakra 55, 182; see also Indra
Sakya (Sa-skya) sect/monks 145–47; monasteries 
144
Śākyakīrti 19n62, 82, 83, 258Śākyamitra 99n78, 341n73Śākyamuni (Buddha) 41, 46n83, 78, 90–91, 103–
104, 133, 164–65, 184, 186–89, 221, 232–33, 235, 
239, 243–44, 260, 370; image of 219; as (Mahā)
Vairocana 37, 41–42, 57n169; see also Buddha
Sakya-pa 146, 317Sakya Pa
ṇḍit
a 144–45, 145n10, 317
Śākyaśrībhadra 21n73, 167n19, 173, 277, 317–18
Saloṇapura Mahāvihāra 228n23
samādhi  51n103, 57, 100, 110, 134, 206, 240
Sam āja
sādh
anavyavasthol ī 3
89
Samantabhadra 17n54, 53n125, 79, 88, 107, 109–110, 
201, 206, 281n22, 357, 358n15; among the Eight 
Great Bodhisattvas 79
Samānta feudalism 123, 202; ma ṇḍa
la 265
Samantap āsādikā 3
91
Samaratuṅga, King 323–24
śamatha-vipa śyan
ā 77
samaya (s) 51, 56n161, 90, 106
sambhogakāya  134n45
Saṁvara 13, 178, 180, 189n120, 240, 242, 248–49, 
252n19, 339–40n72; cycle 9n25; see also Cakra -
sa
ṁvara
Saṁvarodayā  9n25
Samye Mahāvihāra 201n39Sanchi/Sañci 191, 201Sanderson, A.G.J.S. 4, 12n38, 330n36–33n47, 
342n75, 346, 366, 381–82
Sandhyākaranandin 195n18Sanfoqi 11, 240, 256, 260–61, 263
saṅgha 216 –17, 227, 235
Saṅghabhadra 83Saṅ Hyaṅ Advayajñāna 91
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan  (SHK)  12n38, 49, 67, 
68n3, 69, 71, 75–79, 81–82, 86, 90, 93, 98–103, 
106n99, 110–13, 278, 339n68; manuscripts 68; 
Śaiva version 68n7; three versions of 68 
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Advayasādhana  (SHKAS)  
69, 71, 76–77, 82, 88–91, 100
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Mantranaya (SHKM)  69, 
71, 73–79, 91, 100–101, 105, 112
Saṅ Hyaṅ Pustaka Kamahāyānan  93
Saṅ Hyaṅ Samaya 73
Saṅ Hyaṅ Tantra Bajradhātu Subhūti , see Tantra 
Bajradhātu
Sañjaya, line of kings 344, 351n3, 370n37, 377; 
ancestor 323, 343 
Śaṅkara (appellative of Śiva) 328n23
Ṣaṇmaṇ
ḍal
avidhi 47n86
Sanskrit 67; texts, in the Indonesian Archipelago 
67; -Khmer inscription of Bo Īkō 367n27; 
-Khmer inscription of Sdok Kak Thom 346
Śāntākaragupta 279n18Śāntarakṣita 3n9, 74, 76–77, 390
śānt
i 116, 330, 330nn34–35, 332n41, 333n45, 336
Śantideva 21n69, 73, 75, 78, 92, 98, 107
śānt
ika 384
Sap Bak, village 359n16
sapta-ratha 224–25
Sarasvatī 329
Śariputra 372n44
Sarkar, H.B. 212Sārnāth 187, 218, 228n21, 245
Sarvabuddhasamāyoga  14n49
Sarvadurgatipari
śod
hana(tantra)  (SDP) 21n69, 73, 
106n100, 107, 334, 339n67
Sarvajñāna 91Sarvanivaraṇaviṣkambhin 79–80; among the 
group of six Bodhisattvas 80; among the Eight 
Great Bodhisattvas 79
Sarvāstivādin 270, 358n16
Sarvatathāgatādhiṣ
ṭhā
na 357n13
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha  (STTS , ‘The Com-
pendium of Principles’) 9, 14n49, 29n2, 30, 
31n10, 33, 44–45, 47n88, 48n93, 53n129–130, 
Index.indd   458 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 473] ---
Index459
54n131, 58n179, 71, 133n40, 201, 203, 205, 207, 
208n72, 238–39, 240n6, 242, 248, 264, 323–24, 
327n19, 334–39, 341–43, 353n7, 357n13, 365, 
382–83, 389–91; Sanskrit manuscript 201n40; 
-sūtra 86
Sarvavajrodaya  (SV) 73, 99n78, 324, 334–36, 
339n67, 340n69
ṣaṭkar
māṇi (s
ix rites of magic) 330–32nn44–45, 
331n46, 339n66, 345
*Ṣaṭpār
amitāsūtra 34n29
Satyadvayāvatāra  118
Satyavarman 358n16Schnitger, F.M. 258, 267–68, 270Schoemaker, W. 208Schopen, G. 216n13, 217, 227, 228n21Schoterman, J. 113n1, 318
Scripture for Humane Kings 128
Sdok Kak Thom Sanskrit-Old Khmer inscription 
346
Secret History (Mongyol-un niyuca tobčiyan) 153
Seguntang Hill 258; see also Bukit Seguntang 
inscription
Sejarah Melayu  212n6
Sekodde
śaṭī
kā 390
Sen, T. 2n4, 10, 15n53, 17, 194n12Sena, dynasty 169, 174Sena I, King 9n27, 353n8, 354n9, 355n9, 359–60, 
373
Sena II, King 18, 350n3, 351, 359n17, 361, 365, 
369n33, 373–75
Sewu, see Candi Sewu Seyfort Ruegg, D. 5, 144Shanxing 83–84Sharrock, P.D. 317n66Shāstri, H. 91–92Shengshan-si, monastery 34, 50
Shibahui zhigui  337n60, 338, 341n73
Shibian, Dharmācārya 83–84Shihu (Dānapāla) 11, 206
Shijuhō-kyō  (Shizhoufa jing ) 339n66
Shilifoshi 260; see also Śrīvijaya
Shingon 354, 370; order 31; school 99, 376n51 Sh
ōka
i (alias D ōka
i) 40
Shōrai
 Mokuroku 39n58
Shouzhang-lun  83n40
Shilun jing ( or Daśaca
krasūtra ) 80–81
Shūei 4
0
Si Thep 20n66Sichuan Basin 129
siddha( s) 4, 9n26, 13n40, 47, 154, 166n17, 186n110, 231, 265, 345, 372n43
Siddhamāt ṛkā, script 17, 18n59, 32n12, 35, 38, 45, 
55n151, 112, 195, 207n65, 239, 290; inscriptions 
12, 17n55, 18, 357n13
Siddham texts 370n38, 371n41Siddhāntatantras 326n12
siddhayātra 13n38, 257
Siddhayoge
śvar
īmata  332n45
siddhi s 47, 93, 106, 134n44, 136, 265, 333n45, 347, 
353n6
Sidha Karya 3n10
Śikhin 79
Śikṣāsamuccaya  75, 92, 97–98, 107
Śikṣās
amuccayābhisamaya  117
Śikṣās
amuccayakārikā  117
Śilāmegha 356
Silk Road(s) 2n4, 114; maritime 2, 7; southern 114Silla, dynasty 8Sima Guang 123–25
sīmā , inscriptions 351n3
sīmābandha  372
Simpang statue 141n3Sinclair, I. 12Si
ṇḍok
, King (Śrī Īśāna Bhadrottuṅgadeva) 69, 93, 
99
Singhal, S.D. 252, 325–26Siṅhasāri, kingdom/dynasty 21n69, 88, 141, 158, 
268; inscription of ad  1351 278n14
Si Pamutung 267
Śiśireśwara 223
Śiv
a 134n43, 167, 174, 181–82, 184, 187, 225, 239, 
253, 255, 268, 282, 318, 326–32, 335, 338, 
340–44, 362n22, 366, 368n32–72n43, 376, 386n31; dancing 184, 187, 190n125; oneness 
with Buddha 278, 318; temple 351; see also 
Mahādeva, Paśupati, Rudra, Śaṅkara
Śiv
a-Buddha (Bha ṭṭār
a) 150–51, 278; cult of 21, 241
Śivadharma 44n73
Śivagṛha, funeral memorial inscription/stele 18n58, 
345, 351n3, 374n48, 375n49, 393–94
Śivaliṅga s 362n22, 367n27, 371; see also liṅgas
Skanda 184, 184n95, 352n6; see also KārttikeyaSkilling, P. 10–11, 19, 168n27, 241, 262–63, 273n9Skorupski, T. 71
Ślączka, A. 267, 272–73
Slouber, M.J. 382, 383n14Slusser, M.S. 317n65Smith, F.M. 382Snellgrove, D.L. 238n2, 334, 336, 342n75Soekmono, R. 272
Index.indd   459 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 474] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia460
Sogdian, language 46
Sogdiana 131, 131n28Somapura Mahāvihāra 8, 101, 165n10, 168, 170, 
172, 174, 195, 196n20, 197, 199–201, 208–209, 
366n26; see also Paharpur
Somnāth 115Song, dynasty 98, 124, 125n8, 132n33, 259, 264, 
269; biography 241
Song Fazhi 204
Song gaoseng Zhuan 383n14
Songtsen Gampo 115, 119Songwang 114South and Southeast Asia, relations and cultural 
exchanges, 175, 177n77, 178–80, 183–84, 190–91, 
193, 200–209; and Sanskrit 205
Spirit possession 382n10
śram
aṇa 34, 127, 383
Śrāvastī 187, 372n44; miracles of 85Śrī Canāśā 250Śrīcandra, King 169, 174Śrī Ghananātha 103, 111Śrī Hariwarddhana, King 148Śrī Jñāneśvarabajra 278n14Śrī Jayawardhanī 148Śrī Kahulunnan 375
Śrīparamādya  14n49
Śrī Sambhara Sūryāvaraṇa 93Śrī Saṅgrāmadhanañjaya, King 18n59Śrī Sūryavarmadeva, King 20Śrīśailam 9, 14n50, 212Śrīśailendracū
ḍām
aṇiv
arman Vihāra 118, 244; 
Śailendra-Śrīvijayan monastery 11
Śrīśīla 240, 356n11Śrīvijaya, Buddhist kingdom of 7, 8n21, 11–12, 18, 
19n62, 82–85, 113, 115–16, 118–21, 123, 205–206, 
238, 240–41, 243–44, 253, 255–56, 258, 260–63, 265, 269, 358n16, 374n48; bronzes 238; centres 
of learning 19n62; influence on Tibetan 
Buddhism 115; inscriptions 244n12; -pura 113, 
115–17, 174n57; renowned seat of Buddhism 116; 
see also Sanfoqi
Śrī Jñānamitra 116
stambhana  330, 336
Stein Callenfels, P.V. van 275
Stele Inscription,  see Amoghavajra
Strickmann, M. 382, 384n21
Stūpa(s) 41, 44, 103–105, 191, 209, 218, 253, 257–58, 
265, 267, 269–70, 354–56, 362n21, 371; archi-
tecture 104–105, 191, 197–98; at Abhayagiri 
357n13; cakravartin  193; donative 213; of Bharhut 79;  of parinirvāṇ a 104–105; of Victor 
104–105; - prāsāda  101–103; votive 103
stūpikā s 102–103, 209, 257; see also stūpa
Stutterheim, W.F. 101Subāhu 41, 45–46, 53, 56n162, 58
Sub
āhu
paripṛcch ā 45
Śu
bhākaradeva, King 9n25, 202
Śubhākarasiṁha 14–15, 18, 30, 31, 33n19, 34, 38, 
45, 86, 101, 125, 135, 205–206, 329n24, 339n68, 
365n25
Subhūti  (Tantra ), see Tantra Bajradhātu 
Subhūtipālita 99n78Sudhana and Manoharā tale, on Borobudur reliefs 
206; on Candi Jago reliefs 275–319
Sudhana(kumāra) 107, 171, 175–76
Sudhanakumārāvadāna  (avadāna ) 279–81, 284, 
287, 289–91, 293, 295–96, 298, 300–302, 304, 
306, 308–11, 314–16, 318; Nepalese 281n22; 
Newar version 280
Sumeru, Mount 50, 336, 336n55, 343Sum pa 116–17Sundberg, J.R. 12, 15, 17, 86, 102n86, 240–41, 252, 
323–24, 331, 332n39, 336, 336n55, 340n69, 341, 343–47, 350n3, 361n20, 362, 369, 370n36, 373n45, 376, 389
Sungai Tekarek inscription 85
śūny
atā 257
Śūrapāla, King 167
Surocolo, bronze ma ṇḍa
la 19, 252, 265
Surowono 317n65Sūrya/Āditya 174, 187, 190n125, 337n60
Susiddhikarasādhanasaṅgraha  47n86
Susiddhikara (sūtra  or -[ mahā ]tantra ) 3n9, 14n49, 
33n19, 45n80, 50n100, 53n126, 337n60, 346
Sutasoma, character 338–40n71
Sutasoma kakavin 20n69, 143n7, 157–58, 278, 
280n21, 338–40n71, 342
Suvar
ṇab
hūmi, see Suvar ṇad
vīpa
Suvar ṇad
vīpa 11, 19, 20n68, 87n53, 113–19, 166, 
174, 241, 256, 260–263, 265, 339n66
Suvar ṇabh
āsottamasūtra  269
Suzong, Emperor 39, 124–26, 128–29, 131, 131n31, 
133, 136, 203, 369, 373n45
Svastika (Bodhisattva) 38Svastika (
śram
aṇa) 50
, 59
Śyāmatārā 277; see also, Tārā
Szántó, P.D. 99
Tabo, monastery 11, 201n39, 262Taish ō, Canon 381, 383; Tripi
ṭak
a 361n20, 365n25
Index.indd   460 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 475] ---
Index461
Taizong, Emperor 5n15, 133n37, 135n49
Taiz ō Z
uzō 
38n51
Taji Gunung inscription 351n3
Takakusu 81n36
Ṭakkirāja 327n19, 334–37nn59–60, 342n75, 
376n51
Talang Tuwo inscription 82–83, 85, 242, 256Tāmralipti 13n42, 83Tandihet gold plaque (Tandihet I, Tandihet  II 
inscriptions) 266, 267
Tang, dynasty 7, 85n43, 90n63, 123–27, 123n2, 
125n8, 126, 133n37, 136–37, 145, 194, 203–205, 
238, 259–61, 382; biography 239–40; bureau-
cracy 127–31; capital 133n39; court 5n15, 15, 
381; diplomatic links with Śailendras and 
Lambakaṇṇas 10n30; emperors 239, 358; lines 
of communication with Java 48; masters 29; 
military 129, 131; period 10; relations with 
Pallavas 15; society 133;
Tanjung Medan 270Tanjur Canon 19n63 
Tantra Bajradhātu  (or Tantra Subhūti/Bajradhātu 
Subhūti ) 93, 98–100, 150 
Tantrayāna, introduction to China 217Tantric magic 134n44, 136, 146, 324, 330, 332, 341, 
345–47, 388; ses also ṣa
ṭkar
māṇi, s
iddhi s, war 
magic
Tāntrikas 231, 375n49Tantular, Mpu 157–58Tārā 8, 9n29, 13, 20, 52, 54n141, 87–89, 110, 118–20, 
166n11, 171–73, 175–78, 181–82, 186, 189, 
207, 217, 232, 234, 238, 265; Aṣ
ṭam
ahābhaya 
186, 189–90, 234; cult of in Tibet and Indo-
nesia 87, 119–120; cult of, maritime aspect 
11; Mahācīna(krama)- 10n32; mantra of 119; 
temple at Somapura 207; temple in Central 
Java 8, 87, 120, 377; temple in Sri Lanka 240; 
Vajratārā 189n120, 264; see also Śyāmatārā
Tāraka 337n60, 342n75
Tārāmūlakalpa  87
Tāranātha 11n34, 18n57, 21n72, 81, 82n37, 111, 113, 
166n11, 167n18, 175, 217; History of Buddhism 
in India  113
Tathāgata(s) 51n103, 76, 82, 88, 90, 92, 102n87, 103, 
104n95, 106, 110, 134, 329, 335n51; Five (Pañca -
ta
thāgatas) 88, 177, 186, 189, 232–33, 264, 331; 
in the STTS  201; worship of in Java 101; see also 
Buddha(s), Jina-Buddhas
Tathāgata-bhasme śvar
a-nirghoṣa  239
tathāgathakula 233Tathāgataguhya (or -guhyaka, -guhyakasūtra ) 
91–92, 94, 98; 
Tathāgatācintyaguhyanirde śa 
91; see also Tathāga -
taguhya
Tathāgatoṣṇīṣa  see uṣ ṇī
ṣa
Tattvasaṅgraha 12n37; tantra 99n78; sūtra  14; see 
also Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha ( STTS )
Tattvasiddhi  3n9, 29n2, 74–75
Taxila 201Telaga Batu inscription (Sabokingking inscription) 
256, 258, 265, 345
Tendai order 31, 35n38
The (Garuḍa) Āve
śa Ri
te (Suji liyan Moxishouluo 
tian shuo [jialouluo] aweishe fa) 381–84, 388
The Blue Annals 74The Great Tang dynasty record of the Western 
Regions  193n4
The Scripture for Humane Kings ( En wang hu guo 
ban ruo bo luo mi duo jing ) 86n51
Theravāda 8n22, 77, 239n4, 240, 361, 375; conflict 
with Esoteric Buddhism 166; monks 190; shift 
in Sri Lanka 350, 374
Tholing 201n39Three Jewels 106
Thūpārāma  353–56, 359–60; stūpa  353
Tian Liangqiu 132, 132n36Tiantai, Mount 35, 39Tibet, military conquest by Khubilai 141Tibetan Buddhism 74, 115, 144, 145; influence on 
Śrīvijaya 115; influence by Śrīvijaya 115
Tibetan Canon 117Tibetan, invaders of China 131, 131n30Tibetan Lamas 146n11, 147Tibetan literature, and information on Śrīvijaya 
113, 261–62, 264–65
Tibetan monks 175Tigawangi 317n65Tilopa 175Tīrabhukti, Kingdom 194n14
Tiriyāy  353–56, 357n12, 359–60
tīrthya s 372n44
To-ji 35, 40Tomabechi, T. 389Tortoise-shell inscriptions 168n22Trailokyavijaya 52, 239, 252n19, 335, 336n55, 
340n69, 340n72; myth/cycle of 323–24, 336, 338–43, 347, 370; see also Vajrapāṇi
Trailokyavijayamahākalparāja  337n59 
Trailokyavijayamahāmaṇḍala 264, 334, 338Trayastrīṁśa 104, 105n97
Index.indd   461 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 476] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia462
Trepiṭaka 383; from Kashmir 382, 383n14
Tri Tepusan inscription 101
tridhātu  101
Trimūrti 90–91Triple Hall ( sandian ) 123, 123n2
Tripura 368–69Tripurāntaka 362n22, 368n32, 369n32Tripurāsura 368n30, 369n33Triratna (Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha) 50n101; 
90–91; see also Ratnatraya
Trisamaya  376
Trisamayarāja 75, 75n23
Tryambaka inscription 368n30Tucci, G. 103n92, 104n96, 105n97
Tuoluoni ji jing 38–39
Turfan 83Turk 131
Tutur Ādhyātmika 326nn13–14Tutur Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa  326n12
Tutur Kamokṣan  326nn12–14, 329n29
Tutur  literature, Old Javanese  and Balinese 39n61
uccā
ṭana 33
0, 332n41
Ucchuṣma 48n92, 54Udaya II, King 9n25, 365Udayagiri 8, 195n17, 197, 207, 213, 218Uddaṇḍapura (Otantapurī Mahāvihāra) 8, 195, 
201n39
Uḍra (present-day Odisha) 206; see also OdishaUjeed, H. 158–59Umā 366Üpa losel 19n63
Upade
śa 85
uṣṇī
ṣa 107; buddhoṣ ṇīṣa/t
athāgatoṣ ṇīṣ
a 36–37, 39, 
41, 43; deities 42
Usṇī ṣac
akravartin, 37; Ekākṣara- 36, 38n53, 39n56, 
41, 43, 46, 47n86, 51n103; -tantra, 36n46, 37
Uṣṇīṣakalpas 29, 36–39, 41, 44–45, 48n92
Vāgbhaṭa 386n33, 389–90Vāgīśvarakīrti 20n66Vairocana 42, 45n79, 57, 88–91, 99, 164, 187, 
201–202, 206, 208n72, 232–33, 238–39, 244, 252, 264, 335n51, 336, 338–39nn66–67, 278, 280n21, 294, 296, 298, 309, 315, 363; five-part mantra 
57; heaven 302; Khmer 244; see also Mahāvai-
rocana
Vairocanābhisaṁbodhi (tantra ) (VAT ) 3n9, 29n2, 
30, 32–35n39, 38, 43–44, 46; 52n109, 55n151, 
57n168; ma
ṇḍa
la of 38, 43, 53n127; see also Mahāvairocanābhisaṁbodhitantra  (MVT )
Vaiśālī 187, 193Vaiṣṇava religion (Vaiṣṇavism) 3, 372n44, 374n46; 
fogure from Abhayagiri 366; state temple 
(Angkor Wat) 371n42; texts 272 
Vaiśravaṇa ( yakṣa  king and form of Kubera) 
55n152, 283, 315n58–59; 
Vaital Deul 223Vājiriyavāda 9, 355n9
Vajra (s) 3n8, 7, 42, 45, 59, 106, 171, 186, 220, 239, 
245, 247, 252, 253, 259–60, 266–68, 270, 270n7, 273, 323, 331, 335nn51–52, 338n64, 339, 339n67, 
344–46, 355, 359n18, 368n31, 370, 374–76; 
family 106; finials at Thūpārāma 359; - kāya  
82; mantras 41, 58; -mastaka (kīrtimukha)  223;  
-
śar
īra 82, 242, 257; single-pronged 52n110, 
53n128; vi śva- 88
n61, 270n7, 273
Vajrabodhi (a.k.a. Vajrabuddhi) 10n30, 12, 14–15, 
17–18, 30–32, 73, 86, 92, 100–101, 125, 135–36, 
237–42, 205–207, 244–45, 252, 352–53, 355–56, 
358, 361n20, 362n20, 365n25, 370, 376n51, 382, 389–91; biographies of 86, 136n51, 239–40, 351, 353n7, 382; journeys 13n41; meeting with 
Amoghavajra in Java 86n47, 205n58, 358
Vajrabodhisattvas 264
vajrācārya  4, 13n40, 18n57, 32
Vajradeva, 168, 169n28Vajradhara 270, 336n55; see also VajrasāttvaVajradharma 106Vajradhātu(mahā)maṇḍala (‘[Great] Diamond 
Realm/World Maṇḍala’) 30, 33, 35n38, 39, 41, 
43, 45, 47n88, 52n110, 55, 99, 134–35, 200–201, 
202n40, 203, 208, 239, 240, 264–65, 280n21, 335, 
370
Vajradhātumahāma
ṇḍa
lopāyikāsarvavajrodaya  
99n78
Vajradhātvīśvarī 89
vajradhṛk  90–91; see also Vajradhara
Vajragarbha-Trailokyavijaya  371n41
Vajragarbharāja 370Vajrahūṁkāra (Huṅkāravajra) 334–36n55, 339n67, 
340n69; -mudrā  339n67
Vajrakarma 106
vajrakula 233
Vajrakuṇḍali 370Vajramuṣ
ṭi B
odhisattva 339n67
Vajrapā ṇi 13
, 53, 88, 90–92, 107, 124, 134, 154, 201, 
219–22, 227, 229–30, 235, 239, 242–43, 252n19, 257, 323–24, 335–44, 346–47, 383; among 
the Eight Great Bodhisattvas 79; among the 
Index.indd   462 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 477] ---
Index463
group of six Bodhisattvas 80; as the Supreme 
Lord of All Tathāgatas 88; images of 211; see 
also Vajradhara, Vajrasattva, Vajrahūṁkāra, 
Trailokyavijaya, Caṇḍavajrapāṇi
Vajraparvata 9; -dwelling monks 9n27; see also 
Śrīśailam
Vajrarāja 335
Vajraratna 106Vajrasattva 9, 13, 19, 88, 90–91, 106, 124, 134, 175, 
232, 240, 242, 245–52, 336n55, 339, 339nn67–68, 
354n9, 359n18, 370n36; as Ādi–Buddha/Sixth 
Buddha 242 278n15; as overlord of the Vajra
-
dh
ātu pentad ( śrī
pañcasugata ) 248; icons 
246–47; Khmerized bronzes. 248–49; Khorat 252; Lovea Em icon 245–46, 252; Mahā- 88; 
school 102; see also Mahāvairocana
Vajrasattvaniṣpādana  337n59 
Vajra
śek
haratantra  (VT, Vajra śek
harasūtra , *Va-
jraśik
hara, Vajro ṣṇīṣa) 30
, 33n19, 86, 132, 264, 
335, 335nn50–51, 337n59, 338, 341n73, 353n7, 370; cycle 135
Vajrasūk
ṣmad
harmama ṇḍal
a 45
Vajratārā, see TārāVajrat
īkṣṇa 3
90–91
Vajravāda 360Vajravarāhī 178Vajrayāna 3–4, 6n17, 8n22, 9n27, 10n30, 11, 12n37, 
13n40, 14, 20n66, 21n69, 98, 218, 234, 237, 241, 
280n21, 353, 355; Buddhism 4, 8, 11, 19, 217; 
South Indian innovators 353
Vajrayoginī 174; (Vikrampur) inscriptions 168n22
Vajro
ṣṇīṣa, 
see Vajra śek
haratantra
Valabhī Mahāvihāra 194, 202, 208Valaiṅ 212Vālavatī, Mount 12, 115Vāmasrotas, Śaiva stream 346
Vaṁsatthappakāsinī 361n19
Vanaratna 175Vanua Tṅah 351n3, 373n45, 377–78; crown 351n3; 
see also Wanua Tengah III inscription
Vāpilladatta 99Varak, King 353n8, 358n16, 363, 373n45, 376–78Vārāṇasī 18Varman, dynasty 169, 174Varuṇa 55, 282, 363n24
va
śīka
raṇa , 329n25–332n39, 335n50, 336, 
336nn56–57, 339n66, 342–43, 345–47, 384
Vasubandhu 92Vasudeva 282Vasudhārā 234n29va
ṭa dāge  354, 355–57, 359
Verardi, G. 21Vespasianus 114Vessagiri 355n9
Vetāla -rituals 4n11
Vibhaṅga 85, 270
vidyā s 4, 106
Vidyā(dhara) Pi
ṭak
a (Mingzhou) 4n11, 84
vidyādhara s 17, 223–24
Vidyāmantra  83
Vidyottamātantra  346
Vighnāntaka 340n72; see also krodha-vighnāntaka 
deities
vihāra  12n38, 18, 214–16, 218–19, 221–22, 228, 231, 
233, 235, 373, 374n47, 377–78; architecture 199, 201; Kūkai’s at Kongōbuji 371; of Jingesi 360
Vijayabāhu 352n6Vikramapura 116Vikramaśīla Mahāvihāra/monastery 8, 10, 18n57, 
21, 71, 101, 116, , 165, 168, 173, 195, 196n20, 197, 
199–201, 207–209, 317n66; see also Antichak
Vikrampur/Vikramapura 167n19, 169–71, 174, 
177–79, 180, 185n105, 187; inscription 168n22, 169; see also Maināmatī
Vimalaprabhā  170–71
Vimalamitra 14
Vimalos
ṇī
sadhāra ṇī 2
16n12
Vīṇāśikh
atantra  326n12, 346
Vinatā 385n29
vinaya  134n49, 169n27, 216–17, 227, 352n5, 372; 
Pali 391
Vināyaka/ vināyaka s 37, 46, 135, 182, 333, 337–42, 
344, 344n80, 347, 365, 370n39, 371; rituals 339n66; series of eight 47, 56n162, 59n185, 370; 
vajra - 47n88; see also Gaṇapati
Vipulaśrīmitra 165Vīrabhadra 333Vīrāṅkurārāma 355n9Virūpa 145Viśakhapatnam 9Vi
ṣṇu 90
–91, 167, 168n22, 169, 174, 177n77, 187, 
190n125, 195n16, 255, 271, 366, 368n32, 371n42, 
383n17
Viṣṇuv
ardhana, King 158–59, 275, 278n13
Viśuddhim ārg
asanne 391
Viśvapāṇi 88Viśveśvara 87–88
vyāghramāṁsa  388n45
Vyākhyāyukti  92
Waddell, L.A. 120
Index.indd   463 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 478] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia464
Wang Xuance 194, 204
Wang Xuanguo 84Wanua Tengah III inscription 18n59, 323,  377–78, War magic 5n15Wat Hua Wiang, inscription 243Wat Keow 243Wat Phra Maen 13Wat Sithor inscription 246, 250Weinberger, S.N. 239Wang Jin 128–31Wayman, A. 79Wedemeyer, C. 75, 98Weerasinghe, S.G.M. 86n50Wendan 358n16
Wenshushili pusa ji zhuxian suoshuo jixiong shiri 
shan’e suyao jing 384n21
Wenxian 129
Wenzi  130
Western Ghats, rock cut architecture 215–16White, D.G. 5, 9n26, 13, 332–33Wijesuriya, G. 355 Williams, J. 201Williams, P . 93n73Wolters, O.W. 256, 260, 266Wonogiri 243Woodward, H.W. Jr. 6, 11, 12n35, 231, 239, 244, 248, 
252, 257, 264–66, 273
Wuatan Tija inscription 370n 37Wulff, K. 69Wutai, Mount 10n32, 127, 145, 203–204, 360, 391Wuwei 132n32
Wuwei Sanzang Chanyao ( T 917) 45
Wu Xiuyue 127Wu Zetian, Empress 203Wuzong, Emperor 18, 240, 242, 373
Xian 86n48Xinping, Commandant of 130
Xin Tangshu ( XTS , ‘New History of the Tang 
Dynasty’) 127–29, 131, 132n32, 137n52, 194n12
Xiping, see Geshu HanXuanchao 33n19Xuanzang 5n15, 113, 119, 135n49, 191, 193–94, 261, 
366
Xuanzong, Emperor 8, 39n6, 126, 128n17, 129–30, 
244
Yab-yum  278n11
Yama 384, 386–87Yamāntaka 180, 335Yamarāja 55Yamunā, River and Goddess 211, 225Yan Zhenqing 130
yantra  244, 273, 327n19, 330–32, 341, 343, 345; see 
also Ratu Boko mantra/ yantra
Yapahuwa 359–60Yarlung, dynasty 7, 131
ye dharmā formula 257, 266, 270; see also Pratītya
-
sa
mutpādagāthā
Yeshe Ö 375n49Yijing 10, 13n42, 14, 19, 82–85, 93n74, 103, 113, 
202n43, 205, 216, 226–28, 234, 250, 258, 261, 
353n7, 372n44; in Śrīvijaya 10, 19n62, 82–83, 
205n55
Ying Chua 145Yixing 34, 46Yoga 14, 41, 57, 74, 76, 84, 93, 98–100, 106, 110–11, 
125–26, 239, 343, 353n7; deity 239; four yoga s of 
the SHKAS  76; 
Yogabhāvanāmārga  76–77, 111
Yogācāra 77, 81–83, 101–102, 262
Yogācāryābhāvanātātparyārthanirde
śa 76
Yo
garatnamālā  115, 261
Yogasūtra s of Patañjali 77
Yogatantras  12n37, 71, 240n6, 264, 323, 346, 351, 
353n7, 357; syncretic ma ṇḍa
las 264
Yogāvatāra  76, 81–82, 87, 111
Yogāvatāropade śa 76
, 111
Yoginīs 21, 151n14; circle of 143, 178Yoginītantras 4, 11, 231, 240, 242, 244, 265, 375Yogīśvara 110
Youyang zazu 261
Yuan, dynasty 147, 178, 242, 275; court 143, 317; 
emperor 144
Yuan shi  143, 149
Yuan Zai 128, 130–31, 132n32Yuanzhao 12, 15, 132, 132n32, 381, 382n7Yudhiṣ
ṭhi
ra 284, 289n29
Yüeh
-chih 114
Yunnan 1, 21Yunqi 85
Zanning 14n46, 128n16, 237, 241, 358Zhang 126Zhao Qian 358Zhen Jin (as Bodhisattva Imperial Prince) 147Zhenla 249
Zhenyuan Catalogue  131n27, 132
Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu 12
Zhi’an Jñānapārin 83–84
Index.indd   464 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 479] ---
Index465
Zhidu fushi 129n18
Zhongnan, Mount 203n47
Zhongzong, Emperor 203Zhou dynasty 124Zhou Zhiguang 137
Zhuangzi  130
Index.indd   465 17/7/16   10:23 PM

--- [Page 480] ---
Front Matter.indd   6 17/8/16   10:42 PM

--- [Page 481] ---
NALANDA-SRIWIJAYA SERIES
1. Nagapattinam to Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval Expeditions to Southeast Asia,
e
dited by Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany and Vijay Sakhuja
2. Ear
ly Interactions between South and Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross-Cultural Exchange, edited 
by Pierre-Yves Manguin, A. Mani and Geoff Wade
3. Ha
rdships and Downfall of Buddhism in India, by Giovanni Verardi
4. Ant
hony Reid and the Study of the Southeast Asian Past, edited by Geoff Wade and Li Tana
5. Po
rtuguese and Luso-Asian Legacies in Southeast Asia, 1511–2011, Vol. 1: The Making of the Luso-
Asian World: Intricacies of Engagement, edited by Laura Jarnagin
6. Po
rtuguese and Luso-Asian Legacies in Southeast Asia, 1511–2011, Vol. 2: Culture and Identity in
the Luso-Asian World: Tenacities & Plasticities, edited by Laura Jarnagin
7. Si
no-Malay Trade and Diplomacy from the Tenth through the Fourteenth Century, by Derek Heng
8. Tr
adition and Archaeology: Early Maritime Contacts in the Indian Ocean, edited by Himanshu
Prabha Ray and Jean-François Salles
9. The S
ea, Identity and History: From the Bay of Bengal to the South China Sea, edited by Satish
Chandra and Himanshu Prabha Ray
10. Ear
ly Southeast Asia Viewed from India: An Anthology of Articles from the Journal of the Greater
India Society , edited by Kwa Chong-Guan
11. The R
oyal Hunt in Eurasian History, by Thomas T. Allsen
12. Et
hnic Identity in Tang China, by Marc S. Abramson
13. Bu
ddhism and Islam on the Silk Road, by Johan Elverskog
14. The
 Tongking Gulf Through History,  edited by Nola Cooke, Li Tana and James A. Anderson
15. Asi
a Redux: Conceptualizing a Region for Our Times, edited by Prasenjit Duara
16. Eu
rasian Influences on Yuan China, edited by Morris Rossabi
17. Of P
alm Wine, Women and War: The Mongolian Naval Expedition to Java in the 13th Century, by
David Bade
18. Off
shore Asia: Maritime Interactions in Eastern Asia before Steamships, edited by Fujita Kayoko,
Momoki Shiro and Anthony Reid
19. Li
terary Migrations: Traditional Chinese Fiction in Asia (17th–20th Centuries), edited by Claudine
Salmon
20. Tr
ails of Bronze Drums Across Early Southeast Asia: Exchange Routes and Connected Cultural
Spheres, by Ambra Calo
21. Bu
ddhism Across Asia: Networks of Material, Intellectual and Cultural Exchange, volume 1, edited
by Tansen Sen
22. A 14th C
entury Malay Code of Laws: The Nītisārasamuccaya, by Uli Kozok
23. Chi
na and Beyond in the Medieaval Period: Cultural Crossings and Inter-Regional Connections,
edited by Dorothy C. Wong and Gustav Heldt
NSC Series list.indd   395 18/7/16   5:52 PM

--- [Page 482] ---
468 Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia
24.
 B
uddhist Dynamics in Premodern and Early Modern Southeast Asia, edited by D. Christian 
Lammerts
25.
 I
mperial China and Its Southern Neighbours, edited by Victor H. Mair and Liam C. Kelley
26.
 I
ndian and Chinese Immigrant Communities: Comparative Perspectives, edited by Jayati Bhattacharya 
and Coonoor Kripalani
27.
 E
soteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, edited by Andrea 
Acri
NSC Series list.indd   396 18/7/16   5:52 PM