--- [Page 1] ---
 
 
 
 
 
EPIGRAPHIC EVIDENCE 
 IN THE PRE-MODERN BUDDHIST WORLD 
  
Proceedings of the Eponymous Conference 
Held in Vienna, 14-15 Oct. 2011 
 
EDITED BY 
KURT TROPPER 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
WIEN  2014 
 
 
ARBEITSKREIS FÜR TIBETISCHE UND BUDDHISTISCHE STUDIEN  
UNIVERSITÄT WIEN  

--- [Page 2] ---
 
 
CONTENTS 
Preface  ................................................................................................  vii 
Arlo  Griffiths:  The ڀGreatly   erociousځ  Spell  (Mahāraudra - 
nāma -hr daya ). A dhāraṇī  Inscribed on a Lead-Bronze 
 Foil Unearthed near Borobudur.   ............................. ................... 1  
Guntram  Hazod:  The Stele  in the Centre  of the Lhasa Ma ṇḍala. 
About  the Position  of the 9th-Century  Sino-Tibetan  Treaty 
Pillar of Lhasa in its Historical and Narrative Context.   ............ 37 
Charles Manson & Nathan W. Hill: A Gter ma  of Negatives. 
H.E. Richardsonځs Photographic Negatives of Manu script 
Copies  of Tibetan  Imperial  Inscriptions  Possibly  Collected 
by Rig ځdzin Tshe dbang nor bu in the 18th Century CE,  
Recently Found in the Bodleian Library, Oxford.   ....................  83 
Cristina  Scherrer-Schaub:  A Perusal  of Early  Tibetan 
Inscriptions in Light of the Buddhist World of the 
7th to 9th Centuries A.D.   ........................................................  117 
Suey-Ling  Tsai:  Historische  Inschriften  aus der Tang- 
Dynastie  (618- 907) im ڄKloster  des Liegenden  Buddhaڅ  
in Anyue, Sichuan. ................................. ............. ..................... 167 
ུ་Ĺེ་Őེ་Řིང་ྱř་Ŋོ : Ŏངའ་Řིས་ས་ུř་ྭ་Ŏདའ་རོང་ ŉ་Ŏཆིས་Ŋའི་ུ་Ĺེ་  
ྱř་Řབས་ྐབས་བཞེངས་Ŋའི་ྷ་ĸང་Ĺི་ŎŐŉ་ྱང་ྐོŘ་ř་ŘĹས་  
ŏŎ་བརོད་Ŋ།  ................................................................................. 193  
Nobuyoshi  Yamabe,  in collaboration  with Academia  Turfanica: 
Toyok Cave 20. Paintings and Inscriptions.  ........................... 217 
About the Contributors ................................................................... .. 263  

--- [Page 3] ---
 
 
THE ڀGREAT LY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  
 (MAH ᾹRAUDRA-N ᾹMA-H  DAYA ) 
A dhāraṇī  Inscribed on a Lead-Bronze Foil Unearthed near Borobudur1 
ARLO GRIFFITHS  
During the preparations for the major restoration of Borobudur that was 
conducted from 1973 through 1983, excavations were carried out in dif-
ferent sectors surrounding the monument, as they became available for 
study after purchase of the lands. A ڄpreliminary report څwritt en in 1Ś76  
by leading Indonesian epigrapher Boechari, and published in 1982, is 
among the principal sources that we have on these excavations, which 
were regrettably carried out under generally rather unfavorable cond i-
tions.2 One of the major finds at the time was the lead-bronze foil whose 
                                                        
1 This paper could not have been written if Bambang Budi Utomo and Titi Surti 
Nastiti, archaeologists of the Indonesian National Center for Archaeology, Jakarta, 
had not so kindly shared photographs of the metal foil under discussion made d ur-
ing a mission of their institution to Borobudur in 2011. In preparin g this study, I 
have benefited, through exchange of letters, from Lokesh Chandraځs magisterial 
knowledge of Buddhist literature and iconography; in August 2013 he kindl y sent 
me a draft of the paper referred to below, and by the end of the year he sent me his 
book Lord Ĕiva and Buddha in the Golden Isles allowing me to refer to the final 
version of his article, published in that book, days before the final draft of min e 
was submitted for publication in the present volume. Ron Davidson, Shingo Eino o, 
Rolf Giebel, Gergely Hidas, Péter-Dániel Szántó, Vincent Tournier, Klaus Wille 
and Yuko Yokochi have given comments and pointed me to sources that are u nac-
cessible to me. I am grateful to all these colleagues.  
2 See Anom 2005: 150- 163, which largely reproduces Boechariځs prel iminary 
report and is also based on a limited number of other publicati ons by Boechari  him-
self, by Boechari in collaboration with Wiwin Djuwita & Heriyanti Ongkodharma, 

--- [Page 4] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 2 
Sanskrit inscription in Kawi script is the subject of this study. From 
Boechariځs report, we learn the following about the circumstances of its 
discovery (1982: 92 [= 2012: 580] ): 
The area west of the temple was purchased in March 1974. Immed i-
ately trial excavations were undertaken. In a number of trenches 
were found formations of cut stones, brick and small river boulders, 
local potsherds, and Chinese ceramic sherds. In trench 35/III was r e-
covered a rolled piece of lead-bronze, which later on turned out to be 
an inscription containing a kind of dhāraṇī . We include a transcri p-
tion of it in this report. On this side, too, we could not make ad e-
quate archaeological investigations, since the area was immediately 
needed for the building of the storage rooms. 
Boechariځs transcription of the text was included on p.  94 of his report 
(= 2012: 585-586), and this is preceded by just a few remarks on its 
interpretation:  
The lead-bronze inscription discovered on the plain west of the mon-
ument contains a very interesting text. But due to our very limited 
knowledge of Buddhism, we will leave its interpretation and also 
that of the shorter texts above transcribed3 to the experts. We only 
can note that the text is Buddhist, presumably from the Wajrayāna 
school of Buddhism, and that we find a reference to the building of a 
mahāĕāĕana , as well as to a location on a hill in the southern region 
(dakṣiṇāpāthāsyaparvatasthala ). Does this text refer to the Borobu-
dur? Unfortunately the script of the epigraph shows the irregularity 
and carelessness of the hands of the non-royal scribe. But from the 
general form of the characters it could not be older than the script on 
                                                                                                                                
as well as a report on pottery by Mundardjito. Boechariځs preliminary report was 
recently republished among his collected papers (Boechari 2012: 575-586). 
3 Boechari is referring here to two short dhāraṇī  inscriptions on silver foil, 
which will not be treated in the present article. The recent publication of Boech a-
riځs collected papers (2012 ) contains photos of these two items (pp. 583-584). 

--- [Page 5] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  3 
the stūpa s: it could be even a decade or two older ( sic). (1982: 93 
[= 2012: 583-585]) 
We shall return below to the contents of the inscription. As for the r e-
mark about its palaeographic dating, Boechari is alluding to inscribed 
miniature stūpa s found during the excavations, about which he sugges t-
ed that they ڄcould not be younger than the second hal f of the ninth 
century A.D.څ( 1982: 93 [= 2012: 582]). Presumably the final sentence 
in the long citation above contains a slip of the pen, and Boechariځs 
intention was to say that the script on the lead- bronze foil ڄcould be 
even a decade or two younger  .څBoechari concludes his report with the 
crucial observation that ڄthe chronological relation of these important 
finds with the Borobudur monument cannot yet be determined on a c-
count of the fact that their stratigraphic position could not be accurately 
recorded( څ1Ś82ś Ś4 [= 2012: 586]). This means that the foil, although 
no doubt a document of great importance for the history of Buddhism in 
Indonesia – as I will try to show below –, cannot be used in any arg u-
ment directly involving the underlying concept and the building of the 
monument in whose vicinity it was unearthed.4 
 I shall not make any attempt here to apply the palaeographic method 
to make a dating estimate for the inscription, because I have already 
tried to do so for another important Javanese dhāraṇī  inscription  
(Cruijsen, Griffiths & Klokke 2012, §4), without much success. I may 
just refer the reader to my discussion in another study (Griffiths 2014 , 
§1) where I have mentioned the tilted shape of the akṣara ma , observed 
on the foil, as a feature that might be characteristic of the middle of the 
9th century. A feature that is, to my knowledge, absolutely unique,5 is 
                                                        
4 Lokesh Chandraځs assertion (2013ś 237) that this inscription ڄshows that the  
Borobudur was dedicated to the STTS [i.e., the Sarvata thāgatatattvasa ṁgraha ; 
A.G.] whose central deity was Vajradhātu Vairo cana and his ferocious counterpart 
was Trailokyavijaya څfails to take these archaeological facts into account.  
5 This statement must be qualified in the sense that Sundanese script of West 
Java, whose earliest attestation belongs to the 13th or 14th century CE, shows the 
same subscript form of virāma  under certain consonants, most notably k. See the 

--- [Page 6] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 4 
the placement of the virāma  signs below  rather than above  their akṣa-
ras. I suspect that this may be the result of influence of Siddhamāt r kā 
on the scribeځs use of Kawi script.6 Although it seems a reasonable e s-
timate, Ū do not share Boechariځs confidence in the palaeographic attri -
bution of the inscription to the 9 th century, and would not wish to e x-
clude the possibility that it dates to the 8 th or the early 10 th.  
 After Boechariځs provisional edition of the inscription, it seems that 
it did not attract any scholarly attention at all until it was taken up just a 
few years ago by Hudaya Kandahjaya (2009), who brilliantly identified 
a parallel for the main dhāraṇī  in a text preserved on Bali under the title 
Navakampa . This text , previously published by Lévi  (1933: 80-81), was 
reedited by Goudriaan & Hooykaas (G&H) (1971: 314- 316; text nu m-
ber 510). But Hudaya Kandahjayaځs textual observations were hindered 
by the provisional nature of Boechariځs edition; this also holds for the 
textual notes recently published by Lokesh Chandra (2013). The main 
purpose of this contribution, therefore, is to furnish a reliable edition , 
on a sounder philological basis than the provisional edition of Boechari, 
who had no knowledge of nor access to Buddhist Sanskrit literature. 
This will make it possible to evaluate more precisely the extent of the 
parallels between the Navakampa  and our dhāraṇī . 7 
                                                                                                                                
inscription of Kawali (de Casparis 1975, plate IXa, line 1). The reading adopted b y 
de Casparis on p. 95 does not recognize the case of k· (k+virāma ), and indeed this 
palaeographic feature remains altogether unmentioned in his handbook. 
6  or a survey of inscriptions of ancient ūava in Siddhamātr kā script, al l Bud-
dhist and in Sanskrit, see Griffiths, Revire & Sanyal 2013:  15-17. The normal script 
of ancient Java was Kawi, and it was used for all languages epigraphically attested 
on Java during the first millennium (Sanskrit, Old Javanese, Old Malay). 
7 When I received the draft of his observations from the author and responded 
by informing him of my work towards a new edition, Lokesh Chandraځs piec e had 
already gone to the press and could not be modified. Since it is based on Boechariځs 
reading, I refer to Lokesh Chandra (2013) only sparingly in t he present contrib u-
tion, limiting myself to his text-critical observations which are useful or in need of  
discussion. 

--- [Page 7] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  5 
The foil is presently preserved at the Borobudur Site Museum ڀM a-
hakarma wibhangga ,ځwhere excellent photos were taken in 2011 by Su -
geng Riyanto during a visit by a team of the National Center of Archa e-
ology. These photographs serve as the basis for the critical edition pr o-
posed below. 
The text has reached us in rather bad condition. The foil on which it 
is inscribed is quite damaged, while the writing was irregular and car e-
less to begin with, as already pointed out by Boechari.8 More over, it 
seems that the exemplar from which the scribe made his copy on  metal 
must itself already have been heavily corrupt. Given these challenges, I 
have decided to present my edition in two stages. First, an edition which 
is basically diplomatic but does comprise restorations of lost or illegible 
syllables, which will be provided with extensive text-critical notes, in 
justification of my restorations and proposals for emendation. These are 
then reflected at the second stage in a restored text, which is the basis of 
my translation. For the sake of comparison, I reproduce the text of the 
Navakampa  as part of stage one. 
 I have not been able to inspect the foil directly, but Titi Surti Nastiti 
kindly informs me that the dimensions of the lead-bronze foil are 45.5 
cm in length × 2.3 cm in height. There seems to be a circular drawing of 
some sort on the left end of the verso , but the photographs at my di s-
posal do not allow me to say anything significant about it. Regarding 
the original function of the foil, it is important to recall that Boechari 
reported it to have been unearthed in a rolled up state.9 
 
                                                        
8 However, when Boechari writes (as quoted above) ڄthe script of the epigraph 
shows the irregularity and carelessness of the hands of the non- royal scribe ,څone 
may question whether the distinction between royal and non-royal s cribes is the 
most pertinent here. Rather, it seems to be the fact that dhāraṇī  inscriptions were 
not meant to be read but were written for magical purposes that is relevant. See 
Griffiths 2014 for other Indonesian examples of very carelessly written  dhāraṇī  
inscriptions. 
9 This is again a feature shared with other Indonesian dhāraṇī  inscriptions (cf. 
Griffiths 2014). 

--- [Page 8] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 6 
Editorial conventions 
The text is initially edited line- by-line. I use the following editorial 
signs: 
 
x  one illegible akṣara  
_ one completely lost akṣara 
· the virāma  sign 
° precedes an independent ( akṣara) vowel sign 
(…) graphic element(s) whose reading is visually uncertain 
[…] graphic element(s) wholly lost or wholly unreadable on the 
foil but restorable on the basis of philological considerations 
ṭ…ṭ  akṣara(s) added between two lines 
 
The text on the lead-bronze foil 
Recto 
1. (namo) ratnatrayāyasya nama[ĕ] c(a ṇḍa)vajrapānayisya mahāya -
[kṣa]senāpatisya namo bhagavat(o) [pra]tihatavalav[īr]yya vicitra-
vi(dyā)[dha]r(e)ĕavarasahasrasya (pr)_( ṇḍa)ĕāĕaṇ akarasya catu(r)-
bhujālaṅ kr taĕarīrasyama[si]muĕalaparaĕupāĕavajrajvalāgniҾ  (vi)[bhī-] 
2. saṇakasupasya (pa)tija Ԇilājalasañcayavilamvitadakṣ iṇapādāsya parvva -
tasthalatapavinivi ṣԆavāmacaraṇasya na[mo] bhagavato mahāvajra [dha-
ra]sya mahārodran nama (h) r daya Ӛ parama(dā)ruṇ aӚ +sarvva+-
bh(ĥ) tagaṇa(vin)āĕakaraӚ  rodrakara Ӛ traĕabhaya - 
3. vivādakaraӚ  sarvvakammāsiddhikaraӚ  siddhikara Ӛ °avarta yiĕyaӚmi 
tadyath(ā) ta bhoҾ  bhoҾ rodra rodra kala kala kampa kampa gañja 
gañja p(r)agañja praga(ñja) mardda mardda pramardda pramardda 
pramardda hā hā hi hi hĥӚ  hĥӚ rodraka x (lā)maӚ  duṣԆagraha Ӛ 
ciñca (lā)ya ha ṣԆaci(tta Ӛ) 
4. pāpacittaӚ  kupitacitta Ӛ pravināĕaya roruṣi pravināĕaya rodraĕva re-
ṇa traĕaya  rodravajre  vajre ṇa vidāraya  (p)ra(hā)ṇ amaӚpi pravināĕa - 
 

--- [Page 9] ---
THE ‘GREATLY FEROCIOUS ’ SPELL  7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
    Figs 1, 2 : recto  (above) and verso  (below) of the lead-bronze foil  
    (all photos 2011, by Sugeng Riyanto, National Center of Archaeology , Indonesia ; reproduced  by permission ) 

--- [Page 10] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figs 3-5 : recto , left side of the foil 


--- [Page 11] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figs 6-8 : recto , central part of the foil 


--- [Page 12] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figs 9-11 : recto , right side of the foil 
 


--- [Page 13] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figs 12-14 : verso , left side of the foil 
 


--- [Page 14] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figs 15-17 : verso , central part of the foil 


--- [Page 15] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figs 18-20 : verso , right side of the foil 


--- [Page 16] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 14 
 
 
Fig. 21 : verso , right extremity of the foil 
 
 
ya sarvvaĕaton[·] pravināĕaya sarvvaӚ  vipran(·) pra(vinā)ĕaya sarvva -
(vyādhi)n· pravināĕaya sarvva Ӛ rogon· ga pravinā - 
5. [ĕaya sa]rvvaviṇāvināĕayakanā pravināĕaya sarvvadussavdān· pravi -
nāĕaya sarvvadurddama(tv)an· pra(vi)nāĕaya devāsuragha(ru)ḍ a[gan-
dharva]yak ṣakinaramaho[ragādīn·] pravināĕa - 
 
Verso 
1. ya kampaya kampaya gañjaya gañjaya pragañjaya pragañjaya mardda  
mardda pramarda+ya+ pramardaya bho Ҿ (bh)[o Ҿ caṇḍa ca] ṇḍa marā 
ma[rā pramattha] pramattha hana (hana dada) haha paca paca kuru 
kuru (mahāro)dra mahāviryya mahātita mahātojaҾ   
2. mahāĕāĕaṇa kuru kuru vāda vāda va svavara svavara svavatu svavat u 
bhāvāmiho  svāhā  nāmo  [ra]tnatrayāya  nama Ҿ caṇḍa[va]jrapāṇ aye ma-
hāyakṣasonāpataye tadyath(ā) °oӚ  ma °īҾ  jaҾ svāhā  
3. °oӚ ma °īҾ  jaҾ hana hanā vijaye jaҾ  hana hana hi °ihi °ihā hāӚ  jaҾ 
svāhā °oӚ  (ma °ī)Ҿ  hana hana dhuna mathāna vidhvaӚĕayettadadma 


--- [Page 17] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  15 
°oӚ x ta svāhā (tathā) tadyathā, °oӚ  tri(kā x °ākā) °ī(kāro) vicchet· 
(pa) 
4. x x x (na)n(d)āka(mākāvānākadhākakayaka) °oӚ  hana hana vija Ҿ 
(j)oҾ svā(hā) Ԇaki hĥӚ  jaҾ jaҾ hĥӚ kiԆa h(ĥ)[Ӛ ] Ԇaki (dhu Ӛ) kiԆa 
dhu(Ӛ) °iya °ija (°i)_ Ҿ svāhā //10 
 
Text of the Navakampa after Goudriaan & Hooykaas 
Namo Ratna- trayāya svāhā, namaĕ Ca ṇḍa-vajra- pāṇi svāhā, mahā -yakṣa-
senā-pati svāhā, namo Bhagavate ځprati -hata-bala- vīrya -vidhi- trividyā -
dhara- sahasra svāhā, catur -bhuja lâkṛti-ĕarīra svāhā, asi -musala- paraĕu -
pāĕa-vajrâgni- jvālâtibhīṣ aṇaka-rĥpa svāhā, paĕu -pati-jatijada-sañcaya-
vilambita-dak ṣiṇa-pāda svāhā, sarva -niyantaka, tava vini ṣԆha-vāma -
caraṇa-uṣṇīṣa svāhā, namo Bhagavate mahā -vajra- dhara svāhā, namo 
Rudra, namo h ṛdaya Ӝ, parama- dāruṇ aӜ, sarva- bhĥta -gaṇa-vinaya-
karaӜ, roṣâstrâĕīviṣ âdha Ҿ-kara Ӝ, sarva-karma-siddhi- karam āvarta -
yiṣyāmi,  
tad yathāś BhoҾ  bho Ҿ vajra vajra kāla kāla karma karma, kampa  
kampa bandha bandha marda marda haha hihi HU ӛ HUӛ; raudrâti-
raudrânusāriṇ am ima Ӝ daӜstrâgra- caṇḍa-graha Ӝ, mayi du ṣԆa-citta Ӝ 
pravināĕaya, raudra -dhĥpena pravināĕaya, raudra -vajre ṇa pravināĕaya, 
ViṣṇuӜ pravināĕaya, Brahmāṇ aӜ pravināĕaya, sarva -rogān pravināĕaya,  
sarva- pāpān pravināĕaya, sarva -devān pravināĕaya, sarva -kleĕān 
pravināĕaya, sarva -duṣԆa-cittān pravināĕaya, sarva -vighnān pravināĕaya, 
sarva- vināyakān pravināĕaya, sarva -kala-kali-kalu ṣa-kalaha-vigraha -
vivādān pravināĕaya, devâsura -garu ḍa-gandharva-kinnara- mahôragâdīn 
pravināĕaya; trāsaya trāsaya, kampaya kampaya, bandhaya bandhaya, 
mardaya mardaya, ca ṇḍa caṇḍa, mara mara, hana hana, daha daha, kuru 
kuru mahā -bala mahā -bala, mahā -vīrya mahā -vīrya, mahā -dīpta mahā -
                                                        
10 Line 4 starts in the left margin, curving downwards; line 3 starts significantly 
further to the right than line 2, which in turn is further justified than line 1. In  line 
4, below jaḥ jaḥ, the word svāhā  is legible. It is not clear whether it forms part of a 
fifth line or is to be inserted somewhere in line 4. 

--- [Page 18] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 16 
dīpta, mahā -tejaҾ mahā -tejaҾ, mahā -raudra mahā -raudra, mahā -ĕāsana 
mahā -ĕāsana, turu turu, dara dara, vara vara, sthāvara sthāvara,11 
svabhāvânta svabhāvânta, bhavāmike12 HUӛ HUӛ PHA ԅ SVĀHA.  
 
Sprinkling formula:13 
Oӛ Ratna- trayāya Nava -kampāya namaҾ  svāhā,  
Oӛ Bhagavatyai svāhā,  
Oӛ Bho Ҿ Buddha Bhĥmi -kampāya svāhā,  
Oӛ sarva-deva-sukha- pradānāya namaҾ  svāhā,  
Oӛ HUӛ HUӛ PHA ԅ PHA ԅ parama- sukhāya namaҾ  svāhā.  
 
Text-critical commentary 
r1  ratnatrayāyasya  nama[ĕ] c(a ṇḍa)vajrapānayisya  ◊ the first word 
seems to be a contamination of the dative form ° trayāya  with the 
genitive form ° trayasya . A subscript c still seems discernible under 
the ĕ which is lost, so one may safely restore namaĕ ca °. The rest of 
the restoration follows from the parallel in verso , line 2, and from 
several occurrences of the formula namo ratnatrayāya namaĕ ca ṇḍa-
vajra pāṇaye mahāyakṣ asenāpataye  in the Susiddhikarasūtra  (see 
Giebel 2001) and other early Buddhist tantric texts (e.g., the Amr ta-
kuṇḍalivināyakabandhadhāraṇī  [Giebel 2012: 190-192]; see also the 
Sarvanāgānāṁ  Hr daya  of the Meghasūtra  [Bendall 1880: 308]). The 
form vajra pānayisya (read vajrapāṇ ayisya ), just like ratnatra yāyas-
ya, is a contamination of standard Sanskrit vajrapāṇ aye with the Bud-
dhist  Hybrid Sanskrit (BHS) form vajrapāṇ isya (Edgerton 1953, vol. 
I, §10.79). The following mahāyakṣasenāpatisya  is a ڀregular ځBHS 
                                                        
11 Goudriaan & Hooykaas 1Ś72ś 315, n. 13ś ڄthus PVTg; others smavara sma-
vara.څ 
12 The edition has bhavānike , but it is reported that this is a reading/emendation 
of Sylvain Lévi, while the manuscripts read ° mike or ° mame . I choose the former 
reading as being closer to our inscription. 
13 This is apparently found in only one of the six manuscripts collated by G&H. 

--- [Page 19] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  17 
form. Gergely Hidas has pointed out to me that the same opening 
formula is found with another kind of BHS form right after the end 
of the Gilgit manuscript of the Hayagrīvavidyā ; cf. the reading r e-
cently published by von Hinüber (2014: 104): namo ratnatrāyāya : 
namaĕ ca ṇḍavajra pāṇāye mahā yakṣasenāpaye  (!). tadya thā ugrāya 
svāhā || atiūgrāya. svāhā || ugrapriyāya svāhā || [ati] ūgrapriyāya svā -
hā ||, etc. This, in turn, is partly parallel to Taishō 21.1243 (as re n-
dered in Bischoff 1956: 81), but there the opening is grammatically 
normalized. Finally, Péter-Dániel Szántó reports to me that in the 
Tibetan canon (Tōhoku 746), the ( Mahā )Vidyottamā  has more than a 
hundred occurrences of vajra pāṇisya, several times in conjunction 
with mahā yakṣasenāpatisya . 
r1  namo bhagavat(o)  ◊ this opening, with genitivus pro dativo  (rather 
than namo bhagavate ), is surprisingly rare. I have found it in the i n-
vocation formulae of Buddhist Prakrit inscriptions of Andhra Pr a-
desh, notably the famous site Nagarjunakonda (see Mirashi 1981, i n-
scriptions 29 and 32; J.Ph. Vogel, Epigraphia Indica  20, 1929- 30: 
16-25; idem , Epigraphia Indica  31, 1931- 32: 62). In transmitted 
(Buddhist) texts, it is found in the Mahāmāyūrī  (ed. Takubo 1972:  
44, l. 15-16: namo bhagavata ḥ alongside namo bhagavate ). Rolf 
Giebel informs me that in Chinese transliteration he has found both 
namo bhagavato buddhasya  and namo buddhasya bhagavato , as well 
as several examples of  namo … tathāgatasya  (cf. Giebel 2002:  
755[34]-754[35]). 
r1  [pra]tihatavalav[ī]ryyavicitravi(dyā)[dha]r(e)ĕavarasahasrasya  ◊ 
understand ’pratihata °. Partially able to support this with reference 
to NK, I restore ° vicitravidyādhareĕvarasahasrasya . Our text is ce r-
tainly better than vidhitri vidyā dharasahasra in NK (all sources have 
vidvā , emended by G&H). The presence of e in r(e) is not entirely 
certain; if it is assumed to be absent, we obtain °vidyādharaĕavara -
sahasrasya , but this is not a likely reading because no other cases of 
the juxtaposition of vidyādhar a and ĕavara  can be found anywhere. 
On the other hand, while vidyādhareĕa  as well as vidyādhareĕvara  

--- [Page 20] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 18 
are fairly well attested compounds in Sanskrit literature, they are 
hardly attested in Buddhist sources. 
r1  (pra)_( ṇḍa)ĕāĕaṇ akarasya  ◊ the reading is very uncertain for the 
first few syllables. If my reading is correct, one may restore pra-
caṇḍaĕāĕaṇ akarasya  (and then correct ṇa to na); praca ṇḍaĕāsana  is 
attested in line 23 of the Allahabad Pillar Inscription of Samudr a-
gupta ( Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum  III, revised ed. 1981: 213), 
but seems a bit out of context here, unless praca ṇḍaĕāsa nakara  can 
be an allusion to the mudrā  of the deity being addressed here. 
r1  °ĕarīrasyama[si]muĕalaparaĕupāĕa ° ◊ we can read ° ĕarīrasya asi° , 
for -m- here serves as hiatus breaker; asimusalaparaĕupāĕa  is a fixed 
set of attributes assigned to wrathful figures in more than one Bu d-
dhist scripture (cf. Susiddhikarasūtra , transl . Giebel 2001 : 132, man-
tra nr. 10; Mañjuĕriyamūlakalpa , ed. Ga ṇapati Sâstrî 1922: 15, 
ll. 26-27; Guhyasamāja tantra , mantra  before 14.12, ed. Matsunaga 
1978: 62). 
r1  °vajrajvalāgniḥ  ◊ emend ° vajrajvālāgni  or ° vajrajvālāgnibhiḥ . The 
compound vajrajvālāgni  appears to be found only in the Sarvata thā-
gatatattvasa ṁgraha  (STTS) and dependent texts. In the STTS itself 
it is found  in two passages:  athāsmin  viniḥsr tamātre  vajrapāṇ ihr daya-
vajrāt sa eva bhagavān vajradharaḥ  samantajvālāgarbhāḥ  sabhruku-
ṭibhrūbhaṅ gakuñcita lalāṭavika ṭadaṁṣṭrākarālamukhāḥ  vajrāṅ kuĕako-
ĕapāĕādivajrajvālāgni pradīpta prahara ṇavyagrakarāḥ  anekavidha-
varṇālaṁkāra vicitrave ṣadharāḥ  vajrapāṇivigrahāḥ  viniĕcaritvā  (ed. 
Horiuchi 1983 , vol. I: 326, §651-652); tatreda ṁ sarvatathāgatākar -
ṣaṇahr daya ṁ bhavati | o ṁ vajrajvālāgni pradīptākarṣ aya sarva ta-
thāgatān mahāvajrasamaya hūṁ  jaḥ | (ed. Horiuchi 1983 , vol. I : 388, 
§860). It is also found in a text related to the STTS brought to Japan 
by Kĥkai, and transmitted in ūapan under the title Daisanmaya Shi n-
jitsu Ippyakuhachi Myōsan  ڀEulogy in One Hundred and Eight 
Names of the ڄTruth of the Great Pledge ځ.څŪn Giebelځs edition of  
this text (2012: 207), the fifth verse reads: rāgavāṇa mahādīpta vajra-
jvālāgni saṁnibha  | r ṣṭisaukhya  mahādra ṣṭar mahāmadana  manmatha  ||. 

--- [Page 21] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  19 
r1-2 (vi)[bhī]saṇ akasupasya  ◊ the reading is uncertain for the first two 
syllables; if it is correct, then emend vibhīṣaṇakarūpasya , following 
NK except with regard to the syllable vi. 
r2  (pa)tija ṭilājala ° ◊ emend paĕupatijaṭilājaṭā ° (partly following NK), 
and, at the end of the long compound, emend ° pādasya . 
r2  parvvatasthalatapa ° ◊ Lokesh Chandra (2013ś 235) convincingly 
proposes to emend this to pārvatīstanadvaya °, with reference to a 
passage from the STTS, which in his edition (Lokesh Chandra 1987 : 
59) reads: athaivam ukte vajrapāṇir mahābodhisatvo mahādevaṁ  vā-
mapādākrāntaṁ  kr tvā, dakṣ iṇena comā[yāḥ  stanau pīḍ a]yann ida ṁ 
svahr dayam udājahāra oṁ  vajrāviĕa hanaya traṁ  traṭ ||. This corr e-
sponds in Horiuchiځs edition ( 1983, vol. I: 347, §726) to: athaivam 
ukte vajrapāṇir mahābodhisattvo mahādevaṁ  vāmapādākrāntaṁ  kr t-
vā, dakṣiṇena comā[devīm ākrama]yann, idaṁ  hr dayam udājahāra 
oṁ vajrāviĕa  hana pātraṁ  traṭ. 
r2  mahārodran nama (h) r daya ṁ ◊ Lokesh Chandra (2013ś 235) pr o-
poses  to emend this to ahaṁ idaṁ nāma -hr dayam . Comparing such a 
parallel as ebhyo namask r tvā āryāvalo kiteĕvaramukhodgīrṇ am am o-
ghapāĕa(rājaṁ) nāma h r daya ṁ tathā gatasaṁmukha ṁ bhāṣitaṁ maha-
tāṁ parṣanmadhye ’ham idānīm āvar tayiṣye in the Amogha pāĕa hr da-
yadhāraṇī  (reconstructed text based on ed. Meisezahl 1962: 321), it 
seems better to remain more faithful to the available reading, and to 
emend either ahaṁ raudra ṁ nāma h r daya ṁ or, still closer, mahā-
raudra ṁ nāma h r daya ṁ. Recalling the clear case of hiatus breaking 
-m- that we observed in l. 1, so that mahā °, too, could easily stand 
for -m-ahaṁ, the former option might at first sight seem viable. But 
mahā raudra  is a well-attested term, occurring for instance twice in 
the account of the subjugation of Maheĕvara by Vajrapāṇ i/Trailok ya-
vijaya in the STTS: atha bhagavān vajrapāṇ ir ma hābodhisattva ḥ 
punar api mahādevam āhūyaivam āha na pratipa[dyasi] du ṣṭasattva, 
mamājñāṁ  kartum iti | atha mahādevo vajrasattvavacanam upaĕrut -
ya, kupitaĕ caṇḍībhūtas tathāpatita eva punar api mahāraudrarū pa-
tāṁ darĕayann evam āha | maraṇ am apy utsa hāmi, na ca tavājñāṁ  
kariṣyāmīti |  (ed. Horiuchi 1983,  vol. I: 345-346, §717-719); atha 

--- [Page 22] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 20 
maheĕvaraḥ  sakalatrailok yādhipatyatayā svajñānavaĕitayā ca bh a-
gavato vajrapāṇ eḥ saṁdarĕanārthaṁ  mahā caṇḍakrodhatāṁ  mahā -
bhairavarūpatāṁ  mahājvālots r janatāṁ  mahāraudrā ṭṭahāsatāṁ  sa-
haga ṇaiḥ saṁdarĕayann evam āha  | (ed. Horiuchi 1983, vol. I: 332, 
§675). The term is also attested as a name of Mañjuĕrī, here ident i-
fied with Vajrapāṇ i, in verse 40 of the Mañju ĕrīnāmasaṁgīti , in its 
section on the Vajradhātuma ṇḍala: mahābhavādrisaṁbhettā mahā -
vajradharo ghana ḥ | mahākrūro mahā raudro  mahābhayabhayaṁ ka-
raḥ || (Davidson 1981: 18 [n. 52], 23, 52). Most importantly, the 
same term also occurs on the verso  of our foil (line 1). I therefore r e-
store mahāraudraṁ  nāma h r daya ṁ. 
r2  rodrakara ṁ ◊ Lokesh Chandra (2013ś 235) proposes to emend this 
to raudrākāraṁ . 
r2-3
 traĕabhaya - ◊ correct trāsabhaya -. Cf. Suvar ṇabhāsottamasūtra  
14.38-39 (ed. Skjaervø 2004 , vol. I : 272): yakṣaĕatasahasrebhiḥ  
r ddhimantair mahā balai ḥ | teṣāṁ rakṣāṁ kari ṣyanti sarva trāsabha -
yeṣu ca || vajrapāṇiĕ ca yakṣ endra ḥ pañcayak ṣaĕatair api  | sarvebhir 
bodhisattvebhis te ṣāṁ rakṣāṁ kariṣyanti || . 
r3  sarvvakammāsiddhikaraṁ  siddhikara ṁ ◊ one expect s here sarva-
karmasiddhikara ṁ, and no repetition (cf. NK). The shape of mmā  
suggests a misreading for rmma ; on the verso , in line 4, the akṣara 
read as mā likewise probably stands for an original rma. The expre s-
sion sarvakarmasiddhi  seems to be typical of the STTS (ed. Horiuchi 
1983, vol. I: 68-69, §118; 462-463, §1127; 606, §1448; vol. II: 17, 
§1526; 33, §2737). It is never found more than once in any other 
Buddhist text that I am aware of. 
r3  °avartayi ĕyaṁmi ◊ correct  āvartayiṣyāmi (cf. NK). 
r3  tadyathā ta  ◊ the syllable ta needs to be deleted (cf. NK). 
r3  pramardda pramardda pramardda  ◊ one expects only one repetition 
of this word. 
r3  rodraka x (lā)maṁ  ◊ instead of lā, one might conceivably read °e, 
but this does not help to make sense out of this difficult sequence, 
apparently without direct parallel in NK. 

--- [Page 23] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  21 
r3  ciñca(lā)ya  haṣṭaci(tta ṁ) ◊ emend cañcalāya du ṣṭacitta ṁ? I very 
hesitantly suggest that cañcalāya  might be imperative to a denom i-
native of cañcala  (cf. cañcalita ). For the expression duṣṭacitta , and 
for the whole segment from duṣṭagraha ṁ through kupitacitta ṁ, cf. 
the following passage from the Sitātapatrādhāraṇī  (ed. Ngawang 
Samten & Pandey 2002: 152): ye kecin mama sarvasattvā nāṁ ca 
duṣṭā du ṣṭacittā raudrā raudracittā pāpāḥ  pāpacittāḥ  kupitāḥ  kupi-
tacittā amitrā amitr acittā | ete mama sarvasattvānāṁ  ca rak ṣāṁ 
kurvantu jīvantu varṣaĕataṁ  paĕyantu ĕaradāṁ  ĕatam | ye kecid ya -
kṣagrahāḥ, …  | pāpacittāḥ , duṣṭacittāḥ, raudracittāḥ, devagrahāḥ , 
…, sarvagrahāḥ  |. 
r3  kala kala  ◊ it is perhaps not necessary to follow NK and emend kāla 
kāla, for kala kala  is attested as such in the Amoghapāĕa hr daya-
dhāraṇī : oṁ kala 2 kili 2 kulu 2 mahāĕuddhasattvāya svāhā | deva tā-
saṁĕodhanamantraḥ  (ed. Meisezahl 1962: 321).  
r3  hi hi  ◊ emend hī hī . Cf. again the Amoghapāĕah r dayadhāraṇī : ma-
hāpaĕupativeĕadhara | dhara 2 dhiri 2 dhuru 2 tara 2 sara 2 ca ra 2 
para 2 vara 2 mara 2 lara 2 hara 2 hā hā | hī hī  hū hū | oṁkāra 
brahmaveĕadhara  | dhara 2 dhiri 2 dhuru 2  … (ed. Meisezahl 1962: 
322). Cf. also Sādhanamālā  271 (ed. Bhattacharya 1925: 541). 
r4  roruṣi pravināĕaya  rodraĕvareṇa traĕaya rodravajre vajreṇ a ◊ 
emend raudrarūpeṇa pravināĕaya  raudrasvare ṇa trāsaya rodra vaj-
reṇa. Cf. NK raudra- dhūpena pravināĕaya, raudra -vajre ṇa pravi nā-
ĕaya. Cf. also mahāraudrarūpatāṁ  in a STTS passage quoted above 
(ed. Horiuchi 1983 , vol. I: 345, §718). 
r4  (p)ra(hā)ṇ amaṁpi ◊ the reading is a bit uncertain; it seems that an 
emendation such as sarvapāpaṁ  (cf. NK sarvapāpān ) cannot be  
avoided, unless one is to emend brahmāṇ aṁ (cf. NK).  
r4  sarvvaĕaton[·]  ◊ emend sarvaĕatrūn , after NK. 
r4  sarvva ṁ vipran(·)  ◊ emend sarvavighnān , after NK. 
r4  sarvva ṁ rogon · (ga) ◊ emend sarvarogān , after NK, suppressing the 
intrusive syllable tentatively read here as ga. 
r5  [sa]rvvavi ṇāvināĕayakanā  pravināĕaya  ◊ emend  sarvavināyakān  pra-
vināĕaya , after NK. 

--- [Page 24] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 22 
r5  sarvvadurddama(tv)an · ◊ Ū hesitantly assume that sarvadurdama-
tvaṁ is intended. This phrase has no parallel in NK, and the pr e-
sumed expression is not found elsewhere. 
r5  °maho[ragādīn·]  ◊ that this restoration must be made is clear from 
comparison with NK, although it seems rather doubtful from remai n-
ing traces of akṣaras that this is precisely how the text was originally 
written down on the foil.  
r5-v1
 Comparison with NK suggests that a repeated trāsaya  must, at some 
stage of transmission, have been lost between pravināĕaya  and kam-
paya kampaya . It is possible that the first readable sign ya at the b e-
ginning of line v1 is in fact the final syllable of trāsaya , and that any 
trace of syllables ya trāsaya trāsa  has been lost to its left. But given 
the position where lines 2 and 3 begin, it is unlikely that such a si g-
nificant number of further syllables would have stood at the begi n-
ning of line 1. 
v1  marā marā  ◊ emend mara mara . Cf. STTS atha vajrapāṇ iḥ punar 
ap[īmaṁ  svadharma]samayam abhāṣ at | oṁ hana hana hu ṁ pha ṭ | 
atha vajragarbha ḥ sva[dharma]samayam abhāṣ at || oṁ hara hara hu ṁ 
phaṭ | atha  vajranetra ḥ……… [sva]dharmasamayam  abhā ṣat | oṁ ma-
ra mara  huṁ pha ṭ | atha vajraviĕvaḥ  svadharmasamayam abhāṣ at | 
oṁ kuru kuru hu ṁ phaṭ | atha vajravidyottama ḥ svadharmasamayam  
abhā ṣat | oṁ huṁ huṁ phaṭ | (ed. Horiuchi 1983 , vol. I: 569, §1376-
1380). 
v1  hana (hana dada) haha ◊ emend hana hana daha daha . 
v1  mahātita  ◊ Ū emend mahādīpta , following NK, whose reading is 
supported by verse 5 of the Daisanmaya Shinjitsu Ippyakuhachi 
Myōsan, cited above. Another possibility would be to emend mahā -
tīkṣṇa. Cf. Sarva durgatipari ĕodhanatantra : vajrapāṇ ir mahā pāṇir vaj-
ravāṇ aḥ suvedhaka ḥ | vajratīk ṣṇo mahātīk ṣṇo mahāmahān maho da-
dhiḥ || (ed. Skorupski 1983: 298). 
v1  mahātojaḥ  ◊ emend mahātejaḥ . Cf. the same passage of the Sarva-
durgatipari ĕodhanatantra : vajratejo mahātejo  jvālāprabhayamā n-
takr t | vajraghoro mahāghoro ghanaprabho mahāghanaḥ  || (ed. Sko-
rupski 1983:  298). 

--- [Page 25] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  23 
v2  mahāĕāĕaṇ a ◊ read mahāĕāsana . This word does not seem to be 
attested as such in Buddhist literature, but in the opening of chapter 
13 of the Guhyasamājatantra  we read:  atha bhagavanta ḥ sarvata thā-
gatā jñānavajrāgracāriṇ aḥ sarva sattvārtha sambhūtā bodhisattvāĕ ca 
dhīmantaḥ praṇipatya mahāśāstāraṁ  muni ṁ sattvārthavajriṇ aṁ pū-
jāsamayatattvajña ṁ vajragho ṣam udīrayan (ed. Matsunaga 1978: 44).  
v2  vāda vāda ◊ emend vada vada  (cf. NK vara vara ), a sequence found 
repeatedly in the STTS (ed. Horiuchi 1983,  vol. 1: 392, §877; vol. II: 
48, §1634; 202, §2093), while vāda vāda  seems unattested els e-
where. 
v2  va svavara svavara  ◊ the va is superfluous; as for the remaining 
syllables, one could emend sthāvara sthāvara , after NK, but it must be  
noted that in that text too, the reading sthāvara sthāvara  is only sup-
ported by some of the sources, the other ones reported by G& H rea d-
ing smavara smavara , which is substantially closer to our reading, 
but equally obscure; moreover, sthāvara sthāvara  is never attested in 
any similar dhāraṇī s known to me. One might therefore prefer a 
more radical emendation, like smara smara  or even smara smara v a-
ra vara . But the matter seems to be too uncertain to justify any pa r-
ticular modification to the text as it stands (besides removal of va). 
v2  svavatu svavatu  ◊ Ū hesitantly propose to emend ĕr ṇvatu ĕ r ṇvatu. 
Edgerton 1953, vol. I: 140, §28.6, records the BHS form ĕr ṇvati built 
on the analogy of the regular 3pl form ĕr ṇvanti  and lists his textual 
sources attesting the stem-form ĕr ṇva- in §43, on p. 234. One of his 
sources was the Mahāvastu , from which one occurrence of the indi c-
ative form ĕr ṇvati is cited, although this form is attested four times 
in Senartځs edition  (1882- 1897 , vol. II: 108 [prose]; vol. III: 82-83 
[2×] and 361- 362 [prose]). The fundamental manuscript designated 
as ڄSaڅ ,which was not collated by Senart, does not support any of 
the four occurrences of ĕr ṇvati in the edition: it reads regular ĕr ṇoti 
throughout (Yuyama 2001, vol. I: fol. 146r2, 296r2 and 397v2 ). 
Edgerton does not mention at all the imperative form ĕr ṇvatu which 
is found three times in Senartځs edition of the same text, in a single 
stanza that is repeated three times. Senart reads the hemistich in 

--- [Page 26] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 24 
question as follows: ĕr ṇvatu bhavān prayo janaṁ yaṁ asmākam iha 
gamanāye . For its attestation at vol. I, p. 152, l. 9 and 226, l. 3, the 
manuscripts collated by Senart give ĕr ṇvantu , which he emends to 
ĕr ṇvatu. The collocation ĕr ṇvatu bh avān  first suggested to me the 
emendation of our inscription proposed here. However, the man u-
script ڄSa( څ Yuyama 2001, fol. 43v4 and 63v6) shows the regular 
form ĕr ṇotu. For the attestation at vol. II, p. 29, l. 6, the two man u-
scripts collated by Senart apparently read ĕr ṇu, again emended by 
Senart. Here ڄSa څreads ĕr ṇuta (fol. 122v6). The manuscript tran s-
mission of the Mahāvastu  thus gives no support whatsoever to the 
existence of an imper. form ĕr ṇvatu, but it must be recognized that 
ĕr ṇotu and ĕr ṇoti are not metrically acceptable readings in at least 
two of the mentioned contexts which are in verse, and hence Senartځs 
emendations are likely to be correct despite lack of explicit man u-
script support. The only explicit attestation of the form ĕr ṇvatu that I 
can cite in support of my emendation is found in the Sarvata thāga -
tādhi ṣṭhānavyūhasūtra , in the following verse quarter: guṇā[ṁ]ĕ ca 
ĕr ṇvatv abhiĕraddadheta (ed. Dutt 1939:  63; ed. Cohen 2010:  221).14 
v2  bhāvāmiho  ◊ emend bhavān iha . Cf., despite uncertainty of reading, 
the collocation ĕr ṇvatu bhavān  in the Mahāvastu  stanza whose text-
critical problem I have just presented. NK reads bhavāmike . 
v2  nāmo  ◊ emend namo . 
v2  mahāyakṣasonāpataye ◊ emend mahāyakṣasenāpataye . 
v3  hana hana dhuna mathāna vidhvaṁĕayettadadma ◊ the final akṣa-
ras, whose reading is perhaps not totally certain, might be emended 
after a mantra  preserved in Chinese transliteration in the Susiddhik a-
rasūtra  (retransliterated in Giebel 2001: 148) namo vajrāya, hūṁ  ha-
na dhuna matha vidhva ṁsayotsāraya phaṭ . To stay somewhat closer 
                                                        
14 On the extraordinary importance of the manuscript designated as ڄSa ,څsee 
Tournier 2012. The readings of this manuscript have been provided to me b y Vin-
cent Tournier on the basis of Yuyamaځs facsimile edition, which is not accessible to 
me. Likewise, Vincent Tournier has checked for me the reading ĕr ṇvatu in the 
Sarva tathāgatādhi ṣṭhānavyūhasūtra  based on the facsimile edition of the Gilgit 
manuscripts. 

--- [Page 27] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  25 
to the text as our foil transmits it, utsādaya  might be chosen as an a l-
ternative reading. Cf. Mañjuĕriyamūlakalpa , chapter 37 (ed. Ga ṇa-
pati Sâstrî 1922:  413, ll. 18-21): oṁ namo apratihatatathāgato ṣṇīṣā-
ya anavalokita mūrdhni cakravarti hūṁ  jvala jvala dhaka dhaka dh u-
na dhuna vidhuna trāsaya mārayotsādaya  hana hana a ṁ aṁ aḥ aḥ 
kaḥ kaḥ proṁkhini pro ṁkhini ku ṇḍalini aparājitāstradhāriṇ i15 hūṁ 
phaṭ; and chapter 54 (p. 662, ll. 22-23): oṁ hana hana sarvabhayān 
sādayotsādaya  trāsaya moṭ aya chinda bhinda jvala jvala hu ṁ huṁ 
phaṭ phaṭ svāhā . The form mathāna  can be explained as a perfectly 
regular 2sg imperative form, of the class IX present mathnāti , al-
though in this register of language (as in the above citation from the 
Susiddhikarasūtra ) we expect the form matha . 
v4  A number of akṣaras may have become illegible at the beginning of 
this line. The sequence kamā  no doubt stands for karma  (cf. recto , 
line 3: kammā ). I am unable to make sense of the following nine 
akṣaras. The remainder of the line, from oṁ onwards, mainly co m-
prises a sequence of bīja mantra s for which I have found no precise 
parallels, except for the sequence ṭaki hūṁ  jaḥ, which I have di s-
cussed elsewhere (Griffiths 2014 , §7). The element kiṭa seems to be 
an inversion of ṭaki; the element dhuṁ (if the readings are correct) 
is unusual in Buddhist mantra s and might perhaps be based on a 
misunderstanding of the sandhi  in the following STTS verse: praty-
ālīḍhaṁ samāsthāya vajrāveĕapra yogata ḥ | kṣaṇād dhu ṁkāramā -
treṇa sarvam āveĕayej jagat |  (ed. Horiuchi 1983 , vol. I: 402, §916).  
 
Reconstructed text 
Syllables I am unable to reconstruct with any confidence are marked by 
an underscore (_).  
 
[1.] namo ratnatrayāyasya namaĕ ca ṇḍavajrapānayisya mahāyakṣ ase-
nāpatisya  
                                                        
15 Ed. aparojitāstradhāriṇ i. 

--- [Page 28] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 26 
namo bhagavato ځpratihatabalavīryavicitravidyādhareĕva rasahas ras-
ya___ĕāĕanakarasya caturbhujālaṅ kr taĕarīrasya asimuĕalaparaĕupāĕa vaj-
rajvālāgnivibhīṣ aṇakarĥpasya pa ĕupatijaԆilājalasañcayavi lambi tadakṣiṇa-
pādasya pārvatī stanadvayavinivi ṣԆavāma caraṇasya  
namo bhagavato mahāvajradharasya mahāraudraӚ  nāma h r daya Ӛ 
paramadāruṇ aӚ sarva bhĥta gaṇavināĕakaraӚ  raudrākāraӚ  trāsabhay a-
vivādakaraӚ  sarvakarmasiddhikaram āvartayiṣyāmi  
tadyathā  
bhoҾ bhoҾ raudra raudra kala kala kampa kampa gañja gañja pra-
gañja pragañja marda marda pramarda pramarda hā hā hī hī hĥӚ  hĥӚ 
raudra___ma Ӛ duṣԆagraha Ӛ cañcalāya du ṣԆacitta Ӛ pāpacittaӚ  kupita-
cittaӚ pravināĕaya raudrarĥpeṇa pravināĕaya raudra svare ṇa trāsaya 
raudravajre ṇa vidāraya sarvapāpaӚ  pravināĕaya sarvaĕatrĥn pra vināĕa-
ya sarvavighnān pravināĕaya sarvavyādhīn pravināĕaya sarvarogān sa r-
vavināyakān pravināĕaya sarvaduҾĕabdān pravināĕaya  sarvadurdama-
tvaӚ pravināĕaya devāsura garuḍagandharvayak ṣakiӚnaramahoragādīn 
pravināĕaya trāsaya trāsaya kampaya kam paya gañjaya gañjaya pra-
gañjaya pragañjaya marda marda pramardaya pramardaya bho Ҿ bhoҾ 
caṇḍa caṇḍa mara mara pramatha pramatha hana hana daha daha paca 
paca kuru  kuru mahāraudra  mahāvīrya  mahādīpta  mahātejaҾ  mahāĕāĕa na 
kuru kuru vada vada svavara svavara ĕ r ṇvatu ĕ r ṇvatu bhavān iha svāhā  
 
[2.] namo ratnatrayāya namaҾ  caṇḍavajrapāṇaye mahāyakṣasenāpataye  
tadyathā  
oӚ ma īҾ  jaҾ svāhā  
oӚ ma īҾ  jaҾ hana hana vijaye ja Ҿ hana hana hi ihi ihā hāӚ  jaҾ svāhā  
oӚ ma īҾ  hana hana dhuna mathāna vidhvaӚĕayotsādaya oӚ  _ta 
svāhā  
tathā tadyathā  
oӚ tri __________ cchet _________________  
oӚ hana hana vija Ҿ joҾ svāhā  
Ԇaki hĥӚ  jaҾ jaҾ hĥӚ kiԆa hĥӚ  Ԇaki dhu Ӛ kiԆa dhu Ӛ iya ija i_ Ҿ svāhā  
 
 

--- [Page 29] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  27 
Translation 
[1.] Homage to the Triple Jewel (Buddha, Dharma, Sa Ӛgha)! Homage 
to the fierce Vajrapāṇ i, the great general of the Yak ṣas!  
Homage to the Lord, who has (a host of) a thousand supreme mag i-
cians ( vidyādhareĕvara ) of irresistible power and might, who has hands 
… teaching, who has a body adorned with four arms, who is of terrible 
appearance due to (his bearing) sword, club, axe, snare, cudgel ( vajra ), 
and flaming fire, whose right foot hangs down over the heap of twisted 
locks of Paĕupati (Ĕiva), whose left foot is placed on the pair of breasts 
of Pārvatī!  
Homage to the Lord, the great Cudgel-bearer! 
I shall recite the Heart named Mahāraudra (ڀGreatly  erocious ,)ځe x-
tremely violent, that causes the destruction of all of (Ĕivaځs) Bhĥtas and 
Gaṇas, of ferocious form, that causes terror, fear and conflict, that cau s-
es the success of all undertakings! 
[It is] like this:  
Ho! Ho! Ferocious one, ferocious one! Soft one, soft one! Tremble, 
tremble! Sound, sound! Resound, Resound! Crush, crush! Crush down, 
crush down! H Ā, HĀ, HĪ, HĪ, HĤә, HĤә! O ferocious … chase away the 
evil seizure! Destroy the evil thought, the bad thought, the angry 
thought! Destroy with your ferocious form, frighten with your ferocious 
sound, disperse with your ferocious cudgel! Destroy all evil, destroy all 
enemies, destroy all obstacles, destroy all diseases, destroy all illnesses, 
destroy all Vināyakas, destroy all those who have bad words, destroy all 
those who have bad thoughts, destroy the Devas, Asuras, Garu ḍas, 
Gandharvas, Yak ṣas, Ki Ӛnaras, Great Serpents, etc. Frighten, frighten! 
Cause to tremble, cause to tremble! Cause to sound, cause to sound! 
Cause to resound, cause to resound! Crush, crush! Crush down, crush 
down! 
Ho! Ho! Fierce one, fierce one! Kill, kill! Tear, tear! Slay, slay! 
Burn, burn! Cook, cook! Act, act! Greatly ferocious one, greatly heroic 
one, greatly fiery one, one of great fire, one of great teaching! Act, act! 
Speak, speak! Svavara svavara (?)! Listen, listen here, your honor! Hail! 

--- [Page 30] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 28 
[2.] Homage to the Triple ūewel! Homage to the fierce Vajrapāṇ i, the 
great general of the Yak ṣas! 
[It is] like this:  
OM. MA Īҽ  JAҽ. Hail! 
OM. MA Īҽ  JAҽ. Slay, slay! Victorious one! J Aҽ. Slay, Slay! H I, IHI 
ŪHĀ HĀә  JAҽ. Hail! 
OM. MA Īҽ. Slay, slay! Shake! Crush! Agitate! Destroy! Annihilate! 
OM. … Hail!  
So also like this: 
(a mantra  that is not sufficiently well preserved to be rendered here) 
OM. Slay, slay! V IJAҽ. JOҽ. Hail! 
ԅAKŪ HĤә  JAҽ JAҽ HĤә KIԅA HĤә  ԅAKI DHU ә KIԅA DHU ә IYA IJA ... 
Hail! 
Analysis 
The contents of the dhāraṇī  suggest that the foil on which it was e n-
graved may have held some protective function, but whether it fun c-
tioned as an amulet, for personal use, or rather as a dharma -relic, i n-
serted into some architectural context, cannot be determined. The i n-
scription comprises two texts, both opening with an invocation to the 
Triple Jewel and Ca ṇḍavajrapāṇi as Mahāyakṣasenāpati. Ūt seem s that 
these two texts were not originally composed together and the distin c-
tion between them is underlined by the fact that the invocations of the 
first are in Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, whereas those of the second are in 
standard Sanskrit.  
The first and principal dhāraṇī  inscribed on the foil bore the title 
mahāraudra -nāma -hr daya , The ڀGreatly Ferocious  ځSpell , with hr daya  
standing as a common equivalent to the term dhāraṇī . It comprises an 
opening invocation, followed by an extended invocation enumerating 
the attributes of the deity being invoked, i.e., Caṇḍavajrapāṇ i, followed 
by a performative statement of the title and purpose of the dhāraṇī  and 
finally the text of the dhāraṇī  proper, this last portion being introduced 
by tadyathā  and terminated by svāhā . 

--- [Page 31] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  29 
This is followed by another dhāraṇī  that does not show any clear 
connection with the principal text, except being addressed to the same 
deity Ca ṇḍavajrapāṇ i. It is also structurally different, comprising b e-
sides the simple invocation nothing but sequences of mantra s, with a 
much higher ratio of untranslatable bīja syllables vis-à-vis translatable 
elements, including mantric imperatives,16 than we saw in the first 
dhāraṇī . This second text apparently comprises two mantra  sections, 
each opening with tadyathā , and each being built up of sequences 
opened with oṁ and terminated with svāhā . But the text is too damaged 
to allow certainty about its original structure. 
Despite these differences, the two texts are bound together by their 
reliance on a variety of elements characteristic of the cycle of the Sar-
vatathāgatatattvasaṁ graha : terminology, bīja mantra s and the figure 
Vajrapāṇ i, here called Ca ṇḍavajrapāṇ i.  
It is only for the first text that we know a parallel elsewhere in the 
Buddhist world. It has not been possible to confirm Hudaya Kandahj a-
yaځs suggestion of a connection with the early Buddhist tantra  entitled 
Susiddhikarasūtra , lost in Sanskrit but transmitted in Tibetan and Ch i-
nese.17 Uniquely, the parallel for our first dhāraṇī  comes not from 
South, Central or East Asia, but from the Buddhist tradition of Indon e-
sia itself. It is the Navakampa  of Balinese tradition whose correspon d-
ence with the Borobudur lead-bronze foil was discovered by Hudaya 
Kandahjaya. Indeed, my new edition reveals the correspondence with 
the Navakampa  to have been more extensive than could be made out 
relying only on Boechariځs provisional reading. The second text has no 
parallel in the Navakampa , and the sprinkling formula of the Navakam-
pa conversely has no parallel among our two texts. Still, it seems poss i-
ble that there is at least a structural parallelism between the Navakampa  
and our combination of two texts: our second text may have served a 
                                                        
16 Cf. Meisezahl 1962: 269. 
17 This is also the implicit conclusion of Lokesh Chandra (2013ś 236)ś ڄThe 
word siddhikara  in sarva-siddhi-kara ṁ is a general statement and need not be tied 
to the Susiddhikara- sĥtra.څ  

--- [Page 32] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 30 
specific ritual function as the sprinkling formula of the Navakampa  pre-
sumably did.18 Although the entire text corresponding to the principal 
dhāraṇī  is known under the title Navakampa  in the Balinese tradition, it 
is only this sprinkling formula that contains the actual expression nava-
kampa , which, being unattested in our version of the dhāraṇī , cannot be 
assumed to have an original connection with it.19 
The Navakampa shows clear signs of having undergone a long hist o-
ry of transmission, with insertion of certain extraneous elements (e.g., 
the names of Hindu deities) and the near or even total loss of original 
ones, most notably the deformation of the title mahāraudraṁ  nāma  
hr dayaṁ  into namo rudra namo hr dayaṁ .20 However, our foil too 
shows clear signs of errors in copying (e.g., r2: ° supasya  for ° rūpasya ; 
r3 and v4: m(m)ā  for rm(m)a ). In fact, it is no exaggeration to say that 
its copy of the two texts is tremendously corrupt. The availability of the 
parallel for the first text in the Navakampa  provides a partially effective 
means to mend the textual problems, but to the extent that the Nava-
kampa  has itself suffered in transmission, we must rely on other phil o-
logical evidence to restore the text on the foil to comprehensible form. 
Indeed, the necessary interventions are sometimes quite drastic. To con-
clude this contribution, I wish to highlight one problem that I have not 
been able to resolve. 
 
                                                        
18 From the sources at my disposal (Goudriaan & Hooykaas 1971: 168 and 
Hooykaas 1973: 112-113), I am unable to form a picture of how and when this 
sprinkling formula would have been applied in ritual context. 
19 For this reason, I feel that Lokesh Chandra (2013: 233) is going b eyond the 
bounds of what the evidence permits us to affirm when he statesś ڄNava -kampa is a 
Balinese reconstruction of Bhava- kampa, wherein Bhava means ڀthe world, exis t-
ence ځand stands for Trailokya or Trailokyavijaya.څ  
20 Note also the genitive endings - sya in the first text of our foil being repr e-
sented as svāhā  in the Navakampa . Cf. Goudriaan & Hooykaas 1971: 8, item 12, on 
the development - sya > -sva that is frequently encountered in Balinese mss. of 
Sanskrit texts. See also the editors ځnote 1 on p. 316 observing the proble ms posed 
by svāhā . 

--- [Page 33] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  31 
The interplay of philological and iconographical problems 
I have proposed in the preceding paragraph on the basis of correspon d-
ences of terminology, of bīja mantra s and the concentration on the fi g-
ure called Ca ṇḍavajrapāṇ i, that our dhāraṇī s are related to the cycle of 
the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṁ graha . This means that the deity whose 
characteristics are listed in the extended invocation of the first text may 
be identified as the figure known as Trailokyavijaya in later Buddhist 
iconographical sources in Sanskrit (such as those used by de Mallmann 
1975: 381-382).21 In order to avoid the problem of anachronism b e-
tween Indian statuary and relevant Sanskrit sources, Robert Linrothe in 
his study of Buddhist tantric iconography makes use of contemporary 
texts preserved in the Chinese canon. With regard to one such text, Tai-
shō 21.120Ś, translated by Amoghavajra between 771 and 774 CE, Lin-
rothe writes (1999: 190): 
The combination of specific descriptions and parallel functions in 
accord with those found in the STTS  makes it clear that the four-
headed, eight-armed Trailokyavijaya standing in pratyālīḍ ha on M a-
heĕvara and Umādevā ( sic) is the hero of the second section of the 
STTS . It is important to clarify this, because the text itself nearly a l-
ways calls him Vajrapāṇ i, despite the fact that Trailokyavijaya is the 
name of the entire section and the maṇḍala. Iyanaga has noted this 
anomaly in the text, and he cited different textual evidence to demon -
strate that Trailokyavijaya was understood as the form of Vajrapāṇ i 
who subjugates Maheĕvara.22 
The indications of our text correspond in a loose manner with the text u-
al and sculptural material studied by Linrothe, but the damage to the 
                                                        
21 This is also Lokesh Chandraځs conclusion (2013ś 235  and passim ), although 
he does not pay attention to the fact that this name as such does not occur in the 
text engraved on our foil, calling it simply the ڄBorobudur inscription of Trai -
lokyavijaya.څ  
22 Linrothe refers here in a note to Iyanaga 1985: 725- 727, n. 5. 

--- [Page 34] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 32 
foil in line 1 precludes the possibility of establishing with certainty 
what gesture, which attributes and how many heads are assigned to the 
deity. Perhaps it is necessary to go against the unanimous evidence of 
our foil and the NK and to emend something like asimuĕalapara ĕu-
pāĕadharasya vajra °. But if the preceding element (with ° karasya ) in-
dicated a mudrā , it is hard to escape the impression that the text assigns 
more features than could be accommodated in the four hands that the 
deity is explicitly stated to have. This number of hands suggests that we 
are in any case dealing with an iconographic form not so far attested i n 
the Indonesian sculptural record, which has yielded four bronze images 
identifiable as Trailokyavijaya, all of them eight-handed and four-
headed.23 
A major discrepancy between the iconography transmitted by our 
dhāraṇī  and the known sculptural corpus all over the Buddhist world 
lies in the fact that the deity is here said to have his right foot placed on 
Paĕupati (Ĕiva), while his left foot is placed on Pārvatīځs chest. All 
sculptural representations of Trailokyavijaya known to me show the 
opposite placement of the deityځs feet.24 One could of course alter the 
assignment of left and right feet as transmitted unanimously both on our 
foil and in the Navakampa , but it seems better to remain prudent, and to 
leave open the possibility that we are dealing with an iconographic va r-
iant not yet attested in the art-historical literature, rather than assuming 
that the text itself is in error here.25 
 
 
                                                        
23 See the discussion and images published by Pleyte (1901 and 1902) under t he 
name ڄVajrapāṇi as Dharmapāla .څThe images in question are Rijksmuseum voor 
Volkenkunde (Leiden) 1403/1760 and 1630/5; Museum Nasional (Jakarta) 655a; 
British Museum (London) 1859, 1228.94. See also Juynboll 1909: 9 4 with exhau s-
tive references to 19th-century publications. 
24 Thus also the textual sources referred to by Lokesh Chandra (2 013: 235), 
who does not note the contrary indication in our inscription. 
25 For another example of such discrepancy between texts and sculptures, see 
Hidas 2003: 280 (and cf. Cruijsen, Griffiths & Klokke 2012). 

--- [Page 35] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  33 
References 
Anom, I.G.N. (ed.) 2005 . The Restoration of Borobudur . Paris: UNESCO Publis h-
ing. 
Bendall, C. 1880. The Megha- Sĥtra. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society  12, 286-
311. 
Boechari . 1982. Preliminary Report on Some Archaeological Finds Around the Bo-
robudur Temple. Pelita Borobudur , Seri CC No. 5, Reports and Documents of 
the Consultative Committee for the Safeguarding of Borobudur , 5th meeting, 
April 1976 (Proyek Pelita Pemugaran Candi Borobudur Departemen Pendidik-
an dan Kebudayaan, 1982), 90- 96. 
ټ 2012 . Melacak Sejarah Kuno Indonesia Lewat Prasasti. Tracing Ancient Indon e-
sian History Through Inscriptions . Jakarta: Kepustakaan Populer Gramedia , 
Universitas Ūndonesia and École française dځExtrême -Orient. 
Bhattacharya, B . 1925. Sādhanamālā . 2 vols. (Gaekwadځs Oriental Series 26.)  Ba-
roda: Oriental Institute. 
Bischoff, F.A. 1956. Contribution à l’étude des divinités mineures du bouddhisme 
tantrique: Ārya Mahābala -nāma -Mahāyānasūtra, tibétain (MSS. de Touen -
Houang) et chinois . (Buddhicaś documents et travaux pour lځétude du boud -
dhisme 10.) Paris: Geuthner. 
de Casparis, J.G. 1975. Indonesian Palaeography: a History of Writing in Indonesia 
from the Beginnings to c. A.D. 1500 . (Handbuch der Orientalistik 3.4.1.) Lei-
den: Brill. 
Cohen, R. S. 2010. The SarvatathāgatādhiṣԆhāna -satvāvalokana -buddhakṣetra san-
darĕana-vyĥhaś A Mahāyāna Sĥtra from Gilgit. Indian International Journal of 
Buddhist Studies  11, 199-251. 
ټ 2012. The Splendid Vision: Reading a Buddhist Sutra . New York: Columbia 
University Press. 
Cruijsen, T., A. Griffiths & M.J. Klokke . 2012 [2014] . The Cult of the Buddhist 
Dhāraṇī De ity Mahāpratisarā Along the Maritime Silk Route: New Epigraphic 
and Ico nographic Evidence from the Indonesian Archipelago. Journal of the I n-
ternational Association of Buddhist Studies 35. 
Davidson, R. M. 1981 . The Litany of Na mes of Mañjuĕrī . Text and Translation of 
the Mañjuĕrīnāma saṃgīti . In M. Strickmann (ed.) Tantric and Taoist Studies in 
Honour of R.A. Stein , vol. 1. (Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques 20.) Bruxelles: 
Institut belge des hautes études chinoises , 1-69. 
Dutt, N. (ed., with D.M. Bhattacharyya & Vidyavaridhi Shiv Nath Sharma) 1939 . 
Gilgit Manuscripts . Vol. 1. Srinagar, Kashmir. 

--- [Page 36] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 34 
Edgerton, F . 1953 . Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary . 2 vols. ( Wil-
liam Dwight Whitney Linguistic Series.) New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Gaṇapati Sâstrî, T. 1922. The Âryamanjusrîmûlakalpa . 3 vols. (Trivandrum Sa n-
skrit Series 76.) Trivandrum: Superintendent, Gov. Press. 
Giebel, R. W. 2001 . Two Esoteric Sutras: The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra, the Su-
siddhikara Sutra . (BDK English TripiԆaka 2Ś -II, 30- II.) Berkeley: Numata Ce n-
ter for Buddhist Translation and Research. 
ټ 2002 . Notes on Some Dhāraṇī -sĥtras in Chinese Translation. Ūn Higashi Ajia 
Bukkyō : sono Seiritsu to Tenkai , edited by Kimura Kiyotaka Hakushi Kanreki 
Kinenkai, Tokyōś Shunjĥsha, 762[27] -743[46]. 
ټ 2012 . Notes on Some Sanskrit Texts Brought Back to ūapan by Kĥkai. Pacific 
World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies , 3rd series, 14, 187- 230.  
Goudriaan, T. & C. Hooykaas . 1971 . Stuti and Stava (Bauddha, Ĕaiva and Vaiṣṇa -
va) of Balinese Brahman Priests . (Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse 
Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afd. Letterkunde, Nieuwe reeks 76.) Amste r-
dam: North-Holland Publishing Company. 
Griffiths, A . 2014. Written Traces of the Buddhist Pastś Mantras and Dhāraṇīs in 
Indonesian Inscriptions. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies  
77, 1 (2014). 
Griffiths, A., N. Revire & R. Sanyal . 2013 . An Inscribed Bronze Sculpture of a 
Buddha in bhadrāsana  at Museum Ranggawarsita in Semarang (Central Java, 
Indonesia). Arts Asiatiques  68, 3- 26. 
Hidas, G . 2003 . Preliminary Notes on the Mahāpratisarā Mahāvidyārājñī , a Bu d-
dhist Protective Text from the Pañcarakṣā -collection. Berliner Indologische 
Studien  15/16/17, 263-284. 
von Hinüber, O. 2014. The Gilgit Manuscripts: An Ancient Library in Modern Re -
search. In P. Harrison & J.-U. Hartmann (eds) From Birch Bark to Digital D a-
ta: Recent Advances in Buddhist Manuscript Research . Wien : Verlag der Öster-
reichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 79-135. 
Hooykaas, C. 1973 . Balinese Bauddha Brahmans . (Verhandelingen der Koninklijke 
Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afd. Letterkunde, Nieuwe reeks, 
vol. 80.) Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company. 
Horiuchi, K . 1983 . Bon- Zō-Kan Shoe kongōchōgyō no kenkyū: bonpon kōtei hen . 2 
vols. Kōyasanś Mikkyō Bunka Kenkyĥjo. ( Annotated critical edition of the Sar-
vatathāgata tattva saṁgraha ). 
Hudaya Kandahjaya . 2009 . The Lord of All Virtues. Pacific World: Journal of the 
Institute of Buddhist Studies , 3rd series, 11, 1- 24. 
Iyanaga, N . 1985 . Récits de la soumission de Maheĕvara par Trailokyavijaya ٻ  
dځaprès les sources chinoises et japonaises (Notes autour de Maheĕvara -Ĕiva 

--- [Page 37] ---
THE ڀGREATLY FEROCIOUS  ځSPELL  35 
dans le bouddhisme. I ). In M. Strickmann (ed.)  Tantric and Taoist Studies in 
Honour of R.A. Stein , vol. 3. (Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques 22.) Bruxelles: 
Institut belge des hautes études chinoises, 633-745. 
Juynboll, H.H. 1909 . Catalogus van ’s  ijks ethnographisch Museum , V: Ja-
vaansche Oudheden . Leiden: E.J. Brill. 
Lévi, S . 1933 . Sanskrit T exts from Bāli . (Gaekwadځs Oriental Series 67. ) Baroda: 
Oriental Institute. 
Linrothe, R. N. 1999 . Ruthless Compassion: Wrathful Deities in Early Indo-Tibetan 
Esoteric Buddhist Art . London: Serindia Publications. 
Lokesh Chandra. 1987. Sarva- tathāgata -tattva- saṅgraha. Sanskrit Text with Intr o-
duction and Illustrations of Maṇḍalas . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
ټ 2013 . Borobudur Inscription of Trailokyavijaya. In idem, Lord Ĕiva  and Buddha 
in the Golden Isles: in Search of Classical Indonesia . New Delhi: Aditya Pr a-
kashan, 232-237. 
de Mallmann, M.-T . 1975 . Introduction à l’iconographie  du tântrisme Bouddhique . 
(Bibliothèque du Centre de Recherches sur lځAsie Centrale et la Haute A sie 1.) 
Paris: Librairie Adrien-Maisonneuve. 
Matsunaga, Y . 1978 . The Guhyasamāja Tantra: a New Critical Edition . Osaka: 
Toho Shuppan. 
Meisezahl, R.O. 1962 . The Amoghapāĕahṛ daya- Dhāraṇī. The Early Sanskrit Manu -
script of the Reiunji Critically Edited and Translated. Monumenta Nipponica  
17.1/4, 265-328. 
Mirashi, V.V. 1981 . The History and Inscriptions of the Sātavāhanas and the Wes t-
ern Kshatrapas . Bombay: Maharashtra State Board for Literature and Culture. 
Ngawang Samten & J . Pandey. 2002. Āryatathāgatoṣṇīṣasitātapatrānāmāparājitā  
Pratyaṅgirā Mahāvidyārājñī.  Dhīḥ  33, 145-154. 
Pleyte, C.M. 1901 . Bijdrage tot de Kennis van het Mahayana op Java [I]. Bijdragen 
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde  52, 362-380.  
ټ 1902 . Bijdrage tot de Kennis van het Mahayana op Java II. Bijdragen tot de  
Taal-,  Land- en Volkenkunde  54, 195-202. 
Senart, É . 1882- 97. Le Mahâvastu . 3 vols. ( Collection dځouvrages orientaux / S o-
ciété asiatique.) Paris: Imprimerie nationale. 
Skjaervø, P.O . 2004 . This Most Excellent Shine of Gold, King of Kings of Sutras: 
The Khotanese Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra . (Sources of Oriental Languages and 
Literatures: Central Asian Sources.) Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ., Dept. of 
Near Eastern Languages and Civilizations. 
Skorupski, T . 1983 . The Sarvadurgatipariĕodhana Tantra: Elimination of All Evil 
Destinies. Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Takubo, Sh . 1972 . Ārya -mahā -Māyūrī Vidyā - ājñī . Tokyo: Sankibo. 

--- [Page 38] ---
ARLO GRIFFITHS 36 
Tournier, V . 2012 . The Mahāvastu and the VinayapiԆaka of the MahāsāӜ ghika-
Lokottaravādin. Annual Report of the International Research Institute for A d-
vanced Buddhology  15, 87-104. 
Yuyama, A . 2001 . The Mahāvastu -Avadāna in Old Palm -Leaf and Paper Man u-
scripts . 2 vols. (Bibliotheca Codicum Asiaticorum 15-16.) Tokyo: Centre for 
East Asian Cultural Studies for Unesco. 